Logic, Vol. 2
Christoph Sigwart (Helen Dendy, trans.) (1895)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Sigwart's Logik, Vol. 2 — method and the logic of the sciences. Dendy's 1895 translation.

========================================================================

J.


LOGIC


LOGIC


BY


DR. CHRISTOPH SIGWART

Professor  of  Philosophy  at  the  University  of  Tubingen

VOL. II
LOGICAL METHODS


SECOND EDITION, REVISED AND ENLARGED


TRANSLATED BY HELEN BENDY


lontoon

SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO.

NEW YORK  : MACMILLAN &  CO.

1895


BUTLER  &  TANNER,

THE  SF.LWOOD  PRINTING  WOKKS,

FROME,  AMD  LONDON.


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  GERMAN

EDITION

As  the  need  of  a  clear  consciousness  of  the  starting  points,  methods  and
aims  of  scientific  knowledge  has  made  itself  felt  within  particular  provinces
of  investigation  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  as  the  reform  of  logic  has  been
demanded  in  high  quarters  from  the  side  of  philosophy  itself,  as  by  Prantl
and  Harms,  and  started  in  a  work  so  important  as  that  of  Lotze,  I  have
felt  it  my  duty  to  investigate  and  exhibit  as  completely  as  was  possible
for  me  to  do  the  presuppositions  from  which  scientific  endeavour  starts,  the
most  general  concepts  employed  in  its  researches,  and  the  fundamental
forms  of  the  methods  of  which  it  makes  use.  It  has  given  me  special
satisfaction  that  in  one  main  part  of  methodology,  the  theory  of  induction,
W.  Stanley  Jevons,  in  his  important  work  Principles  of  Science,  agrees  on
essential  points  with  my  own  view.  I  have  myself  been  more  sparing  than
he  has  with  illustrations  from  the  history  of  science,  and  have  selected  as
far  as  possible  elementary  examples  from  the  region  of  ordinary  know
ledge.  In  doing  so  I  have  been  guided  partly  by  the  desire  for  brevity,
partly  by  the  conviction  that  abstractions  required  by  logic  can  be  most
easily  made  in  connexion  with  what  is  most  familiar  to  us.

August,  1878.


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  GERMAN

EDITION

What  I  have  said  in  the  preface  to  the  second  edition  of  the  first  volume,
as  to  the  considerations  by  which  I  have  been  guided  in  the  revision  of  the
work,  applies  also  to  the  second  volume.  To  a  still  greater  extent  than
there  I  have  endeavoured,  on  the  one  hand,  to  give  as  accurate  and
definite  a  form  as  possible  to  my  propositions,  and  on  the  other  to  treat
more  fully  of  particular  points.  More  especially  have  the  questions  con
cerning  the  methodological  presuppositions  of  psychology  and  its  dependent
science  of  history  received  fuller  discussion.  I  do  not  conceal  from  my
self  that  the  position  which  I  here  take  will  appear  to  many  to  be  anti
quated  and  to  have  been  relinquished  by  the  later  developments  of  the
science  ;  this  could  not  withhold  me  from  giving  expression  to  my  con
viction.  I  wish  however  to  guard  myself  against  being  supposed  to
maintain  that  those  efforts  of  physiological  and  experimental  psychology
which  are  prominent  to-day  are  not  fully  justified  within  the  limits  imposed
by  the  nature  of  the  subject,  and  appropriate  to  the  furtherance  of  our
knowledge.  It  merely  seemed  to  me  necessary— and  here  I  hope  to  find
support  in  other  quarters — to  emphasize  all  the  more  decidedly  certain
•considerations  which  are  sometimes  allowed  to  fall  into  the  background.

THE  AUTHOR.

TUBINGEN,  September,  1893.


CONTENTS


PART  111. TECHNICAL. LOGICAL METHODS


INTRODUCTION

§ 60. General  Problem  of  Methodology

§ 6l. Conditions  and  Aims  of  Thought

62.—  Postulates  of  Knowledge

63. Historical  and  Critical  Character  of  Methodology ....

Division  of  Methodology ..••••

Conceptual  Elements,  and  the  Forms  in  which  they  are  synthesized

The  Beginning  of  the  Methodical  Analysis  of  Concepts  .

Concepts  of  Number

Elements  of  the  Idea  of  Space

Elements  of  the  Idea  of  Time •

Motion  ...-•••'

Simple  Sensations  ...••••

Qualitative  Change

The  Concept  of  Thing . . • •

The  Concept  of  Efficient  Action  and  Causality ....

The  Elements  of  Psychological  Concepts

The  Synthesis  of  Conceptual  Elements  into  Composite  Concepts .

The  Beginning  and  Aims  of  Conceptual  Synthesis  ....

The  Constructive  Formation  of  Concepts

The  Classificatory  Formation  of  Concepts

Different  Forms  of  Unity  in  the  Concepts  of  Things
The  Direct  Methods  of  Forming  Judgments  ;  Deduction  and  Proof,
and  their  Presuppositions

Deduction ..••••

Deduction  as  the  Analytical  Development  of  Concepts .

Deduction  from  Synthetical  Propositions

Proof

Reduction .

The  Discovery  of  Hypotheses

Determining  Questions  .

The  Calculation  of  Probabilities

Concluding  Remarks  to  Chapter  III.


§


§  64.
CHAPTER I.

§  65.

§  66.

§  67.

§  68.

§  69.

§  70.

§  7i.

§  72-

§  73-

§  74-
CHAPTER  II.

§  75-
§  76.
§  77-
§  78.
CHAPTER  III.


I.
i.

2.

II.

III.

t/lv.

V.
VI.


§  79-

§  80.

§  81.

§  82.

§  83.

§  84.

§  85.


PAGE

3
3
5

19

21
24
24
30
42

57
61

65
76

78
92

121

144
144

I58

1 68

181
182

182

185
192
203

2IO
214

216

230


via


CONTENTS


CHAPTER  IV.


§  87.

§  88.

§  89.

§  90-

§  9i-

§  92-

CHAPTER  V.  \

^

I- § 93-

II- § 94-

III. § 95.


IV. §

v.  § 97-

* VI. §  970.
VII.

1.  § 98.

2.  § 99-

3- §  i°°-
VIII.

§  101.

§ IO2.

CHAPTER  VI.
§  103.
CHAPTER  VII

y

§ 104.

§ 105.

APPENDIX  A
APPENDIX  B
APPENDIX  C
APPENDIX  D
APPENDIX  E


The Methodological Principles of Constructing Judgments of

Perception. ..........

General  Conditions  of  Judgments  of  Perception ....

Determination  and  Measurement  of  Time .....

Determination  of  Position  and  Magnitude .....

Errors  in  Observation .........

Determination  of  Continuous  Changes  by  Discrete  Observations
Phenomenal  and  Real  Subjects  of  Judgments  of  Perception .
Cataloguing  and  Statistical  Numeration  of  the  Particular
The  Process  of  Induction  as  the  Method  of  obtaining  Universal

Propositions  from  Particular  Perceptions .....
The  General  Logical  Character  of  Empirical  Induction  .
Induction  as  the  Method  of  forming  Valid  Concepts  about  Reality  .
The  Process  of  obtaining  Universal  Propositions  about  the  Action

of  Causes  ..........

Laws  which  are  not  Causal  Laws  .......

Generalizing  Induction  .........

Induction  in  Psychology ........

Concluding  Remarks  to  §§  95~97«  .......

The  Explanation  of  the  Given .......

Explanation  by  Causal  Laws  ........

Explanation  by  Inferred  Facts,  and  the  Methodological  Principles  of

Historical  Investigation ........

Explanation  by  the  Nature  of  Substances .....

Methods  auxiliary  to  Induction .......

Statistical  Methods

Probability  and  Statistics ........

Systematization ..........

Deductive  and  Classificatory  Systematization  .....

The  Methodological  Principles  of  Ethics .....

Methods  in  Practical  Thought .......

Final  Results ..........

The  Problem  of  Metaphysics  .......


234
234
236
252

26 1

271

278

282

288
288

3"

334

361

370

374.

416

417
418

426
460

480
480

504
508
508

529
529
548
548

562

563
566
568


PART  III. (Technical]


LOGICAL METHODS


S.  L. — II.


LOGIC

PART  III


INTRODUCTION.

§  60.

THE  general  problem  of  METHODOLOGY  is  to  show  how  we  may  apply  our
natural  mental  activities  in  such  a  way  that,  starting  from  a  given  state  of
thought  and  knowledge,  we  may  attain  the  object  of  human  thought  by  an
ideally  perfect  process  ;  a  process,  that  is,  in  which  none  but  fully  deter
mined  concepts  and  adequately  grounded  judgments  are  employed.

1.  The  task  which  we  have  set  before  us  in  logic  is  to  show  how  pro
positions  which  are  certain  and  valid  for  all  might  be  attained. With  this
object  we  were  occupied  in  Part  I.  in  investigating  that  function  of  judg
ment  which  finds  expression  in  propositions  claiming  to  be  certain  and
universally  valid,  in  bringing  to  light  the  presuppositions  naturally  involved
in  it,  and  in  stating  the  natural  laws  by  which  it  is  always  governed. In
Part  II.  we  endeavoured  to  ascertain  the  general  conditions  to  which  our
judgments  must  conform  if  they  are  to  attain  to  universal  validity,  and  we
developed  these  conditions so  far  as  they  are  involved  in  the  nature  of
judgment  itself. The  two  essential  characteristics  of  the  ideal  state  to \/
which  our  thought  aspires  proved  to  be  the  complete  determination  of
concepts,  and  the  consciousness  of  the  grounds  of  our  judgments.

The  question  how  to  attain  to  this  ideal  state,  with  the  means  at  our
disposal,  forms  the  subject  of  the  third  and  last  part  of  our  investigation,
i.e.,  of  Methodology.  Its  problems  in  their  most  general  features  are  already
implied  in  our  preceding  discussion.

2.  With  reference  to  the  first  point  in  our  question,  we  showed  in  our
Introduction  (§  2)  that  no  really  practical  Methodology  can  aim  at  a  com
plete  reconstruction  of  our  thoughts  in  accordance  with  technical  rules  ;


4  LOGIC

it  must,  on  the  contrary,  accept  as  given  a  mental  activity  already  at  work,
which  can  merely  be  amplified  or  corrected.  Unless  there  were  a  supply
of  ideas  already  in  existence,  as  well  as  a  natural  impulse  to  employ  them
in  forming  judgments,  there  would  be  neither  pupils  to  learn  the  art,  nor
material  upon  which  to  exercise  it ;  the  very  possibility  of  mutual  under
standing  presupposes  a  store  of  mental  contents  which  must  in  the  first
instance  be  taken  as  it  is  found.  The  art  of  gymnastics  is  practicable
only  for  those  who  already  have  control  over  their  limbs,  and  its  object
is  merely,  on  the  one  hand,  to  develop  and  multiply  movements  already
familiar,  on  the  other  to  eliminate  any  which  are  superfluous  ;  it  cannot
suddenly  annihilate  all  previous  habits,  or  create  new  joints  and  muscles.
In  the  same  way  a  logical  gymnastic  must  always  bear  in  mind  that  the
mental  activities  at  which  it  aims  must  depend  for  their  execution  upon
rudiments  already  possessed  by  the  individual  learner,  and  can  succeed
only  in  so  far  as  they  can  be  developed  and  elaborated  from  activities
which  are  already  naturally  initiated  and  exercised  without  reflection.

3.  With  reference  to  the  second  point,  our  first  object  in  Part  II.
was  to  develop  the  condition  of  complete  determination  of  our  concepts.
It  proved  to  be  necessary  to  discover  the  simple  conceptual  elements  and
to  determine  the  forms  in  which  they  might  be  synthesized  ;  and  this  had
to  be  done  in  such  a  way  as  to  ensure  on  the  one  hand  that  these  simple
elements  should  be  thought  by  every  one  in  the  same  way,  thus  making  it
possible  that  there  should  be  a  conceptual  system  the  same  for  all;  while
on  the  other  hand  the  conceptual  elements  should  be  extensively  com
plete,  and  sufficient  for  every  object  of  thought  to  be  conceptually  deter
mined  and  reduced  to  generally  established  elements.  Only  when  this  is
done  shall  we  always  be  provided  with  predicates  for  our  judgments  which
will  enable  us  to  make  our  statements  precise  and  unambiguous  ;  and
under  these  conditions  alone  is  it  possible  for  judgments  to  be  strictly
necessary  and  universal.

From  our  investigation  of  the  demand  that  there  should  be  a  ground  for
every  judgment,  there  next  arose  the  problem  of  ascertaining  those  judg
ments  which  contain  their  own  ground,  i.e.,  are  necessary  by  virtue  of  the
contents  of  the  ideas  connected  in  them,  or  possess  the  evident  certainty
of  immediate  self-consciousness;  with  this  is  also  connected  the  necessity
of  finding  the  axioms  indispensable  to  all  proof.  Here  again  the  general
object  which  we  set  before  us  includes  the  need  for  extensive  complete
ness;  we  can  only  ensure  that  our  judgments  shall  be  thoroughly  grounded


INTRODUCTION  5

when  we  are  fully  conscious  of  the  ultimate  presuppositions  of  judgment,
and  recognise  them  as  self-evident  and  immediate  principles.

4.  Thus  we  get  the  following  questions  for  our  Methodology  :  How  is
it  possible  to  determine  all  the  simple  elements  of  the  whole  contents  of
mind,  in  such  a  way  that  we  may  be  certain  of  their  being  the  same  for  all
thinking  beings,  and  the  forms  of  their  synthesis  in  such  a  way  that  every
one  may  proceed  alike  in  combining  them  into  composite  concepts?
How  is  it  possible  to  become  conscious  of  those  ultimate  presupposi
tions  of  all  judgment,  which  are  the  ground  for  judgments  which  are  not
immediately  evident,  and  how  may  we  show  each  particular  judgment  to
be  grounded  in  a  way  which  may  be  convincing  for  every  one  ?


The  more  exact  form  which  Methodology  must  take  depends,  on  the  one
hand  upon  the  nature  of  the  actual  conditions  of  the  thought  which  it  is  to
regulate  ;  upon  the  other  on  the  content  of  the  aim  we  set  before  us  in  our
deliberate  thought.

This  aim  is  to  know  the  universe  which  is  accessible  to  perception,  and
to  determine  the  final  objects  of  the  will.  The  ideal  of  knowledge
contains,  in  the  first  place,  a  representation  of  the  universe  as  complete  in
space  and  time,  next  a  classification  of  all  that  is  given  in  a  perfect  con
ceptual  system,  and  finally  discernment  of  the  necessity  of  what  is  given
in  the  form  of  perfect  causal  connection.  Consideration  of  the  objects  of
the  will  results  in  the  selection  of  a  supreme  end  which  comprehends  all
particular  actions,  and  in  the  recognition  that  this  end  ought  to  be  uncon
ditionally  willed.

i.  By  formulating  in  §  60  the  questions  to  be  answered  by  Method
ology  we  obtained  only  the  most  general  and  formal  definitions.  To  make
them  really  practical  we  must  first  realize  more  exactly  what  is  that  store  of
ideas  and  generally  accepted  judgments  from  which  we  start,  taking  into
account  not  only  the  conditions  under  which  we  gather  and  increase  the
material  of  thought,  but  also  those  natural  tendencies  to  reflection  by
which  we  are  impelled  to  form  ideas  and  judgments  and  to  believe  in
their  validity  ;  and  secondly,  some  more  complete  idea  of  the  aims  of  all
serious  thought  is  indispensable.  We  must  assume  that  we  think  inten
tionally,  that  our  thought  does  not  wander  vaguely  and  at  random,  with  no
definite  object  in  view;  an  object  will  be  supplied,  at  any  rate  in  its  general


6  LOGIC

outlines,  by  the  permanent  instincts  of  human  nature,  and  by  the  current
standard  of  intellectual  development.

2.  With  regard  to  the  natural  conditions  of  human  thought  we  find
that  a  great  part  of  our  conceptual  elements comes  to  us  through  the
activity  of  the  senses  and  their  connected  functions,  which  give  rise  to  the
idea  of  the  spatial  universe,  which  persists  and  changes  in  time  ;  and  in
the  same  way  our  composite  ideas  are  for  the  most  part  occasioned  by
perception. We  are  stimulated  to  the  synthesis  of  certain  conceptual
elements  by  the  manifold  composite  external  objects  which  present  them
selves  to  perception,  and  which  we  try  to  compare  and  to  arrange  accord
ing  to  similarities  and  differences  in  our  first  beginnings  of  thought. Here
our  thought  depends  for its contents upon external conditions  ; what
will  be  presented  to  it  does  not  depend  upon  its  own  activity;  and  even
when  the  will  directs  itself  to  perception  of  the  external  world  its  chance
of  success  is  limited  by  many  conditions. The  perception  is  of  inex
haustible  variety,  hence  we  can  never  be  certain  of  completeness  in  this
direction,  either  of  the  particular  elements  or  of  those  infinite  combina
tions  which  perception  may  offer  to  us.

And  this  is  true,  not  only  of  the  objects  which  Nature  affords  to  obser
vation,  without  the  intervention  of  man,  but  also,  and  in  a  still  higher
degree,  of  those  objects  of  apprehension  which  are  produced  by  human
activity,  of  all  the  forms  and  products  of  mental  life,  of  all  inventions  and
arts,  of  all  social  relations  and  contrivances.  Here  again  we  are  con
stantly  stimulated  to  new  conceptual  combinations,  and  we  generally
confine  ourselves  to  forming  those  concepts  which  are  to  serve  as  the
expression  of  what  is  given  in  perception,  or  which  arise  out  of  occasions
which  stimulate  the  will  in  a  definite  direction.

3.  In  judgment, on  the  other  hand,  we  are  largely  determined  by
tradition  ;  the  individual  learns  most  of  what  he  believes,  and  his  judgment
depends  upon  the  prevailing  convictions  which  rule  those  around  him,  and
which  are  far  from  being  all  of  them  grounded,  at  any  rate  for  the  con
sciousness  of  the  individual. Corresponding  to  this  receptivity,  we  find
the  universal  impulse  to  communication,  the  expansiveness  by  which  we
endeavour  to  reproduce  our  own  thought  in  the  minds  of  others,  to  fortify
and  strengthen  our  own  belief  by  the  acknowledgment  of  others. Any
treatment  of  thought  which  abstracts  from  the  characteristic  of  community,
from  the  social  nature  which  man  shows  here  as  everywhere,  must  be  one
sided  and  untrue. Hence  it  is  especially  important  to  take  account  of  all


INTRODUCTION  ^

those  ideas  and  presuppositions  of  thought  which  every  one  receives  in
his  appropriation  of  language.

4.  If  now  we  ask  what  is  the  aim  towards  which  all  human  thought  is
working  under  these  conditions,  and  what  is  the  final  use  of  the  methods
by  which  logic  seeks  to  direct  it  towards  this  aim,  we  must  start  from  an
actual  tendency,  which  we  accept  for  the  present  as  it  is  given,  without
asking  whether  it  is  to  be  regarded  merely  as  .an  irresistible  craving  of
human  nature,  or  whether  we  can  or  do  recognise  in  it  a  higher  ethical
necessity.

5.  Here  we  find  that  the  significance  of  human  effort  in  the  region  of
thought  is,  in  the  first  place,  determined  by  the  fact  that  before  we  attain  to
any  logical  reflection  we  have  learned  to  refer  our  manifold  sensations  to
a  real  world,  which  is  not  only  the  object  of  perception  and  curiosity,  but
is  also  the  means  of  enjoyment  and  the  source  of  pain,  and  therefore  the
object  also  of  practical  activity. When,  rising  above  immediate  necessities,
we  yield  to  the  desire  for  knowledge  and  by  generalizing  make  it  our
conscious  object,  there  next  arises  the  ideal  of  an  exhaustive  knowledge
of  the  particular,  as  it  presents  itself  in  the  form  of  perception,  the  ideal  of
a  complete  world-image,  in  which  the  whole  manifold  which  exists  in  space
and  time  shall  be  displayed  before  us. Just  as  at  any  given  moment  our
surroundings  present  themselves  to  the  eye,  each  particular  object  acces
sible  to  observation  and  intuitable  by  the  senses,  so  the  whole  universe
is  to  become  an  object  of  perception. As  with  the  traveller  landscape
succeeds  to  landscape,  and  new  scenes  open  out  beyond  the  last,  so  we
are  to  be  able  to  send  our  searching  glance  throughout  the  fulness  of  the
perceptible,  and  the  universe  of  existence  is  to  be  spread  out  in  one  vista
for  us  to  survey  in  detail  and  gather  up  in  memory.

6.  The  order  in  which  we  thus  arrange  the  particular  is,  in  the  first
instance,  that  of  space. In  any  given  field  of  vision  everything  is  localized
in  a  definite  place,  and  we  endeavour  in  the  same  way  to  assign  to  every
object  of  perception  its  place  in  one  space,  and  to  comprehend  as  it  were
in  one  survey  the  spatial  relations  of  the  universe. The  world  must  lie
before  us  in  its  ground  plan  ;  we  endeavour  to  determine  its  position  in
space  for  every  star  in  the  heavens,  to  gauge  every  height  and  depth  of  the
earth,  to  learn  how  stones  and  plants  and  animals  are  distributed  upon  its
surface. It  is  as  if  we  could  not  feel  at  home  in  the  world  until  we  knew
it  in  every  nook  and  corner.

7.  This effort to attain a complete  spatial  image of  the world is


8  LOGIC

accompanied  by  the  attempt  to  get  a  complete  picture  of  its  history,  to
arrange  in  a  time  series  every  possible  object  of  human  perception,  and  to
extend  into  the  infinite  past  that  immediately  intuitable  flux  of  changes
which  we  are  able  to  follow  with  uninterrupted  glance.  We  must  be
present  in  the  spirit  to  watch  the  heavenly  bodies  describe  their  orbits
myriads  of  years  ago,  to  see  the  earth  take  shape,  and  its  surface  break  up
into  land  and  water,  to  notice  races  of  plants  and  animals  appear  and
disappear  ;  we  can  no  more  tolerate  a  gap  in  the  annals  of  the  universe
than  we  can  in  the  chart  which  maps  out  its  spatial  relations.

8.  These  aspirations,  which  it  has  remained  for  the  present  age  to
grasp  clearly  and  definitely  in  their  full  extent,  arise  out  of  our  longing
to  break  through  the limits  of  the individual  range  of  vision  and  the
individual  memory,  and  to  widen  our  narrow  consciousness  until  it  com
prehends  everything  in  one  intuitive  knowledge,  thus  satisfying  both  our
natural  curiosity,  and  our  desire  for  communication. Whether  or  not  we
are  justified  in  assuming  that  in this  way  we  shall  arrive  at  complete
knowledge  of  a  real  world  as  it  actually  is,  is  not  a  question  which  arises
for  subjective  effort  or  affects  the  means  of  its  satisfaction ;  it  is  enough
that  our  perceptions  are  independent  of  our  will,  that  they  are  given  to  us
as  a  number  of  intuitions,  that  they  present  themselves  in  inexhaustible
abundance  and  thus  yield  a  constantly  new  content  for  consciousness.

9.  But  such  a  world-picture  could  never  be  the  object  of  one  compre
hensive consciousness unless the activities by which we apprehend
particular  phenomena  and  reduce  them  to spatial  and  temporal order
were  accompanied  by  others  which  make  their  manifold  contents  com
prehensible  to  us  under  the  form  of  unity. We  should  have  a  bewildering
chaos  of  details,  of  forms,  of  things  and  events,  which  no  memory  could
grasp  and  recall  unless  thought  could  master  the  plurality  of  content  by
means of comparison and  distinction ; and could on the one hand
recognise  sameness  and  similarity,  on  the  other,  estimate  degrees  of  dif
ference. Not  until  we  have  discovered  the  one  which  is  common  to  the
many,  have  discriminated  the  like  and  unlike  elements in phenomena
separated  by  space  and  time,  have  ranged  differences  according  to  degree
and  so  brought  logical  order  into  our  intuitions,  can  perception  become
real  knowledge,  and  each  particular  fall  into  place  in  a  system  of  ideas
which,  as  predicates  of  judgments  of  perception,  enable  us  to  transform
the  particular  phenomena  into  a  permanent  idea. Such  a  process,  if  com
pletely  carried  out,  would  lead  to  a  comprehensive  system  of  concepts,  in


JNTR  OD  UCTION  9

which  the  whole  contents  of  the  perceptible — of  things  as  well  as  of  events
— would  be  displayed  in  order  of  similarity  and  difference  :  to  a  classifica
tion  extending  over  the  whole  sphere  of  perception,  and  finding  its  ex
pression  in  a  well  established  system  of  notation  in  a  scientific  termin
ology.

10.  Let  us  suppose  that  we  have  succeeded  in  reducing  all  objects -of
perception  to  this  logical  order  of  similarity  and  difference,  and  have
drawn  up  a  table  of  more  or  less  general  concepts  into  which  every  single
form  of  a  given  thing,  every  event,  every  relation  can  be  fitted,  so  that
each  part  of  our  world-picture  has  not  merely  its  position  in  space  and
time,  but  also  its  logical  position  in  the  hierarchy  of  concepts.  We  should
then  have  satisfied  the  impulse  to  bring  everything  into  relation  by  com
parison  and  distinction,  but  this  logical  classification  would  be  only  like  an
external  framework  over  the  manifold  of  the  given  reality,  and  the
plurality  of  species  under  one  and  the  same  genus,  the  number  of  dif
ferences  into  which  a  common  element  develops  itself,  would  remain  pure
matter-of-fact.  It  might,  indeed,  give  rise  to  wonder  at  the  inexhaustible
fertility  of  nature  in  producing  different  combinations  of  qualities  ;  it  could
never  be  the  object  of  real  understanding.

Unless  we  can  find  necessity  in  the  differentiation  ot  the  general,  and
in  the  comprehension  of  different  characteristics  in  the  unity  of  a  thing,  we
cannot  even  be  certain  of  the  completeness  of  our  classification ;  we  must
be  able  to  see  not  merely  that  a  genus  has  such  and  such  species,  but
that  it  must  have  just  these  and  no  others  ;  we  must  understand  what
is  the  bond  which  holds  together  the  characteristics  constituting  a
composite  concept,  and  by  what  necessity  differences  are  developed  from
a  common  element.  The  perfection  of  thought  lies  in  seeing  that  co-
existents  are  necessarily  connected,  and  we  could  not  be  certain  that  our
classification  was  complete  unless  we  knew  that  those  combinations  ot
attributes  which  were  absent  were  also  impossible.  All  attempts  to
deduce  special  concepts  from  general  by  logical  development,  above  all
that  latest  and  most  ambitious  attempt,  the  Hegelian  method,  are  expres
sions  of  this  effort,  repeating  in  an  intensive  form  the  characteristic  of  the
effort  after  totality  of  extensive  comprehension — i.e.  penetration  of  the
given  manifold  by  the  unity  of  one  consciousness.  In  what  way  we  are  to
endeavour  to  find  this  necessity,  and  whether  it  can  be  found  by  means  of
our  thought,  we  must  consider  later  on ;  at  present  we  are  concerned
only  to  point  out  the  aims  towards  which  thought  strives.


io  LOGIC

n.  But  our  desire  for  knowledge  needs  for  its  complete  satisfaction
something  more  than  this  insight  into  the  necessity  of  conceptual  articula
tion  in  the  manifold  of  the  world  ;  if  the  given  reality  is  to  be  completely
penetrated  by  the  necessity  of  thought,  then  neither  the  spatial  and
temporal  arrangement,  nor  the  number  of  the  objects  in  which  concepts
are  realized,  can  be  regarded  as  something  indifferent  and  accepted  merely
as  given.  The  theory  of  the  universe,  as  conceived  by  Plato  and  Aristotle,
was  one-sided  in  thinking  the  problem  solved  by  an  enumeration  of  the
general  concepts  which  determine  the  manifold  forms  and  differences  of
the  sense-given,  and  in  neglecting  in  comparison  with  the  purely  logical
system  of  concepts — if  not  entirely  excluding  from  scientific  interest — the
plurality  of  phenomena  as  definite  in  number  and  arrangement.  Why
some  forms  are  more  frequent  than  others,  why  these  are  to  be  found  in
one  place  and  those  in  another,  is  a  question  which  will  make  itself  heard
sooner  or  later.  Bacon  complained1  that  as  yet  no  one  had  attempted  to
explain  why  some  things  are  and  can  be  so  numerous  and  abundant
in  nature,  while  others  appear  so  seldom  and  in  such  small  quantity  (for
it  is  certainly  impossible  that  there  should  be  as  much  gold  as  iron) ;
and  in  this  he  gave  emphatic  utterance  to  our  effort  to  understand  the
whole  position  of  matter-of-fact,  even  in  that  aspect  which,  as  compared
to  the  concept,  is  merely  fortuitous.

12.  The  question  just  raised  refers  in  the  first  place  to  the  permanent
parts  of  our  world-picture,  to  the  things  which  in  their  diversity  form  at
any  moment  the  constituent  parts  of  the  whole.  But  similar  observations
arise  when  we  turn  to  the  course  of  events  in  which  these  parts  are
changed  in  themselves  and  in  their  relations  to  each  other.  Here  again
our  desire  for  knowledge  is  not  satisfied  by  a  conceptual  comprehension
and  classification  of  all  kinds  and  forms  of  change,  by  judgments  which
tell  us  that  one  thing  undergoes  a  particular  kind  of  change  in  this  place,
another  in  that,  and  that  in  this  way  the  form  of  the  whole  passes  through
constant  change  from  moment  to  moment.  Even  if  we  succeeded  in  a
complete  survey  of  the  course  of  all  changes  and  could  reduce  each  one
to  its  appropriate  concept,  there  would  still  remain  the  pressing  question
as  to  the  necessity  of  all  this  happening,  and  we  should  want  not  merely  an
external  connection  of  events  in  our  consciousness,  but  a  knowledge  of
them  as  connected  in  themselves.  We  need  to  think  of  them  proceeding
from  each  other,  as  our  thoughts  depend  upon  each  other,  with  logical
1  De  dign.  et  augm.,  sc.  iii.  i.


INTR  OD  UCTION  1 1

necessity,  and  so  to  find  in  the  external  world  a  counterpart  of  the  unity
which  binds  our  thoughts  together.

13.  It  is  in  the  general  thought  of  causality  in  its  many  forms  that  this
tendency  seeks  to  satisfy  itself. When  defined  with  scientific  exactness,
this  concept  is  the  means  by  which  we  comprehend  the  necessity  of  all
happening,  and  thus  find  again  in Nature  that  relation  which  exists  for
thought  between  the  particular  and  the  general,  the  conclusion  and  its
premises. Hence  the  thought  of  causation  has  its  full  effect  only  in  con
nection  with  the  conception  of  a  general  law  from  which  particular  events
follow  of  necessity  and are  comprehensible  as  the  results  of  a  general
principle. Thus  there  now  appears  with  reference  to  happening  a  logical
subordination  of  the  particular  under  more  and  more  general  laws,  like  the
subordination  of  the  particular  under  species  and  genera  in  the  world  of
things  and  their  forms. For our thought a  judgment which states  a
particular  event  is  well  grounded when  we  can  recognise  it  as  the'' con
sequence  of  universally  valid  laws.

14.  The  more  exact  form  in  which  this  thought  is  to  be  carried  out
and  applied  is  left  undetermined  by  the  general  tendency  to  find  a  ground
for  the  particular. This  tendency  would  be  just  as  well  satisfied  by  the
Leibnitzian  theory  that  all  changes  of  particular  things  are  only  develop
ments  of  their  own  essence,  and  follow  as  a  consequence  of  their  nature,
independently  of  external  influence ;  but  the  course  of  the  world  as  we
perceive  it  will  not  allow  us  to  find  regularity  in  the  series  of  changes
which  each  particular  thing  undergoes,  so -long  as  we  refer  those  changes
merely  to  its  own  condition. On  the  contrary,  we  find  sufficient  instances
ot  connection  between  the  changes  of  a  thing  and  its  changing  relations
to  other  things  to  enable  us  to  formulate  general  principles,  and  sufficient
ground  to  think  that  we  must  look  for  knowledge  of  necessity  in  events,  not
merely  to  the  laws  of  self-development  of  independent  substances, but
also  to  laws  of  action  and  reaction  amongst  substances  which  are  mutually
dependent.

15.  Thus  out  of  the  attempt  to  comprehend  the  given  as  necessary  in
the  forms  of  thought  there  arises  the  ideal  of  a  universal  knowledge,  which
regards  the  perceptible  world  as  the  realization  of  a  system  of  concepts,
and  the  course  of  events  as  the  expression  of  necessary  consequences  follow
ing  from  ultimate  principles. By  a  complete  arrangement  of  all  particulars
in  their  manifest  logical  connection our  thought  would  be  satisfied,  the
functions  of intuition and thought would be  harmoniously  combined.


12  LOGIC

Both  outer  and  inner  life,  material  and  spiritual  events,  would  be  alike
removed  from  the  sphere  of  isolation  and  chance,  and  that  ideal  unity  of
consciousness  which  we  set  before  us  in  our  pursuit  of  knowledge  would
be  at  once  complete  in  itself  and  the  expression  of  the  totality  of  being.

16.  But  it  is  not  only  the  perceptions  in  which  we  obtain  without
effort  of  our  own  an  intuitable  content  of  ideas  to  be  elaborated  into  the
world-picture,  which  afford  us  objects  of  thought ;  nor  does  our  mental
activity  exhaust  itself  in  seeking  the  necessity  of  that  which  is  or  happens.
In  addition  to  these  we  find  within  ourselves  a  constant  activity  of  will.

We  are  not  mere  passive  spectators  of  what  goes  on  without  and  within,
letting  ourselves  be  surprised  by  successive  events  as  in  a  dream,  and  seeing
our  own  action  intervene  only  as  necessity  may  happen  to  give  rise  to  it.
We  are  constantly  putting  forth  action  as  conscious  self-determination,  and
realizing  aims  which  we  have  designed  and  affirmed  as  our  aims.  It  is  true
that  it  is  our  wants,  or  some  impulse  which  we  cannot  explain,  by  which
we  are  led  to  devise  an  imaginary  state  of  things  for  the  future,  and  it  is
true  that  in  the  choice  of  means  to  realize  this  state  we  are  limited  by  our
knowledge  of  the  existing  world  and  our  own  powers  of  acting  upon  it.
But  that  we  can  take  such  an  imagined  aim  for  our  own,  and  control  our
limbs  in  such  a  way  as  to  lead  to  its  realization,  this  is  for  us  something
final,  due  to  ourselves  alone  ;  and  the  true  pulse  of  life  beats,  not  in  the
activity  of  receptivity,  but  in  the  continual  devising  and  realization  of  aims
which  through  our  conscious  acceptation  alone  attain  validity  and  rise  to
something  higher  than  idle  play  of  fancy.  The  most  comprehensive
knowledge  could  neither  alter  nor  kill  this  activity  of  effort.  However
clearly  we  might  see  that  even  mental  life,  even  the  particular  acts  of  the
will,  obey  an  inevitable  necessity,  we  should  never  succeed  in  calmly
watching  our  own  action  and  efforts  of  will  as  the  infallible  consequences
of  the  course  of  Nature.  We  may  indeed  attempt  in  the  interests  of
knowledge  to  regard  the  self  as  object  only,  as  a  part  of  the  universe  ;  to
take  up  our  position,  as  it  were,  outside  the  self,  and,  regarding  the  Ego
as  a  sort  of  double,  to  explain  the  causation  of  its  will  by  an  analysis
of  its  motives.  But  this  very  process  is  itself  an  act  of  will,  and  the  true
self  remains  the  living  Ego  which  effects  these  duplications  of  self  in  the
struggle  for  knowledge.  However  exhaustive  reflection  may  have  been,
the  object  of  observation  is  the  mere  shadow  of  the  self,  an  etSw/W,  of
which  the  life-blood  has  retreated  from  the  observed  to  the  observer ;  the
actual  will,  through  which  alone  an  activity  and  the  aim  towards  which  it


INTR  OD  UCTION  1 3

is  directed  exist,  must  still  be  an  irresolvable  remainder.  Of  course  a
necessarily  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  manner  in  which  acts  of  will  occur
at  any  moment  in  the  subject  will  always  be  sufficient  to  secure  for  us  the
restless  excitement  of  willing  and  resolving  ;  but  even  if  we  had  the  fullest
insight  into  a  psychical  mechanism  for  bringing  about  any  given  resolu
tion,  our  knowledge  would  still  not  suffice  to  make  us  accept  the  act  of  will
thus  produced  as  a  matter  of  course,  to  affirm  the  aim  contained  in  it,  and
to  be  content  to  will  something  because  we  were  constrained  to  will  it.
Because  something  is  and  happens  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  it
ought  to  happen,  and  that  we  are  therefore  constrained  to  acknowledge  it
as  something  which  we  ought  to  will  and  which  is  worthy  of  being  made
our  aim.  This  is  the  more  to  be  borne  in  mind  because  knowledge  itself
can  only  be  finally  realized  through  the  will,  it  grows  only  through  the
setting  of  definite  aims  before  thought.  The  relinquishment  of  a  will
which  is  independent  of  what  we  actually  do  would  be  self-destructive,  for
it  would  annihilate  that  distinction  between  true  and  false  which  arises  from
a  comparison  of  actual  thought  with  an  ideal,  and  it  would  be  open  to
error  as  well  as  to  true  knowledge  to  appeal  to  the  justification  of  actu
ality.

17.  In  proportion  as  self-consciousness  develops  it  strives  for  unity  of
the  will,  for  subordination  of  all  particular  aims  under  one  which  is  higher
than  all  and  embraces  all,  for  the  determination  of  every  practical  question
by  one  supreme  law.  Until  a  man  has  made  his  purposes  coherent  and
connected,  and  set  himself  to  govern  his  changing  and  complicated
activities  by  one  principle,  he  drifts  at  random,  and,  like  a  child,  is  a  prey
to  every  chance  stimulus  from  the  external  world  and  to  his  own  manifold
impulses.  The  reasonableness  by  which  he  is  distinguished  from  the  rest
of  Nature  consists  in  just  this,  that  by  means  of  a  clearly  conceived
system  he  brings  order  and  harmony  into  his  own  activities  and  keeps  one
and  the  same  object  in  view  in  every  single  exertion  of  his  power  over
himself  and  the  external  world.  Here  again  his  thought  ends  in  a  con
sciousness  of  the  necessity  and  unconditional  validity  of  the  end  which  he
accepts,  in  the  consciousness  of  "  ought,"  and  from  it  springs  the  idea  of
a  law  which  is  valid  for  all  reasonable  beings  alike,  the  idea  of  something
which  is  right  and  good,  not  for  him  alone,  but  for  all.

From  the  nature  of  purposive  will  it  further  follows  that  here,  at  any
rate,  the  validity  of  the  particular  ends  is  dependent  upon  the  validity  of
the  general  and  highest  end  :  the  particular  is  only  to  be  willed  because  it


j4  LOGIC

is  a  constituent  part  of  that  object  of  our  will  which  is  supreme  and
includes  all  others.  In  the  purely  theoretical  sphere  it  is  conceivable  that
investigation  might  lead  us  to  a  plurality  of  independent  principles  which
are  merely  not  contradictory,  but  cannot  be  derived  from  each  other.  A
practical  principle  demands  unity,  for  my  will  is  only  mine  when  it  is  one
with  itself  in  all  its  activities,  when  it  is  ruled  in  all  particular  actions  by
one  aim.  Nor  can  sceptical  prudence  reserve  to  itself  any  loophole  of
escape  in  these  practical  questions  ;  we  may  defer  the  theoretical  question,
and  hope  that  later  on  the  progress  of  knowledge  will  afford  an  answer,
but  in  practice  we  must  choose  between  yes  and  no,  for  inaction  is  itself
an  answer  here.

Thus  reflection  upon  what  man  ought  to  do  reveals  itself  as  the  highest
and  most  urgent  problem  of  thought, — a  problem  moreover  which  is  not
only  incapable  of  complete  solution  by  the  mental  elaboration  of  what  is
given,  but  which  proves  upon  enquiry  to  include  this  purely  theoretical
activity  as  dependent  upon  it.

1 8.  We  need  only  point  out  briefly  that  perception  can  never  suffice
to  give  any  final  teaching  as  to  the  ends  at  which  we  must  aim,  and  that
history  would  become  totally  incomprehensible  if  it  should  deny  the  in
fluence  of  ideals  which  have  transcended  all  that  is  given  in  perception.
Or,  again,  if  we  argue  upon  psychological  grounds  that  we  can  will  nothing
seriously  which  does  not  promise  us  some  satisfaction,  the  question  at  once
arises  what  does  satisfy  us  ?  and  no  analysis  can  ever  show  that  only  the
repetition  of  an  experienced  pleasure  or  pain  can  exercise  this  stimulus
upon  the  will. On  the  contrary,  the  unprejudiced  observer  must  acknow
ledge  that  the  most  intense  satisfaction  of  all,  that  which  is  found  in  the
consciousness  of  harmony  with  self,  presupposes  a  will  directed  towards
that  harmony,  which,  as  universal,  can  be  determined  by  no  experience,
and  which  must  therefore  be  regarded  as  ultimate  and  original.

19.  But  we  rest  upon  the  same  ground  even  in  our  scientific  investiga
tions  of  the  perceptible  world. That  comprehensive  knowledge  for  which
we  seek  is  no  gratuitous  gift  of  a  self-developing  nature,  nor  is  its  acquisi
tion  merely  incidental  to  the  necessary  process  of  satisfying  our  wants. It
is  a  freely-willed  end,  for  which we  work  with  conscious  and  voluntary
activity,  and  our  justification  in pursuing  this end  is  ultimately  derived
from  the  validity  of  the  moral  ideal  as  including  the  conception  of  the
most  comprehensive  knowledge. We  must  assume  that the voluntary
thought  presupposed  in  logic,  when  in  its  concrete  form  it  is  directed  to-


\


INTR  OD  UCTION  \  5

wards  a  definite  end  valid  for  all,  is  contained  in the  universal  duty  of
mankind,  and  is  a  necessary  aim  of  human  activity.


§  62.  ^

In  directing  our  thought  towards  these  ends  we  assume  on  the  one
hand  that  our  perceptions  submit  to  the  claims  of  thought  so  far  as  to
allow  of  their  being  arranged  in  a  conceptual  system  and  in  orderly  con
nection  ;  on  the  other  hand,  that  all  our  actions  can  be  subordinated  to  a
single  end.

These  assumptions  are  POSTULATES,  and  our  acceptance  of  them  rests  in
the  last  instance  upon  our  will.

1.  We  shall  not  attempt  here  to  show  how  far  the  ideal  of  theoretical
knowledge  sketched  above  can  be  derived  from  general  ethical  principles  ;
for  the  present  we  must  assume  that  it  is  a  part  of  man's  duty  to  realize  it,
and  that  the  very  nature  of  his  thought  in  its  effort  to  find  necessity  com
pels  him  to  seek  just  this  form  of  knowledge  if  he  will  have  knowledge
at  all. But  we  are  concerned  to  point  out  the  consequences  involved  in
those  presuppositions,  and  thus  throw  light  upon  the  true  character  of  the
starting-point  of  our  Methodology.

2.  Though  our  thought  aims  at  ranging  the  whole  perceptible  world  in
one  system  of  concepts,  and  at  showing  its  complete  submission  to  law
and  necessity,  we  cannot  assume  a  priori,  nor  actually  demonstrate  from
our  always  incomplete  perception,  that  the  content  and  course  of  our  per
ceptions  will  submit  to  the  claims  made  by  thought  as it  arranges  its
material  and  endeavours  to  find  in  it  unity  and  necessary  connection.

Kant  has  pointed  out  *  that  our  perceptions  might  be  so  constituted  as
to  make  it  impossible  for  us  to  divide  them  into  genera  and  species,  or  to
make  them  the  object  of  a  comprehensive  knowledge,  and  impossible  to
derive  their  manifold  laws  from  a  few  ultimate  principles.  It  cannot  be
taken  for  granted  as  an  axiom  that  all  perceptions  are  necessarily  capable
of  being  ranged  in  a  conceptual  system  in  which  it  would  be  possible  to
group  together  similars  and  distinguish  differents  by  accurately  fixed  gra
dations.  On  the  contrary,  the  difficulties  by  which  we  are  met  in  any
classification  teach  us  that  the  logical  arrangement  of  what  is  given  is  no
easy  matter,  that  similarities  do  not  always  force  themselves  upon  our  view
nor  differences  fall  into  clearly  marked  divisions.  Those  departments  in

1 Kritik  der  Urtheihkraft.


16  LOGIC

which  conceptual  classification  can  be  successfully  carried  out  are  sur
rounded  by  and  mingled  with  others  in  which  the  varieties  of  form  are  so
capricious,  or  transitions  are  so  gradual,  as  to  seem  to  mock  the  frame-work
of  our  concepts ;  we  have  therefore  no  invariable  experience  to  which  to
appeal  as  a  proof  that  a  system  of  genera  and  species  is  realized  in  the
phenomena  of  perception.  If  we  nevertheless  hold  by  our  assumption
that  we  must  be  able  to  arrange  all  given  phenomena  under  definite  con
cepts  we  are  justified  only  because  it  is  on  this  supposition  alone  that  our
aim  can  be  attained,  and  the  infinite  number  of  our  intuitions  mastered  by
the  unity  of  consciousness  ;  in  assuming  as  possible  that  which,  if  unattain
able,  would  render  our  will  futile,  and  therefore  unreasonable,  we  lay  down
a  postulate  of  knowledge.

3.  The  same  is  true  of  the  conception  of  a  thorough-going  causal  con
nection.  It  must  be  allowed  that  no  strict  proof  of  the  absolute  im
possibility  of  a  purposeless  and  lawless  happening  has  ever  been  brought
forward.  Experience  can  show  no  invariable  system  according  to  which
events  subordinate  themselves  to  laws  which  may  be  discovered  by  the
mere  comparison  of  similar  instances  ;  nor  can  constructive  metaphysics
succeed  in  convincing  us  that  the  existent  cannot  be  thought  otherwise
than  as  determined  according  to  rule  by  some  other  existent,  or  that  the
logical  law  of  identity  contains  the  principle  that  all  change  in  the  existent,
whether  from  internal  or  external  grounds,  is  necessarily  determined  by
universal  laws.  The  attempt  to  prove  upon  subjective  grounds  that  per
ceptions  cannot  be  combined  in  one  consciousness  unless  they  obey  the
law  of  causation  has  been  no  more  successful,  and  has  failed  to  show  that
experience  is  impossible  unless  every  change  is  preceded  by  another  upon
which  it  follows  according  to  law.  True,  a  science  of  experience  which
can  be  expressed  in  universal  propositions  is  possible  only  when  we  assume
the  law  of  causation  ;  only  then  can  we  say  of  two  events,  a  and  b,  that  b
always  follows  a,  and  that  if  it  ever  does  actually  follow,  it  is  necessary
according  to  a  universal  law.  But  Kant  has  not  shown  why  events  should
not  be  combined  in  one  consciousness  which  as  a  matter  of  fact  only  follow
each  other  in  one  instance,  without  our  being  conscious  of  any  necessity.
On  the  contrary,  unless  it  were  possible  in  the  first  place  to  establish  the
fact  that  here  or  there  b  follows  a,  it  would  be  absolutely  impossible  to
discover  the  law  according  to  which  a  is  the  cause  of  b.  The  science  of
experience  of  which  Kant  sought  the  conditions,  in  the  sense  of  mechanical
physics,  is  preceded  by  another  science  which  merely  observes  and  records


JNTR  OD  UCTION  1 7

the  temporal  sequence  of  events  and  maintains  the  same  attitude  towards
occurrences  which  seem  to  us  causal  as  towards  those  in  which  we  can
recognise  conformity  to  law.  Unless  it  had  been  possible  to  determine
the  successive  positions  of  Mars  by  observation  before  its  movement  was
recognised  as  the  expression  of  a  causal  law,  Kepler  could  never  have
discovered  his  laws,  nor  Newton  have  explained  them  by  the  law  of  Causa
tion.  Thus  what  Kant  has  shown  is  not  that  irregular  fleeting  changes
can  never  be  the  object  of  consciousness,  but  only  that  the  ideal  conscious
ness  of  complete  science  would  be  impossible  without  the  knowledge  of
the  necessity  of  all  events  ;  his  principle  of  causality  is  no  principle  of  the
pure  understanding  in  the  sense  of  a  synthetical  judgment  a  priori,  but  a
postulate  of  the  effort  for  complete  knowledge.

4.  Thus  we  see  that  the  universal  presuppositions  which  form  the  out
line  of  our  ideal  of  knowledge  are  not  so  much  laws  which  the  under
standing prescribes  to Nature, or rather to our sense-perceptions, as
laws  which  the  understanding  lays  down for  its  own  regulation  in  its  in
vestigation  and  consideration  of  Nature. They  are  a  priori  because  no
experience  is  sufficient  to  reveal  or  confirm  them  in  unconditional  uni
versality;  but  they  are  a  priori  not  in  the  sense  of  self-evident  truths,  but
only  in  the  sense  of  presuppositions  without  which  we  should  work  with
no  hope  of  success  and  merely  at  random,  and  which  therefore  we  must
believe  if  we  are  in  earnest  in  our  endeavour  after  knowledge. They  are
postulates,  and  are  akin  to  the  ethical  principles  by  which  we  are  wont  to
determine  and  guide  our  free  conscious  activities.1

It  is  for  this  reason  alone  that  however  we  may  fail  in  our  attempts  to
subordinate  the  world  of  perception  to  a  complete  conceptual  system
and  to  derive  ail  events  from  universally  valid  laws,  we  never  doubt  the
truth  of  our  principles.  We  still  maintain  that  even  the  worst  confusion
is  capable  of  being  resolved  into  comprehensible  formulae ;  again  and  again
we  start  our  work  anew,  and  believe — not  that  Nature  opposes  an  inexorable
refusal  to  our  endeavours — but  only  that  as  yet  we  have  failed  to  find  the
right  way;  but  this  perseverance  is  due  to  the  conviction  that  we  ought  not
to  despair  of  the  accomplishment  of  our  task,  and  the  courage  of  the  explorer
is  sustained  by  the  obligatory  force  of  a  moral  idea.

5.  It  is  the  same  in  the  sphere  of  practical  thought. Here  again  an
ideal  presents  itself  which  has  arisen  from  our  endeavour  to  find  a  com-

1  Cf.  Lotze,  Logik,  p.  567  sq.  Laas,  Kanfs  Analogieen  der  Erfahrung,  p.  175  sq.
A.  Riehl,  Vierteljahrsschr.  f.  iviss.  Phil.,  l,  365  sq.

S.  L. — II.  C


1 8  LOGIC

plete  unity  and  harmony  of  will  such  as  no  experience  can  yield,  for  it  is
never  realized.  Here  again  it  is  no  matter  of  course  that  thought  will
succeed  in  finding  one  comprehensive  end,  from  which  all  particular  ends
are  necessarily  derived,  and  through  which  we  may  determine  unequivo
cally  at  every  moment  of  life  what  is  to  be  done,  so  that  all  our  actions
may  be  knit  together  by  a  complete  logical  necessity ;  nor  is  it  certain  that
all  the  actions  proceeding  from  the  nature  of  the  subject,  from  his  inextin
guishable  impulses,  will  submit  to  such  a  logical  order  and  unity.  The
plurality  of  our  wants  and  of  external  stimuli  corresponds  to  the  manifold-
ness  of  perception  which  theoretical  knowledge  attempts  to  master  by  its
logical  forms  ;  the  fact  that  our  life  can  contain  one  temporal  series  alone
and  that  many  impulses  present  themselves  at  every  moment  is  to  the
unity  of  the  end  as  the  chaos  of  external  impressions  is  to  the  forms  of
regulative  thought.  And  in  the  same  way  we  may  have  the  general  idea
of  connected  unity  without  the  particular  form  in  which  it  should  and  can
be  realized;  just  as  the  idea  of  complete  knowledge  is  the  motive  power
of  theoretical  effort,  so  the  idea  of  the  supreme  good  is  in  the  first  instance
merely  the  motive  power  of  practical  thought.

6.  Thus  every  attempt  to  construct  a  methodology  refers  us  back  to
definite  aims  towards  which  thought  strives,  and  which  depend  for  their
validity  as  ends  upon  the  will ;  and  herein  is  involved  a  further  subjective
presupposition  without  which  the  instruction  to  be  given  to  thought  would
remain  barren  and  unfruitful — the  presupposition  that  the  end  is  attainable
by  actual  thought.  This  involves  the  assumption  that  the  psychological
conditions  under  which  actual  thought  takes  place  oppose  no  insuperable
obstacles  to  the  attainment  of  the  end  or  to  the  carrying  out  of  the  rules
demanded  by  it ;  that  consciousness  of  the  end,  and  of  the  laws  prescribed
by  it,  really  can  determine  our  particular  acts  of  thought  and  direct  them
towards  the  desired  end  ;  that  it  does  not  follow  from  the  psychological
conditions  of  mental  activity  that  we  must  passively  and  inevitably  fall
victims  to  error  and  contradictions.  But  this  is  none  other  than  the
postulate  of  freedom  as  referred  to  our  thought  as  a  voluntary  activity ;
the  postulate  that  the  concentrated  will,  when  directed  towards  the  idea  of
an  end,  has  the  power  to  rule  all  particular  acts  of  thought  into  correspon
dence  with  it,  and  thus  to  establish  the  ideal  unity  of  self-consciousness
throughout  its  manifold  thoughts.  Descartes  was  right  in  saying  that  our
judgment  is  free,  and  that  we  have  the  power  to  withhold  our  assent  from
any  judgment ;  not  indeed  as  he  put  it,  as  if  we  could  at  any  moment,


INTRODUCTION  19

without  further  conditions  being  introduced,  believe  or  not  believe  as  we
like  by  a  mere  act  of  will,  but  right  in  the  sense  that  one  of  the  conditions
of  true  knowledge  is  that  consciousness  of  the  laws  demanded  by  the  unity
of  self-consciousness  should  be  able  in  the  course  of  time  to  bring  about
this  unity.  Even  in  the  sphere  of  practice  the  idea  of  freedom  is  im
portant  not  as  enabling  an  arbitrary  caprice  to  choose  at  any  moment
contradictory  actions,  but  by  making  it  possible  for  the  will  to  be  one  and
harmonious  by  virtue  of  the  end  which,  when  thought  and  willed  with  a
consciousness  of  duty,  determines  the  particular  temporal  acts  of  volition.

7.  The  postulate  of  freedom,  then,  is  none  other  than  that  of  the
unity  of  self-consciousness,  if  by  self-consciousness  we  mean,  not  merely
the  one  form  of  unity  in  which  every  content  is  comprehended,  but  also
the one source of  volitional  activities. When we recognise that the
thought  which  Logic  investigates  depends  upon  volition,  then  we  have
recognised  the  supremacy  of  the  will  in  the  sphere  of  theory  as  well  as  of
practice,  and  the  final  presupposition  is  not  merely  that  the  "  I  think  "
must  accompany  all  my  ideas,  but  also  that  the  "  I  will  "  must  govern  all
my  acts  of  thought  :  in  other  words,  that  the  natural  laws  of  thought  by
which  it  is  guided  in  its  particular  acts  must  oppose  no  obstacle  to  their
complete  interconnection,  nor  the  natural  laws  of  the  will  to  the  subordina
tion  of  all  ends  to  one  supreme  end.

8.  Thus  we  have  on  the  one  hand  the  general  principles  which  are
involved  in  the  ends  towards  which  thought  is  directed,  and  which  in  their
ultimate  dependence  on  a  will  share  in  the  characteristics  of  the  a  priori,
and  on  the  other  hand  that  which  as  object  of  an  immediate  self-conscious
ness  referring  to  a  particular  moment  is  itself  immediately  certain  ;  and
between  the  two  thought  moves  to  and  fro  weaving  the  links  of  necessity.
But  if  we  wish  to  bring  to  light  and  make  sure  of  that  necessity,  we  can
do  so  only  by  ascertaining  the  invariable  natural  laws  of  the  activity  of
thought  itself.

§  63-

In  pointing  out  the  paths  which  thought  must  take  to  the  ends  it  has  in
view  methodology  must  call  to  its  aid  the  History  of  Science,  it  must
investigate  the  methods  through  which  those  ends  have  actually  been
reached,  or  through  which  at  least  an  approximation  has  been  successfully
made,  and  it  must  show  the  grounds  upon  which  these  methods  have  been
based,  and  examine  their  justification.  Its  procedure  therefore  must  be
both  historical  and  critical.


20


LOGIC


1.  Our  task  now  leads  us  to  endeavour  to  point  out  the  ways  by  which
the  ideal  before  us  may  be  reached — or  at  least  approached — under  the
universal  conditions  of  human  thought,  and  starting  from  such  ideas  and
judgments  as  have  been  formed  in  the  natural  course  of  psychological
development. Another  element  now  appears  in our  investigation, the
history  of  science,  in  which  we  find  recorded  progressive  attempts  to  attain
to  concepts  and  judgments  which  are  logically  perfect  and  appropriate  to
the  highest  ends  of  thought,  and  which  shows  us,  on  the  one  hand  under
what  conditions  and  through  what  means  problems  have  been  solved,  and
on  the  other  hand  what  circumstances  have  until  now  hindered  a  complete
solution  and  what  expedients  have  at  least  facilitated  an  approximation  to
the  end.

2.  Generally  speaking,  a  technical  science  appears  after  the  art  with
which  it  is  concerned  has  been  for  some  time  practised,  and  it  reduces  to
rules  that  which  has  already  been  successfully  carried  out  by  proficients  in
the  art. Where  the  art  is  one  so  generally  practised  as  that  of  thought,  it
is  not  for  Logic  to  attempt  to  offer  new  and  original  methods  and  artifices  ;
we  shall  rather  content  ourselves  with  promoting  the  security  of  the  pro
cedures  already  discovered  and  in  use  by  a  consideration  of  the  general
grounds  and  presuppositions  of  methods  employed,  in  order  to  find  out
how  far  and  under  what  conditions  they  are  fitted  to  attain  the  perfection
aimed  at  and  to  secure  freedom  from  error. Thus  we  have  not  to  invent
methods, but by  considering  the  presuppositions involved  in them  to
establish  the  extent  of  their  validity,  the  limits  of  their  application,  and  the
significance  of  their  results. The  work  is  therefore  essentially  historical
and  critical  j  we  take  from  actual  practice  the  manifold  of  particular  pro
cesses,  and  we  estimate  their  logical  justification  by  the  conditions  of
normal  thought,  the  determination  of  the  concepts,  and  universal  validity
of  the  judgments,  and  their  value  by  their  importance  for  the  attainment
of  the  highest  aims  of  our  thought.

3.  In  all  this  we  must  of  course  confine  ourselves  to  the  proper  sphere
of  Logic.  Those  methods  within  the  departments  of  each  particular
science  which  depend  upon  the  special  nature  of  the  objects  and  contain
directions  for  treating  these  so  as  to  bring  about  the  most  favourable  con
ditions  for  knowing  them  (e.g.  for  making  certain  phenomena  artificially
perceptible,  or  for  avoiding  certain  illusions)  belong  to  the  special  tech
nology  of  the  sciences.  No  one  will  expect  to  find  in  a  general  methodology
,  instructions  how  to  use  an  astronomical  instrument  or  to  institute  an


INTR  OD  UCTION  2 1

accurate census, although methodology involves the measurement of
magnitude  and  the  enumeration  of  the  individuals  in  given  groups.

Our  subject-matter  is  limited  to  those  mental  processes  which,  starting
from  given  ideas,  lead  to  the  formation  of  definite  concepts  and  to  know
ledge  of  the  necessity  of  our  judgments.

§  64.

The  course  of  our  investigation  is  determined  for  us  partly  by  the  logical
ideal,  partly  by  the  fact  that  this  logical  ideal  is  not  equally  easy  of  attain
ment  in  every  direction  in  which  we  seek  to  attain  the  ends  of  thought.

The  first  and  fundamental  task  is  the  attainment  of  COMPLETELY  DETER
MINED  CONCEPTS.  It  necessitates  in  the  first  place  the  analysis  of  all  our
ideas  into  their  simplest  elements,  and  next  a  synthesis  guided  by  fixed
rules.  The  second  task  is  the  formation  of  PERFECT  JUDGMENTS  which  are
absolutely  certain  and  well  grounded.  It  necessitates  the  discovery  of
judgments  which  are  self-evident,  and  of  the  way  in  which  all  other  judg
ments  may  be  grounded  upon  these.

But  in  this  logically  perfect  form  the  end  at  which  thought  aims  can  be
only  partially  attained  in  a  direct  manner.  Where  fixed  rules  of  con
ceptual  synthesis  and  absolutely  self-evident  judgments  are  wanting,  and
the  need  nevertheless  remains  for  the  conceptual  arrangement  of  a  given
material  and  for  assigning  the  ground  of  suggested  judgments,  then  we
have  to  make  use  of  indirect,  in  other  words,  hypothetical  or  tentative
methods.

Our  first  task,  that  of  carrying  out  strict  methods,  will  show  of  itself
when  taken  in  connection  with  the  whole  problem  of  thought,  the  limits
outside  of  which  other  methods  must  be  applied  according  to  the  nature
of  the  problems  in  view  and  of  the  conditions  under  which  they  must  be
solved.

i.  The  first  condition  to  be  realized  for  the  perfect  fulfilment  of  the
problems  of  thought  is  the  attainment  of  completely  determined  concepts.

According  to  §  41,  r,  p.  253,  the  possibility  of  the  perfect  formation  of
concepts  depends  upon  the  analysis  of  our  ideas  into  their  simplest
elements,  and  upon  the  regulated  synthesis  of  these  elements  into  com
pound  ideas.  Hence  it  follows  that  in  methodology  we  must  begin  on  the
one  hand  by  indicating  the  way  in  which  all  simple  conceptual  elements
may  be  discovered  and  a  fixed  meaning  assigned  to  them  ;  on  the  other


22  LOGIC

hand  by  pointing  out  the  forms  of  synthesis,  and  developing  the  rules
according  to  which  composite  concepts  are  formed  from  their  elements.
Perfection  would  be  attained  if  this  synthesis  were  carried  out  in  such  a
way  that  the  genesis  of  each  concept  could  be  seen  to  be  necessary,  and
the  interconnection  of  its  characteristics  to  be  demanded  by  general  laws,
while,  further,  the  process  should  itself  guarantee  the  completeness  of  the
conceptual  system,  inasmuch  as  the  elements  of  thought,  when  completely
reviewed,  would  naturally  develop  into  their  manifold  combinations  accord
ing  to  obvious  principles.  Two  opposite  poles  present  themselves  towards
which  this  ideal  construction  tends :  the  one  is  the  greatest  possible  spe
cialization  of  concepts  which  arises  out  of  the  actual  enumeration  of  all
determinations,  and  serves  to  develop  all  possible  differences,  so  that  every
subject  may  be  denoted  by  an  exhaustive  predicate  ;  the  other  is  the
greatest  possible  generalization,  which  serves  to  bring  to  light  on  all  sides
the  unity  of  differents,  and  to  make  possible  the  most  comprehensive
universal  judgments.

2.  A  glance  at  the  results  actually  attained  in  the  construction  of  con
cepts  shows  that  these  ideal  logical  conditions  are  fulfilled  in  very  different
degrees. In  some  departments,  such  as  mathematics,  we  find  both  that
analysis  leads  to  completely  determined  mental  elements  which  are  the
same  for  every  one,  and  that  the  subsequent  synthesis  is  perfectly  clear  and
governed  by  self-evident  axioms ;  while  in  others,  such  as  psychology,  we
are  met  by  the  greatest  difficulties  even  in  the  analysis  of  mental  ele
ments. Whenever  we  are  dealing  with  external  perception,  even  if  we
could  imagine  the  analysis  of  elements  complete,  we  fall  short  of  finding
necessity  in  the  synthesis,  and  certainty  as  to  when  there  is  a  reason  for
combining  characteristics  and  when  there  is  none,  so  that  we  lack  a  safe
and  general  clue  for  the  construction  of  all  concepts. Hence  it  becomes
necessary,  in  those  departments  where  strict  rules  for  conceptual  synthesis
fail,  to  find  some  other  means  of  satisfying  the  needs  of  science  so  far  as
possible,  and  these,  in  the  absence  of  rules,  can exist  only  in  provisional
assumptions. Thus  we  get  the  distinction  between methods  which  are
certain  and  strict,  and  those  which  are  only  hypothetical  or  tentative.

3.  A  similar  distinction  appears  with  respect  to  the  construction  of
judgments. The  universal  and  final  aim  of  methodology  is  to  attain  to
absolutely  certain judgments  ; i.e. to  judgments which  are  either  self-
evident  or  deducible  as  necessary  from  others. This  is possible  with
purely  analytical  judgments,  which  merely  explain  the  contents  of  concepts


INTR  OD  UC1ION  2  3

which  are  already  formed  ;  it  is  possible,  further,  whenever  we  are  able  to
draw  conclusions  by  valid  inferences  from  established  axioms.  But  in  Part
!!.,§§  45-48  we  have  already  shown  that  all  basis  for  such  a  process  fails  us
as  soon  as  judgment  begins  to  deal  with  the  reference  of  our  perceptions
to  an  objective  being  ;  particular  perceptions,  if  we  attempt  to  make  them
express  more  than  a  subjective  fact,  cannot  lay  claim  to  immediate
certainty,  nor  are  there  any  universal  propositions  given  to  us  with  axiom
atic  validity  which  would  enable  us  to  establish  the  particular  judgment  of
perception  as  necessary  consequence  of  some  necessary  and  self-evident
presupposition.  Here  again  then,  in  addition  to  the  methods  which  bear
the  character  of  strict  deduction,  we  must  seek  for  others  which  will  satisfy
the  need  we  are  under  of  referring  the  given  to  an  objective  being  and  of
arranging  it  in  complete  interconnection  ;  and  the  attempt  to  find  these
will  teach  us  that  we  can  only  apply  hypothetical  or  tentative  methods.

Meanwhile  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  construction  of  concepts  and
of  judgments  are  not  processes  which  can  be  carried  out  independently  of
each  other.  At  that  point  in  our  construction  of  concepts  where  we  satisfy
logical  conditions  every  conceptual  synthesis  contains  the  judgment  that
certain  characteristics  belong  together,  and  this  judgment  must  have  its
ground  in  some  law.  It  is  only  while  we  are  analysing  the  process  that
these  two  sides  of  thought  can  be  separated ;  as  they  actually  occur  they
are  always  passing  over  into  each  other.

4.  Our  exposition,  then,  will  take  the  following  course.  We  start  with
the  fundamental  problem  of  finding  the  simple  elements  of  concepts ;  in
doing  this  we  shall  naturally  be  led  to  distinguish  those  departments  in
which  it  is  possible  to  have  a  synthesis  corresponding  to  the  logical  ideal
and  determined  by  fixed  rules,  and  we  shall  discover  the  rules  of  this
synthesis.  The  synthesis  itself  will  lead  us  to  the  consideration  of  a  logi
cally  perfect  construction  of  judgments  which  are  certain  and  obviously
necessary — this  is  the  sphere  of  DEDUCTION.  Then  we  shall  turn  to  prob
lems  where  strict  methods  fail  us ;  for  the  most  part  this  is  when  we  are
dealing  with  the  reference  of  the  empirically  given  to  general  principles.
The  theory  of  INDUCTION  teaches  us  under  what  conditions  and  presuppo
sitions  judgments  concerning  the  objects  of  our  perception  may  be  formed
and  what  degree  of  certainty  pertains  to  them ;  the  theory  of  CLASSIFICA
TION  treats  of  the  construction  of  concepts  in  this  department.  The  fact
that  we  here  place  the  construction  of  judgments  before  that  of  concepts
must  be  justified  by  the  course  of  our  discussion.


CHAPTER I.

CONCEPTUAL ELEMENTS, AND THE  FORMS  IN WHICH  THEY
ARE SYNTHESIZED.

§ 65.

THE  first  precept  enjoined  by  the  art  of  thought  is  that  we  should
make  ourselves  clearly  conscious  of  what  we  do  when  we  think  of  any
object,  and  that  we  should  make  this  consciousness  invariable.  From  such
a  consciousness  arise  the  ideas  of  IDENTITY,  of  NON-IDENTITY,  and  of  UNITY
as  the  interconnected  results  of  reflection  upon  the  form  of  those  activities
through  which  our  self-consciousness  realizes  itself  in  its  unity.

According  to  their  contents  objects  thus  distinguished  are  further  deter
mined  by  their  RESEMBLANCE  or  DIFFERENCE.

1.  Our  investigation  of  the  simple  elements  of  our  concepts  would  have
attained  its  purpose  (according  to  §  41)  if  we  had  full  knowledge  of  the
laws  of  the  genesis  of  all  our  ideas,  and  could  show  the  simple  acts  through
which  their  elements  arise  and  by  which  they  enter  into  more  and  more
complicated  connection  ;  and  if,  moreover,  we  could  control  the  means  of
evoking  these  functions  and  their  products  in  ourselves  and  others  at  will,
as,  e.g.,  we  can  be  sure  of  producing  the  sensation  of  a  particular  yellow  for
the  normal  eye  by  burning  natrium. But  we  have  no  such  science  and  art
in  our  possession ;  our  logical  theory  must  start  from  an  infinite  multitude
of  the  most  manifold  ideas,  which  we  may  take  to  be  represented  by  the
whole  wealth  of  language, — ideas  of  which  we  rarely  know  the  origin,  since
they  have  taken  shape  so  unintentionally  and  without  reflection  that  they
only  come  into  clear  consciousness  when  complete,  and  concerning  which
a  closer  consideration  shows  us  that  we  can  be  certain  neither  that  they
are  constant  in  themselves  nor  that  they  are  the  same  for  all.

2.  The  first  step  in  working  up  this  material  must  be  to  get  a  clear  con
sciousness  of  all  our  ideas  such  as  they  ordinarily  present  themselves — a
consciousness  such  that  we  are  able  to  grasp  the  content  of  a  given  idea,


ELEMENTS OF CONCEPTS  25

and  to  be  sure  in  repeating  it  that  it  remains  identical.  At  the  moment,
of  course,  we  are  always  conscious  of  what  we  are  thinking,  but  this  con
sciousness  is  fleeting,  and  often  passes  but  lightly  over  its  objects ;  it  does
not  guarantee  that  stability  and  constancy  in  our  ideas  which  is  demanded
by  logical  requirements.  We  must  accept  here  as  granted  by  psychology
that  with  increasing  practice  the  conscious  will,  the  inner  attention,  does
succeed  more  and  more  perfectly  in  grasping  the  contents  of  ideas  with  a
certainty  and  accuracy  equal  to  that  with  which  the  sounds  of  words  are  re
membered  and  reproduced  without  particular  effort.  The  first  step  in  learn
ing  to  think  consists  in  nothing  else  than  in  this  careful  attention  to  mental
activity,  with  the  object  of  gaining  complete  mastery  over  it.

3.  Language  is  a  powerful  aid  to  the  reproduction  and  remembrance  of
different  ideas,  but  as  it  stands  it  is  not  altogether  favourable  to  this  logical
endeavour. Words  have  many  meanings,  and  according  to  the  context  in
which  they  appear  express  very  different  shades  of  thought  which  are  often
remote  in  significance,  and  for  our  present  consciousness  altogether  discon
nected. Hence  they  often  hinder  the  attempt  to  keep  distinct  and  repro
ducible  the  ideas  with  which  we  work,  and  present  difficulties  when  we  try
to  excite  in  others  ideas  exactly  like  our  own,  or  to  form  our  own  from
theirs. It  was  with  the  sure  touch  of  the  master  hand  that  Aristotle  was
wont  in  his  analysis  of  concepts  to  begin  by  distinguishing  the  different
meanings  of  words  and  to  guard  against  the  dangers  of  the  confusion  inci
dent  to  speech  by  an  investigation  of  the  7roA.A.a^ws  Aeyo/xcva. He  carried
out  to  its  completion  the  Socratic  method  of  always  directing  the  attention
from  the  word  to  the  thought  which  accompanies  it.

4.  If  we  assume  now  that  we  have  fulfilled  this  condition,  and  made
ourselves  clearly  conscious  of  the  ideas  which  we  connect  with  words,  our
next  task  will  be  to  analyse  these  ideas  into  their  elements  and  to  reduce
them  to  simple  acts, — to  acts  which  every  one  performs  in  the  same  way.
Where,  when  we  think  of  the  infinite  manifold  of  the  content  denoted  by
language,  shall  we  begin  our  operations? How  shall  we  find  any  clue  to
making  even  a  start  in  the  process  ?

5.  What  we  are  always  told  is  that  we  must  compare  our  ideas  with  one
another,  so  as  to  show  wherein  they  are  similar  and  wherein  they  differ,  and
in  this  way  to  break  them  up  into  parts.  An  object,  it  is  said,  is  like  others
in  various  respects,  and  thus  it  breaks  up  of  itself  into  different  constituent
ideas ;  by  virtue  of  each  of  these  it  is  like  some  other  objects,  different
from  others ;  by  continuing  this  process  in  all  directions  we  must  at  last


26  LOGIC

come  to  the  simple  parts  which  cannot  be  further  analyzed,  and  at  the  same
time  we  shall  attain  to  abstraction,  the  power  of  thinking  them  by  them
selves,  apart  from  their  connections.  Thus  in  the  visible  world  form  and
colour  fall  apart  inasmuch  as  an  object  is  like  a  number  of  others  in  form,
but  unlike  in  colour ;  while,  again,  it  is  like  others  in  colour  but  different
in  form.  This  process  is  facilitated  where  an  object  undergoes  changes  in
which  some  aspects  change  while  others  remain  the  same  ;  the  leaf  in
fading  forces  me  to  distinguish  the  unchanging  form  from  the  changing
colour.

6.  This process  is of  course begun, and to  a  large  extent  carried
through,  under  the  psychological  laws  which  govern  the  formation  of  lan
guage  ;  and  it  would  almost  seem  as  if  our  purpose  could  be  achieved  by
merely  completing  what  is  already  given  naturally.

But  even  if  it  were  an  easy  task,  one  which  might  be  said  to  proceed  of
itself  and  without  training  or  practice  on  our  part,  to  recognise  the  like  in
the  different  and  disengage  it  from  its  actual  connections,  yet  this  method
would  still  fail  to  tell  us  where  we  must  begin.  It  would  fail  again  in  its
process  of  elimination  to  distinguish  those  characteristics  which  appertain
to  all  objects  as  such,  just  because  they  are  our  objects ;  and,  finally,  it
would  fail  to  give  us  any  guarantee  that  the  ideal  elements  to  which  it
attains  are  always  the  same  for  all  and  possessed  by  every  one  alike.  It  is
these  alone  of  which  logic  can  make  use,  and  what  we  must  aim  at  is  first
of  all  to  find  those  elements  which  are  the  same  for  every  one,  and  we  shall
then  have  in  them  a  standard  by  which  to  estimate  individual  differences.

7.  The  content  of  thought  is  of  infinite  variety  ;  and  if  we  begin  our
process  of  comparison  and  abstraction  at  random,  we  have  no  guarantee
that  we  are  starting  from  data  which  are  the  same  for  all. One  thing,  how
ever,  must  be  assumed  to  be  the  same  in  every  one ;  that  is,  the  activity  of
thought  itself,  and  the  manner  in  which,  together  with  its  content,  it  appears
in  consciousness ;  unless  we  assume  this,  Logic  itself  becomes  meaningless.
We  may, therefore,  begin  with  the  problem stated  above (2), for  this
activity  itself  involves  certain  original  ideal  elements. The  fundamental
condition  is  that  we  shall  attain  such  a  knowledge  of  our  mental  activity
that  we  may  be  able  to  repeat  it  as  consciously  the  same,  and  the  very
form  of  this  activity  involves  elements  which  we  must  accept  as  abso
lutely  the  same  for  all. Such  a  consciousness  of  our  own  mental  activity
would  be  impossible  without  the  ideas  of  unity,  of  identity,  of  non-identity,
of  similarity  and  dissimilarity ;  we  are  conscious  of  our  thought  when  we


ELEMENTS OF  CONCEPTS,  27

observe  how  we  distinguish  one  from  others,  and  identify  it  with  itself  as
opposed  to  something  else.  The  same  assumption  is  involved  in  the
method  of  comparison  and  abstraction ;  it  presupposes  that  thought  al
ways  begins  by  distinguishing  differences  and  recognising  similarities,  and
by  maintaining  the  distinction  between  one  and  others ;  and  it  thus
assumes  these  elements  as  the  natural  properties  of  thought.  But  we
really  possess  them  only  when  we  observe  our  mental  activity,  when  we
become  aware  that  we  are  distinguishing  and  unifying ;  we  must  recognise
them  as  simple,  interconnected  acts,  through  which  alone  the  many  and
the  different  can  enter  into  consciousness,  and  which  are  therefore  involved
in  every  content  of  thought.  In  so  far  as  we  are  conscious  of  performing
these  acts  always  in  the  same  way  and  of  necessity,  we  have  in  them  an
original  possession  common  to  every  one  alike.

There  is  no  moment  of  our  waking  life  in  which  we  do  not  find  a  num
ber  of  objects  presented  to  consciousness.  Reflection  upon  what  takes
place  when  we  think  of  these  objects  shows  first  a  process  of  distinguishing
in  the  sense  that  in  passing  from  one  object  to  another  we  are  conscious  of
a  new  and  distinct  act,  without  ever  losing  sight  of  the  first  object.  In  this
way  we  distinguish  the  acts  through  which  we  apprehend  some  object,  and
then  another  and  another,  and  by  comprehending  together  a  number  of
such  discriminated  acts  we  obtain  the  consciousness  of  a  plurality  of  ideas.
Each  of  them  is  one  in  so  far  as  we  are  conscious  of  grasping  it  in  one  act,
and  see  no  distinction  in  it  itself,  but  merely  contrast  it  as  different  from
some  other  ;  each  stroke  of  a  bell,  each  distinct  figure  which  we  seize  with
one  glance,  is  in  this  sense  one.

The  simplest  example  may  be  found  in  the  contents  of  our  field  of  vision.
When  we  are  not  staring  absent-mindedly  in  front  of  us,  but  are  thinking
about  what  we  see,  we  discriminate  objects  by  their  different  colours.  As
we  glance  from  one  to  the  other,  the  consciousness  arises  of  successive
apprehensions ;  and  at  the  same  time,  inasmuch  as  the  objects  first  per
ceived  are  still  present,  either  towards  the  extremes  of  the  field  of  vision  or
in  memory,  these  apprehensions  are  connected  together,  and  there  arises
the  consciousness  of  a  plurality  of  visible  objects  side  by  side.  The  same
thing  takes  place  with  successive  sensations ;  when  I  hear  the  strokes  of  a
bell  one  after  another  I  am  conscious  at  each  fresh  stroke  of  a  new  sensation,
while  the  one  just  past  still  lingers  in  memory  ;  in  this  way  I  distinguish  the
new  perception  from  the  one  before,  and  combine  them  in  one  conscious
ness  into  a  temporal  series.  Finally,  when  I  revert  after  some  interruption


28  LOGIC

to  a  visible  object  which  I  remember  seeing  before,  I  am  conscious  of  a
new  perception  which  I  both  distinguish  from  the  original  one  and  connect
with  it.  And,  in  the  same  way,  when  I  survey  anew  the  present  field  of
vision  and  come  again  upon  an  object  which  I  noticed  before,  I  am  con
scious  of  perceiving  the  same  object  over  again,  and  discriminate  it  from
others  as  the  same.

In  the  distinction  between  successive  mental  acts  we  have  the  basis  for
the  opposite  concepts  of  identity  and  non-identity.  What  I  represent  to
myself  in  a  second  act  is  either  a  second  object  distinct  from  the  first,  or  it
is  the  same  presented  over  again,  after  the  intervention  of  some  other,  and
with  a  consciousness  that  the  repeated  presentation  implies  no  difference  of
object.  In  a  motionless  field  of  vision  non-identity  and  identity  become
intuitable  through  difference  or  sameness  of  position  in  space.

The  mere  perception  that  mental  acts  which  are  separated  in  time,  and
particular  objects  which  are  separated  in  time  or  space,  are  distinct,  must
not  be  confused  with  the  recognition  of  likeness  or  difference  of  content
in  objects  which  are  in  the  first  place  merely  distinguished  from  each  other.
Before  I  can  speak  of  likeness  I  must  have  distinguished  at  least  two
objects,  and  be  able  to  maintain  the  distinction  between  them  ;  but  it  does
not  follow  that  objects  thus  distinguished  are  different.  We  are  aware  of
the  likeness  or  difference  of  given  objects  (visible  figures,  sounds,  etc.)  by
a  sort  of  immediate  impression  which  may  so  far  be  included  under  the
concept  of  perception  in  the  wider  sense.  But  the  abstract  concepts  of
these  relations,  through  which  alone  they  can  become  predicates  in
judgments,  have  their  origin  in  reflection  upon  psychical  processes,  upon
what  we  do  and  feel  when  we  compare  one  thing  with  another ;  and  they
presuppose  the  development  of  conscious  comparison,  of  investigation  of
different  relations.

The  same  relations  extend  to  everything  which  is  the  object  of  percep
tion  and  thought ;  we  can  have  a  definite  and  clear  consciousness  of
nothing  except  by  a  continual  process  of  distinguishing,  identifying,  com
paring,  and  finding  likeness  or  difference.  Opinion  may  differ  as  to
whether  those  most  elementary  functions  by  which  we  merely  distinguish
amongst  different  impressions  and  get  the  idea  of  plurality  are  to  be  called
judgments  or  not;  if  we  start  from  the  formula  "A  is  distinct  from  £"
we  assume  the  abstract  concept  of  distinctness  which  can  be  got  only  from
reflection  upon  our  original  activities,  and  is  therefore  based  upon  these  ;
hence  there  is  some  ground  for  saying  that  we  merely  notice  distinctness,


ELEMENTS OF  CONCEPTS  29

thus  distinguishing  between  those  simplest  operations  and  the  statements
which  are  contained  in  complete  judgments.  But  we  cannot  have  a  clear
consciousness  of  even  that  simplest  action  except  in  the  form  of  the  judg
ment  "  A  is  other  than  B."  Clear  consciousness  consists  in  just  this  state
ment  of  what  the  objects  of  consciousness  and  their  relations  are,  which
have  their  origin  in  immediate  psychical  apprehension ;  it  is  the  expression
of  them  in  judgments.

8.  Thus  from  the  source  of  all  methodical  procedure,  observation  of
what  we  do  when  we  have  the  idea  of  an  object,  there  arises  the  conscious
ness  of  certain  original  ideal elements. From  this  point  of  view the J
idealistic  philosophy  is  right  in  teaching  that  the  essence  of  intelligence  is

in  that  continuous  reflection  by  which  events  at  first  unconscious  are
brought  into  consciousness,  and  that  the  self-intuition  of  the  ego  in  its
activity  is  the  source  of  all  knowledge.  In  looking  for  the  conceptual  \/
elements  which  are  the  same  for  all  we  must  begin,  not  with  the  fortuitous
plurality  of  the  content  manipulated  by  thought,  but  with  the  activity
of  thought  itself.  That  these  fundamental  determinations  are  simple  and
constant  is  guaranteed  by  the  unity  of  self-consciousness,  which  would  dis
appear  if  the  functions  in  which  it  realizes  itself  were  not  always  fulfilled
in  the  same  way.

9.  Here  enter  the  so-called  principles  of  identity  and  contradiction,
in  the  form  in  which  they  are  generally  presented  by  logic  (A  =  A,  not
non-^4). Generally,  it  is  true,  they  are  meant  to  apply  only  to  the  con
tent  of  concepts,  and  not  to  the  merely  numerical,  spatial  or  temporal
distinction  between  objects ;  but  the  formulae  may  be  extended  to  every
object  of  thought,  even  to  the  particular  which  is  distinguished  only  in
time  and  space. On  the  one  hand,  they  are  imperatives,  commanding  us
to  maintain  every  object  in  memory  as  the  same,  and  guarding  against
all  confusions,  all  unnoticed  blending  amongst  our  ideas ;  on  the other
hand,  when  presented  as  fundamental  laws  of  thought,  they  state  that  the
concepts  of  identity  and  non-identity  are  given  with  thought  itself,  and
are  the  first  immediate  results  of  a  reflection  which is  directed  upon  our
mental  activities  and  apprehends  them  in  their  fundamental  forms  (of.  i,
§  14.  6,  p.  88,  §  22.  6,  p.  129).

10.  In  the  fact  that  this  reflection  apprehends  constant  activities  which
repeat  themselves  in  every  mental  act,  lies  the  difference  between  the  con
sciousness  of  these  universal  elements  of  thought  and  the  mere  apprehen
sion  of  some  particular  mental  event,  such  as  the  seeing  of  a  particular


30  LOGIC

colour  or  the  feeling  of  a  pain  of  a  certain  intensity.  They  are  the  factors
which  constitute  the  unity  of  self-consciousness  itself,  not  factors  which
refer  to  the  plurality  of  its  objective  content;  and  in  deriving  the  main
concepts  of  the  understanding  from  the  transcendental  apperception  Kant
was  right,  in  so  far  as  the  self-consciousness  which  is  one  and  the  same  in
all  particular  acts  realizes  itself  in  distinguishable  activities,  amongst  which
the  most  original  are  just  these  processes  of  distinguishing  and  identifying.

ii.  But  this  is  so  only  in  connection  with  the  function  of  which
the  result  is  the  concept  of  unity.  For  when  we  recognise  something  as
identical  and  as  different  from  another,  by  that  very  fact  we  recognise  each
as  one ;  and  when  we  become  conscious  of  these  combined  functions  in
their  relation  to  one  another,  there  arises  with  the  concept  of  one  that  of
two  also,  and  here  we  have  the  foundation  of  all  numerical  concepts.

The  justice  of  this  view  of  the  manner  in  which  we  arrive  at  the  most
primitive  conceptual  elements  must  be  confirmed  by  the  derivation  of
number  and  numerical  concepts  from  these  first  beginnings.  For  if  any
thing  is  perfectly  determined  and  universally  valid,  thought  and  understood
by  every  one  in  the  same  way,  it  is  numbers  ;  moreover  numbers  can  be
shown  to  be  amongst  the  oldest  and  earliest  constituents  of  language.1

§  66.

From  consciousness  of  the  activities  which  take  place  whenever  we
think  of  objects,  there  develops  COUNTING  and  the  concept  of  NUMBER,
in  which  we  are  conscious  not  only  of  distinguishing  and  comprehending
the  particular  acts  by  which  we  proceed  from  one  to  another,  but  also  of
the  law  of  this  procedure.  Hence  there  develop  also  the  concepts  of
particular  numbers  and  the  general  concept  of  number  as  well  as  of  re
lations  of  MORE  and  LESS  and  EQUALITY.

The  possibility  of  continuing  the  series  of  numbers  indefinitely  at  will
depends  upon  our  consciousness  of  the  law  of  counting  ;  the  possibility  of
reversing  the  numerical  series  is  due  to  the  presence  of  the  successive  steps
from  unity  to  unity  in  the  consciousness  which  combines  them ;  and  from
the  application  of  counting  to  numbers  themselves  arise  those  methods  of
calculation  which  again  lead  to  an  extension  of  the  concept  of  number  by
the  introduction  of  negative,  fractional  and  irrational  numbers,  though

they  can  never  overcome  the  originally  discrete  nature  of  number.

•

1  H.  Ilankel,  Zur  Geschichte  der  Matliematik,  p.  7  sq.


CONCEPTS OF  NUMBER  31

Thus  all  numerical  concepts  are  nothing  but  developments,  in  higher
forms  of  synthesis,  of  the  formal  functions  which  we  practise  in  every  mental
act  by  identifying  and  distinguishing.

1.  It  might  be  held  that  the  idea  of  number  arises  at  the  lowest  stages
of  human  mental  life  from  the  sense-impression  of  things  which  can  be
counted,  and  that  the  ideas  of  numbers  2,  3,  4,  etc.,  are  got  by  simple
abstraction  from  different  groups  containing  the  same  number  of  objects.
Not  only  does  Mill  hold  this  view,  when  he  says  that  all  numbers  must  be
numbers  of  something,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  number  in  the  ab
stract,  and  that  the  properties  of  number  are  really  properties  of  things,1
the  algebraical  symbols  a,  b,  c,  etc.,  symbols  of  things  in  general;  even  Bain2
refers  to  sense  impression,  at  any  rate  for  the  simpler  numerical  concepts.
Number  is  for  him  a  series  of  discrete  sense-impressions,  coloured  spots,
notes,  etc. ;  unity  is  the  abstraction  from  numerous  concrete  things,  i.e.,
from  many  particular  impressions. Hegel  himself  says  3  that  the  operation
which  gives  rise  to  number  is  the  counting  of  fingers,  points,  and  so  on ;
we  can  only  show  what  we  mean  by  four,  five,  etc.

2.  There  can  of  course  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  in  this  way  that  we  learn
to  count,  that  is,  the  examples  which  are  shown  to  us  make  us  aware  of  the
meaning  of  the  numerical  words  we  hear,  and  that  we  make  use  of  similar
sensuous  helps  to  facilitate  our  understanding  of  addition,  subtraction,  mul
tiplication,  etc. This  process  presupposes  that  it  is  immediately  evident  to
us  that  each  of  the  many  things  thus  grouped  together  in  counting  is  one.
But  it  is  not  clear  that  this  "one"  can  rest  simply  upon  the  sense-impres-

:  sion ;  Mill  himself  tells  us  that  we  can  think  of  everything  as  divided  into
four  equal  parts,  so  that  we  may  predicate  of  it  every  attribute  of  the  number
four.  If  so,  what  determines  whether  we  shall  think  of  it  as  one  or  as  four  ?
Evidently  not  the  sense-impression,  which  is  the  same  in  both  cases,  but
the  manner  in  which  we  apprehend  and  interpret  this  sense-impression.
But  if  this  is  so,  then  mere  abstraction  from  concrete  things  cannot  give  us
unity  and  the  simplest  numerical  concepts,  in  the  sense  that  nothing  more
is  necessary  than  that  a  series  of  particular  discrete  impressions  should  be
presented.  The  idea  of  one  finger  is  certainly  different  from  the  idea  of
two  fingers ;  but  this  does  not  mean  that  in  the  one  case  the  idea  of  one,
in  the  other  the  idea  of  two,  is  given  with  the  objects  themselves,  and  that
just  as  we  may  abstract  the  idea  of  red  colour  from  a  number  of  red

1  J.  S.  Mill,  System  of  Deductive  and  Inductive  Logic,  I,  bk.  2,  ch.  6,  §  2.

2  A  Bain,  Logic,  ii.  200  sq.  3  Logik,  i.  p.  238.


32  LOGIC

things,  so  we  can  without  more  ado  abstract  the  idea  one  from  a  number
of  concrete  things,  or  the  idea  two  from  a  number  of  pairs  of  things.  When
we  ask  what  is  the  point  of  resemblance  between  all  things  which  we
naturally  think  of  as  one — sun,  moon,  and  stars,  animals,  trees  and  sounds
— we  find  that  in  respect  to  their  perceptible  contents  they  are  so  abso
lutely  different  as  to  show  no  common  element;  and  Bain  shows  the
confusion  of  his  presuppositions  in  attaching  special  importance  to  inter
rupted  sensations,  to  transitions  of  consciousness.  If  the  common  element
is  to  be  the  transition  of  consciousness,  the  interruption,  then  in  order  to
perceive  this  we  evidently  have  need  of  another  function  than  that  which
makes  us  aware  of  the  particular  sense-impression  itself;  we  hear  the  single
toll  of  the  bell,  but  we  do  not  hear  the  pauses  between  the  tolls,  and  in
the  same  way  we  do  not  hear  the  number  of  tolls,  although  we  hear  the
tolls  themselves.  In  hearing  a  sound  three  times  nothing  is  given  but  a
succession  of  three  sensations,  not  the  idea  of  this  succession  nor  the  idea
of  the  number  three ;  it  is  only  when  we  group  them  together  in  memory
and  become  aware  of  the  "  transition  of  consciousness  "  itself,  that  the  idea
of  plurality  can  arise.  In  the  same  way  the  idea  of  unity  presupposes
that  we  are  conscious  of  the  self-contained  and  definite  act  of  perception
of  one  object,  in  distinction  from  the  repeated  perception  of  other  objects.
All  that  we  think  of  as  one  in  the  domain  of  sense  is  first  disengaged  from
the  continuum  by  such  an  act  of  defining  and  comprehending ;  the  par
ticular  sound  from  the  continuum  of  time,  the  particular  form  from  the
continuum  of  space.  Change  of  sensation  affords  the  occasion  for  this
function,  but  purely  passive  change  is  not  the  function  itself.  It  would  be
simply  inexplicable  how  we  could  regard  the  same  thing  as  one  and  as
many  if  it  were  not  due  to  the  different  way  in  which  we  draw  our  limits,
and  become  aware  of  this  limitation  and  progress  to  something  else.  We
may  regard  one  of  the  words  before  us  as  one,  inasmuch  as  we  combine  a
plurality  of  letters  by  one  act  of  limitation  into  one  image,  and  separate
it  from  other  images  which  are  divided  from  it  by  intervals ;  we  may  also
regard  it  as  many  when  we  turn  our  attention  to  the  transition  from
one  letter  to  another,  and  notice  each  step.  Thus  it  appears  to  be
a  matter  of  choice  what  combinations  we  shall  think  of  as  one.  Wherever
it  is  possible  to  combine  even  differences  in  one  consciousness,  so  that
memory  can  survey  them  and  connect  the  beginning  with  the  end,  arid
discrimination  'include  the  whole  within  one  boundary,  there  we  have  the
possibility  of  the  one  ;  wherever  it  is  possible  to  think  of  differences  within


CONCEPTS  OF  NUMBER  33

a  whole,  or  to  combine  a  number  of  different  objects  while  still  maintaining
the  consciousness  of  their  difference,  there  we  have  the  possibility  of  the
many.

3.  This  is  the  foundation  of  number. Each number  is  not mere
plurality,  but  a  plurality  which  is  bound  together  and  limited,  and  so  far
thought  as  a  unity,  in  one  act  of  thought  which  combines  together  the  re
peated  acts  by  which  we  have  distinguished  the  units. The  possibility  of
number  lies  in  our  consciousness  of  the  steps  we  take,  and  in  the  fact  that
the  one  act  by  which  we  combine  two  of  our  consciously  performed  unifi
cations  is  distinct  from  that  by  which  we  combine  three,1  and  can  be  clearly
retained  in  memory.

We  need  hardly  show  in  more  detail  that  the  formation  of  numerical
concepts  means  the  determination  for  consciousness  of  spontaneous
activities,  which  are  occasioned,  but  not  necessarily  produced,  by  sense-
impressions  ;  and  that  these  activities  are  of  a  purely  formal  nature,  in  so
far  as  they  can  not  only  be  repeated  with  respect  to  any  given  content
whatever,  but  may  even  guide  the  creation  of  a  content  to  correspond  to
them,  as  when  in  rhythmical  movements  our  production  of  a  numerical
content  is  guided  by  the  thought  of  number.  In  this  sense  we  may  speak
of  number  as  abstract,  but  not  as  meaning  that  it  is  abstracted  in  the
ordinary  way  from  a  given  content.  We  should  rather  think  of  it  as  a
spontaneous  creation  of  thought  in  becoming  conscious  of  its  own  activities,
and  as  therefore,  when  it  has  once  arisen,  absolutely  independent  in  its
further  developments  of  all  that  is  sense-given.

Thus  number  shows  itself  to  be  the  simple  consequence  of  the  funda
mental  functions  of  thought  itself,  the  development  grounded  upon  these
functions  of  the  discrimination  of  unities.  In  it  we  merely  bring  into
definite  consciousness  what  we  always  do  when,  in  thinking  of  and  dis
criminating  unities,  we  pass  from  one  to  another.  Hence  it  is  of  the  most
universal  application,  and  in  developing  its  laws  we  do  no  more  than
develop  in  one  particular  direction  the  laws  of  activities  which  are  the
basis  of  all  thought.2

4.  Not  only  is  this  view  of  number  instructive  for  our  methodological
studies ;  it  is  a  further  confirmation  of  what  was  shown  in  §  41,  6.  7  (I.  pp.

1  In  this  sense  Bain  is  right  in  saying  (p.  200  and  elsewhere)  : "  By  memory  we  can
easily  retain  a  small  succession  of  interrupted  sensations  or  transitions  of  consciousness
and  identify  it  with  another  small  succession."

2  See  Appendix  A.

5.  L. — II.  D


34  LOGIC

258  sq.)  viz.,  that  the  assumption  (generally  involved  in  the  schematic  repre
sentation  of  concepts  as  a  sum  of  attributes),  that  we  can  carry  the  analysis
of  our  ideal  elements  back  to  isolated,  independent  attributes,  is  false.
Unity  and  difference,  one,  two  and  several,  are  inseparably  connected  for
thought ;  the  acts  of  unification  and  discrimination  are  mutually  con
ditioned  in  such  a  way  that  neither  can  come  into  consciousness  without
the  other.  Counting  itself,  as  the  general  form  of  conscious  progress  from
one  unity  to  another  proves  to  be  a  function  which,  though  it  presupposes
discrimination,  cannot  be  regarded  as  simply  a  combination  of  other  acts.
Thus  instead  of  isolated  elements  we  find  interrelated  functions,  and  get
already  a  glimpse  of  the  end  to  which  the  analysis  of  our  conceptual
elements  leads  ;  we  see  that  the  theory  which  hopes  to  derive  everything
from  particular  elements  of  sensation,  originally  separate  and  given  in
successive  moments,  overlooks  the  essential  determinations  of  a  thought
which  has  its  root  in  self-consciousness.

5.  The  consideration  of  number  shows  also  that  just  because  related
functions  are  so  inseparably  connected  certain  general  forms  of  synthesis
are  involved  in  the  simplest  and  most  primitive  mental  functions. In  our
consciousness  of  one  together  with  another  which  is  different  from  it,  we
have  the  most  fundamental  synthesis  which  is  consciously  realized  in  the
number  two. And  since  this  synthesis  can  be  applied  to  any  series  what
ever,  counting  appears  as  a  general  form  which  brings  into  consciousness
its  own  laws  as  a  process  from  one  unity  to  another,  accompanied  at  each
step  by  the  combination  of  previous  acts  into  a  new  unity. As  we  become
conscious  of  this  form  and  this  law  we  avail  ourselves  freely  of  them,  and
create  an  infinite series  of  particular  numbers  in  accordance with the
law; we  need  no  other  help  from  sense  than  the  numerical  word or
symbol  which  enables  us  by  its  characteristic  form to  remember and
distinguish  the  particular  numbers,  in  a  way  which  the  uniform  law  of  their
production  could  not  do.1

6.  When  we  actually  carry  out  this  process  in  the  numerical  series
i  +  i  or  2,  2  +  i  or  3,  etc.,  we  obtain  a  series  of  definitions  in  which  both
the  particular  elements  and  the  form  of  their  synthesis  are  fully  deter
mined. They  have  the  character  of  nominal  definitions  in  so  far  as  they
convey  the  meaning  of  the  particular  numerical  terms,  but  from  the  first
they  are  also  synthetical  definitions  (§  44,  4, 1.  pp.  290  sq.),  inasmuch  as  the

1  On  Helmholtz's  proposal  to  base  arithmetic  on  a  fixed  series  of  symbols  see  Appen
dix  B.


CONCEPTS OF  NUMBER  35

corresponding  ideas  must  always  be  constructed.  Each  of  these  concepts
is  completely  determined  and  has  therefore  no  extension  (§  42,  5,  i  pp.
270  sq.  cf.  §  26,  4,  note  pp.  159  sq.)  and  each  is  logically  perfect  because
we  are  conscious  of  its  origin  in  definite  conscious  acts.1

1  J.  S.  Mill,  in  the  passage  cited  above,  contends  that  propositions  such  as  2  +  1  is  3
may  he  regarded  as  definitions.  Certainly,  if  we  regard  them  as  propositions  referring  to
things,  they  have  all  the  appearance  of  merely  identical  propositions.  The  assertion
"  Two  pebbles  and  one  pebble  are  equal  to  three  pebbles  "  does  not  affirm  equality  between
two  collections  of  pebbles,  but  absolute  identity.  It  affirms  that  if  we  put  one  pebble  to
two  pebbles  those  very  pebbles  are  three.  The  objects,  therefore,  being  the  same,  and
the  mere  assertion  that  "objects  are  themselves"  being  insignificant,  it  seems  but
natural  to  consider  the  proposition  "  two  and  one  is  equal  to  three,"  as  asserting  mere
identity  of  signification  between  the  two  names.  This,  however,  continues  Mill,  ihough
it  looks  so  plausible,  will  not  bear  examination.  "The  expression  'two  pebbles  and
one  pebble,'  and  the  expression  '  three  pebbles,'  stand  indeed  for  the  same  aggregation
of  objects,  but  they  by  no  means  stand  for  the  same  physical  fact.  They  are  names  of
the  same  objects,  but  of  those  objects  in  two  different  states  :  though  they  denote  the
same  things,  their  connotation  is  different.  Three  pebbles  in  two  separate  parcels,  and
three  pebbles  in  one  parcel,  do  not  make  the  same  impression  on  our  senses  ;  and  the
assertion  that  the  very  same  pebbles  may  by  an  alteration  of  place  and  arrangement  be
made  to  produce  either  the  one  set  of  sensations  or  the  other,  though  a  very  familiar
proposition,  is  not  an  identical  one.  It  is  a  truth  known  to  us  by  early  and  constant
experience,  an  inductive  truth ;  and  such  truths  are  the  foundation  of  the  science  of
numbers.  The  fundamental  truths  of  that  science  all  rest  on  the  evidence  of  sense  ;  they
are  proved  by  showing  to  our  eyes  and  our  fingers  that  any  given  number  of  objects,  ten
balls,  for  example,  may  by  separation  and  rearrangement  exhibit  to  our  senses  all  the
different  sets  of  numbers  the  sum  of  which  is  equal  to  ten."

The  whole  of  this  explanation  shows  in  a  most  characteristic  manner  to  what  expe
dients  we  must  have  recourse  if  we  try  to  base  arithmetic  upon  the  crude  empiricism  of
sense-impressions.  It  seems  almost  as  if  thought  such  as  this  concerning  the  nature  of
number  had  stopped  short  on  the  level  of  the  elementary  school ;  as  if  the  empiricist  did
not  know  how  to  count  three  unless  the  objects  counted  are  all  together,  and  could  not
recognise  them  as  the  sum  of  one  and  two  unless  he  laid  one  of  them  apart.  He  for
gets  that  in  order  to  be  certain  that  after  such  an  operation  we  have  still  the  same  stones,
we  must  ultimately  rely  upon  counting,  and  would  have  to  trust  the  evidence  of  his
senses  just  as  much  if  a  juggler  should  manipulate  the  three  pebbles  in  such  a  way  as  to
show  them  producing  two  parcels  of  two,  and  again  appearing  as  three  when  put  together.
Merely  for  the  sake  of  showing  that  man  is  no  more  than  an  animal,  merely  in  order  to
eliminate  all  thought  from  logic,  the  harmless  proposition  2+1=3  must  be  taken  to
signify  the  physical  law  that  three  pebbles  which  are  arranged  thus  #%  can  always  be

arranged  thus,  *  *,  and  our  repeated  experience  of  this  is  to  be  our  only  ground  for
believing  the  proposition  !  Here  again  Bain  follows  his  predecessor,  though  his  language
is  not  so  clear,  when  he  says  (p.  201,  and  elsewhere)  :  "Addition  is  the  next  funda
mental  notion  ;  also  obtained,  in  the  last  resort,  from  the  senses.  When  we  bring
two  detached  groups,  or  successions  from  different  places  to  the  same  place,  or  into
one  continuous  group  or  succession,  we  are  said  to  add  ;  the  implicated  contrary  is  to
subtract."  Here  the  important  distinction  between  bringing  together  and  adding  is
obliterated  ;  the  external  means  by  which  we  stimulate  counting  and  facilitate  conscious
ness  of  it  is  taken  as  the  cause  producing  it.


36  LOGIC

7.  Here  again  we  may  see  a  relation  of  the  general  to  the  particular
comprehended  under  it,  which  seems  contrary  to  all  accepted  ideas  con
cerning  general  and  special,  super-  and  subordinated  concepts. Looking
at  numbers  as  they  stand,  it might  certainly  appear  as  if  the  general  con
cept  of  number  were  a  simple  and  easy  abstraction  from  particular  numbers,
these  being  the  first  known,  and  the  concept  of  numbers  in  general  being
attained  by  disregarding  the  differences  in particular  numbers. But  we
forget  here  that  counting  as  the  universal  form  of  the  process  is  necessary
to  the  formation  of  particular  numbers,  and  that  by  it  the  series  of  suc
cessive  numbers  is  produced  ;  hence  it  is  rather  the  nature  of  the  universal
which gives us the  plurality  of  the particular, and the generality in
question  ultimately  resolves  itself  into  the  consciousness  of  the  spontaneity
of  thought,  in  which  lies  both  the  power  of  continuing  the same  process
indefinitely  and the  consciousness that  the  law  of  the  process  is  always
the  same.

8.  This peculiarity  of the general  concept of  number shows itself
clearly  in  the  endlessness  of  the  numerical  series. When  a  general  con
cept  is  obtained  by  abstraction  from  a  number  of  ideas  we  may  indeed  be
uncertain  whether  the  particular  ideas  we  know  exhaust,  the  extension  of
the  general  concept,  and  the  indefinite  possibility  remains  that  the  same
concept  may  be  found  in  other particulars ;  but  here  it  is  part  of  the
nature  of  the  general  concept  to  admit  of  an  indefinite  progress,  so  that  it
cannot  be  exhausted  by  any  number  of  particulars. Inasmuch  as  every
number  to  which  we  come  can  be  increased  by  one  it  seems  to  be  a  part
of  the  concept  of  number  itself  to  actually  comprehend  an  infinite  series
of  numbers  ;  but  inasmuch  as  it is  necessary  to  think  of  every  series  of
ones  as  a  unity,  the  complete  concept  of  number  in  general  can  only  be
applied to finite number, and an infinite number  is  a  contradidio  in
adjccfo,  since  the  term  implies  that  the  limitation  by  which  number  becomes
what  it  is,  is  now  absent. Thus  the  expression  indicates  rather  an  im
possible  task  to  which  we  cannot  even  approximate,  since,  count  as  long
as  we  may,  we  shall  always  be  as  far  removed  as  ever  from  the  infinite.
From  this  point  of  view, therefore,  number  is  a  concept  of  which  one
element  is  limited  by  the  other,  and  is  thinkable  only  when  so  limited.
The concept  of  infinity means logically only that in  the concept  of
number  itself  no  definite  limit  is  set  to  the  process of  counting;  but to
speak  of  an  infinite  number  as  if  it  could  be  used  for  calculations  as  finite
numbers  are,  leads  necessarily  to  contradictions.


CONCEPTS OF  NUMBER  37

9.  From  that  nature  of  numerical  concepts  as  above  interpreted,
purely  logical  as  it  is  as  first,  still  further  developments  proceed.  The  com
prehension  of  successive  steps  in  one  consciousness,  together  with  the
consequent  continuation  of  the  consciousness  of  the  former  steps  in  that  of
the  later,  gives  rise  to  the  process — at  first  in  memory — of  running  through
the  series  backwards ;  this  takes  place  in  the  simplest  cases  when  we
break  up  the  number  two  into  its  units  in  order  to  combine  them  afresh,
and  it  is  only  in  this  backward  and  forward  play  that  the  permanent  con
sciousness  realizes  itself.  As  with  the  sight,  which  does  not  fix  itself,  but
travels  through  the  field  of  vision  and  returns  to  the  same  point,  so  with
any  given  number,  the  series  of  steps  through  which  it  has  been  produced
may  be  traversed  backwards,  and  the  numbers  be  thus  produced  in
reversed  order.  Here  another  point  arises.  In  counting  upwards  i,
strictly  speaking,  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  number ;  counting  does  not
begin  until  we  pass  to  the  second  one,  and  hence  2  is  the  first  number.
But  when  we  count  backwards,  and  find  that  i  proceeds  from  2  just  as  2
does  from  3,  then  i  takes  its  place  as  a  uniform  member  of  the  series,
and  according  to  the  same  principle  brings  with  it  zero  also  ;  the  original
distinction  between  unity  and  number  disappears,  and  only  appears  again
in  the  special  significance  of  unity  in  the  more  advanced  methods  of
calculation.

But  this  apparent  extension  of  the  original  concept  of  number  is  not
real.  A  unity  can  never  be  grasped  by  itself;  it  never  appears  in  con
sciousness  but  as  member  of  a  series,  for  we  can  be  conscious  of  it  only
as  we  distinguish  it  from  others,  and  only  discriminating  reflection  can
isolate  the  one  act  from  the  process  with  which  it  is  connected.  We
may  arrive  at  the  same  conclusion  in  another  way.  We  have  treated
counting  as  a  progress  ;  but  this  progress  presupposes  the  continuing
consciousness  of  whatever  objects  twere  distinguished,  even  though
these  are  represented  merely  by  external  or  internal  acts  which  have
remained  in  memory.  Each  one  of  these  co-existing  objects  forms  a
member  of  the  series,  and  when  we  think  of  them  altogether  it  is  in
different  with  which  we  begin ;  the  first  is  as  much  a  part  of  the  series  as
the  others.  Moreover,  because  the  consciousness  of  a  something  pre
sents  itself  as  distinct  from  negation,  zero  also  presents  itself  as  the  natural
conclusion,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  as  the  natural  beginning  of  counting ;
so  that  the  comprehensive  consideration  of  the  complete  functions  which
lead  to  number  justifies  us  in  ranking  one  and  zero  as  numbers.


38  LOGIC

10.  We  must  distinguish  between  the  general  concept  of  number,
which  derives  its  meaning  from  the  law  of  counting  alone,  and  the  use  of
letters  in  arithmetic  as  general  numerical  symbols.  In  the  formula
a  +  b  =  b  +  a,  a  and  b  do  not  express  the  general  concept  of  all  number,
applying  indifferently  to  the  infinite  series  of  particular  numbers,  and  the
propositions  referring  to  a  and  b  state  nothing  about  this  general  concept ;
the  letters  are  symbols  of  any  particular  number  whatever,  but  always
imply  that  it  is  a  definite  one.  We  cannot  make  calculations  with  number
in  general,  but  propositions  may  easily  be  stated  which  are  true  of  any
number  in  the  whole  series,  and  they  are  expressed  by  means  of  these
symbols  for  which  all  values  can  be  successively  substituted.  Here  then
a  and  b  are  not  symbols  of  concepts,  but  only  common  names  of  all  the
particular  objects  contained  under  the  concept ;  only  in  so  far  as  the
series  of  these  is  incapable  of  completion  do  they  participate  in  its  conse
quent  indeterminateness.

IT.  The  relational  concepts  of  More  and  Less  (which  we  can  distin
guish  as  greater  and  smaller  numbers  only  indirectly)  are  included  in
counting  itself.  That  which  we  reach  by  counting  further  is  more,  and
when  we  look  backwards  every  previous  stage  is  less  ;  the  proposition  that
if  a  7  b  and  b  7  c  so  much  the  more  is  a  7  c,  expresses  merely  a  conscious
ness  of  the  law  of  progress,  and  is  therefore  involved  in  the  law  of  the
construction  of  numbers ;  it  is  the  most  elementary  comparison  without
which  numbers  themselves  cannot  arise.

The  concept  of  equality,  when  applied  to  numbers,  depends  in  the
same  way,  upon  those  processes  by  which  numerical  concepts  are  formed.
Its  ground  lies  in  our  consciousness  of  the  sameness  of  the  process  by
which  in  different  instances  or  at  different  times  we  obtain  the  number  two
or  three  ;  in  this  sense  we  should  speak  of  the  idetitity  of  numbers.  The
concept  A,  though  thought  at  different  times,  does  not  appear  as  a
plurality  of  similar  A's ;  and  in  counting  2  or  3  over  again  we  should  not
speak  of  counting  equal  numbers,  but  the  same.1  Equal  can  be  used  only
of  numbers  of  different  things;  the  number  of  fingers  on  the  left  hand  is
equal  to  that  on  the  right  hand ;  the  distinction  presupposed  in  equality  is
distinction  in  the  objects  to  which  counting  refers.

The  concept  of  equality  as  applied  to  abstract  numbers  is  justified  only
when these  numbers  are  attained  by  different  methods,  when  the  same
processes  are  not  repeated,  and  when  therefore  the  difference  lies  in  the
1  Cf.  Ilelmholtz,  Phil.  Aufs.  zu  Zeller'sjubil.,  p.  24.


CONCEITS OF  NUMBER  39

method  of  counting  itself,  not  merely  in  its  external  occasion.  But  the
symbol  of  equality  has  a  different  meaning  in  arithmetic  and  in  geometry ;
in  the  latter  it  applies  to  objects  (lines,  surfaces,  etc.)  which  are  separate
in  intuition,  in  the  former  to  concepts  which  are  ultimately  identical.

12.  In  addition  we  have  the  first  example  immediately  connected  with
counting  of  a  method  of  attaining  a  number  which  differs  from  elementary
counting  itself. In  simple  counting  we  proceed  from i as  our  starting
point,  but  in  addition  a  twofold  counting  takes  place,  inasmuch  as  the
unities  which  are  added  to  the  first  number  must  be  counted  themselves  ;
thus  addition  rests  upon  the  possibility  of  referring  the  same  increment  of
unities  to  two  points  at  once,  of  regarding  the  same  unit  as  part  of  two
numbers — hence  upon  a  consciousness  of  the  absolutely  identical  repeti
tion  which  is  contained  in  counting  and  which  enables  us  to  take  any
point  in  a  numerical  series  as  the  starting  point  of  a  new  process  of  count
ing. To  this  is  due  also  the  possibility  of  breaking  up  any  number  as  we
like,  of  representing  it  as  a  sum  of  smaller  numbers,  and  from  this  is
derived  subtraction,  which  presupposes  such  an  analysis. The  proposition
a  +  b  =  b-\-a  tells  us  nothing  more  than  that  the  particular  groupings  by
which  we reach the same number through different combinations of
smaller  numbers  is  a  matter  of  indifference.

13.  It  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  for  every  method  of  combining  numbers
the  same  proof  that  all  are  originally  concepts  of  functions  in  which  the
fundamental  process  of  counting  is  repeated,  syntheses  which  are  applied
to  syntheses,  and  that  these  concepts  can  arise  only  from  the  conscious
ness  of  a  spontaneous  activity. Even  the  arithmetical  signs  +,  — ,  etc.,
are  always  on  the  one  hand  symbols  of  a  problem,  imperatives  which  com
mand  some  operation,  on  the  other  hand  symbols  of  the  simple  numbers
obtained  by  this  operation  ;  and  all  calculation  consists  finally  in  reducing
manifold  combinations  of  numbers  to  simple  counting,  the  value  of  a  sum
or  a  product  to  its  expression  in  the  natural  numerical  series. Progress
beyond  simple  counting  depends  upon  the  power  of  voluntary  combina
tion,  from  which  every  form  of  numerical  combination  could  arise,  just  as
they  actually  do  arise  when  excited  by  the  relations  of  enumerable  things.

14.  These  combinations  lead  us  naturally  beyond  the  original  sphere
of  the  simple  numerical  series. The  reversed  methods  of  calculation,  such
as  counting  backwards,  subtracting,  dividing,  finding  roots  and  logarithms,
are  of  course  first  obtained  by  simply  retracing  the  steps  taken  in  counting,
adding, multiplying, and  involution, but  as  soon  as  the  concepts  have


40  LOGIC

been  found  in  this  way  they  can  be  applied — at  any  rate  in  the  form  of  a
question  or  problem — to  any  number  whatever.  In  the  expressions

a  —  b,-,lya,  logj  a,  we  can  give  any  value  from  the  actual  numerical  series

to  a  and  b,  and  thus  we  get  the  problems  2  —  5,  -f,  ^5,  Iog2  5 — problems
which  are  insoluble  by  the  original  concept  of  number,  and  cannot  there
fore  be  equated  to  any  number.  Nevertheless,  we  speak  of  negative,
fractional,  irrational  numbers,  on  the  ground  of  an  extension  of  the  con
cept  of  number,  which  we  begin  to  apply  to  all  combinations  arising  out  of
the  methods  of  calculation ;  and  the  extension  is  justified  by  the  fact  that
those  combinations  resemble  actual  numbers,  at  least  in  the  one  respect
that  they  are  all  comparable  as  more  or  less,  and  can  therefore  be  brought
into  a  series,  and  that  therefore  the  different  methods  of  calculation —
similarly  extended  in  meaning — can  be  applied  to  them  with  all  their
formal  laws  of  combination  and  transmutation.

Imaginary  numbers  take  us  a  step  further  in  the  extension  of  the  con
cept  of  number,  for  in  them  appears  not  merely  the  impossibility  of  finding
in  the  original  series  of  whole  numbers  the  number  which  is  yielded  by  the
formula,  but  also  a  contradiction  of  the  formal  laws  of  combination  which
must  hold  good  for  negative  numbers.  If  all  square  numbers  must  be
positive,  the  problem  contained  in  „/ '  —  a  contains  a  contradiction  in  the
combination  of  signs,  while  the  formula  ^/a  merely  fails  to  represent  any
number  for  certain  values  of  a ;  the  former  problem  does  not  simply  arise
from  the  possibility  of  applying  reversed  processes  of  calculation  to  all
possible  actual  numbers,  because  —a  could  not  be  obtained  by  a  process
of  squaring.

From  a  purely  arithmetical  point  of  view  the  distinction  between  frac
tions  as  rational  numbers  and  roots  which  cannot  be  expressed  in
numbers  as  irrational,  cannot  be  justified ;  \  has  as  little  claim  to  be  called
a  number  as  ^/2,  and  it  is  only  because  we  are  more  familiar  with  the
process  .of  division  as  applied  to  given  continuous  magnitudes  that  we
imagine  ourselves  to  be  still  dealing  with  something  tangible.  Only
because  we  are  always  able  to  divide  any  area  taken  as  a  unity  into  three
equal  parts,  each  of  which  we  regard  again  as  a  unity,  does  it  seem  to  us
that  i  or  f  is  a  comprehensible  number  with  which  we  can  reckon  just  as
we  do  with  i  and  2,  and  find  no  difficulty  when  called  upon  to  multiply  it
by  3.  In  the  case  of  v/2  this  easy  analogy  fails  us,  and  we  are  confronted
by  the  twofold  impossibility  of  conceiving  of  v/2  as  a  unity  of  parts  in  any


CONCEPTS OF  NUMBER  41

way  attainable  by  counting  and  of  actually  multiplying  it  by  ^/2.  Sup
porters  of  the  view  that  all  arithmetical  concepts  are  based  upon  the
evidence  of  the  senses  might  well  be  called  upon  to  show  upon  what  sense-
impression  the  concept  of  a  root  or  a  logarithm  is  based.

15.  The  possibility  of  inserting  any  number  of  fractions  and  irrational
numbers  between  any  two  consecutive  numbers,  thus  diminishing  to  any
extent  the  difference  between  successive  members,  seems  to  reduce  num
ber — which  originally  arose  out  of  discrete  steps — to  a  continuum,  and  to
transform  it  into  a  magnitude  in  the  same  sense  in  which  space  and  time
are  magnitudes  ;  hence  we  often  speak  of  numerical  and  spatial  magnitudes
as  if  they  were  co-ordinate. But  a  strict  interpretation  of  the  concepts
forbids  us  thus  to  bridge  over  the  cleft  between  them  by  an  inaccurate
analogy  ;  number  is  always  discrete,  for  however  far  we  may  push  our
process  of  interpolation,  we  can  never  succeed  in  reaching  more  than  a
finite  number  of  intervening  members,  and  the  law  according  to  which  the
interpolation  takes  place,  though  it  fixes  no  definite  limit,  must  always,
from  the  nature  of  the  numerical  expression,  call  upon  us to  break  off
somewhere. It  is  with  infinite  division  as  with  infinite  number,  it  contra
dicts  the  logical  character  of  number  and  numerical  expressions,  and  the
infinitely  small  is of  as  little  avail  for purposes of  calculation  as the
infinitely  large. The  continuous  progress  which  intuition  gives  us  in  space
and  time  can  never  be  really  expressed  in the  logical  forms  of  number,
which  depends  upon  unity  and  difference  in  determinate  acts. In  the
differential  calculus,  we  attempt  to  break  down  the  limits  which  arise  from
the  nature  of  number,  but  we  succeed  in  forcing  upon  it  the  expression  of
continuous  change  only  by  means  of  artifices  in  which  we  avoid  assigning
any  numerical  value  to  the  differentials  themselves,  and  confine  ourselves
to  expressing  their  relations  to  each  other  in  numbers  and  combinations
of  numbers.

1 6.  By  tracing  these  conceptual  elements  and  their  developments  we
come  to  see  that  a  number  of  interconnected  and  mutually  dependent
functions  arise  from  the  conditions  under  which  all  consciousness  takes
place;  we  find  that  our  ability  to  reflect  upon  these  functions  and  their
connection  is  the  basis  of  the  arithmetical  concepts,  and  that  the  funda
mental  function  of  counting  is  re-directed  upon  particular  acts  of  counting,
as,  for  instance,  in  multiplication,  when  we  count  how  often  we  complete
a  given  number  in  counting  straight  on,  thus  performing  three  series  of
countings  applied  to  each other,  the  whole  activity  consisting  merely  in


42  LOGIC

becoming  conscious  of  the  positing  of  one  unity  and  progress  from  it  to
another.

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  in  arithmetic  we  are  in  the  same  sphere  as
in  logic,  and  have  to  deal  merely  with  an  increasing  complication  of  those
activities  upon  which  all  thought  depends,  facilitated  by  a  method  of
notation  which  owes  it  efficacy  to  the  perfect  determination  and  yet  com
plete  generality  of  its  symbols,  qualities  which  are  possible  because  they
apply  not  to  the  manifold  of  an  ideal  content,  but  to  formal  activities  of
consciousness  which  are  the  same  whenever  they  recur.

17.  These  concepts  are  a  priori  m  nature,  inasmuch  as  the  functions
must  be  regarded  as  ultimate  and  of  immediate  certainty,  and  inasmuch
as  we  can  find  no  explanation  for  them  in  the  nature  of  external  im
pressions,  but  only  in  the  nature  of  consciousness  itself.  In  every  one
whose  consciousness  resembles  ours  we  must  assume  the  same  functions
and  the  same  power  of  reflecting  upon  them,  and  are  therefore  certain  ot
their  identity  in  all  thinking  subjects ;  and  as  any  given  content  can  come
into  consciousness  only  through  these  activities,  we  have  here  conceptual
elements  which  enter  into  all  thought,  and  from  which  nothing  can  escap
which  can  be  distinguished  and  compared  in  definite  acts  of  thought —
nothing,  therefore,  which  can  be  thought  of  at  all.

But  these  elements  are  purely  formal ;  they  leave  it  quite  undeterminec
what  is  to  be  comprehended  and  distinguished  as  one  and  as  many.  I
we  turn  now  to  the  content,  of  which  we  gain  a  clear  consciousness  b
means  of  these  forms,  then  our  investigation  comes  in  the  first  place  upon
ideas  of  the  external  world,  and  in  these  the  first  elements  which  presen
themselves,  and  which,  because  of  their  peculiar  nature,  can  be  easily  an<
certainly  distinguished  as  part  of  the  objects  even  by  unskilled  analysis
are  the  ideas  of  space  and  of  time,  and  of  spatial  and  temporal  determina
tions  and  relations.

§  67.

The  attainment  of  elementary  and  perfectly  definite  concepts  of  the
Spatial  presupposes  that  the  idea  of  SPACE  must  have  already  arisen  with
out  any  conscious  activity  on  our  part ;  no  conscious  process  of  the  creation
of  the  idea  of  space  out  of  particular  elements  takes  place  as  in  reference
to  number.

On  the  other  hand,  the  continuity  of  space  prevents  us  from  establishing
by  means  of  mere  abstraction  from  perceived  forms  and  positions  any


SPACE  43

perfectly  definite  and  invariable  elements  of  the  idea  such  as  are  actually
'  given  in  the  straight  line  and  the  concepts  dependent  upon  it — the  plane,
the  right  angle,  etc.

The  possibility  of  forming  the  geometrical  concept  of  the  straight  line

within  the  general  idea  of  space  must  in  the  last  instance  depend  upon  the

,'fact  that  the  straight  line  is  a  determining  element  in  the  genesis  of  the

idea  of  space  itself ;  it  is  the  direction  in  which  we  project  objects  into

space;  but  the  mutual  relations  of  different  straight  lines  by  means  of

which  all  the  particulars  contained  in  our  idea  of  space  are  originally

determined  as  to  position  are  themselves  determined  by  an  unchanging

and  invariable  law  of  our  space  intuition. The  necessity  of  this  law  can

[only  be  recognised  ;  it  cannot  be  deduced  from  any  other  law,  and  so  far  it

is  empirically  known.

The  means  by  which  we  determine  different  spatial  relations  according
to  the  established  laws  of  spatial  intuition  is  MEASUREMENT,  the  reduction
of  these  relations  to  comparisons  of  lines  and  .angles  and  to  numerical
relations.

1.  It  would  seem  that  in  order  to obtain  simple  fundamental  con
cepts  of  the  Spatial  which  are  the  same  for  all  we  must  adopt  other  methods
than  those  which  lead  to  the  numerical  concepts. We  create  number  con
sciously,  we  learn  to  count,  but  we  do  not  learn  the  intuition  of  space  ;  we
find  it  always  present  in  the  idea  of  the  external  world. Hence  we  can
not  speak  of  the  creation  of  the  idea  of  space  by  particular  conscious
acts  ;  when  we  learn  to  count  the  idea  of  spatial  things  is  there  already,
ind  we  cannot  think  of  a  conscious  state  preceding  the  idea  of  space
is  we  can  think  of  one  in  which  the  concept  of  numbers  is  not  yet  con-
ained.

Hence  the  construction  of  geometrical  concepts  must  always  start  from /
m  idea  of  space  already  present,  and  the  question  is,  how  do  we  pass  from
:his  idea  to  concepts  which  are  logically  perfect,  and  what  are  the  elements
Df  these  concepts  ?

2.  The  most  obvious  way  seems  to  be by  a  simple  process  of  com-
jarison,  by  means  of  which  we  pass by  abstraction from  the  sensuous
qualities  of  colour  and  so  on  first  to  the  concepts  of  different  forms,  and
hen  by  abstraction  from  the  difference  of  the  forms  to  that  which  is  alike
n  all  perceptible  objects— the  concept  of  Extension. Here  it  is  assumed
is  a  matter  of  course,  or  regarded  as  proved  by  experience,  that  this  at;-
ribute  of  extension  is  the  same  in  all  objects,  however  different,  indepen-


44  LOGIC

dent  of  their  position  as  of  their  other  attributes,  and  of  the  same  nature
in  the  most  different  magnitudes.

Descartes,  for  example,  employed  this  concept  of  extensio  in  longum,
latuin  et  profitndum  as  needing  no  further  analysis  ;  he  regards  extension
as  an  attribute  of  things  like  any  other  attribute,  and  for  this  reason  can
not  conceive  of  it,  wherever  it  may  be  perceived  or  thought,  except  as
attribute  of  a  thing,  of  a  res  extensa.  By  attending  to  the  most  general
differences  of  the  extended  we  may  get  the  concept  of  Magnitude  from  the
intuition  of  one  body  containing  another,  or  by  the  comparison  of  a  part
with  the  whole  ;  the  Divisibility  of  extended  objects,  whether  actual  or
ideal,  is  also  given  in  immediate  intuition.

3.  But  this  manner  of  explaining  the  genesis  of  the  concept  of  space
by  abstraction  from  the  extended  objects  of  intuition  overlooks  one
essential  element — the  fact  that  particular  objects  are  presented  to  us  not
only  as  each  extended  in  itself,  but  also  as  spatially  related  to  each  other
in  different  directions  and  at  definite  distances  apart.  It  overlooks  more
over  that  our  immediately  given  space-idea  includes  extension  to  which
there  is  no  corresponding  sensation  (none,  that  is,  which  is  ordinarily  per
ceptible)  The  air  in  which  we  move  and  through  which  we  see  makes
no  direct  impression  upon  our  eyes  ;  for  original  sense-perception  space
filled  with  air  is  empty  space,  not  an  extended  thing  amongst  other  things,
one  body  amongst  other  bodies  ;  indeed  it  would  be  impossible  either  by
sight  or  by  touch  to  get  the  idea  of  external,  visible  and  tangible  bodies  if
space  were  entirely  filled  by  visible  and  impenetrable  objects.  Hence  it
is  not  necessary  in  order  to  get  the  idea  of  empty  space  to  get  rid  of  the
bodies  which  fill  it  by  an  effort  of  thought ;  our  ordinary  idea  always  con-
tains  both  ;  extended  things  are  in  empty  space,  which  surrounds  and
separates  them,  and  the  expression  that  perceptible  things  fill  space  is  made
perfectly  comprehensible  and  familiar  by  our  original  way  of  regarding  it.
It  will  not  do  therefore  to  attempt  to  construct  the  idea  of  space  only  by
abstraction  from  sense-perceptions,  such  as  might  be  regarded  as  the  pri
mary  consequences  of  affections  of  sense,  and  which,  together  with  colour,
contain  extension  ;  we  cannot  in  this  way  explain  the  position  and  arrange
ment  of  particular  images  in  an  all-embracing  space.  To  say  that  .the
extension  of  perceptible  bodies  is  similar  to  the  extension  of  empty  space,
and  that  our  experience  of  extended  bodies  moving  through  empty  space
justifies  the  abstraction  of  an  extension  common  to  that  which  is  empty
and  to  the  body  which  fills  it,  is  true  from  one  point  of  view ;  but  in  ordei


SPACE


45


to  carry  out  these  comparisons  we  must  first  imagine  the  whole  of  space,
and  we  might  just  as  well  say  that  not  until  we  think  of  particular  exten
sions  as  parts  of  a  total  extension  are  we  conscious  of  their  homogeneity,
and  if  therefore  we  speak  of  space  as  an  enlargement  of  that  which  we
abstract  from  particular  objects,  we  must  speak  also  of  a  limitation  of  the
totality  of  space  which  is  presented  together  with  particular  objects.

4.  If  we  turn  to  psychology  for  information  as to  the  genesis  of  the
space-idea  and  for  an  indication  as  to  where  we  must  seek  the  real  be
ginnings  of  the  idea  and  the  law  of  its  construction,  we  find  the  difficulty
rather  confirmed  than  solved. The  problem  before psychology  is  to  ex
plain  how  our  sensations  give  rise to  our  idea  of  space  ;  how,  from  the
superficial  ideas  which  alone,  from  the  nature  of  the  organs  of  sight  and
touch,  can  be  the  immediate  consequences  of  particular  sense-affections,  a
three-dimensional  space  can  be  constructed,  and  whether  even  the  super
ficial  arrangement  of  colours  in  the  field  of  vision  and  of  touches  upon  the
surface  of  the  body  is  not  something  composite,  and  needing  to be  ex
plained  into  psychological  processes.

5.  With  reference  to  the  psychological  genesis  of  the  idea  of  the  spatial
world  the  question  as  to  whether  the  space-idea  is  a  priori  is  relevant,  in
:.he  sense  that  it  is  possible  to  maintain  the  thesis  that  the  mere  fact  of  a
lumber  of  adjacent  nerve-endings  being  touched  is  not  sufficient  to  ensure
•;he  production  of  a  spatial  idea  of  a  superficially  extended  field  of  vision,
Tiuch  less  to  explain  the  third  dimension  ;  but  that  there  must  also  be
something  in  the  nature  of  the thinking  subject  which  necessitates  his
irranging  the  plurality  of  sensation  in  just  this  spatial  order — a  necessity
vhich  is  merely  directed  and  guided  by  the  sensation  as  immediate  con
sequence  of  the  stimulation  of  particular  nerves. In  this  sense  a  careful
psycho-physical  analysis  could  subscribe  even  to Kant's  statement  that
,'that  wherein  alone  sensations  can  range  themselves  and  be  placed  in  a
certain  form  cannot  itself  be  sensation  "  ;  but  not  to  what  follows,  that  for

his  reason  we  must  be  able  to  consider  the  form  apart  from  all  sensation.
?or  in  psychology  it  remains  certain  that  the  idea  of  space  is  never  given
o  us  apart  from  actual  sensations ;  that  in  the  first  instance  we  think  of
ipace  only  in  that  extension  to  which  actual  sensations  impel  us,  and  that
:ven  when  we  pass  beyond  in  fancy  we  are  always  accompanied  by  dim
mages  of  the  visible ;  we  help  ourselves  to  increase  the  distance  by  ima
gining  certain  marks  in  space  which  we  are  forced  to  think  of  as  traversed
)y  something  which  is  presentable  to  sense.  Kant's  proposition  that  space


46  LOGIC

is  thought  of  as  an  infinite  given  magnitude  is  certainly  false  as  the  ex
pression  of  a  general  psychological  fact ;  we  can  never  think  of  infinite
space  in  the  same  way  as  of  a  space  which  is  finite,  even  though  it  may  be
indefinitely  extended.  It  is  also  false  that  all  the  spaces  of  which  we  think
are  thought  of  as  parts  of  one  and  the  same  continuous  space.  The  space
in  which  my  imagination  constructs  geometrical  figures  is  not  part  of  the
space  in  which  I  place  my  real  world  ;  it  is  of  the  latter  only,  and  not  of
any  conceivable  space,  that  we  can  say  that  it  is  one  and  only  one,  and
that  all  particular  spaces  are  only  its  parts.  But  it  is  true  of  all  alike  that
we  can  never  actually  think  of  it  except  in  connection  with  some  content.

6.  For  this  reason  the  fact  that  space  is  psychologically  a  priori  cannot
be  simply  utilized  for  our  conceptual  determination  in  the  sense  that  in  the
space-idea  we  are  quite  independent  of  external  affections  and  guided  only
by  a  subjective  law  of  thought. It  might  be  true  that  from  the  nature  of
our  representative  activity  we  were  forced  to  range  our  sensations  in  this
form  of  continuous  proximity,  and  yet  that  the  particular  manner  in  which
we  construct  our  space-idea  depended  upon  the  nature  of  our  sensations,
and  ultimately  upon  the  nature  of  an  objective  space  containing  the  things
which  give  rise  to  our  sensations,  and  was  therefore  merely  empirical. For
example,  it  might  be  that  the  perfect  equivalence  of  the  space-idea  in  all
its  parts,  the  possibility  of  conceiving  any  figure  as  transferred  to  any  part
of  space  without  change,  without  being  either  increased  or  diminished,  was
only  due  to  the  fact  that  there  are  actual  solid  bodies,  unchangeable  in
form,  which,  according  to  natural  laws,  do  admit  of  these  changes  of  position
in  every  direction. Then  the  impossibility  which  we  feel  in  imagining  any
other  than  the  space  to  which  we  are  accustomed  would  not  be  absolute,
but  would  have  arisen  merely  from  an  unbroken  experience  ;  we  could
only  say  that  we  actually  do  represent  space  in this  way  without being
conscious  of  any  necessity  in  so  doing. On  the  other  hand,  when  we  say
that  twice  two  is  four,  we  see  not  merely  that  it  actually  is  so,  but  that  it  is
necessarily  so ;  and  even  if  the  world  were  so  ordered  that  by  a  constant
trick  of  magic  a  fifth  thing  came  into existence  whenever  we  put  two  and
two  together  and  vanished  again  when  we  separated  them,  this  could  only
justify  the  proposition  that  two  things  and two  things  make  five  things,
never  that  twice  two  is  five.

7.  The  issue  of  this  dispute  has  no  immediate  and  decisive  importance
for  our  investigation. Whether  the psychological  processes  which  give
rise  to  the  space  intuition  have  their  origin  exclusively  in  the  subject,  or


SPACE  47

whether  they  are  partly  conditioned  by  the  nature  of  the  object  of  sensa
tion,  there  is  no  doubt  that  so  far  as  concerns  the  logical  analysis  of  the
space  idea,  the  intuition  must  be  taken  as  given.  We  can  show  neither
processes  by  which  we  could  consciously  change  or  vary  this  space  idea,
nor  processes  by  which  we  could  consciously  produce  it  in  such  a  way  as
to  refer  the  particular  steps  to  simple  acts,  as  in  counting.  The  chief
obstacle  to  such  an  analysis  is  that  continuity  of  our  space  intuition  which
Aristotle  recognised  as  the  fundamental  difference  between  space  and
number.  We  might  attempt  to  discover  creative  acts  which  could  be  con
sciously  repeated  after  being  unconsciously  practised,  such  as  the  traversing
of  space  in  different  directions  with  the  movement  of  sight  or  of  imagina
tion  ;  but  then  this  activity  itself  is  not  simple,  since  a  plurality  is  distin
guishable  in  what  it  is  to  create ;  nor  is  it  determinate,  containing  its
measure  in  itself/ The  simple  method  of  drawing  a  straight  line  from  some
point  and  then  moving  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  describe  a  plane,  and  the
plane  so  as  to  construct  a  solid,  shows  that  the  idea  of  space  cannot  be
really  constructed,  but  that  these  operations  can  only  take  place  in  a  space
which  is  already  there  and  from  which  they  derive  their  meaning  and
results.  \  Moreover  the  concept  of  movement  conceals  just  that  element
of  continuity  which  cannot  be  treated  as  something  simple,  and  the  direc
tions  of  movement  always  presuppose  space.  The  distinction  between
intuition  and  thought,  between  intuitive  and  discursive  ideas,  expresses
just  this  fact — that  we  cannot  produce  space  in  this  sense  by  means  of
simple  conscious  acts.

This  being  so,  our  logical  discussion  must  start  from  the  general  idea  of
space  such  as  we  actually  find  it.  All  we  can  do  is  to  note  distinctions
within  it,  and  thus  to  obtain  ideal  elements  which  are  as  simple  and  definite
as  possible,  but  which  are  all  derived  from  the  general  idea,  and  presup
pose  it.

8.  Such  distinctions  we  find  appearing  in  language  with  reference  both
to  the  spatial  extension  of  things  themselves,  and  the  manner  in  which
they  are  spatially  related  to  each  other.

With  respect  to  the  first,  language  distinguishes  not  only  the  different
forms  and  magnitudes  which  present  themselves  to  perception,  but  it  also
draws  a  distinction  between  the  superficies  and  the  solid,  between  the  line
and  the  plane,  the  point  and  the  line ;  and  in  doing  so  it  is  guided  by  the
nature  of  the  intuition  itself,  which  could  never  take  place  without  these
distinct  elements,  and  in  its  concrete  determinations  always  involves  them.


48  LOGIC

For  sight  as  for  touch  surfaces  alone  are  the  direct  objects  of  sensation  ;
they  are  an  element  which  can  be  grasped  independently,  and  to  them  is
added  the  idea  of  the  solid  of  which  they  are  the  superficial  boundaries.
Surfaces  themselves  however  appear  in  the  field  of  vision  as  variously
coloured,  each  one  bounded  by  others  of  different  colour,  and  it  is  due  to
the  primarily  superficial  arrangement  of  the  parts  of  the  field  of  vision  that
these  boundaries  also  appear  in  consciousness  as  lines.  They  do  not,  in
deed,  appear  in  direct  sense-perception ;  the  boundary  line  which  divides
two  surfaces  is  not  seen  in  the  sense  in  which  the  surfaces  are  seen,  for  it
has  no  colour;  but  unless  we  were  conscious  of  the  limits  by  which  two
different  coloured  surfaces  are  divided,  their  arrangement  side  by  side  in  a
continuous  field  of  vision  would  be  impossible.  In  the  same  way  the  edge
in  which  different  planes  intersect  reveals  itself  to  touch  as  the  boundary
separating  dissimilar  sensations.  It  is  true  again  of  the  point  as  the  end  of
a  line  which  was  followed  so  far  continuously  ;  the  point  is  invisible,  but
we  are  conscious  of  it  as  the  apex  of  a  solid,  or  as  the  corner  of  a  superficial
figure,  because  of  the  sudden  and  contrasting  changes  of  direction.1  It  is
only  through  this  power  of  perceiving  and  representing  boundaries  that  we
can  perceive  forms,  it  is  attention  to  the  course  of  the  boundary  which
makes  us  conscious  of  them  and  able  to  remember  them.

With  respect  to  the  second  point,  the  spatial  arrangement  of  objects,
ordinary  perception  distinguishes  right  and  left,  above  and  below,  before
and  behind  ;  and  in  so  doing  we  take  as  starting  point  our  own  body  with
the  positions  of  equilibrium  and  possibilities  of  movement  determined  by
its  organization,  directions  of  movements  being  referred  to  and  distin
guished  by  its  principal  axes.  We  further  distinguish  distances  in  these
different  directions,  and  measure  them  by  the  paths  which  have  to  be
traversed  by  movements  of  the  eye,  the  hand,  or  the  whole  body.

1  Mill  shows  little  reflection  upon  the  nature  of  seeing  as  it  ordinarily  takes  place,
when  he  says  (Logic,  vol.  i.,  bk.  2,  ch.  v.  §  i),  "The  points,  lines,  circles  and  squares
which  any  one  has  in  his  mind,  are  (I  apprehend)  simply  copies  of  the  points,  lines,
circles  and  squares  which  he  has  known  in  his  experience.  Our  idea  of  a  point  I
apprehend  to  be  simply  our  idea  of  the  minimum  visibile,  the  smallest  portion  of  surface
which  we  can  see  ...  we  cannot  conceive  a  line  without  breadth ;  ...  all
the  lines  which  we  have  in  our  minds  are  lines  possessing  breadth  ;  but  we  can  attend
only  to  the  length  of  these  lines,  and  abstract  from  the  breadth."  No  doubt  the  marks
by  which  >ve  indicate  lines  upon  paper  are  planes  ;  but  where  is  the  breadth  in  the  line
where  the  sea  ceases  and  the  sky  begins,  or  in  the  line  made  by  the  ridge  of  a  house
against  the  background  ?  And  is  not  this  line  perceived  and  distinguished  as  a  line  from
the  plane  surfaces,  notwithstanding  that  it  can  never  be  seen  without  these?


SPACE  49

9.  It  might  be  thought  that  by  continuing  our  process  of  abstraction
and  analysis  of  the  forms  and  positions  presented  in  perception  we  must  at
last  come  upon  the  simplest  and  most  completely  determined  elementary
concepts  of  space ;  concepts  of  lines,  surfaces  and  solids,  as  well  as  con
cepts  of  directions,  distances  and  positions. But  even  if  the  point  might
perhaps  be  reached  in  this  way  as  a  perfectly  simple  and  definite  idea,
yet  as  soon  as  we  pass  beyond  the  point  simplicity  ceases,  inasmuch  as  no
space-idea  which  is  in  the  least  extended  can  really  be  brought  into  con
sciousness  by  one  indivisible  act;  there  is  always  presupposed  the  com
prehension of  a  continuous manifoldness,  distinguishable  into  parts, a
comprehension  moreover  which  cannot  take  place  merely  as  a  repetition
of  the  simple,  of  the  point, since  points  can  never  give  rise  to  a  line.
Determinateness  also  disappears,  for  the  forms  actually  presented  are  so
incalculably  manifold,  and  pass  into  each  other  by  such  imperceptible
differences,  that  the  method  of  mere  abstraction  would  be  confronted  by
a  chaos  the  confusion  of  which  no  art  could  regulate  ;  the  bare  evidence
of  the  perceiving  sense  could  afford  no  inducement  for  preferring  one  line
or  one  form  rather  than  another,  nor  any  guarantee  that  in  the  ideas  pre
sented and  reproducible  in  intuition  we  have  elements which are  un
changeable  and  always  repeated  in  the  same  way. Geometry  would  thus
be  inexplicable.

10.  More especially  would  it  be quite incomprehensible from this
purely  empirical  point  of  view  why  the  straight  line  and  the  right  angle
play  such  a  predominant  part  amongst  geometrical  concepts,  and  are  looked
upon  as  perfectly  determined  standards  for  all  forms  and  relations  of  posi
tion. Apart  from  the  creations  of  human  art  nature  is  very  sparing  with
anything  approaching  to  a  straight  line  such  as  might  give  rise  to  the  con
struction  of  the  concept,  while  she  is  wastefully  lavish  with  curves  and
curved  surfaces.^  In  the  wilderness  of  the  uninhabited  earth  there  are  but
very  few  objects  which  could  leave  as  their  copy  the  idea  of  a  straight

ine,  and  what  should  draw  attention  to  such  exceptional  cases,  especially
as  they  merge  through  many  gradual  transitions  into  forms  of  increasing
rregularity?  Do  we  not  regard  every  perfectly  straight  line  which  we
discover  in  a  landscape  as  a  sure  sign  of  human  work,  whether  it  be  a
traight  road,  or  a  watercourse,  or  the  outline  of  a  pyramid?  And  it  is
:he  same  with  the  right  angle.

If  the  importance  of  the  straight  line  cannot  be  explained  in  this  way, v
hen  the  fact  that  man  theoretically  regulates  space  by  means  of  the

s.  L. — ii.  E


5o  LOGIC

straight  line  and  the  right  angle,  and  practically  takes  the  straight  line  as
the  basis  of  his  own  creations  as  persistently  as  nature  rejects  it  in  hers,
must  have  its  origin  elsewhere  than  in  our  perception  of  external  forms.  It
must  be  due  to  something  else  than  mere  reception  of  what  is  presented,
that  the  straight  line  is  accepted  as  a  perfectly  determined  idea,  thought
by  every  one  in  the  same  way,  and  therefore  a  concept  which  can  be
utilized  in  science.

ii.  The  problem  finds  its  solution  when  we  remember  that  our  sen
suous  representation  of  the  spatial  world  first  arises  when — as  it  is  generally
expressed — we  project  our  sensations,  when  more  especially  we  transfer
our  visual  images  into  space  and  so  localize  them.  The  manner  in  which
this  is  done  may  be  very  obscure,  the  psychological  functions  called  into
play  quite  unexplained,  but  the  fact  that  our  intuition  of  objects  which
are  separated  from  us  by  space  has  its  origin  in  a  mental  activity  which
supervenes  upon  particular  sensations  is  unquestioned  and  indisputable.
It  is  as  indisputable  that  the  straight  line  is  the  direction  in  which  this
activity  presses  forward,  and  as  it  were  repels  objects  outwards  from  some
point  in  the  body  in  order  to  range  them  at  different  distances ;  to  speak  in
more  concrete  terms,  as  our  space-perception  is  mainly  developed  through
sight,  if  not  entirely  due  to  it,  the  straight  line  is  originally  the  line  of
sight, 1  the  direction  in  which  we  look  upon  coloured  images,  the  line
moreover  in  which  our  actual  movements  tend,  although  the  movement  of
our  limbs  in  a  straight  line  is  hindered  by  their  construction.  We  are  too
much  accustomed  to  assume  first  that  objects  exist  external  to  us  and  then
become  visible  by  means  of  their  rectilineal  rays  of  light,  to  grasp  easily
the  reverse  idea  that  first  of  all  we  have  projected  them  in  straight  lines
issuing  from  ourselves,  and  that  our  localisation  of  them  always  continues
to  be  determined  by  the  original  idea  of  direction  which  is  accurately  ex
pressed  by  straight  lines  alone.  Thus  the  straight  line  is  really  the  vehicle
of  all  actual  spatial  intuition  in  which  the  position  of  each  visible  object
is  referred  to  the  self  as  the  intersecting  point  of  all  directions.  It  is  inde
pendent  of  direct  sensation  and  in  so  far  it  is  non-sensuous  in  nature.
Inasmuch  as  it  is  presupposed  in  every  space  intuition  which  we  have,  it

1  I  know  of  no  thorough  and  complete  investigation  of  the  development  of  spati
intuitions, by  means  of  touch  alone,  such  as  must  take  place  in  the  case  of  those  bor
blind. The  fact  that  their  space-idea  coincides  with  that  of  people  who  see  proves  that
similar  conditions  must  be  present,  although  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  this  may
since  the  movements  of  the  organs  of  touch  naturally  take  place  in  curves  ;  this  is  only  aii
additional  proof  of  the  non-sensuous  nature  of  the  fundamentai  idea  of  the  straight  line.


SPACE  51

is  a  priori;  and  this  reveals  itself  in  the  fact  that  no  sensation  can  place  a
limit  to  the  mental  activity  which  presses  forward  into  space,  and  that  we
find  it  possible  to  think  of  every  straight  line  as  indefinitely  lengthened.1

When  visible  and  movable  objects  at  different  distances  intercept  each
other,  we  become  conscious  of  rectilineal  direction,  and  this  consciousness
is  confirmed  by  movement  towards  fixed  points.  This  ideal  of  the  straight
line  must  always  be  present  if  we  are  to  recognise  as  straight  any  per
ceptible  line,  the  limit  of  some  visible  plane  or  an  edge  ;  we  test  it  by
trying  whether  all  its  points  cover  when  brought  into  the  line  of  sight.  It
is  not  until  afterwards  that  we  find  that  the  rays  of  light  are  straight  because
we  really  come  upon  the  objects  when  we  move  towards  them  in  the  direc
tion  of  the  line  of  sight,  the  correctness  of  our  localisation  depends  upon
this  fact,  but  not  the  process  of  localisation  itself.2

If  our  concept  of  the  straight  line  arises  in  this  way,  then  it  is  closely
connected  with  those  elements  in  our  space-idea  which  cannot  find  an
explanation  in  sensation — with  the  third  dimension  and  empty  space.  We
find,  moreover,  that  in  constructing  the  concept  of  the  straight  line  we
merely  bring  into  consciousness  what  we  do  when  unconsciously  and  in
voluntarily  we  first  project  our  visual  images  ;  we  find  here  the  funda
mental  form  of  the  procedure  in  which  our  space-idea  has  its  unconscious
origin.

12. Together  with  the  directions  in  which  we  project  objects,  we  get,

1  Zindler  in  his  Beitriige  zur  Theorie  der  mathematischen  Erkenntniss  in  the  Sitzungs-
btrichten  Jer Wiener  Academic,  vol.  118,  ix. p.  32,  gives  the  name  of  "axiomatic  con
cepts,"  or  "axioms  of  definition,"  to  those  ultimate  conceptual  elements  which  cannot
be  further  defined but are fully  determined. The  name  is, indeed,  open  to  objections
in  so  far  as  axioms  are  always  understood  to  be  propositions  ;  but I am  in  material
agreement  with  him  in  counting  the  straight  line  amongst  these  "axiomatic  concepts  "
(P-  3)-

2  It  might  no  doubt  be  urged  that  we  also  distinguish  directions  from  right  to  left,  up
and  down,  within  our  field  of  vision  ;  directions  which  we traverse  by  moving  the  focus
of  sight  by  means  of  the  muscles  of  the  eye,  and  of  which  therefore  the  idea  is  associated
with  the  idea  of  this  movement. But  this  consciousness  of  opposite  directions,  left  and
right,  up  and  down,  and  the  reverse,  does  not  reach  the  full  determination  of  the  concept
<>f  the  straight  line  ;  just  as  we  can  speak  of  East  and  West,  North  and  South  without
referring  to  accurately  determined  points  upon  the  horizon,  just  as  we  can  say  the  sun
moves  in  the  sky  from East  to  West,  although it moves  in  a  curved  line, so  the  com
pletely  determined  straight  line  may  be  absent  from  that  idea  of  direction  according  to
which  we  distinguish  the  different  directions  within  our  field  of  vision  ;  it  is  indeed  much
more  difficult  to  say  with  certainty  of  a  line  drawn  across  the  field  of  vision  than  of  a  line
receding  from  us,  whether  or  not  it  is  straight. We  always  refer  mentally  to  the  line  of
vision,  and  we  learn  to  judge  which  of  the  lines  given  in  the  field  of  vision  would  prove
to  be  straight  if  placed  in  the  line  of  vision.


52  LOGIC

by  help  of  our  consciousness  of  the  movement  of  eye,  head  and  body,
the  difference  of  these  directions,  and  the  concept  of  the  angle  made  by
the  different  directions  which  have  the  self  for  their  centre.  The
magnitude  of  the  revolution  to  which  corresponds  that  area  of  the  field
of  vision  which  the  sight  traverses  gives  us  a  measure  for  the  various
angles,  and  the  fact  that  we  can  repeat  this  process  in  the  same  way  in
all  directions  is  a  guarantee  that  all  angles  are  comparable  as  to  their
magnitude,  and  makes  it  possible  to  make  of  the  right  angle  as  determinate
an  idea  as  the  straight  line  itself.

13.  But  though  we  can  bring  into  consciousness  these  definite  forms
of  our  space  intuition  in  the  concept  of  the  straight  line  and  the  angle,
we  must  note  that  in  so  doing  we  can  merely  single  out  elements  which,
in  the  total  space-idea  as  it  is  always  present,  are  given  all  at  once  in  a
way  which  we  can  never  understand ;  that  is,  can  never  resolve  into  discrete,
numerable  acts. It  is  obvious  that  we  can  never  construct  space  out  of
any  number  of  straight  lines  radiating  from  us  at  different  angles,  or  visible
surfaces  out  of  the  terminating  points  of  these  straight  lines,  we  come
upon  the  antagonism  between  the  continuous  and  the  discrete,  an  inex
haustible  field  is  presented  to  our  discrimination  of  directions,  which  can
be  repeated  from  every  point  of  space  at  which  we  may  place  ourselves
actually  or  in  thought.

When  therefore  we  realize  the  position  of  visible  objects  in  space,  we
draw  an  invisible  network  of  straight  lines  from  every  point  which  we
discriminate  to  every  other.  These  lines  all  pass  through  space,  but  they
do  not  fill  it ;  still  less  can  they  create  it.  They  merely  single  out
particulars  and  thus  make  us  realize  that  something  is  represented  in  space
which  can  never  be  exhausted  by  this  activity  which  distinguishes  discrete
elements.

14.  By  the  introduction  of  movement,  which  cannot  be  resolved  into
discrete  elements,  we  do  indeed  succeed  in  producing  the  plane  surface
from  the line,  and  space  from  the  plane  surface. But  this  movement,
as  we  have  already  noticed, always  takes  place  in  an already existing
space, and  all  we  really see  is  that  the  space arising  from  the  move
ment  of the  surface completely  fills  the space already  present. We
are aware  moreover of  the  connection  which exists  between the  con
tinuity  of  space  and  that  of  time,  but  we  cannot  overcome  the  difficulties
which  are  presented  by  the  intuition  of  the  continuum  to  conception
analysis. The famous  demonstrations  of Zeno  merely  expose  the  i


SPACE  53

possibility  of  the  attempt  to  comprehend  the  continuum  by  means  of  a
number  of  conceptually  determinable  steps.

15.  But  though  space  cannot  be  created  in  this  way,  the  existing  space-
idea may be rendered perfectly determinate  by  connecting it with a
framework  constructed  from  the  most  simple elements  and  capable  of
being  always  thought  of  in  the  same  perfectly  definite  manner. We  are
aware  that,  wherever  we  may  represent  space,  we  always  localize  in  the
same  way  by  straight  lines  which  radiate  from  one  point,  that  when  we
turn  a  straight  line  in  a  plane  in  space  round  this  point  the  same  four
right  angles  must  always  arise,  and  that  space  can  always  and  everywhere
be  divided  by  three  planes perpendicular  to  each  other, and  that  it  is
indifferent  in  which  direction  these  planes  are  laid. We  know  that  the
space  which  we  regard  in  this  way  is  not  merely  that  which  results  from
sense  impressions,  but  that  wherever  we  like  to  imagine  anything  spatial
it  contains  exactly  the  same  elements  combined  in  the  same  way.

1 6.  From  a  purely  logical  point  of  view  it  is  of  course-  matter  of  fact
that  our  space-idea  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  be  always  alike  throughout,
that  we  can  move  at  will  from  one  place  to  another  and  turn  in  all  direc
tions  without  involving  any  change  in  our  space  ;  we  are  made  aware  of
this  invariability  by  the  fact  that  we  can  always  construct  the  same  forms
from  any  point  by  drawing  lines,  and  that  whatever  point  we  start  from

;  we  must  always  refer  space  in  the  same  way  to  some  system  of  axes.  But
although  we  recognise  this  as  matter  of  fact,  we  do  not  therefore  mean
that  our  space-idea  is  empirical  in  the  sense  that  it  might  chance  to  be
altered  by  some  change  in  the  nature  of  our  external  perceptions.  Ex
ternal  impressions  do  not  create  a  continuum  of  this  kind  by  themselves,

^r

for  no  space  is  ever  presented  to  us  which  is  completely  filled  by  sensa
tions  ;  nor  could  they  elicit  this  particular  kind  of  projection  upon  which
all  localization  depends.  What  is  empirical  is  only  our  recognition  of  the
fact  that  all  men  agree  in  their  manner  of  representing  space  just  as  they
agree  in  the  form  of  their  self-consciousness  and  the  fundamental  laws  of
their  thought ;  and  from  the  actual  invariability  of  the  space-idea  in  each
individual  and  its  sameness  for  all  we  infer  a  necessity  which  we  can

:  neither  understand  nor  prove,  but  can  only  recognise  as  actually  given.
Again,  the  belief  that  on  the  presupposition  of  an  objective  space  filled

jwith  real  objects  our  localization  is  correct,  is  empirical;  but  this  belief
means,  in  the  last  instance,  merely  that  the  different  ways  in  which  we  can

•ascertain  the  position  of  a  body  leads  to  consistent  results,  or  that  dis-


54  LOGIC

crepancies  which  present  themselves  when  we  localize  objects  by  projection
in  straight  lines,  as  in  cases  of  refraction,  can  be  explained  according  to
general  laws  by  just  this  assumption  of  the  objective  validity  of  our  space-
idea.  Finally,  the  belief  that  the  forms  of  bodies,  of  which  the  solidity
corresponds  to  the  constancy  of  our  images,  and  which  we  have  therefore
learned  to  regard  as  invariable,  maintain  their  invariability  even  when  in
motion  in  our  space,  is  again  empirical.  Should  the  forms  of  bodies  vary
when  in  motion,  this  would  be  no  reason  for  modifying  our  view  of  space,
but  only  our  idea  as  to  the  solidity  of  the  bodies.

17.  This  attempt  to  discover  the  simple  elements  of  the  space-idea  has
taught  us  that  isolated  elements  are  not  to  be  found,  that  the  straight  line
and  the  angle  which  we  find  within  all  space  as  strictly  determined  ideas
only  obtain  real  significance  when  they  are  accompanied  in  consciousness
by  those  relations  between  different  lines  and  angles  which  are  prescribed
to  them  by  the  idea  of  space  as  a  whole. These  relations  are  therefore
themselves essential  elements  of the  space-idea, and  the  same logical
character  must  reveal  itself  in  them.

The  means  of  obtaining  a  clear  consciousness  of  the  relations  between
the  particular  elements  and  parts  of  our  space-idea  is  measurement ;  and
measurement  presupposes  that  it  is  possible  to  think  of  everything  spatial
as  consisting  of  equal  parts  or  as  constructed  by  the  addition  of  equal
parts.

1 8.  The  more  indefinite  relations  of  larger and smaller are given
directly  by  ordinary  sense-intuition ;  a  body  which  encloses  another, a
plane  which  includes  another  as  its  part,  a  line  from  which  a  portion  is
separated,  give  us  the  difference  between  larger  and  smaller  upon  simple
comparison. The  relation  of  part  to  whole,  upon  which  this  comparison
ultimately  rests  (§  6,  3,  r,  p.  35  sq.),  is  always  given  in  the  continuum  of
spatial  intuition  and  the  homogeneity  of  extension. We  are  also  familiar
with  the process  of  comparing  objects  which  are  exterior  to  each  other;
we  lay  them  together  or  think  of  them  as  laid  together,  and  either  perceive
how  the  one  extends  beyond  the  other,  or  judge  it  to  do  so  with  immediate
certainty  on  the  ground  of  their  juxtaposition  in  our  imagination. As  to  the
assumption  involved  in  this  operation,  that  things  do  not  alter  by  being
moved  to  another  place,  we  have  no  doubt,  for  we  certainly  do  move  our
spatial  images  here  and  there  without  difficulty,  and  a  hundred  experiences
teach  us  that  the  spatial  image  of  a  moving  body  also  remains  the  same.1

1  I  cannot  persuade  myself  that  if  objects  were  to  shrink  upon  being  moved  in  a  certain


SPACE  55

For  the  same  reason  we  never  have  any  apprehension  lest  the  dimensions  {
of  a  body  present  to  sense  should  vary  because  it  turns  about  in  space.

19.  But  these  expedients,  although  they  lead  to  the  process  of  measure
ment,  do  not  suffice  to  explain  either  the  geometrical  concept  of  equality
nor  the  development  of  geometrical  concepts  of  measurement.  So  long
as  we  have  to  do  with  real  objects,  we  cannot  attain  absolute  coincidence
either  of  lines  or  of  points.  Our  sense-perception  of  equality  and  in
equality  is  bewildered  by  our  knowledge  of  the  continuity  of  space,  by  the
continuity  of  increase  and  decrease  in  spatial  magnitude  which  it  involves,
and  by  the  gradual  disappearance  of  perceptible  differences.  Not  until
we  mentally  construct  our  non-sensuous  straight  lines  and  lay  them  upon
each  other  do  we  get  the  idea  of  their  absolute  coincidence  when  they
have  two  points  in  common  ;  not  until  we  exclude  even  the  smallest
difference  which  escapes  perception  have  we  the  ideal  concept  of  geometric
equality,  to  which  in  intuition  we  can  approximate  only  negatively  by
denning  the  equal  as  that  which  is  neither  greater  nor  smaller — an  ideal
concept  which  we  can  never  realize  in  intuition.1  Only  in  the  thought  of
a  perfect  straight  line  have  we  any  foundation  for  an  absolutely  invariable
definite  measure ;  and  only  by  thinking  of  the  parts  of  a  straight  line
as  strictly  continuous  do  we  get  completely  geometrical  division  and
addition.  The  same  is  true  of  angles,  only  the  angle  which  is  enclosed
by  straight  lines  has  an  absolute  definite  magnitude.  Moreover,  we  have
here,  in  the  invariability  of  the  angular  revolution  of  a  line  in  a  plane
back  to  its  original  position,  an  invariable  unit  of  measurement,  which  the
straight  line  lacks  because  it  can  be  indefinitely  produced.

Thus  these  relational  concepts  also  ultimately  depend  for  all  their
determination  upon  a  mental  construction  and  movement  of  lines,  which

direction,  we  should  not  notice  it,  provided  that  we  ourselves  and  the  standards  by  which
we  measure  were  to  shrink  in  the  same  proportion.  It  would  have  to  be  assumed  that
not  only  the  percipient  surface  of  the  bodies  and  the  standard  of  measurement,  but  also
our  memory-images,  were  subject  to  the  same  law  of  shrinking.  But  then  we  should
have  another  mental  life  altogether,  for  all  our  present  apprehension  is  based  upon  our
ability  to  reproduce  sense-impressions,  at  any  rate  for  a  short  time,  without  perceptible
change  ;  even  our  confidence  in  the  constancy  of  our  standards  of  measurement  depends
ultimately  upon  the  fact  that  as  at  present  seen  they  do  not  differ  from  the  image  repro
duced  from  the  previous  moment  ;  in  this  way  alone  can  we  get  the  idea  of  constant
solid  bodies.

1  Cf.  the  pertinent  remark  of  Zindel,  p.  II  :  "VVhen  we  say  '  two  lines  are  equal,  if,
being  placed  the  one  upon  the  other,  they  coincide,'  we  tacitly  assume  that  the  lines  have
not  changed  while  being  moved.  But  this  assumption,  that  is,  the  concept  of  unaltered
length,  already  involves  the  concept  of  equality,"  etc.


5  6  LOGIC

again  has  its  basis  in  the  consciousness  of  an  activity  which  never  changes
in  its  representation  of  space.

20.  The idea  of  difference  in  magnitude  acquires  definiteness only
through number,  which  states  what  part  the  smaller  is  of  the  larger,  or
how  many  equal  parts  the  one  or  the  other  of  the  compared  magnitudes
contains, and thus reduces the indeterminate larger and smaller to
determinate  relations  of  magnitude. But  in  the  application  of  number
to  spatial  measurements  we must  never  overlook  the  conditions under
which  the  counting  takes  place  and  which  are  contained  in  the  continuity
of  the  unities  counted  ;  that  which  is  added  is  not  merely  a  plurality  of
unities,  but  a  plurality  of  unities  which  lie  in  continuous  contact  and  thus
form  a  connected  whole. Only  spatial  intuition  can  show  what  is  meant
by  adding  one  line  or  angle  to  another  in  such  a  way  as  to  express  that
continuous  contact  of  parts  without  interval which  is  not  to  be  found  in
the  concept  of  number  by  itself. Thus  the  expression  of  the  relations  of
spatial  magnitudes  by  numbers  and  their  relations  is  always  connected
with  certain  fundamental  presuppositions  as  to  the  nature  of  the  parts  to
be  counted  and  the  meaning  of  the  process  of  addition,  etc.  ;  and  has  no
significance  unless  it  is  based  upon  intuition.1

21.  But  here  we  come  again  upon  the  antagonism  between  the  con
tinuous  and  the  discrete. The  spatial  continuum  can  never  be  exhausted
by  numbers ;  it  always  resists  exact  numerical  measurement. From  this
point  of  view  also  intuition  maintains  its  original  supremacy  against  every
attempt  to  resolve  it  into  mere  relations  of  measurable  magnitude. It  is
only  by  passing  beyond  the  sphere  of  number  in  the  strict  sense  by  means
of  irrational  numbers  and  the  expedients  of  the  differential  calculus  that
we  succeed  in  overcoming  this  resistance. At  the  same  time  when  we  have
learned  that  there  are  incommensurable  magnitudes  in  space,  we  have  the
most striking proof  against all empirical  theories  of  space ;  no  actual
measurement  could  convince  us  that  it  is  impossible  to  express  the  side  of
a  square  and  its  diagonal  by  numbers  of  the  same  unit.

22.  On  the  other  hand,  intuition  affords  a  perfect  counterpart  to  the
peculiarity  in  the  relation  between  the  general  and  the  particular  which  we
found  in  the  meaning  of  the  general  numerical  symbols. It  is  part  of  the
nature  of  the  continuum  that  we  can  think  of  any  magnitude  as  changing
and  diminishing  throughout  all  values  ;  the  power  of  increasing  at  will  every
element  of  our  space-idea,  according  to  the  same  law  of  construction,  in-

1  On  the  conception  of  a  non-Euclidean  Geometry  see  Appendix  C.


TIME  57

volves  the  certainty  of  being  able  to  give  to  every  numerical  value  its  exact
counterpart  in  spatial  magnitude.  From  this  point  of  view,  then,  the
applicability  of  numbers,  even  in  their  general  expressions,  is  unlimited  ;
indeed,  it  is  this  applicability  alone  which  enables  us  to  apply  the  idea  of  a
continuum — although  only  in  the  form  of  an  approximation — to  the  series
of  numbers  which  progresses  by  constantly  diminishing  differences.  The
actual  numerical  values  must  always  from  their  nature  continue  to  show
finite  differences,  even  though  we  can  diminish  them  at  will.

23.  But  still  another  and  different  form  of  generality belongs  to  the
particular  spatial  ideas. Every  straight  line  of  which  we  think  is  a  par
ticular  straight  line ;  but  since  we  can  repeat  it  in  exactly  the  same  way  in
every  part  of  space  and  in  every  direction,  it  represents  an  endless  number
of  counterparts  exactly  like  itself,  which  are  not  identical,  as  the  number
3  is always  the  same  identical  number, but can  be  thought of  as  an
actual  intuitable  plurality.

24.  In  the  sphere  of  numbers  we  have,  then,  developing  itself  from  a
few  interconnected  elements  which  are  subject  to  a  simple  law  of  synthesis,
a  series  of  which  we  are  first  conscious  when  we  construct  it ;  in  space  we
have  a  presentation  in  its  totality  within  which  we  have  to  distinguish  and
:o  determine  the  simplest  definite  elements  in  order  to  reconstruct  by  their
spatial  combination  according  to  fixed laws  the  idea  already  given,  thus
ittaining  for  the  first  time  a  consciousness  of  its  actual  necessity.

§  68.

The  investigation  and  determination  of  the  elements  contained  in  the
idea  of  TIME  also  depends  in  the  last  instance  upon  our  power  of  reflecting
apon  the  functions  which  act  in  our  consciousness  of  the  time  series  as  the
synthesis  of  memory  and  upon  our  consciousness  of  the  mutual  relations  of
hese  functions  as  necessary,  and  as  always  the  same  whatever  the  tem
poral  content  may  be.

The  parallelism  of  the  processes  by  which  we  determine  the  idea  of
ime  and  that  of  space  is  grounded  upon  the  intuitable  continuum  of  time,
in  antithesis  to  both,  number  stands  in  a  like  relation  both  to  space  and
:o  time.

i.  The  idea  of  time  is  inseparable  from  consciousness,  and  is  contained
n  everything  which  we  experience  immediately  as  our  own  states  or  our
)wn  actions.  We  find  ourselves  existing  in  time  and  acting  in  time,  and
he  manifold  which  fills  consciousness  contains  time  as  an  element  and


5  8  LOGIC

is  arranged  for  us  in  the  form  of  a  time-series.  In  this  sense  a  time-series
filled  with  a  definite  content  is  given  before  reflection.  If  we  should
attempt  by  abstraction  to  disengage  time  from  the  content  which  is  in  time,
we  should  first  obtain — corresponding  to  extension  in  space — duration  as
the  common  property  of  our  different  states,  and  of  objects  in  so  far  as
they  are  present  to  consciousness  ;  and  from  the  continuation  of  one  state
after  another  had  ceased  (e.g.  the  continuation  of  sight  after  cessation  of
hearing),  we  should  also  get  the  distinctions  of  longer  and  shorter  periods
of  duration.  But  duration  does  not  exhaust  the  idea  of  time  any  more
than  extension,  as  the  common  property  of  all  objects,  exhausts  that  of
space ;  the  ranging  of  distinguishables  in  before  and  after,  temporal  succes
sion,  is  also  involved  in  the  content  of  consciousness,  and  even  the  idea
of  empty  time  is  not  wanting  as  the  interval  between  successive  and  inter
mittent  impressions,  acts  of  will,  etc.,  corresponding  to  the  intervening
space  between  external  objects.  An  absolutely  empty  time  cannot,  in
deed,  be  immediately  given  in  the  way  in  which  an  empty  space  is  intui-
able  in  the  distance  of  objects.  Every  moment  is  filled  by  our  own
existence  and  the  unobtrusive  mental  changes  which  accompany  our  con
sciousness  of  it,  and  it  is  only  in  connection  with  this  background  that  the
intermittent  activities  appear  to  be  separated  by  pauses  ;  the  same  time
must  be  related  to  distinguishable  series  of  events,  of  which  the  one  is  con
tinuous,  the  other  intermittent,  and  thus  there  arises  the  second  temporal
relation,  contemporaneousness.

Where  every  conscious  content  disappears  the  idea  of  time  also  dis
appears,  as  in  sleep.  When  we  imagine  our  experience  of  time  to  be
extended,  as  in  forecasting  the  future,  we  cannot  lengthen  time  except  as
accompanied  by  the  thought  of  some  content,  however  indefinite.

2.  It  is  more  easily  obvious  than  in  the  space-idea  that  this  fact  of  the
time-idea  being  given  does  not  prevent  its  being  a  priori  in  the  psycho
logical  sense,  for  it  is  evident  that  the  succession  of  particular  perceptions
does  not  amount  to  a  perception  of  their  succession.  On  the  contrary,  in
order  to  explain  the  actual  state  of  our  consciousness,  we  must  refer  back
to  some  original  connection  between  the  particular  movements  of  con
sciousness  which  is  inseparable  from  the  process  by  which  we  become
aware  of  the  particular,  and  appears  first  in  the  simple  form  of  memory
leading  from  one  particular  to  another  and  drawing  one  moment  after
another.  By  virtue  of  this  connection  what  is  presented  is  never  an  in
stantaneous  Now  alone,  but  accompanying  it  a  longer  or  shorter  series  of


TIME  59

preceding  moments.  Time  is  a  priori  in  the  sense  that  in  the  laws
which  regulate  consciousness  this  function  is  involved  as  necessarily  taking
place ;  it  may  be  called  a  form  in  so  far  as  the  mode  of  connection  is  inde
pendent  of  any  particular  content,  but  we  can  no  more  attain  to  the  idea
of  time  without  a  content  which  is  experienced  and  retained  in  memory
than  we  can  attain  to  an  idea  of  space  which  is  not  occasioned  by  stimula
tion  of  sense.

3.  What  really  remains  when  we  attempt  to  gain  the  pure  concept  of
time  by  abstraction  from  this  content  is  nothing  but  a  consciousness  of  this
connection  itself  and  the  fundamental  relations  contained  in  it  of  before
and  after,  which  are  based  upon  the  way  in  which  we  pass  from  the  present
moment  backwards  and  forwards  through  the  series  contained  in  conscious
ness.  Our  power  of  passing  beyond  our  immediate  experience  and  repre
senting  in  the  same  way  whatever  content  we  like,  of  imagining  time  as
extended  either  in  the  past  or  in  the  future  at  will,  depends  only  upon  the
spontaneous  manipulation  of  that  activity  which  when  raised  into  con
sciousness  gives  us  the  concept  of  a  time  of  unlimited  extension.  But  all
the  ideas  of  times  which  we  get  in  this  way  combine  to  form  one  all-em
bracing  time  of  which  the  particular  times  are  parts  only  on  the  presuppo
sition  that  we  expressly  accept  the  content  as  existing,  and  place  it  in
actual  relation  to  our  own  actual  existence,  determining  its  distance  from
our  Now.  But  the  concept  of  the  one  time  in  which  everything  exists  is
not  the  concept  of  time  in  general.  The  antithesis  between  the  one  pre
sent  moment  which  is  and  the  past  which  is  no  longer,  as  well  as  the
future  which  is  not  yet,  is  also  grounded  upon  this  reference  of  the  concept

iof  being  to  that  which  is  represented  in  time;  apart  from  this  reference

•
:time  is  for  us  a  uniform  continuum,  without  any  prominent  point. When

'for  mathematical  purposes  we  imagine  a  body  rotating  round  its  axis,  this
emphatic  opposition  between  the  Now  and  the  Before  and  After  disappears
!  altogether;  we  are  not  obliged  to  attribute  to  the  image  with  which  we  are
concerned  an  independent  being  or  to  assign  to  it  a  place  in  real  time,  a
reference  to  our  Now,  and  we  therefore  are  able  to  regard  an  indefinite
period  of  time  as  if  it  were  a  uniform  whole  like  a  spatial  area.  The  par
ticular  parts  of  this  time  are  mutually  exclusive  in  no  other  sense  than  are
the  particular  parts  of  a  line ;  for  in  contemplating  a  line  also  we  direct  our
attention  successively  to  different  parts.

4. As  the  universal  concept  of  time  in  general  arises  only  through  our
consciousness  of  what  we  do  when  we  represent  a temporal  series,  so  the


60  LOGIC

more  exact  determination  of  the  particular  elements  contained  in  time  and
supported  by  it  depend  upon  the  same  activity  of  reflection.  Here,  again,
it  is  true  that  all  we  can  do  is  to  determine  differences  and  particulars
within  a  total  idea.  A  point  of  time  as  an  indivisible  moment  is  never
given  to  us  in  the  sense  that  we  can  think  of  it  as  filled  by  any  definite  con
tent  ;  it  is  only  by  discrimination  within  a  flowing  continuum  that  we  can
grasp  it  as  a  limit,  at  first  occasioned  by  the  change  of  content  as  it  ceases
and  begins,  and  then  applied  to  uniform  duration  within  which  the  same
process  of  limitation  can  be  repeated.

5.  By  division  we  get  periods  of  time,  which  are  comparable  as  to  their
length,  are  greater,  smaller  or  equal. The  overlapping  of  one  duration
by  another,  or  the  equal  duration  of  two  objects  which  begin  and  cease
together,  was  given  by  immediate  perception  of  co-existing  objects,  so  that
here  our  comparison  rested  upon  a  definite  given  content ;  but  the  power
of  comparing successive  periods  of  time  depends  ultimately  upon  the
manner  in  which  time  enters  into  consciousness. When  we  break  up  the
combination  of  successive  moments  into  a  repetition of  connected  acts
and  compare  them  together,  we  are  able  to  distinguish  the  act  which  em
braces  more  from  that  which  embraces  less  and  to  think  of  an  equal  time
as  a  limit  between  the  two. In  the  last  instance  it  is  always  an  unanaly
sable  impression  through  which  two  periods  of  time  appear  to  us  as  equal,
and  we  are  really  certain  of  it  only  with  very  small  intervals,  such  as  occur
between  the  strokes  of  the  metronome. It  is  however  from  this  subjective
measurement  of  time  that  all  our  knowledge  of  equal  durations  starts,  just
as  measurement  by  the  eye  alone  makes  it  possible  to  find  fixed  standards
of  measurement.

6.  The  resemblance  between  the  processes  by  which  we  compare  and
combine  successive  intervals  of  time,  and  those  in  which  number  as  the
unifying  combination  of  a  plurality  has  its  origin,  is  obvious  ;  and  it  is
easy  to  understand  how  they  should  come  to  be  thought  identical. But
in  number  we  have  to  do  with  a  series  of  indivisible  acts,  which  need  not
necessarily  be  observed  as  passing  through  consciousness  in  a  temporal
series  :  so  that  when  we  have  completed  our  idea  of  number  we  lose
sight  of  the  time  which  we  used  for  counting. On  the  other  hand,  the
basis  of  the  connection  between  successive  periods  of  time  is  the  con
tinuum  of  moments  which  pass  into  each  other  without  break ;  the  acts
which correspond  to  counting are limitations  of a  duration,  and thus
contain something  which  always  remains divisible  and cannot  be pro-


TIME  6 1

duced  from  a  combination  of  unities.  To  this  extent  time  stands  in  the
same  relation  to  number  as  space  does ;  counting  is  applied  to  both  in
exactly  the  same  way.

7.  But  it  follows  further  that  it  is  only  by  calling  in  the  assistance  of
number  that  periods  of  time  can  appear  as  definite  magnitudes  and  be
reduced  to  conceptual  expression. On  the  other  hand,  immediate  sub
jective measurement  is  extremely  limited ; it suffices  only  to  yield a
principle  and  general  mode  of  procedure  of  measurement  which  we  can
extend  and  apply  at  will  in  our  idea  of  time,  so  as  to  construct  the  general
scheme  of  temporal  magnitude, but  which  needs  artificial  aids  for  its
application  to  the  time  of  actual  experience.

8.  The product which results from the combination of  all these
elements is the thought of a time which progresses uniformly and
without  limit,  and  is  divisible  into  periods  as  short  as  we  like ;  it  does
not  signify  how  small  we  make  the  unit  of  time  if  we  adapt  our  actually
limited power of discrimination to existing conditions by imagining
every  period  to  be  so  far  magnified  as  to  admit  of  still  further  division  in
intuition. This  artifice,  without  which  we  could  never  perceive  intuitively

.  the  progressive  division  of  any  given  period  into  smaller  and  smaller
periods,  is  made  possible  by  the  uniform  flow  and  the  simple  propor
tionality  of  all  temporal  relations  to  which  it  gives  rise.

9.  Thus it appears that definite, conceptually fixed  ideas  of the
temporal — as  of  the spatial — are  attainable  only  by  means  of  a  recon
struction  of  that  which  is  immediately  given,  and  that  this  reconstruction
depends upon our attention to activities of continual and uniform
occurrence, of  which  the invariability appears to  consciousness  as  the
sign  of  their necessity,  and which  thus disengage  themselves  from  any
definite  content. We  find  also  that  in  the  idea  of  time,  as  in  that  of
space,  there  are  given  a  number  of  inter-connected  elementary  ideas,  the
mutual  relation  of which is determined by  the  general  idea  of time,
which  regulates  it  and  gives  it  meaning ;  and  that  we  have  not  succeeded
in  making  our  idea  of  time  conceptually  clear  and  fixed  until  we  have
attained  to  a  consciousness  of  this  inner  connection  and  its  necessity.

§  69.

The  concept  of  MOTION  presupposes  for  its  complete  determination
first,  reflection  upon  the  co-operating  functions  of  the  ideas  of  space
and  time  as  connected  in  the  idea  of  movement,  and  then  the  reduction


62  LOGIC

of  this  connection  to  its  mathematically  determined  elements.  The
concept  cannot  be  perfected  by  the  method  of  abstraction,  but  only
by  the  reconstruction  of  what  is  given.

1.  Space and time unite in the idea of motion. Kant himself
contrasts  motion  as  something  empirical,  presupposing  a perception  of
something moved, to the a priori  forms  of  space and time,  and  it
certainly  does  seem  as  if  here  we  could  get  no  conceptual  analysis,  no
determination  of  simple  elements,  except  by  abstraction  from  movements
given  in  perception. But  here  again  closer  observation will  show  that
the  matter  stands  just  as  with  space  and  time,  that  while  the  original
idea  of  motion  is  given  empirically,  the  definite  concept  of  motion  can  in
no  way  be  obtained  from  simple  sensuous  apprehension.

2.  The  simple  motion  of  a  body  in  the  field  of  vision,  or  the  motion
of  our  own  limbs, seems  at  first  to  be  an  immediate  perception  and  to
need  no  further  analysis. From  various  moving  solids  we  easily  abstract,
by  disregarding  the  particulars  in  which  they  differ,  an  abstract  general
concept  of  motion,  and  we  as  easily  find  the  contents  of  the  idea  to  be
change of place in  time, motion being  thus  distinguished from  rest,
which  is  continuance  in  the  same  place.

3.  But  if  we  proceed  to  ask  what  is  involved  in  the  idea  of  change
of  place, and  why  it  is  so  easy  to  abstract  the  general  idea  of  motion
from  the  perceived  changes of  place  of  the  most  various  objects,  then
it  appears  that  there  is  certainly  something  in  the  activity  of  perceiving
a  movement  which is independent  of  the  form and magnitude  of  the
moving object, and which is always  the  same  whenever  we  perceive
motion. It  is  not  one  indivisible  act  with  which we  have  to  do  when
we  say  that  we  perceive  change  ;  there  is  always  involved  the  combination
of  different  temporal  moments  in  one  total  idea,  and  this  involves  that
activity  of  memory  which  connects with the  present  that  which  is  dis
tinguishable  from  it  as  preceding,  and  thus  constructs  a  whole  from  the
successive  stages  retained  in  consciousness. But  the  intuitable  element
in  the  idea  of  motion,  that  which  cannot  be  further  resolved  into  discrete
elements,  consists  in  the  fact  that  we  do  not  think  of  and  distinguish  an
enumerated  number  of  separated  places, which  we  afterwards combine
as  a  whole, but  that  in  the  process  of  combination  we  apprehend  the
continuum  between  the particular  and  momentarily  fixed  points  of  the
path  of  the  moving  solid.1

1  Phenomena  are  known,  such  as those  of  the  stroboscope, which  prove  that  this


MOTION  63

Now  the  form  of  the  process,  through  which  motion  is  thought,  is  evi
dently  always  the  same,  inasmuch  as  the  same  functions  of  distinguishing
and  combining  must  always  be  involved  ;  difference  arises  only  in  its  refer
ence  to  the  different  material  of  moving  objects,  and  the  different  magni
tudes  of  successively  distinguishable  intervals  of  space.  This  is  the
ground  of  the  ease  with  which  we  abstract  the  idea  of  motion,  and
raise  it  to  generality.1

4.  But  not  even the  general  idea  of  motion can  be  raised  in  this
way  to  complete  conceptual  determination. Inasmuch  as  sense-intuition
gives  us  only  moving  solids  (or  surfaces)  their  motion  breaks  up  at  once
into  the  motion  of  their  parts,  and  we  find  no  end  to  this  division  ;  the
smallest  perceptible  element  which  moves  is  still  extended,  and  cannot  be
re/)lved  into  ultimate  perceptible  elements. And  if  we  further  proceed
\M  determine  the  differences  which  appear  in  motion,  sensuous  intuition
leaves  us  completely  at  a  loss,  and  we  find  that  only  spontaneous  construc
tion  in  merely  imaginary  space  and  time,  that  is  only  the  mathematical
consideration  of  motion,  can  help  us  to  reduce  to  fixed  and  unchangeable
ideas  that  wavering  representation  of motion which we get  from the
senses.

5.  From  the  nature  of  our  spatial  concepts  it  follows  that  a  completely
determined  place  is  only  a  point  in  space,  and  hence  that  the  only  way
to  get  an  unambiguous  idea  of  change  of  place  is  to  follow  the  motion  of
a  point. In  this  way  alone  is  it  possible  to  determine  the  beginning  and
end  of  a  motion,  and  therefore  the  distance  traversed,  and  in  this  way
alone the path which is  always involved in the thought  of motion
becomes  fully determined. Even in  ordinary thought  we  reduce  the
path  which  a  body  describes  to  a  line,  of  which  alone  the  direction  can
be  easily  distinguished  and  determined. But  this  reduction  is  uncertain
so  long  as  we  retain  the  whole  which  is  given  in  perception  ;  only  when
in  mathematical  abstraction  we  move  a  point  in  a  straight  line,  a  circle,

continuum  is  present  in  thought,  even  where  the  perceptions  were  really  intermittent ;
but  they  do  not  prove  that  the  whole  idea  of  motion  is  due  only  to  the  intermittent  per
ceptions  of  separate  successive  positions,  and  that  what  takes  place  in  the  intervals  is
not  perceived  but  only  added  by  imagination.  The  intuitable  idea  of  motion  is  composed
of  both  elements ;  it  is  not  possible  without  consciousness  of  the  difference  between  the
successive  positions  which  are  traced  by  intermittent  movements  of  the  eye,  and  form  to
this  extent  discrete  points  within  the  one  comprehension  ;  but  it  also  contains  continuous
passage  through  the  areas  traversed,  as  something  entering  into  immediate  apprehension
itself.

1  Cf.  i.  §  41,  12,  p.  264.


64  LOGIC

an  ellipse,  do  we  get  that  mathematical  ideal  of  rectilinear  or  circular
motion  with  which  we  compare  motion  as  actually  perceived,  and  this
is  only  possible  when  we  fix  upon  definite  points  in  the  moving  solids.
We  often  see  the  motion  of  a  passing  cart-wheel,  we  easily  distinguish
between  the  progress  of  the  whole  and  the  rotation  round  the  axis  ;  but
do  we  see  in  the  ordinary  sense  the  path  described  by  a  point  in  the
circumference,  or  could  we  get  an  image  of  the  cycloid  from  the  simple
apprehension  of  sense  ?

It  would  seem  then  that  from  perceived  motion  we  can  never  arrive
at  clear  and  unambiguous  concepts  of  motion,  such  as  we  could  retain
and  reproduce  with  a  certainty  of  their  identity.  Only  the  purely  ideal
thought  by  which  we  move  an  invisible  point  in  space  can  give  both
the  general  concept  of  motion  and  in  it  all  the  different  elements  contained
in  motion.

6.  This  is especially true  of  velocity. It is true that when we
perceive  motion  we  are  at  once  struck by  differences  of  greater  or  less
velocity. One  movement  declares  itself  swifter  than  another  by  a  peculiar
stimulus  which  is  closely  connected  with  motor  sensations  of  the limbs
and  the  following  eye  ;  when  one  body  overtakes  another  in  the  same
path  we  get  a  still  more  definite  clue. But  we  get  no  further  than  the
mere comparatives of "quicker" and "slower" until we introduce
measurement  of  the relation between  space  and  time  in  motion  ;  and
this  measurement,  if  it  is  to  be  accurate,  again  involves  the  mathematical
ideals, the  point  as  the  beginning  of  motion,  the line  as  its  path,  and
a  strict  equality  of  spaces  and  times  which  no  perception  can  absolutely
guarantee.

7.  When  we  reduce  the  idea  of  velocity  to  the  concept  of  the  relation
between spaces and times, we find that the particular form of the
synthesis  of  space-  and  time-magnitude  gives  us  at  once  all  the  speciali
zations which result from the nature  of magnitude  and  of numbers
as  they  pass  through  all  values. It  is possible  to  extend  the  concept
to  cases  in  which sense-perception fails  us owing  to  the  slowness  or
swiftness  of  the  motion  ;  it  is  also  possible  to  separate  uniform  motion
from  different  degrees  of  retardation  or  acceleration  by  indefinitely  small
intervals. Thus nothing more than the concepts of numbers and
numerical  relations  are  needed  in  order  to  develop  the  general  concept
into  its  differences. No  apprehension  by  the  senses,  however  favourably
endowed,  would  ever  be  in  a  position  to  abstract  the idea  of  uniform


MOTION  65

acceleration  from  one  or  more  observations  of  falling  bodies.  The
discriminating  capacity  of  our  senses  and  the  subjective  measurement
of  time  are  far  from  being  competent  to  a  problem  which  requires  that
the  relation  between  space  and  time  should  be  measured  into  the
smallest  intervals  ;  a  Galileo  was  needed  to  construct  mathematically  the
law  and  the  course  of  such  a  motion,  and  then  to  find  it  in  reality.

8.  Here  again,  then,  we  find  that  the  only  means  of  making  our
fundamental  ideas  fixed  and  unambiguous  is  conscious  reconstruction  of
what  is  given  from  simple  definite  elements  ;  here  again,  we  find  involved
in  the  nature  of  these  ideas  their  fundamental  relations  to  one  another,
and  the  form  and  law  of  their  synthesis.  The  ideas  of  space  and  time
rule  that  of  motion,  while  on  the  other  hand  definite  concepts  of  spatial
images  are  formed  by  help  of  the  idea  of  motion,  and  time  is  most
easily  represented  in  motion.  They  form  a  trio  of  interconnected  spheres
which  cannot  be  resolved  into  simple  isolated  elements ;  rather  is  it
characteristic  of  them  that  they  act  as  a  compulsory  bond,  holding
together  in  mutual  dependence  all  which  is  distinguishable  and  different
within  them ;  they  are  a  universe  of  ideas  which,  once  brought  into
consciousness,  bring  with  them  the  consciousness  of  a  necessary  activity
by  which  they  are  produced.  This  constitutes  the  characteristic  which
has  been  denoted  as  a  priori  in  the  logical  and  epistemological  sense,
a  word  so  often  misinterpreted  and  therefore  unjustly  attacked.  Neither
space,  nor  time,  nor  motion  is  a  priori  in  the  sense  that  it  is  originally
due — as  number  is — -to  a  conscious,  spontaneous  activity.  They  precede
ill  thought ;  we  find  them  as  mental  products  and  can  alter  nothing  in
:hem,  but  the  idea  in  its  totality  prescribes  invariable  mutual  relations
.0  all  the  particular  parts  which  can  be  distinguished  within  it,  and  is  thus
perfectly  determinate  and  exclusive  of  all  ambiguity.  A  definite  principle
)f  synthesis  governs  all  particulars  which  we  can  represent  in  time
ind  space,  and  thus  governs  also  the  sensuous  content  of  which  the
/aried  change  can  in  no  way  affect  the  general  form  of  spatial  and
emporal  apprehension  and  combination.

§  7°-

For  the  conceptual  determination  of  ELEMENTARY  SENSATIONS  the  first
•equisite  is  a  resolution  of  what  is  given  into  homogeneous  parts.

These  parts  fall  naturally  into  definite  groups,  which  are  clearly  dis-
inguished  from  each  other — the  spheres  of  the  particular  senses ;  but

s.  L. — ii.  F


66  LOGIC

within  these  groups  mere  comparison  of  subjective  sensations  can  give  us
neither  fixed  points  nor  a  universally  valid  measure  for  differences.

In  a  logical  determination  of  these  elements  we  start  from  the  assump
tion  of  a  constant  relation  between  differences  in  the  cause  of  sensation
and  differences  in  the  sensation  itself  as  it  would  occur  in  an  assumed
normal  subject,  and  we  endeavour  to  represent  the  causes  of  the  sensation
directly  by  spatial  and  numerical  relations,  or  indirectly  by  substituting
for  the  effect  of  the  cause  upon  the  feeling  subject  an  analogous  effect
upon  an  external  constant  body.

Thus  in  this  sphere  all  methods  depend  upon  the  assumption  of  fixed
causal  relations,  and  the  only  subjective  element  involved  is  the  estima
tion  of  likeness  of  intensities  and  of  qualities  in  sensation.

1.  In  number,  space,  and  time  we  have  found  conceptual  elements
which  can  always  be  presented  in  perfect  clearness  and  determination  be
cause  they  have  their  origin  in  functions  which  are  always  being  exercised
in  a  uniform  manner  so  long  as  our  minds  are  active  at  all,  which  are  to
be  found  in  all  alike,  and  in  the  representation  of  which  we  are  conscious
of  an  inherent  necessity. The  ideas  of  the  sensuous  qualities,  of  colours,
notes,  temperatures,  etc.,  are  given  to  us  under  essentially  different  condi
tions,  which  call  for  other  methods  in  their  conceptual  determination.

2.  The  process  of  abstraction  by  which  they  are  disengaged  from  their
complication  with  other  elements  is  indeed  easy,  and  has  therefore  been
everywhere  carried  out  in  language ;  nor  can  any  doubt  arise  as  to  their
simplicity  when  once  we  have  analysed  spatial  objects  so  far  that  the  par
ticular  parts  present  homogeneous  sensations,  and  have  broken  up  into
simple  constituent  parts  that  which  is  given  at  one  time  so  far  as  it  still
contains  a  distinguishable  plurality.1 For  example  :  the  impression  of  a
colour  uniformly  spread  over  a  surface  cannot  be  further  analysed  into
different  elements ;  it  is  simply  there,  and  we  are  conscious  of  it  all  at  once
in  its  completeness. But  then  it  is  there  only  amongst  external  conditions,
which  vary  in  many  ways,  and  without  these  external  conditions  it  can  be
only  incompletely  reproduced. It  is  out  of  the  range  of  that  voluntary
manipulation  of  which  mathematical  concepts  allow,  and  thus  it  happens
that  the  memory  images  become  more  and  more  uncertain  as  the  differ-

1  The  f~ct  that  artificial  expedients  may  be  necessary  here,  as  in  the  resolution  of  a
musical  sound  into  its  constituent  notes  (by  means  of  Helmholtz's  instruments),  refers
primarily  only  to  the  conditions  under  which  we  are  able  to  carry  out  the  analysis  accu
rately  ;  it  does  not  affect  the  proposition  that  we  do  ultimately  arrive  at  simple  and  un
analysable  elements  f  sensation.


SIMPLE SENSATIONS  67

ences  given  by  sensation  become  more  numerous  and  manifold.  Difference
between  individuals  also  presents  itself  here ;  both  as  regards  the  extent
of  sensations  and  the  clearness  of  their  discrimination  we  have  no  right  to
assume  that  all  people  have  the  same  ideas,  quite  apart  from  the  impossi
bility  of  ever  proving  perfect  agreement  in  this  sphere  between  different
individuals.  Finally,  the  main  difficulty  by  which  we  are  confronted  in  a
logical  treatment  is  the  gradual  nature  of  the  transition  between  distinguish
able  colours,  sounds,  tastes  and  sensations  of  temperature  (although  it  is
not,  as  with  spatial  and  temporal  differences,  strictly  continuous,  nor  con
tained  within  a  continuum  of  perfectly  homogeneous  progression),  and  the
absence  of  fixed  elements,  which  can  easily  be  established  for  all,  such  as
are  given  in  the  straight  line.  We  are,  moreover,  hampered  by  uncertainty
as  to  the  completeness  with  which  we  can  collect  and  compare  all  possible
sensations.  Who  can  be  certain  of  having  really  seen  all  visible  colours,  of
having  really  heard  all  possible  sounds,  so  that  he  can  arrange  them  in  a
fixed  conceptual  system  including  all  ?  Nor  can  imagination,  as  with
space  or  motion,  supply  the  deficiencies  of  perception ;  the  limits  of  per
ception  and  the  distinctions  contained  in  it  cannot  be  extended  at  will,  or
new  colours  invented  as  we  can  invent  all  possible  curves.

3.  If  we  now  consider  what  it  is  which  we  have  to  start  from  in  re
ducing  ideas  of  this  kind  to  fixed  elements,  we  find  it  in  the  fact  that
latural  abstraction  and  discrimination  have  already  begun  by  sorting  out
different  groups,  incomparable  with  each  other  and  disconnected,  but  con-
aining  comparable  elements,  which  belong  to  different  senses,  or,  as  with
;ensations  of  pressure  and  temperature,  to  different  functions  of  the  same
;ense.  Colours  which  are  seen  fall  naturally  apart  from  sounds  which  are
leard ;  they  form  two  closed  wholes  of  similar  and  comparable  impres-
;ions,  although  we  can  abstract  no  further  element  which  is  common  to
ill.  When  they  are  classed  together  as  sensations  of  light  or  sensations
>f  sound,  this  means  no  more  than  that  they  are  all  either  seen  or  heard.1
The  division  between  sensations  of  smell  and  of  taste  is  indeed  less  cer-
ain,  for  these,  owing  to  their  constant  association,  are  sometimes  con-
used,  and  sensations  of  taste  and  of  touch  are  connected  in  the  same
^ay ;  but  for  the  present  we  can  neglect  these  limiting  cases.  Language
tself  has  further  initiated  a  series  of  distinctions  within  this  sphere,  and
imilar  impressions  are  grouped  together  under  a  common  name  and
eparated  from  others  which  are  clearly  different ;  thus  amongst  colours
1  Cf.  i.,  §41,  ii.,  p.  256.


68  LOGIC

reds,  blues,  and  yellows  are  classed  together;  amongst  sounds  whistlings
and  rustlings.

4.  In  our  logical  treatment  we  must  simply  recognise  the  first  division;
but  the  second  gives  rise  to  difficulties. The  similarity  of  one  colour  to
another,  of  one  sound  to  another,  is  logically  indefinable ;  it  rests  upon  an
impression  which  cannot  be  further  analysed,  which  indeed  always  guides
our  classification,  but  which  can  be  utilized  only  after  we  have  obtained  a
measure  for  the  difference  which  still  remains — a  difference which  dis
tinguishes  the  merely  similar  from  the  absolutely  same,  and  the  magnitude
of  which  determines  greater  or  less  similarity  and  thus  institutes  a  series  of
gradually  increasing  differences  up  to a  limit  beyond which  difference
preponderates  over  similarity.

5.  It  seems  to  be  a  matter  of  course  that  in  comparing  our  sensations
we  should  distinguish  two  kinds  of  difference — that  of  intensity  and  that
of  quality;  in  the  latter  we  are  clearly  conscious  of  difference  in  the  felt
content ;  in  the  former,  whether  the  content  be  the  same  or  different,  we
are  conscious  only  of  difference  in  the  strength  of  the  peculiar  subjective
excitement,  though  we  are  accustomed  to  regard  this  at  once  as  a  difference
in  the  strength  of  the  stimulus. But  it  is  open  to  question  whether,  if  we
were  able  to  apprehend  sensations  purely  as  subjective  phenomena,  with
out  thinking  of  their  significance  as  representing  objective  things,  these
two  aspects  would  be  as  distinct  as  are  two  dimensions  of  space  ;  whether
sensations  which  we  consider  only intensively  different  really  show  no
qualitative  difference  at  all,  or  whether  we  do  not  merely  overlook  the
qualitative  differences  of  two  intensively  different  sensations because  we
know  that  they  proceed  from  the  same  object,  and  therefore  refer  the
difference  merely  to  a  different  strength  of  stimulation under different
conditions  (as  of  illumination). In  the  sphere  of  colour  every  difference  in
brightness  is  really  a  qualitative  difference. We  are  apt  to  think  that  one
and  the  same  object  must  present  the  same  colour,  only  in  different  inten
sity,  according  as  it  is  more  or  less  strongly  illuminated ;  but  the  painter
knows  that  the  illuminated  and  shaded  parts  of  a  surface  of  uniform  colour
present  two  colours  which  may  be  as  different  as  the  colours  of  two  objects
under  the  same  illumination. It  is  easier  to  maintain  that  the  same  note
may  be  heard  as  stronger  or  weaker,  although  here  again  it  is  a  question
whether  the  weaker  A  of  the  same  violin-string  does  not  differ  from  the
stronger  by  more  than  mere  intensity.1 But  if  we  are  to have  any  firm

1  Cf.  the  remarks  on  this  point  in  Stumpf  s  Tonpsychologie,  i.  240,  349. I  can  accept


SIMPLE  SENSATIONS  69

foundations  at  all,  we  cannot  cut  ourselves  loose  from  the  objective  sources
of  sensation,  and  it  is  desirable  to  lay  down  the  distinction  between  in
tensity  and  quality  at  any  rate  for  the  beginning  of  our  investigation,  the
more  so  that  even  in  our  immediate  apprehension  we  find  sometimes  the
more  or  less  of  subjective  excitement  preponderating,  sometimes  differences
in  the  objectified  content  of  sensation.

6.  The  next  question  is  where  to  find  fixed  standards  for  intensities,
and  a  measure  for  their  differences.

If  we  take  as  an  example  heat,  in  which  we  think  that  we  know  merely
intensive  differences  most  clearly,  we  see  how  difficult  it  is  to  determine
these  differences  conceptually  and  for  all  alike,  and  to  fix  upon  any
starting  point.  The  power  of  discrimination  is  very  far-reaching,  but  not
only  does  the  problem  as  to  how  much  greater  the  intensity  of  one  sensa
tion  of  warmth  is  than  another  remain  insoluble  ;  even  the  dividing  point
between  the  contrary  intensities  of  cold  and  warm  remains  indefinite,  and
is  not  merely  variable  and  subjectively  different  as  compared  with  external
temperature,  but  cannot  even  be  determined  subjectively  with  any  cer
tainty.  When  we  try  to  present  immediately  the  series  of  distinguishable
intensities  and  to  state  their  differences,  we  are  confronted  by  none  but
fluctuating  determinations;  we  seem  nowhere  able  to  get  beyond  the  in
definite  more  or  less  so  long  as  we  work  only  from  immediately  given
sensation.

7.  Fechner's  brilliant  adaptation  of  Weber's  observations  of  just  per
ceptible  differences  as  a  universal  measure  of  intensity  of  sensation,  seems
at  first  sight  to  claim  also  an  eminently  logical  significance. The  just  per
ceptible  increase  of  sensation  is  taken  as  unit,  the  point  from  which  every
just  perceptible  sensation begins  as zero-point ;  and  thus  it  seems  as  if
every  intensity  could be  expressed  as  a  sum  of  such  units  in  a  definite
number. If,  for  example,  we  fix  upon  20°  as  the  zero-point  at  which  heat
'and  cold  as  felt  by  the  hand  divide,  and  agree  l  that  a  rise  in  temperature
'of  i°  yields  a  just  perceptible  increase  of  sensation,  then  we  should  be
able  to  express  the  intensity  of  the  sensation  given  by  22°  as  10,  of  that
igiven  by  28°  as  40. In  this  way  the  Kantian  principle — "in  all  phe-

:he  explanation  on  p.  240  of  the  qualitative  difference  which  I  seem  to  hear,  and  certainly
lio  not  dispute  that  in  comparison  with  the  consciousness  of  differences  of  intensity,  the
qualitative  changes  which  may  be  present  are  extremely  small.
1 l  Assuming  that  Weber's  law  is  not  true  for  sensations  of  temperature  within  certain

imits,  but  that  the  just  perceptible  differences  of  sensation  correspond  to  an  equal  in-

:rease  of  objective  stimulus.


yo  LOGIC

nomena  the  real,  which  is  the  object  of  sensation,  has  intensive  magnitude,
i.e.  a  degree  " — could  be  definitely  formulated  ;  the  synthesis  producing
the  idea  of  the  magnitude  of  a  sensation  would  be  represented  as  the  sum
of  demonstrably  equal  units.

This  just  perceptible  increase  of  sensation  is  however  not  presented,  as
any  measurable  spatial  or  temporal  unity  may  be  presented  ;  nor  even  in
the  same  sense  as  a  particular  sensation  of  definite  intensity  is  presented.
The  whole  calculation  is  based  merely  upon  a  judgment  that  of  two  suc
cessive  sensations — successive  at  least  for  our  attention — the  one  is  stronger
than  the  other,  and  the  value  which  we  attach  to  the  just  perceptible  in
crease  only  measures  our  power  of  distinguishing  two  sensations  according
to  their  intensity  by  means  of  this  judgment  of  comparison.  This  process
of  discrimination,  moreover,  presupposes  not  merely  the  sensations  them
selves,  but  also  the  power  of  remembering  them  accurately,  and  is  de
pendent  upon  the  time  which  intervenes  between  the  two.  This  alone
makes  it  impossible  to  assume  that  the  just  perceptible  differences  of  sen
sation  are  all  equal  and  to  treat  them  as  fixed  units  of  measurement.
The  theory  implies,  moreover,  that  that  which  we  recognise  as  difference
of  sensation  is  itself  sensation  and  forms  a  part  of  the  stronger  sensation  ;
but  the  difference  between  two  degrees  of  brightness  does  not  present
itself  to  consciousness  as  a  third  sensation,  any  more  than  the  difference
between  two  colours  is  itself  a  colour.  But  even  if  we  could  regard  the
just  perceptible  difference  between  two  degrees  of  sensation  as  itself  a
sensation  of  given  intensity — if  the  difference  between  dark  and  light  grey
were  itself  grey,  as  the  difference  between  two  lines  is  a  line — we  should
be  still  more  entitled  to  raise  the  question  whether  we  are  justified  in  using
this  just  perceptible  difference  as  a  unit  of  measurement.  It  is  obvious
that  the  degree  in  which  a  loud  note  must  be  increased  in  order  to  yield  a
still  stronger  sensation  cannot  be  equivalent  to  the  corresponding  increase
of  a  note  which  is  only  just  audible,  and  that  the  perceptible  increase  of  a
brilliant  white,  if  itself  regarded  as  sensation,  must  be  quite  different  from
the  increase  which  distinguishes  a  dark  grey  from  still  darker  grey.  The
differences  in  different  regions  of  a  scale  of  intensities  cannot  be  taken  as
equivalent,  and  for  this  reason  any  given  intensity  cannot  be  represented
as  a  sum  of  equal  units  ;  it  follows  that  it  is  not  measurable  in  the  ordinary
sense  of  the  word.  Weber's  observations  merely  go  to  show  that  our
power  of  recognising  sensation  a  as  more  intense  than  b  depends  upon  the
degree  of  intensity  of  b ;  what  this  itself  depends  upon  we  cannot  investi-


SIMPLE  SENSATIONS  71

gate  here,  but  we  cannot  in  this  way  obtain  a  direct  measure  of  intensity
of  sensation.  Fechner's  method  of  true  and  false  instances  indicates
clearly  that  he  is  not  dealing  with  something  immediately  given ;  his  very
statement  of  it  assumes  that  an  increase  of  sensation  corresponds  to  every
minimum  increase  of  stimulus,  but  that  our  judgmerjt  of  comparison  is  at
fault.1

In  this  way  the  method  suggests  the  necessity  of  finding  other  standards
of  measurement  if  we  are  to  attain  to  logical  definition,  and  these  are  the
objective  standards  upon  which  it  is  itself  grounded.  If  we  look  more
closely,  it  is  evident  that  the  above  method  of  determining  the  subjective
zero-points  of  sensation,  and  the  differentials  of  increment,  is  made  of  no
avail  for  logical  purposes  by  differences  of  individuality  ;  the  problem  is,
how  to  eliminate  these  subjective  differences.  Psychologically  it  is  of  the
greatest  value,  for  in  psychology  these  subjective  differences  have  also  an
essential  significance  ;  but  logic  aims  at  utilizing  these  elements  of  thought
for  a  universally  valid,  objective  knowledge,  and  the  nature  of  our
immediate  judgments  concerning  intensity  makes  them  unavailable  for
this  purpose.

8.  If  we  consider  the  methods  actually  used  by  science  to  make  these
questions  clear  and  definite — the  simplest  example  is  the  thermometer —
we  find  that  they  generally  start  from  the  assumption  that  differences  in
intensity  of  sensation  correspond  to  differences  in  the  objective  constitu
tion  of  things  ;  in  this  way  alone  could  we  perceive  that  heat  expands
quicksilver,  and  cold  contracts  it.  But  they  rely  more  upon  the  constancy
and  uniformity  of  the  effect  which  the  source  of  heat  has  on  an  inanimate
body  than  upon  the  uniformity  of  its  effect  on  the  feeling  subject ;  and,

1  The  fact  that  practice  produces  a  marked  increase  in  the  certainly  with  which  we
discriminate  small  differences,  implies  that  complicated  psychical  processes  condition  the
result,  and  that  we  are  not  dealing  with  a  fixed  magnitude  ;  we  have  still  clearer  evidence
of  this  in  the  interesting  observation  made  by  Volkmann  that  when,  in  consequence  of
often  repeated  experiments,  the  ability  of  one  side  of  the  body  to  estimate  small  differ
ences  correctly  has  been  increased,  a  similar  acuteness  appeared  in  the  corresponding
part  of  the  other  side  without  being  preceded  by  experiment.  This  proves  clearly  that
we  are  dealing  with  an  increasing  accuracy  in  apprehending  stimulated  sensations,  with
a  process  like  that  which  always  occurs  where  what  is  at  first  held  to  be  the  same  reveals
differences  when  more  closely  attended  to.  It  is  only  gradually  that  the  painter  can  learn
to  apprehend  the  finer  differences  in  colour,  the  musician  in  the  pitch  and  intensity  of
notes,  and  can  practise  their  power  of  remembering  them.

With  reference  to  the  whole  of  this  question  cf.  v.  Kries,  Ueber  die  Messung  intensiver
Grosscn,  etc.  Vierteljahrsschr.  fur  -atiss.  /%»'/.,  vi.  27359.,  and  the  careful  explanations
in  StumpPs  Tonpsychologie,  i.  §  1-4  ;  there  is  also  much  which  is  relevant  in  A.  Groten-
feld's  Das  Weber1  sche  Geselz  und  die psyckische  Relativitat.


72  LOGIC

most  important  of  all,  they  endeavour  to  find  that  increase  of  effect  upon
external  objects  which  corresponds  to  increase  of  sensation  in  instances
where  it  appears  as  simple  expansion  in  space,  and  is  thus  immediately
measurable  down  to  the  smallest  portion.  We  have  now  accustomed  our
selves  to  determine  degrees  of  heat  by  the  thermometer,  but  the  process  is
really  based  upon  the  fiction  of  a  normal  sensation,  which  always  follows
the  same  stimulus  and  increases  according  to  the  same  law.  In  speaking  of
heat  we  speak  of  a  subjective  quality  of  sensation;  but  for  scientific  pur
poses  we  do  not  make  use  of  it  as  it  is  felt  at  the  moment,  but  as  it  would
appear,  assuming  that  our  sensation  were  always  constant  under  the  same
external  stimulus.  We  do  not  measure  the  more  or  less  by  the  unit  of
just  perceptible  difference,  but  for  this  subjective  standard  we  substitute
an  objective,  which  we  can  rely  upon  to  express  in  always  the  same  way
any  increase  in  that  which  gives  rise  to  the  sensation  of  heat.

It  is  much  the  same  with  sensations  of  weight.  Light  and  heavy,
lighter  and  heavier,  are  primarily  statements  of  immediate  sensations,  and
of  differences  in  their  intensity ;  but  in  this  state  of  indefiniteness  and
relativity,  without  any  fixed  limits,  the  terms  are  useless  for  logical  pur
poses.  We  have  recourse  to  the  balance  which  enables  us  to  determine
the  differences  numerically,  by  means  of  spatial  movements  which  are
measurable,  and  to  establish  a  system  of  predicates  which  are  objectively
valid.

The  methods  of  photometry  also  make  use  of  spatial  relations,  and  pre
suppose  only  the  simplest  of  immediate  perceptions,  the  power  of  judging
that  two  degrees  of  brightness  are  equal ;  but  from  immediate  perception
they  obtain  neither  a  fixed  starting  point  nor  a  standard  of  measurement.

9.  As  the  general  result  of  these  considerations,  it  appears  that  in  con
ceptually  determining  the  intensities  of  sense-impressions  we  are  obliged
to  have  recourse  to  spatial  magnitudes  and  numbers,  by  which  they  can
be  expressed  according  to  one  standard  of  measurement ;  this  of  course
involves  assumptions  as  to  the  uniformity  of  the  effect  of  objective  causes
of  sensation,  of  which  the  validity  and  origin  cannot  be  investigated  until
later.  Where  we  fail  to  make  such  a  reduction,  as  in  the  case  of  intensities
of  smells,  there  no  logical  determination  is  possible.

If,  moreover,  this  reduction  is  to  have  any  value,  it  must  hold  good —
first,  that  our  perception  of  spatial  magnitudes  in  the  process  of  measure
ment  is  itself  free  from  subjective  variations,  that  there  is  universal  agree
ment  ;  secondly,  that  our  power  of  discriminating  the  spatial  magnitudes


SIMPLE  SENSATIONS  73

which  correspond  to  differences  of  sensation  is  at  least  as  great,  and  if
possible  greater,  than  our  power  of  discriminating  the  differences  them
selves.  We  must  be  able  to  read  off  from  the  thermometer  an  increase  of
heat  which  would  escape  a  comparison  of  sensations.

10.  The  methods  of  conceptually  determining  different  qualities  are
still  more  difficult  and  involved.  Discrimination  between  different  colours
or  notes  is  one  of  the  facts  which  does  not  admit  of  further  analysis ;  what
we  have  to  do  here  is  to  find  fixed  points,  and  a  measure  of  differences.

Turning  first  to  colours  we  find  the  course  taken  by  language  very
instructive.  A  few  unmistakably  distinct  colours — black,  white,  grey,
red,  brown,  yellow,  green,  blue  l — are  selected  as  fixed  points  from  among
the  incalculable  number  which  present  themselves  to  the  eye,  and  there  is
no  doubt  that  here  we  have  a  primary  psychological  fact.  Certain  colours
make  a  predominant  impression,  which  is  moreover  characterized  by  their
value  for  feeling,  and  are  thus  especially  attractive  to  attention  and
favoured  in  reproduction  ;  in  this  way  we  obtain  a  number  of  ideal  colours,
which  are  distinguished  for  their  aesthetic  value,  and  by  this  standard  we
measure  all  which  actually  present  themselves,  in  order  to  see  how  far
;  they  contain  the  ideal  element  for  which  we  are  looking.  The  extent  of
i  the  limits  within  which  we  are  able  to  trace  a  similarity  to  one  of  these
main  colours  is,  again,  a  purely  empirical  quality  of  our  minds,  and  follows
partly  from  habits  determined  by  language ;  no  universal  objective
principle  can  instruct  us  as  to  where  in  the  spectrum  it  becomes  impossible
to  discover  any  similarity  to  red,  any  reddish  tinge  in  orange,  or  where
green  begins  to  be  bluish.  The  analysis  which  (led  by  the  names  in  use)
we  make  here  is  of  a  peculiar  kind  ;  the  one  undivided  impression  made
by  the  colour  orange  is  broken  up  by  us  into  a  similarity  with  red  on  the
one  hand  and  yellow  on  the  other,  and  our  tendency  to  speak  of  mixture
and  mixed  colours  is  not  sufficiently  explained  by  our  experience  of
mixing  colouring  matters.  No  doubt  experience  shows  us  that  when  we
mix  colouring  matters  we  frequently  get  mixed  colours  ;  but  green  is  not
regarded  as  a  mixture  of  yellow  and  blue,  because  blue  and  yellow  colour
ing  matters  make  green  when  mixed  ;  for  it  is  subjectively  impossible  to

1  We  may  consider  that  the  attempts  to  infer  from  the  history  of  the  names  of  colours
in  language  that  the  colour  sense  has  been  developed  within  historical  times,  have  broken
down  before  the  results  of  the  discussions  from  different  points  of  view.  The  history  of
such  names  is  psychologically  interesting,  as  showing  how  gradually  attention  to  the
differences  has  grown ;  just  as  some  children  are  still  very  slow  to  use  the  existing  names
with  absolute  correctness  ;  beyond  this  it  proves  nothing.


74  LOGIC

find  any  similarity  to  blue  in  green.  We  speak  of  a  mixed  colour,  as
distinct  from  the  colour  of  a  mixture,  when  the  immediate  impression — say
of  violet — allows  us  to  trace  a  resemblance  to  blue  on  the  one  hand  and
red  on  the  other,

11.  In  gradual  transitions  we  find  almost  insuperable  hindrances  to
complete  conceptual  determination  ;  and  here,  again,  by  making  use  of
objective  and  orderly  processes,  we  have  recourse  to  spatial  and  numerical
relations  in  carrying  out  a  methodical  limitation  of  the  various  colours.
The  spectrum  has  long  been  recognised  as  the  fixed  basis  of  all  conceptual
determination,  but  it  is  only  lately  that  it  has  been  turned  to  full  account ;
it  is  by  division of  the  spectrum  into  parts,  and  by  mixing  the  spectral
colours  together,  and  with  white,  according  to  the  spatial  relations  of  the
sectors  of  the  colour-circle,  that  we  are  able  to  represent  the  continuum  of
gradual  changing  differences  in  all  its  variations. As  soon  as  this  is  done
we  revert  to  the  method  employed  from  the  first  by  language ;  instead  of
marking  off  a  space  to  each  colour-name,  within  which  it  is  to  hold  good,
we  fix  upon  certain  values  (e.g.  particular  Fraunhofer  lines),  and  represent
intervening  colours  as  intervals  of  definite  magnitudes  and  combinations
in  definite  proportions.

12.  We  determine  qualities  appertaining  to  the  sense  of  hearing  in  a
similar  manner. In  language  there  is  recognised  first  a  number  of  noises,
distinguished  above  others  by  the  liveliness  of  the  impression  which  they
make,  but  not  admitting  clear  lines  of  demarcation. It  is  only  where
sounds  are  musical  that  we  can  apply  the  artificial  means  of  exact  con
ceptual  determination. Here  we  are  guided  by  musical  intervals  ;  starting
from  a  key-note,  we  give  names  to  a  series  of  notes, but  refer to the
indefinitely  many  which  intervene  according  to  their  distance  from  those
which  are  named. For  reference  to  the  key-note  itself  and  for  exact
determination  of  the  intervals,  we  must  again  turn  to  spatial  and  numerical
relations,  to  the  length  of  organ pipes and  the  number  of  oscillations.
Starting  in  this  way,  we  can  follow  up  the  combinations  of  simple  notes  to
definite  consonances,  which,  like  the  vowel  sounds,  appear  as  simple  to  the
ordinary  apprehension,  and  then  proceed  to  represent  the  different  har
monies  ;  but  our  art  fails  us  if  we  endeavour  to  represent  the  many  kinds
of  noises  as  a  definite  combination  of  simple  elements. The  application
of  this  method  again  calls  for  nothing  from  sensation  and  the  judgment  of
comparison  but  a  statement  of  the  equality  of  two  sensations,  which  are
given  together  or  in  immediate  succession.


SIMPLE SENSATIONS  75

13.  From  what  has  been  said  it  is  evident  how  little  that  which  is
immediately  given  in  sensation,  the  purely  empirical  in  its  rude  form,  is
adapted  to  yield  ideas  which  can  be  used  for  logical purposes. Those
ideas  which  have  arisen  from  a  simple  repetition  of  the  similar  all  share  in
the  fault  of  indefiniteness  and  variation  from  one  individual  to  another ;
any  conceptual  limitation  and  arrangement  of  these  simplest  elements  is
only  possible  by  means  of  various  expedients  which  presuppose  a  know
ledge  of  the  causes  of  sensation,  and  succeeds  only  in  so  far  as  we  assume
a  normal  typical  relation  between  objective  causes  and  subjective  sensa
tion,  and  reduce  differences  of  sensation  to  measurable  and  enumerable
differences  of  objective  causes,  in  which  we  think  we  have  a  sphere  of
ideas  free  from  subjective  differences  and  capable  of  perfect  conceptual
determination.

14.  When,  finally,  we  attempt  to  obtain  a  complete survey  of  all
qualities  of  sensation,  we  find  it  only  possible  when  we  are  able  to  repre
sent  the  manifold  of  what  is  given  in  spatial  dimensions  or  in  numerical
series. The  manifold  of  tastes  and  smells  have  so  far  defied  all  attempts
at  comprehensive  arrangement,  because  no  measurable  objective  relations
can  be  found  corresponding  to  the  increase  of  subjective  variations. The
series,  on  the  other  hand,  formed  from  the  number  of  oscillations  repre
sent  a  scale  from  the  lowest  note  audible  to  the  highest,  which  is  complete
at  any  rate  from  this  point  of  view,  and  in  which  we  are  certain  of  finding
a  place  for  every  audible  simple  note. With  colours  the  task  is  more
difficult ;  the  fact  that  a  mixture  of  colours  produces  the  impression  of  a
new  simple  colour  favours  the  operations  by  means  of  which  these  mix
tures  are  exhibited  ; but  then  the  variations even  of  the  so-called  pure
spectral  colours  are  so  numerous,  and  we  are  so  little  certain  of  their  com
pleteness  (witness  those  colours  which  appear  only  under  certain  condi
tions),  that  we  can  only  aim at  an  approximation,  and  can  attempt  this
only  by  having  recourse  to  a  representation  of  colour  variation  in  a  spatial
diagram. These  defects  are  the  less  important  because  the  chief  and
most  direct  service  rendered  by  colours  is  not  the  knowledge  as  to  differ
ences  in  the  material  of  objects, which they give by means of  their
innumerable  variations,  but  the  knowledge  we  obtain  from  their  spatial
limits  as to  dimensions ; and  the  essential  importance  of  the  services
rendered  by  the  spectrum  is  that  it  connects  colour  qualities  with  the
sections  of  a  linear  extension  and  ultimately  reduces  the  judgment  about
colour qualities to a  judgment  about  spatial coincidence. Even  the


76  LOGIC

meaning  which  colours  have  as  indicating  the  nature  of  objects  has  only
become  fruitful  since  spectral  analysis  has  overcome  the  imperfections  of
subjective  sensation  and  reduced  the  problem  to  that  of  determining  upon
which  line  of  the  spectrum  a  bright  or  dark  band  appears.

§  7i.

The  analysis  of  the  idea  of  QUALITATIVE  CHANGE  brings  us  to  elements
analogous  to  those  which  we  found  in  analysing  the  idea  of  Motion  ;
differences  in  the  quality  and  intensity  of  sensations,  following  each  other
continuously  in  time,  are  connected  together  just  as  differences  of  place
are  connected  together  in  motion.

TChe  conceptual  determination  of  the  elements  contained  in  the  idea  of
change  presupposes  measurement  of  differences  in  intensities  and  qualities,
and  can  only  be  completely  carried  out  with  the  help  of  mathematical
construction.

i.  The  idea  of  qualitative  change  (oAXotwo-is)  in  its  sensuous  meaning  is
connected  with  the  simple  predicates  of  sensation  just  as  the  idea  of  motion
is  connected  with  space ;  and  the  function  fulfilled  by  the  idea  of  time  is
the  same  in  both  cases.  We  have  already  shown  why  the  general  idea
of  change  can  be  so  easily  disengaged  from  the  idea  of  that  which  changes ;
it  is  the  constantly  recurring  connection  of  a  series  of  differences  following
upon  each  other  in  time.

In  comparing  change  of  quality  with  change  of  place  we  mean  to  in
clude  not  merely  change  of  quality  taken  in  the  narrower  sense,  but  also
of  intensity  of  the  same  quality  ;  hence  the  differences  which  correspond
to  differences  of  place  and  constitute  the  basis  of  our  discrimination  and
recombination,  are  differences  of  the  quality  and  intensity  of  our  sensations.
Here  again  when  we  think  we  have  an  immediate  perception  of  change  it
is  based  upon  a  continuum  in  so  far  as  we  do  not  find  a  sudden  break
between  two  immediately  successive  moments,  but  only  become  clearly
conscious  of  the  magnitude  of  difference  after  an  interval  of  time  which
has  been  continuously  filled  by  imperceptible  transitions.  Thus  in  the
general  form  of  the  activities  which  lead  to  the  idea  of  change  there  is  a
complete  coincidence  between  motion  and  qualitative  change.

But  this  element  of  continuity  is  again  a  hindrance  to  conceptual
determination,  and  makes  it  difficult  for  us  to  obtain  conceptual  elements
which  might  be  perfectly  determinate  and  absolutely  identical.  Owing  to
it  the  series  of  differences  passed  through  grows  continuously  and  without


QUALITATIVE CHANGE  77

limit  from  the  mimimum  upwards,  and  the  relation  between  the  temporal
magnitudes  and  the  magnitudes  of  the  differences  passed  through,  the
velocity  of  change,  is  capable  of  indefinitely  many  values.  Because  of
our  limited  power  of  discrimination  by  the  senses  immediate  sense-per
ception  leaves  the  minimum  of  change  indefinite,  and  is  unable  to  follow
all  the  stages  of  any  change  because  a  perceptible  magnitude  of  difference
between  two  successive  sensations  can  only  be  presented  in  definite  in
tervals  of  time,  while  the  intervening  differences,  in  proportion  as  they
become  smaller  and  follow  upon  one  another  more  closely,  withdraw  them
selves  from  the  range  of  direct  sense-perception.  Moreover  in  the  sphere
of  sight  and  touch  every  quality  perceived  is  spatially  extended.  Hence
change  of  these  qualities  consists  in  the  sum  of  the  changes  of  spatially
distinguishable  parts  which  may  be  indefinitely  multiplied.  Thus  the
limits  of  the  concept  tend  to  fall  into  confusion,  and  in  the  manifold  com
prehended  in  it  we  fail  to  grasp  any  definite  point  from  which  to  work  in
our  conceptual  elaboration ;  the  measurement  of  change  according  to
magnitude  and  velocity  is  not  included  in  the  general  concept  of  change,
and  cannot  be  obtained  from  mere  observation  if  we  demand  exact  ac
counts.  We  may  indeed  form  a  mental  picture,  which  can  be  reproduced
to  a  certain  extent,  of  the  increase  of  light  when  greater  pressure  increases
a  gas  jet,  or  of  the  crescendo  or  diminuendo  of  a  note ;  and  we  may  re
member  the  preliminary  or  final  state  if  it  is  distinguished  from  the  change
by  longer  duration  ;  but  to  distinguish  the  amount  of  increase  for  every
moment  is  impossible.

2.  Here  again  we  turn  for  fixed  concepts to an  ideal  construction,
which presupposes measurement of  the  intensities and  qualitative dif
ferences  ;  it  then  fixes  sharply  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  change  by
a  given  standard,  and  represents  the  course  of  the  change  by  a  mathemati
cally  demonstrable  relation between measured differences  of  time  and
measured  differences  of  intensity  and  quality. Only  so  far  as  definite
formulae  can  be  applied  to  this  relation  can  we  obtain  fixed  and  invariable
concepts  within  the  chaos  of  particular  mental  pictures  of  change.

3.  The  simplest  case,  which  we  can  apply  as  a  standard,  is  uniform
change,  in  which  the  variations  are  proportional  to  the  times,  and  which
corresponds  to  uniform  motion. We  have  a  perfectly  definite  concept  of
what  uniform  increase  of  temperature  or  light  is,  and  what  is  meant  by  the
uniform  heightening  of  a  note,  and  so  on  ;  in  other  cases,  we  can  construct,
according  to  the  circumstances,  the  different  formulae  which  express  varia-


7  8  LOGIC

tion  in  the  course  of  the  changes.  If  a  light  is  moved  with  uniform
velocity  away  from  a  surface  and  in  a  line  perpendicular  to  it,  and  if  the
illumination  at  the  end  of  the  first  second  is  t\,  then  we  should  have  to
express  the  decrease  of  the  illumination  (z)  at  the  base  of  the  perpendicular

by  the  formula  *"=— ^-,  and  the  change  of  illumination  in  the  other  parts  of

the  surface  by  a  more  complicated  formula.  The  increase  again,  say  of
daylight  when  the  sun  rises  above  the  horizon,  would  be  expressed  by  still
another  formula.

4.  We  must  be  careful  to  distinguish  between  the  concept  of  qualitative
change,  which  expresses  merely  the  continuous  transition  of  a  sensation
through  a  series  of  variations  of  intensity  or  quality,  from  the  concept  of
undergoing  change  and  being  altered,  which  has  for  its  subject  not  the
immediately  given  intuitable  sensation  passing  from  difference  to  differ
ence,  but  a  thing  to  which  the  change  is  referred,  and  which  changes  or  is
changed  as  its  qualities  alter.  For  the  determination  of  this  concept  we
must  first  of  all  fix  that  of  a  thing.


§  72.

These  last-mentioned  determinations  of  sense-given  qualities  and  their
changes  are  always  connected  in  ordinary  thought  with  the  idea  of  THINGS
which  have  qualities  and  undergo  change.

Our  endeavour  to  make  this  idea  of  a  Thing  logically  perfect,  and  to
fix  it  in  the  concept  of  substance,  must  start  from  the  analysis  of  that
which  is  contained  in  the  idea,  and  from  the  question  why  we  form  such
an  idea.

A.  (a)  If  for  the  present  we  disregard  change,  then  we  find  that  the  idea
of  a  thing  is  based  in  the  first  place  upon  the  comprehension  into  unity  of
a  figure  which  is  bounded  in  space  and  continues  in  time ;  that  is,  upon  a
spatial  and  temporal  synthesis.  Moreover,  inasmuch  as  the  sensations  of
different  senses  are  referred  to  the  same  space,  a  synthesis  takes  place  be
tween  different  sensational  contents  to  enable  us  to  think  as  one  that  which
occupies  one  position  in  space,  and  this  gives  rise  to  the  distinction  between
the  one  thing  and  its  different  qualities.  The  series  of  elementary  func
tions  contained  in  the  idea  of  the  thing  is  completed  by  the  thought  of
its  existence.

The  motive  which  gives  rise  to  this  thought  can  be  none  other  than  our


THE CONCEPT  OF  THING  79

need  to  think  of  the  subjective  synthesis  as  well  grounded,  and  of  spatial
and  temporal  co-existence  as  necessary.

(fr)  In  our  logical  elaboration  of  the  concept  we  must  start  from  the
question :  what  are  the  conditions  under  which  these  syntheses  may  be
seen  to  be  not  arbitrary  and  fortuitous,  but  objectively  necessary  and  there
fore  perfectly  determinate  ?  This  leads  us  first  to  the  antinomy  between
the  unity  of  the  thing  and  its  spatial  extension  which  always  contains  a
plurality,  which  we  may  attempt  to  solve  either  through  the  concept  of
the  unifying  form  or  through  the  concept  of  the  atom ;  in  both  the  de
termination  of  the  concept  of  substances  must  be  carried  back  to  mathe
matical  elements,  and  in  the  latter  we  must  call  in  the  help  of  the  concept
of  causality.

B. The  idea  of  the  changes  of  things  contains  still  further  problems.

(a)  It  has  arisen  from  the  necessity  of  comprehending  into  a  unity  that
which  happens  continuously  in  one  place ;  so  far  the  synthesis  which  refers
different  successive  sensations  to  one  thing  is  exactly  similar  to  those
syntheses  which  give  rise  to  the  idea  of  the  thing  at  rest  and  without
change.

(&)  In  the  logical  determination  of  the  thing  which  changes  we  are  con
fronted  by  the  difficulty  of  giving  a  definite  expression  to 'its  unity,  of
saying  what  that  is  which  persists  through  change.  Thus  there  arises  the
attempt  to  reduce  all  change  to  variation  in  the  relations  of  unchanging
i  subjects,  as  the  simplest  way  of  grasping  the  unity  of  the  thing  throughout
the  course  of  its  changes.  But  while  on  the  one  hand  the  apparent  varia
tion  can  only  be  a  change  of  relation  to  the  perceiving  subject,  there
:  arises  on  the  other  hand  the  question  whether  the  ground  of  simultaneous
: changes  in  different  things  lies  in  each  thing  independently  or  in  their
mutual  relations,  and  thus  the  logical  elaboration  of  the  concept  of  sub
stance  leads  here  again  to  the  concept  of  causality.

i.  Our  consideration  of  sense-given  qualities  and  their  changes  leads  us
naturally  to  investigate  those  concepts  through  which  alone  the  elements
we  have  reviewed  assume  the  form  in  which  they  are  generally  present  to
thought ;  the  form  of  things  to  which  belong  attributes  and  activities  which
we  can  predicate  of  them  in  our  judgments.  If  we  are  called  upon  to  state
unambiguously  what  we  mean  by  that  which  we  call  a  thing  all  the  ex
pedients  of  conceptual  determination  which  we  have  so  far  recognised
seem  to  desert  us.  In  talking  we  always  make  use  of  propositions  which
presuppose  this  thought,  but  it  is  none  the  less  difficult,  as  previous  at-


8o  LOGIC

tempts  show,  to  make  the  idea  which  is  involved  conceptually  clear  and
unambiguous.  In  proportion  as  it  seems  a  matter  of  course  that  in  the
sphere  of  our  ideas  we  are  dealing  with  things,  and  to  raise  a  question
about  them  seems  unnecessary  and  over-subtle,  it  behoves  us  to  use
greater  caution  ;  even  in  face  of  the  fact  that  one  of  the  most  thorough
investigations,  that  of  Herbart,  arrives  at  the  conclusion  that  the  familiar
idea  of  a  thing  with  many  attributes  is  a  contradictory  concept,  the  contra
dictions  of  which  have  to  be  discovered  by  logic  and  swept  away  by  meta
physics.

2.  The  method  by  which  we  reach  conceptual  determination  even  here
can  have  no  other  starting  point  than  the  ordinary  thought  which  is  always
present, and which_jtis_the_general problem of all_rnethodolpgy_jta_
inte^prejt,^tp^ccaTe^^ji^Jp_extend. If,  however,  we  attempt  to  apply  the
process  of  comparative  abstraction,  and  to  begin  by  finding  the  common
element  in  all  which  we  are  accustomed  to  call  Thing,  we  are  met  at  once
by  the  difficulty  mentioned  in  §  40,  5 (i.  p.  248) ;  that  is,  the  extent  of  the
sphere  within  which  we  should  begin  our  process  is  not  fixed. That  which
we  call  a  Thing,  and  which  we  treat  as  formally  the  same  in  logical  opera
tions,  has  not  always  the  same  meaning ;  the  word  is  a  TroAAaxws  Xeyo/Aevov.
In  using  the  substantival  form  of  speech  we  make  no  distinction  between
the  parti£]j^j^hmor_3.vhirhJ<i.  tbcwgjjtj^f  ^  ^"flUy  ^'^'"grr  and  the  merely
JogiaUjsubject  of_wb|gh.  something  1*3  predicated  ;  nor  is  it  possible, until
the  concept  has  been  to  some  extent  determined,  to  see  at  once  the  limits
where  the  one  meaning  passes  into  the  other,  and  which  divide  the  actual
thing  of  j^ijy  experience,  from  the  ^fictiorj^of  imaginaUorj,  and  this  from  the
geometrical  figure,  and  this  again  from  the  abstract  substantive.

3.  In  such  cases  there  is  no  other  way  open  than  to  relinquish  the
survey  of  the  whole  and  to  begin  our  operation  with  the  most  obvious
examples,  to  analyse  what  is  contained  in  the  thought  of  these,  and  then
to  see  what  are  the  extent  and  limits  which  are  self-imposed  by  the  concept
thus  gained. This  is,  no  doubt,  an  experimental  process,  but  it  is  a  process
already  familiar  to  us  in  the  concept  of  number  in  which  it  is  naturally
involved.

Let  us  begin,  then,  with  what  is  most  obvious,  which  is  unhesitatingly
called  "  Thing  "  by  every  one,  with  the  particular  objects  of  the  world
around  us,  which  even  when  unfamiliar  give  rise  to  the  question,  "  what  is
that  thing?  "  It  is  not  difficult  by  analysing  what  we  name  in  this  way,
and  by  disregarding  differences  in  the  examples  before  us,  to  determine


THE CONCEPT  OF  THING  81

that  we  mean  in  the  first  place  an  object  of  thought  which  as  first  per
ceived  and  afterwards  reproduced  in  memory,  presents  itself  above  all
as  a  spatially  bounded  figure  which  persists  in  time.  (A  flash  of  light,  a
shot,  a  smell,  are  not  "  things  "  in  the  same  sense  as  a  stone  or  a  piece  of
wood.)  If  we  reflect  as  to  what  determines  us  to  consider  anything  per
ceived  as  a  thing,  ^wpfinrli^tnjjf;  4bp  JQyaria.bility  qfjts  figuje  ;  but  the
spatiaj^  limitation  as  well  as  the  persistence  of  a  figure  is  most  easily
obvious  when  it  disengages  itself  in  motion  from  others,  and  appears  as  the
same  in  different  positions  in  space.  The  attribution  of  real  existence  to
the  perceived  figure  is  also  involved  in  the  sense  in  which  we  are
accustomed  to  speak  of  things.

4.  If  we  leave  this  last  determination  for  the  present,  then  that  which
shows  itself  as  most  important  isjonity. That  which  we  regard  as  a  thing
must  be  one  thing — a  single  object  which  we  represent  in  one  definite
act,  distinguishing  it  from  other  things  and  maintaining  its  distinction.1
This  determination  of  unity  alone  makes  it  capable  of  being  the  subject
of  a  ^sjjriEle  judgment.

But  this  determination  of  unity  has  itself  many  meanings. We  mean  by
,it,  on  the  one  hand,  the  singleness  which  is  represented  intuitably  by  spatials
(limitation,  and  the  resulting  distinction  from  everything  else  in  other  partsl
•of  space  ; on  the  other  hand,  that  identity  with  self  which  is  contained  in
ithe  possibility  of  retaining  the  same  elements  as  permanent  for  the  idea
•throughout  different  moments  of  time. We  are  not  here  speaking  of  unity
|in  the  sense  of  simplicity  ; on  the  contrary,  the  unity  of  a  thing  does  not
'exclude  discrimination  of  its  different  parts  or  of  different  elements  in  our
j  dea  of  it. A  geometrical  figure,  such  as  a  circle  or  triangle,  may  serve  to
Illustrate  this  element  of  the  idea ;  it  is  one,  inasmuch  as  we  think  of  it  in
bne  act  of  comprehension  as  spatially  limited  within  surrounding  space,
md  maintain  it  for  any  length  of  time  as  an  unchanging  object; it  is  not
pimple,  for  in  the  circle  we  can  distinguish  between  centre  and  circum-
Terence,  while  in  the  triangle  we  can  distinguish  the  sides  from  each  other
jtnd  from  the  angles  ;  only  the  point  would  be  absolutely  simple. We  may
jilso  regard  the  things  of  actual  perception  in  the  same  way  as  geometrical
jigures  in  so  far  as  they are  mere  images, which persist in intuition.
A.  rainbow,  or  the  shadow  of  a  body  at  rest,  have  this  bounded  figure  which
persists  for  intuition ;  their  unity  depends  upon  spatial  limitation,  and  upon
ie  comprehension  of  a  definite  sensuous  content  which  may  be  homo-
1  Cf.  §  66,  2,  p.  31  sq.

5.  L. — II.  G


82  LOGIC

geneous  or  not,  but  which  is  at  any  rate  continuous,  and  that  this  unity  is
at  first  merely  subjective  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  it  is  often  a  matter  of
choice.  When  observing  the  stars  it  is  open  to  us  to  construct  figures  by
any  possible  combination  of  the  bright  points,  and  to  regard  the  constella
tion  of  the  Great  Bear  or  of  Orion  as  a  connected  group,  as  a  figure  ;  all
that  is  wanted  is  a  frame-work  in  which  we  may  combine  a  manifold.  In
the  same  way  we  can  call  a  pile  of  wood,  a  pyramid  of  balls,  or  a  heap  of
sand  a  unity  or  a  thing,  although  it  contains  a  plurality.

It  follows  from  what  we  have  said  that  in  the  first  place  we  obtain  ideas
of  things  in  this  sense  only  from  those  senses  of  which  the  sensations  are
from  the  first  spatial,  and  which  are  also  distinguished  by  their  uninter
rupted  excitement  from  the  intermittent  sensations  of  the  other  senses.
That  which  can  be  limited  as  one  and  persistent  is  determined  either
by  colour  or  by  touch  ;  it  is  a  seen  or  felt  figure.

5.  But  it  next  appears  as  an  essential  point  that  the  things  which  we
know  are  not  present  for  one  sense  alone,  but  generally  manifest  themselves
to  several  senses  at  once,  principally  to  sight  and  touch.

This  is  not  the  place  to  enquire  how  the  reference  of  different  sensations
to  the  same  object  takes  place  psychologically  ;  all  we  have  to  do  is
to  realize  clearly  what  ideas  are  involved  in  our  ordinary  mode  of
apprehension.

The  fundamental  assumption  here  is  that  seen  and  felt  space  are  one
and  the  same,  that  the  contents  of  visible  space  is  none  other  than  that  of
tangible  space,  hence  that  whatever  is  presented  both  to  sight  and  touch
in  any  given  place  must  be  one  and  the  same,  because  the  same  position
in  space  cannot  be  occupied  in  two  ways  at  once.  This  unity  of  space,
therefore,  is  not  a  product  of  our  perceptions,  but  is  th^jjresuppjDsitioa
which  enables  us  to  construct  ideas  of  things  from  our  various
sensations  ;  the_j>yjvthesiso£jcojx3i^^

governed  by  the  law  that  whatever  occupies  the  same  position  in  space
can  only  be  one.

\  In  this  way  we  get  the  idea  of  the  occupation  of  space  on  the  one  hand,
/  and  of  spatial  exclusion  on  the  other.  Qualities  of  colour  and  touch  are
|  given  only  in  connection  with  extension,  and  in  reference  to  extension
(  different  colours  are  mutually  exclusive ;  in  the  same  way  the  thing  of  our
)  thought  is  constituted  by  the  fact  that  we  find  a  part  of  space  occupied  by
f  a  particular  colour  and  tangible  quality.

6. It  is  upon  the  ground  of  this  identity  of  space  and  of  places  that


TUB CONCEPT  OF  THING  83

different  sensuous  qualities  appear  to  us  as  attributes  of  one  and  the  same
thing;  the  identity  is  in  the  first  place  that  of  locality,  the  unity  is  given
by  spatial  limitations  which  are  present  in  a  consistent  manner  for  both
touch  and  sight.  It  is  obvious  that  from  this  point  of  view  the  difficulties
raised  in  Herbart's  metaphysics  against  the  concept  of  a  thing  with  many
attributes,  disappear ;  .that  wgrc^ggty-  emBJQy_ *U£~  ^n^Wfi-US-io. .think  of
he_ga_nie  fo r  different  senses,  and  to  speak  of,  something  which  is
agiyen^^  this  j>ame__space.  Our  different  senses

would  fall  into  hopeless  conflict  unless  the  spatial  images  of  one  were
identical  with  the  spatial  images  of  another.

7.  The  ordinary  popular  idea  with  which  we  operate  in  the  beginning
of  any  science  is  completed  when  we  connect  with  this  geometrical  concept
of  the  unity  and  selfness  of  a  thing  the  thought  that  it 45,  a  thought  which
cannot  be  derived  from  anything  else.  Hence  the  principle  that  two
different  things  cannot  be  in  the  same  place  is  not  one  which  is  added  to
our  idea  of  things  after  it  is  complete,  but  a  principle  which


formaticmj)f  this  idea  itself,  and  as  such  might  be  included  among  the
gj>r/<2?jjpresu  positions  of  our  experience  with  far  more  right  than  many  a
Kantian  principle ;  its  origin  in  the  unity  of  self-consciousness  is  moreover
obvious.1

8.  Our  consideration  of  what  we  really  do  when  we  think  of  a  thing
has  shown  us  a  threefold  comprehension  : it  is  temporal,  in  so  far  as  we
can  only  think  of  something  as  persisting  through  distinguishable  moments
by  comprehending  these  altogether  ;  it  is  spatial  in  so  far  as  in  marking  the
bounds  of  a  spatial  image  we  must  comprehend  its  different  parts ; and
finally,  it  is  iinio_Q.of  the  space-ideas  derived  from  sight  (with  those  derived
from  touch,;  by  means  of  which  the  qualities  of  the  two  senses  become
ittributes  of  one  and  the  same  object.

9.  The  originally  spatial  basis,  however,  upon  which  the  idea  of  a  thing
is oj]£_  thing  rests  brings its  difficulties with  it, and calls for further
elaboration. From  the  fact  that space  is  extended  arises  the  question
whether  an  extended  thing  can  really  be  grasped  as  a  unity,  whether  the
imitation  which  is  the  first  step  by  which  it  is  marked  off  as  a  unity  and
listinguished  from  other  unities  is  definitive  ; i.e., whether  it  is  necessary
md  such  as  could  not  have  been  carried  out  in  a  different  way.

Even though complete  uniformity in the  general process  by which
ensations  are  worked  up  into  the  ideas  of  things  indicates  a  natural  law
1  Cf.  §47,  9,  i,  p.  312.


84  LOGIC

which  has  its  ultimate  ground  in  the  unity  of  self-consciousness  as  opposed
to  the  manifoldness  and  incomparability  of  sense-affections,  yet  this  does
not  guarantee  a  uniform  and  objectively  necessary  application  of  the
process  to  the  whole  content  of  sensation.  We  have  still  to  ask  how  this
application  must  be  made  if  we  are  to  make  our  concepts  quite^ie finite
and  jreeJrQm_ualj^s ub  jec:  tjve_y n ri n i- i orv_

10.  We  may  disregard  for  the  present  the  conclusion  to  which  we  have
come  that  the  reference  of  different  sensations  to  one  thing  is  conditioned
by^lpcaUzatiqn,  which  gives  rise  to  the  further  question  as  to  how  it  can  it
self  be  carried  out  in  a  universally  valid  manner  ; and  we  may  disregard
all  the  difficulties  entailed  by  change  and  motion. Then,  as  we  have
already  shown,  we  find  that  it  is  to  some  extent  a  matter  of  choice  whic
of  the  contents  of  the  spatial  world  we  will  comprehend  within  the  limit
of  a  unity,  a  matter  of  choice  whether  we  regard  a  heap  of  wood  or  th
single  sticks  contained  in  it  as  the  unit. This  is  the  case,  moreover,  wit
every  extended  unity,  the  mere  possibility  of  thinking  of  parts  within  ever
extended  thing,  of  regarding  it  as  a  whole  consisting  of  different  parts,  o
distinguishing  between  right  and  left,  between  the  upper  and  the  lovve
halves,  reveals  the  contradictions  between  unity  and  extension  which  ma
be  traced  throughout  the  whole  history  of  the  conceptpj^-s»bstaiic€. Fron
this  has  sprung  the  distinction  between  Form  and^Matter,  and  the  attemp
of  Plato  and  Aristotle  to  place  the  unity  of  the  thing  in  its  fomi  as  some
thing  which  is  permanent  for  thought ;  and  here  we  find  the  origin  of  a
the  attempts  to  reach  by  a  division  of  extension  a,j^allysinvp]e__and  ult
jrmte  which  is  no  longer  spatial,  or  at  least  no  longer  actually  divisible  int
parts,  attempts  to  get  a  subject  which  would  meet  the  logical  demand  fo

i  an  absolutely  single  and  simple  statement.  Thus  ancient  as  well  as  moder
;atomism  is  to  be  explained  as  fundamentally  due  to  the  need  of  a  logica
^determination  of  the  concept  of  the  thing.

11.  But  when  we  enter  upon  this  question, the  old  antagonism  re
appears  between  the  continuity  of  space  and  the  demand  for  unity. S
long  as  our  division  merely  continues  to  give  us  smaller  things  we  kee
our  original  intuition,  but  never  come  to  an  end ;  if,  on the  other  hanc
the  process  is  driven  to  a  point  where  atoms  lose  all  extension  in  gainin
absolute  unity,  then  there  disappears  at  once  all  the  content  of  the  ide
of  the  thing,  and  all  possibility  of  applying  those  predicates  which  ar
primarily  known  as  attributes  of  a  spatially  extended  thing. Neither  colour
nor  hardness,  nor  any  other  of  the  sensational  qualities  which  are  insepar;


THE CONCEPT  OF  THING  85

ably  connected  with  the  idea  of  extension  can  any  longer  be  applied,  andr
the  concept  of  the  thing  is  entirely  removed  from  the  spjiere^jif  snmHTLl
Untipn  ;  that  which  was  a  thing  and  a  unity  is  only  a subjective  £Qmpje-
hension  of  a  plurality  of  points  which  occupy  definite  spatial  positions;  the
continuous  occupation  of  space  is  an  illusion,  and  the  mutual  limitation  of
things  depends  merely  upon  the  way  in  which  th  es£  jion-s ensuous  things
in  their  plurali^affect  our  sensation. The  concept  of  the  sensuous  attri
bute  resolves  itself  into  an  effect  upon  our  subjective  sensation;  and  that
which  is  really  a  thing  ceases  to  be  perceptible. If  the  ordinary  expression
:  that  a  number  of  atoms  are  comprehended  in  one  thing  can  have  any  justi-
cation,  it  can  only  be  found  in  the  real  relations  which  exist  between  a
ven  plurality  of  atoms  in  their  r^a,ctinry  j^nn^ne^ar^h^r  ;  the  concept
f  the  composite  thing  is  dependent  upon  the  concept  of  causality, the
erceptible  form  is  the  expression  of  the  laws  by  which  the  co-existence  of
us  given  plurality  is  governed.

12.  Whichever  way  we  take,  whether  we  fix  the  concept  of  the  thing  in
lat  of  the  form  or  that  of  the  atom^  it  is  evident  that  here  again  we  can
each  conceptual  determination  only  by  means  of  mathematical  concepts.
Ve  have  no  fixed  concepts  of  forms  except  in  so  far  as  we  can  avail
urselves  of  geometrical  construction  according  to  established  laws. The
oncept  of  the  atom,  moreover,  presupposes  the  geometrical  concept  of
ic  point,  and  in  reducing  an  intuitable  thing  to  atoms  we  need  a  geomet-
cal  construction  of  the  relative  positions  of  many  points. So  that  here

igain  the  dependence  of  conceptual  construction  upon  the  development  of
ur  mathematical  ideas  becomes  most  evident.

13.  We  need  not  go  further  to  see  how  completely  unreliable  the  doc-
ine  is,  which  endeavours  to  reduce  the  popular  idea  of  the  thing  to  the
gre  co-existence  ofsense^Lveji  jqualllks. Hume's  attempt  to  eliminate
together  Locke's  wavering  and  changing  concept  of  substance  (which  had
nally  no  intelligible  content  left  but  "  a  number  of  simple  ideas  which  go
onstantly  together  "  x)  was  quite  consistent  from  the  empirical point  of

ew,  and  Mill 2  formulated  the  necessary  consequences  of  this  attempt  in
xplaining  the  import  of  every  judgment  concerning  the  attributes  of  a
ling  to  be  the  statement  of  the  co-existence  of  the  attributes  which  con-
itute  the  meaning  of  the  predicate  with  those  which  constitute  the  mean-
g  of  the  subject.  Here  again  the  attributes  can  be  finally  resolved  into

1  Essay  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  ii.  23,  §  I.

*  System  of  Deductive  and  Inductive  Logic,  book  i.  ch.  3  and  4.


86  LOGIC

pure  Siates^ofjeeling,  inasmuch  as  these  are  all  which  we  really  know  of
the  assumed  external  objects ;  for  sensations  -aQcTthe  order ^pfjheir  appear-
^nce^coiistjtute all  that  we  can  knowpj^niatter-  But  is  the  popular  idea  of
a  thing — and  it  is  only  with  this  that  these  theories  are  concerned — really
exhausted  by  the  statement  that  a  number  of  sensations,  colour,  hardness,
etc.,  "  co-exist  ? "  In  the  first  place,  we  cannot  even  say  that  this  co
existence  is  in  the  strictest  sense  an  object  of  immediate  perception,  for
the  sensations  by  which  we  learn  to  know  a  thing  are  generally  successive.
But  a  more  important  objection  is  that  the  concept  of  co-existence  is  much
too  wide  and  indefinite,  it  leaves  the  sensations  independent  of  each  other,
and  does  not  even  include  that  local  identity  which  is  undoubtedly  con
tained  in  the  idea  of  the  thing  (Mill  sometimes 1  says  "  Order  in  Place  "
instead  of  "  co-existence,"  but  this  is  an  inaccuracy;  the  different  attributes
of  a  thing  are  not  arranged  in  space).  Even  if  local  identity  is  added  to
the  concept,  there  is  still  lacking  the  point  of  union  which  Locke  rightly
recognised  as  forming  part  of  the  current  idea,  and  which  Hume  was  at
pains  to  explain  by  subjective  custom,  but  which  finds  expression  in  the
principle  that  there  cannot  be  two  different  things  in  the  same  place.  To
the  empirical  theory  of  a  merely  external  association  of  different  sensa
tions,  given  in  perception  and  strengthened  by  habit,  we  must  therefore
oppose  the  proposition  that  in  the  concept  of  a  thing  we  have  a  synthesis,
which  cannot  be  explained  by  the  sensuous  factors  of  thought,  but  is  ulti
mately  referrible  to  an  original  function  by  means  of  which  we  refer  the
sensations  of  different  senses  to  each  other,  in  order  to  construct  from
them  the  idea  of  a  spatial  object.  The  genuine  concept  of  the  thing
depends  upon  our  bringing  into  consciousness  the  law  of  this  synlhe.sis,
and  finding  its  normal  oj^ctivejy^jie^e^sajr^-applicatioji.  As  to  how  this
can  be  done,  whether  by  the  concept  of  the  form  or  by  the  concept  of  the
atom,  can  be  decided  only  by  the  nature  of  the  content  to  be  combined
and  the  development  of  the  concept  of  causality.

If  we  enquire  what  is  the  ultimate  motive  of  this  synthesis,  we  shall  find
it  on  the  one  hand  in  the  necessity  for  unifying  the  particular  elements
of  consciousness;  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  fact  that  this  unification  is  only
necessary  and  well  grounded  when  the  object  itself  is  the  ground  why
different  sensations  exist  together  in  the  same  place.  The  unity  of  the
thing  makes  that  necessary  which  is  given  together  in  consciousness.

14.  So  far  we  have  been  concerned  with  the  difficulties  attaching  to  the
1  See  op.  at.,  i.  5,  §  6.— ED.


THE CONCEPT  OF  THING  87

determination  of  the  concept  of  the  thing  considered  in  reference  to  its
spatial_£xj£nsion  and  the  pluralit^_oj^it§^ttributes  ;  a  new  series  of  ques
tions  arises  when  we  attempt  a  conceptual  elaboration  of  the  ordinary  view
which  ascribes  to  things  not  merely  persistence  through  any  length  of  time,
but  also  cjiange  during  their  persistence.  It  was  from  this  point  of  view
that  Kant  undertook  to  find  the  import  of  the  concept  of  ^substance_  by  re
ducing  it  to  that  which  persists  through  change ;  and  he  endeavoured  to
make  the  necessity  of  the  concept  obvious  by  the  fact  that  without  something
permanent  change  itself  could  not  be  thought  as  such,  hence  that  all  objective
determination  in  time  and  with  it  all  experience  would  be  impossible.

15. If  we  examine  the  meaning  in  which,  according  to  our  ordinary
apprehension,  we  speak  of  change  with  reference  to  things,  then  we  find
that  the  confidence  with  which  in  the  simplest  cases  we  speak  of  change  of
a  sensuous  attribute  as  change  of  the  thing  itself  depends  upon  the  imme
diately  perceived  continuity  of  the  processes  going  on  within  the  spatial
boundary  which  is  occupied  by  a  given  thing. When  a  blue  paper  turns
red  before  our  eyes,  or  a  piece  of  wax  melts  in  front  of  the  fire,  or  a  cold
body  grows  warm  in  the  hand  and  a  hard  one  softens, we  have  in each
instance  a  continuous  transition,  which  takes  place  at  the  same  position  in
space ;  nothing  occurs  to  make  us  suppose  that  what  was  previously  there
has  been  replaced  by  an  entirely  new  substance. The  unity  of  the  thing
which  was  due  before  to  its  limitation  in  space  now  rests  in  the  temporal
continuity  of  transitions  of  sensation  within  the  limits,  or  in  continuous
change  in  these  limits  themselves. Because  of  this  continuity  we  feel  our
selves  constrained  to  maintain  the  unity  even  when, as  in  the  case  of
melting  ice, every sensible quality  changes,  colour,  form,  temperature,
hardness,  etc. In  this  case  we  cannot  speak  of  a  permanent  which  is
given  to  intuition, a complex  of  sensible attributes, of  which a part
remains  the  same  while  another  part  changes. Even  if  we  choose  to  call
this  a  transformation  of  one  thing  into  another,  still  the  transition  between
such  an  instance  and  another  in  which  only  a  part  of  the  attributes  change
is  so  gradual  that  no  fixed  limit  can  be  drawn  between  change  and  trans
formation  ;  and  if  we  had  nothing  to  go  upon  but  what  appears  to  the
senses,  we  should  find  ourselves  puzzled  where  to  draw  the  line  between
the  concepts  of  change  and  of  transformation,  to  distinguish  when  a  thing
remains  the  same  and  merely  changes  one  or  more  of  its  attributes  and
when  it  entirely  passes  over  into  another  thing.
We  are  met  by  similar  difficulties  in  that  aspect  of  change  which  refers


88  LOGIC

to  increase  and  diminution  in  volume.  Here  again  it  is  the  continuity
of  the  process,  the  continuous  expansion  or  contraction  of  the  local  limits
of  the  thing  as  first  perceived,  which  forbids  us  to  doubt  that  the  growing
organism,  the  rising  stream,  the  contracting  quicksilver,  the  shrivelled
fruit  remains  the  same  thing,  and  here  again  we  are  led  by  gradual  tran
sitions  to  cases  where  the  limits  disappear,  to  cases  of  origination  and
annihilation.  Immediate  perception  certainly  justifies  us  in  saying  that
clouds  appear  and  disappear  in  the  clear  sky,  that  mists  gather  and  the
fire  goes  out.

)  1 6.  We  see,  then,  that  change,  growth  and  diminution,  beginning  and
^ceasing  to  be,  as  predicates  of  one  and  the  same  thing,  are  due  to  the  fact
that  our  continuous  consciousness  combines  together  a  Aeries  of  images
which  follow  upon  each  other  in  unbroken,  transition,  and  combines  them
because  there  is  no  sudden  I  breaking  off,  no  gap  in  sense-perception  to  be
a  motive  for  drawing  a  line  and  separating  the  existence  of  one  moment
from  that  of  the  moment  which  follows.  When  we  have  realized  this,  it
is  obvious  that  the  synthesis  in  which  this  combination  of  temporally  suc
cessive  phenomena  takes  place  is  of  the  same  kind  as  the  synthesis  of  a
spatial  continuum  and  the  synthesis  of  a  plurality  of  attributes  belonging
to  the  different  senses,  and  we  see  the  meaning  of  the  unity  which  is  thus
conceived  and  jyJbich  does  notexdude^but-jpjesupposeSj,  a  plurality  of
successive  differences.  The  concept  of  change  involves  no  more  con
tradiction  than  does  the  concept  of  the  thing  with  many  attributes,  for  to
say  that  it  is  the  same  thing  which  is  now  hard  and  now  soft  is  not  to  say
that  hard  and  soft  are  the  same,  nor  yet  to  say  that  the  thing  is  the  same,
in  the  sense  that  it  is  undistinguishably  identical ;  it  is  just  this  distinction
between  jhe :  Xhin^and4^aUributes  which  makes  it  no  contradiction  to
conceive  of  the  same  thing  having  many  attributes.  If  the  thing  were
merely  the  sum  of  its  attributes,  if  the  idea  of  it  were  due  merely  to  the
functions  by  which  we  perceive  the  attributes  as  such,  we  could  never  even
think  of  a  changing  thing  ;  the  smallest  change  would  imply  that  the  pre
vious  unity  had  disappeared  and  was  replaced  by  a  new  unity,  differently
composed.

It  cannot  therefore  be  due  to  these  supposed  contradictions  that
science  has  from  the  first  attempted  to  free  itself  from  the  thought  of
change,  of  beginning  and  of  ceasing.

17.  Even  Kant's  proof  for  the  permanence  of  substance  in  which  he
admits  of  change,  and  merely  gets  rid  of  transformation  and  beginning,  is


THE CONCEPT  OF  THING  89

not  convincing.  His  effort  to  show  that  a  law  of  physics  which  he  pre
supposes  as  the  corner-stone  of  all  natural  science  is  a  priori  necessary
from  the  conditions  of  the  possibility  of  experience,  obscures  the  course
of  the  proof  itself,  and  introduces  an  element— the  invariable  quantum  of  /?  JjT
substance — which  does  not  follow  from  the  premises.  If  all  that  is  wanted  y
is  that  simultaneity  and  succession  should  be  perceived,  that  something
existing  should  correspond  to  absolute  empty  time,  then  this  is  sufficiently
provided  for  if  there  is  anything  whatever  permanent  in  the  whole  of  my
experience  by  which  I  can  estimate  change.  But  this  permanent  element
is  before  all  Myself,  as  the  correlate  of  all  the  objects  of  my  con
sciousness  ;  and  since  time  certainly  depends  in  its  origin  upon  this  con
sciousness  of  mine,  it  involves  the  possibility  of  perceiving  simultaneity  and
succession.  Space,  again,  in  which  all  external  perceptible  change  takes
place,  is  also  permanent.  Kant's  further  stipulation,  which  he  connects
with  this,  that  we  should  find  in  objects  of  perception  the  substratum
which  represents  time  in  general,  is  not  really  fulfilled  in  the  general  form
in  which  he  puts  it ;  part  of  that  which  corresponds  to  sensation,  of  the
real,  is  always  changing,  and  the  substratum  which  is  to  remain  always  the
same  is  not  the  real,  i.e.  not  that  which  corresponds  to  sensation ;  it  is
not  an  object  of  perception.  It  is  not  true  that  it  is  absolutely  impossible
for  beginning  and  ceasing  to  be  objects  of  perception  because  only  the
permanent  renders  possible  the  transition  from  one  state  into  another,
from  not-being  to  being ;  it  is  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  perceive  begin
ning  and  ceasing  if  a  part  of  the  phenomena  persist  within  which  and  by
comparison  with  which  the  introduction  of  a  new  phenomenon  can  be
perceived.  The  principle  of  the  permanence  of  substance  in  the  Kantian
sense  assumes  a  totality  of  phenomena  which  is  never  found  in  percep
tion  ;  the  proof  proceeds  as  if  all  were  one  unity.1

1 8.  According  to  our  view,  it  is  quite  another  motive  which  has  led  to
:he  principle  of  the  permanence  of  substance  ;  the  proof  by  which  it  is
ustified  is  only  empirical,  and  the  principle  itself  holds  good  only  within
:he  limits  in  which  it  is  empirically  proved.

The  motive  lies  in  the  slippery  way  in  which  change  in  whatever  form
iludes  the  grasp  of  our  thought.  Just  as  the  spatial  extension  of  the  thing
mpels  us  to  overcome  the  difficulties  of  infinite  divisibility  by  having
•ecourse  to  the  absolutely  simple,  so  the  temporal  continuity  of  change,

1  Cf.  the  searching  critique  of  the  Kantian  principles  by  Laas,  Kanfs  Analogical  der
Erfahi-ung,  p.  63  sq.


90  LOGIC

its  incomprehensibility  for  thought  with  its  desire  to  analyse,  impels  us
to  get  rid  of  it  from  the  concept  of  the  thing. According  to  the  ordinary
way  of  looking  at  it,  although  there  may  be  change,  yet  because  of  the
continuity  of  this  change  the  idea  of  an  individual  thing  is  given  as  con
tinuing  the  same  in  spite  of  the  alteration  which  it  undergoes  ;  and  thus
we  find  ourselves  called  upon  to  say  what  this  one  is,  to  fix  it  in  a  definite
concept. The  first  step  is  to  separate  that  which  persists  from  that  which
changes  ;  in  the  autumn  leaf  the  form  persists,  while  the  colour  changes  •
hence  though-t^can  gi^sp_4h^^rjp^r^foj^te^rjain^uon. Or  sometimes  it
is  the  form  which  changes,  as  in  fluids,  which  will  take  the  form  of  any
vessel,  while  their  other  qualities  remain  unaltered. Thus  when  we  speak
of  things  being  changed  itisgenerally  the  most  familiajMma,ge_jyJiich_  we
jiave^injDur  minds  as  the  true  thing,  and  in  order  to  accustom  ourselves
gradually  to  the  new  image  we  survey  the  series  of  changes  in  imagi
nation. But  our  need  for  definite  concepts  demands  strict  unity  ;  that
which we  are  to  regard  as  one  thing  must  not  be  this  Proteus  which
eludes  our  grasp. And  thus  we  are  led  to  the  attempt  to  find  the  per
manent  and  persisting  behind  the  perceptible  phenomenon, to think  of
the  attributes by  which  we  distinguish it  as something a-bsnhjjely per^
manent, and of  that,  whidi__^a£ge^asjr^rei^atiQri-  which  does  not
affect  the  thing  itself  in  its  constitution. In  proportion  as  the  change  is
more  penetrating  and  extends  to  more  attributes  (as  with  melting  ice  or
solidifying  ore)  we  feel  ourselves  more  urgently  called  upon  to  find  some
definite  centre  for  the  unity  which  was  originally  merely  suggested  by  the
comprehending  process  of  perception,  to  show  clearly  how the  subject
which  remains  the  same  and  persists  throughout  change  may  be  thought.
It  is  to  this  need  of  reducing  the  changeable  to unchanging  subjects
that  the  old  atomism  is  more  especially  due  ;  from  it  is  derived  the  gtgni
de  nihilo  nihil,  in  nihilum  nil  posse  reverti  of  Lucretius,  while  the  principle
more  often  used  as  a  causal  principle  than  as  referring


to  the  permanence  of  substance.

The  proof  for  the  validity  of  the  principle  that  the  quantity  of  substance
is  invariable  could  not  be  established  until  a  measure  was  found  for  the
quantity  of  substance,  until  weight  —  as  a  relation,  an  effect  —  was  recog
nised  as  this  measure,  and  chemistry  could  prove  that  weight  remained
the  same  throughout  all  chemical  combinations  and  analyses.  In  this,  and
in  the  possibility  of  reproducing  the  previous  thing  as  externally  recog
nisable,  lies  the  empirical  proof  of  an  hypothesis  which  will  meet  our


THE CONCEPT  OF  THING  91

logical  needs  ;  but  the  principle  is  in  no  way  necessary  for  a  perception
of  simultaneity  and  succession,  nor  does  it  give  us  any  indication  (as  it
should  do)  what  it  is  in  the  phenomenon  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  the
permanent,  i.e.  as  substance.  The  mere  proposition  that  the  changing
must  be  the  different  modes  in  which  the  permanent  exists  again  assumes
:  the  permanent  as  a  unity,  as  one  general  substratum,  while  from  the  first
the  question  always  before  us  is  :  What  particular  element  is  the  subject
which  changes  ?

In  the  proposition  "in  all  phenomena  the  permanent  is  the  object  itself,
i.e.  the  substance,  while  all  that  changes  or  can  change  belongs  only  to
the  way  in  which  the  substance  or  substances  exists,  hence  to  their  modes
of  being,"  Kant  has  already  indicated  the  gap  in  his  doctrine  by  the  use
of  the  indefinite  "  substance  or  substances."  But  in  addition  to  this,  the
difficulty  still  remains  undiminished  as  to  how  the  unity  of  the  thing  in  the
change  of  its  determinations  can  be  grasped ;  the  problem  of  change  as
emphasized  by  Herbart  is  not  even  touched.  And  yet  it  is  just  here  that
the  chief  interest  centres  in  the  scientific  determination  of  the  concept  of
substance.  If  we  ask  what,  from  a  general  point  of  view,  are  the  con
siderations  in  favour  of  chemical,  atomism,  we  find  that  it  is  in  this  way
that  we  get  rid  of  this  problem  of  the  actual  change  of  the  attributes  in
herent  in  a  thing.  If  we  ask  what  the  physiology  of  the  sense-organs  and
the  development  of  the  mechanics  of  aggregate  states  have  done  for  meta
physics,  we  find  that  it  consists  in  the  reduction  of  that  change  of  attri
butes  which  ordinary  perception  seems  to  force  upon  us  into  change  of
1  relations  only,  into  which  invariable  substances  enter  ;  so  that  all  change,  \
iwith  the  exception  of  spatial  motion,  which  alone  remains  objective,  passes  I
into  the  activities  of  the  feeling  and  perceiving  subject,  which  is  affected/
in  changing  manner  by  invariable  things.

In  this  way  the  attributes,  by  which  we  first  attempt  to  determine  thefc
concept  of  the  thing  and  its  change,  resolve  themselves  into  effects,  andj
here  again  it  appears  that  the  concept  of  the  thing,  when  once  it  is  removed/
from  its  popular  vagueness,  cannot  be  complete  without  that  of  cause.

19.  We  are  brought  to  the  same  concept  from  still  another  point  of
view.  According  to  p.  86  we  are  finally  led  to  the  synthesis  performed
in  the  thought  of  the  thing  by  the  attempt  to  think  of  the  co-existence
of  qualities  which  our  self-consciousness  constrains  us  to  combine  in  one
place  as  necessary.  We  may  regard  the  unification  of  changes  in  the
same  way  ;  here  again  we  seek  one  ground  for  the  successive  co-existence


92  LOGIC

of  different  qualities.  The  concept  of  action  as  contained  by  intransi
tive  verbs  places  the  ground  of  this  succession  in  the  unity  of  the  thing,
and  in  itself  it  is  no  more  contradictory  than  the  thought  of  the  many
qualities  of  one  thing.  But  we  have  also  the  succession  of  the  actions
of  different  things,  and  then  the  question  arises  whether  there  is  a
ground  for  this  succession  also,  and  whether  instead  of  finding  the  ground
of  change  in  each  thing  by  itself  we  must  not  look  for  it  in  their  relation
to  one  another,  by  virtue  of  which  one  thing  necessitates  change  in
another,  i.e.  in  a  causal  relation.

§  73-

A.  Leaving  for  the  present  the  question  as  to  a  universal  principle  of
causality,  the  analysis  of  the  idea  of  CAUSALITY  must  start  from  the  idea
of  the  operation  of  one  thing  upon  another,  which  is  always  implied  in
ordinary  language,  especially  in  transitive  verbs,  and  which  is  thought  to
be  given  beyond  doubt  in  particular  cases.

In  the  first  place,  an  operation  is  always  assumed  where  we  perceive
spatial  and  temporal  continuity  in  the  motions  or  other  changes  of  different
things ;  but  mere  succession  of  events  does  not  exhaust  the  meaning  which
we  connect  with  the  term  "  efficient  action  " ;  it  must  be  supplemented  by
the  thought  that  the  action  of  one  thing  (the  cause)  passes  over  into  the
other  and  produces  in  it  a  change  which  it  would  not  have  experienced
by  itself.

The  motive  which  gives  rise  to  this  idea  of  efficient  action  lies  in  the
need  for  having  one  ground  for  the  perceived  connection  between  changes,
and  it  is  thus  akin  to  the  motive  which  leads  to  the  idea  of  the  "  thing."

From  this  motive  the  idea  of  influencing  and  being  influenced  (cause
and  effect)  extends  beyond  the  limits  within  which  it  was  first  applied  to
further  cases,  and  guided  by  analogies  it  applies  the  same  thought  even
to  that  which  is  at  rest  and  that  which  persists,  regarding  it  partly  as
the  effect  of  a  previous  operation,  partly  as  endowed  with  faculties  and
powers  for  an  action  which  is  to  come.

B.  (a) In  logically  determining  these  elements  of  the  idea  we  have  first
to  overcome  the  difficulties  contained  in  the  time-relations  of  cause  and
effect,  then  those  which  are  grounded  in  the  exclusive  reference  of  the
whole  result  to  the  efficient  cause. We  obtain,  in  consequence,  in  the
first  place  the  simultaneity  of  the  action  with  the  realization  of  the  effect ;
in  the  second,  the  necessity  of  referring  the  effect  to  the  object  under-


CA  USALITY  93

rt

going  it  as  also  its  ground — of  referring  it  therefore  to  a  relation  between
two  things.  In  this  way  the  concept  of  force  is  determined  as  a  relational
concept.

(b) Logical  determination  aims  further  at  deriving  efficient  action  from
invariable  substances  with  invariable  forces,  and  the  change  which  occurs
merely  from  their  relations  as  the  conditions  of  the  efficiency  of  the  forces  ;
and  this  invariability  finds  its  expression  in  the  unity  of  a  law  according  to
which  every  force  takes  effect. The  term  cause  being  then  transferred  to
the  changing  relations  which  represent  the  conditions  under  which  the
forces  take  effect  at  any  time,  it  can  be  equated  to  the  totality  of  these
conditions  ;  and  in  so  far  as  this  occurs  the  cause  (as  the  entrance  of  the
conditions  which  takes  place  at  a  given  point  of  time)  precedes  the  effect.
When  the  change  which  appears  is  also  defined  as  the  measure  of  the  action
actual  or  possible  under  the  given  conditions,  the  conceptual  determination
of  the  connected  elements  is  completed  by  the  principle  of  the  conserva
tion  of  energy,  and  at  the  same  time  the  concept  of  the  thing  is  made
complete  as  the  concept  of  the  one  ground  of  its  attributes  and  activities.
<•  C. The  so-called  PRINCIPLE  OF  CAUSALITY  has  many  meanings. From I
'  the  nature  of  thought  there  arises  the  obligation  of  conceiving  everything 1
which  we  think  of  as  existing  as  necessarily  following  from  a  real  ground  of \
its  existence,  and of  its  existence  in  a  particular  manner,  an  obligation
which  ultimately  presupposes  a  simply  and  absolutely  existent. From  this
obligation  follows  the  assumption  that  whatever  is  given  has  a  ground.  ^

It  is,  however,  not  determined  by  the  general  principle  what  is  the
nature  of  this  ground  of  the  existence  of  a  given  thing.  We  may  look  for
it  in  the  relation  to  external  causes,  which  act  upon  that  which  is  given  ;
out  we  may  also  look  for  it  in  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself,  by  which

ts  activities  and  the  order  of  their  succession  are  necessarily  determined
according  to  a  law  of  development.

The  term  "causa,"  which  was  originally  used  only  to  denote  an  external
:ause,  being  applied  to  this  latter  relation  also,  there  results  the  distinction

>etween  the  causa  tinmanens  and  the  causa  transiens. "  Cause  "  is  again

sometimes  used  of  the  subject  as  the  one  ground  of  its  activities,  some-
: imes  of  the  particular  activity  in so far  as  another  follows  necessarily

ipon  it.
In  what  sense  we  can  show  that  which  is  actually  given  to  be  grounded,

mist  be  determined  by  our  attempts  to  reduce  it  to  its  grounds.
i. The ordinary view which finds its expression in  language has


94  LOGIC

answered  the  question  raised  at  the  end  of  the  last  §  by  developing  the
thought  of  an  interaction  amongst  things.

In  dealing  with  the  idea  of  the  action  of  a  cause  it  is  even  more  difficult
than  with  the  idea  of  a  thing  to  find  its  ordinary  content,  as  determined
by  our  use  of  language,  in  order  that  we  may  define  its  limits  and  make  it
logically  perfect ;  nor  is  it  more  easy  to  show  how  such  logical  perfection
is  to  be  attained.  The  question  as  to  the  genesis  of  the  idea  of  the  action
of  a  cause  is  more  intimately  confused  with  the  question  as  to  its  content,
and  scientific  language  itself  has  failed  to  come  to  any  conclusion,  even
more  than  with  reference  to  the  concept  of  substance.

2.  It  would  be  trouble  thrown  away  if  we  were  to  make  the  origin  of
the  causal  idea  the  subject  of  our  direct  investigation,  as  a  means  of  arriving
at  its  meaning  and  content. Though  this  idea  has  doubtless  had  its  origin
in  the  course  of  the  development  of  human  ideas,  and  though  it  could  not
have  arisen  without  the  stimulus  of  the  sense-impressions  with  which  the
development  of  consciousness  begins,  yet  we  are  for  ever  shut  off  from  any
direct  observation  of  its  growth,  and  the  variety  of  the  theories  as  to  the
origin  of  the  causal  concept  speaks  clearly  enough  of  the  difficulties  which
beset  the  question  as  to  the  genesis  of  the  idea. When  we  begin  to  reflect,
the  idea  is  already  there,  and  is  being  made  use  of  as  something  natural
and familiar. How  it  has  come  into  consciousness,  no  recollection  can
inform  us,  and  all  hypotheses  as  to  its  origin  can  be  based  only  upon  the
content  which  we  find  to  hand.

3.  But  this  given  content  itself  is  not  easily  grasped  nor  always  the
same;  the  results  of  a  hjghly__developed  scientific  elaboration  of  the  con
cept  of  causality  are  easily  confused  with  its  earlier  and  more  elementary
form,  and^t_becomes_uncertain  what  we  are  to  understand  by  cause  or
causality. Only  too  often  the  question  as  to  whence  we  get  our  idea  of
causality  in  general  has  been  entangled  with,  or  quite  mistaken  for, the
question  as  to  the  origin  of  the  causal  principle,  the  law  that  everything
must  have its  cause ;  and  this  general causal  principle has  then  been
further  confused  with  particular  aspects  of  it. More  especially  when we
speak  of  the  causal  principle  does  the  term  itself  suffer  from  ambiguity;
sometimes  it  signifies  the  real  ground  of  necessity  in  general,  sometimes  the
ground  contained  in  an  efficient  cause.

/4y  We  must  begin  by  making  a  distinction.  The  conscious  thought
that  everything  has  its  cause  is  undoubtedly  later  than  the  thought  that
there  is  something  which  must  be  thought  of  as  cause ;  hence  the  meaning


CA  USALITY  95

of  the  causal  relation  must  be  present  before  it  can  be  thought  of  and
affirmed  in  its  universality.1

To  get  at  the  meaning  of  this  causal  idea,  as  it  precedes  scientific
elaboration,  the  only  way  is  again  to  turn  to  the  most  indubitable  and
simplest  cases  which  are  intelligible  to  every  one,  and  which  are  already
universally  and  confidently  denoted  as  cases  of  efficient  action  by  the  use
in  popular  language  of  words  containing  the  thought  of  efficient  action.
For,  here  again,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  idea  of  active  operation,  as
presented  in  concrete  particular  cases,  precedes  the  concept  of  cause,  in
which  the  idea  of  the  relation  of  efficacy  is  mingled  with  that  of  the
efficient  thing;  just  as  murderer  is  derived  from  the  verb  to  murder,  and!
not  vice  versa.

5. Here  we  may  note  three  points  : —

First,  that  which  takes  effect  is  originally  always  a  thing,  and,  properly
speaking,  efficient  action  can  only  be  predicated  of  concrete  things  with  a
particular  existence ;  indeed,  those  verbs  which  express  efficient  action
must  always  have  such  a  concrete  subject.

Secondly,  efficient  action,  where  we  seem  to  find  it  most  clearly  and
indisputably,  is  action  which  occurs  at  a  definite  time,  is  instantaneous  or
persists  for  a  space  of  time  and  is  directed  towards  some  other  thing.

Thirdly,  that  which  is  effected  is  a  definite  change  of  this  second  thing,
and  the  action  finds  its  fulfilment  in  just  this  production  of  change,  in  the
realization  of  the  effect.

When  I  overthrow  an  upright  body  by  a  blow,  when  a  falling  body
wounds  me  or  breaks  a  vase,  then  I  act  as  a  cause  by  moving  my  arm  in
the  direction  of  the  body,  the  stone  by  falling  on  to  the  vase  or  my  skin  ;
by  the  change  that  takes  place  in  the  object,  the  causation  is  exhausted,
even  though  the  effect,  the  state  brought  about  by  the  change,  persists.
iThe  position  of  the  fallen  body  does  not  continue  to  be  caused  by  my
action,  but  has  been  caused  by  it;  the  pain  of  the  wound  continues,  but
the  stone  which  wounded  acts  no  longer ;  its  causation  was  fulfilled  at  the
moment  in  which  it  struck  me ;  only  the  effect  persists,  not  the  causation.
In  speaking  of  after-effects,  we  distinguish  between  the  events  which  occur
after  the  real  causation  and  the  causation  itself.

It  is  an  obvious  abbreviation  of  speech  when  we  substitute  for  the

1  This  excludes  neither  that  the  causal  idea  is  due  in  the  individual  to  a  kind  of
rational  instinct,  nor  that  the  knowledge  that  A  is  the  cause  of  B,  depends  for  its
certainty  upon  the  known  validity  of  a  general  principle.


96  LOGIC

efficient  subject  the  action,  through  which  it  takes  effect,  as  a  unity,  and
denote  this  as  productive  of  an  event.  In  so  far  as  the  efficient  agent  can
produce  an  effect  only  by  virtue  of  and  through  its  own  action,  this  effect
may  be  directly  ascribed  to  the  transitory  action  ;  we  say,  either,  that  my
blow  overthrows  the  body,  or,  that  I  overthrow  it ;  that  the  stone,  or  that
the  falling  of  the  stone,  breaks  a  vase.1  What  significance  is  to  be  attached
to  this  distinction  will  appear  later  on.

6.  As  in  our  ordinary  practice  we  keep  in  view  the  beginning  and  end
of  the  whole  process  as  it  occurs  in  time,  and  lay  especial  emphasis  on
comparing  the  conditions  before  and  after  the  action,  jt  naturally  follows
that  the  beginning  of  the  action  and  the  completion  of  the effect  fall

h  asunder  in  time ;  and  inasmuch  as  we  look  at  the  action  from  the  begin-

J& ning  and  at  the  effect  from  the  end,  it  follows  that  the  effected  state  suc-
/ ceeds  the  action  of  the  cause,  or,  more  accurately,  succeeds  the  moment
(/\  when  it  begins  to  be  efficient. First,  I  strike  a  blow,  then  the  body  falls
\first  the  stone  begins  to  fall,  then  it  strikes  my  skin  and  wounds  it.

But  the  idea  which  we  connect  with  efficient  action  is  not  exhausted  by
this  thought  of  temporal  succession  ;  it  contains  also  the  passing  over  o
the  activity  of  one  thing  into  the  sphere  of  another,  the  power  which  it  can
exert  over  it,  the  constraint  which  it  can  put  upon  it,  the  suffering  which  it
can  make  it  undergo.  The  body  is  not  overturned  "of  itself,"  just  when
my  hand  touches  it ;  the  vase  does  not  break  "  of  itself,"  just  when  the
stone  strikes  it ;  it  is  not  merely  this  temporal  connection  which  obtains
between  the  one  movement  and  the  other,  although  it  is  only  this  tempora
connection  which  is  the  object  of  immediate  perception.  The  origin  o:
the  change  effected  lies  in  the  efficient  cause;  the  object  of  the  action
would  not  itself  have  produced  it.

7.  It will  not  be  disputed  that in  these and  similar  cases  we  are
immediately  certain  of  the  action  of  a  cause,  and in  support  of  this  we
quote  Locke,2  when  he  says  that  mere  observation  teaches  how  change  is
brought  about  in  a  thing  through  the  application  or  operation  of  another
If, however, we  ask what  it  is  in  such instances which  gives  us  this
certainty  of  inner  connection,  we  are  first  confronted  by  the  answer  o:
Hume  and  his  followers,  that  it  is  perception  of  the  regular  recurrence  o;
the  sequence  of  A  and  B  which  finally  brings  us  to  regard  A  as  the  cause
of  B. According  to  this  view,  we  mean  by  cause  that  invariable  antecedent

1  Cf.  i,  §6,  3,  p.  36-39,  §  13,  3,  p.  78.

2  Essay,  etc.,  ii.  7,  §  8,  26,  §  I ; cf.  supra,  \  ;  §  47,  12,  p.  314.


CAUSALITY  97

of  any  phenomenon  which  we  learn  to  know  from  experience,  and  by
generalizing  from  numerous  instances  we  arrive  at  the  assumption  that
every  change  has  its  cause, — has,  that  is,  an  antecedent  upon  which  it
regularly  follows.  But  though  this  observation  of  invariable  sequence  is
of  great  value,  both  in  giving  rise  to  the  thought  that  efficient  causes  act
according  to  law,  and — given  this  thought — in  helping  us  to  determine  what
is  to  be  regarded  as  the  cause  of  B  and  the  effect  of  A  and  in  correcting
our  mistakes,  yetJt_^jn^aj2aWe_^f_creating  the  thought  of  causation  itself,
for  this  contains  more  than  mere  sequence.  It  is  inconceivable  how  mere

~ ~. — ~

repetition  should  introduce  an  entirely  new  element  of  which  there  is  no

trace  in  the  particular  instances  which  are  repeated.

8. If  we  turn  our  attention  first  to  the  nature  of  the  events  in  which

efficient  action  is  most  immediately  obvious,  what  we  first  find  is  the  spatial

nd  temporal  continuity  of  the  changes  which  take  place  in  different  things,

nd  it  must  be  this  continuity  which  first  impels  us  to  regard  them  as  one

onnected  event. When  the  spade  penetrates  into  the  earth  and  pushes

ide  those  parts  with  which  it  comes  into  contact,  when  the  axe  splits  a

)iece  of  wood  or  the  hand  pushes  forward  a  body,  we  are  quite  unable  to
link  of  the  one  movement  without  the  other;  the  principle  that  two
lings  cannot  both  occupy  the  same  position  in  space,  involves  that  when-
ver  the  one  body  moves  the  other  should  move  out  of  its  way.  And
nee  the  two  processes,  that  of  penetrating  or  pressing  forward,  and  that
f  receding,  take  place  in  unbroken  connection,  our  original  datum  is  the
cture  of  the  whole  event.  This  we  nevertheless,  because  of  the  duality
f  the  things  moved,  distinguish  at  once  into  two  events,  into  the  move-
ent  of  the  body  which  presses  forward  and  the  movement  of  the  body
nich  recedes,  only  that  we  may  again  annul  the  division  and  look  upon
ie  receding  movement  as  the  immediate  continuation  of  the  forward
ovement.  Thus  we  come  naturally  to  think  of  the  action  of  the  first
ody  as  continued  in  the  change  of  the  second,  to  extend  it  spatially  and
mporally  beyond  its  own  movement,  and  not  consider  it  as  finished  until
e  whole  continuum  of  changes  has  come  to  an  end.  Thus  in  the
Bought  of  efficient  action  is  contained  the  real  ground  of  that  unification
hich  our  self-consciousness  in  its  temporal  continuity  and  spatial  compre-
ension  performs  between  two  spatially  and  temporally  connected  events.
i  this  way  this  thought  comes  very  near  to  the  apprehension  of  the
ranging,  and  indeed  of  the  unchanging  thing  ;  just  as  the  continuity  of
lange  will  not  allow  us  to  break  off  the  existence  of  one  thing  and  begin
s.  L. — n.  H


98  LOGIC

that  of  another,  so  the  same  motive  leads  us  to  find  the  ground  for  the
continuous  progress  of  the  change  of  one  thing  into  that  of  another  in  the
first,  the  action  of  which  passes  over  into  the  second.  From  this  point  of
view  a  new  light  is  thrown  upon  persistence  also ;  the  ground  of  persis
tence  is  again  contained  in  the  unity  of  the  thing,  it  is  the  thing  itself  which
continues  its  existence  in  time.  Although  this  persistence  seems  such  a
matter  of  course,  it  is  none  the  less  certain  that  it  is  based  upon  a  similar
comprehension  of  different  moments  in  unity,  only  here  the  comprehension
takes  place  most  easily,  because  there  are  no  differences  but  those  of  time
itself  to  be  overcome.  That  it  does  actually  take  place,  becomes  obvious
when  we  are  confronted  by  the  violence  which  is  done  to  the  idea  of  the
continuity  of  existence  by  the  doctrine  of  Arabian  philosophers,  and  adopted
by  Descartes — the  doctrine  that  the  existence  of  the  universe  at  any  one
moment  is  absolutely  independent  of  its  existence  in  the  preceding  moment,
and  that  it  is  only  the  recurrence  of  divine  creation  at  every  moment  which
produces  an  appearance  of  continuity.

9. This  root  of  the  idea  of  efficient action  finds  expression  in  the
Aristotelian  doctrine  that  bodies  cannot  act  upon  each  other  except  when
in  contact ;  it  has  given  rise  to  the  obstinate  and  constantly  recurrent  oppo
sition  to  any  kind  of  action  at  a  distance,  and  it  appears  also  in  th
originally  local  significance  of  the  cases  and  prepositions  which  denot
in  the  active  voice  the  object,  in  the  passive  the  subject  of  the  action
Nor  is  it  wanting  where  spatial  continuity  falls  into  the  background,  am
the  temporal  only  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  present  in  the  relation  between
internal  and  external  events. The  pain  caused  by  a  blow,  the  feeling  o
satisfaction  which  follows eating  and  drinking,  the  connection  between
volition  and  movement,  all  this  is  regarded  as  cause  and  effect  as  confi
dently  as  in  the  case  of  pushing,  pulling,  or  pressure. The  spatial  relation
indeed  is  not  wholly  wanting  even  here ; the  pain  is  localized  just  where
the  blow  was  struck  and the  will  works  from  within  the  body,  but  the
action  and  its  result  cannot  be  comprehended  intuitively  in  a  spatial  whole
Nevertheless  the  temporal  continuity  is  sufficient,  at  any  rate  where  it  i
not  contradicted  by  the  spatial  relations,  to  connect  the  different  events  as
a  unity,  and  to  make  us  regard  the  second  as  the  continuation  of  the  action
which  constituted  the  first ;  the  need  of  referring  elements  which  accom
pany  each  other  in  perception  to  one  ground  of  unity  remains  the  same.

The  theory  according  to  which  the  whole  idea  of  causality  is  originally
due  to  the  consciousness  of  my  own  voluntary  action,  forgets  that  after  al


CA  USALITY  99

the  movement  of  my  limbs  merely  follows  the  volition  which  is  directed
towards  them,  and  that  here  again  it  needs  explanation  how  I  come  to
regard  this  as  the  action  of  myself  upon  my  limbs.  To  say  that  here  the
inner  connection  is  brought  about  by  an  aim  which  governs  my  action,  is
to  forget  that  before  I  can  consciously  set  before  me  an  aim  I  must  have
already  experienced  the  consciousness  of  my  power,  hence  the  efficiency
of  my  will.  Moreover,  the  psychological  development  of  gradual  mastery
over  the  limbs  and  of  the  consciousness  of  being  able  by  means  of  my
will  to  effect  something  outside  myself,  is  only  explicable  if  preceded  by
involuntary  movements,  and  if  the  results  of  these  have  been  noticed.
;0nly  this  much  is  true  in  the  theory :  that  these  mutual  relations  between
'ourselves  and  the  external  world  are  the  events  which  interest  us  most  and
jare  first  to  excite  our  attention,  and  that  the  thought  of  inner  connection
.between  successive  events  would  probably  not  come  into  clear  conscious
ness  so  easily  or  so  soon  if  we  were  mere  spectators  of  external  events  ;
3ur  voluntary  action  and  the  pleasurable  or  painful  experiences  which  we
undergo  from  without  make  a  livelier  impression  and  form  a  sort  of  typical
i  nstance,  so  that  we  are  inclined  to  interpret  even  external  events  anthro-
bomorphically  by  ascribing  endurance  to  the  object  of  the  action,  and  to
ts  subject  a  kind  of  volition.  In  the  same  way  it  is  our  consciousness  of
Exertion  which  is  the  original  measure  by  which  we  estimate  the  magni-
ude  of  an  action,  and  by  this  same  feeling  we  determine  how  far  we
leffect  anything ;  when  we  place  a  ball  upon  an  inclined  plane,  and  let  go,
ve  know  that  it  rolls  down  "of  itself"  because  we  have  used  no  exertion
o  produce  its  movement.

•  10.  Everywhere,  then,  where  we  speak  of  efficient  action  in  the
>riginal  sense,  this  synthesis  of  connected  changes  in  the  thought  of  one
Tound  takes  place,  and  this  explains  why,  when  we  distinguish  between
cting  and  being  acted  upon,  we  first  comprehend  a  continuum  in  a  unity,
nd  then  call  an  event  which  occupies  more  or  less  of  time,  and  which  we
^gard  as  one,  the  action  of  the  cause,  and  the  change  connected  with
— again  considered  as  one — the  effect.  When  I  throw  a  stone,  the  move-
lent  of  my  arm  until  the  stone  flies  is  one  act,  the  flight  of  the  stone
ntil  it  alights  the  second  act ;  the  whole  action  which  is  apprehended  as
cting  and  being  acted  upon  is  concluded  in  these  two  acts.  In  this
istance  the  efficient  agent  works  from  within  outwards  ;  it  is  impelled
y  itself  to  begin  the  action  which  is  concluded  when  the  stone  ceases
)  move.


TOO  LOGIC

ii.  From  these  simple  and  comprehensible  examples  the  idea  of
.  efficient  action  is  extended  in  various  directions.  In  the  first  place,  we
can  trace  chains  of  effects  in  which  changes  pass  from  one  thing  to  a
number  of  other  things  successively: — a  body  is  struck  by  a  blow,  it  falls
into  the  water,  drops  of  which  splash  up  and  wet  the  surrounding  objects,
etc.,  where  we  distinguish  between  near  and  remote,  immediate  and
mediate,  causes  and  effects.  In  this  way  the  beginning  and  the  end  fall
still  further  asunder  in  time,  and  we  are  led  by  analogy  to  connect  as
cause  and  effect  events  between  which  we  perceive  no  intermediate  links.
Recovery  does  not  follow  immediately  upon  the  swallowing  of  a  remedy;
we  say  "it  does  not  take  effect  yet";  nor  does  illness  follow  immediately
upon  a  chill ;  but  our  perception  of  many  changes,  which  do  not  appear
"  of  themselves,"  causes  us  by  means  of  simple  association  to  look  for  the
efficient  cause  and  to  find  it  even  in  remote  events  if  these  seem  appro
priate,  from  their  similarity  with  known  causes,  to  effect  the  change  before  us.

Analogy  leads  us  further  to  regard  even  the  quiescent  in  the  same  way,
and  its  state  may  be  looked  upon  as  the  effect  of  a  previous  action ;  its
present  position  implies  that  it  has  been  brought  here,  its  present  consti
tution  that  something  has  acted  upon  it,  and  it  follows  that  the  idea  of
being  acted  upon  is  extended  to  many  instances  where  we  have  no  imme
diate  perception  of  change,  but  where  we  are  convinced  that  the  object
owes  neither  its  presence  here  nor  its  constitution  to  itself.

From  another  point  of  view  efficient  causes  may  also  be  looked  at  in
this  way.  The  action  presents  itself  at  a  definite  point  of  time,  and  so
far  the  action  of  a  cause  is  itself  a  change  of  the  cause,  and  the  question
arises  as  to  the  origin  of  this  change;  the  same  need  of  unification  works
backwards,  and  seeks  a  ground  for  the  action  in  a  preceding  state  or  event.
This  question  marks  the  division  between  actions  working  from  within
outwards,  and  actions  excited  from  without.  Our  own  action  is  an  ex
ample  of  the  first;  it  proceeds  from  a  volition  which  arises  within  ourselves
and  which  we  are  wont  to  regard  as  something  ultimate ;  we  are  conscious
that  we  have  only  to  will  in  order  to  be  able  to  perform  an  action,  that
our  limbs  obey  our  command  as  soon  as  it  is  given.  This  is  the  origin  ot
the  concept  of  a  faculty,  of  a  power  which  is  present  as  the  permanent
state  of  the  capacity  for  action,  and  which  is  distinct  from  the  momentary
volitional  impulse  through  which  the  power  is  set  in  action.  By  extending
this  aspect  everything  which  passes  from  rest  into  action  seems  to  be
acting  from  a  power  which  is  always  there,  as  we  ourselves  act  in  volition ;


CAUSALITY  101

vhile  on  the  other  hand  some  stimulus  to  bring  the  power  into  action,
iiome  impulse  to  excite  it,  is  needed  as  a  substitute  for  the  will.  The  idea
,)f  an  effort  which  is  checked  by  obstacles  and  becomes  action  when  these
lire  cleared  away  is  based  upon  the  same  psychological  ground ;  a  state
^recedes  the  actual  result  which  stands  midway  between  rest  and  action,  a
itate  in  which  no  visible  result  appears,  but  in  which  an  effort  is  made  to
each  the  result.  It  is  unnecessary  to  point  out  how  easily  the  state  of  a
ense  spring  or  a  hanging  weight  may  be  compared  with  the  exertion  which
.  man  feels  when  he  strives  to  overcome  an  obstacle  which  surpasses  his
ower.

We  are  taught  by  our  experience  that  heavy  bodies  fall  "  of  themselves  "
the  ground,  or  slide  off  a  steep  plane  when  they  are  not  supported  or
eld,  that  the  string  of  the stretched  bow  springs  back  when  we  let  go,  to
stinguish  between  the  activity  which  merely  lets  go,  and  the  action  which
urls  a  body  or  strikes  a  blow  ;  in  the  former  case  the  ground  of  the
otion  must  lie  in  the  body  itself,  which  is  only  freed  from  an  obstacle,
ristotle's  explanation  was  the  most  obvious  when  he  derived  the  fall  of
body  from  an  inherent  effort  to  reach  its  natural  place ;  it  needs  no  cause
the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  moving  it  from  without,  to  make  it  enter
)on  the  downward  path. It  is  a  much  later  reflection  which  attributes
e  fall  to  the  attraction  of  the  earth,  that  is,  to  an  external  cause  to  which
ascribed  a  power  which  is  constantly  acting  upon  bodies — a  power,
oreover,  which  the  earth  exerts  while  in  rest  without  itself  changing. No
:tion,  as  when  motion  is  imparted  by  moved  bodies,  now  corresponds  to
e  producing  of  an  effect ;  and  in  the  pressure  again  which  a  body  exerts
)on  that  which  supports it,  power  is  also  manifested  which  elicits  no
ovement,  which  does  not  therefore  act  in  the  ordinary  sense.
Here  again,  then,  the  quiescent  becomes  involved,  not  this  time  as  an
feet,  but  as  possessing  a  faculty  or  power  of  activity,  or  an  effort  to  act ;
e  idea  of  the  quiescent  is  animated  by  that  which  it  can  or  could  do.
12. This  process  of  expansion  in  all  directions  which  the  idea  of  action
d  being  acted  upon  undergoes  is  not  due  merely  to  natural  association
lich,  led  by  similarity  with  primary  and  easily  intelligible  causal  connec
ts, completes  the picture in imagination  and  traces the course of
anges  backwards  and  forwards. Just  as  the  simplest  idea  of  action  is  i

:Dtived  by  the  thought  of  a  ground  of  unity  for  the  simultaneous  changes
two  things,  so  that  which  impels  us  to  extend  the  idea  of  the  causal
ation,  even  where  no  perceptible  event  calls  for  it,  is  none  other  than  the


io2  LOGIC

need  for  connecting  isolated  events  or  states,  of  bringing  unity  into  the
changing  course  of  things,  of  mediating  sudden  transitions  from  rest  to
movement  and  unexpected  changes  by  finding  a  ground  from  which  they
proceed.  The  same  motive  from  which  we  obtain  the  mastery  over  a
particular  succession  of  changes  by  the  thought  of  efficient  action,  impels
us  to  establish  within  the  whole  spatial  and  temporal  universe  a  connec
tion  by  which  the  particular  is  torn  from  its  isolation.  And  this  need
becomes  especially  imperative  when  a  sudden  transition  occurs  which
cannot  be  explained  by  the  habitual  behaviour  of  the  particular  thing.  A
change  which  proceeds  continuously,  as  in  the  growth  of  plants  and
animals,  or  in  the  movement  of  stars  and  the  flowing  of  streams,  is  much
less  likely  to  make  us  ask  after  the  cause  which  brought  it  about ;  we  are
satisfied  in  such  cases  by  referring  to  the  unity  of  the  moving  or  changing
thing  itself,  which  seems  to  us  to  be  animated  from  within.  Sudden
changes  are  less  comprehensible,  and  we  surmise  an  external  cause  for
their  origin  all  the  more  easily  because  we  have  often  seen  such  sudden
changes  occasioned  by  intrusion  from  without.  The  Herbartian  theory
that  the  whole  concept  of  change  is  contradictory,  and  that  the  concept  of
cause  has  been  introduced  to  do  away  with  this  contradiction,  is  so  far
correct  that  every  change  in  a  thing  which  deviates  from  its  own  habits
and  from  the  behaviour  of  similar  things  is  difficult  to  refer  to  the  thing
itself,  and  indicates  its  connection  with  others.  A  man  in  good  health
does  not  ask  what  makes  him  healthy,  and  streams  may  flow  for  long  before
any  one  troubles  himself  as  to  why  they  flow ;  but  when  the  streams  are
frozen,  and  the  healthy  man  falls  ill,  curiosity  arises  and  impels  us  beyond
the  particular  to  its  connection  with  other  events.1

13.  If  we  pause  here,  without  at  present  taking  into  consideration  the
consequences  which  follow  from  consciously  generalizing  the  effort  to
establish  causal  connection  into  the  so-called  principle  of  causality,  we
shall  find  that  the  idea  of  efficient  action  as  used  in  ordinary  popular
thought  offers  difficulty  enough  to  its  logical  determination  if  the  thought
contained  in  it  is  to  be  freed  from  all  ambiguity  and  reduced  to  a  fixed
concept.  We  have  in  this  logical  determination  to  overcome  an  obstacle
like  that  which  we  met  in  determining  the  concept  of  the  thing,  an  obstacle
the  ignoring  of  which  has  brought  hopeless  confusion  upon  the  treatment
of  this  doctrine  by  the  English  empirical  school  from  Bacon  to  Mill.

In  our  ordinary  way  of  regarding  events  in  the  perceptible  world,  from
1  Cf.  Zeller,  Vorlrdge  und  Abhandlungen ,  2.  Samml.  p.  26.


CAUSALITY  103

the  point  of  view  of  their  causation,  we  fall  back  upon  unities  of  which  the
limits  are  easily  defined  in  time,  just  as  in  our  apprehension  of  things  we
are  guided  by  spatial  unities.  The  blow  which  strikes  a  fragile  object  is
one  event ;  its  breaking,  until  the  fragments  rest  upon  the  floor,  is  the
second  event.  The  swallowing  of  poison  is  one  act,  the  death  which
follows  a  few  hours  after  is  a  second  event ;  the  striking  of  a  match  is  one,
its  burning  until  it  is  consumed  is  another ;  the  warm  spring  weather  which
begins  to-day  is  one,  the  vanishing  of  the  snow  and  the  appearance  of  buds
is  another.  Thus,  in  speaking  of  causes  and  effects,  we  ordinarily  refer  either
to  events  which,  because  of  their  homogeneity,  we  can  easily  combine  into
a  temporal  whole  or  to  especially  striking  changes ;  we  do  not  concern
ourselves  either  about  the  divisibility  of  every  duration  into  smaller  sections
of  time,  or  about  the  interval — indifferent  to  us — which  lies  between  the
two  changes  which  strike  us.  This  explains  how  it  is  that  to  our  ordinary
apprehension  it  is  such  a  matter  of  course  for  the  effect  to  be  later  in  time
than  the  efficient  activity  of  the  cause,  that  we  find  no  difficulty  in  the  fact
that  there  is  actually  an  interval  between  the  event  which  we  regard  as
cause  and  that  which  we  denote  as  effect.  It  is  upon  this  popular  ap
prehension  that  the  attempt  is  based  to  strip  the  causal  relation  of  all  mean
ing  but  that  of  a  regular  sequence  of  different  events.

14.  But  here  we  are  threatened  with  logical  confusion,  when  we  re
member  that  after  all  it  must  be  things,  and  not  their  changes  only,  which
are  causes,  that  these  things  exist  and  persist  contemporaneously  with  those
upon  which  they  act,  and  that  efficient  action  is  primarily  regarded  as  an
activity  beginning  in  time  and  directed  towards  a  particular  object.  Now
if  we  are  to  be  accurate,  we  cannot  speak  of  the  efficient  action  of  an  A
upon  a  B  so  long  as  A  alone  changes  and  B  shows  no  sign  of  change.  If
the  action  consists  in  the  production  of  the  effect,  the  cause  acts  just  in
that  it  produces  the  effect,  the  action  of  the  cause  A  and  the  production  of
the  effect  in  B  must  be  simultaneous ;  that  which  goes  on  in  A  before  this
we  cannot  call  its  (efficient)  action,  but  merely  an  intransitive  change
which  precedes  this  action.1  The  movement  of  the  stone  which  I  hold  in

1  Wundt  observes  (Logik,  i.  p.  540)  that  we  can  never  infer  from  the  logical  relation
between  concepts  to  the  temporal  relations  between  the  phenomena  to  which  the  concepts
refer,  but  in  this  general  form  the  statement  does  not  hold  good.  From  the  logical  re
lation  between  the  concepts  thing  and  attribute  there  certainly  follows  simultaneity  in
the  existence  of  the  thing  and  certain  of  its  attributes  ;  and  from  the  concept  of  the  position
of  different  things  in  space  there  follows  simultaneity  in  the  existence  of  the  things  and  of
the  relation  between  them.  It  is  the  same  here.  If  effect  consists  in  a  change,  and  if  we  can


104  LOGIC

my  hand  does  not  follow  the  movement  of  my  arm,  but  is  simultaneous
with  it ;  the  lifting  of  a  load  does  not  follow  the  movement  of  the  lifter,  as
he  contracts  his  muscles  the  load  rises  ;  the  movement  of  the  horse  does
not  as  a  whole  precede  that  of  the  carriage,  but  only  continuing  work
produces  the  effect,  the  progress  of  the  carriage,  and  when  the  action  of
the  cause  ceases,  the  change  or  movement  which  can  be  regarded  as
immediately  effected  ceases  also.  The  saying  cessante  causa  cessat
effectus  could  find  as  much  support  in  a  host  of  popular  instances  as  the
view  that  the  cause  must  precede  the  effect.

15.  We  find  ourselves  called  upon  by  this  antinomy  to  examine  more
closely  in  our  conceptual  determination  of  efficient  action  the  temporal
relation  between  cause  and  effect,  and  this  the  more  imperatively  because
of  the  necessity  of  deciding  whether  that  which  we  regard  as  a  unity  is
really  a  unity,  and  must  necessarily  be  thought  as  such,  or  whether  the
time-occupying  event  which  we  regard  as  the  action  of  the  cause,  and  that
which  we  take  as  the  effect,  must  not  be  broken  up  into  a  series  of  compo
nent  events  which  themselves  form  another  causal  chain.  The  simple
consequence  of  the  concept  of  change,  its  divisibility  into  indefinitely  small
successive  degrees  of  change,  impels  us  to  ask  as  to  the  ground  upon  which
the  second  stage  of  a  change  must  follow  the  first,  and  either  to  look  for
the  ground  of  the  progress  of  the  change  in  the  first  cause  of  the  beginning
of  the  change,  or  to  find  another  ground  for  it.

The  bearing  of  these  observations  will  be  most  easily  seen  if  we  remember
that  in  mechanics  Galileo's  principle  of  inertia  first  threw  light  upon  these
difficulties,  and  laid  the  foundation  for  all  further  progress  by  giving  a
universal  ground  for  the  necessity  of  the  persistence  of  a  movement  which
has  once  been  begun — a  ground  which  was  no  longer  found  in  a  continued
action  of  the  cause  of  motion  (A),  but  in  the  necessity  of  the  persistence
of  the  object  B  in  the  state  of  motion  once  induced,  according  to  which
every  succeeding  differential  of  the  orbit  must  be  traversed  because  the
preceding  one  has  been  traversed,  and  a  new  cause  is  involved  only  by  a
change  of  movement  as  to  velocity  or  direction.  Uniform  motion  in  a
straight  line  now  falls  under  the  same  point  of  view  as  rest,  persistence  in
which  is  generally  regarded  as  something  quite  natural,  so  that  no  one
asks  what  is  the  cause  of  the  rest  of  a  body  (cf.  p.  98).

speak  of  causation  only  in  so  far  as  a  change  occurs,  if,  therefore,  nothing  is  effected  until
the  change  occurs,  then  the  action  of  the  cause  and  the  resulting  effect  must  necessarily
be  simultaneous.  Wundt's  statement  is  true  only  of  the  abstract  concept  of  dependence,
which  is  no  doubt  applicable  to  different  time-relations.


CAUSALITY  105

In  this  way  we  may  distinguish  three  stages  in  time  : —

1.  There  is  the  state  of  the  cause  (motion  of  the  striking  body)  which
precedes  its  action  (e.g.  a  blow).

2.  There  is  the  time  in  which  the  cause  acts,  imparts  a  motion  of  a
given  velocity  to  another  body,  or  changes  the  velocity  or  direction  of  an
existing  motion.

3.  As  soon  as  this  action  ceases  there  is  the  simple  persistence  of  the
new  state  of  motion. In  the  wider  and  only  mediate  sense  this  persistence,
which  may  possibly  be  of  endless  duration,  can  and  must  be  regarded  as
the  effect  of  the efficient  cause  ; and  thus  every  effect  has  an  infinite
duration  in  time;  in  the same  way  the  preceding  motion  of  the  strik
ing  body  is  mediately  the  cause  of  the  blow, which  it  strikes  only  by
virtue  of  the  velocity  it  has  previously  acquired. In  a  narrower  sense,
however,  the  effect  of  the  cause  is only  the communication,  change,  or
annihilation  of  the  motion ;  the  continuation  of  the  state  thus  brought
about  is  not  the  immediate  effect  of  the  acting  cause,  but  only  the  necessary
consequence  of  this  effect,  and  thus  we  have  simultaneity  in  the  strictest
sense  between  the  activity  of  the  cause  and  the  realization  of  the  effect.

Here,  no  doubt,  we  fall  into  another  difficulty  as  to  whether  an  instanta
neous  action,  such  as  we  think  we  perceive  in  a  blow,  really  is  possible
and  conceivable,  whether  a  finite  velocity  can  arise  in  a  nothing  of  time,
ind theory inclines to  assign  to every  mechanical action  a  period  of
:ime  during  which  the  body  moved  passes  from  a  state  of  rest  through  all
:he intervening stages  to  a  finite  velocity. In the  first  unit  of  time  a
ninimum  of  acceleration  is  imparted,  which  persists  according  to  the  law
)f  inertia  and  to  which  the  accelerations of  the  successive  units  of  time
ire  continually  added,  until  the  finite  velocity  is  reached. We  need  not
:nter  upon  a  more  exact  exposition  of  this  problem  of  mechanics  ;  all  we
lave  to  show  here  is,  that  the  attempt  to  grasp  the  relation  of  cause,  action
.nd  effect  with  conceptual  accuracy  necessarily  leads  to  a  breaking-up  of
emporal  wholes  which  we  do  not  hesitate  to  treat  as  unities  in  ordinary
anguage,  and  that  it  is  necessary  to  analyse  what  takes  place  in  the  cause
ito  its  action  and  the  process  which  precedes  and  prepares  the  action,  and
.'hat  takes  place  in  the  object  into  the  immediate  effect  of  the  action  and
:s  continuation.1

1  It  is  characteristic  that  mechanics,  in  the  fundamental  views  of  Galileo,  was  forced

.1 )  break  up  time  into  points  within  which  action  takes  place  and  empty  intervals  in  a

ay  exactly analogous  to  that adopted  by  atomism  in  order  to  free  the  concept  of


io6  LOGIC

Of  course  even  where  the  action,  as  in  the  interaction  of  atoms,  occupies
a  period  of  time  too  small  to  be  measured,  or  indeed  none  at  all,  the
whole  process  which  we  bring  under  the  category  of  causality  is  not
crowded  into  this  instant,  but  must  represent  a  lapse  of  time ;  the  blow
is  only  possible  through  a  preceding  movement  of  the  body  striking  which
occupies  time,  and  what  takes  place  is  the  communication  of  a  velocity  to
the  body  struck,  which  velocity  must  again  manifest  itself  in  a  movement
of  some  duration.  Time  cannot  be  altogether  eliminated,  in  the  first
place,  because  what  we  originally  apprehend  as  effects  are  changes  which
take  place  in  time,  and  even  states  of  equilibrium,  when  brought  under
the  same  point  of  view,  can  only  be  considered  as  persisting ;  in  the  second
place,  because  even  the  action  of  the  cause  itself  can  at  first  only  be  con
sidered  with  reference  to  a  preceding  state  as  the  beginning  of  a  new
state,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  must  have  for  its  consequence  a  change
which  takes  place  in  time.  Moreover,  since  an  unlimited  duration  of
efficiency  is  contained  in  the  concepts  of  the  so-called  continuously  acting
forces,  this  efficiency  may  consist  either  in  actual  movement  or  merely  in
the  maintenance  of  a  given  state  of  equilibrium  or  tension.

1 6.  If  we  apply  the  questions  which  first  made  themselves  clearly  felt
in  mechanics,  to  the  concept  of  change  in  general,  the  problem  which
confronts  us  everywhere  is  to  distinguish  in  that  which  we  are  tempted  to
regard  as  the  effect  of  a  cause  between  the  immediate  change  accompanying
the  action  and  the  mere  persistence,  or  further  independent  development,
of  a  process  once  induced,  and  in  this  way  to  find  a  solution  of  the
antinomy  between  the  proposition  that  the  effect  follows  the  cause  and
the  proposition  that  the  action  of  the  cause  and  the  beginning  of  the  effect
must  be  simultaneous.  When  one  man  wounds  another  by  stabbing  him,
his  action  in  the  strictest  sense  is  limited  to  the  time  in  which  the  dagger
penetrates  the  body  and  tears  its  tissues  ;  what  follows  is  the  further
development  (independently  of  external  interference)  of  the  state  which  has
been  brought  about,  of  the  wounding  of  the  tissues,  of  the  opening  of  blood
vessels,  etc.  ;  while  the  process  which  precedes,  the  seizing  of  the  dagger
the  movement  of  the  hand  holding  it,  the  velocity  thus  communicated  t


substance  from  the  troublesome  continuity  of  space.  That  manner  of  conceiving  of  th
acceleration  of  a  falling  body,  which  thinks  of  it  as  brought  about  by  a  succession  of  in
stantaneous  impulses  which  increase  the  previous  velocity,  shows  the  same  endeavour  t
break  up  the  continuous  into  the  discrete,  as  the  reduction  of  extended  masses  into  in
divisible  points.  On  the  objections  of  Benno  Kohn  to  the  above  view  see  Appendix  D,


CAUSALITY  107

the  weapon,  does  not  yet  constitute  an  action  upon  the  wounded  man,
though  it  can  itself  be  analysed  into  actions  and  their  consequences.

17.  As  soon  as  we  are  convinced  that  the  action  of  the  cause  and  the
realization  of  the  effect  are  necessarily  simultaneous,  and  further,  that  in  the
effect  itself  we  must  distinguish  between  what  follows  from  the  mere  faculty
of  persistence  in  the  substance  acted  upon,  and  what  is  produced  by  the
action  of  the  acting  substance,  a  further  alteration  in  the  popular  ideas
becomes  necessary,  In  the  first  place,  we  find  that  what  we  began  by
regarding  as  the  simple  transference  of  the  action  of  a  substance  A,  to
another  substance  B,  is  now  grounded,  at  least  partially,  in  the  substance
B,  which  changes  because  of  the  action,  and  that  the  ground  of  the  con
nected  event  must  no  longer  be  looked  for  in  the  substance  A  alone,  but
in  the  substance  B  also.  It  depends  upon  B  in  what  way  it  changes  and
continues  the  change  when  it  has  been  introduced,  and  thus  it  ceases  to
be  the  mere  object  of  the  action,  the  mere  passive  substratum  upon  which
A  exerts  its  power,  and  becomes  a  part  of  the  total  ground  from  which  its
perceptible  change  proceeds.1  Add  to  this,  that  whatever  proceeds  from
this  part  of  the  total  ground  is  already  completely  simultaneous  with  the
action  of  the  cause,  and  that  the  action  of  the  cause  exhausts  itself  in  the
production  of  the  effect,  by  which,  therefore,  its  course  is  determined  (quite
apart  from  any  resistance  which  it  experiences),  and  we  see  still  more
clearly  that  what  at  first  was  one-sidedly  regarded  as  the  action  of  the
cause  A,  is  the  common  action  of  A  and  -B,  and  that  its  ground  must  be
sought  in  both  together.  But  since  it  is  contained  in  neither  by  itself,  it
can  only  lie  in  the  mutual  relation  of  both,  by  virtue  of  which  the  action
of  B  is  guided  by  that  of  A,  and,  vice  versa,  the  action  of  A  is  determined
by  the  nature  of  B.

This  relation  cannot  be  thought  of  as  one  external  to  the  two  things,
as  a  third  cause  in  addition  to  the  two  things  themselves  which  acts  upon
both,  and  thus  produces  harmony  between  their  activities.  This  expedient,
by  which  occasionalism,  with  its  continual  intervention  of  divine  omnipo
tence,  or  Leibnitz,  with  his  pre-established  harmony,  hoped  to  escape
the  difficulties  involved  in  the  idea  of  efficient  action,  only  doubles  the
problem  ;  the  divine  action  which  is  exercised  upon  both  A  and  B  has
now  to  be  explained,  or  we  are  forced,  in  following  Spinoza's  doctrine,  to
relinquish  A  and  B  as  independent  things  altogether.

1  Bacon  himself  illustrated  this  thought  by  the  example  that  the  sun  softens  wax  and
hardens  clay.


io8  LOGIC

There  is  no  way  open  to  us  but  to  find  this  relation  in  the  permanent
nature  of  both  substances.  We  found  ourselves  obliged  to  think  of  the
one-sided  action  of  a  thing  as  the  manifestation  of  a  force  which  is  always
present,  in  order  to  reconcile  it  with  the  unity  of  a  substance  persisting  in
time ;  and  the  same  concept  presents  itself  here,  although  it  needs  modifi
cation  in  a  direction  indicated  by  the  considerations  referred  to  above.
Force  can  no  longer  be  conceived  as  a  quality,  as  if  a  thing  by  itself
possessed  the  power  of  intruding  itself  into  the  sphere  of  other  things,  dis
turbing  and  changing  them  ;  it  becomes  of  necessity  a  relational  concept,
expressing  that  the  nature  of  a  thing,  the  inner  ground  of  its  activities,  can
not  even  be  thought  of  if  we  regard  it  as  absolutely  isolated,  that  there  is
contained  in  it  a  relation  to  others  such  as  under  certain  conditions  gives
rise  to  common  action.

1 8.  In  proportion  as  the  logical  elaboration  of  the  concept  of  substance
constrains  us  to  think  of  substance  as  something  invariable,  because  in  this
way  we  most  easily  obtain  a  fixed  and  absolutely  definite  concept,  must
the  force  which  belongs  to  it,  i.e.,  its  essential  relation  to  other  substances
as  the  ground  of  changes,  be  also  thought  of  as  something  invariable.  But
the  ground  of  changes  cannot  be  found  in  that  which  remains  the  same,
but  only  in  something  which  varies,  and  it  is  only  the  relations  of  things,
above  all  their  spatial  relations,  which  are  variable ;  in  these  relations,
therefore,  we  must  find  the  ground  for  the  varying  manner  in  which  forces
become  efficient.  They  contain  the  conditions  under  which  constant
forces  can  become  active,  that  upon  which  it  depends  whether  and  what
changes  follow  from  the  essential  relation  of  things  contained  in  the  con
cept  of  force.  In  this  way  we  distinguish  between  the  ground  of  change
which  is  contained  in  force,  and  is  unaffected  by  differences  of  time,  and
the  changing  relations  which  are  the  conditions  under  which  appear  the
changing  consequences  of  this  ground.  The  word  "condition"  is  here
used  in  its  ordinary  sense,  not  as  the  ground  itself,  but  as  something  which
makes  its  activity  possible  and  the  absence  of  which  would  annul  this
activity.

This  explains  why,  as  we  make  our  concept  of  efficient  action  more
precise,  we  can  no  longer  regard  things  as,  in  the  first  instance,  the  ground
of  changing  occurrences,  but  speak  instead  of  their  relations,  and  substitute
for  the  concept  of  cause  as  the  ground  of  a  given  event  a  sum-total  of
conditions  upon  which  a  result  depends.  It  is  when  the  name  cause,
contrary  to  its  original  meaning,  is  transferred  to  these  changing  relations


CAUSALITY  109

upon  which  depends  the  action  of  the  forces  that  the  proposition  arises
that  this  cause — i.e.,  the  sum-total  of  conditions — precedes  the  appearance
of  the  change.  But  this  is  not  the  effect  of  the  cause  when  conceived  in
this  way  in  the  same  sense  as  it  was  the  effect  of  the  acting  force.  When
the  thread  by  which  a  heavy  body  is  suspended  is  cut,  we  may  indeed  call
this  cutting  the  cause  of  the  fall,  and  the  cutting  does  precede  the  fall  in
time.  But  no  one  thinks  that  the  cutting  throws  the  body  on  the  ground ;
as  causa  occasionalis  it  merely  brings  about  the  condition  under  which  the
attraction  of  the  earth  can  take  effect,  and  it  is  this  which  is  the  causa
efficiens  of  the  movement.  Thus  the  proposition  that  the  cause  precedes
the  effect  presupposes  quite  another  meaning  for  the  word  "  cause  "  than
we  find  in  the  proposition,  that  cause  and  effect  (more  exactly  the  action  of
the  cause  and  the  production  of  the  effect)  are  simultaneous.

19.  To  illustrate  the  course  of  this  alteration  in  the  concept  by  a
concrete  example,  we  may  take  the  most  simple  instance  of  an  impulse,
in  which  the  action  of  A,  the  body  striking,  upon  B,  the  body  struck,
seems  to  be  immediately  clear.  As  we  first  apprehend  it,  we  find  the
ground  of  the  whole  phenomenon  in  A,  the  body  striking ;  it  is  it  which
drives  the  other  body  £,  and  the  whole  movement  manifested  by  the  latter
until  it  conies  to  rest  is  the  effect  produced  by  the  force  of  the  striking
body.  More  accurate  analysis  then  teaches  us  that  the  body  A  cannot
take  effect  until  it  has  struck  B,  and  a  change  appeared  in  J3,  and  that  it
ceases  to  take  effect  so  soon  as  B  withdraws  ;  the  efficient  action  is  limited
to  the  moment  of  the  blow  which  imparts  a  movement  to  B,  to  be
carried  on  by  B  in  accordance  with  its  own  nature.  But  even  in  the
moment  of  the  communication  of  the  movement  both  are  active ;  the
ground  of  the  result  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  is  as  much  a  part  of  the  nature
of  B  to  move  when  it  is  struck  as  it  is  part  of  the  nature  of  A  to  occasion
this  movement ;  thus,  the  ground  is  really  that  relation  between  A  and  B
from  which  this  form  of  event  arises  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of  both.
We  think  of  this  relation  as  some  sort  of  repulsive  force,  which  is  an
essential  possession  of  both  bodies,  and  present  in  B  as  well  as  in  A.  But
the  repulsive  force  which  is  a  permanent  determination  of  both  bodies
becomes  active  only  when  they  approach  each  other ;  it  always  belongs  to
them,  but  produces  change  only  when  certain  conditions  are  fulfilled.
These  conditions — the  approximation  of  the  two  bodies  at  a  given  velocity,
the  absence  of  obstacles  to  the  movement  of  B,  etc. — are  spoken  of  as
introducing  the  change ;  and  what  we  now  call  the  cause  of  the  movement


no  LOGIC

is  neither  the  body  A  nor  the  mutual  repulsion  which  always  belongs  to
them,  but  that  contact  of  the  body  A,  moving  at  a  given  velocity,  with  the
body  B  which  gives  rise  to  the  conditions  under  which  alone  their  repul
sive  force  can  take  effect.  Here  the  movement  of  the  body  B  does  not
appear  until  after  the  point  of  time  at  which  A  arrives  at  B.

20.  From  the  alterations  which  the  concept  of  force  has  had  to  under
go,  it  follows  of  necessity  that  its  significance  extends  beyond  its  origin.
This  we  found  in  the  need  of  unifying  the  perceived  and  continuously  con
nected  changes  of  different  things,  the  results  to  which  this  attempt  leads
necessarily  involving  also  their  state  of  rest  with  respect  to  each  other. It
it  depends  upon  the  conditions  whether  forces  become  active in change,
it  also  depends  upon  the  conditions  whether  they  remain  inactive  ; thus
rest  itself  now  appears  as  emanating  from  the  same  forces  to  which  change
is  due  ;  it  is  grounded  in  an  equilibrium  of  forces,  in  conditions  which
permit  no  single  force  to  take  effect. In  this  way  it  first  becomes  possible
to  apply  the  same  conception  to  the  whole duration  of  the  existence  of
things.

21.  What  we  have  said  will  serve  to  show  how  those  alterations  in  the
concepts  connected  with  the  idea  of  causality  which  appear  in  the  history
of  science  may  be  simply  explained  by  the  logical  need  of  distinguishing
and  making  precise  the  elements  contained  in  the  popular  ideas. But
the  final  source  of  the  firm  hold  we  keep  of  the  fundamental  idea  itself
is  the  same  as  that  from  which  in  the  first  instance  it  sprang — the  instinct
which  impels  us  to  refer  continuously  connected  Being  and  Happening
in  a  constantly  increasing  extent  to  one  fixed  comprehensible  ground.

22.  From  the  same  source  spring  also  other  elements  which  we  have
hitherto  overlooked,  but  which  must  be  connected  with  the  thought  of
efficient  action  when  we  take  it  as  a  concept  and  develop  the  nucleus
contained  in  it  into  all  its  consequences.

The  most  important  point  is  that  to  which  the  empirical  doctrine  has
attached  exclusive  importance,  regularity  in  the  action  of  causes. We
have  already  dismissed  the  view  that  it  is  this  regularity  perceived  in  the  j
succession  of  two  events  a  and  b  which  first  gives  rise  to  the  thought
of  efficient  action  ;  we  must,  on  the  other  hand,  willingly  allow  that  to  a
large  extent  our  most  ordinary  experience  manifests  this  regularity  in  the
sense  that  when  the  same  things  come  together  or  are  brought  together
in  the  same  way,  then  the  same  effect will  be  repeated. That  drink ":\
regularly  quenches  thirst,  that  fire  warms,  that  a  blow  hurts,  that  a  stone :


CA  USA  LIT  Y  1 1 1

flies  off  when  thrown,  this  is  easily  taught  by  experience,  and  the  ex
pectation  grounded  upon  such  observations  guides  all  our  action  and
treatment  of  external  things.  But  none  the  less  false  and  impossible
is  the  empirical  doctrine  that  simple  observation  of  the  course  of  nature
shows  us  uniformity  in  the  sequence  of  antecedents  and  consequents,  in
such  a  way  that  we  obtain  by  an  easy  and  obvious  generalization  from
experience,  not  merely  the  proposition  that  under  like  circumstances  like
will  occur,  that  the  same  antecedents  are  followed  by  the  same  conse
quences,  but  also  the  further  and  much  more  far-reaching  proposition
that  everything  which  happens  is  preceded  by  antecedents  from  which
it  must  inevitably  follow.  If  we  could  appeal  only  to  the  results  of  our  >/
ordinary  experience,  then  the  impossibility  of  calculating  what  will  happen,
the  freaks  of  chance,  the  occurrence  of  events  for  which  we  find  no
familiar  ground  of  explanation  as  a  regular  antecedent,  will  be  observed
at  least  as  frequently ;  throughout  large  spheres  of  observation  changes
succeed  each  other  in  the  most  varied  diversity  and  our  expectations
continue  to  be  bitterly  deceived.  If  we  had  needed  merely  to  open
our  eyes  in  order  to  see  "uniformity  in  the  course  of  Nature"  everywhere
before  us,  belief  in  the  thoroughgoing  constancy  of  the  way  in  which
causes  act  would  not  have  been  so  slow  to  arise  nor  have  been  still
3nly  a  scientific  and  not  a  popular  belief;  nor  would  the  tendency  to
make  capricious  powers,  demons  and  gods,  responsible  for  what  happens
.n  the  universe  have  been  so  deeply  rooted.  No  doubt  instances  of  the
nvariability  of  the  effects  of  certain  causes  are  frequent  enough,  even  in
in  untutored  experience,  to  bring  us  close  to  the  thought  that  like  things  '
ilways  act  in  the  same  way  upon  like  things ;  but  that  thought  becomes
Drominent  not  through  its  generality  in  experience,  but  through  the  value
vhich  regularity  of  effect  has  for  our  practical  needs,  and  for  our  effort
ifter  knowledge.

If  we  disregard  as  remote  from  our  present  subject  those  views  which
'efer  to  the  possibility  of  general  judgments  concerning  a  plurality  of
imilar  things,  then  the  value  belonging  to  the  regularity  of  the  effects
>roduced  by  one  and  the  same  thing  upon  the  same  other  things  depends,
n  the  first  place,  upon  the  value  attaching  to  the  thought  of  invariable
ubstances  (see  the  previous  §).  In  this  alone  the  thought  of  the  thing
ctually  reaches  its  logically  perfect  conclusion,  and  since  the  concept
>f  substance,  when  we  grant  it  as  capable  of  taking  effect,  involves  the
oncept  of  force,  there  results  from  the  invariability  of  substances  the


112


LOGIC


invariability  of  forces;  but  it  follows  from  the  invariability  of  forces  that
given  the  same  relations  the  same  actions  and  effects,  i.e.,  the  same
connected  changes,  must  present  themselves.  Thus  the  definition  of
the  invariability  of  substances  and  their  forces  reduces  itself  to  the
establishment  of  a  law,  according  to  which  given  actions  depend  upon
given  relations.  Thus  law  is  the  expression  of  force,  the  formula  in  which
we  state  the  one  permanent  ground  of  manifold  changes.

In  such  laws  the  assumption  of  necessity  as  the  ultimate  ground  of  that
invariability  and  regularity  is  expressed  in  the  only  comprehensible  way.
When  we  regard  some  particular  event  as  an  instance  of  efficient  action
the  relation  of  necessity  which  obtains  between  the  ground  and  its  con
sequence  first  appears  in  the  form  of  the  constraint  which  the  object
of  the  action  undergoes  ;  it  is  not  a  matter  of  choice  whether  it  will
undergo  the  action  and  change  itself,  it  is  subjected  to  a  power  external
to  itself  which  does  violence  to  it.  But  as  we  proceed  in  our  logical
development  of  the  concept  the  meaning  of  necessity  also  gains  in  depth  ;
when  we  look  for  the  ground  of  their  behaviour  in  the  nature  of  the
things  acting  and  acted  upon,  the  idea  of  external  constraint  vanishes,
and  necessity  appears  as  such  that  both  parts  by  virtue  of  their  nature
are  equally  subjected  to  it  as  to  the  inner  coherency  of  their  essential
determinations.  We  think  of  the  essence  of  a  thing  as  invariable  and
strictly  one,  and  necessity  manifests  itself  in  the  invariability  with  which  like
effects  appear  under  like  conditions.  It  is  here  that  we  find  a  justification
for  extending  the  concept  of  cause  even  to  changing  relations  of  which
it  cannot  be  said  that  they  act,  but  only  that  changes  follow  regularly
upon  them.  The  external  relation  at  first  posited  between  the  things
acting  and  acted  upon  passes  into  one  which  corresponds  to  the  logical
relation  between  the  general  law  and  its  particular  applications,  and  the
necessity  of  the  logical  ground  finds  a  perfect  counterpart  in  the  necessity
with  which  a  given  mode  of  action  follows  from  the  nature  of  things  as
from  a  real  ground.

23.  The  last  point  needed  to  complete  our  logical  elaboration  of  the
concept  of  causality  refers  to  the  quantitative  determination  of  the
relation  of  cause  and  effect.  It  follows  from  the  concept  of  efficient
action  itself  that  the  magnitude  of  the  change  effected  is  the  measure  for
the  action  of  the  cause,  for  it  is  just  this  production  of  change  which
constitutes  the  action.  The  heating  of  a  body  20°  indicates  greater
efficiency  in  the  cause  of  the  heat  than  the  heating  of  the  same  body


CAUSALITY  113

10°,  the  moving  of  a  double  load  with  the  same  velocity  indicates  a
doubled  efficiency  of  the  moving  cause.  At  first  it  is  the  effect  actually
produced  by  which  we  measure  the  actual  efficiency  of  the  cause  ;  after
wards,  assuming  regularity  in  the  causal  relation  and  invariability  in  the
things  acting,  we  refer  action  to  the  capacity  which  things  have  of  action
and  expect  the  same  result  from  the  same  conditions,  and  then  we  frame
a  universally  valid  proposition  in  which  the  measure  of  the  capacity
for  action  under  given  conditions  is  determined  by  the  magnitude  of  the
possible  future  result.  A  mass  moving  with  a  given  velocity  possesses
the  power  of  imparting  a  given  velocity  to  another  mass  with  which  it
comes  in  contact ;  a  compressed  spring  when  released  the  power  of
lifting  a  given  weight  a  certain  height.  This  measure  of  capacity  for
work  which  is  given  in  a  particular  state  is  called  energy,  to  distinguish
it  from  constant  force.  Though  we  speak  in  the  first  case  of  kinetic,  in
:he  second  of  potential,  energy,  we  must  remember  that  in  both  cases
ilike  we  have  included  a  hypothetical  element  in  our  concept ;  even  the
noving  body  only  works  if  it  comes  into  contact  with  another,  just  as
:he  spring  only  works  if  it  is  released,  and  so  far  the  antithesis  between
cinetic  and  potential  energy  is  not  entirely  correct.  The  real  opposite  to
potential  energy  would  be  actual  energy,  and  this  is  to  be  found  only
n  actual  work  done  ;  kinetic  energy  therefore  is  not  actual  energy,  but
s  the  capacity  for  work  of  a  moving  body  as  distinct  from  that  of  a
)ody  at  rest.  Only  if  we  should  think  of  the  movement  of  a  body  itself
.s  a  continuous  exercise  of  its  energy  would  this  be  actual ;  but  to  think
>f  it  in  this  way  is  contrary  to  the  principle  of  inertia.

A  universal  measure  for  the  capacity  for  work  presupposes  that  the
ctual  or  possible  amount  of  the  effect  can  be  reduced  to  a  uniform  unit
'f  measurement.  The  disputes  between  the  schools  of  Descartes  and
..eibnitz  as  to  the  true  measure  of  kinetic  forces  prove  that  it  was  no
asy  matter  to  measure  the  effect,  which  consists  in  movement,  in  such
way  as  to  enable  its  relations  with  the  capacity  for  work  of  the  cause
D  be  harmoniously  determined.  After  this  had  been  successfully  done,
ie  next  undertaking  was  to  reduce  to  the  same  measure  effects  of  quite
nother  sort,  such  as  the  heating  of  a  body,  to  find  the  equivalents  of
ifferent  kinds  of  effects.

The  proposition  that  the  magnitude  of  the  effect  is  the  measure  of  the
:tion  of  the  cause  seems  to  find  another  expression  in  the  proposition
pon  which  J. R.  Mayer  bases  his  treatment  of  the  question  : Causa
s.  L. — n.  i


ii4  LOGIC

czquat  effectum.  By  causa  here  is  certainly  not  meant  the  thing  endowed
with  force  ;  since  the  effect  consists  in  a  change,  movement,  heat,  etc.,  it
cannot  be  equated  to  a  thing ;  it  is  a  measure  not  of  the  thing,  but  of  the
action  of  the  thing.  But  Mayer's  proposition  has  still  another  meaning
which  we  cannot  reach  until  after  further  consideration,  and  this  meaning
rests  upon  the  assumption  that  in  the  sphere  within  which  the  proposition
holds  good  we  have  to  deal  only  with  external  causes  and  with  invariable
subjects  and  objects  of  action.

The  action  of  a  thing  is,  as  such,  not  an  object  of  perception  nor  of
direct  measurement ;  we  know  it  only  by  inference  from  perceptible  change.
But,  if  we  confine  ourself  to  the  mechanical  aspect,  a  body  possesses
capacity  for  work  only  in  so  far  as  it  has  a  definite  velocity,  and  as  the
capacity  depends  upon  the  amount  of  this  velocity,  it  can  be  measured  by
the  velocity  ;  and  inasmuch  as  the  body  loses  its  velocity  in  imparting  it  to
another  body  of  equal  mass,  we  are  able  to  lay  down  the  further  proposition
that  the  capacity  for  work  is  exhausted  in  the  production  of  the  effect —
vis  agenda  consumitur.  In  the  same  way  the  distance  of  a  body  from  some
centre  of  attraction  by  virtue  of  which  it  attains  a  certain  velocity  admits
of  direct  measurement;  here  again  it  is  the  measure  of  the  capacity  for
work,  and  here  again  it  is  exhausted  by  the  actual  fall,  which  in  its  turn
can  produce  a  further  effect  of  equal  magnitude,  e.g.,  the  lifting  of  an  equal
weight  to  the  same  height.  On  the  other  hand,  it  follows  from  the  assump
tion  of  merely  external  causes  that  the  capacity  for  work  of  a  body  cannot
be  exhausted  except  by  the  production  of  an  effect ;  but  the  effect  itself
represents  a  further  capacity  for  work,  so  when  a  change  is  communicated
from  one  body  to  another  the  amount  of  energy  remains  intact.  When
a  state  which  we  know  to  be  capable  of  work,  such  as  the  movement  of  a
body,  vanishes,  it  must  have  produced  an  equivalent  effect ;  it  cannot  at
one  time,  say  in  contact  with  an  elastic  body,  elicit  an  equivalent  motion
by  the  loss  of  its  own,  and  at  another  time,  in  contact  with  an  unelastic
body,  have  no  effect  at  all.  Its  energy  must  be  preserved  in  some  form  or
another,  and  it  is  so  preserved  by  being  changed  into  heat,  which  in  its
turn  may  again  be  transformed  into  motion.  It  is  of  the  capacity  for  work
which  is  conditioned  by  given  states  of  substances — motion,  spatial  dis
connection,  heat,  chemical  dissociation — that  the  proposition  holds  good
"  ex  nihilo  nihil  fit,  nihil  fit  ad  nihilum"

From  what  Mayer  says  in  his  first  treatise  (1842),  we  cannot  doubt  that
he  thought  his  results  were  obtained  from  truths  of  axiomatic  validity,


CAUSALITY  115

and  that  in  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat  he  merely  proved  empirically
what  followed  of  necessity  from  his  principles.  The  starting  point  is  the
indestructibility  of  energy  ;  but  then  it  has  to  be  shown  empirically  what
states  or  changes  are  to  be  regarded  as  energy,  and  what  are  the  quantita
tive  relations  which  obtain  between  them.

We  shall  have  to  discuss  later  on  (§§  97^  and  too)  to  what  extent  the
validity  of  the  principle  of  the  indestructibility  of  energy  can  be  main
tained,  and  what  consequences  it  has  for  the  methods  of  discovery  of
causal  laws.  Here  we  have  only  to  point  out  that  the  principle  of
conservation  of  energy,  which  gives  us  a  general  principle  by  which  to
determine  the  causal  relation  between  the  successive  states  of  different
substances,  does  not  contradict,  but  presupposes  the  concept  of  force  as
the  permanent  relation  of  substances.  Only  on  this  assumption  can
spatial  disconnection  or  chemical  separation  be  regarded  as  potential
energy.  Gravity  is  not  exhausted  by  taking  effect ;  it  is  only  the  capacity
of  a  heavy  body  to  attain  a  constantly  increasing  velocity  which  diminishes
with  approximation  to  the  earth,  and  vanishes  when  it  falls  upon  it ;  what
vanishes  is  not  gravity,  but  the  space  for  falling,  the  condition  under
which  gravity  takes  effect

24.  Our  investigation  of  the  idea  of  efficient  action  has  shown  us  its
close  connection  with  the  idea  of  the  thing,  and  the  similarity  of  the
motives  by  which  the  two  ideas  are  to  be  explained. In  the  one  our  aim
is  to  combine  in  a  unity  elements  which  are  presented  as  together  in  space,
which  appear  in  one  and  the  same  place,  and  which  persist  continuously
in  time  or  change  without  a  break,  thus  thinking  of  the  different  elements
connected  in  this  way  as  proceeding  from  one  ground. In  the  other  we
have  to  combine  in  like  manner  the spatially  and  temporally  connected
changes  of  different  things,  and  to  explain  them  by  one  ground  of  unity.
The  universality  with  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  this  takes  place,  with
which  ideas  of  things  are  formed,  and  their  simultaneous  changes  explained
as  the  action  of  one  upon  the  other,  indicate  a  necessity grounded  in
thought  itself;  and  this  necessity  is ultimately  based  upon  the  fact  that
only  in  this  form  can  we  grasp  the  thought  that  what  we  perceive  is,  by
finding  in  the  given  itself  a  ground  which  corresponds  to  the  comprehen
sion  by  self-consciousness  of  the  manifold which  is  continously  extended
in  space  and  time.

25.  So  far  the principle  that  "  everything  which  is,  is  a  thing  with
attributes  and  activities,"  is  primarily  only  the  expression  of  the  internal


n6  LOGIC

necessity  by  which  we  form  the  idea  of  things,  and  so  far  it  is  a  priori ;
and  the  particular  form  which  we  give  to  this  idea  in  dealing  with  the
external  world  finds  utterance  in  the  principle  that  "two  different
things  cannot  occupy  the  same  position  in  space."  But  how  in  particular
cases  the  reference  of  perceptions  to  things  is  to  be  carried  out  cannot  be
deduced  from  this  general  statement,  and  we  are  therefore  called  upon  to
consider  with  respect  to  the  particular  nature  of  what  is  given  whether
and  in  what  manner  it  necessitates  one  definite  kind  of  reference.  This  is
what  we  saw  to  be  the  methodological  question  as  to  the  rules  according  to
which  the  concept  of  the  thing  must  be  formed,  if  it  is  to  be  formed  in  a  per
fectly  logical  and  unambiguous  manner.  We  found  that  we  should  obtain
perfectly  definite  concepts,  such  as  would  best  meet  the  needs  of  thought,
if  we  could  refer  everything  to  absolutely  simple  and  invariable  substances  ;
but  whether  we  can  succeed  in  doing  this  is  another  question,  and  the
necessity  of  such  predicates  cannot  be  inferred  from  the  concept  of  sub
stance.  Indeed,  our  needs  might  be  satisfied  also,  though  in  a  less
comprehensible  manner,  by  things  or  unities  possessing  (like  the  monads  of
Leibnitz)  the  ground  of  their  changes  within  themselves  as  an  inner  law  of
development ;  and  only  the  nature  of  what  is  given  can  determine  which
of  the  two  assumptions  best  serves  our  purpose,  or  whether  perhaps  some
of  the  phenomena  admit  of  the  former  explanation,  while  others  admit  of
the  latter  only.  We  shall,  however,  be  methodologically  justified  in
endeavouring  to  make  use  of  the  most  perfect  form  of  explanation  every
where.

26.  Still  less  is  it  possible  to  derive  from  the  motives  which  lead  us  to
the  idea  of  efficient  action  any  one  sure  guide  for  our  methods,  which  will
admit  of  only  one  possibility.  Here  is  the  place  to  discuss  the  meaning
and  truth  of  the  so-called  causal  principle.

1  The  sphere  within  which  this  principle  is  to  hold  good  is  certainly  the
existent,  and  it  presupposes,  therefore,  that  something  should  be  thought
as  existing.  It  is  in  this  way  that  its  sphere  is  distinguished  from  that
of  the  logical  ground,  which  refers  only  to  thought,  no  matter  whether  this
thought  is  of  what  exists  or  not.  Moreover,  as  we  see  it  in  the  first  place
and  immediately,  thought  is  something  original  and  ultimate  ;  of  an
existent  we  can  only  speak  in  so  far  as  we  think  it,  and  even  if  we  regard
our  own  thought  as  existent,  inasmuch  as  it  is  an  activity  in  time  of  an
existing  Ego,  yet  we  do  so  only  by  means  of  a  thought  of  which  this
existing  thought  is  the  object.  Thus  we  have  to  do  here  with  a


CAUSALITY  117

principle  which  does  not  apply  to  thought  as  such,  but  to  that  which  is
thought  of  as  existing.

We  need  not  discuss  the  question  how  the  thought  that  something  is
arises  ;  l  we  may  confine  ourselves  to  the  fact  that  it  is  always  present
and  also  that  what  is  perceived  in  space  and  time  is  always  said  to  be.
It  is  to  this  that  the  causal  principle,  however  understood,  refers.

As  the  principle  is  most  generally  understood,  and  as  it  is  stated  by
Leibnitz,  it  tells  us  that  for  everything  which  is,  there  is  a  ground  which
determines  why  it  is,  rather  than  is  not,  and  why  it  exists  in  one  way  rather
than  in  another ;  2  and  by  "ground  "  (ratio sufficiens]  Leibnitz  means  nothing
else  than  that  which  enables  us  to  see  that  the  existent  is  necessarily,  and
such  as  it  is.

Leibnitz  assumes  here  that  the  existent  consists  of  substances  and  their
changes.  What  he  looks  for  is  something  which  will  enable  us  to  under
stand  that  substances  are  such  as  they  are,  and  that  events  occur.

But  this  tells  us  as  yet  nothing  as  to  the  direction  in  which  the  ground
is  to  be  sought,  nor  as  to  the  nature  of  the  necessary  connection.

It  appears  from  what  we  have  said  that  the  effort  to  understand  the
perceived  as  necessary,  to  find  a  ground  from  which  the  given  follows  of
necessity,  is  always  at  work,  and  manifests  itself  even  in  the  formation
of  the  idea  of  a  thing.  It  is  true  that  we  did  not  begin  with  the  universal
form  of  the  principle,  but  with  the  procedure  which  starts  from  particular
objects  ;  but  the  motive  of  this  procedure  is  none  other  than  to  find  satis
faction  by  understanding  the  necessity  of  the  given.

When  we  become  conscious  of  this  impulse,  which  acts  at  first  instinc
tively  and  in  particular  cases,  and  when  the  satisfaction  which  follows  it
is  taken  as  a  universal  aim,  then  we  can  derive  from  it  the  generality  of
the  principle  that  we  ought  to  understand  everything  as  necessary  by
finding  its  ground ;  and  as  we  cannot  rationally  seek  a  ground  unless  one
is  there,  the  assumption  follows  that  everything  has  its  ground,  from  which
it  proceeds  of  necessity.

What  do  we  include  in  "  everything  "  ? Our  analysis  of  the  concept  of

1  Cf.  I,  §  12,  7,  p.  72  sq.  Schopenhauer's  attempt  to  show  that  the  assumption  of
external  objects  first  arises  from  the  principle  of  causality  (an  attempt  of  which  we  have
already  spoken  from  another  point  of  view,  I,  §  48,  4,  p.  320  sq. )  moves  in  a  circle  in  so
far  as  it  starts  from  the  assumption  that  our  sensations  are  subjective ;  this  already  in
volves  the  antithesis  between  an  existing  object  and  the  subject,  and  all  that  can  be  done
is  to  determine  how  such  an  object  is  constituted,  not  to  infer  its  existence.

1  Cf.  I,  §  32,  p.  189.


n8  LOGIC

necessity  in  the  preceding  volume1  has  shown  us  that  the  demand  to
understand  "everything"  as  necessary  involves  an  insoluble  problem.
Every  ground  which  enables  us  to  understand  something  existing  as  neces
sary  breaks  up  into  an  existent  which  is  assumed,  and  the  relation  of
connection  with  its  consequence  which  makes  this  consequence  neces
sary  ;  somewhere  or  other  we  must  come  to  an  end  with  a  simply  existent.
Thus  the  "  everything"  needs  restriction,  and  this  we  shall  find  by  pur
suing  the  way  upon  which  we  have  entered.  Permanent  and  variable
perceptions  are  referred  to  things.  These  things  themselves  stand  in
spatial  and  temporal  order  ;  thus  a  ground  of  unity  may  be  sought  for
their  plurality,  and  for  their  spatial  and  temporal  co-existence,  and  in
this  way  we  arrive  at  the  one  substance  of  which  all  particular  things  are
parts  or  accidents.  This  one  substance  is  absolute  ;  in  it  is  grounded
everything  having  particular  existence,  things  as  well  as  their  changes  ;
it  stands  to  the  whole  perceptible  universe  in  the  same  relation  as  for
our  ordinary  apprehension  the  particular  thing  to  its  parts,  attributes,  and
activities.

The  alternative  is  to  maintain  these  substances  in  all  their  plurality  and
particularity  ;  then  their  co-existence  demands  still  more  imperatively  a
ground  which  is  sought  in  the  World  Creator  of  Leibnitz,  or  some  kindred
idea.  But  this  ground  simply  is.

If  we  are  to  regard  both  views  as  issuing  from  the  same  causal  prin
ciple,  it  is  evident  that  the  term  "  causa "  merely  presupposes  being
grounded  in  quite  a  general  manner;  it  does  not  determine  the  manner  of
being  grounded.  Something  may  be  grounded  in  the  same  way  in  which
the  connected  existence  of  a  thing  is  grounded  by  the  unity  of  the  thing,
but  it  may  also  be  grounded  by  a  relation  to  an  effective  cause,  which  pro
duces  something  external  to  itself.

The  same  distinction  holds  good  even  when  we  narrow  the  sphere  of
application,  and  accept  substances  as  the  simply  existing,  asking  only  as
to  the  ground  of  that  which  they  are.  Here,  again,  we  may  find  a  ground
in  two  ways ;  we  may  refer  everything  either  to  the  nature  of  the  sub
stances,  which  develop  a  series  of  states,  either  permanent  or  varying,  or
to  their  relations,  by  virtue  of  which  states  or  changes  which  appear  to
gether  are  necessary.

The  proposition  that  every  change  has  a  cause  cannot,  therefore,  mean

1  Cf.  i,  §  33,  p.  196  sq.


CAUSALITY  119

that  every  change  of  a  thing  must  have  an  external  cause,  must  depend
upon  the  action  of  another  thing.  Nothing  but  actual  experiment  can
show  whether  the  one  or  the  other  kind  of  reference  leads  to  a  consis
tent  view.  Indeed,  our  analysis  of  the  concept  of  efficient  action  has
shown  us  that  a  ground  which  is  merely  external  to  a  thing  leads  to  con
tradictions.  Thus  in  the  course  of  these  considerations  the  meaning  of
the  words  cause  and  effect  and  their  synonyms  has  been  extended  still
further.  A^cause  means  primarily  a  thing,  in  so  far  as  it  acts  upon
anothej.  and  what  we  regard  as  effect  is  a  change  which  is  produced  in
a  thing  from  without  by  the  action  of  another.  Thus  our  remarks  in
this  paragraph  apply  first  (1-23)  to  the  concept  of  the  causa  transiens.

But  in  the  conceptual  determination  of  this  thought  we  found  on  the
one  hand  that  the  ground  of  the  effect  cannot  be  entirely  outside  the  ob
ject  of  the  action,  on  the  other  hand  that  we  were  led  to  think  of  a
thing  as  producing  change  by  itself,  in  virtue  of  its  nature ;  and  thus  the
terms  were  extended  to  apply  to  a  thing  as  itself  the  ground  of  its  own
determinations,  and  this  in  a  two-fold  sense.  In  the  first  place,  the  thing
is  the  cause  of  its  own  activities  in  so  far  as  they  follow  from  its  nature
alone  ;  thus  Spinoza's  substance  is  the  cause  of  all  its  modes,  but  it  is  the
causa  immanens,  and  even  causa  libera,  in  so  far  as  it  cannot  be  deter
mined  to  action  by  anything  external ;  in  the  second  place,  however,  a
given  state  or  action  of  the  substance  appears  as  the  ground  of  following
states  or  activities,  which  proceed  from  it  of  necessity,  and  of  which  it
is  therefore  called  the  cause.  To  take  Spinoza's  example,  the  under
standing  is  the  immanent  cause  of  the  thoughts  which  it  creates  ;  but  in
another  sense  a  thought  may  also  be  called  the  cause  of  another
thought  which  necessarily  follows  from  it.  If  in  this  latter  sense  we  call
one  given  state  of  a  substance  developing  its  activities  from  itself,  the
cause  of  the  following  state,  we  can  still  find  the  necessity  of  the  con
nection  only  in  the  nature  of  the  substance  manifesting  itself  in  this  regular
succession  of  its  activities  upon  one  another.

27.  Neither  the  proposition  that  everything  has  its  external  cause  (in
the  sense  of  causa  transiens},  nor  the  proposition  that  everything  (in  the
sense  of  causa  immanent)  must  be  explained  as  the  necessary  development
of  its  own  nature,  can  claim  to  have  the  validity  of  a  universal  principle
which  is  necessary  for  thought.  Only  the  general  stipulation  that  the
given  must  be  understood  as  necessary  can  make  good  its  claim  to  be
regarded  as  absolutely  universal  from  the  nature  of  thought,  and  this  is


120  LOGIC

so  only  in  the  form  of  a  postulate,  of  which  the  meaning  finally  proves  to
be  that  the  plurality  of  perceptions  must  be  combined  according  to  prin
ciples  of  unity.  Any  more  definite  ideas  of  the  rules  according  to  which
things  and  their  changes  must  be  referred  to  "  causes  "  can  only  be  verified
by  the  material  of  our  perceptions  themselves.  The  conception  of
efficient  action  arises  naturally  as  one  form  of  this  reference,  on  the
ground  of  the  already  presupposed  conception  of  things ;  logical  elabora
tion  may  make  it  precise  and  clear,  but  how  it  is  to  be  applied  so  that  we
may  be  certain  of  the  necessity  of  what  we  are  doing  is  a  question  which
cannot  be  answered  beforehand  and  from  general  principles.  Its  place  is
not  in  the  investigation  of  conceptual  elements,  but  in  the  investigation  of
the  universal  judgments  through  which  we  endeavour  to  know  the  per
ceived  as  it  is  actually  constituted.

28.  It  is  never  possible — though  the  attempt  has  often  been  made  since
Wolff's  time — to  reduce  the  relations  of  ground  and  consequence,  whether
in  the  sphere  of  logic  or  of  reality,  to  that  of  identity,  if  we  are  to  under
stand  this  term  in  all  the  strictness  of  its  meaning.  In  this  strict  meaning
upon  which  is  based  the  formula  A  is  A,  it  signifies  that  what  is,  or  is
thought,  is  absolutely  the  same ;  but  a  ground  aims  at  combining  that
which  is  different  and  distinguishable,  whether  in  the  form  of  the  thing,
which  is  the  unifying  ground  partly  of  states  which  are  only  temporally
distinguishable,  having  the  same  content,  partly  of  attributes  which  exist
together  in  time  but  differ  in  content,  and  partly  of  variable  states  which
differ  both  in  content  and  in  time  ;  or  in  the  form  of  causality  by  virtue  of
which  one  determination  follows  as  necessary  from  another.  The  propo
sition  of  J.  R.  Mayer,  "  causa  cequat  effectum"  expresses  no  identity ;  he
does  not  regard  movement  and  heat  as  identical,  but  only  as  compar
able  ;  and  this  only  with  respect  to  their  capacity  for  work.  When  in  the
sphere  of  logic  the  ground  is  obvious  as  necessarily  producing  the  con
sequence,  or  when  affirmation  annuls  the  opposite  negation,  we  have  no
repetition  of  the  same,  but  necessity  combining  different  acts.  When  the
conclusion  follows  from  the  premises,  the  ground  is  the  relation  between
the  general  and  special  concepts.  And  this  again  is  a  relation,  not  of
identity,  but  of  distinguishable  objects  of  thought;  this  is  most  obvious
when,  as  with  number,  the  production  of  the  general  concept  is  neces
sarily  accompanied  by  the  whole  series  of  its  differentiations.  The  general
concept  of  number  is  not  identical  with  that  of  the  particular  numbers  ;
each  of  these  is  formed  in  a  particular  manner,  but  according  to  one  law.


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS  121

To  refer  all  necessity  to  the  relation  of  identity,  is  to  maintain  the  Eleatic
doctrine,  which  denies  plurality  and  becoming. 1

§  74-

The  analysis  of  PSYCHOLOGICAL  CONCEPTS  into  simple  elements  pre
supposes  the  conscious  reference  of  internal  events  and  states  to  the  one
ego,  and  all  it  can  aim  at  doing  is  to  discriminate  those  given  acts  and
affections  which  cannot  for  our  consciousness  be  broken  up  into  further
distinguishable  elements.

We  must  carefully  distinguish  between  the  problems  of  this  conceptual
analysis  and  those  involved  in  the  explanation  of  inner  events  from  simple
elements  which  are  only  assumed.  To  state  the  conditions  under  which
certain  psychical  phenomena  develop  cannot  help  us  in  determining  their
content ;  it  is  only  an  expedient  by  which  in  our  analysis  of  concepts  we
give  reality  to  the  idea  of  inner  states,  and  are  enabled  to  remember
them.

In  so  far  as  in  self-consciousness  we  refer  ourselves  in  different  ways  to
something  which  is  different  from  ourselves,  there  is  a  ground  for  the
distinction  between  the  form  and  content  (or  object)  of  our  inner  acti
vities.

An  exact  determination  of  those  psychological  elementary  concepts,
which  appear  as  simple  forms  of  our  action,  is  rendered  difficult  by  the
complication  of  this  action  with  the  functions  by  means  of  which  it  comes
into  consciousness,  and  by  the  varying  degree  of  energy  of  these  functions.
We  shall  find  most  help  towards  a  complete  analysis  in  considering  the
results  of  our  psychical  activities,  since  what  is  distinguishable  in  these
indicates  distinguishable  activities.

The  application  of  mathematics  to  psychology,  and  the  utilization  of
mathematical  methods  within  its  sphere,  is  excluded  by  the  peculiar  nature
of  the  subject.

In  so  far  as  particular  psychical  acts  are  regarded  as  arising  out  of  each
other  according  to  law,  and  as  being  grounded  upon  each  other,  the
general  causal  conception  is  applied  to  psychical  life  also  ;  but  the  causal
concepts  which  develop  in  this  connection  must  be  distinguished  from
those  by  which  we  connect  material  events.

i. The  conceptual  elements  so  far  considered  are  those  to  which  we  are

1  See  Appendix  E.


i22  LOGIC

led  by  the  analysis  of  ideas  referring  to  the  external  world.  Far  greater
difficulties  meet  us  when  we  attempt  to  reduce  the  processes  given  in  self-
consciousness  as  our  own  inner  action  to  simple  and  fixed  concepts,  of
which  we  could  be  sure  that  they  were  the  same  for  all.  It  has  frequently
been  pointed  out  (and  sometimes  in  an  exaggerated  manner)  that  the
sphere  within  which  inner  events  can  be  immediately  perceived  is  incon
veniently  limited  to  the  individual,  and  that  even  within  this  sphere  there
are  many  hindrances  to  the  exact  observation  and  accurate  comparison  of
our  mental  states ;  so  that  there  is  no  object  in  repeating  these  complaints.
What  we  are  here  concerned  with  is  the  question  what  we  have  to  look  for
in  the  course  of  our  analysis  of  psychological  concepts,  and  by  what  means
we  may  hope  to  find  it.

2.  The  first  task  in  establishing  psychological  concepts  must  be  to
determine  what  we  find  in  immediate  self-consciousness  in  a  way  which
may  be  unambiguous  and  the  same  for  all,  and  in  this  way  to  obtain  predi
cates  with  which  to  express  the  states  and  activities  which  we  refer  to
ourselves  as  subjects.  An  analysis  directed  towards  this  end  presupposes
that  we  have  in  immediate  self-consciousness  ideas  of  ourselves,  our  states
and  activities,  which  show  a  manifold  content ;  that  in  every  moment  of
our  waking  life  there  is  present  to  us  not  merely  a  surrounding  external
world,  but  clearly  distinguished  from  this  the  self  as  the  subject  of  states
and  activities  of  which  we  are  immediately  aware.  Language,  when  we
come  to  examine  it,  offers  a  surprising  wealth  of  names  for  particular  inner
states  and  processes,  as  well  as  for  the  peculiarities  by  which  individuals
are  distinguished  in  their  inner  life,  for  particular  transitory  events,  as
well  as  for  more  permanent  dispositions  of  temper  and  mood,  or  for  the
varying  degrees  of  intensity  of  our  total  energy — a  wealth  which  seems
at  first  to  contradict  the  complaints  alluded  to.  If  such  varied  inner
experiences  have  already  found  distinguishing  names  in  popular  lan
guage,  and  if  the  descriptions  of  inner  events  which  are  depicted  by
the  help  of  these  names  are  understood,  and  can  give  us  intuitable
pictures  of  an  alien  life  without  our  being  able  to  have  an  immedi
ate  intuition  of  it  as  of  our  own,  then  neither  the  limited  horizon
of  the  particular  individual  nor  the  difficulty  of  apprehending  inner  states
can  be  such  an  important  and  insuperable  obstacle  to  the  development  of
manifoldly  different  ideas  which  shall  yet  be  the  same  for  each  person.
And  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  the  state  of  scientific  psychology,  the  wide
divergence  of  different  theories  in  the  questions  of  classification  of


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS  123

psychical  phenomena,  and  the  absence  of  fixed  concepts  known  by  gener
ally  accepted  names,  prove  sufficiently  that  the  problem  of  establishing  a
system  of  simple  and  unambiguous  conceptual  elements,  together  with
well-determined  forms  of  synthesis,  has  not  yet  been  solved,  and  that  logic
can  therefore  hardly  be  called  upon  to  describe  the  methods  by  which
psychological  concepts  are  formed.

3. But  logic  both  may  and  should  undertake  to  warn  us  against  a  con
fusion  of  the  problems  towards  the  solution  of  which  we  need  methods  in
'••  psychology. The  first  and  most  fundamental  task  of  psychology  has  often
:been  neglected  and  confused  with  more  remote  problems,  because  psycho
logical  investigation  has  been  more  directed  towards  explaining  phenomena
than  towards  analysing  them  and  reducing  the  object  of  self-apprehension
to  fixed  concepts. It  often  happens  that  the  aim  which  the  psychologist
has  in  view  is  to  exhibit  a  process of  development,  in  which  composite
phenomena  are  gradually  produced  from purely  elementary  acts  of  the
implest  kind,  as  a  plant  is  produced  from  cells  or  a  tissue  from  threads  ;
nd  inasmuch  as  this  development  cannot  be  directly  observed,  the  objects
iven  to  consciousness  being  already  the  results  of  a  long  process  of  con
traction  depending  upon  innumerable  conditions,  a  hypothetical method
5  introduced,  and  the  hypotheses  employed  are  generally  determined  by
metaphysical  propositions. In  this  respect  the  Herbartian  psychology  falls
ehind  the  views  which  it  combats. Though  it  has  done  great  service  in
ccepting  as  the  ultimate  and  proper  aim  of  psychology  the  investigation
f  the  causal  connection  of  what  actually  takes  place,  instead  of  the  mere
lassification  of  psychical  phenomena,  which  was  what  Psychology  as  the
octrine  of  the  faculties  of  the  mind  first  aimed  at ;  and  though  it  has
stablished  many  valuable  observations  of  particular  facts,  yet  the  method
y  which  it  undertook  to  construct  that  which  we  find  from  an  assumed
implicity  which is  nowhere  to be  found,  was  entirely  arbitrary. The
orced  interpretations  put  upon  the  processes  of  feeling  and  volition,  and
construction  of  the  fact  of  self-consciousness  which,  though  acute,  yet
voids the  kernel of the question, were  necessary consequences  of  a
lethod  which,  swayed  by  metaphysical  presuppositions  as  to  the  essence
f  the  soul  and  the  nature  of  its  self-conservations  and  their  relations  to
ach  other,  proceeded  by  mere  construction,  without  having  first  ensured
be  possibility  of  comparison  between  the  results  of  the  construction  and
lie  actual  facts  by  establishing  exact  concepts  for  the  Jatter  through  an
nalysis  of  the  immediately  given.


124  LOGIC

But  the  work  of  reflecting  upon  the  genesis  of  mental  processes,  and  of
finding  the  laws  according  to  which  they  follow  upon  external  conditions
or  upon  each  other  and  combine  together,  is  essentially  other  than  that  of
analysing  the  contents  of  what  we  apprehend  as  consciously  experienced
at  every  moment  and  of  applying  clear  concepts  to  distinguishable  ele
ments.  The  prism  teaches  us  that  white  is  a  composite  colour,  and  that
the  sensation  of  white  arises  when  a  combination  of  spectral  colours  in
certain  relations  strikes  upon  the  eye ;  but  we  cannot  construct  the  sensa
tion  of  white  from  the  ideas  of  the  spectral  colours,  nor  would  any  analysis
of  the  idea  of  "white"  help  us  to  discover  in  it  the  conditions  of  its
genesis.  White,  as  a  fact  of  sensation,  is  something  absolutely  simple,  co
ordinate  to  other  colours,  and  the  nature  of  the  sensation  is  not  made  more
comprehensible  by  a  description  of  its  genesis  ;  all  we  can  do  is  to  estab
lish  the  fact  that  under  certain  conditions  it  always  arises.  It  is  the  same
with  the  ideas  of  our  inner  states  ;  the  number  of  presuppositions  upon
which  the  actual  coming  to  pass  of  an  inner  event  depends  does  not  in
volve  the  same  number  of  conceptual  elements  in  the  idea  of  this  event;
the  unpleasant  feeling  awakened  by  the  dissonance  of  two  notes  or  two
colours  is  not  a  composite  note  or  a  composite  colour,  and  the  inner
experience  to  which  it  gives  rise  cannot  be  resolved  into  colours  or  notes
as  its  elements.

4.  Nevertheless  there  is  some  ground  for  the  tendency  to  substitute  for
an  analysis  of  the  ideas  of  mental  events  the  enumeration  of  the  conditions
under  which  they  arise,  and  hence  (for  example)  to  speak  of  feelings  and
acts  of  volition  as  relations  of  the  ideas  from  which  they  result,  instead
of  states  and  activities  of  the  Ego.  The  peculiarly  difficult  circumstances
under  which  we  have  to  work  in  a  logical  determination  of  our  psycho
logical  concepts  makes  it  necessary  to  employ  a  statement  of  the  con
ditions  of  particular  events,  as  a  help — not  towards  analysing  the  content
of  the  idea,  but  to  enable  us  to  rouse  the  idea  itself  and  keep  it  before
us,  and  to  ensure  agreement  as  to  the  use  of  terms.  What  I  immediately
experience  at  any  moment  is  but  little,  and  even  memory  can  only  give
me  a  successive  intuition  of  previous  experience,  the  familiar  and  fre
quently  occurring  being  more  easily  recalled  than  events  which  are  rare
and  which  deviate  from  the  daily  routine.  Before  these  can  be  recalled
at  all,  and  compared  with  others,  there  is  no  other  way,  where  the  term
denoting  them  has  not  yet  been  sufficiently  defined,  than  to  remember
the  conditions  under  which  the  event  is  wont  to  occur,  thus  exciting  the


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS  125

eproduction  of  what  has  been  experienced,  unless,  indeed,  as  sometimes

lappens  we  can  succeed  in  directly  producing  the  actual  event,  as in

•xperiment. We  generally  choose  the latter  way where  it  is  possible

o  elicit  definite  psychical  effects  by  voluntarily  bringing  about  the  external

onditions. The  process  by  which  we  compare  and  conceptually  deter-

nine  sensations  depends  upon  our  knowledge  of  invariable  external  con-

.itions  which  will  regularly  give  rise  to  the  subjective  events  of  sensation  ;

nd  in  order  to  maintain  our  concepts  and  to  subsume  new  perceptions

nder  them, we  are  always  obliged to  actually  produce  the  sensations

efore  we  can  compare  them  with  confidence,  as  when  we  bring  together

given  note  and  the  note  of  a  tuning-fork,  or  a  given  colour  and  a

olour  of  the  spectrum. In  the  same  way  we  produce  at  will  the  pleasant

nd  unpleasant  feelings  of  consonance and  dissonance,  or  give  rise  by

ic  stereoscope  to  the  illusion  of  the  third  dimension. These  expedients

Drrespond  to  demonstrative  experiment,  which  is  merely  intended  to  bring

efore  intuition  events  which  do  not  present  themselves  at  every  moment

i  the  course  of  nature. Allied  to them  are  the  experimental  methods,

hich  help  us  to  analyse  given facts  of  consciousness  into  their  simple

ements, and  make  us  realize  our  tendency  to  accept  as  simple,  facts

hich  conceal  a  plurality  of distinguishable  elements  ; such, to recall

,e  most  familiar  instances,  are  the  methods  of  analysing  a  chord  into  its

mstituent  notes,  or  the proof  that  certain  supposed  sensations  of  taste

e  compounded of  tastes  and smells — by a process of  isolation we

parate  the  elements.

5. But  throughout  a  large  part  of  our  mental  life  it  is  impossible,  from

e  nature  of  the  case,  to  evoke  our  inner  states  at  will,  and  so  compare

nat  they  contain. The  feelings  of  liking  and  dislike,  of  love  and  hate,

the  excitement  of  resolution  to  important  actions  are  not  the  simple

suits,  always  recurring  in  the  same  way,  of  a  few  circumstances  which

n  easily  be  brought  about. If  they  have  ever  been  experienced  at  all

ey  can  be  recalled  intuitably  only  by  recollection  of  the  whole  state  of

e  individual ;  the  idea  can  be  re-animated  only  by  a  return  to  the  con-

tions  of  the  individual. In this  way, no  doubt,  the  investigation  of

usal  connections  in  our  psychical  life  serves  to  clear  up  the  meanings  of

rrent expressions, and  a  general statement of  the  conditions  under

lich  certain  events  occur  enables  us  to  survey  more  easily  the  sphere

lich  is  occupied  by  different  modifications  of  a  general  concept ;  but  such

statement  of  conditions  is  not  conceptual  analysis,  and  cannot  be  sub-


i26  LOGIC

stituted  for  it.  When  I  say  "  the  circle  is  the  line  described  by  the  move
ment  of  one  end  of  a  straight  line  when  it  is  moved  in  a  plane  around  the
other  end,"  then  the  intuition  of  a  circle  arises  within  ideal  space,  and  I
see  its  growth  under  the  stated  condition.  But  when  I  say,  "  fear  is  the
feeling  which  accompanies  the  expectation  of  an  evil  likely  to  occur,"  the
feeling  of  fear  does  not  proceed  from  the  idea  of  this  theoretical  expec
tation  as  something  already  contained  in  it  \  my  proposition,  in  the  guise
of  a  definition  combining  various  characteristics,  lays  down  a  general  rule
of  what  happens,  and  states  that  the  expectation  of  future  evil  always  has
for  its  consequence  that  definite,  and  perhaps  unanalysable  feeling  which
I  call  fear.  From  a  logical  point  of  view  such  a  proposition  resembles
definitions  like  "white  is  the  colour  which  is  formed  from  the  mixture  of  the
spectral  colours,"  or  "  sleep  is  the  state  which  follows  upon  taking  a  given
dose  of  chloral."  Only  if  we  assume  that  mental  states  are  causally  con
nected  in  all  individuals  in  the  same  way,  and  that  every  one  is  conscious
of  a  similar  association  of  their  memories,  can  such  formulas  serve  to
include  all  similar  states  ;  but  these  states  themselves  are  not  brought  into
thought,  nor  is  it  in  any  way  determined  whether  we  have  in  them  simple
conceptual  elements  or  not.  The  definitions  of  Spinoza,  again,  in  the  third
book  of  the  Ethics,  are  not  statements  of  facts  themselves,  but  of  their
conditions.  For  instance,  the  definition  of  amor  as  Icetitia  concomitant*
idea  caus/z  externcz  merely  states  the  generic  concept  and  the  relation
which  gives  rise  to  the  particular  nature  of  amor ;  the  specific  determina
tion  of  love  itself  is  not  given  in  the  definition,  but  merely  developed  from
it  afterwards  as  its  consequence.  Such  statements  are  like  the  formulae
of  chemistry,  which  express  water  as  H2O  ;  we  are  told  merely  what  water
consists  of,  not  what  it  is  ;  it  is  assumed  that  we  already  know  this.

6.  What  we  must  substitute  for  this  causal  explanation  in  our  analysis
of  psychological  concepts  is,  first  of  all,  the  discovery  of  those  ideal
elements  of  our  inner  life  which  can  no  longer  be  regarded  as  a  plurality
of  distinguishable  parts,  as  composed  from  heterogeneous  factors  ;  and  the
investigation  of  the  manner  in  which  these  combine  themselves  into  com
posite  phenomena  for  consciousness.

From  one  point  of  view  we  have  attempted  such  an  analysis.  In  trying
to  find  the  conceptual  elements  which  resulted  from  the  analysis  of  our
idea  of  the  external  world  we  had  to  bear  in  mind  that  this  idea  of  an
external  world,  with  all  its  component  parts,  is  also  a  fact  of  our  conscious
ness,  and  expresses  one  of  our  modes  of  thought ;  we  succeeded  in  breaking


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS  127

up  the  objects  of  thought  into  simple  conceptual  elements  only  in  the
sense  that  we  found  in  the  activity  of  thought  itself  distinguishable  acts
which,  though  never  taking  place  apart,  are  yet  different  and  not  identical
for  reflective  consciousness.  What  we  were  first  called  upon  to  do  was  to
observe  what  we  do,  when  we  have  any  given  idea.  Here  the  content  of
the  object  of  thought,  which  we  could  keep  before  us,  served  to  guide  us
in  our  distinctions ;  in  so  far  as  it  contained  a  plurality  of  distinguishable
elements  we  were  constrained  to  reduce  them  to  a  plurality  of  mental  acts,
which  combine  together  to  produce  the  idea  of  a  composite  whole.  In
this  way  we  discovered  the  activities  which  distinguish  and  re-combine,
the  functions  which  are  active  in  the  ideas  of  space  and  time  ;  and  thus
we  gained  also  psychologically  elementary  concepts,  which  took  the  form
of  activities,  always  connected  in  the  same  way  with  the  most  varied
content  of  that  which  is  discriminated  in  thought  or  represented  as  existing
in  space  and  time.

7.  But  the  canon  which  led  us  here  to  refer  differences  in  the  objects
of  thought  to  differences  in  thought  itself  cannot  be  similarly  applied
throughout  the  whole  sphere.  When,  for  example,  we  have  to  deal  with
simple  sensations,  it  does  not  seem  as  if  to  every  difference  of  content  there
corresponded  an  equivalent  difference  of  activity.  Colours,  notes  and
smells  are  incalculably  manifold  ;  but  in  ordinary  language,  as  in  scientific,
we  speak  of  seeing,  hearing  and  smelling  as  if  these  modes  of  activity
remained  the  same  however  varied  the  colours,  notes  and  smells.  Although
we  never  have  seeing  in  general,  but  always  the  seeing  of  something,  never
hearing  in  general,  but  the  hearing  of  some  particular  sound,  we  find
nevertheless  something  common  to  all  seeing  or  hearing.  We  do  not
think  that  the  hearing  of  a  deep  note  is  another  hearing  than  that  of  a  high
note,  the  seeing  of  a  bright  colour  other  than  that  of  a  dark  grey ;  we  see
something  other  in  either  case,  but  we  do  not  see  otherwise,  Ircpov,  not
£T€pws.  We  are  accustomed  to  express  this  distinction  by  saying  that  the
form  of  our  activity  is  the  same,  that  only  its  content  or  object  differs  ;  and
:he  same  distinction  recurs  throughout  the  whole  sphere  of  psychology  in
he  concepts  of  thought,  will,  etc.

If,  however,  we  try  to  think  of  this  common  and  identical  element  by
tself  we  are  met  by  peculiar  difficulties,  for  we  cannot  imagine  a  seeing
vithout  also  thinking  of  a  visible  which  is  seen,  nor  of  a  hearing  without
ome  sound  which  is  heard.  If  we  say  that  seeing  and  hearing  are  simple
elational  concepts,  and  denote  the  manner  in  which  the  visible  and  audible


128  LOGIC

come  into  consciousness,  the  conscious  reference  of  the  ego  to  the  seen
and  heard,  then  all  distinction  between  seeing  and  hearing  as  the  subjec
tive  form  of  our  relation  to  the  object  would  disappear,  and  only  the
general  relation  of  becoming  conscious  would  remain  ;  the  peculiar  charac
teristics  of  particular  spheres  of  sensation  would  be  dependent  only  on
peculiarities  in  the  objects,  seeing  would  be  the  relation  of  our  conscious
ness  to  colours,  hearing  to  sounds.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  particular
colours  would  yield  no  common  element  other  than  that  of  being  seen,
particular  sounds  none  but  that  of  being  heard  ;  and  thus  we  seem  to  move
in  a  circle.  Nor  can  it  avail  us  to  point  out  that  the  thought  of  seeing  is
accompanied  by  the  idea  of  the  eye,  of  hearing  by  that  of  the  ear,  and
that  certain  sensations  of  touch  or  movement  are  referred  to  the  eye  or  the
ear;  it  does  not  seem  "difficult  to  set  aside  these  subsidiary  ideas,  and  the
distinction  between  seeing  and  hearing  clearly  does  not  consist  merely  in
the  fact  that  the  one  takes  place  through  the  eye,  the  other  through  the
ear,  else  must  the  sensation  of  pressure  on  the  hand  be  specifically  differ
ent  from  that  on  the  foot.

We  cannot,  then,  be  content  either  with  the  view  which  accepts  merely
an  identical  relation  to  various  objects,  for  then  seeing  and  hearing  differ
merely  by  their  object ;  nor  with  the  view  which  relinquishes  the  common
element  in  all  seeing  and  assumes  as  many  kinds  of  seeing  as  there  are
colours.  There  remains  only  to  find  the  identical  element  in  all  seeing  in
a  similar  excitement  of  the  subject,  which  announces  itself  immediately
as  such,  and  which  is  immediately  perceived  as  different  from  the  excite
ment  which  is  common  to  all  hearing.  And  it  is  just  this  purely  subjec
tive  element  which  is  indicated  in  language,  where  seeing  and  hearing  are
treated  as  active  and  transitive  verbs,  and  thus  acknowledged  as  definite
modes  of  action  ;  what  is  expressed  is  not  merely  a  coming  into  conscious
ness,  but  a  taking  up  into  consciousness.  In  this  way  language  itself
contradicts  the  theory  that  we  can  be  conscious  of  the  sound  only,  not  of
hearing  it.  The  physico-psychological  theory,  which  describes  sensations
merely  as  the  effect  of  an  action  exerted  by  external  objects  through  our
sense-organs  upon  consciousness,  is  directly  contradicted  by  the  view
embodied  in  language  which  always  finds  in  sensation  an  act,  issuing
from  the  subject,  and  directed  upon  the  object.  The  simple  fact  that  to
see  and  to  hear  are  used  in  the  imperative  mood  indicates  our  conscious
ness  of  a  volitional  element,  and  it  is  some  time  since  a  careful  psycho
logical  analysis  pointed  out  that  attention  is  one  condition  of  fully  con-


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS  129

scions  seeing  and  hearing.  In  this  way  the  external  reference  to  the  object
must  be  supplemented  by  certain  forms  of  our  purely  subjective  mode  of
being  before  we  can  complete  the  whole  of  that  which  we  regard  as  our
own  share  in  the  process.

8.  This  example  should  serve  to  show  that  the  distinction,  so  familiar
in  psychology,  between  the  form  and the  object  of  our  activity  does  not
straightway  solve all the difficulties which  beset  our  attempt  to  find
identical  and  perfectly  determinate  conceptual  elements  ;  that  it  can  only
be  justified  by  showing  that,  notwithstanding  difference  of  objects,  there
really  exists  for  immediate  consciousness  a  homogeneous  activity. This
difficulty  did  not  occur  with  respect  to  the  functions  of  distinction,  count
ing,  etc.,  because  these  referred  to  a  content  already  given,  and  had  for
object  only  the  recurring  relations  of  this  content.

9.  In  the  sphere  of  presentations,  again,  differences  of  presented  con
tent facilitated  our  investigation  of  the  distinguishable  acts  of  the  sub
jective  activity  at  work  upon  it ;  but  this  help  is  also  withdrawn  when  we
come  to  aspects  of  the  inner  life  which  cannot  be  directly  conceived  as
ideal  relations  to  an  object  distinct  from  ourselves,  but  appear  at  first  as
merely  varying  states of  our  own being,  varying activities  of  our  life,
which are indeed conditioned  and  accompanied by that manifold of
presentation,  but  can  never  be  resolved  into  it. So  far  as  concerns  these
phenomena  of  our  inner  life,  we  can  only  attain  our  purpose  by  observation
of  what  we  do,  and  by  analysing  what  vtefaid  at  any  given  moment. The
terms  used  in  ordinary  language  must  serve  to  help  us  as  clues,  and  a
comprehensive  consideration  of  the  results  of  our  psychical  activities, so
far  as  in  the  forms  of  external  actions  and  products  they  belong  to  the
external  world,  must  guide  our  attention  to  the  source  from  which  they
spring ; this is especially  the  case in spheres of  social activity. A
deficiency  was  recognised  in  the  ordinary  treatment  of  psychology  when
the  psychology  of nations  ( Volkerpsy dialogic]  was initiated  as distinct
from  the  psychology  of  the  individual. What  was meant  by  it  was  that
iman  is  never  found  in  isolation,  and that  the  psychical  events  which  we
actually  find  in  him  are  on  the  one  hand  variously  conditioned  by  com
munity  with  others,  through  which  they  first  arise ;  while  on  the  other  hand
they  themselves  constitute  and  maintain  this  community  and  give  to  it  its
particular  character ;  and  so far  it  was  a  decided  gain to  reclaim for
psychological  treatment  the  spheres  of  language,  customs  and  law. But
:he  antithesis  which appears  is  not  happily  expressed  by  the  antithesis

s.  L.— ii.  K


130  LOGIC

between  the  mind  of  the  individual  and  the  mind  of  the  people  or  the
common  spirit,  and  the  division  between  the  psychology  of  nations  and
that  of  the  individual  is  untenable.  All  psychology  is  of  the  individual,
for  it  can  speak  only  of  what  takes  place  and  is  present  in  consciousness,
and  this  consciousness  can  only  be  that  of  an  individual  of  himself.  But
in  the  stirrings  of  the  individual  life  we  must  undoubtedly  attend  most
carefully  to  those  events,  and  investigate  especially  those  moods  and
efforts  which  determine  the  relation  of  man  to  man,  for  upon  them
depends  the  historical  life  of  mankind.  Here  again,  what  we  have  to
guard  against  is  the  assumption  of  purely  hypothetical  causes  for  com
munity  of  action  amongst  men,  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  our
immediate  consciousness ;  fundamental  psychological  concepts  can  only
be  concepts  of  activities  or  events  which  we  actually  discover  by  reflec
tion  upon  ourselves.

10.  The  first  result  of  such  reflection  will  be  a  number  of  qualitatively
distinguishable  states  and  events,  which  we  are  unable  to  analyse  further,
and  which  therefore  cannot  be  further  described,  but  must  be  experienced
in  their  simplicity  and  denoted  by  the  current  term. The  distinction  al-j
ready  noted  between  form  and  content  recurs  here,  accompanied  by  the!
same  difficulties  ;  we  desire  the  most  varied  objects,  but  the  inner  move-'
ment  which  we  call  desire  seems  to  be  homogeneous ;  our  will  is  directed,
towards  the  most  manifold  ends,  but  the  relation  in  which  we  place  our
selves  towards  the  future  state,  which  we  take  as  an  end,  appears  to  be
always  the  same.

But  it  is  not  principally  here  that  we  find  the  greatest  difficulties  in  our
analysis  of  psychological  concepts.  They  consist  rather  first  in  the  com
plication  of  the  functions  through  which  our  own  activities  come  into  con
sciousness  with  the  activities  themselves ;  and,  secondly,  in  that  relatio
between  the  different  functions  interconnected  in  one  psychical  state  whic
prevents  us  from  accepting  them  as  a  mere  sum  and  from  being  satisfie<
with  an  analysis  of  the  state  into  its  particular  components.

11.  With  reference  to  the  first  point,  the  question  by  which  all  psych
logical  investigation  is  burdened  is  :  whether  the  degree  of  consciousnes
is  the  degree  of  the  conscious  process  itself. On  the  one  hand,  it  appea
a  matter  of  course  that  psychical  events  exist  as  such  only  in  so  far  as  the
are  conscious,  and  that  their  distinctive  character  lies  in  just  this  bein
conscious. We  can  form  no  idea  of  a  seeing  of  which  we  know  abs
lutely  nothing,  a  pain  of  which  we  are  in  no  wise  aware,  an  act  of  volitio


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS  131

which  takes  place  without  our  being  able  to  notice  it  in  any  way,  because
the  seeing  which  we  know  is  given  to  us  only  by  means  of  consciousness,
and  this  consciousness  cannot  be  separated  from  the  thought  of  seeing.  It
is  impossible  to  get  determinate  concepts  of  psychical  activities  or  states
unless  we  presuppose  that  we  are  conscious  of  them  and  thus  have  ideas
of  them,  that  we  can  consciously  distinguish  them  from  each  other  and
recognise  particular  instances  as  of  the  same  kind.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  just  as  indisputable  that  what  we  call  conscious
ness  of  an  inner  event  does  not  always  take  place  in  the  same  way, that
there  are  different  degrees  and  modes  of  becoming  conscious, and  that
therefore  actual  events  may  also  come  into  consciousness  in  different  ways.
When  we  speak  of  consciousness  of  our  actions,  we  think  first  of  cases  in
which  we  say  :  I  see  a  red  light  in  the  sky,  I  hear  thunder,  I  feel  a  touch
on  my  arm,  I  feel  a  sharp  pain  in  my  chest,  I  know  who  stands  before  me,
I  distinguish  different  colours  in  this  stream,  I  remember  this  name,  I  am
pondering  over  this  problem,  I  am  trying  to  lift  this  weight,  I  want  to  be
quiet,  I  will  carry  the  message,  etc. In  such  instances  what  takes  place  is
a  subsumption  of  the  particular  event  under  general  ideas,  by  which  the
form  of  judgment  is  determined;  and,  indeed,  if  the  given  fact  is  to  be
fully  expressed,  not  merely  is  the  particular  form  of  happening  subsumed
under  a  psychological  concept,  but  the  object  to  which  it  refers  is  also
stated,  for  there  is  no  seeing  or  willing  in  general,  but  only  seeing  or  will
ing  of  this  or  that. It  is  cases  such  as  these  which  Herbart  has in  view
when  he  finds  the  essence  of  self-consciousness  in  self-observation  ; this
explains  how  it  is  that  he  can  regard  the  subsumption under  already
Dresent  ideas  as  the  essential  point,  and  can  represent  the  process  as  the
aking  up  of  the  new  idea  into  an  ideal  mass  already  present. But  this  is
lot  the  primary  and  original  process. Before  the  subsumption  can  take
)lace  the  element  to  be  subsumed  must  be  given,  and  it  must  be  given  in
.n  immediate  apprehension  upon  which  the  further  process  of  subsumption
upervenes. Just  as  it  is  not  necessary  to  the  conscious  seeing  of  a  colour,
>r  hearing  of  a  noise,  that  for  every  colour  and  every  noise  there  should  be
concept  already  fixed  in  form  and  provided  with  a  name,  so  it  is  not  a
iccessary  condition  of  a  consciousness  'in  general  that  general  ideas of
>sychical  events  must  be  forthcoming. Such  general  ideas, indeed, can
[  >nly  be  formed  gradually  from  particular  unnamed  perceptions. I  use  the
ames  of  colours  to  say  what  I  see,  not  to  say merely  that  I see some-
:iing ;  and  I  use  the  concept  of  seeing,  pain,  etc.,  to  say  what  goes  on  in


1 32  LOGIC

my  consciousness,  but  not  to  get  an  immediate  knowledge  of  some parti
cular  distinguishable  mental  content.

But  even  with  reference  to  what  comes  into  consciousness  in  this  wa;
without  reflection  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  at  least  indispensable  that ther
should  be  a  discrimination  of  the  particular elements  which co-exist  a
every  moment,  accompanied  by  some  notice  of  them,  before  we  can  speak
of  consciousness. At  every  waking  moment  there  are  given  at  least  sensa
tions  of  touch  and  sight,  and  connected  with  these  slight  feelings  of  comfor
and  discomfort,  as  well  as  memory-images,  and  it  would  seem  that  we  can
hardly  speak  of  a  consciousness  of  all  this  until  these  different  component
have  been  actually  noticed  and  distinguished,  at  any  rate  so  far  as  to  enable
us  to  perceive  them  as  different. This  is  a  necessary  condition  to  thei
being  afterwards  subsumed  under  concepts.

But  closer  consideration  forbids  us  to  limit  even  so  far  as  this  the  con
cept  of  consciousness  in  its  widest  signification.  What  is  to  be  distin
guished  must  already  be  given  in  some  way ;  we  can  create  nothing  b;
making  distinctions,  we  can  only  draw  boundaries  within  what  is  alreadj
given.  Before  we  distinguish  in  the  field  of  vision  different  objects,  o
even  colours,  the  whole  field  must  already  be  somehow  in  consciousness
the  visible  must  make  a  total  impression,  which  we  break  up  by  a  proces
of  distinction  into  its  component  parts.  And  we  cannot  say  that  what  w
do  not  thus  specially  notice  is  therefore  in  no  sense  conscious.  We  d
not  generally,  for  instance,  notice  the  slight  pressure  of  our  clothes,  o
even  of  the  support  upon  which  we  lean,  in  the  sense  that  we  are  consciou
of  them  as  distinct  elements  of  our  given  state ;  but  should  the  pressur
suddenly  cease  we  should  certainly  be  aware  of  it,  and  notice  a  change
But  the  cessation  of  what  is  absolutely  unconscious  could  make  no  im
pression,  and  could  not  be  noticed ;  the  cessation  of  waves  of  soun
which  had  not  entered  consciousness  at  all  could  not  evoke  a  change  i
consciousness.  In  cases  where  such  a  change  takes  place  they  have  bee
heard,  but  not  especially  noticed  ;  they  have  merely  formed  a  part  of  th
unanalysed  background  on  which  stand  out  the  elements  which  ar
distinguished.1

It  is,  then,  indubitable  that  in  the  manner  in  which  we  become  awar
of  psychical  events  there  are  perceptible  differences  which  justify  us  i

1  On  the  questions  discussed  above  cf.  Stumpf,  Tonpsychologie,  I.,  §  I,  and  th
treatment  of  them  by  H.  Cornelius  in  his  articles  on  Vtrschmelzung  und  Analys
Vierteljahrschr.  f.  miss.  Phil.,  xvi.  4,  xvii.  I.


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS  133

distinguishing  in  every  mental  process  between  the  function  through  which
we  become  conscious  of  something  and  that  of  which  we  are  conscious,
although  we  can  never  actually  separate  them  from  each  other ;  and
although  the  actually  perceived  intensity  of  a  sensation  or  a  feeling  is  not
altogether  independent  of  the  amount  of  attention  which  we  direct  towards
it.  The  view  that  in  self-consciousness  we  have  immediate  apprehension
of  an  actual  event  generally  represents  this  actuality  as  independent  of
the  varying  vivacity  and  determinateness  of  self-consciousness ;  and  inas
much  as  the  clearness  and  energy  of  inner  perception  can  diminish  from  a
maximum  to  zero,  it  is  supplemented  by  the  further  conception  of  uncon
scious  mental  activities,  unconscious  syntheses,  unconscious  inferences,
etc.  It  is  true,  however,  that  the  distinction  is  not  always  carefully  made
between  that  which  does  not  come  into  consciousness  at  all,  in  any  sense,
and  that  which  merely  does  not  come  into  consciousness  in  such  a  way
that  we  distinguish  it  within  the  whole  complex  presented  at  any  moment,
pay  special  attention  to  it,  or  even  subsume  it  under  any  given  concept.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  in  order  to  bring  some  connection  into  mental  life
and  to  explain  the  constitution  of  our  ideas,  we  are  forced  to  assume
functions  of  which  only  the  result  comes  into  clear  consciousness,  while
they  themselves  take  place  unnoticed,  certainly  without  being  distinguished
and  observed.  Already  in  the  course  of  our  investigation  we  have  had
occasion  to  speak  of  spatial,  temporal,  and  other  syntheses  which  had
taken  place  unconsciously,  because  we  found  them  presupposed  as  a  con
dition  of  the  complex  content  present  in  consciousness ;  and  we  were
undoubtedly  justified  in  this  in  so  far  as  we  were  able  in  particular  in
stances,  by  fixing  our  attention  upon  them,  to  bring  such  functions  into
clear  consciousness,  or  so  far  as  we  could  show  that  they  were  at  first
consciously,  and  even  intentionally,  performed,  and  that  it  was  only  gradu
ally  and  by  force  of  habit  that  attention  was  dispensed  with,  the  functions
themselves  not  disappearing  altogether  since  they  continued  to  manifest
themselves  in  their  results.

This  is  not  the  place  to  investigate  how  far  we  are  justified  in  making
use  of  this  assumption.  Our  object  is  to  obtain  definite  psychological
concepts  and  conceptual  elements,  and  for  this  we  must  keep  to  those
modes  of  consciousness  in  which  we  are  able  to  perceive  clearly  definite
forms  of  psychical  process,  to  distinguish  them  from  one  another,  and  to
maintain  the  distinctions  between  them;  we  must  limit  the  proper  signifi
cation  of  psychological  terms  to  that  which  we  can  grasp  in  this  way.  Not


134  LOGIC

until  this  has  been  done  can  we  proceed  to  hypothetical  assumptions  as  to
similar  processes  taking  place,  although  we  are  not  conscious  of  them  in
the  same  way  and  with  the  same  clearness.

12.  Thus  the  methods  at  our  disposal  cannot  do  more  than  help  us  to
get  a  firm  grasp  of  definite,  well-characterized  events  which  easily  impress
themselves  upon  consciousness.  We  cannot  reduce  to  conceptual  deter
mination  all  the  variation  in  intensity  with  which  they  enter  consciousness,
nor  yet  the  imperceptible  transitions  between  them,  because  we  have  no
measure  either  for  intensities  or  for  the  qualitative  differences  of  similar
phenomena  ;  nor  is  it  possible,  as  with  sensations,  to  bring  together  at  will
similar  processes  or  proximate  degrees  of  the  same  action,  and  refer  them
to  an  objective  scale  of  stimuli  having  approximately  the  same  result  at  all
times.  At  the  most  all  we  can  do  is  to  erect  a  scale  of  just  perceptible
differences  for  the  strength  of  the  volitional  impulse  through  which  we  act
upon  our  muscles  in  order  to  lift  a  weight  or  exert  a  pressure,  and  com
pare  it  with  the  magnitudes  of  the  results  attained,  and  even  this  we  can
only  do  within  the  limits  laid  down  in  §  70,  p.  69  sq.  For  the  intensity  of
our  joy  at  the  success  of  our  effort,  for  the  strength  of  the  will  which  mani
fests  itself  in  attention  or  makes  itself  known  in  a  resolution,  we  have  no
analogy,  and  however  certainly  we  know  that  differences  are  there,  we  are
yet  unable  to  say  how  great  they  are.

Thus  throughout  a  large  part  of  the  inner  life  the  psychologist  must
content  himself  with  bringing  into  clear  consciousness  the  differences  be
tween  characteristic  modes  of  activity  in  cases  which  are  simple  and  easily
accessible  to  memory,  and  with  establishing  them  as  types  which  recur
with  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  similarity,  through  such  analysis  discover
ing  and  correcting  the  confusion  or  ambiguity  of  verbal  expressions.  He
proceeds  in  much  the  same  way  as  language  does  in  dealing  with  sounds,
giving  names  to  the  most  striking,  most  easily  remembered,  and  most
frequently  recurring,  and  then  ranging  the  others  around  these  fixed  points;
or  as  the  physiognomist,  who  maintains  definite  types  of  race  or  family
characteristics  without  being  able  to  reduce  them  to  fixed  concepts.  The
ground  for  giving  one  instance  precedence  over  another  is,  in  the  last
instance,  an  aesthetic  impression.  What  shame  is,  or  anger,  or  pity,  we  all
know  from  instances  in  which  we  have  been  conscious  of  unmingled  and
unmistakable  emotions,  but  we  cannot  reduce  all  the  shades  of  the  feeling
of  shame  to  order,  nor  draw  up  a  table  of  the  degrees  of  warmth  of  our
compassion.  The  specialization  of  such  concepts  can  be  indicated  by


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS  135

remembering  various  occasions,  but  it  cannot  be  carried  out,  and  their
limits  can  no  more  be  determined  than  can  the  limits  between  growling
and  roaring,  between  whistling  and  hissing.  But  although  our  consonants
are  indefinable  noises,  and  our  vowels  unanalysed  sounds,  which  are
uttered  by  every  individual  in  a  slightly  different  way,  yet  we  can  speak  so
as  to  be  understood  ;  and  we  can  imagine  a  development  of  the  elements
of  psychological  concepts  which  would  maintain  and  reproduce  essential
differences  so  far  as  needed  for  scientific  purposes.  We  must,  however,
turn  our  attention  from  the  unattainable  ideal  of  a  mathematical  psychology
to  that  which  is  attainable,  and  must  relinquish  the  fancy  that  physiology
may  be  forced  to  yield  the  key  to  a  region  which,  on  the  contrary,  alone
enables  us  to  interpret  the  physiological  processes  of  the  nervous  system
and  to  guess  their  significance.  Physiology  has  given  a  most  desirable
impulse  to  psychology,  but  in  passing  beyond  the  limits  of  psychophysics
has  raised  more  questions  than  it  has  answered.  The  tendency  to  assume
that  for  every  psychological  event  there  must  be  a  definite  change  of  some
part  of  the  brain,  and  to  explain  it  by  hypothetical  events  in  the  ganglionic
cells,  has  often  stood  in  the  way  of  a  clear,  careful,  and  purely  psycho
logical  analysis  by  withdrawing  attention  from  objects  which  could  be
directly  investigated,  and  turning  it  towards  uncertain  constructions  within
the  region  of  the  unknown.

13.  Any  application  of  mathematics,  or  of  spatial  construction  in  any
but  a  purely  figurative  sense,  is  made  futile  also  by  the  second  of  the
above-mentioned  points  (p.  130),  i.e.,  by  the  relation  in  which  elements
stand  to  each  other  which  are  given  contemporaneously  to  consciousness
as  distinguishable  parts  of  our  life.  No  moment  of  life  in  which  we  can
discover  a  plurality  of  distinguishable  acts  and  forms  of  activity  can  ever
be  regarded  as  a  mere  sum  of  elements,  or  represented  figuratively  as  a
spatial  whole  consisting  of  different  parts  ;  it  is  much  more  true  that  the
manner  in  which  the  particular  co-exists  in  consciousness  is  something  in
itself  which  cannot  be  reduced  to  a  compound  of  its  constituent  parts.  To
take  the  simplest  instance  :  to  see  a  picture  is,  of  course,  to  see  the  par
ticular  figures  in  it,  and  the  whole  thing  seen  contains  the  particular  parts
of  the  picture  ;  but  then,  to  see  the  whole  in  one  comprehensive  act  of
vision  is  something  more  than  to  see  the  parts,  and  includes  the  seeing  of
the  parts  in  a  way  which  cannot  be  expressed  in  any  external  figure.  It
is  in  the  same  way  that  in  a  melody  we  hear  the  particular  notes  and  mark
the  interval  from  one  to  another ;  but  the  same  particular  notes  and  their


136  LOGIC

intervals  might  be  heard  by  a  number  of  men,  each  of  whom  heard  only
two  successive  notes,  and  any  one  hearing  the  melody  would  hear  more
than  all  the  others  together,  although  they  would  amongst  them  have  all
the  particular  parts.  Thus  every  combination  of  distinguishable  activities
produces  a  special  effect  for  consciousness,  comparable  to  the  sense  of
harmony  or  discord  in  music,  which  is  something  more  than  the  mere  sum
of  the  notes  that  are  sounded  ;  and  it  is  just  the  highest  and  most  import
ant  developments  of  our  psychical  life  which  depend  upon  such  functions  of
the  second  degree,  functions  which  have  their  ground  in  the  particular  form
in  which  elements  are  combined  without  being  absorbed  as  in  a  mixture.

14.  One  more  point  remains  which  prevents  an  application  of  mathe
matics in the psychological  sphere  which  is  often attempted — it  is  the
relation  of  psychical  functions  to  time. It  is  true  of  the  infinite  divisibility
of  space  that  it  must  also  be  applied  to  that  which  occupies  space,  and  of
motion  that  for  every  portion  of  time,  however  small,  a  portion  of  space
must  be  traversed ;  but  the  thought  ceases  to  be applicable  when we
turn  to  events  of  the  inner  life. Our  functions  succeed  each  other  in
time, and  inasmuch  as  they  occupy  time  continuously  they  must  have
some  duration ;  but  there  is  no  sense  in  investigating  the  temporal  magni
tudes  of  particular  acts  which  we  must  regard  as  simple,  or  in  conceiving
them  as  in  some  way  analogous  to  motion  and  coming  to  pass  succes
sively,  or  in  applying  the  divisibility  of  time  to  the  thoughts  which  arise  in
time. When we  count, of  course  we  need time  to  get  from  i  to  100,
but  yet  the  thought  of  each  particular  number  is  indivisible  in  time. It
is  just  this  which  forms  the  problem,  how  it  is  we  are  able  in  time,  by
means  of  functions  which  occupy  time,  to  annihilate  distinctions  of  time
itself,  and  to  comprehend  a  temporal  series  of  moments  in  the  indivisible
Now  of  thought.

15.  The  difficulty of  psychological analysis obscures all concepts
which  can only  be  thought  of  as  grounded  upon  psychological  events,
especially  those  which  express  a  relation  to  our  feeling  and  will. We  can
only  tell  what  "  good "  means, and  whether  the  word  is  ambiguous  or
not,  by  referring  back  to  the  elementary  functions  which  take  effect  in  our
will,  and  to  the  feelings  in  which  it  is  reflected  ;  what  we  are  to  under
stand  by  an  "  end,"  and  whether  the  relation  expressed  by  it  between  our
will and the object thought  of  is simple or composite, can  only  be
answered  by  psychological  analysis ;  and  the  extension  of  such  concepts
depends  upon  the  correct  delimitation  of  the elementary psychological


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS  137

concepts.  But  here  again  it  is  true  that  one  chief  help  to  this  analysis
lies  in  surveying  and  carefully  distinguishing  that  which  emerges  most
clearly  from  the  purely  inner  life  into  the  objective  world  which  is
common  to  all.  For  we  are  accustomed  in  knowledge  and  action  to
attend  much  more  to  anything  which  confronts  us  as  a  tangible  and
permanent  object  than  to  the  manifold  of  inner  events,  and  we  often
show  first  in  our  estimate  of  things,  and  in  the  way  we  treat  them,  the
inward  impulse  towards  them.

1 6.  So  far  as  the  thought  of  causal  connection  can  be  applied  at  all
to  conscious  inner  events,  it  is  so  in  a  two-fold  sense.  Inasmuch  as
sensations  appear  as  the  effects  of  stimuli,  we  get  the  concept  of  transient
causation  (§  73) ;  the  psychical  subject  is  affected  by  the  change  of
another,  and  responds  to  this  affection  by  the  conscious  process  of
sensation.  But  even  within  the  course  of  conscious  events  we  affirm  a
connection  in  virtue  of  which  one  psychical  event  of  a  particular  kind
depends  upon  another  psychical  event  of  the  same  or  a  different  kind  ;
certain  ideas  excite  other  ideas  according  to  the  so-called  laws  of  associa
tion,  or  ideas  excite  feelings  of  pleasure  or  pain,  or  feelings  give  rise  to
efforts.  It  is  obvious  that  this  relation  of  real  dependence  between  our
functions  cannot  be  subsumed  under  the  same  causal  concept  which  has
for  its  content  the  action  of  one  thing  upon  another,  the  dependence  of
change  in  a  thing  upon  conditions  contained  in  its  relation  to  other
things  ;  we  prefer  to  say  that  one  activity  of  the  subject  is  the  ground
from  which  another  activity  of  the  same  subject  proceeds  without  our
being  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  an  external  cause  for  its  explanation.
The  relation  is  the  same  as  when,  by  virtue  of  the  law  of  inertia,  we
regard  the  movement  of  a  body  from  A  to  B  as  the  ground  for  its
further  movement  from  B  to  C ;  we  do  not  generally  call  the  movement
in  any  preceding  moment  the  cause  of  the  movement  in  the  subsequent
moment,  but  merely  look  or  ask  for  a  cause  when  there  is  any  change
of  velocity  or  direction.  But  in  the  inner  life  we  have  to  do,  not  with
the  simple  distinctionless  continuation  of  a  given  event,  but  with  changing
and  newly  introduced  functions  and  states,  and  with  the  question  as  to
how  these  are  grounded  ;  there  is  therefore  no  objection  to  affirming  a
causal  relation  here  also  when  we  know  that  we  are  applying  the  expres
sion  in  a  sense  essentially  different  from  that  of  the  transient  causality
familiar  to  natural  science,  which  depends  upon  a  relation  between  dif
ferent  subjects  (cf.  §  73,  26).


i38  LOGIC

At  first  sight  it  seems  to  be  a  matter  of  course  that  within  the  sphere  of
the  inner  life  events  only  should  be  regarded  as  causes  in  this  sense,  and
that  we  cannot  therefore  speak  of  efficient  action  in  the  sense  developed
above,  in  so  far  as  we  do  not  derive  inner  events  from  external  stimuli,
but  consider  them  as  determined  by  preceding  facts  of  consciousness
alone.  The  task  of  psychology  would  then  be  to  establish  the  laws
according  to  which  a  given  conscious  state  or  event — e.g.  hearing  the
words  of  a  description — is  followed  by  another  event,  the  idea  of  the
object  described,  or  the  sight  of  a  wounded  man  is  followed  by  the
feeling  of  compassion,  and  this  again  by  the  wish  to  help  him.

There  is  no  doubt  that  if  psychology  is  ever  to  pass  beyond  mere
descriptions,  it  can  only  be  by  regarding  a  subsequent  event  as  deter
mined  by  preceding  events ;  the  scientific  endeavour  to  know  what  is  given
as  necessary  must  in  the  first  instance  work  in  this  direction.  But  this
does  not  mean  that  psychology  can  only  know  events,  and  cannot  get
beyond  regularity  of  connection  amongst  these  events ;  that  because
the  object  of  inner  experience  is  only  a  changing  succession  of  events,
therefore  the  assumption  of  a  single  subject  for  these  events  is  unfruitful
or  impossible.  Nor  is  it  proved  that  psychology  could  manage  to  make
even  this  concept  of  causality  sufficient  for  its  purposes,  or  that  it  could
resolve  into  mere  activity — whether  transcendental  apperception  or  voli
tion — all  that  is  meant  by  the  word  "  I."

In  immediate  self-consciousness  all  particular  events  are  referred  to  one
subject ;  we  cannot  express  consciousness  except  in  the  form  "  I  am  think
ing  this  or  that,  I  feel  pain,  I  will  do  so-and-so."  It  is  perfectly  true  that
we  have  no  definite  intuitive  idea  of  what  we  call  "  I,"  such  as  we  have  of
external  objects,  or  even  of  particular,  temporally-limited  events  in  con
sciousness  ;  we  cannot  even  make  our  own  ego  completely  object,  for
there  must  always  remain  that  subjective  activity  by  which  the  object  is
thought.  But  is  this  any  reason  why  we  should  abstract  altogether  from  a
single  permanent  subject  of  our  psychical  activities  ?  Can  we  really
think  of  our  feeling  as  mere  event  without  anything  which  feels,  of
our  will  as  mere  event  without  a  subject  which  wills?  Is  it  possible
to  conceive  of  our  whole  psychical  life  as  we  ordinarily  do,  say,  of  a  storm,
as  a  series  of  occurrences  the  definite  subject  of  which  remains  concealed,
and  which  we  describe  by  saying  it  storms,  it  lightens,  it  thunders,  it  rains,
it  hails  ?  Is  it  necessary,  in  order  to  speak  with  scientific  accuracy,  to
speak  impersonally — it  thinks,  it  feels,  it  wills  ?  Even  the  psychologist,


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS  139

who  demands  a  psychology  of  mere  events,  always  speaks  of  our  will,  our
ideas,  our  psychical  states ;  in  the  mere  description  of  the  fact  he  employs
a  symbol  for  a  subject  of  which  ideas,  feeling,  or  will  are  the  activities  or
states,  and  I  doubt  whether  any  one  could  seriously  think  of  a  pain  which
hurts  no  one,  a  will  which  is  no  one's  will,  or,  further,  of  an  inner  percep
tion  of  these  events  in  which  there  is  no  perceiver,  but  only  the  object  of
the  perception,  the  subjectless  will  or  feeling  itself.  No  one  can  seriously
think  that  there  is  a  stream  of  impersonal  thought  connecting  the  particular
events  of  seeing,  hearing,  feeling,  and  their  memory-images,  and  inces
santly,  at  every  moment,  creating  the  illusory  thought  of  a  subject  to
which  these  events  are  referred  ;  and  that  connected  with  this  there  is  the
further  impersonal  event,  by  which  is  thought  the  identity  of  this  subject
throughout  the  successive  moments,  but  which  in  truth  only  produces  a
phantom  for  thought  which  has  no  subject.  I  doubt  whether  any  one  can
consistently  think  that  what  he  calls  "  I "  is  merely  the  incomprehensibly
connected  sum  total  of  these  events  (to  which  must  also  be  added  the  event
which  thinks  of  this  sum  total  as  such).  We  may,  indeed,  with  Hume,  be
influenced  by  certain  presuppositions  to  affirm  that  we  find  within  us
nothing  else,  but  we  can  only  do  so  by  ignoring  the  "find  within  us  "  and
taking  account  of  the  occurrences  "  found  "  alone ;  there  is  always  latent
the  ordinary  way  of  thinking  which  inevitably  assumes  that  the  perceived
objects  of  consciousness  belong  to  the  one  perceiving  subject.

If  it  can  be  shown  that  the  idea  of  persistent  and  durable  things  is  only
possible  on  condition  that  we  know  ourselves  to  be  identical  in  time  ;  if
the  thought  of  the  identity  of  the  same  object  necessarily  presupposes  con
sciousness  of  the  identity  of  the  thinking  subject,  then  we  cannot  eliminate
the  latter  and  yet  maintain  the  identity  of  objects.  If  it  is  true  that  the
primary  certainty  of  being  does  not  refer  to  objects,  but  is  expressed  in  the
proposition  "  I  am,"  that  we  can  be  sure  of  any  being  only  in  so  far  as  we
are  first  sure  of  our  own  being,  then  all  knowledge  is  annihilated  if  we  are
to  say  that  there  is  nothing  more  than  an  impersonal  process  of  thought
positing  an  imaginary  subject.  It  is  true  that  if  we  yield  to  the  undeniable
utterances  of  self-consciousness  and  accept  a  subject  for  all  conscious  activi
ties,  there  arise  difficulties  for  our  further  consideration  as  to  the  relation
in  which  this  subject  stands  to  the  totality  of  objects  which  we  distinguish
from  ourselves  ;  but  great  as  these  difficulties  may  be,  we  cannot  get  rid  of
them  by  introducing  the  impossible  thought  of  subjectless  activities.  The
difficulty  that  we  can  never  think  ourselves  merely  as  objects  (cf.  Lieb-


140  LOGIC

mann's  Aphorisms)  is  not  decisive  ;  inasmuch  as  we  must  assume  other
subjects,  like  ourselves,  we  are  constrained  to  think  of  self-conscious
subjects,  which  for  us  are  mere  objects.

17.  But  even  apart  from  the  question,  how  we  are  to  interpret  the  facts
of  self-consciousness,  we  are  prevented  from  conceiving  of  psychical  events
as  related  merely  to  one  another  as  cause  and  effect  by  the  nature  of  the
events  themselves;  for  when  thus  limited,  we  cannot  apply  the  relation  of  a
sufficient  ground  to  its  consequences,  and  we  are  unable  to  explain  subse
quent  stages  of  consciousness  as  necessarily  following  from  preceding
stages.  If  it  is  true  that  the  idea  of  the  thing  is  not  merely  a  sum  of  the
particular  sensations,  if — as  Wundt  (System,  p.  314)  has  excellently  pointed
out — a  new  act  of  consciousness  is  called  for  which  contains  a  kind  of
creative  synthesis,  if  the  pleasure  arising  from  a  harmony  is  not  merely
the  sum  of  the  elementary  feelings  accompanying  the  particular  sounds,
if,  therefore,  what  we  call  effect  contains  more  than  the  cause  assumed,  if
something  new  supervenes,  which  is  not  yet  contained  in  what  is  given,
whence  shall  we  say  that  this  more,  this  new  element  comes?  Under
these  circumstances  the  subsequent  cannot  really  be  explained  by  the
precedent,  by  itself  and  regarded  as  mere  event ;  it  can  be  explained  only
by  assuming  a  subject  in  the  nature  of  which  it  lies  to  produce  upon  the
occasion  of  certain  activities  other  activities  of  its  own,  the  ground  of  the
new  element  is  really  to  be  found  in  the  capacity  of  development  of  the
subject  to  which  both  the  preceding  and  subsequent  activities  belong  as
functions.  In  the  physical  sphere  the  constancy  of  forces  enables  us  to
carry  out  to  a  certain  degree  a  causal  connection  between  mere  events ;
the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  the  equivalence  of  motion
which  precedes  and  which  follows,  causes  physical  events  to  appear  as  a
uniformly  flowing  stream  in  which  the  power  of  work  present  at  a  later
point  of  time  is  the  same  as  was  present  at  an  earlier  point,  only  in  a
different  form  ;  nothing  new  occurs  which  was  not  already  contained  in
the  conditions.  But  in  the  psychical  sphere  this  new  element  appears
wherever  there  is  a  development  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word ;  and  if  the
principle  of  equivalence  between  cause  and  effect  does  not  hold  good,
then  the  preceding  state  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  one  and  sufficient
ground ;  what  we  now  call  cause  in  a  wider  and  inaccurate  sense  merely
means  a  condition  under  which  the  psychical  subject  produces  new
activities.  For  this  reason  the  much-despised  because  misapplied  concep
tion  of  "  faculty  "  nevertheless  really  expresses  the  relation  before  us;  the


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS  141

term  denotes,  when  rightly  understood,  that  nature  of  the  psychical  subject
by  virtue  of  which  it  produces  from  within  itself,  and  upon  certain  occa
sions,  activities  which  are  not  merely  continuations  of  those  which  preceded,
and  by  virtue  of  which  it  develops  itself  in  time,  and  so  realizes  what  is
contained  in  its  disposition.  A  psychology,  such  as  the  purely  empirical  >/
and  sensational,  which  regards  the  whole  content  of  consciousness  as  only
a  sum  of  sensations  which  are  excited  from  without,  and  which  finds
nothing  more  in  all  later  stages  than  the  summation  of  these  simple  effects
of  sense-stimulation,  can  represent  the  successive  states  of  consciousness
as  cause  and  effect ;  it  is  done  also  by  the  Herbartian  psychology,  which
disengages  ideas  from  their  ground,  and,  maintaining  the  invariability  of
the  soul,  transfers  all  activity  to  the  ideas  which  come  and  go,  combine  and
resist,  as  independent  things.  According  to  this  view,  the  real  cause  of
psychical  events  lies  quite  without  the  subject,  which  is  merely  the  passive
theatre  for  influences  from  the  external  world.  But  if  this  view  fails  to
satisfy  us,  then  there  is  no  other  way  than  to  recognise  that  successive  sen
sations  are  not  by  themselves,  and  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word,  the  cause
of  all  the  further  "events"  which  arise  out  of  them,  that  the  presence  of
two  or  more  sensations  does  not  necessarily  involve  their  being  distin
guished  or  counted,  that  a  feeling  by  itself  contains  nothing  more  than  a
state  of  pleasure  or  pain,  and  that  it  would  never  develop  into  anything
further  were  it  not  the  nature  of  the  feeling  subject  to  be  impelled  thereby
to  the  further  activity  of  desire  and  will.

18.  Whether  or  not  the  subject  of  psychical  events,  which  is  indispens
able  if  we  are  to  speak  comprehensibly,  is  to  be  placed  under  the  concept
of  substance,  depends  upon  how  we  define  substance  ;  the  dispute  is  mainly
one  of  words.  If  we  start  from  the  concept  of  substance  which  has  been  '
developed  in  natural  science,  if  we  take  as  its  essential  characteristics
invariability  of  forces  and  modes  of  action,  so  that  under  the  same  con
ditions  substance  always  undergoes  and  produces  the  same  changes,  then,
indeed,  the  soul  is  not  substance.  But  if  we  merely  mean  to  express  by  ,
this  term  that  we  are  compelled  by  the  nature  of  our  thought  to  add  to  the
varying  events  always  combined  in  one  consciousness  a  subject  which  ex
plains  the  connection  of  these  events,  and  which,  remaining  one  with  itself,
forms  a  common  ground  for  the  continuously  successive  changes,  then  the
subject  of  self-consciousness  must  be  called  a  substance.  Not  indeed  a
substance  which  has  an  existence  apart  from  its  activities ;  it  is,  in  that  it
is  active,  but  it  is  not  the  mere  momentary  activity;  its  existence  is  not


142  LOGIC

exhausted  in  the  particular  activity  any  more  than  the  existence  of  material
substance  is  exhausted  in  its  momentary  state,  but  outlasts  them  as  the  one
ground  of  succeeding  activities.  The  materialist  may  try  to  identify  the
subject  of  psychical  events  with  the  collective  unity  of  the  brain,  endowing
it,  in  addition  to  its  chemical  and  physical  powers,  with  the  faculty  of  pro
ducing  ideas  and  feelings;  but  if  we  decline  to  do  this,,  we  cannot  think  of
mental  processes  as  a  mere  happening  without  any  subject.  We  may  at
tempt  to  substitute  for  the  individual  soul  a  universal  ground,  but  then,
this  must  always  be  the  res  cogitans,  and  particular  conscious  states  proceed
from  the  infinita  'potentia  cogitandi  of  the  infinite  substance.  Such  meta
physical  supplementations  of  the  immediately  given  do  not  at  any  rate
attempt  to  think  of  a  happening  without  something  in  which  it  happens,  a
knowledge  which  no  one  knows,  a  will  which  is  no  one's  will.

19.  Here,  again,  the  general  idea  of  cause  may  be  variously  applied.
In  one  direction  the  causal  concept  has  already  been  used  in  so  wide  a
sense  as  to  be  applied — as  by  Spinoza — to  the  relation  of  substance  to  its
activity  ;  the  understanding  is  called  the  cause  of  its  thoughts  as  plants
are  called  the  cause  of  their  own  growth,  and  the  falling  body  the  cause  of
its  fall  because  the  falling  is  its  activity.  But  we  shall  do  better  to  avoid
including  in  the  concept  simple  action  as  such.  In  mechanical  science
the  concept  is  limited  to  the  relation  between  different  unities ;  it  is  the
causa  transient.  We  apply  the  same  concept  in  psychology,  when  we  refer
inner  events  to  a  cause  distinct  from  the  subject  of  consciousness,  when
we  refer  sensations  to  stimuli  proceeding  from  the  external  world.  The
incomparability  of  the  two  events  and  their  subjects  is  not  in  itself  an
obstacle  to  the  application  of  the  causal  concept ;  the  proposition  that  like
can  act  only  upon  like  would,  if  strictly  interpreted,  render  every  applica
tion  of  the  causal  concept  impossible ;  and  we  are  bound  by  the  actual
connection  of  phenomena  which  constrains  us  to  find  a  ground  for  what
takes  place  in  a  relation  of  cause  and  effect.

When  we  come  to  the  relation  between  particular  psychical  functions,  the
causal  concept  finds  another  application  ;  we  are  here  dealing  with  the
states  or  changes  of  a  subject  which  by  virtue  of  its  nature  has  other  states
for  a  consequence  of  these,  and  in  this  sense  an  idea  is  called  the  cause  of
a  feeling,  a  feeling  the  cause  of  a  desire.  In  so  far  as  what  we  mean  to
express  is  the  regular  connection  obtaining  between  states  of  the  same
subject  we  use  the  word  in  the  same  sense  as  when  the  lowering  of  the
temperature  of  water  below  zero  is  called  the  cause  of  its  freezing ;  by


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS  143

virtue  of  the  nature  of  water  the  one  change  is  necessarily  accompanied
by  the  other.

But  in  the  psychical  domain  the  causal  concept  gains  a  still  more  specific
meaning  in  the  relation  of  the  will  to  other  functions ;  not  only  because
volition  appears  in  voluntary  movement  as  the  direct  cause  of  a  material
event — states  of  feeling  also  appear  as  causes  of  the  most  varied  material
events, — but  because  even  within  the  sphere  of  events  of  consciousness
themselves  we  are  conscious  of  directing  our  volition  towards  the  realiza
tion  of  certain  acts,  and  find  within  us  the  power  of  producing  or  at  least
guiding  them.  It  is  so  when  we  fix  our  attention  upon  perception  or
thoughts,  when  we  voluntarily  excite  a  series  of  recollections,  or  follow  out
a  logical  chain  of  thought.  It  is  not  a  necessity  independent  of  conscious
ness  and  known  only  by  its  results,  which  connects  that  mental  act  which
is  cause  with  that  which  is  effect,  as  when  feelings  are  excited  by  some
object  of  thought.  When  we  realize  what  we  have  thought  of,  we  are
immediately  conscious  of  determining  ourselves  by  our  own  activities  ;
and  this  immanent  self-determination  passes  into  the  sphere  of  external
causality  through  the  dependence  of  our  bodily  movements  upon  conscious
volition.1

1  Cf.  here  my  treatise,  Der  Begriff ' des  Wollens  und  sein  Verhaltniss  zum  Begriff  dti
Ursache.  Kleine  Schriften,  II.  115,  sq.


CHAPTER  II.

THE  SYNTHESIS OF CONCEPTUAL ELEMENTS INTO COMPOSITE

CONCEPTS.

§ 75-

AN  exhaustive  analysis  of  our  ideas  into  SIMPLE  ELEMENTS  which  are  com
pletely  determined  and  the  same  for  every  one,  and  an  investigation  of  the
different  forms  of  their  SYNTHESIS,  constitute  the  condition  under  which
alone  it  is  possible  to  determine  our  composite  ideas  in  a  way  to  satisfy  the
demands  of  logic.

In  the  construction  of  composite  ideas  itself,  it  is  necessary  on  the  one
hand  that  we  should  carry  out  the  syntheses  of  the  conceptual  elements  to
the  extent  called  for  by  the  aims  of  thought ;  on  the  other  hand,  that  the
construction  of  the  particular  composite  groups  should  be  accompanied  by
their  arrangement  in  a  definite  system  of  relative  subordination,  co
ordination,  and  disjunction.

In  so  far  as  our  ideas  are  of  such  a  nature  that  definite  principles  ot
synthesis  are  given  together  with  the  elements,  composite  concepts  are
generally  formed  by  a  free  construction  according  to  those  principles  of  all
possible  combinations.  But  in  so  far  as  the  synthesis  of  certain  con
ceptual  elements  is  only  required  by  their  actual  co-existence  in  objects  of
experience  the  formation  of  composite  concepts  is  limited  to  reconstruction
of  the  given,  and  these  concepts  are  principally  arranged  by  the  method
of  abstraction.

In  the  construction  of  final  concepts  both  methods  are  combined.

i.  In  the  preceding  section  the  analysis  of  our  ideas  into  simple
elements  showed  the  impossibility  of  getting  constituent  parts  of  ideas  in
complete  isolation.  Everywhere  we  found  inseparable  functions  determin
ing  the  content  of  thought,  and  the  particular  elements  were  always  con
nected  \vith  definite  forms  of  synthesis.  Unity  itself  cannot  be  thought
without  plurality,  nor  line  and  point  without  space;  the  concept  of  the
thing  has  no  meaning  except  as  the  synthesis  of  different  elements,  and


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  145

concept  of  causality  would  be  nothing  if  it  did  not  connect  the  states  and
changes  of  things.  According  to  the  different  classes  of  ideas  these
syntheses  differ  entirely  in  import ;  the  relation  between  the  unities  in  a
number  is  incomparable  with  the  relation  between  points  in  space,  and
this  again  with  the  relation  between  qualities  and  between  these  and  the
thing  to  which  they  belong.

2.  It  follows  from  this  that  we  cannot  find  any  method  of  combining
conceptual  elements  into  composite  concepts  which  shall  be  absolutely
universal  and  apply  to  all  concepts  in  the  same  way.

No  doubt  if  we  start  with  a  purely  formal  denotation  of  conceptual
elements  and  their  synthesis,  as  when  the  content  of  a  composite  concept
A  is  expressed  by  its  characteristics  abed,  it  is  natural  to  apply  to  the
sum  total  of  simple  elements  obtained  by  analysis  the  method  of  combina
tion  of  different  elements,  in  order  to  find  all  possible  combinations  and  so
to  obtain  the  whole  series  of  possible  concepts  and  their  relations.  Then
even  the  principle  according  to  which  they  would  be  arranged  would  be
that  by  which  we  should  be  guided  in  obtaining  the  combinations  ;  we
should  start  from  some  series  of  characteristics,  and  we  should  take
the  same  series  as  the  basis  for  an  enumeration  of  the  combinations.  Thus
from  the  characteristics  a,  b,  e,  d,  we  should  get  the  series  of  binary  com
binations  ab,  ac,  ad,  be,  bd,  cd,  of  trinary  combinations  abc,  abd,  acd,
bed,  and  finally, the  combination  of  all  the  elements  abed;  and  we  are  at
once  struck  by  the  remarkable  phenomenon  that  there  are  more  of  the
general  concepts  ab,  ac,  etc.,  than  of  the  more  specialized  abc,  etc.,  and
>  that  all  these  genera  have  only  one  specific  concept  under  them,  for  the
doctrine  presupposes  that  the  arrangement  of  characteristics  in  a  concept
is  indifferent,  and  that  abed  is  the  same  concept  as  bcda.

The  principal  difficulty  in  the  simple  application  of  this  theory  of  com
binations  lies  in  the  fact  that  characteristics  are  not  all  compatible,  but
that  many  of  them  are  so  related  that  the  affirmation  of  one  excludes  a
number  of  others  ;  thus  by  a  wearisome  process  a  great  number  must
always  be  excluded  as  impossible  from  the  combinations  found  by  the
calculation.  If,  however,  the  process  were  otherwise  correct,  and  ensured
x  certain  result,  we  should  have  to  submit  to  this  inconvenience ;  aiming
nerely  at  complete  determination  of  the  relations  of  incompatibility.  For
his  it  would  not  suffice  to  discover  the  simple  incompatibilities,  for  it
sometimes  happens  that  an  element  a  would  be  compatible  with  b  or  c
:ach  by  itself,  but  not  with  both  together ;  equilinear  is  compatible  with

s.  L. — ii.  L


146  LOGIC

rectangular  by  itself  (in  the  square),  and  with  triangular  by  itself, but  not
with  both  together.

But  apart  from  these  difficulties  the  method  of  combinations  in  this
general  form  is  not  applicable  to  the  relations  of  conceptual  elements.  As
generally  understood,  it  presupposes  an  equivalence  of  elements  and  a
single  meaning  for  the  union  between  them,  which  is  not  true  of  the
elements  of  our  concepts ;  and  important  as  it  is  when  properly  applied,
it  has  proved  unfruitful  as  a  general  logical  method  for  the  construction  of
concepts,  whenever,  that  is,  the  attempt  has  been  made  to  revive  the  art  of
Raymundus  Lullus.  In  all  attempts  to  reduce  logic  to  an  arithmetic  with
simple  elements  for  units,  it  is  overlooked  that  arithmetic  is  always  based
upon  homogeneity  of  elements  and  of  their  syntheses,  a  presupposition
which  is  all  the  less  applicable  here  because  the  particular  elements  do
not  appear  in  isolation,  but  are  dependent  upon  each  other  in  the  most
complicated  manner.

3.  If  we  are  to  proceed  methodically  in  the  formation  of  our  con
cepts,  we  must  be  guided  on  the  one  hand  by  the  natural  conditions  of
thought,  on  the  other  hand  by  the  aims  towards  which  we  are  striving
in  thought.

With  reference  to  the  former,  our  investigations  in  the  previous  section
have  brought  out  characteristic  distinctions.  In- the  sphere  of  numerical
concepts  we  came  across  an  activity  proceeding  according  to  conscious
and  comprehensible  laws,  by  which  the  objects  and  their  relations  were
created  and  which  can  be  continued  independently  of  all  external  rela
tions,  while  in  dealing  with  qualities  of  sensation  we  are  constantly
dependent  upon  external  conditions,  and  can  neither  produce  them  in
their  manifoldness  according  to  any  simple  law,  nor  yet  submit  to  one
comprehensible  law  the  relations  between  qualities  belonging  to  different
senses.  In  the  former  case  one  general  law  suffices  to  give  rise  to  the
whole  manifold  ;  in  the  latter  an  indefinite  manifold  is  given  withou
fixed  limits,  and  the  general  law  which  should  govern  it  cannot  b
found.

So  far  as  concerns  the  aims  of  our  conceptual  construction  we  have  on
the  one  hand  to  obtain  fixed  and  definite  predicates  for  our  judgments
and  to  keep  them  ready  for  judgment  as  extensively  and  as  well  arrangec
as  possible  ;  while  on  the  other  hand  we  must  apprehend  what  is  giver
to  perception  as  exhaustively  as  may  be,  and  represent  it  in  logical!)
ordered  concepts.  On  the  one  hand  the  tendency  is  to  multiply  anc


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  147

specialize  our  concepts  as  far  as  possible,  to  construct  a  comprehensive
system  of  combinations  of  conceptual  elements  ;  on  the  other  hand  this
tendency  is  limited  by  the  fact  that  we  form  our  composite  concepts
only  so  far  as  we  are  called  upon  to  do  so  by  observation  of  given
things  and  their  relations,  and  have  no  occasion  to  form  those  concepts
for  which  there  is  no  corresponding  object  in  experience.  Here  the
foreground  is  occupied  by  given  things,  of  which  the  synthetical  form
is  the  concept  of  substance.  The  idea  of  every  particular  thing,  how
ever,  is  compounded  from  an  incalculable  multitude  of  elements,  and  the
co-existence  of  these  elements  is  the  less  to  be  derived  from  definite
general  rules  because  the  concept  of  substance  is  completely  indifferent
towards  its  content.

Thus  we  have  two  opposed  starting  points.  In  the  sphere  of  concrete,
real  things,  we  have  given  to  us  a  manifold  of  the  richest  combinations,
incalculable  in  number  ;  our  task  is  to  determine  the  whole  content  of
the  perceived,  to  exhibit  similarities  and  differences  in  logical  arrange
ment  ;  in  other  words,  to  classify  what  is  given  ;  we  cannot,  however,
discover  from  the  characteristics  themselves  how  they  are  combined,  we
can  only  learn  it  by  their  actual  co-existence.  On  the  other  side,  we
i  find  the  ideal  elements,  with  which  is  given  according  to  their  nature  the
law  of  their  synthesis,  and  for  which  there  is  the  possibility  of  develop
ment.  Here  our  task  is  to  carry  out  this  development  to  its  fullest
extent,  and  this  takes  place  most  markedly  in  the  sphere  of  mathematical
concepts,  which  are  developed  in  particular  directions  much  further  than
is  called  for  by  the  claims  of  immediate  perception.

4.  In  calling  this  formation  of  concepts  from  their  elements  CON
STRUCTIVE,  logic  has  borrowed  a  term  from  geometry.  The  production
of  some  figure  from  particular  spatial  elements,  lines  and  angles,  which
can  take  place  either  in  pure  imagination  or  by  the  external  help  of
drawing,  seemed  the  most  fitting  image  by  which  to  represent  a  process
in  which  the  composite  idea  is  produced  for  us,  while  the  voluntary
variation  of  elements  independently  of  external  perception,  and  the
combination  of  them  together,  gives  the  construction  the  character  of  a
free  activity  guided  only  by  the  nature  of  the  ideas  themselves.

It  is  less  appropriate  to  contrast  with  this  process  of  construction  that
of  ABSTRACTION,  as  the  process  by  which  concepts  are  formed  from  given
perceptions.  Abstraction  in  the  sense  of  separating  the  ideas  combined
in  the  unity  of  a  thing,  so  as  to  present  the  particular  qualities  by


i48  LOGIC

themselves,  is  one  of  the  expedients  used  in  the  analysis  of  ideas  into
simple  elements  ;  but  abstraction  in  the  other  sense,  as  expressing  the
formation  of  general  concepts  from  special  ideas  by  the  omission  of  different
characteristics,  cannot  be  the  general  process  by  which  we  are  to  reduce
the  given  according  to  its  determinations  to  conceptual  expression,  for
to  do  this  we  should  first  need  to  note  all  the  differences  which  dis
tinguish  particular  objects  from  one  another,  and  to  establish  an
exhaustive  formula.  A  process  of  abstraction,  leading  to  the  grouping
of  different  specific  concepts  under  one  higher  general  concept,  could
not  be  made  use  of  until  we  wished  to  reduce  the  ideas  already  gained
to  logical  order,  and  to  exhibit  the  higher  concepts  under  which  they
could  be  subsumed.  But  since  we  have  no  other  familiar  term  at
command,  the  word  may  be  used  in  its  wider  sense  for  the  sake  of
brevity.

In  a  more  detailed  exposition  it  will  have  to  be  shown  that  neither
process  can  take  place  alone ;  that  in  the  sphere  of  construction,  ab
straction  must  be  called  in,  while  the  classification  of  the  given  which  is
begun  by  abstraction  cannot  be  completed  without  construction.

5.  The  FINAL  CONCEPTS,  which  are  the  objects  of  our  will  and  guide
our  voluntary  action,  occupy  a  peculiar  position.

On  the  one  hand  they  share  in  the  reference  to  reality  which  prescribes
definite  rules  of  formation  to  the  concepts  of  real  things.  That  which  is
really  willed,  and  not  merely  dreamed  in  idle  wishes,  is  always  a  real
state  of  ourselves  and  of  other  men  or  external  things,  which  is
thought,  indeed,  as  future,  but  which,  if  realized,  can  be  realized  only  in
the  concrete  definiteness  which  belongs  to  all  objects  of  the  real  world ;
that  which  is  to  be  effected  by  our  will  is  a  change  of  real  things  which
must  be  latent  in  their  nature,  and  leads  to  a  state  which  constitutes  a  part
of  the  real  world  and  is  governed  by  its  laws.

In  so  far,  then,  as  our  final  concepts  are  frequently  formed  upon  the
ground  of  previous  experience,  and  our  will  is  simply  directed  towards  the
repetition  of  that  which  previously  pleased  and  satisfied  us,  their  content
seems  to  differ  in  no  way  from  that  of  the  ideas  by  means  of  which  we
always  think  of  the  real,  and  to  be  formed  in  just  the  same  way  ;  it  is  only
the  subjective  reference  to  our  will  which  makes  a  final  concept  of  the
concept  of  any  given  existing  thing.  The  water  which  we  want  to  drink
when  thirsty,  the  fire  which  we  desire  to  light  when  cold,  does  not  differ
because  thought  as  a  final  concept  from  any  other  fire  and  water.  We


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  149

find  also  the  same  relation  between  special  and  general  concepts  in  our
aims  as  in  the  classification  of  the  given,  and  this  in  a  twofold  way.  The
will  may  be  directed  to  a  particular  object,  to  a  momentary  satisfaction  ;
but  in  the  final  concept  we  affirm  only  a  general  idea  under  which  fall  the
various  specific  objects,  a  general  idea,  however,  which  is  abstracted  from
our  experience  of  common  attributes  in  a  number  of  things.  Thus  the
thirsty  man  wants  drink  in  general,  and  the  cold  man  combustibles  of  any
kind.  On  the  other  hand  the  final  concept  may  be  general  with  reference
to  the  will  itself,  when  the  will  is  directed  not  to  some  particular  object  or
state  as  the  means  of  momentary  satisfaction,  but  to  a  plurality  of  objects
or  states  which  all  yield  a  similar  satisfaction.  The  will  to  gather  supplies
for  the  winter,  or  to  injure  a  hated  person,  is  directed  towards  a  general
idea;  but  this  general  concept  itself  can  only  be  abstracted  from  ex
perience  ;  my  knowledge  of  what  will  serve  as  supplies,  or  of  what  will
injure  a  man,  can  have  been  learned  from  experience  alone.  And
I  could  have  formed  the  same  concept  without  any  reference  to  the
will  by  a  comparison  of  particular  relations  of  the  given.  The  fact
that  the  relation  which  was  at  first  only  an  object  of  experience  is
now  an  object  of  the  will  can  make  no  difference  in  the  way  in  which
the  concept  is  formed  ;  given  states  or  events  are  taken  as  objects  for  our
will  just  as  experience  has  taught  us  to  know  them,  and  the  more
accurately  they  are  known,  the  more  our  concepts  are  complete  and  cor
respond  to  the  real  state  of  affairs,  the  more  secure  we  are  in  volition,
since  we  shall  have  no  unexpected  results  to  fear.

6.  Nevertheless  a  closer  analysis  shows  even  in  these  cases  one  aspect
which  distinguishes  final  concepts  from  the  purely  theoretical  concepts  of
experience,  even  when  they  have  exactly  the  same  content.  When  the
thirsty  man  desires  water,  or  the  cold  man  fire,  the  immediate  object  of
his  will  is  not  the  external  thing  as  such,  but  the  cessation  of  his  dis
comfort;  thus  the  ground  upon  which  he  desires  these  objects  is  the
definite  relation  in  which  they  stand  to  him  as  the  means  of  satisfaction,
and  it  is  only  because  a  certain  object  is  the  only  one  known  or  attainable
in  the  real  world  that  his  will  is  directed,  not  towards  the  general,  but
towards  the  definite  and  concrete.  When  various  objects  possess  in  the
same  degree  the  quality  of  satisfying  the  want  which  gives  rise  to  the  will,
then  the  generality  of  the  final  concept  appears  ;  and  when  we  actually
and  consciously  separate  what  is  really  willed  from  its  accompanying
determinations,  then  the  final  concept  thus  formed  becomes  distinct  from


150  LOGIC

the  general  concepts  gained  by  abstraction,  for  then  the  general  precedes
the  special  and  serves  as  a  clue  by  which  to  find  the  means  of  satisfaction
in  the  real  world.

This  is  at  once  obvious  when  the  objects  to  which  the  will  is  directed
are  not  forthcoming,  but  must  be  invented  and  made.  The  final  concept
now  appears  as  the  problem  :  how  to  produce  a  thing  having  a  given
quality  or  manifesting  given  relations.  Only  what  corresponds  to  the  end
is  determined  by  it,  everything  else  is  undetermined ;  and  what  we  have
to  do  is  to  change  the  things  given,  or  to  combine  a  number  of  them,  in
such  a  way  that  the  result  may  have  the  desired  qualities.  A  consideration
of  the  processes  by  which  the  end  is  realized  in  a  concrete  thing,  as  well
as  of  the  movements  of  thought  in  its  activity  of  invention,  must  come
later  on.  At  present  we  have  merely  to  point  out  how  in  the  sphere  of
ends  a  formation  of  concept  takes  place  which  is  relatively  independent
of  the  things  given,  and  how  the  results  of  this  process  have  at  first  the
character  of  general  conceptual  formulae,  which  await  their  specialization
and  determination  from  a  consideration  of  the  means  by  which  the
characteristics  contained  in  the  concept  can  be  realized  in  the  real  world.
(Cf.  §  42,  8.  I.,  p.  273  sq.)

§  76.

The  constructive  formation  of  concepts  has  for  its  first  and  fundamental
form  a  process  of  combination  which  starts  from  the  simple  elements  and
forms  from  them  in  their  appropriate  synthetical  forms  (of  number,  space,
etc.)  a  complete  series  of  lowest  groups,  and  then  combines  these  again
according  to  the  same  methods.

This  process  is  accompanied  in  part  by  another  which,  starting  from
given  forms  of  combination,  develops  them  through  all  the  differences  of
which  their  elements  are  capable,  and  is  characterized  as  logical  division  ;
in  part  also  by  a  statement  of  general  conceptual  formulae,  which  express
certain  conditions  to  be  fulfilled  by  a  number  of  more  special  concepts,
and  which  present  themselves  as  problems  and  therefore  as  final  concepts.

When  the  number  of  elements  and  differences  is  unlimited,  these  methods
cannot  be  actually  carried  out ;  completeness  of  conceptual  construction
can  only  be  indirectly  expressed  either  by  general  symbols,  representing  an
infinite  series  of  differents,  or  by  negative  formulae.

The  process  of  abstraction  is  a  mere  expedient,  by  which  we  determine
the  concepts  of  certain  combinations  in  cases  where,  owing  to  the  infinity


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  151

of  possibilities,  no  definite  way  is  prescribed  to  free  construction.  It  is
supplemented  by  imaginative  invention.

i.  We  find  the  simplest  example  of  a  purely  constructive  formation  of
concepts  in  numbers  themselves,  and  in  numerical  combinations  and  com
binations  of  numerical  combinations ;  it  is  in  them,  therefore,  that  we  may
most  easily  trace  the  simple  characteristics  of  the  constructive  process.
First  of  all  units  are  combined  in  a  series, — two,  three,  etc. — according  to
the  simple,  recurrent  synthesis  of  counting,  and  in  this  way  we  get  the
concepts  of  simple  numbers.  But  even  here  we  find  that  the  process  of
combination  cannot  be  fully  carried  out,  owing  to  the  absence  of  limit,  and
we  substitute  for  the  incomplete  and  infinite  series  the  letter,  used  as  a
general  numerical  symbol.

This  first  and  fundamental  combination,  in  which  the  perfect  equivalence
of  all  the  elements  admits  of  no  difference  beyond  that  of  number  itself,  is
followed  by  further  developments.  The  same  form  of  synthesis  being
applied  to  the  combinations  already  obtained,  there  arise  the  forms  of
combination  contained  in  the  modes  of  calculation  known  as  addition,
multiplication  and  involution.  From  the  concept  of  the  sum,  again,  follow
sums  arising  from  two  or  three  or  more  terms  ;  and  inasmuch  as  each
addendum  may  be  of  any  value  we  get  an  infinite  series  of  combinations  of
which,  for  practical  purposes,  only  the  twofold  addition  of  the  numbers
from  i  to  10  is  generally  carried  out  one  by  one,  since  the  decimal  nota
tion  of  numbers  in  language  and  writing  reduces  all  addition  to  the  addition
of  numbers  between  i  and  10.  In  the  same  way  the  concept  of  multipli
cation  leads  first  to  the  multiplication  table  showing  all  the  combinations
of  the  same  numbers  in  products  of  two  terms,  but  admits  also  of  an  in
finite  series  of  products  resulting  from  two,  three  or  more  factors.

Thus  the  numbers  combined  by  methods  of  calculation  become  them
selves  the  subjects  of  new  combinations,  and  there  arise,  according  to  the
same  principle  of  combination,  sums  of  differences,  differences  of  sums,
products  of  sums  and  differences,  sums  and  differences  of  products,  etc. ;
and  these  general  concepts  are  again  differentiated  by  the  fact  that  each
one  contains  the  possibility  of  any  number  of  terms,  and  each  term  may
be  of  any  value.  Just  because  the  principle  itself  is  so  simple  and  so  easy
of  application,  there  is  no  need  to  actually  carry  out  all  the  combinations
:or  to  provide  special  names  for  the  more  complicated  forms  ;  the  infinity
'of  possibilities,  moreover,  would  make  it  impossible  to  get  further  than  the
|beginning  of  any  actual  statement  of  all  combinations.


152  LOGIC

2.  This  principle  of  the  complete  combination  of  given  elements  into
composite  forms  is  accompanied  by  another  which  in  one  aspect  develops
from  it,  and  this  second  principle  starts  from  a  given  combination  and  ex
tends  it  beyond  its  original  limits  by  an  exhaustive enumeration  of  all
particular  cases. The  concept  of  multiplication  arises  first  from  the  re
peated  addition  of  equal  numbers  ;  instead  of  2  +  2  +  2  we  say  3x2. But
when  we  take  the  general  expression  of  the  product  a  x  b  and  substitute  for  a
and  b  all  values  in  the  numerical  series — including  as  the  result  of  counting
backwards  i  and  o  (p.  31  sq.) — the  concept  of  the  product  is  extended  be
yond  the  limits  imposed  by  its  original  meaning. Both  i  x  a  and  o  x  a  are
brought  into  the  concept  as  limiting  cases  which  from  one  point  of  view
may  be  formally  included  in  the  concept  of  multiplication,  though  in  such
a  way  that  its  original  meaning  is  no  longer  applicable,  and  is  indeed  funda
mentally altered  by  the  new  interpretation  which  must  be  given  to  the
formulae. If,  notwithstanding  this,  formulae  such  as  i  x  a  and  o  x  a  are  not
to  be  regarded  as  self-contradictory  concepts,  it  is  because  they  form  part
of  the  same  series  and  proceed  according  to  the  same  law  as  the  true  pro
ducts,  and  according  to  the  same  law  have  as  definite  a  value. In  the
same  way  we  extend  the  concept  of  difference  by  thinking  of  the  general
formula  a — b  as  applying  to  all  values  of  a  and  b,  and  the  concept  of  involu
tion  by  introducing  negative  and  fractional  exponents. The  extension  of
the  concept  over  the  whole  series  of  possible  combinations  leads  us  to
include  under  the  same  name  numerical  combinations  which  no  longer
admit  of  the  same  original interpretation,  though  their  meaning  can be
inferred  from  this.

It  is  obvious  here  that  in  these  cases  pure  construction  gives  first  only
the  narrower  concept,  and  that  we  get  the  wider  concept  only  by  an  ex
tension  of  the  synthesis  already  given.

3.  The  importance  of  the  latter  process  appears  still  more  clearly  in
geometry.

In  the  first  place,  what  we  may  call  the  geometrical  synthesis  of  simple
elements  is  determined  by  no  such  simple  law  as  in  the  formation  of
numbers.  That  which  determines  the  synthesis  is  space,  but  in  space  we
cannot  think  of  a  plurality  of  elements  without  introducing  relations  of
situation  and  magnitude.  The  number  two  never  varies  ;  but  two  points
can  only  be  thought  of  in  connection  with  some  distance  between  them,
and  with  three  points  appears  the  question  of  their  mutual  position.  Thus
in  geometry  all  synthetical  conceptual  construction  is  concerned  with  the


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  153

genesis  of  the  idea  of  spatial  figures,  variations  of  the  general  relations  of
position,  magnitudes  and  distances  of  points  and  lines.

An  inexhaustible  field  is  here  opened  to  construction ;  but  it  is  a  field  in
which  from  the  first  we  are  without  definite  guidance,  so  that  the  con
struction  must  be  purely  inventive.  Just  because  the  elementary  and
conceptually  determined  ideas  of  the  straight  line,  the  angle,  etc.,  can  only
be  gained  by  a  discriminating  analysis  within  space,  the  total  idea  of  space
is  indifferent  with  respect  to  all  combinations.  Whether  we  begin  by
forming  systems  of  points,  or  investigate  the  position  of  two  lines  in  space,
or  imagine  a  continually  increasing  number  of  radii  issuing  from  a  point,
there  is  no  internal  necessity  to  determine  this  production  of  manifold
geometrical  images,  in  the  same  way  as  the  concept  of  number  itself  pro
duces  the  numerical  series,  sums  and  products.

4.  But  however  the  construction  may  begin,  it  depends,  on  the  one
hand,  upon  certain  fundamental  assumptions  as  to  the  simplest  construc
tions  and  their  possibility  1 — such  as  are  contained  in  the  aMjfjMTa  of
Euclid — and,  on  the  other  hand,  certain  rules  are  prescribed  to  it  by  the
nature  of  space.  From  the  combination  of  a  few  elements — lines  or  points
— it  proceeds  further  in  space  to  the  combination  of  more  ;  at  first  two
straight  lines,  then  three,  then  four,  are  drawn  and  brought  into  different
combinations  of  position.  Thus  from  the  beginning  number  is  needed  as
a  guide,  and  here  again  we  find  that  the  construction  of  arithmetical  and
geometrical  concepts  cannot  be  regarded  as  co-ordinate,  inasmuch  as  the
geometrical  synthesis  presupposes  the  arithmetical.  The  continuity  of
space,  again,  permits  of  an  infinite  number  of  possibilities  of  position,  e.g.
}f  two  straight  lines  with  respect  to  each  other ;  for  this  reason  conceptual
instruction  can  never  proceed  by  an  exhaustive  combination  of  a  fixed
lumber  of  elements,  but  can  merely  draw  limits  within  the  continuum,
eaving  it  to  intuition  to  fill  up  the  space  between  these  limits.  We  cannot
enumerate  the  particular  distinguishable  cases  in  which  the  position  of  two
ines  to  each  other  differs  ;  but  by  turning  and  moving  them  in  all  direc-
ions  we  get  certain  definite  cases  which  can  be  determined  by  simple
:haracteristics,  with  reference  to  which  all  others  can  be  determined  by
icgative  characteristics  alone  (§  43,  5,  I.,  p.  280  sq.).  Two  lines  in  space
:ither  coincide  and  have  all  their  points  in  common,  or  they  do  not  coincide;
f  they  do  not  coincide,  then  they  either  have  one  point  in  common  and

1  Cf. Zindler,  Beitriige  zur  Thcorie  der  mathematischen  Erkenntniss  (Sitzungsberichte
'er  phil.  -hist.  Classe  der  Wiener  Academic,  vol.  118,  1889,  ix.  p.  32).


154  LOGIC

intersect,  or  they  do  not  intersect  ;  if  they  do  not  intersect,  then  they  are
either  parallel  or  not  parallel ;  it  is  in  this  form  that  we  must  develop  the
closer  determination  of  the  combination  which  begins  by  bringing  two
straight  lines  together  as  elements.  The  concepts  are  here  formed  by  dis
junctions,  of  which  the  one  term  is  a  definable  case  from  amongst  an  infinite
number  of  co-ordinate  cases,  while  the  other  term  is  the  mere  negation  of  this
case,  merely  borrowing  a  significance  from  the  general  intuition  of  space.

Or  suppose  we  investigate  three  lines  in  a  plane  ;  all  three  are  parallel
or  two  are  parallel  and  one  not,  or  all  three  intersect,  and  intersect  either
in  one  point,  or  in  three  points  so  as  to  form  a  triangle,  and  then  either
so  as  to  form  three  equal  angles,  etc.  Everywhere  we  find  the  same
method  of  dividing  the  infinite  manifold  of  relations  which  are  possible
between  certain  elementary  parts,  by  means  of  a  disjunction  (a  and  non-fl)
into  a  particular  case  and  an  infinite  number  of  others.

5.  Geometrical  construction  has  shown  a  preference  in  its  development
for  bounded  figures  :  triangles,  squares,  circles,  etc.  ;  and  this  points  to  an
empirical  origin.  What  is  first  given  to  sense-perception  consists  in  images
of  bounded  bodies  and  surfaces,  and  imagination  also  begins  by  drawing
particular  figures  ;  in  distinguishing  these  and  endeavouring  to  determine
them  conceptually  our  thought  is  occupied  with  a  quite  definite  intuition.
But  when  this  intuition  is  thought  of  by  means  of  a  few  general  predicates
only,  apart  from  the  fixed  dimensions  of  the  particular  case,  or  when
figures  agreeing  in  certain  characteristics  are  classed  together  by  a  process
of  abstraction,  we  have  begun  the  process  of  extending  a  given  figure  by
variation  of  its  elements  within  the  limits  imposed  by  the  fixed  general
predicates.  The  concept  of  the  triangle  is  certainly  due  rather  to  the
sense-intuition  of  particular  cases  than  to  the  attempt  to  see  in  how  many
ways  three  straight  lines  may  lie  in  space ;  but  then  it  has  passed  beyond
the  particular  given  figures,  beginning  with  a  comparison  of  different
triangles,  and  including  all  possible  positions  and  dimensional  relations
of  sides  and  angles.  Here  again  the  limiting  case  appears,  when  the  three
lines  coincide  in  one  line,  or  the  three  points  in  one  point ;  but  within  the
infinite  variety  we  find  certain  fixed  forms  which  are  determined  by
equality  of  sides  or  by  the  possession  of  a  right  angle.

This  process  of  abstraction,  as  employed  in  construction,  is  distinguished
from  that  which  is  ordinarily  so  called  by  the  fact  that  the  concepts
obtained  in  this  way  pass  at  once  beyond  the  fortuitous  beginnings  of
abstraction  and  find  their  limits  in  their  own  characteristics.


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  155

6.  "Whatever  is  thus  produced  by combination of  points or  straight
lines  is  determined  by  the  nature  of  space  in  general,  and  this  same  nature
of  space  prescribes  limits  to  the  concepts,  inasmuch  as  the  variation  of  the
particular  elements  can  be  limited  by  their  synthesis. From  this  point  of
view  the  process  of  construction  itself  makes  us  conscious  of  the  limits
imposed  upon  it  in  the  form  of  axioms  of  space-intuition  ;  the  proposition
that  two  straight  lines  cannot  include  a  space  shows  by  its negative  form
that  it  has  been  obtained  through  the  attempt  to  combine  two  straight
lines  in  all  possible  positions,  and  from  the  perception  that  as  soon  as  they
cease  to  coincide  they  continue  to  diverge  from  the  point  of  intersection.
To  this  extent  knowledge  of  these  axioms  contains  an  empirical  element ;
their  truth  first  becomes  manifest  after  an  exhaustive  survey  of  all  possibili
ties,  but  they  attain  unconditional  validity  only  from  the  consciousness  of
the  invariability  of  space,  by  which  is  excluded  the  possibility  that  if  we
were  to  try  again  we  should  get  another  result.

7.  In  the  syntheses  treated  of  above  we  have  already  seen  the  import
ance  of  the  movement  of  points  and  lines  in  space,  as  the  only  means  of
surveying  exhaustively  the  possibilities  included  in  a  general  concept ;  and
this  importance  becomes  especially  obvious  when  spatial  images  are  such
that  our  ideas  of  them  must  have  their  origin  in  movement. In  dealing
with  straight  lines  we  have  our  elements,  as  it  were,  ready  to  hand,  but
curves  can  only  be  geometrically  constructed  by  movement  according  to  a
fixed  law ;  the  synthesis  leading to  the concept already contains  this
element  within  itself. It  is  in  this  way  that  we  get  our  ideas  of  the  circle,
of  rotating  bodies, etc.  ;  and as  lines and circles, planes and curved
surfaces,  intersect  in  free  combination,  constantly  exhibiting  new  relations,
we  get  an  indefinitely  increasing  variety  of  constructions. Everywhere,
however,  we  are  called  upon  in  the  same  way  to  survey  the  whole  area  of
possibilities  affirmed  by  a  conceptional  formula,  and  thus  to  obtain  limiting
cases  and by  means  of  division  to  draw limits  within  the area  itself.
When  we  construct  the  cone  by  the  rotation  of  a  right-angled  triangle
about  its  cathetus,  it  is  the  nature  of  space  which  in  the  first  place  deter
mines  what  will  result ;  but  the  extension  of  the  concept  is  fixed  by  vary
ing  the  triangle  through  all  the  terms  which  intervene between the  two
limiting  cases  in  which  either  the  axis  or  the  radius  of  the  base  is  O,  in
which  the  cone  passes  either  into  the  circle  or  the  straight  line. In  the
same way  the  general concept  of  the conic section has its  origin in
voluntary  construction  when  we  imagine  the  cone  as  intersected  by  a  plane  ;


156  LOGIC

but  when  once  the  concept  is  grasped,  it  is  extended  to  all  possible 'cases,
and  develops  into  its  subordinate  species.

8.  There  is  in  geometry  another  kind  of  conceptual  construction  which
is  essentially  different  from  the  above  ;  it  is  construction  by  formulae  which
precede  intuition  and  contain  problems  as  to  how  geometrical  figures  may
be  produced  which  shall  correspond  to  certain  conditions,  and  which  are
therefore  analogous  to  final  concepts.  When,  for  example,  I  propound
the  concept  of  a  line  having  all  its  points  equidistant  from  one  point,  then
an  attribute  of  the  line  is  given  which  by  itself  is  insufficient  for  the  carry
ing  out  of  the  intuition ;  even  if  I  were  to  begin  to  draw  any  number  of
points  at  an  equal  distance  from  another  point,  I  should  never  succeed  in
constructing  from  them  the  continuous  line.  Moreover,  as  thus  stated,  the
concept  is  left  quite  indeterminate,  since  any  line  drawn  on  the  surface  of
a  sphere  would  satisfy  the  conditions  ;  even  if  we  added  the  further  deter
mination  that  the  line  must  be  in  a  plane,  our  formula  would  not  at  once
give  us  the  intuitable  idea  of  the  shape  of  the  desired  line.  The  mere
relations  of  magnitude  contained  in  the  formula  would  indeed  suffice  to
distinguish  the  already  constructed  circle  from  all  other  lines,  but  in  itself
it  contains  in  the  first  place  a  problem  to  be  solved  by  the  geometrical  con
struction  of  a  continuous  line,  and  we  are  bound  to  ask  whether  it  can  be
solved  in  one  way  only.  All  the  equations  of  analytical  geometry  fall
under  the  same  point  of  view ;  they  contain  the  problem  of  finding  a  line
of  which  the  points  will  satisfy  all  the  dimensional  relations  of  abscissae  and
ordinates  expressed  in  the  equation,  and  which  finds  in  the  equation  the
determining  law  of  its  construction.

While  the  true  geometrical  synthesis  creates  spatial  figures  for  intuition,
and  the  conceptual  formulae  in  which  it  is  expressed  at  once  give  rise  to
the  intuitable  idea  and  show  how  far  it  is  determined  and  how  far  it  is
capable  of  further  variation,  the  analytical  formula  necessitates  an  investi
gation  as  to  the  position  in  space  of  the  points  which  satisfy  the  equation,
and  as  to  whether  it  can  be  satisfied  in  one  way  alone  or  in  several.
Assuming  that  the  intuition  can  be  realized,  then  the  problems  of  deter
mining  the  limits  of  the  concept  recur  ;  for  example,  the  equation  of  the
ellipse  includes  the  possibility  of  varying  the  relation  between  the  greatei
and  the  smaller  axis  from  equality  to  the  vanishing  of  the  one  or  the  infinit)
of  the  other,  and  thus  of  passing  through  all  excentric  figures  from  the
circle  to  the  straight  line  or  parabola.  Whether,  indeed,  we  may  infer  from
this  that  the  straight  line  is  included  in  the  concept  of  the  ellipse  and  maj


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  157

be  treated  as  an  ellipse  of  which  the  one  axis  =  a  and  the  other  =  o,  is
doubtful,  since  according  to  the  original  meaning  of  the  equation  the  values
of  the  two  axes  represent  actual  lines.  This  meaning  is  contradicted  when
one  of  the  axes  disappears  altogether  ;  it  is  only  the  continuity  of  the  tran
sition  which  enables  us  to  regard  the  straight  line  as  an  ellipse,  in  the
same  way  as  we  regard  o  x  a  as  a  product.

9.  The  latter  method  of  geometrical  construction  passes  without  fixed
limits  into  the  sphere  of  those  problems  which  instruct  us  to  produce
particular  figures  which  will  fulfil  certain  quite  definite  conditions  as  to
position  and  magnitude.  Every  geometrical  figure  represents  a  general
concept  in  so  far  as  it  may  be  repeated  in  the  same  way  at  every  point  in
space,  every  position  being  merely  relative,  and  hence  particular  figures
which  are  fully  determined  may  be  regarded  as  merely  the  most  specialized
concepts,  although  they  can  never  be  developed  by  division  because  of  the
infinity  of  differences  in  magnitude.  The  logical  import  of  the  problem  to
construct  an  equilateral  triangle  with  a  given  side,  or  a  circle  with  a  given
diameter,  is  just  the  same  as  that  of  a  conceptual  formula  which  merely
states  the  conditions  to  be  fulfilled  by  a  species  of  figure  ;  in  both  cases
we  are  dealing  with  a  kind  of  final  concept,  to  which  we  have  to  find  the
corresponding  real  intuition.  The  difference  lies  in  the  fact  that  such  a
problem  of  construction  involves  conditions  which  do  not  admit  of  an  un
limited  variety  of  objects,  but  can  be  fulfilled  only  by  a  single  spatial  figure
or  by  a  limited  number;  the  question  which  arises  here  is:  how  far  we
must  proceed  in  the  determination  to  exclude  all  indefiniteness,  and  how
far  we  can  proceed  if  we  are  to  avoid  affirming  incompatible  determinations.
A  right-angled  triangle  with  a  hypotenuse  =  a  is  an  indeterminate  problem,
i.e.,  the  formula  represents  a  concept  which  includes  an  unlimited  variety
of  right-angled  triangles  ;  a  right-angled  triangle  having  the  hypotenuse  a
and  the  perpendicular  b  >  a  is  a  contradictory  concept,  and  a  right-angled
triangle  with  the  sides  a,  b,  c,  is  a  contradictory  concept  unless  a~  =


1  Zindler  (loc.  cit.,  p.  33  sq.  ,  p.  53  sq.)  speaks  of  existential  propositions  in  mathematics,
and  maintains  that  what  is  ordinarily  held  to  be  derived  from  a  definition  really  follows
from  an  existential  proposition  which  is  in  thought  but  not  expressed  (cf.  J.  S.  Mill's
I-Agic,  bk.  I,  viii.  5).  But  I  should  like  to  avoid  applying  the  concept  of  existence  to
purely  mathematical  objects.  The  question  is  not  at  all  whether  these  have  any  existence
independently  of  our  thought,  but  only  whether  a  conceptual  formula  which  is  stated  in
general  characteristics  can  be  realized  in  intuition,  or  whether  (as  in  arithmetic)  it  can  be
actually  carried  out  by  our  thought.  \/4  "  exists"  only  in  the  sense  that  I  actually  carry
out  the  operation  required  by  the  root-symbol,  and  can  state  a  number  which  corresponds
to  the  condition  ;  ^/  —  i  does  not  exist,  the  conditions  cannot  be  satisfied  in  the  sense  in


158  LOGIC

From  this  it  is  clear  that  conceptual  construction,  which  does  not  start
from  the  intuitable  synthesis,  must  be  guided  by  general  propositions
deciding  the  possibility  of  the  combination  of  characteristics,  and  that  in  so
far  it  is  secondary  (§  84) ;  just  as  in  the  formation  of  real  final  concepts  it
is  knowledge  of  the  real  causal  connections  which  enables  us  to  distinguish
possible  from  impossible  syntheses.  The  original  syntheses,  on  the  other
hand,  are  governed  only  by  the  rules  which  we  have  called  axioms  of  con
ceptual  construction  (§48,  3,  I.,  p.  317  sq.),  which  must  come  into  thought
together  with  the  consciousness  of  the  ideas  because  they  merely  express
the  relations  obtaining  between  our  elementary  ideas  as  such,  and  upon
which  it  depends  how  far  in  the  specialization  of  a  concept  variation  in  one
element  determines  variations  in  other  elements.  Thus  simple  intuition
teaches  us  that  variation  in  the  relative  magnitudes  of  the  sides  involves
variation  in  the  magnitudes  of  the  angles  in  the  triangle,  but  not  in  the
parallelogram  ;  and  we  obtain  the  distinction  between  characteristics  which
are  mutually  dependent  and  those  which  are  independent.

10.  It  is  only  when  we  are  developing  an  already  established  general
concept  by  differences  of  independent  characteristics  that  there  is  room  for
a  safe  and  really  useful  application  of  a  kind  of  calculus  of  combinations,
without  fear  of  coming  upon  the  impossible  as  well  as  the  possible  (cf.  §  43,
10,  I.,  p.  285,  and  below,  §  85).

11.  We  cannot  here  pause  to  show  how  the  same  methods  find  applica
tion  also  in  the  form  of  the  synthesis  which  is  contained  in  the  concept  of
motion  ;  for  the  particular  concepts  relating  to  motion  depend  partly  upon
geometrical  concepts  of  orbits,  partly  upon  relations  of  magnitude  between
space  and  time.


When  we  come  to  the  classificatory  formation  of  concepts  no  simple
and  direct  rules  can  be  established  for  the  synthesis  of  the  elements  which
unite  to  form  the  concepts  of  real  things  and  their  real  relations  ;  we  can,
indeed,  proceed  here  only  hypothetically  and  provisionally.

\vhichtheyarestated.  Zindler  himself  allows  (p.  33)  that  to  "exist"  in  mathematics
generally  means  to  "be  possible."  He  is,  however,  quite  right  in  saying  that  a
mathematical  definition  is  only  legitimate  when  it  involves  no  contradiction  or  incom
patibility  amongst  its  characteristics,  and  again,  that  there  are  axiomatic— i.e.  immediately
evident — propositions  concerning  the  possibility  of  certain  objects  expressed  in  conceptual
formulae  ;  but  these  are  essentially  of  the  same  kind  as  those  which  Euclid  calls
ai.T7jfj.aTa.


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  159

The  beginning  of  classificatory  formation  which  accompanies  language
starts  from  the  assumption  of  fixed  forms  and  sharp  distinctions  between
them,  but  it  can  have  for  its  foundation  neither  extensive  completeness  of
the  things  to  be  classified  nor  exhaustive  knowledge  of  the  particular.

The  methodical  completion  of  what  is  thus  begun  must  also  do  without
this  foundation,  insistence  upon  which  would  render  any  classification
impossible  ;  but  it  must  aim  at  being  founded  at  least  upon  the  most  ex
haustive  knowledge  possible  of  known  particulars.  The  conceptual  for
mulas  are  complicated  by  the  necessity  of  including  in  them  causal
relations  and  laws  of  development,  and  we  are  thus  forced  to  substitute
diagnostic  definitions  for  complete  statements  of  the  content  of  the  con
cepts.

But  these  are  themselves  possible  only  when  grounded  upon  a  com
prehensive  induction,  which  again  presupposes  that  a  classification  has
already  taken  place.  From  this  it  necessarily  follows  that  every  classifica
tory  formation  of  concepts  has  a  provisional  character.  On  the  other
hand,  we  are  driven  to  hypothetical  construction  by  the  difficulties  which
result  from  the  gradual  transitions  between  things,  and  which  render
uncertain  our  formation  of  the  higher  specific  concepts.

The  formation  of  concepts  of  things  is  connected  with  the  formation  of
the  complex  concepts  of  attributes,  activities  and  relations ;  and  this  again,
in  so  far  as  the  concepts  are  intended  to  express  only  the  actual,  is  carried
out  only  so  far  as  the  given  affords  occasion,  and  lacks  a  fixed  principle
for  the  necessity  of  its  syntheses.

i.  We  turn  now  to  the  other  side  of  formation  of  concepts,  that  which
starts  from  perceived  things  and  aims  at  establishing  general  concepts
under  which  they  can  be  subsumed  with  their  relations,  and  at  forming
these  concepts  in  such  a  way  as  to  represent  the  essence  of  things  them
selves  and  to  express  one  ground  of  unity  for  the  co-existence  of  distin
guishable  characteristics.  We  have  already  indicated  above  (p.  144  sq.)  why
t  is  impossible  here,  starting  from  the  analysis  of  conceptual  elements,  to
)roceed  by  constructive  combination.  The  concept  of  substance  is  an
>mpty  form  determining  nothing  by  itself,  in  which  we  combine  the  most
nanifold  given  content ;  in  itself  it  tells  us  nothing  as  to  the  charac-
:eristics  to  be  combined  in  it ;  it  gives  us  neither  a  law  by  which  to
iistinguish  compatible  from  incompatible,  nor  a  rule  according  to  which
)ne  characteristic  would  depend  upon  another.  Only  the  most  general
md  formal  determinations  as  to  the  spatial  and  temporal  relations  of


160  LOGIC

presented  qualities  and  changes  are  contained  in  it,  while  no  general
principle  prescribes  what  definite  sense-content  we  shall  combine  in  it,
and  how ;  and  even  when  it  is  supplemented  by  the  concept  of  causality
this  again  is  much  too  indefinite,  with  its  thought  of  necessary  connection,
to  say  beforehand  what  forces  we  must  ascribe  to  a  thing,  and  how  we  are
to  determine  its  mode  of  working.  Attempts,  such  as  have  been  made  by
Spinoza  or  Herbart,  to  derive  from  the  mere  concept  of  substance  or  of
the  existent  its  definite  characteristics  or  attributes,  lead  by  latent  assump
tions  alone  to  a  result  which  is  not  contained  in  the  general  concept  of
substance.

Here,  therefore,  we  are  thrown  back  entirely  upon  experience,  which
shows  us  which  of  the  attributes  given  to  sensation  stand  in  such  spatial
and  temporal  relations  that  we  have  occasion  to  apply  the  thoughts  of
substance  and  causality  as  a  form  for  their  combination,  and  which  has
already  been  elaborated  in  this  way  by  unpremeditated  psychological
processes.

2.  It  is  upon  these  considerations  that  the  doctrine  is  based  according
to  which  all  concepts  arise  from  comparison  of  the  given,  and  abstraction
of  that  which  is  common  to  much  of  the  given  ;  but  to  proceed  methodi
cally  with  this  abstraction  we  must  be  conscious  of  the  aims  to  be  pursued
by  conceptual  construction.  Language,  to  which  this  doctrine  looks  first,
is  no  sure  guide ;  it  does  not  aim  at  the  highest  ends  of  knowledge,  but
serves  primarily  the  immediate  necessity  for  mutual  understanding,  and
its  terminology  is  not  grounded  upon  an  exhaustive  analysis  of  given
objects,  but  has  in  view  a  few  easily  noted  characteristics,  often  neglecting
finer  distinctions.  In  its  general  terms,  again,  it  combines  whatever  seems
to  agree  in  some  specially  important  attribute,  but  does  not  consciously
aim  at  forming  those  species  which  will  make  possible  the  greatest  number
of  general  propositions.

Scientific  method,  on  the  contrary,  starts  from  particular  things  in
their  most  concrete  determination,  and  no  aspect  which  they  present  to
perception  may  be  overlooked  or  neglected  ;  it  must  begin  with  the  whole
extent  of  knowledge  which  is  attainable  with  reference  to  particular
objects,  and  which  will  include  purely  individual  traits,  or  at  least  abso
lutely  definite  degrees  of  more  general  qualities.  This  accurate  knowledge
alone  can  be  the  ground  for  any  conclusion  as  to  which  resemblances
should  guide  us  in  forming  general  concepts,  and  what  extent  of  indi
vidual  differences  in  the  particular  may  be  overlooked  to  enable  us  to


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  161

form  a  general  concept  comprehending  objects  of  the  greatest  possible
similarity.  For  what  judgment  demands  is  certainly  not  mere  recon
struction  of  the  purely  particular,  such  as  would  be  given  by  the  ex
haustive  description  of  the  particular  object,  but  general  concepts  which
will  be  applicable  to  a  number  of  objects  ;  such  concepts  alone  yield
predicates  by  which  the  particular  can  be  determined  and  distinguished,
and  enable  us  by  the  abbreviation  of  general  propositions  to  survey  the
endless  plurality  of  actual  perceptions.

3.  But  assuming  this  beginning  to  be  made,  we  find  ourselves  threatened
with  failure  at  the  first  step  of  our  procedure  because  of  the  unlimited
nature  of  our  material. There  is  no  limit  to  what  can  be  said  of  the
particular  thing  when  we  take  into  account  all  its  relations,  and  we  cannot
exclude  them,  since  all  which  we  know  of  it  rests  finally  upon  relations ;
and  there  is  no limit  to  the  extent  of  the  particular  within  which  our
comparison  must  seek  for  similars  and  determine  the  value  of  differences.
The  method  which  demands  that  the  whole  material  of  particular  things
shall  be  surveyed  before  beginning  the  formation  of  concepts  is  logically
correct  if  all  that  exists  is  to  find  a  place  in  our  conceptual  system  ;  but  it
can  never  pass  beyond  the  preliminary  steps  to  the  beginning  of  its  real
work.

As  a  matter  of  fact  the  formation  of  concepts  from  the  perception  of
actual  things  has  never  proceeded  by  this  direct  way ;  it  has  always  begun
within  a  limited  area  from  incomplete  knowledge  of  the  particular.  Its
mode  of  proceeding  has  been — guided  here  again  by  language — on  the
one  hand,  to  group  into  lowest  species  objects  the  most  similar  for  its
knowledge;  on  the  other  hand  to  divide  into  higher  kinds  objects  which
seemed  separated  by  specially  important  and  widely  spread  differences.
To  form  the  concepts  of  man,  horse  and  sheep  was  as  natural  as  to
separate  the  animate  and  inanimate  halves  of  the  living  into  the  wide
classes  of  animals  and  plants.  In  this  way  scientific  reflection  began  not
only  to  appropriate  the  formation  started  by  language,  but  also  to  adopt
the  assumptions  latent  in  this  process — assumptions  which  are  in  part  due
to  and  confirmed  by  those  objects  which  are  attainable,  and  in  part
grounded  upon  the  needs  of  our  thought  when  it  is  directed  towards  the
knowledge  of  things.

4.  These  assumptions  have  reference,  first,  to  the  nature  of  the  generality
if  the  concepts  thus  obtained. The  Socratic  definition  of  the  meanings
:onnected  with  words  undertakes  to  fix  the  content  of  the  thought  accom-

s.  L.— ii.  M


i6z  LOGIC

panying  the  word  man,  horse,  gold,  in  the  form  of  a  concept,  which,  as
identical  with  itself  and  strictly  determined,  would  form  one  stone  in  the
edifice  of  our  knowledge ;  and  in  so  doing  it  assumes  that  objects  them
selves  manifest  a  corresponding  constancy,  remaining  the  same  in  the
future  and  recurring  in  instances  which  never  vary — in  other  words,  that
there  are  fixed  forms  in  nature.  The  value  of  a  concept  does  not  consist
in  the  information  that  such  and  such  characteristics  have  been  common
to  a  certain  number  of  things,  but  in  the  fact  that  it  presents  a  type  to
which  the  particular  will  always  and  everywhere  conform,  that  it  shows  the
die  with  which  nature  stamps  her  objects.  In  the  Platonic  doctrine  of
ideas  and  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  of  forms  we  have  a  simple  and  clear
expression  of  this  view,  which  supposes  an  inner  necessity  combining
definite  characteristics  and  prohibiting  arbitrary  and  lawless  change,  or  the
constant  flux  of  things.

A  second  assumption  is  that  there  are  clearly  marked  distinctions  be
tween  these  forms  which  enable  us  to  fix  their  limits  with  certainty.
Within  the  region  in  which  conceptual  construction  begins  we  find  unmis
takable  divisions  between  gold  and  silver,  between  oak  and  beech,  be
tween  horse  and  ass ;  differences  in  the  particular  objects  form  gaps
sharply  separating  similar  objects  of  one  kind  from  those  of  another
species.  The  same  necessity  which  binds  together  certain  characteristics
within  narrow  limits  of  variation  holds  others  apart;  the  distinctness  of
forms  is  only  the  negative  aspect  of  their  fixity,  the  importance  of  the
Sia<£opa  etSoTroios  is  necessarily  given  with  the  doctrine  of  fixed  forms.

5.  Starting  from  such  assumptions,  the  way  seems  open  to  a  complete
classification  of  the  given.  But  we  can  only  learn  by  actually  carrying  out
our  attempt  whether  these  assumptions  hold  good  in  the  sense  in  which
we  affirm  them,  whether  with  their  help  we  can  complete  a  classification
which  will  be  simply  a  continuation  of  the  nomenclature  begun  by
language  and  will  exhibit  fixed  and  distinct  forms,  and  whether  the  super
ficial  and,  as  it  were,  mechanical  rules  which  bid  us  compare  the  objects
to  which  language  gives  the  same  name,  or  which  present  themselves  in
some  other  spontaneous  way  for  comprehension  into  one  concept,  will
always  suffice  to  yield  a  firm  basis  for  classification.  Although  we  must
certainly  begin  with  such  processes  in  order  to  get  a  preliminary  stand
point  \vithin  the  multiplicity  of  phenomena,  yet  we  find  grave  difficulties
when  we  attempt  to  establish  concepts  within  the  whole  extent  of  the
given,  which,  as  infimce  species,  shall  express  it  in  its  full  determination


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  163

and  so  that  none  but  insignificant  differences  peculiar  to  the  individual,
and  easily  separated  from  those  which  are  important  and  specific,  shall  be
overlooked.

6.  We  are  first  confronted  by  the  variability  of  objects  themselves,
which  forces  us  beyond  the  statement  of  a  fixed  complex  of  perceptible
characteristics,  and  obliges  us  to  include  causal  relations  or  laws  of  de
velopment  in  our  enumeration  of  the  attributes  by  which  one  class  of
things  is  distinguished  from  all  others.  The  two-sidedness  of  the  concept
of  substance,  by  virtue  of  which  it  refers  to  one  and  the  same  ground,  not
only  that  which  co-exists  at  a  given  point  of  time,  but  also  the  changing
in  time,  complicates  the  conceptual  formulae  ;  for  if  they  are  not  merely  to
serve  to  fix  an  idea  obtained  under  certain  circumstances,  but  are  to  express
the  nature  of  the  thing  as  manifested  in  the  course  of  time  in  different
phenomena,  it  must  take  into  account  the  variability  of  things  themselves.
Quicksilver  seems  to  admit  of  a  simple  statement  of  characteristics  by
means  of  which  its  attributes  are  expressed  in  a  combination  which
belongs  to  no  other  object ;  but  it  is  only  at  an  ordinary  temperature  that
it  is  such  an  easily  recognisable  object,  it  evaporates  in  heat  and  becomes
solid  in  cold,  it  combines  with  other  metals  to  form  amalgams,  and  with
sulphur  to  form  cinnabar,  and  not  until  we  have  included  these  transforma
tions  in  our  concept  can  we  claim  to  have  stated  what  quicksilver  is.
Moreover  only  experience  can  teach  us  whether  and  how  these  changes
depend  according  to  laws  upon  certain  external  circumstances.  Finally,
even  the  most  immediate  predicates  resolve  themselves  into  causal  rela
tions,  so  that  the  concept  we  were  looking  for  turns  out  to  be  a  system  of
laws  expressing  the  way  in  which  an  X,  which  cannot  be  immediately
communicated  in  any  simple  expression,  is  related  to  us  and  to  other
things.

It  is  the  same  with  organic  beings.  When  we  construct  their  concepts  it
is  generally  the  permanent  forms  of  their  maturity  which  we  have  in  mind  ;
but  if  these  concepts  are  to  express  the  definite  nature  of  the  particular
organic  forms,  then  all  the  stages  of  development  from  the  earliest  germ
must  also  find  a  place  in  the  expression,  and  here  again  the  concept  seems
to  give  way,  and  to  be  obliged  to  include  laws  of  development,  and  even  the
dependence  of  development  upon  external  conditions.

But  in  proportion  as  the  concept  strives  towards  completeness  it  becomes
evident  how  impossible  is  the  task  of  preserving  the  conceptual  formula  as
a  comprehensible  unity.  The  nature  of  a  metal,  a  plant,  or  an  animal


1 64  LOGIC

proves  inexhaustible  when  we  try  to  include  all  its  relations  in  the  concep
tual  expression ;  and  this  is  even  more  the  case  when  the  innumerable
causal  relations,  in  which  a  thing  alters  its  modes  of  appearance,  cannot  be
deduced  as  necessary  consequences  from  other  attributes,  but  form  ele
ments  which  for  our  knowledge  are  independent  of  them  and  of  each  other.
From  the  attribute  of  fluidity  in  quicksilver  we  may,  of  course,  derive  a
number  of  attributes  which  depend  upon  the  general  laws  to  which  all
fluids  are  subject,  but  these  laws  themselves  were  only  empirically  dis
covered  ;  in  other  aspects,  e.g.  in  chemical  relations,  there  are  hardly  any
but  special  laws  between  which  there  is  no  known  connection.  Thus  the
task  of  establishing  exhaustive  concepts  for  the  lowest  species  seems  im
possible,  and  even  were  it  possible  such  concepts  would  lose  in  usefulness
by  their  richness  of  determination  ;  they  would  be  too  cumbersome  to  be
manipulated  or  to  serve  for  the  subsumption  of  particular  things  as  they
appear  to  perception  under  established  conceptual  formulae ;  it  would  be
necessary  to  renew  the  whole  round  of  investigation  with  every  object
before  it  could  be  safely  subsumed.

7.  For  this  reason  the  formation  of  concepts  in  this  province  always  aims
at  abbreviations,  which  enable  us  to  accept  a  part  of  the  characteristics  as
representatives  of  the  rest,  and  so  to  obtain  formulae  which  may  be  briefly
called  diagnostic  definitions.

Such  an  abbreviation  of  the  conceptual  formulae  may  be  carried  out  by
substituting  for  a  group  of  characteristics  which  always  occur  together  a
combination  of  a  few,  or  even  a  single  one,  amongst  them,  which  occurs
only  in  this  group,  and  which  is  therefore  a  sure  sign  of  the  presence  of  all
the  others.  In  direct  opposition  to  the  method  recommended  by  the
ordinary  doctrine  of  conceptual  formation  from  particular  ideas,  that  of  com
bining  what  is  common  to  all  the  objects  of  a  group,  scientific  classification
aims  rather  at  selecting  the  characteristic  attributes  which  distinguish  the
group  under  consideration  from  all  others.  It  is  obvious  that  this  necessi
tates  a  very  extensive  survey,  and  an  investigation  as  to  which  characteristics
may  be  accepted  as  always  occurring  together  because  connected  by  natural
necessity,  and  this  investigation  presupposes  the  methods  by  which  we
•  obtain  general  propositions  from  particular  perceptions,  i.e.  the  methods  of
induction.  We  find  the  same  dependence  upon  induction  in  the  fact  that
in  establishing  the  conceptual  characteristics  we  are  always  obliged  to  em
ploy  causal  relations  which  are  only  to  be  arrived  at  by  induction.

It  must  be  left  to  our  consideration  of  the  inductive  process  later  on  to


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  165

show  what  difficulties  it  has  to  overcome,  and  how  far  it  is  possible  at  all  to
make  sure  of  the  fundamental  point,  that  a  given  characteristic  occurs  only
in  connection  with  a  certain  group  of  others,  and  is  therefore  characteristic
of  this  group.  For  the  present  the  conclusion  we  have  reached  is  that  a
formation,  which  begins  by  combining  particular  things,  can  only  be  pro
visional,  and  must  reserve  the  right  of  future  correction.

8.  From  still  another  point  of  view  we  may  see  the  impossibility  of  start
ing  upon  what  we  may  call  the  direct  way  from  the  construction  of  infimse
species to  obtain  serviceable  classificatory  concepts. The  teachings of
Darwin  have  especially  emphasized  the  gradual  nature  of  the  transitions  in
the  sphere  of  organic  forms  which  intervene  between the  clearly  distin
guished  and  limited  classes,  which  at  first  sight  we  seemed  able  to  take  as  a
basis. The  gradually  increasing  differences  in  space,  slow  changes  in  time
taking  place  by  hardly  perceptible  steps,  seem  to  mock  beforehand  all  our
endeavours  to  obtain  a  fixed  and  sharply  defined  complex  of  invariable
characteristics  as  the  expression  of  the  permanent  nature  of  a  connected
group  of  organic  individuals,  and  the  attempt  to  establish  in  this  way  a  con
cept  under  which  a  plurality  of  similar  individuals  may  be  easily  subordi
nated,  while  others  are  unhesitatingly  excluded. The  greater  the  extent  of
observed  facts  from  which  we  start,  the  more  arbitrary  it  appears  to  draw
the  circles  of  our  concepts  within  the  stream  of  differences ;  if  we  proceed
to  specialize,  then  the  number  of  concepts  becomes  incalculable,  and  yet  we
do  not  escape  the  difficulty  of  finding  intermediate  forms  always  presenting
themselves  upon  the  boundaries  of  our  concepts  ;  and  if  we  disregard  sub
ordinate  differences  and  pause  only  where  the  course  of  known  phenomena
actually  shows  a  gap,  yet  this  gap  is  itself  fortuitous,  and  we  can  never  pro
ceed  with  the  consciousness  that  our  concepts  express  a  law  contained  in
the  nature  of  things,  nor  determine  what  elements  belong  together  once  and
for  all,  and  what  we  are  forbidden  by  the  laws  of  being  to  combine.

9.  The  same  difficulty  presents  itself  in  singular  and  rare  deviations  from
a  form  which is well  defined  and  recognisable  in a great number  of
instances;  what  can  we  make  of  men  with  six  fingers,  or  less  than  32  teeth,
of  plants  whose  stamens  are  wanting  or  change  into  petals  ? From  the
point  of  view  of  the  conceptual  construction,  which  merely  compares  the
given,  such  abnormal  cases  have  as  much  right  as  any  others  to  be  the
ground  for  specialization,  for  the  rarity  or  frequency  of  a  form  is  in  itself  no
determining  ground  for  our  construction  ; that  they  are  not  so  is  only
because  we  generally  introduce  presuppositions  concerning  normal  laws  by


166  LOGIC

which  our  classification  is  guided,  we  frame  certain  types  which  we  regard  as
ideally  perfect,  and  by  which  we  test  particular  instances.  Only  a  renewed
and  comprehensive  comparison  of  the  particular,  and  an  investigation  of
the  laws  of  its  genesis,  can  really  teach  us  what  we  are  justified  in  regarding
as  normal  and  what  is  fortuitous  and  abnormal.

10.  If  what  seems  the  easiest  step,  the  obtaining  of  the  infimae  species,
which  appears  to  be  immediately  forced  upon  us  in  the  given,  is  so  beset
with  hindrances,  how  shall  we  be  guided  in  our  progress  by  means  of
ascending  abstraction  to  the  higher  classes  ?  For  if  we  start  from  the  given,
and  attempt  to  arrange  it  according  to  similarities  and  differences,  we  are
left  free  to  choose  what  we  will  take  as  the  determining  common  character
istic  of  a  higher  class  ;  it  is  as  if  we  were  called  upon  to  classify  the  words
of  a  language  according  to  the  letters  which  they  have  in  common.  Shall
we  begin  by  grouping  together  all  which  have  one  letter  in  common,  or  those
which  differ  by  one  letter,  and  which  letter  shall  it  be  in  either  case  ?  If
we  find  the  combinations  abed,  abcf,  al>fg,  shall  we  combine  the  two
first  as  abc,  or  the  two  last  as  abf,  and  how  shall  we  dispose  of  the  third  ?
The  most  serviceable  arrangement  is  doubtless  that  which  groups  together
things  which  have  most  in  common  ;  but  in  order  to  achieve  this  we  must
have  complete  knowledge  of  all  which  can  be  predicated  of  the  particular
kinds,  and  inasmuch  as  they  manifest  their  nature  chiefly  in  the  causal
relations,  this  again  presupposes  a  previous  investigation  of  the  causal
relations.

ii.  From  what  we  have  said  above  we  may  at  least  gather  that,  so  far  as
concerns  those  concepts  which  are  meant  to  correspond  to  the  existent,  no
simple  and  fundamental  direct  rules  for  the  combination  of  elementary
characteristics  can  be  given,  which  follow  from  the  nature  of  these  elements  ;
that  although  some  objects  submit  to  classification  more  easily  than  others,
yet  even  with  these  there  is  no  obvious  necessity  constraining  us  to  form
certain  concepts  and  prohibiting  others  ;  and  that  our  formation  of  concepts
has  no  certainty  except  when  based  upon  knowledge  of  general  laws  stating
that  certain  groups  of  characteristics  are  always  combined  and  others
never.  If  we  consider,  moreover,  that  general  laws  themselves  presuppose
a  preceding  formation  of  concepts  by  which  alone  we  can  obtain  subjects
for  them,  it  follows  that  we  are  moving  in  a  circle  between  abstraction  and
induction.  The  only  method  which  can  actually  be  pursued,  and  which
has  been  actually  pursued  in  the  history  of  science,  is  characterized  as
hypothetical;  starting  from  the  general  assumption  of  the  possibility  of  a


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  167

classification,  it  begins  at  first  with  inadequate  means,  proceeds  then  to
inductions  of  the  causal  laws,  and  modifies  in  accordance  with  these  such
of  its  first  attempts  as  cannot  be  confirmed  by  them.  But  as  we  shall  see
upon  closer  investigation,  we  need  the  help  of  construction  also  before  we
can  finally  gain  our  highest  and  most  general  laws.

12.  Connected  with  the  formation  of  those  concepts  which  are  to  serve
for  the  classification  of  given  things  is  the  formation  of  composite  concepts
of  qualities,  attributes  and  relations ;  and  these,  again,  are  generally  de
veloped  only  so  far  as  occasion  is  afforded  by  the  nature  of  the  given.

Owing  to  the  nature  of  the  relation  which  exists  between  the  attribute  and
activity  on  the  one  side,  and  the  thing  on  the  other,  the  ground  of  the
synthesis  between  concepts  of  independent  attributes  or  activities  is  to  be
found  ultimately  in  their  common  relation  to  a  thing.  "  Coloured  "  and
"  extended  "  naturally  belong  together,  because  only  the  extended  can  be
thought  of  as  coloured  ;  but  in  the  concept  "  metallic  "  determinations  are
combined  which,  when  thought  of  in  the  abstract,  have  no  necessary  re
lation  to  each  other  ;  their  bond  of  union  is  their  common  appearance  in
a  class  of  perceptible  things.  The  psychological  concepts,  by  which  we  ex
press  total  states  and  complex  activities,  show  a  more  complicated  struc
ture  ;  for  the  most  part  they  contain  not  only  the  thought  of  a  mutual
dependence  between  the  particular  elements,  but  also  the  relation  men
tioned  on  p.  135,  by  virtue  of  which  the  co-existence  of  certain  elements
in  consciousness  gives  rise  to  new  processes  in  which  they  themselves  are
absorbed.  In  addition  to  this  they  denote  in  part  actual  processes  taking
place  at  a  definite  time,  such  as  the  concepts  of  the  emotions,  in  part  mere
dispositions  and  faculties,  such  as  the  predicates,  quick-witted,  sanguine,
passionate.  These  concepts,  again,  are  held  together  in  the  last  instance
by  reference  to  the  one  subject,  as  activities  or  states  of  which  their
elements  appear.

Relatively  independent  of  substantival  concepts  are  those  relational  con
cepts  which  contain  the  thought  of  a  complex  relation  between  certain
points  of  reference  ;  a  spatial  and  mechanical  relation,  as  in  "  support,"  or
a  relation  of  homogeneity  and  causality,  as  in  the  relation  of  the  offspring
to  the  parent.  Here  again  psychological  relational  concepts  show  the
most  complex  combination  of  relations ;  how  many  distinguishable  refer
ences  are  combined  in  the  concept  of  friendship?  Here  belong  more
especially  all  concepts  of  relations  within  the  province  of  law,  which  are
compounded  from  actual  states  and  references  to  an  end  which  depends


1 68  LOGIC

upon  the  will ;  but  these  we  cannot  enter  into  more  closely  here.  From
one  point  of  view  they  fall  into  the  sphere  of  classification,  in  so  far  as  their
syntheses  are  carried  out  only  to  the  degree  demanded  by  actual  relations ;
from  another  they  contain  a  constructive  element  in  so  far  as  constructed
from  the  thoughts  of  ends.

§  78.

The  forms  of  synthesis,  when  we  are  dealing  with  the  concepts  expressing
perceptible  things,  differ  according  to  the  kind  of  unity  by  means  of  which
each  of  the  things  to  be  classified  is  thought  of  as  one.

That  unity  of  conceptual  elements  which  is  contained  in  the  concepts  of
different  kinds  of  MATTER  is  distinct  from  the  unity  contained  in  the
concept  of  the  INDIVIDUAL  FORM.  This  latter  unity  is  either  merely
CAUSAL,  or  also  TELEOLOGICAL.

Collective  concepts  contain  a  synthesis  of  individual  unities ;  this  again
may  be  either  merely  causal,  or  also  teleological.

1.  Although  the  methods  of  classification  can  only  be  fully  considered
in connection with  the  methods  of  induction  and  cannot  be  presented  as
direct rules for the synthesis of the simple conceptual elements of
perception,  it  is  at  any  rate  possible  to  state  in  general  outlines  the  forms
of  synthesis  which  are  applicable  in  this  sphere. Logic  has  until  now
neglected too much  to discriminate between them ; as, for  example,
when  it  treats  of  the  concepts  of  different  kinds  of  matter  and  the  concepts
of  organisms  in  the  same  way,  although  the  sense  in  which  we  speak  of
conceptual  characteristics  is  quite  different  in  the  two  cases.

If  we  start,  as  all  method  must  start  in  this  sphere,  from  the  endeavour  to
reconstruct  given  ideas  of  things,  we  are  at  once  confronted  by  the  differ
ences  of  the  processes  which  lead  us  on  the  one  hand  to  the  concepts  of
known  kinds  of  matter,  on  the  other  hand  to  the  concepts  of  things  which
we  regard  as  individuals.  The  elements  are  the  same,  but  the  meaning  of
their  combination  is  different.

2.  No explanation is needed to  show that an easy and obvious
abstraction  is  sufficient  to  form  the  concepts of  different  kinds  of  matter
from  a  number  of  things  which  differ  only  in  their  geometrical  form  and
are  alike  in  everything  else,  and  which  in  the  course  of  nature,  or  as  the
result of  human interference, manifest variability  in form  while their
sensuous  qualities  and  properties  in  general  remain  the  same. Water,  glass,
iron,  etc., never  appear  to  us  without  some  form,  but the  forms they


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  169

happen  to  take  disengage  themselves  from  that  which  takes  the  form,
because  within  the  same  thing  every  part  makes  the  same  impression  and
shows  the  same  attributes  to  our  senses  :  thus  the  attributes  which  a  thin<>-

'  o

has  are  independent  of  magnitude  as  of  form,  and  division,  however  far
it  may  be  carried,  affects  nothing  in  them  but  quantitative  relations.  This
seems  to  make  the  synthesis  of  attributes  independent  of  spatial  extension  ;
a  piece  of  gold  is  gold  in  every  point ;  the  attributes  of  gold  are  present  in
the  same  manner.  But  this  is  only  apparent ;  only  so  long  as  the  parts
are  perceptible,  and  therefore  extended,  can  they  possess  the  same
attributes  as  the  whole,  and  amongst  the  attributes  of  the  whole  belong
also  the  relations  of  its  parts  to  each  other — cohesion,  hardness,  flexibility,
etc.  Thus  the  attempt  to  fix  the  concept  of  any  given  kind  of  matter
necessarily  leads  us  to  homogeneous  parts,  but  is  unable  to  fix  any  definite
limits  to  the  magnitude  of  these  parts,  and  cannot  therefore  represent  any
given  matter  as  a  definite  sum  of  homogeneous  units.  Matter,  therefore,
as  the  object  of  perception,  falls  under  the  concept  of  the  continuous,  and
is  similar  in  its  relations  to  spatial  magnitude.  If  then  the  immediately
given  is  to  be  expressed  conceptually,  without  the  aid  of  hypothetical
ideas,  such  as  atoms  and  molecules,  we  have  need  of  a  standard  of
measurement  which,  without  referring  to  actual  units,  can  nevertheless
express  the  relations  of  magnitude  between  different  wholes,  or  between  a
whole  and  its  parts.  This  measure  is  in  the  first  place  spatial  extension,
taken  in  connection  with  the  assumption  that  space  is  occupied  homo
geneously  ;  and  with  reference  to  particular  kinds  of  matter  it  is  always
assumed  that  (e.g.}  two  cubic  centimetres  of  the  same  water  contain  twice
as  much  matter  as  one  cubic  centimetre.  Descartes  attempted  to  employ
extension  as  the  measure  of  the  quantity  of  matter  in  general,  but  the
standard  proved  impracticable,  partly  because  of  the  variability  of  the
volume  of  the  same  body,  partly  because  of  the  impossibility  of  reducing
:o  harmony  by  its  means  the  mechanical  differences  of  matter  and  its
nodes  of  working.  The  desired  standard  has  finally  been  found  in  a
:ausal  relation,  in  weight ;  and  the  general  standard  for  the  quantity  of
natter,  the  concept  of  mass,  is  determined  by  the  number  of  units  of
veight  with  which  a  given  body  is  in  equilibrium.  We  cannot,  however,
ihow  in  detail  upon  how  many  assumptions  as  to  the  causal  relation  of
hings  which  cannot  be  regarded  as  self-evident  this  standard  depends  ;
he  whole  calculation  is  based  upon  the  mere  assumption  that  two  units
iave  twice  as  much  effect  as  one,  so  that  we  are  here  dealing  with  a


i  yo  LOGIC

system  of  laws  which  are  grounded  upon  and  conditioned  by  each  other,
and  which  attain  certainty  only  by  the  fact  that  they  enable  us  to  point
out  harmonious  regularity  on  the  part  of  phenomena.  The  logical  import
of  such  propositions  can  only  be  made  clear  by  the  theory  of  induction  ;
meanwhile,  this  method  also  falls  back  ultimately  upon  the  original  spatial
standard,  since  the  weight  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  water  of  a  given
temperature  is  taken  as  unit.

Thus  we  see  that  it  is  with  the  concept  of  the  synthesis  expressed  by
the  word  "  matter "  as  it  was  with  the  conceptual  determination  of  the
simple  sensuous  qualities  ;  it  can  only  be  determined  by  means  of  a
number  of  assumptions  which  we  make  concerning  the  causal  relations,
and  of  which  only  experience  and  observation  can  give  us  an  exact  under
standing.  Here  again,  then,  we  find  that  formation  of  concepts  depends
for  its  completion  upon  induction,  which  in  its  turn  presupposes  that  for
mation  has  already  begun.

3.  Essentially  different  from  the  synthesis  which  produces  the  concept
of  matter  is  that  which  is  active  in  the  concepts  of  INDIVIDUAL  FORMS.
In  the  former  case  magnitude  and  form  are  indifferent  and  are  abstracted
from  in  the  construction  of  the  concept  as  fortuitous  and  changing,  the
number  of  the  parts  and  their  mutual  position  being  determined  by  no
rule;  while  in  the  latter  this  relation  of  the  parts  to  each  other  ranks  as  a
part  of  the  concept  itself,  and  combines  as  a  constituent  element  of  the
synthesis  with  the  characteristics  which  merely  express  the  kind  of  matter.

4.  In the first  place,  it  is  the  merely  geometrical  form  of  a  spatial
limitation  which  gives  a  definite  unity  to  the  objects  and  excludes  in
definite  divisibility  from  the  concept. Crystals,  for  example,  appear  to  us  as
such  unities  ;  in  their  concept  definite  form  is  included  in  addition  to  the
attributes  which  characterise  the  matter  from  which  they  are  formed;  and  this
is  due  in  the  first  instance  entirely  to  the  fact  that  the  same  kind  of  matter
is  presented  in  a  number  of  cases  in  the  same  form. Then,  because  the
same  forms  occur  in  different  kinds  of  matter,  abstraction  from  differences
of  matter  takes  place,  and  a  general  concept  is  constructed  which  contains
only  a  certain  geometrical  form  as  the  form  of  many  different  kinds  of  matter.

The  concept  of  form  gains  a  further  meaning  when  it  includes  also
the  composition  of  a  whole  from  heterogeneous  parts  connected  in  a
definite  spatial  position.  Here  again  it  is  primarily  grounded  upon  the
geometrical  form  of  the  whole,  which  must  be  established  before  we  can
speak  of  its  parts  and  determine  the  relation  of  these  parts  to  one  another;


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  171

the  formation  of  the  concept  is  at  first  guided  only  by  the  external  co
existence  which  manifests  itself  in  cohesion  and  community  of  motion.
Thus  in  the  perception  and  discrimination  of  organic  forms  the  element
by  which  we  are  guided  is  the  spatial  image,  as  it  might  be  given  in  a
drawing,  with  its  definite  arrangement  of  differently  formed  parts  ;  the
conceptual  synthesis  by  which  we  reconstruct  these  forms  is  therefore
similar  at  first  to  the  geometrical  construction  which  directs  us  to  construct
squares  upon  the  three  sides  of  a  triangle,  the  determining  characteristics
of  the  concept  refer  to  the  definite  spatial  combination  of  parts  formed  in
a  certain  way.  The  only  difference  is  that  here  the  limits  of  variation  are
imposed  not  by  some  a  priori  law,  but  by  the  actual  occurrence  of  the
forms.  When  we  add  the  special  material  nature  of  the  particular  parts,
the  synthesis  is  complete.

But  it  is  still  only  a  synthesis  corresponding  to  a  merely  anatomical
process,  which  first  analyses  a  composite  body  until  it  comes  to  homo
geneous  parts,  and  then  consciously  determines  their  relative  positions.
The  question  always  remains  how  this  relation  of  the  parts  to  one  another
in  this  form  is  to  be  explained,  and  whether  the  mere  fact  of  their  spatial
co-existence  is  not  grounded  upon  an  inward  necessity.

5.  Since  every  definite  form  which  is  not  only  casually  induced  from
without  indicates  certain  relations  of  the  parts  to  one  another,  we  must
look  for  some  principle  for  these  relations  in  our  synthesis  of  the  concepts.

The  first  principle  which  offers  is  that  of  a  causal  relation  between  the
parts  ;  the  connection  between  a  certain  form  and  a  certain  kind  of  matter
is  explained  when  the  parts  of  matter  assign  to  each  other  their  respective
positions  by  their  mutual  action,  and  thus  give  rise  to  a  form  of  the,
whole  which  is  circumscribed  according  to  a  definite  rule.  In  this  way
we  explain  the  globular  form  of  the  drop  of  water  or  quicksilver  by
mechanical  laws,  and  assume  even  for  crystals  a  similar  necessity,  which
gives  rise  to  the  form  of  each  particular  crystal.  The  only  difficulties  in
the  way  of  our  construction  here  lie  in  the  fact  that  in  matter  itself  no
units  are  given  which  we  might  regard  as  the  ultimate  subjects  of  these
effects,  and  that  we  are  obliged  to  assume  these  units  hypothetically.

Where,  however,  heterogeneous  parts  combine  in  one  form,  which  we
cannot  explain  as  determined  by  the  nature  of  the matter  according  to  •
general  laws,  another  principle  for  the  unity  of  synthesis  is  found  in  the
concept  of  the  end.1

1  Cf.  with  what  follows  my  Kleinc  Schriftcn,  II.  p.  24  sq.


172


LOGIC


What  we  have  to  say  about  this  concept  is  at  present  only  from  the
point  of  view  that  in  it  is  affirmed  a  ground  for  the  unity  of  a  whole
consisting  of  different  parts,  and  we  are  led  to  consider  it  by  the  fact  that
since  Aristotle  the  unity  of  organic  individuals  has  generally  been  ex
pressed  by  just  this  concept.

6.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  conception  of  an  end  has  its  origin
in  our  own  voluntary  action. When  we  act,  we  first  imagine  a  state  of
ourselves  or  other  things,  towards  which  our  will  for  some  reason  directs
itself; as  this  purely subjective thought,  as  a  purpose  proceeding  from
some  need  or  wish,  the  end  contains  as  yet  no  synthetical  principle. But
this  purpose  is  to  be  realized,  the  willed  state  is  to  be  brought  about  in
the  actual  world,  and  this  can  only  be  by  means  of  movements  of  the
body  which  are  immediately  subject  to  the  will,  and  which  produce  a  real
change  in  external  objects  corresponding  to  the  purpose  ;  that  is,  a  real
causal  relation  is  introduced  the  result  of  which,  as  the  end,  stands  over
against  the  producing  cause  as  the  means. It  is  upon  this  causal  relation
that  the  saying  is  grounded  that  to  will  the  end  is  to  will  the  means,  and
involves  the  actual  carrying  out  of  the  means.

7.  When  we  are  dealing  with  particular  ends  which  are  realized  at  a
given  point  of  time,  the  means  consist  first  of  all  in  the  action  of  some
cause,  or  of  a  chain  of  causes,  in  a  change  therefore  which  takes  place  in
time,  and ultimately  brings  about  the  desired  state;  the means  consist
primarily  in  the  action,  derivatively  in  the  acting  thing  ;  but  the  relation
between  end  and  means  is  transitory. When,  in  order  to  move  a  load,
I  take  the  nearest  stick  and  use  it  as  a  lever,  or  when  I  break  a  nut  with
a  stone,  then  the  movement  of  the  stick  or  the  blow  from  the  stone — and
hence  the  stick  or  the  stone  itself — is  the  means  by  which  I  attain  my  end;
but  the  relation  is  momentary  and  cannot  form  the  ground  for  a  con
ceptual  relation,  by  which  I can  determine  the  thing  employed  as  means.
The  qualities  which  it  has,  as  such,  permit  of  its  being  used  as  a  means,
but  it  is  not  determined  by  this  final  relation.

It  is  different  when  I  shape  and  prepare  things  for  a  given  particular  or
general  end,  when  I  make  tools.  In  these  the  form  given  to  a  stone,  to  a
piece  of  wood  or  metal,  is  determined  by  the  end  which  they  are  to  serve
as  means ;  the  end  of  cutting  determines  the  handle  and  blade  in  the  knife,
the  end  of  striking  the  handle  and  head  in  the  hammer.  As  in  the
simplest  tools  the  form  is  determined,  so  in  the  more  complicated  the
combination  of  differently  formed  parts  is  again  determined  by  the  end,


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  173

which  thus  appears  as  a  synthetical  principle  of  unity.  This  is  still  more
apparent  when  what  is  constructed  is  not  a  dead  tool,  which  awaits  the
motive  power  of  the  human  will  before  it  can  act,  but  a  machine  working
by  natural  forces ;  the  result  which  is  brought  about  by  the  combination  of
parts  of  a  certain  form  under  certain  conditions  is  the  ground  of  their  form
and  of  their  combination.  The  end  makes  of  the  parts  a  whole  which
loses  all  meaning  if  any  part  is  wanting  which  is  a  condition  of  the  result ;
and  the  unity  of  which  consists  in  the  possibility  of  the  co-operation  of  the
parts  towards  a  definite  result.

8.  At  this  point  it  is  clear  that  the  end  to  be  realized,  when  thought  as
the  ground  of  the  form  of  a  thing  and  of  the  unity  of  a  whole  consisting  of
parts,  is  not  opposed  to  the  causal  concept,  but  includes  it.  When  a
thought  is  to  be  realized  in  the  external  world,  it  can  only  be  done  by  the
existing  causal  relations,  by  the  forces  through  which  things  act  upon  each
other,  by  the  causality  of  our  will  upon  the  movement  of  our  limbs,  by  the
action  of  our  limbs  in  changing  other  things.  The  form  of  the  tool  is
certainly  determined  by  the  end ;  but  it  is  so  only  through  the  causal  rela
tions,  which  ordain  that  only  a  sharp  blade  shall  overcome  the  cohesion  of
bodies,  and  that  only  a  heavy,  hard,  and  rapidly  moving  body  shall  break
a  stone.  The  movement  of  thought  when  seeking  the  means  starts  from
the  end,  to  find  from  its  knowledge  of  existing  causal  relations  that  form
and  material  nature  for  the  means  which  will  produce  the  intended  result.
Appropriateness  to  an  end,  the  fitness  of  a  means  to  produce  the  desired
result,  depends  entirely  upon  those  qualities  of  the  things  by  virtue  of
which  they  can  take  effect ;  it  is  only  the  presence  of  the  means  or  tool,
when  it  does  not  occur  of  itself  in  the  course  of  nature,  which  depends
upon  conscious  purpose.

Leaving  now  on  one  side  these  conditions  of  the  genesis  of  the  means,
let  us  look  only  at  the  relation  of  a  given  means  to  an  end,  as  manifested,
for  example,  in  a  machine  which  presents  itself  as  a  finished  product ;  what
we  first  find  is  a  purely  formal  application  of  the  final  concept  as  a
synthetical  form  of  unity.  A  purely  causal  treatment  would  start  from
particular  elements  of  action,  and  inquire  what  must  result  from  this  or
that  combination  of  them,  according  to  natural  laws  and  by  virtue  of  their
material  nature  and  their  form;  it  would  regard  the  movement  of  the
paddles  of  the  waterwheel  as  a  consequence  of  the  flow  of  water,  and
would  know  from  the  form  of  the  wheel  and  the  position  of  the  axis  that
the  former  must  revolve  about  the  latter;  other  combinations  of  the  same


i74  LOGIC

elements  would  have  another  result.  A  treatment  from  the  point  of  view
of  the  end,  on  the  contrary,  would  start  from  the  result,  and  would  ask
what  combination — or  what  sort  of  combinations— of  causes  would  bring
about  just  this  result,  what  it  is  which  must  be  if  the  result  is  to  appear.
Thus  the  treatment  of  the  end  is  to  the  treatment  of  the  efficient  causes
much  as  division  is  to  multiplication  ;  if  we  start  with  simple  numbers,  the
multiplication  table  will  show  us  what  products  result  from  the  combinations
of  any  two  numbers  ;  but  if  we  take  any  number  and  regard  it  as  a  product,
the  question  which  arises  is  :  what  are  the  factors  by  which  it  might  be
produced?  The  causal  treatment  states  that  6  times  6  is  36;  the  final
treatment  that  36  might  arise  from  the  multiplication  of  4  by  9,  as
well  as  of  6  by  6.  As  in  this  example,  so  it  is  also  in  nature  ;  absolute
necessity  permitting  of  only  one  method  does  not  hold  good  when  we  look
backward.  The  same  effect  may  be  produced  by  different  combinations
of  causes,  and  when  we  start  from  the  end  we  often  obtain  a  disjunctive
judgment  stating  that  either  this  or  that  combination  of  elements  is  neces
sary  to  a  result ;  within  each  of  the  combinations,  however,  each  particular
element  is  a  conditio  sine  qua  non  of  the  result,  an  integral  part  of  the
complex  of  means.

9.  If  we  had  complete  insight  into  the  causal  connection  of  the  world,
these  two  modes  of  treatment  would  coincide  completely ;  and  in  so  far  as
we  have  insight  the  connections  may  be  represented  in  either  way.  When
we  subject  the  given  masses  and  orbits  of  the  planets  to  a  calculation,  and
find  that  their  mutual  disturbances  always  compensate  each  other,  and
produce  oscillations  in  the  orbits  only  within  certain  limits,  the  stability  of
the  solar  system  appears  as  the  necessary  result  of  given  causes  ;  and  this
is  the  causal  treatment.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  start  with  the  solar
system  as  a  stable  whole,  and  ask  how  this  stability  is  brought  about,  the
uniform  persistence  of  the  relations  of  its  parts  now  appears  as  the  end,
and  we  inquire  as  to  the  conditions  under  which  it  is  possible ;  various
possibilities  may  perhaps  present  themselves,  amongst  which  one — incom
mensurability  of  times  of  revolution — is  realized.  This  is  the  formal
ideological  treatment.

The  two  modes  of  treatment  are  similar  also  in  that,  when  estimated
from  the  standpoint  of  necessity,  they  both  contain  a  hypothetical  element.
The  causal  treatment  assumes  a  plurality  of  elements  acting  upon  each
other ;  it  says  that  when  abc  are  present  in  this  combination  the  result  d
follows,  when  in  another  combination  the  result  d';  but  that  just  these


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  175

elements  should  be  given  in  this  combination  is  not  a  matter  of  necessity,
but  merely  of  fact.  The  teleological  treatment  reverses  the  process,  and
takes  the  result  for  its  starting  point ;  it  treats  it  as  something  to  be
realized,  without,  therefore,  having  to  demonstrate  necessity  why  it  must
be  realized,  although  if  it  is  to  be  realized  this  combination  of  conditions
is  imperative  under  the  natural  laws  known  to  us.  Thus  from  the  point  of  ./
view  of  the  end  just  that  is  necessary  which  the  causal  treatment  must
take  as  merely  given.

10.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  in  application  to  empirically  knowable  things  - — ^
and  events  we  find  motives  to  employ  sometimes  the  purely  causal  view,
sometimes  the  teleological,  in  order  to  obtain  the  synthesis  of  a  manifold
in  a  unity.  When  a  number  of  known  things,  acting  according  to  known
laws,  produce  persisting  results  in  persisting  combinations,  we  can  explain
their  connection  in  a  whole,  without  further  help  than  the  thought  of  their
active  forces  ;  in  this  way  we  explain  the  spherical  form  of  the  earth  by
the  laws  of  the  attraction  of  its  parts,  and  because  of  these  constant
relations  it  is  for  us  a  whole.  When,  however,  the  combinations  vary,
and  give  rise  to  varying  results,  no  occasion  presents  itself  for  forming
the  concept  of  a  connected  unity,  because  the  relations  are  only  transi
tory.

It  is  different  when  we  see  combinations  of  different  parts  to  a  whole  in
the  process  of  formation,  without  understanding  what  causes  are  producing
them  according  to  general  laws,  or  finding  any  necessity  which  might  be
explained  by  general  laws,  according  to  which  the  particular  parts  take
shape  and  co-operate,  although  there  actually  is  a  persisting  result.  This
is  the  case  with  organisms.  The  maintenance  of  individuals  and  of  species
is  a  constant,  always  recurring  result ;  but  by  what  necessity  different
kinds  of  matter  combine  in  organic  forms,  and  the  particular  limbs  develop
and  differentiate,  we  are  unable  to  explain  from  the  general  qualities  of
matter.  Here,  therefore,  it  is  natural  to  explain  these  phenomena  by
starting  from  the  whole  and  its  constitution,  and  inquiring  as  to  the  means
which  will  produce  this  actual  result.  The  whole  being  taken  as  an  end,
there  follow  a  certain  connection  and  mode  of  action  between  parts
iormed  in  such  a  way  ;  the  relation  of  each  part  to  the  unity  is  understood
when  we  have  decided  what  contribution  it  yields  towards  the  preservation
and  maintenance  of  all  the  other  parts  in  their  combination.  Physiology
ias,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  never  been  able  to  guard  itself  from  this  point  of
;  and  it  was  a  superfluous  polemic  which  combated  every  applica-


1 76  LOGIC

tion  of  the  final  concept,  with  a  view  to  carrying  out  a  purely  causal  and
mechanical  treatment  of  the  animated  universe.  The  final  concept  does
not  contradict  the  causal  treatment,  but  insists  upon  it ;  it  is  a  guiding
principle  for  the  discovery  of  causal  relations  ;  and  since  we  certainly  can
not  refer  in  particular  cases,  as  in  the  explanation  of  a  machine,  to  some
power  acting  like  a  human  being,  there  is  no  limit  to  the  investigation  of
causal  relations  called  for  by  the  final  concept.  Its  importance  rests
only  upon  the  fact  that  it  expresses  the  unity  of  a  system  of  parts  which
are  such  that  when  taken  in  isolation  we  are  unable  to  deduce  this
particular  combination  from  their  nature.  It  follows  also  that  the  end  can
never  be  taken  as  ruling  absolutely  ;  the  realization  of  the  end  depends
upon  the  means  at  hand  and  their  modes  of  action,  and  this  involves  that
the  same  means  which  realize  the  end  have  also  incidental  results  which
cannot  be  subordinated  to  the  end  (e.g.  the  vulnerability  of  the  animal
tissue),  and  also  that  the  end  can  only  be  attained  within  certain  limits.
The  enumeration  in  the  so-called  Dysteleology  of  everything  which  does
not  seem  to  subserve  an  end,  or  seems  hostile  to  an  end,  makes  claims
upon  this  idea  of  subservience  which  are  rendered  unattainable  from  the
first  by  its  connection  with  causal  laws.

ii.  The  unity  which  is  explained  by  the  end  leads  to  a  special  view  of
the  concept  of  the  individual.  We  found  that  the  first  motive  for  dis
criminating  definite  unities  in  the  world  offered  to  our  perception,  and  for
distinguishing  them  from  each  other  as  particular  things,  lay  in  a  given
spatial  limitation ;  what  we  denote  as  one  particular  thing  is  given  in  the
first  instance  by  the  fact  of  a  permanent  or  continuously  changing  spatial
outline.  But  the  attempt  to  fix  this  unity  was  wrecked  by  the  question
whether  anything  within  a  spatial  area  was  necessarily  to  be  regarded  as  a
definite  unity,  and  from  this  question  we  were  led  to  the  thought  of  the
atom  which  alone  has  a  unity  of  which  we  can  speak  as  necessary.  But
as  soon  as  we  take  into  consideration  the  causal  relations  between  atoms,
we  get  a  new  point  of  view  from  which  we  can  speak  of  the  unity  of  an
extended  thing ;  where  and  so  long  as  these  relations  continue  to  subsist
between  the  same  atoms,  even  though  it  be  only  from  external  causes,
there  we  have  a  ground  for  combining  them  into  a  unity,  and  for  dis
tinguishing  things  as  particular.  A  stone  which  retains  its  form  and
magnitude  by  the  cohesion  of  its  parts,  or  a  piece  of  wood  which  does  not
of  itself  change  shape,  counts  for  such  a  unity  because  of  this  permanence
of  the  causal  relations  between  its  parts.  But  this  unity  is  only  one  of


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  17?

fact,  and  has  no  necessary  connection  either  with  the  nature  of  the
particular  parts,  and  their  relations  to  each  other,  or  with  their  number ;
from  this  point  of  view  it  is  to  a  large  extent  a  matter  of  chance  how  large
or  of  what  shape  a  piece  of  wood  or  stone  may  be  ;  there  is  no  fixed  con
nection  between  the  matter,  the  shape  and  the  size.  Such  unities  are
particular  pieces,  but  not  individuals  ;  they  might  as  well  be,  or  have
been,  parts  of  a  larger  unity,  just  as  they  may  be  divided  into  smaller  parts
without  any  change  in  the  meaning  of  the  unity  of  these.

The  term  "  individual "  first  begins  to  be  applicable  where  a  definite
relation  exists  between  the  unity  of  the  whole  and  the  plurality  of  the
parts,  where  the  parts  necessitate  a  certain  circumscribed  form  for  the
whole,  or  the  end  of  the  whole  necessitates  a  certain  combination  of
parts ;  where,  therefore,  the  unity  is  not  arbitrary  and  casual.  The  fixity
of  the  form  of  the  crystal  justifies  us  in  speaking  of  individuals  ;  because
the  matter  itself  prescribes  its  own  form,  which  can  be  fixed  in  a  strictly
geometrical  concept,  the  unity  appears  as  one  determined  by  the  parts
themselves,  and  whenever  a  crystal  is  destroyed  this  form  is  modified,  and
the  law  of  its  construction  contradicted ;  the  destruction  annuls  the  con
cept,  the  fragments  of  a  crystal  are  no  longer  crystals  in  the  same  sense.
But  when  to  the  definite  form  is  added  the  unity  of  the  end,  we  get  a  still
richer  concept  of  individual  unity,  and  this  unity  disengages  itself  in  its
ideal  and  formal  character  still  more  decidedly  when,  as  in  organisms,
identity  of  matter  is  replaced  by  continuous  change  of  the  particular
material  parts,  only  the  form  of  the  parts  as  of  the  whole,  and  the  mode  of
interaction  between  the  parts  remaining  constant.  When  thought  of  in
connection  with  time,  the  identity  of  the  organic  individual  depends  only
upon  the  form  into  which  there  enter  successively  new  parts,  and  upon  the
continuous  development  of  the  form  of  which  the  particular  stages  can  be
combined  to  unity  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  end.

It  is  this  which  justifies  the  Aristotelian  view  that  the  form,  both  the
geometrical  and  that  determined  by  reference  to  an  end,  is  that  which
makes  a  thing  into  a  definite  particular  thing,  a  r68e  TL  ;  and  from  this  it
follows  that  the  concept  of  the  atom  and  the  concept  of  the  form  mutually
supplement  each  other,  the  first  as  the  limit  of  analysis,  the  second  as  the
principle  of  conceptual  synthesis.  It  follows  also  that  no  objection  can
be  urged  against  the  logical  justification  of  the  concept  of  the  individual
from  the  fact  that  we  are  confronted  with  difficulties  in  its  application  to
real  objects, — difficulties  such  as  appear  in  the  botanical  dispute  as  to

S.  L. II.  N


178  LOGIC

whether  the  whole  tree,  or  the  single  twig,  or  the  cell  is  to  be  called  the
individual,  or  in  the  argument  that  the  animal  individual  has  no  fixed
limits  in  its  temporal  existence  because  it  has  broken  away  from  a  parental
organism,  nor  yet  in  space  because  the  air  in  its  lungs  passes  over  without
fixed  limits  into  the  surrounding  atmosphere.  From  the  point  of  view  of
the  end  those  points  in  which  the  exclusiveness  of  the  individual  yields  so
as  to  admit  connection  with  the  surrounding  world  in  no  way  contradict
its  concept,  for  it  is  implied  in  this  that  it  exists  through  universal  causal
laws  and  becomes  what  it  is  by  a  process  of  gradual  development.  The
logically  perfect  concept  is  an  ideal  concept,  constructed  as  the  strict
consequence  of  one  principle,  and  the  impossibility  of  finding  a  completely
corresponding  counterpart  to  it  in  perception  does  not  prejudice  its  logical
justification  and  usefulness  any  more  than  the  ellipse  or  the  parabola  are
made  futile  because  no  body  can  show  an  outline,  no  planet  or  comet  an
orbit,  which  is  a  strict  ellipse  or  parabola  in  the  geometrical  sense.  Such
objections  only  prove  once  more  that  mere  perception  of  the  given  with  its
gradual  transitions  could  never  lead  to  any  concepts  at  all,  because  from
this  point  of  view  all  limits  and  distinctions  would  be  ultimately  arbitrary;
only  by  the  productions  of  spontaneous  thought  can  we  check  the  stream
of  differences  and  solidify  into  clearly  defined  figures  the  fluid  mass  of
phenomena.

12.  We  have  still  to  investigate  the  more  comprehensive  synthesis
which  leads  to  the  so-called  COLLECTIVE  CONCEPTS.  All  collective  concepts
in  the  sphere  of  things  are  concepts  of  a  whole  consisting  of  a  plurality  of
discrete  parts  which  are  themselves  thought  of  as  unities,  of  a  whole  formed
from  pieces  or  individuals.  The  concept  of  a  given  mass  of  matter,  of  a
quantity  of  water  or  iron,  is  not  a  collective  concept  so  long  as  no  reference
is  made  to  discrete  unities,  but  merely  the  possibility  of  this  reference  is
present.  The  parts  are  still  indiscriminate  in  the  whole,  the  opposites
which  appear  separate  in  the  collective  concept  are  as  yet  blended  in
unstable  unity,  while  we  speak  of  divisibility  but  not  of  definite  ultimate
parts ;  it  is  the  atomic  theory  which  first  makes  the  concept  of  a  visible
body  a  collective  concept.

The  unity  affirmed  by  the  collective  concepts  passes  through  stages
analogous  to  those  of  the  unity  of  the  particular  thing.  First  there  is  the
external  and  causal  unity,  corresponding  to  the  "piece";  when  we  speak
of  a  heap  of  sand,  a  bundle  of  wood,  a  group  of  trees,  a  range  of  hills,  and
so  on,  the  spatial  co-existence  in  this  number  and  grouping  of  the  particular


CONCEPTUAL SYNTHESIS  179

pieces  or  individuals  is  not  determined  by  any  necessity  contained  in  them,
and  there  is  no  other  relation  between  them  than  might  exist  between  any
other  things  whatever.

Other  collective  concepts  have  for  the  basis  of  their  unity  a  causal  rela
tion  (it  may  be  dependence  upon  one  cause,  or  it  may  be  interaction),
which  connects  the  particular  discrete  unities,  whether  spatial  limitation  of
the  whole  be  also  affirmed  or  not.  Thus  the  collective  concept  of  the
solar  system  has  gradually  advanced  from  the  mere  unity  of  the  sum-total
to  causal  unity ;  thus  the  merely  genealogical  concept  of  the  family  is  based
entirely  upon  the  causal  relation  of  descent  from  a  common  ancestor ;  and
thus  we  can  introduce  into  the  collective  concept  of  the  wood  the  mutual
dependence  of  its  parts  in  their  vegetation  as  a  causal  element.

Finally  there  appears  the  teleological  unity.  It  is  most  obvious  where
the  end  is  immanent  in  the  particular  members  as  conscious  thought,  or  at
any  rate  as  instinct ;  such  is  the  case  in  all  the  relations  of  human  society,
or  in  swarms  of  bees,  or  in  herds  of  gregarious  animals.  Here  we  find
again,  as  with  organism,  that  so  soon  as  the  unity  consists  in  the  refer
ence  of  a  plurality  of  parts  to  a  common  end,  the  identity  of  the  whole
consists  in  the  form  in  which  its  parts  are  related,  and  is  independent  of
the  identity  of  any  particular  parts;  a  State  remains  identical  although  all
its  members  change  within  a  given  time,  so  long  as  those  who  take  their
places  do  so  in  the  same  combination  of  subservience  to  an  end  ;  its  unity
consists  in  the  institutions  which  are  not  the  mere  results  of  the  forces  of
particular  co-existing  individuals,  but  which  rather  as  final  concepts  deter
mine  the  manifestations  of  these  forces.  Here,  again,  it  is  true,  moreover,
that  the  teleological  view  of  society  and  of  the  State  does  not  exclude  the
causal,  but  on  the  contrary  insists  upon  it.  Just  because  the  teleological
view  ceases  here  to  be  merely  a  formal  logical  principle,  and  finds  its  justi
fication  in  the  fact  that  the  State  lives  and  persists  only  by  actions  of  the
individuals,  which  are  consciously  led  by  ends,  we  are  forced  to  ask  how
the  individuals  come  to  have  such  ends,  and  what  are  their  motives  for
maintaining  and  pursuing  them  ;  the  State  and  all  similar  unities  must  also
be  explained  as  total  effects  of  individuals  thinking,  willing,  and  acting
iccording  to  psychological  laws.

13.  From  our  investigation  of  collective  concepts,  and  of  the  forms  of
inity  of  individual  things,  it  follows  that  the  syntheses  expressing  them  can
36  regarded  in  two  ways.  On  the  one  hand,  they  may  be  taken  as  concepts
)f  substance,  and  it  is  as  these  we  have  so  far  dealt  with  them ;  on  the


i8o  LOGIC

other  hand,  they  pass  of  themselves  into  relational  concepts,  where  the
permanent  is  to  be  found  only  in  the  relation  of  a  number  of  definite
elements,  not  in  these  elements  themselves  regarded  as  particular  things.
The  concept  of  the  State  can  be  included  amongst  collective  concepts  in
so  far  as  it  always  presupposes  a  number  of  persons  who  are  combined  by
definite  relations  into  a  unity  ;  it  may  also  be  taken  in  the  first  instance  as
a  composite  relational  concept,  as  a  system  of  relations  between  persons.
As  such  it  certainly  presupposes,  as  does  every  relational  concept,  that  the
elements  combined  by  the  relation  should  be  present  in  a  general  sense ;
but  it  does  not  call  for  the  existence  of  definite  permanent  persons  before
it  can  be  carried  out.


CHAPTER  III.

THE  DIRECT  METHODS OF  FORMING  JUDGMENTS ; DEDUCTION
AND PROOF,  AND THEIR PRESUPPOSITIONS.

WHAT  we  ultimately  aim  at  in  our  construction  of  judgments  is  to  reach
perfectly  certain  propositions,  of  the  grounds  of  which  we  are  conscious.
Our  investigations  in  §§  45-48  have  shown  the  conditions  under  which  such
judgments  are  possible ;  we  are  further  called  upon  by  the  general  aims  of
thought  to  carry  out  our  perfect  construction  of  judgments  to  the  greatest
possible  extent.

If  we  now  ask  as  to  the  ways  in  which  these  ends  are  to  be  attained,  we
find  that  the  immediate  utterances  of  self-consciousness,  which  were  dealt
with  in  §  46  (i),  fall  beyond  the  reach  of  methodical  investigation  as
soon  as  the  concepts  have  been  obtained  under  which  we  may  safely
subsume  the  particular  facts  of  self-consciousness.  With  reference  to  other
judgments,  in  which  it  is  possible  to  have  either  immediate  certainty  or
syllogistic  inference  from  immediately  certain  judgments,  the  methods  differ
according  to  the  movement  of  thought  in  judging.  Either  the  ground  is
already  contained  in  the  way  in  which  the  judgment  arises  from  its  pre
suppositions,  and  it  appears  from  the  first  as  the  necessary  consequence  of
its  presuppositions ;  or  else  the  conception  of  a  judgment  as  a  hypothesis
and  the  discovery  of  its  ground  fall  asunder,  and  what  first  arises  is  a
question  or  surmise,  as  to  the  validity  of  which  we  have  to  decide.

The  former  is  the  direct  development  of  judgment,  the  DEDUCTIVE  PRO
CESS,  which  is  divided  into  the  establishment  of  immediately  certain
judgments  and  the  syllogistic  development  from  these ;  the  latter  is  the
process  of  proving  a  statement  which  is  at  first  suggested  hypothetically.

The  process  of  REDUCTION  is  the  reverse  of  deduction  ;  it  finds  premises
for  given  propositions  from  which  they  might  follow  deductively,  and  it
serves  to  bring  into  consciousness  the  highest  starting  points  of  deduction.

PROOF  presupposes  the  propounding  of  hypotheses  which  first  appear  in
the  form  of  questions ;  it  thus  necessitates  heuristic  methods,  which  con
stitute  the  art  of  asking  questions  or  of  finding  hypotheses.


1 82  LOGIC

In  addition  to  the  determinate  questions,  which  call  for  Yes  or  No  as
an  answer,  there  are  determining  questions  which  ask  for  the  completion
of  an  indeterminate  term  of  a  judgment.

If  from  the  given  presuppositions  we  cannot  attain  to  a  definite  affirma
tion  or  denial,  but  are  yet  able  to  exhaust  the  number  of  possibilities  in
disjunctive  judgments,  then  we  can  proceed  to  the  calculation  of  the
PROBABILITY  of  a  judgment,  which  is  a  peculiar  form  of  deduction  from
disjunctive  judgments.

I. DEDUCTION.

i.  Development  of  Concepts.

§  79-

DEDUCTION  first  appears  as  the  merely  analytical  development  of  con
cepts.  Its  positive  fundamental  form  is  the  so-called  SORITES.

1.  The  simplest  form  of  deduction  is  the  purely  analytical  develop
ment  of  concepts. In  so  far  as  it  deals  with  the  explication  of  an  already
constructed  conceptual  system,  it  takes  place  when  developing  the  content
partly  in  the  simple  unfolding  of  the  particular  attributes  combined  into  a
concept,  which  when  fully  carried  out  in  a  conjunctive  judgment  yields  a
definition  by  means  of  simple  elements,  partly  in  the  form  of  syllogisms
which  proceed  from  the  next  highest  concepts  contained  in  a  concept  to
those  which  are  more  remote ;  when  developing  the  extension,  in  divisive
judgments  which  describe  the logical extent  of  a  concept  by  actually
affirming  the  differences  which  are possible,  starting  from  one  general
characteristic. In  both  cases  it  merely  repeats  what  must  have  already
taken  place  in  the  construction  of  the  concepts  themselves,  which  cannot
have  come  into  existence  except  through  active  judgment.

What  we  have  already  said  about  this  in  §§  43,  44,  53-55,  needs  only  a
brief  supplementation  in  so  far  as  the  attempt  to  make  the  development
complete  gives  special  forms  to  the  operations  concerned  in  it.

2.  The  simple  progress  in  the  subsumption  of  a  given  concept  under
successively  higher  concepts  produces  first  the  so-called  sorites,  the  pre
mises  being  arranged  in  the  order  known  as  the  Aristotelian  : —

A  is  B
B  is  C


Therefore  A  is


DEDUCTION  183

As  the  means,  however,  of  complete  development  this  construction
needs  to  be  expanded.

3.  If,  that  is,  our  object  is  to  find  a  definition  which  will  unfold  the
complete  content  of  a  concept  in  its  ultimate  elements,  we  should  have  a
series  of  definitions  by  the  genus  proximum  and  differentia  specified,  in
which  each  subsequent  term  would  define  the  genus  of  the  preceding
definition  ;  a  series,  that  is,  of  the  form —

A  is  a  B
B\sb  C
C  is  c  D
Disd  E


Therefore  A  is  abed  E

a  system  of  equations  in  which  for  every  simple  term  a  composite  one  is
substituted  in  the  next  premise.

4.  If,  however,  we  aim  only  at  a  complete  enumeration  of  the  judgments
which  proceed  from  a  concept,  it  must  not  be  overlooked  that  we  can  pro
ceed  from  every  concept  by  itself  to  several  higher  ones,  and  the  sorites
instead  of  pursuing  a  simple  line  will  branch  off  in  different  directions.

A  is  B,  C

B  is  Z>,  E C  is  F,  G
etc.


A  is  Z>,  is  E,  is  F,  is  G

5.  When  the  conceptual  relations  are  followed  out  in  the  direction  of
specialization  of  the  extension,  progress  to  the  lower  species  gives  us  first
the  so-called  Goclenian  sorites  : —

D  is  E

Cis  D

£is  C

A  is  B


Therefore  A  is  E1

1  If  we  compare  the  two  forms  of  sorites —

Aristotelian  Goclenian

A  is  B  D\sE

BisC  CisD

CisD  Bis  C

DisE  A'isB

AisE  AisE


1 84  LOGIC

But  here  again  a  methodical  treatment  demands  completeness  of  de
velopment  not  merely  in  length,  but  also  in  breadth,  and  we  get —

D  is  E

D  is  partly  B,  partly  C
B  is  partly  M,  partly  N,  C  is  partly  P,  partly  Q

Therefore  M  and  N  and  .Pand  Q  are  all  E

a  development  which  may  be  called  a  chain  of  divisions.

6.  The  value  of  such  deductions  becomes  of  more  than  merely  didactic
interest  in  two  cases  only. The  first  is  when  a  concept  which is  newly
constructed  from  definite  attributes  is  to  be  connected  with  an  existing
conceptual  system  by  making  clear its relations of subordination and
exclusion  ;  the  second,  when  we  wish  to  make  use  of  a  definition  consist
ing  of  characteristic  attributes,  for  the  subsumption  of  a  particular  object.
When,  for  example,  a  chemist  is  enabled  by  some  reaction  manifesting  a
characteristic  attribute  to  determine  a  substance  as  iodine,  he  ascribes  to
it  by  the  subsumption  all  those  other  attributes  of  the  element  which  con
stitute  its  full  concept,  and  the  process  of  inference  takes  the following
form  :

S  has  the  attribute  B

Whatever  has  the  attribute  B  is  C

Whatever  is  C  has  the  properties  D,  E,  F

Therefore  S  has  the  properties  D,  E,  F

which  again  is  what  is  called  an  Aristotelian  sorites.

7.  The  relations  of  exclusion  lead,  like  the  positive  relations  of  super-
and  subordination,  to  series  of  inferences  which  limit  the  single  concepts
on  all  sides,  or  prohibit  the  subsumption  of  an  object  A  under  a  concept
B. Since  inferences  from  merely  negative  premises  are  impossible,  nega-

it  is  evident  that  they  differ  only  in  the  arrangement  of  their  premises.  Every  process  of
inference  which  employs  not  one  but  several  middle  concepts  is  naturally  capable  in
itself  of  being  presented  in  either  order,  and  from  the  point  of  view  of  ordinary  syllo
gistic  doctrine  the  distinction  between  the  two  forms  is  quite  barren  and  superficial ;
moreover,  it  is  misusing  the  name  of  Aristotle  to  suggest  that  he  overlooked  the
arrangement  of  the  premises  which  was  afterwards  pointed  out  by  Goclenius.  The  dis
tinction  between  the  sorites  and  the  simple  syllogism,  and  the  distinction  between  its
different  forms,  has  no  meaning  except  from  the  point  of  view  of  method  ;  here,  no
doubt,  the  rirst  form  is  natural  when  we  start  from  a  given  proposition  and  develop  its
predicate,  the  second  when  we  proceed  by  subsuming  more  specific  concepts  under  the
subject-concept.


DEDUCTION  185

live  judgments  yield  no  connection  analogous  to  the  sorites;  and  we  may
omit  to  investigate  particular  possibilities  of  connection  between  negative
and  affirmative  premises,  since  their  methodological  value  is  rendered  very
small  by  the  secondary  character  of  the  negative  judgment,  and  by  the
impossibility  of  completing  the  series  of  negations  in  the  same  way  as  the
developments  in  an  affirmative  sense  l  may  be  completed.

8.  A  special  process  of  subsuming  a  given  concept  under  a  presup
posed  conceptual  system  takes  place  where  a  chain  of  divisions  is  em
ployed  for  definition,  by  means  of  exclusion  on  the  ground  of  disjunctive
judgments.  The  form  of  this  would  be  :—

A  is  partly  £,  partly  C

Every  A  is  either  B  or  C

X  is  A,  but  not  B

Therefore  it  is  C

C  is  partly  D,  partly  E
Every  C  is  either  D  or  E
X  is  not  D


Therefore  it  is  E
from  which  we  finally  get  :


The  familiar  example  of  the  angler  in  Plato's  Sophist  (22OA  foil.)  runs,
at  any  rate  partly,  in  this  form.

.
2.  Deduction  from  Synthetical  Propositions.

§  80.

•  When  deduction  passes  beyond  merely  analytical  conceptual  relations
and  takes  up  synthetical  propositions  —  which  generally  affirm  relations  —
then  the  syllogistic  process  can  no  longer  be  exclusively  represented  in
simply  progressive  sorites,  but  assumes  more  complex  forms.

The  possibility  of  progress  here  depends  upon  the  development  and
transformation  of  concepts,  enabling  us  to  make  new  applications  of  the
fundamental  propositions.

i.  Deduction  first  becomes  really  fruitful  when  it  has  for  its  ultimate
Demises  not  only  definitions,  but  can  combine  with  the  definitions  other

1  Drobisch  (Logik,  §  105  sq.)  has  the  credit  of  having  investigated  all  possible  combi-
lations  of  inferences,  including  those  with  negative  and  particular  judgments.


i86  LOGIC

propositions  which,  by  their  synthetical  character,  bring  about  a  necessary
connection  between  the  attributes  of  a  concept  and  other  predicates ;  this
is  more  especially  the  case  when  the  judgments  which  are  developed  deal
with  relations.  It  is  this  kind  of  deduction  which  we  have  in  view  when
we  speak  of  deductive  sciences,  and  instance  mathematics  as  the  type ;
and  it  needs  for  its  foundations  axioms  as  well  as  definitions  (cf.  §  55,
5,  I.,  p.  362).

2.  Suppose  a  number  of  definitions  and  axioms  to  be  given  :  the  art  of
the  deductive  process  consists  in  combining  these  in  the  greatest  possible
completeness,  in  such  a  way  that  they  will  be  premises  of  valid  syllogisms ;
in  finding  for  every  conclusion  of  a  syllogism  a  new  premise  which,  with
it, — either  as  major  or  minor — will  form  the  ground  for  another  syllogism ;
and  in  thus  developing  from  the  fundamental  propositions  in  chains  of
valid  inferences  the  whole  series  of  consequences.

3.  Postponing  for  the  present  the  question  whether  the  definitions  from
which  the  deduction  starts  are  supplemented  by  real  axioms,  or  only  by
assumed propositions, and  confining  our  attention  to  the  form  of  the
process, we  find  that  it  depends  upon  the  nature of  the  fundamental
propositions  what  syllogistic  forms  the  deduction  will  take,  and  how  the
single propositions can  be  combined. One  essential  condition  of  this
combination  will  be  the  finding  of  middle  members. Here  again  the
simplest  way  of  proceeding  is  the  sorites,  but  instead  of  the  sorites  in
categorical  judgments  we  now  have  the  more  general form  of  the  hypo
thetical  sorites  which  connects  successive  propositions  by  the  necessary
link  of  ground  and  consequence. It  depends  upon  the  movement  of
thought  whether  the  premises  naturally  arrange  themselves  in  such  a  way
that  the  second  premise  which  is  added  to  the  judgment  forming  the
starting  point  is  one  which  states  the  more  remote  ground,  or  one  which
states  the  further  consequence ;  and  this  is  true  again  of  the  successive
conclusions.1

1  If  we  have  three  propositions  of  the  form  : —

I.  If  A  is  true,  B  is  true  ;
II.  If  B  is  true,  C  is  true ;
III.  If  C  is  true,  D  is  true  ;

we  may  begin  with  the  first  two  and  draw  from  them  the  conclusion  :  —

If  A  is  true,  C  is  true,  and  then  add  the  third  —

If  C  is  true,  D  is  true,  so  as  to  obtain  the  conclusion

If  A  is  true,  D  is  true  ;


DEDUCTION  187


The  nature  of  the  hypothetical  inference  often  necessitates  a
(§  50,  i,  p.  330),  and  when  the  premises  express  relations  the
refers  sometimes  to  one,  sometimes  to  the  other  term  in  the  relation  ;  such
intervening  substitutions  of  a  definite  for  an  indefinite  subject  interrupt
the  uniformly  progressive  character  of  the  inferences,  which  then  assume
more  complicated  forms.

4.  If,  for  example,  we  examine  the  beginning  of  Spinoza's  Ethics,  we
find  that  first  of  all  from  the  definition  of  the  modus  (per  modum  intelligo

in  this  case  the  process  is  to  more  remote  consequences  which  are  connected  with  the
original  ground.
Or  we  may  begin  with  III.  and  II.  so  as  to  obtain  from  them  the  conclusion  :  —

If  B  is  true,  D  is  true, and  then  add  the  first  —
If  A  is  true,  B  is  true, obtaining  the  conclusion

If  A  is  true,  D  is  true  ;

in  this  case  we  pass  from  the  original  proposition  (III.)  to  more  remote  grounds.

It  is  in  this  form  that  we  see  most  clearly  the  distinction  which  is  expressed  in  logic
with  reference  to  categorical  inferences  by  the  terms  prosyllogism  and  episyllogism  ;  the
prosyllogistic  or  regressive  process  supplies  grounds  for  the  premises  of  a  given  syllogism,
which  is  taken  as  starting  point,  the  episyllogistic  develops  consequences  from  its  conclu
sion  by  the  addition  of  further  premises.

If  we  take  a  chain  of  categorical  inferences  in  the  first  figure,  with  the  premises  in  the
usual  order  :  —

I.  D—  E
C—D


II. C—  E
B—C


III.  B— E

A—B


A—E.

then  starting  from  the  second  syllogism,  the  first  appears  as  prosyllogism,  because  it
contains  the  ground  for  the  major  premise  of  the  second,  while  the  third  appears  as
episyllogism,  because  by  introducing  a  fresh  minor  premise  it  develops  the  conclusion
of  the  second.
If  we  reverse  the  order  of  the  premises  to  the  so-called  Aristotelian  we  get  : —

I.  A—B
B—C


II.  A—  C
C—D


III.  A—  D
D—E


A—E.
Here  the  prosyllogism  proves  what  is  ordinarily  known  as  the  minor  premise,  while


i88  LOGIC

stibstantice  affectiones  sive  id,  quod  in  alio  est,  per  quod  etiam  concipitur]  and
the  definition  of  substance  (per  substantiam  intelligo  id,  quod  in  se  est  et per
se  concipitur,  hoc  est  cujus  conceptus  non  indiget  conceptu  alterius  rei,  a  quo
formari  debeat)  there  is  derived  the  proposition  :  Substantia  prior  est
natura  suis  affectionibus.  This  can  only  be  done,  however,  by  the  help  of
a  proposition  not  expressly  included  amongst  the  axioms  which  would
run  :  Id  in  quo  aliud  est,  hoc  natura  prius  est,  and  which  would  therefore
express  a  relation,  resulting  from  one  attribute  of  the  definition.

It  is,  however,  impossible  to  construct  from  these  propositions,  as
formulated  by  Spinoza,  a  simple  syllogism  or  sorites  of  the  ordinary  form ;
the  inference  would  run  as  follows  : —

Id  in  quo  aliud  est,  hoc  natura  prius  est,  to  which  proposition,  by
means  of  a  two-fold  TrpocrX^i/'ts,  substituting  definite  concepts  for  the  tivo
points  of  reference  of  the  relation  "  in  aliquo  esse,"  is  added —

Modus  est  in  substantia,  from  which  follows  :  Substantia  prior  est  modis
sive  affectionibus  suis.

The  major  proposition  is  an  axiom  expressing  the  connection  of  two
relations ;  the  minor  proposition  follows  from  the  definition  of  the  modus
which  contains  the  first  of  these  relations.

the  episyllogism  adds  a  new  major  premise  to  the  conclusion  A — D ;  the  proposition
which  it  introduces  last  of  all  is  that  which  contains  the  most  general  concepts,  and  from
which  we  started  in  the  first  arrangement.

From  this  we  see  that  if  we  start  from  any  chance  arrangement  of  inferences,  the  dis
tinction  between  prosyllogism  and  episyllogism  is  also  a  matter  of  chance  and  cannot
represent  any  essential  distinction  in  the  movement  of  thought.

It  would  rather  appear  that  the  essential  point  of  distinction  is  whether  the  prosyl
logism  proves  the  major  or  the  minor  premise.  In  the  latter  case  it  can  merely  insert
intermediate  terms  ;  it  is  only  in  the  former  that  it  takes  us  back  to  a  higher  and  more
comprehensive  ground  for  the  conclusion,  and  is  really  regressive.  It  is  the  same  with  the
episyllogism.  If  it  adds  to  the  conclusion  of  a  given  inference  a  new  major  proposition,
it  thereby  places  its  subject  under  a  general  rule,  and  by  means  of  this  it  derives  a  new  pre
dicate  from  the  one  already  given,  it  moves  by  way  of  the  development  of  predicates  ;  but
if  it  adds  a  new  minor  premise,  it  specializes  the  subject  of  the  conclusion,  and  applies  a
given  rule  to  the  particular  instances  ;  it  is  only  in  the  latter  case  that  it  is  progressive.

Or  in  the  hypothetical  form  ;  if  to  the  inferred  judgment

If  A  is  true,  B  is  true,  we  add
If  B  is  true,  C  is  true,

then  we  pass  to  further  consequences,  that  which  was  originally  consequence  becoming
the  ground  for  a  new  consequence.  But  if  we  add  :  If  X  is  true,  A  is  true,  then  we
move  backwards  to  higher  grounds  ;  that  which  was  originally  ground  is  presented  as
consequence  of  a  further  ground,  and  that  which  was  consequence  as  a  derived  con
sequence.  The  latter  process  is  regressive,  the  former  progressive,  although  in  both
cases  we  are  dealing  formally  with  a  so-called  episyllogism.


DEDUCTION  189

From  the  proposition  :  Substantia  prior  est  affectionibus  suis  it  is  then
inferred  in  the  proof  of  Proposition  V.,  again  by  means  of  a  proposition
not  expressly  set  forth,  and  in  the  form  of  a  two-fold  TT/DOO-XT/I^IS  :

Quod  natura  prius  est  alio  hoc  deposito  potest  considerari  •

Substantia  natura  prior  est  affectionibus  suis,

Ergo  depositis  affectionibus  suis  potest  considerari.

On  the  other  side  the  positive  definition  of  substance :  "  Per  substantiam
intelligo  id,  quod  in  se  est  et  per  se  concipitur"  yields  first  the  negative  con
clusion  which  is  appended  to  the  definition  and  denies  a  relation  :  cujus
conceptus  non  indiget  conceptu  alterius  ret,  a  quo  formari  debeat  •  and  when
as  a  consequence  of  this  it  is  tacitly  assumed  that  Substantia  conception
alterius  rei  non  involvit,  and  further  added  that  quod  conceptum  alicujus  ret
non  involvit,  nihil  cum  hac  re  commune  habet  (the  converse  of  Ax.  V. ),  the
proposition  follows  that  duce  substantice  nihil  inter  se  commune  habent
(the  clause  diversa  attributa  habentes  is  only  justified  if  it  is  intended  only
as  an  explanation  of  "two").  Thus  we  should  get  the  following  chain  of
inferences  issuing  from  the  definition  and  progressing  by  means  of  hypo
thetical  propositions  : —

Per  substantiam  intelligo  id  quod  in  se  est  et  per  se  concipitur  ;

Quod  in  se  est  et  per  se  concipitur,  ejus  conceptus  non  indiget  conceptu
alterius  rei,  a  quo  formari  debeat ;

Cujus  conceptus  non  indiget  conceptu  alterius  rei,  id  conceptum  alterius  rei
non  invoivit ;

Quod  conceptum  alterius  rei  non  invoivit,  nihil  cum  hac  re  commune
habet.

Ergo  substantia  nihil  cum  alia  re  commune  habet ;  from  which,  by  a
Trpoo-Xr/i^ts  (substitution  of  substantia  for  the  indefinite  re)  we  get :

Substantia  nihil  cum  alia  substantia  commune  habet ;  and  finally,  by  a
merely  verbal  transposition,  based  upon  the  mutuality  of  the  relation  :

Duce  substantice  nihil  inter  se  commune  habent.  The  further  develop
ment  attaches  itself  to  this  predicate  "  nihil  inter  se  commune  habent"  from
which  by  Ax.  V.  it  is  concluded  that  one  substance  does  not  include  the
concept  of  the  other;  according  to  Ax.  IV.  the  concept  of  the  effect
includes  that  of  the  cause,  whence  it  follows — modo  tollente — that  one
substance  cannot  be  the  effect  of  another.

We  may  find  another  example  in  the  Phczdo  (78  B  sq.).  The  inferences
developed  there  can  be  expressed  in  the  following  propositions  :  —


190  LOGIC

I. The  soul  knows  ;

That  which  knows  is  of  the  same  kind  as  the  known,
Therefore  the  soul  is  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which  it  knows.
II. That  which  is  known  by  the  soul  as  such  is  ideas  ;
Therefore  it  is  of  the  same  kind  as  ideas.

III.  Ideas  are  unchangeable ;
Therefore  the  soul  is  unchangeable.

IV.  The  unchangeable  is  simple  ;
Therefore  the  soul  is  simple.

V. The  simple  is  indissoluble  ;

Therefore  the  soul  is  indissoluble.

VI. That  which  is  indissoluble  is  indestructible  ;
Therefore  the  soul  is  indestructible.

If  we  examine  this  deduction,  we  shall  find  that  to  some  extent  it  really
does  take  the  form  of  a  simple  chain  of  inferences,  especially  in  the  latter
half,  but  that  sometimes  the  inference  proceeds  by  means  of  substitutions —
as  in  II. — which  are  occasioned  by  the  introduction  of  relational  concepts
(known,  of  the  same  kind  as).  The  example  from  Spinoza  shows  further,  in
the  first  place,  to  what  an  extent  propositions  concerning  relations  are  em
ployed  ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  that  the  whole  deduction  can  naturally
only  be  carried  out  in  hypothetical  inferences,  because  it  is  only  in  these
that  we  can  operate  with  only  negative  determinations  which  are  related  as
ground  and  consequence.

5.  The  same  considerations  hold  good  in  the  sphere  of  mathematics.
Here  the  relations  of  equality  and  inequality  form  the  predicates  of  most
of  the  propositions,  and  the  axioms  referring  to  them  the  major  premises
from  which  the  inferences  proceed.  The  art  of  deduction  consists  essen
tially  in  constantly  introducing  as  major  premises  propositions  according
to  which  one  equality  follows  from  another,  and  mathematical  substitution,
as  distinct  from  the  logical  Trpoo-X^t?,  which  replaces  a  general  by  the  special
included  in  it,  is  ultimately  no  more  than  an  abbreviated  syllogism,  of
which  the  major  proposition  is  one  of  the  constantly  recurring  axioms  that
equals  added  to  equals,  or  equals  multiplied  by  equals,  etc.,  give  equals.

An  examination,  moreover,  of  the  forms  in  which  these  deductions  take
place  shows  us  that  the  ordinary  examples  of  prosyllogism  and  episyllo-
gism,  chains  of  syllogisms,  and  sorites,  in  which  it  is  assumed  that  syllogism
follows  upon  syllogism  in  such  a  way  that  the  conclusion  of  the  preceding
syllogism  becomes  the  premise  of  the  one  following,  represent  only  the


DEDUCTION  191

most  elementary  combinations.  In  actual  practice  syllogisms  are  con
nected  in  a  much  more  complicated  manner ;  when,  e.g.,  two  chains  of
syllogisms  starting  from  different  points  converge  towards  a  single  result
through  one  of  them  yielding  the  major,  the  other  the  minor  premise  of  a
syllogism  ;  and  still  more,  when  the  nature  of  the  subjects  of  the  judg
ments  being  expressed  by  conjunctive  propositions,  these  give  rise  to
parallel  chains  of  syllogisms  the  results  of  which  are  again  combined  by  a
new  syllogism,  in  such  a  way  that  its  major  proposition  contains  a  copula
tive  or  conjunctive  judgment,  under  the  different  terms  of  which  the  pre
ceding  conclusions  are  subsumed.

This  is  particularly  obvious  in  geometrical  deductions,  the  subjects  of
which  can  only  be  determined  by  their  particular  parts  (two  triangles  are
congruent  when  their  particular  parts  are  equal).  It  is  impossible  that
all  this  should  be  reduced  to  the  form  of  a  simply  progressive  chain  of
syllogisms.1

The  elements  of  particular  propositions  may  also  be  transformed  in  many
ways  ;  a  magnitude,  e.g.,  may  be  regarded  as  either  the  sum  or  the  differ
ence  of  two  others.  It  often  happens,  again,  that  only  the  expression  of  a
proposition  need  be  altered  in  order  for  it  to  serve  for  the  continuation  of
the  deduction.

6. Even  more  important  than  to  see  how  incalculably  manifold  are  the

1  In  the  very  beginning  of  the  first  hook  of  Euclid  (Prop.  4)  we  find  this  complicated
form  of  deduction,  which  may  be  represented  as  follows  : —

The  subjects  with  reference  to  which  the  deduction  takes  place  are  first  determined  ;
the  hypothesis  of  the  proposition  (If  two  triangles  have  the  two  sides  AB,  AC  equal  to
the  two  sides  DE,  DF,  each  to  each,  and  if  the  angles  formed  by  them  are  also  equal)  is
from  a  logical  point  of  view  equivalent  to  a  constructive  definition.  By  the  help  of  super
position  each  part  of  this  definition  is  made  to  yield  its  special  consequences,  i.e.  : —

I.  From  placing  D  upon  A  and  DE  upon  AB  it  follows,  because  equal  lines  when
placed  upon  each  other  must  coincide  at  all  points  including  the  ends,  that  E  falls  upon
B\

II.  From  the  equality  of  the  angles  it  follows  that  DF  falls  in  a  line  with  AC;

III.  From  the  equality  of  DF  and  AC  it  follows  that  F  falls  upon  C  ;

IV.  From  I.  and  III.  together  it  follows  that  the  line  EF falls  upon  BC\
From  this  last  coincidence  and  that  of  I.  it  follows  that  the  angle  DEF=ABC ' ;
From  II.,  III.  and  IV.  that  angle  DFE=ACB.

The  principles  employed  in  this  deduction  are  partly  such  as  to  contain  two  or  more
conditions ;  hence  the  minor  proposition  by  which  they  are  applied  consists  of  several
links,  of  which  each  must  itself  be  proved.  Thus  particular  conclusions  are  combined  in
the  most  varied  manner,  to  get  the  composite  minor  premises  of  new  axioms.

The  process  is  the  same  in  the  numberless  cases  in  which  we  have  first  a  deduction  that
A  =  B,  then  a  second  that C=Z>,  and  then  the  combination of  the  two that
B+D.


i92  LOGIC

combinations  admitted  by  particular  forms  of  inference  is  it  to  recognise
that  the  creative  power  of  progress  in  deductions  lies  in  conceptual  con
struction  and  development,  which  gives  us  new  subjects  to  which  we  may
apply  general  principles.  It  is  customary  to  call  deduction  progress  from
the  general  to  the  particular,  but  this  progress  is  possible  only  in  so  far  as
concepts  are  differentiated,  and  a  wider  sphere  thus  opened  up  for  the
application  of  a  general  proposition.

The  Euclidean  geometry  is  not  really  woven  out  of  the  few  definitions,
axioms  and  postulates  by  which  it  is  introduced ;  it  obtains  material  for
its  deductions  by  the  inventive  construction  of  figures  and  their  relations,
and  by  the  specialization  of  general  concepts.  The  syllogism  of  itself  can
do  no  more  than  enable  two  propositions  to  produce  one  new  one  ;  only
concepts  are  really  fertile.

II. PROOF.
§  81.

The  PROOF  of  a  proposition  is  its  syllogistic  derivation  from  other  propo
sitions,  which  are  known  to  be  certain  and  necessary,  ultimately  therefore
from  DEFINITIONS  and  AXIOMS.

To  this  extent  every  deduction  from  definitions  and  axioms  is  also  the
proof  of  the  conclusion  reached  by  it.

When  a  distinction  is  made  between  proof  and  deduction,  the  proof  is
regarded  as  the  problem  of  deciding  as  to  the  truth  of  a  hypothesis,  of
confirming  or  refuting  it.  The  proof  of  an  affirmation  is  the  refutation  of
the  negation,  and  vice  versa.

I.  An  affirmation  is  derived  either  from  simple  categorical  or  hypothe
tical  premises,  and  by  means  of  categorical  or  hypothetical  syllogisms  modo
ponente  (direct  proof) ;  or  from  a  disjunctive  judgment  by  negation  of  the
other  members  of  the  disjunction  (proof  by  exclusion  or  indirect  proof).

The  negation  of  a  proposition  follows  from  the  fact  that  it  conflicts,
either  in  itself  or  in  one  of  its  consequences,  with  a  true  proposition.  In
the  latter  case  the  deductio  ad  absurdum  takes  place.

II.  The  discovery  of  the  proof  of  a  proposition  consists  in  the  discovery
of  middle  concepts,  and  in  the  case  of  affirmative  propositions  these  are
found  by  development  of  the  content  of  the  subject  and  the  extension  of
the  predicate  (in  the  case  of  hypothetical  judgments,  in  the  discovery  of
mediating  propositions by  means  of  the  development  of  the  antecedent
into  its  consequences,  and  resolution  of  the  consequent  into  its  grounds).


PROOF  193

In  this  way  we  get  first  the  substitution  of  one  demonstrandum  for  an
other.

When  convertible  premises  can  be  introduced,  the  proof  may  be  dis
covered  by  developing  the  demonstrandum  syllogistically,  until  we  arrive
at  a  true  result,  from  which  the  proof  may  be  constructed  by  a  reverse  pro
cess  (analysis  in  the  sense  of  the  ancients).

1.  The  form  of  the  deduction  is  the  same  whether  it  starts  from  merely
assumed  propositions,  which  are  to  be  developed  into  their  consequences
— we may, e.g., investigate  deductively what  would happen if  masses
attracted  each  other  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  cubes  of  their  distances, —
or  whether  it  works entirely  from propositions  of  immediate  certainty,
from  axioms  and  definitions.

If  the  latter,  then  the  formal  correctness  of  the  deduction  includes  tire
necessity  of  the  results  at  which  it  arrives  ;  it  becomes  proof.  For  to
prove  a  proposition  is  to  derive  it  syllogistically  from  other  propositions,
which  are  known  to  be  certain  and  necessary ;  the  new  proposition  itself
obtains  unconditional  and  necessary  validity.

In  such  cases  the  derived  proposition  and  its  proof  are  discovered
together.

2.  If,  however,  the  thought  of  the  validity  of  a  proposition  has  arisen
in  some  other  way,  so  that  it  is  first  presented  as  a  hypothesis,  then  the
problem  arises  of  deciding  as  to  its  validity;  and  from  this  point  of  view
of  a  problem  the  process  of  proof  becomes  distinct  from  direct  deduction.
The  proof  may  then  be  merely  didactic,  when  the  result  of  the  deduction
is  first  imparted  to  the  hearer  and  its  derivation  given  afterwards,  though
the  teacher  discovered  the  proposition  by  deduction ; or  it  may  be  sub
servient  to  research  itself,  when  some  proposition  is  first  merely  constructed
in  the  form  of  a hypothesis, and  its  validity  investigated  later  by  the
question whether it  can  be  shown  to  be a  necessary  consequence  of
recognised  principles. These  are  the  upx0"  TYJ<;  a7ro8ei£eu)s,  the  principia
demonstrandi ; the proposition itself is TO  TrpoySX^a, demonstrandum  •
the  aTroSeifis,  demonstratio^ consists  in  the syllogistic  derivation of  the
demonstrandum from the principia demonstrandi. The problem of
proving  a  proposition  calls  upon  us,  therefore,  to  show  it  to  be  the  necessary
consequence  of  true  and  necessary  propositions  which  are  recognised  as
such ;  to  show  it, therefore, to be  the necessary consequence of  im-

s.  L. — ii.  o


i94  LOGIC

mediately  certain  propositions,  or  of  propositions  which  are  deductively
obtained  from  these.1

3.  If  we  leave  for  the  present  the  question  as  to  the  way  in  which  a
hypothesis  needing  proof  may  arise,  and  assume  some  supply  of  original
or  derived  propositions  from  which  the  proof  may  be  drawn,  then  the  first
question  to  be  dealt  with  is  :  How  are  we  to  find  the  proof?

The  method  prescribed  by  the  nature  of  syllogism  of  arriving  at  a  proof
of  the  proposition  A  is  J3,  is  by  finding  a  middle  concept  (in  the  hypo
thetical  form  a  mediating  proposition)  between  A  and  B '.  If  there  were
a  concept  X  of  which  we  could  say  from  the  beginning  that  A  is  X  and  X
is  B,  then  the  proof  would  be  given  in  the  syllogism  : —

A  isX


Therefore  A  is  B

Suppose  the  proposition  to  be  proved  to  be  that  virtue  is  capable  of
being  taught;  then  the  question  is  whether  there  can  be  found  a  middle
concept,  which  is  a  predicate  of  virtue,  and  has  the  predicate  "  capable  of
being  taught."  Such  a  concept  is  knowledge  ;  virtue  is  knowledge,  know
ledge  is  capable  of  being  taught,  therefore  virtue  is  capable  of  being
taught.  It  is  assumed  that  the  two  premises  are  acknowledged  as  true.

If  the  proposition  to  be  proved  is  the  negative  A  is  not  B,  the  proof
may  be  obtained  either  by  finding  a  middle  concept  which  belongs  to  A
but  excludes  B  (or  is  excluded  by  B),  or  which  does  not  belong  to  A  and
is  necessarily  connected  with  B ;  or,  again,  by  developing  a  consequence
from  A  which  is  a  ground  for  denying  B,  or  which  is  contradictory  to  a
consequence  of  B.

Suppose  we  wish  to  prove  that  an  equilateral  triangle  is  not  rectangular;
equality  of  angles  is  a  property  of  the  equilateral  triangle,  but  equality  of
angles  excludes  the  possibility  of  one  of  them  being  a  right  angle ;  or  to
put  it  in  another  way,  equality  of  angles  contradicts  'the  necessary  con
sequence  of  being  rectangular,  which  is  that  the  angles  are  unequal.

4.  It  is  evident  that  when  an  affirmative  proposition  is  to  be  proved  in
the  first  figure  (modo  ponente)  such  a  middle  concept  must  be  found

1  Aristot.  Top. ,  i.  I  :  "Ecm  5?j  <ri;XXo7t<r/x6j,  ev  $  TfdtvTtav  TLVUV  erepov  n  TUIV  Kfi^fvuv
f£  dvdyKijs  ffVfj.j3a.lvei.  dia  T&V  Kfifj.£i>uv  d7r65«£i5  .  .  eaTlv,  Srav  e£  d\T]6ui>  Kal  irpdiruiv
6  crv\\oyio-/jLbs  ?;,  ^  £K  TOIOUTUIV  &  Sid  nvuv  irpuruv  Kal  dXrjduv  TTJS  irepi  avrd  yisdxreus  r
V  ft\i](pfv.  Cf.  Anal,  post.,  i.  i.


PROOF  195

amongst  the  concepts  which  belong  as  predicates  to  A,  and  also  amongst
those  to  which  B  belongs  as  predicate ;  thus  what  we  have  to  do  is  on  the
one  hand  to  develop  the  content  of  A,  on  the  other  hand  to  review  the
extension  of  £,  and  to  ascertain  whether  there  is  any  common  element.
Or,  when  applied  to  hypothetical  inferences,  we  must,  on  the  one  hand,
develop  A  into  its  consequences  ;  on  the  other  hand,  ascertain  the  grounds
from  which  B  would  follow  according  to  known  principles ;  and  in  this
way  discover  a  middle  term  to  be  the  consequence  of  A  and  the  ground
of  B.  If,  however,  we  wish  to  prove  negative  propositions,  we  must
develop  the  exclusions  resulting  from  A  and  B,  and  in  this  way  find  a
common  term  which  will  make  the  syllogism  possible.

5.  Only  in  the  simplest  cases  will  a  single  middle  concept  suffice  to
help  us  to  recognised  propositions  as  starting  points  for  our  proof.
Generally  our  analysis  will  have  to  be  applied  to  several  terms  before  the
desired  concepts  are  found,  and  the  process  becomes  proportionately
complicated  until  it  becomes  the  trial  of  different  possibilities.

Take,  for  example,  the  proposition  A  is  B ;  analysis  of  A  shows  that
X,  Y,  Z  belong  to  it,  but  we  know  of  no  proposition  to  the  effect  that
either  X  or  Y  or  Z  has  the  predicate  B.  The  question  arises,  therefore,
whether  any  one  of  the  propositions  X  is  J3,  Kis  B,  Z  is  B  can  be  proved;
the  same  process  begins  anew  of  seeking  a  further  middle  concept  by  the
development  of  X,  Y,  Z  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  survey  of  that  to  which
£  belongs  on  the  other.

It  often  happens  that  in  this  way  we  merely  succeed  in  reducing  one
proposition  to  another  in  the  sense  that  if  the  latter  were  proved  the
former  would  follow  from  it.  A  is  B — in  the  above  example — would  be
proved  if  it  were  proved  that  Xis  B,  because  it  has  been  found  that  A  is
X ;  in  the  same  way  the  proposition  A  is  B  is  proved  when  it  can  be
shown  that  A  is  M,  and  we  know  that  Mis  B.

Suppose,  for  example,  it  is  to  be  proved  that  in  an  isosceles  triangle
ABC  the  straight  line  A  D  drawn  from  the  apex  A  to  the  point  D
bisecting  the  base  is  at  right  angles  to  the  base ;  all  I  need  prove  is  that  it
makes  equal  angles,  for  equal  adjacent  angles  are  right  angles  ;  but  it  is
proved  that  it  makes  equal  angles  if  the  two  triangles  A  B  D,  A  CD  are
congruent,  and  thus  the  problem  is  reduced  to  proving  that  the  con
struction  before  us  gives  two  congruent  triangles.  Here  the  reasoning
works  back  from  the  predicate  of  the  demonstrandum  (or  from  the  conse
quent)  to  its  nearest  ground  ;  by  the  introduction  of  a  universally  known


1  96  LOGIC

proposition,  for  the  final  conclusion  itself  (that  the  angles  are  right  angles)
is  substituted  its  ground  (that  they  are  equal  adjacent  angles).  If  we  had
begun  by  developing  from  the  construction  that  it  would  give  rise  to
triangles  having  three  sides  of  the  one  equal  to  three  sides  of  the  other,
then  the  proof  would  resolve  itself  into  the  problem  of  showing  that
when  the  triangles  A  B  D  and  A  CD  have  the  sides  of  the  one  equal  to
the  sides  of  the  other,  then  the  angles  A  D  B  and  ADC  must  be  right
angles  ;  the  reduction  would  start  from  the  subject  of  the  problem,  or
from  the  antecedent.

This  replacement  of  the  original  demonstrandum  by  another,  from  which
it  can  be  derived  by  a  simple  inference,  was  called  by  Aristotle  (though
in  a  narrower  sense)  /xeraXa/i/Saj/etv,  and  to  the  proposition,  to  the  proof
of  which  the  problem  is  reduced,  he  gives  the  name  of  TO


6.  Such  a  change  in  the  original  demonstrandum  may  take  place  not
only  through  simple  development  of  the  given  ;  geometry  can  show  many
examples  in  which,  with  a  view  to  discovering  the  proof,  the  subject  or
predicate  of  the  demonstrandum  is  so  changed  by  a  special  operation  that
the  syllogistic  middle  terms  may  be  found,  e.g.,  by  representing  the  given
lines  or  angles  as  sums  or  differences  of  others.  Here  inventive  construc
tion  is  at  work,  producing  the  conditions  under  which  alone  a  development
of  the  subject  or  predicate  concept  which  will  lead  to  the  desired  end  is
possible.  If,  for  example,  it  is  to  be  proved  that  in  a  quadrangle  ABCD
inscribed  in  a  circle  the  sum  of  the  opposite  angles  A  and  C,  B  and  D,
always  =  2^,  the  proof  cannot  be  carried  out  without  further  data,  the
figure  shows  nothing  from  which  the  relations  between  the  angles  could  be
derived.  It  is  only  when  the  diagonals  AC  and  BD  are  drawn,  dividing
each  angle  into  two  parts,  that  we  get  conditions  under  which  these
parts  can  be  compared  ;  in  place  of  the  original  subject,  the  sum  of  two
angles,  there  now  appears  the  sum  of  four  angles.  The  predicate  is  also
replaced  by  another  ;  the  sum  of  the  opposite  angles  is  zR  when  it  is  half
of  the  sum  of  all  the  angles  of  the  quadrangle,  when,  therefore,  the  sum
of  the  angles  A  and  C  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  angles  B  and  D,  and  the
/j.eraXafji(3av6fj.f.vov  is  now  :  that  the  sum  of  the  four  angles  lying  on  the
one  diagonal  AC  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  four  on  the  other  diagonal
BD.

1  Analyt.  pr.,  i.  23,  4ia,  39.  For  an  explanation  of  this  expression  see  my  Programm,
p.  4,  note.


PROOF  197

Or  suppose  the  proposition  to  be  proved  to  be  that  the  three  lines
bisecting  the  angles  of  a  triangle  intersect  in  one  point ;  for  this  proposi
tion  is  substituted  another,  stating  that  the  line  drawn  from  the  point  of
intersection  of  two  bisecting  lines  to  the  apex  of  the  third  angle  bisects  this
third  angle.  In  this  case  we  are  first  led  to  transform  the  predicate  by  the
consideration  that  the  bisecting  line  of  the  third  angle  must  pass  through
the  point  of  intersection  of  the  two  other  bisecting  lines  if  a  line  drawn
from  this  point  to  the  apex  of  the  angle  bisects  the  angle,  because  there
cannot  be  more  than  one  bisecting  line ;  what  now  has  to  be  proved  is
the  equality  of  two  angles  instead  of  the  passing  of  a  line  through  a  given
point.

The  expedients  employed  in  this  substitution  of  problems  are  manifold,
and  it  is  difficult  to  establish  rules  of  method  where  an  inventive  combina
tion  is  at  work  within  a  large  range  of  possibilities  ;  nevertheless,  the
fundamental  character  remains  the  same  in  these  more  complicated
operations  as  in  the  most  simple.  The  process  always  starts,  on  the  one
hand,  from  the  subject  (or  the  antecedent)  of  the  problem,  and  develops  it
into  its  predicates,  or  the  proposition  into  its  consequences  ;  on  the  other
hand,  from  the  predicate,  or  from  the  consequent  of  the  demonstrandum,  and
works  back  from  it  to  its  nearest  conditions,  from  which  it  proceeds,  in
order  to  ascertain  whether  these  two  ways  coincide  at  any  point.

7.  In  one  case  we  may  substitute  for  a  process  which  assumes  the
character  of  mere  experiment,  in  proportion  as  the  number  of  terms  to  be-
discovered  increases,  one  which  leads  directly  to  the  end  ;  when,  that  is,  the
premises  leading  to  the  conclusions  are  all  convertible  propositions,  either
categorical  or  hypothetical.  When,  to  take  the  simplest  instance,  a  pro
position  A  is  B  can  be  proved  by  means  of  a  middle  concept  X  in  such  a
way  that  the  syllogisms

1.  A  is  X or If  A  is  true,  X  is  true;

2.  X  is  B  If  X  is  true,  B  is  true  ;


3.  A  is  B  If  A  is  true,  B  is  true  ;

are  valid,  and  the  premises  are  convertible,  then  the  first  proposition  (in
ordinary  terminology  the  minor  proposition)  can  also  be  represented  as
the  consequence  of  the  second  and  of  the  conclusion,  the  second  (or  major
proposition)  as  the  consequence  of  the  first  and  of  the  conclusion  ;  that
is,  the  following  syllogisms  will  be  valid : —


198  LOGIC

I. 2.  B  is  X  If  B  is  true,  X  is  true

3.  A  is  ^  If  ^4  is  true,  B  is  true

1.  A  is  X  If  ^4  is  true,  ^f  is  true

II. i.  X  is  A  If  X  is  true,  ^4  is  true

3.  A  is  B  \i  A  is  true,  ^  is  true

2.  Jf  is  B  If  X  is  true,  .#  is  true

Here  we  may  find  a  ground  for  that  method  which  the  ancients  called
analysis ;  the  method  which,  taking  the  demonstrandum  as  starting-point,
constructs  a  syllogism  by  introducing  a  second  acknowledged  premise,
either  as  a  minor  or  major  premise,  and  then  proceeds  to  develop  the  con
clusion  in  the  same  way  until  a  proposition  is  reached  which  is  known  to
be  true  independently  of  this  derivation.  As  soon  as  this  point  is  reached,
the  process  is  reversed,  and  by  conversion  of  the  premises  a  chain  of
inferences  is  established,  in  which  the  last  conclusion  is  the  demonstran
dum.

The  deduction  from  the  Phczdo,  quoted  on  page  190  as  a  proof  of  the
proposition  that  the  soul  is  indestructible,  might  (if  we  assume  the  proposi
tions  forming  it  to  be  convertible)  have  been  found  by  some  such  analysis
as  the  following,  which  starts  from  the  demonstrandum  : —

1.  The  soul  is  indestructible  ;

2.  The  indestructible  is  indissoluble ;

3.  The  indissoluble  is  simple  ;

4.  The  simple  is  unchanging —

Therefore  the  soul  is  unchanging.

5.  The  soul  as  knowing  is  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which  is  known  by

it;

6.  Therefore  that  which  is  known  by  it  is  unchanging.

7.  The  soul  knows  ideas;

8.  Therefore  ideas  are  unchanging.

Supposing  this  result  to  be  true  in  itself,  in  consequence  of  a  definition,
as  here,  or  as  an  axiom,  and,  therefore,  capable  of  being  used  as  a
prindpium  demonstrandi ;  then  if  all  the  intervening  propositions  are
convertible,  the  whole  deduction  may  be  read  backwards;  the  proof  would
now  begin  with  8,  and  read  as  follows  :

8. Ideas  are  unchanging.

7,  6. The  soul  knows  ideas,  therefore  it  knows  the  unchanging.


PROOF  199

5.  It  is  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which  it  knows,  therefore  it  is  un
changing.

4. The  unchanging  is  simple ;

3. The  simple  is  indissoluble ;

2. The  indissoluble  is  indestructible  ;

i. Therefore  the  soul  is  indestructible.

We  may  here  see  what  importance  'attaches,  not  only  to  the  converti
bility  of  simple  universal  propositions,  but  also  to  those  relations  which  are
either  entirely  reciprocal,  such  as  equality,  or  which  belong  together  as
correlates,  such  as  right  and  left,  sum  and  difference,  etc.  For  the  propo
sition  A  is  greater  than  B  can  always  be  converted  by  virtue  of  this
correlative  concept  into  the  proposition  B  is  smaller  than  A  (though  the
proposition  A  is  the  ground  of  B  cannot  always  be  converted  into  the
proposition  B  is  always  the  consequence  of  A).  Mathematical  syllogisms
frequently  progress  partly  by  means  of  the  relation  of  equality,  partly  by
means  of  such  correlative  concepts  as  larger  and  smaller,  sum  and
difference ;  and  for  this  reason  the  method  of  discovering  proof  which  we
have  just  described  is  chiefly  available  in  the  mathematical  sphere.1  Of
course  the  discovery  of  the  proof,  i.e.  the  derivation  of  a  true  proposition
from  the  demonstrandum,  is  not  to  be  called  the  proof  itself,  or  even  a
kind  of  proof ;  for  the  truth  of  the  conclusion  would  not  follow  from  the
truth  of  the  premises  unless  the  further  condition  of  convertibility  of  the
premises  were  fulfilled  (§  59,  3).

8.  A  distinction  is  generally  made  between  proof  and  refutation  ;  but
this  is  incorrect  if  it  is  meant  that  they  are  different  ways  of  procedure  in
thought,  and  if  the  distinction  does  not  merely  refer  to  a  belief  or  an
inclination  to  accept  the  proposition  as  true,  which  is  present  indepen
dently  of  the  proof.  In  itself  that  which  is  still  to  be  proved  is  uncertain,
both  its  affirmation  and  its  negation  must  be  held  to  be  possible ;  only  a
subjective  disposition  can  cause  us  to  advance  an  ungrounded  proposition
with  the  expectation  that  it  will  be  valid,  and  to  feel  the  demonstration  of
its  opposite  as  an  overthrow  of  something  already  established.  Apart
from  this  disposition  every  demonstrandum  is  a  question  which  calls  for
Yes  or  No,  and  for  which  we  seek  an  answer  ;  every  proof  of  the  Yes  is  a
refutation  of  the  No,  every  refutation  of  the  Yes  a  proof  of  the  No.  Thus
the  means  of  refutation  are  absolutely  identical  with  the  means  of  proof.2

1  Cf.  Duhamel,  Des  methodes  dans  les  sciences  de  raisonnemeiit,  I,  p.  39  sq.

2  6  yap  £Xe-yxos  <nAXoytcr;u,6j  dvTLif>dcrfws. Aristotle,  Ilepl  ao<t>.  A.,  6.  l68a,  36.


2OO


LOGIC


It  is  however  natural  that  the  question  as  to  the  ways  in  which  positive
propositions  are  proved  should  occupy  the  foreground,  as  the  positive
proposition  is  the  original,  and  the  negation  has  no  meaning  except  as  the
denial  of  a  positive  proposition,  and  thus  the  question  as  to  the  means  of
proving  positive  propositions,  with  which  we  have  so  far  been  chiefly
concerned,  does  certainly  fall  apart  from  the  question  as  to  the  means  of
proving  negations.  We  have  already  indicated  these  means  in  a  general
way ;  they  consist  in  the  discovery  of  relations  of  exclusion  which,  when
we  are  dealing  with  simple  syllogistic  forms  of  the  first  or  second  figure,
can  yield  the  middle  terms  required.  But  by  far  the  most  important  and
fruitful  method  of  establishing  the  falsity  of  a  proposition  consists  in  the
development  of  its  consequences  by  the  introduction  of  true  premises  ;
these  consequences  leading  ultimately  to  contradictions  amongst  them
selves  or  with  recognised  truths,  the  falsity  of  the  conclusion  taken  in
connection  with  the  truth  of  the  other  premises  disproves  that  one  which
was  taken  as  a  starting  point.  Thus,  in  the  familiar  example  used  by
Aristotle,  the  commensurability  of  the  diagonals  of  the  square  with  the
sides  is  refuted  because,  from  it,  it  would  follow  that  an  even  number  would
be  odd.

This  example  itself  shows  a  special  form  of  refutation  by  the  in
validity  of  the  consequences,  the  process,  that  is,  through  a  divisive  or
disjunctive  judgment,  of  which  all  the  members  are  denied.  If  a  proposi
tion  A  is  B  can  be  developed  into  the  disjunction  :  If  A  is  JB,  either  Cor
D  or  E  is  true  ;  and  if  it  can  then  be  shown  that  neither  C  norZ>  nor  E  is
true,  then  the  presupposition,  the  proposition  A  is  B,  is  itself  denied;  if
the  demonstrandum  before  us  is —

A  is  B,

But  B  is  either  C  or  Z>,
And  A  is  neither  C  nor  D,

then  the  proposition  A  is  B  is  refuted  (cf.  §  57,  4,  §  58,  3.  L,  pp.  370,  372).
9.  Methods  of  proving  negative  propositions,  or  the  falsity  of  positive
statements,  first  become  important  when  they  are  the  means,  not  merely  of
guarding  against  the  error  which  attempts  an  untenable  affirmation,  but
of  grounding  a  positive  statement.  The  importance  of  the  disjunctive
judgment  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  makes  it  possible  to  pass  from  a  negation
to  an  affirmation.  It  is  in  this  way  that  we  get  the  forms  of  proof  known
as  indirect,  in  opposition  to  the  simple  derivation  of  a  proposition  from
principles  by  means  of  categorical  or  hypothetical  syllogisms.


PROOF  201

10.  Proof  by  exclusion  starts  from  a  disjunctive  judgment,  and
demonstrates  one  member  of  the  disjunction  by  the  denial  of  all  the
others  ;  this  denial  again  may  be  demonstrated  in  the  different  forms,
leading  to  negative  judgments,  modo  ponente  or  modo  tollente.

The  proof  which  alone  is  generally  called  indirect  or  apagogic  (f)  ei?
dSwaTov  (iTraywyr?)  is  only  a  special  form  of  this  proof  by  exclusion.

As  ordinarily  represented,  its  essence  consists  in  demonstrating  a  pro
position  by  the  refutation  of  its  contradictory  opposite,  and  in  achieving
this  refutation  by  showing  that  the  opposite,  when  developed  into  its  con
sequences,  leads  to  the  impossible.  It  proceeds,  therefore,  as  follows  to
prove  A  is  B  : —

If  A  is  not  B,  then  by  the  introduction  of  other  premises  it  can  be
shown  to  follow  that  C  is  D ;  but  the  proposition  C  is  D  is  false,  therefore
it  is  false  that  A  is  not  £,  therefore  true  that  A  is  B.

In  this  purely  formal  representation  it  might  easily  seem  as  if  the
indirect  proof  needed  no  help  but  that  of  the  principle  of  the  excluded
middle  in  order  to  reach  its  goal.  But  if  we  look  more  closely,  we  shall
see  that  in  a  case  where  there  is  really  nothing  else  introduced  the  whole
circumlocution  is  unnecessary  and  the  direct  proof  possible.

If,  that  is,  it  is  true  that —

If  A  is  not  B,  C  is  Z>,  then  it  is  also  true  that
If  C  is  not  D,  A  is  B.

But  the  proposition  C  is  not  D  is  known  to  be  true  ;  thus  the  same  con-
lection,  according  to  which  the  false  proposition  C  is  D  follows  from  A  is
lot  B,  enables  us  to  demonstrate  directly  from  the  true  proposition  C  is
lot  D  the  proposition  A  is  .Z?.1

If  an  indirect  proof  is  to  lead  to  anything  which  cannot  be  reached
lirectly,  its  essence  must  consist  in  attaining  to  a  sphere  of  action  in

1  It  is  the  same  in  the  categorical  form. If  the  proposition  to  be  proved  is  all  A 's  are
?,  the  contradictory  would  be  some  A  is  not  B.
From  this  we  may  proceed  to  infer,  either  in  the  second  figure  :

Every  C  is  B

Therefore  some  A  is  not  C ;
r  in  the  third  :

All  A's  are  C
Therefore  some  C  is  not  B.

f  the  first  conclusion  is  false,  then  it  is  true  that  all  A's  are  C ;  if  the  second  is  false,
^ien  it  is  true  that  all  C's  are  B.  Hence  it  is  true  both  that  all  A's  are  C,  and  that  all
^s  are  B  ;  and  from  that  it  follows  directly  that  all  A's  are  B  (cf.  §  25,  8.  I.,  p.  155).


202  LOGIC

which  it  can  move  independently.  This  happens  when  it  succeeds  in
gaining  by  the  denial  of  the  demonstrandum  positive  propositions  which
can  be  developed  into  their  consequences ;  and  this  is  possible  only  by
means  of  a  disjunctive  judgment,  which  exhausts  the  circle  of  possi
bilities.  The  others  all  proving  by  their  consequences  to  be  false,  only
the  original  proposition  remains,  and  as  the  only  one  possible  it  is
necessary.

It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  indirect  proof  so  often  runs  in  several
parallel  series ;  when  several  possibilities  present  themselves,  each  one
must  be  refuted  before  the  exclusion  of  all  other  members  of  the  disjunc
tion  can  establish  the  one  which  is  left.

Disjunctive  judgments  are  therefore  the  true  foundations  for  indirect
proofs ;  they  proceed  in  one  series  where  the  disjunction  has  two
members,  in  several  series  where  it  has  more  than  two.

ii.  When  we  see  that  the  genuine  indirect  proof  is  based  upon  a  dis
junctive  judgment  which  contains  more  than  the  mere  antiphasis  of  an
affirmation  and  a  negation,  the  objections  often  raised  against  it  to  the
effect  that  its  power  of  conviction  is  less  than  that  of  the  direct  proof,  and
that  it  masters  truth  only  by  a  stratagem,  disappear.  The  disjunction  upon
which  it  stands  must  proceed  from  and  develop  the  nature  of  things ;  all
our  concepts  gain  whatever  they  may  have  of  determination  from  distinc
tion  and  opposition,  and  the  proof  which  starts  from  such  oppositions
employs  ultimately  only  what  is  contained  in  the  nature  of  the  concepts  or
their  relations.  It  shows  no  imperfection  to  prove  the  equality  of  two
lines  by  the  fact  that  one  can  be  neither  longer  nor  shorter  than  the
other,  for  the  concept  of  equality  gets  its  determination  from  just  this
negation  of  all  difference,  and  its  very  nature  is  to  present  a  limiting  case
to  which  we  approximate  by  diminishing  the  differences.  When  Euclid
proves  indirectly  that  two  lines  which,  meeting  in  the  same  point  with  a
third,  make  angles  of  which  the  sum  =  zR,  form  one  straight  line,  the
proof  constrains  one  line  to  be  the  continuation  of  the  other  by  the
exclusion  of  every  other  direction,  and  follows  as  much  from  the  nature  of
the  figure  as  any  direct  proof.

If  we  are  dealing  with  the  proof  of  negative  propositions,  then  the  in
direct  proof  may  be  said  to  be  the  normal  method,  inasmuch  as  it  obtains
from  the  affirmation  itself  the  negation  of  its  possibility  by  showing  the
self-destructiveness  of  its  consequences.  Thus  Spinoza  is  fully  justified
in  proving  a  number  of  negative  theorems  apagogically  (e.g.  Eth.,  i,  5.  6.


REDUCTION  203

Coroll.,  12,  13  ;  II.  10,  etc.),  showing  that  the  opposite  alternatives  are  by
their  positive  determinations  impossible.

12.  The  problem  of  proof  is  solved  when  the  proposition  in  question
can  be  exhibited  as  a  syllogistic  conclusion  from  premises  which  are  with
out  exception  true  and  valid,  which  therefore  rest  finally  upon  immediately
certain  propositions.  Moreover  the  truth  of  a  proposition  which  is  not
self-evident  cannot  possibly  be  grounded  in  any  other  way  than  through
such  a  proof;  only  when  a  proposition  is  the  necessary  consequence  of
necessary  propositions  is  it  itself  necessarily  valid  ;  and  in  order  to  show  it
to  be  so,  we  must  make  use  of  the  syllogistic  forms  in  which  alone  that
necessity  is  to  be  found.  Proof,  therefore,  in  the  strict  sense,  is  possible
only  in  so  far  as  there  are  definitions  and  axioms. x


III. REDUCTION.


The  framing  of  possible  premises  for  given  propositions,  or  the  construc
tion  of  a  syllogism  when  the  conclusion  and  one  premise  is  given,  is  called
REDUCTION.  It  leads  first  to  hypotheses,  but  when  the  propositions  obtained
by  reduction  prove  to  be  immediately  necessary,  it  is  a  means  of  finding
the  first  principles  of  deduction.

INDUCTION,  which  takes  place  by  means  of  comparison  and  abstraction
of  general  concepts,  is  a  special  form  of  reduction.

i.  From  proof  we  pass  first  to  the  explanation  of  a  proposition  which
is  already  known  to  be  true,  but  which  is  also  shown  to  be  the  necessary
consequence  of  general  grounds  and  thus  takes  its  place  in  a  connected
ieduction  from  first  principles.

If  I  know  that  the  sum  of  the  digits  of  all  compounds  of  9  from  twice  to
en  times  9,  is  9  ;  or  vice  versa  that  all  numbers  between  10  and  90  of

1  I  can  only  briefly  refer  to  errors  of  proof,  which  are  partly  of  a  formal  nature,  based
:ither  upon  insufficient  determination  of  concepts  and  terms  or  upon  ignorance  of  the
yllogistic  rules ;  and  partly  such  as  violate  the  conditions  of  proof  because  mingling
vith  their  premises  propositions  which  do  not  possess  unconditional  validity,  thus
ssuming  a  ground  of  proof  too  hastily  (alrelcrdai.  rb  ti>  apxy,  petitio  principii],  or  because
omething  other  follows  from  the  deduction  than  that  which  was  to  be  proved  (erepofjj-
j?<ns).  The  latter  error  does  not,  of  course,  take  place,  when  instead  of  the  proposition
squired  a  more  general  one  is  found  in  which  it  is  contained.  The  rule  "  qui  nimium
robat  nihil  probat "  does  not  apply  to  the  proof  which  yields  more  than  is  needed,  but
nly  to  that  which  yields  too  much,  i.e.  something  notoriously  false,  in  addition  to  the
reposition  to  be  proved,  and  thus  betrays  either  an  error  of  inference  or  a  false  premise.


204


LOGIC


which  the  sum  of  the  digits  is  9,  can  be  divided  by  9 ;  I  have  here  a  pro
position  obtained  from  immediate  observation  of  the  numbers  18,  27,  36,
etc.,  an  actual  coincidence  without  exception,  within  these  limits,  of  9  as
the  sum  of  the  digits,  and  divisibility  by  9.  The  question  is  whether  we
can  find  any  necessity  in  this  coincidence ;  whether  it  can  be  represented
as  the  consequence  of  other  known  numerical  laws ;  and  to  decide  this
question  we  must  proceed  just  as  if  we  were  dealing  with  a  proposition
which  had  still  to  be  proved.  By  analysing  the  denary  expression  of  a
number,  upon  which  is  based  the  statement  of  the  sum  of  the  digits  ;  by
substituting  10 — i  for  9  or  9  +  i  for  10,  which  follows  simply  from  the
definitions  of  9  and  10 ;  and  by  introducing  propositions  about  multiplica
tion  and  division,  we  find  the  middle  terms  which  make  it  possible  to
prove  that  a  number  of  the  form  ;//  lo  +  w  is  divisible  by  9  when  m  +  n  is
divisible  by  9,  and  that  every  compound  of  9  must  give  a  number  of  which
the  sum  of  the  digits  is  9  or  can  be  divided  by  9  ;  and  it  is  then  evident
that  the  proof  can  be  applied,  not  only  to  numbers  with  two  digits,  but  to
all  numbers  whatever  which  have  for  the  sum  of  their  digits  9,  or  a  com
pound  of  9.

2.  In  this  case  the  propositions  from  which  the  proof  is  derived,  and
the  explanation  given,  are  known  beforehand.  But  the  same  process  may
also  serve  to  discover  principia  demonstrandi,  which  have  not  yet  been
consciously  put  forward  as  propositions.

It  is  here  that  we  come  upon  a  new  phase  in  the  construction  of  judg
ments  which  follows  a  direction  the  reverse  of  deduction  ;  it  is  frequently
called  analysis,  but  as  this  term  is  ambiguous  reduction  is  a  better  name.

To  start  with  the  simplest  cases  :  if  two  propositions  all  A's  are  JB's,  and
all  A's  are  C's,  are  given,  then  if  we  employ  them  as  premises  of  a  syllo
gism,  it  follows  only  in  the  third  figure  that  some  C's  are  J5's,  or  some  jB's
are  C's  •  in  other  words,  that  C  and  B  are  compatible,  or  do  not  neces
sarily  exclude  each  other.  But  these  same  propositions  admit  of  another
interpretation  ;  they  may  be  taken  as  conclusion  and  minor  premise  of  a
syllogism  having  for  its  major  premise  "  all  -B's  are  C's,"  or  "  all  C's  are
JB's"  so  that  the  syllogisms  in  which  they  would  naturally  be  placed  would
be  either

All  £'s  are  C's
All  A's  are  JB's

All  A's  are  C's ;


REDUCTION  205

All  C's  are  £'s
All  A's  are  C's


All  A's  are  £'s.

In  the  first  case  A  is  B  is  the  minor  proposition  and  A  is  C  the  con
clusion  ;  in  the  second  case  vice  versa.  According  to  the  major  premise
introduced  they  would  enter  into  the  one  or  the  other  necessary  relation  ;
a  ground  could  be  given  for  the  meeting  of  the  two  predicates  in  the
subject  in  so  far  as  predicate  B  necessarily  involved  predicate  C  or  vice
versa.

If  we  have  two  negative  propositions  :  no  A  is  B,  no  A  is  C,  nothing
can  be  obtained  from  them  so  long  as  we  regard  them  as  premises.  But
if  in  the  natural  order  of  a  comprehensive  thought  they  should  become  the
premise  and  conclusion  of  a  syllogism,  this  would  run  as  follows  :

All  C's  are  £'s or All  £'s  are  C's
No  A  is  B  No  A  is  C


No  A  is  C  No  A  is  B

in  the  second  figure. Or  if  we  convert  the  propositions  and  take  them  as
major  premises, —

No  B  is  A  No  C  is  A

All  Cs  are  B  All  &s  are  C


No  C  is  A  No  £  is  A

in  the  first  figure,  the  assumed  premise  being  now  the  minor  premise.
Here  again  the  connection  between  B  and  C  is  the  ground  for  both  being
denied  of  A.

Finally,  suppose  an  affirmative  proposition  all  A's  are  £'s,  and  a  negative
proposition  no  A  is  C,  to  be  given ;  if  we  take  them  as  premises,  it  is  only
in  the  third  figure  that  an  inference  can  be  made  :

All  A's  are  &s
No  A  is  C


Some  J3's  are  not  C,

where  the  conclusion  merely  denies  necessary  connection  between  C
and  B.  But  if  it  were  true  that  no  B  is  C  or  no  C  is  £,  then  we  should
get:


206  LOGIC


No  B  is  C  No  C  is  .

All  A's  are  B  All  -4's  are


No  ^4  is  C  No  A  is  C

in  the  first  figure  in  the  second  figure.

Instead  of  the  particular  negation  following  from  the  two  propositions,
we  might  presuppose  a  universal  negation  as  the  ground  of  the  relation
between  them.

Or  in  the  more  general  formulae  of  the  hypothetical  judgment :  two
propositions —

If  A  is  true,  B  is  true,
If  A  is  true,  C  is  true,

are  necessarily  connected  when  B  is  a  ground  of  C,  or  C  is  a  ground  of
B ;  for  then  the  syllogism  is  possible  :

If  B  is  true,  C  is  true.
If  A  is  true,  B  is  true.

If  A  is  true,  C  is  true.

or  : If  C  is  true,  B  is  true.
If  A  is  true,  C  is  true.

If  A  is  true,  B  is  true.
In  the  same  way,  given  two  propositions  :

If  A  is  true,  B  is  true,
If  A  is  true,  C  is  not  true,

the  second  follows  from  the  first  when  we  have  the  true  proposition :  If
B  is  true,  C  is  not  true ;  and  the  first  follows  from  the  second,  when,  If
B  is  not  true,  C  is  true.  For  when  we  add,  If  A  is  true,  C  is  not  true,
it  follows  modo  tollente,  If  A  is  true,  B  is  true.

3.  This  framing  of  possible  premises  for  given  propositions  is,  of
course,  as  much  bound  by  the  syllogistic  rules  as  deduction ;  it  is  similar
to  those  processes  of  calculation  which  proceed  backwards,  inasmuch  as
it  proceeds  from  the  result  to  the  elements  which  give  rise  to  it ;  it  is,  as
it  were,  a  division  of  the  product  by  one  factor  in  order  to  find  the  other.
We  do  not,  however,  get  an  unambiguous  result,  but  generally — as  in  the
extraction  of  roots — a  double  possibility  with  reference  to  the  supposed


REDUCTION  207

major  proposition  according  as  one  of  the  propositions  to  be  reduced  is
taken  as  minor  premise  or  as  conclusion  ;  even  apart  from  this  difficulty,
the  result  to  which  this  process  leads  is  at  first  only  a  possibility,  and  the
discovered  premise  only  a  hypothesis,  of  which  we  cannot  say  that,
because  when  taken  together  with  a  true  proposition  it  yields  a  true  con
clusion,  it  is  therefore  itself  true  (cf.  §  59,  3.  I.,  p.  374).

4.  The  same  process  of  reference  to  a  possible  major  proposition  may
appear  when  a  predicate  C  belongs  to  a  subject  A,  and  the  question
arises  as  to  which  of  the  determinations  of  A  has  C  for  its  consequence;
it  may,  for  instance,  depend  upon  one  alone  of  its  attributes,  B,  and  then
we  should  have,  All  B  is  C,  A  is  £,  therefore  A  is  C.  In  our  former
example,  the  compounds  of  9  from  twice  to  ten  times  have  9  for  the  sum
of  their  digits,  and  then  the  question  arises  whether  this  attribute  depends
only  upon  their  being  compounds  of  9,  or  also  upon  their  having  two
digits;  whether,  that  is,  they  follow  necessarily  from  the  whole  subject  as
the  complex  of  all  its  determinations,  or  from  only  one  of  its  determinations.

This  question  would  be  still  more  pressing  if  several  subjects,  A1,  A2,
A3,  having  the  predicate  C,  should  all  agree  in  falling  under  the  general
concept  A.  For  then  the  particular  propositions  A1  is  C,  A2  is  C,  As  is
C,  appear  as  common  consequences  of  the  same  major  premise  all  A's
are  C,  in  which  all  alike  find  their  explanation ;  the  reduction  brought
about  in  this  way  is  ordinarily  called  induction.

Here  again,  however,  no  necessity  is  shown  why  the  predicate  C  should
be  the  consequence  of  the  common  A  :  iron,  gold,  and  silver  are  heavier
than  water ;  iron,  gold,  and  silver  fall  under  the  concept  of  metal,  but  it
does  not  follow  that  the  fact  of  being  metal  is  by  itself  the  ground  of
greater  specific  weight.

Only  if  A1,  A2,  A3  should  constitute  the  whole  logical  extension  of  A,
would  it  be  possible  to  infer,  the  validity  of  the  proposition,  All  A's  are  C.
We  should  have :

A  is  either  A1,  or  A2,  or  A3,
A1,  and  A2,  and  A3  are  all  C,

Therefore  all  A's  are  C  (according  to  §  57,  I.,  p.  368).

This  proposition  may  then  be  taken  as  the  major  proposition  by  which  to
explain  the  particular  propositions  A1  is  C,  etc.

5.  We  shall  have  to  show  in  a  later  section  what  part  is  taken  in
empirical  inquiry  and  the  inductions  grounded  upon  it  by  this  process  of


208  LOGIC

assuming  major  propositions  from  which  given  propositions  follow  as
conclusions.  Here  the  process  of  reduction  comes  into  consideration
only  so  far  as  it  bears  upon  the  problems  of  deduction.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  clear  that  reduction  is  one  of  the  ways  in  which
hypotheses  arise  of  which  the  validity  can  be  decided  by  a  process  of
proof;  it  is  therefore  of  use  as  a  heuristic  process  leading  to  the  construc
tion  of  questions.  It  is,  however,  chiefly  important  as  a  process  for  dis
covering  ultimate  first  principia  demonstrandi ;  when,  that  is,  a  propo
sition  found  by  reduction  proves  to  be  self-evident,  an  axiom.  The  most
universal  presuppositions  of  thought  do  not  generally  appear  in  con
sciousness  in  their  most  abstract  form  ;  their  force  makes  itself  felt  as  the
ground  of  certainty  and  self-evidence  in  special  and  concrete  cases.  Just
as  our  ideas  are  not  at  first  consciously  formed  from  their  simple  elements,
which  are  interwoven  without  explicit  consciousness  and  need  therefore  to
be  reconstructed  by  logical  reflection,  so  also  our  convictions  are  not
constructed  from  first  principles  by  means  of  explicitly  stated  syllogisms  ;
what  appears  in  consciousness  is  the  general  principle  in  a  particular
application,  from  which  it  must  be  disengaged  and  raised  into  clear
consciousness  in  its  pure  form.  In  the  practical  sphere,  also,  we  are
always  coming  upon  convictions  as  to  the  right  or  the  expedient  which
have  not  been  constructed  at  every  step  with  conscious  reflection,  but  of
which  the  certainty  is  nevertheless  maintained  by  the  inner  necessity  of
universal  rules.

This  is  especially  true  of  logical  axioms  themselves.  Locke  is  per
fectly  right  in  saying  that  many  men  are  all  their  lives  unconscious  of  the
principle  of  contradiction,  although  in  the  concrete  case  they  maintain  the
incompatibility  of  affirmation  and  negation  with  the  fullest  conviction.
The  principle  of  contradiction,  like  all  other  logical  principles,  is  found
only  by  reduction ;  the  question  being  raised  why  A  is  B  and  A  is  not  B
cannot  both  be  true  at  the  same  time,  it  becomes  apparent  that  the
impossibility  does  not  attach  to  this  particular  A  or  B,  that  it  is  not
merely  impossible  for  B  to  be  affirmed  and  denied  at  the  same  time  of  A,
but  that  the  impossibility  is  grounded  in  the  relation  between  affirmation
and  negation  themselves.  Thus,  what  is  needed  is  an  analysis  which  will
set  free  the  concept  "  to  affirm  and  deny  B  of  A  "  from  the  special  case,
and  disengage  from  the  particular  instance  the  general  concept  "  to  affirm
and  deny  something  of  something  "  ;  the  proposition  "  it  is  impossible'  at
the  same  time  to  affirm  and  deny  something  of  something  "  now  becomes  the


REDUCTION  209

major  proposition  to  the  particular  case,  which  derives  from  it  alone  its
absolute  certainty.

This  analysis  of  the  general  from  the  special  is  aided  by  comparison,
which  shows  that  it  is  also  impossible  to  say  both  C  is  D  and  C  is  not
D,  x  is  y  and  x  is  not  y  ;  the  abstraction  of  the  general,  which  is  neces
sary  to  the  attainment  of  the  general  proposition,  takes  place  more  easily
when  the  general  appears  as  the  common  element  in  different  cases.

This  is  what  Aristotle  means  when  he  teaches  that  first  principles  are
obtained  by  induction,1  by  a  process  which  mounts  from  the  particular  to
the  general.  He  did  not  mean  that  the  general  actually  derived  its
validity  from  the  particular,  but  that  the  recognition  of  general  principles
has  its  origin  in  the  particular  case ;  they  rest  their  claim  to  be  principles
upon  the  fact  that  they  bear  their  own  necessity  within  them  and  are
immediately  true,  a  -n-porepov  ffrvcrei  over  against  the  concrete  example
which  is  the  irporepov  Kaff  r)/j.S.<;.  This  disengaging  of  principles  is  akin  to
the  process  of  induction  in  the  proper  sense,  which  endeavours  to  derive
the  truth  of  a  general  proposition  from  the  truth  of  a  number  of  particular
instances,  only  in  so  far  as  both  are  grounded  upon  abstraction  of  the
general  concept  from  particular  examples.

What  is  true  of  logical  axioms  can  be  said  also  of  mathematical  axioms.
The  fundamental  laws  of  space  intuition  do  not  at  first  come  into  con
sciousness  by  themselves,  but  attached  to  certain  particular  figures  ;  but
as  we  come  to  see  that  the  predicate  is  not  grounded  upon  that  which
constitutes  the  speciality  of  the  particular  case,  the  general  proposition
disengages  itself  as  the  condition  of  the  necessity.  That  two  straight
lines  cannot  enclose  a  space  becomes  evident  first  from  experiments  made
with  two  particular  straight  lines  ;  but  when  we  find  that  the  predicate
does  not  depend  upon  the  position  of  these,  or  upon  the  angle  made  by
them,  but  that  we  can  disregard  these  details,  then  the  necessity  of  the
general  proposition  becomes  manifest.

In  the  logic  of  jurisprudence  this  process  of  disengaging  the  general
legal  principle  from  some  special  determination  of  which  it  is  the  ground
is  known  as  analogy.

Here again  it  is  true that the validity of  some special  proposition

attaching  a  judicial  consequence  F  to  a  condition  ABC,  or  the  validity

of several  propositions  attaching  the  consequence  F  to  the  conditions

ABC,  ADE, cannot at first give more  than  the possibility  that  the

1  Analyt.  post.,  II.  19,  loob,  4.

S.  L. — II.  p


210  LOGIC

consequence  F  depends  upon  the  general  element  A,  and  not  upon  the
modifying  determinations  B  or  C,  D  or  E ;  the  certainty  of  the  proposi
tion  that  F  depends  upon  A  must  be  evident  in  itself  or  upon  other
grounds  if  the  analogy  is  to  lead  to  an  unquestionably  valid  proposi
tion.

6.  Sometimes  the  reduction  may  indeed  be  transformed  by  an  in
direct  process  into  a  valid  proof.  If  the  proposition  were  established
that  the  condition  ABC  has  the  consequence  F,  and  if  it  could  be  shown
that  the  consequence  F  cannot  be  grounded  either  in  the  presence  of
determination  £,  or  in  the  presence  of  determination  C,  or  of  both
together,  then  by  a  process  of  exclusion  A  would  remain  as  the  only
possible  ground  of  F.

IV. THE  DISCOVERY  OF  HYPOTHESES.

§83.

The  fundamental  heuristic  methods,  by  means  of  which  hypotheses  are
framed,  are  the  CONVERSION  of  given  propositions,  INDUCTION  and  ANALOGY.

1.  We  have  until  now  postponed  the  question  as  to  how  the  problems
arise  which  become  the  object  of  proof;  we  have  assumed  that  there  is  a
question  before  us  to  be  answered  by  Yes  or  No,  a  hypothesis  connecting
a  definite  predicate  with  a  definite  subject.

How  do  such  hypotheses  arise,  and  what  methodical  process  can  lead
to  their  construction?  The  method  which  plays  at  combining  every
possible  predicate  with  every  possible  subject  has  indeed  been  recom
mended  as  ars  inventiva  •  but  the  aimlessness  and  arbitrariness  of  such
combinations  have  always  condemned  this  art  to  futility.  A  question  can
only  be  reasonably  asked  where  there  is  some  occasion  to  expect  a  predi
cate  ;  and  our  methods  of  framing  questions  must  take  into  consideration
the  motives  which  will  suffice  to  induce  us  to  undertake  the  trouble  of
seeking  a  proof.

The  combinations  which  may  lead  to  a  surmise  are  in  themselves  of
many  kinds ;  they  may  however  be  reduced  to  a  few  fundamental  forms.

2.  The  first  to  suggest  itself  when  some  universal  proposition  is  given
is  the  attempt  to  convert  it ;  in  other  words,  the  inquiry  as  to  whether
the  predicate  of  such  a  judgment  belongs  exclusively  to  the  subject,  and
is  therefore  a  characteristic  attribute,  and  whether  the  consequent  of  a
hypothetical  judgment  has  only  one  ground  and  may  therefore  in  its  turn


HYPOTHESES  211

serve  as  ground  for  the  antecedent.  When  we  know  that  in  the  isosceles
triangle  the  angles  at  the  base  are  equal,  the  question  suggests  itself
whether  all  triangles  having  equal  angles  at  one  side  are  isosceles ;  or  to
express  it  differently,  whether  equality  of  two  sides  is  the  exclusive
ground  of  equality  of  two  angles,  so  that  when  a  triangle  is  not  isosceles
it  has  not  two  equal  angles.

Since  the  conversion  of  the  universal  affirmative  judgment  gives  only  a
particular  proposition,  and  the  validity  of  the  ground  is  not  proved  by  the
validity  of  the  consequence,  it  follows  that  a  special  proof  is  always
necessary  for  the  converse  of  a  universal  affirmative  proposition,  and
for  the  conversion  of  a  hypothetical  judgment.1

1  It  has  been  stated  by  F.  C.  Hauber,  and  quoted  by  Drobisch  in  the  Appendix  (p.
234  of  ed.  5),  that  the  conversion  of  a  universal  affirmative  hypothetical  judgment  needs
no  special  proof,  if  we  allow  that

S  is  either  a  or  b  or  c
2  is  either  a  or  |3  or  7,
and  that  if  S . . a  then  2 . . a
if  S . . &  then  Z . . /3
if  5" . . c  then  2 . . 7
Since  it  follows,  without  further  proof,  that

if  S  .  .  a  then  S  .  .  a
if  2  .  .  /3  then  S  .  .  b
if  2  .  .  7  then  S  .  .  c

In  this  general  form  the  proposition,  together  with  its  proof,  is  false.
The  proof  begins  :  Assuming  that  if  2 . . a,  then  S  is  not  a,  then  since  it  is  pre
supposed  that  the  disjunction  is  complete,  either  S . . b  or  5" . . c.

But  this  assumes  without  proof  that  if  2  .  .  a  then  there  is  an  S  to  which  a  or  b
or  c  belongs ;  the  possibility  that  S  is  neither  a  nor  b  nor  c,  hence  that  it  does  not  exist  at
all,  is  left  out  of  consideration.  The  disjunctive  judgment  S  is  either  a  or  b  or  c  tells
us  that  if  S  is  then  it  must  be  a  or  b  or  c  ;  but  if  it  is  false  that  S  .  .  a,  this  may  be
either  because  it  is  b  or  c,  or  because  it  does  not  exist  at  all,  because  the  ground  of  the
disjunction  is  removed.
E.g.  If  a  quadrangle  is  a  parallelogram,  it  is  either  equilateral  or  unequilateral.

If  the  diagonals  are  drawn  within  a  quadrangle,  they  will  intersect  either  at

right  angles  or  at  oblique  angles.
If  a  quadrangle  is  an  equilateral  parallelogram,  the  diagonals  will  intersect  at

right  angles.
If  a  quadrangle  is  an  unequilateral  parallelogram, the  diagonals  will  intersect

at  oblique  angles.

Does  it  follow  from  this  that  if  the  diagonals  of  a  quadrangle  intersect  at  right  angles,  it  is
an  equilateral  parallelogram ;  and  if  at  oblique  angles,  it  is  an  unequilateral  parallelogram  ?
Or  :  A  triangle  is  either  acute-angled  or  right-angled  or  obtuse-angled.

Of  three  given  angles  either  the  sum  of  each  two  is  greater  than  the  third,  or

the  sum  of  the  smallest  is  equal  to  the  third,  or  smaller  than  the  third.
If  a  triangle  is  acute-angled,  the  sum  of  each  two  of  its  angles  is  greater  than
the  third.


212  LOGIC

3.  This  is  one  way  in  which  a  question  may  arise,  and  it  leads  of  itself
to another. Reliable conversion of  the universal proposition all A1*,
are  B  gives  us  at  first  only  some  ^'s  are  A  ;  but  the  question  is  raised
whether  all  Z?'s  are  A, and  this  attempt  to  convert  universally  may  be
represented  as  an  attempt  to  raise  a  particular  into  a  universal  judgment,
from  the  fact  that  P  belongs  to  one  or  some  6"s  to  suggest  that  it  belongs
to  all  ,S's ;  i.e.,  that  it  is  the  determinations  thought  in  the  concept  S,  and
not  some  peculiarity  of  the  particular  .S1  of  which  P  is  true,  which  make
this  predicate  necessary.

When,  e.g.,  we  find  that  32 — i  is  divisible  by  2,  4^ — i  by  3,  52 — i  by  4,
62 — i  by  5,  etc.,  then  the  question  arises  whether  this  property  of  the
squares  of  the  numbers  minus  i  to  be  divisible  by  the  original  number
minus  i  depends  upon  the  peculiar  properties  of  these  particular  numbers,
or  whether  it  is  universally  true  that  n~ — i  is  divisible  by  n — i,  or  in  a
still  more  general  form,  that  nm — i  is  divisible  by  n — j.

4.  The  way  in  which  we  arrive  at  the  hypothetical  statement  of  such
a  general  proposition  may  he  called,  on  the  one  hand,  reduction,  as  the
addition  of  a  universal  major  proposition  to  two  or  more  definite  judg
ments  ;  on  the  other  hand  induction,  in  so  far  as  we  infer  from  a  number
of  instances  to  the  possibility  of  the  general  rule ;  the  process  of  reduction
thus  appears  as  the  heuristic  method  of  discovering  general  propositions,  for
which  the  deductive  proof  is  to  be  discovered  subsequently. The  history
of  mathematics  shows  that  even  in  the  sphere  of  strict  deduction  a  great
number  of propositions have  been  originally  found  by way  of  induc
tion.1 We  cannot,  however, speak  of  inductive  inference, if  the  term

If  a  triangle  is  right-angled,  the  sum  of  the  two  smallest  angles  is  equal  to  the

third.
If  a  triangle  is  obtuse-angled,  the  sum  of  the  two  smallest  angles  is  smaller

than  the  third.

Here  again  it  does  not  follow  that  if  three  angles  are  given  of  which  each  two  to
gether  are  greater  than  the  third,  they  are  the  angles  of  an  acute-angled  triangle  ;  it
would  first  have  to  be  shown  that  wherever  three  angles  are  given,  they  are  the  angles  of
a  triangle.

Hence  we  cannot  dispense  with  the  proof  that  the  proposition  :  if  6"  is  a  or  b  or  c,
then  S  is  a  or  /3  or  7,  must  be  convertible  into  the  proposition  if  2  is  S  is  ;  it  is  only  on
this  condition  that  we  can  be  sure  of  the  convertibility  of  the  propositions  combining  the
particular  terms  of  the  disjunction.

1  In  the  disputed  question  whether  the  fundamental  propositions  of  mathematics  are
obtained  by  induction  or  in  some  other  way,  it  is  necessary  to  make  a  distinction,  which
is  sometimes  overlooked  in  the  meaning  of  the  word  induction.  It  cannot,  of  course,
be  questioned  that  we  first  become  aware  of  the  simplest  relations  of  numbers  by
means  of  intuition,  and  that  the  geometrical  axioms  also,  such  as  that  two  straight  lines


HYPOTHESES  213

inference  is  to  be  used  in  its  strict  sense ;  the  most  comprehensive  com
parison  of  instances  cannot  lead  to  the  certainty  of  the  universal  proposition
unless  based  upon  a  logical  division,  unless,  that  is,  it  becomes  a  divisive
inference  (§  57).

5.  Co-ordinate  with  induction  as  a  heuristic  process  stands  analogy,
which  is  also  important  only  as  a  means  of  framing  hypotheses. In  its
simplest  form  it  may  be  represented  as  follows  : if  a  judgment  A  is  B  is
given,  and  a  subject  A1  possesses  some  attributes  in  common  with  A,  it
may  be  supposed  that  A1  will  also  possess  the  predicate  B.

6.  Analogy  takes  a  more  definite  form  when  a  comparison  of  given
cases  not  merely  suggests  the  connection  of  a  general  A  with  a  general  B,

cannot  include  a  space,  and  that  equal  straight  lines  can  be  made  to  coincide,  depend
upon  intuition  which  is  concerned  at  first  with  particular  straight  lines.  That  two  and
two  are  four  we  first  learn — assuming  that  we  know  the  meaning  of  the  numerical
terms — by  a  particular  attempt  to  add  together  two  pairs  of  things.  But  when  we
notice  what  it  is  we  do,  we  see  at  once  the  necessity  that  it  should  be  so,  that  from  the
nature  of  our  counting,  whatever  it  may  be  applied  to,  it  is  impossible  ever  to  arrive
at  any  other  result ;  we  become  aware  in  the  particular  concrete  case  of  the  necessity
which  dominates  it.  It  is  the  same  with  geometrical  axioms.  It  is  not  our  experience
of  different  instances  which  first  shows  us  that  our  intuition  of  space  is  constant ;  if  it
were,  this  constancy  would  be  only  empirical,  and  not  to  be  relied  upon  unconditionally  ;
we  know  that  it  cannot  be  otherwise.  The  proposition  that  two  equal  straight  lines
coincide  when  laid  one  upon  the  other,  shows  itself  as  quite  evident  so  soon  as  we
have  realised  by  an  example  what  it  means ;  and  this  is  possible  just  because  the  con
cept  of  the  straight  line  is  not  empirically  abstracted  from  sense  objects,  but  is  a
constituent  element  in  our  idea  of  space.  Wundt  (Logik,  ii.  108)  says  quite  rightly
that  the  really  mathematical  elements  are  those  which  are  subjective  and  belong  to  our
activities  of  thought  ;  that  what  remains  when  we  have  abstracted  from  the  particular
objects  of  sense  is  nothing  else  than  the  activity  of  thought  which  is  operative  in  the
formation  of  mathematical  ideas.  This  is  why  it  is  possible  in  particular  instances  to
become  conscious  of  this  activity  and  of  the  laws  to  which  it  conforms.  If  this
recognition  of  the  general  and  necessary  in  the  particular  instance  is  to  be  called
induction,  then  the  term  has  an  essentially  different  meaning  from  that  which  it  has
where  the  general  proposition  is  only  hypothetically,  and  without  any  certainty  of  its
necessity,  applied  to  a  number  of  instances  including  no  exception.  That  all  heavy
bodies  fall,  is  a  proposition  which  is  accepted  in  consequence  of  invariable  perception,
but  of  which  we  merely  assume  and  do  not  see  the  necessity  ;  for  a  body  to  fly  towards
the  sky  would  contradict  no  law  of  our  own  mental  activity,  as  would  be  done  if  twice
two  were  five.  We  can  only  speak  of  induction  in  the  ordinary  and  strict  sense  when
the  proposition  is  believed  merely  because  the  particular  instances  of  which  it  is  an
enlargement  are  given  as  facts  ;  as  soon  as  they  are  known  to  be  strictly  necessary,  though
the  proposition  may  have  been  originally  found  by  way  of  induction,  it  is  no  longer
believed  because  of  this  induction,  but  on  the  ground  of  immediate  self-evidence  or  of
a  deductive  proof.  Hence  the  fact  that  in  mathematics  also  we  start  from  par
ticular  instances  does  not  affect  its  deductive  character;  the  process  resembling  real
induction  is  only  an  auxiliary  operation,  and  attains  its  end  only  when  we  can  see  that
the  propositions  obtained  by  it  are  strictly  necessary.


214  LOGIC

but  from  the  modification  which  B  undergoes  when  A  is  varied  leads
us  to  expect  a  definite  modification  of  B  for  every  variation  in  A.  It  is  an
essential  condition  here  that  the  variations  both  of  A  and  of  B  should  fall
into  a  series  which  can  be  recognised  to  be  governed  by  a  rule ;  this  will
be  the  case  when  they  are  of  a  quantitative  nature,  and  manifest  therefore
increase  or  decrease,  either  in  general  or  according  to  a  definite  formula.
In  this  case  the  construction  of  a  general  formula  according  to  which  B
varies  with  changes  in  A  is  a  reductive  process,  and  the  suggestion  that  a
further  modification  of  A  will  be  in  accordance  with  the  same  rule  is
framed  by  analogy  (in  the  narrower  sense).

We  may  find  a  simple  example  of  this  in  the  binomial  co-efficients.
The  calculation  of  (a  +  <£)2,  (a  +  b}*,  (#  +  ^)4  shows  the  co-efficients

I, 2, I

!,  3,  3>  i

i,  4,  6,  4,  i  ;

from  these  instances  may  be  discovered  the  rule  according  to  which  each
subsequent  series  is  derived  from  the  one  before,  and  by  analogy  it  is
assumed  that  the  following  powers  will  also  follow  the  same  rule. l

In  the  same  way  every  process  of  interpolation  is  a  process  of  this  kind
of  analogy.

V. DETERMINING  QUESTIONS.

§  84.

Every  question  which  cannot  be  answered  by  Yes  or  No,  but  aims  at
determining  an  element  of  the  proposition  (subject,  predicate,  or  part  of
the  predicate)  presupposes  as  valid  a  more  general  proposition,  and
endeavours  merely  to  determine  what  is  thought  in  this  in  indefinite
generality.  If  this  general  element  can  be  developed  into  a  disjunctive
judgment,  the  question  presents  itself  in  a  more  definite  form  as
disjunctive.

The  answer  to  such  questions  is  obtained  by  the  same  methods  which
lead  to  the  proof  by  which  determinate  questions  are  decided.

i.  In  addition  to  the  questions  of  which  the  origin  is  shown  in  §  83,
we  have  others  which  cannot  be  answered  by  Yes  or  No,  but  which
try  to  determine  some  part  of  a  judgment.  Their  general  character

1  The  close  connection  between  induction  and  analogy  will  be  discussed  again
la'.er  on.


DETERMINING QUESTIONS  215

always  consists  in  the  attempt  to  find  for  a  general  concept  the  special
determination  demanded  by  the  other  elements  of  the  judgment.
For  every  question  of  this  kind  presupposes  a  general  concept  before  it
can  be  possible,  and  the  interrogating  word  itself  contains  the  concept  of
this  general  element.  When  I  ask :  what  is  A  ?  it  is  assumed  that  A  has
some  predicate  X  by  which  it  is  distinguished  ;  when  I  ask  :  how  large
is  A  ?  I  assume  that  it  is  a  quantity  which  can  be  determined  by  some
measure ;  what  still  remains  to  be  achieved  is  the  more  exact  determination
of  the  general  predicate,  which  is  needed  by  the  nature  of  the  subject.

2.  If  the  general  concept  which  is  presupposed  in  every  question  can
be  developed  into  a  disjunction  having  a  finite  number  of  terms,  we  may
in  this  way  obtain  from  the  one  original  question  a  number  of  determinate
and  mutually  exclusive  questions,  and  thus  proceed  directly  to  hypotheses
for  which  a  _  roof  may  be  sought. The  question  :  What  is  the  relation  be
tween  two  manuscripts,  A  and  B,  of  the  same  work?  leads  at  once  to  the
disjunction  that  either  A  is  derived  from  B,  or  B  from  A,  or  that  both  are
derived  independently  from  the  same,  or  from  different,  older  manuscripts.

3.  The  process of  answering  determining  questions does  not  differ
essentially  from  the  process  of  deciding  determinate  questions  by  Yes  or
No  ; here  also  the  determinate  predicate  must  be  introduced  by  means  of
a  deduction,  and  the  problem  is  to  find  the  premises  for  this  deduction.

In  the  first  place,  we  can  proceed  only  by  starting  from  the  given
elements  of  the  judgment,  and  developing  these  by  means  of  known
premises  introduce  the  missing  element.  If  I  ask,  what  is  the  length  of
the  perpendicular  of  an  equilateral  triangle  of  which  the  side  =*  i  ?  a  con
sideration  of  the  figure  shows  first  that  the  relation  of  this  perpendicular  to
the  known  parts  is  that  of  one  side  of  a  right-angled  triangle  of  which  the
hypotenuse  =  i  and  the  other  side  =  |,  which  therefore  are  already  known.
By  the  Pythagorean  theorem  it  follows  that  this  side  must  be  -/  ia—  (£)3,
and  this  gives  us  the  answer  to  the  question.  The  same  operation  which
would  prove  the  proposition  that  the  perpendicular  is  */  f  of  the  side,
would  also  answer  the  question.

4.  Here  again  we  may  employ  that  expedient  of  analysis  in  dealing
with  convertible  propositions  which  we  described  above  as  a  means  of
discovering  proofs. We  assumed  there  the  truth  of  the  demonstrandum
and  developed  it  into  its  consequences  ;  here  the  missing  determination
is assumed  to  be given and  its  relations to  the known determinations
developed  deductively — the general mode of  procedure in algebraical


216  LOGIC

analysis,  of  which  the  chief  expedient  is  to  denote  the  missing  element  in
such  a  manner  that  it  may  be  handled  as  if  it  were  known.  If  I  want  to
know  what  number  is  greater  by  5  than  7,  I  may  either  proceed  to  subsume
the  predicate  under  a  general  concept  by  arguing  that  a  number  which  is
greater  than  another  may  be  got  from  it  by  addition,  and  that  therefore  the
desired  number  must  be  the  sum  of  7  and  5  ;  or  I  may  proceed  analytically
by  reasoning  that  the  desired  number  x  must  be  such  that  ^—5  —  7,  and
developing  this  equation  deductively,  I  find  by  the  addition  of  5  to  both
sides  that  ^  =  5  +  7.

5.  It  need  not  be  pointed  out  that  what  are  generally  called  problems
in  mathematics  are  logically  identical  with  such  questions  as  these  ;  the
problem  of  constructing  a  cube  which  shall  be  double  a  given  cube
coincides  completely  with  the  question  as  to  the  length  of  the  side  of  a
cube  which  is  twice  the  size  of  a  given  cube.  Thus  every  solution  of  a
problem  is  also  the  proof  of  a  proposition.

VI. THE  CALCULATION  OF  PROBABILITIES.

§85-

Where,  though  it  is  not  possible  to  decide  a  question,  the  desired
answer  can  be  at  any  rate  limited  to  a  finite  number  of  possibilities  by
means  of  a  disjunctive  judgment  of  which  the  terms  are  so  far  equivalent
that  for  our  knowledge  they  represent  equal  specializations  of  a  general
concept,  or  equal  parts  of  its  total  extension,  then  we  may  proceed  to  an
estimation  of  the  PROBABILITIES  of  the  particular  possibilities  ;  its  measure
is  a  fraction  of  unity  of  which  the  denominator  is  the  number  of  the
equivalent  terms  in  the  disjunction.

To  this  is  added  a  further  process  of  deduction,  of  which  the  form  con
sists  originally  of  inferences  from  a  combination  of  disjunctive  judgments,
and  which  is  based  upon  the  framing  of  exhaustive  disjunctive  judgments.
In  both  processes  the  application  of  mathematical  methods,  and  more
especially  of  the  theory  of  combinations,  is  necessary.

That  which  we  can  calculate  in  this  way  is  merely  the  amount  of
subjective  expectation  which  is  justified  by  the  relation  between  knowledge
and  ignorance  upon  which  the  disjunctive  judgment  is  based.  Inferences
as  to  the  relative  frequency  of  the  particular  possibilities  according  to  the
measure  of  their  probability,  are  reliable  only  when  they  are  supported  by
certain  presuppositions  as  to  the  conditions  of  this  occurrence.


PROBABILITY  217

Corresponding  to  deduction  in  the  sphere  of  probability  is  a  reduction
which  finds  its  special  application  when,  from  the  numerical  relations  of
actual  instances,  that  disjunction  of  possibilities  is  affirmed  upon  which
they  are  most  probably  based.  The  results  thus  obtained  also  have  no
more  than  subjective  probability. 1

1.  When  the  development  of  a  determining  question  leads  only  to  a
disjunctive  judgment  (§  84,  2)  without  any  apparent  possibility  of  pro
ceeding  to  a  decision, the  investigation  is brought  to  a  halt  before  a
question  which  is  insoluble. Deduction  in  the  proper  sense  ceases,  and
thought  can  merely  survey  the  different  possibilities,  uncertain  as  to  which
of  them  is  valid.

Even  in  this  case,  however,  a  further  deductive  process  presents  itself
when  different  disjunctions  can  be  combined.  The  inferences  from  dis
junctive  judgments  were  examined  in  §  58  only  in  so  far  as  they  led  from
the  affirmation  of  one  term  of  the  disjunction  to  the  negation  of  the  others,
or  from  the  negation  of  one  term  to  the  limitation  of  the  disjunction  to  a
smaller  number  of  possibilities,  or  from  the  negation  of  all  the  terms  but
one  to  the  affirmation  of  this  one.  But  the  disjunctive  judgment  also
permits  of  forms  of  inference  which  can  be  developed  only  in  disjunctive
judgments,  and  which  depend  upon  a  combination  of  disjunctions.

2.  a.  Suppose  we  have  two  independent  disjunctive  judgments,

A  is  either  b  or  c
A  is  either  m  or  n

the  relation  in  which  b  and  c  stand  to  m  and  n  being  neither  that  of
necessary  connection,  nor  yet  that  of  exclusion ;  by  combining  them  we
should  get :

A  is  either  bm  or  bn,  or  cm  or  en

(A  parallelogram  is  either  equilateral  or  not  equilateral,
A  parallelogram  is  either  rectangular  or  oblique-angled ;  hence
A  parallelogram  is  either  equilateral  and  rectangular,  or  unequilateral  and
rectangular,  or  equilateral  and  oblique-angled,  or  unequilateral  and  oblique-
angled).

1  Cf.  with  this  section  J.  v.  Kries,  Die  Principien  der  WahrscheinlichkeitsrechmiHg.
Eine  logische  Unlersuchung,  1886,  and  my  notice  of  this  work  Viertdjahrschr.  filr  miss.
Phil.,  xiv.  p.  90  sq.  ;  also  an  article  by  Stumpf  in  the  Sittungib.  der  Munchner  Accuiemie,
1892:  Ueber  den  Begriff  der  mathematischen  Wahrschdnlichkeit.  I  have  benefited  by
what  is  contained  in  the  first  of  these  writings  so  far  as  to  give  a  more  accurate  form  to
some  sentences.


218  LOGIC

Again,  suppose  three  judgments  to  be  given  under  the  same  conditions  :

A  is  either  b  or  c
either  m  or  n
either  x  or_y
we  should  obtain  :

A  is  either  bmx  or  bmy
or  £«.# or  bny
or  rw^c  or


or  cnx  or  «ry.
A  If,  again,  two  judgments  are  given  :

If  A  is,  then  either  m  is  or  n  is,
If  B  is,  then  either  x  or^  or  z  is,
it  follows  :

If  both  A  and  .Z?  are,  then  either  mx  or  my  or  #z.z,  or  ;/#  or  ny  or  we  is.

It  needs  little  consideration  to  show  that  the  disjunctions  thus  obtained
contain  all  the  combinations  of  the  particular  terms  of  one  series  with
each  term  of  the  other  series,  and  that  they  must  therefore  have  a  number
of  terms  equal  to  the  product  of  the  number  of  terms  of  the  particular  dis
junctions  from  which  they  were  derived.

3.  We  get  another  form  of  derivation  in  the  development  of  the  particular
terms  of  the  disjunction  by  disjunctive  judgments.  Let  these  be  given  :

1.  If  A  is,  it  is  either  b  or  c.

2.  If  A  is  b,  it  is  either/  or  q.

3.  If  A  is  c,  it  is  either  x  or  y  or  z,

then  by  substitution  of  disjunctions  2  and  3  in  disjunction  i  (assuming  that
Pi  9->  x>  y>  z  exclude  each  other)  it  follows  :

If  A  is,  it  is  either/  or  q  or  x  my  or  2.

A  quadrangle  is  either  a  parallelogram  or  a  trapezium  or  a  trapezoid.

If  it  is  a  parallelogram,  it  is  either  (a)  a  square,  or  (b)  an  oblong,  or  (c)
a  rhombus,  or  (d)  a  rhomboid.

If  it  is  a  trapezium,  then  it  has  those  sides  which  are  not  parallel  either
(e)  equal  or  (/)  unequal.

If  it  is  a  trapezoid,  it  either  (g)  has  a  re-entrant  angle,  or  (/z)  has  not.

A  quadrangle  is  either  a,  or  ft,  or  c,  or  d,  or  e,  or  f,  or  g,  or  h.  The
number  of  terms  in  a  disjunction  obtained  in  this  way  is  the  sum  of
the  number  of  terms  of  the  particular  disjunctions  from  which  it  is  derived.


PR  OBABILITY  2 1 9

4.  Should  the  development  of  a  disjunction proceed  by  simple  hypo
thetical  judgments,  then  what  would  take  place  would  be  a  simple  substi
tution of  consequences, assuming  these  to  be  mutually exclusive ;  the
derived  judgment  would then have  the  same  number  of  terms  as  the
original  judgment.

If  A  is  either  b  or  c  or  d,  and  it  is  true  that
If  A  is  b,  then  it  is  x
If  A  is  c,  then  it  is  y

If  A  is  d,  then  it  is  z ;  then  it  is  also  true,  assum
ing  that  x,  y,  z  exclude  each  other,  that
A  is  either  x  or  y  or  z.

If,  however,  the  consequences  of  b  and  c  (e.g.}  should  not  exclude  each
other,  but  should  combine  in  some  common  characteristic,  then  there  would
be  a  decrease  in  the  number  of  terms, —

A  is  either  b  or  c  or  d.

If  A  is  b,  it  is  x  and  also  w.

If  A  is  c,  it  is^  and  also  w.

If  A  is  d,  it  is  z,  then  it  would  follow  that

A  is  either  w  or  z.

If,  finally,  all  three  terms  of  the  disjunction  should  have  the  same  con
sequence  w,  the  conclusion  would  be  A  is  w,  according  to  the  form  of
inference  in  §  57.

5.  It  is  clear  that  these  forms  of  inference  by  the  combination  of  disjunc
tive  judgments  hold  good  both  for  those  disjunctions  which,  being  based
upon  the  division  of  a  concept,  enumerate  the  more  special  determinations
of  a  general  subject,  and  which,  therefore,  enable  us  to  find  the  number  of
kinds  resulting  from  combined  divisions  : and  for  those  hypothetical  dis
junctive  judgments  which  state  how  many  possible  cases  may  occur  on  the
assumption  of  some  condition  or  set  of  conditions.

The  judgments  :  When  a  coin  A  is  thrown  it  will  fall  either  heads  up
(Ah)  or  tails  up  (At) ;

When  a  coin  B  is  thrown  it  will  fall  either  heads  up  (Bit)  or  tails  up  (Bt),
combine  according  to  2b  to  form  the  proposition  :

When  A  and  B  are  thrown,  there  will  follow  either  Ah  Bh,  or  Ah  Bt,
or  At  Bh,  or  At  Bt,

6.  The  theory  of  this  branch  of  inference  from  disjunctive  propositions


220  LOGIC

has  not,  however,  been  developed  in  a  form  corresponding  as  this  does  to
the  ordinary  logical  mode  of  representation ;  it  has  taken  shape  as  the
mathematical  theory  of  probabilities,  which  is  shorter  and  more  elegant,  at
any  rate  in  more  complicated  cases,  and  which  is  fundamentally  nothing  but
a  mathematically  formulated  chapter  from  logic.1

The  possibility  of  a  mathematical  treatment  lies  primarily  in  the  fact
that  in  the  disjunctive  judgment  the  number  of  terms  in  the  disjunction
plays  a  decisive  part.  Inasmuch  as  a  limited  number  of  mutually  exclu
sive  possibilities  is  presented,  of  which  one  alone  is  actual,  the  element  of
number  forms  an  essential  part  of  our  knowledge  ;  our  ignorance  differs  in
character  and  in  significance  according  as  the  uncertainty  extends  over  2,
3,  or  4  possibilities.

But  before  we  can  pass  from  the  number  of  terms  in  the  disjunction  to
any  definite  measure  of  the  confidence  with  which  we  may  expect  the  truth
of  a  particular  term,  we  need  another  presupposition.  Our  knowledge  must
enable  us  to  assume  that  the  particular  terms  of  the  disjunction  are  so  far
equivalent  that  they  express  an  equal  degree  of  specialization  of  a
general  concept,  or  that  they  cover  equal  parts  of  the  whole  extension  of
the  concept ;  or — in  hypothetical  disjunctive  judgments — that  the  alterna
tive  consequences  are  equally  possible,  i.e.,  that  nothing  is  forthcoming  to
favour  one  consequence  rather  than  another  ;  or,  again,  that  the  extensions
of  the  specializations  of  the  ground  from  which  the  consequences  proceed
are  equivalent.  This  equivalence  is  most  intuitable  where  we  are  dealing
with  equal  parts  of  a  spatial  area,  or  equal  parts  of  a  period  of  time ;  that
a  grain  of  corn  dropped  upon  a  chess  board  must  fall  either  upon  a  black
or  upon  a  white  square,  that  an  event  of  which  nothing  is  known  as  to  the
time  of  its  occurrence  must  take  place  upon  the  first  day  of  the  week,  or
the  second,  etc.,  these  are  instances  of  such  disjunctions.  But  even
where  this  obvious  equality  is  not  forthcoming  we  may  ground  our  ex
pectations  upon  a  hypothetical  equivalence,  where  we  see  no  reason  for
considering  the  extent  of  one  possibility  to  be  greater  than  that  of  the
others.

The  disjunction  :  A  triangle  is  either  right-angled  or  acute-angled  or
obtuse-angled,  is  a  correct  one,  but  its  terms  are  not  specializations  of  equal
value ;  the  expressions  obtuse-angled  and  acute-angled  cover  an  endless
number  of  variations  in  the  size  of  the  angle,  of  which  each  one,  considered

1  F.  A.  Lange  rightly  saw  that  the  theory  of  probability  is  based  upon  the  disjunctive
judgment,  and  is  in  this  way  connected  with  logic.


PROBABILITY  221

as  the  specialization  of  the  general  concept  of  the  angle  of  a  triangle,  is
equivalent  to  the  one  instance  of  the  right  angle,  which  is  only  one  case
amongst  indefinitely  many.  In  the  same  way,  if  we  know  that  there  are
one  white  and  ten  black  balls  in  an  urn,  the  disjunctive  judgment  that  a
ball  drawn  from  amongst  them  must  be  either  black  or  white  is  indisput
ably  correct,  but  its  terms  are  not  equivalent  because  the  predicate  black
represents  an  element  common  to  ten  variations  of  the  event,  and  the
predicate  white  only  one  variation.  If  a  coin  is  thrown  up  twice  succes
sively,  it  is  quite  true  that  it  will  fall  twice  heads  or  twice  tails,  or  once
heads  and  once  tails ;  but  the  last  case  represents  two  possibilities,  heads
first  and  tails  second,  and  vice  versa.

To  speak  of  an  equivalence  in  the  terms  of  the  disjunction  or  of  any
relation  between  their  extensions  is  impossible  when  a  disjunction
merely  opposes  affirmation  and  negation  ;  for  the  bare  negation  is  quite
indefinite.  I  can  say  of  every  A  that  it  is  either  b  or  not  l>,  of  every
body  that  it  is  either  green  or  not  green,  of  every  expected  or  possible
event  that  it  will  either  occur  or  not  occur ;  but  the  negative  term  of  the
disjunction  is  quite  indeterminate,  and  cannot  be  regarded  as  any  deter-
minable  part  of  a  total  extension.1

Assuming  that  the  terms  of  a  disjunction  are  equivalent,  their  number
gives  us  a  measure  for  the  probability  of  each  one  amongst  them.  The
confidence  with  which  we  are  justified  in  expecting  the  truth  of  a  par
ticular  one  is  evidently  greater  when  the  choice  lies  between  two  only
than  when  we  have  the  choice  between  three,  four  or  more  possibilities;
it  diminishes  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  the  terms,  and  may,  there
fore,  be  expressed  as  the  reciprocal  value  of  this  number.

On  the  other  hand,  the  proposition,  "  the  probability  that  given  condi
tion  A  the  proposition  B-^  is  true  is  i,"  merely  states  that  a  disjunctive
proposition  having  n  equivalent  terms,  of  which  one  is  B,  exists  in  the
form  :

If  A  is,  then  B\  or  £2 . .  .or  Bn  is.

1  There  is,  e.g.,  no  meaning  in  saying  that  the  probability  that  there  is  iron  upon  Sirius
is  equal  to  the  probability  that  there  is  none  ;  there  is  no  universal  common  to  both.
If  we  assume  that  there  are  only  the  «  elements  known  to  us,  we  might  determine  the
probability  that  a  certain  chemical  simple  body  is  iron  as  — ,  for  now  we  have  a  uni
versal  given  which  specializes  into  a  given  number  of  positive  members  of  disjunction  ;
to  calculate  the  probability  of  a  composite  body  containing  iron  we  should  need  a
disjunction  of  all  the  chemical  combinations  and  all  their  possible  conglomerations —
an  impossible  task.


222  LOGIC

7.  Hence  follow  the  simple  fundamental  rules  of  the  theory  of  proba
bilities  :

1.  The  probability  which  is  to  be  ascribed  under  condition  A  to  one

amongst  various  equally  possible  cases  is  measured  by  a  fraction
of  which  the  numerator  is  i,  and  the  denominator  is  the  number  of
mutually  exclusive  possibilities  stated  in  the  disjunctive  judgment.

2.  If  an  instance  x  has  by  itself  the  probability  i ,  and  an  instance  y

the  probability  i,  then  the  coincidence  of  the  two  xy  will  have
the  probability  ~  x~  (see  above  2  a  and  ft).

3.  If  amongst  various  possible  instances  of  which  the  probabilities  are

known,  several  have  the  same  consequence,  then  the  probability  of
this  consequence  will  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  probabilities  of
the  particular  instances  in  which  it  occurs  (4).

These  principles  are  generally  illustrated  by  the  familiar  examples
of  one  or  more  urns,  in  which  there  are  different  coloured  balls,  or  of  one
and  several  dice.

Take,  for  instance,  a  die  :  I  have  here  the  disjunctive  judgment  that  when
thrown  it  will  show  on  the  upper  surface  either  i  or  2  or  3  or  4  or  5  or  6 ;
the  probability  of  each  of  these  numbers  is  ±.

If  two  dice  are  thrown  together,  the  case  falls  under  zb  ;  with  each  term
of  the  one  disjunction  there  may  be  combined  one  term  of  the  other,  and
I  get  a  combined  disjunction  of  36  terms;  the  probability  that  i  and  i,  6
and  6  will  be  thrown  is  -^.

If  it  is  not  taken  into  consideration  whether  the  one  number  of  a  combi
nation  (e.g.  2  in  the  combination  2  and  5)  appears  upon  the  first  die,  the
other  number,  5,  upon  the  second,  or,  vice  versd,  5  upon  the  first  and  2
upon  the  second,  then  the  probability  that  5  and  2  will  be  thrown  together
in  some  way  will  be  -sV  +  ^g^TV?  for  amongst  the  combined  disjunctive
judgments  we  shall  get  both  2  and  5  and  5  and  2.

If  we  merely  look  to  the  sum  of  the  numbers  thrown,  then  in  the  com
plete  disjunction

12  =  6  +  6 will appear  once,

11  =  5  +  6  (I  5,  116;  16,115)  twice,
10  =  5  +  5  =  4  +  6  three  times,

9  =  4  +  5=3  +  6  four  times,

8  =  4  +  4  =  3  +  5  =  2  +  6  five  times,

7  =  3  +  4  =  2  +  5  =  1+6  six  times,


PROBABILITY  223

=  2  +  4=1  +  5  five  times,

5  =  2  +  3  =  1+4  four  times,

4  =  2  +  2  =  3  +  1  three  times,

3  =  2+1  twice,

2  =  1  +  1  once.

Hence  the  probability  of  1  2  =  ¥\.
of  ii  = .


„  „ of 8  =  ^.

»  » 01 7  =  ~:3^~)  stCt

The  sum  of  all  the  probabilities  is  ff  =  i,  that  is,  some  one  of  these  com
binations  must  be  thrown.

Exactly  the  same  probabilities  result  from  two  successive  throws  with
the  same  die  ;  we  get  a  combination  of  the  same  disjunctive  judgments  for
the  first  and  the  second  throw.

If  I  know  that  an  urn  contains  only  white  and  black  balls,  without
knowing  either  their  number  or  proportion,  then  I  have  the  disjunc
tion  :

Every  ball  drawn  out  will  be  either  white  or  black,  and  the  probability  of
drawing  a  white  one  is  i.1

1  v.  Kries  has  disputed  this  proposition  on  the  ground  that  we  are  only  justified  in
a  numerical  statement  of  probability  when  we  have  certain  knowledge  of  the  objective
equality  between  the  areas  belonging  to  the  particular  possibilities  as  parts  of  the  whole
area.  I  think  I  have  (I.e.)  shown  in  answer  to  this  that  we  can  never  have  such  absolutely
exact  knowledge  even  in  what  seem  to  be  the  most  favourable  instances  ;  that  we  must
confine  ourselves  to  assuming  that  the  possibilities  are  equal  if  our  knowledge  affords
us  no  ground  for  expecting  any  one  more  than  the  others.  In  the  example  before  us,  our
knowledge  that  only  black  and  white  balls  are  present  justifies  us  in  stating  an  exhaustive
disjunction  as  follows  :  Let  the  unknown  number  of  balls  be  «,  then  the  urn  contains
either  i  black  and  M-I  white  balls,
or  2  black  and  n-2  white,

or  «-l  black  and  i  white  ball.

The  terms  of  this  disjunction  ar«  absolutely  equivalent.  In  the  first  case,  the  proba
bility  of  drawing  a  black  ball  is  i-,  in  the  second  •£,  and  so  on  until  ^  ;  the  probability
Df  drawing  a  white  ball  is  in  the  first  case  —  •.  in  the  second  "-",  and  so  on  to  —  ;  the

n  '  n  » '

sums  of  these  particular  probabilities  for  black  and  white  are  equal,  therefore  the  state
ment  i  is  justified  for  both  the  black  and  the  white  balls.  All  that  we  can  yield  is  that
3ur  expectations  are  more  uncertain  in  proportion  as  our  ignorance  is  greater  ;  but  it
:annot  be  disputed  that  in  the  case  before  us  they  are  equal  for  black  and  white.


224  LOGIC

But  if  I  know  that  there  are  6  black  and  4  white  balls  in  the  urn,  the
disjunction  is  one  of  10  terms  ;  the  probability  of  drawing  any  given  one  is
T^,  but  6  of  these  give  the  same  result  black,  and  if  I  look  to  this
only,  the  probability  of  a  black  one  is  T%,  the  probability  of  a  white
one  TV

This  last  example  is  well  adapted  to  show  the  purely  subjective  char
acter  of  the  foundations  of  the  theory  of  probabilities.  It  measures
nothing  but  the  degree  of  expectation,  justified  upon  the  ground  of  a
disjunctive  judgment  stating  the  number  of  mutually  exclusive  disjunctive
propositions  which  are  present  for  my  state  of  knowledge ;  a  judgment
which  may  change  as  soon  as  my  knowledge  becomes  more  exact.

8.  This  purely  subjective  character  of  the  theory  of  probabilities  is
often  concealed  by  the  fact  that  the  illustrations  chosen  contain  a  further
knowledge,  which,  in  itself,  is  not  contained  in  the  statement  made  by  the
disjunctive  judgment.  In  the  case  of  the  die,  for  instance,  we  know  with
absolute  certainty  upon  geometrical  grounds  that  when  it  lies  upon  a
plane  surface,,  one  of  the  six  sides  will  lie  uppermost,  and  hence  follows
the  disjunction  from  which  we  estimate  the  probability  of  each  throw  at  \.
But  we  know  further  from  considering  the  way  in  which  the  die  is
handled,  and  from  comparing  our  observations  of  a  series  of  throws,  that
the  different  throws  do  actually  succeed  each  other  with  great  irregularity
and  will  therefore  continue  to  do  so  in  future ;  and  this  irregularity  is  of
such  a  kind  that  in  a  long  series  of  throws  the  particular  throws  will
appear  an  approximately  equal  number  of  times,  so  that  we  know  that  the
real  causes  which  bring  about  the  particular  throw  will  vary  in  such  away
as  to  realize  the  various  possibilities,  without  giving  definite  preference  to
any  one  throw  over  the  others.  We  have  not  merely  no  ground  for  assum
ing  that  the  possibilities  are  unequal ;  we  have  ground  for  assuming
that  objectively  they  are  at  least  approximately  equal.  Since,  however,  we
are  not  in  a  position  to  determine  the  degree  of  approximation,  perfect
equivalence  is  hypothetically  assumed,  as  it  was  when  our  starting  point
was  merely  the  simple  disjunctive  judgment  that  every  throw  must  yield
either  i  or  2  or  3  or  4  or  5  or  6.

When  the  probability  of  any  particular  throw  is  to  be  calculated,  there
is  complete  ignorance  of  the  special  conditions  actually  existing,  complete
ignorance  as  to  the  degree  of  strength  in  the  throw  or  the  number  of  times
the  die  will  turn,  etc.,  complete  ignorance  as  to  how  the  preceding  throw  may
perhaps  influence  the  next  one,  and  we  must,  therefore,  in  our  calculation


PROBABILITY  225

treat  every  throw  as  independent  of  the  others,  though  we  must  suppose
that  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  is  not  independent.  As  we  do  not  know  how
the  position,  say,  of  the  die,  in  which  it  is  taken  up  from  the  preceding
throw,  will  coincide  with  other  variations  in  the  conditions  of  the  move
ment,  there  remains,  so  far  as  our  knowledge  extends,  the  equal
possibility  of  all  six  numbers  for  each  throw  ;  and  accordingly  in  each
particular  case  we  determine  the  probability  of  each  number  as  \.

Those  assumptions  which  we  are  justified  in  making  as  to  a  variation
in  causes  which  passes  gradually  through  all  values,  first  become  important
when  we  are  no  longer  determining  the  probability  of  a  single  throw,  but
are  directing  our  conjectures  to  what  will  happen  in  a  long  series  of  throws  ;
we  then  infer  that  the  causes  vary  in  such  a  way  that  in  a  long  series  each
number  will  occur  the  same  number  of  times,  that  the  numbers  of  the
actual  events  will,  therefore,  be  in  proportion  to  the  fractions  of  the  proba
bility.  If  this  were  not  so,  the  assumption  would  fall  to  the  ground ;
if,  in  a  large  number  of  throws,  6  should  occur  considerably  more  often
than  ~  of  the  whole  number,  we  should  be  justified  in  assuming  that  there
was  something  in  the  construction  of  the  die  which  favoured  the  throw
6,  and  we  should  be  obliged,  even  so  far  as  concerned  one  particular
throw,  to  drop  the  assumption  that  all  the  terms  of  the  disjunction  were
equal.

But  we  are  justified  in  applying  the  methods  of  the  theory  of  proba
bilities  not  only  in  those  cases  where  we  are  able  to  make  and  believe
assumptions  as  to  a  uniform  variability  of  causes  such  that,  given  a  large
number  of  instances,  all  the  terms  of  the  disjunction  will  be  realized  in
equal  proportion  ;  the  methods  apply  wherever  a  disjunction  with  equiva
lent  terms  can  be  established,  and  we  have  no  ground  to  hold  one  to  be
real  rather  than  the  others  ;  they  apply  also  when  some  of  the  terms
of  the  disjunction  are  actually  impossible,  or  where  only  one  would  be
possible  in  reality — as  is  indeed  always  the  case  when  we  confine  our
selves  to  a  single  instance.  The  assumptions,  if  justified,  give  a  more
definite  meaning  to  our  estimates  of  probabilities,  in  so  far  as  they  are
supported  by  at  least  an  approximate  knowledge  of  the  causes  which  are
likely  to  bring  about  the  particular  terms  of  the  disjunction;  but  they
cannot  be  made  the  ground  of  an  essential  distinction.  The  fraction
representing  the  probability  in  the  strict  sense  can  state  only  the  amount
of  subjective  expectation  which  is  justified,  which  the  amount  of  our  know
ledge  permits  us  to  entertain  ;  it  always  depends  upon  assumptions  which

s.  L. — ii.  Q


226  LOGIC

we  cannot  strictly  verify,  and  for  this  reason  it  cannot  in  any  way  prescribe
to  reality  the  course  which  it  must  take.

Thus  even  the  less  probable  still  remains  possible,  and  a  high  degree  of
probability  is  yet  far  from  certainty ;  so  much  only  is  certain,  that  one  of
the  disjunct  cases  will  occur  ;  which  of  them  it  will  be  depends  upon  just
those  circumstances  which  we  do  not  know  and  which  no  logical  considera
tions  will  prevent  from  declaring  themselves  in  favour  of  the  less  probable
case.  The  man  who  buys  500  out  of  1,000  chances  in  a  lottery  will  count
upon  winning  with  greater  probability  than  the  man  who  buys  one  ;  but
should  the  latter  win,  there  is  no  difficulty  to  be  overcome  because  of
the  greater  probability  of  another  issue  to  the  event,  one  of  the  1,000
equally  possible  cases  has  occurred  regardless  of  the  expectations  which
the  players  were  justified  in  entertaining.  The  possessor  of  500  chances
could  not  hope  to  win  with  more  than  one  amongst  them,  and  it  is  just  as
improbable  that  any  given  one  amongst  them  should  win  as  that  the  single
one  belonging  to  the  other  man  should  win.

9.  It  follows  from  the  whole  character  of  the  calculation  of  chances
that  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  so  far  as  concerns  the  principles  of  the
process  whether  the  probability  to  be  determined  is  that  of  a  future  event,
or  of  a  past  event,  or  of  a  proposition  of  permanent  validity.  In  the
games  of  chance  which  generally  serve  for  illustrations  the  expectation  of  a
future  event  no  doubt  predominates  ;  but  the  characteristic  feature  is  that
we  are  limited  to  a  disjunction  of  possibilities,  concerning  the  reality  or
necessity  of  which  we  know  nothing.  We  may  expect  in  just  the  same
way  confirmation  of  our  conjectures  as  to  a  past  event;  our  knowledge
and  ignorance  may  be  related  to  the  past  or  present  exactly  as  it  is  to  the
future.  So  long  as  I  have  not  seen  the  list  of  winners  my  expectation
that  I  have  won  with  a  number  which  was  drawn  yesterday  has  exactly
the  same  value  logically  as  my  expectation  that  I  shall  win  in  a  drawing  to
take  place  to-morrow.

Inasmuch  as  the  whole  process  is  based  upon  the  fact  that  a  general
concept  is  established  while  its  determinations  are  uncertain,  every  state
ment  of  probability  concerning  the  particular  depends  ultimately  upon  a
hypothetical  judgment  of  universal  validity.  The  probability  of  throwing
6  with  a  given  die  is  •£,  only  because  we  know  that  any  body  of  the  shape
of  a  die  «dll  afford  equal  expectation  for  each  of  its  six  sides  so  long  as  we
know  nothing  of  the  conditions  of  its  position.  Every  statement  of  proba
bility  for  a  particular  case  can  be  represented  as  the  consequence  of  a


PROBABILITY  227

general  proposition  ;  for  it  is  only  upon  the  ground  of  general  propositions
that  we  can  obtain  the  fundamental  disjunction.  Here  again  we  see  the
deductive  character  of  the  whole  process.

10.  The  art  of  correctly  manipulating  the  deductions  belonging to  the
calculation  of  chances  depends  less  upon  the  simple  application  of  the
principles  according  to  which  the  disjunctive  judgments  are  reduced  to
numbers  than  upon the  establishment  of  correct  disjunctive  judgments
from  the  conditions  known  to  us, — judgments,  that  is,  in  which  the  number
of  disjunctive  terms  corresponds  to  the  number  of  originally  different  and
equally  possible  cases. When 5 coins  are thrown  together,  a  superficial
observation  seems  to  show  only  6  different  cases  as  possible,  viz.,  5  heads,
4  heads i tail,  3  heads 2 tails, 2  heads 3  tails, i  head 4  tails,  5  tails.
But  when,  constructing  the  original  disjunctions,  we  find  that  the  coin  A
may  give  either  Ah  or  At, B  may  give either  Bh  or  J3(,  etc.,  we  learn
by  actually  combining  these  five  disjunctions  that  the  second  case (4
heads  i  tail),  as  well  as  the  fifth,  is  the  result  common  to 5 originally
different  cases  (for  the  one  coin  which  shows  tails  may  be  either  A  or  B
or  C  or  D  or  E\  while  the  third and  fourth  are  the  result  of  10  cases.
In  this  way  the  probabilities  for  the  6  cases  take  the  value,  not  of  £  each,
but  of-gV>  -sV>  if>  sif>  w»  -sV  (l'-e-  tney  proceed  as  the  binomial  co-efficients
for  the  fifth  power).

It  is  chiefly  for  the  correct  statement  of  these  disjunctions  in  more
complicated  cases,  and  for  the  calculation  of  the  number  of  combinations
of  the  same  elements,  which  appear  in  different  order,  that  the  help  of
mathematical  methods  is  necessary.  Their  fundamental  principles  follow
from  the  results  obtained  by  the  combination  of  disjunctive  judgments,
and  it  is  no  part  of  our  task  to  carry  them  out  in  detail ;  it  is  enough  to
have  explained  the  relation  of  this  branch  of  deductive  method  to  the  de
ductive  process  in  general.

11.  To  this  form  of  deduction  also  there  is  a  corresponding  form  of
the  reduction  of  given  propositions  to  the  premises  from  which they may
have  proceeded.

In  the  first  place,  every  disjunctive  judgment  of  the  form  A  is  either
ax  or  bx  or  ay  or  by,  or  of  the  form  A  B  is  either  ax  or  bx  or  ay  or  by,
refers  us  back  to  the  components  from  the  combination  of  which  it
may  have  proceeded ;  the  only  question  to  be  asked  is  whether  the  terms
which  are  given  together  represent  a  complete  combination  of  simple
elements.


228  LOGIC

In the  first  case  this  reference  gives  at  once  A  either  a  or  b,  either  x
or  y  :  in  the  second  case  we  have  the  double  possibility
A  is  either  a  or  b,  B  is  either  x  or  y  ;
or  :  B  is  either  a  QI  b,  A  is  either  ^  or_y.

Given  one  of  these  premises,  the  other  would  be  found  by  a  sort  of
algebraical  division.

But  it  is  not  in  such  cases  as  these  that  reduction  is  generally  employed
in  connection  with  the  calculation  of  chances  ;  it  is  employed  when  the
numerical  relations,  in  which  the  disjunct  possibilities  of  a  given  presupposi
tion  actually  occur,  give  rise  to  the  problem  of  constructing  the  fundamental
general  disjunctive  judgment  of  which  they  may  be  regarded  as  instances
— in  other  words,  when  we  are  passing  from  an  empirical  to  a  logical
division.

When  a  black  ball  is  drawn  from  an  urn  at  the  first  time  of  drawing,
absolutely  nothing  can  be  inferred  from  the  fact  but  that  a  black  ball  was
there ;  whether  the  drawing  of  the  black  ball  was  the  only  possibility,  or
whether  other  possibilities  may  be  assumed,  we  have  no  grounds  whatever
for  conjecturing.

But  if,  the  second  time,  a  white  ball  is  drawn,  we  should  already  be
justified  in  forming  as  a  conjecture  the  disjunctive  judgment  that  either  a
black  or  a  white  ball  will  be  drawn  ;  but  whether  the  disjunctive  judgment
is  correct  in  the  sense  that  it  enumerates  all  possibilities,  that  the  urn
therefore  contains  balls  of  no  other  colour,  and  whether  it  is  an  accurate
statement  of  different  equivalent  coses  remains  uncertain.

If  repeated  trials  should  fail  to  give  a  ball  of  other  colour  than  black  or
white,  the  conjecture  that  either  a  black  or  white  ball  must  be  drawn
because  none  of  a  third  colour  was  there  would  gain  very  rapidly  in
certainty ;  and  if  a  large  number  of  trials  should  give  an  equal  number  of
black  and  white  balls,  we  should  at  once  conjecture  that  there  was  an
equal  number  of  the  two  colours  in  the  urn,  although  the  same  result
would  not  in  itself  be  absolutely  impossible  if  there  should  be  only  one
black  and  one  hundred  white.

The  principle  upon  which  these  two  conjectures  are  based  may  be
formulated  as  follows  :  that  assumption  is  always  the  most  probable  upon
which  the  result  which  is  actually  there  most  probably  follows.

If,  for  .example  (referring  to  our  first  conjecture),  there  were  in  the  urn
one  black,  one  white,  and  one  red  ball,  then  the  probability  that  in  six
trials  only  black  and  white  balls  would  be  drawn  is  only  T6/y- ;  but  if  there


PROBABILITY  229

are  in  the  urn  only  a  black  and  a  white  ball,  then  it  is  necessary  that  only
black  and  white  should  appear.  Thus  the  latter  assumption  is  incompar
ably  more  probable  than  the  former.

If,  again,  there  should  be  one  white  and  three  black  balls  in  the  urn,
then  a  simple  calculation  will  show  that,  given  four  trials,  the  probabilities
of  the  only  possible  cases  are  as  follows  :

4  white,  Tj-lj-g  ;  3  white,  i  black,  ^/^  ;  2  white,  2  black,  -^ ;  i  white,  3
black,  i°-f  ;  4  black,  -f±r.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  were  two  white  and  two  black  balls,  then
we  should  get  for —

4  white,  yV;  3  white,  i  black,  T\ ;  2  white,  2  black,  T6g  ;  i  white,  3
black,  TV ;  4  black,  TV

In  the  second  case,  therefore,  the  probability  that  an  equal  number  of
black  and  white  balls  will  be  drawn  is  T6y  or  -/^,  which  is  considerably
greater — nearly  twice  as  great — as  in  the  first  case,  where  it  is  -//^ ;  the
second  assumption  is  proportionally  more  probable  than  the  first,  and  it  is
in  a  still  higher  degree  preferable  to  one  assuming  a  still  more  unequal
relation,  which,  when  deductively  developed,  would  give  a  still  smaller
probability  of  equality.1

It  is  sufficient  here  to  indicate  the  main  features  of  this  process  of
reduction  ;  the  theory  would  proceed  to  show  that  the  greater  the  number
of  trials  resulting  in  only  black  and  white  balls,  the  more  rapidly  the
probability  would  increase  that  there  were  only  black  and  white  balls  in
the  urn,  and  that  the  two  colours  were  there  in  the  same  or  nearly  the
same  proportion  as  they  appeared  when  drawn,  and  that  a  very  great  num
ber  of  trials  would  be  a  ground  for  very  probable  conjectures  concerning
the  fundamental  assumptions  to  be  made.

The  application  of  this  reduction  to  problems  of  inductive  investigation
will  occupy  us  later  on  ;  here  we  have  merely  to  show  that  the  proba
bility  calculated  in  this  way  of  disjunctive  hypotheses  has  the  same
character  of  subjective  probability  as  that  derived  immediately  from  dis-

1  It  is  due  to  the  same  process  of  reduction  that  we  refuse  to  believe  that  all  is
straightforward  if,  e.g.,  each  of  the  players  in  a  game  of  whist  holds  cards  all  of  one
colour.  Apart  from  the  fact  that,  in  consequence  of  the  way  in  which  the  cards  are
shuffled  and  dealt,  this  result  is  certainly  still  more  improbable  than  would  follow  from
the  mere  calculation  of  possible  combinations,  our  suspicion  rests  upon  a  comparison  of
two  assumptions,  from  one  of  which  the  result  would  be  very  unlikely  to  follow,  while
from  the  other  it  would  be  certain.  The  second  assumption  is  that  of  intentional
urangement  of  the  cards.  According  to  the  general  principles  of  reduction,  this,
hypothesis  is  by  far  the  more  probable  of  the  two.


2jo  LOGIC

junctions,  and  that  this  purely  subjective  character  is  modified  only  so  far
as  we  know  from  other  sources  of  laws  affecting  the  question — such  as
laws  concerning  the  uniform  change  of  the  conditions  giving  rise  to  the
different  cases.1


In  §  48  it  was  shown  that  immediately  certain  judgments  which  are  not
statements  of  self-consciousness  can  only  refer  to  our  ideas  as  such,  not  to
anything  having  particular  existence ;  thus  the  application  of  strict  deduc
tion  is  limited  to  those  judgments  in  which  we  deal  only  with  our  own
activities,  which  are  governed  by  inner  necessity,  and  it  extends  so  far  as
we  become  conscious  of  this  necessity  in  axioms.  It  is  limited,  therefore,
to  logic,  arithmetic,  geometry,  chronometry  (if  the  term  may  be  allowed  in
this  sense),  and  the  purely  constructive  mathematical  doctrine  of  motion ;
but  as  soon  as  our  statements  refer  to  anything  existent  which  lies  beyond
our  own  self-consciousness  and  the  sphere  of  the  constructive  formation
of  concepts,  our  certain  consciousness  of  necessity  disappears,  and  the
methods  which  determine  the  construction  of  our  judgments  are  altered.
For  every  judgment  that  something  is,  is  valid  only  when  we  have  general
rules  according  to  which  a  subjective  something  indicates  an  existing  some
thing  ;  the  question  is,  how  to  find  these  rules,  and  in  what  way  to  become
certain  of  them.

The  sphere  of  ends,  and  the  judgments  referring  to  them  that  some
thing  ought  to  be,  seem,  on  the  other  hand,  to  admit  of  a  purely  deductive
development.  Here  the  validity  of  the  propositions  that  something  ought
to  be  is  grounded  ultimately  in  ourselves,  in  the  consciousness  of  our
volition  and  of  its  necessity ;  and  there  may  be  ultimate  ethical  axioms
which,  like  logical  axioms,  are  accompanied  by  the  feeling  of  evident  cer-

1  The  attempt  made  by  John  Venn,  in  his  otherwise  instructive  and  clever  book,  The
Logic  of  Chance  (London,  1876),  to  find  a  purely  empirical  basis  for  the  principle  of  the
theory  of  probability,  makes  it  especially  important  to  point  out  that,  according  to  the
principles  of  the  theory  itself,  it  is  only  by  chance,  even  with  large  numbers,  that  we  can
clearly  know  the  original  disjunctive  judgments  and  the  probabilities  to  which  they  lead.
If,  for  instance,  we  calculate  the  probability  that  in  200  throws  a  coin  will  fall  exactly
100  times  heads  and  100  times  tails,  it  is  somewhat  smaller  than  the  probability  of  the
proximate  cases  taken  together  ;  hence  an  inference  from  actual  experiment  would  give
in  the  majority  of  cases,  not  £  for  heads  and  \  for  tails,  but  only  fractions  which
approximate  to  \.  Thus  the  fundamental  relation  can  never  be  deduced  with  certainty
directly  from  the  observed  numbers,  but  only  by  way  of  the  reduction  we  have  described,
which  is  based  upon  the  subjective  view  of  probability.


CONCLUDING  REMARKS  231

tainty.  The  principle,  e.g.,  which  is  parallel  to  the  logical  principle  of
contradiction,  that  we  ought  not  to  will  what  is  contradictory,  i.e.,  that  all
the  ends  of  our  will  must  harmonize,  is  undoubtedly  such  an  axiom.
Nevertheless,  ethics  is  not  adapted  to  purely  deductive  science  ;  its  minor
propositions  cannot  be  obtained  either  from  mere  concepts  or  from  subjec
tive  necessity.  In  so  far  as  it  is  to  be  a  practical  science,  and  its  Ought  is
to  pass  into  Is,  the  spheres  within  which  it  is  applied  are  of  a  real  nature,
and  the  validity  of  the  minor  propositions,  by  means  of  which  the  deduc
tion  advances,  is  of  the  same  kind  as  the  validity  of  propositions  concern
ing  the  existent.  Theoretical  and  practical  science,  which  refer  as  know
ing  and  willing  to  the  existent,  are  so  far  different  that  in  the  former  the
conclusions  are  given  to  which  the  premises  are  to  be  sought,  while  in  the
latter  the  major  premises  are  established  and  the  certainty  of  the  minor
propositions  still  remains  to  be  found  ;  they  are  so  far  alike  that  neither
admits  of  a  purely  deductive  treatment  by  means  of  axioms  and  definitions.
Here  again  we  see  the  middle  position  occupied  by  final  concepts  between
constructive  and  empirically  abstracted  concepts.

Because  our  judgments  that  something  is  always  start  originally  from  the
immediate  self-consciousness  in  which  some  affection  is  affirmed  which  we
refer  to  reality,  and  because  the  existent  which  thus  becomes  the  object  of
our  belief  is  always  some  definite  particular,  therefore  our  investigation  of
the  methods  by  which  we  arrive  at  knowledge  of  the  particular  must  start
from  these  fundamental  acts,  i.e.,  from  judgments  of  perception.

One  general  consideration  remains.  If  we  assume  that  the  most
valuable  judgments  are  those  which  attribute  to  a  subject  a  predicate  of
the  greatest  possible  specialization,  which  do  not  merely  subordinate  it  to
a  wide  general  concept,  but  also  state  that  special  determination  of  the
concept  which  belongs  to  the  subject;  if  we  further  assume  them  to  be
those  which  do  not  merely  state  the  general  kind  of  consequence  which
follows  from  certain  conditions,  but  include  also  its  specialization  within
the  narrowest  possible  limits  (cf.  §  55,  i,  I.,  p.  357) ;  then  it  follows  that
the  most  valuable  major  premises  for  deductions  are  those  which  enable  us
to  find  for  every  variation  in  the  subjects  or  assumptions  falling  under
them  an  appropriate  variation  in  the  predicates  or  consequences  resulting
from  the  major  premise.

The  proposition  that  in  a  right-angled  triangle  the  larger  side  is  opposite
the  larger  angle  is  obviously  less  valuable  as  a  major  premise  than  the
proposition  that  every  cathetus  is  the  sine  of  the  opposite  angle  multiplied


232  LOGIC

into  the  hypotenuse.  In  place  of  a  proposition  which  contains  both  in  the
condition  and  its  consequence  the  indefinite  term  "greater,"  including
indifferently  an  indefinite  number  of  more  special  determinations,  we  get
another  which  accurately  determines  for  every  variation  in  the  magnitude
of  the  angle  the  appropriate  variation  in  the  magnitude  of  the  side.

Such  propositions  are  possible  where  its  specializations  follow  of  them
selves  from  the  general  concept  as  its  natural  development,  and  where  one
and  the  same  relation  is  possible  between  the  terms  of  the  two  series  in
which  the  connected  concepts  are  unfolded  ;  they  are  possible,  therefore,
wherever  we  are  dealing  with  numbers  or  with  relations  of  measurement
between  magnitudes  of  any  kind.

The  expression  "  formula  "  is  generally  used  in  mathematics  to  denote
those  hypothetical  major  premises  which  state  for  every  value  of  the
specializations  falling  under  the  first  general  concept  the  appropriate  value
of  the  specialization  falling  under  the  other.  Their  simple  expression  is
made  possible  by  the  general  symbols  which  express  the  whole  series  of
successive  values  of  a  number,  and  what  they  generally  affirm  is  the
equality  of  the  value  of  each  term  in  a  series  to  another  value  which
stands  in  a  definite  arithmetical  relation  to  the  appropriate  value  of  the
other  series.  The  general  concept  upon  which  the  formula  is  grounded  is
not  the  concept  of  equality,  but  that  of  this  constant  relation  ;  this  relation
is  the  general  expression  of  the  connection  to  which  all  particular  in
stances  are  subject,  or,  to  use  the  traditional  expression,  it  is  the  concept
of  the  given  function  which  one  variable  is  of  the  other.

The  simplest  relation  between  variations  in  magnitude  belonging  to  the
special  determinations  of  a  concept  A,  and  variations  in  magnitude
belonging  to  those  of  another  concept  J5,  is  when  to  equal  variations  in  A
there  correspond  equal  variations  in  the  appropriate  B ;  that  is,  the
relation  of  proportionality.  The  constant  element  in  all  the  various
instances,  the  concept  connecting  them,  is  here  the  constant  quotient
between  the  numbers  which  measure  the  one  and  the  other  magnitude.

When  both  magnitudes  are  measured  by  the  same  measure,  as  in  the
case  of  the  periphery  of  the  circle  and  its  diameter,  then  this  quotient
contains  also  the  relation  of  the  differences  by  which  the  one  magnitude
increases  to  the  differences  by  which  the  other  increases ;  the  formula  for

the  circumference  p  =  dir  OT^—TT contains in the product, or in  the

d

quotient,  the  general  concept  of  proportionality,  but  in  the  constant  TT  it


CONCLUDING REMARKS  233

contains  the  fixed  relation  between  the  increase  of  the  one  magnitude  and
the  increase  of  the  other.

When  two  magnitudes  are  measured  by  a  different  measure  as  space
and  time  are  in  motion,  then  the  constant  states  the  number  of  units  by
which  the  one  magnitude  increases  when  the  other  is  increased  by  unity  ;
in  the  formula  for  a  uniform  motion  s  =  vt  the  constant  v  contains  the
number  of  spatial  units  which  are  traversed  in  one  unit  of  time.

The  importance  of  such  major  propositions,  which  enable  us  to  develop
for  every  variation  in  the  subject  the  appropriate  variation  in  the  predicate,
and  for  every  variation  in  the  condition  the  appropriate  variation  in  its
consequence,  will  be  especially  evident  when  our  object  is  to  derive  from
perceived  phenomena  universal  judgments  expressing  the  laws  of  these
phenomena.  For  the  name  of  law  in  its  strictest  and  fullest  sense  is
generally  given  only  to  those  universal  judgments  which  exclude  every
element  of  indefiniteness  from  the  predicate  or  consequence,  and  which
therefore  possess  the  logical  character  of  a  mathematical  formula,  applying
with  equal  strictness  to  every  value  of  the  variables,  even  though  we
should  imagine  these  to  vary,  as  in  the  differential  calculus,  by  the  smallest
possible  increase.


CHAPTER IV.

THE METHODICAL PRINCIPLES OF CONSTRUCTING  JUDGMENTS

OF  PERCEPTION.

§  86.

THE  ideal  at  which  thought  aims  demands  that  our  judgments  of  percep
tion  shall  be  so  constructed  as  to  ensure  objective  validity  and  exhaustive
accuracy,  and  this  both  with  reference  to  the  description  of  particular
things  and  events,  and  with  reference  to  their  determination  in  time  and
space.

The  methodical  construction  of  judgments  of  perception,  which  has  its
first  starting-point  in  the  unpremeditated  reference  of  our  sensations  to
particular  things  in  space,  completes  itself  in  the  objectively  valid  deter
mination  of  single  subjects,  to  which  sensuous  qualities  and  spatial  and
temporal  relations  are  attributed  as  predicates.

i.  The  general  characteristic  of  our  JUDGMENTS  OF  PERCEPTION  is,
that  by  them  the  subjective  affection  given  in  sensation,  which  in  the  first
instance  is  the  object  of  immediate  self-consciousness,  is  referred  to  an
existing  object.  We  have  shown  in  §  47  that  for  this  reference  to  have
objective  validity  we  need  general  laws  according  to  which  it  may  be
carried  out,  according  to  which  more  especially  we  may  assume  definite
objects  corresponding  to  the  sensations,  and  may  ascribe  to  these  objects
their  place  in  time  and  position  in  space  ;  only  upon  this  condition  can
the  judgment  of  perception,  which  always  starts  from  a  purely  subjective
fact,  claim  to  have  objective  validity.  In  methodology  we  have  therefore
to  inquire  how  we  may  find  such  universal  principles,  and  what  logical
character  they  possess.

But  there  are  still  further  conditions  to  be  satisfied  by  our  judgments  of
perception.  If  the  universe  which  we  are  endeavouring  to  know  manifests
itself  only  through  perception,  then  in  the  interests  of  knowledge  it  is
essential  that  the  judgments  in  which  we  give  utterance  to  our  perceptions
should  express  the  content  of  sensation  as  completely  and  accurately  as


JUDGMENTS OF  PERCEPTION  235

possible,  and  that  nothing  which  is  contained  in  our  subjective  conscious
ness  should  be  lost  in  formulating  the  judgment.  Every  difference  of
sensation  must  find  expression  in  the  conceptual  predicate,  which  must  be
free  from  every  kind  of  indefiniteness.  We  are  not  here  concerned  with  the
subsumption  of  a  given  fact  under  a  general  concept,  but  on  the  contrary
with  the  specialization  of  the  predicate  to  such  a  degree  that  there  is  no
longer  any  difference  between  it  and  its  subject.  Ancient  and  modern
logic  differ  perhaps  in  no  point  more  clearly  than  in  the  fact  that  logic  of
old  was  satisfied  with  the  subsumption  of  every  Given  under  a  general
concept  in  which  many  small  differences  were  disregarded  ;  while,  on  the
other  hand,  logic  as  actually  practised  in  modern  times,  though  not  yet
completely  confirmed  in  theory,  insists  upon  this  general  concept  being
specialized  with  complete  definiteness,  so  as  to  be  the  full  expression  of
individual  difference.  Our  investigations  in  chapter  I.  showed  that  this
complete  accuracy  of  predication  is  possible  where  the  predicates  are
reduced  by  their  conceptual  construction  to  a  continuum  which  can  be
mathematically  represented,  arid  can  therefore  be  expressed  by  measure
ment  ;  and  that  this  possibility  extends  as  far  as  our  power  of  perceiving
small  differences  and  subjecting  them  to  measurement.

2.  The  ends  at  which  we  aim  in  thought  demand  not  only  that  our
expression  of  particular  perceptions  should  be  exhaustively  accurate,  but
also  that  we  should  endeavour  to  make  these  perceptions  extensively  com
plete. This means that from the  beginning the  particular  should  be
regarded  as  a  part  of  the  whole  and  in  its  perceptible  relations  to  the  whole.
Hence  follows  also  the  necessity  of  determining  for every  judgment  of
perception  which  is  to  be  complete  the  position  occupied  by  the  perceived
in  time  as  well  as  in  space  ;  and  the  question  arises  as  to  the  possibility
of  objectively  valid  time  and  space-determinations. According  to  §  46,  5
(I.,  p.  305)  even  subjective  statements  about  the facts  of  sensation  as
given  in  self-consciousness  are  not  complete  until  the  time-determination
involved  in  them  has  been objectively fixed  ; a  further  question  then
presents  itself  as  to  the  relation  of  the  time-determinations  of  objects  and
their  changes  to  the  time  of  subjective  sensation. Space-determination,
on  the  other  hand, demands that  every object  of  perception  shall  be
ranged  in  the  one space  which  embraces  all  the existent, its  position
being  thus  determined  with  reference  to  all  other  objects.

3.  Here  again  in  perfecting  our  method  we  must  start  from  activities
which  are  being  carried  on  without  premeditation,  and  we  cannot  at  the


236  LOGIC

commencement  free  ourselves  from  assumptions  which  have  their  origin
according  to  psychological  laws.  The  conscious  construction  of  judg
ments  of  perception  is  always  preceded  by  the  habit  of  referring  sensations
to  particular  things  which  are  in  definite  places  and  which  persist  in  time  ;
it  first  appears  as  the  description  of  particular  things  as  given  in  percep
tion,  when  for  the  indefinite  judgment  of  denomination  (expressed  in  one
general  predicate)  is  substituted  the  analysis  of  the  object  into  its  parti
cular  simple  attributes,  activities  and  relations,  leading  to  the  reconstruction
of  the  idea  from  elements  which  have  been  apprehended  with  the  greatest
possible  definiteness.

When  the  description  starts  from  unities  which,  owing  to  some  limita
tion,  offer  themselves  as  subjects  for  judgments  of  perception,  then  further
reflection  constrains  us  to  define  more  accurately  the  concept  of  thing
itself,  and  to  inquire  about  the  methods  which  will  enable  us  to  find  an
accurate  determination  for  the  subjects  of  which  we  predicate  sensuous
qualities  and  spatial  and  temporal  relations.

4.  The  questions  of  method  which  arise  here  remain  unaffected  by  our
final  conclusions  as  to  whether  what  we  perceive  are  ultimately  mere
phenomena,  or  real  things  existing  independently  of  our  thought.  Even
in  reference  to  phenomena  there  can  only  be  objective  and  universally
valid  propositions  if  there  are  definite  laws  according  to  which  the  affection
of  the  individual  can  be  transformed  into  a  judgment  which  is  objective
and  valid  for  all.  We  in  no  way,  therefore,  prejudge  the  question  as  to
realism  or  idealism  when  we  start  from  the  familiar  assumption  that  real
things  exist  in  an  objective  space  and  in  objective  time ;  and  all  we  are
concerned  with  is,  how  we  may  construct  from  the  manner  in  which  they
appear  to  the  individual  a  judgment  concerning  their  objective  nature  and
their  real  relations,  which  shall  be  valid  for  all.


§87-

It  is  necessary,  in  order  that  even  our  purely  subjective  statements  about
what  is  contained  in  our  consciousness  may  be  fully  determined,  that  our
own  subjective  time  should  be  referred  to  a  TIME-SYSTEM  which  is  common
to  all,  and  so  far  objective.

Because  the  correspondence  of  one  individual  consciousness  with
another  is  only  possible  by  means  of  external  sensation,  this  must  depend
upon  external  perceptions  which  are  shared  by  all,  and  which  occur


DETERMINATION  OF  TIME  237

simultaneously  for  all.  Recurrence  of  these  forms  the  ground  for  a
division  of  time  into  periods  which  are  the  same  for  every  one.

The  complete  determination  of  our  statements  of  time  necessitates  a
STANDARD  OF  TIME.  Owing  to  the  uncertainty  of  the  subjective  estima
tion  of  time  this  can  never  be  reached  directly,  but  only  by  the  aid  of
hypothetical  assumptions  concerning  the  laws  of  motion.

The  use  of  these  standards  of  time  for  the  temporal  determination  of
subjective  events,  and  still  more  for  the  determination  of  the  objective
events  of  which  they  are  perceptions,  necessitates  the  determination  of  the
relation  between  the  time  of  the  event  and  the  time  of  the  perception,  and
the  reduction  of  the  subjective  series  of  perceptions  to  the  objective  series
of  changes  in  things.

This  reduction  can  only  be  carried  out  by  assuming  causal  laws,  in
which  the  sensation  is  regarded  as  a  temporally  determined  effect  of
objective  change  ;  but  to  establish  such  laws  is  possible  again  only  by
assuming  that  in  the  case  of  continuous  events  the  succession  of  sensa
tions  corresponds  to  the  succession  of  the  events.

From  this  point  of  view  Kant's  doctrine  that  an  objective  time-deter
mination  is  only  possible  by  means  of  a  principle  of  causality,  according  to
which  objective  events  prescribe  to  themselves  their  place  in  time,  is,  as
stated  in  his  formula,  inaccurate.

i.  If  we  inquire  first  about  the  time-determination  of  our  narrative
judgments,  in  so  far  as  they  are  the  purely  subjective  statements  of  im
mediate  self-consciousness  (§  46,  5.  I.,  p.  305),  we  find  that  they  presuppose
the  reference  of  our  subjective  discrimination  of  definite  points  of  time
and  their  intervals  to  a  time  which  is  uniformly  valid  for  all  individuals  ;
they  necessitate  therefore  the  reduction  of  the  time  of  the  individual  to  a
time  which  is  the  possession  of  all,  and  the  elimination,  therefore,  of  sub
jective  differences  in  the  estimation  of  time.

Though  the  idea  of  the  chains  of  inner  events  and  their  continuous
succession  in  time,  by  virtue  of  which  they  form  a  series  in  which  every
conscious  act  has  its  place  between  others,  is  familiar  to  every  individual
consciousness ;  and  though  we  easily  distinguish  on  the  whole  longer  and
shorter  durations — at  any  rate  in  the  immediate  proximity  of  our  Now —
yet  this  idea,  in  its  immediate  connection  with  our  momentary  conscious
ness,  cannot  be  raised  into  one  which  is  objective  in  all  its  parts ;  that  is,
in  the  first  place,  valid  for  all  conscious  and  thinking  subjects  in  the  same
way,  because  necessary.  We  assume,  indeed,  that  there  is  one  time  for


238  LOGIC

all,  in  which  we  and  every  one  are  and  live,  and  in  which,  as  in  a  frame,
the  conscious  moments  of  all  are  ranged  in  a  certain  order  of  simultaneity
and  sequence,  one  time  which  is  reflected  in  the  time-consciousness  of
each  person  ;  but  how  shall  we  bring  about  a  relation  and  comparison
between  the  time  idea  of  one  and  that  of  another?

2.  For  our  purely  subjective time-consciousness  the  starting  point  is
always  the  immediate  Now,  with  which  memory  connects  the  nearest  Past
with  tolerable  confidence  as  to  the  sequence  and  duration  of  its  particular
moments,  and  the  more  remote  with  diminishing  certainty  with  reference
both  to  the  Before  and  After,  and  to  the  particular  intervals. But  this  Now
is  not  a  fixed  point ;  it  advances  incessantly  in  time,  and  as  the  head  of  a
comet  is  followed  by  a  constantly  changing  tail,  so  this  moving  Now  is
followed  by  a  chain  of  memories  which  is  always  changing  its  form.

If  we  are  to  bring  about  a  community  of  the  time-consciousness,  we
must  begin  by  establishing  fixed  points  which  are  common  to  all,  by
reducing  the  Now  of  one  man  to  comparison  and  coincidence  with  the
Now  of  others,  and  by  determining  a  common  measure  for  the  intervals
between  the  past  and  the  common  present.

3.  Such  points  of  coincidence  can  only  be  found  where  we  are  certain
that  different  people  are  simultaneously  conscious  of  the  same  fact,  and
where,  therefore,  the  content  of  the  one  consciousness  can  be  compared
as  to  time  with  the  content  of  the  other ;  and  since  the  reference  of  the
conscious  content  of  one  person  to  that  of  another  is  only  possible  through
the  external  world,  this must  be where  a  phenomenon  which  is  external
for  both  is  simultaneously  perceived. But  a  single  coincidence  would
leave  the  series  Before  and  After  without  points  of  comparison  ;  a  progres
sive  comparison  can  only  be  carried  out  by  the  repetition  of  coincidences
which  enable  us  to  continue  to  compare  the  subjective  time-idea  of  the
one  with  that  of  the  other.

Thus  we  see  that  periodically  recurring  external  phenomena,  which  are
shared  in  by  all  alike,  form  the  first  basis  of  a  common  time  conscious
ness,  and  most  important  amongst  these  are  the  alternation  of  day  and
night,  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun.  From  them  we  get  a  division  of
time  into  enumerable  sections,  in  which  the  points  of  division  are  the
same  for  every  one  ;  and  the  most  obvious  and  natural  application  of  this
division  would  be,  reckoning  backwards  from  the  to-day  of  every  one,  to
determine  the  days  and  nights  in  which  other  remembered  experiences
(whether  of  the  individual  or  of  the  community)  must  be  located,  which


DETERMINATION  OF  TIME  239

will  serve  as  further  points  of  comparison.  The  endless  succession  of
such  marks  both  backwards  and  forwards  prevents  there  being  any  natural
starting  point  except  the  present.  But  to-day  is  always  passing  away,  and
is,  therefore,  ill  adapted  to  be  the  starting  point  for  a  fixed  and  uniform
reckoning  ;  for  this  reason,  in  reckoning  forwards  we  start  from  some
arbitrarily  selected  point  which  is  determined  by  some  memorable  event.
The  primary  division  of  time,  the  day,  is  next  followed  by  the  month  ;
the  reappearance  of  the  new  moon  enables  us  to  mark  off  a  definite
(though  varying)  number  of  days  into  a  period  ;  while  the  year,  owing  to
the  gradual  change  of  the  seasons,  forms  a  less  easily  recognised  period,
and  was  late  in  becoming  an  accurately  determined  measure  of  time.

4.  This  division  of  time  according  to the popular  calendar  is  suffi
cient  to  bring  about  uniformity  amongst  the  time-ideas  of  individuals,  at
any  rate  with  reference  to  the  limits  of  considerable  periods  ;  and  it  needs
no  further  assumption  than  that  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun  are  per
ceived  simultaneously,  and  that  the  days  are  counted  in  the  same  way
by  all. But  because  there  is  no  certain  and  natural  division  of  the  day
it  is  not  sufficient  to  the  further  task  of  affording  a  fixed  and  universally
valid  measure  of  time,  which  would  enable  us  on  the  one  hand  to  compare
the  durations  of particular  intervals  according  to  one  standard,  on the
other  hand  to  determine  particular  points  of  time  at  any  intervals,  how
ever small, as  parts  of  the  day  ; and  it  is  here  that  the  difficulties  of
chronometry  begin.

5.  Daily  experience  teaches  us  that  the  purely  subjective  measurement
of  time  is  varying  and  deceptive  ;  we  are  unable  to  form  any  judgment
which  is  certain  and  coincides  with  that  of  others  as  to  the  equality  of
time-periods  if  they  pass  beyond  a  very  small  limit  in  size  and  are  not
given in immediate repetition. Nevertheless, if  we  are to determine
objectively  the  relations  of  duration  between  different  states  of  conscious
ness, and  to  determine  every  moment  in one and  the  same  time, we
must  have  an  absolutely  fixed  measure  and  an  absolutely  fixed  point  from
which  to  measure ;  and  these  are  not  given  in  the  merely  popular  division
of  time  into  days. The  equality  of  days  cannot  be  in  any  way  certainly
and  immediately  recognised — indeed,  the  solar  days  are  actually  unequal —
nor  would  equality  in  the  days  give  us  that  possibility  of  division  which
is  needed  for  an  available  measure.

A  real  standard  of  time  could  only  be  given  by  the  perfectly  uniform
motion  of  a  perceptible  body,  which  would  enable  us  to  measure  times


24o  LOGIC

which  could  not  be  directly  compared  by  means  of  the  spaces  traversed,
which  spaces  we  could  bring  into  direct  coincidence  by  a  measure.  But
whether  a  motion  is  uniform  or  not  can  never  be  empirically  known  with
certainty,  because  there  is  no  immediate  and  reliable  certainty  in  our
equation  of  subjectively  estimated  successive  time-magnitudes.

If  we  define  a  uniform  motion  as  one  in  which  equal  spaces  are  traversed
in  equal  times,  then  in  order  to  know  it  as  such  we  must  suppose  that
we  are  able  to  measure  directly  the  equality  of  two  periods  of  time.1
Thus  all  the  means  which  we  can  employ  for  measuring  time  depend
upon  assumptions  which  can  never  be  strictly  proved ;  they  depend
ultimately  upon  the  assumption  that  the  rotation  of  the  earth  is  constant
in  velocity,  and  that  the  time  between  one  culmination  of  a  fixed  star
and  another  is,  therefore,  always  the  same  ;  and,  again,  upon  the  assump
tion  that  the  oscillations  of  the  pendulums  regulating  our  clocks  are
isochronous.  It  may  be  urged  that  it  is  strictly  proved  that  oscillations  of
the  same  pendulum  within  fixed  limits  are  isochronous,  but  this  proof
depends  partly  upon  the  Galilean  law  of  inertia,  which,  again,  is  in
no  way  empirically  demonstrable  if  only  because  it  contains  the  concept
of  uniform  motion.  Our  conviction  that  in  our  clocks  and  our  astro
nomical  observations  we  really  measure  equal  times  depends  ultimately
upon  nothing  more  than  the  agreement  of  those  motions  which  various
physical  principles  lead  us  to  expect  with  those  motions  which  we  actually
observe.

It  is  instructive  to  follow  the  course  actually  taken  by  science  in  this
connection.  External  perception  first  leads  us  to  think  of  uniform
motion,  when,  e.g.,  the  motion  of  the  stars  appears  to  our  rude,  subjective
estimation  as  uniform  ;  this  thought  is  elaborated  to  mathematical  ac
curacy,  and  the  assumption  is  made  that  the  stars  in  their  daily  revolution
move  with  absolute  uniformity.  But  in  proportion  as  the  standard  based
upon  this  assumption  is  generally  applied,  and  laws  concerning  the  times
of  motions  are  established,  the  realization  of  which  is  estimated  by  this
standard,  there  appear  slight  divergences  ;  and  at  the  present  time  we
actually  do  not  know  whether  the  rotation  of  the  earth  is  constant  in
velocity  or  not,  and  whether  there  is  any  real  motion  to  be  found  cor
responding  to  the  mathematical  ideal.

Thus  upon closer consideration of  even the first problem, that of

1  Cf.  C.  Neumann,  iiber  die  Principien  der  Galilei- Newton' schen  Theoric,  1869,  p.  14-
Liebmann,  zur  Analysis  de.r  Wirklichkeit,  ed.  2,  p.  86' sq.


DETERMINATION  OF  TIME  241

establishing  an  objectively  valid  temporal  determination  of  judgments
concerning  our  immediate  inner  experiences,  we  find  that  at  best  it  can
only  be  approximately  solved.  We  start  from  the  thought  of  one  time
in  which  everything  happens,  and  our  ideal  is  the  division  of  this  time
into  absolutely  equal  intervals ;  but  we  can  only  succeed  in  marking  off
intervals  of  this  time  in  an  objectively  valid  way  by  means  of  external
perception  of  periodical  changes  or  of  successive  positions  of  a  body  in
motion,  and  our  conviction  that  these  are  equal  depends  upon  a  number
of  assumptions  and  presuppositions  with  reference  to  physical  laws  of
motion  for  the  validity  of  which  no  strict  proof  is  possible,  and  which  we
only  assume  because  the  facts  of  our  sensation  can  be  explained  by  them
with  the  highest  degree  of  probability.

How  to  construct  the  best  clocks  is  a  technical  matter,  and  the  methods
of  regulating  them  also  aim  only  at  determining  with  the  highest  degree
of  probability  the  relation  of  their  time  and  the  absolute  time  of  our
assumption.  But  the  fact  that  an  objectively  valid  measurement  of  time
is  possible  only  by  means  of  external  marks,  and  at  best  approximately,
opens  up  new  questions  for  our  consideration.

6.  In  the  first  place  the  use  of  these  expedients  in  the  measurement
of  time  assumes that the  objective event which  marks any point of
time  is  in  fact  perceived  absolutely simultaneously  by  every  one, and
that  there  is  no  difference  between  the  intervals  of  subjective  perception
of  periodical  events  and  the  events  themselves. Then  the  use  of  these
external  expedients  reduces  the  ranging  of  any  conscious  moment  in  the
objective  time  series  to  the  problem  of framing  with  objective  validity
a  judgment  concerning  the  simultaneity  of  two  events,  or  of  determining
whether  some  affection  of  the  Self  appeared  before  or  after  the  perception
of  an  objective  event — the  peal  of  a  bell,  or  the  movement  of  the  second
hand  from  one  mark  to  another.

7.  Now  the  succession  of  our conscious  moments  as  such  certainly
seems to be given with such  immediate self-evidence, that we are
immediately  certain  about  the  Before  and  After,  about  the  unmistakable
succession  of  an  inner  event  B  to  an  inner  event  A  •  and  we  seem  forced
to  accept  our  perception as laid  down  in  the  judgment  that  for  us  B
follows  A,  as  the  simple  expression  of  an  actual  subjective  fact. No  one
doubts  the  validity  of  his  own  judgment  that  he  saw  the  flash  of  a  cannon
at  a  distance  before  he  heard  the  report,  or  mistrusts  a  similar  statement
on  the  part  of  another;  no  one  thinks  himself  mistaken  in  hearing  the

s.  L. — ii.  R


242  LOGIC

first  words  of  a  sentence  before  the  last ;  the  affirmation  of  this  succession
is  vouched  for  by  the  immediate  truth  of  those  statements  of  self-conscious
ness  which  refer  to  actual  existence.  And  yet  the  events  of  which  we
have  to  determine  the  succession  need  only  be  crowded  close  together  to
make  our  judgment  uncertain.  The  activities  belonging  to  the  successive
sense  perceptions,  and  to  their  comparison  in  judgment,  which  must  take
place  together,  disturb  and  confuse  each  other ;  especially  when  the  per
ceptions  concerning  the  simultaneity  or  succession  of  which  we  have  to
judge  belong  to  the  provinces  of  different  senses,  or  lie  within  different
series.

If  that  which  is  the  object  of  consciousness  consisted  of  a  simple  series
of  subjective  events,  and  if  our  apprehension  of  them,  by  which  we  com
prehend  them  into,  one  temporal  whole,  went  on  apart  from  and  without
obstructing  them,  like  the  activity  of  a  spectator  who  watches  a  play  with
out  having  any  effect  upon  it,  then  the  immediate  apprehension  of  every
inner  event  would  also  assign  to  it  its  place  in  time.  But  the  problem  is
more  complicated  than  this.  Our  inner  life  does  not  progress  in  this
simple  line ;  several  distinguishable  series  proceed  simultaneously ;  we  do
not  cease  to  see  while  we  hear,  and  hearing  continues  while  we  consciously
endeavour  to  compare  the  seen  and  the  heard.  The  uncertainty  which  we
sometimes  feel  gives  rise  to  the  question  whether  our  judgment  in  com
parison  is  capable  of  recognising  unmistakably  even  the  simultaneity  of
every  moment  in  one  series  with  every  moment  in  the  other,  and  of
referring  both  in  the  correct  order  to  the  one  line  of  time.  This  is
especially  the  case  when  the  moments  to  be  compared  are  themselves
composite  acts,  as,  e.g.,  the  perception  of  the  coincidence  of  two  spatial
objects,  of  the  second  hand  of  a  clock  with  a  given  mark,  of  the  image  of
the  star  in  the  telescope  with  the  thread.

We  will  pass  over  the  psychological  questions  arising  out  of  the  relation
between  an  intermittent  conscious  comparison,  which,  it  may  be,  can  only
grasp  events  after  they  have  already  happened,  and  the  subjective  object
of  comparison  (the  various  perceptions)  ;  questions  which,  upon  closer
investigation,  threaten  to  limit  even  the  proposition  as  to  the  immediate
certainty  of  our  statements  about  ourselves.  For  our  purpose  they  are
fruitless.  If,  in  fact,  no  certain  judgment  were  forthcoming  as  to  whether
A  preceded  B  or  were  simultaneous  with  it,  then  this  uncertainty  itself
would  be  the  ultimate  psychological  fact  upon  which  we  could  build
nothing  further  ;  if  our  judgment  decides  that  A  preceded  B,  it  will  help


243

us  nothing  to  call  its  correctness  into  question  hereafter,  we  must  accept  it
as  the  momentary  fact,  and  assume  that  A  really  came  into  conscious
ness  before  B,  although  we  may  have  expected  something  else.

This  difficulty  is  primarily  of  interest  not  because  we  are  investigating
the  relation  between  our  conscious  comparison  and  our  purely  inner  states,
but  because  we  are  trying  to  obtain  from  the  simultaneity  or  succession  of
subjective  events  a  knowledge  of  the  simultaneity  or  succession  of  an
objective  occurrence;  and  the  whole  of  this  difficult  question  would  hardly
have  arisen  for  psychology  unless  there  had  appeared  in  the  estimation  of
the  temporal  relations  of  objective  events  discrepancies  between  different
observers,  and  discrepancies  between  results  obtained  by  them  and  con
clusions  which  we  are  forced  to  accept  upon  other  grounds.  The  so-called
personal  equation  of  astronomers  has  called  attention  to  this  point ;  it
happened  that  the  statements  of  different  observers  as  to  the  time  in  which
a  star  crossed  the  intersecting  thread  in  the  telescope  were  at  variance,
closer  investigation  showed  that  variation  occurred  even  with  one  and  the
same  observer,  which  proves  that  there  is  no  fixed  relation  between  the
subjectively  apprehended  succession  of  perceptions  and  the  succession  of
perceived  objective  events.

8.  This  leads  first  to  the  more  general  question  as  to  how  we  can  pass
from  the  subjective  succession  of  our  sensations  of  external  events  to
objectively  valid  judgments  concerning  the  succession  of  these  events
themselves.

The  assumption  with  which  our  unschooled  perception  starts  in  referring
sensations  to  external  things  is,  that  something  external  is  and  happens
in  the  same  moment  in  which  we  perceive  it ;  hence  that  the  succession
of  events  coincides  point  for  point  with  the  succession  of  our  perceptions.
In  the  moment  in  which  we  see  it,  what  we  see  is  such  as  we  see  it,  and  is
in  the  place  in  which  we  see  it ;  that  which  we  hear  sounds  at  the  moment
in  which  we  hear  it,  and  what  we  feel  touches  us  at  the  moment  in  which
we  feel  it.

But  the  observation  of  daily  life  is  itself  sufficient  to  break  down  this
assumption  by  demonstrating  its  contradictions.  If  we  stand  beside  a
cannon,  we  see  the  flash  and  hear  the  sound  in  immediate  succession ;  if
we  stand  some  way  off,  the  sight  and  the  sound  are  separated  for  us  by  an
interval.  Or  other  results  are  contradicted  :  the  eclipse  of  the  satellites  of
Jupiter  appears  sometimes  before,  sometimes  after  it  is  due,  according  to
the  calculation  of  their  motion  from  general  conditions.


244  LOGIC

Recognising  that  sound  and  light  are  gradually  propagated,  we  are  thus
forced  to  make  a  corresponding  deduction  in  respect  to  what  we
immediately  perceive,  and  when  we  further  take  into  consideration  our
observations  as  to  the  velocity  of  transference  by  the  nerves  we  find  that
at  all  points  there  must  be  a  discrepancy  between  the  times  of  perception
and  the  times  of  the  perceived  event,  and  that  it  is  impossible,  without
further  expedients,  to  bring  into  a  time  series  with  objective  validity,  not
merely  the  subjective  sensations,  but  also  the  events  to  which  they  corre
spond,  and  especially  to  determine  their  relation  to  the  events  by  which  we
measure  time.

9.  If  we  consider  the  way  in  which  these  subjective  discrepancies  are
compensated,  and  a  reduction  of  the  time  of  perception  to  the  time  of
occurrence  accomplished,  we  might  at  first  sight  find  in  it  a  confirmation
of  the  Kantian  proposition  that  an  objective  time-determination  is  possible
only  through  the  concept  of  causality,  and  its  connected  principle  that
everything  which  happens  presupposes  something  upon  which  it  follows
according  to  rule,1  the  mere  order  of  perceptions  having  only  a  subjective
significance  and  warranting  no  objective  judgment  that  B  succeeds  A  in
time.

Every  reduction  employed  in  compensating  subjective  discrepancies  in
time-results  aims  first  at  establishing  a  causal  relation  between  the
objective  event  and  the  subjective  sensation,  the  former  being  regarded  as
the  cause  of  the  latter  ;  an  accurate  determination  of  the  way  in  which  the
objective  cause  brings  about  the  subjective  sensation  includes  the  difference
in  time  which  intervenes — owing  to  the  transmission  of  light  and  sound
through  media,  and  of  the  peripheral  impression  through  the  nerves —
between  the  event  and  conscious  sensation,  and  it  shows  how  the  varying
magnitude  of  this  discrepancy  depends  upon  varying  distance  and  upon
individual  temperament.  It  is  due  to  these  causal  relations  that  we  are
able,  when  the  distance  is  known,  to  calculate  from  the  point  of  time  in
which  a  shot  is  heard  back  to  the  point  of  time  in  which  it  was  fired ;  and
it  is  due  also  to  these  causal  relations  that  we  are  able,  from  the  interval
between  the  perception  of  the  flash  and  the  hearing  of  the  report,  to
determine,  with  at  any  rate  approximate  accuracy,  both  the  distance  of  the
cannon  and  the  true  time  of  the  event.  And  if  we  ask,  further,  how  the
personal  equation  of  astronomers  is  compensated  and  made  capable  of

1  As  stated  in  the  first  edition  ;  the  second  differs  by  formulating  the  principle  :  all
changes  occur  according  to  the  law  of  connection  between  cause  and  effect.


DETERMINATION  OF  TIME  245

redaction,  we  find  that  it  is  done  by  mechanical  contrivances  which  pro
duce  a  report  at  the  moment  in  which  a  visible  mark  reaches  a  given  point,
and  so  enable  us  to  compare  the  subjective  apprehension  with  this
objective  fact,  warranted  by  mechanical  laws.  The  causal  connections  in
the  mechanism  of  apparatus  give  us  exact  time-relations  for  the  visible  and
audible  event ;  the  latter  cannot  precede  the  former,  because  its  production
depends  upon  the  motion  of  the  indicator  to  a  given  point.  We  may
illustrate  the  same  fact  by  a  more  familiar  instance  :  when  a  spectator
watches  a  battalion  exercising  from  a  distance  he  sees  the  men  suddenly
moving  in  concert  before  he  hears  the  word  of  command  or  bugle
call,  but  from  his  knowledge  of  causal  connections  he  is  aware  that
the  movements  are  the  result  of  the  command,  hence  that  objectively
the  latter  must  have  preceded  the  former,  and  he  is  at  once  conscious
of  the  illusion  involved  in  the  reversion  of  the  temporal  series  in  his
perceptions.

It  would  seem,  then,  that  an  objectively  valid  temporal  determination  is
only  possible  where  there  is  a  relation,  by  virtue  of  which  one  event  as
cause  determines  for  another  as  effect  its  position  in  time,  by  introducing  it
of  necessity  and  according  to  rule  in  temporal  sequence  ;  only  in  so  far  as
I  know  that  A  is  the  cause  of  B  can  I  say  with  certainty  that  A  precedes
£,  whether  in  my  subjective  sensation  A  precedes  B  or  is  simultaneous
with,  or  succeeds  it.  Only  because  I  know  that  my  sensation  is  the  effect
— mediated  by  various  intervening  facts — of  a  change  in  the  object,  must
the  lightning  flash  from  cloud  to  cloud  before  I  see  it,  and  the  bell  be
struck  before  I  hear  it.

10.  But  as  against  this  view  it  is  just  as  obvious  that  I  can  only  discover
concrete  causal  connections  and  causal  laws  by  perceiving  that  A  regularly
precedes  B  ;  all  our  knowledge  of  causal  relations  in  the  real  world  may
be  ultimately  reduced  to  the  perception  of  temporally  connected  changes,
in  which  the  activity  of  the  cause  precedes  the  change  effected  in  the
object  upon  which  it  acts.  No  one  would  think  of  connecting  lightning
and  thunder  as  cause  and  effect  unless  it  were  a  regular  experience  for
lightning  to  precede  thunder ;  our  belief  in  the  simplest  as  in  the  most
complicated  causal  connections  depends  ultimately  upon  the  fact  that  an
objective  succession  of  A  and  B  was  established  before  we  could  gain  the
conviction  that  A  is  the  cause  of  B.  Thus  we  are  confronted  by  an  anti
nomy  :  before  we  can  establish  a  causal  connection,  a  rule  according  to
which  B  follows  A,  we  must  be  able  to  affirm  with  objective  validity  that


246  LOGIC

B  has  followed  A  ;  but  before  we  can  affirm  this  with  objective  validity
we  must  have  recognised  a  causal  connection  between  A  and  B.

ii.  How  can  we  escape  from  the  contradiction  ?  Where  shall  we  find
certain  principles  to  guide  us  in  establishing  objective  relations  ?  Perhaps
a  more  careful  examination  of  the  Kantian  view  may  throw  light  upon
the  question.

In  the  first  place,  Kant  evidently  goes  too  far  in  affirming  that  the  per
ception  of  a  manifold  is  always  successive,  and  that  accordingly,  in  so  far
as  it  is  a  question  merely  of  subjective  apprehension,  there  is  no  distinction
between  the  perception  of  the  co-existent  parts  of  an  object  and  the  per
ception  of  successive  events.  It  is  not  correct  to  say  that  the  perception
of  the  parts  of  a  house  is  successive  in  the  same  sense  as  the  perception  oi
the  different  positions  of  a  boat  gliding  down  the  stream.  No  spatial
apprehension  of  an  extended  object  would  be  conceivable  at  all  unless  a
manifold  of  distinguishable  parts  were  seen  in  the  strictest  sense  together;
even  if  we  should  limit  this  seeing  to  the  place  of  clearest  sight,  to  the
centre  of  the  field  of  vision,  even  here  a  surface  is  seen,  and  therefore  a
plurality  of  the  distinguishable  parts  of  this  surface  perceived  together.
Moreover,  as  even  in  the  less  central  parts  of  the  field  of  vision  movements
of  objects  easily  catch  the  attention,  we  may,  when  we  glance  over  the
particular  parts  of  a  house,  fixing  one  window  after  another,  be  quite
certain  in  our  judgment  that  the  whole  surface  is  at  rest;  those  parts
which,  by  the  movement  of  the  eye,  fall  to  the  side  of  the  field  of  vision,
do  not  vanish  from  perception,  and  succession  is  really  only  to  be  found  in
the  differences  of  clear  and  less  clear  vision,  which  we  are  led  by  the
motor  sensation  of  our  eye  to  refer  to  a  movement  on  our  part  and  not  to
a  change  of  the  object ;  more  accurately,  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  particular
acts  in  which  we  make  successive  judgments  about  parts  of  the  house
which  are  seen  simultaneously,  recognising  them  as  window,  door,  etc.
Thus  when  we  regard  an  object  at  rest  we  perceive  the  persisting  un
changing  position  of  its  parts,  and  our  subjective  consciousness  of  the
passage  of  time  finds  its  only  expression  in  the  judgment  that  the  object  of
our  perception  is  unchanging  and  persistent,  hence  that  it  affords  no
occasion  for  distinguishing  in  it  a  Before  or  After,  because  there  is  no
spatial  difference  between  the  later  and  earlier  content  of  perception.  But
it  is  different  when  a  change  in  the  position  of  the  parts  of  an  object  takes
place.  When — to  take  Kant's  example — we  see  a  boat  gliding  down  the
stream,  our  image  is  made  up  of  an  environment  at  rest  and  an  object


DETERMINATION  OF  TIME  247

moving  within  it ;  we  have  immediate  consciousness  of  the  continuous
succession  of  varying  positions  of  the  boat  in  the  total  image,  of  its  in
creasing  distance  from  one  object  and  increasing  approximation  to  others.
The  subsequent  perception  does  not  merely  differ  from  that  which  pre
cedes,  as  would  be  the  case  if  the  perception  were  of  another  object,  but
it  is  partly  the  same,  partly  different ;  and  for  this  reason  the  succession  is
now  apprehended  as  one  going  on  in  the  object  of  perception.  Kant's
proposition,  "  Every  apprehension  of  an  occurrence  is  a  perception  which
follows  upon  another,"  is  incorrect,  because  it  does  not  state  that  where  we
perceive  an  occurrence,  an  event,  a  change,  the  content  of  the  subsequent
perception  differs  from  that  of  the  preceding  in  the  spatial  configuration  or
in  the  quality  and  intensity  of  the  sensation  of  the  same  objects  ;  when  I
turn  myself  round  180°  in  a  landscape,  then  the  perception  of  the  west
horizon  follows  that  of  the  east,  but  I  apprehend  no  event  because  the
second  perception  is  entirely  new  and  shows  no  connection  with  the  first.
Kant  should  have  said  :  Every  apprehension  of  an  event  is  a  perception
which  follows  upon  another  partly  different  from,  partly  identical  with  it,
and  which  is  accompanied  by  the  consciousness  both  of  the  difference  and
of  the  identity.

Now  when  we  begin  to  refer  our  perceptions  in  general  to  an  externally
existing  object,  it  is  necessary  also  to  refer  the  succession  of  our  different
perceptions  to  a  successive  variation  in  the  object;  and  where  the  varia
tion  is  quite  continuous,  as  when  one  and  the  same  body  moves  through
the  field  of  vision,  then  we  are  also  perfectly  certain  of  the  objective
succession  in  the  sense  that  what  was  last  perceived  happened  last,  that
there  was  the  same  sequence  of  different  states  in  the  object  as  in  our  per
ception.  When  I  see  the  boat  glide  down  the  stream,  then  it  is  necessarily
involved  in  the  general  reference  of  my  perception  to  objects  that  I  should
assume  the  sequence  of  perceived  positions  to  be  the  sequence  of  actual
positions,  and  not  that  the  boat  should  in  reality  have  gone  up-stream,  I
having  perceived  its  first  position  last  and  its  last  first.  All  localization  in
objective  time-relations,  and  ultimately  in  space-relations  also,  depends
upon  this  assumption  ;  if  we  need  an  explicit  confirmation,  we  shall  find  it
in  the  harmony  between  the  succession  of  perceived  movement  in  our  limbs
and  the  succession  of  the  subjective  acts  of  will,  which  set  them  in  motion.

Absolute  necessity,  indeed,  cannot  be  demonstrated  for  this  assumption,
any  more  than  absolute  necessity  can  be  shown  for  referring  our  percep
tions  to  an  existent.  The  certainty  with  which  we  regard  perceived


248  LOGIC

motions  as  objectively  happening  in  the  same  sequence  depends  ultimately
upon  nothing  but  the  agreement  of  all  those  time-determinations, — which
we  gain,  e.g.,  through  the  different  senses — amongst  themselves  and  with
the  purely  subjective  apprehensions  of  time  ;  the  motion  of  my  arm  as
seen,  as  felt,  and  as  willed,  all  agree.

12.  If  we  develop  those  assumptions  by  help  of  the  view  that  our
subjective  sensations  are  the  effects  of  objects,  we  shall  find  that  the
assumption  as  to  their  manner  of  acting  is  so  defined  that  the  later  state
produces  its  subjective  effect  later  than  the  earlier  state  ;  and  inasmuch  as
the  concept  of  efficient  action  involves  in  its  genesis  temporal  continuity
between  the  activity  of  the  cause  and  the  production  of  the  effect,  this  is
also  necessarily  assumed  in  employing  the  concept  of  efficient  action.

Inasmuch  as  the  action  is  not  necessarily  immediate,  but  takes  place
through  media  and  transmission  by  the  nerves,  we  get  the  possibility  of
non-coincidence  between  the  particular  points  of  time  in  the  objective
motion  and  the  particular  points  of  time  in  the  perceived  motion ;  but
when  we  have  to  do  with  a  single  continuously  changing  object  the
sequence  of  successions  must  at  least  be  the  same.

From  this  point  of  view  it  is  manifest  that  an  objectively  valid  determi
nation  of  the  temporal  sequence  of  the  stages  a  b  c  d  in  the  continuous
change  of  an  object  is  possible  if  we  assume  that  the  order  of  my  percep
tions  corresponds  according  to  rule  with  the  order  of  changes  in  the  object ;
that  a  series  of  perceptions  abed  which  appears  to  me  in  this  order  can
not,  if  the  conditions  are  exactly  the  same,  appear  to  some  one  else  in  the
order  d  b  c  a  or  any  other.  But  these  rules  themselves  can  only  be
established  upon  our  original  assumption,  that  we  are  in  a  position  to  begin
by  perceiving  successions  with  objective  validity  from  which  we  may
derive  the  rules ;  the  movement  of  my  hand  before  my  eye,  and  my  seeing
it,  follow  each  other  immediately,  and  thus  the  presence  of  the  hand
appears  as  the  cause  of  the  seeing.

When,  by  comparison,  we  have  found  such  rules  according  to  which  the
time  of  the  perception  is  determined  by  the  time  of  the  event — e.g.  the
laws  of  the  velocity  of  transmission  of  sound  and  light — then  non-con
tinuous  changes  may  also  be  brought  into  an  objectively  valid  order,  the
time-relation  between  a  visible  phenomenon  and  the  sound  of  a  bell  may
be  determined,  and  all  perceived  events  brought  into  one  time-sequence.

In  establishing,  for  example,  the  velocity  of  the  transmission  of  sound
we  start  first  from  the  fact  that  the  hearing  of  the  sound  is  regarded  as  the


DETERMINATION  OF  TIME  249

effect  of  the  stroke  upon  the  bell,  and  this  because  of  the  immediate  and
invariably  recurring  continuity  of  the  events  when  I  observe  them  from  a
short  distance.  I  am  at  once  certain  of  the  immediate  succession  between
the  visible  perception  of  the  hammer  which  strikes  the  bell  and  the  sound,
and  it  is  upon  this  basis  only  that  I  can  establish  any  causal  connection  at
all ;  but  the  fact  that  the  sound  is  always  heard  at  a  greater  interval  after
the  movement  is  seen  as  I  move  farther  away,  enables  me  to  discover  that
the  action  upon  my  ear  depends  upon  the  distance  in  a  definite  relation,
while  I  never  come  across  a  similar  delay  in  perceptions  of  sight ;  and
thus  a  means  is  given  by  which  we  can  interpolate  the  blows  as  heard  into
the  series  of  sight  perceptions  with  objective  validity.

13.  Thus  it  is  not  in  that  perceptible  fact  which  precedes  an  external
event  that  we  must  find,  as  Kant  does,  "  the  condition  for  a  rule  according
to  which  this  event  follows  always  and  of  necessity";  it  is  in  the  pre
ceding  of  one  event  by  another  that  the  condition  lies  for  the  rule  that
the  apprehension  of  the  second  follows  the  first,  or,  to  put  it  more  generally
and  more  accurately,  the  temporal  relation  of  the  apprehensions  of  two
events  must  follow  from  the  temporal  relation  between  the  two  events  and
from  the  law  according  to  which  the  moment  of  their  perception  is  deter
mined  by  the  moment  of  their  occurrence.

The  corrections  by  means  of  which  we  reduce  the  subjective  time  of
perception  to  the  objective  time  of  the  event,  and  allow  for  discrepancies
between  individuals  in  the  time  of  perceptions,  do  not  therefore  directly
touch  the  causal  relations  of  perceived  events  amongst  themselves,  but
refer  to  the  laws  according  to  which  our  perceptions,  as  they  proceed  from
the  object,  are  determined  as  the  same  for  all  men,  or  as  differing  for
different  men.  If  one  man  is  placed  near  a  clock  and  another  near  a
cannon  3,000  feet  away,  and  the  cannon  is  fired  in  objective  simultaneity
with  the  first  stroke  of  the  clock,  then  the  first  man  will  hear  the  report
when  the  clock  strikes  for  the  fourth  time,  but  the  second  man  will  not
hear  the  first  stroke  of  the  clock  until  three  seconds  after  the  report;
neither  of  them  will  be  justified  in  regarding  the  sequence  of  his  percep
tions  as  the  sequence  in  the  object  until  he  knows  the  rule  according  to
which  sounds  from  different  distances  succeed  each  other  in  perception.
This  rule  as  to  the  sequence  of  the  event  and  its  perception  is  necessary  to
enable  us  to  reinstate  the  objective  event  from  its  subjective  discrepancies,
but  it  is  absolutely  unnecessary  that  there  should  be  any  rule  according  to
which  the  report  succeeds  the  stroke  of  the  clock,  or  vice  versa ;  otherwise


250  LOGIC

we  could  never  affirm  the  fortuitous  succession  in  time  of  two  independent
events.

In  the  same  way,  if  one  astronomical  observer  places  the  passage  of  a
star  through  the  indicator  at  one  second  later  than  another,  the  discrepancy
is  overcome  by  establishing  the  law  according  to  which  the  sequence  of
objective  events  is  reflected  in  the  consciousness  of  each ;  there  is,  how
ever,  no  causal  connection  between  the  passage  of  the  star  and  the  striking
of  the  second-clock.

We  cannot,  then,  believe  it  to  be  "  an  indispensable  law  of  the  empirical
idea  of  the  time-series  that  the  phenomena  of  past  time  determine  every
existence  in  subsequent  time."  We  maintain,  on  the  contrary,  that  the
empirical  idea  of  the  time-series  is  given  and  absolutely  certain  in  our  im
mediate  consciousness  of  inner  events,  that  the  sequence  of  our  conscious
states,  which  are  also  phenomena  of  the  inner  sense,  is  that  which  origin
ally  occupies  time,  and  with  reference  to  this  we  can  no  more  speak  of  a
distinction  between  a  merely  subjective  and  an  objective  sequence  than  we
can  of  a  rule  according  to  which  each  moment  of  consciousness  determines
the  following  moment.  From  this  basis  we  will  proceed  to  ask  what
objective  order  in  the  causes  of  our  inner  events  is  necessitated  by  the
laws  according  to  which  these  inner  events  are  produced  by  the  objects
of  external  intuition.

14.  This  immediate  certainty  could  only  be  confirmed  if  I  could
succeed  in  comprehending  into  one  causal  chain  all  the  events  in  the
universe,  in  regarding  every  moment  as  the  necessary  consequence  of  the
preceding  moment ;  if,  that  is,  I  were  not  limited  to  merely  tracing  out
different  parallel  series  of  independent  causal  connections,  such  as  the  move
ment  of  a  clock  and  the  course  of  a  fire  which  goes  on  quite  independently
of  the  clock,  but  could  see  a  complete  linking  together  of  all  things  by
virtue  of  which  the  present  total  state  of  the  universe  proceeds  from  that
immediately  preceding  by  a  reciprocal  determination  of  all  its  parts.  I
should  then  also  perceive  the  necessity  of  the  simultaneity  of  different
events  which  at  present  I  can  only  recognise  as  matter  of  fact.  But  be
fore  we  can  attain  to  such  knowledge  we  must  have  a  knowledge  of  the
sequence  of  isolated  concurrent  series,  and  this  is  based  upon  the  assump
tion  that  what  takes  place  objectively  in  continuous  succession  is  also
perceived  successively.  Indeed,  Kant  himself  points  out  that  we  merely
assume  that  every  event  has  its  place  in  time  assigned  to  it ;  the  assump
tion  in  no  way  helps  us  to  know  its  place  in  time.


DETERMINATION  OF  TIME  251

What  must  be  admitted  in  Kant's  view  is  this  :  If  an  objective  time-
determination  is  possible  only  under  assumptions  which  represent  the
sequence  of  subjective  perception  as  depending  according  to  law  upon  the
sequence  of  events,  then  these  assumptions  must  themselves  harmonize
with  those  causal  laws  of  phenomena  which  are  grounded  upon  them,  and
must  rank  merely  as  a  part  of  the  causal  laws  by  which  we  interpret  the
course  of  events  and  endeavour  to  know  them  as  necessary.  For  in  so
far  as  our  own  perception  must  be  regarded  as  merely  a  part  of  the  general
causal  connection  and  as  manifoldly  conditioned  by  it,  the  aim  of  our
investigation  is  to  represent  that  which  enters  into  our  perceptions  as  a
result  of  a  system  of  laws  (uniformity)  connecting  all  events ;  and  there  is
no  doubt  that  in  detail  the  particular  values  of  time-determinations  which
we  ground  upon  the  subjective  perception  of  inner  events  are  subject  to
subsequent  corrections,  although  the  basis  upon  which  we  rely  must  have
some  claim  to  objective  validity  before  we  can  even  try  to  establish  uni
versal  causal  laws  about  phenomena.

We  must  allow,  also,  that  so  far  as  we  fail  to  establish  absolutely  fixed
laws  as  to  the  time-relations  between  perceptions  and  events — and  small
subjective  deviations  take  place  with  the  most  practised  observers — -an
absolutely  certain  measure  is  impossible.

It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  difficulties  which  confront  us  in  subjectively
estimating  with  any  confidence  the  simultaneity  of  perceptions  lying  in
different  series  (e.g.  the  visible  perception  of  a  signal  and  the  audible  per
ception  of  a  sound,  etc.)  lead  to  the  construction  of  self-registering
apparatus,  in  which  the  two  series  of  events  leave  visible  marks  on  a
uniformly  moved  surface.  We  have  more  confidence  in  the  temporal
uniformity  of  the  causal  connections  in  the  apparatus  than  in  the  uniformity
of  the  effects  of  external  objects  upon  our  nervous  system  and  upon  our
consciousness.  Instead  of  having  to  compare  fleeting  moments  of  time  we
get  for  observation  stationary  spatial  objects  ;  and  the  task  of  determining
the  position  of  the  moment  at  which  one  perception  occurs  between  the
moments  at  which  other  perceptions  occur,  is  reduced  to  one  which  is
much  easier  and  can  be  carried  out  with  the  help  of  external  aids — that  of
establishing  the  position  of  one  spatial  point  between  others.  Similar
expedients  serve  to  determine  time-differences  which  lie  beyond  the  limits
of  our  powers  of  discrimination.

But  our  confidence  in  the  reliability  of  self-registering  apparatus  de
pends  ultimately  upon  our  confidence  in  the  objective  validity  of  mechanical


252  LOGIC

laws  ;  these  are  themselves  obtained  by  means  of  induction  from  percep
tion,  and  thus  each  particular  time-determination  indicates  a  background
of  premises  which  are  quite  general  in  their  application,  and  of  which  the
logical  character  must  be  more  completely  shown  in  the  theory  of  induc
tion.  These  premises  are  in  the  last  instance  hypotheses,  from  which  our
perceptions  follow  with  uniform  necessity.

15.  To  sum  up  the  result  of  this  investigation  :  all  time-determination
starts  first  from  the  assumption  that  the  objective  sequence  of  changes  in
objects  corresponds  to  the  subjective  sequence  of  those  changes  as  per
ceived.  This  assumption  continues  so  long  as  it  does  not  lead  to  contra
dictions  ;  where  it  leads  to  contradictions  it  is  not  immediately  abandoned,
but  further  assumptions  are  based  upon  it  concerning  the  time-relations
between  event  and  perception  by  which  these  are  connected  with  varying
conditions,  and  the  assumptions  are  continually  modified  until  all  the  data
agree.  Thus  the  whole  process  is  hypothetical ;  we  modify  our  original
and  unpremeditated  assumption,  and  find  a  guarantee  for  the  correctness
of  the  proceeding  neither  in  immediate  empirical  observation,  nor  in  an
a  priori  principle  (for  which,  in  the  generality  in  which  Kant  states  it,  we
should  have  no  rules  of  application),  but  in  the  agreement  of  all  the  con
sequences  which  follow  from  our  hypotheses.


The  problem  of  passing  from  the  subjective  localization  of  our  impres
sions  of  sight  and  touch  to  objectively  valid  judgments  about  the  POSITION,
FORM  and  MAGNITUDE  of  the  objects  found  in  space,  presupposes  first  an  idea
of  space  which  is  the  same  for  every  one,  and  a  uniform  principle  by  which
we  may  determine  the  relative  positions  of  the  perceived  limits  of  objects.

Uniformity  in  the  idea  of  space  is  guaranteed  by  the  nature  of  geo
metrical  definitions  and  axioms.  The  principle  of  localization  is  expressed
for  the  sense  of  touch  in  the  proposition  that  a  sensation  of  resistance
is  the  sign  of  contact  between  two  bodies,  of  the  partial  coincidence  of
their  limits ;  and  for  the  sense  of  sight  in  the  proposition  that  points  which
cover  each  other  lie  in  the  same  straight  line.  Both  propositions  rest  upon
assumptions  concerning  causal  relations  between  the  objects  and  our
sensation.

The  exact  statement  of  relative  positions  presupposes  a  uniform  measure
ment,  and  this  presupposes  as  standards  of  measurement  bodies  which
are  not  subject  to  variation.  But  because  the  assumption  that  there  are


POSITION  AND  MAGNITUDE  253

unvarying  bodies  is  refuted  by  its  consequences,  actual  measurement
gives  us  only  the  relations  between  variable  things,  and  objective  determi
nations  of  magnitude  in  space  can  only  be  attained  with  approximate
probability  on  the  ground  of  assumed  laws  as  to  the  changes  of  things.

The  predication  of  movement  as  change  of  place  in  an  objectively
valid  sense  presupposes  an  absolutely  fixed  space  to  which  changes  of
relative  positions  can  be  consistently  referred.  This  absolute  space  is  not
an  object  of  perception,  but  can  only  be  inferred  from  causal  laws  con
cerning  the  action  of  motive  forces.

These  causal  laws,  again,  depend  in  their  turn  upon  the  perception  of
relative  motion,  together  with  the  assumption  that  motive  forces  exert  the
same  action  whether  the  bodies  are  at  rest  or  in  motion.

Thus  every  judgment  concerning  the  position  or  magnitude  of  an  object
is  obtained  by  deduction  from  hypotheses,  and  these  can  only  be
presented  as  probable  because  of  the  agreement  of  their  consequences
with  the  propositions  of  geometry  and  with  the  subjective  sense-impressions;
they  can  never  be  strictly  proved.

i.  The  problem  of  describing  perceptible  objects  according  to  their
spatial  relations  in  objectively  valid  judgments,  and  of  stating  their  form,
magnitude,  and  position,  starts  from  similar  data,  and  finds  a  similar  solu
tion,  as  the  problem  of  time-determination.

The  localization  of  our  visual  images  and  impressions  of  touch,  which
proceeds  at  first  naturally  and  without  conscious  rules,  leads  to  the  idea  of
the  co-existence  of  corporeal  objects  of  different  form  and  magnitude
in  the  space  around  us.  The  spatial  image  which  every  one  gets  in  this  way
in  immediate  sense-conditioned  intuition  is  referred  to  a  single  centre,
the  position  of  his  own  body,  the  spatial  image  of  which  determines  both
the  localization  of  tactual  sensations  and  of  visual  impressions.  It  may  be
represented  as  a  system  of  polar  co-ordinates  having  its  origin  in  the
body ;  the  revolutions  of  the  body  and  of  the  eye  measure  the  angles
made  by  the  various  lines  of  direction,  and  the  length  of  the  rays  up  to
the  object  is  measured  for  the  sense  of  touch  by  motor-sensations  of  the
hand  in  grasping,  for  the  eye  by  a  series  of  indirect  means.  To  this
extent  every  one  has  his  own  spatial  world  of  perception,  and  the  first
question  is,  how  this  subjective  idea  of  space  can  be  elevated  to  one  which
is  common  to  all  and  valid  for  all,  in  such  a  way  that  spatial  apprehensions
may  agree,  and  there  may  arise  as  the  basis  of  our  judgments  a  space
which  is  common  to  every  one.


254  LOGIC

This  community  in  our  idea  of  space  results  partly  from  the  uniformity
of  the  geometrical  laws  according  to  which  localization  is  carried  out,  and
from  the  allied  uniformity  of  the  total  space-idea ;  partly  from  the  power
of  movement  of  the  particular  individual  which  enables  every  one  to  put
himself  in  another  person's  place  ;  and  partly  from  the  fact  that  every  one
is  perceptible  for  others  at  a  given  position  in  space,  and  that,  therefore,
his  space  intuition  as  it  is  from  his  point  of  view  can  be  constructed  by
others  from  their  knowledge  of  how  their  own  intuition  would  be  altered
if  they  were  in  his  place.

This  explains  why  the  space-idea  of  a  particular  person  disengages  itself
so  easily  from  the  place  where  he  may  happen  to  stand,  and  his  originally
merely  perspective  view  of  objects  in  space  reduces  itself  to  an  idea  of
the  distribution  of  objects  in  space  which  is  independent  of  his  particular
position — at  any  rate  so  far  as  it  is  possible  for  him  by  his  own  motion  to
combine  the  different  perspective  views  into  a  complete  image,  which,
though  never  as  such  the  object  of  sense-intuition,  is  yet  due  to  a  con
struction  which  combines  different  intuitions,  just  as  the  completed  form  of
a  building  is  obtained  from  ground-plan  and  elevation.

2.  But  that  of  which  we  get  this  uniform  idea  is  after  all  only  space
itself  as  continuous  extension  of  three  dimensions,  and  the  laws  prescribed
by  it  to  the  boundaries  of  the  bodies  which  fill  it  continuously  ;  whether
the  form,  magnitude  and  position  of  each  particular  perceptible  object  are
determined  in  exactly  the  same  way  by  every  one,  we  cannot  tell  from  mere
measurement  with  the  eye, however  small  the  differences  which  it  can
perceive may be under favourable circumstances. We must have
measurement  by  a  standard  which  is  the  same  for  every  one.

The  problems  of  measurement  are  in  all  essential  points  identical  for
the  determination  of  the  form  and  magnitude  of  particular  bodies  and
for  the  determination  of  the  position  in  which  they  stand  to  each  other;
in  all  cases  what  we  have  to  do  is  to  express  the  magnitudes  of  straight
lines  by  their  relation  to  a  fixed  standard,  and  the  magnitude  of  angles  by
their  relation  to  the  right  angle.  There  is  no  more  essential  difference
between  measuring  the  edge  of  a  cube  and  determining  the  distance
between  its  corner  and  that  of  another  cube,  than  there  is  between
measuring  the  angle  of  a  triangular  surface  of  one  and  the  same  body
and  measuring  the  angle  made  by  the  lines  drawn  from  the  corner  of  one
body  to  the  corners  of  two  others.

3.  The  fundamental  assumptions  upon  which  all  measurement  depends


POSITION  AND  MAGNITUDE  255

have  reference,  first,  to  the  question  how  the  position  of  any  body  may
be  determined  beyond  doubt ;  and  next  to  the  question  how  serviceable
standards  may  be  constructed.

As  to  the  first  point,  all  localization  presupposes  ultimately  that  felt
contact,  the  impression  of  resistance,  which  we  feel  by  direct  contact  of  a
solid  with  our  organs  of  touch  or  by  means  of  another  solid,  is  a  proof
of  the  spatial  contiguity  of  two  solids,  a  proof  of  the  coincidence  of  their
boundaries  in  space  at  the  point  of  contact.  It  is  obvious  how  closely
this  assumption  is  connected  with  the  principle  that  two  bodies  cannot
occupy  the  same  position  in  space ;  it  is  a  simple  consequence  of  this
principle  of  impenetrability.  Here  the  sense  of  touch  takes  precedence
over  that  of  sight.  Thus  all  measurement  depends  ultimately  upon  the
application  of  measures  to  the  object  to  be  measured  and  to  each  other  ;
and  it  is  the  sense  of  touch  which  primarily  decides  whether  an  applica
tion — i.e.,  spatial  contiguity — has  actually  taken  place.

4.  But  it  is  also  clear  that  only  relative  positions  can  be  determined
in  this  way ;  the  momentary  coincidence  of  the  boundaries  of  one  body
with  that  of  another  at  first  merely  establishes  a  relation  between  the  two.
If  this  determination  is  to  lead  to  an  absolute  statement  valid  for  all  space,
then  we  must  have  bodies  in  absolute  rest,  situated  at  a  fixed  distance  and
in  a  fixed  position,  to  which  we  may  refer  the  permanent  or changing
positions  of  all  other  bodies,  and  which  will  serve  as  the  starting  point  for
all  our  measurement.

It  does  not  at  first  sight  seem  difficult  to  satisfy  this  condition.  The
motionless  masses  of  the  surface  of  the  earth  upon  which  we  move  afford
a  fixed  system  of  points  in  the  mutual  position  of  which  we  perceive  no
change.  To  these  we  first  refer  in  all  our  determinations  of  position  in
the  sky  and  upon  the  earth  ;  the  fixed  axes  of  space  we  find  in  above  and
below,  west  and  east,  north  and  south,  and  so  long  as  any  one  system  of
points  is  agreed  upon  as  the  starting  point  it  seems  possible  to  have
absolute  determination  of  position  by  stating  the  position  of  any  point
with  reference  to  the  axes  determined  by  the  system.

5.  It  seems  easy  also  to  provide  standards  which  can  be  used. Solid
jodies  give  us  invariable  form  and  magnitude  ;  and  if  we  assume  that  points
vhich,  for  our  eye,  cover  each  other  are  in  a  straight  line — an  assumption
oy  which  localization  is  guided  from  the  very  first — we  can  get  straight
idges  for  our  measures,  as  well  as  straight  lines to  be  measured  by  them.
All  we  need  is  an  arbitrarily  chosen  normal  standard  by  the  application


256  LOGIC

of  which  we  may  measure  any  distance,  and  then  we  can  proceed  by  the
help  of  trigonometry  to  measure  all  our  angles.  It  is  from  this  funda
mental  measurement  of  the  straight  line  that  all  others  are  derived,  e.g.,
the  measurement  of  angles  by  the  parts  of  the  periphery  of  a  circle,  the
equality  of  which  is  determined  by  the  equality  of  their  chords.  However
great  the  technical  difficulties  may  be  in  dividing  a  measure  into  smaller
intervals,  the  periphery  of  a  circle  into  equal  arcs,  they  cannot  be  of  first-
rate  importance  so  long  as  our  assumptions  hold  good.

To  the  direct  measurements  of  distance  we  must  finally  add — again
assuming  that  we  can  know  when  a  line  is  straight — those  of  trigonometry,
which  are  based  upon  the  same  geometrical  propositions  by  which  we  are
guided  in  all  localization.

6.  If  we  disregard  for  the  present  the  uncertainty  in  accurate  measure
ment  of  lines  and  angles  due  to  the  limits  of  our  power  of  sense-discrimina
tion,  and  ask  merely  whether  in  this  way  we  get  objectively  valid  statements
about  the  dimension  and  position  of  objects,  then  it  is  obvious  that  if  the
results  of  our  measurement  are  to  be  objectively  valid,  the  presuppositions
referred  to  must  be  strictly  true.

The  first  presupposition,  that  sensation  of  resistance  signifies  contact,
cannot  be  shaken  without  putting  an  end  to  all  possibility  of  referring  our
sensations  to  real  objects;  nevertheless,  reflection  shows  us  that  we  are
here  dealing,  not  with  a  self-evident  axiom,  but  with  an  assumption  con
cerning  a  causal  relation  between  object  and  sensation,  and  concerning  the
particular  mode  of  action  of  the  cause  which  excites  the  sensation.  This
assumption  is  hypothetical,  for  physics  has  gone  so  far  as  to  dispute  the
possibility  of  actual  contact ;  and  its  hypothesis  that  one  body  is  prevented
from  penetrating  into  the  sphere  of  another  by  the  mere  force  of  repul
sion  without  contact  has  necessitated  the  distinction  between  a  merely
phenomenal  occupation  of  space  by  perceptible  matter  and  the  quite
different  real  places  of  efficient  subjects,  although,  indeed,  these  real  places
can  only  be  determined  on  the  ground  of  the  spatial  determinations  of
phenomenal  matter.  With  this  distinction,  then,  our  first  principle  can  be
maintained  as  a  presupposition  of  measurement ;  not,  however,  as  an
indisputable  axiom  concerning  that  which  really  is,  but  as  an  inevitable
assumption,  by  which  we  must  be  guided,  at  any  rate  at  first,  in  referring
our  sensations  to  things,  because  it  is  the  first  which  offers  itself.

7.  The  other  presuppositions,  on  the  contrary,  have  proved  not  merely
to  be  not  necessarily  valid,  but  because  of  the  contradictions  to  which


POSITION  AND  MAGNITUDE  257

they  led  amongst  themselves  or  with  geometrical  propositions,  to  be  als-o
untenable.

In  the  first  place,  there  is  no  possibility  of  obtaining  a  material  measure
which  shall  be  strictly  invariable.  In  a  greater  or  less  degree  change  of
temperature  affects  all  bodies  and  all  objects  of  measurement ;  and  if  we  try
to  nullify  this  change  by  reduction  to  a  normal  temperature,  we  are  con
fronted  by  similar  uncertainties  in  determining  the  normal  temperature ;
strictly  speaking,  we  have  always  to  deal  with  relations  between  magnitudes
which  vary  in  different  degree  according  to  different  laws.  It  is  only
by  presupposing  definite  laws,  inductively  obtained,  which  again  contain
the  assumption  that  under  the  same  circumstances  the  same  bodies  are
absolutely  the  same,  that  we  can  get  any  basis  from  which  to  work ;  and
this  basis  itself  ultimately  presupposes  the  assumption  that  the  movement
of  objects  in  space  involves  no  change  in  their  form  and  magnitude,  an
assumption  which  is  called  into  question  by  recent  speculations  concern
ing  the  nature  of  space,  in  order  to  illustrate  the  proposition  that  we  have
no  knowledge  with  reference  to  the  phenomenal,  but  mere  conjectures,
in  which  we  endeavour  to  guess  how  things  are  most  probably  con
stituted.

Moreover,  the  presupposition  upon  which  is  grounded  the  judgment
concerning  the  position  of  different  points  in  a  straight  line,  has  proved  to
be  incorrect ;  the  phenomena  of  refraction  affect  all  measurements  at  any
great  distance,  and  necessitate  corrections  which  rest  upon  inductively
gained  laws  concerning  the  motion  of  rays  of  light.  Here  again,  then,
the  objective  validity  of  space  determination  depends  upon  the  validity  of
inductively  obtained  laws  ;  only  geometrical  propositions  remain  un
shaken,  the  statement  that  three  perceived  points  form  a  triangle  having
sides  and  angles  of  a  certain  magnitude  can  never  be  proved  with
geometrical  strictness,  but  only  upon  the  ground  of  hypotheses.

8.  Finally,  our  whole  spatial  image  of  the  real  world  is  shaken  when
we  find  that  the  fixed  axes  of  space,  to  which  all  positions  are  to  be
referred,  are  nowhere  to  be  discovered.  For  we  find  no  objects  at  rest  to
serve  as  a  frame  within  which  to  insert  all  others.  If,  indeed,  all  we
wanted  was  to  determine  the  position  at  any  given  moment  of  particular
Doints  with  respect  to  each  other,  this  would  be  possible  if  we  knew  even
)ne  body  of  invariable  dimensions,  no  matter  whether  this  moved  with
•espect  to  the  others  or  not.  But  it  is  a  part  of  the  problem  of  localiza-
ion  to  construct  the  orbits  of  moving  things,  and  here  the  mere  relativity

s.  L. — ii.  s


258  LOGIC

of  empirical  space  determination  overwhelms  us  with  perplexities  when  we
have  to  make  an  objectively  valid  statement  as  to  the  orbit  and  direction
in  which  a  body  is  moving.

The  mathematical  conception  of  motion  presupposes  a  space  at  rest
and  absolutely  determined  by  a  number  of  fixed  points,  within  which  one
point  alters  its  position  continuously  with  respect  to  other  points.  If  this
concept  of  motion  is  to  be  applied  to  a  perceived  body,  then  we  need  in
the  same  way  a  system  of  perceptible  points  which  are  at  rest,  and  the
motion  of  the  body  will  be  described  by  determining  the  successive  points
of  its  orbit  by  means  of  their  position  with  respect  to  the  fixed  points.
It  is  thus  that  we  determine  the  line  in  which  bodies  fall  as  perpendicular
to  the  earth ;  and  it  is  in  this  sense  that  a  locomotive  running  on  straight
rails  moves  in  a  straight  line  in  relation  to  its  surroundings,  which  are
thought  of  as  at  rest.

But  when  the  points  which  we  took  to  be  at  rest  are  regarded  as  them
selves  moving  with  reference  to  others  now  taken  as  fixed,  then  the  predi
cates  of  the  motion  are  at  once  changed  by  the  reference  to  another  back
ground.  When  we  take  the  sun  as  a  fixed  point,  and  think  of  the  rotatory
movement  of  the  earth  with  reference  to  it,  then  the  path  of  the  falling
body  changes,  and  becomes  a  curve  ;  if  we  think  of  the  earth  as  moving
forward  in  space,  we  get  yet  another  orbit ;  if  we  think  of  the  sun  as
moving  amongst  fixed  constellations,  then  the  position  of  the  points
traversed  by  the  falling  body  changes  again  with  reference  to  the  space  of
the  fixed  stars.  But  the  system  of  fixed  stars  may  itself  move,  and  thus
there  really  remains  nothing  perceptible  which  we  can  regard  as  at  rest,
and  the  absolutely  fixed  space  which  we  seek  is  represented  by  no  visible
object ;  no  relation  can  be  discovered  between  it  and  the  spaces  of  per
ceived  things.  Who  shall  say  whether  the  heaven  and  the  earth  are  at
rest,  or  whether  they  move,  whether  their  motion  in  space  is  towards  north
or  south,  east  or  west  ?  It  might  seem  an  idle  question,  since  it  must  be
ultimately  a  matter  of  indifference  in  what  direction  everything  moves.
But  it  is  not  so ;  an  absolute,  fixed  space  is  the  one  condition  which  can
give  objective  validity  to  a  judgment  concerning  the  path,  direction,  and
velocity  of  the  motion  of  a  body,  in  the  sense  that  in  it  motion  is  ascribed
to  the  body  as  its  predicate,  and  not  merely  as  a  phenomenon  relatively
valid  for  me  under  subjective  assumptions ;  it  is,  moreover,  the  only
presupposition  which  makes  it  possible  to  establish  universal  laws  of
motion,  for  such  universal  laws  cannot  possibly  take  into  consideration  the


POSITION  AND  MAGNITUDE  259

constantly  changing  relative  positions of  all  bodies  in space  to  which
merely  relative  motion  must  be  referred.

Any  perceived  motion,  therefore,  authorizes  only  the  judgment  that
certain  points  change  their  position  with  reference  to  each  other,  not  the
judgment  that  one  of  them  is  moving  in  a  given  direction  ;  and  in  the
apparently  simplest  task  of  a  judgment  of  perception,  that  of  stating  the
magnitude  of  an  object,  its  position  in  space  and  the  direction  of  its
motion,  we  are  met  by  the  impossibility  of  obtaining  an  objectively  valid
result  by  a  directly  empirical  method.  In  measurement  we  must  start
with  standards  of  varying  magnitude,  and  we  can  only  approximately
determine  ideal  constant  magnitudes  from  those  which  are  variable  by
means  of  general  laws  concerning  change  of  volume.  Only  upon  the
ground  of  general  assumptions,  such  as  Galileo's  principle  of  inertia,  can  we
come  to  any  conclusion  in  our  spatial  determination  as  to  the  distribution
of  relative  motion  amongst  the  bodies  moving  towards  or  away  from  each
other;  and  from  amongst  a  confusion  of  perceived  relative  motions  we
must  obtain  the  fixed  axes  to  which  we  may  ultimately  refer  actual  and
absolute  motion.1  The  one  thing  which  gives  us  anchorage  in  the  dizzy

1  A  simple  example  may  make  this  clear.  When  a  stone  falls  to  the  earth,  the
principle  of  the  relativity  of  all  motion  tells  us  that  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  whether
we  think  of  the  earth  as  at  rest  and  the  stone  as  in  motion,  or  of  the  stone  as  at  rest  and
the  earth  in  motion  ;  the  result,  the  meeting  of  the  two,  is  the  same  in  either  case.  But
Newton's  Law  of  Gravity  rejects  this  arbitrary  way  of  looking  at  the  matter.  We  must
not  think  of  the  earth  as  traversing  the  whole  distance  to  the  stone,  but  of  both  as  mov
ing  towards  their  common  centre  of  gravity,  which  in  this  instance  lies  at  an  immeasur
ably  small  distance  from  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  earth  ;  so  that  the  whole  way,  except
an  immeasurably  small  portion,  must  be  travelled  by  the  stone,  to  which,  therefore,  the
motion  must  be  ascribed  as  predicate.  And  this  relation  remains  the  same  even  if  I
think  of  both  as  moving  ;  the  motion  otherwise  belonging  to  the  stone  must  always
change  in  proportion  to  its  distance  from  the  earth,  while  the  earth  itself  experiences
only  a  minimum  change.  It  is  the  same  in  the  motions  of  the  planetary  system.  From
the  point  of  view  of  relative  motion  I  can  think  of  the  centre  of  the  sun  as  at  rest,  and
determine  the  motions  of  the  planets  with  reference  to  it,  or  I  can  think  of  the  earth  as  at
rest,  and  make  the  sun  and  planets  describe  their  orbits  (which  will  now  indeed  be  more
complicated)  with  reference  to  it.  The  mere  perception  of  the  motions  does  not  decide
between  the  Copernican  and  Ptolemaic  systems  of  the  universe  ;  but  Newton's  principle
teaches  me  that  the  latter  is  absolutely  impossible,  and  that  even  the  former — the
assumption  that  the  sun  stands  still — is  not  exact,  in  so  far  as  mutual  attraction  involves
a  motion  of  the  sun  about  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system,  though  this
never  falls  outside  the  sun  ;  and  this  view  remains  consistent  when  we  think  again  of  the
whole  system  as  moving  within  the  universe  of  the  fixed  stars.  The  relative  motion  of
each  body  in  our  solar  system  with  respect  to  the  fixed  stars  must  be  analysed  into  that
which  is  due  to  forces  acting  within  the  solar  system,  and  that  which  is  due  to  other
causes.  Our  whole  understanding  of  the  laws  of  motion,  the  only  possibility  of  getting


260  LOGIC


chaos  of  endlessly  involved  relative  motions,  and  enables  us  to  carry  out  a
relative  localization,  is  the  assumption  that  moving  forces  in  their  effect
upon  material  masses  are  independent  of  the  motion  in  which  these  are
already  involved,  and  that  the  change  of  place  demanded  by  them  takes
place  in  direction  and  amount  indifferently,  whether  the  object  affected  is
at  rest  or  not ;  in  the  latter  case,  what  takes  place  is  the  combination  of
motions  called  for  by  the  parallelogram  of  the  forces.  But  this  assumption
also  is  no  self-evident  axiom,  and  has  lately  been  seriously  attacked  ;  if
the  attack  were  justified,  we  should  only  feel  more  pressingly  the  difficulty
of  saying  how  a  body  moves  in  absolute  space,  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  a
ground  upon  which  to  formulate  the  causal  laws.

9.  It  is  not  a  part  of  our  work  to  describe  all  the  technical  expedients
by  which  the  difficulties  of  exact  measurement  and  localization  are
diminished,  and  which  depend  upon  accurate  knowledge  of  causal  laws ;
all  we  have  to  do  here  is  to  point  out  the  methodological  principles
involved  in  transforming  judgments  of  perception,  concerning  the  position
of  visible  and  tangible  points,  into  objectively  valid  judgments.  Upon
examination  it  appears  that  the  processes  by  means  of  which  each  parti
cular  measurement  is  determined  are  always  in  their  nature  deductive.

The  problem  is  to  localize  particular  perceptions  in  the  spatial  system
already  geometrically  established,  and  the  localization  takes  place  by  the
help  of  general  assumptions  as  to  the  laws  of  motion  and  change  in  per
ceptible  objects — assumptions  which  do  not  possess  the  character  of
absolute  axiomatic  necessity,  but  are  guaranteed  only  by  the  fact  that  they
render  possible  a  localization  in  accord  with  geometrical  truths  and  with
itself.

On  the  other  hand,  the  establishment  of  the  causal  laws  themselves
depends,  as  in  temporal  sequence,  upon  the  preceding  localization  as  it
occurs  before  reflection  ;  this  is  not  overthrown,  but  remains  as  the  first
approximation,  and  calls  for  corrections  only  where  its  own  consequences
would  force  us  into  contradictions.  When,  therefore,  we  try  to  grasp  the
conditions  of  a  perfectly  valid  time  and  space  determination,  we  find  that
each  particular  case  must  be  woven  out  of  a  whole  network  of  deductions
from  general  propositions,  the  results  of  which  ultimately  agree  with  the

any  insight  into  the  confusion  of  relative  motions,  depends  upon  the  assumption  of  an
absolute  space ;  even  though  we  should  never  succeed  in  disentangling  the  empirical
data  in  such  a  way  as  to  know  what  it  is  which  we  must  regard  as  absolute  motion.  Cf.
C.  Neumann,  p.  15,  and  O.  Liebmann,  p.  96  sq.,  of  the  writings  quoted  on  p.  240.


ERRORS  JN  OBSERVATION  261

immediately  given,  with  the  simple  sensation  of  touch  or  sight,  in  so  far
as  it  is  apprehended  as  a  purely  subjective  phenomenon,  and  has  as  such
immediate  validity.

§  89.

Because  our  power  of  discrimination  by  the  senses  is  limited,  direct
measurement  leads  only  to  the  judgment  that  two  magnitudes  are  for  us
indistinguishable,  not  that  they  are  equal :  in  consequence  it  leads  always
to  rational  numbers.

For  the  same  reason  it  becomes  possible  that  repeated  measurements  of
the  same  object  will  yield  different  results,  and  the  problem  arises  of
deducing  from  these  the  true  magnitude.

This  problem  can  be  solved  only  with  probable  approximation  by
making  assumptions  about  the  mode  of  action  of  the  causes  giving  rise  to
the  errors,  by  developing  these  assumptions  deductively,  and  by  deter
mining  from  them  what  assumptions  as  to  the  true  magnitudes  will  lead
with  the  greatest  probability  to  the  values  found.

Thus  the  method  of  least  squares,  and  the  rule  of  taking  the  arithmetical
mean  of  the  values  found,  as  well  as  the  determination  of  the  probable
error  in  the  numbers  thus  obtained,  all  depend  upon  deduction  from
hypotheses.

i.  In  connection  with  the  limits  of  discrimination  allowed  by  our
sensations  there  arises  a  series  of  questions.

All  measurement  in  time  and  space  comes  ultimately  to  this  :  that  we
have  to  decide  as  to  the  temporal  coincidence  of  sensations  or  as  to  the
spatial  equality  of  objects,  i.e.  as  to  the  coincidence  of  their  limits  ;  but
sooner  or  later  all  the  differences  of  magnitude  reach  a  limit,  beyond  which
they  make  no  further  impression  upon  us.  And  this  difficulty  is  seriously
increased  where  the  limits  of  the  object  to  be  measured  are  themselves
affected  by  this  imperceptibility,  for  it  holds  also  for  the  differences  of
intensities  and  qualities  by  which  we  recognise  the  limits  of  objects.  The
boundaries  of  the  zodiacal  light,  the  boundaries  of  the  spectrum,  the
boundaries  of  a  half-shade,  cannot  be  determined  with  certainty,  because
the  differences  of  illumination  between  the  outermost  parts  of  the  object
and  its  surroundings  are  too  weak  to  be  perceptible,  and  are  caused  by
the  varying  disposition  of  the  eye  to  appear  wavering.  But  even  in  the
most  favourable  instance,  where  we  have  to  do  with  the  measurement  of
a  sharply  defined  object,  it  is  impossible  to  establish  absolute  equality


262  LOGIC

because  we  cannot  distinguish  between  it  and  a  minimum  difference  in
magnitude.

Here,  again,  we  abstain  from  speaking  of  the  technical  expedients  by
means  of  which  the  relations  most  favourable  for  perception  may  be
brought  about,  the  inaccuracy  of  observation  reduced  to  a  minimum,  and
differences  which  are  imperceptible  directly  made  perceptible  by  skilful
multiplications  ; 1  they  all  depend  in  part  upon  mathematical  propositions,
in  part  upon  causal  laws.  We  are  concerned  only  with  the  general
methods  by  which  we  attain  to  judgments  concerning  relations  of  magni
tude,  and  with  the  logical  character  of  these.  And  here  it  is  at  once
obvious  that  directly  we  cannot  get  beyond  the  statement  that  two  magni
tudes  are  undistinguishable  for  us  we  cannot  say  that  they  are  equal ;  and
if  we  wished  to  be  accurate,  we  should  have  to  confine  them  within  limits,
between  which  they  would  lie,  and  beyond  which  the  one  magnitude  could
be  definitely  known  as  larger  and  the  other  as  smaller.

2.  It  follows,  in  the  first  place,  that  in  measuring  we  always  obtain
rational  numbers,  although actually  magnitudes  would  be  incomparably
oftener  incommensurable  with  our  units  of  measurement  than  commensur
able.

3.  The  second  consequence  is, that  different measurements  of  the
same  object  by  the  same  observer,  or  by  different  observers,  may  give
different  values ; and  the  question now arises  as  to  what is the  true
magnitude of  the  object, what  is the  amount  of  the  error  which  has
occurred  in  the  different  measurements. Here  we  stand  before  a  problem
which  is,  strictly  speaking,  insoluble,  unless  some  definite  ground  can  be
found  which  will  explain  the  contradiction  between  the  results  ;  such  is
the  case,  for  example,  when  we  recognise  the  variation of  the  standard
with  the  temperature  as  the  ground  of  different  results,  and  are  able  by
consideration  of  such  circumstances  to  reduce  the  result  of  one  measure
ment  to  that  of  another  and  to reconcile  them. In  addition  to  these
differences  which  admit  of  definite  correction,  there  are  others  which  are
purely  errors  of  observation,  and  which  indicate  partly  a  varying  relation
between  the  object  and  our  physical  functions,  partly  unknown  sources  of
deviation  in  the  instruments  used  for  measurement,  and  the  way  in  which
they  are  used,  or  errors  in  the  assumptions  which  we  make  in  all  indirect
measurements  when  it  is  not  the  object  itself,  but  a  magnitude  varying  in

1  Cf.  with  this  Jevons,  Principles  of  Science,  I,  p.  313  sq.


ERRORS  IN  OBSERVATION  263

a  definite  relation  to  it,  which  is  measured.  If  we  can  discover  no  ground
which  will  explain  the  discrepancy  in  the  values  found  by  measurement,
then  all  we  know  is  either  that  one  value  is  correct  and  all  the  others
false,  or  that  all  are  without  exception  false ;  but  which  value  is  the  correct
one,  or  where  between  all  the  incorrect  values  the  undiscovered  true  value
lies,  seems  to  be  a  question  to  which  there  can  be  no  answer.

4.  Suppose  the  simplest  instance,  that  two  measurements  of  the  same
straight  line  have  given  two  different  values — say  100  and  101 — and  that
we  are  not  in  a  position  to  discover  a  ground  for  the  discrepancy  ;  so  far,
nothing  is  proved  but  that  our  measurement  is  unreliable.  Both  values
cannot  hold  good  ;  and  when  we  enumerate  the  possibilities  all  we  can
say  is  :  either  both  are  too  small,  or  both  are  too  large,  or  the  true  value
lies  between  100  and  101  (thus  including  as  limiting  case  the  case  in
which  it  coincides  with  one  of  the  two  numbers),  but  for  none  of  these
possibilities  is  there  any  preponderating  ground.  The  statement  that  we
must  at  once  conclude  that  the  desired  value  lies  between  100  and  101  is
completely  without  ground ;  on  the  contrary,  if  we  make  no  further
assumptions,  it  is  just  as  probable  that  there  is  some  tendency  in  the
relations  between  the  objects  and  our  senses  and  in  our  methods  of
measurement  to  magnify  the  result,  and  that  this  tendency  has  merely
acted  more  powerfully  in  the  second  case  (101)  than  in  the  first,  or  that
there  is  a  tendency  to  diminish,  which  has  reduced  an  objectively  greater
amount  in  the  one  case  to  101,  in  the  other  to  100.  The  assumption  that
the  truth  lies  between  the  two  is  only  preferable  when  we  can  argue  from
the  way  in  which  the  measurement  itself  has  been  carried  out  that  some
compensation  takes  place ;  as,  for  example,  when  an  angle  has  been
measured  first  upon  one  side  of  a  moving  and  divided  circle,  and  then
upon  the  opposite  side,  in  which  case  we  assume  that  the  point  round
which  the  circle  revolves  does  not  lie  exactly  in  the  centre ;  or  when  a
weight  has  been  tested  first  upon  one  side  of  the  balance  and  then  upon
the  other,  in  which  case  the  discrepancy  is  explained  by  an  inequality  in
the  beam.  If  no  such  explanations  present  themselves,  then  there  is  so
far  no  ground  for  estimating  the  possibility  that  both  values  are  too  large,
or  both  too  small,  as  less  than  the  possibility  that  they  represent  errors  in
opposite  directions.

The  same  thing  recurs  when  we  have  a  large  number  of  measurements  ;
there  are  plenty  of  instances  in  which  it  has  finally  appeared  that  all  were
incorrect  in  one  or  the  other  direction,  and  we  shall  find  a  ground  for


264  LOGIC

supposing  this  to  be  the  case,  more  especially  when  constantly  repeated
measurements  yield  a  series  of  values  all  varying  in  one  direction.1

On  the  other  hand,  even  where  one  method  of  measurement  results  in
considerably  larger,  and  another  in  considerably  smaller  values,  nothing  is
established ;  the  difference  may  just  as  well  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the
one  is  more  accurate  than  the  other,  although  the  easiest  assumption  may
be  that  the  larger  values  indicate  a  too  much  and  the  smaller  a  too  little,
the  true  value  lying  within  the  limits  of  those  obtained.

General  considerations  of  this  kind  therefore  merely  show  the  necessity
of  investigating  whether  any  inferences  may  be  drawn  from  the  grouping
of  the  numbers.  Only  when  it  is  presupposed  that  the  same  methods
are  employed  and  that  numbers  obtained  by  them  vary  unaccountably,  or
when  there  is  absolutely  no  ground  for  regarding  the  results  of  one  method
as  more  accurate  than  those  of  others,  are  we  justified  in  making  certain
assumptions  as  the  basis  for  the  calculation  of  the  probability  of  a  given
magnitude  as  the  true  value.

5.  The  first  of  these  assumptions  is,  that  it  is  in  itself  equally  possible
for  a  measurement  to  yield  too  small  a  value,  as  for  it  to  yield  too  large  a
value  ;  hence  that  in  any  particular  case  the  probability  of  a  positive  and
that  of  a  negative  error  are  equally  great.  (The  probability  of  an
absolutely  accurate  measurement,  which  represents  only  one  case  amongst
infinitely  many,  is  so  small  that  it  may  be  left  out  of  consideration.)

This  assumption  places  us  in  the  same  position  in  measurement  as  in
the  throwing  of  a  coin,  where  we  are  equally  likely  to  get  heads  or  tails.
If  we  consider  what  we  may  expect  from  two  measurements  which  we
are  going  to  make,  then  in —

(i)  the  value  found  will  be  too  large  or  too  small,  and  in  (2)  also  the
value  found  will  be  too  large  or  too  small.  Because  the  two  instances  are
independent  of  each  other,  the  combination  of  these  disjunctions  will  give
a  four-fold  disjunction  :  either  the  first  value  is  too  large  and  the  second
too  large,  or  the  first  is  too  large  and  the  second  too  small ;  or  the  first  is
too  small  and  the  second  too  large,  or  the  first  is  too  small  and  the  second
too  small.

The  probability  that  both  will  be  found  too  large  or  both  too  small  is
therefore  never  more  than  \ ;  while  the  probability  that  the  one  will  be
too  large  and  the  other  too  small  is  \.

In  the  same  way  if  we  make  three  observations,  the  probability  that  the
1  This  is  the  case,  e.g..  in  determining  the  diameter  of  the  fixed  stars.


ERRORS  IN  OBSERVATION  265

values  will  be  all  too  large  or  all  too  small  will  never  be  more  than  £• ;  on
the  other  hand,  the  probability  that  the  true  value  lies  between  the  extremes
of  the  observations  will  be  f .  With  the  number  of  measurements,  there
fore,  the  probability  increases  that  they  do  not  all  err  on  the  same  side.

6.  Where  we  get  more  than  two  results  another  point  has  to  be  taken
into  consideration.  In  estimating  the  probability  of  three  measurements
in  accordance  with  our  first  presupposition,  we  find  that  it  is  -g  for  the
case  that  two  measurements  are  too  small  and  one  too  great,  and  -f
for  the  case  that  two  are  too  great  and  one  too  small.  But  if  we  suppose
the  numbers  obtained  to  be  115,  in,  no,  we  shall  not  estimate  the
probability  that  two  are  too  large  and  one  too  small  (hence  that  the  real
value  lies  between  in  and  no)  as  equal  to  the  probability  that  two  are
too  small  and  one  too  large  (hence  that  the  value  falls  between  in  and
115).  Our  ground  for  this  will  be  a  second  assumption,  the  assumption
that  smaller  errors  are  more  probable  than  larger,  and  that  conversely  that
magnitude  will  most  probably  be  the  true  one  which  presupposes  the
smallest  error.

If,  for  the  present,  we  leave  the  attempt  to  determine  the  degree
according  to  which  the  probability  of  an  error  diminishes  as  it  increases
in  magnitude,  then  we  shall  find  that  the  general  assumption  that  larger
errors  have  less  probability  leads  first  to  the  following  results. —

Where  a  measurement  yields  two  values,  a  and  b,  a  being  greater  than
b,  all  that  we  can  infer  from  this  is,  that  the  value  sought  for,  x,  will  be
between  a  and  b.  For  if  it  lies  between  a  and  b,  then  whatever  we  may
assume  it  to  be,  the  sum  of  the  errors  is  (a  —  ;tr)  +  (x  —  b}  —  a  —  b ;
but  if  it  were  larger  than  a  by  n,  or  smaller  than  b  by  n,  the  sum  of  the
errors  would  be  in  +  (a  —  b} ;  and  this,  according  to  our  assumption,  is
less  probable.  On  the  other  hand,  it  remains  from  this  point  of  view
absolutely  undetermined  whether  x  =  a,  or  x  =  b,  or  whether  x  lies
somewhere  between  a  and  b ;  for  the  greater  probability  of  the  smaller
error  on  the  one  side  will  always  be  compensated  by  the  smaller  proba
bility  of  the  greater  error  on  the  other  side.  There  is  nothing  to  deter
mine  which  is  the  more  probable,  the  assumption  that  the  two  errors  are
equal,  hence  that  x  lies  midway  between  a  and  b,  each  error  being
\(a  —  b\  or  the  assumption  that  x  =  a,  where,  though  the  larger  error  in
b  is  less  probable,  the  disappearance  of  error  from  a  is  proportionately
more  probable.

If  we  had  obtained  three  results,  a,  b,  c,  then,  according  to  our  assump-


266  LOGIC

tions,  it  would  be  most  probable  that  x  corresponded  exactly  to  the
middle  value  b,  wherever  it  might  lie  between  a  and  c;  for  wherever  we
place  it  between  a  and  c,  the  sum  of  the  deviations  from  a  and  c  will
remain  the  same,  while,  by  assuming  x  to  coincide  with  b,  we  reduce  the
third  error  x  —  b  to  o.

In  the  same  way,  where  we  have  four  observations,  we  must  assume  the
desired  value  to  lie  between  the  two  middle  values,  although  we  shall  not
be  able  to  assign  any  definite  position  as  the  most  probable ;  with  five
observations  we  must  equate  it  to  the  middle  value.1

7.  But  since  both  universal  practice  and  theory  have  decided  that  in
such  cases  it  is  the  arithmetical  mean  of  all  the  observations  which  is  the
most  probable  measure  of  the  magnitude,  there  must  be  further  con
siderations  determining  the  relation  between  the  probability  of  larger
errors  and  the  probability  of  smaller  errors  in  such  a  way  that  the  former
diminishes  much  more  rapidly  than  the  numbers  expressing  the  errors
increase.  For  without  some  such  assumption,  if  we  have  three  values
15,  n,  10,  that  which  yields  the  smallest  sum  of  errors  will  be  n.  For:

15  —  11=4,  ii  — 11=0,  ii  — 10  =  1,

where  the  sum  of  the  errors  =  5;  while,  if  we  take  the  arithmetical  mean

15  +  11  +  10  t,

—  =  12,  then

3

15—12  =  3, 12  —  11  =  1, 12  — IO  =  2,

where  the  sum  =  6.

In  the  same  way,  with  the  5  values  15,  n,  9,  8,  7,  the  middle  number
9  would  give  the  sum  of  the  errors  ii,  while  the  arithmetical  mean

15  +  11  +  9  +  8  +  7  .  , .

-  =10,  would  give  12.

The  rule  that  we  must  take  the  arithmetical  mean  cannot  therefore  be
derived  simply  from  the  desire  to  select  that  value  which  involves  the
smallest  sum  of  inevitable  errors  in  the  observations ;  there  must  be
further  considerations  which  make  a  few  large  errors  less  probable  than  a
larger  number  of  small  errors.

1  If  we  have  4  values  a,  b,  c,  d  of  decreasing  magnitude,  then,  wherever  we  may
insert  x  between  a  and  d,  the  sum  of  the  errors  a— x,  x—d  is  the  same  ;  but  if  we
insert  x  between  a  and  b,  or  between  c  and  d,  say  by  n  larger  than  b  or  by  «  smaller
than  c,  then  the  sum  of  the  errors  x— b  and  x—c,  or  of  b— x  and  c— x,  will  be  equal
to  2n  +  b— c,  that  is,  greater  by  2n  than  if  it  lay  between  b  and  c,  and  had  for  the  sum  of
its  errors  only  b — c.  Where  we  have  5  values  a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  we  get  in  the  same  way  the
minimum  error  a—e  +  b—a  by  taking  the  middle  value  c.


ERRORS  IN  OBSERVATION  267

8.  These  considerations  are  derived  in  the  first  place  from  the  assump
tion  that  every  given  deviation  is  the  result  of  an  indefinite  number  of  par
ticular  causes,  of  which  each  one  may  in  itself  be  the  ground  of  a  deviation
in  either  direction ;  from  this  it  follows  that  the  probability  of  all  factors
working  together  in  the  same  direction,  and  thus  yielding  the  maximum  ot
error,  is  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  probability  of  combinations  in
which  the  tendencies  to  error  compensate  each  other  in  part  or  entirely.

We  may  take  as  the  simplest  case  two  causes,  A  and  B,  which  are  as
likely  to  give  rise  to  a  deviation  in  one  direction  as  in  the  other,  and
which  take  effect  in  every  measurement,1  causing  the  value  found  to  be
always  one  too  small  or  too  large.  Here  four  cases  will  be  possible  :

A  +  i,  B+i,  error -f  2  ;  A+  i,  B—  i,  error  o  ;  A  —  i,  B+  i,  error  o  ;
A— i,  B—  i,  error— 2.

Thus  the  probability  that  the  errors  will  compensate  each  other  is  £,
the  probability  that  the  value  found  will  be  too  large  or  too  small  \.  With
repeated  measurements,  therefore,  we  may  expect  that  half  the  results
will  be  correct,  one-fourth  of  them  too  large,  and  one-fourth  too  small ;
then  the  arithmetical  mean  of  all  the  observations  will  also  give  the  true
value.

If  we  assume  6  causes,  each  of  which  takes  effect  in  every  measure
ment,  and  is  as  likely  to  cause  the  found  value  to  be  one  unit  too  small,
as  too  large,  then  all  6  causes  may  take  effect  in  the  same  direction,  either
positive  or  negative,  and  thus  give  rise  to  the  errors  +  6  or  —  6.  Or  they
may  act  5  as  positive,  i  as  negative,  or  vice  versa,  giving  rise  to  the
errors  +  4  and  —  4 ;  or  4  positive,  2  negative,  or  the  reverse,  the  errors
being  +  2  or  —  2  ;  or  finally,  there  may  be  3  positive,  3  negative,  where  the
errors  compensate  each  other,  and  we  get  the  right  result.

If  we  develop  the  number  of  combinations  in  which  these  cases  occur,
we  get :

1  The  result  is  the  same  if  we  modify  the  assumption,  and  assume  two  causes  A  and
B  such  that  A  increases  the  result  by  I,  and  B  diminishes  it  by  I,  assuming  also  that  A
and  B  are  as  likely  to  act  as  not ;  then  we  have

A  either  increases  the  result,  or  does  not  act ;

B  either  diminishes  the  result,  or  does  not  act.
From  this  we  get  the  4  instances  :

A  increases  the  result,  B  does  not  act,  error  + 1.

A  increases  the  result,  B  diminishes  it,  error  o.

A  does  not  act,  B  does  not  act,  error  o.

A  does  not  act,  B  diminishes  the  result,  error  — I.

The  difference  lies  merely  in  the  arbitrarily  assumed  amount  of  the  error.


268  LOGIC

i  combination  yielding  the  error  +  6 ;  6  combinations  yielding  the
error +  4;  15  combinations  yielding  the  error+2;  20  combinations  yield
ing  the  error  o;  15  combinations  yielding  the  error— 2;  6  combinations
yielding  the  error  —  4  ;  i  combination  yielding  the  error  —6.

Thus  in  every  64  observations  we  may  expect  to  find  20  correct,  15
which  give  a  result  too  large  by  2,  15  in  which  it  is  too  small  by  2,  6  in
which  it  is  too  large  by  4,  6  in  which  it  is  too  small  by  4,  finally,  only  one
in  which  it  is  too  large  by  6  and  one  in  which  it  is  too  small  by  6.  Here
again  the  arithmetical  mean  of  these  64  cases  would  give  exactly  the
right  value.

In  proportion  as  we  assume  the  causes  to  be  more  and  the  amounts  of
their  action  smaller,  it  becomes  obvious  that  comparatively  small  devia
tions  are  very  probable,  and  if  we  add  together  positive  and  negative  devia
tions,  even  more  probable  than  the  right  result  (for  in  the  example  given
above  30  cases  give  a  result  which  differs  by  2  from  the  true  value,  and
only  20  give  the  right  result)  ;  extreme  cases,  on  the  other  hand,  diminish
in  number  very  rapidly,  and  the  probability  that  all  6  cases  will  take  effect
in  the  same  direction  is  only  -^.

When  we  examine  the  number  of  combinations  for  the  different  errors
which  result  from  assuming  different  numbers  of  causes,  we  see  at  once
that  they  are  expressed  by  the  binomial  co-efficients  of  the  powers,  of
which  the  exponent  is  the  number  of  causes.

9.  These  considerations  are  enough  to  show  why,  if  we  take  first  two
observations,  the  arithmetical  mean  is  the  most  probable  value  of  the
magnitudes  measured.  Let  there  be  two  observations,  of  which  the  differ
ence  is  4.  Other  things  being  equal,  both  may  yield  a  value  too  large  or
both  a  value  too  small ;  one  may  be  right,  and  only  the  other  false ;
finally,  the  one  value  may  be  too  large,  the  other  too  small.

Assuming  as  above  6  sources  of  error,  each  of  which  falsifies  the  result
by  i,  it  is  possible  that  :

(1)  One  observation  represents  the  error  +  6,  the  other  the  error  +  2.

(2)  One  observation  represents  the  error— 2,  the  other  the  error  — 6.

(3)  One  observation  represents  the  error  +  4,  the  other  the  error  o.

(4)  One  observation  represents  the  error  o,  the  other  the  error  — 4.

(5)  One  observation  represents  the  error+2,  the  other  the  error  — 2.

If  we  calculate  the  probabilities  on  the  basis  of  the  above  assumptions,
we  obtain  first  the  total  probability  that  a  difference  of  4  will  occur  in  two


ERRORS  IN  OBSERVATION  269

observations  to  be  ^Vro  > l  ^is  will  be  distributed  in  such  a  way  that  the
comparative  probabilities  of  the  5  previous  cases  will  be  expressed  by  the
following  numbers  : —

1.  Case  ( +  6  and  +  2)  by  the  fraction  —.

2.  „ (-2  and -6) „  „ |£

3.  „ ( +  4  and  o)  „  „ H°

642

4.  ,, (o  and  -4)  „  „ *4°.

5.  „ (  +  2  and -2) „  „ 45.0

64^

The  probability  that  the  true  value  is  represented  by  the  arithmetical
mean  of  the  two  observations  is  therefore  greater  than  that  of  any  given
one  of  the  other  values  ;  although  it  follows  from  the  same  numbers  that
if  this  mean  is  accepted  as  the  true  value,  the  probability  is  in  favour  of  its
being  erroneous,  since  the  other  possibilities  taken  all  together  have  a
probability  of  f^g,  as  against  ff §  for  the  arithmetical  mean.

This  explains  the  further  necessity  of  stating  the  probable  error  of  such
a  mean  ;  it  is  done  by  determining  the  limits  within  which  the  value  in
question  will  lie  with  a  probability  of  at  least  |.  From  the  previous
examples — which  must  deal  with  whole  numbers — it  follows  that  there  is
a  preponderating  probability  that  the  true  value  will  not  differ  from  that
determined  by  the  mean  by  more  than  4,  that  it  will  therefore  lie  between
the  mean ±4;  for  the  probability  that  it  lies  beyond  these  limits  is

1  The  proportional  probability  that  two  observations  will  give  the  various  possible
differences,  12,  10,  8,  6,  4,  2,  o,  is  represented  by  the  following  numbers  (the  numerators
of  fractions,  of  which  the  common  denominator  is  64*)  :

For  the  difference  12  ......  2

,, 10 24

8 132

6 440

4 990

2 1584

o 924

This  is  another  proof  that  not  only  the  smallest  possible  difference  of  2  units,  but  even
the  next  greatest  of  4  units,  would  be  more  probable  to  occur  than  would  the  agreement
of  both  measurements  in  any  result,  whether  correct  or  incorrect  ;  while  the  probability
that  both  measurements  will  agree  in  the  right  result  is  represented  only  by  the  fraction
400
64*'


27.o  LOGIC

expressed  by  the  fraction  g^°5,  the  probability  that  it  does  not  lie  beyond
them  by  the  fraction  — —  |-|C+2'''0  or  ff  £.  If  we  assumed  a  larger  num
ber  of  causes  to  calculate  from,  we  could  determine  still  more  exactly
how  great  the  deviation  from  the  found  mean  is,  for  which  the  probability
that  the  true  value  falls  within  its  limits  equals  the  probability  that  it  falls
outside.

Similar  considerations  would  show  that  for  a  larger  number  of  observa
tions  also  it  is  the  arithmetical  mean  which  has  the  greatest  probability.1

10.  In  the  mathematical  treatment  of  this  subject  the  arbitrary  assump
tion  of  a  given  number  of  causes  affecting  the  measurement  to  a  given
amount  is  avoided  by  basing  the  calculation  upon  an  infinite  number  of
causes,  which  take  effect  in  infinitely  small  amounts ;  in  this  way  errors  of
any  value  whatever  can  be  explained,  while  on  the  previous  assumptions
there  would  be  intervals  in  their  values.  In  this  way  we  get  a  proportion
of  the  probable  frequency  of  errors  of  different  degrees  of  magnitude,  to
which  the  proportion  of  their  frequency  (on  the  assumption  of  a  finite
number  of  sources  of  error)  which  is  expressed  by  the  binomial  co-effi
cients  approximates  as  the  number  taken  increases.2  At  the  same  time  a

1  For  3  observations  of  which  the  differences  are  2  and  2  we  get,  under  the  above
conditions,  as  numbers  for  the  ratio  of  probability,  that  they  represent  :

1.  The  errors +6,  +4,  +2 I

2.  The  errors  +  4,  +  2,  o  . . . . .20

3.  The  errors  +2,  o,  —2  . . . . -5°

4.  The  errors  o,  —  2,  — 4  . . . . .20

5.  The  errors  — 2,  — 4,  — 6  ..... I

Thus  the  arithmetical  mean  of  3  numbers  has  already  a  much  greater  preponderance  of
probability  than  that  of  2  ;  and  in  the  same  proportion  this  probability  increases  with
the  increase  in  the  number  of  observations.

2  This  law  of  errors,  as  it  is  somewhat  hyperbolically  called,  may  be  represented  to
intuition  by  a  curve. First  the  increasing  magnitudes  of  the  errors  are  brought  to  view
by  marking  on  a  horizontal  line,  right  and  left  of  a  point  corresponding  to  error  o,  equal
intervals,  which  represent  equal  amounts  of  increase  in  positive  and  negative  errors  ;  by
taking  this  line  as  the  axis  of  the  abscissae  and  erecting  at  the  beginnings  and  ends  of  the
intervals  ordinates  of  which  the  magnitude  measures  the  probability  of  the  errors  repre
sented  by  the  abscissas,  and  connecting  the  ends  of  these  ordinates,  we  get  a  curve  of  the
figure  of  a  bell  ;  its  highest  point  lies  upon  the  ordinate  which  stands  on  the  error  0 ;
thence  it  falls,  at  first  slowly,  then  more  rapidly,  so  as  to  approximate  to  the  axis  of  the
abscissae  at the  point  where  the  greater  and  less  probable  errors  begin,  finally  following
the  axis  with  reversed  curvature  as  its  asymptote. This  is  involved  in  the  mathematical
formula,  which  will  not  regard  any  error,  however  great,  as  absolutely  impossible,  and
cannot  therefore  allow  the  ordinates  as  the  expression  of  the  probability  of  the  errors  to
fall  to  o.

This  is  enough  to  show  that  we  ought  not  to  speak  of  a  law,  but  of  a  mathematical
construction,  embodying  conditions  which  cannot  be  found  in  reality,  but  which  form  an


CONTINUOUS CHANGES  271

general  proposition  has  been  demonstrated  which  applies  also  to  those
cases  in  which  the  errors  do  not  simply  consist  in  a  too  much  or  too  little,
and  are  therefore  not  related  to  each  other  as  the  distance  of  different
points  in  a  line  from  one  given  point,  but  deviate  from  the  true  value  in
different  directions  (as  shots  upon  a  target,  e.g.,  deviate  from  the  centre) ;
the  proposition,  namely,  that  the  most  probable  value  is  that  for  which  the
sum  of  the  squares  of  its  differences  from  the  observed  values,  hence  the
sum  of  the  squares  of  the  assumed  errors,  is  a  minimum.  In  assuming
the  arithmetical  mean  where  the  differences  lie  in  one  direction  only,  we
simply  apply  this  more  general  proposition  ;  and  we  get  similar  general
rules  for  the  determination  of  the  probable  error  of  a  result  thus  obtained.
We  cannot  follow  out  the  mathematical  treatment  further ;  here  again  we
find  that  the  method  in  which  a  result  is  obtained,  even  though  it  be  only
a  probable  result,  is  in  its  nature  deductive  and  determined  by'assump-
tions  concerning  causal  relations  between  objects  and  our  sensations.

ii.  As  we  have  seen  in  §  70,  all  determinations  of  intensities  and  quali
ties  of  sensation,  in  so  far  as  they  can  be  conceptually  denned,  lead  to  the
problem  of  the  measurement  of  spatial  magnitude.  With  regard  to  them
also  it  is  true  that  neither  the  absolute  equality  of  two  sensations,  nor  the
absolute  equality  of  two  spatial  magnitudes,  is  the  object  of  perception  ;
but  that  the  predicates  which  are  most  probably  objectively  valid  must  be
inferred  from  presuppositions  which  cannot  themselves  be  actually  proved.

§  9°-

Inasmuch  as  direct  measurement  can  only  determine  discrete  points
in  objects  at  rest,  and  can  only  be  intermittent  where  the  objects  are  in
motion,  it  cannot  exhaust  the  spatial  continuum  of  a  given  figure,  or  the
temporal  continuum  of  a  perceived  motion  or  change.

Where  no  mechanical  expedients  are  available  we  have  to  proceed  by
inference,  seeking  geometrical  concepts  of  configuration,  or  functions  be
tween  spatial  or  qualitative  changes  and  time,  from  which  the  data  given
by  observation  may  be  deduced  as  consequences.

So  far  as  this  process  fails,  it  is  supplemented  by  models  or  drawings  of
the  figures,  and  the  graphical  representation  of  changes.

approximate,  and  because  of  its  generality  an  easily  applicable,  expression  for  that  which
really  occurs  in  different  ways.  Where  more  specific  data  are  wanting  it  is  necessary  to
work  from  such  a  hypothesis,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  has  been  confirmed  in  particular
cases  in  an  extraordinary  way  ;  e.g. ,  in  the  series  of  numbers  in  numerous  astronomical
measurements  ot  the  same  magnitude. — Cf.  Jevons,  Principles  of  Science,  i.  445.


272  LOGIC

1.  Really  direct  measurement,  by  which  we  endeavour  to  determine
the  form  and  magnitude  of  an  object,  can  merely  give  us  the  distance  from
each  other  of  certain  discrete  points  ;  for  this  reason  it can  never  ex
haustively  express  the  configuration  of  bodies,  since  their  continuous  limits
can  never  be  absolutely  determined  by  a  number  of  points,  however  great.
No  trigonometrical  measurement,  however  extensive,  can  determine  the
shape  of  the  earth  in  all  parts  of  its  continuous  surface  in  such  a  way  that
the  position of  any  particular  point  in  it  would  be  certainly  given  ;  no
system  of  measurements  of  a  human  skull  shows  its  complete  configuration,
but  merely  a  system  of  points  between  which  there  might  be  various  cur
vatures  of  surface. Only  when  the  bodies  measured  are  bounded  by  plane
surfaces,  or  exhibit  simple  geometrical  forms — such  as the sphere,  the
cylinder,  the  screw — so  that  the  coincidence  of  their  form  with  one  which
is  geometrically  determinable  can  be  demonstrated  by  mechanical  motion,
can  we  ascertain,  with  as  much  certainty  as  measurement  is  capable  of,
the  coincidence  of  all  points  in  their  surface  with  the  measure  prescribed
by  the  geometrical  concept ;  the  continuity  of  motion  then  steps  into  the
gap  which cannot  be filled  by  measurement. In  all  other  cases  we  can
only  supplement  the  description  expressed  by  definite  predicates  and  state
ments  of  size  by  an  image,  which  may  be  plastic,  or  projected  upon  a  plane
surface,  or  stereoscopic,  and  which  in  all  complicated  forms  tells  us  incom
parably  more  than  could be  done  by  the  most  accurate  enumeration  of
magnitudes. The  value  which  the  art  of  the  draughtsman,  the  painter,
the  modeller,  and  the  skill  of  the  photographer  have  for  science,  marks  also
the  limits  set  by  the  continuum  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  claims  of  logic.

2.  But  the  image  can  represent  only  objects  at  rest. The  difficulties
of  exact  judgments  of  perception  increase  in  proportion  as  we  have  to  do
with  objects which  change,  and  are  called  upon  to  represent  exactly  as
they  are  perceived  a  movement,  the  change  of  a  quality,  the  gradual  trans
formation  of  one shape  into  another, in  judgments with conceptually
determined  predicates. We  referred  in  §  69  to  the  uncertain  and  wavering
nature  of  our  perceptions  of  movements  and  changes,  which  makes  them
unfit  to  be  the  bases  of  fixed  concepts ;  now  we  get  the  reverse  difficulty
of  ascertaining  the  coincidence  of  the  mathematically  formulated  concepts
of  motion  with  the  actual  perception,  or  of  developing  that  concept  which
coincides  with  the  perception.

The  intuitive  perception  of  a  motion  or  change  can  indeed  be  assumed
to  be  continuous,  and  allows,  or  rather  constrains,  us  to  apprehend  the


CONTINUOUS  CHANGES  273

event  as  a  continuum  ;  but  all  measurement  of  place  and  time,  even  if  we
assume  it  to  be  perfectly  accurate,  is  intermittent.  When  a  body  sinks  in.
front  of  a  scale,  even  though  it  falls  with  the  diminished  velocity  of  At-
wood's  machine,  or  upon  an  inclined  plane,  we  can  only  determine  accurately
the  position  in  which  it  is  at  any  given  time,  and  carry  out  the  comparison
of  time  and  space,  at  definite  intervals  of  time — say  every  second  ;  that
which  intervenes  escapes  our  observation.  In  other  cases  of  very  slow
motion  the  spaces  traversed  are  too  small  to  be  perceived,  and  not  until
they  have  attained  perceptible  magnitude  is  it  possible  to  get  a  measure
ment  of  the  distance  traversed,  in  which  the  difference  in  the  spatial
determinations  can  no  longer  be  attributed  merely  to  errors  of  observation  ;
we  find  such  slowness  as  this  in  the  motion  of  the  fixed  stars.  Other  con
ditions  give  rise  to  intermittence  in  other  ways ;  the  constellations,  for
instance,  can  only  be  observed  at  night ;  and  even  if  they  were  uninter
ruptedly  visible,  we  should  be  prevented  from  determining  their  position
from  moment  to  moment  by  the  nature  of  our  instruments  of  measurement.

3.  How  shall  we  proceed  to  an  objectively  valid  judgment  concerning
the  motion  of  an  object ;  a judgment,  moreover,  not  merely  about its
motion  in  general,  but  about  an  absolutely  determinate  species  of  motion  ?
In  most  cases,  indeed,  continuous  perception  is  sufficient  to  assure  us  that
the  same  object  makes  a  continuous  passage  from  one  place  to  another  ;
for  though  measurement  is  intermittent,  yet  the  intuitable  image  is  of  such
a  kind  that  we  are  certain  of  having  perceived  no  sudden  leap  sideways  or
backwards. But  what  we  have  to  do  is  to  determine  the  motion  conceptu
ally,  to  express  the  form  of  its  path  and  the  relation  of  the  space  traversed
to  time  for  every  moment.

4.  It  is  not  necessary  to  prove  that  we  must  obtain  by  inference  what
cannot  be  immediately  observed. Our  first  clue  in  this  process  is  the
assumption,  arising  from  intuition  itself,  of  continuous  change  of  place  ;
and  in  the  case  of  non-uniform  velocity,  of  continuous  variation  in  velocity
without  sudden  leaps. We  might  say  that  this  presupposition  was  induc
tively  obtained,  inasmuch as  it  has  undoubtedly  arisen  from  actually  in
tuited  motions,  if  it  were  not  that  the  apprehension  of  motion  itself  displays
those a  priori  activities by  which we  combine and connect  particular
moments  of  time. All  that  we  really  do  is  to  bring  into  consciousness  a  law
of  that  activity  of  intuition  through  which  the  idea  of  the  continuous  first
arises,  and  from  this  point  of  view  Kant  was  fully  justified  in  declaring  the
principle  of  the  continuity  of  all  change  to  be  a  priori,  because  it  contains

s.  L. — n.  T


274  LOGIC

the  condition  under  which  alone  the  apprehension  of  that  which  happens
in  time  is  possible.  We  may  supplement  the  principle  by  saying  that  it
would  not  even  be  possible  to  perceive  interrupted  motion  strictly  as  such.

5.  But this  general presupposition  does  not  tell us  what  particular
motion  takes  place  in  the  particular  case. The  problem  here  is  to  deduce
from  our  observations  the  geometrical  form  of  the  orbit  and  the  numerical
expressions  for  the  relation  of  space  and  time  which  will  exactly  represent
the  motion  of  the  observed  body.

If  a  series  of  observations  in  the  times  <tlt  f2,  t&  gives  us  the  positions  of
a  body  in  its  orbit,  such  that  a  straight  line  may  be  drawn  through  them,
and  gives  their  distances  from  a  fixed  point  s{,  s2,  %  etc.,  such  that  the

quotients  -^,  — ,  —  are  equal,  then  we  affirm  that  the  body  moves  in  a

*1 ?2 ?3

straight  line  with  a  uniform  velocity.  But  our  inference  presupposes  the
concept  of  the  straight  line  and  the  concept  of  uniform  motion ;  and  what
we  do  is  to  show  that  the  given  positions  and  times  are  related  just  as  they
would  be  if  the  body  had  moved  in  a  straight  line  with  uniform  velocity.
We  compare  the  given  observations  with  the  ascertained  and  familiar  con
sequences  of  the  concept  of  rectilinear  uniform  motion,  and  from  their
agreement  with  those  consequences  we  infer  that  the  whole  orbit  was  tra
versed  according  to  the  law  which  was  satisfied  by  the  observed  positions.
If  observation  of  a  body  falling  upon  an  inclined  plane  showed  that  at
the  end  of  the  first  second  one  foot  was  traversed,  at  the  end  of  the  second
4  feet,  and  at  the  end  of  the  third  9  feet,  we  should  have  the  figures  i,  2,  3
for  the  time,  i,  4,  9  for  the  space.  Our  problem  is  to  find  the  formula
which  connects  these  numbers  in  such  a  way  that  the  connected  times
and  spaces  will  appear  as  the  expression  of  one  and  the  same  rela
tion,  the  formula  s  =  t2 ;  here,  again,  we  can  only  say  that  the  observed
positions  are  related  as  they  would  be  if  the  body  had  traversed  its  path
according  to  the  law  s  =  t2.  In  this  case  it  is  easy  to  find  the  relation
which  combines  all  the  numbers  because  the  series  of  the  squares  is
familiar  to  us ;  it  would  have  been  more  difficult  if  the  numbers  had  been
greater.  It  is  clear,  however,  that,  strictly  speaking,  there  is  no  kind  of
necessity  for  assuming  this  simple  relation,  since  other  formula;  are  con
ceivable  which  would  give  the  same  values.  No  doubt  repeated  observa
tions  which  conform  to  the  same  assumption  strengthen  it  with  increasing
probability,  but  they  do  not  make  it  necessary.

6.  If  three  points  of  an  orbit  were  determined  as  not  lying  in  a  straight


CONTINUOUS CHANGES  275

line,  the  possibilities  would  be  incalculably  many ;  all  possible  curves  may
pass  through  three  points.  The  greater  the  number  of  points,  the  more
curves  are  excluded,  but  no  curve  is  necessarily  determined  by  a  finite
number  of  points,  and  we  are  always  brought  to  the  problem  of  formulat
ing  a  hypothesis,  of  deducing  the  positions  from  it,  and  of  comparing
them  with  those  which  are  given.

We  must  leave  it  to  mathematics  to  develop  the  methods  by  which  from
a  number  of  connected  values  of  x  andjy  to  find  the  form  of  the  function
which  obtains  between  them,  and  so  to  determine,  on  the  one  hand,  the
equation  of  the  curve  which  passes  through  the  observed  positions,  on  the
other  hand  the  law  of  the  acceleration.  It  is  always  essentially  a  process
of  reduction,  the  discovery  of  a  universal  major  premise  for  given  minor
premises  and  conclusions ;  more  exactly,  the  discovery  of  the  formula  or
of  the  general  concept  according  to  which  the  various  minor  premises,
/!=:,  /2  =  2>  *3  =  2»  nave  for  their  necessary  consequences  the  corresponding
conclusions  Sl  =  i,  sz  =  4,  ss  =  g  (p.  232).

7.  We  find  the  most  famous  example  of  such  a  process  in  the  discovery
of  Kepler's  laws.  Given  the  positions  of  Mars  according  to  a  series  of
observations,  the  problem  was  to  find  the  motion  of  the  planet,  both  the
form  of  its  orbit  and  the  law  determining  its  velocity  in  that  orbit.  It  is
well  known  how  long  Kepler  toiled  at  this  problem  because  he  started
from  the  assumption  that  the  planets  must  move,  according  to  the  dogmas
of  the  natural  philosophy  of  the  ancients,  in  circles  and  with  a  uniform
velocity;  no  matter  how  he  selected  his  circles,  his  observations  never
agreed  with  the  consequences  of  that  assumption.  Then  he  tried  the
ellipse,  which  was  suggested  by  the  eccentric  circles  of  the  Copernican
system,  and  he  then  found  that  the  lines  drawn  from  the  sun  in  accordance
with  the  observed  positions  of  Mars  followed  the  same  law  of  increase  and
decrease  as  the  radii  vectores  which  are  drawn  from  the  focus  of  an
ellipse  to  its  periphery.  It  needs  no  great  mathematical  knowledge  to  see
that  not  even  the  most  marvellous  acuteness  could  have  succeeded  in  con
structing  from  observations  alone  the  ellipse  as  a  continuous  line  governed
by  a  simple  law  ;  if  Kepler  had  not  known  the  geometry  of  conic  sections,
ind  had  not  had  in  his  mind  the  attributes  of  the  ellipse  as  proceeding
:rom  purely  geometrical  considerations,  to  serve  as  major  premises  for  his
:alculations,  he  would  never  have  discovered  his  first  law.  Nor  was  it
)bservation  which  led  him  to  compare  the  areas  described  by  the  radius
"ector  with  the  time ;  geometrical  knowledge  alone  enabled  him  to  calcu-


276  LOGIC

late  these  areas,  and  so  to  discover  that  they  are  equal  for  equal  times.
It  is  the  same  with  the  third  law ;  given  the  mean  distances  from  the  sun,
to  find  the  one  principle  from  which  their  successive  values  may  be  ascer
tained  as  consequences.  He  tried  all  possible  major  premises,  starting
with  the  regular  bodies  of  the  mysterium  cosmographicum ;  finally,  he
discovered  the  fixed  relation  which  holds  between  the  mean  distances  and
the  times  of  revolution.  That  relation  of  the  cube  to  the  square  is  the
general  concept,  of  which  the  relations  of  the  mean  distances  to  the  times
of  revolution  represent  particular  instances.

There  is  no  example  which  shows  so  clearly  as  this  that  it  is  a  deductive
process  with  which  we  are  concerned  ;  a  number  of  major  premises  are
tried  and  found  useless,  they  have  to  be  developed  into  their  consequences,
but  are  refuted  by  the  discrepancy  between  these  consequences  and  the
results  of  observation.  Finally,  the  agreement  between  the  consequences
of  the  last  hypothesis  and  the  observation  justifies  the  conclusion  that  the
ellipse  and  the  law  of  the  areas  contain  the  desired  major  premise,  and
that  those  positions  and  parts  of  the  orbit  which  have  not  been  observed,
and  the  velocity  in  those  parts,  will  also  agree  with  this  presupposition.

It  is  also  because  Kepler's  laws  are,  strictly  speaking,  false  and  do  not  agree
exactly  with  the  results  of  observation,  that  their  history  and  the  history  of
the  further  development  of  astronomy  is  so  instructive  as  to  the  actual
methods  of  scientific  investigation.  They  represent  an  ideal  case  only,
not  an  actual  state  of  things,  and  nevertheless  Newton's  theory  was
developed  out  of  these  laws,  by  the  same  method  of  reduction,  into  a
universal  major  premise,  of  which  the  consequences  (i.e.  disturbances)
explained  the  discrepancy  between  the  actual  motions  as  accurately  ob
served  and  the  strictly  elliptical  motion  first  assumed.

8.  Where  a  comprehensive  formula  cannot  be  found  because  its  mathe
matical  expression  is  too  complicated,  or  because  the  assumed  regularity
is  wanting  altogether,  nothing  remains  but  to  have  recourse  to  the  image,
and  to  represent  graphically  the  continuum  which  we  cannot  get  from
actual  observations  because  of  their  discontinuity.  If,  for  instance,  we
mark  off  distances  on  a  line  which  are  proportional  to  times,  and  erect
perpendiculars  from  the  points  of  division  to  represent  spaces,  and  connect
the  upper  ends  of  these  perpendiculars  by  a  continuous  line,  then  this
line  will  .give  us  the  representation  of  continuous  motion,  and  by  its
convex  or  concave  curvature  we  can  at  once  recognise  gradual  decrease  or
increase  of  velocity.


CONTINUOUS CHANGES  277

The  logical  process  in  the  construction  of  such  a  curve  is  essentially
the  same ;  the  only  point  is  that  the  assumption  which  we  make  with
reference  to  continuous  changes  now  appears  in  the  line  of  the  curve,  which
is  drawn  so  as  to  show  continual  curvature.  But  it  still  remains  clear  that
we  make  an  assumption  which  does  not  seem  to  follow  necessarily  from  the
given  data,  and  that  at  best  we  can  only  hope  to  get  an  approximation  ;
it  is  clear  also  that  we  infer  from  the  fact  that  the  curve  as  drawn  connects
all  points  without  difficulty  that  it  expresses  the  course  (which  cannot  be
represented  in  a  formula)  of  the  actual  motion,  and  that  those  parts  of  it
which  lie  between  the  marked  points  also  correspond  to  the  intervals  of
motion  which  lie  between  the  points  of  observation.

9.  The  uncertainty  of  all  such  inferences  which  depend  upon  the  mere
assumption  of  a  law  has  naturally  made  the  need  felt  of  avoiding  inter-
mittence  in  observation,  and  where  it  is  practicable  of  causing  motions  to
register  themselves  by  means  of  a  mechanical  apparatus  which  follows  the
motion  exactly ;  the  curve  corresponding  to  the  motion  is  marked  upon  a
uniformly  moving  piece  of  paper. It  is  in  this  way  that  by  means  of  a
lever  we  obtain  a  curve  for  the  gradual  rise  and  fall  of  the pulse,  and  it  is
in  this  way  that  the  rising  and  falling  of  the  barometer  registers  itself;  an
image  of  the  motion  is  presented  for  spatial  observation  and  measurement,
and  thus  all  the  difficulties  which  occur  in  the  logical  process  are  elimi
nated,  while  there  are  substituted  for  errors  of  observation  the  more  easily
recognised  defects  in  the  working  of  the  apparatus. The  construction  of
the  apparatus  itself, and knowledge  of  the  relation  between  the  curve
and  the  actual  motion,  depend  upon  simple  geometrical  and  mechanical
laws.

10.  Exactly  the  same  methods  must  be  applied  when,  instead  of  motion
in  space,  we  are  dealing  with  changes  of  any  kind,  changes  of  qualities  and
intensities. So  far  as  qualities  and  intensities  are  measurable  at  all,  they
may  be  reduced  to  numbers  and  proportional  spatial  magnitudes  ;  and  we
proceed  in  the  same  way  to  construct from the  temporally  separated  ob
servations  the  continuous  course  of  the  change, either  by  means  of  a
formula  or  by  the  graphical  method. It  is  thus  that  we  construct  the
curves  of  temperature  for  the  daily  rise  and  fall  of  the  atmospherical
temperature,  or  the  curve  of  the  temperature  of  a  patient  in  a  fever.

In  many  cases  it  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  show  the  course  of  a
change  from  moment  to  moment ;  when,  for  instance,  it  is  too  rapid  to
admit  of  several  observations,  or  too  complicated  for  us  to  be  able  to


2  78  LOGIC

follow  the  simultaneous  change  of  a  number  of  parts.  In  rapid  chemical
action  our  observation  is  limited  to  comparing  the  beginning  and  final
point  of  the  change,  and  to  ascertaining  the  difference  between  the  second
state  and  the  first ;  we  determine  the  changed  state  and  not  the  process  of
change.


Since  the  reference  of  sensibly  perceived  qualities,  relations  of  magnitude
and  changes,  to  individual  things  can  only  take  place  in  the  syntheses
described  in  §  72,  perception  can  lead  directly  only  to  the  description  of
PHENOMENA,  and  we  must  distinguish  between  this  and  the  reference  of
the  phenomena  to  their  REAL  SUBJECTS.

In  so  far  as  spatially  limited  figures  are  given  to  perception,  these  are
the  subjects  of  judgments  of  perception.

Where  spatial  limits  are  lost  to  observation,  the  reference  of  predicates
to  their  subjects  is  guided  by  the  principle  of  the  permanence  of  matter,
and  determined  by  measurement  of  weight.

Neither  the  principle  of  the  permanence  of  matter,  nor  the  principle
that  the  weight  is  the  measure  of  the  quantity  of  matter,  is  a  priori.

i.  In  our  preceding  considerations  we  have  dealt  with  the  means  of
determining  in  an  objectively  valid  manner  the  predicates  belonging  to
the  things  given  to  our  perception.  We  begin  by  assuming  these  to  be
simply  given,  as  they  appear  to  the  ordinary  sense-apprehension  ;  they
form  the  starting  points  to  which,  by  analysis  of  their  particular  aspects,
judgments  are  attached  which  express  in  fully  determined  predicate-con
cepts  their  perceptible  magnitudes,  their  attributes,  and  their  changes.
But  our  investigations  have  shown  in  §  47,  9  (I.  p.  312)  and  §  72
(II.  78  sq.)  that  the  idea  of  individual  things  as  subjects  of  our  judg
ments  of  perception  is  brought  about  by  a  synthesis  of  those  extended
and  successive  qualities  of  sensation  which  alone  are  immediately  given,
and  that  this  synthesis  is  not  determined  in  one  invariable  way  by  any
necessity,  but  is  originally  governed  only  by  the  negative  principle  that
two  things  cannot  occupy  the  same  position  in  space ;  finally,  in  §  78  we
found  different  forms  of  unity  for  these  syntheses,  according  to  which  the
meaning  in  which  we  speak  of  a  single  thing  is  differently  determined.
There  still  remains  for  our  investigation  the  question  :  how  is  it  possible
for  our  judgments  of  perception  to  be  objectively  valid  in  the  sense  of


PHENOMENA AND  REAL SUBJECTS  279

referring  their  predicates  unerringly  to  those  subjects  to  which  they
helong  necessarily  and  with  universal  validity,  and  which  are  connected
with  the  predicates  by  every  one  in  the  same  way  ?

2.  When  we  learn  that  what  is  immediately  given  consists  only  of  our
sensations,  and  that  these  are  themselves  only  the  effects  of  presupposed
real  things  upon  consciousness  through  the  medium  of  our  sense  organs,
then  we  are  first  led  to  distinguish between  the  mere  phenomenon,  the
sensibly  perceived  appearance,  and  the  thing  itself  which  gives  rise  to  the
appearance. We  then  find  ourselves  called  upon  to  free  ourselves  in  all
observation  from  habits  of  referring perceptions to  things, from every
interpretation  of  the  seen  and  heard,  and  to  describe  the  phenomenon
as  such  ;  so  that  the  subject  of  our  judgment  shall  be  in  the  strictest  sense
only  that  which  is subjectively  and  directly  perceived,  and  we  shall  there
fore  be  entirely  in  the  position  in  which  the  so-called  impersonal  judg
ments arise,  in so far as what they  express is merely  the  perceived
phenomenon  without  reference  to  a  definite  thing  (cf.  §  n,  I.  p.  59  sq.).
When  we  see  a  rainbow,  we  can  only  say  that  we  see  colours  which  are
arranged  in  a  certain  way  and  describe  an  arc  ;  as  to  what  is  coloured  we
shall  prefer  to  withhold  our  judgment,  since  we  have  no  perceptions  of
touch  or  any  kind  of  analogy  to  guide  us. When  we  see  lightning,  we  can
speak  only  of  the  transitory  flash  of  light ;  or  wken  we  see  a  dark  round
spot  upon  the disc  of  the sun, of  this optical impression. It is  left
uncertain  what  it  is  which  flashes,  and  whether  the  dark  spot  is  a  planet
passing  before  the  sun  or  something  else. But  the  question  what  it  is
which flashes and is coloured  means only : in what way would the
assumed  object,  which  takes  effect  as  light  upon  our  eyes,  affect  our  eyes
and  our  other  senses  under  other  conditions ;  in  what  way  would  it,  under
given  conditions, change  itself  and  other  things ;  in  other  words, what
complex of spatial and temporally successive phenomena would it
present  by  itself  or  in connection  with others,  for  it  is  only  as  the  one
ground  of  perceptions  and  change  of  perceptions  that  it  is  ever  thought
of.

3.  Our  attitude  towards  the  rainbow  or  flash  of  lightning  is  funda
mentally  the  same  as  that  in  which  we  originally  approach  all  perceptible
objects;  hence  the  direct  and  immediate  expression of  our  perception
can  be  merely  that  we  perceive  at  a  certain  place  such  and  such  colours,
such  and  such  qualities  of  touch,  etc. Here  we  see  again  how  the  con
cept  of  the  one thing must originally  be determined  by  the  bounded


LOGIC

form,  and  how  the  individual  subject,  to  which  the  predicates  of  the  de
scription  apply,  is  first  given  by  the  permanent  form,  which  even  in  motion
remains  the  same  or  changes  continuously.  In  every  description  of  plants
and  animals  the  subject  of  the  judgments  is  only  the  form  which  appears  ;
the  predicates  are  attributed  to  this  spatial  whole.  The  subjects  thus
gained  are  finally  established  by  the  fact  that  every  one  agrees  in  the
apprehension  of  their  forms  and  of  their  spatial  boundaries  ;  their  identity
attaches  to  the  constancy  of  the  image  and  to  the  uninterrupted  continuity
of  perception,  and  so  long  as  our  statements  merely  refer  to  the  permanent
or  changing  qualities  of  sense  within  certain  spatial  limits  the  objective
validity  of  the  statement  depends  only  upon  similarity  in  our  organizations
and  consequent  sameness  in  sensations,  and  upon  coincidence  in  measure
ment.

4.  But  as  soon  as  we  substitute  for  the  form,  as  the  element  determining
unity,  the  actual  individual  subject  which  appears  in  this  form,  the  meaning
of  the  statement  changes,  and  it  passes  beyond  the  merely  phenomenal  to
an  interpretation  of  the  phenomenon,  to  a  process  of  inference  which  no
longer  merely  gives  immediate  utterance  to  the  perception,  but  introduces
general  propositions  by  which  the  interpretation  is  guided.  While  what  I
say  is  merely  that  what  appears  at  a  given  place  within  perceptible  limits  is
yellow,  shining,  smooth,  hard,  etc.,  I  describe  the  phenomenon  ;  as  soon  as
I  say  that  it  is  gold  I  interpret  the  phenomenon  by  a  general  concept,  and
carry  out  an  inference  of  subsumption,  of  which  the  major  premise  is  the
definition  of  the  concept  of  gold  (§  56,  I.  p.  367) ;  this  statement  therefore
presupposes  the  classificatory  formation  of  concepts.  So  long  as  we  are
dealing  merely  with  objects  at  rest  and  of  fixed  limits  the  concepts  of
particular  kinds  of  matter  (for  instance)  may  be  regarded  as  simple  con
stant  complexes  of  perceptible  qualities  (as  Locke  represents  them),  and
the  concept  gold  might  then  be  taken  merely  as  an  abbreviation,  as  a
simple  substitute  for  a  plurality  of  perceptible  qualities  ;  it  was  no  doubt  in
this  way  that  the  concepts  of  particular  kinds  of  matter  originally  arose,
and  from  such  concepts  all  description  of  things  by  definite  words  must
start.

But,  as  we  have  shown  in  §  47,  9  (I.  p.  312)  and  §  72,  14  sq.  (II.  86  sq.),
the  fact  of  change  in  what  is  perceived,  while  we  still  need  to  apprehend
that  which  changes  continuously  as  one  thing,  forces  us  beyond  this  simple
way  of  forming  concepts,  and  makes  us  uncertain  as  to  our  affirmation  of
the  identity  of  the  substance  which  appears  in  different  forms  and  trans-


PHENOMENA AND  REAL SUBJECTS  281

formations,  if  it  is  to  be  grounded  upon  the  mere  perception  of  spatial
continuity.  Where,  as  in  the  mixture  of  fluids  or  the  solution  of  a  solid
body  into  a  fluid,  the  boundaries  of  two  things  originally  distinct  in  space
disappear  ;  where  chemical  combination  does  not  merely  obliterate  spatial
boundaries,  but  withdraws  the  original  qualities  of  the  combined  materials
from  the  senses  and  replaces  them  by  the  entirely  new  qualities  of  the  com
pound  ;  where,  as  in  evaporation,  parts  become  invisible  which  were
previously  visible,  or  as  in  the  precipitation  of  gases  and  fluids,  visible
drops  and  solid  bodies  arise  where  there  was  before  nothing  to  be  seen,  in
such  cases  as  these  immediate  perception  leaves  us  uncertain  how  we  are
to  maintain  the  unity  of  the  bodies  which  were  separated,  and  how  the
later  subject  of  perception  is  related  to  that  which  was  seen  earlier.
There  is  no  a  priori  principle  which  forbids  us  to  assume  that  substances
disappear ;  on  the  contrary,  the  assumption  is  suggested  by  the  simplest
interpretation  of  perceptions.  It  is  only  on  the  one  hand  our  logical  needs
(§  72,  p.  84),  on  the  other  the  inference  from  analogy  which  passes  from  the
plurality  of  bodies  which  we  see  persisting  to  the  others,  which  favours  the
assumption  that  even  substances  which  have  become  invisible  still  exist
somewhere,  an  assumption  which  finds  its  confirmation  in  our  constantly
increasing  knowledge  of  the  possibility  of  reproducing  elements  from
compounds,  or  of  precipitating  vapours.  The  proposition  that  matter
persists  has  become  certain  by  way  of  induction  ;  but  the  history  of  the
concept  of  matter  shows  clearly  how  slow  the  early  general  assumption
of  a  permanent  substratum  for  all  changes  has  been  to  take  definite
form,  how  long  the  Aristotelian  theory  held  its  ground  that  this  substratum
is  completely  without  quality  and  equally  capable  of  all  forms  and  definite
attributes,  how  the  concept  of  the  chemical  element  first  vindicated  this
predicate  of  the  permanent  for  determinate  kinds  of  substances,  and  the
development  of  chemistry  afterwards  yielded  a  comprehensive  inductive
proof  for  the  general  presuppositions,  thus  establishing  definite  concepts
concerning  the  material  subjects  to  which  our  predicates  refer.  But  it  still
remained  a  doubtful  question  how  the  constancy  of  subjects  could  be  known
in  the  particular  case  by  way  of  perception,  and  how  it  could  be  determined
whether  successive  states  were  really  referable  to  one  and  the  same  thing,
until  the  principles  that  weight  is  the  measure  of  substance,  and  that  the
same  material  body  must  invariably  have  the  same  weight,  gave  us  the  clue
by  which  to  establish  with  certainty  the  identity  of  substances  as  subjects
of  our  judgments  of  perception,  and  to  form  inferences  from  perceived


282  LOGIC

motions  as  to  the  identity  or  non-identity  of  the  things  to  which  succes
sive  predicates  belong.1

It  is  this  which  gives  its  importance  to  the  balance  as  a  supplementary
help  in  all  our  description  of  external  things  and  events ;  it  does  not
directly  determine  any  predicate  of  sense-perception,  as  the  measure
determines  visible  magnitude,  but  by  measuring  through  a  perceptible
motion  the  quantity  of  matter  which  is  contained  within  definite  spatial
limits,  it  not  only  adds  an  important  relation  to  the  immediately  apparent
qualities,  but  serves  principally  to  determine  whether  that  which  confronts
us  in  successive  perceptions  is  the  same  subject  or  not.  Thus  it  may  really
be  called  a  metaphysical  instrument  which,  by  the  information  it  gives,
guides  us  in  our  reference  of  sense-given  to  the  permanent  ground  which
we  are  constrained  to  add  in  thought,  and  raises  bridges  for  the  under
standing,  by  which  it  may  pass  from  the  world  of  sensations  to  the  non-
sensuous  world  of  the  subjects  which  we  assume  as  the  cause  of  the
sensations,  and  which  can  be  apprehended  only  in  the  concept.  It  is  true
that  it  does  not  remove  the  impossibility  of  finding  absolutely  individual
subjects,  such  as  would  satisfy  the  claims  of  logic,  in  the  province  of
intuition  where  we  can  know  only  the  extended,  that  is  the  divisible  ;  but
it  does  enable  us  to  control  their  numerical  relations,  and  to  determine
their  increase  or  decrease.

Thus  the  validity  also  of  our  statements  as  to  the  sense  in  which  the
predicates  of  our  judgments  of  perception  belong  to  their  subjects
depends  upon  a  comprehensive  frame-work  of  hypotheses,  which  have
arisen  in  part  from  our  logical  needs,  and  have  in  part  been  gained  by
way  of  induction.  In  reference  to  the  limits  of  accuracy  in  weighing,  and
in  establishing  the  most  probable  results  of  the  process,  the  same  methods
are,  of  course,  applicable  as  in  other  measurements.


Our  desire  to  attain  extensive  completeness  of  perception  in  space  and
time  would  be  realized  by  a  DESCRIPTION  of  the  universe  containing  all
particulars  of  perception  in  their  spatial  and  temporal  order,  which  would
take  the  form  of  a  catalogue  of  all  particular  objects  and  their  changes.

In  so  far  as  this  exhaustive  completeness  of  description  is  not  possible,

1  Cf.  above,  p.  169,  and  v.  Kries,  "  Ueber  Messung  intensiver  Grossen,"  Viertd-
jahrschr.f.  wiss.  Phil.,  vi.  260  sq.


NUMERATION  OF  THE  PARTICULAR  283

a  substitute  is  found  in  the  STATISTICAL  NUMERATION  of  like  things  and
events,  which  presupposes  a  given  classification  of  objects.

Within  narrower  limits  this  numeration  serves  partly  for  the  description
of  the  particular  in  its  course  in  time,  and  partly  for  the  description  of
collective  wholes  as  to  their  composition  and  change  ;  beyond  those  limits
its  task  is  partly  to  present  for  our  survey  the  spatial  and  temporal  distri
bution  of  like  things  and  events,  partly  to  bring  before  intuition  the
numerical  relations  in  which  the  various  specific  differences  of  a  general
concept  are  realized.

1.  Perception, and the description  expressing it,  begins within  an
incalculable  plurality  of  things,  and  of  events  taking  place  in  and  between
these  things, as  this  or  that  happens  to  present  itself  or  is  selected  by
subjective  interest. But  even  the  Localization  of  them  in  space  and  in
the  time  common  to  all  forces  us  to  extend  perception  until  it  embraces
all  space  and  all  time,  and  so  to  establish  a  spatial  order  for  the  plurality
of  perceived things  and a temporal order for their movements and
changes,  within  which  every  particular  object  appears  as  part  of  a  spatial
whole, and every period of  time  occupied  by a plurality  of  contem
poraneous  events  as  part  of  a  temporal  whole. An  extensively  complete
perception would  become  a  cosmography,  in  which  for  every  point  of
time  there  would  be  assigned  to  everything  its  position  in  space  and  its
state  ; within  this ideal  frame- work are  ranged  those  fragments  of  the
representation  of  larger  spatial  wholes  and  historical  events  which  we  are
able  to  establish  by  exact  perception. And  the  basis  of  this  all-embracing
image  of  the  universe  is  the  determination  of  the  spatial  distribution  of
objects  which  are — at  any  rate  for  us — invariable  in  time,  of  the  fixed
masses  of  the  earth  and  constellations,  geography  and  uranography ;  when
this  ground-plan  is  once  given  for  any  point  of  time,  then  movements  of
the  objects  to  and  fro  are  introduced,  and  can  be  known  by  means  of
comparison.

2.  Within  the whole, which  comprehends  a  plurality  of  perceptible
things,  every  part  which  forms  a  unity  is  determined  as  a  particular  thing  ;
it  is  also  determined  as  single,  and  distinct  from  all  which  are  to  be  found
near  it  in  space. The  principle  that  the  same  thing  cannot  at  the  same  time
occupy  different  positions  in  space  secures  numerical  distinctness  between
objects  and  the  determination  of  their  number  at  any  given  time. The
principle  that  different  states  of  the  same  thing  can  only  be  successive
and  not  simultaneous  secures  difference  in  point  of  time.


284  LOGIC

3.  Astronomy,  favoured  by  the  fact  that  the  greater  part  of  its  objects
are  easily  surveyed  and  constant,  and  by  the  wonderful  development  of  its
instruments  and  methods  of  measurement,  has  realized  as  fully  as  possible
the  idea  of  an  accurate  representation  of  the  spatial  distribution  of  its
objects. By  undertaking  in  its  charts  and  catalogues  to  determine  the
position  at  any  given  time  of every  permanently  visible  object  in  the
heavens,  and  by  tracing  their  motions,  it  approximates  to  the  ideal  of  a
cosmography  embracing  the  whole  realm  of  the  perceptible ;  and  the  com
pleteness  with  which  it  recognises  and  distinguishes  the  particular  as  such
finds  expression  in  the  fact  that  it  denotes  every  object  as  particular  by
its  proper  name  or  the  number  equivalent  to  it.

4.  In  constructing  a  world-catalogue  to  contain  all  perceptible  objects
and to  present them in a  spatial  system as  particular  with  name  or
number,  we  are  opposed  by  the  number,  the  transitoriness  and  the  irregular
motion  of  most  earthly  objects,  as  well  as  by  the  absence  of  spatial  separa
tion in  the masses  of  the  earth's  surface. Nevertheless  geography,  no
doubt  chiefly  with  a  view  to  the  results of  human  activity,  has  to  a  large
extent  set  before  itself the  same  task  of  determining  the  particular  as
such  in  its  spatial  distribution  and  number,  and  of  cataloguing,  of  giving
proper  names  to  the  mountains,  rivers,  etc. But  where  this  way  of  making
the particular  as  such  in its completeness  the  object  of  knowledge  is
impracticable,  an  approximating  process  offers  itself  in  the  counting  of
particular  things  of  the  same  kind.

5.  So  far  as  the  classification  of  substances  and  of  forms  according  to
perceptible  characteristics  has  been  carried  out, every  description of  a
particular  object  serves  either  for  its  subsumption  under  existing  concepts,
or  to  show  us  that  they  are  insufficient  and  that  the  classification  needs  to
be  extended  or  corrected. If  we  leave  aside  for  the  present  the  latter
case,  then  the  first  consequence  of  this  subsumption  is  that  the  subjects  of
our  judgments  of  perception  can  be  named  by  a  general  term  expressing
a  concept. As  perception then  takes  the  extensive  direction  towards
completeness  of  knowledge  of  the  particular,  and  observes  the  plurality  of
the  particular  as  such,  it  leads  to  the  numerical  statement  of  those  objects
which  fall  under  one  and  the  same  concept,  and  determines  the  number
of  things  of  the  same  kind  which  it comes  across. Here  the  particular
place  or  particular  time  occupied  by  each  particular  thing  is  no  longer
regarded,  and  any  chance  differences  in  individuals  by  which  each  one  is
distinguished  from  all  others,  and  which  must  be  noticed  in  a  description,


NUMERATION  OF  THE  PARTICULAR  285

also  disappear ;  but  the  particular  as  such  still  maintains  its  own  in  so
far  as  it  is  not  merely  taken  as  the  indifferent  representative  of  a  general
concept,  but  retains  its  value  as  an  existence  numerically  distinct  from  every
other.  Quite  apart  from  the  fact  that  for  the  real  relation  of  particular
things  amongst  themselves  and  to  others  it  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference
in  what  numbers  they  are  forthcoming,  these  numerical  statements  have
an  interest  in  themselves  with  reference  to  the  ideal  of  an  extensive
completeness  in  our  knowledge  of  the  particular.

6.  There  is  no  familiar  name  for  this  kind  of  classified  cataloguing  of
the numbers  of  particular  objects which  fall  under  a general  concept,
except  the  terms  statistical  statements  and  tables ;  the  peculiarity  of  all
statistical  surveys  consists  just  in  the fact  that  they  do not numerate
and  catalogue  particular  objects  and  instances  as  such,  but  that  they  give
us  the  total  numbers  of  homogeneous  objects  and  phenomena, and  so
merely  summarize  particular  perceptions  according  to  certain  categories,
To  this  extent  statistical  numeration  belongs  to  the  province  of  the  obser
vation  and  description  of  the  particular,  but  the  inferences  which  can  be
drawn  from  such  numbers  must  be  reserved  for  a  later  section.

7.  The  object  with  which  the  numeration  of particular objects is
undertaken  is  not  always  the  same.

In  the  first  place,  the  numerical  statement  is  subservient  to  the  descrip
tion  of  collective  wholes,  the  constituent  unities  of  which  are  either  all  of
the  same  kind  or  fall  under  a  limited  number  of  different  concepts.  In  the
exact  description  of  a  group  of  stars  such  as  the  Pleiades,  we  must  have
before  everything  a  statement  of  the  number  of  the  stars  forming  it ;  in  the
exact  description  of  a  flock  of  sheep,  a  statement  of  the  number  of  sheep ;
in  the  description  of  a  family  or  people,  a  statement  of  the  number  of
members  ;  in  the  description  of  a  caravan,  a  statement  of  the  number  of
camels,  horses,  and  men  composing  it.  If  it  is  taken  into  consideration
that  the  unities  forming  a  collective  whole  manifest  in  addition  to  the  fact
that  they  fall  under  the  same  generic  concept  differences,  either  of  quality
or  of  mere  quantity,  then  the  description  will  be  more  complete  if  the  total
number  of  the  individuals  which  fall  under  the  generic  concept  is  broken
up  into  the  numbers  of  individuals  corresponding  to  specific  concepts  or
varieties.  The  description  of  the  Pleiades  states  how  many  stars  there  are
of  the  4th,  5th,  6th  magnitude,  etc. ;  the  description  of  a  flock  of  sheep,
how  many  rams,  ewes,  and  lambs  ;  the  description  of  a  people,  how  many
males  and  females,  how  many  of  different  ages,  how  many  of  different


286  LOGIC

callings,  etc. ;  the  conceptual  order  appears  as  a  point  of  view  by  which  to
guide  the  numeration  within  the  limits  given  by  the  collective  unity.

Such  a  description  of  different  wholes  composed  of  analogous  elements
leads  us  further  to  institute  a  comparison  between  them,  and  to  recognise
differences  in  their  composition.

Where  the  province  within  which  a  census  is  being  taken  is  not  given  as
a  definitely  limited  collective  unity,  the  problem  would  at  first  be  merely  to
determine  the  total  number  of  objects  falling  under  a  concept, — to  count
how  many  men,  etc.,  there  are.  But  a  twofold  interest  connects  itself  with
this  process  ;  on  the  one  hand,  to  determine  how  the  total  number  of  the
individuals  of  a  genus  is  distributed  in  space ;  on  the  other  hand,  to  see
how  the  total  number  of  the  individuals  of  a  genus  is  distributed  amongst
its  species  or  its  quantitative  differences,  and  thus  to  obtain  a  basis  for
comparison,  for  the  establishment  of  numerical  relations,  which  will  be
analogous  to  measurement.

In  the  first  proceeding  we  may,  at  any  rate  to  some  extent,  find  a  sub
stitute  for  that  ideal  completeness  of  perception  of  the  particular  in  which
we  were  called  upon  to  assign  to  every  particular  thing  its  position  in
space ;  and  even  where  this  may  have  been  done,  as  in  the  lists  of  stars,
the  statement  of  the  numbers  of  stars  in  the  particular  parts  of  the  heavens
enables  us  to  make  a  comparative  survey  of  their  distribution.  In  statistics
of  population  we  count  the  total  number  of  human  beings  inhabiting  the
earth.  We  do  not,  however,  stop  here,  but  by  dividing  the  earth  into
spatial  parts  and  stating  the  population  of  the  particular  continents,  coun
tries,  and  provinces,  we  make  a  comparative  survey  ;  we  have  the  same
aim  before  us  in  the  geography  of  plants  and  animals.

On  the  other  hand,  the  numeration  is  guided  by  the  division  of  the  con
cept,  which  gives  for  our  comparison  the  numbers  in  which  the  differences
of  things  are  realized.  How  many  stars  there  are  of  the  first,  second,  or
third  magnitude,  how  many  human  beings  belong  to  the  different  races,
how  many  are  males  and  how  many  females, — all  this  is  included  in  a
complete  knowledge  of  the  particular.

The  extent  to  which  the  statistical  method  prevails,  and  everything  is
counted,  is  another  instance  of  the  fundamental  difference  between
modern  and  ancient  science.  Nothing  seems  more  superficial  and  unim
portant  when  contrasted  with  the  mere  concept,  in  which  for  Aristotle  all
knowledge  lay,  than  these  merely  matter-of-fact  numerical  relations  ;  the
knowledge  of  the  concept  can  gain  nothing  by  our  knowing  how  often  it  is


NUMERATION  OF  THE  PARTICULAR  287

realized,  and  there  can  be  no  inner  relation  between  the  number  there  may
happen  to  be  of  individuals  and  their  qualitative  differences.  Number
attains  scientific  value  only  when  we  realize  that  our  first  task  must  be  to
apprehend  the  Given  fully  and  accurately  in  its  actual  constitution,  and
then  to  understand  the  necessity  of  this  constitution  ;  its  importance  even
for  the  higher  problems  of  science  is  proved  by  the  inferences  which  can
be  drawn  from  statistical  tables,  and  it  has  become  an  indispensable  aid  to
induction.

8.  The  numeration  of  particular  events  which  occur  in  time  accompanies
the  numeration  of  particular  things  which  exist  side  by  side  in  space,  and
has  a  similar  aim.  Where  the  things  numerated  arise  and  pass  away  in
time,  as  do  the  generations  of  living  beings,  the  two  kinds  of  numeration
are  necessarily  combined  in  reference  to  the  same  objects.

The  numeration  of  like  events  subserves  primarily  the  description  of
the  particular  object  and  of  collective  unities  in  their  temporal  duration
and  change.  Where  the  same  events  recur  in  the  same  individual,  or  in
similar  individuals,  such  as  the  breathing  or  beating  of  the  pulse  in  man,
or  the  birth  and  death  of  individuals  within  a  nation,  the  numeration  of
these  events  and  the  determination  of  their  distribution  in  time  is  an  aid
to  mere  description  which  is  unable  to  note  down  each  case  as  individual ;
the  number  of  definite  recurring  activities  and  exertions  gives  us  the  total
amount  of  action  within  definite  time-limits.  Then  conceptual  arrange
ment  appears  here  also,  and  we  are  called  upon  to  count  how  many
events  of  different  kinds  occur  within  given  time-limits,  or  within  a  circle
of  like  conditions,  so  that  we  may  compare  their  frequency.  We  shall
have  to  return  later  on  to  the  importance  of  statistical  statements  of  this
kind  ;  here  they  appear  primarily  only  as  a  summation  of  particular  per
ceptions  which  is  made  possible  by  the  subsumption  of  the  particular
under  general  concepts,  and  which  in  this  abbreviation  enables  us  to  take
as  the  object  of  communicable  knowledge  the  particular  which  we  should
have  neither  time  nor  strength  of  memory  to  survey  in  its  inexhaustible
fulness  and  with  all  its  specializations.1

1  Cf.  A.  Meitzen,  Geschichie,  Theorie  und  Technik  der  Statistik  (1886),  where  in
§§  63-67  the  conditions  of  statistical  numeration  are  carefully  discussed.


CHAPTER V.

THE  PROCESS OF  INDUCTION'  AS THE METHOD OF OBTAINING
UNIVERSAL PROPOSITIONS  FROM  PARTICULAR  PERCEPTIONS.

THROUGHOUT  the  preceding  chapter  we  have  been  led  to  see  that  objec
tively  valid  statements  about  particular  perceived  things  and  events  rest
upon  universal  propositions,  which  express  a  necessary  connection,  and
from  which  it  can  be  inferred  that  if  something  is,  something  else  also  is  ;
they  rest  upon  rules  which  express  the  connection  between  our  subjective
perceptions  and  things,  the  connection  of  the  attributes  of  things  amongst
themselves,  and  the  connection  of  their  changes  with  other  changes.  On
the  other  hand,  it  has  also  been  established  that  belief  in  the  truth  of  such
universal  propositions  depends  entirely  upon  the  particular  facts  of  per
ception,  and  the  question  which  we  now  have  to  consider  is — to  put  it
tquite  generally — how  do  we  pass  from  judgments  of  perception  referring
to  the  particular  to  universal  propositions  ?

^  In  the  problem  of  determining  a  continuous  motion  or  change  from
intermittent  observations  we have  already  approached  this  question ;  we
were  there  concerned  in  finding  for  the  particular  event  the  rule  accord
ing  to  which  the  magnitude  of  the  changes  is  determined  in  successive
moments,  in  deriving,  that  is,  from  particular  data  a  proposition  to  hold
good  for  all  particular  stages  of  the  change ;  and  it  appeared  that  parti-  jf
cular  observations  pass  imperceptibly  into  inferences  bearing  the  character  I
of  INDUCTION. In  this  simplest  example  we  already  find  an  indication  of
the  general  nature  of  the  logical  process  contained  in  it ;  and  it  is  this
process  which  first  calls  for  closer  investigation.

I.  THE  GENERAL  LOGICAL  CHARACTER  OF  THE  PROCESS  OF  EMPIRICAL

INDUCTION.

§  93-

-If  the  object  of  the  inductive  process  is  described  as  the  attainment  of
universal  propositions  from particular  judgments  of  perception, then  it


PROCESS OF  INDUCTION  289

may  be  shown  that  induction  in  this  sense  is  indeed  a  process  which  is
universally  practised  according  to  psychological  laws ;  but  that  from  no
point  of  view  can  a  ground  be  found  for  its  logical  justification  in  the
sense  that  the  propositions  inferred  in  this  way  are  necessarily  true,  and
that  induction  is  therefore  a  kind  of  strict  proof  for  universal  propositions
by  means  of  particular  facts.

The  logical  justification  of  the  inductive  process  rests  upon  the  fact  that
(according  to  §  62)  it  is  an  inevitable  postulate  of  our  effort  after  know
ledge  that  the  given  is  necessary,  and  can  be  known  as  proceeding  from
its  grounds  according  to  universal  laws.

This  presupposition  is  the  ground  for  a  process  of  reduction,  through
which  we  seek,  upon  the  ground  of  the  syllogistic  rules,  the  premises  as
consequences  of  which  the  particular  facts  of  observation  present  them
selves.

The  premises  thus  discovered  are  HYPOTHESES,  which  may  indeed  be  re
futed  by  contradiction  between  their  consequences  and  observed  phenomena,
but  which  cannot  be  proved  by  agreement  between  their  consequences  and
the  phenomena,  and  can  at  most  be  made  increasingly  probable.

Within  this  process  of  reduction,  which  is  ordinarily  known  as  the  in
ductive  method,  we  must  distinguish  between  the  process  of  obtaining
specific  propositions,  which  possess  a  merely  numerical  generality,  and
generalization,  in  which  the  results  are  obtained  by  means  of  generic
concepts.

i.  INDUCTION  (eVaywyr/)  was  opposed  to  the  syllogism  by  Aristotle  as  a
special  kind  of  inference,  by  means  of  which  the  truth  of  propositions  is
known  ;  and  he  describes  it  as  ascending  from  the  particular  to  the  uni
versal,1  without  giving  us  any  detailed  teaching  about  it.  He  finds  first
the  process  of  illustrating  a  universal  proposition  by  a  series  of  examples
in  the  practice  of  oratory,  and  more  especially  in  the  method  of  Socrates ;
ai\d  he  explains  that  it  is  the  popular  process  because  it  attaches  itself  to
k  familiar  experiences,  and  thus  easily  excites  belief.  Its  only  presupposi
tion  is,  that  the  similar  in  different  instances  is  recognised,  and  that  a
familiar  word  for  it  exists.  Thus  it  is  shown  that  the  best  pilot  is  he  who
understands  the  matter,  and  the  best  driver  in  the  same  way  he  who

1  Top.,  1,12,  105^,  IO  sq.  :  eirayuyr)  i)  airo  r!av  Ka.6'  <*Ka.ffTov  firi  TO.  KaOoXou  t<f>o8os.
Cf.  Top.,  I,  18,  io8£,  7  sq.  Anal  post.,  I,  13,  8oa,  40  sq.  With  what  follows  cf.  Max
Consbruch,  "'Eirayuyr),  und  Theorie  der  Induction  bei  Aristoteles,"  Arrhiv  fur  Gesch.
d.  Phil.,  v.  3,  302  sq.

S.  L. — II.  U


29o  LOGIC

understands  it,  and  hence  it  is  inferred  that  in  every  art  he  is  the  best  who
understands  it.  Akin  to  the  evraywy^  is  the  proof  from  the  particular
example  (TrapaSeiy/m).  Athletes  are  not  chosen  by  lot,  therefore  states
men  should  not  be  chosen  by  lot.1  In  a  wider  sense  the  process  of
explaining  a  general  concept,  such  as  that  of  the  relation  between  8wa/us
and  ci/epyeia,  by  examples  such  as  the  relation  between  the  man  who  knows
how  to  build  and  the  man  who  actually  builds,  is  called  eTraywyi).2

That  such  an  eTraywy?)  is  cogent  as  a  proof  is  always  taken  for  granted
by  Aristotle ;  if  any  one  will  not  accept  a  proof  from  the  particular,  he
must  produce  a  negative  instance,  without  which  to  assail  the  proof  is
mere  contentiousness.3  The  very  major  premises  of  our  syllogisms  are
themselves  not  syllogistically  proved,  and  therefore  rest  upon  an  eVaycoy^.

There  is  only  one  passage  (Anal,  pr.,  II.  23,  24)  in  which  Aristotle
deals  more  fully  with  the  process  of  inference  contained  in  the  €7raywyi/,
by  contrasting  it  with  the  syllogistic  process.

If  the  concepts  A,  £,  C  are  subordinate  to  each  other,  then  the  syllo
gism  shows  by  means  of  the  middle  concept  B  that  A  belongs  to  C ;  the
inference  is  B  is  A,  C  is  B,  therefore  C  is  A.

But  induction  shows  by  means  of  the  lowest  concept  C  that  the  highest
concept  A  belongs  to  the  middle  concept  B.  For  instance,  let  A  =  long-
lived,  B  —  without  gall,  C=the  particular  long-lived  animals,4  man,  horse,
mule  ;  then  induction  infers —

man,  horse,  mule  are  long-lived  ;

man,  horse,  mule  are  without  gall ;

therefore  that  which  is  without  gall  is  long-lived.

The  inference  is  necessary  when  man,  horse,  and  mule  are  all  animals
which  have  no  gall ;  for  where  the  middle  concept  B  does  not  extend
beyond  C  the  minor  premise  may  be  converted,  and  we  get —

man,  horse,  mule  are  long-lived  ;

that  which  is  without  gall  is  man,  horse,  mule  ;

therefore  that  which  is  without  gall  is  long-lived;

i.f.,  an  inference  according  to  the  rules  of  the  first  figure,  where,  instead

1  Rhet.,  II.  20,  1393^,  27.
1  Mctaph.,  6.,  6,  10483,  25.

3  Top.,  VIII.  8,  156*,  35  sq.

4  We  sbculd  expect,  instead  of  rb  KO.O'  '^Kaffrov  fuucpbfiiov,  to  find  rb  Kad'  ZxaffTov  &xo\ov
Kal  nuKpbfiiov. With  respect  to  difficulties  in  the  text  of.  Consbruch  :  nevertheless  the
logical  structure  of  the  inference  which  Aristotle  means  to  present  is  beyond  question.


PROCESS OF  INDUCTION  291

of  a  simple  middle  concept,  we  have  the  total  of  the  members  of  the
division,  which,  in  the  natural  order  of  the  concepts,  occupy  the  last  place.
Thus  the  presupposition  is  that  C  consists  of  all  the  species  of  13,  for  in
duction  surveys  all  the  particulars ; l  it  is  then  the  means  of  proving  a
proposition  B  is  A,  which  cannot  be  proved  by  a  syllogism  following  the
natural  order  of  the  concepts,  because  there  is  no  middle  concept  between
B  and  A.

In  this  way  is  shown  what  Aristotle  sets  out  to  prove  in  the  chapter,
that  even  rhetorical  inferences,  and  all  processes  of  conviction  however
they  may  be  arrived  at,  follow  the  syllogistic  figures.

Aristotle,  then,  treats  in  a  similar  manner  the  inference  from  an  example
(Anal.  pr.  II.  24).  It  is  shown  that  it  would  be  harmful  for  the  Athe
nians  to  make  war  with  the  Thebans  by  a  similar  instance,  by  the  example
of  the  Thebans,  who  made  war  with  the  Phocians ;  both  are  instances  of
wars  between  neighbours.  Here  there  are  four  concepts  :  the  highest,  A,
is  harmful ;  the  next,  B,  is  war  between  neighbours  ;  the  two  subordinate
to  B  are  C  and  D,  war  between  Athenians  and  Thebans,  war  between
Thebans  and  Phocians.  Now  we  have  the  propositions,  which  are  imme
diately  certain  (yvwpt/xa) :

D  is  A — the  war  between  Thebans  and  Phocians  was  harmful.

D  is  B — this  war  was  a  war  between  neighbours.

C  is  B — war  between  Athenians  and  Thebans  is  also  a  war  between

neighbours,
and  we  infer :

C  is  A — therefore  it  is  harmful.

This  contains  really  a  double  inference  ;  from  the  example  it  is  inferred  :

D  is  A,  D  is  B,  therefore  B  is  A  ;

then  from  this  universal  proposition  it  is  inferred,  according  to  the  first
figure  :  B  is  A,  C  is  B,  therefore  C  is  A.2

1  'H  yap  tiraybryrj  5ia  TTO.VTUV. Anal,  pr.,  II.  23,  6S&,  28.

3  The  fact  of  this  double  inference  explains  how  Aristotle  can  say  at  one  time  (68  b  38,
69  a  ii)  that  the  inference  from  the  example  shows  that  the  higher  concept  belongs  to
the  middle  concept  (A  to  B},  and  directly  afterwards  (69  a  13  sq.)  can  state  that  example
differs  from  induction  by  the  fact  that  in  example  we  infer  from  particular  to  particular,
while  induction  does  not  direct  its  conclusion  to  the  lower  concept  (the  particular),  but
nfers  from  all  the  particular  that  the  higher  concept  belongs  to  the  middle  concept.  Thus
nduction  lacks  the  application  to  the  particular  instance  which,  according  to  Aristotle,
s  peculiar  to  the  example  ;  it  is  however  superior  to  the  example  as  affording  complete
evidence  for  the  universal  proposition.


292  LOGIC

In  the  same  way  it  might  be  shown  by  several  examples  that  A  belongs
to  £,  and  this  is  what  Aristotle  calls  in  the  wider  sense  eVaywyT/,  in  those
passages,  that  is,  where  he  does  not  maintain  that  induction  must  include
all  the  particular.

Here  it  is  clear  that  the  first  inference  is  not  cogent,  and  is  not  justified
by  syllogistic  theory.  From  one  or  several  examples  which  may  be  pre
sented  in  the  propositions,

D,  E,  .Fare  A
jD,  £,  F  are  B,

it  does  not  follow  universally  that  B  is  A  ;  there  is  absent  just  that  inclu
sion  of  all  cases  which  would  justify  the  conversion  of  the  minor  premise.
A  generalization  takes  place  by  which  that  which  happened  in  one  or
several  cases  is  taken  as  a  universal  rule.

It  is  worth  noticing  that  Aristotle, when  he  speaks  of  induction,  is
hardly  ever  thinking  of  deriving  a  universal  proposition  from  the  observa
tion  of  particular  instances  in  the  proper  sense. His  examples  generally
have  reference  to  concepts  of  species,  and  what  he  does  is  to  combine,
not  particular  facts  into  a  lowest  concept,  but  specific  concepts  into  a  more
general  concept,  or  specific  rules  into  a  general  rule. That  the  best  driver
j  is  the  man  who  understands  it,  is  itself  a  universal  rule,  but  he  treats  it  as
I  particular;  in  the  same way  he  takes  as  particulars  that  man,  horse  and
mule  are  without  gall,  although  these  are  already  universal  judgments. He
does  not  inquire  how  these  have  been  obtained  from  the  observation  of
particular  men,  horses  and  mules ;  his  metaphysical  presuppositions  make
him  regard  the  power  of  the  conceptual  form  over  the  particular  datura
as  so  absolute,  that  he  never  considers  whether  he  is  justified  in  affirm
ing  of  mankind  what  he  has  observed  in  particular  men,  any  deviation  he
would  attribute  to  the  inertia  or  imperfection  of  matter,  without  losing
faith in the thorough-going  determining  power of  the form. For  this
reason he  is  not  troubled  by  the  objection  which suggests  itself  as  to
whether  the  inexhaustibility  of  number  does  not  make  it  impossible  to
survey all the  particular ;  what  he  is concerned with is the  complete
enumeration  of  the  species  of  a  genus,  and  this  he  holds  to  be  attainable.

When  this  presupposition  that  a  genus  is  exhausted  by  the  enumeration
of  its  known  species,  and  the  previous  presupposition  that  whatever  falls
under  one  specific  concept  is  similarly  constituted,  fail,  then  the  cogency
of  the  imerence  also  breaks  down  ;  it  can  no  longer  be  a  ground  for  the
conceptual  judgment  from  which  further  inferences  may  be  made,  but  only


PROCESS OF  INDUCTION  293

for  the  empirical  summation  of  particular  judgments  by  means  of  a  com
mon  name  (cf.  L,  §  57,  p.  368  sq.).  When,  therefore,  the  inductive  process
is  taken  to  mean  only  that  what  is  true  of  all  A's  known  to  me  is  for  that
reason  true  of  all  A's,  then  the  conclusion  goes  beyond  the  premises  and
the  inference  is  not  cogent.

2.  It  has  been  rightly  pointed  out  that  every  such  inference  can be
represented  as  referring  back  to  those  characteristics  a,  b,  c  of  the  concept
A,  by  which  the  subsumption  is  guided. In  all the  instances  known  to
me  I  find  connected  with  the  attributes  a,  b,  c, a further  attribute  d;
from  that  I  infer  that  everything  which  agrees  with  these  instances  in  pos
sessing  the  attributes  «,  b,  c  will  also  possess  the  attribute  d. I  assume
therefore  that  that  which  is  alike  in  the  known  part  of  its  determinations
will  be  alike  in  the  unknown  remainder  also. But  this  is  nothing  else
than  what  is  ordinarily  called  the  inference  from  analogy  (v.  §  83,  5,  p.  213).
Induction  in  this  sense  first  argues  by  analogy  from  the  known  A's  to  all
others  which  fall  under  the  concept  A,  and  then  sums  up  all  A's  in  a
common  judgment. To  express  it  differently  :  from  the  fact  that  in  the
instances  known  to  me  I  find  a,  b,  c  together  with  </,  I  infer  that  d  accom
panies  those  attributes  a,  b, c  necessarily. But  this  is  only  the  Aristo
telian inference  from  example,  which  would  therefore  coincide  with  in
duction.

3.  Bacon  is  fully  justified in  directing  his  criticism  in  the  Novum


Organon  (i  Aph.  105)  against  this  view  of  the  inductive  inference.  That
induction,  he  says,  which  proceeds  by  simple  enumeration  is  a  childish
matter,  and  infers  rashly,  and  is  always  liable  to  be  refuted  by  a  negative
instance.  It  is  therefore  unsuitable  for  a  scientific  method.

As  opposed  to  it,  Bacon  then  attempts  to  give  the  rules  of  the  true
scientific  methods,  by  which  we  may  pass  safely  from  immediately  given
particular  facts  to  universal  propositions,  and  thus  to  determine  the  true
concept  of  induction.

In  order  to  estimate  rightly  the  instructions  which  he  gives  here,  we
must  bear  in  mind  what  is  the  end  to  which  they  are  intended  to  lead.
•  Knowledge,  he  says,  is  the  knowledge  of  causes  ;  hence  the  universal
propositions  (axiomata)  which  are  to  be  gained  are  causal  laws.  Now,
according  to  Aristotle,  there  are  four  kinds  of  causes  :  material,  efficient,
formal,  and  final  causes.  Final  causes  are  at  once  excluded  from  the  in
vestigation.  Material  and  efficient  causes  have  only  a  subordinate  im
portance  ;  the  most  important  kind  of  cause  is  the  formal.  Form  is  that


294  LOGIC

,  which  constitutes  the  essence  of  a  phenomenon,  the  ground  which  re
mains  the  same  throughout  varying  fortuitous  conditions,  for  the  fact
that  a  thing  is  what  it  is.  There  are  forms  of  concrete  things,  of  gold,
silver,  man,  horse;  but  these  forms  are  not  simple,  but  compounded  from
the  forms  of  particular  qualities,  or,  as  Bacon  calls  them,  natures.  The
form  of  gold  is  compounded  from  the  forms  of  yellow,  heavy,  malleable,
etc.  Therefore  we  must  first  find  the  forms  of  the  simple  and  ultimate
qualities  or  natures,  and  then  from  their  manifold  combinations  we  shall
get  the  forms  of  particular  things.  V

In  these  views  Bacon  shows  himself  still  the  disciple  of  scholasticism.
Although  he  waged  such  bitter  war  against  Aristotle,  he  nevertheless
inherited  from  him  the  presuppositions  of  his  methods ;  the  concept  and
its  attributes  have  an  immediately  real  significance,  and  as  the  concept  is
compounded  from  its  attributes,  so  the  concrete  thing  is  compounded
from  its  various  natures.  But  he  is  also  influenced  by  the  physico-atomis-
tic  theories  of  his  time,  for  he  distinguishes  in  particular  perceptible  attri
butes  between  the  quality  of  sensation  appearing  to  us  (warm,  white,  etc.),
and  that  which  corresponds  to  it  objectively.  This  objective  element  he
looks  for  in  the  structure  of  bodies,  in  the  way  in  which  the  smallest
particles  move  and  are  related  to  each  other.  For  example,  he  considers
(the  cause  of  the  colour  white  to  be  the  mixture  of  a  transparent,  finely
/divided  body  with  air,  on  the  ground  that  powdered  glass  and  snow  are
!  white.  For  this  reason  he  can  explain  the  concept  of  the  form  by  that  of
(  the  law,  the  significance  of  which  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  determines  that
arrangement  or  motion  of  the  smallest  particles.1

On  the  basis  of  these  presuppositions  he  sets  about  describing  the  methods
according  to  which  we  have  to  determine  the  form  of  a  sense-perceived
attribute,  e.g.  of  heat;  i.e.,  to  determine  that  which  really  brings  it  to  pass
that  bodies  are  warm,  however  different  the  substances  may  be  (where
there  are  different  material  causes),  and  however  different  the  occasions
(where  there  are  different  efficient  causes,  friction,  ignition,  etc.).

According  to  the  presuppositions,  then,  the  form  of  heat  must  be  some
thing  which  is  everywhere  where  heat  is,  and  nowhere  where  heat  is  not,
which  is  present  in  a  higher  degree  where  there  is  more  heat,  and  in  a  less
degree  where  there  is  less  heat.

1  Concerning  Bacon's  concept  of  form,  cf.  the  penetrating  investigation  of  Hans
Ileussler,  Franz  Bacon  und  seine  geschichtliche  Stelluiig,  and  flans  Natge,  Ueber  Francis
Bacorfs  Formenlehre.


PROCESS  OF  INDUCTION  295

The  method  of  proceeding  is  as  follows  :  In  the  first  place,  a  table  is
drawn  up  in  which  all  the  instances  are  entered  in  which  heat  appears — sun
beams,  volcanoes,  fire,  warm-blooded  animals,  etc.,  etc.  Secondly,  a  table
is  drawn  up  containing  instances  in  which  heat  is  absent  In  itself  this
would  be  a  never-ending  business  ;  but  it  is  sufficient  to  note  those  cases
which  are  similar  to  the  first  in  other  respects,  but  differ  from  them  in  the
absence  of  heat :  thus  the  moon  is  opposed  to  the  sun,  etc.  Finally,  a
tabula  graduum  is  prepared,  which  contains  all  the  instances  in  which
there  is  a  more  or  less  of  heat.  In  each  of  the  registered  instances,
various  other  qualities  or  natures  are  connected,  or  not  connected,  with
that  of  heat ;  in  the  sun,  the  Natura  cxlestis,  light,  etc.,  are  connected
with  heat ;  in  the  moon,  the  Natura  ccdestis  and  light  are  not  connected
with  heat.

The  problem  now  is  to  discover  that  nature  which  is  everywhere  where
heat  is,  nowhere  where  heat  is  not ;  which  is  present  in  a  higher  degree
where  there  is  more  heat,  in  a  lower  degree  where  there  is  less  heat.
The  process  employed  for  this  purpose  is  that  of  exclusions.  From  those
natures  which  accompany  heat,  all  are  excluded  which  do  not  satisfy  the
conditions ;  and  after  a  complete  process  of  exclusion — hopes  Bacon —
that  nature  will  be  left  which  is  the  desired  form.  So  he  begins :  Rejice
naturam  ccelestem,  because  there  are  heavenly  bodies  which  are  cold,  and
terrestrial  bodies  which  are  warm,  such  as  terrestrial  fire.  Away  with  light
because  there  are  bright  bodies  which  are  cold,  and  dark  bodies  which  are
warm ;  away  with  a  special  heat-substance,  because  warm  bodies  can  im
part  heat  to  others  without  losing  in  weight,  and  so  on.  In  his  illustration,
however,  he  does  not  complete  this  process  of  exclusion,  because  he  is  not
in  possession  of  a  knowledge  of  all  the  natures  present.

The  application  of  his  instructions  obviously  presupposes  that  there  is  a
definite,  finite,  known  number  of  simple  so-called  natures,  and  that  every
observed  phenomenon  is  a  definite  combination  of  a  number  of  such  ele
mentary  determinations  or  natures  ;  that  one  of  these  natures  is  the  form
of  heat,  i.e.,  the  ground  which  is  always  present  when  there  is  a  subjective
sensation  of  heat.  Given  this  presupposition,  then  there  must  be  a  quite
simple  process  of  elimination,  tedious,  perhaps,  and  cumbersome,  but
quite  certain,  and  capable  of  being  carried  out  mechanically  like  a
^calculation.

-  4. In  order  to  get  a  clear  idea  of  the  Baconian  induction,  we  may
represent  it  schematically,  denoting  the  various  natures,  including  heat  w,


296  LOGIC

by  the  letters  of  the  alphabet. The  instances  of  the  first  two  tables  will
then  be  represented  by  the  following  combinations : —

abcdw  acdf

a  b  dfw  a  dfg

b  ghw  d  g  h  x

etc.  etc.

What  we  now  have  to  do  is  to  find  that  letter  which  always  appears  in
the  first  column,  and  never  in  the  second,  and  that  will  be  done  by  striking
out  of  the  total  list  of  letters  every  one  which  appears  in  the  second
column,  and  is  absent  anywhere  in  the  first.

Represented  as  logical  inference,  the  process  will  take  the  following
form  : —

The  form  of  heat  is  either  a  or  b  or  c,  or . . . x  or_y  or  z.
The  form  of  heat  is  not  a,  for

r  the  form  of  heat  is  everywhere  where  heat  is ;
.a  is  not  everywhere  where  heat  is,
.therefore  the  form  of  heat  is  not  a.
The  form  of  heat  is  not  f,  for

the  form  of  heat  is  not  present  where  heat  is  not  present ;
/  is  where  heat  is  not  present,  therefore
the  form  of  heat  is  not  f,  etc.
Whence  we  obtain  by  combining  the  negative  conclusions  :

the  form  of  heat  is  neither  a  nor  c  nor  d,  nor  e  nor . . . z  ;
therefore  the  form  of  heat  is  b.

That  upon  which  the  whole  process,  therefore,  is  grounded  is  a  disjunc
tive  major  premise  with  many  disjunctive  members  ;  the  minor  premise  is
a  copulative  negative  judgment,  which  excludes  all  members  of  the
disjunction  but  one  ;  the  inference  passes  by  the  modus  tollendo  ponens  to
the  member  which  remains.

The  particular  members  of  the  copulative  minor  premise  which  are  com
bined  by  it  are  derived  by  special  syllogisms,  which  are  all  in  the  second
figure,  in  Cesare  or  Camestres.

Thus  we  really  have  a  completely  syllogistic  process ;  the  induction  of
Bacon  is  in  no  way  opposed  to  the  Organon  of  Aristotle.  His  endeavour
to  obtain  certain  propositions  which  are  not  liable  to  the  dangers  of  ordi
nary  induction  leads  him  back  to  the  same  logical  rules  which  he  had
described  as  incapable  of  building  up  science.


PROCESS OF  INDUCTION  297

That  which  is  obtained  by  an  induction,  in  the  sense  of  Aristotle,  is
only  the  enumeration  of  the  members  of  the  disjunctive  major  premise,
in  so  far  as  it  states  that  a  number  of  empirically  discovered  natures  ex
hausts  the  totality  of  the  concept.  But  it  is  just  this  major  premise  which
Bacon  is  unable  to  establish,  nor  has  he  given  any  rules  as  to  how  it  is
to  be  found,  and  how  we  are  to  obtain  certainty  about  it ;  he  recognises
a  weak  place,  which  he  promises  to  remedy  later  on.

But  all  which  follows  in  the  particular  steps  of  the  process  of  inference
is  as  purely  deductive  as  any  process  of  inference  in  Aristotle ;  inferences
are  drawn  from  a  principle  which  is  not  gained  from  experience,  but  is
assumed  a  priori,  and  from  the  concept  contained  in  it.  The  principle  is
that  every  quality  perceptible  by  sense  has  one  formal  cause,  which  con
sists  in  one  of  the  natures ;  and  it  is  a  part  of  the  concept  of  cause  to  be
always  immediately  connected  with  the  effect,  and  to  be  proportionate
to  the  effect.

From  this  principle  follows  the  disjunction  of  the  major  premise,  by
means  of  which  it  is  affirmed  that  one_na.tuTQ,  to  the  exclusion  of  all
others,  is  the  desired  form ;  from  this  concept  there  follow  the  major
premises  of  the  particular  syllogisms  by  which  the  exclusion  is  carried
out.

Thus,  although  Bacon  lays  such  stress  upon  experience,  and  insists  that
scientific  investigation  must  take  perception  of  the  particular  as  its  founda
tion,  he  does  not  really  derive  any  universal  proposition  from  merely  par
ticular  facts  of  experience  by  themselves.  The  facts  of  experience  only
give  him  the  minor  premises;  they  can  only  be  employed  as  members
of  a  process  of  inference  when  accompanied  by  universal  major  premises
which  can  trace  their  descent  from  the  scholastic  metaphysics.

5.  The  question  as  to  the  nature  and  justification  of  a  method  of
obtaining  universal  propositions  which  should  start  from  particular  per
ceptions  alone  without  the  aid  of  general  principles  could  not  be  formu
lated  clearly  and  completely  until  Locke  and  Hume  had  propounded  the
thesis  that  all  knowledge  and  all  mental  content  whatever  has  its  origin
in  experience  alone,  and  that  therefore  all  universal  propositions  must  have
the  same  origin.  The  critical  point  in  the  question  was  introduced  when
Hume  undertook  to  derive  entirely  from  particular  sense  impressions  just
that  concept  which  had  played  the  chief  part  amongst  Bacon's  presup
positions,  the  causal  concept.

But  there  are  two  meanings  in  which  the  question,  "  how  do  we  pass


298  LOGIC

from  particular  impressions  to  universal  propositions  ?  "  may  be  asked,
the  psychological  and  the  logical.  It  may  be  asked  :  How  does  it  happen
that  from  particular  perceptions  alone  we  arrive  at  the  belief  in  universal
propositions  and  at  conclusions  about  that  which  is  not  perceived  ?  or  it
may  be  asked  :  What  right  have  we  to  derive  a  universal  judgment  from
particular  conceptions,  and  by  what  right  do  we  infer  from  known  facts
to  unknown  facts  ?

In  other  words,  we  must  distinguish  between  induction  as  a  psycho
logical  fact,  and  induction  as  a  logical  method.

,  6.  It  is  in  the  first  sense  that  Hume  has  interpreted  the  problem,  and
his  treatment  is  distinguished  by  its  complete  clearness  and  consistency.
In  accordance  with  simple  psychological  laws  associations  are  formed
which  give  rise  to  habits  of  imagination ;  qualities  which  we  have  seen
several  times  connected  with  another  quality  associate  themselves  in  our
imagination  in  such  a  way  that  when  we  think  of  the  former  the  latter  also
presents  itself,  and  when  we  come  across  the  former  again  we  expect  the
latter  also.  In  the  same  way  events  which  we  have  seen  succeed  each
other  repeatedly  give  rise  to  an  association,  and  when  the  first  appears
we  necessarily  expect  the  second.  Humejnight  have  added  that  not  even
a  repetition  is  needed  to  give  rise  to  an  association ;  one  case,  if  only  it
has  made  a  lively  impression,  is  sufficient  to  make  us  expect  a  similar
event  in  a  similar  case.  Burnt  children  dread  the  fire  after  a  first  experi
ence,  and  refuse  the  second  spoonful  of  a  bitter  medicine;  repetition
merely  strengthens  and  confirms  the  association  which  a  single  event  was
sufficient  to  establish.  Or  we  may  express  this  process  differently  by
saying  that  there  is  a  powerful  and  ever-acting  tendency  to  generalize
every  particular  proposition  which  experience  offers  ;  we  are  always  in
clined  to  expect  similar  from  similar,  and  we  meet  the  events  of  every
new  day  with  a  host  of  anticipations,  which  are  grounded  upon  single
or  repeated  experiences  ;  we  are  always  guided  by  such  generalizations
in  seeking  the  useful  and  avoiding  the  harmful.  All  experience  in  the
ordinary  sense,  all  the  rules  which  guide  the  action  of  men,  and  even  of
animals,  may  be  traced  to  this  ^tendency.  If  induction  is  nothing  more
than  the  process  of  forming,  from  a  number  of  propositions  of  perception
referring  to  particular  things,  a  universal  judgment  which  we  take  as  a
ground  for  expecting  similar  results  from  similar  things  in  the  future,  then
we  certainly  do  not  need  to  learn  the  process  of  induction ;  we  practise
it  from  childhood  without  instruction  and  without  being  conscious  of  a


PROCESS OF  INDUCTION  299

/

ih,wC*

rule,  just  as  we  digest  and  breathe. We  are  dealing  with  apsychplogical ' ^

and  natural  law  of  generalization,  the  validity  of  which  is  unassailable .jt--
^ .„__ a — »-

upon  psychological  ground ;  and  when  in  many  instances  new  experiences '
constantly  fulfil  our  expectations  and  strengthen  the  associations,  there
results  quite  naturally  and  in  an  increasing  degree  what  Hume  calls  belief,
the  subjective  confidence  that  our  anticipations  will  continue  to  be  justi
fied  in  the  future  also.

7.  But  Hume  is  acute  and  logical  enough  to  see  that  the  universal  ^
rules  thus  obtained  cannot  possess  objective  validity,  that  we  cannot  pre
tend  to  regard  the  laws  of  association  amongst  our  ideas  as  laws  of  real
things,  and  that  the  feeling  of  subjective  psychological  constraint  must
not  be  confused  with  an  objective  knowledge  of  the  necessity  of  nature  ;
upon  this  foundation,  therefore,  no  science  can  be  erected,  but  only  the

I

recognition  of  the  impossibility  of  knowledge.

However  firmly  established,  therefore,  the  psychological  fact  may  be
that  we  generalize  in  consequence  of  the  laws  of  association,  nothing  is
determined  by  it  as  to  our  right  to  the  generalization  and  the  trustworthi
ness  of  the  assumptions  based  upon  it.  If  we  simply  have  in  view  a
collection  of  particular  facts  there  is  nothing  to  show  us  how  ninety-nine
cases  in  which  we  have  found  a  raven  to  be  black  are  to  decide  anything
as  to  whether  the  hundredth  is  also  black,  since  this  hundredth  is  as  much
a  particular,  independent  instance  as  the  first ;  the  accumulation  of  obser
vations  which  agree  can  do  nothing  directly  but  heighten  the,  subjectivg
probability-with  which  we  are  inclined  to  expect  in  the  hundredth  case
what  appeared  in  the  ninety-nine  preceding  cases  ;  but  this  subjective
probability  has  no  kind  of  significance  with  reference  to  reality.

8.  This  sceptical  result  of  Hume's  forced  his  successors  in  the  doctrine
of  empiricism  to  look  around  for  a  guarantee  by  which  to  justify  generaliza
tion  ;  nevertheless  they  are  frequently  obliged  to  be  content  to  show  that
our  universal  propositions  are  as a  matter  of fact  largely  obtained  by
generalizations  from  experience,  instead  of  showing  that  some  objective
necessity  justifies  this  process  as  a  logical  method  of  obtaining  universal
propositions  of  certain  validity.

In  one  respect  J.  S.  Mill  holds  the  same  views  as  Hume.  For  him
nothing  is  given  but  particular  sensations,  and  these  sensations  are  origin
ally  subjective  states  of  feeling.  But  there  must  be  some  way  of
proceeding  from  these  to  science  in  the  full  sense,  and  this  way  is  to  be
shown  by  inductive  logic  ;  this  will  be,  moreover,  the  only  way  in  which


300  LOGIC

we  can  pass  beyond  immediate  experience  to  the  knowledge  of  something
which  we  do  not  experience  immediately.

Induction,  as  he  defines  it,1  is  that  operation  of  the  mind  by  which  we
infer  that  what  we  know  to  be  true  in  a  particular  case  or  cases  will  be
true  in  all  cases  which  resemble  the  former  in  certain  assignable  respects—
the  process  by  which  we  conclude  that  what  is  true  of  certain  individuals
of  a  class  is  true  of  the  whole  class,  or  that  what  is  true  at  certain  times  will
be  true  in  similar  circumstances  at  all  times.

But  he  goes  on  to  add  that  this  process  of  inference  presupposes  a  prin
ciple,  a  general  assumption  with  regard  to  the  course  of  nature  and  the
order  of  the  universe,  namely,  that  what  happens  once  will,  under  a  suffi
cient  degree  of  similarity  of  circumstances,  happen  again,  and  not  only
again,  but  as  often  as  the  same  circumstances  recur.2  [This  proposition,
that  the  course  of  nature  is  uniform,  is  the  fundamental  principle,  or  general
axiom  of  induction.^

Every  particular  'so-called  induction  is  therefore  a  syllogism,  of  which
the  major  premise  is  this  general  principle,  and  which  can  be  expressed  as
follows  : —

Under  similar  circumstances,  the  same  event  will  always  happen.

Under  circumstances  a,  6,  c,  D  has  been  found  ;

Therefore  under  circumstances  a,  b,  c,  D  will  always  be  found.

It  is  clear,  although  Mill  has  not  sufficiently  noted  it,  that,  regarded
only  in  this  aspect,  the  particular  case  proves  just  as  much  as  a  whole
series  of  cases,  and  that  I  can  draw  exactly  the  same  conclusion  from  a
•  single  observation  as  from  many  similar  observations.

But  now  the  question  arises  as  to  the  origin  of  the  universal  major  pre
mise  and  the  consequent  significance  of  this  syllogism ;  and  here  comes  in
again  Mill's  doctrine  as  to  the  nature  of  the  syllogism  of  which  we  have
already  spoken  (I.  §  55,  3,  p.  359).  The  universal  major  premise  cannot
explain  the  inductive  process,  for  it  is  itself  obtained  by  induction ;  it  is
indeed  one  of  the  latest  and  highest  inductions  grounded  upon  preceding
partial  inductions.  The  more  obvious  laws  of  nature  must  have  been
already  recognised  by  induction  as  general  truths  before  we  could  think  of
this  highest  generalization.  Hence  we  can  only  regard  this  highest  major
premise  as  a  guarantee  for  all  our  inductions  in  the  sense  in  which  all  major
premises  contribute  something  to  the  validity  of  their  syllogisms  ;  the  major

1  J.  S.  Mill,  System  of  Deductive  and  Inductive  Logic,  bk.  iii.  ch.  2.
*  Ib.,  ch.  iii.  p.  331.


PROCESS OF  INDUCTION  301

jremise  contributes  nothing  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  conclusion,  but  is  a
ecessary  condition  of  its  being  proved,  since  no  conclusion  can  be  proved
or  which  there  cannot  be  found  from  the  same  grounds  a  valid  universal
najor  premise.

In  other  words,  we  really  infer  only  from  observed  cases  of  uniformity  to
ther  cases  ;  because  we  have  found  a  uniform  relation  between  a  certain
.umber  of  phenomena,  we  infer  that  it  will  be  so  also  with  every  other
lass  of  phenomena ;  but,  according  to  Mill,  this  latter  conclusion — a  real
Aristotelian  inference  from  example — is^nly_certain_ifjwe  can  infer  from
tie_observed  uniformities  to^enetal  uniformity.

Upon  what  ground  can  we  infer  from  a  number  of  instances  of  observed
niformity  to  universal  uniformity  ?  Mill  enters  more  fully  into  this  ques-
ion  in  chapter  21  of  the  same  book  on  the  Law  of  Universal  Causation.
le  there  tells  us  that  men  first  begin  to  perceive  uniformity  within  parti-
ular  provinces;  they  learn  that  fire  burns,  food  nourishes,  water  drowns,  and
hey  learn  it  by  means  of  an  inductio  per  enumerationem  simplicem.  After
hey  have  perceived  a  number  of  such  uniformities  they  generalize  their
>bservation,  and  assume  a  general  uniformity,  and  this  assumption  enables
hem  to  look  for  and  find  uniformity  even  where  it  is  not  obvious.

One  would  think  that  since  the  inductio  per  enumerationem  simplicem  is
n  unreliable  process  in  particular  inferences,  inasmuch  as  it  is  often  decep-
ive,  the  inference  to  a  universal  uniformity  must  be  doubly  unreliable,
'irst  we  make  the  uncertain  inference  from  particular  cases  of  a  given
ind  to  all  cases,  assuming  what  is  at  most  only  probable,  that  the  unknown
re  similar  to  the  known ;  then  from  the  particular  results  thus  obtained
^e  derive  a  second  generalization,  which  would  itself  be  uncertain,  even  if

were  based  upon  none  but  certain  data,  and  which  is  doubly  uncertain,
ince  it  has  for  its  ground  not  facts,  but  uncertain  generalizations.

Mill  does  indeed  try  to  show  that  the  inductio  per  enumerationem  simplicem
»  more  reliable  in  proportion  as  it  refers  to  a  more  extensive  subject-
latter.  "  When  a  fact  has  been  observed  a  certain  number  of  times  to  be
•ue,  and  is  not  in  any  instance  known  to  be  false,  if  we  at  once  affirm
lat  fact  as  an  universal  truth  or  law  of  Nature  ...  we  shall  in
eneral  err  greatly;  but  we  are  perfectly  justified  in  affirming  it  as  an
mpirical  law,  true  within  certain  limits  of  time,  place,  and  circumstance,

rovided  the  number  of  coincidences  be  greater  than  can  with  any  probability

e  ascribed  to  chance." But  if  the  subject-matter  of  any  generalization  is

)  widely  diffused  that  there  is  no  time,  no  place,  and  no  combination  of


302  LOGIC

circumstances,  but  must  afford  an  example  either  of  its  truth  or  of  its
falsity,  and  if  it  be  never  found  otherwise  than  true,  then  it  is  an  empirical
law,  co-extensive  with  all  human  experience,  a  point  at  which  the  distinc
tion  between  empirical  laws  and  laws  of  nature  vanishes.  Hence  the
4  causadlaw  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  most  extensive,  and  therefore  the  most

\  certain  induction.

It  need  not  be  pointed  out  that  this  latter  comparison  between  the
. greater  and  lesser  certainty  of  induction has  a  meaning  only  when  we
^  assume  the  uniformity  of  nature  to  be  actually  forthcoming,  and  are  con
sidering  the  conditions  under  which  it  may  be  known ;  it  has  no  meaning
"  so  long  as  we  are  still  endeavouring  to  obtain  the  certainty  of  this  unifor
mity. It  is  true  that  when  we  are  dealing  with  many,  and  to  some  extent
counteracting,  conditions,  it  is  more  difficult  to perceive  the  uniformity
which  is  there ;  but  what  has  that  to  do  with  the  question  whether  we  have
any  right  at  all  to  assume  a  universal  uniformity?

According  to  Mill's  own  views,  we  have  no  such  right  from  the  stand
point  of  the  inductio  per  enumerationem  simplicem. He  himself  observes
that  at  the  beginning  of  investigation  the  uniformity  of  phenomena  appears
within  certain  spheres,  but  not  in  others ;  hence  these  latter  are  "  negative
instances  " ;  and  it  would  be  absolutely  inconceivable  that,  in  view  of  the
absence of  law  throughout  so  large  a  sphere  of  phenomena,  men  should
ever  reach  the  idea  of  universal  uniformity  if  they  had  had  nothing  but  the
facts  of  experience,  which  Mill  himself  admits  could  for  the  most  part  be
I brought  under  general  laws  only  by  the  application  of  methods  which  are
4 \  derived  from  the  principle  of  universal  uniformity.

Moreover^Minjiimselfjienies  the  universal  validity  of  the  law  of  causa
tion  by  the  limitations  which  he  sets  to  it.  He  recognises  that  there  is
nothing  in  our  experience  which  could  yield  a  sufficient,  or  indeed  any
ground  for  believing  it  to  be  impossible  that  in  some  distant  region  of  the
fixed  stars  events  might  succeed  each  other  by  chance,  and  not  according
to  any  fixed  law  ;  he  finds  it  possible  to  conceive  of  the  present  order  of
the  universe  coming  to  an  end  and  a  chaos  following,  in  which  there  would
be  no  fixed  order.  The  uniformity  in  the  succession  of  events  must  be
;  received  not  as  a  law  of  the  universe,  but  of  that  portion  of  it  only  which
is  within  the  range  of  our  means  of  sure  observation,  with  a  reasonable
degree  of  extension  to  adjacent  cases.

/ By  these  limitations  the  universality  of  the  induction  is  really  destroyed;

0J  if  it  depends  upon  what  lies  within  the  range  of  our  sure  observation,  then

inference  from  the  known  to  the  unknown  is  abolished  in  principle;  if  we


PROCESS OF  INDUCTION  303

never  know  where  the  limits  lie  in  space  or  in  time  beyond  which  we  are
no  longer  to  be  able  to  infer,  then  we  can  lay  down  no  universal  proposi
tions  ;  we  are  confined  to  narrating  what  has  happened  until  now,  to
narrating  that  so  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  disentangle  phenomena  they
have  shown  uniformities,  to  narrating  that  our  conjecture  that  what  has
happened  a  hundred  times  will  happen  again  has  often  been  confirmed,
but  for  the  rest  we  must  leave  it  to  chance,  or  to  the  gods,  whether  it
will  happen  again  in  the  next  hour  or  in  a  remote  stellar  region.  When
we  lay  down  a  universal  proposition  we  venture  upon  unsafe  ground,  and
there  is  ultimately  no  motive  for  assuming  such  a  proposition  beyond  mere
subjective  association.

Taking  away  with  one  hand  what  he  gives  with  the  other,  Mill  shows  in
the  uncertainty  of  his  views  the  helplessness  of  pure  empiricism,  the  im
possibility  of  erecting  an  edifice  of  universal  propositions  on  the  sand-heap
of  shifting  and  isolated  facts,  or,  more  accurately,  sensations  ;  the  endeavour
to  extract  any  necessity  from  a  mere  sum  of  facts  must  be  fruitless.

The  only  true  point  in  the  whole  treatment  is  one  in  which  Mill  as  a
logician  gets  the  better  of  Mill  as  an  empiricist ;  namely,  that  every  in
ductive  inference  contains  a  universal  principle ;  that  if  it  is  to  be  an  in
ference  and  not  merely  an  association  of  only  subjective  validity,  the
transition  from  the  empirically  universal  judgment  all  known  A's  are  B  to
the  unconditionally  universal  all  that  is  A  is  B  can  only  be  made  by
means  of  a  universal  major  premise,  and  that  only  upon  condition  of  this
being  true  are  we  justified  in  inferring  from  the  particular  known  A's  to
the  still  unknown  A's.  But  then  the  universal  major  premise  cannot  be  \
obtained  simply  by  means  of  a  summation  of  facts,  for  this  by  itself  can
yield  no  more  than  it  says,  that  in  a  certain  number  of  cases  A  was  B,  and
as  pure  matter  of  fact  contains  no  reason  for  passing  beyond  these  A's  to
other  A's ;  it  must  have  some  other  origin  than  in  previously  perceived
facts,  and  our  right  to  make  use  of  it  must  have  some  other  ground  than
the  narration  of  cases  which  have  been  observed  so  far.

9.  It  has  sometimes  been  thought  that  the  theory  of  probabilities  might
be  called  in  to  establish,  if  not  absolute  certainty,  yet  a  probability  approxi
mating  as  near  as  we  like  to  certainty,  for  a  general  proposition  when  it  has
been  confirmed  in  a  given  number  of  cases ;  and  we  are  instructed  to
reason  somewhat  in  this  fashion :  If  a  and  b  did  not  belong  necessarily
together,  but  coincided  by  chance,  then  the  judgment  would  be  true  that
a  is  either  accompanied  by  £,  or  not  accompanied,  meaning  that  there  is


304  LOGIC

an  equal  probability  for  either  case  ;  the  probability  for  either  would  be
\.  Suppose,  now,  in  100  cases  where  a  is  present,  b  is  always  there;  if
we  assume  their  coincidence  to  be  fortuitous,  the  probability  that  they  will
accompany  each  other  100  times  in  100  cases  is  only  (|)IO°;  but  if  we
assume  that  they  are  necessarily  connected,  this  result  would  be  necessary,
therefore  certain,  and  thus  the  second  assumption  is  incomparably  more
probable  than  the  other.

But  in  stating  the  alternative  between  chance  and  necessity  this  deduc
tion  presupposes  the  existence  of  necessary  connections,  and  can  merely
help  us  to  find  them  with  more  or  less  probability  in  the  particular  case,
and  to  determine  which  of  the  given  coincidences  may  be  regarded  with
most  probability  as  the  sign  of  necessary  connection.  It  cannot,  therefore,
dispense  with  the  hypothesis  of  a  uniform  order,  in  inferring  by  induction
to  a  presupposed  proposition,  and  here  also  this  hypothesis  is  not  the
simple  product  of  facts  ;  finally,  as  in  every  induction,  the  process  leads
only  to  probability,  not  to  certainty.

10.  We  might,  finally,  take  the  purely  logical  point  of  view,  and  say
that  it  is  an  identical  proposition,  that  all  A's  are  constituted  alike ;  that
like  things  have  the  same  attributes,  that  under  like  circumstances  the
same  event  will  take  place  ;  it  is  a  part  of  the  concept  of  likeness  that  one
thing  can  be  simply  substituted  for  another.

This  proposition  is  no  doubt  true,  but  it  fails  to  apply  to  the  given.
For  the  question  is  just  this,  whether  what  seems  to  us  like  is  really  like;
whether  the  constancy  which  prevails  in  our  concepts  is  realized  in  that
which  we  perceive.  Absolute  likeness  in  all  attributes  and  relations  is  an
ideal  which  we  could  not  see  realized  in  perceptible  things  until  we  had
thoroughly  penetrated  them  and  learned  to  know  them  in  all  aspects ;  but
as  soon  as  this  came  to  pass  any  ground  for  an  inference  leading  from  the
known  to  the  unknown  would  disappear ;  nothing  would  remain  but  simple
subsumption,  and  before  we  could  undertake  this  everything  which  induc
tion  endeavours  to  infer  must  be  directly  observed.  As  the  presupposition
for  a  process  of  induction,  therefore,  this  self-evident  proposition  is  useless  ;
"'an  every  induction  it  is  assumed  that  we  are  justified  in  inferring  from  a
group  of  a  few  perceptible  attributes  which  serve  for  subsumption  under  a
specific  or  generic  concept  to  one  or  more  other  predicates  which  are  not
directly  perceptible,  or  which  we  can  dispense  with  perceiving  directly  just
because  the  connection  which  we  find  in  a  number  of  individuals  between
the  conceptual  attributes  and  other  predicates  justifies  us  in  assuming  that


PROCESS OF  INDUCTION  305

they  are  necessarily  connected. The  proposition  that  all  ravens  are  black
can  indeed  be  inferred  from  a  single  example,  if  I  determine  to  give  the
name  of  raven  only  to  those  birds  which  are  exactly  like  my  pattern  raven
in  all  respects,  so  like  that  I  can  substitute  any  one  for  the  first ;  the  pro
position  is then as analytical as  the  proposition  that  all  triangles  are
triangular. But  then  before  I  can  apply  the  word  raven  to  any  bird,,  I  shall
first  have  to  show  that  it  resembles  the  first  in  all  respects,  and  if  I once
know  that,  I  have  no  further  need  of  inference,  since  I  can  learn  nothing
fresh  about  it. But  I  may  regard  the  proposition  "  all  ravens  are  black  "
as  obtained  by  induction  :  then  my  concept  of  raven contains primarily
those characteristics which are taken from the form and anatomical
structure,  etc. ;  in  many  cases  and  without  exception  I  have  found  the
black  colour  of  the  plumage  combined  with  this  form,  and  am  now  to
believe  that  black  is  so  inseparably  connected  with  the  characteristics of
the  form  that  I  can  lay  down  the  universal  major  premise  "  whatever  has
the  form  and  structure  of  the  raven has  black plumage,"  and  may  be
certain  beforehand  that  every  bird  with  that  form  must  also  have  black  I*
plumage. But  it  is  evident  that  hundreds  of  thousands  of  black  ravens  I ft
would  not  make  it  impossible  that  I  should  ever  come  across  a  white  one  ; ^
they  prove  only  that  so  far  as  my  observation  extends  ravens  are  black,  not j
that  the  combination  of  white  plumage  with  the  structure  of  the  raven  is  <J
impossible.
If  we  _shou_ld_  try  to  employ  the  principle  that  like  is  true  of  like  as  a  ^  \

oasis  for  induction,  we  should  find  it  useless,  not  only  because  absolute [\ /-jo,

I /\i  w'
ikeness  cannot  be  known,  but  also  because  in  many  departments  of  reality

!  t  is  the  rule  for  the  objects,  to  which  I  must  apply  my  concepts  if  I  am  to  ^
nake  any  use  at  all  of  them,  to  differ  individually.

ii. We  may  take  the  question  as  we  will;  we  shall  never  find  in  the

;iven  a  sufficient  ground  to  yield  us  the  conviction  that  because  so  many

>erceived  A's  have  without  exception  the  attribute  J3,  or  because  event  B

ias followed so many times upon circumstance  A, therefore  it  must

•ecessarily  be  so. The  innumerable  exceptions  by  which  many  attempted

eneralizations  of  this  kind  are  met  do,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  refute  even  to

uperfluity  the  assumption  that  a  universal  law  can  be  derived  with  infal-

ble  certainty  from  similar  cases,  however  great  their  number. For  a  long

me  it  is  for  most  Europeans  a  good  induction  that  all  men  are  white;  it

a  good  induction  that  all  men  have  five  fingers  ;  for  thousands  of  years

was  a  good  induction  that  all  metals  are  heavier  than  water. We  cannot

' S.  L.— II.  X


3o6  LOGIC

even  guard  against  exceptions,  which  may  subsequently  overthrow  a
universal  proposition  by  insisting  upon  our  observations  being  as  extensive
as  possible;  at  the  best  our  field  of  observation  is  minute  as  compared
with  space,  and  is  always  limited  in  time  by  insurmountable  barriers ;
nevertheless,  both  theoretically  and  practically,  the  value  of  the  universal
propositions  we  are  looking  for  consists  to  an  important  extent  in  the  fact
that  the  future  is  to  conform  to  them.

12.  On  the  other  hand,  it  remains  just  as  certain  that  our  knowledge  of
the  perceived  world  has  arisen  and  developed  in  no  other  way  than  by
these  inferences,  for  which  there  is,  strictly  speaking,  no  sufficient  ground
and  the  results  of  which  have  been  actually  confuted  in  thousands  of  cases.
These  inferences  were,  indeed,  made  before  any  question  was  raised  as  to
the  assumption  upon  which  they  were  made;  men  continued  to  make  them
without  being  disturbed  by  the  numerous  cases  in  which  they  turned  out
badly  ;  and  unless  such  attempts  had  been  constantly  renewed,  and  had
become  gradually  more  successful,  the  universal  highest  principle,  without
which  no  conscious  method  was  possible,  could  not  have  been  established
and  applied,  although  even  this  principle  is  in  no  way  strictly  justified  if
we  regard  it  merely  as  the  result  of  such  inferences.

How  is  the  riddle  to  be  solved  ?  Does  it  not  seem  humiliating,  and  a
bad  omen  for  the  value  of  all  logic,  that  the  greatest  and  most  important
part  of  all  our  knowledge  should  have  arisen  in  an  illogical  manner,  as  it
were  by  chance,  and  in  defiance  of  strict  logic  ?  that  in  demanding  the
proof  of  a  proposition  logic  is  a  preacher  in  the  wilderness,  with  whom  no
one  troubles  himself?

If  we  look  more  closely,  however,  we  shall  find  that  logic  has  played  a
more  important  part  in  our  empirically  gained  knowledge  than  might
appear  ;  it  needs  only  to  see  rightly  what  that  part  has  been.

13.  It  is  true  that  human  experience  begins  first  with  those  associations
which  make  us  expect  to  undergo  again  what  we  have  undergone  once.
It  is  these  associations  which  make  the  infant  expect  milk  from  its  mother,
and  not  from  its  father ;  which  make  the  child  believe  that  the  apple  he
sees  tastes  good,  and  desire  it,  and  which  make  him  fear  the  bottle  holding
a  bitter  medicine  ;  and  as  one  part  of  these  associations  is  confirmed  by
frequent  repetitions,  while  another  part  is  destroyed  by  contradictory  ex
periences,  the  universe  becomes  divided  into  one  sphere  in  which  we  feel
at  home,  and  are  accustomed  to  expect  results  with  certainty,  and  another
composed  of  phenomena  which  are  changing,  variable,  and  fortuitous.


PROCESS OF  INDUCTION  307

It  is  characteristic  that  from  this  point  of  view  of  mere  associations  the
belief  which  is  based  upon  association  can  hardly  be  shaken,  even  by
exceptions,  especially  when  this  belief  is  not  merely  theoretical,  but  has  »

grown  up  with  the  wishes  and  needs  of  men.  Chance  is  of  such  every-day
occurrence  within  a  wide  sphere  that  it  is  not  found  strange  that  it  should

••  • A O —

sometimes  occur  even  within  the  sphere  where  order  is  the_rul_e  ;  by  some
personification  of  the  capricious  power  of  chance  men  easily  overcome  the
difficulties  which  further  reflection  might  find  in  exceptions.  There  is  even
a  peculiar  attraction  about  the  exception ;  it  is  an  object  of  wonder,  a
flavin,  and  the  miracle  is  accepted  with  the  same  easy  credulity  as  the
supposed  rule.

The  whole  history  of  popular  ideas  about  nature  refutes  the  assumption
that  the  idea  of  a  universal  order  can  in  any  way  have  arisen  of  itself,  by
the  mere  passive  reception  and  association  of  particular  perceptions.
There  is  no  doubt  that  every  one  infers  from  known  cases  to  unknown,  but
it  ist  just  as  certain  that_jhis  process^ so  long  as  it  starts^ only  from  that
whicJL  presents  itself,  cannot  lead  to  the  assumption  of  universal  uniformity,


but  only  to  the  thought  that  law  and  disorder  bear  sway  in  wild  alternation.


But  for  strict  empiricism  there  is  nothing  but  the  sum  of  particular  percep
tions  with  their  coincidences  on  the  one  side,  and  their  contradictions  on
'the  other  side.

That  there  is  more  order  in  the  world  than  it  shows  at  first  sight,  is  only
found  out  when  order  is  looked  for. The  first  impulse  to  look  for  it  starts J  sr,
Irrom^practical  needs  ;  where  we  want  to  attain  ends  we  must  find  reliable  .X
neans,  which  are  certain  to  possess  an  attribute  or  to  bring  about  a  result. *7
.But  practical  needs  merely  form  the  first  occasion  for  reflecting  upon  the
Conditions  of  a  real  and  certain  knowledge;  apart  from  them  there  are
notives  which  drive  us  beyond  the  level  of  mere  association. It  is  not
vim  equal  interest,  or  rather  equal  want  of  interest,  that  we  confront  events
n  which  like  combines  itself  with  like,  or  like  with  different ;  the  former
orrespond  to  the  conditions  of  our  thought,  the  latter  do  not ;  in  the
Drmer  our  concepts,  judgments,  and  inferences  have  a  significance  for
sality,  in  the  latter  they  have  none. Thus  even  the  satisfaction,  which  we
rst  feel  without  thinking  about  it,  contains  the  stimulus  to  the  wish  to  find
ialized  in  the  whole  world  of  the  perceptible  that  necessity  which  is  the
indamental  element,  and  the  aim  by  which  we  guide  our  thought.
14. Thus,  as  we  have  shown  in §  62,  the  universal  presupposition  by
hich  we  are  guided  in  our  mental  elaboration  of  the  particular  proposi-


3o8  LOGIC

-  tions  given  by  perception  is  that  the  Given  is  necessary ;  and  since
necessity  signifies  for  us  the  same  as  the  invariable  and  universal  connec
tion  of  a  ground  with  a  consequence,  we  get  as  the  postulate  of  our  search
for  knowledge  that  every  particular  perception  is  an  instance  of  a  general
rule,  a  conclusion  which  follows  from  subordination  to  a  universal  major
premise.  This  presupposition  has  reference  both  to  the  co-existence  of
the  permanent  attributes  which  we  find  in  a  particular  object,  and  to  the
connection  between  the  changes  in  the  same  or  different  objects  ;  the
concepts  of  things,  in  which  we  synthesize  certain  perceptible  attributes  at
first  as  subjective  images,  have  objective  significance  just  in  so  far  as  the
connection  is  necessary,  and  as  there  is  a  general  rule  according  to  which
these  attributes  exist  together  in  the  particular  case ;  the  particular  event
is  necessary  when  it  happens  according  to  a  rule  which  prescribes  that
under  certain  conditions  a  certain  change  will  take  place.

Hence  it  follows  that  we  are  forced  by  the  nature  of  knowledge  to
apprehend  all  particular  objects  and  facts  with  which  observation  presents
us  as  instances  in  which  a  universal  rule  expresses  itself ;  the  problem  of
induction  is  to  find  this  universal  rule,  and  to  formulate  it  in  such  a  way
that  the  Given  shall  everywhere  correspond  to  it.

In  other  words,  we  are  dealing  with  a  process  of  reduction,  which  con
structs  the  premises  from  which  the  particular  perception  follows  with
syllogistic  necessity,  whether  it  expresses  the  co-existence  of  attributes  in  a
thing,  or  a  change,  or  the  succession  of  different  changes  ;  and  the  problem
is  to  determine  these  major  premises  in  such  a  way  that  they  may  be  in
harmony  with  all  the  perceptions  known  to  us. l

15.  From  this  it  follows  in__the  first  place  that  the  propositions  gained
by  induction  are  never  proved  in  the  strict  sense,  but  from  a  logical  point
"of  view  are  only  hypotheses  ;  further,  that  the  fundamental  principles  even
of  induction  are  based  upon  the  rules  of  the  syllogism,  by  which  it  is  deter
mined  whether  the  premises  assumed  lead  necessarily  to  the  conclusion.
Just  as  in  the  division  of  a  number  by  a  divisor  what  we  want  to  do  is  merely
to  determine  by  what  number  the  divisor  must  be  multiplied  in  order  to  give
the  dividend,  and  the  division  of  36  by  4  consists  solely  in  going  through
the  products  of  4  as  contained  in  the  multiplication  table  in  order  to  find
the  one  which  is  36,,  multiplication  being  for  that  reason  the  proof  o

1  It  has  been  shown  quite  clearly  by  Jevons,  Principles  of  Science,  I.  139  sq.,  that  in
duction  as  a  logical  method  is  a  reverse  operation,  and  is  related  to  deduction  as  divisioi
to  multiplication,  or  the  integral  to  the  differential  calculus.


PROCESS  OF  INDUCTION  309

division,  so  also  methodical  induction  always  presupposes  the  knowledge


of  deduct[on/anH^  can  onlyseek  the  premises  which,  according  to  known
rules,  give  the  result,  and  the  proof  of  it  is  that  the  result ^  really^ follows  of
necessity  fromjihese  rules.  iLdiffers.  however,  from  division  in  that  the
proof  does  not  prove  the  correctness  of  the  premises,  but  only  their  pos
sibility  ;  for  it  is  conceivable  that  every  conclusion  should  have  different
premises  from  which  it  may  follow.

T]hus  induction  necessarily  takes  the  form  of  a  hypothetical  experimental
method,  which  tests  an  assumed  proposition  by  the  agreement  of  its  conse
quences  with  given  progressive  perceptions,  and  so  determines  whether  it
may  be  accepted  as  the  rule  to  which  the  particular  conforms  ;  and  it  must
at  once  relinquish  its  assumed  propositions  when  their  consequences  con
tradict  observed  facts.

In  this  respect  Bacon  is  right  in  telling  us  to  proceed  by  way  of  exclu-  "7
sion,  and  has  hit  upon  the  most  essential  feature  of  the  logical  process  of
induction,  that  only  negative  conclusions  are  strictly  necessary.

If  a  perception  does  not  agree  with  what  is  at  first  the  assumed  hypo
thesis  of  a  universal  proposition,  then,  assuming  the  process  of  inference  to
be  correct,  one  of  the  premises  is  necessarily  false  ;  but  the  most  compre
hensive  agreement  of  the  hypothesis  with  facts  can  never  show  it  to  be
necessarily  true,  it  can  at  most  make  it  probable.  One  case  in  which  A  is
not  B  refutes  the  proposition  that  all  A's  are  B ;  while  one  thousand  cases
in  which  A  has  the  predicate  B  are  not  sufficient  to  prove  the  proposition,
it  is  impossible  for  an  A  not  to  be  B.

When,  however,  any  one  hypothesis  breaks  down  because  the  inferred
universal  proposition  is  opposed  by  exceptions,  our  universal  presupposi
tion  that  the  Given  is  necessary  is  not  on  that  account  destroyed ;  it  is  only
the  special  assumption  with  reference  to  the  necessary  connection  between
a  special  ground  and  a  special  consequence  which  fails.

1 6.  It  is  because  the  obtaining  of  universal  propositions,  expressing  a
necessity,  from  particular  facts  can  only  be  a  process  of  reduction,  which
is  justified  by  the  universal  assumption  that  the  actual  is  necessary
because  as  reduction  it  must  by  its  nature  be  a  hypothetical  and  tentativ
process,  that  we  are  also  justified  in  beginning  the  inductive  process  before
we  have  ensured  the  completeness  of  our  observations.  It  is  true  of
iuction  what  we  said  of  classification  (§  77,  p.  166),  which  indeed  merely
•epresents  a  special  aspect  of  induction  ;  just  because  we  are  dealing,  not
vith  the  summation  of  the  particular,  but  with  knowledge  of  the  necessity


310  LOGIC

determining  each  particular,  this  necessity  must  be  able  to  manifest  itself
under  favourable  circumstances  in  a  single  instance.  A  single  experiment
is  sufficient  to  justify  the  chemist  in  pronouncing  the  universal  proposition
that  two  substances  in  certain  proportions  enter  into  a  combination  having
such  and  such  qualities.

17.  From  this  view  of  the  true  nature  of  empirical  induction  it  also
follows  that  the  number  of  instances  from  which  a  universal  proposition  is
obtained  makes  no  fundamental  difference  in  the  logical  process  involved,
and  that  the  character  of  the  process  is  obscured  when  the  colligation  of  a
number  of  similar  instances  is  put  forward  as  its  essential  feature.  We
should  rather  assure  ourselves  from  the  beginning  that  the  distinction
which  Aristotle  makes  between  the  eVaywyi)  as  a  process  which  undertakes
a  complete  enumeration  and  the  inference  from  the  particular  example
disappears  in  our  view ;  the  fundamental  process  of  reduction  is  the  same

.in  both  cases,  and  this  leads  to  the  inconvenience  that  the  term  induction,
which  has  established  itself  for  the  process  of  deriving  universal  proposi-

jtions  from  particular  perceptions,  can  only  be  used  in  the  wider  sense  in
which  Aristotle  sometimes  uses  it,  and  not  in  the  narrower  sense  alone,
according  to  which  it  denotes  an  inference  from  a  number  of  similar
instances  to  a  universal  proposition.

The  importance  in  various  ways  which  attaches  to  the  comparison  of  a
large  number  of  instances  as  the  basis  of  an  inductive  process  must  be
shown  in  the  fuller  treatment  of  the  subject.  In  this  general  explanation
it  is  enough  to  point  out  a  distinction  which  is  often  insufficiently  observed,
but  which  certainly  appears  in  logical  processes,  according  to  the  nature  of
the  universal  proposition  to  be  obtained — more  accurately,  according  to
the  meaning  of  its  universality.  This  universality x  may  be  merely
numerical  and  comprehend  only  like  instances,  which  are  not  conceptually
distinguishable  but  only  separate  in  space  and  time  ;  or  it  may  be  a  generic
universality,  to  which  are  subordinated  specific  instances  which  differ  from
each  other,  but  which  meet  in  a  general  concept.  In  the  first  case  the
subject-concept  contained  in  the  universal  proposition  is  fully  determined,
an  infima  species ;  in  the  other  case  it  is  a  generic  concept,  admitting  of  a
number  of  modifications.

The  distinction  may  be  illustrated  by  an  example.  That  oxygen  and
hydrogen  combine  in  certain  proportions  to  make  water  is  a  universal  pro
position  in  so  far  as  it  is  true  in  all  particular  instances  and  for  all  oxygen

1  Cf. §  7,  10,  I.,  p.  47  ; §  42,  2,  I.,  p.  266  sq.


•  3 r^^*  '

J


PROCESS OF  INDUCTION  311

and  hydrogen  wherever  it  is  forthcoming  ;  that  carbon  and  oxygen  in  certain
proportions  yield  carbonic  oxide  and  in  different  proportions  carbonic
acid  is  also  a  universal  proposition  in  the  same  sense.  But  the  concepts
contained  as  subjects  in  these  propositions  are  absolutely  determined,  and
have  no  further  species  below  them.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  I  lay  down
the  proposition  that  all  the  elements  combine  chemically  in  certain  propor
tions,  then  I  have  for  my  subject  a  general  concept,  and  the  proposition  is
obtained  by  inferring  that  what  is  true  of  all  known  species  of  a  genus  is
true  of  the  genus  itself.  In  the  former  case  that  which  was  found  in  parti
cular  instances  was  extended  to  all  completely  similar  objects  in  all  space
and  all  time;  in  the  latter,  to  all  which  agree  in  a  general  concept,
although  not  similar  throughout.  The  former  may  be  called  induction  of
specific  laws  ;  the  latter,  generalizing  induction  or  generalization.1

The  two  kinds  of  induction  have  not  always  been  distinguished  with
sufficient  care  ;  in  accordance  with  the  precedent  set  by  Aristotle^  indjic-
tion  has  generally  been  understood  to  mean  generalizing  induction.2

II. INDUCTION  AS  THE  METHOD  OF  FORMING  VALID  CONCEPTS
ABOUT  REALITY.

§  94-
Every universal proposition which  ascribes  to  the things  contained

1  The  expression  "generalization"  is  used  commonly  for  all  the  different  ways  of  arriv
ing  at  a  universal  judgment;  its  etymology  justifies  us  in  confining  it  to  those  cases  in
Wnich  the  process  is conditioned  by  a  generic,  as  distinguished  from  a  specific  concept.
The  term  "generalization"  then  coincides  with  the  narrower  use.of  the  term  "induction."

2  Benno  Erdmann, Zur Theorie  des  Syllogismus  und  der  Induction  in  the Fhilos.
Aufsdtzen,  E. Zeller  zum  funfzigjahrigen  Doctor-jubilaum  gewidind,  p. 197  sq.  ;  and
Logik, I,  p. 568  sq., has  lately attempted to establish  another  view concerning  the
nature  of  induction  and  its  relation  to  the  syllogism. He  begins  by  distinguishing  two
kinds  of  induction  ;  in  the  one  we  infer  from  a  part  of  the  extension  of  the  subject  to
the  whole  extension  of  the  subject,  in  the  other  from  a  part  of  the  content  of  the  predi
cate  to  the  whole  content  of  the  predicate  (the  kind  of  inference  generally  known  as
inference  from  analogy). Leaving  the  latter  for  the  present,  the  former  may  be  repre
sented  :

S^  S<i,  S3  etc.,  are  P,  therefore  all  6"swill  be  P.

The  question  is,  what  is  the  logical  justification  for  this  inference?  how  far  is  the
generalization  contained  in  the  inference  one  which  is  necessary  to  thought  ?  We  see  at
once  that  the  universal  proposition  which  is  inferred  can  have  only  a  probable  validity,
and  differs  in  this  from  the  conclusion  of  a  syllogism  with  valid  premises  ;  the  question
is,  therefore,  whether  the  special  cases  given  can  contain  conditions  which  make
probable  statements  about  the  superordinate  universal,  or,  more  accurately,  probable  pre
dictions  about  the  still  unknown  S,  a  necessity  of  thought.

These  statements  are  necessary  only  in  so  far  as  we  may  assume  that  in  the  subjects


312  LOGIC

under  a  concept  A  a  certain  predicate  as  necessarily  belonging  to  them,
presupposes  the  objective  validity  of  this  concept,  i.e.,  that  its  attributes
belong  to  each  other  with  objective  necessity,  and  affirms  that  with  these

Sa,  S4,  etc.,  which  are  not  given  but  are  included  in  the  conclusion,  the  same  causes  of
the  reality  of  the  predicate  /'will  be  present,  as  in  the  S^,  Sy,  which  are  given,  and  that
these  same  causes  will  bring  with  them  the  same  effects  ;  that  these  causes  are  con
tained  in  that  which  is  common  to  all  S's,  in  the  nature  of  S.  The  assumption  can  be
more  exactly  expressed  in  the  two  propositions  :

(1)  the  same  causes  will  be  given,

(2)  the  same  causes  produce  the  same  effects.

The  second  of  these  propositions  may  be  accepted  as  immediately  evident.  Causes
are  events  in  so  far  as  experience  teaches  us  that  their  actuality  is  connected  with  the
actuality  of  other  events  in  such  a  way  that  when  they  occur  these  others  also  occur.  We
learn  from  experience  that  an  event  which  we  regard  as  a  cause  is  not  followed  by  different
effects,  but  that  the  effects  are  definitely  fixed  for  every  cause.  The  causal  law  says
Every  event  which  is  actual  requires  sufficient  causes  for  its  actuality ;  it  may  also  be
formulated  :  Every  cause  produces  an  effect  which  is  determined  by  it.  Thus  the
second  proposition  follows  as  an  immediate  consequence  of  the  causal  law.

Although  this  exposition  leaves  the  question  open  as  to  what  character  belongs  to  the
causal  law,  I  am  content  to  point  out  that  according  to  it  we  can  only  know  from
experience  that  there  is  anything  of  the  nature  of  a  cause  (cf.  Logik,  I,  p.  582  :  the  causal
law  does  not  tell  whether  events  are  given  as  causes),  and  that  only  experience  teaches
us  that  the  same  events  have  the  same  effects.  Thus,  according  to  Erdmann,  the  pro
position  that  the  same  causes  produce  the  same  effects  is  only  a  generalization  from
experience,  which  can  only  teach  us  in  the  first  place  that  hitherto  when  an  event  A  has
occurred  another  event  B  has  occurred,  and  that  up  to  the  present  time  A  has  always
been  followed  by  B,  and  not  by  C  or  D  at  random.  To  obtain  from  this  a  universal
proposition  which  will  be  true  for  the  future  also,  we  have  need  of  generalizing  induc
tion  ;  hence  according  to  Erdmann  himself  the  proposition  is  only  probable  ;  it  cannot  be
accepted  as  an  immediate  consequence  from  the  causal  law  in  the  above  sense,  since  it
merely  brings  to  it  minor  propositions  which  are  inferred  from  experience,  and  are
therefore  merely  probable;  it  does  not  depend  for  its  validity  upon  the  evidence  of  the
causal  law  itself.

But  for  the  present  we  will  allow  the  second  proposition  to  stand,  and  turn  to  the  way
in  which  the  first  is  grounded ;  of  this  it  is  rightly  said  that  it  must  have  the  really
decisive  function  for  the  inductive  inference  in  Erdmann's  sense.  After  various  pos
sibilities  have  been  rejected  there  follows  the  proposition  :  We  must  allow  that  we
assume  the  same  causes  to  be  given  in  the  unobserved  similar  S's,  merely  because
they  have  constantly  appeared  in  the  given  actuality,  Slt  S»,  etc.  Thus  the  thought
itself  is  an  inductive  statement,  it  is  the  most  general  amongst  all  the  general  principles
obtained  by  induction,  for  every  other  presupposes  it  as  the  basis  from  which  it  is
itself  obtained.

In  other  words,  Erdmann's  theory  is  primarily  no  other  than  that  of  J.  S.  Mill.
Every  particular  induction  depends  upon  a  general  presupposition,  and  is  syllogistically
inferred  from  it ;  for  this  reason  therefore  we  cannot  speak  of  an  antithesis  between  the
inductive  and  the  deductive  process,  of  an  essential  difference  between  the  two.  The
distinctions  made  on  p.  585  do  not  affect  this  point.  The  particular  induction  is  a
necessity  of  thought  only  in  so  far  as  it  follows  syllogistically  from  the  general  presup
position.  But  this  general  presupposition  is  primarily  only  the  expectation  that  the
same  causes  will  be  given,  and  this  expectation  is  not  a  necessity  of  thought,  as  we  are


INDUCTION  OF  CONCEPTS  313

attributes  constituting  an  essential  concept  the  predicate  is  necessarily
connected.

The  statement  that  the  attributes  of  a  thing  necessarily  belong  to-
taught  on  p.  585,  but  has  its  origin  in  experience  alone.  Thus,  we  should  have  neces
sary  inferences  from  a  principle  which  is  not  necessary.  In  one  important  point  Erdmann
certainly  goes  further  than  Mill ;  he  calls  the  presupposition  a  postulate  of  foreknow
ledge,  and  says  that  our  thought  receives  from  the  actual  the  problem  of  learning  to
know  beforehand,  upon  the  ground  of  what  we  know  by  experience,  the  experience
which  is  possible  and  to  be  expected.  Thus  the  presupposition  is  not  what  Mill  repre
sents  it  to  be,  a  mere  result  of  previous  experience ;  but  it  is  made  for  the  sake  of  an
endeavour,  a  problem  which  we  set  before  our  thought.

With  this  I  agree  completely ;  but  it  does  seem  to  me  that  this  problem  is  too  narrowly
limited,  if  it  is  to  be  confined  to  mere  foreknowledge  of  the  future.  No  doubt  for  all
practical  purposes  this  is  the  main  interest,  but  for  purely  theoretical  knowledge  this
important  distinction  does  not  exist.  Here  what  is  most  important  is  the  endeavour  to
understand  things,  to  find  in  them  a  comprehensible  order  ;  and  the  particular  is  under
stood  when  it  is  recognised  as  necessary,  and  it  is  recognised  as  necessary  when  it  is  the
consequence  of  a  general  law  which  determines  both  past  and  future.  The  presupposi
tion  that  the  particular  must  admit  of  being  presented  as  the  representative  of  a  general
concept,  as  the  fulfilment  of  a  general  law,  is  not  merely  a  postulate  of  foreknowledge,
but  a  postulate  of  the  whole  endeavour  to  know  ;  and  the  process  of  induction  consists
in  finding,  upon  the  ground  of  the  presupposition,  these  concepts  and  laws  in  the  par
ticular  form  required  by  the  constitution  of  the  actual.  We  should  have  attained  the
object  of  induction  if,  without  reference  to  the  future,  we  were  to  represent  what  is
merely  known  hitherto  as  such  an  expression  of  necessity.

It  is  nothing  more  than  this  which  is  affirmed  when  I  say  that  induction  is  a  process  of
finding  universal  major  propositions  when  the  conclusions  are  given, — a  reduction  and
therefore  the  reverse  process  of  the  syllogistic  deduction  from  given  major  propositions,
that  all  induction  consists  in  framing  hypothetically  universal  propositions  and  comparing
their  consequences  with  the  Given.  Erdmann  himself  says  that  verification  by  experi
ence  is  the  justification  of  the  process.  But  how  is  this  verification  brought  about  ?
Obviously  by  showing  that  every  new  experience  agrees  with  the  general  proposition
when  this  is  applied  to  the  instance  in  question.  Thus  the  confirmation  presupposes  a
comparison  of  the  consequences  of  the  general  proposition  with  the  particular  given,
while  the  consequences  themselves  can  only  be  deductively  developed.  Represented
schematically  : —

To  S±  is  P,  and  S.2  is  P,  etc.,  we  add  as  universal  major  premise  :  All  5"s  are  P.  If
a  new  Sn  comes  in  view,  we  infer  from  the  universal  major  premise  :  this  will  also  be  P,
and  this  conclusion  is  confirmed.  In  the  simplest  cases  we  lose  sight  of  this  process,
because  it  is  so  simple  and  takes  place  so  easily  ;  but  when  we  apply  the  law  of  falling
bodies  to  the  pendulum  in  order  to  show  that  its  motion  is  determined  by  the  law,  the
deductive  calculation  by  means  of  which  the  agreement  between  the  observed  motion  and
the  law  is  ascertained  is  quite  clear.

I  cannot  therefore  consider  my  own  views  to  be  refuted,  since  Erdmann's  theory  in  its
consequences  leads  to  the  same  result.  The  attempt  to  show  that  the  comparison  of  in
duction  to  a  reversed  mode  of  calculation  fails,  assumes  what  I  never  affirmed,  that  they
are  the  same  in  all  respects.  I  have  indeed  expressly  noted  the  difference  (p.  309).

I  must,  however,  note  a  few  objections  to  Erdmann's  exposition.  He  aims  at  reduc
ing  the  presuppositions  of  induction  to  a  causal  concept  which  merely  relates  events  as
cause  and  effect  (although  he  remarks  incidentally  that  this  view  may  perhaps  seem  too


3i4  LOGIC

gather  is  itself  the  result  of  a  reduction,  which  refers  their  actual  co
existence  to  a  necessity  contained  in  the  unity  of  the  thing  as  the  ground
of  these  connected  attributes.

narrow).  But  then  his  examples  should  at  least  have  agreed  with  this  formulation.  On
p.  570  it  is  stated  that  various  hexagonal  crystals  have  a  double  refraction,  and  hence  it
is  inferred  that  all  hexagonal  crystals  have  a  double  refraction  ;  but  the  quality  of  being
hexagonal  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  event  the  actuality  of  which  is  regularly  accompanied
by  another  event,  that  of  refracting  a  ray  of  light.  Nor  in  the  proposition  (introduced  as
an  instance  of  a  false  induction)  that  all  birds  learn  to  talk  can  we  call  a  parrot  an  event
with  the  actuality  of  which  the  actuality  of  learning  to  talk  is  regularly  connected.  The
formulation  of  the  ultimate  presuppositions  of  all  induction  is  certainly  too  narrow.

We  see  this  still  more  clearly  when  we  consider  the  other  branch  of  induction  which
infers  from  particular  predicates  to  the  totality  of  predicates — what  Erdmann  calls
"  erganzende  Induction."  Here,  from  the  fact  that  certain  partial  predicates  /j,  P2<  P3,
etc.,  of  a  total  predicate  P,  belong  to  a  subject,  we  are  to  infer  that  /"belongs  to  it.  Ex
ample  :  this  body  has  the  colour,  the  extensibility,  and  the  specific  gravity  of  magnesium,
therefore  it  is  magnesium.  On  p.  583  we  are  told  that  in  proportion  as  we  find  more  Plt
P.2,  etc.,  together,  we  may  be  assured  that  these  Plt  P9,  P3  have  not  come  together  by
chance,  but  obey  a  cause  contained  in  the  nature  of  P  by  which  they  are  combined  in  one
whole.  Here  the  previous  concept  of  cause  is  quite  inapplicable  ;  the  nature  of  P  is  not
an  event  any  more  than  colour,  specific  gravity,  etc.,  are  events.  The  attempt  to  treat
the  two  branches  of  induction  as  parallel  leads,  when  represented  in  this  way,  to  ob
scurity.  We  must  point  out  especially  that  the  predicate-concept  P  cannot  be  called  a
"universal  of  content"  with  respect  to  its  attributes,  and  treated  as  parallel  to  the
general  concept  S  in  its  relation  to  the  particular  6''s  included  in  it.  This  way  of  treating
them  as  parallel  leads  to  a  logical  error.  On  p.  570  there  is  given  as  a  negative  "  erganz-
ender  Inductions-schluss  "  :  G  is  not  Plt  P2,  P3,  etc.  ;  therefore  G  is  not  P.  But  wei
need  no  proof  to  show  that  the  first  premise  suffices  to  exclude  the  subsumption  of  G
under  P ;  the  absence  of  one  attribute  of  a  concept  makes  subsumption  impossible,  and  it
is  therefore  superfluous  to  go  through  all  the  different  premises.

Finally,  I  must  in  self-defence  touch  upon  one  special  point.  On  p.  603  sq.  Erdmann
endeavours  to  show  that  at  least  two  premises  (Sl  is  P,  Sy  is  P)  are  necessary  to  an  in-*
ductive  inference,  while  I  had  stated  (p.  310)  that  it  was  not  essential  to  the  nature  of
the  process  itself  to  start  from  a  number  of  instances,  since  the  presupposed  necessity
might  under  favourable  circumstances  reveal  itself  in  a  single  instance.

I  cannot  see  why,  according  to  Erdmann's  own  premises,  the  conviction  that  the  sam<
causes  produce  the  same  effects,  and  that  the  same  causes  will  be  given,  cannot  attach
itself  to  a  single  fact  in  such  a  way  that  in  similar  cases  we  should  expect  the  same.  Ir
the  ordinary  course  of  thought  it  is  certainly  so,  but  even  for  the  most  cautious  considera
tion  one  case  must  be  sufficient  for  the  application  of  these  presuppositions,  fo'
similarity  does  not  necessarily  presuppose  many  to  which  a  new  instance  is  similar,  then
may  be  similarity  with  only  one.  Moreover,  since  the  result  of  an  inductive  inference  i
after  all  only  a  hypothesis,  there  is  no  reason  why  these  hypotheses  should  not  bi
founded  upon  one  instance.

So  soon  as  I  have  grounds  for  the  assumption  that  a  certain  phenomenon  is  condi
tioned  by  a  certain  thing,  and  for  the  assumption  that  I  shall  come  across  other  simila
things  which  I  shall  recognise  as  similar,  then  the  inference  that  what  is  true  of  orj
will  be  true  of  all  similar  to  it  is  fully  justified  according  to  Erdmann's  own  presuj
positions.  This  is  the  case  in  the  example  I  have  used  (Erdmann  employs  for  h
refutation  another  example  which  I  have  not  used,  and  of  which  the  conditions  ai


INDUCTION  OF  CONCEPTS  315

In  this  way  the  significance  of  the  subject-concepts  in  propositions  which
are  meant  to  express  an  objective  necessity  differs  from  the  merely
logical  significance  of  the  concept  as  a  subjective  product,  and  in  conse-

essentially  different)  :  the  chemist  can  infer  from  one  experiment  that  two  substances  in
certain  proportions  will  enter  into  a  combination  having  certain  qualities.  He  has
means  of  distinguishing  whether  or  not  he  has  before  him  the  same  chemical  substance,
and  knows  that  chemical  substances  of  the  same  kind  are  exactly  alike  in  their  qualities,
and  when  the  experiment  is  carefully  prepared  he  has  ground  for  assuming  that  no
unknown  variable  causes  have  been  at  work  ;  such  are  the  "  favourable  circumstances"
of  which  I  spoke.  Erdmann  here  objects  that  a  particular  case  S  is  P  cannot  determine
whether  the  conditions  under  which  /*is  predicated  of  .S  are  essential  or  accidental ;  the
assumption  that  they  are  contained  in  the  nature  common  to  all  S's  must  be  grounded
upon  at  least  two  instances.  This  is  true  when  S  is  a  universal  concept  generic  to  the
particular  .S's,  which  therefore  have,  in  addition  to  their  common  nature,  specific  or
individual  differences,  upon  which  the  predicate  observed  in  a  particular  JT  may  depend  ;
or  when  the  predicate  in  the  particular  case  may  depend  upon  varying  and  accidental
conditions  ;  but  it  is  not  true  when  S  is  an  infima  species  of  such  a  kind  that  all  parti
cular  iS"s  are  exactly  similar.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  have  myself  always  pointed
out  (§  94,  3,  4 ;  §  95,  2,  3,  etc.)  that  in  order  to  exclude  accidental  circumstances  it  is
generally  desirable  to  make  a  number  of  observations  ;  and  have  represented  the  pos
sibility  of  obtaining  a  general  proposition  from  a  single  experiment  as  an  exception
occurring  under  favourable  circumstances.  When  therefore  Erdmann  shows  (p.  604)  that
an  isolated  observation  of  the  number  of  stamens  in  a  floral  specimen  does  not  suffice
for  a  general  proposition,  he  refutes  nothing  which  I  have  said.  I  grant  also  at  once,
since  I  have  myself  stated  it  elsewhere  (e.g.  p.  320),  that  the  ''  favourable  circumstances"
consist  of  knowledge  obtained  elsewhere,  from  which  I  am  able  to  infer  that  within  the
province  of  chemistry  the  particular  subjects  of  my  experiments  will  be  exactly  similar,
and  that  so  far  there  is  a  deductive  element  in  the  process.  But  that  does  not  affect  the
fact,  that  on  the  strength  of  a  single  observation  a  general  proposition  is  believed,  which
cannot  be  deduced  in  this  definite  form  from  other  propositions,  solely  upon  the  pre
supposition  that  events  are  determined  according  to  law  and  the  Given  by  universal  rules  ;
and  that  there  is  therefore  no  fundamental  difference  of  process  between  the  inference
from  the  single  example  and  the  inference  from  several  examples.  For  the  inference
from  several  examples  also  presupposes,  according  to  Erdmann's  own  showing,  that  the
causal  connections  are  the  same,  and  makes  use  of  several  examples  only  in  order  to
ascertain  what  can  be  accepted  as  the  same  causes.  In  practice  it  is  always  found  in  the
inductive  process  that  we  are  unable  to  avoid  making  hypotheses,  upon  the  strength  of  a
single  observation,  concerning  a  law  upon  which  they  are  based,  and  that  to  a  large
extent  the  multiplication  of  experiments  serves  only  to  test  and  verify  our  conclusions
and  to  exclude  errors.  I  cannot  therefore  regard  my  view  of  the  inductive  process  as
refuted  in  any  point  by  Erdmann.  The  antithesis  between  induction  and  syllogism  as
two  different  methods  of  proof  is  justified  while,  as  with  Aristotle,  induction  as  tTrayuyrj
did  irdifTuv  is  a  means  of  proving  a  proposition  ;  as  soon  as  we  recognise  that  this  is
impossible,  that  we  can  obtain  only  hypotheses  by  which  to  explain  the  given  deductively,
then  the  principles  of  the  syllogism  become  regulative  for  the  inductive  process  also
(cf.  Riehl,  "  iiber  Galilei,"  Vierteljschr.  f.  w.  Phil.,  xvii.  i).

In  his  general  view  of  the  theory  of  induction,  Dr.  Venn  (The  Principles  of  Enipi-
iica.1  or  Imhutive  Logic,  London,  1889)  is  a  follower  of  J.  S.  Mill;  but  in  his  careful  and
acute  analysis  of  all  the  presuppositions  involved  in  inductive  inferences,  he  not  only
supplements  in  a  valuable  way  Mill's  Logic,  but  also  corrects  its  doctrines  on  essential


316  LOGIC

quence  there  is  also  a  change  in  the  relation  of  different  predicates
attributed  to  the  things  falling  under  the  concept  to  the  concept  itself.
On  purely  logical  ground,  that  is,  such  predicates  are  merely  fortuitous
in  relation  to  the  concept ;  but  in  view  of  the  principle  that  the  given  is

points.  He  recognises  that  Mill's  attempt  to  represent  the  belief  in  the  uniformity  of
nature  as  the  certain  result  of  an  inductive  process  has  failed  ;  he  falls  back  upon  the
facts,  that  man  always  acts  in  the  first  instance  upon  psychological  grounds  according  to
the  assumption  that  similar  things  or  events  will  have  similar  qualities  and  effects  ;  that
this  belief,  confirmed  in  particular  fields,  gradually  widens,  and  that  it  may  lead  those
who  have  a  strong  disposition  to  generalize  (p.  135)  to  the  ideal  of  a  uniformity  which
rules  the  whole  of  nature  ;  but  he  adds  quite  consistently :  <;  Whether  or  not  they  are  justi
fied  in  believing  in  an  absolute  uniformity  ruling  over  tj^e  whole  of  nature  and  of  mind
it  seems  to  me  impossible  to  say."  While  thus  referring  mainly  to  a  merely  psycholo
gical  fact,  he  approximates,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  view  stated  above  when  in  chaps,
iv.  and  v.  he  says  that  all  possibility  of  inference,  by  which  we  partly  guide  our  practical
course  and  partly  extend  our  knowledge,  depends,  on  the  one  hand,  on  the  objective
uniformity  of  nature  ("Uniformity  is  the  foundation  of  inferribility,"  p.  93),  on  the
other,  upon  our  subjective  tendency  to  generalize,  for  which  no  logical  ground  can  be
given.  It  must  be  assumed  as  a  postulate,  "so  far  as  logic  is  concerned,  that  the
belief  in  the  uniformity  of  nature  exists,  and  the  problem  of  accounting  for  it  must  be
relegated  to  psychology."  It  seems  to  me  only  a  small  step  from  this  to  the  proposition
that  we  must  assume  uniformity  in  nature  if  we  desire  to  know  it  by  means  of  thought
and  by  way  of  inference,  and  that  we  are  therefore  forced  to  this  postulate  partly  by
practical  needs,  partly  by  our  desire  for  knowledge.

Dr.  Venn  further  disputes  the  proposition  laid  down  by  Jevons  that  induction  is
the  reverse  of  deduction.  But  on  p.  351  he  acknowledges  that  it  needs  a  stroke  of
insight  to  discover  which  predicate  is  to  be  generalized,  as  well  as  to  detect  the  class
over  which  this  property  is  to  be  generalized,  that  not  until  then  can  actual  generaliza
tion  (according  to  Mill's  four  rules,  which  certainly  need  to  be  more  accurately  expressed)
be  carried  out,  and  that  exclusions  play  here  an  essential  part ;  and,  thirdly,  he  insists  upon
verification  as  the  final  stage  ;  so  that  the  view  which  he  expresses  seems  to  me  not
essentially  different  from  that  which  I  hold.  By  pointing  out  the  first  stage  he  empha
sizes,  on  the  one  hand,  the  mutual  dependence  between  induction  and  the  classificatory
formation  of  concepts,  and  the  necessity  for  both  of  an  analysis  of  phenomena  by  which
alone  the  element  common  to  many  cases  can  be  discovered,  while,  on  the  other  hand,
he  recognises  that  the  first  conception  of  a  possible  universal  proposition  is  of  the  nature
of  a  question  or  hypothesis  for  the  construction  of  which  no  sufficient  and  general  rules
of  method  can  be  given,  because  it  frequently  depends  upon  an  inspired  combination.
There  then  follows  the  methodical  comparison  of  instances  by  which  to  ascertain  the
empirical  generality  of  the  conjectured  proposition  ;  and  here  again  Venn  rightly  points
out  that  the  simple  summation  of  a  number  of  particular  instances  is  in  no  way  sufficient,
and  that  the  ordinary  form  of  the  inductive  inference  is  not  a  correct  expression  of  the
actual  process.  When  he  criticises  and  supplements  Mill's  methods,  it  becomes  evident
in  his  own  explanation  what  part  is  to  be  played  by  deduction,  more  especially  in
exclusion.  Finally,  the  general  proposition  obtained  by  the  comparison  of  different
instances,  or  by  a  process  of  exclusion,  must  be  verified  ;  this  is  done  either  by  proving
that  it  follows  deductively  from  other  laws,  or  by  the  agreement  of  its  consequences  with
other  facts.

In  all  essential  points  lean  assent  to  Dr.  Venn's  representation  of  the  general  charactei


INDUCTION  OF  CONCEPTS  317

necessary  they  must  follow  from  the  subject  with  either  internal  or  causal
necessity.  They  must  therefore  be  grounded  in  the  fact  either  that
different  modifications  of  the  attributes  of  the  subject-concept,  or  that
different  causal  relations,  bring  about  different  predicates ;  and  this  is  so
both  when  the  different  predicates  appear  in  the  same  thing  in  conse
quence  of  its  change,  and  when  they  appear  in  different  things  subsumed
under  the  same  concept.

The  problem,  therefore,  of  induction  as  a  means  of  finding  essential
concepts,  is  to  derive  the  different  characteristics  which  appear  in  things
subsumed  under  the  same  concepts  from  laws  of  development,  or  causal
laws.

In  this  way  the  differences  between  individuals,  which  are  disregarded  in
the  traditional  logic,  become  important  in  the  formation  of  our  concepts.
The  Darwinian  theory  has  the  credit  of  having  made  us  aware  of  this
deficiency  in  logic  and  having  pointed  out  the  necessity  of  explaining  the
specialization  of  general  concepts  by  means  of  general  principles.

i.  Every  process  of  reduction,  by  which  we  try  to  find  for  a  judgment
of  perception  of  the  form  this  particular  is  b  the  premises  from  which  it
necessarily  follows,  presupposes  the  subsumption  of  the  subject  under  a
concept  A  without  which  a  universal  judgment  is  impossible.  The
primary  form  of  the  syllogism  in  which  the  perception  appears  as  conclu
sion  is  :

All  A's  are  b. This  is  A  ;  therefore  it  is  b.

It  is  possible  here,  either  that  the  concept  A  already  contains  the  attri
bute  b  in  itself,  the  major  premise  being  an  analytical  judgment;  or  that
the  concept  A  does  not  contain  the  attribute  b,  and  then  the  major
premise  states  that  the  predicate  b  is  necessarily  connected  with  the  attri
butes  constituting  the  concept  A,  hence  that  it  necessarily  belongs  to  the
given  particular  because  it  has  the  characteristics  of  A.

Now  the  concepts  under  which  we  can,  at  the  beginning  of  a  methodical
process,  subsume  the  objects  given  to  perception  are  at  first  only  the
subjective  products  which  have  arisen  from  the  apprehension  of  one  parti
cular,  or  by  abstraction  from  several  particulars,  and  the  nature  of  which
we  have  examined  in  §  42  (I.  p.  265).  It  is  natural,  therefore,  that  even  if

of  induction  ;  for  it  seems  to  me  to  show  that  he  also,  in  spite  of  his  opposition  to
Jevons,  does  not  attach  the  chief  importance  to  the  so-called  simple  induction  as  opposed
to  deduction,  but  sees  in  the  whole  process  a  method  of  showing  a  hypothesis  which  has
been  framed  in  some  way  to  be  more  and  more  probable,  by  means  of  processes  which
ire  of  an  essentially  deductive  nature.


3i8  LOGIC

they  were  logically  complete,  i.e.  if  their  attributes  were  fully  determined,
they  would  not  exhaust  the  content  of  the  whole  possible  perception  of
the  object,  but  would  merely  include  those  features  which  first  present
themselves;  and  the  subsumption  of  the  given  ^object  under  such  a
concept  merely  states  that  I  find  the  attributes  contained  in  this  concept
in  my  perception,  and  therefore  connect  the  given  with  a  familiar  idea.

2.  When,  however,  I  come  to  employ  such  a  concept  in  forming  a
judgment  which  is intended  to  express  real,  objective  necessity,  hence
invariable  universality  and  applicability,  I  presuppose  that  the  subjective
comprehension  of  attributes  has  an  objective  ground,  that  the  attributes
belong  together  necessarily  and  represent  one  of  the  fixed  forms  which
the  classification  of  the  given  has  in  view. I assume  that  it  possesses
not  merely  the  purely  logical  universality  of  being  applicable  to  an  indefi
nite  number  of  particular  ideas,  but  objective  universality  in  the  sense
that  by  virtue  of  the  order  of  nature  these  attributes  belong  together,  and
the same complex will therefore recur wherever the conditions are
present,  and  that  the  same  order  of  nature  separates  it definitely  from
other  complexes.

The  application  of  such  a  concept  to  a  universal  judgment  expressing
necessity  (e.g.,  all  gold  is  malleable)  itself  presupposes  a  process  of
reduction  in  which  I  assume  that  the  actual  co-existence  of  certain  attri
butes  is  in  some  way  grounded  in  the  nature  of  the  things  in  question  (or
else  in  their  relations),  and  thus  explain  the  fact  that  I  find  the  same
attributes  repeatedly  combined  by  an  assumed  necessity.

It  is  this  assumption  which  alone  makes  it  possible  to  regard  the
particular  thing  as  the  representative  of  an  essential  concept  which  is
objectively  valid,  of  a  concept  which  does  not  merely  signify  that  I  once
had  occasion  to  combine  certain  attributes  subjectively,  but  which  asserts
an  objectively  universal  ground  for  the  combination.

3.  When  the  perception  as  it  recurs continues to  present  the  co
existence  of  that  which is  already  thought of  together  in  one  concept
(which  is  perhaps  first  formed  by  chance  and  merely  as  subjective),  then
it  gives  rise  to  the  assumption  that  the  combination  of  the  attributes  is
objectively  grounded,  and  that  their  co-existence  will  therefore  always  recur
in  the  same  way. All  water  which  I  find  to  be  like  in  its  perceptible  attri
butes  to  what  I  know  already,  every  piece  of  gold  or  silver  which  I  examine,
is  a  confirmation  of  that  assumption,  and  strengthens  my  right  to  regard
my  concept  as  an  essential  concept. It  is  not,  therefore,  for  the  subjective


3T9

formation  of  concepts,  or  their  purely  logical  completeness,  that  it  is
essential  for  them  to  be  abstracted  from  a  number  of  similar  particular
perceptions,  but  for  our  belief  in  their  objective  significance,  by  virtue  of
which  they  are  capable  of  expressing  the  nature  and  differences  of  defi
nitely  determined  and  separate  forms  of  beings.

4.  The  fact  that  our  earliest  concepts  cannot  exhaust  the  full  content
of  possible  perception,  together  with  the  further  fact  that  in  the  natural
course  of  thought  general  concepts  are  formed  side  by  side  with  the  most
specific,  involves  the  appearance  of  perceptions  combining  a  further
predicate  with  those  attributes  of  the  concept  which  serve  for  subsumption,
or  determining  more  accurately  an  attribute  already  included  in  it.  We
learn  that  a  bee  has  a  sting  and  a  snake  a  forked  tongue  after  the  sub-
sumption  of  the  particular  object  under  the  concept  "bee  "  or  the  concept
"  snake  "  has  already  taken  place,  and  we  learn  it  first  from  a  particular
instance  ;  in  the  same  way,  though  it  is  part  of  the  concept  gold  that  it  is
heavy,  it  needs  more  careful  observation  to  teach  us  that  a  piece  of  gold
is  heavier  than  a  piece  of  iron,  lead  or  silver  of  the  same  size.

That  in  this  A  a  b  occurred  which  was  not  included  before  in  its  con
cept  is  for  mere  perception  a  simple  fact ;  for  the  systematizing  impulse
in  its  search  for  necessity  it  serves  as  a  stimulus  to  the  question  whether
this  new  predicate  is  necessarily  connected  with  the  attributes  of  the
concept  or  not.

The  question  will  first  lead  to  comparison ;  if  all  the  bees  which  I  can
examine  have  a  sting,  and  all  the  snakes  a  forked  tongue,  then  the  assump
tion  is  confirmed.  If  there  should  be  a  bee  without  a  sting,  or  a  snake
with  a  tongue  not  forked,  it  would  be  refuted,  and  the  universal  judgment
by  which  we  desired  to  explain  the  particular  fact  invalid  :  there  would
be  no  necessary  and  universally  valid  connection  between  the  attributes
of  snake  and  a  forked  tongue.  Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  our  concepts,
once  established,  are  always  being  enriched  by  such  new  attributes  as  are
ilways  found  together  with  the  original  ones ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  pro
gressive  perception  is  always  breaking  up  formed  concepts,  and  separating
Tom  their  complex  some  attributes  as  not  necessarily  belonging  to  the
Dthers,  because  the  latter  have  been  found  without  the  former.  A  man
vho  had  never  in  his  life  seen  any  but  white  sheep  would  at  first  suppose
he  colour  to  belong  to  the  other  attributes  of  the  animal,  and  would  regard
ris  concept,  that  of  a  white  sheep,  as  one  of  the  fixed  forms  of  nature  ;  on
:oming  across  an  animal  like  a  sheep  in  all  respects  but  that  of  colour  his


320  LOGIC

assumption  would  be  destroyed,  and  the  concept  framed  would  not  be  con
firmed  as  was  expected  ;  invariable  connection  between  the  colour  and  the
other  attributes  is  absent,  and  the  first  result  is  that  the  colour  is  removed
from  the  concept  as  a  variable  and  therefore  unessential  attribute.  There
appears  the  particular  judgment  that  many  sheep  are  white,  but  that  others
may  be  black  ;  according  to  the  view  of  the  older  logic  the  colour  is  only
contingent,  and  the  concept  has  nothing  to  do  with  it.

Thus  the  process  is  everywhere  a  tentative  one,  forming  from  a  co
existence  of  attributes,  once  or  repeatedly  perceived,  the  assumption  that
these  attributes  belong  together  and  constitute  an  essential  concept,  which
makes  all  its  elements  necessary  as  constituent  parts  of  it ;  and  this
assumption  continues  to  stand  until  refuted  by  some  fact  which  forces  us
to  remodel  the  concept.  The  more  extensive  our  field  of  observation
becomes,  the  less  probable  is  the  assumption  that  any  negative  instance
has  escaped  our  observation.

5.  The  process of  induction, therefore, is first employed for that
formation  of  concepts  which  must  be  the  basis  for  all  further  progress  ;  and
in  some  departments  it  meets  at  first  with  no  important  difficulties  in  this
work  of  laying  the  foundations. As  regards  many  simple  substances,  we
find  constant  confirmation  of  the  assumptions  that  their attributes are
always  combined  in  the  same  way  and  clearly  separated  from  other  groups
of  attributes  ;  and  in  this  way  there  is  formed  a  fixed  kernel  of  objectively
valid  concepts,  together  with  the  justified  hypothesis  that  we  shall  find  the
same  constancy  in  all  similarly  formed concepts. No  chemist  is  afraid
that  when  he  discovers  a  new  element  it  will  behave  differently  from  all  the
others,  and  manifest  variability  in  contingent  attributes  ;  and  the  inductive
hypothesis  that  the  chemical  elements  yield  us  these  distinct  fixed  concepts,
in  which  everything  is  necessarily  determined  by  the  whole,  by  the  nature
of  the  substance,  is  always  being  confirmed  anew.

6.  Even  these  concepts  have  not,  indeed,  been  too  easily  discovered.
The  earliest  and  most  straightforward  induction,  that  the  characteristics
which  occur  together  in  these  pieces  of  gold  or silver  will always be
together  in  the  same  combination,  and  will  thus  confirm  the  necessity  ot
the  combination,  has  yet  a  difficulty  to  overcome  ;  and  this  lies  in  the
variability  of  all  observable  things  which  we  learn  from  a  more  extended
experience,  and  the  importance  of  which  for  the  establishment  of  the  con
cepts  of  things  we  have  pointed  out  in  §  72,  14,  p.  86  sq.,  and  §  77,  6,  p.  163.
A  complex  of  perceptible  attributes  could  be  definitely  accepted  as  the


INDUCTION  OF  CONCEPTS  321

real  essential  concept  of  a  thing  only  if  it  should  remain  invariable  ;  when
a  change  occurs,  and  water  becomes  solid  or  gold  fluid,  then  the  necessity
by  which  the  attributes  of  the  substance  are  held  together  in  its  habitual
state  cannot  be  unconditional  and  contained  only  in  the  attributes  them
selves,  the  assumed  concept  breaks  down.  Instead  of  being  the  expression
of  the  essence  of  things,  it  becomes  only  the  expression  of  their  chance  con
dition  ;  and  the  same  principle  according  to  which  the  black  or  white
colour  of  the  sheep  was  described  as  unessential  or  accidental  compels  us
also  to  describe  the  solidity  or  fluidity  of  water  as  accidental  and  not  be
longing  to  its  essence.  But  then  we  are  in  danger  of  having  nothing  left
;but  accidental  states  ;  for  if  we  put  aside  the  variable  as  accidental,  what
.perceptible  qualities  remain  as  the  kernel  of  the  concept,  which  are
.common  to  both  steam  and  ice  ?

7.  The  only safeguard against  this  failure  of  our  first  attempts  is  to
accept  change  itself  as  necessary,  and  to  see  whether  we  cannot  substi
tute  for  the  judgments  which  aim  at  constructing — e.g. — the  concept  of  a
(substance  by  means  of  the  necessary  and  invariable  connection  of  certain
attributes,  others  which  are  the  expression  of  change  itself  as  necessary  and
as  proceeding  from  the  nature  or  the  relations  of  the  thing. The  concept
ivill  then become  (see  §77,  6)  a  system  of  universal  propositions,  which
•epresent  the  changing  states  of  a  thing  as  the  necessary  consequences  of
:ertain  presuppositions,  and  in  this  way  connect  them  together;  and  these
universal  propositions  are  also  to  be  obtained  by  way  of  reduction,  which
ays  down  a  universal  major  premise  as  a  ground  for  what  is  actually
)bserved.

Two  alternatives  are  open  to  us  in  this  process  of  reduction.  Either  the
traversal  propositions  may  be  constructed  in  such  a  way  as  to  express
nerely  the  connection  between  the  fixed  attributes  and  changing  qualities
>f  the  same  thing,  in  which  case  the  necessity  of  the  change  proceeds
rom  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself  and  is  thus  internal  (§33,  3,  I.  p.  198) ;
>r  we  are  compelled  to  have  recourse  to  external  relations,  to  regard  the
hange  as  brought  about  by  external  causes,  and  its  necessity  as  the
.ecessity  of  external  causality.

8.  We  cannot  ascertain  which  of  these  alternatives  to  take  from  one
articular case, but only by comparison of  many cases,  in  which  the
hanges  supervene  upon  a  given  state  of  a  thing  which  is  expressed  by  a
reviously  formed  concept. The  question  is,  whether  this  comparison  is
ivourable  to  the  hypothesis  that  the  necessary  ground  of  the  changes  lies

s.  L.— ii.  Y


322  LOGIC

in  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself,  or  to  the  other  hypothesis,  that  the  change
depends  upon  external  causes.

Organized  beings  seem  in  their  development  to  afford  an  illustration  of
the  first  kind  of  change.  All  individuals  of  the  same  kind  pass  through
the  same  series  of  like  changes  in  similar  intervals  of  time,  and  so  afford
ground  for  the  assumption  that  the  subsequent  state  follows  necessarily
upon  the  preceding,  and  that  these  sequences  are  grounded  upon  the
unity  of  the  being  itself.  Thus  the  essential  concept  of  an  organic  species
cannot  indeed  be  exhausted  by  the  attributes  expressing  any  one  given
state,  whether  that  of  maturity  or  of  some  earlier  stage  of  development ;
but  it  might  be  exhausted  by  the  law  of  development,  which  tells  us  what
particular  forms  of  the  individual  succeed  each  other  in  an  invariable
series,  from  the  germ  to  the  state  of  maturity,  and  thus  confirm  the
assumption  of  a  purely  internal  necessity.  In  establishing  this  law  of
development  induction  would  have  constructed  the  full  and  exhaustive
concept,  and  the  particular  individual  would  prove  itself  to  be  the
realization  of  this  concept  by  the  fact  that  this  development  does  actually
take  place  in  it.1

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  should  try  to  regard  the  changing  states  of  a
quantity  of  water  in  the  same  way,  the  attempt  would  fail.  It  is  true,  that
with  changes  of  temperature,  beyond  certain  limits,  the  aggregate  state
changes,  and  so  far  we  must  presuppose  a  necessary  connection  between
the  two,  leading  to  the  concept  that  it  is  the  nature  of  water  to  be  ice
below  o°  Centigrade,  fluid  water  between  o°  and  100°,  steam  above  100°;
but  the  corresponding  changes  of  temperature  and  aggregate  state  do  not
always  proceed  in  the  same  way,  and  in  the  same  succession,  from  previous
states.  The  state  of  fluid  water  does  not  follow  of  itself  from  the  state  oi
ice  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  change  can  be  explained  as  necessary  only  by
causal  relations,  it  is  not  produced  by  the  thing  itself.  Hence,  in  this
case  the  system  of  universal  propositions,  which  is  to  express  the  essentia'
concept  of  a  changing  object  of  perception,  must  include  causal  relations.

1  That  the  development  of  the  organic  individual  itself  depends  upon  the  externa
conditions,  and  is  modified  by  variations  in  these,  may  be  left  out  of  consideration  here
where  we  are  concerned  only  to  illustrate  the  logical  opposition  between  those  concept
which  must  be  constructed  by  means  of  laws  of  development,  and  those  which  need  th
help  of  external  causal  laws.  In  reality,  the  two  points  of  view  combine  in  the  com
pletely  accurate  determination  of  the  concepts  ;  that  water  solidifies  at  o°  is  grcundo
piimarily  on  its  own  nature,  and  is  so  far  comparable  with  a  law  of  development ;  it  i
only  the  becoming  cold  which  depends  upon  external  relations.


INDUCTION  OF  CONCEPTS  323

which  connect  the  states  of  the  object  with  external  conditions ;  and  the
complete  concept  more  accurately  stated  will  be  that  fluid  water,  when
cooled  below  o°,  changes  into  ice,  when  heated  above  100°  into  steam.

Those  changes  which  follow  from  mixture  and  chemical  combination

i  occupy a position between laws of  development and external causal

;  relations. If  we disregard both the external conditions, which may

.promote  or  hinder  the  combination  of  two  substances,  and  the  variability

;  of  the  combination  itself,  then  the  change  in  each  substance,  which  follows

from  the  combination,  though  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  development

of  one  alone,  is  yet  comparable  to  development,  in  so  far  as  its  ground

lies  only  in  the  nature  of  the  combining  substances,  which  both  persist  in

i  the  combination  in  such  a  way  that  the  attributes  of  the  combination  are

inseparable  common  attributes  of  the  substances  combined. One  subject

does  not  merely  undergo  action  by  which  it  is changed,  from  another

which  remains  distinct  from  it,  but  both  together  constitute  a  new  unity

of  which  the  attributes  seem  to  be  grounded  only  in  the  nature  of  the

combined  substances,  in  a  way  analogous  to  development ;  on  the  other

hand,  there  is  also  a  causal  relation  in  so  far  as  the  change  occurs  for  the

one  substance  only  when  the  other  is  added  to  it. It  is  true  that the

:omplete  development  of  the  causal  concept  on  the  one  hand,  and  the

Atomistic  theory  on  the  other,  put  an  end  to  a  distinction  which  continues

Duly  so  long  as  in  the  first  stages  of  induction  we  confine  ourselves  to

concepts  which  are  combined  from  perceptible  attributes  and  changes.

The  peculiarities  of  chemical  action  explain  why  exhaustive  essential
:oncepts  of  substances  must  include  their  chemical  affinities,  while
:hemical  constitution  forms  the  fundamental  conceptual  formula  for  all
:omposite  substances.

Thus,  to  complete  the  inductive  process,  which  begins  with  the  formation
>f  concepts,  it  is  necessary  to  find  laws  of  development,  external  causal
aws,  and  the  chemical  laws  which  lie  between  them  ;  but  the  finding  of
hese  is  conditioned  by  the  first  preliminary  beginnings,  in  which  we
eferred  attributes  invariably  given  together  to  a  necessity  of  co-existence,
tecause  only  in  this  way  can  we  obtain  subjects  for  laws  of  development
nd  causation.  From  the  variability  of  objects  we  get  only  the  general
ule  that  simple,  fixed,  conceptual  formulae,  expressing  merely  a  co-exist-
nce  of  perceptible  attributes,  are  primarily  true  only  as  the  expression  of
ertain  perceived  states  or  stages  of  development  in  the  thing,  and  not  as
xhaustive  essential  concepts ;  they  should  rather  be  regarded  as  meant  in


324  LOGIC

the  first  instance  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  our  investigation  of  those  laws  of
change  by  which  alone  the  essential  concept  can  be  made  complete.

9.  We  are  next  concerned,  not  with  the  particular  processes  by  which
such  laws  are  found  and  verified,  but  with  a  further  and  difficult  question
which  is  connected  with  the  fundamental  principles  of  that  induction
which  aims  at  forming  concepts,  and  which  is  more  especially  suggested
by  the  organic  world.

We  have  pointed  out  above  that  when,  in  forming  our  concepts,  we
come  upon  attributes  which  vary  with  the  individual  in  a  complex  in  other
respects  fixed  (such  as  varying  colour  in  different  species  of  animals),  we
are  easily  satisfied  by  calling  these  attributes  unessential  and  accidental,
and  therefore  not  to  be  included  in  the  concept.  The  small  quantitative
differences  in  individuals,  which  cause  particular  specimens  of  a  species  of
plant  or  animal  to  be  distinguishable  from  each  other,  are  treated  in  the
same  way ;  they  matter  nothing  to  the  concept,  which  is  sufficiently
elastic  in  its  attributes  to  admit  of  small  variations  without  injury  to  its
validity.  Whether  the  leaves  of  a  plant  are  more  or  less  hairy,  whether
the  bones  of  one  horse  are  somewhat  stronger  than  those  of  another,
whether  particular  organs  are  relatively  more  or  less  strongly  developed,
the  concept  remains  the  same  ;  a  fixed  law  binds  all  the  parts  together.

In  this  easy  disregard  of  small  differences,  and  the  convenient  distinc
tion  between  essential  and  unessential  attributes,  we  trace  the  original
aesthetic  and  teleological  element  contained  in  the  Platonic  doctrine  of
ideas  and  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  of  forms.  The  concepts  of  organic
forms  are  ultimately  types  which  we  think  of  as  intuitable  by  sense,
original  models  of  which  the  particular  individuals  are  more  or  less
successful,  and  therefore  more  or  less  beautiful,  copies  •  when  nature
reproduces  them  in  somewhat  different  substances,  there  are,  of  course,
slight  deviations,  just  as  there  are  in  the  copy  of  a  human  work  of  art,
which  nevertheless  reproduces  the  total  impression  in  such  a  way  as  to  be
easily  recognised  by  intuition.

10.  But  this  expedient  cannot  continue  in  face  of  the  stricter  logic
of  modern  science.  The  given  must  be  necessary, — necessary  in  its  full
determinateness,  in  the  totality  of  all  its  parts,  as  it  is  for  the  most  accurate
observation.  If  two  things,  A  and  B,  falling  under  the  same  concept  M.
show  deviation  from  each  other,  like  the  black  and  white  sheep,  then  the
colour  of  the  black  sheep  must  also  be  regarded  as  necessary,  and  £
ground  sought  for  it ;  we  cannot  have  a  predicate,  b  or  w,  belonging  no\\


INDUCTION  OF  CONCEPTS  325

to  A  and  now  to  B,  without  any  connection  with  the  attributes  of  the  con
cept  M,  an  indifferent  appendage  which  might  as  well  be  something  else.

Here  we  must  face  the  dilemma  :  either  the  different  attributes  of  A
and  B  are  entirely  determined  by  the  attributes  constituting  their  concept,
which  cannot  then  be  absolutely  the  same  for  A  as  for  B ;  or  the  concep
tual  attributes  are  the  same,  and  then  the  variations  must  proceed  from
external  causes,  by  which  they  are  made  necessary.  They  are  not  un
essential  even  in  the  latter  case,  for  in  this  reaction  upon  external  causes
the  essence  of  the  thing  is  again  revealed.

n.  If  we  take  the  first  case,  then  it  may  be  that  the  unity  of  the  con
cept  disappears  altogether,  and  we  have  really  two  different  concepts  ;  we
make  a  special  specific  concept  of  black  sheep ;  the  remaining  attributes
of  the  one  concept  are,  it  is  true,  similar  to  those  of  the  other,  but  the
very  fact  that  they  necessitate  another  predicate  reveals  their  difference.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  unity  of  the  concept  is  to  be  maintained,  it  can
only  be  by  expressing  the  concept  in  a  formula,  in  which  the  variation  of
one  or  more  constituent  attributes,  which  are  not  absolutely  determined,
but  admit  of  a  certain  breadth  of  interpretation,  is  connected  with  varia
tion  in  others.  If  the  black  colour  of  a  sheep  were  always  connected
with  some  peculiarity  of  organization  in  other  respects,  and  white  with
some  other  peculiarity,  then  the  resulting  concept,  instead  of  having  none
but  constant  and  absolutely  determined  attributes,  would  contain  some
which  are  variable  within  certain  limits  although  connected  by  a  constant
relation ;  it  would  resemble,  not  the  concept  of  the  circle  in  which  every
thing  is  absolutely  determined,  but  the  concept  of  the  ellipse,  of  which  the
eccentricity  is  variable  but  in  which  one  law  governs  all  relations  between
its  points.  What  Darwin  describes  as  "  correlation  of  growth  "  indicates
some  such  formula,  combining  the  variation  of  one  attribute  with  varia
tions  of  others,  and  thus  enabling  us  to  find  necessity  in  them ;  if,  e.g.,
:ats  with  blue  eyes  are  invariably  deaf,  then  the  colour  of  the  eyes  is  no
accidental  freak,  but  is  connected  with  modifications  in  the  organ  of
hearing.

12.  When  no  ground  can  be  found  for  such  formulae,  then  the  deviation
}f  particular  predicates  in  instances  of  the  same  species  points  to  external
:auses  which  deviate  from  those  acting  upon  other  specimens  ;  the  greater
^airiness  of  particular  individuals  among  plants,  for  instance,  points  to  a
irier  situation.  Such  variations  may  be  called  accidental  in  relation  to  the
:oncept,  which  asserts  nothing  as  to  the  presence  of  this  or  that  external


326  LOGIC

cause,  but  need  only,  in  order  to  be  exhaustive,  contain  the  information
that  if  cause  A  takes  effect,  then  modification  a  must  follow,  if  cause  B
then  modification  {3.

So  long  as  we  are  treating  a  concept  merely  as  a  subjective  product,  the
addition  of  different  attributes  to  the  same  general  concept,  and  its  conse
quent  division,  matters  nothing  if  only  they  are  compatible  ;  it  then  seems
a  matter  of  course  that  any  possible  colour  may  be  added  to  the  attributes
expressing  the  structure  of  the  horse  in  order  to  specify  it.  But  when  we
attribute  objective  significance  to  the  concepts,  and  try  to  understand
the  Given  in  its  complete  determination  as  necessary  (hence  all  that  co
exists  in  a  thing  as  necessarily  co-existing),  then  the  general  concept  enters
into  a  new  relation  towards  its  specializations.

13.  As  soon  as  we  have  made  it  clear  to  ourselves  in  what  sense,  hav
ing  in  view  only  the  general  presuppositions  of  induction,  we  can  speak
of  accidental  variations  in  the  things  of  a  species,  or  of  the  comprehension
of  attributes  which  differ  within  the  unity  of  the  concept,  a  wider  perspec
tive  opens  out  before  us.  The  same  principle  by  which  we  are  forced  to
distinguish  in  particular  things  between  the  attributes  determined  by  the
concept  and  those  which  are  accidental,  in  order  to  include  differences  in
individuals  under  one  concept  without  giving  up  our  assumption  of  the
necessity  of  the  given,  assails  the  stability  of  our  concepts  themselves,
threatens  to  dissolve  their  internal  connection,  and  to  change  into  external
causal  necessities  that  essential  necessity  for  which  we  were  looking.  For
no  fixed  line  can  be  drawn  between  the  differences  belonging  merely  to
individuals,  which  we  must  neglect  in  order  to  obtain  an  infima  species,
and  the  specific  differences  which  we  disregard  in  ascending  to  a  genus;  and
even  if  there  were  such  a  line,  yet  the  generic  concept  would  be  related  to
the  specific  differences  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  the  specific  concept  to
the  differences  of  individuals,  as  soon  as  we  attribute  objective  reality
to  the  generic  concept  and  necessity  to  the  co-existence  of  its  attributes.
Just  as  the  attributes  of  the  sheep  are  found  sometimes  together  with
black  colour,  sometimes  with  white,  so  the  attributes  of  each  genus  a  b  c
are  found  in  one  species  together  with  difference  d,  in  another  with  differ
ence  e ;  but  if  both  abed  and  abce  are  to  represent  a  concept,  it  cannot  be
that  the  same  abc  necessitates  in  the  one  case  d,  and  in  the  other  an  e
which  is  incompatible  with  the  d.  The  possibility  and  ground  of  variation
must,  on  the  contrary,  lie  either  in  abc  itself,  in  such  a  way  that  a^  ^
produce  the  attribute  d,  and  a2  bz  c2  the  attribute  <?;  or  opposite  external


INDUCTION  OF  CONCEPTS  327

causes  must  supervene  upon  the  same  abc,  and  so  give  rise  in  one  case  to
d,  in  the  other  to  <?.

14.  In  the  first  case  it  is  possible  to  have  a  real  development  of  the
concept,  by  means  of  which  the  specific  concepts  may  be  seen  to  be
differentiations  proceeding  from  the  nature  of  the  general  concept ;  just  as
all  possible  ellipses  proceed  from  the  formula  of  the  ellipse.  If  the  generic
concept  contains  abc,  e.g.  if  the  concept  of  the  mammal  contains  a  certain
construction  of  the  skeleton,  a  certain  arrangement  of  the  digestive  ap
paratus,  a  general  form  for  the  teeth,  etc.,  and  also  a  formula  according  to
which  every  variation  in  the  teeth  necessitates  a  variation  in  the  digestive
apparatus  and  the  extremities,  then  such  a  concept  might  be  schemati
cally  represented  in  such  a  way  that  each  concept  could  be  developed
into  a  disjunction  of  the  specializations,  a  into  al  az  a3  <74,  b  into  b-^  bz  b$  b±,
c  into  q  cz  £3  c±.

We  must  now  find  a  formula  according  to  which,  when  a  is  determined
as  al}  b  becomes  b±,  and  c  becomes  q,  so  that  the  only  combinations  pos
sible  are  al  b^  c^  a.2  bz  cz,  etc.,  each  representing  an  essential  concept ;  in
this  way  the  species  would  be  idealiter  contained  in  the  genus,  and  the
general  concepts  would  have  the  same  objective  validity  as  the  specific,
though  they  would  not  exist  in  individual  specimens,  because  the  universal
i  could  be  actually  present  only  as  av  or  a2,  etc.1

In  the  same  way  we  may  ascend  still  further  to  the  highest  generic  con-
:epts  of  the  animal  and  the  plant.  But  knowledge  of  the  ideal  compre-
lension  of  the  species  within  the  genus  gives  us  only  a  hypothetical  law ;
.f  there  is  an  abc,  of  which  the  attribute  a  is  determined  as  a{,  then  the
Dther  attributes  are  b±  c\ ;  it  tells  us  nothing  as  to  the  existence  of  the

1  The  merely  logical  or  mathematical  combination  of  these  disjunctions,  which  would
\ssume  that  there  was  no  connection  between  the  variations  of  a  and  those  of  b  and  c,
.vould  yield  no  less  than  64  species,  in  which  the  concept  abc  developed  itself;  and  if
he  number  of  attributes  were  increased,  and  their  merely  quantitative  and  therefore  un-
imited  variations  included,  we  should  have  the  possibility  of  endlessly  many  specifica-
ions  in  which  everything  would  be  compatible  with  everything  else.  But  such  an
issumption  does  away  with  that  inner  connection  which  is  requisite  to  the  concept  of  the
hing,  as  well  as  with  all  possibility  of  induction ;  where  everything  can  be  everything
ve  have  only  the  particular  and  nothing  universal.  If  Darwin's  theory  of  the  varia-
)ility  of  organisms  were  not  limited  by  his  assumption  of  the  dependence  of  certain
'ariations  upon  others,  it  would  then  be  represented  by  the  merely  mathematical  calcu-
ation  of  the  combination  of  all  possible  variations,  which  admits  of  no  inference  from
me  case  to  another  because  it  presents  us  with  no  concept  which  is  valid  in  reality,  but
>nly  with  subjective  combinations.  Here  again  we  find  the  difference  between  the
nerely  logical  combination  of  attributes  and  that  which  is  determined  by  the  idea  of  the
ssential  concepts  of  things.  Cf.  §  42,  4  and  §  43,  8,  I.,  p.  283  sq.


328  LOGIC

forms  possible  in  these  concepts.  The  question  :  how  have  these  possi
bilities  become  actual?  in  what  way  has  any  one  of  these  specializations,
which  has  others  in  its  train  according  to  the  law,  been  actually  brought
about  ?  denotes  the  revolutions  which  have  been  introduced  by  Darwin's
teaching  even  into  logic,  and  which  extend  in  their  consequences  over  the
whole  province  of  substantial  concepts.

15.  The  first  result  of  the  Darwinian  theory  seems  to  be  merely
destructive.  It  does  away  entirely  with  the  Aristotelian  basis,  upon  which,
more  or  less,  our  logical  theory  has  stood  until  now,  more  especially  in
obtaining  its  classificatory  concepts,  and  denies  the  objective  validity  of
the  specific  and  generic  concepts  by  which  the  classification  of  the  organic
world  proceeded  under  the  assumption  that  the  whole  organic  world  was
constructed  according  to  forms  which  could  be  fixed  in  definitions,  and  in
such  a  way  that  each  individual  could  be  attributed  to  this  or  that  species
according  to  unmistakable  characteristics.  On  the  other  hand,  attention
has  been  drawn  to  the  gradual  transitions  between  those  differences  which
are  peculiar  to  the  individual  and  which  have  always  been  neglected  in  the
formation  of  concepts,  the  differences  of  varieties  to  which  a  doubtful
recognition  has  been  accorded,  with  a  tendency  to  refer  them  to  external
causes  of  climate,  situation,  etc.,  and  the  differences  which  are  usually
accepted  as  specific,  and  employed  for  the  determination  of  species ;
and  in  so  doing  the  Darwinian  theory  has  assailed  the  distinction  be
tween  the  Bia<f>opa  eiSoTi-oios  and  the  o-u/x/Se^Ko?,  and  represented  it  as  an
arbitrary  one.  By  pointing  out  the  innumerable  transitional  cases  which
confuse  the  boundaries  of  the  species,  and  the  impossibility  of  carrying  out
any  classification  in  such  a  way  that  every  individual  can  be  confidently
assigned  to  a  species,  it  has  substituted  for  the  "  discretion  "  demanded
in  forming  concepts  the  continuum  of  imperceptibly  small  differences  as
being  alone  objectively  valid  ;  and  by  disputing  the  invariability  of  organic
forms,  and  asserting  that  different  forms  have  gradually  come  into  being
through  small  deviations  from  common  forms,  it  has  destroyed  the  chief
assumption  upon  which  the  Aristotelian  doctrine  of  the  concept  was  based
— the  assumption  that  a  significance  independent  of  time  attached  to
concepts,  as  timeless  forms  always  realizing  themselves  in  the  same  way.
It  is  only  for  the  present  moment  that,  the  intermediate  members  having
disappeared,  a  part  of  the  organic  world  falls  into  separate  spheres  in  such
a  way  that  individuals  of  one  sphere  seem  more  similar  to  each  other  than
those  of  different  spheres  ;  in  another  part  we  find  continuous  transitions


INDUCTION  OF  CONCEPTS  329

between  individuals  which  are  just  as  remote  from  each  other,  or  even
more  so,  than  those  which  in  the  former  case  belong  to  different  spheres ;
and  if  we  should  try  to  establish  sharply  limited  concepts  even  within  the
first  province,  they  would  possess  only  an  ephemeral  validity,  and  the
restless  activity  of  variation  would  sooner  or  later  compel  us  to  re-model
them  like  coins  that  have  been  withdrawn  from  the  currency.  They  can
possess  no  other  significance  than  that  of  being  a  temporarily  convenient
1  arrangement,  enabling  us  to  make  a  general  survey  of  all  which  is  known
to  us.

No  more  impressive  way  could  be  found  than  this  of  showing  the
merely  subjective,  and — in  relation  to  the  totality  of  being — accidental
importance  of  general  concepts,  which  makes  any  universal  judgment
impossible  ;  and  the  theory  of  the  tendency  of  organisms  to  vary  in  all
directions  repeats  the  Heraclitean  Trdvra  pel  in  a  way  which  seems  to  mock
all  our  attempts  to  obtain  from  past  experiences  any  universal  proposition
of  which  we  could  guarantee  the  truth  for  even  one  day,  or  to  find  in  the
co-existence  of  different  attributes  any  necessity  which  would  exclude
other  possibilities.  There  might  be  a  history  of  this  eternal  flow  of
variation  in  individuals,  if  time  and  memory  sufficed  to  write  it,  but  there
'can  be  no  knowledge  of  a  universal  which  governs  the  formation  of  its
waves.  What  remains  as  universal  proposition,  the  so-called  laws  of
variability  and  inheritance,  is  not  capable  of  replacing  the  concept  which
has  been  banished  ;  placed  side  by  side  in  this  crude  form,  the  two  proposi
tions  that  the  offspring  are  not  like  the  parents,  and  that  the  offspring  are
like  the  parents,  contradict  each  other.  They  are  not,  indeed,  universal
propositions  expressing  a  necessity  which  enters  into  every  case  ;  on  the
contrary,  the  first  one,  strictly  interpreted,  contains  only  the  negation  of  all
necessity,  inasmuch  as  the  direction  of  the  variation  is  left  wholly  undeter
mined  ;  while  the  second  merely  states  a  tendency,  i.e.  a  possibility,  which
it  best  only  happens  frequently,  a  w?  eVi  TO  TTO\V.  All  that  remains  as  uni
versal  proposition,  the  multiplying  capacity  of  every  organic  form,  refers  to
ust  that  which  is  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  concept,  the  number
?f  individuals  corresponding  to  it ;  the  struggle  for  existence  also  has
mmediate  reference  only  to  the  numbers,  since  its  direct  effect  is  only  to
destroy  and  not  to  create.  The  only  general  concept  which  finally  remains
s  the  widest  of  all,  that  of  the  organic  in  general ;  but  we  are  deprived
>f  the  means  of  predicating  anything  definitely  about  it  with  universal
.•alidity.


330  LOGIC

1 6.  Although,  therefore,  Darwin's  theory,  in  the  form  in  which  he  has
presented  it,  negates  in  principle  within  its  sphere  the  presuppositions  of
all  induction,  of  all  subordination  of  the  particular  to  a  universal  proposi
tion  ;  yet,  carried  a  step  further,  it  is  fertile  even  in  the  sphere  of  logic
by  disclosing  the  inadequacy  of  the  traditional  doctrine  of  the  concept
and  of  induction,  and  by  forcing  us  to  revise  these  doctrines ;  and  its
importance  in  this  respect  is  quite  independent  of  whether  its  assumptions
are  confirmed  or  refuted.

It  brings  into  evidence  the  impossibility  we  have  already  pointed  out  of
treating  the  variable  attributes  of  individuals  as  something  external  in
relation  to  the  concept;  of  drawing  a  line  between  that  which  is  alike  in  all
individuals  and  that  which  differs  in  different  individuals,  in  such  a  way
that  the  latter  is  really  removed  from  scientific  notice,  and  only  finds  a
place  at  best  in  the  form  of  occasional  notices  ;  and  of  being  led  by  the
subjective  psychological  motives,  by  which  we  are  guided  in  forming
concepts  by  abstraction,  to  overlook  the  claims  of  logical  necessity.  It  is
not,  indeed,  possible  for  the  general  concepts  which  are  denoted  by  words
to  arise  at  all  without  this  overlooking  of  differences  and  determinations
peculiar  to  the  individual ;  but  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  their  objective
significance.  Here  Darwin  has  the  great  merit  of  having  put  an  end  to
the  neglect  of  all  which  would  not  conform  to  the  traditional  logic,  and
compelled  us  to  consider  the  manifold  of  things  in  their  full  concrete
determination;  in  this  way,  by  showing  that  the  determinations  and  differ
ences  of  the  individual  need  scientific  explanation  no  less  than  common
attributes,  he  has  given  a  right  direction  to  the  induction  upon  which  our
formation  of  concepts  is  based.

It  is  possible  to  assume  with  Leibnitz  that  everything  is  individually
determined  according  to  its  nature,  and  that  therefore  there  exists  for  every
particular  thing  a  different  law  for  the  mutual  relation  of  its  attributes  and
its  development ;  it  is  possible  to  say  with  Spinoza  that  the  modi  of  one
and  the  same  attribute,  which  is  everywhere  essentially  alike,  are  determined
only  from  without  by  external  causes  in  different  ways ;  either  view  is  at
least  consistent.  But  it  is  arbitrary  to  come  to  a  halt  at  a  given  point  up
to  which  the  inner  determination  of  the  concept  prevails  exclusively,  and
then  to  hand  over  what  remains  exclusively  to  external  determination  by
causal  relation.  If  Spinoza  and  Leibnitz  are  wrong  a  way  of  mediation
can  be  found  rationally  only  by  endeavouring  to  think  of  everything  as
determined  both  by  internal  and  external  necessity  ;  at  any  rate  only  the


INDUCTION  OF  CONCEPTS  331

most  comprehensive  consideration  can  determine  the  share  which  each  has
in  the  development  of  the  particular  individual.  For  if  external  conditions
are  capable  of  causing  a  malformation  which  we  think  we  must  regard  as
an  accidental  encroachment  upon  the  order  of  nature,  and  neglect  in
determining  the  concept,  then  the  normal  construction  must  also  be  partly
due  to  external  influences  which  differ  from  the  disturbing  conditions ;  on
the  other  hand,  the  direction  taken  by  the  malformation  is  partly
prescribed  by  laws  of  development.

17.  Another  aspect  of  the  importance  of  the  Darwinian  theory  for  logic
lies  in  the  problems  which  it  raises  as  to  our  view  of  the  relations  between
particular  concepts.  For  a  long  time  logicians  had  been  content  to  regard
concepts  which  were  co-ordinate  to  each  other,  and  subordinate  to  higher
generic  concepts,  as  something  simply  given,— -essential  rerum  sunt  ceternce ;
by  this  scholastic  proposition  they  excluded  every  question  as  to  why  just
these  concepts  are  realized  in  the  world.  The  divisive  judgment  breaking
up  a  genus  into  so  many  species  which  together  exhaust  its  extension,  is
true  simply  because  there  actually  are  these  and  only  these  species,  which
agree  in  certain  generic  attributes ;  it  was  only  by  assuming  such  an
eternally  persisting  and  finite  number  of  valid  concepts  that  Aristotle  could
speak  of  an  cTraywy?)  Sia  irdvrwv.  It  makes  no  difference,  from  the  point
of  view  of  principle,  whether  we  assume  that  the  existing  species  are  all
known,  or  that  because  of  the  narrowness  of  our  horizon  they  are  only
partly  known  ;  the  important  point  is  that  a  finite  number  of  specific  con
cepts  are  assumed  as  the  exhaustive  expression  of  the  manifold  of  the
*iven,  and  that  it  is  supposed  that  nothing  must  be  said  about  these  infimas
species  except  that  they  are  subordinated  in  a  particular  way  to  higher
:oncepts,  and  distinguished  from  each  other  by  certain  attributes.  The
.vhole  relation,  including  not  merely  the  fact  that  a  universal  specializes
tself,  but  that  it  specializes  itself  in  just  this  way,  is  taken  as  an  ultimate
presupposition,  and  is  not  even  an  object  of  investigation  which  should
isk  about  the  why  of  this  relation  and  derive  it  from  more  remote  grounds.
^o  one,  however,  has  seriously  tried  to  develop  logically  from  the  concept
nan  the  different  races,  nor  its  various  species  from  the  concept  rodent.

This  ignava  ratio  is  now  called  upon  by  the  theory  of  evolution  to
:xplain  the  plurality  of  the  species  themselves  by  some  universal  ground,
o  say  why  it  is  permissible  to  comprehend  similar  and  yet  different  indivi-
luals  in  specific  concepts,  and  these  again  in  genera,  and  then  from  these
;rounds  to  deduce  the  reason  why  just  these  forms  and  no  others,  no  more


332  LOGIC

and  no  fewer,  are  forthcoming  as  species  of  a  generic  concept.  What
makes  the  solution  of  this  problem  possible  is  the  principle  that  everything
which  is  has  first  gone  through  a  process  of  becoming ;  that  the  history  of
reality  corresponds  to  the  logical  development  and  differentiation  of  con
cepts  ;  that  the  laws  by  which  becoming  is  controlled  have  under  given
circumstances  developed  differences  in  what  was  previously  undifferentiated,
and  have  made  necessary  just  these  particular  differences.  The  only  point
which  is  opposed  to  scientific  principles,  because  it  excludes  the  possibility
of  scientific  knowledge  in  the  form  of  general  propositions,  is  the  way  in
which  Darwin  frequently  speaks  of  the  variation  as  something  quite  capri
cious,  as  a  tendency  which  strives,  so  to  speak,  in  all  directions  at  once,
thus  making  the  basis  of  his  edifice  an  absolutely  irrational  element.  As
soon  as  we  inquire  about  the  laws  of  this  variation,  and  try  to  find  rules
according  to  which  it  must  follow — either  (according  to  one  school  of  Dar
win's  successors)  chiefly  through  inner  development,  or  (according  to  the
other  school)  through  external  influences, — then  the  application  of  his
principles  is  assured.  It  is  true  that  we  now  have  three  unknown  elements
to  determine,  the  universal  essence  upon  which  the  organic  is  grounded,
then  its  laws  of  development,  and,  finally,  the  external  causes  which  deter
mine  it  in  this  or  that  direction ;  but  the  difficulty  of  a  problem  is  no  proof
that  it  has  not  been  correctly  formulated.

1 8.  The  solution  of  this  problem  would  include  a  reconciliation  between
the  Platonic-Aristotelian  view,  and  the  conception  of  mechanical  explana
tion  which  refers  everything  to  external  causes  ;  the  general  concept  would
contain  the  possibility  of  specialization  in  definite  directions,  but  it  would
depend upon external circumstances which  of  the  various possibilities
became  actual. And  in  another  aspect  the  causal  concept,  when  consis
tently  followed  up,  attributes  by  means  of  the  concept  of  force  everything
which  a  subject  can  become  by  external  relations  to  its  own  essence,  and
thus  treats  it  as  in  a  certain  sense  a  development  of  its  being,  though
also  conditioned  by  external  circumstances  ;  thus  in  this  way  also  we  are
justified  in  desiring  to  think  of  the  specializations  of  general  concepts  as
determined  both  by  an  inner  necessity  of  development  and  by  the  external
necessity  of  causality.

19.  These  considerations,  to  which  we  are  first  led  when  we  investigate
the  logical  application  of  the Darwinian  theory,  are  not  confined  to  the
sphere of  the organic ; we  find questions  of  exactly  the  same  sort  in
chemistry. Just  as  irrational  as  the  plurality  of  the  hundreds  of  thousands


INDUCTION  OF  CONCEPTS  333

of  species  of  plants  and  animals  registered  in  descriptive  botany  and
zoology  is  the  plurality  of  elements  enumerated  by  chemistry.  Although
none  of  the  difficulties  are  seriously  felt  here,  which  in  the  former  case
prevent  us  from  forming  sharply  limited  lowest  concepts,  although  here,  if
,  anywhere,  we  have  to  do  with  objects  which  readily  conform  to  the  claims
of  discrete  specific  concepts,  yet  those  of  the  chemists  who  are  philosophers
have  not  been  willing  to  allow  that  with  these  elements  we  have  come  to  the
end  of  everything,  and  that  all  that  is  left  for  us  to  do  is  to  see  how  we
may  bring  them  under  higher  genera  which  have  only  a  subjective  value,
whether  as  metals  or  metalloids,  according  to  their  atomic  value,  or  accord
ing  to  some  other  principle.  The  question  has  always  remained  :  in  what
relation  does  this  plurality  stand  to  that  which  is  common  to  them  all,  to
the  universal  essence  of  matter  ?  and  this  has  given  rise  to  the  idea  of  ex
plaining  chemical  atoms  by  homogeneous  material  atoms  of  the  second
power,  which  unite  in  different  combinations,  thus  returning  really  to
Aristotle,  for  whom  matter  is  one,  and  only  the  form  differs.  But  if  we  try
to  think  of  this  theory  as  carried  out,  there  is  only  one  way  open  to  us  ;
under  different  conditions  of  spatial  distribution  or  of  the  motion  of  this
last  homogeneous  substance,  a  different  grouping  must  follow  from  the  law
which  expresses  its  being,  and  the  permanent  relations  which  are  now  con
tained  in  the  atoms  before  us  must  at  some  time  have  become  what  they
ire.  And  if  we  are  inclined  to  call  these  idle  speculations,  we  must
remember  that  they  arise  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  every  other  induction,
even  those  which  seem  to  be  forced  upon  us  by  nature  itself;  the  principle
:hat  we  must  explain  the  given  as  necessary  is  satisfied  only  by  working
Backwards  from  the  plurality  of  phenomena  to  ultimate  presuppositions
which  are  common  to  them  all.

And  thus  we  see  that,  however  far  apart  they  may  seem  at  first,  Darwin
n  the  problems  which  he  places  before  logic  is  striving  towards  the  same
;nd  as  Hegel :  that  completeness  in  the  concepts  applicable  to  reality
ipon  which  the  justification  of  induction  depends  is  only  to  be  attained
vhen  the  law  is  found  according  to  which  the  plurality  of  determination
irises.  Hegel  believed  that  in  the  essence  of  the  concept  he  discovered,
lot  only  the  necessity  of  development,  but  also  the  one  law  according
o  which  the  differentiation  of  the  concepts  proceeds,  and  produces  from
tself  the  content  which  progressively  determines  itself.  From  the  point
)f  view  demanded  by  Darwin's  suggestions  we  have  only  to  presuppose
hat  the  laws,  according  to  which  the  real  plurality  of  distinct  beings


334  LOGIC

has  come  to  be,  must  be  knowable  in  the  form  of  universal  propositions ;
what  these  laws  are,  and  to  what  presumably  original  elements  they  are
to  be  applied,  is  not  to  be  discovered  deductively,  but  only  by  way  of
induction.

20.  The  first  result  which  these  considerations  yield  for  those  methods
of  induction  which  are  to  lead  to  concepts  is  the  general  rule  that  when
a  tentative  proposition,  All  A's  are  b,  is  not  confirmed,  the  comparison  ot
many  instances  leading  to  the  result  :  the  A's  are  in  part  &,  in  part  c,  then
we  must  not  infer  that  b  and  c  have  no  connection  with  the  conceptual
attributes,  but  that  on  the  contrary  we  have  to  discover  the  ground  of  the
difference.  This  can  only  be  done  by  again  trying  the  possible  hypotheses  ;
the  ground  of  difference  will  lie  either  in  modification  of  the  attributes  of
the  concept  itself,  or  in  external  causal  relations ;  we  have  to  see  which  of
these  hypotheses  breaks  down,  which  is  confirmed,  and  to  what  extent  the
one  or  the  other  is  to  be  accepted.

The  complication  of  the  problem  of  forming  concepts  with  that  of  find
ing  causal  relations  does  not  prevent  us  from  investigating  the  methodical
principles  of  its  solution  ;  just  because  the  whole  process  is  a  hypothetical
one,  the  circumstance  that  we  must  begin  with  merely  provisional  concepts
cannot  be  any  hindrance  to  our  formulating  universal  propositions  about
causal  relations,  and  observing  whether  perception  of  the  particular  agrees
with  their  consequences.

III. THE  PROCESS  OF  OBTAINING  UNIVERSAL  PROPOSITIONS

ABOUT THE ACTION OF CAUSES.

§  95-

I.  In  formulating  universal  causal  laws  we  first  aim  at  predicating
of  certain  perceptible  things  that  by  a  certain  activity  they  necessitate
changes  in  other  things,  and  we  thus  presuppose  the  popular  concept  of

an EFFICIENT CAUSE.

The  logical  process  is  one  of  reduction.  It  starts  from  the  chief
postulate  that  perceptible  events  are  necessary,  and  begins  by  conjecturing
in  a  particular  case  that  the  change  ft  in  thing  £,  which  follows  immedi
ately  upon  a  change  a  in  thing  A,  is  brought  about  by  A.

This  conjecture  is  uncertain,  because  there  is  the  possibility  that  the
coincidence  in  time  of  a  and  ft  is  due  to  chance.  It  will  be  confirmed  by
the  comparison  of  several  cases  in  which,  on  the  one  hand,  B  ft  followed
A  a,  while  on  the  other  hand  ft  was  wanting  in  B  when  A  a  was  absent.


INDUCTION  OF  CAUSAL LAWS  335

From  this  follows,  in  the  first  place,  the  assertion  that  A  a  is  the  cause
which  regularly  and  necessarily  produces  B  (3.

But  such  a  proposition  does  not  attain  to  complete  logical  exactness
without  the  determination  of  the  quantitative  values  of  A  a,  B  ft,  for  which
it  is  true ;  and  it  gains  increased  certainty  from  the  establishment  of  a
formula  which  states  the  effect  ft  to  be  proportional  to  the  efficient  action
of  the  cause.  Where  such  a  formula  can  be  found  and  confirmed  in  all
known  cases,  it  may  be  stated  as  a  causal  law.

II.  In  reality  the  presupposition  of  such  simple  causal  connections  be
tween  A  and  B  proves  to  be  a  fictitious  case,  and  the  hypotheses  referring
to  it  meet  with  exceptions  and  deviations  from  the  rule  which  point  to
the  co-operation  of  a  plurality  of  presuppositions,  upon  which  the  result
depends.

The  problem  is,  to  find  this  plurality,  to  express  in  a  partial  law  the
contribution  which  each  one  yields  to  the  result,  and  to  formulate  the  law
according  to  which  the  partial  results  combine  to  make  the  total  result.
This  also  takes  place  by  means  of  a  hypothetical  process  of  reduction.

When  we  cannot  show  different  co-operating  perceptible  causes  in  the
original  sense  of  the  term,  the  distinction  appears  between  the  CIRCUM
STANCE  and  the  EFFICIENT  CAUSE,  and  the  problem  arises  of  eliminating
the  indifferent  circumstances,  and  of  determining  for  those  which  have
an  influence  the  law  according  to  which  they  modify  the  effect,

In  so  far  as  there  are  circumstances  which  counteract  the  effect  of  an
efficient  cause,  we  need  for  the  complete  expression  of  every  causal  law  a

statement  of  the  NEGATIVE  CONDITIONS  ;  i.e.  a  statement  of  those  circum-

'J

stances  the  absence  of  which  is  a  condition  of  the  result.
.  III.  The  simple  and  fundamental  causal  laws,  to  which  the  analysis
of  the  given  connections  between  different  causes  and  circumstances  leads,
are  therefore  hypothetical  assumptions,  which  can  never  be  directly  com
pared  with  the  observed  reality,  because  it  nowhere  shows  absolutely  simple
connections.  Only  the  consequences  which  follow  from  the  combination
of  those  simple  laws  can  yield  an  expression  of  what  actually  happens  in
the  form  of  universal  judgments.

i.  As  we  have  shown  in  §  73,  the  concept  of  causality  contains  a
synthesis,  which,  like  that  in  the  concept  of  substance,  has  for  its  primary
and  original  aim  to  connect  the  spatially  and  temporally  continuous
changes  of  different  things,  by  referring  them  to  one  ground  of  unity.  In
every  judgment  which  expresses  efficient  action  there  is  presupposed  the


336  LOGIC

reference  of  distinguishable  changes  to  different  subjects,  which  at  the
beginning  of  the  logical  process  can  have  only  the  phenomenal  significance
of  §  91.

If  we  presuppose  that  there  is  given  to  perception  the  motion — or,  more
generally,  the  change — -of  an  individual  thing  A  which  is  given  in  this  way
by  spatial  limitation,  and  standing  in  immediate  spatial  and  temporal  con
nection  with  it  the  change  of  a  second  thing  B,  then  the  judgment  that
A  causes  the  change  of  B  seems  to  be  a  judgment  of  perception  in  the
same  sense  as  the  judgment  that  A  or  B  changes,  which  is  valid  as  a
judgment  of  perception  because  a  universal  necessity  of  thought  constrains
us  to  refer  to  one  and  the  same  thing  the  continuous  changes  of  sense-
given  qualities  which  take  place  within  the  same  spatial  limits.  Thus  it
seems  possible,  first,  to  ascertain  efficient  action  in  particular  cases,  and
then  from  these  particular  causal  judgments  to  obtain  universal  causal  laws.

2.  Against  this  we  must  set  the  objection  that  the  application  of  the
causal  concept  is  not  unambgiuous  in  the  same  way  as  the  application  of
the  concept  of  substance. The  assumption  that the  subject  of  a  con
tinuous  series  of  changes  suddenly  vanishes  to  make  room  for  another,  in
which  the  change  proceeds  further,  is  inadmissible  ;  but  the  perception  of
the  consecutive  changes  of  two  things  is  always  open  to  the  interpretation
that  what  takes  place  is  mere  succession  without  inner  connection,  that  the
ground  of  the  change  in  B  is  to  be  found  only  in  itself  or  in  an  unnoticed
third,  not  in  the  action  of  A  ;  that,  as  it  is  ordinarily  expressed,  the  coin
cidence  of  the  two  changes  is  chance,  i.e.  not  necessarily  brought  about  by
the  relation  of  A  and  B. If  a  bomb  explodes  just  as  some  one  touches  it
to  throw  it  away,  or  if  a  man  falls  down  in  a  fit  just  as  some  one  is  speaking
to  him,  there  is  the  same  continuity  of  events  which  generally  gives  rise  to
the  thought  of  efficient  action;  and  if  a  causal  judgment  could  be  un
ambiguously  and  infallibly  grounded  by  the  particular  perception  by  itself,
then  this  succession  would  have  to  be  apprehended  as  efficient  action  and
its  result,  just  as  much  as  the  breaking  of  a  dish  by  a  blow. But  it  is  open
to  us  to  see  in  such  cases  only  a  casual  coincidence  of  two  events,  only  a
temporal  succession  of  changes  which  occur  without  inner  connection  as
the  result  of  inner  development  or  of  independent  causes.

3.  We  are  guided  in  our  decision  by  the  fact  that  we  see  one  set  of
successions occur  regularly,  but not  the other. Thus, if  it is to  claim
validity,  every  causal  judgment  presupposes  a  universal  proposition,  and
we  move  in  a  circle  in  so  far  as  the  universal  proposition  must  be  derived


337

from  the  particular  cases,  while  the particular  case  can  only  be  really
established  as  a  case  of  causality  by  the  universal  proposition.1

The  logical  process  by  which  we  succeed  in  establishing  the  universal
'proposition  is  none  other  than  that  which  we  have  described,  in  another
application,  in  the  previous  section.  We  are  naturally  inclined  to  refer
every  connection  of  changes  to  an  efficient  action  as  its  inner  ground,  and
in  this  way  to  explain  it  as  necessary ;  but  in  one  set  of  cases  this  hypo
thesis  is  refuted  by  the  fact  that  the  same  circumstances  do  not  lead  to
the  same  event,  while  in  another  set  it  is  confirmed  because  when  the  same
'circumstances  are  present  the  same  changes  always  succeed  each  other.

4.  Just  because  it  is  only  possible  to  determine  causal  relations  in  this
hypothetical  manner,  the  procedure  calls  for  careful  consideration  of  the
sense  in which  a  causal  relation  is assumed  and  employed  to  connect
phenomena. The  analysis  of  the  causal  concept  has  shown  it  to  us  in
different  stages  of  logical  elaboration,  from  the  popular  view  which  finds
expression  in  the  meaning  of  transitive  verbs  to  the  determination  of  the
concept  of  invariable  forces  which under different  conditions  produce
different  results  according  to  certain  laws ;  and  it  has  also  pointed  out  how
:his  elaboration  of  the  causal  concept  goes  hand  in  hand  with that  of  the
:oncept  of  substance. The  logical  process  by  which  we  arrive  at  universal
:ausal  propositions  must  take  a  different  form,  according  as  we  ask  in  the
popular  sense  what  are  the  changes  produced  by  certain  perceptible  things

n  exerting  their  activity  upon  other  things,  or  what  is  the  law  of  action  of
he  forces  which  belong  to  the  substances.

5.  The  investigation  of  causal  judgments  must  always  start  in  the  first
nstance  from  the  point  of  view  taken  by  ordinary,  unschooled  apprehen-
ion. The  problem  is to  determine  in  what  way  the  things  given  to
>erception as  the most obvious  phenomenal  unities  regularly  produce
hanges  in  other  things  ;  and  here  the  changes  in  the  object  of  the  action
re  also  taken  as  a  unity  at  first.

6.  From  this  point  of  view,  to  find  the  causal  connections  between
aily  events  seems  an  easy  and  simple  problem,  which  ordinary  experience
olves  satisfactorily  without  the  aid  of  any  scientific  methods. That  to  eat
Dod  satisfies  hunger,  and  to  drink  water  quenches  thirst,  that  fire  burns
•ood,  and  a  stone  is  set  in  motion  when  thrown,  that  salt  is  dissolved  by
?ater,  and  cooking  makes  an  egg  hard :  these  propositions  seem  so  easily

1  Cf.  §  47,  12,  I.  p.  314  sq.
s.  L. — n.  z


338  LOGIC

discovered  and  so  securely  established  that  the  way  in  which  they  have
been  obtained  recommends  itself  as  a  model  of  causal  induction  ;  all  we
have  to  do  is  to  analyse  the  process  as  we  observe  it,  and  to  reduce  it  to
generally  applicable  rules.

It  is  really  this  popular  concept  of  efficient  action  which  J.  Herschell  in
his  Preliminary  Discourse,  and  after  him  J.  S.  Mill  in  his  Logic,  have  had
in  view  in  following  the  plan  of  Bacon's  Noinim  Organum  and  apply
ing  the  rules  therein  laid  down  for  the  investigation  of  forms  to  the
investigation  of  such  causal  relations.  The  causes  which  are  to  be  sought
are  those  perceptible  things,  and  changes  of  things,  upon  which  other
things  and  their  changes  regularly  follow  ;  the  cause  is  the  invariable  ante
cedent,  the  effect  the  invariable  consequent.  The  assumption  1  is,  there
fore,  that  the  same  antecedents  are  invariably  followed  in  time  by  the  same
consequents  ;  the  problem  is,  so  to  disentangle  the  course  of  actual,  observed
events  that  it  may  be  resolved  into  constant  connections  between  given
antecedents  and  given  consequents.  The  result  of  the  process  consists  in
universal  propositions,  which  state  that  whenever  an  A  appears  it  is  fol
lowed  by  a  B ;  when  that  has  been  ascertained  we  call  A  the  cause,  B
the  effect  of  the  cause.  To  avoid  the  objection  that  in  this  case  night
would  be  the  cause  of  day,  Mill  adds  a  distinction  :  it  is  not  sufficient
that  B  should  have  followed  without  exception  upon  A  during  the  whole
course  of  our  experience ;  we  must  also  be  able  to  believe  that  B  follows
A  unconditionally,  i.e.  independently  of  any  other  determining  circum
stances.  Because  we  do  not  believe  that  day  follows  night  independently
of  the  rising  of  the  sun,  while  we  do  believe  that  the  rising  of  the  sur.
above  our  horizon,  and  the  absence  of  any  dark  body  between  us  and
the  sun,  would  have  day  as  a  consequence  whatever  other  circumstances
might  be  present ;  therefore  we  call  not  the  night,  but  the  sun,  the  cause
of  day.  In  the  same  way  another  distinction  is  employed  to  remove  the
objection  that  frequently  what  we  call  effect  occurs  simultaneously  with
the  cause,  and  that  therefore  the  cause  cannot  be  its  antecedent  :  th(
beginning  of  the  effect,  we  are  told,  may  be  simultaneous  with  the  cause
but  the  caused  phenomenon  as  a  whole  follows  the  appearance  of  th<
cause,  and  its  beginning  certainly  does  not  precede  the  cause.

7. Starting  from  these  assumptions,  we  get  first  two  simple  methods  b;
which  to  select  from  the  circumstances  which  precede  or  follow  a  natura

V *  We  have  noticed  on  p.  300  the  ground  upon  which  this  presupposition  is  based  fo
Mill.


INDUCTION  OF  CAUSAL LAWS  339

phenomenon  those  which  are  connected  according  to  an  invariable  law  :

the  METHOD OF AGREEMENT  and  the  METHOD  OF  DIFFERENCE.

In  the  first  method  we  proceed  in  this  way :  we  compare  a  number  of
instances  in which  a  natural  phenomenon  a  is  given  to  observation ;  in
,  each  instance  we  note  all  the  antecedents  of  a,  and  also  all  the  pheno
mena  which  follow  a. Now  we  can  say  :

(i)  that  whatever  does  not  precede  a  in  all  the  instances  cannot  be  its
cause,  whatever  does  not  follow  a  in  all  the  instances  cannot  be  its  effect ;
thus  we  eliminate  all  the  circumstances  which  are  not  causally  connected
.with  a;

,  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  whatever  precedes  whenever  a  appears  will  be
,the  cause  of  a,  or  will  contain  the  cause,  or  will  be  a  part  of  it ;  whatever
follows  whenever  a  appears  will  be  the  effect  of  a  or  will  contain  it.

Thus  the  process  ends  as  a  purely  mechanical  enumeration.  Let  the
instances  in  which  a  presents  itself  as  consequent  be  expressed  by

A  B  C—a  b  c
A  D  E—a  de
AFG—afg

where  be,  de,fg  represent  circumstances  accompanying  a  :  now  we  eliminate
from  amongst  the  antecedents  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G  because  they  do  not
[always  precede  when  a  follows,  and  only  A  remains  as  the  circumstance
:in  which  all  the  instances  agree  ;  A  will  therefore  be  the  cause.

By  a  corresponding  process  the  effect  is  sought  of  a  given  circumstance
which  is  taken  as  the  cause  ;  we  compare  all  the  consequents  of  A,  and
:hat  which  is  common  to  them  all,  a,  is  the  desired  effect.

The  method  of  difference,  on  the  contrary,  compares  two  instances,
.vhich  differ  only 'in  the  fact  that  a  is  present  in  the  one  and  absent  in  the
Jther.  If  two  instances  are  to  each  other  as  be  and  a  be,  and  if  we  find  in
:he  second  an  antecedent  A  which  is  absent  from  the  first,  then  A  must
~>e  the  cause  of  a  or  a  part  of  the  cause  of  a ;  if  we  find  in  the  second
nstance  a  consequent  a  which  is  absent  in  the  first,  then  a  must  have  the
effect  a.  This  method  is  applicable  wherever  anew  element  is  introduced
nto  a  known  set  of  conditions  and  has  changes  following  upon  it ;  we  are
hen  convinced  that  these  changes  are  brought  about  by  the  newly  intro-
luced  circumstance.  This  is  the  method  of  experiment.

Similar  to  these  two,  and  really  only  a  special  application  of  the  method
)f  difference,  is  the  method  which  Mill  calls  the  METHOD  OF  CONCOMITANT
.•AKIATIONS,  and  which  has  for  its  axiom  that  any  phenomenon  of  which  the


34°  LOGIC

modifications  are  invariably  followed  by  modifications  in  another  must  be
the  cause  of  the  latter,  or  connected  with  its  cause.  In  fact,  the  plus  or
minus  of  the  antecedent  and  consequent  constitute  the  two  different
instances  which  are  necessary  for  the  method  of  difference.

8.  But  it  is  just  this  application  which  reveals  those  deficiencies  in  the
original  formulation  of  the  problem  and  its  solution  which  are  easily  over
looked  in  the  schematical  representation  of  the  methods,  but  which  make
themselves  apparent  even  in  the  examples  which  are  given.

If  we  disregard  for  the  present  the  question  how  far  we  are  justified  in
assuming  that  every  phenomenon  has  only  one  kind  of  cause,  if  we  over
look  the  difficulties  caused  by  the  frequent  presence  of  counteracting
conditions,  and  the  impossibility  of  really  enumerating  all  the  antecedents
and  consequents  of  a  particular  event — even  then  the  formulae  leave  us
entirely  uncertain,  in  the  first  place,  as  to  what  we  are  to  understand  by
these  antecedents,  and,  secondly,  in  what  sense  universality  belongs  to  these
symbols  A  and  a.

The  examples  which  Mill  quotes  are,  first,  the  contact  of  an  alkaline
substance  and  an  oil  as  antecedent,  the  production  of  soap  as  consequent;
then,  the  deposition  of  a  solid  matter  from  a  liquid  state  as  antecedent,
crystallization  as  consequent ;  a  shot  through  the  heart  as  antecedent,
death  as  consequent ;  the  sun  as  antecedent,  the  gravitation  of  the  earth  as
consequent,  etc. ;  and  this  collection  is  enough  to  show  how  heterogeneous
are  the  relations  to  which  the  methods  are  to  be  applied.  Now  it  is  a
substance  which,  in  combination  with  another,  yields  a  new  substance,  now
it  is  changes  in  the  aggregate  state  of  one  and  the  same  substance,  and  in
the  example  of  crystallization  that  is  treated  as  effect  which  closer  observa
tion  shows  to  be  only  a  particular  form  of  the  event  itself;  again,  as  in  the
instance  of  the  sun  and  the  earth,  no  relation  of  sequence  in  time  can  be
established  at  all,  and  an  ever-present  body  is  taken  as  the  cause  of  a
perpetual  motion.

Mill  himself  afterwards  corrects  this  inaccuracy  by  saying  that  the  causes
which  we  have  to  look  for  and  determine  are  not  certain  substances  which
may  have  all  possible  qualities,  but  one  definite  quality  of  the  substances
But  even  then  we  are  still  left  in  doubt  as  to  what  we  are  to  regard  as
antecedent  and  consequent,  for  qualities  in  the  sense  in  which  the  wore
is  here  used  are  themselves  permanent.  If  we  are  to  take  as  the  cause  oi
the  poisonous  action  of  various  metalloxydes  their  property  of  entering
into  insoluble  combinations  with  the  tissues  of  the  body,  which  prevent  the


INDUCTION  OF  CAUSAL LAWS  341

possibility  of  chemical  change,  then  there  is  no  meaning  in  saying  that  this
property  is  the  invariable  antecedent  in  such  cases  of  poisoning;  the
antecedent  is  only  the  fact  that  such  substances  have  been  brought  into
contact  with  the  body  under  certain  conditions,  or  that  they  have  been
1  swallowed.

Again,  what  is  the  generality which  we  may  attribute  to  our  A  and  a  ?

•  Mill's  examples  show  that  by  his  methods  he  aims  at  reaching  at  once

propositions  of  considerable  generality  ;  propositions  such  as  that  alkalies

1  and  oils  combine  to  produce  soaps,  that  in  the  transition  from  the  fluid  to

the  solid  state  crystals  are  formed. Here,  then,  we  are  not  dealing  with

an  investigation  merely  of  a  number  of  instances,  which  differ  only  in  the

combination  of  circumstances  and in  which exactly  the  same  a  is  to  be

'shown  as  cause or  effect ; it  is  an  investigation  of  instances  in  which

different  phenomena  occur, having  only  one element or  attribute  a  in

common,  i.e.  falling  under  the  same  generic  concept  a ;  like  that  of  Bacon

in  seeking  the  causes  of  heat,  whiteness,  density. Bacon's  procedure  was

so  far  comprehensible  that he  undertook  to  determine  the  proper  and

formal cause, the  essence  of these  qualities, which is  everywhere the

same,  wherever  heat, whiteness,  etc.,  appear ; but  in Mill's application

what  we  have  to  determine  is  not  only  the  really fundamental  qualities

from  which  an effect  results,  but  also  the  merely  occasional  antecedents

which  are  accessible  to  observation,  and  of  which  it  certainly  cannot  be

expected  that  they  resemble  each  other  in  the  same  measure  and  have  in

common  a  characteristic  which  is  as  easily  recognised  as  the  attribute  a  in

the  investigated  instances  ;  in  Bacon's  example,  for  instance,  the  perceptible

antecedent  of  heat  is  now  the  rays of  the  sun,  now  friction,  now  burning.

Mill's  own  example  of  crystallization  shows  the  inadequacy  of  the  methods,

for  if  we  ask  what  is  common  to  the  states  from which crystalline  bodies

issue,  we  find  that  there  is  ultimately  nothing  but  corporeality  in  general,

since  crystalline  structure  is  formed  from gaseous,  fluid  and  amorphous

solid  states  of  the  most  various  substances  ; the  method  of  agreement

would  show  as  the  invariable  antecedent  of  this phenomenon  only  some

material substance, and for this there  was  no  need  of  a  complicated

•nethod. The  result  would  be  similar  if  we  conducted  our  inquiry  as  to

he  cause  of  death  of  a  living  being  ;  the  instances  in  which  a  living  being

iies  have  no  antecedent  in  common — at  any rate  for the  one  way  of

nvestigating  antecedents — except  life,  and  life  would  appear  at  the  end

}f  the  elimination  as  the  cause  of  death.


342  LOGIC

The  logical  error  in  this  formulation  of  the  method  of  agreement  is  to
be  found  in  the  assumption  that  the  invariable  antecedents  of  a  number
of  phenomena  to  which  the  attribute  a  belongs  in  common,  must  also
possess  in  common  a  recognisable  attribute  //,  so  that  the  whole  process
appears  ultimately  to  be  the  very  uncertain  inference  from  analogy  that
the  causes  of  events  which  in  some  way  resemble  each  other  must  also
resemble  each  other.  On  the  other  hand,  the  method  of  difference,  as  Mill
states  it,  suffers  from  a  similar  logical  fault — it  is  incapable  of  proving  a
universal  proposition  when  we  are  inquiring  about  the  cause  of  a  given
phenomenon.  Take  Mill's  example  :  the  two  instances  are,  a  healthy  man
in  certain  circumstances,  and  the  same  man  in  circumstances  otherwise
the  same  who  is  shot  through  the  heart  and  dies  ;  because  the  two  cases
differ  in  nothing  but  on  the  one  hand  cessation  of  life,  on  the  other
hand  the  shot  which  supervenes  upon  the  other  circumstances,  it  follows
from  the  method  of  difference  that  the  shot  was  the  cause  of  death.  In
this  case  that  is,  of  course,  beyond  doubt,  but  it  does  not  prove  the
universal  proposition  that  the  cause  of  the  death  of  a  man  is  a  shot
through  the  heart ;  and  yet  the  methods  are  to  be  employed  to  obtain
causal  laws,  and  to  instruct  us  how  to  discover,  not  merely  the  effects  of
given  causes  but  also  the  causes  of  given  effects.  This  method,  however,
is  only  capable  of  finding  the  effect  of  a  given  cause,  and,  as  Mill  himself
rightly  points  out,  its  usefulness  for  this  purpose  is  limited  by  the  difficulty
of  knowing  whether  two  instances  are  really  quite  alike  in  everything
except  one  single  circumstance.

We  do  not  mean  by  these  objections  that  Mill's  exposition  has  no  firm
basis,  nor  that  fruitful  inferences  cannot  be  made  in  the  ways  indicated  by
him  ;  we  desire  only  to  show  that  both  the  questions  which  are  to  be
answered  in  this  manner,  and  the  limits  within  which  an  answer  is  possible,
must  be  more  precisely  defined,  and  that  to  discover  real  causal  laws  is
much  too  complicated  a  business  to  be  achieved  in  such  a  simple  manner.

9.  If  we  are  to  avoid  the  inaccuracies  of  Mill's  doctrine,  it  is  most
important  to  start  from  an  unambiguous  concept  of  causality,  and  we  musl
be  careful  not  to  confuse  generalization  with  simple  reduction.

Turning  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  section,  \ve  find  that  we  had  first  tc
deal  with  a  particular  case  in  which  the  change  a  (regarded  as  a  whole)  of  c
thing  A  stood  in  immediate  temporal  and  spatial  connection  with  anothei
change  ft  (also  regarded  as  a  whole)  of  another  thing  B.  The  first  ques
tion  to  be  decided  was  whether  the  change  ft  in  B  (the  explosion  of  tht


INDUCTION  OF  CAUSAL LAWS  343

bomb)  coincided  in  time  with  the  change  a  in  A  (contact  with  the  hand)
only  by  chance,  or  whether  it  was  caused  by  the  change  in  A.  In  the
former  case  it  must  nevertheless — according  to  our  universal  presupposition
— have  occurred  necessarily,  and  therefore  have  been  produced  either  by  a
necessity  of  sequence  in  the  states  of  B,  which  was  contained  in  B  alone,
or  by  some  third  agent.

10.  By  itself  the  particular  case  can  settle  nothing  as  to  this;  we  need
comparison  of  several  cases. If  we  know  that  the  same  B  has  never,  when
we  have  observed  it  apart  from  A,  undergone  this  particular  change  /3,
while  the  change  /?  always  followed  in  B  whenever  it  was  preceded  in  imme
diate  connection  by  the  particular  change  a  in  A,  then  we  infer  that  it  is
the  action  of  A which  has  caused  the  change  in  B. This  assumption  ex
plains  all  instances,  both  positive,  in  which  a  change  occurs,  and  negative,
in  which  none  occurs ;  while  the  assumption  that  B  has  changed  of  itself
would  involve  a  repetition  of  chance  coincidence  between  the  same  change
in  B  and  the  same  change  in  A,  which  becomes  more  improbable  in  pro
portion  as  we  observe  more  cases,  and  have  less  ground to  assume  such
spontaneous  variability  in  B. When  we  notice  that  a  bell  never  vibrates
and  rings  when  it  hangs  still  and  without  being  touched  by  another  body,
and  that  it  always  vibrates  and  rings  when  the  hammer  strikes  it,  then  we
infer that the blow  of the  hammer  is  the  cause  of  the  vibration  and
ringing.

11.  Thus  the  rule  according  to  which we  make  our  inference  in  this
case  must  be  formulated  :  If  a  body  B  shows  a  definite  change  ft  in  several
instances  when  a  change  a  in  another  body  A  has  preceded  it  in  spatial
and  temporal  connection,  and, on  the  other  hand,  does  not  show  this
change  when  not  so  preceded,  then  we  must  assume  that  A  by  its  action
a  has  caused  the  change  ft  in  B^

If  considerable  experience  had  enabled  us  to  be  sure  that  B  never
underwent  any  change,  or  only  changes  which  followed  some  definite  rule,
or  changes  of  another  kind  than  ft — then  a  single  instance  in  which  we
observed  that  an  unusual  change  (3  followed  in  B  after  a  change  a  in  a
spatially  connected  A  would  justify  us  in  assuming  that  it  is  this  A  a  which
caused  the  B$  (the  so-called  simple  method  of  difference).*  Then  the

1  This  is  what  Mill  calls  the  combined  method  of  agreement  and  difference.

2  Simple  only  if  \ve  overlook  the  fact  that  the  conviction  of  the  invariability  (from
inner  grounds)  of  B  needs  a  long  observation— more  accurately,  a  number  of  particular
observations.


344  LOGIC

universal  proposition  is  true  :  "  Whenever  A  and  B  come  together  in  this
way,  this  change  in  B  follows  " ;  and  this  proposition  would  merely  be
confirmed  if  (by  the  method  of  agreement)  we  found  the  same  change  in
B  following  the  same  action  of  A  in  a  number  of  instances.

In  this  way  we  always  infer  that  when  a  persisting  state  of  rest  of  one
or  more  bodies  is  interfered  with,  and  a  change  follows,  this  interference
has  caused  the  change  ;  a  single  experience  is  enough  to  convince  us  that
a  spark  has  exploded  a  heap  of  powder,  and  that  touching  a  hot  body
caused  a  blister ;  and  we  at  once  believe  ourselves  justified  in  expecting
that  the  same  thing  will  happen  again  under  the  same  conditions.

It  is  this  which  gives  its  peculiar  power  of  proof  to  the  arbitrarily  insti
tuted  experiment.  When  a  new  body  is  introduced  into  a  complex  of
known  bodies  which  are  at  rest  with  respect  to  each  other,  and  are  as  far
as  possible  protected  from  the  intrusion  of  unexpected  agents,  or  when  a
change  is  arbitrarily  brought  about  in  their  relations,  and  a  change  follows
at  once,  then  we  are  certain  of  the  causal  relation  in  proportion  as  we  were
familiar  with  the  previous  constitution  of  the  bodies.  We  are  still  more
certain  if  mere  repetition  of  the  experiment  at  arbitrarily  selected  times
always  gives  the  same  result.

12.  These  considerations  are  primarily  useful  as  excluding  the  idea  of
accidental  coincidence,  and  as  treating  the  observed  instances  as  instances
of  causation  ;  and,  in  accordance  with  our  assumption  that  the  causation  is
necessary,  they  .are  reduced  to  a  universal  proposition  which  states,  at  first,
that  this  B,  whenever  it  enters  into  the  same  relation  with  this  A,  will
undergo  the  same  change.

But  this  universal  proposition  is  at  first  only  a  hypothesis,  and  rests  upon
the  assumption  that  B  in  its  causal  relations  is  invariable,  and  is  influ
enced  in  its  dependence  upon  A  neither  by  inner  development  nor  by
external  circumstances.  This  hypothesis  could  be  much  strengthened  if
other  bodies  exactly  like  B  behaved  in  the  same  way ;  we  should  then
have  an  induction  in  the  narrower  sense,  mediated  by  the  specific  concept
B,  and  stating  that  all  jB's  manifest  the  same  change  (3  when  an  A  enters
into  relation  with  them  in  this  way.  The  belief  that  this  bell  is  made  to
ring  by  the  hammer  is  strengthened  if  all  the  bells  known  to  me  act  in  the
same  way  when  they  are  struck  by  a  hammer,  or,  more  generally,  by  a  hard
body ;  and  I  should  be  still  more  inclined  to  lay  down  the  universal  pro
position  :  When  a  hard  body  strikes  a  bell,  it  makes  it  vibrate  and  ring,
meaning  thereby  to  express  a  causal  necessity.


INDUCTION  OF  CAUSAL  LAWS  345

On  the  other  hand,  the  conjecture  that  touching  the  bomb  caused  its
explosion  is  refuted  by  the  fact  that  bodies  of  exactly  the  same  kind
frequently  explode  of  themselves,  while  others  do  not  explode  when
touched  in  the  same  way.  Hence  the  coincidence  was  probably  acci-
dental— probably,  because  there  is  still  the  possibility  that  this  one  was
differently  constructed  from  the  others.

In  this  way  the  propositions  arise,  pointing  out  causal  connections  in
.  the  earliest  and  popular  sense. They  start  from  the  perception  of  con
tinuous  change  in  two  things  ;  this  arouses  the  thought  of  efficient  action
itself,  and  further  comparison  of  the  same  or  similar  things  confirms  it.

Meanwhile  the  assumption  of  efficient  action  is  easily  extended  to
regions  within  which  immediate  spatial  connection  is  wanting ;  we  know  in
i  the  same  way  that  the  sun  illuminates  and  warms,  dries  and  bleaches  ;
instead  of  immediate  spatial  proximity  we  have  a  definite  spatial  relation,
which  admits  of  causation  just  as  immediate  contact  did  in  the  other
instances.

13.  The  assumption  which  we  began  by  making  in  n,  that  B  did  not
manifest  the  change  (3  so  long  as  it  was  not  preceded  in  spatial  connec
tion  by  the  change  a  in  A,  seems  to  justify  the  conclusion  that  only  A  a
causes  the  change  (3  in  B,  that  the  former  is  the  conditio  sine  qua  non
of  the  latter,  therefore  that  the  universal  proposition  is  also  true  that
.vhenever  B  ft  occurs  A  a  must  be  the  cause.  We  should  have  the  means
)f  stating,  not  merely,  "when  A  a  occurs,  B  ft  follows,"  but  also  the  other
)roposition,  which  is  not  included  in  it,  "when  Bft  occurs,  A  a  has
receded."

But  for  this  conclusion  it  would  be  necessary  not  merely  for  this
:ssumption  to  hold  good  within  our  experience,  but  also  for  us  to  have  a
omprehensive  knowledge  to  the  effect  that  a  B  ft  never  occurred  at  all
-•ithout  A  a  preceding.  But  such  a  negative  proposition  cannot  be  justi-
ed  by  our  limited  experience ;  we  may,  indeed,  infer  from  positive
istances  to  a  necessity  connecting  B  ft  with  A  a,  but  not  from  the  mere
bsence  of  positive  experiences  to  an  impossibility.

Moreover,  the  assumption  often  fails  to  apply  as  our  experience  grows
'ider.  The  possibility  that  the  same  perceptible  phenomenon  may  be
rought  about  by  different  causes  has  been  made  familiar  by  our  daily
bservations  ;  in  one  set  of  cases  we  were  forced  to  assume  that  B  ft  was
lused  by  A  a,  in  another  set  that  it  was  the  effect  of  Cy  or  D  8.  Thus
ie  attempt  to  infer  that  any  definite  cause  is  always  connected  with  a


346  LOGIC

given  effect  stands  from  the  first  upon  an  uncertain  footing,  because  our
experience  tells  us  that  B  ft  is  connected  in  the  way  which  we  must  accept
as  signifying  a  causal  relation,  not  only  with  A  a,  but  also  with  Cy  and
-D  8.  We  may  establish  the  fact  that  when  a  hammer  strikes  a  bell  it  will
ring ;  that  a  man  who  is  shot  through  the  heart  will  die  suddenly  ;  but
not  that  when  a  bell  rings  it  has  been  struck  by  a  hammer,  and  not  that  a
man  who  dies  suddenly  has  been  shot  through  the  heart.  Induction
which  proceeds  in  the  way  described  can  only  aim  at  proving  that  certain
events  have  a  certain  consequence,  not  that  a  particular  phenomenon  pre
supposes  particular  conditions.  The  hypothetical  judgments  which  tell  us
that  when  A  a  occurs  B  ft  follows  cannot  be  converted.  Only  the  most
comprehensive  comparison  of  specific  propositions,  telling  us  by  what
causes  the  changes  in  B  are  brought  about,  can  be  a  ground  for  the  beliel
that  Bfivs,  caused  only  by  A  a.

14.  Suppose  that  such  a  proposition,  that  a  certain  activity  a  of  an  A
causes  a  change  /3  in  J3,  had  never  met  with  an  exception  within  the  range
of  our  observation,  it  would  still be  nothing  more  than  a  crude  preli
minary  assumption. What  we  have  to  do  is  to  secure  for  it  the  most  logi
cal  accuracy  of  expression  which  is  possible,  and  to  endow  it  with  all  the
strictness  of  a  universally  valid  proposition,  of  which  the  particular  appli
cations  are  the  particular  instances  observed. It  is  upon  those  stages  in
the  process  which  we  have  considered so  far  that  popular  inferences  o!
causal  connections  are  based  ;  the  scientific  and  methodological  problem
in  the  narrower  sense  only  begins  now.

15.  First  with  respect  to  the  elements  contained  in  the  proposition
All  external  events,  which  we  can  perceive,  are  quanta,  and  can  be  com
pletely  and  accurately  expressed  only  by  quantitative  determinations. AL
change,  motion,  heating,  cooling,  etc.,  in  an  A take  place  in  a  certair
amount;  and  in  the  same  way  the  effect,  which  consists  in  the  change  in
B,  is  quantitatively  determined. In  many  instances  the  A1 5  and  B's  also
of  which  the  proposition  speaks,  are  capable  of  quantitative  distinctions,
even  when  they  are  of  exactly  the  same  kind ;  and  only  when  these  are
taken  into  consideration  can  we  say  with  conceptual  accuracy  what  is  to  be
understood  by  A  and  B,  and  their  changes  a  and  ft. Hence  the  proposi
tion  must  say  how  great  an  a  of  how  great  an  A  produces  how  great  a  /:
in  how  great  a  B. Neglect  of  quantitative  determinations  is  the  chie'
deficiency  in Mill's  Logic,  as  in  that  of  Bacon. If,  indeed,  we  are  tc
speak  accurately we  cannot  say  that  eating  stills  hunger  and drinking


INDUCTION  OF  CAUSAL LAWS  347

thirst,  for  a  mouthful  or  a  sip  is  no  good  ;  nor  can  \ve  say  that  arsenic
kills  or  quinine  reduces  fever,  for  it  depends  upon  the  dose  ;  it  is  inaccu
rate,  again,  to  say  that  common  salt  is  dissolved  by  water,  for  it  is  not  true
that  any  quantity  of  salt  is  dissolved  by  any  quantity  of  water.

The  quantitative  determination  of  all  events  not  only  calls  for  the
accurate  determination  of  the  limits  within  which  the  conjectured  pro
position  is  to  hold  good ;  it  also  affords  a  very  efficient  test  of  its
correctness.

1 6.  With  reference  to  the  first  point,  the  logical  determinateness  of  the
proposition  necessitates  first  an  investigation  as  to  whether  every  value  of
A  and  a  produces  a  change  of  the  kind  /8  in  B\  whether  there  is  a  limit
below  which  A  a  has  no  effect,  or  limits  beyond  which  the  effect  becomes
qualitatively  different. A  few  observations  are  enough  to  convince  us
that  heat  expands  a  certain  amount  of  quicksilver,  and  that  cold  reduces
its  volume  again  ;  but  this  rule  cannot  be  stated  as  an  absolutely  universal
proposition  ;  there  is  a  degree  of  heat  at  which  the  effect  becomes  quite
different, — is  evaporation,  and  a  degree  of  cold  at  which  solidification  takes
place. If  the  proposition  is to  be  determined,  we  must  first  of  all  state
the  limits. Where  all  possible  gradations  in  the  cause  and  its  continuous
decrease  and  increase  are  presented  in the  course  of  nature,  these  limits
can  be  found  by  mere  observation  ;  in  other  cases,  we  must  have  recourse
to  experiment,  which  varies  the  quantities  and  shows  us  the  corresponding
changes  of  effect.

17.  Within  these  limits  we  now  have to  determine  whether  and  how
change  in  the  effect  is  connected  with  change  in  the  cause,  thus  establish
ing  the  law  of  the  effect  in  the  narrower  sense,  assuming  that  both  are
measurable. When  it  is  found  that  a  gas  changes  its  volume  with  increase
of  pressure,  then  we  have  to  discover  the  appropriate  values  of  pressure
and  volume,  and  to  see  whether  any  mathematical  relation  obtains  between
:he  values— the  same  problem  which  occurred  (§  90,  5,  p.  274)  in  finding
:he  formula  for  a  continuous  change  from  intermittent  observations.

In  the  simplest  case  these  values  are  proportional ;  and  because  the
effect  is  the  measure  of  the  efficient  action  of  the  cause,  we  have  ground
or  assuming  that  where  this  simple  proportionality  manifests  itself  the
vhole  observed  change  in  the  cause  A  has  been  efficient,  and  that  the
:hange  in  B  is  to  be  attributed  entirely  to  the  action  of  the  cause  A.

Our  proposition  is  then  for  the  first  time  fully  determined,  and  can
:laim  to  include  every  particular  case  in  such  a  way  that  it  can  be  derived


348  LOGIC

from  it  in  its  complete  specialization  ;  we  can  now  speak  of  a  law  in  the
strict  sense.

1 8.  The  formula  of  the  law  is  still  capable  of  further  verification  by  the
continual  confirmation,  by  means  of  observations  and  experiments,  of  the
values  following  from  it ;  in  proportion  as  the  cases  in  which  the  observed
and the calculated values agree increase in number, the probability
increases  that  the  causal  law  has  been  discovered.

But  we  still  have  only  a  proposition,  of  which  there  appear  as  the  con
sistent  consequences  a  number  of  observations,  which,  though  they  may  be
great,  are  yet  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  total  number  of  cases
possible.  That  it  is  true  without  exception  can  never  be  shown  empirically,
and  is  only  assumed  on  the  presupposition  of  constancy  in  the  order  of
nature,  and  of  the  objective  validity  of  the  concepts  of  A  and  B.

Instead  of  the  unattainable  proof  that  an  exception  is  impossible,  we
must  substitute  the  proof  that  it  is  improbable  that  within  the  range  of  our
experience  a  case  should  have  escaped  us  in  which  A  a.  took  place,  and  B
did  not  undergo  the  change  (3.  When  this  consideration  has  also  brought  us
to  a  satisfactory  result,  then  the  causal  connection  between  A  a  and  B  /3  has
been  inductively  proved  as  completely  as  the  logical  nature  of  the  process
will  allow,  and  is  as  fully  determined  as  it  demands.

Only  the  causal  connection  between  two  phenomena  as  wholes,  how
ever,  not  the  forces  which  must  be  attributed  to  A  and  B,  nor  yet  their
mode  of  action.  The  necessity  has  not  yet  been  referred  to  the  nature  of
A  and  J3,  and  their  relation  to  each  other  ;  we  have  merely  established  a
constant  occurrence  as  the  expression  of  a  necessity  of  nature  in  general.

19.  But  it  is  not  often  that  an  inductive  process  leading  to  causal  laws
can  be  carried  out  in  this  clear  and  simple  form.  That  a  change  (3\nJ5  should
be  the  unmixed  and  whole  effect  of  an  isolated  cause  A  and  its  activity  a,
and  that  between  the  quantitative  differences  of  A  and  B  there  should
exist  a  simple  relation  of  proportion,  applying  exactly  in  every  observed
instance,  is  a  fictitious  case. In  it  A  and  B  are  isolated  from  the  rest  of
the  world ;  it  overlooks  the  possibility  that  other  things  may  act  upon  B
as  well  as  A,  and  may  modify  its  behaviour ;  that  there  may  be  amongst
them  causes  which  counteract  A  in  producing  the  effect,  that  the  same  B
may  vary  from  inner  development  or  external influence,  or — where a
universal  proposition  is  to  be  true  of  all  similar  j5's — that  the  individual
J?'s may differ, and each  respond  to the  action  of  A  in  a different
manner.


INDUCTION  OF  CAUSAL LAWS  349

Moreover,  the  method,  as  described  in  this  fictitious  simplicity,  is  only
applicable  where  both  the  action  of  the  cause  and  the  effected  change  are
perceptible,  where  both  are  accessible  to  immediate  observation  and
measurement ;  it  is  not  applicable  where  they  are  withdrawn  from  immediate
perception,  or  at  any  rate  measurement.

20.  These  considerations  would  lead  us  to  expect  that  this  simple
process  of  reduction  would  soon  break  down  if  it  demanded  conformity  to
its  rules  on  the  part  of  the  actual  world,  and  the  manifestation  of  these
isolated  connections  in  reality.  And  in  accordance  with  the  character  of  the
whole  process,  this  break-down  will  make  itself  known  by  the  fact  that  the
assumptions  made  come  upon  contradictions  in  the  Given,  the  observations
do  not  agree  with  the  presuppositions  ;  that  the  universal  proposition  :
A  a  causes  B  /3,  is  confronted  with  an  instance  in  which  A  a  was  present,
and  B  (3  absent,  or  that  the  formula  which  makes  differences  in  ft  depend
upon  differences  in  a  fails  when  the  same  A  a  has  different  B  /3's,  and
differentia's  the  same  B  (3  for  consequence.  Even  the  impossibility  of
finding  a  simple  proportionality  between  A  a  and  £  (3  is  at  variance  with
the  assumption  that  they  are  related  simply  as  cause  and  effect.  If,  for  in
stance,  the  exhalation  of  oxygen  from  a  plant  were  not  simply  proportional
to  the  strength  of  illumination,  the  conjecture  that  a  direct  and  simple
causal  relation  existed  between  illumination  and  the  exhalation  of  oxygen,
such  as  exists  between  pressure  and  change  of  volume  in  a  gas,  would  be
•efuted,  even  though  a  quickening  of  the  chemical  processes,  increasing
n  a  complicated  relation  with  the  strength  of  light,  should  point  to  the
act  that  the  cause  produces  a  part  of  the  effect,  or  a  part  of  the  cause
produces  the  effect,  or  part  of  the  effect.

But  where  there  is  no  fixed  relation  at  all,  different  B  fi's  following  the  same
4  a's,  and  vice  versa,  then  pure  logical  theory  would  proceed  as  in  respect
o  the  differences  in  attributes  of  objects  falling  under  the  same  concept ;
ve  could  merely  infer  that  the  universal  proposition  is  not  true,  and  that
he  assumption  of  a  fixed  connection  is  erroneous,  that  the  results  occur
ccidentally  in  relation  to  the  assumed  causes.  But  the  assumption  of
.ecessity  in  all  that  happens  does  not  leave  this  way  of  escape  open  to  us  ;
rom  a  purely  logical  point  of  view,  it  is  the  first  to  present  itself,  in  reality
he  most  improbable  as  soon  as  a  considerable  number  of  instances  have
hown  A  a  and  B  ft  as  connected  ;  the  occurrence  of  B  ft  must  be  based
pon  some  law,  and  the  effect  must  measure  the  action  of  the  cause.  If
len  the  change  B  ft  occurs  after  A  a  at  one  time,  and  not  at  another,  or  if


350  LOGIC

at  one  time  a  larger  or  smaller  B  fi  follows  A  a  than  at  another,  or  if  the
effect  is  not  proportional  to  the  cause,  then,  because  a  connection  between
A  and  B  is  probable  upon  other  grounds,  we  must  make  one  of  two
assumptions.  Either  our  presupposition,  that  the  same  A  has  acted  in  the
same  manner  upon  the  same  JB,  is  false,  in  which  case  the  discrepancy
must  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  A  and  B  which  appear  alike  are
not  really  alike,  but  fall  under  different  concepts,  or,  at  least,  under
different  quantitative  degrees  within  the  same  concept,  or  represent
different  stages  in  development,  or  else  the  difference  must  be  due  to  the
fact  that  there  are  further  causes  co-operating,  and  that  the  result  is  deter
mined  by  the  combination  of  several  laws,  and  then  the  problem  consists
in  breaking  it  up  into  the  partial  effects  of  the  particular  co-operating
causes.  The  rule  that  everything  which  does  not  produce  a  result  every
time  must  be  eliminated  as  not  being  a  cause  would,  if  consistently
applied,  prevent  us  from  obtaining  any  results  by  way  of  induction.

21.  This  analysis  of  the  effect  is  again  only  possible by  a  process  of
reduction,  which  assumes  a  rule  according  to  which the  particular  partial
effects  combine,  and  so  form  the  one  phenomenon  as  it  is  given  ;  thus  in
addition  to  the  particular  laws  we  need  a  further  law  according  to  which
the  results  of  causes  which  act  together  combine.

This  law  of  the  composition  of  the  effects  of  several  causes  admits  of
a  simple  formulation  when  the  partial  results  are  only  quantitatively  differ
ing  magnitudes  of  the  same  kind ;  e.g.,  motions  in  the  same  direction,
which,  assuming  that  every  cause  acts  upon  a  body  in  motion  in  the  same
way  as  upon  a  body  at  rest,  may  be  simply  added  together.

22.  The  analysis  of  a  given result  into  the  partial  effects  of  different
causes  is  rendered  difficult  by  the  fact  that  we  are  frequently  unable  to  find
within  the  range  of  observation  efficient  causes,  in  the  sense  in  which  we
have  regarded  A  a.  as  an  efficient  cause  ;  in  other  words,  a  second  A*  which
should  present  itself  to  observation  as  an  efficient  cause  by  means  of  a
visible  change  a1  proceeding  simultaneously  with  a.

The  fact  that  water  boils  at  one  time  when  it  is  heated  to  100°,  and  at
another  when  heated  to  90°,  proves  that  the  boiling  of  water  cannot  be
regarded  as  a  simple  effect  of  heat,  according  to  a  law  stating  the  invariable
connection  of  the  phenomenon  of  boiling  with  the  presence  of  a  certain
temperature.  But  when  we  compare  the  two  cases,  we  find  nothing  per
ceptible  which  at  all  resembles  the  heat-giving  fire  as  an  efficient  cause,  or
which  acts  upon  the  water  by  a  visible  activity  ;  no  perceptible  change


INDUCTION  OF  CAUSAL LAWS  351

goes  on  in  any  surrounding  body,-  which,  by  its  presence  the  first  time,  and
absence  the  second,  would  explain  the  difference.

23.  It  is  upon  this  that  the  distinction  between  circumstances,  and
efficient  causes  in  the  narrower  sense,  is  chiefly  based.  According  to
etymology,  circumstances  are  primarily  surrounding  bodies  ;  when  distin
guished  from  efficient  causes,  they  were  so  called  because  by  themselves
they  do  not  exercise  the  particular  effect  in  question.  With  reference  to
a  particular  effect,  they  are  then  divided  into  circumstances  which  are
indifferent,  and  circumstances  which  have  some  influence  in  so  far  as
difference  in  them  modifies  the  effect  of  a  particular  cause.  In  a  wider
sense  even  the  changing  states  of  bodies  acting  upon  each  other,
and  the  differences  of  the  individual  things  falling  under  the  same
:oncept,  are  also  called  circumstances ;  and  these  again  are  some-
:imes  indifferent  and  sometimes  modify  the  result.  Circumstances  which
•nay  modify  or  hinder  the  result  of  a  cause  appear  as  conditions
)f  a  given  effect,  and  where  we  distinguish  conditions  from  efficient
rauses  (in  another  meaning,  as  conditions  of  forces,  §  73)  that  body  is
railed  the  cause  of  which  the  perceptible  change  has  a  change  for  its
:onsequence,  while  those  other  bodies,  or  states  of  bodies,  are  the
:onditions,  variation  in  which  makes  the  result  different,  although  they
:annot  by  themselves  produce  a  perceptible  change.1  But  this  distinction
:an  only  be  maintained  so  long  as  we  keep  to  the  popular  concept  of
ause  and  effect.  Further  elaboration,  which  takes  us  back  to  invariable
onstant  efficient  forces,  banishes  the  distinction  and  takes  as  the  equiva-
ant  of  the  cause  coming  into  action  at  a  given  time  a  change  in  the
otality  of  the  conditions ;  though  even  then  we  may  still  distinguish
>etween  the  permanent  conditions  and  that  of  those  which,  being  intro-
uced  by  some  change,  complete  the  total  complex  at  a  given  point  of

1  It  is  easy  to  understand  why  in  popular  language  the  answer  to  the  question  as  to
hat  any  given  event  is  due  confuses  causes  and  circumstances  at  random.  That

died  when  struck  with  a  stick  on  the  head  was  due  to  his  thin  skull ;  that  an

cl  tree  was  blown  down  yesterday  was  due  to  its  being  hollow,  etc.  Where,  as  in
iese  instances,  the  efficient  cause  is  fully  understood,  the  ordinary  expression  which
akes  the  circumstances  responsible  for  a  result  larger  than  appears  in  the  plurality  of
ises  is  quite  correct  ;  it  extends  the  accusation  even  to  that  which  is  not,  by  ascribing
ie  falling  of  fruit  to  the  want  of  rain,  or  a  theft  to  the  absence  of  the  police,  though  it
not  meant  that  the  rain  which  does  not  fall  breaks  the  fruit  from  the  tree.  But  as  a
icstion  of  language  it  should  be  noticed,  with  reference  to  remarks  sometimes  made
•out  this  way  of  talking,  that  such  circumstances  or  negative  conditions  are  not  usually
•noted  by  the  term  causes,  but  by  more  general  expressions.


352  LOGIC

time  in  such  a  way  that  an  effect  can  arise.  (From  this  point  of  view  the
cause  of  the  spontaneous  fall  of  an  apple  from  the  tree  is  composed  of  its
distance  from  the  attracting  earth  and  its  consequent  tendency  to  fall,
and  the  organic  changes  which  gradually  weaken  the  cohesion  of  the  twig
and  the  fruit ;  when  these  have  reached  a  certain  degree,  all  the  conditions
of  the  fall  are  completely  present.)

For  the  present,  however,  we  prefer  to  adhere  to  popular  usage,  all  the
more  because  the  investigation  of  causal  connections  always  starts  from
causes  active  in  a  perceptible  manner,  and  because  the  application  of  the
causal  concept  is  here  the  most  obvious  and  original ;  moreover  through
out  large  departments  of  knowledge  even  exact  investigation  cannot  get
beyond  formulating  causal  laws  which  connect  perceptible  changes  in
certain  bodies  with  changes  in  others.

24.  Since  all  induction  presupposes  a  definite  meaning  in  the  proposi
tions  which  it  seeks,  we  will  illustrate  the  above  distinctions  by  a  few
examples.  Water  boils  at  a  higher  temperature  in  low  elevations  than  on
the  mountains  ;  the  circumstance  which  explains  the  difference  here  is
that  the  pressure  of  the  surrounding  atmosphere  is  greater  in  the  former  in
stance,  less  in  the  latter.  The  surrounding  atmosphere  by  itself,  and  change
in  its  pressure,  does  not  (at  any  rate  within  the  range  of  our  common
experience)  make  water  of  the  ordinary  temperature  boil ;  not  until
the  fire  is  introduced  does  boiling  occur,  and  for  this  reason  the  atmo
spheric  pressure  is  described  as  circumstance,  and  the  heating  by  fire
as  cause.  A  spark  causes  powder  to  explode,  but  wet  powder  does
not  explode ;  the  circumstance  that  it  is  wet,  in  other  words,  the
presence  of  water,  prevents  the  explosion.  By  itself,  however,  water
produces  no  perceptible  change  ;  with  respect  to  the  powder,  it  is  only
circumstance,  not  efficient  cause  ;  its  absence  is  condition,  but  not  cause
of  the  explosion.  ,

A  blow  makes  a  bell  ring ;  but  if  it  is  touched  on  the  rim  by  an  inelastic
body,  the  sound  is  muffled ;  this  body  itself  causes  nothing,  but  the
circumstance  that  it  is  there  diminishes  the  action  of  the  hammer,  its
absence  is  the  condition  of  the  full  sound.  A  given  remedy  acts  or  does
not  act  according  to  the  circumstances,  i.e.  according  to  the  permanent  or
changing  disposition  of  the  patient,  etc.

Of  still  greater  importance  are  the  circumstances  where  we  have  to  do
with  chains  of  action  :  how  a  change  which  is  directly  brought  about  by  a
single  cause  will  produce  further  changes  will  depend  in  quite  another  sense


INDUCTION  OF  CAUSAL LAWS  353

than  the  preceding  upon  the  circumstances — i.e.  upon  the  possibilities  of

:future  action  given  by  the  collocation of  certain  bodies. In  setting  fire

to  a  house  it  may  be  that  we  directly  cause, in the ordinary  sense, only

:he  burning  of  a  wisp of  straw;  but  the  given  circumstances,  proximity

Df  combustible  bodies,  wind,  scarcity  of  water,  etc.,  may  cause  the  conflagra-

ion  of  a  city  to  follow  from  this  fire  through  the  continual  transmission

)f  the  action  to  new  bodies. If  we  wound  a  man  by  a  shot  we  directly

:ause  nothing  but  the  movement  of  the  trigger  with  the  finger;  the  explo-

;,ion of  the priming is the  act of the spring  which is  released,  the

'^plosion  of  the  powder  the  act  of  the  priming,  and  this  explosion  causes

'he  motion  of  the  bullet,  which  causes  the  wounding  of  the  tissues. Each

'»f  these  stages  is  conditioned  by  special circumstances,  and  upon  cir-

umstances  it  depends  also  whether  the  wounded  man  will  bleed  to  death

1  r  will  be  bandaged,  whether  the  wound  inflames  or  not,  whether  in  conse-

uence  of  this  wound  he escapes  another  danger  or  falls  into  one  which

e  would  otherwise have  avoided. This  concatenation of  effects  pro-

eeding  from  each  other,  which  is  so  important  for  practical  life,  we  will

isregard  for  the  present,  and limit  ourselves  to instances  of  immediate

ljusation,  where  the  action  of  the  cause  and  the  genesis  of  the  effect  can

e  regarded  as  single  events  in  two  single  things.

25.  What  are  the  problems  to  be  solved  by  our  methods  of  discovering
lusal  laws,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  effect  of  a  given  cause  varies
:cording  to  circumstances  ?

Let  us  return  to  our  first  case,  that  in  which  comparison  of  a  number  of
stances  has  given  us  the  proposition  "  when  A  a  occurs,  B  (3  occurs,"  and
which  we  are  able  to  establish  a  formula  according  to  which  the  differ-
ices  in  ft  correspond  to  the  differences  in  a.

The  question to be  answered now is,  whether  A  a  gives  rise  to  B$
cording  to  this  rule  under  all  circumstances,  and  whether  therefore  it
n  be  described  as  by  itself  the  complete  and  whole  cause ;  and  if  not,
:iich  circumstances  are  indifferent,  which  have  influence.
For  the  elimination  of  indifferent  circumstances  we  have  the  canon  that
Stances  are  to  be  compared  which,  while alike  in everything  else,  differ
ithe  fact  that  one  circumstance  varies  quantitatively,  or  is  present  at  one
ij'-ie  and  absent  at another. If  the result of  the  causes  remains  the
ne,  then  this  circumstance  is  indifferent.

With  reference  to  circumstances  which  are  not  indifferent,  the  problem
ses  of  determining  their  contribution  to  the  observed  effect  in  the  form

1 I'-  L.— II.  4 \


354  LOGIC

of  a  law.  For  this  it  is  necessary  that  each  particular  circumstance  shoulc
be  varied  by  itself  whilst  everything  else  remains  the  same,  and  that  frorr
our  observations  the  formulas  should  be  constructed  according  to  whicr
differences  in  the  effect  are  connected  with  differences  in  the  circumstance

These  formulae  lead  us  at  once  to  another  meaning  of  causal  depend
ence  than  that  which  belongs  to  the  causal  laws  which  we  were  before
looking  for.  When  expressing  the  action  of  different  circumstances  ii
partial  laws,  we  are  no  longer  engaged  in  determining  the  dependence  o
one  perceptible  change  upon  another  perceptible  change,  but  only  ir
ascertaining  the  modification  which  varied  circumstances  bring  about  ir
the  action  introduced  by  a  perceptible  event ;  and  since  these  variec
circumstances  will  generally  be  bodies  at  rest,  not  engaged  themselves  ii
any  motion  or  change,  we  may  be  brought  to  ascribe  efficient  action  t<
them  also  in  so  far  as  they  alter  the  result  by  their  mere  presence.  Thu
we  arrive  at  the  thought  of  causes  which  take  effect,  without  themselve
manifesting  any  perceptible  change.

The  result  of  the  whole  process  would  be  a  connected  complex  of  laws
expressing  the  dependence  of  an  effect  B  ft  which  follows  a  cause  A  o
partly  upon  the  cause  A  a,  partly  upon  the  many  circumstances  amongs
which  it  acts.  Each  particular  case  then  appears  as  the  application  o
different  laws  taken  together,  according  to  a  rule  which  determines  th
combination  of  partial  consequences  in  a  total  result.

26.  The  obstacles  to  this  process  lie  first  in  the  difficulty  of  finding  o
constructing  instances  admitting  of  comparison,  in  which  one  and  only  on
circumstance  varies.  The  presence  of  the  earth  cannot  be  eliminated  i
terrestrial  observations  and  experiments ;  if  we  attempt  to  vary  it  b
observing  the  same  events  at  different  points  in  the  earth's  surface,  or  2
different  elevations,  then  a  host  of  other  circumstances  are  changed  2
the  same  time ;  the  circumstance  cannot  be  varied  alone.  Still  mor
difficult  is  it  to  overcome  the  second  difficulty.  What  is  to  be  regarde
as  circumstance,  and  brought  under  our  investigation  ?  When  the  immed
ate  intuitable  connection,  which  causes  one  thing  to  appear  to  us  £
acting  upon  another,  is  not  present,  an  unlimited  range  is  given  to  conje<
ture ;  to  the  innumerable  perceptible  things  which  co-exist  with
phenomenon,  and  are  in  some  sort  of  spatial  relation  to  it,  must  be  adde
innumerable  others,  which  are  perhaps  not  perceptible,  and  which  betra
their  existence  only  by  their  disturbance  of  events  which  we  expect  t
happen  according  to  a  preconceived  law.


INDUCTION OF  CAUSAL LAWS  355

A  direct  and  exhaustive  process,  leading  us  straight  to  our  goal,  is
therefore  not  to  be  expected  ;  at  best  we  can  only  be  guided  by  analogies
in  conjecturing  that  some  circumstances  will  be  indifferent,  while  others
will  exert  some  influence  ;  and  if  there  still  remain  discrepancies,  they
point  to  unknown  sources  of  disturbance.

27.  A  simple  example  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  treatment  of  the
different  kinds  of  circumstances.  When  a  bullet  hanging  freely  on  a  string
is  pushed  on  one  side,  it  moves  from  its  former  position,  rises  in  an  arc  up
to  a  certain  point,  then  turns  back  and  swings  for  a  time  to  and  fro,
diminishing  the  length  of  its  movements  until  it  finally  comes  to  rest.  We
know  that  the  push  was  the  cause  of  the  movement  because  the  bullet
never  enters  into  motion  of  its  own  accord,  and  always  enters  into  motion
when  it  is  pushed,  and  because  when  the  push  is  stronger  the  motion
is  stronger  and  longer.  In  this  way  the  causal  relation  between  the
push  and  motion  is  first  established  with  all  attainable  certainty,
in  the  ordinary  sense  according  to  which  one  change — -the  motion  of  the
pushing  hand — is  connected  with  another — the  swinging  bullet — as  its
necessary  consequence.  At  the  same  time  the  whole  continuous  course  of
oscillations,  until  the  bullet  is  again  at  rest,  may  be  taken  as  one  whole,
as  the  effect  of  the  push,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  homogeneous  continuous
motion  of  one  and  the  same  thing.

But  if  we  are  to  find  the  strict  causal  law,  we  must  first  of  all  measure
the  event  itself,  and  establish  quantitative  relations  between  cause  and
effect.  If  we  had  an  exact  measure  for  the  strength  of  the  push,  and
caused  this  to  vary,  then  we  should  find  that  the  stronger  push  drove  the
bullet  higher,  and  caused  it  to  continue  to  swing  for  a  longer  time  ;  that
nevertheless  the  particular  oscillations— at  any  rate  for  any  but  a  very
minute  observation — will  occupy  equal  times,  and  that  therefore  the  whole
:ime  of  the  event  will  be  measured  by  the  number  of  oscillations.  Experi
ments  made  with  the  same  pendulum  in  the  same  manner,  and  differing
inly  in  the  strength  of  the  push  (which  might  be  measured  by  difference  in
he  elevation  from  a  state  of  equilibrium),  may  now  yield  a  formula  express-
ng  a  definite  relation  between  the  strength  of  the  push  and  the  number  of
>scillations  of  a  given  duration  until  the  pendulum  comes  to  rest;  and  we
hould  be  inclined  to  state  it  as  a  universal  law,  that  a  bullet  suspended  by
.  thread  responds  to  a  push  in  this  way.

But  now  the  question  arises  :  Is  the  whole  course  of  the  event  really
lependent  upon  the  push  alone  and  a  simple  function  of  it?  Are  our


356  LOGIC

assumed  conditions  so  closely  determined  as  to  necessitate  the  result
following  always  in  the  same  way  ?  This  would  be  the  case  if  the  law,  as
first  formulated,  was  confirmed  under  all  circumstances.  What  we  have  to
do  is  to  vary  the  circumstances.  But  what  are  the  circumstances  ?

In  the  first  place,  we  have  the  solid  bodies  around,  and  the  direction  in
which  the  blow  is  imparted.  That  these  are  indifferent,  we  learn  because
the  event,  so  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  is  the  same  whether  the  bullet  be
caused  to  swing  within  the  room  from  north  to  south  or  from  east  to
west,  and  whether  any  other  bodies  are  removed  from  the  room  or  not.
It  takes  place  in  the  same  way,  again,  by  day  or  by  night ;  the  position  of
the  sun  or  the  stars  has  no  influence.  But  finding  that  the  air  offers  re
sistance  to  the  movement  of  the  hand,  we  are  led  by  analogy  to  the
thought  that  the  surrounding  atmosphere  might  have  some  influence ;  we
must  either  vary  this  ourselves,  or  compare  cases  in  which  it  is  varied  from
other  causes.  If  it  should  prove  that  when  the  barometer  stood  high  the
number  of  oscillations  in  response  to  a  given  push  was  smaller  than  when
it  stood  low  ;  if  it  should  prove  that  in  proportion  as  the  air  is  rarefied  the
duration  of  the  single  oscillations  diminishes  while  their  number  increases  ;
then  the  air  would  be  shown  to  be  a  circumstance  having  influence,  and
we  should  have  to  find  the  formula  according  to  which  increasing  density
of  the  atmosphere  affects  the  motion.

A  second  class  of  circumstances  would  be  found  in  the  changes  of  which
the  object  is  capable ;  in  the  first  place,  the  quantitative  changes.  The
original  law  of  the  action  was  obtained  for  a  given  length  of  the  thread.
If  we  shorten  the*  thread,  a  change  appears  in  the  result,  the  oscillations
become  more  rapid  ;  if  we  lengthen  it,  they  become  slower ;  and  at  the
same  time  the  total  time  occupied  by  the  oscillations  alters.  A  series  of
observations  will  now  show  the  values  !l  /2  /3  for  the  length  of  thread
corresponding  to  /x  /2  ^3  f°r  the  duration  of  each  oscillation,  and  on  com
paring  them  we  shall  find  that  the  various  t's  are  proportional  to  the  square
roots  of  /,  and  shall  obtain  the  constant  by  which  the  length  of  the  second-
pendulum  is  determined.  In  this  way  we  determine  the  connection  be
tween  length  and  duration  of  oscillation  ;  further  comparison  would  give
us  the  effect  which  the  length  of  the  pendulum  has  upon  the  duration  of
its  motion  altogether,  and  upon  the  total  number  of  oscillations  in  response
to  a  blow  of  a  given  strength.  If  we  diminish  the  bullet  while  keeping  the
thread  the  same  length,  the  effect  upon  the  duration  of  the  particular  oscilla
tion  will  not  be  perceptible,  though  it  will  be  upon  the  number  of  oscil-


INDUCTION  OF  CAUSAL LAWS  357

lations  until  the  pendulum  comes  to  rest ;  a  further  law  would  determine
the  dependence  of  duration  of  oscillation  upon  the  size  of  the  bullet.

A  third  class  of  variations,  which  may  be  called  circumstances  in  the
widest  sense,  are  the  differences  in  objects  which  fall  under  a  common
concept.  If  we  compare  bullets  of  equal  weight  and  equal  size,  but  of
different  material,  no  difference  would  follow  in  the  result;  it  is  therefore
a  matter  of  indifference  what  material  they  are  made  of.

But  the  formulas  thus  found,  which  determine  the  influence  of  the
atmosphere,  length  of  thread,  and  weight  of  the  bullet,  upon  the  time  of
oscillation  and  the  whole  duration  of  the  phenomenon,  yet  give  us  no
certainty  as  to  whether  they  are  absolutely  valid,  and  whether  they  contain
all  the  conditions  upon  which  the  phenomenon  depends.  If  no  further
conjecture  draws  our  attention  to  some  unnoticed  circumstance,  then
nothing  remains  but  either  to  vary  at  hap-hazard,  or  to  wait  until  a  diver
gency  from  the  law  appears  somewhere,  and  then  to  seek  the  circumstance
to  which  it  may  be  ascribed.

If,  for  example,  we  should  find  in  another  part  of  the  world  deviations
from  what  was  to  be  expected  from  established  laws,  this  would  point  to
some  circumstance  not  yet  noticed  ;  there  must  be  some  circumstance
which  differs  in  the  two  places.  What  we  now  have  to  do  is  to  eliminate
from  the  innumerable  circumstances  which  differ — in,  e.g.,  Cayenne  and
Paris — those  which  are  indifferent,  and  to  discover  those  which  are  of  in-
luence — those  to  which  it  is  due  that  the  same  pendulum  swings  more
slowly  in  Cayenne  than  in  Paris.

Here  the  unlimited  number  of  the  circumstances  prevents  there  being
my  direct  method,  and  the  ground  of  the  difference  would  hardly  have
:>een  discovered  so  soon  had  not  the  mathematical  theory  of  the  pendulum
ihown  that  gravitation,  which  is  measured  by  the  fall  of  a  body  during
>ne  second,  enters  into  the  formula  by  which  the  duration  of  a  pendulum
oscillation  is  determined,  and  so  directed  attention  to  the  possibility  of  a
/ariation  there.

If  we  had  to  proceed  entirely  by  a  comparison  of  observations,  nothing
vould  remain  but  to  make  conjectures  as  to  the  ground  of  the  difference,
md  to  test  them  by  comparison  with  other  cases ;  or  else  to  discover  from
i  large  number  of  observations  what  are  the  circumstances  which  vary  in
>roportion  to  the  time  of  oscillation.  Even  this  latter  investigation  would
lot  by  itself  give  us  a  result,  however  many  observations  it  might  be
)ased  upon.  Some  of  the  observations  would  suggest  that  the  length  of


358  LOGIC

the  pendulum  is  a  function  of  the  geographical  latitude,  but  others — those
made  at  a  considerable  height  above  the  sea — would  form  exceptions
interrupting  the  regular  series.  Only  by  comparing  a  number  of  obser
vations  alike  as  to  elevation  but  differing  as  to  latitude,  and  a  number
alike  as  to  latitude  but  differing  as  to  elevation,  could  we  construct  the
twofold  influence  of  these  circumstances  and  reduce  it  to  formulas,  the
common  result  of  which  would  be  the  actually  observed  lengths  of  the
second  pendulum  ;  but  it  is  clear  that  such  a  selection  amongst  the  obser
vations  must  be  guided  by  some  conjecture  in  order  to  be  possible,  so  that
here  again  the  hypothetical  nature  of  every  such  process  appears.  Here
again  only  experiments  at  any  latitudes  and  any  elevations  could  be
decisive.

28.  In  reality,  then,  every  particular  event  which  we  attempt  to  refer
to  a  causal  law  appears  as  the  complex  result  of  a  number  of  more  special
laws, which make  the amount of effect depend, not  merely upon  the
causes  first  perceived,  but  upon  a  larger  or  smaller  number  of  subsidiary
causes. It  is  expressed,  therefore,  not  in  a  hypothetical  judgment  of  the
form,  "  if  Ao.  is  then  Bfi  is,"  but  in  one  of  the  form,  "  If  A  is  a,  and  C  is
y,  and D is  8,  etc., then  B  is  /?,"  where  (3  is  a  function  of  /'  (a),/"  (y),
/'"  (8).

29.  In  the  instance  just  analysed  we  are  dealing  with merely  quantita
tive  changes  in  the  duration  of  oscillation,  and  in  the  motion  in  general;
but the result  appeared  every  time  that the pendulum was pushed or
moved from its position of equilibrium  ; we could always  distinguish
between  the  one  efficient  cause  and  the  modifying  circumstances  which
only  alter  the  amount  of  the  action.

Other  instances  in  which  the  effect  fails  according  to  the  circumstances,
whilst  it  occurs  in  other  circumstances,  oblige  us  to  add  the  negative
conditions  to  the  above  formula,  so  as  to  make  the  expression  of  the
causal  law  as  accurate  as  possible.  The  proposition  that  a  spark  causes
gunpowder  to  explode  is  incomplete ;  we  must  add  the  negative  condition
that  the  powder  is  not  wet.  The  proposition  that  water  under  the
pressure  of  an  atmosphere  boils  at  100°  is  also  incomplete  ;  the  negative
condition  that  the  vessel  is  open  must  be  there.  Thus  our  causal  law  in
its  completed  expression  takes  the  form  :

If  A  is  a  and  C  is  y  and  D  is  8,  and  E  and  .Fare  not  e  and  <£,  then  B
is  /?.

We  must  not,  of  course,  forget  that  an  exhaustive  statement  of  all  nega-


359

tive  conditions  is  from  the  nature  of  the  case  impossible;  we  can  never  be
certain  that  we  know  all  the  agents  the  presence  of  which  would  hinder
the  action  of  given  causes  ;  we  must  confine  ourselves  to  stating  those
which  are  known  to  us.  To  this  extent  the  most  exact  formulation  of  such
causal  laws  is  only  an  approximation,  and  is  true  only  for  those  cases  in
which  none  but  the  known  agents  are  present ;  strictly  speaking,  we  ought
to  add  to  every  such  law  the  general  clause  :  provided  no  counteracting
causes  intervene  from  elsewhere.  These  laws  are  strictly  true  only  for  an
assumed  and  relatively  simple  combination  of  causes  and  conditioning
circumstances.  We  may  perhaps  expect  that  in  the  great  majority  of  cases
this  assumption  will  be  entirely  realized,  and  the  result  correspond  to  our
law  :  should  the  opposite  occur,  we  should  not  be  satisfied  to  regard  it  as
valid  only  J>s  eVi  TO  TTO\V,  but  should  be  forced  to  inquire  as  to  the  ground
of  the  deviation,  and  to  find  another  partial  law.  A  number  of  previously
unknown  causal  connections  have  been  discovered  by  observations  in
which  a  law  was  found  to  fail  which  had  previously  been  regarded  as
reliable  ;  the  most  famous  instance  is  the  discovery  of  the  atmospheric
pressure  by  Torricelli.

30. In  the  knowledge  that  actual  events  depend  upon  many  conditions,
and  in  the  recognition  of  the  fact  that  events  which  are  alike  for  our  per
ception  may have  different  causes,  we  find  a  ground  for  regarding  the
methods  of  agreement  and  difference  which  Mill  presents  as  fundamental
as  being  useful  merely  as  heuristic  methods,  not  as  the  means  of  establish
ing  a  causal  law. Let  us  look  again  at  the  method  of  difference. It  com
pares  two  instances  of  antecedents  ABC  and  B  C,  of  which  the  first  has
for  consequence  a  phenomenon  a,  which is  wanting  in  the  second. We
may  not  infer  from  this  (as  Mill  himself  allows)  that  A  was  the  whole  cause
of  a,  and  that  the  other  antecedents  B  C  contributed  nothing  to  the  effect,
and  did  not  belong  to  the  conditions  of  a  ;  B  and  C  could be  eliminated
only  by  showing  that  they  might  be  absent  and  a  yet  occur. Thus  a  single
pair  of  such  observations  can  never  establish  more  than  that  the  circum
stance  in  which  they  differed  will  be  a  part  of  the  cause. If  we  sow  seed
n  a  dry  bed,  and  water  one  half  and  not the  other,  the  plants  will  grow
n  the  watered  half  and  not  in  the  other  ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  the
Yater  alone  was  the  cause  of  growth,  and  that  soil  and  warmth  and  light,
vhich  produced  no  growth  in  the  dry  bed,  did  not  belong  to  the  conditions
)f  growth. Thus  the  method  of  difference  shows  us  a  circumstance  which
s  part  of  the  cause,  but  what  we  want  to  do  is  to  include  the  whole  circle


360  LOGIC

of  agents  which  are  necessary  to  produce  the  effect,  and  this  can  only  be
done  by  eliminating  the  indifferent  circumstances  and  discovering  those
which  co-operate.

It  is  the  same  with  the  method  of  agreement.  From  the  fact  that  only
A  was  present  in  all  the  instances  in  which  a  phenomenon  B  occurred,  it
does  not  follow  that  A  by  itself  is  the  cause  of  B ;  it  may  be  that  it  has
produced  this  result  only  in  connection  with  other  things.

One  more  result  follows  from  these  considerations.  Every  methodology
which,  starting  from  the  purely  empirical  standpoint,  insists  chiefly  upon
extending  perceptions  as  far  as  possible,  and  regards  the  inductive  process
as  primarily  a  summation  of  like  perceptions,  not  only  makes  a  demand
which  would  prevent  our  ever  passing  beyond  preliminaries  to  the  begin
ning  of  induction ;  the  way  which  it  directs  us  to  take  is  an  impossible  one
because  the  greater  the  extent  covered  by  the  phenomena  the  less  is  the
probability  that  they  will  manifest  connections  of  simple  regularity.  The
actual  process  of  science  has  been  a  tentative  one,  which  starts  with  a
limited  range  of  observation  and  corrects  its  first  assumption  by  means  of
further  comparison.  A  comprehensive  knowledge  of  facts  is  valuable
only  as  facilitating  combinations  which  lead  by  analogy  to  hypotheses,  and
as  preventing  the  over-hasty  formulation  of  definite  universal  propositions.

31.  Looking  back  upon  what  has  preceded,  it  becomes  obvious  that
the  fundamental  laws  by  which  we  can  express  the  causal  connection  of
phenomena  exactly,  i.e.,  with  a  mathematically  accurate  statement  of  the
magnitude  of  the  effect  for  every  value  of  the  cause,  do  not  generally  re
present  the  way  in  which  phenomena  actually  behave ;  that,  on  the  con
trary,  they  are  valid  only  for  instances  of  a  fictitious  simplicity  which  are
never  forthcoming  in  reality.  They  cannot  therefore  be  directly  verified
by  observation,  much  less  obtained  by  a  simple  summation  of  observations.
They  are  hypothetical  not  merely  in  their  logical  form,  in  so  far  as  they
state  that  if  A  is  true  B  is  also  true  ;  nor  yet  merely  in  the  sense  that  their
unconditionally  universal  validity  is  only  of  the  nature  of  a  probable  hypo
thesis,  not  of  a  strictly  proven  proposition  ;  they  are  also  hypothetical  in
the  sense  that  they  refer  to  instances  which  are  assumed  although  they  are
forthcoming  in  no  experience.  The  whole  science  of  mechanics  rests  upon
the  law  of  inertia,  which  alone  enables  us  to  give  a  consistent  interpreta
tion  to  events  according  to  their  causal  relations ;  but  no  observation  is
capable  of  showing  us  that  a  body,  when  set  in  motion,  continues  its  motion
in  a  straight  line  with  uniform  velocity  ;  the  law  does  not  express  the  form


INDUCTION  OF  EMPIRICAL  LAWS  361

of  an  actual  event.  It  is  the  same  with  the  law  of  parabolic  projectile
motion,  etc.  The  actual  events  never  conform  to  these  simple  formulae  ;
the  laws  by  which  we  can  express  what  actually  happens  are  all  of  them
deduced  by  means  of  different  combinations  of  the  fundamental  formulae,
corresponding  to  the  actual  changing  combinations  of  their  elementary
conditions.

Here  another  point  must  be  noticed.  In  the  mathematical  formulation
of  the  "  exact  "  laws,  especially  when  we  are  dealing  with  constant  forces
such  as  those  to  which  we  have  been  brought  in  our  consideration  of
"circumstances,"  we  are  always  obliged  to  fall  back  upon  the  differentials
of  space,  time,  velocity,  etc.  But  we  can  never  observe  any  but  finite
magnitudes  which  present  themselves  as  integrals  within  certain  Imiits.
Here  again,  therefore,  the  law  which  can  be  seen  to  agree  with  what
actually  takes  place  appears  as  a  deduction  from  the  simple  and  original
causal  laws  ;  and  the  agreement  itself — owing  to  the  possibility  of  errors
of  observation — can  be  only  approximately  ascertained.  Once  more,  there
fore,  we  see  that  the  problem  of  finding  strict  causal  laws  can  only  be
solved  by  hypotheses  which  pass  beyond  experience,  and  by  mathematical
construction.1

IV. LAWS  WHICH  ARE  NOT  CAUSAL  LAWS.

§  96.

We  must  distinguish  between  the  causal  laws  treated  of  in  §  95,  and
those  universal  propositions  which  are  also  frequently  described  as  "  laws,"
but  which  are  merely  descriptive,  either  containing  the  formula  of  a  par
ticular  actual  event,  or  of  what  goes  on  in  a  class  of  things,  or  else  express-
ng  the  regular  connections  between  different  phenomena  which  exist  as  a
matter  of  fact  within  our  experience.

By  themselves  the  former  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  expression  of  a
necessity,  nor  do  they  affirm  any  necessity  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  assumed
hat  a  constant  way  of  happening  is  conditioned  by  a  constant  ground.
The  latter  do  indeed  point  to  a  causal  connection,  but  they  also  stand  in
iced  of  more  definite  explanation  and  of  being  derived  from  proper  causal
aws.  In  distinction  from  these  they  are  usually  called  merely  empirical
aws.

i. The  conclusions  just  arrived  at,  as  to  the  value  of  methods  which  we

1  Cf.  F.  Braun, Ueber  Gesets, Theorie  utni  Hypothese  in  der  Physik  (1886),  p.  5  sq.


362  LOGIC

have  already  found  to  be  inadequate,  are  less  important  than  the  extension
we  have  made  in  the  import  of  those  universal  propositions  which  are  in
tended  to  express  necessity  in  what  happens  ;  for  this  carries  us  on  to
judgments  of  an  essentially  different  character  from  those  which  were  first
sought  concerning  the  actions  of  particular  given  causes.  Those  proposi
tions  which  state  the  influence  of  circumstances  upon  the  action  of  a  given
cause  can  no  longer  be  described  as  causal  laws,  in  the  same  sense  as  the
law  that  pressure  diminishes  the  volume  of  a  gas  ;  they  express  only  re
lations  of  dependence  between  a  change  and  certain  conditions,  but  by
themselves  they  give  no  information  as  to  the  causes  active  therein.  That
the  same  pendulum  oscillates  more  rapidly  in  a  higher  latitude  than  it
does  at  the  equator  is  so  firmly  established  that  we  may  speak  of  a  law
of  the  dependence  of  the  time  of  oscillation  upon  the  latitude  ;  this  law
might  be  established  without  anything  being  known  as  to  the  actual
ground  of  the  acceleration,  for  mere  difference  of  place  can  never  by  itself
be  described  as  an  active  cause.

This  leads  us  to  determine  the  various  meanings  in  which  we  are  accus
tomed  to  speak  of  laws,  for  the  ambiguity  of  this  term  has  sometimes  been
to  blame  for  serious  confusion.

2.  The  mere  description  of  a  given  event  led  us  in  §  90,  5,  to  formulae
which  expressed  the  relations  between  differences  of  time  and  differences  ot
space  or  quality,  by  means  of  a  concept  to  which  the  particular  stages  in
the  event  were  subordinated  ;  and  such  a  formula  may  be  called  the  law  ot
this  given  event  in  so  far  as  it  states  the  fundamental  principle  which  is
added  as  major  premise  to  the  particular  values  belonging  together,  and  ot
which  they  appear  as  the  necessary  consequences. Observation  of  a  single
falling  body  would  justify  us  in  the  proposition  that  it  moves  according  to
the  law  s  =  \  gtz  ;  what  it  tells  us  is  that  it  moves  as  if  this  formula  deter
mined  for  it  the  space  it  should  traverse  during  every  interval  of  time ;  the
law  is  true  from  beginning  to  end  of  the  motion.

3.  Nearest  to  this  description  of  a  particular  event  of  given  duration
comes  the  description  of  an  event  which  recurs  indefinitely  in  a  given  sub
ject,  an  event  which,  from  another  point  of  view,  may  be  regarded  as  one
connected  whole. We  may  call  it  a  law  that  the  earth  turns  round  its  axis
with  uniform  velocity  every  twenty-four  hours  ;  so  far  as  memory  extends,
the  motion  of  the  earth  has  been  determined by  this  formula. But  here
another  thought  creeps  in,  and  we  expect  the  earth  to  move  according  to
the  same  law  in  the  future  also  ;  the  use  of  the  expression  "  law  "  involves


INDUCTION  OF  EMPIRICAL LAWS  363

a  tacit  inference  from  the  form  of  the  event  as  perceived  until  now  to  its
continuance  in  the  same  form  for  an  indefinite  time, — an  inference  which
is  in  no  way  justified  by  the  mere  fact  of  what  has  occurred  previously,
any  more  than  the  inference  that  a  man  who  has  lived  eighty  years  will
complete  his  eighty-first  year  has  any  certain  basis.  Such  a  basis  it  would
have  only  if  it  could  be  shown  that  no  cause  of  change  is  present,  and  that
therefore  the  same  grounds  which  have  necessitated  the  event  so  far  will
also  last  for  an  indefinite  time  ;  otherwise  the  so-called  law  contains  merely
the  description  of  a  fact,  together  with  the  indefinite  expectation,  grounded
upon  mere  habit,  that  it  will  occur  again.

4.  Kepler's  first  law  is  itself  only  a  description  of  what  actually  takes
place  in  certain  subjects,  with  the  difference  that  it  is  also  an  empirically
universal  judgment  in  so  far  as  it  predicates  motion  in  an  ellipse  not
merely  of  one  planet,  but  of  all  which  were  then  known.  It  expresses
:mly  the  actual  form  of  the  event,  and  conceals  the  ground  of  its  necessity;
Dnly  by  assuming  invariability  in  the  heavens  may  we  justify  the  expecta-
:ion  that  it  will  be  just  as  true  in  future.  As  an  expression  of  necessity  it
acks  the  hypothetical  form,  which  would  represent  this  mode  of  happening
is  the  necessary  consequence  of  some  ground  ;  it  is  a  purely  categorical
udgment,  one,  moreover,  which  predicates  no  attributes,  but  only  a
.emporal  activity  or  relation.  The  categorical  judgment  that  all  ravens
ire  black,  and  all  gold  yellow,  contains  the  ground  of  the  predicate  in  the
:ssential  concept  of  the  subject ;  by  assuming  the  necessity  in  reality  of
he  combination  of  certain  attributes,  I  extend  the  empirically  universal
)roposition  that  all  the  gold  known  to  me  is  yellow  into  one  of  uncondi-
ional  universality  ;  this  categorical  judgment  is  equivalent  to  a  hypo-
hetical.  But  the  judgment  that  the  planet  Mars  moves  round  the  sun  in
n  ellipse,  within  the  time  of  687  days,  states,  in  the  first  instance,  only
lie  fact  that  it  has  moved  so  hitherto,  and  connects  with  this  fact  the
expectation  that  it  will  continue  to  move  so  in  the  future  ;  but  this  judg-
nent  cannot  derive  its  predicate  from  the  nature  of  the  subject,  and  hence
he  extension  to  all  time,  which  is  contained  in  the  expectation,  is  not
notived  by  a  necessity  expressed  in  the  judgment  itself,  but  by  the  tacit
ssumption  that  the  ground  of  the  motion  of  the  planet  is  invariable, — an
ssumption  which  has  no  firm  footing  so  long  as  we  know  nothing  as  to
he  ground  of  this  motion.

If  Kepler's  first  law  is  taken  to  mean  that  it  is  true  of  all  planets,  both
nown  and  unknown,  then  it  contains  a  two-fold  induction  :  by  help  of  a


364  LOGIC

definition  of  "  planet"  it  includes  a  generalization  and  also  affirms  a  predi
cate  which  is  true  of  all  things  belonging  to  a  class  ;  it  is  a  judgment
universal  as  to  time  and  genus,  but  it  is  still  merely  categorical.

5.  The  law  of  falling  bodies  is  again  only  a  generalizing  description  of
the  form  of  an  event  recurring  in  many  things  ;  it  does  not  say  that  they
fall,  nor  under  what  conditions  they  fall,  nor  why  they  fall,  but  how  they
fall  ;  it  says  that  whenever  a  body  falls  freely  it  describes  spaces  which  are
proportional  to  the  squares  of  the  time. It  is  a  law,  in  the  first  place,
because  it  regulates  all  the  stages  of  the  event  according  to  a  formula,
and  in  the  second  place,  because  it  is  assumed  to  be  true  for  all  bodies,
without  exception,  hence  to  have  generic  universality.

It  is  the  same  with  the  law  of  multiple  proportions  in  chemistry ;  it
expresses  a  universally  valid  form  of  the  event  :  whenever  two  substances
combine  chemically,  they  do  so  in  definite  relations  of  weight,  etc.  (If  we
should  say  :  if  two  substances  combine,  they  do  so,  etc.,  this  would  be  no
hypothetical  judgment  connecting  a  real  ground  with  a  real  consequence;
"if"  here  means  only  a  general  connection,  for  the  consequent  states,  not
a  result  of  the  antecedent,  but  only  the  particular  mode  of  the  event
expressed  in  it.)

6.  In  this  class  of  laws  we  have  had  to  do  only  with  descriptions  of
the  way  in  which  particular  events  take  place  in particular  things,  or  in
whole  classes  of  things  ;  to  them  we  must  now  add  those  other  universal
propositions  which  state  relations  between  what  is  different,  without  being
causal  laws  in  the  sense  referred  to  in  §  95. Every partial law,  which
makes  the  modification  of  an effect  depend  upon given  circumstances,
belongs  to  this  class  ; but it extends much further than  to  these  in
stances,  and  passes  over  gradually  into  the  class  of  judgments  which  state
necessary  connection  between  the  attributes  of  one  and  the  same  thing.

7.  When  we  find  that  water  boils  upon  a  high  mountain  at  a  lower
temperature  than  it  does  below,  we  have  established  the  influence  of  a
circumstance  which  consists  primarily  only  in  position  upon  the  action  of
a  cause ;  how  elevation  above  the  level  of  the  sea  manages  to  exert  this
influence  may  be  entirely  concealed  from  us. When we  find  that  the
inclination  of  the  magnetic  needle  becomes  greater  as  we  move  from  the
equator  towards  the  pole,  there is  no  question of  a perceptible  active
cause  which  places  the  needle  in  a  certain  direction  ;  we  can  show  no
thing which  causes by  its  change the  change  of  direction, such as  a
magnet,  which,  if  placed  near  the  needle,  would  alter  its  direction ;  com-


365

parison  of  different  cases  merely  gives  us  a  regular  connection  between  the
situation  of  the  place  and  the  position  of  the  needle,  which  we  attempt  to
state  in  one  law,  by  means  of  a  process  of  reduction,  deriving  all  par
ticular  cases  from  one  major  premise.

Observation,  again,  does  not  show  us  the  cause  of  the  motion  of  the
;idal  waves  in  the  ocean.  We  may  begin  by  determining  in  a  merely
•descriptive  law  the  regularity  of  the  recurrence  of  the  event,  and  say  that
;  he  tide  is  repeated  every  12^  hours;  but  comparison  of  the  times  with
he  changing  position  of  the  moon  with  respect  to  the  earth  gives  at  once
he  general  rule  that  in  every  place  the  tide  stands  in  a  definite  temporal
elation  to  the  culmination  of  the  moon,  and  thus  leads  to  a  law  of  the
elation  between  the  tide  and  the  position  of  the  moon.  Comparison  of
he  varying  heights  of  the  tide  with  the  position  of  sun  and  moon  witli
espect  to  each  other  shows  a  regular  relation  between  the  maximum  and
he  syzygies,  and  between  the  minimum  and  the  quadratures,- — a  law,
herefore,  which  states  the  connection  between  changes  in  the  height  of
:ie  tide  and  the  changing  positions  of  sun  and  moon  with  respect  to  each
ther.  But,  directly,  what  it  shows  is  only  the  temporal  connection  ;  at  the
ottom  it  is  again  only  a  descriptive  law  concerning  the  regular  accom-
animent  of  one  change  by  the  other,  and  it  is  essentially  different  from
ic  causal  explanation  which  deduces  this  connection  from  the  attraction
f  moon  and  sun  upon  the  waters  of  the  earth.

If  we  examine  Kepler's  second  law,  we  find  that  in  one  aspect  it  is
lerely  a  formula  for  the  motion  of  the  planets.  But  this  formula  states  a
:lation  between  diminishing  velocity  and  increasing  distance  from  the
in,  and  between  increasing  velocity  and  diminishing  distance  from  the
in,  and  it  may  therefore  be  taken  also  as  the  law  of  the  relations  between
jlocity  and  distance  from  the  sun  ;  it  does  not,  however,  cease  to  be  a
ere  description  of  what  happens,  without  any  statement  of  the  ground
hy  it  happens.

Many  every-day  experiences,  as  well  as  scientific  propositions,  are
.pressed  in  such  laws  of  relation.  That  bodies  when  dropped  fall  to  the
ound  is  no  more  a  causal  law  than  that  water  flows  down-hill,  or  stands
the  same  level  in  tubes  which  communicate  ;  in  the  first  of  these  pro-
•sitions  the  dropping  is  regarded  by  no  one  as  the  active  cause,  and  in
e  others,  although  the  inclination  of  surface  or  the  communication
tween  the  tubes  is  a  condition  of  the  phenomenon  occurring,  it  is  not
e  ground  of  it.


366  LOGIC

8.  Physiology,  again,  abounds  in  general  propositions  which  have  onl-
the  character  of  empirical  laws.

In  the  first  place,  there  are  the  laws  which  describe  events  in  the  indi
vidual.  The  propositions  stating  the  development  of  an  organism  of  giver
form  from  the  spore,  the  successive  stages  in  the  division  of  a  germina
cell,  and  in  the  growth  of  the  particular  organs,  all  describe  a  successior
of  given  events  which  recurs  regularly  in  all  individuals  of  the  same  kind
That  a  seed  when  laid  in  the  ground  will  sprout,  will  unfold  its  cotyledons
will  strike  down  with  its  roots  and  up  with  its  stalk,  that  the  roots  wil
branch  and  the  stalk  bear  successively  leaves  and  blossoms,  that  the  malt
parts  of  the  plant  bear  pollen,  which  settles  upon  the  pistil  and  there  give:
rise  to  further  processes  which  lead  to  the  ripening  of  the  fruit,  and  tha'
from  this  fruit  there  is  again  developed  a  similar  plant, — all  this  is  primarily
description  of  a  succession  of  events  which  repeats  itself  in  many  simila
individuals.  In  the  same  way  it  is  an  empirical  law  that  the  bodib
temperature  of  mammals  and  birds  varies  only  within  narrow  limits,  o
that  when  they  breathe  an  exchange  of  gases  takes  place  in  their  lungs.

The  general  laws  in  which  we  give  descriptive  expression  to  sue!
regularities  of  event  do  not,  in  the  province  of  physiology,  admit  of  th<
same  strict  form  as  in  mechanics  ;  the  great  variation  in  individual  speci
niens,  even  when  they  belong  to  the  same  inferior  species,  and  the  mort
or  less  rapid  change  in  one  and  the  same  individual  which  is  inseparablt
from  the  vital  processes,  prevent  any  accurate  quantitative  determination:
which  would  be  always  similarly  applicable,  as  in  the  fall  of  bodies  or  tin
motion  of  the  planets,  either  with  respect  to  the  temporal  course  of  tht
changes  or  to  the  form  and  size  of  the  particular  organs.  Where  prope
generalizing  induction,  which  connects  the  phenomena  observed  in  con

O  O  i  A

ceptually  different  things,  has  not  yet  come  into  play,  the  variation  be
tween  individuals  manifests  itself  in  the  fact  that  all  we  can  do  is  to  stat<
certain  limits  within  which  the  events  in  similar  individuals  vary,  limits  o
the  size  to  which  they  develop,  limits  of  periods  occupied  by  the  particula.
stages  of  development,  etc.  The  expression  of  the  common  elemen
takes  the  form  of  an  average ;  we  determine  the  average  duration  o
human  life,  the  average  duration  of  its  state  as  an  embryo,  the  average
time  at  which  puberty  commences,  the  average  frequency  of  pulse  and  o
breathing  at  different  ages,  etc.  (see  below  §  101,  5).

Those  laws,  again,  are  purely  empirical  which — as  laws  of  relation-
determine  the  connection  between  corresponding  changes  in  the  samt


INDUCTION  OF  EMPIRICAL LA  ]VS  367

subject,  concerning  the  causal  relation  of  which  we  are  still  uncertain  ;  or
the  connection  between  corresponding  deviations  in  the  individual  from
an  average  type.  That  the  larynx  enlarges  and  the  voice  breaks  at  the
commencement  of  puberty,  or  that  red  hair  is  generally  combined  with  a
fair  complexion,  are  such  general  propositions.

To  these  we  must  add  those  propositions  which  express  temporal  con
nection  between  vital  phenomena  and  parallel  events  in  the  surrounding
material  universe.  That  the  blossoms  of  certain  plants  open  and  shut  at
certain  hours  of  the  day,  that  periodical  changes  in  animals  take  place  in
certain  months  and  are  early  or  late  according  to  temperature,  are  propo
sitions  establishing  actual  coincidences  between  the  course  of  the  sun  and
the  temperature  on  the  one  hand  and  organic  events  on  the  other ;  and
that  the  hairiness  of  certain  kinds  of  plants  or  the  colours  of  the  blossoms
change  with  the  situation  are  also  relations  which  can  at  first  be  only
empirically  established.  Over  a  wide  range  want  of  knowledge  as  to
definite  causal  relations  restricts  us  to  these  merely  empirical  uniformities.

9.  It  is  more  difficult  to  determine  the  exact  import  of  such  proposi
tions.  In  what  sense  are  they  universally  valid,  and  to  be  regarded  as  the
expression  of  a  necessity  when  they  are  confirmed  without  exception  in
the  range  of  our  experience  ?

Starting  from  the  postulate  that  the  given  is  necessary,  and  from  the
further  assumption  that  it  is  determined  either  by  the  inner  necessity  of
the  essence,  or  by  the  outer  necessity  of  causality,  or  by  both  together,
then  all  that  we  find  at  first  in  descriptive  general  laws  is  an  indication
that  there  are  grounds  for  the  regularity  of  events  and  an  instigation  to
look  for  them  ;  but  they  also  form  a  ground  for  the  assumption  that  these
grounds  have  been  constant  within  the  range  of  our  experience  until  now,
and  that  they  are  contained  in  the  constancy  and  similarity  of  things
themselves  and  their  relations.  According  to  this  assumption  we  are  then
able  to  establish  them  as  universally  and  invariably  valid  at  first  within  the
province  in  which  we  have  observed  such  uniformities ;  even  while  we  do
not  know  why  bodies  fall  we  are  perfectly  justified  in  assuming  that  every
where  upon  the  earth's  surface  they  fall  in  the  same  way  whether  we  see
:hem  or  not,  and  that  they  will  continue  to  fall  in  the  future  so  long  as  no
ither  change  takes  place  upon  the  earth  than  such  as  we  have  already
experienced  ;  this  confidence,  however,  is  based,  not  upon  the  mere  sum-
nation  of  the  particular  cases,  but  upon  the  assumption  that  bodies  are
governed  by  an  invariable  necessity  which  is  common  to  them  all  and


368  LOGIC

grounded  upon  their  given  attributes  and  relations.  But  the  certain
validity  of  the  law  is  limited  to  the  sphere  within  which  it  is  found,  to  the
surface  of  the  earth  ;  so  far  we  have  not  sufficient  evidence  to  warrant  us
in  inferring  that  all  bodies,  at  whatever  distance  from  the  earth,  would  in
the  same  way  press  towards  its  centre.  The  descriptive  laws  of  physiology
also  we  can  accept  as  universally  valid,  if  we  assume  that  no  change  occurs
v  either  in  the  nature  of  individuals  or  in  the  conditions  of  their  life.

Where  the  propositions  which  express  empirical  uniformities  connect
different  phenomena,  they  point  more  definitely  to  a  causal  connection,
either  to  a  direct  dependence  of  the  one  phenomenon  upon  the  other,  or
to  the  fact  that  they  are  both  connected  consequences  of  the  same  ground.
For  that  a  mere  temporal  coincidence,  or  the  exact  agreement  in  the
periods  of  independent  events,  should  be  repeated  so  often  is  so  highly
improbable  that  we  find  ourselves  forced  to  assume  that  there  is  a  real
dependence.  That  the  period  of  the  tide  should  be  accidentally  the  same
as  that  of  the  culmination  of  the  moon,  that  the  period  of  the  highest  tide
should  be  accidentally  the  same  as  that  of  the  syzygies,  is  possible  in
abstracto,  but  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable ;  the  far  more  probable
assumption  is,  either  that  sun  and  moon  produce  the  tide,  or  that  their
motion  is  due  to  the  same  grounds  as  the  motion  of  the  tide.

10.  In  physiology  it  is  obvious  that  we  can  attribute  universal  validity
to  descriptive  laws  only  if  we  assume  a  circle  of  constant  conditions,  even
though  we  may  as  yet  be  unable  to  discover  what  is  contributed  by  each
of  them  towards  the  possibility  of  life  and  development.  That  a  germ
will  develop  and  pass  through  a  series  of  successive  stages  is  true  only
if  we  assume  the  presence  of  suitable  nutrition,  suitable  temperature,  etc. ;
like  the  physical  laws,  this  general  law  really  represents  an  instance  of
fictitious  simplicity  in  so  far  as  it  disregards  the  manifold  disturbances  of
unfavourable  conditions.

If  we  presuppose  these  constant  conditions  then  to  the  mere  description
of  the  development  is  added  the  thought  that  this  development  is  neces
sary,  in  so  far  as  it  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  germ  to  evolve  from  itself
these  successive  forms,  it  appears  as  the  causa  iinmanens  of  its  changes.
By  virtue  of  this  nature  of  the  particular  individual  each  particular  state
forms  the  ground  in  reality  for  the  transition  to  the  state  following  it ;
those  causal  concepts  which  in  §  73,  26,  p.  167  sq.,  were  distinguished
from  the  concepts  of  transient  causation  find  their  application  here.

The  comparison  of  the  course  of  development of  particular  organic


INDUCTION  OF  EMPIRICAL LAWS  369

individuals  shows,  however,  deviations  from  the  general  law  of  the
average  ;  and  to  some  extent  we  have  empirical  laws  of  relation  for  these
deviations,  which  in  their  turn  point  to  an  external  causality  modifying  the
development.  Physiology  aims  at  forming  into  strict  causal  laws  these
propositions  of  interdependence  which  first  appear  in  an  indefinite  form  ;
it  aims  at  establishing  experimentally  the  influence  of  different  light  or
different  temperature,  etc.,  upon  the  growth  of  plants,  or  at  showing  that
the  variation  between  sexual  and  non-sexual  reproduction,  which  there  was
'formerly  a  tendency  to  refer  entirely  to  grounds  contained  in  the  organism
'itself,  is  directly  dependent  upon  nutrition.  Thus  every  actual  organic
development  may  be  regarded  in  the  twofold  aspect  of  immanent  and  of
transient  causality  ;  the  difficulty  is  to  ascertain  for  particular  individuals
to  what  extent  the  peculiar  phenomena  which  they  manifest  are  to  be
referred  to  the  disposition  of  the  particular  individual  and  to  the  law  of
development  thereby  determined,  and  to  what  extent  to  external  in-
luences.

ii.  Thus  causal  explanation  must  always  be  called  in  to  complete  our
knowledge.  Where  we  cannot  find  efficient  causes  such  as  are  treated  of
n  §  95)  we  rnust  extend  our  hypotheses  as  to  the  working  of  causes
urther ;  and  we  first  have  recourse  to  those  forms  of  action  in  which  a
hing,  without  visible  change  on  its  own  part,  by  its  mere  presence  and
patial  relation,  conditions  the  motion  or  change  of  another  thing,  or
ounteracts  and  prevents  a  change  which  would  be  introduced  by  other
auses.  The  most  careful  empirical  comparison  of  all  observed  instances
i  which  bodies  fall  tells  us  nothing  as  to  the  "why  "  of  the  fall  ;  this  may
.ist  as  well  have  its  ground  either  in  a  tendency  of  bodies  downwards,  or
i  a  pressure  acting  a  tergo,  as  in  a  force  belonging  to  the  earth  which  sets
11  neighbouring  bodies  in  motion.  The  only  question  is,  which  hypo-
icsis  explains  all  the  connected  phenomena  of  fall,  pressure,  equilibrium,
tc.,  and  whether  a  law  can  be  formed  for  this  action  to  which  all  the
lienomena  will  conform.

Most  of  the  partial  laws  which  contain  the  influences  of  circumstances

ad  to  similar  assumptions  of  latent  active  forces ;  the  real  causal  connec-

)n  can  only  be  held  to  be  established  when  the  actual  things  playing  the

irt  of  causes,  as  well  as  the  form  and  law  of  their  action,  are  known. It

an  empty  rhetorical phrase  to  speak  of  natural  laws  as  if  the  mere

rmula  exercised  a  magical  power  over  phenomena,  commanding  them  to

sume  a  form  which  does  not  follow  from  their  own  nature ; laws  can

s.  L. — ii.  . B  B


370  LOGIC

never  be  the  grounds  for  what  actually  happens,  they  only  express  the
constant  manner  in  which  real  things  behave.  It  may  be  that  to  a  large
extent  we  shall  not  get  beyond  establishing  propositions  which  merely
allow  us  to  regard  one  event  as  a  sure  sign  of  another  ;  but  to  just  that
extent  we  shall  fail  to  reach  the  final  aim  of  knowledge.

12.  Thus  the  general  problem  is  to  reduce  merely  empirical  uniformities
to  propositions  which  state  the  necessary  connection  of  the  state  of  a
thing,  in  part  with  its  previous  states,  in  part  with  the  relations  in  which  it
stands  to  other  things  in  certain  states,  and  to  state  it  so  that  we  may
understand  a  given  mode  of  being  from  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself.  We
shall  not  now  pursue  this  question  further  ;  we  have  shown  in  §  73  how
the  concepts  of  causal  connection,  upon  which  the  necessary  hypotheses
are  based,  must  change  their  form.


V. GENERALIZING  INDUCTION.

§  97-

As  soon  as  we  pass  beyond  merely  empirical  generality  we  are  onl;
justified  in  comprehending  several  specific  propositions  into  one  mon
general  proposition  by  means  of  a  generic  concept,  under  which  thei
subjects  or  hypotheses  fall,  if  we  assume  that  like  consequences  must  hav
like  grounds.

A  proposition  so  obtained  is  to  be  regarded  as  valid  only  if  the  predicate
are  in  all  cases  completely  identical,  or  if  their  differences  correspond  t
modifications  of  the  attributes  of  the  generic  concept.

GENERALIZATION  is  a  means  both  of  eliminating  the  indifferent  attribute
still  contained  in  the  formulae  of  the  specific  laws,  and  of  thereby  givin
the  laws  as  precise  a  shape  as  possible.

i.  Both  in  investigating  causal  laws,  as  in  §  95,  and  in  establishing  th
uniformities  mentioned  in  the  last  section,  we  start  first  from  a  limite
number  of  observations,  of  which  the  objects  are  concrete  things  and  the
definite  relations  in  any  particular  case.  The  first  step  was  to  find  for  tl:
same,  or  for  perfectly  similar  things  that  differ  only  quantitatively,  tin
formula  which  corresponds  to  their  mode  of  action  at  all  times.  In  th
way  we  obtain  propositions  of  which  the  subjects  are  partly  fully-determine
particular  things — the  earth,  the  moon,  etc., — partly  infimae  species,  whoe
universality  is  not  generic.


GENERALIZING INDUCTION  371

But  even  unpremeditated  experience  leads  to  a  number  of  propositions
which  have  generic  universality,  and  which  assert  the  same  predicate  of
dissimilar  things  agreeing  only  in  one  or  a  few  attributes.  That  all  bodies
which  are  heavier  than  water  sink  in  water,  that  all  fluids  assume  a  hori
zontal  surface,  that  all  birds  are  warm-blooded,  are  such  propositions  of
experience.  If  they  aim  at  being  more  than  mere  narrations  of  our
experience  hitherto,  then  what  they  tell  us  is  that  the  predicate  is
necessarily  connected  with  the  attributes  of  the  general  subject — -concept.

2.  We  need  not  explain  at  length  that  the essence  of  this  kind  of
induction  consists  in  the  formation  and  import  of  the  generic  concept ;
the  process  which  takes  place  in  it  is  that  described  by  Aristotle  :  all  things
which fall  under the specific concepts  A, B, C  have  a  predicate  P ;
A,  B,  C  are  the  species  of  the  genus  G ;  from  this  it  is  inferred  that  the
proposition  all  G's  are  P  is  true. But  we  have  already  pointed  out  that
>ve  cannot  assume,  as  Aristotle  did,  that  the  species  of  a  genus  are  all
cnown,  especially  where  classification  depends  upon  preceding  induction,
[f  we  look  more  closely,  what  really  takes  place  is  the  following  process  :
tf  A,  B,  C  agree  in  manifesting  predicate  P,  then  we  may  conjecture  that
)redicate  P  has  its  ground  in  that  in  which  they  are  alike,  not  in  that  in
vhich  they  differ  ;  by  comparison  and  abstraction  we  now  find  an  E  and
in  fin  which  A,  B^  C  agree,  and  assume  that  E  and  F  make  the  predi-
:ate  necessary  ;  if  from  E  and  J*~a.s  attributes  we  form  the  generic  concept
7,  then  it  is  assumed  that  G  represents  the  ground  of  the  predicate  P,  and
hat,  therefore,  all  other  as  yet  unknown  things,  which  fall  under  the  same
eneric  concept  G,  must  have  the  predicate  P.

Or,  to  express  it  differently,  the  attempt  is  made  to  represent  the
articular  propositions  A  is  /'  B  is  P,  C  is  P  as  consequences  of  a  com-
lon  major  premise  ;  this  is  possible  by  subordinating  them  to  a  middle
oncept  G,  to  which  the  predicate  P  belongs.

3.  An  assumption  is  made  here,  which  we  have  not  yet  examined — the
jsumption  that  like  consequences  flow  from  like  grounds ;  the  assump-
on which Newton expressed  in the first  two  Regulae  philosophandi  :
Tatura  nihil  agit  frits tra,  et  frustra  fit  per  plura  quod  fieri  potcst  per
inriora. Natura  enini  simplex  est  et  rerum  causis  supeifluis  non  luxuriat.
ieoque effectuuin naturaliuin ejusdem  generis ecedem assignandce sunt
'•usa,  quatenus  fieri  potest,  uti  respirationis  it}  homine  et  in  bestia,  etc.

This  assumption  is  not  empirical,  for,  if  we  consider  it  more  carefully,
e  find  that  all  our  reference  of  sensations  to  things  is  based  upon  it.


372  LOGIC

Like  the  postulate  that  the  given  is  necessary,  it  is  an  assumption
demanded  by  our  logical  needs  ;  but,  as  Newton  indicates  by  his  cautious
quatenus fieri  potest,  it  is  an  assumption  which  merely  regulates  hypotheses,
and  not  a  principle  to  which  we  could  promise  unconditional  confirmation.
It  is  always  confronted  by  the  possibility  that  what  is  like,  or,  at  least,
indistinguishable  for  us,  follows  from  different  grounds.

4.  It  is  important  here  again  to  distinguish  between  general  proposi
tions  of  a  more  indefinite  character  and  strict  laws  which  determine  the
predicate  completely. When  it  is  shown  experimentally  that  in  a  chamber
emptied  of  air  all  known  solids  and  fluids  fall  with  equal  velocity,  we  are
justified  in  affirming  that  all  differences  in  their  chemical  constitution,  size,
form,  etc.,  are  indifferent,  and  that  the  ground  of  their  behaviour  is  to  he
found  in  that  alone  in  which  they  all  agree,  and that  it  will  be  such  as
always  to  give  rise  to  the  same  quantitatively  determined  motion  ;  we  have
a  strict  generic  law. But  when  it  is  said  that  all  metals  conduct  electricity,
the  predicate  is  not  absolutely  determined,  for  the  power  of  conducting
differs in different metals ; the ground of a predicate which differs
quantitatively  cannot  lie  simply  in  that  in  which  all  metals  are  alike. A
strict  law  could be  established  only  if  there  appeared  in  the  attributes
constituting  the  concept  of  metal  quantitative  differences  proportional  to
the  power  of  conducting ;  then  we  could  assume  that  the  power  of  con
ducting  was  grounded  in  these  attributes  by  themselves. But  if  that  can
not  be  shown,  it  is  open  to  conjecture  that  the  power  of  conducting  doe;
not  merely  depend  upon  that  in  which  all  metals  are  alike,  but  that  it  i:
also  influenced  by  those  characteristics in which they  differ. To  this
extent  the  general  proposition  will  be  uncertain,  and  cannot  be  regarded  a;
the  expression  of  a  simple  necessity ;  we  have  a  mere  inference  of  analogy
in  which  we  expect  that  every  body  which  agrees  with  the  known  metal;
in  the  attributes  constituting  the  concept  of  metal  will  also  resemble  then
in  the  power  of  conducting.

Thus  it  is  only  where  an  absolutely  identical  predicate,  or  a  predicate
which  is  proportional  to  quantitative  differences  in  the  attributes  of  G
belongs  to  the  different  things  A,  B,  C  which  fall  under  a  genus  G,  tha
generalization  stands  upon  firm  ground,  and  can  infer  from  the  knowr
species  of  G  to  the  whole  genus,  according  to  the  same  principle  by  whicl
we  refer  like  sensations  to  similar  things.

5.  These  considerations  have  another bearing  when  we attempt  tc
make  the  expression  of  the  general  propositions  perfectly  precise. If,  to


GENERALIZING INDUCTION  373

example,  we  have  a  number  of  specific  laws  that  gold,  silver,  iron,  lead,
glass,  etc.,  sink  in  water,  then  the  combination  of  them  to  one  general
proposition  serves  for  the  elimination  of  those  attributes  of  the  subject
which  are  indifferent  and  without  influence  upon  the  predicate,  and  it
shows  this  as  the  consequence,  not  of  the  -whole  subject,  but  of  a  certain
attribute  of  it ;  logical  abstraction  serves  the  same  purpose  as  would  be
served  by  the  separation  in  reality  of  different  circumstances  in  investigat
ing  their  contribution  towards  an  effect.  That  gold  sinks  in  water  is
indeed  a  true  proposition,  but,  if  stated  as  a  law,  it  contains  more  than  is
necessary  ;  it  includes  in  its  subject  attributes  which  contribute  nothing  to
the  predicate.  We  find  the  particular  ground  why  it  sinks  when  we  learn
from  comparison  that  all  bodies  which  sink  in  water  have  in  common  a
specific  gravity  which  is  greater  than  that  of  water  ;  and,  further,  that  in
ill  fluids  those  bodies  sink  which  have  a  specific  gravity  greater  than  that
Df  the  fluid.

From  this  point  of  view  generalization  is  not  merely  an  external  com-
>rehension  ;  it  is  also  a  means  to  logical  completeness  in  the  expression
)f  particular  laws.  The  judgment :  If  A  is,  B  is,  has  complete  logical
precision  only  if  A  does  not  merely  contain  the  ground  of  B,  but  is  the
ground ;  and  the  value  of  such  a  precise  expression  shows  itself  in  the
act  that  it  yields  the  most  general  contraposition.  From  the  proposition
hat  gold  sinks  in  water,  I  infer  that  what  does  not  sink  is  not  gold  ;
rom  the  proposition  that  all  bodies  with  a  greater  specific  gravity  than
hat  of  water  sink  in  water,  I  infer  that  what  does  not  sink  has  not  a
reater  specific  gravity;  I  negate  a  much  more  general  predicate,  and
hus  obtain  a  much  more  useful  major  premise,  excluding  a  far  greater
.umber  of  possibilities.

6.  When  the  special  laws  combined  by  a  generalizing  induction  have
een  collected  from  the  whole  range  of  our  experience,  then  Newton's
ule  of  explaining  like  by  like  is  a  reason  for  conjecturing  that  the  general
roposition  contains  the  only  ground  of  the  predicate.  When  we  find
ut  all  A's  are  B,  and  that  B  appears  under  no  other  conditions  than  A,
icn  we  have  a  right  to  convert  the  proposition  and  say  :  whatever  is  B
A,  or  only  the  A's  are  B.  It  is  true  that  our  inference  is  not  absolutely
;rtain ;  it  might  be  that  in  consequence  of  the  limitation  of  our  field  of
Jservation  our  A's  contain  some  superfluous  determination,  and  that  B
i  itself  might  be  the  consequence  of  some  other  condition.  When  we  find
at  all  known  ruminants  have  cloven  hoofs,  and  that  cloven  hoofs  have


374  LOGIC

never  been  discovered  in  any  other  animals,  we  have  a  sufficient  ground
for  conjecturing  that  these  two  attributes  are  necessarily  connected ;  yet
no  one  will  maintain  it  to  be  impossible  that  some  other  organization
of  the  digestive  apparatus  should  co-exist  with  cloven  hoofs.  Whether
such  an  inference  is  trustworthy  or  not  can  only  be  finally  decided  with
a  certain  amount  of  probability  by  mere  analogies,  and  by  passing  under
survey  large  provinces  ;  in  one  set  of  phenomena  we  invariably  find  fixed
distinctions,  and  exclusive  connections  between  certain  predicates  and
certain  presupposed  conditions,  e.g.  in  mechanics  and  chemistry  ;  in  others,
e.g.  in  the  organic  world,  the  manifold  combinations  and  the  variation
between  individuals  teach  us  greater  prudence  in  closing  our  concepts,
and  in  formulating  general  propositions.

7.  Where  the  propositions  obtained  by  generalizing  induction  are
confronted  by  exceptions,  a  revision  is  needed  of  the  concept  reached  by
abstraction.  For  the  way  in  which  this  is  to  be  done  we  may  refer  to
§  94-

VI.  INDUCTION  IN  THE  PROVINCE  OF  PSYCHOLOGY,  AND  ITS
PRESUPPOSITIONS.

§97  «•

The  methods  which  aim  at  discovering  general  propositions,  whethei
causal  or  empirical  laws,  may  be  applied  in  principle  also  to  the  province
of  PSYCHOLOGY,  i.e.,  to  the  phenomena  of  the  particular  individual  con
sciousness,  and  to  the  events  of  the  external  world  which  are  giver
together  with  them.

More  especially  is  the  assumption  of  causal  relations  between  events  ir
consciousness  and  external  changes  justified  by  the  general  presupposi
tions  of  empirical  investigation ;  while  the  theory  of  PSYCHOPHYSICAI
PARALLELISM  is  neither  made  requisite  by  the  concept  of  causality  or  tht
principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  nor  capable  of  being  carried  out
owing  to  its  consequences.

A  process  quite  parallel  to  the  induction  of  natural  science  is,  howevei
opposed  partly  by  the  impossibility  of  measuring  psychical  phenomena
partly  by  the  variability  of  psychical  subjects  in  consequence  of  thei
development,  and  partly  by  the  great  differences  between  individuals  whic
are  to  some  extent  connected  with  this  development.

Except,  therefore,  within  the  sphere  of  psychophysics  in  the  narrowe


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  375

sense,  we  cannot  hope  to  establish  exact  general  laws,  by  which  the
concrete  temporal  course  of  successive  events  in  consciousness  would  be
determined  on  all  sides  in  an  unmistakable  way.

The  development  of  psychology  shows  that  it  is  first  within  the  total
content  of  consciousness,  which  can  be  comprehensively  surveyed  by
memory  and  association,  that  fixed  connections,  which  are  independent  of
,  the  moment  at  which  they  happen  to  enter  into  consciousness,  are
recognised  between  ideas,  volitions,  etc.  ;  and  within  certain  limits  these
show  regularity  in  our  psychical  life  on  the  whole.  This  is  the  basis  from
which  we  must  start  in  our  analysis  of  particular  moments  of  consciousness,
and  find  by  observation  or  experiment  the  corresponding  connections  in
them.

It  is  in  this  way  also  that  we  can  alone  find  firm  ground,  where  the
differences  of  individuals  will  fall  into  the  background,  and  that  which  is
common  to  all  will  preponderate.

Knowledge  of  the  connections  to  be  thus  found  refers  partly  to  the
dependence  of  events  in  the  individual  consciousness  upon  previous
conscious  events  in  the  same  subject,  partly  to  the  dependence  of  the
particular  subject  upon  the  mental  events  in  other  subjects,  partly  to  the
dependence  of  psychical  life  upon  the  states  of  the  organism,  more
especially  of  the  brain.

With  reference  to  the  last  point,  the  claim  to  ground  psychology  upon
physiological  knowledge  is  unrealizable ;  psychological  investigation  has
its  independent  task  to  perform,  and  it  should  rather  be  said  that
psychology  is  the  key  to  this  part  of  physiology.

i.  The  processes  by  which  we  pass  from  particular  perceptions  to  the
establishment  of  general  propositions  concerning  what  is  given  to  percep-
:ion,  especially  to  the  establishment  of  causal  laws,  have  been  traced  in
he  preceding  paragraphs  only  so  far  as  referred  to  connections  in  that
.miverse  of  things  which  is  distinct  from  us,  the  perceiving  and  thinking
subjects ;  things  to  which,  in  accordance  with  the  ordinary  view,  we  assign
i  being  distinct  from  our  conscious  being,  and  of  which  we  assume  that
hey  may  be  known  in  the  same  way  by  all  who  perceive  them  under  the
;ame  conditions.  For  even  when  *  we  have  realized,  by  analysing  the
:oncept  of  the  thing,  that  the  idea  of  thing  has  only  been  brought  about
>y  means  of  a  synthesis  which  affirms  one  ground  of  unity  for  immediately
,iven  sensations,  we  still  think  of  this  ground  as  existing  independently  of
mrselves,  and  it  is  only  by  this  assumption  that  we  are  able  to  bring  unity


376  LOGIC

and  connection  into  phenomena  which,  from  the  purely  subjective  point
of  view,  are  irregular  and  accidental  in  their  changes.

New  questions  arise,  however,  when  we  take  up  the  position  of  the
particular  individual  subject,  and  regard  everything  which  is  given  in  his
consciousness  as  primarily  nothing  but  the  object  of  consciousness.  In
this  way  we  test  more  closely  the  assumption  upon  which  is  based  the
whole  process  of  the  idea  of  an  objective  world,  that  one  part  of  our
conscious  experience,  sensations,  are  to  be  regarded  as  effects  of  external
objects  ;  and  we  investigate  in  particular  the  way  in  which  we  come  to
know  the  causal  laws  assumed  in  this  view ;  and  examine  how  the  induc
tive  methods,  so  far  regarded  only  in  their  application  to  the  external
world,  are  applicable  here;  and  again  how  the  methods  of  induction  can
be  applied  to  that  total  content  of  consciousness  which  includes  in
addition  to  the  idea  of  external  things  all  the  experiences  which  we  refer
only  to  ourselves  as  conscious  subjects,  such  as  acts  of  thought,  feelings,
desires,  resolutions.

We  have  already  pointed  out,  when  describing  the  elements  of  the
psychological  concepts  (§  74,  16-19,  P-  J37  scl-)>  ^nat  *ne  general  concept  of
causality  is  applied  in  a  different  meaning  to  those  elements  which  make
up  the  content  of  self-consciousness  ;  and  in  accordance  with  this  different
meaning  the  methods  by  which  we  endeavour  to  establish  psychical  laws
must  also  take  a  different  form.

Having  regard  to  the  incomplete  stage  at  which  psychology  now  stands,
and  to  the  agitation  in  which  questions  of  method  are  involved,  we  cannot
undertake  to  describe  more  fully  the  methods  of  psychology,  but  only  to
make  clear  what  it  starts  from  and  what  it  aims  at,  and  to  test  the  various
possibilities.

2.  Those  connections  seem  to  offer  the  simplest  task  which  take  place
between  a  stimulus  coming  from  the  external  world  and  the  simple
elementary  sensations;  when  once  we  have  assumed  that  the  objects  of
the  external  world  are  distinct  from,  and  independent  of  us,  we  have  here
a  relation  which,  according  to  the  concepts  employed  elsewhere,  presents
itself  as  one  of  transient  causality,  and  it  seems  a  matter  of  course  that
the  methods  by  which  we  establish  laws  concerning  the  action  of  causes
elsewhere  can  be  applied  easily  and  simply  here  also.  The  sensation  of
pressure  or  pain  which  is  excited  by  a  body  coming  into  contact  with  the
skin,  the  sensation  of  sound  which  follows  upon  the  striking  of  a  hard
body,  these  fall  naturally  into  that  general  class  of  connections  between


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  377

successive  events  in  different  subjects,  to  which  the  relation  of  an  efficient
cause  to  its  effect  is  primarily  applicable  in  the  inaccurate  popular  sense  ;
and  upon  the  assumption  that  our  subjective  sensations  are  in  this  sense
effects  of  external  causes  is  based  (according  to  §  87,  9,  p.  244)  all  our
more  accurate  determination  of  the  real  relations  of  objects,  their  spatial
and  temporal  relations, their  attributes,  and the  changes  in  these. In
rendering this original assumption scientific what we aim at is to
investigate  more  exactly  the  objective  events, and  more  especially  the
intervening  terms  in  the  causal  process,  and this  we  do by  tracing  the
vibrations  which  are  imparted by  the sounding  body  to  the  air,  by  the
shining  body  to  the  ether,  as  media  by  means  of  which  they  reach  the  ear
and  eye  ;  we  undertake  to  determine the  time-relations  and  the  amount
of  mechanical action, according to  the general methods applicable  in
formulating  mechanical action  ;  we  try moreover to explain  the events
within  the  body,  the  function  of  the  nerve  when  excited  at  the  periphery,
the  process  by  which  this  peripheral  excitation  is  transmitted  to  the  central
organs,  the  velocity  with  which this  transmission takes  place. Even  if
the  exact  nature  of  the  progressive  change  known  as transmission,  and
more  especially  the  nature  and  extent  and  even  the  position  of  the  change
which occurs  in the  central organ, may be far from being exactly
.determined,  yet  we  cannot doubt  that  such  changes  do  take  place,  and
that  the  final  link  in  the  chain,  the  conscious  event  of  sensation,  depends
in  nature  and  amount  primarily  upon  these  events  in  the  central  organ,
and  only  through  them  upon the  external  causes. Where  we  have  like
external  conditions — the  same  events  between  external  bodies, — and  a  like
subjective  disposition — both  physiological,  in  the  nervous  apparatus,  and
psychological,  in  the  attention,  etc.,— then  sensations  follow  the  stimulus  in
i  definite  sequence  in  consciousness,  which  we  are  obliged  to  pronounce
ilike,  though  it  is  true  that  for  the  most  part  we  can  judge  only  by  com
paring  the  present  sensation  with  memory-images. So  far  as  any  exact
:ontrol  is  possible  here,  we  must  also  assume  that  for  the  great  majority
)f  particular  individuals  the  consequences  of  the  same  external  causes —
;ensations  of  colour,  sound,  etc. — are alike  ;  for  other  individuals  we  are
ible  to  refer  the  absence  of  certain  classes  of  sensations  to  organic  defects
vithout  fear  of  error,  or  at  least  to  assert  that  in  consequence  of  unknown
>rganic dispositions anomalous  sensations must occur,  as in  cases of
:olour-blindness.
All  the  motives  which  everywhere  lead  to  the  assumption  of  a  causal


373  LOGIC

connection  are  given  so  completely  and  unambiguously  in  the  actual
relation  between  stimulus  and  sensation,  and  the  dependence  of  the  latter
upon  the  former  is  so  analogous  to  the  dependence  of  external  events
upon  preceding  changes,  that  there  has  generally  been  no  hesitation  in
seeing  here  also  a  causal  relation  in  the  same  sense  in  which  we  confidently
assume  one  between  a  blow  and  a  movement  of  the  body  struck,  or
between  the  heating  of  a  body  by  fire  and  its  melting.  The  assumption
•which  we  make  elsewhere,  that  by  the  activity  of  a  certain  real  thing  a
change  is  produced  in  another  which  has  not  its  origin  in  that  other,  can
be  applied  here  also  in  so  far  as  we  regard  ourselves  as  the  one  permanent
subject  of  our  activities  and  states,  and  place  ourselves  over  against
external  things  as  such  ;  it  is  these  external  things  which  act  upon  us,  the
conscious  subjects,  and  give  rise  to  events  in  consciousness.

3.  If,  however,  we examine  it  more  carefully, this  relation  presents
several  aspects  which  exclude  a  complete  congruence  between  the  causal
laws  of physics  and  the  causal  laws  of psychophysics. In  the  former
(§  95)  J7)  it  was  necessary,  before  a  causal  law  could  be  formulated  with
complete  exactness,  that  both  the  amount  of  the  acting  cause  and  the
amount  of  the  effect  should  be  determined,  and a  proportional  relation
established  between  the  two. But  this  condition  cannot  be  fulfilled  here,
inasmuch  as  sensations  and  feelings  are  not  as  such  directly  measurable ;
and  even  if  we  had  the  right  to  take  the  intensities  as  proportional  to  the
strength  of  the  stimulus,  yet  we  could  establish  no  simple  relation  between
qualitative  differences  in  sensation  and their  corresponding  differences  in
stimulus,  which  are  frequently  only  quantitative. In  the  same  way  the
"  circumstances," and especially  the  subjective conditions of  conscious
sensations  (attention,  etc.),  refuse  to  submit  themselves  to  definite  measure
ment.

These  difficulties,  however,  would  merely  prevent  us  from  formulating
an  accurate  law,  with  an  exact  and  ascertainable  application  to  all
particular  cases,  for  the  causal  dependence  of  sensation  upon  stimulus :
by  themselves  they  would  be  insufficient  to  break  down  the  conviction
that  in  the  ordinary  sense  sensations  are  to  be  regarded  as  effects  of  the
action  of  external  stimuli.

4.  More  serious  difficulties  have  lately  been  raised,  which find  their
expression  in  the  view  that  the  assumption  of  a  causal  relation  between
a  mechanical  event  in the  external  world  and  a  conscious  sensation  is
contradictory  to  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  and  that  this


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  379

principle  necessitates  an  entirely  different  view  of  the  connection  between

!  stimulus  and  sensation — that  of  psychophysical  parallelism.1  As  this
view  would  give  an  essentially  different  direction  and  importance  to  our
methods  in  the  province  of  psychology,  it  must  be  briefly  explained  here.

We  may  distinguish  between  two  propositions  which  are  contained
in  the  assumption.  There  is  first  the  positive  statement  that  throughout
material  and  physiological  events  there  is  a  strict  causal  connection  in

•  the  sense  that  every  change  in  the  brain  substance,  whether  caused  from
without  or  produced  by  internal  organic  processes,  must,  according  to  the

1  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  have  its  material  consequences,
whether  they  consist  in  chemical  changes,  in  a  different  disposition  of  the
atoms,  in  the  motion  of  fluids,  or  in  electrical  events,  etc.,  and  on  the
other  hand  that  everything  which  takes  place  in  the  body  must  have  its
completely  sufficient  cause  in  the  preceding  material  events.  The  body
would  then  be,  according  to  Descartes'  statement  (though  it  is  not  consis
tently  carried  out  by  him),  a  self-sufficing  machine  ;  everything  which  goes
on  in  it  would  go  on  in  just  the  same  way  from  merely  physical  and

'chemical  causes,  if  no  psychical  activity  existed.  The  negative  aspect
of  this  proposition  is  that  a  psychical  event  can  never  be  regarded  as  the
effect  of  a  physiological  event,  for  the  capacity  for  work  of  the  brain-

'  substance  is  exhausted  in  the  equivalent  physiological  events,  and  cannot
therefore  produce  a  surplus  of  effect  which  fails  to  be  in  any  way  equated
to  molecular  motions.  On  the  other  hand,  a  psychical  event  cannot  be
the  cause  of  a  physical  event ;  if  it  were,  the  sum  of  active  and  potential
energy  which  is  constant  in  the  whole  material  universe  would  experience,
in  defiance  of  the  principle,  an  increase  (or  in  the  case  of  inhibition  a
diminution).

But  experience  shows  us,  on  the  one  hand,  that  physiological  events
of  a  certain  kind  are  regularly  accompanied  by  phenomena  of  conscious
ness,  and  on  the  other  hand,  that  we  have  every  ground  to  believe
that  no  psychical  event  goes  on  without  corresponding  physiological

1  Cf.,  e.g.,  Hugo  Miinsterberg,  Ueber  Aufgaben  nttd  Methoden  der  Psychologie  (a  work
*hich  contains  in  detail  much  which  is  true,  as  well  as  certain  principles  with  which  I
:annot  agree)  ;  F.  Paulsen,  Einltitung  in  die  Philosophic  I  note  expressly  that  I  do  not
:ount  Wundt  amongst  the  supporters  of  this  view,  since,  even  apart  frftm  his  metaphysical
Background,  he  breaks  through  it  by  the  assumption  of  "  volitional  powers,  which  inter
vene  in  and  determine  the  course  of  natural  phenomena  "  (p.  331  of  the  System).

I  have  aimed  above  at  noticing  as  briefly  as  possible  the  essential  points,  without
idhering  to  any  given  formula.


380  LOGIC

changes — chemical  transformation  of  brain-substance,  change  of  tension  in
the  vascular  nerves,  etc.  ;  thus  the  only  assumption  left  to  us  is,  that  the
two  series  are  completely  independent  of  each  other,  and  yet  run  strictly
parallel,  that  we  are  justified  in  looking  for  definite  causal  relations  only
within  the  series  of  physical  events  by  themselves,  or  within  the  series  of
psychical  events  by  themselves.  Each  of  the  two  worlds  presents  a  closed
circle — at  any  rate  so  far  as  concerns  particular  causal  connections,  and  in
place  of  the  reference  of  physical  to  psychical  processes  we  have  only  the
statement  of  the  simultaneity  of  the  corresponding  series.  It  is  the  modern
way  of  stating  Spinoza's  doctrine,  which  culminates  in  the  proposition:
Ordo  et  connexio  idearum  idem  est  ac  ordo  et  connexio  rerum.

5.  Upon  what  this  parallelism  as  a  whole  ultimately  depends  is  a
question  for  general  metaphysics  :  we  may,  however,  draw  various  conclu
sions  from  it  respecting  our  empirical  knowledge  of  what  is  actually  given
and  the  methods  applicable  to  it.

On  the  one  hand  it  may  be  emphasized  that  in  the  physical  universe  the
causal  connection  is  given  to  us  without  any  break;  though  we  may  not  yet
have  traced  it  in  all  its  details,  yet  the  material  events  lie  before  us  and  we
may  hope  to  resolve  them  into  completely  mechanical  action.  It  is  different
in  the  psychical  universe.  Here  we  are  quite  unable  to  attain  to  a  similar
knowledge  of  necessity  in  the  sequence  of  our  ideas,  feelings  and  efforts  of
will ;  the  most  we  can  say  is  that  the  relation  of  an  act  of  will  to  its  conse
quences  is  a  connection  which  may  be  known  as  necessary.  But  beyond
this,  psychical  events  are  not  given  in  unbroken  connection ;  the  course  of
ideal  associations,  which  corresponds  psychologically  to  a  general  uni
formity,  is  interrupted  by  sensations  for  which  no  connecting  link  can  be
found  in  the  preceding  state  of  consciousness.  It  is  thus  impossible  to
establish  causal  laws  within  the  psychological  region.  If  we  want  to  trace
an  unbroken  connection,  we  must  pass  to  the  physical  side ;  here  there  are
no  gaps,  and  certain  observable  laws  of  correspondence  between  cerebral
states  and  phenomena  of  consciousness  enable  us  to  show  that  the  events
given  in  consciousness  are  such  that  in  their  physiological  counterpart  we
can  find  a  strictly  causal  chain,  one,  however,  which  cannot  be  known  as
between  them,  but  only  as  between  the  changes  of  the  organism.  The  co
existence  and  succession  of  psychical  elements  can  now  be  explained  by
the  co-existence  and  succession  of  physical  acts  ;  but  just  because  of  this
correspondence  the  necessary  connections  can  be  transferred  from  the
physical  to  the  psychical  series.  For  a  psychology,  therefore,  which  aims


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  38 1

at  understanding  the  causal  connection  of  conscious  events,  the  clue  is  to
be  found  in  physiology.

Over  against  this  view  there  is  another  which  assumes  in  principle  a
causal  connection  between  psychical  events  also,  and  is  obliged  to  take  as
the  problem  of  psychological  investigation  the  knowledge  of  this  causal
connection ;  as,  however,  an  unbroken  chain  cannot  be  constructed  out  of
the  events  in  the  consciousness  of  a  particular  individual,  it  is  compelled
to  assume  hypothetical  elementary  psychical  events,  which  belong  to
subordinate  centres  of  consciousness,  but  exercise  an  influence  in  the
central  consciousness.  In  this  case  investigation  must  aim  first  at  finding
regular  connections  within  the  particular  psychical  life,  and  then  at
extending  these  by  means  of  analogy,  and  taking  into  consideration  the
physico-psychical  parallelism,  so  far  as  is  necessary  to  the  explanation  ot
the  given.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  latter  view  alone  treats  the  two
spheres  as  really  parallel,  and  that  it  is  only  in  accordance  with  it  that  a
psychology  which  goes  beyond  mere  description  is  possible  on  this  basis.

6.  Without  question  the  difficulties  are  serious  which  have  led  to  the
view  that  a  causal  connection  between  physiological  events  and  psychical
phenomena  is  inconceivable,  that  we  are  compelled  to  return  to  Spinoza's
assumption  that  the  modi  of  the  two  attributes  are  completely  independent
•  of  each  other,  or  to  a  mere  pre-established  harmony,  and  to  relinquish  the
thought  which  is  always  first  to  suggest  itself  that  sensation  is  causally
dependent  upon  stimulus,  and  motion  upon  volitional  impulse.  But  are
the  difficulties  absolutely  insoluble?  Is  the  assumption  of  the  psycho-
physical  parallelism  called  for  by  infallible  material  or  methodological
orinciples?  and  if  not,  if  it  is  a  mere  hypothesis  which  recommends  itself
js  a  way  out  of  certain  difficulties,  does  it  not  lead  to  much  greater  difficulties
>vhich  are  from  the  nature  of  the  case  insoluble  ?  The  importance  of  this
question  for  the  principles  of  method  must  justify  us  in  pointing  out  a  few
if  its  aspects.

First  as  to  the  meaning  and  application  of  the  principle  of  the  conser
vation  of  energy,  and  the  justice  of  the  inferences  drawn  from  it.  On  page
[i2  sq.  we  had  to  distinguish  between  two  ideas  which  are  contained  in
his  principle.  The  first  follows  from  the  relation  between  the  concepts,  and
s  that  the  effect  is  the  measure  of  that  which  we  can  regard  as  the  action  of
i  cause  ;  the  second,  which  does  not  coincide  with  the  first,  is  that  within
he  material  universe  of  action  all  changes  proceed  from  external  causes
.lone,  and  that  things  can  exert  efficient  action  only  in  so  far  as  they  stand


382  LOGIC

in  relations  which  may  give  rise  to  a  change  in  another  thing;  and  finally
that  within  the  same  universe  the  power  of  a  cause  for  efficient  action  is
exhausted  in  proportion  as  it  produces  in  another  object  an  effect,  which
itself  possesses  a  similar  capacity  for  efficient  action.  These  latter  pro
positions  are  beyond  doubt  empirical,  and  extracted  from  a  number  of
events  in  the  first  instance  from  inorganic  nature  ;  they  cannot  be  deduced
as  a  necessary  postulate  from  the  general  conception  of  causality.  The
principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  tells  us,  moreover,  nothing  as  to
what  effects  depend  upon  what  causes,  and  what  the  conditions  are  under
which  particular  causes  act ;  it  does  not  tell  us  that  motion  under  certain
conditions  produces  warmth,  it  refers  only  to  quantitative  relations,  it  says
that  where  efficient  action  takes  place  this  quantitative  equality  exists
between  the  amount  of  capacity  for  work  represented  by  the  effect  and  the
amount  of  capacity  for  work  from  which  the  effect  has  proceeded,  between
the  capacity  for  work  which  one  body  gains  and  that  which  the  other  loses.
By  itself  it  tells  us  nothing  as  to  the  conditions  under  which  active  energy
passes  into  potential  energy,  and  vice  versa  ;  it  tells  us  only  that  when  a
certain  motion  or  other  change  actually  occurs  it  has  been  produced  by
active  or  potential  energy,  which  must  have  disappeared  itself  in  the  pro
cess.  What  direction  will  be  taken  by  the  successive  changes  which  con
form  to  this  law  of  quantitative  equivalence  must  be  discovered  in  each
case  empirically,  as  well  as  the  equivalent  numbers  between  the  par
ticular  forms  of  the  events.  If  a  body  thrown  perpendicularly  upwards
should  by  a  miracle  remain  suspended  at  the  highest  point  for  a  hundred
years,  the  principle  would  not  be  violated,  any  more  than  it  would  if,  say,
phosphorus  and  oxygen  should  subsist  peacefully  side  by  side  for  some
time  without  combustion ;  the  sum  of  active  and  potential  energy  would
not  be  altered.

But  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  as  ordinarily  understood,
contains  the  further  statement  that  every  effect  actually  possesses  the
power  of  producing  a  further  and  equal  effect,  and  will  produce  it  sooner  or
later,  and  that  every  energy  (active  or  potential)  points  back  in  its  turn  to
a  previous  quantitatively  equal  amount ;  that  we  must  refer  every  state  of
capacity  for  work  to  a  previous  one,  and  that  from  it  states  will  follow  ad
itifinitum,  which  contain  the  same  amount  of  capacity  for  work.  The
principle,  when  thus  understood,  contains  therefore  a  general  statement
about  the  actually  existing  causal  relations  of  all  events  and  states  in  the
whole  of  material  nature  ;  it  contains  the  statement  that  the  conditions  of


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  383

capacity  for  work  are  produced  by  a  process  of  constant  change  in  such  a
way,  that  every  existing  capacity  for  work  will  again  become  actual.

That  all  the  activities  of  causes  which  take  effect  are  the  mere  continua
tion  of  previous  action,  and  that  every  state  which  is  due  to  an  action  will
itself  become  capable  of  action,  is,  however,  true  only  if  we  assume  that  we
are  dealing  with  absolutely  permanent  substances,  of  which  the  changes
,  are  conditioned  only  from  without, and  that  the  world  is  so  constituted
that  every  causally  conditioned  state  disappears  in  order  to  bring  about  a
further  change. But  the  assumption  is  by  no  means  the  only  one  possible  ;
there  is  no  logical  law  to  prevent  us  from  assuming,  as  effects  of  causes,
changes in which the process  comes to  an end, and which need  not
necessarily  be  the  sources  of  fresh  changes  in  other  things. The  mecha
nical  theory  of  heat  has  shown  it  to be  the consequence  of  its  own  pre
suppositions  that  the  course  of  the  transformations  of  energy  in  the  universe
will  lead  to  a  constantly  increasing  amount  of  mechanical  motion  being
changed  into  heat,  which  cannot  be changed back  again,  because  where
there is  a  uniform  distribution  of  temperature  the  condition  is wanting
under  which  alone  heat  can  take  effect,  the  presence,  that  is,  of  a  colder
body  to  which the  heat  of  the  warmer  one  can be  imparted. Then  all
action,  all  production  of  change,  would,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  come  to  an  end;
the  uniform  distribution  of  temperature,  which  means  the  absolute  cessa
tion  of  all  processes  whatever,  would  be  an  effect  only,  no  longer  a  cause.
AVe  are  confirmed  in  what  we  pointed  out  on  page  113,  that  the  concept
}f  energy  always  contains  a  hypothetical  element;  energy  belongs  to  the
noving  body  only  on  condition  that  it  comes  into  contact  with  another,  to
:he  warm  body  only  on  condition  that  it  can  transfer  its  heat  to  a  cooler
)ne. If  these  conditions  cannot  be  realised,  then  capacity  for  action  is  an
mipty  phrase ;  it  ceases,  indeed,  to  exist  when  the  conditions  are  absent
vhich are necessary to  action. That they always  will be  realized  is,
ndeed,  generally  included  in  our  meaning  when  we  speak  of  the  conser
vation  of  energy,  but  the  question  is  made  doubtful  by  these  consequences
)f  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat. Even  if  these  consequences  should  prove
o  be  actually  incorrect,  still  they  show  that  to  assume  them  is  not  to  con-
radict  the  physical  laws  ;  the  statement  that  in  the  course  of  the  world  no
iffect  appears  which  is  not  itself  the  cause  of  fresh  change  expresses,  not  a
iccessity,  but  only  the  assumption  of  a  matter  of  fact,  which  must  be
mpirically  demonstrated.
Limitations  similar  to  those  which  we  get  by  looking  forward  to  the  end


384  LOGIC

of  the  present  course  of  the  world  follow  also  from  looking  back  to  its
beginning,  or  more  accurately  to  those  conditions  which  are  assumed
as  given  in  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy.  We  have
pointed  out  (App.  E.)  that  the  spatial  distribution  of  the  masses  which
represents  potential  energy  must  be  accepted  as  something  simply  given,
which  cannot  be  again  reduced  to  previous  active  energy ;  it  is  only  in  the
particular  case  that  spatial  distance  can  be  derived  from  active  energy,  and
these  particular  motions  which  lead  to  spatial  separation  always  presuppose
an  original  total  distribution  of  the  masses  which  cannot  be  further
explained  causally.  It  is  the  same  with  the  chemical  differences  between
substances  ;  they  contain  potential  energy  in  so  far  as  motions,  heat,  etc.,
are  produced  when  they  combine  ;  but  the  presence  of  chemically  different
elements  is  pure  matter  of  fact,  it  presents  a  condition  which  cannot  be
derived  from  elsewhere,  and  unless  it  were  given  the  occurrences  to  which
the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  is  applied  would  not  be
possible.

Even  if  equivalence  between  all  chemical  events  and  mechanical  motions,
heat,  electricity,  etc.,  were  fully  established  empirically,  yet  we  could  he
certain  of  the  truth  of  the  principle  only  within  the  sphere  in  which  its  de
terminations  were  obtained,  in  those  purely  physical  and  chemical  events
of  inorganic  nature  which  we  reduce  to  exact  causal  laws  in  such  a  way
that  every  event  may  be  calculated  from  its  conditions.  Strictly  speaking,
as  soon  as  we  come  even  to  physiology  we  are  unable  to  show  that  we  are
dealing  only  with  causes  which  obey  these  laws.  The  fundamental  physio
logical  events,  the  formation  and  propagation  of  cells,  do,  it  is  true,  so  far
as  they  can  be  directly  investigated,  manifest  themselves  as  chemical  com
binations  and  divisions,  and  manifold  mechanical  and  other  change?
connected  with  these ;  but  to  deduce  them  from  known  laws  of  the
chemical  combinations  between  the  elements,  and  in  accordance  with  these
laws  to  determine  by  measurement  and  calculation  the  exact  course  to  be
taken  by  the  transformation  of  energy  from  moment  to  moment,  to  state
the  amount  of  potential  energy  stored  up  in  a  spermatozoon  or  a  germ,  a^
we  state  the  amount  of  potential  energy  represented  by  a  kilogram  of  coal
and  the  corresponding  amount  of  oxygen,  will  be  allowed  by  the  most
hopeful  to  be  a  problem  which  is  at  present  insoluble.  That  it  is  possible
is  a  hypothesis  justified  upon  methodological  grounds,  but  not  a  provec
proposition;  the  statement  that  all  that  happens  in  the  material  universe,
including  organisms,  constitutes  a  closed  circle  governed  unambiguous!)


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  385

and  without exception  by the  principle, is  an  assumption  in  which  we
extend  by  mere  analogy  what  is  true  on  certain  grounds  and  within  cer
tain  limits  to  a  different  region  where  an  empirical  proof  is  not  possible.
Or  do  we  know  enough  about the  chemical, electrical  and  vaso-motor
events  in  all  particular  parts  of  the  brain,  to  enable  us  to  reduce  them,  even
by  a  first  rough  approximation,  to  definite  unbroken  causal  connections,
and  to  weigh  in  a  balance  the  gain  and  loss  of  energy  ? Can  we  show  in
detail  what  becomes  of  the  active  energy  of  the  waves  of  sound  which
i  strike  the  ear,  and  how  and  where,  within  the  auditory  nerve,  the  brain,  the
motor  or  vascular  nerves,  it  is  transformed  into  actual  or  potential  energy,
or  disengages  stored  potential  energy? Who  can  determine  the  amount
of  potential  energy  called  into  play  by  a  few  words  of  exciting  news? It
can  never  be  shown  empirically  that  within  an  animated  organism  also  all
events  constitute  nothing  but  a  material,  closed  causal  connection,  which
conforms  to  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy. The  more  cer-
:ainly  all  physical  causal  connections  and  the  equations  for  the  different
irorms  of  events  are  established  empirically,  the  more  surely  is  empirical
oroof  called  for  before  these  connections  can  be  extended  to  what  takes
blace  in  nerves  and  brain,  if  they  are  to  be  accepted  as  certainly  true,
i 7. Nor  can  the  possibility  of  regarding  physiological  and  conscious
events  as  mutual  cause  and  effect,  and  of  applying  the  concept  of  causal
dependence  in  general  to  them,  be  refuted  by  means  of  the  general  con-
:epts  of  cause  and  effect. It  has  been  said  that  it  is  inconceivable  that
my  equation  should  exist  between  a  chemical  transformation  or  a  physical
tvent  in  the  brain  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  sensation,  a  thought,  a  feeling,
m  the  other  hand  ;  that  energy  should  disappear  from  the  physical  side  to
e-appear  in  the  wholly  dissimilar  form  of  conscious  events,  or  that  con-
ersely  a  given  amount  of  material  change  should  correspond  as  effect  to
n  immaterial  conscious  event. So  much  we  must  allow,  that  we  cannot
icasure  psychical  events  with  any  measure  so  as  to  connect  by  an  exact
ausal  law each amount of  neural  excitement with  the  corresponding
mount  of  psychical  process,  and  to  reduce  the  different  forms  of  psychical
rocess  to  a  common  measure. But  even  in  the  region  of  natural  science
lany  causal  connections  have  been  accepted  as  existing  beyond  doubt  and
-garded  as  inductively  proved  before  their  equations  were  known  ;  that
iction  produces  heat,  and  that  heat,  through  the  expansion  of  steam,  gives
se  to  motion,  was  ascertained  before  Mayer  and  Joule  had  found  the
}uations  which  enabled  them to  calculate  how  much  of  the  heat  pro-
s.  L.— n.  c  c


386  LOGIC

duced  changes  into  motion,  and  how  much  is  useless  for  the  purposes  of
the  steam-engine.  The  formulation  of  the  causal  law  was  incomplete,  the
exact  limits  within  which  it  was  true  were  as  yet  unknown  ;  but  that  a
causal  connection  does  exist,  and  that  heat  increases  with  the  mechanical
force  of  friction,  and  the  machine's  power  of  work  with  heat,  was  in
disputable.  It  is  much  the  same  in  psychophysical  events.  The  intensity
of  pain  caused  by  a  blow  cannot  be  exactly  measured,  any  more  than  the
intensity  of  the  volitional  exertion  by  which  I  contract  my  muscles.  We
are  unable  also  to  discover  a  common  measure  for  physical  and  psychical
events  ;  but  that  my  pain  increases  with  the  force  of  the  blow  and  the
work  of  the  muscles  with  the  amount  of  exertion  is  so  far  beyond  doubt,
that  from  an  unprejudiced  point  of  view  we  cannot  hesitate  to  place  the
two  events  in  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect.  Of  course,  while  we  are  so
entirely  ignorant  of  the  exact  physiological  action  of  a  nerve-stimulus,  no
one  would  think  of  stating  or  expressing  in  kilogrammes  the  amount  of
chemical  transformation  in  a  number  of  ganglionic  cells,  or  the  strength  of
the  electrical  current  produced  in  them,  which  is  due  to  the  sensation  of
sunshine  or  of  the  report  of  a  cannon  ;  as  we  know  nothing  about  the  more
exact  relations  in  the  transformation  of  the  active  energy  of  the  waves  of
light  and  sound  in  the  nerves,  we  are  also  unable  to  discover  which  portion
of  it  would  be  the  proximate  cause  of  the  genesis  of  sensation.  Nor  can
we  ascertain  how  far  a  volitional  impulse  consciously  exerted  would,  like  an
active  force,  give  rise  as  direct  cause  to  an  excitation  of  the  motor  centres,
or  how  far  it  is  to  be  regarded  merely  as  setting  free  some  store  of  energy,
like  the  closing  of  the  electric  current  which  explodes  a  mine.1

But  the  absence  of  exact  knowledge  does  not  prevent  us  from  making
the  general  assumption  that  a  causal  relation  does  nevertheless  exist ;  and
the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  is  overstrained  if  it  is  taken  as
prohibiting  this  assumption.  Even  in  the  physical  universe,  from  which  it
was  obtained,  and  within  which  it  is  empirically  proved,  it  states  only  that
within  a  certain  complex  of  material  causes,  which  we  assume  to  be  a
closed  circle,  and  not  influenced  from  without,  the  sum  of  active  and
potential  energy  remains  constant ;  and  it  depends  essentially  upon  the
presupposition  that  within  this  circle  we  are  dealing  only  with  elements  oi
constant  forces,  and  with  conditions  of  their  action  which  are  contained  in

1  It  might  ev&n  be  possible  to  maintain  the  hypothesis  that  the  physical  law  of  energy
remains  intact,  and  that  only  the  conditions  of  the  transition  from  active  energy  intc
potential,  and  nice  versa,  vary  with  relations  to  psychical  events.


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  387

the  external  relations  of  position  and  reciprocal  motion.  This  principle  is
not  violated  if  we  assume  that  such  a  system  of  material  masses  may  also
enter  into  causal  relation  with  elements  of  other  kinds  of  force,  and  that
the  effects  which  issue  from  the  forces  present  in  it  may  appear  also  out
side  its  limits,  or  that  it  may  be  determined  in  particular  parts  by  forces  of
a  different  nature.  The  principle  states  only  that  if,  and  in  so  far  as,
i  material  masses  act  upon  each  other  an  equation  will  exist  between  the
•  power  of  work  of  the  preceding  state  and  that  of  the  succeeding  state.
In  no  sense,  however,  that  can  be  empirically  confirmed  does  it  demand
that  every  material  change  should  have  only  material  effects,  or  proceed
only  from  material  causes  ;  the  truth  of  a  principle  within  a  closed  circle
•of  constant  material  causes  does  not  justify  us  in  the  inference  that
material  things  must,  under  all  circumstances,  form  a  circle  closed  on  all
sides.

All  our  assumptions of causal relations in the  material world refer

altimately  to  relations  which  are  contained  in  the  nature  of  substances  and

ind  their  expression  in  the  concept  of  constant  forces,  but  this  does  not

nean that  the material elements  can  stand in  relations  only  to such

:lements  as  we  can  determine  entirely  by  material  attributes  and  forces ;

n  addition  to  those  relations  which  alone  physics  investigates  and  which  it

;an  isolate  in  particular  cases,  other  relations  to  subjects  of  another  kind

nay  exist. And  since  more  careful  analysis  of  the  physical  concept  of

xce  shows  us  that  the  event  which  we  regard  as  effect  is  due  as  much  to

le  nature  of  the  patiens  as  to  that  of  the  agens,  that  the  patiens  changes

i  the  way  appropriate  to  its  own  nature  when  it  enters  into  a  given

Nation  with the  agens, there  is  nothing  in the  causal  concept  itself  to

revent  us  from  finding  between  even  heterogeneous  substances  and  the

^ents  occurring  in  them  a  relation  of  such  a  kind  that  a  given  change

hich  is  appropriate  to  the  nature  of  the  one  is  responded  to  by  the  oiher

the  way  peculiar  to  it ;  a  material  change  of  some  sort  in  the  brain  is

sponded  to  by  the  subject  of  consciousness  with  a  sensation,  etc. Nor

it  any  objection  that  we  can  form  no  intuitable  picture  of  what  takes

ace ; it  is  a  mistake  to  think that  the  principles  of mechanics,  for

stance, are  particularly  recommended  by  being  intuitable,  what  we  can

tuit  is  never  more  than  the  event  and  the  linking  of  events,  never  the

:t  that  the  one  is  grounded  by  the  other. For  ordinary  consciousness

s  connection  between  my  will  and  the  motion  of  my  arm  is  just  as  in-

.table,  i.e.,  just  as  firmly  grounded  in  immediate  experience  and  associa-


388  LOGIC

tion,  as  the  transmission  of  a  shock  from  one  billiard-ball  to  another  ;  it
may  be,  indeed,  that  we  should  find  the  latter  even  less  comprehensible  if
we  had  not  been  previously  familiar  with  our  power  of  thrusting  a  body
away  by  a  voluntary  movement  of  the  hand.

According  to  the  ideas  which  we  always  apply  in  external  nature  when
reducing  what  we  see  happen  there  to  causal  relations,  we  are  also  com
pelled  to  interpret  the  external  and  internal  events  which  follow  in  imme
diate  temporal  succession  by  finding  the  ground  for  the  one  series  in  the
other ;  by  this  empirical  connection,  which  is  given  uninterruptedly,  our
thought  in  its  search  for  grounds  is  called  upon  in  just  the  same  way  to
apprehend,  at  first  in  the  popular  sense,  a  sensation  as  the  effect  of  an
external  event  and  of  the  change  caused  by  it  in  the  body,  and  a  volun
tary  movement  as  the  effect  of  the  conscious  volitional  impulse  directed
to  it,  and  then  to  analyse  this  connection  as  it  first  presents  itself  into  its
particular  stages  and  to  elaborate  them  logically.  Empirical  investigation
must  begin  with  these  connections  as  we  know  them  in  particular  cases.
We  can  obtain  an  objective  interpretation  of  our  subjective  perception,
and  hence  the  laws  of  nature  and  the  principle  of  conservation  of  energ)
itself,  only  upon  the  presupposition  that  our  sensations  are  regularly
happening  effects  of  external  events,  and  only  upon  the  same  presupposi
tion  can  we  reach  an  intelligible  explanation  of  those  changing  phenomena
of  consciousness  which  do  not  directly  stand  in  any  knowable  connection ,
nothing,  therefore,  but  insoluble  contradictions  could  compel  us  to  relin
quish  finally  this  entire  basis  of  our  idea  of  the  external  world,  anc
to'  look  elsewhere  for  connections  which  can  be  found  only  in  a  pureb
hypothetical  manner  both  in  the  physiological  and  the  psychologica
universe.

8.  I  believe  that  I  have  shown  that  neither  the  general  concept  o
causality  nor  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  forbid  us  to  com
prehend  in  one  causal  connection  the  whole  of  that  which  is  given  t<
consciousness  as  happening,  and  which  we  break  up  into  events  withii
consciousness  and  changes  in  a  material  substratum  other  than  ourselves
But  even  if  we  allow  that  the  difficulties  latent  in  a  more  exact  formulatioi
of  psychophysical  laws  might  make  us  favour  the  thought  of  a  mer<
parallelism,  could  this  thought  be  actually  carried  out,  and  would  it  no
lead  us  into  far  greater  and  insuperable  difficulties  ?  It  will  be  enougi
to  notice  two  points.

In  the  theory  of  parallelism  we  must  assume  that  exactly  determine'


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  389

physical  or  chemical  events  correspond  to  all  distinguishable  psychical  acts,
j  and  that  every  connection,  e.g. of  ideas,  by  means  of  which  further  ideas
arise,  is  represented  by  a  transition  from  one  chemical  or  physical  process
to  another. When I carry  on the  most  ordinary  mental  operation, e.g.
multiply  or  divide  one  number  by another,  the idea  of  the  numbers,  or
,  of  their  digits,  is  represented  by  some  states  of  certain  ganglionic  cells,  the
.consciousness  of  the  rules  applied  in calculating  by  others;  from  these
i  states  others  must  proceed  according  to  general  laws,  which  correspond  to
the  successive  stages  of  the  operation,  and,  finally,  the  state  which  cor
responds  to  the  result  obtained. Now  there  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  assume
•that  the  cerebral  process  conforms  at  once  to  two  sets  of  laws :  firstly,  to
the  chemical  laws  according  to  which  carbon,  oxygen,  hydrogen,  nitrogen,
phosphorus, etc., carry  out the  redistribution  of  their  atoms  in  the  cere
bral  substance,  or  to  the  physical  laws  according  to  which  the  forces  which
are  disengaged  or  which  are  confined  are  transformed  in  accordance  with
the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  ;  and secondly  to  the  logical
laws  of  calculation,  the  rules  of  addition  and  subtraction,  the  rules  of  the
imultiplication  table,  etc. Thus  the  appropriate  parts  of  the  brain  really
represent  a  kind  of  calculating  machine,  in  which,  by  placing  the  particular
Tgures  of  the  factors  in  certain  positions,  the figures  of  the  product  are
•Drought together by  means of  mechanical  motion. The same must  be
rue  for  all  other  psychical  operations  ;  the  most comprehensive  combina-
ions  of  elements,  such  as  take  place  in  far-reaching  chains  of  thought  in
)Detical  or  musical  composition,  have  for  their  exact  counterpart  just  as
:omplicated  transpositions  of  the  cerebral  substance,  which  take  place  on
.he  one  hand  according  to  chemical  and  physical  laws,  and  with  strictly
nechanical  regularity,  but  also  on  the  other  hand  according  to  the  laws  of
ogic,  aesthetics, harmony, etc. Taken  simply  in  this way, the strictest
dealist  might  triumph  over  this  acknowledgment  that  the  whole  mecha-
iism  of  the  atoms  is  something  secondary,  that  its  true  and  ultimate  ground
es  in  conformity  to  logical, sesthetical  and  ethical  law ;  that the  arrange-
nent  of  the atoms  and  the  play  of  their reciprocal  actions can  only  be
eally  understood  when  they  are  regarded  merely  as  consequences  of  higher
cental  laws,  as  the  means  of  realizing  a  spiritual  order  :  that,  as  Leibnitz
xpressed it, the  kingdom  of nature finds its explanation only in  the
ingdom  of  ends. If  the  brain is  a  calculating  and thinking  machine,
ien  the  analogy  certainly  leads  us  to regard  the  arrangement  of  its  parts
nd  of  its  mechanical  interactions  as  determined  by  logical  laws  in  such


390  LOGIC

a  way  that  the  mechanical laws  coincide  with  the  logical ;  their  motions
are  the  means  of  representing  these  logical  laws.

But  the  supporter  of  parallelism  now  has  before  him  the  task  of  making
conceivable  the  possibility  of  such  a  coincidence  point  for  point  of  the
claims  of  two  codes  of  law  ;  and  here  all  detailed  explanation  breaks
down.  The  calculating  machine  certainly  seems  to  be  a  proof  that
purely  mechanical  processes  may  give  expression  to  numbers  and  their
relations,  because  it  has  to  deal  with  equivalent  units  of  which  the  nume
rical  relations  may  be  ultimately  expressed  by  spatial  arrangement.  But
can  we  conceive  in  the  same  way  of  a  correlative  to  the  consciousness  of
the  necessity  with  which  the  product  follows  from  the  factors,  and  of  a
correlative  to  the  consciousness  of  the  universality  of  numerical  concepts?
In  what  way  shall  we  represent  the  relation  of  the  general  numerical  con
cept  to  the  particular  numbers  thought  of?  And  in  a  series  of  successive
events  how  is  the  comprehensive  consciousness  of  their  course  in
time  imaged  in  the  states  of  a  complex  of  cells  ?  Even  if  we  tried  to
make  elementary  parts  and  particular  processes  of  the  brain  correspond
to  the  particular  elements  of  our  associations  and  processes  of  thought,  yet
it  is  utterly  impossible  to  make  conceivable  by  any  spatial  arrangements,
such  as  combinations  of  fibres  and  so  on,  the  infinite  connections  which
are  brought  about  in  inexhaustible  variety  by  thought  or  by  imaginative
combination.  How  can  all  the  combinations  of  sounds  into  words,  of
words  into  propositions,  of  propositions  into  comprehensive  sequences  of
thought,  proceed  from  the  combination  of  elements  by  chemico-physical
processes  ?  Every  attempt  to  carry  this  out  in  detail  can  only  show  the
complete  incomparability  of  the  nature  of  the  connection  and  sequence
of  material  processes  and  the  nature  of  the  connection  of  images  and
thoughts  in  our  consciousness,  and  hence  the  impossibility  of  thinking  of
even  the  simplest  mental  operations,  of  distinguishing  and  identifying,  as
represented  by  a  system  of  contiguous  elements  external  to  each  other;
there  is  no  conceivable  correlative  to  the  consciousness  which  compre
hends  the  particular  elements.  The  thoughts  of  an  author  are,  no  doubt,
represented  in  black  and  white  by  a  number  of  letters,  but  only  for  him
who  can  read,  and  mentally  reproduce  from  the  signs,  the  connections
which  have  led  to  their  arrangement  ;  without  this  unity  of  consciousness
they  show  only  a  spatial  contiguity  and  succession ;  the  mental  unifica
tion  of  the  concepts  of  subject  and  predicate,  the  logical  progress  from
premises  to  conclusion,  cannot  be  printed  with  the  letters.  However


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  391

firmly  convinced  we  may  be  that  certain  cerebral  dispositions  belong  to
the  conditions  of  psychical  activity,  we  must  nevertheless,  if  we  are  wise,
acknowledge  that  these  relations  cannot  be  so  direct  and  so  simple  as  these
assumptions  would  make  them,  and  we  shall  relinquish  the  hope  of  find
ing  in  the  chemical  processes  of  the  brain  a  causal  connection  by  which  to
explain  the  logical  necessity  of  inference.

9.  The  other  point  which  seems  to  me  to  contain  an  insuperable
difficulty  lies  in  the  consequences  which  follow  from  the  theory  for  the
meaning  of  the  will.  That  we  move  our  limbs  by  means  of  will,  that
we  change  things  in  accordance  with  our  aims,  would  be  mere  illusion ;
everything  which  goes  on  in  the  external  world  stands  in  a  closed  causal
connection,  and  proceeds  from  physical  causes  ;  we  stand  in  no  other
i  relation  to  our  bodies  than  to  the  motion  of  the  fixed  stars.  We  cannot
even  secure  a  specific  causality  of  will  for  purely  psychical  acts ;  the
corresponding  dependence  of  cerebral  processes  upon  each  other  is  of  the
same  kind  throughout,  because  it  conforms  to  the  same  principle  of  the
conservation  of  energy  ;  the  connection  between  the  will  and  the  events  to
which  it  is  directed,  and  which,  according  to  erroneous  popular  opinion,
it  determines,  cannot  differ  in  principle  from  the  connection  by  means  of
which  one  idea  involuntarily  calls  another  into  existence,  the  subjective
phenomenon  of  the  will  is  just  one  member  in  the  whole  series,  of  equal
value  with  any  other  event.  It  is  therefore  quite  consistent,  starting  from
this  basis,  to  try  to  eliminate  the  will  altogether,  to  reduce  it  to  the  mere
expectation  of  events  about  to  happen,  or  the  "  feeling  of  innervation  "
which  accompanies  what  is,  physiologically  regarded,  a  reflex  transition
from  the  sensory  to  the  motor  sphere  ;  and  this  view  has  found  its  most
:haracteristic  expression  in  the  proposition  that  the  will  is  only  a  "complex
Df  sensations."  According  to  this  the  consciousness  of  exerting  some  force
:hrough  the  will  is  pure  illusion  ;  at  the  most  we  can  only  be  spectators  of
:he  causal  connections,  which  play  their  parts  without  our  intervention,
and  more  especially  mere  spectators  of  all  the  motions  which  follow  at
my  time  from  the  disposition  of  the  brain.

This  final  consequence  has  already  been  pointed  out  by  Occasionalism  :
ibi  nihil  vales,  nihil  veils ;  from  this  point  of  view  the  will  is  altogether
neaningless,  we  cannot  reasonably  will  where  we  can  effect  nothing  ;
lothing  remains  but  pure  quietism  ;  the  attempt  to  cease  willing  (though
his  indeed  is  itself  willing),  and  then  to  relinquish  the  distinction  between
rue  and  false,  and  finally  thought  itself  altogether.  If  this  consequence


392  LOGIC

is  impossible,  if  in  our  conscious  life  the  will  constitutes  our  most  essential
being,  without  which  even  the  comprehending  process  of  self-consciousness
would  be  impossible,  then  we  cannot  accept  psychophysical  parallelism  as
a  basis.

10.  Starting  from  such  presuppositions,  moreover,  how  could  we
interpret  the  mutual  relations  of  men,  their  spiritual  community  ?  The
most  obvious  view  is  that  all  intercourse  between  man  and  man  is  mediated
by  external  nature  ;  the  communication  of  thoughts  and  feelings  always
takes  place  through  words  and  gestures,  our  influence  upon  the  wills  of
others  through  external  motions.  According  to  that  view  of  parallelism
which  allows  us  to  trace  only  physical  causal  connections,  movement  and
speech  proceed  only  from  physiological  causes,  and  the  processes  to  which
they  give  rise  in  spectator  and  hearer  are  also  purely  physiological.  When
we  wish  to  issue  a  communication  or  a  command  to  another  person  our
will  effects  nothing,  either  in  our  own  body  or  in  the  body  of  the  other;
the  physical  causal  connection  gives  rise  upon  physiological  grounds  to  the
movements  of  speech,  the  waves  of  sound  produce  in  the  body  of  the
hearer  those  changes  which,  in  some  incomprehensible  way,  find  their
counterpart  in  the  understanding  of  the  hearer,  and  all  further  actions
follow  from  the  bodily  changes  of  the  hearer.  Neither  the  visible  creations
of  culture,  nor  the  products  of  common  action  in  the  external  world,  nor
social  institutions,  are  the  product  of  common  thought,  issuing  from  the
interaction  of  individuals ;  we  are  each  of  us  completely  isolated  in
consciousness,  thoughts  and  feelings  are  the  mere  reflection  of  our  own
brain  and  of  events  which  are  excited  in  it  partly  by  other  brains  ;  that  we
stand  in  any  relation  of  spiritual  give  and  take  is  an  illusion.

But  if  we  are  so  far  in  earnest  with  parallelism  as  to  maintain  that
psychical  causal  connections  proceed  parallel  to  the  physical,  then  the
physiological  interaction  of  speaking  and  moving  bodies  must  be  accom
panied  by  a  corresponding  interaction  upon  the  purely  psychical  side;
the  same  direct  connection  exists  between  one  individual  soul  and  another
which  exists  between  the  movements  of  one  body  and  the  changes  in
another.  We  have  immediate  action  of  spirit  upon  spirit,  and  this  would
necessarily  manifest  itself  in  our  spiritual  life  even  if  we  should  chance  to
have  no  perception  and  no  consciousness  of  the  external  influences  ;  we
could  never  know  whether  what  we  think  has  its  origin  in  the  connection
of  our  own  consciousness,  or  is  an  inspiration  from  some  other  spirit,  and
this  would  cut  off  all  possibility  of  tracing  any  comprehensible  connection


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  393

between  the  ideas  and  thoughts  which  constitute  my  consciousness. This
direct  suggestion  would  also  become  the  guiding  principle  for  the  explana
tion  of  historical  connections  ;  and, finally, the individual  unity  of  our
psychical  life,  which  is  said  to  consist  only  in  the  connection  between  events,
would  be  lost  in  the  confused  stream  of  the  totality  of  events  within
which  it  would  be  in  vain  to  try  to  isolate any  causal  combinations,  since
by  means  of  universal  suggestion  everything  acts  upon  everything. Such
presuppositions  would  ultimately  make  all psychology  impossible,  for  in
psychology we must  start from  the  closed  unity  of  the  individual  con
sciousness,  and accept the fixed Ego  as  the centre  of  all  relations ;  to
continue  to  speak  upon  this basis  of  psychological methods by  which  to
discover  a  comprehensible  connection  of  what  is  given  in  consciousness,
(involves  a  series  of  inconsistencies. The  objection that the  concept  of
:the  soul has rendered no service to psychology applies only to the
attempts  of  rational  or  metaphysical  psychology  to  derive  definite  predi
cates  from the concept of substance  or of simple  essence,  instead  of
.obtaining  them  from  the  given,  experienced content  of  life ;  apart  from
that,  the  concept  of  the  soul  at  any  rate  renders  this  service  to  psychology,
•that  from  the  point  of  view  of  method  it  alone  makes  pyschology  possible.
ii. If,  then,  we  desire  to  proceed  reasonably  according  to  the  methods
which  have  led  to  constantly  increased  knowledge  in  the  external  world,  we
must  refuse  to  ratify  too  hastily  a  hypothesis  which  is  obtained  by  isolating
one  part  of  the  given  reality  ;  the  only  justifiable  way is  to  start  from  the
ivhole  complex  of  what  is  immediately  experienced,  and  to interpret  the
:onnections  we  find  in  it  by  the  postulate  that  the  given  is  necessary  and
:omprehensible. It  is  a  pure  fiction to  say  that  the  external  connection
>f  Nature  is  given  as  a closed  circle ;  inasmuch as  it  is  given  to  us,  we
ire  present  with  our  functions  of  knowing, and cannot be  eliminated,
^uite  apart  from  the  idealistic  view  that  this  whole  universe  may  be  ulti-
nately  regarded  as  mere content of  consciousness,  even  ordinary  realism
nust  allow  that  in  every  observation,  every  experiment,  we  have  a  complex
)f  external  and  internal  facts. We  may,  by  isolating  and  abstracting,  trace
irst  the  complex of  external  facts ;  but  we must not  forget  that  our  ab-
• traction  is  only  provisional, adopted  with  the  view of  enabling  us  to
malyse  the  whole  reality  ;  it  remains  as  a final  problem to understand
iccording  to  the  same  methods  the  whole  given  complex. We  may  in-
juire  how  two  bodies  would  be  related  if  they  were  alone in  space  ;  but
vhat  we  accept  as  true  of  them  cannot  be proclaimed  as  an  ultimate  law


394  LOGIC

of  the  universe,  since  as  a  matter  of  fact  they  are  connected  with  innumer
able  others.

Scientific  investigation  always  starts  from  that  way  of  looking  at  things
which  first  develops  before  philosophical  reflection  begins,  and  aims  at
completing  it,  at  making  it  logically  perfect,  and,  where  necessary,  at  cor
recting  it.  But  before  philosophical  reflection  begins  the  total  content  of
consciousness  falls  apart  into  two  regions ;  into  ideas  which  we  refer  to
external  things  independent  of  ourselves,  and  into  the  idea  of  the  Ego,  its
states  and  activities,  and  its  relations  to  those  existences  which  are  other
than  it.  We  have  already  pointed  out  the  presuppositions  upon  which  this
assumption  of  external  things  is  grounded,  and  we  have  shown  also  that  we
cannot  avoid  assuming  the  existence  of  the  one  subject  of  our  thoughts,
feelings  and  efforts  of  will,  which  are  given  only  in  this  relation  to  the
Ego,  and  find  in  this  relation  their  connection  and  possibility  of  com
bination.1

For  the  beginning  of  the  process  and  for  the  presuppositions  from  which
it  starts  we  do,  no  doubt,  distinguish  strictly  and  surely  between  the
province  of  psychical  occurrence  and  that  of  external  things  and  events  ;
there  can  never  be  any  doubt  as  to  what  in  the  given  content  of  conscious
ness  I  must  refer  to  the  external  corporeal  world,  and  what  to  myself ;
knowledge  of  myself  and  my  internal  states  belongs  to  me  alone ;  the
external  world  can  be  perceived  under  certain  conditions  by  every  one
in  the  same  way  as  by  me.  The  visible  object  before  me  is  there  for
every  one  alike,  but  whether  /  see  it,  and  how,  I  alone  know ;  no  one
can  have  immediate  knowledge  of  my  seeing,  and  if  I  were  to  say,  I  see
nothing  here,  no  one  could  directly  refute  me.  Another  can  perceive  as
well  as  I  can  the  blow  which  is  struck  against  my  hand  ;  he  may  also  ex
amine  the  contusion  produced  by  it,  the  change  in  the  tissues,  the  process
in  the  nerves ;  but  I  alone  feel  the  pain,  and  direct  knowledge  of  this  is
inaccessible  to  the  other;  at  most  he  can  only  infer  its  degree  and  nature
from  his  own  experiences,  by  assuming  in  me  a  psychical  event  similar  to
one  which  he  himself  has  experienced.

1  Even  if  we  were  inclined  to  regard  that  which  we  called  "  I  "  as  only  object,  and  as  such
to  resolve  it  into  mere  temporally  successive  events,  we  should  still  be  obliged,  at  the
beginning  of  our  investigation,  to  accept  it  at  any  rate  as  the  phenomenal  subject  in  the
sense  of  §  91,  since  we  are  inevitably  led  by  the  processes  of  thought  to  the  idea  of  a
single  subject  from  our  connected  conscious  phenomena.  We  cannot,  however,  really
abstract  from  the  consciousness  of  a  unified  knowledge  of  these  events  which  is  incon
ceivable  without  a  knowing  subject.


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  395

But  though  the  two  provinces  can  be  distinguished  with  certainty,  yet
they  cannot  be  separated  in  reality,  nor  their  connection  abolished.  If  we
isolate  the  external  world  in  thought,  its  relation  to  our  perception  and
memory  still  remains  in  the  background  and  cannot  be  got  rid  of.  If,  on
'the  other  hand,  we  place  ourselves  entirely  at  the  standpoint  of  the  subject,
and  look  at  the  content  of  consciousness  merely  as  such;  if  we  describe
things  as  only  subjective  images  of  sight  and  memory,  and  disregard  the
fact  that  at  other  times  we  attribute  to  these  ideas  of  ours  a  being  which  is
Independent  of  ourselves,  yet  there  still  remains  the  antithesis  of  thinking
-and  what  is  thought ;  we  ourselves  are  not  what  we  think,  any  more  than
our  dreams  are  ourselves ;  they  are  only  the  objects  of  our  dreaming  ima
gination,  to  which  we  know  ourselves  to  be  related,  not  only  in  the
relation  of  thought,  but  also  in  that  of  joy  or  fright,  of  pleasure  or  of
horror.  This  presupposition  also  leaves  an  antithesis  between  that  which
concerns  the  object  and  that  which  concerns  ourselves  as  distinct  from
the  object ;  even  if  we  had  only  to  analyse  dreams,  we  should  have  to  make
:he  same  distinction  which  is  given  with  the  fundamental  fact  of  thought,
with  the  division  into  subject  and  object.

If  we  leave  these  abstractions,  there  remains  for  the  induction  which  is
1  ooking  for  general  propositions  about  psychical  phenomena  the  task  of
"educing  to  general  laws  those  causal  connections  which  are  actually
brthcoming ;  and,  as  it  is  generally  presupposed,  these  connections  are  of
wo  kinds;  some  are  connections  between  psychical  phenomena  and  the
)bjective  world  outside  us,  some  are  connections  amongst  the  psychical
:vents  which  we  refer  to  ourselves.

12.  The  way  in  which  we  may  succeed  in  inductively  establishing
lefinite  connections  is  prescribed  by  the  nature  of  the  case  itself.  The
nost  important  point  is  the  psychological  analysis  of  that  which  is  given
s  co-existing  in  every  moment  of  consciousness,  the  discrimination  of
he  elementary  events  which  we  have  to  relate  to  each  other  and  to  ex-
ernal  objects.  In  the  external  world  things  are  spatially  separated,  and
'ounded  by  each  other,  and  the  changes  which  they  manifest  stand  in
iefinite  spatial  relations,  by  virtue  of  which  we  can  distinguish  and  arrange
lem  ;  for  internal  events  we  have  no  such  means  of  discrimination  and
urvey ;  all  that  is  given  is  a  complex  whole  which  changes  in  time,  and
nly  by  logical  analysis,  in  which  we  compare  what  is  immediately  per-
eived  with  what  is  remembered,  can  we  succeed  in  discriminating  within
ie  complex  the  qualitatively  different  and  elementary  data  of  conscious-
ess.


396  LOGIC

13.  It  is  in  this  way  that,  in  the  first  place,  the  analysis  of  those  ideas
which  we  refer  to  the  external  world  has  progressed,  and  has  shown  how
that  which  in  ordinary  life  we  call  hearing  and  seeing — as  when  we  say  we
see  a  man  moving,  or  we  hear  a  clock  striking — is  a  very  complicated
process,  and  how  the  result,  which  is  all  that  comes  into  distinct  con
sciousness,  has  come  about  by  means  of  a  number  of  distinguishable  acts
— sensations  of  colour,  spatial  configurations,  acts  of  discrimination  and
comprehension,  combinations  of  the  immediately  perceived  with  memory-
images,  etc.  The  fact  that  sometimes  certain  of  these  elements  appear
without  the  others — a  sound  without  the  idea  of  the  subject  producing  it,
a  flash  of  light  without  definite  outline — may  support  this  analysis,  and  it
can  be  carried  further  and  completed  by  means  of  experiment.  On  the
other  hand,  the  fact  that  the  clearness  of  apprehension  with  which  we  per
ceive  that  which  is  similar  in  content  varies  greatly  teaches  us  to  recognise
the  subjective  conditions  which  are  given  in  attention.

This  psychological  analysis  must  precede  before  we  can  really  investigate
that  set  of  causal  connections  which  has  till  now  attracted  most  attention,
and  has  led  more  than  any  to  laws  which  at  any  rate  approximate  to
exactness,  those  connections,  that  is,  in  which  our  sensations  depend  upon
external  stimuli.  Psychological  analysis  alone  can  determine  the  concept
of  sensation  as  that  of  the  element  which  we  have  to  regard  as  the  im
mediate  effect  of  nerve  stimulation  ;  in  reality,  a  sensation  is  never  given
in  complete  isolation.  All  experiment  in  this  department  presupposes
the  possibility  of  this  psychological  analysis,  in  which  the  student  must  be
trained  before  his  utterances  can  have  any  scientific  value.

Here  we  are  already  confronted  with  difficulties  in  formulating  exact
psychophysical  laws.  It  seems  easy  to  determine  according  to  the  general
methods  of  induction  that  light  of  a  given  refrangibility  will  give  the  sen
sation  of  red,  and  that  a  string  which  vibrates  a  certain  number  of  times
when  struck  will  give  the  sensation  of  the  note  A.  But  the  actual  sensa
tion  does  not  depend  upon  external  causes  alone,  but  also  upon  the  ac
companying  subjective  dispositions,  according  to  which  the  way  in  which
the  result  of  the  stimulus  appears  in  consciousness  varies  ;  not  only  the
amount  of  attention  which  is  turned  towards  this  part  of  the  content  of
consciousness,  but  also  preceding  or  simultaneous  sensations,  modify
that  which  appears  in  consciousness  ;  indeed,  as  a  subjective  phenomenon
it  has  no  definite,  determinable  character  except  in  so  far  as  it  can
be  estimated,  compared  with  other  sensations,  and  identified  with  the


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  397

memory-images  of  previous  impressions.  If  we  constantly  forgot  our
,  previous  sensations  so  that  at  best  only  indistinct  and  uncertain  traces  of
them  remained  with  us,  and  were  therefore  constantly  in  danger  of  con
fusing  different  sensations  all  together,  it  would  be  impossible  for  us  to
'ascertain  that  a  certain  subjective  result  corresponded  to  a  certain  external
'cause.  Thus  the  only  psychological  result  which  we  can  study  is  funda
mentally  a  judgment  concerning  the  likeness  or  difference  of  distinct
; sensations  ;  this  is  quite  clear  when  we  are  dealing  with  degrees  of
intensity.

When  therefore  we  say  that  the  same  sensation  corresponds  to  the  same
stimulus,  and  that  the  intensity  increases  in  a  given  proportion  to  the
strength  of  the  stimulus,  we  really  only  form  a  hypothesis  and  apply  it  to
cases  of  fictitious  simplicity  and  regularity  ;  the  hypothesis  is,  however,
as  fully  justified  as  the  law  of  inertia,  or  that  of  the  parabolic  motion  of  a
projectile,  if  we  can  make  the  actual  variations  agree  with  it  by  introducing
modifying  circumstances.

A  hypothetical  element  cannot  be  avoided,  if  only  because  the  causal
Connection  between  stimulus  and  sensation  is  not  direct,  but  mediated  by
intervening  terms,  of  which  we  do  not  know  the  exact  nature  and  mode
pf  action. The differences of  opinion  as to  whether the  logarithmical
brmula  of  Fechner's  law  expresses  the  relation  between  the intensity  of
i:he  external  stimulus  and  the  physiological  processes  of  neural  and  cere-
oral  excitation,  while  there is  a  direct  proportion  between  these  and  the
sensation  ;  or  whether the  physiological  processes  increase  in  intensity  in
proportion  to  external  stimulus,  while  in  the transition  to  sensations  the
;eometrical  progression  changes  into  an  arithmetical,  show  the  difficulties
presented  by  this  intervening  term. The  most  probable  solution  is  that
vhich  tells  us  to  find  in  the  conditions  of  our  subjective  estimation  of
lifferences in the  strength  of  sensation  the  ground  why,  when  a  greater
ntensity  is already present,  a  greater increase  of  stimulus is  necessary
>efore  we  can  judge  that the  second  sensation  is  stronger  than  the  first ;
ind  this  shows again  that  psychological  analysis  may  help  us  where  it  is
mpossible  to  ascertain  anything  directly  about  the  physiological  processes.
We can only briefly mention those  differences between individuals
?hich  even  here  make  it  difficult  to  establish  exact  laws  which  shall  be
rue  of  all,  or  at  least  of  the  great  majority  of  individuals. Here  again
he  question  arises  whether  we  have  to  do  merely  with  differences  of  the
lementary  events  themselves — as  is  certainly  the  case  in  colour-blindness,


398  LOGIC

or  in  the  incapacity  to  hear  very  high  or  very  low  notes— or  with  differ
ences  in  estimating  them ;  the  fact  that  with  practice  our  power  of
estimating  small  intervals  increases  points  to  the  latter  factor.  The
consequence  is  that  we  can  formulate  universal  propositions  for  different
individuals  only  in  the  form  of  averages,  adding  the  limits  within  which
the  values  vary.

14.  When  we  leave  this  department,  in  which  we  have  to  deal  with
comparatively  simple  direct  connections  between  external  events  and
elementary  phenomena  of  consciousness,  the  difficulties  of  investigation
increase.  According  to  analogy  with  our  researches  in  the  external  world,
the  problem  would  be  to  analyse  the  given  course  of  our  conscious  states
and  activities  in  such  a  way  that  whatever  occurs  at  any  moment  should
appear  as  the  regular  consequence  of  the  preceding  conditions ;  more
exactly,  as  the  combined  result  of  a  number  of  partial  laws  determining
the  influence  of  the  different  co-operative  causes  and  circumstances.
Every  change  in  consciousness  which  occurs,  e.g.,  in  the  course  of  a  day —
and  in  actual  perception  we  never  have  a  state  of  rest,  only  an  uninter
rupted  happening — would  have  to  be  investigated  in  its  conditions  and
consequences,  and  the  laws  obtained  which  determine  its  occurrence ;  in
much  the  same  way  as  the  motion  of  the  column  of  quicksilver  in  the
barometer  is  the  combined  result  of  variations  in  the  pressure  of  the
atmosphere  and  of  the  temperature,  and  is  reduced  to  laws  expressing  the
dependence  of  its  height  upon  the  laws  of  equilibrium  and  the  laws  of  the
expansion  of  matter  by  heat.

But  if  we  are  looking  for  connections  which  may  perhaps  be  more
accurately  determined  by  induction,  we  shall  find  our  causes  falling  into
three  main  lines.  First :  there  are  those  shown  by  psychophysics.
Certain  changes  take  place  in  the  organism,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the
dependence  of  psychical  phenomena  upon  the  states  of  the  organism  is
not  confined  to  those  elementary  sensations  and  feelings  which  are  found
to  follow  external  stimuli  with  determinable  regularity,  but  that  it  holds
good  throughout  the  whole  course  of  psychical  processes  of  all  kinds.
The  simple  fact  that  by  means  of  medicine  such  a  total  change  in  the
state  of  consciousness  as  sleep  can  be  introduced  proves  the  importance
of  dependence  in  this  direction.

In  the  second  place,  certain  conscious  events  appear  as  dependent  upon
immediately  preceding  conscious  events,  as,  e.g.,  a  memory-image  upon
the  perception  which  awakens  it,  a  feeling  of  terror  upon  a  sensation,  the


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  399

thought  of  a  certain  activity  of  will  upon  a  wish  that  has  somehow  arisen.
In  all  such  cases  application  of  the  methods  which  serve  to  establish
regular  connections  in  the  external  world  is  hindered  by  the  fact  that  we
are  not  dealing  with  an  invariable  subject;  the  after-effects  of  previous
events  are  always  creating  new  dispositions  which  play  their  part  in
determining  the  succeeding  motions  of  memory-images,  thoughts  and
efforts  of  will,  so  that  in  the  course  of  life  the  conditions  upon  which  it
depends  what  new  activities  will  proceed  from  any  given  state  of  conscious
ness  are  literally  changing  from  hour  to  hour.  To  this  must  be  added  the
complex  relations  of  particular  forms  of  activity  to  one  another :  the
.movement  of  our  ideas  does  not  depend  merely  upon  the  relations  of  their
content  or  upon  the  manner  in  which  they  were  originally  connected  in
;spatial  or  temporal  series ;  it  depends  also  upon  the  feelings  which
accompany  them  and  upon  the  directions  taken  by  our  interest,  and  this
has  its  origin  in  the  will.  The  wide  differences  between  individuals  which
•ve  are  always  coming  across  depend  to  a  large  extent  upon  this  con
stitution  of  our  mental  life.  The  way  in  which  our  psychical  activities  are
:ontinued  from  a  given  moment  and  its  content  is  determined  by  the
vhole  history  of  the  individual,  and  however  similar  the  surroundings  may
>e,  this  is  certainly  different  for  each  particular  individual ;  thus  the  com
parable  cases,  which  are  always  necessary  if  we  are  to  carry  out  an
nductive  process  completely,  are  not  given,  and  we  cannot  assume  that
>ermanency  in  the  subject  which  would  justify  us  in  expecting  like  events
inder  the  same  conditions,  even  for  one  and  the  same  individual,  to  say
lOthing  of  whole  classes  of  individuals.

A  third  direction  in  which  we  must  look  for  the  conditions  of  what  takes
•lace  in  the  individual  consciousness  is  to  its  intercourse  with  other
uman  beings,  and  the  dependence  of  its  ideas,  feelings  and  volitions
pon  the  ideas,  feelings  and  volitions  of  others.  This  dependence  is  not,
ideed,  direct ;  all  intercourse  between  minds  passes  through  the  external
•orld,  but  in  so  far  as  we  have  learned  to  interpret  by  analogy  with  what
•e  experience  in  ourselves  external  sense-perceived  motions,  words,  etc.,
5  signs  of  an  inner  life,  as  the  expression  of  images,  thoughts,  feelings,
^litions,  we  construct  in  ourselves  the  inner  life  of  others,  and  in  this  way
e  are  moved  to  many  psychical  activities  which  we  should  never  have
reduced  from  ourselves  or  from  the  mere  action  of  the  external  world
pon  our  organs  of  sense.  This  is  true  even  though  the  possibility  of
iderstanding  what  others  communicate  to  us  is  always  conditioned  by


4oo  LOGIC

our  being  able  to  connect  it  with  what  we  have  produced  ourselves,  and
though  teaching  can  never  do  more  than  bring  about  the  conditions  and
give  the  impulse  for  combining  and  elaborating  ideas  which  are  originally
our  own,  so  that  to  this  extent  the  result  of  the  external  signs  is  altogether
dependent  upon  our  individual  nature  and  disposition.

15.  When  we  are  fully  aware  of  the  wealth  of  psychical  content  and
the  manifold  ways  in  which  it  acts  even  in  the  most  meagre  life,  and
realize  the  extent  of  the  differences  between  the  inner  lives  of  individuals,
we  find  ourselves  confronted  by  a  confused  chaos  of  data,  and  the  question
as  to  how  we  may  disentangle  it  and  obtain  even  descriptive  propositions
which  may  express,  as  natural  laws  do,  what  really  takes  place,  seems
insoluble  ;  and  yet  our  ultimate  aim  must  be  to  represent  the  actual,  i.e.,
the  whole  concrete  course  of  thoughts,  feelings  and  volitions  in  the  par
ticular  individual  within  a  given  time,  as  conforming  to  law.

If  we  look  at  the  ways  in  which  what  we  regard  as  relatively  the  most
certain  possession  of  psychology  has  been  obtained,  we  shall  find  that
they  differ  in  many  respects  from  the  methods  of  natural  science.

One  part  of  the  process  is  indeed  the  same.  We  first  become  aware  of
particular,  easily  noticed,  regular  connections  between  distinguishable  ele
ments,  which  constantly  recur,  and  which  we  can  therefore  first  pick  out
from  the  whole  course  by  analysing  and  isolating  them.  Amongst  them
belongs  that  connection  between  perception  and  reproduction,  between
impression  and  idea,  upon  which  Hume  based  his  psychological  analysis,
and  which,  in  a  different  aspect,  Herbart  has  taken  as  the  basis  of  his  whole
system.  That  perceptions  which  have  occurred  once  or  repeatedly  will  be
reproduced,  and  that  on  the  other  hand  most  of  our  intuitable  ideas  which
are  not  directly  dependent  upon  present  impressions  have  their  ground  in
previous  perceptions,  is  one  of  the  propositions  which  were  most  easily
discovered  ;  primarily,  no  doubt,  it  is  an  empirical  law,  but  it  is  one  which
leaves  no  doubt  as  to  the  subsequent  phenomenon  being  causally  depend
ent  upon  the  preceding  one  (§  74).  But  even  here  we  find  a  fundamental
difference  :  the  events  which  we  thus  relate  as  cause  and  effect  do  not  for
the  most  part  succeed  each  other  immediately  in  time,  nor  show  any  tem
poral  relation  which  can  be  determined;  the  memory-image  emerges  after
a  longer  or  shorter  interval,  which  may  sometimes  be  very  great,  and  it  is
no  easy  question  how  we  always  know  it  to  be  such  and  distinguish  it  from
a  mere  creation  of  imagination.  There  is  certainly  no  direct  and  simple
causal  connection  ;  we  must  interpose  a  hypothetical  middle  term,  in  the


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  401

shape  of  a  disposition  introduced  by  the  first  impression — however  we  may
'conceive  of  it — and  then  the  further  question  arises  as  to  what  causes  this
disposition  to  be  active  at  the  given  moment  and  to  produce  a  conscious
image,  and  whether,  as  Herbart  thinks,  the  removal  of  obstacles  is  suffi-
;ient,  or  whether  a  positive  force  is  necessary  to  set  it  free.

1 6. The  so-called  laws  of  association,  which  also  belong  to  the  earliest

'discoveries  of  psychology,  attempt  to  answer  this  question  ;  they  also  are

.he  result  of  an  analysis  which  lays  hold  of  a  few  obvious  connections  in

he  confusion  of  our  inner  life. But  they  have  no  claim  to  the  name  of

aws,  if  only  because when  taken  strictly  they  contradict each  other ;  the

me  lays  it  down that reproductions  follow the  relation of  contiguity  in

pace  and  time,  the  other  that  they  follow  the  quite  different  relation  of

imilarity. And  even  apart  from  that — they  cannot  say  that  the  correspond-

ng  ideas  will  always  and necessarily  occur  whenever  the  occasion  arises  ;

.ny  such  statement  is  prevented  by  the  fact that  very  many  objects  have

ntered  successively  into  many  different  series  of  associations,  of  which  our

ctual  ideas  follow  sometimes  one,  sometimes  another,  when  there  is  any

ssociative  reproduction  at  all. In most  cases  it  seems  to  be  entirely  a

latter  of  chance,  and  beyond  calculation,  what  will  occur  to  us  upon  any

iven  occasion  in  the  involuntary  course  of  our  thoughts;  we  may  indeed

onjecture  that  it  was  necessarily  so  according  to  some  law,  but  we  cannot

oint  to  the law. Thus  the  laws of  association  merely  indicate  certain

irections which  our  reproductions may  follow, or will in many  cases

)llow,  certain  tendencies  in  the  actual  sequence  of  images,  words,  etc.  ;

icy  cannot  be  represented  as  laws  by  which  every  actual  course  of  ideas

juld  be  shown  to  be  necessary,  for  a  law  it is  necessary  that  given  the

ime  conditions  the  same  thing  always  happens. Attempts  to  study  this

rocess  of  association  experimentally have  chiefly served to  show  how

lany  are  the  different  directions  in  which  associations  may  work,  without

iy  ground  being  discoverable  why  sometimes  one  and  sometimes  another

rection  is  taken. We  cannot  say  even  of  the  most  habitual  association

-'tween  wojrds  and that  which  they  signify,  that  a  given  word  will  always

i  certain  to  call  up  the  same  idea.

We  cannot  regard  the  propositions  about  association  as  psychological
ws,  clearly  determining  what  happens  in  particular  cases,  if  only  because

sociations  show  in  particular  cases  very  different  degrees  of  firmness  in

eir  connection,  and  are  at  one  time  complete,  at  another  fragmentary.
hey  cannot  even  be  taken  as  hypothetical  partial  laws,  yielding  a  definite

S.  L.  —  II.  D D


402  LOGIC

contribution  towards  the  causal  explanation  of  the  particular  case,  since  we
are  quite  unable  to  determine  with  sufficient  accuracy  the  conditions  upon
which  the  consequences  would  be  dependent.  And  yet  there  is  no  doubt
that  when  regarded  from  another  point  of  view  they  are  of  great  import
ance.

17. The laws of association are incomplete as an expression ol
psychical  regularity,  if  we  are  aiming  at  reducing  to  an  exact  universal
formula  the  events  which  proceed  in  time  from  moment  to  moment  in  the
particular  concrete  consciousness. But  the  nature  of  our  psychical  life
cannot  be  expressed  by  saying  that  conscious events  follow  in time  upor
conscious  events ;  it  does  not  present  such  a  simple  course  as  the  growtl
of  a plant,  in which  cell  is  formed  after  cell, and each stage in tht
physiological  events  is  present  only  for  one  moment  before passing  intc
another. The  power  of  remembering  previous  impressions  and  experiences
the  connection  of  new  experiences  with  the  previous  store  of  ideas,  whicl
does  not  consist  in  mere  addition  but  is  brought  about  by  the  most  varie(
syntheses  ;  the  knowledge  that  the  new  is  partly  identical  with  or  like  t<
the  old,  partly  different ;  the  fact  that  whole  series  of  ideas  and  the  syn
theses  of  judgment  proceeding  from  them  can  be  reproduced  at  will — al
this  tends  to  make  the  moment  in  which  the  particular  elements  are  presen
to  consciousness  unimportant  in  comparison  with  those  fixed  permanen
connections  between  our  ideas,  which  are  always  capable  of  entering  int-
consciousness  in  the  same  way  at  any  time. The  spatial  intuition of  m
ordinary  surroundings  is  not  present  in  consciousness  at  every  moment
nevertheless  it  is  a  fixed  image  which  I  can  recall  at  any  moment  with
consciousness  of  its  identity ;  it  depends  not  so  much  upon  the  varyin
occasions  which  remind  me  of  it,  upon  the  momentary  causes  which  mak
me  aware  of  it, as  upon the  connection  in  that  of  which I  am  awart
The  numerical  series  exists  in  my  memory  in  a  fixed order;  it  does  nc
depend upon  what may  happen  to  cause  me  to  count, nor  upon  th
temporal  succession  of  the  subjective  acts  by  which  I  think  of  one  numbe
after  the  other,  or  of  one  numerical  symbol  after  the  other ;  nor  does
matter  whether  I  happen to  be  interrupted ;  the  important  point  is  m
comprehensive  consciousness  of  a  certain  order,  which  I  am  able  to  thin
objectively  as  a  sequence  of  numbers, and not  merely  of  my  acts  <
thought,  and  which  I  can  therefore  run  through backwards  when  I  lik
Thus  the  ideas  show  an  association  not  merely  in  the  sense  that  I  ca
observe  and  watch  the  passage of  consciousness  from  one  to  the  othei


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  403

•  this  is  always  the  case  when  one  occurs  and  the  next  follows  ;  but  in  the
sense  that  I  comprehend  their  own  objective  connection,  and  thus  survey
(the  whole  series  as  with  one  glance.  Association  in  the  purely  subjective
:ausal  sense  as  the  law  of  the  actual  sequence  of  my  ideas  would  be
Dresent,  even  if  I  should  forget  every  term  at  once,  if  one  idea  should
draw  another  into  consciousness  only,  as  it  were,  for  an  outside  observer.
The  possibility  of  thinking  the  connected  terms  simultaneously  is  indeed
eally  limited  to  a  certain  number  ;  the  essential  point  is  that  I  should
nyself  be  conscious  of  the  series  and  of  the  law  according  to  which  its
erms  succeed  each  other,  so  that  I  may  run  through  the  whole  connection
>vith  a  certain  consciousness  of  its  order.

Thus  what  the  so-called  laws  of  association  are  meant  to express is

tot  merely  laws  for  events  in  time,  but  also  the  much  more  important  fact

•hat  my  ideas  present  themselves  in  various  connections  which  have  become

;xed for my thought, and are constantly repeated independently of

'inferences  in  time  and  with  the  consciousness of  their  identity. And

lis  objective  and  persisting  relation  is  much  more  accessible  to  observa-

on  than fleeting, changing  particular  phenomena, or  than  the  way  in

hich  these  associations  have  formed themselves  in  the  course  of  time  ;

icir  formation  began  at  a  time  when there  was  no question  of  clear

Dnsciousness,  and  we  can  only  infer hypothetically  and  from  what we

ibserve  in  particular  cases,  the  course  which  it  has  taken.

These  fixed  and  permanent  connections  are  to  our  present  conscious

re  as  the  permanent background, upon  which  the changing  light of

omentary  consciousness flits  to  and  fro  ;  in  them  we  can  find  rules  by

hich  the  transition  of  actual  consciousness  from  one  term  to  another  is

>verned,  more  or  less  completely,  according  as  certain  disturbances  are

esent  or  not. We  cannot,  indeed,  calculate  from  them  the  actual  life

ideas,  since  that  depends  upon  many  other  factors  as  well,  but  we  can

any  rate  subsume  a  great  number  of  actual  sequences  under  them,  and

far  explain  them.

In  so  far  as  they  are  the  result  of  a  gradual  development  they  serve  as
;n-posts  telling  us  in  what  directions  observation  and  analysis  of  actual
ents  must  proceed  and  what  they  must  notice.  They  raise  questions
us  to  answer  in  our  attempts  to  proceed,  it  may  be  by  experimental
ychology,  and  lead  us  to  enquire  how  under  given  conditions  new
rmections  of  the  same  kind  may  arise,  and  they  also  serve  to  control
r  procedure ;  our  hypotheses  about  the  gradual  development  of  these


404  LOGIC

fixed  connections  can  be  satisfactory  only  if  they  explain  the  state  of  thing
which  actually  exists  in  them.

In  taking  this  for  our  starting  point  there  is  the  further  advantage  tha
we  get  a  fundamental  analysis,  and  that  the  varying  influences  of  othe
forms  of  psychical  activity  are  eliminated  ;  we  are  here  dealing  witl
connections  which  belong  only  to  the  sphere  of  ideas,  and  which  presen
themselves  first  as  relations  between  the  objects  of  ideas.  The  subjectiv
accompanying  phenomena,  the  manifold  feeling,  etc.,  do  indeed  determin
the  direction  which  reproduction  will  follow  in  particular  cases,  but  the
do  not  affect  the  spatial  or  temporal  relations  of  ideas,  the  similarity  o
dissimilarity  of  their  content.

Finally,  in  starting  from  this  fixed  portion  of  our  ideal  world,  we  gain  th
important  advantage  that  in  this  way  the  differences  between  particula
individuals  may  be  more  easily  overcome,  inasmuch  as  we  obtain  a  basi
which  in  its  essential  characteristics  is  the  same  for  all  individuals.

How  the  idea  of  the  surrounding  world  forms  itself  in  each  individus
from  the  varied  play  of  sensations,  we  are  unable  to  trace  even  approx
mately  and  for  ourselves  ;  and  of  directly  perceiving  psychical  processe
in  other  people  there  is  not  even  a  possibility.  Nevertheless,  that  this  ide
is  essentially  the  same  for  all,  that  every  one  comprehends  and  di:
tinguishes  the  same  things  in  the  same  space  and  in  the  same  spati;
relations,  that  they  agree  in  the  way  in  which  they  connect  their  experiena
in  time,  and  recognise  the  same  similarities  and  differences,  we  know  wit
sufficient  certainty  from  the  agreement  in  their  statements  and  behaviour
we  are  even  able  to  ascertain  certain  differences,  as  in  the  estimation  <
distance,  etc.  That  such  an  image  of  the  surrounding  world  should  tat
the  same  shape  in  every  one  in  spite  of  the  innumerable  differences  in  tl
succession  of  particular  sensations,  points  to  a  psychological  necessi
acting  in  the  same  way  in  every  one,  by  which  particular  sensations  a:
connected  in  certain  ways  ;  a  necessity  which  could  never  be  discovered  t
observing  particular  events.  Analysis  will  aim  at  discovering  this  necessi
and  at  determining  the  particular  distinguishable  functions  which  co-opera
in  this  result.  For  this  purpose  it  will  make  use  of  the  events  which  v
actually  observe  in  ourselves  in  particular  cases,  in  forming  and  verifyii
its  hypotheses.  From  this  point  of  view  we  can  at  once  state  the  law  th
the  particular  elements  combine,  partly  according  to  similarity,  partly
spatial  and  temporal  series,  because  we  find  them  regularly  combined
these  two  ways  in  our  image  of  the  world.  At  the  same  time,  if  we  tal


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  405

.his  view,  we  shall  guard  against  building  too  much  upon  the  analysis  of
particular  events,  which  is  not  to  be  relied  upon  for  completeness,  and
igainst  believing that such ideas as those of  thing  and  causality are
'•educible  to  the  mere  associations  of  sense  impressions,  or  that  the  idea  of
;pace  is  based  merely  upon  the  formation  of  qualitatively  different  sense
mpressions  into  series. Kant's  procedure,  although  not intended  as  psy
chological,  gives  us  the  right  clue  to  psychological  analysis;  what  we  have
o  do  is  to  discover  the  different  forms  of  synthesis  by  which  that  has  been
Combined,  which  we  find  combined  in  our  present  content  of  consciousness.
1 8. A  second  instance of  the connections  which  confront  us  clearly
nd  obviously  throughout  the whole course of  life  is  to  be found  in  the
'phere  of  the  will,  in  the  connection  between  the  end^  and  the  means,  in
!he  mutual  dependence  between willing  the  end  and  willing  the  means,
nd  in  the  order  which reference to conscious aims  imposes  upon  our
arious activities. As we grow  older  the fortuitous and involuntary
lenient  in  consciousness  becomes  continually  less  important  in  comparison
•ith  that  arrangement  of  our  activities  which  is  guided  by  conscious  ends,
liis arrangement directs most of  the functions, both  theoretical and
'radical,  and  into  this  main  stream  all  greater  or  smaller  tributaries,  which
ame  from  other  sources,  flow. It  is  on  the  one  hand  intellectual,  and
aided  by  our  knowledge  of  the  causal  connections between  end  and
leans  ;  on  the  other  hand  it  is  the  consequence  of  and  determined  by  the
'ature  of  the  will  itself, by  virtue  of  which  a  resolution,  especially  when
irected  towards  a  universal  end,  can  determine  whole  series  of  activities
'hich  work  under  its  permanent  sway. This  connection,  again,  is  different
om  any  natural  connection,  in  that  no  causal  chain  of  conscious  events
hich  is  continuous  in  time  is  created  by  it,  any  more  than  by  the  relation
;tween  perception  and  memory ;  on  the  contrary,  the willing  of  an  end
aintains  itself  throughout  all possible interruptions,  and  often  combines
mote  activities  into  one  connection. In  a  present  which  is  independent
change  in  moments  of  time,  the  system  of  ends  rules  over  the  particular
tivities,  which  are  due  to  external  occasions,  or  proceed  from  the  system
cording  to  a  self-created  arrangement  of  change  of  work  ;  and  the  willing
these  ends  shows  its  power  further  in  the  fact  that  it  governs  even  in-
•luntary  associations,  and  gives  rise  to  habits  which,  in  their  turn,  act  like
iginal  laws  in  determining  the  production  of  one  kind  of  activity  after
other. We  are  thus  able  to  discover  within  the  varied  play  of  particular
ents  a  fixed  connection  which  combines a  great  part of  them within


406  LOGIC

itself;  and  even  though,  from  the  variety  of  human  aims,  we  do  not  fine
the  same  agreement  as  in  the  image  of  the  external  world,  the  form  of  the
connection  is  nevertheless  comprehensible  and  everywhere  the  same.  Ii
is  indeed  fundamentally  different  from  the  causal  connection  of  nature,  foi
it  is  no  unconscious  uniformity  ruling  over  conscious  life  and  determining
it  once  for  all  which  has  given  rise  to  its  orderliness,  but  only  our  wil
itself  which  maintains  the  end  and  directs  particular  activities  towards  it.1
In  this  way  we  may  disregard  the  casual  disturbances  of  the  particular  life
and  by  starting  from  a  given  universal  end  construct  a  normal  course  o
purposive  action.  In  asking :  how  would  a  certain  will,  together  with  ?
given  knowledge  of  causal  connection,  produce  and  arrange  particulai
activities?  we  are  again  taking  for  our  basis  a  case  of  fictitious  simplicity
in  which  we  can  calculate  everything ;  comparison  with  what  actually  take;
place  then  shows  us  the  many  other  influences  which  supervene  to  brine
about  variations  or  disturbances.

The  further  analysis  to  which  we  submit  the  process  of  willing  enquire
as  to  the  conditions  and  presuppositions  of  will ;  and  here  the  fact  tha
particular  individuals  agree  in  the  general  directions  taken  by  their  wil
leads  us  to  certain  fundamental  tendencies  of  human  nature,  which  are  U
some  extent  more  or  less  closely  bound  up  with  organic  dispositions,  am
which,  though  they  are  in  different  individuals  combined  in  very  differen
proportions,  yet  give  us  a  basis  from  which  to  determine  the  forces  whicl
are  active  in  the  empirically  given  course  of  our  inner  life.

19.  If  understanding  of  the  particular  can  only  be  gained  by  firs
seeing  clearly  the  larger  and  more  widespread  connections  which  ar
present  in  the  comprehending  consciousness,  if  the  only  safe  starting  poin
for  psychological  investigation  is  a  general  survey  of  the  whole  constitu
tion  of  developed  consciousness,  it  follows  that  the  direct  observation  o
particular  events,  and  more  especially  the  experimental  methods,  howeve
much  they  may  contribute  to  accuracy  and  precision,  can  yet  have  only  ;
subordinate  importance  in  this  department.  They  can  never  give  us  mor
than  fragments,  nor  directly  determine  the  conditions  given  in  the  particu

1  In  stating  that  the  connection  between  willing  and  what  is  willed  always  appears  a
necessary,  and  is  therefore  a  counterpart  to  the  mechanical  necessity  in  nature  (Atijga.be>
und  Methoden,  der  Psychologic,  p.  107  sq. ),  Miinsterherg  overlooks  the  fundamenta
opposition  between  the  principle  of  inertia  and  the  consequence  of  willing.  The  latte
does  not  follow  of  itself  when  once  a  resolution  has  been  formed,  but  only  by  means  c
continued  willing  ;  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  we  do  not  feel  ourselves  subjected  to  con
straint,  but  feel  ourselves  to  be  free.


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  407

lar  case,  since  amongst  them  are  included  habits  of  thought  and  will  which
do  not  enter  as  such  into  consciousness:  they  presuppose,  if  they  are  to  be
of  any  service  at  all,  these  comprehensive  views,  and  their  results  so  far
have  done,  perhaps,  more  to  show  the  extent  of  differences  between  indi
viduals  than  to  teach  us  any  general  uniformity.  This  is  itself  a  service  ;
and  beyond  this  they  are  important  as  enabling  us  to  support  or  verify
hypotheses  which,  starting  from  the  whole  of  our  present  life,  we  form
concerning  its  gradual  growth.  But  from  the  fragmentary  elements  which
ilone  they  can  give  us,  we  are  unable  to  construct  the  whole.

20.  But  the  whole  state  of  our  knowledge  and  opinions,  and  of  the
:omplex  of  ends  which  we  pursue  by  applying  known  means,  has  not
irisen  in  us  without  manifold  co-operation  on  the  part  of  others,  without
:hance  or  intentional  teaching,  guidance,  and  education.  It  is  just  this
.vhich  gives  to  the  psychical  life  of  man  its  peculiar  character,  by  which  it  is
divided  by  a  wide  gulf  from  that  of  animals ;  for  in  the  latter,  influences
"rom  without  must  be  extremely  small  compared  to  what  each  individual
icquires  independently  of  others.  Here  there  is  no  doubt  that  we  have  to
do  with  causal  relations  between  individual  and  individual ;  but  here  also
,ve  are  confronted  by  an  insoluble  problem  if  we  aim  at  establishing  exact
aws  for  this  influence  upon  individuals,  which  are  directly  applicable  to  the
particular  case,  and  which  would  make  of  education  and  government  an
trt  which  could  be  practised  with  as  much  certainty  of  success  as  billiards
)r  photography.  The  experience  of  every  schoolmaster  who  finds  that  his
eaching  and  educating  has  very  different  results  with  different  individuals,
hows  that  it  would  be  in  vain  to  attempt  to  derive  general  laws  from  par-
icular  observations  and  experiments.  The  very  way  in  which  this  influ-
:nce  is  exerted,  and  the  means  by  which  it  is  carried  out,  prohibits  such
;eneral  laws ;  as  we  have  already  pointed  out,  we  can  never  have  a  simple
lirect  creation  of  thoughts  or  resolutions ;  all  we  can  do  is  to  present  the
onditions  and  the  stimulus  by  which  the  pupil  is  incited  to  exert,  accord-
ng  to  psychological  laws,  his  own  activities  as  contained  in  his  nature,  and
>repared  for  by  previous  development.

No  doubt  the  practice  and  theory  of  pedagogy  has  developed  a  number
•f  rules  of  method,  which  are  based  upon  certain  assumptions  concerning
he  causal  relations  between  the  action  of  the  teacher  and  educator  and
he  progress  of  the  pupil,  and,  to  go  further  back,  upon  certain  psychologi-
al  assumptions  concerning  conditions  which  are  contained  in  general  laws
f  psychical  development,  and  of  the  further  elaboration  of  received  stimu-


408  LOGIC

lus  and  incitement.  The  history  of  pedagogy  shows  clearly  the  influence
of  certain  psychological  theories,  such  as  those  of  Rousseau  or  Herbart,
upon  the  forms  which  methods  have  taken  ;  the  onesidedness  involved  in
these  theories  has  always  been  corrected,  at  any  rate  to  some  extent,  by
practice.  It  would  be  unjust  also  not  to  recognise  that  in  the  specially
didactic  sphere,  where  we  have  to  do  with  the  imparting  of  knowledge  and
insight  into  logical  connections,  the  correctness  of  the  methods  employed,
and  of  their  psychological  presuppositions  has  generally  been  justified  by
their  average  results.  There  is,  moreover,  this  great  advantage  in  the  school,
that  by  its  examinations,  which  are  ultimately  nothing  less  than  psychologi
cal  experiments,  it  is  able  to  ascertain  how  far  the  intended  effects  of
instruction  have  taken  place.  Thus,  though  the  experience  of  the  school
cannot  give  us  exact  laws  determining  each  particular  case,  yet  we  can
obtain  from  it  general  views  concerning  the  psychological  conditions  of
educational  action,  and  the  average  course  and  result  of  educational
influence.

But  this  same  experience  of  the  school  shows  also  how  complicated  the
conditions  are.  Didactic  methods  must  attempt  to  isolate  the  intellectual
factor  ;  in  reality  the  attention  of  the  scholar  and  his  inclination  to  follow
the  impulses  given  to  him  to  exert  his  memory  and  understanding,
depends  partly  upon  his  individual  nature,  partly  upon  conditions  which
act  on  his  will,  upon  the  skill  of  the  teacher  in  interesting  him,  and  upon
his  personal  authority,  which  may  itself  be  acquired  in  very  different  ways.
Even  the  most  obvious  assumption,  that  the  will  may  be  influenced  by
rewards  and  punishments,  cannot  appeal  to  any  law  which  would  be  true
without  exception  ;  and  the  opinions  of  teachers  as  to  the  advisability  of
applying  these  means  are  well  known  to  be  widely  different.

Thus  even  where  we  have  the  most  favourable  opportunity  and  the
strongest  inducement  to  establish  general  causal  laws,  we  are  at  best
dealing  with  propositions  which  state  that  the  application  of  certain
means  will,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases,  have  an  average,  though  within
certain  limits  a  varying  result.  We  could  speak  of  strict  laws  only  by
assuming  typical  scholars,  in  whom  we  disregarded  actual  deviations  and
disturbances.

The  most  modern  school  of  historical  literary  investigation  has  attempted
to  trace  in  a  particular  direction  the  influences  acting  upon  poetical  crea
tion  •  and  this  attempt  would  triumph  if  it  could  show  from  whom  Goethe
borrowed  every  expression  which  he  uses,  and  could  discover  the  model


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  409

from  which  he  copied  every  figure  which  he  depicts.  Detailed  proof
might  be  given  of  the  exact  coincidences  ;  yet  after  all  it  would  only  be
proved  that  in  the  long  run  it  does  not  depend  upon  these  particular  in-
;  citements  and  reminiscences,  but  upon  what  the  poet  makes  of  them,  and
that  for  this  reason  we  can  obtain  no  general  propositions  from  these  par
ticular  observations,  unless  perhaps  that  the  raw  material  of  our  thought
and  combinations  is  not  produced  from  within,  but  makes  its  way  into  con
sciousness  from  the  most  varied  sources.

What  we  can  learn  from  particular  departments  of  our  experience  con
cerning  the  influence  of  individuals  upon  each  other,  cannot  do  more  than
•explain  certain  aspects  of  the  relations  existing  there  ;  if  we  want  to  get
really  general  and  comprehensive  conclusions,  the  basis  of  more  accurate
knowledge  must  here  again  be  the  whole  of  the  facts  which  we  have  before
'iis  concerning  the  mutual  relation  between  individuals.

The  phenomenon  that  notwithstanding  the  innumerable differences  be
tween  individuals,  each  person  lives  in  a  surrounding  atmosphere  of  views
ind  opinions concerning  all possible  things,  which  he  has  not produced
rrom  within,  but  has  accepted  from  society  ;  the fact  that  he  understands
\nd  speaks  the  language  of  his  circle — though  it  may  be  with  personal  dis
crimination — and thus makes  known  that his  thought  agrees  with  that  of
Dthers  not  merely in  its material of  particular elements,  but  also  in  its
•eferences  and combinations  ;  the  fact that manners  and  customs  agree
iown  to  the  smallest  details — this  whole  historical state  of  things  is  what
ve  first  find. It  shows in broad outlines the  directions in which the
nutual  influence  of  individuals  acts,  and first  presents definite  problems
or  analysis  ;  it  has  to  be  discovered  how  these  different  uniformities  have
:ome  about  and  are  maintained,  and  our  analysis  could  never  lead  to  any
;nd  if  we  should  start  from  the  particular  observation  of  a  given  instance
n  which  I  communicate  something  to  another  person,  or  influence  him  by
.  command. The particular  example can never  be  simply  accepted  as
epresentative  of  a  general  concept,  nor  is  it  analysable  into  its  conditions ;
he  complication  of  every  present moment  with  the  whole  psychical  past
irohibits here  again the simple application of  the methods of natural
cience,  which  can  start  from  the  particular instance,  to  discover  the  law
11  it. Only  when  we  have  the  whole  result  before  us  can  we  set  to  work
3  seek  the  elementary  processes  first  in  our  own  experience  and then  in
••hat  we  know  of  the  life  of  others,  to  lay  bare  the  motives  from  which  one
onforms  to  the  other,  and  the  ways  in  which  uniformity  of  ideas,  manners,


410  LOGIC

etc.,  grows  up ;  and  in  this  way  we  shall  prove  that  what  we  first  guessed
from  the  larger  connections  is  a  vera  causa,  inasmuch  as  we  can  show  it  in
our  own  consciousness  and  in  the  experiences  of  particular  individuals.

We  may  find  an  instructive  example  of  this  method  of  psychological  in
vestigation  in  the  development  of  the  science  of  language.  Scientific  study
turns  first  to  the  common  element  in  language  which  seems  to  have  an
existence  of  its  own  apart  from  individuals,  it  describes  the  store  of  words
and  the  rules  of  grammar  on  the  assumption  that  these  actually  govern  the
particular  ;  they  are  descriptive  empirical  laws  of  the  total  phenomenon  of
a  particular  language.  By  tracing  the  history  of  particular  languages  we
find  certain  transformations,  e.g.,  in  the  sounds  ;  we  are  still  discovering
general  laws  according  to  which  the  change  of  sounds  takes  place — the
Latin  c  and  g  soften,  etc.  These  general  phenomena  show  a  far-reaching
conformity  to  law.  Knowledge  of  this  sort  had  to  precede  before  the
psychological  aspect  of  the  matter  could  be  successfully  attacked  and
analysis  pushed  forward  in  this  province.  It  is  really  a  very  simple  con
ception,  and  yet  one  which  has  been  slow  to  make  its  importance  felt,  that
what  we  call  language  consists  finally  only  in  the  uniform  habits  of  a  num
ber  of  people  having  intercourse  with  each  other,  and  that  it  depends
entirely  upon  intellectual  processes,  upon  memory  and  adroitness  in  cer
tain  movements  of  our  organs  of  speech,  and  that  all  the  phenomena  of
language  lead  us  back  to  the  psychology  of  the  individual.  What  then
has  to  be  done  is  to  find  in  the  particular  experience,  and  examine,  what  it
is  which  goes  on  in  the  appropriation  of  language,  both  of  the  sounds  and
of  the  meanings ;  to  trace  in  the  fragmentary  perception  of  the  individual
those  processes  which  we  find  on  a  larger  scale  in  the  history  of  language.
In  proportion  as  our  use  of  language  is  unaccompanied  by  express  con
sciousness  because  we  have  already  become  fixed  in  the  use  of  all  its  con
nected  activities  by  the  time  we  begin  to  reflect,  and  in  proportion  as
everything  connected  with  our  first  learning  to  speak  is  more  remote,  the
more  difficult  would  it  be  to  discover  by  mere  observation  that  tendency
of  the  individual  to  vary  customary  forms  of  speech,  or  to  make  new
applications  of  familiar  expressions,  etc.,  by  which  changes  in  language
must  be  ultimately  explained.  With  respect  to  many  phenomena  the
actual  process  can  only  be  hypothetically  constructed  according  to  analogy ;
it  can  only  be  inferred  from  general  historical  facts  that  it  has  taken  place ;
but  these  facts  can  make  other  processes  visible  to  us  which  would  have
escaped  our  attention  unless  it  had  been  guided  by  some  such  interest.


IND UC TION  IN  PS YCHOL OGY  411

21.  If,  after  these  considerations,  we  finally  turn  again  to  those  causal
connections  which  we  mentioned  first  (p.  398),  to  the  dependence  of
psychical  activities  upon  physiological  events,  we  find  that  what  we  have
to  do  is  clearly  to  trace  in  detail  this  dependence  which  we  find  to  be
so  extensive,  and  to  establish  the  most  exact  laws  possible  as  to  what
causal  relations  exist  between  certain  changes  in  organic  life  and  changes
in  psychical  life  even  beyond  the  limits  of  psychophysics  in  the  proper
sense.  In  face  of  the  hopes,  however,  which  lead  some  to  expect
ultimately  to  raise  psychology  to  an  exact  science  by  following  this  line  of
investigation,  it  is  especially  needful  to  bear  in  mind  what  the  data  are
which  can  be  given  as  the  basis  for  our  inferences.  The  process  must
consist  in  observing,  on  the  one  hand,  variations  in  the  state  of  the  brain,
which  alone  can  be  accepted  as  immediate  causes,  on  the  other  hand,
variations  in  conscious  events  ;  in  establishing  by  means  of  these  observa
tions  what  are  at  first  only  empirical  laws  of  relation,  and  in  raising  these,
where  possible,  by  means  of  further  elaboration  and  precision,  to  exact
causal  laws.  Now  to  every  individual  his  own  conscious  states  are  given,
and  we  may  at  first  disregard  the  difficulties  by  which  we  are  met  in
perceiving  and  describing  them  more  exactly  ;  but  there  is  no  possibility
of  comparing  with  them  the  preceding  or  simultaneous  states  of  one's  own
brain.  Only  vague  conjectures  are  possible  as  to  what  chemical  and
other  changes  go  on  in  the  particular  cells  and  fibres  of  the  brain  from
moment  to  moment ;  that  they  are  partly  conditioned  by  the  circulation
of  the  blood  and  by  the  substances  contained  in  the  blood,  is  certainly
beyond  doubt,  but  we  have  no  accurate  knowledge  of  the  processes  nor
of  the  changes  produced  by  stimulus  to  the  senses,  etc.  In  the  normal
course  of  life  the  changes  in  the  cerebral  substance  are  not  only  withdrawn
from  our  direct  knowledge,  they  cannot  even  be  in  any  way  accurately
established  from  more  remote  causes.  Thus  there  is  no  direct  process
by  which  we  might  resolve  the  general  conviction  that  the  state  of
consciousness  depends  upon  the  state  of  the  brain,  into  special  causal
laws.

The  basis  from  which  we  can  at  first  work  consists  in  a  comparison  of
psychical  disturbances  which  occur  during  life,  with  the  results  of  sub
sequent  dissection,  or  in  the  case  of  wounds  with  a  knowledge — which
is  always  incomplete — of  the  lesion  ;  and,  further,  in  experiments  upon
animals.  In  the  former  case  we  compare  what  an  observer  infers  from  the
aehaviour  and  utterances  of  a  patient  as  to  his  psychical  state,  with  what


4i2  LOGIC

he  knows,  or  only  infers  by  all  sorts  of  combination,  about  the  changes  in
the  brain ;  but  such  inferences  as  to  the  psychical  life  of  others  are  more
uncertain  in  proportion  as  the  disturbance  is  deep-seated  and  easily  recog
nised  anatomically,  because  it  generally  happens  in  this  case  that  the
ability  of  the  patient  to  give  an  account  of  his  own  states  is  more  or  less
injured;  in  any  case  these  inferences,  if  they  are  to  have  any  value,  pre
suppose  a  large  amount  of  psychological  knowledge.  Inferences  as  to
the  psychical  life  of  animals  are  from  the  nature  of  the  case  still  more
hazardous,  and  the  changes  which  can  be  observed  in  their  behaviour  still
more  difficult  to  interpret.

22.  What  we  must  first  attempt  in  this  direction,  as  involving  the
condition  of  all  further  determination,  is  the  so-called  localization  of
psychical  events,  i.e.  the  description  of  those  spatially  limited  parts  of  the
brain  with  the  wounding,  or  disease,  or  even  the  stimulation  of  which
there  is  connected  the  disappearance  or  the  intensification  of  certain
psychical  activities,  of  which,  therefore,  we  can  assume  that  their  normal
function  conditions  the  corresponding  psychical  activity.  But  this  localiza
tion  has  not,  as  yet,  been  unanimously  established,  even  for  the  simplest
events,  the  perception  of  sensations  and  the  voluntary  movements  of
particular  limbs — it  is  unnecessary  here  to  enter  more  fully  into  the
differences  of  opinion  among  particular  investigators.  But  in  all  the  more
complicated  psychical  events  the  difficulties  of  localizing  them  naturally
increase  ;  on  the  one  hand  the  situation  of  the  particular  elements,  on  the
other  hand  that  of  their  connections,  has  to  be  established.  The  much
discussed  question  of  disturbances  affecting  speech  is  an  instance  of  how
defective  a  psychological  analysis  was  employed  until  Kussmaul  showed
that  the  various  psychical  functions  which  co-operate  in  speech  (or  in
understanding,  reading  and  writing)  must  first  be  distinguished  and
observed  in  their  relation  to  one  another,  before  we  can  think  of  localizing
disturbances  of  speech.  At  best,  therefore,  psychological  analysis  must
precede,  to  enable  us  to  interpret  the  anatomical  discovery  ;  upon  the
correctness  of  this  analysis  everything  depends,  and  only  by  referring  to  it
can  we  frame  conjectures  as  to  the  significance  of  circumscribed  parts  of
the  brain.  But  no  one  has  ever  yet  got  so  far  as  to  predict  from  clinical
observation  the  exact  results  of  dissection,  or  to  diagnose  from  the  result
of  dissection  alone  the  exact  nature  of  the  disturbance.

But  even  if  we  have  succeeded  in  our  localization,  all  that  we  have  so
far  established  is  that  the  normal  function  of  certain  parts  of  the  brain  is


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  413

one  of  the  conditions  of  the  normal  course  of  the  psychical  activities  ;  that
is  very  different  from  the  proposition  that  the  physiological  function  is
unconditionally  the  cause  (or  even  the  exact  correlative)  of  the  corre
sponding  psychical  function.  From  the  fact  that  when  a  wheel  breaks  the
watch  stops  it  does  not  follow  that  this  wheel  was  the  cause  of  the  watch  ,
going  correctly.

23.  The  theory  which  aims  at explaining  the  psychic  life  by  physio
logical  events,  would  have  to  show  what  the  processes  are  in  the  particular
parts  of  the  brain,  which  condition  particular  and  specific  psychical  acts  ;
where  the brain cells  are  situated,  and what  goes on in them,  when  I
remember  a  previous impression,  or when I count from  i  to  100. To
fully  realize  the  problem  (cf.  p.  389)  is  sufficient  to  show  us  how  impossible
it  is  to  solve  it  with  the  means  at  our  disposal. As  a  matter  of  fact  all
these  events  are  really  only  translated  from  psychology  into  the  physiology
of  the  brain. With a certain amount  of imagination we may indeed
attribute  all  sorts  of  meanings  to  the  millions  of  ganglionic  cells  and  fibres,
in  order  to  explain  by  them  the  course  of  ideas,  recollections  and  associa
tions. But  hardly  since  her  first  beginnings  has  any  school  of  philosophy
been  guilty  of  such  rash  and  airy  speculations,  and  trifled  so  with  diffi
culties,  as  in  hoping  to  reduce  the  whole  complex  of  thought  and  will  to
chemical  and  physical  events.

24.  But  even  supposing  that  this  object  had  been  realized,  what  should
we  really  have  gained  ? Should  we  have  obtained  any  insight  into the
necessity  of  the particular  event,  any  possibility  of  calculating  it  before
hand, any  means of  practically utilizing this calculation? For this  it
would  be  necessary  to  survey  at  any  moment  the  whole  of  any  brain,  with
all  its  organic  dispositions,  and — for  practical  purposes — to  have  the  means
of  modifying  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  directly  introduce  certain  changes,  to
produce certain ideas, combinations of thought and resolutions. But
.such  definite  dispositions  of  the  brain  are  unknown  to  us  in  the  particular
case  ;  all  we  can  do  is  to infer back to them  from the  psychical  facts,
which are alone accessible, and possibly from accompanying bodily
symptoms. Nor  have  we any  laws according  to  which  one  state  of  the
brain  passes  into  another  ;  at  best  we  could  only  guess  from  the  course  of
ideas,  etc.,  how  the  chemistry  of  the  cells  is  proceeding. That  they  are
governed  by a  uniformity  which  is important for psychical  life,  we can
merely  infer  from  the  comprehensible  connections  of  conscious  life,  and
when  the  normal  course  has  been  destroyed  it  is  made  known  to  us  only


4i4  LOGIC

by  manifestations  of  psychical  disturbance.  Where  certain  types  of
psychical  disease,  such  as  are  described  in  psychopathology,  are  found  to
agree,  we  infer  that  similar  changes  have  taken  place  in  the  brain,  though
in  many  cases  they  cannot  be  directly  ascertained.  Here  again  psycho
logical  knowledge  is  the  basis  from  which  we  make  inferences  about
cerebral  states.  It  has  long  been  known  in  therapeutics  that  by  modifica
tions  in  nutrition,  by  physical  and  medical  intervention,  psychical  effects
may  be  attained ;  we  know,  not  indeed  the  immediate,  but  at  any  rate  the
more  remote  causes,  which  have  an  influence  upon  the  course  of  psychical
activities.  But  can  we  in  this  way  produce  definite  ideas  and  combina
tions  of  thought  which  might  not  be  explained  by  known  psychological
connection  ?  Can  we  bring  about  any  definite  content  in  men,  instil  into
them  any  knowledge,  instead  of  imparting  it  to  them  in  the  ordinary  way?
Even  the  fancies  of  the  maniac  are  psychologically  grounded  in  the  mental
store  which  he  has  acquired  ;  they  arise  according  to  general  laws,  under
abnormal  conditions  ;  it  is  not  their  particular  content,  but  only  the  fact
that  they  are  checked,  or  intensified,  or  confused,  which  can  be  referred
to  organic  disturbance.  The  treatment  of  the  body  may  establish  the
conditions  of  a  course  of  the  organic  functions  which  will  be  favourable  to
the  normal  psychical  life ;  but  where  we  are  concerned  with  the  events  of
psychical  life  as  such,  psychical  influence  is  as  important  as  treatment  of
the  body.

Even  if  we  had  the  knowledge  desired,  it  would  not  be  superfluous  to
study  scientifically  the  uniformity  in  the  course  of  psychical  processes  by
themselves  ;  it  is  the  connection  of  these  results  only  which  is  accessible
to  our  observation,  so  that  psychology  would  still  remain  the  key  to  all
physiological  knowledge.  We  may  be  most  firmly  convinced  that  all  our
psychical  activities  are  conditioned  by  organic  states,  and  yet  see  that
accurate  knowledge  of  this  dependence  rests  entirely  upon  direct  psycho
logical  investigation  and  can  never  be  substituted  for  it.

25.  If  we  take  up  the  empirical  standpoint,  and  begin  by  regarding
the  two  spheres  only  as  separate,  we  must  consider  also  the  other  side  of
the  question;  at  first  sight  we  shall  find  just  as  extensive  a  reaction  of
events,  for  which  we  know  only  psychical  causes,  upon  the  organic  func
tions.  Even  those  physiological  processes  which  are  withdrawn  from  the
direct  influence  of  the  will,  are  extensively  influenced  by  ideas  which  can
be  explained  only  by  communication  from  without,  or  association,  by
moods  for  which  we  know  no  ground  but  intellectual  or  aesthetic  excite-


INDUCTION  IN  PSYCHOLOGY  415

mentj  and  the  relation  between  our  experiences  and  our  wishes  or  aims  ;
mast  we  necessarily  convert  this  causal  connection  which  first  presents
itself,  and  upon  what  ground  must  we  do  so  ?

Here,  again,  the  right  method  must  be  to  start  from  that  which  is
given  by  immediate  perception  in  both  spheres,  and  this  shows  us,  in  the
first  place,  a  connection  between  volition  and  motion  which  we  cannot
refuse  to  regard  as  a  real  causal  connection  unless  we  are  already  involved
in  certain  hypotheses  ;  and,  secondly,  changes  in  the  physiological  sphere  —
at  first  in  the  form  of  empirical  laws  of  relation — which  accompany  activities
having  a  psychical  origin  and  a  psychical  motive.  To  extend  our
knowledge  of  these  relations,  and  to  formulate  them  more  precisely,  is
again  a  problem  for  inductive  investigation.  We  have  here  to  guard
:  against  a  danger  which  is  not  very  remote ;  it  may  happen  that  from
tracing  this  organic  resonance  of  our  psychical  activities  a  tendency  will
'arise  to  substitute  for  the  main  phenomenon  those  sensations  and  feelings
which  make  us  aware  of  these  organic  reactions,  to  substitute  the
sensation  of  palpitation  and  of  trembling  knees  for  the  feeling  of  anxiety,
and  the  sensations  of  commencing  tension  in  the  muscles  for  the
consciousness  of  energetic  will,  thus  taking  the  sign  for  the  real  thing.
As  naturally  perceived,  the  two  are  most  closely  connected,  and  as  a
result  of  correct  observation  the  affections  are  often  denoted  in  language
by  their  external  manifestation,  but  panting  and  clenching  the  fist  is  not
anger  itself,  nor  does  shame  or  confusion  consist  in  blushing.

In  that  part  of  psychological  work  which  is  concerned  with  finding  a
basis  for  all  the  sciences  which  treat  of  human  life  as  an  historical  whole,
:the  physiological  side  of  psychological  investigation  has  so  far  proved,
on  the  whole,  rather  sterile  and  barren,  except  where  questions  arise
— as  in  the  physiology  of  speech— which  specially  belong  to  the
psychophysical  sphere.  To  explain  the  state  and  justice,  science  and
religion  is  still  left  to  that  psychology,  of  which  the  first  task  is  to  point
out  the  general  connection  between  psychical  phenomena  themselves.

We  do  not  mean  by  this  that  the  investigation  of  connections  between
psychical  life  and  its  organic  conditions  is  not  a  work  of  the  greatest
importance ;  from  it  we  shall  obtain  an  increasing  store  of  material
:owards  the  fundamental  question  as  to  the  relation  between  phenomena
}f  the  body  and  the  mind.  We  would  only  protest  against  proclaiming
inowledge  which  is  not  yet  found  as  the  certain  basis  of  an  investigation
•vhich  is,  on  the  contrary,  bound  to  confine  itself  at  first  to  immediately


4i6  LOGIC

certain experience, to the facts of consciousness, and to test anc
correct  its  hypotheses  constantly  by  this  standard.

The  process  of  induction  with  which  we  have  so  far  been  more
particularly  engaged,  aimed  at  establishing  between  perceptible  attribute;
and  events  universally  valid  relations  which  might  be  accepted  as  thf
expression  of  a  necessity.  The  propositions  realizing  this  aim  took  th<
form  :  if  the  conditions  a,  b,  c  are  given,  then  d  is  connected  with  them
if  certain  subjects  are  given  in  certain  states,  and  in  certain  relations  tc
each  other,  then  there  are  necessarily  connected  with  them  certair
states  or  changes  in  one  or  more  of  these  subjects.  Such  proposition;
were  to  be  called  laws  in  the  strict  sense  when  the  predicate  wa;
absolutely  definite,  and  exactly  determined  for  every  modification  o
the  condition.

Some  of  these  laws  were  causal  laws,  properly  so-called,  expressing
the  action  of  perceptible  things  upon  others,  and  they,  when  logical!)
completed,  were  entitled  to  be  the  expression  of  a  real  necessity ;  anc
we  found  the  most  conclusive  confirmation  of  a  causal  law  in  the  abilit;
to  make  the  result  by  bringing  about  the  conditions,  and  so  to  sho^
that  nature  obeys  the  thought  which  we  possess  in  the  form  of  the  universa
proposition  ;  these  laws  form  the  true  centre  and  starting  point  of  tht
understanding.  Other  laws,  similar  to  these  in  their  determinateness
could  nevertheless  not  be  accepted  as  laws  of  efficient  action,  but  merel)
as  descriptive  expressions  of  uniform  happening,  or  as  expressions  o
actually  given  uniform  relations.

In  other  departments,  finally,  no  strict  laws  could  be  obtained,  parti;
because  of  the  differences  between  individuals  which  prevent  us  fron
stating  any  definite  amount  of  the  particular  phenomenon  as  universal!;
valid,  and  at  best  allow  us  to  state  only  average  values,  partly  becausi
the  nature  of  the  objects  did  not  admit  of  any  measurement  of  th>
events,  and  partly  because  the  complication  of  conditions  was  too  grea
to  be  completely  analysed,  and  the  contribution  of  each  one  to  b
distinguished.  In  this  case  inductive  analysis  can  only  lead  to  a  statemen
of  the  general  forms  and  directions  in  which  particular  events  are  con
nected,  and  which  we  regard  as  tendencies ;  these  govern  what  happen
under  simple  conditions,  but  are  counteracted  and  modified  in  many  way
in  the  particular  case,  and  are  in  consequence  only  to  be  recognised
by  help  of  comparison,  in  the  average  agreement  of  many  cases.


EXPLANATION  OF  THE GIVEN  4,7

These  results  must  be  presupposed  before  we  can  proceed  with  the  task
to  which  we  were  led  in  the  last  section  but  one  in  the  form  of  gener
alization,  and  in  the  last  section  by  the  consideration  of  the  psychological
methods,  the  task  of  explaining  what  actually  happens,  i.e.,  of  finding
grounds,  either  internal  or  external,  for  the  Given.
I

VII. THE  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  GIVEN.
I

Starting  from  the  general  postulate  that  we  must  regard  the  Given  as
necessary,  the  inductive  process  had  first  to  aim  at  establishing  in  general
Depositions  the  effects  of  certain  causes  and  the  influences  of  the  circum
stances  modifying  their  effects  ;  but  in  stating  the  problems  involved  in
'his  more  carefully,  we  were  led  on  certain  points  to  the  question,  how  are
ve  to  discover  the  conditions  from  which  given  phenomena  necessarily
>roceed  ?

If,  in  accordance  with  the  terminology  of  §  82,  i,  p.  203,  we  call  the
lerivation  of  an  actually  established  proposition  gained  from  immediate
xperience,  from  a  universally  valid  major  premise,  an  explanation,  then
;very  given  co-existence  of  attributes  and  every  event  is  explained  when  it
;an  be  derived,  according  to  a  valid  proposition,  from  a  ground  which  is
'Ctually  forthcoming.

:  Thus  all  EXPLANATION  is  in  its  essence  deduction.  But  the  problems
ombined  under  this  term  may  be  separated  into  three,  which  are  essen-
ally  different.

1.  To  explain  a  phenomenon  is  to  present  it  as  the  necessary  con-
;quence  of  another  phenomenon,  according  to  a  known  proposition,  or
:cording  to  a  proposition  deducible from  known  propositions. Either
>e  ground  of  the  explanation  is  present  from  the  first,  and  what  we  have

I  do  is  to  apply  the  law  according  to  which  it  produces  the  phenomenon,

II  else  it  is  the  causal  law  of  which  we  are  first  conscious,  and  the  ground
!;manded  by  it  has  to  be  shown  to  be  really  forthcoming. The  rainbow

thus  explained  as  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  actually  forthcoming
nshine  falling  upon  the  raindrops,  according  to  the  laws  of  refraction
d  reflection;  and  an  illness  is  explained  by  finding  the  bacteria  which
Dduce  it.

2.  To  explain  a  phenomenon  in  another  sense  is  to  infer  on  the  ground
known  causal  connections  the  cause  which must  have  given  rise  to
but which is not  directly  perceptible. I  explain  the  dampness  of

?.  L. — ii.  F.  t


418  LOGIC

the  ground,  which  I  perceive  in  the  morning,  by  the  fact  that  it  must  have
rained  in  the  night,  although  I  did  not  perceive  the  rain.  Thus  explana
tion  in  this  sense  seeks  to  establish  the  existence  of  a  certain  state  of
things  on  the  ground  of  known  causal  connections.

3.  Explanation  in  the  third  sense  tries  to  find  the  grounds  for  the  laws
of  action  of  causes,  and  of  empirical  uniformities,  in  the  nature  and  relations
of  substances,  in  accordance  with  the  logical  completion  of  the  causal  con
cept,  which  is  described  in  §  73.  Kepler's  laws  are  explained  in  this
way  by  gravitation  and  inertia  as  universal  qualities  of  matter.  Explana
tion  in  this  sense  is  final  ;  it  endeavours  to  complete  the  essential  concepts
both  of  material  substances  and  of  the  subjects  of  conscious  processes :
but  it  can  only  do  this  hypothetically,  inasmuch  as  the  grounds  which  it
assumes  for  the  immediately  Given  can  from  their  nature  never  be  directly
shown.


The  CAUSAL  EXPLANATION  of  an  event,  or  of  a  chain  of  events,  of  whicl-
all  the  stages  are  perceptible,  takes  place  in  simple  syllogisms,  which  preserv
the  given  case  as  consequence  of  a  known  law  ;  or  in  a  combination  o
known  laws  in  a  syllogistic  chain.  The  processes  are  the  same  as  thos<
employed  in  finding  a  proof  for  a  given  proposition.

If  this  derivation  from  known  laws  cannot  be  carried  out,  then  we  mus
either  establish  a  probable  connection  directly  by  applying  the  method
of  agreement  and  difference,  and  follow  up  the  conjecture  thus  arrived  at
or  find  an  explanation  by  extending  known  laws  by  means  of  analogy.

The  causal  explanation  of  an  event  will  never,  strictly  speaking,  enabl
us  to  point  to  a  single  agent  as  its  sole  ground.

1.  The  simplest  form  of  explanation  is  the  subsumption  of  a  perceive'
connection  of  changes  under  a  known  law. That  lacmus  paper  will  tor
red  when  dipped  in  acid  is  explained  when  I  know  that  acids  always  brin
about  this  change  in  colour  ;  whether  I  know  beforehand  that  the  fluid  i
an  acid,  or  only  ascertain  it  subsequently, makes  no  essential  difference
the  process  is  a  simple  syllogism.

2.  The  next  cases  are  those  in  which  I  have  to  combine  different  la\v
in  the  form  of  a  syllogistic  chain. I  may,  perhaps,  be  unable  to  subsum
under  a  known  special  law  the  fact  that  a  bottle  will  break  when  watt
freezes  in  it;  but  if  I  know  that  water,  when  it  freezes,  expands  with  gre;


EXPLANATION  OF THE GIVEN  419

brce,  and  that  the  glass  is  too  brittle  to  admit  of  any  extension,  then  by
Combining  these  two  rules  I  get  the  conclusion  that  the  glass  must
iccessarily  break.  The  logical  processes  which  take  place  here  are
hroughout  similar  to  those  which  we  employed  in  discovering  proofs  for  a
;iven  proposition  (§  81,  3,  p.  194),  except  that  here  the  major  premises  in-
roduced  are  only  inductively  established.  For  this  reason  every  such
•xplanation  is  also  a  new  confirmation  of  the  proposition  by  which  we
xplain  ;  the  consequences  exacted  by  the  law  are  fulfilled.  If  any  dis-
repancy  should  appear  between  the  Given  and  that  which  follows  as
onclusion  from  the  assumed  laws,  this  would  point  to  the  fact  either  that
he  law  is  not  correct  or  that  some  circumstance  which  modifies  the  result
.as  escaped  our  notice.

3.  Where  we  fail  to  subsume  a  given  event  under  laws  of  which  the
onditions  are  perceptible,  we  shall  be  tempted  at  first  to  proceed  to  a
irect  comparison  of  different  cases  in  which  the  same  event  takes  place,
nd  to  look  around  for  an  antecedent  or  a  circumstance  which  is  common
)  the  different  cases  in  which  the  phenomenon  to  be  explained  occurs.
!"  we  notice  that  intermittent  fever  is  only  found  in  places  where  there  are
'iarshes,  but  which  differ  in  every  other  possible  respect,  that  cases  of
itermittent  fever  multiply  in  places  east  of  a  marsh  when  a  west  wind
.ows,  and  west  of  it  when  an  east  wind  blows,  then  we  have  sufficient
•ound  for  assuming  that  the  marsh  is  causally  connected  with  the  inter-
.ittent  fever,  and  that  the  air  above  it  is,  or  contains,  the  cause  of  the
ver.  If,  wherever  we  find  oak-apples,  we  also  notice  an  insect  which
erces  the  oak -leaves,  then  this  insect  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  cause  of

e  formation  of  oak-apples.

A  proposition  obtained  in  this  way  can,  however,  be  quite  certain  only
we  can  reverse  the  process,  and  show  experimentally  that  men  always
H  ill  with  intermittent  fever  when  they  breathe  marsh-air,  and  that  oak-
'•ples  appear  on  the  leaves  upon  which  the  insects  are  placed  ;  when,  that
1  the  conjecture  obtained  by  comparison  can  be  made  the  basis  for  the
verse  process  of  observing  the  results  which  arise  under  given  conditions.

4.  In  other  instances  favourable  circumstances  give  us  the  opportunity
applying  the  method  of  difference. If  we  try  to  establish  the  conditions
der  which  typhus  arises  by observing  a  great  number of  cases  and
ding  the  circumstances  which  always  preceded,  we  shall  indeed  derive
tie  benefit  from  the  instructions  to  eliminate  the  different  antecedents

the  different  cases  and  to  retain  those  which  are  common  to  all  ;  even


420  LOGIC

if  uncertainty  as  to  whether  the  perceptible  conditions  are  ultimately  alvvay
the  same,  or  whether  the  same  form  of  illness  may  not  proceed  fror
different  causes,  did  not  make  us  hesitate  from  the  first,  yet  it  would  b
absolutely  impossible  to  enumerate  all  the  antecedents  which  ough
perhaps  to  be  taken  into  consideration,  and  to  be  certain  that  none  wa
overlooked.

But  when  we  find  an  epidemic  of  typhus  in  a  town,1  and  one  part  c
the  town  contains  all  those  attacked  and  another  part  none ;  if  all  the  ir
fected  houses  draw  their  water  from  one  reservoir^/,  while  no  case  is  foun
among  those  supplied  from  the  second  reservoir  .Z? ;  and  if,  in  additioi
the  same  facts  should  occur  in  a  second  town  at  a  considerable  distanc<
then  we  should have  an indication that  the  conditions of  the  illnes
lay  in  the  first  reservoir  of  water. For  all  the  cases  of  illness,  howevt
different  their  circumstances  may  be  otherwise,  would  then  agree  in  th
fact  that  they  have  for  their  antecedent  the  use  of  water  from  source  A
and  where  under  similar  circumstances  of  locality,  climate,  etc.,  the  resu
is  absent,  the  antecedent  is  also  absent. If  it  also  happened  that  whe
the  first  reservoir  of  water  was  cut  off  no  more  cases  of  illness  occurrec
then  the  first  result  would  be  confirmed  in  another  way. If  it  should  the
be  found  that  the  waters  from  the  two  sources  differ  in  the  fact  that  th
first  is  defiled  by  refuse,  then  we  have  singled  out  a  definite  circumstanc
connected  with  that condition ; and if  in  the  second  town, the oth<
circumstances  being  quite  different,  the  partial  epidemic should aga:
attack  a  district  supplied  from  a  source  similarly  defiled,  then  the  pro
that  such  defiled  water  is,  or  contains,  the cause  of  the  illness  would  1
sufficiently  complete. The  fact  that  all  do  not  fall  ill  who  use  the  wat>
can  be  explained  by  the  general  observation  that  certain  individuals  a
not  liable  to  such  infections.

But  it  would  still  only  be  proved  that  in  these  cases  the  impure  wat
is,  or  contains,  the  cause  of  the  typhus ;  we  have  not  proved  the  univers
proposition  that  wherever  typhus  appears  impure  water  has  been  drun
The  method  of  difference  does  indeed  prove  (according  to  §  95,  8,  p.  34
causal  connection  for  the  particular  case  ;  it  cannot  give  us  a  univen
proposition  to  the  effect  that  a  given  phenomenon  is  always  produced  I
the  same  cause.

5.  It  is  obvious  that  a  comparison  under  such  selected  circumstanc
can  only  be  made  in  favourable  instances.  In  the  great  majority  of  cas

1  Cf.  Dentsches  Archiv  fur  klinische  Medicin,  vii.,  p.  155  scl-


EXPLANATION  OF THE GIVEN  421

t  is  not  possible  to  find  causes  for  given  phenomena  in  this  more  direct
;vay ;  it  can  only  be  done  by  means  of  a  deductive  process  making  use  of
inalogy  as  a  guiding  principle.

Suppose,  taking  the  instance  employed  by  Mill  to  illustrate  his  methods,
ihat  we  had  to say merely  upon the ground of  observation, without
ixperiments  or other presuppositions,  upon  what  conditions  the  pheno
menon  of  dew depends ; we might watch  the  phenomenon  for  a  long
ime  without  getting  any  clue,  and  the  attempt  to  gather  from  the  ante-
;edents  observed  in  the  different  instances  the  whole  of  the  conditions
i  pon  which  the  phenomenon  itself,  and  the  degree  to  which  it  is  present,
epends,  would  certainly  fail. It  would  first  occur  to  us  that  night  and
clear  sky  constitute  the  condition,  for  this  is  always  present  when dew
'ills ;  hut  the  proof  breaks  down  because  there  are  clear  nights  in  which
jo  dew  falls,  so  that  dew  cannot be necessarily  connected  with  a  clear
ky. Moreover,  we  find  that  during  the  same  night  certain  objects  will  be
lore  strongly  bedewed than others, so that night cannot be the  sole
ondition  ;  we  are  however  quite  at  a  loss  to  say  how  those  which  are
lore  strongly  bedewed differ  from the  others  until  we  are  led  by  some
onjecture  to examine them as  to their capacity for conducting and
idiating  heat. Neither  the absolute temperature  of  the  night, nor  its
•inference  from  the  temperature  of  the  day,  gives  us  any  definite  measure
>r  the  amount  of  dew  ;  in short,  we  are  confronted  by  a  confusion  of
iirying  phenomena which  refuse  to conform  to  any  comprehensible  rule,
id  which  we  should  never  succeed in  disentangling  without  applying
lies  which  we  have  learned  elsewhere  and  established  experimentally.
The  explanation  of  dew  has,  on  the  contrary,  like  the  explanation  of
ost events which we cannot establish immediately  as  produced by
irceptible  causes,  taken  an  entirely  different  course  ;  it  has proceeded
inductively  by  the  subsumption  of  the  phenomenon  under  a  law  which  is
lown  as  a  ground  for  a  similar  result,  and  by  showing  that  the  conditions
this  law  are  present  whenever  dew  falls.

The  point  we  start  from  is  the  regularly  observed  fact  that  water  settles
drops  upon  bodies  which  are  colder  than  the  surrounding  atmosphere*
'.  upon  a  bottle  of  cold  water  when  brought  into  a  warm  room.  Dew
not  only  similar  in  form  to  this  deposit ;  it  also  agrees  with  it  in  the
:t  that  it  appears  without  any  visible  water  being  present  and  falling.
ie  attempt  now  follows  to  extend  this  special  rule,  and  to  subsume
ider  it  the  formation  of  dew  ;  and  this  is  done  by  showing  that  similar


422  LOGIC

conditions  are  present  where  dew  forms,  that  the  bedewed  bodies  are
actually  colder,  at  any  rate  were  for  a  time  during  the  night  colder,  than
the  surrounding  atmosphere,  and  that  under  circumstances  alike  in  other
respects  bodies  with  more  dew  upon  them  are  colder  than  those  with  less.
This  may  be  shown  either  directly  by  measurement  of  temperatures,  or
deductively  from  known  laws  of  the  conduction  and  radiation  of  heat.

In  a  similar  manner  we  refer  all  variations  in  the  formation  of  dew  to
their  conditions  by  subsuming  them  under  known  connections,  and  showing
that  the  requisite  conditions  are  actually  forthcoming  ;  and  this  process
confirms  in  its  turn  the  validity  of  the  rule  upon  which  it  is  based  by
showing  its  efficacy  in  new  combinations.

In  the  same  way  animal  heat  is  explained  by  showing  that  a  known
cause  of  heat,  combustion  (and  other  chemical  processes),  takes  place  in
animals,  although  in  a  peculiar  form  ;  and  the  explanation  would  be
complete  if  the  amount  of  heat  produced  by  an  animal  body  could  be
shown  to  be  the  result  of  a  given  quantity  of  chemically  combining
substances,  of  burnt  carbon,  etc.

6. The  inference  may  be  represented  in  the  following  form  :
There  is  given  a  phenomenon  E.
It  is  known  that  E  occurs  under  conditions  ABC.
Now  in  the  given  case  ABC  are  present ;
Therefore  they  must  have  E  for  consequence  ;

Therefore  the  given  consequence  E  can  be  due  to  no  other  condition.

For  the  inference  to  be  conclusive,  it  is  of  course  necessary  that  the
given  E  shall  be  just  the  same  in  quantity  also  as  the  E  which  follows
according  to  known  laws  from  the  conditions  ABC.

Explanations  in  this  sense  take  place  sometimes  by  subsumption  under
causal  laws,  properly  so  called,  sometimes  by  subsumption  under  merel)
empirical  uniformities ;  the  process  is  the  same  in  either  case,  and  consists
in  showing  that  the  requisite  conditions  are  present,  and  that,  therefore
what  actually  occurs  is  known  to  be  identical  with  what  is  required  by  the
rule.

By  means  of  these  processes,  a  connection  is  found  between  observable
phenomena  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  in  a  direct  way,  but  which
can  be  established  by  simple  subsumption  under  known  laws,  or  by  genera
lization  of  those  laws.  It  is  here  that  we  are  frequently  guided  by  the
principle  of  analogy,  according  to  which  we  expect  to  find  similar  condi
tions  for  similar  results,  and  which,  when  we  do  find  them,  is  a  ground  foi


EXPLANATION  OF THE GIVEN  423

ithe  conjecture  that  the  same  connection  exists  between  A  and  B  which
exists  between  an  A\  and  £l  which  are  similar  to  them,  and  which  fall  under
;the  same  higher  concept.  When  it  has  been  shown  that  the  oak-apple  is
due  to  the  bite  of  an  insect,  we  are  led  by  analogy  to  refer  similar  forma
tions  in  other  leaves  to  a  similar  ground  :  if  the  conjecture  is  confirmed,  we
have  the  beginning  of  a  generalizing  induction.  The  modern  develop
ment  of  the  theory  of  infectious  diseases  has  been  guided  entirely  by  such
inferences  from  analogy.

The  main  condition  upon  which  success  in  this  method  of  deduction
from  inductive  propositions  depends  consists,  therefore,  in  our  being  able
to  subsume  a  given  phenomenon  under  another  of  which  the  conditions
'are  known,  or  to  discover  the  element  common  to  both.  Without  quickness
of  combination,  by  which  we  can  call  up  a  number  of  possible  analogies,
and  apply  them  to  the  unexplained  case  ;  without  a  happy  power  of  divina
tion,  which  is  guided  by  unanalysable  associations  to  discover  that  analogy
which  embraces  most  aspects  of  the  event ;  finally,  without  imagination  to
construct  connections  for  which  the  only  ground  maybe  a  hidden  similarity,
our  thoughts,  if  compelled  to  proceed  strictly  according  to  method,  would
frequently  be  condemned  by  the  impossibility  of  discovering  in  this  way  a
sufficiently  grounded  connection  to  complete  stagnation.

But  this  fact  is  in  no  way  contrary  to  the  nature  of  induction  ;  it  is  a
necessary  consequence  of  it.  We  cannot  even  begin  the  process  of  infer
ence  without  making  general  assumptions;  and  the  general  proposition
which  we  get  by  summing  up  a  number  of  instances  is  really  a  hypothesis
::o  which,  it  is  true,  we  are  led  clearly  and  certainly  in  this  case.  But  be-
:\veen  these  most  general  presuppositions,  upon  which  all  induction  is
'grounded,  and  the  simplest  cases  to  which  they  can  be  applied,  there  is  a
»vide  region  within  which  the  hypotheses  which  are  always  necessary  for
nduction  can  only  be  formed  tentatively,  in  order  to  give  some  definite
iirection  to  investigation,  to  serve  in  our  analysis  of  phenomena  into  their
elements  as  a  means  of  breaking  up  complete  phenomena  on  certain  lines,
xnd  to  invent  the  experiments  which  will  make  it  possible  to  confirm  or
"efute  an  opinion.

It  is  therefore  inevitable  that  we  should  always  have  wider  and  more
comprehensive  ideas  about  the  connections  in  nature  than  we  can  verify  in
detail;  anticipations  of  nature,  as  Bacon  calls  them,  are  no  doubt  the
sources  of  numerous  errors,  but  they  are  also  the  indispensable  conditions
af  progress,  and  there  can  never  be  any  question  of  wishing  to  prohibit


424  LOGIC

them,  but  only  of  applying  the  strictest  test  to  their  empirical  proof.  The
proof  is  itself  of  such  a  nature  that  it  presupposes  a  hypothesis,  and  its
chief  characteristic,  which  is  that  it  can  refute  beyond  doubt  but  can  never
strictly  confirm,  causes  the  course  of  investigation  to  be  such  that  every
definite  and  irreversible  step  in  advance  must  consist  in  refuting  errors.

7.  Since  events  and  chains  of  events  are  explained  as  the  effects  of
certain  causes  by  the  application  of  known  causal,  laws,  an  instance  will,
strictly  speaking,  be  explained  according  to  the  nature  of  the  causal
laws  upon  which  the  actual  event  depends,  only  when  all  the  conditions
upon  which  it  depends,  efficient  causes,  circumstances,  and  negative
conditions,  are  enumerated ;  and,  as  a  rule,  if  we  are  to  speak  quite
strictly,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  denote  any  particular  thing  as  the
sole  and  complete  cause  of  a  given  event.  More  especially  where  the
effect  is  mediated  by  a  number  of  intervening  links  is  it  an  inaccurate
abbreviation  to  describe  a  cause  from  which  there  issues  a  chain  o:
effects  as  the  cause  of  the  whole  course.  It  produces  the  final  effeo
only  if  the  given  circumstances  are  present  and  counteracting  condition;
are  absent  ;  the  presence  of  these  circumstances,  the  absence  of  counter
acting  causes,  have  themselves  many  other  causes,  and  every  particulai
event  is  thus  determined  by  an  incalculable  number  of  preceding
conditions,  which  are  to  a  large  extent  independent  of  each  other.

The  problem  of  finding  a  single  cause  as  the  complete  ground  o
an  event  could  only  be  really  solved  if  it  could  be  shown  that  tht
action  of  a  thing  must  by  itself  produce  the  effect  under  all  circumstances
and  could  be  prevented  by  no  obstacle.  But  this  can  never  be  shown
If  I  strike  a  dagger  into  a  man's  heart,  I  have,  of  course,  caused  h;
death,  and  no  one  will  hesitate  to  describe  my  action  as  the  whole  am
sole  cause  of  his  death,  because  my  action  produced  a  state  in  th
wounded  man  which  made  death  inevitable.  Accurately  speaking
however,  all  which  I  directly  do  is  to  impart  a  certain  velocity  in
certain  direction  to  my  arm  and  to  the  weapon  I  am  holding  ;  whethe
the  blow  is  fatal  or  not  depends  upon  the  position  or  movement  of  th
victim  at  the  time ;  if  he  swerve  out  of  the  way,  the  blow  will  miss
but  the  position  and  motion  of  the  victim  are  conditioned  by  a  number  c
circumstances  which  may  be  quite  independent  of  my  action.  Th
reason  why  in  such  cases  we  describe  the  blow  with  the  dagger  as  th
whole  and  sole  cause  of  death  is  ultimately  the  fact  that  the  blow  wa
intended,  and  that  its  direction  was  determined  by  the  different  circun


EXPLANATION  OF THE GIVEN  425

stances  co-operating  idealiter  in  the  thought  of  the  person  aiming  it;  to
this  extent  the  whole  cause  is  represented  only  in  the  preconceived
intention,  and  is  completely  represented  in  proportion  as  all  circumstances
are  taken  into  account.  Apart  from  this  subjective  element  it  must  be
impossible  to  find  a  formula  which  would  distinguish  between  the  cases
in  which  an  agent  and  his  deed  might  be  fairly  described  as  whole
and  sole  cause  of  an  event,  and  those  in  which  he  is  only  the  co-operating
;:ause.  If  I  injure  a  man  by  a  wound  which  is  made  fatal  only  by  the
:ircumstances,  and  would  under  other  circumstances  be  curable,  the
:ase  differs  from  the  preceding  one  only  by  the  fact  that  a  greater  number
jf  conditions  have  co-operated  to  bring  about  the  result.  If  I  had
.aken  all  these  circumstances  into  consideration,  and  foreseen  the  result
:,vith  certainty,  then  the  whole  cause  would  here  also  have  been  ideally
represented  in  me,  and  there  would  have  been  the  same  reason  for  saying
hat  I  had  killed  the  man  ;  but  if  these  circumstances  had  no  determining
nfluence  upon  my  will,  it  cannot  be  said  in  the  same  sense  that  I
:iave  killed  the  man,  although  I  constituted  an  integral  part  of  the  cause,
md  without  my  action  the  remaining  circumstances  would  not  have
aken  effect.

Our  every  action,  even  the  most  unimportant,  gives  rise  to  circurn-
•tances  which  may  be  connected  in  such  a  way  as  to  co-operate  towards
.  remote  result  ;  every  action  of  ours  upon  our  surroundings  has
ncalculable  consequences,  and  co-operates  as  cause  in  an  endless  series
:>f  effects.  Whether  I  take  part  in  causing  this  or  that  event  by  an
ccident  for  which  I  am  not  accountable,  or  whether  it  is  to  be  attributed
o  me  as  merit  or  guilt,  cannot  be  decided  by  the  purely  objective
elation  of  causality,  according  to  which  a  constantly  diminishing  part
if  the  cause  is  asciibed  to  me,  but  only  by  the  relation  of  the  consequence
o  my  conscious  intention  and  purpose.1

8.  We  can  only  refer  briefly  to  the  relation  between  those  deductive
>rocesses  which  determine  the  causal  connections  of  given  events  and
hose  by  which  we  seek  means  for  our  ends.  Here,  again,  we  have
3  find  the  major  premises,  according  to  which  a  desired  result  follows
•om  known  conditions,  and  then  to  bring  about  these  conditions  ;  or,
"  they  do  not  lie  directly  in  our  power,  to  go  back  to  other  laws  until  we

1  For  the  juridical  application  of  the  causal  concept  cf.  my  article  :  Der  Regrifl
'.f  Wollens  und  sein  Verhdltniss  zuin  Begiiff  der  Ursache.  Kleine  Schriften,  II.,
15  sq.


426  LOGIC

find  conditions  which  we  can  directly  create.  It  is  the  same  process
as  in  finding  a  proof,  and  it  is  also  similar  to  the  finding  of  a  proof
in  that  the  result  may  be  attainable  in  various  ways.

We  must,  therefore,  observe  one  precaution.  If  we  represent  the
process  thus  :

E  is  desired,

If  A,  B,  C  is,  E  will  follow  ;

Therefore,  ABC  must  be  realized,  in  order  that  E  may  follow,  then
this  must  is  objectively  justified  only  if  we  know  that  E  can  proceed  from
no  other  conditions,  that  A,  £,  C  is  the  only  real  ground  of  E.  If,
on  the  other  hand,  we  merely  do  not  know  any  other  real  ground  for
£,  the  must  has  a  merely  subjective  significance  ;  if  we  will  that  E  is  to
be,  then  we  must  will  A,  B,  C,  because  our  limited  knowledge  makes  us
unable  to  will  anything  else.

§  99-

The  explanation  of  a  fact,  of  which  we  have  not  been  able  to  perceive
the  genesis,  from  actual  conditions  of  which  we  can  only  infer  the  exist
ence,  presupposes  the  knowledge  of  propositions  according  to  which  it
could  only  depend  upon  one  or  a  limited  number  of  conditions.  Such
propositions,  however,  can  only  be  made  probable  by  increasing  our  know
ledge  to  the  greatest  possible  extent.

Even  where  such  propositions  are  valid,  the  condition  cannot  be  in
ferred  in  its  complete  determination,  but  only  those  aspects  of  it  which
are  indicated  by  the  given  phenomenon.  The  reconstruction  of  the
conditions  succeeds  more  completely  in  proportion  as  the  fact  to  be  ex
plained  presents  a  combination  of  many  elements,  and  so  makes  it  more
probable  that  those  conditions  in  relation  to  which  this  combination  would
be  fortuitous  should  be  excluded.

The  test  of  every  such  assumption  consists  in  the  deductive  develop
ment  of  all  its  consequences,  which  must  not  conflict  with  any  known
fact ;  this  process  strengthens  the  probability  of  the  hypothesis  if  it  also
explains  facts  from  which  it  was  not  derived.

The  general  rule  is,  to  presuppose,  if  possible,  only  conditions  which  are
known  to  be  actually  forthcoming  elsewhere  (causes  verce).

The  most  important  application  of  inferences  from  a  given  fact  to  the
reality  of  the  causes  which  have  produced  it  takes  place  in  HISTORICAL

INVESTIGATION.


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  427

The  problem  here  is  to  infer  back  from  given  external  products  of  human
activity — it  may  be  writings  or  creations  of  human  art — to  the  definite
psychical  processes  which  have  produced  them ;  and  to  explain  these
processes  themselves  by  preceding  internal  or  external  conditions.  It  is
chiefly  psychological  knowledge  which  is  presupposed  in  this  investi
gation.

Upon  such  psychological  knowledge  even  the  preliminary  stages,
literary  criticism,  philological  exegesis,  investigation  as  to  the  credibility
,of  authorities,  depend  ;  as  well  as  the  reconstruction  of  the  continuous  and
lictual  course  of  events  from  the  fragmentary  facts  which  alone  we  are  at
ifirst  able  to  infer.

i  In  consequence  of  the  comprehensive  interaction  between  the  individual
;md  the  community  in  which  he  lives,  the  ideal  of  complete  historical
knowledge  would  require  that  the  life  of  each  individual  should  be  known
as  interwoven  with  that  of  all  others,  as  depending  upon  tradition  and  as
influencing  contemporary  and  successive  generations  ;  and  that  in  this  way
every  historical  phenomenon  should  be  traced  back  to  its  ultimate  sources
I  n  the  vital  activities  of  individuals,  and  represented  as  the  collective  result
}f  a  complicated  psychical  causal  connection.

This  unattainable  knowledge  can  be  in  part  replaced  by  the  investiga
tion  of  those  vital  phenomena  which  are  shared  in  essentially  the  same
,vay  by  all  the  members  of  a  nation,  such  as  language,  morality,  religion,
technical  methods,  social  and  national  ordinances  and  legislation.  These
brm  the  background  from  which  proceeds  the  particular  mode  of  action
of  eminent  and  well-known  personalities.

Within  the  common  life  it  is  possible  to  analyse  particular  tendencies
!.vhich  manifest  a  connection  which  can  be  investigated  ;  this  analysis  is
nost  complete  when  it  can  start  from  the  general  aims  which  control  the
iction  of  the  individual  in  a  particular  direction.

The  gradual  remodelling  of  common  thoughts  and  volitions  may  be
derived  from  general  laws  in  so  far  as  we  can  find  in  it  a  logical
iccessity.

Historical  investigation  points  beyond  the  limits  which  are  imposed  by
ts  means  of  knowledge  in  two  directions.  In  the  first  place,  it  points  to
i  first  state  which  can  only  be  hypothetically  constructed  ;  and  in  the
econd  place,  to  certain  assumptions  concerning  the  nature  of  man  in
vhich  empirical  psychology  also  concludes,
i .  Explanation  takes  another  direction  when  direct  observation  of  the


428  LOGIC

conditions  under  which  a  phenomenon  occurs  is  impossible,  and  the  ques
tion  takes  the  form  of  asking  what  must  have  been  if  the  Given  is  to  be
understood  as  necessarily  following  from  it ;  when,  therefore,  it  has  to  be
proved  that  certain  conditions  have  actually  taken  place.

Thus  I  explain  a  wound  found  in  a  man's  body  by  a  shot  having  been
fired  at  him,  the  rising  of  the  thermometer  by  the  increased  heat  of  the
atmosphere,  the  polished  surface  of  a  stone  by  the  action  of  a  glacier ;
I  infer  from  the  presence  of  a  certain  state  that  a  certain  cause  has
acted.  By  far  the  most  important  and  comprehensive  application  of
this  class  of  inferences  takes  place  in  the  interpretation,  from  words,
gestures  and  actions  of  the  thoughts,  feelings  and  resolutions  of  other
people,  which  can  indeed  be  known  in  no  other  way  ;  we  must,  therefore,
be  especially  careful  to  make  clear  the  basis  and  justification  of  this  kind
of  inference.

When  it  is  understood  that  those  propositions  about  causal  relations  of
which  we  can  be  most  certain  state  the  dependence  of  a  consequence  upon
certain  conditions,  then  it  is  clear,  in  the  first  place,  that  it  is  not  possible
to  infer  strictly  according  to  general  rules  from  the  existence  of  the  effect
to  the  existence  of  the  efficient  cause  upon  which  the  law  makes  it  depend.
For  even  if  the  major  premise  :  If  A  is,  then  B  is,  were  absolutely  certain,
yet  the  hypothetical  judgment  does  not  allow  us  to  infer  from  the  validity
of  the  consequent  to  the  validity  of  the  antecedent ;  from  the  fact  that  the
consequent  is  true  we  can  only  infer  that  possibly  the  antecedent  is  true.

For  such  an  inference  to  be  formally  correct,  it  would  be  necessary  for
the  proposition  to  be  convertible  :  If  B  is,  then  A  is  ;  or,  in  other  words,
it  must  be  known  that  B  is  only  when  A  is.

2.  But  it  is  just  this  only  which  is  the  difficult  point.  We  found  that
the  principle  that  like  consequences  follow  from  like  grounds  was  indeed
a  regulative  principle,  but  not  an  unconditionally  safe  guide  ;  and  even  if
we  were  fully  justified  in  acting  upon  it,  if  we  could  assume  that  difference
in  the  grounds  would  somehow  make  itself  known  in  difference  in  the
consequences,  yet  this  assumption  would  only  apply  when  the  whole  result
of  a  presupposed  cause  was  known  to  us,  and  we  could  watch  its  develop
ment  at  all  points.  What  we  are  concerned  wiih,  however,  is  only  the
perceptible  part  of  the  effect,  generally  only  one  state,  which  we  cannot
observe  in  its  growth  ;  it  may  even  be  a  state  mediated  by  several  inter
vening  causes,  by  the  action  of  which  the  characteristics  peculiar  to  the
remote  cause  have  been  obliterated.  When  I  find  a  coin  lying  upon  the


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  429

hard  ground,  I  know  that  it  has  certainly  not  grown  out  of  the  ground  or
fallen  from  the  sky,  but  the  most  careful  investigation  will  not  reveal  to  me
whether  it  has  been  placed  there,  or  has  fallen  from  some  height,  or  has
been  thrown  there,  and  there  may  be  no  conceivable  trace  about  it  of  who
has  brought  it  there  or  lost  it.

Moreover,  what  we  have  to  do  is  to  construct  what  has  really  taken
place  from  its  effect.  But  what  has  really  taken  place  is  perfectly  concrete
and  determinate.  We  know,  however,  that  the  attributes  of  the  cause  and
of  the  circumstances  under  which  it  acts  do  not  all  of  them  contribute  to
the  result,  but  that  the  circumstances  conditioning  the  result  are  con
nected  with  many  others  which  are  indifferent,  and  therefore  that,  even  if
I  had  not  to  choose  among  different  kinds  of  conditions,  the  condition

•  assumed  would  be  subject  to  a certain  generality and indeterminateness.
If  I  find  a  round  hole  in  a  window,  I  may  be  justified  by  my  knowledge  in
believing  that  a  circular  body  has  forced  itself  through  the  pane  with  great
velocity;  but  whether  it  was  a  conical  or  a  round  bullet,  whether  it  was  made
of  lead,  or  iron,  or  some  other  material,  the  hole  does  not  tell  me,  although

•  any  difference  in  material  and form might  have  betrayed  itself  by  certain
differences  in  what  actually  took  place,  if  only  I  could  have  observed  it.

3.  If  we  disregard  this  difficulty  for  the  present,  and  ask  upon  what  we
can  base  our  conviction  that  a  result  could  only  proceed  from  one  kind  of
condition,  though  it  might  admit  of  subordinate  differences,  we  find  that  it
ultimately  depends  only  upon  the  extent  of  our  knowledge.  If  it  has  been
observed  in  a  great  number  of  cases  that  B  occurred  after  A,  and  if  A  was
the  preceding  condition  in  all  cases  in  which  B  was  found,  and  in  which
there  was  any  possibility  of  perceiving  the  accompanying  and  preceding
circumstances,  then  we  generally  assume  that  B  can  be  produced  in  no
other  way,  that  A  is  not  merely  the  cause,  but  also  the  conditio  sine  qua  non
of- A

We  are  in  this  position  with  respect  to  the  genesis  of  organisms.  We
know  from  hundreds  of  thousands  of  observations  of  the  most  different
plants  and  animals  that  organisms  arise  by  propagation,  that  a  germ
springing  from  a  parent  organism  develops  under  certain  further  conditions
:o  a  new  organism  ;  and  whenever  we  have  been  able  to  observe  carefully
:he  growth  of  organic  individuals  there  has  always  been  such  a  germ.
vVhen  we  add  the  experience  that  more  careful  investigation  shows  that
:he  exceptions  previously  believed  in  are  not  forthcoming;  that  we  have
succeeded  in  subsuming  under  the  general  law  the  previously  unexplained


430  LOGIC

origin  of  infusoria  by  finding  the  germ  which  had  escaped  observation  ;
that  no  case  has  been  ascertained  beyond  doubt  in  which  organic  life  has
arisen  in  any  other  way,  then  the  great  extent  of  this  concurrent  experience
gives  us  the  right  to  assume  that  organisms  can  arise  in  no  other  way,  that
the  presence  of  a  germ  springing  from  a  parental  organism  is  the  conditio
sine  qua  non  of  their  existence.

4.  Nevertheless,  the  certainty  of  this  proposition  is  essentially  different
from  the  certainty  which  we  have  to  the  opposite  effect,  that  all  men  die.
For  since  death  occurs  under  the  most  varied  circumstances,  even  those
which  are  most  favourable  to  the  preservation  of  life,  it  must  be  that  the
nature  of  man,  together  with  the  general  conditions  of  his  life,  makes  death
necessary  ;  otherwise  it  would  not  occur  so  inevitably  ;  that  a  man  should
continue  to  live  for  ever  appears  as  an  impossibility.  But  from  the  fact
that  we  never  see  organisms  arise  without  previous  organisms,  it  does  not
follow  that  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  arise  otherwise  ;  it  only  follows  that
within  the  range  of  our  experience  the  conditions  are  not  given  ;  we  may
therefore  believe  that  it  is  impossible  within  the  sphere  in  which  we  move,
and  within  circumstances  which  are  like  those  under  which  we  observe,
but  only  that  it  is  relatively,  not  absolutely  possible.  A  negative  proposi
tion  can  never  be  established  upon  the  ground  of  a  limited  experience ;
this  may  give  us  the  constant  consequences  of  certain  conditions  ;  but  no
proposition  which  says  that  if  A  is  B  is,  can  by  itself  justify  the  proposition
if  A  is  not  B  is  not.

For  this  reason,  if  we  can  be  sufficiently  certain  of  finding  the  condi
tions,  a  much  narrower  experience  will  suffice  to  prove  that  a  consequence
is  inseparable  from  its  conditions,  than  will  show  that  a  certain  condition
or  a  certain  kind  of  condition  is  inseparable  from  a  certain  consequence.
It  was  for  a  long  time  believed  that  urea  could  only  be  produced  in
animal  organisms,  and  there  was  as  much  ground  for  the  belief  as  for  any
statement  concerning  the  exclusiveness  of  certain  conditions  ;  yet  the
proposition  was  false,  while  the  reverse  proposition  that  such  and  such
animals  produce  urea  could  be  established  as  a  universal  proposition  after
only  a  few  observations.

Thus  we  are  somewhat  at  a  loss  to  justify  the  assumption  that  certain
consequences  depend  only  upon  certain  conditions,  and  yet  there  are
many  cases  in  which  we  do  not  hesitate  to  make  use  of  such  assumptions.
Every  snail-shell  and  every  piece  of  coral,  every  bird's  nest  and  every
spider's  web,  points  unmistakably  to  a  certain  origin,  and  we  do  not


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  431

icsitate  for  a  moment  as  to  what  cause  to  assume  for  these  things  ;  if  it

vere  objected  that  inference  from  a  given  effect  to  a  certain  cause  is

uncertain,  we  should  regard  it  as  logical  chicanery. But by  what  are  we

ultimately  guided  in  our  inference  ? Not  only  by  never  having  observed

,uch  products  made  by  other  kinds  of  animals  than  those  known  to  us,  or

orming  themselves by  any  natural force,  but  also  by  finding  in them  a

Certain  character  which  is  common  to  a  great  number  of  similar  products

if  whole  classes  of  animals  ;  and  further by  the  fact  that  it  is  improbable

:hat  anything capable  of  forming  snail-shells  or bird's-nests in this  way

hould  have  escaped  our  notice,  and  finally  because  there  is  no  ground  to

•revent  us  from  assuming  the  existence  of  a  snail  or  of  a  bird  from  which

he  object  in  question  may  have come,  at any  spot on  the  earth. The

.ssumption  that  the  snail-shell  is  due  to  a  snail  agrees  with  all that  we

I  now  ;  the  assumption  that  it  is  due  to  something  else  would force  us  to

:ssume  a  cause  as  yet  entirely  unknown. This  is  in  accordance  with  the

,ondition  laid  down  by  Newton  in  the  first  Regula  philosophandi  :  causas

frum  naturalium  non  plures  admitti  debere,  quam  qtttz  verce  sin/. A  causa

°ra  can  only  be  one  of  which  we  know  that  it  does  exist,  and  can  produce

ic  effect  in  question.

:  5. To  this  we  must  add  another  consideration. It  is  inferred  in  the

nalysis  of  the  spectrum  that the  dark  and light  lines in the  spectrum

f  the  protuberances  in the  sun or  the fixed stars, or  of  the  nebulae,

•e  due to the fact that  the  same substances are present in these

sdies, which  manifest  the  same  lines  upon  the earth. The fact that

1  the  different  substances  observed upon the  earth  produce different

ines proves, because of our approximately exhaustive knowledge of

rrestrial substances, that  where we  find  the same phenomenon  upon

ie  earth  it  will  have the  same  condition  for  its  ground. It  does  not  of

>urse  follow  from  this  that  there  are  not  other  substances  in  the  universe,

hich,  while  differing  in other  respects  from  those  of  earth,  agree  with

em in emitting light of the same refrangibility ;  and we should be

stifled  only  in  the  inference  from  analogy  that  there  also  the  same  lines

dicated  like  substances,  and  different  lines  different  substances. But

e  nature  of  the  phenomenon  strengthens  our  certainty  ;  the positions

lich  might  be  occupied  by  the  particular  lines  in  the  spectrum  being  so

any,  while  the  possible number  of  combinations  of  the  particular  lines

quite  incalculable,  it  would  be  the  most  extraordinary  coincidence  if  so

:  my  lines  as  appear,  e.g.,  in  terrestrial  iron,  should  be  produced  in  exactly


432  LOGIC

the  same  combination  by  a  different  substance,  and  if  of  the  innumerablt
possible  combinations  it  should  always  be  just  this  and  no  other  whicl
was  realized.  It  is  therefore  the  combination  of  a  great  number  o
different  attributes  which,  so  far  as  we  know,  are  independent  of  eacl
other,  which  forces  us  to  the  conclusion  that  things  which  agree  in  s<
many  particulars  must  be  the  same.  Thus  the  process  is  the  same  a:
when  a  chemist  investigates  a  substance ;  if  it  reacts  like  a  knowr
substance,  we  are  not  indeed  justified  as  yet  in  abstracto  in  the  conclusior
that  it  is  the  same  ;  but  if  it  manifests  a  large  number  of  phenomeru
which  are  like  and  none  which  are  different,  then  the  improbability  in
creases  that  different  bodies  should  act  in  the  same  way  and  that  thei;
difference  should  betray  itself  in  no  single  point.  It  is  the  same  in  :
case  of  crime.  If  a  large  number  of  facts  which  are  independent  of  eacl
other  are  explained  by  a  certain  person  having  committed  the  deed,  while
in  order  to  acquit  him  we  should  have  to  assume  that  each  particulai
item  of  incriminating  evidence  had  a  special  and  independent  ground
and  that  they  were  all  brought  together  by  chance  alone,  then  no  om
would  have  any  doubt  as  to  how  to  decide.

Thus  it  is  not  merely  a  question  of  inferring  sameness  of  condition;
from  sameness  of  results,  but  of  inferring  from  the  sameness  of  tin
combination  of  a  great  number  of  specific  determinations  in  a  result,  tha'
its  condition  is  that  from  which  just  this  combination  would  necessaril)
follow.  Each  particular  characteristic  may  in  itself  admit  of  differeir
interpretations,  but  of  these  interpretations  of  each  particular  characteristic
there  is  always  one  which  leads  to  the  same  point  to  which  one  of  the
interpretations  of  each  other  characteristic  leads,  whilst  the  remaining
interpretations  all  diverge ;  and  that  gives  us  the  right  to  refer  it  to  thai
one  point,  and  not  to  the  improbable  chance  coincidence  of  a  numbe'
of  independent  conditions.

6.  Having  investigated  the  conditions  under  which  we  can  affirm  tin
proposition  that  a  result  is  produced  exclusively  by  a  certain  condition,
and  having  found  that  they  consist  partly  in  a  comprehensive  knowledge
of  the  ways  in  which  actually  existing  conditions  act  and  in  ths  grea'
differences  in  the  results  of  large  classes  of  conditions,  partly  in  the  specific
combinations  of  many  attributes  which  we  can  expect  only  from  one  kinc
of  condition  and  not  from  many  :  we  now  proceed  to  establish  the  realit)
of  a  certain  condition  by  a  simple  hypothetical  inference  of  which  the
major  premise  states  that  if  B  is,  A  was  its  condition.


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  433

7.  In doing  this  we  have  to  keep  in  view  two  points. In  the  first
: place  the  particular  value  of  B  requires  a  particular  value  of  A,  and  this
can  only  be  established  if  the  relations  between  A  and  B  can  be  expressed
in  all  their  variations  by  comprehensive  formulae  ;  from  a  certain height
3f  the  thermometer  we  infer  a  certain  degree  of  heat  in  the  surrounding
medium,  and  not  merely  heat  in  general,  and  our  A must  therefore  be
•such  that  B  appears  as  its  necessary  consequence  according  to  the  known
relations  between  them.

i  In  the  second  place,  the  inference  needs  to  be  tested  in  proportion  as  its
najor  premise  is  not  absolutely  certain  ;  and  this  test  consists  in  trying
..vhether  consequences  must  not  follow  from  the  assumed  A  which  would
Contradict  some  actually  existing  state  of  things.  From  this  it  follows  that
i  he  certainty  of  the  inference  from  a  given  fact  to  its  conditions  always
depends  ultimately  upon  the  certainty  with  which  we  can  reverse  the  pro
cess  and  calculate  the  results  of  assumed  or  known  conditions.

8.  In  proportion  as  we  lack  established  laws  showing  the  dependence

i>f  quantitatively  determined  effects  upon  quantitatively  determined  condi-

ions,  it  will  be  more  difficult  to  infer  back  to  causes. In  many  cases  we

ave  no  proposition  affirming  the  exclusive  dependence  of  an  event  upon

i  single  species  of  cause,  and  a  simple  hypothetical  inference  will  be  im-
,ossible.

There  is  a  way  out  of  the  difficulty  if  we  can  succeed  in  establishing  a
isjunctive  judgment,  stating  that  if  B  was  then  its  condition  was  either  A
if  A'  or  A".  We  need  not  point  out  that  the  possibility  of  finding  an  ex
haustive  disjunction  depends  upon  the  same  conditions  as  the  finding  of  a
mple  proposition  ;  upon  the  most  comprehensive  knowledge  of  the  con-
litions  which  always  produce  the  consequence  B,  and  upon  the  knowledge
lat  no  other  condition  within  the  range  of  our  experience  has  this  conse-
aence.  This  disjunction  may  refer  to  different  classes  of  conditions,  or
ily  to  different  modifications  of  similar  conditions  ;  the  process  is  the  same
'.  either  case.

The  first  use  we  make  of  the  disjunction  is  to  develop  each  of  the  dis-
nct  conditions  into  its  results,  and  to  inquire  whether  it  has  not  additional
•nsequences  which  contradict  a  fact,  or  others  which  agree  with  a  given
"i  which  would  be  otherwise  inexplicable ;  by  means  of  the  former  we
ould  refute  one  term  and  proceed  by  exclusion  ;  by  means  of  the  latter
:  should  strengthen  the  assumption  in  favour  of  a  given  term.  The  alter-
tion  of  day  and  night  may  have  for  its  condition  either  the  rotation  of  the
s.  L. — ii.  F  F


434  LOGIC

earth  or  the  revolution  of  the  sun ;  direct  perception  does  not  enable  us  to
ascertain  what  actually  takes  place.  But  if  the  earth  rotates,  the  centrifugal
force  will  be  greatest  at  the  equator,  and  this  explains  why  the  seconds
pendulum  is  shorter  there,  a  fact  for  which  we  should  otherwise  know  no
ground;  and  this  consequence  is  a  presumption  in  favour  of  the  first
alternative,  especially  since  it  agrees  exactly  in  amount  with  what  may  be
calculated  from  the  assumption.

]f  it  is  impossible  to  come  to  such  a  decision,  we  may  find  help  in  a  con
sideration  of  probabilities.  If  we  find  two  books  with  different  dates  on
the  title-page,  both  being  exactly  alike,  even  to  errors  in  printing,  then
either  the  whole  book  has  been  're-printed,  or  only  the  title  has  been
altered.  Either  assumption  is  in  itself  possible,  but  we  know  from  experi
ence  in  the  manipulation  of  type  that  few  pages  issue  from  the  press  which
exactly  correspond  to  the  copy,  and  that  it  is  therefore  most  improbable
that  in  a  second  edition  there  would  not  be  differences  from  the  first,  even
if  it  was  meant  to  be  exactly  the  same,  especially  in  printer's  errors,  which
are  easily  overlooked.  The  first  assumption  is  therefore  most  improbable,
and  we  shall  not  hesitate  to  decide  for  the  second.  The  same  probability
serves  to  show  that  two  copies  of  a  text  which  deviate  from  the  original  in
the  same  passage  have  not  been  made  independently  of  each  other ;  where
they  do  depend  upon  each  other  it  is  most  probable  that  one  will  have
copied  the  error  of  the  other ;  where  they  do  not,  it  is  most  improbabk
that  it  should  contain  exactly  the  same  error  as  the  other.

We  prefer,  therefore,  that  assumption  from  which  the  result  would  mos
probably  proceed ;  and  where  direct  means  of  proof  are  wanting  we  mus
always  have  recourse  to  this  criterion,  though  it  is  only  in  extreme  case;
that  it  can  be  determined  and  estimated  with  any  certainty.  Nor  can  i
be  determined  in  any  rules  or  numbers  where  the  probability  is  to  b<
regarded  as  equal  to  certainty ;  here,  again,  everything  depends  upon  thi
degree  of  certainty  with  which  we  know  the  causal  connections.

9.  If  our  knowledge  is  insufficient  even  for  such  disjunctions,  there  i
open  to  us  an  unlimited  range  of  conjectures,  by  which  to  construct  th>
possible  antecedents  ;  and  here  we  can  have  no  other  rule  but  that  we  hav
no  right  to  any  assumption  which  is  not  based  upon  a  connection  known  t
be  in  accordance  with  experience.  What  we  always  have  to  do  is  to  cor
struct  the  circumstances  from  which  the  result  to  be  explained  may  hav
proceeded  according  to  known  rules.  But  any  form  of  deduction  ceases  t
be  possible  where  there  is  no  limit  to  the  number  of  cases,  nor  even  a


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  435

estimation  of  probabilities  in  the  sense  that  the  condition  most  frequently
found  would  be  preferred,  for  where  it  is  not  possible  to  exhaust  the
instances  there  is  no  ground  for  even  this  estimation.

10.  The  whole  problem  would  take  another  and  far  more favourable
form  if  it  were  possible  to  construct  the  required  conditions,  not  backwards
from  the  result,  but  forwards  from  more  remote  conditions  which  are  known
to  us,  and  to  show  that  it  is  the  necessary  result  of  existing  relations. The
fact  that  the  mammoth  and  rhinoceros  have  lived  in  far higher  latitudes
than  their  relations  now  inhabit  presupposes  either  that  the  climate  was
then  warmer,  or  that  the  constitution  of  the  animals  has  changed ;  the
warmer  climate  might  have  been  due  to  the  fact  that  the  cooling  of  the

,  earth  by  radiation  had  not  then  proceeded  as  far  as  now,  or  to  a  more
intense  heat  from  the  sun,  or  to  the  fact  that  the  heat  was  then  differently
distributed  upon  the  earth.  If  it  could  be  shown,  say,  that  owing  to  the
existing  relations  of  our  solar  system,  to  variations  in  the  eccentricity  of

:the  earth's  orbit,  and  to  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  there  must  be  a

I  periodical  change  in  the  distribution  of  heat  upon  the  earth,  and  that  the
amount  of  these  variations  is  exactly  enough  to  bring  about  sufficient  heat
in  the  northern  latitudes  for  the  existence  of  these  pachydermata,  then  we

:  should  decide  in  favour  of  this  alternative,  and  the  other  would  be  super
fluous.  In  the  same  way  we  may  always  make  a  rule  of  deciding  even
merely  hypothetical  assumptions  by  way  of  deduction  in  the  first  place,  and
of  dealing  with  the  circumstances  introduced  for  the  sake  of  explanation
just  as  we  do  with  the  phenomena  to  be  explained  ;  that  is,  by  finding  out

ithe  conditions  from  which  they  proceed  of  necessity.  In  this  way  they
would  take  their  place  in  a  wider  connection  of  causes  and  effects.

11.  By  far  the  most  important,  but  also  the  most  difficult  application
of  such  inferences  from  a  given  fact  to  the  reality  of  a  cause  which  pro
duced  it,  is  called  for  by  the  problem  of  inferring  from  perceptible  mani
festations,  words,  gestures,  actions,  and  their  results,  the  reality  of  inner
events  in  other  people,  of  finding  out  their  thoughts,  feelings,  intentions,
and  resolutions.

In  daily  intercourse,  it  is  true,  this  process  of  inference  goes  on  exten
sively  in  such  a  way  that  we  are  conscious  neither  of  special  operations  of
:hought  and  their  conditions,  nor  of  any  difficulties.  We  understand  each
:>ther,  and  we  are  frequently  quite  unconscious  of  adding  anything  in
.hought  to  the  words  we  hear,  or  of  regarding  them  as  signs  of  inner  events
n  another  person.  When  communications  of  a  purely  theoretical  nature


436  LOGIC

are  made  to  us,  we  generally  think  only  of  the  subject  matter  to  which  they
refer,  of  the  event  which  we  are  told  about,  or  of  the  content  of  the  propo
sition  which  is  being  explained  to  us ;  by  means  of  the  accustomed
association  the  words  bring  about  directly  the  idea  which  they  are  intended
to  call  up,  and  it  frequently  happens  that  we  do  not  think  at  all  of  the
person  speaking,  or  consider  that  it  is  his  ideas  which  are  revealed  in  the
first  instance.  To  whom  would  it  occur,  in  reading  the  newspaper,  with
its  miscellaneous  information,  to  think  at  each  item  of  the  unknown
reporter,  and  to  realize  that  the  printed  words  must  be  referred  in  the  first
instance  to  the  content  in  the  consciousness  of  the  reporter  ?  It  is  enough
for  us  that  we  learn  what  has  happened,  and  are  entertained  by  it  and  our
curiosity  satisfied.  It  is  only  when  a  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  some  one
can  know  what  he  is  relating,  or  a  question  as  to  why  he  is  making  the
communication,  or  when  purely  inner  events,  mere  conjectures,  doubts,
feelings,  intentions,  are  expressly  imparted  to  us  as  such,  when  the  speaker
speaks  of  himself,  that  we  are  called  upon  to  construct  his  mind  from  his
words,  and  to  think  of  certain  psychical  events  as  the  sources  of  his  words.
But  even  this  generally  takes  place  without  consciousness  of  any  mediating
process;  we  remember  the  events  which  occurred  in  ourselves  upon
similar  occasions,  and  this  recollection  being  reproduced  by  the  familiar
word  and  its  connected  associations,  we  are  able  to  portray  within  our
selves  the  experiences  of  the  other  person  ;  we  can  "  imagine  how  he
feels,"  can  estimate  his  joy  or  his  sorrow.  It  never  occurs  to  us  that  in  so
doing  we  need  or  employ  any  general  presuppositions  ;  we  transfer  without
any  conscious  process  of  inference  what  we  ourselves  feel  into  the  mind  of
the  other  person.  It  is  similar  with  the  interpretation  of  actions  ;  in  the
majority  of  simple  cases,  we  recognise  at  once  from  the  movement  what
the  intention  is.  If  some  one  is  striking  a  nail  on  the  head  with  a  hammer,
he  wants  to  drive  it  into  the  wall,  and  if  he  is  arranging  his  paper  and
dipping  a  pen  into  the  ink,  he  wants  to  write  ;  the  immediate  ground  of
his  movements  is  at  once  made  obvious  to  us  by  the  ground  of  similar
actions  in  ourselves.  We  do  not  indeed  think  that  we  possess  a  complete
picture  of  his  mind,  of  his  whole  conscious  state  at  the  time  ;  the  visible
movements  do  not  tell  us  why  he  is  driving  the  nail  in,  and  what  he  is
going  to  write,  and  all  that  we  can  at  first  know  is  that  fragment  of  his
mind  from  which  his  mode  of  action  immediately  issues  ;  what  is  more
remote  can  at  best  be  revealed  to  us  by  combinations.  Moreover,  we
know  that  much  goes  on  in  us  which  we  do  not  reveal  or  make  known  by


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  437

any  external  sign.  The  most  we  can  do,  therefore,  is  to  conjecture,  accord
ing  to  the  psychological  connections  familiar  to  our  own  consciousness,
what  intentions  or  ultimate  thoughts  not  directly  to  be  known  determine
the  nearest  aim  of  an  action  or  spoken  word  which  can  be  known.

The  expression  of  emotions  in  face  and  gesture  is  again  similar,  although
here  the  process  is  somewhat  more  complicated.  We  have  no  direct  or
clear  idea  of  our  own  countenances  and  looks  ;  we  do  not,  like  the  actor,
study  the  change  of  our  facial  muscles  before  the  looking-glass  ;  and
because  this  change  takes  place  for  the  most  part  involuntarily,  we  do  not
generally  notice  the  accompanying  motor  sensations,  nor  could  we  trans
late  them  into  any  intuitable  image.  We  learn  principally  from  other
people  what  expressions  belong  to  certain  emotions  ;  we  first  construct  the
state  of  mind  from  other  signs,  from  the  occasion  which  we  know  to  have
been  present,  from  words  and  actions,  and  we  see  that  it  is  accompanied
by  a  certain  mimetic  expression,  which  then  for  the  first  time  becomes  a
comprehensible  sign.  This  is  particularly  obvious  when  \ve  consider  how
individuals  differ  in  these  expressive  movements ;  we  have  first  to  learn
by  a  process  of  combination  what  it  means  when  a  person  assumes  a  cer
tain  expression,  but  long  intercourse  enables  us  to  carry  out  this  process
with  sufficient  certainty.  Still,  the  reconstruction  of  what  goes  on  in
some  one  else,  especially  in  complicated  cases  of  lively  emotions,  always
remains  somewhat  vague  and  indefinite ;  we  can  only  attribute  to  others
what  we  have  experienced  in  ourselves,  or  what  we  at  least  find  analogies
for  in  ourselves.  The  limits  to  this  possibility  of  mental  reproduction
must  not,  however,  be  drawn  too  close  ;  we  have  many  stirrings  within  us
of  which  we  repress  the  consequences,  but  which  we  have  nevertheless
experienced,  and  which  we  can  therefore  understand  when  they  find
expression  in  others;  and  imagination  enables  us  to  think  of  our  own
experiences  as  heightened  and  extended.

Thus  our  power  of  referring  given  manifestations  even  to  their  immediate
psychical  sources  varies  between  a  maximum  of  subjective  certainty  and
objective  truth,  and  a  limit  where  we  are  conscious  of  the  impossibility  of
understanding  another  person,  where  we  cannot  reproduce  within  our
selves  a  state  which  would  explain  the  external  perceptible  signs  according
to  known  laws.  The  ground  of  this  impossibility  lies  either  in  the  fact
:hat  what  is  unknown  to  us  is  only  the  particular  connection  between
external  sign  and  psychical  cause,  or  that  we  can  form  no  idea  at  all  of  the
nner  event  because  analogies  are  wanting  in  our  o»vn  experience.  The


438  LOGIC

former  is  the  case  when  any  one  speaks  to  us  in  a  strange  language.  But
when  we  come  across  an  incomprehensible  sentence  in  a  known  language,
we  may  indeed  be  able  to  think  of  the  ideas  corresponding  to  the  elements,
but  the  power  of  combining  them  in  a  comprehensible  whole  is  wanting;
we  cannot  even  form  a  probable  conjecture  as  to  the  thought  which  has
led  to  this  expression.  It  is  the  same  with  actions  of  which  we  cannot
guess  the  meaning  and  purpose ;  we  assume  at  once  that  they  are  volun
tary,  that  the  ground  of  the  particular  movement  lay  in  an  impulse  directed
towards  it ;  but  we  are  unable  to  construct  the  one  end  of  the  various
activities.

12.  But  to  infer  the  inner  connection,  the  more  remote  psychical
causes  and  conditions  of  particular  manifestations,  is  just  the  problem
which  the  knowledge  of  our  fellow-men,  so  desirable  in  our  intercourse,
requires  to  be  solved.  We  are  impelled  by  our  own  experience  to  regard
the  particular  manifestations  of  others  as  parts  of  a  larger  connection,  and
to  penetrate  into  this  so  far  as  to  be  able  to  foresee  and  calculate  as  far
as  possible  the  future  of  their  psychical  life.  Such  a  knowledge  might  be
grounded  partly  upon  general  and  universally  valid  laws  concerning  the
causal  dependence  of  psychical  events  upon  each  other,  partly  upon
special  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  the  psychical  activities  are  deter
mined  in  each  particular  individual  by  his  special  nature.  If  our  inference
is  to  be  reliable,  there  must  always  be  the  certainty  that  certain  events
are  produced  only  in  one  way.

Such  a  special  knowledge  we  do  not  possess,  but  only  an  idea  of  the
most  general  forms  of  the  connection  between  ends  and  means,  between
states  of  feeling  and  their  results,  between  premises  and  their  conse
quences  ;  and  the  calculation  is  made  still  more  uncertain  by  the  know
ledge  drawn  from  our  own  experience,  e.g.,  that  the  effects  of  certaii
emotions  and  the  impulse  to  utter  our  thoughts  may  be  suppressed  b\
self-control  for  the  sake  of  other  ends.  Even  where  we  see  regular  con
nections  comparatively  clearly,  we  should  consider  any  one  who  shouk
employ  his  psychological  knowledge  without  further  precautions  to  refe
particular  manifestations  to  corresponding  actual  inner  events  according  tc
general  rules,  to  infer  the  opinion  or  the  intention  from  the  words,  as  ver;
simple-minded ;  for  we  know  that  our  speech  and  action  is  often  calculatet
to  create  illusion  and  to  lead  astray,  the  visible  actions  being  reall;
motived,  not  by  the  events  which  would  first  be  inferred  from  them,  bu
only  by  the  purpose  of  exciting  the  belief  that  these  events  are  there


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  439

This  is  true  not  only  of  the  simple  lie  ;  it  would  also  be  foolish  to  take  all
social  courtesy  literally,  all  oratorical  pathos  for  the  genuine  expression  of
real  inspiration  or  indignation,  all  the  promises  of  a  candidate  for  election
as  signs  of  his  serious  will  and  intention. That  such  an  illusion  can  be
brought  about  is  due,  of  course,  to  the  fact  that  certain  relations  have  been
,  abstracted  from  psychological  experience  as  generally  valid,  otherwise  we
•  could  create  no  illusion  ;  but  as  soon  as  the  intention  of  deceit  is  conjec-
i  tured,  such  inferences  lose  their  validity,  and  we  are  always  confronted  by
the question  whether  we  can  apply  our  psychological  knowledge  in  its
original meaning,  i.e.  whether we  may assume frankness and straight
forwardness  in  another  person,  or  whether  we  must  mistrust  him.

It  is  not  necessary  to  analyse  these  phenomena  of  daily  life  any  further
i  in  order  to  see  that  inferences  as  to  the  inner  events  of  others  as  causes
,  of  their  manifestations,  if  they  are  to  be  in  any  way  probable,  cannot  be
,  based  upon  simple  psychological  laws  easily  applied  in  the  particular  case,
but  only  upon  comprehensive  combinations ;  that  the  particular  and  frag
mentary  words  or  actions  of  others  frequently  admit  of  the  most  different
,  interpretations  ;  that  here  it  is  almost  the  rule  for  the  same  event  to  have
different  causes. It  is  only  by  assuming  that  for  every  one  there  are  certain
,  ends  which  determine  his  actions,  that  he  pursues  these  ends  by  employing
suitable  means,  that  he  is  preoccupied  by  certain  views,  and  guided  by
,  certain  principles  and  habits, that  we  are  gradually  able  to  construct  the
inner  connection ;  only  from  the  harmony  between  his  different  manifesta-
I  tions  and  modes  of  action  can  we  infer  that  he  is  candid  or  consistent,
only  from  contradictions  in  his  behaviour  that  he  is  hypocritical  or  incon
sistent. In  our  ordinary  estimation  of  men  we  are  quite  familiar  with  the
fact  that  we  must  know  the  whole  man  before  we  can  correctly  refer  his
actions  and  words  to  their  ground  ;  in  this  way  there  are  formed  images  of
certain  types  of  individualities,  such  as  Theophrastus  attempted  to  portray
in  his  characters.1

We  are  here  confronted  by  a  circle  like  that  we  found  in  a  much
simpler  form  in  the  most  elementary  problem  of  finding  the  causal  relation
between  two  external  events  in  certain  things  :  we  cannot  establish  the
particular  instance  as  an  instance  of  causation  unless  we  have  a  general
proposition,  and  we  can  only  infer  the  general  proposition  from  the  par
ticular  facts.  Nevertheless  we  succeeded,  at  any  rate,  in  obtaining  definite
laws,  which  were  gradually  confirmed;  but  here,  in  the  psychological
1  Cf.  my  KleincSckrifteii,  II.,  211  sq.,  "  Die  Unterschiede  cler  Individualitiiten."


440  LOGIC

region,  analogous  laws  which  might  serve  as  a  safe  guide  in  inferring  frorr
the  effect  to  the  cause  are  excluded  by  the  nature  of  the  subject.  Each
particular  manifestation  admits  of  various  interpretations  ;  only  by  com
paring  and  combining  many  of  them  together  do  we  find  that  amongst  the
various  interpretations  of  each  and  all  there  is  always  one  which  refers  us
to  the  same  point,  and  so  accept  the  hypothesis  by  which  all  may  be
harmoniously  explained.

We  find  especially  obvious  in  this  department  a  relation  between  the
particular  case  and  general  conditions,  which  enables  us  to  "  understand  "
the  particular  event  before  us,  without  being  able  to  show  its  necessity  in
the  strict  sense,  or  even  to  calculate  it  beforehand  from  given  conditions.
We  may  explain  an  error,  a  hasty  action,  an  outburst  of  emotion,  a  crime,
in  so  far  as  the  production  of  the  effect  by  what  is  known  to  us  of  the
facts  is  in  accordance  with  our  knowledge  of  the  general  forms  of  con
nection  between  psychical  events ;  we  cannot,  as  with  a  physical  event,
show  that  it  necessarily  happened  so,  because  we  know  neither  the  actual
antecedents  in  their  completeness,  nor  do  we  possess  strict  laws  according
to  which  definite  consequences  must  follow  from  these  antecedents ;  the
differences  between  individuals  will  cause  the  same  stimulus  to  have  different
consequences.  Strictly  speaking,  the  only  clearly  determined  laws  are  the
normal  laws  for  our  different  functions,  in  which  is  implied  the  question  as
to  how  far  they  will  be  actually  obeyed.  It  is  true  that  the  result  of  a
calculation  follows  clearly  and  of  necessity  from  the  problem  set,  a  con
clusion  from  its  premises,  the  sentence  of  a  judge  from  the  code  of  the
law  and  the  facts  falling  under  it,  a  determination  of  the  will  from  moral
principles  ;  but  this  necessity  is  logical  and  not  psychological,  and  it
determines  the  actual  event  only  when  the  thinking  and  acting  man  lets
himself  be  guided  by  this  objective  necessity  and  not  by  chance  impulses ;
otherwise  error  and  unreasonable  action  would  be  impossible.  We  can
explain  a  breach  of  faith  by  pressure  of  need,  a  fatal  blow  by  the  passion
of  anger,  because  we  know  how  temptation  to  crime  may  arise  in  this  way,
but  that  the  crime  was  necessary  follows  from  no  general  law  ;  the  actual
facts  included  also  the  insufficient  feeling  of  duty  or  self-command  which
was  present,  and  this — apart  from  the  question  of  freedom — can  only  be
constructed  for  the  individual  and  not  from  general  laws.  Our  "  explana
tion1'  is  satisfied  with  showing  the  presence  of  a  part  of  the  conditions,
from  which  experience  shows  us  the  action  might  proceed,  if  other  condi
tions  were  added  or  counteracting  influences  were  absent ;  whether  this  is


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  441

150  we  infer  only  from  the  fact  itself,  without  being  able to  ascertain  it  in
my  other  way,  or  even  to  show  that  it  is  necessary.

i  13.  We  have  been  obliged  to  treat  somewhat  fully  of  these  relations,
,vhich  are  familiar  to  us  from  our  own  practice  in  daily  intercourse  with
)thers,  because  they  form  the  basis  upon  which  to  estimate  the  methods
ivhich  can  be  applied  in  the  scientific  treatment  of  history  in  the  widest  sense.
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  psychical  events  which  take  place  in
nen  form  the  real  kernel  of  history;  whatever  appears  in  external  nature
)elongs  to  history  only  in  so  far  as  it  has  its  origin  in,  and  reacts  upon,
mman  spiritual  life  ;  and  the  facts  which  belong  to  nature  gain  historical
importance  only  in  so  far  as  they  contain  conditions  for  spiritual  action
,nd  exercise  an  influence  in  determining  its  direction.

It  is  here  that  natural  science  and  history  diverge.  Within  the  visible
i/orld  shown  to  us  by  our  senses  an  invisible  one  actually  exists  which  can
e  directly  perceived  only  by  the  self-consciousness  of  particular  indi-
iduals.  For  this  reason  the  conditions  of  knowledge  make  this  invisible
•orld  accessible  to  us  only'  in  so  far  as  effects  proceed  from  it  into  the
xternal  world,  which  are  attainable  by  direct  observation,  or  can  be  in-
irectly  ascertained ;  what  we  have  to  do  is  to  recognise  these  effects  as
le  products  of  spiritual  forces,  thus  distinguishing  them  from  merely
iatural  results,  and  to  determine  their  causes  as  exactly  as  possible.  But
istory  has  its  highest  interest  in  the  fact  that  our  own  individual  and
)cial  life  depends  upon  these  causes  by  means  of  their  external  effects;
isnce,  from  the  point  of  view  of  this  interest,  we  regard  as  historical  in  the
'urower  sense  only  those  events  which  we  can  regard  as  continuing  to
cert  an  influence.

!  Nor  can  there  be  any  doubt  that  what  we  aim  at  in  all  historical  investi-

itions,  in  the  first  place,  is  to  inquire  into  the  particular  concrete  event

:hich  has  taken  place  at  a  particular  time  in  a  particular  place ;  from  the

aterial  before  us  we  infer  definite  events  and  try  to  determine  their  data

id  sequence  ;  we  do  not  attempt  to  obtain  general  concepts  and  general

opositions,  but  a  picture  of  what  actually  has  happened  represented  in

irrative  judgments  about  the  particular. Historical  investigation  may  be

pplemented  by  attempts  to  derive  from these  judgments  general  laws,

it  this  presupposes  that  the  first  part  of  the  work  has  been  completed,

ice  we  cannot  begin  by  anticipating  a  uniformity  like  that  in  the  province

nature.

14. The  problem  of  discovering  from  the  external  events  which  we  can


442  LOGIC

perceive  the  reality  and  concrete  nature  of  their  spiritual  causes  recurs  i
a  different  form  at  the  various  stages  of  historical  investigation.

First,  there  is  the  task  of  discovering  what  has  taken  place  externally,  i.e
of  ascertaining  the  reality  of  those  external  events  which  are  withdraw
from  our  observation,  and  which  we  have  to  regard  as  the  effect  of  huma
mental  activity. In  natural  history  also  there  is  historical  investigation  i
an  analogous  sense  ;  it  attempts  to  construct  those  earlier  states  and  event
in  the  material  universe  which  have  produced  the  present  state  accordin
to  natural  laws  ;  and  in  order  to  mark  off  the  two  departments  of  work  froi
each  other,  we  assume  that  we  are  able  to  distinguish  with  certainty  b«
tween  what  is  independent  of  conscious  human  action  and  what  is  due  t
this  alone  in  the  external  world. In  particular  instances  we  may  be  i
doubt ;  we  may  be  unable  to  decide  whether  a  ruin  which  is  discovere
points to human  destructiveness  or  an  earthquake,  whether  a  skeleto
should  arouse  a  suspicion  of  murder  or  of  a  natural  accident. But  on  tr
whole  we  distinguish  with  complete  certainty  by  an  inference  from  tl
nature  of  the  given  what  is'to  be  referred  to  human  activity. We  regar
every  potsherd  which  is  discovered  as  an  infallible  proof  of  the  presenc
of  a  human  hand  which  formed  it,  and  in  so  doing  are  guided  by  the  CO'
sideration  that  we  find  men  constantly  making  pots,  and  have  never  foun
them  produced  by  animals,  or  forming  themselves  by  chance  in  the  coun
of  nature  ;  and  by  the  further  consideration  that  they  imply  the  idea  of
purpose  and  an  amount  of  observation  and  skill  which  we  can  attribu
to  man  alone  of  all  known  animals,  and  that  this  product  agrees  in  i
general  characteristics  with  numerous  other  human manufactures. Th
what  we  first  see  in  many  tangible  objects  is  an  action  of  man,  an  activi
of  his  intentionally  exercised  mechanical  power ;  every  building  points
the first  place and  immediately  to  the  work  of  the  builders,  and  or
in the second place to the purpose and inner conception of t
architect.

15.  But  the  most  important  material  for  historical  investigation  does  n
consist  in  potsherds,  stone  knives,  implements,  ornaments,  or  building:
important  as  these  are  for  our  knowledge  of  particular  branches  of  hum
activity,  of  technical  skill,  of  methods  of  satisfying  human  needs,
artistic  products  and  of  the  ideas  expressed  in  them,  and  many  as  r
the  results  to  be  obtained  from  them  by  a  comprehensive  comparison,  j
they  fall  far  short  of  the  written  evidences  of  human  mental  activity  whi
are  handed  down  to  us,  and  which  are  either  immediate,  intended


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  443

nake  permanent  the  thoughts  and  opinions  of  the  writer,  or  mediate,
.uch  as  records  and  narratives  of  the  action  of  others.

But  what  do  all  these  documents  prove  ?  Directly  and  beyond  doubt
'hey  prove  only  that  they  have  been  produced  by  a  human  hand  ;  they
orove  further,  with  very  great  probability,  that  the  written  symbols  point
iltimately  to  ideas,  thoughts,  and  opinions  of  a  person  writing  or  dictating,
•xpressed  in  a  certain  language.  It  is  when  we  attempt  to  infer  beyond
his  that  uncertainty  and  the  work  of  mere  conjecture  begins.

There  is,  first,  the  merely  literary  question  of  the  age  and  origin  of
he  documents.  We  can  here  only  briefly  remind  the  reader  upon  how
nany  assumptions  the  inferences  frequently  depend  by  which  the  date
'5  first  fixed  for  a  document  handed  down,  either  in  the  original  or  in
:.  copy  ;  ho\v  comprehensive  is  the  knowledge  required  concerning  the
'iistory  of  the  written  characters,  of  the  language,  of  the  material,  etc.,
nd  concerning  the  dates  of  the  historical  events  recorded  or  presupposed
T  the  document ;  knowledge  which  can  itself  only  be  obtained  by  a
•omprehensive  comparison  of  the  documents,  so  that  we  stand  again
'icfore  a  circle  in  which  hypotheses  must  move  before  they  can  attain
1  higher  degree  of  probability.1  Particular  points  can  only  be  established

1  To  give  only  one  example  :  the  presuppositions'upon  which  the  investigations  as  to
ic  genuineness  and  order  of  the  writings  handed  down  under  Plato's  name  are  based  are
iken  from  external  evidences  which  can  only  be  fully  accepted  when  their  origin  has  been
ivestigated  and  established  in  a  similar  way,  and  from  considerations  concerning  the
mguage  used.  But  how  do  we  know  what  language  Plato  used  ?  Even  if  we  start  only
rom  those  writings  which  are  undoubtedly  genuine,  the  Egyptian  discovery  of  the
Manuscript  of  the  PJitcdo  suggests  the  question  whether  the  text  handed  down  is  really
'iat  of  Plato,  or  whether  all  sorts  of  changes  have  not  found  their  way  into  the  copies
,nd  made  the  language  more  like,  or,  perhaps,  more  unlike,  than  it  originally  was.  The
ittempt  to  construct  their  order  from  statistics  about  certain  forms  of  speech  is  based  upon
sychological  considerations  concerning  habits  of  speaking  and  writing  which  cannot  be
roved  with  certainty  from  such  comparatively  limited  material.  But  even  if  we  had  a
•umber  of  documents  in  their  original  form,  how  wide  a  scope  must  be  allowed  for
ic  variations  of  expression  which  are  possible  in  the  same  writer,  and  what  is  the
tmount  of  deviation  which  compels  us  to  assume  another  author  ?  We  cannot  draw  any
jrtain  conclusion  from  the  presence  of  a  word  or  a  phrase  which  is  absent  elsewhere  ;
ot  everything  has  been  written  which  has  been  spoken.  It  is  the  same  with  the  content.
,'he  psychological  assumption  that  a  writer  must  always  be  consistent  is  obviously  false  ;
ut  how  far  deviations  may  go  cannot  be  ascertained  with  universal  validity.  To  give
ny  certain  foundation  to  the  various  critical  presuppositions  which  have  often  been
mployed,  we  should  have  to  begin  by  dealing  with  some  author  whose  authentic  and  dated
'orks  extend  over  decades,  from  the  various  points  of  view,  in  order  to  see  how  far  the
resuppositions  hold  good  ;  the  statistics  of  phraseology  would  have  to  be  obtained,  and
ijreement  in  style  and  in  thought  tested  with  regard  to  such  specimens.  If,  for
istance,  acting  upon  the  principle  of  starting  from  the  known  to  infer  from  it  the


444  LOGIC

gradually  by  their  greater  probability,  and  they  form  a  basis  from  which
work  further,  always  reserving  the  right  to  correct  first  assumptions.

1 6.  When  the  author  and  date  of  a  document  have  been  ascertaine
and  the  textual  questions— which  to  some  extent  move  in  a  simil
circle — have  been  decided,  we  still  know  only  that  the  author  desire
either  to  register  something  for  his  own  remembrance,  or  in  tl
majority  of  cases  to  communicate  something  to  other  people.  What  1
wants  to  communicate,  what  ideas  and  thoughts  he  desires  to  excit
and  what  rules  he  desires  to  impress  upon  the  reader's  notice,  must  1
discovered  by  philological  exegesis ;  and  here,  again,  we  can  only  brief
indicate  the  logical  processes  called  into  use,  and  the  limits  of  what
attainable.  Even  if  the  language  were  as  familiar  to  us  as  a  whole  ;
our  own,  still  the  word,  even  if  it  has  only  one  meaning,  is  not  a  complete
exhaustive  and  accurate  expression  of  what  the  writer  means  to  deno
by  it ;  its  value  is  determined  for  it  by  combination  with  others  in
proposition  or  in  a  larger  connection  ;  we  are  called  upon  to  reconstru
the  whole  from  its  elements,  and  what  we  need  for  this  is  partly  knowled*
of  the  subject  matter,  partly  logical  and  psychological  presuppositioi
concerning  the  mutual  dependence  and  determination  of  ideas.  Whe
the  word  has  more  than  one  meaning,  or  where,  as  in  a  more  remo
language,  its  meaning  has  to  be  determined  by  comparisons,  then  tl
process  is  a  hypothetical  one  :  several  possibilities  lie  open,  among
which  we  must  choose,  and  the  meaning  to  be  assumed  here  is  eith
obtained  directly  from  the  fact  that  it  is  required  by  the  context,  or  by  w;
of  exclusion,  because  all  the  other  possibilities  contradict  the  conte?
The  presupposition  on  which  all  these  attempts  are  based  is  th
psychological  and  logical  agreement  in  the  combinations  of  ideas  ai
judgments  by  virtue  of  which  alone  we  can  comprehend  and  repeat  in  o
own  thought  what  the  writer  meant  to  express.

But  the  combinations  of  the  individual  depend  partly  upon  the  whc
store  of  concepts  and  intuitions,  and  where  we  are  dealing  with  remo
times  we  can  reconstruct  this  only  incompletely.  Who  could  entire
transport  himself  into  the  sphere  of  thought  in  which  Heraclitus  moved?'**

That  we  cannot  succeed  in  making  our  reproduction  exactly  agr
with  the  original  matters  less,  however,  where  we  are  not  dealing  wi
scientific  or  poetical  representation,  but  with  the  narration  of  facts,

problematical,  we  should  try  whether  these  presuppositions  hold  good  when  applied
Schelling's  works,  we  should  obtain  very  remarkable  results.


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  445

.'finite  external  and  internal  events  ;  here  we  must  always  be  satisfied
ith  placing  them  under  general  concepts,  since  the  actual  can  never
,3  completely  expressed  in  terms  of  a  general  significance,  but  these
)ncepts  may  be  taken  as  coinciding  with  them  in  so  far  as  they  serve  to
•ate  prominent  characteristics.  When  it  is  recorded  that  Alexander  died
'  fever,  the  physician  may  be  doubtful  as  to  the  nature  of  the  illness,  and
•2  cannot  ascertain  what  exact  ideas  the  recorder  connects  with  the  term
.die";  but  all  that  is  important  is  contained  in  the  general  concept
death,  and  the  essential  content  of  this  is  independent  of  these
bsidiary  circumstances,  and  unambiguous.  The  most  detailed  descrip-
m  can  only  proceed  in  this  way  by  subsuming  the  Given  under  general
incepts,  and  leaving  it  to  the  reader  to  reconstruct  therefrom,  by  means

his  imagination,  the  concrete  reality.

1 17. When  the  exegesis,  from  which  we  learn  what  the  author  desired

say,  is  completed,  there  begins  historical criticism (in the narrower

nse)  of  that  part  of  the  literature  which  does  not  merely  record  the

oughts  and  subjective  views  of  the  writer,  but  records  facts  and  events.

lis  criticism  consists  in  investigating  the  trustworthiness  of  the  author,

th  as  to  whether  he  really  wished  to  say  what  he  regarded  as  truth,

d  whether  what  he  regarded  as  truth  really  is  truth,  whether  he  did

t  deceive  himself  or  let  himself  be  deceived  by  his  informants ; in

nsidering,  where  contradictions  arise  between  different  recorders,  how

;;y  may  be  solved,  and  which  statement  is  to  be  preferred ;  and  where

:y  agree,  whether  they  do  not  depend  upon  each other or upon a

mmon  source,  in  which  case  the  agreement  would  lose  that  power  of

x>f  which it would otherwise have. Our inferences here will be

)unded  upon  considerations  partly  of  the  whole  mental  constitution  of

;  recorder  and  his attitude  to the  events,  partly  of  the connection

ssible between the recorded events,  and this possibility will again

estimated  to  a  large  extent  from  a  psychological  point  of  view.1

18. The events which can frequently be established in this way

h  a  certainty  beyond  doubt,  and  dated  in  sequence,  are  actions  which

nifest  themselves  in  the  external  world,  visible  deeds ; they  are  the

gestce,  the  wanderings  of  tribes,  the  campaigns  of  armies,  the  battles

n,  revolts,  plebiscites,  the  promulgation  of  laws,  the  taking  office  or

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  note  specially  that  in  practice  the  investigation  of  origin,
1  ological  exegesis,  and  historical  criticism  are  closely  connected  and  mutually
•  endent.


446  LOGIC

resignation  of  magistrates,  the  first  appearance  and  death  of  prominent
men,  and  all  such  facts  as  find  their  place  in  the  school  chronologies
as  the  most  tangible  framework  of  history.  But  however  accurately  we
may  determine  all  attainable  facts,  they  represent  only  particular  prominent
points  or  fragments  of  a  continuous  course.  This  course  must  be
interpolated  before  we  can  get  even  a  connected  picture  of  external
events,  as  with  the  route  taken  by  an  army  of  which  only  the  night
quarters  are  noted.

But  there  is  a  more  important  supplementation  and  interpolation  to  be
effected,  and  this  lies  within  the  province  of  psychology.  Here  alone,  in
the  consciousness  of  the  persons  acting,  is  there  any  continuous  connection
of  events  which  can  be  apprehended  in  its  causal  significance  ;  actions  are
only  the  expressions  of  the  thoughts,  motives,  and  calculations  upon  which
they  are  grounded,  and  from  which  they  necessarily  proceed.  The
problem  is,  therefore,  to  infer  this  mental  activity  for  the  particular  person
acting ;  and  here  the  insufficiency  of  data  introduces,  in  an  intensified
form,  all  the  difficulties  by  which  we  are  met  when  we  attempt,  in  daily
intercourse,  really  to  understand  other  people,  and  to  fathom  what  goes
on  in  their  minds.  We  cannot  here  enter  more  fully  into  the  processes
of  comprehensive  combination  which  have  to  be  employed,  and  which
demand  from  the  historian  a  large  amount  of  creative  imagination  in  sug
gesting  possibilities,  and  testing  them  by  historical  traditions  ;  the  inex
haustible  variety  of  the  particular  makes  it  impossible  to  give  briei
instruction  as  to  method.  In  so  far  as  there  is  any  safe  process  it  consists
in  simple  inferences  from  major  premises  of  the  most  various  kinds,  which
contain  knowledge  about  reality.  But  work  of  this  kind,  which  is  main!)
biographical,  indicates  a  wider  background.

19.  The  individual,  with  his  knowledge,  his  range  of  ideas,  his  aims
and  the  means  of  attaining  them  at  his  disposal,  stands  within  a  certair
community  ;  that  which  is  active  within  him  has  not  its  origin  in  hirnsel
alone,  but  is  conditioned  on  all  sides,  both  by  the  men  around  him,  anc
by  the  past  of  the  community.  It  is  this  which  constitutes  the  historica
continuity  and  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  psychical  life  of  men
that  the  content  of  every  individual  consciousness  points  to  a  long  series
of  preceding  conditions,  which  were  actual  in  preceding  generations,  ant
is  quite  incomprehensible  without  this  history.  Every  word  which  w<
speak,  every  letter  which  we  write,  the  way  in  which  we  clothe  ourselve;
and  behave,  in  which  we  manifest  joy  and  sorrow — all  this  may,  to  som<


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  447

extent,  be  traced  back  through  thousands  of  years ;  the  individual,  in  his
most  ordinary  functions,  repeats  with  only  slow  modifications  the  habits  of
long-vanished  generations.  And  in  the  present  also  the  action  of  the
individual  is  constantly  influenced  by  the  living,  by  the  authority  of  their
opinion,  by  their  advice  or  commands ;  his  actions  are  guided  by  the
,  calculation  as  to  what  impression  he  will  make  upon  others,  to  what
thoughts  and  resolutions  he  will  determine  them  ;  at  every  step  he  is
entangled  in  this  complicated  net  of  relations.  Every  word  which  I
address  to  another  on  the  one  hand  presupposes  an  idea  of  his  mental
!  habit,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  may  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  experiment,
in  so  far  as  I  cannot  be  quite  certain  of  the  effect  intended.

The  import  of  that  which  we  can  attain,  and  for  which  alone,  therefore,
there  is  any  sense  in  striving,  is  most  easily  obvious  when we  compare  it
'with  the  ideal  of  an  exhaustive  and  all-including  knowledge of  human
psychical  life. In this complete knowledge of  the actual causes of
:historical  events,  the  whole  of  the  psychical  movements  of  all  the  indi-
ividuals  in  any  way socially connected  would  be  open  to  us,  like  the
motions  of  the  planets  and  moons  of  our  solar  system  ; all  direct  and  in
direct  relations  between  individual  and  individual  would  also  be  know-able  ;
'no  one  is  quite  without  influence  upon  others,  each  contributes  in  different
.ways  his  share  towards  the  social  life  of  the  whole,  and  it  is  the  result  of
:he  complicated interaction of  all these individual unities which the
science  of  history  endeavours  to  know  in  the  first  place. Spiritual  content
s  actual in the  consciousness of  the individual alone ; there  are no
houghts  which  think  themselves,  no  language  which  has  existed  except  in
he  speech  of  the  individual,  no  belief  and  no  science  which  has  shone  of
tself  like  a  universal  sun  above  the  heads  of  individuals,  no  constitution
vhich  has  existed  elsewhere  than  in  the  consciousness,  the  will,  the  feeling
>f  duty  or  fear,  of  the  particular  citizen. The  connection  between  indi-
•iduals,  their  influence  upon  each  other,  are  also  brought  about  only  by
heir  conscious  activities  ;  each  individual  is,  as  conscious  self,  an  inde-
>endent  unit, and  moves  apart  from others  as  in  an  empty  space  ;  no
ifluence  passes  immediately  from  one  soul into  the  other, no  cohesion,
cting  with  unconscious  necessity,  binds  individuals  together ;  the  ground
f  the  bond  lies  within  each individual,  in  the  relation  of  the  thoughts,
:elings,  and  volitions,  which  he  is  constrained  by  mere  signs  to  produce
i  himself. To  speak  of  a  common  will,  or  common  consciousness,  as  if
•e  meant  a  universal  spiritual  substance,  of  which  particular  souls  are  only


448  LOGIC

the  modi  or  parts,  is  merely  to  hypostatize  a  general  or  collective  concept,
and  we  are  always  in  danger  of  confusing  a  mere  sum  of  similar
phenomena,  which  exists  only  for  the  spectator,  and  forms  a  homogeneous
aggregate  only  for  him,  with  the  consciousness  of  community  which  indi
viduals  feel.  We  can  only  speak  of  the  common  consciousness,  or  com
mon  will  of  a  people,  in  the  proper  and  useful  sense  of  the  term,  when  the
individual  includes  others  in  his  consciousness,  is  aware  of  his  agreement
with  them,  wills  that  which  he  knows  that  others  will  also,  when  he  con
sciously  and  voluntarily  harmonizes  his  action  with  the  action  of  others.
Otherwise  we  might  ascribe  a  common  consciousness  and  common  will
even  to  prisoners  in  solitary  confinement.  There  are,  of  course,  many
phenomena  occurring  in  many  people  which  are  in  harmony  and  are
recognised  by  us  as  being  in  harmony,  and  which  are,  nevertheless,  in
dependent  of  any  conscious  relation  between  the  individuals.  The  sum
total  of  these  phenomena,  which  primarily  exists  only  for  us,  may  itself  be
regarded  as  a  whole  if  they  happen  to  exercise  a  collective  influence.  But
we  must  distinguish  carefully  between  this  merely  objective  similarity  and
that  community  which  exists  for  the  consciousness  of  the  individual.  It  is
upon  the  latter  alone  that  historical  continuity  and  human  interaction
between  individuals  depend  ;  it  is  only  by  recognising  others  as  like  my
self,  by  inferring  their  thoughts  from  their  utterances  and  taking  them  into
myself,  by  letting  myself  be  determined  by  their  example  or  their  will,
that  I  bring  about  the  relation  which  frees  me  from  the  complete  isolation
in  which  I  live  primarily  in  my  consciousness  as  an  individual.  The  only
ground  of  real  connection  lies  in  the  consciousness  of  the  individual.

But  the  activities  of  each  individual  proceed  for  the  most  part  not  from
particular  isolated  conditions,  but  from  the  whole  of  his  opinions,  know
ledge,  and  volitions  ;  the  source  from  which  they  spring  is  the  whole
personality.  Every  sentence  which  we  utter,  every  resolution  which  we
carry  out,  points  to  a  multitude  of  conditions,  which,  by  means  of  the
interaction  of  our  ideas,  feelings,  and  desires,  have  produced  a  certain
psychical  complex,  particular  aspects  of  which  co-operate  in  each  of  our
activities.  Si  duo  fatiunt  idem,  non  est  idem.  The  store  of  knowledge,
the  habits  of  thought,  the  ruling  interests  of  each  person,  combine  in  a
manner  peculiar  to  him  to  give  a  certain  tendency  to  his  consideration  of
any  question,  and  to  his  practical  decision  on  any  occasion.

Thus  a  complete  knowledge  of  historical  phenomena  would  include  all
mutually  connected  events  in  all  individual  centres,  as  well  as  the  whole


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  449

of  their  causal  determination,  whether  by  individual  dispositions  and
tendencies,  or  by  relations  with  the  external  world,  or  by  intercourse  with
others  and  the  tradition  of  previous  generations.  Every  historical  state
of  a  permanent  nature,  manners,  habits,  forms  of  society,  political  con
stitutions,  religious  forms  of  life,  these  are  all  the  common  product  and
the  common  expression  of  activities  which  continually  recur  in  the  same
way  amongst  individuals  who  are  combined  in  society ;  their  stability  is
due  to  the  memory  and  constant  volitions  of  individuals  ;  every  historical
event  which  produces  a  change  in  them  is  the  product  of  impulses  which
have  first  become  active  in  a  single  individual  or  in  several  together,  and
have  determined  them  to  a  fresh  activity.

20.  When  we  have  realized  in  its  full  concrete  determination  and
completeness  what  really  takes  place  in  the  life  of  a  people  or  of
humanity,  what  we  should  have  to  know  in  order  to  have  a  complete
knowledge  of  the  whole  of  the  life  of  which  only  fragmentary  manifesta
tions  can  be  established  from  historical  documents,  then  we  see  at  once
how  far  removed  that  which  our  knowledge  can  really  attain  is  from  an
exhaustive  insight  into  the  whole  of  what  actually  takes  place,  an  insight
combining  the  description  of  its  course  with  knowledge  of  the  causes
which  determine  it  according  to  universal  laws.

So  much  is  obvious  and  cannot  be  seriously  disputed,  that  the  funda
mental  laws  of  all  historical  events,  from  which  their  necessity  might  be
deduced,  can  only  be  psychological  laws  determining  events  in  particular
individuals  ;  these  are  the  basis  of  all  that  happens,  the  essential  part  of  all
history  unfolds  itself  in  them  and  through  them. We  should  have  a  satis-
ractory  science  if  we  could  so  determine  the  forces  of  individual  souls  and
.he  laws  of  their action  that  everything  could  be  known to  follow  of
necessity  from  the  nature  of  the  individuals  given,  and  from  the  relations
n  which  they  stand  to  each  other  and  to  the  external  world, — if  we  could
explain  historical  phenomena  as  the  collective  action  of  these  individuals,
s  we  calculate  the  direction  and  velocity  of  a  stream  from  the  nature  and
ateraction  of  the  atoms  of  water  in  a  certain  bed  of  a  certain  fall. We
nd  here  that  the  whole  province  of  the  natural  sciences  is  distinguished
•om  that  of  the  mental  sciences  by  the  fact  that, in the  former, the
Itimate  unities  to  which  analysis  leads  us  as  the  subjects  of  the  funda-
icntal  forces  are  purely  hypothetical,  while  in the latter  their  nature  is
nmediately  known  to  us, because we  experience immediately  in  our-
-Ives  the  elementary  modes  in  which  they  work. The  difficulty  of  the
s.  L. — n.  G  G


450  LOGIC


problem  consists  only  in  establishing  the  conditions  of  the  particular  event
on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  in  synthesizing  in  particular  individuals
the  impulses  from  different  sources,  and  in  combining  together  the
activities  which  issue  from  individuals  and  summing  them  up  into  collec
tive  action.

But  of  the  great  majority  of  these  units  we  know  at  best  only  their  ap
proximate  number  and  the  general  physical  condition  under  which  they
live,  their  habitat  and  its  climate,  etc.  We  know  nothing  of  their  special
existence,  of  their  individual  peculiarities,  or  of  their  development  in
detail ;  they  form  a  confused  background  for  the  appearance  of  the
prominent  individuals  of  whom  historians  primarily  relate  ;  w,e  cannot,
therefore,  refer  directly  to  them  in  order  to  explain  known  facts  from  their
thought  and  action.

21.  But  these  individuals  are  combined  in  families,  tribes  and  states;
and  there  is  handed  down  to  us,  or  inferred  from  tradition,  besides  the
fates  and  deeds  of  individuals,  that  which  is  common  to  the  individuals  of
such  a  group,  and  that  which  we  must  regard  as  their  collective  action,
whether  it  is  directly  the  sum  of  particular  actions,  or  brought  about  by
means  of  a  definite  organization  of  their  activity.  This  common  element
we  may  assume  to  be  present  in  all,  though  not  in  an  absolutely  identical
form ;  we  may  at  any  rate  construct  from  the  innumerable  individual
phenomena  an  average  type,  in  which  differences  cease  to  be  important.
The  most  important  among  these  common  possessions  of  a  large  group  is
language.  The  dead  languages,  however,  have  been  preserved  in  only  a
few  monuments,  meagre  in  amount  as  compared  with  what  has  actuall)
been  spoken  (what  is  the  whole  Greek  literature,  in  comparison  with  ali
that  has  actually  been  said  in  every  house  and  every  market-place  since
Homer's  time  ?  ).  Neither  the  store  of  words,  nor  their  different  applica
tions,  nor  the  variations  of  dialect  have  been  completely  preserved  foi
us ;  nevertheless  language  represents  an  important  part  of  the  commor
spiritual  life,  and  we  may  infer  that  all  who  have  used  the  language  have
been  more  or  less  alike  in  their  ideas  and  in  their  manner  of  employing
them  ;  it  represents  a  common  intellectual  turn  of  mind.

It  is  the  same  with  religious  ideas  of  every  kind ;  we  cannot  say  \vha
form  they  have  taken  in  the  mind  of  each  individual,  and  what  moods  am
feelings  were  in  each  case  connected  with  them,  or  how  far  they  acted  a:
motives  to  action ;  but  from  analogy  with  what  we  see  more  clearly  am
completely  around  us,  we  assume  that  in  what  has  been  handed  down  t(


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  451

us  we  are  dealing  with  a  common  background  of  life.  And  here  we  have
again  to  take  into  consideration  that  relation  between  leaders  or  rulers
and  followers  or  dependants  which  we  find  in  every  community  of  what
ever  kind  it  may  be ;  the  few  think  for  the  many,  and  in  order  that  we
may  regard  a  whole  of  religious  ideas  as  a  common  possession  it  is  not
requisite  that  each  particular  member  should  possess  this  whole  com
pletely,  nor  that  its  various  consequences  should  take  effect  in  each ;  it
is  sufficient  that  the  leaders  and  rulers  should  be  filled  with  them,  they
serve  as  representatives  of  the  others.  And  where  we  find  gradual
changes  in  such  ideas,  it  is  in  itself  possible  that,  in  consequence  of
general  associations,  certain  new  ideas  should  appear  in  many  people  at
the  same  time ;  but  those  cases  in  which  we  are  able  to  trace  the  process
more  accurately  make  it  seem  probable  that  the  impulse  started  from
individual  points,  and  only  that  became  common  to  all  which  most  easily
won  assent  in  accordance  with  general  logical  and  psychological  laws.

With  this  is  connected  our  knowledge  of  manners  and  customs,  habits
of  life,  mode  of  agriculture,  and  construction  of  implements.  We  know
from  experience  of  our  own  immediate  neighbourhood  that  in  these
matters  there  is  generally  community  and  persistency,  that  invention  plays
a  part  subordinate  to  that  of  imitation,  that  custom  and  habit  exercise
a  constraint  which  is  often  tyrannical.  Hence  a  few  examples  enable  us
to  infer  that  in  essential  points  all  will  agree.  The  deviations  of  in
dividuals,  however,  are  generally  without  effect ;  and  for  changes  it  is
again  true  that  they  are  most  easily  explained  by  assuming  that  they  start
from  particular  points.

The  forms  of  government,  by  which  the  will  of  the  individual  is  confined
within  certain  limits,  and  the  ends  which  he  is  to  aim  at  are  dictated  by
an  authoritative  will,  generally  possess  the  chief  interest  for  historical
investigation.  Here  again  we  find  the  fundamental  fact  that  more  or
less  close  forms  of  social  combination  have  arisen  everywhere,  of  which
the  really  constitutive  element  is  the  power  by  which  individual  wills  may
be  combined  for  common  ends,  and  their  divergent  tendencies  restrained.
However  much  disputed  the  ultimate  ground  of  the  formation  of  states
may  be,  it  is  unquestionable  that  here  again  we  have  a  total  phenomenon
Before  us  in  which  the  great  majority  of  individual  persons  agree,  and
»vhich  so  far  serves  as  a  substitute  for  the  unknown  movements  of  in-
iividuals  inasmuch  as  it  is  just  this  organization  which  causes  the  forces  of
ndividuals  to  subserve  the  one  will  and  combines  them  for  collective


452  LOGIC

action.  And  however  different  the  motives  may  be  from  which  the
individual  obeys  authority  and  the  laws,  the  collective  result  is  a  certain
one  and  accessible  to  our  knowledge.  The  most  certain  means  of
bringing  all  activities  into  uniformity,  and  guiding  them  into  one  direction,
is  not  spontaneous  unanimity,  but  the  constraint  of  force.

These  uniform  and  comparatively  permanent  habits  form  the  back
ground  to  the  action  of  particular  prominent  personalities,  the  starting
point  for  all  particular  events.

As  in  considering  the  particular  life  the  fixed  and  constant  connections
of  ideas  and  volitions  are  more  important  than  their  accidental  manifesta
tions,  so  also  in  the  life  of  the  community  the  uniform  tendencies  of
thought  and  will  form  the  constant  factors  which  determine  what  will
happen  upon  varying  occasions  ;  they  represent  in  one  general  picture
the  unknown  multiplicity  of  the  individual  life  in  such  a  way  that,  while
individual  peculiarities  are  blotted  out,  the  common  elements  which  have
the  strongest  and  most  constant  effects  stand  out  in  clearer  relief.

22.  These  collective  phenomena  cannot,  indeed,  put  an  end  to  causal
explanation  ;  on  the  contrary,  they  constitute  the  chief  problem  for  final
psychological  explanation,  they  give  rise  to  the  questions  :  how  must
individuals  be  constituted,  and  to  what  laws  must  their  development  and
interaction  conform,  to  enable  us  to  explain  the  particular  forms  and
particular  content  of  the  life  of  the  community  ?

The  view  that  from  the  course  of  history  as  a  whole  certain  laws  might
be  obtained  which  would  refer,  not  to  individuals,  but  to  masses  as  such,
laws  easy  of  application  and  governing  the  collective  life  of  people,  even
though  they  should  only  be  laws  in  the  sense  in  which  we  formulate
empirical  uniformities  such  as  the  alternation  of  the  seasons  in  the  province
of  nature — this  view  has  indeed  been  repeatedly  expressed  (most  decidedly
by  Buckle),  but  always  rightly  disputed  and  rejected.  The  expression
"law"  must  be  deprived  of  all  its  logical  characteristics,  if  the  vague
similarities,  or  parallel  cases,  which  may  be  discovered  by  a  historical
bird's-eye  view  are  to  be  proclaimed  as  historical  laws.  The  same  com
binations  never  recur,  and  it  is  therefore  quite  useless  to  attempt  to
discover  by  simple  comparison,  by  enumerating  similar  sequences  of
conditions,  general  uniformities  showing  themselves  in  the  complicated
course  cf  history  ;  unless,  indeed,  we  give  the  title  of  historical  laws  to
such  statements  as  that  bad  harvests  create  famine,  and  weak  governments
discontent.  Although  the  comparison  of  analogous  relations  is  an  im-


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  453

portant  means  of  interpreting  and  supplementing  what  we  know  in  the
particular  instance,  and  of  connecting  fragmentary  items  into  a  compre
hensible  whole,  yet  any  attempt  to  obtain  in  this  way  general  laws  in  the
strict  sense  would  be  stifled  by  the  number  of  exceptions.

Nevertheless  we  must  first  start  from  collective  phenomena,  since  these
are  more  easily  seen  than  their  elementary  factors,  which  are  for  the  most
part  unknown ;  but  our  only  chance  of  success  will  lie  in  an  analytical
process,  distinguishing  within  the  whole  complex  of  the  vital  phenomenon,
e.g.,  of  a  people  over  a  certain  period  of  time,  certain  features  which  show
a  connection  within  themselves.  We  find  here  again  on  a  larger  scale
what  we  have  already  found  for  psychology  :  actual  action  from  moment
to  moment  proceeds  from  the  unity  of  the  individual  soul ;  the  interaction
of  the  particular  elements,  of  ideas,  feelings,  intentions,  is  so  complete
that  every  given  activity  is  the  resultant  of  manifoldly  complicated  condi
tions.  Nevertheless  we  can  isolate  and  bring  to  view  particular  connections,
we  can  distinguish  particular  threads  interwoven  in  the  fabric,  which  show
a  causal  connection,  and  which  may  therefore  take  the  place  of  partial
laws,  not  in  the  sense  that  such  forms  of  connection  can  by  themselves
determine  what  happens,  but  still  in  the  sense  that  they  express  ruling
tendencies  which  work  in  one  direction  within  manifold  complications.1

We  can  proceed  analogously  with  these  historical  collective  phenomena  ;
they  can  be  analysed — -chiefly,  according  to  psychological  categories —
into  component  parts,  as  it  were ;  such  a  part  is,  for  instance,  language.
What  we  say,  and  how  we  say  it,  depends  upon  the  whole  psychical  life
in  all  its  aspects,  upon  the  development  of  ideas,  upon  the  greater  or  less
wealth  of  imagination,  upon  excitability  of  temper,  upon  the  ends  which
ire  pursued  ;  but  by  disregarding  in  actual  speech  the  varying  content
}f  the  moment,  and  by  considering  only  the  constant  elements,  the
methods  in  which  thoughts  are  expressed  by  words,  and  the  habitual  ways
:>f  using  the  organs  of  speech  in  uttering  the  traditional  symbols,  we  find
jniformities  which  we  cannot  indeed  call  laws  in  the  strict  sense  of  the
vord,  since  they  are  broken  through  by  many  exceptions,  but  which  show
icvertheless  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  a  general  similarity  in  what
akes  place,  which  constitute  a  general  tendency.  The  tendency  to  make
he  utterance  of  words  more  easy  and  convenient  which  is  guided  by
>hysiological  conditions  in  the  way  in  which  the  organs  act,  the  tendency

1  See  the  careful  distinctions  drawn  by  F.  J.  Neumann  in  Naturgesctz  and Wirth-
•haftsgesetz>  1892.


454  LOGIC

to  construct  new  forms  of  speech  in  analogy  with  others,  the  tendency  to
extend  the  ordinary  meanings  of  words  according  to  certain  associations
so  as  to  denote  new  turns  of  thought  by  them,  such  as  appears  in  our
innumerable  metaphors — all  these  are  uniformities  which  appear  alike  in
different  languages,  and  which,  if  we  use  the  term  in  a  somewhat  wide
and  lax  sense,  may  well  be  called  empirical  laws.  Although  they  may  be
frequently  contradicted  by  particular  cases,  they  do  nevertheless  express
tendencies  which  can  be  recognised  as  determining  in  a  great  number  of
cases.

Particular  connections  can  be  traced  in  this  analytical  way  still  more
clearly  where  we  are  not  dealing,  as  in  language,  with  events  in  which
conscious  intention  plays  only  a  subordinate  part,  but  with  the  conscious
pursuit  of  ends.  The  life  of  the  grown  man  is  determined  in  its  main
aspects  by  the  ends  which  he  endeavours  to  realize;  they  may  be  re
garded  as  constant  causes,  from  which  the  successive  particular  activities
proceed.  But  what  a  man  will  set  before  him  as  an  end  is  generally
determined  by  his  nature,  which  on  the  one  hand  constrains  him
imperatively  to  the  satisfaction  of  certain  needs,  and  on  the  other  hand
causes  him,  by  the  wide  receptibility  of  his  disposition  for  pleasure  of  all
kinds,  to  imagine  attainable  results  which  tempt  him  to  bring  them  about ;
how  he  will  satisfy  these  needs  and  wishes  depends  upon  the  means  at
his  disposal  and  the  organization  of  society.  The  satisfaction  of  hunger
and  thirst,  the  guarding  against  cold  and  heat,  physical  comfort  and  the
gaining  of  the  means  to  it,  all  the  vital  feelings  of  sense  and  emotion
appertaining  to  the  difference  of  the  sexes,  the  satisfaction  derived  from
the  approbation  and  appreciation  of  others,  or  from  the  consciousness  of
power  and  dominion  (to  say  nothing  of  the  highest  moral  and  religious
objects) — all  these  are  ends  which  we  set  before  ourselves  with  more  or
less  distinct  consciousness,  and  endeavour  to  attain  with  more  or  less
energy.  In  reality  the  particular  action  is  generally  determined  by
different  motives  at  once ;  the  artizan  does  not  necessarily  think  only  of
earning  his  bread  ;  he  finds  pleasure  in  his  skill,  and  in  what  he  produces ;
he  desires  to  reap  honour  from  it,  to  excel  his  rivals,  to  fulfil  an  engage
ment  he  has  entered  into,  he  regards  his  work  as  a  vocation  which  he  has
to  fulfil  before  God  and  in  the  service  of  the  community — all  this  may
determine  the  way  in  which  he  works,  and  the  amount  of  energy  which
he  devotes  to  the  work.  But  we  are  able  to  isolate  these  particular  ends
in  thought  and  by  a  consideration  of  the  causal  connections  which  are


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  455

known  to  us  and  the  means  which  are  within  our  reach  we  may  construct
the  process  required  by  each  of  these  ends,  or  find  in  what  respects  the
same  modes  of  action  are  determined  by  the  one  or  the  other  considera
tion  ;  we  proceed  as  in  natural  science  by  imagining  a  process  which  would
occur  as  the  result  of  a  given  cause  if  the  conditions  were  as  simple  as
possible.  Of  course  we  cannot  assume  a  process  here  which  must
necessarily  follow,  for  it  is  a  part  of  the  assumption  that  men  act  in
conformity  with  a  purpose  and  reasonably,  and  that  they  have  a  correct
knowledge  of  the  means  ;  what  we  therefore  construct  is  the  normal
mode  of  action  to  which  an  end  gives  rise,  and  in  doing  so  we  assume-
that  we  have  here  a  connection  which  can  be  known,  and  which  will
be  at  least  approximately  realized  in  the  course  of  phenomena  as  a
whole.  For  that  which  follows  from  the  given  conditions  with  logical
necessity  and  certainty  will  ultimately  maintain  itself  against  the  many
divergent  cases  ;  errors  correct  themselves  by  their  consequences,  and
cannot  yield  uniform  results  tending  in  the  same  direction.

In  the  sphere  of  political  economy,  the  question  as  to  the  right  method
of  regarding  and  investigating  economic  phenomena  has  been  actively
discussed.  For  the  most  part  this  has  been  with  reference  to  the  theory
propounded  by  Adam  Smith,  that  economic  phenomena  are  determined
by  the  principle  of  egoism,  and  that,  starting  from  this  basis,  general  laws
may  be  found  as  to  the  regulation  of  price  by  supply  and  demand,  varia
tions  in  wages,  etc.  On  the  other  hand,  the  historical  school  have  rightly
insisted  that  economic  egoism  is  far  from  being  the  only  factor  to  be
taken  into  consideration,  that  the  concrete  form  of  every  economic
system  is  also  influenced  by  the  whole  state  of  culture,  and  by  religious
and  ethical  motives,  that  the  doctrine  involves  an  untrue  abstraction,  and
that  given  economic  phenomena  can  only  be  causally  connected  with
other  aspects  of  the  national  life,  and  laws  established  amongst  them,  by
the  historical  method  and  by  observation  of  all  the  phenomena  in  actual
co-operation.

But  though  these  objections  are  fully  justified,  and  though  credit  is
indisputably  due  to  Knies,  in  the  first  place,  for  emphasizing  the  com
prehensive  historical  point  of  view,  yet  we  cannot  dispense  with  the  other
view  when  we  are  not  merely  tracing  causal  connections  which  are  historical
in  the  narrower  sense,  i.e.,  essentially  narrative  and  particular  concrete
causal  connections,  but  are  attempting  to  analyse  particular  factors  and  to
establish  partial  laws,  the  combined  fulfilment  of  which  is  historical  reality,


456  LOGIC

and  so  to  obtain  an  "  exact "  theory  of  phenomena  showing  that  certain
consequences  must  follow  from  certain  causes  regarded  as  isolated. But
though  this  attempt  also  is  justified,  it  does  seem  to  me  that  the  method
employed  under  the  influence  of  the  hypothesis  of  egoism  has  not  been
that  which  corresponds  best  to  the  nature  of  things. It  is,  of  course,
allowable  in  the  interests  of  science  to  start  from  such  a  fiction  as  that
a  number  of  persons  producing  and  exchanging  commodities  are  ruled
only  by  egoism,  and  from  the  further  fiction  that  the  means  of  satisfying
this  egoism  in  the  best  way  are  seen  and  applied  by  them  reasonably  and
consistently. But  because  a  reality  corresponding to these  hypotheses
can be nowhere ascertained — the nearest approach is found in the
methods  of  international  trade  in money and commodities, and even
these,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  cannot  proceed  entirely  from  egoistic  motives —
the  deductions  of  this  exact  process  cannot be  confronted  with  reality.
Fictitious  simple  cases  are  assumed  in  physics  also,  but  the  subjects,  to
which  the  elementary  laws  are  applicable,  are  assumed  to  be  real ; here
the  subjects  are  fictitious,  or  are  at  least  subjects  whose  existence  cannot
be  ascertained,  for  particular  motives  can  never  be  directly  shown,  they
can  only  be  surmised. It  seems  a  more  fruitful  way,  and  one  more  easily
compared  with  reality,  to  start  from  ends. To  obtain  the  greatest  possible
value with  the  least  possible  outlay of  labour and capital is an end
which  is  not only quite  comprehensible,  but  is  extensively  present  and
acknowledged  ;  from  what  motives  individuals  place  this  end  before  them
is  a  further  question  which  it  is  not  necessary  to take  into  immediate
consideration  for  the  consequences  of  the  end,  particularly  as  the  pro
duction  of  commodities  is  not  an  ultimate  end. Commodities  have  value
only  as  the  means  to  the  various  ultimate  ends ;  to  a  large  extent  they  are
sought  for  the  sake  of the  power  which  they  bestow,  and  as the  con
dition  of  satisfaction  of  every  sort,  and  it  is this  satisfaction  which  is
primarily  important,  and  the  real  motive to action. And  we  certainly
cannot  say  that  the  motives  must  be  egoistic  which  make  us  wish  to  receive
the  highest  possible  reward  for  our  work,  and  to  earn a competency ;
it  is  an  end  which  may  be  accepted  from  the  most  unassailable  moral
motives. The  economic  end  is  so  universal  only  because  it  includes  the
conditions  of  existence,  and,  therefore,  of  all other purposive activity.
It  is  this  proximate  end  which  must  logically determine  the  behaviour
of  men  to  a  large  extent ;  whatever  follows  from this  end  under  given
actual  conditions  can  be  constructed,  and  can  be  directly  compared  with


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  457

reality  where  the  end  either  acts  alone  or  predominantly.  In  this  way  we  can
judge  also  whether  the  action  of  the  individual,  or  the  forms  of  exchange,
etc.,  are  adapted  to  the  end  or  not ;  we  can  distinguish  between  those
who  really  follow  this  end  and  those  in  whom  it  is  limited  or  entirely
suppressed  by  other  ends.  In  construction  from  motives  we  must  work
from  the  fictitious  normal  man,  who  is  not  merely  possessed  entirely  by
the  principle  of  economic  egoism,  but  is  also  free  from  inertia,  carelessness,
and  extravagance,  and  we  must  operate  with  these  fictitious  elements  ;  if  we
construct  from  the  end,  that  in  itself  includes  the  determination  of  a  normal
behaviour,  and  the  possibility  of  various  deviations  from  it  without  our
being  compelled  to  think  of  reality  as  other  than  it  is.  It  is  only  necessary
to  isolate  one  of  the  ends  which  actually  determine  the  action  of  men
in  the  economic  world,  and  to  trace  its  consequences  ;  to  ask  what  modes
of  action  are  called  for  by  it  under  the  conditions  given  at  any  moment,
and  how  far  reality  corresponds  to  the  course  of  action  so  constructed.1

The  credit  of  having  given  a  leading  place  to  the  analysis  of  historical
reality  by  distinguishing  between  different  systems  of  ends,  and  of  having
based  upon  it  the  methods  of  the  mental  sciences,  belongs  to  Dilthey.2

23.  Both  in  our  common  intuitions  and  in  our  ends  and  the  rules
Df  action  dependent  upon  them,  we  find  a  continual  change  going  on,
A'hich  constitutes  what  we  are  accustomed  to  call  the  historical  develop-
nent  of  intuitions,  institutions,  etc. ;  no  generation  simply  repeats  the
ictions  of  the  previous  one  ;  more  or  less  slowly  change  takes  place
n  what  we  may  call  the  common  spiritual  possession  of  a  people,  or
)f  a  complex  of  peoples.  These  changes  themselves  take  place
iltimately  in  particular  individuals ;  on  the  one  hand,  the  individual
>rogresses  to  new  thoughts,  new  knowledge,  new  ideals,  new  means  of
ealizing  them  ;  on  the  other  hand,  what  we  receive  by  mere  tradition
indergoes,  in  consequence  of  the  processes  in  which  the  appropriation
>f  tradition  consists,  more  or  less  substantial  changes  from  one  generation
o  another.3  And  just  because  there  is  uninterrupted  interaction  in

1  In  the  literature  of  this  question  with  which  I  am  acquainted,  I  find  that  II.  Dietzel
''  Beitrage  zur  Methodik  der  Wirthschafts-Wissenschaft,"_/aAri.  fitr  Nationalokonomic
nd Stalistik,  N.  F.,  vol.  9,  p.  34)  definitely  emphasizes  this  point  of  view  of  the  end  as
ie  starting-point  for  economic  theories,  as  opposed  to  the  reference  to  motives  ;  for  what
e  calls  (in  agreement  with  A.  Wagner)  "  economic  principle  "  is,  according  to  his  own
^presentation,  nothing  but  a  rule  of  action  following  from  a  general  end.

2  See  his  Einleitung  in  die  Geistesiuissenchaften,  I., 1883.

3  This  has  been  shown,  e.g.,  with  reference  to  the gradual  changes in language,
Jmpletely  and  convincingly  by  Paul,  Principien  der  Sprachgeschichte.


458  LOGIC

the  particular  individual  between  the  different  sides  of  his  psychical  life,
there  must  also  be  in  the  greater  whole  a  connection  between  the
different  spheres  of  science,  of  religious  intuitions,  of  morals  and  law,
and  of  art.

Such  developments  become  comprehensible,  and  can  be  recognised  as
essentially connected, in  proportion as we can refer to  psychological
laws which  are true in  the same way  of  every  one,  and  to  which  it
is  due  that  what  is  first  thought  of  and  striven  after  by  individuals  is
assented  to  and  imitated  by  others. Such  progress  can  be  most  easily
traced  where  we  are  dealing  with  pure  theory,  in  the  history  of  science.
For  our  knowledge  of  the  objective  world  the  other  psychological  factors
are less important ; that which is logically correct exerts  through  its
self-evidence  a  constraint  upon  us  which  cannot  be  withstood  permanently
by  merely subjective and fortuitous combinations ; it  can  be  accepted
universally  while  errors  diverge. It is,  therefore,  to be expected that
when  an  opinion  is  universally  accepted  its  necessary  consequences  will
also  hold  good ; while,  on the other hand, every deficiency or con
tradiction  in  a  theory  will  afford  an  impulse  to  its  supplementation  or
correction. It  is  thus  that  we  are justified  in  attempting  to  introduce
the  logical  necessity of  the  process  from  ground  to  consequence, and
of the solution of contradictions as the motive power in historical
development,  to  connect  its  particular  stages  by  this bond,  and  so  to
explain its  sequences  ; we  shall  be  driven  to  this  expedient especially
where  we  have  before  us  only  the  results  of  scientific  research  and  not
the  whole  mental  processes  of  the  particular co-operators. But here,
again,  we  cannot  do  more  than  retrospectively  arrange  what  has  actually
happened ; here again it is true that logical necessity  is  not  a self-
subsisting force,  which,  acting,  as  it  were, independently  of  individuals,
determines  what happens. The correctness of a conclusion is no
guarantee  that  it  has  been  actually  inferred,  and  neither  the  individual
nor  communities  have  so  painful  a  sensibility  for  contradictions  in  their
opinions  or  in  their  particular  commissions  and  omissions,  that  it  would
be  impossible  for  them  to believe  contradictions  and  give  expression  tc
them  in  their  actions  without  being  especially  troubled  by  it, or  even
without  noticing  it. The  strict  legislation  of  logic  applies  only  to  an  idea!
consciousness  containing  at  one  and  the  same  time  all  the  elements  of  its
ideal  world  in  all  their  relations,  and  thoughts  do  not  think  themselves:
amongst  all  the  thoughts  which occur  involuntarily  to  the  more  active


EXPLANATION  IN  HISTORY  459

and  intelligent  a  critical  selection  must  be  made  according  to  logical  rules.
If  it  were  not  so,  it  would  be  incomprehensible  how  things  which  now
seem  quite  evident  should  have  been  so  slow  to  be  recognised.  For
this  reason  we  can  never  assert  with  reference  to  reality  that  any  scientific
progress  has  been  necessary;  from  all  that  has  been  produced  we  can
subsequently  select  that  which  is  to  be  described  as  progress,  but  we
cannot  calculate  what  will  follow;  for  all  progress  is  of  the  nature  of
invention.

That  factor  of  development  which  is  peculiar  to  the  individual,  and
cannot  be  calculated,  naturally  plays  a  much  greater  part  in  all  those
departments  which  are  closely  connected  with  the  feelings  and  with
practical  interests.  Here  again  the  dependence  of  individuals  upon  each
other,  and  the  force  of  habit  and  of  existing  institutions,  provides  for  a
certain  stability;  the  judgments  as  to  what  is  beautiful  and  becoming,
'what  is  just  and  worthy  of  endeavour,  change  but  slowly  within  a
community.  Nevertheless  the  changes  within  these  departments  also
can  be  explained  by  general  psychological  motives;  whatever  would,  or
at  any  rate,  might  follow  in  an  individual  consciousness  from  the  presence
of  a  certain  content,  we  are  justified  in  transferring  to  the  whole  of  the
intuitions  and  endeavours  which  manifest  themselves  within  a  people,
•just  because  all  progress  and  all  development  can  take  place  only  in
the  individual.  We  must,  however,  always  bear  in  mind  that  for  the
most  part  what  we  can  directly  prove  are  only  the  derived  consequences
of  events  which  we  cannot  know  in  detail,  and  frequently  cannot  even
construct  hypothetically  because  we  have  not  sufficient  grounds  to  go
upon.

24.  That  general  way  of  regarding  historical  events  which  determines
the  particular  direction  which  will  be  taken  by  the  causal  explanation  of
facts  will  always  oscillate  between  two  extremes.  On  the  one  hand,
it  will  lay  stress  on  the  importance  of  individuals,  the  influence  of
prominent  and  original  personalities  which,  by  the  superiority  of  their
intellect  and  the  strength  of  their  will,  give  new  content  to  the  life  of
the  people  and  new  directions  to  their  common  action ;  on  the  other
hand,  it  will  emphasize  the  common  element  by  regarding  the  individuals
as  only  the  expression  and  organ  of  the  universal  spirit,  and  explaining
:heir  thoughts  and  action  by  the  total  life  of  their  time  and  their  people.
The  two  lines  of  thought  must  supplement  each  other.  From  the
second  point  of  view  the  kernel  of  history  consists,  not  in  particular  deeds,


460  LOGIC

but  in  the  ideas  which  are  realized  in  the  common  life  of  the  nations  ;
but  ideas  do  not  grow  of  themselves  ;  they  are  originally  produced  by
individuals  ;  they  cannot  be  known  directly  but  can  only  be  inferred  from
their  consequences,  and  their  importance  is  ultimately  due  to  the  concrete
actions  which  spring  from  them  and  which  alone  are  capable  of  producing
further  effects.  There  is  a  similar  relation  between  the  tendency  to  ex
plain  everything  by  conscious  purpose  and  calculation  and  the  tendency
to  refer  to  a  necessity,  concealed  from  the  particular  consciousness,  by
virtue  of  which  individuals  produce  more  than  they  know  or  will,  and
are  subservient  to  the  law  of  development  of  the  race.  This  opposition
is  reconciled  by  the  view  that  in  our  conscious  voluntary  action  we  can
only  set  before  us  ends  which  are  inherent  in  the  nature  of  man  and
which  first  appear  in  the  form  of  an  involuntary  impulse ;  nor  again
can  we  refer  to  conscious  purpose  the  fact  that  thoughts  arise  which,  by
the  satisfaction  which  they  promise,  stimulate  the  will  to  seek  the  means.
We  find  here  what  in  other  departments  we  call  instinct,  a  form  of  action
which  is  objectively  directed  towards  an  end,  but  which  cannot  be  ex
plained  by  conscious  ends.

Our  historical  treatment,  which  began  by  merely  seeking  the  reality
of  concrete  causes  by  which  to  explain  the  sequence  of  events,  here  takes
us  beyond  itself.  We  come  upon  a  limit  in  two  directions.  First,  in
following  our  original  inquiry,  and  penetrating  the  past,  we  come  upon
a  point  where  historical  records  fail  us,  a  primary  state  which  we  can
only  construct  by  hypothesis.  How  human  society  has  founded  itself,
how  language  arose,  how  the  simplest  forms  of  skill  developed,  can  only
be  conjectured.  Such  conjectures  must  be  partly  supported  by  analogies
which,  taken  from  the  known  course  of  history,  serve  for  the  construction
of  previous  stages ;  but  for  the  most  part  they  depend  upon  certain
assumptions  concerning  that  general  nature  of  man  of  which  the  course
of  history  is  the  explication.  Here,  therefore,  we  are  again  brought  to
the  third  and  last  of  the  problems  of  explanation  distinguished  on  p.  418,
explanation  by  the  essential  concepts  of  substances.

§  Io°-

In  order  that  the  causal  concept  (§  73)  may  be  logically  complete  we
have  to  find  the  ULTIMATE  GROUND  of  all  perceptible  events  in  sub
stances  which,  by  virtue  of  their  nature  and  their  essential  relations  to


ULTIMATE GROUNDS  461

other  substances,  necessarily  give  rise  to  the  activities  appearing  in  them  •
and  at  the  same  time  we  complete  the  ESSENTIAL  CONCEPTS  OF  SUBSTANCES.
The  simplest,  and,  from  a  logical  point  of  view,  most  obvious  form  in
which  we  can  carry  out  this  reference  to  substances  is  that  of  a  me
chanism  ;  i.e.  of  a  relation  between  a  limited  number  of  invariable  sub
stances  to  each  other,  such  that  they  vary  in  their  relations  to  each  other
according  to  invariable  laws.  Here  the  PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  CONSERVATION
OF  ENERGY  serves  as  a  clue  in  referring  the  action  of  perceptible  causes
to  the  forces  essentially  inherent  in  substances.

But  we  cannot  infer  that  this  hypothesis  is  the  only  one  to  be  relied
upon;  we  must  distinguish  between  leading  principles  of  the  methods  of
investigation  and  metaphysical  axioms.

In  the  organic  world  the  expression  of  facts  requires  the  concept  of
DEVELOPMENT.  This  can  be  applied  in  two  ways  ;  either  we  may — accord
ing  to  the  mechanical  theory  of  life — assume  that  the  ultimate  subjects
are  invariable  atoms,  or  the  concept  may  be  employed  for  the  essential
determination  of  subjects  which  contain  in  themselves  the  ground  of  a
change  and  increased  efficiency  which  is  determined  by  their  own
activity.

Psychical  phenomena  require  as  the  ultimate  ground  of  explanation
single  subjects  for  that  which  is  contained  in  one  consciousness  and  the
:oncept  of  inner  development.  The  most  obvious  assumption  to  employ
n  the  methods  of  investigation  is  that  of  determinism ;  but  it  is  neither
:he  only  one  possible,  nor  is  it  a  conclusion  confirmed  on  empirical
grounds.

i.  In  so  far  as  the  inductive  methods  we  have  as  yet  discussed  were
lirected  to  the  investigation  of  causal  connections  in  external  nature,
he  concept  of  cause  upon  which  they  were  based  was  that  which  ap-
)roached  most  nearly  to  the  popular  meaning  of  the  term.  The  causal
:onnection  which  we  were  looking  for  existed  between  a  perceptible
ictivity  of  a  thing  and  a  connected  perceptible  change  in  another  thing  ;
he  action  of  the  cause  consisted  in  an  event  in  time.  The  effect  came
.bout  in  the  same  time  and  must  therefore  be  completed  after  the  beginning
>f  the  action.  That  the  effect  must  be  subsequent  to  the  cause  is  still
aore  certain  where  we  have  chains  of  effects,  where  a  change  in  one  thing
ransfers  itself  successively  toother  things.  The  certainty  of  causal  con-
icctions  always  depends  primarily  upon  the  knowledge  of  such  causal
aws,  which  only  give  us  a  real  explanation  when  definite  things  can  be


462  LOGIC

pointed  out  as  efficient  causes.  In  the  principle  that  the  effect  must
always  be  the  measure  of  the  action  we  found  a  means  of  determining
where  we  might  assume  a  complete  and  definitely  established  causal  law  of
this  kind.

2.  The  logical  elaboration  of  this  popular  concept  which  we  developed
in  §  73  leads  us  to  new  problems. We  have  shown  (pp.  102-116)  that  it
follows  from  the  concept  of  efficient  action  itself  that  the  action  and  the
genesis  of  the  effect  must  be  contemporaneous,  if  we  regard  them  not  as
units,  but  as  an  event  passing  continuously  through  a  series  of  moments.
It  was  shown  further  that  when  the  event  is  referred  to  the  nature  of  the
substances  entering  into  a  causal  relation  as  its  ultimate  ground,  the  effect
must  be  derived  both  from  the  nature  of  the  agent  and  that  of  the  patient
i.e.  it  must  be  grounded  upon  a  relation  between  these  two  which  find;
its  expression  in  the  concept  of  force. Finally,  it  was  shown  that  ir
every  effect we  must  distinguish  two  things  : first, that  consequence  o
the  state  brought  about  by  the  agent  in  the  patient  which  continues  fron
moment  to  moment,  and  which  is  grounded  only  in  the  patient  itself;  anc
secondly,  that  amount  of  change  (which  again  is  introduced  from  momen
to  moment)  which  must  be  referred  to  the  continued  action  of  the  cause
Galileo's  law  of  inertia,  and  its  importance  in  the  explanation  of  motions
was  an  illustration  of  the  last  point ;  the  continuance  of  a  motion,  whei
once  brought  about,  no  longer  appeared  as  the  immediate  action  of  th
cause  which  first  produced  it,  but  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  natun
of  the  moved  body  itself  by  virtue  of  its  attribute  of  inertia.

It  is  similar  in  other  departments.  In  ordinary  language  the  illnes
produced  by  injury  to  an  organ,  and  the  consequent  death,  are  th
effect  of  the  injury  ;  but  by  more  exact  analysis  we  find  that  the  proximal
effect,  which  the  injurious  cause  produces,  is  only  the  mechanical  sepan
tion  of  certain  tissues,  or  the  introduction  of  a  strange  body.  The  groun>
of  all  which  follows  is  found  only  in  the  organization  of  the  injure
person,  and  develops  therein  from  one  stage  to  another  according  t
physiological  laws.

3.  The  first  problem  arising  out  of  this  analysis  is  to  break  up  ever
event  induced  by  a  cause  into  that  part  which  follows  merely  from  th
nature  of  the  patient,  and  that  part  which  is  due  to  the  agent ;  to  dete
mine,  iherefore,  the  rules  according  to  which,  when  a  state  has  once  bee
brought  about  in  a  thing  from  without,  its subsequent  states  follow  <
themselves,  and  the  rules  according  to  which  these  sequences  are  altere


ULTIMATE GROUNDS  463

by  changing  relations  to  other  things.  The  latter  rules  must  be  grounded
on  the  relation  between  substances  themselves.

To  carry  out  this  process  directly  would  be  possible  only  if  we  could
isolate  particular  things,  so  as  to  observe  how  they  would  behave  when
placed  in  a  certain  state  and  then  left  entirely  to  themselves ;  but  this
isolation  is  not  possible.  We  cannot  observe  any  body  which  is  able  to
continue  its  motion  without  being  acted  upon  by  any  causes,  nor  any
development  in  which,  from  a  given  moment,  the  inner  succession  of  the
states  which  follow  from  the  nature  of  the  organism  itself  would  unfold
itself  without  being  influenced  from  without.  Thus  the  division  of  the
ground  of  a  perceptible  effect  into  the  nature  of  the  patient  by  itself,  and
its  relation  to  the  agent,  is  always  hypothetical ;  the  analysis  must  be  carried
out  in  thought.  Comparisons  may  indeed  give  us  a  clue  to  a  hypothesis  ;
by  observing  that  a  body  prolongs  its  motion  in  proportion  as  obstacles
are  diminished  we  may  be  brought  to  think  that  if  there  were  no  obstacle
at  all  it  would  continue  to  move  indefinitely ;  but  the  conjecture  cannot
be  confirmed  by  any  direct  experiment.  It  is  only  the  possibility  of
inferring  from  such  assumed  propositions  what  really  happens  with  absolute
accuracy  which  raises  the  hypotheses  to  that  degree  of  probability  which
can  be  bestowed  upon  them  by  the  inference  from  the  truth  of  the  con-
i  sequence  to  the  truth  of  the  premises.

4.  The  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  plays  a  part  here
similar  to  that  taken  by  the  principle  of  the  permanence  of  substance,
when  in  §  91,  4,  we  were  dealing  with  the  reduction  of  the  phenomenal
subjects  of  our  judgments  of  perception  to  real  subjects  persisting  through
out  change.  In  the  first  place,  the  principle  establishes  an  equation  from
which  can  be  determined  whether  successive  changes  are  related  entirely
and  purely  as  cause  and  effect ;  and  it  further  affords  in  the  equivalent
terms  a  common  measure  for  efficient  action,  just  as  the  principle  that
weight  is  the  measure  of  the  quantity  of  matter  affords  a  common  measure
for  substances.

In  so  far  as  this  principle  is  unassailable  and  can  be  empirically  verified
it  serves  as  a  clue,  not  only  in  determining  whether  we  are  justified  in
regarding  a  given  effect  as  the  whole  and  sole  action  of  a  cause,  but  also
in  deciding  the  question  how  a  composite  effect  is  to  be  referred  to  the
substances  taking  part  in  it.  When  the  drawing  of  the  trigger  is  followed
by  the  explosion  of  the  powder,  and  this  by  the  flight  of  the  ball,  or
when  the  blasting  of  a  rock  follows  the  connection  of  the  conductors  in  a


464  LOGIC

galvanic  battery,  it  is  evident  that  there  is  no  equality  between  the
mechanical  energy  of  the  hand  and  the  energy  of  the  movements  which
result  from  it.  We  cannot  therefore  refer  the  whole  of  the  succeeding
events  directly  to  the  action  of  the  cause  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  greater
part  of  it  must  be  referred  to  another  ground,  and  for  this  we  cannot
assume  the  same  form  of  causal  action  as  in  our  first  discovered  causal
laws,  but  are  forced  to  postulate  causal  relations  which  make  possible  the
transition  from  a  state  of  rest  to  one  of  motion,  powers  of  action  which
are  always  present,  and  are  disengaged  under  certain  conditions.

5.  The  simplest  example  of  such  a  causal  relation  is  gravity. It  was
noticed  on  p.  369  that  direct  observation  leaves  us  completely  at  a  loss
when we  try  to  say  why  bodies  fall ;  all  that  we  see are  negative  con
ditions,  the  absence  of  circumstances  which  hinder  the  fall,  not  active
causes. Gravity  itself  as  an  attribute  is  primarily  only  another  expression
for  the  general  phenomenon,  but  as  a  relational  concept  this  predicate
is  not  alone  sufficient  to  determine  where  the  ground  of  the  phenomenon
is  to  be  looked  for. All  definite  assumptions  about  the  ground  of  gravity
and  the  tendency  to  fall  are  hypothetical,  and  by  means  of  them  we  place
in  the nature  of  certain  substances  the  ground of  the changes  which
occur under certain conditions. But the more comprehensive the
combinations  upon  which  such  hypotheses  rest,  the  less  possible  it  is  to
state  any elementary  method for  them ; the  history  of  the  concept  of
gravity  and  of  the  theory  of  falling  bodies  shows  sufficiently  how  remote
from  analysable  processes,  such  as  could  be  learned by  rule,  were  the
inspired  conceptions  of  Galileo  and  Newton.

6.  Newton  himself  gives  an  example  of  the  double  meaning  of  such
hypotheses. In  guarding  himself  against being supposed to wish to
determine the physical causes of  gravity,  he explains  the  expressions
"  attractive  force  "  and  so  on,  as  merely  paraphrases  of  the  law  manifested
in  the  way  in  which  bodies  behave ;  motions  occur  as  if  there  were  an
active  force  in  the  centre  of  the  sun  which  attracts  bodies  in the  inverse
ratio of  the square  of  the  distance. For  him,  therefore,  the  force  oi
attraction is merely  a  concept which helps him in the mathematical
formulation  of  the laws, but  which  has no  significance  for reality ;  it
contains  no  statement  as  to  a  universal  essential  attribute  of  matter.

This  purely  formal  use  of  hypothetical  ideas  as  to  the  ultimate  grounds
of  actual  phenomena  is  opposed  to  that  which  we  may  call  the  meta
physical  use.  This  believes  itself  justified  in  assuming  that  whatevei


ULTIMATE GROUNDS  465

enables  us  to  explain  phenomena  harmoniously  constitutes  the  actual
nature  of  the  substances  and  completes  their  essential  concepts.  Not
withstanding  Newton's  precautions,  his  immediate  successors  regarded  the
force  of  attraction  as  such  an  essential  determination  of  matter,  and
included  it  in  the  concept  of  matter;  the  only  justification  for  this  lies
in  the  fact  that  our  thought,  which  moves  in  the  syntheses  of  the  cate
gories  of  substance  and  causality,  finds  it  necessary,  in  order  to  reduce
observed  events  to  general  propositions,  to  frame  somehow  or  other
concepts  of  substances  and  of  their  modes  of  interacting.  The  hypo
thetical  character  of  all  concepts  thus  constructed  continues  in  their
metaphysical  significance ;  they  can  only  be  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the
observed  event  can  be  deduced  from  them  in  its  whole  extent;  and  those
cases  in  which  previously  inexplicable  phenomena,  from  which  the
hypothesis  was  not  derived,  can  be  explained  by  it,  or  in  which  it  enables
us  to  discover  the  facts  which  it  requires,  occupy  the  position  of
confirmations  of  a  proposition  inductively  obtained  by  experiment.  The
explanation  of  the  oblateness  of  the  earth  and  the  tides  of  the  sea  by
an  assumption  grounded  only  upon  the  fall  of  terrestrial  bodies,  and  the
motions  of  the  planets,  and  the  discovery  of  Neptune,  are  exempla
illustria  representing  the  highest  attainable  degree  of  confirmation  of  a
hypothetical  assumption  which  cannot  be  directly  affirmed.

In  a  similar  way  chemical  processes  are  referred  to  fundamental  relations
of  the  particular  substances,  by  virtue  of  which  certain  motions  and
positions  of  the  atoms  occur  under  certain  conditions.  And  even  if  the
attempt  to  refer  all  the  events  in  the  universe,  including  the  phenomena
of  gravity,  to  the  mere  communication  of  motion  between  the  ultimate
elements  should  succeed,  it  must  still  be  part  of  the  permanent  nature  of
:hese  elements  that  under  certain  spatial  conditions  they  fall  into  motion
determined  both  in  direction  and  velocity;  all  actual  events  would  be  the
:onsequence  of  this  permanent  nature,  which  includes  a  definite  relation

each  particular  element  to  all  the  others.

7.  If  the  end  at  which  we  aim  in  this  stage  of  explaining  phenomena
)y  their  grounds  were  attained  with  the  highest  degree  of  probability,
hen  we  should  have  the  concepts  of  all  the  substances  active  in  the
naterial  world,  complete  and  self-contained,  in  a  form  which  would
:nable  us  to  infer  from  the  definition  of  every  substance  how  it  would
ct  towards  every  other  in  every  relation  into  which  it  might  enter  with  it ;
consequences  would  proceed  for  all  from  every  change  in  their

s.  L.— ii.  H  H


466  LOGIC

relations,  and  how  every  modification  introduced  in  every  substance
would  have  consequent  modifications  in  itself;  we  should  know,  further,
by  the  laws  of  the  composition  of  effects  what  must  proceed  from  every
combination  of  substances  which  are  in  simultaneous  but  different  relations
to  each  other.

In  the  science  of  the  mechanism  of  the  heavens  we  have  a  grand
and  simple  illustration  of  such  construction,  though  indeed  it  is  itself,
strictly  speaking,  only  possible  by  means  of  an  abstraction  ;  only  the
movements  of  the  bodies  in  space  are  regarded,  and  other  relations,
such  as  those  of  the  radiation  of  light  and  heat,  are  unnoticed;  only  two
invariable  attributes  common  to  all  bodies  are  taken  as  the  ground
of  their  motions ;  and  then  we  can  say  that  the  orbits  and  velocities
of  the  planets  follow  according  to  simple  laws  from  their  masses,  distances
and  previous  motion,  and  the  chief  difficulty  lies  in  the  methods  of  calcu
lation,  by  which  we  have  to  derive  from  the  continually  changing  relations
of  a  number  of  elements  further  changes  always  following  the  same  laws.
The  popular  concept  of  cause  and  effect  has  completely  disappeared  here ;
the  corresponding  acceleration  or  retardation  of  motion  is  absolutely
simultaneous  with  every  change  of  distance ;  the  force,  as  the  attribute
of  the  masses,  remains  the  same,  but  in  different  relations  it  gives  rise
to  different  acceleration  ;  and  however  different  the  form  which  these
relations  may  take,  still  from  every  collocation  of  invariable  masses
endowed  with  force  their  motions  proceed  according  to  the  same  laws.
All  distinction  between  particular  intervals  of  time  disappears ;  the  whole
course  from  the  immemorial  past  to  the  boundless  future  may  be  regarded
as  the  one  consequence  of  one  ground,  which,  unaffected  by  time,  governs
what  happens  in  a  continual  present ;  or  this  course  may  be  broken
up  into  immeasurably  small  intervals,  of  which  each  contains  the  whole
of  the  conditions  from  which  the  subsequent  one  necessarily  proceeds
And  in  so  far  as  all  which  happens  is  caused  only  by  these  element.'
we  can  calculate  from  any  moment  backwards  to  the  past  as  well  a<
forwards  to  the  future.

8.  It  is  easy  to  understand  how  the  logical  clearness  with  whicl-
concepts  of  active  substances,  of  their  forces  and  laws  of  action,  an
here  constructed,  and  the  exactness  with  which  calculations  made  fron
them  agree  with  our  observations,  might  lead  to  the  ideal  of  an  all
embracing  formula,  in  which  the  whole  series  of  states  of  all  things  coul<
be  similarly  explained  by  relations  varying  according  to  constant  laws.


ULTIMATE GROUNDS  467

; But  attractive  as  this  ideal  is,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between
;  methodological  aspirations  and  propositions  for  which  a  proof  is  presented,
1  or  is  at  any  rate  possible,  according  to  the  general  principles  of  induction,
i  We  must  not  forget that  here  we  have  to determine,  from the given
phenomena  and  their  phenomenal  laws,  two  unknowns :  first,  the  concepts
of  the  single  active  substances,  and,  secondly,  the  laws  of  the  action  of
i  their  forces ; and  that  no  proposition  can  be  directly  verified  as  where
we  are  dealing  with laws  referring  to  events  in  phenomenal  unities. In
i  the latter case the elements with which we are dealing are  directly
measurable  magnitudes ;  in  the  former  they  are  constructed  concepts,  the
existence  of  which  cannot  be  demonstrated  to  the  senses. Behind  the
:  perceptible  universe  there  is  being  built up an intelligible universe  of
.mere  concepts,  which  can  reveal  its  presence  in  its  influence  upon  our
.senses,  but  can  never  immediately  enter  into  the  series  of  phenomena.
From  the  point  of  view  of  method  there  is  no  difference between  the
universe  of Platonic ideas  and Aristotelian forms, which determine  a
matter which is similarly imperceptible and only to be apprehended
in  thought,  and  the  atoms  of  modern  science,  which,  themselves  imper
ceptible,  are  taken  as  the  ultimate  active  subjects  in  all  phenomena. All
:hat  can  be  demanded  of  such  constructions  is  that  they  should  suffice
'or  the  explanation  of  the  immediately  given, — ultimately,  therefore,  of
i:hose affections of  consciousness which  are given  to the senses, and
should  enable  us  to  deduce  them  in  their  whole  concrete  determination,
vith  all  their  quantitative  attributes;  the more  particular  nature  of  the
lypotheses  is  determined  not  by  general  logical  considerations, but by
he  nature  of  what  is  given.

9.  All  that  we  can  do  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  general  methodology
s  to  show  what  formal  attributes  are  most  desirable  in  the  hypotheses
rom  a  logical  point  of  view,  and  offer  the  simplest  and  most  convenient
iiieans  to  attaining  the  ends  of  science,  in  case  they  can  be  carried  out;  what
ttiibutes,  therefore,  it  is  reasonable  to  look  for  and  trace  to  their  results
rst,  before  proceeding  to  other  assumptions.  From  the  nature  of  the
niversal  propositions  which  we  endeavour  to  attain,  and  from  the  nature
f  the  concepts  of  substance  and  causality,  we  may  derive  some  rules
f  method,  which  must  guide  us  at  first  in  the  construction  of  these
ypothetical  assumptions,  but  which  must  not  be  elevated  from  their
osition  as  mere  methodological  principles  of  investigation  to  the  dignity
f  metaphysical  axioms ;  it  does  not  follow  that  they  are  true,  because  they


468  LOGIC

would  give us the  consistent  explanation  of  the  given  on  the easiest
conditions.

The following may be taken as instances of  these methodological
guiding  principles  :

1.  It  is  a  logical  requirement  to  break  up  the  continuous  into  the
discrete,  to  assume  as  the  true  subjects  of  all  phenomena  actual  enumerable
unities,  and  to  think  of  these  unities  as  simple,  and  not  themselves  con
sisting  of  heterogeneous  or  homogeneous  parts,  so  that  every  predicate
of  these  subjects  is  true  absolutely,  without  limitation  or  distinction.

2.  It  is  a  logical  requirement  to  think  of  these  unities  as  determined
in  such  a  way  as  to  fall  under  a  number  of  concepts  which  can  be  surveyed,
or  which  is  at  any  rate  finite,  and  to  think  of  them  as  being  exhaustively
expressed by these concepts ; to assume, therefore,  that the infima
species  represent  a  number  of  beings  which  are  absolutely  indistinguishable,
thus  making  it  possible  to  have  strictly  universal  judgments  with  fully
determined  predicates.

3.  It  is  a  logical  requirement  to  think  of  these  unities  as  absolutely
invariable  in  time,  so  that  every  proposition  which  refers  to  them  may
be  true  without  limitation  of  time,  that  they  can  enter  into  every  relatior
without  changing,  and  always  have  the  same  predicates  under  the  samt
conditions;  or,  to  express  it  differently,  that  every  change  of  predicate  hai
its  ground  in  external  relation  alone.

We  have  here  nothing  but  the  points  of  view  by  which  we  were  guidec
in  the  logical  elaboration  of  the  concept  of  substance  (§  72), — hypothese
in  which  we  assume  such  substances  would  best  answer  our  logical  needs
Atomism  satisfies  these  demands,  and  it  therefore  recommends  itself  fron
the  logical  point  of  view  as  the  most  obvious  assumption.  Atoms  ar>
these  discrete  homogeneous  unities,  which  exclude  all  plurality  of  dis
tinguishable  parts,  are  invariable  in  time,  and  fall  under  comparatively  fev
fixed  concepts ;  and  for  this  reason  they  are  so  constituted  that  one  aton
can  be  substituted  for  every  one  of  the  same  sort  without  any  difference
that  under  like  conditions  they  always  act  in  the  same  way,  that  no  chang
takes  place  within  them,  and  that  every  general  proposition  about  ther
is  true  without  limitation  of  time.

10.  There  is  a  second  series  of  logical  demands  having  reference  t<
the  nature  of  the  predicates  which  are  to  be  expressed  in  the  universe
judgments  we  try  to  find.  Where  we  have  absolutely  single  and  invariabl
subjects  such  predicates  can  only  be  the  relations  which  exist  betwee


ULTIMATE GROUNDS  469

them  ;  all  that  remains  to  be  known  about  them  is  their  relation  to  our
sensation  and  to  each  other  under  certain  conditions.  But  their  relation
to  our  sensation  depends  upon  their  spatial  relations  to  each  other,  so  that
ultimately  the  only  predicates  which  are  the  results  of  their  essence,  i.e.
of  their  invariable  forces,  are  their  situation  and  motion  with  respect  to
each  other.  Here  we  have  obtained  the  most  favourable  conditions  for
the  determinateness  of  the  predicates.  The  continuum  of  the  purely
mathematical  predicates  enables  us  to  express  the  smallest  differences  in
conceptual  exactitude  by  means  of  measurement,  so  that  every  universal
judgment  assumes  the  character  of  a  mathematical  formula  which  repre
sents  spatial  and  temporal  relations  as  the  function  of  spatial  and  temporal
relations.

If  we  are  to  be  able  to  construct  and  use  these  formulae,  the  most
favourable  assumption  we  can  make  is  that  the  fundamental  relations  are
as  simple  as  possible,  in  order  that  the  art  of  mathematical  analysis  may
be  equal  to  them,  that  is,  that  the  functions,  which  make  the  motion
depend  upon  the  distance,  are  as  simple  as  possible.1

ii. We  can  understand  from this  how  it  is  that  the  conception  of  a

i  mechanism  of  the  universe  which  attempts  to  represent  all  perceptible

i  events  as  the  motion  of  invariable  atoms  according  to  invariable  laws  is

the  form  of  explanation  which  would  most  easily  and  completely  satisfy

our  logical  requirements. According  to  it  no  other  data  than  different

kinds  of  atoms  and  space  would  be  needed  to enable  us  to  calculate

what  would  be  the  results  of  any  number  of  atoms  and  any  distribution

of  them  in  space  ;  and  if  it  should  ultimately  prove  that  even  the  hetero-

1  I  cannot  convince  myself  that  this  general  postulate  includes  also  the  particular
assumptions  which  are  sometimes  derived  from  it  ;  i.e.  Galileo's  law  of  inertia  and
Newton's  law  of  the  diminution  of  efficient  action  according  to  the  square  of  the  distance.
Forces  which  should  be  modified  with  the  velocity  of  a  body,  if  the  modifications
occurred  according  to  a  constant  law,  would  also  be  invariable  forces  in  the  sense  needed
by  the  theory  ;  Galileo's  law  of  inertia  is  only  the  simplest  case  conceivable  in  which
the  forces  exercised  by  a  body  are  independent  of  its  own  motion.  In  the  same  way
Newton's  law  does  not  seem  to  be  given  by  the  condition  that  a  force  is  invariable  in
-pace  ;  the  invariability  requisite  for  general  propositions  can  merely  mean  that  the  force
exercises  the  same  effect  at  every  position  in  space,  hence  that  the  propositions  undergo
no  change  when  applied  to  different  regions  in  space.  That  the  sum  of  the  actions
remains  the  same  when,  diminishing  indirectly  as  the  square  of  the  distance,  they  extend
'ver  more  and  more  remote  spherical  surfaces,  is  obvious  only  for  the  case  in  which  an
Ktion  transmits  itself  within  a  uniformly  filled  space,  as  in  the  motion  of  waves ;
ivhere  we  are  dealing  with  an  actio  in  distans  the  demand  for  an  invariable  force  would
>e  satisfied  also  by  a  force  which  should  diminish  in  simple  or  cubic  proportion  to  the
listance.


470  LOGIC

geneity  of  the  chemical  atoms  could  be  explained  by  combinations  of
homogeneous  atoms,  then  the  whole  manifold  of  the  universe  would  be
reduced  to  the  smallest  number  conceivable  of  principles  of  a  purely
logical  and  mathematical  and  therefore  completely  comprehensible  nature.
We  can  understand  the  charm  with  which  this  view  attracts  the  most
scientific  spirits,  and  the  zeal  with  which  this  hypothesis  is  proclaimed  as
the  only  scientific  one.

But  there  is  a  great  difference  between  laying  down  rules  for  the  con
struction  of  logically  desirable  hypotheses  and  carrying  them  out ;  we
may  willingly  acknowledge  the  justification  for  trying  such  assumptions
first,  and  yet  deny  that  the  nature  of  given  external  and  internal  facts
affords  any  sure  prospect  of  realizing  this  ideal  formula  of  the  universe,
or  that  there  is  any  proof  that  there  is  no  need  of  other  principles,  or  that
no  others  are  admissible.  There  is  no  logical  law  to  prevent  us  from
assuming  substances  which  do  not  possess  that  invariability  which  causes
them  always  to  act  according  to  the  same  laws,  but  which  on  the  contrary
have  an  inward  development  according  to  the  law  of  which  their  acti
vities  give  rise  to  each  other,  and  each  stage  manifests  a  different  reaction
externally ;  there  is  no  logical  law  which  requires  us  to  find  the  ground  of
every  event  in  external  relations  alone.  Nor  is  it  anywhere  written  that
substances  are  impossible  which,  within  the  same  general  concept,  differ
from  one  individual  to  the  other  in  such  a  way  that  no  one  can  be  simply
substituted  for  another ;  the  proposition  that  no  two  things  in  the  universe
are  exactly  alike  is  not  a  metaphysical  axiom,  nor  yet  the  proposition  that
for  every  thing  there  must  be  an  unlimited  number  of  absolutely  similar
things  under  the  same  concept.  It  is  not  even  impossible  to  think  of
substances  as  being  generated  in  time  ;  the  principle  of  the  permanence  of
substance  is  an  empirical  one,  and  can  only  be  accepted  as  true  within
that  sphere  in  which  its  truth  has  been  proved  ;  it  does  not  refute  the
possibility  that  in  some  other  sphere  a  genesis  may  take  place.  We  must
of  course  inquire  into  the  ground  of  the  existence  of  every  substance  to
which  we  attribute  any  real  being,  so  as  to  apply  to  them  the  postulate
that  the  Given  is  necessary,  especially  if  in  their  existence  and  action  they
stand  in  causal  relations  to  the  rest  of  the  universe.  But  the  nature  of
this  ground  and  the  law  according  to  which  it  works  could  only  be  inferred
from  the  most  comprehensive  consideration  of  the  whole  connection  of
phenomena.

12. The  only  decisive  justification  for  any  hypothesis  is  to  show  that


ULTIMATE GROUNDS  471

the  Given  can  be  completely  explained  from  it  ;  that  from  the  nature  of
the  elements  which  it  assumes,  the  whole  course  of  the  universe  is  made
as  comprehensible  as  the  motion  of  the  planets  and  the  satellites  from  the
inertia  and  gravitation  of  masses.

In  the  province  of  inorganic  nature  this  end  has  not  indeed  been  yet
attained  ;  no  one  can  say  that  the  concepts  of  the  atoms  and  of  their
original  forces  and  laws  of  action  are  already  so  completely  and  unani
mously  determined,  that  all  observable  events  could be  unambiguously
derived  from  them. The  relation  of  ponderable  atoms to  those  of  ether
has  not  yet  been  established,  nor  has  the  conflict  of  different  hypotheses
led  to  any  certain  result  with  reference  to  the  laws  of  motion  and  the
forces  to  which  they  refer ;  the  wide  sphere  of  electricity  and  magnetism
;  still  awaits  the  realization  of  definite  mechanical  ideas,  in  comprehensible
,  relation  to  the  hypotheses  which apply  in  other  spheres. But  notwith-
;  standing  this  incomplete  state  of  the  physical  hypotheses  we  are  justified,
.  partly  by  the  character  of  physical  phenomena  in general, partly  by  the
results  which  have  been  obtained  in  particular  departments,  in  assuming
that  we  shall  succeed  here  in  determining  the  concepts  of  the  ultimate
'.  elements  of  the  material  universe  in  such  a  way  that  all phenomena  may
i  be  derived  from  the  invariable  laws  of  the  relations between  them. The
strictness  with  which  the  physical  laws  hold  good,  and  the  exactitude  with
which,  under  the  same  conditions,  the  same  phenomena  always  recur  in  all
parts  of  the  same  kinds  of  substance,  indicate  that  substances  are  of  such
a  nature  as  atomism  assumes ;  the main  outlines  of  the  theory  are  pre
scribed  in  this  way,  and  all  we  have  to  do  is  to  determine  more  accurately
the  constant  attributes  and  forces  to  be  attributed  to  the  various  kinds  of
material  elements. There  is  no  occasion  to  include  more  in  the  concepts
of  the  elements  than  is  required  by  the  phenomena.

13.  But  whether  these  assumptions  can  be  carried  out  with  reference
to  the  organic  world  is  doubtful.  In  so  far  as  organic  bodies  are  built
I  up,  directly  or  indirectly,  from  substances  which  belong  to  inorganic
nature,  we  are  indeed  justified  methodologically  in  attempting  to  reduce
all  which  goes  on  in  them  to  known  physical  and  chemical  laws,  and  in
assuming  as  the  ultimate  bases  of  events  just  those  simple  and  invariable
substances  to  which  we  are  led  in  investigating  lifeless  nature,  only  in
more  complicated  connections  and  more  varied  interaction.  Should  the
attempt  succeed,  the  aim  of  knowledge  would  be  attained  in  the  simplest
and  most  comprehensible  way.  But  these  rules  of  method  do  not  justify


472  LOGIC

us  in  asserting  that  this  hypothesis  is  the  only  one  scientifically  possible,
and  that  every  other  is  excluded  by  principle  ;  only  the  result  can  decide
as  to  the  correctness  of  this  as  of  every  other  conjecture.  If  the  attempts
to  deduce  as  recognisable  consequences  from  the  general  attributes  of  the
substances  constituting  the  organic  body  their  combination  in  this  par
ticular  form,  the  processes  of  the  formation  and  division  of  cells,  the
course  of  development  of  individual  unities,  the  processes  of  propagation,
etc.,  should  leave  an  insoluble  remainder, — if  experiment  fails  to  produce
artificially  a  cell,  then  it  is  not  only  allowable  but  necessary  to  introduce
other  hypotheses.  The  specific  empirical  laws  which  are  obtained  from
observation  of  organic  life  require  subjects  of  another  sort,  acting  accord
ing  to  other  laws.  However  insufficient  the  attempts  have  hitherto  been
to  find  any  conceivable  subject  for  the  specific  vital  forces,  and  however
easy  it  has  therefore  been  for  the  mechanical  theory  to  wage  war  against
these  vague  concepts,  still  there  has  been  a  perceptible  diminution  in  the
confidence  that  this  theory  can  be  carried  out  with  complete  success,  and
its  supporters  begin  to  complain  of  the  heresy  of  the  "  Neovitalists."

If  we  leave  aside  for  the  present  the  attempt  to  explain  organisms  de
ductively  from  mechanical  principles,  and  turn  ourselves  to  the  task  of
finding  the  fundamental  concepts  which  complete  our  knowledge  of  the
living  as  such,  these  would  seem  to  be  beyond  doubt  the  concepts  of  the
individual  and  of  development.  The  former  gives  us  the  subject  to
which  the  predicates  belong  ;  the  latter  expresses  the  fundamental  mode  of
being  by  which  the  nature  of  this  subject  is  determined  in  distinction
from  the  invariability  of  atoms  and  their  forces.

The  concept  of  the  individual  was  explained  in  ^  78,  starting  from  the
question  what  it  is  which  determines  us  to  speak  of  the  unity  of  a  thing.
We  found  that  our  ground  for  applying  to  a  system  of  parts  the  concept  of
the  individual,  in  distinction  from  that  of  the  merely  externally  limited
thing  or  piece,  consisted  partly  in  causal  considerations,  as  with  a  crystal,
partly  in  teleological,  as  with  an  organism  (or  even  with  a  clock).

This  point  of  view  leaves  it  still  open  to  which  ultimate  ground  the
unity  of  the  individual  is  to  be  referred.  The  real  point  at  issue  in  the
view  to  be  taken  of  organic  individuals  is,  whether  the  organic  individual
is  only  a  collective  unity  of  atoms  which  interact  by  virtue  of  their  forces,
and  to  which  the  concept  of  finality  can  only  be  applied  in  a  formal  sense  ;
or  whether  it  includes  a  real  indivisible  unity,  by  which  alone  this  arrange
ment  of  different  parts  is  made  possible  and  explained, — whether,  therefore,


473

\ve  have  to  assume  an  ultimate,  really  individual  subject,  a  central  monad
as  the  ground  of  the  unity  of  the  individual.

14.  This  brings  us  to  a  difference  of  meaning  in  the  concept  of  deve
lopment.

We  can  speak  of  development  even  where  we  are  dealing  with  purely
mechanical  atomism.  In  the  first  place,  all  the  actions  of  a  given  atom,
and  all  the  states  into  which  it  falls,  may  be  regarded  as  the  development
of  all  which  is  grounded  in  those  constant  forces  which  are  unaffected  by
differences  of  time  ;  for  these  forces  only  become  active  under  conditions
which  are  brought  about  in  time  by  its  changing  relations  to  others.  When
the  chemist  prepares  a  synthesis  of  different  substances  which  has  never  been
known  before,  and  which  perhaps  has  never  yet  existed,  then  the  atoms
manifest  for  the  first  time  actions  which  were  from  the  first  included  in  their
invariable  nature,  but  had  never  found  the  necessary  condition  of  actuality ;
what  had  been  only  possible  now  becomes  real.  But  what  is  remarkable  is,
that  this  reality  is  only  brought  about  by  actual  relations  to  other  atoms,
the  atom  itself  does  not  change  its  nature ;  it  remains  the  same,  and  it  is
as  the  same  that  it  enters  into  each  new  combination.

The  concept  of  development  is  here  applied  to  the  relation  between  the
constant  force  and  the  temporal  manifestation  of  this  force  in  one  and  the
same  atom,  but  in  another  sense  it  may  be  applied  to  a  larger  or  smaller
system  of  atoms,  ultimately  to  the  whole  universe.  The  transformation  of
Kant's  nebulous  globe  into  the  solar  system,  the  breaking  up  of  the  masses
into  separate  bodies,  the  processes  upon  the  particular  planets  by  which
their  surfaces  take  shape,  etc.,  may  all  be  described  as  development  of  an
original  total  state,  in  so  far  as  the  states  implied  in  the  forces  of  the  ele-
.nents  and  in  their  spatial  distributions  become  successively  real.  The
.vhole  development  merely  represents  that  collective  sum  of  the  successive
notions  of  the  particular  atoms,  which,  under  the  given  conditions,  is
grounded  in  their  forces.

For  the  mechanical  theory  of  life  the  development  of  every  organic  in
dividual  is  of  this  kind.  All  changes,  all  chemical  transformations  and
milding  up  of  form,  proceed  from  the  collocation  of  the  different  atoms
n  the  germ  and  their  relation  to  their  surroundings ;  each  state  thus
leveloped  leads  according  to  the  same  laws  to  a  new  one,  and  the  ground
>f  the  whole  process  lies  in  the  forces  and  laws  of  motion  of  the  particular
nvariable  elements,  just  as  from  the  present  distribution  and  motion  of
he  sun  and  the  planets  there  proceeds  by  virtue  of  gravitation  and  inertia


474  LOGIC

their  collocation  in  each  subsequent  moment.  The  cessation  of  the  vital
processes,  the  death  of  the  organic  individual,  is  the  continuation  of  the
same  series, — is  in  the  same  sense  the  development  of  the  preceding  rela
tions  of  its  elements  according  to  invariable  laws.

Essentially  different  is  that  concept  of  development  which  is  the  first
result  of  our  reflection  upon  the  organic  world.  The  expression  is
primarily  meant  only  to  express  descriptively  the  particular  nature  of  what
happens,  not  to  offer  an  explanation,  and  this  meaning  is  immediately  con
nected  with  the  etymology  of  the  term  and  its  synonyms.

The  original  meaning  of  the  word  implies  that  something  previously
folded  up  expands  spatially,  thus  revealing  an  extension  or  plurality  of
parts  which  was  not  previously  perceived.  It  is  in  this  way  that  we  un
fold  a  rolled-up  scroll,  and  that  a  bud  unfolds  when  it  breaks  through  the
covering  around  it  and  spreads  its  petals  out.  What  now  appears  was
previously  there,  but  it  was  so  arranged  as  not  to  be  visible,  the  parts  were
not  separated  by  intervening  spaces,  and  therefore  not  distinguishable.
To  this  is  added  the  next  enlargement  of  the  concept,  which  may  be  illus
trated  by  the  same  process  ;  the  particular  petals  do  not  merely  unfold,  they
grow  at  the  same  time,  they  change  their  size  and  form,  differences  appear
which  were  not  there  before.  From  a  small  bud  there  grows  a  whole  bough,
from  a  grain  of  corn  a  whole  plant.  Growth  and  development  now  be
long  together  ;  when  we  speak  of  the  growth  of  plants,  we  do  not  mean
a  simple  increase  of  volume,  but  also  a  differentiation,  a  genesis  of  new
forms  from  the  present,  which  are  more  complicated  in  shape  and  manifest
new  attributes  and  functions.

Primarily  development  is  a  general  concept,  by  means  of  which  a  series
of  successive  and  continuous  changes  of  this  kind  is  expressed  as  having  a
nature  of  its  own,  but  it  also  contains  the  thought  that  all  the  particular
stages  are  referred  to  the  same  individual  subject  which  develops,  and,
when  we  have  occasion  to  enclose  the  series  of  changes  within  definite
limits,  the  antithesis  of  the  beginning  and  the  final  state  of  this  subject.
The  beginning  is  that/;w«  which,  the  end  that  toiuards  which,  it  develops;
and  the  more  closely  the  processes  resemble  each  other  in  similar  subjects,
the  nearer  we  approach  to  finding  laws  of  development  in  the  sense  of
general  descriptive  propositions,  which  are  true  of  individuals  of  the  same
species  (§  96,  p.  366).

The  next  step  is  to  the  thought  that  the  subject  in  its  first  state  already  con
tains  the  ground  of  the  whole  subsequent  series,  that  in  its  particular  nature


ULTIMATE GROUNDS  475

is  contained  the  necessity  of  passing  through  these  stages,  that  in  virtue  of
this  nature  each  stage  produces  the  subsequent  one  ;  that  therefore  the  sub
ject  itself  changes  itself,  and  attains  to  new  capacities  of  action.  This  in
volves  also  that  only  the  end  of  the  development  reveals  what  the  beginning
contains  ;  it  first  contains  as  disposition  what  ultimately  comes  to  pass
through  the  successive  activities.  Thus  the  whole  process  is  brought  under
the  teleological  point  of  view,  which,  starting  from  the  final  result,  explains
the  preceding  stages  as  conditions  or  means,  through  which  the  re'Ao?  is
realized,  but  is  also  forced  to  include  in  the  concept  of  the  subject  the
full  ground  of  that  which  it  becomes.

Those  who,  in  dealing  with  the  organic  world,  abstain  from  hypotheses
•  concerning  ultimate  subjects,  will  begin  by  taking  individuals  as  the  unities
in  reference  to  which  they  formulate  their  concept  of  development,  and
1  the  formula  of  the  concept  will  contain  the  law  of  development  of  the  par
ticular  species  ;  in  this  way  the  essence  is  described  of  individuals  of  the
same  species. From  this  point  generalization  leads  us  to  more  general
laws  and  conceptual  formulas.

15.  The  concept  of  development  extends  further  beyond  particular
individuals  to  the  whole  range  of  the  organic  universe,  and  thus  gains  a
:new  meaning.  We  are  told  to  find  in  the  temporal  sequence  of  organic
forms  a  development,  which  is  so  far  analogous  to  the  development  of  the
'individual  that  it  leads  to  a  constantly  progressive  change  of  form,  to  a
'constantly  greater  differentiation  ;  and  here  again  we  come  upon  teleo
logical  consideration,  in  so  far  as  the  later  forms  are  judged  to  be  the  more
perfect,  to  represent  a  higher  stage  of  organic  life.  The  difficulty  in
•applying  this  concept  consists  in  describing  the  subject  to  which  this  uni
versal  development  is  to  be  ascribed.

Only  in  a  logical  sense  we  can  attribute  development  to  general  con
cepts,  such  as  the  organic  in  general,  which  differentiates  itself  into  genera
land  species,  as  Schelling  and  Hegel  attempted  to  do  in  their  philosophy
Df  Nature ;  when  we  regard  development  as  an  actual  process,  it  requires
i  concrete  subject  existing  in  time.  But  the  only  subjects  which  actually
ixist  are  the  particular  organisms  which  succeed  and  produce  each  other ;
icnce  this  concept  of  development  in  its  application  to  the  totality  of
)rganisms  requires  as  its  necessary  supplement  that  of  propagation  and
hereditary  transmission,  in  the  sense  that  in  the  subsequent  generation  not
)nly  is  the  previous  one  repeated,  to  pass  through  the  same  course  of
levelopment,  but  that  the  results  of  the  development  of  the  elder  genera-


476  LOGIC

tion  pass  into  the  germs  of  the  younger  one  in  such  a  way  that  they  are
capable  of  making  further  progress.  However  we  may  think  of  it  in
detail,  the  conditions  of  that  which  the  particular  germ  becomes  are  now
contained  in  the  whole  history  of  its  ancestors.  Here  again  it  is  true,
however,  that  the  disposition  to  all  which  becomes  actual  in  the  successive
generations  of  its  descendants  must  be  present  in  the  nature  of  the  first
germ  ;  here  again  it  is  true  that  only  the  end  of  the  development  reveals
what  the  beginning  contains.  Thus  any  earlier  form,  from  which  higher
ones  develop,  is  not  exhausted  in  what  it  visibly  presents ;  it  also  has  a
latent  significance  by  virtue  of  that  which  proceeds  from  it  by  way  of
heredity  in  later  generations,  in  its  own  life  it  manifests  only  a  part  of  its
nature.

The  thought  of  development  has  sometimes  been  treated  like  a  logical
charm  by  means  of  which  we  may  explain  without  difficulty  hitherto
inexplicable  phenomena  ;  all  the  puzzles  of  the  wonderfully  purposive
complication  of  forms  and  functions  in  the  higher  organisms  are  to  be
solved  by  regarding  them  as  the  result  of  an  incalculably  long  develop
ment,  in  which  the  forms  have  had  time  to  change  quite  gradually  by
imperceptible  degrees.  Sometimes  it  is  also  implicitly  thought  that  if  this
long  series  were  broken  up  into  as  many  and  as  small  parts  as  possible  it
would  be  no  longer  necessary  to  seek  a  cause  for  such  a  minimum  of  pro
gress  as  each  part  would  represent — Darwin  is  helped  by  the  general
concept  of  variation,  which  he  introduces  simply  as  a  fact.  It  is  as  if  we
should  say,  that  though  force  is  necessary  to  lift  a  weight  a  given  height
perpendicularly,  yet  if  it  is  brought  to  an  inclined  surface,  and  this  surface  is
made  very  long,  so  that  over  small  intervals  the  weight  will  rise  impercep
tibly,  it  might  be  able  to  lift  itself ;  as  if  we  should  say  that  because  the
force  may  diminish  in  proportion  as  the  time  in  which  it  is  exerted
increases,  therefore  the  force  may  be  dispensed  with  altogether  if  only  we
take  a  very  long  time.  In  opposition  to  such  hazy  applications  of  the
concept  of  development,  we  must  insist  that  the  question  as  to  the
ultimate  ground  of  the  successive  stages  must  be  answered,  whether  the
time  be  long  or  short,  and  the  change  great  or  small.  If  we  trace  the
unfolding  of  a  germ  through  all  its  stages,  we  get  indeed  a  picture  of  its
growth,  but  no  explanation,  unless  we  can  show  from  general  laws  that
the  preceding  state  is  the  whole  cause  of  the  succeeding  one.  But  it  is
just  that  which  we  cannot  do  ;  if  we  could,  the  concept  of  development  in
its  specific  sense  would  be  superfluous.  This  concept  presupposes  a


ULTIMATE GROUNDS  477

ground  which  must  be  entirely  present  at  the  beginning  of  the  process,  if
it  is  to  explain  anything  ;  for  even  if  we  should  try  to  refer  the  transforma
tions  which  occur  in  the  course  of  time  to  external  causes,  to  the  external
conditions  and  mutual  relations  of  individuals,  these  causes  could  only
take  effect  if  it  were  part  of  the  nature  of  organic  beings  to  respond  to  the
stimulus  by  a  change  in  form  and  function  ;  it  is  only  the  direction  of  the
development  which  is  determined  from  without;  that  development  takes
place  at  all,  and  not  merely  a  repetition  of  the  same  processes,  must  be
due  to  the  original  disposition.  The  law  of  development  does  not  deter
mine  everything  even  in  the  particular  organic  individual ;  its  complete
expression  would  be  that  under  these  conditions  this  course  takes  place,
under  other  conditions  another  course,  that  these  causes  act  favourably,
while  others  act  unfavourably  or  destructively.

If  the  concept  of  development  is  to  be  not  merely  a  general  formula  for
the  description  of  facts,  if  it  is  to  be  a  ground  for  their  explanation,  then
it  requires  a  subject  of  such  a  nature  that  by  its  successive  changes  new
conditions  for  further  changes  in  a  fixed  series  are  continually  introduced,
and  that  this  series  leads  ultimately  to  an  end  in  which  the  original  dis-
.  position  is  completely  realized.  It  is  not  by  itself,  but  by  virtue  of  the
permanent  nature  of  the  developing  subject,  that  each  particular  stage  is
the  cause  of  the  next  (§  73,  26,  p.  116).

If  we  regard  the  organic  world  merely  in  its  material  aspect,  as  is  most
natural  in  the  vegetable  kingdom,  then  the  attempt  to  pass  from  the  organic
individuals  which  are  the  phenomenal  subjects  of  development  to  the  com
bining  atoms  as  constituting  the  ultimate  grounds,  and  to  reduce  the  specific
concept  of  development  to  the  more  general  one,  which  is  applicable  also
to  mechanism,  is  not  merely  possible,  but  is  justified  methodologically.
But  for  the  ultimate  subjects,  in  so  far  as  they  are  invariable,  there  is  no
development  in  the  proper  and  narrower  meaning.

1 6.  Turning  to  the  last  problem,  that  of  determining  the  fundamental
:oncepts  to  which  psychical  phenomena  lead,  we  find  that  the  nature  of
:he  facts  leaves  us  no  choice.  In  constructing  our  concepts  here,  we  must
start  from  our  own  consciousness,  and  can  only  apply  what  we  find  here
:o  the  animal  world ;  to  start  from  an  assumed  elementary  psychical
ife  in  the  lower  animals,  to  construct  from  it  our  own,  and  to  lay  down
ules  as  to  how  we  must  regard  it,  would  be  to  explain  the  known  by  the
mknown,  to  illuminate  light  by  darkness.  Even  if  our  consciousness  had
;radually  developed  from  that  of  animals,  it  would  be  only  this  mature  and


478  LOGIC

highest  form  which  would  show  us  what  we  have  to  presuppose  as  original
disposition,  and  what  significance  attaches  to  the  lower  stages  ;  our  hypo
theses  as  to  the  course  of  the  development  must  be  guided  by  what  we
find  as  a  result  in  our  own  consciousness.  If  we  had  before  us  only  the
acorn,  we  could  not  deduce  from  its  form  and  chemical  constitution  what
it  can  and  must  become  ;  only  the  oak  tree  reveals  to  us  what  is  contained
but  cannot  be  perceived  in  the  acorn ;  and  in  the  same  way,  only  human
consciousness  can  give  us  the  key  to  the  lower  stages,  only  from  it  can  we
obtain  the  fundamental  concepts  in  which,  as  in  ultimate  presuppositions,
the  explanation  of  the  given  -comes  to  an  end.

We  have  already  shown  that  the  facts  of  consciousness  require  a  subject
which  is  a  unity  ;  the  assumption  that  they  may  have  no  subject  at  all  is
as  impossible  as  the  assumption  that  a  mere  collection,  a  plurality  of  con
nected  ultimate  unities,  can  be  thought  of  as  their  subject.  The  simplest
and  most  elementary  psychical  event,  which  we  do  not  hesitate  to  assume
even  in  the  lowest  animal,  a  feeling  of  pain,  contains  the  consciousness  of
a  state,  a  reference  of  a  being  to  itself;  it  is  impossible  to  distribute  this
feeling  amongst  different  unities, — each  could  then  only  feel  its  own  pain,
and  for  this  reason  it  is  also  impossible  to  regard  a  feeling  of  pain,  which
for  our  consciousness  is  a  single  state  of  only  intensive  magnitude,  as  a  col
lective  sum  of  the  feelings  of  a  plurality.  Such  a  plurality  could  only  com
bine  to  the  unity  of  one  feeling  if  each  element  of  the  plurality  shared  in
the  pains  of  the  other,  and  so  increased  its  own  pain.  To  regard  a  pain  as
a  sum  is  as  impossible  as  to  represent  the  velocity  of  a  body  as  the  sum  of
smaller  velocities  of  its  parts.

If  we  must  start  from  the  unity  of  the  subject,  the  next  problem  is  to
determine  the  nature  of  this  unity  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  that  the  given
facts  are  grounded  in  it,  and  to  explain  the  sequence  and  connection  of  the
functions  which  actually  occur.  For  this  purpose,  as  we  showed  in  §  74,
17,  p.  140,  the  concept  of  faculty  is  quite  appropriate,  for  it  gives  expres
sion  to  the  thought  which  forces  itself  upon  us  everywhere,  that  the  activi
ties  of  the  psychical  subject  are  not  merely  changes  due  to  external
influences  in  some  way  proportioned  to  them,  but  that  new  elements  come
into  being  as  through  some  creative  power,  for  which  external  influences
are  only  the  occasional  causes  or  stimuli,  and  that  from  preceding  activities
there  proceed  by  virtue  of  the  nature  of  the  subject  alone  further  and
higher  activities.  If  stress  is  laid  upon  this  spontaneity,  we  shall  determine
the  concept  of  faculty  more  closely  by  that  of  tendency,  which  represents


ULTIMATE GROUNDS  479

the  faculty  not  merely  as  a  passive  force  awaiting  its  stimulus,  but  as  striv
ing  of  itself  towards  activity  :  thus  it  is  quite  correct  to  speak  of  a  faculty
of  feeling,  and  of  a  tendency  to  activity.  All  psychological  laws  will  then
express  how  the  subject  is  in  part  excited  from  without  by  virtue  of  its
receptivity,  and  in  part  develops  new  activities  by  virtue  of  its  spontaneous
tendencies.

The  most  difficult  questions  arise  out  of  the  problem  of  determining  the
relation  of  the  psychical  unity  to  the  plurality  of  the  elements  which  con
stitute  the body. The history of  psychology contains very different
attempts in  this direction. From  the  point  of  view  of  methodology  no
;  definite  way  can  be  prescribed  for  this  problem,  which  is  only  to  be  solved
i  by the most comprehensive  combination ; all  we  can  do  is to guard
:  against  looking  only  to  the  dependence  of  the  psychical  life  upon  that
organic  life  which  is  supposed  to  be  more  easily  seen  and  comprehended.
It  is  just  as  possible  to  begin  by  explaining  the  peculiarities  of  the  latter
i  by  its  connection  with  the  psychical  life,  and  Wundt  deserves  great  credit
for  having  emphasized  this  point  of  view. The  closer  the  connection  be
tween  the  two  aspects  of  man  which  is  made  comprehensible  by  our  way  of
regarding  the  fundamental  concepts,  the  more  capable  these  concepts  will
be  of  expressing  reality.

17. Comparative  psychology,  together  with  the  doctrine  of  evolution,  is
confronted  by  the  question  whether  any  definite  limited  concept  of  man
can  be  formulated  in  such  a  way  as  to  enable  us  to  assume  that,  so  far  as
iour  historical  knowledge  extends,  the  essential  concept  of  man  is  constant.
It  may  be  safely  asserted  that  the  empirically  known  facts  not  only  allow,
.but  require  a  definite  demarcation  from  the  animal  world  ;  the  intermediate
terms  required  by  the  theory  are  only  hypothetical. It  is  another  question
whether  within these  limits  we  must  assume  a  development  in  the  sense
::hat  we  must  think  of  the  man  of  to-day,  especially  the  man  of  culture,  as
:  ifurnished  with  faculties  and  tendencies  which  are  at  any  rate  quantitatively
different  from  those  of  previous  generations  ;  whether  the  nature  of  m;.n
:hanges  by  heredity,  whether  we  must  assume  natural  differences  between
nen  of  to-day  and  the most ancient  who  are  indicated  by  historical  re-
uains,  which  are  greater  than  those  which  we  now  find  to  be  due  to  indi7
•idual  peculiarities. We  are  tempted  to  attribute  great  importance  to  the
nheritance  of  capabilities  which  are  gained  in  the  course  of  culture;  it  will,
lowever,  be  more  prudent  to  employ  as  far  as  possible  known  and  demon-
trable  grounds  of  explanation. The  most  important  form  of  heredity  to


480  LOGIC

which  we  can  point  in  the  psycho-historical  sphere  is  tradition,  and  it  will
be  methodologically  right  to  employ  so  far  as  possible  for  the  explanation
of  historical  development  this  concept,  which  can  be  explained  by  general
psychological  laws  ;  in  this  way  the  mutual  support  of  historical  investiga
tion,  and  of  that  psychological  investigation  which  starts  from  present
perception,  may  be  extended  over  the  whole  sphere.

Finally,  induction  in  its  various  forms,  throughout  psychology  and
historical  investigation,  always  assumes  determinism,  simply  because  we
cannot  have  a  scientific  explanation  unless  we  can  refer  the  particular
phenomena  of  the  psychical  life  to  laws,  partly  evolutionary,  partly
causal,  according  to  which  certain  phenomena  of  consciousness  occur
under  certain  conditions.  But  here  again  we  must  not  be  in  a
hurry  to  regard  what  is  a  regulative  principle  of  investigation  as
the  only  possible  result,  especially  when  we  recollect  that  the  general
presuppositions  by  which  we  are  guided,  and  which  are  necessary
to  an  inductive  method  as  providing  major  premises,  are  them
selves  the  expressions  of  a  will,  and  derive  their  justification  from
the  energy  of  this  will,  which  sets  before  it  as  an  end  the  knowledge  of
the  universe.  Our  thought  can  neither  really  break  down  the  unity  of  self-
consciousness  which  forms  its  ultimate  and  irreversible  presupposition,
nor  deny  that  independence  of  the  will  through  which  alone  it  is  active.
The  only  empirical  confirmation  of  determinism  would  be  the  conceptual
construction  of  individual  peculiarities,  and  the  finding  of  laws  from
which  the  will  of  every  individual  might  be  calculated.

VIII. METHODS  AUXILIARY  TO  INDUCTION.

The  Statistical  Process,  and  the  Calculation  of  Probabilities  as  Grounded

upon  it.

§  J  °  J  •

Where  the  differences  between  the  individual  objects  falling  under  our
concepts,  and  the  impossibility  of  isolating  the  conditions  of  given  pre
dicates,  make  it  impossible  to  establish  laws,  properly  so  called,  the
comparison  of  statistical  numbers  leads  first  to  empirical  uniformities.
These  uniformities,  which  are  expressed  in  constantly  recurring  averages,
refer  partly  to  the  differentiation  of  a  general  concept,  partly  to  the  dis
tribution  of  things  of  a  certain  kind  in  space,  or  of  events  of  a  certain
kind  in  time.


STATISTICAL METHODS  .481

These  uniformities  are  primarily  of  a  merely  descriptive  nature,  and
incapable  of  expressing  any  necessity,  unless  the  assumption  is  made  that
the  conditions,  from  which  in  any  department  the  particular  varying  cases
proceed,  are  constant  in  their  totality.

Causal  connections  can  be  inferred  only  by  the  method  of  difference,
which,  by  comparing  the  partial  averages  in  which  cases  of  a  distinguishing
nature  are  grouped  together  with  the  general  average,  justifies  us  in  assum
ing  that  the  differences  of  the  partial  averages  from  the  general  average
are  conditioned  through  that  factor  by  which  the  specially  numerated
cases  are  distinguished  from  the  others.

The  same  considerations  apply  to  the  statistical  methods  of  numera
tion  which  guided  us  in  the  description  and  characterizing  comparison  of
collective  wholes  in  their  constitution  and  temporal  changes.

i. The possibility  of  establishing strict uniformities among events,
whether  as  empirical  laws  or  as  causal  laws,  and  of  explaining  by  them
particular phenomena in their  concrete  determination,  is  limited  to the
region  within  which  events  depend  upon  conditions  which  can  be  accu
rately  expressed  in  general  concepts  and  separated  from  each  other,  either
iexperimentally  or  at  any  rate  by  logical  analysis  ;  within  which,  moreover,
;it  is  possible  to  have  a  knowledge  of  all  the  facts  influencing  the  course
iof  events,  or,  if  this  is  not  the  case,  where  the  unknown  facts  are  perfectly
constant. But  within  wide  regions  we  cannot attain  to  the  logical ideal
i:>f  strict  laws  and  adequate  explanation  of  phenomena ;  neither  our  know-
edge  of  the  facts  upon which  the phenomena  depend, nor  of  the laws
iccording to which they  depend  upon them,  can be  expressed  in  those
ogically  and  sharply  determined  propositions,  which  are  to  be found,  e.g.,
n  physics  and  chemistry. In meteorology,  for example, the  vastness  of
jhe  atmosphere  and  the  inaccessibility  of  its  higher  levels  prevent  us  from
lirectly  observing the whole  of  the circumstances  to which change of
•veather  is  due,  and  every  attempt  to  establish  uniform  sequences  between
:no\vn  antecedents  and  consequents breaks down before the  irregularity
ith which phenomena, wherever  they  may  be  observed, succeed each
ther. Throughout the whole of  physiology  the  complication  of  condi-
ons  and  the  irreconcilable  differences  between  individual  living beings
lake  it impossible  at any rate  to discover  exactly  all particular  condi-
ons  and to establish certain relations of  magnitude. We cannot  de-
:rmine  what  result will  be  produced by any  interference  in  an  organism
ith  the  confidence  with  which  we  can determine what will be  the  rate
s.  L. — n.  i  i


482  LOGIC

of  oscillation  of  a  given  pendulum,  or  at  what  angle  a  ray  of  light  will  be
refracted  when  it  passes  from  air  into  water.

2.  These  two  examples  suffice  to  show  that  we  do  not  stand  in  quite
the  same  position  towards  all  instances  of  this  kind.  In  meteorology  we
know  a  large  number  of  particular  connections  upon  which  changes
depend  :  the  weight  of  the  atmosphere,  its  rarefaction  by  heat  and  densi-
fication  by  cold,  the  aerostatic  laws  according  to  which  the  more  rarefied
air  rises  and  the  denser  must  occupy  the  space  beneath  it,  the  evaporation
of  water  through  heat  and  its  condensation  through  cold,  the  different
absorbing  powers  of  the  air  at  different  temperatures,  and  so  on  ;  in  this
way  we  possess  no  doubt  a  large  part  of  the  elementary  connections  which
concur  in  the  meteorological  processes,  but  we  cannot  construct  the  weather
from  them  because  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  even  their  magnitudes  apart
from  each  other — we  do  not  know,  for  example,  whether  the  heat  radiat
ing  from  the  sun  to  the  earth  is  a  constant  or  a  variable  magnitude,  and
if  the  latter,  according  to  what  law  it  varies — and  because  the  constantly
changing  distribution  of  the  operative  elements  and  their  relations  to
each  other  never  allows  us  to  ascertain  the  whole  circle  of  conditions  at
any  given  point  ot  time.

In  physiology  we  are  often  still  far  from  having  any  knowledge  of  even
the  elementary  laws.  We  lack  not  only  the  magnitudes  of  the  conditions
of  the  vital  phenomena  and  their  combination  at  any  time,  but  also  the:
mathematically  accurate  rule  according  to  which  any  change  depends
upon  its  conditions ;  and  to  establish  such  a  rule  is  difficult  if  only
because  particular  individuals  are  not  exactly  alike  either  in  the  totality
of  their  conditions  or  in  their  causal  relations,  while  their  differences
cannot  be  simply  formulated.  The  whole  complex  of  conditions  is  no;
doubt  contained  in  the  organic  constitution  of  the  living  beings  and
their  external  circumstances  ;  but  according  to  what  rule  each  particular
circumstance  varies  in  its  effect  for  each  different  individual  and  in
what  way  their  results  combine  is  unknown.  No  one  knows,  e.g.,  whatj  !;;
determines  whether  in  any  particular  instance  a  boy  or  a  girl  will  be
born ;  in  spite  of  millions  of  experiences  the  sex  of  every  child  remains
an  incalculable  chance.  We  must  assume  that  certain  conditions  are
present  which  determine  the  sex  of  the  foetus,  and  are  justified  in  suppos
ing  that  the  proximate  causes  at  least  are  entirely  contained  within  the
parental  organisms  ;  but  what  they  consist  in  no  induction  has  yet  been
able  to  discover.


STATISTICAL METHODS  483

Are  \ve  then  left  quite  without  resource  in  the  face  of  such  problems,
obliged  to  wait  for  what  may  happen,  and  unable  to  obtain  any  approach
to  a  general  rule  ?

3.  Scientific  practice  shows  that  even  in  these  cases  there  are  means  of
establishing  definite  empirical  uniformities,  and  even  causal  connections ;
and  where  the  analysis  and  comparison  of  particular  instances  gives  us  no
result  the  last  expedient lies  in  the  statistical  numeration  of  particular
cases,  and  in  the  attempt  to  obtain  from  these  by  inference  results  which
may  serve  as  a  substitute  for  the  unattainable  laws  in  the  true  sense.

We  have  explained  in  §  92,  5-8,  pp.  284-7,  tne  significance  attaching  to
the  numeration  of  particular  things  under  certain  categories,  as  a  compre
hensive  representation  of  particular  perceptions. With reference to par
ticular  objects  at  rest,  it  serves  partly  to  describe  the  distribution  in  space
of  the  things falling  under  a concept,  partly  to represent the  numerical
'relations  in  which  the  differences  of  a  general  concept  are  realized,  whether
he  differences  are  specific  or  merely  quantitative;  with  reference  to  variable
bjects,  it  serves  primarily  as  a  description  of  the  particular  by  stating  the
umber  of  given  events  which  take  place in  them,  and their  distribution
n  time. Numeration  becomes  especially  important  as  a  means  to  exact
description  of  collective  wholes,  of  their  composition  from  different  unities,
and  their  change  in  the  course  of  time.

In  proportion  as  we  are  unable  to  reduce  the  particular  event  to  rules
md  laws,  the  numeration  of  particular  objects  becomes  the  only  means
:>f  obtaining  comprehensive  propositions  about  that  which  is  for  our
<nowledge  fortuitous  ;  as  soon  as  the  laws  are  found  statistical  numera-
ion  ceases  to  be  of  interest.  There  was  some  interest  in  counting  how
nany  eclipses  of  the  moon  and  sun  took  place  year  by  year,  so  long  as
hey  occurred  unexpectedly  and  inexplicably ;  since  the  rule  has  been
bund  according  to  which  they  occur  and  can  be  calculated  for  centuries
>ast  and  to  come,  that  interest  has  vanished.  But  we  still  count  how
nany  thunderstorms  and  hailstorms  occur  at  a  given  place  or  within  a
;iven  district,  how  many  persons  die,  and  how  many  bushels  of  fruit  a  given
rea  produces,  because  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  calculate  these  events
m  their  conditions.

4.  The  next  treatment  of  the  results  so  obtained  aims  at  representing
e  relations  of  the  numbers  in  such  a  way  that  they  may  be  surveyed  as

ily  as  possible,  thus  enabling  us  to  compare  different  regions,  whether
f  space  and  time,  or  of  concepts.


484  LOGIC

Where  we  are  dealing  with  the  division  of  a  genus  into  its  species  we
have  an  easy  means  of  making  the  numbers  comprehensible,  we  state  the
relations  of  the  numbers  which  have  been  found  for  the  particular
differences  either  in  the  smallest  and  most  convenient  numbers  possible,
or  in  percentages  of  the  whole  number  or  of  the  number  of  a  part.  When
we  say  that  so  far  as  has  been  counted  the  number  of  male  to  female  births
is  approximately  as  17  to  16,  or  that  of  1,000  born  515  are  male,  485
female,  or  that  for  every  100  girls  there  are  106  boys,  we  have  a  more
comprehensible  relation  than  if  we  should  compare  millions  with  millions.
The  same  reduction  enables  us  to  compare  the  spatial  or  temporal  regions
within  which  the  numeration  takes  place  ;  in  the  one  region,  the  ratio  may
be  100  to  105,  in  the  other  100  to  107  ;  we  then  see  at  once  the  greater
preponderance  of  the  male  sex  in  the  second.

When  we  are  dealing  with  the  distribution  of  a  number  of  objects  in
space  and  time,  we  can  only  compare  their  density  or  frequency  by  reduc
ing  them  to  a  common  measure.  The  population  of  Europe  and  Asia  can
not  be  compared  until  the  magnitudes  of  the  continents  are  taken  into
consideration  and  we  learn  in  what  relation  the  number  of  inhabitants
stands  to  the  number  of  square  miles  ;  in  the  same  way  the  amounts  of  rain
which  fall  at  different  periods  become  comparable  when  they  are  reduced
to  equal  intervals  of  time.

These  things  would  be  too  simple  and  too  much  a  matter  of  course  to
be  dealt  with  here,  if  it  were  not  that  we  have  to  show  the  importance  ol

AVERAGES.

5.  The  arithmetical  concept  of  an  average  is  the  quotient  obtained  by
dividing  the  sum  of  a  number  of  given  numbers  by  their  number,  and
arithmetic  shows  that  the  sum  of  the  positive  and  negative  differences
between  all  these  numbers  and  the  average  equals  zero,  i.e.,  that  of  the
numbers  those  which  are  smaller  than  the  average  are  together  just  as  much
less  as  those  which  are  greater  are  more.  Thus  the  average  serves  as  a
measure  for  the  magnitude  of  the  numbers  when  we  disregard  their  differ
ences  among  themselves  and  thfnk  of  them  as  supplementing  each  other.
More  especially  when  we  are  dealing,  not  with  the  magnitudes  of  the  parti
cular  addenda,  but  with  the  whole  result,  the  averages  of  two  different
groups,  each  containing  as  many  numbers  as  the  other,  tell  us  the  relation
between  their  sums  and  fix  the  point  about  which  their  particular
addenda  vary  with  an  equal  rise  and  fall ;  they  afford  further  the  means  ot
comparing  two  groups  consisting  of  unequal  numbers  of  numbers  with
respect  to  the  magnitude  of  their  addenda.


STATISTICAL METHODS  485

In  dealing  with  the  average  height  of  the  adult  male  population  of  a
country,  it  is  the  arithmetical  mean  of  all  the  measurements  which  is  taken;
the  sum  of  the  differences  by  which  the  smaller  men  fall  short  of  the
average  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  differences  by  which  the  taller  men  sur
pass  it.  In  comparing  the  peoples  of  two  countries  the  average  gives  us
at  once  a  standard  of  magnitude,  and  although  we  disregard  the  differences
between  individuals,  yet  we  know  that  the  one  people  must  contain  more
tall  men  than  the  other.

The  mere  statement  of  the  average  may  then  be  supplemented  by  the
statement  of  the  limits  within  whicli  the  numbers  vary,  or  further  still  by
the  number  of  individuals  falling  into  the  particular  sections  into  which
the  interval  between  the  limits  is  divided.  Thus  the  statement  of  the
average  age  of  a  people  at  a  given  time  is  supplemented  by  the  statement
of  the  maximum  reached  by  some,  and  the  statement  of  the  absolute  num
ber,  or  the  percentage  of  individuals  who  are  below  five  years  of  age,
between  five  and  ten  years,  etc.  ;  in  this  way  we  can  survey  both  the
magnitudes  of  the  differences  which  are  forthcoming,  and  the  grouping  of
,the  individual  cases  above  and  below  the  average.

6.  In its concrete application  we  must  note  an  extended  use  of  the
i:erm  "  average." According  to  the  definition  the  particular  numbers  are

^iven  and  the  sum  formed  from  them,  but  the  relation  may  be  reversed,
and  we  may  start  from  the  sum,  knowing  only  that  it  is  formed  from  a
Certain  number  of  addenda,  without  knowing  exactly  the  magnitudes  of  the
Particular  numbers  and  their  differences  ;  here,  in  place  of  these  different
iddenda,  of  which  the  particular  magnitudes  are  unknown,  we  take  the
iverage  value  as  a  standard  of  their  magnitude  and  as  a  means  of  compar
ing  one  group  with  others.  Thus  from  the  sum  and  the  number  of  terms
ke  get  the  average  value  of  the  particular  term,  as  it  would  appear  if  the
rallies  were  equally  distributed.  If  in  14  days  I  walk  280  miles,  I  shall
I  j  ve rage  20  miles  daily  ;  if  in  an  hour  I  read  6,000  words,  I  shall  read

n  the  average  100  a  minute; in this way  we  obtain  a  measure  for the

)eed  with  which  we  read  or  travel.

7.  We may apply this arithmetical concept  of the  average  in  two
ays: we may state either the average relations between indivisible
nities,  or  the  average  magnitudes  of  a  class  of  objects.

In  the  former  case  we  determine  the  numerical  relation  in  which  the
ipresentatives  of  the  species  within  a  genus  stand  to  each  other,  or
ie  relation  in  which  the  total  number  of  a  class  of  objects  stands  to


486  LOGIC

the  magnitude  of  the  space  or  time  within  which  they  have  been
observed ;  in  the  latter  case  we  measure  each  one  of  a  class  of  objects,
and  determine  the  mean  value  of  all  these  measurements.  It  is  in  the
former  sense  that  we  say  that  on  the  average  106  males  are  born  to  every
100  females  ;  in  the  latter  that  we  say  that  the  average  magnitude  of  the
adult  man  is  168  centimetres,  and  the  average  length  of  the  day  twelve
hours.

Our  first  use  of  the  concept  of  the  average  in  the  former  sense  is  in  the
reduction  of  instances  which  are  distributed  over  a  large  area  of  space  or
time  to  a  common  measure ;  we  start  from  the  total  number,  think  of  it
as  equally  distributed,  i.e.,  regard  it  as  a  sum  of  equal  component  sums,
and  thus  obtain  a  measure  for  the  relation  between  the  number  of  instances
and  the  extent  of  the  space  or  time  in  which  they  are  found.  The  state
ment  in  statistics  of  population  that  in  Europe  there  is  an  average  of
1,550  people  to  the  square  mile,  or  that  on  an  average  so  many  people
are  struck  by  lightning  in  the  year  in  Germany,  merely  gives  us  a
comprehensible  expression  for  a  relation  between  two  numbers,  of  which
one  enumerates  the  frequency  of  the  instances,  while  the  other  expresses
a  spatial  or  temporal  magnitude.  Uniform  distribution  is  a  mere  fiction,
but  it  is  one  which  is  harmless  so  long  as  there  is  no  question  as  to
what  are  the  particular  groups,  and  how  they  are  distributed,  of  which
the  whole  sum  is  composed.  The  fiction  becomes  necessary  when  it  is
impossible  to  localize  the  particular  instances  in  space  and  time,  or  to
find  units  which  are  not  arbitrary.  The  population  of  a  country  cannot
be  assigned  to  particular  square  miles,  as  it  would  be  an  entirely  arbitrary
matter  how  these  limits  should  be  drawn ;  all  we  can  do  is  to  take  as  our
smallest  units  certain  districts  for  which  there  is  no  common  measure.
In  the  same  way  we  cannot  ascertain  how  much  salt  is  used  annually
by  each  individual  in  the  nation,  although  we  may  determine  how  much
each  one  uses  on  an  average.

It  is  similar  with  the  numbers  expressing  the  relative  magnitudes  of
the  differences  which  occur  in  a  genus.  We  say  that  on  an  average  106!
boys  are  born  for  TOO  girls  ;  this  expresses  the  relation  between  the  totals
which  have  been  established,  but  we  do  not  trouble  ourselves  about
the  particular  components  of  the  total,  about  the  families,  parishes,  etc.
That  this  relation  is  equally  distributed  in  space  or  time  is  a  mere  fiction  ;
the  expression  is  only  intended  to  state  the  relation  between  the  total
numbers  found  throughout  the  whole  sphere  of  observation  ;  it  is  in  the


STATISTICAL METHODS  487

same  sense  that  we  say  there  is  one  case  of  twins  amongst  87  births  ;
all  differences  between  particular  regions  or  times  disappear,  just  as  when
it  is  ascertained  that  upon  a  given  railway  there  has  been  a  daily  average
of  x  passengers  travelling  _y  kilometres.

From  this  point  of  view,  then,  there  is  no  mystery  in  the  average
as  such ;  it  is  an  abbreviation,  and  it  has  so  much  in  common  with  the
>rdinary  logical  abstract  concept  that  it  neglects  all  differences,  and  we
cannot  tell  from  it  how  far  the  numbers  from  which  it  is  obtained,  or
vhich  it  has  to  represent,  may  differ  from  each  other.  It  is,  however,
nferior  to  the  general  concept  in  so  far  as  the  latter  is  a  statement  of
vhat  is  the  same  in  all  the  particular  instances,  while  the  average  is  a
merely  fictitious  value  which  may  never  actually  occur  in  any  particular
case,  and  which  by  itself  does  not  even  justify  us  in  expecting  that  the
majority  of  the  particular  instances  in  a  region  will  approximate  to  it.

It  is  the  same  with  average  measurements  ;  these  again  give  only  a
general  result,  in  which  concrete  instances  with  their  differences  have
vanished,  and  which  in  itself  is  as  much  a  matter  of  chance  for  us  as  the
lumber  and  magnitude  of  the  particular  objects  from  which  the  average
s  drawn.  The  average  of  the  morning  temperatures  in  the  month  of  May
n  a  given  year  in  any  place  is  as  much  a  fortuitous  number  as  are  its
^articular  components  ;  it  becomes  important  as  expressing  the  magnitude
if  a  sum  when  we  are  interested,  say  in  the  total  amount  of  heat  present
n  the  month.  So  far  as  concerns  a  large  part  of  the  vegetable  world,  it
s  much  more  important,  for  example,  to  know  whether  and  how  far
he  minima  have  fallen  below  o,  than  whether  the  average  was  a  degree
igher  or  lower.

8.  The  calculation  of  averages  serves  primarily  only  to  enable  us
o  survey  and  to  compare  sum-totals  ;  but  the  comparison  leads  to  the
Dossibility  of  establishing  uniformities  of  a  peculiar  kind,  which,  while
hey  are  allied  to  the  merely  descriptive  laws,  differ  from  them  in  that
hey  do  not  state  what  takes  place,  constantly  or  under  certain  conditions,
n  particular  objects,  but  merely  express  the  invariable  numbers  and
umerical  relations  of  objects  or  events  of  some  kind  within  a  conceptual,
T  spatial  and  temporal  region.

In  saying  that  the  average  temperature  of  any  place  is  so  many  degrees,
ve  do  not  mean  to  convey  merely  the  fact  that  the  sum  of  our  observations
>f  the  temperature  has  shown  this  average  for  a  number  of  years,  but  to
tate  a  constant  attribute  of  this  place,  that  is  a  rule  according  to  which


48S  LOGIC

this  average  will  be  found  in  the  future  also.  This  extension  of  the  actual
average  to  be  the  expression  of  a  rule  is  based  either  upon  the  fact  that
the  average  of  the  particular  years  from  which  the  observations  were
gathered  varied  little,  hence  that  in  spite  of  particular  deviations,  and
in  spite  of  the  different  distribution  of  heat  over  the  particular  months,  the
total  annual  result  has  remained  almost  constant,  and  hence  that  we  may
expect  the  same  value  to  appear  in  the  future  also  ;  or,  at  any  rate,  it
must  be  based  upon  the  fact  that  longer  partial  periods  give  similar
results,  hence  that  the  variations  of  particular  years  have  always  com
pensated  each  other.  Where  this  is  not  the  case,  an  average  can  merely
express  a  fact,  it  cannot  be  the  ground  for  any  expectation.

We  may,  therefore,  always  assume  a  rule  where  the  average  of  a  larger
whole  is  repeated  exactly,  or  with  only  small  deviations  in  the  smaller
divisions  which  constitute  its  parts.

If,  e.g.,  the  preponderance  of  male  births  varied  greatly  in  different
lands,  and  in  some  was  converted  to  a  preponderance  of  female  births,
then  the  average  ratio  drawn  from  our  sphere  of  observation  would  have
only  the  value  of  a  memorandum  ;  we  could  not  expect  to  find  the  same
relation  confirmed  elsewhere,  and  by  taking  in  new  districts  we  might
essentially  alter  the  average.  But  if  the  facts  are  such  that  we  find  the
same  preponderance  in  the  various  districts  with  only  small  variations,  then,
when  we  have  extended  our  observations  over  a  sufficiently  large  area,  we
are  justified  in  assuming  that  it  will  be  found  everywhere.  We  may
formulate  a  general  proposition  which  is  at  first  purely  empirical,  but
which  is  certainly  approximately  true,  and  its  lower  limits  are  those  totals
in  which  the  relation  shows  itself  clearly  ;  by  a  simple  inductive  inference
we  infer  that  the  same  relation  will  be  found  elsewhere.

We  are  limited  to  the  statement  of  these  uniform  averages  where  the
differences  between  individuals  and  the  variability  of  the  objects  falling
under  a  concept  do  not  admit  of  a  general  law  applying  to  each  particular
one.  This  is  especially  true  in  physiology,  which  tells  us  the  average
size  of  the  individuals  belonging  to  a  species,  the  average  relative  propor
tions  of  their  limbs,  the  average  rate  of  breathing  or  of  pulse,  the  average
number  of  seeds  produced  by  a  species  of  plant,  the  average  duration  of
the  vital  periods  in  an  animal,  and  so  on.

The  average  size  or  number  is  frequently  taken  as  that  which  is  a  normal
one,  and  the  assumption  contained  in  this  expression  is  justified  in  the
sense  of  its  being  what  occurs  ordinarily,  and  as  a  rule,  when  the  small


STATISTICAL METHODS  489

deviations  from  the  average  are  much  more  numerous  than  the  large  ;  we
speak  of  the  normal  weight  of  brain  of*  an  adult  man  because  the  extreme
cases  are  rare,  and  the  larger  number  are  found  to  approximate  to  the
mean,  and  \ve  may  also  fix  the  limits  within  which  the  deviations  are  not
as  yet  abnormal.  We  always  tend,  however,  to  introduce  the  ideological
idea  that  the  average  size  is  really  that  which  is  intended  by  nature,  and
which  is  appropriate  to  the  tasks  of  the  individual,  while  the  deviations
are  consequences  of  disturbances  which  have  prevented  her  from  realizing
her  idea  exactly.

9.  The  inference  that  those  average  numbers  which  have  shown  an
actual  uniformity  so  far  will  recur  in  the  future  and  be  confirmed  is,  as  with
the  merely  descriptive  laws  (§  96,  4,  p.  363),  only  justified  if  we  tacitly
assume  that  the  conditions  to  which  the  uniformity  has  hitherto  been  due
do  not  vary,  and  that  the  totality  of  the  conditions  from  which  the
particular  instances  with  their  variations  have  proceeded  remains  in  some
way  the  same.

But  however  often  an  average  may  have  been  confirmed,  we  can  never
attribute  to  it  the  importance  of  being  by  itself  the  expression  of  any
necessity.  Every  result  is  necessary  when  its  conditions  are  given  ;  every
particular  instance  was  necessary  in  so  far  as  from  the  given  conditions
it  could  only  be  such  and  no  other  ;  all  individual  determinations  and
differences  in  the  particular  cases,  which  were  neglected  by  the  average,
were  necessary ;  the  most  extreme  deviations  were  necessary,  and  it  will
.also  be  necessary,  if  all  the  particular  conditions  recur  in  exactly  the  same
way,  that  they  should  again  have  the  same  results,  and  that  therefore  the
isurn  of  these  results  will  be  the  same.

But  this  necessity,  to  which  the  particular  instances  are  due,  is  concealed
Tom  us  if  we  can  do  no  more  than  group  them  together  and  count  them  ;
md  because  they  all  differ  and  each  one  varies  without  regard  to  any  law,
jecause  the  particular  instances  of  a  group  showing  a  given  average
io  not  generally  correspond  in  any  way  with  the  particular  instances  ot
mother  group  showing  the  same  average,  we  cannot  even  speak  of  the
:xact  repetition  of  the  same  conditions.  The  extraordinary  thing  is  that
ivhere  the  conditions  differ  so  in  the  particular  cases  we  should  yet
egularly  find  almost  the  same  averages  when  we  take  larger  numbers.
Ul  that  we  can  infer  from  it  is  that  the  manner  in  which  the  conditions
f  the  particular  instances  have  so  far  acted  necessitated  that  larger
•umbers  should  always  yield  the  same  total  ;  that  these  conditions


490  LOGIC

themselves  and  their  combinations  must  always  be  present  does  not
follow,  and  no  ground  for  such  a  statement  can  be  found  in  any  of
the  presuppositions  of  our  investigations.  It  is  the  same  as  with  the
alternation  of  day  and  night.  However  often  the  same  alternation  may
recur,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  rotation  of  the  earth  and  its  illumination
by  the  sun  must  continue ;  only  so  long  as  the  alternation  continues  does
it  prove  that  a  cause  has  been  at  work  to  produce  it  and  that  no  other
cause  has  counteracted  its  action.

It  is  often  forgotten  that  what  is  elsewhere  proved  by  the  recurrence  of
instances  is  something  quite  different  from  this.  The  ordinary  inference  is,
that  because  B  always  follows  A,  therefore  a  B  will  always  appear  when
ever  an  A  is  present ;  here  it  is  assumed  that  because  the  same  number  of
£'s  always  recur  in  the  same  periods  of  time,  therefore  it  will  continue  to
be  so  ad  infinitum.  And  when  we  look  for  the  two  elements  to  be  com
bined  by  the  necessity,  we  arrive  ultimately  at  the  absurdity  that  space
and  time,  or  the  number  of  the  things  within  which  we  are  counting,
produce  the  given  events,  or  that  the  one  specification  is  the  cause  of  the
others.  According  to  our  mode  of  procedure  elsewhere,  we  should  have
to  infer  from  the  proposition  that  as  often  as  a  year  passes  3%  of  the
population  die  that  there  is  a  causal  connection  between  the  passing  of  the
year  and  death,  and  that  time  itself  acts  as  a  poison;  from  the  proposition
that  as  often  as  100  girls  are  born  106  boys  open  their  eyes  to  the  light
it  would  follow  that  the  girls  have  the  boys  for  followers  ;  or  we  should
have  to  infer  that  the  suicide  who  hangs  himself  thereby  compels  another
to  shoot  himself,  in  order  that  the  received  relation  between  the  different
kinds  of  death  may  not  be  disturbed.

10.  Such  uniformities  of  numbers  and  averages  are  primarily  mere
descriptions  of  facts,  which  need  explanation  as  much  as  the  uniformity
of  the  alternation  between  day  and  night ;  and  the  explanation  can  be
found  only  where  the  actual  conditions,  the  efficient  causes,  are  forth
coming.  But  these  are  the  concrete  conditions  of  the  particular  instances
counted,  they  are  not  directly  causes  of  the  numbers  ;  it  is  only  the  nature
of  the  concrete  causes  which  can  show  it  to  be  necessary  for  the  effects
to  appear  in  certain  numbers  and  numerical  relations.  From  the  way  in
which  the  stamps  work  in  the  Mint  we  can  see  the  necessity  that  one
should  produce  a  thousand  shillings  every  day,  and  the  other  a  thousand
pennies,  and  that  if  both  work  at  once  the  number  of  the  two  coins  must
be  the  same;  but  without  knowing  whether  both  continue  to  work  we


STATISTICAL METHODS  491

cannot  infer  from  the  fact  that  one  thousand  pennies  have  been  produced
to-day  that  one  thousand  shillings  have  also  been  produced,  because
yesterday  the  number  of  the  two  sorts  of  coin  was  the  same.

Thus  the  question  is  :  How  must  the  conditions  of  a  number  of  instances
be  constituted,  in  order  that,  whatever  irregularity  there  may  be  in  the
particular  cases,  the  average  of  large  numbers  may  yet  show  regularity  in
time,  or  within  equal  areas,  or  in  the  relations  between  the  specifications
of  a  general  concept  ?

11.  We  should  have  an  answer  to  this  question  if  we  could  make  a
probable  assumption  concerning  the  conditions  upon  which  the  phenomena
depend  which  are  numerated and  measured in  their relative frequency
or  varying  magnitude. If  all  the  objects  numerated  are  ruled  by  a  fixed
number  of  conditions  which  are  partly  constant,  partly  variable,  and  upon
which depend both  their  specific  differences  and their magnitude and
the  occurrence  of  various  changes in  them  ;  if  the  variable  conditions
are  so  constituted  as  to  pass  through  a  certain  limited  circle  of  values  ;
and  if  the  effect  of  the  variable  conditions  is  both  to  increase  and  diminish
in equal proportion  that of  the constant conditions ; then, when the
variable  conditions  have  run  through  the  whole  circle  of  their  values,  they
will  be  neutralized in  the  sum  of  all  the  particular  effects,  and  this  sum
will  be  the  same  as  if  only  the  constant  conditions had  acted  ;  the  total
effect  will  therefore  be  constant. Or  if  we  had  none  but  conditions  which
varied  within  certain  limits,  then  if  we  assume  again  that  they  have  passed
through  the  whole  circle  of  their  values,  the  total  result will be  the  same
as  if  it  had  been the  mean value  of  the  variable conditions  which was
active  in  all  the  instances. This  is  true  again  when  variable  conditions,
which  do  not  annul  each  other  in  their  effects, combine with  constant
conditions  ;  here also  there  will be  a  mean  value  of  the  variable  condi
tions  around  which  the  variations  neutralize  each  other,  and this,  when
all  the  values  have  been  exhausted,  plays  the  part  of  a  constant  factor  in
the  total of  all  the  particular effects. So  long  as  the same conditions
persist  the  same  averages  must  follow,  and  we  shall  be  able  to  assume
that  even  a  single  average  drawn  from  a  considerable  number  of  instances
may  be  the  measure  of  the  mean  around  which  the  conditions  vary.

12.  We  may  illustrate this first  by the most simple  cases. In the
oscillation  of  a  pendulum  with  a  metallic  rod  all  the  conditions  affecting  it
may  be  constant  with the  exception  of  the  temperature  ;  as  this  rises  the
pendulum  lengthens  and  its  movement  slackens,  as  it  falls  the  movement


492  LOGIC

becomes  more  rapid.  If  we  suppose  that  the  temperature,  starting  at  10°,
first  rises  10°,  then  falls  20°,  then  rises  10°  again,  and  that  this  happens
uniformly  in  such  a  way  that  all  the  values  up  and  down  succeed  each
other  with  the  same  rapidity,  and  make  their  effects  felt  in  an  equal  degree,
then  the  retardations  due  to  the  higher  temperature  and  the  accelerations
due  to  the  lower  will  counterbalance  each  other  ;  the  average  time  of
oscillation  will  correspond  to  the  mean  temperature  of  10°.

Or  to  take  the  favourite  example  :  when  a  coin  is  thrown  it  will  fall
either  heads  up  or  tails  up  ;  if  it  is  always  laid  in  the  hand  with  the  head
up,  whether  it  will  afterwards  show  heads  or  tails  will  depend  upon  whether
it  turns  an  equal  or  an  unequal  number  of  times  ;  but  the  number  of
times  it  will  turn  depends  upon  the  strength  with  which  it  is  thrown.
Suppose  this  varies  from  the  strength  which  makes  it  turn  once  to  that
which  makes  it  turn  ten  times ;  when  we  have  passed  through  all  these
values  there  will  have  been  the  same  number  of  heads  and  tails.  The
same  result  would  follow  if  either  heads  or  tails  should  precede  the  throw
indiscriminately  ;  it  would  not,  however,  follow  in  the  first  series  of  throws,
but  only  after  a  lengthened  repetition,  when  we  had  exhausted  all  the  com
binations  of  variation  in  the  original  position  with  the  stronger  or  weaker
throws.1

The  result  is  not  changed  by  varying  at  random  the  stronger  and
weaker  throws,  so  long  as  no  particular  strength  predominates  and  always
tells  in  the  same  direction.  But  there  is  no  ground  for  such  a  coincidence
as  this  ;  and  since  we  know  that  the  one  side  is  as  likely  to  fall  up  as  the
other,  and  the  strength  of  the  throws  varies  without  reference  to  the
result,  we  are  justified  in  expecting  that  gradually  all  the  combinations
will  be  realized  an  equal  number  of  times.  Because  of  the  irregularity  of
variation  some  one  combination  will  slightly  predominate  at  any  given
number  of  throws ;  but  the  greater  the  number  the  less  will  this  predomi
nance  affect  the  average  ;  and  therefore,  the  greater  the  number  of  throws,

1  If  we  assume  that  the  throws  vary  in  strength  regularly  up  and  down  the  scale  from
i-io,  and  that  the  coin  is  always  picked  up  as  it  falls,  then,  if  we  begin  with  heads,  we
get  :  1st  throw,  one  revolution — tails  ;  2nd  throw,  two  revolutions — tails  ;  3rd  throw,
three  revolutions — heads  ;  4th  throw,  four  revolutions — heads;  5th  throw,  five  revolutions
— tails ;  6th  throw,  six  revolutions — tails  ;  7th  throw,  seven  revolutions — heads  ;  8th
throw,  eight  revolutions — heads  :  Qth  throw,  nine  revolutions — tails  ;  loth  throw,  ten
revolutions— tails  ;  that  is  six  tails  to  four  heads.  But  if  we  continue  in  the  same  way,
beginning  again  with  I,  then  heads  will  fall  first,  and  we  shall  get  six  times  heads  to
four  times  tails ;  after  the  second  series,  therefore,  there  will  have  been  ten  times  heads
and  ten  times  tails.


STATISTICAL METHODS  493

the  nearer  will  the  average  approximate  to  that  equality  in  the  numbers  of
the  two  alternatives  which  is  to  be  inferred  from  the  conditions.

If  we  are  dealing,  not  with  successive  events,  but  with  co-existent
things,  we  may  illustrate  the  case  by  throwing  a  number  of  grains  upon  a
chess  board  ;  the  various  directions  in  which  they  fall,  and  their  various
amounts  of  motion  after  falling,  must  combine  as  easily  with  the  black  as
with  the  white  squares  ;  and  if  we  could  assume  that  no  one  direction  and
no  one  velocity  in  falling  predominated,  we  should  necessarily  find  the
sum  of  those  lying  upon  the  black  squares  to  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  those
lying  upon  the  white  squares.  For  the  same  reason  we  should  expect  that
on  a  chequered  board  of  different  colours  we  should  find  the  number  of
grains  lying  on  each  colour  to  be  proportional  to  the  space  occupied  by
the  colour.

To  express  it  in  a  general  form  :  If  a  given  number  of  a's  can  combine
with  a  given  number  of  ^'s  and  <r's,  and  no  circumstances  are  present  to
favour  the  one  combination  rather  than  the  others,  then  the  combination
ab  will  occur  as  often  as  the  combination  ac,  if  there  are  an  equal  number
of  £'s  and  c's ;  but  if  there  are  different  numbers  of  £'s  and  c's,  then  the
combinations  ab  and  ac  will  stand  in  the  same  numerical  relation  as  /'
and  c  ;  and  the  relation  which  we  find  between  ab  and  ac,  or  between  their
necessary  consequences  ft  and  y,  will  enable  us  to  infer  the  relation  between
b  and  c.

13.  These  deductions differ  from the simple  calculations of  proba
bilities in that they make definite assumptions ; they do not  merely
operate with  disjunctive  judgments with reference  to which we know
10  ground  why  the  one  alternative  should  take  place  rather  than  the  other;
3Ut  with disjunctive  judgments  with reference  to  which  we  can assume
hat  no  such  ground  is  present,  and  that  the  existing  causes,  when  they
)ave  passed  through  all  their  values  and  realized  all  their  combinations,
nust  have  the  consequence  which  is  calculated  according  to  the  theory  of
>robabilities  (cf.  §  85.  8.  p.  224).

14.  Such  hypothetical deductions  enable  us  to  draw  inferences  from
he merely numerical results of counting and measurement, more
specially  of  average relations  and average magnitudes  referring to  the
onditions  of  numerated  phenomena  ;  but  never,  unless  we are  justified
pon  other  grounds  in  making  assumptions  with  reference  to  the  causes
ipon  which  the  phenomena  in  question  depend.

The  inferences  which  we  make  here  are  like  all  inductive  inferences  in


494  LOGIC

that  they  compare  the  given  results  of  observation  with  the  consequences
which  follow  from  certain  hypothetical  assumptions,  and  conclude  that
where  they  agree  the  assumptions  are  true.

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  an  essential  difference  in  the  assumptions
which  can  be  tested  in  this  way.  The  assumptions  to  be  confirmed  by
those  methods  of  discovering  causal  laws  which  we  developed  previously
are  hypothetical  judgments  saying  :  if  A  happens,  B  happens.  The
assumptions  upon  which  is  based  the  use  of  statistical  results  contain  not
only  the  law  which  makes  B  depend  upon  A,  but  also  the  actual  constitu-
on  of  A,  the  number  or  magnitude  in  which  it  takes  effect ;  they  have  to
find  therefore  two  unknowns.  If  the  law  were  known,  we  need  only  find
the  actual  constitution  of  the  causes,  or  if  this  were  known,  only  their  law;
but  such  favourable  instances  are  comparatively  scarce.  In  the  mere
result  of  the  numeration  there  is  no  distinction  made  between  what  is  due
to  the  necessity  of  the  law  and  what  is  due  to  the  mere  actual  constitution
of  the  conditions,  and  these  cannot  be  isolated  and  investigated  singly.

15.  We  may  start  from  the  illustration  we  have  already  used.  Obser
vation  gives  us  a  certain  numerical  relation  in  the  frequency  of  (3  and  y,  as
differences  appearing  in  a  common  a.  We  assume  that  /3  is  conditioned
by  a  combination  ab,  y  by  a  combination  ac;  we  assume  that  a  is  equally
likely  to  combine  with  b  and  c,  both  by  its  own  nature  and  by  the  circum
stances,  and  we  then  infer  that  b  and  c  are  present  in  the  same  ratio  as  ft
and  y.  Here  we  have  four  assumptions  :  first  a  law  according  to  which  ft
is  the  consequence  of  ab,  and  y  of  ac\  then  a  law  according  to  which  the
nature  of  a  together  with  other  circumstances  is  equally  conducive  to  the
combination  ab  and  ac ;  then  the  presence  of  these  circumstances  ;  and
finally  the  ratio  in  which  b  and  c  are  present.  Or  take  another  case  :  we
had  assumed  on  the  ground  of  certain  conjectures  that  a  combines  with
equal  facility  with  b  and  c,  and  that  there  are  the  same  number  of  ^'s  and
c's,  and  we  expected  that  the  consequences  of  ab  and  be,  /3  and  y,  would
occur  the  same  number  of  times  ;  observation,  however,  showed  a  prepon
derance  of  /3's  over  y's.  From  that  it  follows  that  our  assumptions  are  not
quite  correct ;  either  there  is  in  addition  to  ab  a  further  combination  ax,
which  also  has  (3  for  its  consequence,  or  it  is  natural  for  a  to  combine  more
easily  with  b  than  with  c,  or  the  circumstances  present  are  of  such  a  kind  as
to  be  more  conducive  to  the  combination  ab  than  to  the  combination  ac,
or  there  are  more  £'s  than  ^'s  within  the  range  of  our  observation.

For  instance,  the  preponderance  of  male  over  female  births  may  be


STATISTICAL METHODS  495

due,  according  to  the  hypothesis  which  makes  sex  depend  on  the  degree  of
maturity  of  the  ovulum,  to  the  surplus  of  the  time  in  which  conceptions  yield
boys  over  the  time  in  which  they  yield  girls,  which  would  necessarily  give
rise  to  the  preponderance  of  males  if  the  conceptions  were  indifferently
distributed  in  time.  In  this  case  the  fact  would  be  grounded  upon  a
physiological  law  true  of  all  instances  without  exception,  in  consequence
of  which  a  would  combine  more  easily  with  b  than  with  c.  But  the  same
result  would  follow  if  the  differences  concerned  were  attached  merely  to
the  individual,  and  a  disposition  of  the  female  organism  to  develop  the
male  sex  should  merely  occur  more  frequently  than  the  reverse,  there
would  be  more  £'s  than  c's  forthcoming.  Ultimately  this  frequency  also
must  have  its  causes  ;  but  these  again  may  consist  in  some  special  com
bination  of  facts,  and  the  same  general  laws  from  which  this  proceeds
would  under  other  circumstances  have  given  rise  to  the  opposite  result.

1 6.  We  could  only  succeed  in  inferring  the  reality  of  one  or  the  other
of  these  or  other  assumed  possibilities  if  it  were  possible,  within  the
statistical  method  of  averages,  to  isolate  the  particular  factors  assumed.

If,  that  is,  it  were  possible,  in  dealing  with  a  large  number  of  instances
depending  upon  many  unknown  conditions,  to  select  a  part  which  is  con
nected with a given circumstance, then the question whether this
circumstance  belongs  to  the  conditions  affecting  the  phenomenon may  be
determined  by  comparing  the  average  of  this  part with  the  average  of  the
>hole. If  there  is  any  divergency,  we  must  assume  that  the  circumstance
'las  some  influence,  and  when  we  are  dealing  with  average  magnitudes  we
inay  even determine the amount of  that influence. For  if  we take  a
;ufficient  number  of  cases,  we  may  assume  that  the  remaining  unknown
conditions with their variations  compensate each other even for the
specially  selected  part  of  the  instances,  and  therefore  if  these  conditions
lone  were  active  we  might  expect  the  same  average  ;  if  it  does  not  appear,
bat  points  to  the  presence  of  a  condition  not  present  in the  remaining
nstances,  and  the  fact  that  the  circumstance  in  question  is  common  to  all
hese  instances  leads  us  to  regard  it  as  this  condition.

By  carrying  out  this  investigation  in  different  directions  we  may  succeed
ti  obtaining  a  number  of  partial  results.

It  is  by  these  methods  alone,  for  example,  that  we  can  establish  with
afficient  certainty  the  favourable  or  unfavourable  action  of  medicines  and
lethods  of  healing  ;  there  is  so  great  a  complication  of  unknown  and
ibjectively  varying  causes  upon  which  depends  the  recovery  or  death


496  LOGIC

of  a  patient  suffering  from  any  given  illness  that  individual  instances
prove  nothing,  we  can  never  ascertain  how  the  particular  agent  has  acted,
whether  it  was  indifferent,  whether  it  acted  favourably,  or  whether  its
unfavourable  action  was  counteracted  by  other  causes.  But  by  taking  the
average  of  many  cases  in  which  the  remaining  causes  are  varied  in  every
way  we  eliminate  their  differences.

But  by  means  of  such  observations  alone  we  can  never  directly  prove  a
causal  law,  according  to  which  a  certain  result  would  depend  infallibly
upon  certain  conditions.

In  the  example  adduced  a  change  in  the  average  of  mortality  would
leave  it  uncertain  whether  a  given  treatment  acted  in  the  same  way  with
all  individuals,  or  whether  it  acted  favourably  upon  some  only  and  not
upon  others,  or  whether  it  was  even  injurious  to  some.  At  the  most  we
can  only  infer  that  it  acted  favourably  upon  the  majority,  and  in  order  to
ascertain  whether  certain  contra-indications  were  present  it  would  be
necessary  to  draw  new  averages  according  to  different  symptoms.  If,  for
example,,  it  has  been  established  that  the  treatment  of  typhus  by  reduction
of  the  temperature  diminishes  the  average  mortality  amongst  typhus
patients  by  so  much  per  cent.,  then  all  we  can  infer  with  certainty  is  that
in  a  considerable  number  of  cases  this  treatment  has  had  a  favourable
result,  and  has  co-operated  with  other  conditions  of  recovery.  But  if  it
should  also  be  established  that  the  average  of  a  part,  e.g.,  of  typhus  patients
suffering  from  affections  of  the  lungs,  showed  on  the  contrary  a  greater
mortality,  then  it  would  be  proved  that  in  these  cases  the  conditions  of  an
unfavourable  issue  were  strengthened,  and  that  it  is  due  only  to  the
smaller  number  of  these  cases  that  the  total  average  was  notwithstanding
favourable.

From  what  point  of  view  we  are  to  take  these  partial  averages  we  cannot
learn  from  the  numbers  themselves,  but  only  from  particular  observations
or  more  general  considerations;  so  that  here  again  we  see  the  hypothetical
nature  of  the  process  by  which  we  try  to  confirm  or  refute  certain  assump
tions  by  comparing  their  consequences  with  the  matter  of  observation.

17.  It  is  only  a  special  application  of  this  method  which  we  emploj
when  we  are  dealing  with  periodically  occurring,  or  periodically  changing,
influences,  which  we  have  to  distinguish  from  among  a  number  of  other
conditions.

The  position  of  the  barometer  in  a  given  locality  passes  from  day  to  day,
and  from  month  to  month,  up  and  down  through  all  possible  variations,  in


STATISTICAL METHODS  497

which  we  can  at  first  find  absolutely  no  rule.  An  average  taken  over  a
considerable  time  gives  a  mean  value  about  which  the  particular  positions
rise  and  fall,  and  this  sums  up  the  result  of  the  constant  conditions  to
gether  with  the  mean  value  of  those  which  vary.  The  constancy  of
this  mean  value  over  long  intervals  of  time  enables  us  to  infer  that
nothing  new  has  occurred  within  the  circle  of  these  conditions.

But  if  we  calculate  the  averages  for  the  particular  hours  of  the  day  over
a  considerable  time,  we  find  a  periodical  variation  between  two  maxima
and  two  minima  with  respect  to  the  general  average.  This  period  cannot
be  recognised  in  the  single  day  because  it  is  mingled  with  other  influences
which  occur  irregularly  or  in  different  periods  ;  it  appears  in  the  average
over  a  longer  time  because  here  the  other  variable  elements  for  each  hour
neutralize  each  other,  and  it  points  to  a  condition,  or  a  complex  of  condi
tions,  which  periodically  raise  or  depress  the  position  of  the  barometer.
That  the  period  is  daily  points  to  the  influence  of  the  sun  ;  that  it  does
not  stand  in  any  simple  relation  to  the  position  of  the  sun  shows  that  the
influence  is  not  simple  and  direct,  but  is  affected  by  concomitant  conditions.
But  unless  we  had  conjectured  that  the  different  positions  of  the  sun,
and  the  changes  brought  about  by  them,  had  some  influence,  we  could  not
have  thought  of  summing  up  the  particular  hours  of  the  day  apart  from
each  other.

In  a  similar  way  the  existence  of  an  ebb  and  flow  in  the  atmosphere
has  been  proved.  If  we  calculate  the  averages  according  to  the  periods
which  are  marked  by  the  culmination  of  the  moon,  we  find  a  variation
between  a  maximum  and  a  minimum  the  times  of  which  correspond  with
those  of  the  upper  (or  lower)  culmination  of  the  moon  and  of  the  positions
50°  removed.  As  these  culminations  pass  within  one  lunar  month  through
ill  hours  of  the  day,  the  differences  in  the  time  of  the  day  and  the  other
/ariations  are  neutralized,  and  we  obtain  the  amount  of  influence  exerted
>y  the  moon.

Here,  again,  it  was  to  be  expected  from  general  laws  that  ebb  and  flow
d  take  place  in  the  atmosphere,  and  we  had  to  investigate  whether  it  was
erceptible. It  was  this  expectation  alone  which  caused  us  to  take  the
erage  of  the  hours  of  culmination  of  the  moon,  and to  compare  it  with
e  average  of  the  times  a  quarter  of  a  lunar  day  later  ;  and  here  again
e  calculation  served  only  to  confirm  a  hypothesis  which  the  mere  sight
the  numbers  could  not  have  produced.

That  we  must  then  accept  the moon  as  the  cause of  these  variations
s.  L.— ii.  K  K


498  LOGIC

was  to  be  inferred  from  known  relations.  But  even  if  no  such  inference
had  been  possible,  the  evident  coincidence  of  the  periods  of  the  one
phenomenon  with  the  periods  of  the  other  would  have  pointed  to  a  con
nection,  and  enabled  us  to  conjecture  either  the  dependence  of  the  one
phenomenon  upon  the  other,  or  their  joint  dependence  upon  a  third  factor
(cf.  §  96,  9,  p.  367).

1 8.  The  inferences  from  statistical  statements,  which  aim  primarily  at
the  description  of  collective  wholes  (§92,  7,  p.  285),*  follow  essentially  the
same  principles.  Every  collective  whole  is  characterized  by  the  absolute
and  relative  number  of  the  units  of  which  it  is  composed  ;  and  here  again
the  first  process  consists  in  reducing  the  numbers  to  comprehensible  rela
tions.  This  reduction  allows,  moreover,  the  comparison  of  different
collections  falling  under  the  same  concept,  of  which  the  simplest  example
is  the  quantititive  analysis  reduced  to  percentages  of  a  mixture  of  different
substances,  such  as  a  kind  of  soil,  a  mineral  spring,  etc.  The  first  object
in  this  is  to  ascertain  the  actual  manner  in  which  a  whole  is  compounded
from  its  different  elements  ;  and  from  this  it  may  perhaps  be  inferred,  if  the
actions  of  the  particular  components  are  known,  what  will  be  the  nature
of  the  total  effect  to  be  expected  from  a  unity  so  constituted.

A  large  part  of  social  statistics  is  concerned  with  this  characterization  of
a  whole  by  the  numerical  relations  between  its  different  components,  and
with  the  collective  actions  proceeding  from  them.  The  wholes  which  are
here  depicted  are  held  together  not  only  by  the  most  complicated  inter
action  between  their  parts,  but  also  by  unity  in  the  end  they  have  in  view
(§  78,  12,  p.  178);  it  is  this  which  justifies  us  in  not  merely  referring  the
activities  of  each  particular  member  to  the  individual  unit,  but  in  regard
ing  the  sums  of  their  activities  as  the  actions  of  the  collective  unity.  The
enumeration  of  the  whole  population  of  a  state  at  a  given  point  of  time,
the  relation  between  the  sexes  or  ages  at  the  same  point  of  time,  the  rela
tion  between  the  different  occupations  due  to  the  human  will,  between
married  and  single,  and  so  on  ;  all  natural  and  obtained  commodities,  the
amount  of  commodities  produced  within  a  given  period  of  time — all  this
expresses  the  special  peculiarities  of  this  particular  whole,  and  any  differ
ence  in  these  relations  and  values  at  once  characterizes  emphatically
different  communities.

In  so  far  as  these  wholes  continue  and  change in  time,  the  successive

1  Cf.  with  what  follows  Riimelin's  Reden  und  Aufsatze  :  ubcr  den  Begriff  eints  soaak*
Gesetzes,  p.  I  sq.,  and  Zur  Theorie  der  Statistik,  p.  208  sq.


STATISTICAL JfETHODS  499

alterations  in  the  numbers  expressing  their  component  parts  and  ihe  totality
of  their  actions  represent  the  history  of  their  changes,  which  deals  not
with  the  individual  fates  of  particular  units  but  with  change  in  the  relations
of  whole  classes  of  similar  parts.  The  increase  and  decrease  of  population,
the  change  in  the  proportion  of  ages,  of  occupations,  etc.,  the  increase
of  poverty  or  wealth,  the  accelerated  or  diminished  production  of  com
modities,  tell  us  the  direction  and  amount  of  the  changes  which  are  under
gone  by  the  whole  as  such,  and  which  are  continually  modifying  the
conditions  under  which  takes  place  the  interaction  of  the  members
amongst  themselves  and  their  collective  influence  outwards.

The only  ground which determines us in  drawing  the limits within

which  the  number  of  births,  deaths  and  marriages  are  registered,  lies  in  the

i fact  of  belonging to  such  a  whole. When we calculate the  ratio  of  the

i number  of  births  in  a  year  to  the total  number,  or  of  children to adults,

. for Germany, France, England, etc., our reason for  making  just this

i  selection  of  individual  cases  is  our  desire  to  characterize  the  conditions  of

the  nations  as  wholes.

19. But  these  same  numbers,  which  were  originally  intended to sub
serve  a  purely  historical  description,  afford  upon  closer  consideration  the
i  most  surprising  revelations  as to  laws  to  which  the  life of  the whole is
:  subjected, — laws  which  are  concealed  from  us  when  we  regard  the  facts  of
i  the  particular  members  in  isolation,  but  which  become  obvious  as  soon  as
we  compare the  statistical results  which register from year  to year  the
I  whole  of  certain  events  occurring  within  the  community. The  percentage
'  of  deaths  and  of  births  within  a  large  population  remains  approximately
i  constant  from  year  to  year,  as  also  the  number  of  marriages  and  divorces  ;
the  number  of  crimes  of  certain  kinds,  of  suicide,  etc.,  shows  an  alarming
uniformity. It  is  no  wonder  that  in  the  first  surprise  it  was  thought  that
the great natural laws of society had been discovered to which the
|  individual  is  subjected  without  knowing  it;  and  that  these  numbers  were
; regarded  as  proof  of  an  inexorable  necessity  which year  by  year  not  only
delivers  over  to  an  inevitable  death  its  victims from  all  classes of  society
and  ages,  but  also  constrains  a  predestined  number  to commit  murder  or
to  slay  themselves.

However  worthy  of  consideration  this  uniformity  of  numbers  may  be —
we  do  not  aim  at  dealing  exhaustively  with  the  subject  here — still  more
careful  examination  will  show,  that  to  infer  the  existence  of  a  law  holding
sway  over  the  particular  members  of  a  community  and  concerned  only  with


5oo  LOGIC

completing  the  number,  no  matter  by  whom,  is  premature.  If  even  the
uniform  repetition  of  the  same  event  in  one  and  the  same  subject  cannot,
by  itself,  express  any  necessity,  still  less  can  the  mere  constancy  of
numbers  in  which  the  instances  included  refer  to  constantly  changing
subjects,  and  are  indeed  instances  which  agree  only  in  general  categories,
and  while  abstraction  is  made  from  their  concrete  individual  differences.

20.  The  constancy,  or  more  accurately  the  approximate  constancy,  of
these  statistical  numbers  is  primarily  no  more  than  a  fact  which  stands  in
as  much  need  of  explanation  as  any  particular  event  which  is  merely  de
scribed.  But  explanation  can  only  be  satisfactory  when  it  explains  that
which  really  happens,  when  it  can  state  the  causes  from  which  proceed  the
individual  cases  included  in  the  enumeration,  and  can  deduce  from  the
nature  of  these  causes  that  their  effects  in  a  section  of  the  members  of  a
community  are  equally  distributed  in  time.

These  uniformly  recurring  numbers  after  all  express  no  more  than  the
fact  that,  e.g.,  the  many  causes  of  death  to  which  sooner  or  later  every
living  being  is  subject  act  sometimes  quickly,  sometimes  slowly,  in  such  a
way  that  within  a  large  population  about  the  same  number  of  men  die
every  year.  This  result  of  a  uniform  distribution  in  time  is  just  what  is  to
be  expected  when  a  large  number  of  independent  variable  causes,  acting
according  to  the  most  various  laws,  exercise  their  influence  upon  a  multi
tude  of  objects  which  remains  the  same  in  number  and  composition.
Suppose  that  of  fifty  million  men  living  unaffected  by  change  for  fifty  years
each  should  write  letters  or  take  railway  journeys  from  mere  caprice,  and
not  according  to  any  fixed  occasion  or  rule,  then  just  because  of  the
complete  absence  of  regularity  it  would  be  most  probable  that  in  every
year  there  would  be  approximately  the  same  number  of  letters  written  and
of  journeys  made.  The  fact  that  everything  went  by  chance,  and  nothing
favoured  any  special  time,  would  lead  us  to  expect  in  a  large  average  the
indifferent  distribution  of  these  activities  over  the  time  taken,  and  if  a
cause  were  to  be  sought,  it  would  be  rather  for  the  accumulation  of  such
events  in  any  given  period.  Or,  to  put  it  in  a  different  way,  suppose  it
were  determined  that  every  one  died  before  he  was  100  years  old,  but  a
mere  matter  of  chance  whether  he  died  in  the  first,  second,  third,  or  ninety-
ninth  year,  then  if  we  take  a  very  large  number,  it  will  again  be  most  pro
bable  that  the  cases  of  deaths  of  new-born  infants  would  be  so  distributed
over  the  ninety-nine  years  that  the  same  number  would  occur  in  each
Thus  there  is  little  ground  for  inferring  directly  that,  because  the  number


STATISTICAL METHODS  50]

of  instances  which  occur  in  perpetually  different  persons  is  constant,  there
are  certain  constant  and  invariable  causes  acting  upon  the  whole  commu
nity,  and  effecting  these  uniform  percentages.

21.  If, nevertheless,  we  are  forced  to  give  some  further  significance  to
the  figures,  we  shall  find  it  in  the  fact  that  we  have  to  regard the parti
cular  cases  enumerated  as  the  necessary  consequences  of  certain  causes,  and
that  we  have special knowledge  concerning these causes themselves
derived  from  the  observation  of  the  particular  concrete  instances,  and  are
thus  in  a  position to form hypotheses  concerning the  ground  of  unifor
mities  which by  themselves  point  to  no  cause  and no  necessity. From
the  consideration  of  concrete  instances  we  learn  that every  generation is

^composed  of  individuals  who  have  different  power  of  resistance,  that  the
general  conditions  of  life  and  widely  spread  dangers,  as  well  as  the  various
fates  of  individuals,  tend  to  shorten  life,  whilst  other  conditions  help  us  to
:  guard  against  those  dangers.  The  uniformity  of  the  numbers  enables  us
:to  infer  that  the  relations  upon  which  depends  the  duration  of  life  for  the
particular  individuals  remain  as  constant  as  the  proportion  between  weak
land  strong  constitutions,  but  from  the  constancy  of  the  numbers  we  can
ilearn  nothing  about  these  relations  in  detail.

22.  When  it is  possible  to infer  from statistics  to causal  laws, the
ground  lies  not  in  the  constancy  of  the  numbers,  but,  on  the  contrary,  in

heir  deviations.  When  the  annual  number  of  deaths  increases  or  diminishes
n  proportion  to  the  population,  we  are  justified  in  looking  for  the  explana-
ion  of  the  difference  in  corresponding  changes.  These  will  most  probably
DC  such  as  affect  a  large  number  of  individuals  together,  e.g.  the  increase
>r  absence  of  epidemics  and  favourable  or  unfavourable  states  of  weather  ;
hey  will  not  consist  in  the  improbable  coincidence  of  isolated  and  indi-
•idual  circumstances.

Thus  it  is  the  application  of  the  method  of  difference  to  averages  which
eads to the  explanation  ;  and  it  leads  especially  to  explanation  when  it
'troceeds  by  breaking  up  the  whole  number  into  special  groups  of  a  specific
lature,  and  comparing  the  averages  resulting  from  these  groups  with  the
otal  average. When  the  mortality  of  one  month  deviates  regularly  from
lie  year's  average,  this  suggests  to  us  that  that  wherein this month is  dis-
nguished  from  the  others  intensifies  the  conditions  favourable  or  unfavour-
ble  to  the  duration  of  life. When  the  number  of  births  in a  year  rises
bove  the  average,  we  shall  not  assume  that  the  difference  is  grounded
pon  a  large  number  of  individual  and  indeterminable  causes,  all  working


502  LOGIC

in  one  direction,  but  that  some  far-reaching  influence  has  been  acting  upon
many  at  once ;  and  if  a  comparison  with  other  numbers  shows  that  the
number  of  births  varies  inversely  as  the  price  of  corn  in  the  preceding  year,
then,  although  it  is  not  proved  that  the  lower  price  of  corn  is  the  direct
cause  of  more  births,  yet  we  know  from  psychological  and  physiological
considerations  in  particular  instances  that  deficient  nourishment  tends  to
limit  production,  and  statistical  comparison  'shows  us  the  amount  of  in
fluence  exercised  by  this  condition  in  combination  with  those  which  are
constant  and  those  which  vary  in  the  ordinary  manner.

So  it  is  throughout.  Where  correspondences  appear  between  variations
among  different  sets  of  facts  we  may  conjecture  that  some  connection
exists  ;  but  to  prove  the  presence  of  a  causal  connection  from  the  mere
numbers  is  only  possible  by  means  of  a  most  comprehensive  observation
of  many  wholes  in  which  the  same  events  are  repeated,  while  knowledge
from  other  sources  of  actual  causal  connections,  which  are  true  for  the  par
ticular  individual,  frequently  enables  us  to  decide  at  once  that  the  correspond
ence  between  the  variations  is  based  upon  a  causal  connection.  When
we  find  that  an  increase  in  the  proportion  of  married  to  single  people,  or
a  fall  in  the  average  age  of  those  who  marry,  is  accompanied  by  a  fall  in
the  percentage  of  illegitimate  as  compared  with  legitimate  children,  we  do
not  hesitate  to  say  there  is  a  causal  connection,  not  because  it  is  revealed
by  the  numbers,  but  because  we  expected  it  beforehand  ;  if  the  numbers
had  been  contrary  to  our  expectation,  we  should  have  looked  for  other
causes  to  have  counteracted  those  known  to  us.  All  that  statistics  corro
borate  in  such  cases  is  that  causes  which  we  know  in  some  other  way  have
taken  effect,  and  have  not  been  checked  by  others,  and  they  afford  a
measure  for  the  relation  between  their  efficacy  and  that  of  all  the  others.
There  has  seldom  been  a  more  senseless  statement  propounded  than  that
it  has  been  proved  by  statistics  that  marriages  are  not  based,  according  to
the  ordinary  belief,  upon  individual  inclination,  etc.,  but  are  regulated  by
a  law  which,  regardless  of  the  heads  and  hearts  of  individuals,  makes
marriages  depend  upon  the  price  of  corn.

23.  If  the  variations  of  averages  justify  us  in  inferring  to  general  and
wide-spread  circumstances,  we  have  also  a  right  to  regard  their  constancy,
not  as  the  result  of  the  random  combinations  of  a  number  of  independent
conditions,  but  as  the  expression  of  constancy  in  general  conditions  which,
acting  in  varying  combinations  upon  many  individuals,  have  these  unifor
mities  for  their  result.  \Ve  shall  then  be  able  to  interpret  the  fact  that  the


STATISTICAL METHODS  503

number  of  crimes  of  a  given  kind  remains  much  the  same,  as  signifying
that  men  from  generation  to  generation  are  constituted  in  the  same  way  as
regards  their  inclinations  and  temperaments,  and  that  the  temptations  to
crime  due  to  the  social  relations  remain  as  numerous,  while,  on  the  other
hand,  legislature,  morality,  and  religious  conviction  continue  to  counteract
criminal  inclinations  with  the  same  force.  In  other  words,  we  accept  that
interpretation  of  the  numbers  which  enables  us  to  explain  their  constancy
by  the  simplest  assumptions.

But  even  these  assumptions  can  only  be  confirmed  by  breaking  up  the
total  averages  according  to  different  points  of  view,  and  in  our  numera
tion  combining  so  far  as  possible  what  is  similar  and  distinguishing  what
is  dissimilar.  When  we  analyse  the  number  of  criminals  according  to  cer
tain  points  of  view,  and  compare  the  numbers  so  obtained  with  the  general
averages,  we  find  that  in  the  special  modifications  of  human  nature  are  con
tained  certain  constant  conditions  which  lead  to  violation  of  the  law.  When
we  find,  e.g.,  that  by  far  the  greater  number  of  criminals  are  men,  while  the
number  of  men  and  women  in  the  whole  population  is  almost  equal,  then
it  is  evident  that  the  nature  and  position  of  the  men  contains  conditions
favourable  to  crime,  or  is  wanting  in  checks  ;  when  we  find  the  number  of
young  people  concerned  in  offences  against  the  person  is  more  than  pro
portional  to  the  total  number  of  people  of  that  age,  then  it  follows  that  the
tendency  to  assaults  diminishes  with  age.

In  this  way  a  wide  field  is  opened  for  inferences  in  which  we  attempt  on
the  one  hand  to  connect  together  permanent  relations,  on  the  other  to
ascertain  the  effects  of  changes.

Exactly  the  same  method  by  which  we  distinguished  the  influence  of  the
moon  upon  the  position  of  the  barometer  from  positions  which  were  irre
gular  in  their  particular  variations,  enables  us  to  say  of  every  partial  average
which  is  taken  from  some  particular  point  of  view,  that,  by  reason  of  its
deviation  from  the  total  average,  whatever  is  common  to  the  selected  in
stances  stands  in  some  direct  or  indirect  relation  to  the  magnitude  of  the
result  which  is  measured  by  the  average.  It  is  thus  that  we  ascertain  the
influence  of  certain  occupations  upon  the  duration  of  life,  the  influence  of
town  and  country  upon  infant  mortality,  the  influence  of  change  in  legisla
tion  upon  production  and  trade,  etc.

We  cannot,  of  course,  even  by  comparing  different  communities,  con
struct  really  causal  laws  which  would  determine  every  particular  case.  All
we  can  infer  is  that  in  a  larger  or  smaller  number  of  the  instances  enume-


504  LOGIC

rated  the  factors  present  throughout  are  modified  in  a  given  direction  by
another  one.  Any  formulation  of  real  laws  can  refer  only  to  the  activities
of  the  efficient  units,  of  individuals,  and  must  be  based  upon  psychology.
A  real  explanation  of  social  phenomena  (p.  445  sq.)  must  start  from  the
laws  according  to  which  human  nature  develops  either  generally  or  in  its
individual  differentiations,  and  is  influenced  in  its  developments  by  natural
conditions  and  social  intercourse.  The  collective  results  which  we  obtain
from  statistics  by  neglecting  individual  differences  appear  as  the  sum-totals
of  the  particular  activities  concerned,  and  in  their  turn  afford  a  measure  for
the  average  energy  of  the  particular  factors.

24.  The  same  reasons  which  forbid  us  to  regard  statistical  numbers  as
the  expression  of  a  necessity  dominating  the  particular  instances  enume
rated  also  prevent  us  from  drawing  any  argument  from  moral  statistics  for
psychological  determinism,  or  against  the  assumption  of  a  real  freedom  of
the  will.  No  one  has  seriously  maintained  that  if  a  man  is  free  he  must
therefore  act  quite  disconnectedly,  and  be  able  at  any  moment  to  resolve
to  do  anything  whatever.  It  is  a  matter  of  course  that  his  inducements  to
certain  actions  are  due  to  his  natural  inclinations  together  with  external
relations,  his  temptations  to  certain  crimes  to  his  individual  nature,  to  his
social  position,  and  to  the  circumstances  which  excite  his  emotions ;  the
question  is  whether  what  is  thus  imposed  upon  him  is  a  disjunction  of  dif
ferent  possibilities  between  which  he  has  to  decide,  or  a  completely  deter
mining  cause.  If  the  former  were  the  case,  then  even  if  he  should
approach  the  omission  or  commission  of  a  suggested  action  in  a  state  of
complete  indeterminateness,  and  his  decision  should  be  purely  fortuitous
so  far  as  concerned  the  complex  of  circumstances,  the  probabilities  would
lead  us  to  expect  that  the  decision  in  a  large  number  of  instances  would
be  as  often  for  as  against ;  in  this  case  the  constant  numbers  would  only
show  that  the  temptations  to  crime  recur  with  approximately  the  same
frequency.

§  I02-

In  inferences  from  statistical  uniformities  to  particular  instances,  deduc
tion  takes  the  form  of  the  CALCULATION  OF  PROBABILITIES.

It  is  justified  so  far  as  it  can  be  assumed  that  the  same,  or  at  any  rate
equivalent  combinations  of  causes  affect  every  particular  case,  unjustified
where  we  cannot  assume  that  every  particular  case  falls  under  some  dis
junct  specification  of  a  predicate  belonging  to  all.


STATISTICAL METHODS  505

1.  The  deductive  inferences  which  can  be  made  from  statistical  unifor
mities  to  particular  instances  necessarily  assume  the  character  of  a  calcula
tion  of  probabilities, based  upon the empirically determined numerical
relations  of  the  disjunct  instances  (cf.  §  85,  n,  p.  227  sq.).

When  these  instances  cover  a  sufficiently  large  range,  they  admit  of  the
interpretation  that  the  constant  and  variable  causes  active  within  that  range
combine  in  such  a  way  that,  assuming  them  to  continue  unaltered,  the
effects  already  observed  will  continue  to  be  produced  in  the  same  relations.
In  this  way  we  obtain  a  basis  for  the  expectation  of  the  relative  frequency
of  different  cases,  and  find  the  fraction  of  probability  which  measures  the
expectation  of  a  given  determination  of  the  particular  instance  ;  when,  that
is,  we  are  forced  in  the  particular  instance  to  have  recourse  to  the  indefinite
knowledge  of  the  totality  of  the  possibly  active  conditions,  and  do  not  know
the  individual  causes.

The  purely  logical  disjunction  that  every  human  being  who  is  born  is
either  male  or  female,  together  with  our  complete  ignorance  of  the  condi
tions  by  which  the  sex  is  determined  in  the  particular  instance,  would  lead
us  to  estimate  the  probability  for  either  sex  in  the  particular  instance  at  \.
But  statistical  enumeration  shows  that  the  conditions  actually  forthcoming
do  not  give  rise  to  an  equal  number  of  male  and  female  births  ;  the  assump
tion  of  equal  possibility  is  corrected,  and  in  consequence  of  our  experience
we  shall  take  as  the  basis  of  the  calculation  of  probability  the  fact  that  of
,33  combinations  of  causes  16  will  result  in  a  female  birth,  17  in  a  male,
and  shall  estimate  the  probabilities  at  -|f  and  \\.

2.  For the particular case, nevertheless, this probability remains a
purely  subjective  one,  and  affected  by  our  ignorance  of  the  actually  deter
mining  grounds;  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  say  that  all  the  active  causes  are
affecting  any  one  case,  and  the  varying  combination  favours  the  one  issue

nore  than  the  other.  According  to  the  registers  of  death,  the  probability
that  a  new-born  child  will  die  in  the  first  year  is  £,  that  it  will  reach
the  second  year  §  ;  but  this  calculation  is  not  based  upon  any

.knowledge  of  the  collective  conditions  upon  which  the  life  of  this  particu
lar  child  depends  ;  it  is  not  supposed  that  this  one  individual  is  exposed  to
ill  the  active  and  opposed  influences  which  favour  or  injure  life,  and  that

Jill  depends  upon  whether  the  friendly  or  the  hostile  forces  get  the  upper
land  in  the  arena  of  combinations  ;  many  conditions  which  in  other  cases
>ring  about  death  or  protect  life  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  particular
ife.  To  this  extent  the  distribution  of  the  probability  taken  from  the


506  LOGIC

general  average  amongst  individuals  is  a  pure  fiction  ;  the  calculation  of
the  really  existing  chances  would  generally  give  another  result,  but  we  are
unable  to  discriminate  these.  The  probability  expressed  in  the  fractions
represents  reality  only  in  the  total  numbers  ;  if  a  large  number  of  indi
viduals  were  subject  to  the  same  circle  of  conditions  in  an  analogous
distribution,  the  total  result  would  conform  to  the  probability  :  we  shall
find  that  next  year  in  the  same  large  population  about  a  third  of  the  new
born  infants  will  die  before  completing  their  first  year.

3.  The  distribution of  the  total  relation  amongst  individuals  in  the
form  of  their  individual  chances  would  be  more  justifiable  in  proportion  as
such  averages  were  confirmed  over  smaller  ranges. We  could  then  assume
that  the  results  depend  upon  conditions  which  either  are  alike  everywhere,
and  affect  every  one  equally,  or  at  any  rate,  though they  may  be  different
for  different  individuals,  are  equivalent  to  each  other,  the  absence  of  one
danger  or  advantage  being  compensated  for  by  the  presence  of  another,
so  that  each  individual  really  is  affected  by  conditions  of  which  the  import
is  expressed  in  the  fraction  representing  the  probability.

If,  for  example,  the  classification  of  deaths  which  is  calculated  from  a
population  of  millions,  and  according  to  which  from  every  10,000  born  in
a  year  so  many  die  in  the  first  year,  so  many  before  the  fifth,  and  so  many
before  the  tenth — if  this  classification  is  confirmed  in  a  small  area,  a  small
parish,  or  any  small  number  included  in  one  enumeration,  it  does  not  follow
that  there  is  some  natural  law  inexorably  demanding  the  numbers  ;  but  it
does  follow  that  the  conditions  contained  in  the  relation  between  the
various  bodily  constitution  and  the  external  influences,  the  manner  of  life,
occupation,  etc.,  however  manifold  they  may  be  on  the  whole,  yet  concur
for  smaller  sections  to  form  combinations  having  the  same  result,  and  that
favourable  and  unfavourable  conditions  are  mingled  in  the  sarne  proportion
even  over  smaller  areas.

4.  Under  such  conditions  we  may  allow  that  there  is  some  ground  for
the  distribution of  probability amongst  individuals,  but  it  is  meaningless
where  we  have  not  for  a  basis  some  predicate  belonging  to  all individuals,
and  having  differences  which  can  be  developed  into  a  disjunction. Because
all  men  die,  but  at  very  different  ages,  the  disjunction  is  that  every  one  will
die  in  the  first  or  second,  etc.,  year,  and  the  probability  can  be  stated  for
each  year. But  to  calculate  for  the  individual  the  probability  that  he  will
be  a  railway  porter  or a  millionaire,  because  within  a  given  population  we
always  find  so  many  per  cent,  railway  porters  and  so  many  per  hundred


STATISTICAL METHODS  507

thousand  millionaires,  would  be  as  unreasonable  as  to  calculate  the  proba
bility  that  he  will  next  year  commit  a  murder  or  a  theft.  The  general
element  which  must  appear  in  some  special  determination  is  wanting,  and
we  know  that  the  conditions  which  lead  to  crime  are  unequally  distributed,
and  cannot  be  divided  out  amongst  individuals  ;  here  again  statistics  might
give  us  very  useful  clues  towards  their  investigation,  but  ultimately  it  is
only  the  analysis  of  the  particular  and  the  application  of  the  inductive
methods  upon  which  we  can  rely  for  the  discovery  of  real  laws.


CHAPTER VI.

SYSTEMATIZATION  IN  THE  DEDUCTIVE  AND  CLASS  f PICA  TOR  Y

FORMS.

§ i°3-

IT  is  the  work  of  systematization  to  represent  all  the  knowledge  attained
to  at  any  given  time  as  a  whole  of  which  the  parts  are  all  connected  in
logical  relations.

There  are  two  forms  of  it,  according  as  the  relation  determining  the
arrangement  is  that  of  propositions  or  that  of  concepts.  The  former  is

SYSTEMATIC DEDUCTION, the latter SYSTEMATIC CLASSIFICATION. In the

former  classification  is  a  subsidiary  operation,  in  the  latter  deduction.

Classification  takes  the  shape  of  a  logical  division  of  concepts,  which
by  a  process  of  determination  by  opposed  characteristics  proceeds  from
a  highest  concept  down  to  the  lowest  species,  as  the  fully  determined
concepts  which  are  accepted  upon  the  ground  of  perception  as  exhaus
tively  expressing  reality.

The  usefulness  of  a  classification  is  determined  by  two  points  :  in  the
first  place,  it  must  give  expression  to  the  natural  relationship  of  things,
and,  in  the  second  place,  it  must  enable  us  to  subsume  the  particular  with
ease  and  certainty.

Where  there  is  a  difficulty  in  forming  the  lowest  species  themselves,
as  in  the  organic  world,  we  must  either  look  for  a  certain  criterion  for
specific  differences,  or  where  this  is  not  to  be  found  select  certain  forms
as  types  round  which  the  proximate  groups  range  themselves.  The
selection  of  these  groups  is  guided,  even  under  the  Darwinian  theory,  by
teleological  considerations ;  the  application  of  statistical  methods  to
determine  normal  types  by  averages  is  itself  governed  by  the  idea  of  the
end,  as  well  as  the  arrangement  of  the  classification  of  the  organic  world
in  the  form  of  a  gradual  evolution.

i.  In  the  induction  of  general  propositions  from  particular  perceptions
we  were  obliged  to  assume  provisional  concepts,  by  means  of  which  alone


5  YSTEMA  TJZA  TION  509

we  were  able  to  obtain  both  the  specific  laws  and  their  generalizations
(§  97).  The  inductive  processes  served  on  the  one  hand  to  confirm  and
enrich  the  assumed  concepts,  on  the  other  hand  to  correct  them  when  it
was  found  that  their  attributes  were  not  necessarily  connected  according
to  the  original  assumption.  In  so  far  as  the  inductions  were  successful
they  led  to  the  establishment  of  laws  of  evolution  and  causation,  and  so
to  the  determination  of  the  essential  concepts  of  substances,  or  where
this  was  not  possible,  to  the  formulation  of  the  laws  according  to  which
phenomenal  unities  are  related  under  certain  conditions.

These  inductive  processes  start  necessarily  from  particular  points  upon
which  the  preliminary  hypotheses  are  grounded,  describing  gradually
widening  circles  and  including  an  increasing  manifold  of  phenomena,
lartly  by  subsuming  them  under  known  propositions,  partly  by  combining
them  to  form  new  laws.  The  result  of  extending  the  inductive  methods
over  wider  fields  consists  on  the  one  hand  in  the  increasing  number  of
specific  concepts  and  specific  laws  which  follow,  on  the  other  hand  in
the  progressive  comprehension  of  these  concepts  and  laws  in  generic
propositions,  in  which  general  predicates  are  made  to  depend  upon
characteristics  which  are  common  to  a  large  number  of  different  things.

When  the  totality  of  knowledge  thus  obtained  is  regarded  at  any  given
time  as  relatively  complete,  and  perception  has  covered  the  universe
accessible  as  completely  as  its  present  limitations  will  allow,  then  the
need  arises  of  surveying  the  whole,  of  arranging  the  results  of  knowledge
n  a  comprehensive  inventory,  of  representing  them  as  parts  of  a  com-
irehensive  whole,  and  of  expressing  the  relation  of  the  parts  to  the  whole
oy  means  of  logical  relations.  Such  an  arrangement  of  our  knowledge
nto  a  whole  is  called  a  SYSTEM.

2.  This  logical  arrangement  may  be  guided,  and  the  form  of  the  whole
ietermined,  from  two  points  of  view  :  by  taking  as  its  fundamental  form
:ither  the  logical  relation  of  propositions  which  is  expressed  by  combining
hem  syllogistically  in  the  forms  of  deduction,  or  the  logical  relation  of
oncepts  which  is  represented  in  division.

3.  The  first  arrangement  aims  at  explaining  specific  propositions  from
he  smallest  possible  number  of  first  principles,  at  representing  them  as
•ieir  simple  or  composite  consequences. The  specification  of  concepts
.ibserves  the development  of general  propositions by enabling  us  to
onstruct  the  various  minor  propositions  which  are  combined  with  the
lajor  propositions  to  produce  the  conclusions  ;  and  the  whole  complex


5io  LOGIC

of  propositions  included  in  this  arrangement  assumes  the  character  of  a
deductive  science,  with  the  difference  that  its  first  principles  are  not
axioms,  but  hypotheses  obtained  and  confirmed  by  induction.  We  have
such  an  arrangement  in  mechanics,  the  propositions  of  which  deal  with
the  most  general  properties  of  bodies  ;  it  does  not  need  to  descend  into
the  whole  manifold  of  the  given,  inasmuch  as  it  deals  only  with  events
which  take  place  in  a  similar  manner  in  bodies  differing  in  many  other
respects  ;  it  lays  down  propositions  which  are  true  in  the  same  way  of  all
fluids,  all  gases,  etc.,  and  represents  them  as  the  consequences  of  general
presuppositions.  That  this  or  that  phenomenon  falls  under  these  laws
is  a  matter  for  subsumption  in  dealing  with  the  particular  ;  it  is  not
necessary  to  the  completeness  of  the  arrangement  of  the  whole,  which
need  go  no  further  than  the  predicates  are  specified.

All  such  propositions  are  by  nature  hypothetical  ;  they  state  what
under  certain  conditions  follows  according  to  law;  they  do  not  directly
state  that  the  conditions  take  place,  or  that  all  possible  variations  in  the
conditions  are  realized.  The  mechanical  theory  of  gases  disregards  their
chemical  differences  in  so  far  as  they  do  not  affect  its  special  province  by
giving  rise  to  differences  of  specific  gravity;  it  is  no  part  of  its  task  to
enumerate  how  many  sorts  of  gases  there  are  :  it  is  enough  to  say  that  if
a  body  is  a  gas  it  conforms  to  certain  laws  of  compressibility,  of  expansion
by  heat,  or  of  capacity  for  heat,  etc.

For  this  reason  this  arrangement  of  knowledge  finds  its  limits  where
the  specific  laws  cannot  be  derived  from  more  general  laws,  and  where
the  modification  of  a  general  predicate  cannot  be  represented  as  the
consequence  of  a  modification  in  the  concept  of  the  subject;  from  that
point  it  must  pass  into  an  empirical  enumeration.  In  the  theory  of  heat
we  may  be  able  to  establish  the  general  proposition  that  heat  expands
bodies  and  alters  their  aggregate  state,  and  to  derive  therefrom  a  series
of  consequences  ;  but  we  are  unable  to  deduce  the  coefficients  of  ex
pansion  of  the  particular  substances,  or  their  melting  and  boiling  points,
in  such  a  way  that  they  may  appear  as  the  necessary  consequences  of
certain  conceptually  determined  differences.  In  optics,  similarly,  we  are
able  to  express  the  laws  of  refraction  in  general  formulae,  and  from  the
constancy  of  the  quotient  which  obtains  between  the  sinus  of  the  angles
of  incidence  and  of  refraction  to  deduce  a  number  of  specific  phenomena;
but  we  are  unable  to  find  any  invariable  general  formula  by  which  to
determine  whether,  in  passing  from  one  medium  to  another,  the  ray  is


6"  YS  TEMA  TIZA  TIO.V  5  1 1

>roken  towards  or  away  from  the  perpendicular,  for  difference  in  density
s  not  invariably  a  guide.  Even  if  it  were  a  rule  that  in  passing  from  a
medium  of  less  density  to  one  of  greater  density  the  ray  of  light  is  broken
towards  the  perpendicular,  there  is  still  no  possibility  of  deducing  the
magnitude  of  the  coefficients  of  refraction  from  any  general  differences,
and  of  stating  the  standard  by  which  it  may  be  determined  for  any  two
substances.  Here  again  deduction  comes  to  an  end  in  the  enumeration
of  empirically  given  constants.

4.  That  arrangement  of  the  whole  of  our  knowledge  which  takes  the
form  of  a  division  of  concepts — i.e.,  of  systematic  classification — starts  from
another point  of  view. While  the  deductive  arrangement  is  of  a  hypo
thetical  nature,  this  starts  from  the  given,  from  the  empirically  real,  and
moves  in  categorical propositions  which  always  assume  the  existence  of
their  subjects ;  it generally  takes  the  form  of  divisive  judgments,  stating
that a  general  concept  which comprehends  a given plurality  of  distinct
realities  falls  into  such  and  such  specific  differences,  or  includes  such  and
such  species. The  definitions  which include  both  general  and  special
concepts  are  no  longer  mere  verbal  explanations  of  logical concepts,  for
which  we have  to  find  an  application  ;  they  express the  concept  of  that
which  is  empirically  realized,  and for  this  reason they  extend no  further
than  their  application  to  the  given  is  certain,  or  at  any  rate  probable.

5.  We  must  here  distinguish  between  a  wider  and  a  narrower  sense  in
which  we  may  speak  of  classification, In  the  wider  sense  every  arrange
ment  in  the  form  of  conceptual  division,  of  all those  concepts  expressing
the  given  which  fall  under  one  general  concept  and may  be  regarded  as
exhausting  its  empirical  extension, is called classification  ;  in  this  sense
we  speak  of  a  classification  of  visible  colours,  of  audible  notes,  of  shapes
of  leaves,  of  illnesses,  etc. The  assumption is,  that  the  empirical  exten-
ision  of  whatever  falls  under  the  general  concept  is  determined  by  it,  and
ithe  problem  is  to  arrange  the  manifold  of  whatever  it  includes  in  the  form
bf  a  progressive  division  in  such  a  way  that  all  the  differences  which  go  to
nake  up  the  concrete  determination  of  the  particular  are  as  fully  recognized
is  the  partial  resemblances  ;  the  problem  is  solved  by  producing  a  system
3f  divisions which combines  together in  its  lowest  specific  concepts  that
vhich  is  similar  in  most  characteristics,  and  distributes  that  which  differs
Tiost  in  opposite  highest  classes.

6.  Over  against  this  classification  of  predicative  determinations  we  have
•.lassification  in  the  narrower  sense,  the  classification  of  substances  according


512


LOGIC


to  their  essential  concepts,  or  at  any  rate  the  classification  of  those  unities
which,  though  they  may  not  satisfy  all  that  is  demanded  by  the  concept
of  substance,  must  nevertheless  serve  us  as  subjects  of  all  judgments  of
perception,  as  the  things  to  which  we  refer  our  predicates  and  of  which  we
speak  in  our  laws.

Since  all  judgments  of  perception  dealing  with  the  particular  and  all
laws  obtained  by  deduction  ultimately  refer  to  such  unities,  and  serve  to
determine  their  concepts,  it  becomes  incumbent  upon  us  to  set  out  the
whole  of  what  we  know  of  the  universe  in  an  exhaustive  statement  and
arrangement  of  the  essential  concepts  of  things.  This  classification  of
the  totality  contained  in  the  universe  would  be,  if  we  imagine  it  complete,
the  final  and  perfect  result  of  all  empirical  investigation,  the  conclusion  of
all  the  processes  we  have  been  considering,  the  all-embracing  completion
and  logical  perfection  of  knowledge.  Since  all  events  of  which  the  neces
sity  is  contained  in  our  laws  must  be  explained  by  the  nature  of  the
existent,  any  deductive  form  of  science  which  aims  at  being  the  expression
of  the  actual  universe  must  presuppose  a  knowledge  of  the  actual  consti
tution  of  the  universe,  in  a  form  which  connects  the  hypothetical  necessity
of  laws  with  the  existence  of  fixed  forms  ;  it  is  a  one-sided  view  to
regard  the  deductively  systematic  forms  as  in  themselves  higher  and  more
excellent  than  the  classificatory.  The  latter  do  not  exclude,  but  include,
the  knowledge  and  investigation  of  laws,  while  they  also  add  richness  of
content  to  the  general  formulae  from  which  no  one  has  ever  succeeded  in
deducing  the  actual  in  its  concrete  constitution.1  On  the  other  hand,  the
laws  obtained  by  induction  cannot  be  regarded  as  well  grounded  and
invariable  until  we  have  tested  them  by  employing  them  to  guide  us  in
carrying  out  a  classification  in  all  directions.

7.  The  assumption  involved  in  such  an  all-embracing  classificatory
system  is,  that  the  universe  of  things  given  to  us  in  perception  must  be
capable  of  being  arranged  in  a  comprehensible  logical  division,  in  which
we  proceed  from  one  most  general  and  highest  concept,  by  way  of  deter
mination  by  opposite  characteristics.  This  comprehensibility  would  be
attained  if  the  more  general  concepts  themselves  contained  the  ground
of  specification,  if  the  grounds  of  division  were  not  only  introduced  from
without,  but  were  already  contained  in  their  definitions  (cf.  §  43,  5.  I.  p.
280).  In  the  merely  logical  treatment  of  the  concept,  which  we  dealt  with
in  Part  II.,  there  is  the  general  possibility  of  descending  by  different  deter-
1  Cf.  Schleiermacher's  Dialektik,  §  197.


SYSTEMATIZATION  5,3

: minations  from  one  higher  concept  to  lower  ones,  and  of  ascending  from

i one  lower  concept  in  different  directions  to  higher  ones ;  whether  the

!  arrangement  of  essential  concepts  allows  us  the  same  freedom,  or  whether

their  higher concepts can  be  constructed  in only  one way, we  must

learn  from  a  consideration  of  their  content ;  it  is  not  absolutely  necessary

that  there  should  be  only  one  correct  arrangement  even  here.

8.  From  what  we  have  said  in  §  77,  6  (p.  163),  and  §  94,  5  sq.  (p.  320),
;  it  follows  that  the  complete  expressions  of  the  essential  concepts  of  things

must  include  their  causal  relations ;  these  must  take  the  form  of  laws,
according  to  which  invariable  things  act  under  certain  conditions  by  virtue
of  their  mutual  forces,  or  the  development  proceeding  from  the  nature
of  the  things  themselves  is  modified  by  their  relation  to  other  things.

;  Because  of  their  hypothetical  nature,  these  laws  can  only  tell  us  that  a
subject  assumes  a  certain  determination  if  it  stands  in  certain  relations
to  other  things;  whether  this  or  that  relation  actually  exists  depends,  not
upon  the  concept  of  the  thing,  but  upon  the  actual  constitution  of  the
universe,  in  which  there  is  never  realized  more  than  a  part  of  these

i  hypothetical  relations.  It  is  this  which  always,  even  when  we  think  of
our  concepts  as  complete,  distinguishes  the  logical  division  which  describes
the  extension  of  the  possible  from  the  empirical  division  which  deals  with
those  determinations  only  which  are  conditioned  by  the  actually  existing
circumstances  ;  otherwise  we  must  assume  that  from  the  essential  concepts
of  things  there  follows  with  necessity  the  actual  number  of  individuals
falling  under  the  concept,  and  their  distribution  in  space,  hence  that  no
thing  is  possible  but  the  actual.  This  has  been  affirmed  in  the  philosophy
of  Spinoza  and  of  Hegel,  but  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  has  been  able
to  carry  it  out.  According  to  Spinoza,  the  existence  of  the  particular
•emains  unexplained  by  the  essential  concepts  of  attributes,  inasmuch  as
t  is  always  determined  by  other  particulars  in  an  endless  regression  ;  and
Hegel  leaves  a  wide  field  open  to  empirical  chance  in  that  his  method
urns  at  deducing  according  to  logical  principles  only  the  system  of  con-
epts,  and  not  the  particular  manner  in  which  they  are  realized.  So  far,
herefore,  as  concerns  the  presuppositions  of  method,  the  possibility  of
he  distinction  between  logical  and  empirical  division  remains  open  to
is.

9.  The  ideal  of  every  classification  of  all  the  manifold  things  of  the
.niverse is  therefore  an  arrangement  of the  concepts  expressing their
ssence  in  the  form  of  a  deductive  analytical  development  (§  79,  5,  p.  190)

s.  L.— ii.  L  L


5  M  LOGIC

from  one  highest  concept,  or  in  the  form  of  a  deduction  showing  what
specifications  of  general  concepts  must  become  actual  under  the  given
relations ;  and  in  order  that  such  a  development  should  be  possible  it  is
necessary  that  the  highest  concept,  that  of  the  existent  or  of  substance,
should  contain  the  ground  of  a  differentiation.  Leibnitz  indeed,  with  his
peculiar  logical  acuteness,  constructed  the  most  general  concept  of  sub
stance  in  such  a  way  that  it  should  contain  in  itself  the  possibility  of  differ
ence  in  relations  of  action  and  passion  and  in  the  degrees  of  perception  ;
he  saw  that  further  development  is  not  possible  from  an  absolutely  simple
attribute,  but  only  from  a  determination  which  contains  a  plurality  in  a
unity,  and  that  any  division  which  should  start  from  an  absolutely  simple
concept  would  have  to  introduce  differences  from  without.  But  not  even
Leibnitz  in  his  theory  of  monads  has  succeeded  in  actually  carrying  out
the  classification  of  the  given  in  the  form  of  pure  conceptual  development
down  to  the  concrete.

10.  The  state  of  our  actual  knowledge  prevents  us  from  regarding  this
ideal  stage  as  attained,  and  the  attempts  of  speculative  natural  philosophy
to  deduce  from  the  general  concept  of  the  real,  or  of  the  otherness  of  the
idea,  say  nitrogen  and  oxygen,  hydrogen  and  carbon,  have  been  rightly
ridiculed.  Although  we  must  not  hesitate  to  maintain  the  logical  rule  that
specific  concepts,  which  present  themselves  as  the  species  of  a  genus,  are
not  to  be  simply  accepted,  but  that  we  are  to  look  for  the  ground  which
combines  the  attributes  of  the  genus  now  with  one  specific  difference  and
now  with  another,  yet  we  must  not  delude  ourselves  into  thinking  that
the  given  means  suffice  to  the  fulfilment  of  this  ideal  claim,  and  that
we  have  obtained  in  any  province  a  final  knowledge  of  the  essential  con
cepts  and  of  the  grounds  of  specification  contained  in  them,  such  that  we
could  base  upon  it  a  complete  deductive  development  of  concepts.

Where  the  establishment  of  infimtz  species  has  been  most  successful, —
i.e.,  in  chemistry, —the  concepts  of  the  simple  elements  cannot  be  repre
sented  as  specifications  of  general  concepts  in  such  a  way  that  we  can
formulate  a  law  according  to  which  variation  in  one  attribute  gives
rise  to  variation  in  others,  and  which  constructs  the  different  concepts  of
the  particular  elements,  as  the  general  equation  of  a  curve  of  the  second
degree  constructs  circle,  ellipse,  parabola,  and  hyperbola,  by  variation  in
the  relation  of  the  constant  values  ;  we  are  confronted,  on  the  contrary,  by
a  plurality  which  is  quite  beyond  our  grasp.  Nor  has  the  Darwinian
theory  of  evolution  as  yet  fulfilled  its  promises  of  revealing  the  laws


SYSTEM  A  TIZA  TION  5 1 5

according  to  which  variations  must  follow  from  any  special  stock,  let  alone
the  common  stock  of  all  organisms  ;  in  this  direction  the  theory  has  done
much  more  to  raise  problems — no  doubt  fruitful  ones — than  to  attain
certain  results  which  would  show  that  internal  interaction  of  all  parts  of  an
organic  form,  according  to  which  the  variation  of  one  part  causally  con
ditions  the  variation  of  others,  and  the  necessity  whereby  certain  variations
should  follow  certain  external  conditions.  The  confidence  of  the  state
ment  that  it  is  so  is  not  yet  supported  by  the  convincing  proof  of  the
laws  according  to  which  it  is  so.

ir.  Matters  being  so,  we  are  driven  in  our  methodical  classification  to
find  a  substitute  for  that  complete  understanding  of  the  development  of
essential  concepts  which  is  as  yet  beyond  our  reach,  and,  while  keeping
the  final  end  in  view,  to  begin  by  aiming  at  the  most  practical  logical
arrangement  which  is  attainable  with  the  means  at  our  disposal.

From  this  point  of  view  we  must  relinquish  the  attempt  to  include  all
concepts  in  one  system  designed  upon  one  plan.  This  is  especially
opposed  by  the  different  meanings  in  which  we  form  and  determine  the
concepts  of  things.  In  §  78  we  saw  how  our  concepts  of  things  are
grounded  upon  different  forms  of  unity ;  the  concepts  of  substances  and
the  concepts  of  individual  forms  cannot  be  brought  within  one  framework
of  complete  classification  because  of  the  different  way  in  which  the  attri
butes  are  synthesized.  But  it  is  not  only  by  this  consideration  that
different  spheres  are  distinguished  within  which  we  may  hope  to  carry  out
a  classification.  Within  the  sphere  of  individual  forms  itself,  we  find
departments  marked  off  in  which  a  different  meaning  attaches  to  the
individual  forms,  the  departments  of  the  organic  and  the  inorganic ;  and
yet  another  break  separates  the  totality  of  the  beings  which  we  regard  as
individual  subjects  of  psychical  activities  from  externally  perceptible
things.  So  long  as  we  have  no  clear  insight  into  the  relation  between,
e.g.,  the  concepts  of  organic  individuals  and  the  nature  of  the  substances
from  which  their  forms  are  built  up,  so  long  as  the  relations  between
psychical  and  organic  activities  remain  obscure,  there  is  nothing  for  it  but
to  hold  these  spheres  apart,  although  the  philosophical  systematization  of
the  universe  will  always  make  hypothetical  attempts  to  bring  them  into
comprehensible  relations.  It  is  fortunate  that  on  the  whole  these  different
provinces  of  objects  which  are  to  be  logically  arranged  can  be  distinguished
easily  and  with  certainty.

12. The  other  consideration  by  which we  are  guided  in methods  of


5i6  LOGIC

systematic  classification  is  connected  with  the  fact  that  the  things  which
are  given  to  perception  are  completely  determined  and  concrete,  that  our
most  certain  knowledge  refers  to  the  nature  and  behaviour  of  particular
observed  things,  and  that  we  must  therefore  start  from  these  data  as  being
the  most  firmly  established.  A  simple  process  of  abstraction  first  reveals
the  elements  common  to  all  which  is  contained  within  the  wide  spheres,
which  are  naturally  and  easily  separated  in  their  most  general  attributes ;
between  these  most  general  concepts  of  matter,  of  animated  beings,  etc.,
and  the  lowest  specific  concepts  under  which  we  assume  completely
similar  concrete  phenomena  to  be  comprehended,  it  is  most  important  to
construct  the  middle  concepts,  which  serve  on  the  one  hand  as  specializa
tions  of  the  common  element,  on  the  other  as  comprehensive  generic
concepts  for  the  manifold  of  particular  species.

13.  Whether  or  not  the  construction  of  these  intermediary  concepts  is
adapted  to  its  purpose  must  be  determined  from  two  points  of  view.

In  the  first  place,  the  superordinate  generic  concepts  must  be  so  con
structed  as  to  enable  us  to  make  the  greatest  possible  number  of  universal
judgments,  hence  to  comprehend  that  which  falls  as  far  as  possible  under
common  propositions  and  laws  having  their  predicates  as  fully  determined
as  possible ;  subsumption  under  such  a  concept  would  enable  us  to  make
the  greatest  number  of  inferences,  which  by  applying  these  laws  to  the
subsumed  subject  would  lead  to  the  fullest  and  most  definite  knowledge.
If,  to  take  an  extreme  instance,  I  should  try  to  form  a  general  concept  of
plants  with  white  blossoms,  this  would  not  enable  me  to  make  any  further
general  propositions  than  are  involved  in  the  fact  of  blossoming  in  general ;
the  white  colour  of  the  blossoms  is  neither  ground  nor  sign  of  any  pre
dicates  which  are  common  to  plants  with  white  blossoms  and  distinguish
them  from  those  with  red  blossoms  ;  in  this  respect  the  concept  would  be
unfruitful.  But  by  forming  the  concept  of  monocotyledons  I  am  enabled
to  establish  a  number  of  predicates  which  are  common  to  the  plants
showing  this  form  of  development,  and  which  also  distinguish  them  from
dicotyledons.

It  is  because  these  concepts  are  chiefly  valuable  as  adding  a  number  of
definite  predicates  to  every  subject,  whether  particular  thing  or  specific
concept,  which  is  subsumed  under  them,  that  the  second  need  arises  of
forming  the  classification  in  such  a  way  as  to  enable  the  particular  to  be
subsumed  under  its  framework  easily  and  with  certainty.  For  this  it  is
necessary  that  the  subsumption,  both  under  the  higher  genera  and  the


5  KS  TE  MA  TIZA  TION  5 1 7

specific  concepts,  should  be  guided  by  as  few  and  as  easily  recognisable
characteristics  as  possible.  From  this  point  of  view  we  must  arrange  our
concepts  in  such  a  way  that  they  may  admit  of  those  abbreviated  formulae
of  definition  which  we  described  in  §  77,  7,  p.  164,  as  diagnostic  definitions,
hence  of  comprehension  in  concepts  of  such  a  constitution  that  one  easily
recognised  characteristic  is  the  certain  sign  of  a  number  of  others  by
which  the  concept  is  distinguished  in  different  directions  from  others,
and  which  contain  the  ground  of  further  predicates  or  modes  of
action.  To  express  it  differently,  classification  must  subserve  on  the  one
hand  the  interests  of  generalization,  on  the  other  those  of  specialization.
For  subsumption  attains  its  completion  in  subordination  under  the  most
specific  concept,  while  the  syllogistic  process  opens  out  into  major  premises
of  the  greatest  possible  generality.

14.  If  we  begin  with  the  first  rule,  that  of  so  arranging  the  classifica
tion  that  the  intermediary  concepts  combine  whatever  is  similar  in  most
respects  and  hold  apart  whatever  is  dissimilar  in  most  respects,  and  that
they  therefore  express  the  degrees  of  natural  relationship  between  things,
we  shall  find  that  we  again  have  to  notice  two  points.  On  the  one
hand,  what  'occurs  to  us  first  is  to  proceed  upwards,  combining  those
species  which  have  most  determinations  in  common  into  genera,  and
these  again  from  the  same  point  of  view  into  higher  genera,  by  means  of
a  general  survey  and  comparison  of  things  in  all  their  aspects.  But  there
is  also  the  other  problem  of  arranging  these  concepts  in  such  a  way  as  to
represent  an  exhaustive  division  which  includes  the  whole  extent  of  the
department  in  question,  and  in  which  all  the  concepts  must  stand  in
simple  and  clear  relations  of  subordination  and  disjunct  co-ordination,  in
which  therefore  each  concept  takes  a  given  place,  and  stands  in  simple
opposition  to  co-ordinate,  in  simple  subordination  to  higher  concepts.
All  division  must  proceed  according  to  certain  grounds  of  division,
which  admit  of  disjunct  members  ;  thus  the  problem  is  not  merely
to  combine  whatever  is  similar,  but  to  combine  in  such  a  way  that
the  concepts  thus  formed  may  be  represented  as  disjunctly  co-ordinate
according  to  certain  grounds  of  division.  For  this  reason  we  must  always
notice  both  the  common  attributes  and  those  which  are  different  and
opposed,  and  as  a  preliminary  to  every  classification  we  must  not  only
discover  whatever  agrees  in  many  characteristics,  but  must  also  survey  the
many  disjunct  characteristics  which  are  opposed  on  definite  grounds  of
division.


5i8  LOGIC

15.  Thus  the  process  may  begin  in  two  ways.  In  the  first  place,  we
must  break  up  the  total  extension  by  taking  a  characteristic  which  is
common  to  all,  by  finding  differences  in  it  which  exhaust  the  whole
extension,  by  again  dividing  in  the  same  way  the  classes  thus  obtained,
and  then  we  must  see  whether  in  this  way  we  obtain  concepts  which  com
bine  whatever  is  most  similar.  For  instance,  a  general  attribute  of
animals  is  motion  ;  division  according  to  the  different  kinds  of  motion
or  the  different  conformation  of  the  locomotive  organs  is  a  primary
division  which  is  complete  when  it  includes  all  existing  varieties.  A
general  attribute  of  plants  is  propagation,  and  we  may  get  a  first  division
by  stating  the  different  kinds  of  propagation.  We  shall  naturally
endeavour  to  form  the  subdivisions  also  from  the  same  ground  of
division,  as,  for  example,  in  the  Linnsean  system ;  but  ultimately  we
shall  always  have  to  pass  to  other  grounds,  which  will  differ  for  the
different  classes.  The  test  of  such  a  classification  would  be  that  as  we
descend  the  concepts  we  thus  form  of  orders,  families,  and  genera  should
be  found  to  combine  more  and  more  common  characteristics  ;  in  other
words,  agreement  in  the  distinguishing  attributes  employed  for  the  division
should  be  the  ground  or  the  sign  of  agreement  in  a  number  of  other
attributes,  and  opposition  in  those  distinguishing  attributes  the  ground  or
sign  of  opposition  in  other  respects  also.

Division  thus  proceeding  downwards,  would  be  met  by  the  process  of
abstraction,  which,  mounting  upwards,  begins  by  combining  the  smallest
group  of  species  in  the  larger  circles  of  genera.  If  we  had  begun  with
the  latter  the  success  of  our  progress  from  this  starting  point  would  be
known  first  by  the  fact  that  the  whole  extension  would  be  exhausted  by
the  larger  as  well  as  the  smaller  circles,  hence  that  no  isolated  species
were  left  out,  then  by  the  fact  that  as  we  proceeded  further  groups  of  higher
concepts  would  arise,  which  from  their  opposition  in  certain  attributes  and
similarity  in  others  would  naturally  fall  into  disjunct  co-ordination  under
one  common  higher  concept.  To  take  a  simple  instance,  in  which  the
species  are,  for  the  sake  of  clearness,  replaced  by  individuals  :  if  a  large
community  of  men  should  naturally  fall  into  two  groups  of  similar
individuals,  the  one  set  having  dark  eyes,  dark  complexion,  and  dark  hair,
the  other  being  fair,  blue-eyed,  and  light-haired ;  if  it  should  then  be
found  that  all  the  members  of  the  first  group  spoke  a  Latin  tongue,  and
all  those  of  the  second  a  Teutonic,  or  if  the  former  were  lively  and
excitable,  the  latter  more  thoughtful  and  calm,  then  we  should  have  the


S }  'STEM A  TIZA  TION  5 1 9

type  of  an  easy  classification,  in  which  the  groups  obtained  by  the  ascend
ing  process  are  distinguished  by  a  certain  attribute  which  subsequently
proves  to  be  connected  with  a  number  of  other  differences  in  habits,
customs,  etc.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  had  proceeded  downwards,  say  by
dividing  according  to  language,  and  had  thus  obtained  by  division  just
those  groups  which  we  were  led  to  form  in  our  first  process  by  prepon
derating  similarity,  we  should  again  have  found  a  proof  of  the  success  of
the  process  in  the  fact  that  it  led  us  to  groups  within  which  everything
was  similar.

1 6.  This  easy  coincidence  of  the  lines  drawn  downwards  by  division,
with  the  boundaries  shown  by  combining  the  most  similar  things,  is  just  what
is  generally  denied  to  us  by  the  manifoldness  of  actual  things ;  and  we
are  always  in  danger  either  of  obtaining  by  division,  as  Linnaeus  did,
class  concepts  of  which  some  members  are  much  more  similar  to  members
of  other  classes  than  to  those  of  their  own,  or  if  we  proceed  upwards  of
missing  the  clear  oppositions  which  distinguish  co-ordinate  concepts.

In  combining  from  below,  though  we  often  come  upon  groups  of  forms
which  undoubtedly  belong  together,  yet  we  are  often  confronted  by
numbers  of  forms  which,  from  different  points  of  view,  would  give  dif
ferent  genera,  and  have  therefore  to  choose  which  point  of  view  shall  be
preferred.  Here  we  shall  be  determined  in  the  first  instance  by  reference
to  the  division,  and  those  things  will  be  held  to  be  similar  which  agree
in  differing  from  others,  and  admit  of  a  clear  disjunction  into  as  few
members  as  possible ; 1  if  this  fails,  we  must  avoid  the  choice,  and  must
represent  the  given  concept  as  the  result  of  a  division  from  a  twofold
ground,  having  cross-members.  The  elements  of  the  ancients  may  be
combined  according  to  similarity  in  two  ways  :  the  dry  are  earth  and
fire,  the  moist  water  and  air ;  on  the  other  hand,  fire  and  air  are


1  If  we  had  before  us  the  combination  (i)  abce,  (2)  bcde,  (3)  <W/,  (4)  abcf,  and
wanted  to  combine  the  most  similar,  we  might  combine  (i)  and  (2)  in  bee,  (3)  and
(4)  in  bcf,  or  (i)  and  (4)  in  abc,  (2)  and  (3)  in  bed.  But  if  e  and  /  were  opposed  sub
ordinates  to  a  general  attribute  E,  while  a  and  d  were  disparate,  then  the  first  combina
tion  is  preferable,  as  giving  us  bee  and  bcf  as  disjunct  co-ordinate  concepts  of  a  higher
bcE.

But  if  both  e  and  /and  a  and  (/were  opposites,  then  it  would  be  correct  not  to  give
the  preference  to  either  combination,  but  to  represent  their  relation  as  the  result  of  a
combined  division  of  be  according  to  two  grounds  of  division  :

< /

a  :  be  a e —  b c af
d. be  de-bed f.


520  LOGIC

warm,  water  and  earth  cold.  Neither  similarity  can  claim  precedence
over  the  other;  but  they  are  easily  represented  in  their  logical  relation
by  means  of  a  composite  division,  which,  without  giving  the  preference
to  either  ground  of  division,  divides  according  to  both.

17,  But  there  are  natural  groups  of  allied  and  similar  things,  which
nevertheless  admit  of  no  generic  concept  expressing  their  connection,  and
which  by  their  peculiar  constitution  refuse  to  conform  to  the  orderliness
of  the  logical  system.  If  we  had  a  group  of  concepts  represented  as
follows  (a  and  a',  b  and  b ',  being  taken  as  contradictory  attributes), — •

abcdef  abcde'f

abc  def  abcdef  abcd'ef

ab'cdef  a' be  def

then  each  of  these  concepts  would  be  like  the  middle  concept  in  five
attributes,  and  different  in  only  one,  while  it  would  be  like  each  of  the
others  in  at  least  four  characteristics  ;  but  the  deviations  from  the  middle
form  are  always  in  different  directions.  In  constructing  our  concept  by
abstraction  we  ought  to  be  able  to  select  the  element  common  to  all,
but  all  we  should  be  able  to  find  here  would  be  a  general  concept
ABCDEF,  containing  the  general  attributes  A,  B,  etc.,  in  which  a  and
a',  b  and  b',  would  appear  as  contradictories.  But  this  general  concept
would  contain  the  very  different  concepts  a'b'c'd'ef,  etc.,  and  would  not
be  adapted  to  express  in  any  way  adequately  those  concepts  which  in
our  instance  form  a  connected  natural  group  when  the  other  members
which  would  occupy  the  same  rank  with  equal  differences  are  wanting.
Such  a  group  justifies  a  common  name,  but  there  is  no  concept  corre
sponding  to  it  which  can  be  fixed  in  a  definition  ;  the  statement  that  the
things  belonging  to  the  group  generally  have  the  attribute  a,  but  some
times  a',  that  they  generally  have  the  attribute  b,  but  sometimes  //,
cannot  be  a  substitute  for  a  definition,  which  must  be  equally  true  of
everything  included  in  it.  Such  a  group  is  represented  by  the  central
form,  which  has  most  similarity  with  all  the  others,  so  that  these  others
may  be  regarded  as  the  variations  in  different  directions  of  a  central
type.

In  proportion  as  we  are  unable  to  find  within  the  extension  of  a  higher
concept  far-reaching  and  fundamental  differences  which  would  enable  us
to  make  our  division  safely,  and  in  proportion  as  the  differences  them
selves  are  of  a  quantitative  and  changeable  nature,  we  are  obliged  to  have
recourse  to  the  formation  of  such  groups  in  our  survey  of  the  manifold  of


5  YS  TEMA  T1ZA  TION  5  2 1

things.  In  the  classification  of  men,  e.g.  according  to  their  structure,  we
have  been  forced,  in  proportion  as  our  knowledge  of  the  different  races
became  more  extensive,  to  relinquish  the  idea  of  a  strict  logical  division
and  confine  ourselves  to  finding  such  groups  as  form  themselves  around
certain  types;  we  cannot,  however,  avoid  the  difficulty  of  intermediary
forms,  which  leave  us  doubtful  to  which  group  they  belong.1

In  our  endeavour,  therefore,  to  make  the  classification  as  far  as  possible
the  expression  of  natural  relationship,  we  are  obliged  to  admit  such  logical
anomalies  throughout  the  lowest  stages,  and  are  limited  to  arranging  the
higher  orders  according  to  certain  characteristics  of  agreement  and  opposi
tion,  by  discovering  the  most  far-reaching  differences.

1 8.  The  second  question  now  arises,  whether  the  arrangement  thus
obtained  enables  us  to  carry  on  our  subsumption  with  ease  and  certainty.
If  the  latter  end  should  be  pursued  apart  from  the  former,  we  might
imagine  a  group  of  given  objects  as  classified  in  two  ways,  or  a  classifica
tion  subservient  merely  to  diagnostic  interests  preceding  that  which  starts
from  the  other  point  of  view.  For  what  is  most  needed  in  subsumption
is  to  find  the  lowest  specific  concept  to  which  any  object  can  be  subor
dinated,  because  that  gives  us  the  predicate  which  is  richest  in  content,
that  upon  which  the  most  numerous,  and  the  most  definite  statements  de
pend.  If  the  lowest  specific  concepts  were  known  and  named,  all  that
would  remain  would  be  to  subsume  an  object  under  its  appropriate  specific
concept  in  the  quickest  way ;  and  this  would  be  for  every  species  to  have
its  easily  recognised  characteristic  attribute  distinguishing  it  from  all  others,
so  that  the  subsumption  would  be  determined  by  the  presence  of  this  one
attribute.  Diagnostic  definitions  would  then  consist  entirely  of  these
attributes  ;  they  would  be  like  a  simple  index  to  the  complete  concepts,
i  and  all  we  should  have  to  do  would  be  to  learn  the  characteristic  attribute
for  the  name  of  every  infima  species,  so  as  to  be  able  to  name  every  object,
•and  by  means  of  the  name  to  recall  or  look  up  the  other  attributes.

1  "  The  different  groups  oflower  organisms,  such  as  flagellate,  dinoflagellatae,  rhizopods,
! etc.,  cannot  he  distinguished  from  each  other  by  any  complete  difference.  .  .  The

special  characteristics  of  any  one  of  these  groups  are  only  found  in  the  main  part  of  the
;forms,  not  in  the  outlying  members.  Each  group  centres  itself  in  a  characteristic  type,
I  which  is  sharply  distinguished  from  that  of  the  neighbouring  groups.  .  .  It  is  wel1
>to  review  all  the  lower  groups  of  organisms  from  a  certain  height,  and  see  them  as  a.
great  connected  field  ;  but  it  is  not  less  necessary  to  look  closer  and  to  see  that  we  are
'dealing  with  a  hilly  country.  Flagellatse  or  volvocineae  represent  different  types  or  hills
of  this  kind."— G.  Klebs,  "  Flagellaten  Studien  "  in  Zeitschr.ftir  it'iss.  Zoologie,  lv.,  2,
;p.  266.


522  LOGIC

19.  No  method  of  classification  can  avoid  this  prosaic  consideration,
that  as soon  as  the region to which it  refers  becomes extensive the
totality  of concepts  which  it  is  to  arrange  will  be  present  to,  and  re
membered  by,  few  or  none  ;  the fact  that  only  by  fixing  the  definitions
in  writing  can  we  obtain  a  survey  of  the  whole  manifold  makes it  neces
sary,  in  determining  the process  of  classification,  to  keep  in mind the
practical interest of facilitating the acquirement of  knowledge which
can  only  be communicated by  writing. If  we  could remember  all  the
concepts  with  their  attributes  in  fixed  combinations,  we  should  not  need
to  resort to  the  expedient  of  particular  characteristic attributes for  our
subsumption  ;  the  inferences  which  serve  partly  to  guard  against  subsump-
tion  under  false  concepts,  and  partly  to bring  about  the  right  diagnosis,
would  follow  easily,  and  without  consciousness  of  each  step,  from  per
ceived complexes, so  long as the things  were  at  all  distinguished  by
external  characteristics. In  determining  a  plant  of  the  flora  with  which
he  is  familiar,  the  practised  botanist does  not  go  through  detailed  pro
cesses  of  thought ;  but  the  beginner,  if  he  has  at  hand  only  the  systematic
arrangement  of  the  text-book,  is  confronted  by  the  problem  of  discovering
the  name  of  the  species  of  a  given  plant. Since  the  particular  species  are
so  numerous  that it  is  impossible  to  give  characteristic  attributes  for  all,
it  would  be  at  any  rate  the  shortest  way  for  him if  there  were  easily  re
membered  characteristic  attributes  for  the  lowest  concepts,  or  smallest
classes  possible,  from  which  he  might  start  to  compare  further  particulars.
In  this  respect  the  Linnsean  system  of  classifying  plants  is  acknowledged
to  have  been  most  fortunate,  although  its  class  attributes  are  only  to  some
extent  signs  of  further similarities amongst  the plants  combined in a
class ;  it  acts  as  an  index,  much  in  the  same  way  as  the  directions  to  test
the  chemical  nature  of  some  substance  by  specific  reactions  give  us  the
means  of  at  once  subsuming  it  under  a  special  concept.

20.  If  we  were unable  to  find  easily  recognised  characteristic  attri
butes  for  the  lowest  species  themselves,  or  for  the  smallest  classes  possible,
if  we  had  to  deal  entirely  with  attributes  which  are  common to  many
and  different  objects, so  that  the  only  difference which  could be  ex
pressed  in  definitions  was based  upon different  combinations  of  wide
spread attributes, we might  still,  with  a  view  to  facilitating  diagnosis,
constitute  our  classification  in  such  a  way  as  to  afford  the  most  easily
comprehensible  plan.

This  will  obviously  be  the  case  when  the  division  proceeds  by  simple


6"  YS  TEMA  TfZA  TION  5  2  3

contradictory  opposition,  where  it  may  be  that  an  attribute  is  absent  in
one  subdivision  which  is  present  in  another,  or  that  two  positive  but
clearly  opposed  attributes  are  employed  for  the  division.  Then  we  need
only  remember  the  sequence  in  which  the  division  proceeds  through
these  opposites,  and  we  shall  be  able  to  subsume  every  object  under
first  the  higher  and  then  the  lower  genera  ;  the  most  convenient  form  of
division  is  therefore  dichotomy,  unless  we  can  substitute  for  it  such  simple
polytotnies  as  are  afforded  by  the  successive  numbers.

The  most  perfect  classification  would  be  one  in  which  the  purely
theoretical  interest  of  arranging  the  essential  concepts  according  to  their
natural  relationship  could  be  combined  with  easy  diagnosis,  and  the  con
cepts  so  constituted  that  they  might  be  always  represented  by  easily
recognised,  certain  signs.  Where  this  ideal  is  not  attainable  we  must
have  a  twofold  classification  adapted  to  the  different  ends,  or  effect  a
compromise  between  the  claims  on  either  side.

21.  So  far  we  have  tacitly  assumed  that  the  formation  of  infinite
species  by  combining  completely  similar  things  has  already  been  carried
out  before  we  began  the  arrangement  of  these  concepts ;  and  to  a  large
extent,  not  merely  where  these  concepts  are  as  fully  determined  as  those
of  the  chemical  elements,  but  also  in  a  large  part  of  the  organic  universe,
this  first  step  of  forming  concepts  has  been  unanimously  carried  out,
although  it  was  necessary  in  doing  so  to  overlook  individual  differences
of  more  or  less  importance.  It  has  at  any  rate  been  easy  to  mark  off
groups  of  which  the  individuals  agree  in  a  number  of  attributes,  and  aie
distinguished  from  proximate  groups  by  definite  points  of  difference ;  the
differences  between  individuals  of  the  same  group  were  found  to  be
insignificant  in  comparison  with  the  agreement,  and  to  consist  in  varia
tions  in  particular  attributes  which  do  not  involve  variations  in  any  others,
or  else  in  merely  quantitative  differences.  But  other  relations  less
favourable  to  classification  have  been  found,  which  do  not  admit  of  such
demarcation,  where  a  number  of  individuals  are  connected  by  gradual
transitions  in  such  a  way  that  their  extreme  differences  are  as  great  or
greater  than  those  of  the  individuals  which  elsewhere  belong  to  separate
groups.  Even  if  we  did  not  hesitate  to  treat  the  former  groups  as  infima
species,  the  question  arises  whether  these  groups,  in  which  are  involved
larger  and  wider  differences,  stand  upon  the  same  level ;  and  in  this  way
re  are  led  to  the  necessity  of  finding  a  criterion  by  which  to  decide  what
lifferences  are  to  be  regarded  as  specific,  in  other  words  of  determining


524  LOGIC

the  concept  of  the  species.  It  is  well  known  that  when  the  merely
morphological  comparison  was  found  to  be  insufficient  to  yield  a  certain
criterion,  recourse  was  had  to  genealogy,  and  common  descent  was  fixed
as  the  criterion  of  the  species.  We  include  in  one  species  individuals
which  have  a  common  descent,  and  individuals  which  are  as  similar  as
those  which  have  a  common  descent.  And  since  common  descent  often
cannot  be  directly  proved,  the  further  principle  has  been  employed  that
only  individuals  belonging  to  the  same  species  can  produce  permanently
fertile  descendants  ;  thus  those  individuals  belong  to  the  same  species
which  have  permanently  fertile  descendants.  Where  this  was  accepted
as  fixing  the  concept  of  species,  the  attempt  was  made  to  account  for  the
differences  still  remaining  within  the  species  by  the  introduction  of  the
concepts  of  varieties  and  of  races,  differences  of  variety  being  differences
which  are  common  to  a  large  number  of  instances  and  which  there  was
a  tendency  to  refer  to  external  conditions,  and  differences  of  races  being
inherited  variations.

22.  We  cannot  enter  into  the  question  how  far  it  is  true  of  the  species
hitherto  accepted  that  members  of  the  same  species  have  a  common
descent  and  fertile  descendants,  while  the  members  of  different  species
have  a  different  descent  and  unfertile  hybrids ;  nor  can  we  decide  how  far
the  doctrine  of  evolution,  which  ascribes  an  ultimate  common  descent  to
even  the  most  different  forms  and  thus  nullifies  the  old  criteria  of  the
specific  concept,  is  likely  to  become  a  proved  scientific  theory,  or  has  any
claim  to  be  regarded  as  such.

After  the  account  we  have  given  (§  94,  13 — 18,  pp.  326-332)  of  the
logical  bearing  of  the  Darwinian  theory,  we  can  only  raise  hypothetically
the  question  as  to  what  position,  if  we  assume  the  validity  of  the  theory,  is
to  be  taken  by  classification,  of  which  the  object  always  is  to  find  concepts
under  which  to  arrange  the  whole  manifold  of  the  given.  For  at  first
sight  the  Darwinian  theory  seems  to  do  away  with  all  possibility  of  a
classification  which  presupposes  fixed  and  distinct  forms ;  all  that  it
recognises  is  a  history  of  individuals  in  successive  generations  which,  if
it  were  fully  known,  would  show  none  but  imperceptibly  small  differences,
and  within  the  flux  of  which  it  would  be  impossible,  and  in  any  case
quite  arbitrary,  to  draw  definite  boundaries.  At  best  it  allows  us,  as  we
showed  on  p.  329,  to  construct  at  any  given  moment  groups  which  fall
apart  through  the  failure  of  intermediate  forms  ;  the  unlimited  complexity
of  the  external  conditions,  affecting  the  variation  and  maintenance  of


S  YSTEMA  TIZA  TIO  .V  525

particular  individuals,  makes  it  absolutely  impossible  to  construct  anything
like  formulae,  according  to  which  certain  conditions  would  give  rise  to
one  form,  and  others  to  another,  or  by  introducing  causal  laws  into  the
divisions  to  produce  the  closed  system  of  concepts  which  is  needed  for
an  exhaustive  survey  of  the  whole.

But  the  Darwinian  theory,  by  its  own  point  of  view,  forces  us  to  a  basis
of  classification  which  at  first  sight  seems  diametrically  opposed  to  its
whole  tendency.  If  the  existence  and  reproductiveness  of  certain  forms
depend  upon  the  variations  by  which  they  are  distinguished  from  others
being  useful  to  them,  upon  their  being-  in  accordance  with  the  conditions
of  life  and  ensuring  advantages  to  them  in  the  struggle  for  existence ;  if
those  forms  must  become  stable  which  attain  the  maximum  of  adaptation,
because  every  variation  must  then  be  a  disadvantage,  while  a  tendency  to
vary  in  all  directions  is  regarded  as  a  seeking  after  the  most  favourable
form,  then  the  only  way  of  finding  fixed  forms  which  have  any  counter
part  in  reality  is  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  end,  and  those  forms  stand
out  amongst  the  chaos  of  differences  which  are  the  most  perfect  when  the
end  is  taken  as  the  standard  by  which  to  measure  them.  And  because
the  organization  is  the  more  useful  to  its  possessor  in  proportion  as  it  is
independent  of  external  conditions  and  elastic  in  its  power  of  accom-
1  modating  itself,  we  are  led  by  the  same  point  of  view  away  from  the
external  conditions  to  the  internal  organization,  to  the  relation  between
the  organs  and  their  functions,  to  the  system  of  compensatory  arrange
ments  which  enables  the  machinery  of  life  to  work  on  undisturbed  by
change  in  external  conditions,  and  we  must  give  the  most  important  place
to  internal  adaptation  to  ends.

Thus  the  basis  of  classification  which, when the  old one has been

1  destroyed  by  the  theory of  evolution,  proves to be  not only  compatible

with  the  theory, but  necessitated  by  it,  is  the Ideological. The  forms

i  around  which  the others  group  themselves  are those which  are most

perfectly  adapted to  an  end,  in  which  we  can  see  from  the  point  of  view

of  the  end  how  every  special  modification  of  an  organ  co-operates  in  the

most  favourable  way  with special  modifications  and  functions  in other

organs.

If  we  look  backwards  from  forms  which  have  developed  in  this  way,
the  whole  complex  of  varying  forms  and  all  the  conflict  among  the  condi
tions  of  life  appear  as  a  means  towards  attaining  this  end  ;  and,  indeed,
this  is  what  we  mean  when  we  always  speak  of  evolution  from  lower  to


526  LOGIC

higher  forms.  The  standard  we  erect  is  not  that  of  mechanical  causation,
according  to  which  evolution  means  only  that  invariable  forces  successively
come  into  action  according  to  general  laws  of  nature ;  nor  is  it  merely
that  of  the  causa  im/nanens,  according  to  which  a  series  of  states  proceeds
from  the  nature  of  the  subject  itself,  and  not  from  external  influences  alone.
Contrary  to  this  concept,  we  have  to  deal,  at  any  rate  according  to
Darwin's  own  view,  not  with  internal  development,  but  mainly  with  the
influence  of  external  conditions.  What  is  here  meant  by  evolution  is  that
the  lower  forms  are  merely  the  conditions  for  those  which  are  higher  when
measured  by  the  ideal  of  adaptation  to  the  end,  and  the  whole  is  repre
sented  as  if  the  whole  complex  of  original  dispositions  and  external
conditions  had  been  so  arranged  as  to  produce,  by  a  gradual  development
and  successive  progress,  the  highest  forms.  When  thus  looked  at  retro
spectively  our  types  arrange  themselves  into  a  graduated  course  of  develop
ment  from  the  lower  to  the  higher,  from  the  imperfect  to  the  perfect ;  and
in  this  aspect  also  the  doctrine  of  descent  coincides  with  the  natural
philosophy  of  Schelling  and  Hegel,  in  which,  though  empirical  history  was
disregarded,  the  classification  of  forms  was  represented  as  a  teleological
development  determined  by  concepts.

23.  To  construct  entirely  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  end  the  ideal
types  which  are  to  serve  as  points  of  crystallization  round  which  to  form
connected  groups  would  indeed  be  a  task  needing  an  insight  into  the
laws  of  organic  life  which  we  do  not  possess.  But  even  from  this  point  of
view  we  may  have  recourse  to  external  considerations,  as  supplementing
and  guiding  the  classification.  Since  the  struggle  for  existence  destroys  the
less  adapted  forms,  and  encourages  the  best  adapted,  it  follows  that  num
ber  is  a  criterion  of  the  most  perfect  constitution  within  a  group  of  nearly
allied  forms,  and  we  are  thus  enabled  to  apply  statistical  methods  here
also.  If  within  a  group  of  allied  individuals,  varying  by  small  differences,
we  find  a  certain  combination  of  attributes  to  be  the  most  frequent,
while  of  the  forms  grouped  around  it  those  which  deviate  from  it  least
are  the  more  numerous  and  those  which  deviate  most  the  less  numerous,
then  it  is  probable  that  this  combination  is  the  most  favourable  and
represents  the  equilibrium  best  adapted  to  the  end.  Thus  the  average
would  rank  as  the  normal  determination  of  the  concept  even  from  the
teleological  point  of  view;  and  the  attributes  found  by  the  average
would  constitute  the  concept  which  the  classification  presents  as  the
type.  If  the  medium  height,  the  medium  weight,  the  medium  size  of  the


5  YSTEMA  TJZA  TION  5  2  7

brain,  are  the  most  frequent  in  any  community,  while  the  great  majority
of  cases  do  not  exceed  narrow  limits  above  and  below  the  medium,  and
giants  or  dwarfs,  very  heavy  or  very  light  people,  are  rare  exceptions,  then
we  are  justified  in  regarding  the  average  as  that  size  which  gives  the  most
favourable  relation  between  internal  organization  and  external  conditions,
as  the  form  which  is  most  stable  in  face  of  the  constant  and  variable
causes  and  conditions  of  life.  Thus  the  most  external  point  of  view,
that  of  number,  coincides  directly  with  that  which  is  taken  from  the
highest  metaphysical  meaning  of  the  concept.

24.  If there  is  any object  in making further  distinctions within a
group  which  lies  in  this  way  around  a  central  normal type,  it  can  only  be
done  by  contrasting  with the  means  certain  extremes, whicli  show  the
direction  of  deviation  ;  each  individual  is  then  assigned  its  position  upon
the  radius  which  connects  the  mean with  a  given  extreme,  and  finally,
where  the  number  of  differences  is  too  great  to  be  fixed  in  concepts,  we
may  represent  the  classification  graphically.

It  has  been  impossible,  for  instance,  to  carry  out  the  classification  of
the  various  shapes  of  skulls  into  separate  groups  of  brachycephalous  and
dolichocephalous  :  the  arrangement  has  no  meaning  unless  we  start  from  a
mean  from  which  the  extremes  deviate  in  opposite  directions ;  dolicho
cephalous  and  brachycephalous  denote  opposite  maxima  of  relative
diameters  of  length  and  breadth.  It  must  be  a  matter  for  arbitrary
decision  what  numerical  relations  separate  dolichocephalous  skulls  from
mesocephalous,  and  these  from  brachycephalous.  Whilst  these  differences
are  represented  by  a  line,  if  the  extremes  are  determined  from  two  points
of  view,  they  will  group  themselves  in  a  plane.  If,  e.g.,  human  skulls  were
grouped  on  the  one  hand  according  to  absolute  size  or  capacity,  on  the
other  according  to  the  proportion  of  the  two  diameters,  then  the  position  of
each  one  might  be  determined  by  its  distance  from  two  axes  perpendicular
to  each  other,  one  representing  the  direction  from  the  longest  to  the
shortest,  the  other  from  the  largest  to  the  smallest,  the  mean  value  in
both  respects  being  found  at  the  point  of  intersection.

25.  If  we  review  the  results  to  which  we  have  been  led  in  considering
the  problem  of  systematically  arranging  our  knowledge,  it  appears  that  the
conditions  essential  to  carrying  it  out  consist  in  the  possibility  of  deduc
tive  processes, of  analytical  development  of  concepts,  and  of  syllogistic
derivation  from  general laws. In so  far  as  these  have originally  been
obtained  inductively,  the  hypothetical  nature  of  all  positive  propositions


52S  LCGIC

reached  by  induction  affects  also  the  whole  system  of  classification  ;  on
the  other  hand,  the  formulation  of  the  highest  concepts,  from  which  the
division  starts,  attains  more  and  more  to  the  character  of  construction  as
they  become  further  removed  from  empirically  given,  concrete,  particular
phenomena.  The  general  concept  of  matter,  of  which  the  particular
substances  are  specializations,  whether  we  regard  it  as  filling  space  con
tinuously,  or  as  consisting  of  atoms,  can  only  be  determined  by  means  of  a
construction  the  essential  parts  of  which  are  of  a  purely  mathematical  nature,
and  which  employs  besides  the  ultimately  a  priori  elements  of  substance,
force,  impenetrability,  etc.  In  the  concept  of  the  organic,  again,  in  any
fixed  sense,  we  must  have  recourse  to  construction  in  proportion  as  it  be
comes  more  difficult  from  the  material  point  of  view  to  draw  a  strict  limit
between  the  organic  and  the  inorganic,  and  the  distinction  between  organic
and  inorganic  processes  is  disputed.  There  remains  only  the  form  in
which  such  processes  are  combined,  for  which  we  can  find  a  certain  basis
only  in  the  concept  of  the  end.  Thus  it  is  that  the  highest  and  most
general  concepts  finally  relinquish  all  sensuous  content ;  they  are  logico-
mathematical  schemata,  in  which  we  try  to  grasp  the  essence  of  the
existent,  and  have  their  origin  in  the  nature  of  our  thought.  Just  as  we
are  able  to  arrange  and  understand  the  infinite  manifold  of  spatial  forms
only  by  the  aid  of  our  geometrical  concepts,  so  we  endeavour  to  master
the  given  by  the  analogous  ideal  forrhs  of  substances  and  forms  of  unity
among  things.


CHAPTER VII.
THE METHODOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES OF  ETHICS.

§  104.

IN  considering  what  man  ought  to  do  we  need  first  of  all  an  analysis  of
the  activity  of  volition  itself,  and  this  must  be  carried  out  psychologically.
In  this  analysis  we  always  find  already  present  certain  ENDS  of  action
affirmed  by  the  will,  and  recognised  convictions  as  to  the  RULES  of  action  ;
and  thus  the  first  task  which  presents  itself  is  that  of  logically  elaborating
the  rules  and  ends  which  are  assumed  as  valid.

On  the  one  hand,  we  have  to  apply  them  by  way  of  deduction  to
particular  cases  ;  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  to  find  one  principle  of  unity
for  all  by  way  of  reduction.

This  necessity  of  logical  elaboration  involves  the  necessity  of  rising
above  the  mere  actual  given  consciousness  to  an  ideal  consciousness
which  is  one  with  itself  and  all-embracing.

The  higher  problem  of  practical  thought  calls  for  the  establishment  of
unconditionally  valid normal laws  of  volition,  and  it can  only  be  solved
by assuming that  there  is  an  immediate  and self-evident  certainty  with
eference  to  the  "  ought,"  just  as  logic  assumes  an  immediate  self-evident
ertainty  with  reference  to  objectively  necessary  thought. These  uncon-
itionally  valid  principles  are  discovered  by  analysis.
If  this  analysis leads merely to  formal principles of  the  unity  and
mrmony  of  the  will,  as  logical  analysis  leads  to  the  principles  of  agree
ment  and  contradiction,  we  cannot  derive  from  it  the  system  of  concrete
nds  to  be  realized  by  the  given  means,  but  can  only  establish  negative
anons. The  positive  idea  of  the  highest  good  must  take  in  wider  con-
iderations  which  are  derived  from  the  actual  and  natural  volitions  of  men,
nd  must  have  recourse  to  the  values  of  ends  as  expressed  in  feeling.
This,  however,  can  only  be  on  the  assumption  that  the  natural  volitions
f  men  tend  towards  the  realization  of  morality. This  is  the  postulate  of
very  system  of  ethics  which  is  not  merely  negative  and  critical.1

1  Cf.  my  Vorfragen  der  Ethik  (Freiburg,  1886).
S.  L.— II.  M M


53°


LOGIC


1.  The  two  main problems  which  our  thought  sets  before itself  are
knowledge  of  the  universe  given  to  us  in  perception,  and  reflection  as  to
the  ultimate  ends  of  our  will ;  and  from  the  first  we  have  been  obliged  to
separate  knowledge  of  what  man  ought  to  do  from knowledge  of  what  is
actual,  because  the  former  is  never  a  part  or  a  simple  consequence  of  the
latter.1

When,  however,  we  endeavour  to  develop  the  methods  leading  to  this
ethical  science,  methodology,  which  is  firmly  established  only  when  it
can  prove  the  practicability  and  success  of  its  instructions,  finds  itself  in
a  difficulty  like  that  encountered  in  psychology.  No  sure  science,  certain
of  its  own  principles,  has  ever  revealed  itself  from  the  chaos  of  endeavours
to  give  form  to  ethics,  and  thus  our  first  task  is  not  to  give  definite
instructions,  but  only  to  formulate  the  problems,  to  guard  against  their
confusion,  and  to  consider  the  possibilities  of  methods  which  might  be
employed  for  their  solution.

2.  The  question  as  to  the  ways  which  lead  to  certain  ethical  knowledge
is  complicated  in  a  peculiar  manner  by  the  fact  that  the  will,  of  which  the
rules  are  to  be  discovered,  is  already  active  in  knowledge,  and  acts  as  the
motive  power  in  the  effort  towards  truth  and  certainty.

In  knowledge  of  the  external  world  the  subject  and  object  of  knowledge
fall  apart  clearly  and  distinctly.  The  sensations  from  which  we  construct
the  external  world  are  primarily  independent  of  our  will,  and  offer  mere
material  to  our  endeavours  to  arrange  them  and  to  form  them  into  a
consistent  and  comprehensible  whole ;  the  activities  of  thought  which  are
directed  towards  them  are  the  means  of  attaining  the  ideal  of  truth  or
adequate  knowledge.  Will  and  thought  stand  together  confronting  an
externally  given  material.

But  when  thought  turns  to  the  will  itself,  then  the  object  of  thought  is
that  which  is  also  its  ultimate  subject,  and  we  find  ourselves  in  a  circle
which  is  not  to  be  broken  through.  In  the  sphere  of  ethics  also  the  will
to  think  remains  the  ultimate,  unanalysable  presupposition  of  all  scientific
endeavour,  and  reflection  upon  our  own  volition  cannot  but  realize  that
the  will  can  never  be  objectified  in  the  whole  of  its  extent.

3. There  is,  no  doubt,  one  way  of  knowing  our  voluntary  acts  which

1  In  the  attempts  to  regard  ethics  as  only  an  applied  science  which  employs  empirical
laws  to  le-rn  by  what  modes  of  action  the  general  welfare  may  be  attained,  it  is  forgotten
that  the  "  general  welfare  "  means  many  things,  and  that  we  are  first  concerned  to  know
what  the  general  welfare  is  which  is  worthy  of  our  efforts.  It  is  nowhere  empirically
realized.


METHODOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES OF  ETHICS 531

is  comparable  to  the  mere  receptivity  of  sensation.  The  momentary
immediate  consciousness  of  particular  volitions  which  take  place  in  time
and  develop  consequences,  the  consciousness  that  something  is  just  being
willed  by  me,  seems  to  be  as  capable  of  being  the  simple  object  of  mental
elaboration  as  the  consciousness  that  this  or  that  is  just  being  seen  and
heard.  But  even  if  we  grant  this — though  it  might  well  be  asked  whether
anything  could  reach  consciousness  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  grasped  as  its
object  without  the  co-operation  of  the  will — yet  in  this  way  we  should
only  get  a  manifold  of  particular  perceptions,  to  the  effect  that  I  will  this
or  that  at  any  given  moment.  Any  attempt  to  comprehend  these  facts,
to  analyse  them,  and  refer  them  to  their  grounds,  is  the  expression  of  a
will  which  sets  before  itself  knowledge  as  its  conscious  end,  to  be  realized
by  means  of  thought.

Nor  should  we  be  able  to  succeed  in  disentangling  the  will  which  is
directed  towards  knowledge,  and  in  setting  it  over  against  the  will  which
is  directed  towards  other  ends,  so  that  the  end  of  knowledge  and  the  will
which  is  directed  towards  it  should,  as  it  were,  stand  outside  of  and  above
the  rest,  and  the  will  which  is  directed  to  other  ends  become  the  pure
object  of  the  will  to  know.  Wherever  there  is  will,  wherever  an  end  is
affirmed  as  mine  and  the  means  to  it  are  sought,  the  cognitive  activities
are  at  work,  and  constitute  a  part  of  the  processes  by  which  the  will  is
developed.  On  the  other  hand,  the  ends  which  we  set  before  us  in  the
sphere  of  action  are  some  of  the  most  potent  incentives  to  thought,  and
the  question  :  what  ought  I  to  do  ?  always  demands  an  answer  which
contains  an  element  of  material  truth,  i.e.  of  the  end  at  which  pure
knowledge  aims  ;  for  any  end  which  I  can  rationally  accept  must  be  one
that  is  realizable.  Where  this  question  is  absent  there  might  indeed  be
immediate  desire,  but  no  conscious  will  in  the  proper  sense.  Just  as  the
assured  judgment  is  distinguished  from  blind  association  by  the  question
which  holds  subject  and  predicate  apart  in  order  that  they  may  be  con
sciously  united,  so  the  will  which  proceeds  by  reflection  upon  ourselves
is  distinguished  from  the  momentary  and  involuntary  excitement  of
desire.

Such  is  the  circle  which  seems  from  the  first  to  make  it  impossible  to
find  any  safe  starting  point  for  an  investigation  of  method.  But  it  merely
forces  us  to  begin  with  a  provisional  distinction  to  be  afterwards  put  aside,
to  isolate  artificially  elements  which  we  know  to  be  never  separate
m  reality,  to  disregard  one  factor  at  first  in  order  to  study  the  others.


532  LOGIC

We  begin  by  taking  the  will  to  think  as  something  given,  a  matter  of
course,  which  is  not  itself  the  object  of  reflection,  when  we  investigate  the
human  will ;  by  means  of  artificial  abstraction  we  place  ourselves,  not
indeed  outside  the  circle,  but  at  one  fixed  point  of  it,  from  which  we  may
move  forward  in  one  fixed  direction,  with  the  expectation  of  being  brought
back  to  the  starting  point.

Over  against  the  will  which  is  directed  towards  knowledge,  and  which
first  manifests  itself  as  the  will  to  think,  we  set  the  will  which  leads  to
action,  i.e.  to  influence  upon  the  external  world,  and  we  take  this  by  itself
as  the  object  of  our  investigation.  The  distinction  is  justified,  for  if  there
are  any  general,  ultimate,  and  highest  rules  for  the  will,  they  must  be  dis
coverable  in  every  kind  of  will.  It  was  thus  that  in  logic  we  analysed
thought,  although  the  analysis  itself  was  only  possible  by  means  of  thought ;
it  was  however  necessary  that  the  results  of  the  analysis  should  themselves
be  applicable  to  the  thought  which  investigated  them.

4.  Thus  from  the  beginning  of  the  investigation  we  can  only  accept
as  fact,  that  there  is  a  consciousness  of  the  "  ought  "  ;  that  a  need  exists
and  is  felt  to  subject  our  will  to  certain  rules  and  to  divide  the  possible
ends  which  it  may  set  before  itself  into  such  as  are  in  accordance  with
these  rules  and  such  as  are  opposed  to  them. As  the  fact  that  we  distin
guish  between  true  and  false,  the  fact  of  error  and  dispute,  caused  us  to
distinguish  between  that  part  of  our  actual  thought  which  attains  its  end
and  that  which  misses  it,  between  the  subjective  psychological  necessity
which  we  think  of  as  producing  actual  thought  and  the  necessity  which  is
objective  and  logical, so  the  human  consciousness  always  distinguishes
between  actual  will  and  action  as  they  take  place  and proceed  from  the
existing  psychological  conditions  and  the  will  and  action  which  would  be
in  accordance  with  an  objectively  necessary  rule. The  same  difference
between  actual  will  and  will  which  conforms  to  a  rule  is  expressed  in  the
facts  of  repentance  and  blame.

5.  To  this  parallelism  it  is  due  that  in  our  investigation  of  method  we
shall  have  an  arrangement  of  problems  similar  to  that  in  logic  itself.

When  we  ask  :  how  ought  we  to  act  in  order  to  act  rightly  ?  we  need
first  an  analysis  of  voluntary  action  in  general,  partly  according  to  its
form,  partly  according  to  its  actual  conditions.  For  the  first  analysis  the
rules  of  method  can  only  be  those  with  which  we  have  become  familiar  in
the  analysis  of  concepts,  nor  is  it  in  any  way  contrary  to  the  relations
found  to  exist  in  the  purely  theoretical  sphere  that  the  result  obtained


METHODOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES OF  ETHICS 533

by  an  analysis  of  the  form  of  actual  will  consists  in  a  plurality  of  simple
acts  which  are  interconnected  and  mutually  conditioning.

Without  attempting  to  undertake  this  analysis  in  detail,1  we  must  never
theless  presuppose  so  much  as  is  necessary  to  the  consideration  of  the
methods  of  ethics.  The  object  of  every  actual  will  is  a  state  of  myself
and  of  other  things  which  is  thought  of  as  real,  or  at  any  rate  realizable,  in
the  future,  and  which  is  conceived  in  a  particular  determination  or  in  a
more  general  concept ;  where  all  the  processes  are  clearly  differentiated  this
object  first  suggests  itself  as  a  possible  end,  and  after  due  consideration
is  affirmed  or  rejected  as  my  end.  The  consideration  which  precedes  the
decision  of  the  will  is,  on  the  one  hand,  purely  theoretical,  and  refers  to
the  material  possibility  of  the  end,  the  adequacy  of  the  means  at  my  dis
posal  to  carrying  it  out ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  refers  to  the  practical
question  whether  I  ought  to  make  this  possible  end  really  mine,  to  direct
my  action  to  its  realization,  and  this  question  requires  a  consideration  of
the  relation  in  which  it  stands  to  the  whole  of  my  personality,  my  inclina
tions,  my  interests,  my  principles,  etc.  The  affirmative  or  negative  reply
to  this  question  is  the  inward  decision  of  the  will,  which  accepts  or  rejects
the  possible  end  as  mine,  and  which  finds  utterance  in  "  I  will "  or  "  I
will  not "  ;  if  the  decision  is  affirmative  there  follows  from  it  the  motor
impulse  to  the  actions  through  which  my  will  becomes  causal.

This  analysis  of  the  mere  form  of  voluntary  action  is  enough  to  show
one  of  the  main  difficulties  which  obscure  this  chapter  in  psychology  ;
the  relation,  that  is,  between  comprehensive  determinations  of  the  will
and  stable  tendencies  of  will,  and  more  special  acts,  the  particular  con
crete  impulses.  The  determinations  of  the  will,  as  they  take  place  in
time,  do  not  succeed  each  other  in  a  chain  of  which  the  links  can  be
counted  like  beads  in  a  necklace.  They  penetrate  each  other  in  the
most  manifold,  and  often  in  the  most  complicated,  manner ;  sometimes
simply  subordinated  to  each  other,  as  in  the  series  of  particular  actions
which  are  willed  as  the  combined  means  of  realizing  a  desired  end,  and
which  follow  from  the  end  as  logically  necessary  consequences ;  sometimes
thwarting  and  disturbing  each  other,  and  conflicting  in  many  ways,  where
a  previous  act  of  will  is  disturbed,  modified,  or  annulled  by  a  later  one.
It  is  as  when  in  the  theoretical  sphere  doubt  attaches  to  inferences  from
an  established  judgment,  or  we  are  confronted  by  contradictory  alterna-

1  Cf.  my  essay,  '•  Uber  den  Begriff  des  Wollens  und  sein  Verhaltniss  zum  Begriff  dor
Ursache,"  Kleim  Schriften,  ii.  115  sq.


534


LOGIC


tives  without  finding  a  solution.  These  disturbances  are  of  a  more
superficial  nature  where  they  refer  only  to  the  conditions  of  success,  and
force  us  to  relinquish  an  end  because  it  cannot  be  realized  ;  but  they  are
more  deeply  rooted  when  the  affirmation  of  one  end  conflicts  with  the
affirmation  of  another,  and  contradiction  enters  into  the  will  itself.

We  will  note  only  what  is  most  important  in  this  analysis  :  the  subordi
nation  of  special  to  general  will,  and  the  possibility  of  conflict.  The
relations  with  which  we  have  to  deal  here  are  logical ;  that  which  deter
mines  subordination  or  conflict  is  the  logical  relation  in  the  one  case  of
the  general  to  the  special,  in  the  other  of  the  incompatibility  of  different
ends,  which,  when  we  think  of  them  together,  are  in  conflict,  or  which  if
realized  together  would  annul  each  other  by  the  existing  causal  relations.1

1  We  must  also  mention  here  the  relation  which  holds  between  the  general  rules
which  I  lay  down  for  my  action  and  the  ends  towards  which  my  action  is  directed.
Language  seems  to  insist  upon  a  distinction  between  the  two.  The  end  is  something  con
crete,  the  rule  something  abstract ;  by  the  word  "  end  "  we  generally  mean  first  a  definite
particular  result,  which  is  to  be  attained  in  a  given  time ;  the  rule  only  prescribes
the  general  nature  of  the  action,  and  leaves  it  quite  undetermined  where,  and  when,  and
under  what  circumstances,  and  with  reference  to  what  objects  it  will  take  place.  The
rule  is  thought  hypothetically,  the  end  categorically  ;  the  rule  says  :  if  you  act,  act  in
such  and  such  a  way ;  the  end  says  :  do  this  and  that.  But  the  distinction  disappears
before  closer  observation  ;  every  end  may  be  regarded  as  a  specific  rule,  every  rule  as  a
general  end.  In  §  75,  5,  p.  148  sq.,  we  have  shown  that  the  end,  even  when  fully  deter
mined  and  directed  towards  a  particular  satisfaction,  nevertheless  remains  general  in  so
far  as  what  is  directly  willed  is  ordinarily  not  a  given  particular  thing  as  such,  but  its  quality
as  the  means  of  my  satisfaction,  and  that  it  is  a  matter  of  chance  whether  the  same
quality  is  offered  by  only  one  or  by  several  objects  ;  also  that  general  ends  are  accepted
which  are  realizable  by  many  different  means,  so  that  the  general  end  requires  us  to  make
every  appropriate  and  attainable  thing  the  means  to  this  end.  The  end  of  earning  our
living  may  also  appear  as  a  rule  commanding  us  to  make  use  of  every  opportunity  of
remunerative  work,  the  end  of  forming  a  herbarium  as  a  rule  to  collect  every  species  of
plant  within  reach.  Inasmuch  as  the  complete  attainment  of  the  end  depends  upon
opportunities  which  cannot  be  foreseen,  the  end  itself  becomes  in  practice  a  hypothetical
rule,  even  when  its  complete  realization  would,  as  in  the  last  example,  present  a  whole  of
concrete  things.  On  the  other  hand,  every  hypothetical  rule  implies  the  assumption  that
the  cases  to  which  it  applies  will  actually  occur ;  no  one  lays  down  principles  and  maxims
for  wholly  improbable  cases,  unless  in  the  play  of  imagination  ;  the  rules  which  he
seriously  prescribes  to  himself  refer  to  cases  which  he  expects  to  occur,  and  the  rules
are  to  these  just  what  the  general  final  concept  is  to  the  special  means  by  which  it  is
realized.  It  is  not  all  the  individual  particularities  which  are  willed,  but  the  aspect
common  to  all  which  corresponds  to  the  will.  And  the  result  which  ultimately  follows
from  the  application  of  the  rule  may  also  be  represented  as  a  concrete  whole,  to  the
realization  of  which  conformity  to  the  rule  has  been  the  means  ;  the  prosperity  earned  by
the  man  who  makes  work  his  rule  is  a  state  present  in  concrete  which  follows  as  total
result  from  particular  instances  of  the  rule.

But  does  there  not  still  remain  a  difference  which forbids  us  to  identify  the  two  con
cepts — to  regard  them  only  as  different  perspective  views  of  the  same  content  ? Are


METHODOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES OF  ETHICS 535

6.  Our  analysis  moves  in  a  far  more  obscure  region  when  we  ask  about
the  presuppositions  of  the  will,  and  endeavour  to  investigate  them  empiri
cally  by  observation  and  by  inductively  inferred  connections. Whence
arise  the  ideas  of  ends  which  hover  before  us  as  possible  resolutions,  and
upon  what  depends  the  Yes  or  the  No  by  means  of  which  we  accept  or
reject  an  end  which  thus  attracts  and  tempts  us  ? Fortunately  ethics  has
not  to wait  until  psychology  throws  light  upon  the  labyrinth  of  confused
human  action  and  shows  in  unbroken  causal  connections  the  clue  which
enables us to assign to everything, even to  the  most  startling  events,
their  place. For  its  inquiry  is  not  as  to  what  happens,  but  what  ought
to  happen. Just  as  logic  does  not  undertake  to  explain  every  error  and
superstition,  every  lie  and  sophistry,  but  only  to  estimate  them  and  to
show  them  for  what  they  are  by  telling  us  how  we  must  think  in  order
that  our  thought  may  be  true  and  universally  valid,  and  accompanied  by
the  consciousness  of  objective  necessity,  so  also  in  the  region  of  ethics
thought endeavours  to find out  how  we ought  to act  in order  to  act
well  and  with  the  consciousness  of  objective  necessity.

7.  In  investigating  this  question  the  first fact  which  confronts  us  is
that  this  "ought"  is  recognised  everywhere,  and  that  even  the  content

there  not  limiting  cases  to  be  regarded  only  as  ends,  and  others  only  as  rules?  Can  the
willing  of  a  completely  determined  end  be  conceived  as  the  laying  down  of  a  rule,  or
a  universal  maxim  as  the  content  of  an  end  ?

If  the  human  will  were  quite  disconnected,  then  indeed  an  end  might  be  thought  as
absolutely  particular.  But  then  we  have  not  yet  reached  the  stage  of  rational  conscious
will,  have  not  yet  reflected  upon  the  relation  between  the  particular  thing  which  tempts
me  as  object  of  my  desire  and  the  unity  of  my  personality  ;  this  reflection  is  accom
panied  by  the  subordination  of  the  particular  to  the  more  general  directions  of  the  will,
and  more  careful  consideration  now  shows  the  particular  object  to  be  an  end  only  in  so  far
as  it  is  also  the  means  to  a  more  general  end.  With  this  restriction  the  most  concrete
is  no  doubt  a  particular,  but  it  points  to  a  more  general  end  by  which  the  willing  of  it  is
determined  ;  it  stands  in  the  same  relation  as  the  individual  and  fully  determined  stands  to
the  general  concept,  and  the  determination  by  virtue  of  which  it  is  particular  is  imposed
upon  it  by  the  external  constitution  of  the  object.

On  the  oiher  hand,  there  are,  in  a  certain  sense,  general  rules  which  no  longer  consti
tute  the  content  of  an  end  if  we  apply  the  concept  of  the  end  primarily  to  the  external
result  to  be  attained  by  the  action.  If  the  rules  refer,  like  Kant's  categorical  imperative,
only  to  the  subjective  nature  of  the  will,  which  may  be  the  same  in  every  action  indepen-
l  dently  of  variation  in  the  objects,  then  they  determine  nothing  with  respect  to  the  objects
of  the  action,  and  there  seems  to  be  no  content  whatever  for  a  final  concept.  But  this
is  only  apparent  ;  we  have  at  any  rate  the  subjective  unity  of  the  will  and  the  consequent
satisfaction  as  the  one  end  which  follows  from  the  rules,  and  all  particular  action  appears
as  the  casual  and  indifferent  means,  which  has  no  essential  reference  to  the  abstract  general
end,  but  is  merely  subordinated  to  it  from  without.  We  lose  the  reference  to  an  ex
ternal  end  that  we  may  make  it  entirely  internal.


536  LOGIC

of  the  moral  laws  is  largely  the  same  as  the  object  of  general  conviction,
thus  having  an  at  any  rate  relatively  universal  validity,  and  is  active
amongst  the  factors  which  determine  the  action  of  particular  individuals.
In  any  attempt  to  explain  the  action  of  the  individual  by  the  actual  con
tent  of  his  consciousness,  we  find  amongst  the  conditions  of  the  actual
will  rules  which  are  recognised  as  valid  within  a  community.  The  fact
that  they  have  a  determining  influence  on  the  action  of  the.  individual  is
due  partly  to  his  having  accepted  and  affirmed  them  as  objects  of  his  own
will,  and  being  therefore  guided  by  them  in  the  particular  instance  from
simple  consistency,  partly  to  their  acting  as  standards  of  praise  and
blame  and  arousing  ambition  even  where  their  content  cannot  in  itself
be  regarded  as  the  conscious  and  fixed  will  of  the  individual,  partly  also
to  the  fact  that  the  constitution  of  the  community  has,  by  virtue  of  its
institutions,  the  power  of  connecting  material  consequences  with  their
observation  or  infringement.  We  find  in  history  that  all  morality  in  the
widest  sense  of  the  term,  whether  it  is  of  a  worldly  or  religious  nature,
and  all  valid  law,  has  this  variously  grounded  actual  authority  over  the
individual.

8.  It  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  problems  of  historical  and  psycho
logical  analysis  to  investigate  even  the  way  in  which  these  universal  con
victions  exist  in  the  consciousness  of  the  individual,  and  co-operate  with
individual  impulses  in  particular  actions  to  form  actual  life. It  is  only
the  results,  and  these  for  the  most  part  only  in  broad  outlines,  which  are
accessible  to  observation  and  to  historical  knowledge  (§  99,  p.  450  sq.).
To  investigate  further  how  these  convictions  have  grown  up  and  obtained
their  power  would  be  the  last  and  highest  problem  in  the  explanation
of  comprehensive  historical  facts  ;  the  only  result  of  all  our  philosophy  of
history  which  we  can  accept  as  certain  is, that  they  cannot  have  arisen
by the comprehensible empirical way of sensuous motives of  utility
alone, and  that  we  must therefore acknowledge the independence of
moral  ideas  of  the  mere  course  of  fact. The facility with which we
generally receive what is handed down by tradition, and voluntarily
affirm  rules which are already authoritative without further reflection,
may  indeed  explain  their  continuance,  but  neither  their  genesis  nor  their
alteration.

9.  But  even if  this  explanation could  be  successfully  carried  out, it
could  not  get  rid  of  the  fact  that  the  universal  validity  of  the  propositions
stating  certain rules of  action to  which  experience  is  said  to  testify  is,


METHODOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES OF  ETHICS 537

even  apart  from  their  frequent  actual  infringement,  a  mere  illusion,  and
that  it  is  certainly  impossible  to  present  them  as  the  simple  result  of
human  nature,  or  as  psychological  products  which  can  be  deduced  with
uniform  necessity  from  tendencies  common  to  all,  as  the  perception  of
the  sense-given  world  is  a  uniform  result  of  psychological  activities.  They
are  not  conceived  by  every  one  in  the  same  way,  nor  are  they  affirmed
by  every  one  in  the  same  way  ;  to  those  for  whom  they  are  authoritative
in  the  fullest  sense  they  are  so  because  accepted  by  their  will ;  while  to
others  they  are  as  an  inconvenient  external  power,  against  which
their  individual  inclination  and  actual  will  rebel.  Such  people,  if
they  act  in  accordance  with  them,  do  so  for  the  sake  of  other
ends  which  have  nothing  in  common  with  the  rules  of  morality
and  law.  At  best  it  is  the  harmonious  will  of  the  majority  which
finds  utterance  in  them,  and  even  here  there  are  many  degrees  in
the  sincerity  and  unreservedness  of  assent.  If  we  try  to  explain  this
actual  relation  by  analogy  with  other  methods,  we  must  regard  those
convictions  of  the  majority  which  make  themselves  felt  as  an  average
result,  in  which  the  many  conflicting  efforts  of  individuals  have  counter
balanced  each  other,  as  the  common  resultant  of  all  conflicting  forces  in
which  that  tendency  which  is  common  to  most  preponderates.  This
interpretation  may  be  so  far  extended  as  to  regard  the  rules  as  containing
an  element  common  to  all  and  free  from  subjective  and  disturbing  sub
sidiary  influences  ;  and  then  the  attempt  to  derive  these  convictions,
which  claim  to  be  universally  valid  without  actually  being  so,  from  a
rational  or  moral  tendency  which  is  common  to  human  beings  and  merely
combined  with  other  tendencies  in  a  different  proportion  for  every  human
being,  would  be  perfectly  justified.

to.  Any  treatment  of  ethics  which  aims  merely  at  the  description  of
practical  reason,  and  which  takes  as  its  starting  point  the  consideration
of  existing  morality  in  the  actual  totality  of  human  will  and  action,  must
refer  to  considerations  like  these  from  this  point  of  view.  But  a  treatment
of  ethics  which  overlooks  the  historical  way  in  which  moral  convictions
exist  and  make  themselves  felt  in  the  particular  individual,  and  ignores
'the  consequent  distinction  between  the  actual  will  of  the  individuals,  in
which  consists  the  whole  life  of  the  community,  and  the  rules  which
constitute  their  openly  acknowledged  conviction ;  a  treatment  which
recognises  a  universal  reason  or  a  universal  spirit  as  the  only  subject  of
rational  action,  and  states  the  aims  and  ends  of  this  action  only  in  general


538  LOGIC

concepts,  as  in  the  ethics  of  Schleiermacher,  is  from  the  point  of  view  of
method  a  hybrid  creation.  By  an  arbitrary  abstraction  it  systematizes  one
portion  of  what  actually  happens,  selecting  it  from  the  whole  of  the  rest
as  the  moral  part  according  to  a  tacitly  assumed  standard ;  and  while
appearing  only  to  state  a  formula  of  history,  it  cannot  hide  its  real  intention
of  teaching  us  rather  what  history  ought  to  be  than  what  it  is.  Only  by
assuming  that  history  tends  of  itself  by  continual  progress  to  realize  the
concept  of  morality  can  it  find  any  connection  between  its  general  concept
and  what  actually  happens.  It  is  as  if  in  logic  we  should  aim  only  at
describing  the  forms  in  which  human  thought  moves,  and  should  live  in
faith  that  it  would  produce  truth  by  virtue  of  its  nature,  and  indeed  that
it  is  well  aware  of  the  right  way  even  in  its  blind  tendency,  as  if  we
should  disregard  the  fact  that  when  the  end  is  attained  the  consciousness
of  the  normal  laws  of  thought  is  an  essential  factor  in  the  progress  itself,
and  should  attempt  to  ignore  the  errors  and  mistakes  through  which
actual  thought  has  passed  and  the  labour  we  have  expended  in  con
sidering  the  nature  of  knowledge  and  the  criteria  of  truth.  It  is  the  same
vague  personification  of  a  universal  reason  which  we  found  being  employed
to  account  for  the  growth  of  law,  whilst  ignoring  conscious,  voluntary
work.

We  cannot  accept  this  mixture  of  empirical  investigation  of  the  actual
and  its  estimation  according  to  a  presupposed  standard  as  the  right
method  ;  but  we  find  that,  starting  from  the  same  standpoint  of  given
convictions,  there  is  still  another  task  than  that  of  explaining  them  and
deriving  them  from  their  psychological  grounds,  the  task,  that  is,  of  their
logical  treatment.

ii.  It  follows  from  the  nature  of  the  case  that  all  rules  which  are
intended  to  regulate  conduct,  whether  in  the  conviction  of  the  individual
or  in  the  expression  which  they  find  in  generally  recognised  commands,
are  general  and  to  a  large  extent  hypothetical.  No  end  could  be  set
before  particular  individuals  or  before  the  community  which  would
determine  the  sequence  of  their  actions  in  an  unbroken  connection,  nor
any  programme  devised  which  would  claim  their  whole  will  for  its  simple
execution.  In  realizing  his  ends  every  one  is  dependent  upon  a  thousand
incalculable  interruptions,  which  must  be  met  by  him,  and  it  is  impossible
to  foresee  what  varied  incitements  to  definite  action  will  present  them
selves.  Ethical  convictions  involve  a  willing  of  universal  ends,  which
specialize  themselves  in  the  most  varied  manner  according  to  circum-


METHODOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES OF  ETHICS 539

stances,  and  they  prescribe  how  we  ought  to  act  when  certain  conditions
occur;  prohibitions  especially,  though  they  are  in  themselves  uncondi
tional,  and  are  always  complied  with  when  the  forbidden  action  remains
undone,  have  no  significance  for  the  will  unless  the  temptation  to  violate
them  is  present.

1 2.  There  is  needed,  therefore,  a  continual  application  of  the  general
rules  to  the  concrete  cases  occurring  in  time,  and  a  continual  specification
of  general  ends  according  to  the  means  at  our  disposal,  which  require
the  logical  operations  of  deduction.  The  application  of  the  existing  law
is  the  clearest  and  most  obvious  example  of  this;  and  we  need  not  clo
more  than  point  out  that  the  difficulties  in  this  process  of  deduction  lie
in  the  subsumption  of  concrete  instances  under  the  authoritative  rules.
Every  general  rule  contains  a  general  concept  of  the  relations  to  which
it  is  to  be  applied  ;  these  general  concepts  are  obtained  empirically  by
abstraction,  and  contain  the  general  attributes  of  that  in  reference  to  which
the  legal  ordinance  expresses  some  command.  But,  on  the  one  hand,  the
concrete  instances  are  never  completely  exhausted  by  these  attributes,
while,  on  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  assume  that  the  legislator  whose  will
is  to  have  authority  (or  the  person  whose  will  the  law  commands  us  to
carry  out)  has  actually  thought  of  all  the  modifications  of  which  those
general  attributes  are  capable.  If  we  refer  to  the  conscious  will  of  the
legislator,  we  are  at  a  loss  whenever  a  case  occurs  of  which  we  cannot
assume  that  it  was  meant  to  be  included  in  the  general  concept  ;  if
nevertheless  such  a  case  is  subsumed  under  the  concept  by  the  judge,  we
can  indeed  say  from  the  purely  logical  point  of  view  that  what  takes  place
is  a  simple  application  of  the  law,  for  the  syllogism  is  correct,  but  when
we  consider  that  the  connection  between  these  general  characteristics  and
the  legal  consequence  is  not  logically  necessary,  but  only  created  by  the
will  of  the  legislator,  and  that  it  is  possible  to  doubt  whether  the  ground
of  that  consequence  has  found  its  true  and  complete  expression  in  the
formulation  of  the  general  concept,  then  we  see  that  the  decision  of  the
judge  does  not  simply  apply,  but  supplements  and  continues  the  legislation.
The  nature  of  the  process  of  abstraction,  which  starts  from  an  empirically
limited  group  of  objects,  necessarily  involves  that  a  concept  may  express
the  given  empirical  extension  of  objects  correctly  and  so  as  to  distinguish
them  from  all  other  known  objects,  and  yet  be  an  incomplete  formulation
of  all  that  is  common  to  these  objects ;  any  extended  application  of  that
which  is  established  in  such  a  concept  beyond  the  limits  within  which  it


540  LOGIC

was  obtained  is  then  no  longer  a  syllogism,  but  only  an  inference  from
analogy.  It  would  cease  to  be  such  only  if  it  could  be  shown  that  the
attributes  by  themselves  contain  the  ground  of  the  legal  consequences
which  the  legislator  assigns  to  them,  and  that  no  conceivable  species  of
the  concept  contains  further  attributes  which  would  modify  those  con
sequences.

It  is  this  which  constitutes  the  other  difficulty  in  deduction  from  general
rules,  that  one  and  the  same  fact  may  fall  under  different  general  con
cepts,  and  that  according  as  it  is  subsumed  in  one  way  or  the  other  the
consequences  will  be  different.  Generally  every  legislature  foresees  such
cases,  and  establishes  rules  which  correspond  to  the  laws  of  the  composi
tion  of  effects  (p.  350) ;  but  here  again  the  complication  of  real  relations
is  wont  to  exceed  what  is  foreseen,  and  here  again  the  application  of  the
rule  passes  over  without  fixed  limits  into  its  supplementation.  Nothing
but  the  complete  classification  of  all  specialities  would  make  it  possible  to
proceed  entirely  according  to  the  syllogism.

We  must  content  ourselves  with  showing  here  where  the  rules  of  juristic
interpretation  find  a  place  in  methodology.  An  exactly  similar  process  takes
place  in  other  provinces.  The  maxims  which  the  individual  forms  for
himself  from  his  subjective  conviction,  or  accepts  from  the  rules  prevalent
in  the  community,  are  just  as  insufficient  to  determine  beforehand  how  he
is  to  act  in  all  concrete  cases ;  the  individual  will  cannot  avoid  extending
its  legislation,  and  passing  beyond  simple  logical  necessity  to  make  its  own
decision.

13.  We  come  upon  difficulties  also  in  the  deduction  of  the  means
from  the  ends.  In  order  that  we  may  say  that  a  given  action  is  the
right  means  to  a  given  end,  and  must  therefore  be  willed  because  the
end  is  willed,  we  need  the  certainty  not  merely  that  the  end  is,  generally
speaking,  the  necessary  effect  of  the  means,  but  also  that  this  means  will
produce  the  end  under  the  whole  of  the  given  circumstances.  In  the
simplest  cases  this  knowledge  is  present  with  all  the  certainty  attainable,
but  in  most  cases  only  with  more  or  less  probability ;  we  have  not  before
us  all  the  premises  which  would  enable  us  to  deduce  from  the  end  the
most  appropriate  means,  and  hence  the  only  rule  for  practice  is  to  do
that  which  will  most  probably  bring  about  the  result.  It  is  the  most
trying  limitation  of  our  action  that  frequently  we  do  not  merely  fail  of
our  end,  but  bring  about  by  our  action  what  we  did  not  will ;  the  impos
sibility  of  always  reaching  necessary  conclusions  when  the  ends  are  given


METHODOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES OF  ETHICS 541

as  premises  calls  for  the  supplementation  of  thought  by  the  will  in
the  resolution  to  act  even  upon  mere  probability,  and  to  risk  the  con
sequences.

But  even  where  the  relation  of  the  means  to  the  ends  lies  clearly  before
us,  the  end  does  not  generally  determine  the  means  so  completely  that
it  can  be  attained  in  one  way  only ;  what  is  necessary  here  also  is  in  most
cases  only  a  general  element  which  may  become  real  in  different  ways.
It  is  here  that  we  find  room  for  the  choice  between  different  modes  of  action,
for  imaginative  construction,  for  that  moulding  of  circumstances  by  the  indi
vidual  which  is  in  the  widest  sense  a  work  of  art;  it  follows  necessarily
from  the  logical  relations  obtaining  in  the  sphere  of  ends  that  it  is  im
possible  to  determine  the  concrete  from  the  general  in  such  a  way  as  to
prevent  the  will  from  continuing  to  be  freely  formative  in  the  particular
action.

14.  In addition to this need of  supplementing our general rules
because  of  the incompleteness  of  the concepts upon which they  are
based,  and  bringing  the  ends,  which  also  are  wont  to  appear  first  in  a
general  form,  into  the  full  determinateness in  which  alone  they  can  be
realized,  we  find  ourselves  called  upon  to  undertake  an  opposite  logical
operation  when  we  start  from  the  assumption  of  an  authoritative  ethical
conviction. For  while  the  rules,  which  are  the  expression  of  this  con
viction, have from  one  point  of  view the  character  of  generality,  and
require  activity  of  thought  and  will  to  develop  them  into  the  particular,
they  generally  appear  as  a  plurality  of commands  and  prohibitions,  which
regulate  different  courses  of  action  and  refer  to  our  relation  to  different
classes  of  objects, or,  in  another  form, as  a  plurality  of  judgments  as  to
what  is  good  and  bad,  right  and  wrong,  praiseworthy  or  shameful. Here
what  we  have  to  do  is  to  generalize,  and to  reduce  the  plurality  of  co
existent  propositions to  their final and most general principles. We
have  given  the  general  form  of  such  a  reduction  (§  82,  p.  203),  and  have
shown  what  are  the  conditions  under  which  general  propositions  obtained
in  this  way  may  be  regarded  as  absolutely  valid.

15.  It  is  not  this  branch  of  reduction  which we  wish  to  develop  at
present ;  what  we  must  first  do  is  to  point  out  a  presupposition  which  is
involved  in  the  unquestioning  application  of  these  logical  processes  to  the
propositions  in  which  general  rules  find  expression. When  we  assume
that  whoever  wills  these  rules,  and  acknowledges  them  to  be  binding  for
himself,  also  wills  their  necessary  consequences  and  their  necessary  condi-


542  LOGIC

tions  which  he  has  not  explicitly  received  into  his  consciousness,  we  have
already  substituted  for  the  actual  empirical  consciousness,  in  which  these
rules  are  first  thought  as  the  content  of  will,  an  ideal  consciousness  in
which  everything  is  connected  according  to  strict  rules  of  logical  neces
sity  ;  the  question  is  not  what  is  actually  thought  and  imagined  as  object
of  the  will  and  affirmed  by  the  will,  but  what  under  certain  conditions
and  according  to  logical  rules  ought  to  be  thought  and  affirmed.  Even
logical  legislation  ultimately  presupposes  such  an  ideal,  all-embracing  con
sciousness,  which  consistently  thinks  every  thought  in  its  right  connection
with  others  ;  if  that  is  to  be  authoritative  which  follows  with  logical  neces
sity  from  an  authoritative  rule,  then  the  legislating  will  is  not  the  empirical,
but  an  ideal  will,  and  the  supplementation  of  which  we  have  spoken  above
is  ultimately  the  supplementation  of  the  empirical  by  an  ideal  will.

1 6.  The  development  of  the logical consequences of  any actually
recognised  principle  may  be  also  treated  in  the  way  explained  in  §  99  (p.
457). We  expect  that  the  deviating  opinions  of  individuals  will  ultimately
counterbalance  each  other,  and that  whatever  is  necessary  to  common
human  nature  will  be  left,  that  in  consequence  of  this  what  actually  is
authoritative  will  be  identical  with  what  ought  to  be,  and  that  any  basis
of  ethical  or  legal  judgment  will  in  this  way  be  imperceptibly, but  con
sistently  and  systematically,  developed. It  is  this  which  justifies  us  in
treating  the  historical  development  of  ethical  convictions  from  the  point
of  view  of  a  logically  necessary  process,  in  regarding  the  actual  as  the
reasonable ; to carry out such a treatment, we must select  from the
totality  of  errors  whatever  falls  in  the  line of  objectively  necessary  pro
gress,  and  reject  as  fortuitous  and  irrational  whatever  is  in  conflict  with
it : that  is,  we  must  regard  history  as  teleological.

1 7.  But  the  same  considerations  extend  further,  beyond  the  half-historical,
half-teleological  treatment. For  the  same  reason  which  makes  us  regard
anything  which  follows  according  to  logical  rules  from  an  actually  assumed
ethical  conviction  as  established by  that  conviction,  thus  depending  upon
the  certainty  with  which  the  logical  normal  laws  make  themselves  felt, we
must also apply the same standard to the assumed principle, to  see
whether  it  contains  anything  which  can  be  recognised  as  an  unconditional
"  ought,"  independent of  all subjective opinion. The process of  re
duction  itself  can  only  be  carried  out  when  the  principles  presupposed  do
not  merely  possess  the  problematic  validity  which  belongs  to  them  as
possible  premises  of  known  propositions,  but  can  be  known  as  necessary


METHODOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES OF  ETHICS 543

in  themselves ;  and  thus  every  ethical  conviction  requires  a  final  criterion
of  its  truth.

1 8.  Such  a  criterion  can  only  be  if  there is  something  in  our  actual
will  which  is  accompanied  by  the  consciousness  of  unconditional  necessity,
and  if  there  are  objects  of  the will which  are  not  merely  to  be  willed
because  something  else  is  willed,  but  must  be  absolutely  and  uncondition
ally  willed  wherever  anything  is  willed,  or  wherever  there  is  a  consciously
willing subject. Just as the feeling  of  certainty, which in the logical
sphere distinguishes objectively necessary  thought from that which is
peculiar to the individual and determined by varying psychological
motives,  is  an  ultimate  fact  beyond  which  we  cannot  pass,  so,  if  there
is  any  ethical  knowledge  at  all,  the  conviction  of  an  "  ought "  must  find
its  ultimate  fact  in  the  certainty  of  its  unconditional  necessity,  and  what
we  have  to  do  is  merely  to  become  aware  of  the  conditions  which  give
rise  to  this  certainty,  and  to  reduce  them  to  their  general  expression  (cf.
§  3,  2.  I,  p.  15).

19.  The  process  of  discovering  ethical  principles  can  be  none  other
than  that  which  is  employed  in  obtaining  logical  or  mathematical  axioms,
and  which  we  described  in §  82,  5 (p.  208). We  are  generally  immedi
ately  conscious  of  the  necessity  under  the  guise  of  a  concrete  case,  and
we  have  to  find  out  by  analysis  what  serves  as  a  ground  for  the  necessity
and  what  merely  applies  to  a  casually  given object. Thus  there is  no
other  way  than  that  of  reduction,  or  of  reduction  mediated  by  induction,
by  which  to  obtain  the  ultimate  and  absolutely  certain  ethical  principles.
This  reduction  may  start either  from  the  immediate  consciousness  which
accompanies  the  particular  act  of  will,  or  from  the  standards  by  which  we
estimate  our  own  and  others'  actions,  and  which  present  themselves  with
unconditional  certainty ;  but  the  principles  are  not  discovered  until  they
appear  as  self-evident  and  accompanied  by  the  consciousness  of  necessity.
In  this  respect Kant employed the only  method possible. Herbart
followed  him  in  this,  but  stopped  half-way  in the  attainment  of  his  end,
by  ascribing  only  an  empirical  validity  to  his  standards  of  judgment  and
by  being  satisfied  to  have  more  than  one.

20.  We  must  also  agree  with Kant  that  in  this  way  only  an  abstract
formal  principle  can  be  found. For  if  the  ends  which  are  significant  for
human  action  cannot  be  willed  unless  they  are  practicable,  while  their
practicability depends  upon external  conditions  which  do  not  exist  by
our  merely  willing  them,  then  any  given  action  can  never  be  an  uncon-


544  LOGIC

ditional  duty  for  every  one,  and  all  imperatives  commanding  us  to  bring
about  definite  changes  in  the  world  must  be  hypothetical.  On  the  other
hand,  an  unconditional  principle  for  the  will,  even  with  respect  to  mental
conditions,  can  only  demand  what  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  will,  and  its
form  must  therefore  be  determined  by  the  nature  of  the  will.  As  the
normal  laws  of  logic  are  determined  by  the  nature  of  judgment,  because
they  command  us  to  carry  out  this  function  correctly,  so  also  must  the
ethical  laws  of  action  be  determined  by  the  nature  of  the  will  as  directed
towards  actions,  for  they  command  us  to  will  in  the  right  way.  And  we
may  find  here  a  relation  similar  to  that  between  the  natural  and  the
normal  laws  of  judgment:  just  as  the  principle  of  contradiction  is  a
natural  law  of  thought  in  so  far  as  we  cannot  both  affirm  and  deny  at  the
same  moment,  and  becomes  a  normal  law  by  being  extended  to  the  whole
comprehensive  unity  of  consciousness,  and  commands  us  to  think  every
thing  in  such  a  way  that  all  may  be  combined  in  one  ideal  and  all-
embracing  consciousness,  so  a  normal  law  of  the  will  would  be  one  con
trolling  the  particular  act  of  will  as  a  natural  law,  and  obtaining  authority
as  a  normal  law  by  the  idea  of  an  all-embracing  willing  self-consciousness
of  absolute  unity  ;  and  just  as  the  principle  of  contradiction  is  purely
formal  in  that  it  does  not  say  what  is  to  be  affirmed  and  denied,  but  only
that  if  a.  proposition  is  affirmed  it  cannot  be  also  denied,  so  we  may  con
ceive  of  an  ethical  first  principle  which  would  not  itself  say  what  must  be
willed,  but  only  that  if  one  thing  is  willed  another  must  be  willed,  and  a
third  cannot  be  willed  ;  and  just  as  the  universal  authority  of  logic  rests
upon  the  assumption  of  a  human  reason  which  is  common  to  all,  and  by
virtue  of  which  it  is  possible  for  every  one  to  recognise  its  rules  and  to
regulate  his  thoughts  according  to  them,  so  also  ethical  legislation  rests
upon  the  same  assumption  with  respect  to  the  highest  and  uncondi
tional  rules  of  our  will ;  in  the  last  instance  upon  the  idea  of  a  self-con
sciousness  which  is  completely  one,  but  also,  and  for  the  same  reason,
upon  the  recognition  of  the  equal  right  belonging  to  the  reasonable  ends
of  all  willing  individuals.

21.  If  we  are  right  in  assuming  that  the  analysis  of  the  will  can  only
lead  to  purely  formal  laws,  and  that  the  ideal  to  which  it  leads  is  nothing
more  than  the  complete  unity  and  harmony  of  the  will  in  each  particular
subject,  and  of  the  will  of  all  the  subjects  in  a  community,  then  it  also
follows  that  it  is  impossible  by  way  of  pure  deduction  to  arrive  at  the
particular  ends  which  ought  to  form  the  content  of  our  actual  and  concrete


METHODOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES OF  ETHICS 545


will.  For  what  we  actually  will  is  ultimately  something  particular  and
completely  determined;  our  general  ends  are  realized  only  in  actions
which  are  directed  towards  particular  things  and  their  changes.  But  what
this  particular  something  is  can  be  no  more  derived  from  formal  principles
than  the  whole  content  of  knowledge,  although  it  conforms  to  logical  rules,
can  be  deduced  from  them.

22.  We  must  here  note  an  essential  difference  between  the  conditions
of  theoretical  and  ethical  knowledge.  In  our  theoretical  knowledge  there
are  given  to  us  with  immediate  certainty  not  only  these  highest  rules,  but
also  the  particular  propositions  which  express  our  immediate  consciousness,
and  the  process  of  theoretical  knowledge  consists  in  constructing  the
presuppositions  from  which  these  data  follow,  which  have  their  inde
pendent  validity.  The  material  principles  are  hypothetical,  their  conse
quences  immediately  certain.  Exactly  the  reverse  takes  place  in  the
sphere  of  ethics.  Here  the  particular  determinate  action  has  no  indepen
dent  necessity  of  its  own  ;  it  follows  from  the  nature  of  the  will  and  from
the  ideal  of  an  all-embracing  end  that  particular  actions  can  derive  their
ethical  necessity  only  from  a  general  end  or  from  a  system  of  ends.  Any
system  of  ethics  which  is  applied  to  real  action,  and,  passing  beyond  mere
formalism,  aims  at  stating  what  is  the  content  of  the  ends  which  men  must
set  before  them,  meets  with  difficulties  arising  from  the  fact  that  an  ethical
system  cannot  be  built  up  from  below,  but  can  only  be  sketched  out  from
above,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  conditions  of  actual  action  consist  in
empirical  particular  states,  and  a  general  end  of  which  the  possibility  is
not  contained  in  these  conditions  has  no  basis  in  reality.

The  material  problem  for  ethics  is  therefore  to  construct  a  compre
hensive,  harmonious  end  as  the  object  of  human  action,  in  such  a  way
that  it  may  be  possible  under  the  given  conditions.

23.  But  the  problem  as  thus  expressed  is  indefinite.  Starting  from
any  given  state,  different  courses  appear  to  be  possible,  for  since  the  con
viction  of  what  ought  to  be  willed  is  itself  a  factor  in  moulding  the  future,
this  future  will  depend  to  a  large  extent,  even  from  the  merely  causal
point  of  view,  upon  the  way  the  ends  are  determined.  On  the  other  hand,
by  insisting  upon  the  unity  of  the  end,  upon  the  absence  of  contradiction
in  the  will,  we  get  only  a  negative  canon,  not  rules  for  what  ought  to  be.

Here  we  find  the  basis  for  two  branches  of  ethics.  If  we  start  merely
from  the  formal  principles,  then  their  consequences  can  only  be  negatively
applicable  to  that  which  happens  independently  of  them,  and  does  not

S.L.— II.  N N


546  LOGIC

conform  to  their  requirements.  Ethics  becomes  merely  critical  and
repressive,  but  has  the  advantage  of  standing  upon  firm  ground  and  of
being  demonstrative  ;  it  is  able  to  refute  with  certainty  whatever  does  not
agree  with  the  idea  of  a  harmonious  legislature  for  the  will.  But  it  is
unable  to  say  what  ought  to  be  willed,  what  state  ought  to  be  brought
about  by  the  action  of  the  individual  and  of  the  community ;  it  is  obliged
to  leave  concrete  ends  to  chance  impulses.

The  positive  content  of  the  general  end  which  we  seek  for  the  totality
of  human  action,  the  idea  of  the  highest  good  as  of  a  state  to  be  realized
by  concrete  actions,  cannot  be  derived  from  these  elements  alone  ;  and
every  system  of  ethics  has  accordingly  either  openly  or  tacitly  had  recourse
to  other  data  in  definitely  formulating  its  ideal  of  life  for  the  individual
and  for  the  community,  to  data  which  are  taken  from  that  human  nature
which  is  present  before  ethical  reflection  begins,  and  from  the  natural,
empirically  given  tendencies  of  the  will.

This  psychological  basis  is  necessary  from  two  points  of  view.  On
the  one  hand,  ethics,  like  logic,  cannot  proceed  to  erect  an  entirely  new
edifice ;  any  action  which  it  calls  for  must  be  carried  out  under  given  rela
tions  and  with  given  means,  and  all  common  action  within  a  community  of
given  convictions  and  tendencies,  which  can  only  gradually  be  remoulded,
corrected  and  brought  into  harmony.  How  we  are  to  progress  from  this
point  towards  the  end  is  a  question  which  cannot  be  answered  from  the
unyielding  standpoint  of  the  absolute  ideal ;  the  continuity  of  human  action
makes  its  claims  felt  in  the  sphere  of  ethics,  as  of  logic.  For  this  reason
ethics,  in  its  immediate  application,  passes  into  the  arts  of  education  and
politics,  which  have  to  employ  given  forces  to  the  best  advantage  under
given  relations.

In  considering  the  rules  of  our  will,  we  have  therefore  to  look  to  the
psychological  conditions  in  order  to  find  out  how  progress  is  possible,  and
how  the  existing  course  of  action  is  to  be  guided  towards  the  end  ;  and
we  are  also  obliged  to  understand  human  nature  in  order  to  give  concrete
form  to  the  end  itself,  to  that  which  is  not  merely  relatively  the  best  of
what  is  immediately  attainable,  but  is  to  be  the  absolute  final  end  of  all
action,  towards  which  it  has  gradually  to  approximate.  For  it  is  ultimately
only  the  estimation  of  the  value  possessed  by  the  various  natural  ten
dencies  ot  our  actions  and  the  benefits  arising  from  them  (a  value  which
makes  itself  known  in  feeling)  that  renders  it  possible  to  make  a  systematic
arrangement  of  human  action.  At  this  point  ethics  and  aesthetics,  the


METHODOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES  OF  ETHICS 547

ideal  of  the  good  and  the  ideal  of  the  beautiful,  meet ;  the  highest  good
attains  its  concrete  and  individual  form  only  through  the  harmonious
satisfaction  which  it  ensures  to  the  totality  of  the  natural  human  desires,
through  the  right  relation  in  which  that  which  is  valuable  only  because
physically  indispensable  stands  as  subservient  means  to  the  higher  forms
and  products  of  activity  which  are  valuable  in  themselves.  If  aesthetics
could  succeed  in  finding  an  absolute  standard  for  the  felt  values  of  ends,
it  would  then  determine  the  matter  which,  in  the  ruling  form  of  the  will,
constitutes  the  whole  content  of  the  end  in  the  establishment  of  which
we  should  have  completed  our  consideration  of  the  ends  of  human  action.
In  the  last  instance  every  attempt  to  find  an  unconditional  standard  of
value  points  beyond  the  subjectively  varying  and  historically  conditioned
feeling  of  value  to  the  thought  of  an  objective  universal  end,  and  can
reach  its  highest  aim  only  by  having  recourse  to  the  principles  of  meta
physics  and  theology.

24.  We  cannot  follow  further  these  brief  hints  concerning  the con
nection of  ethical problems  and  the application of  methods to their
solution  ;  from  the  point  of  view  of  method  it  is  more  necessary  to  point
out  the  presupposition  necessary  to  a  systematic  unity  of  ethics. This
presupposition  is,  that  the  nature  of  man  is  so  constituted  that  a  system  of
ends  is  possible  which  is  both  harmonious  and  consistent  in  itself,  and
satisfying  to  those  who  accept  the  ends,  and  which  is  therefore  able to
produce  the volitional  impulse according to natural  laws. This pre
supposition  corresponds  to  that  from  which  all  our  effort  towards  know
ledge starts, i.e.,  that the perceptions given  to us and their logical
elaboration  must  lead  to  a  system  according  to  logical  forms,  to  a  system
of  concepts  and  a  system  of  laws.

25.  One  part  of  the  highest  good  is  knowledge  itself,  for  which  we
seek  the  rules  in  logic,  the  elevation of  the  individual  consciousness  to
the  unity  and  clearness  of  that  ideal  consciousness  which  is  one  with  itself
and harmonious, and the ideal  of which,  though  nowhere  empirically
realized,  is  the  living  force  in  all  the  rational  activity  of  men,  a  self-con
sciousness  in  which  is  realized  not  only  the  formal  unity  of  the  relation  of

'all  the  particular  to  the  knowing  subject,  but  also  the  unity  of  the  merely
given  content  as  independent  of  conscious  and  voluntary  thought.


543  LOGIC

FINAL  RESULTS.
§  105.

The  presuppositions  from  which  all  methods  must  start  which  do  not
refer  merely  to  the  development  of  our  ideas  according  to  subjective  laws
include  an  agreement  between  that  which  is  demanded  by  our  conscious
thought  and  will  as  aiming  at  unity  in  our  ends  and  that  which  is  due  to
involuntary  and  externally  conditioned  activities.

This  agreement  between  two  spheres,  which  at  first  and  from  a  causal
point  of  view  appear  to  be  independent  of  each  other,  can  only  be  made
comprehensible  by  teleologiral  considerations.

If  we  are  to  find  a  real  explanation  in  these,  it  must  be  by  assuming
one  ground  both  for  conscious  thought  and  its  laws  and  for  the  objects
confronting  it  and  independent  of  it,  a  ground  which,  as  the  ultimate
ground  of  explanation  of  the  relation  between  subject  and  object,  must
also  be  unconditioned.

Thus  the  principles  of  methodology  point  to  the  idea  of  God,  which  can
only  be  more  definitely  apprehended  by  means  of  the  ideal  which  hovers
before  our  thought  and  will  as  the  end  at  which  they  aim.

Thus  metaphysics  appears  as  a  problem  :  that  of  obtaining  a  consistent
view  of  the  final  ground  of  the  relation  between  the  subjective  laws  and
ideals  of  thought  and  will  and  the  objective  content  of  knowledge,  of
comprehending  under  it  on  the  one  hand  the  ultimate  presuppositions
from  which  proceeds  all  rational  thought,  on  the  other  hand  the  results
at  which  it  arrives.

The  highest  and  most  difficult  problem  of  metaphysics  consists  in
determining  the  relation  in  which  the  necessity  which  guides  all  our  know
ledge  of  the  existent  stands  to  the  freedom  which  is  the  subjective
postulate  of  the  conscious  will.  Inasmuch  as  logic  itself  presupposes
such  a  will,  and  as  the  principles  of  its  methods  are  postulates,  it  prescribes
itself  the  limits  to  its  demands  for  knowledge  of  all  pervading  necessity.

i.  When  we  survey  the  results  to  which  the  investigation  of  the  pre
suppositions  and  aims  of  logical  methods  has  led  us,  we  find  that  they
all  of  them  ultimately  point  in  one  and  the  same  direction.

In  the  first  place,  it  has  appeared  that  the  ultimate  basis  of  all  the
mental  activities,  for  the  right  conduct  of  which  we  seek  a  clue  in  methodo
logy,  is  a  will  which  sets  before  itself  definite  ends  ;  and  that  to  this  will
is  due  the  motive  force  which  impels  us  to  investigation,  while  the  most


FINAL RESULTS  549

general  principles  of  the  investigation  are  derived  from  the  ends  pursued
by  it.  In  the  choice  of  means  this  will  is  confined  to  the  natural  forms
and  laws  of  ideation  and  thought,  and  thus  the  first  task  of  logic  is  to
bring  these  into  consciousness,  in  order  that  in  our  action,  so  far  as  it  is
determined  by  the  nature  of  mental  activity,  we  may  be  certain  of  necessity
and  universal  validity.  It  is  in  this  way  that  we  obtain  a  firm  and  im
movable  scaffolding  for  all  knowledge.  Geometry  and  logic,  with  its
development  in  arithmetic,  give  us  the  outlines  to  which  all  further  con
tent  must  conform.  They  themselves  are  produced  by  a  spontaneous
and  in  its  higher  branches  constructive  action,  which  not  only  finds  its
laws  in  the  consciousness  of  our  own  action  and  its  necessity,  but  also
creates  its  objects  according  to  these  laws,  not  merely  copying  the  given,
but  forestalling  experience  by  a  network  of  relations  in  which  the  concrete
content  of  sensations  takes  its  place  only  gradually.  The  syntheses,  again,
which  are  contained  in  the  concepts  of  substance  and  of  causality,  also
have  their  origin  in  the  subject,  and  in  the  way  in  which,  by  a  natural
necessity  combining  the  plurality  of  sensations,  it  maintains  its  unity
throughout  change,  and  refers  the  continuous  flux  of  events  to  a  single  and
comprehensible  ground.  Here,  indeed,  our  thought  is  not  in  a  position  to
construct  freely  and  arbitrarily,  but  is  confined  for  the  application  of  these
concepts  to  the  material  given  ;  still  even  here  it  must  recur  to  the  proper
meaning  of  its  action  by  moulding  these  concepts  so  as  to  be  more  clear
and  distinct  and  by  finding  general  rules  for  their  application.  In  the  last
instance  it  is  by  construction  again  that  we  complete  the  task  of  compre
hending  the  ultimate  grounds  of  given  phenomena  in  concepts.

2.  Thus  we  find  the  thinking  and  knowing  subject  to  be  an  indepen
dent  source  of  activities,  productive  of  those  forms  of  its  action  by  which
everything  is  controlled  and  determined,  but  limited  so  far  as  concerns
absolute  certainty  of  judgment  to  the  sphere  within  which  it  merely  brings
its  own  functions  into  consciousness.  When  we  pass  beyond  this  sphere
to  knowledge  of  the  universe  given  to  us  in  perception,  and  turn  our  atten
tion  to  the  ends  which  guide  our  conscious  will  and  our  material  activities,
we  find  that  no  systematic  movement  of  thought,  sure  of  what  it  aims  at
and  of  the  way  of  attaining  it,  is  possible  except  under  presuppositions
which  do  not  possess  the  absolutely  axiomatic  certainty  of  the  principles
of  our  own  action,  and  to  which  is  also  denied  the  guarantee  from  matter
of  fact  of  complete  empirical  confirmation.

No  logical  arrangement  of  the  phenomena entering  into  consciousness


550  LOGIC

by  way  of  sensation  and  perception  can  be  undertaken  with  any  prospect
of  success  except  where  there  is  confidence  that  they  will  conform  to  the
forms  of  thought,  that  their  content  is  such  that  they  can  be  arranged  in
a  complete  system  of  concepts  which  is  determined  by  the  fundamental
functions  of  thought,  by  the  recognition  of  agreement  and  difference.
Moreover,  our  work  upon  the  varying  material  of  our  sensations  must  start
from  the  belief  that  the  syntheses  which — impelled  by  an  inner  necessity  of
thought  in  combining  the  many  to  unity  and  reducing  it  to  one  ground —
we  impose  upon  all  given  content,  are  met  by  no  insuperable  resistance  in
the  material  of  sensations  in  space  and  time  ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  flow
of  phenomena  which  is  represented  by  the  succession  of  sensations  will
crystallize  by  the  aid  of  those  forms  into  fixed  concepts,  and  that  their  con
nection  may  be  expressed  in  unvarying  laws.  The  processes  of  induction  can
only  aim  at  constructing  a  science  in  universal  propositions,  or  be  more  than
subjective  associations  of  doubtful  value,  if  the  particular  phenomena  are
based  upon  invariable  necessity,  and  what  our  thought  expresses  in  its
universal  propositions  is  only  this  necessity  which  is  grounded  in  the
object,  and  which  binds  together  the  attributes  of  an  essential  concept  and
makes  the  activities  of  a  substance  the  unfailing  consequence  of  its  nature
and  its  relations  to  others.  It  is  by  this  presupposition  that  we  are  always
guided  in  constructing  the  hypotheses  by  which  we  attempt  to  explain
the  plurality  of  given  phenomena  in  a  comprehensible  manner.

In  the  same  way  we  cannot  attempt  the  systematic  arrangement  of  our
action,  which  extends  itself  through  time  and  spreads  itself  over  a  number
of  various  objects,  under  one  single  final  concept,  unless  we  assume,  on
the  one  hand,  that  there  are  fixed  relations  between  means  and  ends,  and
that  it  is  possible  to  foresee  and  calculate  results,  so  that  our  attempts  to
influence  the  course  of  things  may  not  proceed  casually  in  all  directions  in
the  absence  of  any  plan,  and  work  against  our  intentions,  to  make  a  sport
of  our  blindness  and  weakness.  This  assumption  is  none  other  than  that
upon  which  our  theoretical  knowledge  is  also  based,  i.e.  the  immutability
of  the  causal  connections  which  offers  the  only  basis  for  purposive  will.
On  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  conceive  of  any  serious  willing  of  an  end
which  we  recognise  as  authoritative,  unless  we  believe  that  the  whole  nature
of  man,  even  when  acting  independently  of  or  before  our  conscious  will,
is  controllable  by  single  ends,  and  that  the  practical  anarchy  of  moment
ary  and  particular  impulses  and  desires  does  not  deny  all  obedience  to
the  authority  of  reason,  while  a  self-consciousness  which  is  one  only  in


FINAL RESULTS  551

theory  holds  together  in  unceasing  torment  volitions  which  are  necessarily-
broken  into  contradictory  and  conflicting  fragments.  In  the  same  way
human  society  is  only  conceivable  if  it  is  possible  for  all  to  unite  in  direct
ing  their  will  towards  common  ends,  and  that  no  inevitable  conflict  between
opposed  wills  should  destroy  the  will  of  one  by  that  of  another;  there  must
be  some  ground  for  the  hope  that  the  battle  for  the  right  will  lead  to  the
right.

3.  Looked  at  from  the  subjective  side,  the  end  aimed  at  by  the  cognitive
activities  combines  with  the  belief  in  its  attainability  to  form  the  ideal  of
an  all-embracing  universal  consciousness,  which  would  possess  the  totality
of  the  universe  as  extended  in  space  and  time  in  intuitive  knowledge,
while  it  penetrated  with  its  thoughts  the  connection  of  the  particular  into
one  unity. The  conceptual  system  of  such  a  consciousness  would  be  the
adequate  expression  of  the  nature  of  substances,  and  it  would  be  able  to
derive  from  them as  obvious  consequences  the  course  of  events  at  all
times  and  places,  penetrating  at  once  into  everything  which  now  we  can
only  calculate  in  a  fragmentary  manner.

In  the  practical  sphere  the  end  towards  which  we  strive  and  the
assumption  of  its  attainability  also  combine  to  form  the  ideal  of  an  ego
which  is  harmonious  in  its  will,  directing  all  its  activities  towards  an  end
of  unconditional  value,  controlling  its  own  activities  by  its  will  and  nature  by
its  activities,  successful  in  realizing  the  highest  good,  and  nosvhere  pro
hibited  by  insuperable  resistance  from  ordering  the  actual  in  accordance
with  its  end.

The  thought  of  this  ideal  is  the  motive  force  both  in  our  effort  towards
knowledge  and  in  the  will  which  we  direct  towards  action.  All  reasonable
activity  which  is  conscious  of  its  end  is  the  rising  towards  this  ideal,  the
complete  reference  of  all  particular  action  to  this  perfect  unity.  Com
munity  of  reasonable  action  both  in  science  and  in  practice  is  possible  in
so  far  as  this  ideal  is  harmoniously  active  in  all,  as  the  motive  force  of
reason ;  and  we  approximate  towards  the  ideal  from  the  given  state  of
individual  limitations  in  such  a  way  that  our  action  is  a  means  of  realizing
the  same  end  for  ourselves  and  for  others.  In  the  form  of  a  community
of  action,  in  which  strife  and  sin  have  disappeared,  it  denotes  the  final  end
of  the  common  rational  activity  of  mankind.

4.  When  we  are  conscious  of  the  full  significance  of  these  presupposi
tions  of  the  voluntary  thought  which  directs  itself  with  the  purpose  of
knowing  towards  that  which  is  and  that  which  ought  to  be,  then  their  full


552  LOGIC

bearing  and  the  whole  content  of  the  belief  upon  which  they  rest  become
obvious.

In  the  first  place,  and  for  our  immediate  apprehension,  our  thought,
with  its  search  after  unity  and  connection,  with  its  connecting  forms  of
concept  and  judgment,  and  with  its  categories  of  substance  and  causality,
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  plurality  of  sensations  on  the  other,  are  quite
independent  of  each  other.  Neither  on  the  ground  of  pure  subjectivity,
nor  on  the  assumption  of  a  real  external  world,  can  it  be  proved  that  they
must  correspond  to  each  other ;  for  our  immediate  consciousness  the  one
function  seems  independent  of  the  other  :  thought  is  one  with  itself  and
guided  by  the  will,  sensation  absolutely  involuntary  and  given.  We  see
no  possibility  of  determining  one  function  by  the  other,  of  knowing  it
simply  as  the  consequence  of  the  other  ;  in  the  actual  course  of  knowledge
they  always  stand  to  some  extent  apart,  sensations  being  incomprehensible
for  thought  and  presenting  it  with  the  problem  of  arranging  them  in
logical  connection,  and  thought  in  its  constructions  passing  beyond  and
seeking  to  be  supplemented  by  sensation.  The  idea,  however,  from  which
we  always  start  is,  that  the  complete  reference  of  the  two  spheres  to  each
other  must  be  capable  of  being  realized,  that  all  the  given  is  thinkable.

It  is  the  same  in  the  sphere  of  the  will.  Over  against  the  self-confidence
with  which  we  demand  the  complete  conformity  of  our  activities  to  the
rule  of  a  clearly  conceived  end  stand  the  varying  impulses  and  inclina
tions  of  our  nature  which  drive  us  in  the  most  various  directions  to  the
satisfaction  of  our  desire  for  momentary  pleasure,  and  manifest  their
independence  of  the  single  moral  will  by  the  conflict  which  we  feel  so
deep  as  internal  discord.  Moreover,  when  we  attempt  to  realize  uur
ends  in  the  external  world,  we  are  confronted  by  the  uniform  order  of
nature,  which  follows  its  mechanical  laws  blindly  and  without  concern
for  our  ideals,  and  only  permits  us  to  influence  it  on  condition  that  we
obey  those  laws.  Here  again  it  often  happens  that,  whatever  progress
we  may  have  made  in  the  control  of  our  own  activities  and  in  our  power
over  nature,  our  reasonable  will  and  the  actual  event  are  opposed,
opposed  not  merely,  as  in  the  theoretical  sphere,  by  being  external  to  each
other,  but  in  a  strife  in  which  the  real  causality  of  nature  refuses  obedience
to  the  real  causality  of  our  will.  Nevertheless  we  still  demand  the
realization  of  the  highest  good  within  and  without,  and  believe  in  the
possibility  of  overcoming  the  resistance  opposed  to  us  and  of  a  harmony
between  the  laws  of  nature  and  the  claims  of  duty.


FINAL RESULTS


553


This  involves  an  assumption  as  to  the  relation  between  our  will  and
thought  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  the  independent  forces  within
and  without,  which  in  its  consequences  necessarily  leads  to  teleological
ideas.  In  what  other  way  than  in  the  thought  of  an  end  controlling  their
relation  can  we  explain  and  understand  the  harmony  between  two  spheres,
each  of  which  appears  from  the  causal  point  of  view  to  be  original,  and
not  to  be  derived  from  the  other?  What  does  the  belief  that  the  universe
given  in  perception  is  knowable  ultimately  mean,  if  not  that  our  thought
and  its  object  are  mutually  determined  for  each  other,  that  nature  is
ruled  by  thoughts,  and  our  minds  so  organized  as  to  think  these  thoughts?
That  doctrine  which,  while  hostile  to  all  teleology,  yet  maintains  the  com
plete  uniformity  of  the  universe  and  is  confident  of  grasping  it  in  formulae,
forgets  that  laws  have  a  real  existence  only  in  the  form  of  a  comprehending
thought,  that  the  invariable  reference  of  a  plurality  of  elements  to  each
other  is  possible  only  in  the  form  of  a  thought,  that  the  concept  of  law
itself  had  its  origin  in  human  actions,  and  presupposes  a  general  concept
which,  when  thought  as  such,  controls  a  plurality  of  activities  by  conscious
will,  and  is  therefore  prior  to  its  particular  realizations.  To  make  the
uniformity  of  the  laws  of  nature  responsible  for  what  actually  happens  is
to  affirm  that  it  realizes  thoughts,  and  to  be  teleological  without  knowing
it ;  it  is  to  compare  nature  to  a  kingdom,  in  which  the  members  carry  out
ordinances  which  have  been  thought  out  beforehand,  and  which  prescribe
the  appropriate  activities  for  every  position.  Even  a  purely  mechanical
natural  science  cannot  dispense  with  a  teleology  which  forms  its  ultimate
presupposition,  and  upon  which  all  its  endeavours  are  based  ;  the  effort
which  is  most  its  own,  that  of  endeavouring  to  understand  the  given  as
necessary,  can  be  really  concluded  and  completed  in  no  other  form  than
that  of  the  idea  of  the  unity  of  the  end.  The  inductive  methods  lead
ultimately  to  the  hypothetical  necessity  of  the  results  which  follow  from  a
plurality  of  efficient  substances,  when  there  is  a  certain  distribution  of
them  in  space  and  certain  relations  between  their  states  ;  neither  their
number  nor  their  arrangement  can  be  derived  from  their  concepts,  even  if
these  should  be  arranged  in  a  complete  classification.  When  we  assume
one  state  of  the  universe  we  can  only  show  it  to  be  the  necessary  conse
quence  of  another,  and  the  cause  of  a  subsequent  one  ;  our  demand  for
causality  never  gets  beyond  mere  hypothetical  necessity  to  the  knowledge
that  the  given  as  it  is,  in  its  whole  causally  connected  course,  is  necessary.
If  we  try  to  assert  this,  there  remains  only  the  empty  statement  that  it  is


554


LOGIC


necessary,  that  it  is  a  part  of  the  concept  of  the  existent  to  be  such  as  it
is  ;  but  this  statement  itself  accepts  the  concept  as  the  ground  of  being,
and  if  it  is  to  be  made  comprehensible,  and  to  explain  the  plurality  of
existence  by  one  ground,  there  is  no  way  but  that  of  teleology.  If  we  can
regard  the  whole  existence  of  the  universe,  or  the  result  to  be  ultimately
realized  by  its  organization,  as  an  end  in  itself  worthy  to  be  realized,  then
the  plurality  of  elements  falls  into  subordination  to  this  end,  as  the  means
to  its  realization  ;  the  merely  hypothetical  necessity  of  causality,  which  says
that  if  certain  things  are  present  in  this  order,  this  result  must  follow,  makes
way  for  the  unconditional  necessity  which  belongs  to  the  highest  end,  and
which  requires  the  existence  of  these  causes  as  the  means  of  its  realization.
Our  limited  range  of  view  may  force  us  to  relinquish  the  hope  of  under
standing  the  common  end  of  the  universe  and  of  explaining  it  as  uncon
ditionally  necessary,  but  that  does  not  affect  the  purely  logical  relation,
according  to  which  the  plurality  of  elements  which  actually  are  causally
connected  can  only  be  subordinated  to  one  common  necessity  from  the
point  of  view  of  the  end,  and  it  remains  true,  as  Leibnitz  held,  that  the
system  of  laws  finds  its  only  ground  in  the  system  of  ends.

5.  But  it  is  impossible  to  stop  at  this  purely  formal  application  of  the
final  concept.  If  it  is  to  be  the  ground  for  the  totality  of  efficient  causes,
it  must  be  conceived  as  a  real  force,  itself  determining  the  nature  of  things
and  their  actual  organization  ;  but  we  cannot  think  of  it  as  such  except
as  the  object  of  an  efficient  will  which  it  brings  into  activity  ;  the  rule  that
only  a  vera  causa  must  be  taken  as  a  ground  of  explanation  forces  us  to
the  only  analogy  within  reach,  that  of  our  own  action.  Thus  the  ultimate
ground,  to  which  we  are  driven  by  all  hypothetical  necessity  as  the  ulti
mate  and  unconditioned,  appears  as  the  real  force  of  a  will  which  aims  at
an  end,  and  by  these  considerations  the  idea  of  God  receives  its  natural
content  from  the  ideal  towards  which  our  own  will  is  striving  in  both  the
theoretical  and  the  practical  spheres.  That  end,  the  thought  of  which
moves  us  as  a  living  force,  is  justified  if  it  is  already  realized  as  the  ulti
mate  and  unconditioned  ground  of  the  universe,  if  the  universe  is  known
in  its  innermost  nature  by  an  absolute  intelligence,  and  is  known  because
it  only  realizes  the  end  conceived  by  that  intelligence,  and  is  determined
by  it  as  a  whole  as  well  as  in  detail.  It  is  to  an  absolutely  single
ground  such  as  this,  which  dominates  the  plurality  of  things  and  their
whole  course,  that  we  are  led  by  the  final  consequences  of  the  pre
suppositions  of  method.  For  if  we  should  cease  in  our  investigation  of


FINAL RESULTS  555

causal  laws  at  the  plurality  of  substances  which  are  by  their  nature
related,  then  this  inner  relation  would  itself  be  the  greatest  problem  of  all,
unless  we  could  assume  some  ground  for  it,  binding  one  to  the  other ;
and  as  even  from  a  mechanical  point  of  view  these  causal  relations,
themselves  eternal  and  immutable,  determine  the  varying  events,  it  is  but
one  step  further  to  the  one  ground  in  which  all  these  relations,  realizing
themselves  in  logical  sequence  in  the  course  of  time,  are  thought  and
willed.

6.  The  methodological  right  of  metaphysics  to  find  in  the  idea  of  God
the  one  keystone  to  theoretical  knowledge  and  to  practical  certainty  is  to
be  found  in  the  principles  of  all  scientific  methods,  all  of  which  contain
ideal  presuppositions.  So  long  as  we  are  concerned  only  with  carrying  out
these  principles  with  respect  to  given  objects,  so  long  as  our  standpoint  is
that  of  our  subjective  need  to  explain  the  Given  and  to  be  certain  of  our
human  ends,  we  remain  within  the  finite  ;  but  as  soon  as  we  begin  to  ask
about  the  actual  justification  of  these  needs,  and  take  for  the  object  of  our
investigation  the  relation  of  the  subjective  to  the  objective,  of  the  ideal  to
reality,  the  necessity  arises  for  an  ultimate  and  unconditional  ground.
Nor  is  it  as  if  this  ground  appeared  only  upon  the  horizon  of  our  finite
knowledge,  as  the  Kantian  division  between  understanding  and  reason
teaches,  as  if  we  could  have  a  science  of  the  finite  complete  and  self-con
tained  in  its  principles,  the  idea  of  God,  meanwhile,  merely  reflecting  in
the  theoretical  sphere  our  insatiable  craving  for  complete  knowledge  of  the
universe.  Its  significance  lies  not  merely  in  extending  our  knowledge  in
this  way,  but  in  being  the  presupposition  without  which  no  desire  for
knowledge  in  the  true  and  strict  sense  is  conceivable  at  all.  It  transcends
given  experience  in  no  other  sense  than  every  attempt  to  explain  the
Given  transcends  it  ;  by  the  same  right  by  which  we  construct  the  par
ticular  substances  and  their  forces  as  an  intelligible  kingdom  which  is  the
ground  of  phenomena,  driven  by  the  same  instinct  to  brjng  together  what
is  scattered  into  unity,  our  thought  calls  upon  us  to  take  this  further  step
to  the  final  explanation  of  the  universe  ;  in  neither  case  is  any  proof  in
the  strictest  logical  sense  possible,  because  external  reality  can  never  be
proved.  Here  again  our  only  guarantee  lies  in  the  harmony  amongst  our
thoughts,  and  in  the  fulfilment  of  our  requirement  that  the  Given  shall  be
explicable.  It  is  not  by  its  method  that  metaphysics  is  distinguished
from  other  science  (this  must  ultimately  be  absolutely  the  same  for  all
knowledge),  but  by  the  universality  of  its  problem,  a  problem  as  necessary


556  LOGIC

as  that  of  knowledge  in  general.  In  that  it  brings  to  light  the  principles
presupposed  in  all  scientific  effort,  metaphysics  stands  at  the  beginning  of
all  science ;  and  in  that  its  assumptions  can  only  be  verified  by  the  result,
by  the  complete  concurrence  of  all  knowledge,  it  stands  at  the  end  of
science.  Hence  it  will  remain  fragmentary,  just  as  all  knowledge  is  frag
mentary,  until  finite  thought  is  extended  and  elevated  into  Divine  thought.

Thus  metaphysics,  in  which  we  aim  at  grasping  in  concepts  the  ultimate
ground  of  the  relation  between  subject  and  object,  thought  and  being,
ideal  and  reality,  appears  as  a  problem  both  underlying  the  analysis  by
which  we  set  forth  the  postulates  presupposed  in  all  voluntary  thought,
and  crowning  the  process  of  thought  by  which  we  press  forward  in  widen
ing  circles  to  seek  at  last  the  final  explanation  of  the  existent.  In  either
case  it  appears  as  the  fulfilment  of  the  deepest  and  most  comprehensive
effort.

7.  But  this  universality  of  metaphysics  involves  also  a  problem  which
passes  beyond  the  sphere  of  the  purely  logical  methods,  and  for  which  a
solution  must  be  sought  before  another  tribunal  than  that  of  logic  :  the
problem  of  the  relation  between  the  necessity  which  is  the  element  in
which  thought  moves  and  the  freedom  which  is  the  postulate  of  the
will.  Our  cognitive  thought,  taken  alone,  would  find  completion  in  the
certainty  of  the  all-pervading  necessity  of  all  that  is  and  happens ;  in  a
system  of  metaphysics  which  could  deduce  the  specializations  of  the
existent  and  the  whole  series  of  its  developments,  with  logical  infallibility
from  one  ground,  and  which  should  comprehend  God  and  the  universe  in
one  formula,  in  such  a  way  that  all  reality  would  merely  represent  what  had
been  implicitly  contained  from  all  eternity  in  the  existence  of  the  ultimate
ground.  Our  will,  with  its  conviction  of  an  ''ought"  to  which  the  Given
does  not  correspond,  refuses  to  acknowledge  this  infallible  necessity,  and
opposes  to  the  course  of  nature  ideals  which  are  only  to  be  realized  by  free
action.  Neither  the  idea  of  the  good,  nor  that  of  the  true,  can  be  repre
sented  as  a  self-realizing  natural  force,  controlling  the  course  of  Nature
without  resistance,  for  the  actual  course  of  events  brings  forth  error  as  well
as  evil ;  nevertheless  when  conceived  of  as  ends  for  our  will  these  ideas
have  unconditional  authority,  though  they  can  only  attain  to  real  causality
by  being  accepted  and  willed  as  ends.  The  genesis  of  these  ideas,  and
their  affirmation  by  the  will,  forms  an  insoluble  problem  for  the  science
which  seeks  for  merely  natural  laws.

It is  just  because  knowledge  itself  is only  realized  by  a  will  which


FINAL RESULTS  557

accepts  the  idea  of  truth  as  an  end  that  there  is  a  limit  to  the  claims  to  be
made  by  the  principles  followed  in  our  knowledge  of  the  existent  upon  an
all-inclusive  and  conclusive  metaphysic  ;  it  cannot  be  called  upon  in  the
name  of  logical  method  to  tear  up  the  roots  from  which  logic  itself  has
grown,  by  destroying  the  independence  of  the  will.  There  is  nothing  in
our  treatment  of  logic  to  prohibit  a  view  of  the  universe  according  to
which  the  most  fundamental  fact  of  self-consciousness  is  the  will,  and
which  has  therefore  the  task  of  solving  the  most  profound  problem  of
philosophy,  that  of  determining  the  relation  between  ethical  principles
and  the  principles  of  knowledge.  If  the  latter  are  what  we  have  repre
sented  them  to  be,  POSTULATES,  then  they  leave  open  a  possibility  from
which  we  should  be  cut  off  if  we  were  obliged  to  regard  them  as  axioms.


APPENDICES.


APPENDIX A

MY  attention  has  been  called  by  the  thorough  and  careful  way  in  which
E.  G.  Husserl  has  treated  this  subject  in  his  Philosophic  der  Arithmetik
(vol.  i.,  Halle,  1891)  to  an  incompleteness  in  §  65,  7  of  the  first  edition,
which  might  give  rise  to  misunderstanding.  In  the  present  form  of
statement  I  hope  to  have  remedied  this  defect ;  I  believe  that  in  the
subject-matter  itself  I  do  not  differ  much  from  Husserl.  It  is  true  that
Husserl  rejects  what  he  calls  the  "  Unterschiedstheorie  "  of  number,  and
attaches  most  importance  to  colligation.  But  in  saying  that  every  colli
gated  content  must  be  noticed  by  itself,  that  (when  the  plurality  is  given
simultaneously)  an  analysis  takes  place,  that  a  plurality  is  noticed,  he  assumes
as  the  condition  of  the  colligation  a  process  by  which  the  unities  to  be
colligated  are  separated,  are  grasped  independently,  and  their  complex
analysed  ;  and  this  process  I  can  only  understand  as  distinguishing,  not  in
the  sense  in  which  we  judge  of  difference  or  likeness  of  content,  but  only
in  the  sense  that  different  contents  which  are  apprehended  by  different
acts  of  consciousness  are  spatially  and  temporally  distinguished.  That
this  is  only  a  psychical  event,  and  not  a  psychical  act,  that  no  one  can
be  inwardly  aware  of  an  activity  of  analysis,  I  cannot  allow ;  when  the
analysis  is  difficult,  as  in  the  case  of  insufficient  illumination,  we  are
expressly  conscious  of  it,  and  from  that  we  may  infer  that  it  takes  place  in
a  similar  manner  under  more  favourable  circumstances,  where  no  doubt  we
are  not  generally  expressly  conscious  of  it.  But  after  all  this  is  a  sub
ordinate  question  so  long  as  it  is  allowed  that  a  separation,  an  analysis,  a
"  fur  sich  Bemerken,"  must  take  place  before  we  can  colligate.  On  the
other  hand,  I  am  far  from  wishing  to  base  the  idea  of  number  merely  upon
distinguishing;  I  have  always  mentioned  distinguishing  and  the  comprehen
sion  of  what  is  distinguished  together,  as  the  functions  which  are  active  in
counting.  In  the  description  of  the  whole  activity  and  its  presuppositions
Husserl  has  regard  especially  to  those  cases  in  which  the  plurality  of
objects  is  given  simultaneously  ;  here  alone  we  can  speak  of  analysis.  But
s.  L.— ii.  o  o


562  APPENDICES

where  we  have  a  discrete  temporal  series — -successive  flashes  of  light,
successive  reports,  which  we  apprehend  and  count  as  a  plurality,  then
there  is  no  analysis  at  all,  but  only  a  successive  noticing,  and  a  distinguish
ing  of  the  particular  separate  successive  acts  and  their  successive  com
prehension  ;  the  colligation  proceeds  step  by  step  as  the  unities  to  be
colligated  come  to  be  presented  one  after  the  other.  This  process  takes
place  also,  however,  when  we  count  what  is  given  simultaneously ;  it  is  only
in  the  indefinite  apprehension  of  a  multitude — as  when  we  see  a  flock  of
birds  or  a  snowstorm — that  the  collective  appearance  predominates,
because  the  confusion  of  what  is  seen  makes  it  difficult  to  be  conscious  of
the  particular  acts  by  which  we  distinguish  the  one  from  the  other ;  but
even  here  we  do  distinguish  in  different  ways,  as  otherwise  we  could  not
notice  a  plurality  ;  it  is  only  that  we  cannot  count  because  the  particular
unities  cannot  be  fixed.  In  the  latter  instance  (the  snowstorm)  there  is  a
difficulty  even  in  colligating,  because  no  definite  limit  is  given  ;  we  do  not
get  the  idea  of  a  whole,  of  a  sum  total,  but  both  the  colligation  and  the
distinguishing  remain  incomplete ;  we  have  in  the  strictest  sense  a  confused
idea  of  plurality.

Apart  from  these  considerations,  I  can  agree  in  essential  points  with
most  of  Husserl's  views  ;  to  discuss  them  in  detail  would  take  us  too  far.


APPENDIX B.

THE  acute  attempt  of  Helmholtz  and  Kronecker  (P/iilos.  Anfsatze  zum
fiinfzigj.  Doctorjubilduni  E.  Zellers]  to  base  arithmetic  upon  a  series  of
symbols,  which  have  been  once  and  for  all  arranged  and  maintained  in  a
fixed  order,  seems  to  me  to  overlook  the  fact  that  etymologically  the
ordinal  numbers  are  entirely  derived  from  the  cardinal  numbers,  and  that
numerical  terms  are  not  originally  employed  to  arrange  the  particular
objects  of  a  group  each  with  a  symbol,  one  after  the  other,  to  mark  them
as  number  i,  2,  3  and  so  on,  but  that  their  fundamental  significance  is
that  of  a  certain  number  of  things,  and  that  for  this  reason  they  are
grammatically  connected  with  the  plural.  This  points  to  the  fact  that  at
every  step  to  a  further  unit  there  is  a  comprehension  of  the  units  so  far
distinguished  to  a  definite  plurality,  that  3  contains  2  and  i,  and  does  not
merely  follow  them.  If  it  is  acknowledged  that  the  psychological  origin
of  the  idea  of  number  consists  in  our  ability  to  retain  successive  acts  in


APPENDICES  563

the  memory,  etymology  certainly  points  to  the  course  taken  by  develop
ment  from  this  origin,  and  here  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  meaning  of
numerical  terms  is  to  express  the  number  of  successive  apprehensions  of
units.  According  to  this  theory,  in  passing  from  ordinal  to  cardinal
numbers  we  do  not,  properly  speaking,  count  objects,  but  the  units  counted
are  the  numerical  symbols  themselves.  Still  the  original  concept  of
number  must  be  surreptitiously  conveyed  into  these  concepts.  "  When  I
need  the  complete  numerical  series  from  i  to  n,  to  assign  a  number  to
each  element  of  the  group,  then  I  call  the  number  of  the  members  of  the
group  n."  This  transition  from  n,  as  the  symbol  of  a  place  in  the  series
to  n  as  the  symbol  of  the  total  number  would  be  incomprehensible  if  the
symbols  had  not  from  the  first  possessed  the  significance  of  number.  I
can  remember  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  in  their  sequence  with  as  much
certainty  as  the  series  of  numbers,  and  may  use  them  to  denote  a  series,
e.g.,  of  pages ;  but  it  is  useless  to  say,  I  have  needed  the  letters  from  A  tc
IV,  assigning  a  letter  to  each  page  of  a  book,  and  the  number  of  the  pages
is  IV.  That  would  tell  me  nothing  about  their  number  if  the  particular
letters  had  no  meaning  in  themselves  and  were  determined  merely  by  their
position  in  the  series  ;  the  number  is  found  only  if  the  meaning  of  each
particular  symbol  includes  the  comprehension  of  the  steps  already  taken
into  the  idea  of  their  definite  number,  i.e.,  when  they  are  not  merely
symbols  of  position,  but  symbols  of  sums  of  units.


APPENDIX C.

IN  certain  profound  and  subtle  enquiries  as  to  the  conceivability  of  a  non-
Euclidean  geometry,  the  space  of  our  intuition  has  been  represented  as

1  only  a  special  instance  of  a  general  concept,  of  a  variously  extended  mani
fold,  and  its  relations  of  magnitude  as  only  empirically  valid,  others  being
in  themselves  conceivable ;  but  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  such  enquiries
have  overstepped  the  safe  interpretation  of  analytical  formulae,  or  have
confused  purely  mathematical  conditions  with  others  which  refer  to  the
physical  constitution  of  bodies  in  space,  although  in  themselves  they  are

; valuable  as  bringing  into  clear  consciousness  the  peculiarities  of  our  space
intuition,  and  completing  the  series  of  problems  which  must  be  answered
by  an  exhaustive  philosophy  of  space.

Riemann,  in  his lecture  on the hypotheses  upon  which  geometry  is


564  APPENDICES

based,  starts  from  the  general  concept  of  a  plurality  of  modes  in  which  a
concept  may  be  determined,  between  which  modes  there  either  is  or  is  not
a  continuous  transition ;  and  he  then  represents  colours  as  in  this  respect
precisely  similar  to  positions  in  space.  But  he  seems  to  me  to  have  over
looked  that  the  parts  of  space  are  logically  related  to  each  other  quite
otherwise  than  are  the  various  colours.  The  latter  are  no  doubt  related  as
different  determinations  of  a  concept ;  and  this  is  evident  from  the  fact
that  each  can  be  thought  of  by  itself,  and  that  a  plurality  of  them  is  at
first  thought  of  as  divided  by  perceptible  differences,  the  manifold  being
only  ultimately  represented  as  a  continuum  in  consequence  of  inferences,
and  by  continually  inserting  intervening  colours  which  can  no  longer  be
distinctly  perceived  as  different.  But  the  parts  of  space  cannot  from  the
first  be  thought  of  as  independent  of  each  other,  but  only  as  within  a  space
which  is  given  to  intuition  ;  the  continuum  is  not  gradually  formed,  but  is
the  primary  datum,  within  which  alone  the  particular  points  can  be  distin
guished.  Thus  they  are  not  different  determinations  of  a  concept  in  the
sense  in  which  colours  are  ;  and  if  we  should  call  the  different  values  of  a
distance  also  different  determinations  of  a  concept,  we  must  remember
that  the  distance  of  one  point  from  various  others  always  presupposes
space,  and  that  the  concept  of  a  distance  which  is  twice  as  great  as  another
contains  not  merely  the  numerical  concept  two,  but  also  continuity  of  the  •
units  of  measurement  in  the  same  direction.  In  the  former  case  (that  of
colours)  the  differences  are  qualitative,  and  depend  upon  comparison  of
content ;  in  the  latter  they  are  spatial,  and  depend  upon  comparison  of
directions  and  distances.  Hence  the  numerical  series  by  which  the
magnitude  of  the  differences  is  measured  in  the  two  cases  must  necessarily
differ  radically  in  meaning  ;  formulae  expressing  relations  between  the
variable  can  only  be  applied  to  spatial  differences,  where  the  spatial  ideas,
which  are  fixed  before  we  measure  them,  will  admit  of  it.  Again,  in  order
to  lend  plausibility  to  the  spatial  interpretation  of  other  formulas  than
those  obtained  from  the  consideration  of  our  space,  reference  is  made  to
the  attributes  of  cylindrical  surfaces  which  can  be  unwound  without  any
extension  of  the  lines  in  them,  to  surfaces  of  constant  curvature  in  which
all  figures  can  be  moved  about  without  change  of  shape,  to  ellipsoids  in
which  the  shape  depends  upon  the  position,  and  the  distinctions  thus
obtained  are  then  applied  to  space  itself,  distinctions  between  space  which
is  plane  or  not  plane,  which  has  or  has  not  a  constant  curvature.  But  all
this  is  based  upon  the  assumption  of  Euclidean  space,  in  which  alone  we


APPENDICES  565

can  get  the  spatial  intuitions  appropriate  to  the  formulas,  and  then  only  of
surfaces  which  we  think  of  as  plane  or  curved  in  our  space  ;  while  intuition
forbids  us  even  to  think  of  three-dimensional  space  otherwise  than  we  now
do.

This  is  true  again  of  the  possibility  of  a  space  of  one  or  two  dimensions;
we  can  trace  the  relations  of  magnitude  within  a  plane  or  a  spherical  sur
face,  but  we  cannot  think  of  the  plane  or  the  spherical  surface  except  as  in
Euclidean  space.  And  when  (in  enquiring  into  the  form  which  would  be
taken  by  the  geometry  of  creatures  so  constituted  as  to  be  able  to  move
only  in  a  spherical  or  pseudo-spherical  surface,  and  therefore  necessitated
by  physical  constraint  to  confine  themselves  to  the  measurement  of  the
paths  thus  prescribed  to  them)  the  concept  of  the  shortest  line  is  substi
tuted  for  the  straight  line  of  our  space,  it  loses  just  that  specific  nature  by
virtue  of  which  it  is  the  vehicle  of  our  space  idea.  The  concept  of  the
straight  line  is  not  exhausted  by  the  mere  determination  of  magnitude  by
which  it  is  compared  with  other  lines ;  although  some  of  the  geometrical
propositions  of  Euclid  make  use  of  no  other  determinations  than  that  the
straight  line  is  completely  determined  by  two  points  and  can  be  moved  in
the  plane  in  such  a  way  that  lines  of  equal  length  can  be  made  to  coin
cide,  and  although  these  attributes  belong  also  to  the  shortest  lines  of  the
spherical  surface,  yet  others  are  absent  which  distinguish  straight  lines  in
our  space,  such  as  all  those  which,  in  our  space  intuition,  are  connected
with  the  revolution  about  two  points.  We  cannot  form  any  intuition  of  a
space  in  which  the  shortest  line  would  not  be  a  straight  line.  And  if,
finally,  appeal  is  made  to  the  fact  that  the  relations  of  a  spherical  or  pseudo-
spherical  space  can  be  brought,  at  any  rate  partially,  into  intuition,  still  this
can  only  be  done  by  considering  how  bodies  conforming  to  the  formula  ex
pressing  that  space  would  be  changed  in  our  space  and  for  our  space-intui
tion  ;  thus  our  space  is  not  replaced  by  another.  The  actual  measurement
of  bodies  by  bodies  teaches  us  nothing  concerning  the  nature  of  space,  but
only  concerning  the  way  in  which  the  dimension  of  bodies  in  space  are
related  to  one  another  and  to  the  conditions  of  our  perception  ;  in  practice
no  one  has  as  yet  been  led  astray  by  finding  that  a  trigonometrical
measurement  gave  more  or  less  than  180°  as  the  sum  of  the  angles  of  the
visual  lines  between  three  points,  or  that  a  distant  vertical  object  proved
larger  upon  direct  measurement  than  followed  from  the  sine  of  the  angle  of
altitude ;  instead  of  correcting  Euclid  we  have  corrected  the  assumption
that  light  moves  in  straight  lines.


566  APPENDICES

Thus  the  result  of  these  enquiries  is  not  that  it  is  left  to  experience  to
decide  whether  we  are  to  assume  the  plane  space  of  Euclid,  or  a  space
which  is  in  some  way  curved  ;  but  only  that  from  the  purely  logical  stand
point  of  analysis  the  quantitative  relations  of  space  are  not  to  be  derived
as  the  necessary  form  of  a  manifold  which  varies  in  three  directions,  but
that  on  the  contrary  they  are  actual,  because  based  upon  an  unanalysable
necessity  of  our  space-intuition,  which  is  essentially  different  from  any
law  which  can  be  expressed  in  numbers  and  numerical  relations.  They
open  up  no  possibility  of  extending  our  space  intuition,  or  of  representing
a  non-Euclidean  geometry  not  merely  in  analytical  formulas,  but  also  for
actual  intuition  ;  we  remain  subject  to  those  laws  of  space  according  to
which  we  first  think  of  it,  and  it  is  as  certain  that  Euclid  will  remain
unrefuted  in  geometry,  as  it  is  that  Aristotle  in  his  principle  of  contradic
tion  has  outlived  the  Hegelian  logic  (cf.  the  pertinent  remarks  of  O.  Lieb-
mann,  Rauincharacteristik  u.  Raiitndcduction,  zitr  Analysis  der  Wirklich-
keit,  ed.  2,  72  sq. ;  and  Wundt,  Logik,  i,  p.  445  sq.).


APPENDIX D.

I  CANNOT  convince  myself  of  the  justice  of  the  objections  raised  against
the  exposition  in  the  text  by  Benno  Kohn  ( Untersuchungen  iiber  das
Causalproblem,  etc.,  Wien,  iSSi),  although  I  quite  acknowledge  the
acuteness  which  he  has  shown,  especially  in  the  criticism  of  Mill's  propo
sitions.  He  calls  the  concept  of  the  action  of  a  cause  a  transcendental
something  to  which  we  can  attach  no  meaning.  I  allow,  of  course,  that
we  are  dealing  with  something  transcendental  in  the  sense  that  something
is  added  in  thought  to  the  purely  empirical,  perceptible  reality,  by  which
to  explain  it ;  it  is  a  concept  which  is  constructed  with  the  object  of  explain
ing  the  given  as  necessary  upon  one  ground.  But  I  cannot  allow  that  we
can  attach  no  meaning  to  it ;  if  it  were  so,  we  could  attach  no  meaning  to
the  concept  of  force  either,  of  which  the  meaning  is  just  this,  that  it  acts
and  is  regarded  as  the  ground  of  a  motion.  What  is  expressed  by  the
concept  of  action  is  that  a  motion  or  other  change  is  to  be  referred,  not  to
the  subject  in  which  it  occurs,  but  to  some  other  as  its  ground ;  but  then,
to  say  that  the  action  of  the  cause  and  the  beginning  of  the  effect  are
simultaneous  is  a  purely  identical  proposition.  What  follows  rests  upon  a
misunderstanding.  In  the  concussion  of  elastic  balls,  we  may  think  as  we


APPENDICES  567

will  of  the  change  in  their  form,  or  in  the  position  of  the  molecules,  as  be
ginning  at  the  surface  of  the  bodies  and  proceeding  inwards,  but  the  effi
cient  action  begins  at  the  moment  in  which  the  most  external  molecules  of
the  ball  which  is  struck  begin  to  change  their  position,  and  it  ceases
as  soon  as  the  struck  ball  ceases  to  have  velocity  imparted  to  it  by  the
striking  ball,  and  moves  away  from  the  latter.  But  when,  as  in  the  kinetic
theory  of  gases,  we  are  dealing  with  the  concussion  of  atoms,  we  must,  so
far  as  I  can  see,  either  assume  that  motion  is  imparted  instantaneously  to
the  atom  struck,  or  we  must  say  that  in  an  immeasurably  short  time  the
velocity  of  the  atom  struck  increases  to  a  definite  value,  while  the  velocity
of  the  atom  striking  vanishes  proportionately ;  this  time  would  be  the  time
occupied  by  the  efficient  action.  We  cannot  infer  from  mere  concepts
that  only  the  second  assumption  is  possible.  Kohn  seems,  moreover,  to
overlook  the  strict  distinction  between  efficient  action  and  effect  which  I
emphasize.  The  example  with  which  he  thinks  to  perplex  me  on  p.  121
belongs  to  another  department  than  that  under  consideration  here.  "  In
the  analogous  case  in  which  a  stone  is  thrown  away  from  the  centre  of
gravity,  we  should  have  to  call  the  highest  turning  point  of  the  orbit  the
point  of  special  causation,  etc."  So  far  we  had  dealt  only  with  those  cases
of  action  in  which  a  body  in  movement  imparts  its  motion  to  another,  not
with  persistent  forces  such  as  gravity.  Gravity  acts  from  the  moment  in
which  the  body  begins  its  motion  to  the  moment  in  which  it  ceases  to
move,  in  every  time-differential  it  imparts  to  it  a  velocity  in  the  direction
of  the  centre  of  the  earth  ;  so  far  as  concerns  the  action  of  gravity  there
is  nothing  to  distinguish  the  highest  point  of  the  orbit  from  any  other,
it  is  merely  that  point  at  which  the  imparted  upward  velocity  of  the  thrown
body  is  annulled  by  accelerations  imparted  in  the  opposite  direction.

Of  course,  if  we  define  as  cause  those  conditions  which  must  be  present
for  the  effect  to  begin,  we  must  assert  simple  succession ;  my  intention,  on
the  other  hand,  is  to  show  that  all  ideas  of  causality  are  ultimately  based
upon  the  thought  that  things  are  the  efficient  causes,  that  this  thought  leads
to  many  modifications,  but  that  it  never  quite  vanishes,  and  that  without
these  "  popular "  thoughts  it  would  be  impossible  to  have  any  uniform
arrangement  of  the  multiform  concepts  which  have  grown  out  of  it.  See
Appendix  E.


568  APPENDICES

APPENDIX E.

I  MUST  decline  to  discuss  in  detail  the  many  works  on  the  causal  concept
which  hare  appeared  since  the  first  edition  of  this  book ;  they  show  anew
the  difficulties  in  distinguishing  between  the  different  applications  of  the
general  causal  idea  and  the  specific  concepts  developed  from  it,  and  in
placing  them  in  any  clear  relation  to  each  other ;  we  have  scarcely  come
any  nearer  to  agreement  in  our  way  of  apprehending  and  naming  them.
More  especially  have  I  been  unable  to  convince  myself  that  the  different
aspects  presented  by  the  causal  idea  can  be  represented  more  easily  in
their  connexion  and  mutual  relation,  and  the  resulting  antinomies  more
easily  solved,  if  we  do  not — as  I  have  attempted  to  do — start  from  that
concept  of  the  action  of  things  upon  which  the  popular  view  is  originally
based,  and  trace  its  scientific  changes;  but  endeavour,  with  the  object
(quite  justifiable  in  itself)  of  eliminating  everything  transcendental  and
hypothetical  and  of  giving  to  the  concepts  concerned  a  content  as  far  as
possible  merely  empirical,  to  limit  the  causal  concept  to  the  succession  of
events,  or  at  least  to  represent  this  succession  as  its  true  essence.

It  is  true  that  it  will  now  be  recognised  by  most  that  a  merely  empirical
derivation  of  the  causal  concept  and  the  causal  law  from  perceived
succession  is  impracticable,  and  that  J.  S.  Mill's  attempt  may  be  regarded
as  a  failure ;  nevertheless  the  fundamental  idea  that  the  scientifically
correct  and  appropriate  concept  of  causality  refers  to  the  regular  succession
of  events,  and  that  the  original  "  popular  "  idea  of  action  must  be  eliminated
so  far  as  possible,  seems  to  be  predominant.  It  has  been  most  carefully
and  fully  treated  by  Wundt  (Logik,  i,  525  sq.,  and  System  der  Philosophic
292  sq.),  and  I  should  like  therefore  to  discuss  briefly  some  points  in  his
treatment  of  the  problem,  with  the  object  of  rendering  my  own  view  more
precise.  I  prefer  to  keep  to  the  more  detailed  exposition  of  the  Logic,  the
principles  of  which  are  repeated,  though  in  a  different  order  of  develop
ment,  by  the  System  of  Philosophy;  although  with  reference  to  certain
special  points  I  cannot  be  certain  whether  they  have  been  tacitly  with
drawn  or  retained.

Wundt's  leading  idea  is  the  distinction  between  the  concepts  of
substantial  and  of  actual  causality  (to  use  the  terms  introduced  in  the
System).  The  most  obvious  view  is  to  mean  by  cause  a  substance,  and
this  substantiation  of  the  causal  concept  no  doubt  has  its  psychological
origin  in  the  acting  personality,  which,  while  itself  persisting,  gives  rise  to


APPENDICES  569

the  particular  action  as  a  passing  event.  From  this  scientific  elaboration
first  proceeds  to  the  concept  of  force,  which  belongs  as  permanent  attribute
to  particular  things,  and  is  attached  to  their  substance  (the  illuminating
power  of  the  sun,  the  attraction  of  the  earth).  But  inasmuch  as  efficient
actions  can  only  occur  when  some  change  takes  place  in  the  arrangement
of  the  bodies  which  are  the  subjects  of  the  forces,  the  causal  concept  is
gradually  transformed  so  as  to  deprive  the  cause  of  its  substantial  character
and  to  resolve  it  into  an  event  which  precedes  the  effect  (Log.,  I.  528).

In  this  way  a  distinction  is  obtained  between  the  empirical  and  meta
physical  elements,  which  are  originally  interwoven  in  the  concept  of  cause  ;
the  concept  of  force  as  completing  the  concept  of  substance  partakes  of
its  metaphysical  character ;  the  causal  law  (here  substituted  for  the  causal
concept)  which  refers  merely  to  the  connexion  of  events,  applies  in  itself
only  to  the  way  in  which  phenomena  are  linked  together  for  our  ex
perience.

This  limitation  of  the  causal  concept  is  justified  from  the  nature  of  the
case  on  p.  536.  We  never  have  occasion  to  apply  the  concept  of  causality
to  the  objects  of  our  external  experience  so  long  as  they  remain  unaltered
in  their  spatial  and  temporal  relations.  "  Change  is  therefore  the  condi
tion  of  causality,  which  refers  not  to  things  but  to  events."

Now  the  first  proposition — that  it  is  change  which  affords  the  occasion  for
the  development  of  the  causal  concept,  and  that  what  we  first  look  for  are
the  causes  of  changes,  which  causes  we  find  in  things  themselves,  showing
an  action  or  change — is  no  doubt  correct.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  the
causal  concept  does  not  refer  to  things,  but  to  events.  Events  or  processes
are  changes  in  things  ;  the  concept  of  change  cannot  be  thought  at  all
without  that  of  the  thing  or  object.  If  an  "event"  or  "happening"  is
to  be  a  cause,  then  it  is  certainly  the  motion  or  change  of  a  thing ;  we
cannot  entirely  abstract  from  this,  especially  as  it  is  not  a  matter  of  in
difference  in  what  thing  an  event  takes  place  which  is  to  be  regarded
as  cause.  Motion  of  a  given  velocity  is  an  event ;  in  another  and  purely
phoronomical  sense  we  may  perhaps  leave  out  of  consideration  the  magni
tude  of  the  mass  moved  ;  but  if  the  motion  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  cause,
it  is  not  all  the  same  whether  what  moves  is  a  grain  of  sand  or  a  rock.  It
is  the  same  with  effect :  the  change  effected  is  change  in  a  given  thing,
and  it  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference  in  what  thing  the  change  takes  place.
Suppose  the  effect  to  consist  in  the  "  event "  of  melting  :  iron  melts  at
another  temperature  than  that  at  which  ice  melts.  The  proposition  that


570  APPENDICES

causality  refers  only  to  events  or  processes  and  not  to  things,  does  not  hold
good  in  this  abstract  form.

In  the  System  Wundt  is  so  far  more  guarded  as  to  point  out  that  natural
science  at  least  must  retain  the  concept  of  substantial  causality,  though
perhaps  in  an  altered  sense,  and  rightly  indicates  the  mutual  relation
between  force  and  mass  ;  but  here  again  (296  sq.)  we  are  brought  to  the
proposition  that  mechanics  is  able  to  subject  all  the  motions  in  nature  to
an  analysis  which  works  in  principle  only  with  empirically  measurable
magnitudes ;  it  is  not  necessary  to  include  anything  in  the  concept  of  force,
but  the  magnitude  of  the  acceleration  by  which  it  is  measured.  Neverthe
less,  it  is  measured  by  the  magnitude  of  the  acceleration  of  a  given
mass;  we  cannot  simply  exclude  m  from  the  mechanical  formulas — e.g.
\  m  v  2.  Only  spatial  and  temporal  magnitude  (volumes  and  velocities)
are  empirically  measurable ;  there  still  remains,  in  the  concept  of  mass,  the
metaphysical  surplus,  which  is  not  directly  measurable  (v.  §  78),  but  can
only  be  determined  by  an  assumption,  which — as  Wundt  himself  rightly
shows  elsewhere — contains  the  concept  of  substance.  The  same  is  true
of  the  proposition  on  p.  298,  that  energy  is  measured  entirely  by  the  event
which  is  given  to  observation,  and  requires  for  its  definition  nothing  which
does  not  itself  belong  to  this  event.  Even  if  we  include  in  the  event  the
mass,  which  is  not  an  immediate  object  of  observation,  still  the  event
itself  is  not  identical  with  the  concept  of  energy ;  the  definition  of  the
event  is  not  eo  ipso  the  definition  of  the  energy ;  we  need  to  add  a  law,  by
virtue  of  which  this  event  has  further  consequences,  before  we  can  get
from  the  concept  of  the  observed  event,  that  of  energy.

On  the  same  page  (298)  it  is  rightly  pointed  out  that  for  mechanics
there  is  a  difference  between  the  acceleration  which  actually  occurs,  and
accelerating  force.  "  The  results  obtained  concerning  force  and  mass  are
grounded  upon  numerous  observations,  guided  by  general  assumptions,
and  mechanical  force  is  not  that  which  is  actually  observed  in  the  par
ticular  case,  but  that  acceleration  which  is  possible  in  respect  to  a  given
unit  of  mass."  Here  it  is  acknowledged  that  the  concept  of  force,  like
that  of  mass,  contains  assumptions  which  go  beyond  what  we  can  observe.

The  difficulties  to  which  the  attempt  to  refer  the  actual  causal  concept
only  to  events  leads,  can  perhaps  be  best  shown  by  the  example  with
which  Wundt  illustrates  his  propositions  in  both  works.  What  is  the  cause
of  the  fall  of  bodies  ?  The  answer  that  the  earth,  or  its  hypothetically
assumed  power  of  attraction,  is  the  cause,  is  denied ;  that  would  involve


APPENDICES


57*


the  false  introduction  of  the  thing  into  the  causal  concept.  The  earth  is
only  the  permanent  condition,  which  being  given  bodies  may  fall ;  the
cause  of  the  particular  phenomenon  of  falling  is  elevation  to  a  given  height.
This  alone  satisfies  the  demand  that  the  cause,  as  well  as  the  effect,  must
be  thought  of  as  an  event.  For  a  body  to  fall  10  feet,  it  must  necessarily
be  first  raised  to  a  height  of  10  feet;  but  how  this  is  brought  about,  and
how  its  supports  may  be  removed,  are  conditions  which  may  vary  in  many
ways  without  the  effect  being  thereby  changed  (cf.  System,  p.  301).

This  example  is  subject  to  certain  considerations,  especially  when  taken
in  connexion  with  the  adjoining  proposition  that  the  cause  is  that  event
which  is  connected  invariably  with  the  effect,  and  the  proposition  on  p.
543,  "  that  the  form  in  which  causality  appears  to  us  is  the  sequence  of
cause  and  effect " — where,  according  to  the  context,  we  must  understand
an  immediate  and  empirically  demonstrable  sequence.  (These  two  pro
positions,  taken  in  this  sense,  are,  it  is  true,  absent  in  the  System  ;  but
not  only  are  they  not  withdrawn,  they  appear  to  be  at  any  rate  partially
presupposed  in  subsequent  passages,  although  on  p.  299  sq.  there  is
substituted  for  particular  succession  the  more  guarded  idea  of  continuous
connexion).

In  the  first  place,  we  may  ask  whether  the  raising  of  the  body  to  the
height  of  10  feet  is  invariably  connected  with  the  effect — with  falling  from
this  height?  Certainly  not  within  the  sphere  of  our  experience.  Millions
of  bodies  are  raised  to  any  height  which,  so  far  as  our  experience  goes,
never  fall  again.  The  stones  of  a  building  which  is  blocked  by  rubbish
from  without  have  been  raised,  but  they  can  fall  no  further  unless  room  is
cleared  below  them.  Building  would  be  a  futile  undertaking  if  every  stone
raised  must  fall  again  as  far  as  it  has  been  raised ;  nor  can  the  necessity  be
affirmed  that  all  volcanic  masses  which  have  once  been  raised  must  fall
again.  Hence,  if  we  look  from  the  cause  to  the  effect,  there  is  no  invari
able  connexion  between  elevation  and  fall.

But  the  example  fails  also  in  the  reverse  direction.  In  the  above  pro
positions  Wundt  suddenly  substitutes  for  the  cause  the  conditio  sine  qua  non,
when  he  says  :  "for  a  body  to  fall  10  feet  it  is  necessary  that  it  should
previously  have  been  raised  10  feet."  But  here  again  there  is  no  invariable
connexion.  An  elevation  to  the  height  from  which  the  body  falls  does
not  precede  every  phenomenon  of  falling.  When  a  shaft  is  sunk  in  the
ground,  and  a  stone  falls  over  the  edge  we  cannot  point  to  an  elevation  of
the  stone  from  the  bottom  of  the  shaft  as  a  preceding  event.  What  shall


572  APPENDICES

we  say  moreover  of  the  meteors  which  fall  upon  the  earth  ?  And  if,
according  to  the  theory  with  which  Wundt  himself  agrees,  the  moon  is
perpetually  falling  towards  the  earth,  when  did  the  "  event"  of  its  elevation
to  240,000  miles  take  place?  According  to  the  form  taken  by  the  Kantian
theory,  its  mass  has  only  been  checked  in  its  preliminary  fall  towards  the
earth  by  the  increase  of  centrifugal  force ;  hence  the  preceding  event  was
certainly  not  elevation  but  a  checked  fall.  Wundt  says  on  p.  542  :  the
attraction  which  exists  at  every  moment  between  the  earth  and  the  moon,
is  "  occasioned "  (why  not  caused  ?)  by  their  immediately  preceding
motions,  which  have  brought  them  into  their  present  positions,  and  the
effect  itself  can  only  be  thought  of  in  the  form  of  a  motion  which  needs  a
certain  amount  of  time  (how  much  ?).  But  from  amongst  the  "  immediately
preceding  motions,"  which  have  gone  on  continuously  for  thousands  ot
years,  we  can  select  no  event  which  can  be  limited  in  time,  and  which
would  be  qualitatively  and  quantitatively  equivalent  to  those  motions  which
are  to  be  regarded  as  the  effect,  and  which  also  persist  continuously  and
indefinitely.  From  the  position  at  any  moment,  as  determined  by  the
stage  just  reached  by  the  motion,  there  follows  only  the  particular  amount
of  attraction,  which  varies  within  narrow  limits  with  the  distance,  not  the
attraction  itself,  which  has  always  existed  and  which  helped  to  determine
the  preceding  motion.

It  is  not  possible  to  discover  an  event  which  is  empirically  perceptible,
or  even  one  which  can  only  be  constructed  by  inferences,  to  precede  in
the  same  way  every  actual  case  of  a  falling  body,  and  to  be  in  this  sense
its  cause.  Of  course  every  motion  downwards  presupposes  that  at  a  given
time  a  body  is  at  a  distance  from  some  lower  part  of  the  earth's  surface —
otherwise  the  body  could  not  move  at  all  towards  the  centre  of  the  earth
either  perpendicularly  or  slantingly — and  the  absence  of  any  hindrance  to
this  motion  (whether  some  intervening  body  or  upward  motion).  That  which
precedes  downward  motion  in  the  region  of  terrestrial  bodies,  and  so  far
appears  as  the  regularly  preceding  event,  is  the  cessation  or  removal  of
this  hindrance  ;  this  is  invariably  connected  with  the  event  of  the  fall,  and
would  therefore  have  to  be  called  its  cause,  but  then  we  could  not  speak
of  an  equivalence  between  cause  and  effect.  But  in  the  case  of  meteors  it
is  the  direction  of  their  orbit  and  their  velocity  which  decides  whether  they
may  fall  upon  the  earth  ;  no  definite  event  can  be  given.  That  which
causes  bodies  to  fall  under  certain  circumstances  is  ultimately — according
to  the  theory  which  is  still  almost  universally  accepted  and  which  has  been


APPENDICES  573

replaced  by  nothing  better — the  attraction  of  the  earth  ;  this  is  the  con
stant  and  true  cause  which  determines  the  motion  of  the  body  towards  the
centre  of  the  earth ;  all  the  others  are  variable  conditions  which  being
given,  the  cause  takes  effect,  and  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  select  from
amongst  the  "  events  "  preceding  the  fall  anything  common  to  all  instances
of  falling  and  invariably  connected  with  them,

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  the  motive  which  has  led  Wundt  to  the
propositions  illustrated  by  this  example ;  it  has  been  the  attempt  on  the
one  hand  to  make  them  fit  in  with  the  proposition  of  the  conservation  of
energy ;  on  the  other  hand,  his  wish  to  distinguish  between  the  empirical
and  metaphysical  elements  of  the  causal  concept,  and  to  present  a  concept
of  causality  which  would  connect  successive  events  in  the  sense  of  the
empirical  school;  in  addition  to  this  there  has  been — as  we  see  from  the
System — the  thought  of  questions  of  psychological  causality  which  he  has
treated  as  parallel  to  these.  But  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of
energy  is  not  in  itself  sufficient  to  serve  as  the  ground  for  a  causal  concept
in  this  sense.  By  the  necessity  of  regarding  mere  spatial  distance  as
potential  energy,  it  presupposes  as  its  basis  the  constant  attraction  of
masses  ;  by  the  change  of  active  energy  into  potential,  and  vice  z'ersa,  it
not  merely  connects  events  amongst  each  other,  but  it  also  connects  events
with  states,  for  after  all  potential  energy  is  not  an  event ;  nor  is  it  well  to
refer  potential  energy  always  to  a  previous  event,  in  order  to  present  a
change  like  the  fall  of  a  body  as  the  effect  of  some  event  which  took  place
thousands  of  years  ago.  According  to  the  theory  of  Kant  and  Laplace
all  the  active  energy  of  the  present  solar  system  has  proceeded  from  the
potential  energy  which  was  due  to  the  merely  spatial  distribution  of
material  elements,  and  it  is  impossible  to  form  any  idea  of  the  event  by
which  this  spatial  distribution  was  caused.  But  mere  spatial  distance  in
itself  cannot  be  a  cause  in  any  sense,  unless  we  assume  the  attraction  of
masses;  it  is  this  therefore  upon  which  alone  the  effect  is  grounded.  (It
is  similar  in  the  sphere  of  chemistry.  According  to  the  view  jvhich  regards
elevation  to  a  given  height  as  the  cause  of  the  fall,  we  should  have  to
regard  the  previous  separation  of  the  combining  substances  as  the  cause  of
chemical  combination.)

Wundt  himself  allows  that  "  substantial  causality"  cannot  be  dispensed
with,  and  must  remain  as  an  inevitable  auxiliary  concept ;  but  then  we
cannot  separate  the  two,  and  try  to  establish  a  causal  connexion  which  is
to  disregard  it  and  to  take  place  merely  between  events.  We  have  in


574  APPENDICES

events  the  phenomena  of  substantial  causality ;  they  cannot  be  separated
from  the  substances  in  which  they  occur.  It  is,  moreover,  a  subversion
of  the  original  meaning  of  the  terms  to  speak  of  the  force-endowed  sub
stances  as  only  permanent  conditions,  and  of  their  changing  relations  as
causes ;  the  older  and  opposite  usage  is  that  which  conforms  to  the  mean
ing  of  the  terms.  The  distance  of  a  body  from  the  surface  of  the  earth  is
one  of  the  conditions  under  which  it  may  fall,  because  where  there  is  no
distance  no  motion  is  possible,  it  is  a  conditio  sine  qua  non ;  another  con
dition  is  the  absence  of  any  hindrance,  but  the  cause  of  the  fall  is  "  sub
stantial  causality,"  the  earth  by  virtue  of  its  attraction.  The  idea  of  the
action  of  one  thing  upon  another  is  no  doubt  a  metaphysical  element ;  but
we  cannot  dispense  with  it  if  we  wish  to  bring  about  connexion  amongst
events,  and  I  hold  it  better  therefore  to  confess  it  openly  and  to  yield  to  it
its  fundamental  importance,  instead  of  putting  it  as  much  as  possible  on
one  side  as  a  mere  "  auxiliary  concept,"  which  we  cannot  unfortunately
quite  do  without.


ADDENDUM.

The  following  passage  has  been  omitted  on  p.  350,  end  of  paragraph  21  : —

According  to  the  same  principle,  when  the  motions  are  in  opposite
directions,  we  get  their  difference;  and  when  they  are  in  different  directions
the  assumption  leads  to  the  so-called  parallelogram  of  forces.  These  are
the  simplest  examples  of  rules  of  the  combination  of  causes.


INDEX


Abstract  :  I.  34,  250.

Abstracts:  as  subjects  of  judgments,  I.  77

sq.
Abstraction  : I.  255  sq.,  268  sq.  ;  II. 26,

31,  44,  61,  73,  '47  sq., 154, 160  sq.,

518  ;  relation  between  abstraction  and

induction,  II.  166,  374.
Active  verb  : I.  72.
Activity,  Action  :  I.  26  sq.,  36,  58  sq.,  70,

301  sq.  ;  II.  92.
Addition  : II.  39.
Adjective  :  I.  29,  31  sq.  ;  as  the  predicate

in  judgment,  I.  58  sq.,  77.
Adverb  : I.  32.

Adversative  Particles  : I. 214.
Agreement  :  principle  of  a.,  I.  79,  295  sq.,

307;  method  of  a.,  II.  339,  360.
All  :  meaning  of,  I.  160  sq.
Analogy  :  II.  209,  210,  213,  355,  372,  421

sq.
Analysis  :  of  concepts,  I.  254;  II. 20,  24

sq.  : of  effects  in  partial  effects, II.

350  ; analytical procedure in the

sphere  of  psychology,  II.  396  sq.  ;  of

history,  II.  453  sq.

Analysis:  of  the  ancients,  II. 198;  alge
braical  a.,  II.  215.
Analytical  Judgments  : I. 102 sq., 162,

182,  183,  296  sq.,  314,  319;  as  major

premises  in  inference,  I.  343,  350,  373

sq.  ;  II.  182,  304.
Analytical  Development  of  Concepts  :  II.

182  sq.,  514.
Angle:  II.  43,  49  sq.
Antecedent  :  in  relation  to  the  concept  of

cause,  II.  96,  320  sq.
Antiphasis  :  I.  139  sq.,  229.
Apagogic  : see  Indirect  proof.
Apodeictic  Judgment  :  I.  176  sq.,  iSl.
Apprehension  :  successive,  II.  246.


A  priori  :  I.  187  sq.,  317  sq.  ;  II.  17,  19  ;
number,  II.  42  ;  space,  II.  45  ;  time,
II.  43  ;  principle  of  impenetrability,
II.  83  ;  principle  of  permanence  of
substance,  II.  89  sq.  ;  causality,  II.
15,  119;  principle  of  conservation  of
energy,  II.  115  ;  synthetical  judg
ments  a  pr.,  I.  in,  317  sq.,  365  ;  II.
89,  185,  244.

Arrangement  of  Ideas  :  I.  252,  285  sq.  ;
II.  8;  a.  of  objects,  spatial,  II.  7,
282  ;  temporal,  II.  7,  282  ;  logical,
II.  8,  508  ;  a.  of  human  activities  to
an  end,  II.  405.

Assertion  : I.  25.

Assertorial  Judgment :  I.  176,  181.

Association  :  I.  55  ;  as  ground  of  mediate
judgment,  I.  114;  of  problematical
judgment,  I.  177;  of  inference,  I.
327  ;  of  the  concept  of  thing,  II.  86.

Association  :  laws  of,  II.  401  sq.

Assumption  : I.  328,  334.

Atom  :  II.  79,  85  sq.,  90,  176  ;  atomistic
explanation  of  the  universe,  II.  473.

Attribute  :  I.  30  sq.,  58,  260;  plurality  of
alt.  in  one  thing,  II.  83  sq.  ;  att.  in
relation  to  relations  and  actions,  II.
84,  91  sq.

Average  :  II.  366,  484  sq.  ;  uniformity  in
averages,  II.  486  sq. ;  a.  as  aid  to
classification,  II.  526  sq. ;  meaning  of
a.  in  physiology,  II.  366 ;  in  psych
ology  and  history,  II.  398  sq.,  537.

Axioms:  I.  315,  317,  336;  of  the  forma
tion  of  concepts,  I.  318  ;  II.  158.

Being  :  concept  of  b.,  I.  72  sq.,  303,  308,
320,  323  ;  "  to  be  "  as  predicate,  I.
72  sq.,  298  sq.  ;  as  copula,  I.  93  sq.


576


INDEX


Catalogue  :  II.  283  sq.

Category  : I.  29  sq.,  254  sq.

Categorical  Judgment  :  I.  213  sq.  ;  rela
tion  to  hypothetical  judgment,  I.  224.

Categorical  Syllogism  : I.  343, 349  sq.

Causa  immanens,  transiens :  I.  38 ;  II.
118  sq.  ;  efficiens,  occasionalis,  II.
109  ;  causa  sui,  I.  202  ;  causality  in
the  sphere  of  psychology,  II.  137  sq.,
374  sq.,  398  sq.

Causal,  Causality,  Causal  Connection  :  I.
29,  36,  70,  189,  195,  314  sq.,  321  ;
II.  n,  16,  92  sq.  ;  genesis  of  the
causal  concept,  II.  93.

/  Causal  Laws  :  II.  334  sq.  ;  methods  of
discovering  c.  laws  in  Herschel  and
Mill,  II.  338  sq.  ;  m.  of  agreement,
II.  338;  m.  of  difference,  II.  339.

Causal  Laws :  from  statistical  data,  II.
480,  495,  501  sq.

Causal  Particles  : I.  215.

Causal  Relations  :  as  elements  in  the  con
cepts  of  things,  II.  91,  160,  163,  317
sq.  ;  as  principle  of  the  form  of  unity,
II.  171  ;  as  constituents  in  the  con
cept  of  the  end,  II.  173.

Causal  Relations  :  as  condition  of  the
objective  determination  of  time,  11.244
sq.  ;  between  sensations  and  objects
or  stimuli,  II.  68,  125,  241  sq.,  376
sq-,  397-

Cause  :  I.  26,  36  sq.  ;  II.  92  sq.  ;  things
as  causes,  II.  95,  334  sq.  ;  events  as
c.,  II.  96,  109,  334  sq.  ;  time  relation
between  the  action  of  the  cause  and
the  effect,  II.  96,  103  ;  immediate
and  mediate  c.,  II.  100  ;  quantitative
relation  between  c.  and  effect,  II.  112
sq.  ;  plurality  of  c.'s,  II.  335,  349  ;  c.
and  condition,  II.  350  sq.  ;  c.  and
circumstances,  II.  351  sq.  ;  laws  of
combination  of  actions  of  c's.,  II.  349
sq.  ;  discovery  of  causes  for  given
events,  II.  417  sq.

Certainty  :  I.  5,  7  sq.,  176  sq.  ;  ground  of
c.,  I.  189  sq.  ;  conditions  of  c.,  I.  239
sq.  ;  immediate  and  mediate,  I.  182,
185  ;  c.  of  self-consciousness,  I.  301
sq.

Chains:  of  effects,  II.  99,  104,  353  ;  c.  of
division,  II.  184.


Change:  I.  312;  conceptual  determina
tion  of  c.'s,  II.  62,  76  sq.  ;  relation  of
c.  to  concept  of  thing,  II.  79,  87  sq.  ;
to  concept  of  causality,  II.  93.

Characteristic  Attributes  :  I.  285  ;  II.  164,
516  sq.,  521.

Chemical  Elements:  v.  Elements;  ch.  laws,

II.  323.

Chronometry  : II.  239.
Circle  in  Definition  :  I.  289.
Circumstances  :  distinguished  from  causes,

II.  351  sq.
Classification: I.  247;  II. 5, 8, 23, 147,

158  sq., 508, 511 sq.  ;  conditions  of

possibility of  classification, II. 15,

161,  512,  550.
Co- existence  :  as  content  of  the  concept  of

thing,  II.  85.
Collective  Concept :  II.  178;  coll.  wholes,

II.  285,  498  sq.
Combination  :  methods  of  c.  of  conceptual

elements, II. 145, 150 sq., 158;

theory  of  combinations  in  determining

probability,  II.  216,  227  sq.
Comparison  of  Ideas  ;  I. 36,  69  ;  for  the

purpose of  abstraction, I. 248  ; II.

25-
Compatible  Concepts  :  I. 279.
Composite  Concepts  : I.  254, 278  sq.  ;  c.

judgments,  I.  219.
Composition  of  Effects  :  II.  350.
Concept  :  I.  42,  239-295  ;  II.  24-181,
311-334,  460-480;  c.  in  the  psychol,
metaphys. ,  and  logical  sense,  I.  245  ;
attributes  (elements)  of  the  c.,  I.  254;
composite  concepts,  I.  254  sq.  ;  II.
144  sq.  ;  subordinate  c.,  I.  265  sq.  ;
compatible  and  incompatible  c. ,  I.
277;  cross  concepts,  I.  279;  extension
and  content  of  c.,  I.  265,  268;  logical
and  empirical  extension,  I.  272  ;  indi
vidual  c.,  I.  271  ;  disjunct,  disjunct-
co-ord.  c.,  I.  280;  division  of  c. ,  I.
277  sq.  ;  problems  and  methods  of  for
mation  of  c.,  II.  21  sq.  ;  investigation
ofc.  elements,  II.  24  sq.  ;  construc
tion  of  c.,  II.  144  sq.,  192,  528;
classificatory  formation  of  c.,  II.  158
sq.,  511  sq.  ;  deductive-analytical  de
velopment  ofc.,  II.  311  sq.,  460  sq.  ;
essential  concepts,  II.  311  sq.,  460


INDEX


577


sq.  ;  statistical  methods  as  means  of
conceptual  determination,  II.  526.

Concessive  Propositions  :  I.  227.

Conclusion  :  I.  327,  350.

Conclusion  (of  Syllogism)  :  I.  327,  350.

Conditions  :  (logical)  of  thought,  I.  14,
2O  ;  II.  6  sq.  ;  conditional  proposi
tions,  I.  220 ;  (actual)  conditions  of
action  of  forces,  II.  108 ;  c.  and  effi
cient  causes,  II.  351  sq.  ;  negative  c.
II.  497.

Conjunctions  :  I.  214.

Conjunctive  Judgment :  1.158;  inferences
from  conj.  jt.,  I.  367.

Consciousness  v.  Self-consciousness  :  de
grees  and  stages  of  c.,  II.  131  ;  causal
relations  between  conscious  events,  II.
400  sq.

Consequence :  I.  220 ;  inference  from
modal  cons.,  I.  338,  339.

Consequence  :  relation  to  ground,  I.  189
sq.,  220  sq.

Conservation  of  Energy  :  vide  Energy.

Constants  in  Formula  :  II.  232  sq.,  511.

Construction  of  Concepts :  II.  63,  144
sq.,  150  sq.,  167,  528;  geometrical
const.,  II.  152  sq.

Contact :  as  condition  of  action,  II.  98  ;
as  means  of  localization,  II.  255.

Continuum  :  II.  41,  42,  47,  60 ;  con
tinuous  and  discrete,  II.  41,  56  sq.  ;
relation  between  cont.  and  unity,  II.
84.

Continuity:  of  change,  II.  no,  125;  its
relation  to  the  concept  of  efficient
action,  II.  92  sq.

Contradiction  :  I.  139 ;  princ.  contr.,  I.
139  ;  contrad.  between  universal  and
particular  judgments,  I.  172;  between
judgments  of  possibility  and  necessity,
I.  204.

Contradictory:  I.  127  sq.,  134,  172,277
sq.,  283;  II.  523.

Contraposition  :  of  judgments,  I.  338,  341.

Contrary  :  I.  127,  134,  277,  283  ;  contrary
opposition  between  universal  affirma
tive  and  negative  judgments,  I.  172.

Contrast :  I.  133.

Conversion  of  Judgments  :  I.  338,  340  sq.  ;
as  means  of  forming  hypotheses,  II.
210  sq.


Co-ordinate  concepts  ;  I.  277  sq.  ;  c.  pro
positions,  I.  216.

Copula  :  I.  93  sq.  ;  in  the  negation,  I.
121.

Copulative  Judgment  :  I.  170,  227.

Cosmography  :  II.  8,  283.

Criticism:  literary,  II.  443;  historical,  II.

445-
Cross  Concepts  :  I.  277,  279;  c.  divisions,

I.  285  ;  II.  520.

Curves:  their  concepts,  II.  49,  155;  as
means  of  representing  changes,  II.
277.

Darwinian  Theory  :  II.  165,  328  sq.,  514,

524-

Deduction:  II.  23,  181-233;  from  in
ductive  propns.,  II.  417,  418  sq.  ;
ded.  from  statistical  props.,  II.  504;
as  systematic  form,  II.  5°8  sq.

Definition  :  I.  286,  318  ;  nominal  and
real  d.,  I.  287;  diagnostic,  I.  293;

II.  159,  164,  517  ;  genetic  d.,  I.  290  ;
analytic  and  synthetic  d.,  I.  290  ;  d.
as  major  premise,  I.  367  ;  d.  of  num
bers,  II.  34  ;  d.  as  the  result  of  de
duction, II. 182 ; as  the  conclusion
of  knowledge,  II.  465  sq.,  5 [I.

Denominative  Judgments  :  I.  57  sq.  ;  II.
236.

Description  :  I.  267  ;  II.  161  ;  problem
of  d.,  II.  234;  descriptive  laws,  II.
361  sq.  ;  description  of  collective
wholes,  II.  285  sq.,  483  sq.

Determination  :  I.  265,  268-70.

Determinism  :  as  a  rule  of  method,  II.
480 ;  in  relation  to  statistics  of  mor
ality,  II.  504.

Development :  (logical)  d.  of  concepts,  I.
280-1  ;  II.  147,  182  ;  (real)  different
meanings  of  the  word  d.,  II.  472  sq. ;
essential  d.,  II.  n,  116,  118;  d.  of
organisms,  II.  366,  368,  472  sq.  ;
psychol.  d.,  II.  140  sq.  ;  historical
d.,  II.  457  sq.

Diagnostic  Definition: I. 293; II. 159,

164,  517-
Difference  :  method  of  d., II. 339, 342,

419  ;  in  statistics,  II.  501.
Differentiation  :  of  concepts, I.  280 ;  II.

514;  v.  Development.


S.  L. — II.


P P


578


INDEX


Disjunct  Concepts  :  I.  277  sq.

Disjunction  :  as  development  of  concepts,
II.  154,  214.

Disjunctive  Judgment  :  I.  155,  212,  228
sq.  ;  280,  298  ;  II.  214  ;  as  basis  of
indirect  proof,  II.  200  ;  as  basis  of
theory  of  probabilities,  II.  216  sq.

Disjunctive  Syllogism  :  I.  371  sq.

Disparate  Concepts  :  I.  278.

Division  of  Concepts  :  I.  277,  280  ;  d.  as
development  of  concepts,  II.  150;  as
basis  for  calculation  of  probabilities,
II.  219;  as  form  of  classification,  II.
511  ;  as  basis  of  statistical  numera
tion,  II.  286  ;  empirical  and  logical
div.,  I.  283,  368;  II.  513;  chain  of
divs.,  II.  184.

Divisive  Judgment  :  I.  228,  230,  280  ;  in
ferences  from  divisive  judgments,  I.


Effect  :  v.  Causality.

Efficient  Action:  I.  36  sq.,314;  II.  n,
92  sq. ,  334  sq.  ;  v.  Cause.

Effort  :  its  relation  to  the  causal  concept,
II.  101.

Ego  :  (see  I).

Elements  of  Concepts  :  I.  254  sq.  ;  II.  21
sq.  ;  e.  of  space-idea,  II.  42  sq.  ;
chemical  elements,  II.  281,  320.

Elementary  Sensations  :  II.  65  sq.

Empirically  Universal  Judgments  :  I.  160,
171  ;  e.  laws,  II.  361  sq.

End  :  of  thought,  the  starting  point  of
logic,  I.  I  sq.,  9  ;  I.  239,  377  ;  e.  of
theoretical  and  practical  knowledge,
II.  5,  15  ;  e.  as  object  of  the  will,  II.
533  ;  as  modal  relational  concept,  I.
40  ;  universal  and  particular  ends,  II.
533  ;  necessity  due  to  the  e.,  I.  200  ;
deduction  from  ends,  II.  230 ;  dis
covery  of  means  to  e.,  II.  425,  540.

Energy:  concept  of  e.,  II.  113  ;  principle
of  conservation  of  e.,  II.  113  sq.,  381
sq.,  388  sq.  ;  its  application  in  psy-
chophysics,  II.  381  sq.

Episyllogism  :  I.  330  ;  II.  186  note.

Equality  :  (sameness),  I.  36,  in,  319;  II.
24,  27  so  ;  e.  of  numbers,  II.  24  sq. ,
3°)  3<3  ;  geometrical  e.,  II.  55  ;  e.  of
times,  II.  55,  240  ;  e.  of  intensities


and  qualities,  II.  66  sq.  ;  e. of  mea
sured  magnitudes,  II.  262.
Equation  :  I.  70  sq.  ;  of  analytical  geom.,

I.  225.

Error  :  in  definition,  I.  288  ;  in  proof,  II.

203  ;  in  measurement,  II., 262  sq.  ;

probable  e.,  II. 269  ;  law  of  e.,  II.

270.
Essence: essential concepts,  I. 198  sq.,

246,  276;  II. 311  sq.,  460  sq.,  509,

sq.

Essential  Attributes  :  I.  265,  274,  291.
Ethics: II. 13; relation between logic

and e., II. 14, 18, 547, 556 sq.  ;

methods  in  e. ,  II.  529  sq.
Evident :  I. 5, 14,  296  ;  II.  542.
Exception  :  I. 161.
Exclusion  :  proof  by  e.  ;  II.  201.
Existence :  v.  Being.
Existential  propositions  ;  I.  66,  72  sq-,299i

303; in  mathematics, II. 157  note;

judgments  of  perception  ase.,  II.  234

sq.
Experiment  :  II.  339,  344 ;  exp. methods

in  psychology,  II.  406.
Explanation  :  of  words and concepts, I.

287  sq.  ;  e.  of  a  proposition,  II.  203  ;

causal  e.  of  facts,  II.  417-460;  e.  in

history,  II.  435  sq.  ;  e. by  the  nature

of  substances,  II.  460-480.
Exponible  Judgments  :  I.  215.
Extension :  II.  43  sq. relation  to unity  ;

II.  84  sq.  ; e. of  concepts, I.  265,
283  sq.  ;  as  the  ground  of  inference,  I.
343  sq.,  352  5  II,  182.

Faculty:  II.  92,  IOO;  psychological  con
cept,  off.  II.  140,  478  sq.

Fall :  motion  in  falling,  II.  101  App.  E,  law
of  fall,  II.  364.

Figure  :  as  part  of  concept  of  thing,  II.  8 1
sq.

Figures  :  of  categorical  syllogisms,  I.  349
sq.

Final  concepts  :  I.  274  sq.  ;  II.  148  sq.,
150,  156;  as  principle  of  unity,  II.
172,  f.  .c.  and  causality,  II.  173  sq.  ;
formal  application  of  f.c.  II.  174,  as  a
clue  in  classification,  II.  525  sq.  ;  as
basis  for  psychological  laws,  II.  405
sq.  ;  for  historical  laws,  II.  454  ;  ends


INDEX


579


as  the  ultimate  ground  of  explanation,
II.  548  sq.

Final  Propositions  :  I.  218.

Force  :  concept  off.,  II.  93,  101  ;  as  rela
tional  concept,  II.  109  sq.,  462
sq.  ;  f.  and  development,  II.  473
sq.

Form  :  I.  264  ;  II.  79,  84  sq. ;  as  deter
mining  the  unity  of  a  thing,  II.  168
sq.,  177  ;  f.  and  content  in  psychology,
II.  121,  127  sq.  ;  fixed  forms  as  pre
supposed  in  classification,  II.  159  sq.,
318,  328,  524.

Formal  Logic  :  I.  10 ;  f.  ethical  principles,
II-  543  sq.

Formula:  II.,  232  ;  conceptual  f.,  I.
266.

Freedom:  voluntary  thought,  I.  3,  n;
relation  to  concept  of  possibility,  I.
203;  the  postulate  off.,  II.  18  sq.,

556.
Function:  (mathem. ),  II.  232.

Generality  :  see  Universality.
Generalization : II. 22, 311, 342, 370

sq.

Generic  Universality  :  I.  47,  267.
Genetic  Definition  :  I.  290.
Genus,  Generic  Concept  :  I.  265  sq.,  272  ;

II. 161  ; as  condition  of  induction,

II.  37i  sq.
Geometrical Concepts  : II. 42  sq.  ; g.

construction, II. 152 ; inferences

in  geom., I. 362  sq.  ;  II. 190  sq.
Good  :  as  modal  relational  concept,  I.  40  ;

highest  g.,  II.  546.
Grammatical treatment of Propositions^

I.  26.

Graphical  Representation  of  Motions  and

Changes  :  II.  276.
Ground  :  I.  103, 189  sq.  ;  relation  to  the

principle  of  causality, I. 190, 195  ;

II.  117  ; relation of g. and  conse
quence,  I.  189,  220,  326  sq.,  373  sq.  ;
psychological  and  logical  g., I. 189,
239  sq.

Hermeneutic  Statements  :  I.  26.
Heuristic  Methods  :  II.  208,  210  sq.,  359  ;

the  concept  of  the  end  as  h.  principle,

II.  176.


History:  II.  8,  453  ;  h.  of  science  as  basis
of  methodology,  II.  19  ;  methods  in  h.
II.  426,  435  sq.  ;  laws  of  h.,  II.
449.

Hypothesis:  I.  178  sq.,  188 ;  h.  in  the
hypothl.  judgment,  I.  220  ;  the  genesis
of  h.,  II.  210.

Hypothetical :  h.  necessity,  I.  200 ;  h.
judgment,  I.  22Osq.,  327,  373;  vary
ing  origin  of  the  h.  judgment,  I.  222,
336;  h.  syllogism,  I.  326  sq.  ;  mixed,
I.  328  ;  pure,  I.  330  ;  h.  sorites,  II.
1 86 ;  h.  character  of  fundamental
causal  laws,  II.  360  sq.

I :  (Ego)  as  subject  of  judgments,  I.  302
sq.  ;  as  presupposed  in  psychl.  con
cepts,  II.  121  sq.,  167,  394;  ques
tion  of  substantiality,  II.  138  sq.,
478.

Idea :  I.  27  sq.,  29  sq.  ;  universal  and
particular  i.,  I.  40  sq. ;  i.  and  concept,

I.  242.

Ideal  of  Knowledge  :  H.  7  ;  as  part  of  the
moral  ideal,  II.  14,  547-

Ideal  Consciousness  :  I.  296;  II.  12,  17,
1 8,  529,  542,  551  sq.,  554.

Identity  :  I.  36,  79,  83  sq.,  258,  296  ;  real
and  logical,  I.  84,  313;  II.  24,  26;
local,  II.  86;  i.  of  the  thing,  II.  87,
280 ;  relation  between  i.  and  causal
ity,  II.  120  ;  principle  of  i.,  I.  83,  296  ;

II.  29.

Imaginary  Numbers  : II.  40.
Immediate  Judgments: 1. 102, 295  sq.  ;
i. inferences, I. 338  ;  i. causes, II.

IOO.

Impenetrability  :  I.  87  ;  II.  82,  255  sq.
Imperative  :  I. 17.
Impersonals  : I.  59  sq. ,  124.
Incomparable  Concepts  : I.  278.
Incompatible  Predicates  :  I.  127,  132,279,

3I9-
Indirect  Proof :  II.  201  sq.  ;  ind.  methods,

II.  21.

Individual :  II.  168,  176  sq.,  472  sq.

Individual  Concepts  :  (particular  ideas),  I.
50,  52,271.

Individual:  psychology  of  the  II.,  I2gsq.  ;
psychical  causal  relations  between  in
dividuals,  II.  407  sq.,  447.


580


INDEX


Induction  :  inductive  (divisive)  inference,  I.
368  sq.  ;  i.,  as  reduction,  II.  207,  212,
308;  process  of  i.,  II.  23,  288-508;
Aristotle's  theory  of  i.,  II.  289  sq.  ;
Bacon's,  II.  293  sq.  ;  J.  S.  Mill's,
II.,  299  sq.  ;  generalising  i.,  II.  310,
370  sq.  ;  and  abstraction,  II.  166  ;  i.
as  the  means  to  the  classificatory  for
mation  of  concepts,  II.  151  sq.,  311
sq.  ;  i.  in  psychology,  II.  374-416.

Inertia:  principle  of, II. 104,  113.

Inference:  immediate,  I.  338,  326  sq.,
.psychological  and  logical  meaning  of
i.,  I.  114,  327  ;  II.  288,  306.

Infinite  :  number,  II.  36  ;  infinity  of  space,
II.  45  sq.  ;  of  time,  II.  59  ;  infinite
judgment,  I.  121.

Inflexion  :  of  the  verb  as  expressing  the  act
of  judgment,  I.  93  sq.

Inheritance  :  II.  329,  479.

Intensity:  of  sensation,  I.  264;  II.  66  sq.,
133  sq.

Interpolation:  II.  214.

Interpretation  :  II.  444.

Invariability  :  of  substance,  II.  89  sq.,  112,
116;  offerees,  II.  93,  108,  112.

Irrational  numbers  :  II.  40.


Judgment  :  I.  8,  16,  25,  232  ;  judgments  :
simple,  I.  53  ;  narrative,  I.  53  scl-  >
explicative,  I.  53,  90  sq. ,  162,  203;
denominative,  I.  53  ;  relational,  I.
65  ;  impersonal,  I.  59  ;  analytical  and
synthetical,  I.  102  sq.  ;  mediate  and
immediate,  I.  102  sq.,  182,  191,  256
sq.  ;  negative,  I.  119;  infinite  or
limiting,  I.  121  ;  plural,  I.  157,  170  ;
•copulative,  I.  157  ;  conjunctive,  I.
158;  universal,  I.  160  sq.,  170;  par
ticular,  I.  166  sq.  ;  singular,  I.  165,
168  sq.  ;  negative  universal  and  par
ticular  j.,  I.  170  sq.  ;  negation  of
universal  and  particular  j.,  I.  172  ;
problematical,  assertorial,  apodeictic,
I.,  176  sq.  ;  judgments  about  j.'s,  I.,
122,  214  sq.  ;  categorical,  hypo
thetical,  disjunctive,  I.  213,  220,  228  ;
exponible,  I.  215;  the  formation  of
judgments,  II.  21,  181  sq.  ;  j.  of  per
ception,  II.  234  sq.


Kepler's  Laws  :  II.  275,  363.

Language:  relation  of  1.  to  thought,  I.  16
sq.,  25,  29  sq.,  41,  242,  249  ;  II.  6  ;  1.
as  representing  ideas,  II.  25  ;  as  an
aid  to  psychology,  II.  122  ;  science
and  history  of  1.,  II.  410,  450  ;  the
judgment  expressed  in  1  ,  1.9,  16,  51,
93  sq.,  122.

Law  :  (see  also  principle)  I.  187,  197,  241
sq.,  324;  II.  ii,  233,  372,  416,  553;
natural  and  normal  laws  of  thought,

I.  20, 84, 242  sq., 307  sq.,  323 sq.  ;

II.  17,  29  sq.,  440;  of  the  will,  II.
544  ;  1.  of  association,  II.  401  ;  laws
referring  sensations  to  things, I.  306
sq.  ; specific  and  generic  1.,  II.,  310
sq.,  372;  causal  laws, II. 334-361  ;
law  of  efficient  action as expression
of  force,  II.  112  ;  1.  of  combination  of
causes, 349 ; 1. of  development,  I.
199;  II. 118  sq., 322, 514;  1. and
formula,  II.  232,  348  ;  empirical  1.  II.
361  sq.  ;  descriptive  1.,  II. 362,  1. of
regular  connection,  II.  365  ;  historical
1.,  II.  449  sq.,  453  ;  statistical  1.,  II.
487.

Legal  Concepts :  II.  167  ;  1.  principles,  I.
18  (note),  discovery  of  1. p.  by  analogy,
II.  209  ;  interpretation  of  l.p. ,  II.  539
sq.

Limits  :  (geom.),  II.  48,  153  ;  in  time,  II.

59-

Limiting  Judgments  :  I.  121.

Line  : II.  48  ;  straight  1.,  II.  43,  49.

Localisation:  I.  311;  II.  50  sq. ;  subj.
and  obj.,  II.  252  sq.  ;  1.  of  mental  pro
cesses  in  the  brain,  II.  412.

Logical :  treatment  of  thought,  I.  I,  9  ;  1.
relations,  I.  29,  36  ;  logical  meaning
of  the  concept,  I.  245  sq.  ;  II.  311
sq. ;  1.  and  empirical  extension,  I.  284,
368;  II.  511  sq.

Magnitude:  I.  35;  II.  40,  54.

Major  Premise  :  I.  328,  350  ;  its  relation  to

the  conclusion  ;  I.  359.
Mass  : Concept of m., II. 169, 281,

570.

Matter  :  (see  Substance).
Material  Truth  :  I.  10.


INDEX


58'


Mathematics  :  II.  28  sq.  ;  math,  equa
tions,  I.  70  sq.,  225  ;  syllogisms  in
m.,  I.  362  ;  II.  190;  application  of  m.
to  psychology,  II.  121,  134  sq.

Mathematical  Concepts  :  II.  25-65, 147.

Mean  :  arithmetical,  II.  266  sq.

Means  :  (see  End).

Measure,  Measurement :  II.  43,  54,  252
sq. ;  m.  of  intensity  of  sensation,  II.
68  ;  of  efficient  action,  II.  112  ;  of
substance,  II.  281;  standards  of  m.,
252  ;  numbers  in  m.,  261,  262;  inter
mittent  m.,  II.  273.

Mechanism: 11.461,  466.

Mediated  Judgments  :  I.  102,  24!.

Memory  : I.  43,  304  ;  II.  59,  402.

Metaphysics  :  II.  548  sq.;  metaphys.  mean
ing  of  concepts,  I.  245  sq.

Methods:  of  logic,  I.  20;  II.  3,  20;  direct
and  indirect,  II.  21.

M.  of  Abstraction  :  I.  248  sq.,  268  ;  of  con
struction,  II.  150;  of  forming  judg
ments  of  perception,  II.  234  ;  of  form
ing  valid  concepts  about  reality,  II.
311  ;  of  finding  causal  laws,  II.  334.

M.  of  Agreement :  II.  339,  418.

M.  of  Difference  :  II.  339,  341,  418,
501.

Combined M. of Agr. and Dif.  : II.

343-

Experimental  M.  :  II.  339  ;  in  psychology,
II.  406.

Rules  of  Method  distinguished  from
Axioms  :  II.  468.

Middle  Concept  :  I.  348,  350  sq.  ;  II.  194
sq.

Minor  Premise  of  the  Syllogism  :  I.  328,
350.

Modal:  relations,  I.  40,  99,  218;  m.  con
sequence,  I.  339.

Modality  of  Judgments :  I.  103  sq.

Modifications  :  of  attributes  and  activities,
I.  29,  32.

Moods  :  of  the  figures  of  the  categorical
syllogism,  I.  349  sq. ;  m.  of  the  hypo
thetical  syllogism  :  I,  328,  349~354  ',  of
the  disjunctive,  I.  371.

Moral  necessity,  I.  201.

Morality  :  statistics  of,  II.  499  sq.

Names:  I.  50,  262,  271  ;  II.  284,  520.


Natural  laws  :  see  Laws.

Necessity  :  psychological  and  logical,  I.  5  ;
n.  of  the  judgment,  I.  79  sq.,  176  sq.,
J93  sq.  ;  n.  of  reality,  196,  2O2  sq.  ;
inner  n.,  I.  196  ;  of  causality,  I.  199  ;
of  the  action  of  causes,  II.  112;
moral  n.,  I.  201  ;  mathematical  n.,  I.
2O2  ;  n.  of  being  and  happening  as  the
object  of  knowledge,  II.  9,  u.

Negation:  I.  uSsq.  ;  different  meanings
of  n.,  I.  123  sq.  ;  ground  of  n.,  127
sq.,  297  ;  negation  of  the  n. ,  I.  148,
161  ;  n.  of  plural  and  universal  judg
ments,  I.  172  ;  universal  n.,  I.
170;  n.  in  the  hypothetical  judgment,
I.  226  sq.

Negative  Characteristics:  I.  278,  282  ;  II.

153-
Nominal  Validity  of  the  Judgment  : I.

79-

Non  A  :  meaning  of  the  formula,  I.
121,  134,  143  sq.,  154,  283.

Normal  : II.  488,  526.

Number  :  I.  36  ;  II.  30  sq.  ;  genesis  of
concept  of  n. ,  II.  60  sq.  ;  universal
ity  of  n.,  II.  36  ;  infinity  of  n.,  II.  36  ;
negative,  fractional,  irrational,  imagi
nary  n.,  II.  40  sq.

Numeration  :  statistical, II.  285  sq.

Numerical  Generality  :  I.  47,  57,  270;  n.
magnitudes,  II.  41  sq.

Objective  :  o.  necessity,  I.  6, 15, 196  ;  o.

validity  of  the  judgment,  I.  79  sq.,  90,

174,  295  sq.,  307.

Observation  :  errors  in, II.  261  sq.
Opposition  : I. 127  sq.  ;  inference  by  o.,

I.  338  ;  contradictory  and  contrary  o.
of  concepts, I. 131, 277  sq.;  o.  of
judgments,  I.  I39sq.,  172  sq.

Optative  :  I. 17.

Organisms  :  II.  163,  171,  175,  471  J  their
unity  and  relation  to  the  final  concept,

II.  171, 175  sq.  ;  their  essential  con
cept,  II.  332  sq.,  471  sq.  ;  their  classi
fication, II. 515  sq ;  genesis  ofo.,
II.  429.

Ought  : I. 5, 17  :  H. 13  sq., 529  sq.

Parallelism  :  psychophysical,  II.  374,  379
sq.


582


INDEX


Parallelogram  of  Forces  :  II.  350.

Part  :  see  Whole.

Particles  :  I.  214  sq.

Particular Judgments: I. 166 sq., 172

sq.  ;  in  the  syllogism, I. 351,  355.
Particularity  : I.  40  ;  II.  8l.
Passive  :  I.  71.
Permanence  :  of  substance,  II.  87  sq.,  278

sq.  ;  of  energy, II. 113  sq.,  388  sq.,

463  sq.
Phenomenal and Real  Things : II. 279

sq.  ;  ph.  occupation  of  space,  II.  256.
Photometry  :  II.  72.
Physiology  :  ph. laws, II. 366  sq., 368,

505 sq.  ; relation to psychology,  II.

135,  411  sq.  ;  cerebral  physiology,  II.

411.

Plural  :  I.  47,  158.
Plural  Judgments  :  1.  157  sq.
Plurality:  I. 36,  47, 157 sq., 170,  258;

II.  27,  32  sq.

Political  Economy  :  Methods  of,  II.  456.
Postulate:  I.  315,  318;  p.  of  logic,  I.  14

sq.  ;  p. 's  of  knowledge;  II. 15  sq.  ;

the  causal  principle  as  p.,  II.  120;  p.

of  induction,  II. 288;  of  ethics, II.

547-

Practical  Problems  :  I.  5,  8  ;  II.  12  sq.,
17;  p.  principles,  II.  14,  543.

Predicate  of  the  Judgment  :  I.  25  sq.,  52  ;
its  unity  with  the  subject,  I.  53,  58
sq.,  66,  82;  differs  from  identity,  I.
86.

Premises  :  I.  328  ;  their  order,  I.  328  ;
discovery  of  p.,  II.  203.

Prepositions  :  I.  34  ;  II.  98.

Present  Tense  :  I.  89,  92,  100.

Principle  :  of  identity,  I.  83  sq.,  296  ;  II.
29  ;  p.  of  agreement,  I.  79,  83,  296
sq.  ;  p.  of  contradiction,  I.  139  sq.,
296  sq.,  323;  II.  29;  p.  of  excluded
middle,  I.  150  ;  p.  of  sufficient  reason,
I.  189  sq.  ;  p.  of  inference,  I.  343  sq. ;
p.  of  practice,  II.  14  ;  p.  of  perman
ence  of  matter,  II.  278  sq.  ;  of  con
servation  of  energy,  II.  113,  388,  463.

Principia  Demonstrandi  :  II.  193.

Privation  :  I.  127.

Privative  Characteristics  :  I.  282.

Probability:  I.  195;  II.  216  sq.,  434,
504  sq.  ;  of  correctness  in  measure


ments,  II.  262 ;  p.  errors,  II.  268  ;
theory  of  p.'s,  II.  216-230,  504  sq.  ;
p.  as  basis  for  induction,  II.  303.

Problematical  Judgment :  I.  176  sq.

Problems:  of  proof,  II.  193;  mathematical,
II.  155  sq.,  216.

Projection,  Spatial :  II.  50.

Proportionality  between  Causes  and
Effects  :  II.  232.

Proposition:  I.  9,  17,  25;  combinations
of  p.'s,  214  sq.

irp&<r\T]if/is  in  the  Syllogism:  I.  330  sq.,
366;  II.  187.

Prosyllogism  :  I.  330;  II.  186  (note).

Psychology  :  analysis  of  psl.  concepts,  II.
121  sq.  ;  form  and  content  or  object
of  ps.  activities,  II.  127  sq.  ;  p.  of
individual  and  of  nations,  II.  129 ;
induction  in  p.,  II.  374-416 ;  ps.  ex
periment,  II.  125 ;  structure  of  ps.
concepts,  II.  167  ;  relation  to  physi
ology,  II.  135,  411  sq.  ;  ps.  as  basis
of  historical  investigation,  II.  427,

435-

Psychological  treatment  of  Thought  dis
tinguished  from  logical  :  I.  9 ;  of
inference,  I.  326,  361  ;  II.  288,  306
sq.  ;  ps.analys.is  of  the  will,  II.  530.

Psychophysics  :  II.  69,  125,  142,  244,
374.  376,  396  sq.  ;  psychoph.  laws
as  causal  laws,  II.  376  sq.,  396;
psychoph.  parallelism,  II.  379.

Point  (geom.),  II.  48.

Quality  in  Sensation  :  II.  66,  68.
Quantity  of  Judgments:  I.  156  sq.
Quantitative  Relation  between  Cause  and

Effect :  II.  112,  346  sq.
Question:  I.  103,  116,  177  sq.  ;  II. 182;

determining  questions,  II.  214  sq.

Rational  Numbers:  II.  40;  a  result  of
measurement,  II.  240.

Reconstruction  as  method  of  forming
Concepts ;  II.  57,  61,  65,  144  sq.

Reduction  :  II.  181,  203  sq. ;  relation  to
deduction  and  induction,  II.  203,  212,
288,  308 ;  as  method  of  obtaining
axioms,  II.  208  ;  of  forming  concepts,
II.  318  sq. ;  in  the  theory  of  pro
bability,  II.  227  sq.


INDEX


583


Relation  :  I.  29,  33  sq.  ;  r.  between  judg
ments,  I.  213  sq.,  339  ;  negation  of  r.,
I.  124;  inference  by  change  of  r.,
!•  338;  judgments  of  r. ,  I.  65  sq. ,
no,  319,  363  sq.  ;  as  major  premises,
I.  346,  363  sq.  ;  rs.  as  causes,  II.
1 08  sq.

Relativa  :  I.  214  sq.

Relative  Propositions  :  I. 216  ;  universal,

I.  224.

Relativity,  of  Place-Determinations  :  II.
255  sq.  ;  of  motion,  II.  258  sq.

Self-Consciousness,  Unity  of:  I.  73,  177,
187,  240,  302  ;  II.  19,  121  sq.,  138  sq.

Sensations  :  I.  261  sq.  ;  II.  65  sq.,  127
sq.  ;  causal  relation  between  s.  and
stimulus,  II.  68,  125,  241  sq.,  376  sq.,
397  ;  intensity  and  quality  of  s.,  II.

68  ;  determination  of intensities, II.

69  sq.  ;  of  qualities, II.  73  sq.. 146  ;
the  Weber-Fechner  law,  II.  69,  397  ;
change  of  s.,  II.  76  sq.

Simple  :  things,  II.  81  ;  ideas,  I.  256  sq.,

262  ;  II.  66.
Simultaneity:  II.  58;  of  cause  and  effect,

II.  104.

Social  Statistics  :  II.  498  sq.

Space :  I.  34,  260,  310 ;  II.  42  sq.  ;
genesis  of  s.  idea,  II.  45  ;  a  priori,
II.  46 ;  empty  s.,  II.  45  ;  non-
Euclidean  s.,  II.  App.  C.  ;  occupation
ofs.,  II.  45,  52,  82  sq.  ;  phenomenal,
II.  256;  absolute  s.,  II.  257  sq.  ;
judgments  about  spatial  determina
tions  of  things,  I.  306,  310  sq.  ;  II.
234,  252  sq.  ;  identity  of  visual  with
tactual  s.,  II.  82  ;  spatial  arrange
ment  of  the  universe  as  the  aim  of
knowledge,  II.  7.

Species  :  concept  of,  II.  328,  524  sq.  ;
infimoe,  s.,  II.  164,  514,  517  sq.  ;
specific  concepts,  I.  265  sq.  ;  II.  161,
164,  324,  514,  516;  specific  differ
ences,  I.  280,  286  sq.  ;  II.  162,  328.

Spontaneity  :  II.  478.

Stability  of  Ideas  :  I.  79  sq.,  85,  242,  252
sq.  ;  II.  25,  67  sq.

Statistics  :  II.  285  sq.,  480  sq.  ;  st.
methods,  II.  483  sq.  ;  st.  numbers  as
the  basis  of  normal  types,  II.  526.


Straight  Line:  concept  of,  II.  42  sq.

Subalternation  :  I.  338  sq.

Subcontrary  :  I.  173.

Subject  :  of  the  judgment, I.  25  sq.  ; in

impersonals, I. 59 sq.  ; unity  of  s.

and  predicate,  I. 53,  58  sq.,  66,  82  ;

differs  from  identity,  I.  86.
Subordination  of Concepts  : I. 265  sq.  ;

as  basis  of  the  categorical  syllogism,  I.

350  ;  sub.  propositions,  I.  216.
Substantive:  I.  29,  31,  38  ;  abstract  s.,  I.

33  ;  as  subjects  in  judgments,  I.  77.
Substance  : I. 313 sq.  ;  II. 78 sq., 159,

281 sq.  ;  permanence  of  s., I. 313  ;

II.  88,  ill,  116,  278  sq.
Substitution :  in inference, I. 334, 346,

358; II. 190;  of problems  in  proof

(fj.eT<i\T)<pis),  II.  196.
Subsumption : I. 18, 57, 59, 306, 363  ;

syllogism  of  s., I.  367  ;  II. 184  sq.  ;

s.  as  a  clue  in  classification,  II.  521.
Succession  :  II.  58  sq.  ;  s.  and  causality,  II.

96,  Iiosq.,  243  sq.,  336  sq.
Successive Apprehension  : II. 246; its

relation  to  succession in the  object,

247  sq.

Superfluity  in  Definition  :  I.  289.
Surface  :  II.  48.
Syllogism  : I. 326  sq., 349  sq., II. 182

sq.  ;  value  of  the  s.,  I 357  sq.
Synthesis  :  of  conceptual  elements,  I.  254

sq.  ;  II.  2O,  24, 144  sq.  ;  synthesis  in

the  judgment, I. 53, 58, 59,  65,  77,

79, 108  sq.  ;  s.  in  concept  of  number,

II. 34;  of  thing, II.  78  sq., 86  sq.,

168 sq.  ;  in concept  of  causality,  II.

99  sq.
Synthetical  Judgment :  I. 102 sq., 182,

314, 317  sq.  ; s.j. as  major  .premise

in  syllogisms,  I. 336, 357,  365  ; de
duction  from  s.j.,  II.  185  sq.  (z>.  also

a  priori).
Systematuation  :  II.  508-529.

Teleology  :  v.  End.

Terminology :  II.  9.

Theory  of  Knowledge  :  I.  8,  21.

Thing:  I.  26  sq.,  198,  260;  II.  78;  as
subject  in  the  judgment,  I.  58,  59 ;
relation  of  t.  to  attributes,  I.,  27  sq.,
58  sq.,  59,  88,  260  sq.  ;  II.  79  sq.  ;


INDEX


unity  and  identity  of  t.,  II.  80  sq.,
278  sq.  ;  change  of  t.,  II.  87  sq.  ;
reference  of  sensations  to  ts.,  I.  312;
II.  82  sq.,  279  sq.  ;  phenomenal  and
real  ts.,  II.  278.

Thought  :  I.  i  sq.  ;  logical  and  psycho
logical  treatment,  I.  9 ;  reflection
upon  the  activity  of  t.,  II.  26.

Time:  I.  29,  34,  260;  II.  57  sq. ;  a  priori
t.,  II.  58  ;  duration,  succession,  inter
val,  II.  58 ;  absence  of  limit,  ii.  59,
6.1  ;  periods  of  t.  II.  60  ;  equality  of
t.,  II.  60;  relation  oft.  to  number,
II.  60  ;  subjective  ideas  of  t.,  II.  238  ;
measure  of  t,  subjective  and  objective,
II.  60 sq.,  237,  sq.  ;  t.  order,  objective,
II.  235,  257  sq.  ;  time  determination
of  judgments,  I.  89  sq.,  143,  152,  302
sq.  ;  of  perceptions,  II.  234,  236  sq.  ;
of  objective  events,  II.  243  sq.

Time  Relation  between  Cause  and  Effect,
II.  92  sq.,  243  sq.  ;  of  moments
of  consciousness,  II.  136,  241  ;  be
tween  event  and  perception,  II.  237,

243  Sq.

Tradition  :  I.  112  ;  II.  6,  410,  446,  479.

Truth  :  I.  8 ;  necessary  and  matter  of
fact  t. ,  I.  183  sq.  ;  t.  of  immediate
judgments,  I.  295  sq.  ;  of  the  utter
ances  of  self-consciousness,  I.  301  sq. ;
II.  241  sq.

Type  : II.  134,  166,  324,  520.

Unconditional  Validity  of  Propositions
(opp.  temporal  v.)  :  I.  92  ;  unc.
universal  judgments,  I.  162  sq.,  339,
368  ;  n.  valid  judgments  as  conditions
of  inference,  I.  329.

Unity  :  I.  36,  258  ;  II.  24  sq.,  30,  31  sq. ;
u.  of  a  thing,  II.  81  ;  relation  of  u.  to
extension,  II.  84 ;  forms  of  u.  in  the
concepts  of  things,  II.  168  sq.  ;  causal


u.  of  a  whole,  II. 170, 179  ; teleo-
logical,  II.  171,  179.

Universal  :  I.  32,  40  sq.

Universality  (or  generality)  of  Ideas  :  I.
32,  40,  47  sq.,  225  ;  of  the  word,  I.
40  sq.,  47,  225  ;  of  concepts,  I.  248
sq.,  261  ;  II.  161  ;  of  the  concept  of
number,  II.  36  sq.  ;  of  space,  II.  56  ;
numerical  and  generic  u.,  I.  47,56-
267.

Universality  and  Necessity :  I.  163  sq.,
198,  202.

Universal  Judgments  :  I.  160  sq.  ;  em
pirically  and  unconditionally  u.j.,  I.
161  sq.,  368  ;  u.  negative  j.,  I.  170  ;
negation  of  u.j.,  I.  172  sq.  ;  u.  pro
positions  as  the  result  of  induction,
II.  288.

Universal  Causal  Laws:  II.  112,  334  sq.  ;
general  and  specific  laws,  II.  370.

Variability  of  Organisms  : II.  329.
Variable  Conditions  :  II.  357  sq.,  491  sq.
Varieties  of  Organisms  :  II.  328.
Verb: I. 29,  31; transitive, I. 36;  as
predicate  in  the  judgment,  I.  58,  77.

Weber's  Law  :  II.  69.

Weight  :  as  measure  of  substance,  II.  90,
281  sq.

Whole  and  Part :  I.  34  sq.,  37  ;  II.  44,
84,  170;  collective  wholes,  II.  178,
285  sq.,  498  sq.

Will  :  its  relation  to  thought,  I.  3,  17,  200,
385,  331  ;  II.  5,  12  sq.,  18,  529  sq.  ;
causality  of  w.,  II.  142  sq.,  391  sq.  ;
unity  of  the  w.,  II.  13,  529  sq.  ;  su
premacy  of  the  w.,  II.  19,  557.

Word  :  I.  29  sq.,  40  sq.  ;  relation  to  the
predicate,  I.  51  sq.  ;  ambiguity  of
words,  I.  29,  40  sq.,  246  sq.  ;  II.  25.


Butler  &  Tanner,  The  Selwood  Printing  Works,  Frome,  and  London.


'•••'" C'-F

JAN  2  7  19  7  b


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
