================================================================================
The Second Punick War Between Hannibal and the Romanes (Punica)
Silius Italicus | Englished from the Latin by Thomas Ross (London, 1661) — the first English translation
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Internet Archive: Silius Italicus, Punica, English (1661)
Source URL: https://archive.org/details/the-second-punic-war-between-hannibal-and-the-romans-silius-italicus-1661
Rights: Public Domain (U.S.)
Staged: 2026-10-09 | Tower of Babel Library, Batch 09a (classical-literature lane)
================================================================================

PUNICK VVAR


_ Berweeri


HANNIBAL.


AND THE


ROMANES:


The wholé Seventeen Books,
ENGLISHED
FROM THE LATINE OF


SILIUS ITALICUS:
| WITH
A Continuation from the Triumph of


SC IPIQ,


HANNIBAL.


_—
By Tuo: Ross, Efq; Keeper of Ha Mayesrie’s Lis
braries, and Groot of His moft Honourable Pring-Chamber


Aut Prodeffe folént, aut Deleétare Poete. Horat.


LONDON,
Printed byT 10. Rovcrorr, andaretobe


fold byJo. Martin, Ja. Miva dens, and T i 0,
-  Dicas, atthe Bell in S$. Paul's Church- Yard,


MDC LXI.


i f
RN TO THE

if KINGS MOST SACRED
{ MAJESTIE.

4 Dread SoveREIGN,


cious Acceptance of this Po-
Se é€m, when it wanted all Or-
Na, nament, both of the Prefs,
and Pencil, hath Embold-

— €ned Me to this fecond Ad.
vefs, moft humbly imploring, that, as Your
Goodnefs was then, both to It, and: Me, the
onely Refuge from the Tyranny of theTimes


GI OU R Majeftie's maft Gra-


at Tou will, now, be pleafed to proteitUs , from
if the Envy of this cenfuring Age, in the San-
ft wun SOE yyy un 2 étuary of Your Name, which will make this
1 \ GAROLUSSea as ere gaan Dee gratit-llagig : Copy as Immortal, asits Original, and fix
| Britcaie runcie os Fito : on it a Character, as Indelible, as the Faith,
| | Your MayesTiers
| |
eat : es 10 710; > ho beft might claim
be ‘Ait the Hopes of Carthage, and of Rome, They would n more cases wae
| ae ee and [ee how eas'ly You, Priority 5 but yield it to Your Name, P and humble Servant,


Rome would her Gen'ral, Carthage Hers refufe,
How from the Rage of War, without the S tain’ And jointly You the World's Commander chufe, T HO: R Oss,
7 ; . T HO; Rosse


4
|
:

Could ‘Hannibal, and Scipio, in whom Of Blood, Ven Sacred Crowns, and Triumphs gains as Siaew .

By Your {ole Virtue, Kingdoms can S ubdue 5

4

!

| e

i

\

!


a ae


PPPPLIOTLILEL DESL E SSSA aS eee
SO9VSVS9VSIIVSG9G VIN 8500S OO LO uL


The Epitle at BRUGES.


ee


TO HIS


SACRED MAJESTIE,


May it pleafe Your Majeftie,


(8) Had not prefumed, to prefent this
yy Poem to Y our Majettie’s view,had
a0 Inot believed, the Dignity of the
eae! Subje@ might, in (ome Meafure,
SSPE ate plead my Apologie. I know Your
Majeftie is familiar with the Hiftory, in its
plainer Drefs of Profe; but this Authour being
frequent in the hands of few, but thofe, whofe
bufinefs is Books, I have adventured to make
him Englith ; believing Cfince, to my ftriGeft
Obfervationof Hiftorians, he does not, inthe
_. main, deviate fromthe granted Truth) that
his Poetical Fancies do not only ad Luftre,but
a more then ordinary Pleafure to the Story; for
herein all the moft eminent A@ions, in that
famous V Var (which once difputed the Em-
pire of the Univerfe ) are defcribed, with {0 vi.
gorous, and lively a Flame, that cif my Englith
hath not too much depreffed it) it may create
in the Readers an emulation of the renowned
Performers : which I have not prefumed to
B 2 prefent


ce
OY Fa


The Epiftle at BRUGES.


prefent to Your Majeftycwhoare above them)
as Examples for Imitation, but that, by refle&-
ing onthem, Your Majefty may fee what un-
perifhable Monuments Great Perfons may
buitd to themfelves,inaflerting their Country;
and, - that as Your Sacred Perfon is endowed
with all thofe Virtues, that rendred the Vali-
ant Hannisat famous, or Scipio a Con-
querour: fo, by the bleffing of Heaven on
Your Majeftie’s Defigns,fome happy Pen may
have Matter to build you fuch another Monu-
ment for future Times; and that Your Maje-
{tie’s Kingdoms being Reftored to their for-
mer Glory by Your Hand, Pofterity may date


_. their Happinefs from Your Conquelt; and
Your Name become an eternal Terrour to


Rebellion.


So prayes,
Bruges, Novemd.
18™ 1657.


Your M ates t1£'s moft Humble,
and moft Obedient Subjett,


and Servant,


Tuo: Ross.


AD Fortune plac'd You on a peace-
full Throne ,
Had not Rebellion. made Yoar Vir-
tues known
Ceds Stormy Nights, and Dark
> Eclipfes, may
Set greater Value on a Fairer Day )
Pofterity had onely underftood, )
Lhat You, like Your Great Anceftours were Good,
eAnd Fuft ; that, under You, the (burch, and State
Flourifh'd, and feem'd above their prefent Fate.
But then, when Hell, and Earth, bad Mull red all
Their Forces, to procure Your Father's Fall ;
When Trait'rous Hands had feix’d upon Your Crown ,
When all Our Rights, and Laws, were trampled down;
Temples to Stables turn'd; Our Flamens fy,
Or elfe, for Vittims, on their Altars dy ;
All Holy things propban'd: That You, alone,
€ As when the Arrian Herefie was grown
Loo ftrong for Truth, and in one Holy Breaft
Religion dwelt, exsl'd from all the reft)
Have ‘gainft thefe Cruel Storms a Bulwark flood,
And ( like the Great Reftorer, when the Flood


O'reran


| To the Kina.


O'reran the Univer[e) an eArk prepare, :
Towhich all fuch, as God, and Loyal are,. ;

For Safety flie ; had ne're been known to Fame;
And fiillcbis great Addition to Your Name

Had been conceal'd, and, after Your Decedfe,, _
The Good, but Eafie, Titles of a Peace,

Had been Your fole Renown : but now we fee,

What Youin Peace, what You in War can be ;

With what an equal Temper Youcan fland

The Shocks of Fortune, and Your Self command.

So that by You the Old inftrutted are

To live, the Young the worfl of Fate to dare.

Hence all, but uch, as are with-beld by Charms

OF W ealth, or Rebels, that now fear Tour Arms,
(ome from all Quarters of the World, in You

Their Prefent Happinefs, thetr Future,view.

Our Church within Your W. alls, alone, can keep

Her Rites, and recolleé ber fcatter'd Sheep.

Within Your ‘Breaft the Archives of the Law

Are fafely lodg’d, and thence we bope to draw |

Thofe Streams of Fusisce, that (as Sacred Nile
Swells, and makes fruitful the Aigyptian SUH )
Shall England Happy make, that, now, with War,
As rudely looks, as if hot Sirius Star
On it, in flead of Libya, only fhed

Its Flames, and Men, worfe then her Monfters, bred.
N one then can juftl of their Fate complain,

That are Exil'd, unlefs You there did Reign.

You are our onely Wealth . and whether You

Aufter’s, or Boreas Froxen Kingdoms view ;

Or fhould You to America repair,

Or ‘other Indies ble/ss whereer'e You are,

All, that are Good, will follow You, and all, |
ThatPlace their Home, that P lace their (ountrey call.


ut


| To the Kinc.


But,Ob! ¢ me thinks ) I fee, with fquallid Locks,
Poor England, rear ber Head above the Kocks ,
And this great Blefiing beg, That She may le
Eas‘d of ber Chains, and, by Your Conqueft, Free.
Gothen ( Great Prince ) £0 5 may propitious Gales
Still wait upon You, and extend Your Sails! ;

Thofe, that from Tyrannie their Native Land |
‘Redeem, in Fame's large Temple Greater fland,
Lhen thofe; whofe Forein Conqucfts Trophies rear
Such the Camilli, Juch the Decii were, .

Whofe Names, in Story, are more Sacred far,
Then theirs, that,bappy in Invafive War,

Brought Weftern Gold, and Eaftern Spices Lome:
T befe did Enrich, but thofe Preferved Rome.

Such ( Sacred Prince y be Your Return! May We
Such Your Succef, and [uch Your Lriumphs fee !
4s when the Phoenix, in bis Parent-N oft
Reviv'd, in Lriumph from the Spicie Eaft
‘Returns, and Offers, on the Pharian Coaft;

Due Sacrifice to bis Paternal Ghoit.

While all the Birds of Night,and thofe of Prey,
Into the Deferts fly, to give him way.

But amore K oble, and Olfeqnious Train

L heir King attend, and /E gypt, wanting ‘Kain,
Sees Father Nilus Flow, without Excefs,

Or'e all the Land, and give a rich Encreafe,
Without their Labour. May You then repair
Lhe Ruins of Your T brone, and, fitting there,
Keffore to Us again an Age of Gold .

While Your Blef Father may, from Hleav'n behold,
Etimfelf in You, as Great, as You are Good,
eAnd all due Expiations for bis Blood

On Rebels made. While all, that now for Fear,


Or Intereft with them Comply, when there


They


i


Pakcbiswriritncsoe.


To the Kine.


They You behold, {ball then, repenting, come,

eAnd juftly from Your Mouth attend their Doom.
When France [hall tremble, and the Swede (ball run,
Fearing Your Arms, et further from the Sun, -

eA nd Vittory, attending on Your Hand,

Wheree're Your Enfigns fie, fhall take ber Stand,
Refolu'd to fix with You, and fhall deveSt

Her felf of Wings, to Plame Your radiant Creft.
eAnd then thofe Wounds, thofe Ills, which We before
So much lamented have,We will Adore.


THE


desrererpetes-


paces ee


om TGR “
AY


PEPPREPS PSSSTTSSESSESSPSPESSHESSH


THE LIFE


C A Irus
SILIUS ITALICUS.


Arus Sititus Iraricus (whether

bornin Sparn, butofIraLtian Ex.

traGion, orin Irary, butof Spanisu
Predeceffors, I fhall leave Perrus Crinirus,
Gyratcpus;, and others to difpute) in his
Youth, applying himfelf to the Study of Rhe-
torick, was a clofe Imitatour of C1c ERO, as
the moft perfe& Pattern of Romane Elo-
quence; after whofe Example, he pleaded ma-
ny Caufes, with fuch Succefs, and Reputation,
that he was, inafhorctime,made a Judg among
the Cen Tum-virt: nor was that Honourthe
fole Reward of his Virtues, though helived in
the Reign of the worft of Em perours; forhe
was thrice Conful, and his firft Confulfhip was
fignalized with (that great felicicy to the Ro-
MANE Empire ) the Death of Nero. He was
Pro-Conful of Asta,and returnedto RoME.
from that Province, with great advantage,both

; *


of


paisa vaal 4


!
i
\
t
f
i.
‘


The Life of Sitrtus Itauicus.


of VVealth, and Honour. It isno mean Ar-
gument of his wifdom, and Prudence, that in
the moft troublefome Changes of the Empire,
he never fell under the difpleafure of the pre-
vailing Party : For, as he was the laft_ Conful,
that Nero made, fo he dyed the laft of all, that
had been Confuls under him. Among the chief
of the City, neither covetous cf Power, nor
Obnoxious to Envy, he was reverenced, and
efteemed by all: and of fuch Integrity in the
Opinion of Vrretiius, that, when he defpair-


- edof Force torefift the Power of Vespasian,


he felected him, with Cluvius R urus,and
SasBinus, to Treat his Conditions with the
Conquerour. Nor did his Friendfhip with
VitTevcius,ectipfehimwith Vespasitan,
having ever entertained ic with Prudence, and
Moderation; fo, that he furvived that Noble
Emperour, and was Honoured with athird
Confulfhip by his Son Domitian. Under
whom, finding the weight of Bufinefs too
heavy for hisdeclining years, he retired into
Campania, andrecreated himfelf withthe
Muses: and, as his Veneration of Crce-
ro had moved himto purchafea Lordfhip,
called by thac Renowned Ornatour, His


Academy (Cin imitation of thatof AT HENs)


where he compofed his Books, entituled his


Acapemiques. So his high Efteem of
Vireit caufed him tobuya Farm, once
belonging to chat Prince of Latine Poets, to
whofe Tombe (near Napres) as to a
Temple, he frequently repaired; and cele-

| Oo brated


ne
The Lifeof Sturus Itauicus:

brated his Birth-Day ; more Religioufly ,
then his own: Nor was he onely a Devore
to his Memory, but a Noble Emulatour of
his Mufe, after whofe Example, he compo-

fed this Immortal Work, fupplying with hig
Care, and Judgment, the Defe€s of Nature:
He was Co-temporary with many other fa.

mous Wits; as Lucan; Sratius, Per-

situs, Junius Aquinas; and Mar.

TIAL, who is frequencin his Praifes, andcom-

mits to his Cenfure his own V Vorks, inthis

Epigram, among many other, excellently

Englifhed by my worthy Friend Jo: Heatu

Efguire.


Martial. ad Silum; Lib. 4. Epigr. 14.
Si1v1, Caftalidum Decus, ec.


Silius, who art the Mufes Fame,
Who the fierce perjur'd Africk’s Name,
eAnd crafty Hannibal's ( Rome's Foes )
Mak:st yield to th’ greater Scipio's,

With thy commanding, pow'rful Stile,

Thy fevere Looks lay'd by a while,

Whilft loofe December now abounds
With cogging Dice, and Boxes founds,
eAnd wanton Lots fly round the Board,
Thou tomy Lines fome Time afford.

But ( pray) thy fmooth, not knitted Brow,
Lo this my loofer Mirth, allow.

Sofoft Catullus Sparrow might,

Appear in our great Virgil's fight.


He


te Neal ae


et rear


The Life of Siurus Itacuicus.


He was efteemed Happy by thofe ofhis Time,
through the wholecourfe of his Life, unlefs in
the lofs of the youngeft of his Sons, who dyed
in his Youth; che other he left flourifhing in
VVealcth, and Confular Dignity. In this Tran-
quillicty, and Content; he lived to the Age of
feventy five years, when, furprized by an incu-
rable Ulcer, he, Voluntary, feta Period to his
Life by Abftinence.


SILTus


ybhh abe Pasig


é. )
a


|
4
ie

i


datum difinguere Lingua


eronta vant Stypia at Veste Sacerdos.
Hac patrio jufii ad Penetratea fortur v


ac Potente. Pinapi Caro fo” Rf


Reo Fider Defenfor- Domina ito ( emt ,
\ Gus Aulpicys Sachoa tater theta in


omanum sent Puerili pectore Bellum.

A

; . :

& Sccundo Ma, zone Britaiiu, Sranae. et Hibe cr
Wa bulam Hanc,vad cunt Stlee fio Angling fue’
Manilline Vovet.Dicat,Con


|x \
Pa Bag Hom int cover Diet Cpr Ri


= OW eee hat ae
SG be


Me =V2 ; a
st ae i ;
7 me 2 6 aN i PINS 5"
DIEV ET Bers


SILIUS ITALICUS


The Second Punick VVar. as


The First | Book,


THe ARGUMENT.:


At nine Years Old, Young Hannibal doth fweanssil: .
At th’ Altar,to maintain theRomane War;

His Father, leading into farthefE Spain :

The Libyan Armie, is in Battel flain +

Him Haldrubal, in cheef Command, Succeeds 5 :

Who, Hate (ontratting by bis cruel Deeds,

By a poor Slave's revengefull Hand doth fall :

Then Hannibal, eletted General,

Breaks Faith with Rome, and to Sagunthus brings

His Arms, whofe famons Siege the Poet fings.


= Sing thofe Arms, by which


‘Rome's Glory {well’d

To Heav’n, and Haughty Car-
thage. was compell'd

To bear Ocnotrian Laws. My _
Mufe, relate


Hefperia’s Toils : how many Men, how Great,

‘Kome bred, of Old, for War. When ) Cadmus Seed () Cadmus, who was the Son of
; : . : i Male King of o Eee on
2 whom the 7 yrians defee F om
Perfidioufly infring’d their Sacred Deed, ip mceae

And, ftrugling for Commiand, did War imbrace.
While Fortune long was doubtful, where to place
C The


= nem acon. alt OA


ss ge a FE -
Fa ee -


ot:


Soon ner + cee -9 Nae wat | aed ates cman 9 — eens 0 mI =


epee pena


3
g
7
a:


Sits aerate


(8) Carthage, her Power encreafed
by many Conquefts in Libya,
Spain; and Rome, no lefs Potent in J-


~ talys they bothafpired co the Empire


of the World.

(c) They had there fharp Wars: in
the firlt, the Carthaginians were over-
thrown, ina Sea-fight,by Lutatine the
Confed, near wy an Ifland be-
tween Sicily, and Africk,) in the fe-
cond, Hanasbal was fubdued by Scipio
Africanus. In che third, Carthage was
fubverted by Scipioe Emilianns.


(d) After the Battel of Canse, no-
thing was wanting to the Subverfion of
the Romane Fortune, but Hannibal’s
Vigorous Profecution of his Vitory,in
beheging Rome it felf, which negleded,
gave er time to recover that memora-

ie Defeat.

Ce) The Romane Conquerour (Sci-
pio) who firlt entced ee

(fs Hannibal,thinking to divert ke
Fulvins fcom the Siege of Capua, ad-
vanced with his Army to the very walls
of Rome, where He was repulfed by
prodigious Storms. See Book 1 3.

(g) Alluding to Dido's Execration
at her Death, on e£aeas’s Poftericy ;
Exoriare aliquis mftris ex offibus ulter,
Qui face Dardanios , ferroque, fequare

Colonos.

“Then from our Bones fhall fome Re-
venger rife,
“*To perfecute the Trojan Colonies
“with Fire, and Sword —
Ogilby, Vieg. En. 1. 4.

(4) Tt isnot ealie te reconcile Appi-
an, Eufebins,jand Fofephus, concerning
the Building of Carthage. The firit
affirming ir tobe built fitty Years be-
fore the Deftruction of Troy.: the other
feventy Years after the Building of
Rome: and the lait, more then three
hundred years after 77 a was deftroy’d,
Bur moft conclude it to have been built
by Dido, who, when her Brother Pyg-
mation had flainher Husband for ‘ius
Wealth, which fhe got into her Poffef-
fion, fled,with fuch Friends,as hated the
Tyranny of Pygmation,by Sea into Ly-
dia, where the {nhabitants, refufing to
let her fhare in their Countrey , She
onely defired to purchafe as much Land
as Shee could encompafs witha Bull’s
Hide, Which Requeft, feeming ridi-
culous, was eafily granted:and the Hide
cut into fmall Thongs, encompafs’d all
that Ground, where the Tower called
Byrfa was built, which firft denomina-
ted the City, that,afterward called Car-
thage , contended with Rome in Great
hele See Appian, in his Book De Lybic.


19

G) Sicanian Coaft, Where with a
Fleet of three hundred Ships, Luéfatins
overthrew a Navy of double the Num-
ber, and thereby forced the Carthagi-
niansto quit Sicily, Sardina and other
Ifles in the Sea, between Africk, and
Jsaly,and accept a difhonourable Peace,


Seetater Tae


Sirius Iraxricus.


Book I.


and © The Empireof the World. The Zorian Lords
Thrice with Succelslefs Arms,and Impious Swords; _
The Senate's Peace,and League, which they had fworn


To Fove, firft broke. And, while, with Fury born,


Each Nation mutual Ruin did contrive .
They, to whom Fate the Victory did give,


@ Were nearefttotheir F all. The Phrygian Powers


In Triumph enter Carthaginian © Towers.
‘Rome's Palaces‘ Sidonian Troops furround ;
While onely in her Walls the Safety found. -


The Caufeof fo great Rage, and Hate, with Care


Cg ‘Bequeathing to their Nephews endlefs War,
Let me relate, and their dark Counfels {can,
The Source of fo great Stirs, which thus began.


® Long fince, when Dido fled her Native Land,


Polluted by her Brother's Impious Hand,

By Chance, on Libya’s fatal Coaft fhe falls, ©
And, on her purchas’d Land, erects new Walls,
With a Bull’s-Hide, in Thongs divided round,
Encompals'd, and fet out the meafur’d Ground.
Here Funo ( asthe Antient Story goes )
Neglecting e4rgos, and Mycenz, thofe

Belov’d, and pleafant Seats, defir’d to build
Eternal Manfions for her dear Exil’d.

But, when She faw ‘Romeraife her lofty Head

So high, and,crofsing Seas, her Eagles fpread


Through all the World ; mov'd by a Jealous Fear,
She the Phenicians fill'd with Thoughts of War.


But thee, at firft, reprefs'd, and having loft
Their high Actempts on the © Sicanian Coaft,
Again fhe Arms prepares: One Captain may
Suffice Her to embroil the Earth, and Sea,
And He was Hannibal ; who now putsen


All Her dire Fury : Him She dares alone


Evn


Book I.


Ev'n ‘gainft the Fates oppofe. When, Joy’d to finde
A Man fo bloody, cafting in her Minde

The IIs, that She would bring on [tah ;

Shall that Dardanian Fugitive ( {aid She)

His Troy, and Houfhold-Gods, twice Captivate ,


In Spight of Me, to Latium tranflate


And, for the Trojans, Latine Scepters found *

k) Ticinus,rather may thy Banks abound.

With flaughter’d Romanes ; and my  Lrebia's Flood
Swell, through the (eltick Plains, with Trojan Blood ;
And Troubled ™ Thrafimenns backward fly, -
Affrighted at the Streams of Purple Dy.

So I may fee Hefperian © Canna Crown'd

With Bodies, and in Blood the Vallies drown’d ;
And Thee, fwift ufdus, incertain where

To leavea Ford, when as no Banks appear, .
Lab’ring o’re Arms, and {catter’d Limbs, thy Way
To break into the ef driatick Sea. _

This faid ; «the Youth, who nothing elfe defires ,
But Broils, and War, with Martial Thoughts fhe fires.
Faithlefs, repleat with Guil, Unjuft was He ,

And, when onee arm’d, contemn’d the Deity ,


Valiant, but Cruel , hating Peace, and fir'd


With a ftrange Thirft of Humane Blood, defir’d,.


Then, in His pride of Youth, to wipe away

His Father’s” Stains, and ith’ Sicilian Sea

To drown all Leagues, uno, with Hopeof Praife ,
Inflames his Heart, to which His Soul obeys.

Now in His Dreams, He feems to break into

The Capitol, and ore the e4 /psto go:

Oft in His troubled Sleep, rifing by Night,

With horrid Cries His Servants Hee'd affright ;
Who found Him, bath’d in Sweat, His future War


To wage, and beat with Rage theempty Air.
C2 This


Sirius IraLicus.


. 3


(kh) Ticinwe,a {mall River in Lom-
bardy, that fallsinto the Po, more re-
nowned by Hannibad’s firft Encounter
wich the Cenful Corn. Scipio, who was
worlted by him,then by the City of the
fame Name. See the Yourth Book,

() Tribia, a River near Placentia s
where,in a fecond Conflid, the Conful
Sempronins was overthrown by Has-
nibal. Sce che fame Place.

(~) Thrafimen, a Lake in the Plains
Of Perufia, near which Hannibal o-
verthrew the Romane Army, and flew
the Conful Cains Flaminins Sce Book 5.

(1) Canne, a {mall Villagein Apulia,
where the Romanes receiveda molt fi-
gnal Overthrow. See Bookg,

(0) Axfidus defcending, with aftrong
Current trom the Hérpin Hills, empti-
ethic felfinto the Adriatick Sea.


(p) Not onely the Difhonour of 4-
milear, (His Father’s) Repulfe our
of Sicsly, but the Lofs of many other
Victories, by former Generis, both by
Sea, and Land.


4-


Sirius IrTaticus.


;


(g) Amilcar, about to lead an Army
into Spain, and having Thoughts of a
greater War again{t the Romanes, Har-
aibal, then nine years old, flattering
Him to go wtih Him, itis faid, chat He
caufed te Childe to lay His Hand on
the Altar, and ro fwear, that, fo foon as
He was able, He would become an E-
nemy to the Romsanes.

(r( Belus was the Father of Dido,
and King of Phenice , from whom A-
milcar Barca \ikewife defcended, his
Anceftour, her Kinfman , accompany-


ing her in her Flight.


(5) Her Image was placed next to
her Husband Sichaus, whofe Memory
fhe preferred to all the Temprations of
other Suicours, keeping her felf conftant
to her firit Nupzial Vow, till che Arri-
val of efineas (as Poets feign) but
her Honour is vindicated by Hiftori-
ans, and by Aufenins in this Epigram
( OXI) on her picture.


1Vido am, whom thon beholdeft here,

Fair, ev'n to Wonder, [uch my Features
Were.

Such 1: not fuch, as Maro feign'd , my
Minde:

Nor tainceftuons Lufts my Life inclin'd.

For Me ne're did A neas fee,nor yet

To Libya, with bis Trojan Fleet,rctreat,

i fled larbas Arms, and Rage, and by

Ay Fall ("ris true ) prefery’d my Cha-

t


fity.

Tranifr'd that Breaft, which a chaft
Sword did prove,

Not Rage, or Grief, incens’d by injur'd
Love.

Thas pleas'd, I fell, liv'd chast:by Fame
belyd,


ei my Husband: built a City:
‘d.


- What envious Mufe did Maro then exe


cite
ALy Lofs of Hemour, falfly,foto write.
Belwewe Historians rather inmy Fame,
Then thofe, who Thefts, and Lykts of
Gods proclaim,
Falfe Poets, who the Truth with Ferfe
pollute,
And Humane Crimes to Deities impute.


(1) Enna was a City fcituate in the
midft of Sicily, where Ceres had a
Tempie, near to which , wasa Sacred
Grove. Out ofwhich Pluteftole Pro-
f-rpina, who is from thence called £x-


This Fury, againit Italy abus‘d, | :
While yeta “Childe, his Father had infus‘d,
Born of the Noble Barcean Race, deriv'd
From ancient Belus. For, when firtt, depriv'd
Of her Sichaus, Dido fled from Tyre ;
The Belian Y outh, ¢ ‘efcape the Tyrian's Ire,
Join’d to her Train, refolyed to embrace
Her Fate, and Fortune: from that Noble Race,
Anilar, fam'd for Valour, claim’d Delcent,
And, ftudious former Hatred to foment 3
Soon as his Son could {peak, and Words expreft,
Kindled the Romane W ar within His Breaft.
Amidft the City, circled by a Grove
OF thady Yew, that did all Light remove,
A Temple ftood, built to Eliza's Ghoft,
And dreadfull held through allthe Tyrian Coatt.
Here (¢ as’tis faid)) the Queen with Her own Hand,
Her felf from Grief abfolv'd: fad Statues ftand
Of Father Belus, and, in Order, all *
His Off-Spring, with Agenor, whom they call
The Glory of their Line, Phenix, whofe F amie,
Gave to that Land, an everlafting Name.
Atlength, Eliza joined to her Lord
Forever ; at Her Feet the Phrygian Sword :.
Next unto thefe twice fifty Alears ftand,
Built to the Gods, that Heav’n, and Hell command :
Clad ina Stygian Vet with {catter’d Locks,
The Prieftefs,here, © Ennea’s Power invokes,
And Acheron : when from the trembling Ground,
Sad Murmures breaking, through the Temple found,
And Flames from the unkindled Altars rife :
Then, rais‘'d by Magick Songs, with horrid Cries,
The wandring Ghofts fly through the hollow Aur;
While Dido, in her Marble, fweats for Fear.
Hither


Book 1.


Book he


Sitius Iraricus.


. . 2


Hither comes Hannibal, commanded by

eA milcar eho obferv'd with Curious eye

His Face, and Gefture. Him. no Horrid Rites

Orth Place, nor mad“) Maofilas Fury frights,

Nor thedark Pavement ftaind with Blood, norFlames’
Arifing at the found of Horrid Names. .
Stroaking his Head, his Father kifs'd him, chears

His early Courage, and thus fills his Ears.

- An unjuft Nation, fprang from ruin’ Troy,
With their harth Leagues do (admus Sons annoy :
If Fates deny the Honour fhould be Mine,

To wipe off this Difgrace, may it be Thine.
Thinkona War may Italy deftroy :
And may the Zyrrbene Youth ( my warlike Boy)
Thy Rifing dread ; and teeming Mothers fear
Their Children to produce, if Thou appear.
Mov'd by this Language, He replies. By Sea,
And Land, fo foon as Years will {uffer Me,
With Fire and Sword the Romanes T'le purfue,
And what Rbetean Fates decree undo.
Neither the Gods, nor Leagues forbidding War,
Tarpeian Rocks, nor e4/ps fhall Me debarr.
Thismy Refolve by Adars I fwear, and by
Thy Ghoft, great Queen. This faid,to Hecate
Falls a black Victime: the Prieftefs enquires
The trembling Entrails, as the foul expires.
And when (as Cuftome was ) with Art the mind
O'dh’ Gods fhe had explor'd, fhe thus Divin'd.
Th tolian Plains I fee with Armies fill'd,
And Lakes, that with (=) Idan Blood are {well’d.
What mighty Bodies climb unto the Skie
By Rocks; on whofe high top thy Camp fhall lie 2
Now from the Hills the furious Army falls
Into the Plains, and now the trembling Walls


D In


(#) A Prieftefs of the Mafftiax
Nation, a Barbarous Pcople, moft fa-
miliar with thofe horrid Rites, which
were there co be performed : wherein,
as if infpired from Heil fhe walked, as
mad, about the Alears; lke that de-
{crib'd by our Enghth Lucan.(Lib. 5.)

Then firft from her mad Mouth the

foansing runs

And, inthe borrid Cave, were beard

at once

Broke-winded Murmurs 4 Howlings,

and fad Groans.


(=) Romane.


Book I.


6 | Sttius ITALicus,


In fmoak are loft. fee ©) Sidonian Flames
Through all He/peria thine, and bloody Streams
Mix'd with Eridanus. Even He, that bare
(Cz) Opimous Spoils wierd fich, Fico Fove the third Opimous Spoils of War;


4s One General , or King» ave con
Another. Romulus was the Auchour a ity : ae
oe dhe Tle s Vid, Liv. lib 1.) who Lyes dead on heaps of Arms and Men his face
took rit from the King of the toe “We :
Cues. Tesecond gui by Gor Retaining ftill its frercenefs. But, alafs /

iffes, aRoman Tri 5 . . a
TLlumains King of the Vejenes was What Tempefts-do with fuddain ftorms arife -
flains And the Third were the Prize 3


‘of cll al his Vit t Virs- | 2 2 2 . . . P.
Se en Mibiecel: ©WWhile, from the gaping Heavn, fwift Lightning flies
The Gods Great things intend, I fee even Fove


(7) Carthaginian, ,


himfalf after ffun by the Carthagini-
ans. Vide Lib. 15+


Engag‘din War, and Thunder from above.
The filent Entrails now no more reveal'd;
But Funo all the Fates to come conceal'd.: .
Dangers, and tedious Laboursare behind. -
So keeping in his breaft the War defignd.
While to remoteft Gades he doth lead

(4) Thetwo Hills, which makethe Elis Troops, and at ‘*) eA cides Pillars fpread


uot Sys aod he His Getick, Enfigns, flain in fight, in pride
eo in Battal againt ()f all his hopes, the Zyrian Captain dy’d.

(b) After the deathof Amitcar,  Edim i) Hafdrubal fucceeds : whofe Reign begun
oie chat War, found thea veyad: In thatrich Land, where the declining Sun


vantageousto the State) by 4 general


gai oie Seals tal eat Stoops to the Ocean : whofe Tyrant-fway
Cw so dinitcar » 0 fucceed in bis, Th’ Iberi, and Beticole obey.

Ofa dark Soul, implacable was He,

The fruit of whofe Command was Cruelty .

His Thirft of Blood unquenchable appear'd,

. Efteeming it an Honour to be fear'd :

a _ This Rage known Torments could not fatiate,
And thus, while He both Gods and Men forgate,


T agus of antient Race, and noble Fame


| f For Beauty,and for valiant Acts, (his Name

: y | Deriv'd from Golden Tagus, and bewail'd hot
| Through all Iberia ;) on an Oak impail’d, :

! He fhews in triumph to’s fad Peoples eyes,

| ai . £\ King deprived of his Obfequies.


i | ‘Content


i ee


And ‘9 pierc’d, with numrous wounds, his cruel Brett.


Ca a a
BookI.  Sriius Irartieus, 7
a a a a Ps et
Content with his own Bounds, he nor requird
Maonian ftreams, nor Lydian Pools defird,

Nor thofe rich Vales, where liquid Gold doth flow,'
And Hermus with the Sand doth yellow grow.

He firft the Fight began, and laft withdrew ¢
And when, with’s fiery Steed, he broke into
The Ranks, no Sword,no Spear, could him withftand;
Butin both Armies, with his Conquring hand,

Tagus in golden Arms by all was known.

Whom when his Servant {aw impail’d upon
The fatal Oak, deformrd ; {natching a Sword’

From’s fide, efteem’d by his lamented Lord,

Into the Tyrant’s Tent he fuddain preft,


heres to Livy, inthe manner of hig
death, 3


(c) lati op , after he had eight
‘ : . F itl ies rea
Grief, now, and Rage, the Tyrian Camp divide, bya stave nt a Prince ce persian
; ‘ : ; try,whom he had cruel! death.
And all their thoughts to fad Revenge applyde. Our Authour dienes from. Polybin
° : . _ and Appian, (che firlt affirming him to
i fo r : i | have bee thered I fly i
Some Fire, fome burning Brals, fome Racks prepare, fmveker"tmrie wefan
And fome with Rods his bleeding Body tear.
All bufie hands in various Torments chufe
Their part : fome deadly Poyfon do infule ;
Others the gaping Wounds with Flames do fill; 2
A\nd (what was terrible to fee, or tell,)
While with all art of Cruelty each Limb
Was ftretcht; that Bones in liquid Fleth did fim, (_ The Conftancy of this stave
? Be ; ea 3 is recorded by Livy in thele words ;
And Marrow, mix’d with Blood, in fmoakdidrife: mene aes
5 > eXs
d os : : "ceeded all fenfe of
His Courage ftill was firm, and did defpife, “endured them with, as plesiaet a
; “* countenance,as if he had efcaped :
And {corn their Torments; or as he had been that the Poet doth not mech fyper.
? bolize the Hiftory, when he adds, thar
A fafe Spectatour onely, and had feen, Penna foe the Grofe,zhe laf
rae ee ee ne aye:
. = ¢ 0 100Nn a wba.
Not felt, what they inflict, the “) Slave difdains the Command oF the Army fee
‘ ae 3 . : or Hannibal (t diflik
His fainting Executioners ; coinplains Hanns Fadion ho apchendd
. aug hty Spirit into rhe Camp: wh
They ’re dull, and ftoutly for the Crofs doth call ae theLoveof he Sout
ok e tery, elpecially of the old Bands
; : ce ae ; ; that had ferved oe bi ;
.Midft thefe defpifed pains, the General Wie eee en avee age
. . F Sar death of Hafdrubal, declared hi oi
Thus loft, the trembling Armie with one voice, ner atthe age of weny fie yar
: ‘ ; ; ‘hich, aflenced to by thereftof th
And cry, on ¢*) Hannibal ftreight fix their choice, ‘oops. immediacy confirmed by


the Senate of Carthage, where the
The 276can Faction was moft Prevalent,


Srtius Iraticus, Book oe


(f) Hansita! ,now Commander
of fo vaftan Army, commanded like-
wife ali che Dominions of the Car-
thaginiass, whoh were then very
greatefpecially in Libya. being Lords
of allchac vait Tract of ground, upon
the Sea-coait, from Curihoge unto
Hercsles-Pillars: whe:e they found an
eafie paffage into Spain, whofe fer-
tile Plains, tobe feen from the Hills
of Mauritania , invited them co that
Conqueft, whch Hannibal obtained.

(2) Which terminated the Bounds
of the Carthagiaians Well-ward, in the
extreme parts of Mauritania; as Ni-
ées was ther Boundary South-ward,


The Image of his. Father’s Valour, Fame

Of the War vow'd againft the Romane Name,
His young and active Courage, noble Heat,
His Eloquence, and mind arnrd with Deceit,
Precured this Applaufe. And, firft of all,

The Libyas Troops falute him General ,

Next thefe, the Pyrenean People, than

The warlike Bands of the Iberian.

When ftreight a Confidence of this Command
Enflames his foul: as if the Sea and Land,
Where Aufler rules, or where the Lamp of Day
In Cancer lodg'd tormenteth Libya,

Or Afia did fubmit, or He beheld

4\ third part of the World Obedience yield.

His Bounds were where Fam‘d NCilus fees the Day
Firft rife, and with feven Streams invades the Sea.
But wherethey milder look to either Bear,

Wath'd by thr Herculean-fea, the / Plains appear
Of fertile Europe, from the neighb’ring Hills :

All the vaft Tract beyond the Ocean fills.

Nor will huge ) Atlas fuffer that his Name

Farther extend: Atlas, whofe Neck the Frame

Of Heaven doth prop : Whole clouded Head doth all
The Stars fuppore ; which, that withdrawn, would fall,
The Winter of un-melting Froft, and Snow,

Dwells on his Beard ; upon his lofty Brow

A Grove of Pines, that caft Eternal fhade ;

His Temples by the Winds are hollow made ;

And Rivers from his mifty Jaws defcend

In Froth ; and both his fides with Seas contend :
Which, when his panting Steeds the weary Sun

Doth drenchin {moaking Waves, do feemto drown
The Chariot. But where parchd Africk’s Fields
4\ppear, the barren Earth no Harveft yields,


But


3S BARES FE:


Book I. Srtius Irarticus,
But Serpents, with fell Poifon charg’d ; yet where
The Soil is blefs'd with a more temperate Air;
Nor Pharian, nor Ennaan Plains excell,

Here the ©) N amidians infulting fill
One quarter of the Camp : no ufe they know
OF Bridles; but, when Horfes fwifteltgo, ..
Them, with a Wand, between their Ears apply'd;
As with the Reins, or Curbs, at pleafure, guid.
A warlike Nation, that in Wars delight ; |
Yet trufting more to Fraud, then open Fight.


i


The Spani/h Troops another part contain’d ;

Aids, by his valiant Father's Trophies, gain'd |

From Esrope: whofe fierce Horfe with neighing fills
The Plains, and fwiftly climbs th’ encamped Hills :
CNot Mars through Thracian Fields more furious
A Nation fierce, and prodigal of Lives, drives)
Willing to haften Death: for, when their Prime

Of years is over-paft by conqu’ring Time,

Scorning decay of Strength, or Age, to know,

Bea‘ in their hands their Fate. Here Metals grow
OF matter mixe, “) Gierum’s Pallid Veins

Produc'd, and darker Stee! the Earth conteins:


‘But God thofe Springs of Mifcheif deeply hides ¥


YeteAftur, covetous, the Harth divides,

And, in her mangled Entrails drown'd again,

Returns with Gold, and bears the Pretious Stain.

Hence Durius, and rich Tagas, with thy Streams

Contend, Pattolus, and that ‘© Flood, that feems

To bring up Lethe to the People, and

Upon the Gravit rolls the Gliftering Sand.

A Land where (eres, and Lyeustoo -

Do dwell, and Olive-Trees in plenty grow.
Thefe Nations, now, reduc'd to the Command


Of Warlike Hannibal, andin his Hand
E The


(4) The Nwmidians,a wandring Peo-
ple, defcended (as Sainf relates) of the
Perfians, were part of Herenles his
Army: and, after his Death, returning
into Spain, planted themfelves in that
part of dfrick , which borders up-
on the Carthaginian Bounds, and
Mauritania. Their manner of fighting
is defcribed by the Poet: and of what
greatufe they were to Hannibal ap-
pears through the whole Porm, agrec-
able to History.


(#) Of Eleé?rum there aretwo forts:
ore whereof isa Gummy fubftance ,
which becomes hard, and hath former-
ly been found, (though not very plen-
ufully ) mix’d with the Sands of £ri-
danus ; (the Po) which gave occafion
to the Peer co fain Phaethon’s Sifters to
be turned into Poplars, and their
Tears into that fab{tance,of which fome
Statues were made for auguftus. The
other fore (meant here) isa mixture
ot the Seeds of Gold with Silver.


(k) Aza (aRiver in Sptin, now
called Guadiana) which, according to
the Antient divifion of spain, fepa-
raies Hijpania Betica ( that contained
the Kingdoms of Granta, Andalufia,
with part of Rew CusHle, and Efira-
madara) trom Lifranie { Portugal)
it runs, for che {pace of eight Germane
Miles, ander Grouuc , and afterward,
breaking forth again, emprieth it felf
witha full Chanel into the Arlantich
Sea. Upon fome part of this was a
Grectan Colony, mentioned here by
the Poct, and afferted by Claverins,
lib, 2, /mered. Geograph.


yr ee


16


(1) Amilcar who,by his canning per-
fuafions, drew many Cities to the Q-
bedience of the c'arrbaginians : in
which Are Hannibal "0 ae coe as

eared, not onely at his firft entrance
Gets Coamnaid which gained him
the ready Obedience of that valt Ar-
my, led by him inzo /raly ; buc among
the Gawts, and /ealy it felf. And for
this he bimfelf commends Pyrrhus, at
that Interview with Scipio, at the
Court of 2Aariochus, as an eminent
Virtue in him. Fide Lsv, lib. 35.


Book I.


SIzius Iraricus,


The Reins of Rule : ftreight with his Father's (4 Arts
He makes his Party ; now with Arms fubverts
_ Decrees of Senate, now with Bribes ; appears

The firft to walkcon Foot; the firft,that bears

A part, if hafte require, a ‘Trench to make, |
The firft, that all Attempts would undertake :

Reinifs in nothing, that to Honour tends,

Refufeth naturg Reft, and watchfull {pends

The night in Arms, Now, by his Caffock known,
Mix’d with the Libyan Foot, lies down

On th’ Earth, contending with the Steel he wore

In Hardnedfs : fometimes he'd Advance before |

His num’rous Troops ; and, with a valiant Hand,
Perform in Perfon, what he did Command:
Sometimes, on his bare Head, he’d entertain

The Ruins of the Heav’ns ; their Storms, and Rain.
The Tyrians faw, th’ eA fturians did admire

To fee, when Fove did dart his forked Fire,

When Thunder fell in Storms, and every Blaft

Of Wind ftruck forth the Flames, how bold he palit
Through all, on’s fnorting Steed : nor would retire,
Though clog’d with Duft,and fcorch’d with Sirius fire.
And, when the fultry Air did frie with Heat,

That parch’d the Earth, they feem’d Effeminate,
Who fought a Shade : while He, to exercife

Fis Thirft, where er’e he fees a Fountain, flies,

His fole Delight’s, to drefs.a furious Horfe

For War, and to be famous for the Force

Ofs killing Arm: to fwima Stream unknown

Or’e Ecchoing Rocks: t' affail the Foe, upon

The adverfe Bank. The firft,that would afcend

To fcale a Wall, and, when he did contend

Jn open Fight, where er’e his Sword did go,

It cazried Death, and Streams of Blood did flow.

Being


een


Book I. Srrius' Iracrecus, - i
Being therefore, now, refolv'dto violate

The Sacred League, he urgeth on his Fate. __
And; where he can, on ‘Rome's Allies doth fall,’
4\nd ftorms in fartheft Lands the Capitol.

_ His waving Enfigns (firft difplard for love
OF greater Wars) againft Sagunthus moves
The Walls, firft built by Hercules, not far
From Sea, upon a rifing Hillappear. ®
Whole noble Name Zacynthus, there by Fate
Entomb‘d upon the Ton, did confecrate.

He, aniong others of ef Icides Train,
Return‘d to Thebes, the fam'd Gerioa'”) flain.
Three Souls that Monfter did inform, three pair pty batal ferme robe Governed


OF Hands, his Head a triple Neck did bear. this Fable, “They were fubdued by


(m) Alteia, Hermandica, Arbacat
éa, and fome other Provinces of Spain,
had before felt the Fury of the Carthg-
Sinians: but Sagunthss was the tick
Confederate City (with the Remanes)
that was Attaqued by them. Ir is now
called (Afor-viedro, Scituate upon the
River ferns (or Ebro) about a mile
from the Sea; sreat onely inits Yame
of this memorable Siege,


(#) Three Brothers , that Reisned
in Spaix, with fuch admircble Unani-


Hercules,


Earth ner beheld another could furvive

One Death, to whom the Fates three Lives did give.
Yet here the Cénqu’rour fhew'd his Spoils: and; as
In Heat of day the Captive Heards did pals

ULnto the Springs, a Serpent, kick’d by chance,

Big with enflaming Poifon, did advance

Histumid Jaws, and by adeadly Wound

Lay’d the Inachian dead on Spanifh Ground,

About that time, an exil’d Colonie,

Born in an Ifland of the Grecian Sea,

Came from the South, and by Aacynthus there
To Ithaca’s Dominions added were.

"The Dawian Y¥ outh, wanting a dwelling, then
Rich in thetr Numbers, led by Valiant men,
Sentfroma City, which we Ardea term,

Arrivd, their weak Beginnings to confirm,
Thele, by Agreement with the Romane State,
Having their Liberties inviolate,

And Honour of their Anceftours, forfook,


What they had lons endur'd, the Tyrian Yoak.
E23 Againtt


Sitius: ITaLicus. Book I,


Again ft thefe, therefore, his incenfed Bands, .
Breaking the League, fierce Hannibal commands:
Difturbs their Peace with Arms. Shaking his Head,
Himfelf high-mounted on his panting Steed,
Surveys the Walls ; and, when he had beheld
The trembling Houfes, Summons them to yield
Their Gates, and Forts: tells them; That Izahe,
Their Leaguas; and hopd-for Aids, far diftant be;
Nor fhould his Mercy meet them, if fubdu'de |
By Arms: That all the Senate could conclude,
Their Laws, and Statutes, nay their Gods, and Faith,
Were now within his Power. And what he faith,
Confirms by’s lavelin thrown againft the Walls:
Which on Caicus, vainly threar’ning, falls ;

And through his Arms his Body pierc'd. He flain,
And tumbling from the Rampart, brings again
To the infulung Conquerour his Dart,

Reeking in Blood, and trembling in his Heart.
The reft th’ Example of the General

With Shouts purfue; and ftreight obf{cure the Wall
Witha dark Cloud of Darts. Nor was their clear
Valour in Number loft: each man doth bear
Himfelfagainft the foremott ; asif he,

Alone, would undertake the Enemie. ;
Here one the Sling with frequent Jerks doth ply;
Which, waved thrice about his Head, lets flie

A Weapon with the Winds; which in the Air

Is loft, to fight. Huge Stones another, there,

Flings from his finewy Arm: thisdoth advance,
And from the flippery noule expells a Lance.

But Hannibal, before all other, rich

In’s Father's Arms, now flings, with flaming Pitch,
A fmoaking Lamp, then hurls his Javelin ;now,


With Stakes, and Stones, doth prefs upon the Foe:


r


BookI.. © Sriius Iraticus.


3


Or poifon'd Arrows fends, and doth applaud
Infulting, as they flie, his Quiver’s fraud:
Such Shafts the Daci, on the Getique Coalt,
Steep'd in the Poifon of their Countrie, boaft,
And by the Banks of two-namrd ©) Ifer thoot.
But now it is decreed, and they, about
The Hill, their horned Bulwarks raife ;and, round
The City, armed Towers do abound. .
Oh Faith, by antient Times adord, which now
On Earth, we onely by thy Name do know!
The Valiant Youth refolved ftand, and fee
All hope of Flight cut off; their Walls to be
Begirt with Arms: yet think a noble Death,
Moft worthy Rome. And that, Sagunthus Faith
By them preferv'd, fhe might more Glorious fall,
Then ftand : they now more refolutely all
Their Strength collect. Then from contracted Strings
Stones of vaft Bulk the Phocean?) Engine flings:
Or, changing weight, whole Trees with lron bound


Ejects ; that, breaking through, the Ranks confound.


A Shout both Armies raife, and furious come

To Blows; as if they had befieged ‘Rome.

Among fo many thoufands, that did ftand,

Circled in Arms, like Corn on fertile Land,

Bold Hannibal, defirous to enfpire

Into his Armie’s minds that furious Fire

Was lodg'd in his own Breaft, doth thus excite

Their Rage, and Stimulates the following Fight.
Do we ftand ftill before a Captiv’d Foe?

Afham'd we have begun? Afham’d to go

On with this Omen ! goodly Valour ! Shall

Thefe be the firft-Fruits of the General?

Mutt we fill Italie with fuch a Fame?

Premile fuch Fights as this? Go on, for fhame:


This


(9) It being alfocalled Danabias by
the Scythians; by reafon of an unfortu-
nate Expedition they once made over
it. Enffath. in Dion,


(p) The Batista was a kinde of Sling ;
invented ( faith Péiny, dh. 7. cap.36.)
by the Phenicsans + wherewith they
cait Scones, Spears, Darts, ee. and is *
here called ‘Phocean: tor that che Sa-
genthines were defcended of the 7'be-
bans, in whofe Territory was Phozis.


14.


Book I.


Sitius I[raticus,


(4) This Engine is defcribed by Li-
vi (. £16. 21.) to have been very long,
fmooth, and round’: bur fyuare at the
End; out of whitch camé a Pike of Iron,
( like that of che xomane Pile) in
length three Foot : that it might pene-
trate borh through the Arms, and Bo-
dies of the Enemy. About it they la
ftened Flax and pitch: which kindled,
and gathering Flames in its Motion,
was not onely very hurcfull co all char
floodin its way, but terrible co thofe
at Diftance.


(r) Thefe were called Plutei by the
Latines: and were made ufe of, to
cover Beams, and Planks, while the
Souldiers were working ; to keep them


from being fired by the Enemy.


This faid, with Fury-they invade the Wall,
On which they leave their Hands, and backwards fall.
With thatin haftea Mount wasrais‘'d, above
The Town, whereon the Fighting Squadrons move.
"But with an (2) Engine, that by many hands
Was mov'd; the brave Befieg’d, the thronging Bands
Drive frorn the Gates. It wasa mighty Oak,
Strange to behold ; which, for defence, they took’
From th’ Pyrenean Hills. This, ftrongly lind
With num’rous Pikes of Steel, could hardly finde
By Walls, refiftance ; and about befmear’d
With Sulphur, and with unaious Pitch, appear'd .
Like an huge Thunder-bolt, and fromthe Walls
Of their high eArcenal it fwiftly falis,
Cutting with trembling Flames the yielding Air;
CSo Comets, running with their bloody Hair,
From Heav'n to Earth, caft a Prodigiouslight }
And with a furious Force, that did affright
Ev'n Hannital, upon the Armie flies, —
Fofsing their fmoaking Members to the Skies :
Till, fix'dtoa vat Tower, the active Flames,
( ) Through the raw Hides, confume the mighty Beams,:
And there, in burning Ruins, both the Men,
And Arms involves: The Carthaginians then,
Grown wile by lofs, through fecret Mines conyey |
Their Troops, and fo the City open lay.
That labour of Great Hercules, the W all,
To th’ Earth, with noife incredible, doth fall ;
And in its Ruin Stonesimmenfe doth roll,
That Eccho from the Alps unto the Pole,
Soairy Rocks, torn from their Native fid e
By Storms, with horrour do an Hill divide.
The Breach was foon, with Heaps of Bodies flain, '
Obftructing their Advance, fupplyd again.
Amidft


Strius Iraricus,


Book I.


pg


Amidtt thofe Ruins, both with equal Rage ~
Do mtet before the reft, in’s prime of Age,
Murrus, ennobled by a Latine Line, .
Himfelf a Greek, his Mother Sagunthine;
Whofe Parents, ina Sacred League combin’d,
Dulichian Nephews to ltahan joyn’d.
He, as {tout Vaidus his Companions calls
Aloud unto the Fight, upon him falls, |
And wounds him, where unarm’d he did appear;
Between his Cask and Corflet ; with his Spear
Stopping his bold Attempts : and, as he lies
Proftrate upon the Ground, infulting cries;
Th’ art down, falfe (Carthaginian: furely thou,
As Conquerour, didft fancy foremoft now
To climbe the Capitol: but, what could move
Such bold Defires? Go, war with Stygian Fove.
Then, as Iberus fiercely did advance,
To fuccour him, fix’d in his Thigh his Lance:
And, fpurning Vaidus dying Face, quoth he;
This to the Walls of Rome your Way mutt be,
O fear’d, and valiant Hands! you all muft tread
This Path, whither foe’re your Hafte doth lead. |
And, as Ilerus labour'd to renew | |
The Fight, his Target feis'd, and pierc’'d him through
His naked Side. Iberus,richin Land, |
And Flocks, unknown to Fame, could well command
His Dart, and Bow, againft a flying Beaft:
Happy in’s Private life, had he poffeft
Thofe Weapons full, within his Father’s Groves.
To fuccour him with fpeed now Ladmus moves:
On whom bold Murrus grimly {miling, Thou
(Said he) fhalt tell Amilcar’s Shade below;
Thatthis right-Hand, after the Vulgars fall,


Shall give you for Companion Hannibal: ee


Sitrus Iravicus. Book I.


Thea, rifing high, with’s Sword on’s Helmet ftruck,
Which, chrough the very brafen Cover, broke ’
His cracking Scull. Then (bremes, who his Hair
Unithora, like to a Cap, on’s Brow did wear :
Wh Mafulus, and Harcalo, though old,

Yet not anfit for War; who with a bold

Aad fearlefs Hand, a: teéming Lyonefs

Would ftroke : then Bragada, whofe Shield’s Imprefs,
A River's Win: Ayemp/al, who the Wrack

Of Ships from dang’rous Sands would boldly take,
4is Spoils, from raging Seas: thefe fadly all,

Slain by his fatal Hand, together fall:

And with them e/y7, skilfull to difarm

Serpents of Poifon, whofe {ole Touch could charm
To fleep the banefull Adder, and apply

The Ceraft, all finfpected Broodsto try.

And thou Ayarba, Garamantick, born

By Oracular Groves, thy Helmet, like an Horn,
Bending about thy Temples, there wer't flain;
Accufing Jove, and Dettinies, in vain,

That often falfly thy Return exprefs‘d.

But now with Bodies flain the Heap encreaf‘d,
Aad with the yet-warm Streams of flaughter fmoaks,
While Maurras to the Fight aloud provokes
The General: as when, purfu'd by cries
Of Spartan Dogs, a Boar the Foreft flies,

Aad, met by Hunters, on his Back doth rear
The Enfigns of his Rage, and his lat War
Attempts, and, as his foamy Blood he eats,


‘ Groaning, his Tusks againtt their Javelins beats,


But in another Quarter, where De {pair


‘Had forc'd the Youth to fally, free from fear,


That any Hand, or Dart, could work his fall,
Raging amidft the Troops was Hannibal:


And


y.


Book I. Sititus IraLicus.


And fhakes his Sword, that was, not long beforé;

With Fire enchanted, on th’ Hefberian Shore,

Made by Old Temifus, whofe pow’rfull Skill

Could temper, with his Charming Tongue, the Steel.

So, in Biffonian Plains, the God of War

Brandi(h’d hisSword ; when, in his Iron Car,

The Titans he purfu’d; or, with the Breath

Of’s Steeds, and Noife of’s Wheels,. extinguifheth

The Flames of War. Hofcus, and“Pholus, nov,

Lygdus, and Dirius, to the Shades below;

By him were fent. To them Galefus fair ;

The Twins, Chronus and Gyas, added were :

With Dita ; who all other did excell,

In Pleading at the Bar, and by his Skill

( Though a moft fuft Obferver of the Laws )

Still gain’d the Hearers minds unto his Caufe,

But, furioufly, with Rage tranfported, now,

This Language adds, as he his Darts doth throw ,
Whither, proud Carthaginian, will che Spire,

And Fury, of thy Father, thee incite?

Here are no Fabricks, bya Womani Hand

Erected, purchas’d with a Price ; or Land

To Exiles meafur'd, by an Oxe’s Hide:


“Here the Foundations of the Gods abide,


And Romane Leagues. While thus he,boafting, {peaks ;
With a fierce Charge, the Carthaginian breaks

Into the fighung Ranks, that him furround,

And feifing on him Captive, having bound

His Hands upon his Back; commands him ftrait,

In flowly-killing Pains, to meet hus Fate.

Then bids his Enfigns to. Advance ; and, through
The Heaps of Slaughter’d Men, the Way doth fhew,
Exciting all by Name ; and gives away,


Sure of Succefs, the’City, as their Prey. .
F But


eer ee


a ee a


ee SEES renee
peepee a ea aE et
ae i er
So a ee


(:) The Cye/ades are Iflands inthe
Archs-pelage , in number fifty three :
Scituate round about the / fle of Delos ,
and from the Circde derive their gene-
ral Name. Selin. cap. 17.


Sitius ITaLicus, Book I.


But now, inform’d by: fome, that F led, that Heaven


‘To Maurras, in another Part, had given


The Day with Victory, enrag’d, he flies
Like a fierce Tiger, and that Enterprize
Forfakes : while, as he goes, his Helmet feems,
Upon his Head, to caft forth killing Beams.
As when a Comet, with its fiery Hair,
A Kingdom frights, and {catters through the Air
Its Bloody Flames; which, as they iffue forth,
With Horrour, threaten Ruin to the Earth,
The Enfigns, Arms, and Men, unto his Rage
Give way ; and, ashe, Furious, doth engage,
Both Armies tremble : while his Spear ejects
A Light, prodigious; that round reflects,
Like Lightning, on his Shield. As when the Waves,
Swelling up tothe Stars, while Corus raves
On the Agean-Sea, hang in the Air;
Filling th’ affrighted Sea~mens Hearts with Fear :
And roaring, Thunder-like, as they encreafe,
Tofs, to and fro, the trembling () Glades,
Within their hollow Bofoms. Him, not all
The Darts, that do invade him, from the Wall,
Nor Flames, caft at his Face; nor Stones, by Art,
Exculs'd from mighty Engines, could divert.
Soon as a fhining Creft he did behold,
And, by the Sun’s reflection, Arms of Gold,
Belmear'd with Blood, look red; enrag’d, he faies,
See Murrus, who Our great Attempts delaies,
And Libya's Affairs : I'le make Thee know,
Whatthy Iderus, and vain Leagues can do,
Keep ftill your Laws, Faith, Juftice : but ( faid he)
Leave your deceived Deities to Me.
— Maurras replies; Th’ art Welcome. My defire
To Combate Thee, long fince, did burn like Fire,


In


‘ “ ‘ : 7
19
he ls


Book J. Sriitrus Iraricus,

In hope to have thy Head : receive what's due

For allthy Fraud, and under Ground purfue

Thy Way to Italy; to thee this Hand

Shall a long Journey give to th’ Trojan Land,

And «Alps, and high Pyrene, crown'd with Snow.
This faid, perceiving his approaching Foe,

From the high Breach, a firm, and weighty Stone,


_ With all his Strength, he takes, and‘hurls it down,


Ashe Advanc’d, and in its fpeedy fall
Opprefs'd him, as if ftricken with the Wall.
Shame fires his Thoughts ; nor, ftill wont to prevail,
Though check’d, did then his con{cious Valour fail.
Gnathing his Teeth, he labours to afcend
The Wall, through all the Darts, that it defend :
But when he nearer fhin‘d, and ftood upon
The Rampart, all the Zyrian Troops came on,
And compafs'd Murrus round, who all the Hoft
Amaz'd, and foon among his Foes was loft.
A thouland Hands, and Swords, together fhine,
Unnumber'd waving Crefts on Casks decline:
Loud Shouts, and Clamours, from all Quarters came,
As if Sagunthus all were ina Flame.
Murrus, bis Limbs, with inftant Death poffefs'd,
Drags after him, and thefe Laft words exprefs'd.

eA Icides, Thou, who firlt thefe Walls didft rear,
Whiofe Sacred foot-fteps we inhabite here,
Avert this Storm, which menaceth our Land, -
If defend not with a fluggifh Hand
Thy Walls. And looking up (as thus he pray’d)
To Heav’n, Shall not our bold Attempts’ ¢ he faid}
More juftly favour'd be, Great Hercules *
Linlefs our emulous Valour thee difpleafe.
For, not unlike thy felf, when Morral, Me
Thou thalt acknowledg. ae propitious be,


hou


May Cre


29


Ce) Firlt Sack’d by Berculer,in the
Reign of King Laomedon.


* Hannibal.


ow =e = :
Se


Sitius JITAaLicus.


Book I,


Thou God, that firft didft ( wafte unhappy Troy:
Me rather, who the Reliques will deftroy

Of th’ Phrygian Race, (faid Hannibal) afsitt.

And, as he foake, with all his Fury preft

His Sword through Maurras. Troubled at his Fall,
The Youth run in; his Arms, and Corps, by all


Well known, were to the Conquerour deni‘de,


For Spoil: the Troops encreafe on either fide,

And ftand all in an Heap ; while Stones rebound
"Gainft Helmets, & while Spears ‘gainft Targets found.
Some hard’ned Stakes do throw; fome pond’rous Lead,
By which the Creft’s divided on the Head,

And Glory of the Plumes in Slaughter fall.

And now the Rivulets of Sweat o’re all.

The * Libyan’s Members flow ; on ev'ry Scale

Stand barbed Arrows, in his Coat of Mail.

No Reft, no Shelter left to (huna Blow :

His Knees decline, and weary Shoulders bow

Under his Arms, Then, from his parched Jaws,

His Breath like Vapour breaking forth, he draws


Deep fighs, and Groans, that check’d by panting throws,


A broken Murmur through his Helmet goes,
His Courage his Adverfity outvies,
Perfwading Virtue, then to exercife
Her Strength, when Fortune frowns : and { outweighs
Dangers, by th’ Glory of enfuing Praife.
A fuddain Noife, among the Clouds, breaks forth
From the divided Heav’n, and (hakes the Earth.
Fove, over both the Armies, thund’red twice;
Then, inan horrid Whirl-wind, in the Skies.
Shak'd the revengfull Lance of unjuft War,
And couch’d upon his adverfe Thigh the Spear.
Ye, Rocks Larpeian, where Powers Divine
Refide! and Trojan Flames, that ever (hine
On


Book I.


eee eer escent ear ce Pea a aE
Sirius Iraxuicus, 21
On Virgin Altars! what great things ¢ alafs ) |

To you, by that fallacious Meteor, was

Promis‘d by Heav'n? for, had it nearer been

Oppos'd againft their Rage, we ne’r had feen

A Paffage through the Alps; nor ef ja

Should ( ¥brafimenus ) to thy Streams give way.

But Funo, on Pyrene's Top, from far,

Beholding his fo early Heat, in War,

And fruizlefs Onfet, pulls his falling Spear

From the hard Bones, where it did firft appear.

He hiding with his Shield the Blood, that {wims,


Diffus’d in Streams, upon his wounded Limbs ;


Fainting, with flow, and doubefull Steps, retires,
The Night, at length, arrives to their defires,
Aand both the Earth, and Sea, in darknefs hides,
And, putting Day co flight, the Fight decides,
But their refolved Minds ftill watch, with Care,
And, lab’ring in the Night, the Breach repair.
Extremities of Danger do incenfe
Their Thoughts, and Courage ; which takes Violence
From their Defpair, Hence Men oppref'd with Age,
Women, and tender Children, all engage
To help, and in that dubious State of things,
With his yet bleeding Wounds, the Souldier brings
Stones tothe Work : the Senatours their fhare
Partake, and Nobles, in the Publick Care.
They meet, and chofen Men exhort, with Pray’rs,
To fuccour their deplorable Affairs,
And from Sagunthus Wallsto drive away
The ZQjrian Flames. Now, go, with {peed ( fay they) Hadise gee
And, ‘ while the wounded Tyger is reftrain’d, and eras poesia
And fhut within his Den, their Ships afcend.
A {peedy Diligence is beft in War;


yet Livy ( Lib,21. ) is pofitive: thar,
inthis Affault , going too unadvifed-
The way to Honour is, where Dangers are.


ly near the Wall, he was defperately
wounded, by a barbed Lance, in the
Thigh : which fo much difcouraged his
Men, that his Officers had much ado
to keep them from deferring their


Hafte Trenches.


Pb


(*) The Satunthines.


(7) Monecian Hills, hanging over
a lice Port, where Hercules had a
Temple, called CAfonecian , becaufe
he would allow no other God to fhare
with himin his Temple, And it was a
Canon in the efugural Laws, That
no Chapel, or Temple, fhould be de-
dicated to two Gods: for thar, ifany
Prodigie happened, the Priefts could
not determine, to which of the two
Deities they fhould Sacrifice. Val. Adax.
die 1, cap. 1.


~


Srtius Iraxticus, Book IL.


Hate ye, thefe antient Walls, that can no more
Defend us, and our Faith, at Rome deplore.
Come home with better Fates: in brief, Return,
Before in Funeral Flames Sagunthus burn.
With this fad Charge to the next Shore they hie,
And or’e the Seas with fwelling Canvafe flie.
Now Tithon’s rofie Wife had Sleep exil’d,
And with her Horfes early neighing fill'd
The Mifty Hills, and fhook her Reins, with Dew |
Surcharg’d: when from the Walls the Youth did thew
Their high-built Tow'rs ; thatthere by Night had bin
Erected, and the City compafs’d in.
All Action’s lay'd afide ; the Souildier’s fad ,
The Siege declines ; that Heat ftands ftill, that had
So “dive been ; and, in that Danger, all
Their Cares are turn’d upon the General.
The “) Rutul, by this, the Seas had croft,
Beginning now to fee th’ Herculean Coalt,
4And Cloud-encompafs'd Rocks, that to the Skies
Fromthe ©) Monecian Hills afpiring rife.
Here Thracian Boreas his Imperial Seat
Maintains: and, always Cold, fometimes doth beat
Upon the Shore ; fometimes, with roaring Wings,
Cleaves ev'n the ef /ps ; and, when himéelf he flings:
Over the Earth, from the ftill-Icie Bear,
No other Winds againft him dare appear.
With whirling Blafts, the Ocean is broke
Into divided Waves, that rife in Smoak,
And hide the Hills from fight : then, ashe flies,
Heaves Rhene, and Rbodanus, unto the Skies.
When this dire Fury of fierce Boreas they
Had {cap’d, th’ alternate Dangers of the Sea,
And their fad War, and dubious SuccefS
Of things, with frequent Sighs they thus exprefS. .


Dear |


Book I. Sittus IrTaLticus. | 23


Dear Countrey ! Faith's renowned Temple! where
Are now thy Fates ¢ do yet thy Tow’ts appear
Sacred on. Hills? Or, of fo Great a Name,

Do Athes, the fad Reliques of a Flame,

Onely remain ; ye Gods? Oh! fill our Sails
With gentle Winds, and give us profp’rous Gales ‘
If that our Temples Roofs the Fire invade

Not yet, or Latian Ships can lend us Aid.

In fuch Complaints, they, Day and Night, deplore
Their State ; untillon the Italian Shore
The Ship arriv’d: where Father Tyber, made
More rich by Anyo’s Waters, doth invade
With Yellow Waves the Sea. From thence they come
Unto the Walls of their own-kindred, ‘Rome.

The Confulcalls a Solemn Council; where
Fathers of unftain’d &) Poverty appear :


_ (2) The Primitive Virtue of the
Romanes was eminently Glorious in


the incorruptible Poverty of fome of


Whofe worthy Names do from their Triumphs rife. tharos DB: Céetianalny,


. Zi : Serranus, Ad.Curins Denratus, Fa-
A Senate, that in Virtue equalize britins, &e. Who contemned the Ten.


tations of their greateit Enemies , cor-


The Gods: {uch Men, as valiant Acts to Fame. tenting themfeives with little Poffet-
ons, and choofing, une to command
ei : < over a Wealthy People, then be rich

Commend ; whom juft Defiresof Right enflame: —siet#, Wealthy Lity’s Epiclb.t4.


Their Beards, and Hair, neglected on their Brow;
Their Hands familiar with the crooked Plow ;
Content with little : Hearts, whom no defire

Of Wealth torments ; who, often, did retire


To their fmall Lares, in Yritumphal Cars.


But, at the Temple-Gates, the Spoils of Wars,

Their Captiv’d Chariots, and Weapons ftain’d
With Blood, Opimous Spoils, which they had gain’d
From Generals, with Axes terrible

In Fight, then Bars of Gates, whofe Cites fell
Under their Fury ; Targets, pierced through

By Darts, and Swords, hang up: and here they view
LEgathes War , Ships {catter’d on the Sea,


Whofe Stems, there hanging, Teftimonials be


OF


te emia i, Bee


24,


Book I:


Sitius. IraLicus.


(a) The Romanes, befieged, in the
Capitol , by the Gauls, Articled to
give fome Talents for their Ranfome.
[he Gants brought falfe Seales, and
the Romane Tribune refafing to weigh
the Gold, fo much to their difadvan-
tage, an Infolent Gas! caft his Sword
inco the heavier Scale , intimating,they
would have on all Advantage. But,
Camline artiving,at the fame Inftanc,
to their Relief , this Sword was raken,
and (the Gawis repalfed ) kepct,as a
<acred Relique, in the Capircd.

\ (6) Camillus was a Noble Romane,
no lefs famous, for the Prefervation of
his Countrey , then Romulus, for
Founding it. He was five times Diéfa-
tour, and was chofen, by the Befieged
Romanes, to his fecond Dictarour-flup,
while he was in Banifhmenr. Ac which
ume he gave that memorable Defeat
to the Gawls. The Arms, which he
wore in that Expedition, were pre-
fervedin the Capitol See Livr, 46. 5.

(c) Pyrrbxs, ( defcended from £.-
cus) King of Spas , who gave great
Teftimonies of his Virtue, in his Expe-
dition into /raly, to Aid the Tare,-
rines againft the Kumanes. With whom
he had feveral Confli€s, with various
Events , and was forced ro quite /rady,
through Condudt of Fabritsns.

(d) The Ge/a werea fort of Wea-
pons, ufed by the Celrich Gants, and
feem,by Marre,to have been Long, and
Slender, like Darts. For that fach, as
had no Targets, carried more then one
of them, in their Hands. Thofe, re-
fervedin the Capito’, were, either ta-
ken by Camillws , or from the Celre,
who (as Appian) were Afercenaries
to the (arreagincans in the firft Px-
mick War,

(e) tberus (now called Ebro) run-
neth, from its Fountain in Cantabris,
with a large Navigable Stream ,
through a large Tract of Ground, by
ay fair Cities, for the fpace of two
hundred and chreefcore Miles. The
Carthaginians were obliged, by the
Articles, between them, and the Ro-
manes, atter the firft War, not to pal
over this River. Which Articles were
violated by Hannibal , who this way
led his Armie, over the ‘Pyrexasx-Hills
(near which it runs ) in his March to-
wards /raly.

(f) A People, border me pee the
greater Lybian Syrts : whole manner
of Living is defcribed by the Noble
Lucan, ( Lib,g ) and thus by Mr. 4Zay


-—~- © Yer this dull Earth
““uncoa few {mall Hearbs affords


airth ,
“ Which arethe hardy Nafamonians


Fare:
“ Near the Sea-Coaft they bleakly
feared are.


“Whom barbarous Syrts with the -


World’s Lofs maintain.


“ For Spoil, they, flill,upon the Sand °


remain ;

“ And, though no Merchants Trade
with them, yet Gold

“They have, and ftill, by Ship-
wrack, Trafick hold

“With all the World .------


Of Libya's vanquith’d Fleet: the Helmets here

OF curled Senones are fix’d; and there

The Sword, the Judg of their “) redeeming Gold:

With thefe, the honour’d Trophies of the boid

(+) Camillus, and his Arms, in Triumph borne

( The Gauls now allrepuls'd ) athis Return:

Here were the Spoils of great © Aacides ;

And &pirotick Enfigns: among thefe,

Dreadfull Ligurian Crefts, with the rude Shield

OF Spain, and Alpine‘) Gefa, they beheld.

Bur, when the Ruins they had born, and fear’d,.

As written in their Squallid Looks appear’d,

So, chat Sagunthus Image feem‘d to ftand,

Before their Eyes, and their Laft Aid demand ;

Grave Sycoris, with Tears, began, and faith.
Ye, Romanes, famous for your facred Faith ;


‘Whom juflly all the ACations, that give place


Unto your Arms, acknowledg Mars his Race ;
Think not, that we have meafur'd o’re the Sea,

For Dangers light. Our Walls, and Countrey, we,
Befieg’d, and falling, faw: andthere, whom wilde
Beafts, or the raging Seas, brought forth, beheld,
Fierce Hannibal, Far from thefe Walls, Oh! far,
Keep him, ye Gods, I pray : and to our War
Confine his dreadfull Hand. What mighty Beams.
He hurls? How Strong, how Great in Arms he feems?
Over Pyrene’s Hills he makes his Way,

And, {corning that ‘* Iberus Flood fhould ftay

His Speed, he lifteth Calpe, in his Bands,

With thofe, that dive in () AC afamonian Sands ;

And feeketh greater Walls: that, if the Sea,

Whofe Rage we lately felt, fhall ceafe to be:

His Bar, into your Cities he will break.


Think you, this defp’rate Youth would undertake
_ The


bree ee


Book [.


Sirius Iraricus, 25


The charge of fo great Broils, and violate
With Arins your League, or thus precipitate
By Vows into a War; onely to give

Sagunthus Laws, or Us of Life deprive °

Oh! hafte, fupprefs the rifing Flame, for fear
The Danger prove too ftrong for tardy Care.
Or, though you have no Terrouts of your Own,
Nor yet the Seeds of War, which he hath fown,
Appear: can your Sagunthus be deny'd

An helping Hand, fo near in ¢#) Blood ally’d¢
All the I/ert, Galli, all chat are

Still chirfting under Libya's fiery Star,

Under his Enfigns march. We pray you, by

Th’ ador’d Beginnings of the ‘Rutul,

Laurentine Houfhold-Gods, and by thefe dear
Pledges of Mother Troy, with {peed prepare

To Aid our Pietie, who are compell'd _

For poor ¢) «Acrifionean Walls to yield

©} Tyrinthian Tow'rs, Younobly did contend
"Gaintt a Sicilian Tyran, and defend

(Campanian, Walls; and, once, to have expel'd
The Samnites ftrength, was a great Honour held,


(2) The Sagunthixes were Allyed
20 the Latines, by the ed rdeates. de~
rived from the Zacynthians, who built
Sagunthum,


(6) Ardean ,from Acrifins, whofe
Daughter Danae built it,
Cf) Sagnnthine.


Worthy Sigean Anceltours. [ call

To Witnefs you Eternal Fountains, all |

That, from Yime’s birth, live in e/pulia,

And clofe Numician Pools: when 2/rdea,

(Yoo happy then) firft fenther Youth abroad,
With Turnus Altars, for anew Abode ;

That they, beyond Pyrene’s Hills, with care,

All che Laurentine Deities did bear. oo
Why then, as Members from the Body torn,
Or elfecut off, fhould we expect your Scorn
Or why fhould We, defcended of your Blood’


Be now opprett, becaufe w have firmly ftood


G Unto


(k) Q.Fabius Maximus Diftator,
famous tor his prudent Condu@ a-
gain Hannibal ; of whom, fee Book.


Sittus Jraxicus, Book I.
Unto your Leagues * Thus, having ended all .
Their fad Complaints (a wofull Sight ) they fall,
Spreading their Squallid bodies onthe Ground.
The Senate ftrait confult, and, as they, round,

Their Votes do pals, bold Lentulus, who feems
Ev'n then to fee Sagunthus fallin Flames,
Advyifeth ; That they inftanily demand

The Youth be punifh’d, and to wafte the Land
Of Carthage, with a fuddain War, if they

Refufe, But “ Fabius, who did wilely weigh
Future Events, in Dubious affairs
NottooElate, who would not ftir up Wars

On Light occafions, and well was Skill’d
Tomanage them, yet not engage a Field ,
Gravely advis'd, In matters of that Weight,
Not to be Rath : but try, if't were the Hate,

And Fury, of the General had mov'd

Thofe Arms ; or if the Senate them approv’d:
That fome be fent, who truly might Relate

The State of things. This, as fore-knowing Fate,
And providently pond'ring in his Breatt
Therifing Broils, wife Fabins expreft,

A\s when, at Stern, a Skilfull Pilot finds,

By Signs, fome future Danger in the Winds,
Contracts, unto the reeling Yard, the Sails,

But Tears, and Grief, with Anger mix’d, prevails
With all, to haften on the hidden Fates:

And, from the Senate, chofen Delegates

Are tothe Gen'ral fent ; and, if he ftand
Deaf to the League, in Arms, have in Command,
To turn to Carthage City, and declare
‘Gainft them, who had forgot the Gods, a War.


—$ <<


Lhe End of the Firft Book,


—
Se mea


i bor
5) Seu clavfas Acres,gremioge efficderit! As rma.
; f Aecypite rafan/At Libya, oventuge Priort
Wy f Sar sngurtbelumee Lasios ff tArnictas -
A 2 ~~ : ae
y A A Dua Eborac:Caroli Martyrs Fitia nafu
ay Aiglie Thalajsia rhe ke: Tabula


Belluin Se fiareSinu pacema ferebat
Quad 8 de legere rs


Neoutrit renucntescuaty


Slike Celsittmay: Frincipt Jacobo


S “A .
49
Zia t# a . ‘ z= AY
Secunda; Carol Secunda Haier bee


eer


Humilltine Dicate


Book Il.


SS \k
sy FL


Z


emt ie


SILIUS ITALICUS


The Second Punick V Var.


The Second Book.


Tuz Arcumenr.


pe eA


Embafsadours from Rome, to Carthage fent,
Young Hannibal's deferved Punifhment,

For Violation of the League,demand :

‘Gainft Hannibal, for them, doth Hanno frand.
The Carthaginians doubefull to declare |
What they intended; either Peace, or War,
Stout Fabius offers, and to Rome returns.

In voluntary Flames Sagunthus burns :

And, to deprive the Congu'rour of the Spoil ,

The People, and their Wealth, compofe the Pile.


H ELatian Ship, o’re the Her-
culean Seas,

The Senate's grave Commands,
with Speed ,coliveys,

And fome chief Senatours. Wife

SS eS CFabius: who,

Tirynthian Race, could thew

) Three hundred Anceftours, that,in one Day,

The cruel Storms of War had caft away ;

When Fortune, that unequally withftood

Their Labours, ftained with Patritian Blood

G 2 The


27


=


relies


(a) The People of Rome affailed
onall fides, by their emulous Neigh.
bours, the Family ofthe Fabii ater
took the War againft the Veientes, and
matched out three hundred & fix men.
OF whom (faith Zivy in his fecond
Book ) the Senate would have refirfed
none, to be their General: but they
were {6 unhappy in their Expedstion,
that they all dyed on the Place. One
Yourh onely remaining ; of whom this
great Reftorer of the Name defcended.
See nore below in the feventh Book.

(4) Patritii, or Patron, were the
chiefofthe Homane Nobility, fo called
either from their number uf Clicnts, or
fromtheir peal: b, Gravity, or Nam- -
ber of Children : out of which Ronty-
das, at firttchofe his Senate of an hun-
dred, intime they came to be three
hundred , and were called Senatozrs,:
and their Sons Patritii, endowed with’
extraordinary Privileges,


oe


23


Sitius JIraxticus.  BooklII.


(c) Publins Valerins (who was made


the firtt Confad with Brutus, after ute


ulfion of the Kings) had the Sur-
ae of Pxblicola aie him, for that
he was a great Lover of the People, and
their Interefs. Ofhim defcended this
‘Confular Perfon, who was joyned with
Fabius in this Embaiffie,


The Banks of (remera. An equal Share,

With him, in Cares, Publicola did bear ;

Who did from Spartan Volefus defcend, |
And, (as his Name imports ) the People’s Friend,
The Romane Fafces, as His Grand-fire, bore.

When Hannibal firt heard, that thefe, before


The Port, arriv’d, bringing Decrees of State;


‘That now Camidft the Flames of War) toolate, | |


Forfaken Peace demanded, and withall,

The Punifhment of Him, the General,

Includedin the League. He ftrait commands

His threatning Enfigns, and his armed Bands,

To thew, along the Shore, their Targets, ftain’d

With Blood,and Swords, that late in Slaughter reign’d;

And cries, There’s now no Place for Words ; you hear

The Lyrrben Trumpets founding ev'ry where,

And Groans of Dying Men. While yet they may,

"Twere beft,they would return unto the Sea;

Unlefs they long to be befieg’d. All know

What Armed men, in Heat of Blood, may do:

How lawlefs Anger is, and what drawn Swords

Willdare to Act. By thefe His threatning Words

Repuls'd, from the inhofpitable Shore,

They hafte to Carthage with the lab’ring Oar ,

While he, to Animate the Army, rails ,

And thus purfues the Veffel, as it fails :

Prepares that Ship to carry o’re the Sea

My Head? Alafs! Blind Souls, and Hearts, that be

Proud with Succeffes!’ Doth your Impious Land

Arm’d Hannibal to Punifhment demand 7

[le come, ne're askit: you enough of Me

Shall have, e’reyou Expect, and that proud She,

Which now doth Forein Gods defend, ev’n Kome,

Shall fear for her own Gods, and Gates, at Home.
Although


Book II. ~Sitrus Iraricus. 29


Although you climb Taypeian Rocks again ,

Or in your Capitol, immur’d, remain +

No Gold your captiv'd Lives fhall dis-engage.
Their Minds incenfed by his Words, and Rage
Join’dto their Arms, foon Clouds of Arrows, round,
The Skies obfcure ; and ecchoing Tow’ts refound
With Storms of Stones : all profecute the Fight ;
While yet the flying Ship remains in Sight,

And views the Walls. Buc ftill the General,

His Wounds difcov’ring, on his Troops doth call
For promis’d © Piacles ; and fills the Air


(4) The Capitol befieged by the
Gaxds, inthe time of Farixs Camillus.
See below:


(e) Piaeulum is properly a Sacrifice
for the Expiation of fome heinous Of


~ Wich new Complaints. We, we CCompanions dear ) fence. But here a vindittive Satisfadti-


on for the A ffronts,and Lefles,the Car-
thaginians had fuftained in former
Wars, If any carp at che Word , as
7 ‘ ; - {carce Engiifi, Uthall defire them to
Shews, in Contempt, our Chains, and we muft foop  incerpre: the Authour (for itishis)

without a Periphrafis, which J believe


Tothe proud Senate's Wrath. lf yourepent _ not proper in this Place,


Demanded are. See Fabius from the P oop


Of what’s begun, or our juft Arms intent

Be worthy Blame: the Romane Ship from Sea
Recall, carenot; come,deliverMe |

Enchain’d unto the Wrack : for why fhould I,

Born of Eéan Belus Race, deny

To betheir Slave? Although fomany Hands

OF valiant Libyan, or Iberian Bands

Circleme in= No, let the Rowtane State

For ever rule, and Enfigns propagate

To evry Age, and Nation : let us dread C fprea d
Their Words, and Frowns.This faid, deep Sighs are
Through all the Camp, and all convert their Hate
Againft A’neas Race, and ftimulate, (Throngs
With Shouts, their Rage. Among the Num’rous
Of un-gire Libyans, and diff rent Tongues ,

Fierce in the War againft the Romane Name,

Hasbyte with Marmarick Epfigns came,

Sprang from Hyarba Garamantick. He,


OF Ammon born, Medufa's Caves, thatbe


In


zo Sirius ITaALicus. Book. II,


In Phorcas Ufles, (yniphian eAd ace, and.

Sun-burnt Bastiades, did once command ;

With Nafamon, and Barce ever-dry , go Way

And ef utololian Woods, and Shores, that ae

Near Treach'rous Syrts ; Getulians, that ride, . ©: ..

Swift, without Bridles. His firft beauteous Bride

The ACymph Tritonis was : fcom whence the Queen

Fler Stock did boaft; That ove himfelf had been

Her Grand-fire, and in Groves, fore-telling Fate,

The Names of her great Anceftours relate.

She, ftill accuftom’d to a Virgin-Bed,

In Hunting, and in Woods, her Life had led ;

The Basket, or the Diftaff, to her Hands
“Unknown; She Hunting, and thy: Virgin- Bands

(Diane) \ov'd,and with Her Heel t’ impell

The running Steed, or flying Beaft to kill;

As when, difdaining Getes, and (icones,

Or Rhafus Family, or Bifones

With Moon-like Arms, a Troop of Amazons

Through the Pangzan lofty Foreft Runs ;

O're Thracian Rbodopé, or Hebrus Plains.

She, by her Countrey’s Habitknown, reftrains :

With Fillets of fine Gold, her flowing Hair.

Her right-fide to the Fight expofed Bare,

Her left a T bermodoantiack Shield, |

Bright as the Sun, defends. Thus through the Field,

Shaking the {moaking Axel-tree, fhe runs

With rapid Speed ; while her Companions,

Some in light Chariots, by two Horfes Drawn :

On Horfe-Back fome, that Venus Rites had known

Witha more Num’rous Virgin-Troop, their Ours

Attend, But She fill in the Vanis feen,

Proud to expofe to View her Fiery Steeds,

CChofen among the Belt her Countrey Breeds )

And


Book II. Sirius Iraxrticus, | 31 3
And, as about the trampled Field the {cowrs,


Flings wounding Darts, into the higheft Tow'rs.
But eMeop/us, not enduring to behold

Her, atthe Walls fo frequent , and fo bold,

Through the moift Air Gortynian Arrows fends ;

Which, by the winged Steel, where he intends,

Give deadly Wounds. He, born in Crete, was wont

( Bred ‘mong the Sibyls Sacred Caves) to Hunt

In the Diilean Woods , and, when a Childe,

Birds, mounting to the Skies, had often kill'd,

And {top'd by fuddatn Wounds the running Dear,

That {cap’d the Touls ; and, while he yet might hear

The finging Bow, perceiv’d the Beaft to fall.

Nor could that Age any, more juftly, call

A skilfall Archer : had Gortyna fought

The Conqueft, and Eoan Arrows brought,

But, when his former Sports the fad Decay

Of Wealth deni’d, conftrain’d to putto Sea,

With Meroe, his Wife, and Sons, by Fate

Into Sagunthus led, in low Eftate,

A Guett he there remain’d. His hopefull Pair

Of Sons full Quivers at their Backs did bear,

With light, Steel-pointed, Cretan Shafts ; which he,

Standing amidft the Valiant Youth, lets flee,

Gaintt the Mafitan Troops : by which bold Tore,

With Gravius,Ghfco, Baga, didexpire,

And Lixus , who deferv’d not to have bin

The Object of fo certain Aim, whofe Chin

The tender Downof Youth not yet indu’d.

But, with his Arrows, while he thus purfu’d,

The Fight, he aims againft a Valiant Maid,

Forfaken Jove invoking to his Aid,

Ulnluckily. For Sarpe, born upon

The bollow Banks of Sandy NCafamon,


°o


SSE LI Pa ae RE Ee i ee


32


Sttius Itvaricus,


Book II.


No fooner faw him turn the fatal Bow,

But fhe receiv'd within her Bofom C though

Far diftant ) the fwift Arrow, and her Fate ;

Which, with a gaping Wound, did penetrate |

So far, that at her Back her Sifters all

Firft faw the Point appear. Before her fall,

Incens’d, another of the Virgin-Train,

Endeay’ring to fupport, but all in vain,

Her dying Limbs, and watring with. her Tears

Her Eyes, whofe Light almoft extina appears ;

With all che Strength, that Grief and Fury lent,

‘Towards the Walls a deadly Arrow fent,

Which through the Shoulder of Stout Dorilas,

( As fwiftas Thought) with Rapid force did pafs.

The Bow was drawn {o far, the Horned Ends

Did feem to touch ; and, as the Nerve extends,

The {pace between the Bow the Shaft fupplies,

And, when Releafed by her Fingers, flies

Before the aétive Winds: then, from the Walls,

Headlong, the miferable Wounded falls .

And turning, upfide-down, his Quiver, round

His dying Body, {catters on the Ground

The fhining Shafts. Then Icarus, who ftood

Near him (alike in Arms? his Brother’s Blood

Prepares to Vindicate j and as, in hatte,

His Hand unto the full-charg’d Quiver paft,

To draw an Arrow ; bya weighty Stone, _

That from the Hand of Hannibal was thrown,

He fell to Earth: a deadly Coldnef all

His ftiffned Limbs poffeft, and, in his fall,

From’s fainting Hand, into its place again

Thehalf-drawn Arrow finks. His Sons, thus flain,

When Father Mop/us faw ; thrice, to purfue

Their with’d Revenge, in a fad Rage he drew
His


Sitius Itraricys,


Book If.


En a erate reg SS


His Gretan Bow? but thrice his Right-Hand fail’d,
And Grief, above his former Skill, prevail’d.
Then, by their Death, of all his Joys bereft,

Too late’, alafs !he griev'd, thathe had Left

His Native Soil: and, Snatching up the Stone,


- That againft thee ( Poor Icarus’) was thrown,


Beating his Breaft, in Vain, when no Relief
His Feeble Hands could give, to Eafe his Grief,
By {peedy Death, himfelf he Head-Long fends
From an High Tow’, and on his Son extends
His dying Limbs, While thus Unfortunate,
In Forein Wars, this Stranger met his Fate ;
Teron, who kept Alcides Temple, and
With Incenfe, at his Altars, us’d to Stand,
To new Defigns the Army Stimulates,
And, in a fudden Sally from the Gates,
Invades the Tyrian Camp. He neither Spear
In’s Hand, nor Helmet on his Head, did bear :
But, trufting to his Strength of Youth, his Broad
And Lofty Shoulders (like th’ C*) Octean God)
With an Huge Club, deftroys the trembling Files
Upon his Head a Lyon’s threatning Spoils,
With Gaping Jaws, he wore. An hundred Snakes,
Carv'd on his Shield, difplay'd their Marble Backs .
‘Mong which a Monftrous double Hydra {preads,
In feveral Serpents, her divided Heads.
Thus Arm’d, he Fuba, and Micipfa, (Fam’d |
For Valiant Deeds, and from hts Grand-fire Nam’d)
With aged Lap/us, and Saces the Moor ,
Driv’n from the Walls, and flying to the Shore,
Fiercely Purfues ;and, by one Valiant Hand,


The Streams of Blood the Neighbring Ocean {tain'’d,


For, Hot with Slaughter, and not fatisfy'd,
That Idus, Rothus, eee y 4,


Or


(4) Hercatles.


(f) Eurydamar, the moftimpor-
tunate of all Penelspe's Suitours : who,
urging herto Marry bim, affured her
her Husband Uy es was drowned: but
he, arriving atthe fame time, (lew him,
See Hom, Ody ff. Lib, 15.


Sitmus Iraricus. ‘Book II.
Or that eAZ armarick Cotbo he had kill'd,
Fasbyte's Chariot, and her Moon-like Shield,
Shining with Gold, he covets, and 1’ invade
With all his Force, aad Rage, the Warlike Maid.
Him, with his Bloody Weapon, when the {py'd
Come tufhing on, fhe turns het Steeds afide,

A\nd in fallacious Circles » Wheeling round

The Champain Field, divides the yielding Ground;
And, asif wing'd with Speed, fhe makes her way,
With her light Chariot, through the winding Sea.
Thus, while the flies his Sight, fwift as the Wind,
The Horfes raife a Cloud of Duft behind,

A\nd, with the ratling Wheels, in Pleces tear,

An adverfe Troop. She, to augment their Fear,
From her fure Hand, did frequent Darts expell :
By which Bold Thamyris, and Lycus fell,

With Stout ‘/) Eurydamas, whofe noble Name .
Derived was from him ; who, known to Fame, -
Fondly to high Embraces once afpir'd, |
And, mad with Love, Penelope defir'd:


_ But by her Chafte, and Modett Arts deceiy'd,


And the fallacious. Web, fo oft unweav’d,

Gave out Ubffes, inthe Sea, was drown'd.

But, what he fain'd of him, he after found

Real in his own Fate, and he expires

By Ithacus dire Hand; his Nuptial Fires

Turn'd into Fun’ral Flames : and, here, of all

His Race the laft, Eurydamas doth fall,

Slain by a Libyan’s Hand ; whofe Chariot makes

Her way, andall his Bones in Pieces breaks,
But now, perceiving Yeron, afer all

His Labours, hard befet, to work his F all,

Inco the Fight again, the Furious Maid

Returns with Speed, and, as, about t’ invade


Her


aa aaa eee

Book II. Sirius Iraricus. | 35
I i st et we

Her Fo, fhe waves her Ax before her Brows,

Herculean Spoils to thee, ‘Diana, Vows.

But Teron, no lefs big with hopes of Praife,

Himlelf againft her bounding Steeds doth raife,

Cafting before their Eyes the Lyon’s Skin,

And threatning Jaws : affrighted, they begin

Toyield to Fear, and, turning fwiftly round,

Catt, with its Load, the Chariot to the Ground.

Then on Hasbyte, who endeavours now

To quit the Fight, he leaps, and, on her Brow,

Strikes his Herculean Club : by which her Brains,

Dafh’d through her broken Skul, upon the Reins,

And fervent Wheels, difperfed ly ; while He,

Hafting that fuch a Trophy all might fee,

With her own Ax cuts off the Virgins Head.

Nor was his Anger there determined ,

But fixed on a Spear he ftrait commands

To bear’t, in view of allthe Punick Bands,

And drive the Chariot to the City-Gates.

Thefe Slaughters Teron, ignorant of Fates,

And that the Favour of the Gods declin’d,

Commits; while his own Death’s not far behinde.

For now Fierce Hannibal, whofe Face the Throne


“OF Rage, and Death appear’d, came Furious on,


Incens’'d, and griev'd to fee Hasbyte dead,

And the yet-bleeding Trophie of her Head

In Triumph borne. But when the Troops beheld
The bright Reflections of his Brafen Shield,

And, as he mov’d ( though diftant far) did hear
The fatal clathing of his Arms, with Fear
Poffefsd, they trembling fled unto the Walls.

As when, to their known Beds, the Ev’ning calls
The winged People, from the fearch of Food :


Or, when, on the Cecropian ae a Cloud 7


Sitius ITaticus. Book II:


- The Hony-lab’ring Bees, on tender Flowers


Difperft, affrighteth, with approaching. Showers :
Like onecongefted Heap, unto their Hive,

And fragrant Cells, they hafte, and Murm’ring ftrive,
One Climbing on anothers Back, to gain
Their Entrance at the Port, and fhunthe Rain.
Thus Fear the Sagunthines precipitates,

While Few difcern their way, unto the Gates.
Oh flatr’ring Light of Heav'n! is Death to be
Shun'd with fo great a Fear ; which none can flee,
Since joined to their Birth? They cry for Aid,
Repenting, that they had this Sally made

From their fafe Walls, and Works: while ftill,in vain,
Teron.their Flight endeavours to reftrain.
Sometime Dire Menaces, fometimes his Hand
He does imploy, and cries, Why flee ye 2 Stand ;
He ismy Enemy: to ‘me the Crown

OF this great Fight belongs ; and from our Town,
And Walls, the Zyrians by this Hand, alone,
Willl Repell. Stand therefore, and look on:
Or, if this ‘Pannick Terrour drive you all,

To feek th’ inglorious Shelter of a Wall ;

( A thame, the greateft, that the adverfe Fates
Can add) againft Me onely, hut the Gates.
But Hannibal, while yet a fad Defpair

Of Safety feis’d their Hearts, and horrid Fear
Did reign in ev'ry Breaft, awhile fufpends

The Slaughter of his Enemies, and -bends

His courfe unto the barter’d Walls, which he
Refolves, with all his Force fhall Stormed be.
Th’ Herculean Prieft, perceiving his intent,
Labours, with {peed, this Milchief to prevent.

At which Fierce Hannibal, more farious grown,
Cries out ; Receive, fond Porter of the Town,


That


BookIfl. © Sitrus Iraricus, 37


That Punifhment of Fate, that fhortly fhall

Sagunthus felt involve, and, by thy Fall,

Open the Gates. His Rage could not afford

More Words: but, as he waves his fatal Sword, _

The Daunian Youth flings his contorted Oak, , :
With all his Force, againft his Breaft : the Stroak, .
Clafhing againft his Arms, with horrour founds,

And from the hollow Brafs the Club rebounds.

Then having loft his Weapon, and his Strength


_ Employ’d in vain, unto the Walls, at length,


He turns ; and, withthe reft, forfakes the Fight.

Th infulting Conquerour upbraids his Flight,

And follows at his Back. ‘Then, with fad Cries,
The weeping Matrons, lifting to the Skies

Their trembling Hands, from the high Walls, proclaim
Their Griefs, and Fears : fome, calling him by Name,
Tell him, They fain would fend unto his Aid,

And let him in; butthat they are afraid,

With him they fhould receive the Conqu’ring Fo.
But now (alafs!) He can no farther go,

For Hannibal opprefs'd him with his Shield:

And, as the City fromthe Walls beheld,

Cry’s ;Go, and let Hashyte Comfort take,

Inthy approaching Death. And, ashe {pake,

Into his panting Throat, which now abhor'd
Alonger Life, thrufts his revenging Sword.

Then, from the very Walls, in Triumph leads,
Through all the Camp,his Spoils, and captiv’d Steeds.
Which, at the thronged Gate, excluded ftand


By Multitudes, that fled his fatal Hand.


And now, the raging Troops of Comades
Hatfte to perform their Queens fad Exequies:
Adding all Funeral Rites, and bearing thrice


The Corps of Teron (as a Sacrifice
ey


38


Siurus Ira ; CUS. Book II.


(¢) Hanno, a Noble Carth iginian,
Head of thar Faction, that oppofed the
Ambition of the Barcean Family. He
always perfwaded the (atheginians
to keep Peace with the Rawsines, and,
endeavouring to induce them to it, by
weakning Hannibal’s Yefigns, obltru-
ted all refolutions ‘of Relief for his
Army, and by that means, in theend,
Ruin’d both him, and his Countrey.


To Hallow her dead Afhes)) round the Pile, |
Catt into th’ Flames his Club, and Lyon’s Spoil,
And fing’d his Face, now of all Form bereft,

And to th’ Iberian Fowls his Carkafs left.

While thus Affairs before Sagunthus ftand,
They, who, at Carthage, were in chief Command, |
Confult upon the War, and what fhall be
Return’d to Kome’s Imperious Embafsie.

Whofe Oratours with Fear their Hearts had fill’d:

While fome to their Demands perfwade to yield ;

Urging their Faith, and League, that, long before,

They, and their Fathers, at the Altats {wore,

The Gods to Witnefs call’'d. Others the Love

Of the ambitious Youth’s Attempts doth move,

To hope for Better things, if they purfu’d —

The War. But (¢) Hanno, whoma Native Feud

Againtt the General, had long enflam’d,

Their Doubts, and rath Applaufe thus ftoutly blam‘d.
I might for Fear (grave Fathers ) now refrain

(For him with Threats fome labour'd to reftrain )

To fpeak ; but I will not defift, although

I faw my Death approaching by my Fo:

I call the Gods to Witnefs, and to Heaven

I leave thofe Sacred Vows, that we have given,

Which to perform, our Countrey’s Safety calls.

Although Sagunthas be Befieg’d, her Walls |

Sinking in Flames; not yet too late, my Fears

This Caution give, which oft, with anxious Cares,

Have broke my Reft, that this pernicious Head _

Might not in Arms, and War, be nurtured ;

And while I live, my Senfe fhall thus abide.

His innate Poifon, and Paternal Pride,

I know. And as thofe Pilots, who the Skies,

And Stars do Contemplate, what Storms will rife,


What


Book I. Sirius Irarrcwus,

‘What future Winds will caufe the Seas't Rage;

‘To the affrighited MarinersPrefage.

Afpiring toa Throne, hedothinvade. .

The Reins of Rule. All Leagues,all Laws are made

The Objects of his Atms : with which he falls: ©

On Cities, and, from far, againft ow-Walls;

By this lat Act, Alneas W arlike Race one

He hath incens’d, and we have loft our Peace. °°

His Father’s Ghoft, and F ury, him excites,

And Memory of thofe Nefandouis Rites

He once did Celebrate, and what of Old -

Vainly to him Mafils’s Prieft foretold :

And thus the Gods, for his infringed Faith;

On his perfidious Head corivere their Wrath.

With Hopes of a new Kingdom blind, he Arms

‘Gainft Forein Lands, and now Saguithus Storins.’ —

But let him not commix this Citie’s Fate :

With his own Fortune; let him expiate,

With his own Punifhment, his proper Crime ;

For now ( Dear Carthage) at this very time,

He Thee Befiegeth, and Affaults thy Walls.

We ftain'd, with Gen'rous Blood, th’ Znean Vales,

And {carce with hird Laconians could maintain

The War: our Navies, broken on the Main,

Have fill'dup Seylla’s Caves : and we have feén,

When, from Charybdis Bottom, Decks have been

Spew'd up again. Vain Wretch! whofe Soul Ao Firé

OF Piety doch Warm ! do but retire

Thy Thoughts, a while, upon A2gathes War,

And Limbs of Libya difperfed far.

Whither dof run? Why, thirfting after Farie,

Thus, in thy Countrey’s fall, doft feek a Name ”

The e4/ps may give Thee way, ahd ef penniné,

Equal to them, his Snowy Head decline : .
Yet


39


(4) After many Conflids by sea:
and Land, bengeen the Riéward, and
Carthaginians, at length C. Luffatins
the Conf! put anendto the War , by
a Naval Victory , obtained near the
Iflands UE garhes (in the Sicilian Sea)
where the (Carthaginians received {>
greata lof, that they were conftrain-
ed tobeg a Peace, and yieldto thofe
Articles, which fo much enflamed both
Amilcar and Hannibal, to break into
a fecond War.


Book H.


Sruoius: Iranicus.


| Yet, though; ehou g gain’ ‘Aefome Ground, aii thow'to


@A Neritian Race, fuch as were.
the Sagunthines. For Sagunthum was
at firft a Colenie from Zacynthus ,
and Neritus,Uflands fubject to Ulyffes.

Ck) Though i in the Conftirution of
the Romane (Militia, none could or-
dinarily , be admitted into the Lift of
Souldiers, before the Age of feventeen
years:yer Examples there were of fome,
that ac fourteen years were in Arms ,


_ and were eminent for cheir Valour;


as the Son of Tarquinins Prifeus ,
Scipio. Africanus (who refcued his
Father) Afarws, &c. See Liv. lib. 34.
Siliws, ib. 6. 8 14,


In thofe great Nations a mortal Mindi? i: > . Cfiade
That they to Fire; anid Sword, will yield) Abs aye:
¥ou fight not now with a () Neritian Racé... 3 :
(k) Their Souldiers in the. Camp are Bred, and: Bom,


‘And, ere the Down appear, their Cheeks are: worn


With Brafen Helmets :' Eafe, and Reft’s unknown oo

To Aged-Men, who Pale, and Bloodlefs allt a

In the contintied Service of the State,” ea! a

In Fronts of Battails do provoke their Fate:.

My felf have Romanes feen, who pierced jou

Their Bodies, from their W ouids their weapons drew,

And turn‘d them on the Fo: their Valour: F-

Have feen, and thirft of Honour, when they dy. .

If therefore, Carthage, thou decline this War, -

Nor give thy Self up tothe Conquerour, ©:

How much of Mifchief miay prevented be,

And how much Blood fhall Hanno fave for Thee?
Thus He: but Geffar, whofe full Breatt the while

With Anger, and Impatience, did boy],

Who twice to Interrupt him had effay’d,

Replies. Is then a Romane Souldier made

One of the Libyan Councils, and muft He

A Member of the Zyrian Senate be?

"Tis true, he is not Arm’d, but, welll know,

In all things elfe, he is a perfeat Fo.

Us with theSnowy e4/ps, and horrid Height

Of lofty Apennine, he would affright,

With raging Seas, and Waves of Scyila’s Coaft: -

Nor wants it much, but he a Romane Ghoft


Still dreads; their wounds,and Deaths, he fo doth praife,


And to the Stars an Humane Race doth raife.
Truft Me ; though fome cold Hearts with Fear may be
Poffefs'd, we have a mortal Enemy.

Ev'n


Book II.


Sizius Iraticus.


Evin beheld their )’Repubs, the Hope: s'.
OF the Heforean Race ;.their ftrongeft Prop; :


His Hands enchain’d behind, with ease ne


Into a Dungeon drag'd, ne’ feen by Day: |;

I faw, when Crucified, from: the high Oak, -

He, hanging, on Hefperia did look. Se
Nor doth the Face of Boys, that Helniees eee |
A caufe of Terrour unto Me appear; |

Or, that their Cheeks with early Casks are worn >
Weare not of a Race fo fluggifh born. |
How many Libyan Troops their Years, in Deeds ©
Of Anms, out-go,; and War on Naked Steeds. ©
The General, {o foon as He could {peaky...

At th’ Altar vow’d, this War to undertake :

To wafte with Flames the Phrygian People, and
His Father’s Arms refoly’d to take in Hand... .
Ev'ninthy Sight ( vile Hanno) he fhall be
Revenger of the Romane Crueltic. .
Then let the Alps encreafe, and let ain joy : ;
To Heav'n their fhining Heads, with Apennine.. «

Yet I dare fay ( though vaineft Fears do finde
Their Influence upon a guilry Mind ) (Stars,
Ev’n through thofe Rocks,and Snows,nay through the
His way he’l make, and fcorn to think them Bars,
Which Hercules or’ecame, or to defpair

©f fecond Honour. But the former War,


Tes Devattations, and the Miferies


Of Libya, Hanno, vainly , amplifies :

Wor would, that we fhould undertake, and try
Again, thefe Labours, for our Liberty.

But let him: lay thofe Throws of Fear afide ;
And with the Women, {afe at home, abide,
And fave his fighing Soul: we, Fathers, we,’ 7
CIs is Decree’d } will meet He nee eo


41


(2) Regatar vanquifhed by Xan-
tippy; andled Captive to Carthage.
See Lib. 6.


St Lius [Tati c us. Book II


And from thy Walls (dear Garthage) far remove
The Tyran Romanes,in defpight of fove.. =~
But if the Fates refift, and Adars give way, |
That Tyrian Byrfa, becondemn’d this Day,
- Ve'rather choofe to:Die, then giveup Thee _
_ Wear Country) to Eternal Slavery,
And gowith Freedom to the Shades below ¢
For astothat (Good Gods) which Fabius now
Demands, that we lay down our Arms, and qu i
Sagunthus, when.our Troops have'conquer'd it.
Then Burn your Targets, let your Navy be
Confum'd in Flames, and wholly qiit the Sea.:
But if our Carthage hath not merited: _
To feel fuch things, as thefe,-ye, Gods, forbid
This Wickednefs !oh, let our Generals‘hands
Be free, and not bound up ia peacefull Bands.
This faid, he filent fate , as cuftom was:
The Senate ftreight proceed their Votes to pals ,
While Hanno urgeth to reftore the Spoils
Of War, and add’s the Authour of thofe Broils.
With that the Fathers, leaping from their Seats,
Amazd, as if the Fo were at the Gates
O' th’ Temple, Pray the Gods, that it may be
A Fatal Omen unto Italy.
Fabius, perceiving that their thoughts were far
From Peace, and, treacheroufly, enclin'd to War,
No longer able toconceal his Ire,
Wich {peed another Council doth require:
4nd to th’ affembled Fathers doth Declare,
Thatin his Bofom he brought Peace, or War,
Demands their Choice, that, Him they would no more
Detain, with dubious Anfwers, as before.
But, when no Choice of either they expreft, .
C Asif he'd powr'd whole Armies from his Breaft, }
Take


Book Il. Srrtius IraLicus, 43


Take then a War ({aid He) (with chatler’s fall | |
(») His folded Garment }) takea War, which fhall. * i Jin) The Poet in his retcion fo
To Lybia, like the former, fatall be,.. - ie !


Bue both Awlws Geli. and A€arcus Var-
: ro differ in the manner of Fabius his
An itsEvents. This faid, incenfed, He


Propofal. The firft affirm s, that hede-
livered to the Carthaginians an Epiftle,
wherein was written, that the Acmane


The Temple, andthe City quit’s, andhome .---.. Revels em to heat a peer, ands
Returns, a Meffenger of War to Rome. eo ha cad might choot wich of the
While fuch at (urthagé was the State of things : eo eae reeset
Fierce Hannibal, enrich’d with Trophies, britigs. pk des soar dar oie


brought them, fhould leave which of
them they pleas‘d , and that thould be


Again his Arms before Sagunthus Walls; their Choife. Varro alleadgeth, they
fent neither Spear nor Cadnce, but


And, to his Aid, thofe many Nations calls, two little Ta/lier, wherein both were


Whole Faith to Rome wasfhaken bytheFear — - Carved.


Of dubious War ; while they coritinued there,


The People, that inhabited the Coaft;

Prefents ( the belt (allaick Art could boat "|
Brought to the General. A (hining Shield, *
That Beams, like Lightning terrible, did yield:
An Helmet on whofe tifing Creft, a Plume
Did tremble, and in Whitenefs overcome


The eA pine Snow. With them a Sword, and Spear


Which afterwards to thoufands Fatall were:


With treble Chains of Gold, a Coat of Mail,


Studded, ‘gainft which no Weapon could prevail.

Thefe made of Brafs, and harder Steel, inlay’d

With Tages Wealth, triumphing, he furvey’d,

A\ndin the Carved Works was pleas'd to fee

His Nations happy Birth, and Hittory.

Dido, the firft Foundation there did lay,

OF Carthage: arid, her Navy fent away, |

The Work begun, th’ induftrious Youth purfu’d.

Some with long Piles, and Banks, the Port include:

Toothers Reverend Bitias prepares

Their Houfes Platforms, all in equal fhares.

And, as they turned up the Fertile Ground,

A Warlike Horfes Head, by chance, they found, -
' I 2 The


44


Sirius JTaLicus.


Book II.


At the firlt, they digged up the
Hoslof an Ox wiih interpreted
a Token o (Gah Bf, fig te
aclength (iis afte bat finding le
Fiead of an Hi nae ear

an Cimen of 4 W. ee sande
and there began the


The “) Omen, with an univerfal Shout

Of Joy; they all appeared to Salute, -

Among thefe Figures fad Aineas ftands,

” Wrack’d on her Coafts, and with extended Hands,
Deprived of his Fleet, and Friends, is feen


To crave Afsiftance. Him th’ unhappy Queen


Views with an earneft Eye, afd Entertains _
With Smiles: for Love within her Bofom Reigns.
Then they Defcrib'd the Cave, and fecret Rites, ©
The Lovers us’d to warrant their Delights.

Mean while the Cries of Men, and Dogs, appear
To Strike the Marble Sky ; till fuddain Fear,
Of an Impetuous Storm, the Hunters all
Conftrain’d, for Shelter, into Woods to fall.
Not far from thefe, upon the Empty Shore,
Eliza Weeps, and did, in Vain, implore

The Trojan-Fleet’s return, that now to Sea

Had hois'd up Sails, and bore her Love away.
Then ona lofty Pile, at laft, She {tands,
Wounded; and to the Zyrians commands
Revenging Wars: the Trojan Prince, the while,
Beholding, from the Sea, the flaming Pile,

To the propitious Fates his Sails doth {pread,
Relolv'd to Follow, wherefoe're they Lead.
Apart from thele, at Stygian Altars, ftood

Young Hannibal (a Childe) who fecret Blood
Offer'd, with the infernal Prieft, and there

The War againft neas Race did fwear.

But Old Amilcar’s Image feem‘d to be

Alive, and Triumph over Sicily:

You'd think he breath’d forth War ; within his Eys


" AFlame of Terrour, with grim Afped, lies.


Upon the left Side of the Shield, a Band
OF Spartans, with their ragged Enfigns, ftand :
Whom


Book II.


Whom Bold: Xanti ppus, as ee, led,
From fair Amyck, fam’d by Leda's Bed, .

Near thefe, hung ‘Regulus, their fad aa
Upon a Crofs, and, to the trembling Town, .
Faith’s great Exaniple was, A joyfull Face 4 22
OF Things adorns the reft : where fome the Chace |
Of Beatts purfue, and carved Houles fhine.
Not far remote from them, with parched Skin,
The black-Moor’s Sifter, inanhorridDrefs,
Tames, with her Country's Speech, a Lyone{s. Cioves
Then, through the Fields the wandring Shepherd
Free without Stop, through unforbidden Groves: © ©
Near them his Dart, and Cwhomhe (ydon names) |.
His barking Dog, his Cottage, andhid Flames —

In Veins of Flint; then, lively, they expreft

His Pipe, familiar to the lab'ring Beaft.

Then ona lofty Hill Saguntbus ftands,

And by unnumbred Nations, and Bands.»

Of Fighting men, Befieged-round appears,

And tobe puth’d at, by their trembling Spears. -
About the Borders, rich Iberus {eems

To make the Circle up, with winding Streams:

Over whofe Banks fierce Hannibal, from far,

Calls() Africk-People tothe Romane War.

On his broad Shoulders, as he, {miling, tries

Thefe wealthy Prefents, proudly, thus, he cries.
Inhow much Romane Blood fhall I imbrue

Thefe Arms? with how great Punifhments purfue
That Gowned Senate ; that themfelves do make
Revengers of the War we undertake ©

Now inthe Siege the Fo grows old, a Day
Concludes the Citie’s Fate; while, weary, they
Their forein Aids expect : but, now, no.more

They look upon the Seas, or helplefs Shore ;


"Perceiving


Sirius Iraxrticus.


as


(¢) Upon Conclufion of the firft
Punick War, the Carthaginians were
obliged by Article, not to pafs over
the River fberws : which Article
was tranfgrefied by Hannibal.


4.6


(+) Difparing of their long ex-


petted Aid trom the Romenes, the Sa~
Santiines, after eight months Sieg.
folved vo dy within their Walls. What
miferies they endured; till the City

was taken, are at large sikcounted in
Livy, Lib. 22.


(kK) Jano.


-Srvius Iraricus, |


(p) Perceiving Deaths approach, with fad Defpair : aes
For their parch’d Entrails, the Contagious Air:
Enflames; ‘while Famine in their Bowels. reigns, |
And dries the Blood, in théircontraéed Veins.
From their: faln Cheeks, their finking Eyes, within. |
Their Heads retire, and through the thrivled Skin .
The Bones, and ill-knie. Joints ( a wofull Sight)
With Nervs, confum’d, appear ; the Dew of Nigh,
Some gather from the Earth, to quench the Fire
Of thirft, and fome themfelves do vainly tre
‘For Liquour, while they hardeft Oaks do braife ;
Their rav’ning Hunger, which doth nought refufe,,
Compels them.to ftrange Food.From Shields they tare
The Hides to feed upon, and leave them bare.
- Thefe Ruins of his Citie from the Skie,

of Icides look’ d on, with a mournful Eye,

But all in vain, for himthe ftria command,

And fear of his great Father Fove withftand,

That he fhould nothing act ‘gainft the Decree

Of his fevere *Step-Mother. Therefore He,
Concealing his Defign, to Faith repairs,

Who in the fartheft part of Heav'n, the Cares:

OF Deities revolv'd : thus, at her Shrine

He tries Her. Counfels: Thou great Power Divine!
Born before Zove him(elf : who art the Grace,
And Honour both of Gods, and Humane Race,
Confort of Juftice, without whom nor Seas,
Nor Earth, can know the benefit of Peace ;
A\ Goddefs ( where thou art ) ‘in every Breatt! !

Canft thou behold Sagunthus, thus opprett,
Unmov’'d* That Citie, which, for Thee alone,
So many, fo great ills, hath undergone ?

For Thee the People dy, upon Thee, all,

Men, Women, Children, that can {peak, do call, |


By


Book II.


Book II. Sitius Iraricus, — 47
ny sis uh peraehshteltase rumba otha ;
By Famine overcome: from Heaven relieve

Their fad Eftate, and fome Afsiftance give.

Thus He; To whom the Heav'nly «ALaid again

Replies. I fee all this, nor is’t in vain,


Thatthus my Leagues infringed are :a Day


Shall come, e4 cides, that fhall fure repay,
With Vengance thefe their dire Attempts, But I
Was forc’d from the polluted Earth to fly,
To feek, in Fove's bleft Manfions, a Place,
Free frort: the num’rous Frauds of Humane Race:
Ileft their Tyrans, that their Scepters hold,
Fearing, as they are Fear’d: that Fury, Gold,
The vile Reward of Treacheries, [ left,
And above all, the Men, who now bereft
Of all Humanity, like Beafts by Spoil,
And Rapine, live, while Honour is the Foil
To Luxury, and Modefty by Night ,
And her dark Crimes oppreft, avoids the Light,
The place of Right, the too imperious Sword
Doth arrogate ; and Force alone’s Ador'd:
Vertue gives way to Vice; for look upon
The Nations of the Earth, and there is none
Is Innocent; their frequent Fellowfhip
Jn Crimes, alone , the Common Peace doth keep.
But that thefe Walls, erected by thy Hand,
May in the Book of Fame for ever ftand,
By an End worthy Thee, and that they may
Not give their Bodies up a Captive Prey,
To the Proud African ( which, onely, now
The Fates, and State of Future things allow )
The Honour of their Death will I extend
Beyond the pow’r of Fate, andthemcommend,:
As Patterns, to Pofterity, and go,
With their prais’d Souls, unto the Shades below. om
is


a ee


OSTE us Ir aticus,


This faid s'The conftant Virgin, ‘through the Ait,
Defcends, andto Sagunthusdoth repair, -
Then ftrugling-with the Fates: : through evry Breaft
She goes, invades their. Minds; which; all-poffett
By her greaeDeitie; each Soul doth prove’
Her Altar, burning by: her. Sacred Love.
Now, as if Strong again; for Arms-they cts
And in the Fight their weak Endeavours try.
Strength, above Hope, they find, while the fweer Name
And-Honour, of theGoddefs doth inflame
Their Hearts ;'refolved, for her Sake, to dye,
And fuffer, Annee far worfe ther Death, +6 try
The Food of Savage Beafts, and Crimes to add
To their Repafts: but‘them chafte Faith forbad - -”
Longer, with fo. much Guilt, to-view the Day, :
Or with Man’s Fleth their Hunger to allay.

Her when Saturnia (who by chance came dawnt


?


Into the Libya Camp’) within the Town,


CWhich fhe fo hated ) faw, the doth upbraid
The Virgin's Courage, and the War fhe made.
Then in a Rage; with troubled Steps the wene


_ Tothat dire Fury, that doth ftill torment


The guilty Souls, and thus upon her ealls,
With Hands extended. Strike (faid fhe) thofe Walls,
Thou Darling of the Night, let thy fell Hands -
Deftroy that People, ‘us Funo commands ;

My felf, within a Cloud, will here ftand bye:

And fee the Iffue of thy Induftry.

Thofe Weapons, which fometimes immortal Fove
Difturb, by which thou Acheron doft move,

Thy Flames of Sulphure, and thy hideous Snakes
In Curls, thy horrid Voice, which filent makes
Hell's Triple-headed Porter, and let fall


From’s Jaws his poys‘nous Spume,commixt with Gall:


Book IL | Book Il.


What |


SILius. IrTaAbLicus. : 49


What Plagues, and Mifchief, what Tinpiety- =
Soe’re within thy: fruitful Breatt da ‘lie. -
Upon thefé hated Ratuk. throw down,

And let Sagunthus fink to eAcheron:

Thus let their peevifh Faith rewarded be. .
Incited by thefe words, Tésphone

Invades the Walls, then, round about, the Hill
Trembles, and roaring Wavesthe Shore desfill.
Innumerable Serpents, on her Head |
Hifsing, her tumid Neck, and Breaft, or'efpread.
Death, walking with her, his wide Jaws extends,
On whom pale Sorrow, and black Grief attends,
All Plagues were prefent, that created were,
While Cerberus with howling rends the Air.


- Forthwith the counterfeits Zyburna's Face,
. Her Voice, her Speech, her Gefture, and her Pace..
Ts burna, of a Noble Race, deriv'd, .


Her Blood from Daunus, and by War depriv'd
Of her dear Husband, «eM urrus, then bewail’d
Her Widdowed Bed. The Fury having. vail'd
Her felf}. awith her fad Countenance, her Hair


« Dithevel ‘d, tothe Affembly doth repair,


‘And tearing there her Cheeks, What end ( {aid fhe }

Of our great Faith, and Citie, thalt we fee?

I have my Murrus een, who, every Night,

Doth me, with his yet gaping Wounds, affright,

And lamentably, thus, on-me doth call,

Flie, my Lyburna, Flie this Citie’s Fall.

Or if the Conqu'ring Libyan deny

The Earth to thee, to me, Lyburna, flie.

Our Gods are faln, and we ( poor Rutuii )

Are loft, the Punick Sword doth all enjoy :

I tremble, and his Ghoff, as yet, before

MineEyes, me-thinks, appears. Shall I no more
K Thy


Sirius Iraricus, Book I.


Thy Stately ‘Palaces, Sagunthus, fee? |
Happy my Murrus was, thrice happy He, . :
Who {aw his Gountrey ftanding, when he fell! +.
Butus Victorious Carthage will compel, “
( After fo many Miferiesof War, .
And Dangers of the Sea), their Yoak to bear,
And ferve Sidonian Ladies, and to lie,
Captives in Libys’s Bofom, when we die.
But you, whofe confcious Valour doth deny,
_ CO brave young Men!) a polsibility
‘Tobe made Captives: to whom Death will be
_ A certain Guard againft all Mifery ;
With your own Hands, your Mothers now redeem,
From Slavery. True Virtue gets Efteem
From hardeft things. Go on, that Praife to gain,
Which, hardly, meaner People can obtain.
With this fad Language having fill'd their Ears,
The Fury to an antient Tomb repairs,
Which on the Hill was buile by Hercules,
A Land-Mark unto fuch as Plough’d thofe Seas,
By him adorned with all Sacred Rites.
Come thither, from the Bottom fhe excites
CA Sight of Terrour ) a Czrulean Snake,
With Spots of Gold upon his Sealy Back ;
His fhining Eyes are fill'd with bloody Flames:
And ( toincreafe the Terrour of thofe Beams )
He hiffech loud, and thakes his forked Tongue,
And then, with Speed, into the trembling Throng
Of Citizens he glides, and from the Walls,
Into the midft of all the Citie, falls.
Thence like a Fugitive he makes his way
Toth’ Shore, and drown’s himfelf i’th’ foaming Sea. .
Then all diftracted are; and, as betrayd,
Its filent Manfion ev'ry frighted Shade
Filed,


ar cia Dn


Book IL.


Sirius Iraticus.


_ Fled, and refus‘d to ftay in Congquer’d Ground.


And, now, Defpair of Safety doth confound
Their troubled thoughts:they,now, their Meats deteft,
And mad Erinnys Reigns in ev'ry Breaft.

Nor is the Wrath of Heav'n, which they endure,
More grievous, then the fad Delays of fure;.
AndcertainDeath. They all conteid their Fate
To meet, with Speed, and longer Life do hate.

() Amidft the City, by the Induftry

Of all the People, raifed to the Skie,

There flood a lofty Pile ; to which they bear,
And drag, their Riches,that congefted were

In long-continued Peace. Their Wealth, acquir'd
By their own Hands, and ftately Robes admir’d
For Art, embroid'red with (allaick Gold.

By Skilfull Matrons, and their Arms, of old,
Brought from Dulichian Zacynthus, by

Their Grand-fires ; and thofe Gods, the Rutuli
Took from their. antient Abodes ; with all,

They could their own, as yet, Unconquer’d, call :
Their Shields, and haplefs Swords, and what within


~ ‘The Earth, in time of War, had buried been,


Again dige’d up, they add unto the Pile,

Glad, with themfelves, to burn the Conqu'rour’s Spoil.
When thele the Fury faw together heap’d,

She fhakes her Lampof Sulphur, lately fteep’d


‘Inburning Phlegetbon, and drives away,


By Stygian Darknels, the affrighted Day.

Then they beganthe Work, whole fad Renown
Their Memories, with lafting Fame, fhall Crown,
Throughvall the World, and them Unconquer'd call.
For, prompted by Evinnys ( Chief ofall )


Scorning Delays, they all, with Triumph, preft


Th’ unwilling Swords into each others Breaft.
_ K 2 Then


51


(z) The Sagunthines driven to the fad
Choice, either of yielding to rhe Mercy
of the Conquerour, or to perifh by the
Sword, which now had fo far prevail-
en as tae they had jf more, then
alf the Cicy, and daily quit
Ground, fo ibe He hess
wihin aS Trenches, befides the

orum,( or great Market-place ) th
heaped all their Riches ie one ed
the Forsns, and with it burned them-
felves, to avoid the infulring Fury of
their Enemies,’


clittle was left rothem


$2


Sitius ITaLcicus,


Then thricethie Stroaks of ‘her Infernal Whip.


Sound fadly through the Citie ; while they dip,


In Bleod of Kindred, their angilise Hands -


And ev'ry Man, with thoughts of Horrour,, ftands
Amaz’d at what he Acts, and doth bemoan,


~ With Floods of Tears, the Mifchief, that is done.


This,mad with Rage, and fenfe of Mifery

So long endur’d, Obliquely turns his Eye -

Upon his Mother's Breaft : whilft that invades

His dear Wive's neck with’s Ax;then,freight,upbraids
Him(elf, and, check’d with Horrour, doth furvey
What he’s about to do; then flings away

The Weapon ‘midft hisRage: yet cannot fhe
Elcape ; for ftreight the Blows redoubled be

By Fierce Erinays: whothrough all appears,

And, with her Breath, infpireth horrid Fears.

Thus in the Husband Nuptial Love doth dye,

Thofe fweet Delights are loft, and Memory

Of Hymeneal Tapers. Then, at length,

The mangled Corps he throws, with all his Strength,
Ulpon the Pile: whence a dark Pyramis

Of Smoak, like a black Storm, doth waving rife,


_ But thou, Zymbrenus, with unhappy Rage,


And Viety Sinifter, doft engage,

Amidft the Throng ; hafting ¢ Anticipate

The Carthaginians, in thy Father's Fate :

Wounding that Face, and Members, that were ced

In all things, to refemble o thine Own.

And you, Lycormas ,and Eurymedon ,

Twins, fo alikein Form; that both were one,

Who labour’d in your Sons to propagate

Your Names, and Forms, here fadly met your Fate;

In prime of Age. But Thee that Sword, from Guile,

Ablolves ; which, through thy Throat transfixed, {pile
Thy


Book If,”


Book fl. Sitius Iraricus. 53
Phy Blood) Zwymiedon : while,with er Woes
Diftracted, and deeeiv'd, Oh / whither goes -
My déar Lytormas, your fad Mother-cryes? 7
Here tutri thy Sword. And, as Lycormas dies
By his own Hand, She, by the Marks, dgain,
OF his Twin-thape, deceiv'd, exclaiitis in vain;
Whither, Eurymedon, doth Rage thee lead * .
Thus fhe, with changed Names, invokes the Dead:
Till, to her trembling Breaft the Sword apply’d,
On her ambiguous Sons, fhe; Frantick, dy’d,
This noble Citie’s horrid Miferies,
Their Punifhments for Faich, and Prodigies
Renown’d, with their fad Acts of Piety ;
Who can relate, without a weeping Eye*
Scarce could the Punick Camp, and cruel Foe,
Forbear their Pitty, in their Tears, to flew.
That Citie, Faith's moft antient abode,
The Authour of whofe Walls was held a God, ©
By the Sidonians treach’rous Arms doth fall,
And their Fore-Fathers mighty Actions all,
By the unequal Gods, neglected are ;
While Fire, and Sword, confumes them ev'ry where
‘That Place, that wants'a Flame, is itnpious held ;
And Clouds of Smoak, with pitchy Darknefs, fivell d
Up to the very Stars: At length, the Tower,
That ftood upon the Hill, by all the Power,
Of Wat,till then, untouch’d ( from whence the Shore,
And (Carthaginian Camp, they usd t’ explore,
And all Sagunthas ) with thofe blefs'd Abodes
On Earth, the Sacred Temples of the Gods,
Now finks in Flames; whole Image, fron the Main,
By Waves, that feem to burn, ’s return’dagains

But now, behold / Tyburna, ‘midit the Heat,


And Rage of Slaughter, moft unfortunate,
Armd


54


Sirius Iraricus. Book II.


Arm’ d with her Husband’s Sword, i in her right-Hand,


_ Her left a flaming Taper waving, and


Her Hair difhev'I'd,her Breafts made black,and blew,
With Stroaks of Grief, and to the publick View
Expos‘d with naked Arms, to eM urrus Tomb, :
O're Heaps of mangled Carcafes, doth come.

As when, tormenting Souls, th’ Infernal King,
With Groans, like Thunder, makes his Courts to ring,
Aleéo at his Throne doth ftrait appear,

To aé& his Will, and Plagues adminifter.

Her Husband's Arms, that lately with much Blood
Defended were, as then fhee weeping ftood,

Upon the Tomb the lays, and, having pray’d
Th’ Ebfian Ghofts to entertain her Shade,

She puts the flaming Taper underneath,

And willing to accelerate her Death ,

Thefe, in the other World, my Self ( {aid She )
My deareft Murrus, will convey to Thee.
Then,taking up the Sword, her felf fhe lai’ |
Upon his Arms, and gaping did invade

The rifing Flames, Difperfed on the Ground;
Promifcuous Heaps of half-burnt Bodies, aad
About her ly, unhappy Funerals !

As when a Lyon, fierce with Hunger, falls

On trembling Flocks, which greedily he eats,
With Thirfty Jaws, and Blood regurgitates

From his extended Throat, or’e mangled Heaps
OF hal&-devour'd Trunks, and Limbs, he leaps ;
Then walking roundthem, with a murm’ ring Noife,
Grinding his Teeth, furveys what he deftroys :
The Sheep, and Guardian-Dog, the Company —
OF Shepheards, with the Mafter, proftrate ly ,
And all the Cottages, as if a War

Had late been there, deftroy'd, and wafted, are.


= And


~ And now the (Carthaginians do invade


Book Il. Srtius IraLicus. | 55


The City, by thefe Ruins empty made. —
This Work, which glad Saturnia commends,
Perform’d, to Hell Tifiphone defcends,

And with her, asin Triumph, proudly takes
Anum‘rous Troop, tothe Infernal Lakes. |
But you, blefs‘d Souls! who cannot equal'd be


. By any Age, fince Time's Nativity,


May you the Glory of theEarth become,

And, happy Dwellers in. Elyfium,

Adorn the chafter Seats of pious Souls!

But you, whom unjuft Victory enrolls,

In Fame’s large Catalogue, ye Nations, hear ; (dear,
Break not the Leagues of Peace, nor Crowns more


Then Faith efteem. Catt from his Countrey, He


A wandring Exile, through the World, fhall be;


And Carthage, trembling, fhall behold him Flie, (r) After the Forces of Antiorbus
While, in his troubled Sleeps, affrighted by were broken, and he made Peace with


the Romanes, Hannibal, when he bad


fpent fome ‘t bout d

Sagunthine Ghofts ) He’ ll with he there had dy’ d Roeder, fill iting i
to Pr, Ki Bithyni

By them : and, when aSword fhall be deny’d, ff civilly joven got eriployed ink

yy. ° in his Wars, bur, atlength , ‘fearing


;
This great unconquer'd Captain then fhall go, gi tora es Romane, tll
(+) Deform’d by Poyfon, to the Shades below.


of their Embaffadeur, C. Flaminins
(whofe Father’ Hannibal had (lain; in
the Fight near the Lake Tbrafi menus)
which to avoid, finding none other
remedy to efcape that Treachery, he
Poyfoned himfelf:


The End of the Second Book,


Book Ill. ? | | 57


ie eS


esl Seeaetditeaoe


SILIUS ITALICUS
OF |
The Second Punick ‘V Var. |
The Third Book,


Tur ARGUMENT.


Boftar te Ammon’s Oracle is fent ,
Tounderftand the future War's Event.
ToCarthage, Hannibal Hi Wife, and Son,
(Conveys by Sea, unwilling they fhould run
Lhe Hazard of the War. eA NCum'rous List
Of all the Nations, that Him Afsift.
Pyrene overpafs'd, He marchethon,
Untill His Conqu'ring Army flood upon
The Banks of Rhodanus: whofe rapid Stream
By Art, and Induftry, He overcame.
eAt length afcends the Alps, great Miferies
The eArmy, in their tedious <M arch, furprize ;
Untill arriving in the Taurine Plain, .
They there Encamp. Boftar returns again,
From Horned Ammon’s Temple, and declares
mmand to profecute the Wars.
a LL Tyesof Faithby Zyrian
Arms undone,
And Walls of © Chait Sagun- —) the aerapiorical Epichete of


the Poer, giventu Saguathns, asa City


= thus overthrown ee of entire, and inviolate Faith
B Through Fove's Dilpleafure :

{trait the Conqu’rour went |
To the World's Bounds, and ,,¢? cris tl tl


; Te Stiages WNeinorum ——_——-. -—— 7 = ct,
Magnage Bune “


Sed ja preterttos vlna menue Lavores
Selewi Generis Lactrimafagp Pata Sequuntur


Cupedia  propius cempsscre pat ntdus Alpes.


; yids anne ae S pose a ; (8) the Zyrians: who, for theBenefic of
ari ele: pi ap ; F Prneipis.ct ob Scrmas Viraites perpe tuo Gades, by Delcent Trade, planted helene in feveral
ts dugendi Henrie Gloceftria Ducts oP’ Tab latofe Confecrat: : . 1: parts of the sori, and had many Colo-
ees cis i i abula Religrof Confecrata. To Himally’d: anddiligentto finde. Eadie pices Wen, De


* ae dorus Siculus, (lib. 5.) believes a Colony
What Prophets, and prefaging Souls divin’d, came, that built Gades. For that Gadir.
ae L ‘yg in the Pxnick Tongue, fignifieth a
, ‘ soncernins walled Town,


one,


58 Stttus Iraricus. Book Il.
a re
| Concerning hisCommand: Boftar is ftrait
Difpatch’d by Sea, to know enfaing Fate,
"ga ae re © *Tisa Belief, in Sanctuaries long
i hs Army, tonitwe Teepe deen Prefery'd, where horned Ammon, placd among


between ef gypr, and Afe.


fee oh hen eel me ae The parched Garamantians, emulates
i hae declared him the Son of


t God. B Strabo oblerves
after the Romany beeare Meter 4. OTrbean Caves, that ina Grove, which Fates


mitded tore seis Bane ae “Foretells, he future Ages did declare ,


Siobe the Fete was ane oh ce, With their Events. An happy Omen chem
ea '  Tohis Defigns he fought,and, ; long before
The Day arriv‘d, all Chances did explore,
And Fortune of the War. But here, the God
Ador'd, the Holy Alears he doth load .
With Spuile friatch’d lately at Sagunibus Fall,
Half-burnt from the then flaming Arcenal,
“TisaReport (and not believed Vain D)
That, from the firft Erecting of that Fane,
The Timber Firm continues, and hath known
The Hands of the firft Archite@s alone.
Here they rejoice to think the Ged doth dwell,
And from his Temple doth Decay repell.
And they, that have the Honour to repair
Into the fecret Places, mutt with Care
. Provide, that Women do not enter in,
And fon the Gates mutt banith briftled Swine.
Neither before the Altars may they wear
Difcolour’d Robes: their Bodies cover'dare
With Linen; and Pelufack Tulbans Crown
Their Heads : : their Garments loofely hanging down;
They Incenfe burn, and, by their Fathers taughe,
The Sacrificing Veft with Studs is wrought :
Bare-foot, fhort-hair'd; thet Beds from loofe Defires
Are free ; their Altars bes Eternal Fires,
Within no Statues ofthe Gods appear,


Or Images. The Place a Rev’rent Fear,
| And


Béok HL - ‘Sauras: Traxicus, : 3


And Majeltys aie Buijcarv a with; ard
The Gates the :Laboursof 24 leides fll. ° Pe ae
There the Lerngan- Hydra lies, her: Saakig’ ee
Cut off ; and there, with: God-like Strength he ica
The Nemaan Lyon's gaping: Jaws: “and then: zo 2 .
Hell's Porter, drag’d from his Eternal Den, .
Affrights the Ghofts. with How ling, and difdains. . :
His. Thraldom ; while Megera fear'd the Chains. =
Near thefe, the Ce ee - and the Boat,
Arcadia’s Plague: the Hartwhole Fore-head wore |
Horns; that, in Breadth, the:Arms of Trees furpals'd'?
Next them, a Conquelt; ric lefs eafie, plac'd, 9 ~~
Earth-born Anieus‘on hisMother ftood; © —
And the two-formed Centaur’s ugly Brood,
While the poor © Acarndnian feems to sa The ni erewens
His Naked Front: then Oecta doth appear - ey Ou iter Boe, cisg ae
To thine with Sacred Fires, and'to the Skies; - .
On winged Flamts, his mighty Soul doth’ iE ped
Thefe various Shapes of Valour having fill'd:
Awhile his Eyes; neat to them he bebield- i,
ASea, that, rifing to a wondrous Hig, *' ah aes
Fell on the fubjeceEarth, witlrall its Weight's’ oe
No Shores dé give it Bounds, ‘but ev'ry where: ee Se
‘The: Waters, ore the Fields, diffuled ate.” oe
For, where blew Cereus, in Czrulean Caves, fae
Turns, fromthe Bottom, the contorted Waves; °°:
An Jnundation breaks’, arid, by Releafé
OF. hiddes Springs, farce Torrents do encreafe ¢
Then, as if Trident-ftruck, with furious Throws
Th’ impetuous Billows labour: to impofe, . : -
Upon the-trembling Earth, the  fweling Mains Te
Then ftrait the fallitig Fide retires again,” |
And the forfakert' Veffel leaves aground 4° meee
While, looking for helo te aati a


cry
wots OY


Ce) The Wife of Haiinibal:


Staus Irazicus. Book Hk


With idle Beamen 2 ftonping fomabov; et


In her bright Chafiet, ‘the Moondeth move


Thele reftlefs Kingdamsof. Cemothes ,
Andshepontioual Labours of the Sea;
Bringingebe Tide, and bearing it away,
While ftill alternate Zerhys-doth hey...
Theleview'din Hatte: for weight of many Carey


Lay on his Thoughts ; firdtea remove, from Wars;


The Confort of - © his Bed, and Son,as yet
An Infant, and depending on the Teat 5.

For they their Virgin Aluptial-Tapers j joyn a:

In Youth, and fill cetain'd a lovisg Minde, -

But at Sagunthus Siege begotathe Childe 2
Not}; yet the Age. of wwice six Moons fulGll'd, .. 5 ~


And Hannibal, relolvirig ta remove


; . : Thofe dear, and. tender Pladges of his: Love,


~ From Armg,, and fusure Danger, tohis San. -


Direds hig Speech sand, imiling, thys begun.

Oh! Thop great Hope of Carehage, and nolel
A Terrour tg the. proud Aineadas |. oo
May’ft Thou exceed thy Father in thy Fame,
And by thy Astigns build “Thy felf a-Name!.
May’ft Thon a, @reater Warriqur appear’...


Then was thy Grand,-fire's 3 avid, now fick wish, Rear, :


May Rome-seach Matrons, to prepare their Tears, .
When they difpoysig the gumber of thy Years 4
If my divining Soul do nos delyds. : sb
My Senfe; . this yery Boy, we may ieiaian

A mighty Labour to the Earch willbe:

I know my Capntenance, ia his, Lhe,


Beneath his angry Brow, histhreqning: By: x : 4 : :


Obferve the weighty Eecho: of big age 2,
Thofe Elemengs.of Anger, that fie


Derived. are.. Uf any Deity. ee a
“IS | See By


Book if. Sisaus Iraticus: 6t


By Chance, fo.gterious ics anticigdes,

And breakidff cheir Bepionings, by ay Face:

(Dear Wife ) -endeawour'to prefcive, with Cart)“.
This Pledg of War: -and, when thou fick fale fidar
Him fpeak, within my Gradlé him conrey, 2 2
And on Eliza's Altarlethim lay our

His tender Hands, and, tomy Ashes, feat

The Profecution of the Remarie War.

Then, when,more firm in Years, his Cheeks thall eat
TheFlower of Youth, let him in Arms appear ;

And, {corniag Leagues, a Conqu'rour at Route,
Raife in the (japitol for me a Tomb.

But Thou, whom th’ happy: Honour of aBirth,

So High, attends, renown‘d through all the Earth,

For Faith, and Conftancy ;rerhove,Ofar,
Remove, from Dangers of uncertain War,

And leave thefe harder Labourss We mult go
Ore Rocks, and Hills,that, coverrd or’e with Snow,:
Seem to prop up the Fleav'ns.. We, whatsnay make :
Fino, her felf, admire, muft uadertake. _

eA Icides Labours, and the eA Ips, that are .

A Toil, more greivous, then the fharpeft War.

But, if inconftant Fortune my Defign .

Shall chwart, and promisd-Favours {lrall decline g
May’ft thou live long; and hafty Fate extend

Thy ev’ner Thread of Life, beyond my End! .

Thus He. Imilce, of @rrbean Race, .. - ee

Whofe Anceftour (Renown'd Cofshusy was -

wA pollo's Prieft : and Caftalo, ix Spain,

So called from his Mother, doth retain

As yet the Name x and: from that faced: List.
Deriv'd her Parents, fince the God of Wine;
Shaking high: Calpe, with: his: Thyrfis, and
Armd Menades,fabdu'd thi Merten Lands a ‘i

n


Bs Ltius. Tr KLIC i Ss ‘Book Ml,


And Milicus, who: (of a Ried ion os
And Ag ymph Myrice):on his Front; the Horn A
Of hislafcivions Father planted wore, 5”
xe Potent Scépter in that Country bére.
From him ber Country did Imilce- ee fe
And fam’d Original , from him, her Name, -
Corrupted by their barbarous Speech; She than;
Tears flowing, with fad Language, thus began. -
i: -Forgetfull, chat My Safety doth depend
On Thine, doft thou refufe Meto attend © :
On thy Defigns? Is thasthy Nuptial Vow,
And firft-Fruits of my Bed neglected now 2 |
Or thall I wanting be toclimb with Theé-
The Frozeb:Hills © believe, andtryinMe ©
A Woman‘sStfength. No Labour is too great
~ Formy ChaftWvove.:but,if on-me You fer
No otherRate; butofimy Sex alone,
Andipart for that's Lyield; [ look-not on
My-Fate; May: forv confent ! Go Happy Thou,
Go, and propitious Gods our Pray’rs allow /
' And when in Fight, and Heat of Arms, you are, |
Think theron Me, and this. Your Son, with Care.
For I nor Romanes, nor their Darts, nor Fire, —
Do dread ‘fo much, as Thee : who doft defire
To Run upon their Swords, and doft prefent
Thy Head to-Danger. Thee no good Event
Of Valour fatisfies: Honour, to Thee’.
' Alone, feems.vefted with Infinity.
Souldiers to dye in Peace, to Thee appears
A Fate ignoble. Oh! my many Fears !
Forgive Me, for I trembles yet, I none:
De fear, thatdhall encounter Theealone,
But pity Us, great Rather Mars, thisStorm. . _ a
di vere; normay the Zzojans.do: Him harm! boon


Ds vin ” Now


Book il. SrLtius in itieus


Now to the Shore they hafte, the Seatnen climb, !


_ And,hanging on the Yards, their Ganvafe trim, —


And fit them for the gently-breathing Wind: -
While to allay his Fears, and éafe his Minde,
Opprefs‘d with Cares, Thus Hannibal, Oh {pare
Thefe Omens, My moft conftant Wir: ! Forbear
Thy Tears. In Peace, or War, Weall mufthave
A Period to Our Life. Our firft Day gave
A Being to Our laft. Brave Thoughts do few
Enflame, by Noble Actions to purfue
Frernal Fame; fuch onely mighty Fove,
Hath deftin‘d to the blefs'id Abodes above.
Shall I che Romane Y oak endure, and fee
The Tow’rs of Carthage in Captivity ¢
Ghofts do by Night affright Me, and the Shade
OF My dead Father doth My Sloath upbraid.
The Alears, and the horrid Sacrifice
I once did offer, ftand before mine Eys.
Shortnefs of dubious Life forbids Delay
Of Time. Shall I fit ftill, that Carthage may,
Alone, acknowledge Me,and {peak My Fame?
And fhall not all the World know what am ?
Shall I relinquifh Honour, through a Fear
ToDy: Alafs! How litleDiftantare
Death,and a Silent Life. Yet think not I
Do Praife affect, with mad Temerity :
LhaveEfteem for Life; for Glory wears
Titles, andis ador’d in length of Years.
Great Trophies of this War fhall alfo Thee
Attend :ifHeav'n, and Gods propitious be.
All Zyber fhall Thee ferve ; th’ Ikan Dames,
And the rich ‘Romane, with the Wealth he claims.
While thus they fadly talk,and qutual Tears ,
Exprefs their prefent Grief, andfurure Fears: |
| From


64 Sitius Iraxticus.. Book III.


ee ee renee ee eee ee
From the tall Ship, the Mafter ( put to Sea )
Beckonsto comeaboard without Delay,
Then ,from Her Husband fnatch’d, with fixed Eys,
She views the Shore, till the fw ift Weffel flies.
Through liquid'Paths,and takes Her Sight away ;
While Sea from Land retires, and Land from Sea.
But, Hannibal, cefolving to remove,
With Cares of War, His penfive Thoughts of Love,
Goes totheruin’d Walls: the which He views, |
And, often,in His Wifhtheir Fallrenews ;
Walking about the Ruins,till, at length,
His Labours overcame His ftubborn Strength ,
And Sleep infenfibly,with pleafing Charms,
Compos‘d His Minde, intent on War, and Arms.
Then Fove, defigning ftill to exereife.
The TrojanRace in Future Miferies ,
Revive their antient Labours, and by Wars
To raife cheir lating Name unto the Stars,
His flothfull Reft, and Refolution curbs,
And, by infufed Fears, His Sleep difturbs.
And, now, (Cyllenius, through the humid Shade
Of Night, His Father’s high Commands convai'd:
And, lighting on the Earth, thus fharply He
The fleeping Youth upbraids. “Tis bafe to fee
A Generalin Sleep confume the Night :
They mutt be Vigilant, would ftand in Fight.
The Seas opprefs‘d with Navies Thou fhale fee,
And the 4sfonian Y outh, infulting, flee
O're all the Ocean : while Thou doft ftand,
At firft Attempts, in the Iberian Land,
Is it an Action of fufficient Fame,
Or Valour ,to commemorate Thy Name ;
That, with fo great Attaques, Sagunthus fell¢
Awake, ifany Thing within Thee dwell,
Fie


ena nme


ook Wl Sirius Iraricus: 65


bse ance ceo oka ee See he ee ee
Fit for brave Actions ; rife, and go with Me;
And, where I call Thee, bear Me Company :

But, I forbid Thee to look back; for this

By th’ greater Thunderer commanded is.
AndifThou doft obey, Thou fhalt become

A Conquerour before the Wails of Rome. —
With that He feem’'d to lead Him by the Hand,
With Speed, and full of Joy, to Saturn's Land.
When trait a Noife breaks forth, with a loud Cracls,
Like Thunder, round about; and, at His Back,

The Eis of direfull Tongues the waving Air
Shakes, and repells : while He, with fudden Fear
Surpriz’d,no more retaineth in His Minde

The Precepts of the God ; but looks behinde.
When dragging Groves from hills,8¢,with the Strokes
Of His vaft Bulk, eradicating Oaks,

And bearing Rocks along, through invious Waies,
A Serpent, black as Night, his Tongue difplaies
With dreadfull Hifsing, and to’s Eys appears

As big, as that, which the unequal Bears,

In num’rous Foldings, doth at once behold,

And botki the Conftellations unfold.

So large his Jaws, immanely, he diftends,
And, lifting up his Head, in Height afcends,
Equal to Hills. Heaven's Rage ingeminates
The Noife, and; mix’d with Hail, new Fear creates.
He, with his Monfter frighted (for nor Sleep,
Nor Night, did then their former Empire keep,
And, with his Wand,the God had put to Flight ©
The Darknefs, and with Sleep had mingled Light)
What mighty Plague it was, demands, and where


Twould fall, or whither that vaft Body bear,


That then the Burthen of the Earth wasmade,
Or, gaping, what fad People Lae invade * 7”


66.


~Sittus JTraricus.


To whom (pllenins anfwers, Thou doft fee.


Book | ul, |


The War, fo much defir'd, and fought by Thee. Sy ee


Thee greateft Wars attend {the dreadful Fall |


Of Woeds, and Ferefts, with high Storms, that all
The Face of Heav’n diftutb, the Slaughter Thee, .


And Death of Men, the great Calamity
Of the Idan Race, and faddeft Fate
‘Do follow, and upon Thee daily wait.
As great, and terrible, as that dire Snake,


Which now the Mountains, with his {caly Back;


Depopulates, and drives the Forefts through
The Fields before him, and doth Earth imbrue


With frothy Poifon. Such thou having paft, _
And overcome the Alps, with War thale waft _


All Italy ; and, with a Noife as great,
The Cities, and their Walls, fhalt ruinate..


Thus wounded with thefe Stings, the God, and Sleep


At once forfake him, and cold Sweat doth creep
Ore all his Limbs: while, in a wofull Fright,
His Dreams revolving, he retracts the Night.
And now,with happy Omens, to the King

Of Gods, and Mars, they Holy Off" rings bring :
But, firft, a Snow-white Bull devoutly they

To Hermes, on deferved Altars, lay.


AAnd, all thefe Rites perform’d, He ftrait commands


_ His Enfigns to advance.With that the Bands,


Whole Languages, and Manners, different were,
With Clamours fhake the Camp; and fillthe Air,


But now, Calliope, declare to Fame,
What, and how many valiant Nations came,
CRais‘d by his dire Attempts) to Italy ;
What Cities, with untam’d Iberians, He
Didarm; what Troops on th’ Paretonian Shore
Lilya prefum‘d to mutter, and before


Great


\


Book Mil.


SILQus ITaALicus; 67


Great Rome, to Halicepe: to. her felf: ‘he Reins

Of Rule, and on the Earth impofe new Chains :

No Tempett, raifed by impetuous Storms, |

Went on {fo furioufly ; no dire Alarms

OF War,when twice five hundred “Ships o'refpread (pes Nan exten

The Sea, and fill’d the trembling World with Dread. happy Expedition Bhgve he an
The Carthaginian Y outh, the Chief of all, ae

Their Enfigns fpread: of Body light; not talb

Of Stature: butof that proud Grace depriv’d. .

Apt for Deceit, they readily contriv’d —

Their fecret Frauds. A Round unpolifh’d Shield,

With a fhort Sword, their Arms; andinthe Field

They Bare-foot march’d ; ungirt, with Garments rec

They cunningly conceal’d the Blood was fhed.


, Captain to thefe, in Purple fplendid , talk


Above the reft , Brother to Hannibal,

eM ago, in’s Charter, with the Noife alarms

The Fo, and ’s Brother imitates in Arms.

Next thele, divided in Sidonian Bands,

(Built before Towr's of antient Byr/a) ftands

Old Utica. Then Apis, which the Shore oo


: Encompals‘d with Sycanian Walls : whofe Store: c


Of crooked Turrets, that a Warlike Shield
Refembled, all the Neighbr’ing Sea beheld,
But young Sychaus drew the Eys of all
Upon himfelf: whom, Son to Ha/drubal,
Witha vain Pride, his Mother’s high Defcent
Had fill'd , and’s Uncle Hannibal content ,
With nolefs Pride, {till to repeat his Name.
Near thefe, the Warlike Souldier, thatcame -
From watry Berenicis, and the Bands ,
That, with long Dolons arm'd, among the Sands
Of thirfty Barce dwell. Then to the Fight
Ovrene, {prang from Aa excite

2


5 yt


(g) Dolon wasa fort of Weapon,nor
alwaies of one Fafhion, being a long
Staff with an head of Iron , fometimes
a fhort Sword faftned co it , fometimey
a Dagger, and fometimes a Whip.


The


ASSURED AZ cor ee SR eG gg ro ie a - Set? I. -. =~ +: 4 A ein (oe al a See ee Ve et NS phay Fe POF er es pes Meier wee


68 Strrus ITaLicus. Book III. if Book II. Sitius Iraricus, a a
The falfe Buttiades: whom, onceextoll’d, . | And Swords, like Hooks, by Art intorted, bear ;
And by Amilcar fam‘d, Iertes old And their left-Legs with Armour guarded were:
_ In War, but young in Couafel, did command. © = But they Rude Tables have, and uncouth Fare ;
With Labraca (then Tyrian People) and. For in hot Sands their Viands roafted are.
Sarranian Leptis,Oeatoocombin'd, — - we 4 iz Mafsilians then, with Enfigns fhining bright
Trinacrian Colonies, with Africk joyn’d: oe 4 2 . Who, laft ofall, behold the falling Light _


And Tingis fent, froma Tempeftuous Sea,

By Lixus : Vaga,and Hippo fam‘d to be oy

The Love of Kings, and their Delight of olds...”

And Rufpina, that doth from far behold —

Unequal Billows, rifing on the Main: - oS
(1) Zama , 2 nal Cie, Sve days With Zama, where the Libyan Troops were flain’ °


_ OF Day, which the He/perian Seas do drown.
Thefe,with long curled Treffes hanging down,
Fierce Bocchus leads, and views upon the Shore,
Growirig, on facred Trees, the precious Ore.

- Getulians likewife, from their wandring Home,
Into the Camp, to his Afsiftance,come;

~ Familiar with wild Beafts, they could allay,
“With Words, the Lyon’sRage. NoHoufesthey
Poffefs ; but dwell, continually, in Wains,
Bearing their reftlefs Lares through the Plains,
A thoufand winged Troops, whofe Steeds obey
The Wand, as nimble asthe Winde, their Way
Into the Camp do break. As when the Hills,


journey diftant from Carthage ;


‘tno bythe, Overthrow Gen by By valiant Scipio, © Tbapfus too, that flood .

Scspio to Hanmbal.

ool ihe Comimation of the f Renown'd, as oft imbru’d with RomaneBlood. =. 4

Thefe Nations, both in Arms, and Body grea, 2 | 3

Whofe Name, and Deeds, did ftill a aaa DEE eo
Alcides Honour; taller by the Head,. Peoatre,

fed, Aneere Libyan King,tinby Then all his following Bands, © et led - ete ;
Then came the Zithiopians, not unknown. ©: > |


To fruitfull ACile; who that myfterious Stone >


+ And Plains, a Pack of Dogs with Eccho fills .
Do cut, that draws, untouch’d, the diftant Seeclk =>. § And with full Crie, in view, the flying Deer,
With Mibians ,; whofe parched Bodies feel; vr M — Do follow, and precipitate with Fear.


The Fury of theSun; notwonttowear ©. 07s 4 ‘Thele,his ftern Face,and Brow, with Rage een
Helmets, or Coats of Mail, or Bows to bear; - a i a — Acheras, flain Hasbyte’s Brother, led.
Accuftomrd, when in Fight they did contend, or. 4. And near to them, the Medicinal Troops, in Arms
With Flax their Heads, and Bodies,to defend, =) = 4 Advance, the tann’d Adarmarides: whofe Charms
And, in fome deadly Poifon,toimbrue “0-9 = yp + : The Poifon of fell Serpents can allay,

Their Swords, or to infect the Darts they threw. bf oud i 2 And make the horned Ceraft to obey.

Then firft Cinyphian Mace didbegin ee a S ‘Then her unskilfill Youth Bamura fent ;

To learn Phenician Warlike Difciplines 2 ‘a A Nation poor in Steel for Arms, content

Their fquallid Beards, their Faces over-{pread, a ’ Their Spears to harden onely inthe Fires

And Goat-Skins rough their Shoulders coveredy & Yet, with this weak-Defence, did they defire,
With Sling-Darts arm'd, they caineinto the Field. - 3 is To mix their horrid Murmurswith the reft,

But th’ Adyrmachida a painted Shield, * tS a And furioufly unto the Battel preft,


a a Thesi


(2) See the Continuation of the Se-
Kk.


Book III.


Sriius ITALicus.


ee ae


Then fierce Autololes, whofe nimble Speed
Outftripsthe Torrent, or the fleeteft Steed :

Birdsto their Speed,in Flight, might feem to yield;
And, when they overran the Champian Field,

It was as vaina Task, to think to finde

Their Foot-fteps, as to trace the lighter Winde.
Next, who by Juice, and Fruit of that fam’d Tree, »
The Hofpitable © Lotus nourith’d be,

Are lifted in the Camp, with thofe, that ftand
Amaz’dto fee, in Garamantick Sand,


The Dypfades ; whofe boiling Poyfon fills


With Flames,and with ftrange thirft the wounded kills.


When Perfeus had cut off the Gorgon’s Head,

CAs Fame reports) her banefull Blood was fhed
“On Sandy Libya , and, fince that, the Ground

With Medufzan Serpents doth abound.

Thefe by a Captain, moft renown’d in War,

And born in Meninx Ile, commanded are:

(hoafpes was his Name, who ftilldid bear

Jn’s fatal Hand, a mifsile barbed Spear.

Then Nafamon, who durft invade the Sea

For Ship-wrack, and deprive her of her Prey.

Next, thofe, who near to Pallas Pools do dwell:

A\nd where the Warlike Maid ( as Fame doth tell )

Among thofe Waters, with her Olive found,

With it did firft enrich the Libyan Ground.

Then all thofe Nations, that inhabit, where

The Sun doth fall, and He/perus firft appear,

Before the reft, the ftout Cantabrians, whom

Nor Froft, nor Summer's Heat could overcome,

Nor Hunger; and were ftill obferv’d to be

Above the Reach of all Extremity:


Who,when their Heads are crown’d with hoary Hairs)


From fome high Rock prevent their weaker Years:
Life


SILEUS Iraricus;


71


The caule of Life; calivein Peace, isbale


‘Wich thefe,nahappy Mennon's Servant,from


‘The E/, a Strangerito his Native Home.


- Th’ Afyrian, {prinkled with eA urora’s Tears,


Within another World, in Arms appears.
This Horfe.was little, and unknown to War;
Yet {wift, and firmly on his Back would bear
The skilfull Rider ; or, in eafie Reins,
Hurry the peacefull Chariot o’te the Plains,
Next, Herdrus, who Pyrene meteth ore.

In Chafe, and fights with Arrews, like the Moor.
To joyn with thefe, the Wazlike Celta came;

Who with th’ deri did divide their Name.

By thefe ‘tis Honour held; in‘ War to dy,

And tobe Burnt, For, when their Bodiesly -
Expos‘d abroad, they do believe’t to be

"Gainft Heav'n, and Gods, a great Impiety,

If on their Limbs devouring Vultures tire.

Then Rich Gallecia, in Divining Fire

And panting Entrails skilfull, thither brings

Her Youth ; who fometimes in their Language fings
Rude Sonnets ; fometimes, with alternate Feet
Seiking the Ground, the barbr’ous Numbers meet ;
Or beat the lofty Tune upon the Shield : |
Their Paftime this, and chief Delight, is held ;
)The Womens Labours other things fulfill ;
For ‘tis beneath the Men,to fow, or till

The fertile Ground ; and whatfoever’s done
Without a War, their Wives perform alone,
Thefe, with the Luftanians drawn from far
Removed Caves, and Dens, conducted aré

© By Viriarthus; whom the active Fire

OF Youth then warm’d ; who after did acquire


Life without War,they hatesin. Arms they place: |


By


) This Cuftom (not wholly o-
mitced in Spain) was fot | eculiarone-
ly to the old Inhabican's of Gullcia ,”
bur tothe Celre, Thracians, and o-
thers; who impofed thofe more fervile
Labours on cheir Wives.


(2) Viriarrhns was, at fir, a cunring
Huuer; then a Robber, atcer, by his
Valour, atiaining to be a General of
a Lefitenian Army , and wich it over-
threw thtee Reman: Capzairs, in three
feveral Conflids : but wasin the ed
flain by fome of his own Party, cor-
rupted, by Cepio the Remane Contul.:
See L. Florxs,


Pert eater ee, OR tte yn me vat ear ae ee


(0) Ierda {cituate neat the River
Sicoris (in Spain) where Cafar be-
fieged Petreixs , and Afranins , two

of Pompey’s Generals.


(p) Aclides were akinde of Pole-
Ax, which, faftned to a Chain, they
threw at the Fo, and drew back again.


q) New Carthagein Spain, found-
ed by Texcer,


(+) This generative Winde was
from the weft, in the Vernal Equinox,
And of this, not onely the Ports but e-
ven Philofophers, as Ariffotle, Varro ,
and Pliny, who ( Lid. 8.¢. 47.) men-
tions them to be about Lisbon in Por-
tagal, And thelike by Saint Anguftine
(Lib. 21. De Civit cap. 3.) in Cappado-
cia, but they allow ee noi fo long
lived, as our Authour, by four years,
However, bozh the Winds ard Mares ,
if ever they had this Virtwe, have iong
fince loft ic.


Srtius IFALrFCuss


By fhiedding ‘Roviané Bloed, anoble Names
With thefe dieneighb'ring Ceretani came; a
Once great ‘Aldides- Carp : and ‘Vafons, who cae es
No Helmets us'd to wear : © Ilérda too, f
Which after faw the Roimanes Civil Rage: - es


Neither did Concavus ; who doth aflwage ~ 7
His Thirft with Horfe’s Blood( whofe Fiercénefs fliews
He fprang from’ Majfagets) this War refufe:-. Pee a
Now &efus Phoenician Arms aflumes, ' |
And Artabus, who, arm'd-with © eAelides, comes;
Or flighter Darts, and fierce the War attends :
With thefe the Balearique, who defcends
From Lindus. But T lepolemus with Slings
Is arm’d, and winged Leadin Battell flings.
From Oena, and AStolian Tyde, came e
The Gravians, who had chang’d their Graian Name,
Next @ Tencrian (arthage {ends a youthfull Band :
P hocenfians, and Tarraco, whofe Land
In Vines abounds, whofe Grapes, in Clufters fwell'd,
By Latian Bacchus, onely, are excell’d.

| "Mong thefe the Hedetanian Cohorts went
In fhining Arms, from cooler Sucro fent :
And Setabis, which lofty Towers adorn:
That Setabis, whofe Textures feem to {corn
T he proud Arabian Webs, and overcome,
Inrareft Art; the beft Egyptian Loom.
Mardonius thefe Commands, and Czfo ktiown,
For Horfe-manthip, their Camps now joyn’d in one.
But the Balarian Light Vetonian Wings
Tries, by the open Sea ; and when the Springs
Approach, and Zepiyrs breath their warmer Airs,
Preferving hidden Luft, his Herds of Mares
E.xpofeth, and by ‘”) generative Winde,
Makes them conceive, and propagate their Kind,


But


Book Il; Book Ill.


Strius ITaLicus..


73


But they are not long-liv'd, their Age doth hafte,
Andch’ feventh Year is, commonly, the Laft:
But Sufana C-whole Walls Sarmatians rear'd )
On Horfes not folight, in Arms appear'd i
Thefe Strong,and full of Mettle, to the Bit,


~ Or their fierce Mafter’s Will, do {carce fubmit.


Thens Rindacus'commands: with crooked Spears
They fight, and ev'ry Crefted Helmet bears

The frightfull Jaws of Beafts: Themfelves they give
To Hunting, and by Theft, and Rapine, live.

But, above all, Parnafsian Caftalo,


With noble Enfigns, thines: and Hifpal, who, _


Affaulted daily by Alternate Tides ,
Renown’d, againft the Ocean firm abides.
Near thefe, familiar with Lyaus Rites,
N ebrifia : where the Satyrs their Delights
Enjoy by Night; and, cloath‘d i‘th’ Panther's Skin,
There Manades their Myfteries begin :

Cart eidtoo .oHeighten hefe Alarms)

The Nephews of great eA rgonthonius Arms ;

A Warlike King; whofe Life the Age furpaft

Of Men, and thrice ten times ten years did latte,


Tartefsos too was there ; which ftill furveys


The Steeds of Phebus diving in the Seas;

Then fatal Munda, that as deep aStain

Of Romane Blood, as the Zmatbian Plaiti ,

Did after bear; and Corduba, the Grace

Of the Gold-bearing Land, tlre War embrace.
Thefe Phorcis, with long yellow Treffes crown’d ;:
And fierce eArantbicus, in Arms renown’d;

Led, from their Native Countrey,,to engage

In Libya’s Quarrel: both of Equal Age,

Born upon Berbe’s Banks; whofe horned Brows’


Were overfhadow’d with fat Olive-Boughs,
N Thefe


_ G) Argonthonins was King of chat
part of Spain, where ftood Carta,
and Tartefsos, uponthe River Betis:
whofe healthful soil is extolled, both by
Pliny, lib. 7. cap. 4. and Strabo, lib.2.
Thote neither allow him above half
that Age,afcribed to him by the Poer.


(+t) Where Cefar eg is the two
Sons of Pompey: the oné whereot was
flain there in Fight , and the other fled.
The slaughter of the Romanes there
was fo great, that Ce/far made a Cown-
ter-Afure in an Attague Of thirty
thoufand C arkafes,


74


(#) That vaft Ridg of Hills, that


divides Spain from France.


Sizaus Irazicus.


Thele the Stdoutan- Captain, through the Field, _
Clouded with Dyft, coamanded, and beheld. -
Mutter’din Arms: and,-in what Placefoe're |
All His bright Enfigns could, at once, appear,

He drew them up in Triumph , all along

Cov’ring the Ground , with Shadows of the Throng.
As when, defcending Sraush the Liquid. ea

To vifit fartheft Tethys in the Main, . ca
Where weary Phebus refts, theGod of Seas ;

His Chariot drives; the blew Nercides . |

Ruth from their Caves, and.each, contending , fwims,


Difplaying, in perfpicuous Waves, their Limbs, 1).


But Hannibal, difkurbing: the Repele. :
O'th’ World, toth' Top of high Pyrene goes:
© Pyrene, C whole rough Brows the lends cfd
From far the R ich Jéeri doth behold; - «. :.*.
Divided fromthe Calta, and full ftands °_ : .
A firm Divorce between thafe mighty Lands.» |
The Hills their Name froma Bebrician Maid Myets 2%
Did firft derive, and by the Crime: itis faid:) . -


OF Hercules,a Guek ; when, bythe Fate...


Of thofe his Labours, rais'd:by fune's Hate,, -
Triple Geryon's Landhe didinvades:.. >

And then, in Bebréx cruel Palace, made.

Lyaus Vaflal, he Pyrene left , ;

Her Form bewailing, now by him bereft .

Of her Virginity ; and .¢ if we may

Believ't)) of her unhappy Death ¢ they-fay)
That God was Caule : that God, who.ia her Womb
Began to {well. For She her deareft Home,


Frighted, forfook ; and, with an awhal Dread, ss


Her Father's Ire, as from aSerpent, fled.

Wandning in defart Caves, Alcides Night

She did Lament, and all his Vows recite, |
And


Book Il


Book III.


Sritius IrTaLticus.


And Promifes; unto the Shady Groves ¢


" Till,thus bewailing his ingratefull Loves, _


And lifting up her Hands ¢’ implore his Aid,

She to the falvage Beafts a Prey was made.

But when, at length, the God return’d again

With Spoils, a Conquerour, Gerion flain,;
Her mangled Limbs with Tears he did bewail,
And, when he {aw her Face, with Rage grew Pale.
The lofty Hills, ftruck with his God-like Voice,


_ Appear to fhake: when with amournfull Noife


He on Pyrene calls ; and under Ggound

The Dens of Beatts, and all the Rocks, refound
Pyrene’s Name: then fadly he prepares

Her Sepulchre , Embalming her with Tears.
Nor can the Teeth of Time deftroy her Fame,


The Hills retaining her lamented Name.


Now, or’e the Airy Mountains, and through vaft

Condenfed Woods , bold Hannibal had pat

The Bounds of Bebrix, and, by’s armed Hand,

His Way, through the inhofpitable Land

OF Volfians, breaks: untill His Army ftood

Upon the Banks of that (*) unruly Flood ;
Which from the Alps, and Snowy Rocks, defcends
Upon the (e/tz, and himfelf extends

Into a fwelling Stream, that makes his Way

O’re Land, with a large Current, to the Sea.

To its great Force. mix'd Arar adds, that feems

To ftand (fo flow his Pace) with filent Streams;
Which Rhodanus once feifing, bearsaway

In reftlefs Billows, and,without Delay,

Drowns in the Main, and forceth it difclaim,

Near to its Native Shore, its Countrie’s Name.
But now the Hoftile River all invade:


While fome upon their Heads, and Shoulders, laid
N 2


Their


(*) Rhodanns.


iia 2 cai 5 1 ak ah eC i:


Pe ee Ree ee eee eee ont eke ae ee MBA Soe ES eg tS | Be


Sitius |raricus, Book Iit.


Their Arms; and, breaking through the Torrent, ftrive,


Which, on the adverfe Bank, hall firft arrive.

To Skifs,( chat late were ‘Trees }their Steeds they binde,

And Watt thea o're : nor do they leave behinde

The Elephants, whofe Fears awhile withftood ;

For covering, with mighty Beams, the Flood,

So much by them abhorr'd, and ev'ry Plank

With folid Earth o’re-{preading, from the Bank

The Beafts defcend ; wham to the other fide

Swimming Cas an the Ground) they gently guid.

The River, frighted with fo vata Weight

OF the fierce Herd, the threatning Billows ftrait

From’s Sandy Bottom turns, and all his Springs

Lets loofe, and, to his Aid, with Murmurs brings.

_ Now the Lrieafsian Goalt the Army gains,

And fertile Fields ; now through Vocuntian Plains

They move, where fwift Druentia, troubled, rolls

Huge Stones, and Trunks of Trees, and fo controlls

Their pleafane March: for from the 4ps it fprings,

And, thence with roaring Waves devolving, brings,

Eradicated Trees, and Quarries torn

From hollow Recks, at the Creation born ;

Then, deviating, his fallactous Streams

Turns from their C.ourfe, and is not what he feems.

The Fords decestfall are, to Foot unftable,

The Chanel ta fimall Barks innavigable :

But,then escreas’d by fall of fudden Storms,

O'rev. hakns a Multitude of Men, with Arms

Surcharg’d; who, finking in the foaming Waves,

Difmembred, in rhe Battom finde their Graves.
Butnow,, atl Memory ef Labours pafs’d,

And Fears, the Alps, fa near in View, difplac'd.

All Parts with Froft, and undiffolving Hail

Are cov'red,and Eternally prevail


To.


Book HI.
To keep their aged Ice : the lofty Brow

O'th’ airy Hillsis bound about with Snow ;

Which, oppofite to Phebus rifing Beams ,

Will know no Diffolution by his Flames.

As far, asthe Tartarean Abyls

Of that pale Kingdom, where the Dwelling is

Of mournfull Ghofts,and Stypien Waters are
Removed, from the upper Earth : {0 far

Erected, through the Air, the Mountains rife,

And, with their Shadow, intercept the Skies.

No Springs, no Summer's Glorigs do appear :

But deform’d Winter full inhabits there,

And on the Cliffs perpetually defends

Her Seat, and thither, from all Quarters , fends

The fwelling Clouds, and Hail-commixed Showres,
Here allthe Storms, and Winds, their-furious Powers
Difpole. Beyond the Rocks no Eyes extend
Their Sight ; the Hills above the Clouds afcend, .° - :
Though ef bas lay an Laurus, Rbadape

On «Mimas, or though {nowy Pelion be


StLtius Ivraxricus, 77


On Offa Heap'd, or Orbrys were beheld


On Hemus lard ; to thefe they all muft yield.
Alcides, firft, tothefe unknown Abodes - _
Afpir'dto go: whom, cutting Clouds, the Gods
Beheld, and cleaving higheft Hills, to clime
Thofe Rocks, untrod-on fince the Birth of. Time,
But now the Souldiers their March retard,
As if thofe facred Bounds, which Nature barr’d ;
Bearing thofe Impious Arms, they had tranfgreft,
And, going forward, fhould the Gods refit.
"Gainft which the General (whom nor.the Height:
O'th’ Alps, nor Terrours of the Place, afteight))
To cure their Minds, with Monfters terrifi'd,
A\nd to recall their Courage, thus reply’d. -

Is’


Pre, SEMEN Ck bes ae a RR eT ES. Fe ga e ae ee ee Re ee GU ee ew “


78 Stuius Ira'ticus. Book II.


Is’t nota Shame, that, through Obfequious Fear
Of Gods, You, that fomany Trophies wear |
- OF War, now-weary of Succefs , fhould yield -.
Your Backs to Snowy Hills, and be repell’d
Wich idle Terrours ; while no Courage warms
Your Hearts, and You to Rocks fubmit your Arms.
Oh! (My Companions) think, You nowaflail
The Walls of Rome, or fove’shigh Temple {cale.
~ This Labour will give up into Y our Hands
- Aufonia, and bring Tyber into Bands ;

“ ‘ ‘This faid ; the Army, mov‘d by promis‘d Spoils,
In hafte the Moauitain climb, nor think what Toils
Enfue : while He commands them to forfake
eA Icides Foot-fteps, and new waies to take ;

_. Totread in Paths, that might be call'd Their own,
And by Their Names, in future Times, be known.
Then through untroder Places, firft of all,

He breaks, and, from the Top of Rocks, doth call
His Troops: and where, in hard congealed Froft,
In the white Cliffs, the flipp’ ry Path was loft,
His Sword th’ obdurate Ice divides, and now
Into deep, gaping, Pits of yielding Snow
Whole Squadrons fink, and, from the hollow Top,
To Bury them alive,frefh Ruins drop.
Sometimes fierce (Corus, on his gloomy Wings
Collecting Snow, againft their Faces flings: .
Sometimes, uniting all his Rage in Storms,
From the Advent’rous Souldier takes his Arms;
Which, with the whirling Blafts, unto the Skies,
In Circles, that delude the Sight, arife.
The higher they Afcend, and feek to Eafe

- Their Steps, the more their Labours ftill encreafe:
To one great Height, a greater doth fucceed,
Andev’ry Hill another feems to breed,


Hence


Book Hi. Sirius Iraxricus. 5


Hence al their evewaanal ison. which pefets
They had¢Q'recome, they durit nornow Explore: :
SuchFears:repeaed Objects do prefent,
And, wherefoe’vetheirsrembling Kies’ were bent, |
The hourid Face of Winter, ever White.
Appearing, gives fad ‘Limits to their Sight.

So Maciners;:that late forfook the Land, o>
And now:amid'ftthecalmed Ocean ftand,*) 25
While no propitious W ind, ‘urgentle Blatt, 3!
Fills the loofe Sails upon the fteady: Mak, |
From the fmooth'Seadiverecheir ee an


_ And fix dieir Ex pettation on the Skits.-°


Above thefe: Miferies;, ‘and fad. Ditief eG
The Places gaveyin.amoftferdid'Drefg, 0.
An Alpine Band, life falvage Bealts, ‘dhiett Lacks-\...'
Stiff with-cternal Squallouir, fromthe Rocks,
And aged MountaineCaves, their Faces’ thowi' ae
And with their asnftane Wigdur, through the Snow;
Through-Thorns, avd invious Paths; by them alone
Frequented, and fainiliarly known, — ~ -


‘By various Incurfions, on Them preft,


And their enclofed: Enemy infeft.


~All Places now affume another Forms


The Snow’s madered with Blood,there Ice grew warm

With purple Streams; and that, which nee before |

Could be o’recome, refolvs, by reeking Gore.

Andas, with Iron Feet, the Horfe divide:

The yielding Froft, thetrr Hoofs, there fix’ d, abide

Within the clofing Ice.- Nor was their Fall

The onely Mifchief ¢ but they leave withall

Their Limbs behind ; which, by the piercing Froft,

Fall, as cut off, and there are fadly loft. She singh tallige ver th Ae


(x) h ; h i re f 2 teen das : a hreke oe Ne oes
x ol ek ti then if hehad fought his way throu
T reugene j eMuferies, when they had paft : eee of his peed on in fis
: : Ano ee (ey, ee March from Rhoda befor
Twelve daies, aS many tedious Nights 5 at laft ved in the Tawtie Dlains, above an
To thirty thoufand Men, anda vait Num.
ber of Horfés,


Book III.


Sitius ITaLicus., -


To the defired Top they come, and there; |

Hanging on broken Cliffs, their Tents they rear:

But Cytherea. Cwho, through Fear, grew Faint).
Goes to her Father, with this fad Complaint.) s".
What ftint of :Panifhment, | pray* what end: -
Of Plagues, {hall the Aineades attend? - -
When fhall they, after Toils by Sea, and Land,
Repofe = Why sow doth (arthagetakein hand; «~~
And labour this, to driverny Progeny. __ es,
_ From that Renowned City, givin by Thee?
See! on the Alps they Lilyaiimpofe; ,
Threatning our Empire's Rain : andthe Woes |:
Ofloft Sagunthus, Rome may juftly fear.
Oh! whither fhall we Fro’s lat Athes:bear,2 9.
Thofe facred Ruins, and th’ Afsarick: Race, siti. :
With Vefla’s Secrets*.Giveus, Fove, a Plaster eee
Where we may Safely dwell. Is it fofmall .
Athing, that they have Wandringfeyght, heck all
The World, their Exile? Or thall Froy become ,
Again, a Prey, in captivated ‘Rome *

Thus (Cytherea : whom the Thunderer
Thus anfwers. Ey rycina, cealeto fear ;
Nor let thefe high Attempts, or what s defign di
By envious Libya, perplex thy Mind.
Thy Blood poffeffeth, and thall Long poffefs.
The high Tarpeian Towr's: the Fates no lefs
Permit. By this great weight of War, will I
Perpend their Virtue, and their Valour Try.
— Shallthat brave Nation, that folong hath been
Inur’d to War, that hath with Triumph feen
So many their great Labours overpatt,
The Honour of their Anceftours, at laft,
Decline? Or shall they, whom our Seed did raile,


Who never. fpar’ d their Blood in feeking Praife,
C Still


Wee Pe oor age EM pes Te ee ee | iy Eg SEO 8 he OE TE od ae _ Ba) ae “a ee .


Book I.


C Still thirfting: afte Fame) : obfcurely fpend
Their Time, or with Inglorious Silence end
Their Daies, as poifen’ ‘d with the Leve of Eafe?
Valour fapprefs'c d doth perith by Degrees.

Itisa mighty Work, not to be done: -


Sinius Iraxicus:


Without much Toil, and Labour, chat alone, ; | |


Among fo-many valiant Nations Rome

Should to her felfthe Reins of Rule affume :
Yet fhall the Time arrive, when She hall be
The Chief, Ennobled by Calamity. —

Hence their great Acts hall add unto the Skies
New Stars,and Names: hence Paulus hall arife ;
Hence Fabius, and Marcellus, who fhall be
Pleafing, for his Opimous Spoils, to Me.
Thefe, by their Wounds, fhall raife in lealy
An Empire, that not all the Luxury

Oftheir degen'rate Iffuecan deftroy.

And there's already born a Warlike® Boy ;
Who fhall the Carthaginian recall

To his own Countrey, and, before the Wall
Of Carthage, of his Arms (hall hirn deprive.
Then Geberea thall thy Iffue live

Longin Command; Then, by the (ures thall
Ceeleftial Virtue to dle Stars extoll

Her felf: and, by their Sacred Rites, proclaim
A large Addition to I#lus Name.


Then from a “ Sabine Stock a Branch thall {pring,


Whofe Father fhall enable him to bring
Trophies from unknown Thule, and fhall be
The firft, that Caledonian Woods fhall fee,.


. With his Victorious Troops ; who thall confine,


Within his hollow Banks, the {welling Rhine
Shall govern the rebellious African,
With Vigilance; and, pwheasn aged Man’


81


(7) After the Battel of Canne ;
Rome was reduced to fuch Diftrefs, that


.  fome confulred to quit their Countrey.


Palin


but by the Virtue of Fabins, Scipio, and

others, fhe recovered to that Height of
ry, thar afterward made her Mis
ffrefs of the world.


(2) Scipio Africanus, who , invading
Libya, forced Hanmibal to quit Italy,
to relieve His own Cowntrey. See Book.
14:


(a) Vefpafian, in whofe Time, and
Domitian’s, the Poet lived,


3 — Sitham's Pr attitcus. “Book Til.


Palm. beabinglldamed hall fubiue | ieee
Noor fhall He; #fter ‘Beith; ‘thofe Kline view ron


That are for Ever Dark: or th’ Styifiah’ Lake, ”
CS oe Butofour Fdnours, and this Place, pata:
se ing rade Companion in tbe "Then fhall a © Youth: , exdélling i his Strength
Of Underftiiiding, on Etinntelf, ‘at lea


And. in His Hiurpire, have an se Share:
He the Fudan War, fo fall of Rage, |
Shall quite extirigaifh in his tender Age.


(4) Xiphitivinthusconzadiés bue- But, thou, @ Germanicus, who, though aChilde, ~~


ees with ee Thy Fathier" $ Ads tranfcendeft, and haft fill'd
The yellow Germanes with: an awful Dread’ : 3 .


(2 Inthe War between Viteliacand Fear not the : Capitolian Fires, ; thy Head,
Vefp a fiar, Domitian, then a Youth, hid


hinfelf ina Chapel of the Capit Amidft thofé Sactilégious ‘lames, {hall be |


which by Chance was fet on Fire. J


memory Of husmiallcis GaP) He Preferv’d. Thou long, and happy’ duies fhale fees 2 .


(when efcaped } Dele a foes
See ee erase ether Gangetick Youth their Bows, unbent, |


Shall offer up 3a nd Battria fhall prefent |
Her empty Quivers? ‘fron thelcy North ~


Thou hale, in | Triumph, bring thy Chariot forth, 7 .
And through the Cry! ride t : then fromthe Eat a :


Such Trophies gain ; “as Bacchus ne're poffelt.
Thou frozen Iffer, {corning to give way
To Dardan Enfigns, fhalt compel t’ obey,”
And in Sarmatick Limits {halt reftrain.


Thou Romane Nephews, that fhall Honour gain i <


By Eloquence, fhalt in thy Speech excell :
To Thee the Learned Sifters, that do dwell -


Near Thefpian Springs, fhall offer Sacrifice. 3


Thy Lyre fall found more fweetly,then did his,
That Hebrus made to ftand, and Khodope

To follow, and fhall utter things may be
Admir'd by Phebus. RaifedbythyHand
On the Larpeian Rocks, where Faith doth Rand ,


dor’d


Book III. Situius Iratticus,


Ador'd of old, Rich:(apitols thall thine ,

And to the Stars their lofty Turrets joyn.

But thou, O bora of Gods !which thalt give Birth

To future Deiviss, the happy. Earth

Rule-with thy Father's Power ; thy Fate thall be

Retarded, and thefe Heav’nly Manfions thee

A late, and Aged; Gueft fhall entertain :

Quirinus {hall give place, and Thou fhale gain

Between thy Brother, and thy Sire, a Throne,

And, near Thee fix'd, hall fhme thy Starry Son.
While fove the Series of Times to come

Doth thus unfold; the Libyan Captain, from


Th’ unequal Hills, through Waies perplex’d,defcends,


And, dubioufly, on Quarries moift contends

To fix his fliding Steps. Nofurious Shocks

Of Foes deterr him : but the obvious Rocks,

Whofe prone, and threatning Cliffs obftrut the Way,
So, as Befieg’d, they ftand, and the Delay,

And Difficulties of their March lament:

Nor wotld-the Time allow them to Foment

With Reft their frozen Limbs, They {pend the Night
In Labour, and their Shoulders all unite,

With Speed, the Forefts from the Hills to bring.

The higheft Mountains naked made, they fling


* The Trees in Heaps together, and furround


With Flames the Rocks: which,with a dreadful found,
Now yielding to their Bars of Iron, breaks,
And, to the weary Troops, a Pafflage makes
Into Latinus Kingdom. When they'd paft, .
Through all thefe Miferies, the e//ps ; at lait ,
The General within the Taurine Plains
His Tents doth pitch, and there Encamp’d remains.

In the mean time, from Garamantian Sands,
With Ammon’s Oracles, and dark Commands,

O 2 Boftar


83


(f) Of the Caufes of the Changes of
this Spring (called by Diodorus Sicn-
lus, lib. 17. The Fountain of the Sun.)
fee Lucretius, lib.6., Englifhed by Mr.
Says} in his Comment on Ovid, Mc-


Sritius Iraxticus. Book II.


Boftar, with Joy, arrives, anddothappear
To glad their Hearts, as fove himfelf were there; .
And thus begins.. Great Hannibal, whofe Hand
Hath banifh’d Bondage from thy Native Land ;


Wehavethrough Libya pafs'd, whereSands re a


Up to the Stars, and lift us to the Skies.


Us Earth, more furious, then the Kaging serial a


Had almoft fwallow’d up:.‘The barren Plain, »-
From the firft Entrance, to the fargheltBound |

Of Heav’n, extends : nor can an Hill be found

By Nature rais'd,in all that {pacious Tiract,

But what, with hollow Clouds of Sand impact, -
‘The nimble-nurning Whitlwinds build : or whea
Fierce Africus, efcaping frombis Den, fle.
To {poil the Earth ; or Coras, thatthe Sears: ee
Doth with the Ocean wath; with furious Wars.
Invade the Field, and with congetted Sand --

Make Heaps, that there in ftead of Mountains. Rand:
Obferving Stars, o're this inconftant Ground

We fail; for Day Our Voyage. would confound,
And (Cynofura, that a faithful Scar =
Doth prove to the Sidonian Mariner, |

The wand’ring Traveller, who feems ¢’ abide -

Still in the Midft, through the deep Plain doth guid.

But when we, weary, tothe Sacred Grove,
And Woody Empire came, of horned Jove,


Where, on large Columns, ftands the fhining Fane; |


With whatachearfull Brow our Entertain —
eArisbas gave, ( the God's divining Prieft)
Who to his Houle conducted Me his Gueft ©
() Near to the Temple, in the Grove, a Spring
Dothrife (.a ftrange, and memorable Thing )
Which, at the Birth of Day, and its Decline,


Is Warm; when Sof, in midft of Heav'n, doth aaa ;
| ; t


Book lll.  Srrrus ITaLicus. 85


Ic foon grows Cold: but, in the Shades of Night,
That Heat is greater made, that fhuns the:-Light:
Full of the God, thefe Places, then, he-fhews, -.
And Glebes,made wealthy without Help of Plows,
And chearfully thus fpeaks, This Shady Grove,.
Thefle Woods,whofe Tops do touch the Feet of Fove,
Connex’d to Heav’n, here Proftrate, falling down,
Boftar adore ; for unto whom unknown

Are fove's fam'd Gifts,through all the World ; the Pair
Of Doves, that in the Top of Lhebe were?

OF which, the firft, chat che Chaonian Land

Did touch, and on Dodona’s Oak did ftand,

Fill'd it with Prophecy, But that, which o’re
Carpathian Seas, unto the Libyan Shore,

With Snowy Wings, repair'd ; this facred Seat


(®) The Gtheredn Bird did then create: (¢) Thefe Deves (faith the Fa-


ble) once gave their Oracles, ( the moft


And where you Altars, and dark Groves, behold —_antient o-all Greece ) ina “Grove f-
‘ > . Ee to fupiter, neat Dodona,a City in

: Chaonia : but quitting that place, one
Standing between the Horns ¢ ftrange to behold) fled to Defohan the other to this Grove:


whence both Places became Oracular.


Of a choice Ram, the Leader of the reft

O'th Wealthy Flock, from its infpired Breaft --
An{wers, to the Marmarick People, furg.
Then out of Earth this Wood, thus Shady, {prung;
And Groves of aged Oaks, that now the Skies
Do feem to touch : and fuch at firft did rife,

By antient Favour, keeping, as before,

Their Po’wr, and we with Altars warm adore.
While I thefe things with Admiration view,
Struck witha Noife of Terrour, open flew

The Temple- Doors, and ftraita greater Light
Our Eyes beheld. The Prieft,array’d in White,
Before the Holy Altars did appear,

The People all contending to go near.

Then J, as was order’d, having pray'd:


Behold! the God doth fuddenly invade
The


Ee a OECD Se Rae NR Are rt ee ee a


86 Sirius Iraxricus. Book III.


The Prophet; and,thtough all che Ecchoing Grove,

Grave Murmurs front the trembling Beams do move.

And,now, a Vicice more loud, then ufual, through —

The yielding Air doth break. Fot Latium you

Intend -¢ faid he ) andtoinfeftwithWar

The Iffue of -4faricus prepare. |

I fee what warlike Libya intends :

And now the cruel God of War afcends

His Chariot, and his furious Steeds expire,

Towards th’ Hefperian Coatt, a gloomy Fire,

While Blood upon their Reins doth largely flow. -

But thou, who doft defire Eventstoknow = ae

Of Battels, and th’ Extremities of Fate,

( Couragionfly attempting Toyls fo Great) © - ; ae
ence Lee pissin Amtiss let bY Th’ ABtolian Captain's Tapygian Field = | ; | ar
ee Invade, encreafe of Honour thou fhalt yi¢id - |

Tothy Sidonian Fathers: after Thee, | 7 a

Into the Bowels of rich Italy, —_ : aas

No Conquerour fhall further penetrate ; 7

Till, by thy Hand fobdu‘de, the Dardan State

Shall tremble, and their Youth ne‘re quit their Fears,

While Hannibal alive, on Earth, appears.

Thele Oracles brought Boar, and Defires
OF prefent Battel into all infpires.


The End of the Third Book.


Wah ORE Mere ig Peg oe TERS Mega ia san eae Le Me a eee gh RE Tg


5 eS ie,


~The Second Punick V Vat.” ~
So
The Fourth Book. » ag
Tue ARGUMENT. rc
The People's Fears, when Hannibal had paft'.* oe
The Alpine Hils : the Senate's Care; and Flafle .
TL’ oppofe His Progrefs. On Ticinus Shore
The Armies meet. What Auguries, before
The Fight begin, forevold the Libyans Seay
Initaly: theRomaniesilofethe Day.
Scipio in Fight’s relieved by bis, Sony,
Then but aBoy. The Romanes,marching on
FoTrebia, their eM rms with'Gracchus join,
eAnd lofea fecond Day. . Tbe Apennine —
When Hannibal bad with His Army crof, —
> ae a , ee | | “Z In (old, and Moorifh Grounds, an Eye He lft.
ae AS Sw df a cee Ce His Son, demanded for 4 Sacrifice |
gf >. ey SM 2-7 SR CY BR Oy To Saturn, by the Senate, He denies ;
S RS BE ESE | eA nd promifeth hereafter to make good -
T hofe'Rites, again, with Noble Romane Blood.
: a O W. Fame Anfonia’s fright-


on


7


Se


Se


4 ee
ed Cities fills a
With Rumours, That the
= Cloud-encompats'd Hills,
: Puce ut patria defi ord Telun ; nq i BSanixum Corvice ferens ikierlgg Papeatone "| And Rocks,that threathéd Hea .
Conspexit,—rapta durts x9) thus Hafla De fs : Wa ee fauta ad. Speclacula Turba. ven, the War imbrat‘'d:;
3 ated ae } BY Fea Nila tenent Ke: Sf . Bee
MUcnona Moufinps" CslaPinaght /& oa SS) Domine Dom™ Maria Prnapifie == = That now the Carthagintans had
Avaufionensinin cre. File Carole R h Limi, Magne Britt: Gea: ab FODErh | =) =a eg p afs'd
Regis. natu Maxima. Tabula Reliqrofe { AK ES ‘ “yy? Confecrata : : =
VS Z _ Thole pathlefs Waits: and often doth repeat,
' ° That Hannibal, who feem’d to emulate -—
| Alcides


a


8B: | Sitius ITaticus. Book IV,


Alcides Labours, did the Plain poffefs. - "2
“And chus mifchievous Tumults doth exprefs,
- Encreafing as She goes ; and, Swifter far,
- Then {wifteft Winds, with the Report of War,
Shakes the affrighted Tow'ts. The People’s Fear
CApt to believe the Vaineft things they hear)
The Rumour feeds. Now all with Care, and Speed,
Prepare for War, the Noife whereof jis {pread
Through all Asfonia, muftring Arms, and Men.
They whet their Piles, and (Rutt wip'd off agen )
{es cruel Splendour to the Steel reftore. .
The Youth their Plumed Helmets, long before
Lai‘d up in Peace, repair: their Loops they join
To Darts ; and new, from Forges, Axes thine.
With thefe, impénetrable Coats of Mail
They form, and Breaft-Plates, deftin'd to prevail
“Gainft many Hands, and fruftrate ftrongeft Blows
Some, carefully, provide Italian Bows. )
While others teach the panting Steeds to wheel
Ortrot the Round ; and whet 6n Stones their Stee
Then with like Care, and Speed, they Stones seit
To antient Walls, and Caftles ; whofe Decay ’
Was wrought by Time: in thele their Magazin
Of Arms they make, and {peedily begin
With Bars of Oak their Trenches
To fortifie; while Fear precipitates
All that they Act, and doth in chief Command
Some in the Defert Fields, amazed, ftand - )
Others their Houfhold-Gods, and Foie forfak
| And,frighted, on their trembling Shoulders tal
Their feeble Parents, whofe weak Thread of Lif )
Was almott fpent. One drives before, his Wif °
With Locks difhevel'd, dragsing a lieel =
That in each Hand unequally doth r


and their Gates


e Son -
un.


ee


Book IV.


Srtius ITaLicus:


89


he ee


Thus do the People vent their Fears, nor {can
The Caufe, or whence thofe Rumours firft began.
The Senate, though thefe bold Beginnings fill'd
Their Hearts with Terrour, and they now beheld,
Ev‘ninthe Heart of Italy, a War, .
To which the Alps, and pathlefs Rocks, from far
Seem’d to defcend, oppofe a valiant Mind
Againft Adverfity, refolv'd to finde
Honour in Dangers, and by Valour raife
A Name fo great, of fuch Immortal Praife,
As Fortune never did before beftow,
Orto the beft Succeffes would allow.
But, now, his Troops, chill'd with a long Excefs
Of Cold, and Tyr, doth Hannibal Carefs
In {afe Retreats, and to their joyfull Byes (Prize.
Shews through rich Fields their Way, and Rome their
Yet He omits not to purfue the Cares
Of War ; and, fill confulting his Affairs,
He, onely, takesno Reft. As, when of old
Aufonia's happy Territory bold,
And Warlike, Nations fiercely did irivade,
And by theit Valour to the W orld were made
ATerrour, the Tarpetan Thunderer,
And Captiv'd Romanes, feltacruel War. —
(4) While He endeavours, with his Gifts, the vain,
And wav'ring, Nations to his Side to gain,
And join in Arms , the (Conful Scipio from
(*) Mafilia, by Sea, returning Home,
Arrived, fuddenly, upomthe Shore :
And thefe great Captains, that had try'd before
The fev'ral Labours of the Sea, and Land,
~ Now, in the Plain, more near to Danger ftand,
And joyntheit Fates ; while a moft difmal Hour’
Approach’d. For, when the oe with His Power ,


ame


(4) Soon as Hannibal had pafled the
Pyrenean-Hiils the Gauis,cthuogn it was
Rumouréd, that the Wer was intended
again italy, hearing how H2 had fub-
jugated s'pain , betook themfeives to
their Arms, refolved co oppofe him:
but, upon Treaty ac His Camp near J/-
tiberts (now Salfas) the peccy-Kings,
won by Hislarge Bribes to His Party,
gave free Paflage to His Army by their
City Rafcino Cnow Rox ffilon in Gafco-
ny) whereupon the cis, mortal Ene.
mies to the Romancs , immediatly re-
Yolted from their Obedience, and wit!
Him invaded /raly. See Livy, lib.as.

(*) Atarfeiles in Provence.


90 ~ Sattus Iratrcus.  BookIV.


Came to the Camp, and Fortune all Delay
Had lai‘d afide, tee Troops no longer Stay
Endure ; burall, incenfed with Defire
Of Fight, the Fo in view, the Sign require.
The Yyrian Captain then, to animate
His num’‘rous Army, doth aloud relate
His glorious Conquetts in th’ Iberian Wart
That not Pyrene’s Hills could fet a Bar | ,
To his Commands ; nor furious Rbodanus :
Sagunthus burnt; that, through the Celta, thus (been
He had, conqu’ring, made his Way, and where ’t had
Alcides Labour, hein Arms had feeri
His Lidyan Horfe infult ; and, trampling on
The Rocks, with Neighing make the ef ips to groan.
But, contrary, the Conful to the Fight,
And noble Actions, doth his Men excite.
Youhave (Cfaid He} aTyr'd, and weary Fo,
Already half confum’d with Froft, and Snow:
Who fearce can drag his Limbs, benumm’'d with Cold,
Go on, and let him Learn, that was fo Bold
To pafs thofe Sacred Mountains, and thofe high
And airy Rocks, how far this Trench doth ly
Above Herculean Tow'rs: that with more Eafe
Fe may afcend thofe Hills ; then break through thefe
Impenetrable Ranks, Let him recite
To Fame his vain Attempts, untill in Fighe
Subdu’d, and hafting to Return again
By the fame Way hecame, the Alps reftrain (through
His Flight. The Gods have brought him hither,
Thofe Difficulties, that he might imbrue,
With his perfidious Blood, th’ Italian Ground,
And that his Bones, hereafter, may be found
Scatter'din hoftile Land. I fain would know,
If't be another Carthage, that doth now
Intend .


Book IV. Sitius Iratticus., 91
Intend us Waryor ist the fame again,


That, near 2gabes, perifh’d inthe Main ?
This fad; the,Anmny-to Ticinus goes.


Ticinus coathallewe ‘Chanel flows 5


With clear, and upuiet Waters, andthe Stream
So Slowly paffeth on; that itdeth feem —


To Stand, as it; with Silence, glidesiatong


T’ embrace the {hady Banks, whereBirds do throng,
And their thrill Quives perpetually keep,
As if to charm,the lazy Flood afleep.
Now, at Night's Period, the Morn begun
With thining Shades, and Sleep its Courfe had run:
When, to explore the Place's Nature, round
The neighb tring: Hill,and view the Champagn-ground,
The (onfulwent abroad the Libyans too
The like refolve, and it with Care purfue.
This done, they;-bothadvance ito the Field,
With Wings of: Horlemen and, as they beheld
The Clouds of-Duft torife; and heard the Sound
OF furious Steeds ; that,ptancing, made the Ground
To tremble, arid the Trumpet’s flrill Alarms,
Each Captain cries, Now(Souldiers ! ) to your Arms,
In both, an equal Walout,. and Defire _
Of Honour, fhin’d, inboth an equal Fire
To prefs into the Fight : and when, as nigh
They came, as from a Simg a Dare might fly,
A fudden Augury diverts their Eyes,
And Minds (all Clouds difpers'd) unto the Skies.
An Hawk purfuing, from the South, the fair,
And gentle Birds, that by ‘Dione are
So well belov’d, with his devouring Bill,
His Pounces, and his W ings, fifteen did kill ;
Nor would be fatisfied : his {trong Defire
OF Blood increas‘d, and sec fed the Fire ;
= i


Unull


(6) Venus, Doves facred to her?


‘Sritius Iraureus. | Book IV.


Untill, as ftooping at a trembling Dove,

That knew not, in its Flight, which Way to move -
To meet with Safety, from the Rife of Day |

An Eagle came ; and, frighting him away ,
Towards the Romane Enfigns flies, and where .


The General'sSon (young Scipio) : did appear cs oe


(Then but a Boy). in Arms, with aloud Cry.) -
There twice, or thrice, Proclaims the Victory: -
Then, with his Bill; his Helmet’s Creft doth bite,
And to the Starsagain refumes his Flight.

Liger, whe knew, by his Divining Skill,

The.God’s Advice, and by his Learned Quill»:
Could Future things declare, aloud, to.all; _.


Exclaims. Full eighteen years eee Ol - i. :


Th cAufonian Youth in Ital purfuess cee. ye
Like that rapacious: Bird, ‘and: fhall. ee
His Hands in Blood, and-wealthy ‘Trophies gain. |
But yet, proud @4 frican, thy Rage reftrain ;
For, fee! fove's Thunder-Bearer Thesdenies
Italian Scepters. Chief of Deities 1...
Be prefent ! may:thy Eagle's Omen be.
Atlength confirm’d. For, noble Youth, to Thee |
The final Fates of conquer’d Libya are -
Referv'd, and amoft glorious Name in War,
Greater then Carthage, in her Height of Pride,
Unlefs thofe Birds, in Flight, the Gods bely’d.

But Bogus, contrary to this, doth fing
All happy Omens to the 7yrian King.
The Hawk agood Prefage, The Doves, that fell,
Slain in their Airy Region , foretell
The Fall , and Ruin, of the ‘Romane State.
Thus having faid, as Confcious of Fate,
And prompted by the Gods ; He, firft, doth throw


With Strength, a ready Jav'lin at the Fo: :
ut


BookIV. Sizius Iraricus. 93


Bit, through the fpaciousField,’thad:Wainly flown, .
And loft its ‘kithinng: Force ; if Riding on...

Full Speed; Ambitious ‘to. be fir of all, a
That gave the Charge, bold Cetus Horfeith’ Fall |.
Had not receiv’dit,“ on his Face; and;-though
Itthen was'weak, hemet the FatalBlow;;. 2 ou
And found “his Ruin: for- thetrembling Wood, .: ;
Fix'd in his Front, between his ‘Temples ftood..


Now, with loud fhouts,both: Agmies,through the: i,
Came rufhing on; and meeting,all Reftrain
Their Reins, to ftand the ‘Charge. ‘Fhe furious Steed
Erected ftands,: andj ftruggling to get Fledd, » |
Flies, like a Tempéft; through the Champapne-Field :

While to his Feet the Sand doth hardly yield.

Before the reft, a nimble Active Band: ~ :

© Of Boii, whom ftout Chryxusdid command, © hap aad MEE steph
Affault the Van, and Chryxus,with a Rage, cite of Dee a
Great as his Giant-Body, doth engage... ve ier mee iro
From Brennus, He his fam’d Original. ~ ere eee se was
Deriv’d ; and, now, the Conquer'd Capitol terate evoked en oie with
Among his Titles wore : upon his Shield ye

The Penfive Romanes, ready all to yield ,

On the TZarpeian Sacred Hill behold

The (elte,weighing their redeeming Gold.

His Iv'ry-Neck a Golden Chain did bear,

His Garments with pure Gold Embroider'd were,

Bracelets of mafsie Gold adorn his Wrett,

And the like Metal fhin'd upon his Creft:

By his fierce Onfet, the Camertine Bands

At firft were routed. Nothing now withftands

The Bait; who, ina condenfed Throng, :

Break through the thickeft Ranks, and, mix’d among. -

The Barb’rous Senones, beneath the Feet

OF their fierce Horfes, trample all they meet,


A


a. ~Siius IrTazicus. Book IV.


And Asew jaithinanbied Garpsshe Field, which: feems |


To {wim in Blood, thatid contiaued: Streams. ey
From Men, and Horfes, flows, and doth: imbine mee
The fliding Steps. of thems; that ‘fill purfae.::
Bodiesihalf-dead, by-Horles hoofs, are flain.
Ouc-right, which flyingiround the fatal Plain,
Scatter'd from thei light Heels the purple Flood, |
And lave the WreechesFaces with their Blood... -.
Torvhenss born nearhigh PelorusShore, 2
’ Firft dying, Rained with his purple Gore =.
A.-conqu’cing:Dant ;-for,iashe didexcite,. |.
With a thrill Eitumpet, others to the Fight, / | «
Reviving Courage by the Wiarhike Sound,
Received, bya Barb tons Dart, a Wound |. a
An's panting Throat: which quickly. : tes |
to "The rifing Neste, yet thetnfuledAur, ) ~~
ae ae Blown from his dying Mouth, awhile, doth pals


wa. «+. C His Lips now flent )hirough thewinding Brafs:


pagel Picens, and Laurus, both by Obryxus dy.

a. But yet not bath alike :for Laurus by

~ His Sword was flain; {elected near the Po, .
A polith’d Spear, gave Picens fatal Blow.
For, as afide he turned, to Delude.. |
( By wheeling round ) the Fo, that him purfu'd,
The Spear, at once, both penetrates his Thigh,
And’s Horfes Flank; and both together dy.
Next he wounds Venulus, and from his Neck
Retires the Weapon ftain’d with Blood, to check
Thy Speed (rath Farfarus)) whoby the fame
Doft likewife fall: with Zadius, near the Seream
OF cold Velinus bred, Aufonia’s Pride, |
And of a glorious Name, had he notdy'd; -
Or had the Zyrians their League maintain‘d.
With thele the great Zyburti, who had gain’d

Renown


Book IV. Sruius Traricus, 95


Renown in Wars, and Romulus his. Hand |
Sent tothe Shades below, . Eiifpellas, and


- Mergurus Daynus too, his Ruin found


From him,whom,with his Lance,he- thoughtto wound.
Nor was there room for Torians to. engage

In Battel, with the ref The Celtick Rage

Fill'd the whole Field: no Shaks from any Hand
Were fent in Vain ; but fix'd in Bodies ftand.

Here, among seoreblite Files, Quivinus, high .
In Courage, and difdaining Thoughts to fly, oe L
Refoly’d to meet, with an undaunted Mind ,

His Fate, if profp‘rous Fortune once declia’ ‘deol...
Inflames his furious Courfer with hisSpear, ©:
And with his Arms difperfech here, and:there , .

The Shafts , that him invade; thinking to make.
His Way, and through the thickeft Ranks to break,
T’ attach the King and, ‘certain to receive

His Death, attempts’ by Valour to atchieve


. That Honour, he could not furvive. A Wound .


Into the Groin of Teatalus, the Ground

Doth make to tremble, with his weighty Fall,

Next Sarmens dy’d, for Valour known to all:

Who his long yellow Trefles, that out-fhin’d

Pure Gold, contracted ina Knot behind,

Had vow'd Cif He return’da Conquerour )

A Sacrifice to Thee, the God of War.

But the fterni Fates, regarding not his Vow,

Him, with his Hair unfhorn, to th’ Shades below

Untimely fent. O’re all his Snow-white Limbs,

The reeking Blood, in Streams diffufed , Swims,

And ftains the Earth. Lycaunus, Shien a Dart,

That met him, as he mov’d, could not divert,

Ruth’din, and , waving bis Revenging Sword,

With allthe Strength, that Fury could afford, :
Upon


(d) From a famous Temple, there


Srrius Iraricus, Book IV.


Upon his Shoulder gives a fatal Wound,
Where his left'Arm. (by yielding Sinews bound)
Its Strength, and. Motion did receive ; which now
Hangs loofely down, and lets the Bridle go:

And, as he, Stooping, labour’d to retain,

Within his trembling Hand; the Reins again, -
From’s Body Vega/us top'd.off his Head, :
And inhis Helmet, as it largely bled,

Ty d to his Horfe’s Main, it bears about ;

The Gods faluting with a barb’rous Shout.


While thins the Field the Gauls with Slaughter feed ;


?


The Confal, mounted ona Milk-white Steed, -
Into the Fight advanc'd, with frefh Supplies:
And firft,'of all; with high-raisd Courage, flies
On the prevailing Fo, On Him attend

The choiceft Youth, that Italy could fend.

The Mart, (ore, and the Latines Pride,

Sabellus, who by all wasmagnifi'd

For flinging his {wift Dare with certain Skills
With ftout Tudertes, from his Native Hill,
Devote to Mars; andthe Falifci, who,

Deck’d intheir Countries-Linen, Wars purfue
With thefe, that bya filent River, near

() Herculean Walls, their wealthy Orchards rear,
With Apples crown'd. Next the (tilliicame,
That dwell on Banks, where Anye’s fwift Stream
To Tyber hafts ; and thofe, that from their Slings
Send Hernick Stones, hardned in freezing Springs.
Nor were they abfent, that inhabit where

Cafinum full is crown’d with mifty Air.

Thus went th’ Italian Youth to War, and by

Th’ unequal Gods were deftin’d there to dy.

But Scipio, where the Fury of the Fo


Did highef&t Triumph in the Overthrow,
And


Book IV. Sivius Iraticus. OF


And Slaughter of his Men, fpurs on his Horfe ;


_ And;as if from their Fallinfpir'd with Force,


To their fad Ghofts kills frequent Sacrifice.

There Padus, Labarus , -and Camus dies :

Brennus; whom many Wounds could {carce deftroy ; .
And Larus, that, like Gorgon, turn’d hisEye. .
And there Leponticus by cruel Fate,

Molt fiercely fighting, fell: for, {natching at -

The (onful’s Reins,and, as he ftood Upright

Afoot, the Horfman equal’d in his Height,

With his harp Sword his Head the (on/ul cleaves,

And it, divided-on his Shoulders, leaves.

Next Abbatus’, that, in its furious Courle,

Endeavour'd, with his Shield, to ftop his Horfe ;

Was by a Kick ftruck dead, upon the Place ;

The Beaft ftill trampling on his wounded Face.

The Romane Captain, through the bloody Plain,

Thus raging Rides: as, when th’ Icarian Main


~— Cold Boreas, with victorious Blafts, doth raife


Fromits deep Bottom, overall the Seas,

In batter'd Ships, the Mariners are toft,

And in white Foam the (/yclades are loft.

Chryxus now feeing Hopes of Life declin’d,

And Death's Approacti, confirms his valiant Mind
Witha coriteitipt of Fate. His horrid Beard

Shin’d witha bloody Foam: his Jaws appear'd
Allwhite with Froth: -his Locks, with flying Sand,


And Duft made fquallid, ftiff, like Briftles, ftand. :


Thus Tarivs fiercely he invades, who nigh

The Conful fought, and with ftrong Blows doth ply :
Then fells him to the Ground ; for with a Spear,

( That his laft Fate upon its Point did bear) i
Wounded, hie tumbles Headlong from his Steed :


Which mov'd by Fear, with uncontrouled Speed,
: Q Drags


ee ip ; . _ weal EA ee ee


93 Sitius ITraricus. Book IV. Book IV. Sirius Iraricus. | 09


ne it eae ee Ni a A Se


er ae oi he ee ‘ seal


Drags him Chis Legs fa{t in the Stirrop bound )
About the Field. Blood iffuing from the Wound
Leaves a long winding Tract, that, with his Spear
Trail’d in his Hand, doth in the Duft appear.

The (onful prais'd his Death, and doth prepare
To vindicate his Ghoft: whenthrough the Air
An horrid Noife washeard; and he defcries
Thofe Shouts commended (hryxas, whom his Eys,
Scarce known before, beheld. His Anger now
Grew high, and viewing, with a troubled Brow,
His Giarit-Body, witha gentle Hand

Clapping his Horfe’s Neck, he makes a Stand,
And thus befpeaks him. We, as yet, have made
A vulgar War, andto the Stygran Shade

Have fent down People of no Name atall:

But, my-Garganus, now, the Gods us call

To greater Actions. See’ft thou not how great
Chryxus appears * To thee le Dedicate

Thofe Trappings, that with Zyrian Luftre thine :
Their Grace, and golden Reins fhall all be thine.
This faid : he Chryxas in the open Plain
Aloud provokes the Combate to maintain.
His willing Enemy the like Defire
Inflames. On either Side the Troops retire,
Commanded to give way, and ftrait beheld
The Champions in the Lifts, amidft the Field.
Great as the Earth-born Mimas did appear —
Inthe Phlegrean Plains, when Heav'n for Fear
Ev’ntrembled at his Arms : from’s falvage Breatt
Such cruel Chryxus, here, himfelf expreft

With horrid Murmuring : and, to engage

His valiant Fo, with Howling whets his Rage,
And thus, infulting, {peaks. Do none Survive
In Burne, and Captivated Rome, could give


Thee


Thee Notice, -what brave Hands the Progeny

OF Brenna bfing to War 2’ now-Learn of Me:
And, as he fpiake, aknorry Beam of Oak; |
That would have fliaken with: its weighty waa

A Citie’s Gates, he flings. ‘Acdreadfall Sound .

It makes, and, falling vainly, tears the Grounds. - -* -
For, having loft his Diftance, by a:‘Throw -

Too ftrong, it flew beyond histrearer Fo.

To him the Conful anfwers :- Take to Hell

This with Thee, andremember, that thou tell

Thy Grand-fire, how far diftane thou didft fall

From the Larpeian-Hill : and fay withall,

Tt was not lawfull for thee once to view.

The Capitol. And, as he fpake, he threw.

A Javilin Cfitted to deftroy fo vaft

A Fo)which,from the thong with vigour caft, (through |


- Pierc’d through his Caffock's num'rous Folds , and


His Coat of Mail, which Nerves confirm’d, inte

His Breaft,whofe Depth the Weapon wholly drown’d:.
With a vaft Ruin, proftrace on the Ground

He falls: The fuff'ring Earth beneath the Weight
Of’s Arms, and Body, groans, and feels his Fate.

So on the Lyrrhene Coaft the Hills, that ftand

T’ oppofe the Billows, that invade the Land,

Struck by impetuous Storms, immanely roar,

And raving Nerens, beating on the Shore,

The Waves, divided by their furious Shocks,

Drown in the angry Deep the broken Rocks,

Their Captain flain, the Cele all to flight
Theméelves, and Hopes, commit; their Courage quite
Declines. As when, on the Pyrenean-Hill,

The bufie Hunter, with Sagacious Skill


Searching the fecret Dens, to rouze his Game


From their thick Coverts,fires the Thornes: the Flame:
Qa With


1e@e@


Book IV.


Sims Teatro:


(e) Ta this Character of the Gauls
in general(and not yet wholy worn out
inthe Nation) Flores agreech with
the Prets, That in their firft Onfer
they feem'to exceed Men, butin the
fecond are inferiour to Women.


With Silence aban Strengsh, andto.the as
Dark Clouds of pitchy Smoke 'alpiring rife 5 ..

- Thenallon fire the Hilldoth Mrait:appeary 0, |
Loud. Naifes fillthe Woods: The Beafts, for ee :
And Birds, forlake. their Shelter, and from far -
Through all she Valethe Castle frighted are.

When Mago faw the (eltick: Troops were gone; _
And their fir® © Onfer. (which in them, alone,

Is vigorous) :was loft, he ftraitdothcall

His Countreymen to fight : and firft of all

The Horfesmen.; wheappearoneyiry Side...
In Troops, and, without-Reins, or Bridles ride.”
Now the Isahans fly, and then renew .


The Fight. The Tysians then for Fear: atte,


_ And now advance again. Thefe their Right Wing


In Moan-like Circles lead ; The other bring ©
Their Lek alike-in Form : Alternately
In Clofe-form’d Globes they fight, and, when they fly;
With Are avoid the Slaughter ofthe Fo. _
So, when che Win ds from fev’ral Quarters blow,
Fierce Boreas one way deivesthe fwelling Main,
Which Surus meeting tumbles back again,
And with alternate Blafts, both furious, throw
The Ocean (that obeys them) toland fro.
At length ia Zyran Purple thining, wrought
With Gold, comes Hannibal, and with Him broughe
Terrour, andFear, and Fury to the Field.
And foon as He His bright Callaick Shield -
Held up, and ftryck a piercing Light through all,
Their Hopes, and Valour bothtogether fall.
Their trembling Souls caft off all Shame of Flight s J
None care to feek anoble Death in F ight.
Refolv'd to fly, they rather with to know
Deaeh by the gaping Earth, then by the Fo.
: ; So


Sittus Iraricus.


Book IV.


: $owhena Tigerfom's ((ticafeat Deni


Deftends, the Fields forlaken areby Men;
And Beatts. All, as:diftracted Ay for Fear;
And Shelter feek ; while, as a Conge’rour,
He wanders up, and down, the defart Plain,
And now extends, then fhuts his Jaws again,


_ As if fome prefent Carcals he did eat ;
_ And, gaping wide, doth Slaughter meditate.


Him nor could Metabas, nor Ufens {hun :

Though Ufens, very tall; did fwiftly run ;

And Mdetabus, full Speedjon Horfe-back fled: :

For Metabus was with his Lance ftruck dead ;

And Ufens, falling on his Knees, did bleed

By’s Sword: fo loft his Life, and Praife: of Speed.
Then Sthenius, Laurus, arid Collinus dy’.

Collinus, born ina cold Climate, nigh

The Chryftal Caves of Fusinus; and o'rel

That Lake, by Swimming, pafs'd from either Shore.
The next Companion of their Fate, that fell

Was Mafsicus ,. born on that Sacred Hill,

That crown’d with fruiefull Vines doch bear his Namie,
Near Lyris nurs’d, thae with a filene Stream

Its Courfe diffembleth, and with glitt’ring Waves,
Unchang’d by Rain, the quiet Margent Laves,

But now the Heat of Slaughter grew fo high,

That they could fearce finde Weapons to fupply
Their Active Rage; Shields clath on Shields, and Feet
On Feet do prefs: and, asthey, Farious, meet,
Encountring clofe, the waving Crefts, that crown’d
Their Helmets, mutually their Fore-Heads wound.
Three famous Twins, all valiant Brothers, whom
Sidontan Barce, happy in her Womb,

In time of War, unto Xantippus bare,
Moft fiercely fighting, in the Van appear,

a Their


1Oe - Sirus Iratrcus, BookIV.


Cf) Xamtippus, who was fent by the Their owes and Wealth in Grevce;: their a) Fathei's


Lacedemonians to be General for the


Carth, mn. inft Regulus the Ro- ‘Fame
= oe, ‘ata be nquithel, (A valiant Captain) with ef myile's: ‘Namie, : ~€
Go ee ne ad Regulus,in Spartan Fetters bound; oo


With all thattheir Fore-Fathers had renown'd > rk


: Inflam’‘d their Minds, in Arms to prove their: high - 4
’ Defcent, and by their Deeds to teftifie ~ \
That they from Lacon sprang: to vifitthen’ * 4

The cold Taygeta, and Wars again- ~~" +


Allai‘d, through their Burotas fail, and fee-
Thofe Rites, Lycargus, were ordain'd-by'Thee.
But Heay‘n; and threeefsfonian Brothers, who -
In Age, and Courage, equalled the Fo;» a."
Sent by eA4ricia from thofe lofty Groves,.. 6: .~ :
Where ACuma with the Niyinph ‘his fecret panes 2
Enjoy’d, deny’dshey fhould to Sparta go.:
Nor would the too impartial Fatesallow, +
iQ pists Taprica, whokad her "Thatthey © Diana’s Altar’ fhouldbehold,
Septhian Manner,had Sacrifices of u- And Sacred Lakes. Fornew:the fierce, andb bold |
Chtias, Eumachus, and Xantippus , proud
Of’s Father's Name, engaged in the Croud, ’
And Heat of allthe Fight. As when; within . ,
The Libyan Plains, the. Lyonsdobegin =. >,
A War among themfelves, their Roaring fills.’
The Fields, and Cottages; or’e fecret Hills,
And pathlefs Rocks, th’affrighted Moor doth fly;
His Wife endeavouring te fupprefs the Cry
O'th’ tender Infant, hanging at the Teat
Of her large Breaft, the raging Beafts repeat
T heir Murmurs, and between their bloody Jaws


[ee
we 7


Crafh broken Bones: while limbs beneath their Claws,


And cruel Teeth, Quill fight ; as if with Scorn
To feem to yield, though from tle Body torn:
So the Egerian Y outh, fierce Virbius, here,


There (apys prefs tofight; Albanus there,
Alike


Book IV. Sirius Irattcus, Yo


Alike in Arms : Him Chtias by Chance,
Stooping to fhun a Blow, ftrikes with his Lanee,
Quite through the Belly. Strait his Bowels fill'd ,
Extruded by his Fall, his hollow Shieid.


Next by ftout Eumachus was Capys flain :
~ Who, asif fix’d, endeavour'd to retain


His Target ; till a Sword from his Left Side
Lopp’d off his Arm, and by the Wound he dy‘d:
While his unhappy Hand refus'd to yield

Tts Hold, and ftuck unto the falling Shield.

Two of the three thus miferably flain ,

The laft great Conqueft Virbias doth remain :
Who, as he fain’dto fly, Xantippus flew

With his keen Sword, and eager to purfue


~ Eumachus by his Jav'lin likewife falls.


Andthusthe Fight by double Funerals

Ts equal made. Then the Survivers dy’d

By mutual Wounds, and lard their Rage afide.
Oh happy you, whom noble Piety,

Urging your Fate, did thus pet{wade to dy !

Such Brothers future Times fhall with to fee,
And your laft valiant Acts your Memory

Shall crown with Honour ; if our Verfes live,
Or miferable Nephews, that furvive, |
Shall read thefe Monuments your Virtues claim,
And great Apollo envy not Our Fame. -

But now his Troops,difpers’d through all the Plains,
The (on/ul, with his Voice, from Flight reftrains,
While He could ule His Voice. Whither d’ ye bear
Thofe Enfigns? How are you deftroy’d by Fear :
If the firft Place of Battel you affright,

Or you want Couragein the Front to fight,
Behinde Me ftand ; but lay afide your Fear,


And fee Me fight. Their Fathers Captives were, 2 |


From


104.


Sturus Iraticus,


Book IV.


(b) Yousg Scip/e.


(i) Scipio Africanus, who ( but
fourteen years old) int this Fight re-
fcued his Father , and, at twenty five
years, undertook the War of Spain»
and never relinquifhed it, till he had
fubducd Hannibal.


From whom you fly, What Hopes can we pretend,
If once fubdu’d? Shall we the Alps afcend?
Oh! think,you fee Tower-bearing Rome, whofe Head
Her Walls do crown, fubmifsively, now, fpread
Her Hands ; while her ‘proud Foes her Sons enchain ;
Daughters are ravith’d, and their: Parents flain.
And in their Blood, me thinks, I-fee the Fire
Of holy Yea now Calals ) expire.
Oh ! then prevent this Sin. Thus having faid a
His Jaws with Duft, and Clamour, weary made;
His Left Hand {natching up the Reins ; the Right
His Sword ; his Breaft to thofe, that fled the Fight, _
He doth sppales now,threatens Them, and then ne
Himfelf to Kill}: unlefs they curnagen.

Thefe Armies: when’; from high Olympus, ii
Beheld, the noble (onful's Dangers:move :
His Mind to Pitty. Then, ‘he calls his Son
( The God of War ) andto Him thus begun.
My Son, I fear that gallant Man’snot far
From Ruin, if thou tak’ft not up the War. -.
Withdraw him, full of Fury, from the Fight’;
Forgetfullof Himéelf, through the Delight »
Of Slaughter. + Stop the Libyan General,
Who will more glory in the Conful’s Fall,
Then dll thofe Numbers;that He doth deftroy.
Thou feeft, befides , how foon that Wiartike' Boy
His tender Hands in Battel doth engage,’
And ftrives by Action to tranfcend his Age, 2
Thinking it tedious to be young in War. .
Thou guiding © Him, he fhall hereafter dare’
T attempt Great things, and his firft Trophie fall
Be to preverit his Noble Father’s Fall.

Thus Fove'; {trait Adars from the Odryfian Field
His Ghariot fufimions, and affumes his Shield :

a Which


Book IV.


Sirius ItTartcus,. 105


Which, like a gloomy Thunder-bolt, its Beams .
Scatters abroad:. his Helmet too, that feems
To other Deities a Weight too greats”


-And’s Breaft-Plate, that with fo much Toil, and Sc


The lab'ring Cyclops form’d :. then {hakes his Spear,
Stain’d with the Blood of Titans, through the At,
And with his Chariot fills the dufty Plain.
The dire Eumenides, and dreadfull Train .
Of Furies him attend, and ev'ry where
Innumerable Forms of Death appear:
While fierce Bellona, who doth guid the Reins,
Whips on his Steeds, and all Delay difdains.
Then from the troubled Heav’n a Tempeft forth |
Doth break, and in dark Clouds involves the Earth,
His Entrance ev'n the Court of ove doth thake, —
And Rivers, by lis Chariots Noife, forfake
Their Banks, and, ftruck with Horrour, backward fly
To their firft Springs, and leave their Chanels dry.
The Garamantian Bands, now, ev'ry where
Inveft with Darts the Con/ul, and prepare
New Prefents for the Zyrian Prince: the Spoils \
Of his rich Arms, his Head, through many Toils
Of that fad Day, bedew’d with Sweat, and, Blood.
While He, notto give way to Fortune, ftood
Refolv‘d, and then, more fierce with Slaughter grown, ’
Returns the num'rous Darts againft him thrown.
Till over all his Limbs the Blood of Foes,
Mix’d with hisown, in Streams diffufed flows,
And then, his Creft declining, ina Ring
More clofely girt, the Garamantians fling
Their fteeled Shafts, with nearer Aim, and all,
Like Storms of Hail, at once, about him fall.

But, when his Son perceiv’da Dart to be
Fix’d in his Father's Body ( . if He


Had


106 Sirius Iraricus. Book IV...


Fad fele he‘deadly Wound) his pious Tears

- Bedews his Cheeks, and Palenefs {trait appears,
Torunoreall his Body, arid with Groans,
That pierce the Skies, his Danger he Bemoans.
Twice he Attempted, to anticipate |
By piercing his own Breaft, his Father's Fate:
As oft the God of War converts his Rage
Againft the Fo; with whom he doth engage,
And, Fearlefs, through the armed Squadrons flies,
And, in his furious Speed, doth equalize
The Deity, his Guid. The Troops, that round
His Father fight, give Way, and on the Ground
A, Tract of Blood appears. Where er'ehe goes,
(Protected by the Heavenly Shield) he mows
Whole Squadrons down. On heaps of Arinshe Slew,
Such as oppos'd his Rage, with him that-Threw
The Dart, who dy’d before his Father's Eys;
With many more, as pleafing Sacrifice. -
Then, fnatching from the Bones the fixed Spear,
Upon his Neck, from Danger, he doth bear
His fainting Sire. The Troops at fuch a Sight
Amazed ftand : the Libyans ceafeto fight:
Th’ Lberians all give way. & Piety
So great, in tender Years, turns ev'ry Eye -
Upon him, to Admire what they beheld, |
And ftrikes deep Silence through the dufty Field.
Then faid the God of War: Thou Dido’s Towers
Hereafter fhaie deftroy ; and Zyrian Powers, -
Compell'd by Thee, a League thall entertain :
Yet never fhalt thou greater Honour gain,
Then this. Go on (brave Youth} go on, and prove»
Thy felftobe, indeed, the Son of Fore.
Goon: for greater Things referved be;
Though better never can be giv’nto Thee.

This


ei ee Se ee ee Se


Book IV. Sirius Iratntcué. 107


This faid : the Sun now ftooping to the Main,
The Deity returns to Heav'n again, .
Involv'd in Clouds. Darknefs the Fight decides;.
Atid, in their Camps, the weary /\rmies hides.

But, when in her declining Wain the Night
Phebe withdrew, and, by her Brother’s Light,
The rofie Flames fromthe €64n Main
Gilded the Margent of the Skies again ,
The Conful, fearing that the Plain might be
A great Advaritage to the Enemy,
ToTrebia, and the Mountains, takes his Way.
Andnow the winged Hours advanc'd the Day,
When with much Toil the Bridg was broken down,
( O're which the Romané Ariny pals'd) and thrown
Into the Flood: whentotheRapidStream |
Of (wikt Eridanus, the Libyan came ;
Seeking, by marching round, through various Waies,
The Fords, and where its Courfe the River ftates :
Trees from the Neighb’ring Groves at length he takes,
And, to tranfport his Troops, a Navy makes. |
The valiant (Con/ul ( from the antieat Line
(&) ©)’th’ Gracchi {prang, whofe Anceftours did fhine Ck), Sembroiae Gracchus bad chen


: a Command of the Romane Navy fo
In Monuments, with noble Titles crown’d, guard Sieh, and the Coat of ely,


trom the Carthaginians , whofe Fleet


1: , he had difperfed: and, leaving Sicif
For Valour, both in Peace, and War Renown d) ob te Beak ioe eke
. . pie ; Fame of Hannibal’s entring {tal
Thither, from high Pelorus, came by Sea, cae ith tis Porter ton ie sand
: joyned with Cornelins Scipio iS
Incamping near the Banks of Trebia. Death; fee Book 12,


The Carthaginians, likewife, in the Plain

(The River over-pafs'd) encamp'd remain,

Encourag’d by Succéfs of their Affairs’:

While their infulting General prepares

Their Minds, and to'their Fury ftill doth give

Freth Fewel. What third Conf} doth furvive

In Reme* (faid He) What other Sicily

Remaineth now in Arms againftus* See! ! 2
R 2 AML


(4 Humer.


108 -


Sittus Iraticus,


All the Itatian Bands, and Daanian Line,

Are met. Nowlet the Latine Princes joyn

In League with Me; now let them Laws require,
But thou, thatin the Fight, unhappy Sire,

Ow ft te thy Son thy Life, fomay‘tt thou live!.
May'ft thou to him again that Honour give! .
May’ft thou not dy in War fo old ! ’tisI,

C When Fate fhall call) that muft in Battel dy.
This with high Rage exprels‘d , he doth advance
With his Mafsilian Troops, and with his Lance,
Ev’n at the Trenches, doth provoke the Fo.

The Latine Souldiers, fcorning thusto ow —

Their Safety toxheir Rampires, and to hear.

The Gates to Eeclio with an Hoftile Spear ,

Break forch : and through the Breath, before the Reft
The valiant Conful flies. The plumed. Creftt
OF his bright Hehnet waving with the Wind: :

His Caffock ftain’d with honour'd Blood behind :

He calls, with aloud Voice, the following Bands,
And ,where the Fo in ftrongeft Bodiesftands, -

He breaks his Way, and chargeth through. the Plain,
4\s when a furious Torrent, fwell'd with Rain, |
Falling from lofty Pindus Top, doth fill


~ ‘The Vallies with a Noifé ; as if the Hill,


By fome rude Tempeft, were in Pieces torn.

The Heards, and falvage Beafts, and Woods a ate bem
Away ; the foaming Waves o're all prevail,
And pafs with Roaring through the ftony Dale.
Could I like the Maonian (© Prophet fing, "> «
Or would ef polo, to afsilt me, bring Oe eee
Anhundred Voices, { could not declare oe =
What Slaugtiter here the Confu/ midde : ie there -
The Libyan’s Fury acted. ‘Hannibal - :
Murranus, avd the Romané General a


7
2


P halantas


Book IV. Book IV..


Sitrus Irarticus. 109


Phalantus, old ia Labours, and ‘for Skill:

In War all famous, hand to-hand, did kill.
From «Ansxwr's ftormy. Cliffs Murranus : fron
Sea-wath'd fvitonts did Phalantus come.

But when, by his Iiluftrious Habit. fhown,
The Confulwasengag’d , Cupentus, one
Depriv’d of half his Sight, that with one Eye
Purfu'd the War, affaults him fiiddenly ;

And fixeth inthe Margent of his Shield.

His trembling Lance. The Gonfulhim beheld
With boiling Rage ; Now ¢ Villain ) lay afide
CSaidhe} whatever Milchief thou doft hide
Beneath thy Ugly, and Deformed Brow.
And, as he {pake, with Aim, directly through
His glaring Eye lie thrufts his fatal Spear.
Nolefs incens'd doth Hannibal appear -;

By whom, in filver. Arms, : unfortunate
Varrenus fell: Yarrenus, whom of late

Fertile Pulginta’s-wealthy Fields with Gain


_ Enrich’d, and, wandring in the open Plain,


His curled Bulls, as whiteas Alpine Snow ,
Return’d from cold © Gitkwinus Stream: but now
The Gods were angry, and thofe Victimes prove
Nourifh’d in waini; which for Larpeian Fove,

With fo much Gare, by lim were fed before. —
Then light Iberians with thé himble Adoor

Advance. Here Piles, there Libyan Arrows fly ;

So thick, from either Side, they: hidethe Sky:

And ail the Space, between the River’s Shore,

And Champagt-Ground, with Darts is cover'd o’re.
So thick they ftaad, the Wounded have no Room
To Fall,and Dy. ‘There Allias, that from
Aryyripa,through Dauntan Fields, withrade —
Unpolith’d Shafts, his flying Game purlu'd,


(k) Clitumnus, a River in Tafca-
ay, wherein fuch Bulls, as were to be
Sacrificed to Pupiter, were wafhed
and became White. See the Continus
ation of the firft Book.


ee cee


Was


ro ~Smius Iratrcus. Book IV.


Sees ee en


Was born, into the midft of all his Foes;

Upon his fapygian Steed, and throws

C Not vainly) his. 4palian Darts : his Breaft
: The Skins of rough Samnitick Bears inveft, —

Inftead of Steel: his Head an Helmet wore;
Fenc‘d with the Tuthes of an Aged Boar.

But him, thus Active, as if he had bin

Then following-the Chale of Beafts, within

The Gargan Woods, when Mago here efpy'd,
There bold Adabarbal , they on either Side

Charge him. As Bears, more fierce by Hunger made,
From fev’ral Rocks atrembling Bull invade ;

Their Fury aot permitting them to fhare

Their Prey with Leifure : fo both here, and there,
-Gainft Allius difcharged Weapons flew. ;

At length, through both his Sides, the Libyan Yew
Doth, finging, pierce into his trembling Heart,

And Death remain’d ambiguous, to which Dart

Ic thould give way ; for both together there,

As intheir Center, met. Now full of Fear

The Romane Troops, with {catter'd Enfigns, fly ;
Whom to the Banks the Lidyan furioufly,  —

C A Sight of Pitty! wandring up and down,

- Purfues, andin the River ftrives to drown.

Then Trebia to their Ruin doth confpire,

And raifing, at Saturata’s Defire,

His fatal Waves, begins a fecond War |

Againft the weary Vanquifhed: who are

By Earth, that flirank beneath then, where they ftood,
Devour'd, and cover'd by the treach’rous Flood.
Nor could they from the thick, tenacious Mire,
CIE once engag’d } their weary Limbs retire:
But ftand, as bound, and fix’d within the Mud,
Untill, o’rewhelm'd by the deceiefull Flood,


Book IV. SrE1us Traticus: 11T


Or Rutins of the hollow Banks, fome fall ;


While others-through the Slippery places crawl,
And feek through the inextricable Shore,
Their feverat Ways to Safety. But, as or’e
The rotten Bogs « they fly;,and Ruin think
To thun, by their own Weight opprefs'd, they Sink.
Here one {wins {wiftly, afd now near the Land,
Snatching the tops of Ruthesin his-Hand ,
To raife himfelf above the Flood again,
Nail’d by a Jav’lin to the Bank, is flain:
Another, having loft his Weapon, faft
Within his Arms his ftrugling Fo embrac't,
And in one Fate, both joyn'd together, dy'd.
Death ina thoufand Shapes, on ev'ry Side,
Appears. There wounded Ligus backward fell
Upon the Shore; ‘and, asthe Flood doth fwell
With Heaps of Bodies, andhis Vilage laves,
He fucks in, with his Sighs, the bloody Waves.
But {carce half-way did fair Hirpinas fwim,
And beckned to the reft to follow him:
When, carryed by the Stream’s impetuous Force,
And gaul’d with many wounds, his head-ftrong, Horle
Obeys the Torrent , till with Labour tir ‘d,
Under prevailing Waves, they both expir'd.
Yet ftill thefe Miferies encreafe: for, as
The towred Elephants attempt to pafs
Into the Flood, with Violence they fell
( As when a Rock, torn from its native Hill
By Tempeft, falls into the angry Main)
And Trebia afraid to entertain
Such Monftrous Bodies, flies before their Breaft,
Or thrinks beneath them with their Weight oppreft,
Butas Adverfity man’s Courage tries,


And fearlefs Valour, doth to Honour rife .
_—_ Fhrough


Sitius. [raticus. Book IV.


Through Danger ; ftout Fibrenus doth difclaim,
A Death ignoble, or that wanted Fame : |
And cries, My Fate fhallbe obferv'd, nor fhall
Fortune, beneath thefe Waters, hide my Fall.
Te try, if Earth doth any living bear,
Which the Asfonian Sword, and Tyrrhen Spear
Cannot fubdue, and kill. With that, hepreft -
His Lance into the right Eye of the Beaft,

That, with blind Rage, the penetrating Blow >
Purfu'd, and tofsing up his mangled Brow,
Befmear'd with reeking Blood, with horrid Cries
Turns round, and from his fallen Matter flies.
Then with their Darts, and frequent Arrowsall..
Invade him, and now dare to hope his Fall.

His immenfe Shoulders, and his Sides, appear
One Wound entire, his dusky Back doth bear
Innumerable Shafts ; that, like a Wood, -

Still waving, as he mov'd, upon him ftood :

Till in fo long a Fight, their Weapons all
Confum’d, he fell, Death hafting through his Fall.

But now (although a Weund, which by the way

An Adverfe Hand inflicted, did delay. 7

His Speed a while) implacable with Rage,
Within the River, Scipio doth engage.

And with unnumbred Slaughters doth infeft
The Enemy; while Trebia feems oppreft

With Targets, Helmets, and with Bodies flain ;
And f{earce dothany vacant Space remain
Tofeethe Water. There Maxeus by

His Lance, there Goflar by his Sword doth dy.
Then againft Zelgon, who from Pelops {prung,
And in (Cyrene dwelt, a Pilehe flung,

Snatch’d from the {tained Torrent, and within


His gaping Mouth fix’ d the whole Steel. His Chin
Now


BookIV. Sirus Iraricus, | “113


Now falls: againft his Teeth the trembling Wood
Rebounds with Noife, and fudden Streams of Blood;
Together with his Life, flow from the Wound ¢
Yet, after Death, no Reft his Body found ; Fi

For Trebia it ¢ Eridanus conveys;

Eridanus it tumbles to the Seas.


- With him, and others, Lapfus likewife dy’ d:


To whom the Fates a Sepulchre deny'd:


* What then avail'd his rich Hefperides, _


Or Groves by ACympbs frequented 7 What his Trees ,
That, bearing Gold, extend their fhining Boughs?
But Trebia, {welling, from the Bottom throws

His curling Waves, unlocketh all his Springs,
Andall his Forces with freth Fury brings:

The Billows roar aloud, and, as they fly,

Stilla new Torrent doth their Place fupply.

The General perceiving this, his Blood

With greater Fury boils. Perfidious Flood
CSaid He) feverely fhalt thou punifh’d be,

For this thy Infolence. I'le {cater thee

In leffer Streams, through all the Gallick Coatt,
Untill'the Name of River thou haft loft.

V'le choak thee in thy Birth : nor fhale thou flow ,
Through this thy Chanel, to the Banks of Po.
What fudden Rage is this, doth thee invade,
And thee Sidonian of a Latine made?

Him boafting thus, the Waters ina Heap

Affail, and on his lofty Shoulders leap.

Himéelf againft their Rage He doth oppofe,
And with His Shield fuftains their furious Throws.
Behind, the Storm-rais’d Surges thicker come,

And cover His Plum’d Helmet with their Foam.
That He fhould farther wade, the God deny'd;
While from His Feet the Mey Earth doth flide.


he


HT


14 Sirius Irattrcus. Book IV.


The angry Billows, now, begin a War
Amony themfelves, and, ftriking Rocks, afar
Diffufe the Noife through all the Neighb’ring Coaft,
And in the Fight his Banks the River loft. -
Then, lifting up his ftreaming, Locks, hisBrow
Impail'd with Bull-Ruthes, faid He, Doft Thou

- So proudly threaten Thy Revenge on Me?
And that the Name of Trebia thal} be
By Thee extinguifh’d? Oh, Thou Enemy
Tothis My Empire! fee what Bodies I
Do bear; that by thy fatal Hand were flain :
Such Heaps of Shields, and Helmets here remain,

‘ That they my Waters from my Chanel force,
And \'me conftrain’d ta. leave my former Courfe.
Thou fee'ft how deep with Slaughter they are ftain’d,
And backward flie. Reftrain thy killing Hand,
And pitch Thy Camp within this Neighbrring Field.
This Cytherea from an Hill beheld,
And, near her, Vulcan ; who themfelves did {hroud
From Mortal Eyes, within anairy Cloud,
But Scipio, fighing, lifteth to the Skies
His Hands, and faith. Ye Gods, whofe Aufpicies
Have hitherto preferv'd Dardanian Rome,
Mutt I, at length, a Sacrifice become
To fuch a Death, preferv'd by You of late
In fo great Fights? Is itabove my Fate
To fall by Fortune? Oh, deliver me
Again (my Son) untothe Enemy ;
ThatI may dy in Bateel! and My End
Unto My Brothers, and to Rome, commend.
Griev'd with this Language, Venus figh’d, and all
Fier Husband's Fury on the Flood lets fall.
O’re all the Banks, the active Flames appear
Difperfed, and the Streams, that many a Year
Had


renvpaces aoe salar ecans nO


Book IV. Srtius Irattcus. tts


Had there been:Nourifh’d by the aged Flood, : ©
Mok furioufly:devour. The Neighb’ring Wood


_ Doth likewife burn, and through the higheft Groves


© Vulcan, an uncontrouled Conqu'rour, moves. a Pen
(s) This Fiftion alludes to that of


Now Fir-Trees lofe their Arms ; the lofty Pines; © Homer, liad. XX1 Where the violent
: 3 : Inundation of the River Scamander
And Alders fink, the Poplar too declines; ere and by Yialcen, atthe Bayes


And from their ftanding Tranks thofe Branches fell;
Where Quires of Chanting Bitds were wont to dwell.
Ev'n from the Bottom of the troubled Flood,
The Fire licks up the Waters,dries the Blood,
Late fhed upon the Banks. The parched Earth,
¢ As when rath Phaeton, to prove his Birth,
Did Fire the World ) with Heat exceftive cleaves,
And Heaps of Afheson the Waters leaves.
Father Eridanus now thinks it ftrange, fe 3
That his Ecernal Courfe fo foon doth change,
The Nymphs their liquid Caves with mournfull Cries
Now fill, and, as the Flood endeayour’d thrice’
Toraife his fcorched Head, the God of Fire,
Throwing a Lamp, conftrain‘d him to retire ~ os
Beneath his fmoaking Waves, and thrice his Head
OF Reeds deprives : at length, as Vanquithed’, aan
And Weak, fubmitting to his Conqu'ring Fo, = *
‘Twas granted in his fortner Banks to flow.
Scipio, and Gracchus, then; from Trebia, all
Their Troops, unto a fenced Hill, recall.
But Hannibal the River doth adore, .
And, with much Honour, {prinkles near the Shore
His ©): Social Waters on the Holy Grafs:
Not knowing how much greater things ( alafs!) Countrey into His Protechon, and A.
The Gods would act, What Woes for Italy we
Were (Thrafimenus)} then prepar’d by Thee.
Not long before; Flaminius did invade __
The Boii, and an eafie ca made
| 2


_ Co) ,Secial waters, in token, that


He then "received chat Part of the:


Over


116 Sitius drauicus. Book IV. Book IV. Sirius Iraricus.. 117
Over that Nation; Weak, iandveidofiall . - ‘Qh Mamibal,: paok happy-inthy Fame,
Deceit, But to‘contend wih Hannibal: | And unto Isaly.a fatal Name! ~ *
Regnir'd more Toul, ‘more Vigilance, sad Skill: Who, if th’ ef afonian Land had giv'n Thee Birth,
Him, fatal to his Cauntrey, and with | ce @ Mighr'ft withishe: Gods, when Thou forfak'ft the (7), Difeaion being peculiar to
Prefagesborn, Saturnia prepares a Hereafter be Rathron’d. While yet we may, (Earth, :
As General, while Italie's Affairs one as ’ And Fates permicus, banifh all Delay : | .
Sadly declin'd: A man mof worthyall . | The great Succefs, which Fortune doth allow,
The Mifchief, that did on his Countrey fall. | Notlongendures. Goon; theBlood, which Thou
For, in the firft Day, thathetookin Hand Didftto thy Father promife, when the War
The Helm of State, and ¢h’ Army did command : : ‘Gainft Rome, before the Altar, Thou didft {wear,
As Mariners, uoskilfull to convey = g ® Shall from Aufonian Bodies flow to Thee,
A beaten Ship through a tempeftuous Se Meteaices And Thou Thy Father's Ghoft thale fatisfie
Obey the Winds, and leave toeyry Blaft, 1’ Wich Slaughter, andto Me fecurely pay
Or Wave, the wandring’Veflel:; which ar as Deferved Honours. Thereforenow Obey:
Is driven by the Pilot's artle& Hands: ee eee For I that Zhrafimenus am, thatby
On Rocks, or elfe is fwallow’ dup in'Sands yi o:5 The Bands, from Tmolus fent, encompafs’d ly ©
_ Se, with rafh Arms, Flaminias dothiavade: : o 2 Beneath high Hills, and reign in thady Streams.
The Lydsans, and (ook Manfions = made” By this Advice excited from his Dreams,
‘ a Fie ey in’ Tafeary By antient © Corthus Arrival there 5 Jy;5 0). : His Amy, which the Deity doth fill


5 A £
Meaonias, parece co patie And the Meonian Colonies, that we Te


whom the Maonians were called Lydi-


ary aa Ct wre paul Joyn’dto Jalan, by their .Grand-fires Blood, ee 3
And in the Catalogue of Kindred food, :
Nor did the Gods neglect ¢o advertife |
The Libyan Captain of an Enterpriz e :


With Courage, ftrait He leadeth to the Hill.
High Apenninus, who his Fore-head joyns

Unto the Stars, farcharg'd with lofty Pines,
Was cover'd,then, with Ice. Among the fteep,
And flipp’ry Rocks, all Trees, in Snow, as deep


That to his Name fuch Honour might produce, Asis his Height, were hid, and to the Skies

For when that Sleep, o're allthe World, his fuice His hoary Head, with Froft congeal’d, did rife.

Of Poppy had diftus’d, and with his Wings’. - Here He commands them on: for having crofs'd ;
Had cover'do're the Tedious Careigf- ‘things. oh ce The e4 ps, all former Glory had been loft,

Juno the Figure of the Neighbri ing Flood.) And quite extinguith’d; had they made a Stand

Affames , and, as he flept, before hiva fiaods : At other Mountains: therefore they afcend

The dangling Treffes; onher watry; Brow, ; : ey Thofe broken Cliffs, whofe. Fops the Clouds inveft

Encompals'd witha wreathed PenanBoigh, . Perpetually with Showrs. Nor did they reft,

With fudden Cares, the dives i into his Breaft, :. When once that Labour they had overcome;


And with this pow'rfull Language br eaks his Rett. a But ftrait defcend into the Plains,thatfwum
Sead Oh pho With


1
i
a
yi
|
i


Hs" 3 Sttius Iranrcus. Book IV,


With thawing Ice, and where, in Moorifh Ground,
The cold, unfrozen Waters did abound :
= In thefe unwholfome Fens, the Gen'nai's bare,
a Banal rea ii te Be Uncover'd, ©) Head, was fhaken by:the Air,’ |
(som 2" ied He Wine And on his bloodlefs eines his melting Eye...
ro meet him through the Fers of He- In Tearsdefcends. While; {corning Remedy,


truria , lying the River rans;


where the exceffive Moifture of the He thinks the T. ime of Battel is to be


Plece ee the greats Incommodi-


ties to his Army, who were conftrained J 2 ith «
foly tee Bagge under them inthe Purchas d ¥ ith any Danger. Therefore He


Watick we Leib ce” Difdains the Beauty of his Face to. {pare,


So He may have His Ends ; nor doth He care,
To part with other Limbs, if Vidtory
May be the Price, and thinks his fingle Eye
Enough; if foaConquerour He may
Behold the (Capitol: or any way
Subduea Fo, that bears the Romane Name.
Through alljthefe Miferies.at length He came.
~ Unto the‘) Lake, where for His Lofs of Sight.
He kills unnumbred Piaeles in Fight. .. ©
But now, behold, from TDprian Carthagefent
Ambaffadours arrive. -The firft Intent, ‘
And Motive,of their Journey was of Weight z. »
Yet could they nothing of Content relate.
It was a Cuftome ‘mong thofe People, where
Exil’d €/:/a, firft, her Walls did Rear,
The Favour of the Angry Gods to feek
(+) This inhumane Cuftome was ©) VWVith Humane Slaughter, and(what ev'n to fpeak |


commonto the Carthaginians, with o-
ther more Barbarous People: fo chat Is


wien hey were overthrow by ee Horrour ) ontheir flaming Altars burn
pant Wee ia

Ene cocahon hey ofered 2 heirtender Sons. Thofe Lots an annual Urn

hofe horrible ii to be ang: i ‘ ; oe. fe .

Silcbsre, cand whereupon’ <Sicriaced Reviv'd ; the bloody Rites to imitate


to him two hundred Noble Children,

Died, lib, 20. Of Thoantéan Dian : to this Fate, -
And Lot of Heav'n, as Cuftome was, infpir'd |...
Ofold, with Malice, Hanno then requir’d
The Son of Hannibal, although the Fear.


Of his Return, and Arms, did then appear


Book IV. Sitius Irarticus. 119


ne


As pitfeat; for Revenge, to other Eyes.


Mov'd by this dire Demand, withmournfull Cries,
Tearing her Hair, and Cheeks, Emilee fills

The Town. As when, on the Pangzan Hills,

Edonian Froes their  Lreiterian Featt - (u) The Fealt of Bacchinals
Perform, and Bacchus reigns in ev'ry Breaft.

Inilce fo,'among the Tyrian Dames,

C Asif fhe faw her Son amidft the Flames )

Cries 16, Husband, in what Part foe’re

O'th’ World thou wageft War, Oh, hither bear
Thine Enfigns; here, here isan Enemy

More violent, more near. Thou, happily,

E.v’n at the Wall's of Rome, receiveft now

Darts, fying, in Thy Target, or doftchrow

A burning Lamp, Tarpetan Tow’rs to fire.

In the mean time, Thy Son, Thy onely Herr, .


- Ev’n from the Bofom of Thy Countrey, to


The Stygian Altar’s drag’d. Whilft Thou doft go 7
Towatt 4ufonian Houfes with Thy Sword ,
Tread in forbidden Paths, break that Accord, |

T hat League ; which, once, by all the Gods was fworn: ©
Thefe dire Rewards doth Carthage, now, return

For Thy Deferts ; {uch Honours unto Thee,
Ingratefull, Shee decrees, What Piety

Is this, the Temples thus with Humane Blood

To ftain 2 Alafs!had Mortalsunderftood

The Nature of the Gods, this horrid Crime

Bad ne’re been known. Go, and, at fucha Time ,
Wi:h Holy Frankincenfe, juft Things defire

OF Heav’n ; and let thofe cruel Rites expire.

The Gods to Men are mild: let it fuffice

CI pray) that we fat Oxen Sacrifice :

Or, if the Gods refolve, that this Decree

Shall ftand, to Your Defires, accept of Me,


Me


Sirius [raricus.


Me that have born him; why fhould You deprive


Libya of thole great Hopes, that in him live?
Why fhould Aigates more lamented be ;
Or, if the Punick Kingdoms we fhould fee
Now finking, then the fad untimely Fall
Of this brave Off-fpring of my Hannibal?

This Speech, the Senate wav'ring ‘twixta Fear
Of Gods, and Men, invited, to forbear
Their Sentence, and to Her ‘twas left to chufe ;
Whether She would the killing Lot refufe ;

Or elfe the Honour of the Gods obey.

At this [mile trembled, ev'ry way

With Fear diftracted : there Her Husband’s Ire
She apprehends; and there the fatal Fire.

This heard with greedy Ears : the General:
Replies, Dear Carthage, What can Hannibal,
Though equal to the Gods, return to Thee,
Worthy fuch Favours? What Rewards can be
Invented® Day, and Night, Arms will bear,
And make, that to Thy Temples Rome repair,
With gen’rous Vittimes, that their Blood derive
From Her Quirinus. But My Boy hhall live,
Heir to thefe Arms, and War, My onely Hope ;’
And, while He/peria threats, the onely Prop -

Of Dorian Affairs by Sea, and Land.

And (Boy) remember that Thou take in Hand,
And wage a War with Rome, while Life doth laft.
Go on, behold the e/ dps which I have paft,
Areopen, Me fucceed in Toils, and War,

And you my Countrey’s Gods, whofe Temples are
By Slaughter Holy made, who ‘re pleas‘d to be
Ador’d with Fears of Mothers, turn to Me


_ Your Minds, and pleas’d Afpect: for I prepare


Y our Sacrifice, and better Altars Rear.
You


Book IV.


Book IV. Sitius Iraticus,


You Mago, tothe Top of yonder Hill
Conduct your Troops ; and let Chaofpe fill
Thofe nearer tothe Left; Sicheus hall
Into thofe Avenues, in Ambuth fall.
While, I will Zbrafmenus quickly view,


With lighter Troops, and for the Gods their Due,


Of Warlike Sacrifice prepare. For now,

They, with clear Promifes, great things allow,

Which having feen (dear Countrey-men) yeu may
Into your native City, home convey. .


The End of the Fourth Book.


raf Pe


ee ie


tzt


A


BokV. 0°


SILIUS' TTALICUS


of ae The Second Punic Va. . - oe, ; 7 |


ae The F Fifeh Book,


ot F we” Ae GUM


Flaminius rafb Valo at ‘the Lake. = sa

Of Thrafimenus.: Phe Sidonians ee

The Hilts, for. Anbajh: Prodigiés: frie

Before the Fight,the Roman's Overthrow. ;
Both Armies (while an Earthquake overthrew | et,

} Giies, and Rivers tarn’d) ‘thé Fight pirfue. 7
‘ | Bat the Sicilians Troops, thar bafel fo" oT eee
T he Field: and climb ebe Treesfor et si fe

Together, by Sichzus, whofe fad Fail -

(Soon after.by by Flaminius flan’) by ali.

The Libyans # bewaild.” Stout Appius killd

By Mago; whonibe wounds; what Slanybrers fit “
| All Quarters: bow Flacninins. bravely dyd 4

Whofe. Gores ti she, Romanes, Jain about bim, bide...


te OW Bansibal, —


~. the Fight, — -
| With écret Ambuth, in athe |
s°, dead oF Night,
: fs F The Mountains .. of om, :
" Witivar tolls Wipbagne Regent rare = Gian a ee a | ay didinveft, |
Mies ng fri rin he ee Rasa ea .. l And all he Paffesof the Woods polleft.
rand: ee Wee Vaiingie. = "eda 2. Lg y, Lerva Mariguc = Oathe Left Hand,. there wasia Lake that Fweltd


_ Imperator: .Jabula Ineraalliiae ves 50
| Sse Like a vaft Sea, and all the Neighb mg Field,


: | IT 2 O're-flowing,


m4 ss St Luss oi aloha Book V; x Book V. ‘Situs [raticus. ag.


; : ; fore Aretinm, and Marched towards
From Danger, and neglected by:the Fo, =
= :

AT i Sea Cea ee x bimfelf d by Hannibal's Yor-
Who, to their Fall; permits them on to go. » = ei encompald by Henwibers | bes
Order , they were totally defeated,


For they, advancing through a narrow Way,:..-~ ‘andthe Cov/ni/ fin, Liv, Book 22,


| |
- a < O‘re-flowing, cover'd with tenacious Slime. a ee ae “And OmitiosiT utriults through: -all Places: Spread 5
re - 4 | a ' Here Faun-got Aunus reign "din Antienttime; a | oo Advancing toshe Fight, esif they: fled.
3 But,now, ‘tis known. by Ti brafimenss Name,. ° A : While from the. Lake,a-Vapour;black.as Niche,
| (2) Trrrbenas wasthe Sonof Atys, WWhofe Sire 4 Tyrrhenus. (Lydian Tmolus ‘Fame Ardley: and, quite depriving chemofSight, . Re os | .
| mia oan oe Tothe Trahan ‘Céafts, that fince do bear | " Inadark Mantle ofcondenfedClouds .. 6s. ee . :
ST. pe atone: (ry Sol pe His Name;-Meonian Colonies,from far, Involves the Skies,and Day défired fhrouds. © :
i. ra) the Lorik “A pe ced By Sea did bring ; sand is by all Renown ‘d, But Haznibal purfies His Fraud the while, + @ Hervibal, andertanding the Tene
SH itl i th ar Ha evel For having taught thofe Nations, firft,to found And, in His Ambuth clofely fitting fill, - Molen, rae ashe Country be
gi Adare arsed tobe The Trumpet, and their Silence brokein Fight, - Would not permit them, in their Hafte,tobe.. ree ie Mileries of War,
Sore invented he Trumpet ordi Yet,not content with this, he doth excite Oppos'd, whileall theShore appeareth free © © aBhinoursble raed bs Cag be.


People impro ved fo emneaey be civil :
Lophinr soni extrac Tritmphal His Son to greater things ; Bur; fir'd with Love


and Confular O ich thei
Rods ees & other afigas of Auto Of the fair Boy (whio-with the Gods above,

rity, as likewife Mufick, Angary, and

Rites of Sacrificing. See Strabe,ti.s: For Beauty, might compare) now, Chafte no more,


ma . | But, from the Threfhold onely, breath’ ‘da Ray;


(4) Agyleaall City in Taha. ©) Apylle fnatch'd him » Walking anghe S Shore,
7 Into the Stream. This Ngmpb's Taiavioar Minde
Was ftill toLave oftbeauteous. Boys inclii'd} »;
And the Itslian'Darts foot warmi'd hier Breatt Da
But him the carefull N aiades caret. ey
Within their mofly Caves: while He:the Place
Abhors, and feeks to fhun their fond Embraée..
From hence the Lake; a Dowry: to, his Famie,-
Still confcious of his Rape; t retains his Name. a
And, now,the Chariot of, she Dewy Night, -
Its Bounds approach’d ; ; although the Morn her Light,
‘Not yet from her bright Chambers did difplay,


And Men could lefs affirm, that Night had ran
Her Courle, then that the Dayi itsRace begun:
When, through by-Ways, the Cohfut March’ d beforé:


=
th
4


His Enfigns ; after Him, the Horfe,. no more Ls an ;


; InQrder) hafte: Next,inConfufiongo$ <<;


The light-arm’‘d Bands ; the-Foot, disorder'dytoo 0:/.


- Forfake their Ranks :. “with them, though us ‘d inWats’


Unfic for “Fight, the Sutlers mixed are;
hed


(Before defign’d, their: Safety to betray): ;
Adouble Ruin: found. , The Waters here
Contract their Paflage :.. therefteep Rocks ; appear,
And, on the Mountain's Top, within the Woes,
T’ engage them, there a Libyan Party ftood,


~ Ready to fallonany, thatfhouldfly:.. : “


Toa Retreat..S0; when'a Fifher,by 0 i
A Ghryftal Brook, an Ofier Weel doth ewine,:? °° i
The Entrance large he inakes, ‘but binds within. :!
The Tonnel Clofe, contracting by Degrees’ .
The yielding Topsintoa Piyvamis,.0° 0 SG

Through whichideceitfall'Hole the Fit, with _ ee
Do enter, but retinrnnotto the Seassi 8

In the mean time, the farious (onfallof Ee ae

Fis Reafon, inthis Storm of Fatessin'Hafte 38° 6 © |

He calls his Enfigns on;untill, from Sea; -.

The Suai’s bright Horfesre-advane'dthe Dey = cou

And Rofie Titan, torevivethe World| 9305 a
The Clouds, that o're the Face of Eleav' n werehutl’d,

Had quite difpers'd; andfenfiblytoHell; 9.
By his clear Rays refolv'd, the Darknefs fell. :. :


12:6 SiLius IrTaLicus., Book V,


d) Our Anceft ‘

ue = so 7; And theta Bird :¢ whych asan'old © Prefage
ar fa

their’ pany This kind of | 4ugary The Latines us'd; before they. did éhgnge |


(for they were oe) was frequently


us'damongthem: and: if theBirds , In Fight’)! ‘he ebok,'t’ explorethe Goahlidenr.’


(which were commo ay ee kept


— Ses oe is what fhould be the following Fighic's Event!”
Gods, bei greedily evouredic,ttey he Bird, Divining future Miferiés,,-- Bes
Sacer Refus'd her Meat, and forts it, érying; flies.
ee * _ With that a Bull (a fad Prefage /'). before:
' The Holy Altars,cealed notto rear, °
- And , waving with. his Neck, the al Soak,
Oo ‘th’ falling Aix, the Sacred Place forfook. :
a = Belides, as they endeavour'd, where they feed: ete
foe ‘ To pull their Enfigns up, the Barth ou Beet
poe oe . Into their Faces fpoutd,as to fordtell.'>. pee
That Slaughter, which thent; ieee
Then fove, the Sea; and/Land, with Thunder took,
And {natching Boks from Mitna's Fords, neue
The Fhraphtenion Leake, thadimoakinwe teens:
To burn, ahd Flames tolivewWahin the: eae
Oh loft Admonithyithts,adtProdigies:: 0: a
That ftrive, in vain; to flop che Deftinies f
Ev'n Gods; theinfél ves; Aiuft with the Fated Sifpetion.
And hers Gorwiztus; fam/‘dl for Blogqirenee,: - ae
And of a Noble Mame, .: Gwhofe Hebhetbores
Thy Bird, eA pollo,, that dit long before, {5
sols Fh "oe ae The Naldur.-of his (? pele rlewrebmsuaie ss ‘
Soh ol te ay easton ay Full of the Gods, = Sees Denar: G@ gma


a Crow ( which is the Bal Sacred to ; With Couitifel Pei ‘ay'r Ts, a witla thefe Wiens


Apollo) took its ftand upon his Helmet


with its Head towards his Enemie , By the Iliack Flames, the Hate of: Bowe, © 7]


whofe Face, as often ashe affaulted F’4-


erins,the Bird furioufl vaded , till,
tered withthe Omen, the Gat iat Our Couettit’s Walls, and by-our Soi; thbe ie:
both his Reafon, and Courage, and


was immediatly i ang who ‘This Fight’ s Evbbt tad Fatesasyeofafpand, 10 ©
Yield t6 che Gods, Wpraylthee, reads ce ee
A Time more ftptunatefor' Battal they:
A Field will givedaee; andabenerDay, a ) : ka
. Onciy


Book V. Sittus Iraticus, 127


Onely difdain not Thou t’ expect the more
Propitious Gods, and that more happy Hour,
Which fhall for Libya's Deftrudien call ;
And when, nat forc'd, asnow, our Enfigns all
Shall follow ; when our Birds thall gladly feed,
And pious Earth no more fo {trangely bleed.
How much is left to Fortune in this Place,
Skilfallin War, Thou know’'ft. Before our Face
The Fo appears : thofe woody Hills now threat
An Ambush ; on the left Hand no Retreat
The Lake allows: the Pafsis narrow too
Between thofe Hills. It’s Wifdom then in y ou
With Stratagems to ftrive, and fight Delay,
Unull with freth Supplies, Serviliusmay =
Arrive, that with you, in Command, doth fhare,
And’s Forces, in the Legions, equal are.
The War with Policy we muft purfue:
To th fighting Man the leaft of Honour’s due.
(Corvinus thus exhorts : the Captains were
No lefs importunate, and all with Fear
Divided. Sometimes for Flaminius pray
Unto the Gods : then him intreat ¢’ obey
The Pow’rs Divine, and not their Will oppofe.
With that his kindled Fury higher rofe,
Andhearing (¢ full of Rage ) that new Supplies
Would foon be there ; Saw you not Me (he cries)
When in the Boian War I charg’d, and when
So great a Ruin, and fuch dreadfull Men
Came on: that, the Zarpeian Rock again
Did tremble, then what Multitudes were flain
By me’ How, then, this vengefull Hand the Ground
Beftrew'd with Bodies, which the deepeft Wound
Could fcarce deftroy : yet were they forc’d to yield,


And now their fcatter’d Bones opprefs the Field.
Therefore


128


Sinius Iraricus.: Book V.


Therefore Servilins Arms may come too late
Tothis brave Action, if you think not that
I cannot overcome, unlefs [ fhare
My Triumphs ; and, contente dam to bear
A. partof Honour; but the Gods do feem
T’ advife us otherwife. Oh donot Dream
( You that now fear the Trumpets Sound) of Gods,
So like your felves. Our trufty Swords aré odds,
And eAugury enough, againft the Fo.
The beft Prefage che Romane Souldierskn ow,
Is, that, in Feats of Arms, they do excell;
Mutt it be then refolv’d chat I fit ftill
Corvinus, bafely thus within a Vale
Befieg’d, while the Sidonians do prevail
Againtt Arretia’s Walls, and levell to
The Ground, the Tow’r of Cor;thus, and go
Thence to Clufnum, and at length may come
Untouch’d, unto the very Walls of Rome?
Vain Superftition/ a Deformity
In men of Arms ! Valour alone fhould be
The Goddefs that fhould o’re their Souls command,
Troops of fad Ghofts, by Night about us ftand,
Whole Corps are tumbled ftill in Trebia’s Waves, :
And {wift Eridanus, and want their Graves.
Thus having faid, without Delay, he quits
Th’ Affembly ; and, Inexorable, fits
His laftunhappy Arms: a Sea-Bulls Hide
His Helmet lines, andonthe Top (its Pride )
A triple Creft alcends, and largely {preads
A Main, the Locks refembling of the Swedes:
Above was Scylla, waving in her Hand, ;
A broken, Oar, and Dogs about her ftand
With gaping Jaws. This noble Trophie, He


Gain‘d near Garganus, and the Victory,
ss So


Book ¥. Sirius Iraticus.


So pleas'd him ¢ having flain the Boian King) ©
That, fitted to his Head, he 'us‘d to bring

This, as his Glory; into ev ‘ry Fight.

Then takes his Coat of Mail, whofe Scales were knit
To Chains of Steel, and ftudded o're with Gold.
Next he affumtes his Shield, where they behold
The Stains of (eléick Blood, which He before
In Battel fhed: and, in it carv'd, lie bore

A the-Wolf's Figure,in her gloomy Den,
Licking a Child’s foft Limbs, as it had been

Her Whelp, and nars'd of the Affarick Line

A Stem, that afterwards was made ‘f) Divine,

At laft, he girds his Sword, and to’s Right Hand
Makes fit his Lance. Hard by doth ready fland
His Horfe ; which, cover’d with a Tiger's Hide,
Champs on his feothy Bit with pleafing Pride,
Then mounted, where the way between the Hills _
Was ftreight, thus with Encouragement he fills _
HisMen. Your Work, and Honour, it will be

( Dear Countrey-men) to let your Parents fee _
Fix‘d on a Spear, and born, with Joy, through all
Thr Streets of ‘Rome, the Head of Hannibal.

That Head may fatisfie for all the reft ¢

Let each man therefore fancy in his Bréaft,

What may excite his Rage, and thus deplore ;

My Brother, now, upon Ticinus Shore’
Ulnburyed lyes. Alafs! my Son through all

The Po now fwims, and wantsa Funeral.

Thsto himéelf let ev'ry Man prepare

Revenge; butastoyou, who have no Share

OF private Grief, let thofe great things, which fire
A publick Soul, enflame your greater Ire,

Think they have broken through the ¢4 /pine Hills;


And then-remember thofe Nefandons'lils
eae a ul Saguntbas


iz9 .


Cf) Romulus Deified,


130


Sirius cane Book V.


) That fome Reliques of this Su-
perftiion was remaining in Pliny’s
Time, he teftifies ib. 7. cap. 2. in thefe
Words.“Not far from Rome,in the Ter-
“ ritories of the Falifci, are fome few
“ Families called the Hirpie, who,in an
« Annual Sacrifice to Apollo,on the Hill


“ Soraéte, walk without Harm on burn-
“ing Coals, and for that, by a Decree


“of the Senate, were difcharged from


* allDury of War.


-Sagunphus. fuffee'd, what: a Sin it was.

Inthem, Ibergs § acred Bounds to pafs, . gis

And now ev'n Tyher toych. For-while, in Vain, =

With Birds,and Enprails, Augurs he detain ;

The Capital, This when he ‘deager faid,

And feeing that his Horfe, amidft the Croud.: -

Of thoufands 3 Tals ¢ ‘d his cloudy Mane,aloud: .

He cries; To fight, my Orphitus, muft proves). Race

Thy Task. What other t to Feretrian ‘Fove

_Opimous ¢ Ori rags can in Triumph bare *

For why fhould any Hand, this Hongur fhare

With, Me? A Then moves, and hearing aknown Voice

In Fight, k Far hence Claid ne), that Martial Noife

Shews thge t¢ to be Myrrapus : sand I Thee

Already high i in Tyrian Slapghrer fees.

How ‘great a. Praife anends| thes * “bye ic J pray), .. .

Let thy Sword wider make the tnarrow Way...

Then knowing. ¢ born upon, Sonafle's Hill )

LE quanys, who in Beauty. did excell, a a

And Arms ¢ the Cuftoms: of whofe Counaey 3 were;

The Entrails thrice, through harmlefs Flames to bear

‘When as the Pious Archer did defire

To offer Sactificei in Holy Fire)

Noble Alquanuss may ‘ft thou ever fo

Unburnt, on Phebus flaming ® Altars go,

And conquering theSmoak,foev'ry Year

To the pleaf’ dGod (aid he) thy Offering bear.

Worthy thy Deeds, and Wounds, conceive.a Rage:

Accompanied by Thee,]. dare engage .

To penetrate through. the Marmarick Bands, ee

Or charge G inyphian Troopt.. ee he ftands.

No longer to, advile, or to delay. | tated

we Words, share which, ee Romanesmay
Be


Book V. - Sitius Iratricus, . | 131


(4) In this Battel were flain fifteen
theufand men, andten thoufand {cat-


Be “ long deplor’d. The Signal ev'ry where
oe a tered th ll He d

Is giv‘n, and fatal Trumpets rend the Air}. oun ie Cefn emia

: ° . ain upon the Place. t d

Oh Grief ! Oh Tears, which, in fo long Defcent by Hannibal, who digest loge his


Body to give it Burial : all, rhat return.
' edatter this Fight to Rome, were re-


Of Ages, cannot, now, too late be {pent ! Loh eerener
1 Tremble, as if now thofe Mifcheifs all. one their Sons, fell dead in
Were acted ; as if Libyans Hannibal ,
And arm’d Afurians, from their Hills did bring,
Or the fierce Balearick with his Shi ng.
Now num’rous Troops of Macians; NComades, <
And Garamantians fally forth : with thefe
The Warlike, ftout Cantabrians , then whom,
With Mercenary Hands, none fooner come
To fight ; or hired Arms more gladly bear :
And Gafcoins too, that Helmets fcorn to wear.
On this Side, horrid Rocks; onthat, the Lake:
Here clafhing Arms, with the loud Shouts they make,
Amaze, and urge: befide the Signal from
The Zyrian Camp, through all the Hills, doth come.
The Gods, their Faces turning from the Field,
Unwillingly to greater Fates do yield.
Ev'n Mars, thy Fortune ( Hannibal) doth fear ;
Sad Venus weepeth, with difhevel’d Hair ;
Apollo, to his Delos, doth retire ,
And ftrives to eafe his Grief with mournfull Lyre.
Funo, alone, on Appeninus ftood
Expecting Slaughter, hating Troan Blood.
But, as if forcing Heaven, and free from Fear,
In their own Hands, th’ incenfed Souldiers bear
Predeftin’d Piacles, and kill again
Freth Sacrifice, in Fight, to thofe were flain.
Firft, the Picenian Bands, when they beheld
The Cohorts difsipated, and repell’d,
And Hannibal advancing furioufly,.
Gharge Him with igi Tas and, before they dy ;


Amaze


Sttius Irarticus. Book V.


Amaze the Conquerour (whom they invade)
To fee the Slaughters,that their Valour made.
For, now, with one Confent, and Force, a Showr


_Of Piles upon the Libyan Troops they pour,


A\nd when repuls’d, their fixed Targets all,

Prefsd with the Weight of crooked Shafts, let fall.
This with their Gen'ral's Prefence doth excite

The Libyans Rage ; who mutually to fight
Exhort each other, and fo clofely preft _

Upon their Foes, they fought chem Breaft to Breaftt.
Her Torch Bellona fhaking through the Air,

And fprinkling, with much Blood, her faming Hair,
Through both the Armies, up, and down,doth flee,
Aud, from her horrid Breatt, ‘Tsfiphone

A deadly Murmur fends: while to engage,

The fatal Trumpets all their Minds enrage.

Thefe by their adverfe Fortune, and Defpair

OF future Safecy, animated are:

Them more propitious Gods, and Vidtory,
Smiling upon them with a joy full Eye,

Encourage , favour'd by the God of War.

But Lareranus, while entic’d, too far

With Love of Slaughter, furious on he goes, -

At length engaged ftood among his Foes :

When Lentulus, of equal Age, him Spy'd,
Too much with Fight, and Blood, ‘on ev ry Side
Opprefs'd, and midft an Army to provoke


The Fates, with a brisk Charge, toaid him, broke


Through all the Ranks ; and Baga, then about


To wound him in the Back C though fierce, and flour) |


Prevented with his Spear, and doth attend

The Fate, and hard Adventures of his F riend, —

With chearfull Courage, now, their Arms they joyn,

Their Fronts, and Crefts, with equal Glory shine.
When


Book V. Sitius Iraricus, 133


When Syrsicus, by Chance (for who durft move
Arms againftthem , unlefs by Stygian Fove
Cocdemn'd to dy * ) defcending from the Hill,
Arm‘d with abroken Oak, upon them fell:

And as the weighty Tree about he waves,

With Thirft of both their Deaths, thus vainly raves.

Nothere (fond Youths} gates, nor a Coat

Treach’rousto Seamen, nor the Ocean, toft

By new-rais'd Tempetts, fhall on you beftow
Fortune, without a War. You now hhallknow,
That once were Conquerours at Sea, by Land
What Lilyan Warriours are, nor us withftand
Within a better Empire. As he fpoke,

At Lateranus with the pond’rous Oak

He ftrikes, and fighting rails: when Lentulus,
Gnathing his Teeth for Anger, meets him thus.

Sooner fhall Tbrafimenus raile his Flood
To thofe high Hills, then in his Pious Blood
That thy pernicious Tree thou {halt imbrue.

And, as he ftretch’d himfelf to ftrike, quite through
His Body pierc’'d him : through the gaping Wound
The reeking Gore flows largely to the Ground.

No lefs, in other Quarters of the Field,+
Imcens‘d to mutual W ounds, their Fury {well'd.

By tall Hiertes Nereus fell: and by
Rullus brave Volunx,rich in Land, doth dy.
Nor Riches heap’d, nor Palaces, that fhin’d
With’'s Countrey’s lvory, to which were joyn’d
His Vaffal Villages, could now withhold
His Fate. What boots extorted Wealth? or Gold,
Which Men, with Thirft infatiable, purfue ¢
Whom Fortune richly did of late endue
Wich her moft wealthy Gifts, is, naked, now
By Charon wafted, to the Shades below.

There


OT SES EN


m¢ Surtus Traricus. Book V. ~Book'V. Sierus ‘Iraticus. 3g


There Warlike e4ppius, though but young in Years, 7 - is Swordupomhil Gashu Vales too! ion 69
Great in Attempts, the Field with Slaughter clears: “Aa UHL his Dthigel edhe akiain a Blow. oor feud:
And where of greateft Strength, and Valour, none With thatwMéne) which; kad not gt tbat bed
Elfe durit afpire, chere Honour He, alone, HibrSwenyah; hegobld noelift, ndw eins) j
Atchieves. Him e4tlas meeting ( Atlas, who, At's Fo ftearHppia thhows:: sits weizhey: Balk. ‘
Sprang from Iberian Blood, did vainly plow Him bachardifele; avd breaks his Borg: ee ie
Remoteft Sands) thruftsat his Facea Lance: When Mago flow tritiiGall.@for rhea an tainsdl i Lor A
The-Top whereof, as it doth lightly glance, He-fnig hr) i bd:wopst benoavh dais Helnéc, and aes
And raze the Skin, tafteth his Noble Blood. Groanirig:with Kagie canton, Thy Alliance lice!
Like Thunder now, ora Storm-raifed Flood — - By them cénitadtedsamdthe:Nephews; thai! 0:4?
He threats. New Flames, within his furious Eyes, : He themudexpevted, fire his! Fhoughtsithe mone

Are kindled : mad, like Lightning, then he flies Cfends But as, with neater ‘Wiewshiedoth dxplore. 07 o 2:
Through all th’ oppofing Troops; his Wound, that : Appius his Shield, large Menhbers; and the Ries
Blood from beneath his Cask, the reft commends Of'siielinet ;hinva whiletharSiphtdelays:: wie
OF his ftout Martial Limbs: then might you fee As when,aiLiyoadrom afhady Hill! + | a
The trembling Youth, contending, as they flee, In hafte defeends, bishun ary Gorge téifill) «|:

To hide themfelves. As, when th’ affrighted Deer He ftands, and fooweontwacts his Spoedyifhe Tea
An Hircan Tiger follows ; or with Fear Within the Plais:alBull apptoaching hey vers 7.
Doves fly the tow'ring Hawk, or asthe Hare, : Though with long blunger prefs'd, — his high,
When the beholds the Eagle, in the Air, ThickriGiirg: Nek ; ‘admires his threatning Eye

Ready to ftoop, to Covert runs with Speed: Bensaiha ruggéd Brow, while he prepares

Here with his Sword, he lops off Atlas Head. For Fight, and Earth,to give the Signal, tears.

And his Right Hand then, raging, on doth go, Firft Appius (poke, ashe Jav'linthrew,
Charging, more furious by Succefs, his Fo. Ifthou haffany Riety, purfue |

For arm’d with a bright Ax, and, in the Sight | TH Contras, andaccompany thy Son

Of's Father Adago, to engagein Fight In Deaths" With that theflying Weapon run
Ambitious: big with Hopes of Praife, there ftood Quite throtigt: his brazen Arms, untill it truck. i
Cinyphian Ifalces , vainly proud His:Left-Arm, and init, deep wounding, fucks

Of promis’d Nuptials, when the Romane War . The Libyan Resatn of Words forbore. — |
Should ended be. But Appius {ets a Bar But with hisSpear' (-which Hannibal before |
To thele his Hopes, and with fuch Fury came Sagunthar Wallsya @onquerour had ta'ne

Againft him ; that, as he his Ax, with Aim, From Noble Durias; there in Battel flain,

Directed at his Face, fo ftrong a Stroak . And to his Brother gave; which, with Délight,

Fierce Appius, rifing higher, gave, he broke : He,abraveTiophie;boreinevryFight})

His . . Charg'd


Sitius Iraricus, Book V,


Charg'd him:-Grief lending Force, the Weapon
* His Cask,and Mouth, inflidsa deadly Blow ;(thr ough
And, as Hie {trove to déaw it from the ‘Wound, .
His Hands, foon bloodle&; >fell. Upon the Ground,
Appius »a. Name through: the Ada omanSea,:' © -
Rendwn’d, a great Part of Rome's: Ruin, lay: :
And in his bloody: Mouth,expiring, there .
Cruth‘d, and, with sane bitesthe fatal. Spe
The Lake then trembled: from his Body dead":
“With Wavescontracted, Thrafimenus fled.
Next, with-no better Fates, M4anmercus ve
And wounded falls; bytall ‘his Ewemies. 0-2. i
For whete the Lwftanian Catiorts fought, © - .
Gain’d with much Blood;and Valour; as he broughe :
A Standard, whofe ftout Bearer he-had flain,::-
Andcall‘d his:flying Countrey-meh again ,
Flis Foes, intiens'd at what they faw himdo, :
What ever in their Hands was Mifsile threw; -
Aind likewife all, hae Earth,then cover'd o're
With Darts, and Spears, afforded (like a Shour
Of Hail) upon him falls, and greater Store:
Of Darts no fingle Romane felt before.
Thus ftout Adamercus fell, and at his Fall,
Vex'd at his Brother's Hurt, came Hannibal,
And raging ask'd (when He the Wound efpy'd J.
Now him, then his Companions, If his Side
The Spear had pierc’d? or, if withinthe Wound
"Twere fix'd? But, when no fear of Death he found),
Nor Danger, from the Field he ftrait was fent,
Cover'd with His own Coat, into His Tent,
Within the Camp, and free from Trouble : here
For Cure all Med’cinal Arts prepared were
By Learned Synalus, who did infule, a
Bathing the Wound throughout, the healing Pe


i
i


Book V. Sitius Iraricus; 37


OF choiceft Herbs, and, with a fecret Charm
The Weapon ftrait extracted from his Arm, —
Him witha crooked Sriake to Sleep compell’d: °
All other Syna/us in Skill excell’d, ae
And for it was through all the Neighb’ ring Land, J
And Cities, fam’d, o’th’ © Paretonian Sand. Bo) Zeros Tow in Lib
To Synalus. ( hisGrand-father) of old: rr ape a
Thofe Secrets Garamantick_ Hammon told, |
And how the Bitings of wild Beafts to heal,
And deepeft Wounds of Weapons did reveal.
He thofe Celeftial Gifts, while yet he liv'd,
Transmitted to his Son ;w ho them deriv'd
To th’ Honour of his Heirs whom Synalus,
As great in Fame, fucceeds, and, Studious _
His Garamantick, Secrets to improve,
C Asa Companion once to Horned Fove)
With many Images, his Grand-fire’s Line
Deduc’d. Now, when he brought thofe Gifts Divine
In Hafte ¢ as Cuftom was) his Garments round
Tuck‘d up, with Water firft he purg’d the Wound
From Blood. But Mago, thinking on the Spoils,
And Death, of his flain Fo, his Brother’s Toils ,
And Cares, with Words of Courage, thus aie
Andeas‘d his own Mithaps, with Thoughts of Praife.
Ceale from Thy Fears(dear Brother)to my Wound.
No greater Remedy can now be found :
Great Appius, by me compell’d, is gone
To th’ Shades below, and we enough have done,
Since He is dead, I, willingly, can go
To Hell it elf, after fo bravea Fo.

But, when the (onful from an Hill beheld ,
That this the Libyan Captain from the Field
Had, troubled, turn ‘d ; that in their Trenches they
C Asif the Glouds of War age vanifh'd ) lay ;


ith


138 Sitius. Iraricus. Book V.
Sa ee ee


With fudden Fury; for his Horfe he calls,

And, from the Hill defcending, fiercely falls

Upon the trembling Files ; which, now grown thin;
He routs, and in the Valley doth begin Ye


The Fight again. Aswhenthe Cloudsabove, . -


Surcharg'd with ratling Hail, diffolve, ‘and Fove,
Mixing his Thunder with their Torrent, thakes
The Alps, and high Ceraunian Rocks, and makes.


The World (thus mov’d) the Earth, the Sea, the Air,


To tremble, and ev’n Hell it felf to fear:
So,likea fudden Tempetft,from the Hill,
The Conful on the frighted, Lybians fell.

The Sight of Him chill Horrour ftrikes into


Their Bones; while he through thickeft Ranks doth g0, |


And,with his Sword, cuts outa fpacious Way.
With that, confufed Cries to Heav’n convey
The Fury of the Fight, and ftrike the Stars.
As,when the angry Seas againft the Bars
Of Hercules do beat, and roaring Waves
Throws into lofty (a/pe’s hollow Caves,
The Mountain groans ; and, as, with furious Shocks,
The foaming Billows break againft the Rocks,
Tarteffos, though far diftant thence by Land ,
And Lixus, that by no {mallSea doth ftand
Divided thence, at once the Eccho fhare.
By a {wift Dart, that Silent through the Air
Had pafs‘d, before the reft doth Bogus fall :
Bogus, who at Ticinus, firft of all,
- Againtt the Rutuh his Jav'lin flung,
And vainly thought, that Clotho would prolong
His Thread of Life, and thata num’rous Line
Of Nephewshe fhould fee, by the falfe Sign
Of flying Birds deceiy’d. But none have power
By Augury to remove the fatal Hour.


‘Mid'tt


Book V. Sitrus Iraticus, | 139


‘Mid’ft Storms of Darts he falls; and to the Skies

Lifting, in vain, his dim, and bleeding Eyes,

O'th Gods, misunderftood, as he expires,

The Promifes of longer Life requires.

Neither could Baga/us then boaft, in Fight

That he, unpunifh’d, in the Conful’s Sight,

Had conquer’d Libo ftrip’d ; who vainly.theré

The Lawrel of his Ariceftours did wear.

But a Mafsilian Sword lops off his Head,

And, on lis Cheeks as Down began‘to fpread,

The barb’rous Souldier, by unumely Death,

Supprefs’d his rifing Years. Yet his laft Breath

Did not in vain implore Flaminius Aid:

For ftrait, by him, his Fo was headlefs made :

A\s pleas’ d that, after his Example, by

The fame fad Death the Conquerour fhould dy.
What God, O Mufes, aptly can rehearfe

So many Funerals * Or who, in Verle,

Worthy fuch Noble Shades, lament their Fall ¢

Or tell how there the Early Youth did all

Contend in Death for Honour? Or what then,
Ev’n in the Porch of Death, more Aged men
Perforard? What Courage of unconquer’d Hearts
They fhew’d; when as their Breafts were fill’d with
On either Side,as Furiousthey engage, (Darts
They Frequent fell, nor would their Eager Rage
Allow them Time to Spoil, or Thoughts of Prey,
Which their Defire of Slaughter takes away.
The Conful, while, within the Camp, the Fo
The Wound of Mago kept, now Darts doth throw ,
Then us'dhis Sword, and, mounted on his Horfe,
Through Mpyriads of Men, his Way doth forcez
Sometimes afoot before the Eagles goes ;


While Blood the fatal Valley overflows: .
| X 2 With


Sirius ITaLticus. Book V.


With numrrous Streams, and th’ hollow Rocks, and _


The Noife of Herfe, and Arms, with Eccho fills. Hills,
Marmarick Othrys, in the Field, among

The reft, advanc’d to fight. His Body {trong
Above all humane Strength: the very Sight
_Ofhis Gigantick Members turn’‘d to Flight
Thetrembling Wings: his Shoulders, largely {pread,
Above both Armies rais‘d his lofty Head.

Rude, like an Horfe’s Mane, his Treffes hung

Upon his lowring Brews : his Beard as long

O''re fhadowing his Mouth : his fquallid Breaft

The horrid Briftles ofa Boar expreft.

Scarce any dare look on him, or come near

To fight him. Like a Monfter ev'ry where

He rangeth through the Field, from Danger free :
Till, curning his fierce Looks on thofe that flee ,

A Cretan Arrow, mounting to the Skies

Wich filent Wings, in one of ’s glaring Eyes

Doth falling fix, and turneth him afide

From the Purfuit, Which,when the (onful {py'd

He lanceth at his Back, as he retreats

Towards the Camp, a Dart, that penetrates

( Breaking his naked Ribs) his Body through,
And in his briftled Breaft the Head doth fhew.

To draw it forth, with Haft, he labours, where

The fatal fhining Point did firft appear ,

Till, the Blood largely flowing to the Ground ,

He fell, and crufh’d the Weapon in the Wound.

His laft Breath, waving through the Field, doth rear
The Duft, and heaves a Cloud into the Air.

In the mean time,a diff’ rent War, the Hills,
The Woods, and Cliffs, with various Slaughter fills ,
The Rocks, and Thorns, as dy’d with Bleod appear.
The Caule of their Deftruction, and their Fear,
Sychaeus


Book V. Sinius lTratticus. 148


Sycheus was: who, ata : Diftance, flew © «
Murranus-with a Lance ; then whom none knew;
Intime of Peace, mare fweesly with his Quill
Totouch Orphaan Nerves, or had more Skill,

Ina vaft Wood he fell, and, ey’nin Death,
Look’d for the AZquanian Hills (where firft his Breath
He drew) in Wine moft fertile ; and for fair
Surentum, where the Zephyrs purge the Air,

Tohis fad Fate conqu’ring Sycheus joyn'd
Another’s Fall: and in that new fad Kind

Of cruel Fight rejoyc’d, For, while into

The Wood, Tauranus, rafhly, did purfue

The ftragling Fo; too far engag‘d, as he

Secur'd his Back, againft an aged Tree ,

From Blows, and vainly his Companions calls

With his laft Breath, he by Sycheus falls


_And,piercing through his Body, in the Wood,


Behind him fix’d, the Zyrian Jav'lin ftood.

But what did You unto your felves prepare ¢

What Anger of the Gods? What fad Defpair
Your Minds poflefs'd * |Who, quitting Fight, did fly
To Arms of Trees for your Security ¢

Pear, in diftrefs'd Affairs, advifech ftill

The worft ; and, whenfoe’re th’ Eventis ill,


‘Itargues want of Courage. In the Wood,


It’s Branches to the Skies extending, ftood

An aged Tree : which, high above the reft ,

Into the higheft Clouds, afpiring, preft

Its fhady Head, and Chad it ftood within

An open Field) as ita Grove had been,

To amoft largeextent, the dark’ned Ground

Had cover'd with its Shade, Near that they found
An Oak, which, there through many Ages grown,
Endeavour'd to the Stars its mofsic Crown


To


142 Sitius Iraricus. Book V.

; To raife, and fronvits {preading Trunk did fill
The-Arms with Leaves, and thadow’d all the Hill.
Hither the Cohorts, fent from Sicily,
Not daring te-prevent their Infamy
By Death, and yielding up their Minds to Fear,
Goritend with Speed to-fly ; and climbing there,
The Wav’ring Boughs,. with their uncertain Weighe
Opprefs'd, and all contending.to be at |
‘The fafeft Place, fome fhaken from their Stand;
Fall-to the Ground, by rotten Branches, and
The aged Tree‘deceiv'd; fome Trembling hung
Stull onthe Top, among the Darts were flung
Againft them by theo : untill refolv'd ,

_ Thatin one Ruin all fhould be involv’d ‘
At once, Sychéus lai‘d his Shield afide, ;
His Weapons chang’d, and ftrait an Ax imploy’d,
Late fharp’ned for the Fight. With him the reft
Haften the Work, and all the Tree inveft ; |
Which now, through frequent Blows declining, cracks
Aloud : and,as the weakned Body thakes,
Th’ unhappy Troop upon it, to, and fro
Are tott’ring tofs'd. So, when the Zephyrs blow
Upon an antient Grove, the Birds, that there,
On the weak Tops of Trees, their Nefts prepare,
Are tofs'd, and made the Sport of ev'ry Blaft,
O'recome with many Blows, the Oak,at laft,
(Their moft unhappy Sanetuary ) doth fall,


A\nd, in its {pacious Ruin, cruth’d them all.


Then doth another Face of Death appear ;

That Tree, that to their Slaughter was fo near,
Shines, and is {eis'd by active Flames: among

The Leaves, and Branches dry, and growing ftrong
Vulcan his Globes of furious Fire doth turn


Toev'ry Side, and higheft Boughs doth burn.
; Nor


Book V.


Sirius Iraticus. 143


Nor do the Libyans ceale their Dartsto caft;
While Bodies, half-confum’d by Fire, imbrac’d
The burning Arms, and with them, groaning, fell.
But amidft this Deftruction ¢ fad to tell)

The incens’d Con/ulcame, arid bufied all

His Thoughts on Rage, and fierce Sycheus fall.
The Danger of fo great an Enemy

Prompts the brave Youth, his Fate again totry
With’s Lance ; which lightly onthe brazen brim
Of’s Shield he plac’d, thereby to hinder him

To pafs through that Defence : the Con/ul, loath
Totruft the Fortune of Sycheus Death

To mifsile Weapons, with his Sword advanc’d,
And, maugre his thick Shield, fo deeply lanc’d

His Side, he fell, expiring, to che Ground

Upon his Face. Death, entring at the Wound,


_ With Stygian Cold, through ev'ry Part doth creep,


His Eyes compofing to EternalSleep. —
While thus the God of War himfelf applies,

To Enterchanges of fad Tragedies,

Mago,and Hannibal the Camp forfake,


And, in their {peedy March, their Enfigns take


Along, moft eager to repair the Time,

That they were abfent, by a greater Crime

Of Blood, and Slaughter : with their furious Pace,
The Troops, advancing, raife inev’ry Place

Thick Clouds of Duft(like Whirlwinds)to the Skies;
And withthe Sand the Field doth feem to rife:

And wherefoe’re the Gen’ral bends hisCourle, .
Like a {trong Tempeft, with impetuous Force,
Through the vaft Air it {wells, and higheft Hills
Covers with horrid Darknefs. Here he kills

Valiant Fontanus, wounded in the Thigh:

There, piered quite though the Throat, tout Bucca by


His:


144


(&) A City,where he was born,


@) A Cityin Campania:


Book V.


Sirius [rTaticus..


His Spear was flain ; the Point through th’ Weund ap-
In’s Neck behind : (©) Pregella hin with Tears Cpears
Bewail'd, renowned for’s antient Defcent :
Th’ other his fair”) Anagniadid lament:
Like Fate ( Levinus) thee befell, although
Thou didft not choofe the Tyrian King thy Fo;
But with Hiremon, who then led the light
eAutololes, contend’ft in fingle Fight:
Whom, wounded in the Knee, and Proftrate, whilé
Thou doft keep down, and vainly {eek to fpoil,
With cruel Force, an heavy Jav'lin broke
Thy Ribs ; thy Body by. the fatal Stroke,
With fudden Ruin, on thy proftrate Fo
Doth fall, and Both in Death together go.

Nor were: the Sidicinian Cohorts then
Wanting in Valour : thefe (athoufand Men )
Stout Viridafus arm'd, whofe Skill did yield
To none, to guida Ship, or pitch a Field ;
None fooner could with batt‘ring Rams prevail
‘Gain ft Walls, or fooner higheft Tow’rs could {cale.
Him, when the Libyan General beheld,
With the Succefles of his Valour f{well’d, .
CFor he 4varicus, not trufting to
His Arms, and by him Hurt, did then purfue)
His Anger rifing higher, at that Sighe,
He thought him worthy with Himfelf to fight :
And, from Avarteus ashe withdrew,
His wounding Spear upon him fiercely flew,
And, piercing deep into his Breaft, faid He;

Prais‘d be thy Valour, whofoe’re thou be ;
‘Tis pitty Thou by other Hands fhould’ft fall.
The Honour, thusto dy by Hannibal,
Bear to the Shades below; and, were not Thou
Born of Italian Blood, thy Life fhould now ~


nme eee


Be


Book V.


Sinius Iraricus. 144


Be fpar'd : next him, he Fabius flew; and bold:


Labicus, who in feats of Arms was old,

And long before, in“ Arethu{as Land,

Had with eA milcar fought, and Honour gain‘d :

And, now, unmindfull of his broken years,

With Courage frefh, again in Arms appears :

But that He now grew cold in War, his Blows

More vain betray (the Fire, fo, weakly glows

In dying Embers, that no Strength at all, .

The Flame retains) him, when fierce Hannibal

C Shew’d by His Father's Armour-Bearer ) {py’d,

Thy former Fight’s due Puriifhment ( He cry'd)

Receive, by thismy Hand: Amilcar now

Revenging, draggs thee to the Shades below.

This faid, from’s Ear, with Aim, a Dart he throws,

Which, as upon the Wound he turned » goes

Quite through his Head, the fatal Shaft again

Pull'd out,his hoary Locks, a Crimfon Stain,

Of Blood, receive, and his long Labours all,

In Death are ended. Next to him doth fall

Herminius (a Youth’) who firft, there took

Up Arms, before accuftom’d with his Hook,

( Fam‘d Thrafimenus) inthy Laketo prey,

And to his-aged Father oft convey

Delicious Food, and with his Angle, from

The Neighbring Waters drew thé.Fithes Home,
But, now the Carthaginians, fad, convey


, Gn) Sicity; from the River of
that Name. i=:


Upon their Arms, Sicheus Corps away,
Unto the Camp, whom with a mournfull Cry
Prefsing along, as Hannibal doth {py.
Wiha Prefaging Grief He ftrikes his Breatt,
Whatis this Sadnefs that’s by you expreft
My Friends? (faidHe} of what hath usthelre
Of Heaven depriv'd? Thee burning with Defire -
| Y Of


|
iz
I


I
|


Ene aa


146 Strius Iraticus. Book V.


Of Praife, Sichens, and too great a Love
: OF thy firft War, doth this Black day remove
From Life, and Us, byan untimely Fail:
With that he groan’d, to which the Tears ef all,
That bare him, do Confent, whe likewife tell ,
Weeping, by whofe revengefull Hand he fell.
Ifecitinhis Breaft (faidHe) fee where
a ‘The Weund was made by the Ilzack, Spear :
Oh worthy our dear (jarthage fhalt thou go,.
And worthy Hafdrubal, to Ghofts below.
Nor fhall thy Noble Mother thee lament,
Degenerate, from thy fo high Defcent. _
Nor, as unlikethy Anceftours, ftom Thee
In Stygian Shades, fhallour Amilcar flee.
But thefe our Tears Flaminins, this Day,
C The Caufe of all) by’s Death thall wipe away:
This Pomp, thy Funeral fhallfure attend ,
And impious Kome her. felf. thall, in che End,
That my Sicheus Body with her/Sword
She ne’re had wounded, any Rate afford,
Thus he his Fury vents, and, as, he peaks’,
From’s foaming Mouth, like Smioak, a Vapour breaks.
His Rage in broken, Murmurs from his Breaft
Extrudes that Breath, that fhould have Words: exprefts
So from a boiling Potin fcalding Heaps, a leaps )
Like Waves, through too much Heat, ‘the ‘Liquour
Then with blind Rage, into the midtt of all,
He Runs, and Rends the Air, as He doth call
Upon Flaminius ; who no eae hears
His Veice, but to the Combat he appears, -


And Mars more near approach’d;while Hand,te Hand,


To fight within the Lifts, beth Champions ftand.
. Then ftrait, through allthe RecksafuddenCrack _-
Doth run the Mountains all with Horrour fhake ;.


Their |


Book Vis Srxtius Irauicus. — ad


Their Tops do tremble, and the'Grove of Pines

That crown'd them) from ts pleafane Height declines ; .

And broken'Qluntries- orfthe Atmiés fall ;

Groaningsas pull'd. from her. Foundations all | | .

The © Earth doth quakdand breaking. Rrangely wide , ( The Poerin this, agrees with


Livy, who affirms , the Fury of the


Through the vakt Gulfe; where Stygian Shades mee d: Souldiers ro be fach,'tbat pe ch

And feavilchie Day again. The troubled Lake ini. sited fe carte sete

Rais‘d to the higheft Hills, fore’d to forfake . ramen Noi, tore Nour

Its ancient Seat, and Channel, with 4 Flood.

Before unknown, now laves the Zyrrhen Wood :

This Storm the People, and the Towris of Kings,

Like a dire Plague to fad Deftruaion brings.

Befides all this, the Rivers backward run,

And fight with Mountains, and the Sea begun

To change its Tydes, the Faunes now quit the Hill

Of Apennine, and fly to Floods, yet ttill

The Souldier ¢ O the Rage of War!) although

The reeling Earth doth tofs himtoo, and fro,

Fights on, and ashe falls, deceived by

Th unconftant Ground, throws at his Enemy

His trembling Dares, till wandring here, and there,

The Daunian ¥ outh diftracted through their Fear,

Fly tothe Shore, and leap into the Stream.

The Conful, who by Chance was mix'd with them,

That by the Earthquake fell, their Fight, in vain,

Upbraids. What then ;I pray you, doth remain

To fuch as fly 2 Fo Hannibal thus you

His Way unto the Walls of Rome doth fhow:

You pat both Fire, and Sword into His Hand,

‘Gainkt Fove's Tarpeian Tow’r: Oh Souldiers ftand ,-

And Learn by meto fight ; If ye deny

To fight at all, then Learn of meto dy;

Flamininsto Pofterity thall give

Neo vile Example ; and while I do live,
¥ 2 No


Sirius Iraricus. Book V.


No Libyan, or Cantabrian, fhall {ee
A ((onful’s Back, althoughalone I be.


~ Bur, if fogreata Thirft, and Rage of Flight: :


Your Minds invades, their: Weapons all {hall light ~
Upon this Breaft and, after this my Fall,
My Ghoft into ‘tie Fight thall you recall.

While thus he vents his Grief, and doth advance.
To meet hisnum’rous Foes, with Countenance, _


And Mind as Cruel, forth Ducarins came,’ -


| Who from his Anceftours deriv'd his Name;


And, fince the Boias Armie’s Overthrow,

Thofe Wounds, which he receiv’d fo long ago,

4s Marks of barb’rous Courage, did retain,

And ,knowing the proud Conqu’rour’s Face again, -
Art Thouthe Boians greateft Terrour? I
(Saidhe) by this my wounding Dare will try,

If ch’ Blood of fuch a Body may be fhed: —

Nor be You flack, more vulgar Hands, that Head
To Sacrifice to valiant Ghofts ; ‘twas he,


_Who in his Chariot, proud of Victory,
_ Ourcaptiv’d Fathers to the Capitol


Drove : and they, now, on You for Vengeance call
With that a Showr of Darts, that ev'ry where

Fly, like a Tempett, through the darkned Air,
O’rewhelm, and hide his Body ; fo that none
Could after boaft, that by his Hand, alone,
Flaminius dy'd. Thus with the General

The Fight foon ended: for the Chief of all

The Youth, asangry with themfelves, and Heaven,
That to their Arms fo ill Succefs had given,
And choofing rather once to dy, then fee
The eA ffrican enjoy the Victory,

With Hands all bloody, in the fatal Fighe,
Scife on their Gen'ral's Body, in their Sight


So


Book V. Sicius Iraticus.


149


So lately flain, with all his Weapons; and,

United i inaRing, about him ftand,

Till all, in one great Heap of Slaughter, dy’d,

And falling, like an Hill, his Body ©) hid,

Now, having {pread Deftruction through the Wood,
And Lake, and left the Valleys deep in Blood,
Toth’ Heap of Bodies Hannibal withdrew,


And with him Mago: and,as them they view, (behold,


What Wounds * What Deathsarehere? (faid he )
How ev'ry Hand ftill grafps a Sword, though cold
In Death ! The armed Souldiers, as they ly, |
Seem to maintain the Fight ! How thefe did dy
Now let our Troops obferve ¢ the Threats appear
Yet in their Foreheads, and their Faces bear
Their living Anger, and, | fear, that Land ,
Which fruitfull is in Men fo valiant, and

OF fo great Courage, Fates to her decree

The Empire of the World, and She thall be
Viétorious in Diftrefs. This faid, He yields

To Night: and Darknels, over all the Fields
Diffus'd, (while So/ into the Sea defcends)
Reftrains their Fury, and the Slaughter ends.


The End of the Fifth Book.


(p) It appears by this, that Flami-
nixshad lar’d afide all Ornamenis of
Cenful, Or General : for that his Body
could not be diftinguifhed from any


of chofe, that fellabour’bim.


ae: Sen: -neetes SRO oe


ie Poi


SILIUS ITALICU
ee
The Second Ptinick V Var.
(The Sixth Bonk


Ta AneuM nN T.
Brutius great V. alour, who, beforebe dy'd,
His Eagle from bis Foes i'th Earth doth bide.


Sorranus, wounded, to Perula’s Plains ©


Hie Regulus (bu Father's) Death, and Wars,


ee


The Vittovies by Sea, and Land, which Rome...
. From Carthage once bad gain’, with Fire confume.


U. .'T,. when his Steedsin the


Tartefsiack Main,
‘Loos'd to give way to Night,
Sol joyn'd again, hs
On the Eoan Shores, ‘and Seri-
P ——Semens “ig a / = ans, who ‘oT &
awe | The firft of all the World his Beams review; - .
7 aay ‘ies fore For filken Fleeces to their Groves repair, 9 3
pois PE Mee The Place of fad Deftructionev'ry where :
: | Appears,


=\ a=


151


Situs Traricus. Book VI.


| Appears, and Monuments of farjous War.


Here Men, and Arms, and Horfes, mingled are,
There Hands lop'd off, ftill to their Lances ftick,
In Wounds of Bodies flain: there Targets thick,
Trumpets, and headlefs Trunks, ly fcatter'd round


~ Through all the Plain:with Swords,that as they wound


‘Gainft Bones were broke.Some with be-nighted Eys,
Half dead, in vain, there fought th’ enlightned Skies.
The Lake all foams of Gore, and on the Waves
Float Bodies, that for ever want their Graves.


Yet midft thefe Miferies, and lofs of Blood :


Firm, as her Fate, the Komane V alour ftood.

Brutius, whofe many Wounds declar’d that He
Againft his Foes had fought inequally ,

Scarce from the Fleaps of th’ miferable Dead,
(Mong whom he lay ) had rais‘d his wounded Head,
Striving with mangled Limbs to creep away,

His Nerves now fhrinking, when the fatal Day -
Was done. Him Fortune had riot plac’d among


' The Rich, nor was he honour’d for his Tongue, -
' Orhis Decent : but Valiant with his Sword.


Nor did the Volfcian Nation afford —


_ Any, thathad of Time recover'd more :


’ (a) This Hononr , which Brutins
enjoyed, as the Reward of his Valour
was alwaies conferred on the firkk Cen
zarion Of the Triarii (who were the
Reterveof the Army) be was obli-
sed to loofe his Life with this Enfign
of his Charge, which washonour’d
the whole Army, and therefore ftiled
Saered by the Poet. The Romanes ado~
ring their Eagles ( which were fome-
times of Silver, feldome of Wood, but -
often woven,or painted on the Banner
asifthey were Divine. Herodian. lib.
4-


) &) To keep his Eagle from the Libyans Hand ; ;


Nor fought he, when but yet a Boy, before -

The Down had cloath’d his Cheeks, himfelf to hide
For Safety inthe Camp. Flaminius try'd

His Courage, when in Fighthe overthrew,

With better Gods, the (eltick “Arms, hence grew
His prefent Honour, in all Wars, that he

The Keeper of the Sacred Bird thould be.

Hence Glory made him to preferve with Care Fe.
TheCaufe of’s Death. For when he did difpair

OF Life, perceiving nothing could withftand


Since


ere. 2.


Book VI. Sitius Ira Licus, 153


Since Fate gave-Way, ‘and that the Romiaie Side -
Was ruin’d in the Fight;: he fought to hide;
And-bury’t in the Earth ; but overthrown
With fadden Darts again, and falling down, °
Extends himfelf upon it, and beneath
His Body hides it, choofing fucha Death.
But, when from Stygian Night, and Sleep, the Light -
Return’d, he from the Neighb’ring Heaps, upright,
Arofe upon his Spear, and Swongalone —-
In his Attempt, the Earth now overflown
With Blood, and foftned by the ftanding Gore,
With’s Sword he digs, and, ashe doth’adore
Th’ unhappy Eagle's Image, with his Hand,
Now fainting, fmooths again th’ unequal Sand <
Then into thinner Air his Breath doth go,
And his great Soul unto the Shades below.
Near him was to be feen the Sacred Rage
Of Valour, whofe Defervings do engage
Our Mufe to fing its Fame. Levinus, born
On high Privernum, that rich Vines adorn,
Dead, on dead Nafamonian Tyres lay ;
And, when unequal Fortune had, that Day,
Depzviv'd him of his Arms, his Spear, and Sword,
Then naked in the Fight, his Griefs afford
New Weapons. With his bloody Mouth he flies
Upon his Fo, and with his Teeth fupplies
His want of other Arms, and thus he tears’ .
His Noftrills off, bites out his Eyes, his Ears
Pulls from his mangled Head, his Forehead too
Strangely disfigures, while the Blood doth flow
About his Jaws, yet this not fatisfies,
Till with his Mouth, all full, he feeding dyes.
While Valour fadly to the Victour’s Eye
Thefe Wonders fhews, the ae Troops, that fy.
°


LTTE BT LE NL TT OS


154 Siztrus IrTavecus.


By-wayes of delert Woods,! fome wardring go:
By Night, chrough unfrequented Fields, and: thie.
Each little Noife; dt Motion of the Ai, 0) dn“


To fear, beleeve that AZago, with his Spear,
Or Hannibal porfues them in the Rear. -

Serranus (aRetiowned Name, thy Son
Great Regulus, whofe lafting Fame fhallrun
Along with Time, to tell all Ages, how
With the perfidious Carthaginians, Thou >
Thy Faith didft keep ) inthe firft glorious State...
Of's Youth, had enter’d, with his Father's Fate | .
The Punick War, and now fore wounded from
The Fight, to his fad Mother, and dear Home
Alone return'd ; no Company to eafe .
His {marting woul: but thus thtough devious waies,
Supported by his broken Lance, while Night
Gave him Protection, he afilent Flight
Towards thy Plains (Pers/a) takes, .and there
Toa {mall Cottage, weary doth repair,
CRefolv'd to try his Fate) and knock’s at Door.
Marus, who to his Father long before
A Souldier, of no mean Efteem had been,
Leaps quickly from his Bed to let him in,
And borrowing Light from the few Coals that a
Upon the Hearth, lifts it up, to furvey
His Face, which ftrait he knows, and faw (fad Sight)
Thofe cruel Wounds were giv'n him inthe Fight.
His fainting Steps fupported by his Spear : i
( The Rumour of this Lofs, before, his Ear
Had ftruck ) What Wickdnels is this (faid he }


C Oh ! born to bear too much Calamity, )
That


“Book Vi Book VL


To variots Chances are expos. ° pansies : =


Or flying Birds, affright theta, and they fade eae ae
No Sleep, or quiet Thoughts;:but ftillinclind 2: =:


Sirius Iraricus, . i55


That I now fee? Thee, greateftCaptain, I. ~:
Beheld ; when, ev't in thy Captivity, ©
Thy Looks affrighted Carthage, and thy Fall .
C Which We the Guilt, and Crime of Pte may call
Gave me fo deep a Wound, that from my Heart.
Not Libya’s Ruin cah remove the Smart.
But Oh! where are Ye now, Ye Gods, again ¢
Him(elf great Regulus offers to be Slain, |
And perjur'd (arthage, now (Oh Grief to fee! )
This rifing Branch of that great Family,
Hath quite, Alafs ! deftroy’d. Thus having faid,
The fainting Youth upori his Bed he lai’d ;
Nor was heignorant ( for he in War
That Skill hadlearn’d) fie Med’cinesto prepare: _
And firft wich Water purg’d his Wounds , then Juice
Of Herbs, of healing Virtue, doth infufe ,
Then binds them up, and witha tender Hand ©
Swatlis on the Bolfters, with a gentle Band..°

Thus having giv’n him Eafe, ‘twas his next Care,
T allay his tedious Thirft, and to repair. © -
His Strength with frugal Diet: this in Hafte
Perform’d, kinde Sleepits Benefits, at laft, _


_ Apply’d,and gave his Body gentle Reft... Lk
But, e’re the Day again did gild the Bait, .
Maras, as if he'd caft off Age, again es
Was ready toallay the burning Pain, =e


That then return'd, with Med’cines try’d before,

And pioufly doth Nat’ral Warmth reftore.

But here the ¥ outh, lifting. up to the Skies,

With Sighs, and ftequent Groans, his weeping Eyes, -

Said ; Oh Immortal fove ! if yet thy Hate -

To the Tarpeian Rock, Quirinus State

Hath not condernn’d, with a more kinde Afpett

On Italie’s diftrefs'd Affairs reflect. -
_ Z 2 -_ Our


Sinus [TALicus. Book VI.


Our Iliads of Woes behold : for we
The Alps have loft, andour Adverfity
No Limits finils. Técinus, and the Po,
Sweln high, with Romane Slaughter, overflow :
And Trebia’s by Sidonian Trophies known
With that fad Land, that Aanus did renown. -
But why do I complain of this? Alafs,
Our prefent Miferies the reft furpafs,
I faw thy Waters, T brafimenus, fwell
With flaughter'd Men. Flaminias, when he fell
Amidft the Weapons, I beheld : and all
TheShades below ( my Gods) to witnefs call,
That by a Death, worthy my Father, I,
With Slaughier of my Foes, then fought to dy ;
Had not hard Fates (asthey my deareft Sire
Refus'd) deny’da Death to my Defire.

Thus bitterly complaining, to divert
The Reft, old Adarus fpeaks. Moft noble Heart !
Whatever be our Lot, or whatloe're
Our Fortune: it, like Romanes, let us bear. .
Through various Chances, fuch, by theDecree
Of Heav’n, the Wheel of our:Mortality
In a fteep Path doth fwiftly ran. Of this
Thy Family a great Example is,


And fam‘d through all the World. That Divine He,


Thy Noble Father (whom na Deity .
Excells) ‘mong all Eternal Honour gain’d, ~
For that he did Adverfity withftand ,

Nor fhrunk from any Virtue; till his Breath
Was from his ftruggling Body forcd by Death.
T hardly wasa Youth, when Down began

On Regulus his Cheeks to fign-him Man: _

~ Yet, then, [ his Companion was, and We
Our Years ftill pals'd with kinde Society ;


Untill


Book VI. Sirius. Iraticus, iy


Untill the angry Gods decreed that Light

Of the Italian Nation fhould quite

Extinguith’d be: within whofe Noble Breaft
Faith kept her Temple, and his Soul poffeft. '
ThatSword (an Enfign of great Honour) He,
As a Reward of Magnanimity,

On Me beftow’d, and Reins, you fee, with Duft,
And Smoak now cover’do’re ( but yet no Ruft
Their Brightnefs ftains ) fuch Gifts as thefe prefer
Marus to any Romane Cavalier.

But, above all my Honours, I muft prize

That Spear, to which I often Sacrifice

Streams of Lyeus Blood, as here you fee ;

*Tis worth your Time to know the Hiftory.

Slow Brageda plows up the thirfty Sand,
With troubled Waves: inall the Libyan Land,
No Flood more largely doth it felf extend,

Or, Swelling, doth its Waters farther fend
O'reall the Fields. Asthither We withdrew,

In fearch of Springs, of which that Land but few
Affords; upon the Banks We joyfull fate,

Hard by the Styg#an Grove, that did dilate,

T’ exclude the Day, its Shadow ev'ry where ;

And a thick Vapour, breaking through the Air,


Expir'd a noifom Smell : within was found


. (6)By this Relique Afarus fignified
the old Religion of the Latines , who
had in great Veneration the Spears, or
other Arms of antient Heroes. For (as
Arnobins lib. 6. Contra Gentes) af-
firms , the Romances formerly adored a
Spear, inftead of Afars.


A dire, and fpacious Cave ; that, under Ground,
With many Labyrinths did winding run,

And, ever Dark, had ne’re beheld the Sun.

( The very Thoughts of it my Soul invades

With Fear’) That fatal Bank, and Stygian Shades;
A moft pernicious Monfter, (by the Rage

Of Earth produc’d) whofe Equal in no Age

Was feen, inhabited ; a Snake of Strength


Prodigious, and an hundred Ells in Lengths: _
His ©


yi SNR TET om Sy Oe


: Sttius Iraricus. Book Vi.
aa Se eS ge Sata pe


His immenfe Paunch, furcharg’d with Poifon Ckill'd
Upon the River's Banks) or Lyons fill’ d;

Or Heards, that, {corched’ by the furious Heat

Of the Sun’s Rays, did thither make Reetreat ;

Or Birds, that, by his peftilential Breath

Autacted from the Skies, there found their Death :
Bones, half-devour'd, upon the Ground were fpread.
And thus, when he had plentifully fed

On divers Prey, within his Noifom Den,

He belching lay, and when the Fire, agen,

OF Thirft was kindled from his fervent Food,

He came to quench i it in the Neighb’ring Flood,
And foaming Waves ; and, e’re half-way within
The Water his vat Bulk had drenche dbeen,

His Head upon the adverfe Bank would ly.

Nor thinking of fo great a Monfter, I

With Havens, and ef quinus, forward go,

T’ explore the Silence of the Place, and know

The Wood: when Horrour feiz‘d,as we drew near,
Our Joynts, and all our Limbs congealed were,
With a moft itrange, unufual Cold, and yet

We enter, and the ACymphs, and Gods intreat
O'th’ Flood, unknown, to favour what we do,

A\nd thus, though full of Fear, prefume to go

Into the fecret Wood ; when from the Mouth
A\nd Entrance ofthe Den (as from the South,
Raging with furious Storms ) a Stygian Blaft

Broke forth, and o’re the Flood the Tempett caft,
Mix'd with an Hellifh Noife. We, ftruck with Fear,
Gaze on each other’s Face, and think We hear
The Earth to groan, and fee it quake, the Den

To fink, and Ghofts to fally forth. But then
Big as thofe Snakes, wherewith the Giants arm’d:


Themfelves, when they the Court of Heav'n alarm’d:
Or


Book VI. Srtius IraLicus. | 159
nn
Or that.which in the Fensof Lerns Thee, > <
(eA kides) tyr'd'y or'keptthd golden Tree,
Such tearing uptht Earth,-andeo the Skies
Lifting hisHead, a Serpent here dothrife, 3
And ‘mong the Clouds, difperfeth, here, and there, :
His Foam, and ashe gapes, infects the Air.
We fled, and out of Breath, with Horreur, ftrove; -_
In vain, toraifeaCry (foralltheGrove =;
His Hifs had fill'd ) when Umbrian Havens, blind
With Fear, and much too blame. ( but Fate inclind
His Mind towhathe did) himfelf betook,
Unto the Body of an ‘aged Oak, ,
Thinking, thereby, the Monftertodeceive:
But (I my felf could hardly this beleive, .
Had I not feen’t}) the Snake himfelf about _

The Oak ftreight twines, and tears ‘tup by the Root.

Then trembling Havens, who to us for Aid

With his laft Voice doth call, he doth invade,

And {wallowing whole ( thislooking Back, I {py d)

In his envenom’d Paunch doth quickly hide. |

Next poor Aquinus, who, in’s {peedy Flight,

Himfelf unto the River did commit,

Swiming amidft the Stream, with fooming Jaws

He feifeth, and (a Death moft cruel) draws

Back to the Banck, and there devours, while I

In the mean time, had Liberty to fly.

As muchas my fick Thoughts permit, I hafte,

And to the General tell all had patt.

He figh’d, and their fad Fate bewail'd, and as

Againft an Enemy, in War he was

Mott eager, burning with Defire to be

Adive in high Attempts, commands, that we |

With Speed, take Arms, and thatthe Choice ofall


The Horfe, into the Field fhould quickly fall - iene


16o


Sirius: Iraricus, Book VI.


Himfelf advanc’d-before, and gaye Command, — -“)
That inftandy.a -Target-bearing Band |
Should follow, with the Engines us'd to be

Employ’ d ‘gainft Walls, and Towr’s, for Battery.


And now, when, prancing on the Champaign Ground,


The furious Steeds began to Thunder round’

His difmal Cave, the Serpent, h ifsing loud,

Leaps forth. A Stygian Vapour, like a Cloud,

Breaks from his {moaking Mouth, from’s slang Eye,
A Flame, as terrible as © chains: flies :

His Creft, erected High, appears above


The Tops of talleft Trees within the Grove. |


His Trident Tongue, which with a Motion quick


_ He waveth inthe Air, theStars doth lick.


But, when he heard the Trumpets found, amaz’d,
His immenfe Body ftrait aloft he rais‘d :

Then into num’rous Rings, beneath his Breaft,
Contradts his Tail, and on his Back doth reft.
Thus fitted for the Fight, thofe twifted Rings
Were foon refolv’d, and, as himfelf he flings

At Length, he fuddenly, as ifat Hand ,

The Faces, ev’n of thofe that fartheft ftand,
Invades. The Horfes now no more obey

The Reins, or Curbs, but as they fly away
Trembling, and panting, from his Sight, expire,
From their extended Noftrills, frequent Fire.

On his fwoln Neck to ev'ry Side he moves

His lofty Head ; and, as his Rage improves,
Flings fome aloft, fome with his Weight were crufh’ds
And as from broken Bones the Marrow Guth'd ,


~ Helicks it up, and, while the Blood doth flow


About his Jaws, invades another Fo,
And half-devoured Bodies throws away :


And now theEnfignsall, asif the Day
Were


- Book Vi. Sirius Itaiicus. | 16t


Were loft, Retreat. Yee fome, ee fartheft fly...

By his contagious Breath: infected, ydys:. ae

But your great. Father, lab’ring’to reftrain-

The flying Troops; thuscallsthembackagains =
What! toa Serpent bafely turn your Backs; ::..

Italian Youth *-and yield to Libyan Snakes

Aufonia’sHonour* If his Breath fubdue

The Cowards ; ortheir Courage, asthey view  .

Him gape, be lott: Alone, Ile undertake

To fight the Monfter. And, as this he {pake,

From his ftrong Arm, a winged Jav'lin flies :

The barbed Point whereof between his Eys(Stiength,

Not lightly wounds his Front; and,'Thrown with

W ithin'the Head o’th’ reeling Beat, at length ,

Itfinks,! and Trembling ftands. Confufed Cries,


_ And Shouts of Joy, now ftrike the Marbled Skies;


Till then the Earth-born Montter ne're did feel
( Though he had liv’d fo long) the wounding’ Steel :


A Stranger to all Pain; and, {corning fo


To yield toany, doth more Furious grow.
Nor had his Rage been vain (which borrow'd Force
From what he felt) if} skill’dto guide his Horfe ,
( After the Wound) your Father had not wav’d
His fierce Affault, and, turning nimbly, fav'd
Himfelf : while, winding ev'ry way with Speed,
He furioufly purfu’d the wheeling Steed.
But all this while your Marus did not ftand,
Ais a Spectatour, with an idle Hand.
The fecond Spear, that wounded him, I flung.
Juft as the weary Steed his forked Tongue
Lick’d on the Back, with all my Strength I threw
My Weapon: and, by that upon Me drew
His Fury, and the War, till all che Bands,
By our Example led, sala d thetr Hands,

_—


And


~ Sriaius Iravicus, Book VE.


And ftorin'd him 'with their Darts, tharhim cmBaEe G


Alternately to exercife hisRage; -


Till froma WarlikeEngine, by a 1 Strabie, ph tp tee
That would havibatter’d down a Wall, we broke -


His Strength, and yet Calehough he could no more, :
His Back new broken, raife as heretofore:
His Head unto the Clouds) ‘ more furious. on,
He ftrove to come, till the Phadarick Stone

Into his Belly funk, and then the Sight

Of both his Eyes, by winged Shafts, was quite
Extinguifh’d: by thofe many Wounds, his Death


Approach'd. Then through his wider Jaws, his Breath’


Infectious Poifen. ¢ his laft Refuge) caft.
Thus by our Darts, and pond'rous Stones, at laft,
Stretch’d on the Ground, he proftrate lay, and yet
His Jaws, extended Wide, appear’d to threat,
Tul, from an Engine fhot, a Beam, that through
The yeilding Air, witha loud Fragour flew, .
Struck off his Head, which as he gafping lay ,
A pale dark Cloud of Poifon ( thatthe Day
Infected where it went ) his Mouth exhal’d,
The mournfull River ftrait his Death bewail'd ,
With hideous Groans, and dolefull Murmurs move
Upon the Waves ; the Den, and Native Grove,
And Banks (upon whofe Sands he us’d to Roule)
With a loud Eccho Roar, and fadly howl.
But oh, how foon this difmal Fight we rue!
With how great Lofs! What Punifhment we drew,
What Plagues upon our felves? The Prophets ftrait
Us of our Dangers, but ( Alafs!) too late,
Admonihh ; that we had the Servant flain
Of the blew Naiades, that did remain
In Bragada’s warm Streams. But then this Spear
( As Honour, and Reward for what I there

Had


‘Haddone) your Father gave Me, ‘caufeit ftood_


Book VI. Sitius Iraricus. a 163
* ; a -


Firft fix'd, and drank the Sacred Serpent's Blood. -

The Noble Youth, who wept while -he relates

This Story, interrupts him. If the Fates -

Had fuffer’'d Himtolivetilnow (faidHe) 0 =’. | 2
Trebia had ne're o'reflown with Blood, nor we ;

Had {een thy Billows (Thrafimenus) hide


‘Somany Noble Names. Marusreply'd ;


Yethethe Piacles of his fad Fate,

And cruel Torments, did anticipate

With Zyrian Blood. For eAfrick, wanting Men,

Eler Wealth confum’d , had begg’dour Mefcy ; when

Therapne, mov d by fome malignant Star |

Sent forth © a Manto profecute the War. 2, Lenina, (born i in Therap 5
OF Stature he was low; no comely Grace fone By, tis Letetemeees COE Ce


neral, for the t Carthaginian, in the fist
: . . War againft the Romanes: who under
OF Meen, or Signs of Honour in his Face: We CendyGt of Auilis Regal, very


much prevailed in. Africk, This Cha-


i i ix . him by the Peer,
But admirable Vigour info {mall Sa rule ae i 2
. ; ‘ e ; 6
A Body ; Active: one, that could the Tall; Se ee ike Or Comoe.


the Forces of many, that were thought


And Larger-Limb’d, o'recome. This Man, defign’d Sinincble, were overthrown,
To manage now the War againft us, joyn’d

To Armsftrong Policy. In Defartshe

Could live, and greateft Hardthip eafily

Survive. Not Hannibal, who now fo welk

For Libya guids the War, doth him excell.

Oh would to Heaven, Tayegeta! ( moft fad,

And fatal untous) by thee He had,

Upon Eurota’s Banks, ne're hardned been:

Then in victorious Flames I might have feen:


~ Phanifia's Walls to fink, nor then the Fall


Had I lamented of my General.
Nor fhould ¢forDeath, nor Fire’ can eafe my Wo}
My Griefs bear with meto the Shades below. _ |
Both Armies take the Field, and through the Plains
The God of War grows ewe Fury Reigns

az


n


164 — Sirius Iraricus,
=
| In every Breaft. Here Regulus, in great =
Attempts, lets loofe his Sword, and haft’s to meet
With Dangers in the mid'ft of all his Foes,
A nd with his valiant Hand, gives deadly Blows.
So, when the South Wind; on his Wings dothbear —
_A pitchy Cloud, that hanging in the Air,
Both to the Sea, and Land, a Tempett a
The Husbandman, and Shepheard ftrait retreats *
For Shelter, to the Woods ;and Fear preva
With the Stout Seaman, to contract his Sails.
Pet says ste eRe But the Laconien, having lai‘d his Snare;


onof almoft two bundred Cities


frice to the Confit Regula ake Secur'd the hollow Rocks ; and, leaving: nee


not oncly ander Hi


nd Difeafes ; bur with
a cs, but wi di Bile His Men, upoiiaSudden, from the Fight, ...


of the Places, throngh wi
Nentppas drew “Bis Fotces out of the


Sligee Brctine purthea ia Wheeling, he turns his Horfe, pretending Flighy


Order £ fora March, fell upon the weary


Honensig Ni, dated ot With fained Fear.’ So Shepheards'tefecure
ot pi ie the Gee. Their Flocks within. theif Folds, by Night allure
| Welves into Pits, the which they over-lay-
ie | With Boughs, and with a bleating Lamb betray.
oe/t 2" Honour, by which brave Minds inflamed are, -
And a fallacious Confidence in War, ue
Invited ; and, drew on your Noble Sire,
Who Spurring.on, as mad with a Defire
Tofight, ne’re looks, if his‘Companions were »
Behind him, or.who follow’d.in the Rear.
When allalone, a thick, and fudden Cloud -
OF fierce Laconians,that themfelves did fhrow’d
Among the hollow Rocks, him round anya
And the Force: of his Ruin {till encreas t
Oh fatal Day. to Italy !:t0. be
Mark’din our Faft, asthe Infamy:. ; :
Of thee, Oh Mars ! thofe Hands that to thy Rene,
And thee were born, by amoft fatal Doom -
Are now condémn'd to Chains.. My Greif will be: ee
Eternal ! a SidonianDungeon Thee : |


Great


Book VI,


Book VI.


Storius Irapticus:


164


( Great Regulas:):'beheld:! andby the odds _
Of fuch a Triumph, Carthage'to the Gods
Seem‘d equal: But what Plagues fufficient are
For the Laconians Guilt of fach a War?

But now the Carthaginian Fathers all
Confult, to offer to our General |
New © Leagues, and fend him Home to mediate
A Peace ; requiring that the Captivate
In War, might be return’d on either Side ;
And, now no more Delay: the Ship doth ride
At Anchor in the Road, the Seamen are
Employd, their Oars,and Benches to prepare :
Some fit the twifted Cables, others hafte
To furle, and trimthe Sails upon the Maft ;
Others the Anchors place upon the Prow :
But above all; Cotbon, ordain’d to go
Chief Pilot of the Ship, in Sea-A ffairs
Renown’d for Skill, the Helm, and Poop prepares.
The triple-pointed Beak; its {hining Raies
( Moft richly guile) o’reall the Sea difplaies. -
Weapons; and all things elfe that needfull were_
“Gainft Dangers.of the Sea, with them they bear ,
Amidft the Ship, upon the Decks he ftands ,
That timeth with his Voice the Seaniens Hands,
And bids theinftrike at once, and as again »
They-raife-ther-Oars (that ecchoo'rethe Main )
Applauds themall: Thuswhen they had perform’d
The Seamens Work, the Ship compleatly arm’d,
And th’ Hour arriv’d, to hoife up Sail; and weigh
Their Anchors;and the:Wind:was fair for Sea ;
A multitudeof Women; Ghildren,Men, .-
Together floddd,: and érivieus Fortune then .
Drage’d throughthe THrong our Noble ales
ste au d kim asa Spedtacleroalk 2!


He


(ce) The Carthaginians, ha: be.
fore loft many confi giant, ee ale
Captive by the Romanes, after this Vi-
ctory, believed they might procure a
Peace, on more eafie Terms ; ; at leaft
an exchan, e of prifoners. To this Pur-
pofe they fent Ambaffadours to Rome ,
and with them, Regu/xs,on Condition;
that, iftheir Offer were not accepted,
he fhould return to Carthage. But, the
Romanes having elfewhere obtained
Advantages over them, Regwlus per-
{waded he Senate to prosecute the

War, and retain their Captives, ‘b
which he fraftrated the Embaffie ofthe
Carthaginians, and returned with them
to their City, where his Fidelity to his
Suniel was punifhed with a cruel
Dea


TER ER OS TERE ELT ET " a at a ah a a ache


‘Book Vi


He, intheir View, as pee Fofchead bere, oe
As when he firft, on the Sidonian Shere,
Arrived with his Fleet. With his @onfent,
Inthe fame Ship, I his Companion went ;
Refolving his Adverfity to fhare,
And thought it greater Fortitude to bear |
Their Naftinels, ill Diet, and their poor,
Obdurate Beds, and to contend with more
Important Miferies ; theri to fubdue
A Fo. Nor is’t fo honourable to

~ Avoid Misfortunes, by our Vigilance;

’ As to O'recome, by Noble Sufferance, —
Whatever Fatecando. Andyet (thoughI —
Knew his fevere, and rigid Conftancy )

J hop’d , if Heav'n permitted usto come

Within our Citie’s Walls, and fee our Home, »
Sis Heart might then relent, or by your'Tears:
CAtleaft) be mollifi'd. Thus my Fears

Kept in my Breatt, and thought that he inclin’d

To weep, and had, in Mifery, a Minde

Like mine. But, when we came to Tybur, I
Obferv’d his Face, and moftintentively

Beheld his Looks, which inward Senfe betray. .

But creditme Cbrave Youth} in what I fay,

His Countenance amid’fta thoufand Teils

Abroad, and when at Home enrich‘d with Spoils, .
And when to cruel Carthage he was fent,

And in the Inftant of his Panifhment,

Unalter'd 1 beheld; and ftill the Same:

Then all Asfonia from her Gities: came . fo
Tomeetthe Captive; all the Neighb'ting Hil,
(The Plains already throng’d) their. Number’ fills,
And Tybur to his Banks the Noife imparts: =»
But the Sidonian Princes (cruel Hearts!’


166 SiLius Iratrcus.


Strive


a ns naa i etna yn i


SILIUs. IrTaLicus, 167


Book M1,


Strive to reduce him tetheir Countrey's Drefs, -“
And fo the Honoumof the Gown fupprefs. ,


_ The Senate weeping flood ;° the. Adatrons. ivan -


And Youth, to. thew their Greifes while He,. among
Somany Sighs, ummioved flarids, His Hand, |”
The Con/ul.on the Shore, as he on Land.’

Firft tept, extendsto help him, andto ce

With kind Refped, and his Arrival greet. o
He ftepping back €ftill carefull of our State > a
Requires the Confuf-not to violate |

His Supream Dignity, but to retire. .


‘Then onhe goes, Cwhile Weeping weadmire


His Conftancy ) and compafs'd by the proud
Sidonians, and with chem a Captive Croud
Rais'dEnvy inthe Gods: But now, his Flame,
With her two hopefull Sons, fad Martia came ;
Unhappy in her Noble Lords Excefs

Of Virtue, that difdain’d in his Diftrefs, .

To ftoop to Fortune. Her difhevel'd Hair ,
And Robes, neglected, as fhe fadly tare,

Oh know’ft thou not the Day, or can it be,

It touch’d thee not in younger Years (faid fhe)
And when in Tyrian Habit ¢ like Difguife )
Deform’d fhe faw him, then with mournfull Cryes,
She fainting fell, and ftraic grew Cold, and Pale
Inall her Limbs ( Oblet our Prayers prevail /
And ifthe Gods be juft, may Carthage {ee

Such the Sidonian Moshers !}) then tome


- He whifpers, and commands that { remove


You, and your Mother, while he ftill doth prove
Impenetrable ‘gainft the ftrongeft Blow

Of Grief, and Scorns that Yoak to undergo.
Here with deep Sighs, and Tears complaining, thus


The Youth begun : Dear Father, whom with us i
Coy


Lees i
ge


No Deiej ately thar doth inelnain.t'-| <2ubs1025:77:


: Inthe Tarpein Taw ef toi Complain. . oe
eae May-beallow'd to: Piety Ob:! ww whys: .


(7) Such Ambaffadonrs, as came
from their Enemies co the Romanes ,
never admittedinto their Ciry , but
buc created with them in the Temples
of Mars, or Apollo, that ftood without
the Walls. And,. though Regulus was


_ admitted to the’ Sewate , yet, accordi ig


to his Promife , he rerarned to lodpe
with them, whofe Quarter was on rhe
other Side of Tiber. See Polybius, Ec-
og. 14.


ThisGomfort unto Usdid'a; ‘Thondtiy Pere ee


Or why, Ohdwhy (The too. fevere ») that Grace


Did’ft thou refufetotouch thy Sacred Face,»

Or Kifs Thee? To: joyn Hands, was'it.aSin--
So great? How, much thefe: Wounds had igh been,
If, fixedin my Minde, whenlrepair
To Shades below, I Thy Embrace might bear?
But I in vain thefe things Record; for we.

Were then’. my: Marss >: i our one

Yet, | remember. well; hisFormwasmore.. | +
Then Humane ; that his Locks defcended ore -

His Manly Neck, white as the 4 pine stoi.
Stern Majefty was féated on his Brow :

The Venerable Index of his Minde ; °


Such as, fince then, mine Eyes.could never finde.


Then Maras, him advifing to refrain , .
By fuch Complaints, to vex his Wounds again,
Refumes the Word. What? when he carelefs paft
By his own Houfhold Gads, and went in hafte
To the Sidonians curs'd ‘f? Abode? his Eyes |
The Monuments of his great Victories
Then faw hung up; ‘as Shields, and Chariots, and
Known Darts: while at the Door his Wife doth ftand
And cryes; Oh / whither goesmy Regulus *

This is no Punick Dungeon, that Thou thus -
Should’ft fly both it, and Me. The Foot-fteps here
Of our Chaft Marriage. Bed are yet as clear,

Asat the firft. Our Houfe ftill entertains

Its Gods withouta Crime: Fhen: fay: what Stains
In us thou find’ft? The Senate gave thee Joy,
Whea Ito thee This, and that other, Boy


Had


Book VI.


Sitius ITALicus. .


Had born : Ohturn, and ‘fee / This Houfe is Thine,

Where Thou, a Noblé Gonfal; once did fhine -

In Purple Robes ; and, marching from this Door,

Did'tt fee the Romane Fafcés go before. .. _

Hericedid'ft Thou go to War, and. ie -with’ Me,

Wert wont the Trophies of. Thy: Vistor y

To fix, againft thefe Potts. I ask not HOW .

The Rites of Hymen, or Our Nuptial; Vow: .

Onely defift Our Houfhold-Gods to flight,

And to Thy Sons, at leaft, allow This Night,

Amid thefe Tears, He with. the Tyrians goes

To lodge, and left Her venting thus Her Wées. .
Scarce had the rifing Day on Orta {een

The Place, where great Alcides Pile had been ;

When for the Libyan Lords the Conful fent.


I, at the Gate beheld (+) Him, as He went (*) Regulus


Into the Temple : what the Senate there |
Debated, what His laft Addreffes were
To the fad, weeping Court, Himfelf to Me
Did Chearfully relate. So foon as He
Wasenter’d, with their Hands, and Voices, all
Him to his wonted Seat, contending, call.
But He, the antient Honour of His Place
Rejects ; while they, about Him throng’d, embrace,
And take Him by the Hand, and thus intreat ;
He would reftore a Captain of fo great
A Name unto his Countrey ; He might be
Exchang'd for Numbers in Captivity,
And then more juftly might the Zyrian Land,
And Towers, be wafted by that valiant Hand;
Which they had bound in Chains, But He, His Eyes;
And Hands together, lifting to the Skies,
ThouGod of Juftice (faid) that govern’tt all /


And Faith, whom I no lefs Divine may call /
| B b And


169


i


And Sarran Fano! all invok'd by Me,
My Promife of Return to tettifie !
Let Mefpeak Worthy of my felf, and by
My Words preventmy Countrie’sRuin: 1
More chearfull thail to Carthage go C faidHe). -
If that my Promife of Return may ‘be od
Preferv'd, though ’t beto Punifhment. Oh then! -
Defift to tender unto Me agen
That Honour, with Deftruétion to the State.
My many Years, and Wars ,accelerate
My Death : and now, by long] mprifonment,
And Bonds, in this my Age, my Strength is fpent.
Your ‘Regulus Was once, and did purfue
The hardeft Duties ofthe War, when you
Did know Him fuch : but now within a Cold,
And bloodlefs Body, you a Name behold.
Oh ! let not Carthage then (that Houle of F raud,
That doth her felf in Treachery applaud)
Not knowing how great things to Us remain,
Think, for this aged Body, to regain
Her Captiv'd Youth, Men fit for War. But go
Arm‘d againft Her Deceits, and let her know
What ‘Kome can do , though I am Captivate:
Nor let a Peace accepted be, but what
rhe Eig) Conditions were s That Quur (2) Fathers entertain’d. They now require
Mico, thavthey thoull weal te, C- And gave it Me in Charge, as their Defire)
TEE oA berdetd Thatinan equal League, the War be weigh’d,
without Ranfom, and that they ;
tou oy eS eee for And equal Laws on either Side be made.
But may I Sink to Styx, before | fee
The Romanes to fo bafea Peace agree.
This faid ; the Courtrefolving to purfure
His Fanhfall Grave Advice: he ftrait withdrew ,
Fiimlelf to render to the Libyans Ire.
Who, with a fad Repulfe of their Defire
Difmifs'd,


170 Sirtus Iratricus., Book VI.


Book VI Sirius Iraxicus, | it.


Dismils'd, réturn‘d, through the Herculean Main , .


Threatning their cheerfull Captive, Homeagain. —
After the Senate, now, amournfull Croud: a
Of People throng, and all the Fields With loud ents
Complaints-are fill’d: fomietirfies refolv'd again

To call him back or elfe by Force retain,

Wich their juft Griefs. But Trembling, bove them all,


‘His W ife,*as at his fudden Funeral ;


When to the Ship he went, with dolefull Cries,
And Shreekings, to the Sea, as Frantick, flies.
Take Me along, O Libyans, let Me
Share both his Death, and Punifhment (¢ {aid She’)
My Dear (¢ | beg this One thing onely, by
Thefe Pledges of our Loves) permit, that I
May Shate with Thee whatever Dangers be
Deftin'd by Land, or Sea, or Heav'n to Thee :.
I did not fend Xantippus to the War,

Nor did I give thofe heavy Chains, that are
About thy Neck {why then doft fly Me fo

To Punifhment * Oh! give meleave to go ;
Me, and my Children, and perhaps, our Teats
May Carthage move to Pity. If her Ears

The cruel City ftop, we then may all,

Thou, and thy Family together fall :

Or, if refolv’d to dy, here dy with Me,

For I a Sharer in thy Fate will be.

As thus fhe {poke, the Veffel by Degrees,
Loos’d from the Shore, to put toSea, She fees:
Then moft Unhappy, mad with Grief, She cries,
(Lifting her weary Hands unto the Skies )

See Him that boats, with treach’rous Libyans, thus,
And Foes, to keep his Faith, but what to Us
Was eae ‘d Naalates! ! Ob! where i is now


rie


. panera


17 Sirius: Iraricus. * Book VIL


Thefe Words He, aarelénting, heard, The reft
The Noife, and-Dathing. of the Oars, fuppreft.


Then down-the River, with the Sueam, Werun | =


Unto the Borders, where.the Sea begun. |
O're which We fail, and with Our hollow. Pine
Cleave the vaft Billows, feamurng.with their. Brine.


I, dreading, more then Death, proud Libygs:Scormn,. . >


With'd that the Ship, by. fomg rude Temper bora

Againft fome Rock, might fplit , or ele thar We |

Might, bythe raging Seas, o'rewhelmed be.

But gently-breathing Winds, the Veffel bore

Away, and Usto Libyan Rage reftore :

Whick I, unhappy, faw ; and Home was fenr,

A fad Relarour of his Panitament.

‘Twas an hard Task: nor would | nowrelate _

To Thee, how (Carthage then. did imjtate

The Fury of wild Beatts, to vent their Spleen:

' If any Age, inall the World, had’ feen

Any thing Greater, then that high, and brave

Example, which the Rev'rent Virtue gave

Of your great Father. “Twere a Shame for Me

To add Complaints to, thofe dire Torments , He,

So unconcern’d, endur'd : and truly You,

Worthy of fo great Blood, Your felf fhould thew,
(») This Engine, buile in Form of By wiping Tears away. A Cage they build


a Cage, and proportioned to his


Body, is beft, (though briefly) def
Body is bet (hough brief) defi Of Wood, whofe Grates, onev’ ry Side, were fill'd


Randing » omits one exadt part of bis WWith equal Pikes of Steel » which fharp, and thick,


ren onan by Valerias
Th
quot hei Rae nat) By Art, in Order, plac’d, sieged fick.


ai i . a os continual

ight, as well, as thofe P f 1

thac rormenced him, F night keep him All Sleep by this Invention was deny’d,

perpetually waking, cll che long ;Vari-

ety of Pain killed Flim, And when, through length of Time, to either Side


Dull Slumbers Him inclin’d, a Row of Pikes
Into his Bowels, through his Body ftrikes.


Oh! ceafe to grieve(brave Youth) fupprefs thy Tears,


He Overcomes, that this with Patience bears, -


His


Book VI. Srnius Iraticus. 173g


His Glory: long, fall fourifh :: while’in Heav'a 5°
Or Earth, to conftant Faith;a Place is giv’; «5.
Qt Mirvae’s Sacred: Name-alive fhallbe.i
A Daythali come; wherein Pofterity .. oe
( Great Regulus) ‘fhalltrémble, when ay ie ae
Thy Fate, which Thou with fo much Scorn did't bear.
Thus Mars: (poke , and with fad Care, again: -
His Wounds fomented,to allay the Pain.
Fame, in the mean time, having {prinkled o’re

Her rapid Wings with Blood (asif before
Dip’d in the Streanis of Thrafs menus) Lies

With Truth commixing, through the City: flies,
And to the People’s Minds again reéalls

The Lols of Alia, and Tarpeian V Valls;

Storm’d by the Senones. Sad Terrour fhakes -

Her Reins, and Fear the Tempeft greater makes. -
Now tothe Walls, with winged Speed, She flies;

An horrid Voiceis heard, Our Ene nS:
Arrroac niand then with Piles,and Darts,the Air,
In vain, they beat. Th’ affrighted Matrons bare

Their hoary Locks, and with them, as they Weep,
The Walls, and Pavements of the Temples fweep,
Andto the Gods, for Friends deceafed, pray ;

Too late Alafs ! and reft not Night, or Day.
Howling with Grief, the {catter’d People ly

Before the Gates, and with acarefull Eye

Allthat return obferve. About them throng,

And,as they {peak, hang liftning at their Tongue;
But cannot Credit give, if News of Joy

They chance to tell, and yet again their Stay

Intreat, and fometimes with fad Looks, alone,

Not Words, with fuch, as hafted to be gone,

Preyail for Tdings, and yet Trembling ftand

Fo hear, what they fo Earneftly demand.


Bad


To undertake ; and prefent Dangers bar


Sitius.Iraricus, Book VIS


Bad News doth Force their Tears, 'and, if deni’d »
To know, or if the Meffenger reply'd |

With doubtfull Words, from thence new Fears arife.
And now when Troops returning, to their Eyes,
More near appear'd, out at the Gates they run

¢ Fearing they had been loft) and then begun _-
To Kifs their Wounds, and tire the Gods with Pays re
Among thele, honoured for his pious Care ,

Old Marus, with him, young Serranus led.

And Martia, who fince ‘Regulus was dead,

Sull kept at Home, all Company forfook,

And onely for her Childrens Sake did brook

The Light, now runs intoa Griefas great,

As was her former. Though diftracted, ftrait

She Marus knew, and thus accofts him: Thou,

( Great Faithsrenown’d Companion ) furely now
Thou giv'ft me lighter Wounds : or fay, hath Fate
Caus'd the revengefull Sword to penetrate
Into my Bowels, deep? What e'’re it be,

So Carthage Him in Chains may never fee,

Nor Sacrifice Him to His Father's Pain,


Im pleas'd. Ye Gods / How oft have I, in vain.


( Oh my dearSon ) intreated Thee, forbear
Thy Father’s Courage, and His Heat in War 2
That his fad Glory might not Thee engage
In Arms. Thave, of too vivacious Age
The hard Afflictions undergone. But now
Spare Us, I pray, ye Gods ! If any of you
For Us have fought: fupprefs the Enemy /
But when this fullen Cloud of Mifery
Was paft ; the Senate with all Speed prepares.
To give Support to their diftrefs’d A flairs..
All ftrive, with Emulation, the War


The


‘Book VI. Sirius -Iraricus.


The Progrefs of their Griefg;: ‘The chie fof all

T heir Cares was,to: appoinitia Pilea

Upon whafe Condua thaken fraly, . .
Andahetwhole Frame of her: Affairs, a |
Imposid; when now. eye cians
To fink, ‘For foverefolved to defer, |

Awhile, the Time of Her Imperial Pow' r3
And, rifing, look’d from the ef lbanian Tow’'r
Upon the Zyrrhen People, and beheld —

The Carthaginian, with Succeffes fwell'd,
Preparing his Vidtorious Airmist’ invade ©

Our Walls. Bur Fove, his Head then fhaking, faid : :


I never will permit, that Thou fhale come,


Proud Libyan Y outh, within the Walls of Rome.
Thou mayft the Zyrrben Vales with Slaughter fill,
And make with Latine Blood the Rivers {well,
And overflow their Banks : but I defend,

That the Tarpesan R ock thou fhouldft afcend ;
Ortothofe Walls (fo dearto Me) alpire.

-- With chat, four Times, he threw his forked Fire ;
Which fhin’d through all the Zyrrben Land, and at
A Cloud upon the Army, as it paft
From the divided Heav'n. But, yet, all this
The Libyan to divert could not fuffice.

With that the God th’ Aneades pofleft

With Refolution,in a faithfull Breaft,

The Nation to repofe, and put the Reins
Of Safety into Noble Fabius Hands.
Perceiving then the Pow’r of War to be
Entruftedto hisCare; notHim (faid He)
Envy, nor Fame, with Libyan Vanity
Guided ; nor Spoil ; nor cunning Treachery ;
Nor other bafe Defires {hall overthrow :


Skilfull, andold in War, He well doth know
Succefs,


“Sirius Iraricus. Book VI.


Succels; and Lols.witlr eqial Thoughts to bear;
His Minde well temper'd:both for Peace,: and W ar.


Thus fove: and then remounted tothe Skies.


This Fzbias, whom his. Foes could ne’re:-farprize:
In Arms, and thus by: fove commended, thought °
Himfelfmoft Happy,-when entire He brought:
Thofe Numbers Home again, which He before
Conducted tothe Field, and no Man mote ®: :
Defir'd Himfelf, or deareft Son tofpare,. -

Then He did them ;none-with fo fad a Care '
Beheld their Woundsin Fight : and when again .
He-came, a Conqu‘rour, with the Noble Stain»
OF hoftile Blood:befmear'd, his Legions:all: ‘
Appear'd. compleat, before the Citie’s Wall. -

His fam’d-Original with Heav‘n did daim ~
Alliance: for when great Alcides caine:

From Spain, Gerion’s Spoils (his Monftrous Kine)
He, that Way, where the Walls of Rome do fhine,
{n Triumph drove. *Then did eA rcadius found

( As Fame reports) in’ Rude, and Defart Ground
His Palace, and a needy People fwai'd :

When,by his Sacred Gueft, the Royal Maid,

4rcas ChisDaughter ) overcome, with Joy,


- From that her Crime of Love, conceiv'da Boy,


Was Fabiasnam’‘d; from Him,a Mother the
Became, to a Tyrinthian Progeny. |
A\nd hence three hundred Fabii-ence did Zo,
Allfrom one Houfe, in Arms, againft the Fo,
Whofe moft Renowned Actions, by his Wife
Delaies (which then Alone could equalize
The Libyan Conduct ) this Our Fabius all - ~
Excell'd. So great, then, wert Thou Hannibal!
But, while the Latines bufily prepare
Toraife Recruits, and re-inforce the War,


The


Book VI. Sitius Iraticus. 177


The (arthaginian Captain, terrified

By Fove;and having laid his Hopes afide _

Of batt’ring ‘Rome's high Walls, his Army leads

Up to the Umbrian Hills, where Fuder {preads,

Upon an high Defcent, its hanging Walls,

And where Mevania o’re large Fields exhales

Thick, gloomy Clouds ; and, Confecrate to Zove
Fat Bulls, through Rich, and Wealthy Paftures move.
From thence, defirous of Picenian Prey,

Through the Palladian Fields he makes his Way,
And wherefoe’re the Spoil invites Him, there

His wandring Troops,their plundring Enfigns bear :
Till fair (Campania ftop'd his furious Courfe

And, undefended, entertain’d the Force _

O’th’ War, within her Bofome. As He there
Beheld the Temple, and the Buildings near


: . c ig re : ; A River of ¢ mpania, upon the
© Linternus {welling Stream, he fix'd his Eyes, wal of hich od tier :
. . . . {mall T , made famous by the Ke-

Upon the various Pictures, where he {pies, eet ro ae ar a


Difgrace at Rome, thought thar more


The Monuments o'’th’ former War, maintain‘d , worayia sea hs Aes hen
By th’ Romane Senate. For they there remain’d 7 .
Carv’don the Porches, and all things expreft

In Order, and at large. Before the reft

Great Regulus appears to inftigate

The War : a War, which (had he known his Fate)

He would have fhun’d. There Noble Appius ftood (2) Appins Ctandive Paleber, Cu


fel vath C. Norbanus Flaccus , vor his


: : " . : Victory over Hicron King of Syrucale,
Tn a pitcht Field, and high in Libyan Blood, as bees iiiadae tle aie one
Affiitance, had the Heneur of ‘dre


From their great Slaughter, a juft Triumph, Crown’d ung:
With Lawrel gain’d. Near thefe, at Sea renown’d,


1 ie o . e — (2) Cuties Diillins was the fir th:
( Duilhus, ona Snow white Column Rok a ; aris te a Sad 5 (enn eid
‘ . - * ; by him over the Carthemipians + end
Bearing his Naval Trophies 3 Stems, and Pr OMe altuna soit bit the sto
; ance, cher ol Svacte , or Peopie, a
Of Ships, the firft that Italy had known eee Honour , when femuvad :


trom any Feat, to have jorchesjand a


Thofe Spoils ¢ the Lorian Navy overthrown } Trumpeter,te mazch betore him.
To Dedicateto ACeptune. Near Him ftand ,


ne Nightly Glories, eon and is


178 | Sitius ITraxicus. Book VI,
His Sacred Trumpeter, that froma Feaft a
Was went with chearfull Sounds (that Joy expreft)
T’ attend him to hishonour’d Home: and then
(om) Aver fis Death, his same (~) ‘The Honours ofthat Noble Citizen,


was placed in the Forsm, and continu-
ed till che Time of Pliny, as he affirms, F oo
lb23.c9.5. OS Deceas’d, He fees, Near thefe doth Scipio ftand, -


. Lis spit ‘
oe erie Seip, Confslsover~ And celebrates, in the © Sardéan Land,


fim bara fe? ™ & The Tyrian Captain’s Funerals, fubdu'd
By Him. Then, on the Libyan Shores, He view'd
The routed Bands, in fcatter’d Parties, fly
About the Field, and ‘Regulus hard by,
Purfuing at their Backs : the MComades,
The Garamantians, the Autololes,
The Moors, and Hammon lay down Arms, and yield
Their Cities up. Within a Sandy Field
Slow Bragada with Poifon foams, and there
| A Serpent ‘gainft an Army makes a War.
(©) Our Authoar follows the val. "Then from his Ship © Aantippus thrown, in yain


gar Opinion, That, after the Defeat of ' :
fegiinss the Carthaginians feemed (Calling upon the Gods, was in the Main


bist z to bat Xantippas his pore ;
smiffed him wit t : >
ae Reward Bat fing 4 fire By a perfidious Band, moft fadly drown’d.
Reproach of the great Benefits th
had received by fis Condué, they And there too late C great Regulus ) He found
gave him a rotcen Ship newly trimmed: .
which, fome fay, funk with him by the The Puntfhment of Thy unhappy Death.


Way , others, that the Seamen were in.


edto d. im : ob ybi; Py '
nor ignowant Of thee Opn The two Aigates likewife, from beneath .


firms, that, fearing their Treachery, h :
prudently withdrew himelf. Pos, 1 he Waves, they make to rife : about them lay
“bs t.


Torn Ships, and Libyans, floating on the Sea.
(») QLattarins, Conf, bis Vito. Lord of the Ocean, then ® Lufatius bore
ry near ¢the


t P: Ifland 2 gates. See before ‘ .
in the Firft Book. Away, with a propitious Gale, to Shore


The Captiv'd Ships. With thefeCin Order all)
Amilcar ( Father tothe General)
(q) It was a Cutom among the Stood ‘) bound, and, from all other Objects, drew


Romanes, to deicribe, in Picture, the


Nations, that had bi db : 5 -
them, and to bear in Trees ine), Upon himfelf the People's Eyes, to view


mages of fuch Generals, as were over-


thrown, and efapedtheirHands As Edis ftern Afpect : and then was to be feen
this Amilcar, who never was their


Captive: and Hannibal, deferibed in The Pace of Peace, the Altars, that had been
Sespio’s Triumph. See 4b, 17. infra. :
; Polluted with the League, and Fove deceiv'd, _
The Romane giving Laws ;and,as they heav'd
Their


Book VI. Sizius Iraxticus, 99


Their Axes up, the Libyan trembling ftands,
And,begging Pardon with fubmifsive Hands,
Swears, but in vain, the League. This, from the Sky,
Fair Gytherea, with ajoyfull E ye,

Beheld. But, when the Libyan General

Had, with a troubled Brow, furvai'd it all ;

His flow contracted Rage, thatall the while _

Boil'd in His Breaft, thus, with a {cornfull Smile


_ He vents. We, iikewife, things as great, by Me


Perform’d, fhall carved on Our Houfes fee.
Let Me (CO Carthage) fee Sagunthus, all

At once, by Fire, and Sword, together fall.
Sons by their Fathers kill’d, and let there be
Space, large enough, the Conquer’d Alps to fee,


' Whereon Victorious AC omades may ride,


And Garamantians. Let Me fee, befide,
Ticinus overflow his Banks with Blood,
And Trebia’s, and T brafimenus Flood
Choak’d up with Thufcan Corps. Flaminias, great
In Body, and in Arms, there finde his Fate.
Let Conful Scipio bleeding fly, and, on
The weary Shoulders of his Pious Sen ,
To's Friends, be born. Let this divulged be ;
Carthage {hall greater things hereafter fee.
Rome burnt in Libyan Flames fhall there be fhewn,
And Fove from his Tarpeian Temple thrown.
Inthe mean time (asitbecomes Ye) you,
Brave Youth, by whofe Afsiftance I can do,
And have done things fo Great, go quickly ; burn
Thofe Monuments, and them to Athes turn.


The End of the Sixth Book,


Cc2z Sil


eee om into, D


Some le Torrieng wy Soeshek


Ge EGIL ae


Esapa ece,


a ana procul bias roekan imattr seh


trbus obfectit voectat Carla lade


r. corgio Ds Duct iff!
~~ his


Tatesenis ities)


pe oedees Pcl
2St.


28 is) oe iP


iL TEALICUS


The:Sveshd: Panicle ViVi sis
ae ‘The Sevinth, oe


te: Oo ece


gr


20


Fabius va a WebDictarvur Wil ut gable
The Libyan, by Ais Polics Webatid «> Mevz cisi
Woafts the Falernian (ountrey, and, 60 again ces
A Battel, fev'al Waves removes, in Vain,
Untill at dengeh, by tbe Aoforian'Bunds’"' *°
Entompafs ‘d, in «Vale bafteg'd de flands so: 35.1%:
Fas Strata agers by which Ass 'T oops agen... eat C om
Are from this Danger freed: the Romane abe


With Mutthy dematiding Bartel, are


By Fabivis appeas'd.:; eit len ipa ae
obi BL? Soe


"Is to Minuuus left, who,foon
Totheir Defga s, and rafbly takes the Field.
£6 fight Pep the Libya prevail
Till Fabius; while all other Succotr Fails,
(ame tothe Ramanes Hid , yi the Di,
- And Sacriftces to bis Honour 7


a. . and Stay |
Of ‘Rome's difteetea Affairs ,
Mafonia
(Now finking through her
: - Wounds ): and hér Allies
Soon arms: and vig'roufly
A a himfelf applies
C Though old) thehardeft Toils to undergo, .


And with his Army march'¢againft che Fo.


His


, UT. Pabine,the onnty Hope,


$32


Book: VII.


His Underftanding more, chen Man's, no Force’’ a
OFDars, no Weapons, nor the Strength of Horfe


Sirius Iraricus,


&


vp Regarded ; buthe went;alone,“gainffall = =
| "The Libyan Forces, and their General;
| AsyetUnconquer‘d; keeping in his Breatti,” -

» Alone, the Strength, and Safetyof-the Retz”


And, if He had not then tefolv'd to ftay.

The CGourfe of Adverfe Fortune, by Delay,
That, the laft Age of the Dardanian Name
Had furely been, and Rome had lofther Fame.
The Favour of the Gods, that did attend


_ The Punick Arms, Hetemper'd, andanEnd
To Libya's Conquetts pit" The Enemy,


Infuleing in the. Woes of Italy; 0
By his wile Coadu& He debell'd, and all
The Fraud deluded of proud Hannibal,
Moft Noble General ! Who Trey again, ie fe
Lapfing to Ruiti, dof aloriefuftain, °— -


And finking'Italy!- Who doft uphold.


Evander's Empire, and whate're of old -
The Labours of our Fathers gain’d in Wars, __
Go Gi at raife thy’ Name unto the Stars. -

ut, when new Titles had proclaim’d hoi
OF the Dizatour, by the publick a ees
The Libyan Prince, revolving in his Minde
That fomething of Importance had inclin'd
The Romanes to that Change of their Command
So fuddenly, defir'd to underftand — ,
What was the Fortune of the Man, what were
His Honours, or why Fabius fhould appear
Their laft, fafe Authour, in Diftrefs ° Why He
After fo many Storms, by Rome fhould be me
Thoughe equal unto Hannibal? and yet
I¢vex'd him, that his Years did want that Heat,

That


Book VII.


Srrtius Itraxticus.


That might expole him, through Temerity,
To his Deceits, and therefore inftantly
He for a Captive calls, ¢’ enquire of all


His Cuftoms, Actions, and Original.


Cilnius,a Youth, and of a Noble Name;

From fair Aretium to Ticinus came,

In an unhappy Hour, and bya Wound,

That overthrew his Horfe, fal’n to the Ground :
His Neck to Libyan Chains then yielded. He,
Defirous by his Death himfelf to free, » |
The Lidyan thus informs. Thou haft not ,now,


“With fierce Flaminius ( faid He) todo,


Or Gracchus rath Refolves: his Family
From the Tyrinthian Gods deriv’d ; had he


‘Within thy Countrey ( Hannibal) beenborn,


(Carthage the W orld’s Imperial Crown had Worn.
With along Series le not ftrive to fhow
Particulars: let this fuffice, to know

The Fabii, by one Combat having broke —

The Peace, and fhaken off the Romane Yoak,
The bold Veientes brought the War's Alarms
Ev'n to our Gates ; the Con/ud cites to Arms

Th’ old lifted Bands ; Alcides Progeny

Fills up a private Camp ; one Family

Sends a “ Patrician Army to the Fight,

Three hundred Captains (each whereof you might
Truft fafely with the Conduct of a War)
Appear. But, going forth, they threatned are
With dire Prefages. Conlcious of their Fate,


‘The trembling Threfhold of the © Guilty Gate


Sends forth a fatal Sound: that Altar roar‘d
Where chiefly the Tyrinthian God's ador’d.
Yet they invade the Fo, and with fo fierce


A Valour charge, that their fmall Number {carce
; Could


(a) The Fabii were of the Patrici:,
(of whom fee the Comment on the
fecond Book ) but their whole Army
was not fo. For the Febit were buc
three hundred: and the Clients, that
followed them, were five thoufand. See
Feftus, De verborum fignificatione, in
the Word Refigio. ;


(6) That Gate, through which they
marched out tothe Fight, formerly
called Porta Carmentalis, was,in Me-
mory oftheir Misfortune, ever after
termed Seclerata,


184 Sitius Iraticus. Book VII.


Could be diftinguifh’d, and their Slaughters are ,
More then the Souldiers : oftentimes theWar,

In Globes compacted clofe, they entertain.

A\s oft difpers’d, in Parties, through the Plain ,
They Dangersmeét. Equal in Labours all;

And Valour, merit to the Capitol - 7

To lead three hundred Triumphs : but, Alafs,
How vain thofe Hopes / each Man forgetfull was
How foon all things, that-humane are, decline /
Thefe men, difdaining, while the Fabian Line
Was fate, chat Publick Wars fhould waged be:
Incompafs‘d by a fuddenEnemy, -
Fell, by the Envy of the Gods /. but yet

Thou haft no Caufe of Joy, in their Defeat

For the Surviver is enough for Thee,

And Libya: as withall their Hands will He
Alone contend ; his Limbs fo Adtiveare

So Circumfpect his Induftry, and'Care,
Secur’d with cautious Eafe. Not you, whofe Veins


Swell'd high with youthfull Blood, can with the Reins —


Sooner reftrain, nor prick the Warlike Steed

Tnto the Battel, with more furious Speed.

But Hannibal perceiving, as He {poke,

He coveted to dy: Thou doft provoke

Invain ¢ thou Fool) our Rage, and feek’ft to free

Thy felf from Bondage by Thy Death ( {aid He )

No, Thou fhale live, and ftraiter Chains thall refs

Thy captive Neck. Thus, fwelling with Succefe

And the propitious Gods, he vents his Scorn.
But, by Religion, to the Altars born. )

The Fathers, and the Latine Dames, theieElyes

With Sorrow fill’d: in order’d Companies

AA Robe, and Vows, to Funo offer, Hear oe

Oh Queen of Gods ! lend usa willing Ear,


We,


Book VIL Sizius Iraticus. i85
Onn er
We, a Chat People; pray Thee. .We, who be
The chief of the eA ufonians, to Thee.
This fair, and venerable Garment, wrought
By our own Hands,with Threds of Gold, have brought,
And till the Fears of Mothers do decreafe, | i
This thall Thy Vefture be. And, if Thou pleafe; :
That this Marmarick Cloud we may behold
Far {catter’d from Our Land, a Crown of Gold,
Enlai'd with various Gemms, to Thee fhall thine.
This Goddefs thus ador’d: to Pallas Shrine,
They proper Off rings bring, then worfhip Thee
Venus, and Phebus, and the Deity
Of War: from theapproach of Miferies,
So great a Rev'rencej of the Gods doth rife.
The Happy feldom to their Altars come. |
While antient Honours in Her Temples Rome
Thus celebrates : great Fabius takes the Field,
With his well-order'd Troops; and,as moft skil'd
In Warlike Arts, like one Secure, though Slow,
All Avenues ‘gainft Fortune, andtheFo =
Blocks up, and from their Enfigns fuffers none
Toftray , and that, which, chiefly, Thee doth Grown
(Brave Romane) and thy Empire's Head fo high’
Hathlifted, taught thy Souldiers to obey. -
But, when, from far, their Enfigns, all in View;
~ Upon the Hills, and all the Troops in new -
Bright Arms appear'd : the Libyan Hopes fwell high,
And Hannibal, with His Profperity
Enflam'd, believ'd His Victorie’s Delay
Was onely, that the Armies in Array be
‘Were not drawn forth to fight. Go on ( faid He)
Quickly affault their Ports ; let their Works be
Ev'n by your Breafts o'rethrown : I'me fure the Fo


Nol hath to Live, then. We can go
ae. Over


_ 186 — Strms Iraricus. Book VIL Book VII. Sizrus Iraticus, | 187
, : | Overthe Plain between Us: fer,toWar | The hungry Wolves fierce Howlings reund about.
Their Sedentaryold Men cited are, “i Streight raife,and gnaw the Fence that keeps them out:
|, | ~ With whom to fight, Lam; almoft,atham'd. = . The Libyans Defign, thusrender'd vain, =.
| What you now fee, are their Remains, difclaimd _ Thence with his Army, through th’ Appulian Plain, ;
| a . : As wholly ufele&s, in the former War. ao | He flowly march’d ; and, fometimes, clofely fate,
gE | Where is their Gracchus now © Or new where are . Conceal’d in Vallies, to precipitate, pe
1 Thofe Thunderbolts, the Scipios! expelld | His following Fo, ortry,if He might be
i _ From Itah, they ne're their Flight withheld; | _ Surpriz’d, unwarily, by Policy.
| | | Till, frighted, te the fartheft Pare theycame Sometimes by fecret Waies, He fteals by Night,
: Orth’ Barth, and Sea. Now, trembling at Qur Name, . And then Retreatsin a pretended Fright.


| | Both wander, and Iberus Banks defend,
And where Weare not, there a War pretend, 4
I, likewife, from Flaminius Death may claim


Then from his Camp, full of rich Plunder goes,
And prodigally thus invites his Focs.
: So, with innumerable turnings through
| Increaleof Honour,and bis AdtiveName Meonian Plains, doth fam’d Meander flow.

i : | | 7 ee aoe aap . Nothing that Fraud can do, is left untry'd.
| i | ee, ia or ae ste take site Ge Hetrurns o’re all, and all his Thoughts apply‘d,

' | Se ee ee ana dae ; To various Attempts. As when the Sun

| | Shining on Water, by Reflection,
Leaps on the Houfes tops, and gliftering fheds
In conftant Raies, and dancing Shadows fpreads
Upon the Roofs. Now mad with Grief, alone,
throws Thus to His Sacred Rage He makes his Moan.
. If He, at firft, Our Enemy had been,
The Names of Trebia, and of Thrafimen
Had ne’re been known. Nor had they given to Us
New Titles, nor had ftain’'d Erydanus,
Troubled with bloody Waves, the frighted Sea:
But he, while we are tyr’d with his Delay ,
And he contains himfelf, hath found anew
Strange Way to Vidtory. Howoft, in Shew
Of meeting Us, hath he Our Plots o'rethrown, |
With Judgement, and Our Stratagems undone *


7. lle make, Me thall no more in Arms appear,
{ : : :  Thisfpoke aloud, His Troops with furious Speed,
| | ; He leadeth on, and mounted on His Steed , .

2 | Sometimeswith His Right Hand provokes His Foes.
| . Sometimes upbraids them ; then, at Diftance, ,
A Dart, infulting in His Armie’s Sight,
Shewing the Image of afuture Fight, _

| (4) Achilles: So Thetis (*) Son, in the Dardanian Field, ;

| Bore his Vulcanian‘Arms, and'in: his Shield,

| Exprefs'dthe Earth, and Heav’n, and ’s Mother curl'd
| | With Waves ; and, in that’ Figure, all the World,
it But Facius, carefull to delay, fits fil],
| | And his vain Fury, ona lofty Hill, 3
| Beholding, checks his proud infulting Mind,
| Aad tires his furious Threats, while he decli,d

|


oe ve So when by Nighta Shepheard keeps —_ Thus to Himfelf, when the Shrill Trumpets Sound, *
ores in fenced Folds, and fafely fleeps, . | Midnight Proclaim’d:but when the third watch, round
a i ‘The | Dd2 — The


PATTI  e
igen meee


188: Sruaus. ITALrIcUS.


Book VIL


The Camp, new @entinelshad call'd té fland, 2!) ~

He turnshis Gourfezand leaving Dainus Landi)

Behind, to the (\ampanian Goattshis Way +! ~

He takes, well Known, as greedy after Prey. =

Here;when he entred the Falernian Fields, :

( That Land is Rich, and‘conftant Profit yields ©

To the laborious Swains ): he ftraitway throws: .

His Hoftile Flames, among the fruitful Boughs.

But here, Lyeus, though great Actions be 7

Our Theme, the Mention of Thine Honour We

Muft nor pals by in Silence: but Record

Thy Praife, who doft that Sacred Juice afford ; -

Whofe Vines, with ACefar[well'd,a:Noblet Name;

Then the Falernian Prefs,can never claim.

Falernus old; in better Times, did Plow -

The Adafsick Hills ( they then no Swords did know )

The Vine-Leays then, within the naked Field. .

Did not, with fwelling Grapes, green Shadows yield:

Nor knew they how to mix Lyzus Blood

Among their Cups;but in fome Chryftal Flood,

Or Spring, their Thirftallai’d, An happy Hour

Thither Lyzus, going tothe Shore

Of Calpe, and the Bounds of Day, a Gueft

Did bring. Nor did the Deity detett

A low; poor Cottage; but heenters, and

The fmoaky Room, and Table, that did ftand

Beforethe Chimney (as the Cuftom was

Ofthat poor Age, receive him, B ut, Alafs,

The Hoft, w hofechearfull Looks his Joy expreft

Did not perceive a God was then his Gue#t .

And yet, as his Fore-Fathers us‘dto do,

Spar’d not his Age, from running to, and fro -

Moftkindly bufie: tillhis choicett Chear

He brought: there Cornelsint ineat Baskets; here
Frefh


Book’ Vil. ~ Srtius IraLicus. 189


Frefhy. from his watry Hort-yards, Juicy Fruits
Serv’d in:.then Hony-Combs, and Milk he puts,
As Daiaties, ‘mong thereft ; and, all the while,
Nothing of Blood the Table doth defile :
But, Cerés Gifts brought in, he doth compofe
The Fire, into the midft whereof he throws,
His Sacrifice. Pleas'd with the Old Man's Care’,
The God refolv'd,his Liquour fhould be there ;
When fuddenly ( ’tis very ftrange to tell }
The Cups of Beech with Wine begin to {well, _
As the Reward of his poor Entertain.
The Milk-Pail too with Blufhing Wine began
Tooverflow : and from an hollow Oak,
Into a Goblet, the {weet Liquour broke
From the well-fented Grapes : Here, take, and {tore
Thy felf ( Lyeusfaid ) with what before
Thou did’ not know.: but which Falernus Name,
For Nobler Vines, hereafter fhall proclaim. .
With that the God himfelf reveal’d, and round,
With Purple Rates, an Ivy Garland Crown’d
tis {hining Front, about his Neck he flung ;
His Locks, in his Right Hand a Tankard hung,
And, fallen from his Thyrfus, Vines about
The Table, with AC/ean Branches, {prout.
Nor could Falernus with the pleafant Taft
Contend, when fome few Cups about had paft,
Now with his Foot, or ftamm'ring Tongue, he makes
The God to laugh, while the ftrong Liquour fhakes
His Brains, and he endeavours to make good
Return of Thanks, in Words {carce underftood,
Till Sleep Cwhich Bacchus fill accompanies,
Wheree're he goes) compos‘d his ftruggling Eyes.
But, when the rifing Sun difpers’d the Dew,
The Mafsick Swains, with Admiration, view
Their


a a i oe
190 Sittus Irarticus. Book VII.
ES ies Sie aes ota Ceuly end
_And, with the Sun, the Branches fhining, round
The Hill, their Glory {pread, and fince that hour
Rich Tmolus, and: Arvifian Cups, that pour
eA mbrofian Liquour forth, and thy fam‘d Field,
Fertile Methymna, to Falernus yield.

Through this, the Libyan (like a Fury > patt
And all the Countrey round about, lai‘d waft:
Incited by His Men, whofe Swords purfu’d
Their thirft of Blood. While Fabias doth delude
Their General: Andnowamad Defire
OF fighting, the Aifonian Camp doth fire ;

All covet, in that Madnefs to defcend

Into the Plain. My Adufe, let us commend
The Man, whom Fate permitted to fubdue
Both Armies, and their Fury overthrew.

If Me the Senate had believ’d to be

Of fuch hot Temper, and fo Rath Cfaidhe )
Or that fuch Clamours, eafily, my Minde
Could hake, they had net, when the State declin’d,
Giv’n me the Conduct of this defp’rate War.
My Refolutions of a Bateel are

Already fix'd, it fhall my Conqueft be
Tokeep you fafe (that urge foeagerly

Your Fate) againft your Will : none of youall
By Fabius fhall have Liberty to fall.

If weary of the Light, you now defire,

That the Asfonian Name with you Expire:
Or if it grieves you, that, atfuch atime 5

No Place isrendred Famous, by the Crime

Of fome new Milchief, or notorious Blow «
Recall Flaminius from the Shades below,,.

A Signal, by his late Temerity,

And Aufpiciesyou have, Doyenot fee


As Lord, and is by it beheld.again :


Book VU. PILIUS Iranieus. | 191


A Precipice, and your-approaching Fate 2

Confider ;: to the Ruin of the State,

One Victorie’s enough for Hannibal.

Stay then, aad underftand your General ;

When the wifh'd Time fhall come, that may require
Your Hands, then let thofe furious Words confpire
With Deeds ; beleive Me, ‘tis an eafie ching

To goto fight: fhould we now open fling

Our Ports, one Hour, you all into the Field

May pour: but they; to whom the Gods thall yield
A kinde, and mild ‘A {pect, as forth they go,

Shall have that Blifsaloneto:feape the Fo,

And fafe return. The Libyan relyes

Upon His Fortune, and His Veflel flies

With a propitious Wind, and, till that Gale

Shall flack, and ceafe to fill his {welling Sail,

It muft of Bufinefs be, and conftant Care

Tofeek Delaies. Fortune's Imbraces are
Perpetualtonone, fee ! how much lef&
The Lyrian Foroes are : how ithey decreafe 7
In Fame, fince We declin’d the Fight. And We,
‘Mong: other things, for this may praifed be
That they, who—But it is:better far, that I
Forbear more Words: You now the Enemy..
A Battel, and. Pitcht-field require. Oh! may
This Confidence befuch another Day ,

Ye Gods! Inthe mean time, excluding all
Chances of greater Dangers, that may fall

Upon you, and My:Countrey, pray let Me,

To the whole War, alone oppoled be ;

Thefe Words their furious Arms,and Rage appeafe .

As when his calmer. Brow. the God of Seas .
Lifts’bove the troubled Waves, and views the Main,


The


Sitrug IraLicus. Book VII.


The raging Winds their cruel Murmurs ceale,


Nor move the Wings upon their Foreheads: Peace


Is foon diffus'd o’re all the calmed Brine,.

And, onthe filent Shore, fmooth Waters fhine.
This by the Libyan’s fubtile Care defcry‘d,

Strait by the Poifen of his: Plots, he try’d

Their Minds. For Fabins, as his Father's Heir,
Plow’d afew Acres, which the Name did bear

Of Mafsicus, Renown'd for Gen‘reus Vines?

Thefe, to advance his mifcheivous Defigns _ ( fread )
(Which, through the Camp, ambiguous Rumours
From Fire, and Sword his{par'd: this Plot foonbred -
Sufpicion of the Quiet of that Place,

As ifthat He did privately imbrace

A League to lengthen out the War. But all

The cunning Stratagems of Hannibal|

The wile Didatour faw, and underftood.

But among Swords, and Trumpets, thought it good
To {corn their Envy: nor, the Wounds to fhuna

Of Fame, the Hazard of a Fightto run.

Till wandrin g up, and-down, and oft in vain,
Moving his Camp, now here, now there, to gain
Occafion to fight, the Libyan He

Enclos'd, where Woods, and rocky Hills we fee,
With hisdivided Troops. HereHim behind .


(©) The City Formiein Campania, The lofty “© LeStrigonian Rocks confin’d :
once inhabited by the Leftrigonia
who wereof the Fabbri tft. Carjeta


There, with its Moorifh Grounds, Linternum was:
No ufe of Souldiers, or of Swords the place
Affords ; but there, fevereft Famine all
; The Plagues, that loft Saganthus did befall,
_Exadting, them opprels‘d, and Fate an End
Seem’dto the Arms of (Carthage to intend.
. - Now Sleep, all Things by Sea, and Land,did hide
‘With’s gloomy Wings, and having lai’d afide


ed


The


Book VIL Sreius Iraticus; —, 195


The Labours of the Day, the pleafing Reft;.
Granted to men by Night, the World poffeft, ; :
But the (/) Sidonian General the Cares , Cf) Hannibal.
That then enflam’d His Heart; and watchfull Fears,

Rob'd of the Benefits of Night ; while He

Left His unquiet Bed, and fuddenly

Cov'ring his Shoulder witha Lyon’s Skin,

That lately {fpread upon the Grafs had been,

His Pallat, in the Field, to’s (*) Brother's Tent, stage
(From‘s Own not diftant far) dire@tly went.

He, not degenerate in Martial Rites,

On aBull’s Hide then flept, and, by the Night's

Great Blefsing, eas’d His penfive Thoughts, and near

Fix’din the Barth, upright, his Fatal Spear,

On which His Helmet hung: upon the Ground

His Breaft-plate, Sword, and Shield, about it round,

His Bow, and Balearick Sling.Not far
From thefe a Youthfull Troop,all try’d in War,

Lay fleeping on the Earth, and near at Hand’

His Horfe, caparifon’d, doth grazing ftand.
His Entrance Mago wakes. Brother, (faid He)

C With that takes up his Arms) What is’t, that T hee’

Thus ftupifies® Then eALago role, and all

His Troop , then lying on the Ground, doth call

With Speedto Arms, Then Hannibal began ;

Us Fabius, that fo vigilant Old Man,

The fole Delay to Our Propitious Fates ,


Lowe EP


Thus indifpos’d by Night, exafperates
ToCares. You fee how We encompals’d are
With armed Bands, and how the Souldier,
Collected in a Ring, doth Usinveft,

Butnow ( fince Our Affairs are thus diftreft
Confider My Defign. Wehave within


The Camp an Herd of a that have been
e Phunder'd.


~Sittus Iraticus.,


Book VIL.


°o


‘Plunderd fronvall the Countrey round, and now oS
3C As Cuftom is) march withthe Army: to

The Horns, and Fronts of fome of thefe, will I

Give a Command dry Twigs, and Sticks to ty ;

Which fir'd, when once the Heat fhall {catter’d be,

The Oxen, fenfible of Pain, will flee,

And on their Necks the wandring Flames will bear


O’re all the Hill : then, feiz’d with fudden Fear, =" Pee


‘Their Centinels.awill from their Stations ru ns
And fear, that fomething more by Night is done.
Ifthis you like, CExtream Refolves delay
Refufe ) Let's do’t faid 5 He. With that away
They go to other Tents, wherein the Field, +
Upon the Ground, his Héad upon his Shield,
‘Mong Horfes, Men, and Spoils, that by his Hand
In Fight were taken, and with Slaughter ftain’d,
Mighty Maraxes lay, and in his Sleep, .
A dreadfull Cry, asifengageddeep _
In Fight, by Chance then gave, and felt about
With’s trembling Hand to finde his Weapons out,
And his.try’d Sword. Thus warring, Mago thakes
The Man; and, with his Spear inverted, wakes
Captain, fince now ‘tis dark, thy Fury lay
AMide, referve thy Valour for the Day ;
With Policy we now mutt ufe the Nighe
For fafe Retreat, and to conceal our Flight:
Into the Woods my Brother doth intend
With kindled Boughs ty’dto the Horns, to fend
The Oxen, where the Paffes guarded be
By Hoftile Bands, and fo our Army free, 22...
Let us be gone, andthis Defign thallbe - .
A Document to Fabiut, that we ae 2
With Policy contend... He makes no Stay,”
But, joy'd at what He fpoke, they:hafte amy


To


Book VIL Sitius Iraticus | 195


To ftout Acherra’s Tent; who, fatisfi'd:
With little Reft; or Eafe, hadnevertry'd = 9°
His Sleep to lengthen with the Night ; but fill *
On Horfe-back, as perpetual Centinel, _ Pate
Serv'd, and-was wont to eafe his weary Steed,
By drefsing him, and alwaies Bridled feed.

Now all their Weapons whet, and the dry’d Gore
Wipe fromthe Steel, and to their Swords reftore
Their Sharpnefs : what the Fortune of the Place,


And Time requir’d, and what their Diaty was:


Declar’d ; advifing, that whoe're did go
As Chief in the Defign, might not be Slow. -
Then through the Camp the Word, and Orders, run,
All mutually inftruct what's to be done ; —_
And importune, they may no longer ftay : _
Their Fears inciting all tohafte away,

While yee the dark, and filent Night mighthide
Their Flight. Then, to the Boughs the Fire apply’d,
From their large Horns the Flames afpiring rofe.
The Mitchief, in an Inftant, greater grows,

And th’ Oxen, fhaking their tormented Heads, ©
Fan out a Pyramis of Fire that {preads

Ivs Bafis largely, and o’recomes the Smoak.

The Beatts, affrighted, through the Foreft broke ;
Then o’re the Hills, and, Rocky Mountains fly,
As they were mad, andas their Noftrils by

The Flames befieged are, they labour oft

In vain to bellow, while o’re Cliffs, aloft,
Through Vallies Vulcan wanders, and ne‘re ftands
Atall ; but, fhining on the Neighb’ring Sands,

As manifold appears, as when atSea

jn aclear Night the Mariners furvey
Innumerable Stars: Or when upon -


arganus T op,a Shepheard, fitting down,
ae : Eec2 Beneath


TO ST


196 Sinius Irapicu
Recah Cabs omens 1
Which Flusbandmen:to- fertile Pafturesturn,
O're all the Hills the Flameswith fach a Face
Appear to fly ; and they, whofe(Chance it was
To be the Guard, believ'd they Wandning fled,
None {catt‘ring them, and thar they, Furious, fed | -
Within the Hills: fome thought, that Zove had thrown,
From his incenfed Hand, his. Thunderdowa: ..*
Others, that kindled Sulphur gave them Birth,
And, from her-fecret Cayes, th’ unhappy Earth, -
Condemn’d to.greater Ruins, threw the Fire.
The Ratuli, affrighted, ftraitretire , are
And from their Station fly. Then Hannibal, . +:
With {peedy Arms, poflefs'd Himfelf of all
The Paffes; and, advantas’d by their Fears, -~
Infulting in the open Field, appears, - if
Yet vigilant, ia Condudt of the War,
The -wife Difatour had advanc’d as far .
As Trebia,and behind him left the Sea _
OF Tufcany ; chat it enough might be
For Hannibal, the Romane Arms ta fhun,
And Fabius: who after him had gone,
And with his Army clofe purfu’d his Flight,
But that fome Sacred Rites did him invite
(2) te was ( a Dayfqucins ob- To his Paternal © Gods. Then as to Rome


: Book: VIL . Book Vil. Sinrus Iraricus 197


- Out Wings, sor ourthrong’d: Legions, (1 Thee


Atteft ). pefform’dit , but ‘twas doneby Me.

T, from the Camp, will.not be lon g away,
Qnely permit, shat tothe Gods d pay

A folemnSacrifice,iand Him again

Shut up ‘by Floods, or Hills -( ifyou refrain
From fighting, }.< will I give imoo your#ands.
In the meantime believe Me: ( forit ftands
With my Experience ) ‘in diftrefs'd Affairs
"Tis Safety to fic till, choughit appears’
Honour tomany ( and may pleafe themtoo ,
As the moft glorious Conqueft, to fubdue
AnEnemy by fighting, > ‘yet to Me: —
Tokeep You fafe, it fhalla Triumph be. .

I a full Camp leave in thy Hands, and Men
Free from all Wounds: to give them fiich agen
To Me, thy Glory, and Renown fhall be. ~
The Libyan () Lyon Thou, perhaps, fhalt fee (f) Hannibal,
Thefe Works affaulting. Sometimes offring Prey
T entice Thee out: fometimes to flee away ,,

Ass if He fear’d thine Arms, butallthewhile
He thinks on Fraud, and doth with Fury boil.
"Tis His Defire to fight ; butlet Thy Stay
Within the Camp take all thofe Hopes away.
Let this Advice fuffice: butif Thy Minde,


ie) an ghee uperftition in

the Remanes, to prefer their private ' :

Sacco ihe rick Date He took his Way, a valiant Youth, to whom

their Religion nor onely obli em :

to the Oblervation of then’ for the The chief Command, and Conduct of the War
Publick, bat it was Impiety to omit


them in Private Families, which fo- S$ giv’ Te 1 ‘epare, -
them in Peat Families, which f Was giv'n, He thus with Counfel doth prepare.


that, when the Gands ftri@ly befiesed bs :
the Ce coe oh Pele If by the Fortune of my Actions, Thou
ten’ td siniton ator C Minutias ) haft not yet Learn’ to allow
Enemies, and Friends, and performed : Fs is

this Solemnity onits appointed Day, ‘Things warily perform’d. nor Words
on the Quirinal Bill : te for ite 5 Y P 2 cen Thee


nb * Py his Anceitours. See Ziv. T ead to true Honour, or invite to flee


And Courage, my Entreaty cannot binde:
I, as Diffatour, by a pious Right ,
And {trict Command, conjure Thee not to fight.
The Camp, by his Advice, thus fortified
He, Pious, left ; and tothe City hied.
But, now, behold! with profp’rous Winds before
The Leftrigonian, and Cajetan Shore


Unworthy things: Thou haftfeen Hannibal
Befieg'd. “Twas not the Souldier, nor all


Our


A Libyan Navy plowstheSea, and.comes
Into the Port, and all-the Ocean foams


With


198


|
| < , (¢) Teleboe, a Colony of e£t0li-
; aas, infamous for their Robberies, who
planted themfelves in the Ifland Ca-
prea, on the Coal of Campania.


cSitrus. Iravticus.


"With num'rous Oars:when,from their chryftal Caves,


Affrighted with the Noife, above the Waves,
The Sea-~-Cymphs rife, and fee the Shore poffels'd
By Hoftile Ships, that then difturb’d their Rett -
Then, fall of Fear, with Speed; they allrepair,
To thofe known Coatts, by them frequented, where


.©) Teleboe's Kingdoms midft the Ocean rife;


And hollow. Thrones, where mighty Proteus lyes
Within a broken Cave, and largely laves> =?
The adverfe Rocks (_ a’Prophet) ‘with his Waves.


He (for heall thingsknew, and what they: fear'd)


When chang'd in various Shapes he had appear’d,
And {car'd them, hifsing like a dreadfull Snake; *'
Then roaring like a Lyon fierce, thus fpake.”

What ts it, ACymphs, that bringsyou hither © tell ;
Why doth that Palenefs in your Faces dwell?
Whiy feek ye, what hereafter fhall. befall ..
Toknow ©. To this the Eldeft, then, of all


’ The Italian NGymphs, Comoduce, replies.


Thou know’ft, already, whence our Fears arife.

What doth this Carthaginian Fleet, that thus.

Deprives us of our Coaft, portend to us?)

Mutt the Rbatean Empire crofs the Seas

To other Gods? Or, ZyrianSeamenthefe °. . ..

Our Ports poffefs? Or, from our Native Seat

Exil'd, muft we to Atlas now retreat ;

And dwell in Calpe’s fartheft Caves * ‘Then he,

Rehearfing things long paft, ambiguoufly,

Thus undertakes to fhew enfuing Fate. —
OnlIda, when the Phrygian Heards-man fate,

And, calling back his ftragling Bulls to feed

In | fertile Meadows, with his Pipe of Reed,


The fam'd Difpute of Sacred Beauty heard :


Then (Cupid, who folicitous appear'd


T’ obferve


: Book VIL


Book VII.


Sitvius Iraricus. 199


T° obferve the Time, the Snow-white Ggnets, joyn'd,


To's Mother's Chariot, drove : a Quiver fhin’d

Upon his Shoulder, anda ‘golden Bow,

And, witha nod tolet his Mother know

There was no caule to fear, fhew’d he had brought

That Quiver.to her Aid, with Arrows fraught.

Some of his Brethers comb her Golden Hair

Upon her Jv'ry Fore-head; others are

Imploy‘d. Her flowing Garments to compofe .

When fighing from her Lips, that like a Rofe

Blufh’d, to her Sons this Language fell. You fee

The Day, that muft a faithfull Witnels be

OF your great Piety to Me. Oh! who

W ould e’re have this believ'd, fo long as you

Are fafe, that Venus Beauty, and her Face

Should queftion’d be? ( Fer now what other Grace

Remainsto us‘) ifmy Artillery,

Infected with moft pleafing Poifon,1

To You committed have, by which youaw

Your Grand-fire at your Pleafure ( who gives Law

To Heav’n, and Earth ) then by my Victory

O're Funo, and eMinerya, let me fee

(Cyprus with Idumaan Palms abound,

And Paphos with an hundred AltarsCrown’d.

While to her winged Boys thus Venus talks,

A gentle Eccho, as the Goddefs walks,

Runs through the Grovezand then the warlike Maid = Pater:
Her ga lai’d afide, her Hair difplai’d!

( Thatlately by her Helmet had been prefs'd ) _
In Curls with Art, and neatly Comb’d, and drefs'd
And, Peace enthron’d inher Serener Eys,
With Speed unto the Place appointed hies.
(Saturnia enters on the other fide, —


After her Brother's Bed, refolving Ide


QO Fano.


The


ff) An Jjlandnearto Brusdnfisen.


Ge) The sibyUine , which had fore
cold, that the Remains fhould receive a
great Lefs cpon the Banks of Anf-
dus.


{oy Scipso Africanus. Seethe thir-
k,


Sirius Iraticus. Book VII


The Trojan's Judgment, and Difdain to bear.
Laft, ( Cotberea, fmiling, doth appear, |

~ And through the Grove, and Caves, within the Rocks
Sheds fragrant Odours from her Sacred Locks. |
Nor could the Judge endure tokeep his Place:
But, dazzled by the Beauty of her Face,

Fear'd onely, left he fhould appear to her
Todoubt. The vanquith’d Goddeffes transfer _
Fierce Wars beyond the Seas, and Troy was foon;
With her unhappy Judge,quite overthrown.
Pious Aneas then by Sea, and Land

Tolsd up, and down, in Latinum takes his Stand ,
With his Dardanian Gods : while Whales within
The Ocean fhall {wim, and Stars fhall thine

In Heaven, and Phebus from the Indian Main
Shall rife, fo long his Progeny fhall reign.

No Bounds of Time their Rule fhall terminate :
But you, my Daughters, while the Thread of Fate
Doth run, the Dang’rous Sands of ‘/) Safon flee.
We eAunfidus, fwell’d high with Blood, fhall fee
Driving his purple Waves into the Main ;

And you, 4tolian Shades, hail, once again,

Fight with the Zeucrs, in that Field, fo long |
Agocondemn’d by an” Immortal Song.

Then Punick Darts the Romane Walls thall fhake,
And Hasdrubal“) Metaurus Flood shall make

To fhine with Slaughter. And then He, that was
So fecretly begot, by fove's Imbrace,

With a levere Revenge fhall expiate,

Atonce his Uncle’s, and His Father's Fate,

Then hall he fill with Flames Eliza's Shore,

And force the Libyan, tormenting fore

The Bowels of Italy, to haften Home,

And Him in His own Countrey overcome.


Carthage


Book VIE. SILius ITALICUS. | 201


Carthage in Arms fhall yield to Flim, and He
Shall fram the Name of 4frick Famous be.
From Him. anesher thall arife; by whom (©) Scipio Emsilienns.


The third fierce War thall be fubdu’d, and ‘Rome


See him Triumphant, after Byr/a's Fall, a , a ;
Bring Libya's Athes to the Capitol. as
"While He the Secrets of the Gods detects ;

Thus inhis Cave, AMinatss rejects

Both Fabiss, and his Counfel, and, with Rage
Poffefs'd, the Fo endeavours to enigage :.

Nor was the Libyan wanting to fornent,

And feed bis Fury. But, with an Intent -

T entice him, to embrace a greater Fight,

With little Lo&, fometimes diffembles Flight.

As when the Fith; allur'd by fcatter’d Baits

In fome clear Brook, forfake their deep Retreats,

And fwimming near the Water's Surface fhine,

The cunning Angler, with his twifted Line,

Soon drags them to the Shore. Now Fame, which lies
Among the Romanes, likea Fury, flies.

Telling the Fo was turn’d, and Hannibal

In Flight his Safety found: an End of all

‘Their Mileries, did then at Hand appear,


" If they to Overcome permitted were.


But, that their Valour had no other Guid,

The one, that did fad Punifhments provide

For fuch, as were victorious ‘gainft his Will.

That He within the Camp would fhut them fill,

And give Command to fheath their Swords again, .
That fo he might a juft Account maintain

In Arms, and Souldiers give a Reafon, why

They dare to overcome the Enemy.

“The Vulgar murmure thus : and Funo fires


The Senate's Minds with ae and Defires a


202 Siiius Irazicus, Book VIL. .


OF Popular Air. Then, madly, re: oe a)
Things not tobe believ'd,'and fuch as be
The With of: Hannibal :fach, as ‘they foon,'* |
With too great Danger; with they ne're tne done,
_For now the Army is divided, and’. 2g
Ree Am sc ©) «Minutius hares with Fasins in Canna
ead ety a The old Didatour, free from Pafsion, faw, --
ee Altecat And fear'd the Ills, that rath Refolv might draw -
iia Upon his Gountrey : therefore, full of Care,
A\nd Penfive, to the Camp return’d, and there
Sharing his Social Forces, all the Hills,
Adjoyning, with his Neighb’ring Eagles fills
’ And there, at-once, obferves the. Libyan’s Powe 6
And Romane Army, froimalofty Tower...
While Mad to perith, or deftroy his Foes :..::
With fudden Fury rath Minutius throws
The Ramparts down: and when, on either a
Here the Diéfatour, there the Libyan {py'd «
Him marching forth ; their Minds with diffrent Care,
This to deftroy, that to preferve him, are
Inflam'’d. But Heto Arm with Speed commands ;
_ And leads, from all Defence, his hafty Bands.
The Libyan Captain pours into the Fight —
His Forces alf, and thus doth them incite:
While the Difatour (Souldiers) is away,
Go on, and bravely’ ufe this fighting Day.
Behold! the Gods now to your Withes yield ,
Off'ring a Battel in an open Field,
And, fince this Opportunity is gain‘d,
Your Weapons cleanfe, that have fo long been ftain’d
With Ruft, and fatisfie your Swords with Blood.
This Fabius obferving, as he ftood
Viewing the Champagn Ground, (And Thou, Alafs !


Oh Rome ! did't fadly Learn what Fabius was
In


~ And equal us :


Book VII. Srrius Ivarreus, 263


263


_ In fo great Danger ) this rath Boy (. laid he)-


Now my Colleague in Arms, thall punifh’d ‘a ,
As he deferves, that through fo blind, and mad _.

A Vote, with fo much Danger, durft invade

Our Fajces. Peevifh Tribes / how flipp'ry aré
Your Pulpits, fee? with what vain men the Bar;
And Forum ’s throng’d ! Now let the Offices

Of War by them be equall’d,and Decrees

Ordain the Sun. to yield unto the Night.

Their Weaknels, the rath Errour of this Fight
Shall quickly rue, and all the Wrongs,which they,
Upon eur common. Parent, bring this Day.

Witch that he fhook hisSpear, and, asa Flood
Of Tears gufh’d from his Eyes, with Zyrian Blood
(Said he} my Sen, thefe fad Complaints muft be
Supprefsid by Thee. Shall I endure to fee

A Citizen deftroy’d before my Face,


- And thefe our Troops: Or, while I amin place;


Permit the Libyan conquer © If my-Hearte. =
Were fuch, they'd feem lefs Guilty, that did pare,
but this, my Son, believe,
And from thy aged Sire, as Truth, receive ; .
Tobe incens‘d, againft our Countrey, is :
A Sin fo great, that none, tothe Abyfs +
Of Hell, can witha fowler Crime defcerrd: -..-
This our Fore-Fathers did to:us commend’,
And thus how good, how great, exil’d from home?“ '
And banifh’d long, did'ft thou (Camillus) come’
Into the Gepitol! How many there
By thy condemned Hand then flaughter‘d were! ‘
Had not thy Thoughts beercalm, or had thy Mitide"
_ Atall, to Anger, or Revenge,indin'd’
fEneas Throne had chang’d its Place, and thin’ io
Great Rome hadft net, upon thy Hills, as now A
i Ff. Stood:


aii ace eR ORES SS Tk hit


Sittus Iraricus.


Stood Hiad of all thé World. Therefore, my Son,
Let all Difpleafuié, for my Sake; be gone, |
Let's haft to aid theth with ur Social Arms.: -
With that, the'Trumipet’s intermix’d Alarms
Sound through the Camp s And all witli fuch a Ferce
Ruth on, they bruife each othet intheit Courfe.
Firft, the DiZatour all Things; that withftand .
His Speed, the Gates, and Bars, with his own Hand
O’returns, and to the Battel breaks his Way. - -
With fuch a Fury Winds contend-atSea, -”
When Boreas fally’s from th’ Odryfian Goat, --
And, with like Rage, by Africusiscroft! > -
The Sea ‘s diftracted, and.to fev'ral Shutes..  -
Each drives the Billows; while the Teinpeft raars,
And the whole Ocean, Wherefoe're it gues,
Obeys now here, now there, with fatious Throws.
So much of Honour cowld not rife from all
Phenjcia fabdu'd, or Byrfa's Fall 5.
As this great-Injury, which firft did {pring
From privatéBnvy, did of Glory bring
To the Didztour. For,by’s Condit there; -
Atonce, He all thofe Diffitulties;Fear,
Envy, and Pafsion, with malicious F afie, 9 2:
And Hennibal, and Fortune, overcame, © <1
When Hannibal perceiv'd thevarut.amain,
Down from the lofty Camp, into the Plainy: :
His Courage trembled ; and, with Sighs, four all ©
His former Hopes of their Deftrudtion fall, :!
For He the Romanes had tncompafs'd rounds =.
With num‘rous Bands; inct doubtihe vw confoind:
Them, fo enclas‘d; by Darts, thavonvhern fath
On ev'ry fide. And, then, their Generali
Already, griey'd for that unhappy Fishe-o-°
The Stygian Waters, arideternal‘Night, ~~
ours Had:


Book VII.


Book VIL


Had entred in his Thoughts, with fad Defpair: -.
Atham’d to hope, that Fabius would be therg,.
To his'Alsiftance. But ewo valiant Wings, . -
Circling the Bateel, the Didatonr brings

To Elis: Relief;andthen,encompalsing

The Libyan Arty witha larger Ring, |
Their utmoft Troops behinde invefts , and thofe,
That late befieg’d the Romanes, doth enclefe.
Alcides made him Higher nifein Fight,

And to appear much Greater to their Sight:
His lofty Creft, (‘twas ftrange) ejecting Rays,
In adtive Vigour foon it {elf difplaies .
Throughall his Members ; while He Jav'lins throws,
And ftorms, with Clouds of wounding Darts, his Foes.
(Such, before he was Old, in Prime ofall

His years, in War the ©) Pylian General (9) Nestor
Appear'd.) Then, tufhing on, he Turis fene

To Hell, and ftout Adaléo, confident _

To Cope with any ; who was known to Fame,

And by his Spear had gain’d himfelf 2 Name. -

Then Butes, Maris, Arfes,Garadus,

Long-hair'd ef dherbes, and con{picuous

For Height, ‘bove both the Armies, Talis dies >.

Who, on the higheft Fortrefs, could furprize

The Batdements. Thefe, at a Diftance, all,

With Darts, but Saph'arus,and Monefus, fall:

By ‘sSword: with them, Mortnus, ashe founds. - .

To Fight with his fhrill Brafs, he deadly wounds .

Onthe Right Gheek ; and, by the dying Blaft

Expelld, the Blood quite through the Trumpet paft,,

From’s wounded Jaws, Idmon, the next vo him ;

Who, us'd o’re afamonian Sands to fwim,

Dy’d by his Lance: for flipping, where he flood,


Upon’ a Place, o'reflown with reaking Blood,
is Endeav'ring:


Sirius Irarticus.


205


7) Lucifer.


Sirius Iraricus, Book VII


Endeay'ring to recover’s Feet again,


_ And fhug that flipp’ry Place, Fabiis,,amain, ..


Upon him {purshis Horfe,and to the Ground

Nails him with’s Spear; which, left within the Wound,
Though trembling with his Motion, firmely held
His Carcafs down, and fix’d it to the Field:

Honour’s Example likewife fires the Minde

OF Sylla, Craffus, and Mdetellus, joyn'd

With Fannius, and Torquatus, {trong in Fight

Above the reft: all thefe, in Fabins Sight,

Engage amid’ft their Foes. But here, in haft
Retiring to avoid a Stone was caft

Againfthim, Bibulas, unhappy, on ..

An Heap of flaughter’d Friends fell backward down,


' And where his Brigandine was gaping wide,


Unhafp'd by frequent Blows, quite through his Side
A Weapon’s point ; that ina Body ftuck.

By Chance, upright into his Bowels ftruck.

Sad Fate! hee'd ‘feap'd AL armarick Troops, and all


~ The Garamantian Darts, that he might fall


By a neglected Lance, that was not thrown, -

With an intent to. wound him.- Breathlels down --

He tumbled, horrid Palenefs trait involy’d ap a
His youthfull beauteous Face, and Life diffely ‘d,
Through all his Limbs;his Arms hang leofe, and Sleep,
With Stygizn Darkueithouch his Eys doth Seep:
From Tyrian Sydon, {prang of Cadmus Race,

Excited by his Nephews, (leadas
Came to the Wai, and, proud of the Command,
Among his Aids, a brave Boan Band -.

Of Archers led : rich Gems all over deck

His golden Cask, and Chains about his Neck:

Such, when late wafh'd, and from the Ocean rais'd .
The © Uther of the Morn, by Venus prais'd,


Contends


Book VII Srrius Ira Licusy’ 287


Contends withother Stats. In Purple He,

His Horfe in: Purple, all his Company: — Bere ee
In Tyrian Purple fhin’ d.. He, as hewheel’d ..
His Steed co th’ Right, and Left, about the Field;.


» Deluding Brutus, eager of the Fight;. :


That, by his Hand, a Name fo famous ike,
Extunguifh’d be, an Arrow,Parthianelike, — :
Backward lets flie, nor doth it vainly ftrike .
But in his Armour-Bearer Cafca’s Chia .

It fticks, and, penetrating deeply in...
The Point, obliquely wounding, upward feruck
To his moift Pallet, and-within it ftack:
But Brutus troubled at his Friend’s fad Fate, .
Him, that ‘fo oft, did thus.diffeminate

In feeming Flight, his cruel Shafts, no more
Sought with his nimble Courfer, as before, .
To overtake : but, his whole Fury to


His Lance committing, the fwift' Weapon threw


From the loofe Thong, afd where the Chains deveft ,

Loofen’d by running to, and fro, his Breaft,

Into the upper Part, a deadly Wound

Thefixed © Cornel gave: down to the Ground -

He dying finks, and.in his Fall lets go,

From his right Hand the Shaft, his Left the Bow.

But, with a better Fate, Charmelus who

Soraéte’s Honour was} did then purfue |

The Fight; for he his Sword with Blood had ftain’d
Of Bragad,, who o're “ Fuba's People reign’d > |
Zeus C who of Spartan Phalanthus Race ;

A Race implacable, derived was,

And whom his Mother), aPhenician, bare
Ta fam’d Laconian)) by him likewife there
Was flain. But ACampficus, not daring to
Appear in Fight, before fo fierce a Fo,


(s) A Spear made of thac Wood.


(2) King of Afanritania,


Noi


208


(4) Tafculum, built by Tefegcn.


With that, he quits his Back, and doth invade


Sittus Iraricus.


Nor yet, as Fear perfwaded; thence to fly ,


Crep’d through the Buthes to an Oak, that nigh.


Did ftand, and climbing to the Top, among


- The fhady Leays conceal’d himfelf, and hung


Upon the Boughs, that trembled with his‘Weight,

Him begging, earneftly, to fhunhis Fate,

And leaping, fearfull, oft from Bough to Bough, - -

Furious Carmelus with a Pike quite through.

The Body pierc’'d (the Fowler fo in Groves

His Lime-Twigs lai’ d, when as his Mark removes

In filence ftrives, on talleft Trees with Aim

To ftrike, with his encreafing Shaft, his Game )

His Life, and Blood guth out, and; as itflows,

The pallid Corps hangs on the bending Boughs.
The Romanes, now the Tyrians put to Flight,

Clofely purfue. When of ftupendous Height

Upona fudden, amoft dreadful Afoor

Breaks forth, his Limbs black as the Arms he wore.

Their lofty Mains his footy Horfes rear,

And all his Chariot, with new Arts, that Fear

Might move, adorn’d, like to their Backs appears.

Like Plumes upon his Creft, like Robes he wears :

As when of old, to his Infernal Bed

The dreadfull King of Night eternal, fled,

And, in his Stygian Chariot, bore away

From 4tna’s Fields, ravith’d Proferpina,

But Cato, thena Youth, and the Renown

OF the high Walls of that © Gircéan Town

Where fam’d Laertes Nephew did command:

Although he faw the Latines make a ftand,

All troubled in the Front, undaunted, He

Spurs on his ftarting Steed, that fought to flee

His Way, affrighted at the Stygian Shade.


On


Book VII.


Protects Litt; wich’ his Tageiffomthe 2 _


Book VIL  Srrius Iraticus. | 209

On foot, ths: Ghariet,and the flying eALber, 2)

Behinde: whanftrairhis Sword; that trembled eh

His Neck;chts-Watip; and Reths, or mae oy

And, fuddenly, an horrid Palenefs:alk.* +: edit

His Litnss/through tofs of Bloodydoth: cin a8

When (ata, with his Sword, lops off his thea; .

And bears jas a’ Trophy, on his Lancesid i. _ ,
But, now; the fietce Disab ioliadens é

And, through a Globe with Sighs oh


—¢ A wofull Sight ty the Gen: ‘ral did: appear, 20°. (3) Minin


Sinking diteugh miahy Wounds, andilofsiof: Blood ae
And poorly begging Quarter 7 with aFlood }
Of Tears, lamenting'to behold him fof 13 2 Rs


And, calling to his Sen’; My valiant Bop - = ee

(Said He} now let thy Valour wipe away

This Stain: let usto-Hennibalretarn,- 8

( For his gréat Kindnefs, that Hi¢ did ‘not burn,

And watt our Fields) adue;and juft Reward.
The Youth, with thefe Encourageniéiits ache :?

And’s Father's Arts rejoyc’d; the Troops, that réurid’

The Libyan ftood, conftrain’d to quit their Ground <

With’s Conqu’ring Sword,and clear’d the Ficidagin

While Hannibal was fore'd to quit the Plain.

Aswhen a greedy Wolf, with Hunger preft,

The Shepheard ftept afide, or taking Reft,

Hath feiz’d a Lamb, and holdsit, Trembling, faft

Between his Jaws: if then the Shepheard hafte,

Hearing it bleat, to meet him in the Way;

The Wolf, now fearfull for himfelf, his Prey;

Panting between his Teeth, lets fall again ,


_ And hungry to the Woods retreats amain.


At length the Stygian Darknefs, that was fpread
Ore all the Earth, by a rude Tempeft, fled.
| Gg Their


© mR aT ERE ERIN ot OnE RETO RTE FO


BokVIL 9 an


ie -Sittus Irazicus. Book VIL


ce a a racine ec GE tat : eee


i


Their Hands-were weary, and they all confels
They did noemerit Safety; with Excefs
Of fudden Joys their Minds diftra@ted were:
Like fuch, that by fomefudden Ruinsare.
Opprels‘d, when they are freed again, and Night
Retires,then wink, and fear to fee the Light.
This done, his Army number'd in the Plaia; -
"T o's Camp upon the Hills, with Joy, again.:.
‘Fhe old DiZatonr, makes a fafe Retteats .c0.6 7:
A\nd then, asrefcu’d from the Hand of Fate, Be ase
The Youth, loud Shouts raile to the Stars, and all:
T” exprefs thei Joy with. Emulation, call -
Fabius their Safety, Fabius their. Renown, |
_ Fabius their.common Father, and the Grown:
Of all their Hopes. ‘Thenhe, that lately {hard
His Troops, to thank them with this Speech repair a.
Mokt Pious Father, if it lawfull be ©
That we complain, to Life reftor’d by Thee, .
Oh why didft: Thou permit us to divide
Our Camp, and Forces? Why didft thouabide
_ So patient, fo calm, thofe-Armsto yield __
Tous, which thoualoneartfittoweild?
Sinking beneath that Charge with lofs of Blood,
We near the Shades Eternal lately ftocd., -


Hither your Eagles, hither quickly bear 2
Your refcu’d Enfigns, Here's our Countrey, here
In this one Breaft the Citie’s Walls abide / .
And thou, Oh Hannibal,now, lay afide
Thy Frauds, and known Deceits, the War with Thee
By Fabius alone muft manag’d be. .
This {aid, when ftrait_ (a Reverend Sight it was )
A thoufand ’Altars rife, of Turfs of Grafs
Compos’d, and noneor Meat, or Wine effai d
To touch, before Devoutly they had pray’d,
Andon the Sacred Table, tothe wife
Diéatour's Honour, paid a Sacrifice, ae
The End of the Seventh Book. - *


SILIUS TTALICUS”


The Sécond Pénick WV are
sits allt & eS aE
+ _ Tue Agoument.


: By aaa fent, to eafe Els prefent Caves,
 Lhe-Goddefs Anne, so Hannibal ook 2
By whofe Advice, toCannz He removes.
Eleéled by the People, Varro proves
A Fatal Conful, the Delaies upbraids
Of Fabius: 4 Lif of ali:tbe Aids;
That with the Romanes jan. The be goes
To Canna: Fabius (ounfel’s to oppofe
Rafh Varro. What fad Prodigies forefhow’
In Heat and S4arth, the Romanes Overthrow.


O W Fabius, the firft, that


Z ‘made them fee

= The flying Backs of Cedmus
© Progeny; -

dq Was by the ‘Romane Camp,
f° ©6~=—Ssaand Souldiers all,

4. Their cotnmen Parent ftil’d :
: by Hannibal,


His Tisonely Fo. facies of Delay, ©
The Libyanraves. For that,to havea Day
OF Battel, the Didatour’s Death muft be
Expected, ‘and the Aid of Deftiny
Was to be With’d:: for whilein Arms he ftood;
While Fabius liv'd,to hope for Frojan Blood,
Wasvain. For now the Souldiers brought again.
Their Eagles, and, united, all remain

G g2 Under


ra Shite


(a) The Carthaginians.


2x2 Sirius ITaxticus, a


-Under-his fole Command. With him alone.
He muft tagain contend and what upon by


a ee


Eh hay eavit wan ties, byD


And, by his Are of iting fil hadrhade. ,
2 a ~The Plenty of the Tyrian Army fades - ‘oe
_ And; though anEnd, by ae couldn not tbe
7 | Obtain’ d,orBattel, hehisEnemy =
Had by his Conduét lately overcome.
Befides, the boafting (elte towards Home»
Zz Began to look: a People « of: a light,
| | Unconftant Minde: Fi ierce, at the firft, in Fight ;
el, But, if withftood, foon'quell'd. They griev'dto ie |
A War fhould be maintain’, from Slaughter free :
a C A thing to them unknowa. ) and‘while. they ftood
| i , In Arms, their Hands were Riff, dnd dry from Blood.
i To add to this, an inward Grief, and Wound C
f | OF civil Envy, did his Thoughts uae
: For Hannd,hwarting all he did intend”
| | At Home, would not permit the Senate fend, |
- () Hanibal,not ableto obtainhis © To his Afsiftance, any Aids atall..


Nefire of Bartel, (the Hopes of which .


i had till chen kept his Army together )
d had Thoughts of returning int France Torn with thefe Car S55 and aie now the F all


}
| faith Livy,tib.22. if the Confals,that
: Hi havent Fablan id ope peg tes OF his Affairs ; ? sf uno, who. knew the Fate


Arts with him to avoid fighting. For _
Hannibal ftrongly srrobder Home rel Of (anna, and with Fier thin gstelate erg ean
Hanno’s¥ackion,had vo Supplies thenc


and, in fal Oft of the Citi Him with frefh Ho
ee hia i tecould not finde Proviti oro. A Es of Arms,and War infpires,


: — ser, ile lowing Vie a his Thoughts,again, with: mad Defi ires.

apg one or © Anna, call'd from the Laurehtine Lakes ;

In thismild Language her Inftrudtions takes...
‘There isa Youth, in Blood ally'dto Thee, |

Call'd Hannibal, and from our Belus he

His Noble Name derives : make Halte away,

And the made Surges of his Cares allay ;

Shake Fabius from his Thoughts, who is alone

The Stop, that Italie’s not overthrown.


Fabins


| Béok VIIL Sirius Iravicus. 213


Fabiagjanow-dilmnils'd, with Varrohe 0
Hereafter muftdontend +! ‘the War nmaft be’ (8%
With Parvo wag’d.- Leehim: not wanting prove * ~
To Fate, but quickly ail his‘ Enfigns ee oe
I will be-prefenes ‘let him hafteaway 2° =
To th’ Tapygian Plains : there Trebia, -
And £ brafimenus: Fates (hall meet again.
eAnna a Neighbour to the Gods,that reign:
In thofe chaft Woods; thus anfwers. - It would be *:
Unjuftin Me, fhould I delay :( faid She }
Your great Commands ; but yet permit, I- pray, oud
The Favours,tomiy antient:Countrey, may |
With Cantion be retain’d ; :and that the Will, ::.
And Charge, of my deat-Sifter I fulfills
Though Anna be efteem’d:Divine; among: -
The Latine Deities, yet Time with long —
Ambages, turning,inObfcurity
Hath drown’d the Reafon of Antiquity ;
Why Temples the e4 u/onians fhould ordain
To Torian Pow'rs: : Or why, where Tiga reign,
Eliza's Sifter fhould be there ador’d. a
But, keeping clofe to Time, I will cond
What antient Fame reports ; and, briefly, all
The Story tell, from its Original,
When Tyrian Dido, by her TrojanGuek,
Forfaken was, and all her Hopes fuppreft :
Within a fecret Place, in Hafte, with Cares,
And Love, diftraa, a Fun’ral Pyle fhe rears;
Thentakesthe Sword (thar fatal Gift) thatby — -
@ Her Husband fled was giv'n, refolv'dto dy: -
When ftrait Hyarbas, whom before She had
Rejected, as a Lover,dothinvade © :
Her Kingdom, and his Arms; Victorious Chile ;


Her Ahes yet were warm )° fix'd'to the Pyles
Who


(d) e&nem.


2345


(ce) Cyrene, a City fcimate between


h
which all th


Cyrenaica,


rt, and Marcos, from
at part of Libyais called


Sitius Jtratnicus.


Who durft, whileshus the AComades fierceKing
Prevail'd, to thnig Diftrels, Alsiftance bring?
Battus, by Chance, the Reins of Chief Commarid
Over © Grene,witha gentle Hand

Then held: this Bateus was by Nature Kind ,

And Humane Chances eafily inclin’d

With Tears, to pity, and, at firft, when done
A Suppliant before Him came, began

The fickle State of Kings to apprehend,

And to relieve her, did his Hand extend.

Here She two Harvetts pals'd, but could no more
Enjoy the Aid of Battus,and that Store

His Bounty did afford: for then.a Fame

Was {pread, Pygmalion to her Ruine came

By Sea. Shatherefore froma that Kingdom flies,
And (asif hated by the Deities,

And nolefs hatefull to her fel that She

Her Sifter’s Death, did not accompany )

By fatal Tempefts, on the Sea, was toft,

Till, with tarp Sails, to the Laurentine Coatt,

She driven was, and, fadly Ship-wrack’d, there


_ AStranger to the People, Soil, and Air,


A fearfull Toriaw Raod, on Latine ground,
When now behold Aneas,having crown'd

His Labours with aKingdom, to the Place

By Chance, with young Iii/us came: His Face
She quickly knew, and when he fpy'd her there,
Her Eys fix’d on the Earth, and full of Fear,
Faln preftrate at Isis Feet, whofe Eys
O'reflow'd with Pity, helping her to rife,

To's Houle, he with.a gentle Hand convey'd,
And when, with kind Reception, he'd allay’d


Her Fears of Danger, witha penfive Care,


Defir'd unhappy Dido's Fate tohear. . -


Book VIII.


| Then


Sirius Iraticus, . RS


Book VIIL. |


Then fhe, with Language fitted for the Time,
And Tears her. Words protracting , thustohim
The Story told. Thou Goddefs-born, alone,
Wert the true Caufe, my Sifter, both her Throne
And Life enjoy’d: herDeath, and Fun’ral Fire

( Alafs that 1, in it, did not expire)

Can witnels this: for when She could no more
Behold thy Face, fometimes upon the Shore

She fate, fometimes fhe ftood, and, asherEys
Purfu’d the Winds, with loud, and mournfull Cries: -
LEneas call'd, and onely bege’d, that fhe


- Might in the Veffel bear thee Company.


Soon after, troubled in her Thoughts, again
She to her Marriage-Chamber runs amain,
Where, as fhe enters, fheisfeiz’dwithfuch  _
A fadden Trembling, that fhe dares not touch
Her Nuptial Bed: then, mad with her Embrace,
The ftarry Image of IélusFace
She hugs, then Thine; on which, at length, fhe dwells
With fixed Eys, and her fad Story tells
To Thee, and hopesan Anfwer to obtain.
But, when Love lai’d all Hopes afide,again _
The Houfe fhe quits, and flies unto the Shore,
Hoping the fhifting Winds might Theereftore.
At length, fallacious Levity invites
Her, ev’nto Magick Arts, and thedire Rites
Ofthe Mafsilian Nation to defcend.
But Oh! What wicked Errours do attend
Such Prophets / while they Stygian Pow'rs allure
From Hell, and promife to her Wounds a Cure.
What alad Aét did I, deceiv’d the while,
Behold ! She throws upon the horrid Pyle
All Monuments, and fatal Gifts by Thee
On her beftow’d. With that thus lovingly


a Sa


He


216


Sirius Irarticus. Book VIL
He interrupts her ; By this Land I {wear :

( Which ia my 'Withes you'did often hear).
By mild Iilus Head (to Her, and Thee me
Once held fo dear) Imoft unwillingly ,

Oft looking back, and troubled in my Mind,

Your Kingdom left. Nor had I chen declin’d

My Marriage-Bed, had I not threatned bin

By Mercury, who with his Hand Mein .

The Cabine plac’d, and drove into the Sea,

With furious Winds, the flying Ship away. )

But why (though all Advice is now too late )

Did you permit, at fach a ‘Time as thar, |

That She, without 4 Guard, ia Love fhould be

So Furious? In:broken Mtitmurs fhe

( Among her many Sighs )'to thisteplies,

Wich trefhbling Lips. 1 then a Sacrifice

To Stygian Fove, and his Infernal Queen,

To try, if my poor Sifter might have been

Eas'd in hét Love-fick Mind, prepar'd, andto

The Altars,with all Diligence, I drew :
The coal-black Lambs, with mine own Hand: for I,


| The Night before, was fill’d with Horrour, by


A Dream: for:thrice my Sifter call’d on you
With aloud Voice, thrice on Sycheus ; who,
Leaping for Joy, with a moft chearfull Face

( I chought } appear'd. But, while I ftrove to chace
Thefe Fancies from my Mind, and, as the Day
Began, that what I faw, might profper, pray

The Gods; She, Frantick, runs unto the Shore, . .
And on the filent Sands, where you before

Had food, her frequent Kiffes fix'd, and preft
Your Foot-fteps with a kind embracing Breaft:
As Mothers, late deprived of their Sons,

Their Afheshugg. From thence away the runs,


ike


Base VIL. “Siviue Iiareus.


Likea rude Bacchinal) her Hair difplai‘d,

To that high Pile, which fhe before had made,
Ofa vaft Bulk, from whence fhe might explore
All €arthage-City, with the Seas, and Shore.
Then putting on the Phrygian Robe, and Chain,
Enrich‘d with Gems, when fhe to Mind, again,
Had calfd the Day, wherein the firft had feen
Thefe Prefents , and the Banquets, that had been
Atyour Arrival made , and how the long
Labours of Troy you told, while on your Tongue, _
With Pity, her ftill-liftning Ear depends ;

Then to the Port her weeping Eys fhe bends ;
And, Off ring to the Gods, in Death, her Hair,
Thus fpeaks. YeGods of lafting Night! who are
By our approaching Death much Greater made,
BePrefent, I befeech you! andmy Shade,
O’recome with Love, and weary, now of Life,
Receive, with kind Afpeét , Aineas Wife,

And Venus Daughter ; who t avenge the Guile
OF my Sychaens Death, thefe Tow’rs have buile
Of lofty Carthage: now the Shade to you

Of that great Body come. My Husband Cwho
“Was fam(‘d for his kind Love) perhaps Me there


Expects, and would renew his former Gare,


This faid,the Sword (that fatal Sword!) which the
Thought a fure Pledg of Dardene Love tobe,

[nto her Breaft fhe thrufts ; her Servants, who

Beheld her, with fad Cries, and Shreeking, through
The Palacerun. The Noife, unhappy, I

Receive, and, frighted to the Palace, fly.

Like one diftracted, with my Hands, my Face

I tear, and f{trive to climb up to the Place.

Thrice, with that Sword, I thought my felf to kill,


As oft J, founding, on my Sifter fell.
| | Hh But,


217


(*) Lavinia was the Daughter of
King Larinus, whom «ae as married,


Sirius. Irarticus. Book VIII.


But, when the Rumour of her Fate was {pread
Through all the Neighb’ring Cities, thence I fled |
To fam'd Grene, and, by Fate ftill crofs'd,
_ From thence upon your Coaft, by Tempefts tofs‘d,
I now am caft. The Trojan Prince, inclin’d ©
To Tears at this, refolv'd to be more kind
To Her: and now all Sadnels, Grief, and Care,
‘Wiaslai‘d afide, and Anne no longer there
A Stranger feem'd to be. But, when the Night
A\ll things by Sea, and Land, had cover'd quite,
Her Sifter Dido feem’d with fad Afpect,
Thefe Words to Her, then fleeping, to direct.
Can’ft Thou(Oh Sifter!) can‘ft Thou long endure
Within thisFamily ( Ohtoo fecure!)
T' indulge Thy felftoReft? And doft not fee
Whatdangers Thee furround? what Plots’gainft Thee
Arelai‘d? Or doft Thou not, yet, underftand
How fatalto Thy Kindred, and Thy Land
The Trojans are? So long as Sphears above,
With Rapid Turning-round, the Stars thall move,
And with her Brother's Light the Moon hall thine,
Upon the Earth between the Trojan Line,
And Tprians, there fhall be no Peace : Arife,
Be gone from hence, (*) Lavinia’s Jealoufies
Now fecret Plots contrive, andin her Minde
Something of Mifcheif ‘gainft Thee is defign'd,
Befide (nor think that this is but a Dream )
Hard by, ACumicus, with a gentle Stream,
From a {mall Fountain,througha Valley flows :
Haft quickly thither, and Thy felf difpofe
To Safety ; there the Nymphs, with Joy, thall Thee
Receive into the Flood, and Thou fhalt be,
In Italy, Eternally Adord )
A Goddefs. And, as Dido {pake that Word,
She


MEL Pome PETER 2 SE AV SpE eo See! CIV, er or eee eee hp eT ee ee


Book MIE. Sin tus [TALIcus. 219


She vagy dine: Ait.: Aune,frightedby =.
Thefe Prodigies, 4uiakess.abdinftensly, 9 oc.
Through Fegr, caldSweas ore all.her.Limbs is. {pread.
Then,clad with a shin Garment, from herBed —-


She leaps, snditlanongh a Window, theg waslow,.


Into the opera Fieldsdoth, {peedy, BO A.
Untill Numicus ibis fandy Waves. 5s
Receiv'd, and hid her in his Chryftal Caves. -..
Now, when through all the World its-Beams the Day
Had fpread, and in the Trojae Chambers they «©
The Tyrian Lady mié'd, with Criesthrough all’.
The Latian Fields they ranjandeA onagall.
At length Her Footfteps tosh: Neighb xing Flood _
They follow, and,asthere they Wond’ring ftood;
The River from his Chanel trait expelltd
The Stream, andinthe Bottomthey beheld _
‘Mong the Cerulean Sifters, ef nne, who broke: .
Silence, and to the Trojans:kindly fpoke..
Since that, when firft the Year begins, is She
Divinely worlhipp'd through all Italy.
When to this Fight that did fo fatal prove

To Italy, the {pigh«full Wife of Fove

Had Her inftructed, in her Chariot, light,

Up tothe Starsagain fhetakes her Flight,
Hoping full Draughes of Troan Blood fhe may

At length receive. The Leffler to obey

The greater Goddels hafts, and ftraicto all,
Befides, unfeen, repairs to Hannibal.

Sequeftred from all Company, alone

She finds Him, fadly ruminating on

The dubious Event of His Affairs, .

And War, with anxious Sighs ; to eafe His Cares

With this kind Language She falutes Him. Why


( Moft Mighty King of Cee ) av


7 a! ——— —— TO RRS rrr s “ - | F
230 “Ortius Itartrecus. Book VIII
fe | a ¢ 2


Book VIII; Sirius Ira LIcus, 221°
Doft Thou perfift to-vex Thy felf with Caré?: a


Hence is it, that I Fabius can declare: ---
Difcharg’d of his‘\Command : the Fafcesare
In other Hands. Now let Me fee thofe great, 7
And valiant Ads; which oft, with fo much Heat,
You promis'd, when exchided from the Fight...
Behold /a Libyan Deity, this Nigh,» : 00 0
Hath promis’d greater things, then We have done,
Then pull Your Enfigns up; let Usmarchon
After the Goddels, and that Land invade,
» That, by the Name of Diomed, was made

. Mott fatal to the Phrygians. While they,
Encourag’‘d thus, to Arpos march’d away,
Varro, by toln Plebeian Voices made


_ Know, that the angry Gods appeafed are 1: «
ToThee : and néw an Eye of Favour caft 21!"
Onth’ Agenorides. “Away; viake hafte p ihe:
Draw Thy eMarmarick Forces oiit to fights";
The Fafces now are chane’d, and Fabius quite;
By a Decrée of Senate, néw hath laid : at
The War, and Aims,afide : it may be faid, |
Witla Flaminius Thou haft now to do.

Me the great Wife of fove Cnordoubr it True)
To Thee hath fent, I, in th’ Oenotrian Land
Religioufly ador'd, a Goddefs ftand,

Sprarig from Your Belus Blood. Then quickly go,


And all the Thunder of ‘War's F ury throw, A (onful, who the? Rofiva did invade : (A the Pulp mbercin ood fc,
Where high Garganus doth it felf difplay With Tyranny, opens a {pacious Gate _ blies;


Through Iapygian Fields unto the Sea ;
The Place is not far diftant, thither all -
Thy Enfigns bear ; that Rome, at length, may fall.
This Victory fhall Libya fuffice. |
This faid, into the Clouds again She flies.

By thefe Affurances, of promis‘d Praife ,
Doth Hannibal His Thoughts dejected raife:
Great Nymph Cfaid He) the Glory of Our Line ;
Then whom by Us no Goddefs more Divine
Is held ! moft happy with fuch Tidings fraught /
as ¢ after | victorioufly have fought )

it Carthage, ina Marble Temple, I

Will place, and, in her Statue » Dido, nigh
To Thee ,thall be ador’d. This faid, He then,
Full of glad Thoughts, thus animates his Men,
Nowall your tedious Cares, your Senfe of ill,
And flow-tormenting Pains of ficting-ftill
C My Souldiers)) lay afide. We have appeas'd:
The Wrath of Heav’n, the Gods with Usare pleas‘d.


Hence


To Ruin, and draws on the Citie’s Fate.
This Fellow, bafely born, his Parent's Name ,
Unknown, into the © Forum, Bawling, came ' © ThePleading pace
With an immodeft Tongue, and made by Bribes,
And Rapine rich, humour’d th’ inconftant Tribes,
By railing at the Senate, and fo far /
Prevail’d in Rome, then fhaken by the War ;
That He (by whom, had he with Victory
Return’d, it had been Shame for Italy
Tobe preferv'd ) ofall Affairs the Weight
_ Afflum’d ; fole Arbiter of her great Fate,
Him ‘mong the Fabii, and thofe Names renown’d
In War, the Scipios, and «AL arcellus ctown'd
With Spoils to Fove, blind Suffrages (a Stain dy
Plac'din the © Fafti, while the Love of Gain , (4) The Romane Kalenders.
And © Mars’sField, a greater Mifchief bred
For Canna, then the Arms of Diomed.
He, as he was Seditious, bufie ftill
‘Fo foment Envy, and devoid of Skill


é


- G) The Place where they Affemb-
bled, Ue ;


To


22B


Sinius Jraricus. - Book VI


To plead, fo was he weak in Martial Arts,


(k) Varro was no fooner elected
Conful, but be told the People, that the
Warhad been brought into Jtaly by
the Nobility, and-would be kept in the
Bowels of ic, if the Fabis the
Command of, their Armies. See Liv,
Book 16. 4

¢) A Cempe'lation frequently u-
fed a the mone iy fuch x flatver'd

em.


And neither fam'd for Courage, nor for Parts)".


To manage fuch Affairs, hop'd yet, among
The Valiant,to be honour'dfor his Tongue, «' -
And from theRojira urgeth for a Fight.
When therefore to the People, full ‘of Spight, '
Ck) He had upbraided Fabius for Delay, :
Againtt the Senate too this boafting Plea
He undertakes : “)Quirites ! Youto whom.
Belongs the chief Command, to you I come,
Your Conful, for Gommifsion now to Fight.
Shall I fit ftill, or, wandring o’re the Height
Of Hills, beneath me Garamantians fee,
And parched Moors to fharein Italy? |
Or thall Lule that Sword, which now! wear,
Giv’n by your Suffrage. Good Diatour, hear
What ‘tis the Martial People now command.
It is their Will, that the Aufonian Land
Be eas’d of Libya's War, and of the Fo.
Do they to War precipitately go ; »
Who, having fuffer'd much, now the third Year,
With faddeft Miferies confum’d appear ?
Haft then, take Arms, brave men ; your fole Delay
To Triumph, tsa litle March. That Day,
Which firft thews you the Fo, fhall overthrow:
The Senate and the Libyan War. Then go
With Speed; I, bound in Latian Fetters,through
The City Hannibal, in Fabias View,
Willlead. This boafting faid, out at the Gates,
Rufhing to Arms,he, ftrait, precipitates :
Like one, that unacquainted with the Arts
To guide a Chariot, fromthe Barriers ftarts ;
Gives the full Reins with one, with to’ther Hand


The Whip imploys, while he doth tott’ring ftand


Unequal


Book VII. Sizius Iraricus: 223


Unequal to the Steeds: the Axel-tree, .

Pre(s'd by th’ ill-turning Wheels, appears to be

On fire, and fmoaks : the Chariot to, and fro,

Is tofs'd; with it the Reins, entangled, flow. |
Paulus, ( who then for Peace, and War, was joyn'd

His Colleague ) well perceiv’d the State inclin’d

To Ruin, and, by his unhappy Sway,

Its Strength, and Glory quickly would decay.

But the unconftant Fury of the rude,

And troubled People, and a “ Wound renew’d

Frefhin his Memory, Complaints fuppreft,

And kept his {welling Griofs w ithin his Breatt.

For when, in younger Years, he had fubdu’d

Hyrium, the envious Multitude


Upon his Conqueft foul Afperfions caft ,


(am) Aer Paulus ee mylins had fub-
dued King Perfees, and Ipeiled feven-
teen Citiesin Jiri , ‘at his Return
toReme, the People accufed him of con-
verting much of the Booty to his own
ufe (as they did, aiterwards, Scipio +-
fricanns) fince which time he never
took any Publick Employment , till
made Colleague with Furre.


And, with unjuft Reports, his Laurel blaft.


Thence of the cruel People he did bear

Still in his Mind a Rev’rential Fear.

But, to the Gods ally'd, his Pedigree

From Heav’n, by fam‘d Progenitours, might be
Deriv'd. His Chief, Amulius, could prove

eA ffaracus his Anceftour; he, Fove.


. And none deny’'d, who Him in Arms had feen,


That that His great Original had been.
To Hin, as then he was about to take
The Field, and quit the Town, thus Fabius fpake.

Ifthat thy greateft War thou dott believe
To be with Hannibal, thou wilt deceive
Thy Countrey, Paulus (1 amlothmy Minde
To {peak thus freely) but, Im’e fure, thou'lt finde ,.
Within the Camp, worfe Conflicts, and a Fo
More fierce, orl , in vain, have fought to know
Events of War fo long. | lately heard
Him promife Cand, if I the Ruins fear‘d,

That


Sintus Iraticus. Book VII.


(2) When Hannibal marched from
Rindanis, his Army coniifted of eight
and thirty thoufand Foor, and above
eight thoufand Horfe:bur, through the
Difficulties which he encountred in_ his
Paffage over the .4/pes, he fcarce
brought halfofthem into Jtaly, Polyb.
“b. 3. Livy affitms , farce a third
part.


That we thal {uffer, Ecowld weary be:

Of Life, and my old Age }- fo foon.as He
Could fee him, he would fight the profp'rous Fe.
Oh Paulus, fhould the eager Libyan know

his Speech, how near would our Deftruction be !
I do believe, that now the Enemy :

Stands ready in the Plairi, and hopes to finde
Another Conful, of Flaminius Mind,

To fal! into his Hands, What men wile Thou
Provoke, mad Varro? Or, unskilfull, how ©

Canft thou, forthwith, their Camp, and es before
Difcover? and, by thy Delays, explore,

How much the Cuftoms of the Fo may Thee
Avail® How great his Magazine may be?

Or what the Place’s Nature? Thou their kind
OF Weapons foon wile: know, and Fortune finde
Standing on all their Points. Paulas, thy juft
Refolves to all his devious Courfesmuft

Oppofed be: if itbe juftin him
T affli& his Countrey, can it be a Crime

10 Thee to fave it? Hannibal is now

Straitned for Victuals: His Affociates grow
Now weary of his Friendship, fince the Heat
Of War'sallai’d : here He finds no Retreat

T o better Quarters: hereno Cities are,

T o whofe Fidelity he can repair.

Nor can he here recruu his Youth again:

” Scarce a third pare of all thofe menremain,
That with him from Ieras came: Oh then
Continue firm, and to our Wounds, agen

The Med’cine of a Cautious War apply.

Ifin the meantime Th’ art invited by

Any propitious Air, and Heav'n approve ;

Near to thy better Fortune quickly move.


Paulus


Book VIII.


Paulus, with Sadness, briefly’ thus again

Anf{wersi: “Fhis Picty:Thall filkremain :

With me: 'thy Minde “Cunconquer'd Goieral) ye
Againft the Libyan Ve itill bear; Withall,
I know there is{uch Reafon to with-hold
From Fight, that Hannibal, now waxing: old,
Throughthy Delays, perceivs :the W arto be
Almoft fupprefs‘d,.and ata Stand: bue fee -
The fad Difpleafure! = fee the Wrath of Heav'n!
One Conful Ci believe ) to Reéme is giv'n. ;
To ‘ther to Carthage: Hedrawswith Himall . . ..
Affairs, and madly fears, that Rome fhouid fall...
By any other Hand, then by His own: |

She, cruel, from the Zorian Senete, none

Could more deftructive choofe: no Warlike Steed;
To carry Him againft the Fo, hath Speed -
Enough. Itgrievs Him, that His March fhould be
Retarded, by the Night’s Obfeurity.

W ith Swords half drawn He marches, that no Stay)
To draw a Sword, His fighting may delay.

But ye Larpeian Rocks, and Tow’rs that be

Sacred to Fove, through him ally’dto Me /

And my thrice happy Countrie’s Walls, which now.
] ftanding leave, the Witnels of my Vow !

Where e’re the common Safety calls me, I

Will go, and greateft Dangers will defie ;

But, if ftill deaf, to what I fhall advife,

The Camp will fight, I fhall no longer prize

Th’ Enjoyment of my Sons, and deareft Home,
Nor, like to Varro, me fhall wounded Kome
Returning fee. Thus high in Difcontent

The Generak ,both,to the Army went.

The Libyan within th’ Azttolien Plains


(As by His Dream advis'd ?. encamp’d remiairis.
Neither


Sittius [Ta Licus. .


225


226 Sitius’ Iraricus.


Neither had Italy e’re fent a Force
Greater for Number, both of Foot, and Horfe;


Into the Fields’ for then-they fear'd the Falk ° 4


Both of the City,and the Nation ; all
(©) Varro having refolved to fight, ¢ a ee, : ; |
wherclocver he mee Hamibe’. he © Their Hopes upon one Battel-did depend. -


People gave him an excefiive Liberty to


raife men : fo that he had a greater Ar- ‘Therefore the Faun-got Rutulidid. fend,


my, then ever the Romanes levied be-


fore , wen See rnercewrae Join’d with Sicanian Arms, their Saered Bands ues
Into the War. Thole, that poffefs the Lands. .
OF Datnus, and Laurentine Palaces,
And fam’d DCumicius: Waters, join’d with fiche
From Caftrum likewile, to the War, they came ;

dhe baer Caton bon beard And Ardéa,, once fatal. to the ® Name


teen Miles) when «4ncas entred Tta~


> Turnus was King of it, who gave OF Phrygians ; and, Lavinum, where of old


Battel ro -meas,and was flain by


Tarquin Spebu, bed ths Ci ( Built ona lofty Hill’): they.did'behold


ty, when his Son Jeft the Camp, and
pofted to Rome, to ravith Laxcretia,


which not onely forced him to raife Great Funo's: Temple, and, Collatia where .

the Siege, bur fubverred his Dominion : as :

over the Romanes. See Liv.tibt. (Chaft Bratus took his Birth : with thofe, tharare
(9) D Grove near Aricia, W 1 5 oe . tg) .

ooo Gees behinde the he tal ont to frequent Diana s cruel - Grove 9

upon the Via Appia. In this Grove Ne A nd that the Moutho'th’ ©) Torrhen River love.


ma pretended his Private Conference


he Nymph E Pieces Sac
“Ol They likewife, that in e4/mo'’s warmer Stream


(s) Almo,afmall Brook , that fl ()
oO es eee es Cherifh © Gbele, to the Army came.
Image of Cybele was wafhed. Thy Zybur too, Catyllus, mufter’d ; and

) Pranefesbuilt by Prenefus, the (*) Preneffé, that upon an Hill doth ftand,


Son of Latinas, and Nephew to Uiy/~
fes, and Circe: where there was a


Tongs Deceit Fara, andi Sacred to Fortune; and Antemna, fam'd :
7 Before (ruflumium, fromthe River nam‘d.

With the Labici, skill’d to Plow, and thle,
That dwell where now Imperial Tiber flows,
With Anyo's Neighbours, and the People, where
The Fields with cold Simbrivium water'd are ;
And the Zquicolz, for Tillage known.
Their Captain, Scaurus was; whofe Chin the Down
Then newly cover'd: but his rifing Worth
Began to future ‘Times to fet him forth.
Thefe were not wont with Steel to poine the Spear,


Or Quivers full of winged Shafts to bear ;
Piles.


Book ‘VIII.


Book VIII.


Sitius IraLticus.


S227


Piles, and forte Swords, theyléve:: 2, their Heads with
Be


Defended are, them ‘Crefts alf elfe furpals.: :

But thole, which Setia, that’s relerv'd alone -
For Bacchus Table;and: Velitre, known |

By many Battels, fromher-Valleyfent, © = &:.
With fuch as Gonalifted,and that went ©° > 2s...
From Signia,tulk.of hurtful Wines; with thofe, .
Where the black Fen of :Satura o: ellows ee.


The Pontine Level, with.anoifomFlood; . (Mud,
Which, running through the Fields, all ftain’d with


Ufens within his:Chanel {trait collects:
And with the Slime the Neighb’ring Seaintedts;,


* Were under valiant Scevola’s Commana ;


Who, Great in’s Anceftours, nor of that Hand
Unworthy held, whofe honour'd Figure He, i: .


Carv'd in his Target, wore: where they might fee


The flaming Altars, ‘midft the Dorrhen Bands, -,:, .
Now angry with himfelf, bold © ‘eALutius: anes
And Valour, in his Image,feem’d to be: | eee
Turn‘d into Rage s!Porfenna,inftantlyys: eee


Having efcap’d the Blow, to Armsteturns, 02.0000


While He his erring Hand, for Anger, burnse. ©. +
Then, from the fam‘d Circean Hills, and from: ;
Anxur (high-ftanding ond Rock) ‘they cores:
With thofe; chat Plowthe Hernick Stony Fields, | ie
And fair Anagnia,that fuch Plenty yields ~ 2. uv:
OF Wheat. ‘ButSylla the Terentines,joyn'd — ..:


With Privernates,led. Then, thofe; that flain’d:!: '1
In their bright Arms, from Soralately fent.... 0"


Next thefe, the -Fabraterian Peoplewent, i>


And Scaptian Youth.. ef tinatoo wasthere, 0%


(4) The Velitrini, upon the Confi-


i+, dence of a Pro nets c, thactold them, a
_ Citizen of U


eir City fhould*one
a obtainthe Dominion over all it2-
He did very often contend with Rome:

ut were {till worfted ; untill Augaftus,
who was bora there, obtaining the
Empire, fulfilled the Prophefiec


(«) Martins Scevola, who, when
Rome was befteged by Tarquinins Sw
perbis, and Porferxa, iffuéd out of the
Chy by night, refolvin “ to kill Porfen-
na, and palling, difguifed, through the
Guards, coming into his Tent, not
knowing the King , flew one: of his
Nobles, and finding immediatly his Er-
rour, ina Rage, burnt his Hand, for -
the Miftake. Liv. lib.t.


From her cold Hill; '-and: Suez, worn with! Wats."


And, from the Plough, Trufino; nat to,be
Efteem’d, as weak. But thofe, that Lyres- fee, ee


i 2 Mixing


28 Sirius Iraxicus. Book VIIL Book VIII. SILius Iraricus. 229


Into the War fogreat Afsiftance brings; |
Thatnot the Raging Seamorénum'rous flings -
Its foaming Billows up: nor Bands more light,

- And Active, when She imitates a Fight, (Shields,
Riding through num'rous Troops , with Moon-like
© The Warlike Maid leads through the Scythian Fields, @ Amazon
And makes T hermedoon, and the Earth, relound
The Noife. Here thole, that in thy Stony Ground,
Numana, dwell, and thofe, that near the Shore —
With flaming Altars, © Cupra, Thee adore,
Wereto be feen. They likewife thither fend,
Their Aids, who the Truentine Tow'rs defend
By the adjoyning River, and the Sun,
From their bright Targets,by- Reflexion,
At Diftance, rais‘d a bloody Light : and there
Ancon as rich in Purple did appear,
As arethe Libyan, or Sidonian Looms...
Then, water'd by Vomanus, Adria comes.
And, near tothem, the Enfigns they behold
Ofchurlith Afeulum, which ¢fam'd ofold) +.
Vepicus, {prung from Saturne, built: Him; by 2
Her Charms, Phabean Girce fore'd to fly,
Depriv'd of his own ‘/) Figure through the Air, Lf Tamed into a Wood-pecker by
With yellow Plumes. Once the Pe/a/gi there
Inhabited, and Aefs ( as by Fame
We learn) their Ruler was, and left bis Name
Unto the River, and his People all
Began Af, from himfelf, to call.
Nor, coming from their hollow Hills, with worle
Supplies, did Umbrian Swains the Camp enforce.
Thefe fs, Sapis, and, with rapid Waves,
Roll'd over lofty Rocks, Metanras Laves :
C4itumnus too, that Bulls for Sacrifice


Watheth in Sacred Streams, and Nar, that flies
Foaming’


Mixing his fulph’rous Waters with the cold
FPibrenus, and,with filent Streams, by old
Arpinum glides ; with the Venafrian Bands, —
And him, that with the Larinates Hands
Brings his Auxiliaries; and the vatt
eAquinum of her Men doth quite exhauft,
Tullius to War, in brafen Arms, did bring:
A Noble Youth, that did from Tullus {pring,
And of {fo great a Wit, that Fate ordain’d,
That He fhould give to the Aufonian Land
and, arent Tallins Cicere, The () One of his Race, that fhould be underftood
Beyond the Indies, and their famous Flood
Of Ganges : whofe great Voice the World thould fill ;
Who, by the Thunder of. his-F ongue,fhould ftill
The Noife of War ; nor thallPefterity »
- Er’e hope the like, for Eloquence, to fee.
But from Theramnean Blood, of Clanfus, {prung,
Inimitable for brave Deeds, among
*@) Vid. Libas. ~ The Chief, was *): ACero: Him the Troops, that came
* From Amiternunt, and,which takesher Name -
From Bairians, Cafperala, with all... 2 |.
From Forssk, and, which we Sacredcall 3.
(4) Cybele. To th’ Mother of the © Gods, Reate,and 3!
Nur fa, that as befieg'd by Frofts doth ftand,:'
And Troops from Tetricus cold Rock, to th’ Field
Attend, all arm’d with Lances, and their Shield
Made, Globe-like,round:no Plumes their Helmets bear,
A Se Nal Ress soit And their left Legs with } Boots defended are,
mone theGenkn + ia eEtltens,2- Thefe, as they Joyfull march’d, fome Praifes fang
sydl Sandtus was the Father of Sa. To Thee,great © Santtus Cfor from Thee they {prung)
Some, Sabus, honour Thee, who firft of all.
Thy People, from Thy Name, didft Subives call.
But Curio, rough with ’s {oaly Coat of Mail ,
A\nd on his Helmet’s Creft an Horfes Tail,


(¢) Pano; who had there a Temple,


Into


230


(g) Silius,in this;
inhis Bacolicks, that
Pafiphae , till Daedalus made a Cow of
Wood, where in the Qu. was enclofed ,
and the Bull deluded.


_Sitis ‘It ME TEUS. Book VIII.


Foaming to Fiber ; and; whofe Waters run:
Inglorioufly, Tinie, and Rubicon, -

With (lavis,and which, from the Senones,
Was Senna call'd: but. Zyber, ‘midft of thefe,
‘With Banks unfhaken, near th’ Imperial Walls,
Sweils high, and thence into the Ocean falls.
Their Cities, Arna; and: Mevania, rich -

In {pacious Meads, Hi/pellum, Narnia, which
Upon a fteep, and rocky Hill doth ly;

Inginum too, of old infeaed by

Moift Clouds; and, lying in anopen Plain ,
Fulginia, wanting Walls... Near thefe. remain
A warlike People, Amerini nam’d: 3
And (amers, near to them, for Arrows fam’ d;
With wealthy.Sarfina,renown’d for Store

Of Milk; and the Tudertessphat adore |’.
The God of War. _Théfe, a out: Race of Men,
Coztemning Death, were led:by‘Pifo; then


A Youth, and there in‘fuch an Habit fhin’d a


But equalting, by-his fagacious Mind,

The Antiene, and in Policy his Years

Excelling, at the. Armie’s Head appears
In Parthian-painted Arms, and Golden Chain’;
Whole Gems: a Luftre caft through all the Plain.
But then a Legion of Hetrurian Bands,


Compleat, ftout Galla (a great Name )-commands:


From (Cretan Minos He his Pedigree
Derivy'd, and from LuftfulkPafthae,


ees with Virgil, © So hated by the Ball,,.and from that Lime «:


His Noble Anceftours in Order thine.

Then Cere chofen Bands, (ortona then = :
(Proud Larcon’s Family }. fend chofen Men;
With old Gravifca, eA lium, by thy Streams


Grecian Alefus, lov’d, and that, which feems
aM, Befieg’d


~ Book VII. Sirius Iranicus.


Befieg’d by arude Plain, Fregelle: nor.

Was Fefula (the Fany ‘d Interpreter

Of Thunder): wanting, with her Sacred Bands.
And, near to them, Clufinum Mutfter’d ftands ,
Oncea great Terrourto the Walls of Rome;
When thou,Porfenna, Armd, didft thither come,
And didft endeavour to reftore, in vain,

Th’ expell'd Targquinii to the Throne again.
Then Luna, from her Snow-white Quarries, preft
Her lab’ring Youth: Luna, before the reft,

Fam’d for her {pacious Port; which can contain
Ships without Number, and fhutsin the Main.
Not far from thefe, the Vetulonian Band

( The Glory ortce-of the Maonian Land)

Which firft ordain’d twelve Fa/ces to precede

The Confuls ; and, to ftrike a filent Dread,

As many Axes'added: it was She,

That firft adorn’d with polifh’d Ivory .

Triumphal Chairs : Her Nobles firft array’d

In Tyrian Purple, and that Trumpets made
Courage by them in Battelto enflame.

Next thefe the Cepefinian Cohorts came,

And Juk Falifci sand, Flavinia, thofe,

Thatkeep thy Fires. Near whom Sabaca goes,

In Fens abounding; and, that near thy Lake,
Ciminus, dwell ; with them, that Sutrinm take

For their Abode; and thofe, that tothe Rites’
OF Phebus high Soraffe oft invites :

Caps of the Skins of Beafts their Heads defend,
Two Dartsthey carry, and their Spears commend
Before the Lycian Bows. Thele, allin War
Moftexpert: butthe Marfan People are
Not onely Valiant, but can likewife Charm
To fleep the banefull Adder, and disarm


The


(b) Who being vanquifhed by 4.
ilo, in his Contention of Atufick ,


S Li FA S I raticus. Book VHI. |


The Viper of her Teeth, by Herbs, and Spells,
Anguitia firk ( as Fame the Story tells).
Oétes Race, thofe hurtful Siznples thew’d,
4\nd with her Touch, all Poifon’s Force fubdu'd: |
She from her Sphear could fhake the Moon,and Floods
Stop with her Voice ; and, calling down the Woods,
The Mountains naked make. But, fall of Dread, ©

© Maryas, when he the Phrygian Creni fled :
By Sea, unto that People gavehis Name ;

When, with a Lute, Apollo overcame | =
His thrill Mygdonian Flite. ‘The Chief of all —
Their Cities they, from antient Maris: call ‘
Marruvium , and, for Corin moifter Fields,

More inward, Alba ftore'of Applesyields.

The reft were little Towns dbfcire in Fame ule


But in their Numbers greater, then their Name.

“Mong which, Pelignas, and cold Suiwéfene

Their Cohorts ; nor, then thefe, lefdiligene

Were thofe of Cales, born; ‘near them in ‘Blood,

From (alais ( as by Fame ‘tis underftood )

The Noble Founder ofa City fair, - :

Whom Orithyia (ravith’d through the Air )

For Boreas nurs’din Getick Caves. No le&.

Active: in War, then thefe, Ve/tini prefs —

Their Y outh, tnur'd to Hardthip by the Chafe

Of falvage Beafts. They likewife War imbrace,

That in thy Tow'rs, Fifcellus, dwell : and, now,

They alfo arm, that fertile Pinne mow ;

And thy rich Meads, Avellz, that fo foon

Sprout upzand then in Emulation

~ Of the Frentani, the Marrucins drew |

Corfinium’s People, and Theate too.

All thefe, with Ruftick Weapons arm’d for Fighe,

Could, with their Slings, a Bird, in higheft Flight,
4 | Suike


Book VIIL


Sitius Itaticus;


‘Strike down : the Skins of Bears, about their Breatt, |


In Hunting kill'd, they wear. And riéw the reft ,
That were for Wealth, or AncéRowtsrenown'd,
In all che Tract of the Campanian Groiind ;
Appear ini Arms, or their Alsiftance fend.

The Ofci in their Neighb’ring Plains ateend

Th’ Arrival of the Generals : and diezé

Warm Sinnefsa, and Vulturnum, were:

Whofe River like a Fortent falls into’

The Sea; and, whombher © Silniéd overthrew ,
cA mycle. Fundi,and Cajeta; where

Lanmy was King. Thy Péople:to6 were there,

©) Antipbates, that’s by the Sea: comprefts

And, which the rotten Fens, and Pools itivett,
Linternum and the Cama;.chat-of old;

Confcious of Fate, all future'things foretold.
There was Aseria; there was Gaurus, sood

For Shipping ;. thete,deriv'd'from Grecia Blood;
With many Souldierswas Patthiendpe :

With Dicarcheniar Bands : atid! efiphe,

And Nola; cothe Libyan hard to pals:
Slighted for Claniuss there Mcerra was:

There the Serraftés:s thet were to Be een:

Mild Saenus: Riches; atid ‘the Troopshad ‘been
Lifted in Phlegray fae with Sulphures and
Maifenus, and the Ishavefiaw Band:

Of Baius, burning-with the “ Giant's Breath,
Not Prochyte, nov which Zyphiews Deacti
In fulph’rous Flames, Inarime; beheld!
Nor ancient Tele’s StonyAfle;this Field’
Avoids. But thither:doth Catitia; from
Her little Walls; chicher Surrenram come’;
And, poor in Corn; Adel, But; ofall:
Fhe Chief was Capua; that, too Prodigal


@) Amycle, a City of the Sabines 7
having had frequent falfe Alarms of
their Enemies Approach, thac they
might beno more difturbed. made a
Law, That none fhould any more dare
to give the Alarm, The Enemy coming,
no man daring co violate the Edi. the
City was taken. ,

(kK) The Bay of Cajeta.


© (1) Where Aturcells gave Hanni-
4ala notable Repulfe,


- (m) Giants there venquifhed, and
buried by Hercules. ‘


¢ Alag /y


@


,"* ee OE OE,


:


234,


SILius IraLicus, Book Vil.


Se a a eet eh


C Alafs! ) notknowingin Profperity _
T okeep a Mean, was loft. in Luxury.

Thefe for the future: War by Scipio form’d :
He gave them Piles ; and then with Iren arm dW ont)
Their Breafts: from Home, (as;was their Father's
They lighter Weapons, Shafts of Cornel, blunt, .
Without an Head of Steel, but hardned by . .
The Fire, with Hurl-Bats, which they canlet fly,
And, witha String, retire, as they invade
The Fo, and Axes for the Countrey made.
Nor was he wanting, ‘midft them all,to fhew
Great Signs of fature Praife. Sometimes He threw
An hardned Stake, or leap’da Trench to {cale
A Wall, or, arm/d, by Swimming would prevail
Againft impetuous Streams : thefe great,and bold
Examples of His Valour all behold. -
Oft,in the open Plain, with wondrous Speed:
Would he out-rin the fpur’d, and fleete(tSteed :


~ Off, crofs the Camp, would He a Jav'lin throw,


(n) The Samnites often rebelled a.
gaintt the Romanes, and, after this De-
feat, difcovered their antient Enmity ,
by revolting to Hannibal.


(0) Herdinia was burned by Hanni-
bal, fearing it would revolt to the Re-
manes, and the chief Citizens flain, for
having had Conference with Fulvins.
See Liv. lib, 27.


Or weighty Stone. He had.a Martial Brow ;

Eis Hair was foft, and gentle, which behind .

Flung in long Treffes; His Afpect was kind,

A\nd gentle’; and His Eys a pleafing-Dread -

With fparkling Raies, onthe Beholders, fhed.

©: Samnis was likewile there, not yet inclin’d

To Hannibal, yet keping in her Mind

Her antient Anger ; Batulum, and thofe e

That dwell where eAfucra by Liguria flows.

With them, that Bovianian Caves frequent,

Or Candine Straits, and which €fernia fent,

Or Rufre ; or, ob{cure Herdonia, from

Thy Fields, foon after © wafted,armedcome, |

Alike in Courage, there,the Brutii {tand, .

With them from Lucane Hills, a lufty Band ;
ve And


Book VIII.


Sittus Iraxicus.. 235


And Hirpine Youth, who,cover'd o're with Hides
Of Beafts, and Darts, like: Briftles by:their Sides, *:-.
Are all by Hunting fed’: and; ever, dwell

In Caves, andin a River Thirft expell, . |
And get their Sleep with Labour. -(Galaber, =>
And the Salentine Cohorts,addedare:**

To them; near whom Brundefiam doth ftand,

A famous Period to th’ Italien Lands

A Legion bold Cerhegus there comm ands,

OF Social Aids, and intermingled Bands.

Now, from Leucofia’s Rocks;the-Souldiers thew -
Themflelves,and from Picentian Pesto too,

And from Carll, that foon after fell

By Hannibal's dire Ragerwith thofe, that dwell - -
Near Silarus, where Fame reports; the Blood - .
Toturn to hardeft Stone the drowned! Wood: --

He both the ftout Szlernian Fauchion, and ~~ _
Th’ unpolifh’d-Club , «that, fitted tohis Harid, 5°
The ftrong Buxentian us'd, commends. While he
(As was the Cuftom of his Family ) a =e
His Arm bar‘d to the Shoulder, joy’dto ride

A ftubborn Horfe, and in his hard Mouth try’d

His Strength of Youth,'by: Wheeling to, and fro.
And you, ye wafted Nations of the Po, .

Your Vows then by thé Gods neglected, all

Ruhh into Arms, by Fate decreed to fall.


“Placentia, ruin’d by the War, contends:


With Autina, and © Adantua,thacfends —


(p) Where Firgi/ was born.
Her Levies, fought Cremona to excell :


- Fam'd Mantua, where the Theppian Sitters walt


Which, Emulous of Smyrna’s ‘Mafe;is prais‘d fs (9) Homer
For efudine Songs, and to the Stars is rais'd
The next, by eA thefis encompals'd; went —
Verona; and Faventia, diligent’
| k 2 Seill


236


Sittus Iraricus. “Book VIII:


(>) King Hieron.


Still to preferve the Pines, that Crown her Fields:
Vercelle , and Pellentia,that yields see
Store of black Wooll ; and Ocnus Family, °
Which againft Tarnus once alsifted Thee,
Eneas ,and Bonouia, that lyes

Near little Rene: with him, that lab’ring plies,


With pond’raus Oars, the muddy Streams, that by ~


Ravenna flow, which ‘mong the Fens doth ly. .

Then, fprang, of old, from the Exganean Land ,

C Antenor's Countrey ) camea Trojan Band.

There Aquileia, with Venetian Arms, -

Are eager for the Fight: there the Alarms

O'th’ Fo, the fwift Ligurians attend; .:

And, featter'd on the Rocks, V, ageni fend:

Their hardy Nephews, there ordain'd to be

The Honour of the Libyan’s Vidory: a

Brutus, in whom thefe People, all, repole _

Their greateft Confidence, their Leader goes

Into the Field, and ‘gainft the ‘Enemy _ .

Excites their Rage. A pleafant Gravity

Adorn’d his Fore-head, and a ferious Mind |

With Valour, not to Crueley inclin'd.

Th’ unpleafant Praife of churlith Rigour He

Did not affect, or harfh Aufterity,

Nor Glory by finifter Courfes fought.

To thefe three thoufand expert Archers, brought

From flaming 4tna,the Sicilian King,

Moft faithfull, adds: but I/va did not bring

So many men; and yet She did afford _.

Her Cohorts, which, felected for the Sword,

And arm’‘d with Native Mettle, thither came:

They Varro's Zeal to fight would hardly blame,

Whoe'refomany Armsat oncebeheld, __

Such Numbers rag‘d through the Rhetéan Field -
When


Book VIIL Sitrtus Iraxttrcus.


When Trey the great Mycena didinvade, - |
And, v hen a thoufand Ships their. Anchors weigh‘d,
And fail'd through Hellespont. So foonas they
Arriv‘d at Canna, where the Ruins lay

OF anold City, they encamp’d, and there

Their moft unhappy Enfigns fix'd : nor were’

The Gods then wanting to forefhew to all

Thofe Ruins, that foon after did befall.

Th affrighted Souldiers {ee their Piles to burn,

The Turrets on the Rampires overturn, —

And fall. Garganus, fromalofty Crown, |
Trembling, the Woods, and Forefts, tumbles down.
From his deep Bottom Aufidus began 7
Panting to roar: amid{ft the Ocean, .2
Remote (eraunian Rocks with Flames affrighe

The trembling Mariners ; and then, the Light

With fudden Stygian Darknels cover'd o’re,

(alabrian Sipus Gropes for Land, and Shore, —

The Owl with fatal Houting oft alarms - .
The Camp, ev’n at the Gates ; and Bees, in Swarms,
Like Clouds, involve the Eagles : inthe Air
Comets, the Fall of Kings, with flaming Hair,

Shine fatally : and falvage Beafts by Nighe

Break through the Camp, and W orks, and,in the fighe
Oth’ frighted Souldiers, through the Neighb’ring field:
Scatter the Limbs o’th’ Centinel they kill'd:

Deluded by the Image of their Fear, -

F om their dark Graves, the Ghofts of Gauls appear
To break : and then the high Tarpeian Rock,
Astorn from its Foundation, often fhook: .
The Temples of the Gods with Streams of Blood
Were wet : Quirinus Statue, as it ftood,

Weptlargely : Allia, greater then before,


Swellshigher then the Banks : the Alpsno BON af


238


Stand ftill, nor Apennine, which: Night, and Day,


Strius Iraticus, Book VII. Book VIII. Situs Ir avicus, 239


After our Cuftom, bears. To Libya

The Pomp of Romane Triumphs born away.
Oh Grief! Yee this,ye Gods, that we behold,

Is yourCommand: while by congefted Gold,
Torn from left Hands, viorious Carthage {ees


() >t ped (s) Afago fent to Carth ith
The Meafure of the Romane Miferies. Tidings of this Vidory, caged in


Shook with vaft Ruptures, and where Libye
Extended lyes, ev'n from the very Pole,
"Gain Italy, the flaming Meteors roll.
Such horrid Thunder-Claps the Heav'nsabove
Divide, that they detect the Face of Fove. .
The Lemnian God his Lightning likewife threw
From tna, and, as broken Quarries flew
Upto theClouds (asin the Giant’s Wars )
Knock'd his Phlegraan Head againft the Stars.
But, ‘midét them all, as confcious-of the Fight,
He looks, and Senfe-diftracted with the Fright,
With horrid Cries the Camp a Souldier fills ,
And,panting, thus ex prefs‘d the future Ills.
Spare us, ye cruel Gods / the Fields I fee.
Toolittle for the Heaps of Slaughter be, - :
Through thicke(t Ranks the Libyan Captain flies,
And His fwift Chariot over Companies “. |
Of Men, and Arms, drives on, and drags along
Theit: Limbs; and Enfigns: while thewind, with trong
Impetuous Blatts; a furious War doth make |
Againft our Eys, and Faces: Fromthy Lake
CSad Thrafimes!) unmindfall of his Years,
In vain, Servilins, now refery'd appears.
Whither!’ Oh whither, is’t that Varro flies /
Oh fove ! among the Stones, fee! Paulus lies ,
The laft great Hope of Rome's declining State:
Thefe Ruins, Trebia, now, exceed thy Fare.
Behold, a Bridg is made of Bodies flain,
And filent e4ufdus into the Main ;
Rolls mangled Corps : o’re all the PlainsI {ee
The Elephants infult with Victory. :
Our Conful's Axes, and-our Fafces, ftain’d
With Blood, a Tyrian Lictor in his Hand,


him a Buthel ( fith Livy, others
more) of Gold Rin s, then worn


The End of the Eighth Book, onely by Romane Gels,


Ate


| Invacuas vitam senior disp


wsperserat Auras.


At Solimns simul enfe 2 fodlit. ‘preecordia chabum


Sustentans vulaus, mana sanguine signat Yq
2ssimo Domino Dn"Thome Comitt &


Tichfedd, “Sumo tottus AnglieThes aura:


4. Confilys .atye Grclyti Or zs Penisceliils Sug Si


a) Southampton; Baroni Wroothes ley de
BS orn ¢ Sanctonbus Regis CaroG’ 2


g Equets ‘xe Tabula fata cum observantia DED


BokIX,  t~S~S~ST


x


citipnal


a ae MA
ahi


SILIUS ITALICUS


The Second Punick V Var.


The Ninth Book,


Tur ArGuMENT.


The Conful Paulus, as advis'd, declines
The Fight, forbidden by.unhappy Signs. ;
Rafb Varro urgeth for aDay. A San,
In that fad Naght, befare the Day begun,
His Father, flying from the Libyan Side,
Unhappy kills , who bids him, as be-dy'd,
Forewarn the Romanes to avoid the Fight:
Hz Son this Warning an bis Shield doth write, .
And kills bimfelf far Grief. The fatal Field
Is fought ; the Romans miferably kill'd a
The Libyans have the Day. While ‘fore his Eys
His Men are flain, the Coward Varro flies.
PAUILE Italy, thus vext with
28 Predigies, _
a The Signs (in vain) of fue
: ture Ruin fees, - |
| Dilcover'd by theGods , asif
Vg CTOtthey might
py Omensof the following Fight ;
The (onful, waking, fpends the Night: and, now ,
Throws in the Dark his Jav‘lins ; then, as flow,


Upbraids


24:2


Book IX.


Sryrius Iraticus.


(a) Ithad antiently been a Cuftom
amorg the Romanes, where both the
Confuls were together, to command al-
ternately by Moneths , but Varro, and
Paulus, bad otherwife agreed to com-
mand the Army by Akernate Daies.
Paulus, onhis Day , kept the Arm
from engaging, but foon as Varro too
his urn, he " without confulting his Col.
leapt, , immediately gave Battel to the
Libyans.


U pbraids his Colleague ; and, while yet ‘twas Nighit,
Would have the Trumpets | founda Charge, and fight
T he Libyans, no lels eager to engage.

Urg’d by the adverfe Fates, with fudden Rage,

Out from the Camp they fally, and begin

To Skirmifh. For the A¢ace, that had bin


Disperft, for Forage, through the Neighb’ring Plain ;


A winged Showr of Shafts, like fudden Rain,
Pour on the Romanes : and, before the reft,
Mancinus (who tobe the firft had preft,

To dip in Hoftile Blood his Weapon ) dy‘d:
And with him many gallant Youth befide.
Nor yet, though Paulus, fadly, did declare, -
How crofs the Au/picies, and Entrails were,
Would Varro from the Battel have abftain'd,

© Unlefs the Lot, by which they did command
The Camp, by Turns, had. thwarted his. Defi ire,
And fore'd ‘the hafty Fates a while retire.

But yet, no longer, then a Day, could be
Between a thoufand Deaths, and their Decree
Allow’d. Into the Camp the Troops return


Again»: : while Paulus ceafeth not to mourn,


Seeing the Reins of the next Day’s Command

Were to be trufted in a frantick Hand,

And, that thole Souls were,then, prefery ‘din Vain

From Slaughter. For enrag’d, and mad again,

For that he had the Bateel then delai ‘d,

Doft Thou, thus now, A/milius ( Vivo faid)

Thy Gratitude, and the Reward repay

Of that thy guilty Head? Or elfe have they

From Thee deferved fuch a bafe Return ; CUrnz

Who {natch’d Thee from the Laws, sid threatning

Command them to furrender to the Fo |

Their Arms, and Swords ; or, when to fight they go,
Cut


To Fight ; yet all thole ara that did go
_ 2


-Book xX


SILTus. Iraticus, 243


Cut all heir Right-Hands off. But you, whom -
Have often Weeping f{een, commanded by

The (onful to retire , or fhun the Fo, Be.

No more expect the Signal, when you go .


To fight; or flow Commands: let ev'ry Man .


Be his own Leader, and go boldly on =...
in hisown Ways. When firft the San fhall fhed

His Morning Rays. upon Garganus Head,

Thefe Hands the Ports fhall open for you all:

Then charge them quickly, and this Day recall,
Which you have loft. T.hus he, with mad Defires,
To Fight, the difcontented Camp infpires.

When Paulus, not the fame in Mind, or Face:

But, as if, after Fight, he’d-feen the Place |

Strew’d with his flaughter'd Friends; and, as if Fo ,
In View the Miferies enfuing were :
As when all Hope of her Son’s Life is paft,

In Vain, his yet-warm Body,inherlaft
Embrace, a Mother huggs, and feems to be

Senflefs with Grief. By Rome's dear Walls (faid He)
So ofteri fhaken / by thofe Souls, which now

Night with a Stygian Shade furrounds, and know


+


~ No Guilt, forbear I pray, to run upon


Your Ruin, till the Wrath of Heav'n be gone;

And Fortune's Fury be confum'd. “Twill be

Enough, if our New Men fhall dare to fee

The Fo without a Fear ; or if, at all,

They will endure the Name of Hannibal.

Saw’ft thou not, when, within the Neighb’ring Plain,
His Voice was heard, how foon the Bloodagain ,
From their Pale Faces fled? and how their Arms
Fell down before the Trumpets fhrill Alarms *

Fabius, as you fuppofe, was dull, and flow, -


With


ee: -. me sto ce


2h


Sictus Iraticus.


Book IX.


With thofe bland Enfigns, now in Arms appear ¢


So do not thole; that with Flaminius were.


_ But Heav'naverefuch things! and,ifyouare: * -


(6) Sibyl, called Grynea, from an
Attribure of Apollo, who infpired her,


Relolv'd my Counfell to refift, and Pray'r;'

Yet hearken ta the Gods: for know, of eld;-.
This the Gryncan © Prophetels foretold

To all the World, in former Ages » Thee,

And this thy Headlong Rage, prefaging, She —
Divulg’d: and, as another Prophet, now,

I plainly to tee here thy Fate avow ;

Unlefsto Morrow's Enfi igns be by ie
Reftrain’d, Thou, with our Blood, wilt ratifie |
The Sybil’s Words :nor fhall chefe Fields be fam‘d
CIF thou perfift ) from Diomed, but nam’d
Fata, from thee. Thus Paulus, in whofe Eys,
Enflam’d with Grief, the Tears began to rife.
And then a wicked Errour ftain’d the Night;

For Satricus, made Captive in a Fighe

In Libya, to Xantippws wasa Slave’,

Who him ¢ for’s Valour priz’d) foon after gave
Toth’ eAstololan King. At Sulmohe

An Heufe poffefs'd , andfeft ewo Sons to be

There Nurtur’d by their Mother z one they call
eM ancinar ;¢° otter Solymas, to all

Known for his ¥rojan Name : for his Defcent
Was Dardane, and his Anceftour, who went
After Zineas Fortune, built, and Wall’d

A City fair, whigh Sohmon he call‘d ,

From his own Name, and, ‘mong Italians fam’d,
By them, corruptly now, is Sudmo nam’d.

This Satricus,the Astololian King ,

Among his Barbarous Troops, did thither bring ,


_ And, on Occafion, us'd him there to teach


Getulians to know the Latine Speech.
But


Book IX.


But, when he found a-Pofsibility

Pelignian Walls;and’s Native Home to fee,

Ta ferbad his Aweript, he cakesthe Night, =

And quits by Stealth ehe Camp. Yeein bf Fie

He took no Ais; ‘beirig fearfullto betray *

Himfelf by’s Shield yand Naked went away.

But, when the Spoils, and Dead within the Field,

He fpy'd, Adancinuiftrip'd : “his Arms,and Shield;.

He ftrait!puts on, by whichhis former Fear 2
Waslightned : butthé Body;which he there
Had Naked made, and he, whofe'Spoils he woré,
Was his own ‘Son, there flain not long before,

By a fieteé Macian Fo: Night growing on,

"Bout the firft Sleep, behold his other Son
CYoung Solymus) appointed, by hisFate,

Then to relieve the Watch, without the Gate,
From the e4ufonian Camp, advanc'd with Speed,
To feek, among the Heaps o'th’ {catter'd Dead,
Mancinus Body, and by Stealth Interr

His deareft Brother : but hehad not far

Advane'd, when arm’d from the Sidonian Side, |
Coming up to him, hea Manefpy'd ;

With which furpriz’d, into thy Tomb he flies

( £tolian © Thoas) and there Skulking lies.
Butwhen he faw no Souldiers in the Rear,

And that alone i’th’ Dark he wandred there,

Out fromthe Sepulchre he leaps, and throws
At’s Father’s Naked Back, as on he goes,

A Jav'lin, not in vain. His Father, who
Thought that fome Tyrian Troop did him purfue,
And gave the Wound, about him look’d, to know
The Aut hour of that unexpected Blow ;
But,when, with Speed, the Conquerour advanc'd,


And from the Arms, well-known, a Luftre glanc’d,
And,


SILIUS IraLicus. 245


() i anion of
fed hes Ip Diemed’s, bu-


246


.SiLiws Iranicus. Book IX:


And, as the Moon did-then: Afsiftance pe ogfe:

He elaialy fanv sit was his Brother's Shield. oy
Enflam’d with Rage} I'me-not thy-Son ( id He as
Oh Sutvicustof Sumo ! Nor fhouldbe.- 5, oh,
cM. ancinus, Brother: nor defervea Name ill de eae
Among thofe Nephews, thag directly. came 2
From'Dardan Solymus ; fhould I now thee |

Permit: (falfe Libyan): with Impunity =

To ‘fcapethis Hand. Shall I endure thee wear.
My Brother’s Spoils before my Face? or bear

The Arms of a‘Peligman Houle away,
While | furvive , or, guilty, fee the Day ¢


No (my dear Mother)’ thefe I'le bear to Thee, 7


A gratefull Prefent, and moft fitto be

A Comfort to thy Griefs,. for thy loft Son;

That thou may’ft them for ever fix upon

His Sepulchre: and, as he {pake that Word

Aloud, heruth’d upon him with his Sword. .

But, Satricus, who now could hardly ftand,

And faintly held his Weapon in his Hand,

Hearing his Countrey nam’d, his Wife, and Sons,

And Arms, cold Horrour through his Members runs,

And ftupifies his Senfe : his dying Mouth,

At length, this Language tothe Furious Youth |

Breaths forth; O {pare thy Hand, I pray thee, fpate ; ;

Not thatl ics forlonger Life, it were

A Sin in meto askit: but the Siaih

Of this my Blood, I wifh may not remain:

Upon thy Hard. I am that Satricus,

Captive to Carthage, {prung from Solymus,

Now tomy Countrey, by the Zyrian brought.

Iknow, my Son, ‘ewas notin thee a Fault,

When firft thou didft thy Spear againft me throw:

I was a Libyan then , but fromthe Fo |
I fled,


ee Bag a ee ye ee ar Ee ve re errs, Sr paar ier


Book IX.. Sizrius Iraricus,.


I fled to you, and hafted now te fee —

My. dear Wife's Face, prevented thus ny Thee.

This Target,as I came, I took away

From thy dead Brother ; but be fure to lay

This with his Arms, excus'd, upon his Tomb:

But, firft be carefull, foon as Thou fhalt come

Into the Camp, my laft Advice to bear

To Gen’ral Paulus, thathe havea Care

Still to protract the War, and Fight decline

With Hannibal , whofe Auguries Divine

Swell Him with Hopes, that He fhall thortly fee

An Immenfe Slaughter. But, let Varrobe,

I pray ,reftrain’d : For he, as Fame doth tell,

Is eager ftill your Eagles-to impell.

‘Tis a great Comfort; as my Life now ends,

That I have giv’n this Warning to my Friends,

But thy laft Kiffes, now, beftow upon

Thy Father loft, and found at once, my Son.
Thusas hefpake, his Helmet off he caft;'* 2s

And, with his‘trembling Arms, the Neck-embrac’d > -

Of’sSon; amaz’‘d, and ftrove,with Words,his Shame

To cure, and to excule the Weapon’s Blanie’; (Son,

That gave the Wound.’ Whoknows ( faid he) my


Or who can teftifie what we have done? ©


Doth not the’ Night conceal the Errour ? Why ©
Dott tremble fo? Thy Breaftmoreclofe apply _


To mine. Why doft thou at fuch Diftance ftand 2
Ev'n I, thy Father, do abfolve thy Hand,

And pray,my Labours ending, it may clofe .
MineEys. The Youth, oppreft with fadden Woes,
Gave no return of Words to what he {aid :

But fighing deeply, labour'd to have ftaid

His Blood, and «¢ ftrangely weeping) to have bound, :


With his torn Shirt, the eae Wound, .
t


247


~ Book IX;


At length, among histany Sighs, thus he

Breaks ined fad Cotnplaints. Doth Fortune Thee
( Dear Father) to thy Countrey,andto Us,

Thus bring again * Or doth She, cruel, dhus
Meto my Father, Him reftore to Me *

Happy my Brother was, thrice happy He,

Who thought our Father was deftroy’d by Fate :
But I, by Zyrians untouch’d, too late

Now know him by a Wound. le would have been,
At leaft {ome Comfort, Fortune, to my Sin,


Srttus ITaznicus,


— Hadit been ftill left doubefull : bue my Woes


No longer fhall be left to the Difpofe

Of the unequal Gods. While his Complaints,
Diftracted, thus he vents, his Father faints
Through lofs of Blood, and into empty Air

His Life refolves : : the Youth, with fad Delpair,
Then lifting to the Stars his Eys ; Thou Moon,


- Who art fole Witnels of what I have done,


By this pollyged Hand ,;, who by thy Light
Did'tt guid, my fatal Jav'lin, in its Flight, ©
Into my Father's Body : thefe mine Eys,
And curfed Sight C{aidHe) while in the Skies
Thou reign’ ft, no more fhall thee contaminate.
With that his Sword his Breaft doth penetrate ;
Yet he endeavour’ d to fuftain the Wound,
Till, the Blood largely-flowing, on the Greund,
His Father's laft Commands he thus did write
Upon his Target, Varro, Suun Ture F IGHT,
Then on his Jav'lin’s Point his Shield he hung,
And himfelf, dying, on his Father flung.

The Gods thefe Omens, of the following Fight,
To the ef ufonians gave; and, asthe Night,
Confcious of all this Wickednes, gave way


Her Shades retiring tothe rifing Day, ;
| The


a


: — wi ~ )
Book IX, = Sixius Iracicus. 249,


The Carthaginian Captain citeth all
His Troops to Arms ; the Romane General
The like performs : and {uch a Day, asin


~ No Age before, for Libya doth begin.


You need no Words (faid Hannibal) & excite
Your Courage, or provoke you tothe Fights
But we havecome fromthe Herculean Bounds,
With Conquett to thefe Iapygian Grounds.
We ftout Sagunthus have deftroy’d; to Us

The Alps gave way; and proud Bridanus

( The chief of Rivers in Italian Ground )

Flows in acaptive Chanel ; Lrebia’s drown’d

In HumaneBlood: Flaminius, who was flain


By Us, Ca Burthen to the Zyrrhen Plain)


Lyes buried there ; and all the Fields are fill'd
With Romane Boties, and fince were never till’d.
But, now, behold a Day, more bright, then all
Thefe Titles,and which to our Withes fhall

Afford more Blood. This Fights Renownto Me
A true Reward, and Great enough hall be.
Allother things your Conqueft fhall become ;

And, without Chance of Lots, whatever Rome
Hath hither, from the rich Iberian Coatt ,

Brovght, as her Spoil ; or what She elfe can beaft

In her @ 4tnean Triumphs, or what more (4) Sicilian.
Sh’ hath bafely ravith’d from the Libyan Shore;
Your Swords fhall gain ; and you fhall carry Home,
All, that to your Victorious Hands fhall come.
Nothing of their vaft Wealth will I, as due

To Me (yourGeneral) demand ; for You

Hath the Dardanian Spoiler plunder’d all

The conquer’d W orld folong. Whoe're can call
Himfelf a Native Zyrian, or can claim,


From his Original, a Sarrane Name,
M m lf


SriLius. Iraticus. Book IX,


If him the fair Lanrentine Land, whith now -
Sigean Swains (your future Slaves) doPlow, -
Delight ; or, rather, the Buxentian Fields ,
Where Corn, an hundred-Fold, the Goddefs yields -
Me give him Choiee of Lands, and add to them |
Thefe Banks, which TZyber with his conquer’d Stream
Doth largely water. Butthen whofoe're
C Mydear Companions) doth now appear
In Arms, and brings from Byrfa sfartheft Land,
Asan Ally, his Aids :if He his Hand
Stain‘d with Aufonian Blood, {hall thew to Me,.
He thalla Citizen of Carthage be.
Norlet Garganus, or this Daunian Land
Deceive you ;at the very Walls youftand
Of Rome : though far that Citie’s lofty Site
Be diftant from this Place, where we fhall fight;
Here fhall She fall this Day, .; and henceforth I
Shall need no more your Valour t to employ
In War (my Souldiers ) but from hence You fhall
Direétly march into the Capitol.
This faid:their Works,and Rampires down they throw,
And over all Delays of Trenches go;
While he, the Place well view'd, in order'd Ranks,
Draws up his Troops, upon the winding Banks,
The Barb'rous \(afamonian Bands were plac’
In the left Wing, and the Marmarick,, vaft
Of Body, the fierce Adcors, and Macians,
Moafsilian Troops, and Garamantians,'
With them the Adrimachides, that give
Themfelves to War, and love by it to live;
Then all thofe People, that inhabit on
The Banks of Wife, and from the {corching Sun
Shelter their Tawny Bodies: Thefe their Head,
And chief nantes ftout Nealces led.
But


BpokIX. Sins IraLicus.


But the right Wing did valiang -Mago guide’, . .
Plac'd whese fwift Aufidus ‘dork. wandring glide, ..
By winding Ranks, with crooked Streams: and os
The Active,Troops of rough Pyrenewere,
And withiconfaled. Murmurs fll'd the Shore:
There fhin‘d the Warlike Youths, that tae bore’. |
Before the reft, Cantabrians appear, |

And Gajcoins, that no Helmets ufe to wear, _

With Betick Troops, and him, that, fighting, flings _
His flying Lead from Balearick Slings.

But the main Battel Alsnnibal Commands :

Which, with His Father’s old Victorious Bands

He ftrengthens, and Blood-thirfty: (elte, who

Their Troops oft mufter on the Banks of Po.

But, where his Courfe the Rivet turn’d away,

So that the Files unflank'd, and Open lay ,

His Libyan Elephants in Order ftood,

Their dusky Backs all charg’d with Tow’rs of Wood .

Which, when they forward mareh’d, up to the Skies,

Like Battlements, or moving Walls, did rife.

But, the AC wmidian Horfe were left to Scout

Onev'ry Side, and {cour the Field throughout :
While he new Force to his incenfed Men

Infpireth, and, Infatiable, agen

Exhorting, fires their Thoughts by boafting, He

A prefent Witnels to each Man would be,

Andev'ry Perfon by his Actions know,

And what Right-Hand a finging Dart did throw.

Now, from their Works, the LegionsVarro drew,

From whenee the Rife of their Deftruction grew ;
While joyfull (baron bufily made Reom,

In his pale River, for the Souls to come.

The Van, affrighted at the Signs of Blood
Upon the hanging Shield, like Statues, flood :

M m 2


Fix'd |


252,


Sruius Iratntreuws.


(e) The Poer agreeth with Lévy, in
the Nomination of the Commanders
of the Romane Army. But Polybins
adds Adarcus Attilins to be joyned
with Serviliwsin the command ofthe
Battalion , and affirms Hanzo, inftead
of Maharbal, tolead the right Wing
of Hannibal’s Army.


Fix’'d at the Omen, . Near to that,'a Face :
OF Dread, tw o Bodies dead.in their Embrace.
The fatal Wound within his Father's Breaft, |


With his Right-Hand ;* the Son, to hideit, pref. ©


At this they:wept; andthen ( Alafs/) too late


- Lament eA aacinus in his Brother’s Fate.


Then the fad Augury, and. Looks alike,

In the dead Bodies, a frefh Sorrow ftrike ;

At length, their Errour’s Guilt, and Fates to be
Lamented, and the Arms; that bid them flee
The Battel, to their General they fhow.

His Thoughts now alla fire ; To Paulus g0


With thefe (laid He) for him (whofe Fears now ftand -


In hisunmanly Breaft) that guiley Hand |
May move, which, ftain’d with cruel Slaughter, when
The Furies Punifhment demanded, then
Perhaps, with’s Father’s Blood this Charm did write.
This faid, with Threats, his Orders for the Fight
Through all the Army run, with Speed : and where
NCealces led his Barb’rous Nations, there
Himfelf with Marfians, Samnites, and with thofe
The Iapygians fent, He doth oppofe,
© But, in the Middle of the Field, where he
Pereeiv'd the Libyan General to be
Againit him, he Servilias commands,
To lead the Umbrian, and Picenian Bands.
Paulus the right Wing led, and befide thefe,
T’ attend the Plots of nimble Noomades, ;
Scipio, a party took, with Charge, wheree’re
He fpy’d their Troops within the Plains appear,
He fhould Advanee, and Fight. Both Armies sow
Drew near, and by the Running to, and fro,
The confus'd Neighing of the fiery Steeds,
And clafhing Arms, a fudden Murmur fpreads -

It


Book IX,:


‘Book IX, Situs Iranieu ss. | 253


Ic {elf through all che troubled Troops: as when
Loud Conflicts ‘twixt the Winds,and Seas, begin
Their inward Rage and Storms, that lave the Skies, ©
The Billows ftrait let loofe :and, asthey rife, (Rocks,
Their threatning Noife , through all the trembling
From their Foundations fhaken by the Shocks, ©.
Expire; and Surges, from the Bottom thrown,
With angry Foam, the lab‘ring Ocean Crown.

Nor was this cruel Storm of Fate alone
The Labour of the Earth, Diffenfion
Crept into Heav‘n, and Gods to War incites.
Here Father A4ars, and here e/ pollo fights,
And Neptune there: vext (ytherea here,
And Vefta, and eA lcides angry, there,
For loft Sagunthus. Old Cybele too,
And Gods of Mortals made: Quirinus, who
Firft rais‘d the Romane State ; with Faunus : then
Pollux, that lately, with his Brother-T win,
Had thifted his Alternate Life: but there,
‘Girt with a Sword, Satarnia doth appear ;
And Pallas, mong the Libyan Waters born :
And Hammon too, whofe Temples with an Horn
Are Circumflex’d, and many leffer Gods
Befide ; who coming, from ‘their blefs’'d Abodes
To fee this Fight, with their Approaches fhook
The Earth ; and all their fev’ral Stations took.
Some on the Neighb’ring Hills, while others fhrow’d
Themfelves,from Mortal Eys, within aCloud. -
The Heav’ns were empty left, while all to Wars
Defcend: and ftrait to the forfaken Stars
As great a Clamour rofe, as when, within
P hlegran Plains, the Giants did begin
The Fight with Hercules ; or ove, for all


His Thunder-bolts, did on the Cyclops call,
W hen


or


Sittus Iraricus.


When the beld Eerth-barn Army didinvade’.
His Throne, and Mountaias upon Mountains laid, :
The. G@hargefo fierce : no Dart, or Spear before... .


The reft was thrown ; but an impetuous: Showr -¢ 0.


Of Shafis together fell, with equal Rage :


~ And,as they, thirfting after Blood, engage,


The Storma Multitude of both deftroy'd. |
But, where the Sword more clofely wasimploy’d,
The greater Number dy'd: on whom the reft
Stood to maintain the Fight ; and, as they preft


To ftrike a Fo, would fpurn them as they groan,


The Seaas foon, with raging Billows thrown
‘Gaintt Calpe, might remove it from its Seat ;
Asall the Libyan Rage toa Retreat | |
Could force the Romanes sor the Romanes make
The Libyan Bands their Station to forfake.

So clofe they fight,no Space was left at all |
For Blows to mifs; or, when they dy’d, to fall :
Helmets ‘gainft Helmets clafh, and ev'ry Stroke
Excufs'd the hidden Flames. Targets are broke
‘Gainft Targets,Swords by Swords are hack'd,and Feet
On Feet do tread; fo furioufly they meet:

Breafts againft Breafts are bruis‘d,and where they ftoad
Barth could not be difcern’d, o’reflown with Blood :
And the thick Clouds of Arrows, as they fly,

Take from their Eys the Day, and hide the Sky.
Thofe of the fecond Rank, as if they foughe

I'th' Front, with their long Pikes, and Lances, fought
To woundthe Fo: and thofe, that farthett ftood, .
With mifsile Weapons labour'd to make good _
The Fight, with thofe were foremoft : all the reft,
With Clamour, their Defireto F. ight expreft,
And, with their horrid Shouts, the Enemy
Provoke. And now all forts of Weapons fly:


Some


Book IX, “BookIX.


: Some hard’ned Stakes, Pines burning where ding,


Sitius IraxLicus, » 453 |


And weighty Piles. Thefe Fatal Pellets fling.”


). Thofe Darts? and, which would thake the ftrongeft


Fuge Stones from the Phalarick Engines fall: € Wall,
And thrqugh the Clouds the finging Arrows fly.
How can | hope ( ye Goddelses whom I

Religioufly adore) ' this Day to thow


_ To future Fimes? Can you fuch Pow'r allow


CYe Learned Virgins) tomy Mortal Song !


And truft the Cannatoa fingle Tongue *


Ifyou affect our Fame, nor thall decline

To give Afsiftance to our high Defign ;

Hither from your Parnaffus, hither all

Your Sacred Lays, and Father Phoebus call,
Butmaiftthou ¢ Noble Romane) till appear.
As Conftant, and thy fature Triumphs bear
With as great Courage, as Adverfity


_ Thou then didft meet / Such maift Thou ever be!


Nor tempt the Gods to try, ifthofe, that are.


-Deriv'd from Troy, can bear fo greata War;


And thou (O Rome) nomore with Tears deplore

Thy dubious Fate.; but rather, now, adore |

Thofe Wounds, that fhall Eternal Praife to Thee

Produce: for ¥ hou fhalt never Greater be ;

But fink in.thy Succefs, and by the Name |

Of former Miferies defend Thy Fame.
Now Fortune, fhifting Sides, between them went,

Deluding, with fad Doubts of the Event,

The Rage of Both ; and furious eAZars, folong

As Hope, between, in equal Ballance hung,

Rag'd in their Arms alike. So have I feen -

The ftanding, Corn, while yet the Stems were green, .

Mov’d by a gentle Wind, wave to, and fro, |


The Weighty Ears, which, as they Nodding go -
: 7 °


256


Sriiius Iraticus.


Book IX.


To this Side, chen to that, alternately
The fey‘ral Motions of the Wind obey.
Atlength Cealces, with confufed Shouts,


_ Brings on his Barb'rous Troops ; and, Charging, routs


(f) This hath been frequently ob-
fered of the eee , when they vate
feen their Cafe d te: particular my
in Catalsne’s Aconyd where every
thatdyed , fell with his Face to owas
his Enemy. See Salajt.


The adverfe Wing : the Ranks diforder'd, through
The Intervals, the fierce victorious Fo

Breaks on the trembling Files; and ftrait a Flood,
( Thatlikea Torrent ruth’d) of reeking Blood
Runsonthe Plain. None, falling, are by Spears}.
Thruft on their Faces : for the Romane fears

‘AW ounds on the Back, and on his Breaft receives
His cruel Death, and Life with Honour leavs.
Among the firft, affecting ftillto be

ch hotteft of the Fight, and equally

To meet all Dangers, ftood brave Scevola ;

Who, {corning to furvivefo fad a Day,


_ Sought worthy his great Anceftour to fall,


And dy beneath that Name: perceiving all.
Was loft, Our Life, how fhort foe're it be >
Now in defpight of Fate, let Us ({aid he )
Extend. For Valour isan empty Name;
Unlefs, in Death's Approach, a lafting Fame ~
By fuff'ring bravely, or by Wounds, we gain
Surviving Honour. Speaking thus, amain
Into the Midft, where the fierce Likyan’s Hand
Cut out his Way, through thofe, that did withftand,
He, like a Tempeft, falls; and, there he flew
Tall Calathis, and with his Sword quite through
His Body pierc’d, as boafting, he put on
The Arms of one there flain: ftrait down upon
The Ground he tumbles, biting with his Teeth
The Hoftile Arms ; the Tortures of his Death
By that fupprefsing, as he groveling lay.
Neither could Gabar,or ftout Sicha flay,

. With


SOOT Ragen in SOMO Tn eee CR, geen he CRC Em SPRITE


Book TX, Sittys IraLicus.: 257,


| With cheinoint Valor hie Impemons Rages 0


For valiancGabar,ashe did engage, . os
Loft his Right-hand , bae Sicha, mad wit Gi, ul iD
And coming rafhly anito his Relief, |
Stumbligi-by Chance upon hisSword, pene
His Naked Foot, by which upontheGreund
He falls, and by the Hand of ’s dying Friend

Lies proftrate. This hisFury,in che end, |

Nealces fatal Rage uponhim.braughs, .«:

Who, by fo great.a Mame intited, fought .

The Honour of his'\Fail, andiftraita Stone,

Torn fromiche Neighb'ring Biodk, :and. tumbled down
By the fwift Torrent, fromthe Mountain, took,, ~
And threwit at his Faces his Jaws were broke
Afunder with che Weight; ‘his Face no more:

Its Form ‘retains: mix’d with thick Clotsof Gover: a
His Brains fow throughthis Nofe; and both his Bye ‘
Dath’d from his inangled Front; hefalls, and dyes. '
Then Marius fell, eudeav’ rig dbrelieve GF
Caper hisFiiend, aid Fearfulbto furvive oe. dk
His Death: .Beth Youths, in Age alike} bath poor


Alike, and both Sacred Prenefte bore #17 9-2-1


They joyn'd their: Labours, and both joindy'aill'd
Their Neighb'ring Fields, they both refus'd, aid ltd
Still the famedhings ; their'Minds alike, through all


_ Their Life. A‘Wedlthy Goneordin Pi ees 7


Eftate. ‘They felltogether; and expe BEN Seats PES
In Fight together; as they both defir'd.

Their Arms; the Trophyof Simetbus eee

But fach: a Beneficof Fortine thete

The Libyan could‘ndt‘long ettjoy. Fornow +

The valiant Scipiowith a'threatning Brow:


‘Came'on (fore griev'd to fee his Cohorts fly )


And Varro € Cau of ‘all their Mifery )
N a With =


2§8


Book TX.


Sititus Iraticus.


With Girio'yellow-hair'd, and Bratus, from’
The firft great Conful {prung, that refcued Rome ;
Thefe by their Valour; had the Field regain‘d, .
Had not the Libyan General reftrain'd
With a fierce Charge, his Troops, about to fly.
Who when far off, He Varro did efpy
Engag'd, and near him moving to, and fro,
The Lifonr, in his Scarlet Coat, I know
.That Pomp, I know the Enfigns of your State
(Said He): fuch your Flaminins was of late ;
Thus {peaking, by the Thunder of his Shield,
His Fury he Proclaims, through all the Field.
Oh wretched Varro !. Thou mighr'ft there have dy'd
With Paulus, had not angry Heay'n deny'd | .
That thou by Hannibal, fhould’ft there be flain.


How oftento the Geds might thou-complain,


That thou.did'ft {cape the Lityan- Sword 7 For there
Bringing thy Safety; when thou did't difpair
Of Life, upon Himfelf brave Scipioall _


_ The Danger turn’d: nor was fierce Hanwibal


Unwilling: ¢ though by:that Diverfion, He
The Honour of Opinjous Victory _
Had loft}. Thee for a greater Fo to change, —


And by that offer'd Combat, to Revenge


On Hin, the Refcue of his F ather, near

Ticinus. Now the Champions both appear

From fev'ral Quarters of the World, then whom

Earth never yet beheld two Greater pore

Within the Lifts; in Strength, and Courage held

Both equal ; but the Romane Prince excell'd

In Piety, and Faith. Then from the Cloud

( Wherein from Mortal Eys, the Gods did throud

Themfelves)leap'd forth(to view the F ight more near)

For Scipio, ALars, and Pallas, fall of Fear, —-
For


Book TX.


Sitius Iraxuicus, 25g


For Hannibal.The Champiens beth abide
Undaunted; buttheir Bnerancecetrifid =

The Armies. ‘Round about thick gloomy Fires,
Where Pallas moves, her Gorgon's Mouthexpires,
And dreadfull Serpents hifs upon her Shield: _
Her Eys, like two great Comets, through the Field
Difperfe a Bloody Light, andto the Skies,

From her large Creft, the waving Flames arife.
ButeMars, the Air difturbing with his Spear,
And cov'ring with his Shield the Plain, doth wear

His Mail ; which, by the Lab’ring (‘yelops made,
Ztnean Flames through all-the Field difplai'd :
And,with his radiant Cask, doth, rifing, ftrike
The Stars. ‘The Champions, on the Fight, alike
Intent, though traverfing with watchfull Eys’ ~
Their Ground, perceiv'd the Armed Deities:
Approach; and, glad that they Spectatours were,
Increas‘d the Fury of their Minds.,-Andhere _—
A Jav'lin Pallas from the Lilyan'sSide 5,
Lets fly, with a {trong Force : which, foon efpy’d
By Mars, inftructed toafford his Aid,’ inst Hise
By that Example of the furious Maid ; «

Strait his Etnean Sword intothe Hands,
O’'th’ Youth, he puts, and. greater things Commands.
At this the Maid incens’d, her Vilage burn'd ;

In Flames of Rage, and She fo ftrangely..turn’d
Her glaring Eys, that in her Dreadfull Look

She Gorgon overcame: as then, She fhook .
Her A’gii, all her Snakes their Bodies rear'd,
And, at her firft Affault, evn Mars appear'd

A little to give Ground : the Goddels ftill

Purfu’d, and Part of the adjoyning Hill,

Torn up, with all the Stones, that on it grew,


‘Gaintt Mars, with all her Force, and Fury, threw.
se N n 2 The


160 Sitius: I[raricus.” Book: TX:


The Horreuref dts Pall, diffuled 0” re: ak yo


The Plain, frights Stsffon wahatreatog Sb Shiore:::
But, when theKing of Geds this Fight’s fade:

Perceiv'd, involy'd in Clouds, He Iris fent,

With Speed, thei too great Fury to allay,

And thus inflruasher.. Goddefs; hafte away

To the Oenotrian Land, and-there her Rage .

Command thy Sifter Pallasto affwages -

Bid her-not hopeto change the fix'dDecree

Of Fate : and likewife tell Her, that, if She |

Defift net“ ( farithe Poifon, and the Fire. .


Of Her fierce Minde I know), and check harIre; 7


Againft the Rowsene, She thall underftand;:


How miith che dreadful Toumder of ariy rua ea


Excells hier Agi. “When ‘Trion:
This, along time’ Uncertain what to-do, ::.


And doubefull in her Thouphts, if She fhould yield 2


T’ Her FathertsGArms = ‘Well, Wewillquicthe: Field


€ Said She) but, when W bre thusexpuls’d,will Fove |


Hindértss to behold fom Heav'n above
Garganas Fields reeking with Blood:!:This laid:
Under an hollow Cload® the furious: ‘Maid:
To other Places of the'Battel took: be
The Erbyan Gaieral, and Barth fort. Bee

But «AL ars the Goddefs gone; recalls again
Their Courdges-and, difpers'd through all the Pi,
( Encompaft'd with : a Cloud, asblack, as Night) .
With his owt Hand, ftrait recollects che Fight.
The Romanetticw their Enfiens titi, and, Fear ee
Quite laid ane the Slatighiter' ewhy: where? +:
Renew. Then! Bolus, whoo" re the Winds" «.
Is King, and chim withii‘a Prifon binds, °°
Who Boreas; Eurus, Corts, Notus, and -
The Reft, ev'ri Heavy’ ncdifturbing; doth Command,’

At


Book IX. Satitus IraLucus. 261


At Funo's: Suit, whole Promifes were. nen ley i%
Furious © Pultireds:. whole Imperial: amet “A ane 5 iif, fons Moraine


Isin th’ Edlién Pipios ) « ainté the Fighe vc!) Scis= itieney which paned in "is Fight
Let's ladles": ( forithen, the Goddels tsk Delight = Feeney na Rea greys
By him to vindicateher cruel Ire}... ere 8 pee

Fle having div’ din ABtna deep, and Fire: 2

Coneeiv’d, flrait raifing up hisflaming Head

Inco the Air, with horrid Roating fled! - tows

Fromthence, and. through the. Dawitan: Kingdens

Clouds of ‘congefted Duft, and, where He goes,

The dark’ned Air from all, . (as if the Day

Were fpent) their Sight,Hands, V oices took away.

Then ‘gainft th’ Izalians Faces!Globes of Sand-- - -

(Sad to relate ) :-hedrives ; ancdhis. Command een :

To fight againft them doth with Rage. purfue 5

And, with that Weight of Rua, oveithtew. |

The Souldiers, Arms! snd Trumpets aie ee

Upon the Rutuls: their fying Darts: =

And fruftrates, with his adverleBlatulth their Bio : eS

But all the Weapons, that the Libyan’ thidws, a oe

He feconds; and their Jav'lins, and theit Spears, te

As with se Loop afsifting, forward bears.

The Souldiers, now, chok’d “with thick Duft,and Breath

Stopp’d ‘ewixt their Jaws, that’ poor, ignoble Death: -

Lament; while, hiding i in'the troubled Air °° '~

His yellow Head, ‘and , ftrewing' ‘all his Hair Peo

With Sand, Volewirenss with his roaring Wings, ¢
Sometimes flies at their Backs, and foretimes flings
Himfelf: againft their Faces,ina Storm, -

That whiftling loud: ‘wholé Cohorts doth disarm? :
Some, that prefs’d'oit, and ‘teady, witha Blow, |
To fix ith’ Throat of the now-yielding | Fo,

Their Swordshe, inthe véry Stroak, withftands;
And jentring toa Wound, pulls back their Hands. -


or


262


SiLius lv avroue: Book TX,


Nor was ’t enough, that thus the ‘Romane Arms,


| And Men,he fpoild ;.bue with loud: bellowing Storms,
| Gainft Mars himfelf, his Fury he expreft’ >


And twice with: Whirl-wind fhook his lofty Creft.
While thus Aolian Fury did engage
The Latine Troops, and Mars provok'dto Rage:


Pallas, near whom Saturnia ftood, to Fove


_ Thus fpeaks. Behold / What Billows A4ars doth move


Againft the Libyans ! With what Slaughters he
Himfelf doth glut! Ist not your Will (faid She ).
I pray, that Iris. now to Earth defcend ?

Though I, when I was there, did not intend

The Teacri to deftroy: ¢ for let your'Rome

Reign with my Pledg, and.my Palladium

There fill zemain:) -y¢t'was I loath the Light |

Of my dear Libya, Hatnibal, fhouldquite .
Extinguith’d be, or that, itt Prime of all

His Years, fo Great Beginnings now thould fall :
Here Funotookthe Word, and, from a Sence

Of her long Labours,.-Yes (faidShe.) that hence
The World may know, how great Fove's Empire is,
How much his Pow’r, how much his Wife by this
All other Gods excells !- Now let thy Fire |
The:Tow'rs of (Carthage, (nqthing We defire )
Deftroy: the Zyrian Army finking down, |
Through gaping Earth, in Stygian Waters drown,
Or elfe o'rewhelm them inthe Neighb’ ring Main.
To whom Jove mildly thus replies. In vain

You ftrive with Fate, and feeble Hopes prolong,
That Youth (Oh Daughter? )againft whom fo ftrong
So furious thou didft fight, fhall overcome
The Africans, and fhall from that affume

That Nation’s Name, ard fhall tranfpore withall


ihe Libyan Lawrel to the Capitol,


And


Book IX, Sirius Iraxricus. 263


And He, onwhom fuch Courage (Wife ) 2 thee

Such Honour is-beftow'd (fo Fates decree) .

Shalltupn his Armsfromthe Laurentine Land,

Noor do the Limits of his Mifchief ftand

Far off; the Day, and Hour approach; with Hlafte, —

Wherein Hee'l with, that he no ¢4/ps had patt.

This faid, He Iris fends away with Speed

To charge the God of War, he fhould Recede,

Aud quit the Fight. He not at all contends

With thofe Commands, but, murmuring, afcends

Into the Clouds, though Trumpetsin the Fight,

Wounds,Blood,and Arms,and Clamours ‘him delight,
The Gods no more contending, and the Plain, « :

Now clear’d from Mars, the Libyan-again, —

From the Remoteft Part, where he to fhun

Celeftial Arms, retir’d, came furious on ; .

And, with loud Shouts, along his Foot, ‘and Horle,

His Towred Elephants, and all the’ Force

Of's batt’ring Engines drew, and ashe {py’d-

A Valiant Youth, that with his Sword detiroy ‘d-

His lighter Troops, his Anger, fparkling i in

His Bloody Cheeks, What God (faidHe ) agen,

Or what dire Furies Thee, Minutins, chus

Drive: onthy Fo.*- That thou, once more to Us,

Dar'ft truft thy felf % 2 Where now is Fabius, made -'

Thy Father by Our Arms, to give thee Aid?. °°

Wreteli! "tis fufficient once to feape from Me;

With this proud Language, Hea Lance lets flee,

That fwift, as from an Engine thrown, his Breaft

Peirc’'d through, and with the Stroak, his Speed fuppreft,

Nor is't enough the Sword doth Rage: they fend

Fierce Beafts, and the Italian Youth contend

With Monfters. For, well mounted, Lucas Rid

Upto the Moor, that with his Spear did guide .


he


a 4


Sinius IPauicus.: Book IX;


T, The Elephants einmandings him URC oh
With greater Spéed, thie Heard-into the Fighe.

The warlike Beafts, shen driv'n on, and, goar’d. (voas'di
With frequent Wounds, .imade Hafte,.:and ftrangely
With Flames, and Men, and Daits, theinfty Tow'rs -
On their pale backs were arm’‘d,whépce furious fhewrs
Of Stones fell on the Troops, and wheré they move 7
Thick Storms of Shafts (as from the Clouds above )
The Libyans from their flying Caftlesthiow’s -.
Whilea long Wall of Teeth: (as white as Snow )-
Runs through the Ranks andiwich their Pointsdeclin’d,


From the bdw'd Top, the Spears of Iy’ty fhin’d, |...


Here, amotig others, fullofFear,a Youth, 7) Jj,
Call'd Ufens, through his Armour, bythe Teeth. .


. OF one of then was ftruck, and. born shrough all.


The troubled Ranks.;.whilehein Vain doth call: :,

For Help, ithe Point, ‘where, quilted thick, was tyd ‘d_ :
His Breaft-Plase, dightly pierc'd by his Left-Side, ‘
And, hisimywounded Body. lifting: high,


pages gain hisShield. His Magrainin, ee _


hen


Bug, turning “that Mig-foreuneoo his les _ a -—
Now, near the Foreheadiof the furious Beaft,, > ©
Through. both his Eyshis Sword he quickly, ie ;
When ftrait enraged by the fatal Wound,
Rifing upright, fhe tumbles to the Ground, :
The Tow’r drawn backward by ingen \ a hen
The Elephant depriv'd of Sight, the Men.
And Arms. (a Spe@acle of Terrour) - all
Arecruth’d together in her fudden fall, :

The yst-prevailing ‘Romane ta withftand
The Fury of thefe Monfters, gives Command, :
That burning Torches wherefoe’re they go,
Should be oppot'd, and Sulph’rousFlamesto throw

Into


“4


peas POUL Ry An Pe eS TINT TMA NNO CITE TE


‘Book IX,  Siurus Iraticus,


Into their Tow'rs. This, with all Speed, obey’d,


The Elephants they fuddenly- invade:

Whole fmoaking Backs, with Flames collected (hin’d>
That,driv'n dn by the Tempeftuous Winde,
Through their high Bulwarks Fire, devouring, fpred:
As when on Rbodope, or Pindus Head ,


- AShepheard {catters Fire ; and through the Groves,
And Woods, like an hot Plazue, it raging moves :


The leavy Rocks are fir'd ; and all the Hills,
Leaping now here, now there, bright Vulcan fills.
But, when the burning Sulphur-once begun
To parch their Skins, th’ unruly Monftersrun ,
Like mad, and drive the Cohorts from their Stand:
Neither durft Any undertake, at Hand,
To fighe them ; but their Darts, and Jav'lins throw
At Diftance -. pamine! they impatient grow,
And, through the Heat of their vaft Bodies, here,
And there, the {catter’d Flames encreafing bear ;
Till by the fmooth adjoining Stream, at laft,
Deceiv'd, themfelves into ’t, they Headlong caft,
And with them all their Flames, thae ftill appear
‘Bove the tall Banks, till both together, there,
In the deep Chanel of the Flood expire.

But, where the Fight continued fill, nor Fire
Had vex’dthe Elephants, from fatal Hands
Now Darts, now Stones, on the Rbeteian Bands,


And winged Lead, at Diftance fall, like Hail.


As when an Army doth a Fortrefs {cale
Through fteep Afcents, or ftorms a fenced Tow'r.


Worthy himfelf, anda more happy Hour,


Here AL utins rais'd hig Hand, and nearer goes,
Cin his Attempt unhappy ) to oppofe
Their Fury with his Sword ; but, witha Breath


Expiring Heat, and Menanks threatning Death ,
| Oo A fariow


A farious Molaltte caught hina from the Ground, ..


And in her winding." Frankhis. Body, bound; ;!... Saale


Whishtéled, aloft, intol'dh¢Air, and lath’ d, fhe 3 "


Oft ‘gainft the. Raitth, wasiall ce: Pieces dafh’dz.,.
‘Amid&t thefe. Slaughiters, foon,:as Paalus. ipy'd 4

Varroin Arms, upbraiding him, heary’d ; -.

Now Jet us:micet with Hannibesl, whonr. Thou


Plac'éfore thy Chariot, bourdkin Chains, didft vow.


To give the City. Olh unhappy Kewe !

And People, facal in thy Favour! whom |

From the foul Guils of fogreat bs no Time.

Can e're abfolve, or purge Thee from this: Crime.

W hitch fheuldft thou, rather, with had ne’re been born

Varro, or Hannibal: Thus, with fad.Scorn,

While Paulus Spoke, the Libyan farioufly |
Advancing, at the Backs of them, that fly


( Evain theit.Gen'ral's View } alt Shafts provokes.


The Conful's Helmet, by their furious. Stroaks
Bruis’d, and his Armsall thatter'd, Paulus throws
Himfelf, more fierce at this, among his Foes,

But Varro, having loft his Courage quite,

C While Paslus to another Place the Fight
Purfu’d) {trait wheels about, and, with his Hand
Turning his Horfe , faid ; Thou doft juftly ftand
Corrected, Rome, that did'ft to Varro give
Command in War while Fabius is alive.

But now, what civil Difcord in my Minde,
What fad Diffenfion of my Fate, I finde ®

What fecret Fraud of Deftinies? I all

Thefe Torments will determine in my Fall.

But, Oh! fome God my Sword withholds, and Me
Referves ¢ Alafs!} for greater Mifery!

Shall live then 2 andtothe Tribes agen

The Fafces, ftain'd with Blood of Countrey-Men,


nd


Sinmps kraticus.: Baek Ey:


Book IX. Sistas Tea icus.


And brokenthus return? And, asI go,

My Face to other angry Cities fhow ¢

Or, (then which Nought more Cruel could for Me
By Hannibal be wilh’d) fly hence, and Thee,

Oh Rome ! behold? More his diftracted Fear

Had utter’d ; but the Enemy drew Near,

And Charging him more Clofe with Darts,his Steed
Snatch’d the loofe Reins, and fled the Field with Speed.


The End of the Ninth Book,


Oo: Silius


267


oy . ie See 7 Ps " 7 Ce ot . 2 3 ie ok Bee


SS


citi == Ce *® EV + ir’.
SILIUS F
“he Second Punick VVar.


- Lhe Fenth Book,
Tus ARGUME Nt.
Paulus great Valow', and what Slaughters be . G
eft Cann, made. He isadvisdtofiee, |
But Thoughts A Flight rejeéls, By Hannibal,
Chrifta, with bis fix Sons, together fall.
Servilius, dy Miriachusflsin, 9
- ‘ByPatilus Hand foon reveng'd again,
And, fighting'midft bis Foes, at length he dies:
“The Libyan Celebrates bis Obfequies,
Commiends his Valour, and his NC oble End.
Their Codnfels, who their Countrey did intend
To quit, by Scipio are fuppre/sd. ToRome, .
Without all Pomp, doth Conful Varro come.
The Multitude, incens'd against him, are
By Fabius appeas'd. “Lhe Slaves for War —
eAre Armd: , the Senate paffetha' Decree, —
That none, that (aptiv'd are, (hall ranfom'd be,


HEWN Panlus faw, the Ad-
 werfe Fight encreas'e;
As; when, with Spears encom-
_ pals'd, a wilde Beaft


gc cites ad Tui 7 donaage Fipera Pauls WS equisNgdo jamge A bal” ins
{7 Us
. . eae A Sot ‘Decor Eoudacgy Beds pint


Batt Hostiles Letht SaclabatHomarem -f


ee : ‘y an ty gal = |= Leaps on their Points, and by

CROTEUTSS § Domino Dr AG sa 5 DS, be 2 acobke Compton Baront de == i : ne ds d h k :

Cometon. Comite No thin eee 3 Tabula fiurit cum objireantte DD.D.. CEE = aaN _ * his Wounds doth know ;
: : a= CE ST | ne eae : * snd choole a Fo:
Where to direct his Rage, and choo '


Tato


279


Sitius Iraricus,.


And feeks a Death; from. ev'ry valiant Hands.
Upbraiding thus his flying Men; ;Oh! ftand,.
Stand ftoutly tot, and in. your Breafts receive


The Sword; nor, wounded in your Backs, thus leave


The World: there nothing now remains, at all,


. For Us, but the fole Glory of our Fall. .


Me, to the Shades below, you all fhall finde

“Your Leader. Then {wift, asthe Northern Winde,
Or winged Shafts ( which, in diflembled F light,
The ‘Parthian backward fhoots into the Fight )
And, where, unmindfull of his tender Age,
Patus ( like Mars,in Courage) did engage,

He rush’d into the mid'ft of all his Foes,
And the Youth, whom light Vafcons did enclofe, ,
And fierce Cantabrians did-with Darts: fartounds


- Freed from their cruel Arms:while they gave Ground,


And Trembling fled. As when a Goat, in View,
Through alarge Plain, the Huntsmen clofe purlue ;
And, in the Chafe, the weary Beaft fo nigh
Approach, they think to catch’t: if faddenly ,
Gnathing his Teeth, a Lyon, from his Den,

Before their Eys appears ; their Colour, then,

And Blood flies from their Cheeks, their Weaponsall,


~ Inferiour to their Danger, they let fall,


And, flying, think no more upon their Prey,
Now, with his Sword, on fuch, as in his Way


~ Oppofe, he prefs'd : and fuch, whom bafer Fear


Made fly, with Darts he follows in theRear,
Fury, and Rage delight him; and, to Crown: ee : |
His Deeds with Honour, by his Hand alone . ae
A multitude of Namelefs People fall. -
And, if another Paulus, there, * mong all


Book X:.


~ Into the thickeft of the Globes he pots ;
"And to all Dangers doth himfelf « expole,’


Baok Xs
The Dardan ‘Troqpabas heaw(iame im Mans. sie oF


Had furely loft, and AagnisBhip Ramey 211 sisc nod We


. At length, his Wing daa Posen Pen rk a


The Frent gives, Weayhancdall:tonethar Ag 3 -.: weds,
There-Ehienss. fell whom. Cingelavpesher cia “ad ' cee:
Sent fronvlier lofty Walls: there rho Lace
With Opiter, Vine-beaning Setiasenty ri: mae : |
From festile Hits. ‘Their Deaths were: em its
Though the Sidoniamjoin’d. the Time legis oe
Shot through the Hip, fell Latinas ; here:


~ One through the Shoulder, tother thraugh the: ° Knee


The Brothers, wounded, him accompany.

And there Mecenas ; ‘who, of ea,
‘Through the Adsins ‘Land, his Nobla Name |
From Tyrrben Kingsderiv'd, wounded quite ca al
The Groin, a Tyrian Jav'lin, likewile Slew... |
But, throughthe thickeft, Pavlus, Loli all pe: |
Defires of Life; and, feeking Hannibakt :
Charg'd fariontly; and thought his Deftioy:

Could onely cruel.be, if he fhould dy, . -

And Hannibal furvive. Fearing this Rage.

( For that, if once in Fight they did engage,

So great a Storm, and Tempeft could not be


. Without great Mifchief) funoinftantly',


©) Frighted Metellus Shape affuming, wa

Conful C{faidShe ) fole Hope of Italy!

Doft thou Renew thy Ragein Vain, while Fate |

Refiftts? if Paulus live, the ‘Romane State _

May ftand ; if otherwife, thou draw’ft with Thee : |

All Italy. Oh Paulus! Can it be

That thou wilt, while the State thus totters; go.
hazard’gaint fo infolenta Fo

ne Sacred Head ¢ -For, now, fo flufh’d in War


- Hannibal, that with the Thunderer “


“SuEsus. Lrapycuse


272 Sittus Irattcus. Book X.


He dares tontend + anid Varro (Lbeheld, ~~
When firft He wheel'd about }* hath left the Field,
Himifelf refetvitig for-a'beeer Day:,


Allow the Fates ‘their Time, and, while you may,


From Death redeem your Soul; ‘that’s greater far -
Then Ours ;' You foon may haveanother War.
To this, with Sighs, the General reply'd.

And is'tnovCaufe enough ( if Nought befide
Didmove Me) that.I now thould with to dy

In Arms, when toan Aa, fo Mon ftrous,I
Metellus urging hear? ‘Thou, Fool ! away.

Fly; Oh / fly:hence with Speed, nor (Heav‘nI pray )
Thee in the Back may:Hoftile Weapons wound !
But with thy Varromayft thou fafe, and found, _
Enter the Walls of Rome ! Doft Thou think Me
Worthy fo bafea Life, and not to be

As worthy (Coward) ofa Nobler End:
Becaufe the Libyan, who dares contend
CForfooth! ) with fove, permits it? Oh, thou bale
Degen’rate Iffue of a Valiant Race /

When fhould I choofe to fight ? With whom fhould I
Defire to Cope, but fuch an One, that by

My Hand fabdu’d, or I by his, might give

To Mea Name, that after Death thall live?

Thus chiding, ‘mong his Foes himfelf he threw :

And, as Acherras covertly withdrew

From the throng’d Maniples, and fought Retreat
To the Main Body, with more nimble Feet,
Him through the thickeft Ranks, with Targets fill'd,
A\nd conftipated Arms, purfu'd, and kill’d.

So Belgick Hounds an hidden Boar purfue,
And with Sagacious Nofes, drown'd in Dew,
Through devious Ways, the doublings of the Beatt
Detect, and all his F ootfteps clofely preft,
Through


Book X. SI Lius IrTaLtic US. 273


Through, thickeft Groves.,. where, ‘Hunts-men cannot
To beat, ftill followsnordefitt they from  . (come
The Chafe, untill: they have him. in the Winde,
And, in fome ‘Thicket, clofe at Covert, finde. °

When Funo fay, that-Paylus could not be -
By Wards diverted; but went on, {trait She
Gelaftes. Shape puts on, and. Hannibal, -
As Slow, exciting, thus to Fight doth call.
This-way chy. Weapons turn; hither thine Aid,
Eternal Fame of (arthage;bring ( She {aid
To fuch, asit implore: the Con/ulnear
The River fights, and horrid Slaughter there : :
Commits : nor canft thou. greater Honour gain
By any-Fo, that fhall by Thee be flain:


Thus Sheto fev’ral Conflicts doth divide -


The furious Youth ; while, near the River's Side:
Old (rita, with’s fix Sons, their valiant Hands
Employ’d, and fore-oppreftabie Libyan Bands. ; ie oe
Tuder, where he:was born, aomealthy Bown - . |
Washeld, yet: hot Obi{cate)), wasof; Renown; -
As Warlike, mongthe Umbrian People;:where: a
Her Youth in Feats of Arms,.and Slaagliters, ware :
Train’d up ; whence this old, chearfull Captain Jed: a
A Valiant Phalanx : who, when they+hdd fed er
Theit: Swords swith! Humane Slaughter, overthrew, 7 =
With frequent Wounds, an Elephant,atid 0 i ; i -
Her Falliadd Flames, that inftantly devobr- c a
CA joyful Sighttothem :): So i ee
When;-{trait, am blelmet's: Lightoing truck aa LYS,
. And they percei diche trembling Plumes to : Reo ;
On the large Grek. Old Chrifta, by that Lig ee
Soon knew the Man; arid:drésw into the Sea -
His Troop of Sons;commands thenrall to. throw #! a
Their Darts, and notto fear the Flames, that'flow. . -


P p From


te


Sitius IfaLicus, Book X:


Fret his fidtce Connitenance, or burning Cre.
As, wen an Eagle; carefull,in her Neft,

To nourith fucha Brood, as may be fic

To bear Fowe's Atins, againft the Sun: doth fet .
Their Faces, and, by their undazled Eys,

Through thofe bright Rays, her doubefull Iffue tries.

And now, to teach the reft, what they fhould do,
With aweak Force, afingle Dart he threw ;

Which -{ though it Nimble patt the middle Air )
But lightly pterc’d his Golden Mail,.and there : .
Stuck loofely, arid by chat weak Stroakbetraid
The old Man’s Hand. To whom the Libyan faid,
What Rage thy Hand,with Age now bloodlefs grown,
To vain Attempts provokes ® Thy'Cornel thrown
So feeble is, that our Gatlaick Gold

It {carce ban raze: thy Weapons now, behold!

, thus,to Thee reeurn, Bewer by Me |

In War the Méimorable Youth fhall be
Inftructed. Spdakwigthus, He forward proft,

And piees'd, with his own Dart, old Chrifta’s Breatt.
But, from the orhier Side; fix Darts are: thrown,
Fromifix Righp#Himds,andthen fix Spears come on,
Witloedual acy, As,in Libya, when

A Lyonefsis chdstbimohérDen, . >.

Her.anigry: Weoelps leap forth, and ftrive, in. Wainy
With tender Teeth, the Combat to maintain.

But Hannibal,with Arms encompals'd ‘round,
Confur‘dtheir Shafts, and weighty Spears (that. foand
Aev'ty Soak with Horrour » through the. Field)
Strongly ferftains; andowith: his batrer’d Shield... -
Repells® ‘tior seas thofei many ‘Woaiinds, : flies he
Hath giv'n, norall thole Slaughtersfarisfie
His Rage sunlefsdte with the. Fatherjoin: ...

The Sonsin Death,:and quite cutoff the Line:
pe Then


Book X, Srtius Iraticus. 275


Then Abaris, who bore his Arms,and there —
Enflam’d the Fight, and him did ev'ry where
Attend, He calls:. With Shafts fupply Me ftill ,
For there ’s a Troop, that muft be fent to Hell,
And fret$ with Darts my Mail: ‘they, inftancly,
Shall finde the Fruits of Foolifh Piety.

Thisfaid ; the Eldeft ( Lucas) witha Dart

He penetrates :the Point preft through his Heart,
Upon his Brother's Arms He backward finks :
Next Volfo, whi, in Hafte advancing, thinks

To draw the Fatal Weapon from the Wound,

A Pile (that ‘mong the Dead, by Chance, he found)
He, through his Beaver, ftrikes into his Nofe:
Then Vefulus, who flipping, as he goes,

Faln in his Brother’s Blood, he with his Sword
Cuts off, and ( barb’rous Valour, and abhorr'd)
His Helmet, fill’d with his diffever'd Head,
Flung,like a Mifsile Shaft, at thofe that fled.

Next Telefinus, ftrucken witha Stone, —

Ulpon the Back, where to the twifted Bone

The Joints are Knit, fell, and beheld withall

His Brother Quercens, by a Sling, to fall,

Dead to the Ground, while he expires the Light
Of Life, and (huts his dubious Eys in Night.
But Perufinus, weary through his Fear, -
Running, and Grief, though ftill he angry were,


_ With feeble Steps, retiring through the Plain,


And, fometimes ftanding to refift, was flain
By a Fire-hard’ ned Stake, which he, that bare
The Armsof Hannibal, {natch’d newly there,
From a flain Elephant: the half-burnt Oak
Fix'd deep into his Groin; the furious Stroak
Turn’d him upon his back. His cruel Rage


abe Youth, with Pray’rs, endeavour'd to aflwage :
P p 2 But


276


Sirius Jraticus.


(6) Paslss,


(c) Thefe were Numidians in
number five hundred ( faith Livy, Va-
lerias Maximus four hundred) © who,
hiding fhort Swords under their Coats,
their Targets hanging at their Backs,
(as was the Cuftom of fuch as revolt-
ed in Fight) fled trom their. own Side
to the Romanes: who,taking from them
their Shields, and Darts, commanded
them to the Rear, but they , foon as
they perceived all’ Men intent on the
Fight, furnifhed themfelves again with
the Targets of fuch as fell, and fudden-
ly affailing the Romanes at their Backs,

ewed them down at the Ham-ltrings
witha great Slaughter, and werea
great Occafion of the following Vi-
Gory. Liv. lib. 22.


But, ashe gap'd; his: Mouth with Stygian Fire.”
Is fill'd, and -in.his Lungs the Flames expire.
Atlength, with all-the reft, (brifla, a Name
Through allthe Umbrian Land, ofantient Fame,
Fell, like-ailofty Oak, that long hadfteod °
Obferv’d, and Holy in its Native Wood,
When ftruck by ove, and{ulph’rous Flames devour
The Olld, and. Sacred Branches, to the Pow’r
O''th Fire, at length ic yields,and covers all, ,
The Trees ‘beneath it, in.its {pacious Fall.

While Hannibalthus rageth near thy:Flood,
C Fam‘d eAufidus) the Conful, with-much Blood, .
Having reveng’d his future Death, she War...
Purfu'd, as if He had: beenConguerour,
There lay huge Pharcus, song athouland Dead,
Came from. Herculean Calpe:t: Gorgbn}s Head ©
Carv'd onhis Shield, about ‘thar dreadfall Face
The Goddels's Original, and Race’.
Him, daring to oppofe, and saunting : high oe
The antient Natnes.o’th'monftrous. Family -
Of Fam‘d Adedu/a..( whofe dire Looks alone
Converted the Beholdersitate Stone)
As he, to forward, ftoop'd ,. and at’s left niet
Too eager, neakh’d, the Valiant Conful:sby}
The Helmet caught, and dragsuie Ueadlane dws
Upon his Knees, deep in:his Back doth drown
His Sword, whevé.’bout:his Reins his Belt was bound :
He, from his gaping Bowels, onthe Ground... '
Spews Streams of Blood;dnd the: 4telian Field, f
To the Atlantick Prince; d Grave dorh yield, , |

Amidft theSlaughters; furious in the Rear,: -
With fudden Férrourjsther © Tioaps appaar,
And charging fiercely, uriex pected, fall |


Upoa the Remanes,: Pel Hainibal
[aes


Book X:


Book X.


Inftruded.inall Fraud, andto-chat Are.

Of Fighting train'd who -( faining to defert

The Punick Camp, arin‘d with Deceit, their Hands, .
And Arms had yielded) onthe Romane Bands *
Then Bufie, in the Slaughter, with a Rage

United, fly, and all their Rear engage:


Sirius IraLticus. | 277


Nor did they Weapons want, Slaughter affords
A large Supply of Jav'lins, Darts, and Swords.
But Valiant Galba ( whole ftill pious Love
To Virtue, no crofs Fertune could remove )
Seeing an Enfign taken bythe Fo,

Purfues with Speed, and with a fatal Blow

The Conqu’rour fells: but, ftriving to regain
The Eagle, which his dying Hands retain,

C And would let go, but flowly, at the Laft )
Pierc'd by eA moreus Sword, who came in Hafte
To's Friend’s Relief he fell, and in thofe great
Attemps, unhappy; fadly met his Fate.

Bnt now , as if Enyo’s Rage were ftill
Unfatisfi'd, Vulturnas, in one Hill - ,
OF Duft, rolls all the Field; and the white Sand
Throwsup: and fuchas Cabourd to withftand -
His Fury, with trong Blafts, that ftrangely Roar,
Toth’ fartheft Part of all the Champagne bore, «


- And’gainft che Hollow Bankstheir Bodies thrown,


‘And bruis’d, withia the {welling Flood did drown :° -
And, here, unhappy in his'filent. Fate, oe
The River Curio’s Life doth terminate. © 7 vi
For, while, with inward Fury boiling, He . °°.
Labours to {top the Romane Troops, that flee, © 2°:
And in their Way, himfelf oppofing, ftood,
Driv’n Headlong by the Throng into the Flood; :-
Ith’ troubled Waves he funk, and born away
Dead, in the AdriackSands, Ingloriousylay.. =~ .
| ut


278


Book X.


Sitius Iraticus.


But the brave Con/ul, whofe unfhaken Minde


~ The worftof Ills: could bear > whonereinclin'd


To ftoop to Fortune, meets the Conqu'ring Fo ©
With equal Fury, and himfelf doth throw —
Amidft their thickeft Arms ; encourag’d by

A. Martial Heat, and Confidence to dy:

When Viriathus, whom th’ Iberian Land

Obey’d, purfuing witha Fatal Hand,

A Fo, now tyr’d, and weary'd in the Fight, ©


_ Nearunto Raging Paulus, and in’s Sight,


(a) - Servillus Galba, had been Coir
fel with Acilins, and that day com-
manded the main Body of the Ro-
munes, Where He dyed, bravely fight-
ing, at the Head of his Men.


Cuts off. Oh Grief! Oh Tears! “ Servilius theres
Next Paulus, the beft Part of all the War,
Fell by a barbrous Hand, and in his Fall


_ Alone, with Envy, We may (anne call


Unfortunate. The Con/ful his fad Ire

No more endures, and, though the Winds confpire

Torob him of his Arms, and blind his Eys

With Duft, yet through a Cloud of Sand he flies,

And him, then tuning, Cas ’tis usd among

Th’ Iéeri}) on his Shield a-barb’rous Song,

Invades, and, through his left Pap driving, paft

His Weaponto his Vitals: this the lait

OF all his Slaughters was, no more could He

In Fight his Handimploy: nor (Rome) for Thee,

In future Wars, muft Noble Paulus ftand.

For an huge Stone, thrown from a private Hand,

Dath‘d on his Head, and deep into his Skull

Flis batter'd Helmet beats, and fills it full,

And all his Face with Blood : retreating then,

Againft the. Neighb’ring Rock as he doth lean,

Now almoft choak’d with Daft, before his Face ”

Befmear’d with:Gore, his Target he doth place,

Likea fierce Lyon (lighter Shafts repreft,

And {corn’d). when, piereing deep into his Breaft,
. At


Book X. Sirius Iraricus;
At length he feelsthic Steed, amidf the :Field
He trembling ftands, and patiently doth yield
Toevry Weapon: while about his Nofe,
His Jaws, and Main, a bleody Riv'let flows ;
And, fometimes, turning his weak Limbs about,
From his wide Mouth, he foaming Goar doth fpout.
But, then, fierce Hannibal {purs on his Steed,
Where e’re the Storm,or Conqu’ring Sword doth lead;
Where furious Troops, and where thofe Monfters are,
That with their Iv'ry Teeth maintain the War.
Here, overwhelm’d with Darts when Pifo fpy'd,
The Libyan Captain over Bodies ride,
Raifing himfelf Upright upon his Spear,
Pierc’d through his Horfe’s Flank, attempting there
(In Vain) to leap upon him being down.
To whom the angry Libyan ¢ who foon
Himfelf recover'd, though his Plunging Steed
Pitch’d him upon his Shoulder) When they ‘re Dead,
Do thus the Romane Ghofts revive ( faid He )
To fight* In Death nor will they Quiet be!
This faid, into his Body, as He ftrives
Torife, upto the Hilts, his Sword he drives,
But, his Foot wounded with a Cretan Shaft,
As Lentulus, full Speed, on Horfe- back left


‘The Field ; the Stones befmearing with his Blood, -


And, witha ftern Aspect, to th’ Stygian Flood

Sinking he Paulus {py'd: at that fad Sight,

His Mind's. diftracted, He's afham‘d of Flight.

Then Romeappears to burn, and Hannibal —

Ev’n atthe Gates to ftand : then, firft of all,

The Field, that Italy-devour'd, He faw.

What thensemain‘d, but the next Day might-draw -
The Zyrianstothe Town? Aclength, he {pake -

To Paulus,thus; Doft Thou the Helm forfake


7


279


280 Sizius lraticus. Book X;


In fuch Diftrefs 2 The Gods my Witnelsare, _
Unlefs thou guid us through this cruel War, —


Andlive (though ‘gainftthy Will) in fucha Storm,
Paulus, (Grief made his Language fharp) more Harm,


Then Varro, Thou wile do .Then take, I pray,
(OF Rome's now finking State Thou onely Stay)
This Horfe : upon my Stioulders I will take
Thee up, and fee Thee fafe upon his Back.
. Asthis he {pake, the Con/ul, {pitting Blood,
From his torn Mouth, replies: Go on, make good
Thy Father's Virtues ; why fhould we defpair,
So long, as fuch brave Souls remaining are ©
In Romulus his Empire * ‘Spur thy Steed,
Which Way. thy Wounds permit thee. Let with {peed
The City-Gates:be fhut.; for fuddenly |
This fad Deftruction to the Walls will fly ;
And (pray) advile, that Fabius:may Command
InChief: blind Rage my Counfel did withftand.
And what of my {pent Life remaineth now ;
But that to the rude Multicude I fhow
That ‘Paulus dares, and knows well how to Dy.?.
For,thus confum’d with Wounds, to them thall I
' Beborn?. ‘What.would the Libyan give, that Me,
Turning my Back in Fight, He once might fee ¢
Paulus hah'no fuch Thoughts: nor willI go
So poor a Soul unto the Shades below.
No, Iam one: but why dol delay «
Thee thus, with mild Complaints? Hiafte thee away ,
Hence quickly with thy Steed, with Service fpent.
With this grave Charge, ftrait to the City went
Sad Lentulus: nor yet did Paulus dy
Without Revenge; but,as when, mortally
Wounded, 4 Tiger doth, at length, retreat,
And falls to truggle with approaching Fate,
He


Book X. ‘Srurus. ITALicus. _ 8k


He opens wide his. weary Jawsto bite.
In vain, and in Astempts, beneath the Height


_ Of his great Rage; -licks, onely, with his Tongue


The Lances, andthe Darts againft him flung..
And new Ilerthes, who infulting near
Approach’d, and fhook, fecure of Wounds, his Spear,
Herifing, with his fudden Sword, doth wound ;
And, then, for the Sidonian Captain, round
About him, looks, defiring in his Hands _


~ Toquithis ftrugling Soul: but ftrait the Bands


OF Nomades,of Garamantians, Moors,

With (elsians, and eA Sturians , thick Showr’s
Of Darts upon him powr’d, on ev'ry Side,
Opprefs the Man. Thus Noble Paulus dy'd; d;

Thus that high, valiant Heart, whom ( if che War
He fole had rul’d)) perhaps we might compare

With Fabius : his brave Death a Grace became |

To Rome, and plac'damongthe ‘? StarshisName. —_, Ashsisonely an Hyperbole expel

But, when the Romanes Hopes were loft, and all Fane of his Dea au cue

Their Courage, ruin‘d in the Con/ul’s Fall ; fading Nap teiot ae eae
To cruel Arms the Headlefs‘ Army: yield ni p ts aS nee the
Their Backs: Victorious Africk through the Field Let, beng el ead ar Aan
Rageth in Blood: . Picenian Cohorts here, ey wes eeruure oe oman
And Warlike Umbrians fall ; Sicanianthere, —

And Hernick, Troops : thofe Enfigns {catter’d are

Upon the Ground, which Samnites, fierce in War,

Which the Sarraftes, and the Marf brought ;

There Targets pierc’d quite through, &,asthey fought

Broke each ’gainft others Shields, and Helmets lay

With ulelefs Swords, and Bridles torn away _

From the fierce Horfe’s Mouths:the Neighb’ring flood

Throws up his Billows, {welling high with Blood,

Into the Fields, and all the Bodies flain


Returns, with Fury, to the Banks again.
| Qq See


282


{g) egyptian.


Sintus Irazicus. Book X;


Seea (s )Lagean Ship, that, Ifland-like,


Floats on the Sea; if it by Chance do ftrike -
Upona Rock, while cloudy Exrus blows,
And Shipwrack over all the. Ocean throws,
Strait Planks, with Oars, and Tackle, .and tall Mafts,
Pendants, and Sails, torn with impetuous Blafts,
And miferable Sea-men, that again
Spew up the Waves, are {catter'd on the Main.
The Libyan, by His Slaughters in the Fight,
Flad meafur'd out the Day : but, asthe Night
The Aid of Light to His great Rage deny’d,
At length, he lai‘d the cruel War afide,
And from the Toil of Slaughter {par'd his Men :
Butyet, with Cares, his Mind ftill wak’d : nor then,
Amidft fuch Favour of the Gods, could He
Endure to reft ; His Thoughts continually
‘Prompt him to enter Rome: and the next day,
Thence with drawn Swords, in Hafte, to march away,
Is his Defign : while yet their Blood was warm,
And Slaughter ftain’d the Troops. Now with His Arm
The Gates He feifeth, fires the Walls, and feems
To mix with Canna the Tarpeian Flames.
Confcious of Fove’s Difpleafure, and the Fate
Of Italy, Saturnia, troubled at
What He defign’d, endeav’ring toreftrain
‘The Youth’s rath Heat, and in Defires {6 vain
To curbhisgreedy Hopes, {trait from His deep,
And filent Empire, She the God of Sleep
( By whofe Afsiftance, She had often clos’d
Fove's weary Eys, and them to Reft compos’d )
Summons, and, {miling, faid ; I call not Thee
(GreatGod} to hard Defigns: nor that to Me
Thou give up Foye, by thy foft Wings fubdued,
Do I require: nor, that thou fhouldft delude
And


Book X. Si uius Ira LICUs. 283


And fut, in. Sipiste Nig ho, hisithaufand Eys,.
That I kept;anddidthy:Powerdefpife. —
But into. Haspibslcnow: Dreams infpire;
Nor nowt witie Rome kerdetim define:
Or Walls forbid, where Fove denies, that He —
Should enter. Her Commands he inftantly
Purfaes, and Poppy, in a crooked Horn,
Mix’d with fome other Juice, through Darknefs born ,
He filently defcends, and to the Tent
Of the Barcéan Prince direély went.
Then, hovring o're his drooping Head, he bss reads
His drowfy Wings, and Shimber gently theds,
Like Dew, inte His Eys,and with his Hand
Unto His Temples the Lethean Wand
Applies ; when fuddenly prodigious Dreams
Poffefs his furious Breaft :and-now he feems
To compafs Zyber, with his num’rous Bands:
But} 4s, infulting, atthe Walls he ftands.
OF Rome, he, frighted, {ees Immortal Fove
Shifiing, on thé F arpetan Rock, above,
And, in his threatning Hand, he Thunder fhook,
While all the Neighb’ ring Fields with Sulphur {moak ,
Blew e4nyo, in cold Wiaters, trembling lies,
Andoft (adreadfull Sight ) before his Eys,
Flathes of Lightning fly, then through the Air
A Voice was {pread; Thy Progrels, Youth, forbear ;
Thy Honour’s great enough, that doth arife
From (anne, Thou as foon our Marble Skies-aorm’d
May’it cleave, as through thefe Sacred Wails Cwhen
By Thee) break way. ‘Thusfano’s Will perfornvd ,
‘Sleep left Him; terrifi'd with what He then »
Had feen, and fearing greater Wars :nor, when
The Night was done, ‘did Day abfolve his Mind


i , which it left behind.
From that dire Image, w ous Amid


284000 Sitius Iranicus. Book KX


A midft thefe Troubles of His Sleep; and vain —
Difturbance, Mago tells Him, they had ta‘ne |
The Romane Camp, by Night, and brought away,
Wich their remaining Treops, a wealthy Prey: - —
lt), ty gions tis Adve © © To Him then promifing:a joyfull Feaft,
Liber Marae Yao ty Within the Capitol, when, to develt .
appearing at the Gates of Rome, before


they apprehended His Coming) when "The World of Day, the fifth Night fhould arife,
Hammibal rejetted, he replyed, Thon : '
ope rg oe aaa The General, concealing the Advife |
OF Heav’n, and His own Fears,their Woundsin Fight,
And Strength exhaufted pleads, and that they might
Not be too Confident of their Succefs. «
The Youth dejected from his Hopes, nolefs,
Then if he had commanded Him to flee,
Ev'n from the Walls, and draw from Victory
His Enfigns, faid, With all this T oil, not Kome
CAs She believ’'d ) but Parro.’s overcome :
By what fad Fate, fo great Suaccefs in Fight
Doft Thou neglect, and thus. Thy Countrey flight ©
Let the Horfe march with Me,and (I will Pawn
My Head ) the Ihack Walls thall be Thine Own ;
The Gates fhall open‘d be without a War.


While thefe by furious Adago urged are,
And by his wary Brother not Believ'd,
The Latine Souldiers, flying, were receiv'd]
() Th t above four thou- ithin © Canufium’s Walls, and there apac
fand Foor sale panded aoe) WwW ‘ uf sh : ? P €
hat fled ina Bod id ce
imo Conan ttenlemebaneed began to fortifie. Ing orious Face
gen ey deinen. bu a Of finking Fortune / there no Eagles ftand,
her ed on : a
them by Noble Lady, called Pee No Enfigns mong the Troops, no high Command
Bafa, who, the War ended, was pub- :
lickly honoured by the Romane Senate, OF Confuls nor by Lidoar s Axes born.
for hes feafonable Bounty. ; . : ;
But faint with Fear, and, as with Ruin torn,
And maim’d, their Bodies on weak Members {trive
To keep their Stand : oft fudden Clamours rive
The Air, and oft deep Silence, with their Eys
Fix'd on the Ground: here naked Companies


With


Book X.  Sixius Iratteus: 285


With broken Targets ftand.; the Waliant.there |

Want Swords: then all the Horfemen wounded are;

From their high-crefted Casks their glorious Pride

Wastorn, and eAZars. his Honour lai'dafide. - -

Their Corflets pierced with many Spears, andin

Their Mails Maurufian Shafts were fometimes feen

To hang: fometimes they fadly call upon

Their Friends, wer¢loft: here Galbathey penny

Pifo, and Curio, worthy of a fai

More Noble Fate, and Scavola, in War |
Motft fierce ; all thefe of Courfei: but Paulus Fate; f
Ass of a common Father, they regrate ,

How He ne’re ceas’d, with Truth, their prefent Woes :

To Prophefie, and Varro's Miride oppofe :

How oft, in Vain, that Day from ‘Rome He fought
Toturn; and, then, how valiantly He fought.
But fuch, who Care of future Things do take,
Either are bufi'd, ‘bout the Wallsto make °'

Their Trenches, or to-fortifie the Gates, -”
CAs Need requir’d ) and where thie Field dilates *

A plain, and eafie Entrance to the Foes, - ms ey

Firm in the Earth they fix Fireehardned Boxght, Soe

Like Horns of Stags, and fecretly befide, -

To wourid them in their March; they Calthrops hide:

"Bove all thefe Miferies; and Wounds, chat a = |

Notto be curd, the Reliques of thie War,”

And fuch as ‘fcap'd the'Fo, through pape Fear, |

Anda more fierce Erynnismovy'd; préparé re AMS ;

C The Climate chang’d ) the Punick Ann, by Sea, i eer
Sidonian Swords, and: Hannibalto flee. ay "and fone othe oie tora eee
The Ghief of this Defign, for Exile, + was : _

® Metellus, {prung fromno ignoble Race: *

The wav'ring Winds of that dégen'rateCrew °° Affoiates, plots pieces re iar be


Le ee ee Lond. osibe drake an Oath to profecate tt
In War, to Counfels bale, and ftrange; he drew : gaint Henvibel and fo broke their De
“aor tae To


er of the young Nobility,


eg and for ever quit their Countrey , dis
" couraging all Counfels of future De-

* fence, till Scipio, attended by fome o-
ther of beft Refolution , breaking incu
Merellus Lodging , where he with his


fign, Liv, 4b. 22.


Book X..


Ssttus Iriaxicus. -


C) Pallas.


Ae : 4\ greater Pride, imany Libyan’s Fall. . ee
- | Thefe Threatnings, crufhing that Defi ices all;

A Sacramental Oath, as wasenjoyn‘d, : “oy os £

. Swear tot the Gods, and to their Countrey, hinde Ai


To leaker Lands; where they themfelves might oe |


Asiavrahother World, and there abide, -

Whercithey might never hear the Libyan's Isms,
And whither their forfaken ‘Countrie’s Fame,
Mightnevercome. But, whenthisNews was trough
To Scipto, withlike Rage, as whemhe foughe::

I'th’ Field ‘gainft Hannibal, his Sword he fnatch'd, |: =
Andto the Haufe, where they this Mifchief hatch’d- ©
‘Gainft Italy, he hafts, and breaking down’) )'
The Doors; and, entring, with adreadfull Frown,
Shaking his Sword, before their frighted Eys,

He thus begun: Thou Chief of Deities

Who dwell'ft on the Tarpeian Rock, a Seat,


| Thenextto Heav'n! and Thou, Fano, not yet


Chang'd with the Woes of Tray, and:thou fierce
Upon whale dreadful digs are difplaid .. (*) Maid
The Gorgon. Furies, and you Gods, that fprung
From Mortals, and are.willingly among... app Bg
Qur Deities ador'd; and; C whieh by Me}...
Is equah, helditq any. Deity) 210 A,
By my great Fathen's Head,J fwear, Ene'te:: ij) 7.
Will the Layinian Land forfake, norere '- ne
Permit, that it forfakenbe, while I

Survive. Now then, MetellusinQantly »,;..

Atteft the Gods, that, if'ia Libyan Fire gS
Thefe Walls {ha} burn, Thou never wilt retire...
Into another, Land 3 ynlefs thqu fwear- :.


- To this: ;although arm’ ‘d, Hannikel were hare, |


Whom Thou dof dread,the Fear of whom dath break
Thy Sleep, Thou fare, fhale dy,nor wild fake.


Their


Book: X. Setius Irattcus, 389


Their Souls, and from that Crime their Breafts abfolve,
‘While thus the Latines their Affairs revolye, —

With troubled Thoughts: Victorious Hannibal

‘The Fields again furvays, and numbers all .

His own dire Aas ; fearching with greedy Eys

Their Wounds, and to the cruel Companies

OF Libyans, that round about Him ftood,

Yields joy full Spectacles of Romane Blood.

Atthelaft Gafp, fore wounded through the Breaft,

With Darts, lay valiant Clelins ‘mong the reft,

Expiring his departing Soul to Air,

And lab’ring, faintly, his pale Face to rear


. Scarce, with his feeble Neck, from Earth his Head


H’ad lifted, when his Horfe, that knew him, Neigh’d
Aloud, with prick’d-up Ears, and, Bounding, threw
Headlong upon the Ground Vage/us, who

Upon his Captive Back was born, and then

Flying with Speed o’re Heaps of flaughter’d Men,
And through the flipp’ry Paths, with ftanding Gore
Made fat, and Bodies chang’d with Wounds, before
His dying Mafter ftands, and there his Neck,


- And Shoulders bowing, offers him his Back,


On bended Knees, as he was wont to do

And, trembling, feems his in-bred Love to fhew.

None could more neatly mounta metled Steed!”

©: Then he; none furer, ashe ran full Speed,

Lay backward all along, or ftood upon

His naked Back, or, when he chanc'd to run

A Race, more happily perform’d the Courfe.
But, not a little, wondring at the Horfe

That equall’d Humane Senfe, the Libyan ftrait

His Name, and Honours, who with adverfe Fate

So bravely did contend, defir'd to know,

And, to difpatch him, gave the Mercy-Blow.


(4) This Kind of recreation ( for-
. merlyinufe among the Romanes) is
now (faith Afounfieur Bandier, in his
Hiftory of the Serraglio) common a-
mong the Turks, who teach their Hor-
' festo kneel, and receive them on their
Backs, and in full Carrier xo leap from
one Horfe to another, to ly along upon
them, or to ftand u pright on their na-
ked Backs,while ahigy run at full Speed:
and this to be done frequently in the

_ Hippodrome at Conjtantinople.


cn


288 Sitius Iraticus. Book X.


Then (ae € for He te the Tyrians Side
Had tured his Arms.) who near him then did ride,
A Slave to Fortune, anfwers: Sir (faid He )
His Story worthy of your Ear may be.
In former Times, that Rome, which now difdains
With fo much Scorn, to bear the Zyrian Reins,
Wasunder Kings; but, hating Tarquin's Sway,
Soon as She had his Scepter thrown away,
Strait mighty Armies, frem Clufinum came, -

— CIé either Cocles, or Porfenna’s Fame,


Or Lidyan Camps, by Chance, thine Ear have found) |


He, with Mdeonian Aids, encompals'‘d round,
And Tyrrhen People ftroveagainto bring ©
By War, into his Throne, the banifh’d King,
Much, they, in vain, attempted: at the Gate
The Tyrant prefs'd,; when, Peace concluded, {trait
All Hate ’s comprefs'd ,and-by a League afide _

The Waris lai‘d, and Faith by Pledges ty‘d.

But, yet (good Gods ! } the Romane Hearts, that know
Not how to yield, prepar'dto undergo

The worft of; Ils for Honourt €lelia, who

Not yet the Age of ewice fix Summers, aa |

One of the Latine Maids, that did remain: :

A Pledg of Peace, among the Virgin-Train
Transmitted to the King: She (not to {peak

Of what the Men perform'd) that King, the League,
Her Years, the Flood contemning, fearlefs, o’re
Admiring Lyber, from the Hoftile Shore, -
Swum, and the Billows broke with tender Hands,
Had Nature chang’d her Sex, the Zyrrben Lands
Porfenna happily fhould ne're again

Have feen; but (that J may no more detain
You in her Story) from her Stock He came,
And from the famous Virgin took his Name.


Book X. Sitius Iratreus, 289


‘As He this Story told, afudden Cry,

On the Left-Hand, broke forth, appearing nigh,
Where Paulus Body, mong the Arms of Men,
And mangled Corps, in Ruin mix’d, they then
Dug up, amidft the Slaughter’d Heaps. Alafs!
How alter’d? how unlike to Him he was,

That, lately, with his Shafts the Punick Bands
Had routed? Or, when the Taulantian Lands,
With Honour, he had vanquith’d, and ae bring
Into Subjedtion the Ilbrick King * 7

His hoary Locks all black with Duft; upon

His Beard dry Clots of Gore ; a Mural Stone

His Teeth had broke : His Body allone Wound;
Which when, o’rejoy'd, the Libyan Captain fatiad,
Fly, Con[ul Varro, now, fecurely fly;

Andlive (faid He} fince Paulus, here, did ie
Fly; andtolazy Fabius, to the State, oa
And People, Canna's Story allrelate. —

If Thou defir'ft, fo greedily, the Light:

Of Life, ‘le grant Thee fuch another Flight.

But He, whofe valiant Heart (that juftly claim’d:.

Me, for aFo ) fo brave an: Heat enflam’d, )

With the laft Rites of Funeral, by Me, -

And Decent Sepulture, {hall Honour’d be.

How Great here Paulus dof Thou ly? eee Ball,

Alone, isgreater Joy to Me, thenall gee:

The Thoufands We have flain ; “andl; whens | a

Me, with the Safety € Goraliage ) .0f my paper ely

Shall call; do I defire to dy. ' This faid, - Sinus

T Interr his Friends, when the next Morn rae

Her Bluthes from her Bed, and to prepare seunneby |

A Pyle of Arms “(that to: the Ged of War.

Were tobe burnt ). He gives Coramiand : eee
Though weary, to the te er falbyric a j


na.


:
i
|
4


Sie Teniieus: Book xX.


And ftrait in fev'ral Heaps the Grovesare lai'd,
And, on the fhady Hills, tall Woods are made
~ToEccho with their Axes: hereto Ground
They fell the Ath, and thady Pop'lar, crown’d
With hoary Leaves, and there the Holm, that took
Root in their Grand_fire’s Age, and firmeft Oak;
With Pines, that flourifh by.a River, and

Sad Cyprefs, that near Sepulchres do ftand,

A mournfull Ornament. Thefeto the Field

They bear, and there, with Emulation, build

The Fun‘ral Pyles (an Office tothe Slain,

Fruitlefs, and fad} till inthe Eaftern Main

Sol drench’d his panting Steeds, and, by his Flight
From Heav'a, with Stygian Darknels rais’‘d the Nighe.

But, when again the Phaethontian Reins

Shed their firft Beams on the &en Plai ns,

And did to Earth its Colours all reftore,

They Flames apply, and Corps, diftilling Gere,

Burn, in an Hoftile Land : an harrid Dread

Of various Chance, feifing their Thoughts, is fpread
‘ With Silence through their Hearts, left Fortune, by
An adverle Fight, might caufe them there to dy..-

ButSacred ¢ Mars) to Thee, upto the Skies,

Likea vaft Hilla Pyle of Arms dothrife:

The General himtfelf lifts up a tall

And flaming Pine, and thus on Thee doth call :

Great Father eALars ! wha,now,hatt heard my Pray’r.
Thefe Sacrifices of a Profp'rous War, f=
And Firft- fruits of the Fight, within this F lame,
I, Hannibal, or'e the eAufonian Name =
Victorious, burn, to Thee, and living Bands -. :
Offer thefe chofen Arms, with gratefull Hands..
Then, throwing in the Torch, the greedy Fire.
Devours the Pyle; and ftrait a flaming Spire


Breaks


Book X..  Siztius Ira icus. 291


Breaks through the Smoak, and to the Stars afcends, -
And aclear Light throughall-the Field extends.:: >
Thence, hafting to the Tomb, and Funeral
To Paulus. giv'n,the Honour of his Fall,
Infulting, boafts. A lofty Pyle, there, They
Had rais‘d, and fofter Beds, compos'd of Hay :
Gifts likewife added are,to th’ Valiant held
A Fan'ral Honour: His dire Sword, and Shield,
C OF late a Terrour, and a ftately Sight)
Then Fafces torn, and. Axes ta’ne in Fight.
No Wife, no Sons, no Troops of Kindred near
Ally'd, were there; nor on the lofty Bier ,
( As Cuftom was.) old Images precede ,
And grace the Exequies: But, now, inftead
Ofother Pomp, was Hannibal, alone
Sufficient, to Eternize His Renown:
Shining with richeft Purple (to the reft
Upon the Pyle) He, fighing, threw his Veft,
And, after that, His Gold-embroider’d Cloak :
Then to His Shade, with this laft Honour, fpoke. |
eA ufonia’s Glory ! go Thouthither; where
Souls, great in Deeds, and Virtue, feated are’ 7
Thou, byThy Noble Death, haft Honour gain’d:
Fortune, as yet, with her unconftant Hand, -
Our Labours guids, and doth command, that We
OF future Chances ignorant fhould be. -
Thus He, and, ftrait from crackling Flames, into
fEtherial Air, the joyfull Soul doth go. .
Now Fame, her Voice encreafing, to the Skies,
The Sea, and Earth, and chiefeft City flies:
() They now diftruft their Walls, and, trembling, all G»)so great ((aith Livy, 4.22.) was
; 4 the Lamentation, Confafion through
Hope Safety onely in the Capitol. | the Cay, that Fabs whole pele
For now, for their Defence, no YouthfullBands hears ee ore 2


fternation, to omit the Anniverfary


Survive; anempty Name As/onia ftands, Rancho Gere
Rr 2 Without


292 Sitius: Iraricus,: Book X .


Without'a Body’s that the Enemy
Not yet broke through the Gates, they think to
Delay, through Scorn: their Houfes new appear
To burn, the Temples fpoil'd, and evry where
Their Sons, in cruel Slaughter, to expire
Before their Eys, and the fev'n Tow'rs on Fire.
One Day lamented the approaching Falls
ised: | OF twice an hundred ‘Chairs, and finking Walls
OF now-exhaufted Rome, depriv'd of twice
| Three hundred thoufand Youth befides ; and this
er alee, After fad Trebia, and the Tufcan™ Flood :
And of Allies, as great a Lofs of Blood.
Amid{ft thefe Griefs, the Pious Senate all,
By Lot, to their appointed Charges fall :
Old Fabius, fuper-vifing what was done -
With Diligence, th’ Affrighted callsupon.
Believ’t, there ‘snow no Reafon ta delay ;
We mult be fpeedy, that the Libyan may, »
T’ approach our.armed Walls, attempt in vain.
By Sitting. ftill crofs Fortune Strength doth gain
Among the Fearfull, and Adverfity a
Through Fear grows greater. Go, go {peedily, (make
() Such Army aswere taken from ®) Snatch from the Temple Arms (Brave Youths) go
their Enemies, bad long been preferved,
Be et nae ees ‘The Courts,and Porches, naked ; quickly take
make nfcofthemto ArmtteirSves. - "The ‘Targets from the Walls, were gain’d in War:
Enough our Numbers for our Countrey are,
If we loofe nothing through our Fear to fight:
In open Fields, that horrid Plague may fright
Perchance ; but the light-naked Adcor fhall ne’re
Break through thefe Walls,or boaft his Triumphs here.
While Fabius thus excites their Minds, with Dread
Dejected. “Bout the Walls a Rumour’s fpread,
That Varro was at Hand, and ev'ry Breaft
With fecret Treuble, and with Doubt,’s pofleft.


As


Book X. Situs Iranrcus. 293
As, when, a, Veflel wrack'd, fafe fom the Sea;
Alone, the Pilot, {wimming, makes his Way
Toth’ open Shore; the People trembling ftand, . -
Uncertain whether they fhould lend an Hand |
To help Him, or refufe Him, and, the reft

So loft; his fole Survival all deteft.

How great his Infamy, who durft come near

The Ports, fo fad an Omen to their Fear !

Thefe Difcontents, and Troubles to aflwage,
And turn the wav'ring People from their Rage,
Fabius declares; How Bale it was to be

Vex'd at Mis-fortunes in Adverfity,

It did un-manly feem, in thofe to bend,

Who their Original from Mars pretend,

Who could not hide their Griefs, but were intent
To remedy their Woes by Punifhment :

But, if they would permit him, to upbraid,

To Him that Day more Difmal fhin’d (he faid)
When He faw Varro marching to the Field,
Then that, wherein Disearm’d he Him beheld.

This Language all their Threatsallay'd, and ftraie
Their Hearts were turn’d. Now they condole his Fate,
Now, fumm up all the Comforts from them ta’ne
By the Sidonian, in two (Confuls flain..


@) Th Bim: @) AtVarro’s Return, left the

® Then, to congratulate Him; out they run People thou grow infoeny-crela
. 3 ¢ Mis-fortunes of thei is,

In Troops ; protefting, that whate’re was done, Schule gave lis Thanks. Gee he te


: notdefpaired of the furur dFor- .
They did believe, proceeded from agreae thacof the Common Weak


And valiant Minde ; That erufting to the Fate
Of their Fore-Fathers, and their mighty Power,
He not defpair'd of the Tarpeian Tow’.

No lefs fad, for his Crime, and fullof Shame,
Towards the Walls, the Conful, weeping, came :-
Not daring his dejected Looks at all
To raife, to fee his Countrey, and recall


Their


294.


SiLius Irazicus.


Book X.,


(7) Thefe Slaves were in number ten
thoufand (fome fay eight thoufand )
and bought from their, Mafters at the
Publick Charge, ‘and made free , that
they might not difhonour the Romant
Militia.


(s) That for the Future, their Soul-
diers might either dy, or conquer, the
Romanes vefufed either to redeem the
Captives atthe publick Charge, or
permit their Redemption by ¢ cir pri-
vate Friends: by which means they
were moft of them cruelly deftroyed
by their Enemies, who forced many of
the chief , and the nearett saan ee
Blood.to fight as Gladiatonrs, and
Paftime to them, while they lulled cach
other. Appian. Hann.


Their Griefs. The Senate, and the People shat”
To meet Him went, feem’d not to. gratulate .


His Safety’: but fad-Parents to require


Their Sons, and Brothers ; or, enflam’d with Ire,
To tear the (onful's Face, appear'd to come? 7
And therefore, with a filent Lifour; Rome
. He, Private, enters, and through Grief contemn’d
That Honour, which the Gods, fo late, condemn’d.
But Fabius, and the Senate doth provide


Speedy Relief, all Sadnefslai‘d afide ,


And ftrait the © Slaves are arm’d:nor doth that Shame,


For common Safety, move them to dis-claim
The Camp. But toreduce th’ 4ineian State,
By any Means, within the Laws of Fate,


It is Decreed, and for the Sacred Tow'r r,


Honour of Freedom, and Imperial Pow‘

Ev’n Servile Hands to Arm. Now, they deveft
Boys of their Garments,and their Shoulders preft
With Arms, to themunknown: ftiff Helmets clofe
Their tender Cheeks, and in the Blood of Foes

They are commanded to grow upto Men. _

But, when ’t was mov'd the Captive Troops agen
Should R anfom’d be at eafie Rates ( for there

Of fuch, that fought it, many thoufands were)

© They to the wondring Libyan left them all.


So much the Pofsibility to fall,


-


Armd, into Bondage, did all ee exceed,
All other Guilt furpafs. Then, ‘twas Diced.


That whofoever fhould Convicted be,


T’ have fled the Fightin fartheft Sicily,


Should ferve, untill the Fo th’ Aufonian Land

Should quite relinquifh. Such then Rome did ftand !
Next whom, Thou, (arthage, had the Fates thought
To change her Manners, mightft,as Chief,have(good


The" End of the Tenth Book.


(ftood.


ae ee


SE EN EE ONS a Fae Me aT, STUB ler ty eee ne yam Deeg Sere eee ae Rang i


Book XI,» | | 295


he 0171008
A oe =


SILTUS ITALICUS
OF


The Second Punick VVar.


Toe ArGuMEnNT. ¢


What People, after Cannx’s Lofs forsake

The Romane Leagues, and part with Libya take.
The Capuans proud Demands at Rome : which She
Contemning, fore'd the MefSengers to flee

With a Repulfe. Strait Capua entertains

The Libyans, which Decius difdains :

His Faith, and Noble Courage: Fie is fent,

In Chains, to Carthage : whither, as be went,

By Storms, upon Cyrenc,he is caft 5

Where refcu'd from the Libyans, at laSt

Efe dies. Withwanton, and luxurious Feafts

Eoofe Capua entertains ber Libyan Guefts.
Amidft their Mirth, the Death of Hannibal
Pactulus Sox confpires. Mago, with all

The Spails of Cannz,is to Carthage fent,

The People’s Acclamations, end Content ,

When he arriv’d, Eda new Supplies demands

Of Men, and Monies: Hanno this with/tands.
In fine, Mago prevails, and all, that He
Requires, the Senate grants by a Decree.


U F now what People to the
Libyan Side, .

And the Sidonian Camp, them-
felves apply’d,

Through Canne’s famous Lofs,

Sy let me unfold.

ls, no Mortals tong will hold


fe caput: tratiturge ferox ante gra fuoram:
Ee Nec Verierem interea  fuagitexoptalhic temp as
E Spargere tela manu mandat faillentianans.


= Ben b
At Decius dum vinda gant neete ociwus igual, > eo;
(Nam sic/tinibalem decet mtravifge catenns i= GE PR Te

ecplura Hirt concefgum;obnu bituratra AN | CA él ne
Necp fete i Petey / ) a <2 Straffordie Lececom Wentworth Burst
Honorate Dornina Dui@ntclneWentporth, Com: Be oy SS y z igh
‘Weatrvorth de Wentrorth, WoodhoufeNen = ey E narcl.Querfi cy, nO ae Incint?

ee. Pariseeds tL Laue) | cum abfervantia DDD.

Ordints Perisccladtts Equite ct. ce OE abu Surima cure byera 1


Their


296


BET re oe a TEN ee ey Wee Oe Rn Nee eee eA


Se Ce ee a SS ee ere Ge


7


‘Book XI.


Srtius ITALICUSs.


Sate ee ee


- a ,


(2) The Samnites, a People inhabi-
ting between Campania, Apulia, and
- Picesunt, had often contended with the
- Romanes,and fometimes had over chem
very memorable Victories ( asat the
Caudine Straits, where they made two
Cee with che whole Army, pa
under the Yoak , thatis, March Man,
by Man, dis-armed, and without their
Belts, under two Spears erected, and a
third lying crofs, like a Gallows, in
token of Bondage ) and, though more
often overthrown by the Romanes, ne-
ver lai’d afide their emulous Hatred of
them, till uccerly fubdued, and ina
manner exturpated, by Syl/a the Ditta-
torr.

(6) The Brats were the firft, chat
revolted to Hannibal, and continued
wich Him, till He left Zraly, and
fome of them accompanied Him into
Africk. They were originally Shep-
heards to the Lxcanians, and, rebelling
againft their Mafters,planted themfelves
in the fartheft part of Jtaly, and be-
came a numerous People. But this De-
fe@ion reduced them to their Priftine
Condition of Servants , their beft Jm-
ployment, ever after, being to carry
Letters,


(c) This part of Jraly was called
Gracia Major, for thatit was fubdued
+ the Greeks, who builtthere feveral
jities, a8 Croton, Arpt, Thurinm,
/ srentum, &c. beginning at Locri,and
- tending its Limits eighty two Miles.


Their Faith. Their Hands now, openly, they ftrive
To the perfidious Libyan to give, |
Too ready in Mis-fortune to defpair.!
Before the reft, the cruel Samnites are
Moft eager, on Occafion, to renew
Their Hate, and long-concealed R age to thew.
Next, the unconftant  Bratians, who, with Shame, ©
(Too late) did afterwards the Fact difclaim.
Perfidious Apulians, next to thefe,
With their ambiguous Arms: then, haung Peace,
The vain Hirpini, who unworthily
Their Faith infring’d. A gen’ral Treachery
(Like the Contagion of fome foul Difeafe }
Through allthe Nations {preads: and now with thefe
Atella, now Calatia (common Fear |
Deprefsing Juftice ) with their Troops appear,
In the Sidonian Camp. ‘Then, with as bold
Inconftancy, Zarentum (that of old
P balanthus built ) the Romane Yoak deny’d :
Her friendly Gates high Croton open’d wide,
And taught the The/pian Nephews, at the Beck
Of Barb’rous Africans, to yield their Neck.
Like Rage poffels'd the Locri, and the Coatt ,
Where Grecia Major © eArgive Walls doth boaft,
And Windings , wath’d by the Ionian Sea. .
Thefe, following the Succes of Libya,
And Fortune, in that Errour, fearfull, fware
To lend their Arms to the Sidonian War.
And, now, the ftubborn Bord’rers on the Po,
C The Cele) ftrive t' encreafe the Romanes Wo
Again .and, mindfull of their antient Hate,
With all their Strength, themfelves affociace.
But, whither is’t more juft, this impious War
To th’ Ceha, or the Boii to refer 7 -


Book XI. Sirius Iraticus
Or rather Gapna's Mladnels; {oto pleale,;.. :.

The Cruel'Nation of. the Senones? 05 fo
And who would think shofe Walls, chat, firlt, did rife
From Dardan Hands., and did, till then, defpife

The Friendthip of a Barb'rous Tyrant, now, os

As fucha Time, fo great a Change fhould fhow 2 |
Bue Luxury, and Eafe, that long had bin :
Nurs‘ in their Brothels ; and, through frequent S in
All Shame, all Modefty confum’d, befide
Infamous Honour, that, alone, rely'd

On. Wealth, with Idlenefs, the City, void
Of Laws, and lazy People, quite deftroy’d.
A\nd.then a cruel Pride provok’d their Fall :
Their Vices want no Aids ; for none, of all


‘Th’ Aufonian People, had a larger Store


Of Gold ¢ fo fulla ‘Sail their Fortune bare ) |
Then they : theirlong-Sleev'd Robes Affyrian Dy: -:
Enrich’d ; they Feaft, with high Regality,
Ev’nin the midft of. Day; foon, as the Sun... 0s
Diffus’d his Light, their Banquetstheybegun;
Their wanton Lives all Stains of Vices bear: =~ GA
Befide, the Senate to the People were. ,
Severe: the,People, through the Senate's Hate.
Incens’d, Seditionstaife; and, with Debate, (while,
Divide their Hearts:,The Head-ftrong Youth, mean-
Their Crimes encreafe. ; arid greater Sins defile.
The Aged. And then fuch, as were of Bale: —
Extraction, and whom an Ignoble Race. - Sei
Defam’d, their Falling:Countréy’s Reins defire "'-
To guide, and to the Chief Comimandafpite: fe
With Slaughter, likewife, ‘twas their Ufe, of old,
T’ exhilarate their Banquets, and behold ey
Dire Spectacles of fuch, as with the Sword. —
Contend, mix’d with the Feaft ; while on the Board, -

| Sf Befmear’d


as :


eae ee


297


Sirius Iravicus.


Book XI.


Belmear'd with Gore, the very Goblets fivell:
Not more with Wine, then Blood of thofé, that fell.
With Cunning, Thele ( thatto the Tyrians He

Their Minds, deprav'd, might turn more eagerly }
The Libyan Prince attempts. Becaufe He knew
Rome ( notwithftanding all that Chance could do)
Would never yield. “T'was eafie to procure a
What Hedefir'd: Paulus Cnotobfeure
For Guilt in this) He Counfels to require
A Share in Government, and to defire, °
That, with a Sociate Conful, he might bear —
Alternate Fafcess fan equal Share

To Him, in Pow’r, and Honour, they deny’d,

Nor to behold two Axes would abide,

He, a Revenger, in their View, would ftand

Of that Repulfe. Therefore a Chofen Band

With Speed was fent, and Virizs ( who the reft

In Eloquence excell'd) himfelfaddreft, —

Chief in the Embafsie. His Bitth, indeed,
,Was mean ; But yet his Fury did exceed

All elfe. Searce what was impioufly defir'd

By th’ frantick People had He told, and fir'd

Their Ears with fwéHing Words, when‘a loud Cry,
From thewhole Counfel rifing, did deny

His Meflage with unanimous Difdain.

Then ev'ry Oneupbraids him, and the Fane,
Through the Contention of their Voices, fhook :
And here the brave Torguatus, with a Look,

Grave as his Grand-fire’s, faid. Doft Thou prefame
C Oh Capua!) fach Meffengersfhouldcome (© .
Within the Walls of Rome? ‘Gainft which to bear —
Their Arms, nor Hannibal, nor Carthage dare,
After their Canne? Hath’t not touch’d your Ear, 5
That, when in the Tarpeian Temple, here,
The


Book XL


Sitius ITALicus, |


Thi Latines proudly urg'd the like Demands: _
Not with a Vote, or Words, bitt furious Hands
They were repuls‘d, and He,who hither brought;
And with proud Language utter'd what they fought,
With fo great Violence, was Headlong thrown, |
Out at the Temple-Gates, that, bruis'd upon
The fatal Rock, hetheredidexpiate;
In View of Fore, his Language, by his Fate ¢
And I, his Off-Spring, ® who that Oratour,
Then, from this Palace of the T hunderer
Expell'd, and (on/ul, with hisnaked Hand,
Defender of the (apitol did ftand , |
This Mad-man, who appears, with threatning Eys,
To view thefe Trophies of ‘Rome's Victories,
And his Fore-Father’s Faétion to purfue. —
Vex'd Fabius feeing; that He fiercer grew ,
In this Difpute, thusinterpofing, faid,
Oh Impudence / Behold that Seat is made
Vacant by Storms of War, and whom of all
YourCrew (I pray) doyouintend to call,
And fubftitute in Noble Paslus Place =
Doth thy Lot, Virins, with the Senate's Grace,
Cite Thee, before all other? Or doth now
The Purple to our Bruti Thee allow
As equal? Gothon Fool, go thither, where
Perfidious Carthage may, for Thee, prepare
Her Fafces. As with Heat he this Expreft,
Impatient ev'n with Sighs, within his Breaft
Longer to keep his Anger ( that thus broke,
Like Thunder, forth} aloud Marcellus {poke.
How dull a Patience (Varro) doth thy Minde
Poffefs? Confounded with this ftormy Winde
Of War, fo much, that, now a Conful, Thow


Thefe mad, vain Dreams, . a toallow* Why


299


(a) This Torguatus (who is com-
mended by the Poet for his Aufterity )
was defcended of the Con/ul A4anlins ,
whom the Remane Militia dreaded for
his overmuch Severity in Command.
He it was, who,when the Zatines (as
now the Capsxans) demanded co have
a Conful of their Nation in Rome, tor-
ced Annins their Ambafladour out of
the Capitol, and (as fome affirm) broke
hisNeck down stairs.


ra A alae en a ss aetna — " ss wate r ee Sel eae te si, EA ey p : : 5 = :
¥ 7 . aT . mo ‘ faa , we ae ee a es ate eal = AE EE


306  Srtaas ‘Traricus. Book XI. Book Xd, Sixtus I[TALICUS.


des rie ; |
Why doft chou:tet,from hence, thefe Hleadlong throw Fiaion, with Truth, did, withthe Fates, declare: | |
Out at the Gates ¢:and make thefe Half-men know — . The Fatal Signal of aBloody War |... |
How great a Pow’r the Confuls have, that be . Was giv’n, and the Campanian Youth, infpir’ d
Gretited by Our Cuftom* And,leeMe With Fury, Arms,, and Hannibal defir'd. . |
Advife (Thou,never-fober Youth! whofe Fall — The People, flocking from all. Parts, invite: | |
Isnigh) fly quickly hence. OurGeneral - The Libyans to their Houfes,and recite
Shall, Arm’d, before your Walls an Anfwer make, What mighty Thingsthe Libyan Prince hath done: .
Such, asis meet. With that, they all forfake How He, like Hercules, had overrun
Their Seats, and, with loud Clamours, prefs upon | The Alps; and, in His Courfe, had pafs'd thofe high
The Capuans, who hafted to be gone; . 7 a Afpiring Rocks, that to the Gods are nigh.
While Virius, vex’d at that Repulfe, lets fall _ Who had,a Conquerour, choak’ dup the Stream
In murmur’d Threats, the Name of Hannibal. . OF Po, with Slaughter: And,how He (the fame
But Fulvins, the Prefages of whofe Minde | Great Conqu’rour ) troubled with e4u/onian Blood
His future Honour at that Time Divin‘d , ’ . The Lydian Lake : and Banks of Lrebia’s Flood
And falling (apua’s Image fore his Eys » 2 Transmitted had, with an Eternal Name,
Appear'd, Replies ; Though, Crown‘d-with ‘Victories, ToFame: How He Fhuminius overcame , 7 |
Thou, Hannibal, His Neck in Chains, to‘Rome  .- And Paulus ¢ Confuls ). whom in Fight He flew. |
Shouldtt bring ; -Yetne're, hereafter, fhalt Thou com, Befide, how He Sagunthus overthrew, .. | ,
Within thefe Sacred! Walls : chen take Thy F fie ye In His firft War. And then Pyrene’s Heights,
cl pray Thee whither Thy fick Thoughts invite. Iberus, and His Father's Stygéan Rites:
At length, thisangry ‘ Anfwer of the vext. ae They all extoll, and th’ War, which long before |
Senate they bore away, with ‘Fhreatning mixt. .. 1 : He, in His Childehood, atthe Altar fwore. .
Isit thy Will, Great ove, thas Fates fhould Y. And, then, fo many Gen’rals overthrown f
Still Buried in fo great Obfcurity$ In Fight ; fo many flain, that He, alone, |
An Age mor¢ happy fhall hereaftercomé, + | By all the Weapons of the Gods did ftand |
When a Campanian Conful Pious ‘Rome xe Untouch’d, in Battel. While He did command, |
Shall gladly entertain, and {hall afford... ioe With fuch a Perfon therefore, they fhould joyn |
Secure thofé Fa/ces, of Her own Accord,. : Their Hands, and with Him, in a League,combine : |
( The firk of Foreiners, that had ‘TO valiant © Nephews, that were long deny'd .. But, ifthat Bloodlefs People’s high Difdain, |
mer Babs, born ike Teron Through Atths, & Warebut of their Grand fire’ 5 Pride Vain Contumacy, and that Citie’s Reign, |
many otters ere adrnttedard song This fhalla lafting Punifhmentrenmaing ooh! That equal Laws, and Fafces had deny’d, |
ayaa Cunea “Aecciow Ame fhall as foon the Suffrage entertain: :: ae fe ( Asto their Servants ) Capua would abide : | |
Onan. cues bene 3 OF. Carthage; as of Capea. This: meds ff 33 Varro was then to be preferr'd, that He, . P |
When Pirivs, intermixing cunningly": e Conful, in Purple, might more Glorious flee. | !


|

Fi ack : @ T his |
|

|


(e) The firft of Foreiners, that had
the Honour of being Confxl, was Cor-
nelins Balbus, born inthe Territories
ofthe Carthaginians . But, after him ,
many others were admitted:and among
them Z. Falvins, aT ufculane, immedi-
ately after his Countrey had rebelled a-
gainft Rome, and he wasthe Anceftour
of that Falvins, who reduced Capua to
their Obedience. See infra, Book 13.


oe aiaieus. | Book XJ,


Why dott chou:net,from hence,thefe Headlong throw
Outat the Gates 2 and make thefe Half-men know
How great a Pow’r the Confals have,that be _
Creited by Our Cuftom * And, let Me |
Advife ( Thou,never- fober Youth ! whofe Fall
Isnigh) fly quickly hence. OurGeneral —
Shall, Arm’d, before your Walls an Anfwer make,
Such, asis meet. With that, they all forfake
Their Seats, and, with loud Clamours, prefs upon
The Capuans, who hafted to be gone;
While Virius, vex’dat that Repulfe, lets fall -
In murmur'd Threats, the Name of Hannibal.
But Fulvins, the Prefagesof whofe Minde
His fature Honour at that Time Divin'd ,
And falling Capua’s Image ‘fore his Eys
Appear'd, Replies ; Though, Crown‘d with :-W ictories,
Thou, Hannibal, His Neck in Chains, to Keme
Shouldtt bring; Yet ne’re, hereafter, fhale Thou come
Within thefe Sacred Walls : chen take Thy Flight \
cl pray Thee) whither Thy fick Thoughts invite.
At length, thisangry Ainfwer of the vext. 5
Senate they bore away, with Threatning mixt. 7. 1°
Isit thy Will, Great ove, that Fates ould ys
Still Buried in fo great Obfcurity
An Age more happy fhall hereafter come ,
When a Campanian Conful Pious ‘Rome
Shall gladly entertain, and fhall afford ..
Secure thofe Fafces, of Her own Reco: |
To valiant © Nephews, that were long deny’d . see
Through Arms, & Warbut of their Graig lie) s Pride
This fhalla lafting Punifhment remain..": ;
‘Rome fhall as foon the Suffrage entertain: . econ
OF. Carthage; as of Capua. This Reply, oy ‘3


When Prins, intermixing cunningly


Fi i ea


Book XI. SiLius Iraxricus,


Fiction with (Eruth, did, with the Fates, declare:
The Fatal Signal of aBloody War... .

Was giv'n, and the Campanian Youth, infpir'd

With Fury, Arms,. and Hannibal defir'd.

The People, flocking from all Parts, invite:

The Libyans to their Houfes, and recite

What mighty Thingsthe Libyan Prince hath done:
How He, like Hercules, had over-run

The Alps ; and, in His Courfe, had pafs’d thofe high
Afpiring Rocks, that to the Gods are nigh.

Who had, a Conquerour, choak’d up the Stream
Of Po, with Slaughter: And, how He (the fame
Great Conqurour ) troubled with efu/onian Blood
The Lydian Lake : and Banks of Trebia’s Flood
Transmitted had, with an Eternal Name,

To Fame: How He Flaminius overcame ,

And Paulus ¢ Confuls) whom in Fight He flew.
Befide, how He Sagunthus overthrew, . |

In His firt War. And then Pyrene’s Heights,
Iberus, and His Father's Stygian Rites:

They all extoll, and th’ War, which long before
He, in His Childehood, atthe Altar fwore. .

And, then, fo many Gen'rals overthrown

In Fight , fo many flain, that He, alone,

By all the Weapons of the Gods did ftand
Untouch’d, in Battel. While He did command,
With fuch a Perfon therefore, they fhould joyn
Their Hands, and with Him, in a League,combine :
But, ifthat Bloodlefs People’shigh Difdain,
Vain Contumacy, and that Citie’s Reign,
That equal Laws, and Fafces had deny’d,

( Asto their Servants ) Capua would abide :
Varro was then to be preferr'd, that He,
Conful, in Purple, might more Glorious flee.


This


(301


vA


Sirrus ITALicus, Book XI.


Thus boafting, they, by Lot, choice Men prepare
To fend, that with the Tyrians might {wear
ALeague: but Decius, then, the foleRenown —
OF Capua, in his Breaft referv'd, alone,
Unconquer'd Gourage : and, receiv'dinto
The Midftofthe Aflembly ( for He knew
He might not long delay ) Why do ye make ©


Such Hafte, dear Countreymen (faidHe) to break-


Our Father’s Laws? And,thus, to entertain
Into your Families that guilty Man,

For breaking of the League, condemned by
The Altars? How is thus all Memory

Of Juttice loft? “Tis Noble, ftill in great
Affairs, with private Men, or with a State,
Tokeep Faith in Diftrefs. Time doth invite

Us now, for the Rutulians to fight:

Now fhould our Armies move, our Enfigns fly,
While their State totters,and a Remedy:

Their Wounds require. That Kindnefs is, alone,
That's offer'd, when Profperity is done,

And that gives Aid, where Fortune is declin’d.
Fortis no Honour toa gallant Minde, _

To hug the Fortunate. Then hearken now
ToMe, their Souls like to the Gods I know,
And Hearts ftill greater, then their greatett Ills.
Believe Me, Them nor J brafimenus fills,

Canna, nor Paulus Memorable Fate :


Ev'n Thefe are they, that with their Arms did beat


Baok XI, Sitius Irarrcus,


~


A Trojan, who frosa Father Capys came, '

To whom he left his Sacred R ites, and Name

From Fove, of great Iulus Kia, thall I |

Among thefe Half-men ( Nafamonians ) ly?
Or ‘mong the barb'reus Garamantians (which,

In Grinning, falvage Beafts refemble } pitch

My Tent; mix'd with Adarmarick Troopers? Or
ShallI- endure a General, that for

The League, and Juftice takes his Sword? and Praife


‘From Blood alone unto Himfelf doth raife ?


No; Right, and Wrong, your Decius does not mix
With fuch Indifference, that he fhould fix
On fuchaChoice: youwith no Good {fo great
Hath cruel Nature Arm’d, as with the Gate
OF Death ; which, alwaies-open, gives you Pow'r
To leave a tedious Life, at any Hour.

Thus, to their Ears averfe, while Decius fpent
His Breath in Vain, a chofen Regiment
Made League with Hannibal : and, ftrait,a Band
Of light Autololes, with Noife, at Hand
Appear’d, fent by the General before,
While He, witha great Body, Marcheth o’re
The Plains with Speed; and Decius agen
Exclaims,Come;now’s the Time(dear Countreymen)
The Hour’s arriv'd, while, following Me, you may
Performaa Action, worthy Capua.
Now fet Us all thofe Barb’rous Troop s deftroy ;
Let ev'ry one ftrive foly to enjoy


That Honour ; if the Fo approach, the Gate

_Obftrue with-Carcafes, and expiate

This Errour with your Swords, Such Blood alone

Can purge your guilty Souls from what is done.

Whilethis Cin Vain )zoall unpleafant, He
Exprefs'd, inform’d of thisSeverity, :

ATrgan, With


(f) The Samnites, eee, vex- (f) The Fo, fix’don your Walls, and Capua


ing the Capnans by their Incurfions

into their Borders, and at length forti- = ,

fying he Hill Tifare, and defearing From the praud Samnites re{cu'd:Thefe are they,
their Army, inthe adjacent Plain, the ie a2
Capnans with Tears defired Aidofthe Who gave you Laws, who all your Fears expell'd,
Romanes,who fent two under the Con- . al we

du of theirtwo Confids, Valeria And which the Sidicinian Army quell'd.


Corvinus, and Cornelins Goffus , who


a ea hola er » and ‘Then what Allies, through Malice, do you fly?
Or, rather, whom d' yeentertain ? Shall J,


404,


Sitius Jt anicus. | Book XI.


With an Hearcfull of Rage; the Libyan ‘ftands ©
Before the Walls,and, inftantly, Commands:

The Deputies intothe Camp'ts fend i PE es
For, Decius, whom rough Valour did‘commend, ~--
And a Breaft arm’‘d with Faith: jaSoulindin‘d ee
To Juftice , and then Capusa Minde Wag

More great; who, with undaunted Courage, ak
Thofe menacing Commands : and, with a Look
Moft fierce, asbitter Words returns again.

The Libyan Him, fo full of brave Difdain,

Amidft fo many Arms, and Enfigns, thus

Aloud upbraids: After Flaminius,

And after Paulus, We are chalieng’d ! See!

Alafs! mad Decius would contend with Me, :

To giveaFame, and HonourtohisFall! =:
But hence, my Souldiers, quickly: march; with all te
Your Enfigns, and, in Spight of Him, to: ‘Me. .


Let the Campanian City open’dbe. — ae
What new Wars He can raifel'de, gladly, gry--
‘Gainft Us, to whom the e4 Ips did openly; «
And Rocks, that ftrike at Heav’n, o’re which a God,
Alone (before Impregnable}! had trod. =


With that He, angry, bluth’d, and from His Eyes ae
Through Fury kindled, fudden Flamesarifej ::::.02..


And, foaming at his Mouth, deep Sighs he draws,

That break, in dreadfull Murmurs, from his Jaws.
By the whole Senate thus attended, He *

The City enters ; and, his Face.to fee |

The People flocking round;He venteth all

The Storms of his dire Rage, and burning Gall

While the approaching Dangers more.enflame:. <:..

Brave Decius Minde, who faw:the Inftant came

Of Time, wherein He wasto vanquith al} 7

The Praife ofan Unconquer'd General...)


Book XI. - Sirus Iratreus.


Him neither Flight, nor Barricado’d Doors
Conceal. But Free, as if no Libyan Pow'rs,
No Hannibal, were then, within the Town,
He, with a Fearlefs Look, walks up, and down ;
When ftrait, with cruel Arms, a furious Band
Seis'd Him, and forc’d Him at the Feet to ftand
Of Hannibal ; who, on a lofty Throne,
A Conqu’rour fate, and, witha Thundring Tone,
This bitter Language vents. Doft Thou prefume,
Alone, to under-prop declining Rome,
And rales Her from Ruin Thou Fool, fay ;
Which of the Gods from Me hall take away
So great Enjoyments * Or, was I, to be
Subdu'd,referv’d (dull Decius} to Thee ?
Weak Decius !. To whom no Woman, born
In eAgenorean Carthage, but would {corn
To Yield. ButHim (for why fuch high Difdains
Should We endure *) Fait in deferved Chains
(My Souldiers}) binde. Scarée He an End had made
Of Railing; when flout Dectus they invade,
And binde, with Chains, His Hands upon His eee
Then, as a Lyon, on the lofry Neck
Of a young Bull, amidft the Herd, doth leap ,
And murmuring with Rage, Victorious, deep
Into his trembling Flefh his Claws hath preft,
There hanging, feeds upon the groaning Beaft :
So Decias raging, while His Chains they binde,
Come fpeedily (for fuch We onght to finde:
Thy Entrance Hannibal) thefe Chains, the Prize
Of this unhappy League, clofe binde, :.¢ He cries)
So Decius may a Worthy Vittime fall :
For ‘tisnot fit, that Thou, who placett all
Delight in Humane Blood, fhouldft Sacrifice ©
Bulls ‘to the Gods. Let (apua, in this, -

, ¥-* Behold


a ey ee
306 Strius Iraticus.  ~ Book XI.


Behold thy Right-Hand ; {ee thy League : as yet

The Court Thou haft not enter'd, nor haftfer

Thy Foot with in the Temples ; but Wefee —

The Prifon’s open’d by the Cruelty |

Of Thy Commands. Goon, and give Encreafe

To Thy Beginnings, by fuch Ads, as thefe :

Fame hall to Me, when Dead, hereafter tell ,

That Hannibal in Capua’s Ruins fell.

. But, here, they ftop'd His Speech, and o’re His Head,

m2 ee ace To blinde His Eys, a“? Fatal Robe was {pread,
woe bis Fea cubich war done by And ftrait He ‘sdrage’d away, in View ofall


throwing a Cloth over it) binde him . é : .
to the curfed Tree, &c. which was the His Friends sand then Triumphing Hannibal,


Judgement given againtt Horatins, for
balling King Pale ders: With a more quiet Minde, and calmer Look,
Goeson; and, viewing all.about Him, took
Survey ofall the Buildings in the Town,
And Temples, and,what’s worthy to. be known
% Enquires ; Who built the Walls; What Numbersare
In Arms ; How Great their Freafure.was for War:
-What was their Strength of Horfe ; How great withall
Their Infantry *-'To Him their Arcenal ig
rib fh one near Cogent Fre They fhew, and  Stellate F telds with Store of Corn.
ine lel Siding, Thi The Day now Phebus to his Bounds had born, - |
that ita great Relief the Com With weary Steeds, and He/p'rus, by Degrees ;
Gy conan at = Deen Obfcur'd his Chariot, hafting to the Seas: . |
Whenthey (as Cuftom was) their Feafts prepare,
And, through the City; crown with Royal Fare _.
Their ftately Tables. Ofthe Honour He,
And Entertainment of a Deity,
Thought worthy, fits aloft upon a Bed
Of Purple ; that far off its Rays doth {pread.
Nor wasthe Troop of Servants fingle ; fome \: .: «
Serve inthe Meat; others burn rich Perfume; -.’
The fev’ral Difhesfome, inOrder, joyn;.. iets
Some ferve in Drinke, and Antique Goblets fhine,:! is


Book X11, Sixtus Ivaxricus. ~ 3097


_ OF makive Geld, upon the Tables; Night,


By nuni‘rous Tapers Flames, is putto Flights. -
With Noife of thofe, that Up, and. Down, do go
The high-Roof’d Palace:rings. A Stranger to
Such lautious Banquets, with a wondring Eye,
The unknownFace of Stately Luxury : ;
The Torian Souldier views: with Silence (*) He: (*) Hannibal.
Feeds on, and blamies {uch Prodigality”
In Banqueting ;. and, that fuch Troops of Guefts
Were entertain’d, at their delicious Feafts.
But when, at Length, His Hunger was allay’d,


_ And Hisrough Mind, with Wine,more Frolick made ,
~ When Mirth upon His fmoother Brow did reft,


And weightier Cares were banifh’d from His Breatt ;
Gmean 7 euthras his Euboick Lyre :
Tun’d, and His Ears, duil’d, with the Trumpet’s Dire


Alarms, in War, with pleafant Eyrs delights.


Now ove he fings, and his ftoln Loves recites :

Eleétra’s Bed (of Atlas.Race was She)

From whence fprung Dardanus ; a Progeny

Worthy the Gods: how, to Immortal Foye

Thence Erifthonius did a Nephew prove:

Whence Tres, whence I/us came, and, in a long

Defcent, e4 faracus: at Length, He fung

Capys, who equal was in Deeds, and Fame,

To All, and’gave unto thofe Walls their; Name.

The (Carthaginians, and (ampanians, all

Applaud his Lays : and, firft, the General,

With all due Rites, a Goblet Crown’d with Wine

Paysto the Honour of the Pow’rs Divine ;

The Reft Him follow, and, inftructed by |

Their Cuftom, Bacchus Juice flows lib’rally

Upon the Boards, and fires their {welling Veins..
And, now, the Zyrians having giv'n the Reins


Tt2 To


to


Pr


508


Sizius It ALICUS. Book Xt.


To Mirth, a Walzant Soul, enh wi Win Mf,


C For willingly, brave Youth, Thy sigs ie oe


Worthy all Memory, [le not: pals. by: . an ‘f :


(i) This yous Man, called Perol/a,
wasthe Son of Pallulus (or Pacurvi-
us) Calavins, who, though he had
marryed the Daughter of Appins
Claudius , and had likewife given his
own Daughter i in Marriage to Livins,
was the Chief of the Faction , that
caufed the Capwans to revolt to Han-
nibal, Liv. lib.23.


1) Silence; nor deferved Fame deny: . Riga


To Thy ‘Anema, which, though Lmnperfedt yet na


Were cleareft Demetiftrattons of aGreat, _.

And Noble Courage) fromall Venom free

Of Drink, the Honour ponder'd, filencly .
Within his Breaft, of a Sidonian Fight, .

And Death, and, tharthis Sacred Motion might .
The rather Bed ache’ d, © Paéulas Son .
Condemun’‘d thofe Arts His Father had begun. -
He, clofely following behinde HisSire, =.
Who, with the Feaft opprefs'd, did, Slow, retire
From the throng'd Palace, when He found a Time
To open what He thought, and tell co Flim

His new Defign ; and when the Place was free
Behinde Them, fromthe Palace: Hear ( {aid He 7
My Refolution, worthy (apua,

And Us, (with that,turning His Gown away,
He fhew'd His Armed Side) Inowintend, -
With this My Swerd, this cruel War to end,
And bear the Lebyan's Head to Fove: this Sword
Shall ratifie this Infamous Accord,

Made fuch by His Deceits ; bue, if Your Age
Cannot, in fo great Spectacles, engage,

Or, tyr'd with greater Deeds, now fearfull be,

You may fecurely Home retire, and Me
Leave tomy Thoughts. Thou Hannibal doft prize
As Chief, and to the Gods doft equalize :
But how much Greater, thena Lityan Name,

Will Thy Sen be 2 With that a Dreadfull Flame
Seem’'d from His Mouth to iffue,and the Man:
Already in his Mindethe War began.


- Bue


"Bushs OK Maw, who, witha deubled Ee,
The Weightnf. a:Defign, fe. greed; did bean,” :
Trembling, before Hiestell, upon she: Place. say
And, as He. did, with Wif les, aftimbrace -

His Feerj Deat Son, by what remains to. Me
Of Life, and bya Father's Rights ( faid =)
Andby thy Safety (dearer far, then: mine
ToMe) defifst..¢ Tpray ) from this Defi ign;


~ Let me not fee Our Hofpitality =. oF.


With Murther ftain’d, nor Friendly Cups to be id
Fill'd up with Blood, and Tables overthrown -


_ In Fury of the Fight. CanftThovalone: ~~


Him, whom nor Armies, Walls, nor Cities dare
Wicthftand, when He comes near, and ev'ry where


~ -Ejecteth Rays, like Lightning ¢ Him, who throws — -


Something like Thunder from His Head, oppofe? --
If, when thy Sword is {py’d, that Dreadfull Voice
He fhould caft forth, by which He oft deftroys
Whole Squadrons in the Field? You but deceive
Yourfelf; if Him, thus Feafting, you believe
Disarm’d. Gain’d by foma ny Slaughters, by
Somany Wars, Eternal Majefty

The Gen'ral Arms. If youapproach Him, then,
That Canne, Trebia, and dire T brafimen,

And Paulusmighty Shade before Thee ftands,
Thou wilt admire; Will His Companions Hands, ..-
Or thofe about His Perfon, in fo great

A Danger Idle be * . I Thee intreat


Forbear , nor wifh Superiority


‘Bove Him, o’re whom Thou cantft not Viour be.
Do not thofe Fatal Chains, that late did binde
Decius, inftruat Thee to compofe Thy Minde ¢
Thus talking, when He faw the Youth to be
Inflam’d with Love of GreaterFame, and free |


From


Book XI. Srrius Iraticus, 7m 311


Boo k Xi


310 Sturus ITaLicus, |


Relerv’d, at his Return, a Sacrifice
_ Tohis flow Rage, had not the Deities,
Pittying his undeferved Punifhment,


From Fear :-I nothing more:'¢ faid He Y ‘requeets :
Come let’ erste with Spéed;.unto thé Feat: °°" |
Thou canft not pierce the Breafts of all ‘that Ring


Of Tyrian Youth, that now. defénd the. Kings yok
3 )The ship, deiven b ‘
Try in this Throat Thy Hand ; for firft Thy Blade“ * Here ® Ptolemy's Pelléan Pow't the Man : tthe Port of yr, {then ander
: ir di tolomy, Ki ecins
CIf Thou intend’ft the: Libyainto invade}>"'2 ad Refcu'd from their dire Menaces, that than to the Kings Stee be Santina


: ; 7 which obliged his Keepers to ache him
His Keepers were, and freed his Neck from Chains ¢ 0 Alexandriato Prlumy , who,


_ Muft through My Bowels pierce. My tardy: Age”


(+) Havnibal.


Contemn.not Thou ; My BadyT'le’ ‘efigage
Againtt Thee, and that Sword, which cannot be-
Extorted now, I, by My Death, from Thee
Will force. With that He wept, and Hannibal,
By Heav'ns great Care, referved was to fall


By Scipio's Arms. Nor then did Confcious Fate ~~
_ Allow, a forein Hand fhould perpetrate
“An Act fo Great. But, of what Praife was He


Depriv‘d, whofe Glorious Magnanimity,
Worthy to Act in Deeds moft famous, won:


So much Renown, for what He would have done é


Then, both together, to the Feaft they went
Again,and clear'd their Brows from Difcontent,


Till Sleep diffolv’d their Banquet, and their Mirth. ’°


But, as the next bright Morning to the Earth

The fiery Steeds of Phaéthon did raife,

His Chariot on the Surfaee of the Sens
Reflecting ; fam’d efmilcar's Active (*) Son
Already on His great Affairs begun

To think. Fierce Mago’s Order'dto repair

To €arthage, to the Senate to Declare
"What Hannibal had done. With Him the Prey,


. And Captivated Men, are fent away,


And Spoils, that to the Gods Devoted are,
A\s Sacrifices of a profp’rous War.

The next Part of HisCare wasto convey
Brave Decius ( Alafs! }) to Libya,


Referv'd,


; : derftanding the Injuftice of his Cape:
But the fame Land, that fav'd his fhort Remains Vity, relealed him, Liv. tib.23,


Of Lifé, from Slavery, foon after gave »
His Bones, inviolate, a quiet Grave.

In the mean Time, the P apbian Goddels findes
The wifh’d-for Hour, t’ involve the Libyans Mindes


_ Infecret Ruin, through Profperity ,


And their infulting Hearts, by Luxury ,

Totame; and, therefore, She her Sons commands,
Enticing Darts to {catter from their Hands

Abroad, and filent Flames to fend into
Their Breafts. Then, {miling on the wanton Crew,
Now let proud Zuno Us defpife ‘¢ faid She } ee
(And ‘tis no Wonder, for now What are We? )
Let Her go on, driv’n with propitious Gales.

She with her Hands, She with her Arms prevails: ~
We mall Shafts onely, fromaChildith Bow, i
Expell, and from Our Wounds no Blood doth flow. :
But, now, be doing ; now’s your Time: take Aim —
(My Sons) and,-withyourfilent Darts, enflame —
The Tyrian Youths ; that Army, which nor Fire,
Nor Sword, nor Mars, with flackeft Reins, can tire ;
With ftore of Wine, Embraces, and by Sleep,

Mutt be fubdu'd. Into His Bowelsdeep -
Let Hannibal imbibed Pleafures drink. . *
Toly on painted Beds, let Him not think

It Shame, and with Afyrian Sweets his Hair °
Perfume; let Him, that, in Hybernal Air,
Oe. Boafted,


|
|
|
The Youth, by Storms, to (*) Bartus City aie (4) Cyrene: . 3 _
|


Sg i i ap a ie
SiEtus ITALICUS. Book XI.


Boatted, to lengthen eut His Sleeps, delight
In Houfes, rather, to confume the Night:
Andlet Him Learn to give the Idle Day »


_ To Bacchus; and, when cloy'd with Feafts, He may -


Be charm’d Sah Mufick,and Luxurious Nights
Or fleeping {pend, or waking in Our Rites:
This Venus ; which the wanton ’Freops commend,


And ftrait, ae Heav'n, with Snowy Wings defcend:


The Libyan Y ouths, foon, feel their fiery Darts,

And the difcharged Shafts inflame their Hearts.
Now Bacchus Gifts, and Banquets they defire,

And warbling Songs to the Piérian Lyre.

Now through the Plains no fweating Courfer flies ;
No Lance, thrown through the Air, doth exercife
Their naked. Arms : in gentle Baths to reft,

Their lazy Limbs they cherifh, and, oppreft _
With miferable Wealth, rough Valour ’s gone :
The General Himfelf, but breath'd upon

By flattering Defire, beginste Feat.

Anew; and, oft invised, 's made a Guelt.

And, by Degiees degenerate ( His Minde, -
Corrupted by thofe fecret Shafts) declind. _.

His Countrie’s Arts, With equal Honour, all

Now Capua another Countrey call , e
Another (arthage.. Their Affections, free

Before, to greedy Vice, through Vidory , 2
Now yield. Nor dethe.Capuans Meafurekeep |

In Luxury; but,drown’d in Riot, heap
Luft upon Luft, and in their Feafts, between


Each Courle, add Sports, and often change the Scene.


So ‘bout the Lotos, on Lagean Banks,
The Phrygian Minftrels, with lafcivious Pranks,
Spartan Canopus fill. Aad, firft, their Ears.


| With his {weet Eyrs . € while Hannibal appears —
Extreamly


Book XI. Sitius Iraticus. 313


Extremely pleas'd ). fam’d Teathras, for his Skill
Moft eminent, Delights with Voice, and Quill ;
And, when he faw the Libyan Prince admire .
The warbling Nerves, then the Aénian Lyre,
With Praife, he celebrates ; and,as he fung,
His well-tiin'd-Harp ouinine with his Tongue,
The Moufick that of dying Swans exceeds,
And thofe fweet Lays’mong many ( for the Deeds
Ofantient Heroes beft the Ear affect ).
Moft pleafant for the Banquet doth felect.
Once by the Avgive People ¢ ftrange to tell! )
A Lute was heard, that did the Rocks compell
To follow, and the flying Stonesto ftand,
Fix'd into Walls. Touch’d by e4mphion’s Hand,
This rais'd the 7 heban Walls ; while to the Skies
Fiints, of themfelves, in Hens: congefted, rife -
T’ enchanted Tow’rs. Another by his Lays —
The Phoce tam’d, becalm’d the raging Seas,
And Protheus drew through all his Shapes, and bore
eArion, ona Dolphin’s Back, to Shore.
But that, whofe Sound, in the Pelzack Cave,
A Bridle to the Minds of Heroes gave, |
And great Achilles Thoughts, the © Centaurelov'd, 7 (0) The Gentare Clivn, Tuo to
And when, upon the Strings, his Finger mov'd, aad |
Hell’s, or the Ocean’s Fury ‘twould ‘allay.


_ He (haos, and the World, once wanting Day,


Or Light a ftarlels Lump; and then how God

Diffus'd the Waters of the Deep abroad,

And bound the Globe of Earth amidft the Frame,

How high Olympus to the Gods became,

By his appointment, a Secure Abode,

And chafter Age of Father Saturne fhew'd.

But thofe {weet Nerves, by Orpheus touch’d, to whom

The Gods, and Shades below, did liftning come,
 Uu Their


314


Sitius Iraticus. Book XI.


(m) The Stone, which Si/yphus rolls
in Hell.


Their Quill emerited,.new fhine among

The brighteft Stars. His Mother his {weet Song,
A\dmir'd, and her Aénian Sifters too ;

His Mufick the Pangean Hills sare.


Hemus, and fartheft Thrace, Beafts,, with their Woods,


Him follow, and the Mountains with their Floods ;


Unmindefull of their Nefts, Flight lai‘dafide, _
Birds, Captiv’d,in th’ unfhaken Air abide.
And, when the Pega/ean Ship ( before


The Sons of Earth were skill'd beyond the Shore )


Refus‘d the Sea to enter, by His Song,

Entic'd up to the Poop, the Waters throng.
He thofe pale Kingdoms, whither Ghofts retire,
And Acheron, that with Eternal F ire,

And Flames, ftill Ecchoes, by His Lays alone
Subdurd, and fix’d the ever-rolling (»)Stone.


Thus Teathras, with His The/pian Lays their Hearts,


Hard’ned in' War, to fofter Eafe diverts.

But, in themean time, with propitious Gales,
eM ago unto the Coaft of Libya fails, ,
And the defired Port, with Lawrel bound, .
The Veflel enters, asin Triumph, Crown’d


With captive Arms: the lofty Prow difplaies


A Luftre over all the Neighb'ring Seas :
The Seamen in the Road the Ecchoing Shores
With Clamours fill, and, as they tugg their Oars


Againft their Breafts, rais'd by their num’rous Blows,


The Foam o’reall the broken Ovean flows :

To catch their Joys, the eager People prefs
Into the Waves, and, proud of the Succefs,
With great Applaufe, and Emulation, all
Their Welcome celebrate. The General

Is with the Gods compar'd : Him, ev'ry where,
Matrons,and Nephews, (that inftructed are


To


Book XE Sirius Iraticus.


315


To Honour Him), commend; by Young, and Old.

The Senate, andthe People, He's extali'd ; is

And likewifle,by flain Heifers .thoughe to = fee

Worthy the Hanoyr ofa. Deuy. ies
Into His Countrey thus proud Adago came, ar

And Gates, triumphing m His Brother's Fame,

Enter'd : the Senate to their Place refare,

And, witha full Convention, throng the Court:

There ( asanantientCuftom did enjoyn )

All Veneration to the Pow’rs Divine,

And the Aflembly, pay'd; I bring (faid He)

News of that broken Force, which Izaly

Againft Us usd, and of that War, wherein

Your Mago no mean Part of Toil hath bin; (crownd.

And, when We fought, the Gods Our Withes

There is a Place, from Diomed Renown’d,

Poffefs'd of old by Daanus, the moift Grounds

Their Aufidus with rapid Streams farrounds,

And,through thePlains o’reflowing, cuts his uy

With Speed into the eA driatick Sea,

Where falling with great Noife, he beats again

The yielding Billows back into the Main :

Here Varro, and (a Name of Honour held

Among the Latines) Paulus, took the Field,

Before the Day had chac’d away the Night,

And kindled with their fhining Arms the Light

Of the then rifing Morn. Deefire, ¢ engage

Enflam’d My Brother, and with equal Rage

Our Enfigns haften on: Earth trembles, ftrook

With Horrour ; high Olympus, groaning, fhook :

And here the General (then whom the Earth

Unto a Greater never yet gave Birth)

In Slaughter hid the River, and the Field;

And, as He furious charg’d (this I beheld )

Uu2


Ev'n


/


316 Siztus Iratrcus. — Book XI.


Evin with the'very Noife, that Hecame on,“

Scatter'd, through all the Plains, to Him alone’

All Italy gave Way : ev'nI beheld;’ ee

When Coward Varro balely fled the Field, 1 said

And threw his Arms away: brave Paulus too

I faw, when ftanding o’re his Friend, and through ~

His Body pierc’d, with Darts, at length He fell.

zates,and thofe Servile Leagues,that tell

Our former Infamy, that Glorious Day

With Streams of Romane Blood hath wafh’d vey:

If fuch another Day Wellive to fee ;

Then Carthage, furely, Thou the Head fhalt Be

Of ev'ry Nation, and fhalt be ador'd

By all the World ! Thefe Trophies fhall Record

The Slaughter; which, a Badg of Honour, there, _

On their Left Handsthe Nobleft Perfons wear.

With that poursforth ¢they wondring to behold)
(x) Ringsamong the Rements, were () AN mighty Heap of fhining Rings of Gold,


peculiar to their Knights to wear


eae his Battel
ae Te bee tet ts turiea, And ratifiesHis Words: and then again


- and thirty of that Order: and, by the


Confent of many Auelowrs . thet Affumes His Speech ; What then doth now remain,
ings filled three Bufhels. B wo :
But, that (faidHe) fromits Foundation turn’d,


‘Rome, with the Ground, fhould levell’d be, and burn’d £


Let Us endeavour this, and now repair

Our Troops, that by fo many Dangers are
Exhaufted. Let the Treafures open’d be,

With greateft Freedom, to fuch Hands,as We
Have gain’din War. OurElephants (a Sight
Of Terrour to the Romanes) now are quite
Decay’d, andall Provifions grow low.

As this He mention’d, with an angry Brow , —
He turn'dto Hanno, (whom the rifing Fame
O'th’ General did long ago enflame


With bitter Thoughts) Now we have giv’n (faid He)


Proof of our Walour,and Defi igns to Thee.


Is


Book XI. Sitius Ira ticus. 317


Is it now fit, that Ia Latine Swain

Should ferve? Or mult We Hannibal again
Deliverup? Unhappy Wretch! forbear

Thy Pois'nous Envy, and Thy Thoughts, that are
Swell’d high with Stygian Gall. -Behold / that Hand
( At Length Crown’d with fo many Trophies, and .
So many Titles) ev’nthat Hand, which Thou
Wouldtt have giv’n up to Romane Tortures, now,
Their Shores, Lakes Rivers, & their Fields with Blood
Hath fill'd. Thus Mago, while the Senate ftood
Inclin’d to favour Him in what He fpoke.

But Hanno, whom both Envy did provoke,

And Anger, thus replies: I not, acall,
Admire the railing Language, now let fall
By thatrath, foolifh Boy. HisInnate Pride, —

And Brother's Spirit may be foon defcri‘d

In Him, and the vain Venom of His Tongue :

But, left You (hould think Me fo chang’d, among
His Vanities, as to defift, Ifay ;

That now’s the very Time, that We fhould pray
Their Peace, and this deftruaiive War forbear :
And I befeech You to confider here

What ‘tis He brings; (there ’s nothing elfe befide
Left co Your Cenfure) ‘tis, that We provide
Arms, Ships, Men, Mony, Elephants, with Stere
Of Corn, If Conquer’d, We could give no more,
We have with Trojan Blood, already, cloy’d
Rutulian Plains, and Italie ‘s deftroy'd :

Now then (good Conquerour ! } let's lay afide
Our Cares, and in Our Countrey f{afe abide ;

Let not Our Families, that oft have been

Made empty, be exhaufted now agen

By the Expentes of a wattfull War.

And, now, I’me fure, the fatal Day’s not far


Remov'd


es


318


Sizius IraLicus. Book XI.


Remov'd (I with, that my Prefagemay be -.
Falfe, and my Minde witha vain Augary
Deluded ) but Their furiousHeartskknow,:...


And fee the fature Anger that will grow


From what they {uffer; And, formy Part, I

Ev’ (anna dread. For lay Your Enfigns by,
Try what isto be done: demand a Peace ;

“Twill not be giv'n. Our Ruins will encreale -
From what they feel and they would fooner yteld
To League with Us; if they had won the Field, ©
Then now, when overcome: But Thou, who doft,
With {uch proud Language, fo Great Actions boalt,
And, with fuch {welling Noife, invad'ft the Ears
O’'th Ignorant, Fhy Brother, ¢ who appears
Equal to Mars in Arms, then whom the Earth
Unto a Greater never yet gave Birth,


For War ) Why hath not Fle (1 pray thee fay )


Unto the Walls of Rome yet March’d away ?
We Children, not yet fitthe Weight to bear
Of Arms, may, from their Mothers, force to War,
And Rigg a thoufand Shipsat His Command,
And feek for Elephants through all Our Land ;
That Hannibal, thus arm‘d, His Empire may
Prolong, and Reign unto His dying Day.
But You, my deareft Countrey-men ( for Us
Wo hidden Dangers compafs} donot thus
Spoil Your dear Families ; but moderate
The Arms, and Wealth of fuch, asin the State
Have Pow’r; let Peace, that is the Beft of things
To Mortals known ; Peace, that more Honour brings,
Then Myriads of Triumphs ; Peace, that can
Our common Safety keep, and make This Man
Equal to That : into Our Countrey be
At Length recall’d, and let the Infamy, -
. And


Book XI, Sitius Iraticus.


And Name of Treachery be banifh’d from

Thy Walls (Phaniffz) but, if You ‘re become
So greedy ofa War, and ftill perfift, .
Notto give up your Arms, at the Requeft

Ev'n of your Countrey, truly I advife,

That hence your Fury may have no Supplies
And this let A4ago to His Brother fay ,

More He'd have faid (for Speaking could not lay
His Anger ) but the Clamours of the Reft,
Divided in their Votes, his Speech fuppreft.
Atlength, ‘twas anfwer'd: If that the Renown
OF Libya ( Hannibal) excell'd by none
In Arms, be Caufe of Anger unto Thee,

Ev‘n at the very Bounds, muft therefore We
Be wanting to the Viffour 2 Or our Aid
Refufe, that one Man’s Envy may be made
A Bar unto that Empire, which We nowy
Have gain’d? With that they readily allow
Whate're for War is needful ; proud, that fo
Their Favour, in His Abfence, He might know.
Then to Iberia they decree the fame

Should be convey'd ; while Envy did defame
The General's lmmortal Deeds, and made
His Honour to be lefsned by this Aid.


The End of the Eleventh Book,


319


I


EES Say
i


nee ee pepe aos


The Taclfth Bonk, ene


Pare eearaoaae


Through Luxury, and Bafe, the Lybians nade
Effeminate, Parthenopeé invade, [. - | they
And arerepulsd. From thengeto ( titi ter
To Putzol, on they March, and are agen‘ ~
Repuls'd : ‘the Sulph’rous Soil, the Pools; and Lakes
Defcrib’'d. From thence the Libyan Captain makes
His Army march to Nola, where they'are oe
Oretbrows. What Contributions forthe War
at Rome aremade: fuch as, would Service fie
InWar, ave punifhed with Infamy. oe
Torquatus prospers in Sardinia.

The Libyan , wafting Countries in bis way,

And burning Towns, goes to Tareatum sapere

The City is betrai d:the Romans are,

For Safety, forcd.to flie nito the Fort.

The Ships, by them block’d up, within the Port, -
By a new Stratagem unto the Sea,

Over the Hits doth Hannibal convey.

By his txoSt's Treach’ry brave Gragchus falls,

In Vain endeav ring the befieged Walls

Of Capua to relieve. T be Libyan goes -
To Rome; where Storms, and Lightuing bim onpofe.


q OW the fharp Winter, in the
Earth again,
: His Icy head, his Temples fwell’d


a ee See Selig it i _ with Rain,
2 Po d et Atras .
Bee reas etnies amatat*™ eda] BRYA nce lee Dore ruit am And ; ‘Cloudy Brows had hid ;
Houoratifgimo Din? Domino, Edoardo¥ 7 melt Ie \fSomin. Mancheltriat Vicecom ade: | and Spring, with clear
ville, Baront de kimbolton, er 8) Dui Beis, A d
Gantabrigien: eSanctioribys Conailijs, ge Ae ip Sy ct ot fholy yti Ordinis Perice dis Equals VS nd warmer Air, and: Winds,
ae | = began to chear


X x The


The Secoid Ponick KVVatt -


Tus AnouNewt, site go) Sak


322


(4) Maples.


ae Iraticus. Book XH.


oP he fertile Fields ;. when forth the Libyan’ breaks -


From Cepia, and with Panick Terrour fhakes ae ie
The neighbring ’ Powns. As Serpents, that lay: aa
Conceal d, while the Riphean Winds were chill,
Sh warmet Days roll from their fecret Beds,

a ind. shining new, erect their Radiant Heads,
: bd, fromtheir lofty Jaws, their Venom Spout.

But foon as Libya's Enfigns Shin‘d about
- The Fields, chrough Fear, all Defolate was made,
And ftraitin Works, as Terrour did perfwade,
Defpairing Safety, they themfelves enclofe,
And Trembling on the Walls, expect their Foes. _
Butthenthat Vigour, that did Arm’d invade
The eA Ips, and, breaking through, a Paffage made,
That Trebia enjoy'd, andftain'd, with Blood -
Of Braveft Romanes, the Meonian Flood;
Was loft. Their Limbs with Wine,and Pleafure made
Effeminate, and, dull with Sleep, decai’d:
Thofe, that were wont ‘in coldeft Nightsto ly
Loaden with Arms; beneatha Stormy Sky,
And oft, when Show’rs of Hail came Ruthing down,
Contemn'd theirTents: who ne're by night were known
To lay their Quivers, Darts, Swords, Shields afide,
And Arms, as ufeful as their Members try’d ;
Their Helmets, now, an heavy Burden call,
Their Targets Weighty feem, their Jav'lins all

So weakly thrown, that they with Silence fly.

The firft of all, that was affaulted by

Their Arms, was Fair “ Parthenope, a Town
Not Wealthy; but fer Strength of fome Renown:
Butthe convenient Port the General, who |
Sought to fecure the Ocean, thither drew ;

That Ships from (arthage, there, might fafe arrive.
The Citizens did then in Pleafure live,


oe


And


Book XI  Sitrus Iraticus. 323


And entertain'dyi in. Peace, the Mufes, free
From weight of ; Gares: Siren Parthenope,
From ‘*) echelons fprang; whofe Adufick long...
Reign’d in thofe Seas, when Her delightfal Song’
Deftroy’d the Mariners, that¢near Her came,
Left, to thofe Walls, Her memorable Name.
Affaulting this behinde, ¢ for by the Sea

The Front was Safe ) ‘ite, Libyan no way
With all his Strength could force. Inglorious in
The lofs of that Defign, He doth begin, _
With Ramis, to Batter the obftruded Gates:
A\nd there, that Conquerour, that evn the Fates
At Canna had Subdu’d ,did ftand, in Vain,

(c)For that antiently it was Peopled


Before a ‘*) Grecian Bulwark : and again with a Greek Colonic,


(4) The sirens were the Daugh-
ters of Achelous, and Melpomene, ,


A cautious Refolution doth approve

By that Event ; for that Hedid not move,

After the Daunian Field (that fadly {wom -

In Zrean Blood y untothe Wallsof Rome. 22... °

Wosv You, that call me Idle, and that fay, = ee

I know norhow, to give the Fates their Ways) 3: :

For that I would not fuffer youtoClimbe. -. i.

(Said He) the Walls of Rowe, ev'n at a Time ..- |

When you had newly Fought :now enter, and ~ -

Within thefe Houfes, which ar aa P ison bagi

Onely detends, give Us that .Feftival, ,

W hich once you Promis’d, in the Copital. gies
While thus He them upbraids :incens'd mith Shame

(Should He defert the place) of future Fame,,.-. -

Heevry thing attempts, and eager Wohets> © of

Their Swords, with his accuftomed Deceits. nl F os

But fudden Flames upon the Walls, and through -: ~

The Air, at ev'ry Breach, {wift Weapons flew... »..

As, when an Eagle hides upon an High


Imperious Rock her Yong; if filently et
X x 2 A Serpent


——


3H


‘Sirius Iraricus. Book XII,


(d) Cums, and Naples.


Propitious were, entreat; for Trebia's fake,


A Serpent thither crawl, and gaping wide,

By his Approach, her Breod isterrifid,

She with her Bill, and Talons ( wontte bear

The Arms of Fove } ftill Watchfull, ev'ry where,
Refiftsher Enenty, and flies about

The Circle of her Neft, to keep him out.

Weary, at length, to (uma’s Port He took

His Way, by various Motion to proveke

Fortune, and wave that Blow to His Renown.

But Gracchus, then Commander of the Town,
Wasits Defence, and forc’d Him to retreat

Ev’n from the Walls, not fuff ring Him to fee

Before the Gates, or hope for Entrance there.

Then, mounted on a nimble Steed, Defpair

Seifing His Minde, He views, and fearcheth all,

And thus again doth on His Souldiers call,

With Arguments of Praife: Good Gods ! ¢ faid He }
What Period .{ Friends ) what Meafure fhall We fee
Of Standing, thus, at “) Grecian Towns, while none
OF You semeimber, what You once have done ¢

Isit becaufe a greater Bulk doth ftand

Before You, thenthe Alps? and I command,

That You should climb again thofe Rocks, that ftrike
AtHeav'n?: Should We another Land, that’s like
To that now finde, where fudden Rocks, and Snow
Invade the very Stars, would Younot go;

And boldly Arms, where're Llead You, bear *

Thefe. Walls ( Alafs/)} and Guman Rampires, here,
Defpairing Gracchus hold, I who, perceive,

Ev’n in the leaft of Danger, dare not leave

Thofe Ports: but fhall the World then think what You
Have gain’d by Toils, you did by Chance fubdue?

I, by thofe Gods, that at the Zyrrhen Lake


And


Book Xi. Sitius IrTaticus,


And by Sagunthas Dutt, Your felves now fhew
Worthy Your prefent Fame, and (anne to
Your Thoughts recall. As thus He fought to raife,
And fix with Words, their Minds,with wanton Eafe
Made dull, and through Profperity decay'd ;
And, ashe there the Avenues furvai’d,
A shining Temple, on the Top of all
The Tower He {py'd, whofe fam'd Original
Thus, (apua’s cruel Captain, Virius told.

In this Our Age, that Fabrick You behold,
Wasnot (faidHe) erected, greater Hands
Built ic: when Daedalus liv'd in the Lands


‘OF the © Diélzan King (thus Fame doth fay )


To quit the Earth, by flying, He the Way
Firft found ; none elfe, in all the World, did dare,
On borrow'’d Wings, himfelf into the Air
To lift, and fhew men hew to fly. But He,
His floating Body poifing equally
Amidftthe Clouds, foon mounted out of Sight ;
Like a ftrange Bird, affrighting in His Flight
The very Gods. His Son likewife affumes,
By his Advice, the Shape of borrow’d Plumes, -
Totry the waies of Birds. But Him again
He fal’n beheld, beating the troubled Main
Withhis unhappy Wings, and broken Oars .
Of Quills; and, as Indulgent, he deplores
His fadden Fate, moving his Hands unto
His Breaft, unmindefull whither He would go,
Sorrow his Flight delay’d: but, to appear
Gratefull for his Cloud-wandring P affage, there
To Phebus he firft built that Holy Fane ; .
Andlai’‘d afide his daring Wingsagain.

This Virius.But Hannibal each Day
Pafs'd without Action Numbers, of that Stay,


nd


533


(c) Aginot, King of Crete,


326


(Cf ) Patecti,


(a) Bains, oneof Vygis his


°


Companions, buricd there.


And crofs afham’‘d he Sighs, and Quits the Town, |
Refolv‘d to fatiatehis Grief upon

The Dicarchean ( City : but ev'n there

The Sea, and Induftry of thofe, that were.
Within, and lofty Walls, repell his Rage.

And, while a Tedious Labour doth engage

His Army, there to force a Paflage, through

The rough obftructed ways, He takes a view

Of the Mirac'lous Pools, and Soil not far

From thence. The Chief of (apua prefent are;
A\nd one among the reft begins to fhow,

Whence the warm Baie were fo call’d, and how
One of the Fam’d Dulichian Ship, which came
Upon that Coaft, left to that Pool his ‘¢? Name.
Another tells, the Lucrine Lake of old

Was call’d Cocytws; and commends the Bold
Adventure of eA Icides, ‘midft the Sea,

When He difperft its Waves, and brought away,
Th’ Iberian Heard: how Styx its Antient Name
Had to Avernus chang’d, of greateft Fame
Among thofe Silent Lakes : then the Dark Face
Of Groves, and Shadows, that inveft the Place.
Fatal to Birds, it breaths, into the Air,

A, dire Contagion, and is ev'ry where
Renown’d, for Stygian Worthip. Near to this,
(4s Fame reports ) aDreadful Pool there is,
Which leads to Acheron, and ,0p ning wide

Witha Deep Gulf, divides, on either Side,

The gaping Earth, and fometimes doth affrighe


' The Ghofts below with unexpected Light.


Not far from this, the Place all Dark,’ they tell,
Where the (ymmerian People long did dwell,
InaTartarean City, under Ground,

Prefs'd with Infernal Clouds, and Night profound.


Sirius -Iraricus. Book XII.


At


Book XIL. ~Sitius Iraricus. 327


At length, they fhew thofe Famous Fields, that — i
Sulphur, and boiling Brimftone-ftill expire.
From the parch’d Entrails of the Groaning Earth |.
Black Vapours break, like Waves, andyat their: Bin
Into the Air caft Stygian Blafts, that from |

The trembling Caves, with dreadful iphone coe:
And as, fometimes, the Fire beats round about

Thofe hollow Rooms, and Labeursto getout; . <. !
It fadly Bellows, with a threatning Sound, ©
Arid tears the mangled Entrails of the Ground, ..
Deftroys the fhaking Mountains, eaten re
With Flames. The Gyants there Cif Fame fay ae),
(+) Subdu'd by Hercules, the Earth that’s éaft |
Upon them fhake, and, often breaching, Blaft _

The Fields,and, when they Threaten to prevail, .

And break their Chains, the very Heav‘ns grow Pale.
There cruel Mimas Prifon; Prochyté

Appears : and, farther off, Inarimé ;

Which, with Black Storms, faniee Fapetus aoa
Doth prefs. While frequene fulph’rous Flames ‘are
From his Rebellious Month,and, ifhe fhould (thrown
fAt any time get loofe, again He would
Againft the Gods, and Fove, the War renew.

Not far from thefe Vefuvian Ciiffs they thew,

And onthe Top the Rocks, devoured ftill

By Flames, with Ruins, round the broken Hill,

And Stones, that equal 4¥tna’sFates: andthere -
He fees Mifenus, in his Sepulcher,


(4) The Phlegreas Field, where
the Gyants were overthrown by Her-
cules,


_ Keeping his Trojan Name, and on the Shore


Th’ Herculean Baul, Thus doth he explore.
With Wounder, both the threatnings of the Sea,
And Labours of the Land.. Thefe feen,away
Toth’ Pherecyades high Walls he hatts,


And the N(y/ean Top of Gaurus watts, _
. Fertile


328 Sirius Iranicus. Book XII. | Book XII. = Sirius Iranicus. 32.6


|
|


Feretlé in Gen’rotis Vines. From thence amain -
His Troops: lee leadsto-AColsy CinaPlain ©
NColsis icitnate, encompafs'd round


- With num’rous Tow’rs, guarding the Levd Greuid
Witha deep Trench) _ but there eAZ. hi asd a


Affum'd net Arms to be. protected fo


. By Tow’'rs, ‘who wouldhave Valour onely made


Their Wall's Defence, brought them both Strength,and
He, when far off the Libyan Fleet he fpy'd, (Aid.
Which thither Steer'd, and tow'rds the Walls apply’d
The Flow’r- ofall their Force; To Arms, {aid He; .
The cruel Foidraws near. And inftantlie,
Exclaimingthus, his Arms he cakes in Hand,

And ftrait the eager Youth about him ftand,
Andina Rage (as Cuftom was) puton

Their blowdy Casks. Then, running up and down,
The Troops he ordersthus ; Nero, by Thee

That Port, on the Right-Hand, hall suarded be:
Thou Tuller, who the Volfci's Glory art,

Thy Larinantian Enfigns fhalt divert, .

And Country Cohorts, to the Left; and, when


_ I give the Word, with fudden F ury then,


And Silence, force the Gates, and pour into
The Fields your Show’'rs of Darts againft the Fo,
Into the Midft of them I'le charge, and force
From th’ open Gates the Skirmith of their Horfe.
As thus Marcellus {poke, the Libyans trove
The Bars, and Palhifadoes, to remove,

And the defpifed Walls to {cale, Then, round


The Town, the Trumpets, and thrill Cornets found,


With Shouts of Men, hoarfe Horns,and olafhing Arms
Againft their furious Limbs. With thefe Alarms
The Elephants advance, incited by

The Darts upon them shrewn : and faddenly,


Like


|
| i
|


Like a rude Storm, the Troops of Horfecame on, |

And charg’d.As when,the Banks, & Locks;o ‘rethrown,

Unruly Rivers Inundations make:

Or, driv’n by Boreas, foaming Billows break

Againft the Rocks : Or, an Eruption made

From their dark Prifons, Winds the Land invade,
Nor with that dreadfull Sight of Arms, and Men,

Could Libya hopeto gain the Place. For then,


On’s frighted Steed, the Dardan General ) Marcellus,


Advanc'd, and attheir flying Backs, withall


_ His Fary, prefs‘d His Lanee: invoking thus
His Friends ; The Gods, and Time, now favour Us.


Go on, this leads to Capua’s Walls. “And then,
Turning upon the Enemy agen,

Stay, whither hafte Yet Idonot ( {aid He)
Upbraid thy flying Men, but rather Thee,
Perfidious Hannibal; for inour Hands

The War, this prefent Field, and Army ftands:
V'le quit Thy Troops from Slaughter, let Them fee ‘
A fingle Combate between Thee, and Me.
Marcellus this demarids! This faid, the Fame,
And Value, of the Danger did enflame

Fim with the Libyan to begin the Fight.

But this to Zuno wasno pleafing Sight; _

Who Him diverted, hafting to His Fall, »

From what He then defign'd: while Hannibal
Strives all He can to Rally, and to Stay

His frighted Troops. Such then from Capua,


_ And from thofe fatal Manfions, do We come?


(Said He) Oh ftand, ye Wretches ; ous whofe Summ
Of.Glory, is Dithonour / ‘Gredit Me;
No Place will Faithfull prove:ts You, that flee :

You have deferv’d, that all Anfonia now


Should rife againft You ;*"and itis from You
Yy ‘You


330


Ae A River, that defcends from the
Ips, and, running more then forty
iles under Ground, breaks out again

a Fenice, and emptieth it felf into
the ‘Adriatick, Sea , the Ewganean Lake
noi far from i it.


Sizius JTALicus. ~ Book XI:


You, that with fo great Terrour routed are,


"Thas all may both of Peace, and Lifedefpair. = - 4


His Voice fapprels d the Trumpet's Sound,and though

Obftruced, through their Ears, bis Glamours go- :
In Grecian Arms young Pedianus ftood,

‘Moft fierce in Fight, and from that Trojan Blood

Himfelf derived, that from ¢4 ntenor came.

Nor lefs, then His Original, in Fame

Was He, ‘Sacred Timavus Glory, and

‘A Name below’d in the Euganéan Land.

To Him, nor Father Po, nor thofe, that boatt

Their ef ponus, nor the V enetian Coatt

Could any Equal finde. Whether he fought, ..

Or ina ftudious Life the Mufes fought,

Ortun’d Aonian Ditties with his Quill,

Not any was more famous for His Skill :

As He, in full Career, did clofe purfue -

The Libyans at their Backs ; and, near them, knew

The Cask, and Noble Spoils, of Paulus flain,

Worn by young Cinyps, who rejoyc’'d (in vain)

In chat great Favour of his General.

This Cinyps was.belov'd by Hannibal :


_ None was, then He, more Beautifull in Face,


None in the Fore-Head had a greater Grace ;
So fhines that Ivory, that, in the Air

OF Tibur bred, Time never can impair ;

Or Gems of the Red-Sea, which in the Ear,
For Whiteneds of admired Price, We wear.


Him Glorious.in His Helmet, and His Cretft


Well known, in the la(t Rank, among the Left,
When Pedianus fpy'd, and to His Eys

Paulus, from Shades below, appear'd to rife, : Le
Gnathing his Teeth, he charg'd him; Mutt ¢ faid He ) :
ee ce ropes of that Sacred Head by Thee


c


Book XU... Sinius Iraxicus. 331


Be worn; :which not, without the Crime of ail

The Gods, and Envy; ev'n your General —

Could wear? See Paulus! : (and, with that, upon

The Ghoft of Paulus calls to‘fee itdone )

And, as he fled, his Lance, with all his Force,

Thrutts in his Side; then, lighting fromhis Horfe, —. :
Tears off the Cask, and Trophies of the Great e
(Conful, with his Right-Hand, and, while he yet
Could fee, defpoils him of his Honour: all

His Beauty is diffolved in his Fall.

And ftrait a Stygian Colour over-cafts

His Snow- white Limbs, and all the Glory blafts

Of Hisadmired Form; His Amber Hair

Disorder’d falls ; His limber Neck can bear

No more its former Weight ; but, as oppreft,

Sinks with His Head into His Milky Breatt.

So, when then  (ythereian Star again | () Lucifer.
Rifing, refrefh’d, from the Edan Main ,

Himfelf to Venus boatts, if Clouds invade

His Face, the Luftre of his Beams will fade, -

And foon, decreafing in that Mask of Night,

Retires his languifhing, and fainting Light.

Ewv'n Pedianus,as he takesin Hand

His Helmet, at his naked Face doth ftand

Amaz’d, and checks his Rage, and then away

Bearing, with Shouts, unto his Friends his Prey ,

He Spurs his furious Steed ; which Stains with Gore,
From his fierce Mouth, the frothy Reins he were.

But, then Marcellus, fierce in Arms,came on,

And meeting Him, the Honour He had won

Thus gratulates. Go, efntenorides,

Goon ; and by fuch valiant Acts, as thele,

Surpafs thy Anceftours: itnow (f{aid He) _
Remains, the Spoils of Hannibal fhould be


Y yz Our


ge S”*«~S Seuss Uraricus. Book XI.


Our Prize. Then, fir'd with Rage, his fatal Lance,
With dreadfull Noife,he threw ; nor had, perchance,
His With been vain, had not the Obvious Force
OF Geftar with his Body ftep'dthe Gourfe
O'th' flying Shaft : for, while He, fighting near
At Hand, defends his General, the Spear,
Notaim’d at Him, paft through Him, ending all .
His mighty Threatnings in His changed Fall.
With that the General, with Speed, withdrew,
Struck with the Danger of his Death, and to
The Campretir'd. Then, with a Headlong Rout,
The Likyan Army turn’d their Armsabout,
And all contend, who fhall moft Speedy fly : .
Their Enemies Purfue, and fatisfie
The long-contracted Anger of their Woes ;
While ev'ry Man with Emulation fhows
To the Revenging Gods, and Heav‘n, His Sword,
(mi) The Reputation of this Vidlry AI ftain’d with Blood. “That Day did firft afford


was of| greater Confequerce, oe =
Car idnis Where thodand cee ‘That, which ev'n from the Gods none durf believe
hundr:


may eehen Gone “the Rome: Before , thatit was pofsible to give

that Hara old be vanquied it A Standto Hannibal in Fight: but then

oe They took His Chariots, Elephents, and Men,
And ftrip'd the Living ; and, thus joy’d to fee,
That Hannibal did from the Slaughter flee,
Return. Marcellus to the Ged of War,
In Honour, is compar'd; and Greater, far,
In Triumph march’d, then when He once did bring

gi fit ite es Virdee, © Opimous Spoils to the T arpeian King.

firft Book. But, when the Libyan Prince, with much ado,
Had from His Trenches fore’d the Conqu'ring Fo;
When, and with how much Hoftile Blood, thall I
Wipe off this Staint Aujonia faw Me fly.
Oh ove! (faid He} doft thou conclude, that I
A\m worthy, afterTrebia, thus to dy 2

And


XU.


Book Sirius Irarreus:


And You, My long-unconquér'd Troops / who are


. C Alafs!) now Vanquifhed without a War


By Capua's Wealth ; 1, not degenerate

From former Acts, have feen You turn of late

Your Conqu’ring Enfigns fem the Latines, and
Shew’d them Your Backs : and, when I call’d to ftand,
And fight, from Me You fled, Affrighted, all ,

As if from the Isakan General.

What then o’th’ antient War remains (laid He )

In You, who can, when | recall You, flee?

Thus Hannibal, while, with loud Shouts, their Prey
The Romane Troops to Nola bear away.

But ‘Rome, which had been long inur’d to hear
The fad Difafters of their Friends, and ne're
Enjoy‘d Succels, the joyfull Tidings brought
At Length, how Happily they then had fought,
With that great Favour of the Gods erects
Her drooping Head, and Courage recollects.

But, firft, thofe Coward Youths, that flowly to

The War were drawn ; and,while it rag’d, withdrew,
And hid themfelves from Danger, punith’d be

For their Concealment. Then with Infamy

They Mark all thofe, that, through a fond Defire
Of Life, had Arts invented to retire ;

Or, ina League with Hannibal had bin

Involv'’d : and purge the Nation from that Sin.

That fatal Counfel’s punifh’d,and Thy Crime

( Metellus)) who confulted in a Time

Of Danger to defert Thy Native Land.

Such then the Hearts of Men: the Women ftand
Refolv'd to equal them, and to require

A Sharein Glory. ‘Then their Antique Tire,

And Gems, which did their Heads, and Hands adorn ;
And Carkanets, that from their Necks were torn,


|


Our Prize. Then, fir'd with Rage, his fatal Lance,
With dreadfull Noife,he threw ; nor had, perchance,
~ His With been vain, had not the Obvious Force.
Of Geftar with his Body ftep'dthe Gourle
O'th’flying Shaft : for, while He, fighting near
At Hand, defends his General » the Spear,
Notaim’d at Him, paft through Him, endingall -
His mighty Threatnings in His changed Fall.
With that the General, with Speed, withdrew,
Struck with the Danger of his Death, and to
The Campretir'd. Then, with a Headlong Rout,
The Lilyan Army turn’d their Arms about,
And all contend, who fhall moft Speedy fly : .
Their Enemies Purfue, and fatisfie
The long-contraéted Anger of their Woes ;
While ev'ry Man with Emulation fhows
To the Revenging Gods, and Heav'n, His Sword,
(m) The Reputation of this Yiloy ANI ftain'd with Blood. “That Day did firft afford


was of greater Gonfequerce, pa re

t i | = > °
Zier felt (though fone £Y.4¢ ‘That, which ev’n from the Gods none durft believe
hb


man) for from tee the omens Before; thatit was polsible to give
tat Harb olde vane A Standto Hannibal in Fight: but then
oa They took His Chariots, Elephents, and Men,
And ftrip’d the Living ; and, thus joy’d to fee,
That Hannibal did from the Slaughter flee,
Return. Marcellus tothe God of War,
In Honour, is compar'd; and Greater, far,
In Triumph march’d, then when He once did bring
gi Hie itr over Vvidemarine, © Opimous Spoils to the Tarpeian King.
firft Book. But, when the Libyan Prince, with much ado,
Had from His Trenches fore’d the Conqu’ring Fo ;
When, and with how much Hoftile Blood, fhall I
Wipe off this Stain? Aufonia faw Me fly.
Oh Fove! (faidHe} doft thou conclude, that I
Am worthy, afterTrebia, thus to dy 7


And


Book XIL


Sriius Iraricus:


And You, My long-anconquer'd Troops ! who ‘are


. CAlafs!) now Vanquifhed withéuta War _


By Capua's Wealth ; 1, not degenerate

From former Acts, have feen Youturn of late |
Your Conqu’ring Enfigns ftom the Latines, and
Shew’d them Your Backs : and, when I call'd to ftand,
And fight, from Me You fled, Affrighted, all,

As if from the Isahan General.

What then o'th’antient War remains (faid He )

In You, who can, when | recall You, flee?

T hus Hannibal, while, with loud Shouts, their Prey
The Komane Troopsto Nola bear away.

But ‘Rome, which had been long inur’d to hear
The fad Difafters of their Friends, and ne’re
Enjoy‘d Succels, the joyfull Tidings brought —

At Length, how Happily they then had fought,
With that great Favour of the Gods erects -

Her drooping Head, and Courage recollects.

But, firft, thofe Coward Youths, that flowly to

The War were drawn ; and,while it rag’d, withdrew,
And hid themfelves from Danger, punifh’d be

For their Concealment. Then with Infamy

They Mark all thofe, that, through a fond Defire
Of Life, had Artsinvented to retire ;

Or, ina League with Hannibal had bin

Involv’d : and purge the Nation from that Sin.

That fatal Counfel’s puniifh’d, and Thy Crime

C Metellus})) who confulted in a Time

OF Danger to defert Thy Native Land.

Such then the Hearts of Men: the Women ftand
Refolv'd to equal them, and to require

A ShareinGlory. Then their Antique Tire,

And Gems, which did their Heads, and Hands adorn ,


And Carkanets, that from their Necks were torn,
he


i


3340


Srurus ITraLicus, Book Xil.


ThejoyfullMatrons bring, and tothe War — -
With Emulation Sacrifice; norare-
The Men unwilling,they fhould fhare fo great
A Lot of P raife, and, to perpetuate ;


That AG, rejoice to give them Place. Next whom —


A Noble Troop of Senatours doth come,
And all into the Publick Treafure heap
Their private Riches: none defire tokeep
Ay fecret Stock, in Store, for better Days :


But, evn the Vulgar ftrive the Banks to raife, _


{o) This Anfwer of the Oracle was
brought by 2. FabinsPittor , who,
infirudted by the ct > wore a
Wreath of Laurel, ashe entred the
Temple, voenquire the Oracle , and,
when he recieved Anfwer, went dire-
Gly ro his Ship, onthe Poop whereof
he placed it, and never removed it,
untill he arrived in Rome, where it was
depofited on the Altar of Apollo, with
great Solemnity. Liv. ib, 23.


And with the Spoils of their poor Lares come.
Thus all her Limbs, and Her whole Body, ome
Ac once employing, rais'd again to Heav’n

Her Bloodlefs Face: befides the An{wer giv’n
At © Grrbaadds new Hopes, and feems t’ allay
Their Woes ; the Meflengers reporting, they
Had joyfull Tidings heard, when fromthe Den
A Sacred Voice, like Thunder, broke, and when,
Infpir'dby Phoebus, the Prophetick Maid
Thisbellow’d out, Let all your Fears belai‘d
Afide, fair Venus Race ! Whate’re remain’d

Of Mifery, in your fad War fuftain’d,
Exhauftedis: Light Labours are behinde,

And, without Dangers, Fears: be ftillinclin’d
To Pray’rs, and to the Gods Devotions pay ;
Warm Sacrifices on their Altarslay :

Noryield to Mifery ; for Mars will you
Afsift, and the ) Grrhaan Prophet (who
Wasever promptto eafe the Trojans Woes }
Will all thofe Ills, that threaten you, oppofe ;

But let an hundred Alears, firft of all,

Be Crow’nd with Fire, as many Vidlimes fall

To fove ; He this dire Cloud, and Storms of War
Shall, Violent, to Libya drive. From far


Your


Book XII. SILru's Traricus, 333


Your felves thall fee Him thaking, forthe Fight,
aS His Agis, which fhall all the World affright.


When this, at Grrbafung, they did Proclaim,

And to the People’s Ears Apollo came,

Upto the Capitol they flockamain, Ss.

There, proftrate to the God, the Holy Fane

With Blood they Honour, Peans fing, and Fave

Entreat, the Anfwer may Authentick prove.
Inthe mean time, Lorquatus, old in Arms, ,


Sardinia, with his Countrey’s Force, Alarms :


For there ( his Name from Trojan Blood deriv’d )
©) Hapfagoras unto the War, reviv'd,

The Zyrians call’d: brave Ofcus was His Son,
Worthy a better Father, who, upon

His forward Youth relying, train’d His Young,

And tender Years ( asCuftomwasamong Get ade Ca ee
Thofe Barb’rous Nations) in Arms. When He mracary eee Meee


and Hanno, three eminent Carthagini-


(q) The Sardinians had yielded to
the Obedience of the Romanes at the
End of the firft Panich War, and now
at the infligation of Hanno (not the
Enemy of Hannibal's Family)rebelled,
under the Condué of Ofcus, and Haf-
drubal. In two feveral Conflids che
Sardinians loft the Day : and in the la-
ter, twelve thoufand men were flain,


ans, and the Ifland reduced to its for


_ Torquatus {aw Advancing, furioufly, met Obedience,


With hafty Enfigns, greedy to begin
The Fight; ftrait fallying forth, experienc’d in


_ Th’ Advantage of the Place, a nearer Way


He takes, and, where thick Forefts did difplay |
Their thady Heads, through devious Paths, Ee flies,
And, inan hidden Vale, in Ambuth lies.


‘The Ifle, Man’s Foot refembling, by the Sea .


Encompats'd, and affaulted ev'ry Way |
By Billows, and by Waves comprels'd, contains


Watt Tradtsof Land: at firft che Grecian Swains.


Call'dit Ichnufa; But, foonafter thefe

( Boafting His Blood from Libyan Hercales.)
From Himfelf, Sardus on the Land His Name
Imposd; the Teucri likewife thither came,

And, there difpers'd through all the Sea, when J roy


Was overthrown, did fore’d Abodes enjoy.
eS | Then


7


| Sinius IraLicus. Book XII.


Then likewife, Is/eus, to the Land

No little Fame didft add ; when with a Band
Of Thefpians, in tay Father's Navy, there
Thou didft arrive. ‘Tis faid, when (ynthia Fair
Was by Adon in the Fountain fen,

And, all his Members torn, his Crime had been
Sadly Reveng’d, affrighted at his ftrange
Unufual Fate, and his prodigious Change,
His Father Ariffens fled by Sea, _

And to Sardinia came: they tell the Way
Unto that Coaft, to Him before unknown,


Was by His Mother fam'd (Cyrene fhown:


_ The Countrey is from Serpents free, and void


Of Poifon ; but with Bogs, and Fens annoy’d,
The Air ‘sunwholfom; where it looks upon
Th’ Italian Shore, with Rocks, and Hills of Stone,
It breaks the fparkling Waves. Within, the Plains


~- With falery South-Winds,when hot Cancer reigns,


Are Pale, and too much parch’d ;_ but all the reft

Is Fertile, and with (eres Favours bleft.

Through this rude Tract of Land, & Pathlef Groves,
The Fo, Terquatus oft deluding, moves,

And in Expedtance of Iberian Aid,

And Tyrian Weapons, for the Battel ftay'd.

At Length, the Fleet arriving, and his Men
Encourag’d more, without Delay, agen
He from his Covert leaps : and then at large
The adverfe Troops drew out, and feem to charge,
And joyn, though Diftant ; and no Space between,
For hafty Darts, at Diftancs could be fee :

Till, truftier Weapons, their try'd Swords they drew,
And then acruel Slaughter doth enfue.

They kill, and fall aleernately, and, on


T heir fatal Points, defcend to Acheron.
: ¥ cannot


Book XI. SILiIus IraLicus,


I cannot hope their num’rous Slaughters, and
So many horrid Acts, for aCommand

So High, fo Great, to utter, as | ought,

Or equal with my Words their Rage, that faake
But Thou, Calliopesmy Labours blels ;

Thar, to Eternity, | may exprefs

Our Poet's Noble Deeds, but little known

As yet, and Confecrate His due Renown !
Ennius, of King Mesapus antient Line,

Who tothe Henour of the Latine Vine

Did, by His Valour, add, led the Forlorn

To fight, fent thither from Calabria ; born
Among the antient Rudiz, now known

In His furviving Memory alone.


He (as,of old, the (*) Thracian Singer, who, (*) Orphene,


When Ciz yeus with War fhook Argos, threw
His ‘Réodopeian Darts, when He had lai’d ©

His Quill afide) with no {mall Slaughter made
Himfelf to be obferv’d, when firft he Charg’d,
And from the Slaughters of his Hand enlarg’d
His Fury. O/cus hoping, if that Stain

He wip'd away, Immortal Praife to gain,

Upon Him flies ; and at Him throws his Spear;
With all His Force : ¢4 pollo, fitting near
Within a Cloud, derides what He defign’d,
And,driving far the Shaft into the Winde,
Fond Youth (faid He) Alafs! Thou doft afpire
Loo high, to let His Spoils be thy Defire :

He ’s Sacred, and the Mufes greateft Care,

A Poet worthy Phebus ; who fhall dare

The firlt, in Noble Verfe, Italian W ars

To fing, and raife their Captains to the Stars:
He Helicon, with His Immortal Lays,


Shall make to Eccho ; a at Hein Praife, O:


eg een


Sh Lege Geer


333


(*) Held


(r) Acerra, and Neeeria, were
both deftroyed by Hannibal, The
firft (the People ftealing out by
Night, and flying into other Cities of
Campania) found empty, was burnt by
Him: The later, after an hard Siege,
yielded on Conditions, That all the Peo-
ple might march away, every Man
with two Gatments, but no fooner
came they out of theCity, but He
forced thee into Salphurous Pits,
where they were choaked with Smoak,
and Vapours. Liv. 23.

() Cafilinum, (now Cafteluccio)
held out a long Siege, until they had
eatenall things Edible ( even to their
Bridles, and all chings covered wich
a) bur, at length, having fome
{mall Relief of Nats, which the Re-
manes put into Barrels,and fent Hosting
down the River Vulturaus (whic
ran through the Town ) Hannibal
(who before was deaf to all Condits-
ons) was induced to ae them their
Lives for Ranfom, and upon Payment
pave them fafe Conduct to Came.
Liv. 23.

(t) The Petilians (whofe City was
built by Philoételes, co whom Hercules


_ bequeathed his sa alithe Bra-
tt


tians, onely kept their Faith to the Re-
manes. Which caufed Hannibal to ule
them with the greater Severity , burn-
ing their City to the Ground, and flay-
ing moft of the Citizens: eight hun-
dred of which, efcaping His Fury,
were, after His Departure from Jtaly,
with great Care, and Honour, replan-
ted by the Romanes, intheir Coun-
trey. Appianin Hannibal.

(s) The Cittadel of Tarentum,pla-
ced within one of the Havens (for
there were two,divided by an J/ihmus)
held out fometime after Concnens, had
betraied the Town to Hannibal: So ,
that, to hinder their Relief by Sea, He
made ufe of this Stratagem to convey
Ships over the {/thmus and fo ftreight-
ning them on all Sides, ‘to. Extremity,

at laftreceived that likewifle to His fie
jection.


Sirius Irazicus. Book XII.
Or Fame, unto the Olt (*) ef ferean yield.
Thus Phebus , and through Ofcus Temples thrill'd

A fwift Revenging Dart : hisfudden Fall

Makes the whole Army face about ,and all

The Troops, affrighted, through the Champagn fled.
The Father,hearing that his Son was dead,

Groaning with Rage, pierc'd his own panting Breaft,
And to the Shadesbelow his Foot-fteps preft.

But, Hannibal in Fight thus broken, and

Cruth’d by Marcellus, watts the Neighb’ring Land,
And turns His unjuft Arms upon the Poor

Acerra , which to Fire, and Sword, giv'n o’re,

With nolels Rage Heon ©) AGenceria falls,

And levels with the Ground her ftately Walls.
Next, Caflinum’s Gates, that long had bin
Stoutly defended by their Arms within,

By Fraud with much ado he gain’d, and fold

Unto the ftarv’d Befieg’d their Lives for Gold.

And then into the Daunian Fields He falls,

And, to what Place foe’re His Malice calls,

Or Plunder doth invite, His Fury turns.

Then, fmoaking in Her Fall, ” Petilia burns,
Unhappy in her Faith, the next to fad

Sagunthus Fate, and Proud, that once She had

Alcides Quiver kept. Toth’ Libyan Side

Tarentum, after this, her felf apply'd,

And gave them Entrance; but a Latine Band,
Relying on the Place’s Strength, remain’d

A ftrong Referve within the Cittadel,

) Here he remov'dhis Navy ( ftrange to tell)
That ready Rigg’d within the Harbour lay ;

For, at two narrow Mouths, the crouded Sea

Breaks out between two Rocks, and, with a Large
Recefs, a fecret Ocean doth difcharge


Into


NR


Book XII. Sirius Iraxricus, 339


Into the Plains s' But He the Ships (thatthere
Block’d up, by th’ drcenal Commanded-were ) |
By Stratagem, recover'd from the Sea’s - fe
Embrace, another Way by Land conveys. .
Firft lipp'ry Planks onev'ry Oaken Wain
Were lai‘d, and Hides of Oxen newly flains
The nimbly-turning Wheels,through Meadows, drew
Their Load, and then o’re lofty Hills, and through
Thick Groves, the Fleet arriv’d , upon the Shore,
And fwum, brought to the Sea, without the Oar.
ButFame (the Navy by no ufual Way
Tranfported ) Him, that terrifitd the Sea,
Now fills with frequent Cares (while He purfu’d
The War far off, andhop'dto have fubdu'd
Th’ © Oébalian Race ) that Capua was then
On ev'ry Side befieg'd, the Bars agen
O'thy Gates forc’d open, and quite overthrown,
And the whole War upon that Wretched Town
Wasturn’d. Enrag’d, He quits that Enterprize ;
And, Shame, and Anger, Wings affording, flies
The next Way thither, with prodigious Hafte,
And Threatning, to the Fight, defired, paft.
So, of her Young depriv’d, a Tigrefs flies
From Covert, and with Rage-inflamed Eys
Explores all (asca/us,and in few Hours,
With the like Speed, o're Ganges Borders {cours :
Tillin her Gourfe, their Trad: She apprehend,
And on her Fo, furpriz’d, her Fury fpend.
Him, in his March, Centenius (rafhly prone
Toall Attempts, and Dangers) falls upon
With fudden {catter’d Troops, but yet with finall
Honour to the Sidonian General : |
For, Rich in Latine Vines, the Pefants He


Had round about Him rais’d, and faddenly
‘Zz. An


(x) The Parentines.


ra aR ob ere Sag t 90% , = ¥ ~e FER 3
’ ? ‘ . wy


Te


Se ee


Cy) Flavius Lucanns , wiio enter-
tained Gracchas in his Houle, pretend-
ing fome of the chief Lucasians would
cometaa certain place to treat wit
him, prevailed, that He went out to
meet them, and was betrayed: into the
Hands of Hannibal, who admiring his

reat Valobr (for that, when hefaw
Rimfelf betrai’d, he refolved not to be


‘taken alive) ac his Death celebrated


his Funerals with greac Solemnity, an
fent his Bonesto Roze.


~Sytius Iraricus. .


An half-Arm‘d Band oppos'd againft the Fo.
Twice fev'n were flain, and ftill they forwardgo:s
Then twicefev'n thoufandFalviss (then He

No more expert, but of a Family . 4
Renown’d in Arms) all well Appointed led

But He ftill over leaps of {catter'd Dead ,

A. Conquerour, goes an, and cuts his Way
Through all ; ner in his March admits Delay.

But the Ambitious vain Defires to raife

Unto Himfelfthe empty Name, and Praife,

Of aBrave, Gen'rous Minde, upon Himcalf -

To folemnize a joyfull Funeral,

For, while a Parley“) Graccbus did demand,


d And the perfidious Promife entertain’d


Of the Lucanian People, (Sad totell >
By His Hoft’s Treachery, furpriz‘d, Hefell ;
And Hannibal with Greedinefs aflum'd
The with’d-for Praife, to fee His Corps entomb’d.
But, foon as it was known, that, with fuch Hafte,
To the Campanian Walls the Libyan paft,
Affairs no where ftand till, Both Con/uls take
The Field with Speed. Nola, and Arpis make
What Strength they can; Young Fabius, anong
The Reft, His hafty Forces brings along.
There Nero, here Syllanus, Day, and Night
Their Cohorts {peed to the defired Fight,
And from all Quarters come ; refolving all). —
Their Gen'rals to oppofe ‘gainft Hannibal
Alone. While, nearer to Tifata, He
Advances, where the Hill’s Vicinity
Prefs'd.onthe Neighb’ring Walls ; and,looking down
From that near Height, furvays the lower Town,
But, when fuch numbers of AlliesHefound,
Which with their Arms the Gates encompals‘d round,
That


| Book: XII. |


Book XH, “Sriius Iracicus.


That Entrance, was,deny’dto Elim alone,
And that they could not Gally from the Town,
Doubtful of the Event, fometime He thought .
Through all, that then eppos'd Him, to have fought
A Paffage with His Sword ; and then declin’d
Again whate're before He had defign’d ;
And feeks thofe Mytiads by Policy
To draw from the befieged Gates, and free
Th’ inclofed Walls. Thus therefore His refolves
He with Himfelf debates, and Cares revolves.
Oh ! whither tend My troubled Thoughts ? Shall I
Yn this unequal Place new Dangerstry , |
And Capua fee Me fly? Or fitting ftill ,
Upen the Top of this adjoyning Hill,
Shall l endure this Town of My Allies’
Tobe deftroy'd, and fall before mine Eys:
Such Me nor Fabius, nor Minusius found,
When I efcap'd from Eiills encompafs'd reund
With armed Troops: With Victory, compell'd
The affrighted Herd to {eatter, through the. Field,


Flames from their burning Horns, wheree’re they run.


Nor yet are al) My Arts, and Projects done:
If €apaa cannot new defended be

By Us, yet Rome may be Befieg’d. When He
Had thus His Refolution fix’d, before


The Sun had rais‘d from the Eéan Shore


His Horfes, breathing Day, both with His Hand,
And Voice, He draws His Troops together, and
Declares His high Defign. Goon (faid He)
My Souldiers, let all Difficulties be

Surmounted by Your Valour, and (as faft,

As You can March away) now boldly hafte;
To Rome You go: this March the ef ipsto You,
This (anna did decree. Go, andinto


Th’


342


Sirius Iraticus. Book. XIl.


Bo eS ee en See


(*) Canne.


Th’ Iiack Walls-your Targets drive, and there:

Retalliate Capua's Ruins, which fo dear -

Shall coft, that yow fhall fee high Tow’rs, pale

From his Tarpeian Temple to remove: : °
Inftructed thus, away the Army hies: -

Rome in their Ears, Rome onely in their Eys

Is fix’d ; andthey believe the Diligence

Of Hannibal that Aion did commence:


~ Moreaptly, then had He conducted them -


From the (*) tolian fatal Field. The Stream

Of fwitt Vuleurnus overpatt, the Rear ,

To ftop th’ Italians, that behinde them were, |
Burn all their Boats ; and then, with nimble panes
March over all the Sidicinian Lands,

And Thracian (ales, chat its antient Name

Did from thy Son ( fair Orithya) claim:

Then Alifanus, thatgreat Plenty yields

Of Bacchus Fruits, and the Cafnian Fields,
Inhabited by ACymphs ; and ftraitway, near

To thofe, Aguinas, and Fregelle, where

The {moaking Giant buried lies, in Hafte

They over-run: Then, with like Speed, they paft
O’re lofty Hills, where Warlike Frufno

Sticks on hard Rocks, and where Anagnia too
Hangs on arifing Hill, agg Plenty yields

Of Corn. Atlength, into Labicus Fields,

‘And Plains, He enters, and thofe Walls declines,


Batter'd by Yelegon, His high Defigns,


Admit no Stop : nor pleafant Algida,

Nor yet Gabinian Funo's Tow'rs can ftay

His March ; but on, like a rude Storm, He goes
To thofe low Banks, where Anyo gently Flows
With fulph’rous Waters, and, with Silence, to


Old Tibers Arms, When here the Line He drew |


f’s


Book Xi


Sirius Iraurcus, . 343


Of’s Camp, and fet His Standard up, and theok
The Banks with ’s Cavalry ; firft, Iia,ftrook
With Fear, flies ta her Hushand’s Sacred Cave,, _
And all the frighted ACympbs the Waters leave...
But the Italian Dames, asif theyhad =~ -
No Wallsat all, Affrighted run, like Mad,
About the Streets ; and, figur'd by their Fear ,
Thofe wounded Ghofts befare their Eys appear,


That at fad Trebia, and Ticinus Stream,


Were flain, brave Paulus, Gracchus, and with them


- Flaminius {eems to wander up, and down. ~


The Waies, and all the Paffes of the Town

Are throng’d. The Stately Senate troubled to

Behold their Fear, endeavour to fubdue

Their fad Diftra@tion withan angry Frown;

Yet Tears fometimes, with Silence, trickle down

Under their Helmets, as they Doubtfull are,

What Fortune threatens, or the Gods prepare.

Through their high tow’rs,the youth difperfed,thought

Affairs were then to fuch a Period brought,

That ’t was enough, for Rome, Her Wallsto keep.

But Hannibal, who {carce the whole Night's Sleep

Had to His weary Souldiers granted, rofe

Betimes, an Enemy to all Repofe,

And thinking whatfoever Time was {pent

In Slumber, that fo much from Life was rent,

His Radiant Arms puts on, commands His Light

NCumidians to break forth : and then, in Sight

Of frighted Rome, with Nimble Courfers, round

About her trembling Bulwarks, with a Sound,

Like Thunder, Rides. Sometimes the fev’ral Ways

The Avenues, and Paffes He furvays:

Now ‘gainft the Barricado’d Gates His Spear

He ftrikes, and feems delighted with their Fears :
; Then


sei, sater aa sali


344.° . Sittus Iraticus. Book AI. qi Book XII. Sizrus Irauicus, - 345
Then, Pleas'd, He to the lofty Hills retires, S —s_-* Theirfeeble Palms, fufficiently excite
And, entring with His EystheTown, enquires _ . | Their Courage ; and, prefenting to their Sight
Of Placés;-and their Caufes: andin that - oe - Their Babes, ev'n penetrating with their Cry |
Survey-had taken Time to penetrate | ‘Their Hearts, their armed Hands-with Kiffes ply. :
Intoall Parts, and ev'ry thing had {een ; _ On they defire to go, and to oppofe
Had Fulvius, with aftrong Relief, not been Their Bodies, for their Walls, againft their Foes :
At Hand: nor was the Siege of Capua quite | Then, on their Friends reflecting, fwallow down
Relinquith’d , but the Lidyan, with the Sight Their Tears. But, when the Gates were open thrown,
Of Rome much fatisfied in His Defires , | | And the whole Army fallyed forth, a Cry,
With His infulting Troops, toth’ Camp retires. . : Mingled with Pray’rs, and Groans, invades the Sky,
But, when the Night from Heav’n was chas‘d away, From the high Walls : the Matrons, with their Hair
And with the firft Appearance of the Day Dithevel'd, howle, and lay their Bofoms bare.
The Ocean blufh’d, and Morn reviv'd again But, Ful vins, flying out before the reft,
Their Labours, breaking down the Works, amain . Exclaims, Who knows not,that the Libyans preft,
He pours His Forces out, and with aCry, . Through a Necefsity, to come before:
As loud as He could make; Oh Souldiers! by Our Walls ¢ He flies from Capua’s Gates : — Asmore
Our many Trophies, asd our Hands in Blood He would have faid, with horrid Murmurs, from
Now Sacred, make (faidHe}) Your Withes good : The broken Clouds, loud Cracks of Thunder come.
Equal Your.own Defires ; Attempt, and Dare | For, when the threatning Libyan Father Fove
As much in Arms, as ‘Rome hath Caufe to Fear. | C As He from Zthiopia did remove)
Deftroy this Heap, and there is Nought for You Beheld approaching near the ‘Romane Walls,
In all the World befide left to fubdue : The other Gods he ftrait together calls,
Nor let the Fame of their Original . Commands the Dardan Temples to defend,
From Mars retard You; You that City thall And quickly into the fev’n Tow’rs defcend.
Now take by Myriads, enter'd long ago | Himfelf, high feated on the Capitol,
Of Warlike Senones, accuftom’d to | Mutters up all his Forces, famnrons all Cp Saas
Betaken; and, perhaps, amidft their Fears, The Winds, and Clouds, with Storms of Hail: then
Pines premnnarnat ©) Their Senatours in theit Triumphal Chairs, Thunder, and Lightning down, with Sagian Show'rs,
Poor beleving tat Yereabiesigit Like their Fore-Fathers, fit, expecting by The Poles with Horrour fhake, the Heav'ns are quite
aa Cir ee mueay in Your Hands a Noble Death, refolv'd to dy. Obfcur’d ; the Earth is cover'd o're with Night; —
- State, At the firit, the Fleverence 0


their Perfons, and Pofture, amazed the Thus He : but the Oen otrian Youth require
Gauls, till a Gaul, ftroaking the Beard ,


ofoneofthem, the Sesatonr wrapped No L an guage of their Gen era i, to fire Ctheir Dear


- him on the Fingers, ir i oe 7 ir
ee ae ae meh, beore Their Thoughts: their Wives, and Children, with
thought Gods, were flain. ;


The Tempeft blinds their Eys; and ‘Rome, though near
To the approaching Fo doth disappear.
Flames, from the Clouds, upon the Army, thrown,


; Continue ftill their Noife, and hifs upon
Their Aaa Their


Parents, that up to Heav’n, lamenting, rear


Sadie hand d Rote! dete edseD


e enemies
A etme a ce met arnt oda


+ Sirius Irarcus. Book XII.


Their blafted Limbs: here Dotus, Boreas thicte,
And Africas, with Cloudy Wings appear,

And War with fuch a Rage, and Fury, move,

As might fuffice the Wrath, and Minde of Fove :
Then fudden (ataraéls of Water fall,

Mix’d with black Storms, and Blafts, and cover all
The Neighb'ring Champagn with a foaming Flood.
Fove on the Top of all the Mountain ftood,
And, as He Thunder poiz’din his Right-Hand,

Vc ‘gainft the Shield of Hannibal ( His Stand

Not yet refolv’d to quit) with Fury throws :

His Lance’s Head ftrait melts, and His Sword flows,
As from the Forge it were but newly ta’ne.

At length, His Arms thus burnt, He doth reftrain

His Men, declares the Vanity of all .

That fecret Fire, that from the Clouds did fall,

And. Murmurs intermix’d with Winds: But, then,
After fo many Miferies of His Men,

And Ruins, pour’d from Heav'n, the Fo not feen,


_ Nor Sword in allthe Storms, that there had been; -


He bids His fainting Army to retire
ToCam p, and fadly thus revives His Ire.
Well : tothe Winds, and Winter-Storms, Thou now
( Oh ‘Rome } the Safetyof one Day doft ow :
But Thee the Morrow's Light thall not defend
From Us ; though angry Fove himfelf defcend
ToEarth, to guard Thee. And, as this He {poke,
From the clear Heav’ns a {udden Luftre broke,
And all the Clouds difpers'd. The purged Sky
Shin‘d out again, the Romanes inftantly a
Perceiv'd the God, and ftraitway, laying all”
Their Arms afide, to the high Capitol
Erect their humble Hands; and, Pious, round
The Sacred Hill, their joyfullLaurelbound:° ~~
And


Na aR aR Ca ia CR PN Et 5 RN aaa le
- 2 ety aS s . cas i ba id <


Book XI Sirius Iraticus.


And then the chearfull Face of ‘Fove, bedew'd,
Oflate, with no fmall Sweat, thus praying, View’d..
Grant Father fFove (fay They) Thou Chief ‘of all
The Gods! O, grant, that Hannibal may fall
By thine own Sacred Shaft,in Fight / for none:
Can Him deftroy, We fear, but Thou alone.
As thus they pray’d, the Ev‘ning ‘gant’ inveft
The Earth with Shades, and Silence ftop’d the reft. ©
But Night, by Sol difpers’d, as from the Sea
He rais‘d his Lamp, and ufe of Life, with Day,
Reftor'd to Mortals, Hannibalagen
Came on: nor did the ‘Romane Y outh within
Their Trenches keep. But, when they came as near
To fight, as one might well have thrown a Spear, .
Their Swords fcarce drawn, the Light of Heav'n began
To fail, thick Darknefs fuddenly o’reran
The Skies, the new-born Day was put to Flight;
And fove began again to arm for Fight,
The Winds blew high, anda thick Globe of Show’rs,
By eA ufier driv'n along, grew Hot; ove pou'rs
His Thunder down, by which he Atlas fhakes,
With Zaurus, Pindus, Khodope: the Lakes
OF Erebus it heard, and, buied far
In Darknefs, once again Celeftial War
Typhaeuslaw. Now Notus, whiftling loud,
Comes on, and whirling round a pitchy Cloud,
Full fraught with Hail ,the Libyan charg’d, in Vain
Struggling, and threatning, and Him forc'd again
Into His Camp : but He no fooner there
Had lai'd His Arms afide; but ftraita clear,
And joyfull Face of Heav'n again was fhown :
Norcould you think mild fove his Bolts had thrown,
Orhad with Thunder torn the Peacefull Sky.
All this He,: vex’d, endures with Conftancy, _


Aaaz And


347


mee ee Fp EEL ES SD


— it tems tats da amc nar
. z oat
B:


Ree recente ts


$48


Sitius_ Iraricus. Book XII.
And oft.affirming,the enfuing Day *
No moreshouldbeagainftthem. Onely they -
TheirMalour of their Countrey muft affume,
And, left they fhould believe to ruin Rome
Might provea Sin, Where was ( Ipray, faid He)
The Thunder of their Conqur’ing Fove, when We
With thele our Swordsth’ Ztolian Ghampagn ftrow'd
With Slaughter * when the Zyrrben Pools o'reflow'd
With Humane Blood. If now the King of Gods
Fights for the ‘Romane Walls, with fo much Ods
OF Thunder thrown; Why ftrikes He notat Me,
Who fight againft Him ‘midft this Noife? No; We
Motkt poorly turn Our Backs to Storms, and Winde:
Oh! (pray) refume that Courage, and that Minde,


_ Which, while as yet the Leagues, and the Decrees


Of Senate were in Force, did prompt Us thefe
Our Arms to takeinHand. Thus ev'ry Breaft
He fires, till Sol his weary Steeds releatt:

The following Night could not His Cares allay ;


Sleep durft not- once approach Him : Withthe Day —


His former Rage returns, and then agen
He fummons to the Fight His frighted Men,
And ftrikes His dreadfull Shield; the Noife,and Storms
Of Heav'n fo imitating, with His Arms.

But when He found, that Rome fo-confident
Was of the Gods, that She Supplies had fent
Unto the Betich Coaft, and that by Night
The Troops march’d fromthe Walls full of Defpight,
And Rage, that the Befieg’d fuch Leifure had,
( Asnow fecure of Hannibal) more Mad
He preffleth forward; and Advanceth near
The Walls: when Funo, almoft fick with Care,
Thus Zove with Counfel feeks to qualifie.
Sifter Cfaid He) and Wife, moft Dear to Me,

| When


Book Xd. Sirius Iraxricus, 349


When wilt thou.check this Zyrian Youth 2 or when
Wilt thou reftrainthis furious Managen? 9.
Let it fuffice, Saguathusto.deftroy, © 20 frat,
To level the high efjps,andteannoy,
And Chains impofeupon the Sacred Po,

And to pollutethe Lakes. He’s ready now

Into Our Temples, and Our Tow’rsto break. -


‘Stop Him, for you may fee (:asnow Wefpeak)


How He prepares, how He for Fire exclaims,

To imitate Our Thunder with HisFlames. ‘
To this Saturnia giving Thanks, through Air

(€ Much troubled ) to the Earth defcends, and there .

Seifing the Youth’s Right-Hand, Whither, faid She,

Thou Mad-Man, doft Thon run? and, not to be

Maintain’d by Mortals, doft a War purfue 7

"Tis uno {peaks to Thee : ( with that She drew |

Her Vail of Clouds away, and fhewd her Face):

Thou haft not now with Phrygian Swains: ( Alafs )

Or the Laurentines, tocontend: behold!.

( For [le remove the Mift awhile,t’ unfold

All Thingsto Thee) obferve, and fee Thou where

That Hill's high Top afcends into the Air,

( The Palace call’d of the ® Parrbafan King ) (4) Mount Palatine where Kin

By Phebus’tis poflelsd; who, menacing, io plete

Prepares his Ecchoing Quiver, and his Bow

For Fight: bat where upon the lofty Brow

Of Neighb'ring Hills, the ® Aventine doth rile, fikesiec timansebee

See ! how Diana fhakes, before thine Eys , Diagatae eens


~ Her Torches, fir'd from Phlegethon ! how She


Hath ftrip'd her Arms for Fight / Then that way fee,
How Mars, in cruel Arms, that © Field, that bears icasalene:
His Name, hath fill'd! there fanus, furious, Wars; —
And here Quirinus: ev'ry Deity
Fights from his Hill, but then obferve with me,
ow


370


Sirius Ira Licus. Book All.


How Fove his xis, breathing Storms, and Fire
Shakes, and-with how great Flames he feeds his Ire:
Or this way turn thy Face, and, if Thou dare,
Behold the Thunderer, what Tempefts are |
Beneath his Nod / or, when he fhakes his Head,
What Thunder falls! what dreadfull Flames are fhed
Againft Thine Eys ! at length, give Way unto
The Gods, nor fuch Titanian Wars purfue. .
This faid; the Man, intractable to Peace,

Or Rule, yet wondring at the ftormy Face,’

And fiery Members of the Gods, with Pain

Away She drew, and Peace to Heav'n again,
AndEarth, reftor’d. He, looking ftill behinde,
Retires, and to the Camp, much vex'd in Minde,
Commands Fis Enfigns ftraitto march away ,
And threatens to return another Day ;
When through the Aira clearer Light difplaies
It felf, and Phebus gilds the trembling Seas.

But, when the Romanes from the Walls beheld

Far off, that Hannibal had left the F teld,
And pull'd His Enfigns up, they, Silent, view
Each other's Face ; and, Nodding onely, thew.
That, which as yet, through Greatnefs of their F ear,


: They durft not then believe, nor willing were


To think Him gone; but rather, that He then
Practis'd His Punick Frauds, and Arts agen.
In this Sufpenfe each filent Mother ftands,
Kifsing her Children, till the Punick Bands
Quite vanifh'd from their Eys, and, Fear remov'd e
Allhis fufpected Plots but Fancies prov'd.
Then to the Sacred Capitol they throng ,
And, mutually imbracing, chanta Song
Of Triumph to Larpeian Fove: and, there
Adorn the Temple of the Thunderer,

No


fide Gil eS Ee, SR


Book XII. Stittus Iraxuicus. 351
nN a aa ee
Now all the Gates fly open, ev’ry.where
Thofe Joys, which they fo lately did defpair,
The People ruth to fee: thefe view the Place,
Where the Sidonian King’s Pavilion was,
And where He proudly, froma lofty Throne,
Spoke to hisfummon’'d Troops; thofe look upon
The Place, where Warlike e4ftur lay, and where
Fierce Getes, and cruel Hanno Quarter’d were.
This done, their Bodies purg’d in living Springs,
Each Hand its Aid, to build up Altars, brings
Toth’ Anienian NCymphs ; and, Joyfull, then
Hallowing the Wall, return to Rome agen,


The End of the Twelfth Book,


7 — na a RMR apa PE OL ee gree
er ae ~ Ba oat ne ie : Pa : : , F i:


353


Eoea awa |
m4) 4


perm O-

ied ENS
fr. “RD
pea zs


}
}
{i a zag :


i =


if


SILIUS IT


The Second Punick VVar.


The Thirteenth Book,


ee


Toe ARGUMENT.


\
i


Repuls'd by Storms, and Lightning, from the Gates

Of ome, refolu'd to try again the Pates ,
! The Libyan returns, Agrippa fbows
| What Miferies, and Plagues attended thofe,
That fought agatnft the Places that contain'd

af - The fam'd Palladium. | By this reftrain’d,
] Away He marcheth tothe Rhegian Coaft:
In the mean time befteged Capua's loft,
What Wealth, and Tropbies,there the Romanes gain,
In Spain two ACoble Scipioes are flain. |
Grief, for bis Friends, opprefsing Him and Cares,
Young Scipio to Autonde repairs, .
Apollo's Priefte/s, who, by AL agick Spels,

- Cumezan Sybil’s Ghofts doth raife, which tells
To Himen{uing Fates, defcribeth Hell ,
And where the Blefed Souls, in Pleafure dwell. --


a HE (Capitol’s high Top He


i J {carce difcern’d

| = = . ; .

1] AEA | altel In His flow March,when ftraie
| Succedunt Siuudacra 2vrum, Scones Glatris, ‘ ~ nw ‘ Baie Jigtens Saenis uaniog, reluert the Libyan turn d

‘| Yraninug Sunul fatrucrut ipse. per vmbram 4 4 % Se ' “ tnebults smules antinags apprenderé tentaé : 7 s :
iy Honoratiiino Dn? Date Conn Comite — N * Me Bathome Vice-cimti Lanfdowne Baroni Towards the City Fis fierce
/ Grenuile de Kilkhampton &« Bideford Cuftod: & Gardiano Stamariorcum ~~ E: = :

a Caprtali SenefchalloDucatus Cornubiz, Gro = zmethe Stole & primo e Cubtculo Dir ysagain,


zl. | Regis encrose . yumma cum


Preparing to return, and in that Plain


ig 7 = | "a Bb b Encamp’d :


Tahu Observanta D Ds


Sitius Iraricus. Book XIII. ~ Book XIL. - Strrus Eoviceus. -


i. é 354
L Eneamp’d, where Banklels Thuria overflows — , But, contrary to this, efgrippe Cwha ;
The level Meadows , and, Inglorious, goes His fam‘d Defcent from Diomedes drew)
Intothe ThufcanSea,afilentStream. © Among th' Oétolian People, much Renown’d,
Here fometimes on his chiefeft Friends the Blame, - "And of a Noble Name, with Riches Crown’d;
- _ | Sometimes upon the God's commands, he laies, 7 oe But Faithlefs, and, when Rome's Affairs declin’d,
Then onHimlelf. Tell meat length (He faies } |. With the faceefsfull Zidyan had joyn’d ;
Thou, by whofe flaughtring Hand the Lidyan Lake . Revolving thefe Traditions, that of old
: Increas'd, who mad’ft the Dauntan Land to fhake To him his Anceftours before had told,
i With Thunder of thine Arms, difcourag'd now, . Thus pleads ; When Tencrine Pergamus with long
r . ~ Into what Countrey back again, doft Thou (Spear Protracted War was fhaken, and among
Thine Enfigns bear* What Sword Thy Breaft, whae The Grecian Souldiers, unengag’d in Blood,
Hath piere’d * Should Towred Carthage now appear The God of War before the Rampires ftood,
Before thine Eys, what Reafon couldit Thou yield Calchas ( for this, fall oft at the Requeft
Souldier, unwounded thus to quit the Field? | Of © Daunus, kept within his faithfall Breaft, Pe nh, Pats Big of Apia, Fe
Wouldft Thou alledge from Storms(dear Countrey)l Amidft their Fealts did Diomed ate: ) © Diamed.
From Tempefts mix’d with Blood, and Thunder, fly* (alces affar'd the doubefull Greeks, unlels
Let this Effeminate Stain be far, Oh far , ; The fatal Image of the Warlike Maid, - | The Palladinm was the is
From Jyrian People, as unfit for War, - | Kept in the Arcenal, they thence effai'd of Pallas,
But in fair Weather, and in Air that's clear. To gain ,the Spartan Arms fhouldne'’re prevail
The Army, though as yet a‘Pani ck Fear O’re Troy, nor fhould they, with their Henour, fail
O'th’ Gods poffefs'd them, and a recent Smel. - Back to Amycle. For it was by Fate _
Of Lightning on their Arms, as yet, did dwell ; Ordain’d, that none thofe Walls fhould penetrate, :
And ‘fore their Eys the Fight of angry Fove: That did poffefs that Imagé, andthen Our - |
Yet ftilla Vigour to obey, and move, © Pydides, joyn'd with Ithacus, the Tow'r © Diemed,
Whereever He fhould them command, appears,  Entred by Stratagem, and having flain Oe 0) Tevet eased be i
. iffus’d i i . : Be ~ ; Calchas, that they fhould never take ;
And, by degrees diffus'd into their Ears, The Guard, juft at the Entrance of the Fane, 0 Tray morreurn Home, while the
(By what He faid ) Defire in ev'ry Breatt Thence the Celeftial Image ftrait convai’d, ee ed nding. comes |
To bear their Enfignsback again, encreaft : | And Troy unto our Fates was open lai’d. hee at ayaa mag the |
As when aStone the Water breaks, it makes , _ But, when, on the Oénotrian Coaft, he built’ =~ uit ne oul freien aie Wie |
At firft, {mall Rings; butasits Motion fhakes A City, troubled at his former Guilt, +o fund elena Ws iy eh vas |
The trembling Liquour, while it fill defcends, T’ appeafe the Phrygian Goddefs with His Pray'rs, ~ Bho (38 Appian atic made mor
The numerous Orbs increafe, tillitextends And Ilian Gods, Devoutly He prepares. | : ee Eni re |
The curling Circle, ev'ry Way, fo wide, ; Then, ona lofty Tow’r, a Temple ftrait oe |
That ie may touch the Banks on either fide. ; (To Trojan Pallas, a mofthatefult Seat) aoe |
But Bb b2 Was


36 +  Sitius Iraticus. Book XJIL


Was rais’d. When, midft his Sleep,the threatning Maid,
Difcov'ring her great Deity, thusfaid ;
This Fabrick, Diomed, which here you raife,
Unworthy ’s of the Honour of fuch Praife.
- To Us Garganus, nor the Daunian Land |
Aredue: Him rather feek, whofe Pious Hand
Now the firft Walls of better Troy doth rear
Inthe Laurentine Fields. Go thither, there
That captivd Relique of their Fathers lay.
Troubled at this advice, He hafts away
(¢) Aineas. ‘To Saturn’s Kingdom, where Anchifes‘? Son,
oe ie Revie. Be SA Conqu’rer, then, (f) Lavinian Troy begun,
awit ceo ey hl (s) And’s Dardan Arms, ina Laurentine Grove,
or be hy er bal in Grove, Had fix’d. But, asthe Dzunian Fleet did move
Near Tiber’s mouth, and Diomedes there
On Shore had pitch’d his fhining Tents, with Fear
The Trojans trembled, till, inhis Right-hand
A Pledg of Peace extending to the Land,
( An hoary Olive-bough) Zydus Son,
Amid the Trojans Murmurs, thus begun ;
Thy mindeful Rage (neas) and thy Fear
Now confidently lay afide; whate're
At Troy, at Simozs, or Xanthus Flood,
Or near the Scean Port, with fo much Blood,
4And Sweat, by Us was done, was not ( AAlals / )
Our Crime: the Gods, and Fate it brought to pals.
Now think on whatremains; why donot We,
With better Aufpicies of Time, agree
To live? Let’sjoynour peaceful Hands: This fhall
: Be Witnels of our League: and thew’d withall
a hoe Gapping Trojan Minerva from the Poop. By Her


came upon them, from Ardea (whi-


tier he had been banithed) with a Fell the Bold (+) Gauls, chat Rome invaded , nor


ae Army a eS

they were weighing the Gold, wiic “4 e
Wrazto random thotein the Capiteljand OF that Great People did there One remain,
made fo great a flaughrer of them,that


there remained not fo muchas a Mef- That to his Native Land return’d again.


fengeygye carry the Tidings of their . +5
gel ion into Gallia. See Liv. lib. 5. Difmai d


Book XIII. SIL1us Iraticus. 357


Difmai'd at this, the General his Bands (mands
(Much joy'd, that they fhould March away’) Com-


To pull their Enfigns up, and to remove
Into thofe Fertile Plains, where in a Grove
Wealthy © Feronia’s Worthipp’d, and o’re all. {i) The Religion of this place, where
: ‘uno Feronia was Worfhipped ff
The Grounds Capéna’s Sacred Waters fall. from a Wiracle, forthe Grove by accis
a : : . : dent being fir’d,tie Inhabitan:s would
From Birth of Antient Faunus (as ‘tis faid > ec Sema ree enna
& ered its former Ver-
Through along Tract of time, together lay'd, oe tthe eh ce
sen . sa franchized , repaired, and, their Heads
Great Wealth, by frequent Gifts encreas'd, and there, panty inc cist
; Ey * of their Liberty, hence fhe was called
Alone, preferv'd by areligious Fear, The Goddefs of Liberty. “This Tem
: ple, enriched by Devotion, was fpoiled
The Gold untouch’d for many Ages lay: by Hanaibal. See Livctit. 26.
Their barb'rous Hearts, and greedy Minds, the Prey
Pollutes, and arms them to contemn the Gods.
From thence it pleasd him through remoter Rodes
Toturn, where Fields, Plough’d by the Brutian Swain,
Extended are to the Trinacrian Main.
While, Difcontented, thus the Libyans go
To th’ Roegian Coatt, Brave Fulvins (the Fo
Remov'd from’s Country) atthe Walls appears
Of Capua, and to the Befieged bears
Th’ unwelcom News. Their Miferies were than
Extreamly high, when Falvins thus began
Toall of Name in Arms: Take this Difgrace
Away by Valour. Shall this Treach'rous Place,
(To Usanother (arthage) after all
Her violated Leagues, and Hannibal


Sent to our very Gates, Her proud Demand
Of an alternate, equal (on/ul, ftand *
And from her lofty Turrets, now difmai'd,
still look for Libyan Cohorts to her Aid ©
Deedsto his Words headds, and, ftreight, he calls
For Tow'rs of Oak, bh: hthe higheft Walls
He could furmount, and, inftantly , commands: .
To joyn huge Beams with Cords, and Iron ones :
Y


358 “Sirius Iraricus. Book XIII.


By which thecalleft Pofts of Gates He brake,
And all Delays of Bars would quickly fhake.

_ Here, fenc’d with Starlike Piles on ev'ry Side,
A. Mount israis‘d, and there they areimploy’d -


is Work was by the R : V7; ,
mie att Vin adcoted or: 2Otailethe © Vines, arm’d above, andall


cetheSlicr ven ae fee : Soon done, which he could Meceffary call,
ERA oe ae He gives the Sign to {cale the Walls, and fills
The Town with Terrour of impending Ills ;
_ When fuddenly an happy Omen fhin’d
On His Attempts: an Hinde (whichrare We finde
Of fuch a Colour ) that the Swans, or Snow,
Surpafs‘d in Whitenefs, which, when with his Plow
Capys the Circuit of thofe Walls defign’d,
A Countrey-Prefent, taken with its Kinde —
Familiarity ( when Young) he fed,
Anda kinde Senfe of Man had init bred. -
All W ildnefs loft, She us'dto take her Stand
To feed at Table; by her Mafter’s Hand
When ftroak’d, much pleas’d,oft the Campanian Dames
Smooth'd her with Combs, and in the Neighb’ring
Renew’‘d her Whitenefs:thus the Hind became( {trea
The Deity o’th’ Place, and had for Name
Diana's Servant ; and, asto a God,
With holy Enfignsthey the Altarsload.
Lufty, and ftrong in Life ( though Aged) She
A thoufand Years, with great Felicity,
Fiad paft, and Houfes built by Trojans there
Equal'd in Age ; but now her Death was near :
For chac’d by cruel Wolves, that fuddenly
Into the Town, ¢ adolefull Prodigie
In V War) by Night had enter'd ; as the Day
Began to break, out at the Gates, away
She ran, and, frighted, fled into the Plain,
| Near'ta.the Walls; where, by the Souldiers ta’ne,


ke (Who


»


Book XIII. - Srrtius Irartrcus. 3359


(Who joyfully contended in the Ghafe )
To Thee, Latonian Goddels, onthe Place _.
The General off ‘ring her. ¢ forunto Thee .::.::
He knew that Sacrifice mult pleafing be) | ==.
Pray'd His Defign might, by thine Aid, be crown‘d:
And ftrait, relying on the Goddefs, round
The City mov’d his Troops, and where into ..
An Orb the Walls were bent, obliquely, drew -
A ftrongly-guarded Trench, and kept them there
Inclos’d with Arms, like Beafts in Toils. While Fear
Increas‘d in others, witha ftately Plume
Out at the Ports doth Warlike Taurea come,
Chafing His foaming Steed (to Him, for brave
Exploits , AL aurufan Shafts the General gave
But lately, and an Autololian Band ) .
He fpurring on his Steed, which fcorn’d to ftand,
Hearing the trembling Cornets, when fo near
He came, that He perciev'dthe Fo might hear
His Neighbrring Call, faid Claudius, ( whor'ch’ Art
Of War excell’d, and Honour, with Defert,
In many a Fight had gain’d ) if yet upon
His Valour Herely, may He alone
Enterthe Field, and fight with Me. What ftay’d
The Romane, when ‘twas heard what He had faid,
Ws, that it was Ordain’d before, on Pain
Of Death, that none fhould dare to entertain
A fingle Fight, without the General's Leave.
But foon as Fulvius His Permifsion gave,
Into the open Plain, with Joy, he flies,
And ftrait thick Clouds of Duft, like Billows, rife.
But {corning all Afsiftance of the Thong,
Or Loop, to make His Weapon fly more ftrong,
Taurea, with his bare Strength, His Spear advanc’d,
Anditwith Headlong Rage, and Fury, lanc'd


Into


Sacius Iraricus, Book XIII.


- Into the Air's’ while, of another Minde,


The brave Reoalian, feeking where to finde
Acertain Place to givea Wound, now fhook, .
Then couch'd His Spear,and many a threatning Stroke
Pretends; ull fix'd in’s Shield his Jav'lin ftood :
But was depriv'd of the defired Blood. |
Then inftantly he drew his Sword, when ftraie
Taurea, to fly che Menaces of Fate,
With his fteel'd Heel drives on his nimble Steed.
While, at his Back, the Romane with a Speed,
Great as his Rage, purfu'd, and very near
Giving the Reins, approach'd him; and, as Fear
The Conguer'd, fo che‘ Conquerour Defire
Of his deferved Blood, Honour, and Ire
Into the Gates invite ,and, while they there
Scarce Credie what they fee, that He thould dare,
Alone,to break into their Walls, and hafte
So boldly through th’ amazed Town, he paft
Through th’ adverfe Port, and to his Friends retir'd.
With that ch’ Mindes of all the reft were fir'd
With the like Heat, and Induftry t’ invade
The Walls ; and where he had a Paflage made,
To enter, Flames, and Swords ftrait fhine;then Showrs
Of Stones,and Darts, affaule the higheft Tow'rs :
None could the Reft in Courage to engage
Excell, all Hands were equall’d by their Rage.
Dian Shafts fly through the Air, and fall
With Wounds i’th’ midfto'th’ Town. The General
Is pleas'd to finde, that they had left no Room
For his Encouragement; they all affume
So eagerly their Task. Whom when he fpy'd
So well refoly'd, and Fortune madea Guide


To all ; upto the Gate he, Furious,came,


And fought with Danger to encreafe his Fame.
: Three


7 Calenus, born upon T ifata's Hills,
Fe Ccce


= MIRE OTN IE gE


Book XIU. Srrius leecreus;- | 361


Three Brothers (Twiris) who each a chofen Band
Had of an Hundred men, at their Commiand,
Guarded that Pals, and there their Station held:

OF thefe in Beauty ACumitor excell'd,.

Laurens in Ranning, and Laburnus Tall

Above the other : but their Weapons all

Were diffrent; One Renowned for his Bow;

For ’s Spear the other, wont in Fight to throw

His poifon’d Lance, and not to truft his Sword:

But Lamps,with Flames, and Sulphur mix’d,the Third
Compos’d. So (famous ina former Age )

That horrid Monfter of a Triple Rage,

Gerton, foughton the eA tlantick Shore; ~~ (bore;
Whofe three Right-Hands three fev'ral Weapons


~ One cruel Flames ; Behinde: him t’other drew
His Bow; the third his trufty Javiin threw:


And dealt three fev'ral Waies, at once, a Wound.

When thefe, thus varying Fight, the Conful found

With diffrent Arms, the Slaughter, that appear’d

Atth’ Entrance of the Gate, and Pofts befmear’d

With Blood of fuch, as thither did advance,

With an inraged Force his twifted Lance

He throws. Importing Death, th’ Italian Yew

Cuts through the Air, and,where (as then he drew

His Bow, and from above his Arrows ply’d)

Stout Numitor was Naked, pierc’d his Side.
But, not Content to fight, befieged there,

In War Unskilfull, though ftill apt to dare,

With headlong Heat, rath Virius open threw

The Gate, and broke into the Field, andto —

The Conqu'rours Rage his miferable Men

Exposd: thefe Scipio fiercely charg’d. Butthen,

As he the offer’d Troop, infatiate, kills,


Bred


ze Sitius Eraricus. Book XIE. i Book XIII. Sirius Irartcus, 363


Bed upito:bold Assempts, His Courage great,
As was Elis Body, often wontto beat
‘Lyons, to fight bare-Headed, to Contend
With Steers, and down the winding Horns to bend
Of fierceft Bulls, by Force, unto the Ground,
And for his vigorous Fate before Renown'd:
He, while bold Virius from the Town expell’d
Some rafh Affailants, whether,that He held
His Breaft-Plate ufelefs, or to fhun Delay,
Into the Field had, Naked, made His Way,
And, nimbler now, the panting Fugitives
O’retakes, and fev’ral Ways, Victorious, drives :
And now, already, Veliternus through
The Belly he had thruft ; and Marius, who
With equal Sport.was wont to exercife
Equeftral Fights with S cipio, by him dyes,
Struck backward to the Ground by an huge Stone,
Torn fromthe Earth. Expiring, with a Groan
FT implores his Friend ; and, Gaping, underneath
The Rock was cruth'd, But, Sorrow for his Death
Doubling his Strength, while all his Face o’reflows
With Tears, his finging Cornel Scipio throws,
Hafting to his Expiring Friend, to how
The with’d-for Comfort of a dying Fo.
The Shaft, as ifa Bird the liquid Air
Divided had, paft through his Breft, and there
Diffolv'd his mighty Frame: fwift, as its Way |
A nimble Galley makes upon the Sea, nf
Which flies more nimbly, then the Winds, as oft -
AAs, to their Breafts reduc’d, the Oarsaloft
The curling Surges ftrike, and with the Stren gth
Of one jéyat Strook runs farther, then her Length.
But Volefus Afcanius (who had caft
His Arms away, that he might lighter hatte
Unto


Linto the Walls, as through the Plain he fled: >.)
Purfues. Strait .fever'd :by.his-Sword,:hisHead..::, «


* ~ Dropsat the Owner's Feet:>.:but, bythe Force’ «|


Of running forward, in its{peedy Gourfe, |
The following Trunk, :at length, beyond it falls.

No longer, now, to keep their open Walls,

Did the Befieged hope.: When ftraigabout
They Face, and {liut their own Companions out, .:
That beg to be receiv'd. Their Hingesthen. . |. .
They turn, and ftrive;too late; theirBarsagen, -
And Boltsto fix. At this th’ Italians preft

More fiercely on, and the Befieg’d infeft. ae
And, had not Earth been taken from their Sight, -.
Wrap'd in the Stygian Bofomof the Night,

The Souldiers their Affault fo furious made,

The broken Gates had then been open lai‘d.

But yet the Darknefs brought not equal Reft
Toall. Thefe Fearlefs Slumbers (fuch, as bleft:.--. .
With Victory, Men know) enjoy; but there
With dolefull Cries of Women, ev'ry where,
With dire Complaints, and trembling Parents Groans,
(Capua affrighted, her fad Fate bemoans,
And praysa Period ef her Woes to fee.

The Head, and Authour of her Treachery

(The Senate) murmurs. Virius,allCares
OF Life, now, lai'd afide, aloud declares

No Hopes of Aid from Hannibal. Said He ;

I hop’d to rule ore Rome, and did agree,

1f Godsthe Libyan Arms, and better Fate

Alsifted had, to Capua to tranflate

Trojan QuirinusEmpire. It was,

That fent that Force to fhake their Walls, and high
Tarpeian Tow'rs. {had the Courage there


To ask an equal Conf: is seg ms bear The


304


Saurus lravicus. Book XIll.


a Se


The Faféei;in Our Namey:Ic hitherto’
Suffideth; We have liv'd! ;-and, while Wenow
Have Might enough, wheever inhis‘Minde —
Affecteth it,-at eAcherommay finde. >
Erernal Liberty¢:let Hisxrepair
Unto my Table, and My Cates, andthere
Drenching himfelf'in. Bacchus Fruits. ( his Minde
Subdu’d)* ke foon a Remedy may finde:
For all his Wes:3' the Sting of Death may charm,
And, with that pleafant Poifon, Fate disarm.
This faid ; 4 Multitude attend him Home.
Amidft his Palace, in a {pacious Room,
A mighty Pyle of Wood did ftill remain,
The common Receptacle of the Slain...
But, yet the People Grief, and Fear, diftraa,
While now, too late, on Decins they reflea —
Their Thoughts, and-his brave Valour, punifh’d by
Acruel Banifhment.. Then from the Sky
Divinett Farthidoks:down, and vexeth their.
Fallacious Hearts, and ftrait through ev'ry Ear
Afcoret Voice'ts:fpred: Break no Accord,
Or Oath (Ye Mortals!) with the cruel Sword ;
But keep Your Faith Inviolate: for This
Then Thrones, that fhine with Purple, better as.
For who with Fallacies deligh ts to break
A League, or {hall the flender Hopes forfake
Of bis affiited Friend; bis Houfe, his Wife,
Perpetual Trouble (hall attend: bis Life
Shall ne've want Tears ; but both by N ight, and Day,
Defpis'd, and violated Faith, by Sea,
eAnd Land purfuing, (hall bim fill torment.
"Then, in a Cloud difguis'd, Erinnys went
To all Affemblies, touch’d their Tables, and
Sits down, and feeds, and then, with her own Hand,
_, Bowls


Book XIIL


Sirius Iraticus.


Bowls, freathihg up:with Strgidn Gore; prefers,
And largely Plaguck, and.Death, adminifters, <.
But Virtus Cwhile-yet Ruin She pretends,
Diving into his Soul’) the Pyle afcends;:
And fticks in her Embrace, commanding {trait
To Kindle it, and fo co joyn their Fate. © .

The Night her Limits touchd, and now, amain ;
The furious Conquerour came‘on again...
When the Campanian Youth upon the Walls
eMilo, who thither his Companions calls,
Beheld: Affrighted, ftrait, they open threw
The Gates, and fuch, as wanted. Courage, to
Avoid their Punifhment by Death, with low
And titembling Knees, now entertain the Fo. -
The Town her Houles, by the Tyrian Guett
Polluted, op’ning, her blindeRage confeft,


“Women, and Children, in Confufion, run,


With the fad Senate ( that their Woes begun )
Adnd vulgar Crew by none lamented ; whiles


- The Army all ftood leaning on their Piles,


Yo view thofe Men, who nor Profperity ,

Nor Mifery could bear :fometimes to fee (they aeae

Them fweep the Ground with Beards, which Trimm’d

Down to their Breafts,; with Duft their Whiter Hair

To fain, and, poorly Weeping, toentreat

Meft fhamefully, and yielding Air to beat

With their effeminate Howliags. But, while thefe.

Unmanly Acts the wondring Seuldier fees,

And, ftill Incens’d, expects the Signal to

O’rethrow the Walls, behold! Religion through

Each Breaft, with filent Senfe of Pity, goes,

And their fierce Mindes doth by her Pow'r compofe.

A gentler God doth fenfibly infpire

Their Hearts, to lay afide all Thoughts of Fire,
nd


365


366


(1) Inthe Feftivals of Pan, which
were called Lupercalia, the Pricfts cut
the hideof the Goat, that was facrificed,
into chongs:wherewich, running naked
about che Streets,they ftruck fach Wo-
men, whom they met, and defired to
be with Childe, upon the Bellies : out
of opinion, thar this caufed them to be
fruictull. Rofin. Antiq. Rom. lid. 3-


And his lov'd Menalus, where on thrill Reeds


| Sitius Iraricus. Book XII.


And their deftructive Torches: notto bura,
And into Dufk,at.once, the Temples turn. :
Helikewifethen-fuggefts (toallunfeen) «. .
That that proud Town's Foundation had been _

By Capys lai'd-of old: Hetells them there

Fair Houles, fit for Habitation, were

Extended far.into delicious Fields.’

Thus, by Degrees, their former Fury yields .

To milder Thoughts, and, quickly mollifi'd

In ev'ry furious Breaft, all Anger dy’d,

The Trojan: Houfes willing fafe to keep,

‘Fove, likewile,thither fent the God of Sheep,

Pan, who {till feems as he were Hanging, and
Scarce on the Earth imprints, wheree’re he ftand,
One horned Foot; his Right-Hand wanton plays
© With a Tegean Hide, and in crofs Ways,
Wagging his Tail, defired Stroaks beftows,

A Pine furrounds his Hair, and Shady Brows :
On his red Front arife two little Horns ;

His Ears upright; . a {quallid Beard adorns

His Chin, 4 Paftral Staff he alwaies bears,

Anda flick Do-Skin on his Left Side wears:

No ragged Rock fo Steep, and High deth rife,
On which, his Body poiz’d, like one that flies,

He will not dare,through pathlefs Waies,to tread : |
Sometimes, he laughing, backward turns his Head,


To fee the Sportings of his bufhy Tail


Upon his Back ; then lifts his Hand to vail

His Forehead fromthe Sun’stoo fervent Rays,

And Paftures with his fhadow’d Sight furvaies.
He, when he had the God’s Commands fulfill’d,

Their raging Hearts appeas'd, and Fury ftill'd,

To the e4frcadian Groves away He {peeds,


He


ok XU. cere Iraticus. 367


Hefweatly plays, and-with his Rural Song. 3
Leads, from the Sacred Hill, his Flocks glang.

But, Fuluias commanding that the Fire. -
Should from the Gates be keprt,.and leavecntire -.
The Walls, th’ e4ufasian Legions, to fhew
The noble Temper of their Minds, withdrew
Their Flames, and Swords ; but from the Temples,and
The Houfes, that enrich’d with Gold did ftand, =
Awealthy Prey they took, with that, which fed
Their Riot, and by which they perifhed,
Effeminate Garments, that their! Men array’d,
And Tables rich, from forein Lands convey’d;
With Goblets, that provok'd to Luxury,
Set with EéanGems: nor couldthey fee -
An end of Silver, and the carved. Weight
¢ Exprefsly made for Feafts) of golden Plate.
Then came the Captives, inanum'rous Frain, —
Wich all their Coin; fufftcient to maintain
Along-protraded War: with Servants, thae,
Tn Multitudes, did attheir Banquets Wait.

. But, when from Plunder of the Town, agen,
The Gen'ral, by the Trampet’s found, His Men
Had call'd'¢a Noble Cherifher of Great:
Attempts) to Milo,'from his lofty Seat, gd) Damgurine bathin this Judi
He thus began: ‘*) Lanuyian Youth; whom We oe jhutour, when Lavin
From Fano Sopite receive, from Me ? Dives des foe ee ckae
This Martial Honour; for thy Vidory, aprsediel the Repo antic ce
Accept, and “bout thy Fower'd Templestry ahd Tele igh be equal ieee
This‘ Mural Crowa: This done, he ftreightway fernt tet*, ssmaybe obferved in zivy.
For all the Nobles; ehat firft Puntthment ~ oe
Had merited,-arid, for their treach’rous Deeds,
Beneath his jufter Ax each Guilty bleeds.
But, that fierce Valout:: Faures€ for to hide,


(#) This Crown, or Wreath ,was
of Gold (zhough noi fo honourable,
as fome of other Inferiour matter, faich
Pliny) and_given by the General to
him’, who firit made his way over the
Walls into any Town taken by affaulc.
Aulns Gelius, lib. 5.


Evin ina Fo, that Honour had-been ry'd, :


Wee


HONE Fe pT ee RT


(0) Puteoli. |


| Siiius ITaALicus. Book XI.


Were bale) witha loud Voice exclaims; Shale Thou, »
Thus Unreveng’d by Me, deprive Menow,
CA Soul more Great,then Thine) of this My Sword?
Or by the Lifour (whemthou giv'ft the Word )
Shall this moft Valiant Head diffever'd fall
Atfach bafe Feet? On Us this never thall
Be by the Gods allow’d. Then witha Look
Threatning, and full of Rage, he fudden ftrook =,
His Warlike Sword quite through his Breaft,and dy'd.
To whom the Romane General reply’d ;
Go, and the Ruin of thy Countrey thus
Accompany in Death. What Mindsin Us
Remain, what is Our Valour,what We are


- (Each Man of Us) thall be difcera’din War.


If thou doft think ic Shamefull to abide

Juft Punifhment, thoumightfthave fighting dy‘d;

Thy Countrey {uff 'ring,at the very time,

With Streams of Blood for her unhappy Crime.
But, mixing Joys with Sorrows, the dire Hand

OF Fortune, then in the Iberian Land

Two Noble Scipioes had deftroy’d, that there

Great Griefs, and Honours to their Countrey were.

By Chancea Youth, of that Illuftrieus Name,

Into the © Dicarchean City came,

After Extremities of War: and there

Refided. Fame, reporting to his Ear

His Friend’s fad Deftiny,and Tears, (though He


_ Ne're us‘dto ftoop under Adverfity )


Beating his Breaft, he tears his Garments’: nor
Could Senfe of Honour,or a Souldier,

Northe Perfwafions of his Friends prevail ;
But ftill his angry Piety doth rail .

On the unequal Gods; hatesall Relief,’


And ufual Comforts of encreafing Grief,
_ And


NEE RIS BRTERI PEIESAMA IE T a


Book XIII. | Sittus Iraticus. -


389


And now fome days were {pent in fad Complaint,
And ftill his Father's Ghoft feems converfant
Before his Eyes, and therefore he intends
To raife the Souls, and «AL anes of his Friends, -
And by Difcourfe with them, at length,the Rage,
And Smart of his great Sorrows to affwage.
So, by a Neighb’ring Lake invited, where
Thee cherufian Liquour doth Declare
The horrid Entrance to Avernus, ftrait
His Thoughts are fir'd to know enfuing Fate.
“And therefore to Autonée ( who then,
Under Apollo's Name, the facred Den,
And Tripodskept) He goes, and open lays
The Counfels of his troubled Breaft, and prays
To fee his Father's Face. Without delay,
The Prophetefs commands him ftraie to flay,
To th’ Shades below, the ufual Sacrifice,
Two Coal-black Lambs, as Day began to rife,
And, while they yet were Breathing, as they dy'd,
The flowing Blood within the Earth to Hide,
Then fhall the S¢ygian Empire fend to Thee
Her People. Whatthou more defir'ft (quoth She)
To know, a greater Prophetels {hall Sing.
For I to Thee true Oracles will bring
From the Ehfan Fields, and Thou fhalt fee, .
Amidft old Sidyl's Rites performed by Me,
That fam’d Phebean Breaft’s Prophetick Shade.
Go then, and, whenthe dewy Night hath made —
Her courfe beyond her middle Line, then bring
Th’ aforefaid Victims to the Stygian King,
Chaft, to Avernus Entrance, . Likewife joyn
To them ehoice Honey, and the pureft Wine.
He, quickned by Her Counfel, and no lefs
With the great Name o’th’ promis'd Praphetefs,
Ddd The


(p) That had never born Yoak.


Sruius Irari ows. Book XIIL.


The Sachifiees For his dark Defi ign


~ Prepares; andy when to the appointed tine


The Night atviv'd, and what was finifhed —

Equal'd the following Darkneds, from his Bed
He rufé, atid tothe troubled Entrance went’ —
Of the Zartarean Port ; where, Diligent

Tokeep her Word, the Prophetefs had then
Allthings fulfill'd, and fate ith’ Stygian Den.
Then that Way, where at firft the broken Greund,
A Cave, thatne‘re by Sun was feen, is found ,

And fadly groaning, from its hollow Mouth,
Belcheth (ocytus bitter Streams, the Youth

Into’t She leads s conimands him, in-the Ground
With's. Sword to dig an Hole; and, ‘Trotting round,
Mutrring a feeret Charin; Shebids, that all °-
The Beafts fot Sacrifice; inorder, fal. =“
To Pluto firft a Bull, to Flecate , Dees
With achat Neek, ai Heifer, then to Thee,
oA leffo, and Megera ( ever fd) are
The chofen Bodies of two Sheep, hat had
Buttwo yearsliv'd: on theft thty Milk infus'd,
Honey, and Witte. The Youth ftood QilFanius’ a,
While the old Prophetefs exclaim’d; She well
Perceiv’d each Fate, that did with Pluto dwell.
I fee, faid She,: all Hell approaching, and
Now the third Enmpire inmy View doth ftand.-
Behold what various Shapes, and whatloe’re
Was born of Man, and dy'd togetlier, there ~
From deepeft Ghaos come. ‘The (yclops fee ! ? |
Scylla, and thofe, that with {uch Cruelty

Their Thracian Horfes fed with Fleth of Met’!
Attend, and mith and, without Fear, agen *


Put up thy Sword.’ Thofe Souls, that in fuch afte .


March on before, the Off red Blood to Taft, -
ae Let


Book XIII. ~~ Sinrus Iranicus, ry a7
Let pals, till the chaft Sidyl's Shade appear. ~

In the meantime, Behold! how Speedy there
Comes that Unburied Ghoft to {peak to Thee,

And hath (as when Alive) the Liberty

To ufe its Voice, till on the Fun’ral Wood

Its Body burn, ifit hath touch’d no Blood:

This noble Scipio faw, and, troubled at

The fudden Apparition, faid; Q: what
Sad Chance Thee from thy finking Country, when
Our horrid Wars require fuch Gallant Men, _
Renowned Captain, fnatch’d? for none could Thee
(eA ppius}in Valour, orin Policy

Excel. Ten times.the glorious Lamp of Day

Hath rofe, fince I return’d from Capua,


_ And faw Thee, then, Bathing thy Wounds, and fad


Onely, that they continued {till fo Bad,

Thou could’ft not go unto the Walls, and quite
Depriv'd Thee of the Honour of that Fight.

To which the Ghoft reply’d: Th’ enfuing Day
The pleafant Horfes of the Sun away -

From Me (then fainting) turn’d, and banifh’d Me
To the dark Waters for Ecernity. _

But while vain Vulgar Rites the tedious Care

Of Friends purfues, my. Body they forbare

To burn: that far about, at length, they may

Ic to my Father's Sepulcher convey.

But by thy glorious Deeds (which emulate

Thofe ofour Father Mars) 1 Thee entreat,

Let Drugs, that keep the Bodies of the Dead

Entire in other Lands, be Banifhed i
From Me, that fo my Wandring Shade may ‘oon
Go freely to the Gates of eA cheron. |

~ Moft noble Branch of ancient: Clandus Line, -
None of my Cares i pet dto'Thine,


2 The a


) The antient Opinion was ;
ois Ten sas continued Unburied wan.
dred upon the Banks of Acheron, and
were not fuffered to go over, till an
hundred years were expired,


——


(r) Among the Egyptians were
three forts of preferving their Dead.
The Poor People onely rook out the
Guts, and dryed the Body with Salt
for the {pice of feventy days. The
more Wealchy never cut open the
Body, but injected into the Belly a
Clyfter of che Juyce, that diftills from
Cedar , which had the Virtue, after
feventy days, to draw out withit all
rhe Entrails, throngh the Side. “The
Carnous parts ,in the mean time were
confumed by Witres, and the Skin
and Bouesonely remained. But thofe
of the beft quality, firft, with a crooked
Iron, drew out the Brain through the
Noftrils, then took out the Guts, and
fillingboth Cavities with Afyrrh, Caf-
ga, and other Perfumes ( Frankin-
cenfe excepted) they again fewed up
th: Body , and buried it feventy days
in Niere: when,all moifture confumed
(and thereforeby the Poet Metapho-
rically termed, Stowe perfumed) it was
taken up, aud in awooden Cafe ( fha-
ped to its proportion ) placed againft
the Wall, infome room of the houfe,
where,even in their Banquets, they had
it in cheir view; not to check their
Mirth, but to invite them to enjo
themfelves, whilealive. Herodor. lib.
2. Ester pe.


The Youth replies, althougls chey are aot imall;
That new Afflikt Mes fori kaow, throughall
The Nations ofthe World, a various Senfe


Of Tombs, and Afhes,keeps a difference, |
_And varies owsch the Fun’rals of che Dead.

Inthe Iberian Country (as ‘tis faid)

An antient Cuftom ‘tis, chat Vuleurs tire

On their Dead:Bodies. When their Kings Expire,

Tr Eiyreanian People think a beft vexpofe

To Dogs their Members. The Egyptians clofe

(r) In Stone perfam'd their Bodies, after Fate,

And hardly from their Tables feparate

The Blegdiels Ghofts. In Pontus they Ordain,

The Heads of Men to empty of the Brain,

And fo Embalm'd, for many Ages, keep.

What fhould We fay of chofe, that Buried deep

Dig naked Garamantigns upin Sand?

Or of the Af 4famonigns, shat command,

Their Dead to bury in the cruel Seas -

Upon the LibyanCoaft: The Cehe pleale:

Their empty Skuls with Gold about to ring,

And fuch for Cups uate their Tables bring,

But the Cecroptans did by chance Ordain,

That fuch,as in their Country's Wars were Slain

Should be together Burn'd. Oppos'd to thefe,

Time onely doth interrthe Carcafes —

Of Scythian People ; who, on Stakesof Wood

Impal'd, hang melting with corrupted Blaad.

As thus he talk’d, ¢futonde (the Shade

O'th’ Sidylrifing ) Seta Period, faid,

ToyourDifconrfe. Behold ¢hat Prieftefs, who

So much of Future things, whea liying, knew,

That ev'n the Gads, thag.they kaew more,deny'd.

And now ‘tis time your Men fhould go afide,


hat


Siz iu 5 : I TA Lic us. Book XI.


Book XU S31 Lius Ita Lic u's,


That You, and I,the Beaftsmay burn. ‘Thisfaid;
With Maftries fill'd, the old  Cymaean Maid,
After the Sacrificed Bleed her Mouth

Had toudh‘d,and talted, viewing well the Youth
C Whole Face was Beantiful began: Whenl
Echerial Light, not idly, did enjoy,
My voice was heard in the (ymaen Den
Toanfwer People; and Thee (S¢ipio) then,

In future Ages, and in ‘Kome's Aifairs

Concern’d, I fung. But yer thy Father's Cares
Scarce merited my Words: forthey nor made


- A due Enquiry after whae I Said,


Nor yet obferv'd it. But now matk; fince Thou
Defir’fi to know the Fatés of Kome, which now


On Thine depend (for Ichy Diligence


To take the Oracles of Life'from henge


. Perceive) and here thy Father's Adanes fee s


On th’ arm’d Iberian Thou, wish Victory,

Thy Father thalt Revenge: to Mdarsbefore

Due years entrusted, and thy Sword the eZ oor

Shall of his Joys depriye. Thou thalt sejoyce,

When Thee, as Omen tothe War, the Voice’

Of Rome fhall choofes when,in th’ Iberian Land,

Carthage Thou fhajt fubdus, Thento command

More eminent Thou thalebe rais'd, nor Fone

From Thee his Gare, and Kindnefs thall remowe,

Till the whole War He into Lifye drive,

Andthereto Thee ew'n Haanibel thall give

To be Subdn'd. But, oh Ingrateful Rome /

Which after all thefe Honours Theeiof Home,

And“) Country thall deprive, Asthis She {pake,

Sheturn'd her Stepstowards the Sygian Lake,.
Whate'reill Chanecof Lifeattends Me, 1

(The Youth replies) will may Endeayours try: — ”

et


373


(5) Sibyl.


(+) After Scipio had fubdued Han-
nibal, and broken the whole Force of
Carthage, and, with bisBrother, over-
thrown sintiochas, he was afterward
accufed, by a Faction, of defrauding the
People of the wealchy Spoils of 4x-
tiochus: whereupon He,ina voluntary
Exile, retired to Linternum , where
hedyed, commanding this Infcripiion
tobe fet on his Tombe. Jngratefrt
Conntry thon haft not [o muchas Bones


He ee eg i ee LT ae Fn Oe ee ee ee, ee eC ae ee RS ne


374


Book XIIL


~Sruius' It ALICUS.


(«) Hei defcribed.


_ Ev'n atthe Entrance Rhadamanth Ordains,


Yet may my Breatt be free from Guilt! but naw:
I pray thee (fince the onely Cauke , ‘that Thou: ;
Didft live, was Humane Labours hae to Aid) ~
Awhile thy Steps reftrain ( renowned Maid )
And unto Me the filent Shades report, »

With all the Terrours of the Stygian Court.

She foon affents to that, which he requir’d, |

But Thou a Kingdom, not to be defir’d,

(Said She) doft open: “) forthe Darknefs there ’
People, that once Innumerable were,

Inhabite, and through endlefs Shadows fly,

And yet make up but One great Family.

I’ ch’ midft a dark, and airy Space, of large


Extent, there is, which common Death doth charge


Witch all, that from the Teeming World’s firft Birth |


The fiery Air produc’d, the Seas, or Earth.
Thither all things defcend, what hath, or fhall
Perith, that gloomy Field devoureth all.

Ten Gates this Kingdom compafs, whereof One
Receives the Warlike Sons of Mars alone :
Another thofe, that Famous Laws have made,
And the Foundations, firft, of Cities lay’d.

The Third ’s for Ceres harmlefs Tribe, that go,
By Fraud unpoifon'd, to the Shades below.
Next Thole, that pleafane Arts did firft invent,
And Way of Living, fullof all Content,

And (which not Father Phebus would Difdain)
Verles compos'd, their proper Gate maintain.
The next the Shipwrack Port, (for fo that Gate
Is Nam‘d) is kept for fuch, as meet their Fate

In Winds, and cruel Storms. Another wide,
And near this ftands, for fach as Guilty dy‘d,
And there confefs their Sins: Their fev'ral Pains.


And


Book XIII.


Situs Iratieu's,


And empty Death infli@s. The Seventh to Bands
‘OF Women, that flack thither; open ftands:
Where her pale Groves the Chaft Proferpina
Maintains. And, near to this, another Way,
And Gate there is, well-known by Infants Cries,
To them afsign’d, and all thofe Companies,
T hat in the Port of Life extinguifh’d are’:
And Virgin Troops, whofe Nuptial Tapers were
Turn’d into Fun’ral Flames.’ But then, remote
From this, there is another Gate, of Note,
Which, Night diffolving, fhines like rifing Day,
And, through the Shadow of afecret Way,
Leadstoth’ Elyfan Fields: Here, nor to Hell
Subjected, nor in Heav'n the Pious dwell.
But quite beyond all Seas, upon the Brink
O’ th’ Sacred Fountain, thither throng to Drink-
Forgetfulnefs of Minde, in Lethe's Streams.
The Laft, with Gold refulgent, feels the Beams
Of Light; and Shines,as if the Moon-were there.
This way the Bleffed Soulsto Heay'n repair,
And, when athoufand Luftra Time hath paft,
Forgetting Dis, into their Bodies hafte: a,
Death, his black Jaws wide op’ning, to and fro,
Through all thefe Ways,and Ports, doth wandting 20.
Then a flow Gulph, without a Body, far |
Extended, and dark muddy. Lakes there are, aie
Where‘ Phlegethon with {welling Waters burns —
The Banks, onev’ry fide, and, Roaring, eurns.- :
The flaming Quarries up, with Stornis of Fite.
Then, in another Quarter, with as Dire
A Rage, ‘» Cocytas rolls black Waves of Blood,
Andruns, a Torrent, with a foaming Flood.
But Styx, which Fove himfelf, and all the reft


Of the Immortal Gods, do ftill Acteft, ee


375


(») The Rivers of Hef.


bah soel PE AR ENRON CE QR TA


sey
P


| Sriuius Ivratricus. Book XH.


Dreadful with Pitch, and Sulphur, fmoaking Mud
Drives through his Chanel. But (then Thelea Flood
More difmal, froathing with Corruption, and
Thick Poifon, Belching up the gelid Sand,
~ ‘With horrid Murmurs) Acheron, through all.
The Pools, with a black Stream, doth flowly fall.
This Venom’d Three-mouth (erberus defires,
‘This for her Drink Ti/iphone requires :
This dire Megara craves ; nor yet can they,
With all their Drink, their raging Thirft allay.
But the laft River breaketh out before
T he Entrance, and inexorable Door
OF Pluto's Palace, froma Fount of Tears.
There a fourth Tribe, in fev’ral Paths, appears
OF Monfters, ftill te Watch, and Terrifie
The trembling Ghofts with their confufed Cry. .
Devouring Grief, and Leannefs, that on ill
Difeafes waits; with Sadnefs, feeding ftill
On Tears; and Palenelfs without Blood; with Cares,
Bafe Treachery, old Age, that nothing bares
Without Complaint ; Envy, with both her Hands
Crufhing her Throat ; and Poverty, that ftands
Deform’d, and Pronetoamy thing that’s Bad,
With wandring Errour, and Diffenfion, glad
To mingle Seas with Heav'n, Then®Briarens,
That with his hundred Hands the Gates doth ufe
OF Hell to open; Cruel Sphynx, with Blood
Mer Virgin-mouth Befmear'd ; the furious Brood
OF two-formed (entaurs, with fierce Scylla there,
And the Rebellious Giants Ghofts, appear :
Here the three-headed Dog, when he hath broke
His Chains, and off {a thoufand Fetters fhook,
And up and down, through Hell, doth Wandring go,
Neither Alefo, nor Megara, though
: With


For, when the Libyan War, in Italy,


Book XIII. Siro IraLicus, | 377


With Fury fwell'd, come near; whilé’*beut his Loins
His Vip‘rous Tail, he fiercely Barking, twines.
On the Right Hand,a Yew, that likea Wood
Its Branches fpreads, and, by Cocytus Flood
Water'd,more Leavy grown, there ftands: here dire,
And fatal Birds, Vultures, that ray ning tire
On Carcafes ; and num‘rous Owls refide: y
Schreech-Owls, with Specks of Blood their Pinions
And greedy Harpyes build their Nefts, and thick
Among the Leaves on all the Branches ftick,
And make the Tree with dolefull Cries to nod.
Among thefe dreadfull Shapes, th’ Infernal God
Sits on a Throne, examining the Crimes
OF Kings, and what they did in former Times,
Enchain‘d they ftand, and ‘fore the Judge repent
Too late, while all the Forms of Punifhment P
And Furies, round about them fly: and now
How glad would they their Scepters disavow /
Thofe Souls, which, when on Earth,unworthy, and
Unequal things endur’d, with harfh Command
Yn{ule, and what they living, did not dare
To utter, now Complain of, freely, there.
Then ” One in cruel Chains is bound upon Cy) Promerhens.
A Rock, ‘*) another rowls areftlefs Stone ; (2) Sifpphns.
While, with her Snaky Whip, Megera till
Purfues him, lab’ring up the lofty ETill.
Such bloody Tyrant’s Punifhments thall be:
But now the Time’s arriv'd, that We to Thee | Mee ry eee
Mutt fhew thy Mother’s Face, whofe Shade in Place ete ale Ct al a


’ : fome hours inthe Chapel of Jupiter,
The firft appears, and hither comes apace. belore he encerpriged any snes


. . . lique, or private. Whence a Reporc
(2) Pomponia, pregnant by Fove S Stealth, drew ni gh » Wenc current; that,before his Mother
was with Childe, a Serpent frequent-

ed her Chamber, and, as foon as any
: man appeared, vanifhed. This they
Fair Venus knew, endeay ring to prevent eacae engeae ee peu
thours affirm to have been the firlt Ce-

far (that is , cut out of his Mother’s


A\ll Funo’s Plots, a filent Flame She fent
eae , Into oe Polybits writes the


SELIUS Lenricus. Book XU.


Jntoher Father's Breafts which had not She
Foreknown,the conquer’d Romane Altars We
By Torian Virgins kindled now had feen.
But, when the off'red Blood had tafted been,
( As the old Prophetefs advis'd)) and both
Each other’s Faces knew, thus firft the Youth
Began: My deareft Mother, whoto Me,
Like fome great Deity, appear’ft , that Thee
I might have feen, how willingly would I
Havedy'd! Ob! what was our fad Deftiny,
When that firft Day, that gave Me vital Breath,
Thee, without Honour, {natch’d away in Death.
As thus He fpoke, his Mother thus again |
Replies: O Son, my Death was free from Pain:
For when the Burthen.of my Womb was lay’d,
By Fove's Command, Me eAZercury convei'd
To the Eby fian Fields, and gave Me there
An equal Place,where Ladanow, and where
eA mena by his Sacred Bounty dwell.
But,fince We now havetime (my Son ) totell
Whence thou didft {pring (that thou no Wars maift
Nor doubt to Heay’n by Deeds thy felftorear: Cfear 5
Know this; when I,by Chance, in mid‘ft of Day,
Retired to repofe, and Sleeping lay,
A\ fudden clofe Embrace my Members bound,
Not fuch,asI before my Husband's found,
Nor eafy unto Me, and then I clear
( Although my heavy Eysin Slumber were
Involv'd) great fovebeheld ( You may believe
This Truth ) nor could his borrow'd Shape deceive
Me then, though, turn’d into a {ealy Snake,
He, soyling, did a thoufand Circles make.
But, foonas Thou wert born, that I fhould dy


It was Decreed, andthen how much did I
_ | Lament,


Book XIII. Sitius Iraricus,


Lament, that to Theecould not declare
Thefe things,before my Soul refoly'd to Air:
A this, ‘embrace her Neck he thrice Eflai'd
In vain, and loft as oft the fleeting Shade.
This done, two Ghofts of Men, that well agreed,
His Father's, and his Uncle’s, ftrait fucceed. .
While,through the Shadows prefsing on, he there
Vain Kiffes fought, and ftrove thofe Ghofts, that were
Like flying Smoak,and Clouds, to apprehend :
Oh Thou! on whomour Empire did depend
.C My deareft Sire) what God, an Enemy
To the ef ufonian Land, did us of Thee
Deprive ({aidhe}) Oh Woto Me! for why,
Was there the leaft of Time, that, Cruel, I
Should abfent be from Thee ? thy Death I might
Have chang’d, by this my Breit, oppos’d in Fight,
What Groans th’ Italian People, ev'ry where,
Giveat your Funerals!’ The Senate rear,
In Mars’s Field, to each of youa Tomb.
Amidft his Speech, the hafty Ghofts affume
The Word: and firft his Fathers Manes barr’d
His farther Language thus; A fair Reward
Is Virtue to her felf ; yet it defcends
Sweet tothe Shades below, when ‘mong our Friends
The Glory of our Lives furvives: nor our
Due Praifes dark Oblivion can devour.
But fay, how greata War doth Thee moleft? .
( Our dear Renown!) how oft doth Fear my Breft
Invade, when I but think how fiercely Thou
Go'ft on, when Dangers meet thee! but I now
Conjure thee, by the Caufe of our fad Fate,
C Moft valiane Youth) thy Rage to moderate,
And thy Defire to Fight, {ufficient be oa


wh’ Examples of our Family for Thee.
ee 2 For


«999,


| ee — $rxrus Iranieus. Book XH.
For the eighty Sammer ther had‘ reap‘dthe dry,
And rusing Sheavsef Corn,when conqu'ring I


te iba Aer then: reviving: Watts, and Houles, we
To poor Saganthus gave. They Betis, free
From: Foes, then Drunk: oft Hasdrubal to Us
His Back hadturn'd. But, ohtheir barbarous,
And ftillcorrupted Faith !- When Victour I
Advanced ‘gainft Hasdrubal, with Milety
Almoft Deftroy’d (a fudden Change) Behold!
The Spanifh Troops, which with his Libyan Gold
CA Mercenary People) Hasdrubal
Had made, breaking their Ranks, their Enfigns all
Forfook : chert ftraitway Us, deferted by
Our Auxiliary Bands, the Enemy
With athick Ring (more numerous in Men)
Encompafs'dround; sordid we Poorly then,
Or Un-reveng’d, the laft of all our Days
On Earth conclude, but ended ie with Praife.
To this his Brother chus began to joya
His own Mishaps, and faid; In the Decline
Of our Affairs, a lofty Caftle I
For a Retreat defir'd, and thereto try
Our laft Actempt+ athoufand Torches they
With Lamps, and {moaking Fire-brands,ev'ry way
Into itthrew. For whatconcerns my Fall,
of the Gods make no Complaint at all:
webe2atte exten, air they For they my Body ©) burn’d, and toa Grave
rt cegigent, Luiur Ateriiar, co OF large Extent, my Arms fix’don it, gave.
dante yooh ote, But [ am griev'd, left, fince We both are flain,
vered what was (olay loft see Liv. The Libyans (hould o'rerun opprefsed Spain.
To which the Youth, his Face with Tears o'refpread,
_ Replies. Ye Gods! asShe hath merited,
May


Book XHI. Siere Ir AL ou Se : 381


‘May Carsbage: all jut Punifhmene endure.
For thefe fouk Deeds! But He, who under your


Command wastry'd, brave Martius, hath reftrain'd


The fierce Pyrenean Troops, and entertain’d

Our weary Friends, and wich known Arms the War
Maintains : and, it isfam’‘d, the “ Conquerour Cd) Hafdenbel.
In Battel lately was o’rethrown, and all

Due Piacles exacted for your Fall.

Much joy'd at this, the Gen’rals went again

To thofe fweet Places, where the Blefs'd remain.

The Y outh,adoring them, with eager Eys

Purfues them: and now Pau/us Ghoft fupplies
Their Room, {carce to be known, as then he ftood,
"Mong many Ghofts. But, having drunkthe Blotd,


. Hethus began: Thou Light of Italy,


Whole Martial Deeds, then one Man’sgreater,I
Have feen. Who now hath inftigated Thee

Thefe Kingdoms, where once All muft dwell, to fee ¢
Towhom again fad Scipio thus replies,

Great General, how long, with weeping Eys,

Did Kome thy Fate lament * how near with Thee,
Falling to Stygian Darknels, did we fee

Oenotrian Palaces! The Tyrian Fo

Did on Thee Dea da Sepulcher beftow,

And in thy Honour fought for Praife. With Tears
While Paulus thus his Hoftile Burial hears, |
Before their Eys Flaminins, Gracchus, and,

With a fad Countenance, Servilius ftand,

At Cann flain. A great Defire he had

To {peak to them, and farther Language add :

But ftronger Inclinations to know

More antient Ghofts made him defift,and now

(©) Brasus , that merited immortal Fame
By’scruel Ax; Camillus then, that came a sons, config wih ocher yong Nox


bie Men toreftore the Targuins, were
Near byhim putto Death. See Liv, ib. 2.


382


Grcins ITALICUS. Book XIIL


(f) Marcus Gurins, refufing a great


fum of money offered him by the
Samaites,in Pyrrhus his name,teplyed,
I had rather Command over the
‘Wealthy, then be Rich. He firft Tri-
umphed over the Samnites, and forced
Pyrrbus out of Italy.

(¢) Appins Clandias Cacns, who
would never hearken to any terms of
Peace with Pyrrbxs , but full per-
{waded him, not to rely upon his
force, and friendsin Italy, but to re-
turn home, and then by Emba/sy treac
of Peace with the Romans.

(bh) Horatius Cocies, who,with two
others, defending the Gates, at the
Bridg over TZ yber, ftopped Porfenna’s
men, who then purfued the Romans ,
ull che Bridg behinde him was broken
down fo, that the Enemy could pafs
no farther: which done, He leapt arm-
edinto the River, and returned fafe
into the City.


Near to the Gods in Praife, and, hating Gold,

(f) Gurius he fees, ( their Namesthe Sibyl told,

And fhew’d their Faces,as they came) That's He,

That, though of Sight depriv’d, the Treacherie :
(2 Of Peace,and Pyrrbus from the Gates repell’d :
And that, the Bridg behinde him broken, held

(+) His Station valiantly, and did exclude
Returning Scepters, when the King purfu'd —

To Zyber's Banks. If you defire to fee

The Man, that in the former War (faid She )

T he League with Libya made, Lutatius there
Behold, with Naval Arms, a Conquerer.

But, if ef milcar’s cruel Shade you'd know,

See !. Thatis. ic, chat ftands far off; his Brow
(Not {mooth’d by Death > as yet his rabid Ire
Retains: to talk with him if you defire,

Tafting the Blood, with your permifsion, He
May fpeak ; which granted, and when Greedily
The thirfty Shade had drunk ; firft Scipio thus
With angry Looks upbraids him :. Such with Us |
( Thou Sire of Fraud ) are thenthy Leagues? with
Captiv'd,on the Sicanian Coatt, did We (Thee,
This Contract make? Againft all Leagues, thy Son
eA ufonia, with War, doth over-run,

4And comes upon Us, breaking through the Bars
O'th’ Alpes. All Italy with barb’rous Wars

Is now inflam’d, and back, obftructed by

Sad Slaughters, to their Springs our Rivers fly.
To this the Shade reply’d: So foon, as He
Was ten Years old, the Latine War, by Me
Commanded, He efpous'd. Nor muft He now
Deceive thofe Gods, attefted to the Vow

Made to his Father. But, if now with Fire

He Italy deftroy, and ftill afpire


Srtius Iraticus.


Book XIII.


383


To overthrow thas State, deriv'd from Troy.


~ O Piety ! O holy Faith! © Boy,


Indeed mine Own ! and would to Heav'n He might
Repair that Honour, We have loft in Fight !
Seeming tofwell, with Speed (as this he faid )
He vanith’d, and retir'd a greater Shade.

‘Next thefe, the Prophetefsthole Ghofts difclos'd,
That, Armd, to conquer’d Nations difpos'd
Their Laws: with thofe, that firft the ‘Romanes taught
©) Thofe Sacred Laws, from Pallas City brought.
Scipio, well-pleas'd, with an infatiate Ey
Views all their Faces, and would willingly
Fave talk'd with all, had not the Prophetefs
Inform’d him, that their Troops were numberlefs.
What Myriads in all the World doft Thou
Believe defcend to Hell, fince here you'now
A\ll thefe behold? A boundlefs Torrent there
Of Shades continually run down, and are
In Charon’s {patious. Veffel wafted ore ;
And that bafe Boat ’s fufticient, were they more.
Many paft by, the Virgin to his View
Prefents a Youth. This isthat (© Wand’rer, who
His Enfigns, where He march’d, did Conqu’ring bare,
By whom the Baéirii, and the Daca were '
Subdu'd;, who Ganges drunk on conquer’d Ground ;
With a Pellcan Bridg AC iphate bound,
Whole“ Walls mow ftand where facred: Nile doth
Tohim neadess Thoueertain Son (run,
Of Libya's horned' Hammon! Oh, how far
Doth thy indubitable Fame, in War,
All Generals excel! The like Defire
(Renowned Shade) hath fet my Breft on Fire,
To know which Way:thou took’ft thy {elf to raife
To that proud Honour, and great Height of Praife.


To


(i) The Romans, having changed
the Government of Confa/s to that of
the Decemviri, fent three Embaffa-
dours, viz, Sp. Pofthumins, Ser. Sul-
Pitins, and da. Manlius, to Athens,
to take an Extract of their Laws.
Which they performed, and thofe
Laws, digefted (with fuch of their
own, asthe Romans elteemed whol-
fom) into swelve Tables, ten of Brafs,
and two of Stone , were ever after
their Rules of Fuftice.


(k) Alexander the Great.


(2) Alexandriss in Egypt.


[TAORNR, ewer,


~ 384


| Sue ITALicus. Book XII


To whom theGhoft: A dull Sedulity,

In War, isbafe. Thou by Adivity, |
And Daring ,may'ft accomplifh greateft Wars.
Slow Valour never yet unto the. Stars


(m) The moft eminent of all Ps-
ets, who, ofvery mean Birth, was
conftrained co Shift for his Livelyhood
by teaching a Schole, till bya Dif
eafe inhis Eys, while yet a Yong-mar,
he was made Blind, wandring through
feveral Cities of Greece, He fometimes
fubffted by repeating Verfes, cafually
compofed, to the People: and at
length entertained by feveral Perfons,
that admired his Learning, he com-
piled thofe Immortal Works of his
Mliads, and Odyffces. He dyed in Jon,
Gin his Voyage to Athens) where the
Inhabitants buile hima Tomb. Vide
Heredet. de Homcro


Her (elf hath rais’d. Do Thou precipitate


The time of thy great Deeds. Black Death doth wait


Upon the Active Man. Thus having faid,
He vanifh’d. Strait fucceeded (refus Shade,
Rich, when alive; now,levell’d with the Poor.
But when, arifing from th’ E/fan Shore,
The Manes of a Beautious Youth he fpy’d,
Whofe Treffes, with a Purple Fillet ty’d,
Flow’d onhis radiant Neck: Divineft Maid,
Tellme (faidHe} who is that glorious Shade,
Whofe facred Fore-head with a Light's indu’d,
To him peculiar, anda Multitude
Of Souls, admiring, follow, and, about
Him thronging , feem togive ajoyfulShout 2
Oh, what a Face! didI not fee him here
I'th’ Stygian Shade, I eafily fhould {wear


He wereaGod. Nor are deceiv'd Cquoth She) -


He hath deferv'd to feema Deity
Norin fo great a Breaft was there a {mall
Divinity. For He in Verfesall


The Seas, and Earth, with Heav‘n,and Hell compris‘d,


And in his Song the Mufes equaliz’d,


(*) In Honour Phebus : when he could notfee,


All this unto the World, in order, he
Divulg’d, and rais'd your Troy unto the Skies.
Scipio, the facred Shade with joyful Eys
Beholding,faid ; Would but the Fates allow,
That through the Univerfe this Prophet now


Might fing the Romane Deeds; how much more great


Would the fame Things, with his Certificate,


Pafs


| Book XIil.


Sitius. Iraricus, | (385


Pafs to Succeeding Times * Thtice happy. You,


(») #acides; tcowhom it happ’ned, to.


The World by fuch a Tongue to be exprefs'dé #1...


Forby his Verlethiy Valour ftill encreas’d,


But what's that Troop, that fuch Applaufes give, -


Seeking the Ghofts of Heroes, and recéive


The Greater Shades? With that eA chiles He, .
And mighty Heffor, is amaz’d to fee.


And then the Valiant Ajax ftately Pace
Admires, and Neftor's venerable Face.

But he was pleas’d, when he beheld the Two
Renown’d (» Atrides,and Ubjfes, who,”

In Prudence, -equall'd great Achilles Deeds,

To thefe Ledean Caftor's Shade fucceéds,

About to live; for then Alternate Light

Pollux in Heav'n maintain'd. But, to his Sight - -
Prefented, ftrait ; Lavinia’s Shade withdrew
His Face: for then the Maid advis‘d him to
Confider Womens Shades, left rifing Day
Should fummon Her (protracting Time) away.
This Venus happy ‘? Daughter is ({aid She)
That Trojans long-deriv'd Pofterity,

Joyn'dto the Latinés. Would you fee the Bold
Quirinus Bride? Herfiliathere behold ’


Once by Her Sheepherd Husband ravith’d, when
‘? Their Neighbours fcorn’d fuch rough, unpleafant
YetShe,well-pleas'd,his homely Cottage faw, ( Men,


And lay withhim on Pallets made of Straw,


And angry Sires, from ’vengeful Arms, withdrew.’


But now ‘”) Carmenta’s Godlike Gefture view ;
She was Bvander's Mother, and Divin’d
Your prefent Labours. If you havea minde
To feethe Face of |) Tanaquil: that’s She,
Whole Chafter minde poe din Augury,


(") Achiles.


‘“s


(*) Agamemnon, and Menclass.


(p) Being Wife to e€neas, Son to
Venus and Anchifes.

(q) When Remylzshad buile his
City, andthe Inhabitants {0 inereaf=
ed, that it wasnow time to forma
civil Society: He {ent Embaffadours
to his Neighbours co demand of
them women , which they then want-
ed. But,his Embaffy every where re-
jected, He, pretending the Cele-
bration of Games to Neptune , the Sa-
fines coming with their Wives and
Children , inviced as well by Curiofity
to fee the News, as Devotion , while
they were intent on the Celebration of
the Festival, the Romans, feifing all the
Virgins that came with them , forced
the reft out of the City. The Sabines
oe armed ro revenge this Vi-
olence, thefe Virgins, now their wives,
became Afedistonrs between their
Husbands and Parents, and made. the
Romans and Sabines one People.

(7) Carmenta wasa Prophete& ,
in whofe honour the Roman Afatrons
(as toa Godde& ) celebrated an Annu-
al Feaft called Carmentalia.

Cf) Tanaguil, who animated her
Husband Targuinins Prifeus (a Stran.
Ger at Rome ) to repair thither , to of-
fer himfelf after the Death of Afartins
Ancns to be their King , andas they
came to the Gates, fitting with his
Wife intheir Cart, an Eagle gently
took off his Cap, and, hovering awhile
over his bead,put it on again: by which
Omen encouraged, Tanaguil perfwa-
ded himito enter the City, and, not
long after Ancus dying, he was cleted
King,


386


Sirius \Iracricus.


And to. her Husband did his. Throne forefhew, —


C#) Virginia, the Daughter of Vir-
ginius , who being vitiated by Appins
Claudius , her Father to provoke the
people againft him, bringing her in-
toa publick Affembly, ftab‘d her, and,
fhewing the Knife all bloody to the

eople, declared, be rather chofe, that
Fis Daughter fhould fo dy, then not
be free from the violence of Appins.
See Liv. Hib. 1.


H]


(w) Tallia, the Wife of Zarquinins
Superbus, who drove her Chariot o-
ver the body of her Father Servins
Tulias , whom fhe had murthered, to
raife her Husband to his Throne.


(*) An Eagle.

(x) Tarpeia, the Daughter of Tar-
peins Keeper of the Capitol ; who con-
tracted with the Sabines to betray to
them the Capito! , on Condition , fhe
might have ali chat wore ontheir
left Arms (meaning their Bracelets )
the Sabines entring, as fhe opened the
Gates, threw upon her fo many Shields
fromtheir left Arms , that fhe was
preft to death with the weight of them,


‘And in the Bird the Gods propitious knew.
There fee, of Romane Chaftity the Grace, —
Lucretia, glorious in her Death , her Face,
And Eys fix'd on the Ground fill bears. Thou CRame
Muft not, alafs/ nordothicTheebecome ;
To with the long Fruition of {0 great
APraife. Near Her, Virginiafee ; who, yet .
The Wound retaining, in her bleeding Breaft,
CSad Monument, that Chaftity expreft
Defended by the Sword!) ‘*) her Father’s hand
Applauds, in that dire ftroke. Next her doth ftand —
The famous Cle/ta, who to fly thy Yoak
( Porfenna) her Weak Sex contemn’d, and broke
The Lidyan War, and Tyber: fuch, as She
CA Virgin) ome once With'd her Men tobe,
This fudden Apparition much Difmai'd.
Yong Scipio, who, more enquiring, faid ;
What may thofe guiley Adanes be, and why
Arethey Tormented* She gave this reply.
That‘ Tallis, who with her Chariot tore,
And broke her Father’s Members, and ftood o’re
His trembling Face with her contracted Reins,
That She may ne'er be free from lafting Pains,
Swims in hot Phiegethon, that, rapid, {prings
From fmoaking Furnaces, and upward flings
Burn'd Rocks, made harder by the River's Heat,
And ftill with Flaming Flints her Face doth beat.
Bur She, whofe Lungs a Bird's fharp Bill deftroys,
(Hark! with his beating Wings how greata Noife,
Returning to his Food, the ‘ Bird of Fove
Now makes!) Oh horrid Wickednefs! for Love
Of Gold, the Capitol, that Treach’rous Maid
‘*) ( Larpeia) to the Sabine Troops betrai’d,


Then


Book XII.


x


‘Book XUL_


Sriius Iraricus,


387


Then doft noifse%Cfor lighter Crimes:our Laws


Scarce touch:)'dire Orcurftill with hungry Jaws


Of the Iberian‘ Niheard,and eagerly’
Affaulteth with his Teeth, and fiercely Frails
The Engrails-out sith his polluted Nails. -
Yetis the Punifhmencinferiourto * |:
The Sin, that ‘) Veflal voluntary threw -
Her Virgin Zone away, and facred Rites
Of Vefa ftain'd. But now thele fev'ral Sights,
Which you have feen, fufficient are, I ftraie
To Thee (concluding) will enumerate
Some Souls, that now Oblivion drink (they are
But few) and fo again to Night repair.
That ©, Marius (for the Time’s not long when he
Shall go into Etherial Light) thall be. |
Your (on/al, and thall long Command procure
From humble Birth. Nor hall Sys endure
Long to drink drowfy Lethe, or Obey. *
Fate, which no God can Change, and Life away ~ -
Himeall. He firft hall Seize, as by Affaule,
The Empire, but the glory of his Fault.
(4) Shall be, that he fhall it reftore alone,
And in fo greata Name there fhall be none,
That thall defire tofecond Sylla. He,
Whole Hair erect on’s rugged Front, you fee
Is Pompey, a moft glorious Head on Earth,
And by the World belov’d. But He, that Birth
O’th’ Gods, who lifts his Starry Head fo high,
As (afar, of liilus Progeny,
When thefe break from their dark Abodes, by Sea,
And Land, how great, how mighty things will they
Attempt? Alafs, how. oft will they Contend
In Fight through all the World? nor in the End,


Doth bark? fold theisionftrous Giardian He!


Fff2z _ Shale


Cy) Gerion,


(z) Thofe Veftal Nuns werechofen
into that Order at fixteen years of age,
and were to continue fo thirty years ,
after which they might marry(though
few did)but ifwhile Devotes,any chan-
ced to violate their Vow , they were
buryed alive.


(4) The Siby/, having fhewed him
the Souls of fuch as had lived on Earth,
now following the opinion of Plato (in
Phedo) that Souls created muft have
fome place of abode before they entred
Bodies , fhews him the Souls, which
after they had drunk of Zethe (thar is
Folly, and Forgetfulnefs of their origi-
nal) were to live on Earth, Among
other, Afarins, who of a mean Perfon
came to be Generaéin the War again{t
the Cimbri, over whom he triumphed,
and, after ftrange variety of Fortune,
dyed in his fevench Confulfbip.


(6) Syla,who, after he had cruell
affli@ed the Common-wealth , and af-
furned to himfelf abfolute Authority o-
ver the Lives , and Eftates of the Ro-
manes , voluntary laid down his Diéta-
tourfhip, and retired to Puteoli, where
he lived privately, and reftored them ro


* their Liberty.


Siz Iws ar ALL cus. | Book: KUM.


ShaltshouitheGengenods y: JefeGiniley lip nil 3


Then Hg, ore whomithduipainG thbVidiorya sos.
- TheasSsigio, WY capwip,cfaids: dngrievesine! much,


That the fad Order of A ffatrs'isfudh’ '. ave\l ot
For Italy. (Bur if swheniIifeis.doness :.°: thai! ae e
There be no Pardon anew ‘Death muftrun:):
The hazard of Deferts: Jays iin pha parts

Of Phiegethon; his Sins full burritrig Ymare:-


Ae : ~ Shall Hannibal epdigre ¢‘or, telmes euee fone
sty Shall aficrav‘sions Fowl for evertare 7° s


His Limbs, whichfor her Food fhall full encreale?

Oh ! fear not that, exelatitis.the- ee a ee
A Life inviolate: he fhall. not lead,.;. aloe
Nor in his Country thall his Boies vilien Déad,
Be lay/dtoreft. Hor when he thal: in Fight:, -


| Be Vanquithed, and all:his Forces quite: +:


a Difpers'd, he fhallendure't he O''reclirown,:

‘And beg inglsri@usSafecy:: Macedon,
For War, fhall givehim Hopes again to tife'.« -

In Arms; aadthen Ccondemn'd for:Treacheries) ~

His conftant Wife, and Son forfaken,He © -

Shall Carthage quit, and through thé Ocean flee. |

Inafmall Ship. Glician Laurus then ©

Hee'l vifit. Bue ( alafs/ -how foolifh Men |

Willrather choofe hard Servitude to bare ,

_ The Hot, and Cold Exceffes of che Air, -

With Hunger,Flight,and Seas. then once to Dy.

He, after thefe great Wars, in Italy,

A Servant to th’ eA /fyrian King thall be,

And thence, depriv’d of his Defire to fee

Aufonia embroil'd, with doubtful Sails

Shall put to Sea, until, with lazy Gales,

Brought to the Prufiack Coat, grown weak with Age,

He in another Service fhall engage,


And,


Book XIII. Siiius IraLicus. Bs 389


And, through that Kingdom's Aid, a Shelter finde:
Till, chat their Enemy may be refign’d

The Romanes urging, fecret Poifon there

In Hafte he drinks, and from continual Fear
Abfolve the doubtful World. Thus having faid,
To hollow Shades of Erebus the Maid
Again withdraws; and Scipio {trait afce nds
Unto the Port, and his rejoycing Friends.


The End of the Thirteenth Book.


Tin


- Ne iam Modus Ensibus addunt- °


PF cemincam (edem,a msontun


=. — Ss
Lixu, &nufeentem turpia du
att obtruncant-


Honoratifeine
CoStauebii


a - de Stratton in Comutatu
no Domino Toanni — ey, Baron de


Cabul Summa cum ¢


Book XIV. — ee


SILIUS FTALICUS
The Second Punick VVar. |


. The Fourteenth Book.


Toe ArcuMenrt,


Sicilia defcrib’d: the wanton King
Is flain. The Libyans, and the Romanes bring,
Into that Land, their Arms. What ViGories
Marcellus gaind. “Both fides have their fupplies
From the divided Land. By Land, and Sea,
ToSyracufa’s Walls the Romanes lay
Clofe Siege. What Arts by Archimedes were
Found out, for their repulfe. New Aids appear
From Libya by Sea. 4. Naval Fight,
Wherein fome Libyan Ships are put to flight,
Some Captive made, fome funk, Both armies are
Infeéted by a Plague z which ceas'd, the War
TheRomanes firait renew, To one AfSaule
Rich Syracufa yields : the Souldier's Fault,
Who Archimedes, as He Figures drew,
Studious, upon the Sand, not knowing, flue,
The General deplores. What praifes He

" Deferv'd, whofe Mercy crown d bis Victory.


1 EE Pow’rsof Helicon,now turn

d your Lays

To Sicily, and the Ortygian Seas :
Sometimes to Daunian King-

=| domsyour Reforts

Sy To make; fometimes tothe Si-

canian Ports,


Or


ote ere nee ie corer


Seelam eat


jt Stee


=
“


p> Sitius Iraricus. Book. XIV.i°


Or Macedonian Palaces to fee, be oem mut
And the eA chaick Land, your Task. muft be : | 4
_ Or wandring, where Sardban Floods.enfold N
“Your Steps; or, where in Cottages, of old,


The Lyriansreign’d,togo ; and fartheft Day: “
To vifit ; and where Eatth’s valt Globe by Sea

Is Limited: allthis the Scenes of War, ~

That, in their fev’ral Quarters, A&ed.are ¥

By Mars, require, This therefore We mutt do,

And, where the War, and Trumpets call, purfue.

Of large extent,a Portof Ital;
Ce) Sisilia wat ansenty case (4 Trinacria was, till once Affaulted by


Trinacria fromthe three | romentories,


oy ' > rane , at
d Lilybenm, Vt a Pesan’, ony, a Q
eli Sine that meone SNC otus, and raging Wives; againtt it heav qd


1 f d ? 7 1 VW’
wee Aig vom Rows) tenie, By the Cerulean Trident, itreceiv'd.


fae ees The Ocean in for, by an hidden way,
The Earth’storn Entrails the impaéted Sea... -
Afunder threw,and,breaking through the Land: :
Witha fall Tide, at once the Peopleyand 2...
The Cities, by the Tempeft’s{ecret'Force
Bore quiteaway. Since, keeping that Divorce,
By an impetuous Flood, th’ unruly Main i
Permits not the Disjoyn‘d to meet again. hes
But yet the fpace, that the two Lands divides,
A\s Fame reports (fo narrow are the Tides, =
That run between ) Barking of Dogs, and Lays
Ofearly Birds, to cither Side conveys.
So rich the Soil, that it the Garners fills
Of Husband.men : with Olives fhades the Hills,
Titles creats to Bacchus, and fwift Steeds,
That will endure the found of Trumpets, breeds.
Cecropian Tapers Hybla, ev'ry where a
Renown’d, from her fweet NCeffar, kindles : there
Paonian Streams with {ecret Sulphur fpring ;
There, by the Mufes grac'd, fam'd Poets Sin 2
Worthy


oe
t
5

'


oe ee ee -


Book XIV.


SPrerus ITaticus, 393


~ Worthy Apolb, whotheir:


Through Sacred Groves : whofe Syracufian\*) Mufe


At, Theecrétus, born in Syracufa,


ie ne an . ; Whom Virgil imitated in his
Makes Helicon refouind. “Fhe: People are as
In Language prompt ; bie, when emploi‘d in War,
Their Ports are Crown'd-with Trophies ;from the Seas. ;

ie Ahad tek aso) gue” | é Antiph
After the Reign. of dire’) eAntipbates,. © Eagar eee yp oes


And (Cyclops Reule, Sicanian Plow s began’ -
Firft co: rurn up the untill’d Ground, and then
From high Pyrene thither People came ;
Who on the vacant Land im pos'd the Name
Ofan Iberian River. After thefe,
There foon arriv'd ftout Bands of Liguvés; _

__(d) The Lignrians,vexed by their


By (a) Siculus Commanded, who by War Neighbours the Brstii, and other Peo-
ple of Calaéria, under the Condu@


Poffek'd the Land, that ftill his Name doth bare. ‘ of Siculus, paft over inro Sicilia ( then


called Sicania, from the Spaniards


Nor wasit Lofs of Fame, or helda Shame i lofrones Ree crete 2 ceed


it fofrom a River, or rather from their
Leader Siculzs ) and, fecling there m


For Siculus to change Sicania's Name. changed che former’ Name to that?
: which now it bears, See Dicnyf. Hali=.


Next Neighb’ring Minos,makinghisDemands «anid
OF Dedalus, his Eteocretian Bands

Led to-the haplefs War: and, after He

A Judg of Hell, through cruel Treachery, a

And Plots of the Cocalides, was made, a 3
Weary of makitig War, his <P eople lay'd tobe encofthe jadgo of Hed) pee


: 4 j : hoes , ee Dedalus ue 509 3 the King
: 1 2 ocaiws treated with him, and pro.
Their Arms ae and dwelt in Sicily. palo prorall be ded, invited
Trojan Aceftes, then, his Pro eny abel (as Dede ta ee
; L

gy : a : ? ie 5 : thor: h the Poet follows the Reon
that he was murthered by the Daugh-

Had mix’d with Trojan Helymus, who there bathe hered by
; : ; ; . 7 _ bers of Cocalus. A ter his Death his
C Some Bands of Youth foon following ) firft did rear See eee Kings ites
: : Fe a EPL, ty DY Me Sicilians ,
: : : LL. : laid down their Arms ,- be Sicili~
Thofe Walls, thatfince from Them retain the Name. 4 , and builea Gity,in avery op


. : rf us heir Kj %
Neither are Zancle's‘Walls ob{cure in Fame, MeTKIng , valle tinea,
Whrch Saturn, laying down his Sickle thera,

( A Renown’d, Butin th’ Ennean Land nené are (f) The Land sbout that City


being very fertile , the Ports feigned


Mere fam’d, then thofe were Founded bythe Name, saturn to havedropt his Sickle there.
That thither from ‘© Sifyphian mus came,


(£) Sifyphus was King of Corinth 3


And,in the Epbyraan' Offipring, all = eens ie acts
Doth muchExcel. Here doth Alpheus fall Ch) Corvetiaes,


G & zg Into


Ar tS eee rn pied
se . B


394 ~Sriius Iracicus. Book XIV.


Into his edrethufa’s filly Springs; ©
is ‘And ofa Sacred Crown the Figure brings. .:
(orate: But in Trinacrian Cavésthe ‘ Lemntan ‘God

Delights, and there hath feetled his: Abode. —

For feeding, under ground,in Forges vaft,

Lipare from her hollow Head doth caft

A fulph’reus Smoak. But her continual Fires -

ZEtna,inflam’d,from trembling Recks expires ;

While, with included Groans, the raging Sea.

She imitates, and reftlefs Night, and Day,

Through fecret Ruptures murm'ring Thunders. So
From Phlegethon the flaming Billows flow,

And from the melting Caverns rolls (among |
Thofe pitchy Tempefts}) half-burnt Rocks along.
But though, within, it boileth with fo Dire —

A Storm of Flames, and ftill-encreafing Fires.

Yet White upon the Top, ‘tisftrange to tell,
How near thofe very Flames the Snow doth dwell;
How th’ burning Rocks are with Eternal Cold
Congeal’d, and horrid; and how they beheld
Perpetual Winter on the Mountain's Head,

4nd Snow with glowing Afhes over{pread.
What fhould I fay of the Zélian Land:
~ That Dwelling ef the Winds, and Bars ordain'd

‘Gainft Storms* Here,wafh’d by the Idnian Main,


(k) Arges. Turn’d to that Land where © Pelops once did Reign,
(1) An High Promontory. © Pachynus Clifis appear: There oppofite
(*) Strong west-winds. To Libya, and the raging “) Gauri’s Spite,


The noble Lilybeum hath in view
Gn) The Arms of che Ceetiae The bending ‘” Chele. A third Frontier to
ar The Shore extended, and to Italy
Oppos'd, upon the other Side,the high
(as) Another Promontery Of Sicily. (n) Pelorus rifeth, with an Hill of Sand.


Here long in Peace did Hieron command
: lis


Book XIV. Sriius Iraricus, 395


His People, with amilde, and-eafy Sway}

And ne’re the Flearts of thofe, that did Obey, —

With cruel Fears perplex’d! «nor could Hebe

Induc‘d to violate that Faith, which he

Had at the Alears{worn. For many Years

His Social League, with the Aufonian Peers,

Entire hekept. But, when the Fates difsolv'd

His aged Life, the Fatal Crown devolv'd

To's eldeft Nephew, and unto that Court

( Of late fo Good ) unruly Minds refort.
© Notfixteen Years of Age the King had known, (0) This you


King, om over


When he Eclipfd the Glory. of his Throne, to Luxury, wich foon after drew -


him into Tyranny, fell into fuch a


Diflike with his Peopfe, that they re
Unable to -{uftain his Kingdom's Weight, belled again him, a atime when they
; ; were divided among themfelves: fome
Too Confident of his too fickle State. i
Ina fhort time all Crime’s protected by tee ee hee
Z to the fubduing ofall Sicify, in taki
The Force of Arms ; there all Impiety Spee


Familtarly was known: the very Name

Of Juftice banifh’d, anda modeft Shame

Was inthe King held Vile. His Mother's high
Defcent from Pyrrhus , the great Family

Of antient Lacus,and Thetis Son,


_ Cin VerfeEternal ) fpurr’d this Fury on


To that fo greata Precipice. And ftrait

His Breaft’s invaded by a fudden Heat,

To favour the Defigns of Libya,

And, this his Sinadmitting no Delay,

He makes new Leagues, by which it was agreed,
That the Sidonian Army fhould recede


From Sicily, if they the Conqueft gain'd,


But yet his Punifhment for this remain‘d

Sull fix’d, and dire Esrnnys hima Tomb

Ev'nin that Land deny’‘d, where he no reom
Would yield tohis Ally. Forfome, whom Ire,


And dayly Fears, invited to Confpire,


Gge2 CRefolv'd


I


96


Suchwas the Rage, and Fury
beke People , thar, Mer they had.
flain the King , they fought ont all of
the Royal Family , and murthered
them likewife,viz. his two Sifters : and
a Daughter of Hiero( his Grand-fa-
ther ) with her Daughters. Liv. 24.


etpsbmus: Itaricus. Book XIV,


(Refolv'd hiy:Youth:ndlonger to: abide," |
Inflam’d wisdx cruel Lufts, and bloody Pride;
And adding: to‘his Tyrariny abhore’d;
And vileft Acts) him flew. And:then the Sword
No meafure knew. To this the Slaughter they
Of Women add, and feizing, asaPrey, —
His guiltle(s‘?) Sifters, killthem. Thus rag,d new-
Recover'd Liberty in Arms, and threw
The Yoakaway. Some Punick Camps require;
Some the Itaéian, and known Friends defire :
Nor was there wanting fome, that, full of Rage,
Refus’d in League with either to engage.

Such were Trinacria’s Broils, fuch was the State


OF Sicily, by the young Tyran’s Fate; i:


~ When high in Honour ¢ for, as ‘twice before,


(4) Atthe very time that Afar-
eellas came into the Harbour of Zancla
( which was capable of fix hundred
Ships, fuch of the Syracufans, as defired
Peace with the Romanes, fent their
Embaffadours to Appius (the Prator )
but before he had difpatched to the
Conful Afarcellus, Tidings came, that
the Carthaginsans Fleet arrived near
Pachynum, which encouraged their
Party within the City to break off the
Treaty,


(r+) Syracafa, fo called from the
River.


Then, athird Time, He Latian Fafces bore)

(1) Marcellus with his Fleet arriv’d upon

Zanclean Coafts: and, when all things were known,
The Murther of the King; th’ ambiguous Minde

O' th’ People ; and-what Places Arms had join’d
With Carthage, what their Strength; who firmly ftood
In Amity with Kome; what vain,and proud

Conceits then‘) Arethufa entertain’d,

Who at the Gates his Entrance did withftand ;

Clofe to the War he falls, and, withan high


-Incenfed Breaft, lets the whole Fury fly


Ofs Arms, through all the Neighb’ring places. So
Himfelf, from Rbodope, doth Boreas throw,

And with Tenth Waves againft the Earth doth raife
The Main, and, following th’ ejected Seas,
Raves with his roaring Wings. By the firft War |
Leontine Territories wafted are ;

A Land, where once the cruel Le/lrigon
Did reign, The General went, Furious, on;


To -


Book !XIV.. SrLius- Iraticus, | 397


To whom it faia’d ‘all -one, ifflowly He -
Subdu’d the Gpetinn Forces, as to be’ -

O’recome. Throughallthe Plain they, Frighted, fly
So, asyou'd:thiakthey'were a Company

Of Women, that his Men at firft withitood,

And (eres Fields made Fertile with their Blood.
Inev'ry Place they're flain: nor,asthey run,
Would farious eALars permit them Death to fhun.
Suchs,as hop'd Flight fome Safety might afford,
The General prevented with his Sword : .
And, urging on his Troops, thatfeem’d too flow,
With his Shield’s Point,exclaims :- Go, quickly Mow
With your keen Swords that coward People down ;
That in their Wrattling Exercife, alone,
AreSkill'd, whofe lazy Youth with Joy affect
The flender Praife;to be with Olive decke ;

When they thofe ealy Conflicts, in aShade, .
Have undergon, and a poor Conqueft made,

This muft your onely Honour be, if You

‘The Enemy, as foon as Seen, fubdue.

This from the Gen'ral heard, the Army, ftrait,
More furioufly fall on, and prefs on Fate:

Now the fole Conteft mong themfelves remain’d,
Who fhould the Foremoft be; what valiant Hand
The reft Excel in nobleft Spoils. Not more
Enrag’d, the Billows of Euripus roar,


, Broken ‘gainft Caphareus : Propontts fo


The bellowing Sea, with Violence, doth throw
From its {trait Mouth : nor near the fartheft Sun,
With greater Tumult, doth the Ocean run, |
And ftrike th’ Herculean Pillars. Yet in Heat

Of Blood, and Fury of aFighe {0 great,

Was the milde Grace of Noble Valour fam’d.

A Tyrrbene Souldier, eA fylus Nam‘d,


|


Srtius Iranicus. Book XIV,


At Thrafimenus Lake once Captive made,
The milde Commands, and eafy Bondage, had
Of Berra undergone, and Home agen,
With his kinde Mafter’s leave, return’d: and then,
Refuming Arms, his former Mifery
Reveng’d in the Sicilian War: while He
Was mingled, in the midit of all the Fight,
And did by Chance on's Mafter Berra light,-
( Who, to the League from Carthage fent,did there,
Entring the Social War, an Helmet wear
Of Brals, that, fhutting clofe, fecur'd his Face)
The Youth He with his Sword invades, and as,
Fainting with feeble Steps, he left his Stand,
And Backward went, o’rethrew him on the Sand.
Hearing the Conqu’rour's Voice, poor Berra, ftrait
His fearful, lingring Soul from inftant Fate
Recovring, from his Chin the F aftning tares
Ofhis then treach’rous Helmet; and to Pray’rs
Had farther Language added: but,amaz’d _
At that fo fudden Sight, Aplus gaz'd
On his known Face, and, as his Sword he ftai'd
With’s Hand, with Groans, and Tears obortive faid
Oh ! beg not Life, I pray, or Doubrful fo
Entreat : ‘tis juft, thaeI defend my Fo.
Fe the beft Souldier is, who firft, and laft
In War, defends his Faith, Me, firft, Thou haft
Refcu'd from Death, and, not preferved by
Thy Fo, didft him preferve. I'de not Deny
My Self (who have endur'd fo much of Il
To be Unworthy, and deferving ftill
To fall into things Worle, fhould this my Hand
Not make thy Way where Fire,and Sword withftand,
And kindly raifing him, as this he faid,
With Life the Benefits of Life repay’d,

His


Book XIV; Sruius Iraricus. | 399


His firft Attenapts in Séeilythus ‘bleft:
With Quiet ; Troops Adarcellue forward preft, :*"
And his Victoriots’Bagkes turningto .*
The Ephyreian Waits, he'ftraitway drew 5
About the Spracufian Towr'saibines» >
Yet did his love of Fighting now decline: —

With grave Advicehe ftrivesto take away

Their blind Refolves, and Fury to allay.

But (left. perhaps they might refufe, or fear ~
To credit Offers, that fo Gentle were)

The Siege with ftricteft Guards ftill forward weni,
And He, with cautious Arms, then more intent,
Watch’d, fearlefs,in the Front, with fecret Care -
Defigning Dangers, not expected there.

So in the Po, or in Cay/ter’s Streams,

Swims the White Swan, and, while her Body feems
Unmov'd, with the prone River forward goes,
And with her Feet: through filent Surges rows.

But,while the Town, Befieg’d, ftill doubtful ands,
What to refolve ; their Arms, and Social Bands,
Th excited People, and the Cities fent
T’ enforce the Camp. Thither «ALejfana went,
That lies upon the Sea, from Latian Ground
Too far disjoyn’d, by Ofcan Tribes renewn'ds
Then Catiné, too near Typheus Flame,


And for two pious ‘‘) Brothers known to Fame ; Fr aad a berg eta


a ; two Brothers ( Amphi; sand Ana-
And Camerina, not by ‘*)Fates to be pins took their sped Father and Mo

, F ther , and carryed them, thro e
Once mov'd : then Hybla, that prefumes with Thee Hames, into safety. Their Statues


were after honour’d with an Epigrans,


i ( more fafting,then the Brafs, or Mar-
( Hymettus ) Hives of ACeHar to compare. Be) by eta Fa or
Per t ert here. ;
Selinis, that fo many Palms doth bear ; Oe) Tar adden ei be Sid iby ie


Sibylline Oracles.
And Myle, once a Port fecure, but now ial


The Shore alone a Refuge doth allow,
And dangerous to fuch as {cape the Sea.
Thenlofty Eryx and Centuripe,


From


I a


4.90


Book XIV.


Srteius Iraricus,


ae ee


(°) Caftor, and Pollux.


(#) Perillys, who invented for Pha-
davis (the Tyran of the Agrigentines )
4 Bull of Brafs, into which when the
Condemned were put , and fire pla-
cedunderneath , their Cries imitated
the bellowing ofa Bull. Ofthis Tor-
ture Persilas, the Inventour , made the
firft Experiment , condemned to it by
the Tyran,


(x) Near Palica (now called Pali-
cena ) Was a Temple ( dedicated to the
Gods Patici) in which were certain
Springs,called Cups, not very large,but
extraordinary Deep,the Water of a fie
ry Colour, perpetually boiling up , but
never encreafing, or diminifhing. The
Religion of the Place was, that, when
any eminent Controverfie happened ,
that could not be decided, but by the
Oaths of the Parties,they were brought
by the Prieftsto the Cups, into which
they caft Tablets | on which they writ
what they afferted by Oath. The Ta-
blets of fuch, as fwore Truth , fwum:
theother funk: and, before the per-
jured got out of the Temple,they were
miraculoufly punifhed by Blindnefs ,
Lamenefs , or fome other Judgment of
Heaven upon chem. See Dicdorns Si-
culus,. lib. 41,


And Hhpates, whofe Chanel runs fo low:


’ From her high Mountain; with Sntells,came, .;


Entella plentifulin Wine; aName. ew. 5ARe
To Troy's Aceftes dear... T. hen:Tepfos, and
Acra, that high on Icy Hills doth ftand.

With thefe an Agathyrnian Band was there, -
A\nd Tyndaris,that glories in her Pair

OF Leeda’s “ Sons, and Agrdgas, that breeds,
And brings her num’rous Troops of W arlike Steeds,
Thatall the Air inflame with Neighing loud,
And roll unto the Walls a dufty Cloud,

Their Leader.Grofpbus was, whofe carved Shield
The Monument of antient Torture held ;

A fierce Bull’s Image ; which, while Bodies, burn’d
By Flames put underneath, to bellowings turn’d
Sad Groans, and you’d believe fome Oxen goar'd,
Anddriven from their Stalls, then truly roar'd.
But, this reveng’d, ‘*) th’ Inventer of {6 Dire

An Art; did, bellowing; in his Bull expire,
Thither came He/a, thither Gela came,

Gela, that from the River takes her Name:

And the “) Palics, where the Perjur'd are
Tortur‘d by prefent Punifhment: and there
Trojan oA cefla was, and ‘™) Acys, who

Through Aztna’s Valesinto the Sea doth flow,
Flis dear Nymph wathing with a pleafane Stream,
Once in thy Flamea Rival >Polypheme :

But, while He fled thy Barb’rous Rage, into
Small Streams difsolv'd, at once, he fcap'd his Fo,
And his victorious Waters mix’d amon

His Galathéa’s Waves. With Thefe, along
Came Thofe, that murm’ring Alabis ; and thofe,
That Apa drink, andthe perfpicuous Flows
Ofclear Achates : Vagedrufatoo,


Pantagya


Book XIV,


Sintus Iratrcus,


4.01


’ . t


Pantagya likewile, eafy to be paft,

Through his fmall Current ; and,which runs fo faft,
The Yellow-Stream’d Siméthus. Therma then, _
OF old enrich’d with Mufes, Arm’d her Men;
Where % Hymera defcends into the Seas :
. For it divides it felf two fev'ral Ways,

And runs to &4/f, and Weft, with equal Force.
Two-Crown’d XN ebrodes keepeth this Divorce ;
Then which, no Hill with a Sicanian Shade

Doth rife more Rich: this lofty Enna made

A facred Fortrefs to the Groves of Gods.

Here a dark Path to Stygian Abodes

A Cave, that opens wide the gaping Ground,
Detects, through which a ftrangé new Lover found
A Way to unknown Coafts, Pluto this way,
Inflam’d with Luft, durft venture up to Day, -
And, leaving doleful Acheron, above,

On the forbidden Earth, his Chariot drove.
Then, having Ravith'd the (+) Ganean Maid ;

In Hafte, retiring, his blaek Steeds, affrai’d

To view the Face of Heav’n, and flying Day,
Drove back to Styx, and hid in Shades his Prey.
‘Petreia Romane Leaders then defir'd:

And ‘Komane Leagues Callipolis requir’d;

And Eugion, arch’d with Stone: and there they fee’
Hadranum, and Hergentum, Melite,

Proud of her ftately Webs, and wealthy Store
Of Wool: Adelaée, with a Fifhy Shore : |

And Cepbaledias near the ftormy Main ;

Whole boift‘rous Coaft, in the Cocrulean Plain,
Feeds the.vaft Whales : the Tauromenians too,
Where Ships by dire ( harybdis, in their view,

In quick-devourin g Gulphs are fwallow'd down,
And from the Bottom ftrait again are thrown


H hh Up


(y) Hymera,rifing out of the Moun-
tain Nebredes ( now called Adadavia )
runs North, and suxth, che Branches
differing in their Nature. (hat, which
runs Nerth-ward, and falis nso che
Libyck, Sea, is Salt: and che ocher,
which falls into the Tyrrben, is Freth
Water.


¢z) Proferpina. OF which fog the
excellent Clandian, ,


cy


wt


Bos, ae


i * . ‘
: a A


4.02 Sirius Irazicus. Book XIV.


;


Oo Sirius Irarrecus, 4.03


Upto the Stars. Thefe Latine Arms approvd,
And under the Laurentine Enfigns mov'd.
Thereft ofthe Sicilian People there,


That their four Tow'ts, and Walls, no Fo, as yet,
Hadentred; That their Fathers faw how great
A Cloud, fo inaceefsible a Town,


(a) Libjen With © &hfean Vows, in Arms appear. Fhrough fituation of her Port, had thrown
A\ thoufand were the Agathyrnian Bands ; Upon the ‘*)Salaminian, Victories

: if (¢) The Athenians, after the vain

As many Strong ylos, that South-ward ftands : And Eagftern Trophies ; when, before their Eyes _ Expedition of Kerve became {0 pow-

> ertull, that they free Greece trom

: . . < the Perf. i
A thouland fent Fa/cellina, the Seat Three hundred Ships, and eA thens, in whofe Ayd Sicty hee ale fvcal Conn
6 P : : : a Naval Fight before syracu/a, und
(Ch) Diana. Of the Z hoantean © Goddels: Thrice as great The Ruins of the Perfian King were made the Conductof Nisas, they eres:


A Number gave Panormos; {ome, that kill'd


Toferve, in one great Wrack, while they fuftain |


verthrown, and their whole force re-
pulfed, and beaten out of Sicily, See
Diodor. lib. 13.


Wilde BeaftsinChafe; and fomein F ifhing skill'd,

' And fome, that could the Birds from Heav'n allure.

- Herbefosthen, nor AC aulochum fecure

OF Danger fate: nor, with her Shady Plains,

_ Morgentia fcom this treach'rous W ar abftains.

_ Joyn’d with NCemaan Forces, thither carne

| cA mafira ; thither Thifse fmall in Name;
Netum with thefe, and eM icité combin‘d ;
With thefe Achetum, and Sidonia joyn’d;

: And Depane ; and, vex'd with roaring Waves,
GF came tore incest Hlelorus ; and‘) Triochala, by Slaves


Sicily came to chat height, that (with


an Army of more then twenty Thou- ad. : .
fand ) havi wafted many Towns, and Ss oon after Watted ; Arabeia fierce 2


Cities in that Country , and a- pu. .
mong others Trischala (St Tricelay Létas high; and Tabas, to converle


eminent for its Strength: they made F
one Salvins(to whomthey gwe tte With Armsmoft ready ;and Cofyra {mall,
Name of oP ) their King , and


anger his Conduct defeated Lucius Le And Muté, which not Megara at all.
cullus. Trypho dying, one Athenio


fucceeded, and prevailed again Zw- : : * +
cullusbis Succelfour C. Stull ng ~Exceedsin Bignefs, came, with Joynt confent,


ined thusin Arms four years, ill ae ae
C. Acie. who was Contd wine. To Libya's Aid ; with Caulon eminent


prefied them see pipers © Forhercalm Sea ; when She the @) Ffalcyon hears
(4) The Bird called the King-Fifver. . eae
&: Singing, and the {carce-moving Water bears
The fwimming Nefts on Surges {trangely ftill'd,
But the fam'dCity (Syracufa) filld
Her {pacious Walls with various Arms and Men,
Collected from all parts. The People, then
Facile, and ready Tumults to defire,


Their Leaders with this boafting Language Fire ;
: That


No Lof at all,were fwallow'd in the Main.

Two Brothers (born in Carthage, and ally'd
To Carthaginians, by the Mother's fide,

Whofe Father, a Sicilian, banifhed

From Syracufe, had them in Libya bred.

In whom Sicanian Levity confpir'd,

With Yorian Fraud, the giddy People fir'd,

Which when eM arcellys faw, and that no Cure
The Wounds of their Sedition would endure,
(The War ftill growing, fromthe Fo, more high)
He ftreight attefts the Gods of Sicily,

Thy Fountains, Arethufa, and the Lakes,

And Rivers; That unwillingly he takes

The War in hand, and that thofe Arms C which He
Ne're of himfelf affum‘d ) the Enemy

Fore’d him to bear. With that, the Wall he ftorms,
And Thunders on the City with his Arms.

An equal Fury them together all

Draws on: on either fide they Fight,and Fall,

{.) With many Cov’rings feeming to invade unade by Archimedes, in oppotition to
The Stars in height, and by a ©) Grecian made on Marches : ve Pe
Ten Stories high, which Shades of many a Grove Ty een
Confum’d, a Tow’r there was,from whence they ftrove

Toroll down mighty Stones, and Engines, which

With Fire wereArm'd,and pow'r down {calding Pitch.


hh 2 Here


Cf) Hippocrates; and Epicydes ,
whole Grand-father was banithed from
Syracufe, and fled to Carthage, where
they were born, their Azorher being a
Carthaginian. See Liv 5 Hib, 24,


(g) Of this, and other Engines ,


we, ee


404 Sttius Iraricus. Book XIV.


nn ee eee.


Here Cimber, at a diftance having thrown ~~
A burning Lamp, the Fatal Weapon on
The fide had fixd: The Fire, afsifted by
The Force of Wind,quite through the Tow’r doth fly,
And through the lofty Machine's fev'ral Floors,
Encreafing, climbes, and trembling Beams devours
Withrapid Flames, which ( Smoak,like Billows, thick
To Heav'n afcending) foon Victorious, lick
The fhining Top. All places, fill'd with Smoak,
And Clouds of Darknefsas, with a fierce Stroak
Of Thunder dath’d, none {caping it, they all,
«  Tnone vaft ruin, into Athes fall. |
Like Fortune on the other Side, by Sea,

The Shipsattended. For,when nearer they
Unto the City, and the Houfes, drew,
Where the Port brings the calmed Waters to
The Walls, a Mifchief Unexpected there
Fills ( by anew Device ) their Hearts with Fear.
A. Beam (exactly Smooth, and evry where
Like a Ship's Maft, the Knots thav'd off ) did bear
Strong Grapples, firmly fix’d, and feifing all
That Fought, from the high Rampart of the Wall,
Caught them aloft with Hooksof Ir'n, andto
The midft of all the City, baekward, threw.
Nor did this Force thus to {s the Men alone,
But, when the Steel, impuls’d,was downward thrown
Upon a Ship, and the impetuous Stroak
Fix’d the tenacious Teeth within the Oak,
Aloft the Veflel’s coft, and fuddenly :
The Chains, with Art, let loofe ( moft Sad to fee)
With fucha Force into the Sea agen
Is thrown, that it there finks with all the Men.
Befide thefe Stratagems, the Wall, by Art
Made hollow,narrow Loop-holes did j impart ;

. Through


Book XIV. Srerius Iraricus. : 4.93


Through which, upon the Fo. they mighe, fecure,
Difcharge their Weapons, from the Counter-Mure : :


“And this fo cunningly Contriv’d, the Fo;
“Through the fame Way,no Shafts again’could throw.


Thus Grecian Policy,and Artexcell'd 9° (4) Archinnedes
Their Arms, and both by Sea, and Land, repell'd
Marcellus, with his mighty Threatnings, and
Before the Walls a dreadful War doth ftand.

The Man Cth’ I/tbmiack Swains Immortal Fame )

In Wit, witheafe, all other overcame; . |

That then the World produe’d. ‘Not rich; but Ohe,
To whom the Heavens, and all'‘the Earth ‘was 8 known.
He, by the Sun's obicired Rays, at Birth ° ak
OF Day, could tell what Storms would eal: 2 if eee
Were Fix'd, or did Inftablehang: why, bound.’

By certain Leagues, this Globe’s encompafs'd round
By Thetis Waves: the Labours of the Sta, :
And Moon, what Laws the Ocean's Tides obey

Nor is it vain to think, that He the Sand
OF the vaft World could Count; who by the Hand
OF a weak Woman, could, with f much Skill, a


Archimedes , to 1h

@) Draw Ships, and heaps of Stones againft an Hill. permet se big Aeon i
caufed a very great Ship to be funk
While thus, with Stratagems ,He wearied all © with is ondidary Burden’ and: Gite


on the Shore with a {mall Engine.


: . which himfelf onely moved, drew it
The Teucr 1, and the Romane General ? out of the Water coon the Land. See


An hundred Sail of Zyrian Ships their Way Perch iti
Made towards their Relief, and plow’d the Sea. _—

Erected now with fudden Hopes, their Fleet |

Lanch’d from the Port, the Syracufians meet,

And joyn withthem: nor, on the other Side, .

Was the Aufonian backward to provide

His Navy ; but,with drowned Oars, apace

Cuts through the Ocean,whofe beaten Face Cave

With frequent Stroaks grows White, and,where they


The Billows, abroad Path of Foam they leave.
Both,


“4OG


Ck) Feigned to be Neptune’s Trum-
peter.


With her wide Yards, but yery flow! y patt,


ieee ITALICcus, — Book XIV.


Both, equally, infuleupon the Main 3
And Neptune's Empire with new Storms again
Trembles, through which their Shouts, and Clamours


And Ecchoes, full as loud,from Rocks rebound, (found,


And now, drawn out for Fight, the Warriours {tood,
And compals with their Wings the fpacious Flood,
And with their Naval Toils the War'y Plaia
Include. Both Navies, in like Form amain, |
Came on, and with their Moon-like Circles crow'd |
The foaming Waves. Now, no Delay’s allow’d ;
The dreadful Murmurs of the cruel Brafs,
Sounding the Charge,through all the Ocean pas :
Which rouzing “© Triton, frighted him ; their Yell,
And Noife, contending with his crooked Shell.
Scarce they the Sea rememb’red, with fo prone

A Fury to the Battel they go on,

And, ftanding on the Gallie’s Margents, throw
Uncertain Darts, frill nodding toand fro: |

The Sea between them is with Weapons ftrew’d ;
While the tall Veffel rifing, as they rew'd

With labrring Stroaks, the foamin 8 Billows cleaves
With the black Keel, and fo their Aim deceives, |

But fome in Fight were torn, and with the ftroke

OF the Affaulting Ship their Oars were broke ;

Some fwiftly through the Bulk of others {trike

With their fharpe Prows, and in the Breach alike.

Are ftop’d, and ftop. But then, amidft them all,

A Gally ¢ terrible to Sight, and Tall

Above the reft, then which none had before

More large been Lanch’d from the Sidonian Shore)

Strikes with four hundred Oars, at Once, the Main,

And, Proud of her large Sails, that could retain

Strong Boreas, and gather ev'ry Blaft


I€


Sirius Iraricus., 407,


Book XIV.


‘Tfonely driv'n with Oars, She put to Sea.


The Latine Ships, more ready to obey
The Pilot's hand, and charg’d with fighting Men,
Made Way with more Celerity. Which when
Himilco, through the calmed Ocean, {pyd,
Advancing, and commanded on his Side :
To give the Charge, obliquely with their Prows,
All the Sea-Gods invoking to his Vows,
( As was hisCuftom) ftrait an Arrow to
Th’ extended Nerve he fits, and ‘gainft a Fo
Directs it with his Ey, and when, again
His Arms releas’d, he fhew’d the flying Kain
Its Paffage through the Air, his fteddy Look
Purfuing,brought it to a Wound ; and ftrook,
Nailing it tothe Helm, the Pilot’s Hand,
Which, now, no more was able to command, .
So maim’d, the yielding Stern, where he was plac’d :
And, while unto his Aid the Sea-Men hafte,
Asif the Ship were taken, ‘midft them all,
With the like Fate, and Nerve, a Shaft doth fall
Again, which Taurus, as he undertook
The vacant Helm, quite through the Body ftrook.
But now, at length, a (aman Ship broke in,
Which Corbulo commanded, and had been
With chearful Youths at Stabie fill'd,of late.
The “ Guardian Goddels (neighb’ring Venus ) fate che sat Far Dias we te
Qn thehigh Poop. This charging very near, .
The Object of all Shafts, amid tt them there
Sinking, the yielding Waters doth divide, |
And their Mouths foaming Dereus ( as they cry'd
For Aid) fills with his Brine, and, asthey {trove
In vain, the Sea them fucking in, above
The Wavestheir Hands appear. But here, behold /


With an huge Leap, quite crofs the Ps Pes a


(/) Icwasantiently their Caffons ,


Rega ae Beh Ete ene Be ia bi cl
TT RR EE STS ECO SNE ieee:


408  Srrrus Iranicus. Book XIV.


With Rage, leap'd (Corbulo upon the Decks .

(For now theGallies, which ftrong Bands connex
OF Ir'n, a Tow’r of Oak broughtup ) and there,
‘Likea dire Comet, fhaking, in the Air,
On the high Top, a flaming Pine, the Fires

With Brimftone fed, with which the Winde confpires,
Throws ‘mong the Libyan Flags. The Lemnian God
Soon enters, and their Hatches, all abroad

Diffus’d, trait fills: the Rowers, full of Fear,
Forfake their Benches ; yet, although they were

So hard Befet, the Noife of that fo great,

And fatal Mifchief, did not Penetrate

To thofe below, till running fiercely down,

By unctuous Lamps,and Torches thither thrown,

- Victorious Flames whizz through the Hold. Yet where
From Dardan F ire,and Smoak, as yet, they were
Untouch’d, and Free, the dire Himiko held .

His Gallie’s Fate, and them with Stones repell’d,
“Andhere poor Cidnus, whilea flaming Brand

Ith’ Air He brandith’d, from Licheus Hand
Into the Ocean, by a Mural Stone,
From the Decks, flippery with Blood, was thrown,
Then, witha filthy Stink, a Lamp the Air

Pollutes, and Hiffeth on the Waves: and there

A mifsile Weapon Sabrata lets fly,

From the adored Poop: the Deity

O'th’ Libyan Ship was fTammon, who furvay’d

_ With his Horn'd Brow the Sea. Now,F ather, Aid,
And graunt ( Thou Garamantick God) that We
May ‘gainft the Romanes fling fure Darts ¢ {aid He.)
Then from the trembling Throng, as this he {poke,
A Cornel came, that through the Vilage broke
Of Neptune's Neighbour, Te/on : nev rthelefs -
Fle, in the Gate of Death, doth forward prels


On


Book XIV. | Sibtius ITavicus, 409


‘On thole,who Flying, ina Crowd; vetird «5 -
Intoa part o'th? Ship ‘as yet not fir'd.-
But, when th’ inevitable Fite iad paft,
Like Lightning, through whate’re was next, at laft,
‘The whole Ship to victorious Flames wasmade _
A\ Prey : but firft Himilco, by the Aid | .
Of a Sea-Rope (where Vulcan had not yet
Rais‘d to extreameft height his Stygian Heat »)
A little fcorch’d, flips down into the Sea, .
And, by the Oars of Friends, is born away.
Next, wretched Batho, did thy Fate deprive
A Ship of agood Pilot, who couldft ftrive
With rougheft Seas, and Weather by thy skill
The higheft Storms ; He could prevent what chil
Boreas next day, or Auffer did intend :
Nor, Gnofura, couldtt thou, though thou bend
Thy Courfe obfcurely, his ftill-watchful Eye
Deceive. When he perceiv’ d their Mifery .
No Mealure had; Thou, Hammon, who dott fee
This our unequal Fate, receive ( faid He )
My Blood. With that, into his Breaft he drives
His Sword, and in’s Right-Hand the Blood receives,
Which largely, ‘twixt his Sacred Horns, he pours,
_ Daphnis, mong thele, unhappy -Fate devours,
( An antient Name } who chofe to leave the Woods,
And chang’d his Farms for the perfidious Floods,
But how much more,under a Shepheard’s Name,
Did the firft of that Race excel in Fame ?
To Daphnis the “” Sicelides inclin’d,
And a Caffalian Pipe to him the kind
Apollo gave ; commanding, when he lay’d
Himfelfalong upon the Grafs, and play’d,
To Dapbnis the joy’d Flocks,through Medows, and


Through Fields,fhould hafte,and Rivers Silent {tand,
Lii When


(m) The Afufes of Sicily.


poeNRS tte oe shears


ro: “Stuius:Iraticus. Book XIV.
| When on his feven-fald Reeds he play'd, the Woods
He charm’d, the Syrens, in their ‘briny Floods, -
Forgot to Sing, and Scylla’s Dogs no more.
Wouldbark, aquiet Face Charybdus bore,
4nd ‘mong the Rocks,the (yclops,overjoy'd,
Would hear his Lays. But here, by War deftroy'd,
Fell the whole Progeny, and that great Name, -
So Amiable for his facred Flame.
On {moaking Planks fierce Ornytos away
Then fwum, and lingred outa Death by Sea.
So Ajax, when her Thunder Pallas threw,
Did rifing Waves with burning Arms fubdue.
Marmarick Seyron , wounded by a Stem’s |
Sharp Point quite through the Belly, part of’s Limbs
Swim under Water, part above, and fo
Through all the Ocean, on the Fatal Prow,
Isbornaway. The Ships the Fight parfue
Clofe, on both fides, and with a bloody Dew
From lab’ring Oars the Faces dath of thofe
That fought. With fuch fierce ftrokes Marcellus goes,
That his ftout Gally overcame the Wind, |
Which, as Libeus feizing faft. behinde,
Witheager Hands,endeavovur'd to have ftop’d
Witha fharp Ax his Members off were lop‘d,
And, flicking to their Hold, were born away
By the {wift Veffel. In this bloody Fray
LEiilides Podetus did engage, 7
Ina Sicanian Ship, although his Age _
Not yet arriy'd to Man. He, whether by
Sinifter Gods drawn thither, or his high
Hot fpirit, and defire of War, not yet
Full ripe for Honour, painted Arms did fir
Tohis white Shoulders, proud fo, with his tall
Chimara,to difturbe the Sea, Now all


Rautulan


Book XIV. Sirius Iraticus,


4


Rutulian Ships, now allthe Likyan, He . -

Better in Oars, and Darts Triumphantly a oe
Outftrip’d, and Neus had already drown’d .... -
Incruel Waves; NN ofus with Turretscrown'd:
Alafs! vain Glory / that did then foill

Perfwadea Boy to Fight, which wanted skill.


- While for Marcellus Creft, which then he wore :


On’s dreadful Caske, and Spoils, he doth implore


The Gods, as he, too rathly,did advance,


A deadly Wound by areturned Lance

He took. Oh how much prais'd, whither he threw

The © Difeus, fhining near the Stars; or drew (n) Difeus wasa round Qaoie os

His Bow, and tothe Clouds his Arrowsfent: uted or Exetel he
: : among our Country People,

Or run with winged Feet, and as he went

Scarce touch’d the Ground: oro’re the meafur'd Plains

By leaping paft, taught by continual pains :

Enough of praife ( fond Youth ) didi thou acquire,

In fuch fafe Conflias , why didft thou alpire

To greater Deeds? When he was beaten down

And funk,through num'rous Darts againft him thrown,

Under the Waves, his thipwrack’d Corps, the while,

Deprived of his Spracofian Pile,


‘Gclopean Rocks bemoan, with Gane,


eAnapus, Arethufa, and the Sea. |
‘But Tiberinus, in another place, —

Where then the Libyan Admiral did pals,

Drives on hisShip, and ftreight they Io cry’d,

And caf their Grapples in on either fides

The Ships ftand bound unto the Combat ; nor

With Shafts, and Darts, at diftance thrown, the War,

Do they purfue ; but Fight it near at hand,

A\nd with the Sword, as ina F ight at Land.

Where the firtt flaughter open’d, and did {hew


A paflage, the Italian Shi psbroke through ;


Iii2 While


\


Book XIV.


Strius JTALIcUus.


While the vaft Chains, and iron Bands hisFriends


Mela advis'dto break, and fointends

Such, as had Boarded him, tobear away _
Farther, from their thea equal Arms, to Sea.
Yong Polypheme in an Aitnéan Cave

Was bred, and thence affected fhill to have

The Name ofantient Fiercenefs, nurtur’d by

A She-Wolf, whenaChilde; his Stature high,
Andterrible of Bulk; a cruel Mi nde ; |
Rage ever in his Face ;: his Heart inclin’d
- To Blood, as allthe (Cyclops: He, at length,
The Chains got loofe, with all his Bodie’s Strength,
Had driven on the Ship, and, in the Sea
Drowning his Oars, had born her quite away,
Had nat Laroams, with a fudden Blow

Of’s Lance, as he his Body rais‘d to row,
Nail'd himto’s Seat. Scarce he, in Death, forfook
“What he begun: for,asits wonted Stroke
His Hand, then languifhing, did ftill purfue

Upon the furface of the Sea, he drew
Thelazy Oar; ftrack with the adverfe Prow,

On one fide, to the other, fromthe Fo
The Libyans throng’d; when with their fudden Weight
Opprefs'd, Waves leaping in, on that fide, ftraie
The Veffel under Water finks, and there
Targets, and Crefts, and ufelefs Darts, that were
Pointed with Steel, with Guardian Gods, upon
The Ocean float. All Weaponsloft: here One
Fights witha broken Plank, and fo agen,

By Shipwrack, Arms himéfelf for Fight; and then
Another, whom blinde Rage too rathly heats,
Spoils of her Oars the Ship, teras up the Seats -
O’th’ Seamen, and with no Diftinction throws.
Neither from breaking Sterns, nor yet from Prows,


0


Book XIV. Sitius Iraticus. | 413


~ Todeal intended Wounds, do they abftain, .


And {natch up Weapons fwimming on the Main.
The Waves at gaping Wounds break in, which ftrait
Their fleeting Souls with Sighs regurgitate,

[nto the Sea. Some in.a ftriét Embrace

Are drown'd,and,where no Weapons elfe have Place,
Kill, in their Death, their Foes. The Rage of thofe,


That from the Bottom rife, more Cruel grows, .


And they refolve,for Swords,the briny Floed

Toufe, while Whirl-pits, coverd o’re with Blood,

The turning Corpsdevour. Loud Clamours here
Are heard:fad Deaths,and Flight,and Groanings there,
With cracks of breaking Oars, and Stems, that beat
The Air with dreadful Ecchoes, as they meet.

Thus chaf‘d, and overfpread with War,theSea
Grew hot, when, ina little Bark, away

Himilco ftealing, weary of the Fight,


_ Towards the Coatt of Libya, takes his Flight.


At length) both Greeks, and Libyans quit the Sea,
And now the captiv’d Ships are born away,
Ina long Train, together link'd, to Land,
While fome amidft the Deep ftill burning ftand.
The Lemnian God fhines o’re the glitt‘ring Seas,
Which brandifh up, and down his trembling Rays.
There known at Sea burns“) Gané,andhere (o) Names of Ships.
The winged ‘Siren burns, Enropa there,
Who, ina white Bull's Shape, by ove was born,


And crofs’d the Ocean, holding by his Hern.


And Nereis, who, with Hair difhevel’d, rides

A crooked Fith, and through the Ocean guides

The wat’ry Reins: there Phyton wand ring o're

The Waves, and Hammon burns; with That, which
Eliza's \mage,and, on either Side, (bore


With twice three Oars, did o’re the Billows ride. j
ut


cg,


| SrLtrus Iraticus. Book XIV. -


But chain'd e4napus to his Native Shore

Is drag'd, with nimble Pegafus, that bore -
His.Gorgon Wings up to the Stars ; and that
Tall Ship, where Carved Lybia's Image fate,
And Triton Captivate, and itna high

With Rocks ( where buried, deep in Flames, doth ly
Panting Enceladus } is drag'd away,

With their Cadmaan Sidon. Nor had they
To break into their trembling Walls delay’d,
Nor from the Temples of the Gods had ftay’d
Their Gonqu'ring Engins then, if fuddenly
Rais‘d by the Envy of the Gods, and by
Their Toils atSea, a dire Contagion, and
Devouring Sicknefs, had not fet a ftand

To alltheir Joys. For So/ with flaming Hair,
And influence of Fiery Stars, the Air


- And Gane, that open lyes, and {wells


With Fenny Waters , round, with noifom smells
Of dire Cocytus fills, and fo pollutes

eAxtumn, then Flourifhing with ftore of Fruits,
And it inflames with Lightning: the thick Air

With Clouds of Darknefs {moaks. Earth, ev'ry where


?


-Parch’d, with a vitiated Face appears,


Affords no Food, nor any Shadows bears

For fainting Man, and in the Pitchy Air,

Black Vapours move. Dogsare the firft,that bear
The fury of this Plague; next,as they Flie,

Birds fall with flagging Pinions from the Skie.

Then Beafts within the Foreftsdy; at laft

Itereeps into the Camp, and there doth watt

Th’ infected Troops: their tongues dry‘d up,cold fweat
Creeps through their Entrails, ore their Limbs: the
Appointed for their fuftenance, their dry, (Meat


And parched Jaws refufe to fwallow: by _
| Sharp


_ That they then liv’d the Trumpet’s Sound to hear.


Book XIV. Sviaus Iranicus.


Sharp Coughs cheir. Lungs are torn, and; Thirfty from
Their panting Throats, a fiery Breath doth come. ~
Their Eys,fcare able to endure the Light, - F

Sink from their crooked Nofes, while they {pit _
Corrsption mix’d with Blood ; a fhrivel’d Skin
Covers their Bones, the Fleth confum’d within.

Oh Greif! in their known Arms renowned, by

A lazy Death, the valiantSouldiers Dy:

Their ftately Trophies, gain‘d in many a War,


‘ Are thrown into the Fire, no Med’‘cines -are


Of Pow’, butall too weak for the Difeafe.
Heap‘d up, the Afhes of the Dead Encreafe
To a vaft Hill, though Bodies ev'ry where
Forfaken, and Unburied ly, through Fear
To touch infected Limbs. Thus fadly fed,
The Acherufian Plague doth farther {pread,


And fhakes with no lefs Grief Trinacrian Walls,


And onthe Libyan Camp as fiercely falls.

Now, equal in their Ruin, ev'ry Place

The common Wrath of Heav’n, and the fame Face
Of Death frequents: and yet no Force of all
Thefe Ils could vanguith ¢ while their General
Wasfafe ) the Romanes: He, alone, fecure, .


Doth balance all the Woes, which they endure.


Soon, therefore, asthe burning ° ) Dog allay’d
His deadly Heat, and the Contagion ftay’d
The greedy Hand of Death, (Caswhen the Seas,
The Sonth-Winds ceafing, their rude Waves appeafe.)
The Fifher driveshis Batk into the Main.
Sohis Youth, wafted by the Plague, agafn


~ Atlength Marcellus Arms, and ev'ry Band,


Purg’d with due Sacrifice, now Chearful ftand
About their Enfigns, and o’rejoy‘d appear,


Againtt


AIS


(p) The Dog-Star.


icé | Sr tus ITALICUS. Book 4 XIV.


Beaink the Fo’ they March, well-pleas d, thatch they |
y If Bates detériine fo ). in Battél may eg |
_ Dy by the Sword, it grieves them fér their Friends, :
Whe, like’ 6 ‘eB, ny fach Legloniets Ends,


Theit Fatal Beds. Then to their Tombs agen,
And worthlefs Fun’ral Piles, they turn their Eys, -
Andrather with, then fee by Maladies
To be o'retéme, to have no Graves at all.
The firft,; whofe lofty Enfigns to the Wall

Advanc'd, the Gen’ral was. Their Faces in
Their Helmets hide that Leannefs,which had bin
Contracted by their lying ftillz:andfo
That Palenefs,which might animate the Fo, -
Is from their Sight conceal’d. Then on they fall,
And in thick Bodies {cale the batter’d Wall.
So many Houfes, and {trong Tow'ss by War,
Before unenter’d, by the Soldier,

(4) See Pintarch. (7) Acone Affault,are tiow furpriz‘d. The Sun,
Wheree're his Chariot through the World doth run,
Could not behold a Town, that might compare

Cr) Nociyinthe worldwasheld (+) With Syracu/a then : fomanyywere


to be more Wealthy, having, till rhac ae
re een fee det divada, “The Temples of the Gods, within the Wall


a Forein Enemy, but enriched by many
ae So numerous their Havens, and withall


Their Market-places, and their Theatres,

On lofty Columns rais‘d, and mighty Bars

Contending with the Sea. Then add to thefe

Innumerable ftately Palaces,

That, in long Rows, moft {patious, appear

Like Countries ; with the Groves, which Sacred were
~ 'ToSports of Youth, which Limits large enclofe

With ample Galleries: then captiv’d Prows,

And Stems of Shipsadorn the Temples, mix’d


we num‘rous Arms, that to the Gods were fix'd ;
Which


" ©) Griev’d, that fo much was left toeruel Men,


SM ow git at 2S TSR tO a


Book XIV. Smee Iratrcus, | 4.17


Whichor the ‘Maritbonian Fo had loft, ::
Or elfe were brought from Conquer’d Lilye sCoatt.


~ And there Agathocléan Trophies fhin’d ; 7. en :


There Hieron’s great Riches : there they finde ©
Antiquity by Artifts Sacred made.

Notany Place, in any Age, (tis faid) -

More glorious wasin Pi@ures: there they také
All Works of Brafs, that‘ Ephyré could make; (/) Corinth,
Garments with Yellow Gold contending, where
The Imagesin Texture breath: and,there,
What Babylon could boatt engrav'd, or Tyre,
Proud in embroider'd Purple, could admire ;
Whatin Attalick Arras Needles wrought,

And varied with Art, orcould be bought -


_ From Pharian Looms, with’ Silver Goblets , rich


With Gems, and Images of Gods, the which

The Deity, firft giv’n’ by Art, retain :

Befide the Spoils o’th’ Erythraan Main

Was made their Prey,with Fleeces, which from Trees
The Serian Women card,. This Wealth, and thefe
Rich Houfes, when the Romane General

Flad taken ; ftanding High, upon the Wall,

The City (Trembling with their Shouts) he views,
And, when he found it left to his Refufe,

Whether the Fabricks, there, of Kings fhould be

Left ftanding, or the following Day fhould fee

No Walls at all, he fadly Groans: and then,


(t) Marcellus wept, both in de-
teftation of the Fury of the Souldiers,
and in Commiferation of the Death
of Archimedes, who, notwithftanding
the great Tumults, at the Entrance of
the Romanes into the City, was fo in-
tentin drawing fome Adathematical
Lines onthe Sands , that, not mind-
ing a Souidier, who asked him, who


He {peedily recalls the Souldiers Ire ;
Commanding, that the Houles ftand entire,
And that the Antient Gods their Temples there
Inhabit till. The Conquer’d thus to {pare hewas, (for Afercelles commanded
Was better worth then Spoil,and Victry ftood rere is a
Content, and Clapd her Wings unftain’d with Blood.


Kkk Tears,


tp


Sicims Iraricus. Book XIV.


che ee ed cs a apa te at ere Rae eS ee


(«) Archimedes,


(*) Marcellus.


_G) The Poet here flatters Domi-
bia.


Tears, for Thee, likewile, from the Geseral

C Thou fantd “) Defender of thy Country ) fall,

Whom, drawing Lines, and Figuresia the Sand, -

( While in fo great a Ruin thon doft fland

Untouched, and Idaasdoft purfue }

By Chance an Ign’rant Common Souldier flew.
But.now again their minds the People give

To Mirth, in which the Conquer'd feem to ftrive

Ev'n with the Conquerours. “) He, emnlous

Oth’ nature of the Gods, preferving, thus,

The City, buile it: which ftill {tands to be

A glorious Trophy to Pofterity,

SAnd fhall continue, that the Manners, fo

OF antient Generals the World may know:

Happy the People, if, as Antienty

In War, our Townscould now preferved be

From Spoils in Peace! for if his Care, by whom

(7) Wenow, enjoy our Peace had not o’recome

That boundlefs Rage of Plundring all: the Hand

Of Rapine had quitebard both Sea, and Land.


The End of the Fourteenth Book.


SILIUS


—_—_— SS eee
‘i 7 t inde prior Promifsis Fisa Yo pias
dente Le Gee na wey nam bahar abe Me , Ingusit


pa 5 * ik
Slee foie Size virtue Shirmica Dolupta
Har fino View bank Nickolas o rete & Sanctioribus Cassilijs .


:  Regibus Secretario. CO Obseruanha D.D.D.


Magne Brittani eee oe CO
a ES ee


MON Delhcis Gade Annis £ . 1 a2 2
Eouatt rato Serens/simis Carolo ) K 2


i hh i 2 ines eee ta


. oO £19


-SILIUS ITALICUS


oo OR. Pca
he Second Punick V.Var, aoe


The Fifteenth Book...
ee Agen ga Ge ae ee


Seipio ( bis Father, and his Uncle, flain) ~ es
Made Conful, undertakes the War of Spain;. Ta
Though but (*) five Luftra old. The vain Delights Ory Deneg ine year
Of Youth, towhich fond Pleafure him invites,

Fie flyes, and Virtue follows. Then by Sea

ToSpain he hagts: and, inone happy Day,

An Omen to bis future Conquefts makes.

New Carthage, which be, fudden, Storms, and takes.

Fis Chastity: that to her Princely Spoufe .

A-Captiv'd Beauteous Maid, untouch'd, allows, guR

The Macedonian King incu-fions makes a rs

Upon the Grecian Coafts. Old Fabius takes ,

Tarentum. The Numidian T) oops Surprize

Marcellus by an Ambufh, where le dies,

Elis Ubfequies by Hannibal perform’d.

The Libyan Camp, in Spain , by Sci pio florm’d.

Young Hafdrubal over Pyrene flies!”

Perfwades the Gauls-with him, in Arms, to rife,

And Italy invades, where be again

Is by the Romans overthrown, and flain

By Neto, who bis Head upon a Spear,

In Triumph, tothe Romane ¢. amp doth bear.


=U T anew Care ‘Kome's Senate
now perplext


Zoi i CThe Nations trembling at ‘their
Lofs) whonext
aShould Rule, and undertake the


(4) After the two Scipices were


War of Spain. We overthrown in Spain, choues Mar-
4 5" Soa tins had recovered very much) yet
> By a proud Fo both *) Scipioes was the Terrour of the Libyan Arms
7. (lai (joyned with the Infidelity of the
were Hain Natives) fo great, sas nae at
5 Rome waved the undertaking of that

K k k 2 (Two War.


Sirius Iraicus. Book XV.


C Two Warlike, Valiant Brothers) hencea Fear,"
Left the Tarte/siack People fhould adhere


"To Tyrian Laws, and dread the War, at Hand.


The State thus fhaken, fad the Senate ftand :
Looking about for Remedies, and pray
‘Th’ Immortal Gods to give them One, that may,
With Courage, in the fhatter’d Camp fucceed,
As General. The Noble Youth, indeed,
Eager his Father's, and his Uncle's Shade
To vindicate, fad Troops of Friends disiwade,
And, adding by their Sorrows to their Fears, '
Sadly recount the Number of his Years :
Should he into that Fatal Country go,
Amidft the Afhes of his Friends ; that Fo
He there muft Fight, who had the Counfels foil'd,
And Arms of two great Generals, and boil'd
With Pride of his Succefs. Nor was it for
His tender Arms to Manage fuch a War ;
Or that Command, at fuch Unskilful Years,
Toundertake. The Youth thefe Cares, and Fears,
( Alone, retiring to the fartheft Part
Of all his Houfe) revolved in his Heart,
Under a Laurel Shade. When fuddenly,
Here Virtue, TPleafure there, Cher Enemy)
Defcending through the Air, on either hand,
Exceeding Humane Stature, by him ftand.
The One breath’d Perfian Odours from her Head ;
Her Amber-Hair upon her Shoulders {pread ;
Shining with Yellow Gold, a Zyrian Vett
She wore; the Beauty of her Front expreft
The Bodkin’s Art ; and from her Wanton Ey
The frequent Flames, with dubious Motion, fly:
A diffrent Habit did the Other wear ;
Her Forehead rough, and never chang’d by Hair


Compos‘d


Book XV. Sixius Iraticus. Ant


Compos'd; afteddy Look; her Gefture nigh

To Man’s,and fach her Face; with Modefty
Chearful ; upon her lofty Shoulders fhin’d

A Snow-white Robe. Then Plesfure firft Cinclin’d

To promife Much ) thus feizeth him, What Rage, .
What Fury’s this (brave Youth) thy Flow’r of Age»
Thus to Confumein Fighting Artthou fo
Ulnmindful of dire Canna, and the Po ¢

Or Thrafimen, then Styx more grievous far ©

To whatend do you Thusthe Fates, by War,
Provoke? Th’ eAtlantick Kingdoms you prepare
Torry, and Yyrian Houles. But forbear

( Let meadvife } to ftrive with Dangers fo,


Or thy Self rathly, as before, to throw


Into thofe Storms of Arms; , unlefs you fhun

Thole Rites, fad Virtue, here, will bid you run

Into the midft of Armies, and through Fire.

‘Tis She, that (Prodigal) thy noble Sire,

Thy Uncle ( Paulus ) and the Decii, down

Into the Lakes of Erebus hath thrown ,;

While Titles to their Afhes She proclaims,

And gilds their Tombs with Memorable Names,
Yet are their Souls afenfible what She

Performs. But, Youth, if Thou wile go with Me,

Ina {mooth Path thy Days (allow’d by Fate)

Shall pafs. .No Trumpet’s Sound fhall violate

Thy troubled Sleeps: nor Northern Frofts, nor Heat
Of burning Cancer {halt thou Feel. Nor eat |
On Tables, oft compos'd of bloody Grals.

Dire Thirft, Duft, {wallow'd under Casks, {hail pafs
By Thee, arid Labours, undergone with Fear.

But bright thy Days, and all thy Minutes clear

Shall run. Thou may’ft grow Old with dainty Fare.


What mighty things by God provided are,
For


422


Book XV.


Sryius Iraricus.


(6) A River near Troy.


With a fall Hand, beftow'd? and Himto be -
Th’ Example of a Quiet Life we finde ,
‘Living at Eafe, with an untroubled Minde.
I'me She, that Venus, near to ©) Simois Stream,


For Man's more chearful Ufe? what Joys hath He,


_ Joyn’dto Anchifes, whencethe Authour came


Of your Great Race. Ev'n 1am She, for whom
ove fometimes hath been willing to become


A Bird, fometimesa Bull; and this Advice


_Obferve. Life fwift from Mornals runs ; nor twice


Canany Manbeborn: away Time flys ;
And Hell's fwift Torrent, fwallowing all, denies,
Fhat You, if any thing hath pleas‘d you here,
It to the Shades below, from hence, fhall bear.


. And who is He, that grieves not, at the laft


€ Too late alafs / ) that all my Hours are patt¢ -
WhenShe was fileat, and an End had made

Of Speaking. In what Darknefs (Virtne faid) ‘

What Cheats of Life, this Youth, in’s prime of Age,

Doft thou endeavour { flatt'ring ) to Eng age®

Unto whom Reafon, by the will of Heav'n :

A\nd a great Mind's celeftial Seeds are giv'n.

As muchas Gods above do. Men exceed,

So They all other Creatures, For, ixdeed,

Such Nature to the Earth, as lefser Gods,

Hath giv’n: and hath Condemn’dto Hell's Abodes,

By fix’d Decree, degen’rate Souls, But ~All,

That keep their Heav’nly Seed’s Original

Entire, fhallenter Heav'n. What fhould| tell

Of great Alcides, who did alldebel?

Or Bacchus , whofe Triumphal Chariot, through

The Cities, fierce Caucafean Tigers drew ;


_ After the Seres, and the Indians He


Fad Conquer’d, and brought Home,with Victory,
' His


SOP ee geen Meme TS EE: Mets tay tee agin ee gt ow et, SNM ee a


Sttius [raticus.


Book XV:


His Enfigns from the Zaft? What fhould I fay


Of thofe fam’d (9 Twins, to whom the Sea-men pray


In Danger © orof yourQsirinus? See.
How God to Heav'n hath rais’d Man’s Face, which he
Ereét hath made! While Birds, and Beafts, with all
Of bafer Kinde, upon their Bellies fall.
Thrice Happy and (ifthey the Gifts Embrace -
Q’th’ Gods) to Hon our born is Humane Race.
Do but confider this; (Ile not repeat
Too many things) by Valour, now, how Great
Is Rome become’ once, much Inferiour to
@) Threatning Fidenz, and Content to grow
Ina poor Sanctuary. Then behold,
What wealthy Cities Luxury, of Old,
Hath overthrown! For not fo much the Ire
Ofallthe Gods, nor Swords, nor Foes confpire,
To Ruin ; as when Pleafure feizeth on
The Mindealone. Thy fure Companion
Is Drunkennefs, withRiot: and on Thee
Still, with black Wings, waits Infamy. With Me
Is Honour, Praife, and, with a chearful By ,
Glory, with fair Renown, and Victory,
Unftain’d, asare her Snow-white Wings. His Head
With Lawrel compals’d, Me doth Triumph lead
Up tothe very Stars. My Houle is Chaft,
And ona lofty Hillmy Dwelling’s plact.
The Way, that up the ftony Cliff doth go,
Atfirftisrough ¢ I’m not Accuftom’d to
Deceive) and they muft Labour, that intend
To enter there. Nordoththat Wealth afeend
With them which faithlefs Chance hath giv'n, and can
Force back again. Strait the whole Race of Man,
( Standing above } beneath Thee, thou fhalt fee,
Andall things contrary to that, which She


Doth,


Aes


(ce) Caffor, and Pollux.


(d) The Fidene werea Colony of
the Veientes, feated on the other fide
Tiber, near theold Territories of the
City of Reme, Inthe ume of Tolam-
nines , ara the Veientes, they (ha-
ving been before fubdued by the Ro.
manes) revolted tothe Veientes , and
flew four Roman Embaffadonrs. Then
joyned with the Falifci, and Veientes,
threacened the Ruin of the Romanes :
who, notwithftanding, under the Con-
ductof ALemercus eLmilins, defeat-
edthem, and Tolwmnins was {lain by
Cornelius Coffus , who, by that Vido- -
ry, gained the next Opimons Spoils after


Romulus,


ti


416 ‘Srxiius Iraricus. Book XV. Book XV. = Sirius Iraricws, gag.
Bul aebaanoun beaklnkenen fs Behold again his'Uncle’s furious Look. :.. oo

But yet (though, with deep Silence, Terrour ftrook

Their Hearts) fad with gréat Dan gers : with their Fears | 3 os

That War's great Weight they ponder'.then his Year, |

Their anxious Favour numbers, But, while they:

Thefe things, with their confufed Murmurs, weigh ; —

Froma crofs Quarter of the Heav'n, behold! *
| & Serpent, fhining Bright with Spots of Gold,

Seems ‘mong the Clouds to pafs, and, through the ‘Air

Rays from the flaming Trac diffufing; where

The Clime to Heav'n-fupporting eA tlas tends,

The Pole refounding with the Noife, defends.

DP Fove tothe eAugury adding. twice, or thrice, iN aanea ae

A fhining Bole, the {cateer'd: Thunder flies Potala a ee ee

Through all the {hakenWorld. Then they command, pea of mite (oa a


i : 1 { . a And therefore (though i-
That, inftantly, he take his Arms in hand ; cc hough not men


Doth, flatr’ring, promife, muft be undergone.
You fleeplefs Nights,under the Stars, (upon -
The hard Ground lying) muft Endure.. You muft
_ Hunger, and Cold fubdue: foftrialy Juft,

That ,whatfoever things you take in Hand,
Think that the Gods as Witnelses fhall ftand
Ofall your Deeds. Then, when your Country’s, or
The Dangers of the State require, for War |
Be you firft ready, Hoftile Ramparts fcale.
The firft: let neither Gold, nor Swords prevail
Upon your-Minde. Robes ftain’d with Trian Dye,
And {weet Perfumes (in Men unhanfome ) fly;
Vie bring to pafs, that He,who now the Land
Infefts with cruel War, fhall by thy Hand ©

. Be vanquith’d, and, the Libyans quite Deftroy’d,

" Ce) Byan, Antient Cuffow, after Thy Lawrel in (*) Fove’'s Bofom hall be lay‘d.


the happy. finifhing of a dangerous
Wer, and Confirmation of Peace,


: ; : +: : Gods con i ips 7
the Hc of Cee edge This fung by Virtue, from her Sacred Breaft : A\nd, humbly proftrate on their Knees, full low pb both of hand pags
in the Capitol, inthe Lap of pre beta ; Leah: -* Title Snake, bef ioned
piCee ee The Youth, whofe Looks approv’d what She expreft, Salute the Omen, and now bid him go as the shape, wiereie Vaiier: beads
* * ; ‘ es “a 2 — him.
With thefe Examples joy'd, She turns: but yet | Whither Casit appear’d) the Gods did lead,.


Pleafure holds not her Tongue, but, ina Heat,
Exclaims. I weigh You not at all, ‘twill come,
My Time (I’mefure }) will come, when ealy Rome,
With all her Might, my Empire will obey,
And unto Me alone will Honour pay.
Thus having faid, thaking her wanton Head,
Into dark Clouds, from them, away fhe fled.

But the Youth, full of Precepts, and inflam'd
With Love of Virtue, fo appearing, aim’d
At Mighty things, within his Heart :and then
Afcends the Roftra, and, while other Men
So hot a Service fhun’‘d, defires to bear
The heavy Charge of that ambiguous War.
The Minds ofall intentupon him were : :
Some thinke his Father's Eys, fome thinke théy there
. Behold


And the Path, fhew’d him by his Father, tread.
And, now, with Emulation, fuch as are |

Joyn’din Affairs, and Minifters of War,

Together flock, and Earneft are to thare

The hardeft Labours: the fame Arms to bear

With him, is Honour held. Then ftrait to Sea

Goesanew Fleet: on him 4ufonia

A\ctends, and is tran{ported into Spain.

As when dire Wars on the Coerulean Plain

Fierce Corus makes,with hollow Floods, he heaves

The lofty ‘9 I/fbmos up, and with rude Waves” Oe re ae

Forcing, at length, through groaning Rocks, his Waye es wane

Mingleth th’ Iénian with figéan Sea, a FARR ght a
Stately, in Arms, fhines Scipio, and, within

The foremoft Ship, to DN eptune doth begin.

Lil Thou,


a


426 Sirius Iranicus. Book XV.


Thou, God of Seas! ! aiveuel whofe deep ener We
Areveady nowta pals ; if jofticbe, =

Which Lintend, grant that this Navy may

Go forward (Father!) and vouchfafe, (We pray )
Our Laboursto Afsift! an Holy War

Itis, which now, I through the Ocean bear.

Thisfaid, ftrait gentle, and propitious Gales

Breath out, and forward drive the fwelling Sails.

And now the Fleet, where 7-yrrhene Billows roar,
Had Nimbly pafs’d from the 4ufonian Shore,

And by the Coatt of the Ligurians ply'd

With {peedy Prows. When, far at Sea, they {py ‘d
Earth ( the high Alpes) the Stars invading: then

(b) Maffia, now Marcelis Ga. ) Mafsilia’s Walls, built by the Gracian,


Provence ) firlt built: by a Colony of


Greeks, from Phocids, afmall Resim WM ith Nations proud begire, and whom, with Rites,
near the Crifjean- Bay ) Commended


by T uly (ooh Se ete he That Cruelare, her barb‘rous Neighbour frights.
cieat ero Rie enone "Ens But Hofpitable, She, among thofe bold
fale ty eGoecamencci wee And Warlike Nations, ftillretains the old
ae | Rites, Manners, Habit, of Phocenfian Greeks.
Hence S cipio, by the Ocean's winding Greeks,
Coaft’s oni: at length, a lofty Hill appears,
Where, onher Woody Top, Pyrene bears
Thick Forefts, in the Clouds, and then he fees
7) Emer 4, Cy of Hiffasia (i) Thr Emporia, that, by ancient Pedigrees,
A Grecian People are: Then Tarracho,
Where the ©) ACy/aan Fruitsin plenty grow.
Then in a Port his Fleet, fecure, he lays,
And quits the Toils, and Terrour of the Seas.
Now welcome Night, did Sleep, like Death, beftow
On Men, when ,ftanding before Stipio,
His Father's Ghoft appear’d, and thus begun.


Dear Son, thy Father's fafety once: dear Son
ie Father's Glory, after Death ; by Thee


(k) Vines.


The Land, that to thefe Wars gave Birth, fhall be
Subdu’d ; if they defire to Fight with Thee,


And


Book XV. Srirus Traricus. | lz
And. all the Troops for Battel Mifter’d are :
Who isit, that the Triple Force can bare

Of Furious Men* All dubious Acs by you
Muft be forborn : but Better things purfue
With Diligence. There isa City Wall’d,
And built of old by Teucer, (arthage call'd,

By Torians now poffels'd ; and, as there is

OF Libya one, fo of Iberia this ,

Is the ALetropolis: in Wealth excell’d

By none, or Port, or Situation; held

As Rich, as any, in her fertile Fields,

And, with as active Vigour, Weapons yields.
(4) This, while the Generals are turn’d away,
Invade , no Fight fo much of Fame, or Prey,

Can give. Thefe Counfels by his Father were znch of ae mah the Be


©) The abfence of the Cartha-
gintan Generals ( employed in redu.
cing other Parts of opain, having pla-
ced here a {trong Garifon, and, ini,
[as by Nature almoft inexpugnable


e:
Declar‘d, and ftill he feem’d t’ advife more near; both Tine, and ourag’ oer
; peices
that he ipen or ine ror.
When ftrait the vanifh’d Shade, and Sleep forlook Bee OTe Governoue “Arrie( fore
The Youth, who, rifing, humbly doth invoke Mae eae bay Tey
tne 7 ; nd much decayedin the time of H,
His Father's Manes, and the Pow’rs, that be wilear | Hasetats Father | whole
5 : Succeffour Ha/fdrubal fo well repair.
In Stygian Groves, by Name. Be You (faid He ) edit, that he was by fome held to
. 5 E be the Founder , and called it New
Our Captains in this War, and lead us to Carthage.
The City you have mention’d. I for you
Will feek Revenge, and, when Iberia
I have fubdu'd, due Sacrifice Ile pay
To You, in Sarrane Purple richly clad,
And Sacred Games unto your Tombs willadd.
Then hafting on, with a{wift March, his Bands
He leads away, and over-runs the Lands.


So from Piféan Stables, once got loofe,
A Metled Courfer, asa Conqu’rour, goes
Before his Fellows,and (as if by Winde
Begot) runs through the Air, and leaves behinde
The reft fo far, that not the quickeft Sight
Is ableto o'retake him in his Flight :
Loa Now


Sade TS aa nl Salat 5 AA RES ak aa a a oe a ra oo ala i Rs SC sat A as alin a a
a se t “ ‘ F Meee


428 Sirius Jranicus. Book XV.


Now th’ feventh Day,by bright Hyperion's Flame,
Arofe, when fenfibly they nearer came
To the Town's Tow'rs; whofe Tops encreas‘d,as they
(or) Letne who then Command. Approach’d, and (* Lelins, at his Time, by Sea
eee ae cna ee ‘Given Arriving ( asbefore the General
por wel feaching the. ettaordiary Appointed had) his Navy to the Wall
vi ime 106, co Tare: Se Lh Draws up, and with his oum’rous Ships, behinde,
i The Town invefts. Carthage,by Nature's kinde
AGsiftance, hath high Walls, which by the Sea
Encompafs‘d are, and, tow'rds the rifing Day,
Alitele [fle, its narrow Mouth doth clofe.
But,where it looks to Phabus fall, ie throws
Up ftanding Pools, into a muddy Plain,
Which coming Tides encreafe, and Ebbs again
Abate. But, where it Frontsthe Northern Bear,
Standing upon a lofty Hill,it there,
Steep, to the Neighb’ring Ocean defcends,
And with Eternal Floods her Wall defends,
But the bold Soldiers, as if, marching in
A Plain, they Conqu’ring Enfigns brought, begin
Toclimbthe Hill; AvrisCommanded there
In Chief, and, had againft them, through a Fear
Of fome Diftrefs, himfelf with Aids fupply’d,
And all the Hull, and Caftle fortifi'd.
A Fo the nature of the Place doth prove,
And with fall Force, of thofe that fought above,
Th’ Afsailants tott‘ring, through the places High,
And Steep, are tumbled down,and maimed Dy.
But, when the turning Tide retir'd again,
And, with a rapid Fall into the Main,
The Billows fled; where tall Ships, lately, Plough’d
The Waves, fafe Paflage ACereus there allow'd
A Foot. Andthis Way noble Scipio,
Confulting with his Thoughts, refoly'd to go,
Draws


. : i : : . .
Book XV, Sitius Iraticus. 429


Draws through the Sea his Men, andfuddenly
Up to the Walls doth through the Waters fly.
And, when with Speed, behinde, they haften on,
Where e/rvis, trufting to the Sea, the Town


_ Had left without a Guard ; ftrait ( {ad to tell )


His Neck in Chains, the Libyan Proftrate fell,

And bade the People all, difarm’d, to yield.

This City Titan,when he rofe,beheld

Circled with Camps, and captiv’d faw the fame,

‘ Before in Weffern Seas he hid his Flame. AS ist) eeceegot iene
Th’ enfuing Morn from Earth had chasd away longer Zadirstobe Teooghe (util

Night's Shades,when firft they Altarsraife: then Slay aaebl y ete ae

entering the City there, had it, before

Unto the God of Seas, for Sacrifice, Sun-fes, inkis poffelfion.

ABull; andfoto fove. Then equallize

Rewards to all Deferts: and,gain’d with Blood, |

Valour her Crown receives. Here, fhining, ftood

One with rich Trappings on his Breaft ; and there

Another, on his Warlike Neck, did wear

A golden Snake: this witha Mural Crown

Washonour'd. Butthen, Lelivs (in renown

Both ofhis Family, and Valour, all

Excelling) is created ef dmiral.

Befides a Gift of thirty Oxen, and


» The Libyan’s Arms that did, in Chief, command.


Then Spears ta fome, and Martial Enfigns are —
To others giv'n (as they deferv'd ) and fhare-
Of Spoils. And when the Praife of Gods, and Men,
Was perfected, their Captive Riches then
Survay’d, and Prey lay’d up; this Gold was for
The Senate, and thofe Talents for the War.
This Kingdom they for Donatives Defign ;
That for the Temples of the Pow'rs Divine

Is Chieflykept: whatever elfe remains
Rewards the Souldiers Valour, and their Pains.


Then -


430 | Srtrus Iraricus. Book XV.
(oy Among the Captives aVirgin Then the Iberian King, whofe “) Sponfal Flame


of incomparable Beauty, was brought


to Scipio: who, finding her betroth- Yas fix’d deep in his Bones, as fummon’d, came ;


ed, tO Luceins(a Prince of the Coun-


try) notonely reftored her Inviolte “To whom, much joy'd, his Spoufe, a Virgin Fair,


into his Hands, bat gave with her


fum of M (prefented
FY Te i mone wokenefthar And Pure,he chearful gave. Then, free from Care,
Gratitude) as aDowry from Him.


oe de Their Tables fpread upon the Neighb’ring Shore,
: And feafting High, with folemn Sports, before
The reft, thus Leliwe. Brave General, —
Go on, ador’d, for thy Chaft Minde,through all
- The World! To Thee theGlory, and the Praife,
And ¢ celebrated in Immortal Lays) _
The Valour of great Heroes {hall give Way.
CP) Agerecrenen: | That‘? Captain, who a thoufand Ships by Sea
Fromthe Mycenaz drew, and Argive Arms .
Joyn’d with Thefalian, througha Woman's Charms,
GQ) Tiago fi Infingd his ¢ ‘ Social League, and they beheld
woe Trey Hippadanie (or Brfex) 2All Tents, within the Phrygian Army, fill'd
mba demons io was With Captive Beds, A Barb'rous Maid by Thee
GE amend EK Alone, more fpotlels, in Virginie
> poucis; ginity
Iskept, then Troy's Caffandra, Thus the Day,
In Talk, they {pene, till Night in dark Aray
Rais‘d her black Steeds, inviting allto Reft.
Inthe mean Time, Zimathian Broils infett
Th’ Atolian Land, invaded fuddenly
(r) Philip, King of Macedon, en By”? eM acedonian Ships : an Enemy,


tring League with the Carthaginians,


fell upon the Alies of the Romans, WWith whomt jan quickly joyn’
fll upon the ies of the Ramen, he eA carnanian quickly joyn‘d.


Pee Heaters = bvaaee For then King Philip, ina League combin‘d
thagimians toe was conftrained toaccept With Libya, againit the Romane Name
wie Fhofe new Commotions had rais'd. TheFame
OF his Defcent, his Antient Crowns, and Throne -
Pals ), debits, from whom he de- From the Alacides, and (/) Thetss Son,
(His Grand-Sire) puff'd him up. Now,He with Fear
Of's Arms, by Night, fill'd Oricon: and where,
Onthe Idyrick Coatt, Taulentians dwell, -
In fmall, and namelefs Walls, upon them fell.


With


Ree agin es ncn Legere


~ Book XV. Sitrus Fraricus. _ 43


Piet


c
} -


Of Pellafcour'd with rapid War, hisQars. .

Beating. Leucate’s chafing Waves, he fireight. .;

At Adium faw Apollo's facred Seat, ie

Nor left he Ithaca ( Laértes Throne)

Untri'd: nor Sames; nor thofe Rocks wherson __..

White-foaming Floods the (epbaleniaus fee...

And Deriton with Rocky Fields: thenHle.

To Pelops Countrey went, glad to behold OF.

Achaian W alls, and Calydon of old ae | .

Affected by Diana. After thefe aa ; . | :
To the Caretes, and Ocniades, a

With promife, to the Greeks, ‘gainft Ingle,

To ulehis Arms, he went: then Aphyre, |

Patre, and Princely Fleuron he furvay'ds

Two-crown’d Parnafus, and ( by Phabus made

To {peak) Prophetick Rocks; and, though agen, .

Often by War call’d homeward : fometimes when

(*) Sarmatian Oreftes did infeft Oia ies ik saree

His Kingdoms, gr fierce Dolopes oppreft : dedius Coumerys

His Countrey, yet unwilling to forbear 7
His vain Defigns,. the fhadow of a War

He carried up, and down,the Grecian Coat ;
Till all his hopes, plac’d inthe Lityans, loft —
By Sea, and Land, aSuppliant, he fign’d

A League, with the ‘“) Dardanians, nor declin'd as saicees
From them,in his own Kingdom, to receive 7

(*) The Law: But then Tarentum's Fortune gave ee ae ee
To Italy encreafe both of Renown, ee ofa Tarewine Wee
And Riches, For, at length, that treach'rous Town, aire year wid beer
| Was ror) inthe Lyrot Fabius


Abo  §urius Iranicus. Book XV.


Was by olf Fibine conquer'd, and all ee

His Titles, ofa Wary General, © nae

The lait becéme:. For then his Induftry |

Gain’d that fafe Honour, that the City He

Had*taken without Blood. And, when ‘twas known,
cs a Sidonian ore in the Town,

A filent Treafon thence might Valour suai :

To his lov’d Sifter, ftrait, her Brother (who —

Then bore Rutulian Arms ) isfore’d to go,

Inftructed to'fabdue the Woman's Minde

With ample ‘Promifes, if She inclin’d

The Libyan to betray the Gates. And, thus

The Libyan overcome, old Fabius °

His With enjoy’d, and, through th’ unguarded Walls
By Night, into the Town the Army falls,

But who,-that heard Marcellus then was flain
In Fight, would think, that So/ fhould Joyn again.
His flaming Steeds, fo turn’d away from Rome ¢
That noble Perfon, that brave Breaft, in whom
The God of War inhabited, who nev’,
In its moft horrid Shape, did Danger fear,
In Combat fell: in his renowned Fall,

C Alafs) how greata Blow to Hannibal !

In him thy Terrour Carthage proftrate lay ,
Who had perhaps from Scipio born away
( Had but the Gods been pleas’d awhile to {pare
His Life) the Name of finifhing the War.
Which feated, then, within the Daunian Land,
Between both Camps, a little Hill did ftand,
Crifpinus with Marcellus bore like Share
In Cares, and Honours, and the Common War
Purfu'd: towhom A4arcellus thus began.

I have a Minde to view thofe Woods, and on

The


Book XV. = Sitius Iratrcus, #3


The Hilltolodgour Men; left firft it be

Pofic(s'd, in Ambuth,by the Enemy. 2

I would Crifpinas ( if you pleafe } that yu |
Would fhare inthis Defign ; for feldom two.

In Counfel fail.- When this they had Decreed,

Each Mancontendsto mount his e ager Steed,

eMarcellus, when he {aw his Son, among

The reft, put on his Arms, and in the Throng

Joyful, and Brisk: Thou doft appear more Great

(Said He?) then Me,by thy admired Heat. |

May this thy early Labour Happy be !

Such, as,at Syracufa once, | Thee

Beheld, before thine Age would Thee allow .
As fit for War, engaging with a Brow, |
Like mine. Oh / hither come ( my Glory) ftand
Clofe to thy Father's fide, and by my Hand

Learn anew Way of Fighting. Then he lay’d
His Arnis about his Neck, and briefly pray’d.
Grant, from the Libyan Gen'ral (Oh! thouKing |
OF Gods ) that on thefe Shoulders | may bring
Opimous Spoilsto Thee! As here he ends ;
From the clear Sky abloody Dew defcends,
And fove the Fatal Drops had fprinkled on |
His (then fucceflefs) Arms. Scarce had he done
His Speech, when through the Straits, advancing up
The Fatal Mountain, ftrait a nimble Troop
Of NComades upon them fly, and pour
Their Darts, as thick, as an Etherial Show’r:
While, from their fecret Ambush, they fupply'd
The Fight, with armed Troops. Onev’ry fide,


When Valour found her felf thus clofe befer ;


And nothing, now, remaining, asa Debt
Unto the Gods: He onely fought to go,


Witha great Name, unto the Shades below, _
Mmm Then


ie Siztus Franicus. Book XV.


Then, at adiftante, his ¢oritorted Spear * ees
With allhis Force he thtows:’ now fights, more hear
At Hand, with'’s Sword ; andhad efcap'd, perchance,
_ ' That cruel Storm of Danger, if Lance —

Had not transfix'd the Body of his Son.

But then: (alafs/) the Father's Hands begun

To fhake, and,weak through Sorrow, loofely bare
His haplefs Arms, untill an obvious Spear

Pierc'd through his naked Breaft;by which fad Wound
He falls, his Face imprinting on the Ground.

When Hannibal perceiv'd ( amidft the Fight )

The Fatal Lance within his Bofom light,

Aloud he crys : now Carthage, ceafe to fear

The Romane Laws; the Nameof Terrour here

Angee Se rian cae Lyesproftrate, and the”) Column of their State.


nent Captains, yetnone did excee


him, in Condud, Scrength, or Cour- But that brave Hand ({o like mine own of late)


age. For which, bis Fortune made him


particularly Renowned , having fought Shall not’ obfeur ely to the Sha des he lene:
many fingle Combats, and in all been


_ Platarch obferves, ’svoi nvy. Strait they went
eid woreda (qu True Valout’s void of Envy y


Marsalis) ase meh excelling We" About to build his Pyle, whieh to the Skies _
for his Valour, that Mi euctyandfee By mighty Oaks, brought from the Woods, doth rife.
Hea ere You might believe the Libyan General
Haddy’d! then Incenfe, Cates, his Shield, withall,
And Falces ( his laft Pomp) are brought, and while,
With his own Hand, the Taper tothe Pyle
The Princeapplies; Eternal Praife (faid He) _
Wehaveacquir'd. For of Marcellus We
Have Italy depriv'd. Perhaps they may
At length, now, laydown Arms. Go then, and pay
To that great Soul, and to his Duft, all Dues
OF Funeral. I never will refufe
Thee this CO Rome ) that thou the Sepulcher
Of one, whofe Valour made him Great,in War,
With Titles may’ftadorn: and lafting Fame,
Among Rutulias Nephews, crown his Name.


Such


Sh ee eee eR nS Ra a ta oS Sea


ook XV. Sititus Iraticus. 435.


Such is your other Gon/al's Fate, whole Steed

Flim, breathlefs, to your Camp convey’d, with Speed.
Such, then, Affairs didin Aufoniaftand.

But notthe fame, in the Iberian Land, ;

Was the Event of Arms; The quick Surprize,

And Conqueft of New-Carthage,cerrifies a

The Nationsround about. The Gen'rals there,

Unlefs they joyn with Social Aids, defpair

Of Safety: fince Young Scipio had fought -

( As if HeThunder in his Arms had brought


From Italy) with fo great Aufpicies,


That hea fenced Town ( whofe H eight their Eys
Could hardly reach,as on an Hill it ftood)
Had taken in one Day,and fill’d with Blood,
While, ev'n their Warlike Hannibal, before
He overthrew Sagunthus, that for Store
OF People, and for Wealth might not appear
As Equal unto that, had {pent a Year. ° |

To his great Brother's Deeds afpiring ftill,~
The nexe was ‘*) Hafdrubal ; whoona Hill ©
Encamp’d, encompafs'd witha rocky Wood. of Spain, (when he began his March
Here, his chief Strength, fierce (Cantabrians ftood , igre vimeed ae al
Mix’‘d with rebellious Africans: and there, mee
Then the fwift ALoor more fwift, Mturians were.
And with as much of Majefty did he
Iberia rule, as then in Italy
His Brother Hannibal with Terrour liv'd,

Itchanc'd, a Lyrian Solemn Day reviy'd
Their antient Honour, and the Time, wherein
The Walls of Carthage they did firft begin,
And a new City of {mall Houfes rais‘d.
His Nations Rife the General much pleas’d


(2) Hafdrubal, Brother to Has
nibal, was by him left fole Governour


' Thus to commemorate, his Enfigns all


Adorn’d with Laurel, kept the Feftival ,


Mmm 2 And


456


(a) Ulyffes.


Sirius JTaLicus.


Book XV.


And th’ Gods-appeas'd. Loofe from his Shoulders
His Brother's Gift (a Mantle ) .which, among Chung
Some other Prefents, asa Complement

Of their ftriat League, Trinacria’s Prince had fent,

AA ftately Robe, among Aélian Kings. .
An Eagle,- through the Clouds, with golden Wings,
Snatch’d up Cin Texturehov'ring) to the Sky
ABoy. A fpacious Cave there was hard by,

Which, in the Purple, there, the Needle made, ‘
The (yclops Houle: here Polypheme was lay’d
Along, and fwallow'd Bodies, dropping Gore,

Between his Deadly Jaws. About him ftore

Of broken Bones ; which, chewing, forth he threw.

Then for his Drink, his Hand extended to

Laertes‘® Son, he calls: and, belching up

Crude Blood, with Wine commix’d it in the Cup.


‘ Confpicuous in this Robe, at Altars made


Of Grafs, the Peace o’th’ Gods the Zyrian pray’d.

When riding in, amidft them all, behold

A Scout, that Hoftile Arms approach’d them, told.

The Worthip of the Gods unfinifhed, _ |

With troubled Minds, they from the Altars fled,

All Sacred Rites broke off, all Night they lay

Encamp’d. But, when the dewy Morn the Day

Firft rais'd, a furious Fight began, and there

Stout Sabbara firft felt the thrilling Spear

Of Scipio. Both Armies feem’d to be

Mov'd withthe Omen. The firft Victim We

I'th’Field ( Ye facred Shades !) to you have flain

C Exclaims the Romane Gen'ral) Now again

Into the Fight, and Slaughter (Souldiers ) Zo,

As with beft Captains you were wont to do.

This faid ; they all fall on: by Lena’s Hand

Falls Myconus ; Latinus,Grta: and ;
Stout


Book XV. Sitius Iraticus, 437


Stout ALaro Thyfdrus kills: and Catiline
Inceftuous Néalces doth disjoyn
From his own Sifter’s Bed. : Then Cartulo
CA Libyack Prince)  isfentto Shades below,
By fierce AC afdius.. Thee ¢ltkewife ) Thee
Lalius (thou great Renown of Italy).
Things, fcarce to be believ'd, performing there,
Amidft the Carthaginians, full of Fear,
Pyrene’s Land beheld.. Nature.beftow’d
By all the Gods. Whenhe washeard to plead
Atth’ Bar, not Neffor could.ia Speech exceed:
Or when the Fathers, and the Gourt did ftand
In Doubt, and his Opinion did demand, _
He led the Senat’s Hearts, as with a Charm.
But, when the Noife of Trumpets did Alarm
His Ears, within the Field, with fuchan. Heat,
He ruth’d into the Fight, and Armies, that.
You'd think, he had been born for War. alone;
And nothing, without Praife, by him was done. '
From a ftoln Life the Gala fighting threw :
() Whom 's Mother once,by changing him withdrew (4) [ie pas dfepediobe suc
From Byrfa's cruel Rites. But quickly all another Childe in his ftead,
Such Joys, as rife from Gods, fo cheated fall.
Then Murus, eA lebis, and Draces, who,
With an Effeminate Cry, for Life did fue,
By him were flain.. Poor Draces, as he pray'd,
And beg'd; his Head cut off, the Murmurs ftay'd
In his diffever’'d Throat. But Hafdrubal
Had not the like defire to Fight. Not all
The extream Lofs,and Slaughter of his Men
Himmov'd. Buttothe Woody Hills agen,
And lurking Holes ofpathlefs Rocks, he flies,
And to the Alpes, and Italy his Eys


SOE Oy ney ee Reet eae eg. fo eT kaon Ne ae ae eg


"438 Satitus Iraticus. Book XV.
Slee een a ae Ry, ee Ye eee ee
Areturn'd: the great:Advantage of his Flight,
" The Signal filently is giv’n, and Fight
Quite lay'd afide, they are Commanded through
The Woods; and Hills to fly difpers‘d, and who-
Soe’re efcap'd fhould to Pyrene's Top
Afcend, their Chief, and fole remaining ie
All Marks of Honour, asa General,
Then lai‘d afide, difguifed, with a {mall
Iberian Targe, firft Hafdrubal afcends
The Hills, atid flying; quits his waridring Friends.
To the forfaken Camp- the Romanes ftraic
Their Enfigns fed. No-City captivate
Could yield more Spoils; and did their Rage withdraw
‘From Slaughter, asthe Libyan forefaw.
So in fome Brook furpriz‘d, when he defpairs
Ce) This may very wellbe reckon. OF Safety, from his Groin the “*) Beaver tares
, sso Beer cee The parts, that caus'd his Danger, and away |
ar oo only out of his ech Wing Swims from his Fo, Intent upon his Prey
rempied by him, when hunted. When thus the Libyan had with Speedy Flight,
Trufting to Rocky Woods, in Shades, like Night,
Himfelfconceal'd: ftraie back again they go
Unto a greater War, tomeet a Fo
More fure to-befubdu'd. But firft upon
Pyrene's Hill, with this Infcription,
(1) When the Ronaneshad ter. 44 Shield they fix,‘ Scir1o a Conquzrour,
iy fede an Ea Neve Rake tevin, Elasprupar’s Sroits Unto Taz Gop Or War,


the Place cretted a Trophy , which was


commonly (as out of Tacitus bis fe- In the mean time, beyond the Hills (all Fear
cond Book may be obferved) of heaps


(of Arms, taken in the dd, withan Now lay'd afide ) Bebrycian People were
eal By Hafdrubal foon arm’d: who Prodigal
To purchafe Hands for Aid, and ready all
Prepar'd to thruft into the War, with Store
Of Gold, and Silver,thither fent before
And with long Labours gain'd, in Wealthy Lands


Had rais’d their Warlike Minds. Hence active at
ull’d


Book XV. Sitius ITALiIcuUS. 439


(4). . drubal took the Field with
Fill'd ee Camp. ‘All Mercenary Souls: m) Hafarn i 0k the Field wich
Thofe, that where “/)!Rbodanns fwift Billows rowls Ligier: (about eight thoufand Me»


and foon after the Averni, and other


Delight co dwell ;: with thofe,where ef rar flows fa wee People of the ip,
Mot foftly ‘hinge the Fields. And, now, the Snows ne sn ana ee es
OF Winter all refolv'd , the Year retains.

A milder Face. Then through the Celtick Plains,

Entring a {peedy March, he goes : admires

The Conquer'd Alps, and pervious Heights: enquire,

The very Foot-fteps, where Alcides trod :

Compares with th’ Adventures of the God


His Brother’s Ways. When to the Top of all


He came, and in the Camp of Hannibal

Satedown : Whathigher Walls ( faid He) do Kome
Inveft? which, after thefe once overcome

By my great Brother, ftand yet fafe? Qh, may

The Glory of fo bravea Hand (I pray)

Prove Happy! nor, letit the Envy be

Ofany angry Deity, that We

The Stars approach’d ! Then, where a fafe Defcent


- The Hill declining thew’d, ftrait down he went,


With hafty Arms. Through all, fo great a Dread
Not the Beginnings of the War had fpread.

Two Hannibals they now report: andtwo

Strong Cainps, on either fide: and glutted, through
Succefs, with Romane Blood, the Chiefs the War
Joyntly purfue. The Armies doubled are,

And to the Walls the Fo would quickly hafte,
And, fticking on the Gates, they Jav'lins, caft
From &/y/<an Hands, fhould fhortly fee.

Much vex’dat this, the Land of Italy |
Thus with her felf. Alafs! ye Gods, muft I
With fo great Fury of the Libyans ly

Defpis'd? who Saturn, when the pow'ful Hand
OF Fove he fear'd, conceal’d : and in my Land


An


xg ee TE ee ke mee en OE Poe Se ON pga EO Se EN Uy
sete ir NOt aE aly Stee me gn We Tad pao Ne a


; | ¥ . 4-41
440 Sirius Iraricus. Book XV. | oo ore Tee veue ae.
) Like a dire Deluge, overruns the Plains,
Where Sene fill her Gallick Name retains :
Unlefsthy winged Troops Thou thither ftrait
Draw out to Fighit, thine Aid will come too late
. Toruin’d Rome hereafter. Rife 3 be gone :
I have condemn’d eM etauras Region;
And all thofe {pacious Fields,to Libyan Bones, , 3
And Graves, Thisfaid: She vanifhing, at once |
Appears to draw him after Her, and through
The broken Gates to drive his Troops into
_ The Field. With that he wakes, and Troubled ftands
_ With an enflamed Heart, and then, with Hands
Lifted to Heay’n, He prays the Earth, and Night,
The {catter’d Stars, and Moon, with filene Lighe
To be his Guides, Then,choofing proper Hands
For fuch a Work, through ©) Lerinatian Lands
( Coafting upon the Upper-Sea}) and where,
Hardy in War, ©) Marrucine P 2ople were, rsa At Soe one Upr
And the ftrict “) Frentane, that his Faith maintains
In Social Arms’: where the Pratutian Swains
(Pleas’d with their Labour) drefs their Vines,he flyes,
Swift asaBird; as Lightning from the Skies ;
As Torrents with Hybernal Billows flow ;
Or Arrows, froman © ef ghemenian Bow. CK) Parshian
- Each Man himfelf exhorts. Go on, and hatte ;
For in thy Feet the doubtful Gods have plac’d
Rome's Safety : whether She ‘hall ftand, or fall,
_ Thuscrying, onthey go; the General


An Empire gave ! -Now the tenth Sammar’s Corn
Appears, fince thus I have been fadly torn..:._ :
' dnd, now, a. Youth, who wanteth nothing more,
But to invade the Gods, the fartheft Shore:.... .
. O'th’ World hath left, and ’s Arms againft me bends, |
_ And, the high e4/ps prophan’d, with Rage defcends
Into my Land. Howmany Corps have I:
Of Slain entomb'd*. Alafs! how often by.
My flaughter'd Sons deform’d? Ihave no Trees
With pregnant Buds: his Cora the Peafane fees,
Yet Green, cut down with Swords: the Tow’rs of all
My Villages into my Bofom fall,
And by their Ruins is my Land defac't.
Yet, now, mutt I endure this Youth at laft,
By whom my wafted Coafts invaded are,
Who feeks the ruthful Reliques of the War
To burn, Then wandring eA/fricans may rend
My Bowels with their Ploughs, ‘and Moors commend
The Crops, which the Aufonian Furrows yield.
Unlels their Troops, infulting through the Field,
I, inone Grave, interr. As, thus, She then | '
Her Wees revolv'd,and Night both Gods, and Men
Compos'd to Reft ; to Nero's Camp She went.
He, witha Neighb’ ring Trench,was then intent
The Libyan from Lucanian Coatts to keep.
The Youth, here, Latium’s Image, in his Sleep,
: Accofts. QO Nero! Thou,who art become
; ( Adarcellus loft} the greateft Hope of Rome ! na Beft Exhortation, being Foremoft, gives :
sehen wen ee gaealete The ‘© Clauf'sGlory! thake off Sleep; by Thee  ¢ ;


ius, and the Sabi : While ev'ry one, his Speed encreafing, ftrives,
n RK © Sabines
pear aettres Cliews, «nd. Something of Moment mutt attempted be, By following, to equal him, and Day, |


‘ed th ith the Romanes . >

with whom they they equally enjoyed C If thou wilt add unto thy Country's Fates ) And Nigh t, un-wearied, nimbly March away.
> 3

But the Report of thofe encreafing Ils,


all Privileges of Citizens , but fuffrage ; .
in Creating Magiffrares. From thi, Which ev'nthe Conquerours ( when from the Gates
O'th’ adverfe War,all Rome with Terrour fills.


Clanfus came both the ¢ laudian Tribe, : }
and Feel: The Foe ’srepuls’d ) fhall wonder to be done,


(4) Hafdrabal, Brother to Hanni- With fhining Arms ¢ behold !) (#) Amilcar ’s Son, | : | N nn ; That
bal. aa Like


vers - Saas ITALICUS. Book XV


See ead eB rs a ee
* That Aero hop'd:too much, they now: complain. -
That by one Wound that Life, that did remain, — os
Might foon be loft. Nor Money, Arms, nor Men,
Nor Blood to lofé, there now remain'd. And then, -
Who had not ftrength to deal with Hannibal,
Alone, in Fight, fhould fall on Hafdrubal.
. That now again (foonas the Libyan faw
His Arms diverted from the Camp) he'd draw ©
His Forcestotheir Gates. That he was come,
Who, in the Glory of deftroying ‘Rome,
Would ftrive with his Proud Brother. With one mind
Thus frets the Senate; yetin-Counfel joyn’d,
To keep their Honour, and themfelves to Free
From threatned Chains, and angry Gods to flee.
Amidft thefe Sighs, Nero, protected by
An obfcure Night, unto the Camp drew nigh;
"  Where,near to Hafdrubal, within the Field,

bth ify Csire, an Sante () Qld Liv lay. He Warlike once, and skill’d

Ea Gena ed him, end ma In Feats of Arms, flourith’d in: former Times,

afterward 7 riamphed for this ViGory. Famous in War ; bur,falfly charg’d with Crimes
By the Unequal Tribes, in Difcontent, —
His Days obfcurely in the Countrey fpent.
But,when a fadder Weight, and Fears began,
Through nearer Dangers, to require the Man,
After fomany Valiant Captains flain; |
Then, to his Countrey call’d, to Arms again
His aged Valour He had vow'd. But all
Thefe Plots of new Supplies to Hafdrubal
Were known,and what the Wings of Night conceal’d
The Signs of Duft upon their Shields reveal'd..
Befides their hafty Running to,and fro :
Their Horfe, and Men prepar’d,and Trumpets ie
( As they the Signal found) the Camp to be
Commanded by two Gen'rals. But ¢ {aid He) :

J


SOREL ene Mg Uae ge + ReeP es ekg to gee “.: ‘tet ee


POE PT ope gt cee SRO GRAS nek oe ee | PIR Me TE eg ER ONE | CREEL ae PEE TE A te! eC a eR


Book XV. Sitrus Iraticus, 443


If yet my Brother live, how can they now

Their Social Foreesjoyn? Yet, till Ukriow

The Truth, itonely now remains, that I

The Time protract, and Chance of Fighting fly:
Nor, with bafe Fear, this poor refolve of Flight
Didhe delay. But, when from Cares the Night |

C Mother of Reft> had freed the Breafts of Men;
And Darknefs dreadful Silence nourith’d, then

Forth from his Camp he breaks, and his mute Bands
To follow with a filent March commands ;

Who, through the quiet Plain, proteaed by

The gloomy Night, all Noife avoiding, fly.

But fhaken, by aMotion fo great, _

Th’ Izalian Land, perceiving their Deceit,

Involves them in dark Errours in the Place,

And ¢ Night confpiring ) in a narrow Space

Still leads them round. For, where, with w inding
His crooked Banks the Fleod obliquely laves, (Waves
And, through rough Creeks. returning, falls again
Intoit felf, there toiling, all in vain

With fruitlefs Wandrings, a fmall Circuit they

Had made, and, in the Errours of their Way,

( The Benefitof Night now loft) the Light


. Comes on, and to their Foes detects their. Flight. -


With thata furiousStorm of Horfe, the Gates
Thrown open, and a Show’r of Steel dilates
It felf; or’e all the Field. Arms, yet, they none,
Nor Hands had mix’d: But Shafts, at diftance thrown,
Drink Blood. To ftop the flying Libae, here.
Dittean Arrows fly :_ and Lances there, '
Like a black Tempeft, and on whom they light
They Death inflia, And, now all thonghts of F light
Quite lai‘d afide, about they, frighted, Face,
And clofe ere their Hopes in Fightingplace.

N Amidtt


nn 2


444


 Srirus- ITaricus.


Book XV.


(m) Nero, having] intercepted
Hafdrnbal’s Letters to Hannibal, mar-
ched very hard, for feveral Nights to-
gether, (while: Hannibal waited the
Countrysof the Larinates, Frentani,
&c.) to joyn with Livy, before He/-
drubal thould enter farther into Italy,
or Hannibal have tidings of his Arr:-


val,


Amidft thenvall, the Gen'ral; mounted ‘High ~
( For now Hesfaw their fad Extremity ).

On a tall Steed, his Hands, and Woice extends :
By allthofe Trophies gain’d by You ( my Friends )
Under the fartheft Pole ; my Brother's Praife:

Make it appear, I You befeech ¢ He fays )

The Brother of Great Hannibal is come ;

For Fortune labours, now, to give to Rome

Sad Documents,and fhew how ftrong an Hand .

You, that hayeconquer‘d the Iberian Land,

And at Alcides Pillars us’d to War,

On the Rutwians urn. Perhaps, not far

From hence, my Brother to this Battel may

Arrive. Oh! haften worthy him C1 pray )

A Spectacle ; with Bodies fill the Plain. -

Each General is by my Brother flain, 7 ,
That might be fear'd, in War: and nowtheir fole |
Remaining Hope, drawn from his skulking Hole.
Decrepit Livy (a condemned Head )

Is offer'dto you. Oh! goon, ftrike Dead

That General, cut off his Feeble Age,

‘Gainft whom ‘twere Shame myBrother fhould engage.
But Nero contrary exhorts: Why are

You flow, the Labours of this mighty War

Toend: ‘») Your Feet already Praife have gain'd,
Now crown thefe high Beginnings with the Hand:
The Camp you, rafhly (all the Bars o’rethrown )
Have left, except you perfect what is done

By Victory. , Your Glory haften: fhow

That your Arrival overthrew the Fo.

But Livy,in another Quarter, where,

His Helmet taken off, his heary Hair

Was feen to all, cries ; Come (my Lads) and Me
Obferve in Fight, and wherefee're you fee


My


Book XV. Sitius Iraticus. AS
cc
My Sword thall make your Way, there enter; fo |

The Alps (too open to the-waftful Fo}

Shut with your Swords, at length. Unlefs we quite

Deftroy this Army, bya fudden Flight,

That Thunder-bolt of (Carthage ( Hannibal)

Will foon be here. Then who is He of all

The Gods, that Us from Stygian Shades can free

Then he refumes his Cask, and inftantly

His Sword confirms his Words,and ('s Age from fight


-Adgain conceal’d) He enters firft the Fight.


Him through the thickeft Bodies of the Field,
Breaking through clofeft Ranks: who, furious, kill'd


“As many, as he Shafts difcharg’d, with Dread


The «Maca, and fierce Antélolians fled :

With Bands of ‘Rhodanus, their Hair unfhorn. |
‘Mong the Prophetick Sands of Hammon born,
Secure of Fate, there Nabi fiercely fought,
And mighty Trophies (asifthenhe thought . _


* The Gods protected him ) to fix at Home,


Had vainly promis, From.the Zyrian Loom, -
Flaming with Garamantick Gems a Vek. ae
He wears ( fo fhine the Stars in Heav’n) his Creft
With Gems, with radiant Gold his Shield enchae’t ;
On’s horned Cask the hanging Fillets caft

A facred Dread, and Honour of the Gods :

A Bowe, and Quiver, which with Shafts he loads -
In Cerafts fteep'd, hang athis Back ; and, fo

With Poifon Armd, to Battle doth he go

Then leaning, backward, on his Horfe ( as he -

His Country’sCuftomus'd) uponhisKace |
Refting the Weight of his Sarmatick Spear,

Ic, prone, upon his Foes he thrnfts, and there

With that vaft weapon,through his Arms, and through


His Body, wounded, in the (on/ul’s view,
. Sabellus


446 Sitrtus Iraticus. Book XV.


Sabellus, with loud Shouts, he bears along
In Triumph, praifing Hammonin his Song.
Butthe old Con/ul, who fo great a Pride,
And Rage, in {Barb'rous Breaftseould not abide,
A Weapon lanc’d, and both his Life, and Prey
A Conqu'rour, from the Conqu’rour took away.
Hearing the Gries of his fad Fall,amain
The Libyan Prince came on, and from the Plain
As Arabus wasthen about to take

"His Spoils, made Stiff with Gold, and Gems, at’s Back
A Weapon aim’d, and through the Chine him ftrook ,
Juftas, in both his Hands, in Hafte he took
His Prize, and left his trembling Body bare.

_ He fell, and all che Sacred Garments, there,
And golden Threads reftor'd (unhappy) to
The Dead, and dy‘d upon his {poiled Fo.

But Canthus, Owner of much Libyan Sand,
Where their Unconquer'd Name unto the Land
(n) The Cyrenenfis,and Cathe. The fam'd( Philéni gave, Wealthy in Sheep, |


finians contended tor Bounds between


their two Cities, feparated bya vaft ll’ i

send Plan. Ace mary thas Con, Kill'd Ressulus, where lofty Folds did keep
1 Wi me ‘ . ” . e

tain Day, twetomeach City thould 44 thoufand bleating Lambs, fpending his Days

fet out ata certain hour, and where . ‘ g

they met, that Place thould be their _In eafy Care. Sometimes the Sun’s hot Rays,

Bounds. The Phileniwere two Car-


thaginicn Brothers, who h He i 1 3
La asso rpc He from his Flocks would break, in fome cool Flood :


nenfes , who, cavilling, thar they came Sometimes retiring to afhady Wood,


out bere Pe ane it wasat jength
eed ; that, if the Phileni Id be eo aes . P

content to beburied alive, wherethey Shining, as white as Snow, their Fleeces fhear'd.

met, that Place fhould be their Bounds. / : : Sar)

To which they confented,and to their. Or when, at Night, they Home again repair’d

Memory , befides other Honours at .

Home, Me Carthaginians built Arars, Brom Pafture, was much pleas‘d to fee the Lambs,
Within the Flood, diftinguifhing their Dams.
Deceiv'd He fell, through his brafs Target ftrook,
And griev‘d too late, that he his Folds forfook.
At this the ‘Romanes forward prefs’d, and came
More Furiouson. Like Torrents, Storm,or Flame
Of Thunder: fwift as Waves from Boreas fly,


Or hollow Clouds run on, when tothe Sky


Eurus


Book XV. Sittus Ivatieus. ae


EE Sanne
Ewres throws up the Ocean's briny Floed.;; ..


“Fall Cohorts, with their Celtick Enfigns, fteod
‘Tth’ Van ; which,with their wedg-like Files, their fierce


Impulfe, and fudden Force they foon difperfe :


~ And tyr'd with Wandring,and the {corching Sun,


And tedious Laboursthey had undergon, |

A native Terrour makes them all to fly.

The Komanes, at their Backs, their Weapons ply, »
And with their following Shafts fo inftant are,
That they no Flight allow. Swait, Zyrus there -
Fell with one Wound. By more fell Khodanus,
With Arrows pierc’d. A Lance thruft Mortus
Downto the Earth. Whom Livy, that full {peed


~ Came on, as he was falling, ftrook, and’s Steed


Into the Troops, as they were flying, {pur'd.

There Mo/a’s {welling Neck he with his Sword

Cut off: his Head,within his Helmet bound,
Falling fo high, thook with its Weight the Ground ;


‘While the yet-fetting Trunk his Steed convey’d,


Frighted, into the Fight. Here Cato {aid

( For he among the thickeft fought) If He

Had firft the Tyrian Youth oppos’d, when We

In Battel loft the Alps, alafs! how great

An Hand from Italy had found Retreat ¢

How many Funeralsto Libyans, flain,

Might the fad Suffrage of that Fatal Plain:

Have giv'n? But, now, the Armies ‘gan to yield.
An univerfal Terrour, through the Field, |
The (elt2’s Fear had fpread. The Tyrtan Side _
Declines, and Victory her felfeapply'd
Tothe Rutulian Arms. The Conful high |

Asin his prime of Years, Triumphandy
Went on, and ftill more great appear'd to all,


But now, behold, the Libyan General =
Comes


a


4.48 “er ~ Sirtus Iraricus. Book XV.


Comes on, and with him brings a Troep, all White


With Duft: and,lancing Darts,exclaims; Your Flight
-Forbear; whoisthis Fo, from whom you fly *

Do you not blufh ? Our Troops are routed by
Anold Man's Feeble Arms. Am I (I pray)
Now grown Degenerate inWar? or fay

Are Ye grown Weary of Me? Me: whéam
OF Belus Race, ally’d to Dido’s Name.

eA milcar was my Sire, in War to all.

To bepreferr'd; my Brother Hannibal, . -

To whom the Hills, Lakes, Plains, and Rivers yield,
Lam the next to Him, at Carthage, held. |

Me Betis in her Coafts, and Nations, where

My Arms have been, do, ev’n with Flim,compare.
As this he {pake, He ruth’d into the Fight,

And {oon, as with his thining Armsin Sight

The Conful came, too haftily, at Him

A Jav'lin threw; which, pafsing through the Brim
Of's brafen Shield, and, at the Top of all

His Breaft-plate entring, lightly,in ies Fall,

His Shoulder wounded, drawing little Blood;
Although the Libyan thought, it would make good
His vain Conceits. The ‘Romanes were difmai‘d

At this. When thus the Confnl,to upbraid

His weak Attempt (You mightbelievethatin
Some Womens Broils, or Boys, he {cratch’d had been)
Cries ; Go, my Lads,and let them underftand,
How great the Wounds are, that a Romane Hand
Inflits. Then fuddenly a mighty Show’'r

Of Darts, whofe Shadow hides the Sun, they pour
Upon the Fo, andall the fpacious Plain
Alternate Slaughter ftrews with Bodies flain:
Whole Heaps encreafing, in the River, joyn’d
The Banks, So, when Diana hath a Minde


To


&%


Pe gee at) Nake, FL amas as ack es eae gO en Ee


Book XV. “Sirus Iraxicus,


4.4.9


To hunt in fhady Groves, and Sport to thew

To her pleas'd Mother, andthe Woody Brow
OF lofty Pindus thakes , or takesa View

Of Manalus , with Arrows charg’d,a Crew -
OF AComphs about her flock, and ftrait furround
The Pathlefs Cop‘ces. There the Quivers found,
And loofely hanging, all the Shaftsdrawn out,
Leap at their Backs, while ftillthey beat about
The Fields. Then on the Rocks, in Coverts, in
The Vallies, Rivers, and the Dens, ( till Green
With Mols) theSlaughter’d Beafts in Plenty ly.
Then on fome Mountain,with a joyful Eye,


i The Prey collected, pleas'd, Latona views.


But furious ero, when he heard the News

Of Livy's Wound, breaks through the thickeft, and
Perceiving, that the Fight did Equal ftand,

What now unto the Fates of Italy

Isleft< (faid He) If you this Enemy

Do not or’ecome ; how will you Hannibal

Subdue* With that, as Mad, amidft them all
Herufh’d: and, whenhe Hafdrubal beheld
£\mong the foremoft Troops, with F ury fwell'd,


* Like.a Sea-Montter, that hath long been toft


In the vaft Deep, quite void of all repaft,

When ‘mong the Waves a Fith, far off, She {pies ;

She boils within, and then,with eager Eys,

Purfuing in the Flood her {wimming Prey,

Swallows, with Fithes mix’d, the Briny Sea.

Now no delay of Darts, or Words. Thou Me

No more halt ‘fcape ; Fyrene's Woods ( {aid He ) Gree
(+) Shall not deceive Me here ;_nor yet, with vain, thache cooidme wey ken end
And faithlefs Promifes, fhale thou again Difs on Causa ane ane
Delude ; as, captiv'd in th’ Iberian Land,


Days, on Constrions to draw all the
Carthacinians outof Spain, and pro-
tracted that Treaty, till he had, by De-
grees, inthe Night, given his whole


. . Army mea 5 ills
Witha falfe League, thou oncedidft fly my Hand, Amma eleape over cheriils,
00


., into places of Security. See Livy, lib.


Thus °°


450


Sins Iraricus. Book XV. _


Thus Nero: andwithall hethrew a Dart,

And notin Vain. For in the lower Part

Of’s Side it tuck. With that, on him he leaps

With’s Sword: and, as with’s Target-Point he keeps
His trembling Body down, If now ( faidHe)

At the laft Gafp, Thou doft defire it, We

Unto thy Brother thy Commands willbear.

Towhom the Libyan replies, I fear

Not Death : make ufe of this thy Victory ;

Tilltomy Shade a {wift Revenger He

Arrive. But, if unto my Brether Thou

Wilt bear my laft Defires, then fay ; that now

Ibid him burn the Capitol, and there

Mix, with the Athes of the Thunderer,

My Bones, and Duft. As more he did defire '

To add, his Heare ftill boiling-up with Ire,

The Conqu'rour piere’d him with his Sword, and then
Cut off his Faithlefs Head. With that, his Men

( Their Gen'raf flain) are routed, and the Fight

No more purfue : and now, at length, the Nighe
The Sun, and Day obfcures :_ when theyrepair (bare
With mod'rate Food, and Sleep, their Strength, and
(The Way they came ) their Gonqu’ring Enfigns, er’e |
The Day return'd back to the Camp, for Fear
Shutup. Then Nero (as He did advance

The Libyan’s Head, aloft, upon his Lance)

Said; Canna, Trebia, Thrafimenus We

With this thy Brother's Head have now to Thee
Repay'd (O Hannibal.) Thy Treach'rous War
Ingeminate, and hither call from far

Thy doubled Troops. Such their Reward thal! be,
Who ¢ the Alps crofs‘d ) defire to joyn with The.e
But Hannibal, whodid his Tears fupprefs, |
By Gonftant bearing, made his Sorrows lef:


And


Book XV. 9 Sizius Irarreuss | 451


- And vows, in time, fit Sacrifice to pay


Unto his Brother's Shade, Then,far away,


His Camp removes: and fo, diflembling right,


His Griefs by Quiet, fhuns a Dubious Fight.


The End of the Fifteenth Book.


Oo002 SILIUS


a


—_/


=


SS}


*


SILIUS ITALICUS
The Second Punick VVar. .


a The Sixteenth’ ‘Book. <_ a


~ E ne


Tue ArauMeEnrt,
The Libyan Army to the Brutian Land
Retires. What full Obedience the Command
Of Hannibal obtein’d. Two Generals
In Spain or'ethrown: aThird, a Captive falls
Into brave Scipio's Flands. Predigious Flames
Crown Maflaniflas Hlead ;- who frrait difclaims -
The Libyan Side, and with the Romane joyns.
Both Hatdrubal, and Scipio their Defigns,
In Syphax Court, purfue. The League again
Confirm'd with Syphax 3 Scipio goes for Spain :
Where, allfubdud, with great Solemnities
His Father's, and his Uncle's Ubfequies
Fie celebrates. Contending for (Command,
Two Brothers give a Combat Bandto Hand,
And both are flain. To Rome the Confil goes,
Where bis Defigns old Fabius doth oppofe.
But, by the Senate bis Defire approy d,
The War is, into Libya, remov'd.


g UT. Hannibal , who for bis


Country grieves, (4) The Bratians fire xeyolced to
=e d’ , Hannibal. See before inthe ‘eleventh
And’s own Mithaps, the“) Bra. zak, page 296.


=


For] We
ay ina te ui clara:
“| Si tube non seqnies ‘contra tua 2 fulmina na hincte pram


: fs, ae M5 \ 2771 lexus fatur. j }
Vist sare sys; dignam te (fate baat) ao em) aibtisch Sige a enc wir 3d saosin ; tian Lan d receives; |
tfern as ‘pio dextram pana! mL ater io wince 1 ,
feromus dextram Ttum dextra Scipio dex Muftrsf sire Domini Di Tacobs Comitis ~ =e Where, he, entrench d,the Tine


Derbi par 2 afses LE ‘ho natu Secundo.


sime Ni (DD (2)


S/S confiders, when
e War, fufpended, he might raife agen.
: | As


EP TS PENSE TS 6 RSE eae Team cadet Spee reeme eM GR BND Sea he a RS Ree


Aeh Sirius Iraricus. Book XVI.


As, when a Bull the Stalls forfakes, and quits

His Empire of the Heard, and Straying gets

Into fome Wood enclos‘d ; on wandring Fights
He ruminates, and, fiercely Bellowing, frights
TheGroves: thenor’ethe lofty Rocks he goes ;


Tearsthemup with his Horns, and Trees or'ethrows. —


While Trembling Shepheards on high Hills, from far
Behold him thus preparing a new War. . a
But, now, that Vigour ( which had quite deftroy'd
eAufonia, had He other Helps employ’d)
‘Througha bafe Envy (lab’ring to retract
Their Mindes at Carthage) was conftrain’d to A&
Without their Aid; and, through the length of Time,
In his Affairs to wax more Dull. Yet him
The Fear, and Terrour, by his valiant Hand, |
And by fo many former Slaughters,gain’d,
As an Invielable, Sacred Head
In Bateel, ftill preferv'd. So thar, inftead
Ofall their Arms; their -Aidsof Camps, and all
teft hi Feri Beenie Oe Their frefh Recruits, the ( Name of Hannibal


former JDeeds, to keep his Army toge-


ther ; which, though very much icd -
thee Se Horcedof ae Reee tlone fuffic'd. So many Troops, that there


from Carthage, and al stely (the D)iffer'dinSpeech; So many Hearts, that were


Bratians excepted) their Enemies ,
Gonot is Worthy en Vou Divided in their Barb‘rous Cuftoms; all
Stood firm, a Reverence of their’ Generals
Kept their Mindes Faithful, when Affairs declin‘d.
eh ieactinc panes But the Dardanian Arms not onely finde


‘als, who, after Hafdrubal (the Bro - : (¢) fee Xt
rifles who feet Hafdcata Ghebre- Suceefs in Italy, but ‘ Phanix yields


rn eed rciclkewiinn Iberia, beaten from thofe Golden Fields.
Africa. . . A és

Ta tis age was. Brother co And “ Mago, having loft his Camp, in hatte,
Haanibal , who, asthe former Gene- F ; ae .
er sate out of Spain, retired to Ure d by his Fears, by Sea to Libya paft. .
Gades,, and thence went with fome :


few Forces by Seainto /raly,to joyn But Fortune, not Content with what before
with Hannibal. ; ;


This Ha not that great oe Sa

Ener reece Fen ) ae For Scipio She had done, referv'd in Store,
5 pai ft chit : <

She Carthagina i, fon acer ie Another Honour. “ ‘Hanno then amain

Camp was inv y Syllanus, one 0 F ‘ 7 oye

Scipio's Lientenants, bis whole Army JAdyanc’d, and leading on a Barb’rous Train

deftroyed, and himfelf, caken Prifoner. 7. With


Book XVI. Sitius Iraticus. ASS


~ With ratding Shields, the Native Spaniards brought


Too late. Yet( had he not with Scipio fought)
Nor Valour, Art, nor Policy, in War

Was wanting in Him. But all Force fo far,
With greater Weight, the Romane General
Deprefs‘d as Phebe's Light {urpaffech all
Theleffer Stars ; as Sol doth Her excell ,

As Atlas other Hills; as ACile doth {well

‘Bove other Rivers ; or the Ocean 9
The J arrow-Seas exceeds. While he began
T’ encamp, as Ev’ning with Un-equal Shades
Olympus veil’d, the ‘Romane him invades ;

And, in the fudden Tumult, ev'ry where

Th’ imperfect Works are overthrown, and there
The weighty Turf, and Earth, opprefsing thofe,
That fell, the Honour of a Grave beftows.

But with a Courage, that might worthy be
Of morethen Qne, and which Pofterity
Deferves to know, and to commend to Fame
Is worth our Pains, Cantabrian Larus came.


‘Who, for his Minde, and Bodie’s Bulk, might be


A Terrour, though Unarm'd. Mott fiercely He

( After his Country’sCuftom) hisright-Hand,
Arm’d with an Ax, the Combat ftill maintain’d :
And (though the routed Bands about him, round,
And his one Country Troop deftroy’d he found )
The Place of thofe were flain fupply’d Alone;
And, ifhe fought at hand, would oft upon

The Forehead wound his Fo. And, when afide
They him afsail’d, with oblique Blows employ’d
His Axreflex'd; Ifhe afsaulted were

Behinde, a furious Conqu’rour, free from Fear,
His Fatal Weapon, he could Backward throw :

In ev'ry parto'th’ Fight, a dreadful Fo.


456


Srtius ITALicus. Book XVI.


At him with mighty Force. ( the Brother to -
The General ) his Lance Young Scipio threw ;
Which, with his Cap of Fenee, his flowing Hair


-Caftdown: For,driven ftrong, the Fatal Spear


Sunk deep, and far the lifted Ax was thrown.


- Atwhich the Youth, whofe Anger now was grow’a


Cf) Hafdrabal, the Son of Gifcox,
the laft of the Carthaginian Generals in
Spain, and Father of Sophonisba. See
Livy.


A mighty Weapon, leaping on him, gives

A Shout, and Home the Barb’rous Weapon drives. |
The Armies trembled, while his batter’d Shield
Sounds,with that Warlike weight,through all the Field.


Nor was’t in vain : For with his Sword, as from


His Stroak the Spaniard drew his Right-hand Home,


Cut off, and Dead, with itslov’d Weapon, down
Ic fell. Which Wall, when it was overthrown,
The Trembling Troops an Univerfal Flight
Scatters, through all the Plain. No thew of Fight;
But the fad Face of Punifhment of thofe,

That fell, on ev'ry fide, by Conqu’ring Foes.

But now, behold/ the Libyan Prince, his Hands
Behinde him bound, through midft of allthe Bands
Is drage’dalong,and bege’d (Oh flatt’ring Light
Of Heav’n !) that Captivate in Chains he might
Have longer Life. To whom the Romane thus.
See thefe are they, who once requir’d or’e Us
So greataPow’r; to whom thy Sacred Race
Mutt yield ( Quirinus}) and the Gown give Place!
But, to fubmit to Bondage if you are
So Ealy,why did you begin the War?

As this he {pake, an Horfman Tidings brought,
That ‘9 Hafdrubal, not knowing they had fought,
Came on with Speed, to joyn his Arms, and Fate,
Scipio {natch’d up his ready Enfigns ftrait,


_ Andwhen, or’ejoy’d, he fawthe Fight (fomuch


Defir’d) approach, and Troops to Death with fuch
| A


Book XVI, ‘Sitrus Iraticus.


A furious Speed advancing, to the Sky

Lifting hisEyes; Nomore ¢ Ye, Gods / ) do E
Of you this Day require, fince now I fee

This Fugitive is drawn to Fight ( faid He)

Our other Withes by our Valour may

Be gain'd. Then hafte ¢ Companions go,) I pray,
Behold my Father here, my Uncle there

With Rage, upon you call. Ohyou, that are

My Deitizs in War, our Leaders be.


_ Te follow you: Afsift! and you fhall fee
C If my prefaging Minde deceive me not)


A Slaughter worthy of your Name. For what

Shall elfe give Period to our Fighting here,

In the Iberian Land * When shall appear

That glorious Day, when at the fierce Alarms

Of the approaching War, and thefe mine Arms

I (Carthage ) thee {hall trembling fee? This faid
Hoarfe Trumpets, with fhrill Murmurs, ftrait invade
The Stars, with Eccho. With fierce Clamours then
They meet, with fuch a Violence, as when

NCotus, and Boreas, or fell Aufler raves

By Sea, and drown whole Fleets in {welling Waves.
Or when his deadly Flames the. Dog expires,

And burns the fainting World with wafting Fires.
Such Slaughters their fierce Fury by the Sword
Commits, the gaping Earth could not afford

A Space, the Ruins of the Fight to hide.

No Rage of Salvage Beafts had er'e deftroy‘d

So many in their Fatal Dens, 4\nd, now,

With Blood the Fields, and Vallies overflow ;


| Their Weapons all are dulld : The Libyans are


Cut off, and the Ider?, that in War
Delight. And yet, though fhatter’d much, a Band


There was, that ftruggled ftill, and kept their Stafd,


Ppp ; ere


(g) Mafaniffa, after his defection
to the Romanes, maintained Jnviolable
Friendship with them,during his whole
Life. See more in the Continuation,


Sirius Iraticus. Book XVI.


Where Ha/drubal did with his Spear contend.
Nor hadtheir-cenftant Valour made anEnd -
That Day ; but that an Arrow chanc’d to fall
~ Upon his Breaft-plate’s top. The Wound,though {mal
Perfwaded him to fly. Then ftrait he quits
The Fight, and on his nimble Courfer gets
~ 'ToShelter, and along the Shore, by Night,
To the Lartefsitack Ports directs his Flight.
The next to him in Arms, and Valour, there,
To th’ Fight ( He the Maffylian Scepter bare,
For’s League, and Friendthip to the Romane Name,
Soon after famous) ‘© Mafaniffa came.
Upon his radiant Head, as,tyr'd with F light,
By Night he flept, a fudden, fhining Light
Appear’d to compals, with a gentle Flame,
His curled Hair, and to diffufe the fame
Upon his rugged Brow. His Servants ftrait
Run in, and hafte the Fire ( that did dilate
Ic felf about his Breaft) with Water to
Supprefs. But his old Mother, who foreknew
The Omens of the Gods, Your Wonders (cries )
Thus, thus ftill hide, propitious Deities!
Long may that Light abide upon his Head!
Neither do Thou, my Mafaniffa! dread
Thofe happy Wonders of the Gods : nor fear,
When ‘bout thy Temples Sacred Flames appear ;
_ This Fire a League with the Dardanian Race,
And Empire, greater then thy Father's was,
Doth promife, and, at length, fhall give to Thee;
And with the Latine Fates thy Name hall be
Involv‘d. Thus {pake the ProphetefS. The Minde
O'th’ Youth, to thefe clear Prodigies inclin’d,
Ner’e thought on Honours from the Libyan Side,
For ls great Valour. And,befides the Pride,


Of


Book XVI.° Sitrus Iraticus. 459 .


OF Hannibal in Arms, now, lefs became,
And, ev'ry Day, the War decreas'din Fame.

From the dark Heav‘ns the Morn began to chace
The Clouds, and {earce had Crimfon-dy'd the Face
OF the eA ¢lantick Sifters: whenhe goes
Tothe AufonianCamp (as yet his Foes.)

Where when heenter’d, and kinde Entertain
Receiv'd from Scipio; thus the King began.
Th’ advice of Heav’n, my Mother's Prophecies,


“And thy great Valour, to the Deities


So dear, Brave ‘Romane }) me have hither brought
( Moftwilliagly) from thofe, for whom I fought.
If gainft thy Thunder I’ve appear'd to ftand
With Courage, here [ offer Thee an Hand,
Worthy thy Name, thou Son of Zove! nor Me
Do wav'ring Thoughts, or vain Inconftancy
Of Minde, to thisinvite. 1 Treachery,
And, pérjur'd from their Birth, a People fly.
And,when Thou at e4 ides Bars haft made
An End, the Mother of the War invade
With Me. For Him, who Italyten Years
Hath now poffefs‘'d, and Scaling-Ladders bears
Againft the Wallsof ‘Rome, You back muft bring.
With Fire, and Sword ,to Libya. Thus the King.

To whom their Right-Handsjoyn’d) If glorious
( The General seplies ) in Arms to Thee (We
Appear; more glorious much We Komaues are
Forkeeping Faith. Then ¢Mafaniffa) far
Thy double-Tongu’d Affociates from thy Minde
Remove. Thy famous Valour, hence, fhall finde
A great Reward: and fooner Me fubdu'd
By Arms, then overcome in Gratitude, -
Thou fhalt confefs. But that, which you perfwade,


That We fhould Libya with Fire invade,
Ppp2- Time


Se Of Syphax, fee the Contins-
ake


Situs |raricus. Book XVI.


Time hall effea.. My Thoughts are oft inclin’d
To that, and Carthage fatigates my Minde. -

Then to the Youth a rich embroider’d Cloak,
And Horfe, which he from conquer’d Mago took,
And had himfelf his Mettle try'd, withall

A Cask, and Golden Cup, which Hafdrubal
Us'dto the Altars of the Gods to bring

With Sacrifice, He gives. Then, with the King
A\ Social League confirm’d, He ftrait employ’d


His Thoughts,that Byr/a's Tow'rs might be deftroy'd,


The richeft King in the Maffylian Land,
And Valiant held, was ‘ Syphax: whol@command
Un-number'd Nations, and the fartheft Seas,
Obey’d. His Territories vaft ; in thefe
He Store of Horfe,and MonftrousBeafts, that are
In Fighta Terrour, andchoice Youth for War,
Poffefs'd. None Him furpa(s‘d in Ivory,
Or Gold, or Garments of Getulian Dy.
Defirous, therefore, to his Side to bring (King
This Strength (the Danger weighing, fhould that
To Carthageturn ) He putsto Sea,andin
His Thoughts, already, doth that War begin.
But when, at length, his Ship arriv'd before
The Port ; fled thither, by the neareft Shore,
Ina weak Bark, was Hafdrubal, who fought
New Leagues,for his diftrefs'd Affairs, and brought
Mafylian Enfigns to the Fyrian Side.
But, when to Syphax it was fi ignifi'd,
That the two Generals of two Nations (who ©
Withall their Might contended to fubdue,
Each, to their Laws, the World) into his Land
Were come :big in his Thoughts,he gives Command,
They thould be ftrait conducted to his Court ;
Proud, that his Throne was Honour’d with Refore

Se


Book XVI. Sitrus Iratricus. 461


So great. Then, as, with joyful Eys, he ran

Or’e Scipio's Face, to him he firft began.

Brave Dardan, fam'd for thy clear Soul! how Thee

I, willingly, Embrace! how gladly fee!

How much Ime pleas'd old Scipio's Face to Minde
Toeall! thy Father in thy Looks I finde.

1 {peak of the Herculean Gades now ;

When, Curious to obferve the (cean’s flow,

And Ebb, to th’ &rythrean Coattl came.

With Kindenefs ftrange,at Bctis neighb'ring Stream, |


Thofe two great Captains came to fee Me ; where


‘They Prefents of their Spoils ( the Beft that were)


On Me beftow’d: as Arms,and (which within


~ My Kingdom, untill then, unknown had been)


Bridles for Horfe, and Bows, with which we may

Our Country’s Darts compare. Befides thefe, they -
Matters of antient Difcipline, that might

In Order form our featter’d Bands, in Fight,

(‘) After your Country’s Manner ) to me gave. abide Jaftey: of ich th
I Gold,and Lvory (¢ of which We have :
Great Plenty in our Land ) on them again °

Would have beftow’d. But'allmy Pray’rs were Vain:
Onely two Swords, which carved Ivory

Enbheath’d, they took. Now therefore chearfully

My Palace enter; and fince, hither now

The Libyan General my Fortune, through

The Seas, hath brought, confider what I fay

With Candid Thoughts: and Thou Cwhomall obey

At (Carthage) Hafdrubal thine Ears to me,

And Senfes turn. ‘ What Storms, thr ough Italy,

Of Arms, like Torrents, run, and fpread the Fears

Of Ruin through the Land? And howten years,
Sometimes Sicanian Earth, fometimesthy Shore.


(Iberus ) hath been drunk with T)yrian Gore;
3 To


4.62


Situs Iraticus. Book XVI.


Toallisknown: Now,therefore, let the War
Be lay’d afide, and joyntly Arms forbare ;


’ Be Thou content with Italy, and Thou


In Libya to contain thy Self. And now,

If toa League of Amity you pleafe

To turn, no mean Procurer of your Peace

Will Syphax be. Asmore he would have faid,
Scipio, not fuff ring Him, before him lay’d

The Cuftoms of his Country, and the Will

O'th’ Senate: thew'd him, that the Fathers ftill
Determin’d fuch Affairs : wifh’d himtolay ~
All Hopes of that Defignafide. Thus they,
Inarguing, the Day remaining fpent,

And then unto their Cups, and Viands, went.
The Banquet ended, ev'ry Man repairs .
To Reft, and the hard Fetters of his Cares
Throws offto Night. But,when the Morn gave Birth
To a new-Day, by her firft Beams on Earth,
And Sol His Horfes from their Stable drew

Unto their Yoak’; Himfelf, not mounted to

His Seat, butonely, with his early Rays, |
Then breaking forth, enchac’d th’ &éan Seas:

Scipio leaps from his Bed, and, witha fair

Alpect, to Syphax Lodgings doth repair.

He (asthe Cuftom of his Country ) bred
Young Lions up; which loft, fo Tamely fed,

Their Native Rage, and,at that very Time
Their Y ellow-Necks, and Mains, while they with Him
Were Wanton, ftrok'd, and handled, without Fear,
Their dreadful Jaws. But, when hé came to hear,
That Scipio was at Hand, he ftrait puts on

His Robe: and Royal Enfigns of his Throne,
In his Left Hand, affumes. White Fillets ty’d
About his Temples, and to his left Side


Book XVI. Sirius Iraricus,
A Sword (aswastheirCuftom). girt: He Rtiait


Invites him in’; where privately they fate,


In equal State. when Scipio thus expreft


_ The Scepter’d King, and the ef ufonian Gueft,


His Minde. It was my Firft, and ChiefeftCare,


So foon as the Pyrenean Nations were
Subdu’d by Me, intothy Land to hafte
C Mok mighty Syphax) nor (which I have


Could me the cruel Seas, between, retard.


paft )


Now, what I fhall demand is neither Hard,


Nor yet Dishonourable to thy Throne:
With the Asfonians let thy Heart be one;
A firm Ally to their Succeffes be :

Not the Majf[ylian Nations can Thee,


Nor Territories ftretch’d to Dang’rous Sands,


Nor Pow’r of thy great Anceftours in Land


Ofvatt Extent, more Glory yield, then will
The Romane Valour, ftill Invincible |

In Faith, ald Honour ofthe Latine Name.
For Cnetto mention more ) none, thatcan
Equality withtheImmortal Gods,
Over the Dardan Arms can compafs Ovdds.


S


claim


The King this hearing, with a chearful Face,


Seems to afsent, and, with a ftrict Embrace,
Let Us confirm this happy Omen ( cries )
And our joynt Vows propitious Deities
Afsift! ‘Both Horned, and Tarpeian Fove,


Letus invoke. With that, they forward move


To Sacred Altars, built of Turfs of Grafs,
Where ready for the Ax the Victim was,
When fuddenly the Bull dhe Altar flies,


Leaps from the broken Cords, and with loud Cries


Fills the whole Temple, and, his difmal Note
Ingeminating ( from his bellowing Throat )


Through


4.63


464


Sitius IraLticus. Book XVI. _


Through all the trembling Palace Terrour {preads,
Then ftrait the Fillet, that. adorn’d the Heads -


_ OF his great Anceftours, without the Touch


OF any, falls from the King’s Temples. Such
Sad Signs by Heav’n of his declining State -
Were giv’n, and heavy Omens of his Fate.

This done: returning to the Port again,
Scipio, with profprous Gales, arrives in Spain.
The greedy Nations met. Pyrene fent
Her fev'ral People: all in Complement
Salute, and call him King, which the Supreme
Honour of Virtue was, in their Efteem.

But witha milde Afpect their Offers were

By Him rejected, and He did declare

His Country’s Cuftoms, and ¢ which well-became
A Noble Romane) that the very Name
Of Kings was Odious at Rome. Again


_ Turn’dto that onely Care, that did remain


CNoEnemy nowleft) the Latine Bands,
With thofe, which Betis, and which Tagus Sands
Enrich, he convocates, and to them thus,
“Midft the Affemblies, fpeaks. Since Heav'n hath Us
So blefs‘d, that, from the fartheft Part of all
The World thrown out, the Libyan fhould fall;
Orin thefe Plains; or, from th’ He e/perian Lands
Exild, fhould Ay to fee his Native Sands,
I now the Fun’rals of my Friends defire
To celebrate, and Peace, whieh they require,
To deareftShadesto give. Confent (| pray)
With Mein this, and lift-to what I fay.
W hen the feventh Sun again the Skies fhall gild,
Whoer’e in Arms, orin the Sword is skill’ d;
Or can with Arc the Chariot drive ; or by
Swiftnefs of Foot hopes Conqueft ; or lets fly

Darts


Book XVI. Sitrus Iraricus.


Darts, that impell the Windes: let fuch appear;
And for the Crown contend with Honour here.
! Rewards worthy, of the choice of all

The Tyrian Spoils,will give. No Perfon thall
Depart without Reward. Thus with Defires

Of Gifts, and Praifes,he the Vulgar fires.

And now the Day arriv’d, when all the Plain
With the vaft Concourfe founds, and witha Train
Well order’d, the pretended Obfequies


Scipio, with Tears Obortive in his Eyes, i


Leads on. All Soldiers of the Latine Name,


~ Andall ch’ Iderian, with their Off rings came,


And threw them on the flaming Pyles: while He


Goblets of Sacred Milk, and Bowls, that be


With blufhing Bacchus fill'd, devoutly pours,

And ftrews the Altars or’e with flagrant .Flow’ts.
Then the excited Shades he invocates

With Tears, their Praifes fings, and venerates

Their glorious Acts. This done: frem thence he goes
Into the Gerque, where firft he doth propofe

The rapid Race of Steeds, and doth Commence

The Sport. The wav’ring People in the Senfe,

And Rage of Fav’ring Sides (the Bars not yet
Thrown open) Fluctuate toand fro, and fret,

Like murm’ring Seas, and ftill their Eyes confine
T’obferve the Horfes ftand. Soon as the Sign

Was giv'n, the Bars refound, and to the Skies

(Scarce the firft Hoof appearing ) Clamours rife,
With dreadful Noife: while prone, and eager all

As thofe that run, they to the Chariots bawl,

And Steeds. The Grque with their Contention fhakes,
And Heat in fome, from others Courage takes.
Exhorting they drive on, and, clam’ring loud,


- Their Horfes guide, and thena Yellow Cloud


Qqq ~ Mounts


4.65


1 ia Reger get h An” Sere ge oe De vam gee


Sirius Iraricus. . Book AVI.


Mounts, from the fandy Tract, into the Air,
Obtcuring, with its Darknels, ev'ry where
The Horfes Way, and Drivers Pains. Here one
Rails at his Head-ftrong Steed: and thisupon
The Mafter. Some the Country's Favour; fome
The antient Stable’s Name, from whenee they come,
Inflames ; and fome with Hopes tormented are
Of the Young Steeds, that Harnefs newly bear.
Some with old Age are pleas’d, and praife the Steed,
Known for long Years. Starting,with rapid Speed,
Callaick Lampon, through the Air, before
The reft, flies out,and runs,infulting or’e, (Shout,
Much Ground, and leaves the Windes behinde. T hey
And with Applaufe grow hot; norfeemtodoubt, —
» That, with the Start, h’ad gain’d the better part
Of his Defires, Butfuch, asinthe Art,
And Knowledg of the Race more Skillful were,
Againft their Clamour, at the firft, declare,
And at great Diftance blam’d, with vain Complaint,
His ill-fpent Pains, which made his Horfes faint.
Oh! whither, rathly, Grnus (for ‘twas He
That drove the Chariot) whither doft thou flee °
Forbear the Whip, take up the Reins, alafs /
His Ears are Deaf, and He doth forward pals,
Stillof his Steeds fecure; nor thinks upon
The {pace of Ground, that yet remain’d to run,

At Diftance from the foremoft, but the {pace
Of's Chariot length, the next Panchates was,
Afturian bern ; his Sire’s White Enfign bright
Upon his Forehead fhin’d,his Feet all White
Alike, his Mettle very great, not: Tall
Elis Members, and his Bodie’s Grace but fmall :
But then He Wings affum’d, and, with Difdain
OF Reins, runs on, with Fury, through the Plain.

| You'd


Book XVI, Sirius Iraticus. 4.67 |
You'd think his Limbs grew Greater, he more High. |


His Spanifh Guide fhin’d in Cinyphian Dye. we


The third, that equal with Pedorus run
Afront, was (ancafus ; moft fierce, and One,
That fcorn’d on’s flatter'd Neck the Hand's applaufe,
But, foaming, lov'd to champ with Bloody Jaws |
Uponthe Bit. But, eafier to obey
The Reins, Peloras never from the Way
The running Chariot, deviating, drew,
‘And inthe Tract went on directly to
The Mark. His Creft was deep, and, to and fro,
Upon his Neck an Ample Main did flow, °
No Sirehe had: Him Harpe, when anew
In the Veélonian Meades the Zephyrs blew,
Brought forth. ‘This Chariot gallant Durius in
The Raceurg’d on. On e4tlas, who had been
His Mafter long, did Cancafus rely.


Him thither then Aitolian Tyde Cby


Ty dides built ) had fent, and thought indeed,
That his Defcent was from that Trojan Breed
Of Steeds, which from ©) Eneas Diomed


(k) In thisthe Pore difcovers the
Care of the Anticxts in preferving


a Race of good Hoerfes, fuch as were


Near Simois took, and home with Conqueftled. thofe fo celebrated of old, taken by


Diomed trom eAZneas, at the Siege of
Troy, After which, Diomed raifing fe-
veral Colonics,and building feveral Ci-
tics, was not onely renowned with Po-
fterity, bucin fome Places adored, and
among the Venetians bad a White
Horfe Sacrificed to him, See Strabo,
Geogr, Book the fifth,


Now, as almoft amidft the Race they drive,

In Spaee enlarg’d, Panchates, fierce, doth ftrive
T’ or'etake the foremoft Horfes, and to tend
Yet higher, and behinde feems to afcend’

The Chariot, that before him went; while He,
Striking on the Callaick Axle-tree,


| Shakes ie with his Forefeet. But, though the latt,


Old Atlas, tow'rds the Goal, as nimbly paft,

As Durius. You mightthink they Peaceful were;
So equally their Fronts, and Reins they bears
But,when th’ Iberian, who then next him went,

Pc erceiv’d, that the Callatck’s Strength was {pént,


Qqqz Nor


S 1Liu s-Iraticus. Book XVI.


Nor, as before, the headlong Chariot leap’d,


But with continual Violence, and Whip’d,


The fmoaking Steeds wenton. As, from high Hills,


A fudden Storm the lower Vallies fills,

Stretch’d to his Horfes Necks, and hanging or’e
Their Heads, Panchates, that he fhould no more
Delay, but bear his Reins with good Succels,
EH excites, and, lafhing on, doth this exprels. |
While thou contend’ft, fhall an e4 /lurian gain


The Prize? Stir up; fly nimbly through the Plain.


For Lampon, who, as wing’d, but lately went,

In’s panting Breaft declines : his Breath is {pent ;
Nor, gaping, hath enough to bear him to

The Mark. Thus having faid, the Horfe anew
Himfelf collects, as ifhe newly then

Had ftarted from the Barriers, and began

The Race, and Grnus ftriving, as he pafs‘d,


-Tocrofs, or equal him, behinde him caft.
_ Heav'n, and the Cirque, with the Spectatours Cries,


Murmurs, while through the Air Panchates flies,
Andraifing his Triumphant Neck more ftrong,
And High, his Fellows (foremoft)) draws along.
eA tlas, and Durius, in the Rear, their Arts

[n Wheeling try. This to the Left converts
His Reins, the other tothe Right doth-bend,
And ftrivesto pafs: and both,in vain, contend
Eachother to deceive; till, on his Strength

Of Youth relying, Darivs carn’d, at length,

His Reins, and headlong drives his Chariot on,
Crofs eftlas Axle-tree, which overthrown,
He, weak with Age, complaining juttly, cries ;
Whither doft go 2 or what mad Way is this
OF running Races? both my Steeds, and Me
To killthoudoft Endeavour. Thus while he


Exclaims


Book XVI. Sittus Iraxricus. 4.69


Exclaims, the Ax-tree broke, upon his Face
He falls, and’s Steeds, now drawing fev'ral Ways,


‘ Runheadlong through the Champagne ( Sad to fee!)


While, in the open Plain, with Victory ,
The Reins unto his Friends Peloras heaves,
And fhakes, and ‘midft the Sand, behinde him, leaves


* Atlas, endeav'ring-there to rife. Noor far


Had he to equal Gyraus weary Carr.

Paft whom ( learning too late to guide his Steeds,

And marching flow) with nimble Wheels he {peeds-
His Friends with Shouts, and Cries, his Chariot make
To go more Swift. And now upon the Back,

And Shoulders o’th’ Iberian Charioter

His mouth the Horfe had lay’d ; who, full of Fear,
By the ftrong Vapour of his Breath, and Foam,


_ Soon feels his Back opprels'd, and Warm become:


While Darius ply'd the Race, and lafh’d amain
His Horfes on, nor feems to ftrive in vain,

On the Right-hand,to reach the Steeds before,
Ande quall’d them; and, then tran{ported more
With fo great Hopes, cries out. Pelorus now,


‘That Zephyrus was thy Sire, ‘tis time to fhow :


And let them learn, that can the Pedegree

OF Steeds, by Name, derive, how much in Thee
A Breed Divineexcels. A Conqu'rour, Thou
Shale Altars raife, and Off rings fhalt beftow
Upon thy Sire. And if, as this he faid,
Through joyful Fear he had not been betrai’d,

By his too great Succels, and letting fall

His Whip, perhapsto Zephyrus he all

His Vows had pay’d, and Altars rais'd. But then,
As if h’ad gain’d the Crown, and it agen

Had tumbled from his Head, Unfortunate,

His Anger turning on himfelf, He ftraie


Acrefs


ret gs ae, ee ty + ee FPR te eee Me re ‘eet Ok ee TE ee ee ayk eas aR ee ES MO ng RPE Oe epee RC ees SO Ee hoe Vee ae Nem re A) EP Re eS TF See eee Some ea | a ae B ete
“ - . . 2 7 7 *


47°


Sirius Iraxicus. Book XVI.


Acrofs his Breaft his golden Garment rends,
And dire Complaints, moft fadly weeping, fends
Up to the very Stars. And now no more
( His Lafhing ceas'd ) the Chariot, as before,
Obey’dhis Hand : but on the Horfes Backs,
Infteedo’th’ Whip, the Reins he, vainly, fhakes.
While, now fecure of Praife, Panchates came
Up to the Goal, and the firft Prize did claim.
The Winde with his large Main, which Nature lay’d
Over his. Neck, and Shoulders, gently play’d :
While, {natching up his fubtile Limbs, about
He praunc'd, and triumph’d witha mighty Shout.
An Ax, in folid Silver carv‘d, to all,
Alike, was giv’n. ‘The reft the General,
Diftinguifhing with fev'ral Honours, gave.


The Firfta nimble Courfer did receive,


Which the Mafplian King a Prefent made,


Of high Efteem. The next in Merit had
Two Golden Cups, o’th’ Zyrian Spoils (which there
In Plenty lay) and, rough with Yellow-Hair,
A Lion’s Skin, and (with like Dread expreft )
A Tprian Helmet, with an horrid Creft.
The Third in Honour, tn Reward the laft,.
Was Atlas ; who, though from the Chariot cat,
( Pitying the fad Misfortune of his Fall,
And his Decrepit Age) the General
Prefented, and, in’s Prime of Age, a Slave,
And Bonnet,of his Country's Fathion, gave.
This done: the General the Race proclaims
AFoot, and Hearts with Prizes fix'd inflames.
To th’ firfta Cask, which, late, upon the Head
Of Hafdrubal, did Pannick Terrour {pread


Through all th’ Iberian Bands. Tohim whole Speed,


Next Merited, a Sword there was Decreed,
Which


Book XVI.


Whichfrom Hyemp/al Tain his Father took. -
And to the Third, a Bull. The reft forfook


Sirius Irapicus.


47


The (irqueseach Man well-pleas‘d,and Proud, that they ;


- Two Darts of Native Metal bore away.


Then Hef'ros, and Larteffos, Lovely Boys,

A\t once appear with the propitious Voice

OF all the Cirque. Of Tprian Blood, they came
From Gades. Next (to whom the River's Name
By Corduba was giv'n, when yet a Childe )

In that great Conteft, Baticas was filtd

With joyfull Hopes. And then, with Yellow-Hair,
( But with a Skin, whofe Whitenefs might compare
With Snow) did Eurythus with Clamours fill
The Lifts. He, bred upon her lofty Hill,

Was thither fent by Setabis, and there,

With trembling Piety, his Parents were.

Then Lamus, and then Sicoris ( thy Brood,
Warlike Ilerda’)) and that drinks the Flood,
Which, under Lethe’s Name, with Silence laves
The hollow Banks with its forgetful Waves,
Theron appears. And, when they all upon

Their Feet ftood ready, and with Bodies prone,
And panting Hearts, with Heat of Praife elate,
Receiv'dthe Signal by the Trumpet: ftrait,
Starting through Air, as fwiftas Arrows, by


Extended Nerves enforc'd, away they fly.


A\nd now the Shouts, and Parties divers are :

The Fav'routs by their Fingers hang, and,where
Each Man affects, by Name their Fr iends excite;
While the fair Troop fpeeds through the Plain, fo hetis
Their Feet leave no Imprefsion on the Sand.

Allin their Prime, in Face all Comely ; and
All{wift of Foot ; all Worthy to Or'ecome.

Now eager Eurythus the foremoft, from


The


(4) Corda , Situate on the Ri-
ver Betss.


aye Sims IraLicus. Book XVI,


The middle Tract, advanc'd ; yet foremoft paft
But a fhort Space: when Hefferos as faft
_ Came up, and prefs'd upon his Heels, while he .

Conceiv’d it was enough for him to be

The Foremoft. T’other it fuftic'd he might

Yet hope to get before. With that, more light

- Their Steps they gather, and with vig'rous Mindes
Drive on their Bodies. While their Beauty findes
Encreafe from Labour. When with eafy Pafe
Theron, who ran the laft of all the Race,

Finding his Strength fufficient for the Courfe,

His Un-fpent Vigour witha fudden Force
Employs, and breaks into the Air, fo fleet,
You'dthink that Mercury with winged Feet

Went his Ethereal Courfe . Now thefe, then thofe,
( The People all admiring) He out-goes ;
And lately laft, now the Third Victour, prefsd
By his {wift Steps, doft Hefperos infeft.

Nor whom he follows onely : but the Rings
Prime Flope, ( advancing with fuch active Wings)
Amazeth Eurythus ; when, Fourth in place,
Tartefos, vainly toiling ( if the Race

The other three purfu’d, as they began )

“With fiery Theron, that betwixt them ran
His Brother prefs'd. Which Theron now no more
Enduring. rais'd Himfelf, and got before
Enraged Hefperos. Then onely One

. Before him went. And now the Goal begun
With nearer Incitations to enflame
The vex’d behinde. When up they furious came,
And all the Force, that either Toil, orFear,
Piercing into their Hearts, had left C while there
Could any thing be hop’d for, in a Space
Sofhort ) collect, The foremoft Two the Race,
With


Book XVI.


SILius IraLicus, 4-73


"With equal Speed purfne, and happily,


The Prizes of a double, Victory
( Coming together to the Mark ) had won
With Merit, had not Hefperos ( who run.

Clofe behinde Theron, and through Anger-made
Moft Cruel} feiz’d upon his Hair ( difplay'd
On’s Milky Neck) and drawn him Back. While thus
The Youth detain’d, Triumphing Surytbus,

A joyful Vidtour, for the Prize appears,

And the fair Prefent of an Helmet bears

Away. Their fix'd Rewards the other found,

And with green Wreaths their un-cut Trefses bound.
Each had two Shafts with Native Metal fteel'd.
Thisdone; more cruel Conflicts ftain the Field.


- The Sword’s drawn Handto Hand, anda fair War


They reprefent. Not fuch, as Guilty are,

Nor vitious Men are to the Sword defign’d :
But fuch, whom Valour equall’d, and a Minde
Inflam‘d with Love of Praife. A perfe@ Face
OF their paft Labours, and of Mars his Race
A worthy ( Spectacle. Among thefe were


: ; (m) This Spelack , much more
Two Brothers, who. 4 what will not Princes dare Memorable, then thofe, where the


Guilty, and Condemned contended ,


Toad‘ what Crimesdo Scepters want 2) engage
Ina full Cirque ( while the whole Pit their Rage
Condemns) in fingle Combat fora Throne.
“Twas a dire Cuftom in their Country, known


was prefented bytwo Spasifs Princes,
(Brothers, by the Father , named Or
bis, and Orfxa) who, difputing for the
Sovereignty of a City, were refolved
to determine the Controverfie at this


Solemmity by the Sword: and though.


the Port, in imitation of that famed
Difpute, and Funeralof Zreecles, and
Polynices, faith, they both dyed, yet


Livy affirms the Elder (Orbs) over-
came the Younger,


Where Orphan Sons their Father's Royal Seat,


With Hazard of their Lives,invade. Both meet


With all the Fury, that a Mad Defire
Of Rule affords, and both at once expire ;
Bearing to Gholts below ambitious Hearts,
Glutted withBlood: and in their Inward Pattscdrown'ds
With one joynt Thraft, their Swords, puth’d on, are
And, adding railing Language to each Wound,

Rr r ‘Struggling


L era are Ba a Pe
. 7h Sirius. Iraricus. Book XVI. ‘Book XVI. .Sinrus Ivaticus, (ie
i _ 8 : Struggling, their angry Souls fly into Air. ~_ = 3 The third Palm brave Acontear had, a Brace |
q Nor could their Ghofts this Bnmity forbare : Of Dogs, that would the Boar with Mettle chace. :
i | For, when their Bodies were together brought But, when Applaufe, and Shouts thefé Honours had F
i . Unto one Pyle: Cas if they fill had fought) .. : ; Approv'd: in Scarlet, Lalint, richly clad,
Za _ payer who ontenied foreso ©) The Impious Flames (‘tis ftrange ) afunder fly, ~ . “nd Younger Spi wihwebesthlook:
it _ se, bgt foment Fy Nor would their Athes there together ly. —— es | The Names, and eA anes of the Dead invoke :
MH oe se heir Souls bad The reft with fev'ral Gifts, as was their Share | Then, ftrait, their Jav'lins throw ; delighting fo |
a OF Courage, or of Force, rewarded are. . All Honour to their Sacred Duftto thow, | = ]
; Some Oxen, that,with Ploughs imprefs'd, could Till ‘Aid’add hat Coremanegehe Gaaics:
The Earth : Some Youths, ‘mong Zyrian Spoils, a Atlength, the (”) General ¢ whofe Face proclaims ne | | > 3 :
Accuftom’d to explore the Dens of Beafts: — Com Z | Elisiawaid: Joyswhen hether Pious Heart P) Scipio, q
Some Silver Plate, with-wealthy Robes, and Cretts | Rewarded had. with Gifts coslicir Deters: | i
R ifing on thining Helmets, bore away, . | And giv'na Weighty Corflet,all of Gold, ; :
The Spoils, and:Frophies of the Libyan Prey. Unto his Brother, anda Pair of bold : | | 4
‘Then with the Dart they Honour fought (the laft : Afturian Steedsto Lelius) rifiag, threw |
Of thele Grcenfian Games ) and ftrove to caft With Force his Conqu’ring Jav'lin, and, to thew {
Beyond the Mark. Here, Neighbourto that Land, ire Shades were eruel# Flonsue'd seit 4
Where Tagiis Pale becomes with golden Sand, - Amid ft the Field (‘tis ftrange ) before their Eyes, it
Was Burnut, Famous for his long Defcent, tv Fix’d in the Earth, the Jav'lin ftands, and ftrait [ |
And Line:. with Glagus, who the Windes out-went With Leaves the lofty Boughsthemfelves dilate. ; 4
_ With his ftrong Arm. eA conteus too, whofe Dart, © Butnow its Shadow, wides.che prowing Tree i"
| In its moft fpeedy Courfe, the nimbleft Hart Extends: the Augurs all, with Prophecy,
Ped Ranta eae eal “tur be iad Ner’e mifsd, With them “) Indibilts, who long : | ‘Command them onto greater Thingsto go,
Fei tate mde Pace win 10 Wardelighted, now e fteem’d among = . Which, by thofe Signs, the Deities forefhow.
ee garintins ; baw Ebel Confederates of Rome: who often flew With this Prefage, the Libyans all from Spain
ipa ia ace Misc With his fure Shafts the towring Fowl, that flew Repuls'd, to Latium he returns again, |
Among the Clouds. And ftout Ilerdes, who Fis Houle,and Country bothreveadd while Caaic | i
Could eafily furprize the flying Doe. The Triumph leads. Nor other Cares inflame
Burnus, who in the Mark firft fix'd his Dart, The Romane Breafts, then Libya to commit, |
Damumreceiv'd , a Maid, that mix’d with Are _ And Sacred Fa/ces, to his Youth. Butyet — | |
The milky Fleeces with Getulian Dye. : (1) The Graver Sort, who fal'nin Courage, or igs ecaciaeet |
But, who the next was Honour’d, and that nigh Succefs had wanted in that dubious War, cll Faby either chu |
Unto the Marka Shaft*had thrown, with Joy, Oppofing his Defigns as Rath, with Fear inhis defign to invade Libya, See Livy. f


Their Dangers magnifie: and, as he there,


Herdes, for Reward, receiv'd a Boy.
_— The Rrr2 | High


476


r) His great Exploits in Spain
had\gained him not onely the Confxl-


Sitrus Iraticus.. Book XVI.


High in the Dignity ‘" of Conful, pray'd . -


foip, butthe Favour of regieiegr Authority: of Senate to inva de,.


fo, chat, notwithftanding the
Fabius Acilsus,and othersin the Senate,
he obtained the Commiffion he defired.


Acad ruin Carthage with his Arms ; this grave —
Reply, aloud, the Elder Fabius gave. .

I hope, I need not fear, that I, whoam
Loaden with Age, and Honour, who in Fame,
And Yearsabound , fhould by the (onful be
Efteem’da Perfon, that malicioufly . .
From his Juft Praifeswould detract. My Name
Is with fufticient Splendour rais‘d by Fame.

Nor wants what I havedone, with fuch Succefs,
New Praife. But, while I live, ‘twere Wickednefs,
To mydear Country to be wanting, or

Conceal: my Minde in Silence. Youthe War
Intend to Libya to transferr; For We

Now wantan Enemy in Italy.

Nor is’t enough,that we have Hannibal

Subdu'd. What greater Honour can inall

Eliza's Land be found! but,if you are


_ Spur’don by Glory, what fhould you Debar


To reap this Harveft* Thee for Deeds at hand


_ Fortune hath Fit, and Worthy made. Our Land


Ev'n thirfts, to drink the Blood of Hannibal.

W hither the War, or Enfigns do you call,

Extinguih firft the Flames of Italy.

You plainly quit a weary Enemy,

And, at that Inftant, Rome muft Naked ftand.

But, when you watte the Syrts, and barren Sand,

Will not that horrid Plague, with Fury, move

‘Gainft thefe known Walls? invade Larpeian Fove,

Depriv’d of Arms, and Men? Of how great Weight
Is it, fhould you give Way, and leave the State |

To the Emerited 2 and, when we are

Struck with the Thunder of fo greata War,


Mutt


Book XVI. -


~Sitcius Itratricus.


Mutt We Cas Fulvias from proud Capas >) Thee
From Libya’s Coatt recall °. Get Victory


_ At Home, and Zéaly, that hath-with Tears


Deplor'é the Funerals of Fifteen Yeats,

Abfolve-from cruel War; thentake your Way

Toremote Garamantians. You may |

Your NM afamonian Triumphs then defign. *

But Italy, diftrefs'd, muft now Decline

Allfuch Attempts. Your Valiant Father ( He,

That fo much Honour to-your Family

Didadd}) when, Con/ul, he was bound for Spain,

Hintelf ‘gainft Hannibal (who then amain

Defcended from the Alps) did firft oppofe,

His Army allrecall’d. From Conqu’ring Foes

You ((Conful) would retire ; that fo youmay

From Us the Libyan withdraw. But, fay,

He will, fecure, fit Quiet ; nor purfue

You, and your Armsto Libye : will not You

Condemn thefe blinde Refolves, when ‘Rome fhall be

Surpriz’d ¢ Or elfe fuppofe, that, troubled, He |

Should turn his Enfigns, and your Fleet purfue ;

He the fame Hannibal will be, that You

Entrench’d have {een before this Citie’s Wall.
This Fabius, and the like was urg'd by all

The Elder fort. The Conf ftrait reply‘d.


‘By ajoynt Death two Valiant Gaptains dy‘d,


When Spain, poflels'd, embrac’'d the Libyan Y oak. .
Not Fabius then,nor Any, that have {poke

His Senfe, afforded Aid, I know, ‘tis Truth,

The War’s whole Fury 1, when buta Youth
Endur’d, and to the falling Shafts alone

My Head expios'd, and drew all Dangers on
My felf. And thenthe Seniour Sort, and ev'n
This Prophet murmur'd, that the War was giv'n


Unto


477—


fo ET Se Wee ae a eee et he ved Sete Ney Teo


478°


(s} Hannibal’s Brother.


(+) Another Hafdrubal.


‘Sirius ITALICUS.


-Ulnte a Boy, and blamrd Our rafh Defign.


But I all Praifes. tothe Pow'rs Divine
CBy whoma Trojan People we remain )


With Thanks return. That very Boy, thofe vain, -


And Childifh Years , that Scipio, who was then —
Unripe for Arms, to You, un-hurt, agen
Hath giv’tt all Spain, the Libyans thence by Force
Repuls'd, and, following thefartheft Courfe

OF Sol to Atlas Bounds, the Libyan Name |
Expell'd from the Hefperian Orb, nor came
With his Victorious Enfigns Home, before

He Phebus faw, upon the Romane Shore,

Loofing his Flaming Chariot, near the Main.
The fame to you did foreign Kingsregain.

Aind (Carthage now remains, the laft of all


| My Toils. This ove declares. See! Hannibal


Old Age now fhakes, or fainting Fears doth frame ;
Left to our Ruins, of fuch Length, my Name
A Period fhould produce. My Valour I
Have furely try’d, and Strength, augmented by
My Prime of Years. Then feek not to delay:
Butrather fuffer,that this Lot I may
Purfue. This the Immortal Gods for Me
Have kept, to wipe away the Infamy
Of former Woes. Itisa fair Renown,
For Wary Fabius notto be or’ethrown:
And the Delayer hath effected all
For Us by fitting ftill. But > Hafdrubal,
Mago, nor Hanno, nor yet “) Gifcon’s Son
Had turn’d their Backs, if we the like had done:
Or, Idle, clofe entrench’d, fpun out the War.

_ Could a Sidonian Boy, who fearce did bear
The Down of Youth upon his Cheeks, invade
Laurentine People: Walls approach, were made


By


Book XVI.


Book XVI.


By Trojan Hands? and drink the Sacred Stream
OF Yellow Tyber 2 and in Latinm feem,

By along War, to fhare? and {hall We ftand
_Thus backward to tranfport to Libya's Land
OurEnfigns? and the Dyrian Tow’rs deftroy®
Their Coatts, fecure of Danger, openly, |
And all the Landa rich Tranquillity

Enjoys. Atlength let Carthage ( wont to be

A Terrour) learn to Fear, and underftand,
That, though from Hannibal th’ Oenotrian Land
Ass yet’s not free, we want not Arms. Ev'n [


- This Man, that hath, fo long, in Italy


(Till He's grown old through cautiousCounfels) ftood,

That hath three  Luffra, largely, fhed our Blood,

Flim, fearing Cruel things, and trembling, I

Back to his Country, that in Flames fhall ly,

Willturn. The Shameful Marks of Tyrian Hands

Shall Rome view on her Walls :_ while Carthage ftands

Free, and fecure, and hears our Milery,

And wars with open Gates? The Enemy

May batter then with their Sidonian Rams

Our Tow’rs again, if firft in ‘Romane Flames

They hear not that their Country's Temples fall.
The Fathers, by this Language, and the Call

Of Fate inflam’d, to what the Conful {aid,

At the fame Time, affent, and, when they'd pray ‘d,

That it to Italy might hapey prove,

Permit the War to Libya to remove.


The End of the Sixteenth Book.


_ SILIUS


Sizius Iraricus,


Pkg) pF el ig MR Ga eh Mn mene gly


(*) Fifteen Years,


479 -


Book XVIL oo a 48t


PARE


Dp


ll


=—
—


SILIUS ITALICUS


The Second Punick VVar.


‘The Seventeenth Book,


Tuz ArcuMznt. —


From Phrigia Cybele’s brought to Rome

With Sacred Rites. Chaft Claudia doth prefume

(To vindicate her felf ) todraw alone

The ftanding Ship, by which ber Virtue's known.

From Sicily the Conful Scipio fails

To Libya, where bis Army fill prevails.

Syphax, and Hafdrubal ( their Camps in one

For Battell joyn’d) by Scipio overthrown, |

Syphax is Captive made a Pannick Dread,

From that great Overthrow, through Africk fpread.

The Carthaginians call, to their Relief,
" The General from Italy. Alis Grief

Expret at bis Return. The Armies fight,

And Hannibal by Scipio's put to flight.

Carthage, at length, receiveth Laws Fin Rome.

Great Scipio returns, in Triumph, Efome.


3 HELE Sidyl’s antient Oracles


forefhow ; .
es ‘That then th’ Au/onian Land the ;
WZatria invetatur sublimi tectaS. Fiumph Forrain Fo | .
4 Should quit, when from Her .
a. a a Phrygian Seat, to Rome, a
Gbbelé ( Mother of the Gods ) fhould come
' Sf ; To


4
|
|
oor ae
i
1
. ie
Ve
en
" ¢
-
“£
4
te:
+
az


\
fe
ee
; : a
a
i,
a


48x.


Book XVI.


Srtius. IraLicus.


(4) This Scipio, furnamed Nafica,
was the Son of that Scipio, who was
flain withthe Father of Africans, in
Spain. A Perfon moft eminent for his
fingular Virtues, particularly fo free
from Ambition, and Avarice , that,
when his Souldiers would have given
him the Title of Emperonr, andthe
Senate decreed to hia Triumph for
his Victories in Dalmatia, he refufed
both and, when he dyed, the Wealth
he left behinde him, was not enough
to bury him. For thefe, and many o-
ther Escellent Qualities,he was judged
the ficteft Perfon to fulfill che Oracle of
the Sybil, viz,


Mater abeft: Afetrem jubea, Ro-
( mane, requiras ;

Cum venict, cafta eft accipienda

( mann.

The abfent Adother, Romeé,T thee
(command

To. feek., Receive her with the
(chafteft Hand.


She was brought from Peffinus, a


Town in Phrygia, where She hada
ftately Templ: of White Marble,


(6) Chaft, from the Godde&, Cy-


. bele, whofe Rites were there moft fo-


lemnly performed.


To be ador’d: andthat the Deity, -
Arriving, fhould by Himreceived be, .

That fhould, {elected from among the reft

Of all the Senate, be efteemed Bett . |
Then living in the Prefent Age. A Name, |
Better then Triumphs, and of greater Fame. :


And now the thing arriv'd, which they had fought : ve


Gbele, ina Latian Ship, was brought.

When (+) Scipio, fearlefs ( while the Senate all

Gave way ) was ready to obey the Call,

To meet th’ appointed Rites. The Son was He

O'th’ General's Uncle, Chofen then to be
The Chief Commander in the Africk Wars:
Illuftrious in his many Anceftours.

When, farr at Sea, the Deity this Youth

Devoutly had receiv'd,and tothe Mouth

Of Thufcan Tyber brought: the Veffel, ftrait,

A female Band fueceeds,and,with its Fraight,

The lofty Gally through the River drew

With faft’ned Cords. Then,round about them,through
The Air, the hollow Sounds of tinkling Brafs,

With the harfh Timbrel's Noife contending, pats -
And dancing Satyres, whichinhabitwhere

‘*) Chaft Dindymus two lofty Hills appear,

And ule in the Diftan Cavesto Sport,

And unto Ide, and filent Woods refort.

Amidft this Noife, the Sacred Veflel, known

By Chearful Shouts, refufing to go on, |
Retracts the Ropes, and, ona fudden, ftood
Immoveable, and fix’d within the Flood.

With that, the Prieft (asin the Ship he flands p)
Exclaims; Forbear, with your Polluted Hands,

To touch the Cords, and, [ advife you,farr
From hence, Oh ! farr depart , whoever are. -

. Prophane,


SRSSEVIL. “Site le eae,


Prophane, norin this Chafter Labour joyn ;
While ic fufficeth, that the Pow’r Divine

Gives this Advife: but, if there any be,

That in her chafter Minde excells, if She

Be Conlcious to her felf, Her Bodie's Pure,

Her Handalone this Pious Task, fecure,

May undertake, Here ) Claudia, who her Name
From th’ antient Clauf drew, by common Fame
Traduc’d, unto the Ship her Hands, and Eyes
Converting, faid ; Mother of Deities,

Thou Powr Divine, who didft for Us give Birth

To all the Gods, whofe Off-(pring Heav'n, and Earth,
The Seas, and Shades below, do rule by “) Lot.

if this my Body be without a Spot,

Great Goddefs be my Witnels! and let Me

By this thy eafy Bark abfolved be.

Thus having faid; the Cable, free from Fear,

She feiz’d, and, fuddenly, they feem to hear

The Lion’s Murmur, and a Sound more Grave,
Untouch’d by any Hand, the Timbrels gave.

The Ship advanc'd{o faft, you'd think the Winde
Had fore'd it on, and Cleudia'sleft behinde,

Though ‘gainft the Stream it ran. And Hopes,that far
All elfe exceed, chear up their Hearts: the War
And all their Fears, at length, fhall ended be.

For active Scipio, leaving Sicily,

Hid with his winged Ships the {patious Seas :
But, with an off'red Bull, did firft appeafe
The God, on whofe blew Waves the Entrails fwum.
Then Thunder-bearing Birds, defcendin g from


' The Geds Abodes, through the clear Air, in view,


Begin to lead the Navy, and to fhew
Their Courfe by Sea. A Joyful efugury


Their Cries afford; and,as they foreward fly
. Sf{f2 Under


4.83


(c) Claudia was of the Sabine
Patrician Family, which firt incorpo-
rated themfelves with the Romanes.
She was a Vella! Verein, and, fufpected.
of Incontinency, made this Miracle the
Teft of Her Chaftity, and was ever
after Honoured, as the moft Virtuous
Matron of her Time.


(4) The Lot between $upiter .
Neptxne, and Plato, by which each of


them received his Empire,


484


SrLius Iraricus. ‘Book XVII.


Ce) OF Syphax. See the Continn-
‘ation, Book, the Firtt,


Undera liquid Gloud, the Ships purfue

As far as they could keep them in their View ;
And the Perfidious Coaft of Cadmus Land
Attain. Nor yet did Africk Idle ftand ;


Bui, fince fo great a Storm upon her came, .


A dreadful Pow’r under a mighty Name,


Againft their Fury had prepar’d to bring

The Arms, and Force of the ‘*) Adafylian King.
Libya's {ole Hope, and Latium’s onely Fear,
Syphax, the Fields, and Valleys, ev'ry where,
And Shores had fill’d with AComades, thiat {corn
Their nimble Steeds with Trappings to adorn ;
Who with their finging Shafts, that, as they flie


Through Air, like Clouds, furcharg’d, obfcure the Skie,


(f) Of this League fee above in
the Sixteenth Book,


Of the Right-Hand, which he had giv’n before,
And League, that He upon the Altar {wore,
Unmindeful ,; Rites of Hofpitality,
And Feafts, that what was done could Teftifie
His Faith, and Truft, chang’d by an Impious Flame
Of Love, He had infring’d, and’s Crown became
The purchafe of hisBed. Great Hafdrubal
A Virgin Daughter had, Efteem’d by all
As Beautiful, as her Defcent was fam’‘d,
She taken to his Bed, as if inflam’d
With his firft Nuptial Taper, fuddenly,,
His Foreesallto Carthageturn'd. The‘! Ty
Of Amity with Rome Heviolates,
And tothe Fo his Dotal Arms tranflates:
But Scipio, careful to advife the King,
Bids him be Faithful to obferve tliething,
That he had Sworn, and nottoviolate
The Laws of Peace, but firmly to his State,
And Kingdom ftand. Te call the Gods to Minde,
And Deeds, that Hofpitality did binde. |
That


Sitius Irartcus,


Book XVII.


That farr his Nuptials, farr his Zprian Bride
Would be ‘mong Romane Arms, if He deny’d
What they demanded, he fhould quickly finde,
That weak Obedience of too foft, and kinde

A\ Husband, and his Bed’s fo ardent Heats


_ Should ftand in Blood. Thus, intermixing Threats,


Scipio advis'd the King, whofe ‘s) Wife before

Had ftop’d his Ears. And, when Advice no more
Took place, He fummons all his Swords agen,
Attefting the Chaft Altars of the then-

Polluted League, and inthe War proceeds

With various Arts. With Huts of flender Reeds,
And Fenny Flags, fuch as the Ruftick Moor

Selects to thatch his Homely Cottage or’e,

The Libyan Camp was fill’d. This he afsail'd

By Stealth, and fecret F lames with Targets vail’d,
Scatter’d in Dead of Night, which, as they run
Diffus'd ¢ like aContagion ) and begun Ww
With mighty Noife, through th’ Unauous Foe Ate |
To make, through all the Air their Light difplay,
And by their active Heat the Rafters fall,
The Hoftile Mifcheif, like a Storm, through all
The Camp goes on, and on the arid Reeds,

With frequent Cracks, devouring Vulcan feeds.

Sad burnings in all Quarters rife, and fome,

Before they could perceiv’t, excited from
Their Sleep, are feiz’d by Fire, and, as for Aid,

In vain, they call, their Faces Flames invade.

The Lemnian God appears in ev'ry Place

A Conquerour, and in his‘dire Embrace (High
Deftroys both Arms, and Men. The Plague fwells
And through theClouds the half-burntCamp doth fly,
In glowing Afhes : Then, with difmal Sounds,

And a prodigious Leap, the Fire farrounds

; The


Cg) Sophoyishe,


St ates ae MA gr a 7. Eh PN etre A Me SN, ke ae SR UT mR hE OPEN gry WRB sete ee
os a ae ita ‘3 ee, vee an .


486


Srrius Iraticus, BookXVIL.


The Affaule of the Romanes, (b ry “T° ; :
fetiieg, the Huts of the Namidiant () The King’s Pavilion, and had fadly there


Camp on Fire, was fofudden, tha
Sophie fled, Naked, out of hisBed


* Devour'd the Man, had not his Guards, through Fear


d hardly efcaped their Hands, : . .3
after which, he joynedhis Camp with OF Danger, (while amaz’d He much enquir'd)


the Carthaginians.


Him from his Sleep, and Bed, by Force, retir'd. ~
But,when, within one Gamp, the Zyrian, and
» Syphax their Strength had joyn’d,and through the Land
Call'd thither, all in Arms, the Youth, agen,
The Wounds of that fad Night had eafed: then
Shame, Anger, and (third pernicious Fire)
His Wife into his Minde new Rage infpire. _
And now, He, threatning, ftorms, his Face fhould be
Blafted by burning of his Camp : that He
Should, Naked, hardly {cape the Fo by Flight,
Amidft his trembling Troops. But inthe Light,
In clearer Day, and lefs perfidious View _
OF Heav’n, no mortal Syphax could fubdue.
Thus Foolithly herants: while Fatehis Pride,
And Breath concluding, would no more abide ;
But cuts the Thread of this vain {welling Tongue:
For foon, as He (like Floods,that draw along
Whole Groves, and Rocks, and like {wift Torrents, go
Through devious Ways, and all the Banks o'reflow
With foaming Waves) leap’d from his Camp, He preft
His furious Courfer on, before the reft
And bids his Troops advance. The other Side:
~ CAnoble,fober Army) whenthey {py'd
The King far off, {nateh’d up their Arms, and ftrait
March on, and fingly with themfelves debate.
See there: See how this proud Maffylian King, -
Infulting, at his Army's Head, doth bring
Them on, and for the Combat calls. Oh! may —
This my Right-hand that Honeur gain to Day.
The Sacred Altarsofthe Gods he hath _
Defil'd, and hath infring’d his League, and Faith,
With


Book XVII. Sirius Iraticus, | 487


With our chat. General, Oh! mayitbe —
Sufficient ( Gods) - that once, already, He —
From his burnt-Camp efcap‘d ! Thisin their Hearts
Refolv'd, chey all, contending, lance their Darts.

In the Fire-breathing Noftrils of his Steed,


_A Jav'lin, that furpals'd the reft in Speed,


Was fix'd: By which the Beaft erected ftood,

And with his bounding Heels (his Jaws with Blood ©
Oreflowing)) beat the Air; then backward to

The Ground he fell, and, with a Spear pierc’d through,
As ev'ry Way he tofs’d his Limbs, betrai’d

His Rider to the Fo: who Him invade,

As He, in vain, endeavour'd from the Ground
Torife, and fly; and, drawing from the Wound

The Weapon,feize Him. Then the Shame of Chains,
And Gyves, they add; while He toallremains _

A great Example, never to rely .

Upon Profperity. And now, they ty |

In Manacles his Scepter-bearing Hands :


~ And He, that,’ lately, faw fo many Lands


Beneath his Feet : that Scepters, atid the Sea, _


_ Thatto the Ocean's bounds extended lay,


Under his Nod beheld, thrown from the Head
OF all his Kingdoms, is in Triumph led.

His Strength thus overthrown, the Lidyans are
Cut off: while hated by the God of War.
And known for frequent Flight, (that Enterprize

Condemn’d) with Speed, the Zyrian Captain flies,

(+) Carthage on one fole Man (her Members all

Thusruin‘d) now rely’d. And Hannibal, bar Deni ane deni
Ev’n with his abfent Name, the Frame fuftain’d, Fein, ennely Ero
Falling with fo great Noife : now,what remain’d

Was, that ev'n Fainting, and diftrefs'd for Aid,
They fhould invite him Home. To this, affraid


(i) After this overthrow, there


?


They


— 488


 §rrius Iracicus. Book XVII.


They all affent, when they perceiy'd, they were
Forfaken by the Gods. And ftrait they are |
Difpatch’d, who with the Ship, the Briny Main
Might pafs with Speed, to call him Home again,
And with the Senate's Mandate thus advife.


‘Hafte Hannibal ; left, through Delay, thine Eyes


Carthage in Ruins fee. Oh! be.not flow

T'alsift thy falling Country, and the Fo

From thefe our Walls repell. Thus charg'd, away
They {ail'd, and, on the fourth enfuing Day, |
The Veffel brought them to th” Italian Shore ;


_ Where cruel Dreams the General's Minde full fore


(k) See the Continuation, Book, the
Fir. .


Difturb’d. For asby Night, oppreft with Care,
He flept, Flaminius, Gracchus, Paulus : there,
Seem‘d with their naked Swords t’affault him, and
Together drive him from th’ Aufonian Land.
With thefe, of dreadful Ghofts,an Army : all
That did at Zbraftmen, and Canna fall,
Appear to chaee him to the Sea. While He 2a
Endeavour'd to the well-known Alps to flee.
Then Italy embracing in his Arms,


To it he ftuck, untill Prodigious Storms :


Forc'd him to Sea, and in a Tempetft fent

Him Home again, Thusdeepin Difcontent,

And with his Dreams perplex'd, to him they came,
And their Inftructions, in the Senate's Name,

With the great Danger of the State declare.

How the Mafylian Forces routed were ;

Their Prince,his Captive Neck,with Chains opprels'd


_ Kept‘® anew Pomp for fove: and, how diftrefs'd


Carthage, by Hafdrubal's not fingle Flight,

Was fhaken, and how they, in dead of Night,

(Sadtorelate) had {een both Camps (conjoyn'd)

Afire, while th’ impious Flames through Africk thin’d.
Impofe


Book XVII. Sitrus Iraticus, | 489


~ Andthat the furious Youth ( while Hannibal


Still kept the Bratian Coaft ) then threatned all


| With FiretoRuin: That the Fall drew nigh .


OF (Carthage. To what Country fhould they fly «
And his great Deeds ( what Slaughters he had made —
In Italy ) relate? When this they'd faid,

And all their Woes, and Fears had laid before

His Eyes ; they wept, and his Right-Hand adore,
Like fome great God. He, witha ftern Afpect


_ Fix’d on the Ground, hears all, and doth refle&


With Silence on their Words, and weighs with Care,
If Carthage of {o great a Value were.

Atlength, Hethusreply’d : OhEnvy! Thou

Dire Fo to Man, who never wilt allow

Encreafe to things, or, that great Praife fhould grow
Unto agreater Height. Not longago

I level with the Ground could Rome, fubdu'd, a
Have lay’d, and Captive into Servitude

Have led the Nation, and on Italy


— Our Lawsimpos’d. But, while at Hometo Me


( Their General} they Pay, and Arms deny;
Nor my Troops, wafted with Succefs, fupply -
With freth Recruits ; and Hanno thitks it good
My Goborts to defraud of Gorn, and Food :

All 4frickis on Fire, and ‘Romane Spears

Puth at (admeian Gates. Now, it appears,
That Hannibal's his Country's Glory, and


Her fole Support: and now, in this Right-Hand


Ly all your Hopes. Well, Homeward turn,with Speed,

Our Enfigns, as the Senate hath decreed.

I both my Country’s Walls, and ¢ Hanno) Thee

Together will preferve. All this when He

Had thunder’d out, ftrait from the Shore to Sea

He lanc’d his Fleet, and ‘” Sighing fail’¢ away.
Tee


(1) When Hannibal was at Sea
(faith Livy) he often looked back to-
wards Jtaly , accufing both the Gods,
and Men, for reducing his great Defigns
Qné _ tothat Neceffity.


Sirius Iraricuse Book XVII.


None durft their’ Backs, as they put off, invade,
Or Him recal. Heav'n feeming to perfwade,


He theuld, of ‘s own accord,thus hafte away,


And Italy, atlength, be freed: they pray
For Windes, and think it is enough agen
To fee the Coaft fo freed of Foes. As, when
Aufter doth his impetuous Blafts reftrain,
And, by retiring, calms the foaming Main,
The Sea-man then, not Prodigal of Pray’rs,
Defireth not fo much as gentle Airs;
Content,that JV otus thould intirely ceafe,
A\nd by the Sea’s fmooth Courfe efteems his Peace.
The Tyrian Soldiers, all, their Faces bent

Towards the Main. But Hannibal, intent,

With fixed Eyes, held Italy in view,

While filent Tears, with frequent Sighs, bedew

His Cheeks, as if he had been driven from

His Country, and had left his deareft Home,

Forc’d to fome Defert Lands. But when,with Sails
Tack’d clofe, the Ships made Way with fwifter Gales,
And by Degrees, the Hills began to draw -

Their Summits down, that now He neither {aw
Hefperian Mountains, nor the Daunian Coatt:

Thus, fretting with himfelf; What have I loft

My Senfe, unworthy toreturn (faid He )

Ev'n thus, when ever I from Italy

Withdrawmy felf: in Flames firft Carthage all
Should perifh, and the Name of Dido Fall.

WasI not Mad, when, after Canne’s F ield,

From the Tarpeian Temples I withheld

My burning Weapons,nor the Thunderer (ftomWar
Dragg‘d from his Threne, through the fev'n Hills.
Now free? my Flames might have {eatter’d then,
And on that haughty Nation brought agen


Troy's


Book XVIL Sirius Irauieus.


Troy's Rinins, arid their Grand-fires Fate: - ‘But: bung
Should this Aiflia me? Who forbids, that I’
Should now invade them with my Sword, and; igo
Directly tothei¢ Walls? “It thall beifo ¢


And, through théfe very Lines returhing, where < . |


Jonce encamped lay, I willrépair

To Anyo’s Waters, by a Way to Me |

Well-known. Then turn your Prows for Italy,

And tack-about the Fleet; 1'le make, ‘fiat Rome,

Befieg’d, fhall call again her StipioHome. .
But, when the God of Seas perceiy'd, he burn'd’


~ With fo great Rage, and that they now had turn’d,


Towards the Shore again, their thining Prows,
Strait , fhaking his Coerulean Head, he throws — |
“Waves fromthe Bottom, and the {welling Main


Extrudes beyond its Bounds. Then Windes jand Rain, |


With black olian Storms, from Rocks arife,

And cover from their Sight, with Clouds, the Skies,
Then, with his Trident, »moving all the Sea, :
Blew Tethys from the Rifir ing of the Day,

And Fall, he drives, and the whole Ocean's Face
Diftracts, The foaming Billows rife apace,
And make the Rocks to fhake, on which they beat.
Firft Anfler, from his NCa/amonian Seat,

Leaps forth, from the loofe Sands the Water flings,
A\nd leaves them bare. Him, on his gloomy Wings,
Fierce Boreas, bearing high a broken Sea,

Purfues. Then thund’ring, in another Way,

With adverfe Blafis, Cloud-raifing Enrus rowls

Part of the Ocean on : the crac king Poles
Bellow aloud ; while frequent Lightning flies,
Asif upon the Fleet che angry Skies
Would fall. The rage of Windes,and Lightning Rain,
And Waves confent, and Darknefs on the Main

Tee Impofeth


fa


“pt


492


‘Sirius \TaLi cus. Book XVII.


facia Night. : Now, coming fronya Rock

A furious Whirl-winde, rais'd by AC orm, ftruck
The Yards, and whiftling Dreadfully among

The Shrouds, a Billow, like a Mountain, flung
Againft the General’ s pale-Face. His Eyes

Ee turning to the Sea, and to the Skies, .

Exclaims; O Happy Brother, Ha/drubal,

And to the Gods made equal,inthy Fall!
Thy valiant Hand in Fight didtheeafford =,
A noble Death Fate did to thee accord, ,
That with thy Teeth, at lealt, on Italy

Thou dying mighr'ft lay-hold. But unto Me,

In Canna’s Field, where noble Paulus dy'd,

And thofe renowned Souls, Death was deny’d,
Nor,when I would have fir'd the Capitol,

Could I by fove's Tarpeian Thunder Fal.

While thus he moans, w ith fev'ral Blafts impell’d,
The Waves, on either Side rufh’d on, and held
Witch their dark Heaps the Veffel down, as drown’d
By that rude Shock, Strait, Whirling {wiftly round,
The Sands, rais‘d high into the Air, it flung
Again, where,pois'd by th’ Windes,on Waves a
But ‘gainft rough Stones,and Rocks (fad te behold )
NCotus two Gallies with hard Foreune roll'd.

The Prows crack’d with the Fall, and with a Sound.
Of Dread, the broken Barks aloft rebound
From the Sharp Stones. Strait, over all the Sea,
A various Face of things. Here Helmets they,
Arms, Crimfon Cretfts, and Capua’s Treafure fee,
And arich Prize, with Care referv'd, to be
A Trophy for the Gen'rals Triumph. There
Tripods, and Tables of the Gods appear,
And Sacred Statues, that, in vain, before
The Miferable Latines did adore,

When


Book XVII. Sirius Iraricus.
When Venus, frighted, that the Ocean.
So high was mov'd, to Neptune thus began.
This Fury, and thefe Threat‘nings (Father ) may.
epuftice for greater things, now {pare (I pray)
Thy Seas, left envious Carthage boatt, that She
A Man hath generated, not to be.
Subdu’d in War, and, that to work the Fall
OF Hannibal, the Romanes needed all
Thy Rage, and Seas, Thus /, enus {poke, and trait
Their Fury all the {welling Waves abate, |
And tow’rds the adverfe Camp the Nayy. drive, .
Their Gen'ral, oldin Arms, and skill‘d to give
Encouragement with Praife, their Mindes, infpir'd
With Anger by thefe furious Words, and fir'd
Their Brefts with Flames of Honour. Thou, to Me,
Plaminins bleeding Head, when flain (faid He)
Didft bring. I know thy Hand: Thoeu,firft of all,
Cam'ft into ftrike, at mighty Paulus Fall,
And in his Bones didft fix chy fatal Sosa,
Th’ Opimous Spoils of ftout Marcellus were
Thy glorious Prize: and falling Gracchus flain'd
Thy Sword. But, there, behold that Valiant Hand
Which, witha Jav'lin, Warlike e4 ppius ( whe
Then ftorm'd the Walls of wealthy Capua) threw
Dead from the lofty Ramparts: and here fee
Another Thunder-bole of Valour! He
It was, who Falvins, a Name renown’d,
Pierc’d through the Breaft,not with a fingle Wound.
Stand thou here in the Van, who didft in Arms
Conful Crifpinus kill, Me,through the Storms
Of Fight, do thouattend, who( I the thing
Remember well ) pleas‘d in thy Rage, didft bring,
At (anne's Field, the ‘”) Gen'ral's Head to Mee,
Fix'd on afervile Lance. Braye Youth, I fee


Thy


OS ARENT TSR SEYRET TD TOT Saal Bedi ta a. itera RMR aS cece
an a Ne 2: > ° ae . eA Ne:


xo4 Sirius Iraricus. seslaeeen |) Book XVI. Sirius ao =


Thy burning Eys, and’ ‘Afpect, that hath more


OF. my Chaft Wits, and Son return again.


Of Terrourjthen thy ‘Sword ; fuch,as before, =” Ze This the laft Battel is, chat doth remain
Thee’ whe’ TL vibuiie: ‘that in vain withftood, - 2 ; To Libya, and to Rome. This Day our Sword © .
; Crufkid by thy ftrong. Embrace, i ith’ cruel Flood ane | Shall giveto the difputed World its Lord.
Of famouisfrebia drown'd) Ididbehold. 2”, | ___ Thus Hannibal, But, astheir General
But Thou, who, firft, didit at ‘the Banks of | cold” a Began to fpeak, the Romane Soldiers call
Tictnus, in old Scipio’ s Bidod imbrue — he ee For Battel, and the Sisal; not abidé
Thy Sword, thy former Enterprize purfae,- — ‘i | ' ‘Delays of Words. Allthis when Fove elpy'd
Andithe Soii’s Blood prefentme now. ° Shall T ee, i , His Wife, at diftance, ina Cloud of hae
Fear ev'n the Gods themfelves, when Thow art by; Behold, and that her eager Looksdid wear
Should they t édme to the Battel 2 °-T beheld, : Something of Sadnefs, to her withthiskinde
"When thou'didtt trample on the Hills, that fwell d | ~~ Addrefs He goes. What Tormients of the Minde
To Heav’ nm, ‘anid’ o’re the highett Abs didft 8° (kno. : Aftli& Thee now? J pri chee, let me know; ;
With Speéd! ‘Since,’ by whofe Sword, and Hands. I. Isit the Libyan Captain’ s overthrow,
ta) The Field of Canne. See a- |
bove, Beck the Ninth, and Tenth. ns Ef. revripa’s ‘ebpacious Fields werefird: | | Or Care of Carthage grieves Thee? do but weigh
we thou inote flowly now, by Me defir’ d, a. Within thy Thoughts the Rage of Libya
Go oft, who firlt of ‘all didit lancea Dart 2G "Gainft th’ Trojans fatal Pow’r, and Progeny,
 Againft the Darian Walls? : nor willing art In violating Leagues. Say what will be
To joynunto out’ Praifé? mutt | again. The End of this Rebellious People ? None,
Thee now excite? Thee, who "gainkt Storms of Rain, Not (arthage,more of Ills hath un dergone,
Thunder, and: Lightning, and, when I did ftand Or Labour, then thy Self: who long haft teil’
Fove's Fury, didit; as fierce.as He, command a For the (admean Raee. Thow haft embroil’d
T endure thofé‘vainer Stormis,and wentft before The Seas, and Earth, and into Italy
Thy Genral td the Capitol. No more : Haft fenta furious Youth, while we might fee
Need I exhort younow, who, bya War The Walls of Rome ftand trembling, and of all
So fam’d, Saguntbus overthrew ; and are Man-kinde, for Sixteen Years, was Hannibal
Renown'd for thole Beginnings: now again ~ - The Chief. ’Tistime the Nation to compofe, —
( Asit becomes your felves,and Me ) maintain . _ The Periodis come, and we niutt clofe
The former Praifesof your Valour. | The Gatesof War. The fuppliant Queen reply'd.
I'th’ favour of the Gods, and Victory - Norin that hanging Cloud did I abide,
Grown old, now, after Fifteen Years, on You With a Defign, a Day prefix’d, at all,
Relying, tomy falling Country, to , _ Tochange; nor yet the Armies to recall ;
Thofe Houfe-hold Gods, that in fo long a {pace - Nor Warextend: but what You can beftow,
Of Time I have not feen, to the Embrace ( Sincs now ali Favour towards meis low,


— Gitirus TraLicus. Book XVII.


496


.. And our firft Love's decay’d ). ‘gainft Fates Decree

I nothing ask. Let Hannibal now flee

His Eneimies, as you are pleas‘d t’ordain,

And let, in, Carthage, Romang Ashes reign. ~~

By th’ mutual Blédges of adouble'Love,. ~

Thy Wife, and Sifter, I thisonely ( fove )
Intreat, that my brave Captain may furvive

All Dangers, and be kept, by Thee, Alive.

Nor let him, Captiv’d, Latian Fetters wear; -
But, let thefe, my dear Walls, that batter'dare:
With Mifries (though the Tyrian Name decline }
Stand,.and, for’Honour's fake, be keptas Mine.
Thus Fuso: Towhom fove this fhort Reply
Vouchfaf’d. The Walls of lofty Carthage 1


Will, for fome time, forbear, as you defire,


And grant them to your Pray's, and Tears, entire -


Toftand. Yetknow (dear Wife) at whata rate
I this indulge ;. not long, that City’s Fate
Endures. For there will comea General,
(0) ScipioeAmifianss, who,inthe Who, under the fame‘ Name, will ruin all
aor aaa rorks ant © Thefe Tow'rs preferv'd. And, from this fatal Fight
Efcaping, Hannibal Ethereal Light
( AtthisEntreaty ) may enjoy a while.
Hee’'l feek the Stars, and Ocean to embroil,
And with returning Armsto fill the Harth.
L know his Heart, full pregnant witha Birth
(>) OF War. Butto this Boon this fhall remain
A Law: He never muft behold again
Saturnus Empire ; nor to Italy
Return, From inftant Death now let him be
Remov‘d, with Speed; left, if ith’ open Plain
He joyn in Battel, he fhould not again,
By all thy Pow’r, from Scipio's Hand be freed.
While thus their Fates the Thunderer decreed,


(p) The War, which afterwards
enfued under Antiochus, See the Com
tinnation, Bock, the Third.,


Both


Book XVII. Sitrus IrTaticus.


497


Both to the City; and to Hannibal.
The Armies to the Fight advance aid all
With Shouts, invade the Skies. Earth, in no Age
Before, two mightier Nations did engage . | | |
In Fight: nor greater Generals had feen,
Equal in Arms, contending. While, beweda
Thefe two, their fam’d Difpute’s un-valu'd Prize. -
Was what(oe're is cover’d with the Skies.
The Tyrian, rich in P urple, ‘bove the reft
Rais’d his proud Head : upon his Crimfon Creft -
A waving Plume. A cruel Dread precedes
From his great Name: his Sworda Lightning fheds»
Well-known to Izaly. On th’ other Side
Scipio, in radiant Robes, in Scarlet dy‘d,
His dreadful Target fhews ; where, breathing War.
His Father's Image, and his Uncle’s are.
Engrav‘d: Huge Flames from hishigh Fore-head fly
And thus the Hopes of all, and Victory y.
( Under fo great a Force of Arms, and Men) \
Stood in the Generals alone. Andthen — , |
Thus Fear, or Favour (as ‘tis often feen )
Suggefts. If valiant Scipio had been
In Libya born, the Empire might have come
Tp Agenorean Nephews. Or, had Rome
Giv'n Birth to Hannibal, then doubtlefs He
The World had fubject made to Italy.
Now rapid Storms of flying Shafts brake through
The Air, and with them Clouds of Horrour drew :
Then to the Sword more clofe each Army came
And Fight it Face to Face. A dreadful Flame
Burns in their Eys, and thofe, that in the Van,
Contemning Danger, firft the Charge began,
Between both Armies fell; and, long before
Not feen by them, the Earth drunk Native Gore.


Luu But -


498.


(4) Philip , King {of Afacedon : of
whom fee Book, the Fifteenth, Page 430.


Sitius JTALicus.


But here, in Courage hot, as He was Young,
Stout Mafaniffa flings himlelf among
The Adacedonian Cohorts, and flies round :


About, with’s winged Darts, the comaeee Ground,


So, when the painted Britain goes to War,

He circumvents with his hook-bearing Carr...
The thronged Bands. - A Grecian Phalanx then,
Ina clofe Body, had drawn uptheir Men, |


( As was their Country's Ufe }) and firmly ftood,


With intermingled Spears, to make it good.
Unmindeful of the Compact he had made
After the League, thefe ‘7 Phitipto the Aid
OF Cadiwu: fhaken City fent, And now,
Broken with many Wounds, the Soldiers grow
More thin, and, ason ev'ry Side they lay
Proftrate upon the Ground, an apen Way
Between the Weapons leave. Then, with a Stroke,
OF Ruin, in th’ eAufonian Cohorts broke,
And cancell all their Grecian Perjuries:
Archemorus by Rutulus , Teucer dies

By ftout ACorbanus, in declining Age :

Both by their Mother Mantua fent (engage
In Arms. But Samjus brave Calénus flue:
And Selus Clytus ( a Pellzan) who

Vainly infulted in his Country’s Name.


(>) TheCity, where Alexander the But alafs (/ytus! “twas not ‘”) Pella’s Fame,


Great was born


That could from Daunian Darts defend thee here.
But Leiins, with Upbraidings more fevere


(4) OF thele fee above, Bkthe Then thefe, the’) Brutian Bands, of Latine Race,


Eleventh, Page 296.


‘Deftroys. Was Italy fo Vile a Place,
Thatit, vith Zyrian Oars, Youthus ( {aid He)


Through the rude Seas, and raging Waves fhould flee?


But’tis enough, that youare fled. Will You
With Latine Blood a forein Land imbrue?


This


Book XVII.


Book XVII. Sirius Iraticus,
This aids He Silarus, active in the Fight,
Prevented with a Shaft, that in its Flight

Stuck in the Bottoni of his Throat: fohard <.
It flew, that it, at once, the Paflage barr’d


— Of Life, and Voice. Vergilius deftroy’d


Candinus. By Amanus Sarris dy'd.
Their Looks, and Habit of their Arms, well-known,
And Language, that concorded with their own,
[nilam’d their Rage. Whom when Amilcar's Son
Perceiv'd inclining from the Fight to run,


-Hecries; Betray not thus our Nation ; ftand


Then charg’d, and turn’d the Battel with his Hand.
As when a Parethonian Snake, that long,

P'th’ Garamantian Fields, was fed among

The fervent Sands, with Poifon fwell’d, doth rear |
His Neck, and {pouts, through the infected Air,
The flowing Venom to the Skies : fo He

Herjus (that with his Spear continually

Dealt Wounds, who of Marrucian Lineage came,

And in Theaté had a noble Name )

More nimble, ftops, and, as he fomething high

Attempted, feeking with his Enemy ,

An equal Praife, with a fwift Hand, quite through |


. His Body drives his fatal Weapon to


The Hilts, The Wounded falls, and, ashe lies -
Proftrate, his Brother feeks with dying Eyes =
When Young Pleminius came onapace,

And, brandifhing his Sword before his Face,
Enrag’d at his fad Fall with a loud Cry,
Threatning, demands his Brother. This Reply


- Gave Hannibal ; \ thall refufe no mare


CIf you think fit } yeur Brother to reftore,
On this Condition, that from Shades below

You Hafdrubal recall. Shall I forego ;
: Uuu2 | My


‘F068


| ‘Sirius Iraricus. Book XVII


My jafter Hate: ‘gainft fuck as ‘Romanes are ©.
Or fhall {lee my Heare relent? and {pare
One, born on the Italian Greund: then may
The Ghofts me, asa Fo, from thence where they
Abide, expell! Then may my Brother Me
For ever banifh his Society

In dark Avernus! Speaking thus, heran

With all the Weight of ’s Shield upon the Man,
And where the Earth, made flipp'ry with the Blood
Of’s Brother ,fail'd him, as he Fighting ftood,
Fel'd, and with’s Sword: difpatch’d him on the Place :
While with extended Hands in his Embrace

He proftrate Herixs held, and eas'd his weight

Of Grief, by fharing in his Brother's Fate,

The Libyan then a Body mix'd in Fight

Invades, and rufhing on, his Foesto Flight

Turn‘da long way. As,when,with Thunder hurl'd
Th’ Zitnéan Bolts of ove affright the World,

And his high Palace thake, a Pannick Fright


ipteatoa need.


Makes all Man-kinde to quake, th’ Obortive Light


‘With Horrouréhines, and fave feems ready, by
Each Man, at him tolet his Lightning fly.
But in another Quarter, as if there

Where Scipio fought, the onely Danger were,

A bloody Fight new Forms of Death Creates

In various Shapes. A Sword this penetrates,
And down he falls : That lamentably Greans,
A Stone in pieces. crufhing all his Bones.
Some,bafely flying,on their Faces are,
Through Fear,Precipicated, “Gainft the War,
Others, with Valour arm’d, their Breafts oppufe,
While the Rpeseian Gew'ral forward goes

O're the dead Heaps. As when the God of War
With Slaughter pleasd,thakes his Bifonian ae

: ear


_ Book XVIL Sirius Iranrcus, ‘gor


Near frozen Hebras, and the Getick Snow .
Melts with warm Blood, and Ice, by *) Aguilo
Augmented, with his ratling Chariot’s weight
Afunder breaks. Now witha dreadful Heat,
Lookiag about, He ev'ry valianc Name ( Fame
With's Sword affails. There through the World for
Of Slaughters known, among their W eapons, falls '
Onev'ry Side, che Youth, that ftorm‘d thy Walls

( Sagunthus) and a War moft Cruel in

Thy miferable Ruins did begin. —

There; who the Sacred Thrafimen with Blood

Had ftairied, and the Phaétontian Flood

Polluted, who the Boldnefs had to move

Their Arms, to fack the Houfe, and Throne of Fove,

Inone vaft Ruin fell. There they were flain, _

Who did the Secrets of the Gads prophane, |

And firlt the ef ips, prohibited, had prefs’d

With mortal Steps. The Army, all poffefvd

With Fear, in hafte difcouraged retire.

A\s, through a Cities Houfes, when the Fire

Diftufed runs, and ventilated by

A rapid Winde, the active Flames do fly

UptotheSkies, ftruck with a fudden Fear,

And Trembling, as the City captive were

The People run, diftracted ev'ry Way.

But Scipio, now grown weary with Delay,

So to purfue thofe fcarter’d Combats, or

To be detained in fo lighta War,

Refolv'd his Force upon the Caufe of all

Thofe Ills, and War toturn. For, Hannibal ;

Alone that Day furviving, t-wouldbe —

No Benefit at allto Italy, :

Should Carthage Walls be fet on Fire,andall

Their Armies overthrown. But fhould He fall

| Alone,


(+) The North-Winde!


FOL


Strius Iraricus. BookXVIE


Alone, not all their-Arms, and Men. would ought
Avail the Libyans. Him he therefore fought,
And fearch’d, through all the Field, with bufy Eyes.
Then to the thickeft of the Fight he hies,
Withing,that all ef ufonia, if He there

Should him encounter, the Spectatours were.

And bold, witha fierce Voice,his Fo doth cite
CUpbraiding him) untoanother Fight.

Which Language when affrighted Funohears :
Left it fhould toueh the Libyan Gaptain’s Kars,
Sh’ informs a Romane Shape , which (trait affumes
‘Th Italian Prince's fhining Creft,his Plumes,

And Shield, and fpreads his radiant Caffock’s Grace
Upon his Shoulders. Then She adds his Pace,
And Habit ; fach,as him She did behold
Provoking to the Fight : and Motion bold,
Without a Body, gives. Atlength,a Steed,

Like falfe, and vain,She forms, that runs with Speed
Through devious Ways, and offersto the Sight
The Image of a Warlike Shade, in Fight. |

Thus Scipio, fain'd by Fano,proudly to

The Fight advanc’d, and brandifh’d in the view
Of Hannibal hisSword ; who, pleas'd, his Ey
Beheld the Romane General {o nigh,

And hoping mighty things were then at Hand,
Strait claps his Heels againtt his Courfer, and,
With fudden Force, a Jav'lin at him throws.

The winged Shade turns back,and flying goes
Quite crofs the Field, beyondthe Armies. Thea, .

As if poffels’d of ’sChief Defire, agen,

With his fteel’d Heel, th’ infulting Libyan makes


- His Herfeto bleed, and ftill purfuing fhakes


Th’ enlarged Reins. O! whither doft thou tun
Forgetful, that ‘tis our Dominion


(Scipio)


‘Book. XVI.


( Scipio) where iowikes Fly’ a. Lives Thee.


“SIL Ius Iratreus, |


Affords ne-skalking Hale. Thus, proudly,he


With his drawn Sword fill follow'd, as eed
Until, deluded, by: at, he'was led ae


—. Into another Field, far ditavic from


The place of Battel ; where.no fooner come,
But the Delufive Shade to Air refolves.: *.
What God ¢ faid angry Hunnibal ) involves


Himéelf in that dark Light co Met Orwhy - > |


Doth he conceal’d within that Monfterly:
Is then my Glory. to the Gods become
So oppofite 7 Yet never fhalt thou from .


_This Hand compel, or force myFo(fadHe)  — -


By all thy Arts, whatever God thou be,

Who ftaad’ft for Italy. With that he wheel’d
Hig nimble Steed about, and.to the Field
Enrag’d returns. When ftratt, with fecret Dread
OF fudden Mifchief fhock’d, upon his Head
Down fell his Courfer, and,by Funo's care,
Breath’d from his panting Breaft his Lifeto Air.
But then, Impatient, This again (aid He)
This is your Plot ( ye Gods } nor do you me
Deceive : | better by the Rocks had bin
O'rewhelm’ d; I better had been drowned in
The Waves, a Seas. Wasl preferved then
To this vile Death? while thofe unhappy Men,
That have my Enfigns follow’d, and from Me
Alone receiv'd a Battel's Augury,

Are flaughter'd, and {, abfent, underftand


Their Groans stheir Voice,and Words »asthey demand


Their Hannibal. What Stygian Torrent is
Sufficient to wah off my Sin? Asthis

He {pake, on’s Right-Hand with an carneft Ey
He look’d, enflam’d with a Defire to Dy.


503


Sirius Iranicus. BookXVIL.


re


But uno; pitying the Man, 'affumes: -
A Sheepherd’s Face, and, on a fudden, comes: ’
From the thisk Woods ; aad; as hethought to Dy
A Death Inglorious, thus accofts Him: Why,
So arm’d, to thefe Our Woods do you repair ¢
Would you go to that:cruel Battel, where .
Great Hannibal in Arms the reft fubdues
OF the Asfonian Armies? If you'l-choole
The fpeedy, and compendious Way to go
Into the Thickeft of them, I willfhow . _
The neareft Tra&. Tothis He ftrait agrees,
And onerates with ample Promifes
The,Sheepherd’s Breaft : and tells him, that the State
OF Carthage would his Pains remunerate
W ith large Rewards, and-He would give as great.
Thus Eager, hafting o’re the next Retreat
With largeft Sceps, the Goddels him conveys, ©
Deceiv'd by Intricacy of the Ways,
In Circles, and, her felf concealing ftill,
Gave him unwellcome Safety ‘gainft his Will.
But the Cadméan Troops, forfaken all,
And fullof Fear, fecing no Hannibal,
Nor the known Conflicts of their furious Chief,
Some think him flain, others are of Belief,
That He, concluding all was loft, withdrew
From the Sinifter Gods. And now, in View,
The Romane Gen'ral ( likea Storm) amain
Came on, and chas’d them thorough all the Plain.
Carthage her felfthen trembled : Pannick Dread
Through 4frick by the routed Troops is fpread.
And, without Fighting, as they Head-long fly,
To their extreameft Bounds they, frighted hie.


~ Someto Tartefsiack Coafts difperfed are;


Others to Battus Lands, and Nile repair.


So


_ So, whgn; by fecret Force o’recome, at laft


Book. XVII. Sirius Iratreus.


Ve/wvius to the Stars his Flames doth caft,


Through many Ages fed, o’re Sea, and Land
The Fire's diffus'd:' th’ Euan Seres ftand


_ &Amaz‘d, beholding a Prodigious Sight,


(*) Their filken Groves with Latian Athes White.
But now, atlength, the weary General

To th’ neighbrring Hill Saturnia brought, where all
The Face, and Signs o’th bloody Fight more near
Hefaw. Such as Garganus did appear ;

Such as the Lyrrben Lake, and Trebia's Flood,
And Swift Eridanus, with Humane Blood
O'reflowing, he beheld. Such a dire Face

Was fhown of Myriads flaughter’d on the Place.


- Thentroubled Fano re-afcends the Skie,


And, climbing up the Hill, the Fodrew nigh ,
When Hannibal chus with himfelf: Though all
The Fabrick of the Heav'ns diflolv'd thould fall


On thismy Flead ; and Earth fhould open wide : _


Yet fhall the Fame of (anne ( Fove) abide;


_ And fooner from thy Empire thale Thou fall,


Then inthe Deeds, and Nameof Hannibal,
The World be filent. Nor, from this my Hand,
Secure (Q Rome) fhale chou for ever ftand.

I, againft Thee, my Country’s Hope will live,
Foranew War. For that Thou now doft thrive
In Fight, is ‘caufe thy Foes fit fill. To Me
More then enough itis, that Italy,

And Dardan Mothers, while | live, will there
Expect Me, and ne‘re lay afide their Fear.

Then, witha few, that fled away, he gets

Back to the Hills, and more fecure Retreats,
Here the ‘~) War's Period was. To Scipio

Strait, of their own Accord, they open throw


505


(#8) Vefuvins, che Famous Moun-
tain near Naples, hath had fever E-
ruptions of Fire, to the great Ter-
rour, and Detriment of the Inhabi-
tants of Campania, and other Parts;
the A thes flying almoft incredibly (as
Dioaffirms) from thenceinto Africk,
and Afia, as far as rie sand, atone
time covering two Towns, Herenlanc-
sme, and Pompeios with the Inhabitants,
as they were in the Theater. See dm-

brofius Leo, De Agro Nolano: and
of its laft Conflagration, in our Me~
mory, fee Salvator Varo, Vefuviani
Incendii Neap. 1634.


(*) After this overthrow all parts
ave Way to Scipio, and Carthage it
elf fubmmted to the Power of the Rc-

manes,who deprived them of all things,
but their own Laws: after which
they permitted them to live, their Im-
pious Rites of Sacrificing Humane
Blood excepted. For this I take to be
the meaning of Improba jura adempta;
(though Dan(qneius otherwife ) fince,
through the whole Carthaginian Story,


we do nor finde them in ile, after the


Romanes were their Mafters ; though


they were Superftitious in them nor
long before, as appearsby our Poet's
Declamation again them, in the


x x . Their Fourth Zook,


ay Sirius Iraricus. Book XVIE Book XVII. Sirius Itaticus, ;


507


Their Gates.-. Their Impious Rites abolith’d ase. ,
Their Arms he takes away, and Laws, that were ;
Engrav'd. ‘Their Strength in Riches, and their Pride
Is overthrown, and Elephants afide . ar =A
Their Caftles lay. Atlength (to Libya


Butgftanding in his Chariot, to the View
Of ‘Rome, his Martial Facé doth Scipiofhew;
In Gold, and Zyrian Purple, richly dreft:

As, when defcendin g from the fpicy Eaft,
With Bridled Tygers, Bacchus drovealong


whe Adifmal Sight) their Fleetisfir'd: the Sea His Vine-bound Chariot: Or, when, among
cas : _ Burns with the {udden Tempeft, and the Flame The flaughter’d Gyants, in Phlegran Wars
| . . - Nereus affrights. The Gen'ral, witha Name, — eAlcides walk’d, and touch’d the very Stars,
ee That. equal fhall with Time, forever, ftand, Hail,thou Un-eonquerable Parent! who,


With the firft Title of that conquer’d Land,
Sure of that Empire, goes, by Sea, to Rome,
i ded not to . . ; . Z :
wan neti tighe Mucwonof And, in great 2) Triumph, to his Native Home“
Arma,into Arva, for it is Obvious,


‘hee dd nor ary Isborn. Before him Syphax, Captivate,
pe eee Field, but ie pax, Cap ‘


a fafficient quantity was left to defend Upon a Bier, his Eyes dejected, fate ;


them , had all other things been e-


, who, after EJ: : . is
qualto refitthe Rowers hat coud Eis Neck in golden Chains preferv’d. And here
contribute toa War. See more in the


Continntation, Bock che Tilt Hanno, and Young Phenician Nobles were :

Then eM acedonian Princes: next to thefe

The Moors, with parched Skins : then AComades,
And Garamantians known to © Horned Fove : -
Where they the Sands furvay, and Syrts, that prove


) OF this Trinmph, the moft { { hips. (4) AY a
sole of all, that we yet had Deftructive fill toS P s Next, lifting to


feen, as that, which confirmed her in


fe ae eciege ap Lhe Stars her conquer’d Hands,did Carthage go.
2 eye Then the Effigies of th’ Iberian Land,
Now Peaceable: with Gades, that doth ftand
The Period of the Earth ; and Calpe, that,
Of old, Alcides Praife did terminate :
With Batis, which the Horfes of the Sun
Is wont to bath in Streams, that gently run :
And high Pyrene, that gives Birth to Wars,
And liftsher leavy Head untothe Sears.
With rude Iberus, that, with Fury, flings
Againftthe Sea the Rivers, that he brings.
Yet nothing more delights their Mindes, and Eyes,
Then Hannibal, as in the Field he flies, |


In Praife, art equal to Quirinus, to

Camillus in Defervings | nor, when She,
Among the reft, commemorateth Thee,
‘The Offspring of the Gods, doth Rome bely


. Tarpeian Jove’s Immorrat Proceny.


is]


FINIS.


C2) Jupiter Hammon.


. But


OA |
acidic eae ae
O F


SILIUS: ITALICUS


TO
The Deatu of


HAN NIBAL,


In Three BOOKS,


By THOMAS ROSS, Ef,


LONDON,
Printed by Tuo. Rovcrorr, 1664.


TU EE EE ES
. x


. #3
neers


iS SSE > 2200. WSS =) aE)
& SS NG Peace \ Eman \ Seg ae) ee !
f iva ——— ES = _ SS ———— Sie =e


| TO THE |
RIGHT HONORABLE
WILLIAM
- Bart of


STRA FFOR D«


My Lorp,


27 Y Obligations to your Lorp-
ej suip have long fince’ called
4 for fuch Acknowledgement,
das ought to appear under the
@ Title of the Nobleft Subjed.
224 Had any, within the Profpe&


been more Eminent, then this


equateto your Merits: but,none appearing;
I have fele@ed what Sitmis left untouched, to
| raife


The Epiftle Dedicatory.


raife out of it this licle Monument of my
Gratiude; having no other Means 0 ex-
pre& ic. 1 confess, 1, ac firft, intended to adven-
ture on the Tuiro Punicx VVar; which,
though of lefsContinpance,then this Seconp,
had in icas gallant A@ions (efpecially in that
famous Siece of Carruace) as any His-
Tory doth mention: but, Confcious of the
V Veaknefs of what Ihave already built, | fear-
ed, that, by raifing, too many Stories, It mighe
fall under its own Bulk, and my felf under the


Cenfure of Ambition, in afpiring to fo greata


VVork. [have therefore ratherchofen tode-
fift, and fix this little Piece under yourLorp-
suip’s Name, as a Votive ‘Table toteftifie to


the VVorld,how muchI am,
My Lorp,


Your Lorpsuip’s
Mott humble,
and Faithful Servane,


Tuomas Ross,


Ce


OERRRIT Ty


sgh


2 ORIN ” Res val .


Ftiag es
‘anefeimo ae
Fante Rebe
TUM Supplicu


oe eae
be Ie in er
m Regis Magia.


iy 2
th


*
“A
fone CL


2G sak $
ery, SE :


~ eta, Y


bripit Tp
CML, an Si
fipue Horr pa


Comita, Linco. hn aot
Grilty oo bn ane :


Tabula bf errant “s DD


A ConTINUATION OF


SILIUS ITALICUS
HANNIBAL
The Firft Book,


Tue ARGUMENT.


The Romane Piety, and Zeal to pay
( 4t Scipio’s Return) the Vows, which they
InWar bad made. King Syphax Captive dies
By voluntary Famine. ‘Ibe fad Cries
Of Carthaginian Dames. Their Citie’s quite
Difarmd. \milce’s parting Tears. By Night,
Great Hannibal his Treach’rous Country flies ;
Sails to Cercinna : and, in Sacrifice,
‘A Day confumes. Fear ing to be betray'd 5
aries? whom he d.ubts, by Wine afleep are lay d.
eer O W had great Scipio brought
| his Trophies Home,
And with loud Triumphs fill'd
the Streets of Rome :
B The People to their num’rous
a Altars bring
# Their pleafing Off’rings, and
glad Peans fing.
Such Store of Sweets, in ev'ry Temple imoak;
As if not Libya onely felt the Yoak
OF thisgreat Conqueft: but ¢4rabia there
Her Tribute gave, and the Sabans were


Their


* That all the World, in Time to come, fhould be


Ca) Clitamnus, a River in Tfee
ny, inthe Territories of the: Falife cs
(now called Civita Caftellana) wh
fuch Bulls, as were defigned tfor Gee
fice in T “rismaphs, were wa
became White. Plin.ib. 2. cap. "103.
affected by Virgil, Georg. 2.

Hine Albi, Clitumne, greges, &c.
But, this Virtue vanifhing , they fup-
plyed the want of White, with Red
Bulls.


white Heards , and é iflims of the
( beft Eftcem,

Balls, wafo’d (Clirumnus ) én thy Sa-
cred Stream,

The Romane Triamphs to the T ce


Bat this Virtue, &c.


(8) Te was a Laudable Cuftom a-
mong the Romanes, after a Victory
obtained, to command a Feftival of
Nine Days, whercin all the People ab-
{tained from-Work, and Sacrificed to
the Gods for their Succefs, Polyb. lib.
Excerpt. legat. cap, 16.


Bulls, that with Snow, for Whitenefs, might contend,


tai: Pleas'd, that Devotion with Succefs they.fee
So duely mix’d, and grateful Piety


A Continuation of


| Book I.


Their Vaffals. Or, as if to. Prophefie,


By them fubdu'd, and ‘Rome, Triumphant, ftand’
Fhe wealthy Store-houfe of each. conquer’d Land ;


Wath'd in (+) ( litumnus facred Streams, afeend

¢ The Capitol-: their curled Foreheads Crown’d

With flowry Wreaths, their Horns with F illets bound.
Thefe all in folemn Order, round the Hill

Thrice, flowly, lead : the Joyful People fill

The trembling Air with Shouts :_ then enter, while

The Gods feem pleas‘d, and in their Statues fmile ;


‘4 To pay thofe holy Vows, which firft arofe
From Fears of Ruin, and infulting ‘Foes.
Firft,to the Queen of Gods,.aP urple Veit,
Whole rich Embroid'ry all the Art expreft
Of the Sidonian Dames, and then aCrown _
Of Gold, which, haplefs Syphax overthrown,
His Sopbonisba wore, the Matrons bring, .
And, Off ring.at: her Shrine, thus, Pious, fing.
Sifter, and Wife of Fove, Celeftial Queen, .
Whom we, fo long, fo full of. Wrath have feen ;
That Rome, almoft def pairing of, her Fate,
Saw thefe her Walls befieg’d ; let: not thy Hate
To Trojan Blood ftill prompt Thee £0 defpife: .
Our Piety: bue, with ferener Eyes, ~ ae soe
Behold Us now, and hear Us, when We pry _
And our Oblations on thine Altarslay. -
Why fhould thy Love to Libya ftill pfs
Thy Rage ‘gainft Us, who from ndas came *
Let it fuffice : We, to this very Time,
Have ectpatcd, with our Blood, that Crime ..


Of


Book I. Sitrus Iraticus. © 3


Of Paris. Oh! believe him now to be
In Us, repenting his Difdain of Thee.
Be then appeas'd! thy Mercy will no lefs,
Then doth thy Power, thy Deity confefs :
And, if at length, with other Gods, and Fate
Fhou wilt comply, to blefs the Romane State;
As Thou on theSupreameft Throne above .
The Heav'ns art feated: fo, here, next to Fove,
Thou fhalt be worfhipp’d, and the World thall.come
To bring their Off rings unto Thee at Rome.

’ The Flamen, while they thus invoke, his Hands
Difplay'd to Heav'n, at fove's high Altar ftands,
And thus exhorts. Oh! may We ever fee
Religion thus to Crown thy Viétory,
( Quirinus Progeny ) thefe Pious Charms
( Oh Rome ) will force the Gods to blefs thine Arms.
Then, O, then, let thy Piety encreafe,
As now, when War is ended, and thy Peace
Confirm: Impiety alone the Fates
Provokes, and flingeth open‘) Fanus Gates.
This faid: an hundred Bulls at once are flain,
Which, with their Blood, an hundred ‘Altars ftain.
Their Entrails all, enquir'd for what's to come,
Promifea lafting Happinefs to ‘Rome :
That She the Head of all the World thould ftand,
And next to Fove the. Univerfe command.
‘4) The Gods thus ferv'd ; they all begin to Featt,
And in their coftly Banquets {pend the reft
O'th’ Day. The Senate feated are alone,
And to great Scipio's Honour, oneby one,
A ftately Goblet quaff of Ma/fsick Wine.
His Cheeks, mean while, with modeft Bluthes thine ;
As if they‘d Fire the Laurel on his Brow,
Unwilling thofe Jutt en to allow.

z


(c) The Templeof Fanws wasal-
waies open, while the Remanes were
in War, and never fhut, but when in
Peace with all the World :it is obferv-
ed not to have been fhut above thrice,
Firlt,by N#ma. Secondly, after the -Se-
tond Punick, War: and, Lafily, by An-
gaftus Cafar.


(d} Thongh (as Plutarch obferves)
fome other Trinmphs had exceeded
chis of Scépio,in theie Pomp,andWealch,
yet none was entertained with fo mach
Joy, the Romenes being ror Onely ab.
folved from the Defpair of forcing
Hannibal ont of Italy, but Carthage
likewife wholy fubdued.


So


ETAT AT sip i


aie enna oo ee a,


* . &. Continuation of —_ Beok 1. Book. Sixrus Iraprrcus,. %


So, in the Gyants War, when Heay'n'again 5°: | Shakes the whole Habrick, untill fordhit-beeaks 3...
Was free from Fear, andmighty Zyphonflain,, Into the Air) make Way, and thushefpeaks. 0...
To Mirth themfelves the Gods difpos'd,and,round 1 Isthenshe Birth, and Title of a King,,- 3: +
The Tables, Hebe with ACepenthécrown'd — C¥eGods, from whom Kings, {prang } fo vain athing, >
Their Cups: while all Apallo’s Skill proclaim, That, with,one Shock of Fortune onely, |
: Commend his Bow, his Shafts, and csrtain Aim; ~,_ Maft fall fo low, iato Captivity, 9.
By which the Gyants fell; when they upon | As ta become their Slave to. whom, of late;
The Stars had feiz’d, and Fove's Celeftial Throne . Iwasa Terrour® Are the:Laws of Bate.
Almett poffefsd. But, back again toHell, . . | ~ OF fo greaz Force, that whatfoe're’s Defign’d
- Struck with thefe Heav'nly Arms, the Rebels fell. 7 By them, by all muft be obey’d*. muftbinde
The.folemn Day thus fpent: the Night fucceeds, . The Deities chemfelyes* Alafs! if fo,. .
Inviting allto Reft. WhileSyphax bleeds Why do poor Mortals to their Temples go,
Within: the Trampet, which their Triumphs founds, And vainly cravethas Aid; whichcannetbe 9 -:/
Grates aa his Ears, ftrikes to his Heart, and wounds Confirm’d, wolefs.the Fates the fame decree *.
His very Soul. Sometimes, He thinksupon How oftdid |, beforel took inhand: fs
echnsnceae a His former ‘*) State, when, ficing ona Throne This War, their Gounfel, and Confent demand?: ..
the Kings of Liéya, having (ete Of Native Ivory, Hedidcommand. | As oft, thein‘Fripods what | ask'd allowd..-.
and Manic) were ee, Thole Nations, which thd Althiopian Land, - And I,as often, to their Honour-yow'd
7 ee ee ad N afamon confines, with thofe, that by Dardanian Spoils. But, fince lam or’ethrawn,
The Carthaginian Bounds, and:Hammon|y ; ; -Tisnot my Crime they want them, but their own ®..:
:: With all,that South-ward dwell near Aide, and thofe, From them it was, thas‘) Sophonisbe’sCharms sli tees dodo Gilt oae
7 Where the Herculean Sea gainft Calpe throws - Prevail'd, and Head-long thruftme into Arms: uhithe Rentents, and copes aon
-. + Jets foaming Waves: when he could fummon, to Againft that Faith, which | to ‘Rome, before;
The War, whole Myriadsof Horfemen, who =: Religioufly had fworn. I would no more.
On naked Steeds did vide, and gavethem Law: - OF this complain,had we togetheridy’d.
And between Rome, and Carthage when he {aw . - — Or, had noteAL afanifabothmy Bride, . :
The World difputed was, that He had been ‘) My Throne, and Crown enjoy'd. YeGods, You. Sec
The Umpire of their Quarrel, and hadfeen . If not Unjuft.in this; atleaft, Severe. C Wig we niece isobar ps
Them both his Friendthip feek, until his Flame Elfe wherefore did I nat, when Hoftile Fire Fi ioe a
OF Love the Ruinof his Throne became. - Had feiz’'d my Camp, within thofe Flames expire? -
Sad with thefe Thoughts, that,in his troubled Breaft, Then might [ to the Shades below have gone,
Swell like a raging Tempeft, and all Reft Atieaft,a King. ThenI had onely known
Deny: at length his Sighs (that, asa Winde, The Fate of being conquer’d, not the Shame :
Within the Bowels of the Earth confin'd, Nor then had ‘Rome recorded Syphax Name «: Ps
Shakes oe : Among


A Continuation of Book I.


Among her Captives. Nor, then, had thefe Hands,
That fhook aScepter o'refo many Lands, ~~
Been thus bound up in Chains. But, why dol
Complain of Life, and not refolve to Dy ¢

What * though they ftudy to preferve mo ftill,

A living Trophy here ; yet is my Will

Free, asthe Conquerour’s: and ‘Rome {hall finde,
I ftill retain the Empire of my Minde,

That ftands above herreach, where [ alone —
Will rule, and {corn to live, but ona Throne.
This faid; a fudden Silence feiz‘d his Soul :

And,as deep Waters in ftill Chanels roul,

And, murm'riag lefs, into the Ocean flow ;

So the Refentments of his Griefs, that grow

Too great to be exprels'd, through ev'ry part,

Like a fwift Fever, runs, till his great Heart,
Refolv’d to bear that Load no more, deny’d
Nature her common Food, and, ftarv'd, He dy’d.
And, asa Lion, that hath long in Blood
Maintain’d his Empire in fome Libyan Wood,
Surpriz’d at laftin Toils, and kept to be

The Paftime of the Cirque, raging to fee

His Native Freedom loft, doth, roaring , round
” His Prifon walke, and ( with that dreadful Sound,
Was wont all other Bealts to Terrify,

And, with their Flocks, make trembling Sheepherds fly)
Shakes allabout. But, when he findes, at length,
That nor his Rage prevails, nor yet his Strength
Can his Efcape procure, all proffer'd Food

He growling flies, forgetsall thirft of Blood,
And, in Difdain of his Captivity,

Refolves in fullen Silence there to dy,

Sothat great King, to whom, not long before,
Rich Gems were from the Erythrean Shore,


For


Book I. SiILius Irattecus.


. For Tribute brought : ‘to whem, with:Lions Tame,


And towred Elephants, Getulians came,

A\nd, proftrate at his Feet, Obedience pay‘d :

At firftin Love, .then War,a Captivemade,

In a dark Dungeon dy’d, and the fole Fame,

‘) That he ‘gainft Sapio fought, preferves his Name. oa nin ckdpn
me


But while : ‘ OT his greatHeart not brooking theS
> at ‘Kome, their Triumphs full encreafe, of being lead in Triutng . That’ he


. ‘ Was a Spectacle in this Triumph, Af4-

At Carthage the fad purchale of their Peace | Pian Gti, chough Pol. Uib 16.)
- . . an ili

Shews them a Face of things, which they deplore fent, ivy (whom Silins Hollows) con:


As much, as thofe deep Wounds they had before


‘In War receiv'd,and Zama’s fatal Plain,


On which fo many Libyans were flain,

And Hannibal difarm’d. For now they fee,
That nor in Peace, nor War, they can be free.
Not all the Wealth their num‘rous Conquefts gave,
Nor Subjects, gain’d by Hannibal, could fave

Their own at Home : for, while his conqu'ring Hand
O’return’d Sagunthus, and the Iberian Land
Subdu’d, and when his Troops Pyrené patt,
The (elt gain’d, and Italy did wafte,

Their, Victories abroad (ftill calling for ©
Recruits) ascoftly prov'd, asif the War

Had been in Libya made : onely their Fear
Of Utter Ruin wasnotthen fo near.

It was not now enough, that they had feen
Thofe wealthy Trophies, that had thither been
From Sicily, fromthe Herculean Bars, .
And fartheft Nations, in preceeding Wars, _
By great ef milcar fent, tranfported all
To Rome, and there, within the Capitol,

Among gates Spoils, hung up, to be
Eternal Monuments of Infamy. —

Their dreadful Elephants, that had, folong,
Againft all ftranger Nations, been fo ftreng


A. Continuation of


A living Wall : with all the Arms,which there,
Since Dido firtt Phenician Walls did rear,

Had been ftor'd up, and had a Pannick Dread:
Over the Alps, and high Pyrene, {pread,

Are yielded to their Foes, with trembling Hands:
And conquer’d Carthage, now, as Naked ftands,
Aswhen Elixa firft her Walls begun,

Or when enrag’d Hyarbas over-run bo


 ( Fullof Revenge) her narrow Bounds, and, while —


Her Ashes yet were warm, upon her Pyle

Fix'd his victorious Arms: Nor can they fee,

By Land, a Period to their Milery.

Earth hath not {pace enough, whereon to lay

Their Chains, which now, extended to the Sea,

Confine the Force of Carthage; that no more
Tecan, from eAfrick, to Europa's Shore

Terrour diffufe : but melts intoa Name,

Like Trgy, in Ruin onely known to Fame.


: ( a4 ¢ . +
(i) Atthe Burning ofthe Carrhe ©? That Navy, which ( before the Fate of Rome


ginian Navy (which is faid to be five °


feted sul) ‘the Cry, and tamen Prevail’d>) had brought unvalu’d Treafures Home;
tation of the People was as great, as


ifall Carthage had,at the fame time, Which through the Seas, from Eaitto W. eft, had flown,


been utterly deftroyed. Plutarch ,


in the Life of Scipio.


And where the Romane Eagles were not known,
Under its fwelling Wings Sidonian Dyes

Had often born, and chang’d for {uch Supplies,
AseMeroé, and black Syené yields, |
With whatfoe’re renowns thofe fpicy Fields,
‘Where Ganges flows ; by which the Libyan Land
( Thongh they dire Serpents, in the barren Sand,
Plough up ) as great a Plenty ev'ry where

~ Enjey’d, as theirs, whofe Harvelt, twice a Year,

Their Garners fills: is, by this Stormof Fate,
Contracted to fo fmalla Number, that

They now defpair, e’re more, with Hoftile Oars,
To fright from Latian, and Sicilian Shores


The


Book


Book I. Srrirus Iraricus.-


The trembling AGompbs, but mutt, for ever, ftand
Condemn’d, as Slaves, toa parch’d Barren Land.
As fome hot Plague, by a Malignant Star
Diffus'd into an Univerfal War,
Firft the wide Air infects, next Beafts, and then
The Commons, till, at lat, the Beft of Men
Are {natch’d away, by the fame cruel Fate,
Which none but Heav'n knows,where twill terminate:
So, when the Romane Fury, in whofe Hand
Alone, the Fate of Carthage feem'd to ftand,
Had ftrip’d them of all Force by Land, and Sea,
And nothing now was left, but to Obey ;
At length, their Spirits, by a dreadful Doom;
Arefeiz'd : the Beft of all their Youth to Rome
( As Pledges of their Faith ) mutt ftrait be born,
And Libyan Mothers Tears become the Scorn
Of Latian Dames. Ithad been better they
C While Hannibal in Italy did ftay )
Had granted been to re-inforce his Bands.


They then their Country not with fetter’d Hands,


But arm‘d hadleft,and might have Fighting dy‘d,
Nor thus been Sacrificed to the Pride


_ Of an Infulting Fo, whofe Malice knows


No Bounds; but, fed, ftill more Infatiate grows.
But now the Fatal Day arrives, and Fears
Wound ev'ry Breaft, fill ev'ry Eye with Tears.
The weeping Mothers with difhevel’d Hair
Run through the Streets, and, vainly, beat the Air
With loud Complaints. Sometimes they call upon
The Gods : then ftrait exclaim, that there are None,
Atleaft, thatthey are Deaf; elfe might their Tears
Prevail, and their Opprefsions touch their Ears,
Sometimes the Authour of the War, and thofe
Infernal Altars, that, at a their Foes


Provok'd


Sees eae ee ep eS eRe


A Continuation of Book


I.


Provok’d, they curfe. Sometimes thofe Men they blame,
Whole Envy, without Reafon, to the Name
Of Hannibal, had fix'd Victerious Rome

Inthat great Height, and brought thofe Ruins Home,
Which fove himfelf once fear'd, whofe onely Hand,


(k) Inthe Number Appian diffents
from Livy. The firft allowing them
, onely to be one thoufand five hundred,
the latter,two thoufand: but they were
of the Nobleft, whom the Romanes
(as wastheir Cuftom) were careful to
educatein their Manners, and Habir,
asthe readielt Way toa Conquelt, as
well over the Mindes, as the Eftates of
Barbarous Nations.


With Thunder Arm‘d, could Hannibal withftand,
And keep the (apitol. But Oh (Ye Gods )
What-boots it now (fay they) that fo great Ods
Carthage did once enjoy, above the World :

Since, from the Height of Glory, She is hurl’d

Into the depth of Shame. Butthus you ftill

Are Prone to give things Great, yet never will
Prefervethem fo. In vain (alafs !} the Toils

Of our great Fathers have,with wealthy Spoils,
Enrich’d your Temples, and, with noble Wounds,


The Pow’r of Carthage ftretch'd beyond the Bounds


OF Africa, and with fuch dreadful Aw


Her Name had fpread, that allthe World their Law


Expected from her Hand. But( Qh! } how {mall
A Shadow, now, remains to Us of all

Our former Glories? Weare Mothers made,
That, by this Blefsing, We might be betray'd

To a far greater Curfe, and add more weight
Unto our Ruin, and Unhappy Fate.

Had thefe upon your cruel Altars dy’d,

Religion might perhaps have fatisfi'd

Our Lols, and We, at leaft,might Home return
With this Content, that in their Native Urn.
Their Athes were preferv'd. But thefeare born —
To be the Grief of Carthage, and the Scorn


‘Of Rome, whofe now they are, and not our Own:


Nor will they be for fuch hereafter known ;
But taught their Country's Manners to difclaim,
And bury in the (? Gown the Zyrian Name.


As


,


Book I: Sirius Iraricus. _


As thus they fadly tothe Gods complain,
The Winde the ‘Romane Navy to the Main
Invites. The Matters for the Captives call ,
While at their Feet the weeping Parents fall,


. And, Proftrate, thus. implore. . If. yet that Ire


Appeafed be, that did your Breafts infpire


At Zama’s Field ;. wherein our Fates gave Way
To Yours, and Crown’d Y ou with an happy Day ;


Now mildely hear our Pray’rs: and, as you are
Rais‘d, by the Gods, to this great Height in War,
That by their Blefsing You may Higher rife ,

Be Merciful, like them : do not defpife

The Tearsof fuch, as fall; their Cries the Scale


OF. Fortune often turn, and may prevail


With Heav'n to break the Chain of your Succels,


If, whom the Gods afflict, You fhall opprefs.


The braveft Souls no longer will purfue

Their Rage, then while it ferves them to fubdue.
And, when the Conquer‘d do fubmit, they finde
A Sanctuary ina Noble Minde.

When therefore our Unhappy Sons hall come


Within your Walls, Oh! benot too Severe,
Lay ealy Chains tipon them, think they were
Once free, as You : fo may a better Fate

Your Iffue blefs ; fo may You propagate

Your lafting Names to Honour, and, near croft
By Fortune, keep that Freedom We have loft,
As thus they plead, from their Embraces torn,
Two hundred Nobleft Zyrian Y ouths are born
Away to Sea, at ‘Rome ordain’d to ftand

The faithful Plegdes of their Native Land.


~ CSons not for Carthage born, but Conqu'ring Rome)


But,while all other Breafts with Grief, and Care,


Are fil'd, and ev'ry one, with fad Defpair
B 2 —


OF


il


a dine MO hha ae ian al


Of future Liberty, refolves the Yoke


A Continuation of Book k.


To bear with! Patience, and'no more provoke
Thofe Arms}.which, after fuch expenfe of Blood,
And Wealth (too late, alafs!}: they underftood:
Superiourto their own :. ‘Revenge puts. on
eA milcar’s Shape, and: thus, by Night, his Son.
Excitests War. OQ Hannibal, canft Thou.
( After the Fame of thy fo early Vow
To profecute this War} fit ftill, and fee,
By Rome, upon thy Country's Liberty
Such heavy Yoaksimpos'd* Canft thou, my Son,
Tamely defift from what Thou haft begun ©
And feethat Wealth, which, from fo many Lands,
By our great Ainceftours Victorious Hands
Together heap'd, enabled Thee to {pread
Thy Conqu'ting Enfigns o're Pyrene’s Head ;
Ando're the pathlefs Alps to make thy Way, .
Become the Prize of Rome ; Yet thou that Day
Survive? Atlength, awake, and let me finde
Thy Valour, fierce, and active, as the Winde
On Adriatick, Seas. Let not the Tears
Of trembling Mothers, or the vainer Fears
Of Utter Ruin, move thee to confpire
So much with Harno’s With, or Rome's Defire.
That Hannibal fhould now fit fill, is more,
Then all the Victories they had before :
Thofe onely did fubdue thine Arms ; but This
Over thy Minde a greater Conquett is :
And all, that Scipionow, at Rome, doth boat ;
Where he at Zama, when the Field was loft,
Thee flying fhews, and, afterward regains,
And thy Pale Image leads with golden Chains,
( Ashe great Syphax ledin Triumph ) Thou,
Refolving thus to bear it, doft allow.


Nor


Book I. Sibuws Laanieus, 3
Bc eB eee i
Nor will the Wearldvondsmn-whas-Hanuafaics;.

While, in the Senate, he uponthee-layes. _

The Crimes af: all thief Lls,. records the Rites,

We once;pes form 'd.ta-Heegte -- excites .

The People'’sRage, whilehe doth onthem call:s

Where now isyour Victorious Hannibal?

Where isthat Arm, that-could:alone.defend

Thefe Walls<. that{iduci- with Fate izfelf contend?

Where are Sagunthus.Spoils? or thofe, which He

From Spain hath brought* or conquer'd Italy?

If yet that /Arm furvive, let him froma, Kome,

Refcue our Captiv'd Sons, and bring them.Home.

Orif thofe Spoils, which he at Lhrafimen,


' Lrebia, or Canna gain‘d; remain ; why then


Do We for our exacted Talents grieve 2
Nor rather,with that Wealth, our {elves relieve?
Bur, if, confum‘d through his Ambition, We


_ Have, with our Riches, loft our Liberty ;


Why should that guilty Head, to whomwe ow
Thefe Ruins, and the Curfe of allour We,
Amongft Us ftill remain ; and,with a Pride,
(4) Great as the Conquerours, our Tears divide?
Confider this : and, as infufed Oil
Doth heighten Flames, hence let thy Fury beil ;
Create more Spleen within Thee; make Thee rude,
As (auca/us, ull thou haf fully fhew'd
Th’ amazed World, thou wert nat born to bear
The Romane Yoak. Butdo,what othersdare
Not think, and ‘gainft the Latine Name, where're
There fhall be War, de Thou in Arms appear ;
Till Fate abfolve thy Vow, and Thou fhalt be
Crown'd with a Noble Death, or Vidtory.

When thus the Fury had her felf infpir'd
Into his Soul, with Night She ftrait retir’d


(1) Hannibal when he {aw the se-
nate, and People exceffively Lament
the Paimenc of their Tribute (which
Was very great) Laughed at their
Follies, who,more bewailed the empty-
ing of their Purfes, chen the Jols of
their Liberty, and Honour,


To


ae
ae


A. Continuation of © Book I.
To Hell. While He, now void of all Repofe,
Soon as from Tithon's Bed Aurora role,
Tothat fam’d Stygian Temple doth repair,
Where, when aChilde, his Father made him {wear |
The War. Soonas He comesinto the Grove,
Strange, horrid Marrours, round about him, move. |
The Goddefs call’d to Minde, what he before
Had offer'd there, and now expected more.
"Then over all the Place a Cloud She eafts,
Which thither calls the Night again, and blafts
Therifing Day. Ac length,She open throws
The Temple-Gates, while on he, Fearlefs, goes ;
Tillat the Entrance, from her Gloomy Cell,
The aged Prieftefs thus befpeakshim. Tell,
Whatisit, that fo early hither Thee
Invites? and, who thou art® Forwelll fee.
Thou com’ft to offer to the Pow’rs below,
And therefore, with this Horrour, they forefhow
Thy Weleome: tell me then, what ischy Name *
Though, now, thou know’ft Me not, I'me fure my
(Said Hannibal) long fince hath fill’d thine Ears, Fame
lam that Hannibal, who, ere my Years
Two Luftra had fulfill’d, a War, before
Thefe Stygian Altars, ‘gainft the Romans {wore;
The reft the World hath told Thee: and I now
CIn profecution of that Sacred Vow ) |
Am come to know, what yet remains by Me
Tobe purfu'd, and what the Fates decree.
The Prieftefs thus: I know Thee now : norcan
The Univerfe afford another Man
More dear unto the Pow’rs, which we adore:
But we our Rites cannot perform before
The following Night hath finifh'd half her Reign.
Now therefore to thy Houfe make hafte again,
: And


Book I,


Sitius ITaticus. 4g


And my Advice embrace. For often We
Have of the Gods enquir’d concerning Thee,
Whofe thread of Life is twifted with the Fate
Of Carthage, and in That her better State
Confifts: and hence it is Imperious Rome

By her Embafsadours, who, now, are come,
Will not fo much for eA afanifsa plead,

As joyn with Hanno, to obtain thy Head,

Or caft Thee into Chains: therefore till Night


Returns, be Wary, and prepare for Flight;


And when Bootes hath his lazy Wain

Turn’d half about the Pole, hither again

Repair, and I fhail then enquire the Minde

O'th’ Gods, and what they have for Thee defignd.
Penfive with this Advice, ftrait Home He goes,

And, ruminating on his Country's Woes,

His Chamber enters, with a troubl’d Face ;

When, almoft drown’d in Tears, to his Embrace

Imilcé flys, and thus begins > What now

Thy Minde difturbs ¢ what on thy Angry Brow

Creates that Cloud? which, wherefoe’re it be

Difcharg’d (my Hannibal) muft Ruin Me.

I know ‘tis War: for fuch the dire Alarms

OF loft Sagunthus {natch’d Uhee from mine Arms,

So from my Bed, before the Night was done,

To meet theirSallies, thou wert wont to run.

While Fury arm’d thee, and pale Death did wait

Upon Thee, as upon the Hand of Fate.

But then Thou wert protected; Heav'n idid then

For Thee, and (artbage fight : if now agen

The Gods would hear our Pray’rs, and blefs Thee fo,

How gladly would I yield to let Thee go *

But they Calafs !) are Angry, and no more

Willlend their Thunder, as they did before,


Unto


oo ET eee as ee


A Continuation of — Book I.


Unis Thine Arm. ‘Rome now their Ears hath charm‘d
Againft Thee, and Thy Fortune quite difarm‘d.
Naked againft the World Thou now doft ftand:


Allhave fubmitted to Her Conqu’ring Hand.


_ Carthage is Hers, nor Libya, nor Spain,


(mw ) Philip King of Afscedon,who
with the Acarnaniaes made {everal in-
aurfions upon the Allies of the Ro


' guanes: but his Succefs not anfwearing


his Ambition, he madea difhonour-
able Peace with the Romanes, in which
the Carthaginsazs loft all Hopes of his
Affiftiance.


(=) The Abydenians ftridly -be-
fieged by Philip and defpairing of Re-
lief, after the Example of Sarat:

ves, with all cheir


Wealth.


Pyrene, nor the Celte can again

Afford Thee Aid. “ The Macedonian King,

Who to our fainting Hopes appear’d to bring

Some Shadows of Relief} while He o’reran

The Bounds of e4thens, and a War began

With that fad Omen, that Saganthus turn’d

To Abhes, and the ‘*) eA bydenians burn’d,

On Pyles of their own Wealth, is forc’d at laft

To yield to Fortune, and himfelf to caft

‘A Proftrate at Rome's Feet,and Peace implore.
Content with thofe great Acts, that He before

Had done, He now refolves, at Home, t’attend

His Fate : and, would my Hannibal now lend

A Pity to thefe Tears, Thou fhould’ft no more

That Hand of Fortunetry, which Thee before

In one Day thruft from that great Height, to which
The Toil of feventeen Years had rais'd Thee. Rich
In Fame thou art, and, though all elfe is gone,

That's fuch a Treafure, that for it alone

The World may envy Thee, and Times to come
Shall put thy Name in Balance againft Rome,

And all her Generals. But what of Life

( After fuch Deeds ) remains, unto thy Wife,

And Sen fhould be allow’d : and, if thy Breaft

W ith Thoughts of fworn Revenge be fill pofseft,

C Since Fortune courtsthe Young, and Thou art now
In Years, to which She feldemdothallow —
Her Smiles} derive thine Anger to thy Son,

Inftruct him here, at Home, what's to be done


To


na SS


BookI. Sriurus Irariecus, Lay


To perfect thy Defires, and at thy Death,

Into His Breaft; with thy Departing Breath,

‘*) Infpire (my Hannibal) thy mighty Spirit,
That fo He may entirely Thee Inherit, _

And live the Fear of Rome. But, if Thou fly
From hence, and leave Us to the Cruelty.

Of Our infulting Foes, Our Captiv’d Names
Will ftrait become the Talk of ‘Romane Dames, ‘
“Midft their Triumphal Feafts ; or bein Scorn
Supprefs'd, as if We never had been born.

This, with a thoufand Sighs, and all the Charms
OF Kiffes, mix’d with Tears, between his Arms,
Speaking, She finks: while, with that conftant Face,
With which Heentred, in a {trict Embrace,

He holds Her up, and thus replies ; Thy Love
C My dear Imilcé) is fo much above
The Value of my Life, that] would all


7 (0) It wasantiendy a Cuftom in .
many Nations, to receive che laft
Breath of their Expiring Friends,


_ Thofe Dangers ftand, which can upon Me fall, | /


T enjoy Theehere: But this our Enemies
Will not allow. Domeftick Treacheries


_ Have now fo far above the Arms of ‘Rome


Prevail'd, that la Captive fhall, at Home,

In Peace, be made, and hence in Chains be born,
CSnatch’d from thy dear Embrace) to be the Scorn
(2) OF fecond Triumphs, and when that is done

C A Pride peculiar unto Rome alone)

I hall not dy like Syphax, from the View

OF all the World; but they will fomething New

For Meinvent. Whatever was by Us, ayn ete
Before, Inflicted on their Regulus, CES .
Will be efteem'd too Little ; I thall be

Ja Parts divided through all Italy,

And feel, in each, a Death, and yet notall
Their Malice fatiate, when to ae they call


(p) The Cuftom of leading Ca.
ptives in Triumph was firft introduced
by the Romances, and among them
onely in ufe; the Principal Captives,in
Chains, pafling before the Chariot of
the Triumpher, and (for the moft
part) as heentered the Capitol, they
were led to Prifon, and, on the fame


The


18


A Continuation of | Book I.


The Fun'rals of their Friends. But, that I may


Their Plots avoid,and keep a better Way"

Still opento my Fall, E now mutt fly - |

M’ Ingrateful Country, or refolve to dy,

This Day, beforethiné Eyes: for in this Hand


. OF Mine, alone, my Fate flall ever ftand.


Nor hall the World believe, the Life, and Death
OF Hannibal depends upon the Breath

Of Rome. Asthis He {pake, She ftop'd the reft
With Kiffes, and, reclining on his Breft

Her drooping Head ( whil'ft Tears, like 4 pril-cain,
Into his Bofom flow, by Sighs again

Dry'dup ) Since fo itis € faid She) no more
Willl (my Hannibal) thy Stay implore.


- Go, and be Happy ! may thofe Gods, who Thee,


With fuch Severity, deny to Me,

Protect Thee, when Alone : go, Happy! may
Thy with’d Return be {peedy ! But I Pray

For what I cannot Hope; thofe Gods, who now
Us feparate (alafs!)} will not allow,


That We fhould meet again, As from her Tongue |


Thefe laft Words fell, about his Neck She flung
Her Arms, and, after many Kiffes patt,

While both contended, who fhould give the Laft,
With along Silence (for with Grief each Heart


Teo big for Language {well'd) atlength they part.


Now Night the middle of her Courfe had run,
Between the Rifing, and the Falling Sun ;
When Libya's anxious Champion at the Fane
( All chings prepar'd for Flight ) arrives again ;
There findes the Prieftels ; from her hoary Head
Treffes like curling Serpents, over{pread
Her wrinckled Neck : a Mantle crofs her Breaft,
In which forfaken Dido's Death, expreft


By


Book I. | Sitrius Irarieus.


By her fair Sifter’s Hand; and there bequeath’d

As Sacred. ( with the Sword, She, Frantick, fheath’d
Inher own Bofom ) _faftn’d bya Charm :

On her left Shoulder, and her other Arm

Quite Naked, waving round a Stygian Wand;

With which, by adding Words, She could command
The Pow'rs of Hell, She meets him at the Deor,

And leadshimin. The Sacrifice before
Prepar’d,and She ( no Minutes now delay'd)
Tnvoking fome Infernal Names, to aid

The Work, ftrait horrid Voices rend the Air;

Some mornful Groans ; fome Sighs of fad Defpair :
Then, as if Hell were near, the Noife of Chains,
With doleful Cries, which their inflicted Pains
Extort. For all the Ghofts of Cadmus Race,
Whom Guilt had ftain’d, frequenting ftill the Place;
To the un-kindled Altars brought Supplies


Of Bloodlike Flames, which of themfelves to rife


Appear, and by their gloomy Light, and Smell


_ OF Sulphur, fhew, that they were brought from Fell.


At length, the Sacrifice was openlay'd,

Whole Entrails when the Prieftefs had furvay'd,

She thus the Gods declar’d. “ If Hannibal

“ Be fromhis Country free, He never thall.

* Become a Slaveto Rome. His very Name

«« Shall make the Syrian Armiesown'd by Fame,

«¢ And Italy once more fhall fear, left She

“¢ By his Invafive Arms fhould ruin’d be.

“ Scipio {hall not more Fortunate at Rome

« By th’ World be held, then Hannibal at Home.

“© One Year fhall give a Period to their Breath,

“¢ And each finde Satisfaction in his Death.

«In Latian Ground thall Scipio's Athesly,

** On Liby{sean Hannibal thall dy.
C 2 With


‘


19


Rae Se) ge ee ae ee wea a eae, ee
ee Te i


28


ener ee ee ee ne ee Cir Ri ic kta Bi ied 2 ck a Ste tell Sieg


A Continuation of es : Book I.


With this ambiguous Oracle, his Minde °

As Great; :and High, as when he firft defign’d

The War, asif the Gods were ftill the Same,

Away he fpeeds? Thoughts of his former Fame, —
And Victries, all prefent Fearsallay, —

And, with reviving Hopes, his Faith betray

To a vain Confidence, That He, alorie,

Ifarm’'d, could fhake the World, and ‘Rome Ode
Ambition, and Revenge think nought too great

For their Attempt, and, whil’fthe doth repeat _


_ The Adions, which atchiev'd his former Fame,


He countsall Eafy, that’s within his Aim,

Nor weighs th’ Incertainty of Fates to come.
Thofe civil Fa@ions, chat, before, at Home,
Weak ned his Arms, now, undiftinguifh’d, groan
Under that:Y oke, which Rome for Him, alone, .
Solong prepar'd::. fo that ev'n He might boaft

A Vidory, when Envious Carthage loft

Her Liberty, and Captiv'd Hanno found,

Wo other Hand could curethat Fatal Wound,
‘But Hannibal’salone ; who, now, got Free,
Would fearch the World to findea Remedy.

Thus, cheatfal-with the Gods, mifunderftood,

( As a fierce Tyger, thirfting after Blood,

Far from his Covert rangeth, feeking Prey >
O’'re the Vocaxian Plains he took his Way,

And, through the Thapfan Fields, his Courfe purfu’d
Where (ftill che Gods refolving to delude

His Thoughts with dubious things)he Waking dreams
Of future Fates; and, fwiftly Pofting, feems

This Language, fromthe ‘Genius of the Place,
Tohear. Fly hence, fly Hannibal apace.

Let Afia, no longer now attend


Thine Arm, the World's great Quarrél to defend.
se


Book I. Sirius Tratrveus. 21


Delay the Mutherisiof Doubrs, aid Feats,
And he, that long ths Yoke of Bondage. bears;
Forgets, that he was Fret, atid encertains”

A Servile Love of Safety with his Chains.

Thy Prefenee thall éncreafe the Noble Fire

In Syrian Breatts, atid they, atlength, confpire
"Gainft Rome with Thee, arid Carthage entertain
An Hope by Thee her Freedom to regain.


. That War, which Thou didft, with fo great Applanfe,


Wage as Thine Own, is made the Common Caufe


Of the whole World, and all Mankinde is now


Provok'd tobe Affertours of thy Vow. ,

Of Romane “lood, all Seas, all Lands fhall tafte,

And‘? Thapfus, ‘mong the Chief, in Fame be plact- ok 4 ) Where Seip the Hof the
Wo fooner did the Blufhes of the Morn Cer inch Biden outdo of
The Stars extinguifh, and the Day was born,

When they arriv’d near to that Fatal Shore,

Where trembling Seamen hear the Billows rear

(r) Againkt thofe Syrts, which, moving to and fro, (r) Thefe Syrtesare two, where:


of the lefsis not far diftant from Car~
thage, and againft ic is the Ifland CA-


Bring certain Ruin, wherefoe're they go. cage te So ee Ce
Charybdis, nor dire Scylla's Rage, fo great Dangers, and Sie, fee Strabo, Gegr
A Danger to Sicilian V effels threat :

Sometimes themfelves, above the Waves, they hye


And ftand like Promontories to deceive


- Unskilful Mariners; ftrait, falling back,


Choak up the Ghanel, and prepare a Wrack
Under fmooth Waters, where, with all their Pride
Difplay'd,tall Ships of late might fafely ride.
But Hannibal lefs fears the Treach’rous Sand,


_Or raging Seas, then the more Treach’rous Land,


Which, Confident of better Fate, he quits,


And toa little Bark himfelf commits.


The Seas, as Confcious, that he was too Great


To be their Sacrifice, their Rage forget.
: | 7 The


-) . A Continuation of » Book I,


The Spyrés retire, and the Confpiring Gales
Purfue the Bark, and {well her pregnant Sails.
The careful Pilot for Cercina fteers,

_ Scarce knowing, that the Fraight his Veflel bears, _
Once balanc‘d the whole World ; yet wonders Heav‘n,
In that tempeftuous Track, a Courfe fo ev'n
Allow’d: fo much the flatrring Deftinies,

Withafmooth Vizor of Suceels, difguife
Intended Ruin ; that ev'n Hannibal
Meatures, from hence, what ever might befal
Him(elf, and,while they yet the e4frick Shore
( On which the Fates refolv’d henever more
Should tread) in View retain’d : I now am Free

_ (Perfidious Country ) both from Rome, and Thee ;
My better Fortune now (faith He) doth ftand
Not ina Senate's Vote, butin this Hand,
This Hand, which ( maugre thy Ingratitude) _
Shall Thee (if Me the Godsdo not delude ) -
Redeem ; and Thou, at length, confels, that none
Can breake thy Yoke, but Hannibal alone.

Now from the flying Ship the Land withdrew: '

The Libyan Shore defcends ; no mere in View
Thofe Altars, which Ubjfes once did rear,


To refcue his forgetful Friends, appear. e


i is eae Unhappy Men! who inthofe Dang’rous Fields

s a ele rees v om

ropbagi among whom UE {fes his Com- dout ho tt Deli h hat) L ‘eld
ropes among whom Uiyfishis com Found out thofe ftrange Delights, that otus yields,
tecerated aired to dwell, till Vins: Whole Tafte all other Pleafures far exceeds,

Reco’ , the Rui: hereof were to . ‘

betcen in the Time of srrae. (46, Man nothing more to make him Happy needs;


*7 and Homer Com. 39) Ta his alll dear Delights at once they found,
And Memory of Friends, and Country drown’d.
Nofooner thefe were loft, but to their Eyes
Cercina, ‘midft the Waves, began to rife.
Approaching near the Port, fome Ships they found,
Whokt Carthaginian Owners, Homeward bound,


Soon


SE es RP, ee re ee MS ee a ee ee ere OMe nener Ones Sal My Ro a eS ae eee ag mee


Book I. Srtius [raricus, 23
Soon as the Prince they fpy'duponth¢ Shore, =>

Hafte to faite Him, and almoft Adore... |

The Memory of his high Deeds, within

Their Breafts ftill liv'd : how great He once had beén,.

To Minde they call, and pay uato his Name

Thofe Honours, which, they know, his Merits claim 5

Though now his State be lefs: for with a Cloud

O’recaft, or elfe Eclipfd,the Sun ’s allow’d


To bethe fame in Virtue, as before,


— Whoenit fhin’d|Brighteft ; nor was He the more


To be neglected, ‘caufe the borrow’d Rays
OF Train, at which the Common People gaze,
And great with Envy {well, afide are lay‘d.


- He ftillis that fam’d Hannibal, who made


So many Barb’rous Nations to fubmit

To his Commands, and Native R ites forget;

While fierce Ada/fylians, with Iberians, ftood |

In Fight, Revengers each of others Blood ;

While rude Cantabrians, with the Celtz, came

T’ afsert his Quarrel, and beneath his Name -

United liv’d, as ifone Clime their Birth

Had giv’n, and nurtur’d them on Fertile Earth.
_ Here all are bufy to exprefs their Care

To entertain Him, and to fuch, as were

Inquifitive to know, what did invite

Him thither, cunning, He, reply'd: I might

(Indeed ) have gone to Tyre another Way;

But none fo near I judg, fince I this Day


Matt {pend in Sacrifice, to th’ Pow'rs above,


That what [ there muft profeeute, may prove
Propitious to the State, which thither Me
Hath fent, and fince, within this [fland, We
Few Trees for Shelter finde, let Me entreat


Your Sails, this Day, to fhroud Us from the nae ‘
P "t y


24,


a


A Continuation of | Book I.


Sie ee en ee


O'th {corching Sun. No fooner faid, but all

- Their Hands employ ; fome from the Matts lee fall
The Sails ; fome liftthem with their Yards to Land,

. On-which extended ftreight, for Tents,they ftand.

And now whatever Rare the Ifle affords,
Makes up the Feaft, and round the haft‘ned Boards
Lyaus flows: and firft, To Liberty
A Bowl is crown’d, which all as greedily

| Quaff off, as if in it they thought to finde
Their With, and Senfe of Bondage from the Minde
Expel. And, asthe {parkling Liqaour warms
Their Blood, each man, as if he were in Arms,
Defies the Pow’r of Rome ; now {corns to bear
That Yoak, which, in a Sober mind, his Fear
W ould prompt him to imbrace, and what before
Fie durft not Think, he now dares Act, and more.
All former Fears are banifh’d: This exclaims
Gainft Hanno’s Pride; and That his Countrey blames
For want of Courage, bids the Prince again
Attempt to take away that Fatal Stain,
For which, as in th’ inflaming Juice he fteeps
His Brains, he in a Drunken Pity weeps.

But Hannibal, whofe T houghts were far from thence

Remov’d, and entertain’d anobler Senfe _
Of what they fuffer'd, then themfelves, mean while,
Looks on their Follies with a {cornful Smile,
And, with repeated Cups, ftill feeds the Flame ;
Untill, as he defign’d, he overcame
Their Strength, and, while their Hands as yet retain'd
The Blufhing Bowls, Sleep all their Senfes chain’d.


The End of the Firft Book
of the Continuation.


aa


' iy Hafan Haufta Romanos, metuens Nova. Tes niches
Peeing fl ophonss bee Fata. Veneno Servata infeltx, it Libertate mbras


Wiseman dé Magna (anféild?


Dignifemo Vtro Gilielmo d 2 a


in (omutati Efex Baronette'


is 2 (Lee
fue ——


— A ConTiINuATION OF


SILIUS ITALICUS


To the DEATH of


HANNIBAL, _


Ey vue


ee a ET :


7 The Second Book.
. Tue Axcument. eee


To Hannibal Halcesdothrelate
King Mafanifla’s Love, and the {qd Fate _ er oa
Of Sophonisbai: ‘Rottie dread} the Report |. d
Of anew War.: Inthe Ephetian Court i.
Scipio, and Hannibal are entertain'd,

And meet, as Friends. . The City, Temple, and

Its Wealth defcrib'd. Great Alexander's Deeds
Eumolpus fings. Whence a Difcourfe proceeds,
Who the best Captains were. : Past Adtions -are
Revolv'd. The King refolves upon a War.


Pa EA kLE : hus. pretended Piety
oe ee oe
The Vulgar, andthe glad De-


 . ceiver fmiles -


=, =a Atthe Succefs; Secure,that none
SS


: : could bear
The Tidings of his ‘Flight, before the Fear’
Of being ftop'd was paft, to Sea again


Hehaftens, hoifes Sail, while yet the Reign
co D OF


eal, pe ech a oe


25


Fr


26 |


A Continuation of Book If.


yuofura, { Of Urfa Afinor )


C
win’ Tyrians obferved in: Sailing,


as the Greeks did Helice (or. Orfa.
f Ovid,


Major ) eecording to that of

fib, Trift. fee 4 f ies a

T @ ? Pid
we Sears are tr Veeke

The Lefs,the Greater oe WAR


OF Night continu’d, and the ) Torian Star.
Lent faithful Beams to guide the Mariner,
And as, well pleas‘d with what had paft, his Friends


Difcours'd, how much their Mirth had made Aménds .


For all Delays, his fare Numidian Guide.
C Who once atténded on great Syphax Bride )
Began. But He infpir'd above the Reft
To Meappear'd, who did fo much detett,
And {corn their Names,who,through a fhamefulDread
OF Dying, had fubmitted to be led _
In Triumph, and, in Chains, before they Dy’d,
Had tamely Sacrific'd unto the Pride |
OF Roman Conqu'rours. How He did declame,
For this, ‘gainft Syphax ! how adore the. Name
Of Noble Sopbonisba! who did bear
A Face as Chearful, as Lcatty Hidre,
( Said He) and, to avoid that Shame, was feen
To drink her Death, and fall a Glorious Queen,
Iwell obferv'd his Zeal, and, Tconfeé, *
C Reply'd Great Hannibal) could litele ‘Ie&
Then weep, at Mention of fo dear'a'Naine, See
But fince we onely have, by Comrhon Farne, : ~.
Her Story heard, and Youa Witnels were
OF all that paft, to Us her Pare declae.

Then He. When Syphax was o'techrown, and all
NC unidia loft, through his Unhappy Fall Be


 ~ Balle Mafaniffe lef ambitioufly © ~~


Afpir'd unco his Empire, thentbtbe. cs a on
Succeffour in his Bed, and when ih’ had ain'd
The Queen into his Pow’r (the Kitip-enchain’d, im |
And kept a Trophy to Young Scipio’sPride) = >!
Impatient till h’ enjoy’d fo fairaBride,, Aah os
His Minde he thus difcovers: If the Throne Ae Bea
OF Syphax, or NN umidia’s Wealth;alone, 3 fy _
a


Book II,


SILius IrTaLicus, -


Flad been the Object of mine Arms, I tiow

Whate're the Gods, or Fortune could allow

To my Defires, poffef'd': but know my Aira

(Fair Queen ) is Higher; anda Nobler F lame

Reigns in my Breaft, thé Rorisane General

May this( perchance) an Happy Conqueft call,

Becaufe his Eagles, now, fecurely fly

O'te the Numidian Plains. But nothing |

Fave gain‘d, though this late Victory reftore

Whatever Syphax did, from Me, before

Ufarp ; though Hammon, and Larpeian Fove

Confpire to make Me great, unlefs your Love

This Happinefs confirm, For this did I

From Libya’s to the Romane Enfigns fly,

Knowing no other Means to win You from

i My Rival's Arms, and fince He is by Rome

Thrown from that glorious Height, and ean nomore

Be Worthy held of what He did before

In Youenjoy (fince none, but He, that wears

A Crown, and in his Handa Scepter bears,

Can Merit fuch a Blifs) that You may live

A Queen, and (what loft Carthage cannot give,

Nor Sophonisha take, but from my Hand)

Be ftill ador'd through the Numidian Land.

Accept my Love, by which, Youcan alone

Shun Romane Chains, and till polsefsa Throne.
To this the Queen C though an extream Difdain

OF what He offer'd in Her Soul did Reign )

Fearing to bea Spectacle at Rome,

More then toDy, replies. "Tis to prefume

Too much upon your Videry, if You

Imagine itas Eafy, to Subdue


S
- Powerful Prince,inamoure:


27


(8) Aafaniffa, in his Youth Edu-
cared in Carthage, and obferved to be
a Perfon of fingular Accomplifhments,
Hafarubal Cae Son of Gifton be-
trothed to Him his Danghter Sopho-
assba ( aseminent for her Beauty, as
Birth, and imediately procured Him
the Command of an Army in sberia.
But afterward, finding Syphax amore

Af of Her, He
beftowed Her on him, which ( among
other things ) incited Mafaniffa pri-
vately to make Peace with Scipio, and
turn his Arms againft Garthage. Appi-


an, Libyc


This Heart, as late our Arms: and though, by Forces |


You have already made a fad Divorce,


2 Yet


%


28°


A Continuation of


a i a en Oe Pe ee ee


eT ee


Yetknow the Memory of Syphax Name
Will in this Breaft, admit no other Flame,
While He furvives. But, rather then be led
To Rome in Triumph, | confefs the Bed

Of any born of Libyan Blood may be
Prefer'd : yet, if the adverfe Fates decree,


-That, to avoid that Shame, I muftthe Crime


Of hafty Nuptials add, a little Time
(Methinks) you ought, in Juftice, to allow,
Toexpiate, with Tears, my former Vow.

With this Reply, which neither gave Affent
To his Demand, ner yet deny'’d, Her Tent
He quits, advifing Her to fhun Delays,
In herRefolve; for that, e're many Days
Should pals, the Captives mutt be fent to ‘Rome,
And Her Confent would, then, too Tardy come.

Ac thefe laft Words, as when our Libyan Darts
ATygrels ftrike , at firft, amaz’d, She ftarts,
And growling ftands, but when the wounding Steel
Is deeply fix’d, and She begins to feel
The Anguith of a Wound, She rends the Air
With Cries, and, lab’ring with her Teeth to tare
The Weapons forth, augments her Pain, then flies
To fome known Covert, and there, Raving, dies.
Struck to the Heart (as if She then had feen
The Gorgon’s Head, or, like e4 mphion’s Queen,
Congeal'd to Marble ) Statue-like She ftands,
A while, and Silent weeps. At length, her Hands
Invade her Head, from which She, frantick, tears
The lovely Hair, and, furioufly, impairs
The Beauty of that Face, which by two Kings


Had beenador'd. At laft, Her felf She flings


Upon her Bed, and,with amournful Cry,
On her dear Syphax calls. Which hearing, I


Book i.


Stept


Sirius ITaLicus. 29


Book II.


Stept in, and found her turning to and fro,

Hor Eyes: now dry, and fir'd with Anger, fo,
When Pentheus {corn’d the Trieterick Feaft,
eAgave's Looks Her inward Rage expreft,
Amaz’d,a while, | Silent ftood : till She,

Sighs making Way for Words, at length to Me
Her Speech directs. “Tis not, becaufe Uncrown’'d,
( Valces) that] grieve ; adeeper Wound

My Soul afflicts, and I am wrack'd between
TwodireExtreams. Oh! hadI never feen

N umidia’s Court, or had I ne're been led,

By Hymen's Tapers, to my Syphax Bed,

The Waoild,perhaps, had never heard that one,
Born of Great Hafdrubal, was from a Throne
To Rome a Captive led, but I muft now

( Ohcruel Fate! ) renounce my Nuptial Vow,
To yieldup (what my Lord efteem’d above
Numidia's Throne) the Treafure of my Love
To Mafaniffa,and in his Embrace

Thofe Sacred Ties difsolve, or in the Face

OF Rome, the greateft Trophy of the War,
Expofed be, and the Triumphal Car

Of the proud Conquerour, in Chains attend.
Ye Gods! what greater Mifchief can Ye fend
Upon this Head © Your Thunder cannot give
A Blow fo Fatal, if you let Melive .

To fee that Day. Asthus She {pake, her Eyes, |
With fudden Streams of Tears, her Tongue furprize.
When I perceiv’d, that Mafaniffa's Flame
( Though yet an Enemy) was ftill the fame,
He had before profefs'd ; hoping the Charms

Of fucha Beauty might regain his Arms
To Carthage, as they Syphax had withdrawn
From ‘Romane Leagues, after a Solemn Pawn


OF


ES a ne rrr Pe eo


30 | | A Continuation of Book If.


Of Faith, before the Geds: I thus begun.

Had Heav’n left any other Means to fhun
The Pow’r of Rome, and that prodigious Shame,
Which proudly they onall of Zyrian Name
Inflict, I fhould refolve, whate’re it be,

To fhare Your Fortune, But finee, now, Youfee
The Conquerour your Captive is, You may
Redeem your Self, and give a better Day

To Your loft Country. “Twas for this alone,
HaJdrabal plac'd you on Numidia’s Throne,
The Caule is ftill the Same, nor is't a Crime,
Which Fate Necefsitates, and which in Time
You may a Signal Piety avow

To all the World. Ev’n Syphax will allow

Ie fuch, and dy Content, if You reftore
Entire to Libya whatShe loft before.

Perfwaded thus ; as when a Sea-man findes
Nothing, butcertain Ruin from the Windes,
Which on the Ocean ftorm stefolv’d no more
To traft their Fury, for fome Neighbrring Shore
He fteers ,and, to fecure Himfelf, doth choofe,
Upon a Sand, the lab’ring Bark to loofe:

So, from Rome's Rage, the Queen refolves to throw
Her felf, for Safety, on a gentler Fo;

Who now appreach’d, while She puts ona Face
Might movdhis Pity, anda God's Embrace.

So, when her Ademnon dy'd, Aurora threw

Over her Rofy Cheeks a Veil.of Dew,

Through which diffolving Chryftal, from Her Eyes
Day did more fadly, yet more Fragrant rife.

Soon as He entred, Proftrate at his Feet

She falls, and thus now fues his Loveto meet,

If my diftradted Piety did fwell
Too High, if what I uteer’d did not well

Befeem


Book Il, = Si Lius Iraticus. |


Befcem a Captive ¢ mighty Prines) Wheré
Befeech You pardon Me, net wont to bear

So weighty Griefs; and, fiace th’ Immortal Gods,
Above my Syphax Fate; on You thefe Odds
CDueto your Walour; and good Fortune > have
Bettow'd, whatever be my Doom, I crave

It may proceed from You. And as yeu are

A King, and with my Lord did lately fhare .
In the Numidian Name, let Me not be

Expos'd toany ‘Roman's proud Decree.

Aslam onely Wife to Syphax, I

Would rather any Libyan'’s Mercy try,

Then truftaStranger. But withall you know


~ What I, a Carthaginian, Daughter to


Great Hafdrubal, may from a Roman fear.

If then no other Remedy appear |

Within your Pow'r, I here befeech you ftill,

By Deathtofree Me from the Romans Will.
Scarce this ( with all Allurements, that could move

At once the\Conqu’rour’s Pity, and his Love)

She had declar'd, when He wipes off her Tears

With fervent Kiffes;and her future Fears

Allays, with Promife.to preferve. her Free

From ‘Rowan Hands. But pleads Necelsity

C TosbeSecure:) that Night to.Gonfummate

Their Nuptial Rites, :Unwillingly, to Fate,

And his Defires She-yields, and at the Time


_ Her doubtful Heart,.as Confcious of a Crime,


Calls back'her; Blood, then fends it forth.again
Into her. Cheeks ¢{o fhines a Scarlet Stain:
On Ivory 3: afham’d to have it faid, |

One Day a Captive her, and Bride had: made.
And now the Weary Horfes of the Sun


To the Tiartefiack Shore their Courfe hadrun;
. | When


A Continuation of - — .Book IL


When Mafaniffa, with all Sacred Rites, (> =.
The Prefence of. the Marriage God invites:
But no good Omen fhew'dhim tobe there,;:)
The Fire the Incenfe flies; the Altars are
Smooth’rd in Stygian Smoak ; a dreadful Sound


Through all the Templerins, and fhakesthe Ground: - -


And, asfrom thenceinto their Chamber they
Retire, the Holy Tapers, allthe Way,
With Sputt’ring Flames (asif e4/efofhed -. -
Sulphure upon them ). lead them to their Bed.’ -
Ail this, intent upon his Miftrefs Eyes,
Heeither did not fee, or did Defpife. -.
Concluding what He fhould enjoy. would all
Thofe Miferies out-weigh, that could befal.._ |
Before this Fatal Night was {pent.. The Famé . |
OF Mafaniffa's hatty Nuptials came ms
To Scipio's Ear ; He, fearing to give Way
Tofuch a growing Milchief, foon’ as-Day Hae
Had chasd away the Stars, by Lelius fends.:.
A $ummons, and, thus tharply reprehends: :
His Levity. ‘Tis my Belief, (faid Hey. >: |
That when We firft contracted. Amity |
In Spain, andthenin Africa, when Thou :
Didft both thy Self and all thofe Hopes, which new !
Thou callft thine Own, to Me-commit, that then: i °:
Something in Me thou did't ‘bove otherMen =: 7
Worthy that Truft conceive. Butlin none
OF all thefe Virtues, that did prompt Theeon . :*
To feek my Friendfhip, more of Glory place,
Then inmy Temperance: That witha Chaft, . -:
And Sober Minde, I could fupprefs the Flame... ° ::
Of hotteft Luft a and this, I then. did.aim, pe ee FG
To other thy rare Virtuesmighe be joyn’d, A
For truft Me, Noble P rinée, Wecannot finde :.
; So


Book II. Sittus Iraricus,
So much of Danger from our Aritied Foss,
As from thofe ftronger Pleafures, that enclofé
Us round; and whotfoere repells their dire
Affaults, and ean by Temp’rance his Defire
Within Himfelf Subdue, a Victory
OF greater Honour gains, then that, which We


O’re Syphax have obtain’d. Thofe Noble Things,


Which Thou, with Valour worthy greateft Kings,
Haft in my Abfence done, I did, of late,
To allof Namein Arms commemorate
With all due Praife, and fill fhall keep in Minde,
But I had rather Thou on what's behindeé |
Would'tt withthy Self. reflect, then Bluth to hear
Me give'ta Name. It plainly doth appear
To all the World, that Syphax was orethrown,
And Captiv'd by the Aypicies alone
O'th’ Roman People. Whatfoever He a
Poflels'd : his Kingdom, Wife, and People, We
May challenge as our Prize, and nonea Share
OF Right, can claim. Though Sophonis ba were
No (arthaginian born ; ordid not We
Her Father Gen'ral of their Armies fee :
Yet muftShe (whoa King, that was our Friend,
An Enemy hath made, and in the End
Againt Us drawnto Arms) be fent to Rome,
And there the Senate's, and the People’s Doom
Attend. Strive therefore to fabdue thy Minde,
Shake this lewd Pafsion off, fo much inclin’d
To draw Thee into Ruin; nor the Grace
Of allthy Virtues, with one Vice, Deface :
Nor by one Crime deprive thy Self of all
Thofe Thanks, at Rome, for which thy Merits call.
Struck to the Heart ( asif fome fudden Flame
Were darted through his aay the Fire of Shame


Flies


38


34 _ _A Continuation of Book Ji.


Fliesto hisFace: Yetnothiig He replies,

But ftrait retires with Sighs, and fwelling Eyes ;
And, knowing, that what Scipis Had decreed -
Mutt tand ‘Irrevocable; fends, with Speed,.

For Me, and witha Box, into my Hand

A fatal Poifon puts, with this Comiiiand

Bear this tomy Dear Sophonisba, fay,

That Mg/aniffa wasrefolv'd to pay

~ That Faith toHer, which kindett Husbands ow

To their Dear Wives. But, fitice the Fates have fo
Decréed, that They now countermand his Will,
To whom itis fubjected ; He is ftill

Refolv'd his fecond Promife firm thall ftand :

And, that, Alive, into a Roman's Hand

She may not fall, advife, that with her Diink

She intermix this Poifon. Bid Her think

Upon the General (her Father) and

Her Country: think how, once, She did command
The Hearts of two great Kings, to whom Sh’hath been
In Marriage joyn’d, and let Her Dy a Queen. .
The banefui Drug to my Dear Miftrefs I,

With this harfh Meffage, brought. Prepar'dto Dy,
And with Undaunted Minde the Worft to bear,
That Fate could add, She, with Attentive Ear,
Liftn’d to what I faid, and, asShe took _

In her fair Hand the Poifon, with a Look |
Moor Chearful, then when Shea Bride was made
To Mafaniffa, l accept ( She faid)

Fis Nuptial Prefene: nor isitto Me

Atall Unweleome, fince (my Husband) He
Can nothing Greater on his Wife beftow :

But yet, withall, I pritthee let Him know,

That Sophonisba would more pleas’d have Dy'd,


If, ather Death, She had not been his Bride :
For


Book H: |


SIL Ius Ira LI cus,


For then my Goiuatry mightupon my Tomb
Have writ, that, thus; 1-Triumph‘d Over Romie,. :.
No fooner fpoke; birt td her Lips She joynd |
The deadly Cup, and; Greedy there to finde
A {peedy Death, fwallows it yall and,while
We, Trembling, ftand about Her, witha Smile,
Which made her Lovely ev'n in Death Cher Heart
Recalling now the Blood,from ev'ry Pare;
To itsRelief ) She fiaks, and, as She lies
Upon her Couch, gives one Great Sigh, and dies.
As the Numidian this fad Story told, |
The Day began to rife. They now behold
The Tyrian Coatt, by which they Steer unto
That City, whence the Carthaginians drew
Their fam’d Original, when Dido from
Her Brother fled, Receiv'd, asif at Home,
Withallthe Joy, that could exprefs the Pride
They had conceiv’d, in being near ally’d
To that Great Hannibal, who late the Fear
Of all the World had been ; when he had there
Himfelf refreth’d, again He hoifts his Sails
For Antioch : from thence,with profp’rous Gales:
At Ephefus arriy’d ; where, glad to finde
The Syrian King, who, with a dubious Minde
His Hate, conceiv'd againft the ‘Roman Name,
Purfu'd, at length he fix'd, and by his Fame
In Arms, appearing likea eALartial Star,
Guided his wand’ring Thoughts into a War,
And now, o’re all the Syrian Cities, Fame
Her lofty Head had rais'd, and with the Name
Of Hannibal awak'd the God of War:
When ftrait the fev'ral Nations, which from far


H ; . : (c) Axtiochus, the Sixth
Their Tribute to the Syrian Crown did bring, Sevens who va Alcan front
And wave the Ti le. (2) : tin Syria) much enlarged hig

itie Gre . . Dominions by his feve Ic ; .
° 2 E ae unto their King, and was therefore called The Great!


Fly Appian, Syriac;


(4) Aarcus Craffas with his whole . : ;
sot tilt The Fates decreed, fhould ina “) fature War


_A-Gontinwation of : -


Book Ui


The Princes, and Embafladoursrefort, © a


All promife Aid ; fecune, that Hewascomc;:: °°
To ftand a Bulwark ‘gainit the Force of Rome, - :
And Afan Tow'rs defend with greater Odds, > |
Then all their Arms, or Tutelary Gods.
Allhis great Merits plead, and, fondly, raife

The Value of his Virtues with their Praife.

No Errours areallow’d in all, that He

Flath done. So little-do the Vulgar fee

A Fault, wherethey affect, or knowto State

The Reafons of their Sudden Lowe, or Hate.


Carthage ( though now in Chains) Unpiei'd tands :


The Gods are prais‘d, thae hee Ingrateful Hands
He had efcap’d. For hisiate Overthrow, —

And Fight, they caft not on the Publick Fo,

But Home-bred Treachery; as.not the Crime
OF Fortune, buethe Envy of the Time.

Envy, which ftill detracts from greatelt Deeds,
4nd on the Ruins of the Virtuous feeds ;
Which firft, againft the God's rebellious Wars -
Flad rais'd, and made the Giants ftorm the Stars.
She Honour ftill purfues wheree're it goes :
Wheree’re it treads, She Stygian Poifon throws,
That its fair Foot-fteps quickly doth Defaee,
And raifeth her own Trophies in its Place.

With this Applaufe the Court, and City, ring.”
Some invocate the Gods, others the King
Importune tothe War. Then {trait their Bands
They Lift, and levy Troops in fev'ral Lands,

Nor were thofe Aids to Syrian Bounds confin’d :
But Names, and Nations to their Arms were joyn’d,
“) Who, when the Strength of Rome was greater far,


ry Her


Book H, Stow a wasdhriae De ws.


ay


Her Pow heaxith dickid byalbthe. ANG eld prefttain,’


And with a Gonfuls Blobd-her Bales ain. _
With thofevire- Adédss who ew'non Conguiting Foss
Their Manners, and their Habit did4mpafe;:
©) From whom the Penfans fink Tiaras Wore, .
And, falling Proftrate, did their Kings adoret
Whofe mighty Monarchs their Imperial Thione
Had fix'd upon che Walls of Babyhn, |
Till, weak’ ned with Delights, that Empire, which | -
‘PA Woman rais'd to foadmir'd a Pitch,
By Menlefs Valiant loft, the Prize became
Of the Pellzan Youth, and crown’d his Name.
And, as if all, that Afia could prepare,
Where Hannibal appear'd, too little were
T’attend his Fate; asif theRarthalone
Too Narrow were, for Him, to Fight upon. |
Though Europe gave her Aids, and Warlike Thrace,
Muftring her Chariots, did the War Embrace,
Cilician, and Phenician Ports are throng’d
With Ships for War, and thofe where Hero long’d
So oft to fee Leander from the Seas
Rifing (like Hejp'rus, whenhe fought to pleafe
The Paphian Queen) untill returning Day
Reviv'd her Fears, and call’d her Love away.
But when the Rumour of fo great a War,
Somany Nations joyn'd, though diftant far,
Touch’d the Italian Coatt : as {wift, as Thought,
To Rome it flies, and, foon as thither brought,
Fear through all Quarters runs, in fev'ral Shapes
Affrights their Mindes, commits a thoufand Rapes
Upon their Senfe, and greater Prodigies,
Then all before, abufed Fancy fees,
Whatever did Portend their former Ills,


Seems now again to fright the World, and fills =
. ¢


(e) From the Medes, the Perfians


; (as alfo the Armenians) learned their


Arts of Riding , Shooting, and fike-

wife their Habit, and Cuftom of ador.

ing their Kings, Straboinhis Eleventh
ook. .


(f} Semiramis, Queen of Babylon,
renowned for Her many Great ViG@o-
ries in Afia, over the greateft parr
whereof She Reigned fourty two
Years , and at the Age of Sixtytwo
Years was flain byher Son Ainss :
yrho degenerating (as likewife mot
of Her Succeffours) from her Virtue,


' the Empire fell firft into the Power of

_ the Perfians, who Setcicto Alexander.

- OF Her, fee Fwftine, in bis Tenth
Book;


Sgr hn ae PR ge aa Te ge ete Pleo eae ee a OE


38 ~ A&A Continuation of | Book Hi.


The People’s Ears. Sometimes the Alps are faid
To tremble, while Trinacrian Flames invade
Th’ ItalianShore: a8. if, from A2tna’s Womb,
Th’ Infernal Gods, themfelves, had threatned ‘Rome.
Etrurian Augurs, ftrait, confulted are, —
And, from thefe vain Reports, divine a War;
While Nature, fporting, to confirm their F eas,
Makes Lions bring forth Lambs, and Wolves teem
Then, as if Carthage had her Chains again C Bears.
Thrown off, andarming her Revenge with Spain,
The Boit, (eltz, and thofe Nations all,
That Rome had reafon fill her Foes to call,
Did Italy Invade: the Roman Dames
~ Runcothe Temples, and with Holy Flames
The Altars Crown, and thus to Heav'n complain.
If thefe our Walls yeemerit to remain
(Great Father Fove) if Sybil’'s Prophecies
Shall be confirm’d, and thou doft not defpife - |
TLarpeian Tow'rs,: Ah! then, why fhould not We,
After fo many Wounds, and Toils, be Free ¢
Was Rome exalted to fo High a State,
Through fo much Blood, that She might be to Fate
A richer Sacrifice ° and mutt She fall
By None, but by the Hand of Hannibal?
Rather to thofe her Walls her Pow’r confine,
And with the Tarquins let Porfenna joyn :
Orto the Rage of Senones, or Flames
Of Brennus give Usup. Let not thofe Names,
That with fuch Valour have your Temples, here,
So oft preferv'd, and were efteemr'd fo Dear
To Heav'n, be now made Victims to the Hate
OfOne proud Man; who, toaccelerate
. Our Ruin, hath difturb’d thePeace of all
"Fhe World. If FatesDecree, that ‘Rome mult fall, .
Give


\w


At A,


Book II. Sirrus Iraurcus. 39


Give Her a Fo, whofe Virtues may exceed

Her Own; and let our Crimes, and Vices bleed

By amore Pious Hand, fuch, as from Blame

May free your Juftice, with a better Name.

He, Perjur’d, from thofe Holy Altars flies,

Where Peace was {worn,and doth that League defpife,

Which in the Name of all the Gods was fign’d,

And now his Arms hath witha People joyn’d,

Where We that Fate, which He at Capua found,

Shall undergo; where Vices will abound,

As Victories encreafe, and We fhall be

Loft, by our Triumphs, in their Luxury.

(2) Thus will perfidious Carthage, not by Arms,

See her Revenge on Us, but Afia’s Gharms.. were foon entangled in the Delights
of thofe Provinces, and brought their


Mean while great Scipio, who their former Fears Vicesinto aly, ro the Rein of the
Had drown’d in Carthaginian Mothers Tears,
( Whom Heav'n, to balance Hannibal, to Rome
Had lent, and in his Hand had plac’d the Doom
Of allthe World) with gently-breathing Gales,
From the Italian Shore, to 4fia Sails, |
T explore the King’s Intent. Atlength, He eame
To that fam’d City, where Diana's Name
Ina fair Temple more Devotion moves,
With gentile Rites, the ‘” Lhoantéan Groves.


(¢) After the Romanes had ad-
vanced their Conquefts into Afia,they


(b) Thoas, King of the Taurick, Re-


No weeping Mother hereto Heav’n complains, gion in Seyibia, where Dians bad bet
: . : tars, on wohicn t cy Ooffere umane
While her Son 5 Blood the Cruel Altar {tains. Blood. The fame likewife was a Cu-


ftom at Carthage. See Sitins in his


But the bright Goddefs, under Silver Shrines, PE Be
As Pleas’d appears, as when Her Brother joyns,
With full reflected Beams, her radiant Horns,
And, more then all the Stars, the Night adorns.
Ina large Plain, through which eM eander brings
His Winding Waters, in a thoufand R ings,
To the Myrtéan Main, the City ftands ;
Firftbuilt (they fay) by Amazonian Bands,
That


(3) Who flew the Boar, fent by
Diana to Plague Caledansa, and, difpu-
ang che Trophy of his Head with his
Mother's Brothers flew them alfo , for
which, by the Sorcery of his Mother
Althaa,He likewife dyed Languifhing.
Qvid, AMet. lib. 8.


-


A Continuation of ~- BookiIl,


That from TZ bermodéon, with Moon-like Shields,
Victorious march'd, through the Trachéan Fields,
Commanded by an Oracle before,

To build a City, wherea Fith, and Boar

Should, Dying, thew the Place ; Fate was their Guide


_This Way : where, fitting on the Ground, they {py'd


Some bufilyemploy’d their Living Prey

To broil, late taken from th’ adjoyning Sea.

When ftrait a Fith throws, with a fudden Leap,

A burning Coal, upon a Neighbring Heap
OF Straw ; which turn’d to Flame, a fleeping Boar
Beneath it they beheld. Earth None before
MoreTerrible had bred ; as Big, as that,

Which both Diana's, and eA lthea’s Hate

4) On Meleager drew. But this was there

With better Omen found, ¢ Inftrua them, where,
The Goddefs would on Earth moft Pleas'd abide,
And make fam’d Ephefus great Alta's Pride.

They all, amaz‘d, his weighty Bulk admire:

A\nd, as He, Grunting, ftarteth from the Fire,

A ready Hand a well-aim’d Jav'lin throws,
Which in his Shoulder fix'd Cas He arofe )


~ ADeadly Wound. But yet awhile He fled,


(k) This Image is faid tobe of a
Blackifh Wood, very rude in Form,
bur impofed on the People as fallen
from Heaven, as is mentioned by Sc,
Paul ( Adis xix. 33.) and kept inthe
Sanctuary of this Magnificent Temple,
fo renowned through all Afia. It was
the Work of above an hundred Kings,
and nor onely endowed with 'eftima-
ble Wealth, but wich Privviege of ite.
fuge, whofe Bounds were euiarged, or
diminifhed, according to the Devotion
of the Princes, that governed, ntl]
abohthed by Augufins,as a Nurfery
of Villains,


And they with Shouts purfu’d, till, falling Dead,

The Oracle was by his Death fulfill'd,

And they their City thererefoly'd to build.
Now dothe Sacred Ploughs the Walls defign,

And to the Stars the lofty Turrets joyn

Their thining Tops. The Goddefsto renown,

And to Immortalize their Labours, down

From Heav'n her (© Image fent, which with it more

OF Riches brought, then if another Show’r

(Like that of Danae's) Fove powr'd again

Upon the Place : or, if to Silyer Rain


The


Book II, Sirius [rTaticus.


The very Stars diffolv'd. For foonas Fame
The Prefence of the Goddefs, and her Name .
Through e4 (a had divulg’d: Devotion brings


_ From Ganges, and Hydafpes greateft Kings,


Who {weeteft Spices, which their Fields adorn,
Cull'd from the Bofom of the Rifing Morn,
With Gold, and Ivory,devoutly lay

Upon her Shrine, and as their Tribute pay

All Treafures, that the Womb of Afan Earth
Enrich: all, that the Seres, at the Birth

OF Day,could gather from their filken Trees :
What the Sabean, or Arabian {ees,

Dropping from fragrant Boughs: with whatfoe're
From fhining Rocks, or Shells the Indians bare
To Eaflern Kings, into the Sacred Fane
Are heap’d : which now no longer can contain
Its Wealth. And therefore they a Work begun;
Then which the Rifing, nor the falling Sun,
None greater view’d; whofe Structure did excell,
What ever Fame of Babylon doth tell,

Or Pharian Pyramids ; which by one Age
Could not accomplith’d be, but did engage
Succeeding Kings, who in that Work alone
Employ’d the Riches of the Syrian Throne,’

And puzzled Art, to finde out Waies, to .fhow
Their Pious Bounty. There, as White as Snow,
Tall, polifh’d Alablafter Pillars fhine

C As pureft Emblems of that Pow'r Divine,
Was there ador'd ) upon whofe carved Heads
An Ebon Roof the curious Builder fpreads.
This, like black Night, hung or’e the Place, untill
Myriads of Silver Stars the Frame did fill ;

And, to exprefs her Empire in the Skies,


With a full Orb, a Cryftal Moon did rife.
F Through


=


A Continuation of Book Il.


Through this, as Mother to Succeeding Day,

Clear Light flow'd in, and did at large difplay

The Temple's Glory: There you might behold

High Alears, not adorn’d, but built with Gold.

The Hearths were of the bright Pyropus made,

Whofe Flames the Sacrifices on them lay’d,

Seem'd of themfelves to burn: all other Fire

As vanquith’d by their Luftre, to retire;

All Gems thus were, or beautiful, or Rare

( Asif their Native Quarries had been there )

In greateft Plenty thine, in ev'ry part

So plac’d, their Value is encreas'd by Art, -

Their lively Figures as exactly ftand,

Compos’d of fev'ral Stones, as if the Hand

OF fome rare Painter, to exprefs his Skill

In Colours, did the Walls, and Pavement fill.

Through a large Plain of Em’rads, with her Crue

Of Cretan Nymphs, Diana doth purfue

The flying Game: their Arms, and Shoulders bare;

Their Zyrian Vetts tuck'd to their Knees, their Hair

In lovely Trefles, yet neglected flows

Upon their Backs: fomearm'd with golden Bows ;

Some carry Darts, fome Spears, whofe points, infteed

OF Steel, with Diamonds, make the Beafts to bleed.

This wounds a Panther, that a Tyger, this

A Lion kills, not any Hand doth mifs

The Beaftat which it aims, and thus with Chafe

Of various kindes, they beautify the Place.
Above the reft a fecret Chappel ( where

The Eunuch-Priefts alone permitted were

Toenter} did delight, and Terrour move.

In a fair Fountain fhadow’d by a Grove

Of varied Agats made, encom paftround

With naked Nymphs, the Hart, Adlon, found


Bright


Book II, Sitrus Iraticus.


Bright Guthia bathing; ‘bout her Snow-white Thighs


The purling Waters play : with fixed Eyes —
At firft, He peeping ftands behinde a Tree;

But Curious, anon, more near to fee, -

He farther fteps, and ftepping is betra’d
By rufling Leaves. Startling; the Delian Maid
Looks back, and {pying him, Anger; aad Shame
To be fo feen, at once her Face enflame.

As Red She looks, as when her Brother's Lighe
Deni‘d, She doth’? Zhefsalian Dames aftright.
And now her Rage no longer will delay

His Fate, but ftrait his Form fhe takes away:


~ Longer his Head, and Ears, upon his Brow


Large Horns,his Arms,and Thighs more flender grow,
Nomore Erect, but prone t'wards Earthhe goes:


. In alla Beaft, but yer, alafs; he knows


He isnot what he was ; when ftrait the Cry
Ofhis Molofsian Hounds perfwades to fly.

The Nymphs, all laughing, urge them to purfue
The Chale : He flies, they follow, and in View,


‘ Pinch’din the Haunch, ¢ to fhew Diana’s Power )
. He falls,and they their Mafter chang’d devour. Cnone


Here his two Guefts, then which the World had
Then Greater feen, whofe Prefence more his Throne


Renown’'d,then all the Trophies he had gain’d,


_ The King with Chearful Welcom entertain’d,


And to their Eyes, as to invite his Foes

Toa new Conqueft, prodigally thews

His Empire's Riches, For no King before

That had the Syrian Scepter fway'd, did more

Poffefs: He wasof all the Richeft Heir,

Thatdid Great eflexander’s Trophies fhare,

And that vaft Wealth not onely kept Entire,

But greater, which his Gonquefts did acquire,
Fz Heap‘d


43


44+


A Continuation of Book Il.


Heap donhis Throne. Asif, to entertain

Thofe famous Heroes, Fortune did ordain,

That paft, and prefent Ages fhould combine

To yield their Spoils, and in that Honour | joyn.
Itwasa Day, when to commemorate

The King’s Nativity, th’ Ephefan State

With annual Rites their Loyal Joys expreft.

The King (as Cuftom was ) a Stately Feaft

Prepares : the Nobles all, invited,come,

And there the Fates of Carthage, and of Rome

(Scipio, and Hannibal} the Banquet grace,

And now meet, not to Fight, but to Embrace.

So when Ainezs fled from Ruin’d Troy,

And fought a forein Conqueft to enjoy,

Met by Zydides on th’ Oenotrian Shore,

They laid afide that Fury, which before

Reign’d in their Breafts; which Xanthus Yellow Flood,

And the Dardanian Plains had ftain'd with Blood,

And, with new Friendfhip, what they both had done

In Arms, repeat, fince that fad War begun.

They now are glad each others Face to know:

Each counts the other Worthy fucha Fo:

Whole conftant Courage nothing of Succefs _

In War could heighten, nor of Lofs deprefs.

Whole Virtue in all Fortunes was the fame,

And ow’d its Titles to no other Name.

Who, in purfuit of Honour, fought not te

Deftroy a Noble Fo, but to fubdue.

And, when in Arms, would do what Man could auc

T’ attempt, and after Victory would {pare

The Conquer'd Blood: nor vainly fought to praife

His own brave Deeds, and blaft another's Bays.

Such in th’ Ephefan Court thefe Heroes fhin’d,

And with as free, and ftrict Embraces, joyn’d


Their


Book II. Sirius Iraticus.


Their Valiant hands, as if ner Trebia’s Flood,’
Nor Canna had been ftain‘d with Roman Blood
By Carthaginian Swords; Nor Hannibal
So lately had beheld his Countrie’s Fall.
In Zama’s Wounds. Nor Scipio his Fate
Depreft upbraids :. nor Hannibal his Hate,
At Stygian Altars fworn, difcovers now.
But Sacred Concord oneach Heroe’s Brow
Sits, as Enthron’d, and over all the reft
Her Wings difplay’s, ’ inaugurate the Feaft.
And now the Face of Mirth appears through all
TheCourt, Th’ invited in a {pacious Hall
At Iv'ry Tables fit, and richly there
Their Senfes feed, with whatfoever Rare
The e4fian World affords. The Seas, the Earth,
And Air, to gratulate fo higha Birth,
Their choiceft Tribute fend, and all »thae Art
To heighten Nature’s Bounty could impart,
Was liberally employ'd. Amaz’d to fee
The ftrange Excels of Syrian Luxury,
Soon cloy’d with diffrent Thoughts, the Heroes are
Affected, and perpend the future War.
The ‘Romans, pleas'd to think how weak in Fight
Thofe Arms will prove, which foftned with Delight,
All Virtue fo difarm’d : How eafily
The Roman Swords, their Way to Victory
Would finde, where Honour led them on, and Spoils


So wealthy, were the Trophies of their Toils.


But Hannibal, more fadly thoughtful, calls
To Minde the Fate of (apa, and the falls
Of thofe brave Libyan Bands, that had fo far
Advancdhis Name, till amore cruel War
Of Eafe, and Riot, at effeminate Boards, (Swords,


Un-nerv'd their Valour , dull'd their Conqu'riag
Blafted


46


(3, In that Night, when Alexan-
der was born, the Temple of Ephesus
was fired by Heroftrats,who,upon the
Wrack, confeft He did it to make him-


felf Famous ) whereupon Timeus’ (as.


Cicero) or Adagnefins (as Platarch
Tae faa eee Goddefs (called
Lucina, when She a&s the Mid-wife’s
part) was fobufy to bring Alexander
into the World, that She could not
have time to fave her Temple. Cic.
ae Nat. Dear. lib, 2. Plat. Alexan-
der.


A Continuation of | Book II.


Blafted thofe Laurels, that before had crown’d


-Their warlike Brows, and, as in Letbé, drown’d


All Mem'ry of themfelves, in thefe foft Charms
So loft, they quite forgot the Ufe of Arms.

As thus they ruminate, &amolpus brings
His Iv'ry Lute, and to the warbling Strings
é\ccords his Voice, and chants, in fmootheft Lays,
The Kimg's Defcent, and Alexander's Praife.
How firft the Horned God his Libyan Grove,
And Sacred Springs, for fair Olympia's Love,
Forfook, and how, from that Divine Embrace,


Small Pella was by a Celeftial Race


~ Renown’, and while defcending to the Earth


“Mong other Pow’rs Divine, ¢’ afsift his Birth,
Th’ Ephefan Goddels, bufyed wholly there,
Kept not her Famous Temple in her Care,

‘”) An Impious Hand, to build it felf a Name,
With Sacrilegious Flames th’ admired Frame
Deftroy’d. But,when Lucina’s Care had giv'n
To Earth a mighty Conquerour, to Heav'n

) A future Deity, and he began

To fhew the World,that he was more then Man,
By his great Deeds, to his Immortal Name

As humbly proftrate, as to the bright Flame
Of rifing Day, th’ admiring Perfian bow’d.


To him Sabzans, and Arabians vow'd


Their richeft Gums: to him the Parthians broughe
Their Bowes un-bent, and conque'rd Quivers, fraught
With fatal Shafts: him all, from Ganges Shore,
To thofe, that ACile’s myfterious Streams adore,
Their Lord obey’d, and, next the God of Wine,
For Wonders dene acknowlegd'd as Divine.

But when he was for Earth too mighty grown,
And fummon’d hence to a Celeftial 1 nrone,

Heav'na


Heav'n, thae the Syrian Monaichy might ftand -
For ever firm, into Selemons Hand .
The facred Sceptergave. Sinee none, but he
Was worthy tofucceed a Deity,


- Who could Himlelf fubdue. An ad that fae


Tranfcends whatever canbe done in War,

And Man Immortal makes. For,who the Force
Of Beauty can withftand, or can divorce

Love from his wounded Breaft, miay juftly more
OF Conqueft boaft, then Gods have done before,
Yet He, when by expiring Sighs he found

Thofe very Eyes his Pious Son did wound,


" That his own Souls farpriz’d, and that the Name


©) OF Stratonica had the hidden Flame
Reveal’d ( to fhew how much a Noble Minde


(0) Antiochus,the Sonof Selencus}
fell in Love with his Mother in Law,
Stratonica, and afhamed to reveal his


‘Bove (upidinean Shafts prevails) refign'd Prats fell delperately Sick. Eraf-


ftratas,the Phyfician, finding ic a Difeafe
rather of the Minde then Body, and
obferving that while Srratonica was
prefent , his Pulfe, and suits were
Rronger, difcovered the Caufe of his
Malady to his Father, who readily
affented to his Defires, and from them
came the race of this Antiochus.


Into his Arms his Love, and refcu'd from
The hand of Fate, a Raceof Kings to come.
Hence to our Royal Line this folemn Day
Weconfecrate, and grateful Honours pay.

Thus the Iénian{ung; and as among
The reft, the lofty Subject of His Song
The Libyan applauds : the Romane thus
Tohimbegan. Though ‘twixt the Gods, and Us,
Great is the difference, yet Virtue may
Raife Men, to thofe Felicities, which they
In Heav’nenjoy, and none fo worthy are
Of that high Blifs, as thofe whofe Name in War
Hath plac'd them here, on Earth, above the reft
Of Humane Race. Fate cannot fuch devett
Of Immortality. For, with Applaufe,
The World adores them, and obeys their Laws.
From thefe all Arts, and Virtues, that the Minde


OF Man enrich, at firft took Birth, and finde’
Their


A Continuation of | _ Book JI.


- Their juft Rewards. For when Immortal Fove


Had fram‘d the World, though all the Stars above

In Order plae'd, and ftrugling Nature faw

All things created here, her certain Law,

And Times obey; yet, guided by their Will,
Mankinde among themfelvesa Chaos ftill

Retain’d. No Bounds of Juftice to reprefs

The Hand of Rapine : Wicesin, Excefs,

Reign‘d in all Mindes,the Names of Right,andWrong
Unknown toall ; the Virtuous were the Strong.
Nor then did Man to greater Good afpire,

Then what feem’d fuch, fuggefted by Defire.

But, left a Cuftom, in Licencious Deeds,

The ule of Reafon, and Celeftial Seeds

Should quite deprave; that true Promethean Fire,
TheBreafts of fome Brave Heroes did infpire

Thofe Monfters to fubdue, and to compel
The too Licencious under Lawsto dwell:
The Ill to punith, and the Good to Crown |
With due Rewards. Hence Honour, and Renown
The Mindes of Mortals, firft,from bafer Earth (Birth.
Rais‘d towards Heav'n, from whence they took their
But fince Lyeus, and eA lcides Wars

The World with Trophies, and the Heav'n with Stars
Adorn‘d,who (tell me) haththe greateft Name
In Arms defery’d, and an Immortal Fame?

If fuch their Praife, iffuch their Merits are,

The Libyan replies : No Hand in War,

So worthy Fame, fo mighty things hath done,

As the Pelkean Youth : whofe Valour won
More Victories,then Time had Years to Grown
His Life allow’d: TheForce of whofe Renown
His Laws on fartheft Nations did obtrude,
And Kingdoms, which he never faw, fabdu'd, .
or


Book II.  Srrrus Iraticus,


For who, that heatd, iow great his Conquefts were,
How fmall his’ Force, would not, with Reafon, fear


Thofe Arms , which Perfia's ”) Monarch (compaft


49


ae


(p) When fome of Alexander's


With Troops,fo numerous,that all the Ground (round Captains aw the vat Number of his


“Twixt Zigrss, and Euphrates, {carce could yield |
Them room to ftand ) fubdu’d in open Field.
Scorning to Fortune, or to Night to ow


A Victory, He, in full Day, the Fo


_ Affails, while God, and Men together ftand


Spectatours of the Wonders of his Hand,

And fee each Macedonian Souldiers bring

A Nation captivated to their King.

But, not to {peak of Battels, where his Skill,

And Condué, all fabjected to his Will,

No Town, no City (though the Sea, and Land


-Confpir'd againfthis Force ) could Him withftand ;


(7) Our Lorian Walls alone the Glory have
To have refifted well: and that They gave
A\ longer Stand to th’ Torrent of his Rage,


Then all the Perfian Pow’'rs, that did engage


Againft his Arms. No Object was above

His Courage ; whofe Example would remove
All Obftacles, that others might deterr :

And though in great Defigns he would confer,
The Bett, he follow'd his own Thoughts alone,
And fomadeall his Victories hisOwn.,

And may He have the Praife : for none hath more


_ In Arms.deferv'd, perhaps no God before.


Next him that Noble &pirore, that came
To the Tarentines Aid, the Crown may claim.
His Courage, whena Youth, Pantauchus found
Above his Strength,though for his Strength renown’d.
While intwo Armies View (as once before


His mighty Anceftour, on Xanthus Shore,
G Great


Enemies, they advifech him to fall up-
on them by Night: but He replyed,
he fcarned to Real a Vidtory. Quintus


Cartins,


(4) The City of Tyre was fo obfti-
nate in holding out againkt Alexander's
whole Force, that he refolyed once to
raife the Siege , but, fearing it might
ftain the Glory of his former vido.
ries, after feven Months Siege, and
Many terrible Attacks ( wherein He
loft a great part of his Army) He


took it. See Quintus Curtivs in hi
Fourth Book, Quin ‘artins in his


50


A Continuation of Book II.


(7) Pyrrbus was invited into Ira-
Jy, by the Tarentines, to affift them a-
gaihft the Rorsancs. He was a Prince,
eminent for his Valour, and Efleemed
by the Adacedonians, as the likeft Alcc~
ander of any of his Succeffours. He flew
Pantanchus, Demetrins bis Lieuteuant,
in fingle Combat. See Plutarch in the
Life of Pyrrhus.


Great Heffor flew )} He, his proud Fo fubdu’d,

And, to the wondring Macedonians, fhew'd

All chings, that they had feen in former Times

‘r) In their fo glorious Prince, except his Crimes.

Nor were his Victories by Arms alone,

Where Fortune more, then Virtue oft is known

To givethe Bays. His Wifdom Conquetft findes,

Where his Sword could not reach,and or’e the Minde,

Of Men his Triumph gains, and thus he drew

From ‘Romane Leagues Italian Peopleto

His fide. They thought themfelves more Safe within

His Camp, then they in fenced Towns had bin

Under the Romane Laws. For he firft aughe

That Art, and Campsco their Perfection brought.
Batif a Third you Seck, who hath no lefs,

Then thefe deferv'd ( though Envious Gods Suece&

Deny'd ) Mehere, Me Hannibal behold,


~ Who with as early Courage, and as bold


Attempts, a War againft the ‘Romane Name

Purfu’d, and from the fartheft Gades came,

To feek a Fo, which future Times might call

Molt Worthy, to contend with Hannibal.

Not foft Sabeans, or Arabians, or

A People, that the Rites, and Toils of War

So little knew, that charg‘d with rich Perfume,

More then with Sweat, or Duft, did more prefume
Cn Numbers, then their Arms; or fuch, whofe Eafe


_ And Lufts, muft prove the Conquerour’s Difeafe,


And futureRuin. I through Nations born

In War, and nurtur‘d in it, witha Scorn

Of Fate, and Fortune, or’e Pyrene, o're

The dreadful Alps, Victorious Enfigns bore.

And found that Fo, with whom I mightcontend

With greater Fame, who boaft, that they defcend
From


Book II. Sittus IrTaxicus, 51


From Max himlelf, and ta. the World no lef
Appear, by their great, Valour, and Succels.
‘) Nor wast, when Some other Citie’s Pride
With Rome for Empire ftrove, and did divide
Their featter'd Force : but when all Isaly
Her Strength united to-encouster Me. »
Ifhall not open thofe deep Wounds again,
Which then (an Enemy )- I gave, or ftairi
Our Sacred Mirth with mention of each Flood;
Whole Streams ennobled were with Latian Blood,
Shed there by Me (and ftill perhaps, when I -
Ani vam’d, affrighted to their Fountains fly)
V'le onely fay, more then three Luftra there
(In fpite of all che Arts,and Arms, that were
Empley'dagainft Me ) I Victorious ftai‘d,
And, (after many Towns, and Cities made
My Vaflals, and three Valiant Gonfuls Fall)
Shook fove Himfelf within the Capitol
With Terrour ef my Arms, and, had not Rome,
By a bafe Envy of my Deedsat Home,
More then by her Own Valour, been reliev’d,
Our Carthaginian Mothers had not griey‘d,
To {ee their Sons in Chains, but had by Me
Been made, what Romans are,atleaft, been Free.
To this the Roman, with a Smile, replies,
If Thee the Glory of thy Victories,
With thefe Immortal Heroes, thus hath joyn'd,
I prithee fay: what Place thall be afsign’d
To Me, who after I through Spain had fought
My W3y, and, Conqu'ring, into Libya broughe
The War, the Greateft of \(wnidian Kings
Subdu’d, and Captive made, and, on the Wings
Of that freth Victory, tow'rds Carthege (where
But by thy Hand alone mT did Defpair
2


(s) As when Tarentwm., Capua?
"and other Cities contended for ne.
Mority with Rome, and gave Opporta-
nity to forein Enemies to enter Italy,
when Hannibal came againft chem, all
Parts of Jealy, with Sicily, Sardinia ,
&c. united under the Roman Laws.


| - an A Continuation of Book Il, Book II. Sirius Irarreus. 53 | f
fo :


Already have fubdu'd, and Warlike Thrace


To be fecur’d.) march’d ‘on, and, in one Day,
; C Where Mars inhabits) doth our Lawsembrace.


| nee * _. Took all thy former Laurels quite away. ©


"Tis true. (faid Hannibal) but, finse the Fate ~
OF Virtucis,to want an Advecate, ie


If once Depreft, think me not Vain,when I


Thofe Merits plead, that are tranfcended by

Thy Fortune onely. Had I conquer'd Thee,

The World no other Conquerour, but me,

Had known, evn Fhofe I nam’d their Place had sh


. InFame, and:Kome the Triumphs ° She doth boaft.


As thus they mutually their Merits plead,
‘The Sun began to hide his Flaming Head -
In the Hefperian Main, and the oppreft -
With Mirth and Wine, the Night invites te Reft.
To which, when all retir'd, theKing (whofe Heart
Was fix'd on Wer) to Hannibal, apart, ae


Thus breaks his laft P efolve. I fhould forget -


My Honour ( Hannibal) if what, as yet,

I have confulted onely, I fhould now
Delay. The Profecution of thy Vow

Is with my State involv’d, and ‘Rome thall fee,


‘Tis not thy Fortune We Embrace, but Thee.


That, which, through Servile Fear, hath been deni’d -
By thine own (Carthage, thall be here fupply'd
By Me, and fince we know how Various are
The Chances, and Events of Dubious War,
Why fhould we think the Fates will Fayour more
The Romans now, then they have Thee before 2
Fortune alsifts the Bold,and whofoer'e
Attempteth Coldly lofeth by his Fear.
‘Tis therefore now decreed no more thall ‘Rome
On Zama’s Field, and NCabis Fall prefume,
We Nations, great as any She hath known,
The Parthians, Medes, admired Babylon
Already


My better Fortune,what thy Fate hath croft,

Shall give thee, and redeem what Thou haft loft.
This faid ; t’ enjoy the Benefits of Night

Ti-ey both withdrew : but nothing could invite

The Libyan Prince to reft. His thoughts purfue

His hop'd Revenge, and in themfelves renew

The promis'd War. Impatientof Delay

He counts the Minutes, and defired Day

Implores. As promis'd Nuptials waking keep

A longing Lover, and quite banifh Sleep,

Unsill Enjoyment fatiates his Defire,

And both gives Fuel, and abates the Fire.


The End of the Second Book


of the Continuation.


Book IT.


35


A CoNTINUATION OF


SILIUS ITALICUS,


To the DeaTH of


HANNIBAL:


an


The Third Book,


Tue ArGcuMENT.


The Syrian Rome defies, both Scipio's are,
By choice, appointed to purfue the VV ar.
(Contagion wafts the Romau Navy, while
The Syrian Fleet’s detain'd near Venus Ifle,
By adverfeVVinds. The Syrian Lords, a Shore
VVith Hannibal, the Cyprian Rites explore.
The PV inds again invite both Fleets to Sea.
They meet, and fight. The Syrians lofe the Day.
The Libyan Captain to Bethynia flies,

A | : VVhere, to fhun Treafon, He by Poifon Dies.


a U T when the Empire of the
Night was done,


= And fleep the Scepter yielded t
2 6 the Sun,


‘audens fuccumbere Dextra.,


Fef nat Stigias, lave a iho tr Anticpatgus “Ronis Sibi Sp eravit, Honores « == = es a alas Peers ii if the


g pe Ee i] frightful Wine
Had rais’d in ev'ry Breafta War, combine.
With Hannibal, to fhake off all Delay,
To haften on the Fates, and take away


2 tps : 2
— Drani$simo Viro Gulrelmo


fhoufe in (omulatu Ebor: Armg:


enn nner ee


56


A Continuation of Book III.


a a a ee ee


(a) Antiochus, refolving to hold
what He had wonin Greece , fent to.
treat with the Romane Em adour ,
his Favorite, who (as Livy faith in
his Thircy fifth Book) wholly Tgno-
rant of Forcin Affairs, inftead of com-
pofing Differences, made them wider,
by Upbraiding the Romanes for inter-
medling with his Mafter’s Concerns,
and Defying their Power.


Their Fears of Peace, and ftrait the Syrian Kings
(«)Defy proud Minioto the Romane brings.
eMinio, fablime in Syrian Blood, then fway'd
His Mafter’s Counfels ; Him the World obey’'d:
Nothing above him, but the Syrian Throne
He faw, all things, beneath it, were his Own.
Whatev'’r was done, whatever was defign’d,
Was not the King’s, but Haughty Minio’s Minde.
Thus, favour'd with High Infolence, He fold
Rewards of Virtue, all things uncontroul'd


Difpos'd. His greedy Avarice fuppreft


(6) Unle& employed in fome o-
ther War, the Confals were to be
Generals ,{0 that Scipio Africanus, net
being Confsi, could noc pretend to that
Command.


All Thoughts of Bounty in his Mafter’s Breft :
The Name of Merit in that Gulph was drown’d,
And, as he pleas’d, the fuff'ring People found
Eafe, or Opprefsion, to fuch Mifchiefs may
A fingle Favorite Kings, and Crowns betray.
When He a Periodto the Syrian. Pride,
And Hopes of Carthage, as he then defi'd
The Pow’r of ‘Rome, had vainly giv'n: with Rage,
Which nothing, but their Ruin, could aflwage,
The Romane Prince tothe Myrtéan Main
Defcends, and feeks Italian Shores again.

Soonas arriv’d, the Voice of War through all
The City flies. The careful Con/uls call
A frequent Senate: Scipiorepeats
Syria’s vain Boaft of Pow’r, and vainer Threats
OF a proud Favorite, and how the Name
OF Hannibal their Courage did enflame ;
What aids by Land, and Sea prepared were; Cfear :
What Cartbage thence might hope ; what Rome might
All which in Counfel weigh’d, and War decreed,
‘Twas hard-to fay, what Shoulders fhould fucceed,
Tobearthat Burthen : “) Scipio was then
Debarr’d by Law to take that Charge agen ;


ame


Book III.


SILIus ITaLrcus, -


A Name that fo much Virtue did inchide,
That Hannibal could never be fubdu’d
Without its Influence, nor (arthage ceafe
To emulate Kome's Triumphs, and her Peace.

‘-) Lclins greatVirtues,through the World were fam’‘d
And, where the Noble Scipio was not nam'd
Deferv'd the Bays. The Younger ‘?) Scipio known
More by his Brother's Actions then his Own.
Defir'dto do, as He had done before

To vanquifh Kingdoms, and by Conquefts more |


‘€) Then Years to count his Age. But fome,whom fear


OF Syria's Force,and ( what coft Rome fo dear }-


"The Name of Hannibal, then mov’'d, did ftand


Fora more knowing, and experienc’d Hand.

One whofe great Virtues by his Deeds were known,
Supported by no Merits, but his Own.

And, fach was Lalius held by Land, and Sea,

For whom Acilivs, this Important Plea

Affumes. If We Rome's Safety feek,and more
Then Private Names, the publick Peace adore,
Whence Fathers this Difpute ¢ whence this Delay
Why fhould we leave to Fortune what we may
Prevent with Reafon * when Diftempers are
Grown Great, the Wile {trong Remedies prepare.
Let not thofe Seeds of Virtue that appear

In Younger Breafts, be valu'd at the Fear

OF Publick Ruin We've already found

What Milchief Youth (not by afingle Wound)
May through their Heat produce, and ftill do feel
The Anguith of thofe Wounds,the Libyan fteel,
Through them inflicted : which, if now again
Torn open, willingeminate the Pain.

One Errour all our former Ills recals,


And brings the World againft Us to our Walls.
H For


57


Se


(¢) Lelins,a Perfon very Eminent


9 for his fingular Virtwe, next under


Scipio, Commanded both in Spain,and
Africk, and their Friendthip was fo
Great, that it was drawn into Exam-
ple for fuchas would contraé Inviol-
able Amity fo, that Cicero makes them
the Subject of his Difcourfe pe ami-
Curia,

(4) The Younger Scipio, called Lue
cirs, though of excellent Endowments,
had not yet been renowned (as was
Lalies) tor any Military A@ions, bac
was then chofen Confu! with Lelias.

(2) Scipio Africanus, was but
twenty four Years old, whenhe cook
NeW-Carthage, in Spin.


(f) The Yemerity of Flaminins,
and. Minutizs. See the Fifth, and the
Eight Books of Silins.


ra : A Continuation of Book III.


For Rome alas.) can beat no Strength of Friends
Abroad, but what on her Succefs depends.
Her Virtue onely mufther Wealth defend,
‘Her Wisdom to employ it, her Beft Friend.
Then let not Favour toa Private Name
Anticipate yourReafon. I difclaim
All Envy to thofe honour’d Heads, that have
Enrich’d Us with their Trophies, and. that gave
New Titles to our Fa/ft. May they live
Sull glorious in them, and all Time furvive.
But let not Us Heav’n’s Blefsings fo confine,
Asif Entail’d’ upon a fingle Line.
Our Laws have fo ordain’d, that all, that are
Deferving, may in Publick Honours fhare.
Hence Libyan fome; fome Gallick wreaths havecrown'd:
By fev'ral Lands, are fev’ral Names renown’d.
Our Fathers ftill che Burthen of the State
Impos'd on Shoulders, equal to the Weight.
The Greateft Heroes ever would contend,
When Prudence,more then Fortune, might commend
Their Deeds. For, though the great e4 cides kill'd
Serpents in’s Cradle, yet till he was Skili'd
Through many Labours, how his Strength to guide,

ere He never withthe ‘s) Libyan Monfter tri’d
His God-like Courage. Let fuch Honours be
Beftow'd, when Dangers, ina lefs Degree,
Shall threaten Us, and when thefe Forein Storms
Cannot refift, but exercife your Arms.
What skilful Pilot, by late Tempeft toft,
His Veflel torn, fome Sails, and Tackle loft,
While ftill the rude Winds rage, the Billows roar
(Though now he hathin view his Native Shore )
Will Idle, too fecure of Safety, ftand,
And truft the Helm to a lefs Skilful Hand 2


No:


?


Book II. SILiIus ITALICcUs, , _ 5D .


:


No; letthis Senate's Wisdom fo provide,


That what We want of Strength, may be fupply'd


By Conduct : then, if't be decreed the State


‘Shall fuffer, We may not be blam’d, but Fate:


This faid ; his Silence a deep Silence through
The Senate {truck, and on great Scipio drew


The Eyes of all. In himit Jay toturn


F ‘ (4) The Box, into which they pnt
Their Choice to Votes, or Fortune of the Urn. their Lots, was fo called.


This did Young Scipio, Lalivs that defire :


; : ‘ ik
©) As confident,the Senate would require _ Ci) Lelins, confident of his Party -
in the Senate, was defirous to pi’ it to


A Man, whole former Aions might commend the Vote, Lacius Seipioto draw Lots
¢ ye were the two weies of choof-

- . é a an ing cers ) till encouraged by his
Their Choice, and ‘Rome upon his Care depend. Brother Africanus tole-ve it. the


Senate’s Choice, refolving to offer


After fome Paufe, and ftrugling ‘twixt the Names bill co bes Zina, wich
F “4 . etermined the Difpute.
OF deareft Friend, and Brother, while each claims saris


In his divided Soul an. equal Share, .


— Thus ef, fricanus doth himfelf declare.


I fhould forbear to fpeak, did I not fee
(Grave Fathers) that your Eyes are fix'd on Me;
On whoma Province lies more Weighty far,
Then was the Burthen of the #/rick War : é
For there Rome's Fortune with mine own did joyn ;
But this Inteftine Conflict’s wholly mine ;
While, for my Blood, |’gainft my Soul contend;
Diftinguifh’d ‘cwixta Brother, and a Friend.
A Friend, whom ‘Rome may boatt, that he was born
In herEmbrace: whofe Virtues do adorn
The Prefer, and the future Age will blefs.
Whom, as my better Genius Cl confefs )
I ever entertain’d : hisCounfels ftill
Purfu’das Oracles, and never will
My Lelius from my Soul divide. But now
Ev’n what Acilins pleads will not allow,
That to his Conduct we this War alsign.


This, onely, to our Name, the Pow’rs Divine
L Referve. <


SS ST ee RN


60


A Continuation of Book iil.


Referye. If greater Wars fhall threaten Rome,
The Honour of Command will beft become
My Noble Lelias ; and, when War fhallceale,


 Hee'l be her Ghiefeft Ornament in Peace.
Though now the Title, G x « aT, the Syrian King


Affumes, and to his Aid all e4fe bring,

Yet, if the Libyan Captain be not there,

Too mean a Province that for Lalius were.
The Gods their Blefsings, as the Stars beftow
Their Influence on Men, and Things below,
Do fev'rally difpenfe. Some Fatal are —

To thole, that be the moft renown’d in War,
Yet by lefs Warlike fall. Nottorepeat
Forein Examples, or to tell how Great

In Arms,ev'n by a Woman, (yrus fell.

Things nearer to Us ( Fathers) may compell
Your Wonder. After our beft Captains flain,
Your Scipio undertook the War in Spain,


“When {carce five Lujffra old, and all thofe Lands


Ck) Scipio Nafica, in the laft
Punick war, took Carthage, Sacked
it, andrafed the Walls.


Subdu'd, where: Hannibal thofe dreadful Bands


Amaifs’d,that fhook your Walls: What fince I’ve done


Becomes not Meto {peak, whater’e I won
Under Your Aupicies, was the Decree

Of Heav’n, fhould onely be atchiev'd by Me.
Nor cenfure me as Vain, who arrogate

So great a Partage in the ‘Romane Fate,

To fay, that, where the Lidyans are your Foes,
You mutt a Scipio to their Arms oppofe.


_ Carthage will ever threaten thefe our Walls, —


Till Heav’n our‘) Name unto her Ruin calls.
Then ‘tis nat, that [ emulate my Friend,

But for ‘Rome's Safety (Fathers) I contend:
And, if the Arguments of Youth diffwade
Your Choice, let my maturer Age be made


The


4


Book III. Sitrus Iraticus. | | &


The Balance of your Doubts, my Brother's Wears


~ Mine own exceed, when your greater Fears


Allay’d, with Victory ; and, that again


You may the fame affurance entertain, -


~ “Me his Lien-tenant make, and fearno more -


Thofe Arms, which | fubdu'd for you before.
This faid, loud Clamours, with a fall Affent,
The Temple fhook, and through the City went. |
Thenée through all Italy the fwift alarms
Of War excite the active Youth to Arms.
NoRegion from thofe Hills, whofe frozen Heads
The Stars invade, to where blew Neptune {preads
His frothy Arms about the Rbegian Walls,
Their Aid denies. The Name of Scipio calls
The moft Luxurious from their Choice Delights,
And to meet Dangers, under Him invites.
All, who their Country ; all, who Honour love,
His Enfigns {eek to follow, and to prove
What Fortune, and the Gods for them ordain, (Main
And now with num’rous Ships the Neighb’ring
Opprefs'd, groans under their vaft Weight, and feels
The Fate of Carthage from their brafen Keels.
Which, oft as the rebellious Billows rife,
Dath them to pieces : while the Winde fupplies


- With favourable Blafts their {welling Wings,


And tothe e4 fan Coaft the Army brings.

While Rome for future Triumphs thus provides,
Envy, (the Plagueof Courts )_ not Reafon guides
The Syrian Counfels. Whatthe Wile perfwade,
The Ignorant reject. The Courtier’s made
The Souldier’s Judg. What he concludes doth finde
Its Influence upon the Prince's Minde.

Notall the Mighty things, which Hannibal
Had done, which Rome ev’n trembled to recall


To


62


A Continuation of _ Book Ill


(7) The Envy of the Syrian No-
bility traduced FRannibal to the King,
asif his Counfel toinvade Jtaly pto-
ceeded from his Ambition, once more
to fee himfelf, ac the Head of an Ar-
my there. So that they wholly divert-

him from that Advife, and Hanni-
bal was ordered to go with the Navy,
white the King went in Perfon with


- the Army towards Greece.


To Memery, could make his Senfe prevail

“) To quit the Syrian Kingdoms, and affail

The Foat Home. Though whofoever fo

Invaded is, lends Courage tohisFo, :


And Strength to vanquifhhim. But ftrangely Blinde


To his own Fall, the Syrian King’s inclin‘d,
Rather on his own People, all thofe Ills
To bring, with which Invafive Fury fills


~ Amiferable Land. And ftrait his Fleet


(m) Crete.


és ) Puno.


“(o) As the Romane Navy, came


_neat Phafelis (a Promontory onthe


Coat of Pamphylia) a Difeafe fiezed
them, and deftroyed many of their
men, while the Syrians were detain-
edin their Courfe cowards them by
contrary Winds,


Is order’d under Hannibal to meet . 4
The ‘Romane, where ‘*) Iénian Billows move |
About that Ifland, where the Wife of Fove

Was born, and by the Careful Nymphs was bred,
Till call'd by Hymen to her Brother's Bed.

(*) She, although Confcious of the Fates to co me,
Retaining ftill her Antient Hate to Rome,

Her Empire of the Air with () Mi(chief fills,

And on the neighb’ring Ifles fad Plagues diftills.

Th’ unhappy Seafon with her Wrath confpires,
"Twas when the Dog breath’d his Contagious Fires
On fainting Men, depriving Beafts of Food,
And turning into Poifon pureft Blood. |


- Th’ attracted Air their Entrails fcorcheth, fills


Their Veins with F lames, and, e’reex pired, kills,
Such hafty Fates, that Time doth {earce know how.
‘Twixt Life, and Death, his Minutes to allow.
While fome, whom decent Piety invites

T° interr theirF riends, for their own F uneral’s Rites


. Prepare, and ftrait from their departing Breath


Infected fall, and tharea fudden Death,

The Romane Souldier, whofe great Valour {corn’d
To ftoop to Foes, whofe Trophies had adorn’d
His Native Houfe » who ne’re before had known


To yield his Arms, now weak, and feeble grown,
Lets


Book III. Sitrus Iraticus.


Let’s fall his Shield, and Conqu’ring Sword, and dies,


Ev’n in his Arms, difarm'd. This Plague’s Surprize
So fudden is, that, asthe Mafter ftands
To time, with his loud Voice, the Seamen’s Hands,
On his half Deck he proftrate falls, before
The Word’s expreft. Extended at the Oar,
The Seaman, ina lab’ring Pofture, dies,
Not known, if Dead, or rowing, as he lies.
From this fo fatal Coaft, that did aftord
To Death far greater Triumphs, then the Sword,
The ‘Romane Navy, flying the Dileafe,
Retires, and trufts their Safety to the Seas.
But Venus, fearing left Saturnia’s Hate
From this might greater Mifchief propagate,
\f then the Syrian Fleet fhould on them fall, _
Thus to her Aid the God of Winds doth call.
Great olus, whole mighty Empire lies

O’re all the vaft Extent, beneath the Skies,

Afsift Menow. I asknot, That thou make

Earth tremble, and the World’s firm Fabrick. fhake ;
Nor that her Stony Entrails thou fo wide
Should’ft rend, that Ghofts below may be deferi’d ,
Nor thatthe Seas Casinthe Giant's Wars )
Thou hurl in wat'ry Mountains ’gainft the Stars,
Funo for fach Revenge perhaps may call

"Gainft Us, ¢ exalt her fingle Hannibal.

I onely covet to preferve mine Own,

Andto effect the reft, let Fates alone.

She when nor Arms, nor Valour can prevail,

My Race with Hell, and Furies will affail.

Could She infect the Place I hold above,
She’d bring Her Plagues into the Court of Fove :

What's mine on Earth her Malice doth furround.


Thou fee'ft what gloomy Vapours, from the oe
ne


63


ET ae ae Ca Ss:


|
i
H
i


64. —* A Continuation of ~ Book Ill,
STII aa a a RA ala
. She draws, Death hatching, in their pregnant Wombs,
ae And threatning Mifchief to all's Mine, and Rome's.
. Scarfe can my Power, my facred Iflesdefend. __
(1) Befides that, Yeas is fidto © My Gprian, my dear Paphian Temples tend


have been born in that Sea, the Ifland,


Luxurious in its extraordinary Ferti- uae : . :
lity, the Inhabitants weremore prone To Ruin, and eur V otaries, for fear,


to Venus then any other. Their Wo- { : : : 2 is,
ten belore Mariage eepoling them- Of dire Contagion, all our Shrines forbear.


ae Sonat there, See fufine ibis, No Innocence is{par’d: my Birds, thaefrom >
Fighteenth Book.
eA urora’s bofom to my Lap would come,
And the Refrefhments of the choiceft Springs,
“Would, billing, {catter from their Silyer Wings,
A\sto our facred Groves they would repair,
Fall flying Victims, in the poifn’d Air.
But this thy Power great A2dlus can cure,
And, what is now corrupted, render pure.
Then purge Infection from this Ambient Air,
Make it Serene, and the loft Healch repair
Of this once Happy C lime, and Neighb’ring Ifles,
And thy Reward (with that, She fweetly {miles )
Shall be the faireft Nymph ofall my Train.
No fooner faid. ( for who can ought refrain
When Venus pleads) but Zdlus unbindes
From their dark Prifons, the Ete/ian Windes,
Whole Active Force, not onely chas’d away
All noxious Clouds, and Mifts, and gave the Day
A wholfom Face; but, with a conftant Gale, |
Againft all Labour of the Oars prevail,
To keep the Syrian Fleet ( themoreto pleafe
Cie The ") GQprian Goddefs) in her Neighb'ring Seas
. Twice twenty Daies, the Idle Ships, before :
_ The Ifland lay, and Anchor’d pear the Shore.
When a Defire to fee the fam'd Delights
OF Cyprian Groves, the Syrian Lord’s invites
A\nd Hannibalto Land. No place did eee
Indulge to Love, or Venns Pow’r adore,


The


ue. :


BooLll. Sieee evicne e


The Goddefs this to all the World prefers,
And is beft pleas’d; when Mortals calls it Hers. | @
AllDeities, that can Earth's Wealth improve,
Here pay their Tribute to the Queen of Love.
The Medows Flora, the Fields Ceres fills |
Withher rich Plenty, Bacchus crowns the Hills.
The greedy Swains no wealthy Orchards rear
For Nature choiceft Fruits doth, ev'ry where,
Largely beftow, the Bounty of the Soil -
Gives all they can defire, without their Toil.
All other Pleafures, which Affection moves,
They finde moft ample in their Sacred Groves.
Eternal Shades of Trees, whofe Arms above
Embrace, and Roots beneath are making Love :
No Birdsof Prey upon the Branches dwell ;
Or, if they there frequent, ‘tis ftrange to tell,
How foon their cruel Nature they forego,
And Kindnefsto all other Creatures fhow.
Allin their Kinds are pair’d; no Bird alone :
No Turtles, by their Mates deferted, Moan.
Nothing, that Milchief breeds, can there be found,
Love onely hath the Pow're inflida Wound.
From Native Grottoes, that all Art exceed,
Their Chryftal Fountains fev’ral Chanels feed
With cooling Streams, which, as they murm’ring pals,
Still Verdant keep the Lover's Seats of Grafs.
All this furvai’d, their Temple’s facred Rites
To Wonder, and Devotion them invites.
The Chief was P aphos, which their Senfes Charms
AboveBelief. The Goddefs there her Arms,
Her Chariot, harnefs'd Doves, and whatfoe're
On Earth fhe values, keeps. Her Trophies here
Of fuch, as ’gainfther Pow'r rebell’d, the Gates
Adorn ;their Names, and Fate the Prieft relates :


A Prieft


A Continuation of | Book JI.


A Prieft, who yet five Lujtra had not feen,

Yet, fince he three had teld, her Prieft had been :
But muft no longer at her Altar ftand,

Or take the facred Cenfer in his Hand,

When from his Birth twice twenty Years expir'd;
For Youth is by the Goddefs moft defir'd :

Such all her Votaries, and Clients are ;

The Aged feldom at her Shrines appear.


_Thefe view'd, and paft ; to a fair Porch they came,


Where Miracles the Deity proclaim.
Bodies to other things transform'd by Love,
Whofe ftrange Originals their Change did prove:
Some, whofe Obdurate Heartshad made them Stone;
Some, Beafts ; fome, Birds fome, Trees ; their Figures
Had loft, but, as when chang’d,their Shapes retain, (none
And Monuments of her great Pow’r remain,
Above the reft, an Iv'ry Statue ftands, :
Fair ev'nto Wonder. Hannibal demands, |
What Nymph it was of that Celeftial Form?
To whom the Prieftreplies. A Soul did warm
This Ivry once. The Storie’s very ftrange,
Yet this fair City, and thefe Walls the Change
Atteft. When firft Pygmalion in this [fle
Arriv'd,a Votary to Venus, while
Our Gprian Virgins {uch a Freedom us'd,
That jealous Lovers thought themfelves abus'd,
He, flying Hymen, to his Houfe retires.
But fill retaining in his Breaft the Fires
OF Love, his troubled Fancy todivert,
This Statue, with more then Promethean Art,
He frames, and, asall Parts he, wondring, views,
Defires of Hymen in his Breaft renews,
And Venas thus invokes. Give Me C He faid)
For Wife, as Beautiful, and Chaft a Maid,


Great


Book III. Sitius Irartcus. 67


Great Goddefs, and, if thou my Pray’r wilt hear,
A Temple to thy Name my Race {hall rear.

No fooner faid; but th’ Object of his Love
Receives a Soul, and ftrait began to move.

Her Eyes no more are fix’d ; butlively Raies
Eject, and firft on her kinde Maker gaze.

Then on her polifh’d Limbs, which purple Veins
Now warm, and foften with their beauteous ftains.
In brief; She lives Pygmatlion’s deareft Flame}
And from their Nuptial Bed great Paphos came.
Who, when the Fates the borrow'd Soul again
Requir'd, his Iv‘ry Mother, inthis Fane .
Vow’'d to the Goddefs, plac’d, and we ftill here,
With holy Incenfe, Honour, once a Year.

When this, with other Wonders, they had feen,
The?) Adyta they enter, which within


(q) The moft fecret Place of the
No Images adarn. But Venus ftood anh:
Alone, and kept her Altars free from fr) Blood. (r) See Tacitus in his Eighteenth
Book,


They Tears of Myrrha, onely, offer there,

And Sighs of Lovers. The included Air

Is ever warm, and wherefoe're they turn,

They meet foft Kiffes, butno Lips difeern.

Amaz’‘d the Strangers ftand, though ftrangely pleas‘d:

When them from Wonder thus the Prieft releas‘d.
The Goddels, for this fecret Place alone,

This Miracle referves, thus made her Own.

When She her dear ¢4/canins had convey'd

Up to Cythera, and on Violets laid

The fleeping Boy ; Her e4romatick Show’'rs

Of fweeteft Rofes, round about She pow’rs,


The Birth of Kiffes,


Then gazing on his Face, her former Flame,
Her lov'd Adonisto her Fancy came.
Scarce could She,then,withftand his Beautie’s Charms,


_ Scarce from his dear Embrace refrain her Arms.


I 2 But


: 68


A Continuation of Book III.
But fearing to difturb the Boy’s fweet Reft,

Her Lips upan the Neighb’ring R ofes preft.

They ftrait grow Warm, and, rifing from the place,

.Turn’‘dinto Kiffes, fly about her Face.

The Goddels, willing that the World fhould hare,

So {weet a Pleafure, {caters through the Air,

With a large Hand, the new-created Seed,

Which, as from fertile Glebe arifing, breed.


. But the firft Bern She plac’d within this Fane,


Which warm, as now you feel them, {till remain.
This faid, a f{udden Noife permits no more,
But fammons them abruptly to the Shore,
The Wind came fair: the bufy Seamen weigh
Their barbed Anchors, and ftand off to Sea.
The Time no longer flay will now afford,
The churlith Mafters haften all aboard.
Torn from Delight, the Syrian Nobles are
Dilfpleas’d, and rather with another War.
But Hannibal, whofe great Heroick Breft,


_ A Nobler Flame, then that of Love poffet .


With as much Joy the Fetters of thofe Charms

Shakes off, as Towns befieg’d, from Hoftile Arms

Themifelves by Sallies free, and all the Woes

That threatned them, revert upon their Foes.

Honour,which Noble Deeds in War attends,

Exciting his great Soul, he firft afcends

His Ship, and offers ta the God of Seas

Warm Enurails, then at large his Sails difplaies.

Loud Clamours from his high Example, through

The Fieet are fpread, whil'tt allhis Courfe purfue.

And now the Land retires, the Oprian Shore

Is loft, and all the Flames which they before

Cherifh’d, are quite extinain ev'ry Breatt,

Wholly with Thoughts of future War pofleft. +
A War,


Book III, SILIus igaeieue:


~ A War, wherein Kane's Fortune Rood alone.


Againftthe World: and were there mere thea One,
Might with them all contend, So Great was She,
Tillleffen’d by her Crims of Vicery.

Twice had the Sun defcended so.the Sea;
Twice the wing’d Hours had rais‘d again the Day.
When they that Coaft, where Sida doth obtrude
High Rocks (Her ftreng Defence) againft the rude
Affaults of Raging Billows made : and there
Beheld what bath their Wonder, and their Fear
At once creates. The Seamen think they've loft


Their Courfe, and touch upon fome un-known Goaft.


Or Nature, from the Bowels of the Main,
Some (clas thrufts, or floating Grave again.
Butas they nearer came, within that Wood
They faw for Fight prepar'd, an Army ftood,

So numerous they were, that what befere

Their Wonder was, is now their Terrour more.
Their Order fuch, as when her borrow’d Raies
With growing Horns the Silver Moon difplaies.
But her full Glory, their Guile, brafen Prows
Surpaft, and gave the Morning, as it rofe,

A brighter Face ; and, where they made their Way,
With a new Light anticipate the Day.

The Syrian “) Navy, whether clog’d with Fear,
Or their vaft Bulk, though ftill they forward fteer.
Went flowly on, till Hasnibal fo far
Advance'd before, that he provok’d the War.

Athis Approach, the Remane Souldiers fill

The Air with Shouts, that feem the Winds to ftill,
And fright Pamphylian Nymphs, while he goes on
Fearlels, as if his Valour could alone, ;
With all their Force contend. Whena Difdain
To fee him dare fo much, a Rage more vain


(5s) A Sea-fight between Hanni-
bal, and the Romancs.


Creates |


<


Jo A Continuation of Book III,
a Bee a ee


5 A : ne >


Book II]. Sitrus Iraticus, 71


Creates in abrave Rhodian, who forfakes

His Station, and the Combate undertakes.

Both ply their Oars; both feek to gain the Wind.

While Fortune, that, in this alone, inclin’d

To favour Hannibal, extends his Sails

With following Gutts fo, that his {peed prevails,

And bears his Gally on againft his Fo,

With fo great Violence, the barbed Proe

Strikes through his Side, and with the furious Shock

Shakes his whole Bulk, as bruis’d againft a Rock.

A\s from fome Engine thot, the Splinters fly,

Through all the Ship, and One the Captain's Eye

So deeply wounds, it finks into his Brain,

Aind leaves upon the Deck his Body flain.

~ With him the Courage of the reft doth dy,
And a bafe Fear perfwades them ftreighe to fly.
| While Hannibal purfues, with Storms of Fire

From Pitchy Lamps, and Darts, as they retire.

Black waves of Smoak the flying Veffel hide .

And her fad Fate invites from either fide,

Freth Squadrons to the F ight. Thefe tomaintaia
Their Conqueft ; thole totake Revenge, The Main
Foams with their active Oars, and the Sea-Gods

A frighted, feek their moft remote ‘Abodes,
Fearing the future Horrour of the Day,

And bloody Seas, their fafety might betray.

Both Navies now are met, Proes again{t Proes ;
Sides againtt Sides they ftrike, and, grapling dee
So firmly, that, as Foot to Foot they ftand
And, with their Swords, deal Wounds as if on Land
But where the {welling Surges in rexpole,
= Met fo, that the Gallies cannot clofe,

arts, Arrows, Jav'lins, flaming Lamps theyt
4nd Death, and Wounds, in fev'ral aes fas ,

The


pe


The Romanes now; the Syrians now give Way :
Yet neither ily, but equally the Day |
Are confident to gain, and their Retreat;

Like Rams, doth greater Force, and Rage beget.
Till Scipio,to whofe Fortune Syria's Fate .
Moft yield, and thence her future Ruin date, -

A\ Squadron of Italian Gallies brought

*Gaintt e4 pollonius, who too rafhly foughe

So brave aFo. Like Thunder, tearing Clouds,
Their meeting Veffels crack: th’ entangled Shrouds
Some,that would fink, above the Waves retain;
While others to the Bottom of the Main
Defcend, and in their Arms the Souldiers drown'd


_Finde a fad Fate without Revenge, or Wound.


But fome, whofe prefent Courage ftood above
Surprize of Danger, ‘gainft fuch Fortune, ftrove
To dy among their Foes, and leapingon = (thrown
Their Decks, there, fighting, fall. Some backward
Are loftinthe Affaule: others, whofe Skill
InSwimming, and their Rage kept floating ftill,
Attempt to Board again. Eumenes late
A Capuain, who his Tyrian Gallie’s Fate
A while furviv'd, firft feiz’d a Romane’s Qar,
By which he nimbly climbingfup (before
Perceiv’'d) the Deck had gain’d ; when ftrait, one
Lop’d off, the other ftill his Hold maintain’d, (Hand
Untill afecond Wound took that aways
Yet this fad Lofs could not his Minde betray
To wantoe Courage, but his Teeth fupply’d
Their Room, until a Fauchion did divide
His Body from his Head, which ftill did keep
its Hold: the Trunck fell back into the Deep.
Th’ Example of his Death made fome to burn
With Rage: fome, chill with Fear,their Proes co turn.


ef\nd


00 t
q2 A Continuation of Book III, .§ © Book III. Sitrus Iraticus. 73 : 2


Hannibal’s Valour.


Hannibal's Stratagem.


And fly. While Hannibal their Flight, in vain,
Upbraids, and hales them to the Fight again.
But, when they faw Pampbilins poffett .
With fo great Terrour, that he firft the reft
Forfook: no Senfe of Honour could reftrain
Their Flight. But, featter'd over all the Main,
The bale Cilicians {pread their Sails to Fear,
Scarce knowing to what Land, or Coatt they fteer.
But the brave Libyan, who as much to fly
Abhorr’d, as thofe bafe Cowards fear’d to dy,
With three ftout Tyrian Gallies, makes through all
The Latian Ships t'attaque their e4 dmiral :
Thinking, that A& alone would beft become
His Valour, when he feem’d t’affault ev'n Rome
Her Self; and from his Conqueft, or his F all,
The World might fay, “T'was done like Hannibal.
But Fortune the Succefs deny'd, and brought
A furious War upon him, where he fought,
Wheree're he turns, their Numbers him furround
So, as befieg’d he ftands. No place is found,
Where a brave Deed a fingle Arm may boaft.
All Valour in their Multitudes is loft.
This Face of Danger his lat F ury wakes,
As, when too clofe purfu'd, a Tiger takes
His Sta nd, refolv'd to dy reveng'd; he views
His Foes, all Wounds receives ; at length doth chofe
Againft that Hand to fpend his Stock of Rage,
That ‘gainft his Life moft forward doth engage,
Soa Pretorian Ship, that ‘bove the reft, =
With Show’rs of Piles, and Darts did him infeft
With a Prodigious Storm he laies aboard, |
And all the Plagues, that Libya could afford,
(To which her thirfty Sands do give a Birth )
Upon it throws, enclos‘din Pots of Earth,


From


From which (when fall’n, and broken on the Decks)
Myriads of Serpents rais’d their marble Necks:


The Souldiers, in the Fight, with Wonder are


Surpri2’d, as if Adedufa madethe War. :
Their dreadful Hifs fupprefs‘d all warlike Sounds,


And when their Stings, or Teeth infliat their Wounds,


Strange kinds of fudden Death enfue,; while fome,
Whole Nerves the deadly Poifon doth benum,
Like Statues fixed ftand: Others beheld
Their well-{hap’d Limbs above Proportion {well’d,
Till their encreafing Bow'ls their Bellies burft :
Some feem t’have {wallow’d Flames, and a dire Thirft
Firing their bloodlefs Entrails, to allay
Its Rage, they headlong leap into the Sea.
This through one Wound fees all his blood to flow,
His Veins foon empty made ; That doth not know
Hee’s hurt,nor feels a Wound,when Death ftrait creeps
Into his Heart, and he for ever fleeps.

But, though each Serpent thusa fev’ral kinde
Of Death inflicts, yet, to one Ship confin'd
Free from their Venemous Affault, the reft,
The Libyan with all forts of Arms oppretft,
Till Funo, ftrugling ftill with Fate ¢ refolv'd
No Romane Hand fhould boaft his Fall involy'd
The Day in Horrour ; chas'd the Light away
Before its Time ; and overall the Sea
The Wings of Night extends the Pregnant Clouds
Difcharge their Cataracts, and from the Shrouds
The roaring Winds the {welling Canvafe tare
The Romane Ships, as if th Civil War,
‘Gainft one another ftrike, and now contend
How from themfelves they may themfelves defend,
Aclength difpers’d o’re all the Main they flee,


And, by this Danger, from a greater free,
i - K . Safe


74


Book III.


A Continuation of. |


Antiochus overthrown at Land.


(1) Hannibal, fearing to truft him-
felf among the Syrians, in this Decline
of his Fortune, retired to Prefias
King of Bishynia,and ferved him wich
great Succefs againft the Etolians.


Safe to the Lycian Shore the Libyan came,
Refery'd by Fate to be Bithynia’s Shame.
But Fortune had not thus her Aid deny'd
By Sea alone unto the Syrian Side,
But, where by Landthe King his Armies led,
His Enfigns from the ‘Komane Eagles fled.
His Thracian Kingdoms now no more his Law
Obey’d, butthe efs/onian Fafcesfaw
In Triumph, through their Conquer'd Cities,go,
And Him, of late their Lord, efteem’d their Fo. .
His Grecian Friends the Leagues, that they had fworn,
Reject, and now his weaker Friendfhip fcorn.
Scarce would the Syrian Cities entertain
Their flying King, at his return. So‘vain
The People’s Favour, and their Faith, when croft
By Fortune, and his Pow’t a King hath loft!
¢:) This Levity the Libyan Prince revolv'd
Muchin his troubled Thoughts, at tength, refolv'd
No morethe Dang’rous Envy of that Court
To try, butto Bithynia’s King refort ;
A King, who wanted then fo brave a Hand
Againft Etolians to defend his Land.
Prompted to this by his unhappy Fate,
Thither he fpeeds, and findes ( alafs! } too late
: The Malice of his Foes could not extend
To reach his Death, but by a Treach’rous Friend;
A Friend, who to his Valour ow’d his Crown, |
And, by that Fatal Victorie’s Renown,
Made Jealous Rome to haften on his Fall,
By fuch an Act, asall the World may call
Her Infamy. For he, that conquer’d Foes
Deftroys, when he may fpare, doth Honour lofe.
But to the Romane Arms all 4fa now


Submits, and all their Laws impos’d allow.
No


Book HE


And what didimoft wich Haanibal's fad Fate.
Confpire, his Ruimtaaceplerate, ,
Was, that ‘”) Flavtinins, whofe raf Sire before
The Libyan Arms, ow Thrafimenss Shore
Renown’d, a Legate to, Bithynig came, -

A\nd to his bale Reveage the Senate's Namie.
Ulfurp'd. Theiy Peace, and Amity to all
Deny’d, that fhould protect brave Hannibal.
The King, confulting with his Fears, forgets
All Ties of Honour : on his Safety fers

A greater Value. Thofe late Trophies gain’d,:
By which the Libyan Prince his Throne fuftain’d;
Seem toupbraid him witha Debe, .which He
Cannot difcharge, but by this Treachery. -
Thofe Glories, that too near his Crown dilate
Their Luftre into Crimes, degenerate. ‘
They Guilty are, whofe Merits ftand above
Reward: in lower Sphears Men fafeft move.


Stbrus Iraticus.


7


(#) Flaminias, (the Son of that
Flaminins whom Hannibal vanquifh-
ed,and flue nearthe Lake Thrafimenws)
fent Embafladour to Prufias, exceeded
(faith 4 ppian)his Commiffion,demand-
ing Hannibal to be-deliveredto Him,
to which the Perfidious King, fearin
the Power of the Remanes, affented.


Thefe Thoughts drew on the Noble Libyan’s Fate,


Whole ftrong Sufpicious made him (but too late)
T’attempt Efcape. The dubious Faith of Kings,
Which vartes with the Face of Humane Things,
Gave him to fear a Change, and to prepare
‘“) Strange Lab’rinths under Graund,to fhun the Snare
But allin Vain, declining Fortune made
Traitours of neareft Friends, and he’s betrai’d
Inall, that he defigns. Arm’‘d Troops enclofe
His Houfe, and ftop his Way wheree’re he goes.

But his Refolved Minde ’bove Fortune ftands,
And ftill refer ves his Fate in his Qwn Hands,
Though now betrai'd He is, and left by all,
He’s {till fo great, that none can Hannibal,

K 2 But


(x) Hannibal, at leng:h,fufpeding
“the Faith of Prufias, had made fever~
al Paffages under Ground, to efcape
Gif poflible ) the Guards appointed
to befet hisHoufe: but,feeing no means
to avoidthem, he took Poiton, which
he alwaies wore about him ( fome fay,
in the Pommel of his Sword ) and died
inthe feventieth Year ofhis Age. His
Body was buried near Liby Ja (which
he from the Oracle miftook for Libya)
onely with this Infcription , :
Here Lies HANNIBAL.


1
a |
i
a
'
if
i
}
i
I


76 A Continuation of ' Book Jf. Book III. Sitrus ITaticus,. 77 | |
But Hannibal, deftroy. And, to prevent a And, when thy Deeds in War, in fature Time, [
Surprize, into a fecret place he went, | The World fhall read, chy Glories this one Crime
Where, firft the Gods accus'd, and Hanno’s Pride, | Shall blaft, and all account Thee from my Fall
( Thatto his grewing Conquefts Aid deni'd) Unworthy fuch a Fo, as Hannibal. | 2 i
i_ | The Syrians Folly, and bafe Prufias lat ; More He'd have faid, but through his {welling Veins | me
I Perfidious Ad ( which all the reft furpaft | _ Death creeps, and binds in Adamantine Chains q
In Infamy ) with Execrations blam‘d, The Spirits of Life, which with this Language ends?
' a The Aid of his Great Father's Spirit he claim’d : His Soul to other Heroes Ghofts defeends.
I i And adirePoifon ( without farther Paufe ) |
‘ . More Fierce then that,which, fromthe raging Jaws -
i | Of Gerberus, upon Earth’s Bofom fell, FINTIS,
i When Great ef lcides drag’d him chain’d from Hell, . -
ame | He fwallows down. This baneful Drug, before
i Prepar'd bya Maffylian Witch, he wore
| Lock’d on his Sword, which, if that chane’d to fail,
Might, as his furer Deftiny, prevail
| : Againftall Humane Force: and, ashe found


: Itfeiz’dhis Vitals by an Inward Wound, ; ee
He thefe laft Words expir'd. Now lay afide
Thy Fears CO Rome) no.more will I thy Pride
~ Oppofe, but with this Satisfaction Dy,
That, thus Degenerate, Thy felf, wilt my
Revenge effect. Not Arms, but Virtue made
Thy Fathers Great ; which fince in Thee decai‘d,
Thy Ruin muftenfue. They, Nobly, fcorn’d
_ By Treafon to deftroy a Fo, and warn'd 4
(7) Fabricinsadvertized Pyrrbas 1) The Epirote of Poifon, when he ftood : 7 \g


(alter he had given a fignal Overthrow _-


tothe Remanes) of the Treachery of Armd at their Gates, and Triumph’d in their Blood,


his Piyfician, whe for 2 fum of Mo-
ney offered to Poifon Him, Plutarch


gle cert eeritis But Me, oppreft with Fortune, and my Years,
Betrai‘d a feeble Victim to thy Fears,
A Gonslar Legate forceth thus to fly
From Life, ‘gainft Laws of Hofpitality, —
Anda King’s Faith. Butthis vile Stain C(O Rome )

| More lafting then thy Trophies, fhall become;

i And


Er iptceeeee oe


mo) a ne ema Se


are


rete ce


Errata in Sims Yealicus.


P*; 2. In the Margent (¢) for there Sharp Wars, read three fharp. éc. ibid. v.tg. for with a Buls-hide r. which,erf. p. 13.
¥. 18, ra Phocaan, ib. eMfargeat (p)r. Phocdis, p24. Margent (a) t, would have it on.ére. ib, Marg.(c) £.‘Pyrrhus King
of Epire. ib. v,15.t. begins. p.42,ve9. 1. Quit, p.44.¥.27. 1. Offering with the Infernal Prieftefs, there. p. 45.v. 11, £ then
infer through, ec. p. 85. v. 10.5, Lap. lib. 7. argument . Romanes, p.i86. ¥. 1.1. He, p.19t.v. 15. re Our buifinefs,
P.194s V.9T. TUN, p. 201.V.19.1— With Lies, ib. v.26,r. taen.p.210.¥.4, f who,ib. v.16, r. Him, p.238,V.12.4. his Looks,p.280.
vy. 23. rwild, p. 302, Marg. (f)r. fent two Armies, p. 306, Marg. (¢) r. which was the Judgment given againft Heratnes
for killing his Sifter,by K. Tudlus, p.323.v.3, 1. {pruag, p. 324.¥.29,1. who, I, ec. p.330.¥. 3e,fe Reft, p.336. vor. 2. thou, p.
34t.v. get. the Valour. p. 272. Marg. 1. Siedge, p. 373, Marg. ras my Bones, p. 385», Marg. (q) t. New games, p. 387.
vezent. Is Cefar, p.416.v.ter.then fo by Maladies,p, 419, v.5. thy Idéas, Pp. 426, v- 20,0, winding Creeks, p.44s, v. 22.2, the
feree Cantab. po437, ¥. 21,0, He Gala, p.446. voz0. ©. whofe lofty folds, ib,y.28, x, Fold, pe 49 v. 33,1 my Flames Is
P-496, ¥, 23,0 thy Entreary,


Errata for Continuation. emis
T)4¢2.Th life V are immediately to follow the Latiniz, Hinc albi. Clicumne, greges. then follows.
Pisting See Aelisrtie. p16. Marg. Ks tie.and 100.p.33.v.3.0, Whofec're. ps 6.0, 26ot, Flight p.39.V.eACe
Tuen p.40ev.t gor, Mighty. p.ga-V.9E TDA 44 vitgite A lofi prvag.t, Gods. p.72iv.3 Pamphilicas,
