==============================================================================
Demoniality; or, Incubi and Succubi
Ludovico Maria Sinistrari (1622-1701) (1879)
Edition staged: Paris: Isidore Liseux, 1879. First English translation (from the Latin manuscript discovered 1872) with the Latin text. Internet Archive scan.
Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/Demoniality--IncubiAndSuccubiLudovicoMariaSinistrari1875
Rights: Public Domain. Author died 1701; manuscript composed late 17th c.; this edition published 1879, before 1930. (The Summers 1927 re-translation is also pre-1930, but this Liseux 1879 edition pairs English with the Latin text.)
Language: English and Latin
Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library (antarctic-labs.com).
Sinistrari's treatise on demoniality, incubi and succubi as rational corporeal creatures. Complete: English translation + Latin text.
==============================================================================

•j


DEMONIALITY

OR

Incubi and Succubi

BV THE REV. FATHER

SINISTRARI of Ameno
(17 th century)

Now first translated into English
With the Latin Text


PARIS

Isidore LISEUX, 2. Rue Bonaparte

1879


DEMONIALITY


DEMONIALITY

INGUBI AND SUGCUBI

A Treatise

wherein is shown that there are in existence on
earth rational creatures besides man, endowed like
him with a body and a soul, that are born and die
like him, redeemed by our Lord Jesus-Christ, and
capable of receiving salvation or damnation,

By the Rev. Father
SINISTRARI of Ameno
1 ' (17 th century)

Published from the original Latin manuscript
discovered in London in the year 1872,
and translated into French by Isidore Liseux
Now first translated into English
With the Latin Text.


PARIS

Isidore LISEUX, 2, Rue Bonaparte.

i8 79


15 f iSSC
5S


PREFACE


to the first edition (Paris, 1875, in- 8°)


was in London in the year 1872,
and I hunted after old books :

Car que faire la has, a moins qu’on ne
bouquine? (1)

They caused me to live in past ages, happy
to escape from the present, and to exchange
the petty passions of the day for the peaceable
intimacy of Aldus, Dolet or Estienne.

One of my favourite booksellers was Mr
Allen, a venerable old gentleman, whose place
of business was in the Euston road, close to the
gate of Regent’s park. Not that his shop was
particularly rich in dusty old books; quite the


(1) What can one do over there, unless he hunts up
old books?


a


312676


— VI —


reverse : it was small, and yet never filled.
Scarcely four or five hundred volumes at a
time, carefully dusted, bright, arrayed with
symmetry on shelves within reach of one’s
hand; the upper shelves remained unoccupied.
On the right, Theology; on the left, the Greek,
and Latin Classics in a majority, with some
French and Italian books; for such were
Mr Allen’s specialties : it seemed as if he ab¬
solutely ignored Shakespeare and Byron, and
as if, in his mind, the literature of his country
did not go beyond the sermons of Blair or
Macculloch.

What, at first sight, struck one most in
those books, was the moderateness of their
price, compared with their excellent state of
preservation. They had evidently not been
bought in a lot, at so much a cubic yard, like
the rubbish of an auction, and yet the hand¬
somest, the most ancient, the most venerable
from their size, folios or quartos, were not
marked higher than 2 or 3 shillings; an oc¬
tavo was sold 1 shilling, the duodecimo six
pence : each according to its size. Thus
ruled Mr Allen, a methodical man, if ever
there was one; and he was all the better for
it, since, faithfully patronized by clergymen,
scholars and collectors, he renewed his stock
at a rate which more assuming speculators
might have envied.


VII —


But how did he get those well bound and
well preserved volumes, forwhich, everywhere
else, five or six times more would have been
charged? Here also Mr Allen had his method,
sure and regular. No one attended more assi¬
duously the auctions which take place every
day in London : his stand was marked at the
foot of the auctioneer’s desk. The rarest,
choicest books passed before his eyes, con¬
tended for at often fabulous prices by Qua-
ritch, Sotheran, Pickering, Toovey, and other
bibliopolists of the British metropolis; Mr Allen
smiled at such extravagance; when once a bid
had been made ky another, he would not
add a penny, had an unknown Gutenberg or
Valdarfer's Boccaccio been at stake. But if oc¬
casionally, through inattention or weariness,
competition slackened (habent suafata libelli) f
Mr Allen came forward : six pence /, he whis¬
pered, and sometimes the article was left him ;
sometimes even, two consecutive numbers,
joined together for want of having separately
met with a buyer, were knocked down to him,
still for the minimum of six pence which was
his maximum.

Many of those slighted ones doubtless de¬
served their fate; but among them might
slip some that were not unworthy of the ho¬
nours of the catalogue, and which, at any other
time, buyers more attentive, or less whimsical


vm


might perhaps have covered with gold. This,
however, did not at all enter into Mr Allen's
calculation : the size was the only rule of his
estimate.

Now, one day when, after a considerable
auction, he had exhibited in his shop pur¬
chases more numerous than usual, I especially
noticed some manuscripts in the Latin lan¬
guage, the paper, the writing and the binding
of which denoted an Italian origin, and which
might well be two hundred years old. The
title of one was, I believe : De Venenis; of
another : De Viperis; of a third (the present
work): De Dcemonialitate , et Incubis , et Sue -
cubis. All three, moreover, by different au¬
thors, and independent of each other. Poisons,
adders, demons, what a collection of horrors!
yet, were it but for civility's sake, I was bound
to buy something; after some hesitation, I
chose the last one : Demons, true, but Incubi,
Succubi : the subject is not vulgar, and still
less so the way in which it seemed to me to
have been handled. In short, I had the vo¬
lume for six-pence, a boon price for a quarto :
Mr Allen doubtless deemed such a scrawl be¬
neath the rate of type.

That manuscript, on strong paper of the
17th century, bound in Italian parchment,
and beautifully preserved, has 86 pages of text.
The title and first page are in the author’s


IX >—


hand, that of an old man ; the remainder is
very distinctly written by another, but under
his direction, as is testified by autographic
side notes and rectifications distributed all
through the work. It is therefore the genuine
original manuscript, to all appearances unique
and inedited.

Our dealer in old books had purchased it a
few days before at Sotheby’s House, where had
taken place (from the 6th to the 16 th of De¬
cember 1871) the sale of the books of baron
Seymour Kirkup, an English collector, deceas¬
ed in Florence. The manuscript was inscri¬
bed as follows on the sale catalogue :

N° 145. Ameno ( R. P. Ludovicus Maria [Cotta] de\
De Daemonialitate, et Incubis, et Succubis, Manuscript.

Scec. XVII-XVIII.

Who is that writer? Has he left printed
works? That is a question I leave to biblio¬
graphers; for, notwithstanding numerous in¬
vestigations in special dictionaries, I have been
unable to ascertain any thing on that , score.
Brunet (Manuel du libraire , art. Cotta d!A-
meno) vaguely surmises his existence, but
confuses him with his namesake, most likely
also his fellow-townsman, Lazaro Agostino
Cotta of Ameno, a barrister and literary man of
Novara, a The author, * says he, « whose real
Christian names would seem to be Ludovico -
Maria , has written many serious works... »

a.


— X —


The mistake is obvious. One thing is sure :
our author was living in the last years of the
ry 111 century, as appears from his own testi¬
mony, and had been a professor of Theology
in Pavia.

Be that as it may, his book has seemed to
me most interesting in divers respects, and I
confidently submit it to that select public for
whom the invisible world is not a chimera.
I should be much surprised if, after opening it
at random, the reader was not tempted to re¬
trace his steps and go on to the end. The phi¬
losopher, the confessor, the medical man will
find therein, in conjunction with the robust
faith of the middle ages, novel and ingenious
views; the literary man, the curioso, will ap¬
preciate the solidity of reasoning, the clear¬
ness of style, the liveliness of recitals (for
there are stories, and delicately told). All
theologians have devoted more or less pages
to the question of material intercourse between
man and the demon; thick volumes have been
written about witchcraft, and the merits of
this work were but slender if it merely deve¬
loped the ordinary thesis; but such is not its
characteristic. The ground-matter, from
which it derives a truly original and philoso¬
phical stamp, is an entirely novel demonstra¬
tion of the existence of Incubi and Succubi, as
rational animals, both corporeal and spiritual


— XI —

like ourselves, living in our midst, being born
and dying like us, and* lastly redeemed, as we
are, through the merits of Jesus-Christ, and
capable of receiving salvation or damnation.
In the Father of Ameno’s opinion, those
beings endowed with senses and reason, tho¬
roughly distinct from Angels and Demons,
pure spirits, are none other but the Fauns,
Sylvans and Satyrs of paganism, continued by
our Sylphs, Elfs and Goblins; and thus is con¬
nected anew the link of belief. On this score
alone, not to mention the interest of details,
this book has a claim to the attention of ear¬
nest readers : I feel convinced that attention
will not be found wanting.

I. L.

May 1875.


The foregoing advertisement was composed
at the printer’s, and ready for the press, when,
strolling on the quays (1), I met by chance
with a copy of the Index librorum prohibito -
rum. I mechanically opened it, and the first


(1) Paris Embankment.


— XII —


thing that struck ray eyes was the following
article :

De Amcno Ludovicus Maria. Vide Sinistrari.

My heart throbbed fast, I must confess. Was I
at last on the trace of my author ?- Was it Demo¬
niality that I was about to see nailed to the
pillory of the Index? I flew to the last pages
of the formidable volume, and read :

SiNiSTRARt (Ludovicus Maria).de Ameno, De Delictis et
Poems Tractatus absolutissimus. Donee corrigatur.
Decret. 4 Martii 1709.

Correctus autern juxta editionem Romanam anni 1753
permittitur.

It was indeed he. The real name of the
Father of Ameno was Sinistrari ., and I was
in possession of the title of one at least of those
« serious works » which Brunet the biblio¬
grapher alluded to. The very title, De Delictis
et Pcenis , was not unconnected with that of
my manuscript, and I had reason to presume
that Demoniality was one of the offenses in¬
quired into, and decided upon, by Father Sini¬
strari; in other words, that manuscript, to all
appearances inedited, was perhaps published
in the extensive work revealed to me; perhaps
even was it to that monography of Demoniality
that the Tractatus de Delictis et Pcenis owed
its condemnation by the Congregation of the
Index . All those points required looking into.


— XIII —

But it is necessary to have attempted inves¬
tigations of that kind in order to appreciate
the difficulties thereof. I consulted the cata¬
logues of ancient books that came in my way;
I searched the back-shops of the dealers in old
books, the antiquaries , as they say in Ger¬
many, addressing especially to the two or three
firms who in Paris apply themselves to old
Theology; I wrote to the principal booksellers
in London, Milan, Florence, Rome, Naples :
all to no purpose; the very name of Father
Sinistrari of Ameno seemed to be unknown. I
should perhaps have begun by enquiring at
our National Library; I was obliged to resort
to it, and there at least I obtained an incipient
gratification. I was shown two works by my
author : a quarto of 1704, De incorrigibilium
expulsione ab Ordinibus Regularibus , and the
first tome of a set of his complete works :
R . P. Ludovici Marice Sinistrari de Ameno
Opera omnia (. Romce , in domo Caroli Giannini,
1753-1754, 3 vol. in-folio). Unfortunately that
first tome contained but the Practica Crimi¬
nals Minorum illustrata; De Delictis etPcenis
was the subject matter of the third tome, which,
as w r ell as the second, was missing at the
Library.

Yet, I had a positive indication, and I pursued
my investigations. I might be more fortunate
at the Library of St Sulpice Seminary. True,


XIV —


it is not open to the public; but then, the
Sulpician Fathers are hospitable : did they not
of yore afford a refuge to repentant Des Grieux,
and did not Manon Lescaut herself tread the
flags of their parlour ? I therefore ventured into
the holy House ; it was half past twelve, dinner
was nearly over; I asked for the librarian, and
after a few minutes, I saw coming to me a
short old man, unexceptionably civil, who,
leading me through the common parlour, in¬
troduced me into another much narrower, a
mere cell, looking into a gallery and glazed full
breadth, being thus exposed to every eye. An
ingenious provision of which Des Grieux’s
escape had fully shown the urgency. I had no
small trouble in explaining the object of my
visit to the good Father, who was deaf and
near sighted. He left me to go to the library,
and soon returned, but empty handed: there
also, in that sanctuary of Catholic Theology,
Father Sinistrari of Ameno was entirely
unknown. But one more expedient could I try :
namely, to go to his brothers in St Francis,
the Capuchin Fathers, in their convent of rue
de la Sante! A cruel extremity, it will be grant¬
ed, for I had but little chance of meeting there,
as here, the lovely shadow of Manon.

At last a letter from Milan put an end to *
my perplexity. The unfindable book was
found; I received at the same time the first


— XV —


edition of De Delictis et Pcenis ( Venetiis , apud
Hieronymum Albricium, 1700), and the edition
of Rome, 1754.

It was a complete treatise, tractatus absolu-
tissimus y upon all imaginable crimes, offenses
and sins; but, let us hasten to say, in both
those voluminous folios, Demoniality occupies
scarcely five pages, without any difference in
the text between the two editions. And those
five pages are not even a summary of the ma¬
nuscript work which I now give forth; they
only contain the proposition and conclusion
(N rs 1 to 27 and 112 to 11 5 ). As for that whe¬
rein lies the originality of the book, to wit the
theory of rational animals, Incubi and Succubi,
endowed like ourselves with a body and soul,
and capable of receiving salvation and damna¬
tion, it were vain to look for it.

Thus, after so many endeavours, I had set¬
tled all the points which I had intended to
elucidate : I had discovered the identity of the
Father of Ameno(i); from the comparison of
the two editions of De Delictis et Pcenis , the
first condemned, the second allowed by the
Congregation of the Index , I had gathered that
the printed fragments of Demoniality had
nothing to do v/ith the condemnation of the


(1) Vide biographical notice at the end of this vo¬
lume.


XVI


book, since they had not been submitted to
any correction; lastly, I had become convinced
that, save a few pages, my manuscript was
absolutely inedited. A happy event of a biblio¬
graphical Odyssey which I shall be excused for
relating at length, for the « jollification » of
bibliophiles « and none other ».


Isidore Liseux.


August 1875.


DEMONIALITY


D^MONIALITAS *


ocabulum Daemonialitatis primo
inventum reperio a Jo. Cara -
muele in sua Theologia funda¬
mental^ nec ante ilium inveni
Auctorem , qui de hoc crimine tanquam
distincto a Bestialitate locutus sit. Omnes
enim Theologi Morales, secuti D. Thomam ,
2.2., q. 1 54. in corp., sub specie Bestiali-
tatis recensent omnem concubitum cum re
non ejusdem speciei, ut ibiloquitur D. Tho~
mas; et proinde Cajetanus, in Commenta¬
ry illius qucestionis et articuli, 2.2., q. 154.,
ad 3 . dub., coitum cum Dcemone ponit in
specie Bestialitatis ; et Cajetanum sequitut
Silvester, v° Luxuria, Sonatina, de Matrim.,
q . 4., et alii.


DEMONIALITY


first author who, to my
nowledge, invented the word
Jemoniality is John Caramuei,
[in his Fundamental Theology ,
and befo/e him I find no one who distin¬
guished that crime from Bestiality. Indeed,
all Theological Moralists, following in the
train of S. Thomas (2, 2, question 154),
include,\under the specific title of Bestia¬
lity, «. e'yery kind of carnal intercourse
with any th ing wha tever of a different
species » : such are the very" words used by
S. Thomas. Cajetanus, for instance, in his
commentary on that question, classes in¬
tercourse with the Demon uhder the des¬
cription of Bestiality; so does Sylvester, de


<&/ .••••: . P*mOf>ialitas


2. Sed reveva D. Thomas in illo loco con¬
sider ationem non habuitad coitum cum Dee -
mone : ut enim infra probabimus, hie coitus
non potest in specie specialissima Bestiali-
tatis comprehendi; et ut veritati cohcereat
sententia S. Doctoris, dicendum est, quod
in citato loco, quando ait, quod peccatum
contra naturam, alio modo si fiat per con-
cubitum ad rem non ejusdem speciei, vo-
catur Bestialitas: sub nomine rei non ejus¬
dem speciei intellexerit animal vivens, non
ejusdem speciei cum homine: non enim usur-
pare potuit ibi nomen rei pro re, puta, ente
communi ad animatum et inanimatum : si
enim quis.coiret cum cadavere humano,
concubitum haberet ad rem non ejusdem
speciei cum homine (maxime apud Thomis-
tas, qui formam corporeitatis humance ne-
gant in cadavere), quod etiam esset si cada -
veri bestiali copularetur; et tamen talis
coitus non esset bestialitas, sed mollifies.
Voluit igitur ibi D. Thomas prcecise intel-
ligere concubitum cum re vivente non ejus¬
dem speciei cum homine, hoc est cum bruto,
nullo autem modo comprehendere voluit coi¬
tum cum Dcemone.


Demoniality 5

Luxuria , Bonacina, de Matrimonio, ques¬
tion 4, and others.

2. However it is clear that in the above
passage S. Thomas did not at all allude to
intercourse with the Demon. As shall be
demonstrated further on, that intercourse
cannot be included in the very particular
species of Bestiality; and, in order to
make that sentence of thd holy Doctor
tally with truth, it must be admitted that
when saying of the unnatural sin, « that
committed through intercourse with a thing
of different species, it takes the name of
Bestiality », S. Thomas, by a thing of dif¬
ferent species , means a living animal, of
another species than man : for he could
not here use the word thing in its most
general sense, to mean indiscriminately
an animate or inanimate being. In fact, if
a man should fornicate cum cadavere hu -
mano , he would have to do with a thing
of a species quite different from his own
(especially according to the Thomists, who
deny the form of human corporeity in a
corpse); similarly si cadaveri bestialicopu-
laretur : and yet, talis coitus would not be
bestiality, but pollution. What therefore
S. Thomas intended here to specify with
preciseness, is carnal intercourse with a


6


Daemonialitas


3 . Coitus igitur cum Dcemone, sive In-
cubo, sive Succubo (qui proprie est Dcemo-
nialitas), specie differt a Bestialitate, nec
cum eafacit unam speciem specialissimam,
ut opinatus est Cajetanus : peccata enim
contra naturam specie inter se distingui
contra opinionemnonnullorum Antiquorum t
et Caramuelis, Summ., Armill ., v. Luxur.,
n. 5 ., Jabieneo . v. n. 6., Asten. lib. 2. tit.
46. art. 7., Caram. Theol.fundam. post Fil-
liucium, etCrespinum a Borgia t est opinio
communis; et contraria est damnata in
proposit. 24. exdamnatisab Alexandro VII.;
turn quia singula continent peculiarem, et
distinctam turpitudinem repugnantem cas-
titatiy et humance generationi; turn quia
quodlibet ex iispriyat bono aliquo secundum
naturam , et institutionem actus venerei,
ordinati ad jinem generationis humance;
turn quia quodlibet ipsorum habet diver sum
motivum, per se sufficiens ad privandum
eodem bono diversimode , ut optime philoso-
phatur Filliuc.y tom. 2. c. 8. tract. 3 o. q. 3 .
n° 142; Cresp., q. mor. sel. contro.; Cara-
muel., q. 5 . per tot.


7


Demoniality

living thing of a species different from
man, that is to say, with a beast, and he
never in the least thought of intercourse
with the Demon.

3 . Therefore, intercourse with the De¬
mon, whether Incubus or Succubus (which
is, properly speaking, Demoniality), differs
in kind from Bestiality, and does not in
connexion with it form one very particular
species,as Cajetanus wrongly gives it; for,
whatever may have said to the contrary
some Ancients, and later Caramuel in his
Fundamental Theology, unnatural sins
differ from each other most distinctly. Such
at least is the general doctrine, and the
contrary opinion has been condemned by
Alexander VII: first, because each of those
sins carries with itself its peculiar and
distinct disgrace, repugnant to chastity
and to human generation; secondly, be¬
cause the commission thereof entails each
time the sacrifice of some goodby its nature
attached to the institution of the venereal
act, the normal end of which is human
generation; lastly, because they each have
a different motive which in itself is suffi¬
cient to bring about, in divers ways, the
deprivation of the same good, as has been


8


Daemonialitas


4. Ex his autem infertur, quod etiam
Dcemonialitas specie differt a Bestialitate :
singula >enim ipsarum peculiarem et dis-
tinctam turpitudinem, castitati ac humance
generationi repugnantem, involvit;siquidem
Bestialitas est copula cum bruto vivente ,
ac sensibus et motu proprio prcedito : Dee-
monialitas autem est commixtio cum cada¬
ver e (stando in sententia communi, quam
infra examinabimus ), nec sensum, nec
motum vitalem habente; et per accidens est,
quod aDcemone moveatur. Quod si immun-
ditia commissa cum brutali cadavere, vel
humano, differt specie a Sodomia et Bestiali¬
tate , ab ista differt pariter specie etiam
Daemonialitas, in qua , juxta communem
sententiam, homo cum cadavere concumbit
accidentaliter moto .

5 . Et confirmatur : quia in peccatis con¬
tra naturam, seminatio innaturalis (hoc est,
ea ad quam regulariter non potest sequi ge-
neratio) habet rationem generis; subjec-
tum vero talis seminationis est differentia
constituens species [sub tali genere: unde si
seminatio fiat in terram , aut corpus ina-
nime, est mollifies; si fiat cum homine in


Demoniality 9

clearly shown by Fillucius, Crespinus and
Caramuel.

4. It follows that Demoniality differs in
kind from Bestiality, for each has its pe¬
culiar and distinct disgrace, repugnant to
chastity and human generation. Bestiality
is connexion with a living beast, endowed
with its own peculiar senses and impulses;
Demoniality, on the contrary, is copulation
with a corpse (according at least to the ge¬
neral doctrine which shall be considered
hereafter),a senseless and motionless corpse
which is but accidentally moved through
the power of the Demon. Now, if fornica¬
tion with the corpse of a man, a woman,
or a beast differs in kind from Sodomy and
Bestiality, there is the same difference with
regard to Demoniality, which, according to
general opinion, is the intercourse of man
with a corpse accidentally set in motion.

5 . Another proof : in sins against na¬
ture, the unnatural semination (which
cannot be regularly followed by generation)
is a genus; but the object of such semina¬
tion is the difference which marks the
species under the genus. Thus, whether
semination takes place on the ground, or
on an inanimate body, it is pollution; if


10


Daemonialitas


vase prcepostero, est Sodomia;si fiat cum
bruto, est bestialitas : quce absque contro -
versia inter se specie differunt, eo quod
terra } seu cadaver, homo , et brutum, quce
sunt subjecta talis seminationis, specie dif¬
ferunt inter se. Sed Dcemon a bruto non
solum differt specie, sed plusquam specie :
differunt enim per corporeum , et incorpo-
reum, quce [sunt differentice genericce. Se -
quitur ergo quod seminationes factce cum
aliis differunt inter se specie , quod est in -
tentum.


6. Pari ter, trita est doctrina Moralista-
rum fundata in Tridentino,sess. 14, c. 5 .[D.
Th. in 4. dist. 16. q. 3 . art. 2., Vasque%,
q. 91. art. 1. dub. 2. n. 6., Reginald. Va -
len%. Medin. Zerola. Pesant. Sajir, Sott .
Pitig. Henrique £ Bonac. de Sac. disp .

5 . 4. 5 . serf. 2 .punct. 2. g 3 . diffic. 3 . w. 5 .,
eZ tradita per Theologos , confes-

sione manifestandce sint tantum circum-
stantice quce mutant speciem peccatorum. Si
igitur Dcemonialitas et Bestialitas sunt ejus-
dem speciei specialissimce , sufficit in con-
fessione dicere: Bestialitatis peccatum com-
misi, quantumvis confitens cum Dcemone


Demoniality 11

cum homine in vase prcepostero , it is So¬
domy; with a beast, bestiality : crimes
which unquestionably all differ from each
other in species, just as the ground, the
corpse, the man and the beast, passive
objects talis seminationis y differ in species
from each other. But the difference between
the Demon and the beast is not only spe¬
cific, it is more than specific : the nature
of the one is corporeal, of the other incor¬
poreal, which makes a generic difference.
Whence it follows that seminationes prac¬
tised on different objets differ in species
from each other ; and that is substan¬
tiated.

6. It is also a trite doctrine with Mora¬
lists, established by the Council of Trent,
session 14, and admitted by Theologians*
that in confession it suffices to state the
circumstances which alter the species of
sins. If therefore Demoniality and Bestia¬
lity belonged to the same very particular
species, it would be enough that* each time
he has fornicated with the Demon* the
penitent should say to his confessor : I
have been guilty of the sin of Bestiality ;
But that is not so: therefore those two sins
do not both belong to the same very par¬
ticular species.


12


Daemonialitas


concubuerit. Hoc autem falsum est: igitur
non sunt ejusdem speciei specialissimce.


7. Quod si dicatur, aperiendum esse in
con/essione circumstantiam concubitus cum
Dcemone ratione peccati contra Religio-
nem : peccatum contra Religionem com-
mittitur, aut ex cultu, aut ex reverentia,
aut ex deprecatione, aut ex pacto, aut ex
societate cum Dcemone ( D. Thomas, 2.2.
q. 90. art. 2. et q. 9 5 . art. 4. in corp.); sed }
ut infra dicemus, dantur Succubi, et In -
cubi } quibus nullum prcedictorum exhibe -
tur, et tamen copula sequitur : igitur re -
spectu istorum nulla intervenit irreligio -
sitas, et commixtio cum istis nullam habe-
bit rationem ulteriorem, quam puri et sim -
p lie is coitus, qui, si est ejusdem speciei cum
Bestialitate, sufficient er exprimetur dicendo:
Bestialitatem commisi; quod tamen falsum
est .


B. Ulterius in confesso est apud omnes
Theologos Morales t quod longe gravior
est copula cum Dcemone, quam cum quoli-
bet bruto; in eadem autem specie specialise
sima peccati, non datur unum peccatum
gravius alter0, sed omnia cequegravia sunt;


Demoniality


i3


7. It may be urged that if the circum¬
stances of a sensual intercourse with the
Demon should be revealed to the Confes¬
sor, it is on account of its offense against
Religion, an offense which comes either
from the worship rendered to the Demon,
or from the homage or prayers offered up
to him, or from the compact of fellowship
entered into with hifti ( S . Thomas, quest,
go). But, as will be seen hereafter, there.
arelncubiandSuccubi to whom none of the
foregoing applies, and yet copula sequitur.
There Is consequently, in that special case,
no element of irreligion, no other charac¬
ter quam puri et simplicis coitus; and, if of
the same species as Bestiality , it would be
adequately stated by saying : I have been
guilty of the sin of Bestiality; which is
not so.

8. Besides, it is acknowledged by all
Theological Moralists that copula cum Dee-
mone is much more grievous than the same
act committed with any beast soever.
Now, in the same very particular species
of sins, one sin is not more grievous than


H


Daemonialitas


perinde enim est coire cum cane, aut asina ,
aut equa ; sequitur ergo, quod si Dasmonia-
litas est gravior Bestialitate, non sint ambo
ejusdem speciei. Nec dicendum gravitatem
majorem in Daemonialitate petendam esse
ab irreligiositate, seu superstitione ex so-
cietate cum Dcemone , ut scribit Cajetanus
ad 2. 2. q. 154., ar. 11. § ad 3 . in fine, quia
hoc fallit in aliquibus Succubis et Incubis ,
ut supra dictum est ; turn quia gravitas
major statuitur in D^emonialitate prce Bes¬
tialitate, in genere vitii contra naturam :
major autem gravitas in ilia supra istam
ratione irreligiositatis exorbitat ex illo ge¬
nere, proindc non facit in illo genere, et ex
se graviorem.


9. Statuta igitur differentia specifica Das-
monialitatis a Bestialitate, ut gravitas il-
lius percipiatur in ordine ad pcenam de qua
principaliter nobis tractandum est, est ne-
cessarium inquirere quotupliciter Dasmo-
nialitas accidat. Non desunt qui sibi nimis
scioli negant quod gravissimi Auctores
scripserei et quod quotidiana constat expe-
rientia, DcemOnem scilicet turn Incubum ,
turn Succubum, non solum hominibus, sed
etiam brutis carnaliter conjungi. Aiunt


Demoniality i5

another; all are equally so : it comes to
the same whether connection is had with
a bitch, an ass, or a mare; whence it fol¬
lows that if Demoniality is more grievous
than Bestiality, those two acts are not of
the same species. And let it not be argued,
with Cajetanus, that Demoniality is more
grievous on account of the offense to reli¬
gion from the worship rendered to the
Demon or the compact of fellowship ente¬
red into with him : as has been shown
above, that is not always met with in the
connection of man with Incubi and Suc-
cubi; moreover, if in the genus of unna¬
tural sin Demoniality is more grievous
than Bestiality, the offense to Religion is
quite foreign to that aggravation, since it
is foreign to that genus itself.

9. Now, having laid down the specific
difference between Demoniality and Bes¬
tiality, so that the gravity thereof may be
duly appreciated in view of the penalty
to be inflicted (and that is our most essen¬
tial object), \ve must inquire in how
many different ways the sin of Demonia-
lity may be committed. There is no lack
of people who, infatuated with their small
baggage of knowledge, venture to deny
what has been written by the gravest authors


i6


Dasmonialitas


proinde essehominum imaginationem,phan-
tasmatibus a Dcemone perturbatis Icesam ,
sen d&moniaca esse prcestigia: sicuti etiam
Sagce, seu Striges, sola imaginatione per-
turbata a Dcemone , sibi videntur assistere
ludis, choreis, conviviis, et conventibus noc-
turnis, et carnaliter Dcemoni commisceri;
nullo vero reali modo defer untur cor pore
ad ejusmodi loca et actiones, prout textua-
liter dicitur in quodam Capitulo, ac duobus
Conciliis. Cap. Episcop. 26. q. 5 ., Cone.
Ancyr. c. 24., Cone. Rom. 4. sub Damaso,
c. 5 . apud Laur. Epitom. v° Saga.


10. Sed non negatur , quin aliquando
mulierculce , illusce a Dcemonibus, videantur
nocturnis Sagarum ludis corporaliter inter -
esse, dum tamen sola imaginaria visione
ipsis hoc accidit: sicut etiam in somnis
videtur nonnullis cum feemina aliqua con -
cumbere , et semen vere excernitur, non ta¬
men concubitus ille realis est, sed tantum
phantasticus, paratus non raro per illusio-
nem diabolicam ; et in hoc verissimum est
quod habent citatum Capitulumet Concilia .


I


Demoniality 17

and is testified by every day experience :
namely, that the Demon, whether Incubus
or Succubus, unites carnally not only with
men and women, but also with beasts.
They allege that it all comes from the
human imagination troubled by the craft
of the Demon, and that there is nothing in
it but phantasmagoria and diabolical spells.
The like happens, they say, to Witches or
Sagas, who, under the influence of an
illusion brought on by the Demon, fancy
that they attend the nightly sports, dances,
revels and vigils, and have carnal inter¬
course with the Demon, though in reality
they are not bodily transferred to those
places nor taking part in those deeds, as
has been defined verbatim by a Capitule
and two Councils.

10. Of course, it is not contested that so¬
metimes young women, deceived by the
Demon, fancy taking part, in their flesh
and blood, in the nightly vigils of Witches,
without its being any thing but an imagi¬
nary vision.Thus, inadream, one sometimes
fancies cum foemina aliqua concumbere , et
semen vere excernitur, non tamen concubitus
ille realis est y but merely fantastic, and often
brought about by a diabolical illusion: and
here the above mentioned Capitule and


2.


i8


Dasmomalitas


Sed hoc non semper est; sed at in pluribus,
cor pore defer an tur Sagce ad ludos noctur -
nos, et vere carnaliter corpore conjungun-
tur Dcemoni , et Malefici non minus Dcemo -
ni succubo miscentur, et hcec est sententia
Theologorum, et jure consultorum Catho-
licorum, quos abunde citat Frater Fran -
ciscus Maria Guaccius in suo libro intitu-
lato Compendium Maleficarum; Grilland.
Remig. Petr . Damian . Sylvest. Alphon. a
Cast . Abul. Cajet. Senon . Crespet. Spine .
Anan. apud Guaccium, Comp. Malef., c . i 5 .
§ Altera, quam verissimam... n. 69. lib . p.\
quce sententia confirmatur decern et octo
exemplis, ibidem allatis et relatis per vi-
ros doctos et veridicos de quorum fide am -
bigendum non est , quibus probatur Malefic
cos et Sagas corporaliter ad ludos conve-
nire, et cum Dcemonibus succubis et incubis
corporaliter turpissime commisceri . Et pro
omnibus sufficere debet auctoritas Divi Au-
gustini, qui loquens de concubitu homi -
num cum Dcemonibus, sic ait lib. i 5 . de
Civitate Dei, c. 23 .: « Et quoniam cre-
berrima fama est, multique se expertos,
vel ab eis qui experti essent, de quorum
fide dubitandum non est, audivisse confir-
mant, Sylvanos et Faunos, quos vulgo
Incubos vocant, improbos scepe extitisse
mulieribus, et earum appetiisse et pere-


Demoniality 19

Councils are perfectly right. But this is
not always the case ; on the contrary, it
more often happens that Witches are bo¬
dily present at nightly vigils and have
with the Demon a genuine carnal and cor¬
poreal connection, and that likewise Wi¬
zards copulate with theSuccuba or female
Demon. Such is the opinion of Theologians
as well as of jurists, whose names will be
found at length in the Compendium Male -
ficarum , or Chronicle of Witches , by Bro¬
ther Francis Marie Guaccius. This doc¬
trine is therein confirmed by eighteen
instances adduced from the recitals of lear¬
ned and truthful men whose testimony is
beyond suspicion, and which prove that
Wizards and Witches are indeed bodily
present at vigils and most shamefully
copulate with Demons, Incubi or Succubi.
And, after all, to settle the question, we
have the authority of S. Austin, who,
speaking of carnal intercourse between
men and the Demon, expresses himself as
follows, book 1 5 th , chapt. 23 d of the
City of God : « It is widely credited, and
such belief is confirmed by the direct or in¬
direct testimony of thoroughly trustwor¬
thy people , that Sylvans and Fauns, com¬
monly called Incubi , have frequently mo¬
lested women , sought and obtained from


20


Daemonialitas


gisse concubitum. Et quosdam Daemones,
quos Dusios Galli nuncupant, hanc assidue
immunditiam et tentare et efficere, plures
talesque asseverant, ut hoc negare impu-
dentia videatur. » Hcec Augustinus. -


ii. Prout autem apud diversos Auctores
legitur , et pluribus experiments comproba-
tur, duplici modo Daemon hominibus car-
naliter copulatur: uno modo quo Malejicis
et Sagis jungitur , alio modo quo aliis ho-
minibus minime malejicis miscetur.


12. Quantum ad primum modum , non co-
pulatur Dcemon Sagis , sen Malejicis , nisi
prcemissa solemni professione, qua iniquis-
simi homines Dcemoni addicuntur ; quce pro¬
fession ut ex variis Auctoribus referentibus
confessiones Sagarum judiciales in tormen¬
tsfactas y quas collegit Franciscus Maria
Guaccius, Comp. Malef, c. 7., lib. 1., con -
sistit in undecim ceremoniis :


1 3 . Primo , ineuntpactum expressum cum
Dcemone, autalio Mago sen Maleficovicem


Demoniality 2 1

them coition . There are even Demons ,
w>/zom f/ze G^zz/s ca// Duses or Elfs , w>/zo
verr regularly indulge in those unclean
practices : the fact is testified by so many
and such weighty authorities , f/zdtf it were
impudent to doubt it. » Such are the very
words of S. Austin.

11. Now, severalauthors profess, and it
is confirmed by numerous experiments,
that the Demon has two ways of copula¬
ting carnally with men or women: the one
which it uses with Witches or Wizards,
the other with men or women entirely fo¬
reign to witchcraft.

12. In the first case, the Demdn does not
copulate with Witches or Wizards until
after a solemn profession, in virtue of
which such wretched human beings yield
themselves up to him. According to several
authors who have related the judicial ad¬
missions of Witches when on the rack, and
whose recitals have been collected by
Francis-Marie Guaccius, Compend. Malef.,
book 1, chapt. 7, that profession consists
of eleven ceremonials:

1 3 . Firstly, the Novices have to conclude
with the Demon, or some other Wizard or


22


Dasmonialitas


Dcemonis gerente, et testibus prcesentibus,
de servitio diabolico suscipiendo : Dcemon
verovice versa honor es, divitias, et carnales
delectationes illis pollicetur. Guacc. loc. cit.
fol. 34.


14. Secundo, abnegant catholicam fidem,
subducunt se obedientice Dei y renuntiant
Christo, et protectioni Beatissimce Virginis
Mar ice, ac Ecclesice omnibus sacrament is.
Guacc., loc . cit.

1 5 . Tertio, projiciunt a se Coronam, seu
Rosarium B. V. M. y Chordam S. P. Fran -
cisci, aut Corrigiam S. Augustini, aut
Scapulare Carmelitarum, si quod habent ,
Crucem, Medaleas, Agnos Dei, et quidquid
sacri aut benedicti gestabant, et pedibus ea
proculcant. Guacc. loc. cit. fol. 35 . Gril -
land.


0 16. Quarto, vovent in manibus Diaboli

obedientiam, et subjectionem , eique prce-
stant homagium et vassallagium, tangendo
quoddam volumen nigerrimum. Spondent ,
quod nunquam redibunt ad fidem Christi,
nec Dei prcecepta servabunt, nec ulla bona
opera facient, sed ad sola mandata Dee -


Demoniality 23

Magician acting in the Demon's place, an
express compact by which, in the presence
of witnesses, they enlist in the Demon’s
service, he giving them in exchange his
pledge for honours, riches and carnal
pleasures.

14. Secondly, they abjure the catholic
faith, withdraw from the obedience to God,
renounce Christ and the protection of the
most blessed Virgin Mary, and all the Sa¬
craments of the Church.

1 5 . Thirdly, they cast away the Crown,
or Rosary of the most blessed Virgin
Mary, the girdle of S. Francis, or the strap
of S. Austin, or the scapular of the Car¬
melites, should they belong to one of those
Orders, the Cross, the Medals, the Agnus
Dei , whatever other holy or consecrated
object may have been about their person,
and trample them all under foot.

16. Fourthly, in the hands of the Devil
they vow obedience and subjection; they
pay him homage and vassalage, laying
their fingers on some very black book.
They bind themselves never to return to
the faith of Christ, to observe none of thfc
divine precepts, to do no good work, but


Dasmonialitas


H

monis attendent, et ad convent us nocturnos
diligentcr accedent. Guacc. loc. cit.foL 36 .

17. Quinto, spondent se enixe curaturos,
et omni studio ac sedulitate procuraturos
adducere alios mares et foeminas ad suam
sectam, et cultum Dcemonis. Guacc. loc. cit.


18. Sexto, baptiqantur a Diabolo sacri -
lego quodam baptismo, et abnegatis Pa-
trinis et Matrinis baptismi Christi, et
Confirmationis, et nomine , quod sibi fuit
primo impositum , a Diabolo sibi assignan -
tur Patrinus et Matrina novi t qui ipsos
instruant in arte maleficiorum, et imponi-
tur nomen novum, quod plerumque scurrile
est. Guacc. loc. cit.

19. Septimo, abscindunt partem pro -
priorum indumentorum , et illam offerunt
Diabolo in signum homagii, et Diabolus * 7 -
lam asportat, etservat. Guacc. loc. cit.fol. 38 .

20. Octavo, format Diabolus circulum
super terram, et in eo stantes Novitii Ma -
lejici et Sagev firmant juramento omnia,
quee ut dictum est promiserunt. Guacc. loc.
cit.


Demoniality 25

to obey the Demon alone and, to attend
diligently the nightly conventicles.

17. Fifthly, they promise to strive with
all their power, and to give their utmost
zeal and care for the enlistment of other
males and females in the service of the
Demon.

18. Sixthly, the Devil administers to them
a kind of sacrilegious baptism, and after
abjuring their Godfathers and Godmothers
of the Baptism of Christ and Confirmation,
they have assigned to them a new Godfather
and a new Godmother, who are to instruct
them in the arts of witchcraft; they drop
their former name and exchange it for
another, more frequently a scurrilous
nickname.

19. Seventhly, they cut off a part of their
own garments, and tender it as a token of
homage to the Devil, who takes it away and
keeps it.

Q

20. Eighthly, the Devil draws 1 on the
ground a circle wherein stand the Novi¬
ces, Witches and Wizards, and there they
confirm by oath all their aforesaid pro¬
mises.


3


2 6


Daemonialitas


21. Nona, petunt a Diabolo deleri a libro
Christi, ef describi in libro suo, et pro-
fertur liber nigerrimus, tetigerunt

prcestando homagium, ut dictum est supra,
et ungue Diaboli in eo exarantur . Guacc.
/oc. cit .


22. Decimo, promittunt Diabolo statis
temporibus sacrificia, et oblationes; sin¬
gulis quindecim diebus, vel singulo mense
saltern, necem alicujus inf antis, aut mortale
veneficium, et singulis hebdomadis alia
mala in damnum humani generis, ut gran -
dines, tempestates, incendia, mortem ani -
malium, etc . Guacc. loc. cit.foU 40.

23 . Vndecimo, sigillantur a Dcemone
aliquo charactere, maxime ii, de quorum
constantid dubitat . Character vero non est
semper ejusdem formce, aut figures : ali-
quando enim est simile lepori, aliquando
pedi bufonis, aliquando aranece, vel catello >
vel gliri; imprimitur autem in locis cor-
poreis magis occultis : viris quidem ali*
quando sub palpebris, aliquando sub dxillis,
aut labiis, aut humeris, aut sede ima, aut
alibi; mulieribus autem plerumque in
mammis, aut locis muliebribus . Porro si-
gillum, quo talia signa imprimuntur, est
unguis Diaboli . Quibus peractis ad instru-


Demoniality 27

21. Ninthly, they request the Devil to
strike them out of the book of Christ, and
to inscribe them in his own. Then comes
forth that very black book on which, as
has been said before, they laid hands when
doing homage, and they are inscribed
therein with the Devil’s claw.

22. Tenthly, they promise the Devil sa¬
crifices and offerings at stated times: once a
fortnight or at least each month, the mur¬
der of somo child, or an homicidal act of
sorcery, and other weekly misdeeds to the
prejudice of mankind, such as hailstorms,
tempests, fires, cattle plagues, etc.

23 . Eleventhly, the Demon imprints on
them some mark, especially on those whose
constancy he suspects. That mark, moreo¬
ver, is not always of the same shape or figure:
sometimes it is the image of a hare, some¬
times a toad’s leg, sometimes a spider, ja
puppy, a dormouse. It is imprinted on the
most hidden parts of the body: with men,
under the eye-lids, or the armpits, or the
lips, on the shoulder, the fundament, or
somewhere else; with women, it is usually
on the breasts or the privy parts. Now,
the stamp which imprints those marks is
none other but the Devil’s claw. This ha-


28


Dsemonialitas


ctionem Magistrorum qui Novitios initia -
runt, hi promittunt denuo, se nunquam
Eucharistiam adoraturos; injuriosos Sane -
tis omnibus, et maxime B. V. M. futuros;
conculcaturos ac conspurcaturos Sacras
Imagines, Crucem, ac Sanctorum Reli-
quias; nunquam usuros Sacramends, aut
sacramentalibus, nisi ad maleficia; inte -
gram confessionem sacramentalem sacer -
doti nunquam facturos , et suum cum
Dcemone commercium semper celaturos.
Et Diabolus vicissim pollicetur, se illis
semper preesto futurum ; se in hoc mundo
votis eorum sads/acturum, et post mortem
illos esse beaturum. Sic peracta profes-
sione solemni, assignatur singuds eorum
Diabolus , qui appellatur Magistellus, cum
quo in partes secedunt, et carnaliter com-
miscentur': ille quidem in specie foemince,
si initiatus est vir; in forma autem viri, et
aliquando satyri, aliquando hirci,sifoemina
est saga professa. Guacc. loc . cit.fol. 42
et 43.


24. Quod si queeratur ab Auctoribus,
quomodo possit Dcemon, qui corpus non
habet, corporalem commixdonem habe¬
re cum homine : respondent communiter ,


1


Demoniality 29

ving been all performed in accordance
with the instructions of the Teachers who
have initiated the Novices, these promise
lastly never to worship the Eucharist; to
insult all Saints and especially the most
blessed Virgin Mary; to trample under
foot and vilify the holy images, the Cross
and the relics of Saints ; never to use the
sacraments or sacramental ceremonials;
never to make a full confession to the priest,
but to keep always hidden from him their
intercourse with the Demon. The Demon,
in exchange, engages to give them always
prompt assistance; to fulfil their desires in
this world and to make them happy after
their death. The solemn profession being
thus performed, each has assigned to him¬
self a Devil, called Magistellus or Assistant
Master, with whom he retires in private
for carnal satisfaction; the said Devil
being, of course, in the shape of a woman
if the initiated person is a man, in the
shape of a man, sometimes of a satyr, so¬
metimes of a buck-goat, if it is a woman
who has been received a witch.

24. If the authors be asked how it comes
to pass that the Demon, who has no body,
yet has carnal intercourse with man or
woman, they unanimously answer that

‘ 3.


3o


Daemonialitas


quod Dcemon aut assumit alterius maris
aut foemince, juxta exigentiam , cadaver ,
aut ex mixtione aliarum materiarum ef-
fingit sibi corpus , quod movet, et mediante
quo homini unitur. Et subdunt, quod
quando foemince gaudent imprcegnari a
Dcemone (quod non fit, nisi in gratiam
foeminarum hoc optantium), Dcemon se
transformat in succubam, et juncta homini
semen ab eo recipit; aut per illusionem
nocturnam in somnis procurat ab homine
pollutionem, et semen prolectum in suo na -
tivo calore et cum vitali spiritu conservat,
et incubando fcemince infert in ipsius ma-
tricem, ex quo sequitur conception Ita
multis citatis docet Guaccius , /. i. c. i2.j
per totum, qui prcedicta multis exemplis
desumptis <l variis Doctoribus confirmat.


25 . Alio modo jungitur Dcemon turn
Incubus, turn Succubus, hominibus , foemi -
nis aut maribus, a quibus nec honorem, nec
sacrificia, obi at i ones, maleficia, quce a Sa-
gis et Maleficis , ut supra dictum est, prce
tendit, recipit; sed ostendens deperdite
amorem y nil aliud appetit, quam carnaliter
commisceri cum iis quos amat. Multa


Demoniality 31

the Demon assumes the corpse of another
human being, male or female as the case
may be, or that, from the mixture of other
materials, he shapes for himself a body
endowed with motion, and by means of
which he is united with the human being;
and they add that when women are desi¬
rous of becoming pregnant by the Demon
(which only occurs by the consent and
express wish of the said women), the De¬
mon is transformed into a Succuba, et
juncta homini semen ab eo recipit; or else
he procures pollution from a man during
his sleep, et semen prolectum in suo nativo
calore, et cum vitali spiritu conservat , et
incubando foemince infert in ipsius matri -
cem , whence follows impregnation. Such
is the teaching of Guaccius, book i,
chapt. 12, who supports it on a number
of quotations and instances taken from va¬
rious Doctors.

25 . At other times also „the Demon,
whether Incubus or Succubus, copulates
with men or women from whom he recei¬
ves none of the sacrifices, homage or offe¬
rings which he is wont to exact from
Wizards or Witches, as aforesaid. He is
then but a passionate lover, having only
one desire: the carnal possession of the


32


Dasmonialitas


sunt de hoc exempla, quce ah Auctoribus
referuntur, ut Menippi Lycii, qui fuit sol -
licitatus a quadam fcemina ad sibi nuben-
dum, postquam cum ea multoties coivit; et
detecta fcemina queen am esset a quodam
Philosopho> qui convivio nuptiali intererat ,
et Menippo dixit illam esse Compusam,
pufa Dcemonem succubam , statim ejulans
evanuit, ut narrat Ccelius Rhodiginus ,
Antiq., lib. 29. c. 5 . Pariter adolescens
quidam Scotus a Daemone succuba omnium
gratissima, quas vidisset> forma , quce oc -
clusis cubiculi foribus ad se ventitabat,
blanditiiSy osculis , amplexibus per multos
menses fuit sollicitatus , ut secum coiret,
ut scribit Hector Boethius, Hist. Scotor.
lib. 8.^ quod tamen a casto juvene obtinere
non potuit


26. Similiter, multas feeminas legimus
ab Incubo Dcemone expetitas ad coitum,
ipsisque repugnantibus facinus admittere,
precibuSy fletibus, blanditiis, non secus ac
perditissimus amasius, procurasse animum
ipsarum demulcere, et ad congressum in-
clinare ; et quamvis aliquoties hoc eveniat


Demoniality 33

loved ones. Of this there are numerous
instances to be. found in the authors,
amongst which the case of Menippus
Lycius, who, after frequent coition with a
woman, was by her entreated to marry
her; but a certain philosopher, who par¬
took of the wedding entertainment, having
guessed what that woman was, told Me¬
nippus that he had to deal with a Compusa ,
that is a Succuba Demon; whereupon the
bride vanished bewailing : such is the
narrative given by Coelius Rhodiginus,
Antiq ., book 29, chapt. 5 . Hector Boe¬
thius (Hist. Scot.) also relates the case of
a young Scot, who, during many months,
with closed doors and windows, was visi¬
ted in his bed-room by a Succuba Demon
of the most bewitching beauty; caresses,
kisses, embraces, entreaties, she resorted
to every blandishment utsecum coiret: but
she could not prevail on the chaste young
man.

26. We read likewise of numerous women
incited to coition by the Incubus Demon,
and who, though reluctant at first of yielding
to him, are soon moved by his entreaties,
tears and endearments; he is a desperate
lover and must not be denied. And although
this comes sometimes of the craft of some


Daemonialitas


3 4

ob malejicium , ut nempe Dcemon missus a
maleficis hoc procuret: tamen non raro
Dcemon ex se hoc agit , ut scribit Guaccius ,
Comp. Mai. lib . 3 . c. 8., ef non solum hoc
evenit cum mulieribus, sed etiam cum
equabus , cum quibus commiscetur; quce si
libenter coitum admittunt , eo curantur
optime, ac ipsarum jubce varie artijiciosis
et inextricabilibus nodis texuntur; si au-
tem ilium adversentur, eas male tractat,
percutit, macras reddit , et tandem necat,
ut quotidiana constat experientia.

27. Et quod mirum est , et pene incapa -
bile, tales Incubi, qui Italice vocantur
Folletti, Hispanice Duendes, Gallice Fol-
lets, nec Exorcistis obediunt, nec exor-
cismos pavent, nec res sacras reverentur
ad earum approximationem timorem os-
tendendo , sicuti faciunt Dcemones , qui
obsessos vexant; quantumvis enim maligni
Spiritus sint obstinati , nec parere velint
Exorcistce prcecipienti, ut exeant a corpo-
ribus quce obsident y tamen ad prolationem
Sanctissimi Nominis Jesu, aut Marice, aut
aliquorum versuum Sacrce Scripturce, im-
positionem Reliquiarum , maxime Lighi
Sanctce Crucis f approximationem Sacra -
rum Imaginum , ad os obsessi rugiunt ,
strident, frendent , concutiuntur , et timo -


Demoniality 35

Wizard who avails himself of the agency
of the Demon, yet the Demon not infre¬
quently acts on his own account; and it
happens not merely with women, but also
with mares; if they readily comply with
his desire, he pets them, and plaits their
mane in elaborate and inextricable tresses;
but if they resist, he ill-treats and strikes
them, smites them with the glanders, and
finally puts them to death, as is shown by
daily experience.


27. A most marvellous and well nigh in¬
comprehensible fact: the Incubi whom
the Italians call Folletti , the Spaniards
Duendes , the French Follets, do not obey
the Exorcists, have no dread of exorcisms,
no reverence for holy things, at the ap¬
proach of which they are not in the least
overawed; very different in that respect
from the Demons who vex those whom
they possess; for, however obstinate those
evil Spirits may be, however restive to the
injunctions of the Exorcist who bids them
leave the body they possess, yet, at the mere
utterance of the most holy name of Jesus or
Mary, or of some verses of Holy Writ, at
the mere imposition of relics, especially
of a piece of the wood of the Holy Cross, or


36


Daemonialitas


rem ac horrorem ostendunt. Folletti vero
nihil horum, ut dictum est , ostendunt , nec
a divexatione , nisi post longum tempus,
cessant. Hujus rei testis sum oculatus , et
historiam recito quce reipsa humanam
fidem super at : sed testis mihi sit Deus
quod puram veritatem multorum testimonio
comprobatam describo .


28. Viginti quinque abhinc annis, plus
minusve, dum essem Lector Sacrce Theo -
logics in Conventu Sanctce Crucis Papice,
reperiebatur in ilia civitate honesta quce-
dam fcemina maritata optimce conscientice ,
et bonum habens ab omnibus earn agnos-
centibus, maxime Religiosis , testimonium,
quce vocabatur Hieronyma; et habitabat
in parochia Sancti Michaelis. Hcec qua -
dam die domi sues panem pinserat, et per
furnarium miserat ad ilium decoquendum.
Reportat panes coctos furnarius, et cum
illis grandem quamdam placentam curiose
elaboratam , conditam butyro , et pastulis
Venetis , ut in ea civitate solent fieri pla¬
centa? hujusmodi. Renuit ilia placentam
recipere, dicens se talem nullam fecisse.
Replicat furnarius , se ilia die alium pa -


Demoniality 37

the sight of the holy images, they roar
at the mouth of the possessed person,
they gnash, shake, quiver, and display
fright and awe. But the Folletti show none
of those signs, and leave off their vexations
but after a long space of time. Of this
I was an eye-witness, and shall relate a story
which verily passes human belief: but I
take God to witness that I tell the precise
truth, corroborated by the testimony of
numerous persons.

28. About twenty five years ago, when I
was a lecturer on Sacred Theology in the
convent of the Holy Cross, in Pavia, there
was living in that city a married woman of
unimpeachable morality, and who was most
highly spoken of by all such as knew her,
especially by the Friars; her name was
Hieronyma, and she lived in the parish
of S. Michael. One day, this woman had
kneaded bread at home and given it out to
bake. The oven-man brought her back her
loaves when baked, and with them a large
cake of a peculiar shape, and made of butter
and Venetian paste, as is usual in that city.
She declined to take it in, saying she had
not made any thing of the kind. — « But»,
said the oven-man, <r I had no other bread
» but yours to bake to-day, therefore this

4


38


Daemonialitas


nem coquendum non habuisse, nisi ilium
quem ab ea habuerat; oportere proinde,
etiam placentam a se fuisse factam , licet
minime de ilia recordaretur. Acquievit
foemina, et placentam cum viro suo, filia
quam habebat triennem, etfamula comedit.
Sequenti node dum cubaret mulier cum
viro suo, et ambo dormirent, expergefacta
est a quadam tenuissima voce, velut acu -
tissimi sibili ad ipsius aures susurrante,
verbis tamen distinctis: interrogavit autem
fceminam , num placenta illi placuisset?
Pavens foemina coepit se munire signo
Crucis, et invocare scepius nomina Jesu et
Marice. Replicabat vox, ne paveret, se
nolle illi nocere, immo qucecumque illi
placerent paratum exsequi, essefilo captum
pulchritudinis suce, et nil amplius deside-
rare, quam ejus amplexu frui. Turn foemi¬
na sensit aliquem suaviantem ipsius genas ,
sed tactus ita levis , ac mollis, ac si esset
gossipium subtilissime carminatum id a
quo tacta fuit . Respuit ilia invitantem, nec
ullum responsum illi dedit ; sed jugiter
nomen Jesu et Marice repetebat, et se
Crucis signo muniebat; et sic per spatium
quasi horce dimidice tent at a fuit, et postea
abscessit tentator.

Sequenti mane fuit mulier ad confessa-
rium virum prudentem ac doctum, a quo


Demoniality 39


» cake also must have come from your
» house; your memory is at fault». The good
lady allowed herself to be persuaded, and
partook of the cake with her husband, her
little girl three years old, and the house
servant. The next night, whilst in bed with
her husband, and both asleep, she sud¬
denly woke up at the sound of a very
slender voice, something like a shrill his¬
sing, whispering in her ears, yet with great
distinctness, and inquiring whether « the
» cake had been to her taste?® The good
lady, frightened, set about guarding her¬
self with a sign of the cross and repeatedly
calling the names of Jesus and Mary. « Be
» not afraid,» said the voice,«I mean you no
» harm; quite, the reverse : I am prepared
» to do any thing to please you; I am capti-
» vatedbyyour beauty, and desire nothing
» more than to enjoy your embraces ». And
she felt somebody kissing her cheeks, so
lightly, so softly, that she might have fan¬
cied being grazed by the finest down. She
resisted without giving any answer, merely
repeating over and over again the names
of Jesus and Mary, and crossing herself;
the tempter kept on thus for nearly half an
hour, when he withdrew.

The next morning the dame called on
her Confessor, a discreet and learned man,


Daemonialitas


40

fuit in Jide confirmata et exhortata, ut
viriliter, sicut fecerat, resisteret, et sacris
Reliquiis se muniret. Sequentibus noctibus
par priori fuit tentatio , et verbis, et oscu -
/is, ef muliere constantia.

Hcec perteesa talem ac tantam molestiam,
ad Confessarii consultationem , et aliorum
gravium virorum, per Exorcistas peritos
fecit se exorci^are ad sciendum num esset
obsessa; et cum invenissent a nullo malo
spiritu possideri, benedixerunt domui, cu -
biculOy lectOy et prceceptum Incubo fece-
runl, ne auderet molestiam amplius mu-
lieri inferre. Sed omnia incassum isiquidem
tentationem inceptam prosequebatur , ac si
prce amore langueret, ploratus et ejulatus
emittebat ad mulierem demulcendamj quce
tamen gratia Die adjuta semper viriliter
restitit. Renovavit Incubus tentationem,
ipsi apparens interdiu in forma pusionis ,
seu parvi homunculi pulcherrimi, ccesa-
riem habens rutilam et crispam , barbamque
fulvam ac splendentem velut aurum , glau-
cosque oculos, ut flos lini,' incedebatque
indutus habitu Hispanico. Apparebat au-
tem illi quamvis cum ea alii morarentur ;
et questus , prout faciunt amantes, exer-
cens, et jactando basia , solitasque preces
repetendo tentabat mulierem, ut ad illius
amplexus admitteretur . Videbatque, et au•


Demoniality 41

who confirmed her in her faith, exhorted
her to maintain her energetic resistance
and to provide herself with some holy
relics. On the ensuing nights, like tempta¬
tion with the same language and kisses,
ike constancy also on the part of the wo¬
man. Weary however of such painful and
persistent molestation, taking the advice
of her Confessor and other grave men, she
had herself exorcised by experienced Exor¬
cists, in order to ascertain whether per¬
chance she was not possessed. Having
found in her no trace of the evil Spirit,
they blessed the house, the bed-room, the
bed, and enjoined on the Incubus to discon¬
tinue his molestations. All to no purpose :
he kept on worse than ever, pretending
to be love-sick, weeping and moaning in
order to melt the heart of the lady, who
however, by the grace of God, remained
unconquered. The Incubus then went
another way to work : he appeared in the
shape of a lad or little man of great beauty,
with golden locks, a flaxen beard that
shone like gold, sea-green eyes calling
to mind the flax-flower, and arrayed in a
fancy Spanish dress. Besides he appeared
to her even when in company, whimpe¬
ring, after the fashion of lovers, kissing
his hand to her, and endeavouring by


4-


4 2


Daemonialitas


diebat ilia sola prcesentem ac loquentem,
minime autem cceteri adstantes.

Perseverabat in ilia constantia mulier,
donee contra earn iratus lncubus y post ali -
quos menses blanditiarum novum persecu-
tionis genus adortus est. Primo abstulit
ab ea crucem argenteam plenum Reliquiis
Sanctorum, et ceram benedict am , sive
Agnum papalem B. Pontijicis Pii V, quee
secum semper portabat ; mox etiam annu -
los et alia jocalia aurea et argentea ipsius,
intactis seris sub quibus custodiebantur ,
in area suffuratus est . Exinde coepit illam
acriter percutere y et apparebant post ver-
bera contusiones , et livores in facie , bra-
chiis> aliisque corporis partibus y quee per
diem unum vel alterum perdurabant, mox
in momento disparebant contra ordinem
contusionis naturalis y quee sensim paula -
timque decrescit. Aliquoties ipsius infan -
tulam lactentem cunis eripiebat y et illam ,
nunc super tecta in limine prcecipitii loca-
bat y nunc occultabat, nihil tamen mali in
ilia apparuit . Aliquoties totam domus
supellectilem evertebat; aliquoties ollas ,
paropsides , et alia vasa testea minutatim
frangebat y subinde fracta restituebat in¬
tegral Semel dum ipsa cum viro Cuba -
ret y apparens Incubus in forma solita enixe


Demoniality 43

every means to obtain her embraces. She
alone saw and heard him : for every body
else, he was not to be seen.

The good lady kept persevering in her
admirable constancy till, at last, after
some months of courting, the Incubus,
incensed at her disdain, had recourse to a
new kind of persecution. First, he took
away from her a silver cross filled with
holy relics, and a holy wax or papal lamb
of the blessed Pontiff Pius V, which she
always carried on her person; then, leaving
the locks untouched, he purloined her
rings and other gold and silver jewelry
from the casket wherein they were put
away. Next, he began to strike her cruelly,
and after each beating bruises and marks
were to be seen on her face, her arms or
other parts of her body, which lasted a
day or two, then suddenly disappeared, the
reverse of natural bruises which decrease
slowly and by degrees. Sometimes, while
she was nursing her little girl, he would
snatch the child away from on her breast
and lay it upon the roof, on the edge
of the gutter, or hide it, but without ever
harming it. Sometimes he would upset
all the furniture, or smash to pieces
saucepans, plates and other earthenware
which, in the twinkling of an eye, he res-


Dcemonialitas


44


n


deprecabatur ab ea concubitum, et dum
ipsa de more const ans resister et, in furorem
actus Incubus abscessit, et infra breve tern-
poris spatium reversus est, secum ferens
magnam copiam laminarum saxearum,
quibus Genuenses in civitatesua et universa
Liguria domos tegunt , et ex ipsis fabri-
cavit murum circa lectum tantce altitudinis,
ut ejus conopeum adcequaret, unde necesse
fuit scalis uti , si debuerunt de cubili sur-
gere. Murus autem fuit absque calce, et
ipso destructo, sax a in angulo seposita,
quce ibi per duos dies remanserunt visa a
multis, qui ad spectaculum convenerant; et
post biduum disparuerunt.


Invitaverat maritus ejus in die S. Ste-
phani quosdam amicos viros militares ad
prandium , et pro hospitum dignitate dapes
paraverat; dum de more lavantur manus
ante accubitum, dispar et in moment o mensa
parata in triclinio ; disparent obsoniacuncta,
olla, caldaria, patince, ac omnia vasa in
coquina; disparent amphorce, canthari, ca-
lices parati ad potum. Attoniti ad hoc stu-
pent commensales, qui erant octo, inter
quos Dux peditum Hispanus ad alios con -
versus ait: « Ne paveatis , ista est illusio,


Demonialitjr * 45

tored tho their former state. One night that
she whas lying with her husband, the Incu¬
bus, appearing in his customary shape,
vehemently urged his demand which she
resisted as usual. The Incubus withdrew
in a rage, and shortly came back with a
large load of those flag stones which the
Genoese, and the inhabitants of Liguria in
general, use for roofing their houses. With
those stones he built around the bed a wall
so high that it reached the tester, and that
the couple could not leave their bed with¬
out using a ladder. This wall however was
built up without lime; when pulled down,
the flags were laid by in a corner where,
during two days, they were seen by many
who came to look at them; they then disap¬
peared.

On S. Stephen’s day, the husband had
asked some military friends to dinner^ and,
to do honour to his guests, had provided a
substantial repast. Whilst they were, as
customary, washing their hands before
taking their seats, suddenly vanished the
table dressed in the dining-room; all the
dishes, saucepans, kettles, plates and croc¬
kery in the kitchen vanished likewise, as
well as the jugs, bottles and glasses. You may
imagine the surprise,the stupor of theguests,
eight in number; amongst them was a


Daemonialitas


46

» sed pro certo mensa in loco in quo erat ,
» adhuc est, et mode modo earn tactu perci-
» piam.y> Hisque dictis circuibat coenaculum
manibus extends, tentans mensam depre-
hendere , sed cum post multos circuitus
incassum laborasset , et nil preeter aerem
tangeret, irrisus fuit a ceteris ; cumque
jam grandis esset prandii hora , pallium
proprium eorum unusquisque sumpsit pro-
priam domum petiturus. Jam erant omnes
prope januam domus in procinctu eundi,
associati a marito vexatce mulieris, urba-
nitatis causa, cum grandem quendam stre-
pitum in ccenaculo audiunt Subsistunt pa -
rumper ad cognoscendum causam strepitus,
et accurrens famula nuntiat in coquina vasa
nova obsoniis plena apparuisse, mensamque
in ccenaculo jam paratam esse restitutam.
Revertuntur in coenaculum , et stupent men¬
sam mappis et manutergiis insolitis, salino ,
et lancibus insolitis argenteis , salsamentis,
ac obsoniis, quee domi parata non fuerant ,
instructam . A latere magna erecta erat cre¬
dential supra quam optimo ordine stabant
calices crystallinis , argentini et aurei , cum
variis amphoris , lagenis , cantharis plenis
vinis extetis , puta Cretensi, Campano,
Canariensi , Rhenano, etc . In coquina pa-
riter in ollis y et vasis itidem in ea domo
nunquam visis, varia obsonia . Dubitarunt


Demoniality 47

Spanish Captain of infantry, who, addres¬
sing the company, said to them : « Do not be
» frightened, it is but a trick : the table is
» certainly still where it stood, and I shall
» soon find it by feeling for it ». Having
thus spoken, he paced round the room
with outstretched arms , endeavouring to
lay hold of the table; but when, after many
circuitous perambulations, it was apparent
that he laboured in vain and grasped at
nought but thin air, he was laughed at by
his friends ; and it being already high time
for having dinner, each guest took up his
cloak and set about to return home. They
had already reached the street-door with the
husband, who, out of politeness, was atten¬
ding them, when they heard a great noise
in the dining-room: they stood to ascer¬
tain the cause thereof, and presently the ser¬
vant came up to announce that the kitchen
was stocked with new vessels filled with
food, and that the table was standing
again in its former place. Having gone
back to the dining-room, they were stupe¬
fied to see the table was laid, with cloths,
napkins, salt-cellars, and trays that did not
belong to the house, and with food which
had not been cooked there. On a large
sideboard all were arrayed in perfect order
crystal, silver and gold chalices, with all


Daemonialitas


48

prius nonnulli ex its eas dapes gustare,
sed confirmati ab aliis accubuerunt , et ex -
quisitissime omnia condita repererunt; ac
immediate a prandio , dum omnes pro usu
illius tempores ad ignem sedent , omnia us-
tensilia cum reliquiis ciborum disparuere ,
et repertce sunt antiques domus supellecti -
les simul cum dapibus } ques prius paratce
fuerant; et quod mirum est , convives omnes
saturati sunt, ita ut nullus eorum coenam
sumpserit pres prandii lautitia. Quo con-
vincitur cibos appositos reales fuisse , et non
ex presstigio repressentatos.


littered effluxeratit multi menses, ex quos
coeperat hujusmodi persecutio: et mulier
votum fecit B. Bernardino Feltrensi , cu-
jus sacrum corpus veneratur in Ecclesia
S. Jacobi prope murum illius urbis, ince -
dendi per annum integrum indutam panno
griseo, et chordulato, quo utuntur Fratres
Minor es, de quorum or dine fuit B. Ber -
nardinuSj ut per ipsius patrocihium a tanta
Incubi vexatione liberaretur . Et de facto


Demoniality 49

kind of amphoras, decanters and cups filled
with foreign wines, from the Isle of Crete,
Campania, the Canaries, the Rhine, etc.
In the kitchen there was also an abundant
variety of meats in saucepans and dishes
that had never been seen there before. At
first, some of the guests hesitated whether
they should taste of that food; however,
encouraged by others, they sat down, and
soon partook of the meal, which was found
exquisite. Immediately afterwards, as they
were sitting before a seasonable fire, every
thing vanished at once, the dishes and the
leavings, and in their stead reappeared the
cloth of the house and the victual which had
been previously cooked; but, for a won¬
der, all the guests were satisfied, so that no
one thought of supper after such a magnifi¬
cent dinner. A clear proof that the substitu¬
ted viands were real and nowise fictitious.

This kind of persecution had been going
on some months, when the lady betook
herself to the blessed Bernardine of Feltri,
whose body is worshipped in the church
of St James, a short distance from the
walls of the city. She made a vow to him
that she would wear, during a whole
twelve-month, a grey frock, tied round
her waist with a piece of cord, and such as
is worn by the Minor Brethren, the order

5


5 o


Daemonialitas


die 28 Septembris, qui est pervigilium
Dedications S. Michaelis Archangeli, et
festum B. Bernardini , ipsa veste votiva in-
duta est. Mane sequenti } quod est festum
S. Michaelis, ibat vexata ad ecclesiam S.
Michaelis, quce ut diximus erat parochialis
ipsius, circa medium mane, dum frequens
populus ad illam confluebat ; et cum perve -
nisset ad medium platece ecclesice, omnia
ipsius indumenta et orn'amenta ceciderunt
in terram et rapta vento statim disparuerunt,
ipsa relicta nuda. Adfuerunt sorte inter
alios duo equites viri longcevi , qui factum
videntes , dejectis ab humeropropriis palliis
mulieris nuditatem> ut potuerunt, velarunt ,
et rhedce impositam ad propriam domum
duxerunt. Vestes et jocalia quce rapuerat
Incubus , non restituit nisi post sex menses .


Multa alia , et quidem stUpenda operatuS
est contra earn Incubus , quce tcedet exscri -
here, et per multos annos in ea tentatione


Demonialitjr 5 1

to which had belonged the blessed Ber-
nardine; this she vowed, in the hope of
being, through his intercession, at last rid
of the persecution of the Incubus. And ac¬
cordingly, on the 28 th of September, the
vigil of the Dedication of the Archangel S.
Michael, and the festival of the blessed
Bernardine, she assumed the votive robe.
The next morning, which was S. Michael’s
festival, the afflicted woman proceeded to
the church of St Michael, her own pa¬
rish, already mentioned ; it was about
ten o’clock, a time when a crowd of people
were going to mass. She had no sooner set
foot on the treshold of the church, than her
clothes and ornaments fell off to the ground,
and disappeared in a gust of wind, leaving
her stark naked. There happened fortuna¬
tely to be among the crowd two cavaliers
of mature age, who, seeing what had taken
place, hastened to divest themselves of
their cloaks with which they concealed, as
well as they could, the woman’s nudity,
and having put her into a vehicle, accom¬
panied her home. The clothes and trinkets
taken by the Incubus were not restored by
him before six months had elapsed.

I might relate many other most surprising
tricks which that Incubus played on her,
were it not wearisome. Suffice it to say that,


52


Dasmonialitas


permansit; tandemque Incubus videns ope-
ram in ea perdere, destitit a tam impor-
tuna et insolita vexatione.


29. In hoc casu, et similibus qui passim
audiuntur et leguntur, Incubus ad nullum
actum contra Religionem tentat , sed solum
contra castitatem. Hinc fit quod ipsi con-
sentiens non peccat irreligiositate , sed in¬
continentia .

3 0. In confesso autem est apud Theolo -
gos et PhilosophoSj quod ex commixtione
hominis cum Dcemone aliquoties nascuntur
homines , et tali modo nasciturum esse An -
tichristum opinantur nonnulli Doctores :
Bellarm. lib. 1, de Rom. Pont ., cap. 12;
Suare^y tom. 2, dzsj?. 54, sec. 1.; Maluend.,
de Antichr., L 2., c. 8. Immo observant,
quod, qui gignuntur ab hujusmodi Incubis,
naturali causa etiam evenit, ut nascantur
grandes, robustissimi, ferocissimi, super-
bissimi , ac nequissimi, ut scripsit Maluenda ,
loc. tit., g Ad illud; et hujus rationem re-
citat ex Vallesio Archia. Reggio. Sac.
Philosophy c. 8., dicente quod Incubi sum-
mittant in uteros non qualecumque, neque
quantumcumque semen, sed plurimum,
crassissimum, calidissimum, spiritibus af-


Demoniality 53

for a number of years he persevered in his
temptation of her, but that finding at last
that he was losing his pains, he. desisted
from his vexatious importunities.

29. In the above case, as well as in others
that may be heard or read of occasionally,
the Incubus attempts no act against Reli¬
gion ; he merely assails chastity. In conse¬
quence, consent is not a sin through un¬
godliness, but through incontinence.

3 0. Now, it is undoubted by Theologians
and philosophers that carnal intercourse
between mankind and the Demon someti¬
mes gives birth to human beings ; that is
how is to be born the Antichrist, according
to some Doctors, such as Bellarmin, Sua¬
rez, Maluenda, etc. They further observe
that, from a natural cause, the children
thus begotten by Incubi are tall, very
hardy and bold, very proud and wicked.
Thus writes Maluenda; as for the cause,
he gives it from Vallesius, Archphysician
in Reggio : « What Incubi introduce in ate-
ros, is not qualecumque neque quantum -
cumque semen , but abundant, very thick,
very warm, rich in spirits and free from
serosity. This moreover is an easy thing
for them, since they have but to choose


Daemonialitas


H

fluens et seri expers. Id vero est eis facile
conquirere, deligendo homines calidos, ro-
bustos, et abondantes multo semine, quibus
succumbant, deinde et mulieres tales, qui¬
bus incumbant, atque utrisque voluptatem
solito majorem afferendo, tanto enim abun-
dantius emittitur semen, quanto cum ma¬
jor! voluptate excernitur. Hcec Vallesius.
Conjirmat vero Maluenda supradicta, pro -
bando, ex variis et classicis Auctoribus , ex
hujusmodi concubitu natos : Romulum ac
Remum, Liv . decad . i ; Plutarch ., in Vit.
Romul. et Parallel. ; Servium Tullium ,
sextum regem Romanorum, Dionys. Hali-
car., lib. 4, Plin., lib . 36 ., c . 27; Platonem
Philosophum, Laer . 9. de Vit. Philos.;

D. Hyeron ., 1 . 1. Controvers. Jovinian.;
Alexandrum Magnum, Plutarch in Vit.
Alex. M.; Quint. Curt., /. 4, deGest. Alex.
M.; Seleucum, regem Syria?, Just., Hist.,
/. 1 5 ,• Appian., in Syriac.; Scipionem A/ri -
canum Majorem, Liv., decad. 3 , /i&. 6; Cd?-
sarem Augustum Imperatorem, Suet on., in
Octa., c. 94; Aristomenem Messenium,
strenuissimum ducem Grcecorum, Strabo ,
de Sit Orb., lib. 8; Pausan., de Rebus Grae-
cor., lib. 3 ; et Merlinum , seu Melchinum
Anglicum ex Incubo et Filia Caroli Magni
Mohiali * Haulier , volum. 2, Generat. 7,
e/*dtm de Martino Luthero,perditissimo


Demoniality 55

ardent, robust men, et abundantes multo
semine, quibus succumbant, and then wo¬
men of a like constitution, quibus incum-
bant , taking care that both shall enjoy
voluptatem solito majorem , tanto enim
abundantius emittitur semen , quanto cum *
majori voluptate excernitur . » Those are
the words of Vallesius, confirmed by Ma-
luenda who shows, from the testimony of
various Authors, mostly classical, that
such associations gave birth to : Romulus
and Remus, according to Livy and
Plutarch; Servius-Tullius, the sixth king
of Rome, according to Dyonisius of Hali¬
carnassus and Pliny the Elder; Plato the
Philosopher, according to Diogenes Laer¬
tius and Saint Hieronymus; Alexander
the Great, according to Plutarch and
Quintus-Curtius; Seleucus, king of Syria,
according to Justinus and Appianus ;
Scipio Africanus the Elder, according to
Livy; the emperor Caesar Augustus,
according to Suetonius; Aristomenes the
Messenian, an illustrious Greek com¬
mander, according to Strabo and Pausanias ;
as also Merlin or Melchin the Englishman,
born from an Incubus and a nun, the
daughter of Charlemagne; and, lastly, as
shown by the writings of Cochlceus quoted
by Maluendd, that damned Heresiarch
ycleped Martin Luther.


56


Daemonialitas


Heresiarcha scribit Cochlceus apud Ma-
luendam, de Antich., lib. 2, c. 6, § Caeterum.


• 3 i. Salva tamen tot, et tantorum Docto -
rum, #wi iw ea opinione conveniunt, reve-
rentia, wow video, quomodo ipsorum sen -
/ew/ia /?ossi/ subsistere; turn quia, ut
optime opinatur Pererius, tom. 2, iw Ge¬
nes., cajp. 6, <fisp. 5 , /o/a vis e/ efficacia
humani seminis consistit in spiritibus, qui
difflantur, et evanescunt statim ac sunt
extra genitalia vasa , a quibus foventur et
conservantur , w/ scribunt Medici. Nequit
proinde Dcemon semen acceptum conser-
vare , w/ aptum sit generationi, quia

vas, quodcu)nque sit illud, in quo semen
conservare tentaret, oporteret quod caleret
calore assimetro a nativo organorum
humance generationis; similarem enim a
nullo alio prceterquam ab organis ipsis
habere potest generatio. Turn quia gene-
ratio actus vitalis est, per quern homo
generans de propria substantia semen defcrt
per organa naturalia ad locum generationi
congruentem. In casu autem delatio seminis
non potest esse actus vitalis hominis gene -
rantis , quia ab eo non infertur in rnatri-
cem ; proinde nec did potest , quod homo


Demoniality 5 7

3 i. However, with due deference to so
many and such learned Doctors, I hardly
see how their opinion can bear examina¬
tion. For, as Pererius truly observes in his
Commentary on the Genesis , chapt. 6, the
whole strengh and efficiency of the human
sperm reside in the spirits which evapo¬
rate and vanish as soon as issued from the
genital vessels wherein they were warmly
stored: all medical men agree on that point.
It is consequently not possible that the
Demon should preserve in a fit state for
generation the sperm he has received;
for it were necessary that whatever vessel
he endeavoured to keep it in should be
equally warm with the human genital or¬
gans, the warmth of which is nowhere to
be met with but in those organs themselves.
Now, in a vessel where that warmth is not
intrinsical but extraneous, the spirits get
altered, and no generation can take place.
There is this other objection, that genera¬
tion is a vital act by which man, begetting
from his own substance, carries the sperm
through natural organs to the spot which
is appropriate to generation. On the con¬
trary, in this particular case, the introduc¬
tion of sperm cannot be a vital act of the
man who begets, since it is not carried
into the womb by his agency ; and, for


58


Dsemonialitas


eujus est semen, generet fcetum , qui ex eo
nascitur. Neque Incubus ipsius pater did
potest; quia de ipsius substantia semen non
est . Hinc jiet, quod nascetur homo , eujus
nemo pater sit, quod est incongruum . Turn
quia in patre naturaliter generante duplex
causalitas concurrit, nempe materialis , quia
semen , quod materia generations , minis -
/raf, et ejfficiens, quia agens principale est
in generatione, ut communiter statuunt
Philosophic In casu autem nostro homo
ministrando solum semen , pur am materiam
exhiberet absque ulla actione in ordine ad
generationem ,* proinde non posset did
pater filii qui nasceretur : et hoc est con¬
tra id, quod homo genitus ab Incubo non
est illius filius , sed est filius ejus viri, a
quo Incubus semen sumpsit.


32 . Procterea omni probabilitate caret
quod scribit Vallesius, et ex eo recitavimus


Demoniality 59

the same cause, it cannot be said that the
man, whose sperm it was, has begotten
the fetus which proceeds from it. Nor can
the Incubus be deemed its father, since
the sperm does not issue from his own
substance. Consequentially, a child would
be born without a father, which is absurd.
Third objection : when the father begets
in the course of nature, there is a concur¬
rence of two casualties: the one, material,
for he provides the sperm which is the
matter of generation ; the other, efficient,
for he is the principal agent of generation,
as Philosophers agree in declaring. But,
in this case, the man who only provided
the sperm would contribute but a mere
material, without any action tending to
generation; he could therefore not be
regarded as the father of the child begot¬
ten under those circumstances; and this
is opposed to the notion that the child
begotten by an Incubus is not his son, but
the son of the man whose sperm the
Incubus has taken.

32 . Besides, there is not a shadow of
probability in what Was written by Valle^
Sius and quoted from him by us (Vide
Supra w b 3 o); and I wonder that any thing
so extravagant should have fallen from


60 Daemonialitas

supra n° 3 o; mirorque a doctissimi viri
calamo talia excidisse. Notissimum enim
est apud Physicos , quod magnitudo foetus
non est a quantitate molis, sed est a quan¬
titate virtutiSy hoc est spirituum in semine :
ab ea enim tota generationis ratio dependet,
ut optime testatur Michael Ettmullerus,
Instit. Medic. Physiolog., car . 22, thes. 1,
fol. m. y 3 g, scribens ; Tota generationis
ratio dependet a spiritu genitali sub eras-
sioris material involucro excreto; ista ma¬
teria seminis crassa nullo modo, vel in
utero subsistente, vel seu materia foetum
constituente : sed solus spiritus genitalis
maris unitus cum spiritu genitali mulieris
in poros uteri, seu, quodrarius fit, in tubos
uteri se insinuat, indeque uterum fecun-
dum reddit. Quid ergo facer e potest magna
quantitas seminis ad foetus magnitudinem?
Prceterea nec semper verum est , quod tales
geniti ab Incubis magnitudine molis cor -
porece insignes sint: Alexander enim Ma¬
gnus , qui; ut diximus, natus taliter scri-
bitur , statura pusillus erat ; unde carmen,

Magnus Alexander corpore parvus erat.

Item quamvis taliter concepti supra cceteros
homines excellant, non tamen hoc semper
est in vitiis , sed aliquando in virtutibus


Demoniality 61

the pen of such a learned man. Medical
men are well aware that the size of the
fetus depends, not indeed on the quantity
of matter, but on the quantity of virtue,
that is to say of spirits held by the sperm;
there lies the whole secret of generation,
as is well observed by Michael Ettmuller,
Institut. Medic. Physiolog .: « Generation)),
says he, «entirely depends upon the genital
spirit contained within an envelope of
thicker matter; that spermatic matter
does not remain in the uterus, and has no
share in the formation of the fetus; it is
but the genital spirit of the male, com¬
bined with the genital spirit of the female,
that permeates the pores, or, less frequen¬
tly, the tubes of the uterus, which it fecun¬
dates by that means. » Of what moment
can therefore the quantity of sperm be for
the size of the fetus? Besides, it is not
always a fact that men thus begotten by
Incubi are remarkable for the huge pro¬
portions of their body : Alexander the
Great, for instance, who is said to have
been thus born, as we have mentioned,
was very short; as the poet said of him :

Magnus Alexander corpore parvus erat.

Besides, although it is generally a fact
that those who are thus begotten excel

6


6 2


Dasmomalitas


etiam in moralibus , wf in Scipione

Africano , Ccesare Augusto, et Platone
Philosopho , quibus Livius , Suetonius et
Laertius respective scribunt, quod optimi
in moribus fuere; wf proinde arguere pos-
simus , quod si alii eodem modo geniti
pessimi fuere, Hoc non fuerit ex hoc ,
fuerint ab Incubo geniti, sed quia tales ex
proprio arbitrio exstitere.


Pariter ex textu Sacrce Scripturce, Gen.,
c. 6, v. 4, habemus quod gigantes nati sunt
ex concubitu jiliorum Dei cum filiabus
hominum , e* /*oc litteram sacri textus.
Gigantes autem homines erant statura
magna, ut eos vocat Baruch , c. 3 , v. 26, et
excedente communem hominum proceri -
tatem. Monstruosa statura, robore, latro -
ciniis, et tyrannide insignes: unde Gigantes
per sua scelera fuerunt maxima , e/ potis-
sima causa Diluvii , aif Cornelius a Lap id,
in Gen*, c. 6, v. 4, § Burgensis. iVow qua¬
drat autem quorumdam expositio, quod
nomine Jiliorum Dei veniant filii Seth, et
vocabulo filiarum hominum filice Cain, eo
quod illi erant pietati, Religioni, et cceteris
virtutibus addicti, descendentes autem a


Demoniality 63

other men, yet such superiority is not
always shown by their vices, but some¬
times by their virtues and even their
morals; Scipio Africanus, for instance,
Caesar Augustus and Plato the Philosopher,
as is recorded of each of them respectively
by Livy, Suetonius and Diogenes Laer¬
tius, had excellent morals. Whence may
be inferred that, if other individuals
begotten in -the same way have been
downright villains, it was not owing to
their being born of an Incubus, but to
their having, of their own free will, chosen
to be such.

We also read in the Testament, Genesis,
chap. 6, verse 4, that giants were born
when the sons of God came in unto the
daughters of men : that is the very letter
of the sacred text. Now, those giants were
men of great stature, says Baruch, chap. 3 ,
verse 26, and far superior to other men.
Not only were they distinguished by their
huge size, but also by their physical
power, their plundering habits and their
tyranny. Through their criminal excesses
the Giants were the primary and principal
cause of the Flood, according to Cornelius
a Lapide, in his Commentary on Genesis.
Some contend that by Sons of God are
meant the sons of Seth, and by Daughters


Daemonialitas


6 4

Cain vice versa : nam salva opinantium ,
Chrysost., Cyrill ., Theodor. Rupert. Ab. et
Hilar . zw Psalm. 1 32 ,apud Cornel <2 Lap.,
c. 6; G., v. 2, § Verum dies, reverentia,
talis expositio non cohceret sensui patenti
litterce ; az 7 ewzm Scriptura, quod ex con -
junctione talium nati sunt homines mon-
struosce proceritatis corporece : ante illam
ergo tales gigantes non extiterunt : quod
si ex ea orti sunt , hoc non potuit esse ex
eo, filii Seth coivissent cum filiabus

Cain , quia illi erant staturce ordinance ,
prout etiam filice Cain, tzwie oriri ex his
naturaliter non potuerunt nisi filii staturce
ordinance : si ergo monstruosa statura filii
nati sunt ex tali conjunctione , hoc fuit,
quia non fuerunt prog nati ex or dinar ia
conjunctione „ viri cum muliere , sei e.*:
Incubis dcemonibus qui ratione naturce
ipsorum optime possunt vocari filii Dei, e/
zVz hac sententia sunt Philosophi Platonici ,
e* Franciscus Georgius Venetus, /om. i,
problem . 74 : wee dissentiunt ab eadem
Joseph. Hebrceus, Philo Judceus , 5 . /ws-
fwiKS Martyr , Clemens Alexandrinus , ef
Tertullianus, Joseph. Hebrceus, Antiq., /.
1.; Philo, l. de Gigant.; 5 . Justinus M .,
Apolog. 1.; Clemens Alex., lib . 3 ; Tertull .,
lib. de Habit. Mul., apud Cornel., loc.cit.;
Hugo de S. Victor Annot. in Gen., c. 6,


Demoniality 65

of men the daughters of Cain, because the
former practiced piety, religion and every
other virtue, whilst the descendants of
Cain were quite the reverse; but, with all
due deference to Chrysostom, Cyrillus,
Hilarius and others who are of that opi¬
nion, it must be conceded that it clashes
with the obvious-meaning of the text. Scrip¬
ture says, in fact, that of the conjunction of
the above mentioned were born men of
huge bodily size : consequently, those giants
were not previously in existence, and if their
birth was the result of that conjunction,
it cannot be ascribed to the intercourse of
the sons of Seth with the daughters of
Cain, who being themselves of ordinary
stature, could but procreate children of
ordinary stature. Therefore, if the inter¬
course in question gave birth to beings of
huge stature, the reason is that it was not
the common connection between man and
woman, but the performance of Incubi
Demons who, from their nature, may very
well be styled sons of God. Such is the opi¬
nion of the Platonist Philosophers and of
Francis Georges the Venetian; nor is it
discrepant from that of Josephus the His¬
torian, Philo the Jew, S. Justinus the
Martyr, Clement of Alexandria, and Ter-
tullian, who look upon Incubi as corporeal


66


Daemonialitas


qui opinantur illos fuisse Angelos quos~
nam corporeos qui in luxuriam cum mulie-
ribus delapsi sunt : ut enim infra osten-
demus } istce duce sent entice in unam et eamdem
conveniunt .


33 . Si ergo Incubi tales, ut fert communis
sententia, Gigantes genuerunt , accepto se-
mine ab homine , juxta id, quod supra
dictum est , non potuerunt ex illo semine
nasci nisi homines ejusdem staturce plus
minusve , cum eo a quo semen acceptum est:
nec enim facit ad altiorem corporis statu -
ram major seminis quantitas, itaut attracta
insolite aDcemone , dum Succubus fit homini,
augeat ultra illius staturam enormiter cor-
pus ab eo geniti; quia , ut supra diximus,
hoc residet in spiritu, et non in mole semi¬
nis : ut proinde necesse sit concludere ,
quod ab alio semine , quam humano, hujus -
modi gigantes nati sint, et proinde Dcemon
Incubus non humano, sed alio semine utatur
ad generationem . Quid igitur dicendum ?


Demoniality 67

Angels who have allowed themselves to
fall into the sin of lewdness with women.
Indeed, as shall be shown hereafter, though
seemingly distinct, those two opinions are
but one and the same.


33 . If therefore these Incubi, in confor¬
mity with general belief, have begotten
Giants by means of sperm taken from
man, it is impossible, as aforesaid, that of
that sperm should have been born any but
men of approximately the same size as he
from whom it came; for it would be in vain
for the Demon, when acting the part of a
Succubus, to draw from man an unwonted
quantity of prolific liquor in order to pro¬
create therefrom children of higher stature;
quantity has nothing to do here, since all
depends, as we have said, upon the vitality
of that liquor, not its quantity. We are
therefore bound to infer that Giants are
born of another sperm than man’s, and
that, consequently, the Incubus Demon,
for the purpose of generation, uses a sperm
which is not man’s. But then, what is to
be said?


68


Daemonialitas


34. Quantum ad hoc , sub corrections
Sanctce Matris Ecclesice , et mere opinative
dico, Incubum Dcemonem , mulieribus
commiscetur , ex proprio dpsius semine
hominem generare.


35 . Paradoxa in fide, et parum sana
nonnullis videbitur hcec opinio; sed lecto -
rem meum deprecor , ut judicium non
prcecipitet de ea : ut enim incivile est non -
iwm /ota /eg-e perspecta judicare , «/
CelsuSy lib . 24. Jf. ie legib. et S. C., ait,
ita neque damnanda est opinio , m/s/ p*/ws
examinatis , ac solutis arguments, quibus
innititur. Ad probandam igitur supra -
datam conclusionem, nonnulla sunt neces -
sar/o prcemittenda.


36 . Prcemittendum primo de fide est,
quod dentur Creatures pure spirituals
nullo modo de materia corporea parti -
cipantes, prout habetur ex Concilio La -
teranensi, sub Innocentio Tertio , c. Firm,
de Sum. Trin . e/ Cdtf/z. Como. Eph.
in Epist. Cyrill. ad Reggia , e/ a//£/.
Hujusmodi autem sunt Angeli beati, et
Dcemones damnati ad ignem perpetuum.
Quamvis vero nonnulli Doctores , Bann.


Demoniality 69

34. Subject to correction by our Holy
Mother Church, and as a mere expression
of opinion, I say that the Incubus Demon,
when having intercourse with women,
bigets the human fetus from his own
sperm.

35 . To many that proposition will seem
heterodox and hardly sensible; but I beg
of my reader not to condemn it precipita¬
tely; for if, as Celsus says, it is improper
to deliver judgment without having tho¬
roughly inquired into the law, no less
unfair is the rejection of an opinion, before
the arguments upon which it rests have
been weighed and confuted. I have there¬
fore to prove the above conclusion, and
must necessarily premise with some state¬
ments.

36 . Firstly, I premise, as an article of
belief, that there are purely spiritual crea¬
tures, not in any way partaking of'corpo¬
real matter, as was ruled by the Council
of Lateran, under the pontificate of Inno¬
cent III. Such are the blessed Angels,
and the Demons condemned to ever-lasting
fire. Some Doctors, it is true, have profes¬
sed, subsequently even to this Council,
that the spirituality of Angels and Demons


Daemonialitas


70

par. 1. q. 5 . ar . 1. Can. de Loc. Theol. /.
5 . c. 5 . Sz\rf. seu Bibliot. San. /. 5 . anriot.
8., Mirand. Sum. Concil. v°. Angelus,
Molina , 1. q. 5 o., a. 1., Carran\.,

Annot. ad Synod. 7., efinm ;?osf Conci¬
lium illud docuerint spiritualitatem Ange -
lorum et Dccmonum non esse de fide , ita
w* nonnulli alii , Bonav . 2« /16. 2. senf. disf.
3 . q. 1., Scof. de Anim. q. i 5 ., Cajet. in
Gen. c. 4., Franc . Georg. Problem. /. 2.
c. 57., August . Hyph. y de Daemon., /. 3 .
c. 3 ., scripserint illos esse corporeos , et
proinde Angelos Dcemonesque corpore et
spiritu constare non esse propositionem
hcereticam , ne^we erroneam, probet Bona -
ventura Baro , Scot. Defens. fom. 9. aj?o-
/og-. 2., act. 1p. §7. : tamen quia Con¬
cilium ipsum statuit de fide tenendum ,
Deum esse Creatorem omnium visibilium
et invisibilium, spiritualium et corpora-
lium, qui utramque de nihilo condidit
creaturam spiritualem et corporalem An-
gelicam, videlicet ut mundanam : zdeo
d*co de fide esse quasdam creaturas dari
mere spirituals, et tales esse Angelos , now
quidem omnes , sed quosdam.

37. Inaudita forsan erit sententia hcec y sed
non destituta erit probabilitate. Si enim a
Theologis tanta inter Angelos diversitas


Demoniality 71

is not an article of belief; others even
have asserted that they are corporeal,
whence Bonaventure Baron has drawn the
conclusion that it is neither heretical nor
erroneous to ascribe to Angels and Demons
a twofold substance, corporeal and spiritual.
Yet, the Council having formally declared
it to be an article of belief that God is the
maker of all things visible and invisible,
spiritual and corporeal, who has raised
from nothing every creature spiritual or
corporeal. Angelic or terrestrial , I contend
it is an article of belief that there are cer¬
tain merely spiritual creatures, and that
suqh are Angels; not all ofthem,buta cer¬
tain number.


37. It may seem strange, yet it must
be admitted not to be unlikely. If, in
fact, Theologians concur in establishing


Daemonialitas


72

specified , et proinde essentialis statuitur , ut
in via D. Thomce , p. p. 5 o, <zr. 4,
plures Angeli nequeant esse in eadem spe¬
cie , sed quilibet Angelus propriam speciem
constituat, pro/ecto nulla invenitur repu -
gnantia , Angelorum nonnulli sint

purissimi spiritus , e/ proinde excellentis-
simee nature p, aliiautem corporei,et minus
excellentes, et eorum differentia petatur
per corporeum et incorporeum. Accedit
quod hac sententia facile solvitur alias inso-
lubilis contradictio inter duo Concilia
CEcumenica , nempe Septimam Synodum
generalem , e/ dictum Concilium Latera-
nense: siquidem in ilia Synodo , esf

secunda Niccena , actione quinta , productus
est liber Joannis Thessalonicensis scriptus
contra quemdam Philosophum gentilemfin-
quo ita habetur : De Angelis et Archan-
. gelis, atque eorum Potestatibus, quibus
nostras Animas adjungo, ipsa Catholica
Ecclesia sic sentit, esse quidem intelligi-
biles, sed non omnino corporis expertes,
et insensibiles, ut vos Gentiles dicitis,
verum tenui corpore praeditos, et aereo,
sive igneo, sicut scriptum est : qui facit
Angelos suos spiritus, et ministros suos
ignem urentem. Et infra : Quamquam
autem non sint ut nos, corporei, utpote
ex quatuor dementis, nemo tamen vel


Demoniality j2>

amongst Angels a specific, and therefore es¬
sential, diversity so considerable that, ac¬
cording to St. Thomas, there are not two
Angels of the same species, but that each of
them is a species by himself, why should not
certain Angels be most pure spirits, of a con¬
sequently very superior nature, and others
corporeal, therefore of a less perfect na¬
ture, differing thus from each other in their
corporeal or incorporeal substance? This
doctrine has the advantage of solving the
otherwise insoluble contradiction between
two CEcumenical Councils, namely the
Seventh General Synod and the above-
mentioned Council ofLateran. For, during
the fifth sitting of that Synod, the second
of Nicea, a book was introduced written
by John of Thessalonica against a pagan
Philosopher, wherein occur the following
propositions : « Respecting Angels, Ar¬
changels and their Powers , to which I
adjoin our own Souls, the Catholic Church
is really of opinion that they are intelli¬
gences, but not entirely bodyless and sen¬
seless, as you Gentiles aver; she on the
contrary ascribes to them a subtile body ,
aerial or igneous , according to what is
written : He makes the spirits His Angels ,
and the burning fire His Minister ». And
further on : « Although not corporeal in the


Daemonialitas


74

Angelos, vel Dcemones, vel Animas dixerit
incorporeas : multoties enim in proprio
corpore visi sunt ab illis, quibus Dominus
oculos aperuit. Et cum omnia lecta fuis-
sent coram Patribus synodaliter congre -
gatis, Tharasius , Patriarcha Constantino -
politanus, poposcit adprobationem Sanctce
Synodi his verbis : Ostendit Pater, quod
Angelos pingi oporteat, quoniam circum-
scribi possunt, et ut homines apparuerunt.
Synodus autem uno ore respondit: Etiam,
Domine.


38 . Hanc autem Conciliarem adproba -
tionem de materia ad longum pertractata
a D. Joanne in libro coram Patribus lecto >
statuere articulum Jidei circa corporei-
« tatem Angelorum, perspicuum est: unde
ad tollendam contradictionem hujus, cum
allata definitione Concilii Lateranensis>
multum desudant Theologi . Unus enim,
Suare%, Angelis, ait, quod Patres non
contradixerunt tali asserto de corporeitate
Angelorum , quia non de ilia re agebatur.
Alius, Bann,, in p. p. q . io, ait, quod
Synodus adprobavit conclusionem, nempe
Angelos pingi posse, non tamen adpro -


Demoniality jS

same way as ourselves, made of the four
elements, yet it is impossible to say that
Angels, Demons and Souls are incorporeal;
for they have been seen many a time , inves¬
ted with their own body, by those whose
eyes the Lord had opened ". And after that
book had been read through before all the
Fathers in Council assembled, Tharasius,
the Patriarch of Constantinople, submitted
it to the approval of the Council, with
these words : « The Father showeth that
Angels should be pictured, since their form
can be defined , and they have been seen in
the shape of menu. Without a dissentient,
the Synod answered : « Yes , my Lord ».

38. That this approbation by a Council
of the doctrine set forth at length in the
book of John establishes an article of belief
with regard to the corporeity of Angels ,
there is not a shadow of doubt : so Theo¬
logians toil and moil in order to remove
the contradiction apparent between that
decision and the definition, above quoted ,
by the Council of Lateran. One of them,
Suarez, says that if the Fathers did not
disprove such an assertion of the corpo¬
reity of Angels, it is because that was not
the question. Another contends that the
Synod did approve the conclusion, namely


D&monialitas


76

bavit rationem, quia corporei sunt. Alius,
Molinin p. p., q. 5 o. a. 1, ait, quod
definitiones Conciliares in ilia • Synodo
factce sunt solum actione septima, proinde
ea quce habentur in actionibus prceceden -
tibus non esse definitiones de fide. Alii ,
Joverc. et Mirand ., Sum. Gone., scribunt
nec Niccenum, nec Lateranense Concilium
intendisse definere de fide queestionem; et
Niccenum quidem locutum fuisse juxta
opinionem Platonicorum, quce ponit An¬
gelos corporeos, et tunc prcevalebat; Late¬
ranense autem locutum esse juxta mentem
Aristotelis, qui, l. 12. Metaphys., tex.
49, ponit intelligentias incorporeas , quce
sententia contra Plaionicos apud plerosque
Doctores invaluit expost.


3 g. Sed quam frigidee sint istce respon-
siones nemo non yidet , ac eas minime sa-
tisfacere oppositioni palmariter demonstrat
Bonaventura Baro , Scot. Defens., tom. 9,
apolog. 2, actio 1 , § 2 per totum.
Proinde ad tollendam contradictionem
Conciliorum dicendum est, Nicceum lo¬
cutum esse de una , Lateranense autem de
alia specie Angelorum , et illam quidem
corpoream, hanc vero penitus incorpoream;


Demonialitjr 77

that Angels might be pictured, but not the
motive given, their corporeity. A third,
Molina, observes that the definitions is¬
sued in Council by the Synod were thus
issued only at the seventh sitting , whence
he argues that those of the previous sittings
are not definitions of belief. Others, lastly,
write that neither the Council of Nicea
nor that of Lateran intended defining a
question of belief, the Council of Nicea
having spoken according to the opinion of
the Platonists, which describes Angels as
corporeal beings and was then prevailing,
whilst that of Lateran went with Aristo-
teles, who, in his 12th. book of Metaphy¬
sics , lays down the existence of incorpo¬
real intelligences, a doctrine which has
since carried the day with most Doctors
over the Platonists.

3 g. But any one can discern the invali¬
dity of those answers, and Bonaventure
Baro (Scot. Defens., tome 9) proves to evi¬
dence that they do not bear. In conse¬
quence, in order to agree the two
Councils, we must say that the Council of
Nicea meant one species of Angels, and
that of Lateran another: the former, cor¬
poreal, the latter on the contrary abso¬
lutely incorporeal; and thus are recon-

7 -


78 Daemonialitas

et sic conciliantur alitcr irreconciliabilia
Concilia .

40. Prcemittendum 2 0 , nomen Angeli
esse nomen officii , non naturee, ut concor-
diter scribunt S. S. Patres : Ambros. in c.

1 epist. ad Hebr., Hilaris, l. 5 de Trin .,
Augustinus, lib. i 5 de Civit. Dei c. 23 ,
Gregorius, Horn. 34 in Evang., Isidorus,
l. de Sum. Bonit., c. 12; unde prceclare
ait D. Ambrosius : Angelus non ex eo
quod est spiritus , ex eo quod agit , An-
geluSj quia Angelus Greece , Latine Nun-
tius dicitur; sequitur igitur ex hoc y quod
illi , qui ad aliquod ministerium a Deo
mittuntur, sire spiritus sint, sive homines ,
Angeli vocari possunt ; et de facto it a
vocantur in ' Scripturis Sacris : nam de
Sacerdotibus , Concionatoribus ac Doc -
toribus , tanquam Nuntii Dei explicant

hominibus divinam voluntatem , dicitur ,
Malach. c. 2. r. 7 : Labia Sacerdotis
custodient scientiam, et legem requirent
ex ore ejus, quia Angelus Domini exerci-
tuum est. D. Joannes Baptista ab eodem
Propheta , c. 3 v. 1, vocatur Angelus ,
iwm ; Ecce ego mitto Angelum meum,
et prceparabit viam ante faciem meam. Et
hanc prophetiam esse ad litteram de
S. Joanne Baptista testatur Christus Do -


Demoniality 79

ciled two otherwise irreconcilable Coun¬
cils.

40. Secondly, I premise that the word
Angel applies, not indeed to the kind, but
to the office: the Holy Fathers are agreed
thereupon (St. Ambrose, on the Epistle to
the Hebrews; St. Austin, City of God; St.
Gregory, Homily 34 on Scripture; St. Isi-
dorus, Supreme Goodness ). An Angel,
very truly says St. Ambrose, is thus
styled, not because he is a spirit, but on
account of his office : ’AyyeXo? in Greek,
Nuntius in Latin, that is to say Messenger;
it follows that whoever is entrusted by God
with a mission, be he spirit or man, may
be called an Angel, and is thus called in
the Holy Scriptures, where the following
words are applied to Priests,Preachers and
Doctors, who, as Messengers of God, ex¬
plain to men the divine will (Malachi,
chapt. 2, v. 7). « The priest's lips should
keep knowledge , and they should seek the
law at his mouth , for he is the Angel of the
Cord of Hosts. » The same prophet, chapt.
3 , v. 1, bestows the name of Angel on St.
John the Baptist, when saying : ^Behold, I
will send my Angel and he shall prepare the
way before me. » That this prophecy lite¬
rally applies to St. John the Baptist is


8o


D^emonialitas


minus in Evangelio Matthasi, ir, v. io.
Immo et ipse Deus , quia fuit missus a
Patre in mundum ad evangeliqandum
legem gratia ?, vocatur Angelus . Ita in
prophetia Isaice , c. 9 v . 6, juxta ver-
sionem Septuaginta : Vocabitur nomen
ejus magni consilii Angelus, et clarius in
Malachice c. 3 v. 1 : Veniet ad templum
sanctum suum Dominator quern vos quae-
ritis, et Angelus testamenti quern vos
vultis. Quce prophetia ad litter am est de
Christo Domino . Sequitur igitur nullum
absurdum sequi ex hoc , quod dicimus An¬
gelos quosdam esse corporeos , nam et
homines , qui cor pore constant , Angeli vo -
cabulo efferuntur .


41. Prcemittendum 3 °, nondum rerum
naturalium, quce sunt in mundo , satfzs /?er-
spectam esse existentiam , aw/ naturam ,
proinde aliquid negandum sit ex eo ,
de z 7 /o nunquam alias dictum , aw/ scriptum
fuerit. Patet enim tractu temporis de¬
tect as esse novas terras, quas Antiqui
nostri ignorarunt y novaque animalia, her-
bas f plantas, fructus, semina nunquam
alias visa; et si pervia esset Terra Austra¬
lis incognita , cw/ws indagatio y et lustratio


Demoniality 81

testified by our Lord Jesus-Christ, in the
Gospel, according to St. Matthew, chapt. 11,
v. io. Still more : God himself is called an
Angel, because he has’been sent by His
Father to herald the law of mercy. To
witness, the prophecy of Isaiah, chapt. 9,
v. 6, according to Septuagint: « He shall
be called an Angel of Wonderful Counsel. »
And more plainly still in Malachi, chapt. 3 ,
y. 1 : <c The Lord whom ye seek shall
suddenly come to his temple , even the An¬
gel of the covenant whom ye delight in »,
a prophecy which literally applies to our
Lord Jesus-Christ. There is consequent¬
ly nothing absurd in the contention that
some Angels are corporeal, since men,
who assuredly have a body, are called
Angels.

41. Thirdly, I premise that neither the
existence nor the nature of the natural
things in this world has been sufficiently
investigated to allow of denying a fact, me¬
rely because it has never been previously
spoken of or written about. In the course of
time have not new lands been discovered
which the Ancients knew not of? New ani¬
mals, herbs, plants, fruits and seeds, never
seen elsewhere? And if that mysterious
Austral land came at last to be explored,


82


Daemonialitas


a multis hucusque incassum tentata est ,
adhuc nova nobis alia panderentur . Patet
adhuc, quod per inventionem microscopii y
et alias machinas y et organa Philosophies
experimentalis modernce, sicut etiam per
exactiorem indaginem Anatomistarum,
multarum rerum naturalium existentiam y
vires , naturamque turn innotuisse, turn
dietim innotescere , quae preecedentes Phi -
losophi ignorarunt y ut patet in auro ful -
minante, phosphoro, et centum aliis chy-
micis experiments , circulation sanguinis y
venis lacteis y vasis lymphaticis , et aliis
hujusmodi quee nuper Anatomistce adinve-
nerunt . Proinde ineptum erit aliquod exsi -
billare ex hoc quod de eo nullus Antiquo¬
rum scripserit, attento maxime Logicorum
axiomate, quod locus ab auctoritate ne-
gativa non tenet.


42. Prcemittendum 4°, quod in Sacra
Scriptura , et Ecclesiasticis traditionibus
non traditur nisi id, quod ad animeu salu -
tem necessarium est, quoad credendum,
sperandum et amandum; unde infer re non
licet ex eo y quod nec ex Scriptura, nec ex
traditione aliquod habetur, proinde negan -


Demoniality 83

as has been to this day vainly tried by so
many travellers, what unforeseen disclo¬
sures would be the result! Through the
invention of the microscope and other
instruments used by modern experimental
Philosophy,combined with the more exact
methods of investigation of Anatomists,
have there not been, and are there not,
every day, brought to light the existence,
qualities and characteristics of a number
of natural things unknown to ancient
Philosophers, such as fulminating gold,
phosphorus, and a hundred other che¬
mical compounds, the circulation of the
blood, the lacteal vessels, the lymph-
ducts and other recent anatomical dis¬
coveries? To deride a doctrind because it
does not happen to be mentioned in any
ancient author would therefore be absurd,
especially bearing in mind this axiom of
Logic : locus ab auctoritate negativa non
tenet.

42* Fourthly, I premise that Holy Scrip*
ture and ecclesiastical tradition do not
teach us any thing beyond what is requi¬
site for the salvation of the soul, namely
Faith, Hope and Charity. Consequently*
from a thing not being stated either by
Scripture or tradition it must not be in-


Dasmonialitas


84

dum sit , quod illud tale existat : aut nos
quidem Fides docet, Denim per Verbum
suum omnia creasse visibilia, et invisi -
bilia; pariterque ex Jesu Christi Domini
nostri mentis turn gratiam, turn gloriam
omni, et cuivis rationali creatures conferri.
Num autem alius Mundus a nostro, quern
incolimus , sit, et in eo alii homines non ab
Adam prognati, sed alio modo a Deo creati
existant (sicut ponunt illi qui lunarem
globum habitatum opinantur); pariterque
num in hoc Mundo , quern incolimus, alice
existant creatures rationales ultra homines ,
et Spiritus Angelicos, ques regulariter
hominibus sint invisibiles , et per accidens ,
et earum executiva potentia jiant visibiles :
hoc nullo modo spectat ad jidem, et hoc
scire , aut ignorare non est ad salutem ho-
minis necessarium, sicut nec scire rerum
omnium physicarum numerum aut natu-
ram.


43. Presmittendum 5 °, nullam inveniri
repugnantiam , nec in Philosophia, nec in
Theologia; quod dari possint creaturce ra¬
tionales constantes spiritu et corpore , alias
ab homine, quia si essei repugnantia, hoc *
esset vel ex parte Dei (et hoc non quia ipse
omnipotens est), vel ex parte rei creabilis;


Demoniality 85

ferred that that thing is not in existence.
For instance, Faith teaches us that God,
by His Word, made things visible, and
invisible, and also that, through the me¬
rits of our Lord Jesus-Christ, grace and
glory are conferred on every rational crea¬
ture. Now, that there be another World
than the one we live in, and that it be
peopled by men not born of Adam but
made by God, in some other way, as is
implied by those who believe the lunar
globe to be inhabited; or further, that in
the very World we dwell in, there be other
rational creatures besides man and the
Angelic Spirits, creatures generally invisi¬
ble to us and whose being is disclosed but
accidentally, through the instrumentality
of their own power; all that has nothing
to do with Faith, and the knowledge or
ignorance thereof is no more necessary to
the salvation of man than knowing the
number or nature of all physical things.

43. Fifthly, I premise that neither Phi¬
losophy nor Theology is repugnant to the
possible existence of rational creatures
having spirit and body and distinct from
man. Such repugnance could be supported
only on God, and that is inadmissible,
since he is all-mighty, or on the thing to

8


86


Daemonialitas


et neque hoc, quia sicut creatura mere spi¬
rituals, ut Angeli, creata est, et mere
materialise ut Mundus , etpartim spiritua¬
ls, partim corporea, corporeitate terrestri ,
et crassa , homo, zta creabilis est creatura
constans spiritu rationali , ef corporeitate
minus crassa, sed subtiliore, quam sit homo .

profecto post Resurrectionem anima
Beatorum erit unita corpori glorioso dote
subtilitatis donato : ut proinde concludi
posset, potuisse Deum creare creaturam
rationalem corpoream , cui naturaliter in -
iita sif corporis subtilitas, sicut per gra -
fwm corpori glorioso confertur.


44. Astruitur autem magis talium creatu -
rarum possibilitas ex solutione argumento -
rwra, qua? contra positam conclusionem
fieri possunt, par iter que ex responsione ad
interrogationes, quce possunt circa earn
formari.

45. Prima interrogate est , art tales
creatures dicendce essent animalia rationa¬
le? Quod si sic , quomodo different ab
homine, cum quo communem haberent de -
finitionem?


Demoniality 87

be made, and that likewise cannot be sup¬
ported; for, as there are purely spiritual
creatures, such as Angels, or merely ma¬
terial, such as the World, or lastly semi¬
spiritual and semi-corporeal, of an earthly
and gross corporeity, such as man, so
there may well be in existence a creature
endowed with a rational spirit and a cor¬
poreity less gross, more subtile than man's.
No doubt, moreover, but that after Resur¬
rection, the souls of the blessed will be
united with a glorious and subtile body;
from which may be inferred that God may
well have made a rational and corporeal
creature whose body naturally enjoys the
subtilty which will be conferred by the
grace on the glorious body.

44. But, the possible existence of such
creatures will be still better set forth by
solving the arguments which can be ad¬
duced against our conclusion, and replying
to the questions it may raise.


45. First question : should such creatu¬
res be styled rational animals ? And if so,
in what do they differ from man, with
whom they would have that definition in
common?


88


Daemonialitas


46. Respondeo quod essent animalia ra -
tionalia sensibus et organis corporis prce-
dita , sicut homo : differrent autem ab ho -
mine non solum ratione corporis tenuioris ,
sed etiam materice. Homo siquidem ex
crassiore elementorum omnium parte, put a
ex luto, nempe aqua et terra crassafor -
matus est , wf constat ex Scriptura, Gen. 2.
v.7-;ista vero formata essent ex subti-
liore parte omnium, aut unius, seu alterius
elementorum; ut proinde alia essent terrea,
alia aquea, alia aerea, et alia ignea; et ut
eorum definitio cum hominis definitione
non conveniret, addendum esset dejinitioni
hominis crassa materialitas sui corporis,
perquam a dictis animalibus differret.


47. Secunda interrogate est , quando -
nam hujus modi animalia fuissent con -
dita, et num cum brutis producta a terra,
aut ab aqua, ut quadrupedia, et arcs re¬
spective; an vero a Domino Deo formata,
ut fuit homo ?


48. Respondeo quod de fide est, quod
posito , quod existant de facto , creata sint
a principio Mundi: sic enim definitur a


Demoniality 89

46. I reply : Yes, they would be rational
animals, provided with senses and organs
even as man; they would, however, differ
from man not only in the more subtile na¬
ture, but also in the matter of their body.
In fact, as is shown by Scripture, man has
been made from the grossest of all ele¬
ments, namely clay, a gross mixture of
water and earth: but those creatures would
be made from the most subtile part of all
elements, or of one or other of them; thus,
some would proceed from earth, others
from water, or air, or fire; and, in order
that they should not be defined in the
same terms as man, to the definition of
the latter should be added the mention of
the gross materiality of his body, wherein
he would differ from said animals.

47. Second question : At* what period
would those animals have been originated,
and wherefrom? From earth', like the
beasts, or from water, like quadrupeds,
birds,etc.? Or, on the contrary, would they
have been made, like man, by our Lord
God?

•48. I reply : It is an article of belief, ex¬
pressly laid down by the Council of La-
teran, that whatever is in fact and at

8 .


90 Daemonialitas

Concilio Lateranensi (Firm, de sum. Tri¬
nit. etfide cathol.); nempe quod Deus sua
omnipotenti virtute simul ab initio tempo-
ris utramque de nihilo condidit creaturam ,
spiritualem et corporalem. Sub ilia etenim
Creaturarum generalitate etiam ilia anima-
lia essent comprehensa. Quo vero ad eo-
rum formationem, decuisse ipsorum cor¬
pus a Deo ministerio Angelorum formatum
fuisse, sicut a Deo formatum legimus cor¬
pus hominis, quia ipsi copulandus erat spi -
ritus immortalis, quandoquidem spiritus
incorporeus et proinde nobilissimus cor-
pori pariter originaliter nobiliori cceteris
brut is jungendus erat .

49. Tertia interrogate, an talia anima -
lia habuissent originem ab uno solo, velut
omnes homines ab Adam , an vero plura si¬
mul formatd essent sicut fuit de cceteris
animantibus a terra et aqua productis, in
quibus fuerunt mares et fosmince quce spe-
ciem per generationem conservant? Et si
hoc oporteret inter talia animalia esse dis¬
tinct ionem sexus; ipsa nasci, et inter ire;
passionibus sensus affici , nutriri , crescere;
et tunc quo alimento vescerentur,esset quce -
rendum; prceterea an vitam socialem du-
cerent y ut homines; qua politica regeren-
tur; tium urbes ad habitandum struxissent;


Demoniality 91

present, was made in the origin of the
world. By His all-mighty virtue, God,
from the beginning of time, raised together
from nothing both orders of creatures,
spiritual and corporeal. Now, those ani¬
mals also would be included in the gene¬
rality of creatures. As to their formation,
it might be said that God Himself, through
the medium of Angels, made their body
as he did man’s, to which an immortal
spirit was to be united. That body being
of a nobler nature than that of other ani¬
mals, it was meet that it should be united
to an incorporeal and highly noble spirit.


49. Third question : Would those ani¬
mals descend from one individual, as all
men descend from Adam, or, on the con¬
trary, would many have been made at the
same time, as was the case for the other
living things issued from earth and water,
wherein were males and females for the
preservation of the kind by generation ?
Would there be amongst them a distinc¬
tion between the sexes? Would they be
subject to birth and death, to senses, pas¬
sions, want of food, power of growth? If
so, what their nutrition? Would they
lead a social life, as men do ? By what laws


Daemonialitas


92

num artes , studio., possessiones, et bella
inter ea essent, sicut est in hominibus .


5 o. Respondeo : potuit esse quod omnia
ab uno, velut homines ab Adam, sint pro -
genita; potuit pariter esse, quod ex iis
multi mares, et plures foemince fuissent
formatce, a quibus per generationem eorum
species essent propagatce. Ultro admitte -
remus talia animalia oriri et mori; mares
alios , alias foeminas inter ea esse;passio -
nibus, sensibus agitari velut homines; nu-
triri et crescere secundum molem sui cor -
poris; cibum autem ipsorum non crassum
qualem requirit crassities corporis humani,
sed substanfiam tenuem et vaporosam
emanantem per effluvia spirituosa a rebus
physicis pollentibus corpusculis maxime
volatilibus, ut nidor carnium maxime as -
sat arum, vapor vini, fructuum, forum,
aromatum, a quibus copiosa hujusmodi ef
' fluvia usque ad totalem partium subtiliorum
ac volatilium evaporationem scaturiunt .
Talia autem animalia civilem vitam du -
cere posse, et inter ea distinctos esse gra-
dus dominantium ac servientium pro con -
ditione naturae ipsorum, artesque , scientias ,
ministeria, exercitia, loca, mansiones, ac


Demoniality g 3

ruled? Would they build up cities for their
dwellings, cultivate the arts and sciences,
hold property, and wage war between
themselves, as men are wont to ?

5 o. I reply : It may be that all descend
from one individual, as men descend from
Adam; it may be also that a number of
males and females were made initially,
who preserved their kind by generation.'
We will further admit that they are born
and die;.that they are divided into males
and females, and are moved by senses and
passions, as men are; that they feed and
grow according to the size of their body;
their food, however, instead of being gross
like that required by the human body,
must be delicate and vapoury, emanating
through spirituous effluvia from whatever
in the physical world abounds with highly
volatile corpuscles, such as the flavour of
meats, especially of roasts, the fume of
wine, the fragrancy of fruit, flowers, aro¬
matics, which evolve an abundance of
those effluvia until all their subtile and
volatile parts have completely evaporated.
To their being able to lead a social life,

* with distinctions of rank and precedence;
to their cultivating the arts and sciences,
exercising functions, maintaining armies,


94


Dsemonialitas


alia necessaria ad eorum conservationem,
nullam penilus importat repugnantiam .

51. Quarta interrogaiio est, qualis esset
eorum corporis figuratio, an humanam y an
aliam formam, et qualem haberent , et an
partes corporis ipsorum haberent ordinem
essentialem inter se, ut corpora cceterorum
animalium y an vero accidentalem tantum y
ut corpora jluidarum substantiarum, ut
oleij aquve, nubis, fumi, etc.; et num sub¬
stantive suarum partium organicarum di¬
ver simode constarenty ut organa hominum,
in quibus sunt alive partes crassissimve y ut
ossa f alive minus crassve , ut cartilagines,
alive tenues y ut membranve.

f

52 . Respondeo, quod quantum ad figu-
ram corpoream nihil certi affirmare de-
bemus, aut possumus , cum talis jigura non
sit exacte nobis sensibilis, nec quoad vi¬
sum., nec quoad tactum, prve sui corpo¬
ris tenuitate, ac perspicacitate; qualis
proinde vere sit , noverent ipsi , aliique, qui
substantias immateriales intuitive cogno¬
sces possunt. Quoad congruentiam et pro-
babilitatem dico 3 ilia referre speciem cor¬
poris humani, cum aliquo distinctivo a cor -
pore humano, nisi forte ad hoc sufficiat sua


Demoniality 9 5

building up cities, doing in short whatever
is requisite for their preservation, I have
in the main no objection.

5 1. Fourth question: What would their
figure be, human or otherwise? Would the
ordering of the divers parts of their body
be essential, as with other animals, or
merely accidental, as with fluid substances,
such as oil, water, clouds, smoke, etc.?
Would those organic parts consist of va¬
rious substances, as is the case with the
organs of the human body, wherein are to
be found very gross parts, such as the bo¬
nes, others less gross, such as the cartila¬
ges, and others slender, such as the mem¬
branes?

52 . I reply : As regards their figure, we
neither can nor should be affirmative, since
it escapes our senses, being too delicate
for our sight or our touch. That we must
leave to themselves, and to such as have
the privilege of intuitive acquaintance with
immaterial substances. But, so far as pro¬
bability goes, I say that their figure tallies
with the human body, save some distinctive
peculiarity, should the very tenuity of
their body not be deemed sufficient. I am
led to that by the consideration that of all


96 Daemonialitas

ipsorum tenuitas. Ducor, quia corpus hu-
manum plasmatum a Deo perfectissimum
est , inter animalia quceque , et cum ccetera
bruta in ter ram sint prona, eo quia anima
eorum mortalis est, Deus, ut aitpoeta Ovid.,
Metamorphos.:


Os homini sublime dedit, ccelumque tueri
Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere vullus j

quia anima hominis immortalis ordinataest
ad coelestem mansionem. Cum igitur ani¬
malia, de quibus loquimur, spiritum habe-
rent immaterialem, rationalem, ac immor-
talem, et proinde capacem beatitudinis ac
damnationis , congruum est, quod corpus,
cui talis spiritus copulatur, simile sit om¬
nium animdlium nobilissimo, corpori hu-
mano. Ex hacpositione sequitur, ^quod ejus
corporis partes ordinem inter se essentia-
lem habere deberent; nec enim pes capiti,
ant ventri manus conjungi deberet : sed
congrua membrorum essentiali dispositione
ordinata, ut essent idonea ministeriis pro-
priis perficiendis , Quo autem ad partes com-
ponentes ipsarum organa, dico quod neces -
sarium esset, ut nonnullce ipsarum essent
solidiores, alice minus solidce, alice tenues,
alice tenuissimce pro necessitate operationis
organicce. Nec contra hanc positionem fa-


Demoniality 97

the works of God the human frame is the
most perfect, and that whilst all other ani¬
mals stoop to the ground, because their
soul is mortal, God, as Ovid, the poet,
says, in his Metamorphoses ,

Gave man an erect figure , bidding him behold

\the heavens

And raise his face towards the stars,

man's soul having been made immortal for
the heavenly abode. Considering that the
animals we are speaking of would be gifted
with a spirit immaterial, rational and im¬
mortal, capable therefore of beatitude and
damnation, it is proper to admit that the
body to which that spirit is united may be
like unto the most noble animal frame,
that is to say to the human frame. Whence
it follows that in the divers parts of that
body there must be an essential order ;
that the foot, for instance, cannot be an
appendage to the head, nor the hand to
the belly, but that each organ is in its
right place, according to the functions it
has to perform. As to the constitutive parts
of those organs, it is, in my opinion, ne¬
cessary that there should be some more or
less strong, others more or less slender,
in order to meet the requirements of the
organic working. Nor can this be fairly

9


Daemonialitas


98

die potest asseri tenuitas ipsorum corpo -
rum: quippe soliditas aut crassities organi-
carum partium, de qua dicimus, non esset
talis simpliciter, sed comparative ad alias
partes tenuiores . Et hoc patere potest in
omnibus corporibus fluidis naturalibus, ut
vino , oleo , lacte, etc.; quantumvis enim om -
nes partes in ipsis videantur homogenece
ac similares, non tamen ita est: nam in
ipsis est pars terrea , pars aquea , salfixum ,
sal volatile , et pars sul/urea, quce omnia
manipulation spargirica oculis subjici pos-
siint . Ita esset in casu nostro : posito enim
quod talium animalium corpora subtilia
et tenuia, ut corpora naturalia fluida, ve-
lut aqua et aer, essent, non tamen tollere -
tur, quin in ipsorum partibus diversce inter
se essent qualitates, et aliquce ipsarum
comparative ad alias essent solidce f et alice
tenuiores, quamvis totum corpus ex ipsis
compositum tenue did posset.


53 . Quod si dicatur, quod hcec repugnant
positioni supra firmatce, circa partium es-
sentialem ordinationem inter se : quan-
doquidem videmus , quod in corporibus flui¬
dis ac tenuibus una pars non servat ordi -
nem essentialem ad aliam, sed accidenta -
lem tantuin , ita ut hcec pars vini, quce


Demoniality 99

objected to on the ground of the slenderness
of the bodies themselves; for the strength
or thickness of the organic parts alluded
to would not be absolute, but merely in
comparison with the more slender ones.
That, moreover, may be observed in all
natural fluids, such as wine, oil, milk, etc.;
however homogeneous and similar to each
other their component parts may look, yet
they are not so : for some are clayish, others
aqueous; there are fixed salts, volatile
salts, brimstone, all of which are made
obvious by a chemical analysis. So it
would be in our case : for, supposing the
bodies of those animals to be as subtile
and slender as the natural fluids, air, water,
etc., there would nevertheless be discrepan¬
cies in the quality of their constitutive
parts, some of which would be strong when
compared with others more slender, al¬
though the whole body which they com¬
pose might be called slender.

53 . It may be objected that this is repu¬
gnant to what was said above concerning
the essential ordering of the parts among
themselves; that it is seen that, in fluid
and subtile bodies, one part is not essen¬
tially but only accidentally connected with
another; that a part of wine, for instance,


100


Dxmonialitas


modo alteri parti contigua est, mox in-
verso vase, aut moto vino, alteri parti
unitur , et sic omnes partes diversam posi-
tionem habent quantumvis semper idem vi-
num sit , et ex hoc sequeretur, quod talium
animalium corpora figurata stabiliter non
essent, et consequenter, nec organica.


54. Respondeo negando assumptum ; et -
enim in corporibus fluidis, quamvis non ap-
pareat, manet tamen essentialis partium
ordinatio, qua stante stat in suo esse com -
positum, et hoc patet manifeste in vino :
expressum enim ab uvis videtur liquor to -
taliter homogeneus, non tamen ita est; in
eo enim sunt partes crassce, quce tractu
temporis subsident in doliis : sunt etiam
partes tenues, quce evaporant: sunt partes
jixce, ut tartarus, sunt partes volatiles, ut
sulphur, sive spiritus ardens; sunt partes
medice inter volatile ac fixum, ut phlegma.
Partes istce ordinem essentialem inter se
mutant; nam statim ac expressum est ab
uvis, et mustum dicitur sulphur, sive spi¬
ritus volatilis, ita implicatum manet par-
ticulis tartari, quifix us est, ut nullo modo
avolare valeat.


DemonialUy ioi

just now contiguous with some other, soon
comes in contact with a third, if the vessel
be turned upside down or the wine shaken,
and that all the parts together exchange
positions at the same time, though it be
still the same wine. Whence it should be
inferred that.the bodies of those animals
would have no permanent figure, and
would consequently not be organic.

54. I reply that I deny the assumption. In
fact, if in fluid bodies the essential order¬
ing of the parts is not apparent, it subsists
none the less, and causes a compound to
preserve its own state. Wine, for instance,
when expressed from the grapes, seems a
thoroughly homogeneous liquor, and yet
is not so ; for there are gross parts which,
in the long run, subside in the casks; there
are also slender parts which evaporate;
fixed parts, such as tartar ; volatile parts*
such as brimstone and alcohol; others
again, half volatile and half fixed, such as
phlegm. Those divers parts do not respec¬
tively maintain an essential order ; for no
sooner has the must been expressed from
the grapes, and been styled brimstone or vo
latile spirits, than it continues so closely in¬
volved with the particles of tartar, which is
fixed, as not to be in any way able to escape.

9 -


102


«■ *


<- 1 *.


Dakrtionialitas


55 . -f/zwc esf, a musto recenter ab
uvis expresso nullo modo potest distil lari
spiritus sulphureus, qui communiter voca-
tur aqua vitae : sed post quadraginta dies
fermentationis particulce vini ordinem mu -
tant, ita ut spiritus, qui alligati erant par -
ticulis tartareisy et propria volatilitate eas
suspensas tenebant, et vicissim ab eis ne
possent avolare detinebantur, ac tartar eis
particulis separantur, et divulsi ac confusi
remanent cum partibus phlegmaticis, a
quibus per actionem ignis faciliter sepa¬
rantur, et avolant; sicque per distillatio-
nem jit aqua vitce, quce aliud non est quam
sulphur vini volatile cum tenuiore parte
phlegmatis simul cum die to sulphur e vi
ignis elevata . Post quadraginta dies, alia
incipit vini'fermentatio, quce longiori, aut
minus Ion go tempore perjicitur , pro vini
perfectiori aut imperfectiori maturitate ,
et alio atque alio modo terminatur, pro
minore aut majore spiritus sulphurei abun-
dantia. Si enim abundat in vino sulphur,
acescit fermentatione, et evadit acetum; si
autem parum sulphuris continet, lentescit
vinum, et Italice dicitur vino molle, aut
vino guasto. Quod si vinum maturum sit,
ut cceteris paribus est, vinum dulce breviori
tempore, aut acescit, aut lentescit, ut quo-
tidiana constat experientia . In dicta autem


Demoniality io 3

55 . That is the reason why must re¬
cently expressed from the grapes is of
no use for the distillation of the sulfu-
rous spirits, commonly called brandy ;
but, after forty days fermentation, the par¬
ticles of the wine change places : the spirits,
no longer bound with the tartaric particles
which they kept in suspension through
their own volatility, whilst they were, in
return, kept down by them and^ prevented
from escaping, sever from those particles;
and continue confused with the phlegmatic
parts from which they become easily re¬
leased by the operation of fire, and evapo¬
rate : thus, by means of distillation, brandy
is made, which is nothing but the brimstone
of wine volatilized by heat with the most
slender part of phlegm. At the end of forty
days another fermentation begins, which
extends more or less, according as the ma¬
turity of the wine is more or less perfect,
and the termination of which is dependent
on the greater or lesser abundance of sul-r
phurous spirits. If abounding with brim¬
stone, the wine sours and turns to vinegar;
if, on the contrary, it holds but little
brimstone, it ropes, and becomes what the
Italians call vino molle or vino guasto. If
the wine is at once ripe, as happens in
other cases, it sours or ropes in less time,


Daemonialitas


104

fermentatione or do essentialis partium vini
mutatur; non enim ipsius quantitas, aut
materia imminuitur, aut mutatur : vide-
mus enim lagenam vino plenam tractu tern -
poris evadere plenam aceto, nullatenus mu -
tatam circa quantitatem materice, quce
prius ibi extabat, sed tantum mutato par¬
tium essentiali ordine : nam sulphur,
quod, ut diximus, erat phlegmati unitum,
ac a tar taro separatum, iter uni tartar 0 im¬
plicate, et cum eo Jixatur, et proinde si
distilletur acetum, primo prodit phlegma
insipidum> et post spiritus aceti, qui est
sulphur vini illaqueatum particulis tartari
minusfixi. Mutatio autem essentialis par¬
tium supradictarum variat substantiam li¬
quor is expressi ab uva, quod manifeste pa-
tet ex varii& et contrariis effectibus, quos
causant mustum , vinum , et acetum, et vi-
num lentum, quod vocatur corruptum, ut
proinde duo prima apt a materia sint ad
consecrationem, secus alia duo. Hancporro
vini economiam hausimus ab erudito opere
Nicolai Lemerii, Regis Galliarum aroma -
tariiy Curs, de Chimi., p. 2. c. 9.


Demoniality io5

as is shown by every day experience. Now,
in said fermentation the essential order of
the parts of wine is altered, but not so its
quantity nor its matter, which neither
changes nor decreases : a bottle that had
been filled with wine is, after a certain
time, found to be filled with vinegar, with¬
out any alteration in its quantity of
matter; the essential order of its parts has
alone been modified : the brimstone, which,
as we have said, was united to the phlegm
and separated from the tartar, becomes
again involved and fixed with the tartar; so
that, on distilling the vinegar, there issues
from it first an insipid phlegm, and then spi¬
rits of vinegar, which are the brimstone of
wine intermixed with particles of tartar that
is less fixed. Now, the essential shifting of
the aforesaid parts alters the substance of
the juice of the grapes, as is clearly shown
by the varied and contrary effects of must,
wine, vinegar, and ropy or spoiled wine ;
for which cause the two first are fit, but
the two last unfit materials for consecra¬
tion. We have borrowed the above expo¬
sition of the economy of wine from the
able work of Nicholas Lemery, perfumer
to the King of France, Course of Che -
mistry , p. 2. c. q.


io 6 Daemonialitas

56 . Datum ergo naturalem doctrinam
applicando consequenter dico, quod data
dictorum animalium corporeitate subtili
et tenui, sicut corpora liquidorum, et data
pariter eorumdem organisation et figura¬
tions, quce partium essentialem ordinatio-
nem exigunt , non sequerentur inconvenien -
tia ex adverso illata : nam sicut (quemad -
modum dicebamus) ex confusione partium
vini, et diversa ipsarum accidentali posi¬
tions non variatur ordinatio,ear umdem es-
sentialis } it a esset in corpore tenui dicto¬
rum animalium.

5 y. Quinta interrogatio est, an talia ob-
noxia essent cegritudinibus, ac aliis im-
perfectionibus, quibus homines laborant, ut
ignorantia, metu, segnitie , sensuum impe¬
diments, etc.? An labor undo lassarentur ,
et ad virium reparationem egerent somno,
cibo, ac potu, et quo? et consequenter an
interirent, et subinde, an a cceteris anima-
libus casu, aut ruina possent occidi?


58 . Respondeo, quod ex quo corpora ip-
sorum, quamvis tenuia, essent materiata,
essent quidem corruptioni obnoxia; et ex
consequent possent pati ab agentibus con -
trariis, et ita cegrot are, puta, aut simpli-


Demonialitjr 107

56. If now we apply that natural doctrine .
to our subject, I say that, being given the
corporeity of the animals in question, sub¬
tile and slender like the substance of
liquids; being given also their organisation
an dfigure, which demand an essential order
of the various parts, an adverse supposition
could raise no argument contrary to their
existence; for, just as the jumbling together
of the parts of wine and the diversity of
their accidental dispositions do not alter
their essential order, even so it would be
with the slender frame of our animals.

57 . Fifth question : Would those animals
be subject to diseases and other infirmities
under which mankind lies, such as igno¬
rance, fear, idleness, sensual paralysis, etc?
Would they be wearied through labour, and
require, for recruiting their strength, sleep,
food, drink ? And what food, what drink ?
Would they be fated to die, and might
they be killed casually, or by the instru¬
mentality of other animals ?

58.1 reply : Their bodies, though subtile,
being material, they would of course be
liable to decay : they might therefore suffer
from adverse agencies, and consequently
be diseased ; that is, their organs might


108 Daemonialitas

citer, aut nisi cegre, perverse, aut vitiose
prcestare non posse munera, ad quce eorum
organa essent ordinata; in hoc siqnidem
consistit animalium quorumdam cegritudo
qucevis : ut resolutive docet prcestantissi-
mus Michael Ettmullerus, Physiol, c. 5 .,
thes. i. Verum est, quod ex eo quod tantam
materice crassitatem non haberent, et forte
ex tot elementorum mixtione eorum cor¬
pus non constaret, et minus compositum es-
set quam humanum, non tarn facile pate -
rentur a contrariis , et consequenter non
tot cegritudinibus velut homines essent ob-
noxia , et longiorem , etiam homine , vitam
ducerent : quo enim perfectius est animal,
a tota specie, etiam cceteris diutius vivit,
ut pat et de specie humana , cujus vita Ion-
gior cceteris animalibus est. Nec enim ad -
mitto scecularem vitam cornicum , cervo -
rum, corvorum et similium, de quibus more
suo fabulatur Plinius , et ejus somnia sine
prcevia discussione secuti sunt cceteri: quan-
doquidem nullus est , qui talium animalium
natale et interitum fideliter adnotaverit , ut
pari modo de eo scripserit; sed insolitam
diufabulam quisque secutus est; sicutetiam
illud , quod de phoenice dicitur , quod ut
quid fabulosum, circa ejus vitce spatium
recensetTacitus, L 6. Annal. Inferendum
subinde esset quod illorum animalium vita.


Demoniality 109

not perform, or painfully and imperfectly
perform the office assigned to them, for
therein consist all diseases whatever with
certain animals, as has been distinctly ex¬
plained by the most illustrious Michael
Ettmuller, Physiology , c. v. thesis 1. In
sooth, their body being less gross than the
human frame, comprising less elements
mixed together, and being therefore less
composite, they would not so easily suffer
from adverse influences, and would there¬
fore be less liable to disease than man;
their life would also exceed his; for, the
more perfect an animal, as a species, the
longer its days ; thus mankind, whose
existence extends beyond that of other ani¬
mals. For I do not believe in the centenary
existence of crows, stags, ravens and the
like, of which Pliny tells his customary
stories; and although his dreams have been
reechoed by others without previous in¬
quiry, it is no less clear that before writing
thus, not one has faithfully noted the birth
nor the death of those animals : they have
been content with taking up the strange
fable, as has been the case with the Phenix,
whose longevity is discarded as a story by
Tacitus, Annals , b. 6. It were therefore to
be inferred that the animals we are speaking
of would live longer still than man; for, as


10


I 10


Dxmonialitas


etiam humana deberet esse dinturnior ; at
enim infra dicemus, ilia assent homine no -
biliora; consequenter dicendum esset,quod
essent obnoxia cceteris corporeis pathema-
tis, et qaiete , et cibo indigerent, qiiale dixi-
mus supra , n° 5o. Quia vero rationalia, et
provide disciplinabilia essent, ex conse¬
quenti etiam capacia ignorantice, si corum
ingenia non essent exculta studiis, et disci -
plina, et inter ea pro intellectus eorum
tnajori, et minori acumine essent aliqua
magis, aliqua minus in scientiis excellcn-
tia : universaliter vero, et a tot a specie es¬
sent homine doctiora, non ob eorum cor -
gprearn subtilitatem, turn forte, ob majo-
rem spirituum activitatem, turn ob diutur-
niorem vitce durationem, in qua plura ,
quam homines discere possent, quas causas
assignatD .Augustinus, lib. de Divin. Dasm.
c. 3. init. tom. 3 .,et lib. de Spin et Anima,
c. 3y., pro futurorum prcenotione in Dce-
monibus. Ab agentibus autem naturalibus
pati quidem possent, ac difficultcr occidi ra-
tione velocitatis, qua possunt se subtra-
here a nocentibus; quapropter, nec a bru-
tis , nec ab homine armis naturalibus,
seu artificialibus nisi maxima difficultate
possent occidi, aut mutilari, et maxima
eorumdem velocitate in declinando contra-
rium impetum. Possent vero in somno


Demoniality 111

shall be said below, they would be more
noble than he; consequently also, they
would be subject to the other bodily affec¬
tions, and require rest and food, as mentio¬
ned, number 5o. Now, asrational beings
amenable to discipline, they might also
continue ignorant, if their minds did not
receive the culture of study and instruction,
and some amongst them would be more
or less versed in science, more or less clever,
according as their intelligence had been
more or less trained,. However, generally
speaking, and considering the whole of the
species, they would be more learned than
men, not from the subtilty of their body,
but perhaps because of the greater activity
of their mind or the longer space of their
life, which would enable them to learn
more things than men : such are indeed
the motives assigned by S. Austin ( Divin .
Demon. ch. 3. and Spirit and Soul , ch. 3;),
to the prescience of the future in Demons.
They might indeed suffer from natural
agencies; but they could hardly be killed,
on account of the speed with which they
could escape from danger; it is therefore
most unlikely that they could, without the
greatest difficulty, be put to death or mu¬
tilated by beast or by man, with natural or
artificial weapons, so quick would they be


I 12


Dasmonialitas


aut in non advertentia occidi, et mutilari a
corpore solido, ut ense vibrato ab homine,
aut lapide delapso per ruinam, quia eorum
corpus licet tenue, tamen et quantum, et
divisibile esset, velut aer qui ferro, Juste,
aut alio corpore solido dividitur quamvis
tenuis sit. Eorum autem spiritus imparti-
bilis esset, et ceu anima hominis totus in
toto, et totus in quavis corporis parte. Hinc
Jieret quod diviso corpore ipsorum, utprce -
fertur, per aliud corpus, sequi posset mu-
tilatio, et proinde etiam mors : non enim
fieri posset ut diviso corpore idem spiritus
utramque partem informaret, cum ipse in -
divisibilis esset. Verum est quod sicut par¬
tes aeris divisce, per intermedium corpus,
hoc sublato iterum uniuntur, et evadit idem
aer, possentpariterpartes corporis divisce ,
ut supra ponitur, reuniri, 'et ab eodem spi -
ritu revivificari . Sed hoc modo nequirent
talia animalia ab agentibus naturalibus
aut artificialibus occidi : sed rationabilior
esset prima positio ; ex hoc enim , quod
communicarent cum cceteris in materia,
cequum est, ut a cceteris etiam usque ad
eorum interitum pati possent , ut fit cum
cceteHs.


Demonialitjr ii3

at avoiding the impending blow. Yet, they
might be killed or mutilated in their sleep,
or in a moment of inadvertence, by means
of a solid body, such as a sword brandished
by a man, or the fall of a heavy stone;
for, although subtile, their body would be
divisible, just like air which, though vapo¬
rous, is yet divided by a sword, a club, or
any other solid body. Their spirit, however,
would be indivisible, and like the human
soul, entire in the whole and in each and
every part of the body. Consequently, the
division of their body by another body, as
aforesaid, might occasion mutilation and
even death , for the spirit, itself indivisible,
could not animate both parts of a divided
body. True, just as the parts of air, sepa¬
rated by the agency of a body, unite again
as soon as that body is withdrawn, and
constitute the same air as before, even so
the parts of the body divided, as above-men¬
tioned, might unite and be revived by the
same spirit. But then, it must be inferred
that those animals could not be slain by
natural or artificial agencies : and it were
more rational to keep to our first position;
for, if sharing matter with other creatures,
it is natural that they should be liable to
suffer through those creatures, according to
the common rule, and even unto death.


IO.


Daemonialitas


1 14

59. Sexta interrogatio est, an ipsorum
corpora possent alia corpora penetrare, ut
parietes, ligna, metalla, vilram, etc., et an
multa ipsorum possent in eodem loco ma-
teriali consistere, et ad quantum spatium
extenderetur, seu restringeretur eorum
corpus?

1

60. Respondeo, quod cum in omnibus
corporibus quantumvis compactis dentur
pori, ut ad sensum patet in metallis, de qui-
bus major esset ratio, quod in ipsis non
darentur pori : microscopio perfecte elabo¬
rate discernuntur pori metallorum, cum
suis diversis figuris, utique possent per po-
ros insinuari quibusvis corporibus, et hoc
modo ista penetrare, quantumvis tales pori
penetrari non possent ab alio liquore, aut
spiritu materiali, aut vim, salis jammo-
niaci, aut similium, quia longe tenuiora
essent istis liquoribus illorum , corpora.
Quamvis autem plures Angeli possint esse
in eodem loco materiali , et etiam restringi
ad locum minorem minore non tamen in
infinitum, ut probat Scotus in 2. dist. 2. q.
6. § Ad proposi. et qucest. 8., per totum,
hoc tamen concedendum non esset de cor¬
poribus talium animalium, turn quia cor¬
pora ipsa essent quanta, et eorum dimen-
sio non esset reciproce penetrabilis; turn


Demoniality 11 5

59. Sixth question : Could their bodies
penetrate other bodies, such as walls, wood,
metals, glass, etc ? Could many of them
abide together on the same material spot,
and to what space would their body extend
or be restrained ?


60. I reply : In all bodies, however com¬
pact, there are pores, as is apparent in
metals where, more than in other bodies,
it would seem there should be none ;
through a perfect microscope the pores of
metals are discerned, with their different
shapes. Now, those animals might, through
the pores, creep into, and thus penetrate
any other bodies, although such pores
were impervious to other liquors or ma¬
terial spirits, of wine, ammoniacal salt,
or the like, because their bodies would
be much more subtle than those liquors.
However, notwithstanding many Angels
may abide together on the same material
spot, and even confine themselves in a
lesser and lesser space, though not infini¬
tely, as is shown by Scott, yet it were rash
to ascribe the same power to those ani¬
mals; for, their bodies are determined in
substance and impervious to each other ;
and if*two glorious bodies cannot abide


Daemonialitas


ii 6

quia si duo corpora gloriosa non possum esse
in eodem loco, quamvis possent simul esse
gloriosum, et non gloriosum , ut voluit Goto -
fredus de Fontibus, quodlibet 6. 5 ., a quo

non discordat Scotus in 2. distinct . 2. q. 8.
in fine; multo minus possent simul esse isto-
rum corpora, quce , licet subtilia , wow tamen
cequarent subtilitatem corporis gloriosi.
Quo autem ad extensionem et restrictio-
nem, dicendum esset , #wod sicwf rarefac-
tione , e/ condensation, majus aut minus
spatium occupatur ab aere , e/mm arte

potest constringi, ut in minori loco conti-
neatur, quam sit suce quantitati naturaliter
debitus , ut patet in magnis pilis lusoriis,
quce per fistulam seu tubum infiatorium
inflantur : in his siquidem aer violenter
immittitur , et constringitur , et ejus major
ibi continetur quantitas, quam naturalis
pilce capacitas exigat; ita pariformiter ta -
lia corpora ex ipsorum naturali virtute
possent ad majus spatium , non tamen exce-
dens eorum quantitatem, extendi : ut pa -
riter etiam restringi, non tamen circa de -
terminatum locum suce quantitati debitum.
Et quia ipsorum nonnulla, prout etiam in
hominibus est, essent magna , et nonnulla
parva , congruum esset, ut magna possent
plus extendi, quam parva, et hcec ad mino -
rem locum restringi, quam magna .


Demoniality 117

together on the same spot, though a glo¬
rious and a non glorious one may do so,
according to some Doctors, much less
would it be possible for the bodies of those
animals, which are indeed subtile, yet do
not attain to the subtility of the glorious
body. As regards their power of extension
or compression, we may instance the case
of air, which, rarefied and condensed, oc¬
cupies more or less room, and may even,
by artificial means, be compressed into a
narrower space than would be naturally
due to its volume; as is seen with those
large balls which, for amusement, one
inflates by means of a blow-pipe or tube :
air, being forced into them and compressed,
is held in larger quantity than is warranted
by the capacity of the ball. Similarly the
bodies of the animals we are speaking of
might, by their natural virtue, extend to a
larger space, not exceeding however their
own substance; they might also contract,
but not beyond the determined space due
to that same substance, And, considering
that of their number, as with men, some
would be tall and some short, it were pro¬
per that the tall should be able to extend
more than the short, and the short to con¬
tract more than the tall.


118 Dasmonialitas

61. Septima interrogatio est, an hujus-
modi animalia in peccato originali nasce-
rentur , et a Christo Domino fuissent re -
dempta; an ipsis conferretur gratia, et per
qua? sacramenta ; sub qua lege viverent, et
an beatitudinis et damnationis essent ca -

acia?

62. Respondeo, quod articulus Fidei est,
quod Christ us Dominus pro universa crea -
fur# rationali gratiam et gloriam meruit .
Pariter articulus Fidei est, quod Creatures
rationali gloria non confertur nisi prcece-
dat in ea gratia, quee est dispositio ad
gloriam. Similis articulus est quod gloria
non confertur nisi per merita . Hcec vero
fundantur in observantia perfecta manda-
torum Del adimpleta per gratiam. Ex his
satis fit positis interrogationibus. Incertum
est an tales Creatures originaliter pecca-
vissent , necne. Certum tamen est, quod si
ipsarum Prothoparens peccasset , sicut pec -
cavit Adam, ipsius descendentes in peccato
originali nascerentur, quemadmodum nas-
cuntur homines.Et quia Deus nunquam re -
liquit Creaturam rationalem sine remedio,
dum ipsa est in via; si hujusmodi creatures
in peccato originali , aut actuali inficeren -
tur, Deus providisset illis de remedio, sed
quale sit, an fecisset, noverit Deus , nove-


Demoniality 119

61. Seventh question: Would those ani¬
mals be born in original sin, and have
been redeemed by the Lord Christ? Would
the grace have been conferred upon them
and through what sacraments ? Under what
law would they live, and would they be
capable of beatitude and damnation?

62. I reply : It is an article of belief that
Christ has merited grace and glory for all
rational creatures without exception. It is
also an article of belief that glory is not
conferred on a rational creature until such
creature has been previously endowed
with grace, which is the disposition to glory.
According to a like article, glory is con¬
ferred but by merits. Now, those merits
are grounded on the perfect observance of
the commands of God, which is accom¬
plished through grace. The above questions
are thus solved. Whether those creatures
did or did not sin originally is uncertain.
It is clear, however, that if their first Pa¬
rent had sinned as Adam sinned, his de¬
scent would be born in original sin, as men
are born. And, as God never leaves a ratio¬
nal creature without a remedy, so long as
it treads the way, if those creatures were
infected with original or with actual sin,
God would have provided them with a


120


Daemonialitas


rint ipsce. Hoc certum est y si inter ipsas
essent eadem, aut alia sacramenta y ac sunt
in Ecclesia humana militanti , ipsa habuis-
sent, et institutionem, et efficaciam a me -
ritis Jesu Christi, qui omnium creaturarum
rationalium Redemptor et Satis/actor uni¬
versalis est. Convenientissimum pariter ,
immo necessarium esset quod sub aliqua
lege a Deo sibi data viverent, ut per ip-
sius observantiam possent sibi beatitudi -
nem mereri; qucenam autem lex fuisset, an
naturalis tantum , aut scripta, Mosaica ,
aut Evangelica, aut alia ab his omnibus
differenSy prout Deo placuisset, hoc nobis
incognitum. Qiioquomodo autem fuisset,
nulla resultaret repugnantia possibilitatem
talium creaturarum excludens.


63 . Unicumporro argumentum, et quidem
satis debile post longam meditationem mihi
subit contra talium creaturarum possibilita¬
tem : et est quod si tales creaturce in Mundo
existerent, de ipsis notitia aliqua tradita
fuisset a Philosophise SacraScriptura, Tra -
ditione Ecclesiastica , aut Sanctis Patribus;
quod cum non ftier it f tales creaturas mi-
nime possibiles esse concludendum est.


Demoniality j 2 i

remedy ; but whether it is the case, and of
what kind is the remedy, is a secret between
God and them. Surely, if they had sacra¬
ments identical with or different from those
in use in the human Church militant, for
the institution and efficacy thereof they
would be indebted to the merits of Jesus-
Christ, the Redeemer and universal Atoner
of all rational creatures. It would likewise
be highly proper, nay necessary, that they
should live under some law given them by
God, and through the observance of which
they might merit beatitude ; but what
would be that law, whether merely natural
or written, Mosaic or Evangelical, or diffe¬
rent from all these and specially instituted
by God, that we are ignorant of. Whatever
it might be though, there would follow no
objection exclusive of the possible existence
of such creatures.

63 . The only argument, and that a rather
lame one, which long meditations has sug¬
gested to me against the possibility of such
creatures, is that, if they really existed in
the World, we should find them mentioned
somewhere by Philosophers, Holy Scrip¬
ture, Ecclesiastical Tradition, or the Holy
Fathers : such not being the case, their
utter impossibility should be inferred.


i


122


Daemonialitas


64. Sed hoc argumentum, quod revera
magis pulsat existentiam, quam possibili-
tatem illarum, facili negotio solvitur ex
iis quce prcemissimus supra n° 41. et 42.
Argumentum enim ab auctoritate negativa
non tenet. Pr&terquam quod falsum est ,
quod de Hits notitiam non tradiderint turn
Philosophic turn Scriptura , turn Patres.
Plato siquidem , ut refert Apuleius de Deo
Socratis et Plutarchus de Isid. apud Baro -
nem, Scot. Defens., tom. 9. Apparat.jp. 1.
fol. 2., voluit Dcemones'esse animalia ge-
nere, animo passiva, mente rationalia,
cor pore aerea , tempore ceterna : creaturas -
que istas nomine Daemonum intitulavit ;
quod tamen nomen non male sonat ex se :
importat enim plenum sapientia; Unde
cum Diabolum (Angelum nempe ■ malum)
volunt duct ores ex primer e , non simp licit er
Dcemonem sed Cacodaemonem vocant: si-
cut Eudaemonem, quando bonum Angelum
volunt intelligi. Similiter in Scriptura
Sacra et Patribus , de dictis creaturis ha-
betur mentioy et de hoc infra dicemus.

65 . Stabilita hue usque talium creatura-
rum possibilitate, ad earumdem existen¬
tiam probandam descendamus. Supposifa
tot historiarum veritate de coitu hujusmodi
Incuborum et Succuborum cum hominibus


Demoniality 123

64. But that argument which, in fact,
calls in question their existence rather than
their possibility, is easily disposed of by
our premises, Nrs 41 and 42; for no
argument can stand in virtue of a negative
authority. Besides, it is not correct to assert
that neither the Philosophers, nor the Scrip¬
tures, nor the Fathers have handed down
any notion of them. Plato, as is reported
by Apuleius (The Demon of Socrates) and
Plutarch (Isis and Osiris ), declared that
Demons were beings of the animal kind,
passive souls, rational intelligences, aerial
bodies, everlasting; and he gave them the
name of Demons , which of itself is nowise
offensive, since it means replete with wisdom;
so that, when authors allude to the Devil
(or Evil Angel), they do not merely call
him Demon, but Cacodemon , and say like¬
wise Eudemon, when speaking of a good
Angel. Those creatures are also mentioned
in Scripture and by the Fathers, as shall
be said hereafter.


65 . Now that we have proved that those
creatures are possible, let us go a step
further, and show that they exist. Taking
for granted the truth of the recitals concer¬
ning the intercourse of Incubi andSuccubi


Daemonialitas


124

et brutis, ita ut hoc negare impudentia vi-
deatur , ut ait D. Augustinus quem dedi-
mus supra n° 10., ita arguo : Ubi reperitur
propria passio sensus, ibidem necessario
reperitur sensus ipse, cum juxta principia
philosophica propria passio fluat a natura,
sive ubi reperiuntur actiones, seu opera¬
tions sensus , ibidem reperitur sensus ipse,
cum operationes et actiones sint a forma.
Atqui in hujusmodi Incubis aut Succubis ,
sunt actiones , operationes, ac proprice passio -
nes,quce sunt a sensibus; ergo in iisdem re¬
peritur sensus : sed sensus reperiri nequit
nisi adsint organa composita , nempe ex
potentia animce et determinata parte cor¬
poris : ergo in iisdem reperiuntur corpus
et anima; erunt igitur animalia : sed
etiam in ipsis et ab ipsis sunt actiones ,
et operationes animce rationalis : ergo
eorum anima erit rationalis : et ita de
primo ad ultimum tales Incubi sunt ani¬
malia rationalia.


66 . Minor probatur quoad singulas ejus .
partes. Passio siquidem appetitiva coitus
est passio sensus; mceror, ac tristitia, ac
iracundia et furor ex coitu denegato pas-
siones sensus sunt , ut patet in quibusvis


Demoniality 12 5

with men and beasts, recitals so numerous
that it would look like impudence to deny
the fact, as is said by St Austin, whose
testimony is given above (Nr 10 ), I argue :
Where the peculiar passion of the sense is
found, there also, of necessity, is the sense
itself; for, according to the principles of
philosophy, the peculiar passion flows from
nature, that is to say : that, where the acts
and operations of the sense are found, there
also is the sense, the operations and acts
being but its external form. Now, those.,
Incubi and Succubi present acts, opera¬
tions, peculiar passions, which spring from
the senses; they are therefore endowed with.
senses. But senses cannot exist without
concomitant composite organs, without a
combination of soul and body. Incubi and
Succubi have therefore body and soul, and,
consequentially, are animals; but their acts
and operations are also those of a rational
soul; their soul is therefore rational; and
thus, from first to last, they are rational
animals.

66. Our minor is easy of demonstration
in each of its parts. And indeed, the appe¬
titive passion of coition is a sensual passion;
the grief, sadness, wrath, rage, occasioned
by the denial of coition, are sensual pas-


1


126


Dcemonialitas


animalibus; generatio per coitum est ope-
ratio sensus , notum est. Hcec porro om¬
nia in Incubis sunt: ut enim probavimus
supra an 0 2 5 . et seq., ipsi coitum mulie-
brem, et quandoque virilem appetunt , tris -
tantur, et furunt , zzf amantes, amentes, si
ipsis denegetur; coeunt perfecte et quando¬
que generant. Concludendum ergo quod
polleant sensu , et proinde corpore; unde
inferendum etiam perfecta animalia esse.
Rariter clausis ostiis ac fenestris intrant
ubivis locorum : igitur ipsorum corpus te-
nue est; item futura prcenoscunt, annun-
tiant, componunt, ac dividunt; quce opera -
tiones sunt proprice animce rationalis :ergo
anima rationali pollent; et ita sunt vera
animalia rationalia.

Respondent communiter Doctores, quod
malus Dcemon est ille qui tales impudici -
tias operatur, quod passiones , nempe
amorem , tristitiamque simulat ex coitu
denegato, ut cCnimas ad peccandum alii -
ciat, et eas perdat; et si coit, et generat,
hoc est ex semine, et in corpore alieno , ut
dictum fuit supra n° 24.

67. Sed contra Incubi nonnulli rem ha-
bent cum equis , equabus, aliisque etiam
brutis, quce si coitum adyersentur, male ab
ipsis tractantur, ut quotidiana constat ex-


Demonicility 127

sions, as is seen with all animals^; genera¬
tion through coition is evidently a sensual
operation. Now, all that happens with In-
cubi, as has been shown above : they incite
women, sometimes even men; if denied,
they sadden and storm, like lovers : aman -
tes, amentes ; they perfectly practice coi¬
tion, and sometimes beget. It must therefore
be inferred that they have senses, and con¬
sequently a body; consequently also, that
they are perfect animals. More than that:
with closed doors and windows they enter
wherever they please: their body is there¬
fore slender; they foreknow and foretell
the future, compose and divide, all which
operations are proper to a rational soul ;
they therefore possess a rational soul and
are, in sooth, rational animals.

Doctors generally retort that it the
Evil Spirit that perpetrates those impure
acts, simulates passions, love, grief at the
denial of coition, in order to entice souls
to sin and to undo them; and that, if he
copulates and begets, it is with assumed
sperm and body, as aforesaid (Nr 24).

67. But then, there are Incubi that have
to do with horses, mares and other beasts,
and, as shown by every day experience, ill-
treat them if rebel to coition; yet, in those


128


Daemonialitas


perientia; sed in istis cessat ratio adducta,
nempe quod jingat appetitum coitus , ut
animas perdat, cum anima brutorum dam¬
nations eeternee sit incapax. Prceterea
amoris et iree passiones in ipso contrarios
effectus reales producunt. Si enim aut mu-
lier autbrutum amatumillis morem gerant,
optime ab Incubis tractantur ; viceversa
pessime habentur, si ex denegato coitu
irascantur et fur ant $ et hoc firmatur quo-
tidiana experientia; ergo in ipsis sunt
veree passiones sensus. Insuper mali Dee-
mones, ac incorporei f qui rem habent cum
Sagis et Maleficis, ipsas cogunt ad eorum
adorationem , ad denegandam Fidem Or-
thodoxam, ad malefcia et scelera enormia
perpetranda tanquam pensum inf amis co¬
itus, ut supra n° 11. dictum fuit : nihil ho-
rum preetendunt Incubi, ergo mali Dee-
mones non sunt. Ulterius malus Deemon y
ut ex Peltano et Thyreo scribit Guaccius ,
Gompend. Malef. lib. i. c. 19. fol. 128.,
ad prolationem nominis Jesu aut Marice,
adformationem signi Crucis, ad approxi-
mationem sacrarum Reliquiarum , sive
rerum benedictarum, et ad exorcismos,
adjurationes, aut preecepta sacerdotum ,
aut fugit aut pavet, concutiturque , et stri -
det, ut conspicitur quotidie in energumenis,
et constat ex tot historiis , quas recitat


Demoniality 129

cases, it can no longer be adduced that the
Demon simulates the appetite for coition
in order to bring about the ruin of souls,
since those of beasts are not capable of
everlasting damnation. Besides, love and
wrath with them are productive of quite
opposite effects. For, if the loved woman
or beast humours them, those I'ncubi be¬
have very well; on the contrary, they use
them most savagely when irritated and
enraged by a denial of coition : this is am¬
ply proved by daily experience : those In-
cubi therefore have truly sexual passions.
Besides, the Evil Spirits, the incorporeal
Demons which have to do with Sorceresses
and Witches, constrain them to Demon-
Wqrship, to the abjuration of the Ortho¬
dox Faith, to the commission of enchant¬
ments and foul crimes, as preliminary
conditions to the infamous intercourse, as
has been above-stated (Nr n); now, Incubi
pretend to nothing of the kind : they are
therefore no Evil Spirits. Lastly, as written
by Guaccius, at the mere utterance of the
name of Jesus or Mary, at the sign of the
Cross, the approach of Holy Relics or con¬
secrated objects, at exorcisms, adjurations
or priestly injunctions, the Evil Demon
either shudders and takes to flight, or is
agitated and howls, as is daily seen with


Daemonialitas


x 3o

Guaccius, ex quibus habetur, quod in noc-
turnis ludis Sagarum facto ab aliquo
assistentium signo Crucis, aut pronuntiato
nomine Jesu , Diaboli et secum Sagce
omnes disparuerunt. Sed Incubi ad supra-
dicta nec fugiunt, nec parent, quandoque
cachinnis exorcismos excipiunt, et quando¬
que ipsos Exorcistas ccedunt , et sacras res-
tes discerpunt . Quod si mali Dcemones,
utpote a D. N. J. C. domiti, ad ipsius
nomen, Crucem , et res sacras parent :
boni autem Angeli eisdem rebus gaudent,
non tamen homines ad peccata et Dei ojfen -
sam sollicitant : Incubi rero sacra non ti-
ment, et ad peccata prorocant , conrincitur
ipsos nec malos Dcemones , nec bonos An¬
gelos esse; sed patet , quod nec homines
sunt , cum' tamen ratione utantur. Quid
ergo erunt ? Si in termino sunt , et simpli-
ces spiritus sunt , erunt aut damnati aut
beati : non enim in bona Theologia dantur
puri spiritus riatores. Si damnati, nomen
et Crucem Christi rerererentur; si beati,
homines ad peccandum non prorocarent;
ergo aliud erunt a puris spiritus; et sic
erunt corporati , et riatores .


Demonialitjr 131

energumensand is shown by numerous nar¬
ratives of Guaccius concerning the nightly
revels of Witches, where, at a sign of the
Cross or the name of Jesus said by one
of the assistants. Devils and Witches all
vanish together. Incubi, on the contrary,
stand all those ordeals without taking to
flight or showing the^ least fear; sometimes
even they laugh at exorcisms , strike the
Exorcists themselves, and rend the sacred
vestments. Now, if the evil Demons, sub¬
dued by our Lord Jesus-Christ, are stricken
with fear by his name, the Cross and the
holy things; if, on the other hand, the
good Angels rejoice at those same things,
without however inciting men to sin nor
to give offense to God, whilst the Incubi,
without having any dread of the holy things,
provoke to sin, it is clear that they are
neither evil Demons nor good Angels ; but
it is clear also that they are not men,
though endowed with reason. What then
should they be? Supposing them to have
reached the goal, and to be pure spirits,
they would be damned or blessed, for cor¬
rect Theology does not admit of pure spi¬
rits on the way to salvation. If damned,
they would revere the name and the Cross
of Christ; if blessed, they would not incite
men to sin; they would therefore be dif-


i32


Daemonialitas


68 . Prceterea agens mater idle non potest
agere nisi in passum similiter materiale;
tritum siquidem est axioma philosopho-
rum, quod agens et patiens debent commu -
nicare in subjecto; nec id quod materiatum
est , potest agere in rem pure spiritualem.
Dantur auiem agenda naturalia , quce
agunt contra liujusmodi Dcemones Incubos,
sequitur igitur quod isti materiati , seu
corporei sunt. Minor probatur ex iis quce
scribunt Dioscorides , /. 2. c. 168. et l. 1.
c. 100., Plinius, lib. i 5 . c. 4 ., Aristoteles ,
Probl. 34., et. Apuleius , 1 . De Virtute
Herbarum, apud Guaccium , Comp. Ma-
lef., /. 3 . % c. i 3 . fol. 3 16., et confirmatur
experientia , nejnpe de pluribus herbis, la-
pidibus ac animalibuSj quce Dcemones de-
pellunt , ut ruta , hypericon, verbena, scor-
dium , palma Christi , centaureum, adamas,
corallium , gagates, jaspis , pcllis capitis
lupi aut asinij menstruum muliebre , e/

/i/m ; twdte habetur 26, q. 7. cap.final.:
Daemonium sustinenti* liceat petras, vel
herbas habere sine incantatione. quo
habetur , petras aut herbas posse sua vi na-
turali Dcemonis vires compescere , aliter
Canon hoc non permitteret , sei wf super-


Demoniality 1 33

ferent from pure spirits, and thus, have a
body and be on the way to salvation.

68 . Besides, a material agent cannot act
but on an equally material passive. It is
indeed a trite philosophical axiom, that
agent and patient must have a common
subject: pure matter cannot act on any
purely spiritual thing. Now, there are natu¬
ral agents which act on those Incubi De¬
mons : these are therefore material or
corporeal. Our minor is proved by the tes¬
timony of Dioscorides, Pliny, Aristoteles
and Apuleius, quoted by Guaccius, Comp.
Malef. b. \ ch. i 3 , fol. 3 i 6 ; it is confir¬
med by our knowledge of numerous herbs,
stones and animal substances which have
the virtue of driving away Demons, such as
rue, St-John’s wort, verbena, germander,
palma Christi, centaury, diamonds, coral,
jet, jasper, the skin of the head of a wolf
or an ass, women’s catamenia, and a hun¬
dred others: wherefore it is written : For
such as are assaulted by the Demon it is
lawful to have stones or herbs , but without
recourse to incantations. It follows that, by
their own native virtue, stones or herbs
can bridle the Demon : else the above
mentioned Canon would not permit their
use, but would on the contrary forbid it as


12


Daemonialitas


1 34

stitiosum vetaret. Et de hoc luculentum
exemplum habemus in Sacra Scriptura,
ubi Angelus Raphael dixit Tobice, c. 6,
v. 8.; Cordis ejus (nempe piscis , quem a
Tigri attraxerat) particulam, si super
carbones ponas, fumus ejus extricat omne
genus Daemoniorum. Et ejus virtutem ex-
perientia comprobavit : nam incensojecore
piscis , fugatus est Incubus , qui Saram
deperiebat.


69. Respondent ad hcec communiter
Theologi , quod talia agentia naturalia in¬
choative tantum fugant Dcemonem, com¬
pletive autem vis supernaturalis Dei aut
Angeli , ita ut virtus supernaturalis sit
causa primaria, directa , et principalis , na-
turalis autem secondaria, indirecta, et mi¬
nus principalis. Unde ad probationem, quce
supra adducta est de Dcemone fugato a
fumo jecoris piscis incensi a Tobia, re¬
sponds Vallesius , De Sac. Philosoph.,
c. 28., quod tali fumo indita fuit a Deo
vis supernaturalis fugandi Incubum, sicut
igni materiali Inferni data est virtus tor-
quendi Dcemones et animas Damnatorum.
Ad eamdem autem probationem respondet
Lyranus, et Cornelius ad c. 6. Tob. v . 8.,


Demoniality 1 3 5

superstitious. We have a striking instance
thereof in Holy Scripture, where the Angel
Raphael says to Tobit, ch. 6, v. 8, spea¬
king of the fish which he had drawn
from the Tigris : c< If thou put test on
coals a parti cleof i f stiver . the smoke
thereof will drive away all kinds of De¬
mons . » Experience demonstrated the
trutKTof those words'; for, no sooner was
the liver of the fish set on fire, than the
Incubus who was in love with Sarah was
put to flight.

69. To this Theologians usually retort
that such natural agents merely initiate the
ejection of the Demon, and that the com¬
pletive effect is due to the supernatural
force of God or of the Angel; so that the
supernatural force is the primary, direct
and principal cause, the natural force being
but secondary, indirect and subordinate.
Thus, in order to explain how the liver of
the fish burnt by Tobit drove away the
Demon, Vallesius asserts that the smoke
thereof had been endowed by God with the
supernatural power of expelling the Incu¬
bus, in the same manner as the material
fire of Hell has the virtue of tormenting
Demons and the souls of the Damned.
Others, such as Lyranus and Cornelius,


136


Daemonialitas


Abulentis in i. Reg. c. 16. q. 46., Pere-
rius in Daniel., pag. 272., apud Cornel.
loc. cit., fumum cordis piscis expulisse
Dcemonem inchoate vi naturali y sed com¬
plete vi angelica et ccelesti: naturali autem
impediendo actionem Dcemonis per disposi-
tionem contrariam , quia hie agit per natu-
rales causas et humores, quorum qualitates
expugnantur a qualitatibus contrariis re¬
rum naturalium, quee dicuntur Dcemones
fugare ; et in eadem sententia sunt omnes
loquentes de arte exorcista.

70. Sed hcec responsio, que tamen validas
habet instantias , ad plus quadrare potest
contra malos Dcemones obsidentes corpora ,
aut per malejicia inferentes ipsis cegritu-
dines , aut alia incommoda , sed nullo modo
facit ad propositum de Incubis : siquidem
isti nec corpora obsident , nec ipsis officiunt
per cegritudines habituates , sed ad plus icti-
bus et percussionibus torquent. Quod si
equas coitum adversantes macras reddunt ,
hoc faciunt subducendo illis cibum , et hoc
modo macrescere } et tandem interire eas
faciunt. Ad hcec autem patranda non eget
Incubus alicujus rei naturalis applicatione
(qua tamen eget ] malus Daemon inferens
agritudinemhabitualem)\ ea enim potest ex
sua vi organica naturali. Pariter Daemon


Demoniality i3y

profess that the smoke of the heart of the
fish initiated the ejection of the Demon by
native virtue, but completed it by angelical
and heavenly virtue : by native virtue, in¬
somuch that it opposed a contrary action
to that of the Demon; for the Evil Spirit
applies native causes and humours, the
native qualities of which are combated by
the contrary qualities of natural things
known to be capable of driving away De¬
mons; that opinion is shared by all those
who treat of the art of exorcisms.

70. But that explanation, however plau¬
sible the facts upon which it rests, can at
most be received as regards the Evil Spirits
which possess bodies or, through malefice,
infect them with diseases or other infir-
mitfes ; it does not at all meet the case of
Incubi. For, these neither possess bodies
nor infect them with diseases; they, at most,
molest them by blows and ill-treatment. If
they cause the mares to grow lean because
of their not yielding to coition, it is merely
by taking away their provender, in conse¬
quence of which they fall off and finally
die. To that purpose the Incubus need not
use a natural agent, as the Evil Spirit does
when imparting a disease : it is enough
that it should exert its own native organic


12 .


Daemonialitas


138

malus plerumque obsidet corpora , et infert
eegritudines ad signa cum ipso conventa
et posita a Saga aut Malejico, quee signa
multoties res naturales sunt prceditce vi
nativa nocendi, quibus naturaliter resistunt
alia pariter naturalia contrarice virtutis.
Incubus vero non sic; quia ex se, et nulla
concurrente aut Saga, aut Malejico, suas
vexationes infert. Prceterea res naturales
fugantes Incubos suam virtutem exercent ,
ac effectum sortiuntur absque interventu
alicujus exorcismi aut sacrce benedictionis;
ut proinde did non possit, quod fuga In -
cubi inchoative sit a virtute naturali, com¬
pletive autem a vi divina, quia ibi nulla
particularis intervenit divini nominis invo -
catio, sed est purus effectus rei naturalis,
ad quern non concurrit Deus, nisi concursu
universali, tanquam auctor natures , et
causa universalis, et prima in ordine effi -
cientium.


71. Duas circa hoc historias do, quarum
primam habui a Confessario Molinalium,
viro gravi, ac fide dignissimo. Alterius
vero sum testis oculatus.


Demoniality 139

force. Likewise, when the Evil Spirit pos¬
sesses bodies andinfects them withdiseases,
it is most frequently through signs agreed
upon with himself, and arranged by a witch
or a wizard, which signs are usually natural
objects, indued with their own noxious
virtue, and of course opposed by other
equally natural objects endowed with a
contrary virtue. But not so the Incubus :
it is of his own accord, and without the
cooperation of either witch or wizard, that
he inflicts his molestations. Besides, the
natural things which put the Incubi to
flight exert their virtue and bring about a
result without the intervention of any exor¬
cism or blessing; it cannot therefore be
said that the ejection of the Incubus is ini¬
tiated by natural, and completed by divine
virtue, since there is in this case no parti¬
cular invocation of the divine name, but
the mere effect of a natural object, in which
God cooperates only as the universal agent,
the author of nature, the first of efficient
causes.

71. To illustrate this subject, I give two
stories, the first of which I have from a
Confessor of Nuns, a man of weight, and
most worthy of credit; the second I was
eye-witness to. <


140 Daemonialitas

In quodam Sanctimonalium monasterio
degebat ad educationem Virgo qucedam
nobilis tentata ab Incubo, qui diu noctuque
ipsi apparebat, ipsam ad coitum sollici-
tando eniximis precibus, tamquam amasius
prce amore dementatns; ipsa tamen semper
restitit tentanti gratia Dei, ac sacramen -
torum frequentia roborata. Incassum abiere
plures devotiones, jejunia et vota facta a
puella vexata, exorcismi, benedictiones, et
prcecepta ab exorcistis facta Incubo, ut
desisteret a molestia ilia; nec quidquam
proficiebatur multitudo reli qui arum, alia-
rumque rerum benedictarum disposita iri
camera virginis tentatce , nec benedictce
candelce noctu ibidem ardentes impedie -
bant, quomipus juxta consuetum appareret
ad tentandum in forma speciosissimi juve-
nis. Consultus inter alios viros doctos fuit
quidam Theologus magnce eruditionis :
iste advertens virginem tentatam esse tern-
peramenti phlegmatici a toto, conjectavit
Incubum esse dcemonem aqueum (dantur
enim ut scribit Guaccius , Comp. Malefic.
/. 1. c. 19. fol. 129., Dcemones ignei, aerei,
phlegmatici, terrei, subterranei, et luci-
fugi), et consului, quod in camera virginis
tentatce continue jieret suffimentum vapo -
rosum sequens. Requirunt olla7n novam
fgulinam vitreatam; inhac ponitur calami


Demoniality 141

In a certain monastery of holy Nuns
there lived, as a boarder, a young maiden
of noble birth, who was tempted by an
Incubus that appeared to her by day and
by night, and with the most earnest en¬
treaties, the manners of a most passionate
lover, incessantly incited her to sin ; but
she, supported by the grace of God and the
frequent use of the sacraments, stoutly
resisted the temptation. But, all her devo¬
tions, fasts and vows notwithstanding,
despite the exorcisms, the blessings, the
injunctions showered by exorcists on the
Incubus that he should desist from molest¬
ing her ; in spite of the crowd of relics and
other holy objects collected in the maid¬
en’s room, of the lighted candles kept
burning there all night, the Incubus none
the less persisted in appearing to her as
usual, in the shape of a very handsome
young man. At last, among other learned
men, whose advice had been taken on the
subject, was a very erudite Theologian who,
observing that the maiden was of a tho¬
roughly phlegmatic temperament, surmised
that that Incubus was an aqueous Demon
(there are in fact, as is testified by Guac-
cius, igneous* aerial, phlegmatic, earthly,
subterranean demons.who avoid the light
of day), and prescribed an uninterrupted


142


Daemonialitas


aromatici , cubebarum seminis, arisiolochia*
utriusque radicum, cardamomi majoris et
minor is, gingiberis, piper is longi, caryo -
phyllorum, cinnamomi, canellce caryo -
phyllata?, macis , nncum myristicarum ,
styracis calamitce, ben jo ini, ligni ac radi -
c/s rodice, ligni aloes, triasantalorum una
uncia, semiaquce vitce librce tres; ponitur
olla supra cineres calidas ut vapor suffi -
menti ascendat, et cella clausa tenetur.
Facto suffimento advenit denuo Incubus,
sed ingredi cellam nunquam ausus est: sed
si tentata extra earn ibat , e/ per viridarium
ac claustra spatiabatur , aliis invisibilis si-
bi visus apparebat Incubus , e* puella* collo
injectis brachiis yiolenter, ac quasi furtive
oscula rapiebat: quod molestissimum hone -
stcevirginie'rat. Consultus denuo Theologus
ille ordinavit puellce, ut deferret pixidulas
unguentarias exquisitorum odorum, ut mos-
chi, ambrce, qibetti, balsami Peruviani, ac
aliorum compositorum; quod cum fecisset,
deambulanti per viridarium puellce apparuit
Incubus faci minaci, ac furenti; non tamen
ad illam approximavit, sed digitum sibi mo -
mordit tanquam meditans vindictam; tan¬
dem disparuit, nec amplius ab ea visus fuit.


Demoniality 143

fumigation in the room. A new vessel, made
of glass-like earth, was accordingly brought
in, and filled with sweet cane, cubeb seed,
roots of b oth aristolochies, grea t and small
cardamon, ginger, long-pepper, caryophyl-
lese, cinnamon, cloves, mace, nutmegs,
calamite storax, benzoin, aloes-wood and
roots, one ounce of triasandalis, and three
pounds of half brandy and waterjlhe vessel
was then set on hot ashes in order to force
up the fumigating vapour, and the cellwas
kept closed. As soon as the fumigation was
done, the Incubus came, but never dared
enter the cell; only, if the maiden left it
for a walk in the garden or the cloister, he
appeared to her, though invisible to others
and throwing his arms round her neck,
stole or rather snatched kisses from her,
to her intense disgust. At last, after a new
consultation, the Theologian prescribed
that she should carry about her person
pills made of the most exquisite perfumes,
such as musk, amber, chive, Peruvian
balsam, and others. Thus provided, she
went for a walk in the garden, where the
Incubus suddenly appeared to her with a
threatening face, and in a rage. He did not
approach her, however, but, after biting
his finger as if meditating revenge, dis¬
appeared and was never more seen by her.


144


Daemonialitas


72* Alia historia est, quod in Conventu
Magnce Cartusice Ticinensis, fuit quidam
Diaconus, nomine dictus Augustinus,
maximas , ac inauditas, et gene incredibi-
les sustinens a quo dam Dcemone vexatio-
nes; quce tolli nullo remedio spirituali
(.quamvis plura juxta plures exorcistas ,
qui liberationem, sed incassum tentarunt,
fuissent adhibita) potuerunt. Me consuluit
illius Conventus vicarius, qui curam di-
vexati , utpote Clerici , ex officio habebat.
Ego videns frustranea fuisse consueta
exorcismorum remedia , exemplo historice
suprarecensitce consului sujfimentum si¬
mile superiori , ntque divexatus pixidulas
odoramentorum supradictas deferret; et
quia tabacchi usum habebat, et aqua vitce
delectabatur, suasi ut et tabaccho et aqua
vitce moschata uteretur. Dcemon illi appa -
rebat diu noctuque ultra alias species ,
puta scheleti , suis, asini, Angeli , avis,
modo in forma unius, modo alterius ex
suis Religiosis, et semel > in forma sui
Prcelati, nempe Prioris , qui hortatus est


Demoniality 145

72. Here is the other story. In the great
Carthusian Friary of Pavia there lived a
Deacon, Austin by name, who was subject¬
ed by a certain Demon to excessive, un¬
heard of and scarcely credible vexations;
although many exorcists had made repeat¬
ed endeavours to secure his riddance, all
spiritual remedies had proved unavailing.

I was consulted by the Vicar of the convent,
who had the cure of the poor clerk. Seeing
the inefficacy of all customary exorcisms,
and remembering the above-related in¬
stance, I advised a fumigation like unto the
one that has been detailed, and prescribed
that the Deacon should carry about his
person fragrant pills of the same kind ;
moreover, as he was in the habit of using
tobacco, and was very fond of brandy, I
advised tobacco and brandy perfumed with
musk. The Demon appeared to him by day
and by night, under various shapes, as a
skeleton, a pig, an ass, an Angel, a bird;
with the figure of one or other of the
Friars, once even with that of his own
Abbot or Prior, exhorting him to keep his
conscience clean, to trust in God, to con¬
fess frequently; he persuaded him to let
him hear his sacramental confession, reci¬
ted with him the psalms Exsurgat Deus
and Qui habitat , and the Gospel according

i3


Daemonialitas


146

vexatum ad puritatem conscientiae, ad con-
fidentiam in Deum, et ad frequentiam
confessionis; suasit ut sibi sacramentalem
confessionem faceret , quod etiam fecit; et
expost Psalmos Exsurgat Deus et Qui ha¬
bitat, et mox Evangelium S. Joannis si-
mul cum vexato recitavit , et ad ea verba
Verbum caro factum est genuflexit, et
accepta stola , quce in cella erat, et asper -
gillo aquce benedictce benedixit cellae, ac
lecto vexati, et ac si rev era fuisset ipsius
Prior prceceptum fecit Daemoni, ne auderet
ilium suum subditum amplius divexare ,
et post hcec disparuit , sicque prodidit quis-
nam esset ; aliter vexatus ilium suum
Praelatum esse reputaverat. Postquam igi-
tur suffimentum, ac odores , ut supra dic¬
tum est, corisulueram, non destitit Daemon
juxta solitum apparere ; imo assumptafi-
gura vexati fuit ad cameram Vicarii, et
ab eo petiit aquam vitae , ac tabaccum
moschatum, dicens sibi talia valde placere.
Vicarius utrumque illi dedit : quibus accep¬
ts disparuit in momento, quo facto cogno¬
vit Vicarius se fuisse illusum a Daemone
tali pacto : quod magis confirmavit asser¬
tion vexati. qui cum juramento affirmavit,
se ilia die nullo modo fuisse in cella Vica¬
rii. Iste mihi totum retulit, et ex tali facto
conjeci Daemonem ilium non fuisse aqueum,


Demoniality 147

to St John : and when they came to the
words Verbum caro factum est , he bent his
knee, and taking hold of a stole which
was in the cell, and of the Holy-water
sprinkle, he blessed the cell and the bed/
and, as if he had really been the Prior, en¬
joined on the Demon not to venture in
future to molest his subordinate ; he then
disappeared, thus betraying what he was,
for otherwise the young deacon had taken
him for his Prior. Now, notwithstanding
the fumigations and perfumes I had pre¬
scribed, the Demon did not desist from his
wonted apparitions; more than that, as¬
suming the features of his victim, he went
to the Vicar’s room, and asked for some to¬
bacco and brandy perfumed with musk, of
which, said he, he was extremely fond.
Having received both, he disappeared in
the twinkling of an eye, thus showing the
Vicar that he had been played with by the
Demon; and this was amply confirmed by
the Deacon, who affirmed upon his oath
that he had not gone that day to the Vicar’s
cell. All that having been related to me, I
inferred that, far from being aqueous like
the Incubus who was in love with the maid-,
en above spoken of, this Demon was
igneous, or, at the very least, aerial, since
he delighted in hot substances such as


Daemonialitas


148

ut erat Incubus, qui virginem ad coitum
sollicitabat , ut dictum supra est, sed
igneum, vel ad minus aereum, ex quo gau-
debat vaporibus, ac odoribus, tabacco, et
aqua vite, quce calida sunt . Et conjecture
vim addidit temperamentum divexati, quod
erat colericum quo ad predominium cum
subdominio, tamen sanguineo. Demones
enim tales non accedunt tiisi ad eos, qui
secum in temperamento symboliqant; ex
quo validatur opinio mea de illorum cor -
poreitate. Unde suasi Vicario, ut acciperet
herbas natura frigidas , ut nympheam ,
hepaticam, portulacam , mandragoram,
sempervivam , plantaginem , hyoscyamum,
et alias similes , et ex iis compositum fas -
ciculum fenestre y alium ostio celle sus-
penderet; similibusque herbiSy turn came -
ram , fwm lectum divexati sterneret. Mi-
rum dictul^comparuit denuo Demon, ma-
nens tamen extra cameram , nec ingredi
voluit, et cum divexatus ilium interrogas -
set, quare de more intrare non auderet ,
multis verbis injuriosis jactatis contra me,
qui talia consulueram, disparuit, nec am-
plius reversus est .

73. Ex his duabus historiis apparet ta¬
les odores , et herbas respective sua natu -
rali virtute, nullaque interveniente vi su -


Demoniality 149

vapours , perfumes,_jtobacco and brandy.

Force was added to my surmises by the

temperament of the young deacon, which
was choleric and sanguine, choler predo¬
minating however; for, those Demons
never approach but those whose tempera¬
ment tallies with their own : another con¬
firmation of my sentiment regarding their
corporeity. I therefore advised the Vicar
to let his penitent take herbs that are cold
by nature, such as water-lilv 7 liver-wort ,
spurge, mandrake, house-Ieek ? pl antain,,
henbane, and others similar, make two
little bundles of them and hang them up,
one at his window, the other at the door
of his cell, taking care to strow some also
on the floor and on the bed. Marvellous
to say! The Demon appeared again, but
remained outside the room, which he
would not enter; and, on the Deacon in¬
quiring of him his motives for such unwont¬
ed reseryt, he burst out into invectives
against me for giving such advice, disap¬
peared, and never came again.


73. The two stories I have related make
it clear that, by their native virtue alone,
perfumes and herbs drove away Demons

i3.


15o Daemonialitas

pernaturali Dcemones propulisse; unde
convincitur quod Incubi patiuntur a quali -
tatibus materialibus , ut proinde concludi
debeat , quod communicant in materia cum
iis rebus naturalibus, a quibus fugantur ,
et ex consequenti corpore sint prcediti,
quod est intentum.


74. Et magis conclusio Jirmatur, si
impugnetur sententia Doctorum supraci-
tatorum, dicentium, Incubum abactum • a
Sara fuisse vi Angeli Raphaelis , non vero
jecorispiscis callionymi, qualis fuitpiscis a
Tobiaapprehensus ad ripam Tigris , utcum
Vallesio, Sacr. Philos., c. 42., scribit Cor-
neliusa Lap . in Tob. c. 6. v. 2., § Quarto
ergo : salva enim tantorum Doctorum
reverentia, talis expositio manifeste ad -
versatur sensui patenti Textus, a quo nullo
modo recedendum est dummodo non se-
quantur absurda. En verba Angeli ad
Tobiam : « Cordis ejus particulam, si
» super carbones ponas, fumus ejus extri-
» cat omne genus Daemoniorum, sive a
» viro, sive a muliere, ita ut ultra non ac-
» cedant ad eos, et fel valet ad unguendos
» oculos, in quibus fuerit albugo, et sana-
» buntur. » (Tob., c. 6 . v. 8. et 9.) iVo-
tetur, quceso } assertio Angeli absoluta, et


Demoniality 1 5 1

without the intervention of any supernat¬
ural force; Incubi are therefore subject to
material conHItions, and it must be inferred
that they participate of the matter of the
natural objects which have the power of
putting them to flight, and consequently
they have a body; that is what was to be
shown.

74. But, the better to establish our con¬
clusion, it behoves to impugn the mistake
into which have fallen the Doctors above-
quoted, such as Vallesius and Cornelius a
Lapide, when they say that Sarah was rid
from the Incubus by the virtue of the Angel
Raphael, and not by that of the calliony-
mous fish caught by Tobit on the banks of
the Tigris. Indeed, saving the reverence
due to such great doctors, such a construc¬
tion manifestly clashes with the clear mea¬
ning of the Text, from which it is never
justifiable to deviate, so long as it does
not lead to absurd consequences. Here are*
the words spoken by the Angel to Tobias :

« If thou puttest on coals a particle of
its heart, the smoke thereof will expel
all kinds'of Demons , whether from man or
woman, so that they shall never return ,
and its^gaU is^good^for^anointing eyesu*
that have whiteness, and healing them . »


1 52 Daemonialitas

universalis de virtute cordis , sen jecoris , et
fellis illius piscis : non enim dicit: Si pones
particulas cordis ejus super carbones, fu-
gabis omne genus Dsemoniorum, et si felle
unges oculos, in quibus fuerit * albugo,
sanabuntur : si enim ita dixisset, congrua
esset expositio, quod nempe Raphael su -
pernaturali sua virtute illos effectus pa-
trasset, ad quos perficiendos inepta esset
applicatio fumi , et fellis : sed non ita
loquitur , sed ait talem esse virtutem fumi ,
et fellis absolute.


75. Qxicero modo , an Angelas veritatem
puram dixerit de virtute rerum , an men -
tiri potuerit; pariter an albugo ab oculis
Tobice senioris ablata sit vi naturali fellis
piscis , aut virtute super naturali Angeli
Raphaelis? Angelum mentiri potuisse bla -
sphemia hcereticalis est; sequitur igitur
puram veritatem fuisse ab eo assertam;
talis autem non esset , si omne genus Dee -
moniorum non extricaretur a fumo jecoris
piscis nisi addita vi supernaturali Angeli,
maxime , si hcec esset causa principalis ta-


Demoniality 15 3

(Tobit, c. 6, v. 8 and 9). Pray notice that
the Angel’s assertion respecting the virtue
of the heart or liver and gall of that fish
is absolute, universal; for, he does not say:
a If thou puttest on coals particles of its
hearty thou wilt put to flight all kinds of
Demons, and if thou anointest with its gall
eyes that have a whiteness , they shall be heal -
ed. » If he had thus spoken, I could agree
with the construction that Raphael had
brought about, by his own supernatural
virtue, the effects which the mere applica¬
tion of the smoke and the gall might not
have sufficed to produce : but he does not
speak thus, and, on the contrary, says
absolutely, that such is the virtue of the
smoke and the gall.

75. It may be asked whether the Angel
spoke the precise truth regarding the virtue
of those things, or whether he might have
lied; and likewise, whether the whiteness
was withdrawn from the eyes of the elder
Tobit byjhe native force of the gall of the
fish, or by the supernatural virtue of the
Angel Raphael? To say that the Angel
could have lied would be an heretical bla¬
sphemy; he therefore spoke the precise
truth; but it would no longer be so if all
kinds of Demons were not expelled by the


Daemonialitas


1 54

lis effectus , quemadmodum scribunt de hoc
casu Doctores. Mentiretur absque dubio
medicus qui diceret : talis herba curat ta -
liter pleuritidem, sive epilepsiam, ut am -
plius non revertatur : si herba ilia non
curaret illas cegritudines nisi inchoate , et
perfecta illarum sanatio esset ab alia herba
conjuncta priori; sic pari modo mentitus
fuisset Raphael , asserens fumum jecoris
extricare omne genus Dcemoniorum ita ut
ultra non accedant, si talis effectus esset
a fumo solum inchoate, principaliter vero,
et perfecte a virtute Angeli. Prceterea talis
fuga Dcemonis, vel secutura erat universa-
liter, et semper posito jecore piscis super
carbones a quoquam, vel debebat sequi in
illo solummodo casu particulari , jecore
incusso a juniore Tobia . Si primum, ergo
oportet, quod cuicumque talem fumum per
accensionem jecoris paranti, assistat An -
gelus qui supernaturali virtute Dcemo -
nem miraculose abigat regulariter; et hoc
est absurdnm; ad positionem enim rei na -
turalis deberet regulariter sequi miracu -
lum , quod est incongruum, et si absque
Angeli operatione fuga Dcemonis non se -
queretur, mentitus fuisset Raphael asse¬
rens earn esse virtutem jecoris. Si autem
effectus ille sequi non debeat, nisi in illo
casu particulari, mentitus fuisset Angelus


Demoniality 15 5

smoke of the liver of the fish, unless aided
by the supernatural force of the Angel,
and especially, if such aid was the principal
cause of the effect produced, as the Doc¬
tors assert in tho present case. It would
doubtless be a lie if a physician should
say : such an herb radically cures pleurisy
or epilepsy, and if it should only begin the
cure, the completion of which required the
addition of another herb to the one first
used; in the same manner, Raphael would
have lied when averring that the smoke of
the liver expelled all kinds of demons, so
that they should not return, if that result
had been only begun by the smoke, and its
completion had been principally due to the
virtue of the Angel. Besides, that flight of
jthe demon was either to take place univer¬
sally and by any one whomsoever putting
the liver of the fish on the coals, or else it
was only to occur in that particular case,
the younger Tobit putting the liver on. In
the first hypothesis , any person making
that smoke by burning the liver should be
assisted by an Angel, who, through his
supernatural virtue should expel the De¬
mons miraculously and regularly at the
same time; which is absurd; for, either
words have no meaning, or a natural fact
cannot be regularly followed by a miracle;


156


Daemonialitas


enuncians universaliter virtutem piscis, in
fugando omni Dcemoniorum genere, quod
non est dicendum.


76. Ulterius albugo oculorum detracta est
ab oculis Tobice senior is, et ipsius ccecitas
sanata est a virtute naturali fellis piscis
illius , ut Doctores affirmant ( Liran . Dyoni -
si us; et Seraci. apud Cornel. inTobi., c. 6.
v . 9). Piscis enim Callionymus, qui vocatur
Italice bocca in capo, et quo usus est To¬
bias, /el habet pro celeberrimo remedio ad
detegendas albugines oculorum, ut scribunt
concorditer Dioscorides, L 1. c . 96., Gale-
nus, De Simpl. Medicam., Plinius , /. 32 . c.
7., AclaniuSj De Ver. Histor., /. i 3 . c. 14.,
et Vallesius , De Sacr. Philos., c. 47. Tex-
ius Grcecus Tobiae, c . 11. v. i 3 ., habet:
« Inspersit fel super oculos patris sui, di-
» cens : Confide, Pater; ut autem erosi
» sunt, detrivit oculos suos, et disquamatae
» sunt ab angulis oculorum albugines. »
Cum igitur eodem contextu Angelus ape-


Demoniality 157

and, if the Demon was not put to flight
without the assistance of the Angel, Ra¬
phael would have lied when ascribing that
virtue to the liver. If, on the contrary, that
effect was only to be brought about in that
particular case, Raphael would again have
lied when assigning to that fish, universally
and absolutely, the virtue of expelling the
Demon : now, to say that the Angel lied is
not possible.

76. The whiteness was withdrawn from
the eyes of the elder Tobit, and his blind¬
ness healed, through the native virtue of
the gall of that same fish, as Doctors aver.
In fact, that the gall of the callionymous
fish, which the Italians call bocca in capo ,
and of which Tobias made use, is a highly
renowned remedy for removing the white¬
ness from the eyes, all are agreed, Dios-
corides, Galen, Pliny, Aclanius, Vallesius,
etc. The Greek Text of Tobit, c. 11, v. i 3 ,
says : « He poured the gall on his father *s
eyes , saying : Have confidence , father;
but, there being erosion , the old man rubbed
his eyes , and the scales of the whiteness came
out at the corners . » Now, since, according
to the same text, the Angel had disclosed
to Tobias the virtue of the liver and gall
of the fish, and since, through its native vir-


158


Daemonialitas


ruerit Tobice virtutem jecoris, et fellis pis -
cis, et hoc sua naturali virtute ccecitatem
Tobice senior is cur aver it, concludendum est,
quod etiam fumus jecoris sua naturali vi
Incubum fugaverit: quod concludenter con-
fir matur a Textu Grceco, qui ad Tobiae c.
8. v. 2., ubi Vulgata habet : « Partem je-
» coris posuit super carbones vivos », sic
habet : « Accepit cinerem, sive prunam
» thimiamatum, et imposuit cor piscis, et
» hepar, fumumque fecit, et quando odo-
» ratus est Daemon odores, fugit. jo Et
Textus Hebraicus ita cantat: « Percepit
» Asmodeus odorem, et fugit. » Ex quibus
textibus apparet , quod Daemon fugit ad per -
ceptionem fumi , sibi contrarii, ac nocentis,
non autem a virtute Angeli supernaturali.
Quod si in 4 ali liberatione Sarce ab impeti-
tione Incubi Asmodei , ultrafumum jecoris
intervenit operatio Raphaelis , hoc fuit in
alligatione Dcemonis in deserto superioris
jEgypti, ut dicitur c. 8. v . 3 . Tobiae ; fu¬
mus quippe jecoris nequibat in tanta di-
stantia agere in Dcemonern, aut ilium alli-
gare. Quod inservire potest pro concordia
supracitatorum Doctorum (qui voluerunt
Saram perfecte liberatam a Dcemone vir¬
tute Raphaelis) cum sententia , quam tue-
mur : dico enim, quod ipsi senserint quod
perfecta curatio Sarce a Dcemone fuerit in


Demoniality iSg

tue, the gall cured the elder Tobit’s blind¬
ness, it must be inferred that it was likewise
through its native force that the smoke of
the live^ put the Incubus to flight; which
inference is conclusively confirmed by the
Greek text, which, Tobit, c. 8, v. 2, instead
of the reading in the Vulgate : « He laid a
part of the liver on burning coals », says
explicitly : « He took the ashes of the per¬
fumes, and put the heart and the liver of the
fish thereupon , and made a smoke therewith;
the which smell when the evil spirit had
smelled, he fled. » The Hebrew text says :
« Asmodeus smelled the smell , and fled. »
From all those texts it appears that the
Demon took to flight on smelling a smoke
which was prejudicial and hurtful to him¬
self, and nowise from the supernatural
virtue of the Angel. If, in N ridding Sarah
from the assaults of the Incubus Asmodeus,
the operation of the smoke of the liver was
followed by the intervention of Raphael, it
was in order to bind the Demon in the
wilderness of High-Egypt, as related, To-
bit , c. 8, v. 3 ; for, at such a distance, the
smoke of the liver could neither operate on
the Demon, nor bind him. And here we
have the means of reconciling our opinion
with that of the above-mentioned Doctors,
who ascribe to Raphael’s power Sarah's


160 Daemonialitas

aliigatione ejus in deserto, qucefuit ab An -
gelo, quod et nos concedimus; sed extrica-
tio, sive fugatio ejusdem a cubiculo Sara?
fuerit a vi innativajecoris piscis, quod nos
tuemur .


77. Probatur tertio principaliter nostra
conclusio de existentia talium animalium,
seu de Incuborum corporeitate, ex auctori-
tate D . Hieronymi, in vita S. Pauli primi
Eremitae. Refert is D. Antonium iter per
desertum arripuisse , ut ad visendum D.
Paulum perveniret, et post nonnullas dice-
tas itineris Centaurum reperiisse, a quo
cum fuisset percontatus mensionem D. Pauli,
et ille barbarum quid infrendens potius ,
quamproloquens, dextrceprotensione manus
iter D. Antonio demonstrasset, in sylvam
se abdidit cursu concitatissimo. Prosecutus
iter 5 . Abbas in quadam valle invenit baud
grandem quemdam homunculum, aduncis
manibuSy fronte cornibus asperata, cujus
extrema pars corporis in caprarum pedes
desinebat. Ad ejus aspectum substitit Anto -
niiiSy et timens Diaboli artes signo Sanctce
Crucis se munivit . Ad tale signum necfugit,


Demoniality 161

complete riddance from the Demon : for,
I say with them, that the cure of Sarah was
completed by the binding of the Demon in
the wilderness,.the deed of the Angel;
which I concede; but I maintain that the
deliverance properly called, that is to say,
the ejection from Sarah’s bed-room, was
the direct effect of the virtue of the liver
of the fish.

77. A third principal proof of our con¬
clusion regarding the existence of those
animals, in other words, respecting the
corporeity of Incubi, is adduced by the
testimony of St Hieronymus, in his Life
of St Paul , the first Hermit. St Anthony,
says he, set on a journey to visit St Paul.
After travelling several days, he met a
Centaur, of whom he inquired the hermit’s
abode; whereupon the Centaur, growling
some uncouth and scarcely intelligible
answer, shew the way with his out-stretched
hand, and fled with the utmost speed into
a wood. The Holy Abbot kept on his way,
and, in a dale, met a little man, almost a
dwarf, with crooked hands, horned brow,
and his lower extremities ending with
goat’s feet. At the sight of him, St Anthony
stood still, and fearing the arts of the De¬
vil, comforted himself with a sign of the


162


Daemonialitas


nec inetuit homuncio ille, immo ad sanctum
senem actu humili appropinquans, palma-
rum fructus ad viaticum quasi pads obsides
illi offerebat. Turn B. Antonius quisnam
esset interrogans , hoc ab eo responsum ac-
cepit : « Mortalis ego sum, et unus ex ac-
» colis Eremi, quos vario errore delusa
» Gentilitas Faunos, Satyros, et Incubos
» vocans colit ; legatione fungor gregis
» mei; precamur, ut pro nobis communem
» Deum depreceris, quem pro salute mundi
» venisse cognovimus, etuniversam terram
» exiit sonus ejus. » Ad quce gaudens D.
Antonius de gloria Christ i, conversus ad
Alexandriam , et baculo terram percutiens,
mt : « Veh tibi, Civitas meretrix, quae pro
» diis animalia veneraris ! » Hcec D. Hie¬
ronymus, qui late prosequitur hoc factum,
ipsius virtutem longo comprobans sermone.


78. De hujus histories veritate dubitare
temerarium est, cum earn constanter refer at
SS. Ecclesice Doctorum maximus D. Hie¬
ronymus, de cujus auctoritate nullus Catho-
licus dubitabit. Addit fol. 21. 25 . Notandce
proinde veniunt illius circumstantics, quce


Demoniality 1 63

Cross. But, far from running away, or even
seeming frightened at it, the little fellow
respectfully approached the old man, and
tendered him, as a peace offering, dates
for his journey. The blessed St Anthony
having then inquired who he was : « 1 am
a mortal, »replied he,« and one of the inha¬
bitants of the Wilderness, whom Gentility ,
under its varied delusions, worships under
the names of Fauns , Satyrs and Incubi; I
am on a mission from my flock: we request
thee to pray for us unto the common God ,
whom we know to have come for the salva¬
tion of the world , and whose praises are
sounded all over the earth. » Rejoicing at
the glory of Christ, St Anthony, turning his
face towards Alexandria, and striking the
ground with his staff, cried out: » Woe be
unto thee , thou harlot City , who worshipest
animals as Gods ! » Such is the narrative
of St Hieronymus, who expatiates at length
on the fact, explaining its import in a long
discourse.

78. It were indeed rash to doubt the
truth of the above recital, constantly re¬
ferred to by the greatest of the Doctors of
the Holy Church, St Hieronymus, whose
authority no Catholic will ever deny. Let
us therefore investigate the circumstances


164 Daemonialitas

sententiam nostram evidentissime cotifir -
mant.

79. Primo notandum est, quod si ullus
Sanctorum artibus Dcemonis impetitusfuit;
si ullus diversas ejus artes nocendi calluit;
si ullus victorias , ac illustria de eodem tro
phea reportavit , is fuit D. Antonius , ut
constat ex ejus vita a D. Athanasio de -
scripta. Dum igitur D. Antonius homuncu-
lum ilium non tanquam Diabolum agnovit ,
sed animal intitulavit, dicens : Veh tibi,
Civitas meretrix, quae pro Diis animalia
veneraris! convincitur, quod ille nullomodo
fuit DiaboluSj seu purus spiritus de coelo
dejectus, ac damnatus, sedaliquodaliud ani¬
mal. Et conjirmatur , quia D. Antonius eru-
diens suos monachos , eosque animans ad
metuendas Dcemonis violentias , aiebat,prout
habetur in lectionibus Breviarii Romani in
festo S. Antonii Abb. /. 1., quce recitantur
in festo ipsius : « Mihi credite, Fratres,
» pertimescit Satanas piorum vigilias, ora-
» tiones, jejunia,voluntariampaupertatem,
» misericordiam, et humilitatem; maxime
» vero ardentem amorem in Christum
» Dominum, cujusunico SanctissimaeCru-
» cis signo debilitatus fugit. » Dum igitur
homunculus ille, contra quern D. Antonius
Crucis signo se munivit, ad ejus aspectum


Demoniality 1 65

thereof which most clearly confirm our
opinion.

79. Firstly, we must observe that if ever
a Saint was assailed by the arts of the De¬
mon, saw through his infernal devices, and
carried off victories and trophies from the
contest, that Saint was St Anthony, as is
shown by his life written by St Athana¬
sius. Now, since in that little man St An¬
thony did not recognize a devil but an
animal, saying : « Woe be unto thee, thou
harlot City, who worshipest animals as
Gods ! », it is clear that it was no devil or
pure spirit ejected from heaven and damned,
but some kind of animal. Still more : St
Anthony, .when instructing his friars and
cautioning them against the assaults of the
Demon, said to them, as related in the
Roman Breviary (Festival of St Anthony,
Abbot , b. I) : « Believe me, my brethren,
Satan dreads the vigils of pious men, their
prayers, fasts, voluntary poverty, compas¬
sion and humility; but, above all, he dreads
their burning love of our Lord Christ, at
the mere sign of whose most Holy Cross he
flies disabled. » As the little man, against
whom St Anthony guarded himself with a
sign of the Cross, neither took fright nor
fled, but approached the Saint confidently


166


Daemonialitas


nec pavit, nec fugit, immo conjidenter, hu-
militer que accessit ad eum dactalos illi
offerens, signurn est, ilium nullo modo Dia-
bolum fuisse.

80. Secundo notandum, quod homunculus
ille dixit: Mortalis et ego sum; ex quibus
verbis docemur , quod illeerat animal morti
obnoxium, et proinde, quod per generation
nem esse accepit: spiritus enim immateria-
lis immortalis est , quia simplex , et ideo
non accipit esse per generationem ex prce-
jacente materia, sed per creationem; unde
nec amittit esse per corruptionem, quce dici-
tur mors, sed per annihilationem tantum
potest desinere esse. Quod si ille se morta-
lem esse dixit, professus est se esse animal.


81. Tertio notandum, quod ait se cogno -
visse communem Deum in came Humana
fuisse passum. Ex his verbis convincitur
illud fuisse animal rationale : siquidem
bruta nihil agnoscunt , nisi sensibile etprce-
sens, unde ab ipsis Deus 'nullo modo co-
gnosci potest. Quod si homunculus ille ait ,
se cum aliis suis cognovisse Deum in came
Humana passum, hoc probat, quod aliquo
revelante habuit notitiam deDeo, sicut etiam


Demonialitjr 167

and humbly, offering him some dates, it is
a sure sign that he was no Devil.


80. Secondly, we must observe that the
little man said : « I also am a mortal »,
whence it follows that he was an animal
subject to death, and consequently called
into being through generation; for, an
immaterial spirit is immortal, because sim¬
ple, and consequently is not called into
being through generation from preexistent
matter, but through creation, and, conse¬
quently also, cannot lose it through the
corruption called death; its existence can
only come to an end through annihilation.
Therefore, when saying he was mortal, he
professed himself an animal.

81. Thirdly, we must observe that he
said he knew that the common God had
suffered in human flesh. Those words show
him to have been a rational animal, for
brutes know nothing but what is sensible
and present, and can therefore have no
knowledge of God. If that little man said
that he and his fellows were aware of God
having suffered in human flesh, it shows
that, by means of some revelation, he had


Daemonialitas


168

nos habemus de illofidem revelatam; pari-
ter que Deum carnem humanam assump -
sisse, et in ea passum : quce duo sunt arti-
culi nostrce Fidei principales, nempe Dei
unius , et trini existentia, et ipsius Incar -
natio, Passio, et Resurrectio; ex quibus
omnibus habetur, ut dicebam, illud fuisse
animal rationale capax divince cognitionis,
per revelationem, ut nos, et proinde pollens
anima rationali, et ex consequent immor-
tali.

82. Quarto notandum , quod or aver it no -
mine omnium gregis sui, cujus legatione
fungi seprofitebatur , D. Antonium , ut com -
munem Deum pro illis deprecaretur .

/ns deducitur , homunculus ille capax

erat beatitudinis, et damnationis, et quod non
erat in termino, sed in via ; ex hoc enim,
quod, ut supra probatum est, se prodidit
rationalem, et anima immortali consequent
ter donatum , consequens est, quod et bea¬
titudinis, et damnationis capax sit : hcec
enim propria passio est Creaturce rationa¬
le, ut constat ex natura angelica, et hu-
mana. Item deducitur , quod ipse erat in
via, et proinde capax meriti, et demeriti :
si enim fuisset in termino, fuisset vel bea-
tus, vel damnatus; neutrum autem potuit
esse, quia orationes D. Antonii, quibus se


Demoniality 169

acquired the notion of God, as we have
ourselves the revealed faith. That God as¬
sumed human flesh and suffered in it, is the
essence of the two principal articles of our
Faith : the existence of God one and three¬
fold, His Incarnation, Passion and Resur¬
rection. All that shows, as I said, that it
was a rational animal, capable of the know¬
ledge of God through revelation, like our¬
selves, and endowed with a rational, and
consequently, immortal soul.

82. Fourthly, we must observe that, in
the name of his whole flock whose dele¬
gate he professed to be, he besought St An¬
thony to pray for them to the common
God. Wherefrom I infer that that little man
was capable of beatitude and damnation,
and that he was not in termino but in via ;
for, from his being, as has been shown
above, rational and consequently endowed
with an immortal soul, it flows that he was
capable of beatitude and damnation, the
proper share of every rational Creature,
Angel or man. I likewise infer that he was
on the way, in via , that is, capable of
merit and demerit; for, if he had been at
the goal, in termino , he would have been
either blessed or damned. Now, he could be
neither the one nor the other; for, St An-

i5


Daemonialitas


170

commendabat, ipsi nullo modo prodesse
potuissent, si fuisset finaliter damnatus ; et
si beatus fuisset , illis non eguisset. Quod
ipsi se commendavit, signum est eas sibi
prodesse potuisse, et proinde ipsum fuisse
in statu vice, et meriti .


83 . Quinto notandum, quod homunculus
ille professus est, se esse legatum aliorum
suce speciei , dum dixit legatione fungor
gregis mei, ex quibus verbis plura dedu-
cuntur. Unum est, quod homunculus ille
non solus erat, unde potuisset credi mon¬
strum raro conlingens, sed quod plures
erant ejusdem speciei ; turn quiasimul con -
gregati gregem faciebant; turn quia no¬
mine omnium veniebat : quod esse non pos¬
set si multorum voluntates in ilium non
convenissent. Aliud est, quod isti proften-
tur vitam socialem : ex quo nomine mul¬
torum unus ex ipsis missus est . Aliud est ,
quod quamvis dicantur habitare in Eremo ,
non tamen in eo fixa est eorum permanen-
tia : siquidem cum D. Antonius in ilia
eremo alias non fuisset (distabat enim ilia
per multas dietas ab eremo D. Antonii ),
scire non potuerunt quisnam ille esset cu-
jusve sanctitatis; necessarium igitur fuit,


Demoniality 171

thony’s prayers, to which he commended
himself, could have been of no assistance
to him, if finally damned, and, if blessed,
he stood in no need of them. Since he
commended himself to those prayers, it
shows they could be of avail to him, and,
consequently, that he was on the way to
salvation, in statu vice et meriti .

83 . Fifthly, we must observe that the
little man professed to be delegated by
others of his kind, when saying: « 1 am
on a mission from my flock », words from
which many inferences may be deduced.
One is, that the little man was not alone
of his kind, an exceptional and solitary
monster, but that there were many of the
same species, since congregating they made
up a flock, and that he came in the name of
all; which could not have been, had not the
will of many centred in him. Another is,
that those animals lead a social life, since
one of them was sent in the name of many.
Another again is, that, although living
in the Wilderness, it is not assigned to
them as a permanent abode; for St An¬
thony having never previously been in that
desert, which was far distant from his her¬
mitage, they could not have known who he
was nor what his degree of sanctity; it was


IJ2


Daemonialitas


quod alibi eum cognoverint , et ex conse-
quenti extra desertum ilium vagaverint .


84. Ultimo notandum, quod homunculus
ille ait esse ex iis, quos caeco errore de-
lusa Gentilitas Faunos, Satyros et Incubos
appellant; et ex his verbis convincitur no -
strum intentum principale, Incubos nempe
esse animalia rationalia beatitatis, et dam¬
nations capacia.

85 . Talium homuncionum frequens est
apparitio in metallorum fodinis, ut scribit
Gregorius Agricola, lib . De Animal, sub-
terran., prope finem. Isti nempe coram
fossoribuS' miner arum comparent induti
habitu, qualem habent fossores ipsi, et jo-
cantur inter se f tripudiantque , ac rident et
cachinnantur , parvosque lapides joco mit-
tunt in metallarios, et tunc signum est , ait
Auctor prcedictus, optimi proventus, ac in¬
ventions alicujus rami t aut trunci princi¬
palis arboris mineralis.

86. Tales homunculos subterraneos ne -
gat Petrus Thyrceus Novesianus , lib . De
Terrificatio. Noctur., c. 2., per totum,
nixus argumentis sane puerilibus, quce


Demoniality

therefore necessary that they should have
become acquainted with him elsewhere,
and, consequently, that they should have
travelled beyond that wilderness.

84. Lastly, we must observe that the
little man said he was one of those whom
the Gentiles, blinded by error , call Fauns,
Satyrs and Incubi: and by these words is
shown the truth of our principal proposi¬
tion : that Incubi are rational animals,
capable of beatitude and damnation.

85 . The apparition of such little men is
of frequent occurrence in metallic mines,
as is written by Gregorius Agricola in his
book De Animal, subterran . They appear
to the miners, clothed like themselves, play
and caper together, laugh and titter, and
throw little stones at them for the sake
of amusement : a sign, says the above-nam¬
ed Author, of] excellent success, and of
the finding of some branch or body of a
mineral tree.


86. Peter Thyraeus, of Neuss, in his book
De Terrification. nocturn ., denies the exist¬
ence of such little men, and supports his
denial upon the following truly puerile ar-


174


Daemonialitas


sunt hcec : si darentur hujusmodi homun-
ciones, ubinam degunt, et qucenam, et ubi
habent sua dorniciiia , qua ratione genus
suum conservant, si per generationem, aut
quomodo? si oriantur, et intereant,
cibo vitam suam sustentent; si beatitudi -
ms, ef damnationis capaces sint , e/ quibus
mediis propriam salutem consequantur?
Hcec sunt argument a Thyrcei, quibus per-
motus negat talem existentiam.

87. Sed viri parum cordati est negare
id, quod graves Auctores, Jideque digni
scribunt, quodque quotidiana constat expe-
rientia. Argumenta Thyrcei nec minimum
cogunt, ac ea solvimus supra a w°45. et
seq. Remanet solum satisfacere qucestioni
ubinam locorum habitent hujusmodi ho¬
munculi , seu Incubi? Ad quod dico, quod
ut supra dedimus n° 71. ex Guaccio , isto -
rum alii sunt terrei, alii aquei , alii aerei,
alii ignei , quorum nentpe corpora, aut
constant ex talium elementorum subtiliori
parte y sive licet ex pluribus constent ele-
mentis , prcevalet tamen in iis, aut aqua ,
aut aer pro ipsorum natura. Mansiones
igitur, et dorniciiia eorum erunt in ele -
mento illo cujus natura in eorum corpori-
bus prcevalet : ignei enim nisi violenter, et
forte nullomodo in aquis aut locis palustri-


Demoniality 175

guments : given such little men, says he,
where do they live, how and where do they
dwell? How do they keep up their kind,
through generation or otherwise?Are they
born, do they die, with what food do they
sustain themselves? Are they capable of
beatitude and damnation, and by what
means do they procure their salvation ?
Such are the arguments upon which Thy-
raeus relies for denying that existence.

87. But it really shows little judgment
in a man, to deny that which has been
written by grave and credible Authors, and
confirmed by every day experience. Thy-
raeus’s arguments are worthless and have
been already refuted, N rs 45 and following.
The only question which remains to be
answered is this : where do those little
men, or Incubi, dwell? To that I reply: as
has been shown above (N r 71), according
to Guaccius, some are earthly, some aque¬
ous, some aerial, some igneous, that is to
say, that their bodies are made of the most
subtle part of one of the elements, or, if of
the combination of many elements, that
yet there is one which predominates, either
water or air, according to their nature.
Their dwellings will consequently be found
in that element which is prevalent in their


Daemonialitas


176

bus morabuntur, cum hcec sint sibi contra¬
riety nec aquei ad superiorem cetheris par¬
tem ascendere poterunt ob sibi repugnan -
tem regionis illius subtilitatem, quod etiam
videmus accidere hominibus, qui ad quo -
rumdam Alpium summa juga pervenire
nequeunt pree summa aeris subtilitate, quee
homines crassiori aeri assuetos nutrire
nequit.


88. Pluribus sanctorum Patrum auctori-
tatibus, quas congerit Molina in p. p. D.
Thorn., q. 5 o., ar. 1. circa med. y probare
possemus Dcetnonum corporeitatem; quee
tamen stante determinatione Concilii Late -
ranensis de incorporeitate Angelorum, ut
dictum fuit supra n° 37., exponi debent
de Dcemonibus istis Incubis, ac viatoribus
adhuc, non autem de Damnatis. Tamen ne
nimis longus sim , solius D. Augustini ,
summi Ecclesice Doctoris , auctoritates
damus, quibus evidenter convincitur ilium
fuisse in sententia, quam nos docemus.


89. D . Augustinus igitur, lib. 2. super
Genesim ad litteram c . 17. de Daemoni-


Demoniality lyy

bodies : igneous Incubi, for instance, will
only stay forcibly, may be will not stay at
all, in water or marshes, which are adverse
to them; and aqueous Incubi will not be
able to rise into the upper part of ether,
the subtlety of which region is repugnant
to them. We see the like happen to men
who, accustomed to thicker air, cannot'
reach certain lofty ridges of the Alps where
the air is too subtle for their lungs.

88. Many testimonies of Holy Fathers,
gathered by Molina, in his Commentary of
St Thomas , would go to prove the corpor¬
eity of Demons; but, taking into account
the above-quoted decision of the Council
of Lateran (N r 37), concerning the incorpor¬
eity of Angels, we must understand that
the Holy Fathers had in view those Incubi
Demons which are still on the way to sal¬
vation, and not those that are damned.
However, to make matters short, we merely
give the authority of St Austin, that emi¬
nent Doctor of the Church, and it will be
clearly seen how thoroughly his doctrine
harmonizes with ours.


89. St Austin, then, in his Commentary
on Genesis , book 2, ch. 17, writes as fol-


Daemonialitas


178

bus, sic habet: <c Quaedam vera nosse, par-
tim quia subtiliore scnsus acumine, partim
quia subtilioribus corporibus vigent, » et
lib . 3 . c. 1., « etsi Dmmones aerea sunt
animalia, quoniam corporum aereorum
natura vigent. » Et Epistola ii 5 . ad He-
bridium affirmat, eos esse « animantia
aerea, seu aetherea acerrimi sensus. » Et
de Civit. Dei lib. 11. c. 23 ., affirmat
« Daemonem pessimum habere corpus
aereum.» Et lib . 21. c. 10. scripsit : « Sunt
sua quasdam etiam Daemonibus corpora,
sicut doctis hominibus visum est, ex isto
aere crasso et humido. » Et lib. 17. c. 23 .
ait « se non audere definire, an Angeli cor-
pore aereo, ita corporati possint etiam
hanc pati libidinem, ut quomodo possint,
sentientibqs foeminis misceantur. » Et in
Enarrat in Psal. 85 . ait « corpora beato-
rum futura post resurrectionem, qualia
sunt corpora Angelorum; « et in Enarrat.
in Psal . 45 .ait « corpus Angelicum inferius
esse anima. » Et lib. De Divinit. Dtemo-
num, passim per totum, maxime c . 23 .,
docet « Dcerhones subtilia habere corpora.®


90. Potest etiam sententia nostra auc-


Demoniality 179

lows concerning Demons : « They have the
knowledge of some truths, partly through
the more subtle acumen of their senses,
partly through the greater subtilty of their
bodies », and, book 3 , ch. 1 : « Demons
are aerial animals, because they partake of
the nature of aerial bodies . » In his Epistle
ii 5 to Hebridius, he affirms that they are
« aerial or ethereal animals, endowed with
very sharp senses. » In the City of God,
book 11, ch. 1 3 , he says that « the worst
Demon has an aerial body ». Book 21, ch.
10, he writes : « The bodies of certain De¬
mons, as has been believed by some learned
men, are even made of the thick and damp
air which we breathe. » Book i 5 , ch. 23 :
« He dares not define whether Angels , with
an aerial body, could feel the lust which
would incite them to communicate with
women. » In his commentary on Psalm 85 ,
he says that « the bodies of the blessed will,
after resurrection, be like unto the bodies
of Angels; » Psalm 14, he observes that
« the body of Angels is inferior to the
soul . » And, in his book De Divinit. Dee -
monum , he every-where, and especially
.ch. 23 , teaches that « Demons have subtle
bodies ».

90. Our doctrine can also be confirmed


Daemonialitas


180

toritatibus Sacrce Scriptures comprobari ,
quee licet ab Expositoribus aliter declaren-
iur , non incongrue tamen ad nostrum in-
tentum possunt aptari. Prima est Psalmi
77., v. 24. et 25 ., ubi habetur : panem
Angelorum manducavit homo, panem coeli
dedit eis. Hie loquitur David de Manna ,
qua cibatus fuit Populus Israel toto tem¬
pore quo peregrinus fuit in deserto. Quee-
rendum ergo venit, quo sensu Manna did
possit panis Angelorum. Scio quidem pie-
rosque Doctores exponere hunc passum in
sensu mystico, aientes in Manna Jigura -
tam esse Sac ram Eucharistiam, quee voca -
tur panis Angelorum, quia Angeli fruun-
tur visione Dei , qui per concomitantiam
in Eucharistia reperitur.


91. Sed hcec expositio aptissima est qui¬
dem, etquam amplectitur Ecclesia in offi¬
cio Sanctissimi Corporis Christi, sed in
sensu spirituali est . Ego autem queero sen-
sum litteralem : neque enim in illo Psal-
mo David loquitur prophetice de futuris,
sicut facit in aliis locis , ut proinde facile
non sit sensum litteralem habere; sed lo¬
quitur historice de preeteritis . llle enim
Psalmus, ut patet legenti, est pur a anace -
phalestis, seu compendium omnium benefi-


Demoniality 181

by the testimony of the Holy Scriptures,
which, however diversely construed by
commentators, are yet capable of adapta¬
tion to our proposition. First, Psalm 77, v.
24 and 25 , it is said : « The Lord had given
them of the bread of heaven; man did eat
angels’ food. » David here alludes to Man¬
na, which fed the People of Israel during
the whole time that they wandered in the
wilderness. It will be asked in what sense
it can be said of Manna that it is the Bread
of Angels. I am aware that most Doctors
construe this passage in a mystical sense,
saying that Manna figures the Holy Eu¬
charist, which is styled the bread of Angels,
because Angels enjoy the sight of God who,
by concomitance, is found in the Eucha¬
rist.

91. A most proper construction assur¬
edly, and which is adopted by the Church
in the office of the Most Holy Body of
Jesus-Christ; but it is in a spiritual sense.
Now, what I want, is the literal sense; for,
in that Psalm, David does not speak, as a
prophet, of things to be, as he does in
other places where a literal sense is not
easily to be gathered; he speaks here as a
historian, of things gone by. That Psalm,
as is evident to whoever reads it, is a pure

16


i 82


Dasmonialitas


riorum, quce contulit Deus Populo Hebrceo
ab egressu ipsins de ASgypto, usque ad
tempus Davidis, et in eo versu loquitur de
Manna Deserti , ut proinde qu&ratur quo-
modo y et quo sensu Manna yocetur Panis
Angelorum.


92. Scio alios, Lyran., EuthimBel-
larm.j Titelman., Genebrard., in Psal. 77.
v . 24. et 2 5 ., interpretari Panem Angelo¬
rum Panem ab Angelis paratum , seu An¬
gelorum ministerio a Coelo demissum;
Hugonem autem Cardinalem Panem An¬
gelorum exponere : quia ille cibus hoc effi-
ciebat iit Judceis , quod in Angelis efjicit
cibus illorum, pro parte : Angeli enim non
incurrunt 'infirmitatem . Voluerunt enim
expositores Hebrcei, ut etiam asseverat
Josephus, quod Judcei in Deserto vescentes
manna, nec senescerent, nec cegrotarent,
nec lassarentur; proinde ilia esset tan-
quam panis, quo vescuntur Angeli , qui nec
seniOj nec cegritudine, nec lassitudine un-
quam laborant.

g3. 1 st as quidem expositiones recipere
cequum est, utpote tantorum Doctorum
aucthoritate suffultas. Facessit tamen dif-
Jicultatem , quod ministerio Angelorum


Demoniality 1 83

anacephalaeosis, or summing up of all the
benefits conferred by God on the Hebrew
People from the exodus from Egypt to the
days of David, and the Manna of the Wild¬
erness is spoken of in it; how, and in
what sense is it styled the Bread of Angels?
that is the question.

92. I am aware that others look upon
the Bread of Angels as bread prepared by
Angels, or sent down from Heaven by the
ministry of Angels. But Cardinal Hugo
explains that qualification by saying that
that food partly produced the same effect
upon the Jews, which the food of Angels
produces upon the latter. Angels, in fact,
are not liable to any infirmity; on the
other hand Hebrew commentators, and Jo¬
sephus himself, assert that whilst in the
Wilderness, living upon Manna, the Jews'
neither grew old, nor sickened, nor tired;
so that Manna was like unto the bread that
Angels feed upon, who know neither old
age, nor sickness, nor fatigue.


93. These interpretations should indeed
be received with the respect due to the au¬
thority of such eminent Doctors. There is
however one difficulty in this : that, by the


Daemonialitas


184

Hebrceis non minus par at a fue re column a
nubiSy et ignis, coturnices, et aqua de petra,
quam manna; nec tamen ista dicta fuere
columna , aqua, aut pot us Angelorum. Cur
ergo potius vocari deberet manna, quia
parata ministerio Angelorum, Panis An¬
gelorum, quam Potus Angelorum aqua
eorumdem ministerio saxo educta? Insu-
per in sacra Scriptura panis dum dicitur
panis alicujus, dicitur panis ejus qui illo
vescitur, non ejus qui ilium parat, aut fa¬
bricate et de hoc infinita habemus exempla
in sacra Scriptura : ut Exod. c. 2 3 . v. 2 5 .
Benedicam panibus tuis, et aquis; lib. 2.
Reg. c. 12. v. 3 . De pane illius comedens;
Tob. c. 4, v. 17. Panem tuum cum ege-
nis comede; et v. 18. Panem tuum super
sepulturam Justi constitue; Ecclesiast.
c . 11. v. 1. Mitte panem tuum super tran-
seuntes aquas; Isai. c. 58 . v. 7. Frange
esurient! panem tuum; Jerem. c. 11. v. 19.
Mittamus lignum in panem ejus; Maith.
c. 1 5 . v. 26. Nonest bonum sumere pa¬
nem filiorum; Luc. c. it. v. 3 . Panem
nostrum quotidianum. Ex quibus locis
patenter habetur, quod panis dicitur ejus
qui eo vescitur, non vero, qui ipsum confi-
cit , affert, aut parat. Commode igitur in
loco citato Psalnii accipi potest Panis An¬
gelorum, cibus quo vescuntur Angeli non


Demoniality 18 5

ministry of Angels, the pillars of the cloud
and fire, the quails, and the water from the
rock were provided for the Hebrews, no
less than the Manna; and yet they were
not styled the pillar, the water or the bev.-
erage of Angels. Why therefore should
Manna be called Bread of Angels , because
provided by their ministry, when the qual¬
ification Beverage of Angels is not given
to the water drawn from the rock likewise
by their ministry? Besides, in Holy Scrip¬
ture, when it is said of bread that it is the
bread of somebody, it is always the bread
of him who feeds on it, not of him who pro¬
vides or makes it. Of this there are num¬
berless instances: thus. Exodus, ch. 23 ,
v. 25 : « That I may bless thy bread and
thy water; » Kings, book 2, ch. 12, v. 3 :
« Eating of his bread; » Tobit , ch. 4, v.
17 : « Give of thy bread to the hungry, »
and v. 18 : « Pour out thy bread on the
burial of the Just; » Ecclesiasticus, ch. 11,
v. 1 : « Scatter thy bread over the flowing
waters; » Isaiah, ch. 58 , v. 7 : « Deal
thy bread to the hungry ;» Jeremiah , ch. 11,
v. 19 : « Let us put wood into his bread; »
Matthew, ch. i. 5 , v. 26 : << It is not meet to
take the children’s bread ; » Luke, ch. 11,
v. 3 : « Our daily bread . » All those pas¬
sages clearly show that, in Scripture, the


186


Daemonialitas


quidem incorporei (isti enim materiali cibo
non egent ), sed corporei, ista nempe ratio -
nalia animalia, de quibus hucusque disse -
ruimus, degentia in aere, et quce ratione
tenuitatis suorum corporum, ac rationalis
naturee, quam maxime ad Angelos imma-
teriales accedunt, ut proinde nuncupentur.


94. Ducor, quia cum animalia sint, et
ideo generabilia et corruptibilia, egent
cibo, ut restauretur substantia corporea ,
quce per effluvia deperditur; vita enim sen-
tientis non consistit nisi in motu partium
corporearum quce Jluiint, ac rejluunt, ac -
quiruntur, ac deperduntur, ac iterum re -
parantur ; quce reparatio fit per substan -
tias spirituosas, materiales tamen, attra-
ctas a vivente, turn per aeris inspirationem,
turn par fermentationem cibi , per quam
substantia illius spiritualiqatur , ut ratio -
natur doctissimus Ettmullerus, Instit. Me¬
dic. Physiolog., c. 2.


Demoniality 187

bread of somebody is the bread of him who
feeds upon it, not of him who makes,
brings or provides it. In the passage of the
Psalm we have quoted, Bread of Angels
may therefore easily be taken to mean the
food of Angels, not incorporeal indeed,
since these require no material food, but
corporeal, that i$ to say of those rational
animals we have discoursed of, who live
in the air, and, from the subtlety of their
bodies and their rationality, approximate
so closely to immaterial Angels as to fall
under the same denomination.

94. I deduce that, being animals, conse¬
quently reproducible through generation
and liable to corruption, they require food
for the restoration of their corporeal sub¬
stance wasted by effluvia : for the life of
every sensible being consists in nothing
else but the motion of the corporeal ele¬
ments which flow and ebb, are acquired,
lost and recruited by means of substances
spirituous, yet material, assimilated by the
living thing, either through the inhalation
of air, or by the fermentation of food
which spiritualizes its substance, as shown
by the most learned Ettmuller ( Instit .
Medic. Physiology ch. 2).


188


Daemonialitas


95. Quia autem eorum corpus tenue est,
tenui pariter , et subtili eget alimento. Hinc
est quod sicut odoribus aliisque substantiis
vaporosis, ac volatilibus sucu naturce con -
trariis Iceduntur ac fugantur , ut constat
ex historiis recitatis supra , n° 71.2/72.,
ita paribus rebus sibi convenientibus de-
lectantur , et aluntur. Porro « manna non
est aliua, quam halitus aquae, terraeque,
solis calore exacte attenuatus et coctus, a
frigore secutae noctis in unum coactus,
densatusque, »> ut scribit Cornelius; manna
dico , quam demissam de ccelo comederunt
Hebrcei, quce toto ccelo differt a manna
nostrate , quce in medicinis adhibetur ; 7 iam
hcec, ut scribit Ettmullerus Schroder , Di-
lucid. Physiolog., c. 1. de Manna f foL m.
1 Sq., & nihil aliud est, quam succus qua-
rumdam arborum tenuis, vel earum trans-
sudatio, quae nocturno tempore permixta
cum rore, matutino tempore superventu
caloris solis' coagulatur, et inspissatur. »
Manna autem Hebrceorum diver sis orta
principiii calore solis non coagulabatur,
sed vice versa liquejiebat, ut patet ex Seri -
ptura , Exod. c. 16. v. 22. Manna ergo
Hebrceorum utpote constans ex halitibus
tenuibus terrev et aquee, pro/ecto tenuissi-
mce erat substantial , utpote, quce a sole
solvebatur, et disparebat; optime ergo


Demoniality 189

95. But, their body being subtile, equally
subtile and delicate must be its food. And,
just as perfumes and other vaporous and
volatile substances, when adverse to their
nature, offend and put them to flight, as
testified by what we related above (N rs 71
and 72), in the like manner, when agree¬
able, they delight in and feed upon them.
Now, as is written by Cornelius, « Manna
is nothing but an emanation of water and
earth , refined and baked by the heat of the
sun , and then coagulated and condensed by
the cold of thefollowing night ; » of course,
I am speaking of the Manna sent down
from Heaven for the nourishment of the
Hebrews, and which differs all in all from
nostrate or medicinal manna : the latter,
in fact, according to Ettmuller ( Dilucid .
Physiol ., ch. 1), « is merely the juice or
transudation of certain trees which , during
the night , gets mixed up with dew , and ,
the next morning , coagulates and thickens
in the heat of the sun. » The manna of the
Hebrews, on the contrary, derived from
other principles, far from coagulating,
liquefied in the heat of the sun, as is
shown by Scripture, Exodus , ch. 16, v. 22.
The manna of the Hebrews was therefore
undoubtedly of a most subtile substance,
consisting as it did of emanations of earth


Daemonialitas


190

potuit esse talium animalium cibus, ita ut
diceretur a David Panis Angelorum.


96. Alia auctoritas habetur in Evange -
lio Joannis, in quo, Johannes, c. 10. v. 16.,
ita dicitur : Alias oves habeo, quae non
sunt ex hoc ovili, et illas oportet me ad-
ducere, et vocem meam audient, et fiet
unum ovile, et unus Pastor. Si quceramus
qucenam sint oves, quce non sunt ex hoc
ovili, et qualenam sit ovile de quo loquitur
Christus Dominus , respondent communiter
Expositores unum ovile Christi esse Eccle -
Siam, ad'quam perducendi erant per prce-
dicationem Evangelii Gentiles , qui erant
oves alterius ovilis, ab ovili Hebrceorum :
opinantur enim Synagogam esse Christi
ovile , quia dicebat David, Psal. 94. v . 9 ;
Nos populus ejus et oves pascuae ejus; et
quia Messias promissus fuerat Abraham
et David oritur us ex eorum semine, et a
populo Hebrceo expectatus, et a Prophetis
qui Hebrcei erant vaticinatus, et ejus ad -
ventus, conversatio, passio, mors et re-
surrectio in sacrijiciis, cultu, et ceremo -
niis Hebrceorum legis erant prcejigurata.


bemoniality 191

and water, and being dissolved by the sun
and made to disappear : consequently, it
may very well have been the food of the
animals we are speaking of, and thus have
been truly called by David Bread of An-
gels.

96. We have another authority in the
Gospel according to St John, ch. 10, v. 16,
where it is said : « And other sheep 1 have,
which are not of this fold: them also I must
bring, and they shall hear my voice, and
there shall be one fold and one shepherd. »
If we inquire what are those sheep which
are not of that fold, and what the fold of
which the Lord Christ speaketh, we are
answered by all Commentators that the
only fold of Christ is the Church to which
the preaching of the Gospel was to bring
the Gentiles, sheep of another fold than
that of the Hebrews. They are, in fact, of
opinion that the fold of Christ was the
Synagogue, because David had said, Psalm
95, v. 7: « We are the people of his pasture,
and the sheep of his hand », and also
because Abraham and David had been
promised that the Messiah should be born
of their race, because he was expected by
the Hebrew people , foretold by the Pro*
phets who were Hebrews, and that his


J 9 2


Dcemonialitas


97. Scd salva semper Sanctorum Pa-
trum, ac aliorum Doctorum reverentia,
non videtur talis expositio ad plenum sa-
tisfacere. Habemus enim quod de fide est
a principio mundi Ecclesiam Fidelium ex-
titisse unam, usque ad jinem sceculi dura-
tur am. Cujus Ecclesice caput est mediator
Dei et hominum Christus Jesus, cujus con¬
templation creata sunt universa, et omnia
per ipsum facta. Fides enim unius Dei
Trini [quamvis non ita explicite), et Verbi
Incarnaiio revelata fuit primo homini, et
ab ipso edocti ejus filii, et ab iis descenden -
tes. Hinc est quod quamvis pierique homines
ad idolatriam deflexerint, ac veram fidem
deseruerint, multi tamen veram fidem a
patribus sibi traditam retinuerunt, et le¬
gem natitrce servantes in vera Ecclesia
Fidelium permanserunt, ut observat Car-
dinalis Toletusin Job, c. 10. v. 16., et ap -
parct in Job, qui inter Gentiles Idolatras
sanctus fuit. Qitamvis autem Deus populo
Hcbrceo speciales favores contulerit, pecu-
liaremque legem, ac ceremonias illi prcv-
scripserit, ac a Gentilibus segregaverit , non


Demoniality 193

advent, his acts, his passion, death and
resurrection were prefigured in the sacri¬
fices, worship and ceremonials of the
Hebrew law.

97. But, saving always the reverence due
to the Holy Fathers and other Doctors,
that explanation does not seem quite satis¬
factory. For it is an article of belief that
the Church of the Faithful has be,en the
only one in existence from the beginning
of the world, and will thus endure to the
end of time. The head of that Church is
Jesus-Christ, the mediator between God and
men, by whose contemplation all things
were made and created. Indeed, the faith in
the divine Trinity, though less explicitly,
and the Incarnation of the Word were re¬
vealed to the first man, and by him taught
his children, who, in their turn, taught
them their descendants. And thus, although
most men had strayed into idolatry and
deserted the true faith, many kept the faith
they had received from their fathers, and
observing the law of nature, stayed in the
true Church of the Faithful, as is noticed
by Cardinal Tolet in reference to Job, who
was a saint among idolatrous Gentiles. And,
although God had conferred especial fa¬
vours upon the Hebrew people, prescribed


17


Daemonialitas


*94

tamen ad earn legem Gentes tenebantur,
necfideles Hebrcei aliam Ecclesiam consti-
tuebant ab Ecclesia Gentilium , qui Jidem
unius Dei et Messice venturi profitebantur .


98. Hinc est, quod etiam ex Gentilibus
fuere, ..qui Christi adventum, et alia Chri-
stiance jidei dogmata prophetarunt , ut pa-
tet de Balaam, Mercurio Trismegisto, Hy-
daspe, ac Sibyllis, de quibus loquitur Lac -
tantius , lib . 1. c. 6., ut scribit Cardinalis
Baronius in Apparatu Annal. n° 18. Et
quod Messias erat a Gentilibus expectatus
habet Isaias in pluribus locis , et luculen-
tum testimonium de hoc est prophetia Pa¬
triarchce Jacob de Messia, quce sic ait ,
Gen. c . 49. v. 10 : Non auferetur sceptrum
de Juda, et dux de femore ejus, donee ve-
niat qui mittendus est, et ipse erit expe-
ctatio Gentium. Item Prophetia Aggaei,
c. 2. v . 8 : Movebo omnes Gentes, et veniet
desideratus cunctis gentibus, quern locum
explicans Cornelius a Lap . in Aggas. c. 2.
v . 8. § Denique gentes, ait : « Gentes ante
Christum credentes in Deum lege naturae,
aeque ac Judaei expectabant ac desidera-
bant Christum. » Par iter Christus ita se


Demoniality 195

for them peculiar laws and ceremonials,
and separated them from the Gentiles, yet
those laws were not obligatory on the
Gentiles, and the faithful Hebrews did not
constitute a Church different from that of
the Gentiles who professed their faith in
one God and the coming of the Messiah.

98. And thus it came to pass that even
among the Gentiles there were some who
prophesied the advent of Christ and the
other dogmas of the Christian faith, to wit
Balaam , Mercurius Trismegistus , Hy-
daspes , and the Sibyls mentioned by Lac-
tantius, book 1, ch. 6, as written by
Baronius, Apparat. AnnaL , n° 18. That
the Messiah was expected by the Gentiles
is shown by many passages of Isaiah, and
plainly testified by the prophecy of Jacob,
the Patriarch, thus worded, Genesis, ch.
49, v. 10 : <r The sceptre shall not depart
from Judah , nor a law-giver from between
his feet , until Shiloh [he who is to be sent)
come , and unto him shall the gathering of
the people be . » — Likewise in the pro¬
phecy of Haggai, ch. 2, v. 8 : « I will
shake all * Nations , and the desire of all
Nations shall come »; which passage is
thus commented by Cornelius a Lapide :
« The Gentiles before the advent of Christ ,


Daemonialitas


196

prodidit , et manifestavit Gentibus, sicut
Judcvis : si enim in ipsius nativitate per
Angelum ejus notitia data fuit Pastoribus,
per stellam miraculosam ad sui adoratio -
nem vocavit Magos , qui cum essent Genti¬
les fuerunt primitive Gentium in Christo
agnoscendo y et adorando , ut ait 5 . Ful-
gent ins , Sermon. 6. de Epiph., s/cwf Pas-
tores fuerunt primitice Judceorum. Itidem
manifestatio adventus Christi per preedica -
tionem (non quidem Apostolorum) prius
facta est Gentilibus, quam Judceis ; siqui-
dem ut scribit Ven. Mater Soror Maria de
Agreda, in Vita J. C. et B. M. V., p. 1. /. 4. c.
26. n. 664 :« Quando B. M. Virgo cum S. Jo¬
seph portavit Puerum Jesum'injEgyptum,
fugiendo Herodis persecutionem, mansit
ibi per septennium : quo tempore ipsa
Beatissima Virgo prmdicavit iEgyptiis veri
Dei fidem, et Filii Dei in carne humana
adventum. » Ulterius in Christi nativitate
multa fuere prodigia non solum in Judcea ,
sed in AZgypto, ubi corruerunt idola y ac
oracula conticuere; Romce, ubi fons olei
scaturiit; visus globus aurei colons de
ccelo in terram descendere ; apparuere tres
soles; ac contra naturam circuius variega-
tus ad modum iridis solis discum circum-
scripsit; in Grceciag ubi oraculum Delphi-
cum obmutuit , ct interrogate Apollo ab


Demoniality 197

who believed in God and observed the law
of nature , expected and desired Christ
equally with the Jews. » Christ himself
disclosed and manifested himself to the
Gentiles as well as to the Jews; for, at the
same time as the Angel apprized the shep¬
herds of his nativity, by means of the
miraculous star he called the Magi to
worship him, who, being Gentiles, were
the first among the Nations, as the shep¬
herds among the Jews, to acknowledge
and worship Christ ( Vide St Fulgentius,
Sermon 6, upon Epiphany ). In like manner,
the advent of Christ was made known by
preaching (I am not speaking of the
Apostles) to the Gentiles before it was to
the Jews. As is written by the Venerable
Mother, Sister Maria of Agreda, in her
Life of Jesus-Christ and the Blessed Virgin
Mary : « When the Blessed Virgin Mary,
fleeing with St Joseph , from the persecu¬
tion of Herod , carried the Infant Jesus into
Egypt , she tarried there seven years;
and, during that time, the Blessed Virgin
herself preached to the Egyptians the faith
of the true God and the advent of the Son
of God in human flesh. » Besides, the nativ¬
ity of Christ was attended by numerous
prodigies, not only in Judaea, but also in
Egypt, where the idols tumbled and the

* 7 -


Daemonialitas


198

Augusto ipsi sacrificante in proprio pala-
tio, ubi eidem aram extruxerat , de causa
silentii sui, respondit , ut referunt Nice -
phorus, 1 . 1 c. 17., Suidas,verbo Augustus,
et Cedrenus, Compend. Histor.:

Me puer Hebrseus, Divos Deus ipse gubernans,
Cedere sede jubet, tristemque redire sub orcum;
Aris ergo dehinc tacitis abscedito nostris.

Et multa alia acciderunt prodigia, quibus
prcenunciabatur Gentilibus Filii Dei ad-
ventus t quce ex variis Aucthoribus recitat
Baronins, Apparat. Annal. Eccles. n° 24.
et seq. 7 et Cornelius in Aggas. c. *2. v. 8.


99. Ex istis patet 7 quod etiam Gentiles
pertinebant ad ovile Christi idem , ad quod
spectabant Judcei, puta ad Ecclesiam earn -
dem Jidelem; igitur non potest recte did ,
quod ilia verba Christi : Alias oves habeo,
quge non sunt ex hoc ovili, accipienda sint
de Gentilibus , qui communem cum He -


Demoniality 199

oracles were hushed; in Rome, where a
spring of oil gushed out, a gold-coloured
globe was seen to descend from the skies
on earth, three suns appeared, and an
extraordinary ring, variegated like a rain¬
bow, encircled the disc of the sun; in Greece,
where the oracle of Delphi was struck
dumb, and Apollo, asked the reason of
his silence by Augustus, who was offering
up a sacrifice in his own palace where he
had raised an altar to him, answered :

« A Hebrew child , who sways the Gods, and himself a
God,

» Bids me quit my seat and return to the infernal
regions ;

» Depart therefore from our altars , henceforward
mute. »

There were many more prodigies warning
the Gentiles of the advent of the Son of
God : they have been collected from various
Authors, by Baronius, and are to be found
in his Appar at l Annal. Eccles and Corne¬
lius, Commentary upon Haggai .

99. From all this it is clear that the Gen¬
tiles also belonged, like the Jews, to the
fold of Christ, that is, to the same Church
of the Faithful; it cannot therefore be
correctly said that the words of Christ :
« Other sheep I have , which are not of this
fold », are applicable to the Gentiles, who


200


Drcmonialitas


brevis habuerunt de Deo jidem , de Messia
spem 7 prophetiam, expectationem , et signa,
et prcvdicationem .

ioo. Dico igitur quod nomine aliarum
ovium commode possunt intelligi Creatu -
rev istev rationales , sire animalia , de

hucusque disseruimus. Cum enim> ut
diximus y capaces sint beatitudinis, e/ dam-
nationiSy et Christus Jesus sit mediator
Dei , hominum , iinnio totius rationalis
creaturcc (creaturcv enim rationales ,
beatitudinem consequuntur, hanc obtinent
intuitu meritorum Christi per ab eo sibi
collatam gratiam, sine qua nequit beati -
/wdo obtineri)y debuit omnis rationalis crea-
tura de eo venturo spem habere, sicut de
uno Deo Jidem, et de ipsius in came nati -
vitate, et de prevteptis leg is gratiev mani¬
fest ationem. Istcv igitur erant ores, quee
non erant ex hoc ovili humano, et quas
adducere Christum oportebat , et qua; ejus
vocem nempe notitiam de ipsius adventu,
et de evangelica doctrina } quantum per se,
turn per Apostolos Christus erat manifes -
taturus, audire debebant, et ex iis ac ho -
minibus in ccelo beatificatis fieri unum
ovile, et unus Pastor.


Demomality 201

had, in common with the Hebrews, the faith
in God, the hope, prophecy, expectation,
prodigies and preaching of the Messiah.

100. I therefore say that by the words
other sheep may very well be understood
those rational Creatures or animals of
whom we haVe been treating hitherto. They
being, as we have said, capable of beatitude
and damnation, and Jesus-Christ being the
mediator between God and man, as also
every rational Creature (for rational crea¬
tures attain to beatitude in consideration
of the merits of Christ, through the grace
he confers upon them, without which bea¬
titude is impossible of attainment), every
rational creature must have cherished, at
the same time as the faith in one God, the
hope of the advent of Gtydst, and have had
the revelation of his nativity in the flesh
and of the principles of the law of grace.
Those were therefore the sheep which
were not of that human fold , and which
Christ had to bring; the sheep which were
to hear His voice, that is, the announcement
of His advent and of the evangelical doc¬
trine, either directly through Himself, or
through the Apostles; the sheep which,
partaking with men of heavenly beatitude,
were to realize onefold and one shepherd.


202


Dasmonialitas


ioi. Huic expositioni quam incongruam
non puto y vim addit id quod supra n° 77.
ex D. Hieronymo retulimus de homunculo
illo qui rogavit D . Antonium, ut commu-
nem Deum, quem in came humana esse
passum cognoverat, pro se et suis depre-
caretur. lnnuitur enim ex his , quod illi
notitiam habuerunt de adventu et morte
Christi, quem tamquam Deum optabant
sibi propitium , ut proinde ad hoc inter ces-
fionem D. Antonii expostularent .


102. Facit ad idem id , quod ex Eusebio
de Prceparat. Evang. /. 5 . c. 9., et Plutar-
cho /. de Defectu Oracul., refert Cardi -
nalis Baronius, Appar. Annal. n° 129., et
recenset inter prodigia, quce tempore mor¬
tis Christi evenere . Recitat igitur ex cita-
tis Aucthoribus quod Tiberii Imperatoris ,
sub quo passus est Christus , tempore , na-
vigantibus nonnullis a Grcecia in Italiam,
circa Insulas Echinades , cessatis ventis ,
noctu navigium appulit prope terrain. Au¬
dita fuit ab omnibus vox magna quce vo -
cavit Tramnum. Erat is Nauclerus na -
vigii . quo resondente Adsum, replicavit
vox : «Quando perveneris prope quandam
paludem, annunciabis Magnum Pana mor-
tuum esse » : quod cum Tramnus fecisset,


Demoniality 20 3

101. To this interpretation, which I hold
to be in no way improper, force is added
by what we related, according to St Hiero¬
nymus, of that little man who requested
St Anthony to pray, for him and his fel¬
lows, unto the common God, whom he
knew to have suffered in human flesh. For,
it implies that they were aware of the
advent and of the death of Christ, whom^
as God, they were anxious to propitiate,
since they sought, to that effect, the inter¬
cession of St Anthony.

102. Thereto tends also the fact men¬
tioned by Cardinal Baronius (Appar. An -
nal. n° 129), after Eusebius and Plutarch,
as being one of the prodigies which took
place at the time of the death of Christ.
He relates that in the reign of the Emperor
Tiberius, when Christ suffered, whilst
mariners bound from Greece to Italy, were
by night, and during a calm, in the vicinity
of the Echinade Isles, their ship was
brought close to land. All the crew heard
a loud voice calling Tramnus, the master
of the ship. He having answered to his
name, the voice replied : « When near
such a marsh, announce that the great Pan
is dead. » Which Tramnus having done,
there arose suddenly, as from a numberless


204


Daimonialitas


auditi sunt repentc multorum, imo multi -
tudinis prope infinitev gemitus, et ululatus.
Profecto isti fuerunt Devmones, sen Angeli
corporei, sen animalia rationalia prope
paludem degentia, utpole aquea, queu au¬
dita morte Christi, qui nomine magni Pan
efferebatur, in lacrymas et lament a effusa
sunt ; prout etiam Hebrevi nonnulli visa
Christi morte percutientes pectora sua re-
vertebantur (Luc. c. 23 . v. 48.). Ex hue-
usque igitur deductis patet , quod danlur
hujusmodi Devmones, succubi et incubi,
constantes sensu , et ipsius passionibus ob-
noxii , ut probatum cst; qui generantur ,
corrumpuntur, et capaccs sunt bcatitudi-
nis, et damnationis, et ratione corporis
subtilioris, nobiliores homine sunt , et qui si
cum hominibus, maribus autfeeminis, carna-
liter commiscentur, peccant , et eo peccato,
quo peccat homo jungendo se cum bruto,
quod est homine ignobilius; proinde non
raro hi Devmones consuetudinem haben-
tes cum homine, aut equabus, post lon-
gam habitam communicationem eos inter-
ficiunt. Causa porro hujus est, quod si
inter tales datur peccalum, cum sint in
via, dari etiam debet pcenitentia; sicut ergo
homini peccanti consuetudinaliter cum
bruto, ad tollendam occasionem recidi-
vandi, Confessarius injungit, ut brutum


Demoniality 20 5

multitude, groans and shrieks. Doubtless,
they were Demons, or corporeal Angels,
or rational animals living near the marsh
on account of their aqueous nature, and
who, hearing of the death of Christ, de¬
scribed by the name of Great Pan, burst
into tears and bewailing, like some of the
Jews who, after witnessing the death of
Christ, went home smiting their breasts
(Luke, ch. 23 , v. 48). From all that has
been deduced above, it is therefore clear
that there are such Demons, succubi and
incubi, endowed with senses and subject
to the passions thereof, as has been shown;
who are born through generation and die
through corruption, are capable of beati¬
tude and damnation, more noble than man,
by reason of the greater subtilty of their
bodies, and who, when having intercourse
with man, male or female, fall into the
same sin as man when copulating with a
beast, which is inferior to him. Also, it
not unfrequently occurs that those Demons
slay the men, women or mares with whom
they have had protracted intercourse; and
the reason is that, being liable to sin whilst
on the way to salvation, in via , they must
likewise be open to repentance ; and, in
the same manner as a man, who habitually
sins with a beast, is enjoined by his con-

18


206 Daemonialitas

tollat de medio , ita tali Daemoni consue-
tudinario in peccato, et tandem pcenitenti
accidit, ut animal cum quo peccavit, sive
homo, sive brutinn fuerit , occidat; nec
enim tali Dcemoni mors data homini pec -
catum erit, sicut mors data bruto non im -
putatur tamquam peccatum homini : ra-
tione enim essentialis differentiae inter
Daemonem hujusmodi, et hominem , idem
erit homo Dcemoni, quodest homini brutum.


io 3 . Scio midtos, et forte plerosque ,
qui hcec legerent, dicturos de me, quod
Epicurei et Stoici Philosophi nonnulli
dixerunt de Divo Paulo, Actor, c . 17.
v* 18. : Novorum Dsemoniorum videtur
annunciator, et datam doctrinam exsibil-
labunt. Sed isti tenebuntur solvere argu-
menta supra posita , et dicere quinam sint
Daemones isti Incubi , vulgo Foletti, qui
exorcismos, res sacras, et Christi Crucem
non pavent, ac alios effectus istorum, ac
phcenomena salvare, quae nos ex data do -
ctrina ostendimus.


104. Solvitur ergo ex his, quce hucus -
que deducta sunt, quaestio, quam proposui -


Demoniality 207

fessor to destroy that beast, with a view to
suppressing the occasion of relapsing, it
may likewise happen that the penitent de¬
mon should slay the animal with which it
sinned, whether man or beast; nor will
death thus occasioned to a man be reckon¬
ed a sin to the Demon, any more than
death inflicted on a beast is imputed as a
sin to man; for, considering the essential
difference between a Demon of that kind
and man, the man will be the same thing
to the Demon as the beast is to man.

10 3 , I am aware that many, perhaps
most of my readers, will say of me what
the Epicureans ‘and some Stoic Philo¬
sophers said of St Paul [Acts of the Apostles,
ch. 17, V. 18). « He seerneth to be a setter
forth of strange gods », and will deride
my doctrine. But they will none the less
have to answer the foregoing arguments,
to show what are those Incubi Demons,
commonly called Goblins , who dread neither
exorcisms, nor the holy things, nor the
Cross of Christ, and to explain the various
effects and phenomena related when pro¬
pounding that doctrine.

104. What we have hitherto deduced ac¬
cordingly solves the question laid down


208


Drcmonialitas


mus supra n° 3 o et n° 34 ; resolutive
innuimus, quomodo mulier potest ingravi -
dari a dcemone Incubo . Non enim hoc
prcestare potest ex semine sumpto ab ho-
mine, ut fert communis opinio, quam con -
futavimus n° 3 1 et 32 ; sequitur ergo,

imprcegnatur a semine Incubi , cum
enim animal sit, et generet, proprio pollet
semine : et hoc modo optime salvatur ge -
neratio Gigantum secuta ex commixtione
Filiorum Dei cum Filiabus hominum; nati
siquidem sunt ex tali concubitu Gigantes,
qui licet homini essent similes, corpore ta-
men erant majores : et quamvis a Deemo-
nibus geniti , viribus proinde pollerent, non
tamen Dcemonum vires et potentiam a?qua-
bant, ut sequitur in mulis, hinnis et burdo -
nibus, qui' medii quodammodo sunt inter
eas species animalium , a quibus promiscue
generantur, et super ant quidem imperfe -
ctiorem, non attingunt ctutem perfectiorem
speciem generantium : niulus enim supe-
rat asinum, sed non cequat perfectionem
equce, a quibus gcneratur.


io 5 . Conjirmat autem hanc sententiam
consideratio, quod animalia genita ex com¬
mixtione diversarum specierum non gene-


Demoniality 209

N rs 3 o and 34, to wit : how a woman can
be got with child by an Incubus Demon?
In fact, it cannot be brought about by
sperm assumed from a man, agreeably to
the common opinion which we confuted,
N rs 3 1 and 32 ; it follows, therefore, that
she is directly impregnated by the sperm
of the Incubus, which, being an animal
and capable of breeding, has sperm of
its own. Arid thus is fully explained the
begetting of Giants from the intercourse
of the Sons of God with the Daughters of
men : for that intercourse gave birth to
Giants who, although like unto men, were
of higher stature, and, though begotten
by Demons, and consequently of great
strength, yet equalled them neither in
might nor in power. It is the same with
mules, which are intermediate, as it were,
between the kinds of animals from whose
promiscuousness they are sprung, and
which excel indeed the most imperfect, but
never equal the most perfect : thus, the
mule excels the ass, but does not attain
the perfection of the mare, which have
begotten it.

to 5 . In confirmation of the above infer¬
ence, we observe that animals sprung
from the mixing of different kinds do not

18.


210


Daemonialitas


rant; sed sunt sterilia, ut patet in mulis.
Gigantes autem non leguntur Gigantes
generasse , sed natos a Filiis Dei, puta In-
cubis, et Filiabus hominum : cum enim con -
cepti fuerint ex semine Dcemoniaco mixto
cum humano, non potuerunt, tamquam
media * speciei inter Dcemonem et hominem,
generare .


jo6 . Dicetur fortasse contra hoc, non
posse, ex semine Dcemonum, quod pro sui
natura opportet esse tenuissimum, fieri
mixturam cum semine humano, quod cras-
sum est ; unde nec generatio sequipossit.

107. Respondeo quod, ut dictum fuit su¬
pra n° 32 : virtus generandi consistit in
spiritu, qui simul cum materia spumosa et
viscida deciditur a generante; sequitur ex
hoc, quod semen Dcemonis quantumvis te¬
nuissimum, quia tamen materiale, optime
potest commisceri cum spiritu materiali
seminis humani, ac fieri generatio.


108. Replicabitur adhuc contra conclu-
sionem, quod si vere fuisset Gigantum ge¬
neratio ex semine Incuborum et Mulierum,


Demoniality 211

breed, but are barren, as is seen with
mules. Now we do not read of Giants
having been begotten by other Giants, but
of their having been born of the Sons of
"God, that is Incubi, and the Daughters of
men : being thus begotten of the Demoniac
sperm mixed with the human sperm, and
being, as it were, an intermediate species
between the Demon and man, they had no
generative power.

106. It may be objected that the sperm
of Demons, which must, by nature, be
most fluid, could not mix with the human
sperm, which is thick, and that, conse¬
quently, no generation would ensue.

107.1 reply that, as has been said above,
N r 32 , the generative power lies in the
spirit that comes from the generator at
the same time as the spumy and viscous
matter; it follows that, although most
liquid, the sperm of the Demon, being
nevertheless material, can very well mix
with the material spirit of the human
sperm, and bring about generation.

108. It will be retorted that, if the gene¬
ration of Giants had really come from the
combined sperms of Incubi and Women,


2 12


Dsemonialitas


nunc quoque Gigantes nascercntur : non de -
sunt enim mulieres coeuntes cum Incubis y
tit patet ex gestis SS. Bcrnardi et Petri
de Alcantara, ct aliarum historiarum, quce
passim ab auctoribus recitantur.


109. Respondeo, quod prout ex Guaccio
dictum fuit supra n° 81 : alii sunt hujus -
modi Dcemones terrei , alii aquei , aerei
alii , et alii ignei y qui respective in propriis
corum dementis habitant. Videmus autem
animalia eo majora esse quo majus est
clementum in quo degunt , ut patet in pis-
cibus, inter quos licet multi sint minuti , ut
etiam sunt plura animalia terrestria minu -
tissima , et tamen quia elementum aqua*
majus est elemento terra 3 (utpoie continens
majus semper est contento), ideo pisces a
tota specie superant in magnitudine molis
animalia terrestria , ut patet in balenis y or-
cynis y pistis seu pistricibus , thynnis, ac
aliis piscibus cetaceis , seu viviparis, qui
quodvis animal terrestre longe superant.
Porro cun} Dcemones hujusmodi animalia
sint y ut hucusque probatum est , eo erunt
majores in magnitudine quo elementum
majus pro sui natura inhabitabunt. Et cum
aer excedat aquam , et ignis aere major
sit y sequitur y quod Dcemones aetherei ac


Demoniality 2i3

Giants would still be born in our time,
since there is no lack of women who have
intercourse with Incubi, as is shown by
the Acts of St Bernard and Peter of Al¬
cantara, and other stories related by
various authors.

109. I reply that, as has been said above,
N r 81, from Guaccius, some of those De¬
mons are earthly, some aqueous, some
aerial, some igneous, and they all dwell
in their respective element. Now, it is
well known that animals are of larger size,
according to the element they live in; thus
with fishes, many of which are diminutive,
it is true, as happens with animals that
live on land; but, the element water being
larger than the element earth, since the
container is always larger than the con¬
tents, fishes as a species, surpass in size
the animals that dwell on land, as shown
by whales, tunnies, cachalots, and other
cetaceous and viviparous fish which surpass
by far all animals that live on land. Conse¬
quently, these Demons being animals, as
has been shown, their size will be propor¬
tionate to the extent of the element they
dwell in, according to their nature. And,
air being more extensive than water, and
fire than air, it follows that ethereal and


214


Dasmonialitas


ignei Ion.ge superabunt terrestres et aqueos,
turn in mole corporis, turn in virtute. Nec
contra hoc facit instantia de avibus, qui
licet incolant aerem , qui major est aqua ,
tamen cor pore minor es sunt a tot a specie
piscibus et quadrupedibus, quia aves, licet
per aerem volatu spatientur, rev era tamen
pertinent ad elementum terrce, in qua
quiescunt; aliter enim pisces nonnulli qui
volant, ut hirundo marina, et alii, did
deberent animalia aerea, quod falsum est.


no. Advertendum autem, quod post di¬
luvium aer iste terraqueo globo citissimus
magis incrassatus est ex humiditate aqua-
rum, quam fuerit ante diluvium, et hinc
forte est, quod ex tali humido, quod est
principium corruptions, fiat t quod homi¬
nes non cetatem ita producant, ut faciebant
ante diluvium. Ex ista autem aeris crassi -
tie fit , quod Dcemones cetherei, ac ignei,
cceteris corpulentiores, nequeunt diutius
manere in hoc aere crasso, et si descendunt
aliquando hoc fit violenter, et eo modo quo
urinatores ad ima marts descendunt.


Demoniality 21 5

igneous Demons will by far surpass their
earthly and aqueous fellows, both in stat¬
ure and might. It would be to no purpose
to instance, as an objection, birds which,
although inhabitants of the air, a more
extensive element than water, are smaller,
as a species, than fishes and quadrupeds;
for, if birds do indeed travel through the
air by means of their wings, they no less
belong to the element earth, where they
rest; otherwise, some fishes that fly, such
as the sea swallow, would have to be
classed among aerial animals, which is
not.

no. Now, it must be observed that,
after the flood, the air which surrounds
our earthy and aqueous globe, became,
from the damp of the waters, thicker than
it had been before; and,|damp being the
principle of corruption, that may be the
reason why men do not live as long as
they did before the floocQ It is also on
account of that thickness of the air that
ethereal and igneous Demons, more cor¬
pulent than the others, can no longer
dwell in that thick atmosphere, and if
they do descend into it occasionally, do so
only by force, much as divers descend into
the depths of the sea.


2 l6


Daemonialitas


in. Ante diluvium autem, cum adhuc
aer non ita crassus erat 7 veniebant Dcemo-
ncs, et cum mulieribus miscebantur, et gi -
gantes procreabant, qui magnitudinem
corpoream Dcemonum generantium cemu-
labantur. Nunc vero ita non est : Dcemo-
ncs enim In cub i, qui foeminas incessunt ,
sunt aquei quorum corporis moles magna
non est : et provide in forma homuncionum
apparent , et quia aquei etiam salacissimi
sunt; luxuria enim in humido est : ut
proinde Venerem e mari natam Poetce fin -
xerint, quod Mythologi cxplicant de li -
bidine, quce oritur ab humiditate. Cum
ergo Dxmones, qui corpore parvi sunt his
temporibus mulieres impra>gnent, non gi -
gantes, sed staturce or dinar ice filii nas-
cuntur. Sciendum porro quod si miscentur
corporaliter cum mulieribus Dcemones in
sua ipsorum corpulentia naturali, nulla
facta immutatione aut artificio, mulieres
illos non vident, nisi tanquam umbram
pcene inccrtam, ac quasi insensibilem, ut
patet in muliere ilia, de qua diximus supra
n° 28., quce osculabatur ab incubo , cujus
tactus vix ab ea sentiebatur. Qiiando vero
volunt se visibiles amasiis reddere, atque
ipsis delectationem in congressu carnali
affcrre, sibi indumentum visibileassumunt,
et corpus crassum reddunt. Qua vero hoc


Demoniality 217

hi. Before the flood, when the air was
not yet so thick, Demons c^me upon earth
and had intercourse with women, thus
procreating Giants whose stature was nearly
equal to that of the Demons, their fathers.
But now it is not so : the Incubi Demons
who approach women are aqueous and of
small stature; that is why they appear in
the shape of little men, and, being
aqueous, they are most lecherous.£Lust
and damp go together ; Poets have depicted
Venus as born of the sea, in order to
show, as explained by Mythologists, that
lust takes its source in damp. When,
therefore, Demons of short stature impreg¬
nate women nowadays, the children that
are born are not giants, but men of ordi¬
nary size. It should, moreover, be known
that when Demons have carnal intercourse
with women in their own natural body,
without having recourse to any disguise or
artifice, the women do not see them, or
if they do, see but an almost doubtful,
barely sensible shadow, as was the case
with the female we spoke of, N r 28, who,
when embraced by an Incubus, scarcely
felt his touch. But, when they want to be
seen by their mistresses, atque ipsis delec -
tationem in congressu carnali afferre, they
assume a visible disguise and a palpable

19


2l8


Daemonialitas


arte fiat, ip si norunt. Nobis curta nostra
Philosophia hoc non pandit. Unum scire
possumus, et est, quod tale indumentum
seu corpus ex solo aere concreto constare
nequiret, hoc enim esse deberet per con-
densationem, et proinde per frigus; unde
oporteret, quod corpus illud ad tactum
esset veluti glacies, et ita in coitu mulieres
non delectaret, sed torqueret, cum tamen
contrarium eveniat.


112. Visa igitur differentia Dcemonum
spiritualium, qui cum sagis coeunt, et In¬
cub orum , qui cum foeminis minime sagis
rem habent, perpendenda est gravitas
hujus criminis in utroque casu.


11 3 . In coitu sagarum cum Dcemoni-
bus , eo quia non fit nisi cum apostasia a
Fide, et Diaboli cultu, et tot aliis impie -
tatibus quas recensuimus supra a n° 12.
ad 24., est maximum quorumque peccato -
rum, quce ab hominibus fieri possunt : et
ratione tantce enormitatis contra Religio -
nem, quce prcesupponitur coitu cum Dia-
bolo, profecto Dcemonialitas maximum est
criminum carnalium. Sed spectato delicto
carnis ut sic, et ut abstracto a peccatis


Demoniality 219

body. By what means this is effected, is
their secret, which our short-sighted
Philosophy is unable to discover. The
only thing we know is that such disguise
or body could not consist merely in con¬
crete air, since this must take place
through condensation, and therefore by
the influence of cold; a body thus formed'
would feel like ice, et ita in coitu mulieres
non delectaret , but would give them pain ;
and it is the reverse that takes place.

112. Being admitted the distinction
between spiritual Demons, which have
intercourse with witches, and Incubi, who
have to do with women that are nowise
witches, we have to weigh the grievousness
of the crime in both cases.

11 3 . The intercourse of witches with
Demons, from its accompanying circum¬
stances, apostasy from the Faith, worship¬
ping of the Devil, and so many other
ungodly things related above, N r “ 12 to
24, is the greatest of all sins which can be
committed by man; and, considering the
enormity against Religion which is presup¬
posed by coition with the Devil, Demo-
niality is assuredly the most heinous of
all carnal crimes. But, taking the sin of'


220


Dsemonialitas


contra Religionem, Dcemonialitas redi-
genda est adsimplicem pollutionem. Ratio,
ef quidem convincentissima, est quia Dia-
bolus, qui rem habet cum sagis , gurus
spiritus est , et est in termino ac damnatus
iit dictum supra fuit; proinde si cum sa¬
gis coit, hoc facit in corpore assumpto y aut
a se formato, ut sentiunt communiter
Theologi . Porro corpus illud quamvis mo-
veatur, non tamen vivens est ; sequitur
ergo quod coiens cum tali corpore, sive
mas sive fcemina fuerit, idem delictum
committit, ac si cum corpore inanimato
aut cadavere coiret , quod esset simplex
mollifies, ut alias demonstravimus. Verum
est, quod , ut observavit etiam Cajetanus ,
talis coitus effective potest habere defor-
mitates aliorum criminum juxta corpus a
Diabolo assumptum, et vas : si enim assu-
meret corpus virginis consanguine#, aut
Sacrce , effective esset tale crimen incestus
aut sacrilegium, et si in figura bruti co¬
iret , aut in vase prcepostero , evaderet Bes -
tialitas aut Sodomia.


114. In coitu autem cum Incubo, in quo


Demoniality 221

the flesh as such, exclusive of the sins
against Religion, Demoniality should be
reduced to simple pollution. The reason is,
and a most convincing one, that the Devil
who has to do with witches is a pure
spirit, has reached the goal and is damned,
as has been said above; if, therefore, he
copulates with witches, it is in a body
assumed or made by himself, according to
the # common opinion of Theologians.
Though set in motion, that body is not a
living one; and it follows that the human
being, male or female, coiens cum tali
corpore, is guilty of the same offence
as if copulating with an inanimate body
or a corpse, which would be simple
pollution, as we have shown elsewhere. It
has, moreover, been truly observed by
Cajetanus, that such intercourse can very
well carry with it the disgraceful charac¬
teristics of other crimes, according to the
body assumed by the Devil, and the part
used : thus, if he should assume the body
of a kinswoman or of a nun, such a crime
would be incest or sacrilege; if coition
took place in the shape of a beast, or in,
vase prcepostero , it would be Bestiality or
Sodomy.

114. As for intercourse with an Incubus,


9 -


222


Dasmonialitas


nulla habetur qualitas y vel minima, critni-
nis contra Religionem, difficile est rationem
invenire, per quam tale delictum Bestiali -
tate et Sodomia gravior esset. Siquidem
gravitas Bestialitatis prce Sodomia, prout
supra diximus, consistit in hoc, quod
homo vilificat dignitatem suce speciei jun -
gendose cum bruto quod est speciei longe
inferioris sua. In coitu autem cum Incubo
diversa est ratio : nam Incubus ratnone
spiritus rationalis, ac immortalis, cequalis
est homini; ratione vero corporis nobilio -
ris, nempe subtilioris, est per/ectior, et
dignior homine; et hoc modo homo jun¬
gens se Incubo non vilificat, immo digni -
ficat suam naturam, et ita, juxta hanc
considerationem, Dcemonialitas' nequit esse
gravior Bestialitate.


11 5 . Tamen gravior communiter cense-
tur , et ratio, meo videri, potest esse :
quia peccatum contra Religionem est, quce -
vis communicatio cum Diabolo, sive ex
pacto, sive non; puta habendo cum eo
consuetudinem aut familiaritatem, seu ab
eo petendo auxilium , consilium, favorem,
aut ab ipso qucerendo revelationem futu -
rorum, relaiionem prceteritorum, absen -


Denioniality 223

wherein is to be found no element, not
even the least, of an offence against Reli¬
gion, it is hard to discover a reason why it
should be more grievous than Bestiality
and Sodomy. For, as we have said above, if
Bestiality is more grievous than Sodomy,
it is because man degrades the dignity of
his kind by mixing with a beast, of a kind
much inferior to his own. But, when copu¬
lating with an Incubus, it is quite the,
reverse : for the Incubus, by reason of his
rational and immortal spirit, is equal to
man; and, by reason of his body, more
noble because more subtile, he is more
perfect and more dignified than man. Con¬
sequently, when having intercourse with
an Incubus, man does not degrade, but
rather dignifies his nature; and, taking
that into consideration, Demoniality cannot
be more grievous than Bestiality.

11 5 . It is, however, commonly held to
be more grievous, and the reason I take to
be this : that it is a sin against Religion to
hold any communication with the Devil,
either with or without compact, for instance
by being habitually or familiarly connected
with him, by asking his assistance, counsel
or favor, or by seeking from him the re¬
velation of things to be, the knowledge of


Dcemonialitas


224

tiurriy aut alias occultorum . Hujusmodi
autem homines, seu mulieres, concumbendo
cum IncubiSy quos nesciunt animalia esse ,
sed putant esse diabolos , contra conscien -
tiam erroneam delinquunt; et hoc modo ex
conscientia erronea it a peccant cum Incu-
bis se jungendOy ac si cum diabolis co-
irent : unde et gravitatem ejusdem crimi -
nis incurrunt.


FINIS


Demoniality 22 5

things gone by, absent, or otherwise
hidden. Thus, men and women, by mixing
with Incubi, whom they do not know to
be animals but believe to be devils, sin
through intention, ex conscientia erronea,
and their sin is intentionally the same,
when having intercourse with Incubi, as if
such intercourse took place with devils;
in consequence, the grievousness of their
crime is exactly the same.


FINIS


APPENDIX


The manuscript of Demoniality breaks oft
with the conclusion just given. In a purely
philosophical and theoretical acception, the
work is complete : for it was enough that the
author should define, in general terms, the
grievousness of the crime,- without concern¬
ing himself with the proceedings which, were
to make out the proof\ nor with the penalty
to be inflicted. Both those questions, on the
contrary, had, as a matter of course, a place
assigned to them in the great work De Delicti$
et Pcenis, which is a veritable Code for the
Inquisitor ; and Father Sinistrari of Ameno
could rrot fail to treat them there with all the
care and conscientiousness he has so amply
shown in the foregoing pages.

The reader will be happy to find here that
practical conclusion to Demoniality .

(Note by the Editor .)


PROBATIO D.EMONIALITATIS


SUMMARIUM

1. De probatione criminis Daemonialitatis,
distinguendum est.

2 . Indicia probantia coitum Sagae cum Dia-
bolo.

3. Requiritur confessio ipsius malefici ad
plenam probationem.

4 . Histofia de Moniali habente consuetudi-
nem cum Incubo.

5. Si adsint indicia visa in recitata historia,
potest ad torturam deveniri.


1. Quantum ad probationem htijus cri-
minis attinet , distinguendum est de Dcemo-
nialitate, puta, vel ejus, qua? a Sagis seu
Malejicis fit cum Diabolis; sive de ea, qua?'
ab aliis jit cum Incubis.


PROOF OF DEMONIALITY


SUMMARY

1. Distinctions to be made in the proof of
the crime of Demoniality.

2. Signs proving the intercourse of a Witch
with the Devil.

3 . The confession of the Sorcerer himself is
requisite for a full eviction.

4. Tale of a Nun who had an intimacy
with an Incubus.

5 . If the indictment is supported by the
recitals of eye-witnesses , torture may be
resorted to.


1. As regards the proof of that crime, a
distinction must be made of the kind of
Demoniality, to wit : whether it is that
which is practiced by Witches or Wizards
with the Devil, or that which other per¬
sons perpetrate with Incubi.


20


i3o


Daemonialitas


2. Quoad primam, probato crimine pacti
facti cum Diabolo, probata remanet Dte-
monialitas ex consequentia necessaria;
nam scopus turn Sagarum , turn Malefico-
rum in ludis nocturnis, ultra convivia, et
choreas, est hujusmodi inf amis congressus :
qliter , illius criminis nullus potest esse
testis y quia Diabolus, qui Sagce visibilis
est, aliorum oculos effugit . Verum est,
quod aliquoties visce sunt mulieres in syl -
vis, agris, et nemoribus, supince jacenteSy
ad umbilicum tenus denudatce, et juxta
dispositionem actus venerei, divaricatis et
adductis cruribus , clunes agitare, prout
scribit Guacc.y lib. i, cap. 12, v. Scien¬
dum est scepius, fol. 65 . Tali casu emer¬
gent suspicio vehemens talis criminis,
dummodo esset aliunde adminiculata, et
crederem talem actum per testes sufficien-
ter probatum, sufficere Judici ad indagan-
dam tormentis veritatem; et hoc maxime,
si post aliqualem moram in illo actu y visus
fuisset a muliere elevari quasi fumus ni-
ger, et tunc mulierem su^gere, prout ibi¬
dem scribit Guaccius; talis enim fumus,
aut umbra, Dcemonem fuisse concumbentem
cum foemina inferre potest. Sicut etiam y si
mulier visa fuisset concumbere cum homine y
qui post actum de repente evanuit y ut non
semel accidisse idem auctor ibidem narrat.


Demoniality 23 1

2. In the first case, the compact entered
into with the Devil being proved, the evid¬
ence of Demoniality follows as a neces¬
sary consequence ; for,l"the purpose, both
of Witches and Wizards, in the nightly re¬
vels that take place after feasting and
dancing, is none other but that infamous
intercourse J otherwise there can be no
witness of that crime, since the Devil, vis¬
ible to the Witch, escapes the sight of
others. Sometimes, it is true, women have
been seen in the woods, in the fields, in
the groves, lying on their backs, ad umbi-
licum tenus nudatce t etjuxta dispositionem
actus venerei , their legs divaricatis et ad-
ductiSy clunes agitare, as is written by
Guaccius, book I, chap. 12, v. Sciendum
est scepius , fol. 65 . In such a case there
would be a very strong suspicion of such
a crime, if supported by other signs; and
I am inclined to believe that such action,
sufficiently proved by witnesses, would
justify the Judge in resorting to torture in
order to ascertain the truth; especially if,
shortly after that action, a sort of black
smoke had been seen to issue from the
woman, and she had been noticed to rise,
as is also written by Guaccius; for it might
be inferred that that smoke or shadow had
been the Devil himself, concumbens cum


232


Daemonialitas


3 . Cceterum ad probandum concluden-
ter aliquem esse Maleficum, seu Malefi -
cam, requiritur propria confessio; nullus
enim haberi potest de hoc testis , nisi forte
sint alii Malefici, qai in judicio deponunt
de complicibus; sed quia socii criminis
sunt , eorum dictum non concludit , nec
etiam ad torturam sufficit , nisi alia exis¬
tent indicia, puta, sigillum Diaboli im-
pressum in eorum cor pore, prout dixi-
mus supra num. 23 .; et in eorum domibus ,
facta perquisitione, inveniant signa, ac
instrumenta artis diabolicce, ut ossa mor-
tuorum, prcesertim calvariam ; crines
artificiose context os ; nodos plumarum
intricatos; alas, aut pedes, aut ossicula
vespertilionum, aut bufonum, aut serpen-
tium; ignotas seminum species; figuras
cereas; vasculos plenos incognito pulvere ,
aut oleo, aut unguentis minime notis, etc.,
ut ordinarie contingit reperiri a Judi-
cibus, qui, accepta accusatione de hu-
jusmodi Sagis , ad capturam, et domus
visitationem deveniunt, ut scribit Del -


Demonialitjr 233

foemina . Likewise if, as has more than
once happened, according to the same au¬
thor , a woman had been seen concumbere
cum homine, who, the action over, sud¬
denly disappeared.

3. Moreover, in order to prove conclusi¬
vely that a person is a Wizard or a Witch,
the own confession of such person is re¬
quisite : for there can be no witnesses to
the fact, unless perhaps other Sorcerers
giving evidence at the trial against their
accomplices; from their being confederates
in the crime, their statement is not con¬
clusive and does not justify the recourse
to torture, should not other indications be
forthcoming, such as the seal of the Devil
stamped on their body, as aforesaid, N r 23,
or the finding in their dwelling, after a
search, of signs and instruments of the
diabolic art : for instance, bones and, es¬
pecially, a skull, hair artfully plaited, in¬
tricate knots of feathers, wings, feet or
bones of bats, toads or serpents, unfami¬
liar seeds, wax figures, vessels filled with
unknown powder, oil or ointments, etc., as
are usually detected by Judges who, upon
a charge being brought against Sorcerers,
proceed to their apprehension and the
search of their houses.


20 .


234 Daemonialitas

bene, de Off. S. Inquis., par. 2. dub. 206,
num. 7.

4. Quantum vero ad probationem con-
gressus cum Incubo , par est difficultas;
non minus enitn Incubus, ac alii Diaboli
effugiunt, quando volunt , visum aliorum ,
ut videri se faciunt a sola amasia. Tamen
non raro accidit , quod etiam visi sint In -
cubi modo sub una , modo sub alia specie
in actu carnali cum mulieribus.

In quodam Monasterio [nomen ejus et
urbis taceo , ne veterem ignominiam me¬
mories refricem) queedam fuit Monialis,
quee cum alia Moniali, quee cellam habebat
sues contiguam , simultatem ex levibus cau-
sis, ut assolet inter mulieres, maxime Re-
ligiosaSy habebat. Hcec sagax in observan -
do quascumque actiones Monialis sibi ad¬
verse p, per plures dies vidit , quod ista in
diebus cestivis, statim a prandio non spa-
tiabatur per viridarium cum aliis, sed ab
iis sequestra , se retrahebat in cellam, quam
sera obserabat. Observatrix igitur cemula
curiositate investigans, quid tali tempore
ilia facere posset , etiam ipsa in propriam
cellam se recipiebat; ccepit autem audire
submissam quasi duorum insimul collo -
quentium vocem (quod facile erat, nam
cella parvo simplicis , scilicet lateris unius,


j Demoniality


235


4. The proof of intimacy with an Incu¬
bus offers the same difficulty; for, no less
than other Demons, the Incubus,is, at
will, invisible to all but his mistress. Yet,
it has. not seldom happened that Incubi
have allowed themselves to be surprised
in the act of carnal intercourse with wo¬
men, now in one shape, how in another.

In a Monastery (I mention neither its
name nor that of the town where it lies,
so as not to recall to memory a past scan¬
dal), there was a Nun, who, about trifles,
as is usual with women and especially
with nuns, had quarrelled with one of her
mates who occupied a cell adjoining to
hers. Quick at observing all the doings of
her enemy, this neighbour noticed, sever¬
al days in succession, that instead of
walking with her companions in the gar¬
den after [dinner she retired to her cell,
where she locked herself in. Anxious to
know what she could be doing there all
that time, the inquisitive Nun betook her¬
self also to her cell. Soon she heard a
sound, as of two voices conversing in sub¬
dued tones, which she could easily do,
since the two cells were divided but by a


236


Daemonialitas


disterminio dividebatur ), mox sonitum pop¬
py smatum 1 , concussionis lecti, gannitus,
ac anhelitus , quasi duorum concubentium;
unde aucta in cemula curiositate stetit in
observatione, ut sciret , quinam in ilia cella
essent , Postquam autem per tres vices vi -
dit, nullam aliam Monialem egressam e
cella ilia, prceter cemulam, dominant cellce ,
suspicata est Monialem in camera abscon -
ditum aliquem virum, clanculum introduc-
tum, retinere ; ef rem detulit ad Abba -

tissam, quce consilio habito cum discretis,
voluit audire sonitus, et observare indicia
relata ab accusatrice y ne precipitanter et
inconsiderate ageret. Abbatissa igitur cum
discretis se receperunt in cellam obser-
vatricis, et audierunt strepitus, et voces,
quas accusatrix detulerat. Facta igitur
inquisitione , an ulla Monialium potuisset


i. Poppysmatum. — That word being but
little used, it may be useful to record here
the definition given of it by the Glossarium
eroticum linguce latince (auctore P. P., Paris,
^G) :

Poppysma. — Oris pressi sonus , similis illi quo
permulcentur equi et canes. Obscene vero de
susurro cunni labiorum , quum frictu mades -
cunt .

Father Sinistrari, well versed in classical


Demoniality 237

slight partition}, therf a peculiar friction,
the cracking of a bed, groans and sighs,
quasi duorum concumbentium ; her curiosity
was raised to the highest pitch, and she re¬
doubled her attention in order to ascertain
who was in the cell. But having, three ti¬
mes running, seen no other nun come out
but her rival, she suspected that a man
had been secretly introduced and was
kept hidden there. She went and reported
the thing to the Abbess, who, after hold¬
ing counsel with discreet persons, resolved
upon hearing the sounds and observing


literature, had turned to account the following
epigram of Martial (book VII, 18) :•

IN GALLAM

Quum tibi sit facies , de qua nee foemina possit
Dicere, quum corpus nulla litura notet ;

Cur te tam rarus cupiat, repetatque fututor ,
Miraris? Vitium est non leve, Galla , tibi.
Accessi quoties ad opus , mixtisque movemur
InguinibuSy cunnus non tacet , ipsa faces.

Di facerent , ut tu loquereris, et ipse taceret !

Offendor cunni garrulitate tui .

Pedere te mallem : namque hoc nec inutile dicit
Symmachus, et risum res movet ista simul.

Quis riderepotest fatui poppysmata cunni ?

Quum sonat hie, cui non mentula mensque cadit
Die aliquid saltern, clamosoque obstrepe cunno :

Et si adeo muta es f disce vel inde loqui.

(Editorial Note .)


238


Daemonialitas


secum in ilia cella clausa esse , et reperto
quod non, Abbatissa cum discretis fuit ad
ostium cellce clauses; et pulsato frustra
pluries ostio , cum Monialis nec respon¬
ded , nec aperire vellet, Abbatissa minata
est, se velle ostium prosterni facere, et
vecte aggredi opus fecit a quad am con-
versa. Tunc aperuit ostium Monialis, et
facta perquisitione, nullus inventus est in
camera . Jnterrogata Monialis cum quo-
nam loqueretur, et de causa concussionis
lecti, anhelituum , etc., omnia negavit.


Cum vero res perseveraret, accuratior,
ac curiosior reddita Monialis cemula per-
foravit tabulas lacunaris , ut posset cellam
introspicere; et vidit elegantem quemdam
juvenem cum Moniali concumbentem, quern
etiam eodem modo ab aliis Monialibus vi-
dendum curavit. Delata mox accusatione
ad Episcopum, ipsaque Moniali omnia
negante, tandem metu tormentorum com


Demoniality 23 9

the indications that had been denounced
her, so as to avoid any precipitate or inconsi¬
derate act. In consequence, the Abbess and
her confidents repaired to the cell of the
spy, and heard the voices and other noises
that had been described. An inquiry was
set on foot to make sure whether any of
the Nuns could be shut in with the other
one; and the result being in the negative,
the Abbess and her attendants went to the
door of the closed cell, and knocked re¬
peatedly, but to no purpose : the Nun
neither answered, nor opened. The Abbess
threatened to have the door broken in,
and even ordered a convert to force it
with a crow-bar. The Nun then opened
her door : a search was made and no one
found. Being asked with whom she had
been talking, and the why and wherefore
of the bed cracking, of the sighs, etc.,
she denied every thing.

But, matters going on just the same as
before, the rival Nun, become more atten¬
tive and more inquisitive than ever, con¬
trived to bore a hole through the parti¬
tion, so as to be able to see what was
going on inside the cell; and what should
she see but an elegant youth lying with
the Nun, and the sight of whom she took
care to let the others enjoy by the same


240


Daemonialitas


minatorum adacta, confessa est se cum
Incubo consuetudinem habuisse.


5 . Quando igitur adessent talia indicia,
sicut in recitata historia intervenerunt,
posset utique in rigoroso examine rea
constitui ; sine tamen ejus confessione , non
censendum est delictum plene probatum,
quantumvis a testibus visus fuisset con¬
gresses ; siquidem aliquando accidit , quod
Diabolus, ut infamiam alicui innocenti
pararet, prcestigiose talem concubitum re -
prcesentaverit. Unde in his casibus debet
Judex Ecclesiasticus esse perfecte ocu-
latus. *


Demoniality 241

means. The charge was soon brought
before the bishop : the guilty Nun en¬
deavoured still to deny all; but, threat-,
ened with the torture, she v confessed having
had an intimacy with an Incubus.

t

5 . When, therefore, indications are forth¬
coming, such as those recited above, a
charge might be brought after a searching
inquiry; yet, without the confession of the
accused, the offence should not be regarded
as fully proved, even if the intercourse
were testified by eye-witnesses; for it some¬
times happens that, in order to undo an
innocent female, the Devil feigns such in¬
tercourse by means of some delusion. In
those cases, the Ecclesiastical Judge must
consequently trust but his own eyes.


11


242


Daemonialitas


PCENiE


Quantum adposnas Daemonialitatis, nulla
lex civilis, aut canonica, quam legerim,
reperitur, quce pcenam sanciat contra cri¬
men hujusmodi. Tamen, quia crimen hoc
supponit pactum , ac societatem cum Dce-
mone, ac apostasiam a fide, ultra venejicia,
atque alia infinita propemodum damna ,
quce a Maleficis inferuntur , regular iter, ex¬
tra Italiam, suspendio et incendio punitur »
In Italia autem, rarissime traduntur hu¬
jusmodi Malejici ab Inquisitoribus Cur ice
sceculari. '


Demoniality


243


PENALTIES


As regards the penalties applicable to
Demoniality , there is no law that I know
of, either civil or canonical, wich inflicts
a punishment for a crime of that kind.
Since,.however, such a crime implies a com¬
pact and fellowship with the Demon, and
apostasy of the faith, not to speak of the
malefices and other almost numberless
outrages perpetrated by Sorcerers, as a
rule it is punished, out of Italy, by the gal¬
lows and the stake. But, in Italy, it is
but very seldom that offenders of that
kind are delivered up by the Inquisitors
to the secular power.


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE 1


Father Ludovico Maria Sinistrari, of the
Order of Reformed Minors of the strict
Observance of St. Francis, was bom in
Ameno, a small town of the district of
St. Julius, in the diocese of Novara, on the
26th of February 1622. He received a li¬
beral education and went through a course
of humanities in Pavia, where, in the
year 1647, entered the Order of Fran¬
ciscans. Devoting himself henceforward to
tuition, he was first a professor of Philoso¬
phy ; he then, during fifteen successive
years, taught Theology in the same town,
amidst a numerous concourse of students
attracted from all parts of Europe by his
high repute. His sermons preached in the
principal cities of Italy, at the same time
as they caused his eloquence to be admir-


1 . This Notice is an extract from tome 1 of the com¬
plete works of Father Sinistrari, Romce , iy53.


21.


246 Biographical Notice

ed, were productive of the most happy
results for piety. Equally endeared to the
World and to Religion, he had been fa¬
voured by nature with the most brilliant
gifts : square frame, high stature, open
countenance, broad forehead, sparkling
eyes, high-coloured complexion, pleasant
conversation replete with sallies of wit 1 ;
more valuable still, he was in possession
of the gifts of grace, through which he was
enabled to sustain, with unconquerable
resignation, the assaults of an arthritical
disease he was subject to; he was, more¬
over, remarkable for his meekness, can¬
dour and absolute submission to the rules
of his Order. A man of all sciences 2 ; he
had learnt foreign languages without any
master, and often, in the general Meet¬
ings of his Order, held in Rome, he sup¬
ported, in public, theses de omni scibili .
He, however, addicted himself more parti¬
cularly to the study of Civil and Canon
laws. In Rome he filled the appointment
of Consulter to the supreme Tribunal of
the Holy-Inquisition; was some time Vi-


1 . Quadrato corpore, statura procera, facie liberali,
fronte spatiosa, oculis rutilantibus, colore vivido, jucun-
dae conversationis, ac lepidorum salium.

2 . Omnium scientiarum vir.


Biographical Notice 247

car general of the Archbishop of Avignon,
and then Theologian, attached to the
Archbishop of Milan. In the year 1688,
charged by the general Meeting of Fran¬
ciscans with the compilation of the statu¬
tes of the Order, he performed this task in
his treatise entitled Practica criminalis
Minorum illustrata. He died in the year of
our Lord 1701, on the 6th of March, at
the age of seventy-nine \


1. The complete works of P. Sinistrari (Rome, Gian-
nini, 1753-1754,3 vol. in-folio) include the following
books : Practica criminalis Minorum illustrata, —
Formularium criminate, — De incorrigibilium expul-
sione ab Ordinibus Regularibus, — De Delictis et
Pcenis, lo which should be added the present work :
De Dcemonialitate, published for the first time in the
year 1875.


«


INDEX


Pages

Preface .. v

Demoniality : origin of the word. —
Wherein that crime differs from those
of Bestiality and Sodomy. — Opinion

of St Thomas.N” i to 8 1

Material intercourse with Incubi and
Succubi is not a thing of imagination ;
testimony of St Austin. N rs 9 and 10. i 5
Wizards and Witches; their relations
with the Devil; ceremonials of their

profession.N rs 11 to 23 . 21

Artifices resorted to by the Devil for the

assumption of a body.N r 24. 3 i

Incubi do not assail but women. N r 26. 35

Goblins have no dread of exorcisms. N r 27. 37
Humorous story of signora Hieronyma :

the enchanted repast.N r 28. 37

Men begotten by Incubi: Romulus and
Remus, Plato, Alexander the Great,
Csesar-Augustus, Merlin the Enchan¬
ter, Martin Luther. — The Antechrist
to be born of an Incubus . . . N r 3 o. 53

Incubi are not pure spirits : they beget,
and therefore have a body of their own.

— Remark concerning Giants. N rs 3 i

to. 33 . 57

Angels are not all pure spirits : decision
to that effect of the second Council of
Nicea.N r 37. 71


25o


Index


Pages

Existence of rational creatures or ani¬
mals other than man, and endowed,
like him, with a body and a soul. N rs 38

to.43. 85

Wherein do those animals differ from
man? What their origin? Do they all
descend from one individual, as men
descend from Adam? Is there between
them a distinction of the sexes? What
are their manners, laws, social cus¬
toms ?.N rs 44 to 5o. 87

What are the shape and organisation of
their body? A comparison drawn from
the composition of wine. N rs 51 to 56. g5
Are those animals subject to diseases,
to physical and moral infirmities, to

death?.TM 0S 57 and 58. 107

Are they born in the original sin? Have
they been redeemed by Jesus-Christ,
and are they capable of beatitude and

damnation?.N rs 61 and 62. 119

Proofs of their existence. N rs 65 to 70. 123

Story of an Incubus and of a young

Nun.N r 71. 139

Story of a young deacon.N r 72. 14S

Incubi are affected by material substan¬
ces : they therefore participate of the
matter of those substances.. . N r 73. 149

Instance drawn from the history of To-
bit : ejection of the Incubus which
vexed Sarah; cure of old Tobias.

N rs 74 to 76. 151

St Anthony falls in with a Faun in the
wilderness : their conversation. N r 77
to..84. 161


Index 25 1

Pages

Other proofs of the corporeity of Incubi,
especially the Manna of the Hebrews
or Bread of Angels. . . N rs 90 to g 5 . 179

In what sense are to be understood the
words of Christ: « Other sheep I have
which are not of this fold?* Apollo's
address to the Emperor Augustus :
the end of the Gods . . N rs 96 to 101 191

« The Great Pan is dead », or the death
of Christ announced to Fauns, Syl-
vans and Satyrs : their bewailing.

N r 102. 2 o3

Solving of the problem : How caVi a
woman be impregnated by an Incu¬
bus? — Comparison of Giants with

mules.N rs 104 and io 5 207

Wherein lies the generating virtue;
why no more Giants are born. Luxu-

ria in humido .N ra 106 to hi. 211

Appreciation of the crime of Demonia-
lity : i° committed with the Devil;

2 0 committed with an Incubus. N rs 112


to.114 219

Is Demoniality more grievous than Bes¬
tiality? — Conclusion. . . . N r n 5 . 223

Appendix. 227

Biographical Notice. 245


LETTER


OF THE

REV, FATHER PROVINCIAL OF CAPUCHINS
FOR THE PROVINCE OF P...

P..., Friday (8 October 1875).

i

Pax

Mons. Isidore Liseux,

Paris.

I have gone through the work you sent me yester¬
day, arid have, indeed, been satisfied with the edition;
the time has not yet arrived for me to give my opi¬
nion on* the value of the work itself Here you would
have met with no other works of the Rev. Father
Sinistrari of Ameno than his book : Practica crimi*
nalis Minorum ; De Delictis et Pcenis is to be found,
I believe, in another of our convents; but you would
have been given a most welcome reception,

I believe that Des Grieux can hardly have resided
in the present St-Sulpice, which dates but from the

year 1816. So far as a,superficial glance has

enabled me to ascertain, there are some other mis¬
takes; but, altogether, the work is a good one, and
you may accept of the congratulations of

Your very little servant,

Fr, A...


m. p.


Convent of Capuchins, rue ....


Paris, imprimerie D. Jouaust, rue Saint-Honore, 338 .


Isidore LISEUX, Libraire-Editeur

Rue Bonaparte, n° 2, Paris


CATALOGUE COMPLET

AU I er AVRIL 1879


PETITE

COLLECTION ELZEVIRIENNE

Ouvrages curieux , raves ou inedits,
tirds & petit nombre stir papier de Hollande.


Th6ologie

HISTOIRE ECCLESIASTIQUE, PROTESTANTISME

SINISTRARI (Le R. P.). De la Demonia-
litd et des animaux Incubes et Succubes , pu¬
blic pour la premiere fois, d’apr&s le manu-
scrit original decouvert a Londres en 1872,
et traduit du Latin par Isidore Liseux ; avec
le texte en regard. 5 fr.

VALLA (Laurent). La Donation de Con¬
stantin, premier titre du pouvoir temporel des


— 2


Papes, oil il est prouve que cette Donation
n’a jamais existe, et que PActe attribue a
Constantin est P oeuvre d’un faussaire. Tra-
duit en Fra^ais pour la premiere fois et pre¬
cede d'une etude historique par Alcide Bon-
neau, avec le texte Latin. lofr.

LES ECCLtSlA S TIQUES de France,
leur nombre, celuy de^ religieux et des reli- .
gieuses, ce dont ils subsistent et a quoy ils
servent (xvii® siecle). 2 fr.

HUTTEN (Ulrich de). Julius , dialogue -
entre Saint Pierre et le Pape Jules II a la
porte du Paradis; traduction nouvelle par
Edmond Thion, texte Latin en regard. 3 fr. 5o

LUTHER. La Conference entre Luther et
le Diable au sujet de la Messe. 4 fr.

THEODORE DE BEZE. Epitre de maitre
Benoit Passavant ; traduit pour la premiere
fois du Latin macaronique de Theodore de
Beze, par Isidore Liseux, avec le texte en
regard. 3 fr. 5o

PASSE VEN7 PARISIEN respondant &
Pasquin Romain : De la vie de ceux qui sont
alle ? demourer d Geneve; faict en forme de
Dialogue ( 1 5 5 6 ). 3 fr. 5o


— 3 —


Philosophie

MCEURS ET USAGES, HISTOIRE

LA MOTHE LE VAYER. Soliloques seep -
tiques . 2 fr. 5o

POGGE. Un vieillard doit-il se marier?
traduit par Alcide Bonneau. 3 fr.

POGGE. Les Bains de Bade au xv° siecle,
scene de moeurs de Page d’or; traduit en
Frangais pour la premiere fois par Antony
Meray. 2 fr.

ERASME. La Civilite pudrile , traduction
nouvelle, texte Latin en regard, par Alcide
Bonneau. 4 fr.

HENRI ESTIENNE. La Foire de Franc-
fort (Exposition universelle et permanente
au xvi° si£cle); traduit pour la premiere fois
par Isidore Liseux, texte Latin en regard. 4 fr.

GEgNER (J.-M.). Socrate et VAmour Grec
(Socrates sanctus IlatBepacmfcJ; traduit en
Frangais pour la premiere fois, texte Latin
en regard, par Alcide Bonneau. . . 3 fr. 5o

TACITE. La Germanie , traduction entie-
rement nouvelle, texte Latin en regard, par
E.-P. Dubois-Guchan. . . 3 fr. 5o


— 4 —


ULRICH DE HUTTEN. Arminius, dia¬
logue, traduit pour la premiere fois par Ed¬
mond Thion, texte Latin en regard. . 2 fr.

REMONSTRANCE. A UX FRANCOIS,
pour les induire a vivre en paix a Tadvenir

(1576). 1 fr.


Poesie

DU BELLAY (Joachim). Divers jeux rus-
tiques . 3 fr. 5 o

DU BELLAY (Joachim). Les Regrets.

3 fr. 5o

BONNEFONS (Jean). Pancharis. . . 4 fr.

BOULMIER (Joseph). Villanelles, avec
eau-forte de Lalauze. 5 fr,

Contes et Nouvelles

ARISTENET. Les JEpistres amoureuses
d'Aristenet, tournees de Grec en Francois
par Cyre Foucault, sieur de la Coudri&re
( 1597 ); avec notice par A. P.-Malassis. 5 fr.

BOCCACE. Decameron, traduit par An¬
toine Le Ma^n, 6 vol. 3o fr.

POGGE. Faceties, 2 vol. (publie a 20 fr.)

Epliise.


L’ABBE FAVRE. Histoire de Jean-Vont-
pris, conte Languedocien du xvm° siecle,
traduit et precede d’une notice par Jules
Troubat. 3 fr.

VIVANT DENON. Point de Lendemain.
conte dedie a la Reine, avec fleurons dessines
par Marillier; notice par A. P.-Malassis (publie
a 4 fr.). Epuise.

CASTI. La Papesse. . .. io fr.

Philologie, Histoire litt^raire

GABRIEL NAUDE, Parisien. Advis pour


dresser une Bibliothdque . 4 fr.

LA MOTHE LE VAYER. Hexameron
rustique (publie a 3 fr. 5o). Epuise.


GRIMAREST, La Vie de Af r de Molitre;
notice par A. P.»Malassis (publie a 5 fr.)

Epuise.

LES INTRIGUES DE MO LIE RE et
cedes de sa femme, avec notes par Ch.-L. Li-
vet (publie a 6 fr.). Epuisd.

MOL1ERE JUGE par ses contemporains;
notice par A. P.-Malassis. 4 fr.

ELOMIRE HYPOCONDRE, comedie
(contre Moliere), avec une note sur les Enne-
mis de Molidre, par Ch.-L. Livet. . . to fr.


— 6 —


COLLECTION IN-80


ESTIENNE (Henri). Apologia pour Hdro-
dote, avec Introduction et Notes par P. Ristel-
huber, 2 vol.. 2 5 fr.

SINISTRARI (Le R. P.). De la Demonia-
lite et des animaux Incubes et Succubes,
premiere edition (publiee a 10 fr.). Epuise.

LOISELEUR. Les Points obscurs de la vie
de Molidre (publie a 12 fr.). Epuise.

LES INTRIGUES DE MOL IE RE et
de sa femme, avec Pre'face et Notes par Ch.-
L. Livet. 12 fr.


FORMAT GRAND IN-18


SAINT-PIERRE (Bernardin de). Paul et
Virginie , avec huit eaux-iortes de Lalauze.

25 fr.

— Les huit eaux-fortes tirees a part, sur
papier de Chine ou de Hollande. . 10 fr.

POGGE. Faceties, deuxieme edition com¬
plete, avec le texte Latin, 2 vol. . . . i 5 fr.


— 7 —


PIEDAGNEL. Avril, poesies, avec un fron-
tispice de Giacomelli, grave a l’eau-forte par
Lalauze. . . ..* 5 fr.

BOULMIER (Joseph). Villanelles , pre¬
miere edition (avec eau-forte de Lalauze). 5 fr.

BOUTMY (Eugene). Dictionnaire de la
Langue verte typographique . 3 fr.

SINISTRARI. Demoniality , or Incubi and
Succubi, now first translated into English,
with the Latin text.

POGGIO. The «Facetice», or Jocose Tales,
now first translated into English, with the
Latin text.

TROUBAT (Jules). Plume et Pinceau, etu¬
des de litterature et d’art. 3 fr.

DESMARETS. L*ancienne Jonction de
VAngleterre cl la France , ou le Detroit de
Calais, avec deux cartes topographiques. 3 fr.


ENVOI FRANCO RECOMMAND&
Contre le prix en Mandat de Poste.


Paris. — Imp. Motteroz, rue du Dragon, 3i,


3—»• 202 Main Library


)AN PERIOD 1

HOME USE

2

3


5

6


ALL BOOKS MAY BE RECALLED AFTER 7 DAYS


DUE AS STAMPED BELOW


ID


general LIBRARY-U.C. BERKELEY


BOQ0B3b305


Is? - . ..

? i . -


A'.


<S.


UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY
