The Growth of the Soul
========================================
A. P. Sinnett (1896) — Sinnett's sequel to Esoteric Buddhism — the theosophical doctrine of spiritual evolution. Source: https://archive.org/details/growthofsoulsequ00sinnrich. Public domain.

THE  GROWTH 
OF    THE    SOUL 

*/  SEQUEL  TO  "ESOTERIC  <BUDT>HISM" 

BY 

A.  P.  SINNETT 

VICE-PRESIDENT  OF  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY 

THIRD  AND  REVISED  EDITION 

LONDON 
THE  THEOSOPHICAL  PUBLISHING  HOUSE 

i   UPPER  WOBURN  PLACE,  W.C.I. 
1918 

COPYRIGHT,   1896 
BY   THE  THEOSOPHICAL  PUBLISHING  SOCIETY 

PRINTED       IN      ENGLAND 
AT     THE      PELICAN     PRESS 

PREFACE 
TO    THE    FIRST    EDITION 

THE  gulf  which  lies  between  the  thinking  of  the 
ordinary  world  in  reference  to  matters  having  to 
do  with  the  destinies  of  the  human  soul,  and  the 
position  occupied  by  those  students  of  the  school  with 
which  I  am  specially  concerned,  is  widening,  year  by  year. 
"  Current  teaching,"  as  Mr.  Balfour  has  called  it,  stands 
still;  knowledge  concerning  the  conditions  of  existence  in 
ultraphysical  realms  of  Nature  has  expanded  enormously 
for  those  who  have  sought  it  the  right  way  during  the 
last  fifteen  years,  and  is  expanding  with  ever-increasing 
rapidity.  With  the  'first  gush  of  theosophic  teaching 
we  were  told  that  knowledge  concerning  matters  generally 
thought  to  be  unknowable  had  not  only  been  reached 
by  a  few  philosophers  holding  themselves,  for  reasons  of 
their  own,  aloof  from  contact  with  the  world  at  large, 
but  was  acquirable  also  in  the  long  run  by  all  who  took 
certain  prescribed  methods  for  its  acquisition — much  more 
rapidly  if  appropriate  qualifications  were  possessed  at  the 
outset.  This  idea  has  not  lain  unfruitful  in  the  minds 
of  those  who  were  the  first  to  appreciate  the  significance 
of  the  theosophical  opening.  Many  are  those  who  have 
entered,  as  the  phrase  goes,  on  the  path  of  theosophical 
progress;  several  have  already  advanced  sufficiently  to  be 
themselves  in  a  position  to  investigate  mysteries  hitherto 
regarded  as  lying  beyond  incarnate  human  ken.  Much, 
therefore,  that  in  earlier  theosophical  books  could  only 
be  treated  as  ex  cathedra  statement — forcibly  appealing, 
perhaps,  to  reason,  but  not  otherwise  susceptible  of  veri- 
fication— has  come  within  range  of  personal  observation 

M701115 

VI. 

PREFACE 

for  several  students  amongst  ourselves.  The  sources  of 
the  earlier  teaching  have  not  by  any  means  run  dry, 
but  we  are  now  in  a  position  to  get  corroborative  testi- 
mony concerning  the  outlines  of  this  teaching,  together 
with  an  immense  amplitude  of  detailed  information  from 
persons  who  have  thus  advanced  a  part  of  the  way  on  the 
journey  towards  genuine  spiritual  development.  Views 
of  Nature  which  lie  wholly  beyond  the  range  of  ordinary 
perception  have  come  within  the  domain  of  positive  and 
experimental  knowledge  for  those  who  have  best  profited 
by  current  opportunities. 

There  is  something  pathetic,  for  us  who  know  better, 
in  the  attitude  of  mind  of  people  who  treat  as  matters 
of  ribald  incredulity  the  existence  of  faculties  in  daily  use 
amongst  some  of  us  in  connection  with  the  study,  not 
merely  of  literary  philosophy,  but  of  special  conditions 
of  existence.  That  other  world  from  which,  in  the  old 
phrase,  no  traveller  returns,  has  been  found  accessible  to 
travellers  who  are  going  backwards  and  forwards  con- 
stantly, and  in  saying  this,  I  am  leaving  entirely  out  of 
account  communications  from  the  "  next  world  "  pur- 
porting to  come  from  those  who  have  passed  over  to  it 
finally. 

The  explanations  given  in  the  present  volume  con- 
cerning the  principles  on  which  the  growth  of  the  soul 
proceeds,  have  been  rendered  possible  by  the  continual 
expansion  in  this  way  of  the  fundamental  teaching  put 
forward  in  "  Esoteric  Buddhism."  But  nothing  in  this 
later  presentation  of  the  subject  has  been  the  fruit  of 
mere  intellectual  speculation.  Readers  chiefly  familiar 
with  metaphysics  in  their  non-theosophical  aspect  are 
used  to  regarding  them  as  altogether  speculative;  but, 
however  slowly  those  outside  the  central  nucleus  of 

PREFACE 

Vll. 

theosophical  activities  may  recognise  the  fact,  the^  fact 
nevertheless  is  that  metaphysical  experiment  and  observa- 
tion have  now  become  possible  for  a  good  many  people 
still  in  direct  relations  with  ordinary  humanity.  The 
human  body  is  not  really  the  prison  of  consciousness  it 
was  once  supposed  to  be;  other  senses  may  be  developed 
besides  the  five  faculties  of  physical  perception,  and  the 
result  is  that  a  great  deal  may  be  known  concerning  aspects 
of  Nature  which  the  familiar  five  faculties  are  quite 
unable  to  deal  with. 

The  information  so  attained  is  essentially  necessary  to 
a  comprehension  of  the  natural  possibilities  lying  before 
man  in  connection  with  that  growth  of  his  soul  to  which 
this  volume  relates.  To  introduce  the  subject  and  show 
it  susceptible  even  of  definite  treatment,  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to  build  a  bridge  across  the  widening  gulf  of  which  I 
have  spoken,  so  that,  at  all  events,  whoever  endeavours 
to  apprehend  what  I  have  to  say  may  have  before  his  mind, 
even  if  only  in  the  form  of  a  hypothesis,  the  knowledge 
concerning  ultra-physical  nature  which  has  been  accumu- 
lated by  theosophical  students  within  the  last  few  years. 
That  which  we  have  to  recognise  as  actually  going  on  in 
connection  with  the  progress  of  the  human  race  is  a  process 
of  growth  as  regards  individual  souls  not  less  protracted 
and  elaborate  than  that  evolutionary  work  going  on  part 
passu  on  the  physical  plane  of  life  and  developing  the 
simplest  organic  cells  into  the  complicated  bodies  of  the 
higher  animals.  The  fundamental  blunder  concerning 
the  inner  nature  of  man  which  has  saddled  itself  upon 
many  religious  systems  (as  true  as  they  are  beautiful  in 
their  spiritual  essence)  is  the  notion  which  represents  the 
human  soul  as  going  through  two  simple  phases — the 
physical  existence  of  which  we  are  cognisant  on  this 

viii.  PREFACE 

«arth,  and  the  uniform  unchangeable  destiny  of  sorrow 
or  joy  that  ensues  hereafter  as  the  consequence  either  of 
the  brief  physical  life,  according  to  one  view,  or  of  a  pre- 
appointed  destiny  according  to  another.  That  which  we 
get  at,  since  we  have  begun  to  understand  the  actual 
working  of  Nature,  is  a  scheme  in  which  we  see  vast 
amplitudes  of  time  laid  out  before  consciousness  as  the 
field  of  its  individualisation,  and  stupendous  possibilities 
of  growth  and  development,  extending  as  far  beyond  the 
heights  which  human  civilisation  has  yet  reached  as  this 
has  reared  itself  above  the  earliest  humanity  of  which 
geology  bears  trace. 

Occult  teaching  casts  a  light  to  almost  immeasurable 
distances  along  this  path  of  progress,  recognising  the 
continued  individuality  of  every  human  being  as  extending 
through  an  infinite  multiplicity  of  changes  and  varied 
states,  the  whole  process  moving  in  great  cycles  in  which 
we  return  ever  and  anon  to  the  physical  plane  of  existence, 
and  gather  from  each  great  sweep  of  the  spiral  evolution 
something  which  is  contributed  to  the  truly  permanent 
entity  constituting  the  individual  soul.  That  is  the  one 
unchangeable  centre  of  identity  throughout  the  whole 
process.  The  expansion  of  its  consciousness,  faculties,  and 
moral  grandeur  is  the  subject  I  have  before  me  for  elucida- 
tion, so  far  as  the  resources  of  our  present  knowledge 
extend.  And  their  extent  is  already  so  vast — even  though 
the  horizon  of  the  unknown  lies  ever  in  a  widening  circle 
beyond — that  it  is  not  possible  even  to  describe  the  manner 
in  which  this  growth  is  accomplished  without  paving  the 
way  for  the  main  idea  that  has  to  be  developed  by  a 
multiplicity  of  subordinate  explanations.  In  this  way  it 
has  been  necessary  to  wander  sometimes  in  the  progress  of 
this  work  into  many  fields  of  occult  inquiry,  which  at  the 

PREFACE  ix. 

first  glance  may  have  seemed  out  of  touch  with  the  main 
object  in  view;  but  such  collateral  surveys  have  not  merely 
been  necessary  in  themselves,  but  have  been  calculated  to 
show  that  an  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  the  soul's  growth 
is  really  one  of  even  more  dazzling  magnitude  than  the 
simple  words  would  at  first  suggest. 

PREFACE    TO    THIS    EDITION 

FEW  words  are  needed  to  explain  the  principle  on 
which  the  present  revision  of  this  book  has  been 
carried  out.  In  the  twenty  years  that  have  elapsed 
since  its  first  publication,  the  fountains  of  that  teaching 
which  gave  rise  to  "  Esoteric  Buddhism  "  have  never  run 
dry.  The  first  edition  of  "  The  Growth  of  the  Soul  " 
was  written  some  twelve  or  thirteen  years  later.  It  con- 
tained immensely  important  additions  to  the  rough  sketch 
of  Theosophical  Science  embodied  in  the  first  book.  It 
also  contained  a  great  deal  of  new  matter  imperfectly 
comprehended  at  that  period.  It  was  impossible  for  the 
Adept  Teachers  to  convey  the  whole  volume  of  the 
information  and  guidance  they  were  willing  to  give  all  at 
once.  My  attempt  to  present  that  which  came  was 
embarrassed  in  many  directions  for  want  of  deeper  know- 
ledge. And  now  distant  horizons  are  opening  before 
me  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  deal  with  even  in  this 
revised  edition  of  the  present  book;  but,  at  all  events, 
I  think  I  have  cleared  it  of  all  misleading  passages  in  the 
earlier  editions,  and  I  have  entirely  rewritten  the  chapter 
relating  to  the  Astral  and  Manasic  planes,  which  in  their 
earlier  form  represented  a  stage  of  Theosophic  research 
which  I  have  been  enabled  to  leave  far  in  the  rear  of  my 
present  appreciation  of  those  deeply  interesting  regions. 
The  Astral  world  especially  was,  in  former  years,  the 
subject  of  a  deplorably  imperfect  conception  among 
Theosophists  generally.  It  includes  the  purgatorial  aspect, 
on  which,  at  one  time,  our  attention  became  too  exclusively 
focussed;  but,  beyond  this,  glorious  possibilities  of  higher 
life  which  to  some  extent,  in  the  present  edition  of  this 
work,  I  have  endeavoured  to  unveil. 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  I 

PAGE 

INTRODUCTORY     I 

The  progress  of  Theosophic  Knowledge — Super- 
physical  research — Expansion  of  theosophic  litera- 
ture— Its  bearing  on  the  problems  of  life — Advanced 
evolution  in  some  cases  to  be  expected — Nature  of 
effective  testimony  on  occult  matters — The  volume 
of  evidence  now  available — Witnesses  to  the  truth 
amongst  us — Earlier  evidence  now  enlarged — The 
divinity  latent  in  man — Its  development  as  evolution 
proceeds. 

CHAPTER  II 

OCCULT  SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 30 

Theosophy  in  harmony  with  essential  religious 
ideas — The  uncertainties  of  modern  thought  in 
spite  of  religious  teaching — The  exactitudes  of 
theosophic  interpretation — The  methods  of  research 
in  spiritual  science — True  meanings  of  misunder- 
stood dogmas. 

CHAPTER  III 
RE-INCARNATION          46 

The  root  idea  of  evolution — The  nature  of  the 
proof  offered — The  only  theory  that  suits  the  facts 
— The  true  doctrine  cleared  of  misrepresentation — 
The  law  of  Karma — Heredity  and  assimilation — 
Necessary  exhaustion  of  ordinary  memory — Logical 
certainties  of  pre-existence — Inequalities  of  life 
accounted  for — No  "  accidents  of  birth  " — The 
world-wide  acceptance  of  the  doctrine — Buddhist 
teaching  on  the  subject — Absurd  misunderstanding 
thereof  by  many  Western  writers — Some  Buddhist 
symbolism  explained — Re-incarnation  recognised  in 
Christianity — References  to  it  in  the  Gospels — 
The  certain  knowledge  concerning  Re-incarnation 
of  the  occult  disciple. 

xii.  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  IV  PACK 

THE  HIGHER  SELF     ..." 80 

Crudity  of  conventional  ideas  concerning  the  soul 
— The  spiritual  part  of  the  superphysical  man — 
Gradual  involvement  of  the  spiritual  soul  in  a  child 
— The  growth  of  the  Higher  Self  the  purpose  of 
life — The  working  of  the  Higher  Self  in  waking 
consciousness — Its  identity  through  successive  in- 
carnations— Its  disregard  of  minor  experiences — 
The  scope  of  its  evolution — Perverted  version  of  the 
teaching — Higher  consciousness  embraces  lower — 
The  rewards  of  Lower  Self  merit — Relations  of 
Higher  and  Lower  Self. 

CHAPTER  V 
FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA  .     .     .     .,     ., no 

The  theories  of  Necessity  and  Free  Will — Cleared 
up  by  Re-incarnation  and  Karma — The  pressure  of 
Karma  on  action — Concurrent  freedom  of  thought — 
Bearing  of  this  on  the  Karma  of  the  act — Thought 
forces  in  connection  with  good  acts — Dangers  of  a 
half  comprehension  of  the  law — Progress  of  emanci- 
pation from  Necessity — Complications  of  inter- 
blended  Karma — Readjustments — The  Lords  of 
Karma — Distribution  of  consciousness — the  pre- 
destination idea. 

CHAPTER  VI 
THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  MAN         .138 

The  different  vehicles  of  consciousness — Ethric 
matter — Jiva  free  and  specialised — The  astral  body — 
Reflection  of  consciousness  in  the  higher  vehicles — 
The  true  individual  Man — The  Aura — Its  various 
elements. 

CHAPTER  VII 
THE  ASTRAL  PLANE .     .151 

The  sub-divisions  of  the  astral  plane — Conscious- 
ness on  the  sub-planes. 

CONTENTS  xiii. 

CHAPTER  VIII  PACK 

THE   MANASIC  PLANK          170 

Conceptions  of  Heaven — Infinite  resources  of 
spiritual  planes — Responsive  to  soul  growth-r-The 
self-centred  Heaven  of  undeveloped  souls — Necessity 
for  the  subjective  vision — Religious  expectations; 
their  subjective  realisation — Spiritual  consciousness 
during  earth  life. 

CHAPTER  IX 
ELEMENTAL   AND  DEVAS 185 

Mediaeval  terms  —  Physical  forces  in  their 
elemental  aspect — Elemental  forces  subject  to  will — 
Beginnings  of  elemental  evolution — The  three 
kingdoms  of  elementals — Cross  classifications — 
Elemental  forms — Elementals  of  good  and  evil 
efficiency. 

CHAPTER  X 
THE  SYSTEM  TO  WHICH  WE  BELONG 200 

Planetary  chains,  rounds,  and  Manvantaras — 
Prospects  of  the  second  half  of  the  Manvantara — 
Other  schemes  in  the  solar  system  besides  our — The 
system  as  a  whole — The  nebular  theory  confirmed — 
The  origin  of  our  nebula — Condensation  of  atomic 
ether — The  interior  constitution  of  the  earth — The 
various  schemes — Planetary  reconstructions — In- 
fluence of  schemes  on  one  another — The  last 
Manvantara  of  our  scheme — The  various  classes 
of  Pitris — Corresponding  divisions  of  our  own 
humanity — Other  evolutions  connected  with  the 
solar  system. 

CHAPTER  XI 
THE  ELDER  BRETHREN  OF  HUMANITY 249 

Outstripping  normal  evolution — The  necessity 
that  some  should  do  this — The  magnitude  of  the 
achievement — The  possibilities  of  selfish  advance- 
ment— The  range  of  the  path  of  service — its  earliest 

xiv.  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

disciples — The  impulse  of  fifth  race  improvement — 
The  motives  for  an  upward  struggle — Ordinary 
human  suffering  and  Adept  sympathy — The  Divine 
government  of  the  world  and  its  ministers. 

CHAPTER  XII 

THE   ANCIENT   MYSTERIES 275 

Egyptian  and  Gi^ek  initiations  —  Current 
authorities  on  the  subject — The  evident  reality  of 
their  purpose — The  explanation  of  secrecy — Further 
motives  for  reserve  in  the  Middle  Ages. 

CHAPTER  XIII 

THE  THEOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES 290 

The  Alchemical  disguise — The  spiritual  purpose 
of  Alchemy — the  motives  with  which  the  real 
Alchemists  wrote — Their  sordid  imitators — The  real 
Alchemists  aspirants  for  Adeptship — The  powers 
they  incidentally  acquired — Their  chemical  sym- 
bology — Its  Hermetic  origin — Illustrations  from 
Alchemical  writers. 

CHAPTER  XIV 
INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY 310 

The  avenues  of  initiation  still  open — Visible 
temples  not  necessary — Old  secrecy  broken  down — 
Motives  for  a  more  open  policy — Dangers  of  progress 
in  knowledge  unaccompanied  by  spiritual  growth — 
Those  who  are  ready — Understanding  required  as 
well  as  moral  fitness — Mental  powers  and  psychic 
gifts — The  conservation  of  energy  on  the  moral 
plane — Normal  and  abnormal  re-incarnation — 
Immediate  re-incarnation  —  Its  sacrifices  and 
advantages — The  door  open  to  all  who  knock — 
Self-preparation;  the  appeal  required — The  attri- 
butes and  qualifications  to  be  developed — The 
greater  initiations. 

CHAPTER  XV 

IRREGULAR  PSYCHIC  PROGRESS      .  .        .        .        .   367 

Natural     born     faculties — Mediumship — Psychic 

CONTENTS  xv. 

PAGE 

faculties  unaccompanied  by  spiritual  development — 
Their  dangers — A  blessing  or  a  curse — Legitimately 
earned  psychic  faculty. 

CHAPTER  XVI 
INDIVIDUALITY 377 

The  genesis  and  destinies  of  individuality — The 
immensity  of  the  task  involved  in  its  evolution — 
Animal  instinct — The  focalisation  of  consciousness 
— The  touch  with  Atma-Buddhi — The  spiritual 
purpose  of  the  whole  system — The  "  Sacrifice  "  of 
the  Logos. 

THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

CHAPTER   I 
INTRODUCTORY 

THEOSOPHIC  teaching  has  expanded  during  the 
last  twelve  years  till  it  now  constitutes  a  vast 
coherent  statement  concerning  human  evolution, 
the  conditions  of  existence  that  await  humanity  on  supra 
physical  planes  of  nature,  and  the  methods  by  which 
it  is  possible  to  acquire  faculties,  knowledge,  and  oppor- 
tunities of  usefulness  far  exceeding  those  in  possession  of 
ordinary  humanity  at  the  present  day.  It  presents  itself 
as  the  most  widely  reaching  system  of  philosophy  with 
which  the  progress  of  thought  has  yet  put  us  in  contact. 
Treated  as  a  hypothesis  it  would  claim  attention  by 
offering  a  reasonable  explanation  of  many  phenomena 
of  life  constituting  painfully  insoluble  enigmas  on  any* 
other  theory;  including  an  elucidation  of  the  way  in  which 
it  is  built  up  on  positive  knowledge  concerning  the  con- 
ditions under  which  human  consciousness  may  function 
out  of  and  independently  of  the  body,  it  surely  makes  a 
startling  appeal  to  advanced  intelligence.  No  man  of 
science  worthy  of  the  name  would  exalt  the  pursuits  in 
which  he  may  be  engaged  to  a  level  of  importance  com- 
parable with  that  of  spiritual  research,  provided  he 
acknowledged  that  there  were  any  means  of  really  making 
sure  of  discoveries  along  that  road.  Unhappily  most 
patient  questioners  of  Nature  in  the  Western  world  are 
persuaded  that  definite  answers  are  only  to  be  obtained 
in  reply  to  questions  concerning  the  laws  and  properties 
of  matter;  but  if  it  were  satisfactorily  established  that 
questions  concerning  the  laws  and  properties  of 

2 

2        THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

consciousness  could  be  answered  as  explicitly,  eager 
explorers  of  that  untrodden  realm — untrodden  as  they 
imagine  it — would  surely  endeavour  to  equip  themselves 
for  the  new  research. 

No  doubt  it  is  a  very  delicate  research.  Matter,  and 
even  the  subtlest  forces  that  pervade  matter,  are  uniform 
and  reliable  in  their  activities;  once  their  secrets  are  wrung 
from  them,  the  same  answer  will  be  given  to  the  same 
question  however  often  it  may  be  put.  The  truth  may 
be  difficult  to  attain,  but  once  attained  its  disguise  can 
never  again  be  assumed.  Till  recently,  on  the  other  hand 
— and  some  persons  will  still  think  the  qualification  un- 
necessary— there  has  been  nothing  indisputably  established 
about  the  laws  and  properties  of  consciousness,  considered 
as  something  apart  from  its  physical  vehicle.  Metaphysics, 
in  so  far  as  vague  speculation  bearing  that  title  has  been 
cast  in  a  scientific  mould,  has  dealt  with  thought  itself 
as  an  object  of  contemplation  rather  than  with  the  think- 
ing consciousness  as  an  entity.  We  have  no  body  of 
manageable  facts  or  phenomena  to  deal  with  as  a  founda- 
tion on  which  to  build  any  certain  conclusions  in  reference 
to  extra-corporeal  consciousness,  or  rather,  those  of  us 
who  have  such  facts  at  our  disposal  have  been  unable  to 
hand  them  out  to  the  world  at  large  for  examination.  A 
new  chemical  compound,  however  unstable  or  difficult  to 
handle,  is  at  all  events  on  equal  terms  with  every  experi- 
mentalist. An  abnormal  human  being,  with  spiritual 
faculties  adapted  to  function  independently  of  the  bodily 
organism,  is  a  human  being,  with  rights  as  such,  and  gener- 
ally with  an  extreme  susceptibility  to  suffering.  He  or  she 
may  render  priceless  service  to  individuals  by  introducing 
them  to  laws  of  Nature  concerning  consciousness  apart 
from  the  body,  but  cannot  be  used  to  break  down  the  rocky 

INTRODUCTORY  3 

barriers  of  incredulity  in  the  world  at  large,  any  more 
than  a  violin  could  be  used  as  a  spade  to  dig  up  a  clay 
soil.  The  best  that  can  be  done  with  the  help  of  such 
persons  towards  educating  the  world  at  large  is  done  when 
their  capacities  and  testimony  are  reported  upon  by  careful 
observers. 

Nine  people  out  of  ten,  or  a  larger  proportion  of  larger 
numbers,  habitually  reject  the  secondhand  evidence  thus 
provided,  but  at  the  same  time  a  small  minority  shows  a 
better  sagacity,  and  minorities  gradually  accumulate.  In 
this  way,  by  degrees,  a  body  of  enlightened  opinion  is 
formed,  and  so  it  comes  to  pass  that  people  who  are  quite 
untouched  by  the  growing  belief  that  there  is  an  unseen 
world  around  us,  with  which  human  consciousness  is  in 
some  sort  of  relationship  independently  of  the  senses,  are 
already  left  in  the  rear  of  anything  that  deserves  to  be 
called  advanced  thought.  Of  course,  there  is  a  long 
interval  between  the  recognition  of  the  broad  idea  just 
described  and  the  appreciation  of  theosophic  teaching  as 
the  scientific  outcome  of  knowledge  concerning  the  laws 
which  regulate  the  expansion,  growth,  and  the  progress 
of  consciousness  out  of  the  body.  But  at  all  events, 
if  there  is  an  unseen  world,  in  addition  to  that  visible 
to  eyesight,  it  is  a  part  of  Nature,  and  will  be  credited 
as  such  by  every  scientific  mind,  with  being  under  the 
reign  of  law.  There  must  be  a  science  of  unseen,  unfelt 
phenomena  lurking  in  the  possibilities  of  the  future,  if 
there  are  such  phenomena  in  existence.  If  for  no  better 
reason,  theosophical  writers  might  expect,  therefore,  to 
be  commended  for  their  attempt  to  arrange,  with  order 
and  scientific  method,  the  chaotic  evidences  relating  to 
the  unseen  world  which  pour  in  upon  us  from  so  many 
quarters.  Supposing  their  interpretation  of  Nature  in  her 

2* 

4        THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

higher  aspects  were  merely  hypothetical,  by  what  other 
process  has  any  science  been  perfected  ?  Incoherent  facts, 
accumulated  in  the  beginning  at  random,  are  pored  over 
and  studied,  till  hypotheses  are  framed  in  the  attempt  to 
reconcile  and  correlate  them.  The  hypotheses  are  open  to 
revision  later  on,  if  new  experience  challenges  their 
applicability.  The  situation  as  regards  theosophical 
teaching  is  not  as  though  this  represented  a  hypothesis  in 
rivalry  with  others.  It  is  the  only  comprehensive  theory 
of  superphysical  Nature  that  has  yet  been  presented  to  the 
world  in  a  shape  which  can  be  regarded  as  scientific  in 
its  range  and  character.  Supported  as  it  is  at  every  turn 
by  superphysical  facts  available  for  examination,  it 
embraces  an  interpretation  of  the  laws  and  conditions 
which  regulate  the  growth  of  the  Human  Soul,  the 
neglect  of  which  by  any  thoughtful  persons  who  rise  above 
the  contemplation  of  purely  material  objects,  is  so  un- 
reasonable as  to  be  almost  absurd. 

What  other  knowledge  can  compare  with  that  which 
enables  us  to  form  a  right  appreciation  of  the  spiritual 
potentialities  bearing  on  the  permanent  and  imperishable 
elements  of  our  own  being?  The  future,  looking  beyond 
the  limits  of  physical  life,  is  moulded,  according  to 
theosophical  teaching,  in  accordance  with  the  causes 
brought  into  activity  during  the  physical  life,  and  though 
occult  science  is  the  last  spiritual  system  in  the  world 
to  suggest  that  finite  blunders  or  neglect  have  infinite  con- 
sequences, it  is,  nevertheless,  profoundly  earnest  in  assur- 
ing us  that  no  great  results  in  the  future,  either  for  evil  or 
good,  are  possible  without  being  provided  for  by  adequate 
causation.  Our  will,  our  intelligently  directed  effort,  need 
not  be  called  into  play  to  assist  Nature  in  the  regular 
development  of  her  general  design;  but  as  regards  the 

INTRODUCTORY  5 

destinies  of  each  individual,  he  himself  must  make  choice 
with  his  eyes  open  in  reference  to  the  part  he  elects  to 
play  in  the  loftier  regions,  so  to  speak,  of  that  general 
design,  and  the  very  first  step  he  must  take  in  that  direc- 
tion, if  he  is  ever  to  move  on  at  all,  is  the  step  involved 
in  the  effort  to  comprehend.  He  cannot  afford  to  drift 
on  for  ever,  or  for  very  much  longer,  paying  attention 
only  to  material  things.  His  eyes  can  only  be  opened 
to  the  character  of  the  loftier  regions  referred  to  by- 
virtue,  in  the  first  instance,  of  knowledge  gained  concern- 
ing the  superphysical  realms,  spheres,  or  planes  of  Nature. 

Esoteric  teaching  exhibits  the  fundamental  truth  of 
things  in  regard  to  these  mighty  departments  of  conscious- 
ness, as  those  know  full  well  who,  first  taking  the  trouble 
to  understand  the  esoteric  statement,  proceed  then,  with 
whatever  means  may  be  within  their  reach,  to  check  and 
verify  it.  But  this  is  just  what  the  intellectual  world 
of  our  time,  at  large,  has  not  yet  attempted.  Only  a  few, 
relatively  of  its  leading  thinkers  are  even  proclaiming  the 
importance  of  psychic  investigation.  Still  fewer  have  had 
the  quick  discernment  to  perceive  that  the  esoteric  teach- 
ing offered  by  theosophical  literature  reaches  far  ahead 
of  such  immature  discoveries  as  unaided  psychic  investi- 
gation has  yet  brought  out.  Though  embracing  and 
interpreting  these,  it  also  embraces  and  interprets  the  most 
perplexing  riddles  of  human  existence,  and  the  most 
embarrassing  traditions  of  religious  faith. 

The  "  few,"  indeed,  are  pretty  numerous,  if  we  look 
at  them  apart  from  the  rest.  After  all,  the  theosophical 
movement  has  struck  its  roots  into  almost  every  country 
all  over  the  civilised  world.  Its  literature  has  been  trans- 
lated into  nearly  every  civilised  language,  and  all  over 
Europe  and  America  we  find  considerable  groups  of 

6        THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

people,  including  men  of  the  highest  culture,  devotedly 
attached  to  theosophic  study,  ardently  convinced  that  it 
opens  out  a  pathway  of  research  leading  to  positive  know- 
ledge concerning  the  spiritual  future  of  mankind.  But 
this  fact  only  renders  it  the  more  unreasonable  and  deplor- 
able that  such  groups  should  even  collectively  remain  a 
mere  handful,  compared  with  the  hosts  of  the  educated 
world  at  large. 

However,  whether  fully  or  only  partially  compre- 
hended, the  teaching  that  has  been  offered  to  the  world 
through  theosophic  agency  does  nothing  less  than  offer  a 
revelation  from  the  spiritual  plane  of  consciousness  and 
knowledge,  and  one  which  must,  in  accordance  with  the 
infallible  pressure  of  necessity  in  the  future,  be  recog- 
nised as  such,  however  many  or  however  few  may  be  those 
who  in  the  present  invest  themselves  with  the  great  advan- 
tage of  recognising  it  among  the  earliest. 

The  guidance  under  which  I  began  to  write  on  these 
subjects  in  the  year  1880  has  never  been  inactive  in  my 
life  from  that  time  till  now,  and  the  information  on  the 
basis  of  which  "  Esoteric  ^Buddhism  "  was  written  has 
been  expanded  and  deepened  in  a  great  variety  of  ways, 
one  consequence  of  which  is  that  I  am  now  enabled  to 
put  forward  the  great  and  manifold  additions  to  the  earlier 
teaching  which  the  present  volume  contains.  And  in  the 
interval  a  flood  of  theosophical  writing  has  emanated  from 
other  exponents  of  the  spiritual  science  under  elucidation. 
Some  of  these  writings  appear  to  be  exactly  parallel  with 
the  guidance  I  have  received;  in  some  cases  subtle  ideas 
are  differently  expressed;  in  others,  again,  there  may  be 
apparent  discrepancies  between  the  interpretations  I  have 
given  and  those  which  others  have  constructed.  Such 
variations  of  conception,  however,  in  regard  to  the  mean- 

INTRODUCTORY  7 

ing  of  occult  teaching  as  bearing  on  remote  problems  of 
cosmology  and  on  departments  of  natural  science  beyond 
the  range  of  phyical  exactitude,  are  of  no  consequence  in 
reference  to  the  general  value  of  the  theosophic  revelation 
at  large.  Minor  conflicts  of  opinion  in  respect  to  the 
manner  in  which  ideas  of  a  very  obscure  order  can  best  be 
translated  into  the  language  of  incarnate  thinking  ought 
rather  to  be  welcomed  than  otherwise  as  stimulating  the 
activity  of  minds  addressed  to  such  undertakings.  In  its 
bearings  on  the  possibilities  of  individual  spiritual  evolution 
there  is  no  ambiguity  in  the  teaching  of  Theosophy,  no 
room  for  differences  of  interpretation  among  honest  ex- 
ponents of  the  one  great  doctrine. 

And  it  is  mainly  with  the  purpose  of  setting  forth  these 
essential  principles  clearly  by  themselves,  with  all  such 
amplifications  of  the  previously  existing  explanations  as 
the  later  information  supplied  to  me  enables  me  to  fur- 
nish, that  the  present  work  has  been  undertaken.  From 
a  complete  account  of  the  laws  governing  human  evolu- 
tion as  a  whole,  from  the  first  manifestations  of  spirit  on 
the  material  plane,  to  the  culmination  of  the  all  but  deified 
human  individuality,  any  students  sufficiently  in  earnest 
will  be  able  to  discern  the  methods  and  principles  that 
regulate  individual  progress. 

But  theosophic  literature  is  not  merely  designed  for  the 
service  of  those  whose  already  awakened  intuitions  render 
them  quickly  appreciative  of  the  lines  on  which  spiritual 
progress  may  be  achieved.  It  should  aim  quite  as  much 
at  leavening  religious  and  scientific  thought  at  large  with 
the  great  ideas  on  which  the  ultimate  progress  of  the  race 
depends.  At  some  stage  or  other  of  his  immortal  career 
every  human  being  who  would  not  drop  hopelessly  into 
the  rear  of  the  advancing  wave  of  evolution  must  make  a 

8        THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

beginning  in  the  work  of  voluntarily  uniting  his  own  in- 
dividuality with  the  forward  movement.  That  beginning 
is  only  to  be  made  by  attaining  a  broad  comprehension 
of  the  enterprise  before  him.  But  a  great  deal  of  prepara- 
tory culture  is  possible  for  the  human  mind,  even  before 
spiritual  enthusiasm  becomes  a  clearly  defined  motive  for 
intelligent  action.  The  views  of  life  and  Nature  which 
Theosophy  unfolds  are  precisely  adapted  to  subserve  that 
culture,  and  thus  the  explanations  with  which  this  book 
is  concerned  are  subject  to  no  narrow  limitations  as  regards 
those  to  whom  they  are  addressed. 

There  is  no  logical  coherence  in  a  scheme  of  things 
which  regards  the  mankind  round  us  as  a  worthy  cul- 
mination of  all  the  efforts  Nature  has  made  so  far.  Justice 
will  never  be  fulfilled  if  the  variegated  panorama  of 
existence,  as  passing  now  before  our  sight,  is  a  point  of 
departure  from  which  each  of  us  passes  out,  once  for  all, 
to  be  stereotyped  for  good  or  evil  hereafter  in  some  other 
spheres  of  unchanging  beatitude  or  suffering.  Vaguely  it 
may  be  apprehended,  there  must  be  some  unknown 
futurity  in  which  moral  cause  and  effect  will  still  be 
operative  with  much  finer  exactitude  than  would  be  in- 
volved in  a  broad  separation  of  all  post-mortem  humanity 
into  sheep  and  goats.  With  resolute  striving  after  the 
realisation  in  life  of  whatever  ideals  of  goodness  may 
present  themselves  as  best  calculated  to  bring  the  soul  into 
sympathetic  relations  with  the  Divine  consciousness,  many 
people  may  be,  without  knowing  what  they  are  about, 
entering  on  the  path  of  the  higher  evolution;  and  some 
students  of  the  laws  governing  the  higher  life — knowing 
that  it  is  easier  to  become  intelligent  than  morally  exalted 
- — would  prefer  to  see  their  fellow-creatures  animated 
by  moral  enthusiasm  rather  than  by  the  thirst  for  spiritual 

INTRODUCTORY  9 

knowledge  as  such.  But  none  the  less  is  it  inevitably  true 
that  a  beginning  must  be  made  sooner  or  later  in  the 
acquisition  of  the  knowledge,  and  the  response  which 
Nature  would  make  to  the  life  of  unselfish  devotion  to  high 
ideals,  unaccompanied  by  an  intellectual  appreciation 
of  the  reason  why  unselfish  and  moral  exaltation  are  con- 
ducive to  great  results  hereafter,  would  be  the  gift  at  a 
future  step  of  progress,  of  peculiarly  favourable  oppor- 
tunities for  acquiring  the  knowledge. 

And  while  in  this  way  moral  exaltation,  to  begin  with, 
will  bring  such  opportunities  in  its  train  in  the  long  run, 
it  is  also  true  that  for  persons  of  a  type  of  mind  that  I 
believe  to  be  very  widely  diffused,  nothing  can  be  more 
conducive  to  the  cultivation  of  the  highest  moral  attributes 
than  an  intellectual  appreciation  of  the  truly  symmetrical 
and  reasonable  laws  really  governing  human  evolution 
which  the  esoteric  doctrine  brings  to  light.  For  it  may 
surely  be  argued  with  some  force  that  the  spectacle  of  the 
world  with  its  hideous  entanglements  of  apparently  un- 
merited suffering,  with  its  rampant  injustice,  and  wild 
carnival  of  cruelty  and  wrong  always  roaring  in  full 
activity  around  us,  and  interpreted  by  no  other  philo- 
sophy than  an  appeal  to  the  inscrutability  of  the  Divine 
will,  is  hardly  calculated  to  convince  the  thoughtful  spec- 
tator that  he  belongs  to  a  universe  in  which  the  principles 
of  goodness  and  justice  are  triumphant,  nor  to  encourage 
him  in  attempting  to  combat  the  apparent  victories  of  the 
evil  principle.  We  know  that  the  spectacle  leads  some 
thoughtful  spectators,  at  all  events,  to  the  sorrowful  con- 
clusion that  all  is  for  the  worst  in  this  worst  of  all  possible 
worlds,  and  that  non-existence  would  be  distinctly  prefer- 
able to  existence  on  the  terms  offered  us. 

A  new,  a  more  enlarged  and  more  enlightened  view  of 

io      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

human  existence  is  the  foremost  necessity  of  the  age,  and 
that  view  is  afforded  by  the  theosophic  revelation.  My 
task  will  be  to  trace  out  the  bearing  of  that  revelation  on 
the  problems  of  individual  life  as  we  stand  now  confronted 
by  the  phenomena  of  our  own  generation,  and  enabled 
for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  metaphysical  speculation 
to  deal  with  the  higher  planes  of  Nature's  activity,  and 
the  possibilities  of  spiritual  consciousness,  as  with  an  open 
book. 

And  here  at  once  I  may  as  well  grapple  with  questions 
that  will  arise  in  the  reader's  mind  as  to  the  grounds  on 
which  I  speak  of  mysteries  hitherto  generally  deemed 
insoluble,  as  coming  within  the  range  of  positive  know- 
ledge. From  the  first,  theosophical  teaching  introduced 
those  who  studied  it  to  the  idea  that  in  some  excep- 
tional cases  human  evolution  had  far  outstripped  the  stage 
exemplified  by  the  ordinary  humanity  around  us.  Those 
who  had  advanced  to  a  high  degree  along  this  path  of 
development  were  spoken  of  as  Adepts,  and  by  other 
names.  That  one  will  serve  for  the  moment.  Some  of 
us  came  into  more  or  less  intimate  relations  with  certain 
Adepts,  and  out  of  such  relationships  all  theosophical 
teaching  arose.  Now  that  it  has  been  developed  to  the 
extent  with  which  advanced  Theosophists  are  familiar,  it 
constitutes,  as  I  say,  a  coherent  interpretation  of  life  and 
Nature  claiming  attention  and  respect  on  its  own  merits. 
This  volume,  for  instance,  is  offered  to  the  non- 
theosophical  reader  as  a  view  of  the  spiritual  constitution 
and  destinies  of  man,  which  it  will  be  worth  his  while  to 
examine,  independently  of  all  authority  on  which  it  rests. 
It  embodies  its  own  authority,  in  one  way,  by  affording 
the  only  available  solution  of  many  human  problems 
to  which  no  other  system  of  philosophy  or  religion  affords 

INTRODUCTORY  1 1 

an  answer.  But  it  does  really  come  to  us  under  guarantees 
of  immense  importance  for  those  who  can  understand 
them.  So  it  is  only  fair  to  readers  who  may  be  able  to 
appreciate  these,  to  say  something  more  about  them  at 
the  outset. 

Part  of  the  teaching  modern  Theosophists  have  received 
shows  us  that,  granting  certain  conditions  of  preparedness 
on  the  part  of  persons  still  on  the  ordinary  level  of 
evolution,  well-directed  efforts  to  that  end  will  lead  to 
the  awakenment  of  interior  faculties,  by  means  of  which 
such  persons  are  able  to  cognise  and  communicate  with 
adept  teachers,  clairvoyantly.  All  such  processes  of 
development  will  be  considered  much  more  fully  later 
on  in  this  volume,  but  it  is  enough  for  the  moment  to- 
refer  to  the  position  in  general  terms.  As  time  elapsed  a 
considerable  number  of  theosophic  students  became 
enabled  to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunities  thus  pointed 
out  to  them.  No  one  decently  well  informed  concerning 
the  progress  of  superphysical  research  during  the  last 
century  ought  to  find  such  a  state  of  things  surprising 
or  difficult  of  intellectual  acceptance.  Nor,  apart  from 
modern  experiences,  should  the  existence  of  adepts — beings 
on  a  higher  level  of  spiritual  development  than  the 
common  run  of  mankind — be  regarded  as  otherwise  than 
probable  by  rational  thinkers.  Once  let  us  realise  the 
fundamental  fact  of  spiritual  evolution,  ill  understood  as 
yet  by  the  world  at  large — the  fact  that  the  spiritual  entity 
which  is  the  permanent  ego  of  each  human  being,  itself 
evolves  through  successive  physical  lives,  and  the  more 
rapid  evolution  of  some  as  compared  with  the  majority 
becomes  a  matter  of  practical  certainty.  Some  great 
figures  in  the  past,  on  spiritual  heights  far  above  those 
generally  attained,  show  us  examples  of  such 

12 

THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

pre-eminence,  and  reflection  may  enable  us  to  feel  sure  that 
besides  the  pre-eminent  spiritual  leaders  who  have  played 
a  part  before  the  world,  others  must  have  been  evolved 
in  connection  with  less  conspicuous  destinies.  For  when 
we  understand  something  of  the  manner  in  which  spiritual 
influences  operate  on  the  higher  planes  of  Nature,  we 
are  not  surprised  to  rind  that  the  real  work  of  those 
who  attain  great  spiritual  advancement  is  mainly  carried 
on  in  ways  which  do  not  bring  them  into  direct  physical 
relationship  with  the  less  developed  masses  of  mankind. 
The  seclusion  of  the  Adepts  is  a  physical  seclusion  alone, 
favourable  to  greater  activity  on  other  planes  than  would 
be  possible  for  them  if  they  mixed  in  the  turmoil  of 
ordinary  life.  It  is  no  seclusion  at  all,  from  the  point  of 
view  of  those  among  their  pupils  and  disciples,  wherever 
these  may  be  living,  who  also  develop  their  consciousness 
on  those  other  and  higher  plane  of  Nature. 

The  direct  testimony  of  such  pupils,  available  for  many 
earnest  students  of  theosophic  teaching,  is  now  multiplied 
to  such  an  extent  that  doubt  about  the  existence  of  the 
adept  fraternity  has  long  been  absurd,  from  the  point  of 
view  many  of  us  occupy.  Testimony  which  rests  on  the 
use  of  abnormal  faculties  is  just  as  easily  susceptible  of 
collateral  checks  and  corroboration  as  any  other  sort.  Cer- 
tainly it  stands  more  in  need  of  check  and  corroboration, 
because  a  new  factor, — liability  to  mistaken  observation, — 
is  introduced.  But  this  can  be  neutralised.  For  example, 
suppose  a  friend  whose  personal  honour  you  trust,  tells 
you  that  at  a  certain  time  and  place  he  met  some  common 
acquaintance.  Thereupon  you  believe  that  at  the  time 
and  place  mentioned  the  acquaintance  was  actually 
present.  But,  if  your  friend  tells  you  at  such  and  such  a 
time  and  place,  being  then  himself  "  out  of  the  body  " 

INTRODUCTORY  13 

and  functioning  on  the  "  astral  "  plane  of  Nature,  he 
saw  such  and  such  a  person — you  do  not  necessarily  feel 
sure  the  person  named  was  there.  It  is  possible  your 
friend  was  subject  to  a  delusion.  However  completely 
the  statement  may  have  been  made  in  good  faith,  it  wants 
corroboration.  But  suppose  another  friend  whom  you 
also  have  reason  to  credit  with  abnormal  faculties  says, 
"  Yes,  I  was  there  at  the  same  time;  what  A  says  is  true; 
I  also  saw  so  and  so  " — the  united  testimony  of  the  two 
observers  is  worth  very  much  more  than  twice  what  each 
would  have  been  worth  singly.  Now,  suppose  the  two 
observers  become  three  or  four  and  that  their  testimony 
does  not^  relate  to  one  observation  but  to  a  continual 
familiarity  with  the  person  or  persons  and  places  described, 
then  the  actual  existence  of  such  persons  becomes  as 
assured  to  you  as  though  the  testimony  related  to  the 
physical  plane  of  facts  altogether. 

That  is  the  state  of  the  case  for  many  modern 
Theosophists  in  Europe,  not  to  speak  of  those  in  India, 
where  pupils  of  the  Adepts  in  a  position  to  visit  them 
out  of  the  body,  are  more  often  encountered.  The  whole 
subject,  for  them,  has  been  lifted  right  out  of  the  position 
in  which  it  stood  when  it  rested  on  the  testimony  of  the 
first  promoters  of  the  Theosophical  Movement.  The 
honesty  of  that  testimony  has  been  abundantly,  vindicated, 
but  we  can  afford  now  to  rest  our  assurances  on  evidence 
with  which  it  has  had  nothing  to  do.  It  may  be  con- 
venient for  me  to  incorporate  with  this  explanation  the 
substance  of  a  statement  I  put  forward  in  a  Transaction 
of  the  London  Lodge  of  the  Theosophical  Society  in 
April,  1894.  Referring  back  to  the  beginning  of  my  own 
theosophical  studies  in  India,  about  the  year  1880,  I 
explained  how,  growing  interested  in  the  whole  matter,  I 

i4      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

became  acquainted  with  other  persons  also  interested. 
Two  of  these  especially,  natives  of  India,  earnest  spiritual- 
minded  men,  told  me  in  course  of  time  that  they  knew 
the  "  Masters  "  on  the  astral  plane — i.e.,  in  that  extra- 
physical  state  of  consciousness  of  which  millions  of  crass 
materialists  know  nothing,  but  of  which  a  large  number 
of  mystic  students  know  a  great  deal. 

A  third  Indian  acquaintance,  after  acquiring  astral  plane 
knowledge  of  the  Masters,  determined  to  reach  them  per- 
sonally— in  the  physical  body — or  perish  in  the  attempt. 
He  pushed  across  the  Tibet  frontier  and,  guided  by  astral 
perceptions,  succeeded  in  his  quest.  He  saw  in  the  flesh 
those  whom  he  and  others  had  previously  seen  in  vision, 
recognising  them  as  such,  and  returning  to  tell  of  his 
success.  Meanwhile  I  had  been  receiving  a  long  series 
of  letters,  reaching  me,  apparently  from  certain  Mahatmas, 
under  peculiar  circumstances  described  in  my  books,  and 
conveying  a  mass  of  teaching  which  in  due  time  I  was 
enabled  to  publish,  and  in  which  great  numbers  of  people 
have  found  a  better  clue  to  the  comprehension  of  their 
own  nature  and  of  the  world  around  them  than  any  pre- 
viously known  religion  or  philosophy  afforded. 

One  all-important  fact  thus  revealed  was  that  the 
avenues  of  initiation  were  still  open  for  people  who  were 
qualified  to  advance  along  them;  that  the  "  Masters," 
though  in  seclusion,  were  not  inaccessible  for  persons 
in  whom  certain  interior  faculties  were  ripe  for  develop- 
ment. Many  persons,  including  some  Europeans  whom 
I  know,  were  inspired  by  this  revelation  to  make  the 
necessary  exertions,  and  have  learned  to  transfer  their 
consciousness  to  the  astral  plane,  to  get  about  freely  on 
that  level  of  Nature,  to  obtain  access  to  the  Mahatmas, 
and  to  recognise,  as  also  astral  pupils,  friends  whom  they 

INTRODUCTORY  15 

know  in  the  flesh.  One  such  person,  a  European,  whose 
development  has  taken  place  since  the  formation  of  the 
Theosophical  Society,  first  came  into  conscious  relation 
with  the  Mahatmas  while  working  for  Theosophy  in 
India  in  connection  with  the  headquarters  of  the  Society 
at  Adyar.  Another  gained  the  same  privileges  here  in 
Europe,  scarcely  knowing  the  persons  chiefly  concerned 
with  the  Theosophical  Society  organisation  in  India. 
Within  the  last  year  or  two,  other  Europeans  and  one 
person  of  Eastern  parentage,  among  my  own  circle  of 
intimate  friends,  have  in  varying  degrees  acquired  the 
faculty  of  consciousness  on  the  astral  plane,  and  of  clair- 
voyance in  the  ordinary  state,  to  the  extent  of  being  able 
to  hold  converse,  when  permitted,  with  some  of  the 
Mahatmas,  or  to  see  them  when  they  or  some  of  their 
disciples  have  come  astrally  among  us. 

Thus  I  am  dealing  with  a  large  grolip  of  witnesses 
to  the  truth,  not  with  any  one  or  two.  Let  me  call 
them  by  letters  of  the  alphabet,  to  show  more  definitely 
how  their  testimony  hangs  together.* 

A.  went  in  the  flesh  many  years  ago  to  Tibet.     C., 
D.,  and  E.  have  seen  him  with  the  Masters  when  them- 
selves there  in  the  astral. 

B.  is  "  dead  "  as  regards  the  body  in  which  I  knew 
him.    Being  a  regular  disciple,  his  post  mortem  adventures 
do  not  follow  the  normal  course.     C.  knew  him  while 

*  In  preparing  the  present  edition  of  this  work  twenty  years 
after  the  publication  of  the  first,  it  would  be  impossible  for  me 
to  bring  the  statement  which  follows  up  to  date,  because  to  do 
so  I  should  exhaust  the  alphabet  in  referring  to  the  various 
persons  who  have  since  then  crossed  the  threshold  dividing 
mere  confident  belief  from  personal  knowledge  relating  to  the 
occult  world.  I  leave  the  statement  as  it  was  given  in  the  first 
edition  as  an  indication  of  the  manner  in  which,  though  not  as 
showing  the  extent  to  which,  our  touch  with  the  higher  planes 
of  consciousness  has  gradually  been  established. 

1 6      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

living  in  India;  and  sees  him  still  from  time  to 'time  in  an 
astral  body  with  the  Masters. 

C.  is  an  advanced  disciple,  as  much  at  home  on  the 
astral  plane,  and  as  fully  reminiscent  of  all  that  happens 
to  him   there,  as   though   the   matters  dealt  with   were 
yesterday's  doings  in  the  flesh.     On  the  astral  plane  he 
constantly  sees  D.,  E.,  F.,  and  H.,  all  of  whom  know 
him  and  know  one  another  on  this  plane  of  life,  discuss 
what  takes  place  when  with  the  Masters,  after  returning 
to  their  normal  condition,  and  are  in  all  respects  them- 
selves completely  in  their  mutual  relation  on  the  higher 
plane. 

D.  has  more  recently  attained  to  similar  privileges,  and 
is  in  the  full  exercise,  not  merely  of  the   faculties  just 
noticed,  but  also,  as  is  indeed  the  case  with  C.  likewise, 
of  the  astral  and  manasic  planes  in  the  waking  state  in  the 
body.     A  better  appreciation  of  what  this  means  will  be 
acquired  by  the  reader,  to  whom  the  terms  used  may  be 
unfamiliar,   when   he   has  gone   over  some  of   the   later 
chapters  of  this  book. 

E. — Everything  just  said  of  C.  and  D.  applies  also  to 
E.  in  the  fullest  measure.  C.  and  E.  knew  one  another 
on  the  astral  plane  before  they  \yere  acquainted  in  physical 
life.  E.  has  been  in  free  and  unrestricted  relations  with 
the  Masters  for  several  years,  though  only  coming  into  the 
inheritance  of  this  privilege — earned  in  former  lives — since 
the  activities  of  the  Theosophical  Society  began.  Unlike 
C.  and  D.,  however,  E.,  though  also  a  European,  reached 
the  development  described  without  having  any  touch  with 
the  Theosophical  Society  in  the  first  instance.  This  is 
important  with  reference  to  preposterous  hypotheses  some- 
times put  forward  with  regard  to  "  hypnotic  influences." 
E.  knows  others  of  the  Masters  besides  those  of  whom 

INTRODUCTORY  17 

theosophic  literature  has  treated,  sees  on  the  astral  plane 
(as  D.  does  also)  both  in  and  out  of  the  body;  has  friendly 
relations  also  with  F.,  G.,  and  H.  on  the  other  plane. 

F.  is  not  yet  so  far  on,  but  knows  the  Masters  on  the 
astral  plane;  also  sees  D.,  E.,  and  H.  there  constantly. 

G.  is  but  just  beginning  to  exercise   the   faculty  of 
astral    consciousness,   and    need    not   be    more   minutely 
explained. 

H.  is  in  a  position  to  be  present  frequently  when  astral 
meetings  of  pupils  are  held  in  the  Masters'  presence; 
recollects  as  yet  imperfectly,  but  is  sometimes  able  to 
corroborate  C.,  D.,  E.,  and  F.  with  respect  to  conversa- 
tions at  which  all  were  present. 

Concerning  the  reasons  why  the  great  "  Masters  of 
Wisdom  "  have  remained  in  the  deep  seclusion-  that  has 
shrouded  their  very  existence,  even  during  recent  centuries 
of  Western  progress,  it  would  be  premature  to  say  much 
at  this  stage  of  my  explanation.  But  for  the  sake  of  its 
direct  bearing  on  the  question  I  may  quote  a  few  lines 
from  an  old  alchemical  treatise  of  the  seventeenth  century, 
by  a  writer  who  was  truly  an  occult  philosopher,  though 
availing  himself  of  the  then  favourite  alchemical  disguise. 
In  his  Lumen  de  Lumine  Eugenius  Philalethes,  referring 
obviously  to  those  whom  we  now  speak  of  as  the  Adepts 
or  Mahatmas,  says :  "  Every  sophister  contemns  them 
because  they  appear  not  to  the  world,  and  concludes  there 
is  no  such  society  because  he  is  not  a  member  of  it.  There 
is  scarce  a  reader  so  just  as  to  consider  upon  what  grounds 
they  conceal  themselves  and  come  not  to  the  stage  when 
every  fool  cries — enter !  No  man  looks  after  them  but 
for  worldly  ends.  .  .  .  How  many  are  there  in  the 
world  that  study  Nature  to  know  God  ?  Certainly  they 
study  a  receipt  for  their  purses,  not  for  their  souls,  nor  in 

3 

1 8      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

any  good  sense  for  their  bodies.  It  is  fit  that  they  should 
be  left  to  their  ignorance  as  to  their  cure.  It  may  be 
the  nullity  of  their  expectations  will  reform  them,  but 
as  long  as  they  continue  in  this  humour  neither  God  nor 
good  men  will  assist  them." 

The  fact  of  the  matter  is,  indeed,  not  so  much  that 
the  Adepts  have  withdrawn  into  seclusion  as  that  man- 
kind at  large  in  the  modern  world  has  turned  a  deaf  ear 
to  their  teaching,  until  in  the  end  it  has  all  but  forgotten 
their  existence.  As  Thomas  Taylor — the  indefatigable 
translator  of  the  Neo-Platonists — writes  in  his  preface  to 
the  Orphic  Hymns,  "  Wisdom,  the  object  of  all  true 
philosophy,  considered  as  exploring  the  causes  and  prin- 
ciples of  things,  flourished  in  high  perfection  among  the 
Egyptians  first  and  afterwards  in  Greece.  Polite  literature 
was  the  pursuit  of  the  Romans;  and  experimental  enquiries 
increased  without  end  and  accumulated  without  order, 
are  the  employment  of  modern  philosophy.  .  .  . 
Modern  enquiries  never  rise  above  sense,  and  everything 
is  despised  which  does  not  in  some  respect  or  other  con- 
tribute to  the  accumulation  of  wealth,  the  gratification  of 
childish  admiration,  or  the  refinement  of  corporeal 
delight." 

It  is  the  prevalence  of  this  characteristic  in  the  modern 
world  that  has  shut  the  higher  spiritual  teaching  out  of  our 
lives  to  so  great  an  extent.  But  happily  the  exclusion  is 
not  complete.  For  all  who  can  appreciate  the  height  to 
which  it  may  lead,  the  Adepts  in  this  closing  decade  of 
the  nineteenth  century  are  just  as  accessible  as  in  those 
bygone  ages  to  which  Thomas  Taylor  refers,  when  all 
men  knew  that  the  "  Mysteries  "  were  a  portal  through 
which  it  was  possible  for  those  prepared  to  make  im- 
mediate temporal  sacrifices,  to  pass  on  towards  a  loftier 

INTRODUCTORY  19 

spiritual  evolution.  Though  rarely  approached  in  the 
Western  world  of  late,  such  portals  are  open  still;  and 
Theosophists  who  have  gained  access  to  them  have  learned 
before  going  far  to  be  guided  by  the  great  law  which 
governs  all  real  occult  progress, — that  such  progress  is 
never  to  be  attempted  even  by  the  neophyte  with  the 
single  purpose  of  acquiring  spiritual  exaltation  for  himself 
alone.  In  its  higher  stages  that  progress  must  find  its 
pre-eminent  motives  in  the  desire  to  help  on  the  spiritual 
development  of  humanity  at  large;  and  so,  in  a  humbler 
way,  those  who  make  their  first  steps  on  "  the  Path  "  with 
a  clear  sight  of  the  destination  to  which  it  leads,  cannot 
but  be  inspired  to  proclaim  with  all  the  earnestness  at 
their  command  the  importance  of  the  discoveries  they 
have  attained  to  concerning  the  place  occupied  by  the 
Adepts  in  the  spiritual  evolution  of  mankind. 

Only  by  learning  to  appreciate  in  some  measure  the 
attributes  and  powers  of  these,  our  Elder  Brethren,  will 
humanity  at  large  get  some  glimpse  of  the  future  that 
lies  before  them,  of  the  possibilities  connected  with 
spiritual  evolution  that  are  associated  with  the  rank  in 
Nature  to  which  they  have  now  attained.  The  investiga- 
tion of  these  possibilities  is  the  foremost  task  of  those  who 
may  fairly  be  described  as  occult  students.  The  effort 
to  realise  in  daily  work  and  thought  and  habits,  the  lofty 
ideals  which  theosophic  teaching  defines  for  our  aspiration, 
is  the  next  step  in  their  upward  progress.  Such  efforts 
can  only  be  made  with  the  best  effect  when  we  compre- 
hend the  system  to  which  we  belong,  and,  in  some 
measure,  the  design  that  it  subserves.  We  cannot  aim  in- 
telligently at  the  noblest  objects,  for  the  sake  of  which 
such  efforts  should  be  made,  till  we  know  something  of 
the  extent  to  which  consciousness  may  be  developed  on 

3* 

20      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

those  higher  planes  of  Nature,  as  yet  veiled  from  ordinary 
vision.  And  this  cannot  be  appreciated  even  in  imagina- 
tion till  those  higher  planes  are  described  for  us  by  persons 
who  are  already  in  a  position  to  function  there.  Bewilder- 
ing at  first,  as  it  may  be,  the  vast  cosmology  of  occult 
teaching  must  be  apprehended  in  general  outline,  at  all 
events,  before  the  true  character  of  the  spiritual  evolution 
available  for  us  can  be  adequately  grasped.  But  it  is  not 
necessary  to  plunge  into  this  at  the  beginning  of  the  whole 
study.  We  begin  to  appreciate  the  nature  of  the  prospect 
before  us  when  we  get  firm  hold  of  the  idea  that  Man  is 
not  merely  a  product  of  Nature  adrift  on  the  stream  of 
evolution,  but  is  eventually  carried,  so  to  speak,  by  that 
stream  out  into  a  vast  ocean  that  he  can  only  cross  by 
virtue  of  conscious  efforts  put  forward  on  his  own  account. 
And  then,  with  some  comprehension  of  its  winds  and 
currents — with  some  understanding,  that  is  to  say,  of  the 
higher  planes  of  Nature  that  may  be  described  for  us  by 
those  familiar  with  them — we  may  know  enough  to  appre- 
ciate the  way  in  which  it  is  competent  to  man  to  help 
forward  his  own  evolution  towards  the  loftier  levels. 

Just  as  chemistry  or  astronomy  may  be  largely  com- 
prehended now  by  people  who  would  not  have  been 
equal,  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  task  of  wresting  their 
secrets  from  Nature,  so  with  occult  science.  The  com- 
prehension of  great  realms  of  superphysical  law  and 
phenomena  is  relatively  easy  for  any  of  us  who  will  take 
advantage  of  the  adequate  guidance  offered,  now  that  the 
knowledge  has  been  acquired  by  those  who  have  been 
spiritually  strong  enough  to  lead  the  way.  In  the  present 
day  people  quite  unprovided  with  psychic  gifts  may  invest 
themselves  with  a  true  and  sufficient  acquaintance  with 
realms  of  nature  which  seemed  almost  hopelessly  removed 

INTRODUCTORY  li 

beyond  the  comprehension  of  all  but  the  initiated  few 
only  a  handful  of  years  ago.  Only  by  students  of 
mediaeval  occult  literature,  almost  maddening  in  its 
obscurity,  can  the  bright  light  now  thrown  in  our  own 
time  upon  the  subjects  that  literature  dealt  with  be 
estimated  at  its  true  value. 

In  chaotic  disarray,  indeed,  but  in  great  abundance, 
facts  have  been  lying  before  us  for  the  last  half-century 
which  have  all  along  established  for  observers,  whose 
common-sense  has  been  unclouded  by  illogical  prejudice, 
the  broad  truth  that  animated  matter  does  not  sum  up 
or  embrace  the  whole  intelligent  consciousness  of  the 
world.  Mainly,  it  would  seem,  because  these  facts  were 
not  amenable  to  systematic  experiment  or  correlation,  the 
classes  chiefly  concerned  with  the  interrogation  of  Nature 
have  shunned  them  with  something  like  irritation.  They 
had  dropped  from  the  clouds,  as  it  were,  in  an  unintel- 
ligible fashion,  instead  of  growing  in  a  reasonable  and 
coherent  manner  out  of  previously  existing  knowledge. 
It  was  very  doubtful,  when  first  reported,  whether  they 
had  really  occurred.  No  one  could  make  sense  of  them, 
and  with  the  unacceptable  hypotheses  concerning  their 
origin — generally  put  forward  by  those  who  testified  to 
their  occurrence — they  were  doubly  offensive  to  a 
materialistic  generation.  Whether  they  had  to  do  with 
the  records  of  psychic  mesmerism  or  were  frankly 
associated  with  spiritualistic  mediumship,  they  were 
equally  out  of  gear  with  ordinary  knowledge  and  were 
too  hastily  assumed  to  involve  a  denial  of  principles  to 
which  ordinary  knowledge  was  devoted.  But,  inhospit- 
ably received  as  they  were,  evidences  of  incident  and  ex- 
perience transcending  those  of  familiar  physical  science 
continued  to  pour  in  very  freely.  The  literature  of 

22      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

spiritualism,  mainly  consisting  of  records  of  .abnormal 
observation  and  experience,  has  expanded  to  enormous 
proportions.  The  accumulations  of  mesmeric  record  were 
very  considerable  before  the  new  departure,  which  within 
the  last  few  years  has  reconciled  public  opinion  with  mes- 
merism generally  by  restating  some  of  its  conclusions 
under  a  new  name.  Psychic  research  of  an  independent 
character,  keeping  both  spiritualism  and  mesmerism,  with 
all  their  hypotheses,  at  arm's  length,  has  also  accumulated 
its  records,  and  the  situation  is  now  such  that  nothing  but 
ignorance  or  stupidity  of  the  densest  sort  can  in  the  present 
day  provoke  a  denial  of  the  broad  conclusions  which  point 
to  the  existence  of  super-physical  conditions  of  matter, 
force,  and  consciousness.  These  conclusions  may  not  be 
sufficiently  precise  in  themselves  to  constitute  material 
from  which  to  deduce  any  theory  of  extra  corporeal  life, 
but  they  ought  to  satisfy  even  the  least  thoughtful  observer 
that  there  is  a  realm  of  some  sort  of  extra  corporeal  life 
around  us.  And  when  we  find — as  we  do  find  at  the 
outset  of  any  examination  of  the  facts  concerned — that 
different  people  are  very  differently  endowed  in  respect 
to  their  capacity  for  cognising  the  phenomena  of  the  super- 
physical  planes,  that  ought  to  suggest  the  possibility  that 
some  persons  may  be  able  to  cognise  these  completely 
enough  to  make  sense  of  them,  and  fit  their  phenomena 
into  a  coherent  scheme  of  Nature. 

At  this  stage  of  the  argument  we  get  back  to  the  theory 
that  with  adequate  guidance  it  is  possible  for  persons  who 
are  themselves  quite  without  the  gifts  required  for  the 
personal  observation  of  occult  phenomena,  to  bring  the 
whole  subject  within  the  area  of  intelligent  study.  We 
can  listen  first  of  all  to  a  statement  which  may  profess  to 
formulate  the  various  and  bewildering  phenomena  of 

INTRODUCTORY  23 

psychic,  mesmeric,  and  spiritualistic  investigations 
(together  with  many  others  besides).  We  may  check  the 
methods  by  which  information  of  that  kind  is  alleged  to 
be  attained,  by  the  consideration  of  all  accumulated  ex- 
perience of  abnormal  vision,  and  may  then  check  the  state- 
ment itself  by  a  general  consideration  first  of  all  of  its 
inherent  reasonableness;  secondly,  of  its  adaptation  to  the 
enigmas  and  requirements  of  life,  and  thirdly,  of  its  sym- 
metry as  compared  with  the  working  of  Nature  in  depart- 
ments within  the  range  of  easy  observation.  Finally, 
we  may  consider  its  power  of  explaining  the  sporadic  and, 
in  themselves,  unintelligible  occurrences  that  lie  around 
us  in  profusion. 

Just  such  a  statement  as  I  have  here  imagined  is  em- 
bodied in  the  theosophical  literature  of  recent  years. 
Available  for  our  acceptance  if  we  find  it  satisfying  the 
tests  that  we  are  entitled  to  apply,  we  now  have  before 
us  a  scheme  of  nature,  of  the  world,  of  human  life  and 
future  existence,  which  has  as  it  were  drawn  aside  the 
veil  from  the  symbolism  of  religion,  and  brought  the 
region  of  faith  within  the  area  of  exact  apprehension. 

And  theosophic  teaching  in  reference  to  spiritual  pro- 
gress should  surely  claim  favourable  consideration  from 
modern  thinkers,  if  for  no  other  reason,  for  this :  that 
it  brings  that  transcendental  process  within  the  uniform 
operation  of  cause  and  effect.  Perhaps,  indeed,  religious 
teaching  only  seemed  to  disregard  cause  and  effect  in 
assigning  the  conditions  of  after-life  to  arbitrary  favour  or 
condemnation.  Clear-sighted  students  may  as  readily  dis- 
cern true  theosophy  disguised  in  the  symbolism  of  religion, 
as  the  most  intelligent  exponents  of  religious  doctrine 
will  discern  the  spirit  of  religion  in  the  sublime  teaching 
of  occult  science;  but  at  all  events  popular  corrupt  religion 

24      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

is  apt  to  regard  the  destinies  of  man  after  death  as  subject 
to  treatment  which,  whether  gracious  or  retributive,  is 
influenced  by  considerations  quite  external  to  himself; 
and  exact  thinking  must  recognise  such  treatment  as 
capricious — as  outside  the  law  of  cause  and  effect  which 
operates  so  invariably  in  all  realms  of  Nature,  fairly  open 
to  observation.  Theosophy,  on  the  other  hand,  in  regard 
to  the  progress  of  humanity,  embodies  an  infinite  exalta- 
tion of  the  doctrine  of  the  conservation  of  energy.  All 
future  experiences  of  each  of  us  in  turn  are  the  inevitable 
and  logical  outcome  of  our  previous  acts  with  their  con- 
current states  of  mind.  The  apparent  iregularity  and 
injustice  of  life  is  an  appearance  merely  due  to  the  fact 
that  we  take  too  short  a  view  of  life  when  we  think  that 
we  perceive  such  irregularity  and  injustice.  Spiritual 
science  reveals  the  fact  that  each  human  life  stretches 
both  in  front  of  and  behind  any  given  period  of  physical 
manifestation  to  an  enormous  extent.  On  the  whole 
account  the  events  and  conditions  of  each  life  in  turn  are 
the  effects  of  antecedent  causes. 

With  this  magnificent  revelation,  which  is  at  the  root 
of  all  truly  scientific  views  of  human  existence,  we  shall 
be  largely  concerned  later  on;  but  there  are  some  general 
principles  concerning  the  potentialities  of  human  progress 
which  may  be  dealt  with  at  once. 

If  we  start  from  the  safe  point  of  departure  to  be  found 
in  the  established  fact  that  some  persons  have  a  much 
more  highly  perceptive  organism  than  others,  and  if  we 
keep  in  touch  with  the  idea  that  faculty  itself  is  the  pro- 
duct of  causes,  we  are  at  all  events  within  reach  of  a 
plausible  hypothesis  pointing  to  the  theory  that  people 
may  perhaps  be  able  by  appropriate  effort  to  develop  the 
aptitudes  of  their  own  organism  for  cognising  a  wider 

INTRODUCTORY  25 

range  of  natural  phenomena  than  those  which  are  reflected 
in  the  five  senses.  And  if  so,  do  we  not  come  within 
range  of  the  idea  that  human  evolution  may  be  the  product 
of  two  lines  of  force,  the  one  proceeding,  so  to  speak, 
from  Nature  at  large,  and  representing  the  normal  im- 
pulse of  evolution,  the  other  generated  by  the  spontaneous 
volition  of  the  individual,  and  representing  the  previously 
dormant  principle  of  Divinity  within  him  ? 

This  idea  is  really  the  keynote  of  the  scientific  view  of 
human  spiritual  evolution.  The  will  force  of  each  human 
being  who  would  rise  in  Nature  must  be  united  with  the 
evolutionary  tendencies  of  the  race  as  a  whole  in  order 
that  his  greatest  possible  development  may  be  brought 
about.  The  plain  common-sense  of  this  should  be  obvious 
to  anyone  who  will  dwell  in  thought  on  the  deep  signi- 
ficance of  any  among  many  conventional  religious  phrases 
that  are  constantly  echoed  and  rarely  appreciated.  Take, 
for  instance,  the  familiar  idea  that  in  God  we  live  and 
move  and  have  our  being.  The  converse — spoken  with 
all  due  reverence — is  a  corollary  of  that  statement.  God 
— the  spirit  or  influence  of  God — lives  in  us,  and  in  so  far 
as  w'e  have  consciousness  of  being  very  ungodlike  in  many 
respects,  it  should  be  obvious  that  the  extent  to  which 
that  condition  of  things  may  be  destined  to  become  a  vital 
truth,  depends  on  the  degree  to  which  we  render  ourselves, 
so  to  speak,  habitable  for  God.  But  surely,  if  one  human 
being  has  rendered  himself  very  much  more  habitable  for 
God  than  another,  that  human  being  is  the  one  whose  will 
has  became  a  more  potent  force  than  the  will  of  the  other, 
for  it  is  more  largely  infused  with  the  Will  which,  in  its 
perfection,  is  recognised  as  the  first  cause  of  all  things,  and 
the  guiding  principle  of  Nature  and  evolution. 

Who  can  fail  to  see  what  nonsense  it  must  be  to  predi- 

26      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

cate  the  same  immediate  destiny  in  evolution  for  the  God- 
inhabited  man  and  the  mere  self-centred  human  animal. 
True,  conventional  religion,  taking  refuge  in  a  meek  faith 
that  the  worst  sinner  may  be  purified  somehow  in  another 
world,  is  content  to  remain  in  ignorance  of  the  way  in 
which  its  paradox  works, — of  the  device  by  which  it  is 
arranged  that  opposite  causes  should  produce  the  same 
effect;  but  occult  science,  comprehending  the  patience  of 
Nature,  as  well  as  its  invariability,  is  well  aware  that  the 
human  animal  will  have  other  chances,  besides  any  one 
in  particular  that  we  may  see  him  wasting,  for  making 
the  efforts  that  will  render  himself — in  some  future  per- 
sonality— the  temple  of  spiritual  consciousness.  Oppor- 
tunities may  be  wasted,  and  if  so  they  may  recur.  The 
considerations  governing  that  reflection  will  be  examined 
later  on.  The  all-important  point  is  that  at  some  stage 
or  other  of  his  career  a  human  being  must  undertake  his 
own  evolution — unite  an  adequately  powerful  ray  of  the 
Universal  Spirit  with  his  own  consciousness — or  he  will 
not  evolve  up  into  those  superior  realms  of  evolution 
which  the  humanity  of  our  own  epoch  merely  exists  to 
subserve.  Nor  is  that  the  whole  of  the  thought  which 
this  simple  view  of  the  subject  suggests.  It  is  a  common- 
place of  all  scientific  thinking  that  there  cannot  be  im- 
mobility in  Nature;  there  must  be  progress  or  retrogression 
— change  of  some  sort.  Nothing  really  stands  still,  either 
in  the  cycles  of  astronomy,  or  chemical  change,  or  meta- 
physical condition.  A  man  may  live  one  life,  perhaps, 
and  appear  to  be  neither  higher  nor  lower  in  the  scale  of 
Nature  at  the  close  of  it  than  he  was  at  the  beginning; 
but  one  life  is  after  all  but  a  brief  interval  in  eternity, 
or  even  in  those  very  protracted  cycles  of  time  which 
occult  science  prefers  to  handle  rather  than  to  prattle, 

INTRODUCTORY  27 

with  the  modern  creeds,  of  conceptions  so  embarrassing 
to  the  finite  mind  as  eternity  and  infinitude. 

The  man,  as  a  continuous  being,  having  a  life  history 
of  which  the  one  physical  personality  is  but  a  single  link, 
cannot  stand  still  in  evolution.  It  is  an  intellectual 
absurdity  to  imagine  man  doing  that.  He  must  either 
advance  or  recede;  progress  or  retrogress  like  everything 
else — every  being  else — in  Nature.  Up  to  the  rank  in 
creation  where  most  of  us  are  standing  now,  such  retro- 
gression as  has  been  possible  need  not  for  the  moment  be 
considered.  The  great  automatic  forces  of  evolution  have 
driven  each  individual  forward.  There  has  been  suffering, 
perhaps,  if  during  the  process  of  such  driving  his  will 
has  been  set  against  the  Great  Power  behind  him,  but 
broadly  speaking  there  has  been  no  retrogression.  From 
the  humbler  spheres  of  consciousness  in  the  lower  king- 
doms of  Nature  the  soul,  in  dim  ages  of  the  past,  has  risen 
upward.  Through  processes  of  ethereal  existence  ante- 
dating the  humanity  of  the  type  now  attained,  the  in- 
dividuality has  moved  onward  towards  its  higher  destinies 
as  a  human  being  qualified  to  say  with  a  full  comprehen- 
sion of  what  it  is  about — "  Now  I  will  blend  this  con- 
sciousness and  volition  which  is  myself  with  the  superior 
divine  consciousness  of  which  I  am  the  material  mirror, 
and  thus  illuminated  and  inspired  I  will  move  forward 
again  ever  onward  and  upward."  But  just  because  he 
is  now  qualified  to  say  this  if  he  chooses  to  act  upon  such 
a  declaration,  a  man  is  also  qualified  to  determine  that 
it  is  all  too  much  trouble;  too  painful  for  the  time-being, 
perhaps.  And  then  if  the  election  is  so  made,  the  human 
consciousness  which  is  the  product  of  natural  evolution 
so  far,  chooses,  in  effect,  to  unite  itself  with  matter  and 
its  limitations,  instead  of  with  spirit  and  its  potentialities. 

28      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

It  is  not  necessary  to  stop  here  and  at  full  length  attempt 
to  define  the  characteristics  of  the  descent  that  must  then 
set  in.  It  should  be  obvious  to  any  rational  understanding 
that  such  a  descent  is  the  inevitable  alternative  to  the 
conscious  self-directed  ascent,  at  the  turning-point  of 
evolution,  wherever  that  may  be,  at  which  a  higher 
progress  to  be  achieved  by  the  preparation  of  the  interior 
self  for  the  access  of  the  Divine  influx  is  offered  to  each 
man  in  turn  as  a  potentiality  of  the  consciousness  he  has 
attained.  But  looking  upward  and  considering  the  prospects 
of  humanity — so  very  ill  comprehended  as  yet  by  the 
world  at  large — in  their  broadest  aspects  the  truth  just 
defined  is  one  of  pre-eminent  significance.  We  have  got 
half-way  through  the  great  evolutionary  process  on  which 
the  human  faculty  is  launched.  So  far  we  have  been  led 
and  supported.  For  the  rest  of  the  way  we  must  push 
on  ourselves — seeing  our  way;  understanding  what  is 
expected  of  us;  resolute  to  fulfil  the  Divine  purpose. 

Nor  from  this  moment  onward  need  we  be  any  longer 
in  the  dark  concerning  the  road  to  be  travelled,  the  interior 
development  we  have  it  in  our  power  to  reach,  nor  the 
attributes  of  that  rank  in  Nature  which  it  is  open  to  us  to 
attain.  The  view  of  the  whole  evolutionary  scheme  that 
has  been  gradually  set  forth  in  theosophical  literature  is 
now  sufficiently  complete  to  make  the  prospects  of  the 
future  as  intelligible  as  the  history  of  the  past.  We  are 
as  I  have  said,  half-way  through  the  whole  "  manvantara," 
or  period  within  which  the  present  chapter  of  spiritual 
evolution  is  designed  to  take  place.  The  time  spent  up 
to  now — on  other  planets  besides  this — has  been  counted 
in  millions  of  ages.  Millions  of  ages  lie  before  the  human 
family  for  the  full  and  complete  development  of  its 
evolution.  Paying  attention  for  the  moment  to  that  which 

INTRODUCTORY  29 

may  be  described  as  normal  evolution  alone,  occult  science 
shows  us  that  the  stupendous  task  of  harmonising  our  wills 
completely  with  the  Divine  idea  of  the  whole  undertaking, 
and  of  mastering  all  the  knowledge  which  it  is  possible 
for  us  to  acquire  when  our  natures  are  adequately  exalted 
by  that  process,  is  one  which  may  be  protracted  over  the 
whole  range  of  those  millions  of  ages.  We  shall  gather 
more  as  we  go  on  concerning  the  circumstances  under 
which  it  is  so  protracted,  but  taken  as  slowly  as  Nature 
allows  for,  or  as  rapidly  as  the  process  can  be  hastened, 
nothing  can  be  achieved  from  the  middle  point  of  the 
manvantara  onwards  unless  a  comprehension  of  what  is  to 
be  done  animates  each  effort  at  every  stage.  That  is  the 
all-essential  idea  to  keep  hold  of  in  contemplating  the 
prospects  of  humanity.  The  nature  of  the  attainments 
possible  eventually,  will  be  considered  more  conveniently 
at  a  later  stage  of  the  inquiry. 

CHAPTER    II 
OCCULT  SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION 

AT  the  outset  of  any  serious  attempt  to  compre- 
hend Theosophic  teaching  concerning  the  growth 
of  the  soul,  it  is  well  worth  while  to  dissipate  the 
foolish  delusion  that  such  teaching  is  at  war  with  religion, 
and  based  upon  a  godless  and  atheistic  system  of  thought, 
Theosophy  is  so  far  from  deserving  that  reproach  that  it 
even  brings  into  sympathy  with  all  essential  religious  ideas, 
those  of  its  followers  who,  repelled  in  the  first  instance 
by  the  unsatisfactory  creeds  in  which  religion  has  so  often 
been  disguised  by  ecclesiastical  systems,  have  approached 
it  from  the  point  of  view  of  agnostic  or  even  atheistic 
thinking. 

Occult  science  enables  us  to  define  clearly  before  the 
mind's  eye  the  goal  at  which  humanity  has  to  aim. 
Religious  faith,  it  may  be  urged,  does  this  also,  no  matter 
with  what  varieties  of  creed  it  may  be  associated.  It 
points  to  a  happy  spiritual  life  of  a  refined  order  as  a 
reward  for  piety  and  blameless  conduct.  But  that  is 
not  a  "  clearly  defined  "  goal,  because  the  conditions  of 
such  superior  existence  are  never  explained  in  sacred 
writings  with  exactitude.  The  theosophic  exposition  of 
spiritual  science,  on  the  other  hand,  shows  quite  definitely 
the  conditions  of  spiritual  existence  which  ensue  as  a 
consequence  of  simple  piety  and  blameless  life,  and  also 
the  still  higher  conditions  that  may  be  attainable  for  those 
who  unite  with  the  utmost  attainable  blamelessness, 
adequate  knowledge  concerning  the  scope  and  possibilities 
of  human  existence,  and  who,  guiding  their  conduct  by 
the  light  of  that  knowledge,  bring  themselves  so  far  into 
harmony  with  the  loftiest  principles  governing  the  evolu- 

30 

OCCULT  SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION    3  r 

tion  of  the  world,  as  to  rise  in  the  scale  of  creation,  and 
take  their  places  in  that  sphere  of  existence  which,  as 
compared  with  the  kingdom  of  humanity,  might  be 
termed  the  kingdom  of  divinity. 

Before  going  further  let  me  expand  this  contrast  a 
little.  For  one  very  common  mistake  made  about  theo- 
sophic  teaching  by  people  who  begin  to  appreciate  its 
ethical  tendencies,  is  that,  after  all,  it  only  repeats  familiar  * 
Christian  exhortations  in  a  new  form  of  words,  dropping 
out  the  ecclesiastical  phraseology. 

In  spite  of  the  painful  pretences  of  precision  which 
distinguish  the  anthropomorphic  formulas  of  modern 
churches,  the  philosophical  literature  of  modern  thought 
is  saturated  with  the  conviction  that  the  conditions  of 
physical  life  hopelessly  deny  us  exact  knowledge  in 
reference  to  the  hereafter.  **  The  bourne  from  which 
no  traveller  returns  "  is  a  region  which  Shakespeare,  even 
though  presenting  us  in  the  same  breath  with  a  traveller 
who  does  return  from  it,  recognises  as  shrouded  in  im- 
penetrable darkness.  Tennyson  cannot  give,  by  the  Voice* 
of  Faith,  any  more  definite  information  concerning  the 
future  than  is  conveyed  in  the  "  notice  faintly  under- 
stood," which  embodies  the  encouragement  of  "  a  hidden 
hope."  The  leading  exponents  of  modern  knowledge 
concerning  physical  nature  are  bitter  in  their  repudia- 
tion of  the  theory  that  it  is  possible  to  get  touch  with 
positive  facts  having  to  do  with  non-carnate  conditions 
of  consciousness.  With  eighteen  centuries  to  work  in,  the 
Christian  churches  have  finally  produced,  as  the  result 
of  their  teaching,  the  assured  conviction  on  the  part  of 
their  most  intellectual  pupils,  that  there  is  nothing  to  be 
known,  however  much  to  be  hoped  for,  along  that  road. 
Reasonable  conjectures,  pointing  to  a  superphysical  intel- 

32      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

ligence  and  consciousness  of  some  sort  governing  the 
world,  there  may  be,  but  of  real  knowledge,  such  as 
that  we  have  about  the  planetary  movements  or  the  mole- 
cular constitution  of  matter,  there  is  none  attainable. 

Samuel  Laing,  summing  up  the  conclusions  of  Modern 
Thought,  writes :  "  As  far  as  our  experience  and  know- 
,  ledge  extend,  this  life  of  conscious  personal  identity  is 
indissolubly  connected  with  a  material  organ — the  brain. 
What  will  become  of  it  when  the  brain  is  dis- 
solved into  its  elements  ?  No  voice  comes  from  beyond 
the  grave  to  tell  us.  It  is  the  mystery  of  mysteries." 

And  the  authors  of  "  The  Unseen  Universe,"  though 
their  whole  book  presents  itself  as  an  attempt  to  argue 
that  there  may  be  an  unseen  universe  and  some  avenue  that 
may  at  last  lead  from  the  seen  to  the  unseen,  conceive  that 
up  to  now  this  avenue  "  has  unfortunately  been  walled  up 
and  ticketed  with  '  No  road  this  way.'  "  "  In  fine,"  they 
say  elsewhere,  "  the  unseen  may  have  a  very  wide  field 
of  influence,  but  from  its  very  nature  its  working  is  not 
•discernible,  and  we  are  therefore  led  to  consult  the  Chris- 
tian records  for  otherwise  unattainable  information  regard- 
ing the  reality  of  a  present  influence  exercised  by  the  in- 
visible universe  upon  ours."  As  for  the  fate  of  evil  doers, 
"  We  greatly  question  whether  any  school  of  theologians 
have  succeeded  in  throwing  a  single  ray  of  real  light  into 
this  mysterious  region." 

The  whole  body  of  theosophic  teaching  on  the  con- 
trary rests  on  the  confident  declaration  that  an  immense 
volume  of  real  knowledge,  quite  as  precise  and  certain  as 
that  we  possess  about  the  movements  of  the  planets,  or 
the  behaviour  of  molecules,  is  attainable  and  has  been 
attained  in  reference  to  superphysical  conditions  of  human 
consciousness,  the  natural  laws  which  govern  the  transition 

OCCULT  SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION   3  3 

of  human  consciousness  from  one  sphere  or  plane  of  Nature 
to  another,  and  the  conditions  of  existence  which  belong  to 
other  Beings,  some  higher  than,  some  lower  than  the 
humanity  of  which  we  have  cognisance  on  this  earth. 
But  when  the  practical  bearing  of  this  knowledge  on 
human  conduct  during  incarnate  life  is  brought  down  to 
an  every-day  level,  undoubtedly  it  is  found  that  in  many 
respects  the  ethics  of  exact  spiritual  science  are  identical 
with  the  ethics  of  the  inexact,  however  ardent,  aspira- 
tions of  religion.  That  is  in  no  way  surprising  for  students 
of  Theosophy  who  come  to  realise  that  all  religion  worthy 
of  the  name  has  grown  out  of  spiritual  science  as  existing 
in  the  world  at  the  period  of  such  growth.  Religions 
prepared  by  the  various  great  teachers  and  prophets  of  man- 
kind for  propagation  in  the  world  at  large,  are  in  all  cases 
excerpts  clothed  in  a  more  or  less  elaborate  symbolism, 
from  the  great  body  of  definite  scientific  knowledge  con- 
cerning the  spiritual  laws  and  purpose  of  the  world 
possessed  by  the  initiates  for  the  time  being  of  esoteric 
wisdom. 

The  identity,  however,  of  ordinary  religious  and  theo- 
sophic  ethics  up  to  a  certain  point  in  no  way  lessens  the 
importance  of  the  additional  spiritual  guidance  to  be 
derived  from  the  knowledge  of  theosophic  doctrine.  The 
acquisition  of  that  knowledge  at  one  stage  or  another  of 
human  progress  is  an  absolute  condition,  sine  qua  non,  for 
the  attainment  of  the  grander  possibilities  of  that  progress. 
The  good  life  per  se  will  lead  to  happiness  hereafter,  as 
the  most  popular  forms  of  religious  teaching  very  fairly 
declare.  The  ideas  associated  with  religious  piety,  if 
welded  with  that  good  life,  will  colour  the  happiness  to 
which  it  leads  and  determine  its  character  and  kind.  But 
the  good  life  per  se  leads  to  nothing  more  than  happiness, 

4 

34      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

and  not  even  to  an  eternity  of  that.  To  rise  in  the  scale 
of  Nature  and  get  above  the  conditions  of  transitoriness 
that  beset  all  phases  of  consciousness  of  the  merely  human 
kingdom,  whether  incarnate  or  disincarnate,  we  must 
make  specific  efforts  of  a  kind  that  can  only  be  made  by 
virtue  of  knowledge  concerning  the  higher  spiritual  laws  of 
Nature. 

These  are  vague  phrases  till  they  are  brought  to  a  focus 
by  an  exposition  of  the  great  and  magnificent  discoveries 
concerning  the  dormant  spiritual  faculties  of  humanity 
and  the  phases  of  Nature  suitable  to  their  expansion,  which 
some  advanced  representatives  of  humanity  in  all  ages  of 
the  world  since  the  human  epoch  began,  have  been  enabled 
to  make. 

When  churches  or  sects — with  their  hundreds  of 
divergent  creeds — make  definite  statements  of  fact  con- 
cerning the  destinies  of  humanity  which  can  be  shown 
to  have  arisen  from  some  unintelligent  materialisation  of 
an  allegory,  or  from  a  grovelling,  anthropomorphic  con- 
ception of  the  principles  on  which  the  world  is  governed, 
theosophical  teaching  will  naturally  endeavour  to  break 
through  such  incrustations  of  error;  but  the  religious  in- 
stinct or  sentiment  itself  is  so  fundamentally  identical  with 
the  theosophical  instinct  or  sentiment,  that  to  suppose  the 
one  hostile  to  the  other  is  to  misunderstand  the  position 
entirely. 

It  is  quite  true,  more's  the  pity,  that  much  genuine 
religious  sentiment  is  often  blended  with  limited  sectarian 
bigotry.  Whether  a  man  be  a  member  of  the  Church  of 
England,  or  a  Roman  Catholic,  or  a  Baptist,  or  a  Mussul- 
man, if  he  conceives  that  his  own  creed  sums  up  the  actual 
truth  of  things  and  that  the  other  creeds  are  false,  he  is  in 
a  state  of  mind  which  we  must  recognise,  to  say  the  least, 

OCCULT  SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION    3  5 

as  highly  unintelligent.  If  he  goes  further,  as  many  do, 
and  believes  that  there  is  no  salvation,  outside  the  pale  of 
his  own  creed,  for  the  adherents  of  others,  he  stands  before 
us  as  a  reductio  ad  absurdum  of  sectarian  folly.  But  how- 
ever feeble  may  be  his  mental  grasp  of  spiritual  principles, 
even  he — and,  all  the  more,  sectarians  who  are  in  various 
degrees  less  bigoted — may  blend  with  their  foolishness 
a  great  deal  of  genuine  religious  sentiment.  They  may 
set  before  their  own  interior  sight  a  conception  of  Deity 
which  they  adore,  a  code  of  right  and  wrong  which  is,  at 
all  events,  something  divorced  from  the  immediate  dictates 
of  selfish  interest,  and  they  may  govern  their  lives  on  the 
principle  that  the  destinies  of  the  soul  after  death  are  of 
more  importance  than  the  transitory  enjoyments  of  physi- 
cal life.  With  that  much  spirituality  to  begin  with, 
advancing  intelligence  in  progress  of  time  may  lead  them 
into  the  path  of  real  enlightenment. 

In  a  very  much  higher  degree  may  religious  sentiment 
of  a  more  refined  and  intense  order  be  directly  calculated 
to  prepare  the  mind  for  the  supreme  illumination  of  theo- 
sophic  teaching,  and  however  little  modern  popular  creeds 
may  seem  adapted  to  develop  ardent  spiritual  enthusiasm 
of  a  pure  and  refined  character,  we  have  to  recognise  the 
curious  fact  that  in  the  present  age  of  the  world  great 
numbers  of  religious  people  .are  immeasurably  better  and 
more  spiritually  intelligent  than  their  creeds  would  lead 
one  to  expect.  In  fact,  the  growth  of  intelligence  has 
permeated  European  religions  to  an  extent  that  has  honey- 
combed them,  really,  without  apparently  disturbing  their 
external  form;  in  other  words,  the  refinement  of  feeling 
that  general  culture  evokes,  and  the  earnestness  of  spiritual 
aspiration  among  multitudes  of  people  still  professing  some 
orthodox  faith,  have  woven  so  beautiful  a  drapery  of  vague 

4* 

3  6      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

sentiment  around  the  original  doctrines — which  it  has 
never  occurred  to  them  to  dispense  with — that  the  ugly 
deformities  thus  hidden  from  view  are  effectually  for- 
gotten. If  the  outsider  complains,  "  Your  doctrine  says 
so  and  so,"  the  answer  is,  "  Not  at  all;  nobody  of  culti- 
vated mind  takes  it  in  that  sense;  it  really  means  this  and 
that."  And  then  the  ignoble  statement,  whatever  it  may 
be,  is  sublimated  into  something  too  ethereal  to  be  con- 
troverted. 

This  method  of  dealing  with  exoteric  or  popular 
religions  may  be  supported  or  condemned  along  different 
lines  of  argument.  Whether  it  hastens  or  retards  the 
evolution  of  the  popular  religion  into  something  higher 
is  a  question  that  cannot  be  easily  decided.  But  at  all 
events,  the  attitude  of  mind  of  people  who  in  this  way 
cling  to  and  refine — for  their  own  use,  at  least — the  con- 
ventions of  exoteric  belief,  may  go  hand  in  hand  with  a 
capacity  to  assimilate  real  spiritual  knowledge.  And  the 
ardour  of  religious  feeling  which  has  in  the  first  instance 
inspired  their  own  interior  development,  must  be  distinctly 
favourable,  in  their  case,  to  that  practical  application  of 
the  higher  wisdom  to  the  problems  of  human  life  and  con- 
duct which  it  is  the  great  purpose  of  Theosophy  to 
promote. 

Indeed,  it  is  impossible,  from  the  theosophical  point 
of  view,  to  be  too  earnest  in  repudiating  the  miserable 
misrepresentation  of  Theosophy  that  leads  people  some- 
times to  imagine  it  an  aggressive  and  iconoclastic  philo- 
sophy essentially  hostile  to  religion.  It  would  be  as  wise 
to  assert  that  mathematical  teaching  is  hostile  to 
astronomy.  Mathematics  may  from  time  to  time  have 
upset  some  popular  idea  on  the  subject  of  astronomy,  but 
that  has  simply  been  so  much  the  better  for  astronomy; 

OCCULT  SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION   3  7 

and  in  the  same  way  any  religious  idea — any  idea,  that  is 
to  say,  which  has  become  encrusted  on  religion — which 
Theosophy  may  be  in  a  position  to  discredit — will  be  got 
rid  of  by  religion  greatly  to  its  own  advantage. 
Theosophy,  in  fact,  stands  to  religion  very  much  in  the 
position  of  mathematics  to  astronomy;  that  last  relation- 
ship is  the  relationship  of  the  abstract  to  the  concrete. 
The  pure  colourless  truths  of  mathematical  science  lead 
us  upwards  to  an  appreciation  of  the  sublime  and  soul- 
stirring  panorama  of  the  heavens.  So  does  an  understand- 
ing of  theosophic  truth,  however  stern,  scientific,  and 
abstract  it  may  seem  in  the  first  instance,  lead  the  spiritual 
consciousness  upward  towards  realms  of  glowing  emotion, 
and  eventually  into  the  actual  contemplation  of  spiritual 
realities,  the  glories  of  which  may  easily  account  for  the 
way  in  which  the  illuminated  theosophic  student  regards 
all  familiar  objects  of  mundane  desire  as  contemptible 
trivialities  beside  the  experiences  of  his  interior  progress. 

To  repeat  a  phrase  growing  almost  too  hackneyed  for 
use,  but  representing  a  truth  that  must  never  be  forgotten, 
Theosophy  is  the  essence  of  religion,  and  of  all  religions 
worthy  of  the  name.  Or  in  other  words,  it  is  the  science 
of  Divine  things,  as  the  word  implies.  Reverence  for 
each  specific  religion  felt  by  its  adherents,  may  often  blind 
them  to  the  idea  that  there  must  be  such  an  underlying 
science.  The  outer  expression  given  to  the  views  of 
exoteric  religions  concerning  Deity  and  Divine  relations 
with  humanity  must — for  all  but  the  most  circumscribed 
intelligence — be  recognised  as  at  any  rate  falling  far  short 
of  a  complete  explanation  of  those  stupendous  mysteries. 
There  must  be  a  prodigious  complexity,  so  to  speak,  in 
the  organisation  of  spiritual  Nature,  which  very  bald — 
however  poetical — declarations  concerning  omnipotence, 

3  8        THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

omniscience,  Heaven,  and  eternal  life,  fail  to  expound. 
Within  the  far  narrower  field  of  observation  with  which 
physical  science  deals,  it  will  be  seen  on  reflection  that  a 
great  many  broad  generalisations  are  in  the  nature  of  an 
exoteric  substitute  for  the  declarations  which  more  ad- 
vanced knowledge  might  supply.  The  sun,  for  example, 
is  for  the  popular  Western  understanding — a  vast  globe 
in  the  centre  of  the  system  of  planets  to  which  we  belong, 
which  shines  with  a  bright  light  and  gives  out  heat, 
generating  organic  growth,  and  providing  for  the  recur- 
rence of  seasons,  and  so  on.  Other  popular  conceptions 
of  the  sun  have  anthropomorphized  these  ideas,  more  or 
less,  and  have  imputed  a  self-conscious  Divinity  to  the  orb 
on  whose  influence  the  life  and  health  of  the  world  so 
manifestly  depended.  But  underlying  both  views,  there 
are  certainly  immense  realms  of  complex  intermediation 
that  the  popular  understanding  does  not  trouble  itself 
about  in  either  case.  How  does  the  sun  make  a  plant 
grow  ?  It  sends  out  light  and  heat,  but  that  is  a  loose  and 
ineffectual  statement  that  takes  us  no  forwarder.  We  can 
hunt  down  the  physical  elements  concerned,  and  discern 
them,  if  not  absolutely  with  the  sight,  with  the  eye  of 
understanding — in  their  molecular  simplicity.  Heat  may 
throw  these  molecules  into  motion,  but  that  alone  will  not 
account  for  organic  growth.  Moreover,  when  we  begin 
to  examine  into  these  things — how  does  the  heat  get  here 
from  the  sun  ?  The  sun  radiates  it !  That  does  not 
explain  anything.  By  what  intermediation  is  the  influence 
conveyed  ?  Science  begins  at  this  stage  to  be  esoteric. 

Popular  knowledge — the  popular  religion  of  the  matter 
so  to  speak — is  content  with  the  statement — the  sun  emits 
heat.  Even  exoteric  science  finds  it  necessary  to  fortify 
and  expand  this  crude  statement,  and  brings  the  lumini- 

OCCULT  SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION   3  9 

ferous  ether  into  the  field  of  observation.  Ether,  that 
marvellous  medium  of  physical  influences  that  can  neither 
be  seen,  felt,  nor  examined  by  any  instrument,  is  dis- 
covered by  advancing  knowledge  nevertheless,  and 
science,  in  spite  of  its  extremely  cautious  habits,  begins  to 
affirm  certain  definite  propositions  concerning  it.  Then 
does  "  emission  "  in  the  popular  sense  take  place  at  all 
in  connection  with  tjie  sun's  heat  and  light  ?  According 
to  the  very  latest  views  of  physical  science,  such  emission 
is  actually  suspected,  though  till  the  appearance  of  the 
electron  on  the  scene,  the  tendency  of  modern  thought 
was  rather  in  the  direction  of  assuming  that  all  solar  in- 
fluences were  transmitted  to  us  as  vibrations  or  peculiar 
conditions  of  the  ether.  That  the  sun  does  something 
to  the  ether,  and  that  we  feel  effects  in  the  ether  round 
us,  is  undeniable;  but  esoteric  science  enables  us  to  realise 
that  the  sun  at  all  events  is  in  control  of  forces  infinitely 
more  subtle  even  than  those  having  to  do  with  etheric 
vibrations,  and  already  we  can  foresee  developments  of 
scientific  knowledge  in  preparation  for  no  very  distant 
periods  when  the  term  "  physical  science  "  will  have  to 
be  discarded  as  an  incomplete  description  of  the  know- 
ledge accumulated  by  the  Royal  Society. 

Assuming  eventually  that  students  of  solar  physics  come 
to  something  resembling  complete  knowledge  of  the  chain 
of  cause  and  effect  between  the  sun's  influence  and  the 
organic  life  of  the  world,  then  solar  physics  would  be  to 
the  broad  popular  statements  on  the  subject,  just  what 
theosophical  knowledge — in  its  perfection — is  to  popular 
religion. 

The  analogy  just  employed  is  all  the  more  inviting, 
because  it  suits  the  idea  to  be  illustrated  in  more  ways 
than  one.  Just  as  esoteric  solar  physics  require  us  to 

40       THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

investigate  the  properties  of  a  medium  imperceptible  to 
exoteric  senses,  so  in  dealing  with  spiritual  science  we 
must  range  over  fields  of  observation  that  lie  altogether 
beyond  exoteric  understanding.  Even  without  attempt- 
ing this,  a  great  deal  of  very  instructive  and  suggestive 
information  on  the  subject  may,  it  is  true,  be  picked  up 
by  those  peculiarly  qualified,  from  ancient  Oriental 
literature.  Most  of  this  is  maddeningly  obscure,  though 
when  you  know  what  it  ought  to  mean  you  can  often 
see  that  this  meaning  must  have  been  present  to  the 
writer's  mind.  But  granting  that  in  this  way  from  one 
region  or  another  of  ancient  Oriental  literature,  it  would 
be  possible  to  compile  an  account  of  the  great  evolutionary 
processes  of  Nature,  showing  the  origin  of  the  solar  system, 
the  successive  development  of  planets  related  to  each  other, 
the  passage  of  the  life  influence  through  the  vegetable  and 
animal  kingdoms,  and  the  evolution  of  the  human  king- 
dom at  last  through  a  series  of  mighty  races,  and  so  on, 
after  all  the  knowledge  so  preserved  in  the  Eastern  books, 
must  in  the  first  instance  have  been  acquired  by  persons 
qualified  to  direct  their  observation  to  realms  of  Nature 
beyond  those  penetrated  by  the  ordinary  senses.  Whether 
knowledge  concerning  the  higher  planes  of  Nature  was 
obtained  by  ancient  seers  thousands  of  years  ago,  or  by 
modern  seers  quite  recently,  its  acquisition  must  of  neces- 
sity depend  on  the  exercise  by  some  persons  at  one  time 
or  another  of  higher  faculties  than  those  concerned  with 
the  ordinary  objects  of  sense.  We  may  frankly  recognise 
that  the  knowledge  concerning  Nature  on  which  the  lofty 
moral  purpose  of  theosophic  teaching  rests,  could  never 
have  been  acquired  by  the  mere  intellectual  study  of 
evidences  lying  within  the  range  of  mere  scientific  observa- 
tion. The  gifts  of  seership,  including  the  highest  spiritual 

OCCULT  SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION   4 1 

clairvoyance,  have  been  brought  into  play  in  the  prolonged 
task  of  educating  the  human  mind  to  understand  the  great 
scheme  of  Nature  to  which  that  mind  belongs,  and  from 
this  reflection  it  directly  follows  that  the  cultivation  in 
ourselves  of  analogous  faculties,  is  the  great  task  on  which 
it  behoves  us  to  enter  if  we  would  come  fully  into  com- 
munion with  the  aspects  of  Nature  from  contact  with 
which  the  seer's  knowledge  has  been  developed. 

But  not  on  that  account  need  we  assume  that  no 
progress  in  spiritual  science  is  to  be  accomplished  without 
first  developing  faculties  that  will  bring  us  into  conscious 
relations  with  higher  planes  of  Nature.  As  well  might 
we  refuse  to  accept  any  knowledge  concerning  the  stars 
unless  we  were  in  a  position  to  build  an  observatory  for 
ourselves,  and  arm  ourselves  with  a  complete  comprehen- 
sion of  all  sciences  subsidiary  to  such  knowledge. 
Through  every  department  of  human  enlightenment 
through  which  culture  ranges,  most  of  us  are  daily  in  the 
habit  of  relying  to  a  very  large  extent  upon  the  original 
research  of  others.  And  for  the  great  majority  of  man- 
kind, for  a  long  time  to  come,  it  will  be  inevitably  neces- 
sary that  they  should  rely,  in  dealing  with  the  science  of 
spiritual  things,  on  the  original  research  of  others  along 
those  lines.  But  with  reasonable  precautions  they  may  do 
this  confidently  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.  Of  course, 
the  situation  is  embarrassing  at  the  outset  in  the  case  of 
psychic  inquiry.  Jn  the  other  case  the  multitude  know 
that  each  expert  is  checked  and  watched  by  a  number  of 
other  experts,  and  it  is  quickly  known  whether  any  new 
conclusions  of  independent  research  are  accepted  by  con- 
temporary science.  If  so,  the  multitude  accepts  that 
guarantee.  Now,  at  present,  as  regard  spiritual  science, 
we  have  no  Royal  Society  at  hand  to  put  its  imprimatur 

42       THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

on  progressive  discoveries.  Some  of  us  know,  indeed,  that 
there  is,  so  to  speak,  a  Royal  Society  of  spiritual  scientists 
in  existence,  and  that  if  we  reach  it  we  gain  access  to  a 
source  of  authority  in  such  matters  far  better  to  be  relied 
on  than  even  the  elite  leaders  of  contemporary  physical 
science  in  their  department  of  knowledge.  It  is  from 
that  source  of  information,  as  repeatedly  explained,  that 
the  theosophical  revelation  of  our  time  has  come.  But 
for  reasons  which  patient  investigation  makes  very  intel- 
ligible, the  foci  of  spiritual  initiation  are  not  readily 
accessible  to  all  inquirers  at  present,  so  their  authority  can 
never  be  invoked  for  the  guidance  of  people  who  are 
merely  beginning  the  investigation  of  occult  teaching. 
Nothing  is  more  helpful  to  earnest  inquirers  than  a  clear 
conviction  as  to  the  existence  of  such  foci  and  the  con- 
ditions under  which  their  influence  radiates  out  into  the 
world,  but  it  is  possible  to  get  a  long  way  on  the  path  of 
theosophic  culture  before  the  question  is  taken  up  for 
thorough  examination. 

Leaving  it  out  of  sight  for  the  moment  we  have  to 
decide  how  we  are  to  investigate  spiritual  science 
without  special  faculties  which  enable  us  to  cognise 
other  planes  of  Nature  and  without  access  to  any  body 
of  established  knowledge,  in  reference  to  which  we  have 
as  yet  entire  confidence.  My  answer  is  that  we  all  have 
the  capacities  of  reason  that  enable  us  to  consider  the 
statements  of  occult  science  now  lying  before  the  world, 
to  compare  them  with  the  familiar  facts  of  life,  to  test 
them  by  reference  to  ideal  conceptions  as  to  justice  and 
purpose  in  the  spiritual  government  of  the  world,  to  make 
prudent  and  careful  use  of  the  wonderful  analogies  of 
Nature  that  visibly  in  so  many  ways,  and  inferentially  in 
many  more,  bring  her  various  phases  into  harmony  with 

OCCULT  SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION   43 

one  another,  and  finally — this  kind  of  test  bringing  me 
back  to  the  special  subject  I  have  in  hand  for  the  moment 
— to  apply  the  declarations  of  occult  science  to  the  great 
and  fundamental  conceptions  of  traditional  religion,  and 
see  whether  or  not  they  offend,  confirm,  or  illuminate  the 
elements  of  those  conceptions  to  which  we  may  feel  the 
deepest  attachment. 

In  reality  occult  science  not  only  shows  itself  in  funda- 
mental harmony  with  great  religious  ideas,  but  going  far 
beyond  this,  reconciles  itself,  so  to  speak,  with  religion; 
and  actually  invests  in  a  great  many  cases  with  a  new  and 
beautiful  significance,  dogmas  of  exoteric  religion  which 
have  gradually  forfeited  their  true  spiritual  significance 
for  a  materialistic  generation,  which  have  been  for  many 
centuries  taken  by  churches  and  congregations  merely  at 
the  foot  of  the  letter,  to  be  a  stumbling  block  for  some, 
unhealthy  food  for  those  who  have  swallowed  them  in 
blind  faith,  taking  them  literally  and  yet  refusing  to  bring 
them  out,  for  consideration,  into  the  light  of  common 
reason.  Take  for  example — and  merely  as  an  example, 
for  to  go  fully  into  the  interpretation  of  religious  dogma 
by  the  light  of  occultism  would  be  to  write  a  book  on 
that  branch  of  the  subject  alone — the  Vicarious  Atone- 
ment that  has  long  taken  its  place  as  the  leading  doctrine 
of  modern  Christianity.  The  notion  of  a  wrathful  God, 
expending  anger  on  an  innocent  being  and  ultimately  for- 
giving guilty  persons  when  his  desire  to  take  vengeance 
somehow  has  been  satisfied,  is  a  notion  that  blasphemes 
Deity,  offends  justice,  and  is  generally  grotesque — and 
refined  modern  theology  sublimates  it  more  or  less  vaguely 
into  something  different,  while  leaving  it  in  that  form  for 
humbler  understandings  that  do  not  rise  in  overt  rebellion 
against  its  horrors.  Occult  science  on  the  other  hand, 

44      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

gives  us  the  true  reading  of  the  mysterious  dogma.  The 
whole  story  of  the  crucifixion  is  enacted  afresh  in  the  case 
of  every  human  soul  that  attains  spiritual  exaltation.  It  is 
the  allegory  of  the  soul's  progress.  It  is  the  only  process  by 
which  redemption  can  be  accomplished — and  it  is  vividly 
appreciated  as  soon  as  we  understand  the  occult  teaching 
concerning  the  lower  and  the  higher  self.  The  higher  self 
— very  roughly  anticipating  occult  explanations  that  will 
be  given  more  fully  further  on — is  the  truly  spiritual, 
immortal,  imperishable  part  of  a  man — the  growth  and 
expansion  of  which  into  full  consciousness,  is  the  purpose 
of  physical  life,  and  its  protracted  experiences.  That  is 
the  Divinity  which  incarnates,  welding  its  consciousness 
during  each  physical  life  with  its  lower  self,  the  visible, 
sinful,  fallible  man  of  our  every  day  observation — the 
reflection  of  itself  on  the  plane  of  matter.  It  can  only 
exalt  the  personality  to  the  plane  of  true  spiritual  evolu- 
tion and  redeem  it  from  sin  and  suffering  by  crucifixion 
on  the  physical  plane,  by  the  painful  sacrifice  on  the 
plane  of  its  incarnate  manifestation  of  physical  desires  and 
tendencies  and  personal  selfishness — that  is  to  say,  by  the 
subordination  of  the  lower  self — the  ordinary  waking 
consciousness — to  the  Divine  teaching  involved  in  the 
loftiest  aspiration  of  the  Christ  within  us — the  higher  self. 
Then  the  atonement  is  accomplished  without  an  atom  of 
injustice  entering  into  the  transaction. 

In  a  similar  way  the  whole  story  of  Adam  and  Eve, 
the  Garden  of  Eden,  of  the  rib,  the  temptation,  and 
the  fall,  can  be  shown,  when  illuminated  by  occult  know- 
ledge, to  be  a  profound  cryptograph  embodying  some  of 
the  most  important  facts  in  the  evolution  of  the  human 
race — in  the  evolution  especially  of  humanity  as  we  know 
it  now,  expressed  in  the  two  sexes,  from  that  earlier 

OCCULT  SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION   45 

humanity  belonging  more  to  the  "  astral  "  than  to  the 
physical  plane  of  Nature,  which  preceded  our  present  type 
in  the  great  process  of  the  descent  of  spirit  into  matter. 
But  I  need  not  go  into  the  minutiae  of  that  interpretation 
here.  The  broad  principle  which  I  am  specially  con- 
cerned to  lay  down  does  not  really  depend  on,  however 
much  it  is  fortified  by,  the  precise  correspondence  between 
occult  teaching  and  the  dogmas  of  exoteric  religion — as 
soon  as  these  are  raised  above  the  level  of  nursery  tales  or 
Icelandic  sagas — by  an  adequate  translation  into  terms  of 
spiritual  thought.  The  harmony  between  occultism  and 
the  essence  of  everything  that  is  most  exalted  in  religious 
aspiration  or  emotion  is  unmistakable  for  everyone  who 
gets  on  far  enough  in  the  study  of  occultism  to  realise 
how  much  more  it  signifies  than  that  which  it  is  sometimes 
supposed  to  be  chiefly  concerned  with — the  unveiling  of 
a  new  set  of  natural  mysteries,  the  exploration  of  a  new 
realm  of  scientific  wonder.  It  is,  indeed,  the  science 
behind  all  sciences,  without  which  none  can  be  complete; 
but  it  is  also  the  religion  behind  all  religions,  without 
which  none  can  do  more  than  prepare  the  soul  of  man  for 
entrance  on  its  loftiest  inheritance. 

CHAPTER  III 
RE-INCARNATION 

NO  purpose  worth  speaking  of  can  be  served  by 
studying  the  teachings  which  constitute  in  their 
entirety  the  Esoteric  Doctrine  until  the  student 
is  in  the  first  instance  completely  saturated  with  the 
conception  that  the  growth  and  development  of  the  human 
soul  is  accomplished  by  means  of  successive  returns  to 
physical  life  (with  intervening  periods  of  spiritual  rest) 
which,  regarded  in  the  aggregate  as  a  process  of  Nature, 
make  up  what  is  generally  called  the  theory  of  Re-incarna- 
tion. It  is  equally  true,  however,  that  the  subject  cannot 
be  studied  quite  apart  from  other  branches  of  the  great 
body  of  knowledge  to  which  it  belongs.  A  general  appre- 
ciation of  the  perfect  harmony  of  the  Esoteric  Doctrine  in 
its  various  ramifications  is  often  required  for  the  proper  com- 
prehension of  its  fundamental  conceptions.  Esoteric  teaching 
is  not  in  that  respect  quite  like  Euclid's  geometry,  of  which 
one  may  learn  a  little  and  no  more  and  yet  have  that  little 
firmly  established  in  the  understanding.  It  is  like  Euclid's 
geometry  in  the  sense  that  the  later  propositions  cannot 
be  accepted  unless  the  earlier  propositions  have  been 
realised  and  appreciated  first;  but  to  get  at  that  realisation 
it  may  often  be  necessary  to  sweep  on  far  ahead  and  realise 
how  necessary  the  earlier  propositions  are  to  an  apprecia- 
tion of  the  grander  spiritual  ideas  with  which  its  later 
exposition  may  be  concerned.  Then  the  student,  recom- 
mencing the  examination  of  the  whole  teaching,  will 
begin,  perhaps,  to  see  the  fundamental  principles  in  a  new 
light,  and  may  finally  get  them  embedded  in  his  perma- 
nent conviction.  Then  he  finds  himself  at  last  in  pos- 
session of  a  foundation  whereon  he  can  build  a  structure 

RE-INCARNATION  47 

of  knowledge  which  it  is  possible  to  ascend  with  con- 
fidence. 

In  dealing  at  the  outset  with 'the  question  whether  the 
doctrine  of  human  evolution  summed  up  in  the  term  "  Re- 
incarnation" can  be  "proved"  or  not,  in  the  sense  that  you 
can  prove  a  new  discovery  in  physics,  we  have  to  recog- 
nise that,  of  course,  such  proof  is  impossible.  All  we  can 
do  is  to  show  that  it  would  be  profoundly  unphilosophical 
to  believe  anything  else — anything,  that  is  to  say,  at 
variance  with  that  doctrine;  that  Re-incarnation  will  satis- 
factorily account  for  all  the  phenomena  of  human  life 
(which  the  idea  can  have  any  relations  with),  and  that 
these  would  be  chaotic  and  unintelligible  otherwise;  that 
without  bringing  in  this  all-important  interpretation  of 
its  conditions  the  world  around  us  would  be  a  creation  of 
malevolence  and  injustice,  rather  than  one  of  wisdom  and 
goodness;  that  only  by  recognising  Re-incarnation  can  we 
account  for  one  man  being  a  Newton  and  another  an 
ignorant  blockhead;  finally,  that  although  the  majority  of 
human  beings  at  the  present  stage  of  evolution — for 
reasons  that  esoteric  teaching  renders  abundantly  clear — 
do  not  remember  their  past  lives,  some  people  whose 
spiritual  development  has  passed  certain  limits,  actually  do 
remember  theirs  not  merely  in  a  vague  and  shadowy 
fashion,  but  with  complete  precision  and  even  a  fuller 
grasp  of  detail  than  untrained  memory  will  afford  in  deal- 
ing with  the  earlier  periods  of  a  current  life.  I  shall 
amplify  these  and  other  considerations  directly,  but  what 
I  want  to  emphasise  for  the  moment  is  that  in  admitting 
the  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation  to  be  insusceptible  of  proof 
— in  the  absolute,  physical  sense  of  the  word — I  claim 
for  it  all  the  while  that  it  can  be  so  nearly  proved  by 
reasoning,  that  no  intelligent  man  who  correctly  appre- 

48      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

hends  the  idea,  and  who  applies  it  with  adequate  patience 
to  the  experience  of  existence  whether  in  or  out  of  the 
body,  can  possibly  fail  to  believe  it  as  fully,  for  example, 
as  the  modern  scientific  world  believes  in  the  undulatory 
theory  of  light.  That  theory  is  not  argued  about  any 
more  in  these  days.  It  is  the  only  theory  that  will  explain 
all  the  facts.  And  so  with  Re-incarnation  in  the  domain 
of  spiritual  science;  it  is  the  only  theory  which  will  ex- 
plain all  the  facts,  and  it  is  luminous  with  a  truly  scientific 
aspect;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  in  harmony  with  the  uniformities 
of  Nature,  affording  indeed  the  only  way  out  of  supposing 
that  the  uniformities  of  Nature  are  rudely  violated  in  the 
laws  which  govern  the  evolution  of  humanity.  Thus,  in 
progress  of  time,  cultivated  thinkers  will  certainly  cease 
to  argue  about  Re-incarnation,  even  before  the  develop- 
ment in  ordinary  mankind  of  those  higher  faculties  to 
which  the  concatenation  of  successive  lives  will  ultimately 
become  as  plainly  perceptible,  no  doubt,  as  the  identity  of 
the  sun  is  obvious  to  us,  on  his  rising  every  day. 

The  first  step  towards  realising  the  truth  of  the  doctrine 
of  Re-incarnation  is  to  obtain  a  clear  comprehension  of 
the  views  really  held  by  people  who  recognise  that  doctrine 
as  explaining  the  actual  process  of  the  soul's  evolution. , 
We  possess  a  considerable  mass  of  writing  on  the  subject 
now,  which  students  of  Oriental  philosophy  generally 
would  recognise  as  setting  forth  the  teaching  of  the  most 
cultivated  exponents  of  that  philosophy,  and  we  find,  to 
begin  with,  that  a  good  many  popular  notions  on  the 
subject  which  have  floated  about  the  world  at  various 
periods  may  be  pared  away  from  the  central  idea.  The 
esoteric  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation,  for  example,  does 
not  contemplate  the  descent  of  human  souls,  under  any 
circumstances,  into  animal  bodies.  In  the  crudest  presen- 

RE-INCARNATION  49 

tation  of  the  idea,  that  has  been  treated  as  part  of  the 
scheme,  but  I  do  not  believe  it  has  ever  been  suggested 
except  as  a  symbol  of  moral  deterioration  following  on 
bad  lives,  or  as  a  disguise  of  the  true  teaching.  The  only 
theory  that  I  am  anxious  to  support  is  that  according  to 
which  the  drift  of  successive  Re-incarnations  must  always 
be  progressive.  Never  mind  for  the  moment  from  what 
phases  of  existence  in  the  remote  past  human  beings  may 
have  ascended :  once  on  the  human  level  they  remain  on 
that  level,  or,  at  all  events,  continue  to  advance  on  that 
level. 

We  may  start,  in  order  to  explain  the  real  teaching 
of  occultists  on  the  subject  of  Re-incarnation,  at  a  point 
in  human  evolution  when  the  human  condition  has  already 
been  fully  attained  and  when  life  is  going  on  under  the  cir- 
cumstances with  which  we  are  familiar.  The  doctrine 
is  that  when  a  man  of  our  kind  dies — as  regards  the 
physical  manifestation  of  his  consciousness — that  con- 
sciousness passes  first  of  all  into  spiritual  or  relatively 
spiritual  conditions  of  existence,  which  are  calculated  to 
endure  for  a  long  time,  and  are  immensely  important. 
From  some  of  these  conditions  it  is  undoubtedly  possible 
that  touch  may  be  maintained  with  the  consciousness  of 
people  still  in  the  earth  life.  And  though  there  are  some 
spiritual  conditions  into  which  the  soul  may  pass  which  are 
too  exalted  to  permit  anything  resembling  what  is 
ordinarily  meant  by  intercourse  with  friends  still  in  earth 
life,  I  imagine  that  the  experience  of  many  Spiritualists 
would  go  far  to  confirm  rather  than  to  conflict  with  that 
view.  Broadly,  therefore,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  theory 
of  Re-incarnation  does  not  enter  into  competition  with 
any  estimate  of  the  probabilities  of  spirit  life — except 
in  so  far  as  some  of  those  estimates  will  be  satisfied  with 

50      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

nothing  less  than  eternity  as  the  duration  of  the  con- 
ditions they  predict.  The  theory  of  Re-incarnation  con- 
templates, with  the  progress  of  ages,  so  great  an  advance 
and  improvement  in  the  type  of  humanity,  both  as  regards 
earthly  body  and  soul  consciousness,  that  it  would  certainly 
shrink  from  supposing  that  any  human  being  of  an  im- 
perfect type  should  be  doomed  to  preserve  to  all  eternity 
any  single  personality  which  would  perpetuate  its  im- 
perfections. But  that  theory,  let  it  always  be  remem- 
bered, is  in  no  hurry  to  obliterate  personalities.  The 
spiritual  existence  following  the  release  of  the  soul  from 
any  particular  body  may  be  prolonged,  if  the  experiences 
of  life  in  that  body  have  been  of  a  peculiarly  vivid  and  in- 
spiring character,  for  prodigious  periods.  But  the  con- 
tention of  esoteric  philosophy  is  that  finite  causes  must 
have  finite  effects.  The  earthly  experience  of  any  human 
being  between  birth  and  death  is  an  accumulation  of  finite 
causes,  summed  up  within  the  experience,  the  emotions, 
the  thoughts  of  the  life  in  question.  Grant  those  subjec- 
tive energies  any  range  of  amplification  we  please,  a  time 
will  come,  according  to  the  doctrine  I  am  now  describing, 
when  they  are  all  distilled  as  it  were  into  the  essence  of 
life.  The  soul  has  then  absorbed  into  its  permanent  or 
truly  spiritual  nature  all  the  capacities  of  emotion  and 
knowledge,  which  its  last  life  invested  it  with.  It  is  once 
more  a  centre  of  abstract  consciousness,  and  in  that 
capacity,  under  the  affinities  of  its  nature,  it  once  again 
seeks  a  vehicle  for  the  activity  of  its  latent  capacities.  It 
finds  that  vehicle — not  consciously,  but  under  the  opera- 
tion of  a  comprehensive  natural  law — in  a  newly  develop- 
ing human  form. 

So  far  we  have  just  a  bare  outline  of  the  theory  of  Re-in- 
•carnation.  We  start  with  a  soul  in  physical  life — we  follow 

RE-INCARNATION  51 

it  through  the  experiences  of  life  which  develop  all  those 
innumerable  memories  and  affections  and  associations  of 
thought  which  make  up  the  person  or  personality  in  ques- 
tion (a  something  quite  distinct,  of  course,  from  the  body 
which  is  its  vehicle).  We  perceive  that  personality  pro- 
ceeding next  to  enjoy  a  spiritual  existence  (for  periods 
enormously  outrunning  the  span  of  physical  life),  and 
then  we  find  it  returning  to  a  new  earth  life  to  gather  in 
fresh  experience,  and  develop  fresh  capacity  for  know- 
ledge, and  perhaps  to  make  that  all-important  moral  pro- 
gress which  can  only  be  accomplished  in  the  midst  of  the 
temptations,  the  struggles,  and  the  internal  victories  of  the 
physical  plane. 

But  to  understand  the  doctrine  aright,  it  is  above  all 
things  necessary  to  keep  in  view  the  law  under  which  the 
soul,  at  the  expiration  of  its  spiritual  rest,  is  drawn  back 
into  earth  life.  That  law  is  known  to  Oriental  philo- 
sophy as  the  law  of  Karma,  and  it  is  the  essential  comple- 
ment of  the  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation.  In  its  broad  out- 
lines this  law  is  very  easy  of  comprehension.  The  literal 
meaning  of  the  word  is  simply  "  doing  "  or  "  action." 
But  the  law  without  which  the  whole  scheme  of  human 
life  would  be  chaotic,  enacts  that  action  of  whatever  kind 
must  give  rise  to  consequences;  that  on  the  moral  plane 
the  effect  follows  the  cause  as  inevitably  as  in  the  labora- 
tory. The  word  seems  sometimes  to  puzzle  readers  un- 
familiar with  occult  literature,  but  need  never  do  so 
although  used  sometimes  in  different  senses,  because  the 
context  of  any  sentence  must  always  show  in  what  sense 
it  is  used.  The  law  of  Karma  is,  as  just  described,  the 
great  principle  that  effect  follows  cause,  that  as  we  sow 
so  shall  we  reap,  that  good  deeds  give  rise  to  happiness 
in  some  form  or  another,  and  evil  deeds  to  the  reverse. 

5* 

52      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

Then,  as  a  substantive,  Karma  is  often  spoken  of  as  the 
action  itself  which  gives  rise  to  a  result,  and  thus  we 
come  to  speak  of  bad  karma  or  good  karma  as  phrases 
indicating  the  kind  of  action  productive  of  good  or  evil. 
Again  Karma  may  be  spoken  of  as  the  force  which  ex- 
plains any  actual  condition  of  things,  and  is  thus  associated 
especially  with  the  teaching  concerning  Re-incarnation, 
with  which  we  are  now  concerned.  It  shows  us  that  the 
bodily  form  to  which  the  soul  is  drawn  back  is  not  selected 
at  random — as  in  a  certain  sense  the  raindrops  may  be  said 
to  fall  at  random  on  the  shore  or  the  sea,  on  the  desert 
or  the  fruitful  plain.  Governed  by  the  all-sufficient  dis- 
cernment of  Nature,  the  soul  ripe  for  Re-incarnation  finds 
its  expression  in  a  body  which  affords  it  the  exact  conditions 
of  life  which  Karma — in  this  sense  its  desert — requires. 
The  circumstances  of  life  to  which  that  body  introduces 
its  tenant,  the  destiny  of  happiness  or  suffering  which  its 
leading  characteristics  provide  for,  its  intellectual  capacities 
as  an  instrument  on  which  the  soul  can  play,  are  all  deter- 
mined (with  an  infinite  variety  of  other  conditions)  by  the 
Karma  of  the  re-incarnating  soul,  or,  to  use  what  is, 
perhaps,  a  more  scientific  expression,  of  the  re-incarnating 
Ego.  No  one  need  here  for  an  instant  be  embarrassed  by 
the  familiar  phenomena  in  human  life  of  what  is  called 
heredity/'^Physical  forms  are  transmitted  on  the  plane  of 
physical  evolution  from  father  to  son  with  sometimes 
remarkable  resemblances;  in  such  cases  heredity  is  not  the 
cause,  but  the  concomitant  of  the  attributes  manifested  by 
the  son.  For  his  independent  soul  Karma  has  required 
such  a  vehicle  as  the  man  who  becomes  his  father  was 
physically  qualified  to  engender.  Many  illustrations 
might  be  taken  from  Nature  to  show  her  various  forces 
and  powers  playing  in  this  way  into  one  another's  hands. 

RE-INCARNATION  53 

Assimilation   is   the   law   by   which   Re-incarnation   and 
Karma  reconcile  themselves  with  heredity. 

Now  this  statement  of  the  view  really  held  by  occult 
students  in  respect  to  Re-incarnation  should  go  far  to 
answer  by  anticipation  many  objections  to  the  idea  often 
urged  by  people  who  acquire  an  inaccurate  or  incomplete 
notion  of  the  teaching.  The  suggestion,  for  instance,  that 
we  cannot  have  passed  former  lives  on  earth  because  we 
do  not  remember  them,  might  be  an  objection  to  some 
totally  different  theory;  but  it  is  no  objection  to  the  theory 
I  have  reviewed.  For  manifestly,  by  the  hypothesis,  it  is 
impossible  for  anyone  returning  to  the  incarnate  life  to 
remember  that  which  he  must  wear  out,  completely  distil, 
and  forget,  as  regards  its  specific  details,  before  he  is  quali- 
fied to  re-incarnate.  If  it  is  alleged,  as  has,  indeed,  some- 
times been  alleged  with  great  force  in  reference  to  par- 
ticular cases,  that  some  rarely  organised  persons  have  main- 
tained recollections  of  a  former  life  of  no  very  remote 
period,  all  we  need  point  out  is  that  few  of  the  standing 
rules  of  natural  growth  in  any  of  the  kingdoms  of  Nature 
are  beyond  the  reach  of  occasional  abnormal  exceptions. 
It  is  the  rule,  for  instance,  that  men  of  our  race  live  to 
about  threescore  years  and  ten,  but  there  are  many 
examples  in  which  that  rule  is  violated,  and  we  may  con- 
ceive in  the  same  way  that  people  sometimes  die  prema- 
turely from  the  spiritual  planes  of  Nature  and  return 
before  their  time  to  the  earth  life.  Nor  in  venturing  that 
guess  need  we  assume  that  accidents  like  those  which 
terminate  life  abruptly  sometimes  pmongst  us,  are  liable  to 
befall  the  released  souls  of  the  higher  levels.  Premature 
returns  to  earth  life  in  the  rare  cases  where  they  occur, 
may  be  due  to  Karmic  complications  too  elaborate  to  in- 
quire into  now.  The  important  point  is  that  the  regular 

54      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

course  of  events  must  necessarily  clear  the  Ego  of  all 
specific  recollections  of  one  life  before  it  is  ready  for 
another. 

It  might  be  desirable  that  this  should  be  done  in  the 
interest  of  the  soul's  progress,  if  for  no  other  reason.  Life 
would  perhaps  hardly  be  bearable  for  human  beings  still  in 
a  humble  phase  of  evolution,  if  the  long  and  weary  proces- 
sion of  uninteresting  existences  through  which  they  had 
passed  lay  within  sight  behind  them,  before  an  enlightened 
spirituality  of  consciousness  had  shown  them  the  ultimate 
possibilities  of  progress  in  future.  And  each  life  in  turn 
would  not,  perhaps,  be  fraught  with  its  own  lessons  unless 
these  were  learned  separately,  as  it  were,  and  one  by  one. 
But  above  all  the  forgetfulness  of  each  life  is  plainly  due 
to  that  provision  of  Nature  Already  referred  to  which 
ensures  for  each  of  us  after  death  the  maximum  fruition  of 
all  our  spiritual  aspirations  in  the  corresponding  and  appro- 
priate realms  of  consciousness.  It  would  be  unjust  to  the 
soul  that  it  should  remember,  before  it  is  exalted  enough 
to  exercise  faculties  far  transcending  those  of  the  present 
average  mankind.  Memories  are  apt  to  be  tinged  either 
with  sad  longing  or  regret.  For  a  man  to  remember  some 
long  vanished  happiness  of  a  former  incarnation  would 
mean  one  of  two  things :  either  he  would  have  been 
unfairly  deprived  of  the  spiritual  complement  of  that 
happiness,  turned  out  too  soon  from  the  Heaven  in  which 
it  would  naturally  be  protracted,  or  supposing  his  new 
conditions  of  physical  life  owing  to  bad  Karma — i.e.,  to 
evil-doing  on  his  part  in  the  former  life — to  be  the  painful 
penalty  of  such  misdoing,  he  would  be  doubly  punished  if 
allowed  the  tantalising  memory  of  what  he  had  lost. 
Finally,  as  regards  this  point,  though  I  have  here  been 
endeavouring  to  justify  the  law  of  Nature  in  question,  it 

RE-INCARNATION  55 

is  not  always  to  be  expected  that  we  can  do  this  com- 
pletely, and  even  if  some  critics  remain  inclined  to  dispute 
the  wisdom  of  Nature  in  providing  a  draught  of  Lethe, 
"on  slipping  through  from  state  to  state,"  I  would  answer 
that  the  first  thing  we  have  to  do  in  studying  these 
mysteries  is  to  find  out  what  is,  leaving  to  a  more  advanced 
period  of  our  knowledge  the  task  of  ascertaining  why  it  is. 

At  all  events,  the  fact  that  we  do  not  remember  former 
incarnations,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  merciful 
arrangement  that  provides  us  after  each  physical  life  a 
long,  and,  in  most  cases,  highly  enjoyable  and  refreshing 
expansion  of  our  existence  on  the  spiritual  planes,  is  no 
impediment  whatever  to  the  acceptance  of  the  Re-incarna- 
tion theory,  if  we  find  it  recommended  to  acceptance  on 
independent  grounds. 

Coming  now  to  some  of  those  independent  grounds,  I 
would  call  attention  to  a  somewhat  recondite  but  ex- 
tremely important  argument,  which  is  this :  Ex  nihilo 
nihil  -jit.  That  is  a  rule  which  commands  our  respect  as 
much  on  the  spiritual  as  on  the  physical  plane  of  Nature. 
Now,  independently  of  the  broad  teachings  of  religion, 
there  is  plenty  of  evidence  around  us  for  inquirers  who  are 
not  too  much  prejudiced  to  avail  themselves  of  it,  to  show 
that  the  human  soul  is  a  real  entity  even  when  apart  from 
and  independent  of  the  body  with  which  it  is  associated 
during  physical  life.  The  experiences  of  spiritualism  afford 
us  this  evidence.  In  spite  of  all  the  fraud  and  trickery 
with  which  the  practice  of  spiritualism  is  surrounded,  and 
in  spite  of  the  insufficiency  of  its  most  genuine  experiences 
to  establish  the  theories  which  many  spiritualists  have 
hastily  built  up,  nothing  but  wilful  ignorance  of  these 
experiences  can  blind  the  world  at  large  to  the  proof 
it  affords  of  one  all-important  fact,  viz.,  that  intelligences, 

56      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

formerly  those  of  living  persons  on  earth,  do  in  some  cases 
show  themselves  still  actively  functioning  on  another 
plane  of  Nature.  To  take  that  much  as  established  by  the 
investigations  of  spiritualists  at  large,  is  like  taking  from 
astronomy  nothing  more  than  an  assurance  that  the  earth 
is  round.  It  is  a  simple  and  elementary  assurance — to 
which,  of  course,  I  am  aware  that  many  people  do  not 
help  themselves — as  indeed  there  are  other  persons,  or 
some  among  these  who  do  not  help  themselves  to  the 
demonstrations  of  the  earth's  rotundity.  There  will  come 
a  time  when  disbelievers  in  the  reality  of  spiritualistic 
phenomena — persons  who  refer  all  such  alleged  occur- 
rences to  fraud  and  delusion — will  be  to  a  future  genera- 
tion what  the  few  surviving  "  flat  earth  men  "  are  to  our 
own.  But  this  is  not  an  opportunity  which  I  need  take 
for  the  full  discussion  of  that  matter  with  detailed  refer- 
ence to  trustworthy  observations  and  records.  The  argu- 
ment I  am  concerned  with  is  merely  one  among  many  con- 
verging on  the  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation,  and  is  specially 
addressed  to  persons  who  recognise — either  on  religious 
grounds,  or  from  the  experience  of  spiritualism — that  the 
human  soul  is  an  entity  apart  from  the  body. 

Now  where  has  that  soul  come  from  when  we  first 
begin  to  see  it  flutter  in  a  young  child  r  It  is  a  something 
independent  of  the  body,  therefore  it  has  had  an  origin 
independently  of  the  body.  It  has  not  come  out  of 
nothingness — it  is  essentially  of  the  nature  of  the  spiritual 
plane  to  which  we  find  abundant  reason  for  feeling  sure 
it  will  flit  off  whenever  the  body  is  destroyed.  Is  it  not 
obvious,  therefore,  that  it  has  emerged  from  the  spiritual 
plane — coming  into  manifestation  on  the  physical  r 
"  But,"  someone  may  urge,  "  what  we  see  in  the  young 
child  in  the  nature  of  a  soul  is  something  very  different 

RE-INCARNATION  57 

from  that  which  we  can  follow  to  a  certain  extent  on  its 
departure  from  the  worn-out  body  of  a  person  dying  in 
mature  life.  It  may  be  that  we  have  to  recognise  it  as 
coming  into  the  child's  body,  an  entity  already,  but  it 
looks  very  much  like  a  freshly  created  entity.  It  is  merely 
a  centre  of  potentialities,  a  consciousness  that  may  be 
taught,  may  acquire  experience,  may  become  a  man, 
clearly  not  the  trained  soul  of  a  man  from  the  first  moment 
of  birth."  Let  me  show  how  that  objection  is  met. 
Firstly,  for  the  purpose  of  the  argument  I  am  setting  forth, 
all  that  matters  is  to  establish  that  the  soul  is  a  continuous 
entity  which  was  in  existence  before  and  remains  in 
existence  after  the  physical  life.  That  which  we  see 
before  us,  in  the  physical  life  of  a  man,  is  a  bead,  so  to 
speak,  upon  the  thread  of  life.  When  we  fully  appreciate 
the  fact  that  the  thread  stretches  into  darkness  in  both 
directions,  we  realise  that  the  process  of  birth  is,  at  all 
events,  the  coming  of  a  soul  into  incarnation,  an  emergence 
into  physical  manifestation  from  a  spiritual  state;  and  when 
we  once  realise  that,  we  are,  at  all  events,  a  very  long  way 
on  the  road  towards  recognising  the  doctrine  of  Re-incar- 
nation in  its  scientific  completeness.  But,  secondly,  the 
vacuity  of  the  child's  mind,  the  emptiness  of  the  soul  on 
coming  into  incarnation,  is  exactly  the  condition  of  things 
which,  on  the  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation,  as  I  have  ex- 
plained it,  we  are  bound  to  expect.  All  its  specific  states 
of  consciousness,  its  definite  possessions  of  knowledge  and 
stores  of  emotional  experience,  have  vibrated  to  their 
utmost  capacity  for  vibration  on  the  spiritual  plane  of 
being  before  Re-incarnation  claimed  it  for  earth  once 
more.  As  a  re-incarnating  entity  it  can  only  be  a  centre 
of  potentialities,  a  focus  of  consciousness  replete  with  the 
power  of  acquiring  knowledge  and  the  power  of  develop- 

58      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

ing  thought,  as  soon  as  the  new  instrument,  the  new  body, 
with  which  it  is  thrown  into  relations  by  its  Karmic 
affinities,  shall  have  grown  into  perfection  sufficiently 
to  give  it  free  play. 

Here  it  is  worth  while  to  meet  one  objection  that  very 
often  arises  in  the  minds  of  people  who  do  not  really  under- 
stand the  teaching  correctly,  to  the  effect  that  it  must  be 
very  horrible  for  a  conscious  entity  of  an  advanced  order 
to  find  him  or  herself  once  more  in  a  baby's  form,  or  even 
in  that  very  early  stage  of  childhood  identified  with  the 
nursery.  The  mistake  here  arises  from  forgetfulness  of 
the  fact  that  the  ensoulment  of  the  newly-born  child  by 
the  original  entity  coming  again  into  incarnation,  is  a  very 
slow  process.  There  are  complications  to  be  remembered, 
because  the  case  of  quite  common-place  people  unversed 
in  any  occult  knowledge,  does  not  quite  correspond  with 
that  of  those  ripe  for  what  is  technically  called  an  im- 
mediate re-incarnation.  Speaking,  however,  first  of  those 
who  belong  to  the  more  widely-diffused  type,  they  are 
quite  unconscious  of  the  very  gradual  way  in  which  Nature 
enables  them  to  take  possession  of  the  new  form,  and  at  all 
events,  as  in  the  other  case  to  be  considered,  the  first  seven 
years  of  the  newly-born  child's  life  is  simply  spent  in  the 
gradual  assimilation  of  etheric  matter  (this  will  be  ex- 
plained more  fully  later),  and  it  is  not  until  the  child  is 
about  fourteen  years  of  age  that  any  consciousness  really 
identified  with  the  last  incarnation  of  the  Ego  is  really 
manifesting  in  the  new  body. 

In  the  case  of  immediate  re-incarnations  we  are  dealing 
with  more  advanced  Egos  directly  under  the  guidance  of 
a  definite  Being  on  a  lofty  plane  of  consciousness.  The 
original  Ego  is  still  functioning  in  the  astral  vehicle 
appertaining  to  the  former  life.  He  is  fully  conscious  of 

RE-INCARNATION  59 

the  new  birth  as  forecasting  the  beginning  of  what,  when 
it  becomes  mature,  he  knows  will  be  a  vehicle  for  his  own 
consciousness.  But  he  meanwhile  is  looking  on  from  the 
astral  plane  and  is  in  no  way  sharing  the  dawning  con- 
sciousness within  the  baby  form. 

But  passing  on  now  from  subtle  considerations  which 
guide  us  to  the  discovery  of  the  principle  of  Re-incarna- 
tion, let  us  consider  for  a  moment  the  immensely  powerful 
argument  for  its  acceptance  embodied  in  the  condition  of 
the  world  around  us.  On  the  hypothesis  that  each  physical 
life  is  the  only  earth  life  of  each  soul  in  actual  incarnation, 
could  any  cruelty  and  injustice  be  worse  than  that  which 
the  inequalities  of  life  would  exhibit  in  operation  ?  We 
have  not  merely  to  consider  the  stupendous  inequalities 
in  the  lot  of  the  rich  and  the  poor;  we  see  these  inequalities 
emphasised  by  all  imaginable  differences  of  health  and 
physique,  and  by  the  terrible  differences  of  moral  sur- 
rounding. We  see  some  members  of  the  human  family 
strong  and  robust,  and  gifted  with  brilliant  fa  :ulties  of 
intelligence;  prosperous,  carefully  guarded  in  youth  from 
evil,  brought  up  in  innocence  and  purity,  drifted,  as 
naturally  as  a  river  flows,  into  lives  of  benevolence  and 
usefulness,  and  passing  on  into  whatever  spiritual  existence 
may  await  them  beyond  the  grave,  with  every  advantage 
which  the  utmost  development  of  their  loftier  aspirations 
may  bestow.  Others  we  see  crippled,  deformed,  miser- 
able; steeped  in  poverty  and,  perhaps,  painful  disease; 
nurtured  in  crime,  and  fed  on  evil  of  every  sort;  living  a 
curse  to  their  companions,  and  destroyed  at  last  perhaps 
by  the  human  justice  they  have  offended.  With  unfeeling 
foolishness  some  unintelligent  defenders  of  the  one-life 
hypothesis  will  sometimes  attempt  to  argue  that  beneath 
all  the  apparent  inequalities  of  life,  the  relief  the  miserable 

6o      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

and  suffering  may  sometimes  experience,  during  transitory 
moments,  when  their  hard  lot  may  be  a  little  ameliorated, 
is  so  great  that  it  may  be  set  against  their  habitual  misery, 
with  the  result  that  all  may  roughly  be  said  to  have  the 
same  share  of  happiness  on  the  whole.  Words  would 
fail  me  if  I  sought  to  characterise  the  grovelling  and  ig- 
noble nonsense  of  this  theory.  Earthly  happiness  varies 
with  different  people  in  the  proportion  in  which  lakes 
vary  in  size;  in  which  streams  vary  in  length.  There  are 
boundless  differences  in  the  well-being  of  different  men 
and  women  on  earth,  and  these  differences  are  of  a  nature 
that  could  not  be  equalised  on  the  spiritual  plane  of  life, 
in  the  way  sometimes  suggested.  For  if  the  poor  and 
suffering  on  earth  were  translated  to  a  Heaven  superior  to 
that  provided  for  those  who  had  been  happy  in  earth  life, 
that  would  simply  be  translating  the  injustice  of  Provi- 
dence to  the  realms  in  which  its  justice  ought  to  be 
especially  operative.  The  persons  wronged  would  then  be 
those  who  had  been,  without  reference  to  themselves, 
cheated  of  a  blissful  eternity  at  the  poor  price  of  transi- 
tory delusions  here. 

It  is  only  by  realising  the  long  succession  of  earth  lives 
which  make  up  the  individuality  of  each  soul  that  .we  can 
discern  order,  harmony,  and  justice  reigning  in  the 
destinies  of  man.  By  this  interpretation  of  the  phenomena 
of  life  we  not  alone  restore  justice  to  the  government  of 
the  world,  but  discover  the  working  of  natural  law  in 
human  evolution  to  be  precise  and  unerring  in  its  exacti- 
tude. The  good  and  bad  deeds  of  men  are  of  a  mixed 
and  complex  character.  Some  are  spiritual  in  their  colour- 
ing; others  appertain  to  the  earth  life.  These  last  find 
their  fruition  in  the  earth  life  when  the  soul  returns  to  it. 
They  in  their  boundless  variety  account  for  the  boundless 

RE-INCARNATION  61 

diversities  of  human  lot.  Such  diversities  are  not  the 
sport  of  brainless  chance — the  outcome  of  what  by  an 
absurd  phrase — the  expression  of  the  world's  ignorance  in 
these  matters — is  sometimes  called  the  accident  of  birth. 
There  is  no  "  accident  "  in  the  supreme  act  of  Divine 
justice  guiding  human  evolution.  With  the  same  inevit- 
able certainty  that  force  on  the  physical  plane  governs  the 
combination  of  the  molecules  of  matter — though  the 
bewildering  complexity  of  even  that  aspect  of  force 
dazzles  the  mind  as  we  attempt  to  follow  out  its  workings 
— so  does  the  far  more  exalted  force  which  gives  effect  to 
the  primary  laws  of  Nature  in  the  moral  world  operate 
with  an  exactitude  that  no  chemical  reactions  can  eclipse. 
The  outward  circumstances  of  each  life  into  which  we 
may  be  born  are  the  mathematical  result  of  the  causes  we 
have  ourselves  set  in  motion  in  former  lives.  The  causes 
we  are  setting  in  motion  now — the  effort  of  our  own  free 
will  within  the  narrowest  hedge  of  circumstances  we  can 
possibly  imagine  as  confining  it — will  be  the  all-powerful, 
determining  influence  in  the  creation  of  the  conditions 
under  which  we  shall  live  on  earth  next  time. 

And  these  conditions,  let  it  be  remembered,  are  not 
merely  a  response  to  the  moral  requirements  of  the  situa- 
tion ;  meting  out  happiness  or  suffering  in  accordance  with 
the  karma  of  the  individual  Ego  at  the  time  of  each  Re- 
incarnation, they  are  the  expression,  as  well,  of  his  intel- 
lectual and  psychic  progress.  No  human  effort  is  wasted 
and  resultless  in  the  regions  of  such  progress  any  more 
than  in  those  of  the  great  moral  law.  If  a  man  labours, 
for  example,  during  a  whole  life  at  some  branch  of  science 
at  some  art,  or  at  some  special  department  of  study,  the 
specific  acquirements  he  may  possess  at  the  end  of  his  life 
are  not  passed  over,  it  is  true,  to  the  next  life  exactly 

62      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

as  he  lays  them  down.  They  would  probably  be  of  very 
little  use  to  him  in  the  altered  circumstances  of  the  world 
when  he  comes  back,  if  they  were.  But  they  are  thrown 
into  manifestation  again  at  his  Re-incarnation  in  the 
appropriate  form  of  highly  developed  aptitudes  for  the 
line  of  acquisition  he  has  formerly  been  concerned  with. 
Do  we  not  observe,  for  instance,  in  such  a  very  earthly 
matter  as  the  power  of  learning  languages,  great  gulfs  of 
difference  between  the  aptitudes  of  different  people? 
Some  will  learn  a  dozen  languages  with  less  difficulty  than 
others  will  learn  one.  "  They  have  an  inborn  faculty," 
says  the  careless  commonplace  critic,  content  as  usual  to 
libel  Nature  by  setting  down  to  the  accident  of  birth  the 
symmetrical  outcome  of  exquisitely  adjusted  law.  So 
with  the  glaring  examples  of  re-incarnating  acquirements 
presented  to  us  by  the  case  of  people  who  show  extra- 
ordinary genius  for  music  at  an  age  when  less  "  gifted  " 
contemporaries  can  barely  distinguish  a  tune.  There  is 
no  gift  in  the  matter — there  is  acquirement  faithfully  pre- 
served in  the  karmic  affinities  of  the  Ego  and  in  its  true 
individuality. 

Surely  no  one  who  appreciates,  even  imperfectly,  the 
fulness  with  which  the  doctrines  of  Re-incarnation  satisfy 
the  problem  of  life  and  human  evolution,  will  be  surprised 
to  remember  that  it  has  always,  as  far  as  philosophical 
history  can  look  back,  been  accepted  as  the  keynote  of 
spiritual  science  by  the  vast  majority  of  mankind. 
Buddhism  finds  it  established  as  the  corner-stone  of 
Brahminical  teaching  and  takes  it  over  as  a  matter  of 
course.  This  is  a  consideration  which  should  not  be  too 
lightly  put  aside  by  European  thinkers  over  prone  to 
assume  that  their  own  age, — which  has  been  glorified  by 
an  extraordinary  advance  in  knowledge  and  intelligence 

RE-INCARNATION  63 

relating  to  the  physical  plane  of  Nature, — is  entitled  to  a 
monopoly  of  our  intellectual  respect.  Modern  scholar- 
ship which  is  only  now  beginning  to  unlock  the  mysteries 
of  Sanscrit  literature  may  well  stand  aghast  at  its  dis- 
coveries. Not  for  the  moment  to  raise  any  question 
about  the  real  age  of  this  literature;  it  is  established  at 
all  events,  that  far  back  behind  the  beginning  of  European 
philosophy,  there  lies  a  complete  literature  exhibiting 
profound  sagacity  and  subtlety  on  the  part  of  its  authors 
in  regard  to  the  problems  of  the  mind  and  the  speculations 
of  metaphysics.  Take  the  Bhagavat  Git&  for  example — 
at  all  events  an  existent  literary  work — or,  as  occultists 
and  native  Indian  scholars  maintain,  already  a  work  of 
profound  antiquity  when  Britain  was  a  savage  island,  and 
the  race  destined  to  commence  its  civilisation,  only  begin- 
ning its  own  struggle  for  existence  among  the  warring 
tribes  of  Italy.  Now  that  the  boundlessly  elaborate  mean- 
ing of  the  allegory  embodied  in  that  poem  is  shining  forth 
for  us  by  degrees,  it  is  plain  at  least  that  its  authors  were 
deep  students  already  of  the  mysteries  of  human  life  and 
death,  that  they  were  filled  with  spiritual  aspiration  of 
the  purest  kind,  that  their  conception  of  the  relations 
between  the  finite  embodied  and  infinite  consciousness 
have  left  nothing  for  later  theologians  to  refine  upon. 
And  the  stupendous  epic  in  which  the  Bhagavat  Gita  is 
embedded,  is  no  less  remarkable  for  the  finished  delicacy 
of  its  poetic  feeling,  for  the  loftiness  of  its  ethical  code, 
for  the  intricate  abundance  of  its  symbology,  for  all  the 
characteristics  which  mark  the  literary  work  of  a  highly 
cultured  race.  Europeans  are  children  in  metaphysical 
speculation  beside  the  Hindus  of  old,  and  if  we  could 
imagine  an  impartial  inquirer  from  another  sphere, 
acquainted  with  the  intellectual  history  of  these  two  races, 

64      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

and  informed  that  the  Hindus  of  old  believed  in  Re-incar- 
nation while  the  modern  Europeans  rejected  it,  he  would 
certainly  smile  at  the  anti-climax  involved  in  such  a  state- 
ment. Modern  theology  should  show  some  credentials 
more  effective  than  its  ignorance  of  ancient  records  and 
its  obliquity  of  vision  in  regard  to  the  bearings  of  its  own 
sacred  writings — to  which  I  will  come  directly — before  it 
can  justly  claim  to  impose  its  own  negations  on  the  minds 
of  people  who  are  now  beginning  to  look  around  them  in 
an  inquiring  spirit. 

I  have  just  said  that  Buddhism  took  over  the  Brahmini- 
cal  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation  as  a  matter  of  course — 
and  this  is  the  case.  But  Buddha's  teaching  on  all  vital 
points  connected  with  spiritual  growth  has  been  so  wildly 
caricatured  and  distorted  by  commentators  who  have 
approached  it  without  any  interior  illumination  as  to  its 
meaning,  that  I  may  fairly  ask  the  reader's  attention  for  a 
little  while  to  the  true  significance  on  this  subject  of  the 
Buddhist  scriptures. 

The  sacred  books  of  Eastern  religions  are  written,  for 
the  most  part,  in  a  style  which  is  rather  a  disguise  than  an 
expression  of  the  meaning  they  are  intended  to  convey. 
Figurative  phraseology  and  intricate  symbols  are,  at  all 
events,  so  little  in  harmony  with  Western  habits  of 
thought,  that  such  vehicles  of  philosophic  teaching  may 
easily  be  mistaken  by  readers  accustomed  to  a  more  lucid 
treatment  of  religious  doctrine,  for  the  wild  conceptions 
of  a  crude  superstition.  And  even  when  simpler  topics 
than  the  avatars  of  Vishnu  are  under  treatment,  the  same 
habits  of  speech  which  veil  cosmological  theories  with 
narratives  of  Divine  incarnations  in  animal  forms,  lead 
Oriental  writers  to  describe  even  such  events  as  Buddha's 
death  and  cremation  in  the  circuitous  language  of  symbols 

RE-INCARNATION  65 

rather  than  in  plain  and  matter-of-fact  prose.  Thus,  in 
one  of  the  Pali  "  Suttas,"  or  Buddhist  Gospels — the 
Maha-parinibbana  "  Sutta  " — for  the  English  version  of 
which  we  are  indebted  to  the  admirable  scholarship  of  Dr. 
Rhys  Davids,  we  are  told  how  "  the  Blessed  One  "  died 
from  an  illness  which  supervened  upon  a  meal  of  "  dried 
boar's  flesh,"  served  to  him  by  a  certain  Kunda,  a  worker 
in  metals  at  Pava.  A  prosaic  interpretation  of  this  narra- 
tive has  passed  into  all  epitomes  of  Buddhism  current  in 
European  literature.  Mr.  Alabaster,  for  instance,  in  his 
"  Wheel  of  the  Law,"  calmly  quotes  a  missionary 
authority  for  the  statement  that  Buddha  died  "  of 
dysentery  caused  by  eating  roast  pork  ";  and  even  Dr. 
Rhys  Davids  himself  gives  further  currency  to  this 
ludicrous  misconception  in  his  well-known  treatise  on 
Buddhism,  published  by  the  Society  for  the  Propagation 
of  Christian  Knowledge.  One  might  have  supposed  that 
students  of  the  subject,  even  without  a  clue  to  the  meaning 
of  the  "  dried  boar's  flesh  "  in  the  legend,  would  have  been 
startled  at  the  notion  of  finding  the  simple  diet  of  so 
confirmed  a  vegetarian  as  we  must  suppose  any  Indian 
religious  teacher  to  have  been,  invaded  by  so  gross  an 
article  of  food  as  roast  pork.  But  one  after  another, 
European  writers  on  Buddhism  are  content  to  echo  this 
absurdly  materialistic  version  of  the  figurative  Eastern 
story.  If  they  had  sought  to  check  their  interpretation  of 
it  by  reference  to  living  exponents  of  the  Buddhist  faith, 
they  would  have  fallen  easily  on  the  track  of  the  right 
explanation.  The  boar  is  an  Oriental  symbol  for  esoteric 
knowledge,  derived  from  the  boar  avatar,  of  Vishnu — that 
in  which  the  incarnate  god  lifted  up  the  earth  out  of  the 
waters  in  which  it  was  immersed.  In  other  words,  accord- 
ing to  Wilson's  translation  of  the  Vishnu  Purana,  the 

6 

66      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

avatar  in  question  "  allegorically  represents  the  extrication 
of  the  world  from  a  deluge  of  iniquity  by  the  rites  of 
religion."  In  the  Ramayana  we  may  find  another  version 
of  the  same  allegory,  Brahma  in  this  case,  assuming  the 
form  of  a  boar  to  hoist  up  the  earth  out  of  primal  chaos. 
Boar's  flesh  thus  comes  to  symbolise  the  secret  doctrine 
of  the  esoteric  initiates,  those  who  possessed  the  inner 
science  of  Brahma,  and  dried  boar's  flesh  would  be  such 
esoteric  wisdom  prepared  for  food;  reduced,  that  is  to 
say,  to  a  form  in  which  it  could  be  taught  to  the  multi- 
tude. It  was  through  the  too  daring  use  of  such  dried 
boar's  flesh — through  his  attempt  to  bring  the  multitude, 
to  a  greater  degree  than  they  were  prepared  for  it,  within 
the  area  of  esoteric  teaching — that  Buddha  died;  that  is 
to  say,  that  his  great  enterprise  came  to  an  end.  That  is 
the  meaning  of  the  story  so  painfully  debased  by  European 
writers;  and  that  meaning  once  assigned  to  its  central  idea, 
will  be  followed  through  many  variations  in  the  details 
of  the  Pali  narrative,  even  as  translated  by  Dr.  Rhys 
Davids,  apparently  without  any  suspicion  on  his  part  of 
its  true  intention.  Buddha,  for  instance,  before  the  feast, 
directs  that  he  only  should  be  served  with  the  dried  boar's 
flesh,  while  "  the  Brethren,"  his  disciples,  are  to  be  served 
with  cakes  and  rice;  also,  that  whatever  dried  boar's  flesh 
may  be  left  over  after  he  has  done,  shall  be  buried,  for 
none  but  himself,  he  says,  can  digest  such  food — a  strange 
remark  for  him  to  have  made,  according  to  the  materialistic 
interpretation  of  the  story,  which  represents  him  as  not 
able  to  digest  such  food.  The  meaning  of  the  injunction 
plainly  is  that  after  him  none  of  the  Brethren  shall 
attempt  the  task  of  giving  out  esoteric  secrets  to  the  world. 
Buddhist  doctrine  has  fared  but  little  better  than 
Buddhist  gospel  narrative  in  the  hands  of  the  distinguished 

RE-INCARNATION  67 

scholars  who  have  rendered  the  Western  world  the  service 
of  translating  a  good  many  of  the  writings  in  which  it  is 
enshrined,  without  conferring  on  us  the  additional  benefit 
of  elucidating  the  spiritual  science  which  that  doctrine 
cautiously  sets  forth.  Indeed,  the  plain  fact  of  the  matter 
is  that  two  leading  ideas  concerning  Buddhist  doctrine 
have  been  presented  to  the  world  by  the  principal  writers 
on  the  subject,  and  that  both  these  ideas  are  on  a  level 
with  the  roast  pork  theory.  These  ideas  are  that  Buddhism 
does  not  recognise  any  future  conscious  life  of  the 
individual  man  beyond  the  grave,  and  that  in  exhorting 
us  to  tread  the  path  which  leads  to  Nirvana,  it  proceeds 
on  the  ultra-pessimistic  view  that  all  conscious  life  must 
be  misery;  so  that  the  only  wise  course  for  us  to  pursue 
is  to  court  its  extinction  in  profound  and  dreamless 
slumber,  in  utter  oblivion  of  all  things,  in  that  Nirvana 
which  we  are  told  to  regard  as  identical  with  absolute 
annihilation.  Spence  Hardy,  Max  Muller,  Rhys  Davids, 
Alabaster,  Bigandet,  Burnouf,  and  others,  might  be 
shown  by  reference  to  unequivocal  passages  to  entertain 
this  idea,  perhaps  most  grotesquely  emphasised  by  an 
American  caricaturist  of  Buddhist  doctrine,  Dr.  S.  H. 
Kellogg.  The  German  commentator  on  Buddhism,  Dr. 
Oldenberg,  is  honourably  distinguished  by  combating  the 
theory  that  the  Buddhist  Nirvana  is  equivalent  to  annihila- 
tion; but  though  he  argues  the  question  in  an  elaborate 
and  painstaking  way,  he  does  not  put  his  finger  on  avail- 
able passages  in  Buddhist  scriptures  that  would  settle  the 
matter  decisively.  Barth,  also,  in  his  "  Religions  of 
India,"  "  takes  leave  to  doubt  "  whether  the  intention  of 
Buddhism  was  to  preach  that  there  is  no  survival  of  the 
individual  consciousness  from  one  incarnate  existence  to 
another,  but  even  he  thinks  that  "  this  vaguely  appre- 

6* 

68      THE  GRDWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

hended  and  feebly  postulated  ego  "  cannot  be  compared 
with  the  "  simple  and  imperishable  soul  of  the  Sankhya 
philosophy."  And  as  a  whole,  European  Buddhistic 
exegesis  may  be  held  to  rest  chiefly  on  the  two  ideas  above 
referred  to — no  future  life,  and  annihilation  in  Nirvana. 

Now,  the  reconciliation  of  these  two  commanding  mis- 
apprehensions has  given  critics  of  Buddhism  no  little 
trouble.  For,  on  the  face  of  things,  if  man's  consciousness 
is  merely  a  matter  of  this  life,  he  need  not  go  through 
the  self  denial  and  privations  of  the  candidate  for  Nirvana 
to  accomplish  the  annihilation  that  must  await  him  any- 
how. And  again,  Buddhist  teaching  is  saturated  with 
references  to  Karma,  which,  as  the  sum  total  of  merit 
and  demerit  that  determines  the  conditions  of  a  man's 
next  rebirth,  seems  to  presuppose  the  persistence  of  the 
soul-consciousness  which  those  conditions  are  apparently 
designed  either  to  reward  or  punish.  But  the  embarrass- 
ment is  got  over  by  help  of  the  theory — for  the  ingenuity 
of  which  Dr.  Rhys  Davids  appears  to  deserve  the  credit — 
that  Karma  does  not  follow  an  individual  soul  from  one 
incarnation  to  the  other,  but  causes  the  birth  of  an  entirely 
new  individuality,  which  becomes  the  independent  heir, 
for  good  or  evil,  of  its  predecessor.  The  motive  which 
each  person  thus  has  for  making  a  sacrifice  of  himself  to 
achieve  Nirvana,  is  altogether  altruistic.  His  Karma  being 
extinguished  in  the  total  annihilation  of  Nirvana,  no  other 
being  is  born  along  that  line  of  influence  to  suffer  the 
pain  and  sorrow  of  existence.  The  inventor  of  this  idea 
admits  that  the  motive  does  not  seem  a  strong  one,  as 
a  fundamental  rule  of  human  conduct;  but  its  insufficiency 
does  not  present  itself  to  his  mind  as  a  ground  for  dis- 
trusting the  former  conclusions  out  of  which  it  grows. 

All  this  misdirection  of  thought  appears  to  have  been 

RE-INCARNATION  .      69 

started  by  forgetfulness  on  the  part  of  the  first  interpreters 
of  Buddhism  to  the  modern  West — Bournouf  and  Spence 
Hardy  especially — of  the  broad  fact  that  Buddha  was  a 
religious  reformer  rather  than  a  person  who  made  any 
profession  of  re-codifying  the  whole  body  of  religious  truth 
from  A  to  Z.  Roughly  speaking  he  takes  the  entire  block 
of  Hindu  faith,  or  Brahminical  philosophy,  for  granted, 
and  builds  upon  that,  the  higher  teaching  he  has  to  offer 
from  his  store  of  "  dried  boar's  flesh  " — of  esoteric  wisdom, 
adapted  to  the  understanding  of  the  multitude.  '*  The 
simple  and  imperishable  soul  of  Sankhya  philosophy  "  is 
the  property  of  the  Buddhist,  just  as  fully  as  of  the  earlier 
Brahmin  or  later  Hindu.  Current  religious  instruction 
before  Buddha  took  up  the  task  had  familiarised  the  people 
with  the  idea  that  good  men  went  to  Heaven  and  bad  men 
to  hell.  But  Buddha  did  not  put  that  fundamental  idea 
in  the  forefront  of  his  teaching.  It  was  unnecessary  to 
do  so.  Indian  theology  was  already  stocked  to  over-flowing 
with  ideas  concerning  the  life  after  death  in  the  numerous 
heavens  and  hells  which  its  doctrines  recognised.  And 
it  was  also  fully  possessed  with  the  conviction  that  in  each 
case,  after  the  appropriate  period  of  spiritual  enjoyment 
or  suffering,  the  soul  would  return  to  earthly  incarnation. 
Buddha's  reform  started  from  these  assumptions.  The 
fact  is  acknowledged  by  modern  writers,  but  not  its  force. 
Professor  Sir  Monier  Williams,  in  his  treatise  on*  Hinduism 
for  the  S.  P.  C.  K.,  says :  "  About  five  centuries  before 
our  era,  the  reformer  Buddha  appeared,  and  about  con- 
temporaneously with  him  various  Brahmin  sages,  stimu- 
lated by  his  example  and  perhaps  by  that  of  others  who 
preceded  him,  thought  out  what  are  called  the  orthodox 
systems  of  Hindu  philosophy."  What  did  such  thought 
amount  to  ?  Sir  Monier  Williams  sums  it  up  as  including 

yo      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

these  articles  of  faith,  amongst  others :  The  eternity  of 
the  soul,  prospectively  and  retrospectively;  the  periodical 
removal  of  the  soul  to  places  of  reward  or  punishment; 
the  subsequent  return  of  the  soul  to  corporeal  existence. 
Buddha,  from  the  standpoint  of  these  conceptions, 
addressed  himself  especially  to  the  task  of  showing  men 
that,  beyond  spirtual  conditions  and  rebirth,  there  lay 
possibilities  of  human  evolution  which,  in  their  transcen- 
dent excellence,  rendered  the  familiar  alternations  of  cor- 
poreal and  ethereal  existence  relatively  unworthy  of 
acceptance.  A  state  of  blessedness  which  would  come 
to  a  definite  end  was,  for  his  exalted  perception,  no  state  of 
blessedness  at  all.  Human  life  on  earth,  though  such  as 
men  might  esteem  as  happy,  was  subject  to  manifold  perils 
and  to  decay.  It  was  a  state  for  the  wise  man  to  avoid 
by  making  the  stupendous  effort  that  would  emancipate 
his  desires  from  all  the  objects  of  sense,  and  thus  cut  off  the 
attractions  that  would  otherwise  inevitably  bring  him  back 
again,  after  a  period  of  heavenly  existence,  to  physical 
incarnation. 

Buddha's  sermons  and  lessons  became  thus  almost 
altogether  concerned  with  the  contemplation  of  that  trans- 
cendent spiritual  condition  described  by  the  term  Nirvana, 
but  never  defined  with  any  degree  of  precision,  simply 
because  its  attributes  were  by  the  hypothesis  insusceptible 
of  exact  definition  in  terms  of  the  physical  intellect.  That 
which  men  in  the  flesh  can  imagine  as  attractive  must 
necessarily  be  tainted  with  the  limitations  and  sense  of 
separateness  inherent  in  the  incarnate  imagination.  Nir- 
vana could  only  be  described  by  negatives  which  ruled  it 
off  from  any  state  of  being  which  individual  aspirations 
for  happiness  would  be  capable  of  picturing  in  the  mind. 
And  while  the  attempt  would  have  been  fruitless,  it  was, 

RE-INCARNATION  71 

at  the  same  time,  unnecessary  for  Buddha  to  define  Nir- 
vana, because  the  idea  to  be  dealt  with  was  no  novelty 
for  Hindu  audiences.  Referring  again  to  Sir  Monier 
Williams'  epitome  of  Hindu  faith,  we  find  that  system  of 
thought,  quite  independently  of  Buddha's  teaching,  to 
recognise  that  the  supreme  state  of  bliss  involved  an 
escape  from  all  sense  of  individual  personality — complete 
absorption  into  the  Supreme  and  only  existing  Being  who 
is  wholly  unfettered  by  action,  without  qualities  of  any 
kind — pure  life,  pure  thought,  pure  joy.  No  one,  from 
the  physical  plane  of  existence,  can  understand  such  a  con- 
dition; but  this  impossibility  does  not  justify  us  in  the 
absurdity  of  pretending  on  that  account  to  understand 
it  as  equivalent  to  annihilation.  We  are  not  even  called 
upon,  for  the  purposes  of  the  present  argument,  to  consider 
whether  or  not,  Buddha  himself  understood  it.  It  is 
enough  to  realise  that  undeniably  Buddha  treated  it  as  a 
state  of  being  which  was  supremely  desirable  by  reason  of 
its  exaltation  in  the  scale  of  Nature  above  all  other  states 
of  being,  and  that  in  doing  this  he  had  no  antagonistic 
opinion  on  that  point  to  combat.  Brahminism  already 
recognised  Nirvana,  under  various  names — the  ultimate 
absorption  into  the  Supreme — as  the  most  glorious  goal  to 
which  humanity  could  turn.  The  failure  of  modern 
Western  thinkers  to  recognise  the  splendour  of  such  an 
ideal  is  plainly  due  to  our  deeper  immersion  in  material 
habits  of  thought,  in  which  the  sense  of  separateness  that 
Oriental  philosophy,  at  all  events,  already  perceived  to 
be  a  defect  of  the  incarnate  imagination,  has  been  elevated 
into  the  sine  qua  non  of  all  conditions  to  be  desired.  We 
may  be  able  to  conceive  a  high  degree  of  spiritualisation  in 
consciousness.  We  may  contemplate  an  existence  as  free 
from  all  lower  passions,  and  yet  attractive;  but  we  find  it 

72      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

hard  to  realise  that  ultimate  exemption  from  the  fetters 
of  Self,  which  finds  its  most  glorious  fulfilment  in  com- 
plete identification  with  the  universal  consciousness. 
However,  without  professing  to  realise  this,  we  may,  at 
any  rate,  intellectually  comprehend  that  men  of  abnormal 
spirituality,  who  have  declared  such  a  desire,  are  not  on 
that  account  declaring  a  desire  for  extinction  of  conscious- 
ness. For  them,  at  all  events,  the  higher  kind  of  con- 
sciousness embraces  the  lower,  supersedes  it  and  triumphs 
over  it. 

If  Buddha  thus  said  nothing  to  break  down  existing 
beliefs  in  the  normal  progress  of  man  through  successive 
rebirths,  intercalated  with  successive  periods  of  heavenly 
enjoyment,  and  if  Hindu  philosophy  had  already  acknow- 
ledged that  the  highest  state  of  human  evolution  would 
carry  men  into  Nirvana,  what  was  it  that  he  did  teach  r 
The  answer  will  be  readily  substantiated  by  the  sermons 
and  teachings  of  Buddhist  literature,  as  already  translated 
for  Western  reference,  and  will  in  half-a-dozen  words 
afford  the  clue  to  the  comprehension  of  his  whole  position. 
He  taught  the  way  to  Nirvana.  This  teaching  had  pre- 
viously been  esoteric.  He  sought  to  show  all  men  the 
way  to  Nirvana,  and  the  rules  of  life  with  which  almost 
all  his  recorded  utterances  are  thus  concerned,  did  not 
constitute  an  everyday  code  of  morality  for  ordinary 
people.  They  were  the  prescriptions  laid  down  for  those 
whose  spiritual  aspirations  were  already  so  highly 
awakened  that  they  desired  Nirvana;  or,  at  all  events, 
were  so  near  the  threshold  of  that  desire  that  a  little 
stimulus  to  their  spirituality  might  suffice  to  lead  them 
across  it.  The  proof  of  this  view  will  be  supplied  most 
readily,  not  by  quoting  at  length  from  the  language  which 
Buddha  addressed  to  his  monks,  to  "  the  brethren,"  who 

RE-INCARNATION  73 

were  avowedly  candidates  for  Nirvana,  but  by  showing 
that  all  the  while  he  recognised  a  totally  different  sort  of 
morality  for  men  who  were  still  in  the  fetters  of  separate- 
ness,  and  whose  highest  aspirations  were  for  individual 
spiritual  happiness  in  Heaven.  Let  us  take,  for  example, 
the  following  passage  from  the  Mahaparinibbana  Sutta,  as 
translated  by  Dr.  Rhys  Davids  (Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
vol.  xi.j  page  1 6),  by  no  means  the  only  one  of  the  kind 
that  could  be  produced,  but  sufficient  in  itself  for  our 
present  purpose.  The  sentences  quoted  constitute  a  short 
address  to  certain  "  householders,"  followers  of  his  teach- 
ing, but  persons  who  were  not  engaged  in  the  arduous 
struggles  of  arhatship, — that  candidature  for  Nirvana  of 
which  we  have  already  spoken.  Here  there  are  no 
ambiguous  metaphysics  to  lead  astray  the  minds  of  later 
readers  out  of  sympathy  with  the  subtle  selflessness  of 
Nirvanic  aspirations.  The  passage  runs  :  — 

Then  the  Blessed  one  addressed  the  Pataligama  disciples, 
and  said  : — Fivefold,  oh  householders,  is  the  loss  of  the  wrong- 
doer through  this  want  of  rectitude.  In  the  first  place,  the 
wrong-doer,  devoid  of  rectitude,  falls  into  great  poverty 
through  sloth;  in  the  next  place,  his  evil  repute  gets  noised 
abroad;  thirdly,  whatever  society  he  enters,  whether  of 
Brahmans,  nobles,  heads  of  houses,  or  Samanas,  he  enters 
shyly  and  confused;  fourthly,  he  is  full  of  anxiety  when  he 
dies;  and  lastly,  on  the  dissolution  of  the  body  after  death, 
he  is  reborn  into  some  unhappy  state  of  suffering  or  woe. 

Fivefold,  oh  householders,  is  the  gain  of  the  well-doer 
through  the  practice  of  rectitude.  In  the  first  place,  the 
well-doer,  strong  in  rectitude,  acquires  great  wealth  through 
his  industry;  in  the  next  place,  good  reports  of  him  are  spread 
abroad;  thirdly,  whatever  society  he  enters,  whether  of  nobles, 
Brahmans,  heads  of  houses,  or  members  of  the  order,  he  enters 
confident  and  self-possessed;  fourthly,  he  dies  without  anxiety; 

74      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

and  lastly,  on  the  dissolution  of  the  body  after  death,  he  is 
reborn  into  some  happy  state  in  Heaven. 

Certainly  it  might  be  argued  that  this  address  does  not 
contain  a  complete  code  of  even  worldly  morality,  but  if 
we  were  merely  considering  the  ethics  of  Buddha's  teach- 
ing we  should  find  plenty  of  other  material  to  work  with. 
The  very  simplicity  of  the  appeal  here  made  to  selfishness 
as  a  motive  for  well  doing  gives  the  present  quotation  its 
value,  as  showing  how  fully  Buddha  recognised  the  per- 
sistent existence  of  the  soul  as  an  individual  entity  after  the 
death  of  the  body  in  regard  to  the  great  bulk  of  mankind 
at  large,  in  regard  to  whom  there  might  be  no  question 
of  treading  the  path  to  Nirvana. 

Coming  now  to  the  teaching  of  Christianity — in  refer- 
ence to  which  the  Western  world  has  so  long  denied  itself 
the  advantage  of  comparative  theosophy — we  find  the  later 
faith  really  taking  Re-incarnation  for  granted,  just  as 
this  was  done  by  the  earlier  Buddhist  reform. 

One  of  the  most  striking  of  the  passages  in  the  New 
Testament  that  recognises  Re-incarnation  is  that  in  which 
Jesus  refers  to  the  prophecy  in  Malachi  that  Elijah  or 
Elias  would  return  to  earth.  The  prophecy  itself  occurs 
in  the  last  verse  but  one  of  the  Old  Testament,  "  Behold, 
I  will  send  you  Elijah  the  prophet  before  the  coming  of 
the  great  and  dreadful  day  of  the  Lord."  Jesus  refers  to 
this,  according  to  the  eleventh  chapter  of  Matthew,  as 
follows :  "  But  what  went  ye  out  for  to  see  ?  a  man 
clothed  in  soft  raiment?  .  .  .  But  wherefore  went 
ye  out?  To  see  a  prophet?  Yea,  I  say  unto  you,  and 
much  more  than  a  prophet.  This  is  he  of  whom  it  is 
written,  Behold,  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy  face, 
who  shall  prepare  thy  way  before  thee.  Verily  I  say  unto 
you,  Among  them  that  are  born  of  women  there  hath 

RE-INCARNATION  75 

riot  arisen  a  greater  than  John  the  Baptist  .  .  .  And 
if  yeare  willing  to  receive  it  this  is  Elijah  which  is  to  come. 
He  that  hath  ears  to  hear  let  him  hear." 

The  same  idea  is  expressed  in  the  ninth  chapter  of 
Mark,  as  follows  :  — "  And  they  asked  him,  saying,  The 
scribes  say  that  Elijah  must  first  come.  And  he  said 
unto  them,  Elijah  indeed  cometh  first,  and  restoreth  all 
things;  and  how  is  it  written  of  the  Son  of  man,  that  he 
should  suffer  many  things  and  be  set  'at  nought?  But 
I  say  unto  you,  that  Elijah  is  come,  and  they  have  also 
done  unto  him  whatsoever  they  listed,  even  as  it  is  written 
of  him." 

Again,  in  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  Matthew,  we 
read  : — "  And  his  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  Why  then 
say  the  scribes  that  Elijah  must  come  first?  And  he 
answered  and  said,  Elijah  indeed  cometh,  and  shall  restore 
all  things;  but  I  say  unto  you  that  Elijah  is  come  already 
and  they  knew  him  not,  but  did  unto  him  whatsoever  they 
listed.  Even  so  shall  the  Son  of  man  also  suffer  of  them. 
Then  understood  the  disciples  that  he  spake  to  them  of 
John  the  Baptist." 

In  what  sense  these  worcfb  can  be  taken  except  as  mean- 
ing that  John  the  Baptist  was  a  Re-incarnation  of  Elijah 
it  would  be  difficult  to  say.  The  remarkable  words  above 
quoted,  "  He  that  hath  ears  let  him  hear,"  show  that  the 
information  was  given  out  rather  for  the  use  of  the 
enlightened  than  of  the  common  multitude,  who  might  be 
expected  not  to  understand  its  full  significance;  but  it  is 
evident,  from  another  passage,  that  Jesus  assumed  a  wide- 
spread knowledge  around  him  of  the  principle  of  Re-incar- 
nation, for  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  Matthew  we 
read  :  — 

"  Now,  when  Jesus  came  into  the  parts  of  Caesarea 

76      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

Philippi  he  asked  his  disciples,  saying :  Who  do  men  say 
that  the  Son  of  man  is?  And  they  said,  Some  say  John 
the  Baptist;  some  Elijah;  and  others  Jeremiah,  or  one 
of  the  prophets." 

Jesus  then  goes  on  to  repudiate  any  such  specific  in- 
dividuality for  Himself,  but  none  the  less  does  the  con- 
versation show  that  the  idea  of  Re-incarnation  was  a 
familiar  and  accepted  principle  with  those  whom  he 
addressed;  while  far  from  rebuking  that  belief  as  a  prin- 
ciple, He  explicitly  affirms  it  in  the  case  of  John  the 
Baptist. 

That  the  principle  in  question  was  a  generally  accepted 
belief  among  the  disciples  is  plainly  shown  by  the  passage 
in  John  ix.,  relating  to  the  man  who  was  blind  from  his 
birth  : 

"  And  as  he  passed  by  he  saw  a  man  blind  from  his 
birth.  And  his  disciples  asked  him,  saying,  Rabbi,  who  did 
sin,  this  man  or  his  parents,  that  he  was  born  blind  ?  " 

It  would  be  a  digression  if  I  went  into  an  analysis 
of  the  answer  which  Jesus  here  gives — "  Neither  did 
this  man  sin  nor  his  parents,  but  that  the  works  of  God 
should  be  made  manifest  in  turn."  The  value  of  the 
passage  for  my  present  purpose  lies  in  the  significance  of 
the  question.  The  man  had  been  blind  from  his  birth, 
and  yet  the  disciples  asked  did  he  earn  that  affliction  by 
sin  ?  The  question  was  either  nonsense,  or  it  meant  did 
he  sin  in  his  last  incarnation  ? 

The  truth  appears  to  be  that  it  is  only  among  the 
modern  generations  of  the  Western  world,  when  the  inner 
science  of  spiritual  nature  has  been  so  deeply  obscured 
by  the  acquirements  of  material  civilisation,  that  people 
have  lost  touch  with  the  all-important  tenet  that  true 
Theosophists,  students  of  Divine  Wisdom,  are  at  last 

RE-INCARNATION  77 

struggling  to  restore.  It  has  been  forgotten  so  long  that 
people  who  have  constructed  a  fanciful  scheme  of  human 
destinies  for  themselves,  are  sometimes  in  the  present  day 
inconquerably  loth  to  welcome  back  the  truth.  They  find 
it  uncomfortable,  and  regard  that  as  a  sufficient  ground  for 
its  rejection,  unaware  of  the  fact  that  the  other  alternative — 
the  perpetuation  ad  infinitum  of  the  miserable  personalities 
that  so  many  men  are  doomed  to  bear,  or,  as  I  should 
rather  say,  have  built  up  for  themselves  by  the  sad  misuse 
they  have  hitherto  made  of  their  opportunities — would 
be  for  the  majority  of  the  present  race  the  most  profoundly 
uncomfortable  fate  that  could  well  be  imagined.  And  it 
is  but  a  short-sighted  aspiration,  indeed,  which  would  lead 
even  the  most  lofty-minded  and  cultivated  members  of 
that  race  to  prefer  the  infinite  perpetuation  of  their  own 
personalities — to  the  infinite  improvement  of  these  which 
the  principles  of  Re-incarnation  hold  out  to  them.  I  am 
not  unaware  of  the  hypothesis  which  some  thinkers  may 
vaguely  cling  to,  according  to  which  they  hope  for  im- 
provement along  some  unknown  channels  of  progress  in 
spiritual  realms  external  to  the  life  of  this  planet.  Such 
unphilosophical  expectations  ought  not  to  be  maintained 
by  a  generation  for  whom  it  has  been  clearly  shown — if 
they  have  eyes  to  see — that  the  spiritual  planes  of  Nature 
are  closely  linked  with  that  on  which  humanity  is  manifest 
in  the  flesh. 

Such  hopes  ought  not  to  be  the  refuge  of  those  whose 
experience,  far  transcending  that  of  the  common-place 
world  at  large,  renders  them  familiar  with  the  idea  just 
expressed.  The  simple  creed  that  we  shall  go  to  Heaven 
if  we  are  good,  and  there  be  taken  care  of  and  helped 
along  somehow,  may  be  a  good  working  creed  for  men 
in  an  early  stage  of  spiritual  development  who  are  drifting 

78      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

along  from  one  unintelligent  life  to  another,  remitting 
to  later  opportunities  the  commencement  of  their  higher 
evolution.  But  it  is  not  a  creed  that  can  long  suffice  for 
people  who  begin  to  realise  the  intimate  manner  in  which 
various  states  of  existence  in  this  highly  complicated  world 
around  us  are  blended  together.  It  converts  the  visible 
world — for  one  thing,  as  I  have  said — into  a  seething 
cauldron  of  injustice,  and  further  than  this,  it  degrades  it 
into  playing  an  almost  useless  part  in  the  evolution  of 
humanity — for  by  the  hypothesis  I  speak  of  all  that  would 
be  really  important  in  that  evolution  would  have  to  be  per- 
formed elsewhere.  We  need  not,  however,  disinherit  the 
earth  and  deny  it  the  fruition  of  its  own  suffering.  As 
far  as  the  human  family,  as  manifested  on  earth,  has 
already  advanced*  beyond  the  condition  of  the  lowliest 
savages — and  further — will  that  family  advance  in  the 
future.  To  question  or  doubt  this  would  be  an  insult 
to  the  majesty  of  the  Divine  principle  in  Nature,  with 
which  most  surely  the  human  family  must  be  in  close 
relations.  As  we  grow  in  moral  stature  and  wisdom  and 
in  all  the  higher  capacities,  as  we  work  our  way  on  through 
the  sometimes  painful  schooling  of  physical  life,  our  souls 
grow  gradually  fitted  to  inhabit  the  physical  organisms 
of  the  future  which  the  progressive  forces  of  the  material 
plane  will  evolve  for  us  as  we  successively  return  to  them. 
We  shall  all  of  us  see  the  world  again,  under  those  greatly 
ameliorated  conditions,  and  looking  back  then  to  this 
period  will  smile  to  think  that  it  was  ever  possible  for  men 
to  regard  the  present  conditions  of  this  now  current  race 
as  a  fitting  platform  from  which  to  part  company  for  ever 
from  the  sphere  of  incarnate  experience. 

So  far  I  have  dealt  with  a  mass  of  reflections  bearing 
on  the  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation.    The  subject,  however, 

RE-INCARNATION  79 

may  be  handled  in.  a  different  way  as  soon  as  we  get 
touch  with  the  thought  that  at  certain  stages  of  advance- 
ment in  occult  study  people  whose  faculties  have  under- 
gone adequate  development  are  enabled  to  recover  a  full 
and  complete  recollection  of  their  former  lives — a  recol- 
lection far  more  complete  indeed  than  that  which  enables 
ordinary  people  in  mature  life  to  remember  the  events 
of  their  youth.  Clairvoyant  faculties  that  are  susceptible 
of  exercise  on  the  spiritual  plane  as  well  as  on  the 
astral — of  which  more  anon — will  enable  their  possessor 
to  do  more  than  remember  his  own  past  lives.  It  will 
enable  him  to  get  into  magnetic  relations  with  the  im- 
perishable records  of  other  lives  as  well,  and  to  track  back 
the  previous  existences  on  the  physical  plane  of  almost 
anyone  with  whom  he  may  be  acquainted.  And  in  the 
same  way  the  adepts  of  occult  science  know  by  their  own 
personal  observation,  not  merely  that  Re-incarnation  is 
the  law  of  human  evolution,  but  the  exact  way  in  which 
it  works.  I  should  be  arranging  my  explanations,  however, 
in  the  wrong  order  if  I  tried  to  elucidate  the  science  of 
the  matter  before  treating  fully  of  the  "  higher  self  "  of 
man,  which  is  the  true  Re-incarnating  Ego.  So  this 
department  of  the  subject  must  be  picked  up  again  a  little 
later  on. 

CHAPTER    IV 
THE  HIGHER  SELF 

A  FUNDAMENTAL  error  concerning  the  con- 
stitution of  the  human  soul,  which  crude  con- 
ceptions of  spiritual  science  have  imposed  on 
modern  thinking,  has  been  that  which  leads  many  people 
to  regard  it  as  a  simple  entity,  complete  in  itself,  self- 
contained  on  the  plane  of  Nature  to  which  it  belongs,  as 
the  incarnate  man  is,  or  appears  to  be,  self-contained  in 
reference  to  the  other  similar  beings  around  him.  People 
think  of  the  soul — when  so  far  acquiescent  in  conventional 
religious  teaching  as  to  put  trust  in  the  theory  that  there 
is  such  a  thing — much  as  they  think  of  the  Djin,  of 
the  old  fairy  tale,  imprisoned  for  a  time  in  the  bottle  found 
by  the  fisherman  of  the  Arabian  Nights.  Death  is  a 
process  of  letting  it  out  of  the  bottle,  and  then  it  proceeds 
to  live  according  to  its  nature — a  complete  entity  formerly 
imprisoned  but  at  last  set  free.  But  the  more  we  study 
Nature,  even  on  the  physical  plane,  the  more  complex 
do  we  find  her  phenomena  to  be,  and  the  same  rule  holds 
good  on  the  higher  planes  of  natural  activity.  Conceptions 
we  form  of  super-physical  processes,  expand  ad  infinitum 
the  longer  the  mind  dwells  on  their  wider  significance. 
The  first  notion  we  may  put  together  of  any  such  process 
can  rarely,  indeed,  in  the  beginning  bear  any  closer 
resemblance  to  the  truth  than  the  notion  we  form  of  a 
solid  by  examining  one  of  its  sides.  The  mind  may  ulti- 
mately be  enabled  to  hold  all  the  attributes  of  the  solid 
in  its  grasp,  but  that  achievement  is  only  possible  as  the 
consequence  of  a  large  development  of  its  first  impressions. 
It  may  be  unnecessary  to  discard  those  impressions.  From 
the  later  standpoint  they  will  seem  to  have  afforded  a  very 

80 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  81 

crude  idea  of  the  truth,  but  they  will  be  valued  still  as 
having  led  up  to  more  complex  conceptions,  which  for  that 
matter  may  in  their  turn  be  developed  still  further  as  our 
capacity  for  knowledge  is  expanded. 

In  this  way  the  picture  of  the  soul's  growth  through 
Re-incarnation  under  the  guidance  of  the  Karmic  law, 
which  is  presented  to  the  mind  by  the  first  broad  analysis 
of  esoteric  teaching,  is,  to  begin  with,  a  stupendous  advance 
on  the  happy-go-lucky  theory  of  soul  creation.  Even  the 
view  of  life  which  accepts  the  soul  as  a  primary  fact  with- 
out seeking  or  offering  any  explanation  of  its  genesis, 
which  treats  it  as  a  new  creation  originating  with  the  birth 
of  each  child,  is  no  doubt  an  advance  upon  the  blank 
unconsciousness  of  anything  connected  with  life  beyond 
sensation,  which  we  may  reasonably  impute  to  the  animal 
kingdom,  but  which  even  the  savage  feebly  endeavours 
to  rebel  against  when  he  constructs  a  vision  of  the  happy 
hunting  grounds,  though  modern  materialism  endeavours 
to  cultivate  the  gloomy  doctrine  with  much  intellectual 
ingenuity.  In  doing  this,  by  the  bye,  he  is  pleasantly 
unaware  of  the  fact  that  he  is  illustrating  in  his  own  person 
one  of  the  principles  brought  to  light  by  esoteric  science — 
that  the  culmination  of  the  physical  intellect  is  the  nadir 
point  of  spiritual  enlightenment.  He  will  eventually 
appreciate  the  further  principle  that  in  the  progress  of  the 
cycle  evolution  will  go  on,  even  after  that  point  is  reached, 
illuminating  the  physical  intellect  with  an  influx  of 
spiritual  perception  without  requiring  it  to  forfeit  any 
portion  of  its  own  independent  conquest.  But,  to  go  back 
to  our  comparison,  just  as  blank  ignorance  of  soul  is  well 
superseded  by  the  illuminating  conjecture  which  recog- 
nises it  as  at  all  events  a  something,  even  if  created  ex 
nihilo;  and  just  as  that  idea  in  turn  is  enormously  elevated 

7 

8-2      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

in  the  philosophical  scale  when  harmonised  with  the  prin- 
ciples of  Re-incarnation  and  Karma,  so  may  the  first 
conception  of  spiritual  evolution,  as  proceeding  along  that 
path,  be  developed  by  a  fuller  examination  of  the  highly 
complicated  constitution  of  the  soul,  and  of  the  methods 
by  which  the  experiences,  opportunities,  and  sufferings  of 
each  incarnate  existence  are  made  to  react  on  the  perma- 
nent immortal  consciousness,  and  translated  into  so  much 
cosmic  growth. 

In  approaching  such  problems  we  may  be  coming  into 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  boundaries  beyond  which  precise 
language  is  inapplicable  to  spiritual  research.  In  handling 
such  topics  it  is  well  to  remember  that  any  attempt  to 
pass  beyond  those  boundaries  will  necessarily  be  futile. 
The  attributes  and  modes  of  consciousness  of  Universal 
Spirit,  for  example,  are  beyond  the  reach  of  language 
because  they  are  beyond  the  reach  of  thought  functioning 
in  a  physical  brain;  and  metaphysicians,  who  sometimes 
attempt,  by  the  construction  of  quaint  phrases,  to  suggest 
the  belief  that  their  thoughts  have  outrun  in  subtlety  the 
resources  of  expression,  are  probably,  in  most  cases,  as  little 
qualified  to  apprehend,  as  their  phrases  to  convey,  ideas 
that  are  really  entitled  to  be  so  described.  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  as  long  as  we  find  it  possible  to  be  precise,  it 
is  a  fatal  mistake  for  the  student  of  spiritual  science  to  be 
content  with  vague  suggestions.  Cloudiness  of  language 
is  not  depth  of  thought.  Obscure,  allegorical  forms  of 
expression  are  not  superior,  in  occult  dignity,  to  definite 
and  exact  phraseology — though  in  the  past  such  forms 
have  often  been  pardonable,  either  because  the  writers 
who  used  them  were  pledged  to  partial  secrecy  or  pre- 
cluded by  the  bigotry  of  their  age  from  being  quite  explicit. 
That  which  we  have  now  to  aim  at — now  that  spiritual 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  83 

research  has  been  endowed  with  advantages  it  never  pos- 
sessed in  the  days  of  the  alchemists  and  mediaeval  mystics 
— is  the  exact  comprehension,  as  far  as  that  is  possible, 
of  mysteries  till  now  cloaked  in  an  almost  impenetrable 
obscurity.  Of  course,  as  we  extend  our  conquests  there 
will  always  at  their  confines  be  a  region  of  thought  and 
conjecture  which  baffles  exposition.  But  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance  that  we  should  push  precision  as  far  as  possible, 
and  with  care  and  patience  it  will  be  found  practicable 
to  analyse  some  of  the  processes  by  which  soul  evolution 
is  accomplished  and  realise  them,  unseen  and  intangible 
as  they  may  be,  even  as  it  is  possible  to  realise  some  of  the 
intricate  laws  governing  the  no  less  intangible  and  unseen 
molecules  of  matter  in  their  chemical  reactions. 

The  law  which  we  have  to  bring  under  a  higher  micro- 
scopic power  than  that  applied  to  it  hitherto,  is  the  law 
regulating  the  alternate  physical  and  spiritual  existence 
of  the  human  entity.  The  human  soul,  we  have  seen, 
once  launched  on  the  stream  of  evolution  as  a  human 
individuality,  passes  through  alternate  periods  of  physical 
•  and  relatively  spiritual  existence.  It  passes  from  the  one 
plane  (or  stratum,  or  condition)  of  Nature  to  the  other,  under 
the  guidance  of  its  Karmic  affinities,  living,  in  incarnation, 
the  life  which  its  Karma  has  preordained,  modifying  its 
progress  within  the  limitations  of  circumstance,  and 
developing  fresh  Karma  by  the  use  or  abuse  of  its  oppor- 
tunities. It  returns  to  spiritual  existence  after  each  physi- 
cal life — through  the  intervening  region  of  astral  experi- 
ence— for  rest  and  refreshment  and  for  the  gradual  absorp- 
tion into  its  essence — as  so  much  cosmic  progress — of  the 
life's  training  passed  through  "  on  earth  "  or  during  physi- 
cal existence. 

This  broad  view  of  the  subject,  however,  though  it  may 

7*  ' 

84      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

suggest  to  a  thoughtful  mind,  does  not  necessarily  include 
an  all-important  conception  which  is  required  to  invest 
the  whole  process  with  a  truly  Nature-like  aspect. 

It  is  clear  that,  even  during  physical  existence,  people 
who  possess  certain  unusual  faculties — psychic  senses  that 
open  other  avenues  to  their  consciousness  besides  those  of 
the  physical  plane — remain  in  connection  in  some  way 
with  the  planes  of  superphysical  consciousness.  All  of 
us,  indeed,  as  the  experiences  of  sleep  show,  are  capable 
of  entering  into  conditions  of  consciousness  with  which 
the  five  ordinary  senses  have  nothing  to  do.  And  the 
phenomena  of  somnambulism,  as  it  is  sometimes  called 
(the  somnambulism  of  the  soul,  not  of  the  body),  or  of 
clairvoyance,  whether  of  spontaneous  occurrence  or  in- 
duced by  mesmerism,  point  to  the  same  conclusion  with 
very  much  greater  force.  We — the  souls  within  us — 
are  not,  as  it  were,  altogether  contained  in  the  material 
envelope  we  actuate  during  life.  We  clearly  retain  some 
rights  and  interests  in  the  ocean  of  spirit,  so  to  speak,  from 
which  we  have  been  stranded  on  the  shores  of  incarnation. 
The  process  of  incarnation  is  not  fully  described  when  we 
speak  of  an  alternate  existence  on  the  physical  and  spiritual 
planes,  and  thus  picture  the  soul  as  a  complete  entity, 
slipping  entirely  from  the  one  state  of  existence  to  the 
other.  A  more  correct  definition  of  the  process  might 
represent  incarnation  as  taking  place  on  this  physical  plane 
of  Nature  by  reason  of  an  efflux  emanating  from  the  soul. 
The  spiritual  realm  would  all  the  while  be  the  proper 
habitat  of  the  soul,  which  would  never  entirely  quit  it; 
and  that  non-materialisable  portion  of  the  soul  which 
abides  permanently  on  the  spiritual  plane  may  fitly  be 
spoken  of  as  the  Higher  Self. 

In  some  theosophical  writings,  the  term  here  employed 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  85 

has  been  identified  with  a  highly  profound  metaphysical 
idea,  which  we  may  consider  later  on,  and  which  con- 
templates the  spiritual  unity,  if  we  push  the  tonception 
back  far  enough,  of  all  temporarily  segregated  centres  of 
human  consciousness.  Between  the  explanation  I  am  now 
endeavouring  to  give  and  that  great  conception  there  is  no 
divergence  of  principle,  but  the  term  "Higher  Self" 
seems  to  me  most  fitly  assigned  to  the  individual  spiritual 
consciousness  of  each  soul,  and  I  will  maintain  the  har- 
mony of  my  own  writings  on  this  subject  by  continuing 
its  employment  in  that  sense. 

I  must  not,  however,  be  supposed  to  mean  that 
absolutely  every  human  being  is  to  be  thought  of  as 
associated  with  a  more  exalted  form  of  consciousness  on  a 
hig'her  plane  than  the  physical.  The  lower  orders  of 
mankind,  meaning  by  that  term  the  savage  races  as  a 
whole  and  the  least  evolved  amongst  ourselves,  may  be 
as  yet  undeveloped  beyond  the  stage  of  physical  con- 
sciousness. Their  quasi-spiritual  existence  between  in- 
carnations, would  be  little  more  than  a  pale  reflection 
of  that  through  which  they  have  passed  on  earth.  But 
as  the  human  being  advances  as  regards  his  interior  com- 
plexity, developing  in  protracted  lives  of  intellectual 
activity  and  intense  emotion,  great  possibilities  of  thought 
and  feeling  which  it  would  be  difficult  fully  to  express 
in  any  one  life  thereafter,  he  gradually  drifts  into  the  con- 
dition of  those  referred  to,  whose  real  spiritual  or  higher 
self  is  so  to  speak,  too  great  for  expression  in  any  one 
physical  life.  Of  course  it  will  be  seen  that  between  these 
two  extremes  lie  all  possibilities  of  intermediate  develop- 
ment. 

One  great  comfort  at  once  afforded  by  the  appreciation 
of  the  nature  of  the  Higher  Self  is  that  we  escape  from  the 
embarrassment  of  having  to  think  of  the  whole  complete 

86      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

soul  of  a  highly  advanced  human  being,  inhabiting  the 
highly  unsuitable  tenement  of  a  young  child's  body. 
However  unsatisfactory  the  notion  of  such  an  arrangement 
would  appear,  it  would  be  futile  to  try  and  escape  from 
it  by  the  hypothesis  that  the  child  could  be  born  first  and, 
so  to  speak,  ensouled  afterwards.  From  the  earliest  begin- 
ning, the  child  and  the  soul,  to  which  it  might  be  destined 
to  give  incarnation,  must  evidently  be  regarded  as  already 
in  union.  But  the  conception  with  which  I  am  now  deal- 
ing harmonises  with  the  fitness  of  things  and  with  the 
analogies  of  Nature.  The  soul  on  the  spiritual  plane  and 
ripe  for  Re-incarnation  takes  note,  as  it  were,  of  the  newly 
germinating  human  being  whose  physical  associations  and 
destiny  render  it  the  most  appropriate  physical  habitation 
that  soul  can  find.  Of  course,  for  entities  of  the  ordinary 
type, — leaving  out  of  account  those  abnormally  developed 
— there  is  no  conscious,  deliberate  selection  in  the  matter. 
The  Karmic  affinities  constitute  a  line  of  least  resistance 
along  which  the  soul  .throws  out  a  magnetic  shoot  into  the 
objective  world,  just  as  a  root  germinating  in  the  earth 
throws  out  through  that  portion  of  the  ground  which  most 
readily  gives  way  before  it,  the  first  slender  blade  of  green 
growth  which  makes  its  appearance  at  the  surface.  A 
more  recondite  but  still  more  exact  illustration  might  be 
drawn  from  the  behaviour  of  an  electric  current  choosing 
among  several  available  channels  of  approach  those  which, 
though  not  necessarily  the  shortest,  conduct  it  under  cir- 
cumstances best  suited  to  its  own  nature  to  its  goal,  the 
earth.  Along  the  magnetic  fibre  thus  established — itself 
no  doubt  growing  in  vigour  simultaneously  with  the 
growth  of  the  child — the  psychic  entity  flows  into  the  new 
body  by  degrees. 

The  same  idea  has  sometimes  been  expressed  in  other 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  87 

terms.  The  growing  child  has  been  said  to  be  morally 
irresponsible  and  incapable  of  generating  Karma  till  attain- 
ing the  age  of  seven  years.  This  amounts  to  the  same 
thing.  Before  seven  years,  there  is  not  enough  of  the  soul 
passed  down  into  the  child's  bodily  consciousness  to  allow 
of  the  development  of  a  moral  sense.  Conscience  has  not 
begun  to  assert  itself.  The  Higher  Self  has  not  begun 
to  brood  over  the  impulses  of  the  flesh.  If  the  child  dies, 
the  soul  has  simply  to  sprout  in  another  place.  As  the 
body  develops,  more  and  more  of  the  true  soul-conscious- 
ness passes  into  the  new  organism  till  at  last  in  the  grown- 
up man,  all  of  the  soul  which  is  susceptible  of  expression 
in  physical  consciousness  is  once  more  re-established,  or 
re-incarnated,  on  the  earth  plane. 

But  there  is  still  an  all-important  something  belonging 
to  the  soul  remaining  behind  (if  I  may  still  for  a  while 
cling  to  a  materialistic  figure  of  speech  quite  inevitable  if 
we  are  to  have  the  idea  clearly  established  in  our  minds) 
on  the  spiritual  plane.  This  something  is  the  most  essen- 
tially spiritual  element  in  the  incarnating  soul — its  Higher 
Self — almost  dormant  and  unconscious  during  the  full 
activity  of  the  incarnate  being,  but  constantly,  during  the 
sleep  of  the  body,  recovering  a  more  vivid  sense  of 
existence.  Certainly  the  extent  to  which  such  conscious- 
ness is  revived,  differs  for  different  people,  within  very  wide 
limits.  The  Higher  Self  is  not  merely  the  colourless, 
imperishable,  spiritual  monad,  but  the  growing  spiritual 
individuality  of  the  man,  in  each  given  case.  As  we 
shall  realise  more  fully  later  on,  the  growth  of  the  spiritual 
individuality  is,  in  fact,  the  purpose  of  human  life,  and  thus 
the  Higher  Self  may  in  one  case  be  backward  in  its 
development,  in  another  very  greatly  progressed;  but  in 
any  case  where  it  may  be  advanced  to  any  considerable 

88      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL  ' 

degree,  it  must  enjoy  a  certain  degree  of  consciousness  on 
the  spiritual  plane  whenever  the  incarnate  being,  in  which 
it  is  manifest  on  the  earth  plane,  is  plunged  in  profound 
slumber. 

For  most  people,  however,  belonging  to  the  normal 
development  of  the  present  race,  the  physical  brain  is  not 
organised  finely  enough  to  reflect  the  spiritual  conscious- 
ness of  the  inner  Ego  during  ordinary  periods  of  waking. 
At  the  best,  sleep  will  sometimes  be  found  morally  refresh- 
ing. Worries  and  temptations  that  may  have  been  op- 
pressive overnight  will  seem  to  have  diminished  in  power 
or  importance  in  the  morning,  and  where  such  ameliora- 
tions of  feeling  are  very  marked,  one  may  fairly  assume 
.that  the  influence  of  the  Higher  Self,  restored  during  sleep 
to  a  fuller  consciousness  than  usual,  has  had  something  to 
do  with  the  sensation  experienced.  It  is  only  in  the  case 
of  persons  psychically  and  spiritually  advanced  beyond  the 
normal  stage  of  progress  that  the  Higher  Self  conscious- 
ness is  remembered.  That  it  is  so  remembered  in  some 
cases,  is  most  assuredly  the  fact.  At  a  stage  of  develop- 
ment considerably  short  of  that  which  would  take  a  human 
being  out  of  the  range  of  physical  attraction  altogether, 
people  may  lead,  as  it  were,  a  double  life,  fully  conscious 
of  and  remembering  in  daily  life  the  spiritual  life  of  their 
deep  sleep  or  trances.  This  possibility  it  is  which  points 
to  the  sublimest  achievements  of  mesmerism;  for  a  person 
so  gifted  may  be  able  to  converse,  while  in  a  -mesmeric 
trance,  with  a  waking  incarnate  friend,  conversing  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  true  spiritual  consciousness.  But 
some  intermediate  possibilities  may  also  be  considered. 
It  may  happen  that  a  person  with  some  psychic  faculties — 
with  the  bodily  consciousness  of  the  spiritual  plane 
partially  but  imperfectly  developed,  may  perceive  the 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  89 

Higher  Self,  as  it  were,  but  have  the  impression,  in  their 
waking  remembrance,  that  they  have  been  conversing 
with  some  being  external  to  themselves.  They  do  not 
realise,  so  to  speak,  that  they  are  beholding  the  other  end 
of  the  curve  through  Nature,  which  constitutes  in  its 
entirety  their  own  complete  individuality.  As  the  Higher 
Self  would,  by  the  hypothesis,  be  manifesting  thoughts 
of  a  kind  that  had  not  fully  passed  into  incarnation,  there 
might  seem  to  be  a  complete  interchange  of  ideas  between 
itself  and  its  incarnate  phase,  as  though  two  persons  were 
concerned.  In  a  still  less  distinctly  understood  relation- 
ship with  the  Higher  Self,  the  incarnate  man  would  regard 
its  promptings  as  nothing  more  than  what  is  generally 
called  the  voice  of  conscience. 

The  theory  we  are  considering  harmonises  very  well 
with  the  treatment  of  this  world  in  which  we  live  as  a 
phenomenal  world  of  illusion,  though  the  meaning  of  that 
doctrine  of  Oriental  philosophy  is  often  grotesquely  mis- 
conceived. The  intention  of  the  doctrine  is  not  that  the 
earthly  plane  of  existence,  with  all  its  countless  attributes, 
has  no  existence,  but  that  the  idea  of  its  permanence  and 
self-sufficing  completeness  which  sometimes  fills  the  in- 
carnate consciousness,  is  a  delusion.  The  spiritual  world, 
of  which  it  is  the  emanation,  is  more  real — if  the 
phrase  may  pass  current — than  the  world  of  transitory 
material  conditions,  but  that  material  world  is  not  alleged 
to  be  a  delusion  in  the  sense  of  being  a  deception.  The 
highest  consciousness  of  Man  embraces  its  phenomena 
— the  manifestations  of  Nature  which  it  embodies — as 
well  as  the  phenomena  of  superior  planes  of  existence; 
and  in  the  vast  and  perfectly  balanced  design  of  Nature 
the  physical  plane  is  as  much  a  necessity  of  the  whole 
scheme  as  any  other.  But  a  comprehension  of  the  doctrine 

90      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

of  the  Higher  Self  shows  the  relation  between  the  physical 
life  and  the  plane  of  the  spiritual  consciousness  in  a  way 
which  may  well  teach  us  to  forego  the  terrible  mistake 
of  living  altogether  for  the  sake  of  the  lower  conscious- 
ness. The  region  of  Nature,  in  which  the  permanent 
Ego  is  thus  seen  to  be  rooted,  is  immeasurably  more  im- 
portant to  it  than  that  in  which  its  transitory  blossoms 
appear  for  a  brief  space  to  wither  and  fall  to  pieces,  while 
the  plant  recovers  energy  for  sending  forth  a  fresh  flower. 
Supposing  flowers  only  were  perceptible  to  ordinary  senses, 
and  their  roots  existed  in  a  state  of  Nature  intangible  and 
invisible  to  us,  philosophers  in  such  a  world  who  divined 
that  there  were  such  things  as  roots  in  another  plane  of 
existence  would  be  apt  to  say  of  the  flowers,  These  are 
not  the  real  plants;  they  are  of  no  relative  importance, 
merely  illusive  phenomena  of  the  moment. 

The  Higher  Self  doctrine  is  also  recommended  by  its 
correspondence  with  that  inbreathing  and  outbreaking 
of  Brahm,  which  symbolises  natural  phenomena  on  the 
macrocosmic  scale,  and  therefore  probably  fits  in  likewise 
with  the  microscomic  scale.  Physical  incarnation  is  the 
outbreaking  of  the  soul;  the  death  of  the  body  is  associated 
with  its  inbreathing. 

The  Karmic  progress  of  the  soul,  as  depicted  by  the 
first  simple  conception  of  its  passage  backwards  and 
forwards  between  the  planes  of  spirit  and  matter,  is  in 
no  way  interfered  with  by  the  permanent  existence  of  the 
Higher  Self  on  the  spiritual  plane.  No  essential  idea  to 
which  that  broad  statement  of  the  case  gives  rise  is  dis- 
countenanced by  the  more  advanced  and  elaborate  theory. 
For  instance,  let  us  consider  the  case  of  an  incarnate 
being  regarding  Nature  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
physical  plane  on  which  his  consciousness  seems  to  him 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  91 

to  be  altogether  concentrated  in  his  waking  life,  and  cling- 
ing earnestly  to  the  hope  of  retaining  his  present  personal 
consciousness  after  death.  This  hope,  unqualified  by 
spiritual  knowledge,"  has  in  a  pre-eminent  degree  moulded 
the  creeds  of  exoteric  religions.  People  say,  very  reason- 
ably as  far  as  that  one  idea  goes :  "  If  I  do  not  remember 
my  present  life  in  the  next  that  I  may  lead,  there  is  no  '  I ' 
left  in  the  transaction  at  all — I  do  not  obtain  any  im- 
mortality or  survival."  Nor  does  the  esoteric  doctrine  put 
aside  or  rebuke  this  very  natural  aspiration.  In  its  simplest 
form  it  certainly  tells  us :  "  You  will  eventually  wear 
out,  get  tired  of  and  be  done  with  your  present  personality, 
as  you  have  got  rid  of  many  others  in  the  past,  but  you 
will  not  be  violently  torn  from  it.  When  you  pass  after 
death  into  the  higher  planes  of  existence  you  will  still  be 
your  present  self,  remembering  all  that  is  essential  in  your 
present  life,  and  finding,  if  all  goes  well,  on  the  spiritual 
levels  of  Nature  a  much  freer  scope  for  the  development 
of  all  that  may  be  noblest  and  best  in  your  present  life 
than  you  can  possibly  hope  for  in  the  body.  It  is  only 
when  these  phases  of  consciousness  have  vibrated  to  the 
last  possible  echo  of  the  forces  you  have  engendered  during 
life,  and  when  the  spiritual  soul -is  once  more  colourless 
as  regards  definite  recollections,  that  it  will  return  through 
the  Lethe  of  a  fresh  incarnation  to  the  experiences  of  an 
altogether  fresh  personality."  But  now  let  us  see  how  this 
view  of  the  matter  is  affected  by  the  doctrine  of  the  Higher 
Self.  Its  essential  idea  is  preserved,  according  to  that 
doctrine,  as  completely  as  by  means  of  the  most  materialis- 
tic statement  of  which  the  case  is  susceptible. 

The  Higher  Self  may  be  regarded  as  dominating  the 
lower  or  earthly  personality  with  very  different  degrees 
of  completeness  in  different  people,  and  this  considera- 

r 

92      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

tion  would  show  that  personalities  deeply  attached  to 
their  own  earthly  consciousness  would  represent  souls  in 
which  the  lower  elements  were  largely  in  the  ascendant. 
The  reunion  of  higher  and  lower  selves  in  such  cases, 
after  death,  would  probably  mean  the  saturation  of  the 
higher  by  the  lower  in  a  commanding  degree.  But  fn 
truth,  after  a  soul  has  just  been  going  through  a  complete 
span  of  earthly  life,  the  lower  elements  can  hardly  fail, 
on  reunion,  to  have  so  much  to  do  with  the  completely 
restored  consciousness  as  to  determine  the  colour  of  the 
compound  for  the  time  being.  And  this  infusion  of  the 
last  personality  through  the  Higher  Self  or  saturation  of 
the  Higher  Self  therewith  fully  meets  aspirations  we  may 
feel  in  the  direction  of  a  personal  survival  after  death. 

We  need  not  regard  that  aspiration  as  either  blame- 
worthy or  misleading.  For  all  men  below  certain  exalted 
levels  of  spiritual  perfection,  which  we  need  not  at  present 
consider,  a  survival  of  the  personality  is  alike  required  on 
abstract  grounds  of  justice  and  common  sense;  and  as  a 
part  of  our  primary  conception  of  the  esoteric  doctrine 
we  shall  be,  in  the  spiritual  condition,  in  no  sense  less  our- 
selves for  feeling  our  personality  expanded  by  a  large  super- 
addition  of  spiritual  consciousness.  And  it  will  be  to  the 
gradual  reassertion  of  the  supremacy  of  the  spiritual  con- 
sciousness that  we  must  look  forward  as  constituting  the 
fading  out  of  the  personality  which  is  either  dreaded  or 
longed  for  by  people  in  the  flesh,  according  to  the  degree 
of  their  psychic  advancement,  but  which  will,  probably, 
be  no  more  a  source  of  regret  to  the  Higher  Self  in  its 
actual  occurrence  than — on  the  poor  plane  of  our  physical 
analogies — the  digestion  of  the  day's  dinner  is  a  source 
of  regret  for  a  healthy  man  at  night.  That  dinner  may 
have  played  its  part  in  the  nutrition  of  the  body.  At  the 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  Q] 

time  of  its  consumption,  perh^p^  l^-may^iave  been  a 
source  of  some  transitory  pleasure  in  itself;  but  absorbed 
into  the  body  it  is  merely  so  much  renewed  strength  and 
health.  So  with  the  personality  and  the  Higher  Self 
which  digests  it.  We  need  not  push  the  analogy  too  far; 
but  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  conversion  of  the  specific 
experiences  of  a  life  just  past,  which  constitutes  its  per- 
sonality, into  so  much  cosmic  progress  for  the  Higher  Self 
—which  is  the  ultimate  motive,  so  to  speak,  with  which 
those  experiences  have  been  incurred  —  is  a  process  which, 
while  it  goes  on,  constitutes  a  prolonged  preservation  of 
identity  for  the  personality  itself,  and  one  which  only 
yields  to  the  conscious  pre-eminence  of  the  Higher  Self's 
identity,  which  is  inextricably  blended  with  that  of  the 
earthly  personality  during  physical  life,  as  soon  as  the  two 
are  united. 

From  the  last  phrase  of  our  conception,  which  shows  us 
the  Higher  Self  absorbing  the  experiences  of  each  life- 
time in  turn,  we  can  readily  infer  that  all  through  the  long 
ages  of  its  existence  it  is  going  through  a  process  of 
growth  on  that  higher  plane  to  which  it  belongs,  just  as 
a  man's  mind  grows  within  the  narrow  limits  of  one 
physical  life.  And  as  we  reflect  upon  all  that  is  implied 
by  such  growth  we  shall  find  our  conception  of  the  whole 
process  expanding  readily  in  both  directions.  To  go 
back  on  the  past,  in  the  first  instance,  it  is  clear  that  each 
Higher  Self  must  have  existed  at  one  time  in  a  very  im- 
perfectly developed  state.  As  soon  as  any  individuality 
is  defined  by  the  earliest  process  of  human  evolution  in  the 
beginning  of  a  cosmic  period,  there  must  be  associated  with 
that  individuality,  throughout  its  incarnations,  a  focus  of 
activity  and  consciousness  on  the  spiritual  plane  of  Nature^ 
which  constitutes  from  the  beginning  its  Higher  Self.  But 

94      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

the  Higher  Self  of  the  primitive  savage  and  the  Higher  Self 
of  the  spiritualised  man  of  later  races  are  two  very  different 
entities.  It  is  clearly  by  means  of  the  experiences  gathered 
by  its  successive  manifestations  of  activity  on  the  physical 
plane,  that  each  Higher  Self  grows  and  advances  to  loftier 
perfection.  Certainly,  the  quality  of  pure  spirit  can 
never  vary,  but  the  individualisation  of  spirit  may  be 
accomplished  around  different  foci  of  activity  with  very 
different  degrees  of  success.  And  as  the  process  can  rarely 
be  a  rapid  one,  we  may  easily  comprehend  that  the  growth 
of  Higher  Selves  on  the  appropriate  plane  of  existence 
during  a  planetary  manvantara  is  going  on  all  the  while 
part  passu  with  the  improvement  of  the  races  in  incar- 
nation. 

The  Higher  Self  must  always  exercise  a  consciousness 
of  an  elevated  quality,  though,  in  the  beginning,  a  con- 
sciousness deficient  in  vigour  and  intensity.  But  as  it 
throws  out  one  plant  after  another  into  incarnation,  and 
successively  draws  back  into  itself  such  experiences  of 
earthly  life  as  may  be  .susceptible  of  absorption  into  its 
own  consciousness,  its  horizon  widens,  its  knowledge 
expands,  its  individuality  intensifies.  The  normal 
rule  of  its  growth  appears  to  be  very  slow  and  to  be  sym- 
bolised in  this  respect  by  some  of  the  physical  processes  of 
Nature,  like  the  accumulation  of  sand  on  ocean  beds,  or 
the  accretion  of  particles  on  a  coral  reef.  But  in  the  course 
of  time  seas  are  filled  up  and  islands  of  coral  built  on 
foundations  in  deep  water.  So  the  Higher  Self  selects 
its  spiritual  particles  from  the  lives  of  its  innumerable 
offspring,  and  the  greatest  Adept,  or  the  greatest  being 
destined  to  arise  out  of  humanity,  is  a  final  consequence 
of  processes  that  must  have  been  carried  on  as  slowly,  at 
one  time,  as  those  by  which  the  Higher  Self  of  any 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  95 

African  savage  is  rising  in  the  scale  of  Nature  by  virtue 
of  its  all  but  unprofitable  manifestations  on  earth. 

The  theory  of  the  Higher  Self  thus  conceived  seems 
to  me  to  recommend  itself  to  the  mind  as  a  scientific 
idea — that  is  to  say,  as  a  view  in  harmony  with  the  pure 
and  subtle  dignity  of  natural  operations,  which  often  as 
they  may  be  symbolised  by  theatrical  or  fantastic  allegories, 
never  betray  the  taint  of  such  a  character  when  exhaus- 
tively understood. 

It  is  only  when  the  doctrine  of  the  Higher  Self  fully 
takes  possession  of  the  mind  that  we  can  begin  to  realise 
the  purpose  of  earthly  existence,  and  be  in  some  measure 
reconciled  to  the  strain  of  emotion  and  feeling  with  which 
that  existence  is  often  associated.  Viewed  as  a  complete 
thing  in  itself,  the  earthly  existence  but  too  often  seems  to 
justify  the  gloomy  despair  of  the  pessimist — and,  indeed, 
if  the  earthly  existence  were  either  complete  in  itself,  or  a 
singular  experience  in  a  human  career,  to  be  followed 
either  by  good  or  bad  conditions  of  existence  hereafter — 
pessimism  as  a  philosophy  applied  to  the  phenomena  of  life 
as  we  behold  them  would  be  an  irresistible  conclusion. 
But  the  development  of  the  Higher  Self  as  a  purpose  of 
existence  is  an  aim  which  may  reconcile  us  to  life,  and 
justify  the  fact  of  suffering.  For  the  time  being — for 
most  of  us — it  is  impossible  to  feel  the  identity  of  the 
higher  and  lower  self  from  the  incarnate  point  of  view, 
but  an  intellectual  perception  of  the  truth  may  enable 
us  to  foresee  the  inevitably  superior  capacity  of  the  Higher 
Self  in  this  respect.  And  a  full  appreciation  of  all  that 
lurks  in  that  forecast  will  do  a  great  deal  to  illuminate  the 
pathway  we  have  to  travel,  if  we  resolve  to  live  in  the 
lower  self  on  conditions  conducive  to  the  interests  of  the 
higher.  As  a  general  rule — and  by  that  I  mean  in  all 

96      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

cases  but  those  of  people  exquisitely  spiritualised  already 
in  their  earthly  nature,  and  endowed  with  clairvoyant 
vision  of  a  high  order — the  lower  self  must  be  content 
to  regard  itself  as  appointed  to  undergo  the  suffering  phase 
of  existence  for  the  benefit — not  really  of  another  being, 
but  for  the  benefit  of  a  phase  of  itself,  of  which  it  can 
never  have  any  direct  consciousness  in  the  flesh.  But  on 
the  other  hand  it  may  acquire  a  confident  certainty  that  the 
consciousness  of  the  Higher  Self  will  ultimately  be  so 
adjusted  as  to  provide  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  fruit  of 
this  suffering  in  a  manner  that  will  constitute  a  complete 
recompense  to  the  true  individuality  of  the  lower  self. 

Is  it  necessary  here  to  take  note  of  the  occult  theory 
that  calculations  of  recompense  do  not  furnish  the  highest 
motives  of  human  action  ?  We  may  all  be  aware  of  that, 
but  at  the  same  time  be  interested,  on  all  grounds,  in 
studying  the  methods  by  which  Nature  provides  a  recom- 
pense for  the  suffering  incurred  through  aspirations  towards 
a  higher  life. 

The  comprehension  of  the  problem  before  us  turns 
on  a  realisation  of  the  fact  that  while  the  lower  is  not 
conscious  of  the  Higher  Self,  the  higher  is  conscious  of 
the  lower,  and  will  be  increasingly  conscious  thereof  in 
proportion  to  the  extent  that  the  lower  applies  itself 
deliberately  to  the  task  of  living  for  the  sake  of  the  higher. 
Let  us  keep  in  view  the  theory  or  principle,  or  fact  of 
Nature,  that  consciousness  on  the  superior  planes  or 
spiritual  realms  of  Nature  is  accompanied  by  a  vivid  sense 
of  enjoyment.  In  proportion  as  the  Higher  Self  is 
expanded  and  developed  is  that  sense  of  enjoyment 
broadened  and  deepened.  In  such  expansion,  in  such 
development,  the  reward  of  the  efforts  made  by  the  lower 
self  is  realised.  This  appears  to  me  to  be  an  all-important 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  97 

point  on  which  it  is  desirable  for  us  to  dwell  with  the 
closest  attention. 

The  crude,  guardian  angel  theory  of  the  Higher  Self, 
as  well  as  that  which  looks  too  far  ahead  and  seeks  to 
identify  the  higher  individual  with  the  Universal  Self, 
or  God,  both  err  in  leading  us  to  think,  so  to  speak, 
too  well  of  the  Higher  Self  as  a  rule.  There  are,  no 
doubt,  as  I  have  suggested,  advanced  human  beings  still 
in  the  flesh  for  that  matter,  and  far  below  the  Adept 
level  of  advancement,  with  whom  the  Higher  Self  is  a 
very  exalted  and  highly  conscious  kind  of  guardian  angel. 
But  with  the  vast  majority  of  people  it  would  be  an  im- 
mense mistake  to  regard  the  Higher  Self  as  anything  but 
higher  in  kind.  It  may  not  be  nearly  so  much 
higher  in  degree — on  the  general  scale  of  human  progress, 
that  is  to  say — than  the  lower  self,  as  people  are  sometimes 
apt  to  imagine.  Of  course  its  affinities  are  all  spiritual  in 
their  order.  The  Higher  Self,  such  as  it  is,  of  the  most 
grovelling  sensualist  is  wholly  indifferent  to  sensual  things; 
and  in  touch,  to  some  very  limited  extent,  with  the  ocean 
of  real  knowledge,  which  is  the  same  ocean  on  which  a 
Planetary  Spirit  floats.  But  its  consciousness  on  that  plane 
of  existence  is,  to  a  corresponding  extent,  torpid  and  im- 
perfect. For  its  growth,  for  its  happiness,  for  its  awaken- 
ment  to  the  opportunities  within  its  reach  in  the  higher 
realms  of  Nature,  it  is  altogether  dependent — altogether, 
at  all  events,  in  the  earlier  stages  of  such  growth — on  its 
lower  self;  on  its  own  material  phase;  on  the  earthly 
fulcrum  which  it  leans  upon  to  accomplish  an  upward 
movement.  Let  us  remember,  indeed,  that  though  thus 
dependent,  it  is  not  itself  lethargic  in  the  matter.  The 
lower  self  action  which  conduces  to  such  growth  is  neces- 
sarily, when  accomplished,  the  result  of  promptings  from 

8 

9  8       THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

the  Higher  Self  thought,  or  suggestion.  The  growth  we 
are  considering  may  thus  be  said — by  an  enlargement  of 
the  view  already  expressed — to  be  dependent  on  the 
responsive  action  of  the  lower  self;  on  the  efforts  and 
exertions  made  by  the  lower  in  response  to  the  influence 
of  the  higher.  The  action  and  reaction,  in  short,  by  which 
progress  is  accomplished  should  always  be  thought  of  as 
started,  in  the  first  instance,  by  the  Higher  Self.  But, 
keeping  this  in  view,  we  may  safely  shut  our  eyes  for  the 
moment  to  the  capacity  said  to  be  latent  in  every  human 
soul  of  universal  knowledge.  "  Your  own  soul,'*  say  some 
occult  students,  "  is  omniscient.  You  only  have  to  get 
into  union  with  it,  to  share  its  knowledge."  The  doctrine 
may  not  .be  false,  but  it  is  misleading.  You  own  soul, 
your  own  Higher  Self,  may  grow  into  omniscience — or 
something  approaching  that — if  you  give  it  time  and 
adequate  help — through,  certainly,  more  than  one  life, 
from  the  date  at  which  that  enterprise  is  first  set  on  foot 
by  "  you  "  yourself — the  earthly  phase  of  the  being  we 
are  considering.  But  the  Higher  Self  of  an  ordinary  man 
of  the  world  is  certainly  not  yet  in  the  perfection  of  its 
potential  development.  On  the  contrary,  the  fact  that  it 
is  not,  and  cannot  be,  will  be  seen,  on  reflection,  to  square 
exactly  with  the  information  which  has  been  formulated 
during  the  last  few  years  (with  the  help  of  high  authority 
as  well  as  of  the  investigations  carried  on  by  advancing 
students  among  ourselves),  in  respect  to  the  Devachanic 
state.  For  the  majority  of  those  who  share  it,  that  state 
is  not  one  of  highly  advanced  insight  into  truth.  It  is 
a  state  of  great  happiness,  the  intensity  of  which  is  prob- 
ably proportioned  to  the  advancement  of  the  soul  which 
experiences  it;  but  it  is  a  state  replete  with  illusion.  And 
yet,  undoubtedly,  those  are  the  Higher  Selves  of  the  human 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  99 

beings  concerned  who  are  enjoying  the  Devachanic  happi- 
ness; and  more  than  this,  if  they  are  capable  of  conscious- 
ness in  the  Devachanic  condition  at  all,  they  must  be 
already  human  beings  who  in  the  flesh  have  been  animated 
with  very  well  defined  spiritual  aspirations,  or  deeply 
moved  by  truly  spiritual  emotions. 

Their  gradual  elevation  into  Higher  Selves  of  the  true 
guardian  angel  type  may  be  looked  upon — if  for  the 
moment  we  do  not  look  further — as  the  purpose  and  justi- 
fication for  physical  existence.  This  view  of  the  situa- 
tion, be  it  observed,  is  quite  compatible  with  the  view 
which  in  all  cases  assumes  the  best  and  noblest  impulses 
of  each  man's  life,  be  he  higher  or  lower  as  an  incarnate 
being  on  the  scale  of  spirituality,  as  emanations,  warnings, 
or  guidance  from  his  Higher  Self.  To  the  extent  that 
they  are  active,  the  aspirations  of  the  Higher  Self  must  be 
all  towards  good.  But  except  as  regards  its  kind  and 
affinities,  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  consider  the  mental 
activity  of  the  Higher  Self  as  very  greatly  superior  to  that 
of  the  lower.  Before  the  Higher  Self  can  use  the  faculties 
latent  in  its  nature,  before  it  can  be  awakened  from  its 
lethargy  on  the  higher  plane,  which,  in  fact,  has  deepened 
in  the  course  of  ages  as  its  periodical  presentations  on  the 
plane  of  matter  became  more  and  more  intense,  it  must  be 
revived  by  the  conscious  effort  of  its  own  lower  self — of 
itself  on  the  lower  plane — an  effort  which  is  analogous  to 
the  rebound  of  a  ball  dropped  on  the  ground  from  a  height. 

This  group  of  conceptions,  I  think,  will  prepare  the 
rnind  for  an  appreciation  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
recompense  for  meritorious  but  painful  action  on  this 
plane  of  life  is  worked  out.  The  Higher  Self,  in  propor- 
tion to  the  extent  that  its  perceptions  are  awakened,  can 
survey  the  whole  process,  embrace  in  one  retrospective 

8* 

TOO    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

glance  the  suffering  and  the  beneficial  consequence,  and 
thus  feel  that  the  efforts  made  were  not  thrown  away. 
In  the  case  of  an  undeveloped  Higher  Self,  indeed,  the 
fruits  of  the  good  deeds  of  the  lower  self  are  enjoyed  with- 
out being  analysed  in  the  way  just  supposed.  But  by  the 
hypothesis  the  correspondingly  undeveloped  lower  self 
would  never  in  such  a  case  have  been  oppressed  by  meta- 
physical speculations  concerning  its  own  future.  It  would 
have  been  content  to  regard  that  future  in  the  light  of 
some  exoteric  religious  fiction,  and  though  its  expectations 
might  not  be  fulfilled  to  the  letter,  their  essence  would  be 
fulfilled  in  the  unreflective  bliss  of  the  Higher  Self — the 
same  individuality,  really,  though  not  yet  inspired  with  an 
interest  in  the  observation  of  the  fact  of  its  own  identity 
with  its  physical  phases.  But  by  the  time  a  long  suc- 
cession of  physical  lives  and  spiritual  interludes  have  culti- 
vated the  consciousness  of  the  Higher  Self  to  such  a  degree 
that  it  begins  to  approximate  to  the  guardian  angel  type 
of  Higher  Self,  its  relations  with  the  lower  become  sensibly 
modified.  The  true  Ego  begins  not  alone  to  feel,  but  to 
think,  on  the  higher  plane.  It  becomes  more  and  more  a 
conscious,  directing  power,  watching  and  influencing  the 
acts  of  its  lower  self,  and  alive  to  the  advantages  it  may 
derive  from  the  co-operation  thereof.  For  metaphysical 
purposes  one  might,  of  course,  throw  the  idea  just 
expressed  into  other  language,  which  would,  perhaps, 
avoid  some  crudities  involved  in  the  more  dramatic 
formula,  but  at  the  expense  of  vivid  significance.  It  could 
be  argued  that  the  physical  and  spiritual  aspects  of  the  Ego 
act  and  react  on  each  other,  and  that  the  soul  is  manifested 
in  the  phenomenal  world  is  an  illusory  counterpart  of  the 
true  Ego,  whose  absorption  in  the  universal  self  is  more 
or  less  retarded  by  the  greater  or  less  subjection  of  its 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  101 

physical  consciousness  to  the  plane  of  maya.  But  the 
processes  of  development  we  are  examining  will  be 
rendered  more  intelligible,  I  think,  for  most  observers — 
incarnate,  for  the  time  being,  on  this  plane  of  maya — 
by  language  in  harmony  with  the  conditions  of  the 
physical  consciousness. 

It  will  be  understood  that  I  am  not  supposing  the  Higher 
Self  to  be  standing  sentinel  over  the  lower  at  all  moments 
of  its  existence,  and  in  respect  of  all  the  acts  of  its  daily 
life  to  be  nervously  watchful  lest  its  protege  should  take 
a  false  step.  With  persons  of  advanced  development  there 
is,  perhaps,  a  greater  approximation  towards  such  a  condi- 
tion of  things  than  a  first  glance  at  the  situation  would 
lead  us  to  suppose;  for  the  spiritualisation  of  the  lower 
self  or  aspect,  renders  the  higher  all  the  more  continuously 
conscious;  but  I  take  it  that  in  conditions  of  ordinary 
human  life  the  Higher  Self  is  always  more  or  less  asleep 
on  the  higher  plane,  when  the  lower  is  awake  and  only 
conscious  of  its  place  in  Nature,  of  its  relations  with  the 
lower  self,  and  of  the  consequences  to  itself  of  the  exer- 
tions its  lower  self,  or  its  allied  personality  (to  suggest  an 
alternative  phrase),  may  have  been  making — when  that 
allied  personality  is  asleep  on  the  physical  plane — plunged, 
that  is  to  say,  in  a  spontaneous  or  artificially  induced  trance 
as  regards  its  lower  consciousness.  A  proviso  should  be 
interpolated  here,  indeed.  Sleeping  and  waking  are  the  best 
terms  we  can  use  to  describe  the  alternate  states  of  the 
Higher  Self  during  the  life  of  the  body,  but  we  should 
remember  that  its  sleep  has  reference  only  to  its  own 
higher  plane  consciousness,  and  its  influence  is  not  extinct 
as  regards  the  incarnate  personality  at  any  time.  Thus 
the  so-called  voice  of  conscience,  which  asserts  itself,  and 
is  heard  from  time  to  time,  even  in  the  most  unspiritu- 

102    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

alised  personalities,  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the 
influence  of  the  Higher  Self  making  itself  felt.  This 
influence  is,  of  course,  feeble  and  incomplete  in  cases 
where  the  lower  self  does  not,  by  action  responsive  to 
this  influence,  increase  and  strengthen  its  power.  But 
in  endeavouring  to  realise  the  oscillation,  as  it  were,  of 
the  centre  of  consciousness  between  the  higher  and  the 
lower  planes,  it  would  be  undesirable  to  lose  sight  of  the 
fact  that  the  Higher  Self  is  always  the  source  of  the  best 
impulses  of  the  lower. 

The  Ego,  as  I  have  said,  awake  on  the  physical  plane 
is  normally  quite  unconscious  of  its  periods  of  supra- 
physical  or  spiritual  consciousness — of  the  existence,  in 
other  words,  of  its  Higher  Self — even  though  that  same 
Higher  Self,  on  its  side,  is  fully  conscious  when  itself  in 
its  wakefulness  on  the  higher  plane,  of  the  lower  per- 
sonality, and  of  its  efforts  or  inaction,  as  the  case  may  be. 
How  far  it  may  consciously  deplore  the  failures  of  its 
lower  self  to  achieve  this  or  that  specific  rung  on  the 
ladder  of  progress — how  far  it  may  be  distressed,  so  to 
speak,  at  observing  its  own  lower  self  give  way  to  tempta- 
tion, is  a  point  to  be  considered  separately.  The  condi- 
tions of  the  existence  of  the  Higher  Self  may  not  afford 
it  scope  for  emotions  of  distress  or  regret;  and  a  failure  or 
surrender  to  temptation  by  the  lower  self  may  take  the 
shape,  as  regards  the  higher,  of  so  much  retardation  in  its 
progress  in  regard  to  which,  with  its  sublime  capacity 
for  patience,  it  may  be  quite  unconscious  of  any  irritation. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  every  success  and  every  victory 
of  the  lower  self  over  temptation  may  none  the  less  be 
translated  at  once  into  so  much  progress  for  the  Higher 
Self,  and  so  much  definite  consciousness  of  satisfaction 
and  enjoyment  arising  from  that  progress. 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  103 

Now  it  may  seem,  at  first  sight,  to  an  imaginative 
mind,  that  these  views  are  comfortless,  as  regards  what 
may  be  called  the  interests  of  the  Personality.  All  its 
struggles,  and  all  its  sufferings,  are  undergone  for  the 
benefit  of  a  Being  that  it  can  hardly  help  feeling  external 
to  itself — an  almost  pitiless  taskmaster  and  a  thankless 
consumer  of  the  fruits  of  its  physical  slave's  industry. 
Calm  and  impassive  in  the  serene  realms  of  spirit,  the 
Higher  Self  lives  for  enjoyment  only,  luxuriating  in  the 
harvest  of  the  toil  carried  on  below — when  there  is  a 
harvest  to  reap — but  undisturbed  by  the  disaster  when  the 
heavily-burdened  labourer  staggers  or  falls  beneath  his 
load !  But  though  that  would  not  be  a  satisfactory  or 
equitable  arrangement  all  round,  if  the  two  phases  of  the 
Ego  were  really  the  separate  entities  they  look  like  from 
the  earthly  point  of  view,  the  propriety  of  the  whole 
situation  is  amply  vindicated  as  soon  as  we  can  be  quite 
sure  that,  from  the  celestial  point  of  view,  the  personality 
and  the  Higher  Self  or  Individuality  are  felt  and  seen  to 
be  one  and  the  same  centre  of  consciousness,  though  func- 
tioning first  under  one  and  then  under  the  other  set  of 
conditions.  How,  it  may  be  asked,  are  we  to  get  proof 
of  this  vitally  important  theory  ?  In  such  a  region  of 
thought  as  this  we  are  exploring,  it  is  almost  superfluous 
to  answer  that  proof  must  be  sought  for  in  the  interior 
consciousness,  which  is  the  more  or  less  obscured  reflection 
in  each  of  us  of  the  Higher  Self  to  which  such  personality 
may  belong.  But,  meanwhile,  I  venture  to  think  that,  in 
the  "  sweet  reasonableness  "  of  the  position,  a  provisional 
guarantee  of  its  security  may  be  found.  We  stand  face  to 
face  with  the  perennial  problem  of  life — the  hardship  of 
existence  and  the  necessity  of  accounting  for  this  in  some 
way  that  shall  be  coherent  with  the  general  drift  of 

io4    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

humanity  towards  perfection,  and  the  prevalence  of  Justice 
as  a  law  of  Nature,  in  the  long  run.  Around  the  leading 
ideas  of  the  esoteric  doctrine,  which  we  in  this  generation 
have  been  stimulated  to  reflect  upon,  theosophical  study 
has  enabled  us  to  group  a  considerable  mass  of  inevitably 
certain  detail.  The  alternate  manifestations  of  the  Ego 
on  the  physical  and  spiritual  planes  of  Nature  lead  by  an 
indisputable  train  of  conjecture  to  the  doctrine  here  spoken 
of  as  that  of  the  Higher  Self,  and  this,  in  turn,  brings  us, 
along  a  causeway  of  trustworthy  reasoning,  to  the  con- 
sideration of  the  still  more  elevated  subject — the  evolution 
of  the  Higher  Self — with  which  we  are  at  present  engaged. 

In  the  comprehension  of  the  laws  thus  governing  the 
evolution  of  the  Higher  Self,  we  attain  the  innermost  goal 
of  esoteric  study,  as  this  study  may  be  regarded  from  the 
incarnate  point  of  view.  The  practical  value  of  such  a 
comprehension  in  its  bearing  on  life  and  conduct,  and  on 
any  capacity  to  bear  whatever  trials  of  one  sort  or  another 
we  may  have  to  bear  in  our  "  lower  selves  " — that  is  to 
say,  in  the  incarnate  phase  of  our  existence — is  something 
that  cannot  be  exaggerated.  The  old  vague  religious  hope 
that  we  shall  somehow  be  rewarded  after  we  die  for  any 
meritorious  behaviour  we  may  have  contrived  to  carry 
on  here  below,  in  spite  of  our  manifold  embarrassments, 
is  thus  replaced  by  a  specific,  scientific  perception  of  the 
way  that  process  is  worked  out. 

The  method  is  altogether  in  harmony  with  all  truths 
of  spiritual  science  we  have  been  able  to  reach,  and  the 
consequence  is  that,  once  thoroughly  assimilated,  it  is  cal- 
culated to  soothe  in  a  remarkable  degree  the  strain  of 
emotion  and  the  great  vacuity  of  life  which  are  among  the 
well-known  concomitants  of  any  deliberate  attempt  to 
tread  the  upward  path.  It  is  not  in  human  nature  to  be 

THE  HIGHER  SELF  105 

content — above  all  it  is  not  in  the  highly  speculative  and 
introspective  nature  of  an  occult  student  to  be  content — 
with  the  attenuated  promise  of  an  ultimate  absorption 
of  his  consciousness  in  the  Infinite  Consciousness,  as  a 
compensation  for  painful  self-denial  in  this  life,  and  as  a 
readjustment,  in  accordance  with  infallible  justice,  of  the 
long  account  of  physical  existence.  Some  exalted  natures 
may  be  indifferent  to  compensations  as  far  as  they  them- 
selves are  concerned,  or  may  honestly  imagine  themselves 
so  indifferent  at  all  events,  till  some  unforeseen  turn  of 
the  screw,  influencing  them  in  an  unexpected  way,  may 
betray  their  natural  human  weakness  to  their  own  inner 
consciousness.  But  at  any  rate  even  these  will  not  be 
content  to  suppose  that  humanity  at  large  is  destined  all 
along  the  line  to  the  cheerless  prospect  of  unremunerated 
labour.  Let  us  each,  leaving  ourselves  out  of  the  calcula- 
tion, and  thinking  only  of  our  brother,  admit  that  we  have 
not  made  sense  of  the  problem  of  Nature  till  we  have 
distinctly  provided,  by  our  interpretation  thereof,  for  the 
reward  of  merit. 

And  up  to  the  very  threshold  of  the  theory  I  have 
endeavoured  to  set  forth,  this  reward  is  not  adequately 
provided  for  in  the  sense  of  being  specifically  apprehended. 
If  the  Higher  Self  were  in  all  cases  an  already  omniscient 
being,  as  some  occultists  have  seemed  to  imagine,  and  if 
progress  merely  represented  the  efforts  of  the  lower  self 
in  any  given  case  to  rise  into  conscious  relations  with  it, 
the  lower  self  or  personality  would  go  altogether  un- 
rewarded in  the  enormous  number  of  cases  where  that 
conscious  relationship  is  never  established.  The  struggle 
to  do  right  on  this  plane  of  existence  would  then  indeed 
be  a  futile  and  miserable  undertaking,  at  the  very  best 
rewarded  only  by  the  good  Karma,  that  would  render 

106    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

the  next  physical  life,  which  the  impassive  Higher  Self 
or  Individuality  might  overshadow,  a  less  painful  experi- 
ence for  the  practically  new  entity  which  would  have  no 
recollection  of  its  former  struggle  to  give  zest  to  its 
relative  enjoyment  in  the  new  and  altogether  detached 
physical  existence.  Without  the  evolution  of  the  Higher 
Self  to  express  the  consequences  of  that  struggle,  the 
situation  would  go  far  to  justify  the  familiar  objection 
to  the  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation,  which  rests  upon  the 
forgetfulness  in  each  physical  life  of  the  circumstances  of 
the  last.  But  let  us  once  realise  the  position  as  occultists 
of  even  a  moderate  degree  of  advancement  know  that  it 
actually  stands,  and  the  incarnate  man,  however  little  he 
may  himself,  in  his  own  incarnate  consciousness,  feel  the 
reward  of  his  good  deeds  or  self-denial,  is  nevertheless 
assured  of  being  himself,  in  his  spiritual  condition  after 
release  from  the  body,  the  recipient  of  the  harvest  that 
he  has  sown.  He  may  not,  in  the  flesh,  be  conscious  of 
the  emotions  and  exhilaration  of  the  Higher  Self  due  to 
his  work,  but  the  consciousness  of  his  Higher  Self  embraces 
his  consciousness  as  he  looks  back  on  his  past  career  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  superior  plane.  We  are  not 
violently  straining  or  materialising  the  facts,  merely  adapt- 
ing them  to  the  character  of  our  present  consciousness, 
if  we  imagine  the  Higher  Self  as  reflecting :  "  If,  in  the 
physical  environment  from  which  I  am  now  set  free,  I 
had  not  the  strength  of  mind  to  do  this  or  that,"  whatever 
the  important  achievement  may  have  been,  "  I  should  not 
now  be  enjoying  my  present  rich  sense  of  spiritual  blessed- 
ness." Indeed  we  may,  in  the  attempt  to  realise  the 
position  in  all  its  bearings,  accept  the  service  of  illustra- 
tions drawn  from  commonplace  life.  A  man,  established 
from  very  early  youth  abroad  to  carve  out  his  fortunes 

THE   HIGHER   SELF  107 

in  some  distant  country,  may  have  set  his  face  during 
that  undertaking  against  all  kinds  of  wasteful  and  tempo- 
rary self-indulgence.  He  may  have  been  guided  by  the 
resolution  to  postpone  the  enjoyment  of  his  earnings  till 
circumstances  should  permit  him  to  return  to  his  own 
natural  home,  even  though  the  ways  and  surroundings  of 
life  there  should  be  unknown  to  him,  and  the  lines  along 
which  it  should  be  spent,  left  to  be  planned  out  later 
on.  But  assuming  the  programme  to  be  fulfilled,  the 
fruition  of  his  efforts  on  his  return  home  might  be  an 
ample  compensation  to  him  for  the  toil  and  self-denial 
of  his  earlier  years.  So,  in  a  far  more  elevated  and 
glorious  degree,  and  unqualified  by  risks  of  disaster  which 
may  always  dash  any  worldly  cup  of  enjoyment  from  ex- 
pectant lips,  may  we  regard  the  programme  of  physical 
effort  and  fruition  on  the  spiritual  plane,  as  assuring  us 
the  reward  which  we  must  be  able  to  discern  as  awaiting 
the  meritorious  actor  in  this  life's  drama,  if  the  whole 
proceeding  is  to  be  regarded  as  something  better  than  a 
farce  and  a  tragedy  in  one. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  this  speculation  to  treat,  as  an 
essential  part  of  the  scheme  of  Nature,  the  possibility  that, 
by  the  conscious  direction  of  our  efforts  on  this  plane  of 
life  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  idea  thus  conceived,  we  may 
actually,  if  all  circumstances  are  propitious,  obtain,  even 
during  this  life,  something  more  than  an  intellectual  con- 
viction of  the  spiritual  reward  that  will  be  secured  by  our 
efforts  here.  But  we  should  let  slip  a  very  important 
consideration  connected  with  the  whole  transaction  if  we 
did  not  take  note,  in  reviewing  it,  of  the  possibility  to 
which  I  refer.  There  may  be  here  and  there,  even  among 
people  who  are  not  obtrusively  elevated  to  any  remarkable 
degree  above  their  fellows  of  this  race  to  which  we  belong, 

io8    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

some  who  in  the  lower  self-consciousness  are  invested 
with  the  beautiful  characteristics  of  a  spiritualised  clair- 
voyance. Such  persons  will  be  able,  from  time  to  time,  to 
ascend  into  the  consciousness  of  the  Higher  Self,  retain- 
ing in  the  physical  brain  a  recollection  of  those  experi- 
ences. They  are  in  a  position  to  be  the  pioneers  of 
spiritual  progress  for  their  less  gifted  brethren,  rendering 
transparently  obvious,  as  a  fact  in  Nature,  the  existence  of 
that  relationship  between  the  lower  and  Higher  Self  which 
I  have  endeavoured  to  depict.  And  they  may  afford  to 
any  resolute  explorer  of  the  higher  life  good  ground  for 
hoping  that  others  in  turn,  by  earnest  endeavours  in  that 
direction,  may  anticipate  the  revelation — even  while  in 
this  life — of  that  which  has  hitherto  been  regarded  as  the 
great  and  insoluble  mystery  of  death. 

In  dealing  with  these  problems  I  have  endeavoured  to 
avoid  the  comfortless  dissipation  of  thought  and  conjecture 
apt  to  ensue  if  we  endeavour  to  examine  the  conditions 
of  our  present  existence  by  the  light  of  metaphysical  think- 
ing which  seeks  to  adapt  itself  to  infinity.  But  if  the 
subject  has  thus  been  kept  upon  a  plane  of  thought  below 
the  level  of  some  to  which  our  speculations  may  occasion- 
ally soar,  I  would,  nevertheless,  suggest  that,  in  dealing 
with  the  circumstances  under  which  the  lower  self  may 
be  drawn  towards  the  true  individuality  of  the  Ego,  which 
is  the  Higher  Self,  we  are  really  dealing  also  with  the 
circumstances  under  which  the  true  individuality — over- 
shadowed by  the  spirit  as  it  overshadows  the  incarnate  man 
— is  itself  drawn  towards  the  highest  influence — the  uni- 
versal self  or  universal  spirit.  We  may  not,  from  our 
present  standpoint,  be  able  to  divine  very  much  concern- 
ing that  process,  but  we  can  infer,  with  complete  con- 
fidence, that  the  development,  and  evolution  of  the  Higher 

THE   HIGHER    SELF  109 

Self,  which  it  is  within  the  power  of  the  lower  self,  01 
incarnate  man,  to  promote,  is  none  the  less  its  response 
to  that  mysterious  emanation  from  the  supreme,  that  is 
the  ultimate  goal  towards  which  the  later  efforts  of  a 
perfected  humanity,  in  some  remotely  future  epoch,  may 
consciously  and  appreciatively  turn. 

CHAPTER   V 
FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA 

THE  general  purpose  of  this  work  is  to  interpret 
the  opportunities  for  spiritual  progress  lying 
before  humanity.  The  nature  of  these  oppor- 
tunities is  the  first  great  revelation  of  occult  science,  and 
the  prospects  before  us,  if  we  are  resolute  enough  to  ex- 
plore them,  are  the  subject  of  the  occult  student's  most 
eager  study.  Every  phase  of  emotion  and  faith  embraced 
in  religion,  if  rightly  understood,  is  in  harmony  with  the 
theosophical  exposition  of  the  evolutionary  task  provided 
for  us  by  the  design  of  the  world.  We  have  traced  in 
the  great  law  of  Re-incarnation  the  method  employed  by 
Nature  in  working  out  that  design  up  to  a  certain  point, 
and  have  seen  how  the  Higher  Self  of  each  human  unit 
is  the  permanent  centre  of  consciousness  which  is  in  fact 
the  Ego,  and  the  final  expression  of  every  effort  which 
it  puts  forth  during  the  successive  periods  of  its  long 
struggle  in  incarnate  life.  We  shall  go  on  ultimately  to 
endeavour,  as  far  as  it  is  possible,  to  do  this  from  the  point 
of  view  of  consciousness  reflected  in  a  material  organism, 
to  realise  the  kind  of  existence  towards  which  the  Higher 
Self,  strengthened  and  illuminated  by  accumulated  know- 
ledge and  capacity,  must  strive  if  it  would  fulfil  the  loftiest 
potentialities  of  its  Nature.  And  the  explanation  will  be 
fortified  by  a  review  of  the  traces  in  ancient  and  mediaeval 
history  which  show  us,  now  that  we  have  the  key  to  their 
real  meaning,  how  earlier  generations  of  men  were 
already  bent  upon  the  supreme  task.  But  many  side  lights 
have  to  bt  thrown  on  the  explanations  already  given  before 
the  sufficing  character  of  the  theosophic  revelation  can  be 
entirely  appreciated.  And  at  this  stage  it  may  be  con- 

IIO 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA  1 1 1 

venient  to  deal  with  some  metaphysical  embarrassments 
which  thinkers,  trained  in  European  schools  of  philosophy, 
will  be  apt  very  likely  to  regard  as  stumbling  blocks  in  the 
way  of  the  all-important  doctrine  on  which  the  whole 
argument  turns — that  which  recognises  in  the  spontaneous 
Will  of  each  individual  the  force  which  may  direct  his 
evolution  into  the  right  channel. 

Although  few  European  thinkers  adopt  in  its  naked 
simplicity  the  doctrine  of  fatalism,  we  find  the  essential 
idea  of  that  doctrine  firmly  established  in  the  theories  of 
"  necessity,"  which  stand  in  time-honoured  antagonism 
to  the  doctrine  of  "  free  will."  The  arguments  which 
make  for  each  of  these  theories  considered  separately,  are 
often  regarded  as  so  irrefragable  that  the  paradox  in  these 
days  is  accepted  as  such  more  often  than  discussed.  The 
conflict  of  Free  Will  and  Necessity  is  hardly  any  longer 
an  academical — rather  a  schoolboy  theme  for  the  exercise 
of  wit,  just  as  perpetual  motion  and  the  quadrature  of  the 
circle  are  problems  left  now  to  amuse  juvenile  engineers 
and  mathematicians. 

Reason  out  the  matter  how  we  like,  each  man  feels 
within  him  that  he  has  a  liberty  of  choice  between  various 
courses  of  action  at  every  step  in  his  progress  through 
life.  Moreover,  he  not  only  feels  this,  but,  as  a  reasonable 
being,  if  he  has  any  faith  in  an  ulterior  destiny — whatever 
it  may  be — for  the  soul,  he  feels  that  human  beings  must 
have  free  will,  or  the  notion  of  any  spiritual  consequences 
befalling  them  as  a  sequel  to  this  life,  is  incompatible  with 
the  operation  of  justice  as  a  law  of  Nature.  If  rewards 
and  punishments  are  meted  out  to  saints  and  sinners  in 
accordance,  not  with  their  independent  responsible  acts 
in  life,  but  in  accordance  with  the  way  they  were  com- 
felled  to  act  by  an  overruling  power  which  dictated  every 

H2    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

thought  and  movement  of  which  they  fancied  themselves 
the  authors — then,  of  course,  such  an  overruling  power 
would  represent  the  principles  of  mockery  and  malignity, 
instead  of  justice  and  goodness. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  theory  of  Necessity  is  sup- 
ported by  an  unbroken  chain  of  logical  reasoning.  In 
its  broadest  aspects  we  all  recognise  it  as  a  matter  of 
course.  We  can  all  see  that  people  born  under  condi- 
tions of  extreme  degradation,  brought  up  in  ignorance 
of  all  motives  for  right  action  and  of  all  meritorious 
example,  surrounded,  as  they  grow,  by  every  tempta- 
tion, and  educated  in  vice  and  crime,  must  take  to  such 
pursuits,  like  ducks  to  the  water.  Their  evil  deeds  in 
the  main  are  the  outcome  of  moral  influences  as  power- 
ful as  the  forces  of  the  storm  and  tide  on  the  floating 
driftwood  of  the  sea.  So  with  the  self-denial,  and  actively 
benevolent  lives  of  others.  The  persons  who  lead  such 
lives  must,  of  course,  trace  their  general  character  to  the 
teaching  and  influences  of  their  bringing  up.  They  may 
feel — in  accordance  with  the  other  view  of  the  subject — 
that  when  they  came  to  years  of  discretion,  they  exercised 
their  own  free  will  in  applying  to  the  opportunities  of 
existence  the  principle  of  deliberate  choice,  but  many 
of  the  best  among  them  have,  as  a  matter  of  intellectual 
conviction,  declared  on  the  whole  for  Necessity  as  the 
only  logical  theory  of  life.  There  is  no  line  to  be  drawn 
in  Nature  between  important  things  that  it  is  worth  while 
for  her  laws  to  pay  attention  to,  and  others  which  are  in- 
significant and  fit  to  be  left  to  chance.  The  earth's  attrac- 
tion operates  equally  on  a  microbe  and  a  mastodon;  and 
the  chemical  affinity  that  holds  together  the  elements  of 
the  man  is  not  permitted  to  neglect  those  of  the  smallest 
drop  of  dew.  So  argues  the  metaphysician  with  regard 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA          1 1 3 

to  human  conduct.  He  is  withheld  from  shooting  the 
man  who  offends  him  by  the  influences  that  have  been 
poured  into  his  mind  by  his  education,  his  observation 
of  others,  by  reading,  and  reflection.  The  minor  acts  and 
abstinences  of  his  life  are  in  just  the  same  way  the  product 
of  moral  causes  working  in  his  interior  consciousness. 
He  takes  such  and  such  a  journey,  let  us  say,  because  he 
has  read  such  and  such  a  book.  He  read  the  book  because 
he  had  acquired  certain  habits  of  study.  These  were  the 
product  of  previous  influences,  and  so  on.  This  kind  of 
reasoning  has,  at  all  events,  grasped  one  efficient  principle. 
Cause  and  effect  rule  on  the  moral  as  well  as  the  physical 
plane  of  Nature,  and  if  the  recognition  of  this  is  plainly  at 
variance  with  the  theory  that  human  beings  are  responsible 
agents,  the  devotee  of  Necessity  may  sometimes  say,  "  So 
much  the  worse  for  the  general  character  of  the  Universe," 
or  sometimes  "  the  contradiction  is  a  mystery  which  can 
only  be  elucidated,  if  at  all,  hereafter." 

For  some  of  us — yes — "  hereafter  " — a  very  distant 
hereafter — may  be  the  only  period  at  which  we  shall  be 
qualified  to  fathom  such  mysteries.  But  the  "  hereafter  " 
of  one  man  may  be  the  "  now  "  of  another,  more  advanced 
than  himself  in  cosmic  evolution.  The  conventional 
thinker  is  too  apt  to  suppose  that  all  human  intelligence  is 
waiting  to  bear  him  company  in  that  progress  which  he 
may,  perhaps,  admit  as  a  possibility  of  Nature,  after  he 
shall  have  passed  on  to  other  states  of  being.  All  phases 
of  consciousness  are  co-existent  if  we  take  all  planes  of 
Nature  into  account  together.  Time  and  change  are 
merely  conducive  to  the  advance  of  knowledge  qua  any 
given  centre  of  consciousness  localised  at  one  point  of 
space  at  the  moment  under  consideration.  If  A  B — any 
man  of  our  generation — is  destined,  in  the  lapse  of  ages, 

9 

1 14      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

to  attain  a  condition  of  consciousness  in  which  any  given 
mystery  of  this  period  shall  be  made  plain,  assuredly  Y  Z 
in  the  progress  of  past  ages,  has  already  accomplished  that 
amount  of  development.  We  are  not  necessarily  bound 
to  wait  so  long  as  is  sometimes  imagined  for  revelations 
that  we  may  rightly  conceive  to  be  outside  the  reach  of 
mere  intellectual  cogitation  of  the  kind  with  which  we 
are  familiar.  That  which  is  known  may  sometimes  be 
communicated — in  a  world  which  has  many  more  avenues 
to  its  consciousness  than  the  general  multitude  of  its 
inhabitants  are  yet  in  the  habit  of  using. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  among  the  many  com- 
munications of  such  a  nature  that  have  enlarged  the  theo- 
sophical  student's  comprehension  of  spiritual  science 
during  the  last  few  years,  has  related  to  the  great  meta- 
physical dead-lock  represented  by  the  conflict  of  Free 
Will  and  Necessity,  and  I  now  approach  the  occult  solu- 
tion of  that  old  difficulty,  not  merely  for  the  sake  of  its 
value  as  such,  but  because  it  is  pre-eminently  necessary  to 
understand  it,  in  order  that  no  misleading  conceptions 
of  the  Necessitarian  may  stand  in  the  way  of  a  full  accept- 
ance of  the  all-important  truth  that  every  human  being 
holds  the  control  of  his  own  ultimate  future  in  his  own 
hands,  however  closely  he  may  seem  to  the  eye  of  exoteric 
reasoning  bound  down  and  hemmed  in  by  the  narrow 
limitations  of  circumstance. 

To  begin  with,  the  dead-lock,  as  a  mere  logical  dilemma, 
is  loosened  as  soon  as  we  apply  to  the  apparent  contradic- 
tion the  law  of  Re-incarnation.  As  long  as  a  human  life 
is  thought  of  as  a  complete  operation  of  Nature,  beginning 
at  birth  and  ending  at  death,  there  will  be  no  possible 
reconciliation  for  the  opposing  lines  of  argument  which 
show  first,  that  Free  Will  must  be  exerted — to  leave  room 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA          1 1 5 

for  justice  in  the  conception  of  human  affairs;  and, 
secondly,  that  Necessity  must  be  recognised,  or  we  do 
violence  to  the  uniformity  of  cause  and  effect.  But  when 
we  remember  that  justice  has  more  than  one — a  long  series 
— of  lives  to  work  in,  we  see  how  it  may  operate,  even 
though  acts  at  each  moment  of  existence  may  be  the  pro- 
duct of  predetermining  influences.  Each  act  may  be — 
and  necessarily  is — surrounded,  so  to  speak,  with  an  in- 
terior atmosphere  of  consciousness,  the  cloud  of  thought 
by  which  it  is  accompanied.  In  other  words,  an  act  is  not 
exclusively  to  be  estimated  by  the  dead  letter  of  the  thing 
done — this  may  be  done  in  one  spirit  or  another.  The 
interior  consciousness  may  follow  and  emphasise  the  act, 
or  hang  back  from  it  and  in  a  measure  resist  it.  And  it 
will  be  plain  that  this  interior  consciousness — the  product 
of  the  voice  of  conscience  or  the  promptings  of  the  Higher 
Self,  blending  with  the  habits  of  thought  engendered  by 
the  incarnate  will  or  lower  self — may  be  regarded  as 
entirely  within  the  control  of  Free  Will,  even  though 
the  law  of  cause  and  effect  may  determine,  by  overmaster- 
ing influences,  the  actual  deed  performed.  Now  Karma, 
the  law  of  cause  and  effect  on  the  spiritual  plane  in  one  of 
its  aspects,  assuredly  does  not  leave  out  of  account  the 
spirit  in  which  an  act  is  performed.  The  act  itself  is  a 
Karmic  consequence  of  the  sum  total  of  influences  bear- 
ing on  that  point  of  the  life  concerned,  from  the  previous 
life  of  which  it  is  the  sequel.  And  it  is  necessarily  also  a 
cause  of  further  consequences  to  ensue  in  the  future.  But 
at  the  moment  of  its  projection  into  objectivity  as  such  a 
cause,  it  may  be  qualified  to  an  enormous  extent  by  the 
concurrent  thought,  state  of  mind,  or  spirit  with  which  it 
is  associated.  And  the  effect  it  will  have  on  the  next 
life  is  thus  modified  to  a  corresponding  degree.  At  every 

n6    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

step  of  our  progress,  therefore,  we  are  thus  working  out 
Karma,  the  causes  set  in  motion  by  our  last  life,  and 
determining  by  the  spirit  in  which  we  realise  them,  by 
the  Free  Will  we  apply  at  every  step  to  the  Necessity 
under  which  we  act — the  Karmic  effect,  of  our  acts  on 
the  conditions,  welfare,  happiness,  and  opportunities  of 
our  next  life. 

The  law  here  defined  may  be  illustrated  by  extreme 
cases.  Let  us  assume  first  of  all  that  some  person  under 
consideration  is  going  through  the  current  life  under  the 
influence  of  some  terribly  bad  Karma  in  the  last,  which 
is  not  only  productive  of  sorrow  and  suffering  but  of 
renewed  offences  against  the  purpose  of  Nature.  Say 
in  this  way,  it  is  within  the  "  necessity  "  of  the  situation 
that  he  should  commit  some  serious  offence,  against  not 
merely  the  exalted  dictates  of  ethics,  but  the  plainest  prin- 
ciples of  right  and  wrong,  of  course  he  will  never  feel 
that  he  is  an  automaton  as  regards  that  act,  nor  if  the  crime 
is  a  serious  one,  can  it  be  truly  affirmed  from  any  point  of 
view  that  he  is.  A  qualification  must  come  into  play  here 
which  I  will  explain  directly,  for  in  truth  though  the 
broad  law  is  that  our  acts  are  dictated  by  Karma,  there  is 
room  in  the  design  of  Nature  for  some  lateral  play  of  the 
forces  concerned  as  regards  action.  But  reserving  the. 
subject  of  this  qualification  let  us  for  the  moment  assume 
the  act  to  fall  within  the  category  of  those  which  are 
Karmically  inevitable. 

Now  the  man  has  at  all  events  Free  Will  as  regards 
the  cultivation  of  internal  states  of  consciousness.  Will 
any  reader  wish  to  interrupt  me  here  and  argue  that 
the  interior  states  of  consciousness  are  as  much  the  pro- 
duct of  education,  training,  heredity,  and  circumstance 
generally,  as  the  acts  performed  ?  The  answer  would  be 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA          1 1 7 

very  simple.  That  may  be  true  as  regards  a  man  who  has 
never  come  into  contact  with  moral  teaching,  which  is 
the  first  step  towards  theosophic  enlightenment.  But  such 
a  man  is,  indeed,  far  in  the  background  of  evolution,  and 
even  in  his  case  the  opportunities  will  come  later — in 
later  lives — which  will  bring  him  to  the  stage  already 
reached  by  the  man  who  is  a  moral  agent.  So  we  go 
back  to  the  statement  made  above.  The  person  in  ques- 
tion is  hurried  by  circumstance  into  the  commission  of 
his  crime,  but  is  a  free  agent  in  thinking  about  it.  That 
is  a  part  of  his  inalienable  "heritage  as  a  human  being  with  a 
higher  self  in  the  background  and  potentialities  of  Divine 
perfection.  First,  let  us  suppose  he  applies  that  Free  Will 
in  the  same  direction  in  which  his  bad  Karma  is  operating. 
He  commits  his  crime  with  ardour  and  fierce  intensity 
of  desire.  He  is  glad  he  has  done  it,  perhaps,  and  would 
do  it  again  if  the  circumstances  were  placed  before  him 
again.  He  suffers  no  remorse;  his  Karmic  career  is  going 
on  with  its  old  momentum.  The  Karmic  effect,  therefore, 
of  his  crime  on  the  circumstances  of  his  next  life  is 
appallingly  intensified. 

When  that  life  comes  on,  the  suffering  attendant  on 
his  continued  career  of  crime  will  probably  force  on  his 
consciousness  a  distate  for  all  the  experiences  associated 
with  that  suffering — the  crime  included.  So  in  the  ulti- 
mate working  of  a  penal  Karma,  the  interior  repentance  is 
engendered  which  w-'ll  have  its  Karmic  effect  in  turn. 
And  in  this  way  we  see  how  Nature  tends  back  into  the 
straight  road,  so  to  speak,  in  any  case,  even  while  her 
(unenlightened)  children  are  perpetually  straying  off  it. 
But  let  us  now  imagine  that  the  man  with  whom  we 
started,  after  having  committed  his  crime,  brings  to  play 
upon  his  reflections  concerning  it  the  Free  Will  of  his  own 

1 1 8    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

interior  consciousness.  Let  us  suppose  that  he  has  taken 
the  first  step  towards  the  expansion  of  his  moral  nature, 
that  he  has  seen  fit  to  take  a  new  departure,  to  culti- 
vate higher  aspirations  than  were  present  to  his  former 
life,  to  give  in  that  way  freer  play  within  the  conscious- 
ness of  his  lower  self  or  personality,  to  the  promptings 
and  reflections  of  his  Higher  Self,  previously  almost  shut 
out  from  his  cognition.  Still,  it  may  be  the  evil  legacy 
of  his  last  incarnation  is  realised  in  the  criminal  act  which 
the  modern  metaphysician  would  then  regard  as  the  in- 
evitable outcome  of  early  training,  circumstance,  and  so 
forth.  He  has  no  sooner  committed  the  evil  act,  than  the 
rush  of  interior  sensation,  due  to  the  fact  that  his  lower 
consciousness  is  now  partly  open  to  the  influence  of  the 
spiritual  plane,  is  overwhelming.  He  is  horror-stricken  at 

Twhat  he  has  done,  borne  down  with  remorse.  Every 
subsequent  event  in  life  may  be  coloured  by  this  terrible 
emotion;  the  suffering  through  which  he  passes  during 
this  period  may  be  greater  even  than  that  through  which 
he  would  have  passed  if  he  had  for  the  moment  been 
making  worse  Karma,  still  on  his  old  bad  road.  But  bad 
as  his  momentary  condition  may  be,  he  is  all  the  while 
closing  that  formidable  account,  closing  it  in  the  tribula- 
tion that  is  inevitable  under  the  circumstances  one  way 
or  the  other,  but  no  doubt  is  less  that  way  than  if  it  were 
propagated  as  a  persistent  force  through  the  ages. 

According  to  whether  the  crime  is  thus  committed  in 
the  one  spirit  or  the  other,  the  next  life  is  altogether 
different.  Free  Will  is  realised  in  the  conditions  and 
opportunities  it  presents  to  the  being  concerned,  even 
though  he  may  be  bound  perforce  to  the  necessity  inherited 
from  the  past . 

In  just  the  same  way,  mutatis  mutandis,  we  can  apply 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA          1 1 9 

the  law  under  examination  to  the  Karmic  necessities  of  a 
good  life,  and  the  varying  effect  of  a  persistent  spirit  co- 
operating with  their  tendency,  or  on  the  other  hand 
retarding  and  weakening  them.  It  is  in  the  Karmic 
necessity  of  the  case,  with  some  given  person  let  us  assume, 
to  accomplish  some  great  work  of  charity  and  benevolence. 
The  good  Karma  of  his  previous  life  has  drifted  him  into 
the  pleasant  and  influential  position  in  which  he  is  enabled 
to  design  this  and  carry  it  out.  Well,  it  may  be  that  the 
charm  and  soft  indulgence  of  circumstances  have  a  good 
deal  obscured  the  active  sympathies  which,  in  the  former 
life,  were  productive  of  the  good  Karma.  The  man  per- 
forms his  act  of  charity — little  realising  that  it  is  simply 
the  behest  of  his  former  personality — but  performs  it 
perhaps  with  some  interior  hesitation  and  grudging.  He 
is  not  at  all  sure  in  his  own  mind  afterwards  that  the 
objects  of  his  beneficence  deserved  the  good  things  he  has 
secured  for  them.  He  feels  as  if  he  has  been  too  good- 
natured,  and  so  forth,  and  that  after  what  he  has  done,  no 
one  can  blame  him  for  thinking  of  himself  and  his  own 
enjoyment  for  a  change.  Here  the  stream  of  Karmic 
influence  is  stopped  again.  The  man  in  question  will 
not  be  troubled  with  having  to  accomplish  noble  deeds  in 
his  next  life,  nor  embarrassed,  it  may  be,  with  the  power 
and  influence  required  for  their  accomplishment. 
Whereas  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  life  under  notice  had 
been  as  well  filled  with  lofty  emotions  as  its  predecessor, 
if  the  seductive  circumstances  had  been  held  in  subordina- 
tion to  the  continuous  spiritual  effort  begun  in  the  former 
life,  the  man  would  have  been  carried  far  on  along 
the  path  to  ulterior  perfection,  and  the  cumulative  effort 
of  good  Karma  in  successive  lives  might  have  given  rise  to 
some  verv  far-reaching  results. 

120    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

Between  the  two  extreme  cases  put  forward,  there 
is  room,  of  course,  for  an  infinitely  varying  operation  of 
the  same  law  on  minor  conditions  of  good  and  evil. 
Always,  however,  the  same  result  will  be  seen  emerging 
from  all  the  complexities  that  might  be  imagined.  We 
are — however  little  we  can  realise  that  state  of  the  facts 
in  our  physical  consciousness — the  heirs  of  our  last  life's 
Karma,  the  obedient  progeny  of  its  complicated  impulses. 
But  we  have  never  parted  company  with  the  Free  Will, 
the  use  of  which  in  the  past  has  given  rise  to  those  im- 
pulses. We  can  apply  it  to  the  cultivation  of  beneficent 
or  maleficent  states  of  mind  in  the  current  life,  and  so 
accordingly  will  the  Karmic  account  of  that  life  work  out. 

I  can  imagine  an  objection  raised  against  this  view  of 
the  subject  on  the  ground  that  it  is  a  dangerous  doctrine. 
It  will  be  held  by  some  people  to  lend  too  powerful  a 
support  to  the  theory  of  Necessity,  by  clearing  away  the 
apparent  absurdities  which,  in  spite  of  its  logical  character, 
stood  in  the  way  of  its  acceptance.  People  will  say,  if 
our  acts  are  dictated  by  an  irresistible  force,  it  is  useless 
to  struggle  against  them.  And  perhaps  a  very  imperfect 
grasp  of  the  doctrine  here  defined  might  be  demoralising 
rather  than  beneficial.  But  this  is  only  one  of  the  many 
cases  in  which  the  exposition  of  occult  laws  is  more  or  less 
ethically  dangerous.  With  enlarged  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge, comes  enlarged  responsibility,  and  an  occult  truth 
half  understood  may  indeed  be  a  perilous  possession.  But 
in  the  present  case  it  is,  at  all  events,  easy  to  point  out  one 
consideration  which  militates  against  the  notion  that  the 
doctrine  of  Necessity  in  Act,  Free  Will  in  Spirit,  must 
tend  to  make  people  drift  into  evil  and  give  way  without 
an  effort  to  temptation.  Even  though  the  accomplished 
act,  whatever  it  may  have  been,  may  have  been  inevitable, 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA 

no  contemplated  act  can  ever  be  assigned  to  that  category 
up  to  the  moment  of  its  accomplishment,  it  may  be  that 
it  belongs  to  the  group  of  acts  which  we  are  destined  to 
avoid !  It  would  require  a  far  greater  degree  of  occult 
advancement  than  is  embodied  in  an  intellectual  apprecia- 
tion of  the  law  under  review,  to  help  us  in  all  cases  before- 
hand to  a  knowledge  as  to  what  acts  are  decreed  by  the 
Karma  of  the  past,  and  which  are  empty  suggestions  of 
the  imagination.  When  that  sublime  foresight  shall  have 
been  attained,  we  shall  probably  with  it  have  attained  to 
other  characteristics  that  may  enable  us  to  bear  the  weight 
of  increased  responsibility  and  power. 

Of  course,  the  only  way  in  which  we  can  deliberately 
apply  the  right  spirit  to  the  events  of  a  current  life  in 
which  we  "  will  "  to  elevate  our  destinies — to  extinguish 
bad  Karma  in  the  past  and  accomplish  spiritual  progress 
— is  by  working  on  the  hypothesis  that  we  are  free  as  to 
the  acts.  Nature  has  prescribed  that  hypothesis  for  our 
guidance  by  implanting  so  fixedly  in  our  consciousness 
the  feeling  that  we  are  free  as  to  act.  And  here  we  revert 
to  the  "  qualification  "  I  spoke  of  a  few  pages  back. 

Within  limits,  we  of  the  present  stage  of  human  evolu- 
tion are  not  bound  by  Karmic  necessity  to  acts  with  such 
a  rigid  destiny  as  to  deprive  us  altogether  of  Free  Will 
as  regards  them.  Will  anyone  suppose  that  there  is  going 
to  be  something  loose  here  in  the  chain  of  occult  reasoning, 
a  flaw  in  the  great  system  of  cause  and  effect  ?  On  the 
contrary,  there  is  merely  a  beautiful  adaptation  of  minor 
to  higher  laws.  Gradually,  very  gradually,  the  whole 
world,  "  and  all  that  it  inhabits,"  is  moving  on  to  higher 
conditions  of  being  in  which  continued  evolution  must  be 
blended  with  the  exercise  of  their  own  spiritual  will  by 
all  who  share  it.  It  is  a  law  of  Karma — of  the  Karma  we 

122      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

are  now  talking  about,  that  of  physical  life — that  the  per- 
fected Arhat  gets  above  its  operation.  This  is  no  legal 
quibble  like  the  saying  that  the  sovereign  can  do  no  wrong, 
but  is  simply  another  way  of  saying  that  a  man  does  not 
become  an  Arhat  till  the  temptations  of  the  ordinary 
physical  life  have  quite  ceased  to  be  temptations  for  him. 
He  has  got  beyond  the  hopes  and  fears  of  physical  life. 
His  existence  in  the  body  is  merely  an  inconvenient  phase 
of  his  everyday  existence  out  of  the  body.  He  keeps  it 
going  for  duty's  sake  alone,  and  for  no  other  conceivable 
or  possible  motive,  and  he  is  as  likely — or  shall  we  say  less 
likely — to  sin  on  the  physical  plane  than  a  grown  man 
with  us  is  likely  to  cry  and  beat  the  table  if  he  accidentally 
hurts  his  hand  against  it. 

Very  well,  that  being  so  as  regards  the  extreme  case  of 
the  Arhat,  there  is  clearly  no  Karma  left  binding  him 
to  physical  acts.  But  Nature  always  shades  her  varieties 
of  condition  one  into  another  like  the  rainbow's  tints. 
The  man  partially  developed  in  the  direction  of  arhatship 
is  already  partially  exempt  from  the  tyranny  of  Karma 
as  regards  his  acts.  His  Free  Will  is  becoming  a  more 
potent  force  in  his  life  than  it  is  in  the  case  of  the  man 
whom  it  can  merely  influence  through  his  interior  states  of 
mind.  And  at  the  present  stage  of  human  evolution  that 
we  have  reached  as  a  body,  we  human  beings  of  the 
"  nineteenth  century,"  or  as  the  occultist  would  prefer  to 
put  it,  of  the  fifth  race,  have  all  of  us,  broadly  speaking, 
passed  the  stage  at  which  we  are  mere  automata  in  the 
hands  of  Karma  as  regards  our  acts.  It  would  not  be  true, 
for  instance,  to  say  at  the  present  day  that  any  man  in  a 
civilised  country  is  under  Karmic  obligations  to  commit  a 
murder.  He  may  be  under  Karmic  suggestion  in  that 
direction,  but  unless  we  can  find  a  man  whose  education 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA          1 2  3 

and  training  have  been  such  that  it  has  never  been  sug- 
gested to  his  mind  that  committing  murder  is  wrong, 
then  we  may  fairly  deny  that  anyone  is  under  Karmic 
pressure  so  unbending  as  to  make  him  a  mere  instrument 
in  respect  to  such  an  act  as  that.  Observe,  of  course,  that 
in  speaking  here  of  "  murder  "  I  mean  the  wilful  murder 
which  really  involves  the  intention,  and  I  am  not  noticing 
any  crude  distinctions  made  by  legal  enactments. 

So  with  any  of  the  very  great  crimes  against  duty, 
whether  they  come  within  the  catalogue  of  human  codes 
or  not.  The  least  enlightened  of  us  are  at  least  beginning 
to  be  responsible  beings. 

In  most  branches  of  science,  and  in  occult  science 
especially,  the  solution  of  one  problem  will  often  suggest 
others  with  which  we  may  not  previously  have  been  in 
relation.  So  it  may  be  well  here  at  once  to  deal  with  a 
difficulty  that  will  be  sure  to  occur  sooner  or  later  to  any- 
one who  thinks  over  the  limited  Free  Will,  even  as  regards 
acts,  which  is  assigned  by  occult  teaching  to  people  of  the 
present  race. 

All  of  us  are  in  very  close  relations  on  this  plane  of 
life  with  one  another.  Perhaps,  indeed,  on  all  planes, 
and  on  others  more  even  than  here;  but  at  all  events  the 
manner  in  which  our  acts  influence  one  another  is  obvious. 
So  obvious  as  to  make  loose  thinkers  recoil  from  the  notion 
of  anything  resembling  predetermination  in  the  course 
of  events.  If  A  robs  B  he  may  alter  the  whole  course 
of  B's  life.  If  A  has  Free  Will  whether  to  rob  B  or  not, 
how  can  B's  Karma  be  correctly  worked  out  ?  And  so  on 
ad  infinitum,  with  small  acts  and  events  as  well  as  great 
ones.  Indeed,  the  mightiest  events  in  our  lives  often 
ensue  from  acts  on  the  part  of  others  that  look  quite  in- 
significant at  the  time.  Where  are  we  to  draw  the  line 

I24      THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

in  any* scientific  spirit?  Human  affairs  are  so  intensely 
entangled  that  it  looks  as  though  we  must  say — all  or 
nothing,  either  every  act,  to  the  smallest,  must  be  auto- 
matic and  inevitable,  or  there  is  no  prearranged  course  of 
events  and  no  regular  working  out  of  Karma  at  all.  But 
there  is  a  way  of  drawing  the  line  which  becomes  intel- 
ligible in  the  light  of  some  further  revelations.  These 
are  so  subtle  that  I  must  approach  them  gradually. 

When  we  talk  about  the  laws  of  Nature  being  the 
will  of  God  we  use  language  with  which  few  European 
thinkers  will  quarrel.  Even  materialism,  if  not  absolutely 
atheistic,  might  let  the  phrase  pass.  Religious  instinct 
will  cling  to  it  as  a  mode  of  bringing  the  incontrovertible 
facts  of  physical  science  into  harmony  with  theological 
ideas.  But  those  beautiful  generalities  are  never  com- 
pletely satisfactory  to  the  occult  student.  He  wants  some 
closer  interpretation  of  the  spiritual  facts.  When  two 
chemical  salts  are  mingled  in  solution,  and  thereupon  the 
acids  and  bases  change  hands  and  group  themselves  into 
a  new  arrangement  of  molecules,  is  the  will  of  God  con- 
sciously ordaining  that  change  ?  On  the  other  hand,  if  a 
nebula  of  fire  mist  come  under  the  conditions  that  convert 
it  into  a  system  of  planets  teeming  with  life,  with  joy 
and  suffering,  with  lofty  human  aspiration,  and  with  evil 
tendencies,  with  love  and  hatred,  and  so  on,  can  we 
suppose  that  the  will  of  God,  if  producing  this  result,  is 
unconscious  of  it  ?  The  double  problem  lies  in  the  region 
respectfully  put  aside  as  inscrutable  in  most  cases.  But 
the  inscrutability  only  ensues  from  the  pestilential  trick 
of  modern  thinking,  which  will  only  concern  itself  with 
God  in  the  cosmic  sense  if  it  transcends  the  narrowest 
observation  of  the  physical  facts  of  this  world  at  all.  It 
is  only  occult  teaching  that  introduces  us  to  the  links 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA         1 2  5 

between  humanity  and  absolute  universal  spirit — the 
cosmic  God. 

We  are  coming  into  relations  at  this  stage  of  the 
explanation  with  one  of  the  sublimest  mysteries  of  the 
spiritual  plane,  and  I  hope  my  readers  will  deal  with 
the  subject,  and  think  of  it,  in  an  appropriate  attitude 
of  mind.  But  the  fact  is  as  I  have  just  foreshadowed. 
Just  as  there  are,  undoubtedly,  men  far  more  highly 
endowed  or  evolved,  both  as  regards  goodness  and  power 
and  faculty,  than  the  generality  of  those  around  us,  so 
in  Nature  and  in  relation  with  this  world  there  are  spiritual 
beings  of  again  far  more  exalted  attributes.  And  the  direct 
influence  on  the  affairs  of  the  world  of  some  among  these 
beings  is  a  profound  and  wonderful  truth.  Of  such 
beings  we  can  obviously  know  but  little  beyond  the  fact 
that  they  exist,  and  beyond  the  obvious  logical  neces- 
sity for  their  existence  in  the  great  hierarchy  of  con- 
sciousness— of  individualised  spirit.  But  in  the  fact 
of  their  existence  we  may  begin  to  discern  the  real  truth 
at  the  bottom  of  the  somewhat  distorted  popular 
conceptions  concerning  the  providential  government  of 
the  world. 

How  far  these  spiritual  Lords  of  Creation  are  directly 
concerned  with  carrying  out  the  cosmic  will  in  regard  to 
those  great  uniformities  of  Nature  which  constitute  the 
laws  of  matter,  is  a  question  we  need  not  here  investigate, 
but  it  is  at  once  intelligible  that  they  should  direct  with 
conscious  intention  the  marvellous  concatenation  of  events 
which  constitute  the  laws  of  Karma.  Of  course,  the 
ordinary  mind  is  aghast  at  the  complexity  of  the  problems 
to  be  dealt  with,  but  physical  science  teaches  us  not  to 
shrink  from  complexity  as  tantamount  to  improbability 
in  our  interpretations  of  Nature.  The  laws  of  the  spiritual 

126    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

plane  are  not  likely  to  be  less  complex  than  those  of  matter 
and  multiplex  telegraphy — not  to  seek  for  still  more 
powerful  illustrations  in  the  laws  of  optics — will  suffice 
to  warn  us  not  to  reject  as  inconceivable  activities  in 
Nature  that  the  human  mind  cannot  imagine  itself  as 
following  consciously  in  detail. 

At  all  events,  the  differences  that  exist  between  the 
laws  of  physical  matter  and  the  mysteries  of  human  con- 
sciousness suggest,  as  an  analogy,  some  different  mode  in 
which  universal  spirit  should  control  the  laws  of  matter 
and  the  incidents  of  life,  which  contribute  to  make  up  the 
justice  of  Karma.  Somehow  we  may  think  of  the  former 
as  provided  for  by  some  stupendous  exercise  of  Creation 
or  Divine  Will  in  advance,  so  to  speak,  of  the  human 
drama  to  be  enacted  on  that  stage.  Then,  when  the 
human  drama  begins,  we  may  think  of  that  Divine  Will 
as  focussed  in  some  sort  of  exalted  individual  consciousness 
or  consciousnesses,  but  scarcely  less  omnipresent  than  the 
other  or  fundamental  stratum  of  the  Divine  Will.  The 
problem,  as  a  metaphysical  problem  for  the  human  mind 
contemplating  it,  is  a  problem  in  the  distribution  of  con- 
sciousness. The  terrible  limitations  of  the  physical 
organism  as  an  instrument  of  thought  are  such  that, 
broadly  speaking,  an  incarnate  man  is  only  able  to  think 
of  one  thing  at  a  time.  With  practice,  indeed,  I  believe 
that  on  the  very  threshold  of  that  great  process  of  evolu- 
tion, which  occultists  call  initiation,  it  is  found  that  these 
limitations  are  not  so  rigid  as  most  people  think,  and 
that  it  is  possible  to  keep  up  more  than  one  continuous 
train  of  thought  simultaneously — and  by  that,  of  course, 
I  mean  something  more  than  the  power  of  jumping 
rapidly  backwards  and  forwards  among  various  trains  of 
thought  and  recollecting  each  in  turn,  after  the  manner  of 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA          1 2  7 

a  chess-player  engaged  on  several  games  of  chess  at  once. 
The  distribution  of  consciousness  required  for  a  being 
conscious,  so  to  speak — in  Divinity — and  concerned  with 
the  control  of  Karma,  is,  again,  something  as  transcen- 
dently  greater  than  this  simplest  distribution,. in  degree, 
as  the  rapidity,  for  example,  of  light  waves  counted  by 
billions  per  second  is  greater  than  the  rapidity  of  a  piano- 
forte player's  execution.  But  from  the  power  of  thinking 
of  two  things  at  once  to  the  power  of  thinking  of  two 
million  would  only  be  a  question  of  degree.  To  recognise 
the  conceivability  of  the  higher  achievement  is  logically 
possible  for  the  understanding. 

And  this  is  all  we  have  to  recognise,  in  order  to  bring 
within  the  range  of  imagination  the  Karmic  government 
of  the  world,  as  providing  for  the  lateral  play  of  individual 
Free  Will.  Any  of  us  may  now  and  then  disturb  the  pre- 
existing Karmic  plan  with  which,  so  far  we  had  been 
entangled.  Let  it  be  assumed,  for  example,  that  it  lay 
within  the  Karma  of  A  and  B  that  they  should  be  ruined 
and  made  to  suffer  much  material  discomfort  by  the  (prob- 
able) act  of  C.  But  C  has  developed  a  moral  sense,  out- 
running that  of  his  previous  incarnation  by  the  exercise  of 
his  spiritual  Free  Will,  and  he  misses  his  appointment  with 
Karma,  to  put  it  that  way.  Then  other  arrangements 
have  to  be  made,  and  A  and  B  are  provided  with  the 
suffering  due  in  some  other  manner,  and  a  great  number 
of  minor  adjustments  have  to  be  carried  out  accordingly. 
But  this  is  only  %  question  of  adequate  capacity  on  the  part 
of  the  governing  power,  and  our  hypothesis — or  rather, 
the  esoteric  teaching  concerning  the  actual  state  of  the 
facts — recognises  that  adequate  capacity  as  existing  in  the 
"  Providences  "  of  the  world. 

The  principle  I  have  been  endeavouring  to  explain  in 

128    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

regard  to  the  lateral  play  of  Free  Will  during  each  physi- 
cal life  may  be  further  elucidated  with  the  help  of  a 
diagram  (p.  129). 

In  this  figure  the  centre  line  A  B  represents  the  general 
direction  of  evolution  for  the  race  at  large,  and  the  small 
parallelograms  represent  a  few  individual  lives.  Taking 
the  life  a  first,  its  place  on  the  centre  line  shows  that  the 
Karmic  impulses  from  the  previous  incarnation  are  in 
accordance  with  the  normal  tendency  of  the  age.  But 
the  privilege  of  partial  Free  Will,  which  the  person  whose 
life  is  in  question  enjoys,  enables  him  to  modify  the  ten- 
dency of  his  individual  evolution  either  to  the  right  or  the 
left,  to  the  extent  shown  by  the  dotted  lines.  He  cannot 
modify  that  tendency  more  than  is  shown  by  the  dotted 
lines,  for  he  is  hemmed  in  by  the  limitations  of  Karma 
and  circumstance,  in  so  far  as  the  side  lines  of  his  paral- 
lelogram restrain  the  divergence.  Let  us  assume  that  the 
direction  to  the  right  is  towards  spiritual  good — that  to  the 
left,  towards  spiritual  evil.  If  the  individual  concerned 
makes  the  necessary  efforts  during  the  life  represented 
by  0,  his  next  incarnation  has  a  general  Karmic  tendency 
in  the  direction  of  the  centre  line  of  the  life  b.  Suppos- 
ing, again,  efforts  in  the  direction  of  the  better  spiritu- 
ality determine  a  further  inclination  of  the  centre  line 
of  life  towards  the  right,  then  the  third  life  of  the  series 
will  be  in  the  direction  of  c.  And  it  will  be  obvious 
that  a  few  more  lives  of  similar  effort  will  finally  establish 
the  centre  line  of  the  life  at  right  angles  to  the  original 
centre  line — as  in  the  case  of  the  parallelogram  h,  which 
may  be  taken  to  represent  complete  adeptship  in  harmony 
with  the  Divine  idea  of  absolute  good. 

But  at  every  step  of  the  process  the  Free  Will  of  the 
individual  is  an  uncontrolled  agency  in  the  matter,  and  it 

B 

10 

130    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

will  be  always  possible  before  the  complete  perfection  of 
the  h  life  is  attained  that  the  individual  in  question  may 
swerve  in  the  wrong  direction.  Thus  the  energies  of  the 
life  c  may  be  misdirected,  and  give  rise  to  a  subsequent 
incarnation  in  the  direction  d,  and  one  more  wrong  swerve 
in  that  case  would  bring  back  the  Ego  into  the  original 
main  current  of  commonplace  evolution.  At  any  stage  of 
his  progress  along  that  centre  line  an  evil  swerve  will  take 
him  in  the  left-hand  direction,  and  determine  a  new  life 
with  its  predominant  bent  towards  evil,  as  in  the  case 
marked  /.  And  persistence  in  the  evil  tendency  will,  in 
a  few  lives,  establish  the  Ego  on  the  horizontal  centre  line 
in  the  left  hand  direction,  which  may  be  taken  to  represent 
the  course  of  absolute  evil,  which,  like  that  of  absolute 
good,  disentangles  an  Ego  from  the  main  current  of  evolu- 
tion altogether,  under  conditions  dealt  with  in  theosophical 
teaching. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  general  probability  in  regard 
to  a  great  majority  of  lives — considering  the  complex 
tendencies  of  human  nature — will  be  such  that  most  Egos 
will  swerve  now  to  the  right  and  now  to  the  left  in 
such  a  way  that  they  continue  in  the  main  current  of 
evolution.  But  to  make  the  diagram  a  little  more  signi- 
ficant, we  may  suppose  that  the  main  centre  line,  A  B, 
is  not  a  straight  line,  but  the  arc  of  an  enormous  circle 
bending  towards  the  right,  so  that  in  the  great  procession 
of  the  ages  the  great  majority  will  be  slowly  borne  round 
towards  the  direction  of  good — this  tendency  representing 
that  general  preponderance  in  the  long  run  of  the  prin- 
ciple of  good  as  compared  with  the  principle  of  evil, 
nearly  balanced  as  they  often  seem  to  be  if  we  take  short 
views  of  human  affairs.  And  yet  another  modification 
might  be  introduced  into  the  figure,  with  which  I  have  not 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA          1 3 1 

thought  it  worth  while  to  embarrass  the  drawing,  which 
should  give  a  somewhat  greater  breadth  to  each  parallelo- 
gram as  it  swerves  from  the  main  centre  line  in  either 
direction  representing  the  increased  efficiency  of  individual 
Free  Will  as  the  Ego  inclines  more  towards  spirituality 
of  either  sort.  This  would  hasten  the  possibility  of  attain- 
ing the  completely  horizontal  position  as  compared  with 
the  rate  of  progress  that  would  be  available  if  the  more 
spiritualised  lives  were  as  narrowly  hemmed  in  by  the 
walls  of  Karma  and  circumstance  as  those  on  the  normal 
centre  line. 

I  hope  it  will  not  be  supposed  that  in  the  arbitrary 
length  and  breadth  I  have  assigned  to  the  parallelograms 
in  the  foregoing  diagram  I  have  been  endeavouring  to  in- 
dicate the  extent  to  which  Free  Will  is  a  potent  factor 
in  determining  the  events  of  our  lives.  Perhaps  if  we 
correlated  the  figure  with  events  alone,  the  lateral  dimen- 
sions would  have  to  be  much  narrower.  But  reason  about 
Necessity  however  much  we  please,  even  with  the  light  of 
the  present  occult  interpretation  to  fortify  the  conception, 
we  shall  always,  when  the  strain  of  action  comes  on,  pro- 
ceed on  the  practical  assumption  that  we  have  a  liberty  of 
choice  before  us.  And  there  is  not  much  danger  for  any- 
one with  intuitions  sufficiently  awake  to  take  in  the  full 
significance  of  the  occult  interpretation,  of  his  taking,  as  it 
were,  an  unfair  advantage  of  his  intellectual  knowledge 
of  the  occult  law.  Should  anyone  argue  after  any  given 
surrender  to  temptation,  "  Now  the  thing  is  done,  and 
therefore  it  could  not  have  been  left  undone,  and  it  is 
useless  to  make  a  fuss  about  it,"  then  the  answer  would 
be  that  the  application  of  such  a  feeling,  state  of  con- 
sciousness, or  spirit,  to  the  Karmic  result  just  accomplished 
would  be  the  very  worst  possible  spirit  in  which  it  could 

10* 

132    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

be  enveloped  for  its  transmission  through  future  ages  as  a 
new  Karmic  force. 

It  must  be  remembered,  after  all  is  said  that  can  be 
said  about  the  lateral  play  of  Free  Will  as  regards  acts, 
that  the  law  concerned  is  mainly  related  to  thought  in 
reference  to  acts.  For  the  last  few  pages  I  have  been 
dealing  with  an  all-important  qualification  of  the  main 
rule,  but  let  us  now  revert  to  the  consideration  of  the  main 
rule,  always  keeping  the  qualification  at  the  back  of  our 
minds,  but  treating  the  extent  to  which  Free  Will  can 
make  the  centre  line  of  evolution  swerve  to  the  right  or 
left  as  having  chiefly  to  do  with  the  manner  in  which  we 
surround  the  acts  of  our  lives  with  a  Karmic  aura  imposed 
on  them  by  our  thoughts. 

Rightly  appreciated  the  whole  doctrine  laid  down  should 
tend  to  elevate  and  dignify  life.  It  exalts,  to  begin  with, 
the  importance  of  thought  regarded  in  itself  as  a  force  in 
Nature.  Too  often  people  imagine  that  thought  is  a 
casual  and  unimportant  concomitant  of  acts.  Take  care 
of  the  acts,  and  the  thoughts  will  take  care  of  themselves, 
may  be  a  view  of  the  subject  that  many  people  will  con- 
sider to  embody  a  sufficiently  heavy  tax  upon  the  good 
aspirations  of  a  fallible  humanity.  That  we  may  be 
somehow  held  responsible  for  what  we  do,  may  be 
admitted,  but  our  thoughts,  it  may  be  argued,  are  beyond 
our  own  control.  The  lessons  of  esoteric  philosophy  are 
directly  at  variance  with  that  popular  delusion.  Our 
thoughts  are  by  no  means  beyond  our  own  control,  and 
for  them,  in  a  very  high  degree,  we  shall  be  "  held  respons- 
ible," to  use  a  familiar  phrase,  which  can  easily  be  thrown 
into  a  more  philosophical  form. 

A  very  crude  and  imperfect  idea,  which  points  the  same 
way  as  the  doctrine  here  laid  down,  is  embodied  in  the 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA  1 3  3 

frequently-expressed  theory  that  after  all  "  motive  "  is  the 
great  thing;  that  people  may  perform  the  most  mischievous 
acts  and  yet  be  blameless  in  the  sight  of  Providence  if  they 
do  whatever  they  do  from  a  good  motive.  That  notion 
is  only  to  be  recognised  as  sound,  in  so  far  as  it  contains 
the  germ  of  the  far  more  subtle  idea  that  the  Karmic 
efficiency  of  acts  is  greatly  qualified  by  the  spirit  in  which 
they  are  performed.  It  is  in  its  straightforward  meaning 
both  incomplete  and  false,  as  far  as  it  goes.  A  good  motive 
will  not  extinguish  the  Karma  of  a  bad  act  any  more 
than  a  previous  belief  that  a  piece  of  iron  you  may  touch 
is  cold  will  prevent  it  from  burning  you  if  it  is  really 
hot.  The  act  done  will  reverberate  through  time  and 
produce  its  consequences,  and  if  these  are  evil,  they  will 
sometimes,  under  the  infallible  operation  of  the  Karmic 
law,  react  on  their  author.  Motive  may  qualify  their 
Karmic  effect  certainly,  but  if  an  act  be  evil,  good  motive 
may  simply  operate  to  blind  the  agent  to  its  evil  character, 
to  prevent  the  development  in  his  mind  of  the  thoughts 
which  bring  with  them  remorse  for  the  evil  act,  and  hence 
the  extinction  of  the  Karma  of  the  act.  The  tendency 
to  repeat  such  acts,  on  the  contrary,  would  be  established 
in  the  mind,  and  that  line  of  Karma  would  be  intensified 
till  in  later  lives  it  developed,  perhaps,  to  a  terrible  degree 
the  suffering  which  such  a  line  of  action  would  be  cal- 
culated to  produce.  Moreover,  when  people  talk  about 
good  motives  excusing  bad  acts,  they  speak  without  regard 
to  the  complexities  of  old  Karma,  which  really  produce 
the  acts.  They  treat  them  as  an  altogether  fresh  departure, 
which  a  more  philosophical  comprehension  of  the  matter 
shows  us  that  they  are  not.  Of  course  it  is  needless  to 
grant  that  a  man  who  does  a  bad  act  from  a  bad  motive 
is  worse  than  another  who  does  a  bad  act  from  a  good 

134  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

motive,  and  up  to  a  certain  point  the  good  motive  doctrine 
may  be  better  than  none  for  unphilosophical  thinkers. 
But  it  is  a  doctrine  that  will  not  carry  anyone  very  far 
on  the  road  to  a  true  conception  of  ethics,  and,  above  all, 
it  contributes  nothing  whatever  to  the  elucidation  of  the 
mystery  concerning  Free  Will  and  Necessity,  which  the 
corresponding  occult  doctrine  so  satisfactorily  furnishes. 

With  that  profound  reflection  before  us,  it  may  .  be 
worth  while  to  look  back  at  the  pitiable  shifts  by  which  a 
corrupt  theology  and  a  conventional  system  of  metaphysics 
— ignoring  the  sequence  of  continuous  earth  lives — have 
endeavoured  to  grapple  with  the  plain  contradictions  of 
Free  Will  and  Necessity,  applied  to  the  one  life.  The 
Articles  of  Religion,  for  instance,  of  the  Church  of 
England,  inform  us — in  the  interests  of  the  necessitarian 
theory — that  "  Predestination  to  life  is  the  everlasting 
purpose  of  God,  whereby  (before  the  foundations  of  the 
world  were  laid)  he  hath  constantly  decreed  by  his  counsel 
secret  to  us,  to  deliver  from  curse  and  damnation  those 
whom  he  hath  chosen  in  Christ  out  of  mankind,  and  to 
bring  them  by  Christ  to  everlasting  salvation  as  vessels 
made  to  honour," — certain  other  vessels  in  large  number 
being  accordingly  made  to  dishonour,  and  provided  for  in  a 
very  different  way.  The  chosen  people  "  by  grace  obey 
the  calling,"  and  walk  religiously  in  good  works.  This, 
of  course,  is  a  naked  statement  so  far  of  the  necessity 
which  makes  of  men  the  automata  of  a  Deity  who  would, 
by  that  hypothesis,  have  decided  before  the  foundations 
of  the  world  were  laid,  to  carry  it  on  on  principles  revolt- 
ing to  the  moral  sense.  But  though  the  Articles  may  not 
hesitate  to  libel  Divinity,  they  are  quite  ready  to  con- 
tradict themselves,  and  leave  their  disciples  to  take  which 
meaning  they  prefer.  So  the  article  containing  the  words 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA         135 

just  quoted  ends  by  saying  that  "  we  must,"  after  all 
"  receive  God's  promises  in  such  wise  as  they  may  be 
generally  set  forth  to  us  in  Holy  Scriptures."  Inasmuch 
as  Holy  Scriptures  leave  room  for  many  readings,  the 
adherents  of  Free  Will  and  justice,  as  a  principle  of  Divine 
government,  are  thus  empowered  to  accept  the  article  set 
forth  if  they  so  please,  not  in  the  sense  the  words  convey, 
but  as  meaning  diametrically  the  reverse.  A  is  B;  that 
is  the  doctrine  of  the  Church,  but  at  the  same  time,  if  you 
think  that  A  is  not  B,  then  you  may  work  it  out  that  way, 
and  remain,  nevertheless,  a  faithful  believer  of  the 
Church's  doctrine.  This  is  as  though  one  should  teach 
geometry  by  saying  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  were 
made  to  equal  four  right  angles  before  even  the  founda- 
tions of  the  earth  were  laid;  but,  nevertheless  these  facts 
may  be  received  if  you  are  obstinate  about  them,  subject 
to  the  general  conclusions  derived  from  the  study  of 
Euclid;  and  with  this  reflection  to  ease  your  mind,  please 
go  on  saying,  whenever  you  talk  of  such  things,  that  four 
is  the  proper  number  for  good  people  to  put  their  faith  in. 
Metaphysicians  hardly  deal  with  the  subject  more  logic- 
ally than  the  Church.  Materialistic  philosophy  would,  as  .1 
rule,  plump  for  "  uniformity,"  a  pleasanter  word  than 
necessity  or  predestination,  but  meaning  exactly  the  same 
thing  in  this  concatenation.  Free  Will  then  goes  irretriev- 
ably overboard,  and  with  it  justice  in  the  government  of 
the  world  and  all  conjectures  concerning  consciousness 
prolonged  beyojid  the  grave.  The  Materialist  and  the 
Calvinist  join  hands  in  this  matter,  and  there  may  not  be 
much  to  choose  between  the  view  of  the  school  which 
makes  Divinity  a  myth  and  the  soul  an  attribute  of  matter, 
on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  that  which  recognises 
a  God  only  to  invest  Him  with  moral  attributes  that  would 

136    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

disgrace  the  most  degraded  manhood.  However,  both  the 
Materialist  and  the  Calvinist  are  so  far  logical;  that  may 
be  granted  to  them.  On  the  other  hand,  the  reasoners 
who  cling  to  Free  Will — never  suspecting  that  it  may 
exist,  and  exist  with  complete  efficiency  even  if  generally 
incapable  of  controlling  acts — try  to  work  it  out  by  saying 
the  emotions  of  mind  have  a  uniform  efficacy  as  motives; 
but  independently  of  the  attributes  of  mind,  there  is  the 
substance  thereof  to  be  considered,  the  actual  Self  or  Ego 
which  is  exempt  from  the  conditions  that  attach  to  its 
attributes.  This  ultimate  personality  is  free  and  inde- 
pendent, and  a  self-determining  power  of  action,  indepen- 
dent of  external  causes,  resides  therein.  That  is  almost 
as  much  as  saying  that  the  height  of  a  tree  may  be  twenty 
feet,  but  that  is  the  measure  of  its  height  and  not  the 
measure  of  the  tree.  Assuredly  the  Self  or  Ego  is  a  very 
different  thing  from  the  attributes  it  manifests  during  any 
one  earth  life,  but  while  it  is  in  that  earth  life,  you  can 
no  more  deal  with  it  for  the  purposes  of  its  relations  with 
earth — as  something  apart  from  the  sum  total  of  its 
attributes — than  you  can  deal,  on  the  physical  plane,  with 
Berkeley's  orange  apart  from  the  sum  total  of  its  size, 
colour,  weight,  shape,  &c. 

There  is  something  in  the  Ego  which  has  touch  with 
the  physical  plane,  but  is  not  of  it,  and  which  is  exempt 
from  the  "  Uniformities  "  spoken  of  by  the  old  disputants 
concerning  Free  Will  and  Necessity.  This  something  is 
the  thought  of  the  Ego,  its  own  interior  spiritual  aspect 
which  has  direct  relation  to  its  acts,  but  does  not 
constitute  act,  and  therefore  does  not  come — or,  at 
all  events,  does  not  come  entirely — within  the 
operation  of  the  Karmic  forces  which  make  up  the  in- 
fluence under  which  the  doctrine  of  uniformity  is  sup- 

FREE  WILL  AND  KARMA          1 3  7 

posed  to  operate.  It  is  free  at  any  time,  and  always,  to 
appeal  to  its  own  Divine  fountain-head  to  review  the  acts 
to  which  it  has  found  itself  driven,  in  the  light  of  its 
own  Divine  consciousness;  to  reach  out  towards  future 
acts  that  may  better  express  the  Divine  purpose  (which 
it  may,  if  it  so  choose,  become  a  co-operative  agent  in 
carrying  out),  and  very  often  in  so  reaching  it  may  discover 
as  the  future  unrolls  itself,  that  the  Karmic  forces  of 
the  past  are  asserting  themselves  in  the  same  direction, 
and  that  the  Free  Will  of  its  ennobled  desire  has  a  plain 
pathway  before  it,  no  longer  encumbered  by  the  obstacles 
that  have  hitherto  created  such  terrible  trouble — or  it 
may  find  them,  for  that  matter,  strewn  all  the  thicker 
in  the  way,  and  may  only  realise  that  they  can  be  passed, 
however  painful  the  process. 

The  great  point  to  emphasise  is  that  the  recognition  of 
this  interior  freedom,  which  is  in  scientific  and  complete 
harmony  with  the  whole  view  of  Nature  prescribed  by 
the  Esoteric  Teaching,  has  the  effect,  among  others,  of 
accomplishing  what  has  hitherto  been  regarded  as  a 
problem  no  less  insoluble  than  the  squaring  of  the  circle — 
the  reconciliation  of  Free  Will  and  Necessity. 

CHAPTER  VI 
THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  MAN 

TO  pave  the  way  for  an  examination  into  which 
we  must  shortly  enter  concerning  the  actual 
conditions  of  those  realms  through  which  the 
soul  must  pass  in  the  course  of  its  progress  from  physical 
death  to  rebirth,  it  will  be  desirable  to  pause  for  a  moment 
in  order  to  get  a  clearer  view  of  the  complex  constitution 
of  man.  This  constitution  includes  within  itself  vehicles 
adapted  to  the  expression  of  consciousness  on  every  plane 
of  Nature  besides  that  with  which,  for  the  moment,  we 
are  chiefly  concerned,  and  no  adequate  comprehension 
of  the  process  through  which  the  evolution  of  the  central 
individual  consciousness  is  accomplished,  can  be  attained 
by  any  thinker  who  fails  to  grasp  the  true  character  of 
the  various  vehicles  in  which  that  consciousness  may  at 
different  times  be  manifest.  On  the  plane  of  physical 
incarnation  the  vehicles  are  all  involved  one  within  the 
other,  and  in  higher  realms  of  Nature,  we  are,  from  one 
point  of  view,  simpler  beings  than  on  this  level.  But 
confining  our  view  for  the  moment  to  the  physical  plane, 
a  series  of  vehicles  of  consciousness  available  for  use  on 
higher  planes,  are,  during  the  wakeful  state  of  the  physical 
entity,  involved  one  within  the  other. 

At  an  early  stage  of  theosophical  research,  when  definite 
teaching  from  higher  levels  related  mainly  to  very  broad 
ideas  which  had  first  to  be  conveyed,  I  was  led  to  describe 
these  various  vehicles  as  "  the  seven  principles  of  man." 
That  phrase  crept  into  general  use  and  reappears  in  many 
of  the  earlier  theosophical  books.  I  should  never  have 
used  the  word  "  principles  "  had  I,  in  the  beginning,  quite 
understood  the  analysis  I  was  endeavouring  to  work  out. 

138 

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  MAN     139 

The  vague  expression  was  adopted  in  the  first  instance 
because  some  of  what  were  then  regarded  as  the  con- 
stituent elements  of  the  human  being,  were  rather  in  the 
nature  of  force  than  of  materiality,  however  refined. 
Then,  again,  it  was  connected  with  the  belief  that  the 
number  seven  was  in  some  mysterious  way  the  key  number 
of  all  natural  activities  connected  with  this  world.  It 
seemed  necessary  to  think  that  there  must  be  a  septenary 
constitution  of  man  discernible  if  we  could  understand 
it  correctly.  And,  indeed,  that  last  idea  was  well  founded; 
but  we  failed  at  first  to  realise  that  the  seven  should  in 
this  case  relate  definitely  to  seven  varied  vehicles  of  con- 
sciousness, each  invested  with  spiritual  attributes  whicii 
might  properly  be  described  as  principles.  Thus  in  the 
early  presentation  of  the  seven  principles,  Jiva,  the  life 
force  emanating  from  the  Sun,  used  to  be  ranked  as  one. 
This  mistake  spoiled  the  scientific  harmony  of  the  arrange- 
ment and  further  confusion  arose  from  early  mistakes 
which  identified  the  astral  and  manasic  vehicles  as  separate 
souls  spoken  of  as  the  animal,  the  human,  and  the  divine 
souls.  This  involved  a  comfortless  conception  of  the 
human  being  as  a  sort  of  bundle  of  entities  instead  of  being 
a  definite  unity,  and  gave  rise,  amongst  other  consequences, 
to  a  great  deal  of  sarcastic  treatment  devoted  by  outsiders 
to  the  criticism  of  theosophical  teaching  in  the  beginning. 
Now  we  are  clear  of  all  these  embarrassments.  There 
is  a  possible  septenary  view  of  the  human  constitution, 
and  it  relates  entirely  to  the  various  vehicles  of  conscious- 
ness which  on  different  planes  of  nature  it  is  possible  for 
the  Ego  to  make  use  of.  They  may  be  set  forth  in  this 
order :  — 

The  Physical  Body. 

The  Etheric  Double. 

1 40  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

The  Astral  Body. 

The  Lower  Manasic  Vehicle. 

The  Higher  Manasic  Vehicle. 

The  Buddhic  Vehicle. 

The  Atmic  Vehicle. 

Now  that  classification  only  applies  in  reality  to  the 
perfected  human  being.  It  is  simply  a  mis-comprehension 
of  the  whole  subject  to  regard  the  ordinary  human  being 
around  us  at  this  period  of  evolution  in  numerous  millions, 
as  endowed  with  seven  vehicles  of  consciousness.  An 
average  human  being  even  of  the  modern  civilised  cultured 
races,  cannot  be  said  to  have  evolved  any  vehicles  of  con- 
sciousness higher  than  that  of  the  lower  manasic  condition. 
The  savage  races  cannot  be  regarded  as  having  evolved 
anything  beyond  a  half-grown  astral  body.  But  in  some 
mysterious  fashion  there  must  in  all  cases  be  something 
within  the  human  Ego  representing  the  invisible  germ  of 
higher  things,  just  as  the  potentialities  of  the  tree  reside 
in  the  acorn  or  of  the  highly  organised  chicken  within  the 
egg.  But  no  thoughts  working  in  a  physical  plane  can 
even  approximately  forecast  the  aspect  of  those  higher 
vehicles  of  consciousness  which  will  eventually  become 
available  for  use  by  the  Ego,  when,  in  the  ordinary  course 
of  things,  innumerable  ages  hence,  it  will  have  evolved 
the  need  of  activity  on  those  higher  planes. 

Treating  the  seven  constituents  of  the  human  being  as 
in  all  cases  vehicles  of  consciousness,  some  embarrassment 
may  arise  from  the  fact  that  our  etheric  doubles  can 
hardly,  as  a  rule,  be  thought  of  as  vehicles  of  conscious- 
ness at  all.  Etheric  matter  is  of  an  order  too  refined  and 
subtle  to  affect  the  senses  directly  or  even  to  be  cognised 
by  the  most  delicate  instruments  of  physical  research  that 

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  MAN     141 

we  can  make  use  of.  But  nevertheless,  from  the  point 
of  view  of  occult  science,  the  ether  belongs  to  the  plane 
of  physical  manifestation.  And  just  because  it  is,  so  to 
speak,  on  the  outskirts  of  this  manifestation,  it  becomes 
an  intermediary  between  the  higher  forces  of  nature  and 
results  worked  out  on  the  physical  plane.  To  the  eye 
of  the  qualified  clairvoyant  the  etheric  double  permeating 
the  whole  physical  body  is  a  replica  of  that  in  regard  to 
form  with  a  nerve  system  of  its  own  through  which  the 
life  forces  originally  emanating  from  the  Sun  circulate 
in  much  the  same  way  that  blood  circulates  in  the  physical 
body.  It  may  be  thought  of  from  one  point  of  view  as 
nature's  preliminary  sketch  of  the  physical  body  that  is 
coming  into  manifestation.  The  idea  is  almost  too  intri- 
cate for  explanation  in  language,  and  it  would  be  a  mistake 
to  imagine  that  Nature  first  of  all  constructs  a  complete 
etheric  plan  of  what  the  future  body  of  a  newly  born  child 
is  going  to  be  when  it  grows  up.  And  yet  on  some  higher 
plane  of  thought  that  design  has  been  created  and  is  gradu- 
ally realised  in  etheric  matter  as  the  child  grows,  becom- 
ing the  means  by  which  the  physical  molecules  are 
arranged  within  the  body  as  it  gradually  advances  towards 
maturity.  In  this  way,  it  has  been  correctly  stated  that 
the  first  seven  years  of  a  child's  life  are  spent  quite  uncon- 
sciously to  the  Ego  under  the  guidance  of  natural  forces, 
in  the  absorption  of  etheric  matter.  Only  in  normal  cases, 
when  the  child  is  seven  years  old,  can  it  be  thought  of  as 
actually  having  an  etheric  double.  And  yet  you  have 
also  to  think  of  that  etheric  double  as  gradually  growing 
into  the  form  represented  by  the  original  thought  of  the 
creative  agents  in  the  beginning. 

In  the  mature  man  it  seems  hardly  true  to  say  that  the 
etheric  double,  even  when  complete,  is  a  vehicle  of  con- 

1 42  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

sciousness,  for  during  normal  life  it  rarely  has  to  play  this 
part.  It  never  leaves  the  physical  body,  or  never  com- 
pletely, until  death.  The  astral  vehicle  may,  and  does, 
emerge  from  the  body  quite  freely  every  night  in  sleep, 
hut  it  does  not  draw  out  the  etheric  double  with  it  until 
the  period  of  that  change  commonly  called  death.  On 
the  other  hand,  though  I  cannot  stop  here  to  elaborate  this 
statement  more  fully,  there  is  a  definite  etheric  plane  of 
consciousness  with  which  ordinary  humanity  has  little  or 
nothing  to  do,  intervening  between  the  physical  and 
the  astral  worlds.  On  that  plane  it  is  possible  for 
an  etheric  body  to  carry  the  complete  consciousness 
of  the  Ego,  plus  the  involvement  of  the  higher  vehicles. 
So  there  is  no  impropriety  in  classing  the  etheric 
double  with  the  septenary  series  of  human  vehicles  of 
consciousness. 

Coming  now  to  the  astral,  we  are  concerned  with  that 
which,  at  our  present  state  of  evolution,  is  for  most  of  us, 
perhaps,  the  most  important  vehicle  of  the  whole  series. 
Again, — as  is  the  case  with  almost  any  sweeping  statement 
one  can  make  in  attempting  to  follow  the  intricate  work- 
ing of  natural  law, — the  statement  just  made  is  not  quite 
theoretically  true  because,  however  apparently  grovelling 
and  ignoble,  the  physical  plane  of  life  i§  that  from  which 
all  important  spiritual  achievements  must  be  inaugurated. 
But  dealing  with  the  man  of  fairly  advanced  culture  (and 
let  me  here  interpolate  the  remark  that,  of  course,  one 
uses  the  term  "  man  "  for  simplicity  as  covering  both  the 
varieties  of  sex  in  which  human  Egos  are  embodied  in 
physical  life), — the  man  of  fairly  advanced  intelligence 
and  spiritual  growth  has  grown  an  astral  body  capable, 
when  out  of  the  physical  body,  of  becoming  an  efficient 
vehicle  of  consciousness.  That  would  not  be  true  of  less 

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  MAN     143 

developed  entities  amongst  whom  the  astral  body,  when 
detached  from  the  physical  in  sleep,  is  itself  hardly 
more  awake  than  the  form  it  has  left  in  a  temporary  trance. 
To  assume  a  fair  development  of  progress,  the  astral  of 
such  an  entity,  once  free  of  the  body,  is  free,  also,  of  all 
the  limitations  he  is  used  to  in  the  denser  vehicle.  He 
can  instantaneously  visit  regions  of  the  earth  where  the  ties 
of  affection  or  even  of  intellectual  interest  may  draw  him, 
and  beyond  this  become  cognisant  to  some  extent  of  the 
infinite  variety  and  incidents  attaching  to  consciousness  in 
the  astral  world.  Where  still  further  progress  has  been 
accomplished, — where  an  entity  is  in  definite  relation  with 
the  divine  hierarchy  presiding  over  the  government  of  the 
world,  and  of  all  the  planes  of  Nature  surrounding  it, — he 
may  be  able  in  the  astral  body  to  do  much  more  than 
merely  cognise  distant  scenes  or  friends.  He  may  be 
able,  under  superior  direction,  to  do  actually  useful  work 
in  connection  with  what  may  vaguely  be  described  as  the 
Divine  purpose.  But  that  possibility  may  be  dealt  with 
more  definitely  at  a  later  stage  of  this  dissertation. 

The  manasic  vehicles  have  to  do  with  lofty  conditions 
of  consciousness  not  readily  touched  by  any  of  the  human 
family  still  belonging  to  what  may  be  called  the  average 
multitude.  And  in  a  still  higher  degree  that  remark  applies 
to  our  ultimate  potentialities  as  regards  the  still  loftier 
planes  of  consciousness  described  in  terms  of  Eastern  origin 
as  Buddhic  and  Atmic.  Occult  teaching  being  in  no  way 
limited  to  the  eastern  world  is  sometimes  hampered  at 
present  by  the  want  of  terms  in  European  languages  appro- 
priate to  ideas  with  which  European  metaphysicians  have 
not  so  far  concerned  themselves.  But  just  as  words  of 
Greek  etymology  became  definitely  Anglicised  by  use, 
so  I  think  a  few  of  the  expressions  we  have  to  borrow  still 

i44  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

from  Sanscrit,  may  pass  into  the  English  language  and  be 
recognised  as  English  words  with  a  definite  meaning. 

This  comprehensive  survey  of  the  septenary  consti- 
tuents of  manifest  humanity  would  be  incomplete  without 
some  interpretation  of  what  is  generally  called  the  Human 
Aura.  To  clairvoyants  a  complete  human  being  of  a  fairly 
advance^!  type  is  always  surrounded  by  a  more  or  less 
luminous  cloud,  highly  variegated  in  colour,  undergoing 
constant  changes,  full  of  significance  for  those  who  under- 
stand its  cryptograph  and  replete  with  information  con- 
cerning the  mental  and  emotional  condition  of  the  person 
under  observation.  The  whole  phenomenon  is  intricate 
because  blended  together  in  the  case  of  a  fairly  advanced 
Ego  there  are  auras  of  different  vehicles,  those  of  the 
higher  constituents  being  indeed  only  within  the  cognis- 
ance of  clairvoyants  of  a  very  high  order.  The  subject 
has  been  very  fully  treated  in  books  devoted  to  it  exclu- 
sively, and  can  only  here  be  noticed  in  passing.  But  at  all 
events,  that  which  is  generally  seen  by  clairvoyants  who 
can  see  auras  at  all  is  the  aura  of  the  astral  body,  and  some- 
times this  appears  to  be  the  external  portion  of  the  astral 
vehicle,  itself  much  larger  than  the  physical  body  to  which 
it  is  attached.  But  without  presuming  to  be  dogmatic  in 
this  matter — for  like  many  of  the  even  apparently  simple 
phenomena  of  nature,  there  are  mysteries  it  is  difficult  to 
understand  involved  in  the  subject  we  are  dealing  with — 
I  am  inclined  to  think  that  however  large  the  astral  body 
may  be  in  the  case  of  well-developed  people,  it  also  has 
an  aura  which  is  not  part  of  itself,  but  an  emanation  of 
some  kind,  the  occult  chemistry  of  which,  so  to  speak,  it  is 
very  difficult  to  follow.  But,  however  this  may  be,  within 
the  astral  aura  or  circumambient  portions  of  the  astral 
body  lying  beyond  the  physical,  there  is  a  definite  physical 

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  MAN     145 

aura  that  we  can  more  easily  understand.  That  is  dis- 
tinctly visible  to  qualified  clairvoyant  observation  and  is 
fairly  comprehensible.  It  consists,  closely  examined,  of 
myriads  of  minute  lines  apparently  radiating  from  the 
surface  of  the  body  in  all  directions,  only  to  the  distance 
of  an  inch  or  two,  if  so  much,  and  these  lines  give  a 
definite  clue  to  the  comprehension  of  the  health  conditions 
prevailing  in  the  body  from  which  they  emanate.  If  all 
goes  well,  they  all  stand  out  at  right  angles  from  the  part 
of  the  body  from  which  they  proceed,  and  seem,  if  the 
phrase  may  be  used,  stiff  and  free  from  mutual  entangle- 
ment. In  a  weakened  or  diseased  body  they  droop  and 
become  entangled.  Now  the  scientific  meaning  of  this  is 
clear.  Those  minute  and  radial  points,  minute  as  they 
are,  are  really  tubes  through  which  the  superfluous 
prana  developed  within  the  body  is  flowing  out. 
Further  explanation  is  here  needed.  I  spoke  of  the  etheric 
double  as  involving  what  may  be  described  as  a  nerve 
system  through  which  the  life  forces  originally  emanating 
from  the  Sun  are  circulating.  Within  the  physical  body 
at  certain  ganglionic  centres  within  the  etheric  double, 
this  life  force  is,  if  the  phrase  may  be  used,  digested  or 
converted  into  a  condition  in  which  it  is  available  for 
maintaining  the  vitality  of  the  physical  system.  Again, 
it  is  inevitable  that  we  should  use  words  of  an  eastern 
origin,  because  these  ideas  are  to  a  certain  extent  developed 
in  Eastern  literature,  and  absorbed  from  them  into  our 
own  language.  So  we  may  call  the  force — the  life  force 
emanating  from  the  Sun — Jiva,  and  when  it  has  under- 
gone the  change  within  the  physical  system,  or,  rather, 
within  the  etheric  system,  which  we  call  above  digestion, 
it  assumes  a  new  aspect  and  is  known  to  occult  science  as 
Prana,  Now  a  healthy  human  being  digests  a  good  deal 

II 

146  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

more  Jiva  than  he  really  requires  for  his  own  personal 
use.  It  flows  from  him  freely,  a  contribution  to  the 
welfare  of  humanity  at  large,  and  flowing  through  those 
radial  points  or  tubes  above  referred  to,  keeps  them  dis- 
tended and  rigid.  And  it  does  more  than  this,  for  it  carries 
with  it  those  inconceivably  minute  molecules  of  physical 
matter  which  are  always  being  worn  off  from  the  body 
as  time  goes  on.  It  is  a  very  familiar  truth  connected  with 
physiology  that  our  bodies  are  continually  being  disinte- 
grated and  re-made,  that  in  advanced  life  we  have  few, 
if  any,  of  the  molecules  which  build  up  our  bodies  at  earlier 
periods.  The  Health  Aura,  as  it  is  sometimes  called — 
this  surrounding  haze  of  minute  radiant  points — is  the 
mechanism  by  means  of  which  this  change  is  carried  on. 
For  more  complete  attempts  to  interpret  the  significance 
of  the  astral  aura  I  can  only  leave  the  reader  to  consult 
volumes  exclusively  directed  to  that  intricate  subject. 

It  may  be  just  worth  while  to  add  in  reference  to  the 
Health  Aura  that  the  very  familiar  experience  we  must 
all  have  had  of  finding  ourselves  energised  or  invigorated 
by  association  with  some  people,  and  depleted  or  weakened 
by  association  with  others,  has  entirely  to  do  with  the 
activities  of  the  Health  Aura.  Those  who  are  pouring 
forth  an  abundant  stream  of  superfluous  prana  are  stimu- 
lating others  with  whom  they  may  be  in  close  association. 
Where  their  own  supplies  have  fallen  short  and  their  own 
radiant  points  are  drooping  and  impoverished,  they  become 
absorbent  of  the  energy  thrown  out  by  others  to  an  extent 
that  they  seem  to  sop  this  up  as  a  sponge  sops  up  water, 
leaving  the  healthier  companion  considerably  the  worse  for 
the  change.  Not  necessarily  in  any  way  that  is  it  perma- 
nently prejudicial  to  his  welfare,  and,  indeed,  the  correct 
appreciation  of  this  idea  is  the  interpretation  of  the  benefit 

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  MAN     147 

which  may  often  be  given  to  weak  patients  by  a  vigorous 
mesmerist  who  thus  is  consciously  and  willingly  pouring 
out  his  superfluous  volumes  of  Pranic  energy  into  the 
patient  whom  he  desires  to  benefit. 

Etheric  matter  is  still  physical  according  to  the  most 
accurate  classification  that  can  be  adopted,  although 
it  is  already  entirely  beyond  the  reach  of  instrumental 
observation  and  can  only  be  seen  by  the  finer  senses 
appertaining  to  the  Astral  vehicle.  Each  plane  of 
Nature,  as  we  ascend  through  the  refinements  of  the 
Cosmos,  is  constituted  of  different  orders  of  matter, 
each  order  being  subject  to  various  modifications  on 
its  own  plane.  For  example,  we  have  solid,  liquid, 
and  gaseous  matter,  and  beyond  these,  four  varieties  of 
etheric  matter  into  which  the  molecules  of  elementary 
matter,  as  known  to  ordinary  chemistry,  may  gradually  be 
broken  up.  The  whole  subject  is  one  of  very  deep  interest, 
but  I  should  be  turning  too  far  aside  from  the  main 
path  of  what  I  have  to  say  if  I  stopped  here  to  unravel 
its  complexities,  even  as  far  as  these  have  at  present  been 
examined  by  occult  students  qualified  to  engage  in  such 
researches.  It  will  be  enough  to  make  the  leading  idea 
of  this  occult  development  of  chemical  science  intelligible 
in  its  broad  outlines.  The  molecule  of  matter  which 
possesses  the  characteristics  of  one  of  the  known  chemical 
elements  must  be  thought  of,  in  accordance  with  the  actual 
truth  of  Nature,  as  a  complicated  structure  built  up  of 
numerous  ultimate  physical  atoms.  All  these  ultimate 
physical  atoms  are  identical  in  their  own  composition  and 
attributes,  or  approximately  so;  at  all  events  for  our  present 
purposes  whatever  differences  are  latent  within  them  have 
nothing  to  say  to  their  physical  plane  aspects.  Each  mole- 
cule may  be  roughly  thought  of  as  a  different  building,  but 

148  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

each  building  is  constructed  of  similar  bricks.  A  great 
many  bricks  are  required  for  some  molecular  structures, 
and  whereas  the  simplest  known  to  ordinary  chemistry, 
the  hydrogen  molecule,  contains  only  eighteen  atoms,  the 
molecules  of  some  gases  included  many  hundreds,  and 
those  of  other  substances  some  thousands,  the  figures 
expanding  enormously  in  the  case  of  molecules  represent- 
ing the  metallic  elements. 

On  the  lowest  etheric  condition  the  gaseous  molecules 
known  to  chemistry  are  broken  up  into  sub-divisions,  and 
in  this  condition  appear  at  once  to  escape  entirely  beyond 
the  reach  of  physical  senses  and  instruments.  Their  effects 
are,  of  course,  manifest  in  all  the  various  phenomena  of 
Nature  which  have  to  do  with  etheric  vibrations;  and  a 
time,  of  course,  will  come  in  the  progress  of  physical  plane 
knowledge  when  all  this  will  be  the  A  B  C  of  the  text 
books.  In  the  higher  varieties  of  etheric  matter  the  sub- 
divisions get  broken  up  again  and  again  until  finally,  in  the 
highest  condition  of  etheric  matter,  we  find  the  atoms 
entirely  separated  one  from  the  other,  and  matter  at  that 
level  to  be  perfectly  uniform  in  its  structure. 

It  is  of  matter  derived  from  the  etheric  sub-planes 
that  the  Etheric  Double  is  composed  under  the  guidance 
of  extremely  subtle  laws,  and  as  the  expression  indeed  of 
the  most  exalted  spiritual  will  with  which  the  affairs  of  this 
planet  are  directly  concerned.  The  Etheric  Double  guides 
the  actual  deposition  of  physical  molecules  as  the  body 
grows,  growing  with  it  indeed,  but  always  one  step  in 
advance;  and  the  force  which  circulates  through  the  nerve 
system  of  the  Etheric  Double  is  that  which  constitutes  the 
physical  life-principle,  which  as  it  becomes  differentiated 
from  the  vast  stores  of  Nature  for  the  purpose  of  human 
requirements,  itself  comes  within  the  field  of  vision  of  the 

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  MAN     149 

astral  senses,  and  can  actually  be  seen,  by  persons 
adequately  qualified,  coursing  through  the  nerve  system 
of  the  Etheric  Double  as  the  blood  flows  through  the 
veins  of  the  physical  body.  The  force  pours  into  this 
planet  from  the  sun.  It  has  a  multitude  of  tasks  to 
perform  connected  with  organic  Nature,  but  keeping  for 
the  present  to  the  question  of  human  growth,  we  find  it 
undergoing,  in  healthy  human  organisations,  a  process  of 
differentiation  which  adapts  it  for  its  peculiar  task,  just  as 
organic  food  is  converted  into  blood  by  the  physical  body. 
A  strong  and  healthy  human  being  specialises  a  good  deal 
more  than  he  requires  for  his  own  use,  just  as  the  bees 
make  more  honey  than  they  really  want  for  themselves 
In  such  a  case  it  is  constantly  radiating  from  him,  supply- 
ing the  deficiencies  more  or  less  completely  of  those  who 
are  too  feeble  to  specialise  enough  for  themselves. 

A  man  in  good  health  is  thus  constantly,  even  without 
intention,  imparting  some  of  his  spare  vitality  to  others, 
though  he  does  this  with  far  greater  energy  when  he 
employs  mesmeric  passes  to  assist  the  process,  and  uses  his 
will-power,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  according  to  the 
extent  of  its  development,  to  render  them  effective.  Con- 
versely the  man  in  bad  health,  who  through  inefficient 
action  of  the  appropriate  organs  in  his  own  system  is  unable 
to  specialise  for  his  own  use  an  adequate  volume  of  the 
solar  radiation  all  around  us,  acts  unconsciously  as  a  sponge, 
absorbing  that  specialised  by  others  with  whom  he  is  in 
contact.  To  different  degrees  most  people  are  conscious 
that  some  others  weary  and  tire  them  by  their  contiguity, 
even  though  they  may  not  be  able  to  trace  the  nature  of 
the  process  by  which  they  are  affected.  Persons  of  a  very 
robust  temperament  hardly  experience  this  feeling, 
perhaps,  because  in  most  such  persons  the  higher  principles, 

150  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

including  those  subtle  emanations  belonging  to  the  astral 
plane,  are  more  inextricably  entangled  with  their  physical 
molecules;  and  the  very  materialistic  nature  which  is 
extremely  insensitive  itself  is  generally  as  little  disposed  to 
part  with  its  own  influences.  The  sensitive,  very  ready 
to  feel  the  magnetic  emanations  of  others,  is,  on  the  other 
hand,  generally  the  person  who  is  most  easily  drained  of 
whatever  vitality  he  may  himself  possess.  These  con- 
siderations, however,  must  not  be  read  as  implying  that 
perfect  physical  health  and  robust  constitution  are  identical 
with  materialistic  self-involvement.  The  whole  subject 
of  sensitiveness  is  profoundly  misunderstood  when,  as  is 
too  often  the  case,  people  imagine  it  to  be  in  some  way 
identified  with  states  of  health;  but  the  complete  examina- 
tion of  that  idea  would  take  me  too  far  away  from  the 
main  part  of  the  explanation  I  am  now  pursuing. 

The  third  constituent,  or  Astral  Body,  is  the  vehicle  in 
which  the  soul  may  function  on  the  astral  plane  of 
Nature,  that  immediately  above  the  physical,  the  nature 
and  characterises  of  which  we  must  next  examine. 

CHAPTER    VII 
THE  ASTRAL  PLANE 

IN  connection  with  the  early  work  done  by  those  who 
have  been  privileged  to  put  into  a  literary  form  avail- 
able for  Western  readers  the  occult  teaching  derived 
in  the  first  instance  from  Eastern  channels  of  information, 
no  department  of  the  subject  was  so  imperfectly  under- 
stood as  that  which  I  now  wish  to  treat  from  a  later 
standpoint  of  knowledge — the  conditions  and  constitution 
of  the  Astral  World.  Among  the  many  mistakes  habitu- 
ally made  by  those  who  take  up  the  study  of  Theosophy, 
one  we  frequently  encounter  is  the  notion  that  all  the 
subjects  we  are  now  dealing  with  have  always  been  fully 
understood  by  the  early  students  of  Eastern  philosophy 
and  metaphysics.  I  have  not  the  slightest  desire  to  dis- 
parage the  varieties  of  culture  referred  to;  but,  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  information  I  have,  within  later  years, 
been  able  to  obtain,  I  see  now  that  the  prevailing  Eastern 
comprehension  of  the  Astral  World  is  misleading  in  a 
high  degree  for  the  European  student.  That  phrase  may 
seem  bewildering  at  first,  because  great  truths  of  Nature 
must  be  independent  of  Eastern  or  Western  thinking. 
And  yet  the  Astral  World  is  so  wondrously  variegated  a 
region,  of  such  colossal  magnitude  and  diversity,  that 
putting  the  matter  in  the  first  instance  rather  crudely,  the 
Astral  World  of  European  communities  is  a  very  different 
region  from  the  Astral  World  regarded  from  the  Eastern 
point  of  view.  It  is  not  a  mere  uniform  appendage  over 
the  physical  world  or  plane,  it  is  not  merely  a  "  next 
world,"  as  it  may  sometimes  be  correctly  called,  it  is  a 
congeries  of  next  worlds,  just  as  the  physical  earth  is  a 
congeries  of  continents  and  nations;  so  wonderfully 

152  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

complex  in  its  structure  and  in  connection  with  the  natural 
laws  and  forces  operative  there,  that  the  more  we  come 
to  know  about  it,  the  more  difficult  becomes  the  task  of 
expressing  that  knowledge  in  continuous  writing  or 
speech.  No  generalisation  we  can  employ  is  exempt 
from  the  need  of  continual  qualification.  In  the  earlier 
editions  of  this  book,  I  seemed  to  have  a  comparatively 
simple  task  in  describing  the  Astral  Plane.  In  the  present 
edition,  dealing  with  the  whole  subject  entirely  afresh, 
I  feel  at  the  outset  rather  dazzled  by  the  complexity  of 
the  story  that  has  to  be  told.  That  is  indeed  the  case  with 
all  study  of  Nature  on  whatever  level  of  creative  mani- 
festation we  may  be  dealing  with.  At  the  first  glance  the 
phenomena  seem  simple,  to  the  closer  investigation  their 
complexity  is  infinite. 

To  begin  with,  of  course,  the  term  Astral  Plane,  so 
widely  in  use  at  present  that  it  cannot  be  discarded,  is  a 
misnomer,  because  the  Astral  World  or  worlds  is,  or  are, 
vast  concentric  spheres  of  matter — finer,  of  course,  than 
the  matter  cognisable  by  the  physical  senses,  and,  there- 
fore, by  them  quite  unperceived — surrounding  the  physical 
globe  completely  and  extending  in  space  to  dimensions 
within  which  the  physical  earth  is  the  mere  small 
kernel  of  a  gigantic  husk.  But  no  physical  illustration 
can  do  otherwise  than  offend  delicate  intellectual  per- 
ceptions. And  yet,  though  the  astral  spheres  surrounding 
the  earth  may  be  thought  of,  to  begin  with,  as  definitely 
stratified  in  their  character,  so  that  the  conditions  of  each 
are  entirely  varied  from  those  which  prevail  above  or 
below,  nevertheless  in  a  certain  sense  they  all  interpene- 
trate one  another,  and  as  any  of  us  sit  in  any  room  on  the 
physical  earth,  we  are  surrounded  with  matter  derived 
from  all  the  planes  or  spheres  of  the  Astral  Worlds. 

THE  ASTRAL  PLANE  1 53 

Further  than  this,  that  astral  matter  interpenetrates  the 
solid  crust  of  the  earth,  and  regions  of  the  Astral 
World  in  this  way  definitely  available  as  habitations  for 
consciousness  working  in  suitable  vehicles,  are  actually 
sunk  below  our  feet  within  the  body  of  the  planet. 

Now,  in  spite  of  the  interpenetration  that  I  speak  of, 
one  can  best  approach  a  comprehension  of  the  complicated 
truth  by  thinking  of  the  various  planes  or  spheres — it  will 
generally  be  more  convenient  to  use  the  word  "  planes  " 
in  spite  of  its  geometrical  inaccuracy — as  definitely  super- 
posed one  above  the  other.  There  are  the  usual  seven 
great  sub-divisions  of  the  Astral  Plane,  and  counting  from 
below  upwards,  the  first  two  are  actually  submerged 
within  the  crust  of  the  earth  and  to  a  considerable  depth. 
Those  regions  of  consciousness  are  very  terrible  to  con- 
template; but  we  have  to  get  over  one  great  difficulty 
before  describing  their  conditions  more  fully.  It  is  exces- 
sively difficult  for  ordinary  thinking  to  picture  a  habitable 
world  in  a  region  of  space  actually  occupied  by  solid  rock. 
But  here,  without  going  to  the  extreme  length  of  meta- 
physicians who  have  endeavoured  to  deny  the  actuality  of 
matter,  let  us  endeavour  to  realise  the  profound  truth  that- 
the  actuality  or  apparent  solidity  of  matter  is  entirely  a 
question  of  the  senses  devoted  to  its  observation.  Our 
senses  in  the  ordinary  physical  life  are  adapted  to  certain 
attributes  of  matter  which  respond  to  them.  If  we  could 
imagine  ourselves  invested  with  a  wholly  different  set  of 
senses,  the  matter  which  responds  to  the  senses  we  know 
of,  would  simply  be  non-existent  for  us.  However  un- 
acceptable this  may  seem  as  an  abstract  statement,  it  has 
been  for  many  of  us  a  matter  of  simple  experimental  proof. 
There  are  people  who  can  emerge  from  the  physical  body 
in  the  astral  vehicle  of  consciousness,  and  finding  them- 

154  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

selves  by  so  doing  invested  with  an  entirely  new  and 
different  set  of  senses,  such  people  will  cease  to  cognise 
the  objects  of  the  physical  plane,  unless,  indeed — though 
this  qualification  can  only  relate  to  peculiar  cases — they 
are  able  to  retain  some  trace  of  the  physical  senses  plus 
those  of  the  Astral  World.  Never  mind  that  point  for 
the  moment.  To  illustrate  what  I  mean,  let  me  take  the 
definite  case  of  a  friend  who  was  enabled,  like  many  others 
— but  I  am  thinking  of  one  case  in  particular — with  help, 
to  try  the  experiment  referred  to.  He  was  enabled  to 
emerge  from  the  body  in  the  Astral  but  guarded  from  at 
once  wandering  off  into  distant  spaces.  With  the  Astral 
body  still  in  the  room  in  which  his  physical  body  sat  at  the 
table  writing,  he  became  at  once  cognisant  of  astral  pheno- 
mena of  all  kinds  around  him,  while  the  wails  of  the  room 
in  which  he  stood  had  faded  into  a  diaphanous  mist, 
scarcely  perceptible  at  all,  constituting  no  impediment  to 
his  passage  through  them  had  he  moved  in  any  direction. 
So  it  is  with  the  submerged  sub-planes  of  the  Astral  Plane. 
They  are,  as  regards  space,  within  the  solid  body  of  the 
earth,  but  that  solid  body  for  those  who  live  and  move  in 
astral  vehicles  of  consciousness,  is,  I  will  not  say  absolutely 
diaphanous,  but  is  a  condition  which  does  not  do  more 
than  somewhat  impede  and  embarrass  movement  without 
prohibiting  it  altogether.  I  prefer  to  leave  for  later  con- 
sideration the  actual  conditions  of  life  in  these  two  sub- 
merged sub-divisions  of  the  Astral  World,  because  however 
terrible  their  aspect  may  be,  no  great  proportion,  no  more 
than  a  small  minority  of  the  most  hideously  debased 
examples  of  the  human  race,  can  have  any  personal  ex- 
perience of  them. 

If  we  come  to  the  first  sub-division  super-posed  above 
the  earth — the  third  in  the  septenary  classification — we 

THE  ASTRAL  PLANE  1 5  5 

find  ourselves  in  presence  of  a  region  still  of  a  highly 
undesirable  order.  If  the  lower  regions  may  be  thought  of 
as  the  actual  hells  of  Nature  (however  different  from  the 
grotesque  caricature  of  that  idea  presented  by  theology) 
we  may  think  of  the  third  sub-plane  as  the  purgatorial 
region  in  which  the  lesser  offences  of  humanity  are  appro- 
priately dealt  with  in  preparation  for  passage  to  a  loftier 
and  more  enjoyable  region.  And  perhaps  I  may  surprise 
some  of  my  readers  by  saying  I  mean  by  lesser  offences 
every  kind  of  commonplace  crime,  every  variety  of  vice 
or  debauchery,  almost  every  sinful  proclivity  that  can  be 
thought  of.  The  horrible  offences  which  carry  people 
to  the  lower  regions  are  of  deeper  dye  still.  We  will  con- 
sider them  later.  The  purgatorial  third  level,  although 
for  some  of  our  brothers  and  sisters  who  have  frightfully 
misused  the  opportunities  of  physical  life  it  is  a  condition 
of  temporary  suffering  not  to  be  treated  lightly,  must 
not  be  thought  of  as  a  penitentiary.  Most  of  the  grievous 
consequences  of  serious  misdoing  relate  to  the  physical 
life,  and  can  only  be  worked  out  on  the  physical  plane. 
That  is  to  say,  the  person  who  has  engendered  bad  karma 
through  selfish  indulgence  and  disregard  of  other  people's 
welfare — who  has  committed  any  of  the  commonplace 
crimes  against  person  or  property — such  an  entity  must 
encounter  the  consequences  of  his  misdoing  in  the  next 
life  on  the  physical  plane.  In  that  way  the  law  of  Karma 
suspends  its  operation  at  his  death,  and  under  some  imagin- 
able conditions  a  person  might  be  very  faulty  indeed,  full 
of  bad  Karma  which  he  would  have  to  work  out  in  another 
life,  and  yet,  at  death,  free  from  any  of  the  characteristics 
that  would  impede  his  happiness  in  the  intervening  period 
during  his  astral  life.  Such  a  person  might  slip  through 
the  third  plane  without  being  much  aware  of  it,  if  at  all, 

156  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

and  find  himself  in  a  happy  condition  in  the  exercise  of 
what,  by  the  hypothesis,  will  be  the  loftier  characteristics 
of  his  nature — honest  love  for  some  others,  honest  care  for 
his  own  children  or  belongings,  good  human  impulses 
along  certain  directions,  compatible  though  these  may 
have  been  with  serious  defects  along  others.  But  take  the 
case  of  a  person  with  a  very  little  bad  Karma  of  the  kind 
above  referred  to  as  destined  to  embitter  future  lives  on 
earth,  but  none  the  less  with  such  persistent  devotion  to 
the  mere  pleasures  of  the  physical  plane  that  his  mind  is 
unable  to  contemplate  anything  like  pleasure  or  happiness 
in  the  absence  of  those  pleasures.  Now  there  is  no  hard- 
ship for  such  a  person  in  having  to  go  through  experiences 
which  gradually  show  him  that  after  all  those  pleasures 
are  not  the  final  thing  worth  having.  We  assume  that 
such  a  man  has  some  loftier  streaks  in  his  character,  that 
if  it  had  not  been  for  his  infatuated  devotion  to  lower 
pleasures  those  higher  streaks  would  have  operated  more 
freely  in  his  consciousness.  The  third  sub-plane  for  him 
is  simply  the  region  in  which  he  wears  out,  by  satiety, 
the  impulse  to  which  in  the  physical  life  he  had  given  free 
play.  Some  exaggerated  nonsense  is  talked  sometimes 
about  the  after  effects  of  the  vice  commonly  called 
drunkenness.  Of  course,  it  is  a  habit  of  the  entity  in  the 
body  which  he  really  must  be  induced  to  forget  by  some 
experience  of  a  more  or  less  disagreeable  character  on  the 
third  sub-plane;  and  inhering  as  such  tendencies  do  to  a 
very  great  extent  in  the  physical  body,  although  partially 
manifest  also  in  the  astral,  they  will  unhappily  cling  to 
some  extent  in  all  probability  in  his  next  physical  life,  in 
which,  again,  they  have  to  be  worn  out  by  some  more  or 
less  disagreeable  experiences.  But  there  is  so  little  of  what 
may  be  called  spirituality  in  the  vice  of  drunkenness  that 

THE  ASTRAL  PLANE  1 5  7 

it  is  pretty  easily  dealt  with  on  the  third  sub-plane,  and  I 
have  heard  of  cases  in  which  in  its  less  extreme  develop- 
ment, it  has  been  dealt  with  almost  at  once  by  what  may 
almost  be  thought  of  as  a  mesmeric  suggestion.  In  the 
astral  consciousness,  the  entity  is  enabled  to  see  that  there 
are  really  no  roots  in  his  nature  that  demand  this  gratifi- 
cation, and  the  thirst  for  it  disappears.  More  protracted 
embarrassments  ensue  from  the  excessive  development  of 
the  sex  impulse.  Again,  in  itself,  that  is  so  little  to  be 
condemned  that  where  its  gratification  in  no  way  interferes 
with  the  happiness  or  welfare  of  any  others,  it  is  not  to 
be  thought  of  as  a  vice  in  any  degree  whatever.  Indeed, 
it  may  be  so  intimately  blended  with  spiritual  love  as  to  be 
merely  on  the  physical  plane  the  expression  of  states  of 
consciousness  which  will  find  their  more  congenial  expres- 
sion on  lofty  levels  of  the  astral  world  in  ways  wholly 
unlike  that  to  which  the  physical  incarnate  being  has  been 
used.  But  sometimes,  where  the  passion  is  carried  to 
excess,  with  perhaps  a  grievous  disregard  of  incidental 
suffering  to  which  it  may  give  rise  on  the  part  of  others, 
then  it  becomes  a  too  inveterate  propensity  to  be  dis- 
regarded by  those  who  rule  the  purifying  methods  of  treat- 
ment available  on  the  third  sub-level.  People  not  other- 
wise embarrassed  by  any  serious  defects  of  character  have, 
I  know,  been  entangled  for  years  of  our  time  on  the  lower 
astral  level  before  getting  rid  of  this  devouring  propensity 
for  which,  of  course,  loftier  conditions  of  life  on  the  astral 
world  would  afford  no  further  scope.  And  there  are  no 
limits  to  the  variety  of  purifying  experiences  which  people 
of  differently  defective  character  will  have  to  go  through 
before  getting  clear  of  the  third  sub-level.  It  would  be  an 
endless  task  to  try  to  draw  up  a  complete  catalogue  of  the 
varied  experiences  which  those  of  us  favourably  situated 

158  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

for  getting  such  information  may  gradually  hear  of  con- 
cerning existence  on  the  third  sub-level.  But  let  me 
hasten  to  relieve  what,  no  doubt,  any  protracted  devotion 
of  thought  to  this  subject  will  give  rise  to  as  an  appre- 
hension on  the  part  of  many  people  taking  too  modest  a 
view  of  their  own  nature,  let  me  assure  the  multitudes  of 
relatively  quite  innocent  people,  grossly  misled  once  a 
week  in  churches  to  think  of  themselves  as  "  miserable 
sinners,"  that  in  all  probability  they  will  pass  on,  when  in 
time  set  free  from  the  physical  life,  through  that  lower 
sub-division  of  the  Astral  World  all  around  us,  as  easily, 
to  use  an  old  familiar  illustration,  as  an  arrow  passes 
through  a  cloud,  as  utterly  unconscious  of  its  embarrass- 
ments as  the  arrow  would  be  of  the  impeding  mist. 

Passing  clear  in  thought,  now,  from  what  I  have  called 
the  purgatorial  sub-division  of  the  super-terrestrial  astral 
plane,  we  have  to  consider  the  varied  aspects  of  its  higher 
and  happier  sub-divisions.  Although  for  a  variety  of 
reasons  affecting  individual  conditions,  the  intensity  of 
happiness  prevalent  in  the  higher  regions  is  superior  to 
those  of  the  less  exalted,  happiness,  in  one  degree  or 
another,  is  a  normal  condition  of  life  in  that  exhilarating 
next  world.  The  higher  sub-planes  vary,  however,  very 
greatly  in  the  opportunities  they  afford  to  people  at  dif- 
ferent levels  of  development.  And  before  describing  the 
predominant  attributes  of  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  sub- 
planes,  we  have  to  recognise  that  the  highly  variegated 
region  to  be  broadly  defined  as  the  fourth  sub-plane  pro- 
vides for  a  very  great  expansion  of  consciousness  beyond 
that  of  those  who  in  the  beginning  find  their  aspirations 
adequately  dealt  with  on  its  very  threshold.  This  con- 
sideration meets  a  bewildered  complaint  by  those  who  hear 
of  some  first  awakening  to  the  happy  conditions  above, 

THE  ASTRAL  PLANE  159 

because  these  seem  at  the  first  glance  to  be  altogether  too 
materialistic,  too  deeply  tinged  with  the  habits  of  physical 
life  to  be  acceptable  in  any  way  as  a  realisation  of  exalted 
anticipations  concerning  the  life  beyond  the  grave.  The 
confusion  of  thought  involved  is  due  to  the  vague  unen- 
lightened suggestion  provided  by  commonplace  ecclesias- 
tical teaching  in  reference  to  Heaven.  Occult  revelation, 
indeed,  shows  us  conditions  obtainable  by  discarnate  human 
intelligence  which  realise  the  most  glowing  and  poetical 
conceptions  of  a  heavenly  state.  But  accurate  knowledge 
equally  shows  us  intermediate  conditions  of 'super-physical 
happiness  appropriate  to  the  needs  of  those  of  us  who  pass 
on,  still  saturated,  however  innocently,  with  the  habits 
of  the  earthly  life.  The  real  Heaven  World,  as  it  is  some- 
times called,  super-posed  in  one  sense  above  the  astral,  is  a 
region  of  spiritual  beatitude  concerning  which  much  will 
have  to  be  said  later.  But  the  vast  average  multitude  of 
mankind  are  no  more  ready  when  they  quit  this  life  for 
that  sublime  condition  of  existence  than  a  savage  imported 
from  Africa  to  a  European  capital  would  be  at  once  capable 
of  appreciating  the  refinements  of  its  pleasures  or  the  vast 
range  of  its  intellectual  resources.  Thus  the  common- 
place human  entity — if  free  of  any  defects  which  con- 
strain him  to  linger  in  the  third  sub-plane,  or  having  passed 
through  a  purification  there — may  wake  up  on  the  thres- 
hold of  the  fourth  under  conditions  where  the  creative 
power  of  the  thoughts  of  all  around  him  will  have  provided 
a  world,  the  scenery  and  decoration  of  which  are  curiously 
the  counterpart  of  much  that  he  has  been  familiar  with  in 
the  earth  life.  He  and  those  with  whom  he  is  brought  by 
some  natural  sympathy  into  intimate  relationship  will  be 
found  living  in  houses,  going  through  some  routine  of 
life  not  entirely  unlike  that  of  physical  existence,  and 

160  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

yet  already  exempt  from  the  strain  and  liability  to  suffer- 
ing that  enter  so  largely  into  the  familiar  earth  life.  Some 
communications  coming  to  still  incarnate  people  from 
friends  who  have  passed  on  and  are  really  on  the  humbler 
levels  of  the  fourth  sub-plane,  have  even  shocked  many 
who  hear  of  them  because  they  relate  to  such  earthly  habits 
as  eating  and  drinking  and  smoking  cigars.  It  is  difficult 
for  us  in  imagination  to  realise  that  while  the  astral  friends 
who  talk  of  such  habits  quite  honestly  believe  they  are 
indulging  them,  they  are  nevertheless  to  a  certain  extent 
misled  by  their  own  imagination.  Thus  at  the  very  outset 
of  our  attempt  to  understand  the  conditions  of  life  in  the 
Astral  World,  we  come  into  touch  with  mysteries  it  is 
very  difficult  to  comprehend.  We  have  somehow  to 
reconcile  the  idea  that,  for  example,  an  astral,  or  to  be 
more  accurate,  an  etheric  cigar  may  be  at  once  real  and 
unreal,  giving,  that  is  to  say,  to  one  consciousness  a  sense 
of  reality,  to  a  loftier  observation,  the  consciousness  that  it 
is  a  mere  figment  of  imagination.  But  the  leading  idea 
to  keep  touch  with  is,  that  all  through  the  Astral  World, 
the  matter  of  which  it  is  built  is  plastic  to  thought, 
can,  therefore,  assume  almost  any  shape  which  the  thinker 
desires. 

The  apparent  reality  or  solidity  of  buildings  and  scenery 
on  the  lower  fourth  may  generally  be  due  to  the  persistent 
contribution  of  many  streams,  so  to  speak,  of  creative 
thought  confirming  the  original  design.  But  even  though 
we  are  talking  merely  of  the  threshold  of  the  next  world, 
its  conditions,  like  all  those  appertaining  to  Nature  on  any 
level,  present  almost  insoluble  mysteries  to  us  when  we 
endeavour  to  get  to  the  bed-rock  of  scientific  reality. 

Anyhow,  observation  by  those  capable  of  bringing 
adequate  intellectual  development  to  the  task  of 

THE  ASTRAL  PLANE  1 6 1 

investigating  the  higher  regions  still  belonging  to  what  we 
call  the  fourth  sub-plane,  shows  us  these  varying  in  char- 
acter to  an  almost  limitless  degree.  We  very  soon  get  clear 
of  all  those  embarrassing  conditions  above  referred  to  which 
offend  certain  sensibilities  in  the  way  described.  And  it 
will  hardly  be  worth  while  to  attempt  a  methodical  pro- 
gress through  the  vast  region  of  life  we  must  all  be  so 
eager  to  explore.  But  here  let  me  deal  for  a  moment  with 
magnitudes  as  well  as  with  conditions. 

Certainly  those  who  are  especially  impressed  with  the 
way  in  which  higher  planes  of  nature  interpenetrate  one 
another  are  apt  to  forget  that  they  do  none  the  less  have 
relation  with  space  and  magnitude.  Keeping  touch  simply 
with  one  idea  accepted  universally  by  all  who  deal  with 
astral  phenomena,  the  Astral  World  is  composed  of  matter, 
although  of  matter  in  a  much  more  highly  refined  state 
than  that  with  which  we  deal  on  the  physical  plane,  and 
matter,  however  refined,  must  occupy  space.  The  matter 
of  the  Astral  World  increasing  in  refinement  on  the 
higher  levels,  constitutes  an  envelope  enclosing  the  earth, 
the  thickness  of  which  in  the  aggregate  can  hardly  be  less 
than  a  hundred  thousand  miles.  And  though  the  matter 
of  the  higher  levels  undoubtedly  interpenetrates  the  lower, 
from  another  point  of  view,  the  solar  spectrum  suggests 
the  way  in  which,  though  no  definite  boundaries  between 
one  colour  and  another  can  be  discerned,  there  are  never- 
theless regions  in  that  spectrum  which  are  yellow  and 
other  regions  which  are  blue.  So  with  the  Astral  World. 
To  an  adequately  developed  entity,  even  still  of  the  human 
kingdom,  all  regions  are  equally  accessible,  all  sub-plane 
boundaries  equally  negligible,  and  yet  equally  susceptible 
of  observation. 

Another  very  broad  thought  to  be  borne  in  mind  in  all 

n 

1 62  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

studies  of  the  Astral  World  has  to  do  with  the  way  in 
which,  although  again  boundaries  are  not  hard  and  fast, 
those  regions  of  the  Astral  World  that  are  in  space  super- 
posed above  definite  regions  of  the  earth,  are  those  to  which 
the  inhabitants  of  those  definite  regions  would  naturally 
gravitate  after  passing  on.  Thus  we  have  a  European, 
an  American,  an  Asiatic  astral  dominion,  an  astral 
geography,  so  to  speak,  which  takes  count  of  the  broad 
national  distribution  of  life  on  the  earth's  surface.  People 
whose  habits  of  thought  render  them  easily  shocked  if  any 
statement  is  made  concerning  the  after-life  which  fails  to 
harmonise  with  their  religious  emotion,  must  none  the 
less,  if  they  desire  to  comprehend  the  actual  state  of  the 
facts,  be  prepared  to  find  some  of  the  conditions  of  physical 
nature  reproduced  above. 

Thus,  for  example,  within  the  vast  expanses  of  the 
fourth  sub-plane,  we  find  ample  scope  for  the  satisfaction 
of  the  religious  emotion  of  those  amongst  whom  it  exists  as 
a  predominant  idea.  There  are  great  regions  in  the  super- 
physical  world  where  the  representatives  of  the  varied 
religions  amongst  us  are  drawn  together  by  mutual  sym- 
pathy. There  is  a  vast  Roman  Catholic  area  where 
creative  thought  devoted  to  the  task  and  continuously 
re-in forced  by  fresh  outbursts  of  this  energy,  has  evolved 
cathedrals  of  surpassing  magnitude  and  beauty,  where 
ceremonies  are  constantly  in  progress,  appealing  even 
more  effectually  than  any  on  earth  to  the  religious 
emotions  of  those  who  attend  them.  But  we  need  not 
think  of  that  state  of  things  as  interfering  with  the  full 
fruition  of  human  life,  which  may  be  quite  independent 
of  religious  thinking.  The  ties  of  real  affection  bring 
those  who  care  for  one  another  together  in  the  astral  life 
with  the  same  or  even  a  greater  degree  of  certainty  than 

THE  ASTRAL  PLANE  1 6  3 

the  laws  of  chemistry  control  the  combinations  of  the 
elements  amongst  us  here.  That,  indeed,  is  one  of  the 
exquisite  characteristics  of  the  astral  life,  whether  fore- 
shadowed or  not  by  the  experiences  of  the  earth  life. 
Mutual  sympathy  is  the  force  that  brings  people  into 
social  relation  on  the  astral  world.  Over  and  over  again, 
in  touch  with  friends  who  have  passed  on,  I  have  been 
told  that  they  find  themselves  living  in  households  or 
communities  with  people  they  like  exceedingly,  even 
though  they  may  not  have  known  them  on  the  physical 
plane.  Indeed,  on  the  happy  levels  of  the  astral,  there 
seems  to  be  no  room  for  uncongenial  companionship. 

The  reader  will  see  that  I  am  attempting  a  task  of 
extraordinary  magnitude  in  endeavouring  to  describe  the 
varieties  of  life  in  the  Astral  World,  now  that  oppor- 
tunities of  research  in  that  direction  have  so  enormouslv 
outgrown  those  with  which  theosophical  students  were 
concerned  in  the  beginning.  But  although  an  unmanage- 
able volume  of  detail  is  accumulating  to  my  hands,  I  must 
be  content,  in  dealing  with  the  higher  sub-planes,  to 
emphasise  some  broad  considerations  of  supreme  import- 
ance. The  foremost  idea  to  be  emphasised  is  that,  whereas 
at  earlier  stages  of  theosophical  research  some  of  us  were 
led  to  believe  that  opportunities  for  lofty  intellectual  and 
spiritual  consciousness  had  to  be  sought  in  spiritual  regions 
entirely  transcending  the  Astral  World,  we  now  find  that 
the  higher  levels  of  the  Astral  World  afford  almost  limit- 
less opportunities  for  the  expansion  of  the  higher  faculties 
which  inhere  in  human  life.  I  am  very  far  from  wanting 
to  deny  or  belittle  the  importance  of  that  stupendously 
magnificent  aspect  of  Nature  which  some  theosophical 
writers  call  the  Heaven  World,  but  which  I  shall  prefer 
to  designate  by  a  more  scientifically  appropriate  term,  the 

n* 

164  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

Manasic  Plane.  But  before  attempting,  however  faintly, 
to  foreshadow  the  conditions  of  life  there,  let  me  attempt 
to  dissipate  the  notion  that  the  Astral  World  is  itself 
subject  to  any  ignoble  limitations.  On  the  higher  levels 
of  the  Astral  World  there  is  still  scope  for  the  growth,  ex- 
pansion, and  improvement  of  every  intellectual  or  artistic 
faculty  which  we  can  think  of  as  taking  its  rise  on  the 
physical  plane.  Thus  to  begin  with,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  I 
find  that  all  the  great  scientific  men  of  the  past,  not  yet 
specifically  re-incarnated  on  earth,  are  still  to  be  found 
on  the  high  levels  of  the  Astral  World,  distinctly  declining 
a  certain  course  of  development  which  would  carry  them 
into  the  Manasic  condition  because  they  find  the  oppor- 
tunities of  the  higher  Astral  World  best  suited  to  the 
further  development  of  the  researches,  whatever  these  may 
have  been,  with  which  they  were  concerned  in  the  earth 
.life.  This  statement  seems  at  variance  with  what  we 
know  of  the  Manasic  Plane  as  pre-eminently  distinguished 
by  the  characteristic  we  described  as  intellect,  when 
endeavouring  to  analyse  the  human  being.  And  yet  the 
paradox  can  be  interpreted.  The  opportunities  of  the 
Astral  World  afford,  for  example,  a  great  scientist  a  better 
opportunity  than  could  even  be  found  on  the  manasic  level 
for  cultivating  in  his  own  consciousness  those  attributes 
which  will  render  him  more  and  more  capable  of  carrying 
on  scientific  research  when  he  ultimately  returns  to  the 
physical  plane  of  life.  Does  he  sacrifice  anything  by  not 
passing  on,  as  he  might,  to  the  so-called  heaven  world  ? 
So  far  as  mere  happiness  is  concerned,  though  there  may 
be  differences  even  in  that  condition,  the  happiness  insepar- 
ably associated  with  life  on  the  higher  levels  of  the  Astral 
is  so  complete  that  one  can  hardly  think  of  any  sacrifice  as 
involved  in  foregoing  something  that  may  be  even  more 

THE  ASTRAL  PLANE  165 

complete  still.  But  anyhow,  if  there  is  a  theoretical  sacri- 
fice involved,  that  is  one  which  the  great  scientists  of  the 
past,  as  far  as  fairly  extensive  information  on  the  subject 
enables  me  to  speak,  are  deliberately  making  in  pursuance 
of  what  they  hold  to  be  their  loftiest  duty — the  prepara- 
tion of  themselves  for  more  and  more  useful  work  when 
they  return  to  the  earth  life. 

Nor  must  we  imagine  that  such  people  are  shut  off  from 
the  perception  of  manasic  experience.  So  far  as  their 
selected  path  of  progress  is  compatible  with  the  idea,  they 
may  be  thought  of  as  having  perfectly  free  access  to 
manasic  conditions  where  those  are  in  some  way  needed 
to  fulfil  the  developments  of  capacity  at  which  they  are 
aiming.  And  with  appropriate  modifications  all  that  I 
have  said  of  the  great  scientists  applies  equally  to  the  great 
artists,  poets,  and  men  of  letters,  or  if  not  quite  equally, 
in  a  general  way  subject  to  individual  exception. 

In  dealing  with  this  profoundly  interesting  subject,  I 
have  aimed  first  at  giving  the  reader  some  broad  conception 
of  the  varied  beauty,  splendour,  and  opportunity  involved 
in  Astral  life.  And  so  I  shrank  in  the  beginning  from 
dealing  more  minutely  with  the  horrors  of  the  lowest 
conditions  prevailing  in  the  submerged  depths.  Nor  is  it 
necessary  to  dwell  in  detail  on  them.  But  after  what  I 
have  said  with  the  design  of  showing  how  little  those 
regions  of  horror  have  to  do  with  the  prospects  of  ordinary 
humanity,  the  story  as  a  whole  would  be  left  incomplete 
without  some  further  explanation  of  the  circumstances 
under  which  a  small  minority  of  the  most  intensely  evil 
sections  of  humanity  may  be  dealt  with  in  accordance  with 
the  inevitable  justice  of  Divine  Rule.  Broa'dly  speaking, 
there  is  only  one  kind  of  wickedness  which  can  draw  a 
human  entity  after  physical  life  to  the  submerged  regions. 

1 66  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

That  characteristic  is  to  be  broadly  defined  as  cruelty. 
Cruelty,  that  is  to  say,  on  the  physical  plane,  not  merely 
the  outcome  of  thoughtless  or  careless  disregard  of  suffer- 
ing inflicted  on  others.  The  kind  of  cruelty  in  question  is 
that  which  really  takes  pleasure  in  the  infliction  of  suffer- 
ing on  others.  It  is  an  attribute  of  character  which  few  of 
us  can  really  comprehend;  but  it  does  exist  as  a  possibility 
of  the  lowest  and  most  degraded  human  life,  by  no  means 
always  to  be  found  in  the  lowest  in  the  sense  of  the 
humblest,  or  degraded  in  the  sense  of  the  most  ignorant 
examples  of  humanity.  The  horrible  attribute  I  speak  of, 
diabolical  in  its  essential  character,  will  be  seen  on  reflec- 
tion to  be  the  exact  antipodal  reverse  of  the  Divine 
emotion,  love  and  sympathy  for  others,  pleasure  in  the 
sight  of  their  improved  welfare  when  anything  can  be 
done  to  promote  it.  The  diabolical  attribute  where  it 
exists  must  be  burned  out  of  the  Ego  it  has  infected  before 
it  is  possible  for  that  Ego  to  enter  on  the  happier  conditions 
of  the  upper  Astral  World.  And  so  the  awful  process  of 
eradicating  that  characteristic  has  to  be  carried  out  in  that 
region  which  I  have  described  as  the  second  sub-plane  of 
the  Astral,  counting  from  the  bottom,  the  region  im- 
mediately submerged  below  the  earth's  surface.  Beyond 
that,  indeed,  there  is  a  region  which  we  speak  of  as  the 
first  sub-plane  of  the  Astral  with  which  even  the  horrible 
examples  of  humanity  to  which  I  refer  have  little  or 
nothing  to  do.  It  is  a  region  mainly  devoted  to  the  gradual 
disintegration  of  early  elemental  forms  only  appropriate 
to  the  very  primitive  conditions  prevailing  on  the  globe 
before  it  reached  the  condition  appropriate  to  human  life. 
The  second  sub-plane  is  the  hell  of  reality,  as  different 
from  the  hell  of  mediaeval  religion  as  the  perfection  of 
scientific  knowledge  is  different  from  the  crudest 

THE  ASTRAL  PLANE  1 6  7 

superstition.  I  need  not  attempt  to  describe  in  detail  the 
miseries  of  existence  there.  That  existence  has  utter 
misery  for  the  background  of  its  consciousness,  just  as  the 
existence  on  the  higher  Astral  regions  has  happiness  for 
its  background,  whatever  specific  variety  of  happiness  is 
best  appropriate  to  each  variety  of  human  aspiration.  And 
to  each  variety  of  human  atrocity  the  second  sub-plane 
will  provide  an  exactly  appropriate  intensification  of  the 
pervading  misery.  But  even  there,  let  us  constantly 
remember,  that  purification  is  the  purpose  the  Divine 
scheme  has  in  view,  not  merely  blind  revengeful  punish- 
ment in  accordance  with  the  blasphemous  conception 
which  commonplace  religion  provides  for  the  victims  of 
its  foul  imagination.  The  Ego  condemned  by  his  own 
action  to  a  sojourn  on  the  second  sub-plane  will  be  released 
therefrom  as  soon  as  a  genuine  change  in  his  nature  has 
been  effected  by  its  awful  remedies,  but  not  until  then. 
There  is  no  possibility  of  defining  an  average  period  for 
existence  on  the  second  sub-plane;  it  may  even  be  brief 
as  measured  in  months  or  years,  it  may  extend,  as  I 
know  in  extraordinary  cases,  to  centuries  of  our  time.  But 
there  is  only  one  more  thought  to  be  impressed  on  the 
reader  in  connection  with  this  gloomy  topic,  though  that 
is  one  of  supreme  importance. 

The  blundering  stupidity  of  mediaeval  thinking  designed 
a  hell  to  be  ruled  by  a  devil,  by  the  Devil,  so  clumsily 
caricatured.  A  moment's  thought  along  the  line  of  recog- 
nising all  that  exists  in  connection  with  the  programme 
of  human  life  as  of  Divine  origin,  will  show  that  the  real 
hell,  curative  in  its  purpose,  as  I  have  already  shown,  must 
be  ruled  by  Divine  intelligence.  And  it  is  so  ruled  by  a 
Being  whom  we  may  think  of  with  reverential  adoration 
that  cannot  be  in  excess  of  what  the  situation  needs,  if 

1 68  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

we  really  understand  the  wonder  and  beauty  of  the  whole 
idea.  The  ruler  of  a  real  curative  hell  must  be  of  an 
absolutely  god-like  nature,  and  before  going  further,  let 
me  emphasise  one  truth  connected  with  the  great  Divine 
hierarchy  through  which  the  Will,  that  we  vaguely  think 
of  as  Divine,  is  worked  out.  All  service  in  that  mighty 
hierarchy  is  voluntary  service.  Whatever  task  of  the  kind 
that  can  only  be  confided  to  a  being  of  lofty  spiritual 
evolution  has  to  be  fulfilled,  its  fulfilment  awaits  the 
voluntary  readiness  of  some  appropriate  being  to  perform 
it.  Thus  the  awful  task  of  governing  the  hell  I  am 
describing  claimed  the  service  of  a  volunteer  from  regions 
of  spiritual  beatitude  entirely  transcending  the  scope  of 
human  imagination.  And  it  was  from  such  regions  that 
the  glorious  and  mighty  being  who  rules  the  under-world 
at  this  moment  voluntarily  descended  in  order  that  the 
terrible  task  that  had  to  be  fulfilled  should,  in  the  service 
of  God,  be  accomplished.  Faintly  one  can  grope  towards 
a  conception  of  what  it  must  be  for  a  being  who,  to  begin 
with,  so  to  speak,  amongst  other  attributes  of  power,  is  an 
embodiment  of  Divine  Love,  to  undertake  the  task  of 
distributing  in  the  varied  population  of  the  awful  domain 
below,  the  horrible  sufferings  that  have  to  be  borne  by  its 
ghastly  population. 

There  are  few  subjects  connected  with  occult  study  that 
•appeal  more  powerfully  to  the  emotions — if  any  other  can 
appeal  so  powerfully — as  that  mighty  sacrifice  I  am  faintly 
endeavouring  to  describe,  accomplished  by  the  sublime 
being  who  is  the  ruler  of  the  Under- World. 

And  so,  although  a  multitude  of  details  have  been 
omitted,  the  description  of  the  Astral  World  I  have  been 
able  to  give  will  show  how  grotesquely  incomplete  were 
the  first  crude  presentations  of  what,  while  theosophical 

THE  ASTRAL  PLANE  169 

writers  were  still  hampered  by  Eastern  terminology,  was 
called  "  kama-loka."  So  far  as  I  can  make  out,  the  ideas 
attached  to  that  phrase  can  only  have  been  derived  from 
some  imperfect  comprehension  of  the  third  sub-plane  of 
the  Astral.  Nothing  connected  with  the  original  night- 
mare described  as  kama-loka  has  any  resemblance  to  the 
beautiful  realities  of  astral  existence  of  the  loftier  order. 

CHAPTER   VIII 
THE  MANASIC  PLANE 

AGAIN  surrounding  the  astral  world  and  in  one 
sense  above  it,  we  have  to  realise  that  a  vast  con- 
centric region,  still  belonging  to  this  globe  and 
accompanying  it  in  its  revolutions  around  the  sun,  provides 
us  with  a  theatre  of  life  of  a  higher  spiritual  order  than 
that  provided  by  the  astral  world.  This  region  has  borne 
many  names  so  far  in  the  course  of  our  early  attempts  to 
interpret  super-physical  nature.  At  one  time  it  was  gener- 
ally referred  to  as  the  "  Devachanic  Plane,"  exaggerated 
attention  being  then  paid  to  one  of  its  aspects  to  be  fully 
described  presently.  Then,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the 
region  in  question  is  pre-eminently  associated  with  the 
idea  of  intellectual  development,  some  theosophical  writers 
preferred  to  call  it  the  "  Mental  Plane,"  a  term  still  in 
very  general  use,  and  only  to  be  objected  to  because  it 
seems  to  disparage  the  opportunities  for  high  mental 
development  afforded  on  the  superior  levels  of  the  astral 
world,  and  this  is  very  undesirable  from  the  point  of  view  of 
attempts  to  interpret  the  varied  planes  of  nature  correctly. 
Then  because  of  the  supreme  conditions  of  bliss  attending 
life  of  all  varieties  on  that  exalted  level,  the  region  in 
question  has  sometimes  been  called  the  "  Heaven  World," 
a  very  appropriate  designation  except  that  it  seems  to 
involve  us  in  the  connotations  of  that  word  "  heaven  " 
derived  from  theological  conceptions,  which  increasing 
knowledge  leads  us  to  modify.  It  is  really  better  in  deal- 
ing with  the  plane  or  vast  concentric  sphere  now  under 
consideration  to  adopt  into  our  language  an  Eastern  term 
with  a  sound  etymological  meaning,  but  one  which  at  the 
same  time  for  Western  thinkers  will  remain  free  from 

170 

THE    MAN  ASIC   PLANE  171 

misleading  suggestion.  So  let  me  adhere  to  one  of  the 
terms  used  from  the  beginning,  and  call  the  region  I  now 
propose  to  describe,  as  far  as  commonplace  language  will 
make  that  possible,  as  the  Manasic  Plane. 

When  describing  it  as  the  Devachanic  Plane,  we  were 
concentrating  attention  on  one  of  its  aspects  which 
by  degrees  we  have  come  to  recognise  as  the  least 
important  among  those  which  we  are  to  some  extent 
enabled  to  comprehend.  There  are  many  human  Egos 
among  us  entitled  by  their  characteristics  to  a  happy  and 
beautiful  period  of  spiritual  rest  between  incarnations,  who, 
at  the  same  time,  are  hardly  advanced  intellectually  to  the 
extent  of  being  able  to  function  freely  with  advantage 
on  the  higher  levels  of  the  astral  world.  For  them,  para- 
doxically as  it  may  seem  at  first  glance,  the  mental  world 
on  its  lowest  levels,  by  reason  of  its  essentially  blissful 
characteristics,  provides  suitable  conditions  of  temporary, 
though  sometimes  very  protracted,  existence.  The  idea 
may  best  be  comprehended  by  considering  definite  though 
imaginary  cases.  Take  that  of  a  personality  representing 
an  Ego  of  no  very  great  intellectual  advancement;  but  of 
beautiful  character  and  emotion — say  the  case  of  a  loving 
mother,  devoted  during  life  to  the  welfare  of  her  children, 
coupled  with  genuine  love  of  a  husband;  but  not  much 
concerned  during  life  with  the  cultivation  of  her  higher 
mental  potentialities.  Nature  must  provide  her  with  a 
happy  and  restful  interlude  between  her  last  life  and  her 
next.  By  the  hypothesis  she  is  not  in  a  position  to  revel  in 
the  acquisition  of  fresh  knowledge.  Her  love  nature  needs 
no  fresh  stimulus,  it  simply  craves  gratification.  One 
region  of  the  Manasic  Plane  provides  for  this.  She  finds 
herself  under  conditions  in  which  the  love  she  has  exhaled 
meets  with  overflowing  response.  She -finds  herself  sur- 

172  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

rounded  by  all  whom  she  cared  for,  each  representing  her 
own  best  ideals  and  bathed  in  that  delicious  dream,  illusory 
in  one  sense,  and  yet  for  her  more  vivid  in  its  reality  than 
any  life  experience,  she  drifts  deliciously  through  the 
ages  until  the  karmic  and  evolutionary  forces,  operative 
on  her  as  well  as  on  the  rest  of  humanity,  provide  for  a 
return  to  earth  life. 

Now  such  a  condition,  quite  erroneously  by  some  writers 
in  the  early  stages  of  theosophical  study  treated  as  a  goal 
to  which  all  should  aspire,  would  be  hopelessly  repug- 
nant to  the  imagination  of  those  who  look  forward  to  an 
after-life  of  conscious  touch  with  the  sublime  realities 
of  Nature.  For  such  people  it  would  be  a  grotesquely 
unsuitable  variety  of  after-life,  and  in  truth  the  Deva- 
chanic  condition  is  merely  appropriate  to  those  capable  of 
beautiful  loving  emotion  and  of  very  little  beyond  or  out- 
side of  this.  And  for  them  be  it  remembered  that,  although 
the  Devachanic  condition  is  illusory,  it  constitutes  a  dream 
that  can  never  fade  or  conduce  to  disappointment.  It 
lasts  in  full  perfection  until  the  spiritual  forces  engendered 
in  the  previous  life  on  earth  have  ultimately  worn  them- 
selves out,  and  until  a  brief  and  practically  unconscious 
passage  to  the  higher  levels  of  the  Manasic  World  provide 
for  a  return  to  the  earth  life. 

To  fully  understand  the  Devachanic  condition  from  our 
point  of  view  is  exceedingly  difficult.  It  must  not  be 
thought  of  as  a  mere  mental  picture;  its  dramatis  persona? 
are  all  in  vivid  activity,  and  a  thought  must  here  be  in- 
volved in  our  attempt  to  understand  this  condition  which 
invests  it,  in  spite  of  its  illusory  character,  with  influences 
that  make  for  progress.  Let  some  of  the  dramatis  per- 
sonse  in  the  case  above  imagined  acquire  during  life  or 
after  life  higher  spiritual  knowledge  than  they  possessed 

THE    MANASIC   PLANE  173 

during  the  mother's  earth  life,  and  they  may  succeed  in 
animating  the  mother's  Devachanic  vision  of  themselves 
with  the  higher  consciousness  to  which  in  the  interim 
they  have  ascended.  And  thus  for  the  mother  the  Deva- 
chanic vision  becomes  something  more  than  a  beautiful 
illusion,  it  becomes  a  genuine  reality  to  the  extent  sug- 
gested, conducive  to  her  further  interior  evolution. 

Without  elaborating  the  whole  explanation  further,  it 
may  now  be  perceived  that  the  Devachanic  condition, 
while  exactly  fitting  in  with  some  of  the  emergencies  that 
natural  law  has  to  deal  with,  need  not  for  one  moment 
disturb  the  apprehensions  of  those  for  whom  the  pursuit 
of  truth,  the  attainment  of  improved  conditions  of  con- 
sciousness, may  be  more  attractive  than  the  mere  idea  of 
luxurious  emotional  rest. 

Now  let  us  endeavour,  so  far  as  this  is  possible  for  a 
physically  active  brain,  to  contemplate  the  structure  of  the 
Manasic  region  in  its  vast  entirety.  Like  the  astral  world 
beneath,  it  must  be  thought  of  to  begin  with  as  divided 
into  a  series,  the  usual  seven  great  sub-divisions,  or  sub- 
planes,  or  sub-spheres.  But  once  more  plane  is  the  most 
convenient  expression  to  employ,  though,  of  course,  in- 
appropriate from  the  point  of  view  of  its  simple  mechani- 
cal meaning;  and,  again,  inappropriate  as  we  endeavour  to 
keep  in  touch  with  the  fundamental  principle  that  loftier 
planes  of  spiritual  consciousness  interpenetrate  those  below 
so  that  the  loftiest  planes  of  the  Manasic  World  may  be 
actually  around  us  here  on  the  surface  of  the  earth, 
although  equally  in  regions  of  surrounding  space  elevated 
above .  us  to  incredible  distances.  The  last-mentioned 
conception  is  just  as  true  as  the  other,  and  no  correct 
mental  picture  of  the  whole  world  can  be  formed  in  the 
mind  until  we  can  realise  it  as  a  globe  in  regard  to  its 

174  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

finer  orders  of  matter  some  millions  of  miles  in  diameter. 
Now,  without  attempting  a  minute  description  of  the 
Manasic  sub-planes,  we  must,  in  order  to  have  something 
like  a  fair  comprehension  of  the  subject,  keep  in  touch 
with  the  idea  that  the  lower  levels  differ  from  the  higher 
in  one  more  or  less  appreciable  way.  The  lower  levels 
may  be  described  very  unsatisfactorily  as  concerned  with 
form,  and  the  higher  as  concerned  with  formless  aspects 
of  consciousness.  Most  attempts  to  deal  with  this  idea  in 
theosophical  literature  so  far  have  made  use  of  two  terms 
of  Eastern  origin — Rupa  and  Arupa  Planes,  those  terms 
being  the  equivalent  to  form  and  formless.  And  though 
it  is  extremely  desirable,  wherever  we  can,  to  use  words 
of  Western  etymology,  in  dealing  with  facts  of  nature  just 
as  closely  related  to  ourselves  here  in  Europe  as  to  Eastern 
students,  adopting  the  words  just  quoted  as  labels  designat- 
ing regions  of  nature  that  we  more  or  less  understand,  we 
may,  I  think,  prefer  to  use  the  Eastern  terms  in  preference 
to  those  which  though  perhaps  more  familiar,  cannot  but 
suggest  more  than  they  are  intended  to  convey. 

Of  course,  the  Devachanic  conditions  are  found  on  the 
lower  Rupa  levels,  but  in  this  sublimely  attenuated 
spiritual  constitution  of  the  Manasic  Plane,  we  must  not 
think  of  any  particular  region  as  being  ruled  off  or  fenced 
off,  so  to  speak.  There  is  ample  scope  in  the  Rupa  sub- 
plane  for  the  active  life  of  human  entities,  not  to  speak 
of  their  other  inhabitants  who  are  far  above  in  spiritual 
and  intellectual  developments  those  who  sink  into  the 
blissful  indolence  of  the  Devachanic  condition.  There 
are  considerable  numbers  of  the  human  family  who 
actually  pass  in  full  consciousness  from  the  higher  levels 
of  the  astral  world  into  the  Rupa  sub-levels  of  the  Manasic. 
For  them  the  region  in  question  may  be  thought  of,  with- 

THE    MAN  ASIC   PLANE  175 

out  doing  violence  to  language,  as  a  Heaven  World  of 
reality,  providing  the  most  glorious  imaginable  oppor- 
tunities for  an  almost  infinitely  expanded  appreciation  of 
the  sublime  principles  underlying  the  loftiest  religious 
thinking.  At  a  glance  it  will  be  obvious  that  only  those 
among  us  who  have  already  during  the  earth-life  attained 
to  a  fairly  dignified  level  of  spiritual  capacity  could  be 
qualified  to  appreciate  the  opportunities  afforded  by 
Manasic  consciousness. 

Transplant  to  Heaven  a  consciousness,  a  being,  invested 
with  no  attributes  transcending  the  best  emotions  of 
ordinary  physical  life,  and  Heaven  does  not  for  such 
persons  contain  more  than  the  fruition  of  these  emotions. 
You  do  not  change  an  African  savage's  nature  by  bringing 
him  over  to  a  civilised  country  and  planting  him  suddenly 
in  the  midst  of  art  and  science  and  literary  culture.  To 
use  comparatively  grovelling  and  familiar  ideas  in  illustra- 
tion of  the  principle  before  us,  the  savage  can  merely  select 
from  the  resources  of  civilisation,  supposing  them  offered 
to  him  in  all  their  abundance,  the  food  and  drink  and 
physical  comforts  which  his  experience  of  life  enables  him 
to  crave  for.  So  with  the  imperfectly  developed  souls  of 
common  humanity.  Heaven  is  only  Heaven  for  them  in 
so  far  as  the  growth  of  their  minds  enable  them  to  avail 
themselves  of  its  resources.  That  which  it  does  for  all 
who  have  it  in  them  to  attain  its  confines  at  all,  is  to  assure 
them  complete  happiness  along  the  lines  that  their  spiritual 
development  has  followed. 

By  spiritual  development  in  this  sense,  let  me  hasten 
to  add,  I  do  not  mean,  in  any  exclusive  way  at  any  rate, 
the  development  of  the  religious  instinct.  Where  this 
instinct  is  very  energetic  that  is  undoubtedly  one  phase 
of  spiritual  development,  but  real  unselfish  love  is  no  less 

176  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

spiritual  in  its  character  and  is  equally  capable  of  a  glorified 
expansion  on  the  heavenly  or  spiritual  plane  of  conscious- 
ness, and  the  same  may  be  said  of  pure  eagerness  for 
knowledge — by  "  pure  "  meaning  free  from  any  thought 
of  personal  profit  to  be  gained  by  acquiring  knowledge. 

The  artistic  faculty,  again,  is  deeply  tinged  with  true 
spirituality  and  is  thus  capable  of  evoking  a  generous 
response  from  the  spiritual  plane  whether  it  has  to  do 
with  the  beauty  of  form,  colour,  or  sound.  The  resources 
of  the  spiritual  plane  are  all  but  infinite,  for  thought  is 
there  becoming  a  creative  power  in  a  far  higher  degree 
than  on  the  astral  plane,  and  independently  of  this,  con- 
sciousness is  there  in  direct  relation  with  the  all  but  in- 
finite memory  of  Nature,  which  is  preserved — how  we 
cannot  at  present  expect  to  understand  exactly — with  im- 
perishable perfection,  in  the  all-embracing  medium  known 
to  occult  science  as  the  "  Akasa,"  or  Memory  ether. 

This  marvellous  medium  is  discernible  in  some  of  its 
manifestations  on  the  astral  plane,  but  its  clear  and  uncon- 
fused  records  belong  especially  to  the  higher  plane  of 
spiritual  consciousness.  It  is  a  natural  mirror  of  all  events, 
which  recalls  them  for  those  who  have  the  power  of 
reading  in  it,  in  their  minutest  details.  As  nothing  can 
alter  the  past  when  its  events  are  once  accomplished,  so 
nothing  can  obliterate  them  from  the  memory  of  Nature. 
Our  own  individual  memories  in  physical  life  are  imperfect 
readings  of  so  much  in  its  records  as  we  have  personally 
had  to  do  with — of  as  much  as  is  connected  by  mysterious 
affinities  with  our  own  brain  cells;  but  to  the  emancipated 
spiritual  faculties  on  the  Manasic  Plane  the  records  are 
more  easily  accessible.  We  are  in  a  position  to  remember 
everything  that  has  ever  occurred  in  the  history  of  our 
world,  and  to  remember  it  not  in  that  dim  shadowy  way 

THE    MANASIC   PLANE  177 

which  physical  memory  alone  achieves,  but  in  such  a  way 
that  the  past  scene  or  chain  of  events  on  which  we  bend 
our  attention  re-enacts  itself  before  us  in  vivid  perfection 
of  detail.  Obviously  it  would  not  so  unroll  itself  unless 
the  attention  is  bent  upon  it  with  the  set  purpose  of 
evoking  its  records. 

Now,  however,  without  attempting  to  elaborate  these 
considerations  further,  let  me  endeavour  to  answer  the 
question  which  will  certainly  arise  in  the  reader's  mind 
as  to  what  variety  of  human  development  qualifies  any 
given  entity  for  participation  in  the  free  life  of  the  Rupa 
Manasic  Plane.  The  answer  is  very  simple,  though  for 
those  as  yet  unversed  in  the  study  of  the  methods  by  which 
individual  human  progress  can  be  greatly  exhilarated,  as 
compared  to  the  drift  through  the  ages  of  the  main  multi- 
tude, a  full  comprehension  of  what  I  mean  will  best  be 
appreciated  after  I  shall  have  endeavoured  to  describe  what 
is  meant  by  occult  initiation.  Briefly,  in  advance  of  that 
fuller  explanation,  let  it  be  understood  in  accordance  with 
the  earliest  hints  provided  by  theosophical  teaching  that  it 
is  possible  by  strenuous  devotion  to  that  purpose  to  attain 
in  a  relatively  brief  period  (though  relatively  brief  may 
still  mean  the  course  of  many  successive  lives)  a  condition 
of  spiritual  growth  transcending  that  which  would  be 
reached  in  the  same  time  by  those  content  to  travel  slowly 
along  the  main  highway  of  evolution.  In  other  words, 
some  of  us,  sooner  or  later,  enter  on  what  we  commonly 
speak  of  as  the  "  Path  "  leading  to  the  quicker  spiritual 
evolution  (to  be  more  fully  described  later  on),  and 
broadly  speaking,  it  is  only  those  who  are  already  on  the 
path,  though  not  necessarily  far  advanced  along  it,  who  are 
qualified  for  existence  of  the  free  kind  on  the  lower  levels 
of  the  Manasic  world.  Individual  characteristics  will  in 

178   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

all   cases  determine  the  question   whether  such   entities 
should  ascend  to  the  Manasic  region  or  find  a  more  appro- 
priate sphere  of  activity  on  the  higher  levels  of  the  astral. 
I  have  already,  in  speaking  of  those  beautiful  conditions, 
described  them  as  still  abundantly  inhabited  by  the  most 
splendid  examples  of  eminence  in  science,  literature,  and 
art.  Probably  few  of  these  would  be  otherwise  than  entitled, 
if  they  chose,  to  pass  on  into  the  Manasic  condition.     In- 
deed, they  are  so  circumstanced  that  most  of  them  can 
reach  up,  so  to  speak,  to  those  conditions  when  they  desire 
to  do  so  for  the  amplification  of  the  knowledge  they  are 
acquiring  without  finally  severing  their  connection  from 
the  astral  region.    On  that  the  character  of  the  knowledge 
they  are  acquiring  is  better  appropriate  to  later  uses  in 
succeeding  earth-lives  than  perhaps  the  deeper  spiritual 
knowledge  accessible  to   them   on   lofty   levels.      These 
few  words  may  suggest  rather  than  adequately  convey  the 
idea  they  attempt  to  involve.    It  would  claim  rather  a  pro- 
tracted  dissertation   if  kept  on   the  abstract  level.      An 
imaginary  illustration  will  best  help  to  show  what  I  mean. 
Take  the  case  of  an  electrician  bent  upon  trying  to  help 
the  world  of  science  to  an  improved  comprehension  of 
what  electricity  really  is.     That  force  is  probably  identi- 
fied with  some  ultra-refined  manifestation  on  the  Manasic 
Plane.      The  electrician,   entitled   by   his  own   spiritual 
growth  to  ascend  to  the  Manasic  Plane,  might  gratify 
himself  by  coming  there  to  understand  the  higher  mani- 
festation of  electricity,  as  yet  quite  incomprehensible,  no 
matter  how  frank  the  teaching  to  an  incarnate  understand- 
ing.    But  on  the  astral  plane,  without  diving  into  the 
Manasic  mysteries  of  electricity,  he  would  be  able  to  get 
on  a  good  deal  further  than  during  his  previous  life  with 
the  comprehension  of  the  infinite  mystery.    That  sort  of 

THE    MAN  ASIC   PLANE  179 

progress,  once  embodied  in  his  own  capacity  to  understand 
things,  will  be  distinctly  conducive  to  the  success  of  his 
later  work  when  he  comes  back  to  incarnation  as  a  scientist 
of  some  future  generation.  So  he  is  content  with  that 
achievement,  in  one  sense  makes  a  certain  sacrifice  in  order 
to  do  the  work  that  he  conceives  appointed  for  him  better 
than  if  he  refused  the  sacrifice.  I  do  not  pretend  to  think 
the  sacrifice  a  very  terrible  one.  I  have  no  doubt  that 
many  men  of  science  on  the  higher  levels  of  the  astral 
world  will  distinctly  prefer  to  make  progress  in  the  way 
they  are  used  to  rather  than  leaping  an  almost  impassable 
gulf  to  reach  states  of  consciousness  that  cannot  be  brought 
back  into  any  physical  brain.  But  at  all  events,  we  have 
the  alternatives  before  us  in  imagination,  and  we  may 
feel  fairly  sure  that  those  who  actually  avail  themselves  of 
their  right  to  ascend  to  the  Manasic  world  will  do  so 
because  they  can  discern  in  that  condition  opportunities 
for  serving  the  ultimate  progress  of  science  even  better 
than  by  following  the  path  more  congenial  to  others. 

Concerning  the  higher  or  Arupa  sub-planes  of  the  vast 
Manasic  region,  it  may  be  possible  to  suggest  some  broad 
idea  not  entirely  out  of  harmony  with  the  truth,  and  yet 
the  better  one's  own  glimmering  perception  of  natural 
truth  lying  beyond  the  limits  normally  set  for  the  physical 
understanding  of  this  period,  the  more  one  is  daunted  in 
reference  to  any  attempt  to  portray  such  glimmering  in 
familiar  language.  For  those  not  alone  on  the  Path,  but 
considerably  advanced  along  it,  the  higher  regions  of  the 
Manasic  world  are  undeniably  accessible.  But  the  states 
of  consciousness  available  there  are  definitely  beyond  the 
reach  of  language  designed  merely  to  deal  with  lower 
planes  of  manifestation,  I  believe  it  is  quite  true  that  on 
some  of  those  higher  levels  of  the  Manasic  world  vision 

13* 

i8o   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

adapted  to  its  phenomena  will  perceive  the  more  or  less 
developed  centres  of  spiritual  consciousness  appertaining 
to  all  the  mighty  host  of  the  human  family.  No  term 
that  I  can  think  of  as  appropriate  can  be  assigned  to  those 
mysterious  centres  or  vortices.  By  some  writers  they  are 
spoken  of  as  Causal  bodies,  a  comfortless  and  misleading 
expression  which  anyhow  denotes  only  a  small  minority 
of  the  subtle  phenomena  in  question.  The  aggregate 
number  of  Egos  constituting  the  whole  human  family  has 
been  estimated  by  those  who  know  as  approximating 
to  60,000  millions,  including,  not  merely  the  1,500 
millions  or  so  of  incarnate  human  beings,  but  all  those  who 
exist  for  periods  far  more  protracted  than  those  of  ordinary 
life,  in  Astral,  Devachanic,  and  Manasic  conditions.  Now 
the  vast  majority  are  still  on  a  stage  of  evolution  which 
does  not  provide  for  the  complete  evolution  of  any 
vehicle  of  consciousness  on  the  higher  Manasic  levels. 
Therefore  what  is  perceptible  in  the  way  I  have  hinted  at 
above  on  those  levels  is  some  mysterious  germ  of  future 
Causal  bodies  which  would  be  very  inaccurately  thought 
of  as  constituting  any  thing  that  may  be  described  as  a 
population  on  those  lofty  levels.  Their  actual  population 
is  assuredly  to  be  recognised  as  consisting  of  beings  already 
on  a  very  high  stage  of  abnormal  progress.  And  yet  such 
beings  probably  in  most  cases  are  actively  engaged  in  deal- 
ing with  the  affairs  of  the  world  on  our  own  levels  of 
manifestation,  though  working  on  these  levels  in  bodies 
invisible  to  the  physical  senses.  But  such  complications 
may  be  somewhat  better  appreciated  when  we  come  to 
consider  the  meaning  and  purpose  of  initiation,  and  for 
the  moment  I  prefer  to  leave  this  very  imperfect  sketch 
of  the  Manasic  World  in  the  shape  I  have  already  given. 
People  who  are  used  to  thinking  that  the  Heaven  to 

THE   MANASIC  PLANE  181 

which  they  will  pass  after  death  is  co-extensive  with  the 
universe,  are  inclined  to  be  discontented  on  that  account 
with  the  prospect  actually  before  them,  their  discontent- 
ment can  only  be  due  to  an  imperfect  understanding  of 
the  relations  between  their  own  present  consciousness  and 
infinity.  The  child  that  puts  out  its  hand  to  grasp  at  the 
moon  is  a  feeble  illustration  of  that  miscalculation  of  their 
own  spiritual  range,  which  leads  some  incarnate  thinkers 
to  imagine  that  nothing  will  satisfy  them  after  death  but 
all  the  spiritual  potentialities  the  cosmos  contains. 

We  have  seen  how  on  the  astral  plane  itself,  matter  is 
already  infinitely  more  plastic  to  the  influence  of  thought 
and  will  than  the  grosser  matter  we  have  to  deal  with  on 
the  physical  plane.  It  may  seem  somewhat  strained 
language  to  speak  of  the  matter  of  the  astral  plane,  when 
it  is  wholly  beyond  the  reach  of  our  present  senses  nor 
capable,  as  far  as  we  know,  of  affecting  the  most  delicate 
instruments  of  the  physical  laboratory,  but  it  is  material, 
as  truly  as  gold  or  iron  are  material,  to  the  senses  adapted 
to  its  perception.  And  on  the  Manasic  plane  again  the 
thought  of  the  Creator  has  taken  manifestation  in  matter, 
though  this,  in  its  turn,  will  be  beyond  the  range  of  the 
astral  senses  for  those  on  the  lower  level.  Nor,  indeed, 
are  the  various  phases  of  material  nature  entirely  discon- 
nected the  one  from  the  other.  They  melt  as  it  were,  the 
one  into  the  other  like  the  colours  of  the  spectrum.  The 
molecule  of  physical  matter  is  utterly  beyond  microscopic 
reach  in  the  direction  of  the  infinitely  little  and  constitutes 
the  finest  manifestation  of  physical  matter  whose  charac- 
teristics can  be  discerned  by  physical  means.  But  our 
molecule  of  physical  matter  is  a  congeries  of  ultimate 
physical  atoms,  and  the  ultimate  atom  itself  constitutes  the 
ether  of  the  physical  plane  and  is  still  of  the  physical  plane, 

1 82   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

although  already  beyond  the  reach  of  any  instrument  of 
research  designed  up  to  the  present  time.  That  ultimate 
physical  atom,  however,  is  found  to  be  itself  a  highly  com- 
plicated structure,  consisting  of  atoms  of  astral  matter. 
The  Manasic  atoms  in  turn,  we  may  feel  sure,  from 
reasoning  and  the  analogies  of  nature,  are  themselves  con- 
stituted of  similar  aggregations  of  matter.  A  great  region 
of  thought  is  opened  out  in  connection  with  this  branch  of 
superphysical  science,  before  we  begin  to  get  in  touch 
with  the  nature  of  force  on  each  plane.  Force,  it  is  some- 
times said,  is  matter,  although  the  expression  in  that  bald 
shape  is  not  calculated  to  convey  any  acceptable  idea  to 
the  mind,  but  the  matter  which  it  is,  is  in  all  cases  the 
matter  of  a  superior  plane.  Astral  matter  may  become 
force  on  the  physical  plane,  or  to  express  the  idea  with 
greater  precision,  may  become  the  vehicle  of  force  on  the 
physical  plane,  and  Manasic  matter  in  the  same  way  may 
become  the  vehicle  of  a  force  on  the  astral  plane. 

CHAPTER  IX 
ELEMENTALS  AND  DEVAS 

FEW  subjects  connected  with  occult  research 
present  greater  embarrassment  to  the  student  than 
those  which  attend  an  inquiry  into  the  nature  of 
Elementals.  The  term  is  vaguely  understood  to  apply 
to  beings  of  a  superphysical  order,  and  except  for  the  broad 
statement  that  they  are  non-human,  but  subject  to  the 
control  of  human  will,  while  varying  in  their  nature  over 
an  enormous  range  of  characteristics,  the  information 
available  until  considerable  progress  had  been  made  with 
theosophical  teaching  clouded,  more  perhaps  than  it 
elucidated,  the  mysteries  connected  with  their  place  and 
functions  in  evolution.  In  the  beginning  of  that  teaching 
out  of  which  our  present  theosophical  knowledge  has 
been  developed,  information  concerning  the  elementals 
was  avowedly  withheld  on  the  ground  that  it  was  all  but 
impossible  to  be  explicit  on  the  subject  without  revealing 
secrets  that  related  to  the  exercise  of  occult  power.  It  was 
by  the  intermediation  of  the  elementals,  we  were  told, 
that  the  physical  plane  phenomena  of  occultism  were 
brought  about;  as  also  those  which  in  a  sporadic  and  un- 
scientific fashion  took  the  shape  of  marvellous  occurrences 
at  some  spiritualistic  seances.  In  various  theosophical 
books  reference  was  made  to  elementals  of  earth,  air,  fire, 
and  water,  to  gnomes,  sylphs,  salamanders,  and  undines, — 
following  the  nomenclature  of  some  mediaeval  writers  on 
occult  mysteries, — but  every  statement  of  this  kind 
darkened  the  whole  subject  instead  of  clearing  it  up,  and 
left  the  mind  of  cultivated  students  disturbed  by  a  feeling 
that  the  statements  in  question  were  not  merely 

183 

i84   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

unintelligible,  but  designed  rather  to  put  a  veil  over,  than 
to  elucidate  the  subject. 

Step  by  step,  however,  it  has  been  possible  for  some 
of  us  to  make  a  little  progress  in  the  comprehension  of  the 
deeply  intricate  mystery  in  question.  As  the  number  of 
modern  theosophical  students  qualified  to  transfer  their 
consciousness  to  the  astral  plane,  and  to  retain  in  their 
normal  consciousness  a  recollection  of  what  they  learn 
there,  gradually  increases,  it  becomes  possible  for  others 
to  push  their  inquiries  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  impassable 
barriers  that  separate  the  knowledge  of  the  outer  world 
from  that  of  initiated  occultists.  And  we  thus  know  some- 
thing more  about  the  elementals  now,  than  at  the  outset 
of  the  Theosophical  Movement.  We  can  at  any  rate  begin 
to  disentangle  scientific  truth  from  poetical  imagery,  and 
to  formulate  conceptions  concerning  elemental  agency 
which  harmonise,  as  far  as  they  go,  with  definite  physical 
knowledge,  and  suggest  a  line  of  thought  calculated  to  link 
on  that  knowledge  with  the  deeper  mysteries  of  Nature 
some  appreciation  of  which  is  absolutely  required  to  enable 
us  to  form  even  a  partial  comprehension  of  the  vast  theatre 
in  which  the  evolution  of  life  up  to  the  human  level,  and 
beyond  it,  is  carried  on. 

First,  we  have  to  get  rid  of  the  notion  that  elemental 
nature  is  simply  represented  by  semi-intelligent  creatures 
of  a  fairy-like  order  and  of  the  kind  mentioned  above  who 
can  be  seen  and  are  seen  by  clairvoyants  playing  about  in 
the  surf  of  the  sea-shore,  in  flower-gardens,  in  conflagra- 
tions in  towns  and  cities,  wEerever,  in  fact,  natural 
activities  are  in  progress.  Elemental  nature, — it  would  be 
a  misuse  of  language  to  say  the  elemental  kingdom,  because 
it  is  so  infinitely  vaster  than  the  animal,  vegetable,  or 
human  kingdoms  amongst  ourselves, — elemental  nature 

ELEMENTALS  AND  DEVAS       185 

pervades  the  universe.  In  one  way  we  can  go  back  in 
imagination  to  its  beginnings,  and  yet  its  beginnings  must 
not  be  thought  of  as  their  remote  condition  in  the  past 
leading  up  to  the  complicated  results  we  can  now  observe. 
Elemental  beginnings  are  in  progress  amongst  us  at  this 
moment  all  over  the  universe,  and  the  activities  of  highly 
elemental  beings  are  equally  going  on  wherever  worlds  of 
life  exist.  To  picture  in  imagination  the  beginning  of 
elemental  evolution,  we  have  to  think  of  the  vast  ocean 
of  etheric  matter  pervading  the  universe,  with  every  atom 
of  which  an  elemental  germ  is  somehow  associated.  Such 
atoms,  of  course,  defy  imagination  by  their  minuteness. 
The  smallest  speck  of  matter  that  can  be  discerned  in  a 
microscope  is  a  mountain  compared  to  the  etheric  atom, 
and  yet  each  atom  carries  with  it  the  germ  of  elemental 
existence.  To  say  life,  would  be  almost  a  misleading 
use  of  the  word,  because  that  word  is  so  inseparably 
associated  in  our  own  minds  with  some  order  of  conscious- 
ness. The  consciousness  of  an  advanced  elemental  is  so 
unlike  our  own,  that  the  word  is  hardly  applicable,  and 
"  semi-intelligent  "  is  the  term  not  inappropriately  devoted 
to  the  description  even  of  advanced  elemental  beings. 
But  the  whole  subject  is  so  complicated  that  when  we 
begin  to  think  of  elemental  evolution,  we  are  merely 
thinking  of  the  subject  in  one  of  its  many  aspects.  In 
that  aspect  it  must  first  be  contemplated. 

As  etheric  matter  combines  to  form  molecules,  first  of 
the  higher  ether  and  then,  to  concentrate  our  attention  at 
the  outset  on  the  physical  plane,  of  physical  matter,  the 
elementals  may  be  thought  of  as  advancing  in  the  slow 
progress  of  their  gradual  evolution,  and  that  evolution, 
be  it  remembered,  just  because  it  is  universal,  is  as  gradual 
and  more  gradual  than  the  growth  of  worlds.  A  growth 

1 86   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

of  any  given  world  may  be  thought  of  as  no  more  than 
an  episode  in  the  evolution  of  that  department  or  section 
of  elemental  nature  required  to  advance  concurrently  with 
itself.  Keeping  to  the  very  broad  conception  of  the  whole 
subject  which  must  be  entertained  in  the  mind  to  begin 
with,  we  may  regard  the  whole  stupendous  development 
of  elemental  semi-consciousness  as  the  downward  or  pre- 
paratory arc  of  a  vast  cycle,  the  upward  arc  of  which 
constitutes  what  has  been  called,  incorrectly  enough,  the 
"  Deva  kingdom."  Devas  in  that  way  have  a  beginning 
on  a  scale  of  minuteness  exceedingly  difficult  to  deal  with 
in  imagination,  and  as  they  emerge  from  elemental  nature, 
represent  what  mediaeval  writers  have  described  as  Nature- 
Spirits.  A  Nature-Spirit  is  as  definitely  a  natural  agent, 
carrying  out  divine  purpose,  as  the  elemental  in  the  begin- 
ning is  a  natural  agent  working  out  what  we  call  the 
fundamental  laws  of  nature,  themselves  the  expression, 
in  the  inorganic  world,  of  divine  will  and  purpose.  As 
the  Nature-Spirit  develops  higher  and  higher  capacities  for 
dealing  with  the  divine  purpose  in  the  regions  of  organic 
life,  it  gradually  assumes  the  aspect  described  as  that  of 
the  deva.  And,  again,  in  the  higher  developments  of  that 
wonderful  natural  agency,  devas  ascend  to  the  region  of 
existence,  in  which  it  would  be  a  misuse  of  language  again 
to  describe  them  as  semi-intelligent.  The  Nature-Spirit 
from  which  the  deva  grows  was  not  more  than  semi- 
intelligent.  The  deva  attains  a  rank  in  which  he  or  it — 
one  never  knows  what  pronouns  to  use  in  cases  like  this — 
becomes  the  perfected  agent,  not  merely  for  the  fulfilment 
of  divine  purpose  on  the  higher  levels  of  natural  and 
human  evolution,  but  skilful  beyond  the  range  of  our  con- 
ception in  adjusting  the  law  to  the  complications  of  cir- 
cumstance arising  from  the  play  of  human  free-will. 

ELEMENTALS  AND  DEVAS       187 

Every  sentence  I  am  putting  down  might  be  the  point  of 
departure  for  a  long  dissertation  which  at  this  moment 
it  is  impossible  to  condense  into  reasonable  limits.  But 
there  is  first  of  all  the  broad  idea  it  is  necessary  for  us  to 
realise.  Elemental  and  Deva  Nature  constitutes  the 
stupendous  agency  employed  to  realise  the  divine  purpose 
in  physical  and  moral  evolution. 

The  significance  of  the  word  "  moral  "  in  that  sentence 
is  due  to  the  fact  that  on  the  higher  levels  of  deva  activity, 
devas  become  the  instruments  through  which  the  law  of 
Karma  is  carried  out.  Again  condensing  an  enormous 
volume  of  knowledge,  which  has  gradually  accumulated 
on  our  hands,  we  have  to  think  first  of  devas  as  actually 
guiding  events  on  the  plane  of  human  life  in  order  that 
they  may  fulfil  the  necessities  of  the  Karmic  Law.  And 
what  is  that  Karmic  Law  ?  Again,  the  will  of  beings  in- 
comparably higher  in  nature  than  the  highest  deva,  we  can 
think  of,  in  turn  the  conscious  agents  of  that  infinite  divine 
will  which  underlies  not  only  all  manifestations,  but  all 
moral  and  spiritual  growth;  beings  to  whom  for  our  con- 
venience we  must  assign  a  name,  although  their  plane  in 
nature  is  so  exalted  that  our  thoughts  concerning  them 
cannot  but  be  vague.  These  beings  are  sometimes  spoken 
of  as  Lords  of  Karma,  more  definitely  by  a  term  borrowed 
from  Eastern  terminology,  the  Lipika. 

As  far  as  we  know,  the  Lipikas  represent  an  order  of 
consciousness  as  widely  diffused  as  the  universe.  But  in- 
formation filtering  down  to  us  from  levels  of  human  evolu- 
tion far  above  that  of  ordinary  humanity  enables  us  to 
realise  that  a  small  group  of  Lipikas  can  deal  with  all  the 
moral  problems  that  the  vast  and  complicated  human 
family  represents.  In  this  hasty  survey  of  the  whole 
subject,  we  may  think  of  four  Lipikas  presiding  over 

1 88   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

different  departments,  if  the  phrase  may  be  used,  of  the 
vast  Karmic  Law.  They,  working  through  hierarchies  of 
deva  agency,  which,  again,  may  be  thought  of  in  connec- 
tion with  this  very  broad  view  of  the  subject  as  constitut- 
ing four  great  streams  of  agency,  pervade  human  life. 

The  reader  will  see  how  difficult  it  is  to  frame  one 
continuous  statement  aimed  at  clearing  up  thought  in 
reference  to  this  inconceivably  elaborate  agency  em- 
braced by  the  term  elementals  and  devas.  But  reserving 
for  the  moment  some  further  attempts  to  explain  elemental 
agency,  let  us  dwell  a  little  longer  upon  the  deva  agency, 
concerned  with  the  fulfilment  of  the  Karmic  Law.  That 
law,  be  it  remembered,  has  sometimes  been  described,  not 
incorrectly,  as  the  uniform  operation  of  cause  and  effect 
on  the  moral  plane.  In  reference  to  the  consequences 
ensuing  from  the  causes  set  in  motion  by  human  action, 
good  or  bad,  the  Karmic  Law  may  be  thought  of  as 
analogous,  on  the  moral  plane,  to  the  conservation  of 
energy  on  the  plane  of  inanimate  natural  force.  But 
where  inanimate  nature  can,  so  to  speak,  be  relied  upon 
to  obey  natural  law,  human  free-will  is  continually  fret- 
ting against  it,  with  the  result  that  deva  activity,  carrying 
out  the  Karmic  Law  in  reference  to  the  course  of  each 
human  life,  has  to  be  employed  on  continual  re-adjust- 
ments of  circumstance  required  to  fulfil  the  law  in  spite 
of  the  vagaries  of  that  human  free-will,  which  although 
working  within  limitations  it  does  not  altogether  com- 
prehend, is  actually  competent  to  modify  circumstances 
in  a  way  which  very  often  interposes  distinct  embarrass- 
ments in  the  way  of  those  who  are  commissioned  to  vin- 
dicate the  law. 

I  know  that  such  attempts  as  I  am  making  now  to 
define  the  subtle  machinery,  by  which  the  course  of  human 

ELEMENTALS  AND  DEVAS       189 

activity  is  partly  guided  and  partly  left  free,  can  do  no 
more  than  broadly  suggest  ideas  which  it  is  impossible, 
within  the  limits  at  my  disposal,  to  illuminate  even  to  the 
extent  that  might  be  possible  if  I  had  nothing  else  to  do 
but  to  elaborate  this  interpretation.  But  even  in  the 
broadest  aspects,  the  teaching  I  am  now  endeavouring  to 
pass  on  is  essential  to  a  proper  comprehension  of  the  condi- 
tion surrounding  that  growth  of  the  soul  which  this 
volume  aims  at  sketching,  at  all  events  in  outline. 

But  so  far,  going  back  to  the  attempt  to  interpret 
elemental  nature,  I  have  dealt  merely  with  what  may 
be  described  as  its  natural  course  of  evolution.  Ele- 
mental nature  begins  by  working  out  the  laws  of 
matter  in  connection  with  the  inorganic  world,  and 
its  natural  functions  may  thus  be  thought  of 
as  divine  in  their  origin.  But  just  because  elementals  are 
in  a  way  it  is  vain  for  us  to  attempt  to  realise  in  imagina- 
tion amenable  to  the  Divine  Will,  they  are  also,  in  a 
limited,  though  very  extensive  way  amenable  to  human 
will.  And  this  thought  brings  us  into  relation  with  a  vast 
range  of  phenomena,  having  to  do  with  elemental  nature 
in  which,  given  elementals,  or  more  correctly  given 
volumes  of  elemental  activity,  becomes  susceptible  of  im- 
press by  human  intention.  As  usual,  the. mere  abstract 
statement  of  a  natural  law  may,  or  may  not,  convey  a 
definite  idea  to  a  reader's  mind,  and  the  idea  that  I  have  to 
deal  with  now  is  so  intricate  that  the  mere  abstract  state- 
ment of  it  can  hardly  be  expected  to  convey  the  complete 
meaning.  The  fact,  however,  is  simply  this — that  human 
will,  illuminated,  of  course,  by  a  considerable  volume  of 
what  we  commonly  call  occult  knowledge  (gradually 
becoming  less  occult  as  time  goes  on),  can,  as  it  were,  create 
artificial  elementals  designed  to  carry  out  a  definite  purpose. 

190  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

This  purpose  may  be  good  or  bad,  and  the  thought  may 
invest  with  a  fuller  meaning  a  phrase  used  at  the  outset 
of  the  present  chapter,  to  the  effect  that  information  con- 
cerning elementals  was  allowed  to  pass  into  general  know- 
ledge with  some  anxiety,  so  to  speak,  in  the  first  instance, 
on  the  part  of  those  who  inaugurated  the  great  Theosophi- 
cal  Movement.  And  yet  it  was  impossible  to  make  human 
evolution  intelligible  without  conveying  some  of 
this  more  or  less  dangerous  knowledge.  Dealing,  how- 
ever, with  the  facts  instead  of  with  their  surrounding 
embarrassments,  we  have  to  recognise  that  adequately  com- 
petent human  will,  that  is  to  say,  human  will  invested  with 
an  adequate  volume  of  occult  knowledge,  may  practically 
create  elementals  destined  to  accomplish  purposes  that  we 
may  regard  either  as  good  or  evil,  as  the  case  may  be.  As 
usual,  there  is  little  purpose  to  be  served  by  dwelling  per- 
sistently in  imagination  on  possibly  evil  developments  of 
natural  forces.  Let  me  rather  further  illustrate  what  I 
mean  by  concentrating  attention  on  the  possibilities  of 
doing  good  by  means  of  artificial  elementals.  Adept 
power,  to  begin  with,  can  create  an  artificial  elemental 
designed  to  protect  any  given  individuality  in  the  mazes  of 
human  life  either  from  accidental  injury  or  from  malevo- 
lent attack  by  hostile  agency.  That  elemental,  perceiving 
that  the  person  whom  he  is  in  charge  of  is  approaching 
some  danger,  may  contrive  to  give  him  an  impulse  which 
will  turn  his  steps  in  another  direction.  Or  if  the  person 
is  adequately  sensitive  may  convey  what  would  be  loosely 
described  as  an  intuition,  warning  him  off  some  contem- 
plated line  of  conduct.  And  in  many  varied  ways,  an 
elemental  guardian,  invested  with  a  benevolent  purpose, 
may  soothe  or  encourage  or  invigorate,  as  the  case  may  be, 
the  human  entity  whom  he  is  commissioned  to  protect  or 

ELEMENTALS  AND  DEVAS       191 

help.  But  to  understand  the  idea  correctly,  we  must  not 
think  of  the  guardian  elemental  as  invested  with  the  attri- 
bute of  benevolence.  In  its  own  nature  it  is  neither  good 
nor  bad.  It  is  just  a  centre  of  energy  working  along  the 
lines  of  the  original  intention  which  gave  rise  to  its 
temporary  creation,  and  we  need  not  always  think  of  this 
creation  as  due  to  the  exalted  capacity  of  an  adept. 
Ordinary  human  thinking  is  a  force  of  very  much  less 
effective  value  than  the  conscious  will  of  an  adept,  but 
none  the  less  capable  in  some  circumstances  of  uncon- 
sciously creating  artificial  elementals  of  either  variety, 
good  or  bad.  Thus  it  may  happen  that  the  sustained  loving 
thought  of  one  person  in  reference  to  another  at  a  distance 
may  actually  create  an  artificial  elemental  less  powerful 
than  in  the  case  I  have  previously  endeavoured  to  imagine; 
but  still  effective  to  a  certain  sense  as  a  benevolent  or  pro- 
tective influence.  And  in  some  well-authenticated  cases, 
where  philanthropists  have  relied  on  earnest  prayer  to. 
provide  them  with  the  physical  plane  needs — perhaps  even 
simply  the  financial  needs  of  their  enterprise,  whatever  it 
may  be — definite  results  have  been  known  to  ensue.  And 
such  results  can  be  comprehended  by  those  who  under- 
stand the  mysteries  of  elemental  nature,  because  that 
earnest  prayer  has  created  an  artificial  elemental,  the  duty 
of  which  is  to  impress  upon  somebody,  competent  to  render 
the  necessary  aid,  the  desire  to  give  such  help. 

There  is  another  way  in  which  human  intelligence  may 
direct  elemental  agency.  Let  us  consider  a  heavy  block 
of  stone,  which  we  wish  to  raise.  The  force  which  bears 
it  down  towards  the  centre  of  the  earth  is  one  which  we 
can  measure  with  great  exactitude  and  call  by  a  familiar 
name,  but  we  do  not  know  much  about  its  mode  of  work- 
ing. We  can  only  control  it  on  the  physical  plane  by  so 

192    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

arranging  matters  that  a  preponderating  volume  of  itself 
or  some  other  force  counteracts  the  tendency  we  wish 
to  overcome.  Occult  teaching  about  all  physical  force, 
however,  is  that  it  is  the  physical  plane  manifestation  of 
some  elemental  force.  There  must  thus  be  an  astral 
counterpart  of  gravity,  and  in  its  astral  manifestation  it 
must  be  in  some  measure  alive  and  must  come  within  the 
influence  of  a  higher-plane  volition.  Here  we  get  a  c\\i? 
to  the  comprehension  of  the  principle  on  which  advanced 
occult  power  is  known — not  merely  in  former  ages  of  the 
world,  but  in  the  present  day — to  manipulate  heavy  masses 
of  matter  by  will  power.  The  thing  happens,  also,  in  th..": 
experience  of  spiritualism  continually.  It  is  another  illus- 
tration of  the  translation  of  force  from  one  plane  to 
another,  which  is  merely  a  question  of  controlling 
elemental  agency  to  an  adequate  degree. 

But  the  mystery  of  such  translation  is  something  apart 
from  the  aspect  of  elemental  agency  on  the  astral  plane. 
In  reference  to  the  process  of  translation  we  must  be 
content  for  the  present  to  know  that  the  achievement 
is  possible,  and  to  realise  in  that  way  the  continuity  of 
natural  forces — the  coherence  of  the  whole  scheme  of 
force  on  different  planes — and  to  foresee  the  direction  in 
which  man's  control  of  matter  on  the  physical  plane  may 
be  expected  one  day  to  extend.  Let  us  now  pass  in 
imagination  on  to  the  astral  plane  altogether  and  take  note 
of  such  information  as  we  can  gather  concerning  elemental 
agency  as  manifesting  there. 

Every  branch  of  occult  teaching  will  always  be  found 
to  gear  in  with  others.  The  natural  history  of  elemental 
agency  in  its  first  and  broadest  outlines  recalls  attention 
to  the  fundamental  principles  of  planetary  evolution.  In 
the  beginning  of  a  planet's  life,  before  the  evolution  of  its 

ELEMENTALS  AND  DEVAS       193 

mineral  body — not  to  speak  of  its  vegetation  and  animal 
life — the  nucleus  of  cosmic  activity  which  is  going  to  be 
a  planet  is  the  arena  of  certain  elemental  evolutions  fol- 
lowing one  another  in  due  order.  Before  the  formation 
of  the  mineral  kingdom,  we  have  been  told,  the  scheme  of 
things  to  which  we  belong  provides  for  the  successive  evo- 
lution of  three  kingdoms  of  elementals.  The  statement  at 
first  carried  no  very  definite  meaning  for  uninitiated 
hearers,  but  even  at  first  it  conveyed,  in  a  grand  faint  out- 
line, the  idea  that  those  kingdoms  of  nature  of  which  we 
have  cognisance  were  the  outcome  of  mysterious  forces 
acting  on  matter  of  a  finer  order  than  that  into  which  it 
was  ultimately  kneaded.  It  now  appears  that  the  three 
kingdoms  of  elementals  which  preceded  the  mineral  evolu- 
tion are  in  no  sense  extinct.  We  are  concerned  with  a 
later  stage  of  the  process,  but  the  earlier  agencies  are  still 
in  activity.  Cognisable  in  fact  in  varying  degrees  there  are 
three  kingdoms  of  elementals  still  in  touch  with  the 
evolution  of  the  planetary  chain, — force,  that  is  to  say, 
looking  at  the  matter  from  another  point  of  view,  in  three 
orders  of  manifestation.  They  do  not  all  belong  to  the 
astral  plane,  and  the  two  higher  must  be  thought  of  as 
belonging  properly  to  more  spiritual  planes  though  inter- 
penetrating the  astral.  Remember  that  the  astral  plane  is 
a  sphere  of  activity  for  higher  faculties  than  those  which 
properly  belong  to  it;  also  that  it  is  sub-divisible  into 
planes  as  described  in  a  preceding  chapter  that  differ  one 
from  another  in  a  marked  degree.  Remember  also  that 
in  speaking  now  of  the  two  "  higher "  kingdoms  of 
elementals  we  are  looking  back  along  the  course  pursued 
during  the  descent  of  spirit  into  matter.  The  higher 
elemental  kingdoms  were  the  earlier  in  the  order  of 
manifestation,  the  first  to  emerge  from  non-manifestation. 

194  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

The  lowest  of  the  three  is  most  highly  developed  or 
organised,  the  nearest  to  the  still  more  elaborately  evolved, 
finished,  or  materially  perfected  physical  plane. 

The  higher  kingdoms  can  only  be  got  at,  so  to  speak, 
by  powers  on  a  level  spiritually  with  that  to  which  they 
belong.  In  order  to  deal  with  them  at  all  a  human  being 
must  have  passed  up  the  cycle  of  evolution  again  till  his 
consciousness  and  will  are  in  activity  once  more  (plus  the 
experiences  of  physical  incarnation)  on  the  higher  planes. 
The  thought  will  present  no  difficulty  to  anyone  who  has 
grasped  the  first  principles  of  occult  teaching  in  regard 
to  cosmic  evolution,  and  the  bearing  of  it  on  the  subject 
in  hand  tends  to  simplify  rather  than  to  embarrass  the  in- 
quiry before  us.  For  the  present  we  may  ignore  the  two 
higher  or  earlier  elemental  kingdoms.  The  third,  or  that 
nearest  to  physical  manifestation,  is  the  one  with  which 
human  consciousness  of  the  ordinary  type  is  most  nearly 
concerned.  All  varieties  of  elemental  agency  visible  to 
explorers  of  the  astral  plane  who  are  able  to  cognise  its 
phenomena  without  being  as  yet  on  the  more  exalted  levels 
of  spiritual  evolution,  belong  to  the  third  kingdom,  which, 
however,  is  varied  to  an  extent  that  renders  its  division 
into  different  orders  and  classes  a  task  of  considerable 
difficulty.  Let  us  attempt  to  realise  some  of  the  principles 
on  which  that  classification  must  proceed. 

The  elemental  forces,  to  begin  with, — I  will  endeavour 
later  on  to  deal  with  the  subject  of  elemental  beings, — are 
divisible  according  to  the  states  or  conditions  of  matter 
with  which  they  have  to  do  in  their  manifestations  on  the 
physical  plane.  We  all  know  of  the  solid,  liquid,  and 
gaseous  states  of  matter,  and  occult  students  know  some- 
thing of  four  other  states  in  an  ascending  series.  The 
corresponding  elemental  forces  are  those  described  in 

ELEMENTALS  AND  DEVAS       195 

poetical  language,  as  gnomes,  undines,  sylphs,  and  sala- 
manders. The  gnome  does  not  mean  a  sub-human  dwarf 
inhabiting  mines.  This  is  the  caricature  of  the  idea 
developed  by  imperfect  information  grafted  on  an  ill- 
trained  imagination.  The  gnome  or  earth  elemental  is 
the  astral  force  related  to  the  phenomena  of  solid  matter. 
So  the  undine,  or  water  elemental,  is  not  a  fairy  dancing 
in  a  fountain,  but  a  natural  force  related  to  liquid  matter; 
the  sylph,  or  air  elemental,  is  the  similar  force  related  to 
gaseous  matter;  and  the  salamander,  or  fire  elemental,  to 
the  vibrations  of  the  ether. 

At  this  point,  however,  the  classification  may  seem  too 
crude  to  be  scientific.  There  are  common  attributes  in 
all  three  states  of  matter.  Weight,  for  instance,  is  as  much 
an  attribute  of  hydrogen  as  of  lead;  molecular  vibration 
is  going  on  in  the  motionless  rock  as  well  as  in  the  waves 
that  dash  against  it.  There  is  no  force  we  can  think  of 
which  belongs  exclusively  to  either  liquid,  solid,  or  gaseous 
matter.  In  the  same  way,  however,  the  various  elemental 
agencies  do  not  act  singly  and  independently  of  each  other, 
but  in  infinitely  varied  alliances.  The  important  point  is 
that  whatever  combination  of  forces  may  be  recognised  as 
operative  in  any  given  case  on  the  physical  plane,  the 
counterpartal  combination  is  operative  on  the  astral,  and 
assumes  the  relatively  living  aspect  which  renders  it  more 
directly  than  here  amenable  to  the  human  will. 

But  the  astral  plane  is  divided,  as  we  have  seen,  into 
seven  sub-divisions.  Appropriate  to  each  we  find  special 
varieties  of  elemental  agency  presenting  themselves  for 
examination,  and  the  distinction  just  noticed  between  the 
elementals  of  earth,  water,  air,  and  fire  runs  up  through 
them  all. 

Again,  there  is  a  mysterious  classification  of  attributes, 

196   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

tendencies,  or  characteristics  running  through  Nature — 
through  all  the  planes  of  Nature,  the  physical  included — 
which  is  too  subtle  to  be  very  readily  interpreted,  but 
which  may  be  dimly  indicated  by  saying  that  every 
plant,  animal,  and  man,  as  well  as  every  mineral  and 
every  manifestation  of  elemental  agency,  is  "  on  "  one 
or  other  of  seven  great  "  rays  "  proceeding  in  the  first 
instance  from  exalted  regions  of  spiritual  influence, 
which  imagination  penetrates  with  difficulty.  The  ray 
classification  has  to  be  taken  into  account  in  grouping 
the  elementals. 

The  habits  of  mind  engendered  by  thinking  of  the  three 
dimensions  of  space  will  enable  us  to  construct  in  imagina- 
tion not  a  tabular  view  of  this  triple  classification,  but  a 
solid  figure  embracing  the  three  categories.  How  shall  we 
expand  this,  however,  so  as  to  make  it  significant  of  the 
fact  that  the  same  triple  classification  must  be  made  to  run 
all  through  the  three  kingdoms  of  elementals?  For  this 
we  seem  in  need  of  a  fourth  dimension  of  space.  But,  at 
all  events,  without  going  beyond  the  experience  of  life 
around  us,  a  living  creature  may  at  the  same  time  be  a 
mammal,  a  quadruped,  a  pachyderm,  and  a  male,  so  the 
elemental  varieties,  though  too  complicated  to  be  repre- 
sented by  a  diagram  or  even  by  a  solid  figure,  need  not  be 
altogether  unmanageable  in  thought. 

So  far  we  have  been  considering  the  elemental  agencies 
in  their  most  general  or  indeterminate  aspects  as  forces 
rather  than  entities,  and  that  is  the  most  important  idea 
concerning  them,  to  establish  in  the  mind  as  the  founda- 
tion of  all  maturer  conceptions.  It  is  disastrous  to  run 
away  with  the  first  idea  apt  to  invade  the  understanding 
on  the  subject,  that  the  elementals  are  to  the  astral  plane, 
what  its  beasts,  birds,  and  reptiles  are  to  the  forest.  But, 

ELEMENTALS  AND  DEVAS       197 

none  the  less,  early  experience  on  the  astral  plane  is  very 
likely  to  support  this  notion.    Forces  on  the  physical  plane 
are  always  abstract  energies  associated  with  matter,  but 
forces  on  the  astral  plane,  are  not  only,  as  has  been  already 
said,  in  some  sense  alive,  they  are  ready  to  take  shape 
under  the  influence  of  the  will,  whatever  it  may  be,  that 
directs  them,  and  may  be  in  the  same  way  imbued  with  a 
benevolent  or  malevolent  character  for  the  time  being, 
which  has  no  resemblance,  as  far  as  any  internal  conscious- 
ness goes,  to  goodness  or  badness  of  disposition,  but  leads 
them  to  be  of  good  or  bad  efficiency,  just  as  physical  plane 
forces  may  be  of  good  or  bad  efficiency.     The  fire  which 
directed  to  a  useful  end  cooks  food  may,  directed  dif- 
ferently, inflict  suffering  on  a  living  organism.     Gravity 
which  pulls  down  a  clock  weight  usefully  may  kill  a  man 
standing  below  if  the  chain  breaks.    Electricity  may  carry 
good  tidings  or  explode  a  parcel  of  dynamite  without  being 
in  itself  good  or  bad  electricity;  and  the  dynamite  may  use- 
fully clear  a  rock  out  of  the  path  of  navigation  or  blow  up 
a  building  and  mutilate  the  inhabitants.     Per  se,  force  is 
neither  good  nor  evil,  and  the  same  idea  has  to  be  applied 
to    the    consideration    of    elemental    beings,    called    into 
existence  by  will  power  and  invested  with  attributes  by 
conscious  intention.    Undoubtedly,  the  astral  plane  teems 
with  such  beings  of  both  good  and  evil  efficiency,  and  at 
the  first  blush  it  might  well  be  imagined  that  they  con- 
stitute the  animal  life  of  that  plane.    But  they  are  entities 
only  in  so  far  as  a  bucketful  of  water  drawn  up  out  of  the 
sea  is  a  specific  volume  of  water,  taking  the  shape  of  the 
interior  of  the  bucket  for  the  time  being.     If  you  break 
the  bucket  the  water  falls  back  into  the  ocean,  neither  the 
better  nor  the  worse  for  having  been  detached  for  a  while 
therefrom.      Or    it    may    have    gone    through    various 

198    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

adventures  in  the  meantime.    It  may  have  been  converted 
into  steam  in  a  boiler,  may  have  driven  a  ship  on  her  course, 
or  it  may  have  burst  from  its  confinement  injuring  living 
beings  in  the  neighbourhood;  it  may  even  have  entered  into 
chemical  combinations  with  other  matter  and  have  played 
an  elaborate  part  on  the  stage  of  the  earth's  physical  mani- 
festation, but  still  it  is  so  much  water  all  the  while,  and 
will  ultimately,  by  some  road,  return  to  the  ocean  from 
which  it  came.     So  with  the  detached  and  temporarily 
individualised  elemental  life  or  force.     The  will  which 
moulds  it,  or  the  thought  energy,  operative,  perhaps,  with- 
out any  conscious  will  being  at  work  in  the  transaction  at 
all,  may  invest  it  with  a  very  considerable  tenacity  of 
separate  life  and  tendency,  easily  mistaken  for  inherent 
purpose.    Its  very  shape  may  be  enduring,  unless  it  comes 
in  contact  with  some  will  force  that  breaks  it  up,  and  thus 
we  are  presented  with  all  the  external  characteristics  of  a 
living  astral  creature.     The  horrible  or  repulsive  shapes 
encountered  on  the  astral  plane  by  rash  intruders  are  of 
this  nature.     They  may  be  the  creatures  of  evil  or  male- 
volent thought,  and  though  powerless  to  harm  human 
beings  collected  enough  to  oppose  a  courageous  will  to 
their  attack,  may  seriously  torment  or  even  injure  invaders 
of  their  territory  whose  inherent  forces  are  paralysed  by 
terror.    Just  as  real  and  definitely  existing  as  entities  for  a 
time,  other  elemental  shapes  may  be  beautiful  in  appear- 
ance and  beneficent  in  action   if  called   into  being  by 
thoughts  emanating  from  love  and  beneficence,  but  their 
tenacity  of  life  will  depend  on  the  strength  and  persistence 
of  the  will  that  has  called  them  into  being,  and  when  they 
have  fulfilled  their  mission,  or  have  lost  coherence  by  the 
relaxation  of  the  will  that  evoked  them,  they  will  resolve 
themselves  again  into  the  ocean  of  elemental  agency  to 

ELEMENTALS  AND  DEVAS       199 

which  they  belong  and  be  available  for  any  new  purpose, 
good,  bad,  or  indifferent. 

This  part  of  the  explanation  may  help  to  supply  an 
(occultly)  scientific  interpretation  for  stories  connected 
with  the  presiding  "  gods  "  of  some  Indian  temples — 
treated,  of  course,  as  empty  superstitions  by  Western  in- 
telligence alive  to  the  incredibility  of  the  local  belief  as 
crudely  stated,  and  destitute  of  the  occult  knowledge  which 
might  discern  the  natural  possibility  in  the  background. 
Elemental  agency  clothed  with  form  and  inspired  with 
purpose  by  some  adequately  powerful  human  will  in  the 
first  instance,  may  persist  in  that  shape  for  long  periods  of 
time  and  manifest  potencies  along  the  line  of  the  original 
impulse  which  would  easily  be  mistaken  by  an  ignorant 
populace,  in  contact  with  them,  for  the  supernatural 
power  of  a  demi-god. 

CHAPTER  X 
THE  SYSTEM  TO  WHICH  .WE  BELONG 

EVERYONE  who  has  touched  the  outskirts  of 
Theosophic  teaching  will  be  familiar  with  the  idea 
that  this  planet  we  are  actually  inhabiting  for  the 
moment  forms  one  of  a  connected  series  through  which 
the  human  life-wave  flows,  manifesting  in  full  activity 
on  one  only  at  any  given  period;  that  the  course  of  the 
whole  Manvantara  involves  a  septenary  journey  round  this 
chain  of  worlds;  that  each  in  turn  is  brought  into  full 
activity  during  this  progress,  and  fades  back  into  compara- 
tive obscuration  as  the  life-wave  passes  on,  and  that  the 
passage  around  the  whole  seven  globes  is  spoken  of  for 
convenience  as  a  "  round  "  in  evolution,  seven  of  which 
make  up  a  whole  Manvantara.     The  strain  and  struggle 
of  existence  is  not  equally  great  on  all  these  globes — in 
four  of  them,  indeed,  two  of  these  being  on  the  down- 
ward and  two  on  the  upward  arc  of  the  circle,  humanity 
is  not  called  upon  to  undergo  the  strain  of  physical  exist- 
ence at  all.     On  the  first  globe  of  the  series  existence  is 
altogether  conditioned  by  surroundings  corresponding  with 
that  which  we  call  the  Manasic  Plane  of  the  earth,  while 
the  lowest  point  of  materiality  touched  by  the  second  globe 
of  the  series  is  on  a  level  with  that  which  we  here  call 
the  astral  plane.     Life  on  the  third  planet  on  the  down- 
ward series  has  already  the  physical  vehicle,  and  that  third 
planet,  therefore,  becomes  perceptible  to  our  present  senses, 
and  is  in  fact  the  planet  Mars.    Passing  onward  from  this 
earth,  humanity  again  functions  on  a  physical  globe — 
the  planet  Mercury — and  then  passes  to  the  sixth,  the 
lowest  materiality  of  which  is  astral,  and  to  a  seventh 
which,  like  the  first,  is  altogether  manasic. 

200 

THE  SYSTEM  201 

I  need  not  attempt  the  almost  impossible  task  of  describ- 
ing life  on  the  non-material  planets  of  the  chain  to  which 
we  belong.     Nor,  indeed,  will  I  attempt  to  deal  with  the 
conditions  of  life  on  the  three  physical  planets  during 
the  earlier  rounds  of  human  progress  through  them.     Let 
us  be  content  with  an  attempt  to  comprehend  in  some 
measure  the  condition  of  ou"r  world  and  of  the  two  other 
physical  worlds  of  the  chain  during  our  present  world 
period,   the  middle  period  of   the  whole  grand  process 
described  as  the  Manvantara.     Here,  perhaps,  it  is  worth 
while  to  interpolate  an  explanation  of  the  term  just  used. 
The  whole  existence  of  a  given  planetary  chain  consti- 
tutes merely  one  episode  in  the  vast  series  of  manifesta- 
tions which  embrace,  in  the  whole,  seven  successive  epi- 
sodes of  somewhat  similar,  though  in  some  respects  widely 
different,   manifestations   of   creative   power   and   evolu- 
tionary progress.     At  one  time,  at  the  early  stages  of 
theosophical  study,  we  were  left  with  the  impression  con- 
cerning such  episodes  that  each  involved  the  existence  of 
a  septenary  change  of  worlds.    Clearer  and  more  scientific 
comprehension  of  the  process  enables  us  to  realise  that  this 
is  not  the  case.    We  must  think  of  the  first  Manvantara  as 
representing  simply  divine  ideation  on  the  Manasic  Plane; 
creative  power,  that  is  to  say,  engenders  what  we  may 
think  of  as  a  globe  on  the  Manasic  Plane  in  which  the 
scheme  of  the  whole  Manvantara  is   faintly  shadowed 
forth.    That  stupendous  process  of  divine  creative  thought 
constitutes  the  first  Manvantara  or  creative  process.     An 
interval  elapses  and  the  divine  activity  is  resumed.     That 
which  was  done  is  recalled  into  existence  relatively  with- 
out   an    effort.      The    next    effort    is    to    approach    the 
materialisation  of  the  ideas  engendered,  in  the  first  instance, 
on   the   astral   plane   of   consciousness.      So   the   second 

202    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

Manvantara  consists  of  a  manasic  globe,  an  astral  globe — 
realising  the  first  intention  to  that  extent — a  third  globe  on 
the  upward  ?rc  representing  manasic  consciousness 
developed  to  a  higher  level  than  in  the  first  instance.  Such 
phrases,  of  course,  must  be  exceedingly  vague  and  merely 
suggestive,  not  to  be  taken  with  too  rigid  a  devotion  to  the 
letter.  Another  interval  and  then  ensues  the  third  Manvan- 
tara. The  purpose  to  be  achieved  here  is  that  of  bringing 
down  the  original  ideas  to  physical  manifestation,  and 
the  third  Manvantara  witnesses  the  development  on  the 
physical  plane  of  a  world  constituted  of  physical  matter. 
In  our  own  case  that  world  was  the  one  we  now  call  the 
Moon,  but  in  a  condition  of  very  much  fuller  development. 
I  think  this  will  become  intelligible  later  on,  and  I  need 
not  stop  now  to  develop  the  idea.  We  may  then  conceive 
a  return  to  astral  conditions  and  an  ultimate  return  to 
manasic  conditions.  And  again  I  venture  to  describe 
that  interpretation  as  rather  symbolically  than  literally 
accurate.  The  truth  is  that  the  more  our  knowledge 
extends,  the  more  it  becomes  difficult  to  invest  any  stage 
of  natural  activity  with  explanations  that  seem  directly  to 
correspond  with  the  experiences  of  our  present  more 
advanced  stage  of  knowledge.  By  reason  of  the  fact  that 
the  Moon  was  the  physical  planet  of  the  third  Manvantara, 
that  one  is  always  referred  to  in  theosophical  writing  as  the 
Lunar  Manvantara — full  of  the  deepest  interest  for  us,  as 
further  explanations  will  show. 

Here  on  the  earth  we  are  at  the  middle  point  of  our 
progress  in  each  round,  and  this  period  of  the  earth's 
activity  is  the  middle  period  of  the  whole  Manvantara 
as  the  round  on  which  we  are  engaged  is  the  fourth,  just  a 
little  more  than  half  of  which  is  already  accomplished. 
If  we  concentrate  our  attention  on  the  present  world  period 

THE  SYSTEM  203 

alone  we  find  evolution  being  carried  out  during  the  whole 
of   the   period    through   seven   great    races,    with   seven 
different  configurations  of  land  and  water  to  harmonise 
with   their  needs,   the   race  in   the  midst  of  which   we 
Europeans  and  some  other  populations  now  find  ourselves 
being  the  fifth,  while  the  fourth,  the  middle  race,  was  the 
great  Atlantean  race  which  already  began  very  slowly  to 
decline  from  its  culminating  grandeur  nearly  a  million 
years  ago.     The  last  remnant  of  land  which  belonged  to 
the  great  continent  it  once  occupied  disappeared  in  the 
natural  convulsion  of  which  some  faint  records  have  been 
preserved  in  classical  literature,  and  more  definitely  in  the 
Mexican  manuscript  known  as  the  Troana  MS.,  lately 
deciphered  by  Dr.  Le  Plongeon.     Periods  of  years  ex- 
pressed in  figures  simply  bewilder  the  mind  when  we  begin 
to  talk  of  millions,  and  yet  we  know  that  the  duration  of 
a  great  root  race  must  be  counted  in  millions,  that  a  great 
many  millions  of  years  are  thus  represented  by  even  the 
briefest  of  the  world  periods  which  are  connected  with 
the  great  course  of  planetary  evolution.     It  will  not  be 
an  exaggeration  of  the  truth  to  say  that  if  we  think  of  the 
whole  Manvantara  as  representing  the  individual  life  of  a 
man,  such  a  lifetime  as  we  are  familiar  with  now,  say  one 
of  seventy  years,  would  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  the 
whole  as  one  second  of  time  would  stand  in  relation  to  the 
seventy  years.     Illustrations  of  this  nature  may,  to  some 
extent,   help   the  mind   in   realising   the   length   of   the 
evolutionary  journey    through    which   we   have   already 
passed,  and  in  realising  the  rate  at  which  the  soul  grows 
while  it  is  left,  so  to  speak,  to  the  single  influence  of  what 
may  be  thought  of  as  the  evolutionary  drift.     In  looking 
backward  over  the  progress  achieved  in  the  past  by  any 
soul  not  yet  transcending  from  ordinary  conditions — and 

204    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

such  retrospect  is  possible  for  those  whose  faculties  have 
already  begun  to  function  on  manasic  levels — there  is 
something  almost  appalling  in  the  tardiness  in  the  growth 
observable.  Each  physical  life  has  such  infinitesimally 
minute  contributions  to  make  to  the  permanent  individu- 
ality !  Look  back,  if  you  are  able,  for  a  dozen  lives,  and 
you  will  probably  find  so  little  difference  between  the 
spiritual  individuality  at  that  remote  period  and  the  corre- 
sponding individuality  at  this  moment,  that  you  might  be 
tempted  to  think  the  time  and  strain  and  effort  of  all  that 
existence  but  thrown  away  and  wasted.  But  it  has  not  been 
wasted  really,  any  more  than  the  corresponding  interval  of 
time  has  been  wasted  by*  the  stalactite,  that  wonderful 
monument  to  Nature's  patience,  which  is  not  without  its 
significance  for  observers  who  can  appreciate  analogies. 
And  though  progress  may  have  been  slow  along  the  im- 
measurable course  of  bygone  ages,  the  final  result  attained, 
even  if  we  look  merely  at  the  spiritual  individuality  of  the 
human  being  of  our  own  period,  is  a  growth  the  accom- 
plishment of  which  eclipses  that  of  the  stalactite  in  the 
estimation  of  those  who  can  appreciate  the  difference 
between  the  plane  of  Nature  on  which  it  has  been  achieved 
and  that  to  which  the  perishable,  however  ancient,  mineral 
form  belongs. 

But  what  is  the  road  to  be  travelled  by  the  Ego  in 
its  development  between  this  middle  period  of  the  Man- 
vantara  and  the  final  culmination  of  its  possibilities  at  a 
period  in  advance  to  be  measured  by  the  magnitude  of  that 
awful  journey  we  have  already  taken,  during  which  we 
have  been  shielded  from  a  perception  of  its  wearisome 
length  by  the  torpor  of  our  higher  nature  ?  The  distance 
to  be  yet  travelled  as  measured  on  the  scale  of  human  con- 
dition, from  the  place  at  which  the  ordinary  humanity 

THE  SYSTEM  205 

now  stands  to  that  it  should  reach  at  the  end  of  the  Man- 
vantara,  is  not  less  than  that  which  separates  a  fashionable 
example  of  modern  civilisation — say  a  man  of  distin- 
guished literary  culture  or  scientific  attainments — from 
the  primitive  savage  of  Tierra  del*  Fuego.  It  is  the  design 
of  Nature  that  the  majority  of  the  whole  human  family 
shall  at  the  end  of  the  seventh  round  of  planetary  experi- 
ence attain  to  a  condition  in  which  existence,  in  reference 
to  this  planetary  chain  to  which  we  belong,  will  be,  to 
begin  with,  more  free  than  our  present  incarnate  existence 
in  as  great  a  degree  as  the  living  man  of  to-day,  so  to 
speak,  is  freer  than  the  stone.  If  we  endeavour  to  invest 
the  stone  in  our  imagination  with  a  consciousness,  it  must 
clearly  be  one  of  a  very  restricted  character,  and,  amongst 
other  conditions,  it  exists  wherever  it  is  put,  not  wherever 
it  wills  to  go.  Within  limits  the  man  can  move  about  on 
the  surface  of  this  earth  at  his  pleasure,  but  compared 
with  the  being  he  may  become,  he  is  as  much  in  prison  in 
his  present  vehicle,  and  as  much  chained  down  to  one  spot 
by  the  limitations  of  his  capacity,  as  in  comparison  with 
him  the  stone  itself  is  subject  to  restrictions.  The  final 
example  of  perfected  humanity  will  use  whatever  body  he 
then  retains  as  a  mere  instrument  of  his  convenience,  to 
be  worn  or  left  aside  at  pleasure.  The  higher  realms  of 
Nature,  of  which  I  have  been  speaking  in  endeavouring 
to  describe  the  course  of  human  experience  between  death 
and  re-birth,  and  others,  again,  immeasurably  transcending 
these,  will  be  accessible  to  him  as  readily  as  the  various 
rooms  in  the  house  in  which  he  lives  may  be  accessible 
to  him  now.  From  any  one  globe  of  the  chain  to  another 
he  will  be  able  to  pass  as  freely  as  within  the  various 
phases  of  each.  Forces  of  Nature  as  far  transcending  any 
with  which  modern  science  is  acquainted  as  these  transcend 

206    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

the  resources  of  the  African  savage  will  lie  within  his  reach 
and  command,  for  his  moral  nature  will  have  attained  alti- 
tudes corresponding  with  the  development  of  his  power 
and  knowledge,  and  by  that  time  his  Will  will  be  so  com- 
pletely welded  with  that  which  controls  the  whole  of 
Nature,  and  is  represented  to  our  ordinary  thinking  by 
the  idea  of  Divinity,  that  no  care  on  the  part  of  Nature 
for  his  own  or  others'  welfare  will  render  it  necessary  to 
subject  him  to  the  disabilities  of  ignorance.  Language 
entirely  fails  to  do  more  than  hint  in  the  vaguest  fashion 
at  the  kind  of  exaltation  thus  within  the  possibilities  of 
human  progress,  but  that  progress  may  in  some  faint  degree 
be  appreciated  with  the  help  of  the  thought  that  it  will 
amongst  other  things  embrace  all  knowledge  concerning 
this  whole  Manvantaric  design — an  absolute  and  complete 
understanding  of  every  intricacy  in  Nature's  stupendous 
mechanism,  and  will  embrace  the  answer  to  every  moral 
enigma  which  the  experience  of  life  may  suggest,  or  to 
which  in  the  weary  efforts  of  our  speculative  thinking  in 
the  present  day  we  may  turn  continually  in  despairing 
sorrow,  holding  on  with  what  strength  we  may  to  the 
vague  trust  that  in  superior  wisdom  there  resides,  beyond 
our  reach,  a  clue  to  the  mysteries  of  evil. 

That  is  the  course  along  which  human  evolution  has 
still  to  travel,  but  it  ought  to  be  manifest  to  any  reason- 
able thinker  that  the  scheme  thus  set  forth,  involving,  as 
it  does,  the  elevation  of  Man  to  levels  which  we  are  in  the 
habit  of  thinking  God-like,  is  not  to  be  accomplished  by 
any  process  of  evolution  pressing  upon  him  from  without. 
In  a  certain  sense,  though  even  this  is  perhaps  a  strained 
one,  it  may  be  said  that  up  to  the  present  period  of  evolu- 
tion, primeval  germs  of  human  consciousness  have  been 
brought  to  the  position  in  which  we  now  stand  under  the 

THE  SYSTEM  207 

influence  of  external  forces  or  guidance,  but  before  a  man 
can  be  invested  by  nature  with  God-like  attributes,  he 
must  engender  within  his  own  consciousness  the  will  to  be 
God-like,  and  he  must,  as  it  were,  put  the  whole  force  of 
his  own  intention  into  the  undertaking.  He  must  be 
actuated  by  an  intelligent  will  as  well  as  by  vague  aspira- 
tion towards  progress;  he  must  make  the  choice  between 
good  and  evil  with  his  eyes  open;  he  must  determine 
whether  he  would  rather  grasp  whatever  good  things 
connected  with  progress  it  may  be  possible  for  him  to 
monopolise  for  himself,  or  whether  he  would  rather  join 
his  forces  to  those  who  are  endeavouring  to  serve  the 
purposes  of  God,  and  to  promote  the  acceleration  of  the 
whole  undertaking.  It  will  only  be  by  individual  effort  at 
each  step  of  man's  progress  as  he  goes  on  through  the 
ordinary  course  of  Nature  that  he  will  really  ascend  along 
the  gentle  upward  spiral,  but  at  this  point  it  is  impossible 
to  describe  the  course  of  normal  evolution  without  making 
some  reference  to  that  kind  which  is  abnormally  hastened. 
If  a  man  follows  the  normal  course  no  great  magnitude 
of  effort,  so  to  speak,  will  ever  Be  required  from  him  at 
any  given  moment,  but  his  growth  towards  ultimate  possi- 
bilities of  his  own  development  will  be  correspondingly 
slow.  On  the  other  hand,  the  extent  to  which,  by  empha- 
sising that  effort  to  an  enormous  degree  of  intensity,  it  is 
possible  for  him  from  this  stage  of  human  advancement 
onward  to  accelerate  his  own  evolution  will  be  found  to 
eclipse  the  boldest  conjectures  which  anyone  might  form 
from  the  point  of  view  of  comprehending  the  whole  evolu- 
tionary scheme  without  actually  knowing  what  have  been 
the  results  of  abnormal  effort  on  the  part  of  those  who  have 
gone  in  advance  of  the  rest.  But  whether  he  concentrates 
his  effort  or  distributes  it,  for  the  evolution  of  the  latter 

208    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

half  of  the  Manvantara  he  must  contribute  his  own  effort 
to  the  evolutionary  tendency  or  he  will  fall  back  into 
the  rear.  This  will  be  better  intelligible  when  we 
come  to  study  the  conditions  of  abnormal  progress,  but 
meanwhile  explanations  are  still  wanting  to  complete 
our  picture  of  the  whole  evolutionary  field,  within  the 
almost  boundless  range  of  which  the  growth  of  the  soul 
proceeds. 

The  planetary  series  with  which  our  present  Manvan- 
tara is  concerned,  with  all  its  marvellous  intricacies  as 
regards  its  physical  manifestation  alone,  with  all  its  unseen 
conditions  of  existence  around  it,  with  all  its  magnificent 
possibilities  of  consciousness  having  to  do  with  the  spiritual 
planes  of  Nature,  is  but  one  of  a  series  of  such  with 
which  this  human  family  is  concerned.  Seven  Manvan- 
taras  succeed  each  other  in  due  order,  this  we  are  now 
going  through  being  the  fourth,  and  the  worlds  of  each 
succeeding  Manvantara  are  themselves  evolved  afresh  each 
time,  though  each  in  turn  must  be  thought  of  as  a  Re- 
incarnation of  its  predecessor  rather  than  as  an  entirely 
fresh  creation.  Meanwhile  within  the  limits  of  the  solar 
system  of  which  we  form  a  part,  there  are  other  chains  of 
Manvantaras  in  progress  connected  with  other  planets, 
visible  and  invisible,  and  in  all  we  are  given  to  understand 
that  there  are  thus  seven  schemes  of  planetary  evolution, 
all  having  some  touch  with  the  physical  plane,  and  deriv- 
ing their  vital  energies  from  the  sun.  At  certain  very 
exalted  stages  of  spiritual  progress  the  foremost  representa- 
tives of  humanity  in  the  very  vanguard  of  our  evolution 
are  in  a  position  to  acquire  definite  knowledge  concerning 
these  other  schemes,  and  some  information  on  the  subject 
has  filtered  down  to  occult  students  of  our  level.  We  are 
thus  enabled  to  form  a  comprehensive  conception  of  the 

THE  SYSTEM  209 

solar  system  as  a  whole,  and  even  to  appreciate  to  some 
extent  the  nature  of  the  great  design  it  represents. 

Seven,  as  we  have  long  recognised,  is  the  root  number 
of  our  system — in  so  far,  at  any  rate,  as  that  system  is  in 
any  way  concerned  with  physical  manifestation — and  the 
simple  invariability  of  the  law  makes  the  great  plan  in 
question  more  easily  intelligible  than  it  would  be  other- 
wise. The  solar  system  includes  (we  must  take  care  not 
to  fall  into  the  arrogant  mistake  that  might  be  involved 
in  saying  it  consists  of)  seven  great  schemes  of  planetary 
evolution,  in  each  of  which  there  are  some  worlds,  one  or 
more,  on  the  physical  plane.  The  schemes  are  not  all 
designed  to  match  one  another,  and  in  some  more  than  in 
others  the  higher  planes  of  Nature  are  engaged  in  their 
design.  Theosophists  are  well  used  now  to  the  conception 
that  super-physical  planes  of  Nature  may  be  just  as  real 
and  the  manifestations  thereon  just  as  objective  as  those 
which  affect  the  physical  senses.  The  astral  and  manasic 
planes  are  available  as  areas  of  manifestation  within  the 
solar  system  as  completely  as  the  physical  plane,  and, 
indeed,  over  and  above  the  seven  planetary  schemes,  to 
which  I  have  already  referred,  there  are  some  others  which 
are  altogether  established  on  the  higher  planes  and  have  no 
physical  planets  connected  with  their  evolution  at  any 
time.  It  will  not  be  possible  to  say  much  of  these  at 
present,  but  the  recognition  of  the  fact  that  they  exist  will 
help  to  bring  order  into  our  thinking  at  a  later  stage  of 
this  inquiry.  Our  own  scheme  makes  a  larger  draught 
than  any  other  but  one  on  the  resources  of  the  physical 
plane,  and  at  the  period  of  our  present  Manvantara  three 
planets  of  our  own  series  are  on  this  plane;  but  the  con- 
stitution of  the  various  chains  is  varied  in  this  respect. 

Each  scheme  of  evolution  is  worked  out  by  means  of  a 

15 

210    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

series  of  seven  Manvantaras.  Each  Manvantara  includes 
an  evolutionary  process,  such  as  that  set  forth  in  theo- 
sophic  teaching  in  reference  to  the  seven  rounds  of  our 
planetary  chain.  As  each  round  includes  a  world  period 
of  activity  on  each  planet  in  turn,  and  as  each  of  these 
world  periods  is  divided  into  seven  great  racial  cycles,  we 
may  get  a  view  of  the  proportionate  magnitude  of  a  race 
period — itself  extending  over  some  millions  of  years — as 
compared  with  the  whole  system  to  which  we  belong,  if  we 
bear  in  mind  the  following  progression  : 

Seven  root  race  periods  make  up  one  world  period. 

Seven  world  periods  (following  each  other  on  as  many 
planets  in  succession),  one  round. 

Seven  rounds  one  Manvantara. 

Seven  Manvantaras,  one  scheme  of  evolution. 

Seven  schemes  of  evolution  (more  or  less  contem- 
poraneous in  their  activity),  the  solar  system. 

Some  of  these  schemes  are  much  more  advanced  than 
others,  but  before  going  into  a  more  minute  account  of  the 
condition  in  which  we  find  the  whole  stupendous  under- 
taking at  the  present  time,  it  will  be  desirable  to  go  back 
in  imagination  to  its  beginning,  and  appreciate  the  beautiful 
intuition  with  which  modern  science — not  always  entitled 
to  as  much  credit— has  divined  with  a  very  close  approach 
to  accuracy  the  condition  in  which  our  system  existed 
before  any  of  its  planets  were  differentiated. 

The  nebular  hypothesis  is  one  of  the  grandest  achieve- 
ments of  which  the  unassisted  human  intellect  has  ever 
shown  itself  capable.  That  hypothesis  closely  harmonises 
with  theosophic  teaching  on  this  subject,  even  though 
that  teaching  expands  and  interprets  it  in  a  way  that  would 

THE  SYSTEM  211 

not  be  possible  from  the  narrow  platform  of  thought 
which  recognises  only  one  order  of  matter. 

The  theory  that  solar  systems  were  each,  in  the  first 
instance,  vast  aggregations  of  highly  heated  and  very 
attenuated  matter — gaseous,  or  perhaps  even  more 
attenuated  still — and  that  by  degrees  each  such  nebula  was 
subjected  to  a  cooling  and  contracting  process  which  con- 
densed its  nucleus,  and  so  forth,  is  generally  attributed  to 
the  great  astronomer  Laplace.  Some  writers  trace  the 
genesis  of  the  idea  to  Tycho  Brahe,  who  suggested  that 
stars  were  formed  by  the  condensation  of  the  ethereal  sub- 
stance of  which  he  supposed  the  Milky  Way  to  be  com- 
posed. Kepler  extended  the  idea  by  suggesting  that  the 
nebular  substance  may  originally  have  pervaded  all  space, 
instead  of  being  confined  to  the  Milky  Way,  and  other 
great  thinkers  in  turn  suggested  further  modifications  of 
the  original  conception.  It  was  immensely  fortified  when 
the  researches  of  Sir  William  Herschell  showed  us  over 
2,000  separate  nebulae  within  range  of  the  telescope,  and 
then,  in  the  last  year  of  the  eighteenth  century,  Laplace 
worked  out  the  whole  scheme  far  more  systematically  than 
any  of  his  precursors,  and  developed  it  into  pretty  much 
the  shape  in  which  the  astronomical  world  generally 
accepts  it  now. 

Laplace  showed  how  the  planets  of  a  system  could  be 
successively  formed  by  the  rupture,  from  the  central  mass 
of  the  nebula,  of  great  external  rings  of  condensing  matter. 
The  whole  nebula  was  assumed  to  have  been  originally  in 
rotation,  so  the  rings  would  themselves  continue  to  rotate 
in  the  same  way.  By  degrees  the  rings  would  themselves 
be  somewhere  ruptured,  and  then  the  matter  of  which 
they  were  composed  would  roll  up  and  aggregate  itself 
either  into  great  globular  planetary  bodies,  or  into  swarms 

212    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

of  smaller  meteoric  masses.  This  view  is  not  confirmed 
in  detail  by  occult  teaching,  but  is  based  on  broad  ideas 
that  are  fairly  in  harmony  with  that. 

Concurrently  with  the  development  of  the  whole  idea, 
speculation  has  concerned  itself  with  the  question  how 
the  nebula  in  the  first  instance  was  probably  formed. 
According  to  one  view,  sometimes  spoken  of  as  the  vortex 
theory,  matter  is  supposed  to  be  drawn  in  with  a  whirling 
motion  around  some  already  existing  nucleus.  By  another 
— the  impact  theory — the  original  nebula  is  supposed  to  be 
due  to  the  collision  in  space  between  two  cold  and  extinct 
suns  moving  in  different  directions  with  planetary 
velocities.  The  heat  engendered  by  such  an  appalling 
catastrophe  is  recognised  as  sufficient  to  volatilise  all  the 
matter  of  which  the  two  globes  consisted,  and  to  set  up  in 
this  way,  a  new  nebula  of  glowing  incandescent  gas,  which 
would  be  set  in  rotation  by  the  nature  of  the  collision 
which  caused  it,  as  the  chances  would  be  enormous  against 
the  exact  encounter  of  the  two  bodies  centre  to  centre. 
At  present,  I  think,  the  impact  theory  of  nebular  origins 
is  most  in  favour,  and  it  is  profoundly  interesting  to  learn 
from  our  exalted  teachers  that,  though  as  a  matter  of  fact 
it  is  not  the  method  of  development  that  was  actually 
adopted  in  the  case  of  our  own  solar  system,  it  has  been 
employed  in  the  course  of  Nature  with  some  other  systems, 
and  can  be  brought  into  harmpny  with  those  activities  on 
higher  planes  than  the  physical,  which  our  theosophic 
instincts  will  at  once  assure  us  must  always  be  mainly 
instrumental  in  bringing  a  solar  system  into  existence. 

The  method  actually  adopted  at  the  inauguration  of  our 
own  solar  system  was  one  concerned  entirely,  in  the  first 
instance,  with  higher  planes  of  Nature.  On  some  level 
of  superphysical  matter  a  force  was  set  in  action  which  had 

THE  SYSTEM  213 

the  effect  of  creating  what  we  may  think  of — without 
claiming,  in  this  respect,  to  think  with  exactitude — as  a 
vast  electric  field  extended  over  a  region  of  space  greater 
by  far  than  the  area  included  in  the  orbit  of  Neptune. 

The  region  of  space  affected  would,  to  begin  with,  be 
pervaded  by  matter  of  a  certain  order,  or,  indeed,  of  certain 
orders.  The  more  we  comprehend  the  spirit  of  occult 
teaching,  the  more  clearly  we  realise  the  idea  that  space 
is  nowhere  empty  and  vacant.  It  may  contain  nothing 
that  affects  some  given  set  of  limited  senses,  but  for  all  that 
it  is  a  plenum  rather  than  a  vacuum.  Something  pervades 
all  space  with  which  we  can  concern  ourselves  in  thought. 
Recognising  this,  and  recognising  also  that  matter  on 
other  planes  than  the  physical  is  clearly  subject  to  limita- 
tion— so  that  what  we  habitually  talk  of,  for  example,  as 
the  astral  plane  is  not  a  homogeneous  infinitude  but  is 
the  astral  plane  of  this  earth — esoteric  students  sometimes 
puzzle  over  the  question,  What  plane  in  the  ascending 
series  is  common  to  the  solar  system,  what  common  to  the 
cosmos  ?  The  answer  to  the  riddle  is  to  be  found  in  the 
fact  that  each  plane  is  represented  by  matter  in  several — 
the  usual  seven — stages  of  refinement.  The  lower  sub- 
planes  are  in  all  cases  specialised  around  each  planet;  but 
in  each  case  the  highest  sub-plane  is  co-extensive  with  the 
solar  system — with  the  universe  itself,  for  all  we  know  to 
the  contrary.  Thus  in  a  certain  sense  even  the  physical 
plane  is  co-extensive  with  space,  as  represented  by  the 
highest,  the  atomic  state  of  ether.  So  equally  with  the 
astral  and  manasic  planes;  these,  in  their  highest  states, 
are  co-extensive  with  the  ether;  and  a  fortiori  higher  planes 
still  are  co-extensive. 

From  this  it  will  be  apparent  that  matter  of  every 
variety,  plus  all  its  potentialities,  lay  within  the  region 

2i4    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

in  which  the  sublime  power,  directing  the  manifestation 
of  our  system,  set  up  the  activities  already  referred  to. 
These  activities  had  for  one  effect,  we  are  told,  that  of 
drawing  in  from  surrounding  space,  as  into  a  vortex, 
immense  additional  supplies  of  the  all-pervading  ether. 
Some  scientific  difficulties  present  themselves  to  the  mind 
in  reference  to  this  statement,  but  solar  systems  are  suffi- 
ciently wide  apart  in  their  distribution  through  space  to 
harmonise  with  the  idea  that  even  the  ether,  though  we 
have  to  think  of  it  as  incompressible  to  accommodate  our 
prevailing  conceptions  of  matter  with  some  of  its  attributes, 
may  be  attenuated  in  intersolar  space,  and  relatively  con- 
densed in  and  around  solar  systems.  At  all  events,  the 
esoteric  interpretation  of  the  beginning  of  our  system 
seems  to  involve  the  idea  of  such  condensation,  and  on  the 
ether  in  this  condition  an  influence  coming  down  from 
some  higher  plane  of^ature  ultimately  converted  the  con- 
densed mass  into  a  physical  nebula — an  immense  volume 
of  incandescent  gas  at  some  inconceivably  high  tempera- 
ture. 

From  this  condition  of  things  the  process  imagined  in 
connection  with  the  nebular  theory  appears  to  have  come 
into  play. 

The  various  planets  originally  formed  were  grouped 
by  degrees  into  seven  great  schemes  of  evolution,  and  to 
comprehend  these  in  some  approximate  measure,  we  must 
regard  them  from  our  present  point  of  view.  The  survey 
we  have  to  carry  out  would  not  be  materially  assisted  by 
attempts  to  fathom  the  all  but  unfathomable  past  so  far 
as  to  investigate  the  order  in  which  the  various  schemes 
were  launched.  Meanwhile,  however,  we  may  take  note 
of  the  fact  already  referred  to  that  there  are  within  the 
solar  system  three  schemes  of  evolution  to  which  no 

THE  SYSTEM  215 

physical  planets  are  attached,  so  that  in  truth  there  are 
not  seven  but  ten  schemes  to  be  thought  of;  and  probably 
if  we  possessed  a  sufficiently  exhaustive  knowledge  of 
Nature  we  should  find  septenary  systems  constantly 
merging  themselves  in  a  more  embracing  system  of  tens; 
but  wherever  the  physical  plane  plays  a  part  in  any  cosmic 
undertaking  the  septenary  law  appears  to  hold  good.  Thus 
our  first  task  in  attempting  to  understand  the  solar  system 
has  to  do  with  seven  schemes  in  each  of  which  the  physical 
plane  is  touched. 

Beginning  with  that  which  is  the  outermost  in  space, 
we  find  that  the  planet  Neptune  is  concerned  with  a 
scheme  of  a  very  different  character  from  that  which  may 
be  assigned  to  most  of  the  others.  In  this  world-series 
the  evolutionary  process  is  not  destined  to  achieve  results 
commensurate  with  those  which  it  is  the  purpose  of  the 
other  schemes  to  bring  about.  The  life  with  which 
Neptune  is  concerned  is  not  calculated  to  attain  very  high 
levels,  but  on  the  other  hand  this  planet  is  interesting  for 
an  astronomical  reason.  Connected  in  evolution  with 
Neptune  there  are  in  fact  two  other  planets  physically 
belonging  to  our  system  that  have  not  yet  fallen  a  prey 
to  telescopic  research.  One  of  them  may  ultimately  be 
discovered  by  ordinary  means,  the  outermost  lies  far 
beyond  the  range  of  physical  instruments,  for  not  merely 
is  its  distance  something  appalling  to  the  imagination,  but 
the  light  it  would  throw  back  to  us  by  reflection  from  the 
sun  is  exceedingly  feeble.  Viewed  from  Neptune  itself 
the  sun  would  appear  a  mere  speck  in  the  sky  compared 
with  the  glowing  disc  we  have  to  deal  with,  but  the  two 
outer  planets  are  at  distances  from  the  centre  of  the  system 
which  continue  to  observe  what  is  called  in  astronomy 
"  Bode's  law."  Thus  without  having  yet  discovered  either 

2i6    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

of  them  we  know  that  the  radius  of  the  orbit  in  which 
the  outermost  of  all  is  moving  is  something  over  10,000 
million  miles.  (The  distance  of  Neptune  from  the  sun, 
it  will  be  remembered,  is  about  2,700  millions.)  At  that 
distance  the  light  of  the  sun  would  barely  make  darkness 
visible.  And  for  any  warmth  the  distant  planet  may 
require  it  must  be  dependent  chiefly  on  influences  with 
which  physical  science  on  this  earth  at  present  is  ill 
acquainted.  However,  little  as  we  can  expect  just  yet  to 
understand  the  Neptune  scheme,  we  may  formulate  our 
thinking  on  the  subject  So  far  as  to  recognise  that  scheme 
as  including — at  its  present  stage  of  advancement — three 
physical  planets. 

All  the  other  schemes,  as  we  shall  see  by  degrees — 
excepting  our  own — are  at  present  represented  on  the 
physical  plan  by  only  one  planet  each.  But  all  through 
this  survey  of  the  system  it  must  be  remembered  that 
schemes  are  not  equally  represented  on  the  physical  plane 
at  each  of  their  Manvantaric  stages.  Our  own  scheme 
had  but  one  physical  planet  in  its  last  Manvantara,  and 
will  have  but  one  in  its  next  Manvantara,  though 
at  present  it  has  a  triple  manifestation  on  the  physical 
plane.  So  other  schemes  which  at  present  have  only  one 
physical  planet  may  have  more  than  one  at  later  stages  of 
their  progress,  may  have  had  more  than  one  at  former 
stages. 

The  Uranus  scheme — for  thinking  at  this  date  we  may 
as  well  call  each  scheme  by  the  name  of  the  visible  planet 
of  its  present  chain — is  the  next  in  order  to  be  considered. 
I  understand  the  Uranus  scheme  is  fairly  well  advanced, 
and  to  be  concerned  with  evolution  of  a  high  order 
of  life,  but  of  course  the  physical  conditions  of  Uranus 
must  be  widely  unlike  any  with  which  we  have  acquaint- 

THE  SYSTEM  217 

ance.  The  sun  can  hardly  seem  a  much  larger  object 
viewed  from  Uranus  than  Jupiter  appears  to  us,  but  one 
of  the  lessons  most  strongly  emphasised  by  the  esoteric 
study  of  the  whole  system  is  that  life  is  compatible  with 
conditions  of  the  most  diverse  character,  and  that  we  must 
never  seek  to  determine  the  habitability  of  other  globes 
in  space  by  inquiring  how  far  their  meteorological  or 
climatic  conditions  correspond  with  our  own. 

The  Saturnian  scheme  is  very  much  less  advanced  in 
its  Manvantaric  development  than  our  own,  and  the  planet 
Saturn  itself  is  in  an  early  round  of  its  present  Manvantara, 
so  that  it  is  not  yet  physically  habitable  at  all.  The  family 
of  beings  with  whose  evolution  it  is  concerned  are  still  at 
an  early  stage  of  their  descent  into  matter,  even  though  it 
must  not  be  supposed  that  the  Saturn  scheme,  any  more 
than  other  schemes  connected  with  the  outer  planets,  are 
young  in  the  order  of  their  creation  as  compared  with  some 
of  those  nearer  the  sun.  The  rates  of  progress  of  the 
various  schemes  are  very  different.  Saturn  is  slow  in  its 
evolution,  with  Manvantaras  of  enormous  length.  We 
must  be  patient  yet  a  while  in  regard  to  speculations 
which  would  attempt  to  correlate  the  rate  of  progress 
of  the  various  schemes,  though  no  doubt  they  are  all 
designed  to  harmonise  their  results  in  some  way  towards 
the  close  of  the  mighty  drama  in  which  they  play  their 
several  parts. 

The  Jupiter  scheme  is  very  interesting,  for  though  it 
is  still  young — in  advancement,  if  not  in  time — it  is 
destined,  we  understand,  to  bring  forward  its  family  of 
evolution  to  a  very  high  level  eventually.  So  far,  how- 
ever, the  Manvantara  of  the  Jupiter  scheme  now  in 
progress  is  only  the  third  of  the  septenary  series,  corre- 
sponding to  our  lunar  or  last  Manvantara,  which  did  not 

. 

a-i-8.    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

bring  our  family  forward  to  a  very  mature  stage  of  develop- 
ment. Moreover,  at  present  the  Jupiter  family  is  only 
in  the  second  round  of  its  third  Manvantara,  and  its 
physical  planet  therefore  is  not  yet  fitted  to  be  the  abode 
of  physical  life.  It  is  still  hot  from  its  relatively  recent 
condensation,  and  this  condition  of  things,  recognised  by 
ordinary  astronomy,  is  not  due,  as  ordinary  astronomers 
suppose,  to  the  fact  that  Jupiter  is  much  larger  than  the 
inner  planets,  and  has  thus  taken  more  time  to  cool  since 
the  original  nebula  consolidated.  Jupiter  is  a  later  creation 
than  the  earth,  but  the  view  of  the  whole  subject  with 
which  this  fact  is  connected  will  more  conveniently  be 
dealt  with  when  the  general  survey  of  the  schemes  is 
completed. 

Coming  inward  from  Jupiter,  the  next  planetary  orbit 
we  reach  is  that  at  present  occupied  by  the  swarm  of 
asteriods,  merely  the  broken  remains  of  a  complete  planet 
which?  once  occupied  that  orbit.  The  next  -planet  is 
Mars,  but  in  reaching  this  interesting  world  we  of  the 
earth  chain  are  comparatively  at  home,  for  the  scheme  to 
which  we  belong,  at  present  in  its  fourth  Manvantara, 
is  at  the  stage  of  its  deepest  immergence  in  matter,  and 
is  thus  represented  on  the  physical  plane  by  three  planets, 
Mars  being  one.  Mars,  the  Earth,  and  Mercury  are  in 
evolutionary  partnership,  Mars  being  the  planet  behind 
the  earth  in  the  order  of  progress  round  the  entire  chain, 
and  Mercury  in  advance  of  us.  A  large  portion  of  the 
present  human  family  has  actually  lived  on  Mars — where, 
if  we  could  but  visit  the  planet  now,  as,  indeed,  some 
of  our  more  advanced  companions  can  and  do,  in  the 
appropriate  vehicle  of  consciousness  while  out  of  the  physi- 
cal body,  we  should  still  find  the  least  advanced, — the 
dregs  of  the  family, — still  hanging  on  there. 

THE  SYSTEM  219 

Of  all  the  seven  schemes  of  the  system,  that  which 
Venus  at  present  represents  on  the  physical  plane  is  the 
farthest  advanced  in  evolution,  not  necessarily  the  oldest 
as  judged  by  the  period  at  which  it  began,  but  the  quickest 
of  the  series  as  regards  the  rate  of  its  progress  or  the 
duration  of  its  Manvantaras. 

Our  own  scheme  is  now  going  through  its  fourth  Man- 
vantara,  but  that  to  which  Venus  belongs  is  far  advanced 
through  the  fifth.  It  is  already  in  the  seventh  round  of 
that  Manvantara,  the  family  it  is  evolving  being  at  present 
established  like  ourselves  on  the  physical  planet  of  its 
chain,  although  at  such  an  immensely  more  forward  stage 
of  its  progress,  that  the  foremost  of  its  beings,  in  great 
numbers  represent,  as  compared  with  our  humanity,  a 
fairly  god-like  degree  of  exaltation.  From  Venus,  as  all 
students  of  esoteric  teaching  will  be  aware,  the  guardians 
of  our  infant  humanity  in  the  later  third  and  early  fourth 
race  of  this  world  period  descended  to  stimulate  in  our 
family  the  growth  of  the  manasic  principle,  and  to  them 
we  owe  the  fact  that  as  we  stand  at  present  we  are  in  truth 
somewhat  further  advanced  in  evolution  than  our  actual 
place  in  our  own  scheme  strictly  entitles  us  to  be.  We 
have  been  helped  onward  by  some  of  those  who  are  in 
the  loftiest  sense  of  the  term  our  Elder  Brethren  in  the 
whole  system,  and  among  us  there  have  been  found  some 
at  all  events,  who  have  proved  apt  pupils,  and  are  already 
on  levels  of  spiritual  dignity  commensurate  with  those 
previously  attained  by  their  sublime  instructors. 

Within  the  orbit  of  Mercury  another  planet  is  to  be 
found,  and  probably  will  be  found  some  day  by  ordinary 
astronomers,  who  already  suspect  its  existence,  and  have 
been  keenly  on  the  look  out  for  it  when  solar  eclipses  give 
them  a  chance  of  seeing  it.  Merged  as  it  is  in  the  blinding 

220    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

glare  of  the  sun  at  other  times,  it  is  hopeless  to  seek  for  it 
in  the  unshielded  sky.  A  name  has  been  given  in  advance 
by  some  astronomers  to  the  undiscovered  planet,  and  it  is 
sometimes  referred  to  as  Vulcan.  It  must  certainly  be  a 
very  hot  little  world,  although  Bode's  law  should  give  it 
a  distance  from  the  centre  orb  of  something  like  thirty 
millions  of  miles.  However,  it  belongs  to  an  independent 
scheme  of  evolution  not  destined  to  bring  forward  life 
to  the  high  levels  to  be  ultimately  attained  in  connection 
with  our  own  and  the  Venus  scheme.  It  completes  the 
series  of  seven  schemes.  Enumerating  them  once  more  as 
under  we  have : 

1.  The  Neptune  scheme. 

2.  „  Uranus  „ 

3.  „  Saturn  „ 

4.  „  Jupiter  „ 

5.  „  Earth 

6.  „  Venus  „ 

7.  „  Vulcan  „ 

The  first  and  fifth  of  this  series  have  each  three  physical 
planets,  the  others  one  each. 

Of  the  three  schemes  which  have  no  touch  with  the 
physical  plane  there  is  very  little  to  be  said  at  present. 
They  are  concerned  with  high  orders  of  evolution  and  in 
some  way  with  the  ultimate  perfection  of  the  life  of  the 
system  at  large  when  all  the  septenary  schemes  shall  have 
completed  their  cycles. 

It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  they  are  await- 
ing development  till  such  time  as  the  other  schemes  have 
completed  their  cycles.  They  are  already  in  activity,  and 
the  globes  of  which  they  consist  occupy  definite  places  in 
space,  though  composed  of  higher  orders  of  matter  than 

THE  SYSTEM  221 

those  which  our  physical  senses  can  cognise.  On  the  other 
hand  we  need  not  think  of  them  as  dealing  with  phases  of 
existence  entirely  beyond  the  reach  of  our  imagination. 
The  highest  plane  of  Nature  to  which  they  are  directly 
related  is  the  lower  Manasic. 

From  the  general  idea  of  the  structure  and  design  of 
the  system  that  has  already  been  given,  and  particularly 
from  many  passages  in  Theosophical  literature,  it  will  be 
apparent  that  the  configuration  of  the  solar  system  is  no 
more  unchangeable  throughout  the  life  of  that  system  than 
the  configuration  of  land  and  water  on  the  earth's  surface 
is  unchangeable  during  the  progress  of  a  world  period. 
In  every  scheme  the  chain  of  planets  on  which  its  evolution 
has  been  carried  on,  during  any  given  Manvantara,  is  dis- 
integrated at  its  close  (subject  to  a  qualification  to  be 
noticed  directly)  and  a  new  chain  of  worlds  is  called  into 
being.  This  does  not  mean  that  new  matter  is  created  out 
of  non-manifested  substance,  but  that  planets,  when 
their  life  cycle  is  completed,  are  broken  up  or  resolved  into 
dust  which  is  dispersed  through  the  solar  system  at  large 
and  is  available  to  be  drawn  together  into  new  forms,  just  as 
the  elements  of  a  dead  human  body,  dissolved  in  the  earth 
or  air  and  absorbed  in  process  of  time  into  vegetable  tissue, 
become  in  due  season  the  nutriment  of  new  animal  or 
human  forms. 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  our  earth,  for  instance,  with 
its  companion  planets,  is  not  alone  a  new  creation  as  com- 
pared with  the  state  of  things  that  existed  when  the  nebula 
was  first  condensed,  but  is  in  the  fourth  generation  of 
such  new  creations  having  regard  to  our  own  scheme 
alone.  I  have  no  information  as  to  the  manner  in  which 
the  planetary  matter  of  the  system  was  first  distributed, 
but  it  is  a  matter  of  obvious  certainty  that  from  Uranus 

222    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

inwards  not  one  of  the  existing  planets  belongs  to  the  first- 
born series  of  the  nebula.  It  hardly  concerns  us  to  make 
close  inquiry  as  to  the  actual  course  of  events  in  this 
respect.  Our  appreciation  of  Nature's  design  and  of  our 
own  place  therein  would  not  be  materially  assisted  by 
knowing,  for  instance,  what  planets  existed  in  connection 
with  the  Uranus  evolution  before  Uranus  came  into  being. 
Nor  in  regard  to  the  other  chains  would  it  profit  us  much 
to  know  by  how  many  predecessors  each  of  the  now 
known  planets  have  been  heralded  in  past  ages.  But 
there  are  some  aspects  of  the  problem  which  do  present 
features  of  peculiar  interest  as  applied  to  our  own  chain, 
and  without  making  any  conjectures  as  to  the  extent  to 
which  the  analogies  of  our  own  scheme  apply  to  others, 
attention  may  usefully  be  turned  at  this  stage  of  the  in- 
quiry to  the  plan  on  which  our  own  planetary  habitations 
are  from  time  to  time  remodelled. 

As  the  tide  wave  of  life  leaves  each  planet  (in  our 
scheme)  during  the  seventh  round  of  any  Manvantara, 
each  planet  in  turn  is  disintegrated,  and  the  matter  of 
which  it  is  composed  returns  to  the  general  ocean  of  such 
matter  within  the  solar  system.  Corresponding  planets 
are  evolved  afresh  for  the  next  Manvantara,  becoming  as 
it  were  re-incarnations  of  the  higher  principles  inherent 
in  the  old  planets.  This  arrangement,  however,  does  not 
apply  to  the  fourth  planet  of  each  chain — the  most  physical 
in  its  constitution.  That  loses  a  good  deal  of  the  matter 
forming  it  in  a  way  that  will  be  appreciated  directly,  and 
in  its  shrunken  condition  becomes  the  moon  of  its  suc- 
cessor. Each  new  physical  planet  so  called  into  being 
may  be  created  as  new  solar  systems  themselves  are  created 
in  the  first  instance — according  to  different  methods;  but 
our  earth  appears  to  have  been  engendered  on  a  plan  closely 

THE  SYSTEM  223 

resembling  that  by  which  our  whole  system  was  developed. 
Within  the  appropriate  area  of  space,  a  planetary  nebula 
was  evolved,  the  matter  of  which  it  was  composed  being 
drawn  in  from  surrounding  space,  itself  no  doubt  the  dis- 
integrated material  of  former  planets  that  had  been  broken 
up,  or  to  some  extent  no  doubt  meteoric  matter  belonging 
to  the  system  at  large  that  may  not  have  been  previously 
utilised  in  that  way.  The  new  earth  nebula  was  developed 
round  a  centre  bearing  pretty  much  the  same  relation  to  the 
dying  planet  that  the  centres  of  the  earth  and  moon  bear 
to  one  another  at  present.  But  in  the  nebulous  condition 
this  aggregation  of  matter  occupied  an  enormously  greater 
volume  than  the  solid  matter  of  the  earth  now  occupies. 
It  stretched  out  in  all  directions  so  as  to  include  the  old 
planet  in  its  fiery  embrace.  The  temperature  of  a  new 
nebula  appears  to  be  considerably  higher  than  any  tempera- 
tures we  are  acquainted  with,  and  by  this  means  the  old 
planet  was  superficially  heated  afresh  in  such  a  manner 
that  all  atmosphere,  water,  and  volatilisable  matter  upon  it 
was  brought  into  the  gaseous  condition,  and  so  became 
amenable  to  the  new  centre  of  attraction,  set  up  at  the 
centre  of  the  new  nebula.  In  this  way  the  air  and  seas 
of  the  old  planet  were  drawn  over  into  the  constitution 
of  the  new  one,  and  thus  it  is  that  the  moon  in  its  present 
state  is  an  arid,  glaring  mass,  dry  and  cloudless,  no  longer 
habitable,  and  no  longer  required  for  the  habitation  of  any 
physical  beings.  When  the  present  Manvantara  is  nearly 
over,  during  the  seventh  round,  its  disintegration  will  be 
completed,  and  the  matter  which  it  still  holds  together 
will  resolve  into  meteoric  dust,  to  be  made  use  of,  mixed 
with  the  ocean  of  all  such  matter,  in  the  formation  of 
new  planetary  nebulas  hereafter. 

But    without    attempting    to    forecast    in    detail    the 

224   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

processes  associated  with  that  far  distant  event,  we  may  ex- 
pand the  statement  with  reference  to  the  remote  past  when 
our  own  planet  was  in  process  of  construction,  by  the 
addition  of  a  great  deal  more  detail,  not  merely  interesting 
on  its  own  account,  but  conducive,  when  fully  understood, 
to  a  better  comprehension  than  is  obtainable  in  any  other 
way  of  many  physical  phenomena  in  progress  on  the  earth 
at  the  present  time.  The  condensation  of  what  I  have 
described  above  as  the  vast  planetary  nebula  out  of  which 
the  earth  was  composed,  was  not  in  fact  a  process  accom- 
plished at  one  coup.  In  harmony  with  the  analogies  which 
nature  suggests  around  us  in  every  direction,  the  growth 
of  the  planet  itself  was  a  gradual  process,  and  the  first 
condensation  gave  rise  to  a  globe  very  much  smaller  in 
magnitude  than  this  on  which  we  now  stand,  but  which 
in  the  progress  of  ages  was  destined  to  be  the  nucleus 
around  which  the  complete  planet  would  be  constructed. 
It  is  just  worth  while  before  passing  on  to  an  account  of 
the  successive  stages,  to  take  note  of  the  fact  that  in  a 
work  put  together  from  the  point  of  view  of  ordinary 
astronomy,  "  The  Nebular  Theory,"  by  Mr.  William 
Ford  Stanley,  that  author  recognises  the  possibility  as  sug- 
gested by  purely  physical  considerations,  that  the  planets 
were  not  formed  by  one  single  operation  but  by  a  series 
of  successive  condensations.  And  another  representative 
of  exoteric  science  on  wholly  different  grounds  has  come 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  interior  of  the  earth  in  its 
present  state  exhibits  a  condition  of  things  which  would 
be  in  harmony  with  the  idea  of  successive  condensations. 
The  actual  fact  I  understand  to  be  that  the  planet  on 
which  we  are  at  present  living  was  the  result  of  several 
condensations  of  nebulous  matter,  and  the  constitution  of 
the  Earth  at  this  mature  period  of  its  existence  is  only 

THE  SYSTEM  225 

to  be  understood  by  reference  to  this  method  of  develop- 
ment. The  nucleus  having  been  formed  in  the  first  in- 
stance in  the  way  already  described,  a  considerable  time 
was  allowed  to  elapse  before  the  second  deposition  of 
matter  took  place.  In  this  interval  the  surface  of  the 
nucleus  had  time  to  solidify  and  cool  down  to  temperatures 
in  which  all  but  its  more  volatile  ingredients  assumed,  on 
the  surface,  the  solid  state.  Then  another  clash  of 
meteoric  streams  surrounded  the  young  Earth  with  a  huge 
envelope  of  fresh  nebulous  matter.  I  say  "  nebulous  " 
because  the  heat  engendered  by  the  collision  of  the  meteor 
streams  would  resolve  the  meteoric  matter  back  again  into 
its  primitive  state.  It  is  necessary,  indeed,  that  such  a 
return  should  be  included  in  the  process  in  order  to  provide 
the  growing  Earth  with  the  varied  materials  required  in  its 
composition.  Meteoric  matter  for  the  most  part  is  simple 
in  its  composition,  and  very  largely  made  up  of  certain 
metals  of  which  iron  is  the  most  abundant.  But  a  planet 
consisting  almost  entirely  of  iron  would  not  be  a  suitable 
home  for  the  evolutions  it  might  be  destined  to  bear. 
Occult  teaching  in  reference  to  the  constitution  of  matter 
comes  in  here  to  relieve  us  of  the  embarrassment  this 
thought  suggests.  Thrown  back  into  the  nebulous  con- 
dition by  the  intense  heat  of  the  meteoric  collision,  the 
matter  of  the  meteor  streams,  even  if  it  had  all  been  iron 
to  begin  with,  would  be  once  more  in  the  etheric  state — 
in  that  state  in  which  Sir  William  Crookes  has  called  it 
"  protyle  "  in  connection  with  his  extremely  admirable 
and  occultly  justified  theory  of  "  the  Genesis  of  the 
Elements."  From  that  state  it  would  be  capable  of  rear- 
ranging its  atoms  in  the  varied  forms  of  the  many  chemical 
elements  required  for  the  service  of  a  life-bearing  planet. 
The  new  envelope  of  nebulous  matter  is  destined  to 

16 

226    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

condense  into  a  complete  solid  shell  surrounding  the 
original  nucleus,  and  here  it  is  for  the  first  time  in  the 
course  of  this  explanation  necessary  to  interpolate  an  idea 
for  which  we  are  not  fully  prepared  by  any  ordinary 
habits  of  scientific  thought.  When  the  outer  shell  has 
been  completely  solidified,  the  condition  of  things  we  find 
to  exist  is  this  :  The  volatile  ingredients  in  the  composition 
of  the  original  nucleus  have  not  been,  as  expectation  might 
have  led  us  to  expect,  squeezed  through  the  newly 
deposited  shell  of  solid  matter,  but  have  been  confined 
within  that  at  an  enormous  pressure  and  at  a  corresponding 
temperature.  At  the  stage  of  the  Earth's  growth  we  have 
reached  in  imagination,  we  have  an  interior  globe  of  solid 
matter,  the  central  portions  of  which  are  still  at  an  enor- 
mously High  temperature  while  the  outer  crust  is  rela- 
tively cool.  But  on  the  surface  of  that  crust  there  exists 
a  stratum  of  compressed  gaseous  matter,  largely  consisting 
of  water  in  its  gaseous  form,  at  the  temperature,  or  even 
exceeding  through  contraction,  the  temperature  of  the 
nebula  which  condensed  upon  it.  We  cannot  expect  at 
this  stage  of  our  knowledge  to  understand  precisely  how 
the  condensation  is  so  effected  as  to  keep  the  gaseous  matter 
within  the  new  shell,  but  no  extravagant  amount  of  intel- 
lectual modesty  is  required  to  induce  us  to  recognise  that 
there  may  be  laws  of  nature  which  come  into  play  when 
new  planets  are  being  constructed,  the  full  details  of  which 
are  missing  as  yet  from  our  present  catalogue  of  such  laws. 
The  outer  shell  having  in  its  turn  had  time  to  cool  down 
so  that  its  least  volatile  ingredients  are  solid,  and  its  more 
volatile  ingredients  in  the  atmospheric  state  around  it,  H 
third  process  sets  in.  Again  there  is  a  clash  of  meteor 
streams,  another  vast  nebulous  sheath  is  condensed  around 
the  growing  globe,  and  in  time  this  forms,  a  second  shell 

THE  SYSTEM  227 

with  a  stratum  of  confined  gaseous  matter  between  it  and 
the  interior  shell.  Further  operations  of  a  similar 
character  are  carried  on  at  later  stages  of  the  planet's 
growth  until  it  arrives  at  maturity,  and  consists  as  at 
present  of  six  concentric  spheres  or  shells  surrounding  a 
central  nucleus,  with  strata  of  hot  gaseous  matter  inter- 
vening between  each  sphere  and  its  neighbours.  The  outer 
shells  are  of  considerably  greater  thickness  than  those  im- 
mediately surrounding  the  nucleus,  and  the  outermost  of 
all,  with  which  we  are  concerned,  is  much  the  thickest 
of  all.  Within  this,  however,  there  is  a  shallow  stratum  of 
heated  matter  at  a  depth  of  about  twenty-five  or  thirty 
miles  below  the  surface.  It  is  of  a  wholly  different 
character  from  the  interstitial  spaces  of  hot  condensed 
gases.  It  is  simply  a  portion  of  the  Earth's  solid  shell 
which  is  hot  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  it  was  an  extra 
nebulous  condensation  superimposed  upon  the  otherwise 
completely  finished  planet,  with  an  end  in  view,  no  doubt, 
which  I  do  not  as  yet  exactly  understand,  but  which  I 
believe  to  have  related  in  some  way  to  the  ultimate 
development  of  the  vegetable  kingdom.  The  surface  layer 
of  hot  matter  (as  it  may  be  called  by  comparison  with  the 
interstitial  layers  far  down  in  the  depths  of  the  globe)  was 
a  kind  of  "  top  dressing,"  to  use  an  agricultural  expression, 
which  seems  to  have  been  provided  for  as  regards  the  actual 
material  used  up,  by  the  disintegration  of  the  two  outer 
shells  of  the  Moon.  Some  forecast  of  this  condition  of 
things  has  been  already  embodied  in  theosophic  writings  as 
mentioned  above,  but  the  present  explanations  will  advance 
our  comprehension  of  the  matter  to  some  extent.  Leaving 
over  for  the  moment  the  fuller  interpretation  of  the  state- 
ment just  made  about  the  two  outer  shells  of  the  Moon, 
let  us  keep  to  the  Earth's  history  till  that  is  further 

1 6* 

228    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

developed.  The  final  "  top  dressing  "  was  not  designed  to 
form  a  new  shell  separate  in  any  way  from  the  great 
crust  already  formed.  It  did  not  operate  to  confine 
between  itself  and  the  established  surface  any  atmospheric 
gases.  It  was  simply  a  hot  layer  of  physical  matter,  the 
more  volatile  portions  of  which  remained  in  the  atmosphere 
of  the  globe  already  formed,  while  the  solid  portions  settled 
down  and  beginning  to  cool  from  the  outside,  eventually 
established  the  conditions  now  prevailing.  Of  course  at 
first  the  whole  new  layer  of  physical  matter  twenty-five 
miles  thick  was  incandescent,  but  the  cooling  and  solidifi- 
cation of  the  surface  prepared  the  way  for  the  establish- 
ment thereon  of  the  geological  deposits  with  which  we 
are  familiar,  and,  eventually,  for  the  development  of  the 
vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms. 

I  have  been  interested  in  finding  since  I  have  been  at 
work  upon  this  interpretation  of  the  Earth's  constitu- 
tion, that  in  other  schools  of  oriental  occultism  besides 
that  with  which  my  own  opportunities  have  chiefly 
brought  me  into  contact,  the  Earth  is  described  as 
resembling  in  its  constitution  "  the  skins  of  an  onion." 
The  subject  has  not  hitherto  been  treated  in  any  western 
exposition  of  theosophic  teaching,  but  the  main  ideas  of 
the  present  explanation  are  vaguely  in  circulation  already 
among  the  pupils  of  some  eastern  occultists,  even  though 
the  onion  with  its  skins  would  not  constitute  a  satisfac- 
tory analogy  for  the  western  scientific  mind  once  directed 
to  the  problems  of  the  Earth's  constitution. 

In  some  earlier  theosophic  writings  vague  reference 
has  been  made  to  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Earth."  There  is 
such  a  Spirit,  belonging  to  an  evolution  quite  apart  from 
our  own,  who  is  in  the  first  instance  an  emanation  from 
the  stupendous  life  of  the  Sun.  And  such  an  emanation 

THE  SYSTEM  229 

is  the  first  step  taken  in  connection  with  the  creation  of 
any  planet  of  the  system.  It  is  by  his  power  that  the 
meteor  streams  are  guided  in  the  paths  of  those  tremendous 
collisions  which  give  rise  to  the  successive  nebulous  clouds 
required  for  the  construction  of  the  successive  concentric 
spheres.  The  nucleus-globe  remains  to  the  end  of  the 
planet's  life  his  great  workshop — if  the  phrase  may  be 
allowed — and  storehouse  of  those  incomprehensible 
energies  which  maintain  the  physical  health  of  the  planet. 

The  heat  of  the  interior  of  the  central  globe  far  exceeds 
any  temperature  maintained  in  the  interstitial  spaces,  and  a 
vast  army  of  Elemental  Agencies  is  employed  there,  under 
the  direction  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Earth,  on  tasks  the  nature 
of  which  is  utterly  beyond  the  range  of  our  present  com- 
prehension. But  our  world  somehow  depends  for  its 
continued  life  on  the  activities  carried  on  in  the  central 
globe,  and  they  are  never  relaxed  until  the  planet  con- 
cerned has  fulfilled  its  destiny  and  the  time  has  come 
for  its  decease  or  disintegration. 

I  understand  that  life  exists  in  the  Earth's  interior,  even 
in  the  intensely  hot  regions  of  the  interstitial  spaces,  and 
startling  as  the  idea  may  seem  at  the  first  glance,  it  is  only 
for  the  cramped  understandings  of  people  brought  up  to 
regard  the  conditions  around  them  as  the  only  kind  com- 
patible with  consciousness,  that  the  conception  will  be 
seriously  embarrassing.  Flesh  and  blood  designed  to  be 
the  vehicle  of  consciousness  on  the  surface  of  the  external 
sphere  and  at  temperatures  familiar  to  human  life  would 
not  be  adapted  to  temperatures  at  which  platinum  would  be 
a  mobile  liquid,  but  every  occult  student  is  well  aware  that 
his  consciousness,  his  life,  can  go  on  just  as  freely  when  he 
is  in  an  astral  vehicle  or  body  as  when  he  is  animating 
flesh  and  blood.  And  in  the  astral  vehicle,  physical 

230    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

temperature  is  a  condition  that  does  not  affect  him  one  way 
or  the  other.  In  an  astral  body  he  could  live  as  comfortably 
in  the  heart  of  a  furnace  or  in  the  midst  of  arctic  ice-floes 
as  in  the  meadows  of  an  English  farm  in  the  summer. 
It  is  not  even  necessary  to  assume  that  the  bodies  of  the 
beings  who  inhabit  the  interstitial  spaces  of  the  earth  are 
entirely  of  astral  matter.  That  intervening  condition  of 
matter  which  is  called  etheric  would,  perhaps,  furnish  the 
material  adapted  to  provide  vehicles  of  consciousness  for 
the  beings  in  question.  However  this  may  be  arranged, 
this  closely  packed  earth  of  ours  is  made  use  of  through- 
out. Not  merely  in  the  heated  spaces  that  constitute  the 
surface  of  each  interior  globe  but  within  the  substance 
of  each  concentric  sphere  there  are  forms  of  life  adapted 
to  the  conditions  around.  For  in  the  cool  and  solid  depths 
of  each  mighty  crust  there  are  great  cavernous  spaces  in 
which  beings  exist  who  are  going  through  evolutions  of 
their  own,  and  are  scarcely  in  touch  at  all  with  the  supreme 
evolution — supreme  as  far  as  this  Earth  is  concerned — to 
which  the  human  race  belongs.  Very  little  information 
relating  to  these  interior  races  has  reached  me,  and  it 
would  be  useless  to  speculate  as  to  the  purpose  in  the 
whole  economy  of  the  system  served  by  the  involvement 
of  any  part  of  the  Supreme  consciousness,  in  forms  and  in 
the  midst  of  conditions  that  do  not  appear  favourable 
to  spiritual  or  any  other  kind  of  growth.  But  the  varieties 
of  condition  under  which  life  is  carried  on,  in  and  around 
the  world  we  share  with  so  many  other  tenants,  is  all  but 
infinite.  Nor  is  the  life  of  the  Earth's  interior  confined 
to  the  more  or  less  intelligent  beings  or  entities  established 
there.  Wild  as  the  notion  may  strike  one  at  the  first 
glance,  there  is  something  analogous  to  a  vegetable  king- 
dom on  the  white  hot  surfaces  of  the  interior  globes — 

THE  SYSTEM  231 

actual  plants  with  leaves  and  a  kind  of  granular  circulation 
analogous  to  the  sap  of  plants  on  the  outer  surface.  If 
difficulties  present  themselves  to  the  mind  as  we  endeavour 
to  realise  the  scenes  of  these  strange  worlds  within  our 
own,  that  is  merely  due  to  the  false  system  on  which  the 
average  mind  of  the  nineteenth  century  has  been  educated. 
The  tendency  has  been  not  merely  to  encourage  the  idea 
that  "  what  I  know  not  is  not  knowledge  "  but  to  invest 
the  victims  of  our  educational  system  with  a  conviction 
that  what  they  do  not  understand  cannot  exist.  We  do 
know  something  of  the  relationship  in  space  and  magni- 
tude between  the  habitable  portions  of  the  Earth's  surface 
and  the  universe  at  large.  And  yet  the  nineteenth  century 
mind  has  been  only  half  inclined  to  admit  that  there  may 
be  intelligent  beings  in  other  worlds  than  ours — always 
assuming  that  some  of  these  may  be  adequately  provided 
with  water,  food,  and  sunshine,  without  which  we  know 
life  is  impossible !  The  contrast  afforded  by  the  brilliant 
intellectual  achievements  of  the  nineteenth  century  mind 
along  some  lines  of  activity  and  investigation,  with  the 
imbecile  silliness  of  its  habitual  limitations,  is  equally 
irritating  and  amusing  to  the  occult  student  who  has  got 
outside  those  limitations.  But  even  for  many  such 
students,  familiar  though  they  may  be  with  the  idea  of 
superior  planes  of  Nature  and  faculties  of  a  wider  reach 
than  those  of  the  physical  brain,  the  explanation  here  given 
of  the  real  condition  of  the  Earth's  interior  may  be 
received  with  a  kind  of  gasping  surprise.  We  were  not 
prepared  for  so  complex  an  organisation  in  the  body  of  our 
planet,  any  more  than  the  physiologists  of,  say,  the  Eliza- 
bethan period  were  prepared  to  find  so  much  in  the  human 
body  as  later  research  has  disclosed.  But  in  all  likeli- 
hood the  sketch  here  given  errs  in  its  omissions  to  a  far 

232    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

greater  extent  than  in  its  positive  statements.  It  is  a  mere 
broad  outline  of  the  story  that  might  be  told  by  those 
thoroughly  conversant  with  the  facts.  The  interest  from 
the  mere  scientific  point  of  view  of  further  detail  if  we 
could  obtain  it  would  be  intense,  but  for  the  present  we 
must  remain,  if  not  content,  unsatisfied  as  regards  the  mul- 
titude of  questions  that  naturally  arise  in  the  mind.  To 
what  extent  does  the  incombustible  vegetable  kingdom  of 
the  interior  surfaces  cover  the  whole  glowing  landscape  ? 
Are  there  forests  of  white  hot  trees,  and  is  there  an  appro- 
priate animal  kingdom  associated  with  the  others  of  the 
inner  worlds?  The  beings  in  more  or  less  astral  bodies 
already  referred  to,  would  be  the  relatively  human  king- 
dom in  each  case,  the  head  evolution  of  the  series  to  which 
it  belonged,  but  it  is  more  than  probable  that  it  would  be 
surrounded  by  satellite  evolutions,  as  our  own  on  the  outer 
surface  is  so  surrounded. 

With  intense  heat  we  naturally  associate  the  idea  of 
light,  so  as  regards  the  inhabitants  of  the  regions  I  have 
called  the  interstitial  spaces  there  is  no  need  to  consider 
the  question  how  these  are  illuminated.  But  directly  we 
confront  that  question  we  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the 
mistaken  impulse  which  prompts  it.  If  the  intelligent 
beings  of  the  inner  regions  are  invested  with  astral  vehicles 
of  consciousness  they  see  with  senses  altogether  unlike 
those  of  the  physical  plane,  and  are  thus  quite  indepen- 
dent of  physical  plane  light.  A  very  moderate  acquaint- 
ance with  the  experiences  of  super-physical  research 
amongst  ourselves  will  render  us  familiar  with  the  idea 
that  darkness  is  more  favourable  than  what  we  call  light 
to  the  activities  of  some  beings  at  all  events  functioning  in 
astral  vehicles  of  consciousness.  So  it  may  easily  be  that 
the  beings  inhabiting  the  dark  interior  caverns  of  the  solid 

THE  SYSTEM  233 

crusts  may  have  senses  to  which  that  darkness  is  perfectly 
luminous.  It  is  apparently  held  by  the  authorities  of  the 
Earth  that  the  humanity  of  the  outer  surface  should  be 
effectually  cut  off  from  communication  with  the  interior 
kingdoms,  and  this  may  be  provided  for  by  the  heated 
stratum  at  the  twenty-five  mile  depth  through  which  it  is 
quite  impossible  that  any  inquisitive  borings  on  our  part 
should  ever  penetrate.  But  knowledge  may  be  gained,  as 
occult  students  are  well  aware,  in  reference  to  regions 
quite  beyond  the  reach  of  physical  investigation.  And  so 
it  is  coming  to  pass  that  we  are  learning  something  of  the 
conditions  under  which  existence  is  carried  on  in  the 
deeply  buried  cavern  worlds  of  the  Earth's  interior. 

All  thoughts  will  turn  in  connection  with  this  subject 
to  the  beautiful  story  evolved  from  Lord  Lytton's  imagina- 
tion concerning  the  magnificent  civilisation  of  his 
"  Coming  Race."  But  though  there  is  just  so  much  actual 
justification  for  the  tale  in  question  as  is  embodied  in  the 
fact  that  races  do  actually  exist  in  vast  cavernous  spaces 
in  the  interior  of  the  outermost  and  some  others  of  the 
concentric  globes,  we  must  deny  ourselves  the  intellectual 
luxury  of  conceiving  that  the  superb  Gy-ei  of  Vrilya  will 
ever  ascend  to  the  upper  world  to  set  our  "  Koom-poshes  " 
in  order.  The  interior  evolutions  are  far  below. the  intel- 
lectual level  of  even  our  present  humanity,  although  they 
are  advanced  enough  to  have  something  like  systems  of 
government,  dwelling-places  of  artificial  construction,  and 
to  put  inscriptions  on  the  walls  of  their  inner  world. 

Yet  a  third  order  of  consciousness  ranges  the  interior 
spaces  of  the  Earth,  but  this  is  altogether  elemental  in  its 
character.  I  have  spoken  of  the  armies  of  "fire  elementals  ' 
employed  under  the  Spirit  of  the  Earth  on  the  mysterious 
tasks  carried  out  in  the  central  globe  of  all.  Elemental 

234   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

evolutions  are  very  difficult  to  understand,  but  in  some 
way  there  is  an  evolution  outwards  possible  for  these  fire 
elerhentals,  and  an  emergence  for  them  in  some  cases  into 
the  superior  elemental  life  of  the  external  surface  of  the 
earth.  I  can  say  so  little  on  this  subject  that  it  may  seem 
to  some  readers  hardly  worth  while  to  have  said  anything 
at  all,  but  vague  as  our  information  must  for  the  present 
remain  in  reference  to  the  interior  evolutions,  the  mere 
recognition  of  these  as  in  progress  is  calculated  to  enlarge 
our  view  of  the  Nature  of  which  we  form  a  part.  To  my 
mind  there  is  a  gulf  of  difference  in  the  conception  of  this 
Vast  planet  on  the  surface  of  which  we  roam  about,  as  a 
huge  lump  of  inorganic  matter  serviceable  for  no  other 
purpose  than  to  bear  the  minute  organisms  swarming  on 
its  outside,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  conception  of  it  as  a 
teeming  hive  of  life  and  consciousness  filled  to  overflow- 
ing with  the  vital  influence  of  the  Logos.  The  mere 
physical  complexity  of  its  structure  as  now  explained  dig- 
nifies the  whole  globe  as  compared  with  the  crude  ideas 
of  its  interior  condition  prevalent  in  the  common  imagina- 
tion hitherto.  And  although  orthodox  science — as  bigoted 
in  reference  to  its  methods  as  the  Church  in  reference  to 
its  dogmas — will  decline  any  enlightenment  that  does  not 
come  along  familiar  roads,  occult  students  will  be  enabled 
by  the  explanations  now  set  forth  to  check  some  of  the 
speculations  concerning  the  past  history  of  the  Earth  in 
which  scientific  writes  allow  themselves  to  indulge.  We 
are  constantly  told  that  the  manner  in  which  the  Moon 
rotates  once  on  her  axis  in  the  same  time  that  she  revolves 
once  round  the  Earth,  is  the  result  of  tidal  action  in  the 
remote  past.  The  satellite  is  assumed  to  have  been  cast 
off  from  the  Earth  while  this  was  still  in  its  early  molten 
condition  and  having  thus  been  flung  into  space  to  have 

THE  SYSTEM  235 

settled  down  to  its  present  habits  as  the  result  of  tidal 
retardation  while  it  was  still  a  plastic  mass.  Tidal  friction 
is  very  much  in  favour  just  now  among  speculative 
physicists  as  an  explanation  of  some  phenomena  that  have 
taken  place  (in  an  entirely  different  way)  and  of  some 
others  (erroneously)  assumed  to  be  in  preparation  for  the 
future.  As  the  Moon  was  really  in  existence  for  millions 
of  years  before  the  first  initial  measures  were  taken  for  the 
formation  of  the  Earth,  all  guesses  based  upon  the  idea 
that  it  was  a  bit  of  the  original  Earth  torn  off  by  an  early 
convulsion  of  Nature  are  little  likely  to  find  themselves 
in  harmony  with  the  truth.  The  Moon  is,  indeed,  a  dead 
planet  now,  not  because  it  has  never  been  anything  else, 
as  the  conventional  theory  would  imply,  but  because  it  has 
fulfilled  its  part  in  the  economy  of  the  scheme  to  which  it 
belonged  and  is  in  process  of  disintegration. 

For  the  final  return  to  the  bosom  of  Nature  of  the 
materials  used  in  the  construction  of  a  planet  is  accom- 
plished by  degrees,  just  as  the  planet  in  the  beginning  has 
been  built  up  by  degrees.  The  concentric  sphere  arrange- 
ment is,  as  I  infer  from  what  I  have  learned,  the  method 
of  planetary  formation  adopted  throughout  the  solar 
system,  but  at  any  rate  it  was  the  method  adopted  in  the 
formation  of  the  Moon  in  the  beginning  (long  before  the 
Earth  was  thought  about)  just  as  in  our  own  case  after- 
wards. And  when  the  active  life  of  the  Lunar  world  was 
over  and  its  physical  body  had  to  be  dispersed  again — as 
in  the  case  of  each  one  of  us  when  each  life  is  spent  the 
physical  body  concerned  has  to  return  to  dust — the  outer- 
most shells  disintegrated  first.  As  with  their  original  con- 
struction forces  are  employed  that  we  do  not  habitually 
reckon  with,  so  in  the  processes  of  disintegration  agencies 
of  an  unfamiliar  kind  take  the  work  in  hand,  but  the  broad 

236    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

idea  is  that  when  the  Spirit  of  the  Planet  that  is  outworn 
has  no  longer  any  work  to  do  there  he  leaves  it  and  decay 
sets  in  as  naturally  as  it  sets  in  with  a  human  corpse  when 
the  soul  has  fled  away.  In  its  full  maturity,  the  Moon 
must  have  been  a  planet  about  the  same  size  as  our  own, 
for  as  we  look  at  it  now  we  see  the  surface  of  what  was 
originally  its  third  concentric  sphere  going  inwards.  The 
two  outer  ones  have  been  shed,  and  the  matter  of  which 
they  were  composed  no  doubt  largely  drawn  upon  for  the 
final  deposit  of  matter  on  the  outer  shell  of  the  Earth.  A 
long  time  will  yet  elapse  before  the  four  remaining  shells 
arid  the  internal  nucleus  return  to  the  oceanic  store  of 
meteoric  matter,  but  time  in  these  undertakings  is  spent 
by  Nature  with  much  prodigality.  In  guess-work  con- 
cerning the  duration  of  astronomical  periods  modern 
science  has  not  yet  been  furnished  with  data  on  which  to 
proceed  with  security,  and  its  confidence  in  the  data  which 
it  assumes  is  apt  to  be  misplaced.  Thus  all  calculations 
relating  to  the  supposed  maintenance  of  the  Sun's  heat  by 
shrinkage  are  quite  ludicrously  wrong,  and  the  forecasts  at 
present  in  favour  as  regards  the  time  at  which  there  will 
be  no  room  for  it  to  shrink  any  more,  and  at  which  con- 
sequently the  planetary  family  around  it  will  be  frozen  to 
death,  will  sooner  or  later  be  looked  back  upon  by  the 
science  of  the  future  as  quite  on  a  level  with  the  theory 
of  the  tortoise  that  supports  the  world.  I  am  little  in- 
clined, however,  to  encourage  the  flippancy  of  some 
occultists  who  speak  disrespectfully  of  modern  science 
because  our  information  enables  us  to  catch  it  out  here  and 
there  in  mistakes.  The  science  of  the  western  world  is 
in  the  van  of  human  intelligence,  if  we  except  only  the 
wisdom  of  Adeptship.  Its  achievements  so  far  have  been 
beautiful  and  glorious.  It  merely  needs  now  to  avail  itself 

THE  SYSTEM  237 

of  the  wonderful  instruments  of  research  which  lie  but 
half  hidden  in  the  depths  of  human  faculty,  and  then  it 
will  carry  the  exquisite  discipline  of  its  thought  into 
regions  where  at  present  only  a  few  exceptionally  gifted 
explorers  are  roaming,  unprepared  by  their  training  for 
the  work  they  attempt  to  perform.  In  times  not  long 
gone  by,  the  reconciliation  of  science  and  religion  was 
hoped  for  by  enthusiasts  as  promising,  when  it  should  be 
accomplished,  some  immense  advance  in  general  civilisa- 
tion. That  union  is  in  process  of  realisation,  religion 
having,  so  to  speak,  accorded  a  grudging  consent.  But 
the  next  great  step  must  be  the  reconciliation  of 
science  and  occultism.  That,  too,  must  come,  though 
perhaps  this  time  it  will  be  the  scientific  world  that  will 
show  some  disposition  to  be  sulky  as  the  change  forces 
its  way.  That  will  not  matter  in  the  long  run,  and  in 
that  long  run  the  state  of  facts  dealt  with  in  this  volume 
will  assuredly  be  the  subject  of  investigations  with  which 
future  members  of  the  Royal  Society  will  be  engaged, 
though  at  the  moment  the  wonderful  story  I  have  had 
to  tell  may  find  even  some  Theosophists  incredulous, 
unless  they  have  intuition  enough  to  feel  sure  that,  all 
things  considered,  I  should  not  be  likely  to  put  it  forward 
without  such  assurance  of  its  accuracy  as  suffices  to  justify 
its  association  with  the  many  other  Fragments  of  Occult 
Truth  which  it  has  been  my  privilege  to  set  forth. 

The  changes  which  thus  take  place  from  time  to  time 
within  the  interior  economy  of  the  solar  system  must,  of 
course,  produce  perturbing  effects  on  the  movements  of 
planets  already  in  existence  at  any  given  period  when  an 
old  planet  is  disintegrated,  or  a  new  one  solidified,  and 
probably  such  perturbations  play  a  part  in  the  cyclic 
processes  going  forward  in  the  active  worlds  of  the  time. 

238    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

It  sometimes  happens  that  isolated  statements  cropping  up 
in  occult  teaching  point  to  astronomical  events  that  we 
cannot  easily  refer  to  cosmic  causes  visibly  in  operation. 
They  are  very  likely  promoted  by  changes  which  are 
going  on  in  what  may  be  called  the  configuration  of  the 
system,  at  great  intervals.  It  can  never  fall  to  the  lot  of 
any  one  generation  of  observant  beings  on  any  one  planet 
to  witness  the  evolution  of  a  new  world  or  the  destruc- 
tion of  an  old  one.  Such  processes  are  protracted  com- 
pared with  the  span  of  human  life.  But  crises  must  come 
on  at  some  periods  in  the  future  when  rational  inhabitants 
of  some  planets  may  see  new  worlds  in  formation,  or 
processes  in  activity  foreshadowing  the  disintegration  of 
some  aged  planet  that  has  fulfilled  its  purpose. 

The  seven  great  schemes  of  planetary  evolution  pro- 
ceed on  independent  lines,  but  helpfulness  is  the  law  of 
life  throughout  the  entire  system,  and  in  this  way  it  comes 
to  pass  that  the  various  schemes  are  not  rigidly  excluded 
from  the  possibility  of  receiving  benefits  from  others.  On 
this  subject  we  need  only  concern  ourselves  with  one 
example  of  such  intercommunication,  but  it  is  important 
to  comprehend  this  one  example  correctly  if  we  are 
endeavouring  to  understand  our  own  evolutionary  history. 
The  Venus  scheme,  as  already  stated,  is  in  the  seventh 
round  of  its  fifth  Manvantara,  we  of  the  earth  chain  being 
at  present  in  the  fourth  round  of  the  fourth  Manvantara. 
Thus  the  humanity  of  the  Venus  chain  was  already  on 
spiritual  levels  immensely  higher  than  those  of  our 
humanity  when  we  were  still  struggling  on  in  the  earlier 
phases  of  our  evolution  during  this  earth  period.  So 
it  came  to  pass  that  some  representatives  of  the  Venus 
Adeptship,  availing  themselves  of  possibilities  having 
to  do  with  immensely  exalted  spiritual  planes  com- 

THE  SYSTEM  239 

mon  to  the  whole  solar  system,  transferred  themselves 
to  this  earth  for  a  time  during  part  of  the  third  and  early 
fourth  race,  and  took  part  in  the  teaching  and  guidance 
of  our  comparatively  infant  humanity. 

Readers  approaching  these  conceptions  for  the  first  time 
may  be  inclined  to  wonder  how  so  great  a  gulf  on  the 
scale  of  evolution  can  have  separated  the  earlier  humanity 
of  this  world  period  from  that  inhabiting  the  earth  to-day, 
and  including  masters  of  wisdom  who  have  already  scaled 
heights  on  a  level,  so  far  as  we  cart  understand,  with  those 
from  which  our  Venus  teachers  descended.  The  explana- 
tion lies  in  this  simple  fact  that  until  the  midway  point  of 
any  Manvantara  is  reached  the  whole  process  of  evolution 
must  be  thought  of  as  a  downward  growth  into  the  com- 
plexities of  materiality.  No  one,  however  individually 
ripe  for  spiritual  evolution,  could  begin  to  transcend  his 
companions  in  any  extraordinary  degree  until  the  middle 
point  of  the  Manvantara  was  turned.  Then  he  had  a 
clear  course  before  him;  it  was  possible  for  anyone,  assum- 
ing extraordinary  aptitudes  on  his  part,  to  achieve  in  a 
comparatively  brief  series  of  lives  the  whole  development, 
for  which,  as  regards  the  race  at  large,  Nature  liberally 
provides  the  whole  second  half  of  the  Manvantara.  Before 
the  midway  point  of  our  Manvantara — that  is  to  say, 
before  the  middle  period  of  the  great  root  race  preceding 
our  own — there  were  no  Adepts  belonging  to  our  human 
family;  thus  no  further  back  than  at  the  beginning  of  the 
great  Atlantean,  or  fourth  root  race,  the  earth  chain  was 
entirely  dependent  on  external  help  for  its  loftier  spiritual 
guidance. 

The  course  of  human  pirogress  through  this  world 
period,  therefore — the  history  of  the  great  root  races- 
may  be  best  studied  in  theosophical  books  devoted 

24o    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

specially  to  the  elucidation  of  that  magnificent  progress,  but 
the  general  character  of  such  progress  must  be  borne  in 
mind  by  all  who  would  form  a  mental  picture  of  the  whole 
system  to  which  we  belong,  calculated  to  give  an  intelli- 
gent significance  to  individual  progress.  Moreover,  the 
comprehension  of  the  way  the  great  race  evolution  has 
been,  and  is  going  on  during  this  world  period,  will 
connect  itself  in  a  peculiarly  interesting  way  with  the 
general  comprehension  of  the  whole  structure  of  the 
system. 

On  the  planet  Mars,  where  humanity  was  last  incar- 
nated before  the  world  period  of  the  earth  began,  humanity 
already  inhabited  physical  bodies,  and  was  endowed  with 
sufficient  human  intelligence  to  carry  out  architectural 
and  engineering  works  under  the  guidance  of  teachers 
belonging  to  a  superior  evolution.  On  completing  its 
cycle  on  that  planet  mankind  began  its  existence  on  this, 
under  conditions  which  can  hardly  be  thought  of  as 
physical.  The  vehicles  of  their  consciousness  were  of 
ethereal  matter,  insusceptible  to  heat  or  cold,  not  yet 
subject  to  laws  connected  with  waste  and  replenishment, 
which  operate  in  connection  with  the  more  compact 
organisms  of  our  time.  The  first  and  second  great  root 
races  were  of  this  order;  in  the  course  of  the  third,  the 
condensation  of  the  physical  vehicle  of  human  conscious- 
ness was  accomplished,  in  the  fourth  root  race  man  was 
in  the  beginning  considerably  bulkier  than  at  present,  was 
already  designed  on  the  physical  pattern  we  are  acquainted 
with,  and  divided  into  two  sexes.  The  course  of  evolution 
through  preceding  rounds  was  thus  recapitulated  in  the 
course  of  the  present  world  period  in  a  way  which  bears 
some  analogy  to  that  curious  recapitulation  of  physical 
existence  which  goes  on  at  the  present  day  in  connection 

THE  SYSTEM  241 

with  the  birth  of  every  fresh  physical  creature,  as  students 
of  embryology  are  well  aware. 

It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  the  whole  human 
family  of  this  scheme  evolved  during  the  first  half  of  the 
present  Manvantara  on  precisely  the  same  plan.  Our  last 
Manvantara,  the  third  or  Lunar  Manvantara,  so  called 
because  the  present  moon  was  then  the  physical  planet 
of  the  chain,  did  not  bring  forward  all  entities  to  levels 
which  correspond  to  what  we  think  of  as  humanity  to-day, 
but  it  afforded  some  scope  for  individual  progress,  and 
thus  left  the  family  at  its  close,  on  various  levels  of 
advancement. 

The  varied  requirements  of  the  situation  were  provided 
for  in  this  way  :  the  most  developed  entities  did  not  come 
into  incarnation  in  the  earlier  rounds  of  the  present  Man- 
vantara. These  earlier  rounds  afforded  an  appropriate 
field  of  activity  on  lower  levels  of  existence  for  the  less 
developed  entities,  and  while  these  were  enjoying  a  fresh 
opportunity  of  accomplishing  tRe  evolution  they  failed 
to  realise  properly  during  their  last  Manvantara,  the  highly 
developed  entities  of  that  Manvantara  were  passing 
through  periods  of  spiritual  existence  to  which  those  on 
the  lower  levels  had  no  access.  These  spiritual  periods 
occupied  periods  of  time  corresponding  to  three  round 
periods,  so  that  while  the  undeveloped  entities  of  the  last 
Manvantara  were,  so  to  speak,  bringing  the  next  into  a 
condition  which  once  more  would  afford  them  an  oppor- 
tunity of  making  progress  beyond  the  possibility  of  the  last 
Manvantara,  they  were  at  the  same  time  rendering  it 
suitable  for  the  occupation  of  their  elder  brethren  who 
had  not  only  attained  to  the  maximum  possibilities  of  the 
previous  Manvantara,  but  had  spent  time  corresponding 
to  the  three  first  rounds  of  the  next,  in  conditions  of 

242    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

existence  involving  definite  spiritual  progress.  Thus  only 
on  the  conclusion  of  the  three  spiritual  periods  did  the  most 
advanced  entities  of  the  last  Manvantara  come  into  incar- 
nation in  this.  In  the  technical  language  of  modern  occult 
study  the  most  advanced  entities  are  spoken  of  as  the  first 
class  Lunar  Pitris.  The  phrase  is  perfectly  intelligible 
and  significant,  when  we  bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  Pitri 
comes  from  the  same  root  as  Father,  and  simply  signifies 
ancestor. 

As  a  physical  planet  the  moon  is  now  but  the  dead 
body  of  the  planet  which  once  bore  the  mighty  life-wave 
of  the  human  family.  It  has  shrunk  to  relatively  small 
proportions,  for  not  only  have  its  subtle  principles  been 
re-incarnated  in  the  earth,  but  a  good  deal  of  its  physical 
matter  has  actually  been  withdrawn  from  it  to  the  body 
of  its  offspring.  The  process  by  which  this  result  was 
accomplished  has  been  already  described. 

So  then,  the  most  advanced  representatives  of  the  whole 
human  family  came  into  incarnation  in  this  Manvantara 
at  the  middle  period,  that  is  to  say,  during  the  present 
period  of  the  world's  activity,  in  a  condition  which  repre- 
sents the  maximum  development  possible  during  the  Lunar 
Manvantara,  plus  the  further  progress  accomplished  during 
the  three  spiritual  periods.  Thus  the  two  classes  who  have 
been  in  incarnation  during  the  earlier  rounds  of  this  Man- 
vantara have  had  an  opportunity  by  this  time  of  rising  to 
nearly  the  same  development  of  evolution,  but  are  still 
in  the  rear  of  the  foremost  class,  which,  as  the  whole 
body  continues  to  progress,  may  be  thought  of  as  still 
leading  the  van,  and  representing  in  our  own  time  all  those 
who  are  the  flower  of  our  own  age,  who  are  the  exponents 
of  its  most  advanced  intellectual  capacity,  and  especially 
those  who  at  the  earliest  possible  moment  in  the  life  of 

THE  SYSTEM  243 

the  world  show  aptitudes  for  spiritual  progress,  and  most 
readily  assimilate  such  teaching  concerning  the  higher 
destinies  of  man  as  are  involved  in  the  noblest  religious 
conceptions — especially  in  the  occult  philosophy  which 
unites  these  loftiest  aspirations  with  definite  knowledge 
concerning  the  superphysical  states  of  existence.  Not 
only  all  those  who  at  the  earliest  possible  date  emerge 
from  the  ruck  of  humanity,  and  taking  full  advantage  of 
the  guidance  received  from  those  of  a  superior  evolution, 
pass  upward  into  the  ranks  of  Adeptship,  but  all  those  who 
are  in  any  sense  their  pupils,  besides  all  those  whose 
intellectual  and  moral  development  is  of  a  kind  which  will 
render  them  available  as  occult  pupils  in  the  course  of  a 
few  more  incarnations,  may  be  thought  of  as  belonging 
to  the  class  spoken  of  as  the  first  of  the  Lunar  Pitris.  This 
statement  must  not  be  taken  as  implying  that  it  is  impos- 
sible for  entities  belonging  to  the  second  class  to  attain 
spiritual  exaltation,  but  at  the  present  stage  of  evolution 
the  great  majority  of  those  who  get  on  to  the  high  levels 
are  of  the  first  Pitri  class.  As  the  mighty  force  of  evolu- 
tio*n  sweeps  upward  during  the  successive  rounds  of  the 
Manvantara,  great  numbers  of  those  belonging  to  the 
second  class  will  gradually  attain  levels  of  spiritual  growth, 
from  which  they  also  will  be  capable  of  taking  short  cuts 
towards  the  summit  levels  possible  in  this  Manvantara, 
but  the  first  class  of  the  Lunar  Pitris  ought  to  attain  these 
summit  levels  at  periods  far  in  advance  of  the  Manvan- 
tara 's  close.  At  that  remote  period  in  the  future  it  will 
be  theoretically  possible  that  all  members  of  the  human 
family,  whose  differentiation  into  specific  entities  had  been 
accomplished  during  the  Lunar  Manvantara,  will  be  able 
to  attain  the  summit  level.  Those  only  for  whom  this 
progress  would  be  hardly  possible  in  the  time  are  those 

244    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

who  have  only  emerged  as  definite  entities  from  the  animal 
kingdom  during  the  earlier  rounds  of  this  Manvantara. 
The  probabilities  are — and  taking  into  account  the 
enormous  numbers  with  which  we  have  to  deal,  proba- 
bilities in  such  a  matter  amount  to  something  like  cer- 
tainty, over  the  whole  area  considered — the  probabilities 
are,  that  of  the  whole  number  of  entities  constituting  the 
human  family  at  this  time,  including  those  who  have 
emerged  during  the  first  half  of  the  Manvantara  from  the 
animal  kingdom  as  well  as  those  who  have  distinct  Pitri 
ancestry,  three-fifths  will  arrive  in  some  degree  of  appro- 
priate advancement  at  what  I  have  called  the  summit  levels 
of  the  Manvantara. 

The  destiny  of  the  two-fifths  is  profoundly  interesting. 
Nature  does  not  make  the  ghastly  mistake  attributed  to 
her  by  some  ecclesiastical  creeds  of  consigning  to  perma- 
nent perdition  the  failures  of  any  one  evolutionary  period. 
The  two-fifths  cannot  get  along  any  further  with  the 
planetary  scheme  to  which  they  belong.  They  are  not 
qualified  to  enter  on  the  later  incarnations  of  that  period. 
But  what  happens  to  them  ?  That  will  best  be  understood 
by  turning  our  attention  for  the  moment  to  the  failures 
of  the  planetary  scheme  senior  to  our  own,  of  which  the 
planet  Venus  is  the  physical  representative.  The  human 
family  of  that  scheme  has  long  since  passed  the  period  at 
which  its  two-fifths  were  unable  to  get  on  to  the  loftiest 
possibilities  of  the  scheme  to  which  they  belong.  Where 
are  they  to  be  found  ?  At  an  early  stage  of  our  thinking, 
many  of  us  assumed  that  they  would  somehow  begin  again 
in  the  next  Manvantara  of  that  scheme.  Nature  is  much 
more  scientific  in  her  working,  meaning  by  that  phrase, 
more  clearly  in  harmony  with  intelligent  thinking,  as  to 
what  ought  to  take  place.  The  failures  of  the  Venus 

THE  SYSTEM  245 

Manvantara  have  long  since  been  merged  in  the  human 
family  of  the  next  scheme  gradually  approaching  maturity 
— our  own!  The  Venus  failures  are  amongst  us  at  the 
present  day,  although,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they  failed  at  a 
stage  of  evolution  so  far  in  advance  of  that  which  this 
world  has  yet  attained  to,  that  this  world  hardly  yet  affords 
them  incarnations  of  sufficiently  appropriate  advancement 
for  them  to  merge  themselves  fully  in  our  own  family. 
Another  deeply  interesting  state  of  facts  arises  from  this 
condition  of  things. 

Very  broadly  stated  in  all  earlier  books  on  the  subject,  the 
tide  wave  of  humanity  during  any  round  from  one  planet 
to  another  is  a  vast  tidal  wave  of  life  leaving  the  planet 
behind  in  a  state  of  relatively  inanimate  obscuration.  This 
view  rather  too  hastily  interprets  the  method  adopted.  It 
is  true  that  the  vast  majority  of  the  human  family  to  which 
we  belong  did  actually  sweep  on  from  the  planet  Mars 
to  this  earth  at  a  very  remote  period  of  its  present  activity. 
But  it  is  not  true  that  absolutely  all  were  swept  on  with 
it.  A  fairly  considerable  residuum  of  the  less  developed 
entities  remained  behind,  and  to  a  large  extent  remain  still 
on  the  planet  Mars,  of  which  they  are  the  present  inhabi- 
tants. They  are  frankly  the  dregs  of  the  human  family. 
The  interesting  fact  discovered  by  modern  astronomy  that 
they  show  marvellous  capacities  for  hydraulic  engineering, 
does  not  militate  against  the  truth  that  I  have  just  declared. 
In  some  respects  they  are  more  capable;  in  other  respects 
they  fall  behind  the  moral  developments  of  the  earth's  in- 
habitants to  an  extent  that  language  hardly  enables  one  to 
define.  Meanwhile,  as  time  has  gone  on,  some  of  us,  in 
obedience  to  karmic  conditions,  rather  too  intricate  to 
describe  minutely  just  now,  have  gone  on  as  an  advanced 
guard  of  humanity  to  the  next  planet  in  advance  of  us,  the 

246    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

planet  Mercury.  There,  in  truth,  they  are  leading  a  very 
beautiful  life  in  advance,  both  morally  and  in  regard  to 
natural  knowledge  of  our  own  to  a  very  remarkable  extent. 
And  there,  the  residual  population  of  the  Venus  chain 
have  found  appropriate  incarnation.  So  that  the  fairly 
considerable  population  of  Mercury  at  the  present  moment 
largely  and  in  the  great  majority,  consists  of  what  I  have 
so  far  called  the  Venus  failures.  In  all  probability  they 
will  now  continue  to  represent,  although  not  exclusively 
constituting  the  vanguard  of  our  humanity.  The  idea 
once  comprehended  will  be  seen  to  be  susceptible  of 
application  all  through  the  solar  system.  The  next  planet, 
as  matters  now  stand — for  the  planet  once  occupying  the 
asteroid  orbit  proved  a  failure  for  reasons  it  is  impossible 
to  diverge  into  now — the  next  planet  to  be  fully  developed 
will  be  the  planet  Jupiter,  at  present,  as  I  shall  be  able  to 
show  later  on,  at  an  early  stage  of  its  growth  and  in  an 
earlier  Manvantara  than  that  which  is  in  progress  in  our 
own  case  at  present. 

Of  the  Venus  three-fifths,  above  referred  to,  something 
like  half  will  actually  have  achieved  the  maximum  progress 
this  Manvantara  is  designed  to  effect.  That  progress  will 
put  each  of  such  beings  in  a  position  so  far  transcending  the 
conditions  of  humanity  around  us  at  the  present  day,  that 
if  we  compare  them  with  the  ordinary  humanity  they  will 
seem  fairly  God-like  in  their  knowledge  and  power  and 
capacity  for  cosmic  service.  They  will  have  attained  to  a 
full  and  complete  appreciation  of  all  the  powers  and  forces 
and  Divine  purposes  of  which  this  chain  of  worlds  has  been 
the  stage.  For  them  the  whole  chain  of  worlds,  not 
merely  in  their  most  material  manifestations,  but  in  all 
their  astral  and  spiritual  aspects  as  well,  will  constitute 
an  absolutely  familiar  field  of  operations.  They  will  be 

THE  SYSTEM  24? 

functioning  in  full  consciousness  on  planes  of  Nature 
which  embrace  all  these  worlds.  Every  globe  of  the 
chain  will  be  as  accessible  to  them  as  the  different  rooms  of 
a  house  in  which  he  lives  may  be  accessible  to  a  human 
being  of  the  present  ordinary  type.  Their  moral  evolu- 
tion corresponding  with  the  growth  of  their  knowledge 
and  power  will  have  brought  them  into  perfect  harmony 
with  the  whole  Divine  design  of  which  the  Manvantara 
has  been  the  expression.  They  will  be  conscious  and  in- 
telligent agents  engaged  in  working  out  this  design,  and 
as  regards  their  own  ulterior  progress  they  will  themselves 
select  from  many  various  lines  of  ulterior  evolution  open 
to  them,  those  along  which  they  will  best  be  able  to  con- 
duce to  the  complete  fulfilment  of  even  loftier  designs  than 
that  with  which  our  Manvantara  is  directly  related,  and 
may  either  continue  to  guide  and  direct  the  progress  of  the 
succeeding  Manvantaras  associated  with  this  chain  of 
existences,  or  may  pass  away  into  other  regions  of  cosmic 
activity,  already  representative,  as  it  were,  of  the  final 
achievement  to  which  this  chain  of  Manvantaras  is  sub- 
servient, in  connection  with  still  vaster  processes  lying 
within  the  immeasurable  economy  of  Nature.  Those 
who,  while  still  belonging  to  the  great  three-fifths,  have 
not  at  the  close  of  this  Manvantara  actually  attained  the 
maximum  perfection  which  lies  within  its  possibilities,  but 
are  nevertheless  in  sight,  as  it  were,  of  that  perfection, 
will  be  the  vanguard  of  human  life  in  the  next  Manvan- 
tara perhaps  when  that  has  been  prepared  for  their  recep- 
tion by  the  earlier  activities  of  less  advanced  entities.  As 
for  the  nature  of  the  progress  on  which  they  will  then  set 
out  it  is  hardly  necessary  for  us  at  this  stage  of  our  develop- 
ment to  attempt  any  definite  conception. 

One  idea,  however,  should  be  borne  in  mind  in  con- 

248    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

nection  with  all  attempts  to  realise,  however  imperfectly, 
the  colossal  proportion  and  constitution  of  this  system  to 
which,  we  belong.  We  must  not  think  of  the  worlds  of 
the  system  as  existing  wholly  and  solely  for  the  sake  of 
the  evolution  of  the  human  family,  on  which  so  far  our 
attention  has  been  chiefly  concentrated.  Just  as  the  world 
around  us  is  the  theatre  of  a  great  many  forms  of  physical 
life,  destined  perhaps  in  the  progress  of  time  to  merge  one 
into  the  other,  but  for  the  time  being  on  widely  different 
levels,  so  the  whole  chain  of  worlds  is  the  theatre  of  many 
evolutions  which,  during  this  Manvantara,  are  not  destined 
to  blend  one  into  the  other.  Meanwhile  crude  concep- 
tions concerning  the  place  of  humanity  in  the  cosmos  are 
apt  to  render  people  at  the  same  time  too  humble  and  too 
arrogant  concerning  their  place  in  Nature.  Conventional 
teaching  entirely  underrates  the  dignity  and  splendour 
of  the  altitude  to  which  it  is  possible  for  a  human  being  to 
ascend,  and  very  often  as  ludicrously  misconceives  the 
stupendous  proportions  of  the  cosmos,  by  regarding  the 
interests  of  humanity  as  something  like  the  sole  concern 
of  its  presiding  Divinity. 

With  this  very  general  sketch  of  the  system  to  which 
we  belong  it  will  now  be  convenient  to  pass  on  to  an 
explanation  of  the  methods  open  to  us  for  the  ascent  to 
its  summit  levels  at  an  earlier  period  than  that  contem- 
plated by  the  design  of  the  scheme  as  a  whole,  and  when 
we  have  realised  more  exactly  the  phases  ol  spiritual 
achievement  constituting  the  steps  on  trie  great  path  that 
leads  to  the  highest  attainable  Adeptship,  we  shall  be  in  a 
better  position  to  forecast  with  exactitude  the  ultimate 
stratification  of  the  human  family  at  the  close  of  this 
Manvantara. 

CHAPTER  XI 

THE  ELDER  BRETHREN  OF  HUMANITY 

WE  should  never  have  been  in  a  position  to 
acquire  the  knowledge  we  now  possess  of  the 
great  evolutionary  schemes  of  this  planetary 
system,  had  it  not  been  possible  for  individual  units  of  the 
human  family  to  outstrip  the  normal  course  of  evolution, 
and  attain  at  a  relatively  early  period  the  spiritual  faculties 
belonging  to  the  higher  levels  of  progress  to  which  the 
race,  as  a  whole,  can  only  ascend  at  a  very  remote  period 
in  the  future.  We  must  endeavour  now  to  realise  more 
clearly  than  before,  what  is  meant  by  outstripping  normal 
evolution,  to  work  out  in  detail  considerations  which  show 
that  in  doing  this,  those  of  us  who  may  find  it  possible, 
are  not  setting  the  programme  of  normal  evolution  at 
defiance  in  any  way,  but,  on  the  contrary,  are  endeavour- 
ing at  the  earliest  possible  moment  to  unite  our  individual 
efforts,  however  humble  these  may  be  in  the  beginning, 
with  the  purpose  of  Nature  on  the  grandest  scale — to  fulfil, 
so  to  speak,  at  the  earliest  possible  moment  as  regards  our- 
selves, the  design  which  Providence  has  in  view,  and  in 
doing  this,  to  assist  in  the  realisation  of  the  whole  pro- 
gramme as  regards  the  majority  in  a  way  which  really, 
when  properly  understood,  will  be  seen  to  enter  into 
the  normal  scheme.  For  the  teaching  which  enables  those, 
who  are  properly  qualified  to  appreciate  it,  to  accelerate 
the  course  of  their  evolution,  is  really  accessible  to  all  alike, 
and  though  with  each  single  item  of  humanity  it  is  a 
matter  of  choice  whether  his  forces  are  trained  to  the 
work  of  promoting  the  spiritual  evolution  of  the  whole, 
or  exerted  to  put  impediments  in  the  way,  it  is  mathe- 
matically certain  that  amongst  the  enormous  multitude  of 

249 

250   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

individualities  which  constitute  humanity,  some  will  take 
the  loftiest  view  of  their  destinies  and  opportunities,  and 
will  play  that  part  in  the  whole  undertaking  which  it  is 
absolutely  necessary  that  some  should  play  in  order  that 
the  undertaking  may  prosper. 

For  a  long  time  now,  looking  back  on  the  course  which 
human  history  has  taken  for  the  last  few  hundred  thousand 
years,  some  few  have  appreciated  their  opportunities,  have 
availed  themselves  of  the  interior  enlightenment  which 
their  own  aspirations  attracted,  and  have  worked  their 
way  upward  until  they  have  come  to  occupy  a  place  in 
Nature  from  which  the  ordinary  course  of  human  evolu- 
tion, as  it  has  been  traced  in  preceding  chapters,  may  be 
looked  down  upon  as  from  a  height.  The  potentialities 
of  human  faculty  are  such  that  at  certain  stages  of  human 
progress,  incarnate  man  becomes  invested  with  a  sight, 
with  a  prospective  vision  which  ranges  all  through  these 
planes  of  Nature  on  which  normal  evolution  is  being 
accomplished,  as  the  process  has  already  been  described. 
Indeed,  considerably  beyond  them  to  higher  altitudes 
of  spiritual  condition,  from  which  all  the  work  that  has 
been  accomplished  so  far,  can  be  surveyed  as  the  glance 
is  extended  backward,  and  from  which  the  future  course 
and  ultimate  goal  of  human  progress  are  no  less  plainly 
visible.  Nothing  concerning  the  past  history  of  this  earth, 
for  example,  not  to  speak  of  other  globes  connected  with 
the  planetary  chain  to  which  we  belong,  is  obscure  to  the 
vision  of  a  being,  whether  in  or  out  of  the  body,  who 
can  function  on  the  manasic  plane,  not  to  speak  even  of 
those  still  more  exalted  realms  to  which  reference  has  just 
been  made.  There  are  methods  by  which  it  is  possible 
so  to  stimulate  spiritual  growth,  that  incarnate  man  is 
enabled  to  exercise  vision  even  on  these.  And  by  degrees, 

THE    ELDER    BRETHREN       251 

as  I  have  prepared  the  way  for  making  the  situation  in- 
telligible by  other  explanations,  it  will  be  possible  to  indi- 
cate with  a  considerable  degree  of  exactitude,  the  manner 
in  which  such  heights  are  reached,  and  to  show  some  of 
the  responsibilities  which  attach  themselves  to  the  abnor- 
mal advancement  in  Nature  thus  accomplished.  The 
situation  could  only  be  rendered  intelligible  with  the  help 
of  such  a  comprehensive  survey  of  the  whole  scheme 
of  evolution  on  which  we  are  launched,  as  the  foregoing 
chapters  of  this  book  have  already  set  forth.  We  are  thus 
enabled  at  the  same  time  to  realise  the  magnitude  of  the 
work  already  accomplished  up  to  date,  and  the  equal  mag- 
nitude, in  another  direction,  of  that  which  is  still  before 
us.  We  cannot  properly  appreciate  the  nature  of  the 
accelerated  spiritual  evolution,  nor  understand  the  place  in 
Nature  occupied  by  the  most  advanced  representatives  of 
our  humanity,  without  keeping  the  outline  of  the  whole 
Manvantaric  scheme  in  view. 

There  are  men  now  living  on  earth  who,  belonging 
completely  to  our  own  human  family,  have  already 
attained  the  maximum  point  of  development  and  exalta- 
tion which  I  have  just  been  endeavouring  to  describe  as 
that  belonging  to  the  final  culmination  of  the  progress 
on  which  the  whole  family  is  launched.  If  one  were 
merely  to  count,  supposing  that  were  possible,  the  number 
of  lives  which  would  .have  to  be  spent  in  the  ordinary 
course  of  evolution  between  this  and  the  close  of  the 
seventh  round — each  of  these  lives  separated  from  the 
other  by  long  periods  of  spiritual  rest,  sometimes  by  inter- 
vening experiences  that  are  not  restful  at  all  but  sadly  the 
reverse — we  should  have  to  deal  with  numbers  which 
again  would  hardly  lie  within  the  grasp  of  imagination, 
and  yet  already,  though  we  have  got  on  past  the  middle 

252    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

point  of  the  whole  Manvantara  by  a  period  which  is  rela- 
tively a  mere  handful  of  years,  we  find  some  of  the  most 
determined  climbers  already  on  the  topmost  heights  of  the 
system  to  which  we  belong.  That  within  a  brief  series 
of  lives,  even  though  each  in  turn  is  devoted  with  un- 
remitting intensity  to  the  great  purpose  in  view,  it  may  be 
possible  to  reach  these  heights,  will  be,  as  I  say,  a  matter 
of  marvel  to  those  who  really  appreciate  the  magnitude 
of  the  task  to  be  accomplished.  Sometimes  people  who 
hear  vaguely  about  abnormal  capacities  and  powers  pos- 
sessed by  those  who  have  gone  in  advance  of  their  kind 
are  inclined,  in  their  ignorance  of  what  this  advancement 
really  implies,  to  expect  that  if  they  make  an  honest  effort 
in  that  direction  they  ought  to  realise  their  aspirations  at 
once;  to  take  their  degrees  in  occult  science  with  as  little 
difficulty  as  they  might  accomplish  a  similar  process  in 
connection  with  the  teaching  of  a  university.  The 
absurdity  of  this  view  will  be  appreciated  by  anyone  who 
realises  in  his  thinking  the  true  meaning  of  high  initia- 
tion, the  true  place  occupied  in  Nature  by  those  whom  we 
speak  of  as  the  great  Adepts.  The  evolutionary  interval 
which  separates  ordinary  humanity  from  them  has  to  be 
measured,  as  I  have  described,  by  the  whole  of  the  second 
half  of  the  Manvantara.  The  processes  of  initiation  lead- 
ing up  to  high  Adeptship  are  in  reality  epitomes  of  the 
second  half  of  the  Manvantara,  in  which  the  acquisition 
of  knowledge,  moral  dignity,  and  faculty,  for  which 
Nature  has  assigned  the  immeasurable  ages  to  come,  will 
be  condensed  within  the  brief  series  of  three  or  four  or 
half  a  dozen  lives.  We  shall  come  later  on  to  examine 
more  minutely  the  nature  of  the  efforts  by  which  the  earlier 
progress  along  that  road  is  accomplished;  but  we  must 
have  a  general  idea  of  the  whole  effort  in  mind  before 

THE    ELDER    BRETHREN        253 

we  can  examine  the  details  intelligently,  and  the  fore- 
most thought  to  be  embraced  in  connection  with  the 
general  idea  I  have  been  endeavouring  to  convey  is,  that 
the  summit  levels  of  evolution  have  to  do  with  the  com- 
plete identity  between  the  whole  progress  of  the  individual 
and  that  at  which,  as  he  ascends  to  lofty  altitudes,  he  is 
enabled  to  appreciate  in  all  its  completeness,  the  Will  of 
which  this  whole  world  and  all  the  other  worlds  around 
us  are  the  manifestation. 

There  are  possibilities  of  accelerated  evolution,  let  us 
recognise  frankly,  that  lie  within  the  reach  of  men  wha 
set  themselves  to  compass  their  progress  on  purely  selfish 
principles — whose  spiritual  aspirations  have  no  infinite 
range,  whose  hope  in  connection  with  ulterior  progress 
is  that  it  may  in  some  fashion  redound  to  their  own  power, 
who  sometimes  vainly  imagine  that  the  great  possibilities 
they  feel  germinating  within  them  will  enable  them  to 
rob  Divinity  itself  of  its  treasures,  whatever  they  may  be, 
and  accomplish  triumphs  which  may  gratify  their  personal 
pride  through  a  range  of  the  future,  which  is  all  they  care 
to  think  of  as  infinity.  Whoever  sets  out  on  the  path  of 
occult  progress  with  such  motives  as  his  actuating  prin- 
ciples will,  in  all  probability,  do  no  more  than  plunge 
himself  in  agonising  failure,  which  will  render  existence 
in  one  way  or  other  a  misery  for  him  for  a  long  portion  of 
the  normal  road  on  to  which  he  will  be  hurled  violently 
back.  But  if  across  a  thousand  indescribable  perils  the 
candidate  for  merely  selfish  spiritual  advancement  succeeds, 
so  far  as  success  is  possible,  in  attaining  his  object,  it  will 
be  a  success  qualified  from  the  beginning  with  interior 
conditions  that  can  only  be  described  as  the  reverse  of 
beatitude,  and  it  is  impossible  in  the  nature  of  things  that 
spiritual  progress  of  this  evil  character  can  transcend  the- 

254   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

limits  of  the  world  period  in  which  it  is  undertaken.  For 
those  who  prefer  the  path  of  service,  the  service  of  the 
Divine  Ideal,  to  that  of  selfish  aggrandisement  the  maxi- 
mum heights  of  evolution  even  within  this  Manvantara 
are  attainable,  and  they,  when  attained,  instead  of  repre- 
senting a  finality,  are  found  to  be  but  the  avenues  of 
approach  to  beatitudes  of  spiritual  existence  within  the 
universe  the  very  nature  of  which  it  would  be  folly  at  this 
stage  of  our  thinking  to  grapple  with  in  thought.  For  to 
the  vision  of  those  who  are  already  on  the  summit  of  the 
Manvantara  the  horizon  that  extends  beyond  is  infinite 
again,  and  something  of  what  they  see  can  be  communi- 
cated to  us,  so  that  without  being  able  to  realise  the  condi- 
tions of  consciousness  which  would  transcend  our  own 
system,  we  may  realise,  even  with  some  assurance,  the  pos- 
sibility of  ulterior  progress  for  perfected  humanity  into 
conditions  of  existence  in  which  the  individuality  of  the 
human  being  is  merged  into  the  governing  hierarchy  of  the 
cosmos.  But  leaving  considerations  of  that  nature  aside 
for  the  present,  and  also  considerations  in  the  other  direc- 
tion which  have  to  do  with  the  misdirection  of  great 
spiritual  energies,  let  us  concentrate  our  attention  on  the 
possibilities  that  lie  before  us  in  reference  to  that  legiti- 
mately accelerated  evolution  to  be  accomplished  by  tread- 
ing the  path  leading  to  Adeptship. 

That  path,  we  should  always  bear  in  mind,  is  a  short 
cut  across  the  enormous  spirals  of  the  regular  highway, 
leading  humanity  upward  during  the  second  half  of  the 
Manvantara.  It  thus  only  became  a  possibility  of  nature 
after  the  first  half  of  the  Manvantara  was  concluded;  for 
the  complete  undertaking  included  a  double  process — the 
involution  of  spirit  in  matter,  and  the  evolution  of  spirit 
from  matter.  The  first  half  of  the  Manvantara  is  the  des- 

THE    ELDER    BRETHREN        255 

cent  into  manifestation;  the  second  half  the  re-ascent 
therefrom.  One  gets  lost  in  an  ocean  of  metaphysical 
speculation  if  we  go  into  the  question  as  to  what  spirit 
can  gain  from  material  manifestation.  It  is  the  potentiality 
of  all  things,  including  material  manifestation  :  how  can  it 
be  enriched  if  it  is  everything  to  begin  with  ?  It  will  be 
worth  while,  perhaps,  to  deal  with  this  problem  when  we 
are  in  a  position  to  grapple  with  it  from  the  point  of  view, 
let  us  say,  of  an  exhaustive  comprehension  of  the  solar 
system.  Then  mysteries  which  have  to  do  with  that 
whole  of  which  the  solar  system  is  an  infinitesimal  particle, 
will  perhaps  come  within  the  range  of  our  mental  grasp. 
At  present  the  attempts  to  work  out  schemes  of  thought 
relating  to  such  mysteries  are  rather  the  outcome  of  ignor- 
ance concerning  mysteries  that  are  relatively  near  us  than 
of  aptitude  for  dealing  with  those  still  far  off.  The 
theory  of  our  planetary  system  is,  at  all  events,  intelligible. 
Spiritual  energies  involve  themselves  in  matter  and  evolve 
therefrom.  They  cannot  begin  to  evolve  slowly  or 
rapidly  till  the  process  of  involution  is  complete.  Thus  it 
is  only  after  the  middle  point  of  the  Manvantara  that 
accelerated  evolution  becomes  possible,  simply  because 
evolution  itself,  as  far  as  the  human  family  was  concerned, 
only  began  then. 

But  even  during  the  last  Manvantara  the  already  dif- 
ferentiated entities  of  the  human  family  were  in  a  position 
to  fulfil  the  purpose  of  their  existence  at  that  stage  more 
or  less  satisfactorily.  Thus  we  have  seen  that  the  entities 
who  had  derived  most  from  the  experiences  of  that  Man- 
vantara were  not  required  to  make  their  appearance  on 
this  planetary  chain  till  near  the  middle  of  this  world 
period.  They  came  into  incarnation  then  as  already  the 
elder  brethren  of  the  race,  and  many  of  them  at  once  began 

256   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

to  fulfil  the  purpose  of  their  existence  in  this  Manvantara 
in  turn  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner.  They  kept  thus 
ahead  of  the  main  body,  and  at  once  began  to  appreciate 
the  teaching  of  those  more  advanced  beings  from  another 
evolution  who  were  the  early  guardians  of  this  human 
family.  They  were  ripe  to  enter  on  the  path  then  opening 
before  mankind,  the  course  of  which  led  them  rapidly  to 
the  higher  levels  of  consciousness  and  capacity.  There  is 
nothing  in  their  extraordinarily  rapid  progress  to  shock 
the  understanding,  if  we  pay  attention  to  the  simplicity 
of  the  predominant  idea  which  is  the  all-embracing  motive 
of  occult  progress.  The  unity  of  spiritual  consciousness  is 
the  primary  thought  to  appreciate,  the  insignificance  of 
differentiated  sensation,  the  logical  deduction.  The  first 
thought  brings  with  it  the  anxiety  to  realise  that  unity  in 
consciousness,  which  is  equivalent  to  the  anxiety  to 
promote  the  Divine  idea  expressed  in  the  system  to  which 
we  belong :  the  second  thought,  if  fully  absorbed,  ex- 
tinguishes selfishness  absolutely.  With  that  characteristic 
abolished  there  is  no  room  in  the  nature  for  evil;  as  soon 
as  it  is  inaccessible  to  evil  its  capacity  for  infinite  good 
which  embraces  infinite  knowledge,  is  established.  The 
difficulty  with  most  of  us  is  that  we  fail  to  realise  the  unity 
of  spiritual  consciousness,  and  only  to  some  extent  dispel 
the  contrary  idea — the  actuality  of  separate  consciousness. 
Let  anyone  get  himself  absolutely  saturated  with  the 
loftier  conception  so  that  he  feels  his  own  individualised 
sensation  to  be  just  as  important,  and  no  more  important 
to  him,  than  any  other  individualised  manifestation  of  the 
spirit  working  within  him,  and  he  will  find  himself  on 
Adept  levels  "  to-morrow  "  as  compared  with  the  dura- 
tion  of  a  Manvantara — as  soon,  that  is  to  say,  as  in  a  life 
or  two  he  may  have  dissipated  the  evil  forces  he  has 

THE    ELDER    BRETHREN        257 

engendered  in  past  lives,  leaving  the  whole  account  of 
good  and  evil,  so  to  speak — none  the  worse  for  his  in- 
dividualisation — as  a  preliminary  measure  before  he  goes 
on  to  make  it  much  the  better.  If  he  does  really  express 
our  fundamental  idea  in  his  consciousness,  he  will  not 
want  to  manifest  Adeptship  in  his  own  individuality  till 
that  preliminary  work  is  accomplished. 

Even  from  the  midst  of  the  stormy  and  ignoble  period 
of  the  world's  history  represented  by  the  civilisation  of 
Atlantis,  some  of  the  best  individualities  of  the  race  learned 
these  lessons  from  their  more  advanced  teachers,  and 
began  to  supply  the  race  with  Adept  guardians  of  "  its 
own  blood,"  to  use  our  physical-plane  phrase.  A  little 
occult  knowledge  is  enough  to  give  the  phrase  an  almost 
comic  flavour,  in  view  of  the  relatively  small  part  in 
human  evolution  played  by  the  physical  organism  that  is 
habitually  dealt  with  in  our  language  as  though  it  con- 
stituted the  race.  And  thus  from  the  mid-period  of  the 
Atlantean  race  onward  there  has  never  been  a  time  when 
the  world  has  been  unprovided  with  Adept  leaders,  for 
remember  there  is  no  death  out  of  such  a  condition  of 
existence  as  that.  There  may  be  a  transfer  of  activity  to 
the  higher  planes  of  Nature,  but  these  are  a  part  of  the 
world — or  are  partly  of  the  world,  to  put  the  idea  more 
correctly — just  as  much  as  its  physical  aspect.  But  on 
the  other  hand,  re-incarnation  itself,  if  voluntarily 
accepted  by  the  Adept,  who  no  longer  needs  it  for  himself, 
is  no  extinction  of  his  Adeptship;  and  whether  their  work 
was  carried  on  in  or  out  of  the  body — with  or  without 
that  accessory — the  elder  brethren  who  first  attained 
Adeptship  did  not,  we  may  be  sure,  pass  on  to  other  func- 
tions until  others,  coming  up  from  mankind  at  large  to 
join  them,  were  ready  to  take  their  places  at  the  head  of 

18 

258    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

human  affairs.  They  or  their  successors  have,  from  a  far 
remoter  time  than  any  which  commonplace  historical 
research  has  penetrated,  even  in  imagination,  been  in  con- 
trol of  the  great  occult  "  Lodges "  of  initiation,  the 
existence  of  which — the  accessibility  of  which  for  persons 
willing  to  undergo  the  necessary  training,  and  inspired 
by  the  necessary  ideas — has  been  better  known  to  humanity 
at  large  at  former  epochs  in  the  world's  history  than  during 
the  last  few  hundred  years. 

During  the  predominance  of  the  Atlantean  race  on 
earth,  it  was  hardly  to  be  expected  that  the  elder  brethren 
would  obtain  any  great  number  of  recruits.  Not  only 
were  the  Atlanteans  pre-eminently  a  selfish  race — it 
might  almost  be  argued  that  it  was  their  business  in  the 
scheme  of  evolution  to  be  so.  They  may  not  have  been 
much  more  culpable  in  being  so  than  a  community  of 
animals  would  be  under  similar  circumstances.  In- 
dividualised to  perfection,  but  nothing  more,  it  was  their 
business  to  deliver  the  innumerable  hordes  of  the  human 
family  on  the  threshold  of  the  fifth  race  intelligent  enough 
to  learn  the  first  new  lesson  of  the  upward  curve  of  the 
great  cycle,  the  lesson  of  fraternal  sympathy.  Intellectu- 
ally, keeping  that  term  strictly  to  its  limitations,  and 
altogether  excluding  from  it  everything  that  appertains 
to  spiritual  intuition,  the  Atlanteans  were  giants  of 
capacity.  They  possessed  a  great  mass  of  knowledge, 
which  the  younger  generations  of  the  fifth  race — ourselves 
and  our  immediate  progenitors — have  lost.  They  had 
even  penetrated  many  of  the  secrets  of  Nature  belonging 
to  that  astral  plane  which  transcends  the  more  densely 
material  realm  of  the  physical  senses.  They  could  accom- 
plish results  which,  to  our  own  science,  are  as  yet  un- 
dreamed of.  But  be  it  remembered,  that  when  we  speak 

THE    ELDER    BRETHREN       259 

of  the  Atlanteans  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  informa- 
tion concerning  them,  which  occult  science  enables  us  to 
procure,  we  are  dealing  with  that  race  in  its  fullest 
maturity.  Humanity  has  entered  on  the  fifth  of  its  present 
cycles,  armed  with  all  the  intellectual  capacities  required 
for  the  recovery  of  the  lost  Atlantean  knowledge,  and  that 
recovery  is  certain  to  be  brought  about  in  the  progress  of 
time.  The  re-incarnation  of  a  race  precisely  follows  the 
analogy  of  individual  re-incarnation.^  Just  as  the  fresh 
personality  by  the  time  it  arrives  at  maturity  is  once  more 
in  possession  of  all  the  capacities  engendered  by  its  perma- 
nent Ego  during  the  preceding  life,  so  the  race  inherits 
capacity  in  a  similar  degree.  Intellectual  giants  as  the 
Atlanteans  were,  we  are  already  not  far  short  of  their 
stature,  and  the  rest  will  come  to  us  in  due  course. 

But  with  those  gifts,  something  else  will  come  to  us  if 
we  are  willing  to  receive  it — the  first  beginnings  of  a 
general  capacity  to  apprehend  the  spiritual  possibilities  of 
our  Nature.  The  downward  curve  of  the  great  cycle — 
considering  the  Manvantaric  evolution  as  one  process  for 
the  moment — may  be  regarded  as  the  curve  of  preparation. 
The  upward  curve — from  the  nadir  point  of  the  fourth 
race  in  this  round — the  curve  of  fruition. 

Now  the  nature  of  every  evolutionary  cycle — as  under- 
stood by  esoteric  wisdom — involves,  from  one  point  of 
view,  a  return  to  the  condition  from  which  the  circling 
procession  set  out.  But  that  return  does  not  mean  a  mere 
reversion  to  the  status  quo  ante,  without  any  result 
accomplished.  It  must  always  be  a  return  freighted  with 
something  gained  on  the  journey.  And  in  the  broad 
view  of  the  whole  evolutionary  scheme  that  we  are  taking 
now,  the  all-important  distinction  between  the  spiritual 
existence  out  of  which  the  human  race  emerged  in  the 

18* 

260   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

beginning,  and  the  spiritual  existence  to  which  it  will 
ultimately  return,  is  to  be  discerned  in  the  individual  isa- 
tion  of  consciousness  combined  with  spirituality. 

In  dealing  with  these  transcendent  mysteries,  every  in- 
carnate writer  must  be  profoundly  impressed  with  the  im- 
possibility of  thinking  them  out  completely  in  terms  of 
the  physical  intellect.  One  would  gladly  refrain  from  the 
audacity  of  writing  about  them  at  all  if  it  were  not  abso- 
lutely necessary  for^the  elucidation  of  the  spiritual  evolu- 
tion on  which  the  human  race  is  now  entering,  to  take 
cognisance  of  ultimate  ideas  which  it  is  quite  certain  we 
shall  formulate  in  the  mind  but  dimly  and  inaccurately, 
But  somehow,  within  and  beyond  the  immeasurable  pro- 
fundities of  the  spiritual  consciousness  which  crown  the 
edifice  of  a  perfected  humanity,  it  is  certain  that  the 
stupendous  prize  of  individual  consciousness  which  Nature 
has  gone  through  such  infinite  pains  to  evoke— will  not 
be  forfeited.  A  few  misleading  analogies — and  even  the 
most  graceful,  about  the  dewdrop  slipping  into  the  shining 
sea,  cannot  but  be  misleading  in  this  connection — are 
largely  responsible  for  the  comfortless  belief  so  many 
people  entertain,  that  the  esoteric  teaching  of  the  East,  at 
all  events,  preaches  a  kind  of  ecstatic  annihilation  as  the 
supreme  felicity  to  be  struggled  for  through  ages  of  suffer- 
ing existence.  It  should  be  obvious  that  no  epigrammatic 
phrase  can  sum  up  the  unfathomable  subtleties  of  a 
thought  that  reaches  out  towards  a  comprehension  of  the 
incomprehensible — of  phases  of  consciousness  utterly 
transcending  the  limitations  of  the  brain  that  idly  strives 
to  define  them.  If  we  inverted  the  usual  simile,  and  said 
that  on  attaining  the  condition  of  Nirvana,  the  dewdrop 
received  into  its  bosom  the  whole  shining  sea,  that  would, 
perhaps,  be  a  better  way  of  presenting  the  figure  to  the 

THE    ELDER    BRETHREN        261 

mind,  because  it  would  not  then  suggest  a  falsehood,  even 
if  it  failed  to  be  explanatory  in  any  high  degree.  Without 
attempting  so  absurd  a  task  as  to  explain  the  nature  of  the 
spiritual  consciousness  indicated  in  Oriental  philosophy  by 
the  term  Nirvana,  I  will  be  content  to  suggest  a  mode  of 
approaching  a  conception  rather  less  extravagantly  imper- 
fect than  that  generally  entertained,  by  hinting,  on  the 
basis  of  the  suggestion  just  made,  that  it  may  be  much  more 
like  an  absorption  of  all  consciousness  into  the  individuality 
than  an  absorption  of  individuality  into  all  consciousness. 

However  this  may  be,  in  one  conclusion  we  may  safely 
rest;  that  the  purpose  of  Nature  in  evolving  humanity  is 
that  of  evoking  individualities  on  the  levels  of  Nature,  so 
to  speak,  from  which  the  whole  creative  spiritual  im- 
pulse stooped  down  at  the  commencement  of  the  under- 
taking. 

It  is  necessary  to  insert  an  apology  here  for  that  last 
expression  in  dealing  with  a  Nature  that  has  no  beginning 
and  no  end.  Of  all  Nature  we  cannot  assuredly  predi- 
cate an  end  or  a  beginning;  but  one  of  the  most  narrow- 
minded  blunders  of  exoteric  thinking  is  that  which  care- 
lessly identifies  the  human  family  to  which  we  belong 
with  the  eternities  generally  of  time  and  space.  Esoteric 
science,  in  its  coherent  reasonableness,  recognises  this 
human  family,  its  origin  and  fortunes,  as  a  definite  episode 
within  the  eternities — however  protracted  may  be  its  dura- 
tion. 

The  climax  of  the  episode  is  reached  when  the  creative 
power,  which  in  some  unimaginable  manner  sufficed  to 
launch  the  planetary  system,  returns  to  itself  focalised  in 
individualities.  But  what  is  the  nature  of  such  individuali- 
ties ?  By  the  hypothesis  they  partake  of  the  human  nature 
in  so  far  as  they  are  individual;  of  the  divine  nature  in 

262    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

so  far  as  they  are  once  again  identified  with  the  creative 
power  of  the  Spirit.  They  are  no  longer  men — they  are 
gods.  Not  God,  which,  as  far  as  language  can  deal  with 
such  ideas,  must  be  a  designation  assigned  to  Universal 
Omnipotent  Spirit,  but  the  agents  of  Divinity  wielding 
its  powers,  pursuing  its  ideas.  Esoteric  teaching  shows 
us  in  these  perfected  beings  at  once  the  purpose  of 
humanity  and  the  governing  power  of  the  next  evolu- 
tionary undertaking  in  Nature  which  shall  follow  on  after 
that  out  of  which  they  themselves  have  arisen. 

The  hosts  of  ordinary  humanity,  let  us  bear  in  mind, 
are  conscious  only — in  their  physical  intellects — of  the 
material  plane  of  Nature  whereon  they  are  manifesting. 
But  the  spiritual  consciousness  dominant  within  them,  is 
working  all  the  while  in  the  "  Higher  Self."  The  attrac- 
tion to  matter,  to  material  life,  with  its  gratifications  and 
sympathies,  is  at  war  with  this  dormant  aspiration.  As 
long  as  it  remains  the  more  powerful  the  Ego  after  death, 
and  after  the  intervening  period  has  expired,  is  drawn 
back  to  material  manifestation  by  the  Karma  of  its  last 
life.  But  whenever  the  spiritual  aspiration  has  made  itself 
heard  in  that  life,  there  will  be  in  the  circumstances  of 
the  new  existence  some  improved  opportunities  for  the 
culture  of  the  spiritual  consciousness.  If  these  are  duly 
employed,  they  will  rapidly  be  developed  into  contact  of 
some  kind  with  the  grand  realities  of  the  higher  planes  of 
being.  The  incarnate  man  will  begin  by  finding  new 
senses  and  powers  of  perception  developing  within  him. 
Operating,  as  we  shall  see  later  on,  as  snares  and  false 
beacons  sometimes  when  they  have  been  acquired  in  a 
wrong  way,  these  psychic  faculties  are  none  the  less  the 
avenues  to  sublime  knowledge  when  rightly  directed. 
For  the  genuine  neophyte  they  constitute  the  first  links 

THE    ELDER    BRETHREN       263 

of  communication  that  consciously  unite  him  with  the 
Adept  world,  with  those  of  his  elder  brethren  who  are 
already  advanced  in  the  scale  of  Nature  far  beyond  the 
normal  characteristics  of  ordinary  mankind. 

Thus  illuminated  he  may  enter  on  the  path  that  leads 
upward  to  these  levels  of  existence.  His  initiation  has 
commenced,  and  with  the  thirst  for  spiritual  progress 
becoming  a  more  powerful  force  in  his  nature  than  the 
animal  clinging  to  material  life,  the  attractions  that  drag 
him  back  to  normal  incarnation  cease  to  assert  themselves. 
For  several  lives  probably  those  attractions  will  continue 
to  operate,  after  he  has  begun  his  higher  evolution,  and 
failure  of  one  kind  or  another  may  constantly  throw  him 
back.  But  if  he  is  resolute  and  persevering,  the  spiritual 
attractions  conquer  in  the  end,  and  his  incarnations,  if  they 
are  then  continued  at  all,  will  be  voluntarily  undertaken 
as  affording  him  facilities  for  the  better  accomplishment 
of  the  work  to  which  he  will  have  dedicated  himself — the 
cultivation  of  the  spirituality  of  the  race  at  large.  On  the 
level  he  will  have  attained  he  will  be  already  a  co-worker 
with  the  Divine  purpose,  a  conscious  exponent  of  the 
Divine  Will. 

Keeping  still,  for  the  present,  on  the  level  of  generali- 
ties, and  postponing  the  more  exact  examination  of  the 
steps  on  the  path  of  initiation,  I  may  remark  that  for  any 
one  who  can  even  dimly  discern  the  attributes  of  such 
existence  as  is  attained  to  by  the  fully  spiritualised  man, 
there  is  little  need  to  look  beyond  that  condition  in  search 
of  motives  for  an  upward  struggle.  But  let  me  interpolate 
here  a  few  observations  concerning  the  most  ennobling  of 
those  motives  before  going  on  to  speak  of  those  which 
appeal  to  feelings  of  personal  desire,  however  lofty  in  their 
character.  It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  by  the  time  the 

264   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

spiritual  consciousness  of  a  man  on  the  upward  path  is 
fully  developed  he  is  already  so  far  a  participator  in  the 
Divine  nature  that  the  unselfish  eagerness  to  acquire  the 
power  of  benefiting  others  is  really  the  most  efficient 
motive  for  exertion  that  can  appeal  to  him;  and  perhaps 
realising  this  great  truth,  more  or  less  perfectly,  in  advance> 
there  are  many  still  incarnate  human  beings  who  proclaim 
this  as  already  the  only  motive  that  really  commands  their 
zealous  effort.  We  need  not  cast  discredit  on  their  early 
belief  in  their  own  interior  nobility  of  purpose.  But 
without  claiming  that  men  still  on  the  normal  levels  of 
incarnation  should  be  already  infused  by  so  lofty  a  senti- 
ment, it  is  no  degradation  of  their  nature  so  far,  if  they 
recognise  as  the  first  motive  that  inspires  them  with  the 
courage  and  physical  self-abnegation  required  for  the 
cultivation  of  their  spiritual  natures,  a  longing  to  come 
into  closer  relations  with  beings  so  glorified  as  those  who 
have  broken  the  bondage  of  the  flesh  or  have  already  taken 
their  place  in  superior  realms  of  existence.  No  unworthy 
pandering  to  selfishness  is  involved  in  the  representation  of 
spiritual  exaltation  as  in  itself  a  goal  befitting  the  most 
enthusiastic  aspiration — as  regarded  from  the  lower  stand- 
point of  material  existence.  Emotions  and  motives  may 
follow  one  another  in  due  order,  but  it  would  be  a  great 
mistake  to  add  needlessly  to  the  ordeals  of  the  first  steps 
in  occult  progress  by  depriving  them  of  the  encourage- 
ment to  be  derived  from  the  reflection  that  even  earlier  the 
achievements  of  such  progress  carry  with  them  rewards 'of 
an  extremely  elevated  order. 

So  then  we  work  back  to  the  position  that  the  career 
of  initiation — the  path  of  occult  progress — is  an  enter- 
prise not  only  worthy  of  being  the  pursuit  of  the  loftiest 
human  virtue;  there  is  no  other  career  of  philanthropy  or 

THE    ELDER    BRETHREN       265 

benevolence  that  is  comparable  with  it,  for  the  more  the 
community  of  those  who  attain  Adeptship  is  strengthened 
numerically  and  otherwise,  the  greater  is  the  influence 
working  on  mankind  at  large  for  their  spiritual  advance- 
ment, and  their  elevation  above  the  lamentable  Karmic 
conditions  that  give  rise  to  the  physical  miseries  and  suf- 
fering to  which  ordinary  philanthropy,  unable  to  look 
beyond  the  one  life,  is  limited  in  choosing  its  spheres  of 
activity.     But  lest  this  reflection  should  be  misunderstood, 
let  me  point  out  that  the  career  of  occult  progress  is  not 
one  which  has  to  be  selected  in  preference,  or  as  an  alter- 
native tb  other  benevolent  activities.    Whatever  these  may 
be,  for  good  men  impelled  to  engage  in  them  from  beauti- 
ful and  generous  sympathy  with  their  fellow  creatures, 
their  work  in  such  directions,  instead  of  impeding  their 
occult  progress,  must  be  directly  subservient  thereto  if  they 
do  but  blend  with  the  immediate  emotions  of  sympathy 
which  dictate  their  practical  philanthropy  the  desire  for 
spiritual  knowledge,  and  the  efforts  to  attain  it  that  may  be 
compatible  with  their  duties  and  assumed  responsibilities 
in  life.     One  of  the  most  common  mistakes  concerning 
this  subject  made  by  those  who  pick  up  a  few  imperfect 
ideas  from  Oriental  literature  and  tales  of  Eastern  "  yogee- 
ism,"  is  the  notion  that  the  occult  path  means  withdrawal 
from    all    human    companionship,    and    absorption    in    a 
spiritual     selfishness    that    seeks    a    personal     beatitude 
by   means  of  solitary   meditation   and  austere   practices. 
That  which   occult   training  does  undoubtedly  demand 
is   self-denial    in    the   sense    of    entire    abstinence    from 
the  fruitless  indulgence  of  self,  and  some  time  devoted  if 
possible  compatibly  with  altruistic  duties  to  the  interior 
cultivation  of  the  spiritual  consciousness.     But  there  is  no 
life  of  philanthropic  activity  so  full  that  it  would  not  in- 

266    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

elude  the  necessary  opportunities  for  this.  On  the  con- 
trary it  is,  broadly  speaking,  most  assuredly  true  that  the 
active  philanthropist  is,  by  virtue  of  being  so,  in  far  more 
favourable  conditions  for  the  attainment  of  spiritual 
advancement  than  the  man  who  is  merely  bent  upon  his 
advancement,  however  blameless  his  relative  inactivity. 

Here  we  may  pause  to  consider  some  of  the  commonest 
among  the  foolish  criticisms  that  have  been  aimed  at  the 
state  and  methods  of  activity  of  the  Adepts,  since  some- 
thing has  been  promulgated  in  reference  to  them  in  modern 
theosophic  literature.  It  has  been  suggested  that  in  living 
very  secluded  lives  (as  far  as  their  existence  on  the  physical 
plane  is  concerned)  they  are  selfishly  neglecting  the  poig- 
nant sufferings  of  unhappy  humanity,  which  they  might 
do  much  to  soften  if  they  came  down  from  their  lofty 
towers  to  mingle  with  the  human  race.  To  have  power 
over  material  nature  and  disease  and  not  at  once  devote 
that  power  to  the  relief  of  poverty  and  sickness  seems 
to  some  of  our  short-sighted  moralists  to  imply  a  want 
of  sympathy  with  suffering,  and  a  "  selfish  "  neglect  of 
opportunities  for  doing  good.  The  criticism  springs  from 
a  comprehensive  ignorance  of  Nature  and  the  whole  design 
of  the  world — from  a  curiously  complete  disregard  of  the 
hypothesis  that,  in  spite  of  appearances,  the  progress  of 
the  world  may  be  going  on,  under  the  law  of  justice,  and 
that  very  much  more  important  ends  may  really  be  in 
view  than  those  which  have  to  do  with  the  alleviation  of 
the  painful  consequences  which,  in  the  progress  of  their 
successive  lives,  most  human  beings  may  have  brought 
upon  themselves.  Let  me  not  be  misunderstood.  To  the 
true  Masters  of  Wisdom  the  spectacle  of  human  suffering, 
however  completely  that  suffering  may  have  been  earned 
by  the  sufferer's  own  action  in  the  past,  is  one  evoking 

THE    ELDER    BRETHREN        267 

acute  and  tender-hearted  sympathy.  But  this  sympathy 
cannot  but,  in  their  case,  be  associated  with  and  qualified 
by  the  lofty  powers  of  vision  which  may  look  back  to 
the  causes  in  the  past,  by  which  the  suffering  has  been 
brought  on,  and  forward  to  the  results  that  may  be  hoped 
for  as  regards  the  future  by  the  exhaustion  of  those  causes. 
To  us,  who  see  merely  the  suffering,  it  is  perfectly  clear 
that  we  have  only  one  simple  duty  in  regard  to  it — to 
relieve  it  if  we  can,  by  the  exercise  of  such  very  limited 
powers  in  that  direction  as  we  may  possess.  If  we  suc- 
ceed in  doing  this  we  are  not  upsetting  the  design  of 
Nature.  We  are  in  all  probability  merely  playing  a  part 
unconsciously  in  that  design,  and  the  Karma  of  the  sufferer 
whom  we  relieve,  may  be  regarded  as  having  been  to  that 
extent  already  fulfilled  when  the  pressure  of  destiny 
brought  us  into  contact  with  him.  But  the  Adept,  who 
has  come  already  into  conscious  relations  with  the  design 
of  Nature,  who  is  no  longer  drifted  blindly  about  by.  that 
pressure  of  destiny  just  referred  to,  is  very  differently 
situated.  He  is  not  wanted  as  an  instrument  of  Karma. 
The  great  law  finds  its  own  instruments  ready  to  its  hand 
among  the  humanity  still  on  the  same  level  of  existence 
to  which  the  sufferer  belongs.  If  he  intervenes,  with  a 
power  and  a  knowledge  on  a  level,  so  to  speak,  with  that 
on  which  the  design  originates,  he  is  distinctly  upsetting 
the  contemplated  scheme  of  things.  Such  a  violation  of 
the  appointed  progress  of  events  would  quite  possibly  do 
no  more  than  protract  the  suffering  it  might  seem  to 
relieve,  for  the  unfulfilled  law  of  Karma  would  exact 
its  own  measure  of  justice  later  on, — in  another  life, 
perhaps,  which  might  have  been  clear  of  the  old  debt  if 
things  had  been  allowed  to  take  their  normal  course. 

Then,  again,  while  philanthropists  of  the  lowlier  type 

268    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

may  fitly  enough  concern  themselves  with  palliatives  in 
dealing  with  human  suffering,  their  justification  for  doing 
this  is  to  be  sought  rather  in  the  imperfection  of  their 
insight  than  in  the  merits  of  palliatives  as  such  compared 
with  remedies  for  evil  which  should  go  deeper  than  the 
surface,  and  attempt  to  grapple  with  fundamental  causes. 
While  the  worldly  philanthropist  of  the  ordinary  type 
seeks  for  the  causes  of  misery  and  suffering  in  the  external 
neglect  of  economical  laws,  and  would  endeavour  to  cir- 
cumvent these  evils  by  teaching  thrift,  temperance,  and 
industry  as  habits  dictated  by  an  enlightened  selfishness,  we 
can  readily  appreciate  the  idea  that  a  fuller  comprehension 
of  the  laws  of  Karma  may  enable  Adept  vision  to  realise 
that  even  the  practice  of  economical  virtues  would  not 
suffice  to  root  out  from  human  society  the  suffering  which 
in  one  shape  or  another  must  overtake  re-incarnating 
human  creatures  who  have  lived  before  for  merely  selfish 
objects,  and  have  done  evil,  as  judged  by  the  spiritual  stan- 
dard, however  enlightened,  in  the  mere  worldly  sense, 
their  selfishness  may  have  been  at  the  time.  The  Karmic 
retribution  for  sins  against  humanity,  for  cruelty  to  others, 
and  hardness  of  heart  in  presence  of  sorrow,  can  never  be 
circumvented,  and  the  cunningest  devices  for  warding  off 
poverty  and  crime  will  never  be  successful  in  guarding 
future  generations  from  these  calamities  until  the  people, 
who  in  the  present  time  are  creating  the  conditions  in 
which  they  will  live  again,  are  taught  to  live  with  an  eye 
to  that  inevitable  destiny,  and  to  starve  out  the  forces  that 
make  for  wretchedness  and  disease,  so  that  there  sKall 
be  no  Karmic  necessity  for  such  penalties  operative  in  the 
progress  of  the  world  any  more. 

The  end,  therefore,  to  which  the  Adept  must  primarily 
devote  himself  will  always  be  the  cultivation  of  spiritual 

THE    ELDER    BRETHREN       269 

knowledge  and  aspiration,  which  by  weaning  people  from 
their  supreme  devotion  to  the  objects  of  physical  existence, 
will  guide  them  into  those  paths  of  endeavour  which  will 
necessarily  render  them  less  likely  to  sacrifice  the  higher 
dictates  of  humanity  on  the  altars  of  their  individual 
worldly  interests. 

Of  course,  I  am  not  professing  to  explain  and  account 
for  the  whole  policy  of  the  Adept  Brotherhood  in  their 
dealings  with  uninitiated  mankind.  I  am  merely  showing 
how,  with  the  limited  knowledge  of  their  functions  in 
Nature  which  we  possess,  it  is  easy  to  put  aside  the  mani- 
festly inapplicable  criticisms  suggested  by  an  entire  ignor- 
ance on  that  subject.  It  is  with  the  spiritual  interests  of 
humanity  almost  exclusively  that  the  Adepts  must  deal. 
And  in  dealing  even  with  these  it  is  obvious  that  at  some 
periods  of  the  world's  history  their  influence  may  be  much 
more  restricted  than  at  others.  Human  affairs  advance 
through  a  great  series  of  interlinked  cycles,  and  each  of 
these  has  its  periods  of  spiritual  and  material  ascendancy. 
Sometimes  the  exoteric  religious  ideas  in  vogue  may  favour, 
sometimes  they  may  oppose  the  spread  of  true  spiritual 
knowledge.  Sometimes  it  may  be  possible  for  those  who 
have  outrun  their  contemporaries,  and  have  attained  to  the 
power  and  beatitude  of  the  Divine  Kingdom,  to  do  little 
more  than  concern  themselves  with  the  few  who  are 
toiling  along  after  them  across  the  dangers  and  ordeals  of 
the  upward  path.  Sometimes  they  may  find  it  practicable 
to  attempt  the  reform  of  popular  religions,  so  as  to  bring 
these  more  into  harmony  with  the  eternal  natural  laws 
that  govern  spiritual  evolution.  But  whether  at  any 
given  moment  they  can  do  much  or  little,  there  is  one 
thing  they  can  always  do,  and  do  always  accordingly,  they 
can — to  fall  into  the  symbolical  language  that  the  subject 

270   THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

suggests — keep  the  sacred  flame  alight.  They  can  take 
care  that  there  shall  always  be  an  Adept  community  on 
earth,  ready  to  instruct  and  bring  forward  increasing 
numbers  of  those  who,  as  the  cyclic  law  grows  more 
favourable  in  the  future,  may  be  prepared  to  undertake 
the  task  of  self-development,  and  thus  to  co-operate  with 
Nature  in  working  out  her  grandest  design — to  which  all 
preliminary  stages  of  evolution  are,  indeed,  but  subservient. 
To  those  who  have  long  attained  the  exaltation  of  the 
Divine  Kingdom,  it  may  be  that  some  mysterious  condition 
of  supreme  rest  and  beatitude  beckons  them  onward,  and 
without  knowing  much  on  that  subject,  we  may  reason- 
ably conjecture  that  one  by  one,  as  the  aspect  of  the  great 
duty  that  presses  upon  them  all  permits,  they  do  pass  on, 
but  never,  we  may  be  assured,  until  their  places  are  fully 
supplied  by  other  victors  in  the  great  struggle. 

In  this  way  the  Adept  Brotherhood  is  much  more  than 
a  mere  organisation  of  immensely  advanced  and 
spiritualised  men.  It  is  that,  of  course,  but  it  is  a  brother- 
hood so  far  advanced  that  it  has  grown  up  into  being  a 
part  of  the  great  hierarchy  of  superior  beings  constituting 
the  spiritual  government  of  the  world.  Some  of  those 
who  become  Adepts  are,  in  .turn,  drawn  up  into  this 
hierarchy,  and  may  then  be  said  to  guide  and  direct  the 
Will  lying  behind  them  again  in  its  detailed  manifestations. 
Rightly  apprehended  this  idea  is  no  more  in  conflict  with 
the  vague  religious  conception  that  assigns  the  "  creation  " 
of  the  world  to  God,  than  the  fact  that  human  devices  may 
direct  electricity  to  specific  purposes,  is  in  conflict  with 
the  profound  truth  that  electricity  itself  is  a  mighty  and 
ever-present  force  of  Nature.  The  deeply  impressive  truth 
that  the  Will  of  God  works  through  agencies  of  a  character 
intermediate  between  God  and  man,  is  the  scientific  inter- 

THE    ELDER    BRETHREN        271 

pretation  of  Nature,  not  the  deposition  of  vaguer  beliefs 
which  only  seem  more  reverential  to  the  uninstructed  mind 
because  that  mind  has  never  even  sought  to  work  out  its 
beliefs  with  precision. 

That  from  the  beginning  of  humanity  on  earth  in  this 
great  World  Period  through  which  we  are  passing,  there 
has  been  a  Being  consciously  presiding  over  its  evolution 
is,  as  I  say,  a  perfectly  reasonable  idea,  in  harmony  with 
the  loftiest  religious  conceptions.  That  it  is  not  merely 
an  idea,  but  a  fact,  is  ascertained  by  those  who  are  them- 
selves, in  turn,  intermediate  between  that  Being  and 
humanity  at  large.  And  from  them  some  definite  infor- 
mation on  the  subject  filters  down  to  those  who  from  our 
own  level  are  struggling  upwards  and  already  in  contact 
wfth  Adept  instruction.  Evidently  it  would  be  impossible 
to  convey  to  incarnate  intelligence — imprisoned  in  flesh 
and  working  within  the  limitations  of  consciousness  as  it 
functions  on  the  material  plane — very  much  concerning 
the  attributes  of  such  a  Being.  But  the  recognition  of  His 
existence  is  a  step  in  the  direction  of  a  comprehension  of 
the  whole  spiritual  hierarchy. 

People  who  make  a  hard  and  fast  barrier  in  their 
imaginations  between  God  and  Man — treating  humanity, 
as  of  a  horde  of  final  units,  each  with  an  eternal  personality 
as  limited  in  its  scope,  as  compared  with  Deity,  as  the  nine- 
pins a  boy  may  play  with  compared  to  himself, — are  not 
merely  degrading  the  human  personalities  in  question,  but 
are  making  nonsense  of  the  whole  Natural  design.  It 
would  have  no  ulterior  purpose  or  meaning  if  the  con- 
ventional view  were  in  correspondence  with  the  fact.  On 
the  other  hand,  when  we  not  alone  accept  the  principle 
that  there  must  be  higher  destinies  open  to  human  creatures 
than  those  which  are  bounded  by  the  mystery  of  physical 

THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

death,  but  realise  that  those  higher  destinies  may  assimilate 
Man  to  God-like  knowledge,  wisdom  and  power,  and 
elevate  him  at  last— if  he  makes  himself  worthy — to  play 
a  part  in  the  spiritual  government  of  his  race,  then  surely 
we  must  feel  that  we  have  grasped  a  really  lofty  concep- 
tion of  the  design  to  which  humanity  belongs. 

And  in  the  light  of  that  idea  we  may  go  considerably 
further,  even,  than  the  doctrine  of  Re-incarnation  takes 
us  in  appreciating  correctly  the  pathetic  mistake  which 
in  conscious  or  unconscious  submission  to  the  dictates  of  a 
narrow  and  incomplete  theology  many  people  make  in 
contemplating  the  brevity  of  each  individual  physical  life. 
Especially  do  those  aspiring  lovers  of  Nature,  who  most 
reverently  study  her  laws — true  men  of  science — fall  A 
prey  to  the  gloomy  delusion  that  when  the  brain  they  have 
trained  so  carefully  shall  dissolve  in  the  earth,  there  is  an 
end  of  trie  futile  labour  they  have  gone  through.  Con- 
ventional religion  gives  them  a  hope  indeed  of  some  sort 
of  consciousness  hereafter;  but  the  heaven  of  crowns  and 
harps  and  unintelligent  rapture  before  "  the  throne  " — the 
heaven  of  ignorant  and  empty-headed  priests,  good  and 
good-hearted  though  they  may  sometimes  be — affords  a 
prospect  of  drivelling  ennui  to  the  man  who  is  already 
in  this  life  highly  developed  in  knowledge  and  intel- 
lectual energy.  Men  of  such  a  type  turn  from  it  with 
distaste  if  not  with  scorn,  and  forgetting  that  the  priests 
may  be  echoing  a  great  truth  in  promising  future  con- 
sciousness, though  distorting  it  into  nonsense  by  furnishing 
it  forth  with  detail  on  a  level  with  their  own  intelligence 
— they,  the  true  priests  of  Nature,  her  eager  students  and 
worshippers,  fall  back  on  a  forlorn  kind  of  altruism  and  try 
to  take  comfort  in  the  thought  that  their  successors  will 
carry  on  the  mighty  quest  when  they  themselves  are  dust 

THE    ELDER    BRETHREN       273 

and  their  thoughts  as  the  light  of  yesterday  that  has  faded 
into  darkness  and  ceased  to  be. 

The  mere  first  steps  in  esoteric  teaching  should  hold 
out  a  thrilling  prospect  in  exchange  for  this  dreary  expec- 
tation. The  persistence  of  individual  consciousness — the 
re-incarnation  of  each  transient  personality  with  the 
knowledge  and  training  of  each  life  stored  as  so  much 
potentiality  of  further  advancement,  as  so  much  intel- 
lectual faculty  ready  to  spring  once  more  into  activity — 
that  is  the  first  great  law  of  spiritual  evolution  which 
rebukes  the  insult  to  Nature  involved  in  the  idea  that  his 
science  is  extinct  when  the  man  of  science  "  dies."  But 
there  is  really  a  far  loftier  possibility  before  him  in  the 
progress  of  ages,  if  he  wakes  to  a  perception  of  the  higher 
science  that  may  link  his  knowledge  with  that  of  Nature's 
great  evolutionary  plan,  and  summon  him  to  the  task  of 
so  exalting  his  own  individuality  that  he  may  pass  on  into 
the  ranks  of  those  I  have  described  as  playing  a  ministerial 
part  in  the  government  of  the  world.  He  will  not  do  this, 
of  course,  by  the  concentration  of  faculties  on  the  pheno- 
mena of  this  one  facet  of  many-sided  Nature  that  we  call 
the  physical  plane.  However  ardent  and  intelligent  that 
concentration  may  be,  such  an  exercise  of  faculty  can 
develop  but  one  of  the  many  potentialities  of  development 
which  lurk  in  the  nature  of  the  Man  who  must  be  more 
than  what  we  habitually  mean  by  the  phrase  a  man  of 
science,  before  he  can  win  a  place  in  the  Divine  kingdom. 
Knowledge  itself  of  the  kind  we  chiefly  deal  with  in  this 
life,  may  be  a  splendid  stimulant  to  spiritual  evolution, 
out  a  diet  consisting  of  stimulant  entirely  is  not  conducive 
to  health.  We  must  study  other  laws  of  Nature  besides 
those  that  have  to  do  with  physics  before  we  can  utilise 
and  control  the  forces  of  the  spiritual  plane.  Man  does 

274     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

not  live  by  bread  alone;  the  soul  is  not  exalted  by  know- 
ledge alone  (in  the  sense  in  which  knowledge  is  limited 
to  the  same  natural  plane  as  the  bread).  The  man  of 
science  who  would  claim  the  inheritance  that  Nature 
has  provided  for  him  must  appreciate  her  design  before 
he  can  be  appointed  to  assist  in  working  it  out,  and  must 
assimilate  his  aspirations  to  the  spirit  in  which  that  design 
is  conceived.  When  he  has  done  this,  though  not  till 
then,  the  Elder  Brethren  of  humanity  will  be  ready  to 
receive  him  into  their  midst. 

CHAPTER    XII 
THE  ANCIENT  MYSTERIES 

I  HAVE  already  endeavoured  to  show  what  is  the  dis- 
tinction between  theosophic  and  religious  teaching, 
and  why,  though  widely  different  in  some  respects, 
they  are  not  in  any  real  sense  antagonistic.  A  further 
step  along  the  same  line  of  thought,  leads  us  to  the  con- 
clusion that  till  a  recent  period  of  the  world's  history, 
theosophic  and  religious  teaching  went  hand  in  hand — 
that  one  was  the  complement  and  crown  of  the  other. 
That  the  teachings  of  what  used  to  be  called  Initiation  in 
the  era  of  the  Egyptian  and  Grecian  Mysteries  were  closely 
identified  with  what  we  now  call  Theosophy,  is  a  con- 
clusion that  reveals  itself  with  something  approaching 
certainty  when  the  records  that  we  possess,  such  as  they 
are,  concerning  the  ancient  Mysteries,  are  examined  in 
the  light  of  now  current  expositions  of  theosophic 
doctrine.  Nor  must  we  be  misled  in  estimating  the  im- 
portance of  this  fact  by  the  easily  suggested  idea  that  the 
Mystery  teaching  may  have  been  superseded  by  the 
Christian  revelation-r-though  all  very  well  in  its  way, 
while  the  world  at  large  had  to  be  content  with  heathen 
polytheism.  The  Mystery  teaching  was  not  superseded  by 
the  Christian  revelation,  for  the  author  of  that  revelation 
constantly  alludes  to  it  as  embodying  a  higher  instruction 
than  that  offered  to  the  multitude  even  by  Him. 

The  supersession  of  esoteric  teaching  by  that  of  modern 
Christian  doctrine  was  effected  not  by  the  original  Teacher 
or  his  disciples,  but  by  the  Church  when  that  became  a 
State  organisation  with  worldly  interests  to  serve,  and 
arrogated  to  itself  a  spiritual  despotism,  by  pretending  to  a 
monopoly  of  spiritual  knowledge. 

275 

276     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

This  pretence  has  been  emphasised  more  and  more  in 
modern  centuries  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  spiritual 
knowledge  really  possessed  by  the  priesthood.  And, 
indeed,  in  looking  back  on  the  claims  to  superior  spiritual 
knowledge  evidently  advanced  by  the  priesthood  in  early 
ages  of  the  world,  we  are  apt  to  measure  those  claims  by 
reference  to  the  painfully  -familiar  fact  that  priests  in 
modern  centuries  have  not  been  at  all  remarkable  for  the 
possession  of  knowledge  in  advance  of  their  lay  con- 
temporaries. On  the  contrary,  the  early  European  Church 
has  been  in  the  rear  of  intelligence  in  almost  all  respects, 
and  the  claims  of  its  hierarchy  on  the  reverence  of  the 
multitude  have  depended  on  appeals  to  a  very  crude  super- 
stition or  on  mundane  tyranny.  As  our  survey,  however, 
is  pushed  back  further  and  further  into  the  past,  we  get 
well  behind  the  records  of  an  ignorant  and  worldly  church 
to  periods  at  which  the  priesthood  was  evidently  regarded 
as  actually  invested  with  an  insight  into  the  mysteries  of 
Nature  far  transcending  that  generally  diffused  throughout 
secular  society.  The  priests  of  ancient  Egypt  were  real 
spiritual  teachers,  and  the  inferences  of  those  who  study 
Egyptian  antiquities  by  the  light  of  modern  inquiries  into 
occult  science  will  surely  tend  in  the  direction  of  recognis- 
ing them  as  endowed  with  the  spiritual  enlightenment  that 
carries  with  it  an  abnormal  control  over  natural  forces. 

We  do  not  know,  or  at  all  events  we  are  not  helped  by 
literary  and  archaeological  research  to  know,  very  much 
about  the  "  Mysteries  "  and  initiations  of  Ancient  Egypt, 
and  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson  frankly  concedes  that  our 
only  clue  to  their  character  and  significance  is  to  be  sought 
for  in  th€  somewhat  fuller  information  we  possess  con- 
cerning the  Greek  Mysteries  of  Eleusis,  which  were 
evidently  copied  from  Egyptian  practices.  But  it  is  quite 

THE  ANCIENT  MYSTERIES       277 

plain  that  Egyptian   initiations  were  so  serious  in  their 
character — hedged  round  from  profane  intrusion  with  such 
jealous  care,  and  approachable  only  through  probations  and 
ordeals  of  so  formidable  a  description  that  the  outer  world 
must  have  been  entirely  sure  of  the  broad  principle  that 
the  Hierophants  of  the  temples  were  on  a  truly  superior 
level  of  knowledge  and  power,  as  compared  with  the  mul- 
titude.   If  they  had  been  merely  the  exponents  of  a  pom- 
pous ecclesiastical  ceremonial,  candidates  for  their  teaching 
would  not  have  besieged  their  strongholds  with  the  eager- 
ness actually  shown,  and  would  not  have  been  prepared 
to  go  through  the  trials  they  certainly  underwent  in  their 
efforts    to    secure    admission    to    the    charmed    circle    of 
enlightenment.     Even  the  Mysteries   of  Eleusis,  which 
were    according    to    all    reasonable    conjecture    a    very 
degenerate  reproduction  of  the  more  ancient  organisation 
of  Egypt,  were  open,  as  far  as  we  know  anything  of  their 
details,  to  a  highly  philosophical  interpretation.     Thomas 
Taylor,  the  indefatigable  translator  of  so  much  Platonic 
and  Neo-Platonic  literature,  says  in  his  own  dissertation  on 
the  Mysteries,  that  those  of  the  "  lesser  "  order  "  occultly 
signified  this  sublime  truth,  that  the  soul  being  merged  in 
matter,  resides  among  the  dead  both  here  and  hereafter." 
And  quoting  Plotinus,  he  adds,  "  The  soul  therefore  dies 
through  vice  as  much  as  it  is  possible  for  the  soul  to  die; 
and  the  death  of  the  soul  is,  while  merged  or  baptised  as 
it  were  in  the  present  body,  to  descend  into  matter  and 
be  filled  with  its  impurity,  and  after  departing  from  this 
body,  to  be  absorbed  in  its  filth  till  it  returns  to  a  superior 
condition,  and  elevates  its  eye   from  the  overwhelming 
mire." 

Later   on,    dealing    with    the   subject   of   the   greater 
Mysteries,  he  says :  "  As  the  shows  of  the  lesser  mysteries 

278     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

occultly  signified  the  miseries  of  the  soul  while  in  sub- 
jection to  the  body,  so  those  of  the  greater  obscurity  inti- 
mated by  mystic  and  splendid  visions  the  felicity  of  the 
soul,  both  here  and  hereafter,  when  purified  from  the  defile- 
ments of  a  material  nature  and  constantly  elevated  to  the 
realities  of  intellectual  vision." 

Dr.  Warburton,  who  was  Bishop  of  Gloucester  in  the 
middle  of  the  last  century,  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  a 
writer  of  authority  on  the  ancient  Mysteries;  but  his  views 
are  too  much  entangled  with  conventional  orthodoxy  to 
have  any  real  value.  He  labours,  indeed,  to  show  that  the 
Mysteries  were  designed  to  teach  the  Unity  of  God,  as 
contrasted  with  the  polytheism  of  popular  theology  in  pre- 
Christian  ages.  But  Thomas  Taylor  loftily  rebukes  the 
narrowness  of  this  conception.  After  expanding  the  ideas 
above  indicated,  he  goes  on  :  "  From  hence  the  reader  will 
easily  perceive  the  extreme  ridiculousness  of  Dr.  War- 
burton's  system — that  the  grand  secret  of  the  Mysteries 
consisted  in  exposing  the  errors  of  polytheism,  and  in  teach- 
ing the  doctrine  of  the  Unity,  or  the  existence  of  one 
Deity  alone.  .  .  .  But  it  is  by  no  means  wonderful 
that  men  who  have  not  the  smallest  conception  of  the  true 
nature  of  the  gods,  who  have  persuaded  themselves  that 
they  were  only  dead  men  deified,  and  who  measure  the 
understandings  of  the  ancients  by  their  own,  should  be 
led  to  fabricate  a  system  so  improbable  and  absurd." 

As  showing  how  very  far  the  initiations  went  beyond 
being  a  mere  theoretical  repudiation  of  popular  error, 
Taylor  quotes  two  passages  as  follows.  The  first  is  from 
Apuleius,  who  says,  describing  his  own  experiences  in  the 
mysteries :  "  I  approached  the  confines  of  death,  and 
treading  on  the  threshold  of  Proserpine,  and  being  carried 
through  all  the  elements,  I  came  back  to  my  pristine 

THE  ANCIENT  MYSTERIES       279 

situation.  In  the  depths  of  midnight  I  saw  the  sun  glitter- 
ing with  a  splendid  light,  together  with  the  infernal  and 
supernal  gods,  and  to  these  divinities  approaching  nearer 
I  paid  the  tribute  of  profound  adoration."  The  second 
passage  is  from  Plato,  who  in  the  "  Phaedrus  "  describes  the 
felicity  of  the  virtuous  soul,  prior  to  its  descent,  in  a  beauti- 
ful allusion  to  the  arcane  visions  of  the  mysteries.  He 
writes :  "  But  it  was  then  lawful  to  survey  the  most 
splendid  beauty  when  we  obtained,  together  with  that 
blessed  choir,  this  happy  vision  and  contemplation.  .  .  . 
And  these  Divine  orgies  were  celebrated  by  us  while  we 
possessed  the  proper  integrity  of  our  nature,  and  were 
freed  from  the  molestations  of  evil,  which  availed  us  in  a 
succeeding  period  of  time.  Likewise  in  consequence  of 
this  Divine  initiation  we  became  spectators  of  entire 
simple,  immovable,  and  blessed  visions,  resident  in  a  pure 
light,  and  were  ourselves  pure  and  immaculate  and 
liberated  from  this  surrounding  vestment  which  we 
denominate  body,  and  to  which  we  are  now  bound  like  an 
oyster  to  its  shell." 

The  Mysteries  of  Bacchus  were  held  by  Taylor  to  be 
of  somewhat  limited  significance  compared  with  those  of 
Eleusis. 

"  And  thus  much  for  the  Mysteries  of  Bacchus,  which 
as  well  as  those  of  Ceres  relate  in  one  part  to  the  descent 
of  a  partial  intellect  into  matter,  and  its  condition  while 
united  with  the  dark  tenement  of  body;  but  there  appears 
to  be  this  difference  between  the  two — that  in  the  fable 
of  Ceres  and  Proserpine  the  descent  of  the  whole  rational 
soul  is  considered,  and  in  that  of  Bacchus  the  distribution 
and  procession  of  that  supreme  part  alone  of  our  nature, 
which  we  properly  characterise  by  the  appellation  of 
intellect.  In  the  composition  of  each  we  may  discern  the 

280    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

same  traces  of  exalted  wisdom  and  recondite  theology — 
of  a  theology  the  most  venerable  of  all  others  for  its 
antiquity,  and  the  most  admirable  for  its  excellence  and 
reality." 

What  we  may  also  perceive  from  the  evidence  afforded 
by  such  passages  as  those  quoted  from  Apuleius  and  Plato, 
is  that  the  Mysteries  were  associated  with  the  exercise  of 
what  we  should  now  call  psychic  powers  and  faculties. 
And  with  this  clue,  aided  by  the  growing  knowledge  in 
modern  times  of  the  extent  and  range  that  may  be  assigned 
to  such  faculties,  we  may  begin  to  appreciate  the  whole 
situation  more  intelligently  than  has  been  possible  till  now. 

From  the  Egyptian  period  downward,  and  in  a  greater 
degree  in  the  Egyptian  as  compared  with  the  Greek  period, 
the  Mysteries  and  initiations  connected  with  them  were 
systems  of  teaching  and  graduation  in  that  occult  science 
which  has  been  built  up  through  the  ages  by  the  prolonged 
exercise  of  psychic  faculties  that  are  still  available  for  those 
who  know  how  to  employ  them  as  a  means  of  verifying 
the  knowledge  thus  accumulated  in  the  world.  To  a  very 
large  extent  during  the  development  of  modern  civilisation 
those  faculties  have  been  stifled  and  forgotten  in  the 
activity  imparted  to  others  of  a  purely  physical  character; 
but  now  in  all  directions  even  Western  civilised  nations 
are  fermenting  with  a  revival  of  psychic  activity.  Much 
of  this  energy  is  blindly  and  ignorantly  misdirected,  but 
it  is  working  in  all  its  manifestations  to  break  down  the 
dogged  materialistic  incredulity  that  has  been  in  a  supreme 
degree  the  discreditable  characteristic  of  the  last  half 
century.  That  incredulity  has  pervaded  secular  science, 
giving  its  avowed  agnosticism  an  almost  atheistic  bias 
and  has  dried  up  the  life-blood  of  religion,  leaving  the 
churches  a  structure  of  dry  bones  for  all  but  enthusiasts, 

THE  ANCIENT  MYSTERIES       281 

whose  instincts  of  piety  have  adorned  them  with  poetic 
rather  than  spiritual  attributes.  Rituals  may  be  preserved, 
but  the  creeds  on  which  they  profess  to  rest  are  no  longer 
in  touch  with  methods  of  spiritual  research  which  might 
invest  their  priestly  guardians  with  authority  to  utter 
them.  They  are  handed  down  now  from  generation  to 
generation  with  a  bigoted  tenacity  that  is  all  the  more 
querulous  because  it  is  conscious  of  its  own  inability  to- 
trace  them  back  to  their  supposed  sources  in  the  invisible 
realms  of  Nature.  A  clergy  rich  in  professions  but  poor 
in  faith  joins  hands  with  scientific  materialism  to  dis- 
countenance the  theory  that  embodied  human  conscious- 
ness can  have  any  touch  with  the  spiritual  world.  A 
withered  theology  preserved  like  the  petals  of  dried  flowers 
may,  it  no  doubt  feels,  do  better  service  to  a  church  with  a 
complicated  sociological  structure  to  take  care  of,  than  i 
progressive  and  vitalised  scheme  of  spiritual  investigation. 

Neither  clerical  interests  nor  materialism,  however,  can 
hold  their  own  against  the  growing  conviction  that  the 
human  race  is  in  possession  of  faculties  capable  of  piercing 
the  veil  of  matter.  Once  recognising  this  as  a  permanent 
fact  in  Nature,  we  are  relieved  from  the  necessity  of  trying 
to  escape,  by  fantastic  conjectures,  from  the  plain  evidence 
of  contemporary  writers  that  the  Mysteries  of  Greece,  and, 
a  fortiori,  those  of  Egypt,  were  associated  with  a  psychic 
revelation  for  those  who  were  initiated. 

This  point  is  well  sustained  by  a  Russian  writer, 
Ouvaroff,  whose  treatise  on  the  Eleusinian  Mysteries  has 
been  translated  into  English  by  J.  D.  Price  (1817). 

The  first  edition  of  the  original  was  published  in  1812. 
In  his  preface  the  author  says  :  — 

"  My  object  in  this  work  is  to  show  that  not  only  were 
the  ancient  mysteries  the  very  life  of  polytheism,  but 

282     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

still  more  that  they  proceeded  from  the  sole  and  true 
source  of  all  the  light  diffused  over  the  globe." 

He  traces  the  Mysteries  to  an  Indian  origin,  relying 
on  the  identity  of  the  words  Kov£,  'O/z,  IIa£  =  Conx, 
Om,  Pax,  used  at  the  conclusion  of  the  Mysteries  of 
Eleusis,  with  the  Sanscrit  Cansha,  Om,  Pacsha,  the  first 
word  signifying  "  object  of  desire,"  the  second  being  the 
familiar  sacred  syllable  of  the  East,  and  the  third,  Pachsha, 
identical  with  the  Latin  vix  —  change,  course,  or  turn  of 
duty. 

After  describing  the  division  of  the  Mysteries  into  lesser 
and  greater,  he  goes  on  :  — 

"  We  must  again  acknowledge  the  impossibility  of  deter- 
mining with  precision  the  notions  which  the  Epopts  (the 
initiatees  of  the  greater  Mysteries)  received;  but  that  con- 
nection which  we  have  ascertained  between  the  initiations 
and  the  true  source  of  all  our  knowledge  suffices  to  prove 
that  they  hot  only  acquired  from  them  just  notions  respect- 
ing the  Divinity — the  relations  between  man  and  the 
Divinity — the  primitive  dignity  of  human  nature — its  fall 
— the  immortality  of  the  soul — the  means  of  its  return 
towards  God,  and  finally  another  order  of  things  after 
death,  but  that  traditions  were  imparted  to  them,  oral  and 
even  written,  precious  remains  of  the  great  shipwreck  of 
humanity." 

He  also  contends  with  great  force  :  — 

"  It  is  not  in  fact  probable  that  the  superior  initiation 
was  limited  to  the  demonstration  of  the  Unity  of  God 
and  the  immortality  of  the  soul  by  philosophical  argu- 
ments. Clement  of  Alexandria  expressly  says,  when 
speaking  of  trie  great  Mysteries,  '  Here  ends  all  instruc- 
tion; we  behold  Nature  and  things.'  Besides,  moral 
notions  were  so  widely  diffused  that  the  Mysteries  could 

THE  ANCIENT  MYSTERIES       283 

not,  merely  on  account  of  them,  lay  claim  to  the  magni- 
ficent eulogiums  bestowed  by  the  most  enlightened  per- 
sonages of  antiquity.  For  if  we  suppose  that  the  revelation 
of  those  truths  had  been  the  only  object  of  the  Mysteries, 
would  they  not  have  ceased  to  exist  from  the  moment 
when  those  truths  were  publicly  taught  ?  Would  Pindar, 
Plato,  Cicero,  Epictetus  have  spoken  of  them  with  such 
admiration  if  the  Hierophant  had  satisfied  himself  with 
loudly  proclaiming  his  own  opinions,  or  those  of  his  order, 
on  truths  with  which  they  were  themselves  acquainted  ?  v 

It  is  often  urged  by  writers  who  would  disparage  the 
Mysteries  that  they  were  sometimes  associated  with 
licentious  excesses.  This  objection  has  especial  reference 
to  the  Orphic  Mysteries,  and  on  this  subject  Ouvaroff 
writes :  — 

"  We  have  already  mentioned  that  the  Mysteries  of 
Bacchus  bear  a  character  altogether  different  from  that 
of  the  Eleusinian.  This  opposition  strikes  us  at  once, 
and  what  conformity  could  in  fact  subsist  between  the 
savage  licentiousness  of  the  Bacchus  worship  and  the 
severe  character  and  high  destination  of  the  worship  of 
Ceres  ?  Yet  after  a  serious  examination  we  find  that  this 
opposition  consists  rather  in  the  exterior  than  in  the  spirit 
of  the  two  worships;  nay,  it  entirely  disappears  when  we 
raise  ourselves  to  the  parent  idea,  the  true  type  of  the  two 
institutions.  If  we  do  not  obstinately  persuade  ourselves 
that  Ceres  and  Bacchus  were  historical  personages — if  we 
consider  them  as  originally  two  symbols  of  some  power 
of  the  universe,  we  behold  them  so  identified  that  no  other 
difference  exists  but  in  the  exterior  form,  that  is  in  the 
part  depending  wholly  on  men,  on  local  circumstances, 
and  the  political  destinies  of  nations.  The  worship  of 
Ceres  and  the  worship  of  Bacchus  must  belong  to  one 

284     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

principle  alone,  and  this  principle  is  found  in  the  active 
force  of  Nature,  viewed  in  the  immense  variety  of  its 
functions  and  its  attributes." 

A  dignified  treatise  on  the  Mysteries,  by  W.  M. 
Ramsay,  is  to  be  found  in  the  ninth  edition  of  the 
"  Encyclopaedia  Britannica."  The  author  begins,  it  is 
true,  by  speaking  with  respect  of  Lobeck's  great  work, 
the  "  Aglaophamus "  (1829),  in  which  that  author 
endeavours  to  destroy  the  theory  that  the  Mysteries 
u  enshrined  a  primitive  revelation  of  divine  truth,"  but 
he  recognises  the  weakness  of  some  of  Lobeck's  argu- 
ments, and  especially  points  out  that  additional  evidence  has 
been  accumulated  since  his  time,  "  making  it  certain  that 
statements  which  Lobeck  set  aside  as  not  referring  to  the 
Eleusinian  religion  do  really  relate  to  it." 

The  article  is  to  be  regarded  as  representing  the  severely 
erudite  view  of  the  subject  brought  up  to  date,  and  it  is 
in  no  way  inspired  with  any  appreciation  of  the  psychic 
aspect  of  the  Mysteries.  But  all  the  more  on  that  account 
it  may  be  useful  as  showing  how  much  serious  dignity  and 
grandeur  of  thought  is  seen  to  be  associated  with  them. 
Mr.  Ramsay  writes : 

"  The  saving  and  healthy  effect  of  the  Eleusinian 
Mysteries  was  believed  in  not  only  by  the  mass  of  the 
people  but  by  many  of  the  most  thoughtful  and  educated 
intellects — Pindar,  Sophocles,  Socrates,  Plutarch,  &c. 
Plato,  who  finds  no  language  too  strong  to  stigmatise  the 
demoralising  effect  of  the  Orphic  Mysteries,  speaks  of 
the  Eleusinian  with  great  respect.  ...  He  that  has 
been  initiated  has  learned  what  will  ensure  his  happiness 
hereafter.  .  .  .  According  to  Sopater,  initiation 
establishes  a  kinship  of  the  soul  with  the  divine  Nature; 
and  Theon  Smyrnaeus  says  that  the  final  stage  of  initia- 

THE  ANCIENT  MYSTERIES       285 

tion  is  the  state  of  bliss  and  Divine  favour  which  results 
from  it.  .  .  .  There  is  overwhelming  proof  in 
ancient  writers  that  the  effect  of  the  Mysteries  was  not 
dependent  on  any  dogmatic  instruction.  Even  the  doctrine 
of  a  future  life,  which  is  always  associated  in  the  old 
writers  with  the  Mysteries,  was  not  expressly  inculcated  in 
them,  but  left  to  the  spectators  to  gather  for  themselves 
from  the  spectacle  presented  to  them." 

The  serious  view  of  the  Mysteries  suggested  by  all  these 
•quotations  brings  them  into  line  with  what  we  now  call 
theosophic  teaching,  and  with  the  help  of  that  teaching 
we  can  fill  up  all  gaps  in  the  explanation.  In  the  ancient 
world  the  priests  were  really  qualified  to  impart  religious 
teaching  by  .reason  of  being  themselves  in  true  psychic 
relation  with  fountains  of  superior  wisdom.  But  the  state 
of  evolution  of  the  humanity  around  them  made  it  im- 
possible for  them  to  proclaim  their  knowledge  to  the 
multitude.  The  spiritual  civilisation  of  the  people  at  large 
was  not  such  as  would  have  prepared  them  to  accept  and 
profit  by  the  pure  ethical  severity  of  occult  wisdom. 

In  saying  that  I  brush  the  surface  of  a  problem  that 
might  be  dealt  with  more  fully,  but  it  is  enough  for  the 
moment  to  indicate  the  motives  for  reserve  which  are  easily 
intelligible  as  actuating  the  ancient  custodians  of  spiritual 
science.  By  the  operation  of  natural  laws  that  are  plainly 
referred  to  in  many  biblical  passages  not  always  appre- 
hended correctly,  knowledge  concerning  the  possibilities 
of  spiritual  progress  greatly  augments  responsibility.  A 
human  being  who  has  never  been  enabled  or  compelled  to 
realise  that  he  has  it  in  his  own  power,  if  he  lives  a  suffi- 
ciently ennobled  life,  to  rise  in  the  scale  of  existence 
to  conditions  superior  to  that  of  the  commonplace  human 
life  around  him,  does  not  incur  great  moral  responsibility 

286     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

in  leading  a  less  noble  life.  If  he  does  wrong,  natural  laws 
will  entail  suffering  upon  him,  if  not  in  the  life  in  which 
he  sins,  then  in  another;  if  he  does  right,  he  will  be 
rewarded  sooner  or  later  with  happiness;  and  this  will 
happen  whether  he  understands  the  law  or  not.  But  if 
in  any  way  he  acquires  spiritual  knowledge  and  appreciates 
the  scope  of  his  opportunties  as  a  human  being  and  the  law 
which  renders  certain  lines  of  conduct  favourable  to,  and 
certain  other  lines  antagonistic  to  his  higher  development, 
then  if  he  follows  the  lower  path  while  really  seeing  the 
higher,  it  is  much  worse  for  him  than  if  he  had  never  seen 
it.  So  the  wise  priests  of  old — in  the  days  when  priests 
were  really  wise  and  studied  the  mysteries  of  Nature 
instead  of  fantastic  rituals — forebore  from*  pouring  out 
their  knowledge  too  recklessly  into  vessels  ill-qualified  to 
contain  it.  Modern  objectors  often  fail  to  understand  the 
motive  of  their  reticence,  unfamiliar  with  the  notion  that 
religion  can  be  a  more  powerful  agency  than  we  find  it 
now.  Our  churches  have  forgotten  all  that  religion  once 
represented,  except  the  glittering  generalities  that  may 
lightly  be  scattered  abroad  because  they  tell  so  little. 
Those  who  believe  may  be  the  better,  and  those  who  do 
not,  but  may  still  assimilate  some  morsels  of  good  precept, 
can  hardly  be  the  worse.  The  Masters  of  the  Mysteries 
had  a  different  kind  of  teaching  to  deal  with.  They  had 
to  put  those  who  were  qualified  on  the  path  of  upward 
spiritual  progress.  It  is  the  main  purpose  of  this  book  to 
try  and  explain  to  what  that  progress  may  lead,  but  at  all 
events  if  it  is  merely  taken  for  granted  that  it  may  lead 
to  something,  then  the  otherwise  unintelligible  secrecy  of 
the  Mysteries  will  be  seen  to  have  had  a  comprehensible 
theory. 

In  Egypt — where  most  occult  students  will  see  reason 

THE  ANCIENT  MYSTERIES       287 

to  believe  that  the  Mysteries  meant  more  than  in  the 
Grecian  reproduction — their  secrets  seem  to  have  been 
even  more  closely  kept.  Sir  Gardner,  who  has  so  patiently 
elaborated  every  scrap  of  evidence  that  could  throw  light 
on  the  manners  and  social  and*  religious  life  of  the  early 
Egyptians,  is  very  frank  in  avowing  the  great  difficulty  he 
experiences  in  working  out  any  information  bearing  on  the 
secrets  of  initiation.  He  bears  his  testimony,  however,  to 
the  earnestness  of  the  current  feeling  on  the  subject. 

;'  The  chief  cause  of  the  ascendancy  they  (the  priests) 
acquired  over  the  minds  of  the  people  was  the  import- 
ance attached  to  the  Mysteries,  to  a  thorough  understand- 
ing of  which  the  priests  alone  could  arrive,  and  so  sacred 
did  they  hold  those  secrets  that  many  members  of  the 
sacerdotal  order  were  not  admitted  to  a  participation  of 
them,  and  those  alone  were  selected  for  initiation  who  had 
proved  themselves  virtuous  and  deserving  of  the  honour — 
a  fact  satisfactorily  proved  by  the  evidence  of  Clement 
of  Alexandria,  who  says  :  '  The  Egyptians  neither  en- 
trusted their  secrets  to  everyone  nor  degraded  the  secrets  of 
Divine  matters  by  disclosing  them  to  the  profane,  reserv- 
ing them  for  the  heir-apparent  to  the  throne  and  for  such 
of  the  priests  as  excelled  in  virtue  and  wisdom.' 

"  From  all  we  can  learn  of  the  subject  it  appears  that 
the  Mysteries  consisted  of  degrees  denominated  the  Greater 
and  the  Less,  and  in  order  to  become  qualified  for  admission 
into  the  higher  class  it  was  necessary  to  have  passed  through 
those  of  the  inferior  degrees,  and  each  of  them  was  prob- 
ably divided  into  ten  different  grades.  It  was  necessary 
that  the  character  of  the  candidate  for  initiation  should  be 
pure  and  unsullied;  and  the  novices  were  commanded  to 
study  those  lessons  which  tended  to  purify  the  mind  and 
to  encourage  morality.  The  honour  of  ascending  from 

288     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

the  less  to  the  greater  Mysteries  was  as  highly  esteemed 
as  it  was  difficult  to  obtain.  No  ordinary  qualification 
recommended  the  aspirant  to  this  important  privilege;  and 
independent  of  enjoying  an  acknowledged  reputation  for 
learning  and  morality,  he  was  required  to  undergo  the  most 
severe  ordeal  and  to  show  the  greatest  moral  resignation; 
but  the  ceremony  of  passing  under  the  knife  of  the  Hiero- 
phant  was  merely  emblematic  of  the  regeneration  of  the 
neophyte. 

"  That  no  one  except  the  priests  was  privileged  to  in- 
struction into  the  greater  Mysteries  is  evident  from  the 
fact  that  a  prince,  even  the  heir-apparent  and  of  the 
military  order,  was  not  made  partaker  of  these  important 
secrets  nor  instructed  in  them  until  his  accession  to  the 
throne,  when  in  virtue  of  his  kingly  office  he  became  ;i 
member  of  the  priesthood  and  the  head  of  the  religion. 
It  is  not,  however,  less  certain  that  at  a  later  period  many 
besides  the  priests,  and  even  some  Greeks,  were  admitted 
into  the  lesser  Mysteries;  yet  in  these  cases  also  their 
advancement  through  the  different  grades  must  have 
depended  on  a  strict  conformance  to  prescribed  rules." 

The  law  which  prescribed  reticence  in  respect  to  exalted 
spiritual  science  in  ancient  times  was  fortified  in  the  Middle 
Ages  by  an  entirely  new  consideration.  As  the  exoteric 
Christian  Church  grew  into  a  more  and  more  powerful 
engine  of  secular  tyranny,  the  teacher  who  might  too 
rashly  proclaim  the  higher  wisdom  embodied  in  the  secrets 
of  initiation  ran  the  risk  not  only  of  unduly  augmenting 
the  moral  reponsibility  of  those  who  might  listen  to  him, 
but  of  being  burned  himself  at  the  stake.  With  this  peril 
in  their  way,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  mediaeval  occul- 
tists were  careful  in  the  extreme  to  veil  any  statements 
they  ventured  to  make  in  the  disguise  of  an  almost  impene- 

THE  ANCIENT  MYSTERIES       289 

trable  symbolism.  But,  again,  with  the  light  of  modern 
theosophic  teaching  to  show  us  the  solution  of  their 
riddle,  we  may  easily  recognise  the  philosophy  of  the 
ancient  Mysteries  reappearing  in  that  of  the  much-talked- 
of  and  much-misunderstood  fraternity  of  the  Rosicrucians. 

20 

CHAPTER   XIII 
THEOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES 

STUDENTS  of  esoteric  wisdom  are  familiar  with 
the  assertion  that  the  principles  of  spiritual  evolu- 
tion, which  it  is  their  chief  purpose  to  penetrate  and 
comprehend,  have  been  recognised  by  the  illuminated 
mystics  of  all  countries  in  all  ages  of  the  world.  The 
great  science  which  these  principles  constitute  has  not 
been  the  invention  of  modern  Theosophists;  nor  has  it 
been  the  peculiar  inheritance  of  any  small  body  of  Adepts, 
jealously  kept  back  from  the  wider  circle  of  philosophers 
at  large.  The  manner  in  which  a  sudden  outburst  of  in- 
formation relating  to  the  natural  laws  embraced  by  occult 
science  seems  to  have  been  thrown  forward  into  modern 
thought  within  the  last  few  years,  is  calculated  to  suggest 
that  idea  at  first,  but  the  more  we  come  to  understand 
occult  teachings,  the  more  we  are  able  to  discern  them 
cropping  out  at  the  surface  of  earlier  philosophical  and 
religious  literature,  disguised  in  one  kind  of  symbolism  or 
another,  but  evidently  the  same  knowledge  as  regards  the 
root  ideas  and  the  inner  significance  of  the  words  in  which 
they  are  expressed. 

A  good  deal  has  already  been  written — though  still 
probably  a  good  deal  more  might  be  written  with  advan- 
tage— to  show  the  identity  of  gnostic  Christianity  with 
all  points  of  esoteric  science  on  which  that  presentation 
of  the  truth  laid  stress.  And  the  manner  in  which  the  con- 
ceptions of  gnostic  Christianity  were  obscured  by  the 
harsher  and  narrower  dogmas  which  it  became  the  interest 
of  state  churches  to  endorse,  is  in  itself  an  interesting  study, 
throwing  much  light  on  the  processes  of  degradation  to 
which  popular  religious  beliefs  are  subject.  But  in  pro- 

290 

THEOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES  291 

portion  as  Christian  esotericism  became  obscured  by  the 
development  of  the  power  of  the  Church  in  the  Middle 
Ages,  and  perhaps  because  of  that  process  of  obscuration, 
the  essential  doctrines,  which  no  persecution  could  shut 
out  from  the  appreciation  of  enlightened  minds,  sought 
other  channels  of  expression.  In  these  they  altogether 
withdrew  themselves  from  popular  observation.  The 
genuine  philosophy  of  religion  separating  itself  entirely 
from  the  debased  caricature  assumed  a  disguise  which  was 
really  impenetrable  by  all  but  the  initiated  few, — which 
the  Church  itself  was  no  less  incapable  of  seeing  through 
than  the  ignorant  laity.  This  disguise  was  the  much  mis- 
understood research,  science,  or  theory  known  as  Alchemy, 
of  which  some  of  the  Rosicrucian  writers  were  leading  ex- 
ponents. Ignorantly  derided  to  this  day  by  a  materialistic 
generation,  that  persists  in  falling  again  and  again  into  the 
mistake  of  reading  symbolical  expositions  of  interior  truth 
in  their  mere  literal  sense,  alchemy  was,  nevertheless,  the 
cryptographic  expression  of  a  profound  spiritual  wisdom. 

This  view  of  the  subject  is  not  a  conjectural  theory 
developed  to  suit  any  assumed  necessity  of  finding  esoteric 
teaching  somewhere  in  the  literature  of  the  Middle  Ages, 
but  one  which  is  as  certainly  the  correct  view  as  the  inter- 
pretation of  an  ordinary  cryptogram  is  certainly  the  correct 
one  when  it  makes  sense.  For  example,  if  we  see  an 
apparently  meaningless  assemblage  of  groups  of  letters  in 
one  of  the  mysterious  advertisements,  by  means  of  which 
some  people,  who  find  that  system  amusing,  correspond 
with  one  another,  and  if  we  find  that  by  reading  b  for  a 
all  through,  and  c  for  b,  and  so  on,  the  message  translates 
itself  into  straightforward  English,  we  know  with  entire 
certainty  that  the  original  framer  of  the  cryptogram  had 
that  intention  in  his  mind.  So  with  the  seemingly 

20* 

292     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

nonsensical  symbology  of  alchemy,  when  you  try  the  right 
key  in  the  attempt  to  unlock  its  meaning,  it  all  resolves 
itself  into  perfectly  coherent  sense.  We  have  now  got 
the  right  key  in  the  shape  of  that  plain  information  given 
to  the  world  at  large  of  recent  years  in  theosophical  teach- 
ings. The  mist  clears  away  from  the  otherwise  hopelessly 
obscure  verbiage  of  the  alchemical  books,  as  we  read  them 
with  minds  attuned  to  esoteric  thinking  and  on  the  watch 
for  meanings  relating  not  to  the  physical  transmutation  of 
lead  or  antimony  into  gold,  but  to  the  process  of  cultivat- 
ing the  growth  of  the  Higher  Self,  by  the  exaltation  of 
the  lower,  which  is  occult  progress.  The  transmutation, 
in  fact,  of  the  normal  physical  consciousness  of  man  into 
the  divine  consciousness  was  the  magnum  opus  on  which 
the  true  alchemists  were  engaged,  and  much  that  is 
grotesque  imbecility  in  the  directions  and  recipes  they 
have  left  behind,  if  we  read  it  simply  as  nineteenth-century 
chemists,  becomes  beautiful  spiritual  philosophy  in  strictest 
harmony  with  the  laws  governing  human  spiritual  evolu- 
tion, when  we  put  a  symbolical  construction  on  the 
quaintly  expressed  formulae  relating  to  coctions  and  dis- 
tillations and  the  mercury  of  the  wise  and  fiery  waters 
-and  ferments. 

It  will  be  easy  to  take  from  alchemical  books  a  sufficient 
number  of  extracts  to  show  that  the  writers  evidently  had 
a  spiritual  meaning  in  their  minds  as  they  wrote;  it  will 
T^e  equally  simple  to  indicate  lines  of  reading  which  will 
enable  anybody  who  likes  to  take  the  trouble  to  arrive  at 
a  thorough  and  exhaustive  certainty  on  the  subject,  that 
will  never  again  be  disturbed  by  the  silly  sneers  at  alchemy 
so  often  met  with  in  the  pseudo-scientific  literature  of  nine- 
teenth-century conceit.  But  before  going  on  to  make  and 
elucidate  a  few  quotations  that  may  open  up  and  define 

THEOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES  293 

the  proper  method  of  the  investigation  it  will  be  well  to 
show  in  broad  outline  the  indirect  consequences  of  the 
discovery  we  are  dealing  with. 

That  which  has  been  said  so  far  is  the  main  truth  con- 
cerning alchemy.  The  real  alchemists  were  spiritual 
philosophers  concerned  with  the  all-important  task  of 
developing  the  Divine  possibilities  of  their  latent  human 
nature.  They  were  students  of  true  religion  in  the  highest 
sense  of  the  term — men  whose  intelligence  had  emanci- 
pated them  from  the  more  or  less  fantastic  creeds  of  the 
exoteric  Church,  but  who  sought  to  go  behind  the  blunders 
of  a  self-seeking,  worldly-minded  priesthood,  and  associate 
themselves  with  the  will  of  God,  in  the  best  sense  of  that 
expression  :  that  is  to  say,  to  identify  themselves  with  the 
purpose  of  Nature,  with  the  law  of  spiritual  evolution, 
with  the  principle  of  good  in  the  universe.  When  the 
priests  and  officers  of  what  was  blasphemously  proclaimed 
as  religion  were  chiefly  concerned  with  murdering,  rob- 
bing, and  torturing  all  who  stood  in  the  way  of  their  profit- 
able tyranny  over  popular  belief,  the  alchemists  were 
endeavouring  to  learn  how  by  self-denial  and  purity  of 
life,  and  loftiness  of  unworldly  purpose,  it  might  be  possible 
to  elevate  that  human  nature,  which  for  the  most  part 
wallowed  around  them  in  such  ignoble  debasement,  and 
were  struggling  in  their  own  way,  which  hardly  seems  to 
have  differed  in  any  essential  characteristics  from  our  way, 
to  get  upon  what  we  call  the  path  of  occult  progress,  lead- 
ing on  to  the  goal — or  perhaps  only  the  intermediate  goal 
— of  Adeptship.  But  why,  it  may  be  asked,  did  they  write 
books  at  all  if  the  unfavourable  conditions  among  which 
they  lived  were  such  as  to  make  it  impossible  for  them  to 
write  in  a  way  anyone  less  wise  than  themselves  would 
understand  r  If  they  had  taught  their  doctrine  of  salvation 

294     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

plainly  they,  and  their  books  with  them,  would  instantly 
have  been  burned  by  the  authority  of  the  Church.  Was  it 
worth  while,  then,  to  teach  these  doctrines  in  language 
that  could  not  reach  the  intelligence  of  anyone  requiring 
the  lesson  ? 

The  apparent  reply  to  this  question  is  twofold.  First, 
they  who  know  what  they  meant  seem  to  have  imagined 
that  their  meaning  would  become  intelligible  to  persons 
spiritually  ripe  for  profiting  by  occult  teaching.  Whether 
this  expectation  was  often  or  ever  realised  we  cannot  now 
be  sure.  But  secondly,  it  would  be  easy  to  see  why  the 
true  alchemists  should  write,  even  if  they  did  not  expect 
to  be  understood  by  anyone  in  need  of  teaching.  They 
may  have  written  to  introduce  themselves  to  one  another. 
Anybody  who  could  write  a  book  about  alchemy,  about 
the  manipulation  of  lead,  sulphur,  and  mercury,  the  red 
and  white  powder  of  projection,  and  so  on  with  all  the 
"  gibberish  "  that  would  be  used  about  crucibles  and  sub- 
limations, about  coagulating  the  fugitive  tinctures,  and  so 
on,  and  who  could  at  the  same  time  weave  into  this  the 
esoteric  doctrine  concerning  the  path  of  occult  progress, 
which  we  in  this  day  are  privileged  to  discuss  openly, 
would  be  recognised  as  a  genuine  occultist  by  any  other 
occultist  who  might  take  up  his  treatise. 

Bearing  all  this  in  mind,  however,  we  must  remember 
that  besides  the  genuine  occultists  who  wrote  on  spiritual 
progress  under  cover  of  alchemical  symbology,  a  great 
host  of  sordid  hunters  for  gold,  altogether  failing  to  under- 
stand the  loftier  purpose  of  real  alchemy,  took  up  the 
research  in  the  hope  of  acquiring  riches,  and  of  actually 
manufacturing  the  precious  metal.  The  real  alchemists 
were  constantly  giving  out  warnings  against  this  mistake 
in  language  as  plain  as  it  could  be  made  compatibly  with 

THEOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES  295 

not  betraying  their  secret  in  unequivocal  terms,  but  none 
the  less  was  the  avaricious  world  always  fermenting  with 
the  notion  that  alchemical  processes  might  be  a  short  and 
easy  road  to  wealth.  In  this  way  a  great  many  persons, 
entirely  outside  the  range  of  the  description  already  given 
of  the  real  alchemists  all  through  the  Middle  Ages,  spent 
time  and  money  on  trying  experiments  with  physical  mer- 
cury, salt,  and  sulphur,  and  all  the  chemical  drugs  and 
preparations  they  could  get  knowledge  of,  with  the  manu- 
facture of  tangible  gold  as  their  object  and  disappointment 
their  only  harvest.  Some  of  these  may  have  written  some 
of  the  innumerable  alchemical  treatises  which  exist,  record- 
ing the  experiments  they  may  have  carried  out,  and  setting 
forth  their  own  conjectures  as  to  the  reason  why  such 
experiments  may  have  failed;  and  such  deluded  and  dis- 
appointed searchers  after  the  philosopher's  stone  may  here 
and  there  have  stumbled  on  bits  -of  chemical  discovery  so 
far  vindicating  the  profoundly  stupid  view  of  alchemy  at 
large,  common  to  modern  encyclopaedias  and  conventional 
belief.  This  idea,  of  course,  is  that  from  A  to  Z  all  the 
alchemists  were  self-deluded  gold  hunters  who  failed  to 
accomplish  their  object,  ex  necessitate  rei,  but  in  their 
futile  struggles  after  it,  laid  the  foundations  of  modern 
chemistry.  They  really  did  immeasurably  less  in  that 
direction  than  they  have  been  credited  with;  but  the 
modern  commentators  who  are  foolish  enough  to  suppose 
that  a  long  procession  of  learned  men,  whose  writings 
abundantly  prove  them  in  many  cases — alchemy  apart — 
to  have  been  broad-minded,  philosophical,  and  intelligent, 
were  all  the  victims  of  an  empty,  avaricious  dream,  afford 
in  themselves  the  saddest  spectacle  of  self-delusion  that  the 
history  of  alchemy  brings  to  light. 

Before  we  come  to  closer  quarters  with  the  alchemical 

296     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

books  themselves  one  more  general   conclusion   on   the 
subject  may  conveniently  be  set  forth.     Leaving  out  of 
account  the   host  of  alchemical   chemists — the   deluded 
experimentalists  who  sought  the  philosopher's  stone  on  the 
physical  plane  in  order  to  get  precious  metal  by  its  means 
and  grow  rich — and  concentrating  our  attention  entirely 
on   the  real  alchemical   philosophers  who  were  on   the 
path  of  spiritual  progress  and  concerned  with  far  higher 
objects  than  the  transitory  experiences  of  this  life  can 
afford,  we  have  to  consider  by  the  light  of  what  we  now 
know  concerning  occult  mysteries  what  would  naturally 
have  been,  for  the  real  alchemist,  the  consequence  of  dis- 
covering the  real  philosopher's  stone — the  secret,  that  is 
to  say,  of  real  spiritual  attainment.    Remember  that  while 
esoteric  progress  rests,  as  on  a  primary  foundation,  on  the 
ethical  principles  which  are  taught,  though  often  sadly 
mistaught,  by  exoteric  religions  also,  it  contemplates  a  very 
much  larger  result  than  the  attainment  of  an  unintelli- 
gent spiritual  beatitude.     Exoteric  religion  says,  in  effect, 
be  good  and  devout  on  earth,  then  you  will  be  taken  to 
Heaven  and  be  happy  evermore.     Esoteric  teaching  says, 
be  good  and  devout  to  begin  with,  to  put  yourself  in  tune 
with  the  higher  planes  of  Nature,  and  then  aim  at  the  ex- 
pansion of  your  knowledge  faculties  and  states  of  con- 
sciousness in  accordance  with  the  latent  possibilities  of  the 
Divine   principle   within   you.       The   world   contains  a 
kingdom    of    beings,    so    to    speak,    above    the    human 
kingdom,  into  which  men  may  rise  if  they  set  to  work 
to  climb  in  the  right  way.    Now  the  real  alchemists  were 
aspirants  for  "  Adeptship,"  as  we  should  express  the  idea 
in  modern  theosophic  language,  and  it  is  quite  obvious  in 
various  ways  to  the  student  of  occultism  that  some  of 
them  attained  that  condition  of  being.      But  if  any  of 

THEOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES  297 

them  were  Adepts,  then  such  persons  would,  by  the 
assumption,  have  acquired  powers  over  the  obscurer  laws 
of  Nature,  and  knowledge  concerning  the  forces  lying 
beyond  the  physical  plane,  which  would  amongst  other 
results  have  invested  them  with  the  power  of  influencing 
matter  in  a  way  that  is  entirely  beyond  the  capacity  of  the 
physical-plane  chemist.  Occult  phenomena  have  taken 
place  of  recent  years,  within  the  knowledge  not  merely  of 
some  theosophical  students,  but  also  in  great  abundance 
in  presence  of  spiritualistic  wonder-seekers.  Many  of 
these  are  not  less  bewilderingly  unintelligible  than  the 
transmutation  of  one  metal  into  another  would  be.  Apart 
from  all  questions  of  evidence,  therefore,  any  occult 
student  would  recognise  that  the  transmutation  of  one 
metal  into  another  would  be  most  likely  well  within  the 
range  of  the  occult  phenomena,  that  anyone  who  could  at 
all  be  called  an  Adept,  would  be  able  to  produce. 

This  reflection  leads  us  up  to  the  correct  appreciation 
of  one  surprising  discovery  to  which  anybody  who  takes 
the  trouble  will  be  led  by  the  study  of  alchemical  litera- 
ture. The  evidence  to  show  that  certain  of  the  alchemists 
really  did  accomplish  the  much-talked-of  physical  experi- 
ment and  turn  out  metallic  tangible  gold,  that  could  be 
coined  into  money  in  considerable  quantities  is  simply 
overwhelming.  Modern  obstinacy  and  prejudice  in  deal- 
ing with  the  subject  of  alchemy  ignores  this  evidence,  and 
all  branches  of  the  history  of  the  alchemists  which  tell 
unfavourably  on  its  own  pig-headed  and  self-sufficient 
view,  but  with  as  much  confidence  as  we  can  speak  of 
any  historical  transaction,  we  may  say  that  Nicholas  Flam- 
mel  and  Raymond  Lully  among  others  actually  accom- 
plished the  physical  transmutation. 

Were  they,  it  may  be  asked,  as  a  consequence  of  their 

298     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

extraordinary  power,  people  of  great  wealth  and  magnifi- 
cent living?  Not  at  all.  Flammel  certainly  gave  away 
enormous  sums  for  the  building  and  endowment  of 
churches,  and  Lully  supplied  Edward  II.  with  great  quan- 
tities of  gold  to  be  spent  on  the  Crusades;  but  it  invariably 
appears  that  the  Adept  who  could  make  gold,  has  been 
himself  far  too  spiritualised  a  philosopher  to  live  a  mundane 
life  of  luxury  or  profusion.  That  ought  to  be  readily 
comprehended,  and  the  objection  that  alleged  real 
alchemists  sometimes  lived  in  obscurity  and  apparent 
poverty,  as  an  objection  to  the  theory  of  their  power,  is 
no  less  vulgar-minded  and  gross  than  it  is  unintelligent. 
Moreover  the  alchemists,  whether  real  Adepts  or  fraudu- 
lent pretenders,  were  subject  to  very  embarassing  treatment 
by  the  generations  among  which  they  lived — always  liable 
to  be  imprisoned  and  tortured  to  extort  confessions  of  their 
secret.  One  of  the  true  philosophers  of  alchemy, 
Alexander  Sethon,  author  of  a  remarkable  treatise  called 
"  An  Open  Entrance  to  the  Closed  Palace  of  the  King," 
writes  :  "  As  if  driven  by  the  furies,  I  am  compelled  to  fly 
from  place  to  place  and  from  kingdom  to  kingdom. 
And  thus  though  I  possess  all  things  I  have  no 
rest  or  enjoyment  of  any  except  in  the  truth  which  is  my 
whole  satisfaction.  .  .  .  I  am  constrained  even  from 
the  works  of  mercy,  for  fear  of  suspicion  and  arrest.  I 
have  experienced  this  in  foreign  countries  where,  having 
ventured  to  administer  the  medicine  to  sufferers  given  over 
by  physicians,  the  instant  the  cures  became  known,  a 
report  was  spread  about  the  elixir,  and  I  have  been  obliged 
to  disguise  myself,  shave  my  head,  and  change  my  name, 
to  avoid  falling  into  the  hands  of  wicked  persons,  who 
would  try  to  wrest  the  secret  from  me  in  the  hopes  of 
making  gold."  The  history  of  the  persecution  of  the 

THEOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES  299 

alchemists,  in  spite  of  the  precautions  they  took  to  avoid 
confronting  the  hostility  of  the  Church,  would  take  long 
to  tell;  but  for  the  moment  I  am  concerned  with  sketching 
the  whole  position  in  its  general  bearings,  and  will 
presently  refer  the  reader  to  books  in  which  the  broad 
statements  here  put  forward  can  be  followed  out  in  their 
details. 

The  common  herd  of  materialistic  critics  have  supposed 
that  if  the  alchemists  had  been  really  successful,  their 
secret  would  have  been  extorted  from  them,  considering 
the  treatment  many  of  them  received,  and  the  modern 
tendency  of  thought  has  always  been  to  disbelieve  in  the 
existence  of  any  secret  that  is  not  disclosed.  But  already 
our  partial  familiarity  with  the  conditions  of  occult  know- 
ledge gives  us  the  clue  to  the  mystery.  When  the  first 
step  to  be  taken  towards  acquiring  the  power  to  transmute 
lead  into  gold,  was  to  transmute  one's  human  into  a  semi- 
divine  nature,  it  was  obvious  that  the  mere  avaricious  gold- 
seeker  would  be  unable  to  take  it, — unable,  probably,  to 
understand  the  idea,  or  to  look  upon  such  an  explanation 
as  other  than  a  device  for  baulking  his  curiosity.  A  com- 
prehension, in  short,  of  the  elementary  principles  of  occult 
science  at  once  illuminates  all  the  otherwise  insoluble 
riddles  of  the  alchemical  problem. 

But  why  was  the  dangerous  system  of  symbology, 
which  concerned  itself  with  gold  and  silver,  adopted  by 
the  alchemists  at  all,  if  they  were  really  spiritual  philo- 
sophers ?  Was  not  this  directly  calculated  to  stir  up  the 
greedy  passions  of  ordinary  people  and  confront  them  with 
perils  as  serious,  in  another  way,  as  those  of  the  Inquisition 
which  they  sought  to  evade  ?  The  answer  is,  that  they  did 
not  invent,  but  found  the  system  of  symbology  in  use  from 
a  period  of  antiquity  long  preceding  the  era  of  Roman 

300    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

Christianity  and  its  persecuting  priests.  The  alchemical 
version  of  spiritual  philosophy  dates  back  to  the  period  of 
Hermes  Trismegistus,  by  some  authors  considered  a 
fabulous  personage,  by  some  an  Adept  king  of  Egypt,  who 
lived  nearly  2,000  years  before  the  Christian  era.  At  all 
events  the  writings  assigned  to  him  are  of  great  antiquity,, 
and  constitute  the  fountain-head  of  that  Hermetic  philo- 
sophy which  in  the  Middle  Ages  becomes  almost  entirely 
merged  in  its  alchemical  developments,  but  which  in  very 
recent  years,  since  the  Theosophical  Movement  has  been 
in  progress,  has  presented  especial  attractions  to  some 
inquiring  minds  as  constituting  a  relatively  Western  stream 
of  occult  wisdom.  And  at  all  events,  until  very  recent 
years,  the  Hermetic  mystery  summed  up  occult  wisdom 
for  all  European  inquirers,  and  its  methods,  its  systems  of 
exposition,  were  the  only  methods  and  systems  available 
for  them. 

Further  than  this  we  have  always  to  keep  in  view 
the  fact  that  the  alchemical  symbology  must  have  been 
especially  attractive  to  many  of  the  mediaeval  students, 
because  they  were  aware  of  its  double  significance.  In  the 
literal  sense  it  referred  to  the  possibility  of  an  occult  pheno- 
menon, profoundly  interesting,  of  course,  to  every  student 
of  Nature's  obscurer  mysteries,  all  the  while  that  it  equally 
described  the  sublime  spiritual  change  from  the  lower 
human  to  the  higher  human  or  divine  nature. 

I  pass  on  now  to  jnake  some  quotations  from  alchemical 
writings  in  support  of  the  first  position  here  taken  up,  that 
the  alchemical  philosophers  had  a  transcendental  purpose 
in  view.  Many  of  them,  indeed,  express  this  so  plainly,, 
that  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  their  main  purpose 
could  have  been  misconstrued. 

In  "  A  New  Light  of  Alchemy,"  ascribed  to  Michael 

THEOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES  301 

Sendivogius,  the  author  in  his  preface  speaks  of  the  many 
"  adulterated  books  and  false  receipts  "  put  forward  by 
impostors,  and  of  the  "  idle  and  ill-employed  fellows  who 
pretend  that  the  soul  may  be  extracted  out  of  gold."  Then 
he  goes  on  : 

"  Yet  let  the  sons  of  Hermes  know  for  certain  that 
such  a  kind  of  extraction  of  soul  by  what  vulgar  way  of 
alchemy  soever  is  but  a  mere  fancy.  On  the  contrary 
he  which  in  a  philosophic  way  can  without  any  fraud  and 
colourable  deceit  make  it  that  it  shall  really  tinge  the  basest 
metal  with  the  colour  of  gold  ...  I  can  justly 
aver  hath  the  gates  of  Nature  open  to  him  for  the  inquir- 
ing into  further  and  higher  secrets,  and  with  the  blessing 
of  God  to  obtain  them.  ...  I  would  have  the 
courteous  reader  be  here  admonished  that  he  understand 
my  writings  not  so  much  from  the  outside  of  my  words 
as  from  the  possibility  of  Nature  lest  afterwards  he  bewail 
his  time,  pains,  and  costs  all  spent  in  vain.  Let  him  con- 
sider that  his  art  is  for  the  wise,  not  for  the  ignorant,  and 
that  the  sense  or  meaning  of  philosophers  is  of  another 
nature  than  to  be  understood  by  vapouring  letter-learned 
scoffers.  .  .  .  For  it  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  truly  it  is 
not  to  be  attained  to  but  by  the  alone  favour  of  God  en- 
lightening the  understanding,  together  with  a  patient  and 
devout  humility,  or  by  an  ocular  demonstration  from  some 
experienced  master — wherefore  God  justly  thrusts  them 
far  from  his  secrets  that  are  strangers  to  him." 

From  the  text  of  the  book  I  will  take  one  easily  inter- 
preted passage  in  which  the  alchemical  symbology  is 
employed. 

"  Sulphur  " — clearly  employed  here  to  symbolise  the 
conscience  of  Man — "  is  not  the  last  among  the  principles 
because  it  is  a  part  of  the  metal  " — Man  himself — "  yea, 

302     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

and  the  principal  part  of  the  philosopher's  stone,  and  many 
wise  men  have  left  in  writing  divers  and  very  true  things 
of  sulphur.  Yea,  Geber  himself  in  his  first  book  of  the 
highest  perfection  saith  :  '  Through  the  most  high  God 
it  illuminates  every  body,  because  it  is  light  from  light  and 
tincture.'  ' 

It  should  be  explained  that  directly  we  begin  to  read 
the  alchemists  we  discover  that  they  have  no  invariable 
and  recognised  code  by  which  we  can  always  recognise 
the  same  idea  under  the  same  symbol.  The  spirit  of  God 
manifesting  as  conscience  in  Man  is  sometimes  spoken  of 
as  sulphur,  sometimes  as  mercury.  The  normal  un- 
regenerate  Man — the  subject  of  the  art  and  the  object 
of  the  transmutation — is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  lead, 
sometimes  as  antimony,  or  even  as  other  of  the  baser 
metals,  and  with  an  anxious  desire  to  guard  all  who  were 
capable  of  appreciating  an  esoteric  meaning  the  alchemists 
constantly  warn  their  readers  that  "  our  "  mercury  and 
"  our  "  sulphur  are  not  the  common  mercury  and  sulphur. 
Then,  again,  the  subject  of  the  transmutation  is  sometimes 
written  of  as  "  Saturn,"  and  astrological  terms  are 
employed  to  designate  some  of  the  other  ideas  handled — 
Sol,  Luna,  and  Venus.  Each  writer  is  a  law  unto  himself 
in  such  matters. 

Sometimes,  moreover,  without  any  formal  announce- 
ment that  would  be  intelligible  to  the  "  ignorant  "  reader, 
the  alchemists  drop  their  symbols  altogether,  and  as  though 
making  incidental  remarks  concerning  the  nature  of  the 
"  artist  "  or  seeker  after  the  stone,  discuss  some  of  their 
deepest  mysteries  in  plain  language  only  guarded  from 
the  comprehension  of  the  unworthy  by  not  seeming  to 
refer  to  their  subject  at  all.  Thus,  in  the  "  New  Light  of 
Alchemy,"  we  read  : 

THEOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES  303 

"  Let,  therefore,  the  searcher  of  this  sacred  science 
know  that  the  soul  in  a  man,  the  lesser  world  or  micro- 
cosm substituting  the  place  of  its  centre,  is  the  king  and  is 
placed  in  the  vital  spirit  in  the  purest  blood.  That  governs 
the  mind,  and  the  mind  the  body.  .  .  .  Now  the 
soul,  by  which  man  differs  from  other  animals,  operates 
in  the  body,  but  it  hath  a  greater  operation  out  of  the 
body.  ...  So  also  God,  the  Maker  of  all  things, 
works  in  this  world  those  things  which  are  necessary  for 
the  world,  and  in  these  he  is  included  in^the  world,  whence 
we  believe  that  God  is  everywhere.  But  he  is  excluded 
from  the  body  of  the  world  by  his  infinite  wisdom,  by 
which  he  works  out  of  the  world  and  imagines  much 
higher  things.  .  .  .  The  soul  imagines,  but  executes 
not  but  in  the  mind,  but  God  does  effect  all  things  the 
same  moment  when  he  imagines  them.  .  .  .  God, 
therefore,  is  not  included  in  the  world,  but  as  the  soul  in 
the  body.  He  hath  his  absolute  power  separated  from  the 
world.  So  also  the  soul  of  any  body  hath  its  absolute 
power  separated  from  the  body." 

The  writer  of  this  passage  evidently  knew  a  good  deal 
about  the  higher  psychic  phenomena  now  engaging  the 
attention  of  the  most  advanced  modern  occultists.  And 
his  view  of  creation — of  the  material  world  as  a  mani- 
festation of  spirit  on  the  physical  plane — is  on  a  level  with 
the  most  profound  theosophical  conceptions.  It  is  amusing 
to  contrast  such  philosophical  ideas  with  the  gross  cari- 
catures thereof  presented  to  the  world  as  religion  by  the 
churches  of  that  day,  and  to  reflect  upon  the  fact  that  to 
this  day  almost  all  representatives  of  modern  culture, 
except  those  illuminated  by  occult  teaching,  would  treat 
the  theologian,  even  of  the  Middle  Ages,  with  comparative 
respect,  and  the  alchemist  as  a  crazy  fool,  floundering  in 

304    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

the  silliest  superstition.  Nothing  tends  more  forcibly  than 
an  appreciative  study  of  the  alchemists  to  make  us  also 
appreciate  at  its  true  worth  the  blind  conceit  that  has 
passed  current  for  intelligence  in  the  latter  half  of  this 
•expiring  century. 

I  will  now  take  an  example  of  more  obscure  alchemical 
writing  from  Thomas  Vaughan's  "  Aula  Lucis." 
Vaughan  wrote  generally  under  the  name  Eugenius 
Philalethes  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century. 
Some  writers,  he  says,  at  the  outset  have  rather  buried  the 
truth  than  dressed  it.  He  proposes  to  observe  a  mean  way, 
neither  too  obscure  nor  too  open,  but  modern  readers  will 
probably  conceive  that  he  was  principally  careful  not  to  be 
too  open.  Of  the  philosopher's  stone — the  Divine  spirit 
required  to  transmute  the  lower  nature  of  man,  he  says, 
44  It  is  a  subtile  mineral  moisture,  a  water  so  extremely 
thin  and  spiritual,  with  such  a  transcendent  incredible 
brightness  there  is  not  in  all  Nature  any  liquor  like  it,  but 
itself.  .  .  .  I  say  they  called  it  a  stone  to  the  end  that 
no  man  might  know  what  it  was  they  called  so."  Of  the 
"  first  matter  "  which  he  says  may  be  described  by  con- 
traries without  inconvenience — very  weak  and  yet  most 
strong,  fire  that  burns  not,  water  that  wets  not,  and  so  on 
— he  proceeds  to  discourse  at  length,  calling  it  mercury, 
the  laughter  of  fools  and  the  wonder  of  the  wise.  This 
is  here  evidently  intended  to  represent  the  conscience; 
spiritual  aspiration  in  the  incarnate  man;  the  first  influence 
of  the  Higher  Self  in  the  physical  consciousness.  Then 
varying  the  metaphor  he  calls  the  subject  of  which  he  is 
discoursing  "  our  sealed  fountain."  "  In  the  bottom  of 
this  well  lies  an  old  dragon  stretched  along  and  fast  asleep. 
Awake  her  if  you  can  and  make  her  drink,  for  by  this 
means  she  will  recover  her  youth  and  be  serviceable  to 

THEOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES  305 

you  for  ever.  In  a  word  separate  the  eagle  from  the  green 
lyon,  then  clip  her  wings  and  you  have  performed  a 
miracle.  .  .  .  The  eagle  is  the  water,  for  it  is  volatile 
and  flies  up  in  the  clouds  as  an  eagle  doth;  but  I  speak  not 
of  any  common  water  whatsover.  The  greene  lion  is 
the  body  or  magicall  earth  with  which  you  must  clip  the 
wings  of  the  eagle,  that  is  to  say,  you  must  fix  her  so 
that  shee  may  fly  no  more."  Most  assuredly  the  constantly 
wavering  and  fluctuating  allegories  of  the  alchemists  do 
not  lend  themselves  readily  to  any  direct  translation  into 
plain  language,  but  it  is  none  the  less  obvious  that  Vaughan 
is  speaking  here  of  the  higher  psychic  faculties  which  may 
be  taught  to  acquire  consciousness  on  some  superior 
spiritual  plane  of  Nature,  while  still  keeping  up  their 
relations  with  the  bodily  consciousness. 

In  a  very  fantastic  treatise  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
called  "  The  Hermetical  Triumph,"  the  usual  warning 
is  given  very  emphatically  in  the  course  of  a  dialogue 
between  "  Gold  "  and  "  The  Stone."  Gold  is  persistently 
maintaining  the  materialistic  view  of  the  science,  and  The 
Stone  is  continually  reiterating  such  ideas  as  these  :  — 

"  But  when  they — the  true  philosophers — plainly  name 
gold  and  mercury  as  the  principles  of  their  art,  they  only 
make  use  of  these  terms  thereby  to  hide  the  knowledge 
from  the  ignorant,  and  from  those  who  are  unworthy, 
for  they  very  well  know  that  such  vulgar  wits  mind  only 
the  names  of  things,  the  receipts,  and  the  processes  which 
they  find  written,  without  examining  whether  there  be 
any  solid  foundation  in  what  they  put  into  practice.  But 
the  wise  men  consider  all  things  with  prudence,  examine 
how  consonant  and  how  agreeing  one  thing  is  with 
another,  and  by  these  means  they  penetrate  into  the 
foundation  of  the  art." 

21 

306    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

The  extracts  given  so  far  I  have  selected  myself  from 
the  various  books  referred  to;  but  similar  quotations  in 
greater  volume  might  be  taken  at  secondhand  from  either 
of  two  books  of  more  recent  date  which  are  directed  to  an 
exposition  of  the  true  meaning  and  mystery  of  the  Her- 
metic or  alchemical  art.  To  these  books  I  would  now 
refer  all  who  desirous  of  pursuing  the  subject  further, 
and  of  obtaining  a  complete  grasp  of  the  principles  I  have 
roughly  laid  down.  The  first  and  most  important  is  of 
great  rarity,  and  has,  I  believe,  been  as  far  as  possible 
withdrawn  from  circulation  by  the  author,  under  the  im- 
pression that  its  explanation  sinned  too  much  against  the 
rule,  "  Give  not  that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs,  neither 
cast  you  your  pearls  before  swine."  The  full  title  of  this 
work  is  "  A  Suggestive  Inquiry  into  the  Hermetic 
Mystery;  with  a  Dissertation  on  the  more  celebrated  of 
the  Alchemical  Philosophers,  being  an  attempt  towards  the 
recovery  of  the  ancient  experiment  of  Nature."  The 
treatise  was  published  anonymously  in  1850.  It  contains 
a  very  interesting  mass  of  testimony  concerning  the  cases 
in  which  some  of  the  true  alchemists — those  who  by  their 
own  spiritual  growth  had  first  become  adepts  in  the 
manipulation  of  the  hidden  forces  of  Nature — have 
actually  accomplished  the  physical  experiment  of  alchemy, 
so  vainly  attacked  by  all  those  who  were  not  adepts;  and  it 
also  goes  at  great  length  into  the  more  esoteric  view  of  the 
subject,  furnishing,  in  connection  with  a  very  extensive 
review  of  alchemical  literature,  abundant  quotations  bear- 
ing out  the  spiritual  significance  of  the  whole  allegory. 

Amongst  other  extracts  it  supplies  us  with  a  translation 
of  the  Tractatus  Aureus,  or  golden  treatise  of  Hermes, 
concerning  the  physical  secret  of  the  Philosopher's  Stone, 
which  it  says  "  has  been  considered  to  be  one  of  the  most 

THEOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES  307 

ancient  and  complete  pieces  of  alchemical  writing  extant," 
and  "  an  exposition  in  epitome  of  the  whole  art." 

This  is  not  what  would  be  considered  in  the  present 
day  a  luminous  treatise.  As  for  example,  we  read  :  — 

"  Know,  then,  that  the  division  that  was  made  upon  the 
water  by  the  ancient  philosophers  separates  it  into  four 
substances :  one  into  two  and  three  into  one,  the  third 
part  of  which  is  colour,  as  it  were,  a  coagulated  moisture; 
but  the  second  and  third  waters  are  the  weights  of  the 
Wise." 

Still,  however,  even  in  the  Tractatus  Aureus  we  come 
constantly  upon  the  usual  warnings  that  we  know  how 
to  interpret.  Thus:  — 

"  Know  that  this  matter  I  call  the  stone;  but  it  is  also 
named  the  feminine  of  magnesia,  or  the  hen,  or  the  volatile 
milk,  or  the  incombustible  oil,  in  order  that  it  may  be 
hidden  from  the  inept  and  the  ignorant." 

Again  :  — 

"  Ye  sons  of  Wisdom,  burn  then  the  Brazen  Body 
with  an  exceeding  great  fire,  and  it  will  yield  gratefully 
what  you  desire.  And  see  that  you  make  that  which  is 
volatile  so  that  it  cannot  fly,  and  by  means  of  that  which 
flies  not." 

Here  we  have  merely  another  version  of  Vaughan/s 
Green  Lion  and  Eagle — a  veiled  reference  to  the  possi- 
bilities connected  with  the  cultivation  of  the  higher  psychic 
faculties. 

Apparently  without  having  come  across  the  Suggestive 
Inquiry,  an  American  writer,  named  Hitchcock,  published 
a  little  book  in  1857 — an  amplification  of  a  small  pam- 
phlet on  the  same  subject,  written  two  years  previously, 
called  "  Remarks  upon  Alchemy  and  the  Alchemists." 
The  remainder  of  a  somewhat  old-fashioned  title-page 

21* 

308     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

foreshadows  the  convictions  which  the  author  proceeds  to 
set  forth.  He  describes  his  book  as  "  Indicating  a  method 
of  discovering  the  true  nature  of  Hermetic  Philosophy,  and 
showing  that  the  search  after  the  Philosopher's  Stone  had 
not  for  its  object  the  discovery  of  an  agent  for  the  trans- 
mutation of  metals.  Being  also  an  attempt  to  rescue  from 
undeserved  opprobrium  the  reputation  of  a  class  of  extra- 
ordinary thinkers  in  past  ages."  At  the  outset  of  the  book 
itself  he  says  the  object  of  his  original  pamphlet  was  to 
throw  out  an  idea  with  which  he  had  become  strongly  im- 
pressed, that  the  Philosopher's  Stone  was  a  mere  symbol, 
and  that  the  alchemists  were  not  in  pursuit  of  gold  but 
v/isdom,  carefully  and  conscientiously  leaving  the  latter 
word  undefined.  This  pamphlet  having  been  violently 
and  stupidly  attacked  in  the  Westminster  Review,  in  1856 
the  author  came  forward  with  a  renewed  justification  of 
his  argument,  and  this  expanded  into  the  book  now  before 
us.  "  I  affirm,"  he  says,  "  that  the  whole  subject  of 
Alchemy  is  Man.  But  each  writer  for  the  most  part  desig- 
nates him  by  a  word  of  his  own  choosing,  hence  one  writes 
of  antimony,  another  of  lead,  another  of  zinc,  another  of 
arsenic"  And  he  quotes  one  of  the  alchemical  writers  as 
saying,  "  The  work  while  yet  crude  is  called  our  water 
permanent,  our  lead,  our  Saturn,  our  Jupiter;  when  better 
decocted,  then  it  is  argent,  then  magnesia  and  white 
sulphur;  when  it  is  red  it  is  called  auri-pigment  coral,  gold, 
ferment,  or  stone,  a  lucid  water  of  celestial  colour." 

Mr.  Hitchcock's  pursuit  of  these  intricate  metaphors 
through  the  mazy  wanderings  of  the  two  hundred  separate 
alchemical  books  which  he  tells  us  he  has  accumulated, 
is  very  interesting  and  instructive.  And  I  cannot  under- 
stand how  any  reader  of  any  reflective  intelligence  can 
follow  him  to  the  end  and  fail  to  be  convinced  that  he  is 

THEOSOPHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES  309 

on  the  right  track  of  interpretation.  Mr.  Hitchcock  has 
not  been  occultist  enough  to  divine  all  that  resides  in  the 
alchemical  philosophy,  but  although  the  Theosophist  of 
the  present  generation,  if  he  has  taken  advantage  of  all  the 
opportunities  held  out  to  him,  is  in  a  position  to  see  much 
more  in  alchemy  than  even  Mr.  Hitchcock  saw,  the 
admirable  book  he  has  produced  will  at  least  serve  to  open 
up  the  subject  for  those  who  may  be  sufficiently  interested 
by  what  has  been  said  here  to  feel  inclined  to  venture 
further  into  an  area  of  research  which,  to  express  myself 
in  a  paradoxical  phrase  congenial  with  the  spirit  of  the 
authors  I  have  been  quoting,  is  at  once  forbidding  and 
seductive.  Alchemy,  Mr.  Hitchcock  concedes,  may  have 
passed  away,  as  his  opponent  had  been  arguing,  never  to 
return.  '  This  may  be  so;  but  the  questions  about  which 
the  alchemists  employed  themselves  have  not  passed  away,, 
and  never  shall  pass  away  while  man  wanders  upon  the 
surface  of  the  earth.  They  are  the  most  interesting  ques- 
tions which  the  heart  can  propose,  and  although  they 
begin  in  man,  the  answer  must  compass  both  the  micro- 
cosm and  the  macrocosm." 

CHAPTER    XIV 
INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY 

IT  will  be  obvious  on  reflection,  if  we  correctly  inter- 
pret the  meaning  of  ancient  Egyptian  initiation  and 
graft  that  in  a  reasonable  manner  upon  the  general 
view  of  natural  evolution  which  the  esoteric  teaching  gives 
us,  that  the  opportunities  of  ancient  initiation  must  be 
with  us  still.  Still  with  us,  moreover,  are  those  of  our 
predecessors  who,  at  an  earlier  stage  of  the  world's  progress, 
passed  beyond  the  action  of  the  laws  governing  the  periodic 
incarnations  of  ordinary  humanity.  They  will  have 
attained  a  higher  condition  of  being  in  which  life  for  one 
thing  is  very  much  more  persistent,  and  their  power  of 
functioning  on  the  higher  planes  of  Nature  even  more 
persistent  than  that.  But  they  are  none  the  less  within 
our  reach  at  this  day.  And,  of  course,  in  the  long  interval 
that  has  elapsed  since  the  ancient  initiations  of  the 
Egyptian  period  many  new  recruits,  besides  those  who 
entered  on  the  path  in  that  remote  period,  have  joined  the 
stream  of  the  higher  evolution.  Nor  have  the  oppor- 
tunities of  initiation  been  extinguished  merely  because 
after  their  last  public  flicker  in  Greece  the  world  at  large 
has  lost  sight  of  them.  Gradually,  no  doubt,  their 
character  has  changed  in  some  important  respects  in 
accordance  with  the  cyclic  necessities  of  the  time  which 
left  the  race  to  concern  itself  chiefly  with  the  advancement 
of  physical  knowledge,  even  at  the  expense,  for  the  genera- 
tions so  engaged,  of  a  temporary  forgetfulness  concerning 
higher  things.  But  there  has  never  been  a  time  in  the 
world's  history  during  which  the  channels  of  initiation 
have  been  altogether  blocked,  and  for  those  whose  spiritual 
ardour  has  itself,  in  the  first  instance,  developed  as  a 

310 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  3 1 1 

Karmic  consequence  in  successive  lives,  those  higher  facul- 
ties of  vision  and  consciousness  which  are  now  spoken  of 
as  psychic,  there  has  always  been  a  possibility  of  access 
to  the  higher  knowledge  along  the  lines  of  those  very 
faculties.  It  has  ceased  to  be  necessary  that,  in  order  to 
enter  the  path  of  occult  progress,  a  man  should  present 
himself  at  some  specific  temple  and  become  the  acolyte  of 
a  Hierophant  visible  to  all  his  fellows.  There  has  been  for 
him  an  inner  temple  to  which  his  own  psychic  faculties, 
on  the  hypothesis  we  are  dealing  with,  have  given  him 
access.  And  in  this  way  the  body  of  initiated  Adepts  has 
constantly  been  reinforced,  although  probably  there  has 
never  been  a  time  in  the  history  of  the  present  race  at 
which  this  mere  numerical  strength  would  have  been  less 
than  it  is  now.  The  cycle  of  great  activity  in  the  depart- 
ment of  physical  knowledge,  the  scientific  era  par  excel- 
lence— assigning  the  word  "  science  "  to  the  limited  mean- 
ing it  has  latterly  enjoyed  with  ourselves — is  necessarily  a 
period  of  relative  spiritual  stagnation.  The  two  phases  of 
progress  are  by  no  means  antagonistic  to  one  another  in 
reality;  the  highest  scientific  attainments  may  be,  and  in 
the  end,  before  they  reach  their  perfect  efflorescence,  must 
be  united  with  great  spiritual  development  also;  but  taken 
as  a  whole  the  forces  of  natural  evolution  press  with 
greater  intensity  at  one  time  than  at  another  in  the  direc- 
tion of  physical  knowledge,  just  as  at  other  periods  this 
impulse  may  be  in  abeyance,  and  spiritual  aspiration  be  a 
more  powerful  incentive. 

Now  finally  we  reach  the  all-important  fact  that  at  the 
present  moment  as  much  as  ever,  although  less  than  ever 
now  by  old-world  methods,  the  possibilities  'of  attaining 
higher  spiritual  perfection  in  the  sense  in  which  we  have 
been  employing  the  phrase,  chiefly  as  connoting 

3i2    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

knowledge,  power,  and  voluntary  advancement,  are  open 
to  all  those  who  have  the  necessary  qualifications,  and  the 
all-important  intensity  of  desire.  Initiation  in  the  higher 
mysteries  which  have  to  do  with  that  region  of  natural 
law  in  reference  to  which  all  the  little  manifestations  of 
abnormal  wonder  which  attract  attention  at  the  present 
day  in  the  departments  of  mesmerism,  clairvoyance, 
thought-transference,  and  spiritualism,  are  but  as  the 
spray  from  a  wave — those  regions  are  still  accessible 
to  modern  aspirants  who  strive  to  attain  them  in  the 
right  way. 

In  one  sense  I  may  say  that  they  are  more  attainable 
than  ever,  because  it  has  come  to  pass  that  the  great 
authorities  who  direct  the  conditions  of  all  such  progress 
are  fully  alive  to  the  necessity  of  making  the  whole 
situation  more  intelligible  to  the  masses  of  mankind  than 
they  have  been  for  the  last  dozen  clouded  centuries.  A 
very  great  advance  has  been  made  without  being  so  far  in 
the  least  degree  understood  in  this  aspect  by  ordinary 
physical  science  in  the  direction  of  what  may  be  called 
psychic  mystery.  Left  to  itself  without  any  healthy  guid- 
ance or  encouragement,  that  progress  may  be  quite  likely 
to  turn  to  channels  in  which  it  would  be  eminently  in- 
jurious to  the  permanent  welfare  of  the  race.  As  I  have 
indicated  more  than  once,  true  occult  progress  is  a  dual 
achievement  involving  at  the  same  time  a  development 
of  a  very  exalted  morality  pan  passu  with  the  acquisition 
of  a  correspondingly  penetrating  knowledge.  Nothing 
less  than  the  two  achievements  would  accomplish  the 
evolution  of  the  human  being  as  we  know  him  now  into 
that  higher  kingdom  of  Nature,  which,  as  compared  with 
the  human  kingdom,  may  be  spoken  of  as  divine,  and 
nothing  short  of  such  evolution  brings  with  it  a  really 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  3 1 3, 

complete  development  of  the  power  and  capacities  for 
knowledge  latent  in  mankind.  But  something  very  short 
of  that  may  invest  humanity  with  powers  transcending 
those  familiar  to  the  physical  senses.  Just  as  the  rain  of 
heaven  falls  on  the  just  and  the  unjust,  so  in  a  certain  sense 
and  in  a  certain  degree,  knowledge  is  obtainable  by  the 
evil-minded  as  well  as  by  the  good;  and  very  disastrous 
results  both  to  themselves  and  to  others  are  bound  to  ensue 
from  its  acquisition  by  people  who  are  not  adequately  alive 
to  the  loftiness  of  the  responsibilities  which  its  possession 
entails.  In  this  way,  to  put  the  matter  roughly,  the  mere 
pursuit  of  knowledge  along  the  paths  of  purely  physical 
study  may,  by  the  time  it  is  carried  some  distance  beyond 
that  as  yet  reached  by  the  physical  science  of  the  nine- 
teenth century,  superinduce  the  condition  of  things  in 
which  the  possessors  of  such  knowledge  would  be  what 
the  mediaeval  world  called  Black  Magicians.  The  name 
we  give  does  not  matter,  but  at  all  events  the  fact  is  that 
knowledge  concerning  the  deeper  mysteries  of  Nature 
which  have  to  do  with  spiritual  and  psychic  forces  may 
theoretically  be  attained  by  persons  altogether  without  the 
exalted  motives  which  govern  those  who  attain  it  by  what 
occultists  call  the  right-hand  path,  and  therefore  a  time 
comes  in  the  progress  of  science  when  from  all  points  of 
view  the  old  policy  of  extreme  reserve  in  regard  to  the 
mysteries  with  which  initiation  is  concerned,  becomes 
impossible  of  further  maintenance.  That  is  the  state  of 
things  now  coming  on.  For  a  long  time  it  seemed  best 
for  the  human  race  that  during  ages  of  very  imperfect 
human  development  the  tremendous  forces  which  occult 
knowledge  places  within  the  reach  of  man  should  be  kept 
back  from  him  altogether.  Now  his  advancing  intelligence 
has  enabled  him  to  grasp  some  conception  of  what  those 

THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

forces  are,  even  without  the  help  of  initiated  teaching. 
It  becomes  the  policy,  therefore,  of  those  who  represent 
this  teaching  in  the  present  age  of  the  world  to  anticipate, 
if  possible,  this  unhealthy  development  of  psychic  dis- 
covery, and  guide  it  beforehand  into  channels  prepared  for 
its  reception  by  the  theoretical  development  of  spiritual 
science,  in  such  a  way  as  shall  enable  the  races  at  large  to 
-comprehend  the  lofty  purposes  for  which  Nature  holds  this 
superior  wisdom  in  reserve.  To  acquire  knowledge  con- 
cerning the  forces  operative  on  the  higher  planes  of 
Nature,  and  then  to  apply  this  knowledge  to  the  pursuit 
•of  merely  selfish  and  transitory  objects  of  mundane  desire, 
is  to  degrade  and  insult  the  highest  attributes  of  our 
humanity.  The  legitimate  and  progressive  method  in 
which  that  humanity  can  be  expanded  involves  the  sub- 
ordination of  the  physical  life  and  its  conditions  to  the 
service  of  higher  spiritual  objects.  If  the  forces  and 
powers  having  to  do  with  higher  spiritual  phases  of  exist- 
ence are,  by  reversing  the  natural  current,  directed  to  the 
service  of  ends  having  to  do  with  the  gratifications  of 
temporary  physical  life,  that  reversal  of  Nature's  design 
constitutes  a  blasphemy  against  her  highest  intentions, 
which  is  not  only  evil  and  wrong,  as  minor  sins  altogether 
lying  on  the  physical  plane  may  be,  but  is  in  reality  that 
supreme  species  of  wickedness  which  early  theological 
writers,  little  foreseeing  the  extent  to  which  their  words 
would  be  misunderstood,  have  called  a  sin  against  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

We  may  thus  realise  now  the  circumstances  under 
which  the  methods  and  system  of  initiation,  that  have  for 
so  many  centuries  been  concealed  from  popular  observa- 
tion, are  now  once  more  slowly  and  by  degrees  becoming 
known  to  a  generation  which,  at  the  first  blush,  may  seem 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  3 1 5 

to  be  curiously  little  ready  for  such  teaching.  Curiously 
little  ready  for  a  long  time  to  come  most  certainly  the 
majority  of  this  and  many  succeeding  generations  will  con- 
tinue to  be;  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  has  never  been  the  ex- 
pectation of  those  directing  the  course  of  initiation,  whether 
in  the  ancient  world  or  now,  that  people  of  the  ordinary 
type  will  flock  to  them  and  become  candidates  for  their 
guidance  in  any  very  large  numbers.  If  those  in  whom 
the  spirit  or  ardent  enthusiasm  for  spiritual  knowledge 
and  experience  is  already  strong  enough  to  bear  down  their 
eagerness  for  the  pleasures  or  pursuits  of  ordinary  life, 
are  alone  their  regular  pupils,  that  is  all  that  can  be  ex- 
pected or  desired;  but  unless  the  possibilities  of  the  situa- 
tion are  generally  known,  even  the  few  who  are  inspired 
in  the  way  just  described  will  waste  their  ardour  and 
readiness  for  self-sacrifice  in  empty  dreaming  or  futile 
endeavour,  and  the  great  purpose  of  Nature  will  not  be 
advanced  at  all.  That  great  purpose,  let  us  always  remem- 
ber, as  earlier  chapters  of  this  book  have  already  shown,  has 
to  do  not  merely  with  the  perpetuation  of  the  human  race, 
but  with  its  exaltation  into  the  higher  conditions  of  being. 
From  one  point  of  view  the  innumerable  differentiated 
units  of  consciousness  which  we  call  men  and  women  are 
cast  by  nature  in  enormous  abundance  on  the  surface  of  the 
earth,  as  so  much  seed  from  which  spiritual  beings  of  an 
immeasurably  more  important  and  dignified  character  may 
ultimately  be  grown.  But  while  in  dealing  with  its  lower 
organic  manifestations  Nature  is  extraordinarily  profuse 
in  providing  germs,  the  human  germ  is  one  of  a  very 
different  order  from  an  acorn.  The  unused  acorn  may 
resolve  itself  into  its  original  elements  without  suffering 
by  reason  of  not  becoming  an  oak.  Nothing  is  wasted  in 
this  case  but,  so  to  speak,  the  trouble  of  Nature  in  pro- 

316    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

ducing  the  acorn.   But  in  the  human  being,  however  truly 
that  human  being  may  be  regarded  in  his  or  her  highest 
aspect  as  the  germ  of  something  immeasurably  higher,  there 
is,  nevertheless,  already  the  focus  of  divine  consciousness 
which  must  continue  through  an  immeasurable  futurity  a 
vibrating  nucleus  of  suffering  or  enjoyment,  and  whether 
it  unites   itself  consciously   with   the   highest  design   of 
Nature  so  as  to  work  that  out,  or  not,  its  destinies  differ 
very   widely    in   character    from   those   of   the   vegetable 
seed  which  disintegrates  and  is  done  with  if  its  loftiest 
purpose  remains  unfulfilled.     It  has  been  already  shown 
that  the   fulfilment  by  any   given   human   being  of   the 
loftiest  purposes  of  his  existence  can  only  be  accomplished 
by  the  conscious  union  of  his  will  and  intention  with  the 
powers  and  forces  of  Nature  operating  through  him,  and 
it  is  thus  the  simple  truth  of  the  matter,  that  having 
attained  that  rank  in  existence  identified  with  the  present 
stage  of  the  earth's  progress,  his  further  advancement  in 
the  whole  scheme  of  existence,  which  embraces  so  much 
more  than  what  is  sometimes  called  the  scheme  of  creation, 
depends  on  his  acquisition  of  correct  knowledge  concern- 
ing the  nature  of  the  efforts  he  has  to  make  to  bring  his 
will  into  the  harmony  spoken  of;  in  other  words,  it  depends 
on  his  attainment,  sooner  or  later,  of  that  initiation  with 
which  we  are  now  concerned.     This  view  of  the  matter, 
as  apparently  placing  the  destinies  of  man  in  the  hands  of 
other  men,  however  far  these  other  men  may  be  advanced 
in  knowledge  and  spiritual  power,  may  seem  at  the  first 
glance  repugnant  to  the  understanding  of  people  who  have 
been  trained  but  too  constantly  in  the  belief  that  the  wisest 
course  to  pursue  concerning  the  future  life  is  to  regulate 
conduct  in  this  with  a   reasonable   regard   to   right  and 
wrong,  and  for  the  rest,  trust  blindly  in  the  gracious  mercy 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  3 1 7 

of  God.  If  the  explanation  just  given,  however,  be 
analysed  with  reasonable  intelligence,  it  will  be  seen  to 
offend  in  no  way  against  such  trust,  but  on  the  contrary 
to  bring  the  conclusions  of  experience  in  every  department 
of  life  of  which  we  have  any  knowledge  to  bear  upon  the 
great  problem,  as  they  are  necessarily  brought  to  bear  on 
all  of  minor  degree.  No  man  who  wants  a  crab  apple 
tree  to  produce  good  fruit,  sits  down  in  apathetic  content- 
ment, with  a  pious  platitude  concerning  the  goodness  of 
that  power  which  rules  the  processes  of  vegetation  as  un- 
deniably as  those  of  human  evolution.  He  knows  that 
the  powers  of  nature  will  work  with  him  if  he  adapts  his 
measures  to  their  design.  He  learns  all  that  he  can  learn 
of  that  design  and  of  its  requirements  from  other  men  who 
•have  studied  the  subject  before  him,  and  then  applies  his 
knowledge  to  the  case  with  which  he  himself  has  to  deal. 
Having  thus  united  his  will  with  the  laws  of  vegetable 
growth,  he  acquires  his  improved  fruit. 

It  seems  to  me  there  must  be  little  difficulty  in  dispelling 
any  distrust  of  the  kind  here  referred  to  by  the  time  the 
situation  is  appreciated  with  moderate  precision.  Clear 
thinkers  will  recognise  that  the  existence  within  touch  of 
the  world  of  human  beings  immensely  more  advanced  than 
their  contemporaries  along  the  paths  of  spiritual  evolution 
is  a  metaphysical  necessity  of  all  thinking  on  the  subject. 
A  much  graver  difficulty  and  more  serious  embarrassment 
in  the  way  of  those  who  may  get  so  far  in  the  direction  of 
realising  the  possibilities  before  them,  has  to  do  with  the 
question  how  any  given  aspirant  may  succeed  in  putting 
himself  into  touch  with  those  more  advanced  contem- 
poraries, those  higher  teachers  or  masters  of  esoteric 
wisdom.  And  now  I  approach  the  answer  to  that  diffi- 
culty, although  it  is  one  which,  from  the  nature  of  the 

3i 8    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

case,  cannot  be  given  in  half  a  dozen    words.     There 
certainly  is  not  now,  nor  has  there  been  at  any  other  time, 
any  recognised  official  bureau  at  which  people,  however 
honestly  desirous  of  efficient  spiritual  guidance,  can  obtain 
specific  information;  and  though  there  is  much  talk  in 
all  mediaeval  occult  writing  of  doors,  in  the  symbolical 
sense,  which  are  always  opened  to  those  who  knock,  such 
phrases  are  extremely  exasperating  to  Western   thinkers 
who  have  got  out  of  touch  with  those  highly  symbolical 
methods  of  expression,  and  who,  though  sometimes  but 
too  content  with  being  left  in  ignorance,  will  claim  that 
if  they  are  to  be  told  anything  of  what  they  may  want 
to  know  they  shall  be  told  it  in  a  straightforward,  com- 
prehensible way.     The  fact  is  that  access  to  the  masters 
of  initiation  is  only  to  be  attained  in  the  first  instance 
through  the  exercise  of  those  higher  faculties  in  man  which 
it  is  the  province  of  initiation  to  cultivate  and  expand. 
This  will  seem  like  reasoning  in  a  circle.     The  candidate 
for  spiritual  knowledge  will  complain  that  it  is  just  this  he 
requires,  in  order  that  he  may  evoke  from  their  mysterious 
recesses  in  his  own  nature  the  higher  senses  which  consti- 
tute the  channels  of  psychic  perception,  and  that  if  he  is 
told  that  he  must  employ  those  senses  in  order  to  get  at 
the  teachers,  he  is  merely  being  mocked  by  a  paradox,  and 
left  where  he  started.     The  elucidation  of  the  paradox, 
however,  merely  claims  that  we  should  bear  in  mind  that 
doctrine,  already   fully  described  in   these  pages,  which 
describes  the  method  which  Nature  employs  in  carrying 
on  the  evolution  of  the  human  soul.    We  must  not  forget 
that  re-incarnation  is  the  lot  of  every  human  being,  and 
we  must  apply  that  principle  to  every  thought,  and  above 
all  to  every  mystery  which  has  to  do  with  the  study  of 
spiritual  progress.     And  here  it  is  necessary  to  interpolate 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  3 1 9 

a  caveat  even  before  completing  the  explanation  in  view 
for  the  moment,  which  is  to  this  effect,  that  here  and  there 
peculiar  influences  arising  from  the  Karma  of  past  lives 
may  bring  people  within  reach  of  the  higher  spiritual 
teachers,  or  rather  may  enable  them  themselves  to  com- 
prehend the  fact  that  they  are  within  the  reach  of  such 
teaching  without  either  extraordinary  efforts  on  their  part> 
or  without  the  advantage  of  psychic  gifts  already 
developed.  But  let  me  first  deal  with  the  operation  of 
what  may  be  regarded  as  the  normal  rule  before  handling 
such  exceptions  with  regard  to  their  details.  And  the 
normal  rule  certainly  must  be  that  the  very  first  step  in 
the  direction  of  the  higher  initiation  undertaken  in  that- 
life,  whichever  it  may  be,  of  the  long  chain  in  which  the 
person  concerned  first  comprehends  the  matter  intellectu- 
ally, and  sets  himself  to  desire  and  earnestly  to  aim  at 
the  attainment  of  the  higher  spiritual  wisdom,  will  have 
to  deal  with  intellectual  study  and  thought,  directed  to 
the  problem  in  hand.  The  would-be  candidate  for  psychic 
evolution  of  the  kind  which  may  anticipate  that  higher 
evolution  which  alone  can  truly  be  called  spiritual,  must 
set  himself  to  understand  and  appreciate  the  nature  of  the 
task  on  which  he  will  be  engaged,  and  the  attributes,  so  far 
as  these  can  be  ascertained  by  any  testimony  open  to  him, 
of  those  who  control  the  resources  and  opportunities  of 
initiation. 

In  stating  the  case  this  way  I  may  possibly  seem  to  be 
diverging  from  the  doctrines  which  have  often  been  en- 
forced with  great  enthusiasm  in  recent  theosophic  writ- 
ing, and  which  would  rather  emphasise  the  importance 
of  unselfishness,  philanthropy,  altruism,  and  moral  purity 
as  so  much  more  important  in  their  preparatory  effect  than 
any  efforts  of  intellectual  study,  that  it  is  hardly  worth- 

320    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

while  to  enjoin  any  other  processes  of  effort  on  candidates 
for  future  initiation.  In  saying,  however,  that  the  matter 
much  in  the  first  instance  be  intellectually  studied,  I  am 
including  and  not  ignoring  the  preparatory  effect  of  moral 
qualities.  To  understand  that  these  constitute  an  essential 
factor  in  the  conditions  of  interior  feeling  which  lead  up 
towards  the  realities  of  initiation,  is  an  essential  part  of 
that  understanding  of  the  whole  problem  to  which  I  refer. 
But  we  must  not  let  our  enthusiasm  for  moral  beauty  and 
goodness  in  the  abstract  obscure  our  perception  of  the 
great  truth  that  in  the  normal  operation  of  all  the  laws 
which  govern  spiritual  evolution  the  ultimate  effect  of 
goodness,  as  worked  out  in  successive  lives,  is  happiness 
and  not  necessarily  spiritual  progress.  The  anterior  causes 
of  spiritual  progress  must  be  goodness  united  with  a  com- 
prehension of  the  great  design  governing  spiritual  evolu- 
tion, and  of  the  purposes  which  Nature  has  in  view  in 
the  cultivation  of  humanity.  Again  I  say,  therefore,  that 
the  first  step  for  any  candidate  setting  out  absolutely  from 
the  beginning  in  the  direction  of  initiation  must  be  study 
and  intellectual  effort  up  to  the  limits,  whatever  they  may 
be,  to  which  his  intellectual  capacity  may  at  that  period 
have  been  developed.  And  if  on  the  basis  of  a  fair  general 
comprehension  of  the  principles  guiding  spiritual  evolution 
he  unites  a  really  ardent  desire  to  come  into  contact  with 
their  realities,  to  brave  their  ordeals,  and  penetrate  their 
mysteries,  that  condition  of  mind  during  any  one  given 
life  will,  with  infallible  certainty,  engender  as  its  Karmic 
consequence  in  the  next,  those  psychic  attributes  which 
w'ill  enable  him,  if  his  desire  persists  and  his  efforts  con- 
tinue, to  come  into  conscious  relations  with  the  higher 
teachers. 

I  do  not  know  of  any  treatise  on  this  subject,  either  in 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  321 

the  literature  of  mediaeval  occultism,  modern  psychology, 
or  Theosophy  itself,  which  has  dealt  adequately  with  the 
circumstances  under  which  those  mysterious  and  some- 
times beautiful,  sometimes  rather  terrible  and  painful 
developments  of  psychic  faculty,  which  the  experience  of 
life  exhibits,  are  actually  developed.  We  all  talk  habitu- 
ally of  such  faculties  as  psychic  gifts,  roughly  adopting 
the  phraseology  of  a  very  unenlightened  theory  concern- 
ing the  attributes  of  man.  The  use  of  the  phrase  "  gifts,  ' 
whether  applied  to  the  faculties  in  question  or  to  talents 
of  any  kind,  seems  to  connote  a  reverential  and  grateful 
attitude  of  mind  towards  the  unknown  Omnipotence  from 
which  our  existence  has  been  derived;  but  to  a  more  en- 
lightened observation  it  must  really  be  regarded  as  involv- 
ing a  slur  on  that  Omnipotence,  or  at  all  events  a  reproach 
against  that  absolute  justice  with  which  the  idea  of  omni- 
science should  be  united,  if  we  assume  that  either  class  of 
faculties  is  given  capriciously  without  having  been  earned 
fairly  and  honestly.  One  of  the  most  illuminating  con- 
ceptions connected  with  the  study  of  spiritual  evolution 
shows  us,  on  the  contrary,  that  mental  powers  and  psychic 
gifts,  together  with  all  those  talents  which  have  to  do  with 
supremacy  in  art  or  in  other  departments  of  human 
activity,  are  in  all  cases  the  consequence  of  definite  effort, 
definite  action,  or  in  the  brief  and  more  technical  phrase, 
of  the  Karma,  engendered  in  former  lives.  Students  of 
physical  science  talk  with  rapture  of  the  beauty  involved 
in  the  great  law  which  exhibits  to  us  the  conservation  of 
energy  as  operative  throughout  the  various  realms  of  force 
within  the  purview  of  our  physical  senses.  They  are 
strangely  oblivious  to  the  still  higher  beauty  of  that  same 
law  in  its  association  with  the  higher  forces  having  to  do 
with  the  cause  and  effect  of  spiritual  action.  So  important 

22 

322     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

is  it  to  recognise  the  old  familiar  law  in  its  bearing  on  such 
higher  planes  of  existence,  that  one  might  almost  adopt 
as  a  brief  definition  or  motto  associated  with  the  study  of 
Theosophy — the  conservation  of  energy  on  the  moral 
plane.  Whatever  a  man  is  at  any  given  moment,  intel- 
lectually, artistically,  or  in  reference  to  his  perceptions  as 
to  right  and  wrong,  he  is  exactly  what  he  has  made  him- 
self in  former  lives,  working,  of  course,  at  each  stage  with 
the  advantages  or  disadvantages  of  surrounding  oppor- 
tunities which  are  themselves  merely  the  physical  and  ex- 
ternal consequences  of  still  earlier  action  on  his  part, — 
themselves,  that  is  to  say,  the  Karma  of  his  still  more 
remote  existences.  The  always  operative  conditions  of  his 
own  free  will  enable  him  at  every  step  of  his  progress 
to  mould  those  conditions  into  a  new  shape  for  his  own 
service  at  later  stages  of  his  long  career  through  the  ages; 
and  as  regards  the  faculties  with  which  he  will  find  himself 
endowed  at  later  stages  of  his  existence,  these  are,  in  the 
simplest  and  most  direct  fashion,  the  consequences  of  his 
own  anterior  efforts  and  aspirations.  Illustrations  have 
been  already  employed,  in  examining  the  doctrine  of  re- 
incarnation as  a  branch  of  this  subject,  which  have  to  do 
with  the  growth,  for  example,  of  great  musical  or  linguistic 
acquirements.  The  capacities  of  the  interior  Ego,  stimu- 
lated by  the  exertions  along  any  one  particular  line  of 
evolution  during  one  life,  reappear  with  the  return  of  the 
same  individuality  to  re-incarnation  next  time,  and  if 
continuously  exerted,  expand  and  develop  in  almost  un- 
limited degree.  The  child  who  is  a  musical  genius  at  six 
is  the  Karmic  offspring  of  some  great  musician  in  a  former 
age,  or  rather  constitutes  in  his  own  person  the  re-incar- 
nation of  that  great  musician.  The  student  of  languages 
in  a  former  age  may  have  forgotten,  when  he  returns  to 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  323 

life,  the  specific  vocabularies  and  grammatical  rules  with 
which  he  was  once  acquainted,  but  he  has  filled  his  nature 
with  such  ready  affinity  for  knowledge  of  that  kind  that 
the  application  in  his  case  of  a  scarcely  perceptible  effort 
enables  him  to  accomplish  more  than  another  would  suc- 
ceed in  gaining  by  the  protracted  labour  of  years.  So 
with  scientific  aptitudes,  so  also  with  literary  appre- 
ciation, so  also  with  the  evolution  of  psychic  faculties. 
Let  a  man  in  one  life  be  filled  with  a  persistent  longing 
to  penetrate  the  mysteries  of  the  psychic  plane,  with  the 
sympathetic  watchfulness  of  faculties  enabling  others  to 
do  this  already,  with  the  fruits  of  study  relating  to  the 
whole  subject  as  far  as  such  study  has  been  possible  for 
him,  and  the  result  will  blossom  out  as  a  Karmic  con- 
sequence in  the  shape  of  psychic  faculties  within  his  own 
control  on  his  next  appearance  on  this  plane  of  existence — 
always  supposing  that  no  independent  Karmic  causes  are 
set  up  in  an  antagonistic  direction.  And  this  simple  law, 
so  obvious  in  view  of  what  we  know  at  present  concern- 
ing the  principles  of  Karma  and  spiritual  evolution,  will 
be  seen  on  reflection  to  cover  the  whole  ground  of  the 
inquiry  into  all  those  diverse  and  incoherent  varieties  of 
psychic  faculty  which  meet  our  observation.  Sometimes 
these  take  the  shape  of  a  beautiful  spiritual  clairvoyance, 
bringing  their  happy  possessors  into  direct  relations  with 
superior  planes  of  being  and  the  inhabitants  thereof. 
Sometimes  they  simply  render  some  eyes  perceptive  of 
astral  phenomena,  belonging  in  no  way  to  any  exalted 
plane  of  Nature,  but  yet  shut  out  from  the  observation 
of  the  perfectly  commonplace  physical  sight.  Sometimes 
they  are  united  with  great  loftiness  of  character  and 
nobility  of  aim;  sometimes  they  are  associated  with  a 
grovelling  and  sordid  nature,  and  again,  in  other  cases — 

22* 

324    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

happily  rarer  than  these  last — they  are  associated  with 
positive  malevolence  and  tendencies  of  an  altogether  evil 
kind.  But  the  faculties  themselves  have  in  all  cases  equally 
been  the  product  of  a  desire  to  possess  such  faculties,  and 
of  efforts  in  that  direction.  The  character  with  which 
they  may  be  united  is  nothing  more  than  on  its  plane  the 
logical  outcome  of  the  efforts  and  tendencies  having  to 
do  with  the  cultivation  of  character  distinguishing  the 
person  in  question  during  former  lives.  So  surely  as  a 
bullet  fired  from  a  gun  progresses  through  the  air,  so  surely 
is  desire  or  effort  no  abortive  force.  The  effect  of  the 
bullet  when  it  strikes  its  object  has  to  do  with  the  direction 
in  which  the  gun  was  pointed,  which  is  quite  another 
matter.  These  reflections,  if  people  will  only  follow 
them  out  fully,  will  be  found  to  account  for  all  the  com- 
plex manifestations  of  what  is  called  "  mediumship  "  in 
connection  with  modern  spiritualism.  Whether  the 
peculiarities  of  psychic  constitution  which  such  medium- 
ship  represents  are  held  to  be  beautiful  or  pernicious  gifts, 
they  are  effects  which  could  not  have  been  produced 
without  a  cause,  and  we  have  seen  that  whatever  effects 
are  discernible  in  character  or  mental  or  moral  qualifica- 
tions are  effects  the  causes  of  which  are  to  be  sought  for 
in  the  efforts  made  by  their  possessors  at  an  earlier  stage 
of  their  career. 

The  conditions,  however,  of  what  may  be  called  irregu- 
lar psychic  progress  are  sufficiently  intimate  and  interest- 
ing to  be  studied  by  themselves  independently  of  the 
general  line  of  inquiry  with  which  we  are  now  concerned 
— the  conditions  under  which  an  approach  is  to  be  made 
in  the  present  day  to  the  portals  of  initiation. 

To  understand  these  rightly  it  will  be  well  at  this  stage 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  325 

to  review  the  normal  course  of  re-incarnation,  so  as 
the  better  to  appreciate  the  way  in  which  at  certain  stages 
of  the  soul's  growth  the  intervention  of  Adept  help  may 
hasten  the  process  for  those  who  are  ready  to  make  some 
sacrifices  in  the  hope  of  getting  on  the  faster. 

Let  us  realise,  first  of  all,  the  exact  purpose  in  the 
economy  of  Nature  of  the  usually  protracted  experiences 
intervening  between  two  lives.  The  growth  of  the  soul 
is  the  result  to  be  accomplished,  and  that  growth  arises 
from  the  experiences  and  activities  of  responsible  life. 
In  the  case  of  those  in  whom  the  work  is  chiefly  being 
done  during  physical  life — in  the  case  of  the  ordinary 
humanity  with  which  we  are  surrounded — the  doings  of 
physical  life  may  be  thought  of  as  accumulating  a  large 
mass  of  ill-digested  material  out  of  which  that  which  is 
qualified  to  contribute  to  the  growth  of  the  permanent 
Ego  must  be  distilled  and  sublimated.  The  entity  plunges 
into  the  astral  world  with  all  his  accumulated  aspirations, 
desires,  habits  of  life,  and  tendencies  of  character  thickly 
gathered  round  him.  He  is  altogether  a  being  of  the  physi- 
cal plane  of  life;  the  activities  of  his  thought  have  not 
qualified  him  to  take  advantage,  to  anything  like  their  full 
extent,  of  the  opportunities  afforded  by  astral  existence, 
still  less  to  pass  into  conditions  of  a  more  purely  spiritual 
nature.  He  has,  as  it  were,  to  grow  accustomed  to 
the  higher  planes  of  existence,  and  to  expand  his 
consciousness  on  these  so  far  as  the  efforts  he  has  been 
making  up  to  that  time  in  this  direction  render  the 
achievement  possible. 

Perhaps  this  gradual  indrawing  into  the  permanent  Ego 
of  whatever  experiences  of  life  and  fruit  of  endeavour 
may  be  susceptible  of  such  indrawing,  will  be  best  com- 
prehended if  for  a  moment  we  look  at  the  whole  evolu- 

326    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

tionary  progress  from  another  point  of  view.  The  actual 
centre  of  consciousness,  destined  to  grow  and  expand — the 
Soul  in  the  noblest  and  deepest  sense  of  the  term — is,  of 
course,  engendered  on  a  loftier  spiritual  plane,  but  at  first 
it  is  a  centre  of  consciousness  wholly  uncharacterised  by 
specific  attributes.  It  is  an  individuality,  but  an  individu- 
ality without  characteristics.  It  presses  forward  and  out- 
wards, as  it  were,  following  the  stream  of  manifestation 
through  the  various  planes,  but  finding  no  resting  place 
until  it  reaches  the  bottom  of  the  great  descent  of  spirit 
into  matter,  and  opens  its  eyes  to  the  consciousness  of 
objective  creation  on  the  physical  plane  of  life.  Here  for 
the  first  time  it  begins  to  experience  the  sensation  of  life. 
The  whole  objective  universe  lies  around  it,  and  its  own 
first  conception  of  things — an  illusive  plane  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  higher  spiritual  consciousness — leads  it  to 
commence  its  long  and  gradual  development  by  working 
with  an  idea  which  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  fundamental 
heresy  of  metaphysics — the  sense  of  separateness.  The 
awakening  soul  on  the  physical  plane  of  life  feels  itself 
one  thing  and  the  universe  another,  and  however  this 
idea  may  be  destined  to  qualification  at  a  much  later 
date,  it  is  the  first  aspect  of  individuality  which  neces- 
sarily presents  itself  to  the  germinating  Ego.  In  the 
language  of.  the  nursery,  so  applicable  in  many  ways  to 
the  lower  earth  life  as  compared  with  the  higher,  the 
first  thing  the  Ego  does  in  beginning  to  feel  its  capacities 
of  reflection  is  to  "  take  notice."  It  takes  notice  of  the 
physical  world  around  it,  of  the  other  creatures  therein 
on  its  own  level,  of  the  opportunities  it  may  enjoy  for 
acquiring  sensations — the  pleasurable  character  of  some, 
the  painful  character  of  others. 

We  may  picture  the  soul  to  ourselves  at  this  stage  as 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  327 

consisting  of  an  all  but  formless  germ  on  the  higher 
spiritual  plane,  connected  by  a  fine  colourless  thread  with 
the  lower  earth  life,  and  beginning  to  throw  out  roots 
and  expand  in  contact  with  that  lowest  stratum  it  can 
touch.  Of  all  the  knowledge,  experiences,  emotions,  con- 
stituting this  expansion  on  the  physical  plane,  how  much 
is  capable  of  being  withdrawn  along  the  thread  passing 
through  the  various  intervening  planes  of  Nature  into  the 
spiritual  germ  above  ?  Very  little  for  the  most  part,  but 
that  little  is  drawn  back  by  the  contraction  of  the  thread, 
so  to  speak,  after  the  life  is  spent,  drawn  back  through 
ihe  various  intervening  planes  of  Nature,  slowly  enough, 
by  reason  of  the  fact  that  the  accumulation,  however  much 
or  little  it  may  be,  cannot  be  drawn  upward  till  it  has 
been  cleansed  and  purified  of  all  which  only  belongs  to 
and  is  only  capable  of  existence  on  the  lowest  plane.  By 
the  time  the  thread  is  entirely  contracted,  by  the  time 
the  whole  astral  experience  following  the  life  has  been 
worked  out,  and  the  minute  fragments  of  thought  and 
feeling  capable  of  being  drawn  higher  up  through  the 
spiritual  planes  into  the  true  Ego — by  the  time  all  these 
processes  have  been  accomplished,  the  permanent  spiritual 
germ  is  fed  with  very  little,  but  with  something.  It  is 
a  little  more  capable  of  consciousness  on  its  own  region, 
or  rather,  as  it  is  always  theoretically  conscious  and 
capable  there,  it  is  a  little  more  capable  of  endowing 
that  consciousness  with  variegated  aspects  than  it  was  at 
first.  To  that  extent,  however  little  that  extent  may  be, 
the  thread,  when  it  again  extends  itself  downwards  from 
the  higher  planes  of  Nature,  seeking  re-manifestation  in 
the  region  where  the  sensations  of  life  are  most  possible 
for  it,  is  a  little  thicker,  so  to  speak,  than  it  was  before; 
it  is  a  somewhat  better  channel  for  the  withdrawal  in- 

328     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

ward  of  whatever  it  may  come  in  contact  with  in  the 
course  of  its  second  batch  of  experiences.  And  its  previous 
expression,  the  first  personality,  which  has  itself  disinte- 
grated and  disappeared  long  ago  during  the  upward  move- 
ment of  consciousness  after  the  last  life,  is  in  a  great 
measure  re-created  as  the  root  fibre  descends  through  the 
planes  of  Nature,  by  its  re-absorption  on  these  various 
planes  of  matter  appropriate  to  the  expression  of  such 
characteristics  as  it  developed  before.  There  is  no 
recovery,  as  some  imperfectly  expressed  description  of  this 
process  may  have  led  earlier  students  to  imagine,  of  the 
actual  astral  or  lower  manasic  principles  which  belong  to 
the  previous  life,  but  the  Ego  gathers  similar  principles 
around  it  afresh  from  the  appropriate  material  of  the 
various  planes  through  which  it  passes,  or  through  which 
it  sends  its  root.  All  similes  of  this  kind  must  necessarily 
be  inapplicable  at  some  point;  but  at  all  events,  when  the 
physical  plane  of  life  is  again  reached,  the  personality  is, 
so  to  speak,  once  more  built  up  of  materials  resembling 
the  materials  which  its  own  activities  in  the  former  life 
engendered. 

Here,  to  make  the  whole  process  more  intelligible, 
we  may  study  the  esoteric  teaching  which  relates  to  the 
methods,  so  to  speak,  by  means  of  which  the  returning 
soul  is  brought  into  renewed  relations  with  its  old  Karma. 
All  the  causes  which  it  had  set  in  motion  in  the  former 
life  (the  Karma  which  it  had  engendered),  were  built — if 
we  may  so  contemplate  the  idea  (under  the  guidance  of 
lofty  spiritual  agencies  controlling  these  great  develop- 
ments of  the  world's  affairs) — into  an  image  appropriate 
to  express  that  personality  in  another  life.  This  was  done 
at  the  conclusion  of  the  earth  life,  when  the  Karmic 
causes  'set  in  motion  were  complete,  and  the  image 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  329, 

awaits  the  returning  personality  and  the  activities  of  the 
powers  in  Nature  concerned  with  the  guidance  of  its  re- 
birth. In  the  process  of  re-birth  the  Etheric  Double  is 
actually  created  in  advance  of  the  physical  body;  it  is  the 
Etheric  Double  which  is  in  turn  the  agency  guiding  the 
deposition  of  physical  molecules  as  the  body  grows,  and 
which  thus  ensures  the  production  of  a  form  which  shall 
accurately  express  the  necessities  of  the  personality,  and 
accurately  involve  the  rewards  or  penalties  which  may  be 
due  to  his  past  doings.  The  explanation  of  this  point  is- 
difficult  because  it  involves  so  much  that  it  has  not  been 
necessary  in  this  volume  to  deal  with  in  detail,  but  a  fuller 
knowledge  concerning  the  place  in  Nature  occupied  by 
the  stupendous  beings  known  in  occult  writings  as  the 
Lipika,  coupled  with  an  appreciation  of  the  instrumental 
resources  available  for  their  use  in  the  elemental  king- 
dom, renders  the  aspect  of  the  whole  process  clear,  sym- 
metrical, and  scientific.  The  Lipika,  as  already  explained> 
are  sometimes  described  as  the  Lords  of  Karma,  and  in 
the  minute  delicacy  with  which  they  govern  the  destinies 
of  man  they  realise  with  reference  to  his  merit  or  desert 
as  he  returns  to  earth,  life  after  life,  the  popular  concep- 
tion of  Providence.  Many  popular  conceptions  in  this 
way  connected  with  religion  will  often  be  found,  as  the 
occult  student  advances,  vindicated  rather  than  refuted 
by  the  more  accurate  knowledge  he  may  be  able  to  acquire 
— vindicated  not  as  regards  their  materialistic  outlines, 
but  as  to  the  inner  significance  of  the  idea.  It  is  in  this, 
way  then  that  the  entity  is  launched  at  re-birth  on  the 
physical  plane  of  existence  in  very  much  the  same 
condition  as  regards  his  attributes,  character,  desires,, 
tendencies,  as  when  he  left  the  earth  plane  last. 

The  personalities  of  each  existence  may  be  imperma- 

330    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

nent  and  transient  manifestations  of  the  Ego,  vanishing 
into  nothingness  with  the  physical  body  and  the  astral 
material  of  which  they  were  composed;  but  in  the  way 
just  described  each  new  personality  in  turn  is  built  so 
exactly  on  the  lines  of  its  predecessor,  that  except  for 
the  varying  external  circumstances  of  its  life,  determined 
by  Karma,  it  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes  a  repetition  of 
the  previous  personality,  not  the  same,  but  inspired  by 
the  same  individual  centre  of  consciousness,  and  in  regard 
to  its  attributes  and  characteristics,  created  afresh  from  the 
storehouses  of  Nature  and  standing  on  the  plane  of  earth 
once  more  very  much  the  same  being  as  on  its  last  appear- 
ance there.  These  recurrent  processes  continue,  the  per- 
sonality blundering  about  rather  wildly  at  first,  impressed, 
very  imperfectly,  with  the  voice  of  conscience,  which  is 
the  expression  on  the  physical  plane  of  its  own  Higher  Self, 
hardly  even  feeling  this  voice  of  conscience  at  all  at  the 
earlier  stages  of  its  career,  except  in  regard  to  such  depart- 
ments of  activity  as  have  given  rise  during  former  existences 
to  some  permanent  attributes  absorbed  into  the  Higher 
Self.  But  as  we  have  been  looking  at  the  process  we  have 
been  looking  at  it  at  a  very  early  stage  of  human  advance- 
ment. Long  before  humanity  has  attained  the  limits  on 
which  our  contemporaries  for  the  most  part  stand,  many 
hundred  successive  lives  have  each  contributed  their  little 
gift  to  the  permanent  consciousness  of  the  true  Ego,  and 
in  this  way  the  area  over  which  its  influence  is  extended 
in  later  lives  has  been  expanded  to  a  corresponding  degree. 
The  voice  of  conscience  and  the  inner  intuition,  which 
may  sometimes  be  a  guide  to  action,  even  in  matters  where 
no  definite  problems  of  right  and  wrong  are  concerned, 
may  have  become  active  within  the  personality  which 
represents  the  Ego  on  the  physical  plane  of  life,  and  in 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  331 

many  ways  its  physical  life  is  thus  guided  in  a  manner 
which  contributes  more  and  more  abundantly  to  the 
development  of  the  Ego, — to  the  growth  of  the  soul.  By 
this  time  a  much  more  traversible  channel,  to  use  that 
metaphor,  extends  from  the  physical  life  to  the  spiritual 
plane  in  which  the  consciousness  of  the  permanent  Ego  is 
seated,  and  through  this  more  and  more  experience  of  life 
can  be  drawn  when  the  in-drawing  process  recommences. 
As  before,  the  personality  may  be  born  with  much  which 
it  shed  as  it  moved  backward  to  itself  through  the  higher 
planes  of  Nature,  but  there  is  more  and  more  of  it  qualified 
to  exist  on  the  higher  planes,  and  to  express  on  the  lower 
the  characteristics  of  the  individual  Ego. 

In  the  very  beginning,  as  I  endeavoured  to  describe,  the 
Ego  has  little  or  nothing  to  say  to  the  doings  of  the 
permanent  personality  on  this  plane  of  life.  A  time  comes 
when  the  two  influences,  those  of  the  objective  world 
around,  and  the  interior  consciousness  within,  are  in 
equilibrium.  A  time  comes  beyond  that  when  the 
interior  consciousness  is  distinctly  predominant,  and 
when  the  relations  of  its  personality  with  the  external 
world  become  in  this  way  coloured  by  the  interests  and 
loftier  purposes  for  which  it  exists.  Then  the  indrawing 
of  itself  after  death  is  a  far  grander  undertaking.  Accu- 
mulations gathered  round  the  personality  in  physical  life 
are  readily  shed  on  the  astral  planes,  the  real  entity  feels 
itself  to  be  that  which  is  capable  of  activity  on  the  spiritual 
regions  of  Nature.  It  eagerly  returns  to  these  and  feels 
its  true  existence  to  be  centred  there.  This  condition  of 
things  is  the  case  of  the  growing  soul  which  has  attained 
that  period  of  its  evolution  when  abnormal  possibilities  of 
more  rapid  growth  begin  to  set  in. 

What  shape  does  this  abnormal  possibility  take  ?     That 

332     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

is  a  view  of  things  I  have  now  to  endeavour  to  make 
intelligible.  The  Ego,  assuming  his  progress  along  the 
steps  of  the  path  leading  to  initiation  to  have  been  suffi- 
ciently successful  to  bring  him  into  direct  personal  rela- 
tions with  one  of  the  more  exalted  Adepts  qualified  to  sur- 
round his  ulterior  progress  with  new  conditions,  may  be 
regarded  as  a  candidate  for  that  treatment  which  is  known 
to  the  occultist  as  immediate  re-incarnation.  Supposing 
his  last  life  to  have  been  sufficiently  dignified  and  blame- 
less in  its  character  to  have  left  him  tolerably  free  of  un- 
happy responsibilities  in  his  great  account  with  the  Lords 
of  Karma,  it  is  possible  that  the  Master,  in  his  case,  may 
be  permitted  to  fulfil,  as  regards  him,  for  the  next  great 
stage  of  his  career,  the  functions,  if  the  phrase  may  be 
permitted,  of  Providence.  The  Master  has,  by  the  hypo- 
thesis, become  so  entirely  blended  with  the  Divine  idea 
ruling  the  world,  as  regards  his  own  will,  that  the  union 
has  brought  with  it  powers  which  are,  in  their  nature, 
divine.  It  is  possible  for  the  Master  to  guide  the  soul 
of  the  neophyte  into  his  next  incarnation,  and  it  is  possible 
for  him  to  do  this  without  waiting  for  the  neophyte  to 
pass  through  the  usual  spiritual  interlude.  The  soul  can 
be  arrested  on  the  astral  plane,  where,  of  course,  it  has  but 
little  to  shed,  and  turned  back  at  once  into  renewed  mani- 
festation in  the  physical  world,  so  that  it  may  continue 
the  unbroken  series  of  efforts  in  the  direction  of  its  own 
purification  which  have  been  the  leading  characteristics 
of  the  life  just  spent.  When  it  has  attained  the  second 
life,  which  may  follow  at  the  interval  of  a  few  years — 
conceivably,  if  circumstances  happen  to  be  favourable, 
of  a  few  weeks  after  the  close  of  the  last — this  second 
life  is  thus  a  complete  continuation  of  the  last,  as  regards 
all  phases  of  interior  consciousness,  and  the  person  so 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  333 

artificially  re-incarnated  will,  as  soon  as  the  new  body 
with  which  he  is  associated  has  grown  to  be  a  mature 
instrument,  be  able  within  his  waking  consciousness  to 
remember  every  detail  of  his  former  life.  In  the  inter- 
vening period,  before  the  new  body  has  acquired  maturity, 
he  continues  to  function  on  the  astral  plane  in  complete 
consciousness  in  the  appropriate  vehicle  bequeathed  to  him 
from  his  last  life.  The  two  existences  are  blended  in  a 
very  wonderful  way,  but  there  is  no  solution  of  continuity 
in  the  process.  The  old  astral  vehicle  is  not  discarded 
until  the  new  body  has  been  sufficiently  developed  to  have 
grown,  so  to  speak,  or  gathered  around  it  a  new  astral 
vehicle,  which  the  entity  can  then  make  use  of.  The 
occult  relationships  he  will  have  established  remain  un- 
broken. His  intercourse  with  the  Masters  and  with  those 
surrounding  him  will  never  have  been  intermitted,  and 
he  will  recover  touch  in  the  course  of  the  new  life  on 
which  he  may  be  launched  with  others  on  his  own  level 
of  progress,  themselves  the  subjects,  like  himself,  of  abnor- 
mal evolution.  And  thus  it  may  ensue  that  in  a  period  of 
time  covered  by  a  few  centuries,  if  more  than  one  im- 
mediate re-incarnation  takes  place  in  connection  with  his 
advancement,  he  may  condense  a  progress  which  would 
otherwise  have  been  protracted  over  twice  as  many  mil- 
lenniums. The  mere  economy  of  time,  indeed,  is  not  a 
matter  of  so  much  importance,  from  one  point  of  view. 
If  we  leave  certain  considerations  out  of  account,  it  might 
be  argued  that  the  normal  course  of  evolution  would  suit 
the  neophyte  just  as  well,  and  be  in  many  respects  more 
agreeable.  He  would  then  enjoy  the  intensely  blissful  and 
refreshing  conditions  of  existence  in  very  full  conscious- 
ness on  the  higher  spiritual  planes;  each  life  as  he  came 
back  to  it  would  be  one  in  which  he  would,  by  virtue  of 

334    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

the  normal  process  of  evolution,  pick  up  again  the  ten- 
dency to  make  further  progress,  with  which  he  was 
animated  at  the  close  of  the  preceding  life. 

What,  then,  after  all — at  the  first  glance  an  inquirer 
might  ask — does  the  Neophyte  gain  by  immediate  re- 
incarnation ? 

The  answer  is  two-fold,  intelligible  enough  in  one  of  its 
aspects,  highly  recondite  in  another.  In  the  intelligible 
aspect,  the  main  point  turns  upon  the  relationship  between 
the  Neophyte  and  the  Master  to  whom  he  is  attached. 
Words  derived  from  the  ordinary  friendships  and  relations 
of  life  fail  to  define  the  ardour  of  affection  with  which  the 
pupil,  arrived  at  the  condition  in  which  he  is  able  to  have 
personal  touch  with  a  Being  so  exalted  in  nature  as  one  of 
the  higher  Adepts,  will  come  to  regard  this  Being  as  the 
supreme  influence  in  his  life.  One  of  his  most  intense 
aspirations  in  connection  with  occult  progress  at  these 
earlier  stages — and  before  an  even  loftier  feeling,  con- 
nected with  the  unification  of  his  own  will  with  that 
which  rules  all  Nature,  has  come  into  play — will  be  his 
aspiration  in  the  direction  of  freer  intercourse,  and,  so  to 
speak,  companionship,  with  the  Master.  He  wishes  with 
an  intense  longing  for  the  time  when  his  own  advance 
may  enable  him  to  stand  at  something  like  the  level  of 
Nature  on  which  the  guiding  light  of  his  destiny  resides, 
and  if  he  were  to  await  the  progress  of  normal  evolution 
and  spend  many  thousands  of  years  in  spiritual  felicity, 
that  lapse  of  time  might  have  operated  in  regard  to  the 
Master,  towards  whom  he  aspires,  in  some  way  which 
would  have  removed  him  to  still  loftier  functions  in 
Nature,  where  he  would  then  again  be  inaccessible  to  his 
slowly  advancing  pupil.  Though  the  foremost  motive, 
however,  with  which  the  pupil  who  understands  the  whole 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  335 

situation  desires  immediate  re-incarnation,  has  to  do  with 
his  easily  intelligible  love  for  the  Master,  a  very  much 
more    intricate    consideration    must    also    be    taken    inta 
account.    The  surrender  of  blissful  existence  between  the 
two  lives  may  not  be  one  which  presents  itself  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  unenlightened  physical  intelligence 
as  of  such  very  great  significance.     While  the  necessities 
of  progress  attach  themselves  in  a  large  measure  to  ideas 
connected  with  the  present  life,  the  person  who  is  imbued 
with  the  thought  of  immediate  re-incarnation,  with  the 
idea    that   it   would    be   possible    to    forego   the   blissful 
period,  and  so  get  on  faster,  will  suppose  that  an  eminently 
desirable  thing  to  do   from  all  possible  points  of  view. 
He  may  even  speak  with  contempt,  arising  from  ignor- 
ance, of  the  useless  waste  of  time  which  would  be  involved 
in  going  through  the  usual  spiritual  period.    It  is  easy  to  be 
grandly  indifferent  to  privileges  which  we  do  not  appre- 
ciate.   The  conditions  of  existence  for  a  fairly  awakened 
soul  on  manasic  planes  are,  however,  so  enriched,  sub- 
lime, and  blissful,   that  no  one  who  once   tastes   them 
can  resign  them  by  an  act  of  will  without  a  very  vivid  sense 
of  the  reality  involved  in  -such  a  renunciation.     And  no 
disciple  will  be  allowed  to  choose  immediate  re-incarna- 
tion— a  gift  that  would  never  be  allotted  to  him,  without 
his  choice  constituting  one  of  the  features  in  the  arrange- 
ment— unless  he  is  previously  put  in  a  position  to  appre- 
ciate with  exactitude  the  nature  of  the  sacrifice  he  was 
making.     Before  the  expiration  of  his  previous  physical 
life,  he  would  have  been  enabled,  while  out  of  the  body, 
to  pass  on  to  the  higher  level  of  existence.     He  would 
thus  come  to  know  all  that  it  meant,  and  if  he  made  the 
choice  for  immediate  re-incarnation,  would  be  making  it 
with  his  eyes  open.    So  much  for  the  countervailing  con- 

336     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

sideration  against  the  choice,  but  now  let  me  turn  to  what 
I  spoke  of  as  the  second  aspect  in  favour  of  it,  which  cannot 
be  very  completely  defined,  but  may  still  be  partially 
appreciated. 

The  renunciation  of  higher  plane  life  by  the  neophyte 
— when  made  in  the  only  way  in  which  it  can  be  made, 
with  eyes  fully  open  to  the  true  character  of  the  sacrifice 
— is  in  the  nature  of  an  offering  of  immediate  personal 
beatitude  on  the  altar  of  Duty.  The  disciple  is  surren- 
dering individual  happiness  to  which  he  has  a  claim  in 
order  to  be  the  sooner  able  to  take  his  place  among  those 
whose  energies  are  wholly  spent  in  the  promotion  of  the 
well-being  of  the  race  at  large.  In  doing  this  he  is  doubly 
loyal  to  the  Great  Cause,  for  the  sacrifice  he  makes  has  a 
complicated  reaction  in  a  way  that  can  only  be  fully 
understood  at  the  stages  of  progress  when  it  becomes 
possible.  But  at  that  stage  the  altruistic  desire  to  accom- 
plish the  sacrifice  becomes  a  more  potent  motive  than 
any  which  appeal  even  to  the  most  purified  and  exalted 
considerations  related  entirely  to  self.  At  some  future 
date,  when  the  world  is  more  widely  peopled  with  persons 
qualified  to  tread  the  path  of  occult  progress,  and  appre- 
ciate its  loftier  mysteries,  the  force  of  such  considerations 
as  these  will  be  more  readily  apprehended.  Meanwhile  we 
all  feel  in  a  general  way  that  selfishness  is  ignoble  and 
altruism  beautiful,  and  that  perception  is  a  mere  imper- 
fect forecast  of  a  mighty  moral  law  which  arms  the 
disciple,  by  virtue  of  every  sacrifice  he  is  enabled, 
as  he  advances,  to  make,  with  an  ever-increasing  power 
to  fulfil  the  ever-expanding  tasks  of  unselfish  usefulness 
as  they  devolve  upon  him  in  constantly  augmenting 
volume. 

For  the  more  from  any  individual  centre  of  conscious- 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  337 

ness  a  good  influence  is  radiated,  the  more  abundantly 
does  this  well  up  in  the  interior  of  such  an  individuality. 
Such  phrases  can  hardly  be  recast  into  more  specific  and 
exact  language.  We  are  trying  to  handle  in  thought  a 
condition  of  things  analogous  to  the  bewildering  mathe- 
matical enigma  described  as  a  fourth  dimension.  How 
can  a  perpetual  well-spring,  ever  flowing  with  new 
material,  emerge,  as  it  were,  from  an  interior  centre  in  any 
given  individuality?  And  yet  to  the  astral  sight  of 
persons  who  are  enabled  to  dive  more  deeply  than  the  most 
powerful  microscope  will  carry  us,  into  minute  naturev 
and  to  discern  the  constitution  of  the  atoms  of  physical 
matter,  it  is  directly  perceptible  that  each  of  these  atoms- 
— itself  a  complicated  organism,  constructed  of  matter 
belonging  to  a  higher  plane — is  continually  bubbling  up 
with  forces  which  emerge  from  an  interior  centre  uncon- 
nected, as  far  as  such  observation  goes,  with  anything  ex- 
ternal to  itself.  Each  atom  is  within  its  own  enclosing 
surface  a  well-spring  of  energy  which  never  fails.  Com- 
parison with  the  atom  does  not  explain  the  mystery  con- 
nected with  that  spiritual  fountain  of  ever-flowing  force 
within  the  individuality,  which  must  be  ever  giving  out 
from  itself  in  order  that  its  flow  may  proceed  unchecked, 
but  at  the  same  time  the  analogy  is  a  little  helpful  towards 
the  comprehension  of  the  idea. 

There  are  some  qualifications,  moreover,  which  have 
to  be  recognised  as  mitigating  for  the  disciple  the  severity 
of  the  sacrifice  he  makes  in  the  manner  described.  Im- 
mediate re-incarnation  will  link  his  consciousness,  not 
merely  with  the  life  which  he  last  spent,  but  with  the 
intervening  conditions  of  existence,  spent  in  the  partial 
companionship  of  his  Master  and  of  other  advanced  com- 
panions, and,  further  than  this,  puts  him  in  a  position 

338     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

to  exercise  consciously  on  the  physical  plane  of  life  when 
he  returns  to  incarnation  the  senses  belonging  to  the  higher 
regions,  so  that  his  nature  will  have  been  unified  all  the 
way  up  to  the  manasic  region,  which  it  is  not  his  privilege 
to  inhabit  continuously,  but  which  is  nevertheless  acces- 
sible to  him  whenever  the  circumstances  of  physical  life 
enable  him  to  quit  the  body  for  a  time.  All  the  links 
which  connect  the  different  planes  have  been  fully 
developed.  For  the  person  so  immediately  re-incarnated, 
as,  indeed,  for  some  others  who  attain  in  a  different  way 
the  corresponding  pitch  of  development,  the  act  of  quitting 
the  body  is  as  easy  and  simple  as  that  of  putting  off  your 
hat.  Consciousness  is  in  no  way  broken  by  the  process, 
either  as  the  true  entity  leaves  or  as  he  returns  to  his  body. 
For  that  matter  most  human  beings  leave  the  body,  with- 
out knowing  it,  when  they  are  asleep,  and  their  emergence 
therefrom  can  be  seen  by  observers  who  are  sufficiently 
clairvoyant,  but  the  outward  passage  is  so  confusedlv 
accomplished  that  it  is  separated  from  whatever  experi- 
ences are  incurred  out  of  the  body  by  a  non-conducting 
interval  of  unconsciousness,  and  in  the  same  way  the 
return  to  the  body  is  again  broken  by  the  non-conducting 
interval,  so  that  the  activities  of  the  brain  are  enabled  to 
reflect  in  only  a  very  imperfect  degree  the  experiences 
which  such  persons  may  encounter  out  of  the  body.  And 
the  probabilities  are,  their  experiences  in  such  conditions 
are  of  very  little  moment.  They  may  not  be  sufficiently 
developed  to  have  any  real  activity  of  consciousness  even 
on  the  astral  plane,  not  to  speak  of  those  above.  But  the 
non-conducting  interval  has  been  suppressed  in  the  case 
of  the  occult  pupil.  He  has  arrived  at  the  stage  at  which 
he  may  be  entitled  to  the  help  of  a  Master,  which  is 
gfven  him  in  this  way.  The  whole  life  to  which  im- 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  339 

mediate  re-incarnation  is  a  prelude,  is  qualified  by  full 
consciousness  concerning  the  other  planes  of  Nature, 
and  by  ability  to  reach  the  Master,  whoever  he  may  be. 
For,  remember,  while  the  most  important  work  of  any 
great  Adept  is  performed  on  lofty  spiritual  planes  of 
Nature,  it  is  a  necessity  connected  with  his  work  that  he 
should  keep  in  touch  with  humanity  by  virtue  of  occupy- 
ing a  part  of  his  time,  at  all  events,  a  physical  body, 
so  that  the  Master  must  also  have  a  physical  existence, 
however  .secluded  it  may  be,  or  however  remote '  the 
country  in  which  it  is  to  be  found.  To  this  the  pupil 
in  his  astral  body  has  already  access,  he  may  be  there  at 
any  time  that  the  Master  can  receive  him  a  second  after 
he  has  put  his  body  to  sleep  and  quitted  it.  He  is  there 
for  all  purposes  of  consciousness,  of  thought,  of  study,  of 
activity,  of  objectivity  to  others  equally  qualified  with  him- 
self, as  though  he  were  there  in  the  physical  body  itself, 
so  that  the  life  he  leads  as  soon  as  the  physical  instrument 
is  mature  in  his  immediate  re-incarnation  is  one  which  is 
glorified  in  a  hundred  ways,  which  only  those  who  arc 
saturated  with  occult  teaching  can  be  in  a  position  even 
dimly  to  appreciate. 

The  curious  stage,  indeed,  has  now  been  reached  in 
which  the  activities  of  the  physical  life  of  the  disciple, 
though  still  full  of  importance,  and  of  more  significance 
than  could  have  attached  to  those  of  any  former  existences, 
are  nevertheless  dropping  back  to  a  subordinate  place  as 
compared  with  spiritual  activities.  These  he  is  now  in  a 
position  to  carry  on  on  higher  planes  of  Nature  indepen- 
dently of  the  physical  body  and  physical  existence 
altogether.  The  physical  consciousness,  in  the  case  I  am 
imagining,  will  reflect  his  progress;  he  will  know  while 
he  is  awake  all  that  he  has  been  doing  in  loftier  regions; 

23* 

340     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

he  will  be  realising,  so  far  as  that  is  possible,  within  trie- 
physical  brain,  an  infinitude  of  new  states  of  conscious- 
ness on  the  astral  plane  and  others  to  which  he  has  now 
free  access.  Free  access  in  spite  of  that  renunciation  of 
which  I  speak,  because  once  re-established  on  the  physical 
plane  of  life  he  can  pass  into  the  higher  state  of  conscious- 
ness and  pass  out  of  it  again  in  obedience  to  the  call  of 
duty  elsewhere. 

Now  let  us  turn  to  a  consideration  of  the  first  steps 
which  have  to  be  taken  practically  by  the  occult  student 
seeking  for  the  first  time  to  emerge  from  the  normal  evolu- 
tion of  ordinary  humanity,  and  put  himself  in  touch  with 
these  glorious  possibilities. 

At  the  first  blush  of  the  matter  students  of  modern 
occult  literature,  assuming  them  to  have  grasped  and 
accepted  its  broad  and  grand  ideas,  are  sometimes  im- 
pressed with  the  belief  that  the  next  thing  to  do  is  to  get 
introduced  somehow  to  an  occult  fraternity  and  be 
initiated  in  some  inaugural  mysteries,  or  be  confronted 
with  some  imposing  ordeals  at  once.  The  door  is  open 
to  all  who  knock — according  to  the  familiar  aphorism. 
The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  must  be  taken  by  storm,  as 
the  thought  is  expressed  in  another  symbolical  phrase, 
which  people  in  want  of  intelligible  guidance  sometimes 
find  to  be  very  irritating.  Where  is  the  portal  to  be 
knocked  at  ?  Where  is  the  breach  to  be  stormed  ?  The 
true  answer  may  legitimately  be  distilled  from  all  that  has 
gone  before,  but  the  time  has  now  come  for  putting  it  in 
plain  and  straightforward  language,  though  in  truth  no 
such  explanation  can  be  comprehended  until  students 
thoroughly  grasp  the  whole  preliminary  view  of  human 
progress  opened  up  to  the  mind  by  theosophical  teaching. 
It  is  not  possible  for  an  aspirant  who  contemplates 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  341 

•effective  progress  on  the  path  that  leads  to  the  higher 
initiations  to  get  on  more  than  a  few  stages  on  his  way 
during  the  life  in  which  he  first  addresses  himself  to  the 
great  undertaking.  This  is  the  foremost  reason  why  it 
is  premature  for  the  candidate  to  expect  to  be  put,  from 
the  very  beginning  of  his  effort,  in  direct  personal  relations 
with  the  Masters  from  whom  he  wishes  to  obtain  guidance. 
The  task  before  him,  in  the  first  instance,  is  the  develop- 
ment of  his  own  character  along  the  lines  that  lead  in  the 
direction  of  the  remote  perfection  aimed  at.  Eager 
beginners  may  find  the  prospect  discouraging,  but  there 
is  no  short  cut  to  the  acquisition  of  the  interior  characteris- 
tics which  constitute  the  only  recognised  claim  to  par- 
ticipation in  the  wisdom  and  power  of  the  Adepts  of  the 
White  Law.  A  fundamental  mistake  is  made  by  any- 
one who  imagines  that  the  all-important  qualifications 
have  to  do  with  the  cultivation  of  psychic  faculties.  The 
custodians  of  the  knowledge  of  which  the  occult  student 
is  in  search,  are  engaged  in  the  magnificent  task  of  stimu- 
lating and  promoting  the  spiritual  growth  of  humanity, 
not  its  mere  capacity  to  handle  the  finer  forces  of  Nature 
without  regard  to  the  ultimate  piirpose  to  which  they  are 
to  be  applied.  The  disciples  they  are  in  search  of  are 
such  persons  as  may  be  qualified  not  merely  to  exercise 
power  on  the  superior  planes  of  Nature,  but  to  join  in  the 
great  unselfish  work  of  raising  humanity  to  a  loftier  level 
of  thought  and  feeling  than  that  on  which  the  majority 
of  mankind  still  move.  Eagerness  to  penetrate  the  fas- 
cinating mysteries  of  the  superphysical  world,  however 
well  fortified  by  courage  and  strength,  is  no  adequate 
qualification  for  the  true  occult  initiation.  The  attributes 
which  must  belong  to  the  accepted  pupil,  not  to  speak 
of  the  person  fit  to  be  presented  by  his  own  Master  to 

342     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

the  occult  hierarchy,  and  thus  to  be  received  into  the 
community  of  those  who  have  definitely  entered  on  the 
path,  must  be  such  as  promise  to  render  him  in  process 
of  time  a  co-worker  with  those  whose  duty  it  is  in  the 
scheme  of  the  world's  government,  to  foster  and  provide 
for  the  moral  growth  of  all  mankind.  The  impatience 
that  would  set  a  neophyte  in  antagonism  with — as  he 
might  imagine  it — this  too  exclusive  programme  would 
have  no  effect  whatever  in  helping  him  to  get  on  faster. 
Some  of  the  powers  and  faculties,  the  charm  of  which 
may  have  inflamed  his  imagination,  may  have  been 
acquired  by  some  persons  in  whose  possession  he  may  see 
them,  by  irregular  methods  ill-calculated  to  promote  real 
ulterior  growth,  but  they  will  only  be  conferred  by  Hiero- 
phahts  of  the  great  White  Brotherhood  in  the  wake  of 
those  moral  attributes  on  the  part  of  a  candidate  which 
can  alone  afford  those  who  are  already  Masters  in  the 
school  of  supreme  benevolence  no  less  than  in  that  of 
wisdom,  the  assurance  that  he  will  not  misuse  the  power 
and  enlarged  senses  of  perception,  of  which  he  is  in  search. 
Where  would  be  the  motive  for  endowing  the  public 
at  large  with  information  enabling  anyone  who  desires 
to  do  so,  with  whatever  motive,  to  enter  into  personal 
relations  with  the  Higher  Masters?  The  fact  that  there, 
is  a  path  which  the  spiritual  student  may  tread  is  made 
abundantly  obvious  for  everyone  who  has  common  intel- 
ligence to  apply  to  the  matter  by  the  recent  revival  of 
occult  literature.  The  teaching,  which  in  the  course  of 
that  revival  has  been  explicitly  communicated  to  the  world 
at  large  by  Adept  Masters — for  the  first  time  in  coherent, 
intelligible  language — will  show  new  candidates  for  occult 
progress  the  principles  on  which  such  progress  is  alone 
possible.  If  they  do  the  preliminary  work  of  self-prepara-. 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  343 

tion  Karma  must  infallibly,  in  their  next  lives  at  furthest, 
give  them  an  opportunity  of  taking  the  next  steps  under 
the  direct  help  of  the  Master  to  whom,  in  the  very  act 
of  that  self-preparation,  they  will  have  made  an  uncon- 
scious appeal.  He  may  not  have  been  cognisable  in  the 
first  instance  by  them,  but  they  will  assuredly,  by  the 
occult  reactions  of  their  endeavour,  have  made  them- 
selves perceptible  to  him. 

And  now  let  us  examine  more  closely  into  the  nature 
of  that  self-preparation  that  would  operate  in  the  way 
described.  There  is  no  mystery  or  secret  about  the 
matter.  The  interior  moral  change  required  as  a  quali- 
fication for  actual  initiation,  whether  Eastern  or  Western 
neophytes  are  in  question,  is  easily  defined,  and  has  been 
set  forth  in  some  Eastern  writings  which,  in  a  Western 
shape,  have  filtered  into  current  theosophical  literature. 
But  these  have  been  often  misunderstood  by  readers  led 
to  imagine  that  certain  moral  prescriptions  must  be  obeyed 
to  the  letter  by  all  who  aim  at  entering  on  the  Path. 
Much  has  been  said,  indeed,  about  the  "  Probationary 
Path  "  as  a  condition  that  has  to  be  traversed  before  the 
first  genuine  initiation  can  be  reached.  In  the  earlier 
editions  of  this  book,  even,  the  phrase  was  used  with  that 
significance.  But  in  truth  there  is  no  such  probationary 
period  marked  out  by  the  great  spiritual  powers  who 
preside  over  human  progress.  Entrance  on  the  Path — and 
there  is  only  one  great  Path  to  be  considered — is  a  rela- 
tively simple  matter.  In  past  ages  different  conditions 
may  have  prevailed,  and  with  them  for  the  moment  it  is 
needless  to  concern  ourselves.  At  present,  in  this  Western 
world,  everyone  who  is  seriously  impressed  with  the 
dignity  and  importance  of  the  spiritual  flood  of  teaching 
that  has  been  poured  into  the  world  in  connection  with  the 

344     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

Theosophical  Movement — who  can  in  some  measure 
realise  the  constitution  of  the  Divine  Hierarchy  to  which 
those  we  speak  of  as  Masters  of  Wisdom  belong — all  who 
in  this  way  appreciate  the  Theosophical  Movement  are  on 
•the  Path,  whether  they  know  it  in  the  physical  waking 
life  or  not. 

Of  course,  the  moral  attributes  that  used  to  be  spoken 
•of  as  those  of  the  probationary  path  are  absolutely  neces- 
sary to  provide  for  progress  on  the  Path.  I  do  not  want 
to  belittle  the  efforts  needed  to  secure  successive  initia- 
tions, but  these,  whatever  they  may  be,  will  confront 
each  person  in  turn,  as  previously  acquired  knowledge  and 
strength  will  have  prepared  him  for  each  new  achievement. 

But,  keeping  in  mind  the  idea  that  the  perfect  realisa- 
tion in  consciousness  of  the  qualifications  and  accomplish- 
ments of  the  programme  provided  for  the  aspirant  is  not 
expected  until  an  advanced  stage  of  initiation,  it  may 
be  worth  while  to  survey  them  as  indications  of  the 
interior  condition  to  be  desired  by  candidates  for  real 
advancement  on  the  Path.  That  which  is  alone  necessary 
for  the  beginner  is  that  he  should  manifest  an  honest, 
Wealthy  tendency  in  the  direction  of  the  various  achieve- 
ments specified,  or  at  all  events  if  some  of  the  qualifications 
to  be  described  are  fairly  well  defined  in  his  character  an 
imperfect  attainment  of  others  will  suffice  for  the  im- 
mediate object  in  view.  With  this  comforting  assurance 
in  the  foreground  to  guard  the  aspirant  from  the  dis- 
couragement he  might  feel  if  he  supposed  that  from  the 
outset  occult  authorities  claimed  a  complete  realisation 
in  his  consciousness  of  principles  that  seemed  at  the  first 
glance  compatible  only  with  an  almost  superhuman  degree 
of  moral  exaltation,  we  may  pass  on  to  a  review  of  the 
attributes  towards  which  his  efforts  must  be  directed. 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  345 

English  phrases  may  be  conveniently  employed  to 
describe  these  attributes,  without  necessarily  falling  back 
on  such  as  would  accurately  translate  the  Sanscrit  or  Pali 
terms  used  in  the  East.  The  idea  is  the  all-important 
essence  of  the  phrase,  whatever  language  is  used  to  convey 
it.  And  the  foremost  attribute  towards  which  the  occult 
aspirant  must  endeavour  to  train  his  interior  growth  is 
one  which  seems  to  me  best  defined  by  the  phrase  render- 
ing Allegiance  to  the  Higher  Self. 

To  begin  with,  the  aspirant  must  appreciate  the  signi- 
ficance, in  its  bearing  on  himself,  of  the  occult  teaching 
which  shows  us  how  the  imperishable  element  in  our 
consciousness  is  that  "  Higher  Self  "  which  grows  and 
develops  as  it  manifests  in  physical  life  through  successive 
incarnations.  Each  descent  into  incarnation  gives  rise  to 
the  temporary  aggregation  round  the  Higher  Self  of 
emotions,  desires,  characteristics  of  various  kinds  which 
make  up  the  personality  or  physical  mask  of  the  immortal 
soul — the  earthly  man  as  known  to  other  earthly  men. 
These  do  not  constitute  the  permanent  or  true  being — 
the  "  real  "  being,  as  some  writers  call  it  in  contradistinc- 
tion to  the  "  unreal  "  personality.  Correctly  apprehended, 
the  distinction  is  a  just  one,  though  there  is  a  flavour  of 
absurdity  in  applying  the  term  "  unreal  "  to  the  earthly 
personality — so  very  solid  and  definite  a  manifestation 
while  it  lasts — which  is  irritating  to  people  who  endeavour 
to  use  language  with  nicety.  Anyhow,  it  can  be  seen 
that  the  personality  is  impermanent  as  an  aggregate  of 
characteristics,  though,  of  course,  it  is  all  the  while  infused 
with  and  animated  by  the  permanent  Higher  Self.  If 
the  conception  is  found  embarrassing  it  may  be  approached 
by  dwelling  first  of  all  on  the  obvious  truth  that  the 
physical  body  in  which  the  personality  is  expressed  is  im- 

346     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

permanent  as  far  as  that  is  concerned.  A  very  little  effort 
of  imagination  on  the  part  of  anyone  in  any  sensible 
degree  qualified  to  deal  seriously  with  occult  teaching 
will  enable  him  to  feel  that  he  might  still  be  himself  in 
another  incarnation  with  a  new  body  and  a  different 
worldly  environment.  The  experience  of  those  who 
have  progressed  a  little  way  on  the  path  and  are  enabled 
to  recover  recollections  of  former  lives  will  give  us  the 
assurance  that  in  looking  back  on  these  such  persons  feel 
that  their  earlier  incarnations  were  undoubtedly  them- 
selves, in  spite  of  the  wide  differences  of  bodily  condition 
and  environment  they  may  have  represented.  From  the 
stage  of  mental  growth  in  which  each  bodily  manifesta- 
tion of  the  permanent  self  is  appreciated  as  a  temporary 
phrase  of  being,  no  long  step  has  to  be  made  to  the  realisa- 
tion of  the  subtle  truth  that  some  conditions  of  conscious- 
ness attached  to  the  personality  are  transitory  and  imper- 
manent, as  well  as  the  outward  shape  and  appearance  of 
the  body.  With  that  conception  fairly  grasped  the  student 
has  got  a  good  way  on  towards  the  acquisition  of  the 
first  attribute  of  the  series  under  consideration.  That  is 
to  say,  he  has  only  (!)  to  appreciate  the  real  insigni- 
ficance of  those  objects  of  pursuit  in  life  which  relate 
to  the  impermanent  personality  as  compared  with  those 
which  tend  towards  the  growth  and  invigoration  of  the 
Higher  Self — the  real  being  whose  progress,  once  achieved, 
is  never  lost  in  the  course  of  future  evolution.  No  doubt 
the  complete  appreciation  of  this  great  truth  would  make 
the  incarnate  man  so  sublime  a  philosopher  that  it  seems 
absurd  to  claim  the  attribute  from  an  aspirant  just  setting 
out  on  the  path -of  spiritual  progress.  But  throughout  this 
exposition  the  reader  may  bear  one  important  reservation 
in  mind.  There  will  come  a  time  in  the  course  of  the 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  347 

disciple's  progress  when  the  qualifications  under  considera- 
tion must  be  realised  in  his  consciousness  with  perfection; 
but  in  the  beginning  that  which  is  required  is  a  sound 
appreciation  of  the  ideal  condition  of  feeling  aimed  at, 
an  honest  endeavour  to  realise  it  in  some  measure.  Total 
indifference  to  the  usual  objects  of  worldly  ambition  and 
desire  seems  hardly  possible  for  a  person  actually  living 
in  the  world,  and  as  yet  unconscious  in  his  waking  state 
of  the  higher  spiritual  world  beyond.  On  the  other  hand, 
we  can  see  that  complete  absorption  in  objects  of  worldly 
ambition  and  desire  is  on  the  face  of  things  incompatible 
with  even  the  first  beginnings  of  aspiration  in  the  direction 
of  occult  progress.  No  one  to  whom  the  thirst  for  ease 
and  luxury,  for  wealth,  or  for  the  applause  or  considera- 
tion of  competitors  in  the  worldly  race,  is  the  mainspring 
of  activity  in  this  existence,  is  even  planted  with  his  foot 
on  the  first  rung  of  the  occult  ladder,  even  if  a  certain 
intellectual  appreciation  of  esoteric  teaching  as  probably 
true  may  colour  his  thinking  in  leisure  moments.  From 
the  very  outset  of  any  serious  anxiety  to  ascend  in  the  scale 
of  creation,  and  approximate  towards  communion  with 
those  who  represent  its  altitudes,  there  must  come  about 
a  considerable  loosening  of  the  old  ties  to  worldly  objects. 
These  may  not  fade  away  into  entire  insignificance,  but 
they  begin  to  be  coloured  by  a  sickly  aspect  of  instability, 
and  gradually  the  interior  consciousness  that  conditions  of 
existence  relating  to  planes  of  Nature  quite  divorced  from 
all  physical  necessities  or  enjoyments  are  the  only  objects 
worth  energetic  endeavour,  will  take  hold  of  the  mind. 
The  change  may  be  worked  out  by  different  aspirants  with 
very  different  degrees  of  completeness,  but  it  must  set 
in,  for  the  neophyte  even,  or  for  him  the  slow  course  of 
unhastened  evolution  will  roll  on  through  the  ages,  pass- 

348     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

ing  him  through  an  all  but  interminable  succession  of  lives, 
each  at  the  best  but  a  very  little  better  than  its  predecessor, 
many  of  them  involving  bitter  retrogression,  as  measured 
on  the  scale  of  worldly  welfare,  most  of  them  gloomily 
vindicating  the  pessimist  philosophy,  that  would  indeed 
be  justified  by  human  experience  if  consciousness  on  the 
physical  plane  of  life,  with  all  the  penalties  of  that  condi- 
tion in  constant  operation,  were  the  only  kind  to  which 
the  human  family  had  access.  While  loftier  motives  are 
the  allurement  to  occult  endeavour,  this  thought  should  be 
its  spur.  The  path  may  be  hard  to  travel,  but  in  the  suffer- 
ings it  can  hardly  fail  to  entail  in  the  long  run,  the  only 
alternative  road — that  which  carries  us  through  the  tedious 
course  of  secular  evolution — is  a  good  deal  more  deterrent 
to  the  imagination. 

And  what  is  the  next  attribute  to  be  incorporated  with 
the  character  of  the  occult  student  ?  He  is  aiming,  be  it 
remembered,  at  communion  with  those  who  have  achieved 
a  level  of  individual  exaltation,  which  would  enable  them, 
if  they  thought  fit,  to  enjoy  an  existence  of  beatitude 
which  cannot  be  comprehended  by  persons  on  a  far  in- 
ferior level  of  spiritual  development,  but  is  supremely 
attractive  for  those  by  whom  it  can  be  approached.  In 
foregoing  this  and  remaining  attached  by  incarnation  to 
the  plane  of  physical  life,  they  are  governed  by  no  motive 
referring  in  any  way  to  themselves.  They  are  solely 
prompted  by  the  desire  to  do  good  to  others  irrespective 
•of  any  possible  advantage  ensuing  to  themselves.  In  a 
minor  degree,  therefore,  the  aspirant  who  proposes  ?o 
follow  in  their  footsteps  must  cultivate  the  habit  of  mind 
which  they  exemplify  in  perfection.  He  has,  that  is  to 
•say,  to  aim  at  spiritual  exaltation  not  for  the  sake  of  its 
beatitude,  but  for  that  of  its  opportunities,  in  order  that  he 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  349. 

may  put  himself  in  a  position  to  join  in  the  work  of  elevat- 
ing the  condition  of  humanity  en  masse.  As  in  the  case 
of  the  characteristics  concerned  with  rendering  allegiance 
to  the  Higher  Self,  it  would  be  extravagant  to  contend 
that  the  mere  aspirant  must  definitely  attain  the  moral 
condition  in  which  the  efforts  he  makes  in  the  path  of 
spiritual  progress  are  wholly  prompted  by  desire  to  benefit 
others,  and  completely  exempt  from  even  that  lofty  kind 
of  spiritual  ambition  that  impels  him  to  seek  the  beati- 
tudes of  the  spiritual  planes  of  being;  but  there  must  be 
even  in  his  case  a  recognition  of  the  nobler  motive,  and 
an  application  of  it  to  the  immediate  problem  of  existence. 
He  must  wean  himself  from  the  notion  that  the  attainment 
of  spiritual  beautitude  for  himself  is  the  object  of  endea- 
vour. In  doing  right  he  must  not  allow  the  idea  that  he 
will  ultimately  be  rewarded,  in  some  way,  on  another 
plane  of  existence  for  so  doing,  to  take  hold  of  his  imagina- 
tion. Perhaps  a  good  many  right-thinking  people  may 
habitually  do  right  without  paying  much  attention  to  the 
idea  of  any  consequent  reward.  They  do  the  right  thing 
because  that  is  the  right  thing  to  do,  and  in  so  far  as  they 
really  act  on  that  principle  are  perhaps  further  advanced 
on  the  road  leading  to  fitness  for  definite  initiation  than 
they  are  actually  aware  of.  But  at  the  same  time  the 
ethics  of  Western  civilsation,  when  resting  on  religious 
sanctions  of  any  sort,  are  deeply  infused  with  the  expecta- 
tion of  spiritual  beatitude  in  a  life  to  come.  Occult  teach- 
ing concerning  the  motives  that  should  operate  with  the 
enlightened  aspirant  for  advancement  in  the  hierarchy  of 
Nature,  combines  a  loftier  ideal  with  a  comprehension  of 
the  laws  regulating  such  advancement,  as  derived  from  the 
unity  of  all  consciousness  on  certain  exalted  planes  of 
being.  The  gain  of  one  is  in  a  certain  sense  the  gain  of 

350     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

all;  the  advancing  welfare  of  all  in  a  certain  sense  neces- 
sary to  the  advancement  of  the  one.  The  grasp  of  this  idea 
invests  unselfishness  itself  with  the  character  of  a  scientific 
force,  while  at  the  same  time  showing  that  it  can  only 
become  a  force  when  the  genuine  outcome  of  true  human 
sympathy. 

Some  reasonably  sufficient  assimilation  of  these  ideas 
and  the  feelings  to  which  they  give  rise  constitutes  the 
second  attribute  of  the  aspirant  to  initiation.  It  has  some- 
times been  described  as  indifference  to  the  fruits  of  good 
action,  but  that  is  rather  a  cold  and  colourless  definition.  It 
is  rather  indifference  to  personal  reward  as  a  fruit  of  good 
action  and  might  be  summed  up  as  devotion  to  right  in 
the  abstract.  If  the  attainment  of  this  attribute  seems, 
as  it  probably  will  to  many  European  readers,  a  lesser 
achievement  than  indifference  to  the  usual  objects  of 
worldly  desire,  that  will  only  be  because  of  the  extent  to 
which  so  many  of  us  are  saturated  with  the  conditional 
belief  that  if  there  is  another  state  of  existence  beyond 
this,  devotion  to  right  here  will  give  happiness  there.  Prob- 
ably there  is  an  application  of  this  doctrine — taking  suffi- 
ciently long  views  of  the  future — in  which  it  is  true,  but 
a  future  far  beyond  the  space  of  the  existence  first  tinged 
by  devotion  to  right,  may  claim  from  the  occult  aspirant 
continued  effort  and  continued  sacrifice.  He  has  to  face 
that  possibility  with  cheerful  courage  and  to  feel  that 
it  imposes  no  check  upon  his  enthusiasm,  before  he  can 
be  entitled  to  consider  that  in  the  occult  sense  of  the  phrase 
he  has  attained  devotion  to  right. 

We  may  pass  on  now — in  our  survey  of  the  interior 
growth  which  must  go  on  concurrently  with  the  earlier 
initiation  of  which  the  aspirant  may  be  unconscious  in 
waking  life — to  the  consideration  of  a  group  of  six  quali- 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  351 

fications  or  mental  habits  which  the  aspirant  is  called  on 
to  acquire. 

The  first  of  these  is  sometimes  described  as  Regulation 
of  Thought.  Sometimes  the  qualification  has  been 
described  as  purity  of  thought  or  mastery  over  thought. 
Of  course,  absolute  mastery  over  thought  would  make 
a  man  a  magician  at  once;  while,  with  thought  so  habitu- 
ally purified  that  no  impulse  of  an  evil,  ignoble,  or  un- 
saintly  order  should  ever  cross  the  mind  even  to  be  hunted 
out,  the  personality  so  exalted  would  be  almost  ready  for 
Nirvana  on  the  strength  of  that  condition  of  things  alone. 
But  however  unlikely  it  may  be  that  any  mere  aspirant 
to  occult  progress  should  realise  the  qualification  entirely, 
no  one  can  persevere  in  the  effort  to  make  progress  if  his 
thinking  should  remain  entirely  undisciplined,  the  sport  of 
any  breeze  of  circumstance  that  might  eddy  round  him. 
The  control  and  regulation  of  thought  is  an  enormous 
task  on  which  the  energies  of  the  occult  student  will  be 
bent,  in  many  various  ways,  for  a  long  time,  but  he  must 
make  a  beginning  on  it  from  the  outset  of  his  self-prepara- 
tion. In  doing  this  he  is  beginning  in  a  very  subtle  way 
that  training  of  the  will  which  is  an  all-important  process 
as  he  advances  further.  Thought  is  under  the  control 
of  the  will  to  an  extent  that  exoteric  psychology  does  not 
always  recognise,  and  there  are  manifold  reasons  why  the 
aspirant  to  initiation  must  be  able  to  hold  his  thoughts 
fairly  well  in  hand  before  he  is  in  a  position  to  claim 
admittance  to  a  fellowship  in  which  thought  is  apt  to  be  as 
manifest  to  those  around,  as  the  colour  of  the  clothes  A 
man  might  wear  would  be  manifest  to  ordinary  observa- 
tion. 

And  independently  of  this,  regulation  of  thought  in 

352     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

the  aspirant  is  regarded  from  the  occult  point  of  view  as 
the  prelude  to  the  second  qualification  of  the  series  before 
us — regulation  of  conduct.  Taken  thus,  the  first  and 
second  qualifications  will  perhaps  seem  to  some  readers 
presented  in  the  wrong  order.  It  may  look  like  putting 
the  cart  before  the  horse  to  postpone  the  reform  of  one's 
action  till  after  the  reform  of  one's  thinking  on  the  sub- 
ject. And  as  applied  to  the  grosser  vices  of  common  life 
— if  these  were  the  matters  the  occultist  had  to  regulate, 
self-restraint  in  action  would  certainly  have  to  be  accom- 
plished before  anyone  could  talk  seriously  about  regulat- 
ing thought  in  such  a  way  as  to  eliminate  from  his  nature 
the  desires  that  would  have  to  be  self-restrained.  But  the 
student  who  has  already  rendered  allegiance  to  his  Higher 
Self,  and  attained  devotion  to  right,  even  in  a  degree  that 
may  be  far  from  perfection  in  either  respect,  need  hardly 
be  thought  of  as  a  person  under  the  dominion  of  the  grosser 
vices.  The  conduct  to  be  regulated  is  that  which  has  to 
do  with  the  finer  problems  of  life  and  the  subtler  tempta- 
tions. Noblesse  oblige.  The  conduct  of  an  aspirant  to 
initiations  which  will  bring  him  into  conscious  relations 
with  beings  so  exalted  as  those  on  the  higher  levels  of  the 
occult  hierarchy,  should  clearly  bear  some  fair  correspon- 
dence with  the  character  of  his  aspirations.  Here  there  is- 
no  question  of  rank  weeds  to  be  pulled  up,  but  of  in- 
fluences to  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  aspirant's  nature  of 
such  an  order  that  conduct  may  not  only  be  negatively  but 
positively  in  creditable  harmony  with  his  ideals.  With 
that  idea  to  explain  the  arrangement  it  will  seem  reason- 
able enough  that  regulation  of  thought  is  treated  as  the 
first,  and  regulation  of  conduct  as  the  second  of  the  quali- 
fications. 

The  third  has  to  do  with  a  change  of  feeling  in  regard 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  353 

to  religious  matters  which  has  very  different  significance 
for  different  people.  So  many  beautiful  emotions  are  often 
interwoven  around  religious  formulas  and  creeds,  even 
after  these  have  diverged  a  good  deal  from  the  pure  teach- 
ing out  of  which  they  may  have  sprung,  that  the  dis- 
entanglement of  the  truth  from  unfortunate  accretions  of 
thought  gathered  round  it,  is  sometimes  in  such  cases  an 
almost  painful  process.  And  yet  it  must  be  recognised 
that  the  aspirant  in  search  of  real  knowledge  concerning 
the  profound  inner  verities  of  spiritual  science  cannot 
expect  to  carry  to  the  end  of  his  undertaking  the  whole 
burden  of  the  crude  popular  beliefs  which  make  up  the 
exoteric  religion,  whatever  it  may  be,  in  which  his  devo- 
tional instincts  have  first  been  nurtured.  For  the  tender- 
nesses of  thought,  so  to  speak,  to  which  that  nurture  may 
have  given  rise,  occult  teaching  in  its  turn  is  profoundly 
tender.  Genuine  Theosophy  is  far  more  interested  in 
tracing  the  underlying  truth  through  its  various  disguises 
in  all  the  great  religions  of  the  world  than  in  dissecting 
their  several  errors;  and  back  through  the  symbology  that 
he  has  been  used  to,  until  he  reaches  the  fundamental  truth, 
each  student  directed  by  a  teacher  who  correctly  gives 
effect  to  the  spirit  in  which  the  Higher  Masters  of  wisdom 
deal  with  religious  attachments,  would  be  encouraged  to 
choose  his  course.  But  it  is  plain  enough  that  advanced 
spiritual  culture  must  eventually  enable  the  initiate  in 
occult  knowledge  to  look  on  all  external  forms  of  religious 
belief  with  a  grand  and  tolerant  impartiality.  That  Higher 
Self  to  which  the  neophyte  in  occultism  renders  an  allegi- 
ance belongs  of  its  nature  to  a  realm  of  consciousness  far 
exalted  above  ecclesiastical  systems,  whether  of  Europe 
or  Asia.  The  personality  even  of  the  occult  student  shares 
that  exaltation  as  he  advances  in  no  inconsiderable  degree. 

24 

354     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

The  acquisition  of  this  sublime  sort  of  tolerance,  which  is 
something  more  than  the  mere  converse  of  persecution, 
constitutes  the  third  qualification  of  the  series  we  are 
considering.  It  is  that  attitude  of  mind  in  which  a  man 
clings  to  the  essence  of  spiritual  truth,  and  is  no  longer 
in  the  mental  fetters  of  any  hard  and  fast  dogma  or  creed. 
Of  course,  there  are  some  among  the  candidates  for  occult 
initiation  who  have  this  qualification  in  pretty  complete 
development  to  start  with.  The  most  intense  agnosticism 
may  be  compatible  with  readiness  to  accept  spiritual 
teaching  which  approaches  us  with  adequate  guarantees, 
and  in  such  cases  the  growth  of  the  mind,  which  is 
required  at  the  stage  of  progress  we  are  dealing  with,  is 
one  which  will  rather  invest  the  student  with  a  newly 
developed  respect  for  external  religions,  for  the  sake  of 
the  inner  truths  they  embody,  than  oppose  itself  to  a 
bigotry  which,  by  the  hypothesis,  has  no  hold  upon  his 
thinking.  But  for  others  the  old  religious  forms,  phrases 
and  terminology  are  not  only  dear  for  the  sake  of  the 
spiritual  truth  they  may  endeavour  to  set  forth;  they  are 
dear  for  their  own  sake,  for  that  of  innumerable  associa- 
tions bound  up  with  them,  and  thus  for  some  persons  they 
may  be  a  stumbling-block  rather  than  an  aid  to  progress. 
No  one  whose  mind  is  cast  in  a  religious  mould  can  ever 
have  been  asked  by  a  truly  qualified  occult  teacher  to 
break  away  from  the  religion  to  which  he  is  naturally 
attached.  But  he  will  purify  it  for  himself  as  he  proceeds, 
and  find  himself  less  and  less  enslaved  to  its  outer  husk, 
whether  of  form  or  doctrine,  and  the  advance  he  may 
make  in  the  direction  of  this  manifestly  higher  view  of 
the  subject  is  the  measure  of  the  extent  to  which  he 
invests  himself  with  the  third  qualification,  which  may 
thus  be  described  as  freedom  from  bigotry — freedom 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  355 

from  any  exaggerated  attachment  to  any  one  body  of 
doctrinal  belief,  whether  it  has  its  origin  in  the  East  or 
the  West. 

The  fourth  qualification  towards  which  the  candidate 
has  to  aspire,  is  that  state  of  mind  in  which  a  man  feels 
no  resentment  in  respect  of  worldly  wrong  or  ill-usage 
from  which  he  may  suffer.  On  the  face  of  things,  this 
qualification,  in  perfection,  would  be  a  very  sublime 
attribute,  and  I  need  hardly  stop  to  repeat  that  as  regards 
the  occult  candidate  attempting  a  preparatory  self-culture, 
so  divine  a  characteristic  in  entire  perfection  would  hardly 
be  expected.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  can  be  more 
fatally  incompatible  with  the  aspirations  of  a  person 
aiming  at  initiation  than  a  tendency  of  character  which 
would  be  the  opposite  of  the  qualification  in  question. 
For  one  thing  it  will  be  obvious  that  the  guardians  of 
humanity,  who  are  themselves,  above  all  things,  the  ex- 
ponents of  compassion  and  unselfishness,  can  hardly  be 
expected  to  extend  a  welcome  to  pupils  who,  however  well 
qualified  in  other  respects,  might  be  capable  of  that  worst 
of  all  selfishness — revenge.  Before  the  powers  that  accrue 
to  an  initiate  from  the  knowledge  to  which  he  is  admitted, 
can  safely  be  placed  in  his  hands,  it  must  be  reasonably 
certain  that  he  is  not  the  kind  of  person  to  use  them  as 
the  weapons  of  mundane  anger.  From  the  beginning  he 
must  lean  towards  the  frame  of  mind  in  which  he  will  not 
even  feel  the  resentment  to  which  he  must,  at  all  events, 
train  himself  not  to  give  way.  And  for  that  matter,  an 
honest  development  in  the  direction  of  the  first  qualifica- 
tion will  go  far  towards  simplifying  the  acquisition  of  that 
under  notice.  In  proportion  to  the  extent  to  which  we 
really  fix  our  aspirations  on  the  things  which  concern  the 
Higher  Self/ and  dissociate  our  longings  from  the  com- 

24* 

356     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

mon  objects  of  worldly  ambition,  we  shall  be  less  liable 
to  brood  over  resentful  feelings  against  those  who  may 
have  come  in  the  way  of  our  attainment  thereof.  I  need 
not  expand  the  hint  into  a  moral  essay,  but  concentrating 
the  thought  instead  of  enlarging  it,  may  suggest  as  a  con- 
veniently concise  description  of  the  fourth  qualification — 
Forbearance. 

The  fifth  qualification,  like  the  third,  is  a  characteristic 
almost  instinctive  with  some  natures,  extremely  difficult 
of  acquisition  by  others.  It  has  been  described  as  incapa- 
bility of  being  turned  aside  from  one's  path  by  temptation. 
With  persons  of  constitutionally  resolved  and  steadfast 
temperament,  the  motives  for  entering  on  the  occult  path, 
once  appreciated,  could  never  lose  their  weight.  Others 
of  more  enthusiastic  and  impulsive  character  might  be 
turned  aside  more  easily  without  having  been  less  sincere 
at  the  outset.  But  for  all  who  have  made  any  decided 
progress  in  the  acquisition  of  the  tendencies  already 
reviewed,  it  must,  to  say  the  least,  be  growing  probable 
that  faithfulness  to  the  lofty  purpose  in  view  will  be 
strengthened  into  something  like  a  constitutional  attribute. 
It  must  clearly  be  assumed  to  have  thus  established  itself 
as  a  predominant  feature  of  the  candidate's  interior  nature 
before  the  preparatory  stage  of  the  great  process  is  over. 
The  one  word  "  Steadfastness  "  will  sufficiently  denote 
the  phase  of  character  in  question. 

And  now  we  come  to  the  last  of  the  qualifications  in 
the  probationary  series — confidence  in  the  power  of  the 
occult  Master  to  teach  the  truth;  in  that  of  the  candidate 
himself  to  grasp  it  in  all  its  vast  complexity,  and  to  wield 
the  powers  knowledge  may  bring  in  its  train,  as  others 
have  been  able  to  do  this  before  him. 

The  final  qualification  thus  treated  as  among  the  pre- 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  357 

paratory  attributes  to  be  acquired  by  the  mere  aspirant  to 
initiation,  is  very  significant.  How  does  it  come  to  pass 
that  a  "  Master  "  appears  suddenly  on  the  scene  ?  Up  to 
this  moment  all  the  efforts  contemplated  are  in  the  nature 
of  self-preparation,  and  by  the  whole  hypothesis  the 
process  is  one  that  the  neophyte  must  undertake  for  him- 
self, before  undertaking  which  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that 
he  will  be  in  conscious  relations  with  any  of  the  higher 
teachers.  But,  as  already  explained,  it  is  quite  certain  that 
at  a  very  early  stage  of  the  beginner's  loyal  effort  to  accom- 
plish the  interior  development  which  must  precede  his  con- 
scious introduction  to  higher  knowledge  and  fellowship, 
he  will  attract  the  attention  of  someone  among  the  higher 
teachers.  For  a  long  while  he  himself  may  remain  entirely 
unaware  of  this,  but  if  he  fairly  well  realises  the  two  great 
inaugural  attributes  and  trains  himself  with  the  earlier 
qualifications,  he  will  make  the  acquaintance  of  the 
Master,  to  whom  he  naturally  gravitates,  before  the  time 
comes  at  which  the  sixth  assumes  practical  importance 
for  him. 

Of  course,  it  must  always  be  remembered  that  nothing 
in  connection  with  such  a  work  as  this  is  done  in  a  hurry. 
The  earlier  attributes  will  not  be  acquired  even  in  the 
degree  sufficient  for  the  beginner  under  the  sudden  im- 
pulse of  a  new  emotion.  Such  interior  changes  ensue  from 
long  habits  of  thought  by  degrees,  or  even  if  some  natures 
are  so  constituted  that  a  suddenly  acquired  conviction  of 
enthusiasm  may  also  be  held  fast,  the  Master  whose  atten- 
tion was  engaged  would  let  time  elapse,  if  only  for  the 
sake  of  testing  its  persistence,  before  he  took  any  steps  that 
would  illuminate  the  understanding  of  the  pupil  concern- 
ing his  own  identity. 

Indeed,  there  would  be  another  motive  for  delaying 

358     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

that  illumination.  By  the  time  the  habits  of  thought,  the 
interior  growth,  manifest  to  the  Master's  observation, 
which  were  giving  rise  to  the  acquisition  of  the  earlier 
attributes,  were  fairly  developed,  a  state  of  things  would 
have  set  in  bringing  the  aspirant  into  new  and  very  import- 
ant relations  with  the  mighty  powers  in  the  background  of 
the  world's  affairs,  by  whose  conscious  agency  the  law  of 
Karma  is  applied  to  each  individual  of  the  human  family. 
The  desire  to  tread  the  Path  of  Holiness  which  is  expressed 
by  progress  in  initiation,  must  necessarily  include,  if  it  is 
intelligently  entertained,  a  desire  to  close  once  for  all  the 
account  of  evil  doing  in  the  past  which  may  stand  as  an 
impediment  in  the  way.  It  is  practically  an  appeal  to  the 
Lords  of  Karma  that  they  may  hasten  the  process  by 
which  the  aspirant  is — slowly  in  the  ordinary  course  of 
things — expiating  the  mistakes  or  misdoings  of  past  lives. 
As  such  an  appeal  might  be  made  in  ignorance  of  all  it 
might  mean,  we  may  assume  as  probable  that  it  would  not 
be  fully  answered  if  the  account  of  the  past  were  so  heavy 
a  one  that  it  could  hardly  be  disposed  of  in  one  life.  But 
the  greater  likelihood  lies  in  the  opposite  direction.  The 
aspirant  for  spiritual  progress  may,  perhaps,  have  a  good 
deal  to  answer  for  as  regards  Karma  engendered  in  past 
lives,  but  still  he  is  not  likely  to  be  among  the  most  deeply 
besmirched  of  his  race.  So  it  is  probable  that  some 
rearrangement  of  the  programme  of  his  life's  destiny  may 
enable  him  to  go  through  at  once  whatever  inevitable 
suffering  awaits  him,  to  the  end  that  in  the  next  following 
incarnation  there  may  be  no  impediment  in  the  way  of  his 
progress.  So  this  is  generally  the  result  of  a  serious  attempt 
to  get  upon  the  path  of  occult  development.  In  one  way 
or  another  the  aspirant  finds  it  unexpectedly  thorny.  The 
trouble  he  encounters  may  not  necessarily  seem  a  direct 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  359- 

consequence  of  his  spiritual  efforts.  More  probably  it  takes 
the  shape  of  mundane  distress  or  suffering  of  some  kind 
or  another,  loss  of  fortune,  friends,  or  health,  as  the  case 
may  be.  And  such  misfortunes  then  become  the  auto- 
matically established  ordeals  which  constitute  the  reai 
trials  of  the  aspirant's  steadfastness.  The  imperfect 
accounts  of  initiation  as  carried  out  in  more  primitive  ages 
of  the  world  that  have  come  down  to  our  time,  describe 
artificial  ordeals  and  temptations  put  in  the  neophyte's  way, 
and  something  of  this  kind  may  have  actually  been 
arranged  for  in  Ancient  Egypt,  but  even  there  the  natural 
Karmic  tests  and  trials  of  perseverance  must  have  been 
the  more  important,  and  at  all  events  it  is  to  their  by  no 
means  tender  mercies  that  the  modern  aspirant  must  look 
forward  to  being  confided.  If  the  irritation  and  im- 
patience to  which  they  may  give  rise  have  the  effect  of 
turning  aside  his  thoughts  and  anxieties  from  the  path  of 
progress  on  which  he  has  sought  to  enter,  then  he  will  have 
failed  for  that  life,  at  all  events,  in  accomplishing  the  fifth 
qualification,  and  his  responsibility  will  not  be  unduly 
aggravated  by  such  disclosures  or  interior  illumination  as- 
would  bring  the  sixth  into  question. 

Then  in  the  fulness  of  time  the  aspirant — no  longer 
to  be  described  by  that  word  alone — is  conducted  by  the 
Master  by  whom  his  earlier  progress  has  been  watched 
over  and  guided,  to  a  great  result.  He  passes  a  threshold 
beyond  which  he  finds  himself  in  a  certain  sense  a  member 
of  the  great  Fraternity  of  Holiness.  It  is  true  that  from 
one  point  of  view  he  has  but  then  for  the  first  time  begun 
to  tread  the  path  of  true  occult  development.  Many  lives 
may  be  spent  in  the  efforts  and  acquirements  which  lead 
to  Adeptship.  From  that  level  the  horizons  before  him, 
v/hen  he  ultimately  gains  perception  of  them,  will  widen 

360     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

in  a  manner  which  no  one  can  expect  to  realise  with 
exactitude  beforehand;  but  at  all  events  the  aspirant  who 
crosses  the  boundary  of  the  first  great  initiation  has  gained 
something  that  can  never  be  lost,  whatever  may  happen 
to  him  in  the  future,  whatever  difficulties  he  may  encounter 
as  he  proceeds.  He  can  never  in  the  nature  of  things  slip 
back  to  be  what  he  was  before  the  all-important  change 
was  wrought  in  his  nature  first  by  his  own  persistent  effort, 
and  at  last  fixed  by  his  acceptance  at  the  hands  of  the 
governing  hierarchy  of  the  world. 

The  initiation  which  thus  carries  the  aspirant  once  for 
all  across  the  chasm  dividing  ordinary  humanity  from  the 
occult  world  has  hitherto  been  called,  in  theosophical 
literature,  the  "  Sohan  "  initiation.  That  name 
will  serve  for  the  present.  The  attainment  is  not 
a  question  of  psychic  characteristics.  It  may  frequently 
happen  that  it  is  taken  on  the  higher  planes  of  conscious- 
ness without  the  incarnate  personality  remembering  or 
knowing  anything  about  the  matter.  But  at  all  events  it 
is  altogether  a  question  of  moral  and  ethical  development 
and  will  not  be  hastened  one  day,  in  the  absence  of  such 
development,  by  the  possession  of  psychic  senses  which 
may  be  the  Karmic  fruit  of  efforts  to  penetrate  the 
mysteries  of  Nature,  undertaken  (perhaps  in  past  lives) 
from  motives  quite  out  of  harmony  with  the  lofty  altruism 
of  the  genuine  disciple  of  the  Masters.  Psychic  faculties 
grown  in  this  unhealthy  way  are  far  more  likely  to 
entangle  their  possessor  with  evil  relationships  on  the 
occult  planes  of  existence  than  to  help  him  on  the  real 
upward  path. 

Not  even  on  the  attainment  of  the  Sohan  initiation  does 
the  development  of  psychic  faculties,  such  as  will  put 
the  waking  incarnate  man  into  possession  of  those  keys 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  361 

of  knowledge  confided  to  him  at  his  initiation,  become 
the  foremost  object  of  his  appointed  training.     His  work 
as  regards  his  own  training — though  he  will  now,  when 
actively  functioning  in  the  Higher  Self,  have  plenty  of 
other  work  to  do  under  proper  direction,  the  nature  of 
which  cannot  easily  be  comprehended  from  the  point  of 
view  of  ordinary  mundane  thinking — will  still  be  primarily 
concerned  with  the  perfection  of  his  moral  attributes.    For 
one  thing,  now  he  is  on  the  true  path  of  initiation,  he  will  be 
required  to  attain  with  absolute  completeness  the  characteris- 
tics which  are  but  imperfectly  realised  during  the  earlier 
period.  The  result  to  be  attained,  indeed,  is  now  approached 
in  a  somewhat  different  way.   In  the  course  of  his  progress 
through   the   various  stages  of  initiation   leading  up   to 
Adeptship,  the  disciple  is  not  spoken  of  as  acquiring  such 
and  such  attributes,  but  is  called  on  to  cast  off  various 
""  fetters  "  which  attach  him  to  the  lower  levels  of  exist- 
ence.   In  some  Eastern  books  these  fetters  are  enumerated 
in  a  definite  order,  but  I  do  not  think  the  purposes  of  this 
explanation  would  be  served  by  an  examination  of  the 
series.    From  the  point  of  view  of  ordinary  life  their  exact 
significance  in  the  occult  world  would  probably  be  mis- 
apprehended.    But  it  is  none  the  less  interesting  to  survey 
the  stages  of  this  higher  path,  which  are  better  under- 
stood even  in  the  outer  world  by  those  who  are  in  any  true 
sense  occult  students,  than  many  Theosophists  may  be 
aware  of. 

Without  suspecting  what  he  is  unconsciously  dealing 
with,  Prof.  Max  Muller  mentions  certain  steps  of  initia- 
tion in  one  of  his  translations.  In  a  note  to  Chapter  xii. 
of  his  "  Dammapada  "  he  writes  :  "  .  .  .  Arhat  being 
the  highest  degree  of  the  four  orders  of  Ariyas,  viz., 
Srotaapanna,  Sakridagamin,  Anagamin  and  Arhat.'' 

362     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

It  is  quite  unnecessary  for  the  European  student  to  burden 
his  memory  with  Oriental  terms  of  this  kind. 

Long  intervals  of  time  may  separate  the  passage  from 
one  of  these  degrees  to  the  next.  But,  provided  the  Karma 
of  the  past  is  favourable,  progress  may  be  very  much  more 
rapid. 

To  guard  against  a  misunderstanding  that  would  be 
fatal  to  the  proper  appreciation  of  the  system  I  am 
describing,  it  is  necessary  here  to  remind  readers  familiar 
with  certain  frequently  repeated  statements  in  occult 
literature  concerning  the  duration  of  the  intervals  between 
incarnate  lives,  that  such  statements  relate  to  the  normal 
progress  of  humanity  along  the  majestic  course  of  ordinary 
evolution.  Once  "  entered  on  the  stream  "  new  condi- 
tions come  into  play,  and  the  physical  lives  required  for 
the  training  of  the  disciple  may  follow  in  rapid  and  un- 
broken succession.  Again,  in  order  that  the  whole  position 
may  be  properly  apprehended,  it  is  necessary  to  explain  that 
the  course  of  initiation  described  so  far  is  that  which  leads 
the  aspirant  directly  up  into  the  great  "  White  Lodge,"  as 
it  is  sometimes  called — into  close  and  immediate  relations 
with  those  spiritual  beings  more  exalted  in  nature  than 
even  the  full  Adepts,  who  constitute  what  may  be  thought 
of  as  the  governing  hierarchy  of  this  planet.  There  are 
other  paths  of  occult  initiation  by  which  neophytes  may 
be  enabled  to  progress  some  distance  along  the  avenues  of 
advancement  leading  to  power  and  knowledge.  Concern- 
ing some  of  these  the  less  said  the  better,  except  for  the 
consideration  that  to  comprehend  good  aright  it  may  be 
necessary  to  bear  in  mind  the  existence  of  evil.  A  resolute 
and  sufficiently  reckless  determination  may  enable  the 
aspirant  to  knowledge  concerning,  and  power  over,  the 
occult  forces  of  Nature,  even  to  acquire  considerable 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  363, 

control  of  them,  without  fitting  himself  by  moral  develop- 
ment to  use  them  for  the  good  of  humanity  at  large. 
Under  the  guidance  of  purely  selfish  motives,  the  neophyte 
who  is  unfortunate  enough  to  be  able  to  purchase  help  from 
corresponding  Masters  may  get  on  to  levels  of  knowledge 
and  power  corresponding  to  some  of  the  stages  of  pro- 
gress described  above  as  the  four  steps  on  the  true  path. 
This  paper  is  not  concerned  to  trace  the  ultimate  spiritual 
consequences  of  that  sort  of  progress  in  what  is  technically 
called  Black  Magic;  but  the  point  to  remember  in  this 
connection  is  that  a  good  deal  of  psychic  and  astral  develop- 
ment going  on  in  the  world  under  the  guidance  of  various 
old  schools,  or  relatively  modern  societies,  of  occultism,  is 
not  necessarily  Black  Magic,  though  it  may  lie  apart  from 
the  path  of  initiation  leading  directly  upward  to  the  White 
Lodge.  There  was  a  time  when  the  White  Lodge  itself 
claimed  progress  in  psychic  development  from  its  candi- 
dates as  the  first  qualification  for  entrance  on  the  path. 
That  system  prevailed  during  the  Atlantean  period.  But 
with  the  great  spiritual  impulse  imparted  to  the  Fifth  Race 
by  its  naturally  appointed  Teacher  when  his  time  came, 
a  change  was  introduced  under  his  direction  in  the  rules 
of  initiation,  and  the  ethical  or  moral  qualifications  were 
taken  first,  in  accordance  with  the  scheme  set  forth  in  the 
earlier  part  of  the  present  statement. 

The  precise  nature  of  the  acquirements  which  lead  to 
actual  Adeptship  cannot,  as  I  have  already  said,  be  dealt 
with  on  the  physical  plane  of  consciousness  alone.  It 
would  be  as  reasonable  to  attempt  a  treatise  on  meta- 
physics in  words  of  one  syllable.  Splendid  as  the  modern 
achievements  of  the  human  mind  in  many  directions  may 
seem  when  they  are  compared  with  its  conditions  at  ruder 
periods,  they  are  merely  concerned  with  one  aspect  of 

364     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

Nature,  with  one  plane  of  consciousness,  and  the  Adept 
has  to  concern  himself  with  several.  In  terms  of  one 
plane  it  is  impossible  to  describe  the  tasks  of  another.  And 
this  difficulty  standing  in  our  way  before  we  even  reach  in 
imagination  the  Arhat  level  of  progress,  we  are  all  the 
more  debarred  from  attempting  to  analyse  the  functions 
and  attributes  ultimately  exercised  and  acquired  by  some 
of  the  great  Adepts  who  eventually  enter  into  mysterious 
union  with  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  cosmos,  and 
become  in  a  certain  sense  their  expression — their  radiant 
point,  so  to  speak,  through  which  the  Divine  idea  thence- 
forth flows.  Appreciating  nothing  more  in  this  connec- 
tion than  the  broad  principle  that  there  is  no  limit  to  the 
upward  progress  of  humanity  towards  perfection  and  the 
infinitudes  of  wisdom,  we  may  leave  the  subject  at  the 
threshold  of  mysteries  it  would  be  irreverent  to  handle  at 
this  stage  of  the  world's  progress  in  a  treatise  designed  for 
publication.  Of  one  spiritual  rank,  higher  even  than  that 
of  the  Arhat,  it  may,  however,  be  possible  to  speak  defi- 
nitely, because  it  represents  a  condition  of  evolution 
which,  stupendous  as  its  significance  may  be,  is  neverthe- 
less the  theoretical  goal  of  the  whole  human  race  in  this 
Manvantara.  All  will  certainly  not  attain  it,  and  those 
who  do  so  in  the  ordinary  course  of  evolution  will  only 
reach  it  in  the  course  of  millions  of  ages  and  beyond  an 
immeasurable  vista  of  lives,  in  reference  to  which  on  their 
own  merits  the  doctrines  of  pessimistic  philosophy  would 
but  too  generally  apply;  but  for  everyone  who  may  read 
these  pages  it  is  theoretically  attainable. 

The  rank  in  the  hierarchy  of  Adeptship  above  that 
of  the  Arhat,  which  we  may  now  endeavour  in  some 
measure  to  comprehend,  is  attained  by  the  Arhat,  after 
what  periods  of  effort  and  delay  we  need  not  now  attempt 

INITIATION  IN  THE  PRESENT  DAY  365 

to  account  for,  when  he  casts  off  the  final  "  fetter  "  which 
impedes  him  at  that  stage.  The  fetter  in  question  is. 
simply  "  avidya  " — ignorance — and  the  use  of  the  word  in 
such  a  connection  may  help  to  show  how  easily  the  ter- 
minology of  the  higher  "  Path  "  may  be  misunderstood. 
"  Ignorance  "  for  most  of  us  has  a  meaning  derived  from 
comparison  of  certain  states  of  mind  with  ordinary  nine- 
teenth-century culture,  taken  as  the  standard  of  wisdom 
and  knowledge.  The  "  ignorance "  of  the  Adept  is 
measured  against  absolute  knowledge  of  all  that  concerns 
the  system  of  evolution  and  the  chain  of  planets  to  which 
he  belongs.  When  he  has  at  last — probably  through  many 
protracted  incarnations  taken  by  his  own  will  and  choice 
— attained  a  complete  mastery  of  all  the  wisdom  and 
knowledge  this  scheme  of  evolution  can  afford,  he  is  ready 
to  pass  on. 

When  he  is  in  a  position  to  survey  the  whole  process 
on  which  the  human  family  is  launched,  from  its  begin- 
ning in  the  remote  past  to  its  conclusion  in  the  almost 
immeasurably  distant  future;  when  all  the  natural  laws 
and  forces  which  play  round  it  lie  within  his  comprehen- 
sion and  grasp,  whether  they  are  operative  on  the  physical 
plane  with  its  wonderful  complexity  of  molecules  and 
forces,  or  on  those  other  planes  invisible  to  ordinary  sight 
which  interpenetrate  it  or  surround  it  and  are  more 
bewildering  in  their  complexity  still;  when  all  the  myriad 
enigmas  of  good  and  evil,  of  sin  and  sorrow,  and  hope, 
are  resolved  into  intelligible  meaning,  and  neither  the  earth 
below,  nor  the  heavens  above,  nor  life,  nor  death,  hold  any 
riddles  from  his  understanding,  the  Adept  is  qualified  to 
attain  the  final  rank  in  the  vast  concatenation  of  progress 
we  have  been  surveying,  and  is  then  known  to  initiates  as 
"  Aseka."  It  is  by  virtue  of  some  appreciation,  as  far  as  it 

366     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

goes,  of  the  place  in  Nature  which  the  Aseka  Adepts 
occupy,  that  their  pupils,  whether  in  a  humble  or  advanced 
degree,  entertain  the  assurance  they  always  feel  in  refer- 
ence to  occult  teachings  definitely  received  from  such  a 
source. 

CHAPTER    XV 
IRREGULAR  PSYCHIC  PROGRESS 

NATURAL  psychic  faculties  have  been  for  a 
long  time  under  observation  one  way  or  another, 
in  the  ordinary  world,  but  this  observation  has 
been  carried  on  in  such  an  irregular,  spasmodic,  unscientific 
fashion  that  none  of  the  many  writers  who  have  been  con- 
cerned in  the  investigation  have  arrived  at  any  satisfactory 
conclusion.  Very  often  psychic  faculties  have  been  found 
in  persons  afflicted  with  various  physical  maladies,  and 
lookers-on  have  jumped  to  the  entirely  erroneous  con- 
clusion that  in  their  nature  such  faculties  are  associated 
with  diseased  conditions  of  the  body.  The  remarkable 
case  of  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  described  by  Dr.  Kerner, 
may  serve  as  a  typical  instance.  Frederica  Hauffe,  the 
Seeress  in  question,  was  born  in  the  first  year  of  the  nine- 
teenth century,  at  the  little  village  of  Prevorst  in  Wiirtem- 
burg.  Her  wonderful  clairvoyance  and  remarkable  visions 
connected  with  other  planes  of  Nature  were  associated 
with  conditions  of  extreme  bodily  suffering,  culminating  in 
early  death.  The  strange  and  little  understood  nervous 
condition,  vaguely  described  as  hysteria,  is  again  so  fre- 
quently found  in  association  with  the  sensitiveness  which 
renders  some  people  available  for  mesmeric  experiments, 
that  such  capacity  is  again  set  down  by  virtue  of  a  too 
hasty  generalisation  to  some  obscure  disease  of  the  nervous 
system,  and  recent  medical  inquirers  in  France,  out  of 
whose  researches  has  arisen  the  commonplace  view  of  what 
is  called  hypnotism,  have  been  themselves  concerned  so 
generally  with  experiments  in  hospitals  that  they  have 
communicated  to  the  world  at  large  the  ever-current  delu- 
sion that  psychic  faculty  is  a  pathological  condition. 

367 

368     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

Again,  looking  at  the  subject  in  another  way,  common- 
place impressions  connected  with  the  matter  are  largely 
coloured  by  the  estimation  in  which  the  world  at  large 
holds  the  ordinary  spiritualistic  medium.  The  ignorant 
section  of  the  world  at  large  simply  regards  the  medium 
as  an  impostor,  who  practises  by  conjuring  tricks  on  the 
credulity  of  his  companions.  Those  who  go  a  little  further 
into  the  subject  know  that  even  though  imposition  may 
be  mixed  up  with  the  mediumship  which  is  purchasable, 
so  to  speak,  in  the  market,  even  behind  much  of  thisy 
some  abnormal  faculty  or  susceptibility  is  to  be  found. 
Many  people  have  the  experience  of  mediumship  in 
private  life  under  conditions  which  preclude  any  suspicions 
of  imposture,  and  thus  afford  satisfactory  evidence 
that  communication  is  possible  between  beings  on  this 
plane  of  life  and  those  on  others  which  are  intangible 
and  invisible. 

Mediumship  itself  is  manifested,  wherever  it  is  genuine, 
under  so  many  different  aspects  that  it  seems  to  defy  scien- 
tific analysis,  and  where  psychic  faculty  takes  the  shape  of 
sensitiveness  to  mesmeric  influence,  that  again  runs  into  all 
manner  of  different  manifestations,  clearly  showing  for 
experimentalists  along  this  line  that  the  human  creature 
is  psychically  a  far  more  complicated  organism  than  it  is 
supposed  to  be  from  the  physical  point  of  view,  though  we 
are  left  without  any  clue  to  a  comprehension  of  the  reasons 
why  one  sensitive  will  be  able  to  read  in  a  closed  book 
put  at  the  back  of  his  head,  while  another,  quite  unable  to 
do  this,  will  have  visions  of  other  states  of  existence,  or 
be  enabled  to  cognise  events  on  the  physical  plane  at  a 
distance.  Then  it  seems  quite  a  matter  of  chance,  as 
regards  individual  sensitives,  whether  their  faculties  come 
into  play  in  the  waking  state  or  only  in  the  mesmeric 

IRREGULAR  PSYCHIC  PROGRESS  369 

trance.  Some  who  develop  the  so-called  psychometric 
faculty  in  a  high  degree,  and  appear  to  become  acquainted 
with  places,  people,  or  circumstances  that  formerly  sur- 
rounded any  object  they  may  hold,  will  often  be  quite  in- 
susceptible to  mesmeric  influence.  Then  as  regards  mes- 
meric influence  itself,  few  experimentalists  have  been  able 
to  do  more  than  record  facts  out  of  their  own  observation, 
and  these,  however  plainly  they  may  show  that  a  potent 
influence  is  at  work,  are  so  divergent  in  their  character 
that  they  help  us  very  little  towards  a  scientific  apprecia- 
tion of  that  influence.  But  difficult  as  the  whole  empirical 
jungle  of  psychological  inquiry  may  be,  all  these  capricious 
and  irregular  workings  of  the  astral  senses  are  intelligible 
enough  from  the  point  of  view  of  students  who  get  above 
them,  so  to  speak,  and  contemplate  them  from  a  still 
higher  plane  of  observation.  Anyone  whom  we  might 
imagine  seated  in  the  middle  of  a  huge  crystal  would  not 
be  able,  from  that  point  of  view,  to  discern  its  contour, 
however  transparent  its  substance  might  be.  It  is  only  when 
we  get  ouside  that  we  can  look  down  on  the  mass  as  a 
whole,  and  so  it  is  only  when  psychic  faculty,  trained  to  the 
degree  of  being  enabled  to  function  on  the  manasic  plane, 
looks  down  from  that  altitude  on  to  the  phenomena 
of  the  astral  world,  that  it  becomes  capable  'of  un- 
ravelling all  mysteries  connected  therewith,  and  of 
perceiving  how  very  largely,  how  almost  entirely,  the 
miscellaneous  faculties  which  are  described  as  those 
of  the  naturally  born  psychic,  are  concerned  with  astral 
plane  phenomena. 

But  in  their  nature  to  begin  with,  the  astral  senses 
which  may  be  partially  awakened  in  the  case  of  the 
naturally  born  psychic  are  not  different  from  the  senses 
which  may  be  cultivated  in  the  case  of  the  regularly  taught 

25 

370    THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

occultist.  Indeed,  it  may  almost  be  said  that  every  person 
who  may  be  thought  of  as  available  for  systematic  occult 
teaching  independent  of  moral  development,  must  have 
been  in  the  first  instance  a  naturally  born  psychic,  even 
though  his  faculties  may  have  existed  in  the  beginning  as  a 
potentiality  rather  than  as  an  actual  accomplishment.  The 
Etheric  Double  must  have  certain  characteristics  before 
the  senses  of  the  astral  vehicle  can  connect  themselves 
with  the  consciousness  of  the  physical  brain,  and  the  attri- 
butes of  the  Etheric  Double  are  so  largely  dependent  on 
the  Karma  of  previous  lives  that  without  something  having 
been  done  in  previous  lives  towards  the  growth  of  psychic 
faculties,  no  mere  intellectual  comprehension  of  the  whole 
subject,  nor  even  a  genuine  spiritual  aspiration  in  the  direc- 
tion of  higher  development,  will  give  rise  to  these  faculties 
or  set  them  in  a  condition  in  which  they  can  function  with 
freedom  in  the  life  during  which  the  attempt  is  first  made. 
The  astral  senses,  like  everything  else  about  a  man,  are  his 
own  creation,  however  little  he  may  be  aware  of  it,  or 
even  however  little  he  may  have  consciously  in  the  begin- 
ning set  out  with  the  intention  of  creating  them.  The 
aspirations  and  desires  in  one  life,  as  we  have  seen  in  deal- 
ing especially  with  the  problem  of  Free  Will  and  Neces- 
sity, determine  the  capacity  of  the  next,  and  if  aspirations 
and  desires  set  strongly  in  the  direction  at  any  given  period 
of  a  human  being's  progress  of  penetrating  those  mysteries 
of  Nature  which  can  only  be  observed  by  means  of  the 
psychic  senses,  then  these  aspirations,  acting  as  a  Karmic 
force,  set  up  capacity  for  astral  development  in  the  astral 
body  of  the  person  in  question  on  his  next  return,  always 
supposing  that  they  are  not  counteracted  by  Karma  of 
other  kinds. 

Now  I  have  shown  in  the  whole  course  of  this  treatise 

IRREGULAR  PSYCHIC  PROGRESS  371 

that  the  loftiest  kind  of  spiritual  development  is  attained 
along  the  surest  road  by  virtue  of  aspirations  which,  in 
the  first  instance,  set  out  with  a  nobler  purpose  than  that 
of  merely  penetrating  the  mysteries  of  Nature  for  the  sake 
of  knowledge,  and  that  the  growth  of  moral  qualities 
engendered  by  the  desire  to  take  part  in  the  service  of  the 
Divine  Idea  governing  the  evolution  of  the  world  is  pro- 
vocative in  the  long  run  of  far  higher  achievements  even 
on  the  psychic  plane  than  those  which  can  be  attained 
directly  by  specific  effort  in  that  direction.    The  spiritual 
occultist,  who  seeks  to  assimilate  himself  with  the  elder 
brethren  of  mankind  that  he  may  the  better  perform  his 
part  in  connection  with  the  mighty  task  of  helping  on 
the  race  at  large,  will  at  the  fitting  time  be  guided  by 
those  into  whose  companionship  his  aspirations  will  have 
drawn  him,  to  take  the  necessary  steps  which  will  engender 
the  psychic  faculties  he  will  then  require  to  fulfil  the 
purposes  of  his  loftier  nature.    But  at  the  same  time  causes 
produce  results,  whether  they  are  set  in  motion  with  lofty 
or  ignoble  purpose,  and  people  who  are  filled  with  an  ardent 
curiosity  concerning  the  mysteries  of  Nature  as  such,  and 
are  constantly  making  whatever  efforts  lie  within  their 
range    to    penetrate    these    mysteries,    will   karmically 
engender  an  improved  capacity  to  do  this  in  the  future, 
and  will  find  themselves  endowed  in  some  life  or  other 
with  the  abnormal  characteristics  we  may  loosely  describe 
as  psychic  faculty.    They  will  begin  to  see  visions  that  are 
invisible  to  those  around  them,  and  by  thus  bringing  the 
astral  plane  to  a  certain  extent  within  the  range  of  their 
own  cognisance,  they  will  bring  themselves  within  the 
cognisance  of  beings  natural  to  the  astral  plane,  and  so 
will    perhaps    become    mediums    through    which    these 
beings  exert  forces  on  the  physical  plane,  the  effects  of 

372     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

which  become  obvious  to  all  bystanders  in  the  shape  of 
spiritualistic  phenomena.  Assuming  these  dawning  attri- 
butes to  be  quite  unaccompanied  by  moral  or  ethical 
development,  to  be  animated  solely  by  a  thirst  of  know 
ledge  as  a  personal  acquisition  to  be  highly  enjoyed,  then 
such  an  unhappy  psychic  may  become  serviceable  to  mis- 
chievous agencies  functioning  on  the  astral  plane,  who 
may  be  simply  persons  like  himself,  a  good  deal  further 
advanced,  who  may  have  acquired  the  power  not  merely 
of  cognising  the  astral  plane  with  the  astral  senses,  but  of 
getting  clear  of  the  body  and  functioning  on  that  plane  in 
the  appropriate  vehicle,  gathering  there  whatever  they 
think  they  require  for  themselves.  Such  persons,  com- 
monly spoken  of  in  occult  writings  as  Black  Magicians, 
are  ever  on  the  look-out  for  those  whom  they  may  im- 
press into  their  service,  and  the  wholly  ignorant,  untrained 
psychic,  unprotected  by  affinity  with  spiritual  influences 
from  above,  becomes  their  ready  prey,  with  results,  very 
often  as  regards  the  Karma  of  the  person  so  entangled,  that 
reach  over  terrible  periods  of  time,  and  may  entangle  the 
victim  for  a  long  series  of  lives  in  succession,  with  grievous 
miseries  of  a  complicated  sort. 

Just  as  often,  indeed,  the  naturally-born  psychic  faculty 
may  be  due  to  aspirations  which  have  been  largely  mingled 
with  genuine,  though  often  uncultivated  spiritual  long- 
ings. Then  the  possessor  is,  by  the  very  purity  of  his  or 
her  nature,  shielded  from  the  Black  Magician's  attack, 
and  ready,  with  a  little  help,  even  though  up  to  that  time 
such  help  may  not  have  been  earned,  to  get  on  to  the  right 
path  of  true  occult  development.  It  is  necessary  to  be 
thus  as  much  on  our.  guard  against  under-rating  as  against 
over-rating  the  naturally-born  psychic  capacity.  It  may 
be  a  blessing  or  a  curse  entirely  in  accordance  with  the 

IRREGULAR  PSYCHIC  PROGRESS  373 

circumstances  just  referred  to;  or  if  it  may  be  regarded 
as  in  equilibrium  between  the  two  influences,  then 
above  all  things  it  becomes  desirable  to  shield  its  exer- 
cise by  the  earnest  cultivation  of  a  lofty  purpose  and 
by  a  specific  intellectual  appreciation  of  the  course  of 
evolution  leading  to  the  sublime  heights  of  spiritual 
development. 

I  take  it  that  cases  are  extremely  rare  in  which  the 
naturally-born  psychic  faculty  can  be  thought  of  as  func- 
tioning on  any  region  above  the  astral  plane.  Of  course 
the  Higher  Self  of  every  human  being  is  akin  in  its  nature 
to  the  arupa  level  of  the  manasic  plane,  and  in  the  infi- 
nite variety  of  human  characteristics  that  we  have  to  deal 
with,  cases  may  arise  in  which  by  the  continued  feeding  of 
the  Higher  Self  with  the  essence,  as  it  were,  pf  many 
good  and  spiritually  inspired  lives,  the  Higher  Self  may 
have  become  so  individually  conscious  on  its  own  natural 
plane  as  to  be  able  in  some  measure  to  reflect  that  con- 
sciousness back  to  its  physical  manifestation  during  sleep, 
or,  rather,  when  it  has  returned  to  the  body  after  sleep. 
Such  a  person  may  thus  have  true  touch  with  lofty  planes 
of  consciousness.  Such  an  unusual  condition  of  develop- 
ment might  account  for  some  of  the  more  important  pro- 
phetic dreams  which  sometimes  constitute  so  curious  an 
enigma  for  the  psychic  inquirer,  but  it  could  not  often 
happen  that  such  development  as  I  am  here  thinking  of 
would  be  unaccompanied  altogether  by  occult  knowledge, 
for  no  one  who  is  qualified  to  assimilate  that  knowledge 
in  a  useful  way  is  left  by  Karma  wholly  without  any  hints 
which  may  set  him  on  the  true  path.  The  hints  or  oppor- 
tunities may  come  in  one  shape  or  another,  but  they  come, 
we  are  assured,  for  all  who  are  qualified  to  avail  themselves 
of  them,  and  though  they  may  sometimes  be  uncultivated 

374     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

through  a  failure  to  appreciate  their  meaning  correctly 
and  thus  quite  blamelessly,  it  is  not  likely  that  they  would 
be  repeated  in  many  successive  lives  without  giving  rise 
to  the  required  enlightenment  of  the  whole  thinking  soul. 
Leaving  unusual  possibilities  out  of  account,  however, 
the  most  interesting  variety  of  psychic  facility  we  have  to 
deal  with  is  that  which  is  engendered  as  the  fruit  of  some 
anterior  attempts  at  occult  development.  In  some  past  life 
the  person  in  question  may  have  had  an  opportunity  of  the 
particular  kind  I  have  just  been  referring  to.  He  may 
have  availed  himself  of  that  opportunity  up  to  the  limita- 
tions of  his  development,  as  it  then  stood,  which  may  have 
been  associated  with  such  aspirations  as  would  engender 
the  growth  of  the  astral  senses,  and  then  he  gets  launched 
on  a  life  the  Karma  of  which  is  probably  favourable  to 
his  further  progress,  although  in  the  beginning  he  fails  to 
appreciate  its  significance.  His  dawning  faculties  are  full 
of  interest  for  him;  there  are  spiritual  forces  in  his  nature 
which  render  such  visions  as  he  may  have  far  more  attrac- 
tive than  alarming.  As  soon  as  opportunity  serves  he 
assimilates  on  the  intellectual  side  with  marvellous  facility 
all  teaching  pointing  in  the  true  direction  of  occult  pro- 
gress, and  such  a  man  may  become,  not  merely  a  psychic, 
not  merely  an  earnest  devotee  of  theosophical  philosophy, 
but  one  of  those  open-eyed  disciples  whose  consciousness 
has  been  trained  to  work  freely  on  the  spiritual  levels 
above  the  astral,  and  whose  beautiful  privilege  it  is  to  in- 
augurate their  long  career  of  higher  usefulness  in  sub- 
sequent lives  by  constituting  themselves  a  link  between 
the  great  Masters  and  the  awakening  enthusiasm  of  the 
many  students  still  on  the  ordinary  plane  of  life,  who  are 
thus  enabled,  in  advance  of  their  own  development,  to 
acquire  such  specific  knowledge  concerning  the  occult 

IRREGULAR  PSYCHIC  PROGRESS  375 

world  that  their  own  evolution  in  the  next  life  as  open- 
eyed  disciples  in  their  turn  becomes  surely  guaranteed. 

For  the  correct  appreciation,  meanwhile,  of  the  whole 
entangled  problem  which  has  to  do  with  natural-born 
psychic  faculty  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  vast  stratum 
of  intervening  cases  lying  between  those  by  which  some 
inquisitive  explorer  of  the  astral  plane  falls  into  the 
clutches  of  the  Black  Magician,  and  those,  on  the  other 
hatnd,  where  the  loftily  inspired  aspirant  gains,  through 
the  expansion  of  his  psychic  powers,  conscious  touch  with 
those  who  may  lead  him  to  the  sublimest  heights.  Ever 
since  the  human  race  has  come  of  age,  so  to  speak,  since 
the  middle  period,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  Atlantean  Race 
during  this  present  world  period,  there  have  been  people 
governed  by  the  desire  for  occult  knowledge  and  progress 
in  all  possible  varieties,  so  to  speak,  of  purity,  as  regards 
their  motives.  I  suppose  it  may  be  assumed  that  Karmic 
influences,  in  the  very  loftiest  examples  of  such  aspiration, 
would  guide  the  inquirer  into  the  path  leading  directly  to 
the  supreme  Adept  organisation  which  merges,  as  regards 
its  higher  levels,  as  I  endeavoured  to  show  in  the  chapter 
on  the  Path  of  Initiation,  in  the  governing  hierarchy  of 
this  stupendous  system,  and  so  in  the  immeasurable  spiritual 
grandeur  of  the  cosmic  hierarchy.  But  at  the  same  time 
it  has  come  to  pass,  at  various  periods,  that  other  associa- 
tions or  lodges  of  occult  inquirers  have  been  founded,  the 
character  and  purpose  of  which  has  been  very  admirable 
indeed,  and  with  which  great  numbers  of  people  have  been 
associated,  greatly  to  their  own  advantage  and  to  that  of 
others.  The  fact  appears  to  be  that  all  such  subordinate 
lodges  of  occultism  merge  themselves  sooner  or  later  into 
the  main  stream,  but  following  the  bent  of  their  own  in- 
dividual characteristics  some  people,  gravitating  upwards, 

376     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

may  move  for  a  long  time  in  the  almost  exclusive  com- 
panionship of  their  own  original  associates,  and  may  in 
this  way  attain  to  positions  of  influence  on  the  super- 
physical  planes  of  Nature,  from  which  they  will  be  doing 
their  best  to  help  on  the  spiritual  progress  of  others  by  the 
light  of  their  own  convictions. 

CHAPTER  XVI 
INDIVIDUALITY 

SOME  problems  of  consciousness  that  seem  at  the 
first  glance  to  lie  on  the  threshold  of  philosophical 
inquiry  into  the  nature  and  destinies  of  man  are  so 
intricate  in  reality  that  they  can  only  be  considered  in  the 
light  of  extensive  knowledge.  This  is  emphatically  the 
case  with  reference  to  the  state  of  consciousness  we  call 
Individuality.  One  might  suppose  it  would  be  reasonable 
to  treat  that  first  in  endeavouring  to  trace  the  course  of 
human  evolution,  but  the  subject  cannot  be  handled  with- 
out cross  references  to  all  phases  of  evolution.  We  must 
keep  the  manifold  planes  of  Nature  in  view  and  lower 
states  of  consciousness  that  do  not  present  the  pheno- 
menon of  individuality  and  the  system  to  which  we  belong 
as  a  whole,  in  the  attempt  to  appreciate  correctly  the 
genesis  and  destinies  of  individuality.  The  utter  nonsense 
made  of  the  subject  by  conventional  speculation  shows 
how  impossible  it  is  to  deal  with  it  intelligently  without 
a  tolerably  complete  grasp  of  theosophic  teaching  at  large. 
Simple  ignorance  of  the  most  primitive  type — disguised 
in  scholarship  and  intoxicated  with  erudition — is  account- 
able for  the  notion  that  the  creation  of  a  human  soul  is  a 
single  simple  act  of  Divine  Will,  accomplishable  at  any 
moment  when  it  pleases  two  already  existent  human  beings 
to  furnish  certain  conditions.  That  line  of  thought  does 
not  exalt  Divine  omnipotence;  it  merely  excludes  all  per- 
ceptions of  Divine  methods  and  exhibits  a  ludicrously  in- 
adequate notion  concerning  the  magnitude  of  the  task 
under  consideration.  Higher  knowledge  shows  us  that 
the  creation  of  human  souls — the  development  of  in- 
dividuality in  universal  consciousness — is  the  purpose  of 

377 

378     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

the  whole  system  to  which  we  belong,  or  one  of  its  great 
concurrent  purposes,  and  typical  of  them  all.  If  it  was  A 
simple  task  for  Omnipotence,  the  organisation  of  systems 
and  chains  of  planets  with  all  their  kingdoms  of  nature  and 
so  forth,  would  be  the  most  deplorable  waste  of  energy 
the  mind  could  conceive.  Supreme  wisdom  cannot  be 
wasteful  in  that  manner — or  it  would  not  be  supreme 
wisdom — so  that  by  the  time  we  acquire  knowledge  of  the 
way  human  individuality  is  tended  and  cultivated  from 
its  earliest  stages  of  growth,  and  by  the  time  we  come  to 
combine  that  knowledge  with  some  appreciation  of  the 
destinies  to  which  it  may  ultimately  be  conducted,  we  are 
led  to  appreciate  this  idea — that  the  evolution  of  an  In- 
dividuality would  be  a  stupendous  task  even  for  Omni- 
potence. 

Apparently  it  can  only  be  accomplished  by  this 
tremendously  circuitous  and  elaborate  process  that  we  call 
the  descent  of  spirit  into  matter — a  process  which  divides 
itself  into  three  great  stages :  the  preparation  of  the 
material  planes,  the  growth  of  consciousness  thereon  into 
individual isation,  and  the  training  of  the  individuality 
towards  the  complete  realisation  of  its  potentialities — with- 
out which,  after  all,  it  is  the  mere  beginning  of  an 
individuality. 

In  some  way  that  it  is  easier  to  talk  about  than  to 
understand,  the  earliest  manifestations  of  matter  repre- 
sent the  consciousness  or  some  part  of  the  consciousness 
of  the  spirit  by  which  they  have  been  engendered.  But 
neither  in  the  fluctuating  aspects  of  the  elemental  king- 
doms nor  in  the  condensed  manifestations  of  the  mineral 
world  as  it  emerges  from  nebulous  beginnings  do  we  trace 
any  consciousness  of  the  individualised  order.  When  we 
advance  a  step  and  observe  in  the  beginning  of  the  vege- 

INDIVIDUALITY  379 

table  kingdom  the  first  pulsations  we  can  recognise  as  life, 
we  still  find  spiritual  energy  vaguely  diffused  through  great 
orders  of  manifestation.  We  may  talk  now  of  the  monadic 
essence  that  animates  the  vegetable  world  as  something 
distinct  from  the  monadic  essence  that  animates  the  mineral 
creation;  but  the  development  of  individuality  is  still  far 
from  having  been  accomplished.  Across  immeasurable 
ages  of  effort  the  animal  manifestation  of  spirit  emerges 
from  the  vegetable;  but  still  the  achievement  falls  short 
of  the  object  in  view.  The  animal  kingdom  is  an  im- 
mensely higher  form  of  consciousness  than  its  immediate 
predecessor  in  evolution,  but  it  is  still  a  collective  mani- 
festation. 

By  what  process  in  the  beginning  of  the  whole  system — 
in  the  earliest  Manvantaras  of  its  earliest  schemes — the 
concentration  of  consciousness  into  single  individualities 
was  accomplished,  we  need  not  pause  to  inquire.  For  the 
purpose  of  understanding  individuality  it  is  enough  to  trace 
its  genesis  at  such  periods  of  evolution  as  we  can  handle 
in  thought  more  conveniently  than  those  belonging  to  the 
initial  periods  of  Nature's  activity.  Slowly,  slowly  Divine 
consciousness  animating  the  superior  subdivisions  of  the 
animal  kingdom  gathers  in  the  experience  of  conscious- 
ness that  such  life  as  it  inspires  can  afford.  Then  at  last 
comes  the  touch  of  a  more  advanced  consciousness  affect- 
ing it  in  some  one  of  its  incarnate  manifestations.  In 
plainer  language,  and  looking  at  the  process  as  it  works 
after  the  human  kingdom  has  been  evolved,  an  animal  on 
the  physical  plane  of  the  world  becomes  personally 
attached  to  a  superior  being — one  already  an  individualised 
human  creature.  And  to  convey  the  idea  first  of  all  in 
what  may  be  rather  its  poetical  than  its  scientific  presen- 
tation— hut  not  the  less  a  truthful  presentation  on  that 

380     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

account — the  result  of  this  attachment,  the  result  of  this 
first  movement  within  the  consciousness  of  the  animal 
of  the  great  love  principle  in  its  upward  aspiring  aspect,, 
focalises  the  spiritual  force  within  its  nature  and  engenders 
individuality. 

From  that  moment  there  is  a  definite  something — a  film,, 
a  centre,  a  point,  call  it  what  we  like — on  the  spiritual 
plane  that  is  a  re-incarnating  individuality.  It  is  mar- 
vellously, almost  inconceivably,  faint  in  its  outlines,  so  to- 
speak,  but  it  is  a  something  that  has  separated  itself  from 
the  general  volume  of  life  that  inspired  the  animal  when  it 
entered  on  the  critical  life.  It  is  an  independent  spiritual 
energy  which  is  now  competent  in  itself  to  find  expres- 
sion in  a  new  physical  form.  But  just  because  that  is  so> 
it  can  no  longer  find  expression  in  an  animal  form.  By 
the  act  of  individualisation  it  has  passed  into  a  new  king- 
dom of  Nature,  and  belongs  henceforward  to  the  human 
species. 

A  correct  appreciation  of  this  turning  point  in  evolution 
is  not  only  necessary  as  a  factor  in  the  appreciation  of  the 
growth  of  the  soul  from  the  beginning,  but  is  at  the  same 
time  illuminating  in  a  high  degree  with  reference  to  all 
the  problems  of  animal  instinct  so  blindly  blundered  about 
as  a  rule.  At  any  given  moment  of  its  life  an  animal  of 
any  given  species  has  as  much  wisdom  and  no  more  than 
the  other  animals  of  its  class.  The  same  intelligence,  the 
same  soul,  so  to  speak,  is  behind  them  all.  The  experience 
of  all  previous  animals  of  that  class  is  equally  at  the  service 
of  each,  but  there  is  no  other  experience  available,  and 
the  physical  brain  of  no  one  animal  in  the  series  is  equal' 
to  the  task  of  seeking  out  new  experience  differing  very 
widely  from  that  with  which  it  has  been  used  to  deal.  It 
assimilates  in  some  measure  that  which  comes  in  its  wayy 

INDIVIDUALITY  381 

and  thus  a  process  of  growth  is  going  on,  so  to  speak,  within 
the  common  soul  of  the  whole  family.  A  familiar  though 
a  painful  illustration  of  this  may  be  found  in  the  well- 
known  fact  that  in  new  previously  undiscovered  countries 
the  animals  and  birds  will,  at  first,  be  found  to  show  no 
timidity  in  presence  of  man.  But  when  man,  the  un- 
developed savage  man,  comes  amongst  them  either  with  a 
club  or  a  breechloader,  they  quickly  learn  that  he  is  a 
terrible  enemy.  It  is  not  merely  the  unfortunate  victims 
of  his  ferocity  who  learn  this;  their  conscious  soul  becomes 
aware  of  the  fact,  and  the  new  apprehension  thrills  through 
every  one  of  its  subsequent  manifestations. 

We  must  not  make  the  mistake  of  thinking  of  the 
common  soul  of  an  animal  family  as  invested  with  spiritual 
wisdom.  It  represents  consciousness  on  the  upward  path, 
but  at  an  early  stage  of  its  upward  growth.  It  is  not  greater 
and  wiser  than  the  animals  it  ensouls;  it  is  accurately  repre- 
sented by  them  as  regards  its  mental  evolution.  But  each 
animal  it  ensouls  draws  equally  on  the  common  stock  of 
knowledge  and  experiences;  one  consciousness  shares  the 
fresh  experience  of  each.  When  one  animal  of  a  given 
family,  for  example,  suffers,  the  common  soul  suffers. 
Just  as  in  the  case  of  a  human  being,  if  the  right  hand  is 
injured,  the  man  suffers  though  his  left  hand  or  his  foot 
may  not  be  suffering. 

Language  breaks  down,  because  physical  brain  concep- 
tions break  down,  when  we  try  to  interpret  the  relations 
of  the  various  common  souls  of  the  animal  kingdom  with 
each  other.  The  volume  of  spirit,  if  that  clumsy  expres- 
sion may  be  employed,  which  for  a  time  is  ensouling  some 
low  order  of  animal  life,  undoubtedly  achieves  progression 
as  a  whole,  and  at  a  later  period  must  come  to  ensoul  a 
higher  order;  but  it  would  be  premature  for  us  to  attempt 

382     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

an  exact  interpretation  of  the  changes  through  which  that 
progression  is  accomplished.  It  is  more  important  to  com- 
prehend the  later  progress  of  the  differentiated  animal 
towards  true  human  individuality  when,  from  some  one 
of  the  high  orders  of  animal  life,  a  specific  animal 
engenders  a  re-incarnating  individuality,  and  thus  passes, 
in  due  time,  and  after  a  protracted  interlude  of  non- 
physical  blissful  rest,  into  the  human  kingdom. 

An  important  distinction  has  here  to  be  drawn  between 
a  re-incarnating  entity  and  an  imperishable  Ego.  The 
mere  partial  development  of  the  manasic  principle,  which 
is  an  inseparable  accompaniment  of  individualisation  in  its 
first  stage,  does  not  involve  the  acquisition  of  that  attribute 
of  fully  developed  humanity  that  has  been  spoken  of  some- 
times as  the  Divine  spark.  That  is  the  consequence  of 
a  union  between  the  Atma-Buddhic  principle,  which  is 
in  a  manner  latent  in  every  form  of  life  and  therefore  in 
the  newly  developed  re-incarnating  entity,  and  the  ocean 
of  Atma-Buddhi,  brooding,  so  to  speak,  over  the  whole  of 
creation.  This  union  is  stimulated  by  the  growth  of 
Manas  (reason  or  intelligence),  and  when  accomplished 
the  entity — to  be  thought  of  thenceforward  as  an  im- 
perishable Ego — is  definitely  represented  on  the  arupa 
plane  by  a  vehicle  of  consciousness  appropriate  to  that 
condition — the  Causal  body — as  it  is  now  generally  called 
by  European  Theosophists.  Thenceforth  that  permanent 
vehicle  of  consciousness,  the  same  through  all  successive 
incarnations,  is  the  individuality  of  the  entity  concerned, 
clothing  itself  afresh  each  time  it  descends  to  the  plane  of 
matter  in  new  garments  of  circumstance,  but  never  losing 
any  attributes  that  have  once  been  absorbed  into  its  own 
nature. 

The  aggregation  of  fresh  attributes  by  the  Ego  thus 

INDIVIDUALITY  383 

developed  proceeds  very  slowly  in  the  beginning.  It  is 
divine  in  its  nature,  but  is  not  divine  in  its  development. 
Great  confusion  of  thinking  on  occult  matters  has  some- 
times ensued  from  a  neglect  to  make  this  last  distinction. 
There  is  a  great  difference  between  knowledge  and  the 
capacity  to  learn.  Without  the  imperishable  Ego,  the 
being,  even  though  differentiated  and  no  longer  merely 
an  expression  of  a  common  soul  shared  by  other  similar 
manifestations,  is  incapable  of  touch  with  the  higher 
manasic  consciousness.  With  the  touch  once  established, 
the  Causal  body  once  in  existence,  that  capacity  sets  in, 
but  the  new  entity  does  not  derive  knowledge  directly  from 
the  ocean  of  Atma-Buddhi  with  which  it  is  now  connected 
by  what  may  be  thought  of  as  a  fine  though  indestruc- 
tible thread.  It  derives  its  knowledge  up  to  a  point  far  in 
advance  of  the  state  of  things  we  are  talking  about — 
through  the  experiences  of  lower  plane  embodiments. 
Many  such  embodiments  may  contribute  but  little  to  the 
result.  The  wholesale  drift  of  evolution  is  slow,  as  the 
scale  on  which  the  Manvantaras  are  planned  out  should 
teach  us.  But  none  the  less  is  it  equally  true  that  at  a 
certain  stage  the  slow  process  of  growth  is  succeeded  by 
a  progress  of  marvellous  rapidity.  We  may  look  upon 
the  turning  point  from  the  one  rate  of  progress  to  the  other 
as  a  stage  in  evolution  hardly  less  definite  as°  such  than 
the  original  union  with  the  Atma-Buddhi  or  the  original 
differentiation  from  the  common  soul  system  of  the  animal 
kingdom.  The  turning  point  is  that  at  which  the  Ego 
concerned  in  some  one  or  other  of  its  embodiments,  at 
last  comprehends  manasically  its  own  nature,  and  dedi- 
cates its  will  force  to  the  realisation  of  its  divine  poten- 
tialities, the  fulfilment  of  the  purpose  with  which  it  has 
been  called  into  being.  That  achievement  is  generally 

384     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

described  in  the  language  of  occultism  as  getting  on  the 
Path;  and  from  that  time  on,  though  progress  may  be  in 
some  cases  retarded  by  specific  deficiencies  in  the  attri- 
butes of  the  Ego,  which  have  not  prepared  it  equally  all 
round  for  higher  progress,  the  onward  movement  is  accom- 
plished by  leaps  and  bounds,  compared  to  the  previous 
gradual  drift. 

While  our  thoughts  are  still  subject  to  the  limitations 
of  physical  incarnation,  it  is  not  possible  to  follow  that 
progress  in  imagination  to  the  ultimate  development  it 
may  bring  about,  but  we  may  hold  on  meanwhile  con- 
fidently to  the  conviction  that  whatever  enlargement  of 
consciousness  becomes  possible  for  the  imperishable  in- 
dividuality in  its  progress  through  the  higher  realms  of 
Nature,  that  individuality  is  imperishable.  It  is  never  lost, 
not  even  in  the  wonderful  spiritual  union  with  other 
aspects  of  the  universal  consciousness  which  takes  place 
even  on  planes  of  spiritual  existence,  which  can  be  touched 
by  the  consciousness  of  advanced  individualities  still  ani- 
mating a  human  body.  Nothing  has  contributed  more  to 
repel  untrained  minds  from  the  sublime  avenues  of  thought 
•opened  by  occult  teaching  than  the  glowing  language 
that  has  sometimes  been  used  about  the  mergence  of  the 
Soul  ultimately  in  the  Divine  consciousness — its  re-union 
with  God,  or  its  absorption  in  Parabrahm — whatever 
phrase  may  be  used.  This  seems  to  the  finite  under- 
standing to  convey  the  idea  of  individual  extinction,  and 
for  those  to  whom  no  blank  negation  of  suffering,  but 
life  and  more  life  is  what  they  crave,  the  much-talked-of 
union  is  looked  upon  as  tantamount  to  their  own  annihila- 
tion. This  is  an  altogether  baseless  and  deplorable 
delusion.  The  real  union  is  an  infinite  expansion  of  the 
individual  consciousness,  and  not  a  surrender  thereof,  and 

INDIVIDUALITY  385 

while  it  begins  to  be  a  reality,  even  for  those  who  have 
ascended  the  great  path  but  relatively  a  little  way,  the 
individual  consciousness  does  not  cease  to  be  a  reality  as 
deep  and  profound,  even  if  we  reach  in  imagination  to 
heights  which  can  only  as  yet  be  dimly  apprehended. 

In  illustration  of  that  thought,  let  us  turn  back  to 
the  very  broadest  view  we  can  take  of  the  Soul's  growth, 
and  contemplate  once  again  the  whole  system  to  which 
we  belong  in  its  spiritual  rather  than  in  its  scientific  aspect. 
Never  mind  for  a  moment  the  marvellous  and  intricate 
beauty  of  the  mechanism  through  which  the  great  purpose 
of  the  system  is  worked  out.  Let  us  think  rather  of  the 
intention  with  which  the  Logos  of  the  system  sets  the 
whole  undertaking  on  foot.  Let  us,  in  conclusion, 
approach  the  loftiest  phase  of  our  great  theme,  and 
and  endeavour,  in  so  far  as  that  may  be  possible  for  human 
minds  functioning  under  our  present  limitations,  to  com- 
prehend the  spiritual  purpose  of  the  stupendous  system 
to  which  we  belong,  the  underlying  Divine  idea  of  which 
that  system,  with  all  its  astounding  complexity  of  con- 
current evolutionary  schemes  and  of  infinitely  diversified 
life,  is  the  visible  manifestation. 

Sometimes  we  may  be  enabled,  in  a  certain  measure, 
to  comprehend  a  mighty  achievement  in  Nature  as  regards 
the  collective  design,  even  when  the  resources  of  power 
by  which  the  result  is  brought  about  baffle  our  closest 
scrutiny.  Remember  that  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
Theosophist,  there  are  no  blind  forces  in  the  cosmos  super- 
inducing worlds  and  systems  by  their  accidental  conflux. 
Whatever  happens  on  the  levels  concerned  with  the  in- 
auguration of  a  solar  system  is  the  direct  expression  of  the 
Will  of  a  Being  sufficiently  exalted  in  attributes  to  be 
able  to  render  that  will  objective — to  become  the 

26 

386     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

manifestation  He  has  created,  in  the  first  instance,  by 
thought.  By  a  term  familiar  to  us  all  as  associated  with  the 
idea  of  Divinity,  we  are  enabled  reverentially  to  refer  to 
the  Being  whose  Will  engenders  and  whose  Life  is  merged 
in  our  solar  system  as  the  Logos  of  the  system.  We  can 
even  go  further.  We  can  conceive  of  Him  as  emanating 
in  some  unfathomable  manner  from  the  Supreme  Infinite 
Consciousness,  and  undertaking  the  creation  of  the  system 
as  a  stupendous  act  of  self-devotion.  Within  His  nature 
there  resides  the  potentiality  of  an  all  but  boundless  multi- 
plication of  His  own  individuality.  Without  the  appro- 
priate effort  on  His  part,  these  innumerable  possibilities 
would  lie  dormant  in  the  Supreme  Consciousness.  He 
accomplishes  in  the  creation  of  the  system  which  He 
becomes,  the  first  great  act  of  what  is  sometimes  called 
Sacrifice.  His  sacrifice — His  submission  for  the  whole 
duration  of  the  system  to  limitations — is  not  made,  like  the 
sacrifice  of  lesser  beings,  one  for  another  or  for  others,  but 
for  those  who  are  as  yet  non-existent.  He  gives  out  His 
life  to  the  unborn — to  those  who,  but  for  His  self-devotion, 
would  not  have  individual  consciousness  at  all;  in  order 
that  the  whole  volume  of  Divine  consciousness  may  be 
richer  by  countless  additional  centres  of  appreciative 
consciousness. 

It  is  for  our  sake  this  great  act  has  been  accomplished; 
for  our  sake  and  for  that  of  all  others  like  us  or  unlike 
us  who  are  rising  through  the  various  gradations  of  spiritual 
evolution  towards  the  level  of  Nature  from  which  the  im- 
pulse was  first  given  which  launched  every  globe  of  the 
planetary  system  we  see,  and  all  that  as  yet  we  do  not 
see,  on  the  cosmos  of  objective  life. 

The  first  great  outbreaking  of  the  life  of  the  Logos 
which  calls  our  system  into  being  is  the  primary  mani- 

INDIVIDUALITY  387 

festation  of  a  law  which  runs  through  all  the  worlds  of 
which  we  have  knowledge — the  law  which  prescribes  at 
every  stage  of  existence  that  life  and  energy  shall  be  given 
out  for  the  benefit  of  some  consciousness  other  than  that 
of  the  giver,  though  ultimately  to  be  identified  even  with 
that,  the  law  which  is  the  pulse  of  the  v/hole  system — 
a  law  of  giving  out  which  involves  no  absolute  and  ulti- 
mate sacrifice,  but  is  the  only  law  by  which  progress  and 
exaltation  in  Nature  can  be  achieved. 

The  outpouring  is  shown  to  us  in  its  sublimest  aspect 
in  the  manifestation  of  the  system  itself;  in  some  of  its 
humblest  workings  it  is  a  law  of  love  and  generosity  on  the 
physical  plane  of  life;  in  intermediate  degrees  it  is  con- 
sciously guided  by  those  who  promote,  from  higher  levels 
of  existence  than  those  around  us,  the  spiritual  growth 
and  welfare  of  mankind.  The  more  we  know  of  true 
occultism,  and  of  the  intelligent  exercise  of  power  on 
superior  planes  of  being,  the  more  we  come  into  apprecia- 
tive relations  with  this  great  principle,  which  is  equally, 
though  in  a  different  measure,  inspiring  the  ceaseless  bene- 
ficence of  the  Adept  and  the  unselfish  benevolence  of  all 
good  men  and  women  still  working  more  or  less  blindly 
in  obedience  to  the  hardly,  as  yet,  articulate  impulses  of 
their  awakening  spiritual  natures.  The  end  we  cannot, 
from  our  present  point  of  view,  discern  distinctly,  but  we 
may  grasp  with  unhesitating  assurance  the  conception  that 
all  who  lend  themselves  in  willing  sympathy  for  others 
to  the  fulfilment  of  the  mighty  principle,  are  helping  on 
the  great  enterprise  that  our  system  represents,  and  at  a 
later  date,  if  they  persevere,  will  help  that  enterprise  with 
a  fuller  and  clearer  recognition  of  its  whole  design  to  guide 
them,  and  will  thus  be  giving  back  their  response  to 
the  Divine  sympathy  of  which  their  own  consciousness 

26* 

388     THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  SOUL 

as   living   individual   beings   is   one   of   the   innumerable 
fruits. 

Some — we  do  not  know  how  many,  and  for  exact 
knowledge  on  such  a  subject  as  that  we  may  well  be 
content  to  wait — will,  by  the  entire  identification  of  their 
own  life  force  with  the  energy  of  the  breath  which  per- 
meates the  whole  system,  rise  up  from  stage  to  stage  of 
spiritual  exaltation  through  the  various  schemes  of  evolu- 
tion of  which  the  system  consists,  until  at  its  final  culmina- 
tion they  stand  on  a  level  with  the  Being  by  whom  and 
through  whom  all  consciousness  in  the  system  has  been 
developed.  His  life  energy  has  gone  out  from  Him  in  the 
first  instance,  and  has  involved  itself  in  myriad  limitations. 
As  the  great  work  culminates  it  flows  back  to  Him  through 
the  new  channels  of  spiritual  energy,  through  the  new 
Logoi  who  constitute  His  reflection  on  the  manifold  planes 
of  Nature  towards  which  His  influence  has  been  projected. 
The  universe  is  wide,  and  sublime  activities  analogous  to 
His  own  will  doubtless  await  them  in  turn.  In  what 
way  the  countless  individualities,  which  will  fall  in  some 
way  short  of  achieving  the  maximum  possibilities  of  evolu- 
tion within  the  system,  will  be  drawn  back  into  His 
all  but  illimitable  consciousness  when  the  season  of  effort 
is  past — when  the  night  time  of  pralaya  affords  rest  alike 
for  humble  as  well  as  for  exalted  forms  of  consciousness — 
we  cannot  foresee  as  yet.  Nor  even  can  we  clearly  realise 
the  latest  chapters  in  the  appointed  history  of  the  system, 
in  respect  to  the  gathering  in  of  all  the  marvellously  diver- 
sified energies  of  life  which  must  still  be  present  on  the 
stage  of  manifestation  as  long  as  any  planets  continue  to 
circle  round  the  source  of  all  life  energy  we  call  the  Sun. 
But  we  are  told,  and  even  from  some  knowledge  of 
spiritual  conditions  attainable  already,  can  partly  under- 

INDIVIDUALITY  389 

stand,  that  the  individuality  we  think  of  as  the  Logos  is 
at  all  times  a  host  of  individualities  in  one,  and  will  still 
he  a  host,  how  far  multiplied  it  would  be  vain  to  inquire, 
when  the  harvest  of  achievement  has  been  gathered,  and 
the  purpose  of  the  Mahamanvantara  shall  have  been 
fulfilled. 

THE  PELICAN 

PRESS 

Cough  Squart 
Fleet  Street 

E.C.4 

A  branch  of  the  Victoria 

HousePrintingCo  ,Ltd. 

21  Tudor  Street 

Fleet  Street 

E.C.4 

HOME  USE 

CIRCULATION  DEPARTMENT 
MAIN  LIBRARY 

This  book  is  due  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 
1-month  loans  may  be  renewed  by  calling :  642.3405 
6-month  loans  may  be  recharged  by  bringing  books 

to  Circulation  Desk. 

Renewals  and  recharges  may  be  made  4  days  prior 
to  due  date. 

ALL  '  7  DAYS 

JION 

^ 

i—A^Om-S,^ 
(R8191L)    : 

General  Library 
University  of  Califc 
Berkeley 

ornia 

GENERAL  LIBRARY -U.C.  BERKELEY
