HISTORY

OF THE

ITALIAN REPUBLIC

INTRODUCTION.

The republics which flourished in Italy during the
middle ages have neither been attached by ancient
alliances^ nor opposed by long rivalries and wars^ to the
Jiowers which divide Europe at this day. From this it
might be supposed that their history is altogether of
secondary importancej and that each people, after having
•studied its ovm, shoidl givejirecedence over that of the
Italians to the history either of hertflitary allies, or of
those who, by a prejudice of barbarism, are called natural
enemies. It would be a great error : history has no
true importance but as it contains a moral lesson. It
should be explored, not for scenes of carnage, but
instructions in the government of mankind, The know¬
ledge of tihies past is good only as it instructs us to
avoid mistakes, to imitate virtues, to improve by ex¬
perience: but the pre-eminent object of this study, — the
science of governing men for their advantage, of de¬
veloping their individual faculties, intellectual and moral,
for their greater happiness, — that political philosophy,
began in modem Europe only with the Italian republics
of the middle ages, and from them diflused itself over
other nations.

After the destructi(|[|^f the Roman empire, which
cairied away ancient civilisation with it in its fall, power
henceforth, through many generaftions, belonged only to
barbarians, exercising with their brutal passions the

S HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN HEPOBLIOS.

rigbli’Of conquest over hulnsn society. There was na
longer a ^veminent, no loiqger an association of all
die inhabitants of a country organised for the common
good : society wa^ divided between the conquerors and
the conquered. The former, indeed, had a spirit of
independence: they were companions united under their
chief, to satisfy in common their rapacity and luxury j
it was their glory to be feared, to be obeyed, and to be re¬
venged. After having exhausted their caprices on the'van-
quished, they delighted in hearing such feats celebrated
by their poets at festivals, as great deads in which they
took pride. For those, on the contrary, who had fallen
under the yoke of the barbarian^ij there was no pro¬
tection to be expected, there was no government formed
even partly for their advantage—in short, there was no
social bond. They were compelled to labour, that their
conquerors might enjoy, — to suffer and be humiliated,
that those might pride themselves on their domination.
Such was the state of Europe for a lung period after the
fall of the Roman empire,— a statfc of which the' history
offers but little real instrucSon, and on which perhaps it
may be as well not to dwell. We are easily seduced by
the display of energy : the courage of the barbarians,
employed only in crime and devastation, attracts us;
l^g rivalries sometimes appear to us as a reason for
hatred between descendants; and a poetic hue stUl dis.
guises ages which can only teach us one lesson — to avert
at all price their return.

Useful history, that of which the knowledge should
be universally diffused, begins only with the period when
the victors and vanquished, inhabitants of the same
couatry, were fused into one people ; and stiU more
decisively when they became united by a single bond,
the public good, at the period when the goveriiment be¬
longed to the people, and not t^ j)eople to the govern¬
ment. The fusion of conquei^rs and conquered was
more or less rapid in the different states of Europe : in
some it lowered the {otmer, in others it raised the latter;
and public order cannot be considened as having been estas-

INTBODUCTIOfr.

3

Uhhed till theBeople wereJii longer confounded with the
property which they creatftl for the use of their master*.
After the invasion of the barbaiiansj the people every
where belonged, in the first instance, to the army; but,
as the army must preserve its organisation to remain
powerful, it could not exist without a chief: the power
of the chief was often confounded with that of his sol¬
diers, who sometimes found it advantageous to invest him
with* almost despotic authority. Thus it frequently hap.
pened that the chief, called by the barbarians king, from
having been no mpre than the deputy chosen by the army,
became its master. He had ruled for the army, by the
army, and finally he piled the army itself: government
from being military beca.fte patrimonial; the people and
the army belonged alike to the king, and were governed
solely for tbe advantage of the king. In the midst of these
governments, either military or patrimonial, when Gaul
belonged to the Franks, Spain to the Visigoths, England
to the Saxons, and at a later period to the Normans, or
when each of these countries belonged to a king of the do¬
minant race, Italy began early to feel,«d to declare, that
she belonged only to herself — to assume authority, and to
exercise it for her own advantage. Italy, invaded by
the barbarians, like the other western states, pillaged,
oppressed, and disorganised, could, no more than they,
repel the invaders or expel them, and constitute hers^
a single state. There, as elsewhere, the ancient social
body was annihilated ; but there, more than elsewhere,
the principle of life remained in the fragments of the
broken colossus; the Italians succumbed as a nation,
but the component parts of their grand social union,
their cities and towns, the first elements in some sort of
what forms a nation, arose and defended themselves on
their own account; every smaller association of men,
which had survived the great one, had the courage to
exist for itself— to fsel^tbat it had interests to protect,
sentiments above fear, and virtues that deserved success.
The Italiansisought tbe good of all, not that of masters
at the expense «f slaves. Their hearts first told them,
B 2

4 <

BISTORT OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS.

and their reason confirmed/that they had still a country;
for her they set the first example of those public vir.
tues ivhidi became the pattern of Europe. From the
moment tney formed their own governments, and formed
them for the common good, they prospered: while every
Other nation suffered, they rose in intelligence as well as
Virtue. The exercise of commerce and the arts aug¬
mented their wealth, and fixed on them the attention of
other nations; their example enlightened the smaller
associations framed in the towns of the rest of Europe,
and imitating them at a distance; their experience di¬
rected the meditations of some superior minds formed
fn the government of the Italit^ republics, who rose
from the practice to the theory of civil society, and
showed, not only to their own country, hut to future
nations and ages, the object to which all human asso¬
ciations should tend, and the best means by which to
attain it.

In the mean time, while the Italian republics increased
in population, intelligence, virtue, and wealth, the patri¬
monial governments of the rest of Europe advanced also,
but in another manner. Nations made some slow pro¬
gress in civilisation; their chiefs increased in power, not
by the developement of the resources of their people, but
by the agglomeration of new states; their kingdoms,
subject to the laws of inheritance and primogeniture,
■which always cause, and in no long period, the extinction
of rich families, had grown, as the patrimony of the
wealthy grows, by inheritance, by marriage, and by the
abuse of power. The ancient sovereign families had,
for the most part, become extinct, if not in all their
branches, at least in the eldest; and their territories had
accumulated on a few survivors in the younger branches.
About ten powerful succeeded a hundred feeble princes.
Towards the end of the fifteenth century, the chiefs of
the French, German, and Spanish nations were tempted
to invade Italy, allured by the marvellous opulence of a
country where the plunder of a single Sown aiforded
sometipies greater riches than ihey could wrest from

INTitODVCTIO}r.

&

millions of their own subjects. The most frivolous
pretexts sufficed; and, di'ring forty years of war, that
prosperous and beautiful country was ravaged by all the
various nations which could find their way Kto Italy.
The insatiable brigandage of these new barbarians at
length destroyed the opulence which had allured them:
but the soldiers of the north and west carried into their
own countries, along with the treasures of the Italians,
the instruction and example of a more advanced civilis.i
ation: numerous germs of a better state of things, carried
away from the Italian republics of the middle ages, were
spread over the rest of Europe. Let us not, while we
now reap the harvest, forget the parent sod.

It is this first develdpement of the Italian nation,
thus instructive to every other, that we here purpose
shortly to retrace. We have endeavoured to include in
a single volume a summary of the events of which the
Italian peninsula was the theatre, from the fall of the
Roman empire to the end of the Middle Age. This
summary will not satisfy the philosopher, who wishes to
distinguish in the mass of general liistory the peculiar
genius of each people, to follow institutions from their
birth, to know their action and their defects, to study
man in his various circumstances, and to see depicted
individuals as well as nations. We refer those who can
bestow time and attention on historical studies to the
much larger work which we have already published on
the same subject: they wiU there find ample details,
and they will be put in the way to obtain still more.
Proposing to ourselves here only a summary of facts,
and a more luminous view of the ideas they suggest, in
order to satisfy the curiosity of those who can give only
a limited time and attention to the study of history, we
have abstained from all references; we have considered
it useless to cite authorities which we have mpde known
elsewhere; and, above all, we have endeavoured to make
the following pages universally intelligible without the
aid of any other book.

6

BISTORT OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLIOS.

CHAPTER I.

ffTATS OF THE POFULATION OF ITALY AT THE. PALL OF THE
ROMAN EMPIRE IN THE FIFTH CENTURY. ~ ITALY TORMENTED
DURING FIVE CENTURIES SY THE SUCCESSIVE INVASIONS OF
RARBARIANS. -—FIRST EFFORTS OP TOWNS, IN THE TENTH CEN¬
TURY, TO DEFEND AND GOVERN THEMSELVES.

Ancient Italy lost her freedom in the conquests of the
Roman republic. Her numerous and warlike people
had long defended themselves, either in the chain of
mountains which, issuing from the southern Alps, crosses
the whole length of Italy; or in the vast and rich plains
to the east of that chain, formerly occupied by the Cis¬
alpine Gauls. This people disappeared; their cities,
enlarged and embellished by the Romans, lost all inde¬
pendence, all remjpibrance of nationality ; the land was
no longer cultivated but by slaves; when the Roman
republic itself in its turn also lost its freedom. Rome
held sway over the greatest part of the known world;
but, under the necessity of employing despotic authority,
in order to secure the obedience of the army, and the
distant provinces, she finally became herself the pro¬
perty of the master whom she had imposed on others.
One of the early successors of Augustus had granted to
every Italian the rights of citizenship in Rome; but
those rights had ceased to confer a participation in the
sovereignty of the republic. On the other hand, the
inhabitants of the municipalities of Italy, in becoming
Roman citizens, renounced no one of the rights of their
native cities, of which, they might be either jealous or
proud.

Italy continued to decline rapidly under the empe¬
rors : the component parts were no longer jn due pro-

POPULATION IN THE FIFTH OENTUBT. 7

portion. Rome containei^ about two or three thousand
senatorial families^ whost luxury and splendour sur¬
passed all the pomp now displayed by the greatest
nobles of our richest monarchies; but whose Effeminacy
and pusillanimity shrunk from all tlie active offices of
life. These families were often decimated by despotism;
their property was frequently confiscated; and they be¬
came rapidly extinct; but others arrived from the
provinces to take their place. They were surrounded
by an immense population, lodged in miserable houses,
almost the only,property they possessed. Rome con¬
tained several millions of inhabitants: the smallest num¬
ber only exercised the necessary arts and employments
of life, and even this more active part of the population
(composed chiefly of foreigners and freedmen) left the
manual work entirely to slaves; the remainder, all
those lyho gloried in the title of Roman citizen, who
had long despised every vocation but the military service,
henceforward rejected even that, and lived in absolute
idleness ; supported by distributions of com and largesses
from the public treasury, they passei^ their days in the
bath, the circus, and the amphitheatre. The state not
only supported them, but took upon itself the charge of
amusing them by gratuitous public spectacles. Whole
families became extinct from the vices engendered by
idleness; but their place was continually supplied by the
crowd which flocked from the provinces to enjoy a life
of indolence, largesses, immunities, and public shows.

Italy was covered with cities: the greater number of
those now existing, flourished in at least equal splendour
in the time of the Roman empire ; some, such as Milan,
Verona, Bologna, Capua, were so considerable as to pre¬
sent an image of Rome, with their circus, their amphi¬
theatre, their tumultuous and idle population, their
riches, and their poverty. Their administration was
nearly republican, most commonly composed, after the
example of Rome, of a curia, or municipal senate elected
by the people, and of duumvirs, or annual consuls. In all
these towns, among the first class of inhabitants were to
B 4

^ HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS.

be found the proprietors of the neighbouring land, lodged
in palaces with their slaves taiid freedmen; seconfly,
the artisans and shopkeepers whom their consumption
established around them ; lastly, a crowd of idle people,
who had preserved just enough of land to supply, with
the strictest economy, the means of existence. It does
not appear that there was any prosperous manufactory
in Italy. AH manual labour, as well in towns as in the
country, was executed by slaves. Objects of luxury,
for the most part, came from Asia. War had for a
long time been the only occupation of the Italians ; for a
long period, too, the legions had been levied partly among
the Romans, and partly among their allies in Italy : but,
under the emperors, the distrust of the master seconded
the luxurious effeminacy of the subject, the Italians
finally renounced even war; and the legions were re-
qpiited only in Pannonia, Gaul, and the other provinces
bordering on the Rhine and the Danube. At a later
period, the barbarians who menaced Rome were seduced
by liberal pay to engage in its defence ; and in the Roman
armies the enemiesjof Rome almost entirely replaced the
Romans. The country could not, as in modern states,
supply the place of cities in recruiting the armies with a
class of men accustomed to the inclemencies of the
weather, and inured to toil. The only labourers to be
found were an oppressed foreign race, who took no in¬
terest in public affairs. The Romans cultivated their
land either by slaves purchased from the barbarians, and
forced by corporal punishment to labour, or by coloni
partiarii, to whom was given a small share in the har¬
vest as wages : but, in order to oblige these last to con¬
tent themselves with the least possible share, they were
attached to the land, and nearly as much oppressed as
slaves themselves. The proprietors of land varied be¬
tween these two systems, according as the price of slaves
varied, or the colons (peasants, labourers) were more or
less numerous : no cultivator of the land had any pro¬
perty in it. The greatest part was united ip immense
domains, sometimes embracing whole provinces, the ad.

INVASIONS OF BARBARIANS. ^

iniRistration of which wa^iatrusteil to freedmen, whose
only consideration was, how to cultivate the land with
the least possible expense, and how to extract from their
labourers the greatest degree of work with the smallest
quantity of food. The agriculturists, as well what were
called freedmen as slaves, were almost all barbarians by
birth, withBut any interest in a social order which only
oppressed them, without courage for its defence, and
without any pecuniary resources for themselves ; their
numbers also diminished with an alarming rapidity,partly
from desertion, jjartly from new invasions of barbarians,
who carried them off to sell as slaves in other Roman
provinces, and, finally, from a mortality, the necessary
consequence of poverty and starvation.

Italy, nevertheless, was supposed to enjoy a constant
prosperity. During the entire ages of Trajan and the
Antonines, a succession of virtuous and philosophic
emperors followed each other; the world was in peace;
the laws were wise and well administered; riches
seemed to increase ; each succeeding generation raised
palaces more splendid, monuments ^nd public edifices
more sumptuous, than the preceding; the senatorial
families found their revenues increase; the treasury
levied greater imposts. But it is not on the mass of
wealth, it is on its distribution, that the prosperity of
states depend ; increasing opulence continued to meet the
eye, but man became more miserable; the rural popu¬
lation, formerly active, robust, and energetic, were suc¬
ceeded by a foreign race; while the inhabitants of towns
sunk in vice and idleness, or perished in want, amidst
the riches they had themselves created.

It was into this Italy, such as despotism had made it,
that the barbarians penetrated. Eager for the booty which
it contained and could not defend, they repeatedly
ravaged it during the last two centuries of the western
empire. The mercenary troops that Rome had levied
amongst them for its defence, preferring pillage to pay,
frequently< turned their arras against those they were
engaged to defend. They vied with the Romans in

10 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN BEPDBLIC8.

making and unmaking empeijors; and generally chose
them from their own ranks, in order to secure to the
soldier a greater share of the property of the citizen.
The booty diminished as the avidity of these foreigners
increased. The pomp of the western empire soon ap¬
peared^ to an army thus formed^ an useless expense.
Odoacer, of the nation of the Heruli, chief of the mer¬
cenaries who then served in Italy, suppressed it by de¬
posing, in 476 , the last emperor. He took upon him¬
self the title of king, and distributed amongst his soldiers
one third of the land in the most fertile provinces : he
governed during seventeen years this still glorious
country, as a rich farm which the barbarians had a right
to cultivate for their sole use.

The mercenaries united under the sceptre of Odoacer
were not sufficiently strong to defend Italy against a new
invasion of barbarians. The Ostrogoths, encouraged by
the Grecian sovereign of new Rome, the emperor of the
east, arrived in 489, under the cemmand of Theodorio,
from the countries north of the Euxine to the borders of
Italy: they completed the conquest of it in four, and
retained possession of the Peninsula sixty-four years,
under eight successive kings. These new barbarians, in
their turn, demanded and obtained a portion of land and
slaves : they multiplied, it is true; but became rapidly
enervated in a delicious climate, where they had sud¬
denly passed from the severest privations to the enjoy¬
ment of every luxury. They were at last conquered
and subdued, in the year 553, by the Romans of Con¬
stantinople, whom they despised as the degenerate sue.
cessors of the same nation which their ancestors had
vanquished.

The invasion of the Lombards, in 56S, soon followed
the destruction of the monarchy of the Ostrogoths.
Amongst the various hordes which issued from the north
of Germany upon the southern regions, the Lombards
were reputed the most courageous, the most cruel, and the
proudest of their independence j but their number was
inconsiderable, and they scarcely acknowledged any

LOMBASSr SVBJVBATED BY THE FRANKS.

11

Booial tie Eufflcient to them united ; accordingly^
they never completed the conquest of Italy. From 568
to 774, twenty-one Lombard kings, during 206 years,
succeeded each other without establishing their dominion
oither on the Lagunes, at the extremity of the Adriatic
gulf, where such of the inhabitants of upper Italy as
were personally the most exposed had taken refuge and
founded the Venetian republic; or on the shores of the
Adriatic, now called Romagna, governed by a lieutenant
of the emperor of Constantinople, under the title of
exarch of the fiije cities of Pentapolis; or on Rome, de¬
fended only by the spiritual arms of the patriarch of the
western church* or on the southern coast, where the
Greek municipalities ,of Naples, Gaeta, and Amalfi
governed themselves almost as independent republics.
The Lombards, nevertheless, founded a kingdom in
northern Italy, of which Pavia was the capital; and in
southern Italy the duchy of Beneventum, which still
maintained its independence two centuries after the
kingdom was subjugated.

From the middle of the eighth ceitury the Lombards,
masters of a country where the great towns stifl contained
much wealth, where the land had lost nothing of its
fertility, where the example of the vanquished had
taught the vanquishers the advantage of reviving some
agricultural industry, excited the envy of their neigh¬
bours the Franks, who had conquered and oppressed the
Gauls, who despised all occupation but war, and desired
no wealth but what the sword could give. They by
repeated invasions devastated Italy; and at length, in
774, completed the destruction of the Lombard mon¬
archy. For more than twenty years the popes or
bishops of Rome had been in the habit of opposing the
kings of France to the monarchs of Lombardy, who
were odious to them, at first as pagans, and afterwards
as heretics. Chief of the clergy of the ancient capital,
where the power of the emperors of Constantinople had
been nominally established but never felt, they con¬
founded their pretensions with those of the empire; and

12 HISTOaV OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS.

the Lombards having recentJy^conquered the exarchate
of Ravenna, and the Pentapolis, they demanded that
these provinces should be restored to Rome. The
Frank kings made themselves the champions of this
quarrel, which gave them an opportunity of conquering
Ae Lombard monarchy; but Charles, the king who
accomplished this conquest, and who w^as tlie greatest
man that barbarism ever produced, in treating with Rome,
in subjugating Italy, comprehended all the beauty of a
civilisation which his predecessors had seen only to de¬
stroy : he conceived the lofty idea of profiting by the
barbarian force at his disposal to put himself at the head
of the civilisation which he laboured te restore. In¬
stead of considering himself as the king of the conquerors,
occupied only in enriching a barbarous army with the
spoils of the vanquished, he made it his duty and his
glory to govern the country for its best interests, and for
the common good : he did more. In concert with Pope
Leo III., he re-established the monarchy of the con¬
quered as a western Roman empire, which he considered
the representative pf right, in opposition to barbaric
force: he received from the same pope, and from the
Roman people, on Christmas-day in the year 800, the
title of Roman emperor, and the name of Charlemagne,
or Charles the Great, which no one before had ever so
well deserved. As king, and afterwards as emperor, he
governed Italy, together with his other vast states, forty
years : he pursued with constancy, and with increasing
ability, the end he proposed to himself, viz. establish¬
ing the reign of the laws, and a fiourishing civilisation :
but barbarism was too strong for him; and when he
died, in 814, it was re-established throughout the
empire.

Italy had eight kings of the family of Charlemagne,
reckoning his eon and grandson, who reigned under him,
and were, properly speaking, his lieutenants. Charles
le Gros, great grandson of Charlemagne, was deposed in
868 ; after which ten sovereigns, either Italian or Bur¬
gundian, but allied to the race of the Franks, disputed.

BUOOE8BIVK INVASIONa OF BARBARIANS. 13

for seventy years more, *he crown of Italy and the
empire. In ySIj Otho I. of Saxony, king of Germany,
forced Berenger II., who then reigned, to acknowledge
himself his vassal : in 061, Otho entered Italy a second
time with his Germans, was crowned at Rome with the
title of emperor, and sent Berenger II. to end bis days
in a fortress in Germany.

Thus, nearly five centuries elapsed from the fall of the
ancient Roman empire to the passing over of the re¬
newed empire to the Germans. For a long space of
time Italy had })een pillaged and oppressed, in turn, by
barbarians of every denomination, who wantonly over,
tan the country only to plunder, and believed themselves
valiant because, though in small numbers, they spread
terror over a vast extent, and imagined by bloodshed to
give a dignity to their depredations. The country, thus
exposed to so many outrages, did not remain such as the
Romans had left it. The Goth, Lombard, Frank, and
German warriors, who had successively invaded Italy,
introduced several of the opinions and sentiments of the
barbarian race, particularly the hatit of independence
and resistance to authority. They divided with their
kings the country conquered by their valour. They
caused to be ceded to them vast districts, the inhabitants
of which they considered their property equally with the
land. The Lombard monarchy comprehended thirty
dukedoms, or marquisates ; their number diminished
under Charlemagne and his successors ; but, at the same
time, there rose under them a numerous class of counts
and vavasors, amongst whom every duke divided the
province that had been ceded to him, under condition
that they should swear fealty and homage, and follow
him to the wars. The counts, in their turn, divided
among the warriors attached to their colours the land
apportioned to them. Thus was the feudal system,
which made the possession of land the warrior's pay, and
constituted an hereditary subordination, founded on in¬
terest and confirmed by oath, from the king down to
the lowest soldier, established at the same time through-

14 HISTORy OF THE ITALIAN RBFVBLIOB.

out Europe. The Lombards ^ad carried into Italy thr
first germs of this system, which had been developed by
the Franks, and invigorated by the civil wars of Charle¬
magne and his successors : these wars rendered it neces¬
sary that every feudatory should fortify his dwelling to
preserve his allegiance to his lord; and the,country,
which till then had been open, and without defence,,
became covered with castles, in which these feudal lords
established their residence.

About the same time,—that is to say, in the ninth cen.
tury,—cities began to rebuild their ancient walls; for .the '
barbarian kings who had every where levelled these walla
to the ground no longer opposed their reconstruction, thg’
danger of being daily invaded by the rival princes who ■
disputed the throne made them necessary; besides, at
this epochs new swarms of barbarians from all parts
infested Europe; the inhabitants of Scandinavja, under -
the name of Danes and Normans, ravaged England
and France; the Hungarians devastated Germany and
Upper Italy; the Saracens, masters of Africa, infested
the southern coasts ^f Italy and the isles : conqiiesj was
not the purpose of any of these invaders; plunder knd
•massacre were their only objects. Permission to guard
themselves against continual outrages could not be with¬
held from the inhabitants of towns. Several thousand
citizens had often been obliged to pay ransom to little
more than a hundred robbers: but, from the time they
were permitted by their emperors to rebuild their waU^
to purchase or manufacture arms, they felt themselves in
a state to make themselves respected. Their long suffer¬
ing had hardened them, had accustomed them to pri¬
vations and danger, and had taught them it was better
to defend their fives than yield them up to every con¬
temptible aggressor; at the same time, the population of
titles, no longer living in idleness at file expense of the
irovinces of the empire, addicted themselves to industry
or their own profit: they had, accordingly some wealth
0 defend. The ancient curite and municipalities had
leen retained in aU file towns of Italy by their harbariao

EFFORTS OF TOWNS DEFEND THEUSELVES. 15

nue/ers, in order to distrihntfe more equally the burdens
imposed by the conquerors, and reach individuals more
surely. The ‘magistrates were the chiefs of a people
who demanded only bread, arms, and walls.

From the time when towns were secured by walls,
their poVer rapidly increased; the oppressed from all
parts sought refuge in them from the oppressors: they
carried with them their industry, and arms to protect
the rfalls that defended them. Every where they were
eure_ of a good reception ; for every city felt it had
strength only in proportion to the number of its citizens:
eaclf vied wkh its neighbour in efforts to augment the
means of defence, and in the reception given to strangers.
Tlie smaller towns imitated the greater, the villages
those in their turn ; and each had s castle, or at least a
tower, where the population, in case of a sudden attack,
might retire with the most precious of their effects.

In the mean time the dukes, marquisses, counts, and
prelate, who !ooked*on these cities as their property, on
the inhabitants as men who belonged to them, and la¬
boured’Snly for their use, soon perceived that these
citizens were ill disposed to obey, and would not sufier
themselveS^o be despoiled; since they had arms, and
could defend themselves under the protection of their
walls: residence in towns thus became disagreeable to
the nobles, and they left them to establish themselves in
their castles. They became sensible that to defend these
castles they had need of men devoted to them; that, not¬
withstanding the advantage which their heavy armour
gave them when fighting on horseback, they were the
minority; and they hastened to enfranchise the rural
population, to encourage their growth, to give them arms,
and to endeavour to gain their affections. The effect of
this change of rule was rapid: the rural population in the
tenth and eleventh centuries increased, doubled, qua¬
drupled in exact proportion to the land which they had
to cultivate.

Otho I., bis son Otho II., and his grandson Otho III.
were successively acknowledged emperors and kings

16 HrSTORY OF THE ITAUAN HEPUBLIOS.

of Italy, from 96I to When this braniii of

the house of Saxony hec&me extinct, Henry II. of
Bavaria, and Conrad the Salic of Franconia, filled
the throne from 1004 to 1039- During this period
of nearly eighty years, the German emperors twelve
times entered Italy at the head of their armiee, which
they always drew up in the plains of Boncaglia near
Placentia: there they held the states of Lombardy,
received homage from their Italian feudatories, caused
the rents due to be paid, and promulgated laws for
government of Italy. A foreign sof'ereign, howeve;^
almost always absent, known only by his incursioifs at
the head of a barbarous army, could not eificaciously
govern a country which he hardly knew, and where his
yoke was detested. During these five reigns, the social
power became more and more weak in Italy. The em¬
perors were too happy to acknowledge the local autho¬
rities, whatever they were, whenever they could obtain
from them their pecuniary dues; Sometimes th|y were;
dukes or marquisses, whose dignities had survived the
disasters of varioHs invasions and of civil warl some¬
times the archbishops and bishops of great cities, whom
Charlemagne and his successors had frequenjiy invested
with duchies and counties escheated to tfe crown, reckon¬
ing that lords elected for life would remain more de¬
pendent than hereditary lords; sometimes, finally, they
were the magistrates themselves, who, although elected
by the people, received from the monarch the title of
imperial vicars, and took part with the nobles and pre¬
lates in the Plaids (Placita), or diets of Roncaglia.

After a stay of some .months, the emperor returned
with his army into Germany ; the nobles retired to their
castles, the prelates and magistrates to their cities:
neither of these last acknowledged a superior authority to
their own, nor reckoned on any other force than what
they could themselves employ to assert what they called
their rights. Opposite interests could not fail to pro¬
duce collision, and the war was universal. • In the time
of Conrad the SaUc, the prelates almost throughout

AUTHORITY DP THE BISHOPS OP ROME. 17

Lombardy joined t||e cida Sgainst the nobles; and from
1035 to 1039 there Was a general war between the,se two
orders of society. Conrad put an end to it, by a con-
sdtution which is considered to be the basis of feudal law.
By this the inheritance of fiefs was protected from the
caprices of the lords and of the crown,—the most op¬
pressive conditions of feudal dependence were suppressed
or softened,—and the few remaining slaves of the land
wej’tf set free.

The crown of Conrad the Salic passed in a direct line
to his son, grandson, and great grandson. The first,
Hetry III., reigned from 1039 to 1056; the second,
Henry IV., from 1056 to 1106; the third, Henry V.,
from 1106 to 1125. The last two reigns were troubled
by the bloody quarrel between the Empire and the
egurt of Rome, called the war of investitures. Rome
had never made part of the monarchy of the Lombards.
This ancient capital of the world, with the territory ap-
pertaioing to it, had, since the conquest of Alboin,
formed a (jukedom, governed by a patrician or Greek
duke, sent from Constantinople. Th? bishop of Rome,
however, wlw, according to the ancient canonical forms,
was elect^li by the clergy, the senate, and the people of
his diocese, had much more authority over his flock than
this foreign magistrate. He considered himself, too, as
patriarch of the West, and the head of all the Latin
churches. This authority, it is true, was not indisput¬
ably acknowledged by orthodox prelates ; and the bar¬
barians, who professed either paganism or Arianism, held
it in contempt. The pontiff however, who now began
to take exclusively the name of Pope, had more than once
successfully defended Rome with his spiritual arms
when temporal ones had failed. When, in the year 717,
an iconoclast, or enemy of images, filled the throne of
Constantinople, the popes, under the.pretence of heresy,
rejected his authority altogether: a municipality, at the
head of which were a senate and consuls, then go¬
verned Romrtearly as an independent state; the Greeks,
occupied with their own dissensions, seemed to forget it j

18 HISTORY OF TBB ITALIAN REPUBLICS.

and Rome owed to this foi%Afulnes| fifty years of sort
of liberty. The Romans found once more a faint image
of their past glory: sometimes even the title of Roman
republic was revived. They approved, notwithstanding,
of pope Stephen II. conferring on the princes of the
Franks the dignity of patricians, in order to transfer to
them the authority which the Greek magistrate exercised
in their cityin the name of the emperor of Constantinople;
and the people gladly acquiesced when, in the yeaf 800,
Leo III. crowned Charlemagne as Augustus, and re¬
storer of the western empire. From-that period Rome
became once more the capital of the empire. At Rome the
chiefs of the empire were henceforth to receive the golden
crown from the hands of the pope, after having received
the silver one of the kingdom of Germany at Aix-la.
ChapeUe, and the iron crown of Lombardy at Milan*

Great wealth and much feudal power were, by the .
gratitude of the emperors, attached to the see of Rome.
The papacy became the highest object of ambition to
the whole sacerdotal order; and, in an age>of violence
and anarchy, ba/bns notorious for their robberies, and
young libertines recommended only by the i^our of some
Roman ladies, not unfrequently. filled thg pontifical chair.
The other bishops selected were often no better. The
German emperors, on arriving at Rome, were sometimes
obliged to put an end to such a scandal, and choose among
the competitors, or depose a pope who put all Christen¬
dom to the blush. Henry III. obliged the people to
renounce the right which they had hitherto exercised,
and so greatly abused, to take part in the election of
popes. He named, himself, four successively, whom he
chose among the most learned and the most pious of the
clergy of Italy and Germany; and thus powerfully
seconded the spirit of reform which began to animate
the church from the eleventh century.

Amidst the convulsions to which society was exposed,
the wealth of the clergy had remained intact. The
kings whom it tempted dared not seize it for them¬
selves ; but they distributed it, vrith the dignities of the

PLANS OP BEFOBMATIOK BT HILDEBRAND. Ig

diilrch, among their favoirftes— their creatures, — ser¬
vile priests, who had nothing ecclesiastical but the
name. These promotions excited a general clamour.
Religious men pretended that kings introduced corrup¬
tion into the body of the clergy—that they destroyed
the independence which ought to belong to the ministers
of God. An ardent desire to purify the priesthood, by
preventing these dignities from being distributed in
purSly temporal views, was manifested j but it belonged
to one of the greatest characters produced in the middle
age to agitate all Christendom for the attainment of this
end.

Hildebrand, born at Soana, in Tuscany, a man of the
most obscure condition, but from the moment when he
entered into orders distinguished for his talents, was sent
by his convent to pursue his studies at Cluny, in
France. He conceived, in his solitude, the plan of re¬
volution, by which he proposed to himself the subjuga¬
tion of the world to the sacerdotal power. In the
universe he saw but God, the priest his sole minister,
and mankind obedient. He desigifbd that the whole
priesthood 4lhould be moved by one single will, should
know only one passion ^ that of establishing the power
of Heaven. The whole church appeared to him cor¬
rupted : he undertook to reform it in its head, in its
members, in the whole body of the faithful under its
control. He anathematised all intervention of the secu¬
lar power in the distribution of the dignities of the
tdiurch ; it was, he said, simony — making a commerce
of the gifts of the Holy Spirit. The crime was the
same, whether the people in their public assemblies, or
nobles, or kings, took part in the election of prelates, or
attempted to confer on them the investiture of even the
temporal power attached to their bishoprics. In 1059,
he obtained of the council of Lateran that the election of
popes should be vested in the cardinals ; and the nomi¬
nation of all prelates in the chapter*, jointly with the
pope. To Tletach the clergy from human society, he
proscribed and punished with severity the marriage of
c 2

20 HISTORY OP THE IT^IAN REPUBLICS.

priests, whi«h, till then, had been permitted or tolerlted
by some provincial councils, particularly in Lombardy.
Finally, concentrating ail the power of the church in the
pope, he taught the priests to consider him as an unerr¬
ing being, who became holy by his election —who could
alone name and depose bishops — assemble, preside
over, and dissolve councils: he was, he said, in short, a
god upon earth— absolute master of all princes, who were
bound to kiss his feet, and whom he could depoSe at
will, by releasing their subjects from their oaths of
fidelity. •

Hildebrand accomplished, at least for a time, the im¬
mense revolution which he had undertaken: he changed
the spirit of the popedom, of the clergy, and the people ;
and he enslaved kings. He procured, by his influence,
the election of the four popes who preceded him in the
chair of St. Peter, which he ascended himself in the
year 1073, taking the name of Gregory VII. The
popes his successors continued, after his death in 1085,
to act upon his maxims, and seemed as if still animated
by his spirit. Nevertheless, he experienced from the
clergy, above aU from those of Lombardyjj^ prodigious
resistance. He tormented Italy and Germany with a
constant civil war; he called in against Rome the Nor¬
mans, who burnt the city, and sold almost all the inha¬
bitants into slavery ; he compelled his heroic rival, the
emperor Henry IV., to do penance before him in the
open court of Canosa, whilst the ground was covered
with snow ; he obliged him to remain three days and
three nights in the habit of a penitent, barefooted and
fasting, before he would grant him absolution. The
successors of Gregory VII. excited the two sons of
Henry IV. successively to revolt against him, and depose
him. Henry soon died of a broken heart. Henry V.,
the second of these unnatural children, whose cause the
pope had espoused, after having obtained the crown by the
aid of the priests, became their enemy in his turn. During
sixteen years he made war against the churclf, to maintain
'.the independence of the imperial crown, and the rights of

WAR OP INVESTITURES. 21

se<!lilar sovereigns over Ih'fe fiefs held by the clergy.
The people at length, wearied and exhausted, forced these
two rival powers to an agreement, in which the rights.of
both were curtailed. In the diet of Worms, 1122, the
emperor abandoned to the pope the investiture of bishops
by the ring and crosier; while he reserved to himself
the transmission of the regal rights attached to each
bishopric by the concession of the sceptre. These were
onlj exterior ceremonies ; in fact, the people alone
were deprived of their rights in the choice of their pas¬
tor. Sovereigna retained almost exclusively the nomi¬
nation of prelates in their respective dominions.

The war of investitures, which lasted more than sixty
years, accomplished the dissolution of every tie between
the different members of the kingdom of Italy. Civil
wars have at least this advantage,—that they force the
rulers of the people to consult the wishes of their
subjects, oblige them to gain aff’ections which constitute
their strength, and to compensate, by the granting of
new privileges, the services which they require. The
prelates, nobles, and cities of Ital^ obeyed, some the
emperor, dlhers the popej not from a blind fear, but
from choice, from affection, from conscience, according
as the political or religious sentiment was predominant
in each. The war was general, but every where wagetl
with the national forces. Every city armed its militia,
which, headed by the magistrates, attacked the neigh¬
bouring nobles or towns of a contrary party. Al^hile each
city imagined it was fighting either for the pope or the
emperor, it was habitually impelled exclusively by its
own sentiments: every town considered itself as a whole,
as an independent state, which had its own allies and
enemies ; each citizen felt an ardent patriotism, not for
the kingdom of Italy, or for the empire, but for his own
city.

At the period when either kings or emperors had
granted to towns the right of raising fortifications, that
of assembling the citizens at the sound of a great bell, to
concert together the means of their common defence,
c 3

22 HISTORY OP THE ITATJA|r REPUBLICS.

had been also conceded. Tfiift meeting of aU the men
of the state capable of bearing arms was called a par¬
liament. It assembled in the great square, and elected
annually two consuls, charged with the administration of
justice at home, and the command of the army abroad.
The militia of every city was divided into separate
bodies, according to local partitions, each led by a
gonfaloniere, or standard bearer. They fought on foot,
and assembled round the carroccio, a heavy car drawn by
oxen, and covered with the flags and armorial bearings of
the city. A high pole rose in the micMle of this car,
bearing the colours and a Christ, which seemed to bless
the army, with both arms extended. A priest said daily
mass at an altar placed in the front of the car. The
trumpeters of the community, seated on the back part,
sounded the charge and the retreat. It was Heribert
archbishop of Milan, contemporary of Conrad the Salic,
who invented this car in imitation of the ark of alliance,
and caused it to be adopted at Milan. All the free
cities of Italy followed the example: this sacred car, in¬
trusted to the gud('dianship of the militia, gave them
weight and confidence. The nobles whof committed
themselves in the civil wars, and were obliged to have
recourse to the protection of towns, where they had been
admitted into the first order of citizens, formed the
only cavalry.

The parliament, which named the consuls, appointed
also a secret council, called a Consilio di Credenza, to
assist the government, composed of a few members
taken from each division; besides a grand council of the
people, who prepared the, decisions to be submitted to
the parliament. The Consilio di Credensa was, at the
same time, charged with the administration of thefinances,
consisting chiefly of entrance duties collected at the gates
of the city, and voluntary contributions asked of the
citizens in moments of danger. As industry had rapidly
increased, and had preceded luxury, — as domestic life
was sober, and theproduce of labour considerab'le,—wealth
had greatly augmented. The citizens allowed thenap

ORIGINAL OONSTIJUIIONS OF THE FREE TOWNS. 23

selves no other use of theij liches than that of defending
or embellishing their country. It was from the year 900
to the year 1200 that the most prodigious works were un¬
dertaken and accomplished by the towns of Italy. They
began by surrounding themselves with thick walls,
ditches, towers, and counter guards at the gates; im¬
mense works, which a patriotism ready for every sacrifice
could alone accomplish. The maritime towns at the
same time constructed their ports, quays, canals, ahd
custom-houses, which served also as vast magazines for
commerce. Evqjry city built public palaces for the Sig-
noria, or municipal magistrates, and prisons; and con¬
structed also temples, which to this day fill us with
admiration by their grandeur and magnificence. These
three regenerating centuries gave an impulse to archi¬
tecture, which .soon awakened the other fine arts.

The republican spirit which now fermented in every
city, and gave to each of them constitutions so wise, ma¬
gistrates so zealous, and citizens so patriotic, and so capable
of great achievements, had found in Italy itself the models
which had contributed to its formt^ion. The war of
investitures gave wing to this universal spirit of liberty
and patriotism in all the municipalities of Lombardy, in
Piedmont, Venetia, Romagna, and Tuscany. But there
existed already in Italy other free cities, of which the
experience had been sufficiently long to prove that a
petty people finds, in its complete union and devotion to
the common cause, a strength often wanting in great
states. The free cities which flourished in the eleventh
century rose from the mins of the western empire; as
those in Italy which preceded them in the career of
liberty rose from the ruins of the empire of the East.

When the Greeks resigned to the Lombards Italy,
which a few years before they had conquered from the
Ostrogoths, they still preserved severEil isolated ports
and fortified places along the coast. Venice, at the ex¬
tremity of the Adriatic ; Ravenna, at the south of the
mouth of ithe Po ; Genoa, at the foot of the Ligurian
mountains ; Fisa, towards the mouths of the Amo;

0 4

24 BISTORY OF THE ITAEUN REPUBLICS.

f

Rome, Gaiita, Naples, An^ay, Bari, were either never
conquered by the Lombards, or in subjection too short a
time to have lost their ancient walls, and the habit of
guarding them. These cities served as the refuge of
Roman civilisation. All those who had preserved any
fortune, independence of mind, or hatred of oppression,
assembled in them to concert the means of resisting the
insolence of their barbarian masters. The Grecian em¬
pire maintained itself at Constantinople in all its aneient
pride; but, with oriental apathy,it regarded these remains
as still representing its province of Italy, while it did no¬
thing for their defence. From time to time, a duke, an
exarch, a patrician, a catapan, or other magistrate, was
sent, with a title announcing the highest pretensions, but
unaccompanied by any real force. The citizens of these
towns demanded money and soldiers to repair and defend
their fortifications; whilst the emperors, on the contrary,
demanded that the money and soldiers of Italy should
be sent to Constantinople. After some disputes, the
Greek government found it prudent to abandon the
question, and shut its eyes on the establishment of a
liberty which it despised, but which perhaps might be
useful in the defence of these distant possessions; finally,
the magistrates, whom these towns themselves nominated,
became the acknowledged depositories of the imperial
authority. The disposal of Aeir own money and sol¬
diers was allowed them, on condition that nothing should
be demanded of the emperors, who were satisfied to see
their names at the head of every act, and their image on
the coin, without exacting other acts of submission.
This policy was not, however, exactly followed with
respect to Ravenna, or afterwards to Bari. In these
cities the representative of the emperor had fixed his
residence with a Greek garrison. Ravenna, as well as
the cities appertaining to it, denominated the Fentapolis,
was conquered by the Lombards between 720 and 730.
Bari became then the capital of the thema of Lombardy,
which extended over a great part of Apulia. i We have
already shown bow Rome passed from the Greek to thf

2S

ORIQIN OF VENICF.

«f I

wesjern empire: we susj^t, rather than know, that
Genoa and Pisa, after having been occupied by the
Lombards, preserved their relations with Constantinople.
The pallium, or silk flag, presented for some time to the
emperors, was considered by them as a sort of tribute;
but Venice on the upper sea, Gaeta, Naples, and Amalfi,
on the lower, advanced more openly to independence.

From the invasion by Attila in 452, the marsh'es
calle^J Lagune, formed at the extremity of the Adriatic
by the slime deposed by seven or eight great rivers,
amidst which arose innumerable islands, had been the
refuge of all the' rich inhabitants of Padua, Vicenza,
Verona, Treviso, and other great cities of Venetia, who
fled from the sabres of the Huns. The Roman empire
of the west survived this great calamity twenty-four
years; but it was only a period of expiring agony, during
which fre.sh disasters continually forced new refugees to
establish themselves in the Lagune. A numerous popu¬
lation was at length formed there, supported by fishing,
the making of salt, some otlier manufactories, and the
commerce carried on by means of these many rivers.
Beyond the reach of the barbarians, who had no vessels,
forgotten by the Romans, and their successors the Ostro-
go^s, they maintained their independence under the ad¬
ministration of tribunes, named by an assembly of the
people in each of the separate isles. The Venetians looked
upon the Ostrogoths, and their successors the Lombards,
as heretics; so that religious zeal strengthened their
aversion to the dominant powers of Italy. On the
other hand, the population of each island farming a
little separate republic, jealousies arose ; their tribunes
disagreed. To put an end to these factions, the citizens
of every island met in a single assembly at Heraclea in
697 , and elected a chief of maritime Venetia, whom they
called doge, or duke. This title, borne by the Gre^
governors of the provinces of Italy, seems to indicate
that the doge was considered a lieutenant of the empe¬
ror of Constyitinople. The Venetians, in fact, persisting
in regarding themselves as members of the eastern eia»

26 HISTORY OP THE ITALI^N^ REPUBLICS.

pire, never acknowledged'Wie pretensions of Chftrle.
magne and his successors to the dominion of all Italy,
It was in 809) in a war against Pepin, son of Charle¬
magne, that the Venetians made choice of the island of
the Rialto, near which they assembled their fleet, with their
wealth collected on board, and built the city of Venice, the
capital of their republic. Twenty years afterwards they
transported thither, from Alexandria, the body of St.
Mark, the evangelist. They chose him patron ofnheir
state. His lion figured in their arms, and his name
in their language, whenever they would designate with
peculiar affection their country or government.

While the Venetians disputed with the Lombards,
the Frank and the German emperors, the little land
on which stood their houses, they had also to dispute
the sea that bathed them with the Slavonians, who had
established themselves for the purpose of piracy on the
eastern side of the Adriatic. Amidst them, on the same
coast, several little cities inhabited by Greeks, but for¬
gotten by the empire, endeavoured in vain to defend
their liberties and municipal governments. In 997t
these small towns of Istria and Dalmatia made alliance
with Venice ; consented to receive judges chosen by the
doge, and to fight under his banner. With their aid
Venice vanquished the pirates of Narenta and Croatia ;
and the doge from that period took the title of duke of
Venice and Dalmatia.

The first magistrate of the republics of Naples, Gaeta,
and Amalfi bore likewise the title of doge. These
three cities, forgotten by the Greek emperors, and re¬
ceiving no aid from them, still held by the ties of com¬
merce to Greece. The inhabitants had devoted them¬
selves with ardour to navigation; they trafiicked in the
Levant, and covered southern Italy with its rich mer¬
chandise. The country situated beyond the Tiber had
been exposed to fewer invasions than upper Italy. It
bad not, however, entirely escaped. A Lombard chief
entered it in 589, and founded the grtat duchy qf
Benevento, which comprehended nearly th% wboje

I FREE 8UUTHERN ITALT. 27

soutfiern part of the peniR^la. This dukedom iiiain>
tained itself independent of the kingdom of the Lom¬
bards at Pavia, and had not been involved in its fall.
It defended itself with valour against Charlemagne and
bis successors, who attempted its conquest ; but in 839,
at the end of a civil war, it was divided into the three
principalities of Benevento, Salerno, and Capua. The
Saracens had established colonies, in the year 828, in
Sicilf, which till then had been subject to the Greek
empire : these Saracens, a few years afterwards, passed
into southern Itiriy. The three republics of Naples,
Gaeta, and Amalfi preserved their independence by
exciting enmity between the Lombards and Saracens,
who equally menaced them ; but these barbarians soon
sank into the languor produced by the charms of a
southern climate. It seemed as if they had no longer
courage to risk a life to which so many enjoyments were
attached. When they fought it was with effeminacy ;
and they hastened the termination of every war, to
plunge again into the voluptuous ease from which it had
roused them. The citizens of the »epublics had the
advantage over them of walls and defiles ; and, without
being braver than the Lombards, maintained their inde¬
pendence against them for six centuries.

Southern Italy, till the year 1000, was disturbed
only by the petty wars between the Lombard prin¬
cipalities, the republics under the protection of the
Greek empire, the catapans of Bari, and the wander,
ing bands of Mussulmans, whom love of plunder more
than religious zeal had brought into Italy. But about
this epoch there arrived at Salerno, and afterwards
in Apulia, Norman adventurers, the second or third
generation of those terrible Danish corsairs who had
so long and so cruelly ravaged France, and who were
already, in 912, established in Neustria, where they
adopted Christianity and the French language. They
retained the valour of their ancestors, their love of
■'adventure, ind passion for voyages. They first came
in..grea( numbers to visit as pilgrims the sanctuaries of

28 HISTORY OP THE IT|4LIAN BEPUBLIOS.

southern Italy, and afterwfirils entered as soldiers'into
the armies either of the princes of Lombardy, the
republics, or the Greeks of Bari, who had recently
reconquered the whole of Apulia. They proved so
superior in valour to all those to whom they were op¬
posed, that th^se mercenaries soon made all the small
states, among which they had come to seek adventures,
tremble. In 1041, they conquered Apulia from the
Greeks; in 1060, Calabria; from lObT to lOgO) Si¬
cily : about the same time they subjugated the three
Lombard principalities of Beneventum, Salerno, and
Capua. The three republics were the last states in
southern Italy which fell under the Norman yoke.
We do not, indeed, know the date of the conquest of
Gaeta, the records of the history of the town being very
scanty. But Amalfi, illustrious for the foundation, in
the Holy Land, of the hospital and military order of
St. John of Jerusalem, for the invention of the com-^
pass, and for the preservation of the pandects of Jus¬
tinian, surrendered to the Normans in 1131. The
leader of these l^t was then Roger II.; to whom the
antipope Anacletus had, the preceding year, given the
title of king of the Two Sicilies. Roger besieged, in
1138, the city of Naples; which though, in turns,
succoured by the emperor of Germany and the republic
of Pisa, was compelled also to surrender.

The republic of Pisa, which vainly sought to save
from ruin these first Italian republics of the middle
ages, was a city which navigation and commerce had
enriched. Genoa, which soon became its rival, had
escaped the pillage of these northern conquerors, and
had preserved a constant intercourse with Constan¬
tinople and with Syria; from whence the citizens brought
the rich merchandise which they afterwards dispersed
throughout Lombardy. The Pisans and Genoese, in¬
vigorated by a seafaring life, were accustomed to defend
with the sword the merchandise which th^y opnveyed
from one extremity to the other of the Mediterranean.
They were often in conflict with the SaracSis, Ulrt

. PISA OENOA. 29

' . i •

them addicted to maritime commerce, to which these
last frequently added piracy. The Saracens pillaged
Genoa in the year 936. In 1005 they entered a
suburb of Pisa; and again invested that city in the
year 1012. Their colonies in Sardinia, Corsica, and
the Balearic Isles, constantly menaced Italy. The
Pisans, seconded by the Genoese, in their turn attacked
SarcUnia, in the year 1017 ; but completed the conquest
only in 1050. They established colonies there, and
divided it into fiefs, between the most illustrious fa¬
milies of Pisa aSid Genoa. They also conquered the
Balearic Isles from the Saracens, in the year 1113.

When, towards the end of the eleventh century, the
western world took up the dispute with the Saracens
for the sepulchre of Jesus Christ, Venice, Pisa, and
Genoa had already reached a high point of commercial
power; these three cities had more vessels on the Medi¬
terranean than the whole of Christendom besides. They
seconded the Crusaders with enthusiasm. They pro¬
visioned them when arrived off the coast of Syria, and
kept up their communication with tlfe west. The Ve¬
netians assert that they sent a fleet of 200 vessels, in
the year 1099j to second the first crusade. The Pisans
affirm that their archbishop Daimbert, who was after¬
wards patriarch of Jerusalem, passed into the east with
120 vessels. The Genoese claim only twenty-eight
galleys and six vessels; but all concurred with equal
zeal in the conquest of the Holy Land; and the three
maritime republics obtained important privileges, which
they preserved as long as the kingdom of Jerusalem
lasted.

Such were the changes which the space of six cen¬
turies from the fall of the Roman empire accomplished
in Italy. Towards the end of the fifth century, the so¬
cial tie, which had made of the empire one body, became
dissolved, and was succeeded by no other. The citizen
felt nothing for his fellow-citizen ; he expected no sup¬
port from him, and ofiered him none. He could no-
‘-where invoke protection; he every where saw only

30 HISTOBY OF THE IT^iLIAN REPUBLICS.

violence and oppression. ‘'I'owards the t^!^nning of
the twelfth century-j the citizens of the towns of Italy
had as little to expect from abroad. The emperor of
the Grermans, who called himself their sover^ign^ was^
with his barbarian army^ only one enemy more. But
universallyj where the circle of the same wall formed a
common interest, the spirit of association was developed.
The citizens promised each other mutual assistance.
Courage grew with liberty; and the Italians, no longer
oppressed, found at last in themselves their own de¬
fence.

CHAP. II.

rSEDEaiCE BARBAROaSA ENDEAVOURS TO ABRIDGE THE LIBERTIES

or THE TOWNS IIALY. - THEIR RESISTANCE. - THE

LEAGUE OF LOMBARDY. -TRUCE OF VENICE—AND FEACE OF

CONSTANCE-WHICH FIXES THEIR EIGHTS.

When the inhabitants of the cities of Italy associated
for their common defence, their first necessity was to
guard against the brigandage of the barbarian armies,
which invaded their country and treated them as
enemies; the second, to protect themselves from the
robberies of other barbarians who called themselves their
masters. Their united efforts soon ensured their safety;
in a few years they found themselves rich and powerful;
Bod these same men, whom emperors, prelates, and
nobles considered only as freed serfs, perceived that they
constituted almost the only public force in Italy. Their
self-confidence grew with their power; and the desire of
domination succeeded that of independence. Those cities
which had accumulated the most wealth, whose walla
enclosed the greatest population, attempted, from the first
half of the twelfth century, to secure by force of arms

oa^em of odeij>i|s and ohibelines. SI

of such of tS^eighbouring towns as did
not appear Efficiently strong to resist them. These
peater citie's had no intention to strip the smaller of
their lib^y; their sole purpose was to force them into
a perpetuU alliance^ so as to share their good or evil
fortune, and always place their armed force under the
standard of the dominant city.

The long war of the investitures, between the Fran.
Doniafi emperors and the popes, had given the first im¬
pulse to this ambition : as general interests were involved,
as it was a questyjn of distant operations and common
danger, the cities felt the necessity of alliances, and of
an active correspondence, which soon extended from od«
extremity of Itdy to the other. The smaller towns soon
found that this general policy was beyond their means,
and that the great cities, in which commerce and wealth
had accumulated knowledge, and which alone received
the communications of the pope or of the emperor,
naturally placed themselves at the head of the league
formed in their provinces, either for the empire or for
the church. These two leagues were<iot yet known in
l^aly by the names of Guelph and Ghibeline, which in
Germany had been the war-cry of the two parties at the
battle of Winsberg, fought on the 21st of December,
1140, and which had previously distinguished, the
former the dukes of Saxony and Bavaria, devoted to the
pope j^e latter, the emperors of the house of Franconia.
But although these two names, which seem since to
have become exclusively Italian, had not yet been
adopted in Italy, die hereditary affection respectively for
the two parties already divided the minds of the people
for more than a century, and faction became to each
a second country, often served by them with not less
heroism and devotion than their native city.

Two great towns in the plains of Lombardy surpassed
every other in power and wealdt: Milan, which habit¬
ually directed the party of the church ; and Pavia, which
directed that tif the empire. Both towns, however, seem
to have changed parties during the reigns of Lothario III.

da HISTORY OF THE IltU^IAK PXPVBt^,

and Conradll., who, from year 1125 to Spa, {nac^
in opposition the two houses of Gudphs anqfQhibelih^
in Germany. MUan, having during the first half o'f the*
twelfth century experienced some resistance ^om'thi
towns of Lodi and Como, rased the former, mspersing
the inhabitants in open villages, and obliged the latter to
destroy its fortifications. Cremona and Novara ad¬
hered to the party of Pavia; Tortona, Crema, Bergami,
Brescia, Placentia, and Parma, to that of Milan. Ahnong
the towns of Piedmont, Turin took the lead, and dispute®
the authority of the counts of Savoy,'who called them¬
selves imperial vicars in that country. Montferrat con¬
tinued to have its marquises. They were among the
few great feudatories who had survived the civil wars |
but the towns and provinces were not in subjection to
them, and Asti was more powerful than they were.
The family of the Veronese marqftises, on the contrary,
who from the time of the Lombard kings had to defend
the frontier against the Germans, were extinct ; and the_,
great cities of Verona, Padua, Vicenza, Treviso, and
Mantua, nearly eliual in power, maintained their inde¬
pendence. Bologna held the first rank among tltP
towns south of the Po, and had become equally formi-
dable on the one side to Modena and Reggio, and on the
other to Ferrara, Ravenna, Imola, Faenza, Forli, and
Rimini. Tuscany, which had also had its |g^rful
marquises, saw their family become extinct the
countess Matilda, the contemporary and friend of
Gregory VII. Florence had since risen in power,
destroyed Fiesole, and, without exercising dorainios
over the neighbouring towns of Pistoja, Arezzo, San
Miniato, and Volterra, or the. more distant towns of
Lucca, Cortona, Perugia, and Sienna, was considered
the head of the Tuscan league; and the more so that
Pisa at this period thought only of her maritime ex¬
peditions. The family of the dukes of Spoleto had
also become extinct, and the towns of Ombria regained
their freedom; but their situation in the m'ountains pre¬
vented them from rising into importance. In fine,

]15'2. AaVOLD OF ^ESCIA AT ROME. 3S

Rond heiai^ indulged tha lame spirit of independence.
An eloque^jroonk, the disciple of Abelard, who had made
liimself known throughout Europe, preached in lisg
a twofold reform, in the religious and political orders ;
the nam^orne by hitn was Arnold of Brescia. He spoke
to men of the antique liberty which was their right;
of the abuses which disfigured the church. Driven out
of Italy by pope Innocent II. and the council of Lateran,
ne took refuge in Switzerland, and taught the town of
Zurich to frame a free constitution; but in the year 1143
he was recalled tq Rome, and that city again heard the
words "Roman republic,” " Roman senate,” " comitia
of the people.” The pope branded his opinions with
the name of “ heresy of the politicians;” and Arnold of
Brescia, having been given up to him by the emperor,
was burnt alive before the gate of the castle of St,
Angelo, in the year 1155. But his precepts survived,
and the love of liberty in Rome did not perish with him.
In southern Italy, the conquests of the Normans had
finally smothered the spirit of liberty; and the town of
Aquila in the Abruzzi alone preserved any republican
privileges.

Such was the state of Italy, when the Germanic diet,
assembled at Frankfort in 1152, conferred the crown on
Frederick Barbarossa, duke of Swabia, and of the house
of Hgtenstaufen. This prince was nephew to Conrad III.,
whom^e succeeded; he was allied to the two houses
of the Guelphs and Ghibelines, which had contended
with each other for the empire, and was regarded, with
good reason, by the Germans as their most distinguished
chief. Frederick Barbarossa was not only brave, but
understood the art of war, at least so far as it could be
understood in an age so barbarous. He made himself
beloved by the soldiers, at the same time that he sub¬
jected them to a discipline which others had not yet
thought of establishing. He held his word sacred; he
abhorred grgtuitous cruelty, althougli the shedding of
human blood had in general nothing revolting in it to a
prince of the middle ages : but the prerogatives of his

S4 HISTOBY OF THB IT^LIAIT RXPT>Bt.I08. 1154f

crown appeared to him saeaed rights, whicH Aom }irid%
and even from conscience, he was disposed to’^eserve and
extend. The Italians he considered in a state of reTok

against the imperial throne and the German nation; and
he believed it to be his first duty to reducdlHhein to

subjection.

Frederick Barbarossa, accordingly, in the month of
October, 1154, entered Italy with a powerful German
army, by the valley of Trent. He proposed to himsdf
not only receiving there the crowns of Italy and the em«
pire, and reducing to obedience subject who appeared to
him to forget their duty to their sovereign; but also to
punish in particular the Milanese for their arrogance ; to
redress the complaints which the citizens of Pavia and
Cremona had brought against them; and to oblige Milan
to render to the towns of Lodi and Como, which it had

dismantled, all the privileges which Milan itself enjoyed.
On arriving at Roncaglia, where the diets of the king¬
dom of Italy were held, he was assailed by complaints
from the bishops and nobles against the towns, as well
as by complaintsBBgainst the Milanese from the consuls
of Pavia, of Cremona, of Como, and of Lodi; while
those of Crema, of Brescia, of Placentia, of Asti and
Tortona, vindicated them. Before giving judgment on
the differences submitted to his decision, Frederick

announced his intention of judging for himself t^ state
of the country, by visiting in person Piedmont* and
Montferrat. Having to pass through the Milanese ter¬
ritory on his way to Novara, he commanded the consuls
of Milan to supply him with provisions on the road.
The towns acknowledged that they owed the emperors
upon their journeys the dues designated by the feudal
words “foderum, paraia, mamionaticum,” forage, food,
and lodging: but the Germans, retarded in their march by
heavy and continual rain, took two days to reach a stage
which the Milanese supposed they would reach in one:
provisions of course failed; and the Germans avenged
th^nselves on the unhappy inhabitants by pillaging and
burning the villages wherever sufficient rations were not

1155. FIRHT EXPEDITION OF FREDERICS. 95

£ouii4. Frederick treated Bwith kindness the towns of
Novara and Turin ; but those of Chieii and Asti had
been denounced to him as entertaining the same send*
ments as Milan; the inhabitants fled at his approach,
and he {Sundered and burnt their deserted houses. Ar>
rived next before Tortona, he ordered the inhabitants to
renounce their alliance with the Milanese,* but the;-,
trusting to the strength of the upper town, into which
tfaeyihad retreated, while Frederick occupied the lower
part, had the courage to refuse. The Germans began
the siege of Torfona on the 13th of February, 1155.
They could not prevent the entrance of 200 Milanese,
to assist in its defence. For sixty-two days did this brave
people resist the attacks of the formidable army of Fre¬
derick, the numbers of which had been increased by the
armed force of Pavia, and the other Ghibeline towns.
The want of water compelled them at last to sur¬
render ; and the emperor allowed them to retire to
Milan, taking only the few effects which each individual
could carry away; every thing else was given up to
the pillage of the soldiers, and the* houses became a
prey to the flames. The Milanese received with respect
these martyrs of liberty, and every opulent house gave
shelter and hospitality to some of the unhappy inhabit¬
ants of Tortona. Frederick meanwhile placed on his
head, in the temple of Pavia, the iron crown of the kings
of Lombardy ; and began his march on Rome, to receive
there the golden crown of the empire.

But the Germans who accompanied the emperor, not¬
withstanding the ardour with which they had under¬
taken this distant expedition, began to be tired of so
long an absence from their home. The licence extended
to their pillage and debauchery no longer appeared to
them a sufficient compensation for tedious marches and
the dangers of war. They pressed the emperor to ad¬
vance towards Rome, and to avoid all quarrel with the
great towns by which they passed, although almost all
refused to tdmit them within their walls,—providing
subsistence and lodging for them in the suburbs only.

S6 BieiTORY OF THE ITAf.IAN REPUBLICS. 1155.

The impossibility of maintBining discipline in a rapa¬
cious armyj which beheld for the first time the unknown
riches of commerce and the arts ; the difficulty of avoid¬
ing quarrels between two nations, neither of which un¬
derstood the language of the other, perhaps justified this
precaution. Frederick thus passed by Placentia, Parma,
Bologna, and Florence. He was not received even into
Rome ; his troops occupied what was styled the Leonine
city, or the suburb built round the Vatican: hetwas
there crowned by the pope, Adrian IV.; while his army
was obliged to repel the Romans who advanced by the
bridge of St. Angelo and the borgo* of Trastevere to
disturb the ceremony. Frederick withdrew from Rome
the following day; conducting liis army into the moun¬
tains, to avoid the great heat of summer. The citizens
of Spoleto, not having supplied with sufficient haste the
provisions he demanded, he attacked, took, and burnt
their city : sickness, however, began to thin the ranks
of his soldiers; many also deserted, to embark at Ancona.
Frederick, with a weakened army, directed his march
on Germany by ^e valleys of the Tyrol. The citi¬
zens of Verona, who would not admit the Germans
within their walls, constructed for him a briilge of boats
on the Adige, which he hastily passed over, but had
hardly gained the opposite bank, when enormous pieces
of wood, carried down by the impetuosity of the current,
struck and destroyed the bridge. Frederick had no doubt
that the Lombards had laid this snare for him, and
flattered themselves with the breaking of the bridge
whilst he should be in the act of passing over; but he
was no longer sufficiently strong to avenge himself.

The emperor at length returned into Germany with
his barbarian soldiers. He every where on his passage
spread havoc and desolation; the line by which he
inarched through the Milanese territory was marked by
fire; the villages of Rosate, Trecale, and Galiata, the
towns of Chieri, Asti, Tortona, and Spoleto were burnt.
But whilst he thus proved his barbarism, be also

* SorgD is the communiution between Trastevere and the Vatican.

115S. SECOND INVAEIO^ OF FREDERICK. 37

prov^ his weakness. He not dare to attack the
stronger and more populous cities, which congratulated
themselves on having shut their gates, and refused sub¬
mission to him. Thus a year's campaign sufficed to
destroy one of the most formidable armies that Germany
had ever poured into Italy j and the example of ancient
times encouraged the belief that it would be long before
the emperor could again put the Germans in motion.
The jtlilanese felicitated themselves on having preserved
their liberty by their courage and patriotism. Their trea¬
sury was indeed empty ; but the zeal of their opulent
citizens, who knew no other luxury than that of serving
their country, soon replenished it. These men, who
poured their wealth into the treasury of the republic,
contented themselves with black bread, and cloaks of
coarse stuff. At the command of their consuls, they
left Milan to join their fellow-citizens in rebuilding,
with their own hands, the walls and houses of Tortona,
Rosate, Trecide, Ualiata, and other towns, which had
suffered in the contest for the common cause. They
next attacked the cities of Pavia, Cremona, and No-
vara, which had embraced the party of the emperor
and subjected them to humiliating conditions ; while they
drew closer their bonds of alliance with the towns of
Brescia and Placentia, which had declared for liberty.

But Frederick had more power over Germany than
any of his predecessors: he was regarded there as the
restorer of the rights of the empire and of the German
nation. He obtained credit for reducing Italy from
what was called a state of anarchy and revolt, to order
and obedience. His vassals accordingly flocked with
eagerness to his standard, when he summoned them, at
the feast of Pentecost, 1138, to compel the submission
of Italy. The battalions of Germany entered Lom¬
bardy at the same time by all the passes of the Alps.
Their approach to Brescia inspired the inhabitants with
fio much terror, that they immediately renounced their
alliance with Milan, and paid down a large sum of
money for their ransom. The Milanese, on the con-
D 3

58 BISTORT OF TBR IFAUAN REPVBLIOS. 1159.

trary, prepared themaelves for resistance. They had
either destroyed or fortified all the bridges of the Adda;
flattering themselves that this river would suffice to
stop the progress of the emperor; but a body of Get*
man cavdry dashed boldly into the stream, and, swim¬
ming across the river, gained in safety the opposite
bank. They then made themselves masters of the
bridge of Cassano, and the whole army entered into
the Milanese territory. Frederick, following the bourse
of the Adda, made choice of a situation about four
miles from the ruins of the former Lodi. Here he
ordered the people of Lodi to rebuild their town, which
would in future secure to him the passage of the Adda.
He summoned thither also the militias of Pavia and
Cremona, with those of the other towns of Lombardy,
which their jealousy cf Milan had attached to the Ghi-
beline party; and it was not till after they had joined
him that he encamped, on the 8th of August, 1158,
before Milan. His engines of war, however, were in-
euffieient to beat down the walls of so strong and large
a town; and he* resolved to reduce the Milanese by
famine. He seized their granaries, burnt their stacks
of corn, mowed down the autumnal harvests, and an¬
nounced his resolution not to raise the siege till the
Milanese had returned to their duty. The few nobles,
however, who had preserved their independence in
Lombardy proceeded to the camp of the emperor.
One of them, the count de Blandrate, who had before
given proofs of his attachment to the town of Milan,
offered himself as a mediator, was accepted, and obtained
terms not unfavourable to the Milanese. They en¬
gaged to pay a tribute to Frederick of 9000 marks of
silver, to restore to him his regal rights, and to the
towns of Lodi and Como their independence. On their
side, they were dispensed from opening their gates to
the emperor. They preserved the right of electing their
consuls, and included in their pacificatioi^ their aUi^
of Tortona and Crema. This treaty was signed tihe
7th of September, 1158.

1159.^ THTRD WAH* WITfi HILAK, SJ)

Frederickj in granting arf honourable capitulation to
revolted subjects^ whom he had brought back to their
obediencej had no intention of renouncing the rights of
his empire. He considered that he had preserved, un¬
touched, the legislative authority of the diet of his king¬
dom of Italy. The Milanese, on the contrary, regarded
their treaty as definitive ; and were both astonished and
indignant when Frederick, having assembled, towards the
11th of November following, the placita or diets of the
kingdom at Roncaglia, promulgated by this diet a con¬
stitution which overthrew their most precious rights. It
took the administration of justice from the hands of the
consuls of towns, to place it in those of a single judge, and
a foreigner, chosen by the emperor, bearing the name of
podesta; it fixed the limits of the regal rights, giving
them much more importance than had been contem¬
plated by the Milanese when they agreed to acknowledge
them; it deprived cities, as well as the other members
of the empire, of the right of making private war; it
changed the ^undaries of territories appertaining to
towns, and in particular took from Milan the little town
of Monza, and the counties of Seprio and of Martesana,
which the inhabitants had always regarded as their
own property. Just motives had made the emperor
and the diet consider these innovations necessary for
the public peace and prosperity ; but the Milanese
regarded them only as perfidious violations of the treaty.
Tl^en the podesta of the emperor arrived at Milan
to take possession of the tribunal, he was sent con¬
temptuously away. The Milanese flew to arms; and
making every effort to repossess the different passes
of the Adda, prepared to defend themselvea behind this
barrier. Frederick, on his side, assembled a new diet of
the kingdom of Italy at Bologna, in the spring of 1159,
and placed Milan under the ban of the empire.

The emperor did not yet attempt to reduce the Milan¬
ese by a regular siege. His army was neither sufficiently
numerous to invest so large a town, nor his engines of
war of sufficient force to make a breadi in such strong
D 4

40 BISTOBY OF THE IlilLIAN BEPUBLICS. Il60(

■walls; but he proclaimed liis determination to employ
all his power, as monarch of Germany and Italy, to ruin
that rebellious town. The Milanese, accordingly, soon
saw their corn mowed down, their autumn^ harvests de¬
stroyed, their vine stocks cut, the trees which covered
their country either cut down or barked, their canals of
irrigation broken : but the generous citizens of this
new republic did not allow themselves to be discouraged
by the superior force of such an enemy, or by the Inevi¬
table issue of such a contest. They saw clearly that they
must perish; but it would be for the honour and the
liberty of Italy : they were resolved to leave a great ex¬
ample to their countrymen, and to future generations.

The people of Crema had remained faithful to the
Milanese in their good and evil fortune; but the siege
of that town presented feweridifficulties to the emperor
than the siege of Milan. Crema was of small extent,
and could be invested on every side ; it was also more
accessible to the engines of war, though surrounded by
a double wall and a ditch filled with water. The Cre-
monese began the siege on the 4th of July j and on the
10th, Frederick arrived to direct it in person. Four hun¬
dred Milanese had thrown themselves into the town, to
partake the combats and dangers of their allies. The
emperor, who regarded the besieged only as revolted
subjects, sought to terrify them by the spectacle of pu¬
nishments. Hostages had been sent to him by Milan
and Crema: he ordered several of them to be hung
before the walls of the town. Some were children of the
most distinguished families; he caused them to be
bound to a moving tower, which was brought so close to
the attack that the besieged could not repel it without
kilUng or wounding their own children. A cry of de¬
spair rfesounded along the walls of Crema. The wretched
parents implored death from their fellow-citizens, to
escape witnessing the agony of their children, and at the
same time cried out to their chUdren not to fear giving
up their lives for their country. The battle, in fact, was
not interrupted j and the moving tower was repelled, after

SIEQE'OF CREMA.

41

jl6o.

nine of the young hostagSs who covered it with their
bodies had been killed. During six entire months did
the small town of Crema resist the whole army of the
emperor. |^amine at length accomplished what force
could not; and on the 26th of January, Il60, the
heroic inhabitants capitulated, abandoning their wealth
to pillage, and their houses to the flames. For them«
selves, wasted by famine and fatigue, they obtained
peritiission to withdraw to Milan.

The siege of Crema exhausted the patience of the
German army. • At this period, soldiers were unaccus¬
tomed to such protracted expeditions. When they had
accomplished their feudal service, they considered they
had a right to return home. The greater number, ac¬
cordingly, departed; but Frederick, with immovable
constancy, declared he tw^uld remain, with the Italians
only of the Ghibelino towns, to make war against the
Milanese; and placing himself at the head of the mili¬
tias of Pavia, Cremona, and Novara, carried on the war
a whole year, during which his sole object was to destroy
the harvests, and prevent the entrance of any kind of
provision into Milan. In the month of June, ll6l, a
new army arrived from Germany to his aid. His sub¬
jects began to feel ashamed of having abandoned their
monarch in a foreign country, amongst a people whom
they accused of perfidy and rebellion. They returned
with redoubled animosity, which was soon manifested
by ferocious deeds : they tortured and put to death every
peasant whom they surprised carrying provisions of any
kind into Milan. The rich citizens of the republic had
aided the government in making large magazines, which
were already in part exhausted : an accidental fire
having consumed the remainder, hunger triumphed over
courage and the love of liberty. For three entire years
had the Milanese, since they had been placed under the
ban of the empire, supported this unequal contest;
when, in the beginning of March, 1162, they were
reduced to'surrender at discretion. In deep despair they
yielded up their arms and colours, and awaited the

4& HISTORY OF THB ITALIAN REPUBLICS. II62.

orders of the emperor. Frederick, harsh and haughty,
was not ferocious: never had he put to death by the exe.
cutioner rebels or enemies whom he had vanquished. He
Suffered nearly a month to elapse before he^ronounced
his Anal determination j perhaps to augment the anxiety
of the subdued, —perhaps, also, to pacify his own wrath,
which he at last vented on walls and inanimate objects,
while he pardoned man. He prdered the town to be
completely evacuated, so that there should not be left in
it a single living being. On the 25th of March, he sum¬
moned the militias of the rittal and Ghibeline cities, and
gave them orders to rase to the earth the houses as well
as the walls of the town, so as not to leave one stone
upon another.

Those of the inhabitants of Milan whom their poverty,
labour, and industry attached <0 the soil, were divided
into four open villages, built at a distance of at least two
miles from the walls of their former city. Others sought
hospitality in the neighbouring towns of Italy; even in
those which had shown most attachment to the emperor.
Their sufferings, Aie extent of their sacrifices, the re¬
collection of their, valour, and the example of their noble
sentiments, made proselytes to the cause of liberty in
every city into which they were received. The dele¬
gates of the emperor also (for he himself had returned
to his German dominions), the podestas whom he had
established in every,town, soon made those Lombards
who had fought with him feel only shame and regret at
having lent their aid to rivet his yoke on their own
necks. All the privileges of the nation were violated;
justice was sacrificed to party interest. Taxes con¬
tinually augmenting had increased six-fold; and hardly
a third part of the produce of the land remained to the
cultivator. The Itahans were universally in a state of
suffering and humiliation; tyranny at length reached
even their consciences. On the death of pope Adrian
IV., in September, 1159, the electing cardinals had
been equally divided between two candidates; the one
R Siennese, the other a Roman. Both were declared

1159. ’ SCHISM IN TH^ CHURCH. 4S

duly elected by their separate parties; the first, under
the name of Alexander III. j the second, under that
of Victor III. Frederick declared for the latter, who
had shown himself ready to sacrifice to him the liber¬
ties and inde;^ndence of the church. The former had
been obliged to take refuge in France, though alm*ost
the whole of Christendom did not long hesitate to declare
for him. WhUe one council assembled by Frederick at
Pavia rejected him, another assembled at Beauvais not
only rejected but anathematised Victor. Excommuni¬
cation at length reached even the emperor ; and Alex¬
ander, to strengthen himself against Frederick, endea¬
voured to gain the affections of the people, by ranging
himself among the protectors of die liberties of Italy.

Frederick re-entered Italy in the year 1163, accom¬
panied not by an army, bu^y a brilliant retinue of Ger¬
man nobles. He did not imagine that in a country which
he now considered subdued, he needed a more imposing
force; besides, he believed that he could at all times com¬
mand the militias of the Ghibeline towns; and, in fact,
he made them this year rase to the ground the walls of
Tortona. He afterwards directed his steps towards
Rome, to support by his presence his schismadc pontiff;
but,* in the mean time, Verona, Vicenza, Padua, and
Treviso, the most powerful towns of the Veronese
marches, assembled their consuls in congress, to con¬
sider of the means of putting an end to a tyranny which
overwhelmed them. The consuls of these four towns
pledged themselves by oath in the name of their cities
to give mutual support to each other in the assertion of
their former rights, and in the resolution to reduce the
imperial prerogatives to the point at which they were
fixed under the reign of Henry IV. Frederick, informed
of this association, returned hastily into northern Italy,
to put it down. He assembled Ime militias of Pavia,
Cremona, Novara, Lodi, and Como, with the intention
of .leading them against the Veronese marches; but he
soon perceived that the spirit of liberty had made progress
in the GhibeUne cities as well as in those of the Guelphs ;

44. HISTORY OP THE l^AtlAN REPUBLICS. 1166|

that the militias under hisjeommand complained as much
of the vexations inflicted by his podestas as those against
whom he led them ; and that they were ill disposed to
face death only to rivet the chains of their country.
Obliged to bend before a people which*he considered
only as revolted subjects, he soon renounced a contest so
humiliating, and returned to Germany, to levy an army
more submissive to him. Other and more pressing in>
terests diverted his attention from this object fiU the
autumn of 1166. During this interval his anti-pope,
Victor III., died; and the successor whom he caused to
be named was stiU more strongly rejected by the church.
On the other side, Alexander III. had returned from
France to Rome; contracted an alliancewith William, the
Norman king of the two Sicilies; and armed the whole
of southern Italy against the emperor.

When Frederick, in the*month of October, 1166,
descended the mountains of the Orisons to enter Italy
by the territory of Brescia, he marched his army di¬
rectly to Lodi, without permitting any act of hostility
on the way. At Lodi, he assembled towards the end of
November, a diet of the kingdom of Italy, at which he
promised the Lombards to redress the grievances occa¬
sioned by the abuses of power by his podestas, and to
respect their just liberties ; he was desirous of separating
their cause from that of the pope, and the king of Sicily;
and to give greater weight to his negotiation, he marched
his army into central Italy. The towns of Romagna
and Tuscany had hitherto made few complaints, and
manifested little zeal in defence of their privileges.
Frederick hoped that by establishing himself amongst
them, he should revive their loyalty, and induce them
to augment tjie army which he was leading against
Rome. But he soon perceived that the spirit of liberty,
which animated th^^other countries of Italy, worked
also in these: he contented himself, accordingly, with
taking thirty hostages from Bologna, and having vainly
laid siege to Ancona, he, in the month cf July, 116T#
parched his army towards Rome.

1167.

THE liEABUE (OF LOMBARDY.

45

The towns of the Veronese marehesj seeing the em¬
peror and his army pass without daring to attack them,
hecame bolder: they assembled a new diet, in the be¬
ginning of ^ril, at the convent of Pontida, between
Milan and Bergamo. The consuls of Cremona, of
Bergamo, of Brescia, of Mantua and Ferrara met
there, and joined those of the marches. The union of
the Guelphs and Ghibelines, for the common liberty,
was hailed with universal joy. The deputies of the
Cremonese, who had lent their aid to the destruction
of Milan, seconded those of the Milanese villages in
imploring aid of the confederated towns to rebuild the
city of Milan. This confederation was called the League
of Lombardy. The consuls took the oath, and their
constituents afterwards repeated it, that every Lombard
should unite for the recopery of the common liberty ;
that the league for this purpose should last twenty
years ; and, finally, that they should aid each other in
repairing in common any damage experienced in this
sacred cause, by any one member of the confederation:
extending even to the past this contract for reciprocal
.security, the league resolved to rebuild Milan. The
militias of Bergamo, Brescia, Cremona, Mantua, Ve¬
rona, and Treviso arrived the 27th of April, ll67j on
the ground covered by the ruins of this great city.
They apportioned among themselves the labour of re¬
storing the enclosing walls; all the Milanese of the four
villages, as well as those who had taken refuge in the
more distant towns, came in crowds to take part in this
pious work j and in a few weeks the new-grown city
was in a state to repel the insults of its enemies. Lodi
was soon afterwards compelled, by force of arms, to
take the oath to the league; while the towns of Venice,
Placentia, Parma, Modena, and Bologna voluntarily
and gladly joined tile associatioiff

Frederick, meanwhile, arrived within sight of Rome.
The Romans dared to await him in the open field; he
defeated them with great slaughter, and made himself
master of the Leonine city. The inhabitants still de.s

46‘

HISTOBT OF THE IT^ALIAN REPUBLICS. 1168.

fending tbetnaelves in tho> Vatican, he dislodged them
by setting fire to Santa Maria, the adjoining church;
Alexander, in his fright, escaped by the Tiber. After
his retreat the Romans took the oath of fidelity io the
emperor, without, however, receiving hie army within
their walls; but fever, and the suffocating heat of the
Campagna, soon began, by its ravages, to avenge the
Italians: from the first days of August an alarming
mortality broke out in the camp of the emperor. - The
princes to whom he was most attached, the captains in
whom he had most confidence, two thousand knights,
with a proportional number of common soldiers, were
carried off in a few weeks. He endeavoured to flee
from the destructive scourge; he traversed in his retreat
Tuscany and the Lunigiana; but his route was marked
with graves, into which every day, every hour, he de¬
posited the bodies of his soldiers. He was no longer
strong enough to vanquish even the opposition of the
little town of Pontremoli, which refused him a passage ;
and it was by roads almost impracticable that he at length
crossed the Apennines. He arrived at Pavia about the
middle of September, and attempted to assemble a diet;
but the deputies of Pavia, Novara, VerceUi, and Como
alone obeyed his summons. He harangued the assembly
with great vehemence; and, throwing down his glove,
challenged the rebellious cities to a pitched battle. He
passed the winter in combating, with his small remain¬
ing army, the league of Lombardy; but in the month
of March, 116S, he escaped from the Italians, and re¬
passed Mount Cenis, to return and arm the Germans
anew against Italy. After his departure, Novara, Ver-
celli, Como, Asti, and Tortona also entered into the
confederation, which resolved to found, as a monument
of its power, and as a barrier against the Ghibelines of
Pavia and Montferrat,% new city, on the confluence of
the rivers Tanaro and Bormida. The Lombards named
it Alexandria, in honour of the chief of the church, and
of their league. They collected in it all the inhabitants
of the different villages of that rich plain, which extends

116B. REgPIT^i OF ITALT. 47

from the Fo to the LiguriaH AlpSj and secweil to them
all the liberty and privileges for which they themselves
had fought.

Frederick had sacrificed more time^ treasure, and
blood, to strengthen his dominion over Italy than any
of his predecessors: he had succeeded for a long period
in associating the German nation in his ambition. He
persuaded the Germans that their interest and their
honour were concerned in the submission of the Italians.
They began, however, to feel tired of a long contest, from
which they deriv|d no advantage: other interests, afiairs
more pressing, demanded the presence of the emperor at
home; and Frederick was obliged to suspend for five
years his efforts to subdue Italy. During this period
the towns of Lombardy, in the plenitude of their power
and liberty, corrected their laws, recruited their finances,
strengthened their fortifications, and finally placed their
militias on a better war establishment. Their consuls
met also in frequent diets, where they bound themselves
hy new oaths to the common defence, and admitted
fresh members into the confederation, which at length
reached to the extremity of Romagna.

Frederick, however, did not entirely abandon Italy. He
sent thither Christian, the elected archbishop of Mentz,
and arch-chancehor of the empire, as his representative.
This warlike prdate soon felt that there was nothing to
be done in Lombardy ; and he proceeded to Tuscany,
where the Ghibeline party still predominated. His first
pretension was to establish peace between the two mari>
time republics of Genoa and Pisa, which disputed with
arms in their hands the commerce of the East.9 As he
found a greater spirit of pride and independence in the
Pisans, he caused to be thrown into a dungeon their
consuls, who had presented themselves at the diet of the
Tuscan towns convoked hy hink at San Ginasio, in the
month of July, 1173; he arrested, at the same time, the
consuls of the Florentines their allies, while he studiously
flattered these of Lucca, of Sienna, of Pistoia, and the
nobles of Tuscany, Romagna, and Ombria; promising to

48 HISTORY OP THE ITJ^tAH REPUBLICS. 1174.

a^ftige theui^n their enemiis-- hut, said he, " to do so
more effectually, you must first co-operate with me in
crushing the enemies of the emperor.” He thus suc¬
ceeded in persuading them to second him in the attack
which he meditated for the following spring on Ancona.
This city, the most southern of all those attached to the
jeague of Lombardy, contained about twelve thousand
inhabitants, enriched by maritime commerce, and con¬
fident in the strength of their almost unassailable position.
Their town, beautifully situated on the extremity of a
promontory, which surrounded amagpifleent port, pre¬
sented on the side open to the continent only precipitous
rocks, with the exception of a single causeway. The
citizens had accordingly repulsed successfully for ages
all the attacks of the barbarians, and all the pretensions
of the emperors. The archbishop, Christian, arrived
before Ancona in the beginning of April, 1174, and in¬
vested the city with an army levied among the Ghihe-
lines of Tuscany and Ombria. The people of Ancona
repulsed their attack with their accustomed bravery. B«t
hunger, more formidable than the sword, soon menacetl
them. The preceding harvest#had failed; their gpnaries
were empty; and an enemy’s fleet closed their port.
They saw the harvest ripen, without the possibility of
a single sack of corn reaching them. All human subsist¬
ence was soon exhausted; undismayed, however, they
tried to support existence with the herbs and sheE-fisn
which they gathered from their rocks, or with the leather
which commerce had accumulated in their magazines.
Such ms the food on which had long subsisted a young
and b^itiful woman. Observing one day a soldier sum¬
moned to battle, but unable from hunger to proceed, she
refused her breast to the child whom she suckled; offered
it to the warrior; and sent him, thus refreshed, to shed
his blood for his country. But to whatever distress
the people of Ancona were reduced, they rejected
every proposal to capitulate. At length the succojir
invoked from the Guelphs of Ferrara and Romagna ap¬
proached; Cliristian saw the fires which they lighted on

1175. BIEQE Alf ANCONA. 49

the ‘ mountain of Falcognara, about four ^iles from
Ancona ; ancl^ unable to ^re them battle with an army
exhausted by the fatigues of a long siegCj he hastily re>
treated.

In the beginning of October, Frederick, at the

head of a formidable army, again re-entered Italy. He
passed from the county of Burgundy into Savoy, and
descended by Mont Cenis. Suza, the first town to which
he catfle on his passage, was taken and burnt; Asti, In
alarm, opened its gates, and purchased its security from
pillage by a heavy eontribution j but Alexandria stopped
the progress Of tlie emperor. This city, recently founded
by the league of Lombardy, did not hesitate to enter into
a contest with the imperial power, for the sake of its
confederates; although its mud walls were an object of
derision to the Germans, who first gave this town die
surname of Alexandria della paglia, or of straw. Ne¬
vertheless these walls of mud and straw, but defended by
generous and devoted citizens, resisted all the efforts of
thf most valiant army and the most warlike monarch of
Germany. Frederick consumed in vain tour months in a
siege, vahich was prolonged through the winter. The
inundation of rivers more than once threatened him with
destruction, even in his camp ; sickness also decimated
his soldiers. Finally, the combined army of the Lom-
bjfd league advanced from Placentia to Tortona; and
on Easter Sunday of the year 1175 Frederick found
himself obliged to raise the siege, and to march for
Pavia, to repose his army.

This last check at length compelled the empe^r to
acknowledge the power of a people which he had been
accustomed to despise. The chiefs of the Lombard army
. showed tliemselves well prepared for battle; but still
respecting the rights of their monarch, declined attacking
him. He eiftered into negotiation with' them : all pro¬
fessed their ardent desire to reconcile the prerogatives of
the emperor ^nd the rights of the Homan church with
those of libei^. Six commissioners were appointed to
settle the basis of a treaty whith should reconcile these

50 HISTORY OP THE ItXlIAN REPUBLICS. 1176.

several claims. They began fiy demanding that the armies
on each side should be disbanded. Frederick did nothesi>
tate to comply: he dismissed his Germans^ and remained
at Pavia, trusting solely to the fidelity of his Italian
Ghibelines. Legates from the pope arrived also to join
the commissioners ; and the negotiations were opened.
But the demands of Frederick were so high as to render
agreement almost impossible. He declared that he de¬
sired only his just rights; “ but they must be tliose,”
said he, which have been exercised by my predeces¬
sors, Charlemagne, Otho, and the eirfperors Henry III.
and Henry IV.” The deputies of the towns opposed to
this the concessions of Henry V. and Lothario ; but
even these could no longer satisfy them. For the
Italians, liberty had advanced with civilisation ; and
they could not now submit to the ancient prerogatives of
their masters, without returning to their own ancient
barbarism. ®

The negotiations were broken otf, and Frederick sent
to Germany for another army, which, in the spring c^f
1176, entered thb territory ^f Como, by the Grisons.
The emperor joined it about the end of 'May, after
traversing, without being recognised, the territory of
Milan. It was against this great town that he entertained
the most profound resentment, and meditated a new
attack. He flattered himself that he should find the citi¬
zens stiU trembling under the chastisement which he
had before inflicted on their city. On the 29th of May,
he met the Milanese army between Lignano and Barano,
about iJfteen miles from Milan. Only a few auxiliaries
from Placentia, Verona, Brescia, Novara, and Vercelli
had yet joined them. An impetuous charge of the
German cavalry made that of the Lombards give way.
The enemy pressed forward so near the carroccioj as to
give great alarm lest this sacred car should fill into their
hands. But in the army of the Milanese there was a
company of 900 young men, who had deyoted them¬
selves to its defence, and were distinguished by the
name of “ the company of death.” These brave youtha

61

1177' VICTORY or THE LOMBAROa.

seeing the Germans gain ground, knelt down; and in¬
voking God and St. Ambrose, renewed their vow to
jierish for their country ; then rising, they advanced
with such impetuosity that the Germans were discon¬
certed, divided, and driven back. The whole army, re¬
animated by this example, hastily pressed forward. The
Germans were put to flight; their camp was pillaged ;
Frederick was separated from his companions in arms,
and Obliged to conceal himself; aud it was not till he
had passed several days, and encountered various dangers,
that he succeeded*in reaching Pavia, where the empress
was already mourning his death.

The defeat at Lignano at length determined Frederick
to think seriously of peace, and to abandon pretensions
which the Lombards resisted with so much energy.
New negotiations were opened with the pope; and
Venice was chosen, in concert with him, as the place for
holding a congress. This town had withdrawn its sig¬
nature from the league of Lombardyj it was acknow¬
ledged foreign to the Western empire, and might be
considered neutral, and indifferent in tllfe quarrel between
the emperor andthefree totros. Thepope, Alexander III.,
arrived at Venice on the 24th of March, 1177 - The
emperor, whose presence the Venetians feared, first fixed
his residence at one of his palaces, near Ravenna; ap¬
proached afterwards as far as Chiozza, and finally came
even to Venice. The negotiation bore upon three dif¬
ferent points,—to reconcile the emperor to the church,
by putting an end to the schism ; to restore peace be¬
tween the empire of the West and that of the Ea#, and
the king of the Two Sicilies ; and finally to define the
constitutional rights of the emperor and of the cities of
Lombardy. Frederick was ready to submit to the
church; and he had few subjects of dispute with the Gre¬
cian emperor, or the Norman king of the Sicilies; these
parts of the treaty were not difficult to terminate. But
that part which related to the league of Lombardy must
be founded on a new order of ideas; it was the first
pact that Europe had seen made between a monarch and

5 % HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 11S5.

his subjects ; the first bounflaryline traced between au.
thority and liberty. After long and vain atteinptSj the
negotiators separated, contenting themselves only with
obliging the emperor and the Lombards to conclude a
truce of six years, bearing date from the 1st of August,
1177 . During its existence, the rights on each side
were to remain suspended ; and the freedom of com¬
merce was re-established between the cities which
remained faithful to the emperor, and those which drew
still closer their bonds of union by a renewal of the
league of Lombardy. >■

The six years of repose, however, which this truce
guaranteed, accustomed the emperor to submit to limit¬
ations of his authority. Thirty years had passed since
the contest had begun between him and the Italian
nation ; age had now tempered his activity and calmed
his pride. New incidents had arisen to fix his attention
in Germany. His sbn, Henry VI., demanded to be
associated in tlie sovereignty of his two kingdoms of
Germany and Italy. A definitive peace only could re¬
store to Frederick his rights and. revenues in Lombardy,
which his subjects there did llot dispute, but which the
truce held suspended. The adverse claims were honestly
weighed at the diet of Constance; reciprocal concessions
were made both by the monarch and his subjects, and
the peace of Constance, the basis of new public rights for
Italy, was at length signed on the 25th of June, 1183.
By this peace the emperor renounced all regal privileges
which he had hitherto claimed in the interior of towns.
He acknowledged the right of the confederate cities to
levy armies, to enclose themselves within fortifications,
and to exercise by their commissioners within their own
walls both civU and criminal jurisdiction. The consuls
of towns acquired by the simple nomination of the
people aU the prerogatives of imperial vicars. The
cities of Lombardy were further authorised to strengthen
their confederation for the defence of their just rights,
recognised by the peace of Constance. But, on the
other side, they engaged to maintain the just rights of

1183.

53

PEACE 0/ CONSTANCE.

the emperoTj which were defined at the same time; and
ill order to avoid all disputes, it was agreed that these
rights might always be bought off by the annual sum of
2000 marks of silver. Thus terminated, in the esta¬
blishment of a legal liberty, the first and most noble
struggle which the nations of modern Europe have ever
maintained against despotism.

CHAP. III.

raoOREss dp the cities towards independence, rnoM the

PEACE or CONSTANCE TO THE DEATH OF FREDEEICE II. -

RELENTLESS ENMITY BETW'EEN THE CUELPHS AND GHISELINES.

— FIRST PARTY CHIEFS WHO ATTAINED TYRANNICAL POWER.

The generous resistance of the Lombards, during a war
of thirty years, had conquered from the emperors po¬
litical liberty for all the towns of thffkingdom of Italy.
The right of obeying only their own laws, of being go¬
verned by their own magistrates, of contracting alhances,
of making peace or war, and, in fine, of administering
their own finances, with the exception only of a certain
revenue payable into the imperial treasury, was more
particularly secured by the peace of Constance to the
confederate cities of the league of Lombardy. But the
Germans easily comprehended the impossibility of re¬
fusing to their allies the privileges which their enemies
had gained by conquest; the liberties, therefore, stipu¬
lated by the peace of Constance, weie rendered common
to all the towns of Italy: and those which had been most
distinguished by their attachment to the Ghibeline party,
were often found the most zealous for the establishment
and preservation of all the rights of the people. The
cities, however, did not consider themselves independent.
They were proud of the title of members of the empire:
they knew they must concur in its defence, as well as in
E 3

54f HISTORY OF THE itALIAN REPUBLICS. 1183,

the maintenance of internal ^eace; reserving only that it
must be in pursuance of their free choice and deliber¬
ation. They were in a manner confederates of an em¬
peror, who acted on them rather by persuasion than
orders ; rather as a party chief than as a monarch : and
as he was habituated to this compromise with public
opinion in his relations with the princes of the empire,
he yielded with the less repugnance to his Italian subj ects.
It is a circumstance highly honourable to the princes of
the house of Hohenstaufen, which continued to reign
sixty-seven years after the peace of Constance, that
during this long period they made no attempt to infringe
the conditions of the compact. They admitted, with good
faith, all the consequences of the concessions made; they
pardoned liberty, which the vulgar order of kings always
regarded as a usurpation of the subjects on the rights of
the crown.

It was not long, however, before the struggle was
renewed between the emperor and most of the towns.
It was supported with not less devotion and not fewer
sacrifices; it caused not less calamity, whilst it endured;
and it was crowned, at its close, with results not less
happy. But the cities did not, as in the preceding
struggle, engage in it for their own immediate interest;
they rather seconded the policy of the holy see, which
sought the independence of the church and of Italy, and
did not cease to fight for the attainment of this object
till the extinction of the house of Hohenstaufen.

Frederick I. survived the peace of Constance seven
years. During this period he visited Italy with his son
Henry VI.: he remained some time at Milan, where he
was received with respect, and gained the affection of
all the inhabitants, towards whom he testified the utmost
trust, confidence, and kindness. Instead of endeavouring
to intimidate Lombardy, and recover by intrigues his
former power, he was occupied only with the marriage
of his son Henry, whom he had previously crowned king
of Germany, with Constance, sole heiress of the Nor¬
man kings who had conquered the Two Sicilies. The

t

1184. PEACEFUL RETURN 4)F FREDERICK TO MILAN. 55

union of this crown with thfet of Germany and of Lom¬
bardy would have reduced the pope to be no more than
the first bishop of his states ; it would have disarmed
the two auxiliary powers which had supported the league
of Lombardy against the emperor; and it alarmed the
church, in proportion us it flattered his ambition. The
endeavours to prevent or dissolve this union gave rise to
all the wars of the period embraced in the present chapter.
Fredferick Barbarossa did not see the commencement of
them. When the news of the taking of Jerusalem by
Saladin, on the £d of October, 1187, had thrown all
Europe into consternation, Frederick, listening only to
his religious and chivalric enthusiasm, placed himself at
the head of the third crusade, which he led into the East
by land, and died the 10th of June, IIPO, of a stroke of
apoplexy, caused by the coldness of the waters of the
little river Salef in Asia Minor.

Henry VI. had worn for five years the German and
Italian crowns, when he received in Germany, where he
then was with his wife, news of the death of William II.,
king of the Two Sicilies, to whom Constance was suc¬
cessor ; and a few months after, that bf his father Fre¬
derick I. He immediately began his journey towards
southern Italy. Tancred, a bastard of the race of the
Norman kings, put in opposition to him by the Sicilians,
defended, for some time with success, the independence of
those provinces, but died in 1194; and Henry, who hail
entered the kingdom as conqueror, and had made himself
detested for his cruelty, also died there suddenly, on the
28th of September, 1197. He left by his marriage with
Constance only one son, Frederick II., hardly four years
old, who lost his mother in the following year; and
was, under the protection of the pope, acknowledged,
child as he was, king of the Two Sicilies : but the im¬
perial and Lombard crowns were withheld from him for
several years.

From the peace of Constance to the death of Henry VI.
the free citfes of Italy had, for the space of fifteen years,
E 4

56 HISTORY or THE li'ALIAH RERUBLIOS. H90.

no contest to maintain ag'afeist the emperors; but

repose and liberty werej during this period, constantly

endangered by the pretensions of the nobility. The
growing grandeur of the cities, and the decay of the
imperial power, had left the nobles of Italy in a veiy
ambig:uous position.

They in some measure no longer had a country; their
only security was in their own strength; for the emperor
in resigning his power over the towns had not thought
of giving an organisation to the nobles dispersed in
castles. All the families of Italian tdukes, and almost
all those of marquises and counts, had become extinct;
those who remained had lost aU jurisdiction over their
inferiors; no feudal tenure was respected; no vassal
appeared at the baronial court, to form the tribunal of
his lord. The frontiers of the kingdom of Lombardy
were called marches, after a German word adopted into
almost all the European languages, and the commander
of these frontiers was called mai^uis; but the families of
the powerful Tuscan marquises were extinct, as well as
those of the marquises of Ancona, of Fermo, of Canie-
rino, of Ivrea, and of those of the Veronese and Trevisan
marches. There remained, however, on these frontiers
some families which bore the same title, and had pre¬
served some wrecks of these ancient and powerful mar-
quisates; such was the marquis d’Este, in the Veronese
march; the marquises of Montferrat, Falavacino, Mala-
spina, in the march of Ivrea; but they were not acknow>
ledged as lords paramount, or lords of counties and ba¬
ronies : there was moreover no other organisation than
that created by the spirit of party. The nobles were not
united by the hierarchical connection of the feudal sys¬
tem, but by the affections or antipathies of the Guelphs
or Ghibelines. In general, the most powerful families
among the nobles, those who had castles sufficiently
strong, lands sufficiently extensive, and vassals sufficiently
numerous to defend themselves, Ustening only to the am¬
bition of courts, were attached to the Ghibeline party.
Those families, on the contrary, who possessed castte

1190. DEPRESSION ol THE NOBIUTT. _ 57

capable of but little resistam^, situated on accessible emi¬
nences, or in plains; those whose castles were near great
towns, and too weak to support a contest with them, bad
demanded to be made citizens of the towns ; they had
served them in the wars of the league of Lombardy ;
they had since taken a principal share in the government,
and they thus found themselves attached by common
interests to the party of the Guelphs. Independent
noblo; were no more to be found in all the plains of
Lombardy; there was not one who had not become
citizen of some republic; but every chain of mountain
was thick-set with castles; where a nobility choosing
obedience to an emperor rather than to citizens, main¬
tained themselves independent; these, too, attracted
sometimes by the wealth and pleasures of towns, and
sometimes desirous of obtaining influence in the counsels
of powerful republics, in order to restore them to the
emperor, demanded to be made citizens^ when they
thought it would open the way to a share in the govern¬
ment ; and as war was their sole occupation, they were
often gladly received by the republias, which stood in
need of good captains. It was thus tlft Ghibeline family
of Visconti, whose fiefs extended from the Alps to the
Lago Maggiore, became associated with the republic of
Milan. The house of Este, allied to the Guelphs of
Saxony and Bavaria, and devoted to the pope, possessors
of several castles built on the fertile chain of the Euga-
nean hills, jdned the republic of Ferrara; the parallel
chain, which serves as a base to the Tyrolese Alps, was
crowned with the castles of Ezzel, or Eccehno, of Ro¬
mano, a family enriched by the emperors, entirely
devoted to the Ghibeline party, and in process of time
attached to the republics of Verona and Vicenza. In like
manner were situated on the northern side of ttie Apen¬
nines the fortresses of the Ghibeline nobles, who ex¬
cited revolutions in the rapublics of Placentia, Parma,
Reggio, and Modena; on the southern side were the
castles of odier GhibeUnes, in turns citizens and enemies
of the republics of Arezzo, Florence, Pistoia, and Lucca:

58 " HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. llpO.

lower in th#valleys of th^ Po, or in the upper vale of
Arn»j Were the castles of the Guelphs, who had become
decidedly citizens of the same republics.

The more the social tie was weakened in the kingdom
of Lombardy^ tbe more eager the nobles became to be
admitted into the cities. Their wealth and military
education soon led them, by the suffrages of their feUow-
citizens, to the magistracy in this their new country.
But if they displayed more talent for war and pftlitics,
they evinced much less subordination or submission to
the law.s. Their aversions were more virulent, and they
gloried in cherishing them as a family inheritance. Ac¬
customed ill their castles to decide every question by the
sword, they brought the same habits to the towns. Retain,
ing, when they became inhabitants of cities, the wild
independence of their ancient fastnesses, their houses
were fortresses ; thick walls, high and narrow windows,
a massive door of oak, secured with iron bars, promised
to resist more than one attack; and if they were at last
forced, a high square tower still served for refuge. From
these palaces of the nobles bands of assassins were often
seen issuing, to fbb or murder citizens, who were treated
as enemies: chains were prepared to be thrown across
the streets, and in an instant form barricades; behind
which were seen ranged several hundred warriors. The
peaceable citizens, to whom these quarrels were indif¬
ferent, never knew whether the peace they then saw reign
around them should not in a few hours be changed into
a general war. The power of the consuls seemed in¬
sufficient to repress these fiery passions. All the towns
saw the necessity of adopting the institution of the
podestu, which they had received from Frederick Bar-
barossa. Their custom was accordingly to choose
annually, by their conHglio di credensa, a foreign knight
of arms, a warrior chosen from one of the confederate
cities. This knight, whom they named podestd, was
accompanied by two or three doctors in civil and cri¬
minal law, dependent on him, and acting under him
as judges. The podesta received at the same time the

1190. JUDICIAL INSTITUTIONS. . 59

command of the militia^ and*the power of^he sword of
justice, or of pronounciiif; and causing to be executed
sentences on criminals. He was bound to reiftler, at the
end of the year, an account of the manner in which he
had performed his functions to commissioners chosen by
the people, and called syndics, before whom he remained
a certain number of days amenable to justice. The towns
believed that this foreign judge would remain impartial
amidst* their factions; but the podesta himself rarely
escaped participating in the deep hatred of the Guelphs
or Ghibelines : he needed also a hand of iron to maintain
order among nobles, so turbulent and so vindictive; he
was accordingly invested with almost unlimited authority,
the republics preferring rather to submit to his despotic
sway than to anarchy. The violence of faction, never¬
theless, and its natural consequence, a severe admin¬
istration of justice, inspired the citizens universally with
a deep hatred of the nobles, who were alone accused of
having introduced disorder within their walls; and before
the end of the twelfth century all the Lombard cities rose
successively against the nobles, excludell them from all
public functions, and even expelled them from the towns.
Brescia, Padua, and Modena were the first to set the
example; but, after a few months, private affection tri¬
umphed over public resentment, and the nobles were
recalled.

The death of Henry VI. was followed by a general
war throughout the empire, which gave fresh activity to
the passions of the Italian nobles, and greater animosity
to the opposing parties. The two factions in Germany
had simultaneously raised to the empire the two chiefs
of the houses of Guelph and Ghibeline. Philip I. duke
of Swabia, and brother of Henry VI., had been named
king of the Romans by the Ghibelines; and Otho IV.,
son of Henry the Lion, duke of Bavaria and Saxony, by
the Guelphs. Their contest was prolonged to the 22d of
June, 1208, when Philip was assassinated by a private
enemy. The Germans, wearied with eleven years of
civil war, agreed to unite under the sceptre of his rival,

60 JIISTORV OF (THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1212.

Otho IV., ^Ihorn they crowned anew. The following
year he passed into Italy, to receive from the pope
the golden crown of the empire. But though Otho was
the legitimate heir of the Guelplis of Bavaria, so long
chiefs of the opposition to the imperial prerogatives,
yet now wearing himself the crown, he was desirous
of possessing it with these disputed rights; every one
was denied him, and all his actions controlled by the
pope. There was soon a declared enmity betwben the
emperor and the pontiff, who, rather than consent to
any agreement, or to abate any of his pretensions, raised
against the Guelph emperor the heir of the Ghibe»
line house, the young Frederick II., grandson of Fre¬
derick I., hardly eighteen years of age, and till then
reigning under the pope’s tutelage over the Two Sicilies
only. Frederick, excited and seconded by the pope, boldly
passed through Lombardy in 1212, and arrived at Aix
la Chapelle, where the German Ghibelines awaited, and
crowned him king of the Romans and Germans. Otho IV.
in the mean time returned to Germany, and was acknow¬
ledged by Saxolly. The civil war, carried on between
the two chiefs of the empire, lasted till the 19 th of
May, 1218, when Otho died, without "any attempt by
either party to despoil his rival of his hereditary posses¬
sions. It was this civil war that caused the names of
Guelphs and Ghibelines to be exclusively substituted for
those of party of the church, and party of the empire. In
fact, each noble family, and each city, seemed to consult
only their hereditary affection, and not their political prin¬
ciples, in ranging themselves under either standard. The
Guelphs placed themselves in opposition to the pope, to
repel his Ghibeline candidate; and Milan, Placentia, and
Brescia braved even excommunication to resist him:
while, on the contrary, the Ghibelines of Pavia, Cre¬
mona, and of the March armed themselves with zeal
against an emperor of the Guelph blood.

During this period, while the minority of Frederick II.
left BO much time to the cities of ■ Italy to consolidate
their independence, and to form real republics, the peiw

1197- PONTIFICATE OP ’ INNOCENT m. 6l

son most influential and ni 08 t*pToiiiinent in^istoiy was
the popcj Innocent III., who reigned from 1197 to
1216 . He was a Roman noble, count of Signa,. and only
thirty-seven years of age when he ascended the papd
chair: he had been raised to it by his reputation for
sanctity and learning. A worthy successor of Gregory VI I.,
he elevated, like him, the sovereignty of the popes ; but
he seemed to labour for that purpose with a fanaticism
more rAigious, and a pride less worldly: all his efforts
tended much more to confirm the power of the church
and of religion thamhis own. Like Alexander III. he
did not refuse to join the people in their efforts to ob¬
tain liberty, provided that liberty bowed with awe before
the authority of the church, and admitted no private
judgment in matters of faith. He founded the two
mendicant orders of Franciscans and Dominicans; new
champions of the church, who were charged to repress
all activity of mind, to combat growing intelligence, and
to extirpate heresy. He confided to the Dominicans the
fearful powers of the inquisition, which he institute)^;
he charged them to discover and pursue to destruction
die new reformers, who, under the name of paterini,
multiplied rapidly in Italy. He roused the fanatics of
France to exterminate, in the Albigenses, the same reform¬
ers ; and to destroy not only heretics, but all who, in the
popnladon of Languedoc, had any wealth or independ¬
ence. He addressed his orders to the kings of Europe
with a haughtiness worthy of Gregory VII.; but always
fixing his attention much more on discipline and the
maintenance of morality than on the augmentation of
his temporal power. Finally, he gained a triumph over
the eastern church, which he had not sought, but of which
he knew how to profit, in subjecting to his authority,
and attaching to the Latin church, the patriarch of
Constantinople, till then his rival and antagonist.

In the beginning of his pontificate, 11 98, a crusade had
been preacheij^ in France by Fulk de Neuilly. The cru¬
saders, having resolved to goby sea to the Holy Land,bor¬
rowed vessels of tlie republic of Venice; and finding

62 HISTOEV OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1204.

themselves ffterwards tod poor to pay the freight on
which they had agreed, they offered instead of it their
military services. After having subdued Zara, which
had revolted against the republic, they bore up to Con¬
stantinople in concert with old Andrea Dandolo, doge
of Venice. On the 12th of April, 1204, they took
by assault the capital of the Grecian empire. They
named a Frenchman, Baldwin, count of Flanders, em¬
peror of Constantinople, and elgcted under him i Latin
patriarch. They gave the kingdom of Thessalonij;a to an
Italian, the marquis of Montferrat; and they abandoned
to the Venetians, for their share of the conquest, one
fourth and a half of the Roman empire. The doge was
named lord of this portion of the empire, but the con¬
quests of the republic were in reality limited to the
island of Candia, some other isles,|,Achaia, and the
Morea. These possessions beyond the sea diverted for
a long period the republic of Venice frorii any partici¬
pation in the affairs of Italy.

^While Innocent III. caused his power to be felt in the
remotest parts of Christendom, he suffered to be consti¬
tuted at Rome, under his own eye, a republic, the liberty
of which he respected, and over which he assumed no
authority. The thirteen districts of Rome named each
annually four representatives or caporioni j their meet¬
ing formed the senate of the republic, who, with the
concurrence of the people, exercised the sovereignty,
with the exception of the judicial power. This power
belonged, as in other republics, to a foreign military
chief, chosen for one year, and assisted by civil judges,
dependent on him, but bearing the name of senator,
instead of podesta. We have still extant the form of
oath taken by the first of these senators, named in 1207 .
By it he engages to guarantee security and liberty to
the pope as well as to his brothers the cardinals, but
promises no submission to him for himself.

In the beginning of the pontificate of Innocent III.,
two German generals, to whom Henry VI. had given
the titles of duke of Spoleto, and marquis of Ancona, hdd

1204. LEAQUES m OUBRIA AND TUSCANS’.

63

in dependence and subjection the pro'vinces itearest Rome.
Innocent^ to revive the spirit of liberty, sent thither two
legates; and by their interference, the cities of these pro¬
'vinces, built for the moat part in the mountains, and
without any means of becoming either wealthy or popu¬
lous, threw off the German yoke, and made alliance with
those cities which from the preceding period had entered
into the league of Lombardy: thus two Guelph leagues
were fBrmed, under the«protection of the pope; one in
the Majch, comprehending the-cities of Ancona, Fermo,
Osimoj Camejino, •Fano, Jesi, Sinigallia, and Pesaro ,•
the other in tlie duchy, comprehending those of Spoleto,
Rieti, Assisa, Foligno, Nocera, Perugia, Agobbio, Todi,
and Citta di CasteUo. These leagues, however, in accus¬
toming the cities of these two provinces to regard the
pope as their prc^j^tor, led them afterwards to submit
without resistance to the sovereigigy of the church.

Other legates had been about the same time sent into
Tuscany by the pope: they convoked at St. Ginasio, a
borough sitjtated at the foot of the mountalh of San Mi-
niato, thf diet of the towns of that country. These pro¬
vincial diets were in the habit of assembling frequently, and
had till then been presided over by an officer belonging
to the emperor, in memory of whom the castle in which
he resided is still called San Miniato al Tedesco. These
diets settled the differences which arose between cities,
and had succeeded in saving Tuscany from the civil wars
between the Guelphs and Ghibelines. Pisa, which had
been loaded with favours by the sovereigns of the house
of Hohenstaufen, and which had obtained from them
the dominion of sixty-four castles or fortified towns on
the sliores of Tuscany, and over the isles of Corsica,
Elba, Capraia, and Pianosa, proclaimed its determin¬
ation of remaining faithful to the GhibeUne #arty, and
its consuls withdrew from the diet convoked at San Gi¬
nasio ; but those of the cities of Florence, of Sienna, of
Arezzo, of Pi^oia and of Lucca, accepted the protection
of the pope, offered by his tWo legates, and promised to
coalesce in defence of their common liberty. Numerous ■

6'4

HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN BEFHBLICS. ISJLj.

noble families in these towns, both Guelphs and Ghibe^
lines, had demanded the rights of citizenship. Hidierto
the magistrates succeeded in maintaining peace, and one
of the objects of the leagues was to preserve it; but, in
1215, a Guelph noble of the upper Vale of Amo,
named Buondelmonte, 'Who had been made citi^ of
Florence, demanded in marriage a young person of tb*
GhibeUne house of Amidei, and was accepted. While the
nuptials were in preparation, a ^oble lady of t]}e family
Donati stopped Buondelnnbnte as he passed her doy, and,
bringing him into the room where lier u^men were at
work, raised the veil of her daughter, whose beauty
was exquisite. “ Here,” said she, “ is the wife I had
reserved for thee. Like thee, she is Guelph; whilst thou
takest one from the enemies of thy church and race.”
Buondelmonte, dazzled and enamoured|^stantly accejfited
the proffered hand. TSie Amidei,’'looked upon his incen-
stancy as a deep afiront. AU the noble Ghiibline families
of Florence, about twenty-four in number, met,and agreed
that he should%tonq^withhis life for the offence. Buondel¬
monte was attaclKd on die morning of Easter ^Cnday,
just as he had passed the Ponte Vecchio, on horseback,
and killed at the foot of the statue of Mars, which still
stood there. Forty-two families of the Guelph party
met and swore to avenge him; and blood did indeed
atone for blood. Every day some new murder, some
new battle, alarmed Florence during the space of thirty-
three years. These two parties stood opposed to each
other within the walls of the same city; and although
often reconciled, every little accident renewed their ani¬
mosity, and they again flew to arms to avenge ancient
wrongs. ' ‘ ■

The death of Innocent III., and, two years after¬
wards, of Ijtfao IV., broke the unnatural aUianee be¬
tween a pope and the heir of a GhibeUne family. The
Milanese, excommunicated by Innocent for having fought
against Frederick II., did not the less persist in making
war on his partisans; well convinced that the new pope,
Honoiius HI., would soon thank them for it They

■isfio. EAKLY AGE OF FBEDBllICK II. 65

refused Frederick the iron crown of Lombardy, preserved
at Monza, and contracted an alliance with the count
'I’homas of Savoy, and with the cities of Crehia, Pla.
centia, Lodi, Vercelli, Novara, Tortona,Como, and Alex¬
andria, to tlrive the Ghibelines from Lombardy. The
Lrhihelines defeated them on the 6th of June, 1218,
in a great battle fought against the militias of Cremona,
Parma, Reggio, and Modena, before GhibbUo, This
reverse af fortune calnaed for some time their military
ardoub The citizens of ev^ town accused the nobles
of having 1^ thehn into war from family enmities and
interests foreign to the city: at Milan, Placentia, Cre¬
mona, and Modena, there were battles between the nobles
and the people. Laws were proposed, to divide the
public magistral in due proportions between them ;
finally the Milaiwfe, m the year 1221, expelled all the
nobles from^eir cit)^ •

The ^ung Frederick re-enteredi Italy; and, after
some diffet^nces with Honorius.IIL, received from him,
on the 22d of November, 1220, the crewn of the em¬
pire, * We afterwards occupied hims^ in establishing
order in his kingdom of the Two Sicilies, where, during
his minority, the popes had encouraged an universal in¬
subordination. Born in the march of Ancona, at Jesi,
in becembsr, 1104, he was Italian as well by language
as by affection and character. The Italian language,
spoken at his court, first rose above the patois in com¬
mon use throughout Italy, regarded only as a corruption
of Latin : he expressed himself with elegance in this
language, which, from his time, was designated by the
name of lingua cortigiana; he encouraged the first
poets, who employed it at his court, and he himself made
verses j he loved hterature and encouraged learning j he
founded schools and universities ; he proiAoted distin.
guished men; he spoke with equal facility Latin, Italian,
German, French, Greek, and Arabic; he had the intel¬
lectual EUppfenesB and finesse peculiar to the men of the
«Mith, the art of pleasing, a taste for philosophy, and
.great independence of opinion, with a leaning to infl-

66 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 12^.

delity; hence he is accused of having written a book
against the three revelations of Moses, Jesus, and Ma¬
homet, entitled " De Tribus Impostoribus," which no
one has ever seen, and which perhaps never existed.
His want of faith in the sacred character of the Roman
church, and the sanctity of popes, is less doubtful; he
was suspicious of them, and he employed all his address
to defend himself against their enterprises. Honorius III.,
desirous of engaging him to recover the Holy I*nil from
the Saracens, made him, i(^1225, marry Yolanda de Lu-
signan, heiress of the kingdom of Jerufalen^ after which,
Honorius and his successor Gregory IX. pressed him to
pass into Palestine. A malady stopped him, in 1227,
just as he was about to depart; the pope, to punish him
for this delay, excommunicated him. He still pursued
him with his anathema when he wendflb the Holy Land
the year following, and haughtily restified 1^ indignatfon,
because Frederick, in the year 1229, recJvereiJ Jerusa¬
lem from the hands of the sultan by treaty, gather than
exterminate the infidels with the sword.

Meanwhile thS Guelph party again raised their Stand¬
ard in Lombardy, the republics of Milan, Bologna, Pla¬
centia, Verona, Brescia, Faenza, Mantua, Vercelli, Lodi,
Bergamo, Turin, Alexandria, Vicenza, Padua, and Tre¬
viso, assembled their consuls in council at-San Zeiione
in the Mantuan territory, on the 2d of March, 1226.
They renewed the ancient league of Lombardy for
twenty-five years; and engaged to defend in concert,
their own liberty and the independence of the court of
Rome. Three years afterwards, they sent succour to
Gregory IX., when he was attacked by Frederick II. on
his return from the Holy Land; and they were included
in the treaty of peace between the pope and the emperor
in 1230. •

The pope, however, though defended by the arms of
the Lombards, made them pay dearly for the favour
which he showed in naming them to the emperor as his
allies. He consented to protect their civil liberty only
so far as they sacrificed to him their liberty of conscience.

1S33, FERSEOUTIONS. 67*

The same spirit of reformaEion which animated the Al-
bigenses had spread throughout Europe; many Chriatians,
disgusted with the corruption and rices of the clergyj or
whose minds revolted against the violence on their rea¬
son exercised by the church, devoted themselves to a con¬
templative life, renounced all ambition and the pleasures
of the world, and sought a new road to salvation in the
alliance of faith with reason. They called themselves
eathdri, or the purified,' paterini, or tlie resigned. The
free towns had, till then,%efused permission to the
tribunals of jhe inquisition, instituted by Innocent III.,
to proceed against them within their walls ; but Gre¬
gory IX. declared the impossibility of acknowledging at
allies of the holy see republicans so indulgent to the
enemies of the faith ; at the same time, he sent among
them the most ^^uent of the Dominicans, to rouse their
fanaticism. Leo da ferego, whom he afterwards made
archbishop df Milan, had only a too fatal success in that
city, where he caused a great number of paterini to be
burnt. 3aint Peter Martyr, and the nfonk Roland of
Cremona, obtained an equal triumphrin the other cities
of Lombardy. The monk John of Vicenza had the
cities of the March assigned to him as a province, where
the heretics were in still greater numbers than in Lom¬
bardy, and included in their ranks some of the most pow¬
erful nobles in the country; among others, Eccelinoll.
of Romano. The monk John announced himself the
minister of peace, not of persecution. After having
preached successively in every town, he assembled, on
the plain of Faquara, the 2Stb of August, 1233, almost
the whole population of the towns of the March : he
exhorted them to peace in a manner so irresistible, that
the greatest enemies, setting aside their animosities, par.
doned and embraced each other; and aU,yWith tears of
joy, celebrated the warm charity of this man of God.
This man of God, however, celebrated the festival of
this reconcjliation by judging and condemning to the
,flames sixty cathari in the single town of Verona, whose
.aufierings he witnessed in the public square; and after.

• 6 s HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN BEPUBLICS. 1S34.

wards obtained full power from the towns of Vicenza
and Padua to act there in the like manner.

It was only a short period after the peace of Pa-
(juara that Frederick II., believing he had sufficiently
te-estabUsbed his power in southern Italy, began to turn
his attention towards Lombardy; he had no intention
of disputing the rights guaranteed by his grandfather at
the peace of Constance j but it was hie wiU that the
cities should remain, what they ought to be by the treaty,
members of the empire, aifc not enemies of the emperor.
He had raised an army, over which he ‘feared neither the
influence of the monks nor the pope. He had trans¬
ported from the mountains of Sicily, into the city of
Luceria, in the capitanate, and into that of Nocera, in
the principato, two strong colonies of Saracens, which
could supply him with 30,000 mussulman soldiers,
strangers, by their language and religion, to all the in¬
trigues of the court of Rome. There was in the Vero¬
nese march a man endowed with great military talents,
ambitious, intrepid, and entirely devoted to the emperor,
— Eccelino III., of Romano, already powerful by the
great fiefs he held in the mountains, and the number
of his soldiers, whom Frederick made still more so, by
placing him at the head o£ the Ghibeline party in all
the cities. Eccelino, born on the 4th of April, 1194,
was precisely of the same age as the emperor. The
pope had summoned him to arrest his father, and
deliver him to the tribunal of the inquisition as a pa-
terino: but though Eccelino knew neither virtue, pity,
nor remorse, lie was not sufficiently depraved for such
a crime.

As Frederick was on the point of attacking the
Guelphs of Lombardy on the south with the Saracens,
while Eccelino advanced on the east, he learnt that his
son Henry, whom he had in the year 1220 crowned
king of Germany, in spite of his extreme youth, seduced
hy the Guelphs and the agents of the pope, ^ad revolted
against him. The Milanese, in 1234, sent deputies ta
oflfer him the iron crown, which they had refused to-

EOOELINO DA BOBIANO

12S7.

69

his father. The latter hastened into Germany, and or¬
dered his son to meet him at Worms, where he threw
himself at the feet of his father, and entreated forgive¬
ness. Frederick deprived him of the crown, and sent
him to Apulia, where he died a few years afterwards.
The emperor was obliged to employ two years in re¬
storing order in Germany: he after that returned into
Italy ^y the valley of Trento, and arrived, on the l6th
of August, 1236, at Verons^ with 3000 German ca¬
valry. A senate of eighty, members, nobles and Ghi-
belines, then governed that republic: Frederick, by his
address in managing men, engaged them to name Ec-
celino captain of the people: this committed to him
at the same time the command of the militia and the
judicial power j and, in the state of excitement in
which the parties were, much more occupied with the
triumph of their faction than with the security of
their liberty, gave him almost sovereign power. Fre¬
derick, obliged to return to Germany, left under the
command of Eccelino a body of German soldiers, and
another of Saracens, with which this ^le captain made
himself, the same year, master of Vicenza, which he
barbarously pillaged, and the following year of Padua.
This last was the most powerful city of the province,
that in which the form of government was the most de¬
mocratic, and in which the Guelphs had always exer¬
cised the most influence. Eccelino judged it necessary
to secure obedience by taking hostages from the richest
and most powerful families ; he employed his spies to
discover the malcontents, whom he punished with tor¬
ture, and redoubled his cruelty in proportion to the hatred
which he excited.

The same year, 1237, Frederick approached Mantua;
and thus giving courage to the Ghibeline party, made
them triumph over the Guelphs, who had, till Aen, the
ascendant in that city: he was joined there by 10,000
Saracens, whom he summoned from Apulia, and after¬
wards advanced into the Cremonese territory to attack
the confederate army of the Guelphs, commanded by the
F 3

70 HIgTORV OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1237-

Cr

consuls of Milan^ who knew no other art of war but the
bravery evinced in battle. Frederick was a more able
captain; by manoeuvring between Brescia and Cremona,
he drew the Milanese beyond the Oglio, and finally suc¬
ceeded, as they believed the campaign finished, in placing
himself between them and their country at Cortenuova
near Crema. The Guelphs, although thus cut off from
retreat, boldly accepted battle on the 27th of November,
1237, and long disputed the victory. Their defeat was
only the more bloody : it cost them 10,000 men killed
or taken prisoners, with the loss of die carroccio. The
fugitives followed during the night the course of the
Oglio to enter the Bergamasque mountains; they would
all, however, have fallen into the hands of the Ghibe.
lines, if Pagan della Torre, the lord of Valsassina, and
a Guelph noble, had not hastened to their assistance,
opened the defiles covered by his fortresses, and brought
them thus safely to Milan. The citizens of this town
never forgot so important a service; and they'contracted
with the house of della Torre an alliance which subse¬
quently proved dangerous to their freedom.

The defeat of the Guelphs at Cortenuova alarmed the
towns of Lombardy, the greater number of which de¬
tached themselves from Milan. Frederick, entering
Piedmont the following year, gave preponderance to the
Gliibeline party in the cities of Turin, Asti, Novara,
Alexandria, and several others. The constitution was
not changed when the power in council passed from one
party to another; but the emperor generally reckoned
his partisans among the nobility, while the people were
devoted to the church: accordingly, the triumph of the
aristocracy generally accompanied that of the Ghibeline
party. Four cities only, Milan, Brescia, Placentia, and
Bologna, remained at the end of the year opposed to the
imperial power. Frederick began his attack on them by
laying siege t/8 Brescia; but the Brescians dared to face
the storm ; they supported, during sixty-eight days, the
repeated attacks of the emperor, rendered all his efibrts
fruitless, and forced him at last to raise the siege With
an army weakened and discouraged.

71

1239. RENEWAL OF THE LOMBARD LEAGUE.

In the mean timej Gregory IX. redoubled his efforts
to save the Guelph party from ruin. He saw, with
alarm^ an emperor, master of the Two Sicilies and of
Germany, on the point of vanquishing all resistance in
Upper Italy. He anticipated that this monarch, whose
mussulman soldiers were constantly passing through the
states of Rome, would escape the influence of the church,
and soon evince no respect whatever for a religion which
he was accused of not believing. Gregory had recourse
to the two maritime republics of Venice and Genoa,
which, in general bccupied with their conquests and com¬
merce in the East, seldom took any part in the politics
of Italy. He represented to them, that they would be
soon deprived of the freedom of the seas, if they did not
make some effort to save the champions of liberty and
of the church in Lombardy. He at length obtained
their agreement to contract an alliance with the four
only surviving cities of the league of Lombardy; and
finaOy, towards'the beginning of the year 1239, he ful¬
minated another sentence of excommunication against
Frederick. This had a greater efi^ct than Gregory
ventured to hope. A considerable number of nobles of
Guelph origin, seduced by court favours, had been won
over to the imperial party. They perceived that after
the anathema of the pope, the emperor distrusted them.
The marquis d’Este and the count di San Bonifacio
were even warned that their heads were in danger, and
they made their escape from the imperial camp : all the
other Guelph nobles followed their example; and the
Guelph cities gained captains habituated to arms and
familiarised with higher ideas of politics.

Gregory began to think he should give still greater
weight to the anathemas which he launched against the
emperor, if they were sanctioned by a council. In the
year 1241 he convoked at Rome all the prelates of
Christendom. Frederick, who had beqin established at
Fisa rance^he autumn of the year 1239, exerted him¬
self to prevent the meeting of a council which he dreaded.
‘While the two other maritime republics had declared for
F 4

72

HISTOBY OF THE ITALIAN BEPUHLICS. 1241.

the Guelphs, Piss was entirely of the Ghibeline party.
Xhe people were enthusiastically attached to the emperor,
and among the nobles, a few only, proprietors of flefs in
Sardinia, headed by the Visconti of Gallura, had for¬
saken him for the Guelphs. The Pisans, further excited
by their jealousy of the Genoese, promised Frederick
that they would brave for him all the thunders of the
church, and assured him they knew well how to hinder
the meeting of the council. A considerable nuntber of
French prelates had embarked at Nice for Ostia, on
board Genoese galleys. Ugolino Buozacherino de Sis-
mondij admiral of the Pisans, lay in wait with a powerful
fleet before Meloria, attacked them on the 3d of Hay,
1241, sunk three vessels, took nineteen, and made pri¬
soners all the French prelates who were to join the council
at Pisa. The republic loaded them with chains, but they
were chains made of silver, and imprisoned them in the
chapter house of the cathedral. Gregory, alarmed at
this reverse of fortune, survived only « few months:
he died the 21st of August, 1241; and the college of
cardinals, reduced to a very small number, passed nearly
two years before they could agree on a new choice. At
last, on the 24th of June, 1243, Sinibald de’ Fieschi, of
Genoa, who took the name of Innocent IV. was elected
to the chair of St. Peter. His family, powerful in
Genoa and in the Ligurian mountains, was also allied
to many noble families, who possessed castles on the
northern side of the Apennines; and this position gave
him great influence in the neighbouring cities of Pla¬
centia, Parma, Reggio, and Modena, The elevation of
a Fieschi to the pontificate gave courage to the Guelph
party in aE these cities.

Frederick had recourse in vain to the new pope to be
reconciled to the church; Innocent IV. was determined
to see in him only an enemy of religion, and of the
pontifical powetj and a chief of barbarians, whp in turns
summoned his Germans and his Saracens ip tyrannise
over Italy. He drew closer his alliance with the cities
of the league of Lombardy, and promised them to cause

1S45.

COUNCIL OP lil'DIJS.

73

the emperor to be condemnid and deposed by an aeeu-
menical council, as hia predecessor would have done ;
but instead of convoking the council in Italy, he fixed
for that purpose on the city of Lyons, one half of which
belonged to the empire, and the other to the kingdom
of France. He determined on placing himself with
the prelates whom he had summoned under the pro¬
tection of St. Louis, who then reigned in France. He
went drom Rome to Genoa by sea, escaping the Pisan
fleet which watched to intercept his passage: he excited
by his exhortations the enthusiasm of the Guelphs of
Genoa, and of the cities of Lombardy and Piedmont,
which he visited on his passage; and arriving at Lyons, he
opened, on the 28th of June, 1245, in the convent of
St. Just, the council of the universal church. He found
the bishops of France, England, and Germany eager to
adopt his passions; so that he obtained from them at their
third sitting, on the 17th of July, a sentence of con¬
demnation against Frederick II. The council declared,
that for his crimes and iniquities God had rejected him,
and would no longer sufTer him to be either emperor or
king. In consequence, the pope and the council released
his subjects from their oath of allegiance; forbade them
under pain of excommunication to obey him under any
title whatever; and invited the electors of the empire to
proceed to the election of another emperor, while the
pope reserved to himself the nomination of another king
of the Two Sicilies,

Frederick at first opposed all his strength of soul
against the sentence of excommunication pronounced
by the council on him. Causing his jewels to be brought
him, and placing the golden crown of the empire on his
head, he declared before a numerous assembly that he
would BtUl wear it, and knew how to defend it; but,
notwithstanding the enthusiasm of the Ghibeline party,
the devotion of his friends, and the progress of philo¬
sophical opinions, which he had himself encouraged, the
man whom the church had condemned was in constant
danger of being abandoned or betrayed. The mendicant

74 HI6T0R7 OF THE ITALIAN BEPCBLIQS. 1247-

monks every where excit&d conspiracies against him.
They took advantage of the terrors inspired by sickness
and age, to make sinners return, as they said, to the ways
of salvation, and desired them to make amends for their
past transgressions, by delivering the church of God from
its most dangerous enemy. Insurrections frequently
broke forth in one or other of the Two Sicilies; still
oftener the emperor discovered amongst his courtiers
plots to destroy him, either by the dagger or poison;
even his private secretary, his intimate friend, Pietro
deUe Vigne, whom he had raised from abject poverty, to
whom he had intrusted his most important affairs, gave
ear to the counsel of the monks, and promised to poison
his master. Frederick, on his part, became suspicious
and cruel: his distrust fell on his most faithful friends;
and the executions which he ordered sometimes preceded
the proofs of guUt. He had confided Germany to his son
Conrad, and the exclusive government of the Veronese
marches to Eccelino. The hatred which this ferocious
man excited by his crimes fell on the emperor. Eccelino
imprisoned in tbt most loathsome dungeons those whom
he considered his enemies, and frequently put them
to death by torture, or suffered them to perish by hunger:
he was well aware that the relatives of these victims must
also be his enemies; they were, in their turn, arrested ;
and the more he sacrificed to his barbarity, the more
he was called upon to strike. The citizens of Milan,
Mantua, Bergamo, and Brescia every day heard of new
and horrible crimes committed by the governor of the
marches; they conceived the greater detestation of the
Ghibeline party, and entertained the firmer determination
to repel Frederick. He, on the contrary, had no thoughts
of attacking them: he established himself during the
council of Lyons at Turin, and thence entered into a
negotiation with St. Louis, to obtain by his mediation
a reconciliation with the church, to which he made,
in token of his submission, the offer to accompany Louis
fo the Holy Land.

• The revolt of -Parma, on the l6th of June, 124?,

SIESE OF PARMA.

1247.

75

oHiged Frederick to resume his arms at a moment when
he was least disposed. The friends and relatives of
pope Innocent IV., the Guelph nobles of the houses of
Corregio, Lupi, and Rossi, re-entering Parma, whence
they had been exiled, triumphed over their adversaries,
and in their turn expelled them from the city. Fre.
deriok was determined at any price to recover Parma.
He sent for a numerous band of Saracens from Apulia,
commanded by one of his natural sons, named Frederick,
to whom he gave the title of king of Antioch. He
assembled the Lonihard Ghibelines, under the command
of another of his illegitimate sons, named Hans or Hen-
sius, called by him king of Sardinia, and whom he had
made imperial vicar in Lombardy. Eccelino arrived
too at his camp from the Veronese march, with the
militias of Padua, Vicenza, and Verona; and the sol¬
diers whom he had raised in his hereditary defs. On
the other side, the Guelphs of Lombardy hastened to
send succour to a city which had just sacridced itself for
them. The Milanese set the example; the militias of
Mantua, Placentia, and Ferrara foUoi^d it; and the
Guelphs, who had been exiled from Regpo, Modena,
and other Ghibeline cities, thinking they served their
country in fighting for their faction, arrived in great
numbers to shut themselves up in Parma. Frederick was
prevented from hanging the hostages given previous to
the revolt, before the walls of the city, by the militia of
Pavia; who declared it was with the sword of Ghibeline
soldiers only, and not with that of the executioner, that
they would secure the throne of the emperor. The siege
made little progress ; the winter had begun, but Frede¬
rick persisted in his attempt. He proclaimed his de¬
termination to rase Parma to the ground, and to transfer
those of the inhabitants who should be spared into his
fortified camp, of which he would make a new town,
called Vittoria. This camp, which he quitted on a
hawking pst^, on the 8th of February, 1248, was ia
his absence surprised by a sortie of a Guelph army tima
Farma, taken, and pillaged, his soldiers were disperse^*

76 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLIOS. 1248.

a

and the empeTof had the humiliation of being forced to
raise the siege.

Before this event, he had sent his son, the king of
Antioch, into Tuscany with l600 German cavalry, to
secure Florence to his party ; where, since the death of
Buondelmonte, the Guelphs and Ghibelines, always in
opposition, had not ceased fighting. There was seldom
an assembly, a festival, a public ceremony, wthout
some offence given, either by one or other of the
parties. Both flew to arms; chains were thrown across
the streets ; barricades were immedialely formed, and in
every quarter, round every noble family; the more con¬
tiguous, who had the most frequent causes of quarrel,
fought at the same time in ten different places. Never¬
theless the republic was supposed to lean towards the
Guelph party; and the Florentine Ghibelines, in their
relations with other people, had never sought to separate
from their fellow-countrymen, or to place themselves in
opposition to their magistrates. Frederick, fearing to
lose Florence, wrote to the Uberti, the chiefs of the
Ghibehne factioH, to assemble secretly in their palace aU-
their party, to attack afterwards in concert and at once
all the posts of the Guelphs; whilst his son, the king of
Antioch, should present himself at the gates, and thus
expel their adversaries from the city. This plan was
executed on the night of Candlemas, 1248; the barricades
of the Guelphs were forced in every quarter, because
they defended themselves in small bands against the
whole of the opposite party. The Ghibelines, masters
of the town, ordered all the Guelphs to quit it. They
afterwards demolished thirty-six palaces belonging to the
same number of the most illustrious families of that
party; and intimidating the other cities of Tuscany, they
constrained them to follow their example, and declare
for the emperor.

Frederick II., after the check experienced by him at
Parma, returned to his kingdom of the Two Sicilies, and
left to his son Hensius, who established himself at Mo-
ilens, the direction of the war in Lombardy. The pope.

LA SECCBIA RAFITA.

1249,

77

however, had eent a legate, the cardinal Octavian degli
Ubaldini, to the Guelph cities, to engage them to pursue
their victory, and punish the imperial party for what he
called their revolt against the church. The powerful
city of Bologna, already celebrated for its university, and
superior to the neighbouring ones by its wealth, its
population, and the zeal which a democratic government
excites, undertook to make the Guelph party triumph
throughout the Cispadane region. Bologna first attacked
Romagna, and forced the towns of’Imola, Faenza, Forli,
and Cervia to ex^^l the Ghibelines, and declare for
the church. The Bolognese next turned their arms
against Modena. The Modenese cavalry, entering Bo¬
logna one day by surprise, carried ofi" from a public
fountain a bucket, which henceforth was preserved in
the tower of Modena as a glorious trophy. The war
which followed furnished Tassoni with the subject of
his mock-heroic poem, entitled “ La Secchia Raffito.”
The vengeance of the Bolognese was, however, any thing
but burlesque ; after several bloody battles, the two ar¬
mies finaUy met at Fossalta on the 26th*of May, 1249-
Philip Ugoni of Brescia, who was this year podesta of
Bologna, commanded the Guelph army, in which was
united a detachment from the militias of ah the cities
of the league of Lombardy. The Ghibelines were led
by king Hensius: each army consisted of from fifteen
to twenty thousand combatants. The battle was long
and bloody, but ended with the complete defeat of the
Ghibeline party; king Hensius himself fell into the
hands of the conquerors: he was immediately taken to
Bologna, and confined in the palace of the podesta- The
senate that city rejected sdl offers of ransom, all in¬
tercession in his favour. He was entertained in a splen¬
did manner, but kept a prisoner during the rest of hii
life, which lasted for twenty-two years.

This'last check overwhelmed Frederick. He had
now during thirty years combated the church and the
Guelph party: his bodily as well as mental eneigy was
worn out in this long contest. His life was emtutterad

78

HISTORT OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 12S0.

by the treason of those w^A)ln he believed his fiiends, *>r
the disasters of his partisans, and by the misfortunes
which had pursued him even in his own family. He
saw his power in Italy decline; while the crown of Ger¬
many was disputed with bis son Conrad, by competitors
favoured by the church. He appeared to be at length
himself disturbed by the excommunications of the pope,
and the fear of that hell with which he had been so
incessantly menaced. He implored anew the aanstance
and mediation of St. Louis of France, who was then in
the isle of Cyprus. He provided ivagnificently for the
trunts of the crusade army, which this king commanded:
he solicited leave to join it. He offered to engage never
to return from the Holy Land, and to submit to the most
humiliating expiations which the church could impose.
He succeeded in inspiring St. Louis with interest arul
gratitude. Frederick, while waiting the effect of St. Louis's
goo4r offices, seemed occupied solely in the affairs of his
kingdom of the Two Sicilie.s, where he restored order,
and established a prosperity not to be seen elsewhere in
Europe. On the 13th of December, 1 i?.50, he was seized
with a dysentery, of which he died, in the fifty-sixth
year of his age, at his castle of Flurcnlino, in the capita,
nate where he had fixed his residence.

CHAP. IV.

nmaHEOHUu or thi rMriaa. — orcUHx a>D soudcatmm

OF THK COMMAKO RFFCBI 1C& CHAWLES OF AMJOV CALLtO

*D THE SUrrOBT or THE BCALTUA - UlS FOWEa. -BK

CaUCLTT. — UClUAN VEsTEHS.

The Italian cities, wliich for the most part date the
commencement of their liberty from the conflicts be¬
tween tile sovereigns of Italy and Germany, or the in-
vaaion of Otho the Great, in 951, had already, at the
death of Frederick II., enjoyed for three centuries Ae

iNTSRiuEamnr.

1851.

79

• *

protection and progreasiye imprOTemeilt of dieir muni-
qipal constitudona. These three centorieSj with rofer*
ence to the rest of Europe, are utterly barbwus. Their
lilstory is every where obscure and imperfectly known. It
records only sonie great revohidon, or the victoriei and
calamities of princes ; the people are always left in the
shade : a writer would have thought it beneath him
to occupy himself abotjit the fate of plebeians ; they were
not supposed to be woi^y of history. The towns of
Italy, so prodigiously superior to all others in wealth,
intelligence, energy^, and independence, were equally re¬
gardless of preserving any record of past times. Some
grave chroniclers preserved the memory of an important
crisis, but in general the cities passed whole centuries
without leaving any written memorial; thinking it per¬
haps good policy not to attract notice, and to envelope
themselves in obscurity. They, however, of ne^aity
departed from this system in the last ccnlury, owing% the
two conflicts, in both of which they remained victorious.
From 1150 to 118.1, they had fought to obtain the
peace of Constance, which they regardlil as their coit-
adtutional charter. From 1181 to 1250, they pre¬
served the full exercise of the privileges which they had
BO gloriously acquired: but while they continually ad¬
vanced in opulence, while intelligence and the arts be-
rome more and more developed, they were led by two
passions, equally honourable, to range themselves under
two opposite banners. One party, listening only to
their faith, their attachment, anil their gratitude to a
family which had given them many great sovereigns,
were ready to venture their all for the cause of the
Ghibelines ; the other, alarmed for the independence of
the church, and the liberty of Italy, by the always in¬
creasing grandeur of the house of Ilohenstaufen, were
not less resolute in their endeavours to wrest from it the
^ptre which menaced them. The cities of the Lom-
liard league had reacbetl the summit of their power at
ibe period of this second conflict. During the inter¬
regnum which lasted from the death of Frederick 11.

so HIBTOBT '^1^. t«C RitLlAN RtiPVBLIOfi. 1354.

tt> ibe entraaoir Ifs iiSfS'dt ’tkniy VII. in 1310, the
Xerofaard the apMC of faction,

and more istent^ on tfjie .^bbtinph of either the Ou^h
orGhi^line. ptrtiea, tliM on securing their otm
Btilhtiom,'' all taubmitted themselves to the military
power of some nobles to whom they had intrusted
the command of their militias, and thus all lost thdr
liberty. ^

On the death of Frederick 11., his son, Conrad IV.,
king of Germany, did'imt feel himself sufficiently strong
to appear in Italy, and place on his head, in snccession,
the iron crown at Monza, and the golden crown at
Rome. He wished first of all to secure that of the Two
Sicilies ; and embarked at some port in Istria for-NapIm,
in a Pisan vessel, during the month of October, 1251.
The remainder of his short life was passed in combating
ani^anquishing the Neapolitan Guelphs; He died
'Suaftaly at Lavello, on the Slst of May, 1354. His
natdral brother, Manfred, a young hero, hardly twenty
years of age, succeeded by his activity and courage in
recovering the kingdom which Innocent IV. had already
invaded, with the intention of subduing it to the tem¬
poral power of the holy see. But Manfred, beloved
by the Saracens of Luceria, who were the first to de¬
fend him, and admired by the Ghibelines of the Two
Sicilies, was for a long time detained there by the attacks
of the Guelphs, before he could in his turn pursue them
through the rest of Italy. Conrad had left in Germany
a son, still an infant, afterwards known under the name
of Conradin ; be was acknowledge i^ng of Gem^y,
under the name of Conre V., by a snie party only.
The electors left the empire without a head ; Ad tfWi
they afterwards proceeded to elect one, in the year 1^57,
their suffrages were divide between two princes, strangers
to Germany, where they.had never set foot; one, m
Englishman, Rivard earl of Cornwall; the other, -«
Spaniard, Alphonso X. of Castde.* v,

• Until the end of the year 1S56, WillUm, count of Hollandi one of tte
competitom whom the Guelph jiarty had gn'on to Frederick 11.) hoR Ibe
title of King of the Romana

M

^51. •■TVliii or

. louocent IV.'WM. the

doth of the be-

npnii^ oS tho ipiiitg ^ to

O^brate the d^TeisoBce of Wabdl«^

expression to his jo7> t»4 made has cn^ltaa lilhm,
and the principal rities'Of Lombardy, vrith^all die jWM^
of a triumph. He tuppoeed. tbiar ihe r^mhlleans W
Italy had fought only for him, and that he alone o»dld
henceftrth be obeyed theita ;. of thiaMie sobn (nade
them but too sensible., Heittahlbd-tbe ,Milanese-wifli
arroganee, and threatened to eetcommunicate them for
not having respected some ecclesiastical immunity. It

■was the moment in -which the republic, like a warrior
rising himself after battle, began to feel its wounda.
It had made immense sacrifcus for the Guelph party-;
it had emptied the'treasury, obtained -patriotic gifts froin
every citizen who had any tiling to spare; pledg^^ta
revenues, and loaded itself with debt to the exteinw^its
credif. For the discharge of their debts, the citflens
rengncd themselves to the necessity of giving to their
podesta. Bend de’ Gozzadini of Bologna, flnlimited power
to create new imposts, and to raise money under every
form he found possible. The ingratitude of the pope, at
a moment of universal suffering, deeply offended the Mi¬
lanese ; and the influence of the Ghibelines in a city,
where, till then, they had been treated as enemies, might
be, dated frcm that period.

Inmewit iV, .pursued his journey towards Rome;
bnt found eeptul of Christendom still less dis¬
posed than |he ^^_^city of Lombardy to obey him.
The Romans, in tSS^ called another Bolognese noble,
nam^l ..%ancaleone d’Andolo, to the government of
thie& republic; and gave him, with the title of senator,
ahnoat unlimited'authority. The citizens, continually
farmed by die quarrels and battles of the Roman
nobles, who had converted the Colissum, the tombs of
Adrian, Augu|tus, and Cecilia Metella, the arches of
trumph, M><1 other monuments of ancient Rome, into

HISTORY- OY THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1251.

•0 iDAny fortresses, whend issued handitti, whom they
kept ia pay, to pill^ passengers, and peaceable mer¬
chants, demand^ of the government, above all things,
vigour and. severity. They forgot the guarantee due-to
the accused, in their attention to those only which were
required by the public peace. The senator Branoaleone,
at the head of the -Roman militia, successively attacked
these monuments, become the retreat of robbers and
assassins; he levelled to the ground the tower» which
surmounted them ; he.hange^'the adventurers who de¬
fended them, with their commanders the nobles, at the
palace windows of the latter; and thiis established, by
terror, security in the streets of Rome. He hardly
showed more respect to Innocent than to the Roman
nobility. The pope, in order to be at a distance from
him, had transferred bis court to Assisi. Brancaleone
sent^im word, that it was not decorous in a pope to be
wan|h'ing like a vagabond from city to city; and that,
if bfe did not immediately return to the capital of Chris,
tendom, of wliich he was the bishop, the Romans,' with
their senator a. their head, would march-.to Assisi, and
send him out of it by setting fire to the town.

Thus, although the power of kings had given way to
that of the people, liberty was in general ill understood
and insecure. The passions were impetuous; a certain
point of honour was attached to violence; the nobles
believed they gave proof of independence fajr-Waine and
outrage; and the friends of order b^eved i&y had
attained the highest purpose of government, when they
made such audacious disturbers tMmble^ The tur¬
bulence and number of the noble criwnnris, the support
which their crimes found in a fake point of honour,
form an excuse for the judicial institutions of the-iba-
lian republics, which were all more calculated to atii9tB
terror into criminals too daring to conceal themselvas,
than to protect the accused against the unjust
picion of secret crimes. Order could be maiq^DOd
only by an iron hand; but this iron hand non crushed
liberty. Nevertheless, among the Italian rities tlwf«

':'95t. tsPmiT OP THE I%«JtBNTlNE$ Sit

was one which^ above all others^ seemed to think of
justice more than of peace, and of the security of the
hitizeti more than of the punishment of the guilty. It was
'Florence: its judicial institutions are, indeed, far from
meriting to be held up as models ; but they were the
first in Italy which offered any guarantee to the citizen ;
because Florence was the-city where the love of liberty
was the most general and tlie most constant in every
class where the cultivation of the understanding was
carried farthest; and where enlightenment of mind
soonest appeared in the improvement of the laws.

The Ghibeline nobles had taken possession of the
sovereignty of Florence, with the help of the king of
Antioch, two years before the death of hie father, Fre¬
derick II.; but their power soon became insupportable
to the free and proud citizens of that republic, who had
already become wealthy by commerce, and who reckoned
amongst them some distinguished literary men, ilbh as
Bruiletto Latini, and Guido Cavalcante, without hav.
ing lost their simplicity of manners, their sobriety of
habits, or their bodily vigour. Frederick II. still lived,
when, by an unanimous insurrection, on the 20th of Oc¬
tober, 1250, they set themselves free. All the citizens
assembled at the same moment in the square of Santa
Croce; they divided themselves into fifty groups, of
which each group chose a captain, and thus formed
companies of militia; a council of these officers was the
first-born authority of this newly.revived republic. The
podesti, by his severity and partiality, had rendered
himself universally detested: they deposed him, and
supplied his place by another judge, under the name of
enptain of the people, but soon afterwards decreed that
tbe podestk and the captain should each have an in.
dependent tribunal, in order that they should exercise
upon each other a mutual control; at the same time,
ikey determined that both should be subordinate to the
■upifine magistracy of the republic, which was charged
with the»«dministration, but divested of the judicial
foiiier. They decreed that this magistracy, whidh thegr
o 2

84 BISTORT OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1254.

called the signtma, shoulif be always present, alwayi
assembled in the palace of the republic, erer ready to
control the podesta or the captain, to whom they had
been obliged to delegate so much power. The town
was divided into six parts, each sestier, as it was called,
named two anxiani. These twelve magistrates ate
together, slept at the public palace, and could never go
out but together; their function lasted only two months.
Twelve others, elected by the people, succeeded them;
and the republic was so rich in good citizens, and in
men worthy of its confidence, that this rapid suscession
of angiani did not exhaust their number, Tbe Floren¬
tine militia, at the same time, attacked and donulished
all the towers which served as a refuge to the nobles, in
order that all should henceforth be forced to submit to
the common law.

The new signoria was hardly informed of the death
of Frederick, when, by a decree of the 7th of January,
1251, they recalled all the Guelph exiles to Florence.'
They henceforth laboured to give that party the pre¬
ponderance throughout Tuscany. They declared war
against the neighbouring cities of Pistoia, Pisa, Sienna,
and Volterra ; not to subjugate them, or to impose hard
conditions, but to force them to rally round the party
which they considered that of the church and of liberty.
The year 1254, when the Florentines were commanded
by their podesta, Guiscardo Pietra Santa, a Milanese, u
distinguished in their history by the name of the " yeto
of 'Victories.” They took Ae two cities of Pistoia and
Volterra; they forced those of Pisa and Sienna to sign a
peace favourable to the Guelph party; they refused to
profit by a treason which had given them possession of
the citadel of Arezzo, and they restored it to the Aretinl;
lastly, they built in the Lunigiana, beyond the territory
of Lucca, a fortress destined to shut the entry of Tua^
cany on the Ligurian side, which, in memory of their
podesta, bears to this day the name of Pietra Swta. ..The
fiignoria showed therasdves also worthy to be the go¬
vernors of a city renowned for commerce, the arts, Med.

1258. FARINATA DEQLI UBBRTI. 65

liberty. The whole tnonet’ary system of Europe was at
this period abandoned to the depredations of sovereigns
who continually varied the title and weight of coins,—
sometimes to defraud their creditors, at other times toforce
their debtors to pay more than they had received, or the
tax-payers more than was due. During 150 years more,
the kings of France violated their faith with the public,
making annually, with the utmost effrontery, some im-
portlnt change in the coins. But the republic of Flo¬
rence, in the year 1252, coined its golden florin, of
24 carats fine, ihid'Of the weight of one drachm. It
placed the value under the guarantee of publicity, and
of commercial good faith ; and that coin remained un¬
altered, as the standard for all other values, as long as
the republic itself endured.

A conspiracy of Ghibelines to recover their power in
Florence, and to concentrate it in the'aristocratic faction,
forced the republic, in the year 1258, to exile the most
illustrious chiefs of that party. JLf fhen directed by
Farinata degli Uberti, who was looked upon as the
most eloquent orator and the ablest^warrior in Tus¬
cany. All the Florentine Ghibelines were favourably
received at Sienna, although the two republics had mu¬
tually engaged in their last treaty not to give refuge to
the rebels of either city. Farinata afterwards joined
Manfred, whom he found firmly established on the
throne of theTwo Sicilies; and represented to him that,
to guard bis kingdom from all attack, he ought to secure
Tuscany, and give sujiremacy to the Ghibeline party.
He obtained from him a considerable body of German
cavalry, which he led to Sienna. Hostilities between the
two republics had already begun : the colours of Man¬
fred had been dragged with contempt through the
streets by the Florentines. Farinata resolved to take
advantage of the irritation of the Germans, in order to
bring the two parties to a general battle. He knew that
aoiDL ignorant artisans had found their way into the
tignoria «f Florence, and he tried to profit by their pre-
HBnption. He flattered them with the hope that he would
o 3

86 HISTURV OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1200.

open to them one of the gate"s of Sienna, if they ordei ed
their army to pre.sent itself under the walls of that city. At
the same time, hie emissaries undertook to excite the ill
will of the plebeians against the nobles of the Guelph
fparty, who, being more clear-sighted, might discover his
intrigues. Notwithstanding the opposition of the nobles
in council, the gignoria resolved to march a Guelph army
■through the territory of Sienna. They demanded, for
this purpose, succour from Bologna, Pistoia, Prato}' San
Miniato, San Gemignano, Volterra, and Uolle. They
appointed a meeting with the militias of Arezzo and of
Orvieto at Monte Aperto^ five miles from Sienna, on the
other side of the Arbia. The whole power of the Guelph
party in Tuscany, amounting to 30,000 infantry and
3000 cavalry, was collected there. The Guelphs were
only anxious how they should draw their enemies froin
within the w'alls of Sienna. They were themselves in
state of perfect security, when, on the 4th of September
1260, they were ur^mectedly attacked by Farinas
degli Uberti, and by tn^enerals of Manfred. TheGhi-
belines had not wiore than 13,000 men, reckoning the
emigrants of Florence, the militias of Sienna and of
Pisa, and the Germans; but they relied on a treacherous
understanding in the Guelph camp. Bucca degli Ab-
bati, placing himself at the head of the traitors, and
suddenly seizing the great standard of the republic,
threw it to the ground. The whole army was panics
struck when they saw the colours fail: they learned that
the enemy was master of the head-quarters, without
knowing their numbers. The Guelphs fled on all sides;
but, unrelentingly pursued, left 10,000 dead on the
field of battle, and a great number of prisoners in the
hands of the enemy.

The Florentine Guelphs fodnd themselves too mutdi
weakened by the defeat of Arbia to maintain themselvea
in Florence. The circumfererlite of the walls was too
vast, and the population too much discouraged by the
enormous loss which they had experienced, to admit df
defending the city. All those, accordingly, who had eK>

12€0. BArTtG OF ARBIA.

ercised any authority in the'republic,—all those whose,
names were sufficiently known to discover their party,—
left Florence for Lucca toge.her, on horseback. The
Guelphs of Prato, Pistoia, Volterra, and San Gemi*
gnano could not hope to maintain their ground, when^
those of Florence failed. All abandoned their dwellings,
and joined the Flotentines at Lucca. That city granted
to the illustrious fugitives the church and portico of
San Friano, and the surrounding quarter, where they
pitched their tents. The Ghibelines entered Florence on
the 27th of Septsmber; immediately abolished the po¬
pular government; and formed a new magistracy, com¬
posed entirely of nobles, who took the oath of fidelity to
Manfred, king of the Two Sicilies.

At a diet of the Ghibeline cities, assembled at Empoli,
the ambassadors of Pisa and Sienna strongly repre¬
sented, that whilst Florence existed, the preponderance
of the Ghibeline party in Tuscany could never be secure.
They affirmed, that the populW>n of that proud and
warlike city was entirely devoflPto the Gueljdi party;
that there was no hope of mitigating their hatred of the
nobles and of the family of the last emperor ; that de¬
mocratic habits were become a sort of second nature to
every one of the inhabitants; they concluded with de¬
manding that the walls of Florence should be rased to
the ground, and the people dispersed among the neigh¬
bouring towns. All the Ghibelines of Tuscany, all the
deputies of the cities jealous of Florence, received the
proposition favourably. It was about to be adopted,
when Farinata degli Uberti rose, and repelled with in¬
dignation this abuse of the victory which he had just
gained. He protested that he loveil his country far bet¬
ter than his party ; and declared that he would, with
those same companions il> arms whose bravery they had
witnessed at the battle of Arbia, join the Guelphs, and
fight for them, sooner tflan consent to the ruin of what
‘.was in the world most dear to him. The enemies of
.Florence dared not answer him; and the diet of Empoli
8 4

%IST^V OF THB ITAUIAN REPUBIdOS. 1S60,
■« ^ •
cont^ted itself with decreeing that the league of Tus.
«any ^uld take into pay 1000 of the soldiers of Man-
fred,j4p support in that province the preponderance of
fh^umlph party. Dante has immortalised Farinata as
iithe saviour of Florence, and Bocca degli Abbati as
we traitor i^o placed it on (he brink of destruction;
His poem is filled with aUusiobstfo this memorable
epoch. • , ,

While the Ghibelines thus acquired the preponderance
in Tuscany, the tyrant fell who at the head of that party
had caused s» much blood to lioW»in the Trevisan
march. Eccelino was hereditary lord of Bassano and
Pedemonte: he succeeded in making himself named,
captain of the people by the republics of Verona, Vicenza,
Padua, Feltre, and Belluno. By this title he united the
judicial with the military power; he was subject only to
councils which he might assemble or not at his pleasure.
It does not appear that there was any permanent magis¬
tracy, like the iianori c^o t Florence, to repress his abuse
of power. AccordingIBhe soon changed the authority
which he deriv^ from the people into a frightful
tyranny: fixing his suspicions upon all who rose to any
distinction, who in any way attracted the attention of
their fellow-citizens, he did not wait for any expression
of discontent, or symptom of resistance, in the nobles,
merchants, priests, or lawyers, who by their eminence
alone became suspected, to throw them into prison, and
there, by the most excruciating torture, extract confes.-.
sions of crimes that might justify his suspicions. The
names which escaped their Ups in the agony of torture
were carefully registered, in order to supply fresh
victims to the tyrant. In the single town of Padua
there were eight prisons always full, notwithstanding
the incessant toil of the exa^tioner to empty them;
two of these contained each ^00 prisoners. A brother
of Eccelino, named Alberic, gftllemed Treviso with less
ferocity, but with a power not less absolute. Cremona
was in like manner subject to a Ghibeline chief; Milam
DO longer evinced any repugnance to that party. In that

11Z5€> cRtrsAjm JtsAinsr EOOEUNdL, *

as well as in Brescia^ \he facti6ns of not^ and
plebeians disputed for power. ' - *

Alexander IV.j to destroy the monster tbalf'^lMin
terror the Trevisan march, caused a erus(^^*it> Jhe
preached in that country. He promise^ those who!
combated the ferocious'Eccelino all the indulgences
usually reserved for fhe deliverers of the Holy Land.
The marquis d’Este, the count ^i San Bdbifazio, with
the cities of Ferrara, Mantua, and Bologna, assembled
their troops under the standard of the church; they
were joined by a "horde of ignorant 4linatics from
the lowest class, anxious to obtain indulgences, but
unsusceptible of discipline, and incapable of a single
act of valour. Their number, however, so frightened
Eccelino's lieutenant at Padua, that he defended but
feebly the passage of the Bacchiglione, and the town.
The legate Philip, elected archbishop of Ravenna, en¬
tered Padua at the head of the crusaders, on the 18th
of June, 1256; but he eith^^'ould not or could
not restrain the fanatic and ^Plcious rabble, which
he had summoned to the support o# his soldiers ;
for seven days the city was inhumanly pillaged, by
those whom it had received as its deliverers. As soon
as Eccelino was informed of the loss he had sustained, he
hastened to separate and disarm the 11,000 Paduans be¬
longing to his army ; he confined them in prisons, where
all, with the exception of 200, met a violent or lingering
death. During the two following years, the Guelphs
experienced nothing but disasters; the legate, whom the
pope had placed at their head, proved incompetent to
command them; and the crowd of crusaders whom he
called to his ranks served only to compromise them, by
want of courage and discipline. The Ghibeline nobles
of Brescia even delivered ^eir country into the hands
of Eccelino after he had ^ the legate’s army to fiight,
iu the year 1258. The likwing year, this tyrant, un¬
equalled in Italy for bravery and military talent, always
an enemy to luxury, and proof against the Deductions of

90 BIEXORV OF THU ITALIAN REPCBLIOS. 1259>

‘womeitf making the boldest fremhle with a look, and pre¬
serving in his diminutive person, at the age of sixty-five,
ail the vigour of a soldier, advanced into the centre.of
^Lombardy, in the hope that the nobles of Milan, with
:'whom he had already opened a correspondence, would
surrender this great city to him. He passed the Oglio,
and afterwards the Adda, with tfie most brilliant army
he had ever yet commanded ; but the marquis Palavicino,
Buoso da Doara, the Creraonese chieftain, and other Ghi-
belines, his ancient associates, disgusted with his crimes,
had secretly f§kde an alliance with the Guelphs, for his
destruction. When they saw him advance so far from
his home, they rushed upon him from all sides. On the
l6'th of September, 1259, whilst he was preparing to
retire, he found himself stopped at the bridge of Cassano.
The Brescians, no longer obedient to his command, began,
their movement to abandon him; all the points of re¬
treat were cut ofFby the Milanese, Cremonese, Ferrarians,
and Mantuans; repu^^, pursued as far as Vimercato,
and at last wounded^^he foot, he was made prisoner,
and taken to Sofctino: there, he refused to speak, rejected
all the aid of medicine; tore off all the bandages from
his wounds, and finally expired, on the elevenffi day of
his captivity. His brother with all his family were
massacred in the following year.

The defeat of Eccelino, and the destruction of the
family of Romano, may be regarded as the last great
effort of the Lombards against the establishment of
tyranny in their country. About this time, the cities
began to be accustomed to absolute power in a single
person. In each republic, the nobles, always divided by
hereilitary feuds, regarded it as disgraceful to submit to
the laws, rather than do themselves, justice by force of
arms: their quarrels, broilS, and brigandage carried
troubles and disorder into every street and public place.
The merchants were continiSlly on the watch to shiut
their shops on the first cry of alarm ; for the satellitea
ot the noldes were most commonly banditti, to whom

1S60. TURBULENT SPIRIT UF THE NOBLES, 91

tiiey gave shelter in their palaces, anil who took advan¬
tage of the tumult to plunder the shops. At the same
time that the nobles irritated the plebeians by their arro¬
gance, they Ridiculed their incapacity, and endeavoured
to exclude them from all the public offices. The people
often, in their indignation, took arms ; the streets were
barricailed, and the nobles, besieged in their town houses,
were driven to take refuge inwheir castles ; but if the
railitbs of the towns afterwards presumed to pursue in
the plains of Lombardy the nobles whom they forced to
emigrate, they soon found themselves “^adly inferior.
In the course of this century, the nobles had acquired
the habit of fighting on horseback, with a lance, and
covered with heavy armour. Continual exercise could
alone render them expert in the manoeuvres of cavalry,
and accustom them to the enormous weight of the
cuirass and helmet; on the other hand, this armour
tendered them almost invulnerable. When they charged
with couched lance, and witj^ll the impetuosity of
their war-horses, they overthrevmmd annihilated the ill¬
armed infantry opposed to them, witlfcut experiencing
themselves any damage. The cities soon felt the ne¬
cessity of opposing cavalry to cavalry, and of taking into
their pay either those nobles who made common cause
with the people, or foreigners and adventurers, who
about this time began to exchange their valour for hire.
As the custom was prevalent of giving the command of
the militia to the firstofficer of justice, in order to give him
authority either to direct the public force against rebels
or disturbers of order, or to discipline the soldier by the
fear of punisliment, no commander could be found who
would undertake the military service of a town, without
at the same time possessing the power of the judicial
■word,—such power as was intrusted to the podesta or
captain of the people. It became necessary then to de¬
liver into his charge wh& was named the signoria; and
the more copsiderable this corps of cavalry, thus placed
for a certain number of years at the service of the
republic, the more this signoria, to which was attached

92 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 126(/.

the power of adjudging lifS or death in the tribunals^
became dangerous to liberty.

Among the first feudal lords who embraced the cause
of the people, and undertook the service of'a town, with
a body of cavalry raised among their vassals, or among
the poor nobles, their adherents, was Pagan della Torre,
the lord of Valsassina. He had endeared himself to the
Milanese by saving their army from the pursuit of
Frederick II. after the battle of Cortenuova. Ht was
attached by hereditary affection to the Guelph party ;
and although himself of illustrious birth, he seemed to
partake the resentment of the plebeians of Milan against
the nobility who oppressed them. When he died, his
brother Martino, after him Raymond, then Philip,
lastly, Napoleon della Torre, succeeded each other as
captains of the people, commanders of a body of cavalry
which they had raised and placed at the service of the
city; theywere the acknowledged superiors of thepodesta
and the tribunals. Xl^ese five lords succeeded each
other in less than twenty years; and even the shortness
of their lives acfiustomed the people to regard their elec¬
tion as the confirmation of a dynasty become hereditary.
Other Guelph cities of Lombardy were induced to
choose the same captain and governor as Milan, because
they believed him a true Guelph, and a real lover of the
people. These towns found the advantage of drawing
closer their alliance with the city which directed their
party; of placing themselves under a more powerful
protection; and of supporting their tribunals with a
firmer hand. Martin deUa Torre had been elected
podesta of Mjjan’^n 1256'; three years later, he ob¬
tained the title”of elder, and lord of the people. At the
same time, Lodi also named him lord. In' 1265, the
city of Novara ^conferred the same honour on him.
Philip, who succeeded liim in 1264, was named lord'by
Milan, Como, 'Vercelli, and Bergamo. Thus began to
be formed among the Lombard republics, .without their
suspecting that they divested themselves of their IflMrty,
the powerful state which a century and a half later

12b0. NEW TYRANTS. 9®

became the duchy of Milaif. But the pope, jealous of
the house of Della Torre, appointed archbishop of Milan
Otho Visconti, whose family, powerful on the borders of
the Lago Maggiore, then shared the exile of the nobles
and Ghibelines. This prelate placed himself at the
head of their faction; and henceforward the rivalry
between the families of Della Torre and Visconti made
that between the people and the nobles almost for¬
gotten.

The bitter enmity between the two parties of the
Guelphs and Ghibelines was fatal to the cause of liberty.
With the former, the question was religion, — the in¬
dependence of the church and of Italy, menaced by
the Germans and Saracens, to whom Manfred granted
not less confidence than Frederick II.; with the latter,
honour and good faith towards an illustrious family,
and the support of the aristo?racy as well as of royalty;
— but both were more intent on avenging offences a
thousand times repeated, and guarding against exile, and
the confiscation of property, which never failed to follow
the triumph of the opposite party. Theae party feelings
deeply moved men who gloried in the sacrifices which
they or their ancestors had made to either party; while
they regarded as entirely secondary the support of the
laws, the impartiality of the tribunals, or the equal par¬
ticipation of the citizens in the sovereignty. Every
town of Lombardy forgot itself, to make its faction tri¬
umph ; and it looked for success in giving more unity
and force to power. The cities of Mantua and Ferrara,
where the Guelphs were far the more numerous,
trusted for their defence, the one tu the count di San
Bonifazio, the other to the marquis d’Este,'.with so much
constancy, that these nobles, under tlm name of captains
of the people, had become almost aovereigns. In the
republic of Verona, the Ghibelines, on, the contrary, pre¬
dominated ; and as they fured theii'faction might sink
at the death of Eccelino,-they called to the command of
their ^militia,* and the p^sidency of their-iribuna^
Mastmo d^ Scala, lord of the castle of t&t na^e m

94 IllSTURY OF lUE ITALIAN nEPUSLICS. 1^1.

the Veronese territory; whbse gower became hereditary
in his i'aniiiy. The marquis Pelavicino, the most re¬
nowned Ghibeline in the whole valley of the Po ; whose
strongest castle was San Donninoj between Parma and
Placentia, and who had formed and disciplined a superb
body of cavalry, was named, alternately with his friend,
Buoso da Doara, lord of the city of Cremona. ' Pavia
and Placentia also chose him almost always their cap¬
tain; and this honour was at the same time conferred on
him by Milan, Brescia, Tortona, and Alexandria. The
Ghibeline party had, since the offence given by Inno¬
cent IV. to theGuelphs of Milan, obtained the ascendency
in Lombardy. The house of Della Torre seemed even
to lean towards it; and it was all powerful in 'Jluscany.
The city of Lucca had been the last to accede to that
party in 1263; and the^Tuscan Guelphs, obliged to
leave their country, hao*formed a body of soldiers,
which placed itself in the pay of the few cities of Lomr
hardy stiU faithful to the Guelph party.

The court of Rome saw, with great uneasiness, this
growing power, of the Ghibeline party, firmly esta¬
blished in the Ts|^ Sicilies, under tile sceptre of^Man-
fred. Feared even in Rome and the neighbouring
provinces; master in Tuscany, and making daily
progress in Lombardy,—Manfred seemed on the point
of making the whole peninsula a single monarchy. It
was no longer with the arms of the Italians that the
pope could expect to subdue him. The Germans ifforded
no support. Divided between Richard of Cornwall^|||^
Alphonso of Castile, they seemed desirous of deliv^Hi|
themselves from the imperial authority, by diw^lll^
between fore|pers at^ empty title; while each state
sought to estabusb;^^ separate independence at homq,
and abandon tbeltSviremacy of the empire over Italy.
It was accordingly;,n|CS6sary to have recpurse to
barbarians to prevefit the formation of an Italian mojo-
archy fatal to the power of the pontiff Alexander IV^
died on the 2.'ith of Maj, j|||6l : three months ;f£t^
’wards* a Frenchman, whi> t^ the name of jDiIiaii,,!^.,

•JSffS. CRARLZa OF ANJOU. 95

was elected his succes^r ; and he did not hesitate to
arm the Trench against Manfred.

His nredecessor had already opened some negotiations,
for the purpose of giving the crown of Sicily to Ed¬
mund, son of Henry III. king of England. Urban put
an end to them by hhving recourse to a prince nearer,
braver, end more powerful. He addressed himself to
Charles count of Anjou, the brother of St- Louis,
Boverflgn in right of his wife of the county of Provence.
Charles had already signalised himself in war; he was,
like his brother, <a faithful believer, and still more
fanatical and bitter towards the enemies of the church,
against whom he abandoned himself without restraint
to his harsh and pitiless character. His religious zeal,
however, did not interfere with his policy; his interest
Bit‘limits to his subjection tojg^e church ; he knew how
to manage those whom he wished to gaih; and he could
flatter, at his need, the public passions, restrain his
anger, and preserve in his language a moderation which
was not in his heart. Avarice appeared his ruling
passion l,,hut it was only the means of iterving his am.
WtilSI ^ich was unbounded. He *«ccepted the offer
of the pope. His wife Beatrice, ambitious of the title
ef queen, borne by her three edsters, pawned all her
jewels to aid in levying an army of S0,000 men, which
she led herself through Lombardy. He had preceded her.
Having ggne by sea to Rome, with 1000 knights, he
made 9a entry into that city on the £4tb of May, 1£65.
Ar’netv pope, like his predecessor a Frenchman, named
dement IV., Tad succeeded Urban, and was not less
Sh^tiraUe to Charles of Anjou. He ^||^d him to be
elected senator by the Roman v^ublnPimd invested
him with the kingdom of Sicily, charged him

to conquer; tnaier the condition, hbw^^^j that the crown
ahonld never be united to that of the einpire, or to the
sovereignty t>f Lombardy arid Tuscany. A tribute of
flOOO ounces ,of gold, an d a w hite palfrey, was, by thiS
kriestiture, aaaigned to Stjfreter.

French ani)^, hea^ Beatrice, did not pia

96 HISTDRV OF THE ITALIAN^ REPUBLICS.

through Italy till towards thei^nd of the summer of
1265 ; and in the month of February of the following
year, Charles entered, at its head, the kingdom of Naples..
He met Manfred, who awaited him in the plain of
Grandella, near Benevento, on^tha 26th of Febrftary.
The battle was bloody. The Germans and Saracens
were true to their ancient valour;.but the j\pulians fled
like cowards, and the brave son of Frederick II., aban¬
doned by them on the field of battle, perished.'' The
kingdom of the Two Sicilies was the price of this vic¬
tory. Resistance ceased, but not massacre. Charles gave
up the pillage of Benevento to his soldiers; and they
cruelly put to death all the inhabitants. The Italians,
who believed they had experienced from the Reimans
and Saracens of Frederick and Manfred all that could
be feared from the most^rbarous enemies, now found '
that there was a degree of ferocity still greiiteF than
that to which they had been accustomed from the house
of Hohenstaufen. The French seemed always ready to
give as to receive death. The two strong colonies of
Saracens at Lu&ria and Nocera were soon exteapm^^,
and in a few yews there remained not in m«7wo
Sicilies a single individual of that natiim or religion,
nor one German who had been in the pay of Manired.
Charles willingly consented to acknowledge the Apulians
and Sicilians his subjects; but he oppressed them, as
their conqueror, with intolerable burdens. Wljil^e dk--
tributed amongst his followers all the great fief^f the
kingdom, he so secured, with a hand of iron, Ms dm-
tested dominion, that two years afterwar^, when Cen^i
radio, the sq^||i Conrad, and the nephew of Manfiteft,'
arrived fronfiHpinany to dispute the crown, few male-'
contents in Sicilies had the courage to declare

for him. J

The victory Of Cliatlcs of Anjou over|9lanfTed re-
atpred the ascendant df'^e Guelph j^uty in Italy.'
'Itoip della Torre, who fmyyime time aeemed to hsMl
aitate between the two at last gave panagar

through the Milanese territory to the army of Beatztei'

M8@8. CRUELTY ^Or CHARLE! OF ANJOU. 97

Buoso da Doarawas accused oTF having received money not
to oppose her on the Oglio. The count di San Bonifazio,
the marquis (I’E^ste, and afterwards the Bolognese, openly
joined her party. After the battle of Grandella, the
Florentines rose, and drove out, on the 11th of Novem¬
ber, 1266, the Germa'h garrison, commanded by Guido
Novello, the Keutenaiit of Manfred. They soon after¬
wards received about 800 French cavalry from .Charles,
to whAn they intrusted, for ten years, the mgnoria of
Florence; that is to say, they conferred on him the
rights allowed by the peace of Constance to the emperors.
At the same time they re-established, with full liberty,
their internal constitution; they augmented the power
of their .fiumerous councils, from whioh they excluded
thb nobles and GhibeUnes; and they gave to the corpo.
Yations of trade, into which all^e industrious part of the
population was divided, a direct share in the govern¬
ment.

It was about the end of the year 1207 that the young
Conradin, aged only sixteen years, arrived at Verona,
witlul0,Q00 cavalry, to claim the inheritance of which
the pbpes nad despoiled his family. All the GhibeUnes
and brave captains, who had distinguished themselves in
the service of his grandfather and uncle, hastened to join
him, and to aid him with their swords and counsel.
The repubUcB of Fisa and Sienna, always devoted to his
family, bu^whose zeal was now redoubled by their jea¬
lousy 0 ^ the Florentines, made immense sacrifices for
him. The Romans, offended at the pope's having aban.
doned their city for Viterbo, as well as jealous of his
pretensions in* the republic, from theamwernment of
.which he had excluded the nobles, openeip&eir gates to
OoBiadin, and promised him aid. But all ihese efforts,
all this zeal, did not suffice to defied the heir of the
house of Hohenstaufen against the valour of the
French. Conradin entered the kingdom of his fathera
by the Abruz^; and met Charles of Anjou in the plain*
of Tagliacozzo, on the 2Sil|tf August, 1268. A despe¬
rate battle ensued: victory long remained doubtful.

9S HISTORY OF THE ITALIAIf REPUBLICS. ISSS.

Two divisions of the army of Charles were already de¬
stroyed; and the Grennans, who considered themselves
the victors, were dispersed in pursuit of. the enemy;
when the French prince, who, tiU then, had not ap¬
peared on the field, fell on ^em with his body of
reserve, and completely routed them. Conradin, forced
to fiy, was arrested, forty-five miles front Tagliaco*zo,
as he was about to embark for Sicily. He was brought
to Charles, who, without pity for his youth, esteem for
his courage, or respect for his just right, exacted, from
the iniquitous judges before whom ho subjected him to
the mockery of a trial, a sentence of death. Conradin
was beheaded in the market-place at Naples, on the
26th of October, 1268. With him perished several of
his most illustrious companions in arms, — German
princes, Ghibeline nobles, and citizens of Pisa; and,
after the sacrifice of these first victims, an uninterrupted
succession of executions long continued to fill the Two
Sicilies with dismay.

The defeat and death of Conradin established the
preponderancef" of the Guelph party throughou| the
peninsula. Charles placed himself at the head of it;
tire pope named him imperial vicar in Italy during
the interregnum of the empire, and sought to annex to
that title all the rights formerly exercised by the empe.
tors in the free cities. Clement IV. died on the 29th of
November, 1268,— one month after the execution of
Conradin. The cardinals remained thirty-threfe months
without being able to agree on the choice of a successor.
During this interrepium,—the longe^ the pontifical
chair had ever experienced,—Charles remained sole chief
of the Guelpf party, ruling over the whole of Italy,
which had neithe^ope nor emperor. He convoked, in
1269, a diet of the Lombard cities %t Cremona, in
which the towns of Placentia, Cremona, Parma, Mo¬
dena, Ferrara, and Reggio, consented to confer on Mm
the signoria : Milan, Como, Vercelli, Npvara, AlextOr-
dria, Tortona, Turin, Pavia,*Bergamo, and Bologna, da-
dared they should feel honoured by his alliance and

1272. POLICY OP SREOORY X. £)9

friendship, but could not take him for master. Italy
already felt the weight of the French yoke, which would
hare pressed stiU heavier if the crusade against Tunis
to which Charles of Anjou was summoned by his bro¬
ther, Saint Louis, hai| not diverted his projects of
ambition.

The conclave assembled at Viterbo at length raised to
the vacant chair Tebaldo Visconti, of Placentia, who
was al^that time in the Holy Land. On his return to
Italy, in the year 1272, he took the name of Gregory X.
This wise and moderate man soon discovered that the
court of Rome had overreached itself: in crushing the
house of Hohenstaufen, it had given itself a new mas¬
ter, not less dangerous than the preceding. Gregory, in¬
stead of seeking to annihilate the Ghibelines, like his
predecessors, occupied himself only in endeavouring to
restore . Sn equilibrium and peace between them and the
Guelphs. He persuaded the Florentines and Siennese to
recall the exiled Ghibelines, for the purpose, as he an¬
nounced, of uniting all Christendom in the defence of
the Holy Land; and testified the stron{|bst resentment
against Charles, who threw obstacles in the way of this
reconciliation. He relieved Pisa from the interdict that
had been laid on it by the holy see. He showed favour
to Venice and Genoa ; both of which, offended by the
arrogance and injustice of Charles, had made common
cause with his enemies. He engaged the electors of Ger¬
many to take advantage of the death of Richard of
Cornwall, which took place in 1271, and put an end to
the interregnum by proceeding to a new election. The
electors conferred the crown, in 1273, on Rodolph of
Hapsburg, founder of the house of Austi^ The death
□f Gregory X., in the beginning of dpuary, 1276, de¬
prived him of the opportunity to develop the projects
which these first steps seem to indicate ; but Nicolas 111.,
who succeeded him in 1277, after three ephemeral
popes, undertpok more openly to humble Charles, and
to support the Gbibeline ^arty. He forced the king
of Sii^y to renounce the title of imperial vicar,

H 2

100 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1272.

to which Charles had no title except during the inter¬
regnum of the empire; he still further engaged him to
resign the title of senatox of Rome, and the dignity of the
tignoria, which had been conferred on him by the cities
of Lombardy and Tuscany, by representing to him that
his power over these provinces was contrary to the bull
of investiture, which had put him in possession of the
kingdom of Naples.

Rodolph of Hapsburg, who had never visiteti Italy,
and was ignorant of the geography of that country, was,
in his turn, persuaded by the pope to confirm the
charters of Louis le DSbonnaire, of Otlio 1., and of
Henry VI., of which copies were sent to him. In
these charters, whether true or false, taken from the
chancery at Rome, the sovereignty of the whole of
Emilia or Romagna, the Fentapolis, the march of An¬
cona, the patrimony of St. Peter, and the campagna of
Rome, from Radicofani to Ceperano, were assigned to
the church. The imperial chancery confirmed, without
examination, a concession which had never been really
made. The tVo Fredericks, as well as their predeces.
sors, had always considered this whole extent of country
as belonging to the empire, and always exercised there
the imperial rights. A chancellor of Rodolph arrived in
these provinces to demand homage and the oath of alle¬
giance, which were yielded without difficulty; but
Nicolas appealed against this homage, and called it a
sacrilegious usurpation. Rodolph was obliged to ac¬
knowledge that it was in contradiction to his own diplo¬
mas, and resigned his pretensions. From that period,
1278, the republics, aswell as the principalities situated
in the whole extent of what is now called the States of
the Church, held.«f the holy see, and not of the em¬
peror.

A revolution, not long previous, in the principal cities
of Lombardy, had secured the preponderance to the
nobles and the Ghibeline party. These, having been for
a considerable period exiled from Milan, experienced a
continuation of disasters, anT, instead of fear, excked

1277- BISE OF THE VISCONTI AT IttlliAN. 101

compassion. While Napoleon della Torre, chief of the
republic of Milan, was exasperating the plebeians and
Guelphs with his arrogance and contempt of their free,
dom, he was informed that Otho Visconti, whom he had
exiled, although archbishop of Milan, had assembled
round him at Como many nobles and Ghibelines, with
whom he intended making an attack on the Milanese
territory. Napoleon marched to meet him ; but, despis¬
ing enmies whom he had so often vanquished, he care¬
lessly sufi'ered himself to be surprised by the Ghibelines
at Desio, in the night of the 21st of January, 1277-
Having been made prisoner, with five of his relatives, he
and they were placed in three iron cages, in which the
archbishop kept them confined. This prelate was him¬
self received with enthusiasm at Milan, at Cremona, and
Lodi. He formed anew the councils of these republics,
admitting only Ghibelines and nobles ; who, ruined by
a long exile, and often supported by the liberality of
the archbishop, were become humble and obsequious :
their deference degenerated into submission ; and the
republic of Milan, henceforth governed Uy the Visconti,
became soon no more than a principality.

Nicolas III., of the noble Homan family of the
Orsini, felt an hereditary affection for the Ghibelines,
and every where favoured them. A rivalry between
two iUustrioue families of Bologna, the Gieremei and
the Lambertazzi, terminated, in 1274, in the exile of
the latter, who were Ghibelines, with all their adherents.
The quarrel between the two families became, from that
period, a bloody war throughout Romagna. Guido de
Montefeltro, lord of the mountains in the neighbourhood
of Urbino, who had never joined any republic, received
the Ghibelines into his country ; and in commanding
them gained the reputation of a great captain. Nico¬
las III. sent a legate to Romagna, to compel Bologna
and all the Guelph republics to recall the Ghibelines,
and establish peace throughout the province. He suc¬
ceeded in 1279. Another legate on a similar mission,
nnd with equal success, was sent to Florence and Sienna.

H 3

102 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1280.

The balance seemed at last on the point of being
established in Italy^ when Nicolas died, on the 19th of
August, 1280.

Charles, who had submitted without opposition, and
without even manifesting any displeasure, to the depres¬
sion of a party on which were founded all his hopes, and
to a reconciliation which destroyed his influence in the
Guelph republics, hastened to Viterbo as soon as he
learned the death of the pope, fully resolved not lb suffer
another of his enemies to ascend the chair of St. Peter.
He caused three cardinals, relatives' of Nicolas, whom
he regarded as being adverse to him, to be removed by
force from the conclave ; and, striking terror into the
rest, he obtained, on the 22 d of January, 1281, the
election of a pope entirely devoted to him. This was a
canon of Tours, who took the name of Martin IV. +He
seemed to have no higher mission than that of secon^ng
the ambition of the king of the Two Sicilies, and serving
him in his enmities. Far from thinking of forming^^nny
balance to his power, he laboured to give him the sove¬
reignty of all Italy. He conferred on him the title of se¬
nator of Rome; he gave the government of all the pro¬
vinces of the church to his French officers; he catised
the Ghibelines to be exiled from all the cities; and he
encouraged, with all his power, the new design of
Charles to take possession of the Eastern empire. Con¬
stantinople had been taken from the Latins on the
25th of July, 1261 ; and the son of the last Latin em.
peror was son-in-law of Charles of Anjou. Martin IV.
excommunicated Michael Paleologus, the Greek empe¬
ror, who had vainly endeavoured to reconcile the two
churches. The new armament, which Charles was about
to lead into Greece, was in preparation at the same time
in all the ports of the Two Sicilies. The Mug’s ag^s
collected the taxes with redoubled insolence, and levied
money with greater severity. The judges endeavoured
to smother resistance by striMng terror. •'In the mean¬
while, a noble of Salerno, named John da Procida, the
friend, confidant, and physician of Frederick II., and of

1282.

SICILIAN VESPERS.

103

Manfred, visited in disguise the Two Sicilies, to re¬
animate the zeal of the ancient Ghibelines, and rouse
their hatred of the French and of Charles. After having
traversed Greece and Spain to excite new enemies against
him, he obtained assurances that Michael Paleolugus,
and Constance, the daughter of Manfred and wife of
don Pedro of Aragon, would not suffer the Sicilians to
he destroyed, if these had the courage to rise against their
oppressors. Their assistance was, in fact, promised,— it
was even prepared; but Sicily was destined to be deli¬
vered by a suddep and popular explosion, which took
place at Palermo, on the .30th of March, 1282. It was
excited by a French soldier, who treated rudely the
person of a young bride as she was proceeding to the
church of Montreal, with her betrothed husband, to re¬
ceive the nuptial benediction. The indignation of her
relations and friends was communicated with the ra¬
pidity of lightning to the whole population of Palermo.
At that moment the bells of the churches were ringing
for vesperf t the people answered by the cry, “ To
•arms — death to the French!” T^p French were
attacked furiously on all sides. Those who attempted to
defend themselves were soon overpowered; others, who
endeavoured to pass for Italians, were known by their
pronunciation of two words, which they were made to
repeat — ceci and ciceri, and were, on their mispro¬
nunciation, immediately put to death. In a few hours,
more than 4000 weltered in their blood. Every town
in Sicily followed the example of Palermo. Thus the
Sicilian vespers overthrew the tyranny of Charles of
Anjou and of the Guelphs; separated the kingdom of
Sicily from that of Naples ; and transferred the crown
of the former to don Pedro of Aragon, the son-in-law
of Manfred, who was considered the heir to the house of
Hohenstaufen.

104 QlSTOllY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1283.

CHAP. V.

HALT NEGLECTEO BY THE EMPERORS.—ABANDONED BY THE
rOTES. — COUNT UGOLINO. -THE BLANCHl AND NERI AT FLO¬

RENCE. — CLOSE OP THE GRAND COUNCIL AT VENlCEi ^ THE
EMPEROR HENRY VII. — HIS EXPEDITION INTO ITALY.

Hithebto we have found the connecting chain of the
eventSj of which we have undertaken the narrative, in a
common interest felt throughout Italy. In seeking to
trace the concurrent history of more than two hundred
small states, we have found their frequent revolutions
referable to the efforts made by the Italians to maintain
the balance between the rights of the empire, of the
church, and of each city. In the period on which we
now enter, politics became complex, twie

widely spread; and it is much more ^i/e

and follow a dominant idea amidst the r^au-.

tions to which italy was a prey. This difference results
chiefly from the fact, that no potentate existed in Italy
at this time superior to the republics; such as the fon?(er
kings of Naples, the emperors, and popes, who succeeded
in acquiring the entire government of a faction, and in
thus directing to one end the opposite efforts of all the
people of the peninsula.

Charles of Anjou, the first French king of the Twu
Sicilies, survived the Sicilian vespers only three years.
He died on the 7th of January, 1285, aged sixty-five
years. At this period, his son, Charles II., was a pri¬
soner in the hands of the Sicilians: he was set at liberty
in 1289, in pursuance of a treaty, by which he acknow.
ledged the separation and independence of the two crowns
of^aples and Sicily. The first was assigned to the
Guelpbs and the house of Anjou; the second to the
Ghibehnes, and the house of Aragon ; but Nicholas IV.,
by whose influence the treaty wiis made, broke it, re-

12BS. DECLINE OP THE ROVAL POWER. 105

leased Charles from Lis oa^h, and authorised him to
begin the war anew. This war, which lasted twenty,
four years, occupied without lustre the whole reign of
Charles II. This prince was milder than his father,
but weaker also. He had neither the stern character of
Charles of Anjou, which excited hatred; nor his talents,
which commanded admiration or respect. He always
called himself the protector of the Guelph party, but
ceasetk to be its champion ; and neither the court of Rome,
nor the Guelph republics, any longer demanded counsel,
direction, or support from the court of Naples. He died
on the 5th of May, 1.809; and was succeeded by his son
Robert. The influence of the emperors, as protectors of
the Ghibenne party, during this period was almost ex¬
tinct in Italy. Rodulph of Hapsburg, who reigned with
glory in Germany from 1273 to 1291, never passed the
Alps to be acknowledged emperor and king of the Lom¬
bards ; after him, Adolphus of Nassau, and his suc¬
cessor, Albert of Austria,—the one assassinated in 1298,
the'iother if^S'OS,—remained alike strangers to Italy.
The Ghibeline party was, accordingly, no ienger'supported
■pr directed by the emperors, but it maintained itself by
its,Dwn resources, by the attachment of the nobles to
the imperial name, and stiU more by the self-interest of
the captains; who, raised to the signoria either by the
choice of the people or of their faction, created for
themselves, in the name of the empire, a sovereignty to
which the Italians unhesitatingly gave the name of
tyranny.

Lastly, the third power, that of the pope, which till
then had directed the politics of Italy, ceased about this
time to follow a regular system, and consequently to
give a powerful impulse to faction. Martin IV., whose
Ufe terminated two months after that of Charles I., had
always acted as his creature, had seconded him in
enmities, in his thirst of vengeance against the Sicilialn,
and in his efforts to recover his dominion over Italy.
But Honorius IV., who reigned after him, from 1285
to 1287, appeared to have no other thought than that of

106 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 12&S.

aggrandising the noble house of Savelli at Rome, of
which he was himself a member: after him, Nicolas IV.,
from 1288 to 1292 , was not less zealous in his efforts
to do as much for that of Colotina. His predecessor,
Nicolas III., had a few years previously set the ex¬
ample, by applying all his power as pope to the eleva¬
tion of the Orsini. These are nearly the first examples of
the nepotism of the popes, who had hardly yet begun to
feel themselves sovereigns. They raised these three great
Roman families above all their ancient rivals; almost
all the castles in the patrimony of St. Peter, and in the
Campagna of Rome, became their property. The houses
•f Colonna, Orsini, and Savelli, to support their nobi¬
lity, soon began to traffic in their valour, "by hiring
themselves out with a body of cavalry to such as would
employ them in war ; whilst the peasants, their vassals,
seduced by the spirit of adventure, and still more by
the hope of plunder, abandoned agriculture to enlist in
the troops of their Uege lord. The effect of their dis¬
orderly lives was, that the two provinces niirest Rome
soon became tht worst cultivated and the least populous
in all Italy, although the treasures of Europe poured into
the capital of the Faithful. After Nicolas IV., a pBor
hermit,humble, timid, and ignorant, was raised, in 1294,
to the chair of St. Peter, under the name of Celestine V.
His election was the effect of a sudden burst of religious
enthusiasm, which seized the college of cardinals ; al¬
though this holy senate had never before shown them¬
selves more ready to consult religion than policy.
Celestine V. maintained himself only a few months on
the throne ; all his sanctity could not serve as an excuse
for his incapacity ; and the cardinal Benedict Caietan,
who persuaded him to abdicate, was elected pope in hie
place, under the name of Boniface VllI, Boniface,
a^, expert, intriguing, and unscrupulous, would have
r»ored the authority of the holy see, which during the
latter pontificates had been continually sinking, if the
violence of his character, his ungovernable pride, and his
transports of palssion, bad not continually thwarted hii

1283. FHOSPEBITY OF THE REPUBLICS. 107

policy. He* endeavoured at first to augment the power
of the Guelphs by the aid of France ; he afterwards
engaged in a violent quarrel with the family of Colonna,
whom he wouldwillinglyhave exterminated; and,finally,
taking offence against Philip le Bel, he treated him with
as much haughtiness as if he had been the lowest of his
vassals. Insulted, and even arrested, by the French
prince, in his palace of Anagni, on the 7th of Septem¬
ber, 1*803, Boniface died a few weeks afterwards of rage
and humiliation.

While the power of the kings of Naples, of the em¬
perors, and of the popes, was as it were suspended in
Italy, innumerable small states, which had risen A
almost absolute independence, experienced frequent re¬
volutions, for the most part proceeding from internal
and independent causes. We can, at most, only indicate
shortly those of the republics, the most distinguished and
the most influential in Italy: but, before thus entering
within the walls of the principal cities, it is right to give
a sketch of the general aspect of the country, particularly
as the violent commotions which it experienced might
give a false idea of its real state. This aspect was one
of a prodigious prosperity, which contrasted so much the
more with the rest of Europe that nothing but poverty
and barbarism were to be found elsewhere. The open
country, designated by the name of contado, appertaining
to each city, was cultivated by an active and industrious
race of peasants, enriched by their labour, and not fear¬
ing to display their wealth in their dress, their cattle, and
their instruments of husbandry. The proprietors, in¬
habitants of towns, advanced them capital, shared the
harvests, and alone paid the land-tax: they undertook
the immense labour which has given so much fertility to
the Italian soil,—that of making dikes to preserve the
plains from the inundation of the rivers, and of deriymg
from those rivers innumerable canals of irrigation. Ae
navigiio grande of Milan, which spreads the clear waters
of the Ticino over the finest part of Lombardy, was
begun in 1179, resumed in 1257, and terminated a

108 HISTORY OF TH£ ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1283.

few years afterwards. Men who meditatedj and who
applied to the arts the fruits of their study, practised
already that scientific agriculture of Lombardy and
Tuscany which became a model to other nations; and
at this day, after five centuries, thg districts formerly
free, and always cultivated with intelligence, are easily
distinguished from those half-wild districts which had
remained subject to the feudal lords.

The cities, surrounded with thick walls, terfaced,
and guarded by towers, were, for the most part, paved
with broad flag-stones; while the inhabitants of Paris
could not stir out of their houses without plunging into
Ae mud. Stone bridges of an elegant and bold archi¬
tecture were thrown over rivers; aqueducts carried
pure water to the fountains. The palace of the po-
destas and signoria united strength with majesty. The
most admirable of those of Florence, the Palaxzo-
Vecchio, was built in 1298. The Loggia in the same
city, the church of Santa Croce, that of Santa Maria 'del
Fiore, with its dome, so admired by Michael Angelo,
were begun by'the architect Arnolfo, scholar of Nicolas
di Pisa, between the years 1284 and 1300. The pro¬
digies of this first-born of the fine arts multiplied in
Italy; a pure taste, boldness, and grandeur struck the
eye in all the public monuments, and finally reached
even private dwellings ; while the princes of France,
England, and Germany, in building their castles, seemed
to think only of shelter and defence. Sculpture in
marble and bronze soon followed the progress of archi¬
tecture : in 1300, Andrea di Pisa, son of the architect
Nicolas, cast the admirable bronze gates of the Bap¬
tistery at Florence ; about the same time, Cimabue and
Giotto revived the art of painting, Casella music, and
Dante gave to Italy his divine poem, unequalled in
su|ceeding generations. History was written honestly,
with scrupulous research, and with a gracelHil sim¬
plicity, by Giovanni Villani, and his school; the study
of morals and philosophy began; and Italy, ennobled

ARTS AND TRADE.

1283.

lop

by freedom^ enlightened .nations, till then sunk in dark¬
ness.

The arts of necessity and of luxury had been cul¬
tivated with not less success than the fine arts: in every
street, warehouses and shops displayed the wealth that
Italy and Flanders only knew how to produce. It ex¬
cited the astonishment and cupidity of the French or Ger¬
man adventurer, who came to find employment in Italy,
and )vho had no other exchange to make than his blood
against the rich stuffs and brilliant arms which he coveted.
The Tuscan ami Lombard merchants, however, traf¬
ficked in the barbarous regions of the west, to carry
there the produce of their industry. Attracted by tke
franchises of the fairs of Champagne and of Lyons,
they went thither, as well to barter their goods as to
lend their capital at interest to the nobles, habitually
loaded with debt; though at the risk of finding them¬
selves suddenly arrested, their wealth confiscated, by
order of the king of France, and their lives, too, some¬
times endangered by sanctioned robbers, under the
pretext of repressing usury. Industo^, tile employ¬
ment of a superabundant capital, the application of
mechanism and science to the production of wealth,
secured the Italians a sort of monopoly through Eu¬
rope : they alone offered for sale what all the rich
desired to buy; and, notwithstanding the various op¬
pressions of the barbarian kings, notwithstanding the
losses occasioned by their own often-repeated revo¬
lutions, their wealth was rapidly renewed. The wages
of workmen, the interest of capital, and the profit of
trade, rose simultaneously, while every one gained
much and spent little; manners were still simple, luxury
was unknown, and the future was not forestalled by
accumulated debt.

The republic of Pisa was one of the first to
known to the world the riches and power which a small
state might acquire by the aid of commerce and liberty.
Pisa had astonished the shores of the Mediterranean

110 UISTORT OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1284.

by the number of vessels and galleys that sailed under
her flag, by the succour she had given the crusaders, by
the fear she had inspired at Constantinople, and by the
conquest of Sardinia and the Balearic Isles. Fisa was
the first to introduce into Tuscany the arts that ennoble
wealth: her dome, her baptistery, her leaning tower,
and her Campo Santo, which the traveller’s eye embraces
at one glance, but does not weary of beholding, had been
successively Wit from the year 1063 to the end of the
twelfth century. These che/s-d’asuvre had animated the
genius of the Pisans: the great architects of the thir¬
teenth century were, for the most part, pupils of Nicolas
di Pisa. But the moment was come in which the ruin
of this glorious republic was at hand j a deep-rooted
jealousy, to be dated from the conquest of Sardinia, had
frequently, during the last two centuries, armed against
each other the republics of Genoa and Pisa: a new war
between them broke out in 1282. It is difiicult to
comprehend how two simple cities could put to sea such
prodigious fleets as those of Fisa and Genoa. In 1262,
Ginicel Sfsmondi commanded \hirty Pisan galleys, of
which he lost the half in a tempest, on the 9th of Sep¬
tember ; the following year, Rosso Sismondi commanded
sixty-four; in 1284, Guido Jacia commanded twenty-
four, and was vanquished. The Pisans had recourse
the same year to a Venetian admiral, Alberto Morosini,
to whom they intrusted 103 galleys: but, whatever
efforts they made, the Genoese constantly opposed a
superior fleet. This year, however, all the male popu¬
lation of the two republics seemed assembled on their
vessels: they met on the 6th of August, 1284, once more
before the Isle of Meloria, rendered famous forty-three
years before by the victory of the Pisans over the same
enemies. Valour was still the same, hut fortune had,
changed sides; and a terrible disaster effaced the memory
of an ancient victory. While the two fleets, almost
equal in number, were engaged, a reinforcement of
thirty Genoese galleys, driven impetuously by the wind,
struck the Pisan fleet in flank: seven of their vessels

1^88. COUNT UGOliINO AT PISA. IIJ

were instantly sunk, twenty-eight taken. 5000 citizens
perhhed in the battle, and 11,000 who were taken pri¬
soners to Genoa preferred death in captivity rather
than their republic should ransom them, by giving up
Sardinia to the Genoese. This prodigious loss ruined
the maritime power of Pisa; the same nautical know¬
ledge, the same spirit of enterprise, were not trans¬
mitted to the next generation. AU the fishermen of the
coast Quitted the Pisan galleys for those of Genoa. The
vesselrdiifiinished in number, with the means of manning
them; and Pisa could no longer pretend to be more than
the third maritime power in Italy.

WhilB the republic was thus exhausted by this great
reverse of fortune, it was attacked by the league of the
Tuscan Guelphs ; and a powerful citizen, to whom it
had intrusted itself, betrayed his country to enslave it.
Ugolino was count of the Gherardesca, a mountainous
country situated along the coast, between Leghorn and
Piombino: he was of Ghibeline origin, but had married
his sister to Giovan di GaUura, chief of the Guelphs of
Pisa and of Sardinia. From that time he fttfuBy opposed
the Guelphs to the GhibeUnes; and though several accused
him of having decided the issue of the battle of Meloria,
others regarded him as theperson most able, most powerful
by his alliance, and most proper, to reconcile Pisa with the
Guelph league. The Pisans, amidst the dangers of the
republic, felt the necessity of a dictator. They named
Ugolino captain-general for ten years: and the new
commander did, indeed, obtain peace with the Guelph
league ; but not till he had caused all the fortresses of
the Pisan territory to be opened by his creatures to the
Lucchese and Florentines,— a condition of his treaty with
them which he dared not publicly avow. From that
time he sought only to strengthen hds own despotism, by
depriving aU the magistrates of power, and by intimi¬
dating the archbishop Roger degli Ubaldinl, who held
jointly vdth,him the highest rank in the city. The
nephew of Ubaldini, having opposed him with some
haughtiness, was killed by him on the spot with his own

• w 1

112 'HISTORY' OF THE REFUBLICS. 12i8&

hand. Hia violencSj and tHfe^umber of executions \rhich
he ordered^ soon rendered him equally odious to the two
parties: but he had the art^ in his frequent changes
from one to the other^ to make the opposite party believe
him powerfully supported by that with which he at the
moment sided. In the summer of 1282 the Gkielphs
were exiled: but finding in the Ghiheline chiefs^ the
Gualandi Sismondi and Lanfranchi^ a haughtiness which
he thought he had subdued, he charged his son to in¬
troduce anew the Guelphs into the city. His project
was discovered and prevented; the Ghibelinesacalled the
people on all sides to arms and liberty. On the 1st of'
July, 1288, Ugohno was besieged in the palaae of the
gignoria: the insurgents, unable to vanquish the obstinate
resistance opposed to them hy himself, his sons, and his
adherents, set fire to the palace; and, having entered it
amidst the flames, dragged forth Ugolino, two of his
sons, and two of his grandsons, and threw them into the
tower of the Sctte Vie. The key was given to the arch¬
bishop j from whom was expected the vigilance of an
enemy, llut thlr charity of a priest. That charity, how¬
ever was soon exhausted: the key after a few months'
was thrown into the river ; and the wretched count
perished in those agonies of hunger, and of paternal and
filial love, upon which poetry *, sculpture, and painting
have conferred celebrity.

The victory over count Ugolino, achieved by the most
ardent of the Ghibelines, redoubled the enthusiasm and
audacity of that party ; and soon determined them to
renew the war with the Guelphs of Tuscany. Notwith¬
standing the danger into which the republic was thrown
by the ambition of the last captain-general, it continued
to believe, when engaged in a hazardous war, that the
authority of a single person over the military, the
finances, and the tribunals was necessary to its protec¬
tion ; and it trusted that the terrible chastisement just
inflicted on the tyrant would hinder any other from
following his example. Accordingly Guido de Monte-
« Dante.

113

N'OBLES KXCli^lleD FROII POTVEB.

feltro was named captain^ He had acquired a high
repijtation in defending Forli against the French forces
of Charles of Anjou; anil the republic hail not t# repent
of its choice. He recovered by force of arms all the
fbrtresses which Ugolino had given up to the Lucchese
and Florentines. The Pisan militia, whom Montefeltro
armed with cross-bows, which he had trained them to-
use with precision, became the terror of Tuscany. The
Guclp^ of Florence and Lucca were glad to make
peace rn 1293.

, While%ie Pisaits became habituated to trusting the
government to a single person, the Florentines became
still mot% attached to the most democratic forms of
liberty. In 1282 they removed the anziani, whom
they had at first set at the head of their government, to
make room for the priori dvllr. arti, whose name and
office was preserved not only to the end of the republic,
but even to our day. The porporation of trades, which
they called the arti, were distinguished by the titles of
major and minor. At first only three, aftenjgrds six,
major arti were admitted into the govdfninent. The
college, consisting of six priori delln arti, always as¬
sembled, and living together, during two months, in the
p'ub;lic palace, formed the signoria, which represented
the republic. Ten years later, the Florentines completed
this .signoria by planing at its head the gonfaloner of
justice, elected also for two months, from among the
representatives of the arts, manufactures, and commerce.
When he displayed the gonfalon, or standard of the
state, the citizens were obliged to rise and as.sist in the
execution of the law. The arrogance of the nobles,
their quarrels, and the disturbance of the public peace
by their frequent battles in the streets, had, in 1292 ,
irritated the whole population against them, Giano
della Bella, himself a noble, but sympathising in the
passions and resentment of the people, proposed to bring
them to ordnr by summary justice, and to confide the
execution of it to the gonfaloner whom he -cau.sed to be
elected. The Guelphs had been so long at the head of

I

114 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 129S.

the republic, that their nobl^ families, whose wealth had
immensely increased, placed themselves above all law.
Giano determined that their nobility itself should be a
title of exclusion, and a commencement of punishment;
a rigorous edict, bearing the title of ''ordinance of jus¬
tice," first designated thirty-seven Guelph families of
Florence, whom it declared noble and great, and on
this account excluded for ever from the signorias re¬
fusing them at the same time the privilege of renouncing
their nobility, in order to place themselves on a lloting
with the other citizens. When these familie^troubled
the public peace by battle or assassination, a summary
information, or even common report, was sufficient to
induce the gonfaloner to attack them at the head of the
militia, rase their houses to the ground, and deliver their
persons to the podesta, to be punished according to their
crimes. If other families committed the same disorders,if
they troubled the state by their private feuds and outrages,
the aignoria was authorised to ennoble them, as a punish¬
ment of their crimes, in order to subject them to the
same suiftfnaryjustice. A similar organisation, under
different names, was made at,3ienna, Pistoia, and Lucca. “
In all the republics of Tuscany, and in the greater
number of those of Lombardy, the nobility by its tur¬
bulence was excluded from aU the magistracies; and in
more than one, a register of nobles was opened, as at
Florence, on which to inscribe, by way of punishment,
the names of those who violated the public peace.

However rigorous these precautions were, they did
not suffice to retain in subjection to the laws an order
of men who believed themselves formed to rule, and
who despised the citizens with whom they were asso¬
ciated. These very noUes, to whom was denied aU
participation in the government of the republic, and
almost the protection and equality of the law, were no
sooner entered into their mountdn castles, than they
became sovereigns, and exercised despotic power over
their vassals. The most cultivated and wooded part of
the Apennines belonged to the republic of Pistoia. It

1300. PACTIONS OF THE BIANCHI AND NERI. 115

was a considerable district, Ordering on the Lucchese,
Modenese, Bolognese, and Florentine territory, and was
emphaticdly designated by the name of the Mountain.
It was covered with castles belonging either to the
Cancellieri, or Panciatichi, the two families most power¬
ful in arms and wealth in all Italy : the first was Guelph,
the second Ghibeline; and as the party of the former
then ruled in Tuscany, they had obtained the exile of
the I%nciatichi from Pistoia. The Cancellieri took
advanffige of this exile to increase their power by the
purchase of land, by conquest, and by alliance; in their
family alone they reckoned one hundred men at arms.
This family was divided into two branches, of distant
relationship and which were distinguished by the names
of Biannhi and Neri (whites and blacks) ; a quarrel
arose between them, and was maintained with all the
perfidy and ferocity of which the Pistoiese nobility
were then accused. Mutilations, assassinations, and
desperate battles, from 1296 to 1300, followed each
other with a frequency which at last alarm ed all
Tuscany. The Florentines, desirous ^bf^acifying
Pistoia, engaged that city to banish from its bosom all
the Cancellieri, but at the same time opened their own
gates to them, in the hope of being able to accomplish a
reconciliation. This powerful family, allied to all the
Guelph nobility of Italy, instead of forgetting their
reciprocal injuries, drew their hosts into their quarrel:
there were, it is true, already other causes of excite¬
ment in Florence. Corso Donsti, a Guelph, possessed
great influence over the ancient families who had from
the beginning directed that party. Vieri de Cerchi, a
Guelph also, was the chief of those who, like himself,
had recently risen to wealth and power; he reproached
the former for not forgetting the ancient enmity between
the Guelpbs and Ghibelines; for still troubling the
republic with factions, when there was no longer any
motive; and proposed to substitute equal laws, for
luperannuateil proscriptions. The Cancellieri of the
Neri party sided with Corso Donati, the ancient nobles,

I 2

llC HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REFHBLICS.

and the most violent of theCiuelphs. Those of theBianchi,
on the contrary, took part with Vieri deCerchi, the mode¬
rate Guelphs, and subsequently with the Ghibelines and
the Panciatichi. In this last party enlisted Dante, the
historian Dino Compagni, the father of Petrarch, and
all those who began about this time at Florence to dis¬
tinguish themselves in literature.

Boniface VIII. endeavoured to reconcile the two
parties who, under the names of Bianchi and“Neri,
began to divide all Tuscany; hut, violent and choleric,
he was ill calculated to make peace between men as in¬
temperate as himself. He soon espoused with zeal the
party of the Neri, the aristocracy, and the most
zealous Guelphs. He had called Charles de Valois, the
brother of Philip le Bel, to Italy, to place him at the
head of an expedition which he meditated against Sicily.
He charged him to pacify Tuscany in his way ; and
gave him to understand that it would be easy, in states
so rich, to repay himself for his trouble. The republic
of Florence dared not refuse the mediation of Charles :
it was accustomed to regard the house of France as the
protector of the church and of the Guelph party. It,
however, limited, in precise terms, the authority allowed
him, before receiving him, and the 800 cavalry which
he commanded, within the city. But the French
princes, at this period, neither respected nor compre¬
hended the liberty of the citizen ; they were incapable of
forming any idea of the reciprocal rights which they
had to maintain. Charles, making no account of the
engagements which he had taken, formed an intimate
alliance with the Neri, whom he soon discovered to be
the more aristocratic, and more virulent in their enmities.
Having agreed on his share of the booty, he gave, from
the 5th to the 11th of November, 1301, a loose rein to
their passions. He permitted them to pillage and burn
the houses of their enemies; to kill those who were the
most odious to them ; to carry off the heiresses of rich
families, and marry them to their sons ; to cause sen¬
tences of exile and confiscation to be pronounced against

1302. PERSECUTION OF THE BIANOHI. 117

all the most illustrious families of the Bianchi party by
the podesta, a creature of Charles de Valois^ whom he
had brought there. The French cavalry, and the
Guelphs of Romagna, whom C'harlcs had also intro¬
duced into the city, assisted in all these outrages. It
was then that Dante, and Petracco dell'Ancisa, the father
of Petrarch, were exiled from their country, with many
hundred others. Charles at last quitted Florence, on the
4th oT April, 1302, carrying off immense wealth. His
cavalry were loaded with gold and precious stuffs ; but
he carried with him also the curse of the Florentines,
which seemed to follow him in his unsuccessful expedi¬
tion against Sicily. Benedict XI., the successor of Boni¬
face, vainly endeavoured, during his short pontificate, to
reconcile the Bianchi and Neri in the cities of Tuscany,
and to recall the latter from exile. He died of poison, on
the 4th of July, 1304. Some accuse Philip le Bel of
the crime; he at least reaped all the benefit. This king
succeeded by fraud in getting a Frenchman elected
pope, under the name of Clement V., whom, to keep
him more subservient to his will, he alWa^ retained in
France; drawing thither, also, the college of cardinals,
who were recruited in that country, so that the successors
of Clement might also be Frenchmen. It was the
beginning of the long retirement, or, as the Italians call
it, exile of the popes, at Avignon, which terminated in
1 377, and soon after began anew with the great western
schism. This exile was favourable to the independence
of Rome, and of the other cities of the pontifical states ;
and at the same time rendered the holy see almost indiffer¬
ent to the Guelph party, which it had often indecently
seconded.

While the nobles of the Italian cities had, by their
turbulence, excited the resentment of all classes of the
people,— while, by their disobedience to the laws, con¬
tempt of the tribunals and of public peace, they had
drawn on themselves the exclusion not only from the
magistracies, but from the common rights, the most
precious to the citizens of a free state, — the nobility of

IIB HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1297>

Venice rose in importance^ and took possession of the go>
vernment. Submissive to the Jaws, but shaping them for
their own use, — forgetting individuals and families, to
occupy themselves only about their corporate interests,—
they arrived, by insensible usurpations, to the-sovereignty
of this ancient republic. This nobility of Venice, which
appeared so docile to the laws, so patient, so skilful, was
the oldest in Europe. It inherited the honours of the
Roman empire ; and alone preserved, from the fifth to
the eleventh century, the family names, according to the
Roman custom, which had been abandoned by the rest
of Europe. Like the nobles in the other cities of Italy,
they were in turn sovereigns in their fiefs, and subjects
in the city. After the conquest of the Greek empire, the
Venetians distributed among their nobles several islands
in the Archipelago, of which they preserved the sove¬
reignty, with the titles of dukes or counts, even after
the Greeks had recovered Constantinople ,* but they had
not, and could not have, any fortresses in the vast plains
that surround Venice. They had no devoted vassals, al¬
ways rea'Sy tiTtspouse their quarrels ; nor retreats, into
which to withdraw from the power of the law. They
acknowledged and submitted to the authority of the tri¬
bunals ; they conducted themselves as citizens, and tlius
soon became masters of the state.

It was by slow and artfully disguised encroachments
that the nobility of Venice succeeded in substituting itself
for the civic power, and investing itself with the sove¬
reignty of the republic. During the earlier period, the
doge was an elective prince, the limit of whose power
was vested in assemblies of the people. It was not till
1032 that he was obliged to consult only a council,
formed from amongst the most Ulustrioua citizens, whom
he designated. Thence came the name given them of
pregadi (invited). The grand council was not formed
till 1172 , 140 years later, and was, from that time, the
real sovereign of the republic. It was composed of 480
members, named annually on the last day of September,
by twelve tribunes, or grand electors, of whom two were

1297' ARISTOCRACY OF VENICE. 119

chosen by each of the six sections of the republic. No
more than four members from one family could be
named. The same counsellors might be re-elected
each year. As it is in the spirit of a corporation to tend
always towards an aristocracy, the same persons were
habitually re-elected ; and when they died, their chil¬
dren took their places. The grand council, neither
assuming to itself nor granting to the doge the judicial
powei^ gave the first example of the creation of a body
of judges, numerous, independent, and irremovable ;
such, nearly, as' was afterwards the parliament of
Paris. In 117.9, it created the criminal quarantia;
called, also, the vecchia quarantia^ to distinguish it from
two other bodies of forty judges, created in 1229. The
grand council gave a more complete organisation to the
government formedfrom among its members. It was com¬
posed of a doge ; of six counsellors of the red robe, who
remained only eight months in office, and who, with the
doge, formed the signoria ; and of the council of pre-
gadi, composed of sixty members, rcnew jijj paA t year.
The doge was obliged, on entering office, to take a
rigorously detailed oath, which guaranteed all the public
liberties. At his death, a commission of enquiry was
formed, to examine whether he had not exceeded his
powers ; and in case he had, his heirs w ere responsible. In
1249, the sovereign council renounced the election of the
doge, and entrusted it to a commis-sion drawn by lot from
among the whole council. This commission named an¬
other ; which, reduced by lot to one fourth, named a
third ; and by these alternate operations of lot and elec¬
tion, at length formed the last commission of forty-one
members, who could elect the doge only by a majority
of twenty.five suffrages. It was not till towards the end
of the thirteenth century that the people began to dis¬
cover that they were no more than a cipher in the republic,
and the doge no more than a servant of the grand coun¬
cil,— surrounded, indeed, with pomp, but without any
real power. In 1289, the people attempted themselves
I 4

120 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN HEPUBLIOS. 1297-

to elect the doge; but th§ grand council obliged him
whom the popular suffrages had designated to leave Ve¬
nice, and substituted in his place Pietro Gradenigo, the
chief of the aristocratic party. Gradenigo undertook to
exclude the people from any part in the election of the
grand council, as they were already debarred from any
participation in the election of a doge. He represented
it to the grand council as notorious, that for more than a
century the same persons, or families, were inv^iably
re-elected ; that the twelve tribunes charged with the
annual election contented themselves with examining
only whether any of the ancient members merited
exclusion from the sovereign council, and confirming all
the others ; that since the election was reduced only to
the condemnation of some individuals, it was more ex¬
pedient to confide that judgment to the equity of the
same tribunal to which the citizens intrusted their ho¬
nour and their lives, than to the arbitrary wiU of twelve
individuals, most frequently nominated by intrigue. He
proposed, accordingly, instead of election, the purifica¬
tion of fftB-gtteid council by the forty criminal judges.
The decree which he proposed and carried on the 28th
of February, 1297, is famous in the history of Venice,
under the name of serrata del maggior consiglio
(shutting of the grand council). He legally founded that
hereditary aristocracy,—so prudent, so jealous, so am¬
bitious, — which Europe regarded with astonishment ;
immovable in principle, unshaken in power; uniting
some of the most odious practices of despotism with the
name of liberty; suspicious and perfidious in politics j
sanguinary in revenge; indulgent to the subject ; sump¬
tuous in the public service, economical in the administra¬
tion of the finances; equitable and impartial in the admi¬
nistration of justice; knowing well howto give prosperity
to the arts, agriculture, and commerce; beloved by the
people who obeyed it, whilst it made the nobles who par-
tookitspowertrembie. TheVenetian aristocracy completed
its constitution, in 1311, by the creation of the Council of
Ten, which, notwithstanding its name, was composed of

1297- SDUniNO OF THB-SBAND COUNCIL. 121

sixteen inembers and the d(%e. Ten counsellors of the
black robe were annually elected by the great council, in
tile months of August and September; and of the six
counsellors of the red robe, composing a part of the
sigiioria, three entered office every four months. The
Council of Ten, charged to guard the security of the state
with a power higher than the law, had an especial com¬
mission to watch over the nobles, and to punish their
crimaii against the republic. In this they were restrained
by no rule : they were, with respect to the nobility, the
depositaries of tha power of the great council, or rather
of a power unlimited, which no people should entrust to
any government. Some other decrees completed the sys¬
tem of the serrata del maggior consiglio. It was forbidden
to the quarantia to introduce any new man into power. In
l.?15, a register was opened, called the Golden Book, in
which were inscribed the names of all those who had sat
in the great council. In 131(), all limitation of number
was suppressed; and, from that period, it sufficed to
prove that a person was the descendant of a counsellor,
and twenty-five years of age, to be by rigJlWPtiiBmber of
the grand council of Venice.

On the 25th of November, 1308, the diet of Germany
named Henry VII. of Luxembourg as successor to
Albert of Austria ; and this election suddenly brought
Italy back to the same struggle for her independence
which she had so heroically supported against the two Fre¬
dericks. From the death of the second Frederick, fifty-
eight years had passed since she had seen an emperor.
Rodolph of Hapsburg, Adolphus of Nassau, and Albert of
Austria, had too much to do in Germany, to occupy them-
sevles with this constantly agitated country, where they
could demand obedience only with arms in their hands.
Henry VII. was a brave, wise, and just prince ; but he
was neither rich nor powerful. He secured to his
son, by marriage, the crown of Bohemia, which had ex¬
cited some jealousy among the Germans; and he be¬
lieved it wohld be expedient, in order to avoid all
quarrel in the empire, to quit it for some time. To

122 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN BEPVBLICS. IdlO.

flatter the national vanity/he determined on an expedi¬
tion to Italy.

Henry, himself a Belgian, had no power but in
Belgium and the provinces adjoining France. From
Luxembourg he went through the county of Burgundy
to Lausanne. Here he received, in the summer of 1310,
the ambassadors of the Italian states, who came to do
him homage. He entered Piedmont, by Mont Cenis,
towards the end of September, accompanied b^ only
two thousand cavalry, the greater part of whom were
Belgians, Franc-Comtois, or Savoyards. This force
would have been wholly insufficient to subdue Italy;
but Henry VII. presented himself there as the sup¬
porter of just rights, of order, and, to a certain degree,
of liberty. The result of the violence of faction, and
of the exhaustion of the citizens, had been, to subject
almost all Lombardy to petty tyrants. Every city had
its lord, sometimes chief of the Guelph, sometimes of
the Ghibeline faction, whom his partisans had, for their
own interests, invested with dictatorial power. Some¬
times ImwSts neighbouring noble, who, seconded by a
band of his vassals, had inspired terror, and whom the
people respected, because he forced to obedience tur¬
bulent nobles who had never submitted to any law ; and
sometimes too he was a captain of foreign cavalry, called
to the service of the republic by the council, with the
title of lord assigned at the same time. The name
of liberty, and the cry of popoh ! popolo ! were every¬
where frequently heard j but it was only to overthrow
the existing power, and substitute another quite as
arbitrary. These despotisms, it is true, were of short
duration; but yet hardly one city enjoyed true liberty.
The desire of tranquillity, resulting from the outrages
committed by the nobles or by factions, was so great,
that the citizens demanded, above all, of the lords and
magistrates strength to make themselves feared,—to pu¬
nish rapidly and severely whoever troubled the public
peace. Every city submitted to a form of summary
justice, preferring that to anai chy, although the sove-

1310. henry VII. IN W)MBA»I>T*

leign lord often made an ill use of it, either to gritify
his brutal passions, or to accumulate wealth which
should be his resource in exUe; an evil always to be
expected.

The lords of all Lombardy and Piedmont came to
present themselves to Henry; some at Turin, others at
Asti. He received them with kindness, but declared
his determination to establish legal order, such as had
been settled by the peace of Constance, in all the cities
of the empire; and to name in each an imperial vicar,
who should govern'in concert with the municipal ma¬
gistrates. Philippone di Langusco, at Pavia; Simon
da Colobiano, at Vercelli; William Brusato, at No¬
vara; Antonio Fisiraga, at Lodi; in obedience to this
intimation, laid down the sovereign power. At the
same time, Henry every where recalled the exiles, with¬
out distinction of party; at Como and Mantua, the
GhibeUnes; at Brescia and Placentia, the Guelphs ;
leaving out, however, the exiles of Verona, a powerful
city, which he did not visit, and which wasMvemed
by Can' Grande della Scala, the most ilfleHhibeline
captain in Italy, the best soldier, the best politician,
and the person whose services and attachment the em¬
peror most valued. The rich and populous city of
Milan required also to be treated with address and
consideration. The archbishop, Otho Visconti, had
retained the principal authority in his hands to a very
advanced age. But long previously to his death,
which took place in 1295, he had transferred to his
nephew, Matteo 'Visconti, the title of captain of the
people, and had accustomed the Milanese to consMer
him as his lieutenant and successor. Matteo did, in
fact, govern after him, and with almost despotic power,
from 1295 to 1302. He was also named lord of several
other cities of Lombardy; at the same time he strength¬
ened his family by many rich alliances. But Visconti
had not the art^o conciliate either the remains of national
pride, or the love of liberty which still subsisted among
his subjects, or the jealousy of the other princes of Lorn.

124 aiBToav of the Italian repuhlics. 1311.

bardy. A league to give the preponilcraiice to the
Guelph party in this province was formed by Alberto
ScottOj lord of Placentia, and by Ghiberto da Cor¬
reggio, lord of Parma ; they forced the Viscontis to quit
Milan, in 1302, and installed in their place Guido della
Torre and his family, who had been exiles twenty-five
years. When Henry VII. presented himself before
Milan, he found it governed by Guido della Torre
and the Guelphs. Matteo Visconti and the Ghibelines
were exiled. Henry exacted their recall ; he was
crowned in the church of St. Ambrose, on the f)'th of
January, 1311, and afterwards asked of the city a gra¬
tuity for his array of one hundred thousand fiorins. Till
then, the Italians had seen in the monarch only a Just and
impartial pacificator; but when he demanded money,
die different parties united against him. A violent
sedition broke forth at Milan. The Della Torres and
the Guelphs were forced to leave that city. Alalteo
Visconti and the Ghibelines were recalled, and the
forme r re stored to absolute power. The Guelphs, too,
in th^resTTSf Lombardy, rose, and took arms against
the emperor. Crema, Cremona, Lodi, Urescia, and
Como revolted at the same time. Henry consumed
the greater part of the summer in besieging Urescia,
which at last, towards the end of Septerater, l.lll, he
forced to capitulate. He granted to that town equitable
conditions, impatient as he was to enter Tuscany ; but,
although Lombardy seemed subdued to his power, he
left more germs of discontent and discord in it than he
had found about a year before.

Henry VII. arrived with his little army at Genoa, on
the 21st of October, 1311. That powerful republic
now maintained at St. Jean J’.4cre, at Pera opimsite to
Constantinople, and at Cafia in the Black Sea, military
and mercantile colonies, which made themselves re.
spected for their valour, at the same time that they
carried on the richest commerce of therMediterranean.
Several islands in the Archipelago, amongst otliers, that
of Chios, had passed in sovereignty to Genoese families.

1311. HENUY VII. AT OUNOA. 125

The palaces of Genoa, already called the " superb,” were
the admiration of travellers. Its sanguinary rivalry
with Pi.sa had terminated by securing to the former the
empire of the Tyrrhene Sea. From that time, Genoa
had no other rival than Venice. An accidental ren¬
counter of the fleets of these two cities in the sea of
Cyprus lighted up between them, in 12,03, a terrible
war, which for seven years stained the Mediterranean
with blhod, and consumed immense wealth. In 1203.
the Genoese admiral, Lamha Doria, meeting the Vene¬
tian commander, A^nlrea Dandolo, at (lorzuola or Cor-
cyra the Black, at the extremity of the Adriatic Gulf,
burnt sixty-six of his galleys, and took eighteen, which
he brought into the port of Genoa, with 7000 prisoners ;
suffering only twelve vessels to e.scape. The humbled
Venetian.s, in the next year, asked and obtained peace.
The Genoese, van(|uishers in turn of the Pisans and
Venetians, passed for the bravest, the most enterprising,
and the most fortunate mariners of all Italy. The
government of their city was entirely dcmocratii;; but
the two cliains of mountains which extend Irom Genoa,
the one towards Provence, and tile other towards Tus¬
cany (called hy the ItaliansJjeliirii’re diOeniia, because
the foot of these mountains forms the shore of the sea),
were covered with the castles of the Ligurian nobles; the
jieasantry were all dependent on them, and were always
ready to make war for their liege lords. Four familiea
were pre-eminent for their power and wealth — the
Doria and the Spinola, Ghibelines ; the Grimaldi and
tlie Fieschi, Guelphs. These nobles, incensed against
each other by hereditary enmity, had disturbed the stale
by so many outrages, that the people adopted, with re-
sjtect to them, the same policy as that of the Tuscan
republics, and had entirely excluded them from the
magistracy. On the other hand, they had rendered such
eminent and frequent services to the republic; above all,
(hey had produced such great naval commanders, that
the people, whenever the state was in danger, had
always recourse to them for the choice of an atlmiral.

126 niSTOBV OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. ISIS.

Seduced by the glory of tfeese chiefs, the people often
aft^wards shed their blood in their private quarrels ;
but often, also, wearied* by tlie continual disturbances
which the nobles excited, they had recourse to foreigners
to subdue them to the common law. The people were
in this state of irritation against the Ligurian nobles,
when Henry VII. arrived at Genoa, in 1311; and to
oblige them to maintain a peace, which they were
continually breaking, the Genoese conferred oh that-
monarch absolute authority over the republic for twenty
years. But when the emperor suppressed the podesta,
and then the abbate or defender of the people, and
afterirords demanded of the city a gift of 60,000 florins,
the Genoese perceived that they needed a government
not jonly to suppress civil discord, but also to protect
rights not less precious than peace; an internal ferment¬
ation of increasing danger manifested itself; and Henry
was happy to quit Genoa in safety, on the Ib’th of Fe.
bruary, 1312, on board a Pisan fleet, which transported
him wi ^ ab out 1500 cavalry to Tuscany.

HenrTvif, when he eiifcred Italy, was impartial
between the Guelphs and Ghibelines. He owed his
election to the influence of the popes, and he was ac¬
companied by cardinal legates, who were to crown him
at Rome.^ He had no distrust either of Robert, then
king of Naples, the son of Charles II., or of the Guelph
cities. He had no hereditary affection for the Ghibe-
hnes, the zealous partisans of a family long extinct.
He endeavoured, accordingly, to hold the balance fairly
between the two parties, and to reconcile them wher¬
ever he was allowed; but experience had already taught
him that the very name of elected emperor had a magic
influence on the Italians, either to excite the devoted
affection of the’Ghihelines, or the terror and hatred'of
the Guelphs. It was with the latter that resistance to
him had begun in the preceding year in Lombardy ;
and that revolt had burst forth on all sides since Ida
departure. Robert, king of Naples, who assumed the
part of champion of the Guelph party, already testifled

131:2. HENBY VII. IN TUSCANY. 127

m

an open distrust of him; and^lotence, which by its pru¬
dence, ability, wealth, and courage, was the real diregcr
of that party, took arms to resistdiim, refused audience jo
hifl ambassadors, raised all the Guelpha of Italy against
him, and Anally constrained him to place that city under
the ban of the empire. The republic of Fisa, on the
other hand, whose affection for the Ghibeline party was
connected with its hopes, as well as its recollections,
servedffiim with a devotion, Teal, and prodigality, which
he had not met elsewhere. The Pisans had sent him,
when at Lausanne; a present of ti0,000 florins, to aid
him lOn his passage to Italy. They paid his i^ts at
Genoa, and they gave him another present w*n he
entered their city; finally, they placed at his disposal
thirty galleys and 6&0 cross-bowmen, who accompanied
him to Rome, where he received the golden crown of the
empire from the hands of the pope’sdegate, in the church
of St. John de Lateran, on the S^th of June, 1312.
The Romans, who had taken arms against him, and
had received within their walls a Neapolitan^ K?|rrison,
kept their gates shut duri% the ceremony^ and would
not suffer one of his soldiers to enter the city.

The coronation of the emperor at Rome was the
term of service of the Germans: they took m interest
afterw J’ds in what was passing, or might be di®, in that
country, '^hey were anxious to depart; and Henry
found himself at Tivoli, where he passed the summer,
almost entirely abandoned by his transalpine soldiers.
Had the Neapolitan king Robert been bolder, Henry
4rould have been in great danger. In the autumn,
however, the GhibelLnes and Bianchi»of central Italy
rallied round him, and formed a formidable army, with
wiiieh he marched to attack Florence, on the 19th of
September, 1312. The Florentines, accustomed to leave
their defence to mercenaries, whose valour was always
ready for pay, made small account of a military courage
which they saw so common among men whom they de¬
spised ; but no people carried civil courage and firmness
ia misfortifte farther. Their army was soon infinitely

.^28 BISTORT OF'TbE,4ETi.LlAK |«PUBU^ .

()

B«*perior in numbere tt| that, of JHcnjy; they carried <m
perfect calinn«|lb j^ir cqtptiierce and nego^tiom^
a£ if their enemira IjSi8||ib:eady|^pait^ fdi; <i>eniB^yj
but they would ihot them* out of thekSerritory by_
giving batde'; tfeey preferred bearing patienuy their de¬
predations, ajd waiting ■ till they had ’ worn out their
enthusiasm, ^xhaust^ their UnancSs," and should depart
of themselves, wMch 'they did on the 6th of January,*
1313, finding they could obtain no advantage. Henry,
after having-given soqie months of repose to his army,
took the command of the militia of Pisa, and made war
at th^ head against Lucca ; at the same time, he«soli-
dtedTrom his brother, the archblsho'J) of- Treves, a
German reinforcement, which he obj^ied in the follow¬
ing month of July. On the Stl^f August, ISIS,
Henry VII. departed from Pisa, commanding 2500
ultramontane and 1500 Italian cavalry, with a propor¬
tionate number of infantry. He began his march to¬
wards Rome, having been informed that Robert, called
by the J loren tines to their aid, advanced with all tlie
forces of ^"Guelph party to%)pose him. The declining
military reputation of the Neapolitans inspired the Ger¬
mans -with little fear, and Robert had but a small num¬
ber of F^ch cavalry to give courage to his^rniy ; but
the priesirand monks, animated with zeal in deRi^ of
tlie ancient Guelph party and the independence Bf the.
church, seconded him with their prayers, and the re- .
port soon spread that they had seconded him in another
manner andin theirownway. The emperor took the road
of San Miniato to Castel Fiorentino ; arrived at Buonf
Convento,twelv 0 <iniles beyond Sienna; and stopped^her^
to celebrate the festival of St. Bartholomew, pn the
a-tth of August, 1313, he received the communion
from the hands of a Dominican monk, and expired a few
hours afterwards. It was said the monk had mixed the
juice of Napel in the consecrated cup. It was said,
also, that Henry was already attacked iby a malady
which he concealed. A carbuncle had manifested itself

iflS:. l>£ATa dp 'HENBY Vlt. ISg

■},

below the knee I' ead a cojd batB; which he took to talm
the burning irritation', perfaafl| oaeasioned his 'suillEn
and unexpected. death»^ W*' ‘

‘ CHAP. VL-

THE POWER ANH OKBATEE^SS OP SOME OF THE GHXBELIHE CHIEFS.
-DISORGAHlSATlbN OF THAT PARTT, THROUGH THE INCON¬
SISTENCY AND PERFIDY OF THE EMPEROR LOUIS OF BAVARIA.

-^FFORT OF THE FLORENTINES To MAINTAIN AN EUUILIBKIUM

BETWEEN THE BIFFFBENT POWER.S OF ITALY.-THE tHIiaNNY

AND EYPULSION OF HIE DUKE OF ATHENS.

The electors of tlS^mpire were not convoked at Frank¬
fort to name a successor to Henry VII. till ten months
after his death. Ten, instead of seven, princes pre¬
sented themselves j two pretenders disputed the electoral
rights in eatsh of the houses of Saxony, Bohemia, and
Brandenburg. The electors, divided into two colleges,
named simultaneously, on^fhe igth of October, 1314,
two emperors: the one, Louis IV. of Bavaria ; the other,
Frederiek III. of Austria. Their rights appeared equal;
their^ ^hcynts in Germany were also of ne^ly equal
strengflP; %e sword only could decide; and war was
accordingly declared, and carried on till the 28 th of
September, 1322; when Frederick was vanquished and
made prisoner at Muhldorf.

The church abstained, while the civil war lasted, from
pronouncing between the two pretenders to the empire.
Clemeat V. did not witness their double flection; he died
on the 20th of April, 1314. It was necessary, two years
afterwards, to use fraud and violence, to confine the car¬
dinals in conclave at Lyons, fur the purpose of naming his
successor. They at last elected the bishop of Avignon.
He was a native of Cahors, the devoted creature of king
Robert of Naples; and took the name of John XXII.
He was the first who made Avignon, which was hia
episcopal Ifctjfn, the residence of the Roman court.

ISO BI9T0RY OP THE ITAlflAN REPUBLICS. 1313.

('

exiled from Italy. He was an intriguer, notoriously
piteigate, scandalously avaricious: he fancied himself,
however, a philosopher, dhd took a part in the quarrel
between the realists and nominalists ; he made himself
^violent enemies in the schools, on the meiffhers of which
he sometimes inflicted the punishment of death. While
he used such violence towards his adversaries as hei
reties, he shook the credit of the court of Rome, by
being himself accused of heresy. His great object was
to rgise to high temporal power the cardinal Bertrand
de Poiet, whom he called his nephffw, and who was
believ^ to be his son. For that purpose, he availed
himself of the war between the two pretenders to the
empire, regarded by him as a prolongation of the inter,
regnum, during which he asserted all the rights of the
emperors devolved on the holy see. He charged car¬
dinal Bertrand to exercise those rights as legate in Lom¬
bardy, crush the Ghibelines, support the Guelphs j but
above all, subdue both to the authority of the church
and its legate.

The cardinal Bertrand de Poiet launched his ex-
communications, and employed the soldiers, whom his
father had raised for him in Provence, particularly
against Matteo Visconti, lord of Milan, one ^ the most
able and powerful of the Ghibeline chiefs, "^sconti
made himself beloved by the Milanese, whom Ire had
always treated with consideration. Without being vir¬
tuous, he had preserved his reputation unstained by
crime. His mind was enlightened. To a perfect know¬
ledge of mankind, he added quiek-sightedness, prompt*
decision, and a 'certain military glory, heightened by
that of four sons, his faithful lieutenants, who were all
distinguished among the brave, The Italians gave him
the surname of Great, at a period when, it is true, they
were prodigal of that epithet. Matteo Visconti, in his
war with the Lombard Guelphs, took possession of
Pavia, Tortona, and Alexandria. He becieged, in con¬
cert with the Genoese Ghibelines, Robert king* of
Naples, who had shut himself up in Geno#, desirous

1313. MATTED VnOONTI AT MILAN. 131

of making that city the 'fortress of the Guelphs of
Lombardy. Visqonti compelled the retreat of PUlip
de Valoisj who, before he w* king, had entered Italy
at the solicitation of the pope, in 1320. The following
year he vanqIriBhed Raymond de Cardona, a Catalonian,
and one of the pope’s generals ; he persuaded Frederick
of Austria, who had sent his brother to aid the pope, to
recall his Germans, making him sensible it could suit
neither of the pretenders to the empire to weaken the
Ghibelines, who defended in Italy the interests of who¬
ever of the two ]«mained conqueror. But, after having
made war against the church party twenty years, with¬
out ever suspecting that he betrayed his faith, for he
was religious without bigotry, age awakened in hiiy
the terrors of superstition ; he began to fear that tl/
excommunications of the legate would deprive him/
salvation; he abdicated in favour of his eldest J . 1 ,
Galeazzo ; and died a few weeks afterwards, on the _2d
of June, 1322. The remorse and scruples of Matteo
Visconti had carried trouble and disorder into Ijis own
party, and gave boldness to that of his adversaries. A
violent fermentation at Milan at length burst forth;
Galeazzo was obliged to fly, and the republic was pro¬
claimed anew : but virtue and patriotism, without which
it couW not subsist, were extinguished; and, after a few
weeks, Galeazzo was recalled, and reinvested witli the
lordship of Milan.

The two parties of the Guelphs and Ghibelines, since
the death of Henry VII., no longer nearly balanced each
other in virtue, talents, and patriotism. In the begin¬
ning of their struggle, there were almost as many re¬
publics on one side as the other; and sentiments as
pure, and a devotion as generous, equally animated the
partisans of the empire and of the church. But, in the
fourteenth century, the faction of the Ghibelines had
become that of tyranny,— of the Guelphs that of liberty.
The former displayed those great military and political
talants which personal ambition usually develops. In the
second were to be found, almost exclusively, patriotism,

K 2

132 HISTORY OP THE ITAMAN REPUBLICS. 1314.

and the heroism which sacrifices to it every personal in¬
terest. The republic of Pisa alone, in Italy, united the
lave of liberty with the* sentiments of the Ghibeline
party. This republic had been thunderstruck by the
death of Henry VII. at a moment when a career of
glory and prosperity seemed to open on him. Pisa, ex¬
hausted by the prodigious efforts which she had made
to serve him, was true to herself, when all the Guelphs
of Tuscany rose at once, on the death of Henry, to
avenge on her the terror which that monarch had in¬
spired. She gave the command of htr militia to Uguc-
cione da Faggiuola, a noble of the mountainous part of
Romagna, which, with the March, produced the best
soldiers in Italy. The Pisans, under the command of
Faggiuola, obtained two signal advantages over the
Guelphs. They took Lucca, on the 14th of June, 1314,
while the Lucchese Guelphs and Ghibelines were engaged
:n battle in the streets of that city ; and, on the 29th of
August of the same year, they defeated, at Montecatino,
the Florentines, commanded by two princes of the house
of Naples, and seconded by all the Guelphs of Tuscany
and Romagna. But the Pisans soon perceived that they
were fighting, not for themselves, but for the captain
whom they had chosen. Almost immediately after his
victory, he began to exercise an insupportable tyranny
over Pisa and Lucca. Fearing much more the citizens
of these republics than the enemies of the state, be, on
the slightest suspicion, employed the utmost severity
against all the most illustrious families. At Lucca, he
threw into a dungeon Castruccio Castracani, the most
distinguished of the Ghibeline nobles, who had recently
returned to that city with a brilliant reputation, acquired
in the wars of France and Lombardy. A simultaneous
insurrection at Lucca and Pisa, on the 10th of April,
1.316', delivered these cities from Uguccione da Faggiuola,
and his son, while, at the head of their cavalry, they
were departing to join each other, This ^evolution re¬
established the republic of Pisa ; but left it exhausted
and ruined by long hostilities, and discontented with the.

1316’.

CASTRUCCIO AT LUCCA.

133

Ghibelines and with its own nobility, who, hy a blind
spirit of party, had drawn it into continual war. In
the month of May, 1322, fifteen chiefs of noble Ghib^-
line families, defeated in an obstinate battle, were exiled
from Pisa; and, in less than a year afterwards, all the
Pisans established in Sardinia were massacred on the
same day, in consequence of a plot, formed by a Pisan
rebel, to deliver .Sardinia to Alphonso, the son of
Jamet>II. of Aragon. The war with the Aragonese, to
dfefend the island, completed the ruin of the republic ;
and hostilities terminated with the abandonment of this
important possession, on the 10th of June, 132C.

The revolution of Lucca, which had deprived Uguc-
cione da Faggiuola of power, conferred it on his prisoner,
Castruccio Castracani, who still bore the fetters on his
feet when the insurgents delivered him from his dungeon
to be proclaimed lord of Lucca. Castruccio was of the
ancient family of theinterminelli, so long exiled, with all
the Ghibelines, from that city, that it might well have
been believed that tlAy had lost all influence ; but the
emigrants of the Italian republics frequently acquired,
during their exile, new wealth and consideration. Want
frequently forced them to labour with redoubled dili¬
gence,— to devote themselves to commerce, or to military
studies. Lucca had been esteemed the citadel of the
Guelph party in Tuscany during the latter part of the
thirteenth century : since its rich Ghibeline exiles had
been recalled, it was become entirely of the latter party.
The family of Castruccio had acquired its wealth in Eng¬
land ; he had himself learned the art of war there, and
in France and Lombardy. He had seen displayed, in
these countries, the bravery of the soldier; but he owed
to his own intellect and studies the art of leading and
disposing armies, which in Italy only began to deserve
the name of military science. Signally brave himself, he
had the art of communicating to the soldier his courage
and enthusiasm. No one had so quick and sure an eye on
the field of battle. He was a no less able politician than
warrior; and whether he took part with the Ghibeline
K 3

134 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1316.

chiefs of Lombardy, or the emperor Louis of Bavaria, he
became always the sole director of those who admitted
him into their council. To such talents and acquirements
■was added hardly one virtue: without fidelity in his
engagements, without pity for the people, without gra¬
titude to those who had served him, he put to death, by
various cruel executions, all those who at Lucca excited
in him the slightest suspicion; and, amongst others, the
Quartigiani and the Poggi, to whom he owed his 'eleva¬
tion. Lastruccio was thirty-two years of age when He
obtained the sovereignty of his couiltry. He was tall,
with an agreeable countenance ; and his face, thin and
surrounded with long fair hair, was remarkable for its
paleness.

The republic of Florence found itself called upon to
make head against Castruccio, and defend, against his am¬
bition, the independence of Tuscany. Florence was the
Athens of Italy. The genius displayed by some of its
citizens,—the talent and intelligence in business to be
found f.ven the mass of the peo'ple, — the generosity
which seemed the national character, whenever it was
necessary to protect the oppressed or defend the cause of
liberty,— raised this city above every other. Sienna,
Perugia, and Bologna were at this period, like Florence,
attached to the Guelph party ; and these four republics,
with some weaker towns, formed the Guelph league of
Lombardy. The democratic spirit of the Florentines,
■which imparted so much energy, had also its dangers.
These republicans, jealous of all distinction, and passion¬
ately attached to equality, demanded it not only in obe¬
dience, but in command. They insisted that the greatest
possible number.of citizens should, in turn, arrive at the
office of priori, which, for two months, represented the
sovereignty. It, however, did not proceed from base
cupidity: this office, as well as every other of the
magistracy, was gratuitous. The republic provided the
table of the priori only when they were in the palace.
In the month of October, 1323, the Florentines intro¬
duced drawing by lot into the nomination of their first

1323. CONSTITUTION OP FUCIRENCE. 185

magistrates. They ordained that a general list of all the
eligible citizens^ Guelphs, and at least thirty years of age,
shoidd be formed by a majority of five independent ma¬
gistracies, of which each represented a national interest:
the priori, that of the government; the gonfaloner, that
■of the militia ; the captains of the party *, that of the
■Guelphs ; the judges of commerce represented the mer¬
chants ; and the consuls of the arts, industry. Each of
thes#had a right to point out the most eligible citizen.
The list which they prepared was submitted to the re¬
vision of a balia i[a word signifying power), composed
of the magistrates in ofiice, and the thirty-six deputies
chosen by the six divisions of the town. The balia effaced
from the list the names of all those whom it considered
incapable ; and classed the others according as they ap¬
peared suitable to the different magistracies, to which
they were finally to be raised by lot. Lastly, it divided
the list of names by series ; so that the destined purse
from which to draw the signoria contained twenty-one
tickets, on each of which was inscribed a gpnfa^ner and
six priori; similar purses were prepared, from which to
draw by lot the names of the twelve buon’ uomini, the
nineteen gonfaloniers of the companies, and aU the other
magistrates of the republic. All this arrangement
was to last only three years and a half, after which a
new balia recommenced. Still, in our day, the municipal
magistrates of Tuscany are drawn by lot, in the same
manner. The activity, wisdom, and extensive views of
the Florentine republic, while its supreme magistrates
were changed by lot every two montlis, proves, at the
same time, how much intelligence and patriotism there
was in the people, and how worthily the priori appre¬
ciated statesmen, who, without having ostensible ofiices,
directed the republic by their counsel.

This movable signoria, however, could not meet in
war on equal terms with Castruccio, who united to high
talents an energetic character, promptitude, secrecy,

•• The Capitani di Parte were the elective headi of the Guelph party,
three in number.

K 4

136' HISTORY Qg THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1325,

I

and’ unity of design. He began the war by tslpitg'jiroin
the Florentines I’istoia, where an abbot, by thfe Kt^
artifices of a monk, had obtained possession of tJ||esoye-
reignty. The abbot, on the 5th of May, 1324^|Ed his
country to Castruccio. Florence took into Sy^vice
Don Raymond de Cardona, a Catalonian gene^y^hom
the cardinal Bertrand de Puiet had introduced intb Iitedy.
But all who served the Florentines speculated bn
wealth : Cardona remarked, that in the brillianie i^P||r
which the republic had placed under his command, thefe
were many rich merchants, who bore impatiently
fatigues and privations of the service : in order to,
them leave of absence at a higher price, he resolved f
complete their disgust. He led them in, the middle of
summer round the marshes of Bientina, ^here he long
detained them. Many merchants obtained leave of
absence by rich presents; but many more died or fell'
sick. With his army thus weakened by his owg'^M^
he engaged Castruccio at Alto Fascio, and was
on the 23d of September, 1325. Raymond wti||4'aktai
prisoner; th? carroccio fell into the hands of the enemy;
and these trophies of victory ornamented the tri¬
umphal pomp with which Castruccio returned to Lucca
at the head of his army. A signal defeat of the Bolo¬
gnese, at Monteveglio, on the 15th of November, 1325,
completed the discouragement of the Guelph part^i
Bologna sought a protector in the cardinal de Poiet, on
whom was conferred the signoria. The Florentines had
recourse to the king of Naples, who agreed to aid them
only on condition that they would confer the signoria on hfa
son, the duke of Calabria. Intelligence that Castruccio
had engaged the emperor Louis of Bavaria to enter
Tuscany, induced them, though with the utmost repug¬
nance, to adopt this measure.

Louis of Bavaria had treated his prisoner Frederick
of Austria with magnanimity. He not only set him at
liberty, but associated him in his government. Louia
passed in Germany for a loyal and generous prince;
perhaps, only because violent and cruel actions inspired

,1327. ,J LOUIS OK BAVARIA INj|lrALY. 137

UttjB horror; public opinion was not yet awakened;

t jS np one rendered an account to the people of the ino-
ve s^ f princes, or of their sudden changes from one party
to anjp^ but when the emperor arrived in a civilised
CBun^^where free and virtuous men had a share in
the govS'nment, and brought to light the actions of
princes, his conduct, for the most part, seemed stained
cowardice and perfidy — the more so, that he de-
iPPefi without remorse men whom he called deceivers,
only because they were more clever than himself. Louis
of Ba^ria gave a meeting at Trento, in the month of
. ^fotpary, 1327, to the principal chiefs of the Ghibeline
they advanced him 150,000 florins, to pay the
'^pcpdhses of his expedition to Italy: three months after¬
wards he entered that country with a suite of not more
than boo horsemen; but the lords of Milan, Mantua,
«Verona, and Ferrara met him, ntith their men at arms,
to the most part German mercenarie.s, who thus formed
for 'hto a fine army. He received the iron crown at
Milan, on the 30th of May; Galcazzo Visconti, the rich¬
est and most powerful of the Lombard lords, enter¬
tained him ho.spitably: but at the same time that he
excited the jealousy of the other Gliibeline chiefs, his
fine German cavalry and his treasure awakened the
cupidity of Louis. Having secured the obedience of
Jjjtese mercenaries, and feigning to lend an ear to the
reports made against Galeazzo by the other Ghibeline
lords, he arrested Visconti, together with his sons and
his two brothers, in his palace at Milan, on the 6'lh of
July, 1327; and threatened to put them to the torture
if they did not deliver to him their fortresses and their
treasure. He detained them eight months in dungeons,
without trial, and without assigning any reason for this se¬
verity. After eight months he liberated them, at the inter¬
cession of Castruccio. He then ofi'ered to sell them the

sovereignty, of which he hatl himself deprived them :
hut they wer| not rich enough-; for he had deprived
them of the means by which they coul^ profit by his
offer. In the month of September,;.£iQuis passed into

138 HISIOBY OP THE ITALIAN BEPUBLICS. 1327-

Tuscany, at the head of the army which he had seduced
from the Visconti. The Pisans, exhausted with the
war against Lucca and Sardinia, and desirous of pre¬
serving the peace which they had concluded with the
Guelpiis, sent to offer the emperor 60,000 florins, on
that condition, Louis arrested their ambassadors, and
threatened to put them to death by torture, if their
country did not implicity obey his will; after one month
of hesitation, Pisa acknowledged him sovereign, aEd was
forced to advance him 150,000 florins.

From the moment Louis of Bavaria was joined by
Castruccio, he listened to no other counsel; and under
the direction of this able politician, he showed a vigour
and intelligence that promised to give him the dominion
over all Italy, in spite of the excommunications which
the pope poured on him with redoubled irritation, upon
seeing him defeat all the intrigues of his favourite, Ber¬
trand de Poiet. Castruccio persuaded Louis of the
importance of confirming his right to the empire by his
coronation at Home; he delayed, therefore, the war on
Florence, near which the duke of Calabria had assem¬
bled a numerous array, till his return. It is not im¬
probable that Castruccio meant to reserve for himself
the conquest of that city. Louis had named him duke
of Lucca, Pistoia, Volterra, and the Lunigiana, on the
11th of November, 1327; and he flattered himself with
the hope of uniting all Tuscany to this dukedom, after
the departure of the emperor. Castruccio accompanied
Louis to Home; he was made senator of that city, and
count palatine of St.John de Lateran. He carried the
imperial sword at the coronation; which took place on
the 17th of January, 1328, at the Vatican: the cere¬
mony was performed by schismatic bishops, and in con¬
tempt of the excommunications of John XXII. Louis
in his anger commenced a process in law to depose the
pope and appoint a successor; but at this moment he
was deprived of the counsel of Castruccio. who had been
recalled to Tuscany by news of the taking of Pistoia
by the Florentines, on the 28th of January, 1328. On

1328. GBEJTNESS AND DEATH OP OASTHUDCIO. 139

•

his return he took Pisa by surprise; besieged PistoiOj
and made himself master of it on the 3d of August of
the same year; but not till after such fatigue as to oc¬
casion an illnesSj of which he died, on the 3d of Sep¬
tember following. The death of this formidable and
ambitious captain saved Florence from the greatest
danger which she had yet incurred; and, to complete her
good fortune, the sovereign she had chosen to oppose
Castfuccio, the duke of Calabria, died also about the
same time. He had distinguished himself only by his
vices, his want of foresight, and his depredations. Louis
of Bavaria, too, ceased to be formidable: he completed his
discredit by his perfidy towards those who had been the
most devoted to him. Salvestro de’ Gatti, lord of Vi¬
terbo, had been the first Ghibeline chief to open a for¬
tress to him, in the states of the church; Louis arrested
him, and put him to the torture, to force him to reveal
the place where he had concealed his treasure. The
emperor had rendered himself odious and ridiculous at
Rome, by the puerility of his proceedings against John
XXII., and his vain efforts to create a schism in the
church. Having returned to Tuscany, he deprived the
children of Castruccio of the sovereignty of Lucca, on the
Ib'th of March, 1320, and sold it to one of their relatives,
who, a month afterwards, was driven out by a troop of
German mercenaries, which had abandoned the emperor
to make war on their own account, that is to say, to live
by plunder. Louis passed the summer of 1329 in
Lombardy. Towards the end of the autumn he returned
to Germany, carrying with him the contempt and de¬
testation of the Italians. He had betrayed all who
had trusted in him ; and completely disorganised the
Ghibeline party, which had relied on his support.

That party had just lost another of their most dis¬
tinguished chiefs. Can’ Grande della Scala. He was the
grandson of the first Mastino, whom the republic of
Verona had cbosen for master after the death of Eccelino,
in 1260. Can’ Grande reigned in that city from 1312
to 1329, with a splendour which no other prince in

140 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1328.

Italy equalled. Brave anti fortunate in war, and wise
in council, he gained a reputation for generosity, and
even probity, to which few captains could pretend.
Among the Lombard princes, he was the first protector
of literature and the arts. The best poets, painters, and
sculptors of Italy, Dante, to whom he offered an asy¬
lum, as well as Uguccione da Faggiuola, and many
other exiles illustrious in war or politics, were assembled
at his court. He a.spircd to subdue the Veronese and
Trevisan marches, or what has since been called the
Terra Firma of Venice. He took possession of Vicenza;
and afterwards maintained a long war against the re¬
public of I’adua, the most powerful in the district, and
that which had shown the most attachment to the Guelph
party and to liberty. But Padua gave way to all the
excesses of democracy: the people evinced such jealousy
of all distinction, such inconstancy in their choice, such*
presumption, that the imprudence of the chiefs as well
as of the mob drew down the greatest disasters on the
republics The Paduans, repeatedly defeated by Can’
Grande della Scala from 1314 to 1318, sought protec¬
tion by vesting the power in a single person ; and fixed
for that purpose on the noble house of Carrara, which
had long given leaders to the Guelph party. The
power vested in a single person soon extinguished all
the courage and virtue that remained; and on the 10th
of September, 1328, Padua submitted to Can' Grande
della Scala. The year following he attacked and took
Treviso, which surrendered on the 6th of July, 1329.
He possessed himself of Fcltre and Cividale soon after.
The whole province seemed subjugated to his power;
but the conqueror also was subdued. Attacked in his
camp with a mortal disease, he gave orders on entering
Treviso, that his couch should be carried into the
great church, in which, four days afterwards, on the
22d of July, 1329, he expired. He was not more than
forty-one years of age : Castruccio was forty-seven at
his death. Galeazzo Visconti died nearly about the same
age, less than a year before. The Ghibeline party.

1329. can’ CKANDE BELLA SCALA AT VERONA. 141

•

which hail produced such great captains, thus saw them
all disappear at once in the middle of their career.
Passerine de' Bonacossi, tyrant of Mantua, who belonged
to the same party, had been assassinated on the 14th of
August, 1328, by the Gonzagas, who thus avenged an
affront offered to the wife of one of them. They took
possession of the sovereignty of Mantua, and kept it in
their family till the eighteenth century. Of all the
princSk who had well received Louis of Bavaria in Italy,
the marquis d’Este was the only one who preserved his
power. He was lord of Ferrara ; and even this prince,
though Guelph by birth, was forced by the intrigues of
the pope’s legate to join the Ghibelines.

The Ghibeline party, which had been rendered so
formidable by the ability of its captains, was now com¬
pletely disorganised. The Lombards placed no con¬
fidence in those who remained ; they had forgotten
liberty, and dared no longer aspire to it; but they
longed for a prince capable of defending them, and
who, by his moderation and good faith, could give
them hopes of peace. They saw none such in Italy:
Germany unexpectedly offered one. John, king of
Bohemia, the son of Henry VII., arrived at Trent
towards the end of the year 13.30. The memory of
his father was rendered dearer to the Italians by the
comparison of his conduct with that of his successor;
and John was calculated to heighten this predilection.
He could not submit to the barbarism of Bohemia; and
inhabited, in preference, the county of Luxemburg, or
Paris, and having acquired a spirit of heroism, by his
constant reading, or listening to the French romances
of chivalry, he aspired to the glory of being a complete
knight. All that could at first sight seduce the people was
united in him ; beauty, valour, dexterity in all corporeal
exercises, eloquence, an engaging manner. His conduct
in France and Germany, where he had been, by turns,
warrior and pacificator, was noble. He never sought
any tiling for himself; he seemed to be actuated only
by the love of the general good or glory. The Italians,

I'lS ‘history op the ITALIAN REPUBLICS. ISSO.

jusdy disgusted with their own princes, eagerly offered to
throw themselves into his arms; the city of Brescia sent
deputies to Trent, to offer him the sovereignty of their
republic. He arrived there, to take possession of it, on
the 31st of December, 1330. Almost immediately
after, Bergamo, Cremona, Pavia, Vercelli, and Novara
followed the example of Brescia. Azzo Visconti him¬
self, son of Galeazzo, who, in 1328, had repurchased
Milan from Louis of Bavaria, could not withstand the
enthusiasm of his subjects; he nominally ceded the
government to John, taking henceforth the title of his
vicar only. Parma, Modena, Reggio, and, lastly, Lucca
also, soon gave themsehtes to John of Bohemia. John,
in all these cities, recalled indiscriminately the Guelph
and Ghibeline exiles, restored peace, and made them, at
last, taste the first-fruits of good government.

But the Florentines, attached to hberty, and satisfied
with their constitution, who saw a foreign prince, a
Ghiheline, and the son of Henry VIL, whom they had
always .resisted, arrive on their frontier, could not par¬
ticipate in this infatuation. They knew that, whatever
might be the virtue and talents of an absolute prince,
his government always degenerated into tyranny; that,
if he was not himself corrupted by power, his successors
never failed of being so. Numerous examples in Italy,
in their own time, sufficiently demonstrated the rapid
degeneracy of the race of princes, and the profound
pity merited by a people governed by the son of a great
man. They were well aware that it was the municipal,
democratic, independent constitutions of the cities of
Italy, and the constant emulation between them, that
had given them such an immense superiority over the
rest of Europe. They easily perceived that Italy, in
spite of its division, had nothing to fear for its in.
dependence from its transalpine enemies; wHUe it had
every thing to dread for its Uberty, as well as for its
civilisation, from the immeasurable growth of an ab¬
solute principality formed within its bosom. The Floi.
rcntines did not undertake to restore liberty to those

ISSO. KINS JOBH OF BOHEMIA. 143

•

people who had no longer sufficient elevation of soul to
desire or energy to defend it ; but they pursued for
themselves the noble policy of opposing all usurpation
or conquest by any who pretended to domination in
Italy ; and if they could not preserve to each city its in¬
dependence, at least of maintaining, through the changes
which time necessarily brings, fhe balance between the
different powers, in such a manner that respect for the
rights'of all should be guaranteed by the alliance of
those who demanded only to be free themselves, and to
preserve the liberty of others. This system of balancing
the different powers in Italy, invented by the statesmen
of Florence, was, during the fou^eenth and the greater
part of the fifteenth centuries, the fundamental rule of
their conduct.

The Florentines did not find sufficient strength in
the Guelph party to oppose the menacing greatness of
the liing of Bohemia. Robert of Naples was become
old; he wanted energy, and his soldiers courage. The
republic of Bologna, formerly so rich and power^il, had
lost its vigour under the government of the legate, Ber¬
trand de Poiet; those of Perugia and Sienna had within
themselv^ few resources, and those few their jealousy
of Florence prevented their liberally employing. There
remained no more free cities in Lombardy ; and all
tliose, in the states of the church, which, during the
preceding century, had shown so much spirit, had
fallen under the yoke of some petty tyrant, who im¬
mediately declared for the Ghibeline party. The Flo¬
rentines felt the necessity of silencing their hereditary
enmities, and their ancient repugnances, and of making
an alliance with the Lombard Ghibelines against John
of ®ohemia, with the condition that, in dividing his
spoils, they should all agree to prevent the aggrandise¬
ment of smy single power, and preserve between them¬
selves an exact eqpilibrium, in order that Italy, after
their conquesta, should incur no danger of being sub¬
jugated by one of them. The treaty of alliance against
the king of Bohemia, and the partition of the states

144 History of this Italian bepcblics. ' 133&‘i
’ * '

'which he had just acq|iired in Italy, was signed in the
month of September, 1332. Cremona was to be given
to Visconti; Parma to Mastino dells. Seals, the nephew
and successor of Can’ Grande ; Reggio to Gonzaga ;
Modena to the marquis d'Es^e^ "and Lucca to the Flo¬
rentines. John did nut oppose to this league the re¬
sistance that was exped|||p from his efturage and talents.
Of an inconstant character, becoming weai^ of*every¬
thing, always pursuing something new, thinkinjf only
of shining in courts and tournaments, he soon regarded
all these little Italian principalities,’of which he had
already lost some, as too citizen-like and unlordly: he sold
every town which had|^ven itself to him, to whatever
noble desired to rule over it ; and he departed for Paris
on the 15th of October, 1333, leaving Italy in still
greater confusion than before.. The Lombard Ghibel^
lines, confederates of the Florentines, succeeded, before
the end of the summer of 1335, in taking possession of
the cities abandoned by the king of Bohemia. Lucca^
which jlone fell to the share of Florence, was defemj^d
by a band of German soldiers, who made it the centre
of their depredations, and barbarously tyrannised over
the Lucchese. Mastino della Scala offered tc^reat for
the Florentines with the captains who then commanded
at Lucca; and he succeeded in obtaining the sur¬
render of the town to him, on the 20th of December,
1335. As soon as he became master of it, he began
to flatter himself that it would aflPord him the means
of subjugating the rest of Tuscany; and, instead of
delivering it, as he had engaged, to the Florentines,
he sought to renew against them a Ghiheline league
jointly with the Pisans and all the independent nobles
of the Apennines. ft

The Florentines, forced to defend themselves against
their ally, who, after they had contributed tiAis eleva¬
tion, betrayed them, sought the alliaue of the Venetians,
who ^so had reason to complain of Mastino. A treaty
WM signed bgtween the two republics, on the 2lBt of*
June, 1336". The war to which Florence liberally con-

OF FliMUffB*- 14$

tribated in mone^,. HM made c^y in '^{pbardy, and
iffaa succes^ul. Fadua^ines ^a^en from 'Mtetino on the
3d of August, lS3'!^’ind,,as that town*dtowedNio ardent
'desire of liberty, it was ^ven in sovereignty to the Guelph
house of Carrara. TSmiJenetianB took possession of
Treviso, Castel-Franco, and Cen^a. It was the first ac¬
quisition they hadlhade beyon^nc Lagune, their first
establishmeifir on Terra Firma, ^ich henceforward was
to mingle their interests with those of the rest of Italy.
But their ambition at this moment extended no farther.
Satisfied themselves, and sacrificing their allies, they
made peace with Mastino deUa Scala, on the 18th of
December, 1338, without stip4l|Ung that the city of
Lucca, the object of the war, should be given up to the
F^rentines, for which these had contracted a debt of
4TO,000 florins. The Florentines, successively betrayed
by aU their allies, saw the danger of their position aug¬
ment daily ; the Guelphs lost, one after the other, every
sd^porter of their party : the vigour of the king of
Ns^es, now seventy-five years of age, was gone* The
pope, John XXII., had died at'Avignon, on the 4th of
Decefnber, 1334; and his successor, Benedict XIL,
li)^ him ag^renchman, neither understood nor took.any
part in the aflFairs of Italy. A few months previous,
on the 17th of March, 1334, the cardinal Bertrand de
Poiet had been driven by the people from Bologna; and
this ambitious legate, no longer supported by the pope his
father, had disappeared from the political scene. But the
Bolognese did not long preserve the liberty which they
had recovered. One of their citizens, named Taddeo
de Pepoli, the richest man in all Italy, had seduced the
Grerman guard which they held in pay, and by its aid
tooPpoBsession of the sovereignty of il^logna, on the
28th of j^anist. 1337. He then made alliance with
the Ghibelmes. The number of th^ free cities,.on the
aid, or at least the s^npath;!^ of which Florence could
r^kon, continually dimini^ed. The Genoese, from
we commencement of the century, had coasumed th^
Btrbngth in internal ware between the great Guelph am

14^ ■InsTOBar^i' BRgCBiias.

Ghibejjne fapiilies ; a^i^D^as they were free^ howeifa^
the Florentines, withoS iuiy tt;eaty of aliiance, regarom
them as j^endly ; but the long protracted civil wars
had disgusted the people with the government; they
rose on the 23d of SeptemheTj 1339, and overthrew it,
replacing the signoria iy a single chief, Boccanegra, on
whom they conferre(lffl|||title of doge. It might have
been feared they had My given themselves a t^tgiit:
but the first doge of Genoa was a friend to liberty; and
the Genoese people having imitated Venice, in giving
themselves a first officer in the state with that title,
were not long before they carried the imitation farther,
by seeking to combing liberty with power vested in a
single person. In the mean while Mastino della Scale
suffered a Parmesan noble to take from him the city of '
Parma. As from that time he had no farther communi.i'
cation with Lucca, he offered to sell it to the Florentines'
The bargain was concluded in the month of August,
1341; but it appeared to the Pisans the signal of thei|
own servitude, for it cut off all communication between
them and the Ghibelines of Lombardy. They imme¬
diately advanced their militia into the Lucchese states, to
prevent the Florentines from taking possession of*the
town ; vanquished them in a great battle, oiAhe 2d
October, 1341, under the walls of Lucca; and, on the
6th of July following, took possession of that city for
themselves.

The people of Florence attributed this train of dis¬
asters to the incapacity of their magistrates. The burden
of the taxes, and of the debt with which the republic
was loaded; and the jealousy entertained of the rich mer.
chants, who, in spite of the democratic form of the con¬
stitution, in fact governed the state, excited a diBCon||nt
which soon took the darkest hue. The people who in
all Italy were regarded as by far the most l^pubUcan,
those who owed all their greatness to liberty, for which
they had made such immense sacrifices, the people who
carried their love of equality and their jealousy of alk

^pjftinction n excess, of a sudden appeared wearied

itaii " 1’47

q^l^eir own sovereigntj; t^^'^imandei! a ma^r, in
mer to punish and humiliate ^b'se who appeared too
g^eat to be reached by the laws of a repupic; they
aisked to submit to the authority of a single person. At
this period, Gaultier de Brienne, duke of Athens, a
French noble, but bom in Jji^ce, passed through
Florence, on his way from IHpIes to France. The
dudhy of Athens had remained in his family from the'
congest of Constantinople tiU it was taken from his
father in 1312. There remained to him only that of
Lecce, in the kingdom of Naples. He had been the
lieutenant of the duke of Calabria, at Florence, in 1326,
|lid had then distinguished himftlf by his bravery and
the acuteness of his understanding. It was for this
man the Florentines, after their defeat at Lucca, took a
sudden fancy. They protested they never should have
experienced so many disasters if the duke of Athens had
been at the head of their army. On the 1st of August,
1342, they obliged the signoria to confer on him the
title of captain of justice, and give him the comi^and of
their militia.

The duke of Athens was of that degenerate race of
Franks, ^tablished in the Levant, whom the people of
the West designated by the name of Pullani, to indicate
their small stature, their apparent weakness, and fre.
quently their cowardice. To this physical conformation
they joined the most unbridled love of pleasure, cunning,
perfidy, habits of despotism, and contempt of human
life; the vices, in short, which connection with the East
necessarily communicates to barbarians, always more,
disposed to be corrupted than to improve. The duke
of Athens was named president of the tribunals, and*
coAmander of the forces of the repuUic; offices of
more power than ought to have been given to such a
man, but%ot enough for his ambition ; he aspired to
be absolute sovereign, and to make a single duchy
df Tuscany. >He entered into negotiation with thos^
dties which were subject to or allied with Flor'en^
vKhh a view in. induce them to place thema^|p

14S BISTOBT OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1S4S.

under his rule, and to shAe off the yoke and alliance
of the republic. With a rapidity of perception,
and a talent for intrigue, -which he had acquired in
Greece, he, in a few days, unrayelled all the secret
designs, all the jealous passions, which divided the re¬
public. He perceive4 that the first class of citizens,
who had the greatest ^are in the government, had
also the greatest share ih the public hatred; they were
objects of execration to the ancient nobility, whoik they
had excluded from all the offices of government; of
jealousy to the second class of cifazens immediately
under them; and of envy and anger to the populace, who
declared themselves crushed by the taxes. The duke
of Athens sacrificed them to these various passions; he
beheaded many, and ruined others by fines. He sent
to France and Naples for a troop of cavalry, better
suited to intrigue than war. He ordered them to mix
among the people, seduce them into taverns, and keep
them in a constant state of intoxication, celebrating at
the same time the valour and liberality of the duke, and
announcing to them that if he was absolute master, he
would make the poorest people in Florence live in
merriment and abundance. Having thus excited the
people to a ferment, he convoked them in parhameut
in the public square, on the 8th of September. The
agitators directing the lowest orders proclaimed him
sovereign lord of Florence for his life, forced the puUic
palace, drove from it the gonfalonier and the priori, and
installed him therf in their place.

' The liberty of Ifaly had been at an end, if the duke of
|Vthens had succeeded in establishing the despotism
^ which he had just laid the foundation: all the other
republics seemed plunged in a deep lethargy. The
desire of investing power in a single person had invadad
ithe moudest and most opulent cities, all those which had
bef(«l shown ihe Neatest al^horrence of tyranny. Ap
the rest of Europe was not yet rea^Jt-to, profit by the
ittample and in^ruction of Italy, the ^veiy of Fh^
IIUP^ th^ destruction of all liberty^ ip,the city whh^

1S43. EXPULSION' Ot TBE DUKE.

•

gave impulse to the spirit of mquiry, to philosophy^
politics, eloquence, poetry, and the fine arts, would have
stopped, perhaps for centuries, the civilisation of the
World. Gaultier of Athens united all the qualities that
Machiavel, l 60 years later, enumerated as necessary
to a prince, the founder of a despotism. Courageous,
dissembling, patient, clear.sigM^d, perfidious, he knew
neither respect nor pity ; he was bound by no affection
and (to principle; accordingly, he sought the alliance of
the Ghibeline tyrants of Romagna and Lombardy,
whom he had till then combated as enemies to his sove¬
reign the king of Naples. They on their side joyfully
aoalesced with a despot, who delivered them from an
example which might prove contagious to their subjects
in the liberty and happiness of Florence: he had no
enemies abroad; and his executioners rapidly delivered
him from the more dangerous of his enemies at home.

Happily, Florence was not ripe for slavery: ten months
sufficed for the duke of Athens to draw from it 400,000
golden florins, which he sent either to France or Naples ;
but ten months sufficed also to undeceive all parties who
had placed any confidence in him; to unite them all in
one common hatred, and in a common determination to
overthrow his tyranny. Three conspiracies, unconnected
with each other, were secretly formed: they soon com¬
prehended almost aU the citizens of Florence. The duke,
'without discovering them, repeatedly defeated them, by
thejirecautions, more rigorous each day, which he took for
his security ; his cruelty kept pace with his suspicions;,
he questioned with the torture all those on whom feU
Che ilightest of his doubts; it was thus he was led tl
bate Baldihaccio degli Adimari, who, though the duM
was unaware of it, was the chief of one of the conspiracies.
The universal ferment which this arrest excited made
him sensible that he was in the road to a discovery; he dii
not, however, betray his sentiments ; he asked reimorce-
ments from adl his^ allies, and it was not till those, were,
in motion'that, .on the 26th of July, he convoked thi€^
hundred of the miMt distinguished citilfens, profesatlly

150 HISTORY C»' THE ITALIAN REPVBLID8. 1345^

to consult them on the affairs of the republic. Order*
were given in the palace to put every one to death as
soon as he entered ; but the people also were ready. In
each of the massive palaces of Florence, the citizens
■were silently assembling: they arrived one by one, witlK
out noise, and unperceived. The cavalry of the duke
filled the street, where every body seemed occupied only
with their own affairs; no agitation, no apparent con.
fusion, announced any explosion, when suddenly the
cry “ To arms !” burst from the old market-place, and
was re-echoed to the gates of St. Peter’s. Instantly from
every window, from the roofs of all the houses, fell a
shower of stones and tiles, previously made ready, on
the heads of the.duke’s cavalry ; every palace opened and
poured forth armed men, who threw chains across th«
streets, and made barricades: the cry of “ Popoln! popoh!
Libertd,!” resounded from one extremity of Florence to
the other. The cavalry, surprised, dispersed, and over¬
whelmed with stones, were soon disarmed; the chains
were th^ taken up, and troops of citizens united and
marched to the Palazzo Vecchio, where the duke de.
fended himself with 400 transalpine soldiers. Gatiltiet
might have long held out in this massive fortress, if it
had been sufficiently victualled ; but hunger forced him
to have recourse to the mediation of the bishop of
Florence. He capitulated, on the 3d of August, 1343; the
bishop concealed him till the 6th from the fury of the
people, and sent him off secretly in the night \fitli
his cavalry, to whom the duke of Athens owed thar
pay j arrived at Venice, he stole away from his com.
panions in misfortune, to avoid paying them, and
Escaped in a small vessel to Naples, whither he had
previously sent his treasure.

1344f.

neVlVAI. UF LETTERS.

151<

CHAP. VII. .

THE EEVIVAl or LETTERS. — HEVOLCTIONS ATTEMPTED BY TWO
LEARNED MEN. — ITALY RAVAGED BY THE PLAGUE, AND BY
COMPANIES OF ADVENTURERS. —THE POWER OF THE HOUSE OF

VISSONTI. — WAR BETWEEN THE MARITIME REPUBLICS. -THE

DANGERS AND FIRMNESS OF THE REPUBLIC OF FLORENCE.

■

The oppression which weighed upon the rest of Europe
contributed to the maintenance of barbarism, less by
rendering difficult, and sometimes dangerous, the acqui¬
sition of knowledge, than by taking away all attraction
from the exercise of the mind. Thought was a pain to
those capable of judging the state of the human species,
—of studying the past; of comparing it with the pre¬
sent ; and of thus foreseeing the future. Danger and
suffering appeared on ali sides. The men ^ho, in
France, Germany, England, and Spain, felt themselves
endued with the power of generalising their ideas, either
smothered them, not to aggravate the pain of thought,
or directed them solely to speculations Ae farthest from
real life,— towards that scholastic philosophy which so
vigoroudy exercised the understanding, without bring¬
ing it to any conclusion. In Italy, on the contrary,
liberty secured the full enjoyment of intellectual exist¬
ence. Every one endeavoured to develop the powers
which he felt within him, because each was conscious
that the more his mind opened the greater was his enjoy¬
ment ; every one directed his powers to a useful and
practical purpose, because each felt himself placed in a
state of society in which he might attain some influence,,
either for his own benefit or that of his fellow-creatures.
The first want which towns had experienced was that of
their defence. Accordingly, military architecture had
t^en precedence in the arts. From its exercise the trans-
.itioD was easy to that of religious arcbiiicture, at a tune

L 4

152 BISTOHT OF THB ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 134^4.

when religion was indispensable to every heart,—to civil
architecture, then encouraged by a government in which
eve^y thing was for all. The study and pursuit of the
beautiful in this grst of the fine arts had paved the way
to all the others. From the pleasures of the imagination
through the eye, men ascended to those derived from
the soul; and hence the birth of poetry.

In the sciences, also, the Italians had begun with
the personal protection of man. The consideration4)f his
health presented itself; and the earliest school of medi¬
cine was founded at Salerno, in the neighbourhood of the
three republics of Gaeta, Naples, and Amalfi. Then
followed that of his private rights and property; and
the university of Bologna acquired immense celebrity in
the teaching of civil and canon law, before any other
study was diligently pursued. The rights of all naturally
rose out of the rights of each; and politics, as a science,
yet existed only in Italy. Statesmen sought, in history,
how governments made the happiness or misery of na¬
tions, agd the study of antiquity was pursued with
ardour; while the two Villani wrote history with as
much judgment, elevation of soul, and philosophy as
Polybius. At the same time, the thinking men in
France, who, instead of brutifying themselves in order
to suffer less from despotism, anarchy, and the invasion
of the English, exercised their understandings, pas¬
sionately embraced the study of the scholastic theology.
They commented on, and developed with subtlety, prin¬
ciples of which they did not permit themselves to judge;
and the faculty of the Sorbonne, in the university of
Paris, was acknowledged to he the first theological
school in Europe ; it was that in which the most acute¬
ness and depth of thought were united to the most im¬
plicit faith. In Italy, on the contrary, the mind,
accustomed to examine the claims of authority, had
already produced,-since the time of Frederick II., and
still more after the translation from the Arabic of the
hooka of Averrhoes, thinkers whom the priests accused
not only of hereby, but of incredulity and epicurism.

1344.

BTVBY or ANTIQUITY.

15S

The popular form of government must have early
accustomed the Italians to speak in puUic ; but the ex¬
ample of their preachers was prejudicial to their elo¬
quence : they made discoursesj instead of speaking.
They supposed that they ought always to begin with
what they called proposing ; that is, taking a text from
some celebrated author, either sacred or profane. And
this support which they sought in what was said by
anothftr, introduced the substitution of pedantry for
reason. Accordingly, the fourteenth century, in Italy so
fruitful in great mbn, has left us no model of political
eloquence. The Italians were accustomed to express in
verse aU that strongly moved them. Poetry was for
them the language of truth and of persuasion, as much
as of the imagination. Lyric poetry, above all, took
the place of eloquence; it shone forth with great bril-
hancy in the fourteenth century. Some of the cansoni
of Petrarch express the elevated sendments of a great
soul. A crowd of poets at this epoch obeyed the same
inspiration. The name of Petrarch, bom in 1 3(^, and
that of Boccaccio, in 1313, both Florentines, are the
most universally known. The second owes his celebrity
to the light, elegant, and easy prose of his novels, more
than to his poetry. Both have descended to posterity with
their Italian writings alone, which they regarded only as
relaxations from their labour, and not with their Latin
works, upon which they depended for their glory.

The Italians, in the fourteenth century, discovered, as
it were, anew the ancient world: they felt an affinity of
thoughts, hopes, and tastes with the best Latin writers,
which inspired them with the highest admiration. Pe¬
trarch, and particularly Boccaccio, passed from thU^
study to that of Grecian antiquity ; and, on his soUcit-
ation, the republic of Florence, in 1360, founded a chair
of Grecian literature, the first in the West. A paiekn
for erudition spread from one end of Italy to the other,
with an ardour proportionable to the dark ignorance of
'the preceding centuries. It was imagined that all knosv_
Iqdge consisted in knowing and imitating the ancient

134 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 134t»

I

niABters. The highest glory tvas attached to classical
learning,- and Petrarch, and Boccaccio attained a degree
of celebrity, credit, and power, unequalled by any other
men in the middle ages ; not by reason of those merits
which we feel at the present day, but as the pontiffs and
interpreters of antiquity. "

We owe to the learned of the fourteenth century, and
to their school, a deep sentiment of gratitude. They
discovered, and rendered intelligible to us, all th^chefg-
d’asuvre of antiquity. Fragments only of classic works
remained, scattered throughout Eurdpe, and on the point
of being lost. Thoselearnedmen of Italy collected, collated,
and explained them; without their antiquarian zeal, all
the experience of past ages, alt the models of taste,
all the great works of genius, would hever have reached
us ; and, probably, without such guides we shmild
never have attained the point on which we now stand.
But they injured their own age by their exclusive biai
to erudition. The imagination was extinguished; genius
disappeared; and even the language retrograded. It
-was abandoned, as too vulgar, for the Latin, by aU those
who attained any distinction for talents; the forms of
thinking of the ancients were adopted with those of their
language, and pedantry soon smothered all national ori*
ginality.

Two of these men, learned in the Greek and Latin
literature, friends of Petrarch, loving liberty, not like
Italians of the middle ages, but like sons of ancient
Rome, profited by their celebrity and by their powm-
over their auditors to re-establish a republican govern*
ment;—Cola di Bienzo, at Rome, in 1347, and Jacopo de’
Bussolari, ten years later, at Pavia. The former, though
of obscure birth, soon signalised himself by his progress
in letters, by bis familiarity with all the writers of an*
tiquity, by his knowledge of the manners and laws of
the Romaic, and of the monuments and inscriptions
which still ornamented the capital of the world. No.*
one possessed like him the art of. explaining them, anA' <
of striking out in his explanations those traits of gra^ejjC;

OOIiA DI niBNZO.

155

1M7

and glory which distinguish the ancient republic. Bom
at Aome^ he was a more ardent Eoman than republican;
seeking rather to restore the, sovereignty of the ancient
city than the liberty of mankind. He rejected with
deep indignation the usurpations of two barbarians ;
the one a German, calling himself Roman emperor;
the other a Frenchman, wh'o called himself the pontiff
of Rome. All those who'ro'se to eminence by the study
and example of the ancient Romans appeared to him
bound to labour to bring back Italy and mankind under
the dominion of Roihe. Petrarch had also a religious
re^ct for the name of Rome ; but living by turns at
the court of Avignon, or at those of the tyrants of Lom«
hardy, he had much fees elevation of soul and true
enthusiasm than Cola di Rienzo. The latter was sus¬
ceptible of all the emotion which the fine arts give; and
he employed his own sensibility to act on a susceptible
people. Sometimes at the foot of one of the most admir¬
able monuments of ancient architecture, he explained its
purpose to the crowd, by which he was always atte^ed;
he made them feel its beauty, and would take occasion
to recall the grandeur and freedom of ancient Rome,
which still spoke to her children from those colossal ruiifs.
He would contrast it with the state of degradation and
suffering to which Romewas thenreduced. He sometimes
interpreted in the public places the inscriptions which
be discovered; and would draw forth proofs of the
sovereignty which Rome exercised over the whole world.
Sometimes he displayed in the capitol allegorical pictures
which he bad composed, and, in explaining them, would
call upon the Roman people to quit their state of servitude,
and recover what he emphatically called the good state,
nte pope had never exercised any sovereign power in
Rome; but the absence of his court, in ruining the little
commerce of the tradesmen, had contributed to throw
the city into s desolate state of anarchy, llie nobles
bad reduced the‘government, composed of a senator and
thirteen caporioni to entire dependence on themselves/
aad the nobility of Rome, as well as of the rest of Italyi

1S6 BIgTOBT OF THE ITAXiIAN REPUBLICS. 1347

believed it beneath their station to be submissive to tbe
law. The Colonna, Orsini, and Savelli families, alwaya
at war with each other, garrisoned all the fortresses in
Rome with banditti, their satellites ; and at their head
made daily attacks in the streets upon each ofber.
Cola di Rienzo had a classic hatred for these turbulent
nobles ; a hatred which he believed he had inherited
from the Gracchi. He felt anxious to be made tribune
of the people, in order to deliver them from theijroke of
the patricians; and on the 20th of May, 1347, while the
Colonnas had quitted Rome with g «mall body of troopa,
he summoned the people to take possession of the go¬
vernment and of the guard of the city. The Romans
appointed him, with the bishop of Orvieto, the pope's
vicar, or depository of his spiritual power, as tribunes.
They ascend^ the capitol together. At first therevolution
seemed accomplished. The power of tbe name of Rome ;
the joy of men of letters throughout Europe ; the hatred
provoked by the Roman nobles ; the indifference of the
popq^and his distance from Rome, favoured this revo¬
lution. For some weeks it was approved and acknow¬
ledged by all Italy. But Cola di Rienzo, though elo¬
quent, learned, and a poet, was neither a statesman nor
a warrior; he knew not how to consolidate this good
state, to which he pretended to have restored the Ro¬
mans. He continued to occupy them with allegories,
festivals, and processions, while they demanded of him
something more positive. His head was turned by
vanity; and he assumed a degree of pomp which excited
ridicule. He had soon to support a war against the
nobles whom he had exiled; and though several of the
Colonnas perished in an ill-conducted attack on Rome,
Cola in repelling them gave proofs of incapacity and
cowardice. The pope sent a legate to Rome, to appease tlK
civil war; and this legate, being a French noble, sid^
with the nobility. The latter having taken possession of a
division of the town, the tocsin summoged the people to
defend themselves, but it sounded in vain; and on die
13th of December, 1347, Cola di Rienzo, obliged to

JACOPO ]>e’ BVeSOIiARI.

157

1356.

^andon the capitol, retreated to the castle of St. Angelo,
and afterwards sought refuge with Charles IV., son of
John, king of Bohemia, who gave him up to the pope
in 135:3.

The pope Innocent VI., having in the following year
diarged his legate, Egidio Albornoz, to recover the
ecclesiastical states from the hands of the tyrants who
in each city had seized the sovereignty, made Cola di
BienzcPaccompany him, in order to profit by the influ¬
ence which the tribune might still have retained at
Rome. The legatd sent him there in the month of
July, 1354; declaring at the same time that he made
him Roman senator by the authority of the pope. Cola
found again his friends at Rome, and for a short time
succeeded in awakening the popular enthusiasm; but he
was now only an instrument in the hand of the legate,
and it did not depend on him to realise the hopes which
he excited. A new sedition broke forth; and this time
the people joined his enemies the Colonnas : his palace
was burnt down, he was arrested as he endeavotjted to
escape in disguise, dragged to the porphyry lion at the
foot of the Capitol stairs, and there stabbed, on the 6th
of October, 1354.

The monk Jacopo de’ Bussolari, who in the month of
March, 1356, had also restored a sort of ephemeral
liberty to Pavia, was, like Cola, a learned man, a poet, and
a friend of Petrarch; hewas a man of ardent imagination,
who had borrowed his love of liberty from the ancients.
He was a monk of St. Augustine, and was sent to hia
birthplace, Pavia, to preach there during Lent. This
city had been governed, since the year 1313, by the
Ghibeline family of Beccaria, who were supported
from abroad by the Viscontis, and the marquis de Mont-
^fbrrat. A war having broken out between the marqnii
and the lords of Milan, the Beccarias declared against
the Viscontis, who had till then reganled the lords of
Pavia almost dts their lieutenants. The Viscontis in
their anger besieged Pavia; and the city would soon have
fkllen, if Jacopo de' Bussolari had not, by his eloquent

158 HIBTORV OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1356u.

sennonsj roused the energy of the Pavesans; he preached:
dre reform of morals, faith, liberty, and courage; he at:
the same time animated them by his example. On the
27th of May, 1356, in descending from the pulpit, he
placed himself at their head; marched out of the town ;
attacked the redoubts of the Milanese, took three, one
after the other; and forced the Viscontis to raise the siege.
It was as important to deliver his country from domestic
tyranny as from a foreign yoke. As he often preached
against the vices and usurpations of the Beccarias, they
endeavoured to get him assassinated; the Pavesans, to
protect him, supplied him with a guard; there were
several engagements between the faithful troops of their
pastor and the satellites of the tyrants. At last Jacopo
de’ Bussolari issued an order to the Beccarias, to leave the
city: they obeyed, but, making an alliance with the
Viscontis, renewed the war. In 1358, the monk caused
the palaces of the Beccarias to be rased to the ground; m
1359, the Viscontis again besieged the city. An epi¬
demic^ disease broke out in it with virulence ,* all the
allies which Jacopo de’ Bussolari had procured the Pa-
vesans successively abandoned them. The eloquent Euad
courageous monk perceived that he must at last yield to
fortune; and in the month of October, 1359, offered to
capitulate with the Viscontis, and to deliver the city to
them, on condition that they should preserve all the
municipal liberties, that the exiles whom he had recalled
should be allowed to remain, and that an amnesty should
be granted the citizens, without a single exception: he
stipulated nothing for himself; and the Viscontis employ¬
ing his ecclesiastical superiors against him, he was con¬
fined in the prison of his convent at VeroelU, where
he died a miserable death. They afterwards MinuUed
the capitulation of Pavia; declaring that, as they were
imperial vicars, they could not be held to execute asy
thing which they promised, contrary to the rights of
the empire. ,'

This empire had passed from Louis of Bavaria, who
died on the 10th of October, 1347, to Charles IV. trf.

l3BZ. CARDINAL ALB0BNP2. 169

Bcdiemia. He had been set up as competitor with the
former by the pope, on the 10th of July, 1346, and
was called the king of the priests: he was, however,
floon after the death of Louis, acknowledged by the
whole empire. Desirous of obtaining the same acknow¬
ledgment in Italy, he entered it on the 14th of October,
1354, but without an army; “appearing,” says Villani,
“ with his disarmed knights mounted on travelling
palfre^B, rather as a merchant going to a fair than an
emperor.” He was crowned at Milan, and afterwards at
Home: and extractdU from the republics, as he passed, a
ransom for their liberty; he caused, by his petty intrigues,
mmch trouble and insurrection, but he at the same time
degraded, in the eyes of the Italians, the imperial ma¬
jesty, by his cupidity, and want of dignity and energy.
The popes who succeeded each other at Avignon also
lost the respect of the faithful by their immoralities,
intrigues, and ambition. To Benedict XII., an honest
but weak man, possessing a feeble understanding, had
succeeded, in 1342, Clement VI., who lighted the fire
of civil war again in Germany, and signalise^him-
•elf in his Italian politics by the most atrocious treach¬
ery.**' Towards the end of 1352, he was succeeded by
Innocent VI. This pope formed the project of recover¬
ing the state belonging to the church; the sovereignty
of which the imperial charters had abandoned to him.
He made choice, for this purpose, of cardinal Al-
bomoz, a Spaniard, who had already signalised himself
in arms against the Moors; he gave the cardinal little
money and few soldiers, but he reckoned, and with some
reason, on the favour of the people. These last, in
every city of Romagna and of the March, had suSbred
themselves to be enslaved by the boldest and richest of
their fellow-citizens: all were wearied with the yoke of
these petty tyrants, and, without any good reason to
trust to the government of the church, they were glad of
a change. Albwnoz, who had still more ability in in¬
trigue than he had military talent, succeeded in setting,
these tyrants at variance one with the other; in obtain-^

160 HI8T0RV OF THE ITALIAN REFVBL109. 1347 -

t

ing the assistance of the Guelphs of Tuscany; and,
finally, in deposing and subduing them all; but before
he terminated these conquests, Innocent VI. died, on
the 12 th of September, 1362, and was succeeded by
Urban V.

The kings of Naples, during this period, had sunk
still lower in power and consideration. Robert died on
the 19th of January, 1343, at the age of eighty. He
had given his grand-daughter, Joan, in marriag# to her
cousin Andrew, the son of the king of Hungary. An¬
drew was son of the eldest son of Charles II.; and had
a better right than Robert himself to the crown of
Naples. The latter, whom his nephew regarded as«n
usurper, had been desirous of confounding the rights of
the two branches of his family, by marrying Joan to
Andrew, and crowning them together; but these young
people felt towards each other only jealousy and hatred.
Andrew was brutal, Joan was elegant in her manners,
but depraved. She consented to an assassination, which *
delivqjjd her from her husband, on the 18th of Septem¬
ber, 1345; and two years after, married her cousin,
Louis of Tarento, the instigator of the murder. ^htf
crown of Hungary had passed to the elder brother of
Andrew,—LouisJ called the Great. To avenge his bro¬
ther, he entered Italy, and conquered Naples in 1348.
Joan, meanwhile, fled, with her husband, to Provence;
and, to conciliate the favour of the pope, abandoned to
him the sovereignty of Avignon. It was exactly at the
period of the greatest calamity that ever befell mankind.
The plague, brought from the East, made the circuit of
Italy, and afterwards of all Europe; and in every place
it reached carried off, in seven or eight monthi, one
third of the population. It is known in history by tile
name of “ the plague of Florence;" because, while it
mowed down millions of obscure victims elsewhere, a^
Florence, where it carried off nearly a hundred thou¬
sand persons, an advanced civilisation Afidered the loss
more sensibly felt. Many distinguished irien sank under
this scourge; several philosophers studied it; and a

1S48. OBEAT PLAGUE. 16L

great writetj Boccaccio, has*left of it an admirable' de¬
scription. The terror and deeolation, which an inflic¬
tion so dreadful caused throughout Italy, superseded
all political hatreds, — all wars, however obstinate.
.Louis of Hungary, in the middle of his campaign
and of Iiis successes, was discouraged, upon seeing the
most flourishing armies swept off by sickness. In 1351,
lie signed a peace with Joan, who returned with her
JiusbariJ to her kingdom of Naples, where both long
continued their career of vice and voluptuousness ;
abandoning all caT% of administration, and of the na.
tional defence ; permitting their provinces, in the bosom
o^ peace, to be plundered and laid waste, in a manner
hardly to be feared in the moat disastrous wars.

The most immediate cause of the sufferings of the
kingdom of Naples, and of all Italy, was the form¬
ation of what was called “ companies of adventure.”
Wherever tyrants had succeeded to free governments,
their first care had been to disarm the citizens, whose
resistance was to be feared ; and although a little indus¬
try might soon have supplied swords and lances, yet the
(danger of being denounced for using them soon made
th^ubjects of these princes lose every military habit.
£ven the citizens of free towns no longer thought of de¬
fending themselves: their way of life had weakened their
corporeal strength ; and they felt an inferiority too dis.
couraging when they had to oppose, without defensive
armour, cuirassiers on horseback. The chief strength
of armies henceforth was in the heavy-armed cavalry,
composed of men who had aU their lives followed the
trade of war, and who hired themselves for pay. The
emperors had successively brought into Italy many of
their countrymen, who afterwards passed into the service
of the tyrant princes. The'V'iscontis andHellaScalas had
sent for many to Germany, believing that these men
—who 'did not understand the language of the country,
—who were boj^nd to it by no affection,—and who were
acces^bie to no political passion, — would he their best

It

' l62 -histohy op the Italian uepublics. 1349.

defenders. They proved ready to execute the most bar¬
barous orders, and for their recompence demanded only
the enjoyments of an intemperate sensuality.

But the Lombard tyrants were deceived in believing
the German soldier would never covet power for himself,
and would continue to abuse the right of the ntronger
for the advantage of others only. These adventurers
soon discovered that it would be better to make war and
pillage the people for their own profit, without ditiding
the spoil with a master. Some men of high ranlc,
who had served in Italy as condottieri (hired captains),
proposed to their soldiers to follow them, make war on
the whole world, and divide the booty among them¬
selves. The first company, formed by an Italian noble
at the moment that the Viscontis dismissed their sol¬
diers, having made peace with their adversaries, made
an attack suddenly on Milan, in the hope of plundering
that great city; but was almost annihilated in a
battle, fought at Parabiago, on the 20th of February,
13391 A German duke, known only by his Christian
name of Werner, and the inscription he wore on his
breast of “ enemy of God, of pity, and of mercy,"
formed, in 1343, another association, which maintaftied
itself for a long time, under the name of “ the great
company,” It in turns entered the service of princes ;
and, when they made peace, carried on its ravages and
plunderings for its own profit. The duke Werner and
his successors, — the count Lando, a German ; and the
friar Morialb, knight of St. John, — devastated Italy
from Montferrat to the extremity of the kingdom of
Naples. They raised contributions, by threatening to
burn houses and harvests, or by putting the prisoners
whom they took to the most horrible tortures. The pro¬
vinces of Apulia were, above all, abandoned to their
devastations; and the king and queen of Naples made
not a single effort to protect their people.

There now remained no more than six independent
princes in Lombardy. The Viscontis, lords of Milan,
had usurped all the central'part of that province; the'

134S. COMPANIES OF ADYENTUBEIIS. l63

western part was held by the marquis of Montferrat,
and the eastern hy the Della Scale, lords of Verona,
Carrara of Padua, Este of Ferrara, and Gonzaga of
Mantua. These weaker princes felt themselves in danger,
and made a league against the Viscontis, taking into their
service the great company j but, deceived and pillaged
by it, they suffered greater evils than they inflicted on
their enemies. When at last the money of the league
was exhausted, and it could no longer pay the company,
this band of robbers entered into the service of the re¬
public of Sienna, tof be let loose on that of Perugia, of
wliich the Siennese had conceived a deep jealousy. But
the Florentines would not consent to their entering Tus¬
cany, where their depredations had been already felt.
They shut all the passes of the Apennines ; they armed
the mountaineers; they made these adventurers experi¬
ence a first defeat at the passage of Scalella, on the
24th of July, 13.58, and obliged them to fall back on
Romagna. The legate Albornoz, to deliver hi(pself from
such guests, made them enter Perugia the year fojjow-
ing. Never had the company been so brilliant and so
formidable : it levied contributions on Sienna, as well as
Perugia ; but vengeance and cupidity alike excited them
against the Florentines. They determined on pillaging
.those rich merchants, whom they considered far from
warhke, or forcing them to ransom themselves.

The Marquis de Montferrat, desirous of taking the
company into his service, pressed the republic of Flo¬
rence, by his ambassadors to do what the greatest
potentates had always done,—pay the banditti to be rid
of them. He offered himself for mediator and gua¬
rantee, and promised a prompt and cheap dehverance;
but the Florentine republic protested it would not
submit to any thing so base; it assembled an army
purely Italian, placing it under the command of an
Italian captain, who was ordered to advance to the fron¬
tier, and offer. battle to the company. The robbers
gave way in proportion to the firmness of the republic:
they made the tour of the Florentine frontier by Sienna,

M 2

164 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1350,

Pisa, anil Lucca, always threatening, yet never daring
to violate it. On the 12th of July, 1359, they sent
the Florentine commander a challenge to battle, and
afterwards failed to keep the rendezvous which they
had given. They escaped at last from Tuscany, with¬
out having fought, and divided themselves in the ser¬
vice of different princes, humbled indeed, but too much
accustomed to this disorderly life not to be anxious to
begin it anew.

The republic of Florence was continually occupied,
since the expulsion of the duke of Athens, in guarding
against the ambition of the Viscontis, which threatened
the subjugation of all Italy. Azzo Visconti, the son
of that Galeazzo who had been so treacherously used by
Louis of Bavaria, had, in 1328, purchased the city of
Milan from that emperor, and soon afterwards found
himself master of ten other cities of Lombardy ; but he
died suddenly, in the height of his prosperity, the l6th
of August, 1339- As he left no children, his uncle
Lu«hino succeeded him in the sovereignty. Luchino
was false and ferocious, but clever, and possessed in war
the hereditary talent of the Viscontis. He was called a
lover of justice, probably because he punished criminals
with an excess of cruelty, and maintained by terror
a perfect police in his states. He died, poisoned *by
his wife, on the 23d of January, 1349. His brother
John, archbishop of Milan, succeeded him in power.
The latter found himself master of sixteen of the largest
cities in Lombardy; cities which, in the preceding cen¬
tury, had been so many free and flourishing republics.
His ambition continually aspired to more extensive
conquests; and, on the l6th of October, 1350, be en¬
gaged the brothers Fepoli to cede to him Bologna.
These nobles, who had usurped the sovereignty of their
country, were at this time engaged in a quarrel with
the legate, Giles Albomoz, who asserted that Bologna
belonged to the holy see. The archbishop was already
treated by the pope as an enemy; and preferred ex¬
citing Btill further his wrath, to ^e renunciation of bo

1351, OREATNESB OF THE VISCONTIS. l65

•

important an acquisition. When Clement V'l. sum¬
moned him to come, and justify himself at the court of
Avignon, he answered, that he would present himself
there at the head of 12,000 cavalry and 6000 infantry.
The pope, in his alarm, ceded to him the fief of Bologna,
on the 5th of May, 1352, on condition of receiving from
him an annual tribute of 12,000 florins, Florence saw,
with terror, this city, which had so long been her most
powerful and faithful ally, the Guelph city of letters,
commerce, and liberty, thus pass under the yoke of a
tyrant, who had designs upon her liberty also ; who laid
snares around her ; who formed alliances against her
with all the petty tyrants of Romagna, and aU the
Ghibeline lords of the Apennines. She was at peace
with him, it was true ; but she well knew that the Vis¬
contis neither believed themselves bound by any treaty,
nor kept any pledge.

The number of free cities continually diminished.
Pisa was still free, but had, from attachment to the
GhibeUne party, made alliance with the Viscontis^ Si¬
enna and Perugia were free also, but weak and jealous;
they were incessantly disturbed by internal dissensions.
The Florentines could not reckon on them. The arch¬
bishop of Milan suddenly ordered, towards the end of
th'e summer, 1351, John Visconti da' Oleggio, his lieu¬
tenant at Bologna, to push into Tuscany at the head of
a formidable army, without any declaration of war.
The republic had no ally, and but slight reliance on the
mercenaries in its service; but the Florentines, who
showed little bravery in the open field, defended them¬
selves obstinately behind walls; and the great village of
Scarperia,in the Mugello, although so ill fortified that the
walls of many of the houses served instead of a surround¬
ing wall, and having a garrison of only 200 cuirassiers
and 300 infantry, stopped the Milanese general sixty-
one days. He was at last obliged, on the l6th of Octo¬
ber, to retire ta.Bologna.

The republics of Venice and Genoa were, it might
have been thought, the natural allies to whom the Flo>
M 3

166 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 135S.

rentines should have had recourse for their common
defence. Their interests were the same; and the Vis¬
contis had resolved not to suffer any free state to subsist
in Italyj lest their subjects should learn that there
was a better government than their own, Unhapj^ly,
these two republics^ irritated by commercial quarrels in
the Eastj were then engaged in an obstinate war with
each other. The Genoese had fortified Pera, a suburb
of Constantinoplej of which they had rendered them¬
selves masters^ as well as of Caffa in the Crimea ; and
these two colonies almost equalled the metropolis in
wealth and magnificence. These republicans engaged
in a quarrel with the emperor CantacuzenOj besieged
his capital^ and burnt his fleet. Two years later^ they
quarrelled also with the Crimean Tartars at Caffa, and
attempted to interdict the Latins from carrying on any
commerce with them at Tana, now Taganrok. This
attempt produced a quarrel with the Venetians, and a
war between these two states was the consequence. The
Venatians formed an alliance with the Greek emperor,
and with Peter IV. of Aragon ; formidable fleets, com¬
manded the one by the Genoese admiral, Paganino
Doria, the other by the Venetian, Nicolo Pisani, dis¬
played a courage and ability to resist at once man and
the elements, which no maritime people have ever since
surpassed. On the 13th of February, 1352, Paganino
Doria, with sixty-four galleys, attacked, in the straits of
the Bosphorus, the Venetians, Catalonians, and Greeks,
who had collected, at least,- seventy-eight vessels. A
violent tempest assailed, in those narrow seas, the two
fleets in the midst of their combat: they were over¬
taken by a dark night; whilst the violence of the winds
and tide mixed their vessels, and drove them one against
the other. • The loss on both sides was prodigious; but
the morning discovered to Pisani that he was no longer
in a state to continue the combat: he retired to Candia,
and the Greeks made peace with the Genoese. A battle,
not less bloody, took place in the following year, on. the
29th of August, off the coast of Loiera, in Sardinia,

lS54f. WAR OF GENOA AND VENICE.

Faganino Doria no longer commanded the Genoese; they
were defeated with immense loss : in their distress and
discouragement, they gave themselves up, on the lOtli
of October, 1353, to John Visconti, lord of Milan. This
tyrant, the richest in Italy, helped them to re-establish
their fleet; the command was given anew to Faganino
Doria, who attacked and destroyed the Venetian fleet
in the Gulf of Sapienza, in the Morea, on the 3d of
Novejnber, 1354. The Venetians, exhausted by such
great exertions, made peace in the month of May fol¬
lowing. •

Genoa had sacrificed her liberty to her thirst of ven¬
geance ; for although the republic had not conferred the
signori a on the archbishop Visconti without imposing
conditions, it soon experienced that oaths are not bind¬
ing on a prelate and a tyrant. The freedom of Venice
also was in the utmost danger from the consequences of
the same war. It was only a few months after the
peace was signed, that Marino Faliero was elected suc¬
cessor to Andrea Dandolo, in the ducal chair, on the
11th of September, 1354. The disorders and calSnities
of war had relaxed every social tie; the merchants,
and the workmen employed in the construction of ves¬
sels, were discontented; the nobles conducted themselves
with increasing insolence; and the laws were ill observed.
Alarino Faliero, who was old, and furiously jealous of a
young and beautiful wife, was insulted, under a mask,
during tlie carnival, by the president of the quarantia. He
believed the offender in Iqve with his wife. The offence
he received was not punished with the severity which he
demanded. He lent an ear to the complaints of the
plebeians, many of whom had experienced in their
domestic life mortal injuries from the young nobility;
and excited a conspiracy, of which he consented to be
the chief. But just as he was on the point of wreaking
his vengeance on the governmoit of his country, and on
the whole or4gr of nobles, some of his accomplices were
denounced to the Council of Ten : they were seized, and
put to the torture, on the night of the 15th of April,
M 4

V 568 HISTORT OF THE ITALIAN REPURLICe. 1355

Their disclosures implicated the dogCj -who was
also arrested, and on the day after was beheaded.

Though the war of the maritime republics ihight have
deprived Florence of the aid of Venice or Genoa, i^^
at least diverted the attention of John Visconti; Ji|||e
him direct his exertions elsewhere; and procured'Hro
repose to Tuscany. He died on the 5th of OctobefJ,
1354, before he could renew his attacks ; and his threb
nephews, the sons of his brother Stephen, agreed te suc¬
ceed him in common. The eldest, who showed less talent
for government, and more sensuality' and vice, than his
brothers, was poisoned by them the year following. The
two survivors, Barnabas and Galeazzo, divided Lom¬
bardy between them; preserving an equal right on
Milan, and in the government. Their relative, Visconti
da’ Oleggio, who was their lieutenant at Bologna, made
himself independent in that city nearly about the same
time that the Genoese, indignant at seeing all their con¬
ventions violated, rose in insurrection on the 15th of
Noveijjber, 1356, drove out the Milanese garrison, and
again set themselves free. ^

The entry of Charles IV. into Tuscany formed ^o
a favourable diversion, by suspending the projects of the
Viscontis against the Florentines; but it cost them
100,000 florins, which they agreed to pay Charles
treaty on the 12th of March, 1355, to purchase Im
rights on their city, and to obtain his engagement that
he should nowhere enter the Florentine territory. The
republics of Pisa and Sienna;< who received him within
their walls, paid still dearer for the hospitality which
they granted him. The emperor encouraged the mal-
eontents in both cities; he aided them to overthrow the
existing governments ; he hoped by so doing to make
these republics little principalities, which he intended to
bestow as an apanage on his brother, the patriarch of
Aquileia: but after having caused the ruin of his parti¬
sans; after having ordered or permitted ithe execnnnn
of the former magistrates, who were innocent MHp
crime, insurrections of the people forced him tfl^^t

1S57. 'KEV0I,UTI0H at PISA. 169 ,

both cities, without retaining the smallest influence
either. After he had quitted Italy, the Viscontis were
engaged i^'the war to which we have already alluded,
against the marquises of Este, of Monferrat, della Scala,
and Carrara. The siege of Pavia, and the
of the great company exhausted their resources,
but did not make them abandon their projects on Tus-
'eany. The influence which they retained in the repub¬
lic o^ Pisa, as chiefs of the Ghibeline party, seemed to
facilitate their schemes.

Pisa, in losing its maritime power and its possessions
in Sardinia, had not lost its warlike character; it was
still the state in Italy where the citizens were best ex¬
ercised in the use of arms, and evinced the most bravery.
It had given proofs of it in conquering, under the eye
of the Florentines, the city of Lucca, which it still re¬
tained. Nevertheless, since the peace made by the duke
of Athens on the 14th of October, 1342, commercial
interests had reconciled the two republics. The Flo¬
rentines had obtained a complete eiifran chis em enffrom
all imposts in the port of Pisa; they had established
there mieir counting-houses, and attracted thither a rich
trade. From that time the democratic party predo¬
minated in the Pisan republic ; at its head was a rich
qigrchant, named Francesco Gambacorta, who attached
Umself to the Florentines, and to the maintenance of
proce. His party was called that of the Bergolini;
while that of the great Ghibeline families attached to the
counts of la Gherardesca, who despised commerce and ex¬
cited war, was called the Raspanti party. The Viscontis
sought the alliance of the latter; the moment did not
appear to them yet arrived in which they could assume
to themselves the dominion over all Tuscany. It was
Euflicient for their present views to exhaust the Floren¬
tine republic by a war, which would disturb its com¬
merce ; to weaken the spirit of liberty and en«-gy in the
Pisans, by subduing them to the power of the aristo-
the hope, that when once they had ceased to be
Sind bad submitted to a domestic tyrant, tli^

170 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1S6^.

would soon prefer a great to a little princej and throw
themselves into his arms. The revolution, which in
1333 had favoured the emperor in restoring power to
the Raspanti, facilitated this project.

In pursuance of this view, the party of the Raspanti, at
the suggestion of the Viscontis, in 1357 began to disturb
the Florentines in the enjoyment of the franchises secured
to them at Pisa by the treaty of peace. The Floren¬
tines, guessing the project of the Lombard tyrant, instead
of defending their right by arms, resolved on braving an
unwholesome climate, and submitting to the inconveni¬
ence of longer and worse roads, transported all their
counting-houses to Telamone, a port in the maremma of
Sienna. They persisted till ISfil in despising all the
insults of the Pisans, as well as in rejecting all their
offers of reconciliation: at length, animosity increasing on
both sides, the war broke out, in 1S6'2. The Viscontis
supplied the Pisans with soldiers. France during this
period had been laid waste by the war with the English;
and as the sovereigns were rarely in a state to pay their
troo^, there had been formed, as in Italy, companies of
adventurers, English, Gascon, and French, who liveA at
the cost of the country, plundering it with the utmost
barbarity. The peace of Bretigny permitted several of
these companies to pass into Italy : they carried with
them the plague, which made not less ravages in 1361
than it had done in 1348. The English compafty
commanded by John Hawkwood, an adventurer, who
rendered himself celebrated in Italy, was sent to the
Pisans by Barnabas Visconti. After various successes, the
two republics, at last exhausted by the plague, and by the
rapacity, and want of discipline of the adventurers whom
they had taken into pay, made peace on the 17th of
August, 1364. But the purpose of the Viscontis was
not the less attained. The Pisans having exhausted
their resources, were at a loss to make the last payment
of 30,000 florins to their array; they were reduced to
accept the offer made them by Giovanni Agnello, one of
their fellow citizens, of advancing that sum, on condi-

1365. DANGER OF FLORENCE. 171^

tion of being named doge of Pisa. The money had
for this purpose been secretly advanced by Barnabas
Visconti, to whom Agnello had pledged his word never
to consider himself more than his lieutenant at Pisa.
Thus the field fertilised by liberty became continually
more circumscribed; and Florence, always threatened by
the tyrants of Lombardy, saw around her those only who
had alienated their liberty, and who had no longer any
sentjpient in common with the republic.

CHAP. VIIL

THE FLORENTINES SUMMON THE CITIES BELONGING TO THE

STATES OF THE CHORCH TO RECOVER THEIR LIBERTY. - GREAT

WESTERN SCHISM. —WAR OF CHIOZZA. -INSURRECTIONS OF

THE rOi’ULACE AGAINST THE CITIZENS. — CONaUESTSGIAN
GALEAZZO VISCONTI, DUKE OF MILAN. -HIS DEATH.

The chief magistrates of the Florentine republic could
not conceal from themselves the danger which now
menaced the liberty of Italy. They found themselves
closed in, — blockaded, as it were,—by the tyrants, who
daily made some new progress. The two brothers Vis¬
conti, masters of Lombardy, had at their disposal im¬
mense wealth and numerous armies; and their ambition
was insatiable. They were allied, by marriage, to the
two houses of France and England : their intrigues ex¬
tended throughout Italy, and every tyrant was under
their protection. At the same time, their own subjects
trembled under frightful cruelties. They shamelessly
published an edict, by wliich the execution of state cri¬
minals was prolonged to the period of forty days. In it
the particular tortures to be inflicted, day by day, were
detailed, and the members to be mutilated designated,
before death was reached. On the other hand, thdr

^172 HISrOBY OP THE ITALIAN KEPUBLICS. 1368.

finances were in good order j they liberally recompensed
their partisans, and won over traitors in every state ini¬
mical to them. They pensioned the captain of every
company of adventurers, on condition that he engaged to
return to their service whenever called upon. Meanwhile,
these captains, with their soldiers, over-ran, plundered,
and exhausted Italy, during the intervals of peace ;
reducing the country to such a state as to be incapable of
resisting any new attack. All the Ghibelines, alV the
nobles who had preserved their independence in the
Apennines, were allied to the ViscontiSi. The march of
these usurpers was slow, but it seemed sure. The mo¬
ment was foreseen to approach when Tuscany would be
theirs, as well as Lombardy; particularly as Florence had
no aid to expect either from Genoa or Venice. These
two maritime republics appeared to have withdrawn
themselves from Italy, and to place their whole existence
in distant regions explored hy their commerce.

For a moment, the few Italian states still free were
led tmbelieve that the succour, now so necessary, to en¬
able tn§tn to resist the Viscontis, would arrive both from
France and Germany. The pope and the emperor an¬
nounced their determination to deliver the country, over
which they assumed a supreme right, from every other
yoke. Urban V., moved by the complaints of the Christian
world, declared that his duty, as bishop of Rome, was
to return and live there; and Charles IV. protested that
he would deliver his Roman empire from the devasta¬
tions of the adventurers, and from the usurpations of
the Lombard tyrants. In 1367, Urban returned to
Italy ; and the same year formed a league with the em¬
peror, the king of Hungary, the lords of Padua, Fer¬
rara, and Mantua, and with the queen of Naples, —
against the Viscontis. But when Charles entered Italy,
on the 5th of May, 1368, he thought only of profiting
by the terror with which he inspired the Viscontis, to
obtain from them large sums of money ; ^ in return for
which he granted them peace. He afterwards continued
his mardh through the peninsula, with no other olgect

1369- LUCCA KE8T0BED tO FBEBDOM. 17^

9

than that of collecting money. His presence, however,
caused some changes favourable to liberty. A festival
was prepared for him at Lucca, on the 7th of Septem¬
ber ; on which day he intended confirming, by his in.
vestiture, the sovereignty of the doge Gian Agnello
over Pisa and Lucca. But the stage on which Agnello
had mounted gave way, and in the fall he broke his leg.
The Pisans profited by this accident to recover their
freedom, and the emperor kept Lucca for himself. At
Sienila, he favoured a revolution which overthrew the
ruling aristocracy’j intending, on hi^ return to that city,
after a devotional visit to Rome, to take advantage of
the disturbance, and get himself appointed to the signo-
ria : but a sedition against him broke forth on the 18th
of January, 1369- Barricades were raised on all sides;
his guards were separated from him, and disarmed ; his
palace was broken into. No attempt, indeed, was made
on his person j but he was left alone several hours in the
public square, addressing himself in turn to the armed
troops which closed the entrance of every streijt and
which, immovable and silent, remained insensible to all
his entreaties. It was not till he began to suffer from
hunger, that his equipages were restored to him, and he
was permitted to leave the town. He returned to Lucca,
where he had already lived, in the time of his father, as
prince royal of Bohemia. The Lucchese were attached
to him, and placed in him their last hope to be delivered
from a foreign yoke, which had weighed upon them
since the year 1314. They declared themselves ready
to make the greatest sacrifices for the recovery of their
freedom ,• and they, at the same time, testified to him so
much confidence and aflPection as to touch his heart. By
a diploma, on the 6th of April, 1369, Charles restored
them to liberty, and granted them various privileges; but,
on quitting their city, he left in it a German garrison,
with orders not to evacuate that town till the Lucchese
had paid thcprice of their liberty. It was not till the
month of April, 1370, and not without the aid of Flo¬
rence and their other allies, that they could acquit the

[T74 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN HEPOBLICS. 1370.

enormous sum of 300,000 florins, the price of the re¬
establishment of their republic. The Guelph exiles
were then immediately recalled; a close alliance was
contracted with Florence; and the signoria, composed
of a gonfalonier and ten anziani, to be changed every two
months, was reconstituted.

Urban V., on his arrival in Italy, endeavoured also to
oppose the usurpations of the Viscontis, who had just
taken possession of San Miniato, in Tuscany, and rvho,
even in the states of the church, were rendering themselves
mere powerful thaji, the pope himself.' Of the two bro¬
thers, Barnabas Visconti was more troublesome to him,
by his intrigues. Urban had recourse to a bull of ex-
communication, and sent two legates to bear it to him;
but Barnabas forced these two legates, to eat, in his pre¬
sence, the parchment on which the bull was written, to¬
gether with the leaden seals and silken strings. The
pope, frightened at the thought of combating men who
seemed to hold religion in no respect, and wearied,
mor^j^r, with his ill successes, was glad to return to
the repose of Avignon, where he arrived in the month of
September, 1370; and died the November following.

Gregory XI., who succeeded him, was ambitious, co¬
vetous, and false. He joined the Florentines in their war
against the Viscontis; but the legates,to whom he had
entrusted the government of the ecclesiastical states, and
who had rendered themselves odious by their rapacity
and immorality, formed the project of seizing for them¬
selves Tuscany, which they had engaged to defend. AH
the troops of the Florentines had been placed at their
disposal, for the purpose of carrying the war into
Lombardy. The cardinal legate, who commitnded the
combined army, resided at Bologna ; the church having
rescued that city from the grasp of Visconti da’ Oleggio,
on the 31st of March, 1360. He signed a truce with
Barnabas Visconti, in the month of June, 1375; and>
before the Florentines could recall their ..soldiers, sent
John Hawkwood with a formidable army Xo surprise
Florence. The Florentines, indignant at such a ehame^

1375. THE WAB OF LIBEBTF. 175^

less want of good faith on the part of the church, whose
most faithful allies they had always been, vowed yen.
geance on the see of Rome. They determined to rouse
the spirit of liberty in every city belonging to it, and
drive out the French legftes, — more odious and perfi¬
dious than the most abhorred of the Italian tyrants.
They/in the month of June, 1375, without placing any
confidence in Barnabas Visconti, made an alliance with
him ajainst the priests, who had just deceived them under
the faith of the .most solemn oaths. They admitted the
republics of Siennj, Lucca, and Fis^nto this league;
they formed a commission of eight persons, to direct the
military department, called “ the eight of war ; ” they
assembled a numerous army, and gave it colours, on
which was inscribed, in golden letters, the word li¬
berty.” This army entered the states of the church,
proclaiming that the Florentines demanded nothing for
themselves, — that not only would they make no con¬
quests, but would accept dominion ot'er no people who
might offer themselves : they were desirous ot^ of
universal Uberty,—and would assist the oppressed with
all their power, solicitous for the recovery of their free¬
dom.

The army of liberty carried revolution into all the
states of the church with an inconceivable rapidity;
eighty cities and towns, in ten days, threw off the yoke
of the legates. dThe'greater number constituted them¬
selves republics ; a few recalled the ancient families of
princes, who had been exiled by Egidio Albornoz, and to
whom they were attached by hereditary affection.' Bo¬
logna did not accomplish her revolution before the 20th
of March, 1376. This ancient republic, in recovering
its liberty, vowed fidelity to the Florentines, to whom it
owed the restoration of its freedom. The legates, beside
themselves with rage, endeavoured to restrain the people
by terror. John Hawkwood, on the 29th of March,

1376, delivered up Faenza to a frightful military execu¬
tion : 4000 persons were put to death, property pillaged,
and women violated. The pope, not sotii^ed with anbli

17^ HtSTOKY » TKE ETAitAir >157®!.'

rigour, sent Rob^t of Greneva, anotber cardinalieg;sttf;
into Italy, with a Breton company of adventurer*,
considered as the most fefocious of eiU those trained to
Blunder by the wars of France. The new legate -fi-eated
Cesena, on the 1st of Februai^, 137T, with stW greater
hdroaHty. He was heard to calf out, during the ma»>
sacre,. ** I will have more blood ! — kill aB ! —Jblood,
blood!" * Gregory XI. at last feU tiie necessity of
returning to Italy, to appease the universal revolt. He
entered Rome on the 17th’of January, %377 i almough
the Florentines, ^o had sent the stiuidard ofdiberty to
the senators and wnnerets of Rome, and had made alli¬
ance with the Romans, expostulated on the danger they
incurred, if they admitted the pontiff within their
walls.

The two parties, however, began to be equally weary
of the war. Some of the cities enfranchised by the Flo¬
rentines were already detached from the league. The
Bolognese had made, on the 21st of August, 1377, a
separate peace with the pope, who had agreed to acknow-
ledg^heir republic. Barnabas Visconti carried on with
the holy see secret negotiations, in w^uch he offered to
sacrifice to the church his ally, the republic of Florence.
This republic was then pressed for its consent to the
opening of a congress for restoring peace to Italy, to be
held at Sarzana, in the beginning of the year 1378 : the
presidency of the congress was given^to Barnabas Vis¬
conti. The conference had scarcely opened when the
Florentines perceived, with more indignation than sur¬
prise, that the Lombard tyrant, who had fought in. conv
cert with them, intended that they should pay . to him
and to the pope the whole expenses of the war.^ The,,
negotiations took the most alarming turn, when ^ un¬
expected news arrived of the death of Gregory XL, on
the 27th of March, 1378 j and the congress separate^,,
without coming to any decision. The year which nqw.
opened |ras destined to bring with it the post important
revolutions throughout Italy. Amidst those convul-
sions, the Msoe of Florey with the court of Rom^,

'.COIEAT ECHlan OF THE tW£BT. 177

woikeBed by the great'.western schism, was not difficult
tb'Acconiplish.

The pontifical chmr had been transferred to France
^ee the year 1505. Its exile from Italy lasted
seventy-lltree years. Tht Christian rtorld, France ex¬
cepted, had col|ti|eted it a scandal; but the French
kings ^oped by it . to retain the popes in their depend,
ence ; and the French cardinals, who formed more than'
three fourths of the sacred college„seemed determined to
preset^ the pqjj^tifical power in their nation. They
were, howewer, tliwsftted in this intent^ by the death of
Gregory XI. at Rome; — for the conclave must always
assemble where the last jDontiff dies. The clamour of the
Romans, and the manifestation of opinion throughout
Christendom, were not without influence on the con-
/;lave. On the 8th of April, 1578, it elected — not,
indeed, a Roman, whom the people demanded; but an
Italian,—Bartolomeo Prignani; who, having lived long
in France, seemed formed to conciliate the prejudices
of both parties. He was considered learned and
The cardinals ha^ not, however, calculated on the de.
velopement of the passions which a sudden elevation
sometimes gives; or on the degree of impatience, arro¬
gance, and irritability of which man is capable, in his
unexpected capacity of master, though in an inferior
situation he had appeared gentle and modest. The new
pope, who took the name of Urban VI., became so vio¬
lent and despotic, so confident in himself, and so con¬
temptuous of others, that he soon quarrelled with all his
cardinals. They left him; assembled again at Fondi;
and, on the 9 th of August, declared the holy see vacant;
asserting that their previous election was null, having
been forced by their terror of the Romans. Conse.
quently, on the 20th of September, they elected another
pope. Their choice, no better than the former, fell on
Robert, cardinal of Geneva, who had presided at the
massacre of Cessna: he- took the name of Clement VII.
He was protected by queen Joan, with whom Urban had
already quarrelled. Clement established h^p court at

17S HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1376-

Naples ; but an insurrection of the people made him
quit it the year followings and determined him on return¬
ing, with his cardinals, to Avignon. Urban VI., mean,
while, deposed, as schismatics, all the cardinals who had
elected Clement, and replaced'them by anew Mid more
numerous college; but he agreed no better with these
than with their predecessors. He accused theip of a
conspiracy against him; he caused many to be put to
the torture in his presence, and while he recited hk bre¬
viary ; he ordered others to be throwp^nto the^sea in
sacks, and drowjjed j he quarrelled" with the Romans,
and the new sovereign of Naples, whom he had himself
named; he paraded his incapacity and rage through all
Italy j and finally took refuge at Genoa, where he died,
on the 9tli of November, 1389- The cardinals who ac¬
knowledged him named a successor on his death, as the
Trench cardinals did afterwards on the death of Cle¬
ment VII., which took place on the l6th of September,
1394!. The church thus found itself divided between
two popes and two colleges of cardinals, who reciprocally
an^idmatised each other. Whilst die catholic faith
was thus shaken, the temporal sovere!|;nty of the pope,
founded by the conquests of the cardinal Albornoz, was
overthrown. Several of the cities enfranchised by the
Florentines in the war of liberty, preserved their re¬
publican government ; but the greater number, parti¬
cularly in Romagna, fell again under the yoke of petty
tyrants.

The part which Joan of Naples had taken in the
schism, by protecting what the orthodox called the revolt
of Robert of Geneva and the cardinals, awakened the re¬
sentment which Louis of Hungary still entertained for the
murder of her first husband ; she had since suceessively
married three others, without having a child: her na¬
tural heir was the last prince of the race of Charles of
Anjou, named Charles da Durazzo, the grandson of king
Robert's brother, and cousin to the king,of Hungary, at
whose court he had been brought up. The aged Louis,
learning that Urban VI. had excommunicated and de-

1378. WAR OP CHIOZZA. 179

•

posed Joan, charged Charles da Durazzo to execute the
sentence. He entrusted him with an army, with which
the young prince traversed Italy, without meeting any
resistance; he entered Naples on the l6th of July,

1381, and proclaimed himself king, under the name of
Charles IIL The queen, who could not arm a single
person in her defence, was constrained to surrender to
him five weeks afterwards. After detaining her nine
months^ in prison, he caused her to he smothered
under a feather bed. Louis of Hungary did not long
survive this revolution: he died on the l^th of September,

1382, leaving heiress to his dominions a daughter, with

whom Charles da Durazzo soon disputed the crown of
Hungary. The emperor Charles IV. had died before
Louis, at Prague, on the 29th of November, 1378, and
had been succeeded by his son, the debauched'VVenceslaus^
About the same period (1380) the crown of France
had passed to a minor, Charles VI., who afterwards be¬
came mad. Italy had little to fear from abroad; the
danger sprang up in her own bosom. ^ ^

The republics of Venice and Genoa, on every occa¬
sion mutually opposed, regarded each other as rivals.
The Genoese carried on a considerable commerce in
Cyprus, hut had excited there the resentment of the
people, who in 1372 rose, and at a public festival mas¬
sacred aU the Genoese on whom they could lay hands.
The republic avenged this outrage committed on its ci¬
tizens; and in 1373 conquered the isle of Cyprus: but,
using its victory with moderation, restored the island
in fief to the house of Lusignan. The Venetians, not¬
withstanding, offered their alliance to the Cypriots, and
in 1378 they, in concert, besieged the Genoese at Fa-
magosta. In the many quarrels of the Venetians with
Louis of Hungary, and with Francesco da Carrara, lord
of Padua, they had always found the Genoese siding
with their adversaries. The two republics finally attached
themselves to the two opposite factions which disputed
the remains of the empire of Constantinople, now arrived
Bt its last term. Mutual animosity went on continually

180 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1379-

increasing. At last the Venetian and Genoese fleets met
before Antiumj in the month of July, 1378. They
attacked each other in the height of a tempest; and the
Genoese were vanquished. It was the first battle of a
fearful vrar: Lucian Doria was charged, in the month
of May, 1379, to avenge the Genoese. Having entered
the Adriatic, on the 29th of that month he met the
Venetian fleet, commanded by Vittor Pisani, before Pola.
Lucian was killed early in the engagement; but tlpit only
served to redouble the animosity of the Genoese; and tlie
Venetian fleet wap almost annihilated. The senate tlirew
Vittor Pisani, the greatest admiral the republic ever had,
into prison, to punish him for a disaster which would
have been avoided had his counsel been taken; for he
had given battle by the express o^der of the senate, con-
^ary to his own judgment. Pietro Doria, who sue.
iHeded Lucian in the command of the Genoese fleet,
arrived on the 6th of August, to attack the canal or port
of Chiozza, twenty-five miles south of Venice. It is
onC^of numerous openings which cut the Aggere, or
long hank formed by nature between the Lagune and
the sea. Francesco da Carrara sent at the same time a
flotilla of Paduan boats, to attack in rear the Venetians,
who defended this opening. The port of Chiozza was
forced, and the town taken, on the 1 6 th of August. Chiozza,
like Venice, is in the bosom of the Lagune. The Genoese
fleet, having arrived thus far, could pass up to the canals
of Venice. Never had the republic been in such im¬
minent danger; never had she ofiered to purchase
peace by greater or more humiliating sacrifices. But
the Genoese, the king of Hungary, and the lord of
Padua, rejected all advances ; Pietro Doria declared that
he would not make peace, before he had bridled, with
his own hand, the bronze horses in the square of
St. Mark (the same which have since been seen in
the Place du Carrousel at Paris). The Venetians, driven
to the last extremity, redoubled their patieotic exertions:
they arew Vittor Pisani from his dungeon, to place him
in the command of a new fleet; they shut their canals

IS80. DEFEAT OF THE GENOESE. 181

•

with stockades; they recalled their many vessels dispersed
in the Levant, and gave the command of them to Carlo
Zeno, another of their greatest citizens. The defence
of Venice was, notwithstanding, so far doubtful, that
the signoria had made preparations to remove to Candia
on the first reverse of fortune.

On the 1st of January, 1380, Carlo Zeno arrived
with the fleet which he had collected in the eastern
seas ;%he Venetians, instead of waiting to be besieged,
proposed blockading the Genoese fleet in the Laguna of
Chiozza, into which it had so victoriously entered.
They succeeded in first shutting the canal of Chiozza,
and afterwards all the other ports or canals which cut
the Aggere; each of these advantages was, however,
purchased by an obstinate battle. Forty-eight gaUeys,
and 14,000 Genoese mariners or soldiers, were shutja
at Chiozza; but they were not abandoned by them
country : it sent a new fleet into the Adriatic for their
deliverance, while the lord of Padua made the utmost
exertions to open a communication with them., ^She
Venetians, always investing the besieged still closer,
succeeded in avoiding the battle continually offered
them. The Genoese at last perceived that there was
no possibility of saving their galleys; they constructed
boats, in which they intended to escape, and gain the
fleet which awaited them in the high seas. The mo¬
ment these boats were transported to the sea-shore, they
were attacked and burnt by the Venetians. Deprived
of all resource, and pressed by famine, the Genoese
at last surrendered at discretion, on the 21st of June,
1380. Notwithstanding this great reverse of fortune,
Genoa was not cast down. The Venetians, hard pressed
by land, were obliged to abandon Treviso, and shut
themselves up anew in XhAtLagune. But the two re¬
publics, equally exhausted by the war, were glad to sign,
on the 8th of August, 1381, a treaty of peace, which
re-established' their former relations, nearly as they
stood before it commenced. The treaty of peace with
the king of Hungary was more disadvantageous to tike
N 3

1B2 HISTORY OP- THR ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1378.

I

Venetians: they ceded to him the whole of Dalmatia;
but as he died the year following, they took advantage
of the embarrassment into which his daughter was
thrown, to recover their possessions in that province.

The discord which had so long fermented in Flo¬
rence between the higher citizens who administered the
government, and the lower orders, who demanded a
more complete equality, broke out in 1378 ; a year
fruitful in events to Italy. The form of the Florentine
constitution was entirely democratic, the only sovereign
was the people ; the nobles and the Ghibelines were
excluded from all participation in the government; but
a perfect equality appeared to exist in the rest of the
nation, which was rendered more complete by the
citizens being called by lot to the highest dignities in

» e state. Nevertheless, if government is instituted
r the good of all, to invest all indiscriminat^y with
power, would be very far from obtaining that good, the
object of the common effort. Education, and the lei-
BStte )vhich gives time for reflection, are two conditions
equally necessary to man, in order to attain the com¬
plete developement of his understanding, and the know¬
ledge, if ever he should arrive at the administration of
public affairs, of what would constitute the happiness
of all. Those who have not learnt to think, those to
whom manual labour leaves no time for meditation, ought
not to undertake the guidance of their fellow-citizens,
by entering the difficult career of government. There
was at Florence, as there is fvery where, a distinction
to be made between families whose fortune gives them
the means of intellectual improvement, and those who,
to live, are obliged to devote themselves to mere labour,
so much calculated to render the faculties of the
mind obtuse. This distinction was marked by the
division of citizens into twenty-one corporations of arts
and trades; the seven higher arts were distinguished
by the name of arti maggiori. In tho® alone the ma¬
gistrates were always chosen; and they comprehended
families sometimes so enriched by commerce as to rival

1378.

DISCORD IN' FliORENCE.

183

• t

princes in magnificence: they ■were designated by the
ne'w appellation of nobili popolani, nobles of tlie people,
and produced men distinguished in the government of
the republic for as much virtue as talent.

There was, however, a want of union among these
great families ; they had been divided between the two
parties, which were at first headed by the Albizzi and
Ricci : the Albizzi were among the number of those
families which the same revolution that drove out the
Ghibelines had, for more than a century, placed at the
head of the repuClic. They made it a part of their
religion to maintain the Guelph party in all its purity,
and they caused the law of admonition, which excluded
from the magistracy every descendant of the ancient
Ghibelines, and under that pretext every mw man, to
be executed in all its rigour. Their faction, then, WL
essentially aristocratic. The Ricci, and with them
Scali, Strozzi, Alberti, and the Medici, had attained later
their immense opulence. The name of Medici was
never pronounced before the middle of this cenQijy:
their adversaries profited by the obscurity oY meir
origin, to pretend that their ancestors were Ghibelines.
The interest of new families led them to support demo¬
cratic opinions, and to demand that the distinction
between Guelph and Ghibeline, which no longer related
to any thing real, should be annihilated. The com¬
mission of eight, for the department of war, which had
directed, with such courage and ability, the attack on
the holy see, were all of the Ricci faction. In arming
the republic against the* church, it appeared as if they
had made it adopt all the principles of the Ghibelines ;
hut when the citizens, impatient of the weight of taxes,
began to sigh for peace, the Albizzi took advantage of
their discontent, to revive against their adversaries the
accusation of Ghibelinism. They even intended, under
this pretext, to exclude them from their country. The
increasing ill-will between the two factions made it
obvious that the quarrel must soon break out. iVhen
Salrestro de Medici was, in the month of June, 1378,

N 4

184 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1378.

made by lot gonfaloner, he proposed a law to suspend
the proceedings called admonition, which theAlbizzi di¬
rected against his party. The college or little council
of the signoria rejected it, as too favourable to the Ghi-
belines. Salvestro appealed, on the 18th of June, to a
council of the people, and afterwards to the people
themselves. Violent indignation was immediately ma¬
nifested against this small oligarchy, which, under
pretext of maintaining the ancient Guelph par^'in all
its purity, had branded so many honpurable names with
exclusion, had encouraged divisions in a republic to
which union was necessary, and had thrown doubts on
the civic rights of half Florence. The law proposed by
Salvestro de’ Medici passed by an immense majority.

But this first victory awakened more violent disputes

t on the rights and equality of the citizens ; on the pri-
Bges of the nobili popolani; on the artifices by which
they reserved among themselves the nomination to the
magistracies ; on the prerogatives of the major in oppo-
sitiifet ^0 the minor arts; and upon the dependent con¬
dition of the numerous artificers who must range under
the banner of the major arts, without being permitted to
form themselves into a corporation, or to enjoy any of the
advantages attached to these associations. The Ittw which
the Medici had just carried, provided only that no new
family should be excluded from the magistracies under
the pretext that their ancestors were Ghibelines. The
people soon demanded that those who had previously
been excluded by the admonition should be reinstated
in all their rights; that the minor arts should be ad¬
mitted to furnish members for the magistracies in the
same proportion as the major arts ; finally, that three
new corporations should be formed, to include workmen,
dyers, weavers, fullers, and others employed in the
woollen trade. These men, belonging to the vtoollen
ort^having no participation in the government, regarded
themselves as excluded from every politicaf right. They
formed a numerous portion of the population at Flo¬
rence, ctdled in derision by the name of eiompi. The

1378. §EDirlON OP THE CIOHPI. 185

•

signoria, so far from yielding to these demands, reckoned
on restraining the people by terror; on the 20th of July
they caused one of the chiefs of the ciompi to be put to
the torture, as having been found guilty of a plot against
the state; but this only proved a signal, for explosion.
The ciompi, and all the poorer classes of artisans, flew
to arms. The signoria called the urban guard to their
aid ; but those dared not assemble. On the 22d of July
the citmpi laid siege to the palace of the ppdestu, and
took it on the 23d; they attacked and made’themselves
masters also of the palace of the signoria; at that mo¬
ment a carder of wool, named Michele Lando, in a
short waistcoat and barefooted, marched at the head of
the people, carrying in his hand the gonfalon of the
state, which he had seized in the palace of the podesta:
an acclamation suddenly resounded from the crowd wh^
followed him, proclaiming him gonfaloner. During th*
three preceding days, the populace, masters of the city,
had committed many crimes and disorders; but they
had no "sooner given a new chief to the state, than
chief thus chosen laboured, with admirable courage and
capacity, to restore order and peace. He ordained that
for tlie future the supreme magistracy should be com¬
posed of three members of the m^ or .arts, three of the
minor, and three of the ciompi. He put an immediate
end to pillaging, burning, and every other disorder.
He restored authority to the tribunals, security to the
citizens; and exhibited by his own example how much
a free government spreads sound sense and elevated
sentiments among even the lowest classes of society. The
ciompi, it is true, did not long submit to a government
which they had themselves created. They rose anew ;
but Michele Lando vigorously attacked and vanquished
them; a vast number were exiled from the city.

The popular party, however, is near its defeat when
the moderate chiefs are forced to subdue the spirit
of the more ttrdent. Frightened at some blamable
excesses committed by their partisans, they deprive
themselves of all vigour in order to suppress them; th^y

186 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1382.

disarm those by whose strength they have conquered;
they distrust their friends, and confide in their enemies.
A man of the lower order had vanquished the anarchists
whom no other than himself could have subdued: but
immediately afterwards, Florence blushed to have en¬
trusted so much power to a man of his class; and on
the next drawing of lot for the magistracy, the three
ciompi drawn for the priori were not permitted to sit
in the signoria. Giorgio Scali, Salvestro de’ Me^ci, and
Benedetto Alberti were placed at the head or the re¬
public : although belonging themselves to the aristocracy,
they were the enemies of that order. On discovering
a plot of the Albizzi, their ancient rivals, to effect a
revolution, with the aid of the troops of Charles III.
king of Naples, which then traversed Tuscany, they
caused men who had so long administered the republic
with glory to die on the scaffold. Thfe public, not¬
withstanding the confession of the accused, were not con¬
vinced that they were really guilty, or justly punished.
Sut division soon sprang up in the new administration;
some, no longer fearing any rival, insolently ibnsed
their power. Giorgio Scali, learning that one of his
creatures, accused of bearing false witness, was in the
prison of the captain of the people, who prosecuted him,
forced the palace of that judge, on the 13th of January,
1382, at the head of a troop of armed men ; gave it up
to pillage; and set its prisoner free. Benedetto Alberti,
who had always acted honestly, and in the principles of
an austere republican, was indignant at the conduct of
his ancient associate. He summoned the people to
avenge the insulted honour of the tribunals: for that
purpose, he made advances to the major arts and the
party of the Albizzi. Giorgio Scali was placed at the
bar, and received sentence of death, which was imme¬
diately executed. The aristocracy felt, meanwhile, that
it had recovered power. On the 21st of January, the
city rose at the cry of " Long live the Guelph party !”
The nobles, the rich merchants, and the higher citizens
comprehended in the major arts, took possession of the

1382.

NEW PACTIONS AT OENOA.

187

public places, created a halia, or supreme commission,
to reform the state; abolished all the laws which had
arisen from the revolution, or the tumult of the ciompi’;
exiled Michele Lando, Benedetto Alberti, and all those
who had in any way signalised themselves in the in¬
surrection ; and, finally, reconstituted the aristocracy
of the nohili popolani more firmly than it had ever yet
stood.

Similar revolutions broke out at the same time in the
other Italian republips: in every one the same progresswas
to be distinguished. The party which in all had risen
to power, as democratic, no sooner felt themselves in
possession of it than they turned towards aristocracy.
The leaders of the rising generation presented them¬
selves as hereditary tribunes of the people, at the same
time that they impugned hereditary rights. At Genoa,
men of new families completely usurped from the
ancient houses of Doria, Spinola, Grimaldi, and Fieschi,
all power in the government; and ranged themselves,
soon after the middle of the century, under the stjndsBd
of two plebeian families,— the one named Adomi,
and Guelphs ; the other Fregosi, and Ghibelines.
IVhile they proclaimed their hatred of the aristocracy,
and their determination not to allow the doge to be
taken from a noble family, they combated for the Adorni
and Fregosi, with the same enthusiasm and spirit of client-
elage with which their ancestors had fought for a Doria or
a Fiesco. The ruinous civil wars into which the republic
was precipitated by the rivalry between these two fami¬
lies, add the fear that the Viscontis might profit by these
troubles to enslave it, at last determined Antoniotto
Adomi, the doge, in 1396, to confer, on the 26th of
October, the signoria on Charles VI. king of France, in
the hope that a distant monarch might lend the support
of his name to the government, without having either
the power or the inclination materially to injure the
liberty of the republic.

At Sienna, after the nobles had been excluded from
the magistiiicies, several plebeian aristocracies succeeded

188 BISTORT OF* THE ITALIAN BEPUBLICS. 1382.

each other. The signoria^ composed of nine members,
renewed every two months, had found means of reserv.
ing to themselves the nomination of those hy whom they
were to be replaced. From that time, the election ran
among not more than ninety families of rich merchants,
who, from 1283 to 1355, remained the real rulers of
the republic. This first burgher aristocracy was called
“ the order,” or “ monte,” of “ nine." The jealousy it
excited in the rank next below it caused the revolution,
which Charles IV. encouraged, in the hope of becoming
master of Sienna, on his first passage through that city.
The Nine, like the nobles, were excluded from all parti¬
cipation in the government. It was agreed to replace
them by a popular magistracy of twelve members,
chosen from the burghership ; but these men were no
sooner in power, than, affecting to observe an exact me¬
dium between the aristocracy just excluded and the de¬
mocracy whose invasion they feared, they created an
order or monte of twelve, out of those burgher families
wbo aspired only to a respectable mediocrity. This
order, once in possession of the magistracy, became not'
less exclusive than its predecessors, and consequently
not less odious. 'VThen Charles returned in 1368, for
the second time, to Sienna, the twelve were deprived
of power; and a third order was created, named “ the
reformers,” taken from among the classes inferior in
wealth and education to the monte of nine and of twelve.
This order did not, at first, usurp all the power of lie
republic, — it demanded only an equal partitiun";.^th
the other two; but soon betrayed irritation, because,
being by,far the most numerous, it had not the most
influence. ' Its pretensions often occasioned commo¬
tions, and changes in the' constitution, When the
ciompi seized the government at Florence, the reform¬
ers, who regarded themselves as holding the same rank
in life, made alliance with them ; but, frequently giving
way to sudden bursts of passion, they were accus^
of failing in good faith as well as pru^nge. They
were at length driven out of Sienna, on^e S4th of

1385.

GIAN’ QAIJEAZZO TlecbNTi. , , 189

•

March, 1385, after an obstinate battle between them
and the other orders of citizens, Four thousand were
pxiled ; and Sienna remained, from that time, weak¬
ened and shaken in her principles of liberty.

The terror in which the house of Visconti had held Flo¬
rence and the other Italian republics began somewhat to
subside. Barnabas, grown old, had divided the cities of
his dominions amongst his numerous children. His
brothej, Galeazzo, had died on the 4th of August, 1378;
and b^ replaced by his son, Gian Galeazzo, called
count de Virtue, frbm a county in Champagne, given
him by Charles V., whose sister he had married. Bar¬
nabas would willingly have deprived his nephew of his
paternal inheritance, to divide it among his children.
Gian Galeazzo, who had already discovered several plots
directed against him, uttered no complaint, but shut him¬
self up in his castle of Pavia, where he had fixed his re¬
sidence. He doubled his guard, and took pains to display
his belief that he was surrounded by assassins. He
affected, at the same time, the highest devotion : he wj^
always at prayers, a rosary in his hand, ,and surrounded
with monks ; he talked only of pilgrimages and expiatory
ceremonies. His uncle regarded him as pusillanimous,
and unworthy of reigning. In the beginning of May,
1385, Gian Galeazzo sent to Barnabas to say, that he
had made a vow of pilgrimage to our Lady of Varese,
near the Lago Maggiore; and that he should be glad to
see him on his passage. Barnabas agreed to meet him at
a short distance from Milan, accompanied by his two
sons, Gian Galeazzo arrived, surrounded, as was his
custom, by a numerous guard. He affected to be
alarmed at every sudden motion made near him. On
meeting his uncle, however, on the 6th of May, he
hastily dismounted, and respectfully embraced him ; but,
whUe he held him in bis arms, he said, in German, to.
his guards, '' strike ! ” The Germans, seizing Barnabas,
disarmed and dragged him, with his two sons, to some
distance from his nephew. Gian Galeazzo made several
tain attemp^to poison his uncle in the prison into

IpO HISTORY OF IBE ITALIAN REPUBLICS.

•which he had thrown him; but Barnabas, suspicious of
all the nourishment offered him, was on his guard, and
did not sink,under these repeated efforts tiU the 1.8th of
December of the same year.

All Lombardy submitted, without difficulty, to Gian
Galeazzo. His uncle had never inspired one human being
with either esteem or affection. The nephew had no
better title to these sentiments. False and pitiless, he
joined to immeasurable ambition a genius for enterprise,
and to immovable constancy a personal timidity which
he did not endeavour to conceal. The least unexpected
motion near him threw him into a paroxysm of nervous
terror. No prince employed so many soldiers to guard
his palace, or took such multiplied precautions of dis¬
trust. He seemed to acknowledge himself the enemy of
the whole world. But the vices of tyranny had not
weakened his ability. He employed his immense wealth,
without prodigality ; his finances were always flourish,
ing; his cities well garrisoned and victualled; his army
• 1 ^ paid; all the captains of adventure scattered
throughout Italy received pensions from him, and were
ready to return to his service whenever called upon. He
encouraged the warriors of the new Italian school: he
well knew how to distinguish, reward, and win their
attachment. Many young Italians, in order to train
themselves to arms, had, from about the middle of this
century, engaged in the German, English, and French
troops, which inundated Italy; and they soon proved,
that Italian valour, directed by the reflection and intel¬
ligence of a highly civilised nation, who carried their
arms as Veil as tactics to perfection, had greatly the
advantvgVover the brute courage of barbarians. Al-
beric, count of Barbiano, a Romagnole noble, and an
ancestor of the princes Belgiojoso, of M^an, formed a
company, under the name of St. George, into which he
admitted Italians only, and which, in 1378, he plac@lia
the service of Urban VI. This compa,ny def^ted, at
Fonte MoUe, that of the Bretons, attached to Cle¬
ment Vll^ and regarded as the most formidable of the

1386. DOWNFALL OF SCALA AND CARRARA. igl

>

foreign troops. From that time, the company of St.
George was the true school of military science in Italy.
Young men of courage, talent, or ambition.flocked into
it from all parts; and all the captains who, twenty years
later, attained such high renown, gloried in having
served in that company. ^

Gian Galeazzo was no sooner firmly established on
the throne of Milan, than he resumed his project of
subju^iing the rest of Italy : the two principalities of
the Scala at Verona, and of the Carrara at Padua,
were the first to tempt his ambition, The house of
La Scala had produced, in the beginning of the century,
some great captains and able politicians ; but their suc¬
cessors had been effeminate aijd vicious, — princes, who
hardly ever a|tained power without getting rid of their
brothers by poison or the dagger. The house of Carrara,
on the contrary, which gloried in being attached to the
Guelph party, produced princes who might have passed
for virtuous, in comparison with the other tyrants
of Italy. Fraitacesco da Carrara, who then rei^ed^^
his son and grandson, were men of courage, endued
with great capacities, and who knew how to gain the
affection of their subjects. The republic of Venice
neye#" pardoned Carrara his having made alliance against
h|r, with the Genoese and the king of Hungary. After
the death of the last named, Venice engaged Antonio
della Scala to attack Padua, offering him subsidies to aid
him in the conquest of that state. Carrara did all in his
pqiwr to be reconciled to the prince, his neighbour,
whom, in 1386, he repeatedly vanquished; as well a»
with the republic, — always ready to repaii^jffla losses
sustained by the lord of Verona. Unabl4 M^obtain
peace,' he was at last reduced to accept th^moffered
alliapce of Gi^ Galeazzo Visconti, who took Verona on
the ifth of October, 1387. Instead of restoring to
CarMOB the city of Vicenza, as he had promised, he
immediy^ly offered his assistance to the Venetians
against Padua: that republic was imprudent enough to

. jif TBB-

^ ' Vi.on the ^d of .^^Olnaialjer, 1388. A few (fays

Tie'^¥> was surrendered to him ; so wt?
of the lo^ of Milan’s dominions extend^

! edfee of tHae'Lt^une. He had no sooner planteil>
sji^ndard tnere^^than he menaced Venice, which had,
Ji^ipo unwiseJy'faeiUtated his conquests.,

An the rest of Lombardy was dependent on the lord
^ofAlilan. The marquis of Montferrat was brought up
at the gourt of Galeazzo, who governed his ^tes as
guardian of this young prince. Albert, inarqui/*d’Este,^
had, on the 26th of March, 1388, succeiled his brother
iq the Sovereignty of Ferrara, to the prejudice, .of his -
ijpephew Obizzo, whom he caused to be bdiead^ with'
dhis mother. He put to death by various revolting ex?- ..
cudons almost ah his relations, at the Aig^^dba of*
Gian Galeazzo, whose object was, by renderfnghim thu%.
odious to the people, to make the lord of Ferrara
that he had no other support than in him. Accq^#''
ing to the same infernal policy, Gian <^eazzo accused
^ wife of the lord of Mantua, daugbi^ of
,|^d his own cousin and sister-in-law, bf a. criminu m-,*
tercourse with her husband’s secretary, ‘ forged let.^
ters by which he made her appear guit^ conc%led
them in* her apartment, and afterwards ’pokitedf cmi:

‘ where diey were to be found to Francesco da Gionz’agi,',
who, in a paroxysm of rage, caused her to be bel^de^j
and the secretary to be tortured, and,afterwards''put t^'
death in 1390 ; it was not till after many years thit'h?;
discovered the truth. Thus all the princes of
were eidM^ubdued or in discredit for the crimes which
Viscoiu^^Bmade them commit, and by which h‘e beldt
them dependence; he then began to turn hU

attenti^Howards Tuscany. In the years 13^ asll
1389, the Florentines were repeatedly sArmed
attempts to take possession of Sienna, Ihsa, BoIopi^San
>Mbiiato, Cortona, and Perugia: not one attemiriULd'
''Pr.BUcceeded; but Florence saw her gt-owingpemger,
and wuweU aware that the tyrant had not yet attacked'
her, ouy^llpuse he reserved her^or his Iqat conqi^^

ISgO. TfAB pETWEEN AM) VlScajjTI.

The arrival at FloreniSe of PrMiciB II. of Ca^ra^
who came to offer hiS services and his hatred df Gian
Galeazzo to the republic, deteijpined the'Plor^tinies fo
have recourse to arms. The lord of Milm, in retleiMh^
the capitulation of Padua, had promised to givd'ih
compensation some* other sovereignty «o,the house at
Carrara; but he had either poisoned Francis I., or suf¬
fered him to perish in i)rison. Several attempts had
been n«<^e to assassinate Francis II. in the province of
Asti, whither he had been exiled. In spite of many
dapgers, he at last escaped, and fled into Tuscany,
taking his wife, then indisposed, with him. He left
her there, and passed into Germany, in the hopes of
exciting njew enemies against Gian Galeazzo; while the
Florentines made alliance with the Bolognese against the
:|ip:|l.t>f Milan, and placed their army under the command
OTsUohn Hawkwood, who ever afterwards remained in
thefr service. Carrara, seconded by the duke of Bavaria,
the son-in-law^ Barnabas, whose death the duke was
desirous of avenging, re-entered Padua on the 14th oF
June, 1.390, by the bed of the Brenta, and was received
with {^nthusiasm by the inhabitants, who regarded him
morels a fellow-citizen than a master. He ^covered
poJiession of the whqle inheritance of his ancestors.

■■ The extensive commerce of the Florentines had ac¬
customed them to include all Europe in their negoti¬
ations ; and, as they liberally applied their wealth to the
defeoce of their liberty, they easily found allies abroad.
After having called the duke of Bavaria from Germany,
in 1390, they in the year following sent ta|||||y)ce for
the count d’Armagnac with a formidable ar^^But the
G^rmi^s as well as the French found, win^^uonish-
ment that th^ could no longer cope witl^roe new
Itahai#militia, which had substituted military science
for tb^ routine of the transalpine soldier. Armagnac
was vapguished.and taken prisoner, on the 25th of July^
1391, by Giacomo del Verme; and died a few d»yg
afterwards. John Hawkwood, who, in tW hope of
jomipg him, had advwced far into Lombard with the

'f94f BIBTORT OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1392.
t. t> .

Florentine army, had great difficulty in leading it back
^ safety through plains inundated by the Adige. After
this campaign, the republic, feeling the want of repose,
made peace with Galeazzo, on the 28th of January,
1392 ; well knowing that it could place no trust in him,
and that this treaty was no security against his intrigues
and treachery.

These q^pectations were not belied; for one plot fol¬
lowed another in rapid succession. The Flra^ntines
about this time reckoned on the friei^dship of the Pisans,
who had placed at the head of their republic Pietro
Gambacorta, a rich merchant, formerly an exile at
Florence, and warmly attached to peace and liberty:
but he was old, and had for his secretary Jacopo Ap-
piano, the friend of his childhood, who Was "nearly of
his own age. Yet Galeazzo found means to seduce the
secretary: he instigated him to the assassination of
Gambacorta and his children, on the 2let of October,
1392. Appiano, seconded by the satellites furnished
hiSn by the duke of Milan, made himself master of Pisa:
but, after his death, his son, who could with difficulty
maintain himself there, sold the city to Gian Galeazzo,
in the month of February, 1399; reserving onlf the
principality of Piombino, which he transmitted t’o his
descendants. At Perugia, Pandolpho Baglione, chief,«f
the noble and Ghibeiine party, had, in 1390, put himself
under the protection of Gian Galeazzgt, who aided him in
changing the limited authority conferred on him into a
tyranny: but three years afterwards he was assassinated;
and the M^j^bUc of Perugia, distracted by the convulsions
of oppoilj|g*factions, was compelled to yield itself up to
Gian GAeaizo, on the 2l8t of January, 1400.

The^S^dtmans observed with jealousy the continually
increasing greatness of Visconti; whieffi appe^ed to
tli^ to annihilate the rights of the empire, and di:y up
the sources of tribute, on a partition of which theyWways
reckoned. They pressed Wenceslaus td make war on
Gian Gale^zo. But that indolent and sensual monarch,,
after som^threats, gave it to be understood that for

ISyS, QIAti OALEAZZOj l^UKE OF MILAN. l95

money he would willingly sanction the usurpations of
Gian Galeazzo: and, in fact, on the 1st of May, 1395,'
he granted him, for the sum of 100,000 florins, a diploma
which installed him duke of Milan and count of Pavia;
comprehending in this investiture twenty-six cities and
their territory, as far as the Lagune of^ Venice. These
were the same cities which, more than three centuries
before, had signed the glorious league of Lombardy. The
duchyF”^ Milan, according to the imperial bull, was to
pass solely to the legitimate male heir of Gian Galeazzo.
This concession of Wenceslaus caused great discontent
in Germany : it was one of the grievances for which the
diet of the empire, on the 20th of August, 1400, de¬
posed the emperor, and appointed Robert elector palatine
in his stead. Robert concluded a treaty of subsidy with
the Florentines, or rather entered into their pay, to
oppose Gian Galeazzo: but when, on the 21st of October,
1401, he met the Milanese troops, commanded by Jacopo
del Verme, not far from Brescia, he experienced, to his
surprise and discomfiture, how much the German
valry were inferior to the Italian. He was saved from a
complete defeat only by Jacopo da Carrara, who led a
body of Italian cavalry to his aid. Robert found it neces¬
sary to retreat, with disgrace, into Germany, after having
received from the Florentines an immense sum of money.

Gian Galeazzo Visconti continued his course of usurp¬
ation. In 1397, he attacked, at the same time, Francesco
da’ Gonzaga at Mantua, and the Florentines, without
any previous declaration of war. After having ravaged
Tuscany and the Mantuan territory, he consented, on
the 11th of May, 1398, to sign, under the gi^^antee of
Venice, a truce of ten years, during which period he
was to undertake nothing against Tuscany.' That,
however, did not prevent him, in 139.1), from taking
under his protection the counts of Poppi and Uhertini,
in the Apennines; or from engaging the republic of
Sienna to surrender itself to him, on the 11th of No¬
vember in the same year.

The plague broke out anew in Tuscany, and deprived

n o

196 HISTOBY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1400.

I '

the free states of all their remaining vigour. The ma¬
gistrates, on whose prudence and courage they relied,
in a few days sank under the contagion, and left free
scope to the poorest intriguer. This happened at
Lucca to the Guelph house of Guinigi, which had
produced many distinguished citizens, all employed in
the first magistracies. They perished under this disease
nearly about the same time. A young man of their
family, named Paulo Guinigi, undistinguishei^ V-ither
for talent or character, profited by tipis calamity, on the
14th of October, 1400, to usurp the sovereignty. He
immediately abjured the Guelph party, in which he
had been brought up, and placed himself under the
protection of Gian Galeazzo. At Bologna, also, the chief
magistrates of the repiublic were, in like manner, swept
away by the plague. Giovanni Bentivoglio, descended
from a natural son of that king Hensius so long pri¬
soner at Bologna, took advantage of the state of languor
into which the republic had fallen, to get himself pro-
eimmed sovereign lord, on the 27th of February, 1401.
He at first thought of putting himself under the protec¬
tion of the duke of Milan ; but Gian Galeazzo, coveting
the possession of Bologna, instead of amicably receiving,
attacked him the year following. Bentivoglio was de¬
feated at Casalecchio, on the 26th of .Tune, 1402. His
capital was taken the next day by the Milanese general,
he himself made prisoner, and two days afterwards put
to death. Another general of Galeazzo, in May, 1400,
took possession of Assisa: the liberty of Genoa, Pe¬
rugia, Sienna, Pisa, Lucca, and Bologna had, one after
the other,* fallen a sacrifice to the usurper. The Can-
cellieri, in the mountains of Pistoia, the Ubaldini, in
those of the Mugello, had given themselves up to the
duke of Milan. The Florentines, having no longer com¬
munications with the sea, across the territories of Sienna,
Pisa, Lucca, and Bologna, saw the sources of their
wealth and commerce dry up. Never had the republic
been in more imminent danger; when the plague, which
had so powerfully augmented its calamities, came to its

1402 .

DEATH OP GIAN GALEAZZO. 107

' »

aid. Gian Galeazzo Visconti was seized with it at his

castle of Marignano, in which he had shut himself up,
to be, as he hoped, secure from all communication with
man. He was carried off by the pestilence, on the
3d of September, 1402.

CHAP. IX.

ANARCHY IN THE DUCHY OF MILAN. -THE ^NETIANS MAKE

THE CONQUEST OF PADUA AND VERONA. -THE FLORENTINES

OF PISA. -FLORENCE, MENACED IN TURN BY LADISLAUS KINO

OP NAPLES AND FILIPPO MARIA VISCONTI, MAINTAINS AGAINST
THEM THE BALANCE OF ITALY.

The regeneration of liberty in Italy was signalised still
more, if it were possible, by the developement of tiys
moral than by that of the intellectual character of the
Italians. The sympathy existing among fellow-citizens,
from the habit of living for each other and by each
other,— of connecting every thing with the good of
aU, — produced in republics virtues which despotic states
cannot even imagine. Man must have a country, before
he can conceive the duty of sacrificing himself for it.
The arts of intrigue and flattery are recommendations
to a master; his favour is gained by encouraging
his vices; and, in his turn, he recompenses those who
serve him at the expense of morality, by dividing with
them his power. But to please the people, to rise by
the people, virtues must be exhibited to them, not
vices: the sympathy of all is gained only by that which
is most honourable in each. A popular assembly is
swayed only by an appeal to its virtues: even in
its errors, some frankness, probity, and generosity,
by which men sympathise together, are always to
be found; while, if a dark deed be but conceived, it is a
0 3

1 /f no

198 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS.

' secret carefully kept, with conscious shame, from every
eye—it would be easier to execute than to announce or
recommend it to the public. Tyrants act on men by
terror, corruption, venality, espionnage, envy. Free
governments can lead the people only by exciting their
more honourable passions. Eloquence, to move men in
masses, must make its appeals to honour, pity, justice,
and courage. Accordingly, how rich in virtues was
Italy in the twelfth century, when covered wif]i re¬
publics, and when every city simultaneously fodght for
liberty ! These virtues, the most precious of all treasures,
diminished with the progress of time, and in exact pro¬
portion with^^e diminution of free states. From the
moment a rniP entered one of those republics, he might
reckon with certainty on finding good faith in treaties
and negotiations ; zeal for the common advantage in all
Usances; courage and fortitude in adversity; an un¬
bounded liberality from the rich to the poor; in all
great calamities, an eagerness, in every one who had
jupperty, to devote it to the salvation of all; finally, an
energy' in the people to resist, by common exertion,
every act of injustice or violence. Even their excesses
arose most commonly from some virtuous indignation.
From the moment, on the contrary, that a man entered
the states of one of the tyrants of Lombardy or Ro.
magna, he found a government hostile to public opinion,
supporting itself only by perfidy and crime. Spies
watched and denounced every expression of generous
feeling; they insinuated themselves into families to
betray them; they abused the sacred ties of kindred,
home, and neighbourhood, to convert them into snares;
they made all feel that the wisdom of the subject con¬
sisted in distrusting every one, and not meddling in the
affairs of another. Assassination and poison were com¬
mon means of government. Every Italian tyrant was
stained with the blood of his kindred; paid murderers
despatched the objects of his suspicions; he outraged
public virtue, and could maintain order only by fear.
Death itself at length failing to inspire tenor, he com.

1403. Toeoline of freedom and virtue. 19y

billed with capital punishment protracted tortures, the
exhibition of which only rendered men more hardened
and fierce.

But the field of virtue in Italy contracted from age
to age, while that of crime enlarged itself. The in¬
habitants of the kingdom of Naples, from its foundation
in the twelfth century,—from the subjugation of the
three republics of Naples, Gaeta, and Amalfi,—had been
dead to every feeling of association, sympathy, or patriot¬
ism :*t'Aey had since that time been governed by a corrupt
court and nobility,'which offered examples only of vices.
In the thirteenth century, Lombardy also had been de¬
tached from the domain of liberty. I^ing the con¬
vulsions occasioned either by the violentfBfc the Guelph
and Ghibeline factions, or by the contempt of the nobles
for all law, every republic, in its turn, fell repeatedly
under the yoke of some tyrant; and, however short Uh
reign, it sufficed to familiarise the mind with violenW
instead of justice, and with the success of crime. At
the same time, the devotion of factions to their chie&
the reference of patriotism to party, and not' to the
common weal, perverted morality, and confounded the
rules of right and wrong.

In the fourteenth century it was still worse: power
in Lombardy had passed to those who made of it the
uses most destructive of public virtue. Men rose to
be princes by crime; their perfidy towards their neigh¬
bours, and their domestic treachery, marked the com¬
mencement and duration of every reign. Tyrants were
so numerous, so constantly under the observation of
every citizen, that their example was always operating
to corrupt the people. No father of a family could hide
from his children the fact, that the prince they must obey
had attained power only by betraying his friends or his
fellow-citizens, by poisoning or poniarding his uncle
or his brother. The states of the church exhibited not
fewer examples of the success of crime: every city of
Romagna, of the March, of the patrimony of St. Peter,
had its tyrant; and every tyrant reigned only to tread
0 4

^0 . ^BIETORy OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1403.

' undor foot every moral duty. Nay, more: Barnabas
and Gian Galeazzo Visconti had, in some sort, kept a
school of treachery for Tuscany and the states of the
church. They had always encouraged every usurp¬
ation ; and promised beforehand their alliance to who¬
ever could smother the voice of a free people, and seduce
them from the sway of morality to that of crime,

These causes of immorality, all which in Italy con¬
spired against public virtue, operated in the beginning
of the 15th century with redoubled force. Wlfcn Gian
Galeazzo unexpectedly died of the plague, in the height
of his successful career, he divided his estates between
his two song|j|fcGian Maria, then thirteen years of age,
whom he d^Bed duke of Milan; and Filippo Maria,
twelve years dd, whom he left count of Pavia. But, as
these princes were too young to reign, he recommended

t ;m to the condottieri in his service, whom he intro-
ced into the council as part of the regency: these
were the captains of that new militia which had so well
5gfved him in the accomplishment of his projects, and
in whom he placed the greatest confidence. The school
of Alberic Barbiano, which had formed such brave sol¬
diers and able generals, could not,in like manner, produce
good citizens and virtuous men; and Gian Galeazzo,
for the protection of his children, needed counsellors
guided by principles that would have stood in his
way as long as these men were his servants. Jacopo
del Verrae, Pandolpho Malatesta, Facino Cane, Ottobon
TerzOj and the other captains in whom he trusted,
were soldiers of fortune, who made of their valour a
trade of carnage and plunder; who, indifferent to what
was just or unjust, were ready to fight for whoever
would pay them, and to betra'y those for any other who
would pay them more. They did not long remain
faithful guardians to the trust which their master had
reposed in them. They shared it with Catherine, widow
of Gian Galeazzo, and with Francesco Barbavara, sup¬
posed to be her lover, and known to have commenced
his career as vaiet-de-chambre to the duke. Warriors

1403.

NEW TYRANTS ^IN LOMBAXqY. ' *r 2()1

disdained to obey a woman and her valet; the cTiiefs,
too, of the ancient parties in the cities which Visconti
nad*’subdued, rose with their partisans to recover the
sovereignty of their fathers. The condottieri resisted
them, but resisted them for themselves : Facino Cane
made himself tyrant at Alexandria ; Ottobon Terzo
at Farma ; Pandolpho Malatesta at Brescia. Amidst
this anarchy, the duchess Catherine believed herself
energetic in proportion as she was violent and cruel.
She cassed several Milanese nobles to be beheaded
without trial; she gave up many cities to be sacked by
the soldiers ; and thus only redoubled the hatred which
she excited; she was thrown into prison|||kre she died
by poison on the ifith of October, 1404 Francesco
Barbavara was obliged to fly. The rest of the duchy of
Milan was divided into as many principalities as the^
were cities. In some, it was the ancient chiefs of tlfl
Guelph or Ghibeline party who recovered power; in
others, the captain of adventure who happened to be in
garrison there : in several it was some daring yillaiv^
such as Giovanni da Vignate at Lodi, or Gabrino Fon-
dolo at Cremona, who, profiting by the friendship and
coniidence of some other usurper, assassinated him, and
took his place. Never, even in that country so fertile in
tyrants, was power stained with so many crimes.

Gian Maria Visconti, who had seen almost all the
cities svibdued by his father detached from his dominion,
still continued to bear the title of duke of Milan; while
his power, even in that city, passed from one ambitious
chief to another, and was at last assumed by Facino
Cane, one of tbe best generals of his father. All that
Gian Maria Visconti preserved of sovereign power was
an unbounded indulgence in every vice. His libertinism
would hardly have been remarked ; he was chiefly sig¬
nalised by the frightful pleasure which he sought in the
practice of cruelty. He was passionately devoted to the
chace; but such sports soon failed to quench his thirst
for cruelty. The tortures inflicted on mute animals, not
finding expression by speech, did not come up to hia

202 HISTOBV OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1403.

ferocious ideas of enjoyment. He therefore resolved to
substitute men for brute animals; and caused all the cri<
minals condemned by the tribunals to be given up to him
as objects of this inhuman sport. He had his hounds fed
with human flesh, in order to render them more ferocious
in tearing the victims; and, when ordinary convicts were
scarce, he denounced to the tribunals even the crimes in
which he had participated, to obtain the condemnation
of his accomplices; after which he delivered them to his
huntsman, Squarcia Giramo, charged with providing for
the ducal chace. He was at last, on the l6th of May,
1412, assassinamd by some Milanese nobles.

The virtu^nd elevation of soul which had done such
honour to tlPltalian nation became obscured even in
the republics of Genoa, Lucca, I’isa, Sienna, Perugia,
nd Bologna. These republics, in the course of the
rteenth century, had all more than once fallen under
&e power of some tyrant: accordingly, the examples of
cruelty, perfidy, and the success of those usurpers to
^hom they had been forced to submit, had had a cor¬
rupting influence on their citizens. Neither had Venice
preserved the true Italian virtue : its citizens often gave
proofs of an unbounded devotion to their country, of an
unreserved submission to its most severe ordinances; but
it was a narrow-minded and jealous aristocracy, which,
according to the spirit of that government, substituted
national selfishness for patriotism. The Venetians took
not into the least consideration any other people : they
fancied they gave proofs of heroism, when the advan¬
tage of their republic was in question, in suppressing
every human sentiment, in silencing every moral duty.
Venice was governed by secret councils, where the voice
of the people was never heard: its foreign policy was ad¬
ministered bytheCouncil of Ten; which,in its mysterious
meetings, took interest only for a guide. The decemvirs
dared unblushingly propose to their colleagues deliberating
under the sanction of an oath, and animated with the
same spirit as themselves, the sacrifice of what was honest
' and just to what was useful. Italian virtue had UkeQ

1403. VIRTUE OF ^LOBENOE. 203

refuge at Florence : it was there only that the people de¬
liberated ; that they associated together either for peace
or war, or negotiation, as well as for the common admi¬
nistration of the government. Nothing was proposed to
the public, nothing could obtain the assent of aU, except
what all felt to be just, honourable, and generous. The
republic of Florence was always ready to risk its repose
and wealth for the equilibrium and independence of
Italy j for the common liberty; and for the progress of
inteUigeftice and ciyilisation. During two centuries, it
was always seen eager to put itself forward as the
champion of all that was good and noble. Italy might
justly glory in the fact, that wherever ^e was free,
she was always found constant in the totR of virtue :
she is not answerable for the crimes with which she was
sullied by her tyrants. Several tliousand citizens had
always contributed, by their vote, to all that Florence di^
that was grand and noble; while about fifty princes,
distributed in as many palaces, with the few wretches
which it belongs to tyrannical governments alw^ays tn.
bring forward, sufficed to commit, in -spite of a whole
population, all the crimes which affrighted Italy.

At the moment in which the death of Gian Galeazzo
annihilated, at least for a time, the threatening power of
the dukes of Milan, the two republics in Italy which
alone had survived his intrigues, and which he had in
vain menaced, profited by the anarchy into which Lom¬
bardy had fallen, to recover their power, and aggrandise
themselves by conquest. Venice, which had shut itself
up in its Lagune, issued forth to extend its frontiers to
the Lake of Garda; and Florence, to which Gian Galeazzo
had interdicted all approach to the sea, conquered Pisa,
whose ports were necessary to its commerce, and almost
to its existence.

Francesco da Carrara, re-established in the sovereignty
of Padua in the year 1390, had from that period re¬
mained faithful to the Guelph party and to Florence: he
hoped to profit by the confusion in which the death of
Gian Galeazzo had left all Lombardy; and he invited

204 HISTORY tip THE ^ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1404.

Gulielmo della Scala to join him, and recover together
the sovereignties of Verona and Vicenza. Gulielmo was
the son of that Antonio della Scala who, by his alliance
with the Venetians fifteen years before,had caused the ruin
of Carrara and his own ; but a community of misfortune
had reconciled them. On the 7th of April, 1404, they,
in conjunction, took Verona. On the 21st of the same
month Della Scala died ; and the report was spread that
Carrara had poisoned him. Be that as it may, (Jarrara,
on the 17th of May following, arrested the tii^) sons of
Della Scala, and took possession of the city and fortress
of Verona. Vicenza, in the mean time, yielded to the
Venetians, ,^he latter had hitherto sought their gran¬
deur only in commerce, in their navy, and in their posses¬
sions beyond sea; but the confusion into which Lombardy
was thrown gave birth in them to a new ambition : they
resolved on extending their dominion in a country which
seemed to offer itself for their conquest.

They entered into treaty with the duchess Catherine
J^iscqnti, who renounced all right which her son might
have on Verona and Padua; and they set on foot an
army of 9000 cavalry. Their immense wealth permit¬
ted them to choose the most distinguished captains and
the best soldiers in Italy. The republic, in taking them
into pay, made it one rule, never to confide the command
of its armies to one of its own citizens, that they might
have nothing to fear from his power or glory; and
another, not to allow the soldiers to enter the city of
Venice, the defence of which needed no more than its
Lagune, galleys, and sailors. Two senators, distinguished
by the title of procurators of St. Mafk, were charged to
attend in the camp, and watch over the foreign general
whom the signoria had chosen.

War between Venice and the lord of Padua was de¬
clared on the 23d of June, 1404. Francesco da Carrara
carried it on with the utmost valour ; but opposed, with,
out allies, to forces infinitely superior to'his own, he saw
successively forced the passage of several canals which
intersected his territory, and behind which he had raised

1405. VENICE OONtiU^S FADEA. 205

fortifications. The whole of the Paduan territory was ra¬
vaged by the Venetian armyj and almost all its fortresses
taken before the end of the campaign of 1404. A division
of the army arrived to besiege Carrara in his capital, on
the 12th of June, 1405 ; at the same time that another
division besieged his second son, Jacopo da Carrara, in
Verona, and forced him to capitulate, on the 23d of
June. The whole rural population had taken refuge in
Padua j and the privations and sufferings experienced in
consequeftce occasioiied a contagious malady, which car¬
ried off 40,000 persons. Carrara and his son continued
to fight at the head of the survivors with determined
bravery, till the Venetians made themselvp masters of
the first entrenchment. On the 19 th of November, 1405,
a capitulation became necessary. Carrara always flattered
himself that the Venetians would grant him some remu¬
neration for the principality which they wrested from
him. He repaired to Venice, with his eldest son, on the
faith of the general with whom he had capitulated. On
their arrival, they were thrown into prison; where they
found Jacopo da Carrara, who had been taken prisoner at
Verona. The Council of Tdn, putting in practice the ad¬
vice given later by Machiavelli, of annihilating the whole
race of dethroned tyrants, in order to destroy with them
the zeal, hopes, and plots of their partisans, caused
Francesco da Carrara and his two sons to be strangled in
prison, on the l6'th of January, 1406'. They, at the
same time, set a price on the head of the youngest
princes, who had escaped from them, and on those of all
the survivors of the house of Della Scala : not one fell
under the dagger of the assassin, notwithstanding the
great recompence shamelessly promised by the Vene¬
tians ; but, on the other hand, not one ever recovered the
states of his fathers.

The Florentines regarded Francesco da Carrara as one
of the firmest champions of the Guelph party in Lom¬
bardy: they valued his alliance; but they did not think
themselves obliged to plunge into war for him, whom
they accused of having provoked it by his unjust ag-

206 HISTORY OF THE |1TALIAN REPUBLICS. 1405.

I

gression on Verona. All their efforts^ also, were then
directed against Pisa; they regarded the conquest of that
city as a necessary condition of their existence, ever
since the blockade which Gian Galeazzo had made them
experience, by subjugating all the states that opened to
them any communication with the sea. Gian Galeazzo
had left the lordship of Pisa to his natural son, Gabriel
Maria, who had, with his mother, taken possession of
that city. That of Sienna had recovered its freei'om in
the month of March, 1404, and had>renewed its alliance
with Florence. Perugia and Bologna had also, in the
preceding month of September, thrown oif the yoke of
the Viscontis, and voluntarily submitted to the church ;
which had left tliem their republican form of govern¬
ment. The Cancellieri, the counts Guidi and Ubertini,
and the other feudal nobles of the Apennines, who had
placed themselves under the protection of Gian Galeazzo,
had been punished for it by the Florentine republic,
which had again subdued them to its power. Lucca
Teraained subject to Paulo Guinigi, who governed that
ancient republic with moderation, and desired only to be
forgotten by his neighbours. Pisa alone, in Tuscany,
remained the enemy of Florence. As Gabriel was sen¬
sible that his brothers, the Viscontis, were then in no
state to defend him, he purchased the protection of the
marshal Boucicault, the representative of the king o
France at Genoa. Boucicault exerci-sed only the limited
authority assigned by the constitution to the doge. The
Genoese were far more zealous than the marshal in the
support of the independence of Pisa. They feared the
competition of the Florentines in their maritime com¬
merce, if ortce they were masters of Pisa, Leghorn,
and Porto Pisano. Boucicault, on the contrary, after
having taken Gabriel Maria under his protection, soon
thought of making them an article of trade. He offered
to sell Pisa to the Florentines, in the month of June,
1405, for the sum of 400,000 florins; which he agreed
to divide with Gabriel Maria. The Pisans, informed of
.this negotiation, rose on the 2Ist of July ; disarmed the

207

1406. THE FLOBENTINES^ CONQUER PISA.

garrison of their t)Tants; made themselves masters of
the gates of the city; but failed in their attack on the
citadel. Boucicault, informed of these matters, mo¬
derated his demand; and asked the Florentines no
more than 206,000 florins for the Pisan citadel, and
the castles which he still held in the territory of Pisa.
The Florentines paid him that sura: he was engaged
to divide it with Gabriel Maria ; but, to rid himself of
this claim, he accused Gabriel of a plot against the king
of France, and caused him to be beheaded.

The Florentines hoped to induce the Pisans to submit
to them by negotiations; and they offered the most ad¬
vantageous conditions: but the Pisans, who proudly
regarded themselves as the most ancient and illustrious
of the Tuscan republics, and as having preserved, more
than any other, their warlike courage, vigorously be¬
sieged their citadel, and retook it on the 6tli of
September. ■ They afterwards demanded peace of the
Florentines, offering to reimburse them the money they
had paid: to facilitate the negotiation, they rucallecr'
from exile Giovanni Gambacorta, whose family had been
always favoured by Florence, and named him captain of
the people'. But their offers were all rejected; and the
Pisans, forced to have recourse to arms, not only fought
valiantly themselves, but eagerly sacrificed their whole
fortune to purchase the services of the condottieri,
■whom they called to their aid from all parts of Italy.
The war continuerl for more than a year: the Pisans
successively lost all their fortresses and territory; their
city was blockaded during the campaign of 1406; and
they courageously supported privations, maladies, and,
finally, famine. But the chief whom they had elected
did not show a like heroism; Giovanni Gambacorta se¬
cretly treated with the Florentines; and obtained the
gift of 50,000 florins, and the county of Bagno, to pjien
to them the gates of Pisa; which was done in the night
of the 8th and 9 th of November, 1406. The Florentinea
did aU in their power to reconcile the Pisans to the
yoke which they forced on them: their army was pre-.

208 HISTORY OP THE HALIAPT REPUBLICS. l'406.

ceded into the famished towns by wagon-loads of
bread) which the soldiers distributed themselves to atf
that demanded it. Gino Capponi, the commissioner of
Florence, promised, not only the strictest attention to
justice, but privileges, and even friendship, to the con¬
quered people. These adv&nces were all in vain; die
Pisans were too haughty to submit to rivals whom they
had so long combated. The most ancient and optl-
lent families removed to Lucca, Sardinia, and Sicily.
The young men almost all engaged in the companiM of
adventure, to find in the camp an independence whidh
they could no longer hope for in their-own country:
and Pisa, in losing its liberty, lost its commerce, popu¬
lation, and every remnant of prosperity.

The Florentines endeavoured to relieve Pisa from its
state of poverty, by filling it with foreigners : they of¬
fered it to the church for the meeting of the council
which was to terminate the great western schism. This
schism had lasted since the year 1378. Pietro di Luna,
■%i Aragonese, one of the cardinals who had given rise to
it, had succeeded Clement VII., who died at Avignon in
1394 . The succession of popes in the other divi»on
tlie church had been more rapid. Boniface IX.f who had
succeeded the turbulent Urban VI., inl389, was a better
warrior than churchman ; he reconquered successively aU
the states which hispredecessorhad lost; he entered Rome,
and consolidated his power by executions. Innocent VII.,
who succeeded him, in 1404, was a gentle and moderate
man; but as he abandoned the exercise of power to his
brother, who governed only by terror, the number of
executions drove the Romans to revolt. The pope was
anew driven from his capital; but, returning in 1406, he
died a few months afterwards, and Gregory XII., a’Ve-
netian, was named his successor.

In both divisions of the church, the prolongation of
the schism was considered dishonourable ,gnd calamitous
to Christendom: in both the sovereigns were zealous
to suppress it; but on both sides the popes opposed an
^obstinate resistance. They had been each elected by

1409. couNCiE 0# PISA. 209

is , »

the t<vo colleges of cardinals, under the express condi¬
tion that each ■would be read/ to cede his rights, and
Abdicate at the same time with his eompetitor. They
either refused, or by a thousand artifices delayed,, to do
BO. Benedict XIII. was besieged in his palace at
Avignon by the troops of^ the king of Prance, in
orSer to constrain him to yield: but, after he had
declared himself ready to abdicate, his adversary, Gre-
/(Sy XII., refused. Benedict, however, advanced as
far as* I.,a Spezzia, and Gregory as far as Lucca, to
meet in conference Vith their two colleges ; hut Iwth
persisted in not taking the last step. Towards the
end of 1408, their cardinals, losing all patience, left
them, and assemlled at Leghorn; whence they issued
a summons to convoke the oecumenical council at Fisa,
in the month of March following. This council, in which
were assembled almost all the prelates of Christendom,
after long discussion, condemned and deposed the two
popes, on the 5th of June, 1409; and, on the 7th of July,
the assembled cardinals of the two “obediences’' named
in their place a third, Alexander V. The deposed
popes would not submit to the sentence of the council:
bmlip^sttved a small flock of the faithful,—the one in
Aragon, tne other at Rimini and Naples. Gregory had
retired to the first-mentioned town ; so that, instead of
two, there were three popes in the western church. To
terminate the schism, it became necessary to assemble a
^second general council ; which, sitting at Constance, on the
1st of November, 1414, forced two of the popes to ab¬
dicate, and deposed the third. The church, at the same
time, implored a reform ; to accomplish which, a third
council was assembled at Basle, on the 2Sd July, 1431,
and this laid the foundation of a new schism.

’ While two or three pretenders to the pontifical chair
were thus obliged to defend themselves against each
other, as well as against their own cardinals and against
all Christendom, the king of Naples profited by the
confusion to take possession of nearly all the states
of the church. That king was Ladislaus, son of

210 BieroRY op italiai^ republics. 1409-

Charles III. da Durazzo, whom he .had succeeded in
1386, being at that time only ten years old. Louis II.
of Anjou, a minor, like Ladislaus, disputed the throne
with him. The queen, Joan, when pressed by the
Hungarians, had adopted Louis I., duke of Anjou, the
brother of Charles V.; who had entered the kingdom of
Naples in 1382, and died there in 1364. He left one
son, Louis II., then under age, to whom his mother
and her partisans gave the title of king of .Sicily. The
war between these two children, directed ,bjt their
mothers, ruined the kingdom of Na’ples during the latter
part of the fourteenth century, and destroyed its in¬
fluence over the rest of Italy. It was not till 1399
that Ladislaus succeeded in driving %ut the princes of
Anjou, and subduing the kingdom. He had grown up
amidst civil war, receiving the hardening education of
privation and danger, alternately seconded or obstructed
by intrigue and treachery. He was brave, and had
studied the art of war; but was still more expert in dissi-
hnulation and perfidy. His ambition was unbounded, and
hispassions unrestrained by any one moral principle. After
short attempts to preserve Provence, and to acquire the
crown of Hungary, to which his birth gave hinf a title,
he judged it more advantageous to direct aff his efforts
against the states which bounded his dominions in Italy.
In AprU, 1408, he took possession of Rome; and soon
afterwards of Perugia. He conquered almost all the
cities of the March, and of the duchy of Spoleto ; from
thence he entered Tuscany, ravaged the territories of
Arezzo and of Sienna, and took possession of Cortona.

The Florentines, when they saw themselves thus at¬
tacked, without any subject of quarrel, by this ambitious
and faithless prince, resolved on opposing to him
Louis II. of Anjou. They recalled Louis from France,
in 1409 i Bud offered a subsidy to aid him in recovering-
the crown of Naples. At the same time, they formed a
closer connection with one of the two generals who then
attracted the attention of all Italy. Among the nu¬
merous captains who had been forrSed in the school of

211

iWS- I'HE BBACCESCHl AND SFORZESCHI.

Alberic da Barbiapo, there were tiyo regarded as infinitely
superior to all others^ from the progress which they had
made in the art of war. Braccio da Montone, a noble
of Perugia, had studied how to render his army man¬
ageable, by augmenting the number of officers, and by
accustoming it to fight in detached bodies, which dis¬
persed and rallied at will. The other was Sforza Atten-
doloj a peasant of Cotignola, in Romagna, who at first
distinguished for prodigious strength of body and un¬
daunted Ijravery, soon became equally distinguished in
military tactics ; but, instead of adopting the new
method of Bl'accio, he applied himself to bringing the
ancient system to perfection. He continued to move
his army in largi masses; which no one conducted
with such unison and steadiness. Braccio distin¬
guished himself by impetuous valour, by prompt and
decisive action, and sometimes by trusting to chance;
Sforza, by prudent, steady, and cool conduct. All the
soldiers of fortune in Italy soon attached themselves to on%
or other of these two captains; who, nearly of the pm^
age, and having made their first campaigns together, now
found themselves opposed to each other in a rivalry of
interest and glory. The name of the Bracceschi school was
given to the band of soldiers of the one, and Sforzeschi
to the other; and, when a state called one of these into
its service, it was nearly sure of having the other op¬
posed to it.

The Florentines formed a close connection with Brac¬
cio : they placed him at the head of their army; and
they settled on him a considerable pension, which was
to continue even when out of their service, provided he
always returned to it when called upon. Louis of Anjou
rendered them but little service; he was engaged in a
war on their accoimt in the states of Rome, when he
feceived news that the Genoese had, on the 6th of Sep¬
tember, 1409 , risen against the French, and driven
them out of Genoa. Apprehending that his commu-
lucation with France might be interrupted, he hastily
returned to Provence. After his departure, Braccio

p 2

fil'2 BISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1410.

carried on the war successfully against the Neapolitans.
With the Florentine army he made himself master of
Romej on the 2d of January, 1410. Florence, how.
ever, had no sooner gained a signal advantage over
Ladislaus, than it offered him peace, which he eagerly
accepted: he bound himself by treaties in terms the
most precise, and confirmed them by oaths the most
solemn ; which were no sooner taken than unblushingly
violated by him. The war was interrupted only for
the time necessary for the repose of the troops j^ecch year
forced them to a new campaign. Louis of Anjou was
twice called into Italy by the Florentinet: he gainetl
over Ladislaus, at Roccasecca, on the IQth of May,
1411, a great victory, of which he knew not how to
take advantage. He again retired, and left Ladislaus to
finish the conquest of the ecclesiastical states; while
John XXIII., successor of Alexander V., only struggled
to prevent the convocation of the council of Constance,
which deposed him, Ladislaus, who owed his success
chiefly to the talents and bravery of Sforza, then in his
payi made every year some fresh conquest in Tuscany.
The Florentine republic, attacked by him on all sides,
and, exhausted by continual exertion, found no longer
any resource by which to resist him, and began to lose
all hope ; when the king of Naples was seized in his
camp with a violent and painful malady, attributed to
his debaucheries. He was conveyed in a litter to Naples ;
and died on arriving there, on the 6th of August, 1414.
His sister, Joan II., widow of the son of the duke of
Austria, succeeded him. She was forty years of age;
and, like her brother, abandoned to the most unrestrained
libertinism. She left the government of her kingdom
to her lovers, who disputed power by arms: they called
into her service, or into that of her second husband, or
of the rival princes whom she in turn adopted, the two
awmies of Sforza and Braccio. The consequence was the
ruin of the kingdom of Naples ; whict)[ ceased to menace
the rest of Italy.

The moment Ladislaus disappeared, a new enemy

1412. FILIPPO MARIA VISCONTI. 213

•

arose to disturb the Florentines—Filippo Maria Vis¬
conti, the brother of Gian Maria, and third duke of
Milan. He was received in that capital on the 1 6 'th of
June, 1412, four days after the murder of his brother.
Fihppo immediately married the widow of Facino Cane,
the powerful condottiere, who had retained Gian Maria
in his dependence; and who died the same day that
Gian Maria was assassinated. By this sudden mar¬
riage he secured the army of Facino Cane,—which was,
in facfj Tpaster of the greater part of the Milanese : with
its aid he undertooC, without delay, to recover the rest
erf his States from the hands of those tyrants who had
divided amongst them the dominions of his father.
Filippo Maria, like him, united immeasurable ambi¬
tion with extreme timidity. During the first year of
his reign, which was to decide his existence as prince or
subject, he fought with determined courage; but from
that time, though he continually made war, he never
showed himself to his armies. Even in his palace and
garden, he shrank from the eye of man : he never con¬
sented to an interview with the emperor SigismontF, who
had gone to Milan to exert himself for the extinction of
the schism. It is asserted that Filippo Maria was so
sensible of his extreme ugliness, that he could not sup¬
port the humiliation of being looked at. He had the "art
of discovering great talents, and of attaching the best
captains of Italy, in as great a degree as his father; but
placed less confidence in those worthy of obtaining it,
and possessed less elevation and constancy in his projects.
Always as timid as he was ambitious, he became discou¬
raged on the smallest reverse of fortune in the attacks
which he continually made on his neighbours : versatile
in politics, he no sooner made peace than he renewed
war, or contracted an alliance than he broke it. He
eeemed no less alarmed at the success of his own generals,
than at that of his enemies. He was always the first to
stop their progjiess, and to prevent them from profiting
by their success; so that his tortuous conduct daily pro¬
duced some unexpected thwarting result. Without pity
p 3

214 HISTORY OF THG ^TALIAN REPUJBLICS. 1421.

*^101 his subjects, he exposed them both to the vexations
of his own soldiers and those of the enemy. He would
have ruined Lombardy, if the fertility of that rich pro¬
vince had not exceeded his power of mischief.

In the battle of Monza, by which he acquired his
brother's inheritance, and the only battle in which he
was ever present, he iftmai^ed the brilliant courage of
Francesco Carmagnola, a Piedmontese soldier of fortune,
and immediately gave him a command. Carmagnola
soon justified the duke’s choice by the most distirgtiished
talents for war, the most brilliant victories, and the most
noble character. Francesco Carmagnola was, after a
few years, placed at the head of the duke’s armies ;
and, from the year 1412 to that of 1422, successively
attacked all the tyrants who had divided the heritage of
Gian Galeazzo, and brought those small states again
under the dominion of the duke of Milan. Even the
republic of Genoa submitted to him, in 1421, on the
same conditions as those on which it had before submit-

, ted to the king of France, — reserving all its liberties;
and granting the duke’s lieutenant, who was Carmagnola
himself, only those prerogatives which the constitution
yielded to the doge.

As soon as Filippo Maria had accomplished the con.
quest of Lombardy, he resumed the projects of his father
against Homagna and Tuscany. He confirmed the
treaties of alliance which Gian Galeazzo had contracted
with aU the Ghibeline tyrants of the first-named pro¬
vince; renewed his intrigues against the republic of
Florence, and combined them with those which he at
the same time carried on in the kingdom of Naples.
Joan, who had sent back to France her second husband,
Jaques, count de la Marche, and who had no children,
was persuaded, in 1420, by one of her lovers, to
adopt Alphonso the Magnanimous, king of Aragon and
Sicily, to whom she entrusted some of the fortresses
of Naples. She revoked this adoption in 1423; and
substituted in his place Louis III. of Anjou, eon of
Loui» II.. The former put himself at the head of the

1423. VISOONTI ATTACKS THE FUlRENTINfis. 215

ancient party of Durazzo; the latter, of that of Anjou.
The consequence was a civil war, in which the twq'great
captains, Sforza and Braccio, were opposed to each other,
and acquired new titles to glory. The duke of Milan
made alliance with Joan II. and Louis Il-I. of Anjou:
Sforza, named great constable of the kingdom, wus their
general. The Florentines remained constant to Braccio,
whom Alphonso had made governor of the Abruzzi; and
who had seized, at the same time, the signoria of Peru¬
gia, hisknative city. He found a warlike disposition in
the Perugians, associated them in his glory, and made
them sharers in the wealth which his arms had procured
him. He subdued several of the small neighbouring states,
and seemed to be forming a military principality; which
Florence accepted as an ally, to defend, in concert, the
independence of Tuscany. But Sforza and Braccio both
perished, as Italy awaited with anxiety the result of the
struggle about to be commenced. Sforza was drowned
at the passage of the Pescara, on the 4th of January,
1424; Braccio was mortally wounded at the battle
of Aquila, on the 2d of June of the same year. Fran¬
cesco, son of the former, succeeded to his father’s name
and the command of his army, both of which he was
destined to render still more illustrious. The son of
Braccio, on the contrary, lost the sovereignty of Peru?
gia, which resumed its freedom on the 29th of July of
die same year; and the remnant of the array formed
by this great captain elected for its chief his most able
lieutenant, Nicolo Piccinino.

This was the moment which Filippo Maria chose to
push on his army to Romagna, and vigorously attack
the Florentines, after he had acknowledged their right to
defend that province. The Florentines, having no tried
general at the head of their troops, experienced, from the
oth of September, 1423, to the 17th of October, 1425,
not less than six successive defeats, either in Liguria or
^magna. Un^smayed by defeat, they re-'assembled
their army for the seventh time : the patriotism of their
rich merchants made up for the penury of their exhausted
p 4

216 HisTony of the Italian republics. 1426.

r

treasivy. They, at the same time, sent their most dis¬
tinguished statesmen as ambassadors to Venice, to repre¬
sent to that republic, that if it did not join them while
they stiU stood, the liberty of Italy was lost for ever.
, Lorenzo Rklolfi, one of the ten commissioners of war, had
, been* sent on this mission to the signoria of Venice ;
* finding great difficulty in persuading it to take part in
the war, he exclaimed, “ I acknowledge we have been
wrong in not opppsing Filippo Maria in time; for, by
our slowness, we have made him duke of lljil'an and
master of Genoa: but you, by sacrificing us, render him
king of Italy. We, in our turn, if we must submit to
him, will make'him emperor.” An illustrious fugitive,
Francesco Carmagnola, who arrived about this time at
Venice, accomplished what Florence had nearly failed in,
by discovering to the Venetians the project of the duke
of Milan to subjugate them. Francesco Carmagnola
had, by the victories he had gained, the glory he had
acquired, and the influence he obtained over the sol¬
diers, excited the jealousy, instead of the gratitude, of
Filippo Maria; who disgraced him, and deprived him
of his employment, without assigning any reason. Car¬
magnola returned to court, but could not even obtain an
interview with his master. He retired to his native
country, Piedmont: his wife and children were ar¬
rested, and his goods confiscated. He arrived at last,
by Germany, at Venice; soon afterwards some emis¬
saries of the duke of Milan were arrested for an attempt
to poison him. The doge, Francesco Foscari, wishing
to give lustre to his reign by conquest, persuaded the
senate of Venice to^oppose the increasing ambition of
the duke of Milan. A league, formed between Florence
and Venice, was successively joined by the marquis of
Ferrara, the lord of Mantua, the Siennese, the duke
Amedeus VIII. of Savoy, and the king Alphonso of
Naples, who jointly declared war against Filippo Maria
Visconti, on the 27th of January, 1426. Carmagnola
was charged to raise an army of 16,000 cuirassiers and
8000 infantry in the states of Mantua.

1428. coNdUESTa of TfjE veKetians. 217

The good fortune of Carmagnola in war sdll ,at- '
tended him in the campaign of 1426. He was as suc¬
cessful against the duke of Milan as he had been for
him ; he took from him the city and whole province of
JBrescia. The duke ceded this conquest to the'Venetians*
by treaty on the 30th of December : but he eny)loyed*
the winter in assembling his' forces; and in the beginning
of spring renewed the war. He equipped a consider¬
able fleet on the POj in order to take possession of the
states ofsMantua aqd Ferrara, the allies of the two re¬
publics. This fleet was attacked by the 'Venetians, and,
after an obstinate battle, burnt, near Cremona, on the
21st of May, 1427. The duke of Milan had given the
command of his army to Nicolo Piccinino, the pupil of
Braccio, who had brought with him the flower of the
Bracceschi army. Nicolo attacked Carmagnola on the
12th of July, at Casalsecco; but the heat was so intense,
and the dust rose in such clouds from under tlie horses'
feet, that the two armies, enveloped in nearly the dark¬
ness of night, could no longer distinguish each othpr, or
discern the signals: they separated without claiming
advantage on either side. A third battle took place,
on the 11th of October, 1427, in a marsh near Macalo:
Camugnola here completely defeated the Milanese
army, commanded by Carlo Malatesta, in which were
united Francesco Sforza, Nicolo Piccinino, and all the
most illustrious captains of Italy. By an imprudent
generosity, Carmagnola released these important pri¬
soners ; and thus provoked the resentment of the pro¬
curators of St. Mark, who accompanied him. A new
peace, signed on the 18th of April, 1428, again sus¬
pended hostilities without reconciling parties, or inspiring
either of the belligerents with any confidence. The
Florentines took advantage of this interval of repose to
attack Paulo Guinigi, lord of Lucca; whose alliance
with the duke of Milan had irritated them, although
he had afterwafds been abandoned by Filippo Maria.
The Lucchese, profiting by this last circumstance,
i-evolted against their lord in the month of September,

219 HISTORY OF IHR^ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1431.

deposed him, and sent him prisoner to Milan. The
Florentines were afterwards driven out of the states of
Lucca by Nicolo Piccinino, who defeated them on the
borders of the Serchio, on the 2d of December, 1430;
and the [general war recommenced.

In this last campaign, fortune abandoned Carma-
gnola. On the 17th of May, 1431, he suffered himself
to be surprised at Soncino, which he had reached with
his advanced guard, by Francesco Sforza, who took
prisoners l60r of his cavalry: he, hpwever, escr.pSd, and
rejoined his still brilliant army, On the 23d of May be
approached the Po, to second the Venetian fleet in an
attack on Cremona : but the fleet, pushed by that of the
Milanese on the opposite shore, was destroyed in his
presence, without the possibility of his rendering it any
aid. However great his desire to repair these checks,
he could not meet the enemy again during the remainder
(ff the summer. A deadly distemper broke out among
the horses throughout Italy; his troopswere dismounted:
and, gs the fate of battle depended t^ost entirely on the
cavalry, this calamity reduced him to complete inactioiK

The senate of Venice, which made it a rule never
to defend the republic but by foreign arms, — never to
enlist its citizens under its banners either as generals
or soldiers, — further observed that of governing with
extreme rigour those foreign adventurers of whom its
armies were composed, and of never believing in the
virtue of men who trafScked in their own blood. The
Venetians distrusted them: they supposed them ever dis>«
posed to treachery ;• and if they were unfortunate, though
only from imprudence, they rendered them responsible.
The condottieri were made fully to understand that they
were not to lose the armies of the repubhc without an>
sWeringfor the eventwith their lives. The senate joined to
this rigour the perfidy and mystery which characterise an
aristocracy. Having decided on punishing Carmagnole for
thelate disasters, it began by deceiving hifli. Hewas loaded
with marks of deference and confidence: hewas invited to
come to Venice in the month of April, 1432, to fix with

14^3. EXECUTION OF CMHABNOLA- 319

the signoria the plan of the ensuing campaign. The
most distinguished senators went to meet him^ and
conduct him in pomp to the palace of the doge. Car-
magnola, introduced into the senata, was placed in the
chair of honour : he was pressed to speak ; and his di^
course applauded. The day began to close: lights were
not yet called for; and the general could no longer dis¬
tinguish the faces of those who surrounded him j when
sudden^ the sbirri, or soldiers of police, threw them¬
selves on him, loade4 him with chains, and dragged him
to the prison of the palace. He was next day put to the
torture,—rendered still more painful by the wounds which
he had received in the service of this ungrateful republin.
Both the accusations made against him, and his answers
to the questions, are buried in the profound secrecy with
which the Venetian senate covered all its acts. On the
Sth of May, 1432, Francesco Carmagnola, twenty days
after his arrest, was led out,— his mouth gagged to pre¬
vent any protestation of innocence,—and placed between
the two columns on the square of Bt. Mark: he^was
there beheaded, amidst a trembling people, whom the
senate of Venice was resolved to govern only by terror.

CHAP. X.

COSMO os' MEDICI, CHIEF OF THE HSFUBLIC OF FLORENCE. — DSAXB

OF THE LAST VISCONTI. - EFFORTS OF THE MILANESE TO

COVER THEIR LIBEHIV. —THEY ABE ENSLAVED BY FRANCESCO
SFORZA. — CONSPIRACY OF STEFANO FDRCARl AT ROME.

The fermentation which had manifested itself at Fh>-
rence among the lower orders of the people, in the
momentary triumph of the Ciompi, began to Bubsid&
Manufacturers, artisans, men who to live needed thelt
daily labour, themselvee renounced the first offices
of republic.* They felt that political eqiudity did
not exclude a certain degree of subordination: they ac¬
knowledged the power of capital, by which they lived;

220 HISTORY OF THE, ITAUAN REPUBLICS. 1432.

of knowledge, which discovered outlets for the pro¬
ductions of their industry; and they were disposed to
djey the rich merchants who employed them. Accus¬
tomed by the habits ef private life to trust to the in.
telligence of their superiors for their most important
interests, —for those which most constantly occupied
their minds,—they regarded them as still more proper to
decide on political questions, which sometimes excite the
passions of the people, but seldom lead them to prudent
counsel. It is from time to time oply that socdety, even
in the freest states, is universally agitated by some ab¬
stract question, which makes the deeper impression the
less it is understood: experience comes afterwards to
disabuse people of an exaggerated or unreasonable ex¬
pectation. Thus, false ideas of equality made the Flo¬
rentines first demand that every citizen should have an
aqual share in the government: after they had experienced
the violences and depredations caused by the anarchy of
the Ciompi, they unhappily forgot the advantages of true
equality. They did not sufficiently seek to procure to
all equal protection and equal justice, to awaken in all
diat interest in public affairs which should excite the
developement of their faculties. The flame which burnt
too fiercely in 1378 had consumed the materials which
should have nourished it; and, fifty years later, the
"Florentine people no longer evinced any jealousy of those
who, by their position, seemed naturally destined to
rule them.

General ideas exercise a durable influence only on
minds capable of comprehending them. Let liiterty
exist for all; but let power remain with those who com¬
prehend its objects,—with those who can distinguish the
means by which to attain them,—w.ith those who are too
proud to acknowledge masters, and too generous to desire
nibjects, — with those who, anxious for the intellectual
progres^and for the material well-being of their kind,
would pve up all their time and attention to obtain
both,—with those who, enjoying the advantages of a
libenl education, have minds neither irritated by jea.

1432.

CONDITION OF THE, LOWED OHDERJ.

loua^j narrowed by prejudice, nor disturbed by cbimerical
apprehensions. Let all, however, have some share in
political power j such a share as may be necessary to pre¬
serve them from oppression,—to saise their rainda and
feelings in emergency above material interests, — to
divest them of selfishness, that they may, when called
upon, comprehend the great questions of morality: bnt
let tliem participate in this political power as citizens,
not as magistrates.

The ntonber of rppublics had so much diminished in
Italy, that the lower orders ran a far greater risk of
being corrupted by the example of servility, than by that
of the excesses of democracy. In the kingdom of Na¬
ples, in Romagna, and Lombardy, those orders remained
without protection, exposed to the outrages of the soldier
and the oppression of the fiscal oflRcer. Nevertheless,
with the exception of the calamities inflicted by the
passage of companies of adventure, the burden imposed
on them was subject to rules of equal distribution : they
were unacquainted with the personal vexations, thq do¬
mestic oppression, which the nobles inflicted on the pte-
^ians in the west of Europe, Accordingly, in spite of
frequent calamities, and of a great diminution of pitv
ductivB energy, Italy, which had ceased to be free, had
not ceased to be prosperous. In Lombardy, especially^
agriculture and husbandry being well understood, the
natural fertility of the soil was turned to the most pro¬
fitable account; while innumerable manufactures and
extensive commerce animated and enriched the towns.

After the kingdom of Naples and the duchy of Milan,
the republic of Venice was, in power, the tliird state of
Italy. The people of Venice were deprived, almost as
much as those of Milan, of all participation in political
power. Their suflrages were never demanded, their
voice was never heard; they never thought even of ques¬
tioning the wisdom of their government. Aut the
senate, far wiser'in its administration than th* tyrants
of Lombardy, never allowed their subjects to bear any
other burdens than those imposed by itself,- and thoae

9SS HISTORY OP Ta;n it:llian repubuos. 14S2.

were always moderate, always equally distributed, in a
q>irit of justice. All tliat'the Venetians paid the state
was employed scrupulously, and'with economy, either
for the common defence, or for the ornament of their
country. The government cost the people nothing. The
people, themselves, looked with pride upon the employ¬
ment of their money in the public works. The pro¬
vinces of the Terra Firma were carefully secured from
the vexations of the soldier, and as much as possible
from the invasion of the 'enemy. The cityt.ol Venice
from the period of its foundation had never been invaded,
— had never seen the Rialto soiled by the feet of
foreign armies,—had never suffered even the tem¬
porary domination of a tyrant. The riches of .commerce
and industry, fostered by such constant security, had
grown beyond all precedent. The provinces of the
Terra Pirraa, forgetting all pretension to independ-
ence,.found ffiemselves ha^y by comparison with their
neighbours. The peasantry, in particular, were ready to
give their lives for St. Mark: — it was thus they always
designated the state. The only possessions of the re¬
public t^at had reason to complain were those of the
Levant: there the Venetian merchants sacrificed tbeiY
industry to the narrow spirit of monopoly.

The republic of Florence was the fourth state of
* Italy in wealth and importance. More generous than
Venice, it had more frequently endangered itself by
wars, which exp^dd it often to invasion. Less prudent
in its intemq} administration, it had more than once
experienced the convulsions of contending factions, and
sometimes even those of temporary tyranny. On the
other side, the Florentines owed'to the nature of their
government a degree of energy, activity,^nd intelligence
which put them in a state to repair dieir losses much
more raj^idly. They hid in their cit^ manufactures re¬
nowned through the western world, particulariy that
of wodBen stuffs, which occupied mote hands^than any
other, and those of silk and gold brocade. > TfaeiT
pierchants were the greatest c^italists of Europe ; their

1433. ADUINIBTItAI’lBN’ OF TOK AVBIZtt. SS9

-counting-houses were scattered throughout the cora-
nierpial parts of the world / and their funds were^often
lent to princes at enennous interest. The territory of
the Florentines was enriched by the most industrimis
agriculture. In it was concentrated, on a given space,
the most labour and the largest capital. The citizens
submitted of their own accord to heavy imposts ; bat the
peasantry were treated with more consideration. A mo¬
derate and equable partition of the taxes was sought to
be maifttoined ; and it was in this view that the Floren¬
tines, in 1429, invented the catasto, — an enumeration
-and description of property of every kind, with an
eatimate' of its value, to serve' as a basii^to taxes
abvays iqiposed in due proportion. The subjects of
Flri^ce must have fourid themselves at least as happy
as those of Venice : but the memory bf liberty andin-
dependencettwas more receiU ; and Fisa, Fistoia, Arezzo,
Volterra, and even less important towns, mad# repeated
efibit(''to recover their liberty. jAt one town could
yet itself to be subject to the Florentines.

M^'llhin the circle of Tuscany, too, Lucca, which did
ttOt lose its liberty from the time of Paulo Gui|[igi until
dur day, and Sienna, which preserved hers till 1553,
seemed to invite these cities to govern themselves as
independent republics. In the two above mentioned,
however, the democratic fermentation which had agitated"
all free states during the latter half of the fourteenth
century began to subside, and the feyemment had re¬
turned to the hands of those who were ^tted for it by.
their education and talents.

The. democratic party at florence, directed by the
Alberti, Ricci, and Medici, were deprived of power in
1331, in cons^KDceof the abuse which their associates,
the Ciompij Ad made of their victory. From that
time'diMr rivals,*ifbe Albizzi, directed the rej^blic for
fifty-three years, from 1381 to 14^, with
fnkaffl^s and>^lory till then unexampled. Wo tri-
tOafb ^ an aristocratic faction ever-merited a more
fiiffliaitti place in history. The one in ijuestion main^

^“^“" 1 , 1 * frep<m&isctsa<n"

- it iras

' 4ta iiltetst ibd 'Tira.

tbhing tchiA 1
tfiat'

Bi^tmolcinM
la-iel "

Cloeeitee native

in v^ch were aR'iSd^

,tb«n, <)£, vrlipm th^ BC^eij nMt|uipdi^e»,

TC«p^ ue gkry, having had any‘ttiffire ii^

'placing thentj—^-iha^ iipai^i Jh which the*repuMic
'-most.oQpnantly f<dlo'^d the tiobwat poiicyilMiiKil^

'inbst ojimdUntly f<dlo'^d
png I|i^ as the Indian of tht/liherty
^rns Bet limits to the ambition or:Glhn <
^'Visconti; of L|iiislaus, kin^ of Naples'^
ipp'o hfeuia,* -dufe of Milan, t'omaso 4^**
and aii|^ hin^Nicolo da Uzzano, had betiti the cMefi
of the IfcatocracT at this'period of gtor'yand ■

Ts those Bucceedm Rinaldo, son of Ts.maio |"
hiz^^ who forgot, a little more than’ l)is' pr , ,
lhat he was only a simple citizen. ^ lYnpefudub/'^
fQgant,(gealou8, impatient of all opposition, he Tost ^
pre-eminence whichJjjis family had so long maintained.'

Rinaldo degli Albizzi sam with uneasihess, a rivd
present himself in Cosmo, Jm of Giovanni de’ Medici,
* who revived a party formerly the vanquishers of his
ancestors. This man enjoyed an heihditary pt^ul^ty
at Florence; bewFse he was descended from vine of the
1 demagogues in 137S, had undertaken the defence
'of the minor arts against the aristocracy*; he/ht the
aame time, pxcited the .j^ouiy.p f, t!^e latter‘By. Ms Tin-
luense wealth, which equalled tb«||Hi||Umeseitedt princes
of Italy. Altho^h l^fcAJbiz dliiiMife i (Ssta^ the
^Family of their Hvals Mlaih
they cotj^ not excise from ifr-'C
was g(^alonier ihip!^; Hik son G^uy, j
was pi^e in 14flRvhe^iyp^the Keid of ^
aidablishmedt arhich ^ad^^OiWnting-ho«^ ^1
great cities ct lluro^ p^d'in Ute. Levk^^,!

14SS. oo««n»' z^’ _ *' ^

same timer, cultivated literatvum ardour. Bia
oneiof the must'stunftuous in Moresee, ivta therei^
of artists, poets, learned sneiTj of those, amopg
4^e:|ia who* about thia time' introduce^ the Platomc
P^ih^phy into Italy, ThV opulence of Cosmo de'
, ^ftdici.'lvas always At the ^vice of .his fttends. Theje
werg vgrj few ptpor citizatis at Florence to whom hi^
purse was not open. ' •

Cosmo de’ Medici had no thought of reviving the
d^tiinp iJf his ancestors, respecting the. right of the
lowest order of citizens to enter the magistracy. He
exptesaeil iro democratic opinions, although he severely
criticised the government and |Ts measures, whilst under
the directioit of Rinaldo degli Albizzi. He wished to
have seen adopted other alliances and another policy. }le
asserted that, sinci the death of I^colo da Uzzano, in
1427, the. security of the state had been endangered by
imprudent wars, and the finances dilapldkted by the
ToU^y of the commissaries, pAticularly in the ex-
pe<B&n against LucceL Constant opposition anij accu¬
sation at last so provoked Rinaldo, whose character was
impetuous and violent, that he determined fp proceed¬
ing against Cosmo as a state criminal. In the month
of September, 1433, a ^noria, drawn by lot, was found
to be composed of thPmost devoted creatures of the
Albizzi. Bernardo Guadagni presided at it as gonfa¬
lonier. On the 7th of Septemberjhe summoned Cosmo
de' Medici to present himself at palace, and render
an account of his conduct; and, on ^is arrival there,
committed him prisoner to the tower of the clock.
The people were immediat^y called to a parliament by
die tolling of .the great bell. The Florentines had
pretierved, fmm the first period of their republic, the
custom o^tn^ parliaments, in which the whole popu¬
late assembled in the public square. '\(|^ithout its
be^ hecessary to make those present prov^that they
-MterV 4tizeps, and without securing any guarantee to the
fieaUe against the powerful, •they vot^ by acclamation
oo.W^t VBS proposed by the signoria. .• In consequence

226 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1433.
*

oT the sovereignty of the people, the parliament was
regarded as superior to all law, to 4He constitution itself,
and even to justice ; tShen warned of some great national
danger which justified revolutioiiary measures, it was sup¬
posed to be invested with*the whole power of the state,
to be raised above all rule : but experience proved that.the
parliament always sanctioned every'revolution, and that
the sovereignty of the people lent its name to every act
of tyranny. As such a parliament could not deliberate,
it was required to transmit its power to a halia, orocom-
mission, which it invested with all the rights possessed
by the Florentine people ^hemselves. Rinaldo degli Al-
bizzi presented a list ofthe names of those of whom he
wished the balia to be composeclj about two hundred in
number. The balia obtained the purses’ from which
were to be drawn tlfe names of the Magistrates. They
excluded whom they pleased; they entered new’names;
they condemned to exile Cosmo de' Medici and his^
friends. Albizzi haif reckoned on Cosmo’s being...^e-
cuted ; he accused Bernardo Guadagni of bW%g
received money from his enemy to spare Wmf atid
regarded a|t a defeat the incomplete vengeance which he
had just wreaked.

The event justified tis fears. Precisely s year af¬
terwards, in the month of Sej^fcmber, 1434, a new si-
gnoria was drawn, with Nicolo Donati president, and
entirely favourable to Cosmo de’ Medici. The balia,
notwithstanding it^^rtiality, had not dared to exclude
from the magisjj"aty all the eminent men attached to
that great citizen. Donati, in his turn, summoned to
the palace, Rinaldo degli Albizzi and his friends; who,
instead of obeying, endeavoured to defend themselves:
but the same people who had voted for them in the last
parliament, so far from taking arms at their call, ap¬
peared at^ new one convoked by Donati,—where they
showed the same docUity,—where they approved in the
same manner by their acclamation another balia pre¬
sented by the gonfalonier: and this was no sooner con¬
stituted, than Cosmo de’ Medici, with all his friends.

1443. RISE OP FRANCESCO SPORZA. 22?

■were recalled > and Rinaldo Albizzi, with all his party,
exiled.

Albizzi sought an asylum with Filippo Maria, duke
of Milan, on whom, as long as he had directed the
republic, he had always made war. Forgetting the
danger which he had often foretold to liberty in the
aggrandisement of the Visconti, and believing, like all
exiles, that his country could never submit to be with¬
out him, but would rise in his favour on his approach,
he pressed Filippo to make war on Florence. The war
actually broke ouf in the same year. Nicold Piccinino,
the successor of Braccio, ■whom the duke of Milan had
placed at the head of his armies, repeatedly penetrated
into Tuscany : hut the^ presence of Albizzi, who accom¬
panied him, produced no effect. Francesco Sforza was
opposed, on the side of the Florentines, to Piccinino.
Sforza had formed an intimate friendship with Cosmo
de’ Medici; he had often in his need had recourse to the
purse of the rich banker ; and he already laboured to
rise from the rank of condottiere to that of sovereign.
In 1443, he had made the pope, Eugenius IV.j’cede to
him the iVIarch of Ancona, in recorapence for his services
against the pope's subjects ; and he purposed, in making
himself feared by Filippo Maria, to obtain in marriage
his only but illegitimafe daughter, who would bring him
in dower at least some fragments of the duchy of Milan.

During the remainder of the reign of Filippo Maria,
he was habitually at war with*^e two republics of
Venice and Florence. He was desijous of recovering
from the former the Brescian and Bergamasque territory,
which he had been forced to cede to the Venetians; and
he resumed against the Florentines the project of hie an¬
cestors, to extend the dominion of the Viscontis over Tus¬
cany. Francesco Sforza and Bartolomeo Coleoni gave
many proofs of their great talents in tl^ service of
the two republics. Nicolo Piccinino and his two sons,
Francesco and Jacomo, showed not less ability in the
service of the duke of Milan. The last named, however,
almost always lost ground by his distrust of hiy^esm
Q 2

228 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 144l7.

generals, his versatility, his taste for contradictory in¬
trigues, his eagerness to sign peace every year, and to
recommence hostilities a few weeks afterwards. The
history of this war is rendered so confused by the secret
practices of Filippo Maria, which most commonly
seemed in opposition to his own interest, that we do
not attempt to fix it in the memory. The duke of Mi¬
lan, in making peace with the two republics, on the 21st
of October, 1441, granted their general, Francesco
Sforza, his daughter Bianca in marriage, ceding Vith
her in dower the lordships of Cremona and Pontremoli.
It seemed to be his purpose thus definitively to reconcile
himself with Sforza: but it was impossible for this
prince to remain firm in one resolution, or to preserve
his confidence in those whom he had rendered powerful.
He soon entered into the most complicated intrigues to
deprive his son-in-law of aU his lordships. The war was
renewed between him and the two republics; and Sforza
was again the general whom the republics put at the
head of their combined army. He was still their com¬
mander in 1447, when Filippo Maria, pressed by the
Venetians, menaced even in the country around Milan,
and fearing to lose his sovereignty, implored the aid of
his son-in-law, promising him a sincere reconciliatioh-
Francesco Sforza, who had just lost the March of An¬
cona by the secret practices of the duke of Milan, yet
accepted these last offers. He renounced his ancient
alliance with the Florentines and Venetians; and, on
the 9fh of August, he set forward with his army from
Bomagna, where he then was, to the succour of his
father-in-law. Arrived at Cotignola, the village of his
family, — the village in which his father, after having
thrown his pickaxe into the branches of an oak, to be
decided either by its ominous fall, or by its remaining
fixed, had seized the sword to engage in a company of
Adventure, — he there learned the death of the duke of
Milan, which had taken place at his capifal, on the 13th
of August, 1447.

The war of Lombardy was complicated by its con-

1447> KINS ALPHOIfSO AT NAPLES. 229

nection with another war which at the same tiAe
ravaged the kingdom of Naples. The queen^ Joan 11.,
had died there^ on the 2d of February, 1345; three
months after the death of her adopted son, Louis III. of
Anjou: by her will she had substituted for that prince
his brother Rene, duke of Lorraine. But Alphonso,
king of Aragon and Sicily, whom she had primarily
adopted, and who had advanced as far as Ischia, the
more effectually to observe the events which might
occifr jt Naples, claimed the succession, on the ground
of this first adoption, as well as of the ancient rights
of Manfred, to whom he had succeeded in the female
line. The kingdom of Naples was divided between
the parties of Aragon and Anjou. The Genoese, who
had voluntarily ranged themselves under the protection
of the duke of Milan, offered their assistance to the
duke of Anjou; their ancient enmity to the Catalonians
and Aragonese being further quickened by commercial
jealousies. On the 5th of August, 1435, their fleet
met that of Alphonso, before the island of Fonza.
They defeated it in a great battle; in which Xlphonso
had been made prisoner, with his brother, and all the
first nobles of his kingdom. These prisoners were
conducted to Milan, and there in a little time set at
liberty, by an unexpected generosity of Filippo Maria ;
whom Alphonso had made sensible how much the sub¬
jection of the kingdom of Naples to the French would
endanger the independence of the duchy of Milan, as
well as of all Italy. Visconti contracted not only a
dose alliance with his prisoner, whom he liberated, but
promised to aid him in ascending the throne of Naples.
This alliance, however, cost him the lordship of Genoa ;
for the Genoese, indignant at seeing the fruits of their
victory carried off by the prince whom they had chosen,
rose on the 27th of December, 1435, drove out the
Milanese garrison, and recovered their freedom. Al¬
phonso, seconded by the duke of Milan, recommenced
the war against Ren^ of Anjou with greater advantage.
On the 2d of June, 1442, he took from him the city of

230 HISTURY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1447.

J^aples: from that time peace was re-established in that
kingdom^ and Alphonso signalised himself by a liberality
which gained for him the surname of “ the Magnanim.
ous.” No monarch ever showed more zeal in liter¬
ature, or granted a more constant and more enlightened
protection to men of letters. He proved, by many noble
actions, that he had profited by the lessons of antiquity
which he admired and studied with so much ardour.
He established himself amidst a people which he had
conquered, but whose hearts he gained; and returned
no more either to Sicily or Aragon. Ho died at Naples,
on the 27 th of June, 1458.

Filippo Maria Visconti, at his death, left no legitimate
successor: the distant relatives who bore his name were
not descended from the princes his ancestors, who had
usurped the seigniory of Milan ; and they had not been
even thought of in the imperial bull which had insti¬
tuted the Milanese duchy in favour of Gian Galeazzo.
This bull had expressly excluded women from the suc-
cession j. who had, besides, never inherited any Italian
seigniory. Accordingly, Valentina Visconti, sister to
the last duke, and married to the duke of Orleans, and
Bianca Visconti, the natural daughter of Filippo Maria,
married to Francesco Sforza, had neither of them any
right to succeed to the last duke. Upon the extinction
of the male line of Visconti, on whom the republic of
Milan had conferred the seigniory, the sovereignty legi¬
timately returned to the repubhc itself, which claimed
its restoration. Four illustrious citizens, Antonio Tri-
vulzio, Teodoro Bossi, Giorgio Lampugnani, and In-
nocenzio Cotta, on the 14th of August, 1447, excited
tlie people to insurrection; and, with their support, re¬
constituted the Milanese republic. They, at the same
time, engaged all the captains of adventure and men at
arms who had been in the service of the duke of Milan
to declare for them. The most illustrious among these
were the two brothers Piccinino, sons oi Nicolo, who
had died on the 15th of October, 1444 j the three
brothers San Severino, natural children of a princely

1447. BEVIVAL OP THE MILANESE HEFUBLIC. 231

house at Naples; butj above allj Francesco Sforza, wMoj
■with his brilliant army^ entered the service of the re¬
public, upon condition that the republic should confirm
the cession of Cremona, which his wife had brought to
him in dower, and add to it the seigniories of Brescia
and Verona, if Sforza succeeded in taking either or both
those towns from the Venetians.

An excellent opportunity then presented itself of
restoring to Italy liberty and independence. In the
couiPtry most exposed to the invasion of the transalpine
nations there were three rich and powerful republics,
— Milan, Venice, and Florence,—supported on one side
by the warlike republics of Switzerland ; on the other,
by the more feeble ones of Genoa, Lucca, Sienna, and
Bologna. An equitable alliance between them would
have sufficed to secure Italy for ever from the barba¬
rians who menaced it on the side of France and Ger¬
many. The opulence of these three republics, their
numerous population, and the devotion with which the
citizens of free states always concur, with they whole
power, in the defence of their country, would have been
sufficient to render vain every foreign attack. Unhap¬
pily, the two men at the head of the republics of Flo¬
rence and Venice considered only a present and sordid
advantage; they had not the elevation of soul to prefer
the future liberty of Italy j and they refused to admit
the republic of Milan into a confraternity so desirable
for the three states.

Francesco Foscari, who was doge of Venice from
1423 to 1457, had communicated to the republic, of
which he was the chief, his own warlike ambition. He
had made it achieve the conquest of the Brescian and
Bergamasque territory. He judged the opportunity
favourable to detach new provinces from the duchy of
Milan, or perhaps to subjugate the whole; and he re¬
jected all the advances of the Milanese republic, which
ardently desirftl peace. Cosmo de’ Medici, at Florence,
also, so far from having, like the preceding chiefs of
that republic, a true love of liberty, began to aspire to
Q 4

232 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1447>

bfecome the prince of a country in which he had risen
as head of the democratic party. He was so superior
to his former associatesj in wealth, in the number of
dependants, in the deference shown him by foreign
powers ; he was likewise so elated by the flattery of all
the most distinguished men of letters; that he believed
himself formed to govern without opposition, and with¬
out a rival. Almost all the Italian republics had suc¬
cessively submitted to the influence of some family,
which had raised itself above every other. Tl)e'turn
of Florence seemed at last come ; Cosmo was deter¬
mined the Medici should take the same rank there
which the Bentivogli held at Bologna. He had him¬
self contributed to retain that republic, the ally of Flo.
rence, under the domineering power of an usurping
family. When Annibal Bentivoglio fell, on the 24th
of June, 1445, by the hand of assassins, armed by the
pope and the duke of Milan, Cosmo de’ Medici supplied
the Bolognese with another Bentivoglio, by disclosing
an affair of gallantry which one of that name had with
a Florentine lady of burgher family. The fruit of that
intrigue was a son, named Santi Cascese, whom Cosmo
de’ Medici caused to he received as the head of the
Bolognese republic. The moment was, in fact, come
when the credit of the Medici was to prevail over the
legal power of the Florentine signoria; and in which
they might, like the Bentivogli, transmit their usurped
power, not only to their legitimate children, but to their
spurious descendants. Cosmo felt no kind of sympathy
for the newly forming republic at Milan, which vainly
endeavoured to awaken in Italy the ancient enthusiasm
for liberty: he was jealous, too, of the republic of Venice,
which appeared to him to aspire to the dominion of
the whole peninsula. By way of counterpoise, he pro¬
mised Francesco Sforza his support to mount the throne
which had been filled by the duke of Milan.

Francesco Sforza, who had evinced talents for war
superior to those of the most distinguished captains of
the age, possessed, at the same time, the frankness and

1448. PERFIDY OP FRANCESCO SFORZA. 233

k

the liberality which military habits produce. He wife
considered a man eminently true and generous ; his
friends felt devotion to him, his soldiers enthusiasm.
But it is not in the trade of captains of adventure that
men can be formed to true honour. Francesco Sforza
showed himself, more than once, perfidious even to his
own lieutenants; some of whom he put to death with
great cruelty, for having only excited his suspicion. But
what, above all, revealed his character, and, at the same
time,*hv! clevernes|, was the address with which he, in
turn, deceived the two republics which trusted him;
rendering their subsidies and soldiers subservient to his
own elevation, and betraying them, one after the other,
when he had gained his object. It was thus he won at
once the admiration of his friend and disciple, Louis XL,
and lost the esteem of aU honourable men.

The duke of Orleans, in the name of his mother,
Valentina Visconti, advanced pretensions to the duchy of
Milan ; and caused it to be attacked by French troops on
the side of Asti. Sforza, not to commit himself with
France, lef the care of repelling them to Bartolomeo
Coleoni, who served the Milanese, but not under the
command of Sforza. Sforza, himself, in the mean while,
on the l6th of November, 1447, took by assault Pla¬
centia, then the second city of Lombardy, and pillaged
it with a barbarity from which it never recovered. He
also employed himself in exasperating the dissension
which began to manifest itself in the Milanese council.
Trivulzio was a Guelph, Bossi and Lampugnani were
Ghibelines; and the hereditary hatred between their
families envenomed their mutual jealousy. Trivulzio
engaged the Venetians to offer peace to the republic
of Milan, on condition of ceding to them Crema and
the Ghiara d’Adda. The Ghibelines, excited by Sforza,
refused to accede to the treaty, and caused it to be
rejected by the council of SOO: he, at the same time,
strengthened tlteir confidence by his victories. In the
month of May, 1448, he took from the Venetians all
they had conquered on the right of the Adda. On

234 HISTORY OF TRK ITALIAN B^FITBLICS. 1449<

ttie 17th of July^ he burnt their fleet on the Po, near
Casal Maggiore; and, on the 15th of September, he
gained a great and last victory over them at Caravaggio,
vrhere he made nearly their whole army prisoners of
war.

Sforza, after these victories, thought the Venetians
sufficiently subdued to prevent them from attempting to
conquer a state which offered such vigorous resistance.
He feared likewise that the IMilanese might be too much
elated to submit to him. He therefore released ail the
Venetian prisoners taken by him at Caravaggio; and on
the 18th of October, 1448, signed a treaty with the Ve¬
netians, by which he guaranteed to them Brescia and
Bergamo, and ceded Crema and the Ghiara d'Adda, on
condition that they should aid him in making the conquest
of the duchy of Milan, with all the territory attached to it
under Filippo Maria. The Milanese, indignant at this
treachery, soon perceived the extremity of their danger.
Several of the condottieri in their pay, imagining they
might derive greater advantages from an ambitious usurper
than from a republic, preferred following the fortune of a
captain so able and so fortunate as Sforza. Among the
subject cities, also, there were many that, despairing of
.setting themselves free, desired, at least, that Milan, of
whieh they were jealous, should, like them, be subject to
a master. Placentia was the first to yield to Sforza;
Abbiate-GrassOj Varese, Tortona, Alexandria, soon after
successively opened their gates to him. Pavia had sub¬
mitted to him in the preceding year, while he was still in
the service of the Milanese. In the month of February,
1449, he took posession of Parma; in the September
following, of Lodi and Crema. The Milanese, however,
though so hardly pressed, were not wanting to themselves.
They obtained some succour from the duke of Savoy;
and the richest citizens placing their whole fortunes at
the service' of the state, it was enabled to supply its
militia with firelocks, then a recent idVention, and a
costly arm, but inspiring the cavalry with great terror.

The republic of Venice perceived at last, but too late.

145f}. FBANCESUU SFORZA DUSE OF JUILAN. ^35

that its own interests, and the independence of Italy,*
equally demanded of them to save the republic of Milan.
On the 27 th of September, 1449, they signed a treaty
with the Milanese, by which they acknowledged the new
republic, and assigned as limits to it the Adda, the Tessin,
the Po, and the Swiss Alps; at the same time, they
abandoned to Sforza seven of the largest cities of Lom¬
bardy, with their fertile provinces. Sforza believed him¬
self too near attaining his object to renounce it: he,
however,*sent bis bsother to Venice to declare his ac¬
ceptance of the treaty; and, in conformity with the
orders which he had received, he removed his army
from Milan. The events occurred in the sowing season ;
and he was desirous of inspiring the Milanese with
confidence, to finish the sowing of their land, and
thus consume the greater part of their grain. As soon
as this operation was over, he hastily recalled his army ;
he stopped the supplies of provisions, which the Milanese
sent for in every direction ; and he renewed hostilities.
The Venetians attempted to succour Milan; but Ij^ de¬
feated them, on the 28th of December. The famind
which he produced soon became extreme: the people,
incapable of supporting it, rose on the 25th of February,
1450; and, on the 26th, they opened the gates to Fran¬
cesco Sforza, proclaiming him duke of Milan, lihe
Venetians still attempted, for some years after, to dispute
his newly acquired greatness: in this view, they made
alliance with Alphonso, king of Naples, and the duke of
Savoy. But Cosmo de' Medici, who became daily more
powerful at Florence, and who substituted private af¬
fection for the generous and ancient love of liberty,
drew closer his alliance with Sforza, and sent him aid.
Meanwhile, the taking of Constantinople by the Turks,
on the 29 th of May, 1453, spread terror throughout
Christendom. The Italians began to feel the necessity
of re-establishing peace among themselves, for the sake
of their common defence against barbarians: and a
treaty was accordingly signed at Lodi, on the 9th of
April, 1454. Berghrao and Brescia, with the territory.

236 BISTORT OP THE ITALIAN BEPUBUCS. 1452

\hereunto belonging, fell to the Venetians ; but to Fran¬
cesco Sforza was secured the duchy of Milan, in which
Crema and the Ghiara d’Adda were comprehended.

The consent of the emperor was wanting to legitimatise
the title of duke of Milan to Francesco Sforza. But Fre¬
derick III. of Austria, who reigned since the 2d of Feb¬
ruary, 1440, positively refused to acknowledge him. The
new duke, however, felt not the least uneasiness : he de¬
spised Frederick as a weak and indolent prince, incapable
either of defending Germany or his hereditary states ;
and who thought of Italy only as a fair, in which to
sell at auction titles, dignities, and investitures to the
vanity of the great. In 1432, Sigismond had sold the
title of marquis of Mantua to Giovanni Francesco da
Gonzaga, for 12,000 florins; on the 15th of May, 1452,
Frederick III. sold, at a higher price, the title of duke
of Modena and Reggio to Borso d’Este. This family
did not obtain from pope Paul II. till nineteen years
later the title of duchy for the seigniory of Ferrara,
which they held from the church. Sigismond, and
ifter him Frederick, sold, with the utmost effrontery,
the titles of counts, barons, knights, imperial notaries,
and the legitimatising of bastards, to all who would
purchase them ; and Francesco Sforza, believing himself
sule of obtaining a vain diploma whenever he asked for
one, did not esteem it worth the price.

Almost at the same time that the last attempt of the
Lombards to recover their liberty failed at Milan, the last
attempt of a Roman citizen to restore liberty to Rome
was punished with death by pope Nicholas V. The
liberties of Rome, as well as those of aU the states of the
church, had been lost, without the possibility of mark¬
ing the exact moment of their destruction. The senator
and caporioni, or bannerets of Rome, had long adminis¬
tered the government of the republic, without having
the limits of their authority, and of that of the pope, the
first citizen of the state, properly defined. The former,
in the oaths taken on entering ofiice, instead of swearing
obedience to the pope, promised Mm protection: they

1453. LAST STRUGGLE OF ROME FOR LIBERTY. 237

swore not to allow any one to touch his life or limb, 0 /
to infringe his liberty. These magistrates, as well as
those of the other states of the church, were always
elected by the people. The church was regarded as the
protector of popular liberty ; and, when a city returned
under its sovereignty, it always considered that it had
recovered freedom. The pope, however, often made the
people transfer to him the right of naming the senator of
Rome, or the rectors of the other cities of the church.
During the long residence of the popes at Avignon, the
court of Rome had forgotten its ancient principles of
liberty ; its legates had assumed absolute power. The
anarchy of Rome, the outrages committed by the nobles,
the tyranny of several usurpers, had accustomed the
people to the loss of liberty. They had frequently
sought refuge, from a tyranny more cruel, in the absolute
power of the prelates. Perugia, Bologna, and other cities,
had often conferred the signoria on the legate, or the
Roman people on the pope, with the suspension of all
the rights of the citizen. The great western schism again
shook the jiDwer of the pontiffs in the states of the
church, a few years after they had been conquered by
tile cardinal Albornoz. The popes, unacknowledged by
one half of the church, impoverished, and endangered,
lived, nearly the whole duration of the schism, exiled
from Rome, and most frequently dependent on the so¬
vereign lord of Rimini. Martin V., who was elected
at the conclusion of the schism by the council of Con.
stance, did not immediately recover the obedience of the
Roman states : he passed the greatest part of his pon¬
tificate at Florence. Eugenius IV., who succeeded him
on the 3d of May, 1431, again lost, in consequence of
his turbulent, ambitious, and despotic character, several
of the states tliat Martin V. had recovered. His prime
minister, the patriarch Vitelleschi, stained his reign with
numerous acts of cruelty and perfidy : not one of the
liberties of Rome, or of the states of the church, were
any longer respected.

Nicholas V., who^cceeded Eugenius IV. on the 6th

238 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1453.

M)f May, 1447, was known at Florence under the name
of Tomaso da Sarzana. He had been preceptor to Ki-
naldo ilegli Albizzi, and afterwards the daily guest of
Cosmo de’ Medici. His knowledge in ancient literature,
in the fine arts, and philosophy, caused him to be ranked
among the most distinguished members of the society
that assembled at the house of that illustrious citizen.
But the studies of Tomaso da Sarzana had not destroyed
the servile habits of his mind and education. Gram,
marians, poets, and rhetoricians were, in this^jCantury,
too much accustomed to regard themselves as clients or
dependants on the rich and great; to live by tbeir
bounty, and at their table; to receive from their mouths
the word of command for their opinions and sentiments.
Tomaso da Sarzana could not learn, in the palace of Cosmo
de’ Medici, to love or respect a liberty which his patron
was secretly undermining, and of which he was labour¬
ing to deprive his country. After he had obtained the
pontificate, he showed the same zeal for the progress of
ancient learning, for collections of manuscripts, for trans¬
lations of Greek works, for the restoration of the monu¬
ments of antiquity, and for the encouragement of
contemporary artists, that had distingtiished him in a
more humble career. But Nicholas V. rejected impa¬
tiently all opposition, all control of his will: he deter¬
mined on seeing in the Romans only submissive subjects,
to whom he denied all participation in the government.
Stefano Porcari, a Roman noble, willing to profit by
the interregnum which preceded the nomination of
Nicholas V., to make the Homan citizens demand *ihe
renewal and confirmation of their ancient rights and
privileges, was denounced to the new pope as a danger¬
ous person; and, so far from obtaining what he had
hoped, he had the grief to see the citizens always more
strictly excluded from any participation in public affairs.
Those were entrusted only to prelates, who, being pre¬
pared for it neither by their studies,nor sentiments,
suff’ered the administration to fall into the most shame¬
ful disorder. ^

1453. DEATH OF STEFANO POROARI. 239

In an insurrection of the people in the Piazza Navona,
arising from a quarrel which began at a bull-flght, Stefano
Porcati endeavoured to direct their attention to a more
noble objectj and turn this tumult to the advantage of
liberty. The pope hastily indulged all the fancies of the
people^ with respect to their games or amusements; but
firmly rejected dl their serious demands^ and exiled Por-
cari to Bologna. The latter hoped to obtain by conspiracy
what he had failed to accomplish by insurrection. There
wereinot less than 400 exiled Roman citizens; he per¬
suaded them all to*join him, and appointed them a ren¬
dezvous at Rome, for the .5th of January, 1453, in the
house of his brother-in-law. Having escaped the vigil¬
ance of the legate of Bologna, he proceeded there him¬
self, accompanied by 300 sohlie#, whom he had enlisted
in his service. The whole band was assembled on the
night of the appointed 5th of January ; and Stefano
Porcari was haranguing them, to prepare them for the
attack qf the capitol, — in which he reckoned on re¬
establishing the senate of the Roman republic, — when,
his secret having been betrayed, the house w&s sur¬
rounded with troops, the doors suddenly forced, and the
conspirators overcome by numbers before their arms had
been distributed. Next morning, the body of Stefano
Porcari, with those of nine of his associates, were seen
hanging from the battlements of the castle of St. Angelo.
In spite of their ardent entreaties, they had been denied
confession and the sacrament. Eight days later, the execu¬
tions, after a mockery of law proceedings, were renewed,
and continued in great numbers. The pope succeeded in
causing those who had taken refuge in neighbouring
states to be delivered up to him ; and thus the last spark
oftRoman liberty was extinguished in blood.

240 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1454.

CHAP. XI.

ITALT LOSES THE GREAT MEN WHO GAVE LUSTRE TO THE PRE¬
CEDING PERIOD. —THE republic OF FLORENCE ENSLAVED BY

THE MEDICI. -WAR OF THE VENETIANS AGAINST THE TURKS.

- CUNQUEST OF CYPRUS.

. . •

The generation which witnessed the taking of Con¬
stantinople by the Turks, was absorbed by the dai/^er
with which thii terrible calamity menaced Italy. That
country saw on its confines the dominion of the Turk%:
the banner of the crescAt floated over the whole eastern
coast of the Adriatic; from the extremity of the
Morea to the rugged mountains of Bo.snia. Italy was
alarmed every year by the conquest and destruction
of some Christian kingdom, or by the takjpg and
sacking of some flourishing city. It became filled
with emigrants, from the palaces or convents of the
whole eastern world. These emigrants were still ftlU
of the recollections of a civilisation not inferior to that
of Italy herself. They felt the same ardour for ancient
literature and science ; they were equally habituated to
the luxuries and charms of life; while, at the same time,
they had escaped from scenes of desolation, massacre,
and martyrdom, which their imagination vividly retraced
as being about to be repeated in the country which gave
them hospitality. On this plea, they implored pity and
aid from those to whom they exposed their wretched¬
ness ; and their benefactors themselves felt that the
hour of Italy was near when the knell of Greece 1ft
tolled.

The Turks arrived in Europe with an organisation
wholly military, that seemed to ensure them a continu.
ation of new conquests. Still intoxicated with the re¬
ligious fanaticism of their prophet, which had been
revived by communicating it to a new nation and

1433. TUB TUBKS THREATEN ITALY. 241

monarchy, they believed that they secured their salvaJ
tion by the destruction of infidels, Always aggressors,
they marched to battle to gain heaven rather than the
riches of the earth. The Turkish horseman was un-
^ualled in the use of his scimitar, and in the precision
■with which hf managed his horse ; which, running at
full speed, stopped, turned, and returned, with a docility
which the Latin cavalry could never attain. The new
inilitia of the janissaries was, at the same time, the best
infanfry»in Europe.; the most steady and the most in¬
trepid ; the only disciplined force at a period when
there were no troops of the line in the ^st. Finally,
the artillery of the Turks was more mimerous, and
bstter served, than that of the we^ern nations. Industry
was not annihilated in the coifftries which they had
conquered : they knew how to profit by the arts which
had been carried to perfection in those countries; and
thus united the knowledge of civilised people with the
courage •of barbarians. The report soon spread at
Rome, that the same Mahomet who had conquered
Constantinople, had voAd to enter also as conqueror
the ancient capital of the world, in order to destroy
there what he called the idolatry of the Christians.

The fears of Italy were augmented by the conscious¬
ness of the want of great leaders. During the first
quarter of the century after the taking of Constantinople,
all those who had directed with so much glory the
powerful states of that country had disappeared, one
after the other, without being any where replaced by
successors worthy of them. No great name any longer
inspired confidence; no great character undertook the
diction of government; no generous sentiment ani.
nwted the people, who passed alternately from fear to
languor; and the country, which had till then pre¬
sented a scene glowing with so much life, exhibits a
continual conflict of selfish interests, to the entire ex¬
clusion of ever/nobler passion.

The first among the eminent men who quitted the
scene in Italy was the old doge, Francesco Foscari.

B

342 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1453.

tae had directed the republic of Venice for the space of
thirty-four years; and, by communicating his ambition
to his fellow-citizens, had excited them to*the conquest
of a part of Lombardy. The council of ten did not,
it appears, pardon Foscari an influence and glory which
had changed the spirit of the republic, ahd had drawn
it into the whirlpool of Italian politics, of which till then
it had kept clear. The jealous aristocracy of Venice
could not endure that the chief of the state should
acquire the respect and affection of the people; he was
made to expiate by domestic grief the lustre attached to
his name. Jacopo Foscari, the son of the doge, was
accused, in 1445, of having received money from the
duke of Milan, Thawformer was a Florentine exile
of bad repute: nevertneless, as it was the rule of Venice
to act upon every suspicion, however slight, in matters
concerning the safety of the state, the son of the doge
was put to the torture. His sufferings forced from him
an avowal; and he was condemned to exile.* A con¬
fession thus extorted leaves ^e guilt of the accused
uncertain, while the barbarousmieans by which such evi¬
dence is obtained places beyond doubt the criminality of
the judges. Jacopo Foscari was, probably, as guildess
on this occasion as he was five years later, when he was
again tortured and condemned. One of the judges who
presided at his first trial was assassinated in 1450, and
it was suspected that the murderer was an emissary of
Jacopo. Jacopo was accordingly declared guilty, and
the period of his exile prolonged. His innocence, how.
ever, was soon afterwards proved, the assassination hav¬
ing been acknowledged by another person, who declared
that Jacopo had nb share in the murder. On recei|ing
the news of this disclosure, the son of the doge, in
exile at Canea, entreated his judges to allow him to
return to Venice. He preserved for a country, where
he had twice been put to the torture, and twice branded
with infamy, the passionate attachment so characteristic
of the Venetians. He had only one wish, one hope,—
that of carrying back to Venice his bones broken by

1457> DEPOeiTiDN OF fosoari. 243

the executioner, and dying beside his aged father, ifts
mother, his wife, and children, on the spot which had
given him birth. Unable to soften his judges, he wrote
to beg the duke of Milan to intercede for him: the
letter was intercepted, and transferred to the council of
ten. He declared, that this was what he expectetl ;
that he wished to awaken fresh suspicion, as the only
means of being restored to home. He was brought
hacl^to Venice, as he desired. His third criminal pro-
secutioh began, lilee.the two others, with torture ; and it
was at this terrible price that he purchased the happiness
of once more embracing his parents, wife, and children.
He was again sent back to die at Canea. Fifteen months
afterwards, on the 23d of October, 1437, his father
was deposed from his functions of doge, on the ground
of incapacity from extreme age. The old man died
while listening to the tolling of the beU for the inaugur¬
ation of his successor. No one who succeeded to the
ducal throne ever ventured, from that time, to provoke
tile jealousy of the aristocracy.

The next great man whom Italy lost, after the doge
Foscari, was Alphonso of Aragon, king of Naples: he
died on the 27th of June, 1458, in the sixty-fourth year
of his age. He had constantly inhabited Italy, or the
adjoining isles, since the year 1420, when he was adopted
by queen Joan II., and became completely Italian. He
proved it by his zeal for reviving literature; by the pro¬
tection which he granted to men of letters; by his ad¬
miration of the ancients. He deserved the title of
Magnanimous, which had been given him by his people.
No sovereign of Naples Jiad been so much beloved, or
l^ad done so much good to that finf country. Alphonso
left to his brother John, king of Navarre, his kingdoms
of Aragon, Valencia, Catalonia, Sardinia, the Balearic
Isles, and Sicily. But he regarded the kingdom of
Naples, which he had conquered, as belonging im¬
mediately to himself; and he left it to Ferdinand, the
oflfepring of his love. The queen, wife of Alphonso,
believed that this son was born of Marguerite de Hijar ;

R 2

S44 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN BEPUBLICS. 1458.

ud put her to death by smothering. The victim -was
said to have sacrificed her reputation to save that of a
more illustrious person. Alphonso never forgave his
■wife this atrocity; he did not punish her, but he bade her
an eternal adieu. He sent her back to Spain, whither
he vowed never to return. He legitimatised Ferdinand •
and caused him to be acknowledged his successor by
the three orders of the Neapolitan nation assembled in
parliament, and by the pope, lord paramount of the
kingdom. Ferdinand had scarcely mounted the throne
before he showed he in no ways merited the predilection
of his father. He was avaricious, cruel, and perfidious.
He soon alienated all die Neapolitan barons; and his
long reign was passed in repressing the conspiracies of
his vassals. These last called to their aid John, duke
of Calabria, the son of Ren^ of Anjou, who had been
formerly the competitor of Alphonso. The duke of
Calabria, in his enterprise to place his father on the
throne of Naples, believed that he should be assis^
both bp Francesco Sforza,—who, before he was duke of
Milan, had long fought, as his father had done before
him, for the party of Anjou,—and by the Florentine re¬
public, which had always been devoted to France. But
Sforza judged that the security and independence of
Italy could be maintained only so long as the kingdom
of Naples did not fall into the hands of France. The
French were already masters of Genoa and the gates of
Italy : they would traverse in every direction, and hold
in fear or subjection every state in the peninsula, if they
should acquire the sovereignty of Naples. For these
reasons Sforza resisted all his friends, dependants, and
even his wife, who vehemently solicited him for the house
of Anjou : he also brought Cosmo de' Medici over to his
opinion; and thus prevented the republic of Florence
from seconding a party towards which it found itself
strongly inclined. The duke of Calabria, who had entered
Naples in 1459, had begun successfully'; but, receiving
no assiatance from abroad, he soon wearied and ex¬
hausted the people, who alone had to furnish him with

1458. FURDlNANDj KIN'S OF NAPLES. 245

supplies. He lost, one after the other, all the provinc^
which had declared for him ; and was finally, in 1464,
constrained to abandon the kingdom.

Ferdinand, to strengthen himself, kept in dungeons,
or put to death, all the feudatories who had shown any
favour to his rival; above all, he resolved to be rid of
the greatest captain that stiU remained in Italy, Jacopo
Ficcinino, th'e son of Nicolo, and head of what was
StiU called the militia, or school of Braccio. He sent
to Milan, whither Ficcinino, who had served the party
of Anjou, had retired, and where he had married a
daughter of Sforza, to invite him to enter his service,
promising him the highest dignities in his kingdom.
He gave the most formal engagements for his safety
to Sforza, as well as to Jacopo himself. He received
him with honours, such as he would not have lavished
on the greatest sovereign. After having entertained
him twenty-seven days in one perpetual festival, he
found means to separate him from his most trusty
officers, caused him to be arrested in his own palacg
and to be immediately strangled. This happened on
the 24th of June, 1465.

A few nwnths after the duke of Calabria had quitted
the kingdom of Naples, the great citizen, Cosmo de’ Me¬
dici, who governed Florence, died, in his seventy-fifth
year, on the 1st of August, 1464. It was then thirty
years since he had been recalled to his country, by the
same revolution that had banished the Albizzi. By his
authority during that long space of time, he had com¬
pletely iUayed the fermentation which formerly agitated
that republic. The constitution had not apparently
changed; the executive power wap still entrusted to
a gonfalonier and eight priori ; who, during the two
months they were in office, did not quit the puldic
palace. The judicial power was still exercised by two
or three rectors, aliens to the state, who, imder the titles
of Captain of thb people, of Podesta, and of Bargello, were
invested with unlimited power over the lives of the citir
zena. They were chosen each year from some friendly
R 3

246 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1458»

City; they arrived with their judges, serjeants, and all
their officers of justice; they received a munificent salary:
but, on leaving glpce, they were obliged to tender an ac¬
count of their administration before a syndicate charged
with the examination of their conduct. Finally, the laws
could not be executed without the triple sanction of the
college, of the council of the people, and of the common
council. But the Florentines had in vain preserved all
this outward scaffolding of popular power. Inegy^dify
took birth from the immeasurable process of wealth; and
the citizens felt the distance between individuals among
them too enormous to retain the sentiment of equality
even in their political rights. The revenues of many
Florentine citizens surpassed those of the greatest mon¬
archical princes. Their palaces, which are to this day
the object of our admiration, already displayed all the
prodigies of art; at the same time that they presented,
with the crowd of servants who filled them, the aspect
of fortresses, within which public justice dared not
penetrarte. Artisans no longer claimed any participa¬
tion in political power; and even citizens of easy fortune
no longer felt themselves independent. They knew that
the credit and protection of their richer fellow-citizens had
become necessary to the prosperity of their industry.

It was in consequence of this great inequality that a
close aristocracy possessed itself of the whole direction
of the state. It acknowledged as chiefs Cosmo de’
Medici, the richest of the Italians, and Neri Capponi,
the ablest statesman of Florence. The former made
the most liberal use of his fortune: he built palaces,
churches, and hospitals on all sides. He was profuse
of gifts, loans, and his credit to the poorest of the
citizens. He granted pensions to the learned, and to
artists. He collected manuscripts from the Levant and
all parts of Europe, and had them copied. Men cele¬
brated his taste and acquirements. Without having
written any thing himself, he passed for a man of letters;
and the revival of the Platonic philosophy was attributed
to him, in consequence of the translations made by his

1458. LAST YEARS OF COSMO Oe' MEDICI. 247

direction. While Cosmo de’ Medici thus fixed th^
public attention by his private life, Neri Capponi gained
the sufirages of the people by his.Jjublic conduct.
Charged, as ambassador, with every ^fficult negoti¬
ation, — in war, with every hazardous enterprise, — he
participated in all the briUiant successes of the Floren¬
tines, as well during the domination of the Albizzi as
during that of the Medici. From the year 1434 to
1455, in which Neri Capponi died, these two chiefs of
the rt^ublic had sijt times assembled the parliament to
make a balia; and, availing themselves of its authority,
which was above the law, they obtained the exile of all
their enemies, and filled the baUotting purses of the
magistracy with the names of their own partisans, to
the exclusion of all others. It appears that all the efibrts
of their administration were directed towards calming the
passions of the public, and maintaining peace without,
as well as repose within, the state. They had, in fact,
succeeded in preventing Florence from being troubled
with new factions, or engaged in new*wars; but they
drew on the republic all the evils attending an aristocratic
government. Medici and Capponi had not been able to
find men who would sacrifice the liberties of their country
without allowing them to gratify their baser passions.
These two heads of the republic, therefore, suffered their
subordinate agents to divide among themselves all the
little governments of the subject cities, and every lucra¬
tive employment ; and these men, not satisfied with this
first injustice, made unequal partitions of the taxes, in¬
creasing them on the poor, lowering them on the rich, and
exempting themselves. At last they began to sell their
protection, as well with respect to the tribunals as the
councils; favour silenced justice ; and, in the midst of
peace and apparent prosperity, the Florentines felt their
republic, undermined by secret corruption, hastening to
ruin.

When Neri Capponi died the council refused to call
a new parliament to replace the balia, whose power ex¬
pired on the 1st of July, 1455. It was the aristocracy
R 4

24B BISTORT OF TBE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1456.

itself, comprehending all the creatures of Cosmo de’
Medici, that, fr dfflj ealousy of his domination, wished to
return to the dsKion of the laws. The whole republic
was rejoiced, a^ffliberty had been regained. The elec¬
tion of the signoria was again made fairly by lot, —the
catasto was revised,—the contributions were again equi¬
tably apportioned,—the tribunals ceased to listen to the
recommendations of those who, till then, had made a
traiSc of distributive justice. The aristocracy, seeing
that clients no longer flocked to their.houses with hands
full, began to perceive that their jealousy of Cosmo de’
Medici had only injured themselves. Cosmo, with his
immense fortune, was just as much respected as before:
the people were intoxicated with joy to find themselves
again free; but the aristocracy felt themselves weak
and abandoned. They endeavoured to convoke a par¬
liament without Cosmo ; but he bafiled their efiorts, the
longer to enjoy their humiliation. He began to fear,
however, that the Florentines might once more acquire
a taste^for libert;^ ; and when Lucas Pitti, rich, power¬
ful, and bold, was named gonfalonier, in July, 1456,
he agreed with him to reimpose the yoke on the Flo¬
rentines. Pitti assembled the parliament; but not till
he had filled aU the avenues of the public square with
soldiers or armed peasants. The people, menaced and
trembling within this circle, consented to name a new
balia,' more violent and tyrannical than any of the pre¬
ceding. It was composed ef 352 persons, to whom
was ddegated aU the power of the republic. They
exiled a great number of the citizens who had shown
the most attachment to liberty, and they even put some
to death.

Cosmo de' Medici was at this period sixty-nine years
of age; he reckoned that his two sons, now in the
prime of life, would support his declining years: but
Pietro, the eldest, was absolutely incapacitated by he¬
reditary gout. He could neither walk iter ride, butwas
carried about in an arm-chair: he was, besides, undis-
tingnished by intellect or force of character. Giovanni,

PIETRO DE' MEDICI.

1464.

249

the second^ was endued with much more talent: it was
On him that Cosmo had placed the hon^of his house;
but he died, in the month of of the year

146s. Lucas Pitti, rising to the emironce from which
they fell, looked on himself henceforth as the only chief
of the state. It was about this time that he undertook
the building of that magnificent palace which now forms
the residence of the grand dukes. The republican equal¬
ity was not only offended by the splendour of this regal
dwelhng; but the‘construction of it afforded Pitti an
occasion for marking his contempt of liberty and the
laws. He made of this building an asylum for all fugi¬
tives from justice, whom no public officer dared pursue
when once he took part in the labour. At the same time
individuals, as weU as communities, who would obtain
some favour from the republic, knew that the only
means of being heard was to offer Lucas Pitti some
precious wood or marble to be employed in the con¬
struction of his palace.

When Cosmo de’ Medici died, at his country heuse of
Careggi, on the 1st of August, 146'4, Lucas Pitti felt
himself released from the control imposed by the
virtue and moderation of that great citizen ; on whose
tomb the signoria inscribed, in the following year, the
title of “ Father of his Country." His son, Pietro de’
Medici, then forty-eight years of age, supposed {hat he
should succeed to the administration of the republic, as
he had succeeded to the Wealth of his father, by he¬
reditary right; but the state of his health did not
admit of his attending regularly to business, or of his
inspiring his rivals with much i^ear. To diminish the
weight of affairs which oppressed him, he resolved on
withdrawing a part of his immense fortune from com¬
merce; recalling all his loans made in partnership with
Other merchants; and laying out this money in land.
But this unexpected demand of considerable capital
occasioned a fatal shock to the commerce of Florence ;
at the same time that it alienated all the debtors of the
house of Medici, and deprived it of much of its peps-

S50 BISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1466.

fbrity. The death of Sforza also, which took place on.
the 8tli of March, 1466, deprived the Medicean party
of its firmest stUpprt abroad. Francesco Sforza, whether
as condottiere or duke of Milan, had always been the
devoted friend of Cosmo. His son, Galeazzo Sforza,
who succeeded him, declared his resolution of persisting
in the same alliance; but the talents, the character, and,
above aO, the glory of his father, were not to be found
in him. Galeazzo seemed to believe that the supreme
power which he inherited brought^him the fight of
indulging every pleasure — of abandoning himself to
every vice without restraint. He dissipated by his
ostentation the finances of the duchy of Milan ; he
stained by his libertinism the honour of almost all the
noble families ; and he alienated the people by his
cruelty.

The friends of liberty at Florence soon perceived that
Lucas Pitti and Pietro de’ Medici no longer agreed toge¬
ther ; and they recovered courage when the latter pro¬
posed to the council the calling of a parliament, in order
to renew the balia, the power of which expired on the
1st of September, 1465: his proposition was rejected.
The magistracy began again to be drawn by lot from
among the members of the party victorious in 1434.
This return of liberty, however, was but of short dura¬
tion. Pitti and Medici were reconciled: they agreed to
call a parliament, and to direct it in concert; to intimi¬
date it, they surrounded it with foreign troops. But
Medici, on the nomination of the balia, on the 2d of Sep¬
tember, 1466, found means of admitting his own parti¬
sans only, and excluding all those of Lucas Pitti. The
citizens who had shown any zeal for liberty were all ex¬
iled; several were subjected to enormous fines. Five
commissioners, called accoppiatori, were charged to open>
every two months, the purse from which the signoria
were to be drawn, and choose from thence the names of
the gonfalonier and eight priori, who were to enter office.
These magistrates were so dependent on Pietro de’ Me¬
dici, that the gonfalonier went frequently to his palace to

1466.

FLORENTINE EMIGRANTS.

251

take his orders ; and afterwards published them as th#
result of his deliberations with his colleagues^ whom he
had not even consulted. Lucas Fitti n)^ed himself in
building his palace. His talents were judged to bear no
proportion to his ambition: the friends of liberty, as
well as those of Medici, equally detested him ; and he
remained deprived of all power in a city which he had
so largely contributed to enslave.

Italjr became filled with Florentine emigrants: every
revolutidh, even evtry convocation of parliament, was
followed by the exile of many citizens. The party of
the Albizzi had been exiled in 1434 ; but the Alberti,
who had vanquished it, were, in their turn, banished in
1466; and among the members of both parties were to
be found almost all the historical names of Florence, —
those names which Europe had learned to respect, either
for immense credit in commerce, or for the lustre which
literature and the arts shed on all belonging to that
renowned city. Italy was astonished at the exile of so
many illustrious persons. At Florence, the citizens who
escaped proscription trembled to see despotism esta¬
blished in their republic ; but the lower orders were in
general contented, and made no attempt to second Barto¬
lomeo Coleoni, when he entered Tuscany, in 1467, at
the head of the Florentine emigrants, who had taken
him into their pay. Commerce prospered; manufac¬
tures were carried on with great activity; high wages
supported in comfort all who lived by their labour ; and
the Medici entertained them with shows and festivals,
keeping them in a sort of perpetual carnival, amidst
which the people soon lost all thought of liberty.

Pietro de’ Medici was always in too bad a state of
health to exercise in person the sovereignty he had
usurped over his country: he left it to five or six citizens,
who reigned in his name. Tomaso Soderini, Andrea de’
Pazzi, Luigi Gtucciardini, Matteo Palmieri, and Pietro
Minerbetti, were the real chiefs of the state. They not
only transacted all business, but appropriated to them-
eelves all the profit; they sold their influence and credit;

952 HIST DRY OF THE ITALIAN BEFUBLICS. 1466.

"ihey gratified their cupidity or their vengeance: bul
they took care not to act in their own names, or ts
pledge their own responsibility; they left that to the
house of Medici. Pietro, during the latter months of
his life, perceived the disorder and corruption of his
agents. He was afflicted to see his memory thus stained,
and he addressed them the severest reprimands; he
even entered into correspondence with the emigrants,
whom he thought of recalling, when he died, on ,the 2d
of December, 1469. His two sons,' Lorenzo aild Giuli-
ano, the elder of whom was not twenty-one years of
age, were presented by Tomaso Soderini to the foreign
ambassadors, to the magistrates, and to the first citizens
of the ruling faction; which last he warned, that the
only means of maintaining the influence of their party
was to preserve the respect of all for its chiefs. But
the two young Medici, given up to all the pleasures of
their age, had yet no ambition. The power of the state
remained in the hands of the five citizens who had
exerdeed it under Pietro.

While the republic of Florence thus lost its liberty,
that of Bologna fell equally under the domination of the
family of Bentivoglio. Its subjugation was still more
disgraceful. No lustre whatever was attached to the
name of Giovanni II. (Bentivoglio), who governed that
state from 1462 to 1505. Having been left an infant
by his father Annibal, kfiled in 1445, he was brought up
by the illegitimate son of one of his relations, whom
Cosmo de’ Medici had discovered at Florence; and
received from him, as a paternal inheritance, the sove-
reignty of his country. The republics of Sienna and
Lucca, taking advantage of peace, had sunk into pro¬
found and obscure tranquillity: that of Genoa, wearied
with internal convulsions, which followed each other
incessantly, had lost all influence over the rest of Italy;
oonfiiuuaily oppressed by faction, it no longer preserved
even the recollection of liberty. In 1*456, it had sub¬
mitted to the king of France, then Charles VII.; and
John of Anjou, duke of Calabria, had come to exercise

146s. POLIOS’ OP VENICE IN THE BAST. 253

the functiona of governor in the king’s name. He*
made it, at the same time, his fortress, from whence
to attack the kingdom of Naples. But this war had
■worn out the patience of the Genoese : they rose against
the French; and, on the 17th of July, I46l, destroyed
the army sent to subdue them by Rene of Anjou.

The Genoese had no sooner thrown off a foreign yoke,
than they became divided into two factions, — the
Adorni and the Fregosi; both had, at different times,
and moi‘6 than onc«, given them a doge. The more
violent and tyrannical of these factious magistrates was
Paolo Fregoso, also archbishop of Genoa, who had re.
turned to his country, in 1462, as chief of banditti;
and left it again, two years afterwards, as chief of a
band of pirates. The Genoese, disgusted with their
independence, which was disgraced by so many crimes
and disturbances, had, on the 13th of April, 1464,
yielded to Francesco Sforza, duke of Milan ; and after¬
wards remained subject to his son Galeazzo.

The Venedans alone, at this epoch, preserved is ho¬
nour the name of republic in Italy; but it was a
republic without liberty. Their internal policy remains
in the shade: their efforts for the defence of Italy
against the Turks is all that is consigned to history.
These efforts would have been more glorious, if they
had better known how to govern their eastern subjects.
Their possessions on tlie Illyrian coast, up to the extre¬
mity of Greece, were so extensive,— they comprehended
countries the productions of which were so rich, the po¬
sitions of which were so strong; of which one part of the
population were so brave, the other so industrious ; that
if the Venetians had frankly put themselves at the head
of the Illyrian nation,—if they had governed them only
with as much equity, with a protection as intelligent, as
that with which they governed their conquered provinces
in Lombardy, they would have founded an imperishable
empire, in which civilisation would not have been lost:
but the Venetiang always regarded these establishments
beyond Italy as the Spaniards, English, and Dutch, at a

254 HISTDBY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1463.

hater period, have regarded their possessions in the two
Indies. They not only did not allow the inhabitants
the enjoyment of political rights, but they denied them
those of humanity : if they allowed that they were men,
they at least never permitted them to forget that they
were considered as an inferior race to the Italian. In¬
stead of turning to account the superior intelligence and
industry of the Greeks, they were determined to see in
them no other qualities than those of cunning and per¬
fidy; and they appropriated to themteelves, atthb expense
of the natives, and in their own towns, the monopoly of
commerce. The Albanians and Illyrians, very different
from the Greeks, were impatient of control, and de¬
spised the restraints of regular industry; but they
were energetic and brave. The republic would have
found in them its best soldiers and sailors, if it had
received them into its armies and navies on an equal
footing; but it persisted in considering them only as
savages, to whom it yielded no confidence, always re¬
stricting them to the lowest ranks in the army ; and,
when at last it consented to raise among them the light
cavalry of the Stradiots, they were destined more to
over-run and ravage than to defend the county. ^

The Venetians sent an ambassador to MaBomet II.
immediately after the taking of Constantinople, to redeem
those of their countrymen who had been made captive
in the capital of the Greek empire, fln the 18th of
April, 1454, this ambassador signed a treaty of peace
and good neighbourhood with the sultan, by virtue of
which the republic was to support at Constmitinople, as
in the time of the Greek empire, a bails, who was to
be at the same time its ambassador there, andthe judge
of all the Venetian subjects in the Levant. Mahomet II.
took advantage of this peace to subdue successively
the Illyrian or Greek princes whose independence had
survived the fall of Constantinople. In 1458, he con¬
quered the kingdoms of Rascia and of Servia; in the same
year he over-ran the duchy of Athens, causing the last
duke, Francesco Acciaiuolo, a Florentine, to be strangled.

TUBKIBB WAR.

1463.

255

In 1460 , he despoiled the two Paleologij brothers ^
the last emperor, bearing the title of despots of the
Morea. In 1462, he conquered Sinope, Cerasus, and
Trebisond, littlb Greek states which maintained their
independence on the borders of the Euxine sea. In
1463, he subdued WaUachia and Moldavia, afterwards
the kingd(ftn of. Bosnia, and the bannat of Sclavonia.
During theiiame year, the war again broke out in the
Morea, between the Venetians and Turks. The former
had possessed, for * long period, several strong places in
the peninsula, Coron, Modon, Argos, and Napoli di Mai.
vagiq. The commandant of Coron had received within
his fortress a slave, who had stolen the treasury chest of
the Turkish commander at Athens, and had divided the
money with him: he refused to surrender the culprit,
under the pretence of his having turned Christian. The
. TurkI immediately commenced hostilities. Luigi Lore-
dano, captain general of the Venetians, excited to revolt
the Greeks of the Peloponnesus, and undertook jointly
with them to defend the isthmus of Corinth; hut he
suffered himself to be driven out of it the following
year. He abandoned the Greeks who had joined him:
they w«e all massacred, while he returned to seek refuge
in nis Actresses.

The Venetians, notwithstanding this check, used their
endeavoiurs ^ form a powerful league against the Mus.
sulmans. gCWthe 12th of September, 1463, they con.
eluded an alliance with Matthias Corvinus the liberator of
Hungary : they reckoned on the powerful assistance of
a crusad^yhich the duke of Burgundy had promised to
lead ag^st the infidels, and which the pope Pius II. had
caused be preached in aU the Latin countries. But
when the pope visited the army, which he had ordered
to assemble at Ancona, he found only a disorderly and
cowardly troop, greedy of gain, clamorous for money
and arms, on receiving which they immediately deserted.
Pius II. himself, worn down by illness, expired at An¬
cona, on the I4th of August, 1464. The few remaining
crusaders immediately dispersed; the pope had engaged

2S6 uisTonr OF THS

the valiant Geoi|p Qastiiftt, Ournatned SQaniterlMgj oh
the occasion of thir crusade, ''to fbreak the treii^. o#
peace which he had made wilih the Turks, hfter tweney.
years of victories gained oyer them, froih Jf42. tO'1468t<
Abandoned alone to those enemies whom he had so h>ag,
braved, he lost, in 1465, nearly the whole of Epiroi,
which he had excited to insurrection against*th« Tutkju'
he himself died on the 17th of January',9466, ih the^
Venetian town of Alessio, to which he had been driven
to take refuge. Matthias Corvinus* alone rem&ined
the Venetians; by combating the Turks in Hungary, he
prevented them from concentrating their forces against
the republic j but the pope, Paul II., who hall suc¬
ceeded Pius II., feared the reformers of Bohemia stUl
more than the Mussulmans. He engaged Matthias Coit^
vinus to turn his arms against the king of Bohemia, aQ4
depose him for having tolerated the Hussites, ' Jl^
Turks took advantage of the absence of this formidable
antagonist to invade Croatia, in 1469, and to massacre
almost, all the inhabitants. The year following they,
for the first timi, eiyuipped a fleet, with which they
drove that of the Venetians out of the'Vrecian seas j
attacked Euboea,'which belonged to the repub^/ took
Negropont by assault, on the 12th of July, wrO,lmd
put all the inhabitants to the sword.

The Venetians, whose commerce exuded through
the known world, now attempted to finfr^ies against
Mahomet in the distant regions of Asia, situated to the
east of Turkey. Their ambassadors, on this occasioni
have written relations of their travels, whicl^bave be^
handed down to us; and they, for the first tim^revealed
the eastern world to the Latins. Hassan Be^wr Hus-
sun Cassan, who had conquered Persia from the descend¬
ants of Timour, in the year 1468, then threatened the
Turkish empire. He had married a Greek princess of
Trebisond: the Venetians sent to him as ambassador a
relation of that princess, named Catterino Zeno, who,
on his way to him, traversed with infinite danger Cara-
mania, the little Armenia, and the country of the Curds.

-VKMilTialt* RUBUVE CYPRUS. 257

3%is :«wtc vfas soon shut .l>]r.tb$i T^ks against othA*
Venetians disposed to Follow hiA: and Josaphat Bar.
tarOj-Ambrosip Contarini;,and others whom the republic
■BOccessivelf' sent to Hussun, Cassan^ attempted alter-
l^ely either to join the caravans of the Mamelukes in
Bgyptj and,traverse with them Syria up to the Persian
<5ulf; or to ayive by Germany and Poland at the
Bkck Sqjp.j e|bi from thence enter Persia by Georgia
■nd Mingrelia. * When Contarini wanted to return to
E.urope,'he was cuf oiF from both these routes by the
Turks, and. obliged to venture along the whole length
of tlj^Caspian Sea, to pass the gates of Derbend, and
reach I’oland by Astracan and Muscovy. But these
tnvele, wonderful for the fifteenth century, and giving
« great impulse to geography, were of little advantage
^ the war: the communications were too slow and
41nserfain to admit the Mssibility of any concert in
action between the Pemans and Venetians. Their
efforts to meet had no other effect than the ruin and
pillage of several Greek cities of Asia^ In liYS,”Pietro
Mocenigo lai^ waste Caria and the Isle of Cos; he
pillaged Satalll, Famphflia, Smyrna, and Ionia. The
foUpwir^ year he burnt Myra in Lycia, every where
se^cing news of Hussun Cassan, of whose defeat, near
Trebisond, he at last heard. These two campaigns
were stainetewith atrocious cruelties inflicted on the
Greek Chmaans, subjects of the Turks, whom the
Venetians pretended to deliver.

At this period the Venetian admiral was diverted
from the war against the Turks, by the part which he
took iu^e civil wars that for twelve years desolated
the island of Cyprus. James III. de Lusignan, king
of Cyprus, at his death in 1458, left only one legi¬
timate child—a daughter—who, in the following year,
married Louis, the second son of the duke of Savoy :
he had also a natural son named James, who, with
the aid of the soudan of Egypt, whose vassal he ac¬
knowledged himself to be, seized the crown from his
sister and the duke. James de Lusignan was repeatedly

258 HISTOBY OP THE ITAtlAM BEFUBLICS. 1474.

tilled upon to defend himeelf against Lis sister, to do
which he stood in great need of money. A rich Vene¬
tian merchant gave him his daughter Caterina Comaro
in marriage, with a dower of 100,000 ducats. To
render this simple citizeti’s daughter worthy a royal
alliance, the republic adopted Caterina Cornaro, and.
pronounced her daughter of Saint Math. 'I*lie marriage
was celebrated in 1471; and on the 6'ui«ot June, l^yS,
James de Lusignan died, leaving his* wife pregnant.
The republic hastened to proclaim itself guardkn' of its
adopted daughter, and of the child she might bear. This
child died in a year 'after its birth; and the fepubhc
again proclaimed that Caterina Cornaro inherited from
her son, and that the republic, in its turn, should
inherit from its daughter: regarding itself as eternal,
it was sure of surviving Caterina, but it was not equally
certain that she might not marry again, and have olh^r
children. To secure their gtardianship, the Venetians
had garrisoned all the cities of the island, since the
year 1473 j but this precarious possession did not sa¬
tisfy them. In 1%89, they engaged the aueen Caterina
Cornaro to abdicate, and to r^ilrc to Aww in the Tre-
visan. It was thus the Venetian republic gained ^he
kingdom of Cyprus, the crown of which it unfted with
tliose of Candia and the Morea. The isle of Cyprus,
rich in wine, corn, oil, and copper, w'as Ae most im¬
portant of the three.

The Turks vainly besieged Scutari in the year 1474,
and Lepanto the year following j but in the same year
(1475) Mahomet II. took and milled the ci% of CafFa,
the flourishing colony of the Genoese, in th(tf Crimea.
The Turks, afterwards masters of Bosnia, Fegan, in
1477 and 1478, to threaten the states of the Terra Firma
of the Venetians. They passed the Isonzo, and even
the Tagliamento; they laid waste the fertile countries
of the patriarchate of Aquilea and of Friuli; they
massacred the people, or led them away captive; and
thus began to make the Italians experience the horrors
of those wars of barbarians which depopulated before

1474 . AOB OP CONSPIRACIES. 25 £)

they enslaved the Eastern Empire. On the 15th fi
June, 147 s, they took Croia, which had been the
capital of Scaiiderbeg, and massacred the inhabitants,
in contempt of a capitulation. They afterwards renewed
the siege of Scutari. The republic of Venice, aban¬
doned by all Christendom, exhausted by long exertions,
and fearing soon to see the Turkish armies enter Lorn,
bapdy, accounted itself fortunate in purchasing peace by
giving up to the Mussulmans Scutari, together with
severJl fortresses wdiich it possessed in Illyria and the
Korea. Such were the conditions on which peace was
signed between the sultan and the republic, on the 26 th
of January, 147y-

CHAP. XII.

Fni:ciLi:KCY or conspirai tes. —the last resource of thf.

ITALIAN I’ATRlOliSi -TlIKIll ILL SUCTE.SS. — TONSPIRACY OF

TlfE .X’AZZI.—THE AUMINlSTKATION OF LORENZO UE’MEDlCIi —
jllS DEATH.

Italy had reached the fatal period at which liberty can
no longer be saved by a noble resistance, or recovered
by open force. There remained only the dangerous
and, most commonly, the fatal resource of conspiracy.
So long as habits of liberty are preserved amongst a
whole peuple; so long as every class has an equal
htHTOr of slavery; a sudden explosion of the sentiment
which fills every heart suffices to accomplish a revo¬
lution — to render vain the efforts of usurpers, or to
overthrow a recent tyranny, though at the moment it
may have succeeded in establishing itself. The despot,
even when he has silenced by terror the people whom
has oppressed and disarmed, always feels at war with
them; he has too much to fear from every class, to
hope, with any chance of success, to attach any of them

£60 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS- 1474!<

tCfchis cause. But when absolute power has been esta-
blisbed long enough for the violence of its first origin
to be forgotten ; when the majority of the men in the
prime of life have been born under its yokej and have
never known a better statethe usurper finds himself
supported by the inert part of the nation — by those
who, incapable of thinking, or of investigating for them¬
selves, must be contented with borrowed ideas, and with
blindly assenting to every doctrine which the govern¬
ment may promulge. With the loss of liberty h lost
also that free and animated intercourse which warms
the soul, and difiuses noble sentiments even among
classes unenlightened by the knowledge of the past, or
by the experience of foreign nations. In slavish coun¬
tries, the prince alone speaks, amidst universal silence:
he dictates the proclamations of authorities, the sen¬
tences of the tribunals ; he even inspires the language
to be uttered from the pulpit or the confessional: be¬
cause the disposal of the revenue is at his will, he
appeara as a dispensing providence; and makes the
people believe he gives all that he does not take from
tliem. The indigent are grateful to him for the public
charities ; the labourer, for the justice and police which
protect his property. The populace of towns applau4
the rigour which falls on the higher classes. The
national pride takes offence at the foreigner who ex¬
presses his pity for an unhappy and ill.govemed people;
and the vanity of the vulgar is interested in the support
of what exists. If any memory of the period of Ijberty
is preserved amongst the ignorant classes, it only refers
to unhappiness and pain. They have heard of the
efforts, the sacrifices, made by their fathers in defence
of the people’s rights ; but they see only the evils of
the struggle, whUe the result, because it is not of a
material nature, escapes their imagination. They con¬
clude that bread was as dear, and labour as painful, in
the days of liberty as in their times; and to the pri-
fations they endure were then added dangers and vio¬
lent catastrophes, of which fathers transmitted to their

1474. THE POPULACE ATTACHED TO TYBANTS. 261

children some terrible details. Slavery, it is said, 'so
debases man as to make him love it; and experience
confirms the maxim. Nations every where appear at¬
tached each to its government in proportion to its im.
perfections; what is most vicious in institutions is every
where most liked; and the most obstinate resistance is
that which the people oppose to their moral advance^
ment.

Sugh, in particular, was the state of Italy towards the
end of the fifteentk century. The lower orders in the
cities of Lombardy preserved no other memory of the
period of liberty than that impressed on the imagination
by some ruin, which their forefathers pointed out as
monuments of ancient battles or of ancient violence.
The peasantry, having never enjoyed any political rights,
feared nothing but the scourge of war; and prized a
government in proportion only to its pacific disposition.
Galeazzo Sforza, the more to excite the attachment of
the people, moved more by the senses than by reflection,
surrounded himself with the magnificence of the richest
monarch. The Milanese people were grateful to him
for the spectacle, without considering that they paid for
it themselves. The Medici, whose authority at Florence
was more recent, endeavoured still more to render them¬
selves popular, by keeping their fellow-citizens in a state
of continual festivity ; the expense of which, at least in
part, was supplied from their own patrimony. The
sovereigns of the other states of Italy, also, in various
ways succeeded in gaining the affection of the peasantry
and of the populace of towns. The protection against the
law extended to the guilty was one of the great means
of seduction. The law threatened criminals with the
most terrible punishment; prosecutions began with tor¬
ture, and ended with the wheel. Nevertheless every
village festival produced a murder; and those who
committed it were exactly the sort of determined men
whom the tyrant most desired to have about him. By
shielding them from justice, he obtained from them and
their families a grateful attachment, proportioned to the
8 3

262 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1474.

Q

cruelty of the punishment which they escaped. These
men, the most dangerous leaders of a rabble, were
therefore all devoted to the prince ; and a call to the
overthrow of his tyranny found no response either in
the towns or in the country. On the other hand, all
those who had any elevation of soul—who knew what
their country had been, and what it had become—who
could compare the servitude at home with the liberty
abroad, — all those whom philosophy,enlightened qi the
increasing moral degradation of men subject to absolute
power, — could not resign themselves to the loss of liberty,
which they knew would be followed by the loss of vir¬
tue. They would willingly have resisted; but soldiers,
paid with their own money, shielded the tyrant within
walls which their fathers had raised to protect their
freedom. Social organisation, founded for the common
good, was directed by an usurping hand for the oppres¬
sion of all. The right of the tribunals to punish, and
that of^he prince to pardon, were exercised in concert
only to provide resolute assassins for the latter. Alliances
contracteil in the name of the country established a mutual
guarantee of the usurpers against the people. No power
existed which,could be invoked by the enlightened citizen:
though he had been assured that all endued with Intel,
ligence and virtue were on his side — that the whole of
the wealthy part of the nation desired liberty—he knew
that the tyrant could arm against it the whole ignorant
and brutal mass of the people. It was resentment for
the triumph of injustice and brutality—for the oppres¬
sion exercised by men governed only by the senses over
all those actuated by the nobler sentiments of the soul,—
that so frequently in this century obliged the latter to
resort to conspiracy. The study of the works of the
ancients, also, then pursued with so much ardour, con¬
ciliated universal approbation, almost admiration, for
conspirators. Harmodius, Timoleon, Brutus, who with
the dagger had restored liberty to Athens, Corinth, and
Rome, were pointed out to youthful pupils as the avengers
of abused law and justice—as the saviours of humanity;

1470 .

SVnFIUSE OF FHATO.

263

inurilerj on the other hand, was so common, even men
honour felt so little scrupulous respecting it, that con¬
spirators were never stopped by any repugnance to shed
blood : not only every prince and noble, but every ma¬
gistrate and citizen, throughout Europe, was ready to
kill, in order to defend the smallest right, to overcome
any obstacle, to inspire fear, to give proof of energy, or
to blot out an offence. Whoever kept servants, de¬
manded above all that they should be brave, and that
they ^ould wear drms for the execution of any san¬
guinary order in case of need. It was because murders
were generally committed by them, that domestic service
did not degrade. Persons well born placed their cliildren
with nobles, as pages, footmen, and grooms, because
they carried a sword, and their service was ennobled by
the chance of spilling blood.

So far from experiencing the repugnance we now feel
to assassination as a means of delivering our country,
men of the fifteenth century perceived honour in a
murder, virtue in the sacrifice, and historic grandeur
in conspiracy. Danger alone stopped them; but that
danger must be terrible. Tyrants, feeling themselves at
war with the universe, were always on their guard; and
as they owed their safety only to terror, the punishment
which they inflicted, if victorious, was extreme in its
atrocity. Yet these terrors did not discourage the ene¬
mies of the existing order, whether royalist or republican.
Never had there been more frequent or more daring
conspiracies than in this century. The ill success of
some, never deterred others from immediately treading
in their steps.

The first plot was directed against the Medici. Ber¬
nardo Nardi, one of the Florentine citizens, who had
been exiled from his country in the time of Pietro de’
Medici, accompanied by about a hundred of his par¬
tisans, surprised the gate of Prato, on the 6th of April,
1470. He made himself master of the public palace,
and arrested the Florentine podesta; he took possession
of the citadel; and afterwards, traversing the streets,
jt 4

264 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAK BEPVBLICS. 1476.

Called the people to join him, and fight for liberty. He
intended to make this small town the strong hold of the
republican party, whence to begin his attack on the
Medici. But although he had succeeded by surprise in
making himself master of the town, the inhabitants
remained deaf to his Toice, and not one answered his
call, — not one detested tyranny sufficiently to combat
it, at the peril of the last extremity of human suffering.
The friends of the government, seeing that Nardi re¬
mained alone, at last took arms, attacked him on all
sides, and soon overpowered him by numbers. Nardi
was made prisoner, led to Florence, and there beheaded
with six of his accomplices ; twelve others were hanged
at Prato.

The conspiracy, which broke out at Ferrara on the
1st of September, 1476, was directed by a monarchical
party. The house of Este, sovereign of Ferrara, Mo¬
dena, and Reggio, had successively for its chiefs two
natural sons of Nicholas III.;—Lionel, who reigned from
1441 to 1450; and Borso, who reigned from 1450 to
1470. It was not till after the death of the latter, that their
brother, Hercules I., legitimately born in marriage, suc¬
ceeded to an inheritance which had been strengthened
and augmented under the reigns of the two bastards. It
was Borso, in fact, who had caused an authority which
his ancestors held from the people, to be sanctioned by
the heads of the empire and the church. Frederic III.
had named him duke of Modena and Reggio, and
Paul II. duke of Ferrara. Borso had no children; but
Lionel left a son, named Nicolo, who, when Hercules
took possession of the sovereignty, sought refuge at
Mantua. Of all the princes of the house of Este,
Lionel and Borso had been the most beloved by their.'
subjects. The gentleness of their dispositions, their
generosity, talents, activity, and love of letters, had
won every heart. Those who, for thirty years, had
served these two princes, made it a point of duty to
transmit their crown to the son of Lionel, and regarded
t^ succession of Hercules as an usurpation. They

1476. OONSPIBAOy AT MILAN. 265

plotted to establish the rights of one whom they cwi.
sidered the legitimate heir of the throne. On the 1st
of September, 1476, they introduced Nicolo d’Este,
with 600 infantry, into Ferrara, and, immediately dis¬
persing themselves through the streets, called upon the
people to take arms for the son of their benefactor.
But the people were indifferent between their masters,
and would not incur the risk of punishment by de¬
claring for either in preference to the other: instead of
flocking to their cSll, they fled, and shut themselves up
in their houses. The satellites of Hercules, who, for a
moment, had believed the revolution accomplished, re¬
covered courage, and attacked and vanquished Nicolo,
who, with one of his cousins, was immediately beheaded :
twenty-five of his accomplices were hanged.

Girolamo Gentile, the same year, organised a con¬
spiracy at Genoa to throw off the yoke of the duke of
Milan: it failed in like manner, because the people
hesitated to join him, though he had already made, himself
master of the gates. Notwithstanding these fatal'ex-
amples, a;i other conspiracy was formed the same year, at
Milan, against Galeazzo Sforza, whose yoke became insup¬
portable to all who had any elevation of soul. There was
no crime of which that false and ferocious man was not be¬
lieved to be capable. Among other crimes, he was accused
of having poisoned his mother. It was remarked of
him, that, enjoying the spectacle of astonishment and
despair, he always preferred to strike the most suddenly
and cruelly those whom he had given most reason to
rdly on his friendship. Not satisfied with making the
most distinguished women of his states the victims of
his seduction or his violence, he took pleasure in pub¬
lishing their shame — in exposing it to their brothers
or husbands. He not unfrequently gave them up to
prostitution. His extravagant pomp exhausted his fi¬
nances, which he afterwards recruited by the most crud
eictortion on the people. He took pleasure in inventing
new and most atrocious forms of capital punidiment;
even that of burying his victims alive was not the moat

266 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1476.

crttel. At lastj three young nobles^ of families who had
courageously resisted the usurpation of Francesco Sforza,
and who had themselves experienced the injustice and
outrages of his son, resolved to deliver their country
from this monster; not doubting that, when he had
fallen, the Milanese would joyfully unite in substituting
a free government for a tyranny. Girolamo Olgiati,
Carlo Visconti, and Andrea Lampugnani, resolved, in
concert, to trust only to themselves, without admitting
one other person into their secret. Their enthusiasm had
been excited by the lessons of their literary instructor.
Colas di Montano, who continually set before them the
grandeur of the ancient republics, and the glory of those
who had delivered them from tyranny. Determined on
killing the duke, they long exercised themselves in the
handling of the dagger, to be more sure of striking
liim, each in the precise part of the tyrant’s body as¬
signed to hitn. Animated with a religious zeal, not less
ardent than their republican enthusiasm, they prepared
themselves by prayer, by vows to St. Stephen, and by
tile assistance of the mass, for the act which they were
about to perform, They made choice of the 26th of
December, 1476, St. Stephen's day, on winch they knew
that the duke Galeazzo would go in state to the church
of the saint. They waited for him in that church ; and
when they saw him advance between the ambassadors
of Ferrara and Mantua, they respectfully ajiproached
liim, tlieir caps in hand. Feigning to keep off the
crowd, they surrounded him, and struck him all at the
same instant, in the midst of his guards and courtiers.
Galeazzo Sforza fell dead under their weapons; and the
crowd which filled the church saw the tumult, and.^
heard the cries, without comprehending the cause.

The three conspirators endeavoured to escape from
the church, to call the people to arms and liberty; but
the first sentiments which they encountered were asto¬
nishment and terror. The guards of the duke drew their
swords only to avenge him. Lampugnani, in attempt¬
ing to avoid them, got entangled in the trains of the

1478. CONSPIRACY OP THE PAZZI. 267

kneeling womeOj was thrown down, and killed by Sin
esquire of Galeazzo ; a few steps from him, Visconti
also was put to death by the guards. But Olgiati had
the misfortune to escape, in this first moment, from all
who pursued him; and, running through the streets,
called loudly to arms and liberty: not one person
answered the call. He afterwards sought to conceal
himself ; but was discovered, seized, and put to the most
excruciating torturp. In the interval between that in¬
fliction and his death, he wrote or dictated the narrative
demanded of him, and which has been handed down
to us. It is composed in a strain of the noblest enthu¬
siasm, with a deep religious feeling, with an ardent love
of liberty, and with the firm persuasion that he had
performed a good action. lie was again delivered to the
executioner, to have his flesh torn with red-hot pincers
At the time of his martyrdom, he was only twenty-
two years of age.

The conspiracy of the Pazzi at Florence speedily fol¬
lowed that of Olgiati at Milan. Andrea de’ Pazzi, one
of the five accoppiatori, who had exercised such great
power under Pietro de’ Medici, was dead; but had left
three sons, and several grandsons. One of these last had
married a sister of Lorenzo and Giuliano de’ Medici.
Their fortune was immense: it was engaged in com¬
merce, whichtheycarriedonwithgreat success. Theycon-
sidered that they had a right to be reckoned among those
who held the first rank in their country; but Lorenzo
and Giuliano de’ Medici, on arriving at man's estate, en¬
deavoured to recover all the authority which their father
had suffered to escape from his hknd: they, in particu¬
lar, evinced an extreme jealousy of all those who, in his
time, had administereil the republic ; and although tlie
family of the Pazzi then reckoned nine citizens, who, by
their age, rank, and talents, were formed to sit in the
signoria, the Medici did not permit one of them to be
called to it. One of the Pazzi had married the only
daughter,of Giovanni Borromeo, the richest citizen of
Florence, to whose inheritance he was destined to sue-

26S HISTOBY OF THE ITALIAN EEPUBLICS. 1478.

caid; but, at the moment of Borromeo’s death, the Me¬
dici caused a law to be passed, by which the male issue
in the collateral line were called to inherit, in preference
to daughters; and they thus deprived Giovanni de’
Pazzi of a fortune which he had looked upon as already
his. Francesco de’ Pazzi, his brother, whose temper
was hot and impetuous, unable to endure such injustice,
quitted Florence, to establish himself at Rome. There
the pope, Sixtus IV., made him his banker, and, soon
gave him his whole confidence.

Sixtus IV. was of the house of Rovere, a plebeian
family of Savona, in the states of Genoa. His election
to the holy see was tainted with simony ; and he-was
charged with the most dissolute morals. He had foiu
nephews, whom he had loaded with all the church had to
give. He introduced two—Giuliano della Rovere, the
son of his brother, and Pietro Riario, his sister’s son —
into the sacred colleget He intended making princes of
the two others, who were secular. He married Leonardo
della Rovere to a natural daughter of Ferdinand: he
made him prefect of Rome and duke of Sora. Girolamo
Riario he married to a natural daughter of Galeazzo
Sforza, duke of Milan; after which he purchased for
him the city and principality of Imola, to which he
purposed to add some principalities of Romagna. This
dilapidation of the patrimony of the church, to aggran¬
dise the nephews of the pope, was one of the most scan¬
dalous examples of what was afterwards called the
nepotism of the court of Rome. But although Sixtus IV.
was a corrupt man, he was not destitute of talents, nor
even of a certain elevation of sentiment. He had at
heart the support of the independence of Italy; and he,
believed it could be maintained only by republican forms
of government, and with the aid of liberty, the value
of which he had learned to appreciate at Genoa. He
found himself constantly thwarted in his politics by the
Medici, whether pursuing no higher object than the
elevation of his nephews, or following a nobler one, be
endoavpured to engage all the states of Italy to join in

147S. OIULUNO DE’ MEDICI KILLED. 269

a common league for its defence. This continual oppo¬
sition soon engendered hatred; and Girolamo Riario
and Francesco Pazzi laboured to render it more violent.
Sixtus IV. finally promised all the pontifical forces to
second a conspiracy, the object of which was to restore
liberty to Florence by killing the two brothers Medici.
The approbation of the pope alone determined Jacopo
de’ Pazzi, the eldest of the family, and the uncle of
Francesco, to take part in a plot so dangerous.

Tlte Pazzi would not run the risk of being abandoned,
as the conspirators of Milan had been, after the execu¬
tion of the plot, because no one knew their intentions,
or were prepared to second them, Accorilingly, they
admitted vast numbers into their secret: amongst others,
Francesco Salviati, whom the pope had named archbishop
of Pisa; but the Medici had refused to let him take pos¬
session of his see. It was necessary for the success of
the conspiracy, that the two Medici should be struck at
the same moment; for if one survived, he would in.
stantly be the avenger of the other. It was further
advisable that some of the conspirators should occupy
the public palace, and intimidate the signoria, while
others called the people to liberty: four troops, to act
simultaneously, were accordingly requisite. It was
judged indispensable, also, that the two brothers should
be in the same place, in order that the conspirators
might stab them at the same moment. Raphael Riario,
a son of the pope’s nephew, a young man of eighteen
years, whom the pope had just made a cardinal, and sent
to Pisa, gave occasion, on his passage through Florence,
to many entertainments; in one of which, it was
hoped, the brothers might be found together. But
Giuliano was neither at the fete given by Jacopo de' Pazzi
to the young cardinal at Montughi, nor at that which Lo¬
renzo de’ Medici gave at Fiesole. The conspirators were,
on both days, ready. The archbishop Salviati, with Ja.
copo, son of the historian Poggio Bracciolini, and a
numerous troop of conspirators, were to make them¬
selves masters of the palace, and force the signoria to

270 IIISTOBV UF TIIE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1478.

B^rove the revolution; others, with Jacopo de’ Pazzi,
were to raise the people. Francesco Pazzi and Bernardo
Bandini undertook to kill Giuliano, who, timid and
suspicious, generally wore a cuirass under his robe; and
Gian Battista da Montesecco, the captain of a troop
of adventurers, was appointed to despatch Lorenzo.
The absence of Giuliano on these two occasions obliged
the conspirators to defer the execution of their project
to a religious ceremony that was to take place in the ca¬
thedral, and at which the two brothers raus* inditpens.
ably be present. It was agreed that the assassins should
strike them as they knelt, at the moment that the priest,
in performing mass, raised the host, and they, with all
present, bowed down their heads. But Gian Battista da
Montesecco declared, that though he^iad undertaken with
{deasure to kill Lorenzo at a festival—for he was accus¬
tomed to murder — he could not offer the conspirators
his assistance in a church, for he was not accustomed to
sacrilege. All the others then refused to commit what
began to appear to them an irreligious act; so that they
were forced to have recourse to two priests, Antonio da
Volterra and Stefano di Bagnone, who, accustomed to
live in churches, and perform themselves all the offices,
fdt neither respect nor fear for sacred things. This
caused the ruin of all. *

Every one was at his post when the Medici entered the
temple, on the 26th of April, 1478 : the brothers took
their places at some distance from each other. The
mass began: at the moment of the elevation of the host,
Antonio da Volterra put his hand on the left shoulder of
Lorenzo, the better to secure the blow he was to strike
on the right side. The touch, however, made Lorenzo
start up, and with his arm enveloped in his cloak, he
parried the blow; he drew his sword, as did his two
esquires, and the priests fled. At the same instant
Giuliano had been killed by Bernardo Bandini. Fran-
eesco de' Pazzi, intending also to strike him, deeply
wounded himself in the thigh; Bandini immediately ran
towards Lorenzo, who escaped from him, and shut him-

1478. DESTBUCTIOy OF THE FAZZI. 271

self up in the sacristy. Seeing the people in a state*of
tumult, and despairing of success, Bandini immediately
left Flofence, and did not think himself safe till he had
reached Constantinople. Salviati, meanwhile, also failed
at the palace of the signoria : he had concealed his fol¬
lowers near the entry, the door of which shut with a
spring lock, which his satellites were unable to open,
when they were to rejoin him. He afterwards presented
himself to the gonfalonier, but his troubled look and em¬
barrassed la|iguage So excited suspicion, that, without lis¬
tening to him, the gonfalonier sprang to the door, seized
by the hair Jacopo Bracciolini, who was concealed
behind it, delivered him to his sergeants, and was soop
master of the nther conspirators in the palace; he had
t^em all instanu to death, either by the dagger, or
by predfpilating them alive from the windows; to the
frames of which he hung archbishop Salviati, with two
of fts cousins and Jacopo Bracciolini. The two priests,
who had failed in their attempt to kill Lorenzo, were
jTursued and cut to pieces by the friends of the Medici:
lastly, Jacopo de’ Pazzi, who had put himself at the
head of the troop of conspirators, whose part it was
to summon the people to liberty through the streets,
lost all courage, ^eing that no one answered his call.
He left the city by the Romagna gate; but had not pro¬
ceeded far before he was stopped by a party of peasants,
and brought back. In the mean time the friends of the
Medici had called the populace to vengeance; and to this
cry, at least, they were not slow in answering: Fran¬
cesco, Rinaldo, and Jacopo de’ I’azzi were hung at the
windows of the palace, beside the archbishop; all those
who had any relation of blood or connection of friendship
with them—all those who had shown any opposition to
the government—were torn from their houses, dragged
through the streets, and put to death. More than seventy
citizens were torn to pieces by the mob, iij these first
Mays. Lorenzo de’ Medici afterwards exerted all his ac¬
tivity to obtain the surrender of those who had sought
refuge abroad : even Bernardo Bandini was sent back by

272 (flSTOBY OF THE ITALIAk BEPUillOBl ,14?^,

M«hoinet II. from Constantinople. The

did not rest till 200 Florentines had perished ih'coii^

sequence of the conspiracy of the Pazzi. *

The ill success of the conspiracy of the Fazsu
strengthened, as always happens, the government agai^t
which it was directed. The Medici had been content
till then to be the first citizens of Florence; frqp tiiato
time Lorenzo looked upon himself as the pritice faf the
city ; and his friends, in speaking of him, sometimes
employed that title. In addressing'him, t^ epitfi'et of
“ most magnificent lord” was habitually employed. It
was the mode of addressing the condottieri, and tl^
petty princes who had no other title. Lorenzo affjpt^
in his habits of life an unbounded Uber^ty, pomp, emi
splendour, which he believed neceife» to make upTfr'
the real rank which he wanted. The hfkg|iificent,
his title of honour, is become, not without reason^his
surname with posterity. On the failure of the con.
spiracy, he was menaced by all Italy at once. Then
pope fulminated a bull against him on ||te 1st of {unej,
1478, for having hanged an archbishop. He demanded
that Lorenzo de’ Medici, the gonfalonier, the priori, and
the balia of eight, should be given up to him, to be
punished according to the enormity ^their crime. At
the same time he published a leaj^e, which he had
formed against them with Ferdinand of Naples and the
republic of Sienna. He gave the command of the army
of the league to Frederic da Montefeltro, duke of Urbino,
and ordered him to advance into Tuscany. Lorenzo de'
Medici, who was no soldier, did not join the army raised
to defend him; he was obliged to confide the command
of it to Hercules d’Este, duke of Ferrara, who entered
the service of the Florentines, but who soon gave them
room to think that there existed a secret understandi^
between him and the enemy. The duchess Bonne -ot
S avoy, the widow of Galeazzo Sforza, regent of Milan)
was the only ally on whom Lorenzo could reckoi#
But the king of Naples, to prevent her from sending
troops into Tuscany, undertook to raise enemies against

*#79- •; OBOWING DANGER OF LORENZO. S73

' if, home. He began by ofFering aid to the Genoese,
Who, "weaVied of the yoke under which they had voliA-
^arily pjfieed themselves, rose and threw it off in the
month of August, 1478. Having recovered their free¬
dom, they restored the title of doge to Prosper Adorno,
who had previously borne it. ,

SijLtus IV. in the month of January, 1479, succeeded

engaging the Swiss of the canton of Uri, to declare war
against the duchess of Milan. These formidable moun-
taineetrs ob^ned a, victory, at Giornico, over the best
Italian tro^s, to the astonishment, almost more than
alarm,,6f the latter; who W'ere made, for the first time,
to appreciate the corporal strength and unconquerable
courage of a race till then unknown to them. On the 7th
»of September, 147^ the Florentine army was defeated
at Poggjo Imperi®^ by the duke of Calabria, who had
there joinea.his forces with those of the duke of Urbino.
Almost at the same time the brothers of Galeazzo Sforza,
whom the duchess regent had exiled from Milan, re¬
entered at the head of their partisans, and accomplished
li rewolution in ♦at city. They deprived the duchess of
the regency; they punished her ministers and favourites
with death, fur having, as they said, abandoned the true
interests of the state, and of the house of Sforza. They
declared her son^^jian Galeazzo Sforza, of full age,
though not more than twelve years old; and the eldest
•Iwother, Ludovico, surnamed the Moor, undertook the
direction of affairs; from that time he was in fact the
sovereign of Milan.

The situation of Lorenzo de’ Medici became critical:
he found himself, without allies, attacked by all the
forces of Italy. His enemies had successively ravaged
the provinces of the Florentine states, and were already
masters of his strongest fortresses. Even his friends at
norence began to tire of a war which the pope and the
king of Naples declared they made only against him.
The people, whose attachment was founded on his pro-
mgality and his public entertainments, showed, when his
prosperity declined, that they were ready to abandon

S74 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1479-

him. He fdt the full extent of his danger when he wsis
ioWmed by the duke of Urbino, the general of the
enemy's array, that, among his adversaries, thq, king of
Naples and Ludovic the Moor were disposed to be recon¬
ciled to him. The dukes of Urbino and Calabria’ had
not sufficient authqiity to make peace with him; but
they strongly advised him to go in person to Naples, and
they furnished him with a Neapolitan galley at Iftghorn'
to convey him. It was not without fear that Lorenzo
put himself into the hands of ^uch an,^ eneijay as
Ferdinand, who had so often shown himsm cruel and
perfidious. He departed, however, from Florence, on
the 5th of December, 1479; and was received at
Naples with more friendship and respect than h& h|d
ventured to hope. He frankly ac^owledged to Ferdi«»
Hand his danger ; but he explained to h^ ,also Tlis
resources. Italy abandoned him ; but he placed his hope'
in France. Louis XI. and Rene II. duke of Losrain
both pretended to inherit the right of the Angevins to
the kingdom of Naples : they ofl^ed their alliance, and
promised to send troops to Tuscany. ^Lorenzo eodeaa
voured to convinceFerdinandof all thedanger he in'curred
by the introduction of the French into Italy. He ac¬
knowledged that, for himself, he should derive no other
advantage than that of injuring his eMmies. He strongly
represented how preferable it would be for both, to seek
an arrangement between themselves, instead of opening
their country to the incursion of barbarians; and, finally,
he offered him an indemnity in the republic of Sienna,
which the duke of Calabria, son of the king, already
coveted. That state bad made alliance with the pope and
the king of Naples against Florence; hadreceived, without
distrust, the Neapolitan troops within its fortresses; and
had repeatedly had recourse to the duke of Calabria ^
terminate, by his mediation, the continually renewiil
dissensions between the different orders of the republic.
The duke of Calabria, instead of reconciling them, kent
up their discord; and, by alternately granting succour
to each party, was become the supreme arbitrator of Si-

1480. THE TURKS SURPRISE OTRANTO. 275

enna. Lorenzo de’ Medici promised to offer no obstacle
to the transferring of that state in sovereignty to the
duke of Calabria. On this condition, he signed his
treaty with the king of Naples on the 6th of May, 1480.
The republic of Sienna would have been lost, and the
Neapolitans, masters of so important a place in Tuscany,
would soon have subjugated the rest, when an unex¬
pected event saved Lorenzo de’ Medici from the conse¬
quences of his imprudent offer. Mahomet II. charged
his gcand vizier, iWhmet Giedik, to attempt a landing in
Italy, which the latter effected, and made himself master
of Otranto on the 28th of July, 1480. Ferdinand,
struck with terror, immediately recalled the duke of Ca¬
labria, with his army, to defend his own states.

Lorenzo de’ Medici, on his return from Naples to
Florence, rendered still more oppressive the yoke which
he had imposed on his country. He determined, above
aU, to efface from his authority the revolutionary, and con¬
sequently transitory, character which it still retained; at
the same time to obliterate the memory of the sovereignty
of the people, liaintained by the periodical assembling of
parliaments. He called one, however, on the 12th of
April, 1480, which he purposed should be the last. He
made that parliament create a balia ; destined, likewise, to
despoil itself for ever of a power which those extraordinary
commissioners had, in fact, constantly abused. The balia
transferred to a new council of seventy members the
absolute power which had been delegated to them by the
Florentine people. That council, henceforth, was to form
a permanent part of the constituted authorities. It was
charged to exercise a general scrutiny, and to choose
only those among the Florentine citizens who were qua¬
lified for the magistracies. They were afterwards to dis¬
tribute their names in the different elective purses of the
^gnoria. They were to make a new division of the
taxes; to re-establish an equilibrium in the finances, or
gather, to employ the money of the state in acquitting the
debts of the Medici, whose immense fortune was. de¬
ranged, not only by the magnificence of Lorenzo, but by

T 2

276 niSTOBY OP THE ITALIAN BEFVBLICS. 1482.

the profusion and disorder of his clerks, who carried on
his commerce with the pomp and extravagance which
they thought suitable to a prince.

It was not till the 3d of December, 1480, that the
pope, Sixtus IV., reconciled the republic of Florence to
the church. He yielded then only to the terror which
the conquest of Otranto by the Turks had inspired.
Although he had shown talent, and some elevated views
for the defence of the independence of Italy, his absolute
want of all principle, his impetuosity of characteiq and
his blind partiality to his nephews, rendered him one of
the worst popes that ever governed the church.

The Turks had no sooner been driven from Otranto,
by Alphonso, the eldest son of the king of Naples, on
the 10th of August, 1481, than Sixtus excited a new war
in Italy. His object was to aggrandise his nephew,
Girolamo Riario, for whom he was desirous of forming a
great principality in Romagna. With that view, he pro¬
posed to the Venetians to divide with him the states of the
duke of Ferrara ; but a league w’as formed in 1482, by
the king of Naples, the duke of Milan, and the Floren¬
tines, to defend the dukedom. The year following,
Sixtus IV., fearing that he should not obtain for his ne¬
phew the best part of the spoils of the duke of Ferrara,
changed sides, and excommunicated the Venetians, in¬
tending to take from them the provinces which he des¬
tined for Girolamo Riario. The new allies, without
consulting him, soon afterwards made peace with the
Venetians, at Bagnolo, on the 7th of August, 1484.
This news threw him into a fit of gout, which, falling
inward, destroyed him, on the 13th of August follow¬
ing. Innocent VIII., who succeeded him, was quite as
corrupt as his predecessor ; but endued with far less
talent and energy. After having, in the beginning of
his pontificate, made war without any reasonable motive
against Ferdinand and the Florentines, he made peace
with them on the 11th of August, I486. He married
his son, Franceschetto Cibo, to a daughter of Lorenzo
de' Medici ; and this alliance afterwards procured to his

1482. ADMINISTRATION OP LORENZO. 277

posterity the duchy of Massa-Carrara. In 1489, he gave
a cardinal’s hat to Giovanni, son of Lorenzo de’ Medici,
afterwards Leo X. By the venality of distributive justice,
by monopoly, and by the ignorance and carelessness of
the administration, he brought Rome into a state of po¬
verty and spoliation hitherto unexampled. He died at
last, on the 25th of July, 1492, the most despised,
but not the most detested, of the popes who had j^et
filled the chair of St. Peter.

Lillrenzo de’ MSdici, his friend and counsellor, has
been ranked among the number of great men; and, in
fact, he had some right to the gratitude of posterity,
for the constant protection he afforded letters and the
arts, and the impulse which he gave to them himself, as
a poet and a man of taste. He gained the affection of
the literary society which he assembled round him, as
much by the charm of his character as by his liberality.
But it is not as a statesman that he can pretend to
glory. He was a bad citizen of Florence, as well as a
bad Italian: he degraded the character of the Flo¬
rentines, destroyed their energy, ravished from them
their liberty, and soon further exposed them to the loss
of their independence. Fearing the example and con¬
tagion of liberty in the rest of Italy, he preferred
alliance with the sovereigns who were most odious,—
with Ferdinand king of Naples, with Galeazzo Sforza,
with his widow, afterwards with Ludovic the Moor ;
and lastly, with pope Innocent VIII. At the same
time he joined in every intrigue against the repub¬
lics of Sienna, Lucca, and Genoa. He was suspected
also of having favoured conspiracies against two petty
princes of Romagna, his enemies. Girolamo Riario,
whom Sixtus IV. had made sovereign of Forli and
Imola, and who had been the chief promoter of the
Fazzi conspiracy, was stabbed in his own palace by three
captains of his guard, on the 14th of April, 1488.
Catherine Sforza, his widow, and the natural daughter
of the duke Galeazzo, preserved, however, the prin¬
cipality for her son Octavian. She married, not long
T 3

278 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUHLICS. 1489 -

afterwards, Giovanni de’ Medici, the grandfather of the
first grand duke of Tuscany. It was she who gave her
name, afterwards so sadly memorable, to her godchild
Catherine de’ Medici. Galeotto Manfredi, lord of
Faenza, was stabbed by his wife on the 31st of May
following, as he was about to sell his little principality
to the Venetians, and Faenza remained to his son Astor
de* Manfredi, under the protection of Lorenzo de' Me¬
dici.

The house of Medici had encouraged, at Florence,
the taste for pleasure and luxury, as a means of confirm¬
ing its power; but this corruption of morals began to
produce a reaction. All the young men, who had
abandoned themselves with enthusiasm to the study
of the arts and of letters, who rendered a sort of
worship to ancient literature, who studied the Grecian
philosophy, and were accused of preferring even the
religion of the ancient Romans to that of the church,
were, at the same time, devotedly attached to the
Medici. This feeling they shared with aU the liber¬
tines,—all those who thought only of sensual pleasure,
and who sacrificed to it the liberty of their country:
but those of graver morals, and of a deeper religious
conviction, — those who regarded the progress of cor¬
ruption as certain to draw down the vengeance of
Heaven on Florence,—joined to compunctious peni¬
tence a love of ancient liberty, and a detestation of a
tyranny founded on the triumph of vice. They were
called piagnoni (the weepers). Girolamo Savonarola, a
Dominican monk of Ferrara, and an eloquent orator,
had preached to them a double reform, religious and
political ; for he had himself embraced with equal en¬
thusiasm the cause of piety and that of liberty. He
arrived on foot at Florence, in the year 1489, and
lodged in the convent of St. Mark. He began im¬
mediately to preach there, with a profound conviction
on his own part, and with a talent equal to his courage,
against the scandalous abuses introduced into the church
of Rome, and against the criminal usurpations in the

1492.

HEATH OP EDRENZO De’ MEDICI.

279

statBj which had deprived the citizen of his just rights
The partisans of the double reform soon reckoned in
this flock the most respectable citizens of Florence.

In the beginning of the year 1402, Lorenzo de’ Me¬
dici was attacked by a slow fever, joined to the gout,
hereditary in his family; he retired to his country
house of Careggi, where, being sensible of his danger, he
sent for Girolamo Savonarola, who, till then, had refused
to visit him, or to show him any deference; but it was
from *him that Lofenzo, struck with his reputation for
sanctity and eloquence, desired, in dying, to receive
absolution. Savonarola refused him neither his eon.
solation nor his exhortations; but he declared that he
could not absolve him from his sins till he proved his
repentance by reparation, to the utmost of his power.
He should forgive his enemies j restore all that he
had usurped : lastly, give back to his country the
liberty of which he had despoiled it. Lorenzo de’ Me¬
dici would not consent to such a reparation ; he accord¬
ingly did not obtain the absolution on which he set a
high price, and died, still possessing the sovereignty he
had usurped, on the 8th of April, 1492, in his forty-
fourth year.

CHAP. XIII.

INVASION OF ITALV BT CHABLES VIII. -FIETEO SON OF LORENZO

de’ MEDICI DRIVEN FROM FLORENCE. — REVOLT AND WAR OP
FISA.—THE POLITICAL AND RELIOloOS REFORM OF SAVONAROLA
▲T FLOHENCE — H15 DEATH.

The period was at length arrived, when Italy which
had restored intellectual light to Europe, reconciled
civil order with liberty, recalled youth to the study of
laws and of philosophy, created the taste for poetry
and the fine arte, revived the science and literature
T 4

280 HISIOBY OF THE ITALIAN BEFVBUOS. 1492 .

antiquity, given prosperity to commerce, manufac.
tures, and agriculture, — was destined to become the
prey of those very barbarians whom she was leading
to civilisation. Her independence must necessarily
perish with her. liberty which was hitherto the
source of her grandeur and power. In a country
covered with republics three centuries before, there re¬
mained but four at the death of Lorenzo de' Medici ;
and in those, although the word " liberty” was stiU
inscribed on their banners, that principle of life ha^d dis¬
appeared from their institutions. Florence, already go¬
verned for three generations by the family of the Medici,
corrupted by their licentiousness, and rendered venal by
their wealth, had been taught by them to fear and to
obey. Venice with its jealous aristocracy, Sienna and
Lucca each governed by a single caste of citizens, if
still republics, had no longer popular governments or
republican energy. Neither in those four cities, nor in
Genoa, which had surrendered its liberty to the Sforzas,
nor in Bologna, which yielded to the Bentivoglios, nor
in any of the monarchical states, was there to be found
throughout Italy that power of a people whose every
individual will tends to the public weal, whose efforts are
all combined for the public benefit and the common
safety. The princes of that country could appeaj only
to order and the obedience of the subject, not to the
enthusiasm of the citizen, for the protection of Italian'
independence and of their own-

immense wealth, coveted by the rest of Europe, was,
it is true, always accumulating in absolute monarchies,
as well as in republics; but if, on the one hand, it
furnished the pay of powerful armies, on the other, it
augmented the danger of Italy, by exciting the cupidity
of its neighbours. The number of national soldiers was
very considerable; their profession was that which led
the most rapidly to distinction and fortune. Engaged
only for the duration of hostilities, and at liberty to
retire every month ; instead of spending their lives in
the indolence of garrisons, or abandoning the freedom

1492. QENBRAL MILDNESS IN ITALIAN WARFARE. 2S1

of their willj they passed rapidly from one servica to
anotherj seeking only war, and never becoming enerv¬
ated by idleness. The horses and armour of the Italian
men at arms were reckoned superior to those of the trans¬
alpine nations against which^they had measured them¬
selves in France, during “thewar of thepublicweal. ” The
Italian captains had made war a science, every branch
of which they thoroughly knew. It was never suspected
for a moment that the soldier should be wanting in
courSge ; but the general mildness of manners, and the
progress of civilisation, had accustomed the Italians to
make war with sentiments of honour and humanity
towards the vanquished. Ever ready to give quarter,
they did not strike a fallen enemy. Often, after having
taken from him his horse and armour, they set him
free; at least, they never demanded a ransom so enor¬
mous as to ruin him. Horsemen who went to battle
clad in steel, were rarely killed or wounded, so long as
they kept their saddles. Once unhorsed, they surren¬
dered. The battle, therefore, never became murderous.
The courage of the Italian soldiers, which had accom¬
modated itself to this milder warfare, suddenly gave way
before the new dangers and ferocity of barbarian enemies.
They became terror-struck when they perceived that
the French caused dismounted horsemen to be put to
death by their valets, or made prisoners only to extort
from them, under the name of ransom, all they pos¬
sessed. The Italian cavalry, equal in courage, and
superior in military science, to the French, was for some
time unable to make head against an enemy whose
ferocity disturbed their imaginations.

While Italy had lost a part of the advantages which,
in the preceding century, had constituted her security,
the transalpine nations had suddenly acquired a power
which destroyed the ancient equilibrium. Up to the
close of the fifteenth century, wars were much fewer
betweennation and nation than between French, Germans,
or Spaniards among themselves. Even the war between
the English and the French, which desolated France for

282 HIBTOBV OF THE ITALIAN HEPVBLICS. 14^2.

mojte than a century, sprang not from enmity between
two rival nations, but from the circumstance that the
kings of England were French princes, hereditary sove¬
reigns of Normandy, Poitou, and Guienne. Charles VII.
at last forced the English back beyond sea, and re¬
united to the monarchy provinces which had been
detached from it for centuries. Louis XI, vanquished
the dukes and peers of France who had disputed his
authority ; he humbled the house of Burgundy, which
had begun to have interests foreigrr to France. ' His
young successor and son, Charles VIII., on coming of
age, i^ound himself the master of a vast kingdom in a
state of complete obedience, a brilliant army, and large
revenues ; but was weak enough to think that there
was no glory to be obtained unless in distant and chival¬
rous expeditions. The different monarchies of Spain,
which had long been rivals, were united by the mar¬
riage of Ferdinand of Aragon with Isabella of Castile,
and by the conquest which they jointly made of the
Moorish kingdom of Granada. Spain, forming for the
first time one great power began to exercise an in¬
fluence which she had never till then claimed. The
emperor Maximilian, after having united the Low Coun¬
tries and the county of Burgundy, his wife’s inheritance,
to the states of Austria, which he inherited from hie father,
asserted his right to exercise over the whole of Germany
the imperial authority which had escaped from the hands
of hie predecessors. Lastly, the Swiss, rendered illustrious
by their victories over Charles the Bold, had begun, but
since his death only, to make a traffic of their lives, and
enter the service of foreign nations. At the same time,
the empire of the Turks extended along the whole shore
of the Adriatic, and menaced at once Venice and the
kingdom of Naples. Italy was surrounded on all sides
by powers whieli had suddenly become gigantic, and of
wliich not one had, half a century before, given her
uneasiness.

France was the first to carry abroad an activity un¬
employed at home, and to make Italy feel the change

1494. CHAItLES nil. INVADES ITALY. 283

which had taken place in the politics of Europe. Its
Idngj Charles VIII., claimed the inheritance of all the
rights of the second house of Anjou on the kingdom of
Naples. Those rights, founded on the adoption of Louis I.
of Anjou by Joan I., had never been acknowledged by the
people, or confirmed by possession. For the space of a
hundred and ten years, Louis I., II,, and III., and Ren^,
the brother of the last, made frequent but unsuccessful
attempts, to mount the throne of Naples. The brother
and tne daughter of Ren^, Charles of Maine and Mar¬
garet of Anjou, at last either ceded or sold those rights
to Louis XI. His son, Charles VIII., as soon as he was
of age, determined on asserting them. Eager for glory,
in proportion as his weak frame, and still weaker intel¬
lect, incapacitated him for acquiring it, he, at the age
of twenty-four, resolved on treading in the footsteps of
Charlemagne and his paladins ; and undertook the con¬
quest of Naples as the first exploit that was to lead to
the conquest of Constantinople and the deliverance of
the holy sepulehre.

Charles VII1. entered Italy in the month of August,
1494 , with 3()00 men at arms or heavy cavalry;
20,000 infantry, Gascons, Bretons, and French ; 8000
Swiss, and a formidable train of artillery. This last
arm had received in France, during the wars of
Charles VII., a degree of perfection yet unknown to the
rest of Europe. The states of Upper Italy were favour¬
able to the expedition of the French. The duchess of
Savoy and the marchioness of Montferrat, regents for
their sons, who were under age, opened the passages of
the Alps to Charles VIII. Ludovic the Moor, regent of
the duchy of Milan, recently alarmed at the demand
made on him by the king of Naples, to give up the
regency to his nephew Gian Galeazzo, then of full age,
and married to a Neapolitan princess, had himself called
the French into Italy; and, to facilitate their conquest
of the kingdom of Naples, opened to them all the for¬
tresses of Genoa which were dependent on him. The
republic of Venice intended to remain neutral, reposing

284 histort op the Italian republics. 1404,

iirits own strengthj and made the duke of Ferrara and
the marquis of Mantua^ its neighbours^ adopt the same
policy; but southern Italy formed for its defence a
league, comprehending the Tuscan republics, the states
of the church, and the kingdom of Naples.

At Florence, Lorenzo de’ Medici left three sons ; of
whom Pietro II., at the age of twenty-one was named
chief of the republic. His grandfather, Pietro I.,
son of Cosmo, oppressed with infirmities and prema¬
ture old age, had shown little talerit, and no capacity
for the government of a state. Pietro II., on the con¬
trary, was remarkable for his bodily vigour and address;
but he thought only of shining at festivals, tilts, and
tournaments. It was said that he had given proofs of
talent in his literary studies, that he spoke with grace
and dignity; but in his public career he proved
himself arrogant, presumptuous, and passionate. He
determined on governing the Florentines as a master,
without disguising the yoke which he imposed on them :
not deigning to trouble himself with business, he trans¬
mitted his orders by his secretary, or some one of his
household, to the magistrates. Pietro de’ Medici re¬
mained faithful to the treaty which his father had made
with Ferdinand king of Naples, and engaged to refuse
the French a free passage, if they attempted to enter
southern Italy by ’Puscany. The republics of Sienna and
Lucca, too feeble to adopt an independent policy, pro¬
mised to follow the impulse given by Medici. In the states
of the church, Roderic Borgia had succeeded to Innocent
VIII., on the 11th of August, 1492, under the name of
Alexander VI. He was the richest of the cardinals, and
at the same time the most depraved in morals, and the
most perfidious as a politician. The marriage of one of
his sons (for he had several) with a natural daughter of
Alphonso son of Ferdinand, had put the seal to his alli¬
ance with the reigning house of Naples. That house
then appeared at the summit of prosperity. Ferdinand,
though seventy years of age, was still vigorous : he was
rich; l)e had triumphed over all his enemies ; he passed

1494 piEino de’ medici meets the fhench. 2S5

for the most able politician in Italy. His two sons,
Alphonso and Frederick, and his grandson, Ferdinand,
were reputed skilful warriors : they had an army
and a numerous fleet under their orders. However,
Ferdinand dreaded a war with France, and he had
just opened negotiations to avoid it when he died
suddenly, on the 25th of January, 1404. His son,
Alphonso II., succeeded him ; while Frederick took the
command of the fleet, and the young Ferdinand that of
the army, destined to defend Romagna against the
French.

It was by I’ontremoli and the Lunigiana that
Charles VIII., according to the advice of Ludovic the
Moor, resolved to conduct his army into Southern Italy.
This road, traversing the Apennines from Parma to
Pontremoli, over poor pasture lands, and descending
through olive groves to the sea, the shore of which it
follows at the foot of the mountains, was not without
danger. The country produces little grain of any kind.
Corn was brought from abroad, at a great expense, in ex¬
change for oil. The narrow space between the sea and
the mountains was defended by a chain of fortresses,
which might long stop the army on a coast where it
would have experienced at the same time famine and
the pestilential fever of Pietra-Santa. Pietro de’ Medici,
upon learning that the French were arrived at Sarzana,
and perceiving the fermentation which the news of their
approach excited at Florence, resolved to imitate that act
of his father which he had heard the most praised—his
visit to Ferdinand at Naples. He departed to meet
Charles VIII. On his road he traversed a field of
battle, where 300 Florentine soldiers had been cut to
pieces by the French, who had refused to give quarter to
a single one. Seized with terror, on being introduced to
Charles, he, on the first summons, caused the fortresses
of Sarzana and Sarzanello to be immediately surrendered.
He afterwards gave up those of Librafratta, Fisa, and
Leghorn j consenting that Charles should garrison and
keep them until his return from Italy, or until peace was

286 BISTOHY OF TBE ITALIAN BBPUBLIC8. 14S4.

simed; and thus establishing the king of France in
the heart of Tuscany. It was contrary'jto the wish
of the Florentines that Medici had engaged in hos¬
tilities against the French, for whom they entertained
an hereditary attachment; but the conduct of the chief
of the state, who, after having drawn them into a war,
delivered their fortresses, without authority, into the
hands of the enemy whom he hsW provoked, appeared as
disgraceful as it was criminal.

Pietro de' Medici, after this act of weakness, (quitted
Charles, to return in haste to Florence, where he arrived
on the 8th of November, 1494. On his preparing, the
next day, to visit the signoria, he found guards at the
door of the palace, who refused him admittance. Asto¬
nished at this opprsition, he returned home, to put him¬
self under the protection of his brother-in-law, Paolo
Orsini, a Roman noble, whom he had taken, with a
troop of cavalry, into the pay of the republic. Supported
by Orsini, tlae three brothers Medici rapidly traversed the
streets, repeating the war cry of their family,— “Palle!
Palle !”—without exciting a single movement of the po¬
pulace, upon whom they reckoned, in their favour. The
friends of liberty, the Piagnoni, on the other hand, ex¬
cited by the exhortations of Savonarola, assembled, and
took arms. Their number continually increased. The
Medici, terrified,left the city by the gate of San Gallo;
traversed the Apennines; retired first to Bologna, then to
Venice; and thus lost, without a struggle, a sovereignty
which their family had already exercised sixty years.

The same day, the ipth of November, 1494, on
which the Medici were driven out of Florence, the Flo¬
rentines were ilriven out of Pisa. This latter city, which
had been eighty-seven years under the dominion of her
ancient rival, could not habituate herself to a.state of sub¬
jection. Pisa had successively lost aU that gave her pros,
parity or made her illustrious. She no longer had shipping,
commerce, or wealth; the population diminished; agri-
culture was neglected throughout the Fiaan territory;
stagnant water began to infect the air; every professipn

1494. INSURRECTIONS IN FLORENCE AND PISA. 287

■which led to distinction was abandoned. There were
no men of science or letters^ no artists; there remained
only soldiers; but with them, courage and the mUtary
spirit survived at Pisa in all their ancient splendour.
Every noble served in the companies of adventure; every
citizen and peasant exercised himself in arms, and on
every occasion evinced a bravery which was beginning
to be rare in Italy, which commanded the respect
of the French. Charles Vill., on receiving from Pietro
de’ IVferiici the fortresses of Librafratta, Pisa, and Leghorn,
in the Pisan states, engaged to preserve to the Florentines
the countries within the range of these fortresses, and to
restoi)||jthera at the conclusion of the war. But Charles
had'Vei'y confus# notions of the rights of a country
into which he carried war, and was by no means scru¬
pulous as to keeping his word. When a deputation of
Pisans represented to him the tyranny under which
they groaned, and solicited from him the liberty of their
country; he granted their request witlio4| hesitation,
without even suspecting that he disposed of what was
not his, or that he broke his word to the Florentines:
he equally forgot every other engagement with them.
Upon entering Florence, on the 17th of November, at
the head of his army, he regarded himself as a con¬
queror, and therefore as dispensed from every promise
which he had made to Pietro de’ Medici, — he hesitated
only between restoring his conquest to Pietro, or retain¬
ing it himself. The magistrates in vain represented to
him that he was the guest of the nation, and not its
master ; that the gates had been opened to him as a
mark of respect, not from any fear; that the Floren¬
tines were far from feeling themselves conquered, whikt
tbe palaces of Florence were occupied not only by the
citizens but by the soldiers of the republic. Charles
still insisted on disgraceful conditions, which his secret
tary read as his ultimatum. Pietro Capponi suddenly
snatched the paper from the secretary’s hand, and tearing
it, exclaimed, “Well, if it be thus, sound your trumpets,
and wfi will ring our bells! ” This energetic movement

288.. ^ HISIOBT OF lTjU.lAN SErUBLIOS. ligS.

bunted the French;. Cbailet cteclared himself content
wifn the subsidy •f&red bwhe republic, and engaged
on 1^ part to roetore w soW as he had accomplished
the ftn^uest of Naides, or signed peace, or even con¬
sented to a loiig tetice, .all the fortresses which had been
de^ered' to wim by Medici, Charles after this con-
ved^b'n departed from ^orenqu^ the road, to Sieni^a,
on the ^8th of November.i^l^ Neapolitan artuy.
evacuated Romagna, the pattffligny of St. Peter, and
Rome, in Buccessitpij as he advanced. He entered
Rome on the Slst of December, without fighting a
blow. The first resistance which he encountered
was on the frontiers of the kingdom of Naplea^ and
having there taken by assault two smll towns, M^as-
sacred the inhabitants. This instance of ferocity struck
.^Iphonso II. with such terror, that he abdicated the
crown in favour of his son, Ferdinand 11., and retired
with his treasure into Sicily. Ferdinand occupied
Capua witlp his whole army, intending to defend
thp 'passage of the Vulturno. He left that city to
appease a sedition which had broken out at Naples ;
Capua, during his absence, was given up through fear
to the French, and he was himself forced, on the 21st
of February, to embark for Ischia. All the barons, bis
vass^s, all the provincial cities, sent deputations to
Charles; and the whole kingdom of Naples was conquered
without a single battle in its defence. The powers of
the north of Italy regarded these important conquests
with a jealous eye: they, moreover, were already dis¬
gusted by the insolence of the French, who had begun to
conduct themselves as masters throughout the whole
peninsula. The duke of Orleans, who had been left
by Charles at Asti, already declared his pretensions 4|o
the duchy of Milan, as heir to his grandmother, Valen-
-tna Visconti. Ludovico Sforza, upon this, contracted
alliances with the Venetians, the pope, the king of Spain,
and the emperor Maximilian, for maintaining the inde¬
pendence of Italy j and the duke of Milan and the Vene-

■» M 9 ■ .

tirai assembled heftr ». p«w«#ii «ni^,‘'^der^

the comtaand of thfe •'l;* '. *

Charles yi 11.' bni' thi*nr ^wtr^yeryj^ii^ in

feasta and toumainentsj

djiing. and dimrgatii^ng ipf

what was pssaing in nort n It^v detmmheff
leluriiing to France huf m his army.^

parted from Naples^'^Hlie IS^tfa of May,*1^4{ and
passed peaceably thfoi^n Rorhef whilst the»{4«^ ^ut*
himself' up in the* castle of St. Angdo. From Sienna
he went to Pisa, and thence to Pcnrtremoli, where he
entered the Apennines. Gonzaga, marquis of Mantua,
awaiatt him at Fornovo, on the other side of that chain
of rflinmains. Cmarles passed the Taro, With the hope
bf avoiding him ; but was attacked on its borders by the
Italians, on the 6'th of July. He was at the time in full*
march ; the divisions of his army were scattered, and at
some distance from each other. For some time* his
danger was imminent; but the impetuosity ofithe French,
and the obstinate valour of the Swiss, repaired'the
fault of their general. A great number of the Italian .
men at arms were thrown in the charges of the French’
cavalry, many others were brought down by the Swiss
halberts, and all were instantly put to death by the
servants of the army. Gonzaga left 3500 dead ontthe
field, and Charles continued his retreat. On his arrival
at Asti, he entered into treaty with Ludovico Sforza,
for the deliverance of the duke of Orleans, whom Sforza
besieged at Novara. He disbanded 20,000 Swiss,
who were brought to him from the mountains, but to
whose hands be would not venture to confide himself.
On the 22d of October, 1495, he repassed the Alps,
aiCr having ravaged all Italy with the violence and
rapidity of a hurricane. He had left his relative, Gil¬
bert de Montpensier, viceroy at Naples, with the half o#
his army ; but the people, already wearied with his yoke,
recalled Ferdinand II. The French, after many battles,
successively lost their conquests, and were at length
forced to capitulate at Atella, on the 23d of July, 14^.

S90r- HISTOBT OF THE ITALIAH REPUBLICS. 149@.

The invasion of the French not only spread terror
frbm one extremity of Italy to the other, but changed
the whole polic|s of that country, by rendering it de¬
pendent upon that of the tAnsalpine nations. While
Charles VIII.-pretended to be the legitimate heir of the
kingdom of Najdas, the duke of Orleans, who succeeded
him under the name of Louis XU., called himself heir
to the duchy of Milan. MalHilian, ambitious as he
was inconsistent, claimed in the states of Italy preroga.
tives to which no emperor had pretended since tho-death
of Frederick II. in 1250. The Swiss had learnt, at the
same time, that at the foot of their mountains there lay
rich anij feeble cities which they might pillage,^gnd a
delicious climate, which offered all we enjoyihents of
life; they saw neighbouring monarchs ready to pay
,them for exercising there their brigandage. Finally,
Ferdinand and Isabella, monarchs of Aragon and Cas¬
tile^ announced their intention of defending the bastard
branch of the house of Aragon, which reigned at Naples.
But, already masters of Sicily, they puVposed passing the
strait and were secretly in treaty with Charles VIII.,
to divide with him the spoils of the relative whom they
pretended to defend. Amidst these different pretensions
and intrigues, in which Italian interests had no longer
aii^ji^hare, the spirit of liberty revived in Tuscany once
more, but only to exhaust itself in a new struggle be¬
tween the Florentines and Pisans. The French garri¬
sons which Charles had left in Pisa and Librafratta,
instead of delivering them to the Florentines, according
to his order, had given them up to the Pisans them¬
selves on the 1st of January, 1496. The allies, who
had fought Charles at Fornovo, reproached the Floren¬
tines with their attachment to that monarch, and tdik
part against them with the Pisans. Ludovico Sfonsa,
and the Venetians, sent reinforcements to the latter, and
the emperor Maximilian himself brought them aid.
Thus, the only Italians who had at heart the honour
and independence of Italy, exhausted themselves in
unequal struggles and in fruitless attempts.

149^- THE GREAT COUNCIL AT FLORENCE. SQl

At the moment when Florence expelled the Medici,
th&t republic was bandied between three different p'ar-
ties. The first was that of the enthusiasts, directed by
Girolamo Savonarola ; who promised the miraculous pro¬
tection of the Divinity for the reform of the church and
the establishment of liberty. These demanded a demo¬
cratic constitution, —^ley tvere called the Piagnoni.
The second consisteflbf men who had shared power
with the Medici, djut who had separated from them;
who wished to possess alone the powers and profitB of
government, and who endeavoured to amuse the people
by dissipations and pleasures, in order to establish at
their^ase an aristocracy, — these were called the Arab-
biati. The thii*H party was composed of men who
remained faithful to the Medici, but not daring to de¬
clare themselves, lived in retirement,—they were called
Bigi. These three parties were so equally balanced in the
balia named by the parliament, on the 2d of Decegfiber,
1494, that it soon became impossible to carry on the
government. Girolamo Savonarola took advantage of this
state of affairs to urge that the people had never dele,
gated their power to a balidlfwhich did not abuse the
trust. “ The people,” he said, “ would do much better
to reserve this power to themselves, and exercise iXj^ a
council, into which all the citizens should be admH^.”
His proposition was agreed to; more than 1800 Flo¬
rentines furnished proof that either they, their fathers, or
their grandfathers, had sat in the magistracy; they were
consequently acknowledged citizens, and admitted to
ait in the general council. This council was declared
aovereign, on the 1st of July, 1495; it was invested
with the election of magistrates, hitherto chosen by
hit, and a general amnesty was proclaimed, to bury in
oblivion all the ancient dissensions of the Florentine
republic.

So important a modification of the constitution seemed
to promise this republic a happier futurity. The friar
fiavonarola, who had exercised such influence in the
council, evinced at the same time an ardent love of

292 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1497'

mankind^ deep respect for the rights of all, great sensi¬
bility, and an elevated mind. Though a zealous re¬
former of the church, and in this respect a precursor of
Luther, who was destined to begin his mission twenty
years later, he did not quit the pale of orthodoxy; he
did not assume the right of examining doctrine; he
limited his efforts to the restoration of discipline, the
reformation of the morals of the clergy, and the recall
of priests, as well as other citizens, to the practice of the
gospel precepts: but his zeal was mixed with enthusbisra;
he believed himself under the immediate insi)iration of
Providence ,■ he took his own impulses for prophetic
revelations, by which he directed the politics of his' dis¬
ciples, the Piagnoni. He had predicted to the Floren¬
tines the coming of the French into Italy ; he had
represented to them Charles VIII. as an instrument
by which the Divinity designed to chastise the crimes of
t^ j^ation; he had counselled them to remain faith¬
ful to their alliance with that king, the instrument of
Providence, even though his conduct, especially in
reference to the affairs of Pisa, had been highly culpable.
This alliance however i|^ged the Florentines among
the enemies of pope Alexander VI., one of the founders
ofJ^league which had driven the French out of Italy ;
jjHPused them of being traitors to the church and to
thS country for their attachment to a foreign prince.
Alexander, equally offended by the projects of reform
and by the politics of Savonarola, denounced him to the
church as a heretic, and interdicted him from preaching.
The monk at first obeyed, and procured the appoint¬
ment of his friend and disciple the Dominican friar,
Buonvicino of Pescia, as his successor in the church
of Bt. Mark ; but on Christmas.day, 1497, he declared
from the pulpit that God had revealed to him, that he
ought not to submit to a corrupt tribunal; he then
openly took the sacrament with the monks of St. Mark,
and afterwards continued to preach. In the course of
his aenaions, he more than once held up to reprobation
the ecandAlouB conduct of the pope, whom the public

1498. OBDEAL PREPARED FOB SAVONAROLA. ZQS

voice accused of every vice and every crime to be ex¬
pected in a libertine so depraved,— a man so ambitious,
perfidious, and cruel, — a monarch and a priest intoxi¬
cated with absolute power.

In the mean time, the rivalry encouraged by the court
of Rome between the religious orders soon procured the
pope champions eager to combat Savonarola : die w^s
a Dominican, — the general of the Augustines; that
order whence Martin Luther was soon to issue. Friar
Mariano di Ghinazzano signalised himself by his zeal in
opposing Savonarola. He presented to the pope, friar
Francis of Apulia, of the order of minor observantines,
who was sent to Florence to preach against the Floren¬
tine monk, in the church of Santa Croce. This preacher
declared to his> audience that he knew Savonarola pre¬
tended to support his doctrine by a miracle. “ For
me,” said he, “I am a sinner; I have not the pre¬
sumption to perform miracles, nevertheless, let ^ fire
be lighted, and 1 am ready to enter it with him. I am
certain of pciisliing, hut Christian charity teaches me
not to withhold my life, if,^ sacrificing it, I might
precipitate into hell a heresi^h, who has already drawn
into it so many souls.”

This strange proposition was rejected by SavoP
but his friend and disciple, friar Dominic BuonviHRo,
eagerly accepted it. Francis of Apulia declared that he
would risk his life against Savonarola only. Meanwhile,
a crowd of monks, of the Dominican and Franciscan
orders, rivalled each other in their ofl!ers to prove by the
ordeal of fire, on one side the truth, on the other the false¬
hood, of the new doctrine. Enthusiasm spread beyond
the two convents; many priests and seculars, and even
women and children, more especially on the side of
Savonarola, earnestly requested to be admitted to the
proof. The pope warmly testified his gratitude to the
Franciscans for their devotion. The signoria of Flo¬
rence consented that two monks only should devote
themselves for their respective orders, and directed the
pile to be prepared. The whole population of the town

ir

294 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLIDS. 1498.

and country, to which a signal miracle was promised,
received the announcement with transports of joy. On
the 17th of April, 1498, a scaffold, dreadful to look on,
was erected in the public square of Florence; two piles of
large pieces of wood, mixed with faggots and broom, which
should quickly take fire, extended each eighty feet long,
four feet thick, and five feet high; they were separated
by a narrow space of two feet, to serve as a passage by
which the two priests were to enter, and pass the whole
length of the piles during the fire, fevery window was
full; every roof was covered with spectators; almost
the whole population of the republic was collected round
the place. The portico called the Loggia de’ Lanzi,
divided in two by a partition, was assigned to the two
orders of monks. The Dominicans arrived at their
station chanting canticles, and bearing the holy sacra¬
ment. The Franciscans immediately declared that
they would not permit the host to be carried amidst
flames. They insisted that the friar Buonvicino should
enter the fire, as their own champion was prepared to
do, without this divine s^guard. The Dominicans an¬
swered, that “ they wouRi not separate themselves from
their God at the moment when they implored bis aid.”
Th^ dispute upon this point grew warm. Several hours
passed away. The multitude, which had waited long,
and begun to feel hunger and thirst, lost patience;
a deluge of rain suddenly fell upon the city, and de¬
scended in torrents from the roofs of the houses, — all
present were drenched. The piles were so wet that
they could no longer be lighted ; and the crowd, disap¬
pointed of a miracle so impatiently looked for, separated,
with the notion of having been unworthily trifled with.
Savonarola lost all his credit; he was henceforth rather
looked on as an impostor. Next day his convent wak
besieged by the Arabbiati, eager to profit by the incon-
.stancy of the multitude; he was arrested with his two
friends, Domenico Buonvicino, and Silvestro Marruffl,
and led to prison. The Piagnoni, his partisans, were
.exposed to every outrage from the populace, — two of

1498. SUPPLICE OF SAVONAROLA. 295

them were killed; their rivals and old enemies
dting the general ferment for their destruction. Even
in the signoriSj the majority was against them ; and
yielded to the pressing demands of the pope. The
three imprisoned monks were subjected to a criminal
prosecution. Alexander VI. despatched judges from
Rome, with orders to condemn the accused to death.
Conformably with the laws of the church, the trial
opened with the torture. Savonarola was too weak
and llervDUs to sujjport it: he avowed in his agony all
that was imputed to him; and, with his two disciples,
was condemned to death. The three monks were burnt
alive, on the 23d of May, 1498, in the same square
where, six weeks before, a pile had been raised to pre-
pare them a triumph.

CHAP.j^IV.

THE EHENCH MABTEES OE MILAN AND GENOA, AND THE SEANIAEDS
or NAELES. —THE QONFALONlEa SODEBINI AT FLOEENC*. —

LEAGUE OF CAMBEAI AGAINST VENICE. -THE MEDICI EE-

ESIABLISUED AT FLOEENCE.

The expedition of Charles VIII. against Naples had
directed towards Italy the attention of all the western
powers. The transalpine nations had learnt that they
were strong enough to act as masters, and if they pleased
as robbers, in this the richest and most civilised country
of the earth. All the powers on the confines henceforth
aspired to subject some part of Italy to their domi.
iiion. They coveted their share of tribute from a land
so fruitful of impost, from those cities in which indue*
try employed such numbers, and accumulated so much
capital. Cupidity put arms in their hands, and smo¬
thered every generous feeling. The commanders ivere
u 4

296 niSTOKY OF the -ITAtlAW REPUBLICS. 1498-

rapacious; the soldiers thought only of pillage. They
regarded the Italians as a race abandoned to their ex-
^^tions, and vied with each other in the barbarous
methods which they invented for extorting money from
the vanquished, until at last they completely destroyed
the prosperity which had provoked their envy.

Charles VIII. died at Amboise, on the 7th of April,
1498, the day destined at Florence for the trial by fire
of the doctrine of Savonarolai Louis XII., who suc¬
ceeded that monarch, claimed, as grandson of Valentipa
Visconti, to be the legitimate heir to the duchy of Milan,
although, according to the law acknowledged by all Italy,
and confirmed by the imperial investiture granted to the
father of Valentina, females were excluded from all share
in the succession. This monarch, at his coronation, took
with the title of king of France those of duke of Milan
and king of Naples and Jerusalem. It was to the
duchy of Milan that he seemed particularly attached,
apparently as having been the object of his ambitjon
before he came to the throne. He preserved during
his whole reign, as if he were simply duke of Milan, a
feudal respect for the emperor as lord paramount, which
was as fatal to France as to Italy.

After having thus announced to the world his pre¬
tensions to the duchy of Milan, Louis hastened to secure
his possession of it by arras. He easily separated his
^antagonist, Ludovico Sforza, from all his allies. The
emperor Maximilian had married the niece of Ludovico,
to whom he had granted the investiture of his duchy;
but Maximilian forgot, with extreme levity, his pro¬
mises and alliances. A new ambition, a supposed
offence, even a whim, sufficed to make him abandon his
most matured projects. The Swiss had just then ex.
cited his resentment; and to attack them the more effec¬
tually, he signed with Louis XII. a truce, in which
Ludovico Sforza was not included, and was therefore
abandoned to his enemy. The Venetians were interested
still more than the emperor in defending Ludovico, but
were incensed against him; they accused him of having

1499- ■WAH OP VENICE AGAINST THE TURKS. 297

deceived them, as well in the war against Charles V{II.
as in that for the defence of Pisa. They suspected him
of having suggested to Maximilian the claims which he
had just made on all their conquests in Lombardy, as^
having previously appertained to the empire. They
were obliged, moreover, to reserve all their resources
to resist the most formidable of their enemies. Baja-
zet II. had just declared war against them. Bands of
robbers continually descended from the mountains of
Tur'jSish Albania fo lay waste Venetian Dalmatia. The
'rtirkish pachas offered their support to every traitor
who attempted to take from the Venetians any of their
stations in the Levant. Corfu very nearly fell into the
hands of the Turks : at length hostilities openly began.
The Turks attacked Zara ; all the Venetian merchants
established at Constantinople were put into irons, and
Scander Bashaw, sangiak of Bosnia, passed the Isonzo on
the 29th of September, 1499) with 7000 Turkish ca¬
valry. He ravaged all the rich country which extends
from that river to the Tagliamento, at the extremity of
the Adriatic, and spread terror up to the lagune which
surround Venice. Invaded by an enemy so formidable,
against whom they were destined to support, for seven
years, a relentless war, the Venetians would not expose
themselves to the danger of maintaining another war
against the French. On the 15th of April, 1499, they
signed, at Blois, with Louis, a treaty, by which tliey^
contracted an alliance against Ludovico Sforza, and
abandoned the conquest of the Milanese to the king of
France, reserving to themselves Cremona and the Ghiara
d’Adda.

Ludovico Sforzo found no allies in any other part of
Italy. Since the execution of Savonarola at Florence,
the faction of the Arabbiati had succeeded that of the
Fiagnoni in the administration, without chan^ng its
policy. The republic continued to guard against the
intrigues of the Medici, who entered into an alliance
with every enemy of their country, in order to bring it
back under their yoke. Florence continued her efforts

29^ HISTORY OF THE ITAUAK BEPOBLICS. 1499-

to pubdue Pisa; butj fearing' to excite the jealousy of
the kings of France and Spain^ did not assemble for
that purpose either a numerous army or a great train of
artillery. She contented herself with ravaging the Pisan
‘territory every year, in order to reduce that city by
famine. Even these expeditions were suspended when
those powerful monarchs found it convenient to make
a show of peace. The cities of Sienna, Lucca, and
Genoa, actuated by their jealousy of Florence, sent
succour to Pisa. Pope Alexander VI., who had 'neen
always the enemy of Charles VIII., now entered into
an alliance with Louis XII.; but on condition that
Csesar Borgia, son of Alexander, should be made duke
of Valentinois in France and of Romagna in Italy,—
the French king assisting him against the petty princes,
feudatories of the holy see, who were masters of that
province. The king of Naples, Frederick, who had
succeeded his nephew Ferdinand on the 7th of Sep¬
tember, 1496 , was well aware that he should, in his
turn, be attacked by France; but although he merited,
by his talents and virtues, the confidence of his subjects,
he had great difficulty in re-establishing some order in
his kingdom, which was ruined by war, and had neither
an army nor an exchequer to succour his natural ally,
the duke of Milan.

A powerful French army, commanded by the sires De
Ligny and D’Aubigny, passed the Alps in the month
of August, 1499 . On the 13th of that month they
attacked and took by assault the two petty fortresses
of Arazzo and Annone, on the borders of the Tanaro;
putting the garrisons, and almost all the inhabitants,
to the sword. This ferocious proceeding spread terror
among the troops of Ludovico Sforza. His army, the
command of which he had given to Galeazzo San Seve-
rino, dispersed; and the duke, not venturing to remain at
Milan, sought for himself, his children, and his treasure,
refuge in Germany, with the emperor Maximilian.
Louis XII., who arrived afterw.ards in Italy, made his
entry into the forsaken capital of Ludovico on the 2d of

1499' MILAN CONQVEBED BY THE FRENCH. 299

October. The tumbling people, wishing to conciliate
their new master, saluted him with the title of duke of
Milan, and expressed their joy in receiving him as their
sovereign. The rest of Lombardy also submitted with¬
out resistance; and Genoa, which had placed itself
under the protection of the duke of Milan, passed over
to that of the king of France. Louis returned to Lyons
before the end of the year : the fugitive hopes which
he had excited already gave way to hatred. The in-
sojence of the French, — their violation of all national
institutions, their conte.upt of Italian manners, — the
accumulation of taxes, and the irregularities in the
administration, rendered their yoke insupportable. Lu¬
dovico Sforza was informed of the general ferment, and
of the desire of his subjects for his return. He was
on the Swiss frontier, with a considerable treasure: a
brave but disorderly crowd of young men, ready to
serve any one for pay, joined him. In a few days
500 cavalry and 8000 infantry assembled under his
banner; and, in the month of February, 1500, he
entered Lombardy at their head. Como, Milan, Parma,
and Pavia immediately opened their gates to him : he
next besieged Novara, which capitulated. Louis, mean¬
while, displayed the greatest activity in suppressing the
rebellion: his general, Louis de la Tremouille, arrived
before Novara, in the beginning of April, with an army
in which were reckoned 10,000 Swiss. The men of
that nation in the two hostile camps, opposed to each
other for hire, hesitated, parleyed, and finally took a re¬
solution more fatal to their honour than a battle between
fellow countrymen could have been. Those within
Novara not only consented to withdraw themselves, but
to give up to the French the Italian men at arms with
whom they were incorporated, and who were imme¬
diately put to the sword or drowned in the river.
They permitted La Tremouille to arrest in their ranks
Ludovico Sforza, and the two brothers San Severino,
who attempted to escape in disguise. They received
from the French the wages thus basely won, and

300 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1501.

afterwards^ rendered reckless By thfe sense of their
infamy, they in their retreat seized Bdinzona, which
they ever after retained. Thus, even the weakest of the
neighbours of Italy would have their share in her con¬
quest. Ludovico Sforza was conducted into France,
and there condemned to a severe captivity, which, ten
years afterwards, ended with his life. The Milanese
remained subject to the king of France from this period,
to the month of June, 1512.

The facility with which Louis had conqueretl the
duchy of Milan, must have led him to expect that he
should not meet with much more resistance from the
kingdom of Naples. Frederick also, sensible of this, de¬
manded peace; and, to obtain it, offered to hold his
kingdom in fief, as tributary to France. He reckoned,
however, on the support of Ferdinand the Catholic, his
kinsman and neighbour, who had promised him power¬
ful aid, and had given him a pledge of the future by
sending into Sicily his best general, Gonzalvo di Cor¬
dova, with sixty vessels and 8000 chosen infantry. But
Ferdinand had previously proposed to Louis a secret un¬
derstanding, to divide between them the spoils of the
unhappy Frederick. While the French entered on the
north to conquer the kingdom of Naples, he proposed
that the Spaniards should enter on the' south to defend
it; and that, on meeting, they, instead of giving battle,
should shake hands on the partition of the kingdom,—
each remaining master of one half. This was the basis
of the treaty of Grenada, signed on the 11th of Novem¬
ber, 1500. In the summer of 1501, the perfidious
compact was executed by the two greatest monarchs of
Europe.

The French army arrived at Rome on the 25th of
June; at the same time that the army of Gonzalvo di
Cordova landed in Calabria. The former, from the mo¬
ment they passed the frontier, treated the Neapolitans as
rebels, and hanged the soldiers who surrendered to them'.
Arrived before Capua,* they entered that city while the
magistrates were signing the capitulation, and massacred

1502. THE FRENCH AND gPANlARDS IN NAPLES. 301

7000 of the inhabitantB. The treachery of Ferdinand
inspired the unhappy Frederick with still more aversion
than the ferocity of the French. Having retired to the
island of Ischia, he surrendered to Louis, and was sent to
France, where he died, in a captivity by no means rigor¬
ous, three years afterwards. The Spaniards and French
advanced towards each other, without encountering any
resistance. They met on the limits which the treaty of
Grenada had respectively assigned to them ; but the mo¬
ment* the conquest was terminated, jealousy appeared.
The duke de Nemours and Gonzalvo di Cordova disputed
upon the division of the kingdom ; each claimed for his
master some province not named in the treaty. Hostilities
at last began between them on the ipth of June, 1502,
at Atripalda. Louis, while the negotiation was pending,
delayed sending reinforcements to his general. After a
struggle, not without glory, and in which La Palisse and
Bayard first distinguished themselves, D’Aubigny was
defeated at Seminars on the 21st of April, and Nemours
at Cerignola on the 28th of the same month, 1503.
The French army was entirely destroyed, and the
kingdom of Naples lost to Louis XII. Louis had sent
off, during the same campaign, a more powerful army
than the first, to recover it; but, on arriving near Rome,
news was received of the death of Alexander VI., which
took place on the 18lh of August, 1503. The cardinal
d’Amboise, prime minister of Louis, detained the army
there to support his intrigues in the conclave: when it
renewed its march, in the month of October, the rainy
season had commenced. Gonzalvo di Cordova had taken
his position on the Garigliano, the passage of which he
defended, amidst inundated plains, with a constancy and
patience characteristic of the Spanish infantry. During
more than two months the French suffered or perished
in the marshes: a pestilential malady carried off the
flower of the army, and damped the courage and confiv
dence of the remainder. Gonzalvo, having at last passed
the river himself, on the 27th of December, attacked
and completely destroyed the French army. On the lat

S02 BISTORT OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1504.

of,January, 1504, Gaeta surrendered to him; and the
whole kingdom of Naples was now, like Sicily, but a
Spanish possession.

Thus the greater part of Italy had already fallen
under the yoke of the nations which the Italians deno¬
minated barbarian. The French were masters of the
Milanese and of the whole of Liguria; the Spaniards of the
Two Sicilies; even the Swiss had made some small con¬
quests along the Lago Maggiore; and this was the mo¬
ment in which Louis XII. called thd Germans alaj into
Italy. On the 22d of September of the same year in
which he lost Gaeta, his last hold in the kingdom of
Naples, he signed the treaty of Blois, by which he
divided with Maximilian the republic of Venice, as he
had divided with Ferdinand the kingdom of Naples.
Experience ought to have taught him that Maximilian,
like Ferdinand, would reserve for himself the conquests
made in common. The future ought to have alarmed
him; for (’harles, the grandson and heir of Maximilian
of Austria, and of Ferdinand of Aragon, of Mary of
Burgundy, and of Isabella of Castille, was already
born. It was foreseen that he would unite under
his sceptre the greatest monarchies in Europe; and
Louis, instead of guarding against his future greatness,
had promised to give him his daughter in marriage. It
was the thoughtlessness of Maximilian, and not the pru¬
dence of Louis, that delayed, during four ^ears, the
execution of the treaty of Blois.

During this interval, Genoa—which had never ceased
to consider herself a republic, although the signoria had
been conferred first on Ludovico Sforza, and next on
Louis XII. as duke of Milan—learned from experience
that a foreign monarch was incapable of comprehending
either her laws or liberty. According to the capitulation,
one half of the magistrates of Genoa should be noble,
the other half plebeian. They were to be chosen by the
suffrages of their fellow-citizens; they were to retain
the government of the whole of Liguria, and the adlhf-
nistradon of their own finances, with the reserr^tion hf

1607.

C^BAB BORGIA Uf ROMAGNA.

309

a fixed .sum payable yearly to the king of France. But
the French could never comprehend that nobles were on
an equality with villains; that a king was bound by
conditions imposed by his subjects j or that money
could^tc refused to him who had force. All the capitu¬
lations of Genoa were successively violated ; while the
Genoese nobles ranged themselves on the side of a king
against their country : they were known to carry inso¬
lently about them a dagger, on which was inscribed,
“ Chastise villain^;” so impatient were they to separate
themselves from the people, even by meanness and assas¬
sination. That people could not support the double yoke
of a foreign master and of nobles who betrayed their
country. On the 7th of February, 1507, they revolted,
drove out the French, proclaimed the republic, and
named a new doge ; but time failed them to organise
their defence. On the 3d of April, Louis advanced
from Grenoble with a powerful army. He soon arrived
before Gen^g: the newly-raised militia, unable to with-
stan# veteran troops, were defeated. Louis entered
Genoa bn the 29 th of April; and immediately sent the
4pgB and the greater number of the generous citizens,
‘trao had signalised themselves in the defence of their
country, to the scaffold.

^ Independent Italy now comprised only the states of
the Church, Tuscany, and the republic of Venice j and
even thA provinces were pressed by the transalpine na¬
tions on every side. The Spaniards and French alter¬
nately spread terror through Tuscany and the states of the
church; theGermans andTurks held in awe the territories
.,«f V enice. The states of the church were at the same
time a prey to the intrigues of the detestable Alexander,
and his sonCsesar Borgia. More murders, more assassin¬
ations, more glaring acts of perfidy, were committed
within a short space, than during the annals of the most
depraved monarchies. Cssar Borgia, whom his father
created duke of Romagna in 1501, had previously de-
afkiled and put to death the petty princes who reigned at
iPesaro,’^Bimini, Forli, and Faenza. Me had, in like

304- HISTOKY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. ISOS^

manner, possessed himself of Piomhino in Tuscanjr, th«
duc'hy of Urbino, and the little principalities of Came-
rino and Senegallia. He had caused to be strangled in,
this last city, on the 31st of December, 130% four
tyrants of the states of the church, who followti^ the
trade of condottieri. These princes had served in bis
pay, and, alarmed by his intrigues, had taken arms
against him ; but, seduced by his artifices, they placed,
themselves voluntarily in his power. Ceesar Borgia had
made himself master of Citta do Castelli, and of Peru¬
gia ; and was menacing Bologna, Sienna, and Florence,
when, on the 18th of August, 1303, he and his father
drank, by mistake, a poison which they had prepared for
one of their guests. His father died of it, and Borgia
himself was in extreme danger. In thirteen months he
lost all his sovereignties, the fruits of so many crimes.
Attacked in turn by pope Julius II., who had succeeded
his father, and by Gonzalvo di Cordova, he was at last
sent into Spain, where he died in battle, mor^onourably
than he deserved. *

In Tuscany, the republic of Florence found it^lf sur¬
rounded with enemies. The Medici, continuing exile|,
had entered into alliances with all the tyrants in the pon¬
tifical states: they took part in every plot against their
country ; at the same time, they sought the friendship of^
the king of France, who was more disposed to favour a
prince than a republic. Pietro de’ Medici hadAcompa.
nied the army sent, in 1303, against the kingdom of
Naples, and lost his life at the defeat of the Garigliano.
His death did not deliver Florence from the apprehen.
Sion which he had inspired. His brothers Giovanni
and Giuliano carried on their intrigues against their
country. The war with Fisa, too, which still lasted,
exhausted the finances of Florence. The Pisans had lost
their commerce and manufactures j they saw their har¬
vests, each year, destroyed by the Florentines: but
they opposed to all these disasters a constancy and cou¬
rage not to be subdued. The French, Germ^l^a^.
Spaniards, in turn sent them succour; not fro^PVch^'

I'SDSir GONFALONIER FOR LIFE. 305

atRf interest in their cause, but with the view of propt-
inghy the struggle which they protracted. Bucca and
Sienna also, jealous of the Florentines, secretly assisted
the Phans'; but only so far as they could do it without
eompromising themselves with neighbours whom they
feared. Lucca fell, by degrees, into the hands of a
narrow oligarchy. Sienna suffered itself to be enslaved
by Pandolfo Petrucci, a citizen, whom it had named
captain of the guard, and who commanded obedience,
withi/Ut departing* from the manners and habits of re¬
publican equality.

In the new position of Italy, continually menaced by
absolute princes, whose deliberations were secret, and
who united perfidy with force, the Florentines became
sensible that their government could not act with the
requisite discretion and secrecy, while it continued
to be changed every two months. Their allies even
complained that no secret could be confided to them,
without be(^piing known, at the same time, to the whole
repuBlic, They accordingly judged it necessary to place
at the Had of the state a single magistrate, who should
b| present at every council, and who should be the
depositary of every communication requiring secrecy.
This chief, who was to retain the name of gonfalonier,
jjvas elected, like the doge of Venice, for life; he was
to be lodged in the palace, and to have a salary of
100 florAs a month. The law which created a gon¬
falonier for life was voted on the l6th of August, 1502 ;
but it was not till the 22d of September [following that
the grand council chose Pietro Soderini to fill that ofBce.
pHe was a man universally respected; of mature age,
without ambition, without children; and the republic
never had reason to repent its choice. The republic, at
the same time, introduced the authority of a single man
into the administration, and suppressed it in the tri¬
bunals. A law of the 15th of April, 1502, abolished
the offices of podesta and of captain of justice, and
sl^plfe^heir places by the rtiofaa tribunal composed
eHfiill^ldges, of whom four must agree in passing

306 HISTOBY OP THE ITALIAN BEPUBLICS. 1503.

sentence: eachj in his turn, was to be president of the
tribunal for six months. This rotation caused the name
of ruota to be given to the supreme courts of law at
Rome and Florence.

The most important service expected from Soderini
was that of subjecting Pisa anew to the Florentine re¬
public: he did not accomplish this until 1509. That
city had long been reduced to the last extremity; the
inhabitants^ thinned by war and famine, had no longer
any hope of holding out ; but Louis XII. and Ferdi¬
nand of Aragon announced to the Florentines that they
must be paid for the conquest which Florence was on
the point of making. Pisa had been defended by them
since 1507, but only to prevent its surrendering before
the amount demanded was agreed on ; it was at length
fixed at 100,000 florins to be paid to the king of
France, and 50,000 to the king of Aragon. This treaty
was signed on the 13th of March; and on the 8th
of June, 1509, Pisa, which had cruelly sj|^ered from
famine, opened its gates to the Florentine armyt the
occupying army was preceded by convoys of pil^isions,
which the soldiers themselves distributed to the citizens.
The signoria of Florence abolished aU the conflscatiohs
pronounced, against the Pisans since the year 1494;
they restored to them all their property and privileges.
They tried, in every way, to conciliate and attach that
proud people; but nothing could overcome Jheir deep
resentment, and their regret for the loss of their inde¬
pendence. Almost every family, which had preserved any
fortune, emigrated; and the population already so reduced
by war, was stiU further diminished after the peace. •§

The republic of Venice was condemned, by the warJ
which it had to support against the Turkish empire,
from 1499 to 1503, to make no effort for maintaining
the independence of Italy against France and Aragon.
It had solicited the aid of all Christendom, as if for a
holy war, against Bajazet II.; and, in fact, alternately
received assistance from the kings of France, Ara^n,
and Portugal, and from the pope: but these aidr^ limited

3503. VENETIANS IN BOMAONA. 307

to short services on great occasions, were of little real
efficacy. They aggravated the misery of the Greeks
among whom the war was carried on, caused little in¬
jury to the Turks, and were of but little service to the
Venetians. The Mussulmans had made progress in
naval discipline; the Venetian fleet could no longer
cope with theirs; and Antonio Grimani, its commander,
till then considered the most fortunate of the citizens
of Venice, already father of a cardinal, and destined,
long after, to be the doge of the republic, was, on his
return to his country, loaded with irons. Lepanto,
Pylos, Modon, and Coron, were successively conquered
from the Venetians by the Turks; the former were
glad at last to accept a peace negotiated by Andrea
Gritti, one of their feUow-citizens, a captive at Con¬
stantinople. By this peace they renounced all title to
the places which they had lo.st in the Peloponnesus, and
restored to Bajazet the island of Santa Maura, which
they had, on,their side, conquered from the Turks. This
peace was signed in the month of November, 1503.

The period in which the republic of Venice was
delivered from the terror of the Turks was also that of
the death of Alexander VI., and of the ruin of his son
Ctesar Borgia. The opportunity appeared to the si-
gnoria favourable for extending its possessions in Bo-
magna. That province had been long the object of its
ambition. • Venice had acquired by treachery, on the
241th of February, 1441, the principality of Ravenna,
governed for 16'6 years by the house of Polenta. In
1463, it had purchased Cervia, with its salt marshes,
from Malatesta IV., one of the princes of Rimini; upon
die death of Csesar Borgia, it took possession of Faenza,
the principality of Manfredi; of Rimini, the principality
of Malatesta; and of several fortresses. Iraola and
Forli, governed by the Alidosi and the Ordelaffi, alone
remained to be subdued, in order to make Venice mis¬
tress of the whole of Romagna. The Venetians offered
the pope the same sulnniBsion, the same annual tribute,
for whicb those petty princes were acknowledged pon-
z 2

308 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1508.

tifical vicars. But Julius II.j who had succeeded Borgia^
although violent and irascible, had a strong sense of his
duty as a pontiff and as an Italian. He was determined
on preserving the states of the church intact for his suc¬
cessors. He rejected aU nepotism, all aggrandisement
of his family; and would have accused himself of un¬
pardonable weakness, if he suffered others to usurp what
he. refused to give his family. He haughtily exacted
the restitution of all that the Venetians possessed in the
states of the church; and as he could not obtain ifvfrom
them, he consented to receive it from the hands of Louis
and Maximilian, who combined to despoil the republic.
He, however, communicated to the Venetians the pro¬
jects formed against them, and it was not till they
appeared resolved to restore him nothing, that he con¬
cluded his compact with their enemies.

The league against Venice, signed at Cambray, on
the loth of December, 1508, by Margaret of Austria,
daughter of Maximilian, and the cardinal d’Amboise,
prime minister of Louis, was only the completion of the
secret treaty of Blois, of the 22d of September, 1504.
No offence had been given, to justify this perfidious
compact. Maximilian, who detested Louis, had the
same year endeavoured to attack him in the Milanese;
but the Venetians refused him a passage; and after
three months’ hostilities, the treaty between the em¬
peror and the republic was renewed, on the 7th of June,
1508. Louis XII., whom the Venetians defended, and
Maximilian, with whom they were reconciled, had no
other complaint against them than that they had no king,
and that their subjects thus excited the envy of those
who' had. The two monarchs agreed to divide between
them aU the terra firma of the Venetians, to abandon
to Ferdinand aU their fortresses in Apulia, to the pope
the lordships in Romagna, to the houses of Este and
Gonzaga the small districts near the Fo; and thus to give
all an interest in the destrucdon of the only state suffi-
dently strong to maintain the independence of Italy.

France was the first to dedare war against the re-

150g. BATTLE OP AISNAOEL. 309

public of Venice, in the month of January, 1509- Hos¬
tilities commenced on the 15th of April; on the 27th
of the same month, the pope excommunicated the doge
and the republic. The Venetians had assembled an
army of 42,000 men, under the command of the im¬
petuous Bartolomeo d'Alviano and the cautious Piti-
gliano. The disagreement between these two chiefs,
both able generals, caused the loss of the battle of Ai-
gnadel, fought, on the 14th of May, 1509, with the
French, who did not exceed 30,000. Half only, or
less, of the Venetian army was engaged; but that part
fought heroically, and perished without falling back
one step. After this discomfiture, Bergamo, Brescia,
Crema, and Cremona, hastily surrendered to the con¬
querors, who planted their banners on the border of
Ghiaradadda, the limits assigned by the treaty of par¬
tition. Louis signalised this rapid conquest by atrocious
cruelties: he caused the Venetian governors of Cara¬
vaggio and of Peschiera to be hanged, and the garri¬
sons and inhabitants to be put to the sword; he ruined,
by enormous ransoms, all the Venetian nobles who fell
into his hands; seeking to vindicate to himself his unjust
attack by the hatred which he studied to excite.

The French suspended their operations from the Slst
of May; but the emperor, the pope, the duke of Fer¬
rara, the marquis of Mantua, and Ferdinand of Aragon
profited by the disasters of the republic to invade its
provinces on all sides at once. The senate, in the impos¬
sibility of making head against so many enemies, took
the generous resolution of releasing all its subjects
from their oath of fidelity, and permitting them to treat
with the enemy, since it was no longer in its power
to defend them. In letting them feel the weight of a
foreign yoke, the senate knew that it only rendered more
dear the paternal authority of the republic; and, in fact^
those citizens who had eagerly opened their gates to the
French, Germans, and Spaniards, soon contrasted, in
despair, their tyranny with the just and equal power
which they had not had the courage to defend. The
X 3

310 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1509-

Germans, above all, no sooner entered the Venetian cities,
than they plunged into the most brutal debauchery;
offending public decency, and exercising their cruelty and
rapacity on all those who came within their reach. Not¬
withstanding this, the native nobles joined them. They
were eager to substitute monarchy for republican equality
and freedom; but their insolence only aggravated the
hatred which the Germans inspired. The army of the
republic had taken refuge at Mestre, on the borders of
the Lagune, when suddenly the citizen evinced a cou¬
rage which the soldier no longer possessed. Treviso, in
the month of June, and Padua on the 17th of July,
drove out the imperialists; and the banners of St.
Mark, which had hitherto constantly retreated, began
once again to advance.

The war of the league of Cambray showed the Ita¬
lians, for the first time, what formidable forces the
transalpine nations could bring against them. Maximi¬
lian arrived to besiege Padua in the month of Septem¬
ber, 1509 . He had in his army Germans, Swiss,
French, Spaniards, Savoyards; troops of the pope, of
the marquis of Mantua, and of the duke of Modena ; in
all more than 100,000 men, with 100 pieces of cannon.
He was, notwithstanding, obliged to raise the siege, on
the 3d of October, after many encounters, supported on
each side with equal valour. But these barbarians, who
came to dispute with the Italians the sovereignty of their
country, did not need success to prove their ferocity.
After having taken from the poor peasant, or the captive,
all that he possessed, they put him to the torture to
discover hidden treasure, or to extort ransom from the
compassion of friends. In this abuse of brute force,
the Germans showed themselves the most savage, the
Spaniards the most coldly ferocious. Both were more
odious than the French; dthough the last mentioned had
bands called flayers (ecorcheurs), formed in the English
wars, and long trained to grind the people.

Pope Julius II. soon began to hate his accomplices in
the league of Cambray. Violent and irascible, he had

1510. JULIUS n. INTENT ON LIBBRATINO ITALY. 311

often shown in his fits of passion that he could hg as
cruel as the worst of them. But he had the soul of an
Italian. He could not brook the humiliation of his
country, and its being enslaved by those whom he called
barbarians. Having recovered the cities of Romagna, the
subject of his quarrel with the Venetians, he began to
make advances to them. At the end of the first cam¬
paign, he entered into negotiations; and on the 21st of
February, 1510, granted them absolution. He was
aware that he could never drive the barbarians out of
Italy but by arming them against each other; and as
the French were those whom he most feared, he had
recourse to the Germans. It was necessary to begin
with reconciling the Venetians to the emperor; but
Maximilian, always ready to undertake every thing, and
incapable of bringing any thing to a conclusion, would
not relax in a single article of what he called his rights.
As emperor, he considered himself monarch of all Italy;
and although he was always stopped on its frontier, he
refused to renounce the emaUest part of what he had
purposed conquering. He asserted that the whole Ve¬
netian territory had been usurped from the empire; and
before granting peace to the republic, demanded almost
its annihilation.

Its was with the aid of the Swiss that the pope de¬
signed to liberate Italy. He admired the valour and
piety of that warlike people: he saw, with pleasure,
that cupidity had become their ruling passion. The
Italians, who needed the defence of the Swiss, were rich
enough'to pay them; and a wise policy conspired
for once with avarice; for the Swiss republics could
not be safe if liberty were not re-established in Italy.
Louis XII., by his prejudice in favour of nobility, had
offended those proud mountaineers, whom, even in 1^
own army, he considered only as revolted peasants.
Julius II. employed the bishop of Sion, whom he after¬
wards made cardinal, to irritate them still more againat
France. In the course of the summer of 1510, the
French, according to the plan which Julius had formed,
X 4

S12 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1.511.

were attacked in the Milanese by the Swiss, in Genoa by
the Genoese emigrants, at Modena by the pontifical
troops, and at Verona by the Venetians; but, notwith¬
standing the profound secrecy in which the pope en¬
veloped his negotiations and intrigues, he could not
succeed, as he had hoped, in surprising the French every
where at the same time. The four attacks were made
successively, and repulsed. The sire de Chaumont,
lieutenant of Louis in Lombardy, determined to avenge
himself by besieging the pope in Bologno, in the month
of October. Julius feigned a desire to purchase peace
at any price; but, while negotiating, he caused troops to
advance ; and, on finding himself the stronger, suddenly
changed his language, used threats, and made Chaumont
retire. When Chaumont had placed his troops in winter
quarters, the pope, during the greatest severity of the sea¬
son, attacked the small state of Mirandola, which had
put itself under the protection of France; and entered
its capital hy a breach, on the 20th of January, 1511.

The pope’s troops, commanded by the duke of Ur-
bino, experienced in the following campaign a signal
defeat at Casalecchio, on the 21st of May, 1511. It was
called the day of the ass-drivers,” because the French
knights returned driving asses before them loaded with
booty. The loss of Bologna followed; but Julius II.
was not discouraged. His legates laboured, throughout
Europe, to raise enemies against France. They at last
accomplished a league, which was signed cgi the 5th of
October, and which was called Holy, because it was
headed by the pope. It comprehended the kings of Spain
and England, the Swiss, and the Venetians. Louis XII.,
to oppose an ecclesiastical authority to that of the pontiffs,
convoked, in concert with Maximilian, whom he con¬
tinued to consider his ally an (ecumenical council. A few
cardinals, who had separated from the pope, clothed it
with their authority; and Florence dared not refuse to
the two greatest monarchs of Europe the city of Pisa for
its place of meeting, although the whole population be¬
held with dread this commencement of a new schism.

1612. VICTOBY AND DEATH OF NEMOURS. 313

A powerful Spanish army meanwhile advanced from
Naples, to the aid of the pope, under the cotnmand of
Raymond de Cardona; and laid siege to Bologna on the
26 th of January, 1512. The French had driven to
despair, by their extortions, the people of the provinces
which they had seized from Venice. On the 3d of Fe¬
bruary, Brescia revolted against them. Gaston de Foix,
due de Nemours, and nephew of Louis XII., had, at the
age of twenty-two, been just placed at the head of the
French army. With a rapidity ever memorable, he in
turn successfully opposed his two enemies. Having,
on the 5th of February, entered Bologna, he forced the
Spaniards to raise the siege, and make a precipitate re¬
treat through Romagna. He instantly returned to attack
the Venetians, and on his road defeated one of their
armies. He retook Brescia by assault, on the 19 th of
February, and punished that unhappy city by a frightful
massacre of its inhabitants; but pillage disorganised
and corrupted his army, and six weeks elapsed before be
could return to Romagna, to oppose the armies of Spain
and of the pope, which had again advanced. He forced
them to give battle, near Ravenna, on Easter Sunday,
the 11th of April, 1512. It was the most murderous
battle that Italy had yet seen: nearly 20,000 dead
covered the plain on which it was fought. Gaston de
Foix, was, for the last time, victorious. The formidable
Spanish infantry slowly retreated, without permitting itself
to be broken in any part. Gaston, furious at its escaping
him, made one last effort against it, and was killed.

The death of Gaston proved the signal of the defeat
of the French in Italy. The ministers of Louis thought
they might, after the battle of Ravenna, safely dismiss a
part of their army ; but Maximilian, betraying aU his
engagements, abandoned the French to their enemies.
Without consenting to make peace with Venice, he gave
passage through his territory to 20,000 Swiss, who
were to join the Venetian army, in order to attack the
French. He, at the same time, recalled aU the Germans
who had enlisted under the banner of France. Ferdi-

314 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1512>

n^d of Aragon and Henry VIII. of England almost
simultaneously attacked Louis^ who, to defend himself,
was obliged to recall his troops from Italy. In the be¬
ginning of June, they evacuated the Milanese; of which
the Swiss took possession, in the name of Maximilian
Sforza, son of Louis the Moor. On the 29*^ of the
same month, a revolution drove the French out of Ge¬
noa ; and the republic and a new doge were again pro¬
claimed. The possessions of France were soon reduced
to a few small fortresses in that Italy which the French
thought they had subdued. But the Italians did not re¬
cover their liberty by the defeat of only one of their oppres¬
sors. From the yoke of France, they passed under that of
the Swiss, the Spaniards, and the Germans; and the last
they endured always seemed the most galling. To add
to their humiliation, the victory of the Holy League
enslaved the last and only republic truly free in Italy.

Florence was connected with France by a treaty con¬
cluded in concert with Ferdinand the Catholic. The
republic continued to observe it scrupulously, even after
Ferdinand had disengaged himself from it. Florence
had fulfilled towards all the belligerent powers the duties
of good neighbourhood and neutrality, and had given
offence to none: but the league, which had just driven
the French out of Italy, was already divided in interest,
and undecided on the plan which it shbuld pursue. It
was agreed only on one point, that of obtaining money.
The Swiss lived at discretion in Lombardy, and levied
in it the most ruinous contributions : the Spaniards of
Raymond de Cardona insisted also on having a province
abandoned to their inexorable avidity; Tuscany was
rich and not warlike. The victorious powers who had
assembled in congress at Mantua proposed to the Floren.
tines to buy themselves off with a contribution; but the
Medici, who presented themselves at this congress, asked
to be restored to their country, asserting that they could
extract much more money by force, for the use of the holy-
league, than a republican government could obtain fiom
the people by gentler means. Raymond de Cardona readily

1512. FLORENCE- ENSLAVED BY THE MEDICI. 315

believed them, and in the month of August, 15J2,
accompanied them across the Apennines, with 5000
Spanish infantry as inaccessible to pity as to fear. Ray¬
mond sent forward to tell the Florentines, that if they
would preserve their liberty, they must recall the Medici,
displace the gonfalonier Soderini, and pay the,Spanish
army 40,000 florins. He arrived at the same time before
the small town of Prato, which shut its gates against
him: it was well fortified, but defended only by the
ordinanxa, or country militia. On the 30th of August,
the Spaniards made a breach in the wall, which these
peasants basely abandoned. The city was taken by as¬
sault ; the militia, which would have incurred less danger
in fighting valiantly, were put to the sword: 5000
citizens were afterwards massacred, and others, divided
among the victors, were put to lingering tortures, either
to force them to discover where they had concealed their
treasure, or to oblige their kinsmen to ransom them out
of pity; the Spaniards having already pillaged all they
could discover in holy as well as profane places.

The terror caused at Florence, by the news of the
massacre of Prato, produced next day a revolution. A
company of young nobles, belonging to the most illus¬
trious families, who, under the title of Society of the
Garden RucceU^ were noted for their,love of the arts,
of luxury and measure, took possession, on the 31st of
August, of the public palace ,• they favoured the escape
of Soderini, and sent to tell Raymond de Cardona that
they were ready to accept the conditions which he
offered. But all treaties with tyrants are deceptions.
Giuliano de’ Medici, the third son of Lorenzo, whose
Character was gende and conciliatory, entered Florence
on the 2d of September, and consented to leave many of
the liberties of the republic untouched. His brother, the
cardinal Giovanni, afterwards Leo X. who did not enter
till the 14th of the same month, forced the signoria to
call a parliament on the l6th. In this pretended as¬
sembly of the sovereign people, few were admitted
except strangers and soldiers: aU the laws enacted since

316’ HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1512.

the expulsion of the Medici in 1494 were abolished.
A balia, composed only of the creatures of that family,
was invested with the sovereignty of the republic. This
balia showed itself abjectly subservient to the cardinal
Giovanni de’ Medici, his brother Giuliano, and their
nephew Lorenzo, who now returned to Florence after
eighteen years of exile, during which they had lost every
republican habit, and all sympathy with their fellow-
citizens. None of them had legitimate children ; but
they brought back with them three bastards, — Giulio,
afterwards Clement VII., Ippolito, and Alessandro,
— who had all a fatal influence on the destiny of their
country. Their fortune, formerly colossal, was dissipated
in their long exile ; and their first care, on returning to
Florence, was to raise money for themselves, as well as
for the Spaniards, who had re-established their tyranny.

CHAP. XV.

CALAMITIES WITH WHICH THE FRENCH, SPANIARDS, AND GER¬
MANS OVERWHELMED ITALY. — PILLAGE AND RDIN OF THE
GREATEST CITIES. — OPPRESSION OF THE ITALIAN NATION, AND
LOSS OF ITS INDEPENDENCE. 0

The three destructive wars comprised in the last chap¬
ter—viz. that of the French and Swiss in the Milanese,
that of the French and Spaniards in the kingdom of
Naples, that of the French, Spaniards, Germans, and
Swiss, in the states of Venice,—robbed Italy of her in¬
dependence. The country to which Europe was indebted
for its progress in every art and science, which had im¬
parted to other nations the medical science of Salerno,
the jurisprudence of Bologna, the theology of Home,
the philosophy, poetry, and fine arts of Florence, the
tactics and strategy of the Bracceschi and Sforzeschi
schools, the commerce and banks of the Lombards, the
process of irrigation, the scientific cultivation both of

1513.

AOONY OF ITALY.

317

hills and plains^ — that country now belonged no more to
its own inhabitants ! The struggle between the trahs-
alpine nations continued, with no other object than that
of determining to which of them Italy should belong;
and bequeathed nothing to that nation but long-enduring,
hopeless agonies. Julius II. in vain congratulated him¬
self on having expelled the French, who had first im¬
posed a foreign yoke on Italy; he vowed in vain that
he would never rest till he had also driven out aU the
barbarians; but he deceived himself in his calculations ;
he did not drive out the barbarians, he only made them
give way to other barbarians; and the new comers were
ever the most oppressive and cruel. However, this pro.
ject of national liberation, which the pope alone could
still entertain in Italy with any prospect of success, was
soon abandoned. Eight months after the expulsion of
the French from the Milanese, and five months after
the re-establishment of the Medici at Florence, Julius II.,
on the 21st of February, 1.513, sank under an inflam¬
matory disease. On the 11th of March, Giovanni de’
Medici succeeded him, under the name of Leo X. ;
eleven months after the latter had been made prisoner
by the French at the battle of Ravenna, and six months
after the Spanish arms had given him the sovereignty
of his country, Florence.

It has been the singular good fortune of Leo X. to
have hi* name associated with the most brilliant epoch
of letters and the arts since their revival. He has thus
shared the glory of all the poets, philosophers, artists,
men of learning and science, his contemporaries. He
has been held up to posterity as one who formed and
raised to eminence men who were in fact his elders, and
who had attained celebrity before the epoch of his power.
His merit consisted in showering his liberality on those
whose works and whose fame had already deserved it.
His reign, on the, other hand, which lasted nine years,
was marked by fearful calamities, which hastened the de¬
struction of those arts and sciences to which alone the
age of Leo owes its splendour. The misfortij^nes which

318 HISTORY OP THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1513.

he drew down on his successor were still more dreadful.
The pope was himself a man of pleasure^ easy, care¬
less, prodigal ; who expended in sumptuous feasts the
immense treasures accumulated by his predecessor. He
had the taste to adorn his palace with the finest works
of antiquity, and the sense to enjoy the society of phi¬
losophers and poets; hut he had never the elevation of
spul to comprehend his duties, or to consult his con¬
science. His indecent conversation nnd licentious con¬
duct scandalised the church j his prodigality led, him
to encourage the shameful traffic in indulgences, which
gave rise to the schism of Luther; his thoughtlessness
and indifference to human suffering made him light up
wars the most ruinous, and which he was utterly un¬
able to carry on ; he never thought of securing the in¬
dependence of Italy, or of expelling the barbarians : it
was simply for the aggrandisement of his family, that
he contracted or abandoned alliances with the trans¬
alpine nations ; he succeeded, indeed, in procuring that
his brother Giuliano should be named due de Nemours,
and he created his nephew duke of Urbino; but he
endeavoured also to erect for the former a new state,
composed of the districts of Parma, Placentia, Reggio,
and Modena ; for the latter, another, consisting of the
several petty principalities which still maintained them¬
selves in the states of the church. His tortuous policy
to accomplish the first object, his perfidy and cijielty to
attain the second, deserved to be much more severely
branded by historians.

The sovereign pontiff and the republic of Venice
were the only powers in Italy that still preserved some
shadow of independence. Julius II. had succeeded in
uniting Romagna, the March, the patrimony and cam-
pagna of Rome, to the holy see. Amongst all the vas-
sds of the church, he had spared only his own nephew,
Gian Maria della Rovere, duke of Urbino. On the de*
feat of the French, he further seized Parma and Pla¬
centia, which he detached from the Milanese, without
having the remotest title to their possession, as he alw

1513 .

POWER OF LEO X,

819

took Modena from the duke of Ferraraj whom he de¬
tested. Leo X. found the holy see in possession of mil
these states^ and was at the same time himself all-power¬
ful at Florence. Eiien the moment of his elevation to
the pontificate was marked by an eventj which showed
that every vestige of liberty had disappeared from that
Republic. The partisans of the Medici pretended to
have discovered at Florence a conspiracy, of which they
produced no other proofs than some imprudent speeches,
and some wishes uttered for liberty. The most illustrious
citizens were, nevertheless, arrested ; and Machiavelli,
with several others, were put to the torture. Pietro
Boscoli and Agostino Capponi were beheaded ; and
those who were called their accomplices exiled. The
two republics of Sienna and Lucca were in a state of
trembling subjection to the pontiff; so that all central
Italy, peopled with about 4,000,000 inhabitants, was
dependent on him : but the court of Rome, since it had
ceased to respect the ancient municipal liberties, never
extended its authority over a new province without
ruining its population and resources. Law and order
seemed incompatible with the government of priests:
the laws gave way to intrigue and favour; commerce
gave way to monopoly. Justice deserted the tribunals,
foresight the councils, and valour the armies. It was
proverbially said, that the arms of the church had no
edge. The great name of pope still moved Europe at a
distance;^ut it brought no real force to the allies whom
he adopted.

The republic of Venice, with a smaller territory, and
a far less numerous population, was in reality much
more powerful than the church. Venetian subjects, if
they did not enjoy liberty, had at least a government
which maintained justice, order, and the law; their
material prosperity was judiciou^y protected. They in
ftturn were contented, and proved themselves devotedly
attached to their government; but the wars raised by
the league of Cambray overwhelmed that republic with
comity. The city of Venice, secure amidst the waters,

ijjpiii|pipi#1iPBa»?aajLM^k iuli>irBLTcs. 1513.

alcae:^s<»j>i|l#|^e^a;fMk]p ^ftbebubariaBaj tbou^,e^
, tl]iSre, the i^^^guarte^ Been laid waste by an ao«i«
dental Sr& ^^e country and the provincial towns e^per
li^ced in turn the ferocity of the Frnoch^ Swisij Qonnaiuaj
and SpaniaMs. Three Centuries and half had elapsed
since this same Yeronese march, the cradle of the Lom¬
bard' league, had repelled ,the invasion of Fredetiei
^rbarossa. But while the world boasted a continu^
progress, since that period, in civilirtttion, — while^hi-
losophy and justice had better deiined..the rights ofimen,
— while the arts, literature, and poetry, had q^uickened
the feeUngs, and rendered man more susceptible of pain¬
ful impressions,—war was made with a ferocity at which
men in an age of the darkest barbarism would have
blushed. The massacre of all the inhabitants of a town
taken by assault, the execution of whole garrisons which
had surrendered at discretion, the giving up of prisoners
to the conquering soliliers in order to be tortured into the
confession of hidden treasure, became the common prac¬
tice of war in the armies of Louis XII.^ Ferdinand, and
Maximilian. Kings were haughty in proportion to their
power; they considered themselves at so much the greater
distance above human nature: they were the more of¬
fended at all resistance, the more incapable of compassion
for sufferings which they did not see or ilid not compre¬
hend. The misery which they caused presented itself to
them more as an abstraction ; they regarded masses, not
individuals j they justified their cruelties by tl^pame of
offended majesty; they quieted remorse by considering
themselves, not as men, but as scourges in the hand of
God. Three centuries have elapsed, and eivilisation has
not ceased to march forward ; the voice of humanity has
continued to become more and more powerful ; no one
now dares to believe himself great enough to be (hspensed
from humanity; nevertheless, those who would shrink
with horror from witnessing the putting to death of ft
individual, do not hesitate to condemn whole nations to
execution. The crimes which remain for us to relate,
do not merit more execration than those of which we

r5i3.

’ rsB ramos .

are ourselveB the witness^ Bt this day. in their

detestation of freedom, loose’upon nttfat^y If&iy* it>
the sixteenth century, famine, -war, an^ pestilence; as,
from the same motive in our time, they have loosed
upon heroic Poland, faraihe, war, and the Sfrolera,

Louis XII., after having lost the Milanese, through
hie infatuated ambidon to reconquer the small province
of the Gremonese, which he had himself ceded to the
repijblic of Venice^elt anew the desire of beirig recon¬
ciled with that republic, his first ally in Italy. The
Venetians, who knew that without their money, artillery,
anti cavalry, the Swiss could never have faced the French,
much less have driven them out of Italy, saw that
their allies did not appreciate their efforts and sacrifices.
Maximilian, who in joining never granted them peace,
but only a truce, re-asserted his claims on Verona and
Vicenza, and would not consent to allow the Vene¬
tians any states in Terra Firma but such as they pur¬
chased from him at an enormous price. The pope, to
enforce the dem^ds of Maximilian, threatened the Ve¬
netians with excommunication; and their danger after
victory ap|ieared as great as after defeat. Andrea Gritti,
one of their senators, — made prisoner after the battle of
Aignadel, and the same who, during his captivity at
Constantinople, had signed the peace of his country with
the Turks,— again took advantage of his captivity in
France to negotiate with Louis. He reconciled the re¬
public aiilh that monarch, who had been the first to
attack it ; and a treaty of alliance was signed at JBlois,
on the 24th of March, 1513. This was, however, a
source of new calamity to Venice. A French army,
commanded by La Tremouille, entered the Milanese,
and on its approach the Germans and Spaniards retired.
The Swiss, who gloried in having re-estabUshed Maxi-
n^ian Sforza on the throne of his ancestors, were, how-
ewr, resolved not to abandon him. They descended
from their mountains in numerous bodies, on the 6th of
June, 1513; attacked La TreinouiUe at the Riotta, near
Novara; defeated him, and drove him hack with the

BiaxOST OF THE ITAEUjr BEPUBLICS- 1515.

French forces beyond the Alps. The Spaniards and the
soldiers of Leo X. next attacked the Venetians without
any provocation: they were at peace with the republic,
but they invaded its territory in the name of their ally
Maximilian.* They occupied the Paduan state, the Ve¬
ronese, and that of Vicenza, from the 15th of June till
the end of autumn. It was during this invasion the
Spaniards displayed that heartless cruelty which rendered
them the horror of Italy ; that cupidUy which multi^ied
torture, and which invented sufferings more and more
atrocious, to extort gold from their prisoners. The
Germans in the next campaign, over-ran the Venetian
provinces; and notwithstanding the savage cruelties and
numerous crimes of which the country had just been
the theatre, yet the German commander found means to
signalise himself by his ferocity. '

Francis I. succeeded Louts XII, on the 1st of
January, 1515; on the 27th of June he renewed his
predecessor's treaty of alliance w'ith Venice; and on the
15th of August entered the plains of ^mbardy, by the
marquisate of Saluzzo, with a powerfuiarmy. He met
but little resistance in the provinces south of the Po,
hut the Swiss meanwhile arrived in great force to defend
Maximilian Sforza, whom, since they had reseated him
on the throne, they regarded as their vassal. Francis
in vain endeavoured to negotiate with them; they would
not listen to the voice of their commanders; democracy
had passed from their landagemeinde into th^arraies,
popular orators roused their passions; and on the 13th
of September they impetuously left Milan to attack
Francis I. at Marignano. Deep ditches lined with
soldiers bordered the causeway by which they advanced;
their commanders wished by some manoeuvre to get
clear of them, or make the enemy change his position;
but the Swiss, despising all the arts of war, expected to
command success by mere intrepidity and bodily strengll.
They marched to the battery in full front; they repulsed
the charge of the knights with their halberds, and threw
themselves with fury into the ditches which barred their

1515.

BATTLE OF MABIQNANO.

S23

road. Some rushed on to the very mouths of the cannon,
which guarded the king, and there fell. Night cfosed
on the combatants; and the two armies mingled together
fought on for four hours longer by moonlight. Com¬
plete darkness at length forced them to rest on their
arms; but the king’s trumpet continually sounded, to
indicate to the bivouac where he was to be found; while
the two famous horns of Uri and Unterwalden called
the" Swiss together. The battle was renewed on the
14tb at daybreak: the unrelenting obstinacy was the
same; but the French had taken advantage of the night
to -cidlect and fortify themselves. Marshal Trivulzio,
wTjo had been presenl. at eighteen pitched battles, de¬
clared that every other seemed to him children’s play in
comparison with this “battle of giants,” as he called it:
20,000 dead already covered the ground; of these two-
thirds were Swiss. When the Swiss despaired of victory
they retreated slowly, — but menacing and terrible. The
French did not dare to pursue them.

This horrible butchery, however, hastened the con¬
clusion of the wars which arose from the league of
Cambray. The Swiss were not sufficiently powerful to
maintain their sway in Lombardy : eight of their can¬
tons, on the 7 th of November, signed, at Geneva, a treaty
of peace with Francis I., who compensated, with con¬
siderable sums of money, all the claims which they
consented to abandon. On the 29th of November, the
other ci^tons acceded to this pacification, which took
the name of “ Paix perpetuelle,” and France recovered
the right of raising such infantry as she needed among
the Swiss. Raymond de Cardona, alarmed at the retreat
of the Swiss, evacuated Lombardy with the Spanish
troops. The French recovered possession of the whole
duchy of Milan. Maximilian Sforza abdicated the
sovereignty for a revenue of 30,000 crowns secured
tft him in France. Leo X., ranging himself on the side
of the victors, signed, at Viterbo, on the 13th of October,
a treaty, by which he restored Parma and Placentia to
the French. In a conference held with Francis at Bo-

T 2

321l BISTORT OF TBE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 15l6.

logna, between the 10th and 13th of the following De.
cember, Leo induceil that monarch to sacrifice the liber¬
ties of the Gallican church by the concordatj to renounce
the protection he had hitherto extended to the Floren¬
tines and to the duke of Urbino, although the former
had always remained faithful to France. The pope
seized the states of the duke of Urbino, and conferred
them on his nephew, Lorenzo II. de’Medici. Amidst
these transactions, Ferdinand the (!)atliolic died, on the
15th of January, 1516, and his grandson Charles isuc-
ceeded to his Spanish kingdoms. On the Llth of August
following, Charles signed, at Noyon, a treaty, by which
Francis ceded to him all his right to the kingdom of
Naples as the dower of a newborn daughter, whom he
promised to Charles in marriage. From that time
MaximiUan remained singly at war with the republic
of Venice and with France. During the campaign of
151(1, his German army continued to commit the most
enormous crimes in the Veronese march ; but Maximilian
had never money enough to carry on the war without
the subsidies of his allies; remaining alone, he could no
longer hope to be successful. On the 14th of De¬
cember he consented to accede to the treaty of No/on ;
he evacuated Verona, which he had till then occupied,
and the Venetians were once more put by the French
in possession of all the states of which the league of
Cambray had proposed the partition ; but their wealth
was annihilated, their population reduced to one half,
their constitution itself shaken, and they were never
after in a state to make those efforts for the defence of
the independence of Italy, which might have been ex¬
pected from them before this devastating war.

Had Italy been allowed to repose after so many dis-
aaters, she might still have recovered her strength and
population j uid when the struggle should have recom¬
menced with the transalpine nations, she would have
been found prepared for battle ; but the heartless levity
and ambition of Leo did not give her time. While
the family of the Medici was becoming extinct around

1519- CHARLES THE FIFTH. 325

hinij he dreamt only of investing it with new dignities;
he refused the Florentines permission to re-establish
their republic, and offered his alliance to whatever
foreign monarch would aid him in founding on its
ruins a principality for the bastard Medici. His third
brother Giuliano due de Nemours, whom he had at first
charged with the government of Florence, died on the
17th of March, I.*!If). Lorenzo II., son of his eldest
brother Pietro, whom he had made duke of Urbino, and
whom he sent to’ command at Florence after Giuliano
rendered himself odious there by his pride and by
his contemptible incapacity — he too died only three
years afterwards, on the 28th,of April, 1519. Leo sup¬
plied his place by cardinal Giulio de’ Medici, afterwards
Clement VII. This prelate was the natural son of the
first Giuliano killed in the Pazzi conspiracy of 1478.
He was considered the most able of the pope’s ministers,
and the most moderate of his lieutenants. Giuliano II.
had also left an illegitimate son, Ippolito, afterwards
cardinal; and Lorenzo II. had a legitimate daughter,
Catherine, afterwards queen of France, and an ille¬
gitimate son, Alexander, destined to be the future
tyrant of Florence. Leo, whether desirous of esta¬
blishing these descendants, or carried away by the
restlessness and levity of his character, sighed only
for war.

The emperor Maximilian died on the 19 th of Ja¬
nuary, 1519, leaving his hereditary states of Austria to
his grandson Charles, already sovereign of aU Spain, of
the Two Sicilies, of the Low Countries, and of the county
of Burgundy. Charles and Francis both presented
themselves as candidates for the imperial crown; the
electors gave it to the former, on the28th of June, 1519:
he was from that period named Charles V. Italy, indeed
the whole of Europe, was endangered by the immeasur¬
able growth of this young monarch’s power. The states
of the church, over which he domineered by means of
his kingdom of the Two Sicilies, could not hope tu
preserve any indej^ndence but through an aniBnew
V a

5S6 BIETORY «F THB ITALUN REPVBLICS. 1522'.

with France. Leo at first thought so, and signed
tile preliminary articles of a league with Francis ; but,
suddenly changing sides, he invited Charles V. to
join him in driving the French out of Italy. A secret
treaty was signeil between him and the emperor, on the
8th of May, 1521. By this the duchy of Milan was to
be restored to Francesco Sforza, the second son of Louis
the Moor. Parma, Placentia, and Ferrara were to be
united to the holy see: a duchy in the kingdom of
Naples was to be secured to the bast&rd Alexandti* de'
Medici. The pope united his army to that of the
emperor in the kingdom of Naples; the command of it
was given jointly to Prospero Colonna and the marquis
Pescara; war was declared on the 1st of August, and
the imperial and pontifical troops entered Milan on the
19 th of November: but in the midst of the joy of this
first success, Leo X. died unexpectedly, on the 1 st of
December, 1521.

Death opportunely delivered Leo from the dangers and
anxieties into which he had thoughtlessly precipitated
himself. His finances were exhausted ; his prodigality
bad deprived him of every resource; and he had no
means of carrying on a war which he had only just begun.
He left his successors in a state of distress which was
unjustly attributed to them, and which rendered them
odious to the people; for the war into which he had
plunged them, without any reasonable motive, was the
most disastrous of all those which had yet afilicted un¬
happy Italy. There remained no power truly Italian
that could take any part in it for her defence. Venice
was so exhausted by the war of the league of Cambray,
that she was forced to limit her efforts to the mainte¬
nance of her neutrality, and was hardly powerful enough
to make even her neutral position respected. Florence
remained subject to the cai^nal GiuUo de’ Medici. The
republics of Sienna and Lucca were tremblingly prepared
to obey the strongest: all the rest depended on the trans¬
alpine power; for an unexpected election, on the 9lh
of January, 1522, had given a Flemish successor to

1522. OPPRESSION’ OF ITA1.Y. 32?

Leo X.j under the name of Adrian VI. This person had
been the preceptor of Charles V., and had never
Italy, where he was regarded as a barbarian. The king*
dom of Naples was governed and plundered by the Spa¬
niards. After the French had lost the duchy of MUan,
Francesco Sforza, who had been brought back by the
imperialists, possessed only the name of sovereign. He
had never b^n for a moment independent j he had
never been able to protect his subjects from the tyranny
of the Spanish and German soldiers, who were his
guards. Finally, the marquis de Montferrat and the
duke of Savoy had allowed the French to become mas¬
ters in their states, and had no power to refuse them
passage to ravage oppressed Italy anew.

The marshal Lautrec, whom Francis I. had charged to
defend the Milanese, and who still occupied the greater
part of the territory, was forced by the Swiss, who formed
the sinews of his army, to attack the imperialists on the
29th of April, 1522, at Licocca. Prospero Colonna had
taken up a strong position about three or four miles
from Milan, on the road to Monza: he valued himself on
making a defensive war, — on being successful, without
giving battle. The Swiss attacked him in front, throw¬
ing themselves, without listening to the voice of their
commander, into a hollow way which covered him, and
where they perished, without the possibility of resistance.
After having performed prodigies of valour, the re¬
mainder were repulsed with dreadful loss. In spite of the
remonstrances of Lautrec, they immediately departed for
their mountains ; and he for his court, to justify him.^
self. Lescuns, his successor in the command, suffered
the imperialists to surprise and pillage Lodi ; and was
at last forced to capitulate at Cremona on the 6th of
May, and evacuate the rest of Lombardy. Genoa was
not comprehended in the capitulation, and remained still
in possession of the French ; but, on the SOth of May,
that city also was surprised by the Spaniards, and pillaged
with all the ferocity which signalised that nation. It waa
one of the largest depots of commerce in the west, and
Y 4

328 HisTORr OF the Italian republics. I52S.

the ruin of so opulent a town shook the fortune of every
mefchant in Europe. The general of Charles then,
judging Lombardy too much exhausted to support his
armies, led them to live at discretion in the provinces of
his ally, the pope. They raised among the states still
calling themselves independent, enormous subsidies to pay
the soldiers, for which purpose Charles never sent money.
The plague, breaking out at the same time at Rome and
Florence, added to the calamities of Italy so much the
more that Adrian VI. abolished, as pagan superstition or
acts of revolt against Providence, all the sanitary measures
of police which had been invented to stop the spread of
contagion. The pope died on the 14th of September,
1 523 ; and the Romans, who held him in horror, crowned
his physician with laurel, as the saviour of his country.

The death of Adrian, however, saved no one. The
cardinal Giulio de' Medici was chosen his successor, on
the 18th of November, under the name of Clement VII.
This man had passed for an able minister under his
cousin Leo X., because prosperity still endured, and the
pontifical treasury was not exhausted ; but when he had
to struggle with a distress which he, however, had not
caused, his ignorance in finance and administration, his
sordid avarice, his pusillanimity, his imprudence, his
sudden and ill considered resolutions, his long inde¬
cisions, made him alike odious and contemptible. He
was not strong enough to resist the tide of adversity. He
found himself, without money and without soldiers', en¬
gaged in a war without an object: he was incapable of
commanding, and nowhere found obedience.

The French were not disposed to abandon their title
to Lombardy, the possession of which they had just lost.
Before the end of the campaign, Francis sent thither
another army, commanded by hie favourite, the admiral
Bonnivet. Thia admiral entered Italy by Piedmont;
passed the Ticino on the 14th of September, 15S3;
and marched on Milan. But Prospero Colonna, who
had chosen, among the great men of antiquity, Fabioe
Cunctator for his model, was admirahle in the art of atop-

J525. BATTLE OP PAVIA. S29

ping an army, of fatiguing it by slight checks, and At
last forcing it to retreat without giving battle. Bonifivet,
who maintained himself on the borders of Lombardy,
was forced, in tlie month of May following, to open
himself a passage to France by Ivrea and Mont St.
Bernard. The chevalier Bayard was killed while pro¬
tecting the retreat of Bonnivet, in the rear-guard. The
imperialists had been joined, the preceding year, by
a deserter of high importance, the constable Bourbon,
one of the first {tVinces of the blood in France, who was
accompanied by many nobles. Charles V. put him,
jointly with Pescara, at the head of his army, and sent
him into Provence in the month of July ; but after
having besieged Marseilles, he was soon constrained to
retreat. Francis I., who had assembled a powerful
army, again entered Lombardy, and made himself mas¬
ter of Milan : he next laid siege to Pavia, on the 28th of
October. Some time was necessary for the imperialists
to re-asscmble their army, which the campaign of Prd-
vence had disorganised. At length it approached Pavia,
which had resisted through the whole winter. The king
of France was pressed by all his captains to raise the siege,
and to march against the enemy ; but he refused, de¬
claring that itwould be a compromise of the royal dignity,
and foolishly remained within his lines. He was attacked
by Pescara on the 24th of February, 1525 ; and, after’
a murderous battle, made prisoner.

For several months, while Francis I» was besieging
Pavia, he appeared the strongest power in Italy; and
the pope and Venetians, alarmed at his proximity, had
treated with, him anew, and pledged themselves to re¬
main neutral. The imperial generals, after their vic¬
tory, declared that these treaties with the French were
offences against their master, for which they should
demand satisfaction. Always without money, and
pressed by the avidity of their soldiers, they sought
only to discover offenders, as a pretence to raise contri¬
butions, and to let their troops live at free guarten.
The pope and the Venetians were "at first disposed

330 BIBTOBT OF THE ITALIAN REPVBLIC9. 1525t

to join in a league for resisting these exactions ; and
tfaey'oflPered Louisa of Savoy^ regent of France^ their aid -
to set her son Francis at liberty. But Clement VII. had
not sufficient courage to sign this league; he preferred re¬
turning again to the alliance of the emperor and the duke
of Milan, for which he paid a considerable sum. As soon
as the imperial generals had received the money, they
refused to execute the treaty which they had made with
him, and the pope was obliged to go back to the Vene¬
tians and Louisa of Savoy. Meanwhild Jerome Mort)ne,
chancellor of the duke of Milan, an old man regarded
as the most able politician of his time, made overtures,
which revived the hope of arming all Italy for her inde¬
pendence. Francesco Sforza found himself treated by
the Germans and Spaniards with the greatest indignity
in his own palace: his subjects were exposed to every
kind of insult from an unbridled soldiery ; and when he
endeavoured to protect them, the officers took pleasure in
making him witness aggravations of injustice and out¬
rage. The man, however, who made the German yoke
press most severely on him was the marquis Pescara, an
Italian, but descended from the Catalonian house of
Avalos, established in the kingdom of Naples for more
than a century. He manifested a sort of vanity in
associating himself with the Spaniards : he commanded
•their infantry; he adopted the manners as well as pride
of that nation. Morone, nevertheless, did not despair of
awakening his patriotism, by exciting his ambition.
The kingdom of Naples, which had flourished under the
bastard branch of the house of Aragon when the family
of Avalos first entered it, had sunk, since it had been
united to Spain, into a state of the most grievous oppres¬
sion. Morone determined on offering Pescara the crown
of Naples, if he would join his efibrts to those of all the
other Italians, for the deliverance of his country. Suc¬
cess depended on him: he could distribute the imperial
troops, which he commanded, in such a manner as that
they could oppose no resistance. The duke of Milan
had been warned that Charles V. intended taking his

1525.

TBEASONS OF FEaCABA.

331

duchy from himj to confer it on his brother Ferdipand
of Austria. The kingdom of Naples and the duchy of
Milan were ready to pass over from the emperor’s party
to that of France, provided the French king would
renounce all his claims to both, acknowledge Pescara
king of Naples, Francesco Sforza duke of Milan; and
restore to Italy her independence, after having delivered
her from her enemies.

This negotiation was at first successful: each of the
governments to which the proposition of concurring in the
independence of Italy was addressed, seemed to agree to it.
France renounced all pretensions to Lombardy and the
Two Sicilies; Switzerland promised to protect, on its
side, the land of ancient liberty, and to furnish it with
soldiers; HenryVIII. of England promised money;
Pescara coveted the crown, and Sforza was impatient to
throw off a yoke which had become insupportable to him;
but, unhappily the negotiation was entrusted to top
many cabinets, all jealous, perfidious, and eager to oby
tain advantages for themselves by sacrificing their allies.
Clement was desirous of obtaining from the emperor a
more advantageous treaty, by threatening him with
France; the queen regent of France endeavoured to
engage Charles to relax his rigour towards her son, by
threatening him with Italy; Pescara, reserving the choice
of either betraying his master or his allies, as should
prove most profitable to him, had warned Charles that
he W'as engaged in a plot which he would reveal as soon
as he had every clue to it. The duchess of Alenipon,
sister of Francis, sent by her mother to negotiate at
Madrid, spoke still more clearly. She offered Charles
to abandon Italy, the project respecting which she dis¬
closed, provided the emperor, in restoring her brother
to liberty, would renounce his purpose of making him
purchase it at the price of one of the provinces of France.
Pescara, finding that his court knew more than he had
told, determined on adopting the part of provocative agent
instead of rebel; he had only to choose between them,.
On the Hth of October, 1525, he invited Morone to a

332 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1526.

lost ponference in the castle of Novara. After having
made him explain all his projects anew, while Spanish
officers hid behind the arras heard them, he caused
him to be arresteil, seized all the fortresses in the state
of Milan, and laid siege to the castle, in which the duke
had sliut himself up. He denounced to the emperor as
traitors, the pope, and all the other Italians his accom.
pUces; but while he played this odious part, he was
attacked by a slow disease, of which he died on , the
30th of November, 1525, at the age of thirty-six, ab.
horred by all Italy.

Charles, abusing the advantages which he had ob¬
tained, imposed on Francis the treaty of Madrid, signed
on the 14th of January, 1526; by which the latter
abandoned Italy and the duchy of Burgundy. He was
set at liberty on the 18th of March following; and
almost immediately declared to the Italians, that he did
not regard himself bound by a treaty extorted from him
by force. On the 22d of May, he signed a league for
the liberty of Italy with Clement VII., the Venetians,
and Francesco Sforza, but still did not abandon the
policy of his mother : instead of thinking in earnest
of restoring Italian independence, and thus securing
the equilibrium of Europe, he had only one purpose,
—that of alarming Charles with the Italians; and was
ready to sacrifice them as soon as the emperor should
abandon Burgundy. At the same time, his supineness,
love of pleasure, distrust of his fortune, and repugnance
to violate the treaty of Madrid, hindered him from ful¬
filling any of tlie engagements which he had contracted
towards the Italians; he sent them neither money,
French cavalry, nor Swiss forces. Charles, on the other
hand, sent no supplies to pay his armies to Antonio
de Leyva, the constable Bourl^n, and Hugo de Mon-
ipada, their commanders. These troops were therefore
obliged to live at free quarters, and the oppression of
the whole country was still more dreadful than it had
ever yet been.

. The defection of the duke of Milan, in particular, gave

1526.

OPPRESSION OP MII.AN.

333

a pretence to Antonio tie Leyva to treat the wretched
Milanese with redoubled rigour, as if they could be
responsible for what Leyva called the treachery of their
master. The Spanish army was quartered on the citi¬
zens of Milan ; and there was not a soldier who did not
make his host a prisoner, keeping him bound at the
foot of the bed, or in the cellar, for the purpose of
having him daily at hand, to force him, by blows or
fresh torture, to satisfy some new caprice. As soon as
one wretched pcrgun died under his suft'erings, or broke
his bonds and ended his sufferings by voluntarily
death, either precipitating himself through a window or
into a well, the Spaniard passed into another house to
recommence on its proprietor the same torture. The
Venetians and the pope had united their forces, under
the command of the duke of Urbino, who, exaggerating
the tactics of Prospero Colonna, was ambitious of no
other success in war than that of avoiding battle. He
announced to the senate of Venice, that he would not
approach Milan till the French and Swiss, whose sup¬
port he had been promised, joined him. His inaction,
while witnessing so many horrors, reduced the Italians
to despair. Sforza, who had been nine months blockaded
in the castle uf Milan, and who always hoped to be de¬
livered by the duke of Urbino, whose colours were in
sight, supported the last extremity of hunger before he
surrendered to the Spaniards, on the 24th of July, 1526.
The pope, meanwhile, was far from suspecting himself
in any danger ; but his personal enemy, Pompeo Colonna,
took advantage of the name of the imperial party to
raise in the papal state 8000 armetl peasants, with
whom, on the 20th of September, he surprised the
Vatican, pillaged the palace, as well as the temple of
St. Peter, and constrained the pope to abjure the alliance
of France and Venice. About the same time, George de
Frundsberg, a German condottiere, entered Lombardy
with 13,-000 adventurers, whom he had engaged to fol¬
low him, and serve the emperor without pay, contenting
themselves with the pillage of that unhappy country.

334 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. 1527>

The constable Bourbon, to whom Charles had given
the chief command of his forces in Italy, determined to
take advantage of this new army, and uftite it to that
for which at Milan he had now no further occasion ;
but it was not without great difficulty that he could
persuade the Spaniards, to quit that city where they
enjoyed the savage pleasure of inflicting torture on their
hosts. At length, how'ever, he succeeded in leading
them to Pavia. On the .30th of January, 1527, he
joined Frundsberg, who died soon after of apopjexy.
Bourbon now remained alone charged with the com¬
mand of this formidable army, already exceeding 25,000
men, and continually joined on its route by disbanded
soldiers and brigands intent on pillage. The constable
had neither money, equipments, nor artillery, and very
few cavalry; every town shut its gates on his ap¬
proach, and he was often on the point of wanting pro¬
visions. He took the road of southern Italy, and
entered Tuscany, stiU uncertain whether he should
pillage Florence or Rome. The marquis of Saluzzo,
with a small army, retreated before him ; the duke of
Urbino fallowed in his rear, but always keeping out of
reach of battle. At last. Bourbon took the road to Rome,
by the valley of the Tiber. On the 5th of May, 1527,
he arrived before the capital of Christendom. Clement,
long alarmed at his march, had, on the 15th of March,
signed a truce of eight months with the viceroy of
Naples, and dismissed his troops, never imagining that
one of the emperor's lieutenants would not respect the
engagements of the other. On the approach of Bour¬
bon, however, the waUs of Rome were again mounted
with engines of war. The next day, the 6th of May,
this renegade prince led his troops to the assault of the
city. He was killed near the Janiculum, while mount¬
ing the first scaling ladder. His fall did not stop the
terrific band of robbers which he led. The victorious
army scaled the walls, which were ill defended; and
spread terror through the quarters of the Borgo, Vad-

1527 .

BACK OF HOME.

335

caiij and Trastevere. In a few hours they were masters
of the whole cityj Clement having neglected to destroy
the bridges oft the Tiber.

The capital of Christendom was then abandoned to a
pillage unparalleled in the most calamitous period — that
of the first triumph of barbarism over civilisation :
neither Alaric the Goth, nor Genseric the Vandal, had
treated it with like ferocity. Not only was all that
could be seised in every bouse and every shop carried
off,,but the peasants of the fiefs of Colonna took pos¬
session of the heavy furniture which did not tempt the
cupidity of the soldier. From the day on which these
barbarians entered the city all personal protection was
withdrawn •, women were abandoned to the outrages
of the victors ; and sanctuaries, enriched by the vene¬
ration of Christendom for twelve centuries, were de¬
voted to spoliation. The squares before the churches
were strewed wdth the ornaments of the altar, relics,
and other sacred things, which the soldiers threw into
the strei't after having torn off the gold and silver
which adorned them. Men, women, and children were
seized, whenever their captors could flatter themselves
that they had concealed some treasure, or that there was
any one sufficiently interested for them to pay their
ransom. Every house resounded with the cries and
lamentations of wretched persons thus subjected to the
torture j and this dreadful state of crime and agony
lastetl not merely days, but was prolonged for more than
nine months; it was not tiU the 17th of February, 1528,
that the prince of Orange, one of the French lords who
had accompanied Bourbon in his rebellion, finally with¬
drew from Rome all of this army that vice and disease had
spared. TheGermans, indeed, after the first few days, had
sheathed their swords, to plunge into drunkenness and the
most brutal debauchery; but the Spaniards, up to the
last hour of their stay in Rome, indefatigable in their
cold-blooded cruelty, continued to invent fresh torture to
extort new ransoms from all who fell inW their hands ;
even the plague, the consequence of so much suffering.

■336 niSTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. I537>

moral and physical, which broke out amidst all these
horrdrs, did not make the rapacious Spamard loose his
prey. *

i'he struggle between the Italians, feebly seconded by
the French, and the generals of Charles V., was prolonged
yet more than tw'o years after the sack of Home; but it
only added to the desolation of Italy, and destroyed
alike in aU the Italian provinces the last remains of
prosperity. On,the 18th of August, 1527, Henry VIII.
of England and Francis I. contracted the treaty of
Amiens, for the deliverance, as the two sovereigns an¬
nounced, of the pope. A powerful French army, com¬
manded by Lautrec, entered Italy in the same month,
by the province of Alexandria. They surprised Pavia on
th^^st of October, and during eight days barbarously
pillaged that great city, under pretence of avenging the
defeat of their king under its walls. After this success,
Lautrec, instead of completing the conquest of Lom¬
bardy, directed his march towards the south; renewed
the alliance of France with the duke, of Ferrara, to
whose son was given in marriage a daughter of Louis
XII., sister of the queen of France. He secured the
friendship of the Florentine republic, which, on the
17th of the preceding May, had taken advantage of the
distress and captivity of the pope, to recover its liberty,
and to re-establish its government in the same form in
which it stood in 1512. The pope, learning tha(|j
Lautrec had arrived at Orvieto, escaped from the castle
of St. Angelo on the (Jth of December, and took refuge
in the French camp. The Spaniard Alarcon had de¬
tained him captive, with thirteen cardmals, during six
months, in that fortress; and, though the plague had
broken out there, he did not relax in his severity. After
having received 400,000 ducats for h^s ransom, instead
of releasing him, as he had engaged to do the next day,
it is probable that he suffered him to esc^e, lest his
own soldiers should arrest him in order to extort a leeoBd
ransom. ® .?

Lautrec passed the Tronto to enter the Abruzai with

1528 .

LAPTHEO AT NAPLES.

SS7

his power^ army on the 10th of February, 1528.
The bandith whom Charles V. called his soldiers, wliom
he never pai^ *nd who showed no disposition to obe¬
dience, were cantoned at Milan, Rome, and the principal
cities in Italy: they divided their time between de.
bauchery and the infliction of torture on their hosts ;
their officers were unable to induce them to leave the towns
and advance towards the enemy. The people in the
excess of suffering, met every change with eagerness, and
rece’ved Lautrec Ss a deliverer. He would probably have
dbtained complete success, if Francis had not just at this
moment withheld the monthly advance of money which
he had promised. That monarch, identifying his pride
of royalty with prodigality, exhausted his finances^n
pleasures and entertainments,* his want of economy drew
on him all his disasters. Lautrec, on his side, although
he had many qualities of a good general, was harsh,
proud, and obstinate; he piquet^himself on doing always
the opposite of whaj he was counselled. Disregard¬
ing the national peculiarities of the French, Ije at¬
tempted in war to discipline them in slow and regular
movements. He lost valuable time in Apulia, where he
took and sacked Melfi, on the 23d of March, with a
barbarity worthy of his adversaries, the Spaniards ; he
did not arrive till the 1st of May before Naples. The
prince of Orange had just entered that city with the army
tahich had sacked Rome, but of which the greater part
^(1 been carried off by a dreadful mortality, the con¬
sequence and punishment of its vices and crimes.
Instead of vigorously attacking them, Lautrec, in spite
of the warm remonstrances of Ins officers, persisted in
reducing Naples by blockade ; thus exposing his army
to the influence of a destructive climate. The imperial
fleet was destroyed, on the 28th of May, in the gulf
of Salerno, by Filippino Doria, who was in the pay of
France. The inhabitants of Naples experienced the
most cruel privations, and sickness soon made great
havoc amongst them; but a malady not iSs fatal broke
out at‘the same time in the French camp. The oL
z

338 HIBTORT OF THE ITALIAN BEFUBLICS. 1628.

diers, under a burning sun, surrounded with putrid
Water, condemned to every kind of privation, harassed
by the light cavalry of the enemy, infiniMly superior to
theirs, sank, one after the other, under pestilential
fevers. In the middle of June, the French reckoned
in their camp 25,000 men ; by the 2d of August there
did not remain 4000 fit for service. At this period all
the springs were dry, and the troops began to suffer
from hunger and thirst. Lautrec, ill as he was, had
till then supported the army by his„ courage and in¬
vincible obstinacy ; but, worn out at last, he expired
in the night of the 15th of August; — almost all the
other officers died in like manner. The marquis de
Saluces, on whom the command of the army devolved,
fell the necessity of a retreat, but knew not how to
secure it in presence of such a superior force. He tried
to escape from the imperialists, by taking advantage of
a tremendous storm, in the night of the 29th of August;
but was soon pursued, Ad overtaken at Aversa, where,
on the 30th, he was forced to capitulate. The maga¬
zines and hospitals at Capua were, at the same time, given
up to the Spaniards. The prisoners and the sick w'ere
crowded together in the stables of the Magdalen, where
contagion acquired new force. The Spaniards foresaw
it, and watched with indifference the agony and death
of all ; for nearly all of that brilliant army perished—a
few invalids only ever returned to France.

During the same campaign another French armj^
conducted by Francois de Bourbon, count de St. Pol,
had entered Lombardy, at the moment when Henry
duke of Brunswick led thither a German army. Henry,
finding nothing more to pillage, announced that his
mission was to punish a rebellious nation, and put to the
sword all the inhabitants of the villages through which
he passed. Milan was at once a prey to famine and the
plague, aggravated by the cupidity and cold-blooded
ferocity of Leyva, who still commanded the Spanish
garrison. L^va seized aU the provisions brought in
from the country; and, to profit by the general misery.

ANDREA OORIA.

1529 -

839

resold them at an eporraous price. Oenoa had remained
sulyect to the French, and was little less oppressed;
none of its Republican institutions were any longer re¬
spected : but a great admiral still rendered it illustrious.
Andrea Doria had collected a fleet, on board of which
he summoned all the enterprising spirits of Liguria;
Ills nephew Filippino, who had just gained a victory
over the imperialists, was his lieutenant. The Dorias
demanded the restoration of liberty to their country as
the price of their services: unable to obtain it from the
Frfinch, they passed over to the imperialists. As-j^
sured by the promises of Charles, they presented
themselves, on the 12th of September, before Genoa,
excited their countrymen to revolt, and constrained the
French to evacuate the town : they made thems^ves
masters of Savona on the 21st of October,, and a few
days afterwards of Castelletto. Doria then proclaimed
the republic, and re-established once more the freedom of
Genoa, at the moment when all freedom was near its
end in Italy. The winter passed in suifering and in¬
action. The following year, Antonio de Leytta sur¬
prised the count de St. Pol at Landriano, on the 21st of
June, 1529, and made him prisoner, with all the prin¬
cipal officers of the French army. The rest dispersed or
returned to France. This was the last military incident
in this dreadful war.

Peace was ardently desired on all sides; negotiations
Hlvere actively carried on; but every potentate sought to
deceive his ally in order to obtain better conditions from
* his adversary. Margaret of Austria, the sister of the
emperor’s father, and Louisa of Savoy, the mother of
the king of France, met at Cambray ; and in conference,
to which no witnesses were admitted, arranged what
was called “ Le traits des dames.” Clement VII. had
at the same time a nuncio at Barcelona, who negotiated
with the emperor. The latter was impatient to arrange
the affairs of Italy, in order to pass into Germany. Not
pnly had Soliman invaded Austria, and, pn the IStlt of
September, arrived under the walls of Vienna, but the
z 2

940 HisroRr of the Italian republics. 152§.

reformation of Luther excited in aM the north of Ger¬
many a continually increasing ferment. On the 20th
of June, 1529, Charles signed at Barcelona a treaty of
perpetual alliance with the pope: by it he engaged to
sacrifice the republic of Florence to the pope’s vengeance,
and to place in the service of Clement, in order to ac¬
complish it, all the brigands who had previously do.
vastated Italy. Florence was to be given in sovereignty
to the bastard Alexander de’Medici, who was to marry an
illegitimate daughter of Charles V. On the 5th of August
H^ollowing, Louis and Margaret signed the treaty of
Cambrey, by which France abandoned, without reserve,
aU its Italian allies to the caprices of Charles; who, on
his side, renounced Burgundy, and restored to Francis
lUB two sons, who had been retained as hostages. Charles
arrived at Genoa, on board the fleet of Andrea Doria, on
the 12th of August. The pope awaited him at Bologna,
into which he made his entry on the 5th of November.
He summoned thither all the princes of Italy, or their
deputies, and treated them with more moderation than
might*have been expected after the shameful abandon¬
ment of them by France. As he knew the health of
Francesco Sforza, duke of Milan, to be in a declining
state, whkh promised but few years of life, he granted
him the restitution of his duchy for the sum of 900,000
ducats, which Sforza was to pay at different terms :
t'ley had not all fallen due when that prince died, on.
the 24th of October, 1535, without issue, and his estater
escheated to the emperor. On the 23d of December,
1529, Charles granted peace to the Venetians; who
restored him only some places in Apulia, and gave
up Ravenna and Cervia to the pope. On the 20th
of March, Alphonso d’Este also signed a treaty, by
which he referred his differences with the pope to the
arbitration of the emperor. Charles did not pronounce
on them till the following year. He conferred on Al¬
phonso the possession of Modena, Reggio, and Rubbiera,
as fiefs of the empire; and he made the pope give him
the investiture of Ferrara. On the 25th of Mardi,

1530. PEACE slavery OS' ITALY. 5*41

1530, a diploma of the emperor raised the marquisfte of
Mantua to a duchy, in favour of Frederick de Gon-
zaga. The duke of Savoy and the marquis de Mont-
ferrat, till then protected by France, arrived at Bologna,
to place themselves under the protection of the emperor.
The duke of Urbino was recommended to him by the
Venetians, and obtained some promises of favour. The
republics of Genoa, Sienna, and Lucca had permission
to vegetate unden the imperial protection ; and Charles,
having received from the pope, at Bologna, on the
of February and 24th of March, the two crowns of
Lombardy and of the empire, departed in the beginning
of April for Germany, in order to escape witnessing the
odious service in which he consented that hie troops
should be employed against Florence.

CHAP. XVI.

OrPRISSIOK 01 ITALY DURIMO THE THREE LAST CEHTORtES. —•
SUCCESSIVE FALL OF ALL HER REFUBLICS.-HER LAST CON¬

VULSIONS.

^he evil destiny of Italy was accomplished. CharlesVIIL,
when he first invaded that country, opened its gates 'to
all the transalpine nations : from that period Italy was
ravaged, during thirty-six years, by Germans, French,
Spaniards, Swiss, and even Turks. They inflicted on
her calamities beyond example in history; calamities so
much the more keenly felt, as the sufferers were mom
civilised, and the author s more barbarous. The French
invasion ended in giving to the greatest enemies of France
the dominion of that country, so rich, so industrious,
and of which the possession was sought ardently by all.
Never would the house of Austria have achieved the
conquest of Italy, if Charles VIII., Louis XII., and
Francis I. had not previously destroyed the wealth and
a 3

Sit

HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN (REPUBLICS. 1527'

military organisation of the nation; if they had not
themselves introduced the Spaniards into the kingdom
of Naples, and the Germans into the states of Venice ;
forgetting that both must soon after be subject toCharlesV.
The independence of Italy would have been beneflcial
to France : the rapacious and improvident policy which
made France seek subjects where it should only have
sought allies, was the origin of a long train of disasters
^ the French. '

w A period of three centuries of weakness, humili¬
ation, and suffering, in Italy, began in the year
1530: from that time she was always oppressed by fo¬
reigners, and enervated and corrupted by her masters.
These last reproached her with the vices of which they
were themselves the authors. After having reduced her
to the impossibility of resisting, they accused her of
cowardice when she submitted, and of rebellion when
she made efforts to vindicate herself. The Italians,
during this long period of slavery, were agitated with
the desire of becoming once more a nation : as, however,
they had lost the direction of their own affairs, they
ceased to have any history which could be called theirs;
their misfortunes have become but episodes in the his¬
tories of other nations. We should not, however, look
upon the task which we have imposed on ourselves as
concluded, if we did not distinguish, amidst this general*
subjugation, the particular calamities which closed the
existence of the republics which still remained inde¬
pendent after the coronation of Charles V.

The Florentines, who, from 1512, had been victims
of all the faults of Leo X. and Clement VII., — who had
been drawn into all the oscillations of their policy, and
called upon to make prodigious sacrifices of money for
projects with which they had not even been made ac¬
quainted, — were taught under these popes to detest the
yoke of the Medici. When the constable Bourbon ap¬
proached their walls in his march to Rome, on the 26 th
of April, 1527, they were on the point of recovering
their liberty; the cardinal de Cortona, who commanded

1528. LAST E|RVQOLE OF FLORENCE. jMS

for the pope at Florence, had distributed arms anong
the citizens for their defence; and they determined to
employ them for their liberation ; but the terror which
this army of brigands inspired did the cardinal the ser¬
vice of repressing insurrection. When, however, they
heard soon after of the taking of Rome, and of the cap¬
tivity of the pope, all the most notable citizens presented
themselves in their civic dress to the cardinal de Gor¬
ton j ; declared fiimly, but with calmness, that they were
henceforth free ; and compelled him, with the two basA
tard Medici whom he brought up, to quit the city. It
was on the 17th of May, 1527, that the lieutenant of
Clement obeyed; and the constitution, such as it existed
in 1512, with its grand council, was restored without
change, except that the office of gonfalonier was declared
annual. The first person invested with this charge was
Nicolo Capponi, a man enthusiastic in religion, and mo¬
derate in politics : he was the son of Pietro Capponi,
who had braved Charles VIII. In 1529, he was suc¬
ceeded by Baldassare Carducci, whose character wes more
energetic, and opinions more democratic. Carducci was
succeeded, in 1530, by Raffaele Girolami, who witnessed
the end of the republic.

Florence, during the whole period of its glory and
power, had neglected the arts of war ; it reckoned for
its defence on the adventurers whom its wealth could
summon from all parts to its service ; and set but little
value on a courage which men, without any other virtue,
were so eager to sell to the highest bidder. Since the
transalpine nations had begun to subdue Italy to thdr
tyranny, these hireling arms sufficed no longer for the
public safety. Statesmen began to see the necessity of
giving the republic a protection within itself. Macchi-
avelli, who died on the 22d of June, 1527, six weeks
after the restoration of the popular government, had been
long engaged in persuading his fellow citizens of the
necessity of awakening a military spirit in the people:
it was he who caused the country militia, named Fordi-
nanza, to be formed into regiments. A body of mer-
z 4

34^ HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN REPUBLICS. L529.

cena^ietj organised by GioTanni dl' Medici^ a distant
kinsman of the popes, serred at the time as s military
school for the Tuscans, among whom alone the corps had
been raised: it acquired a high reputation under the
name of hande nere. No infantry equalled it in courage
and intelligence. Five thousand of these warriors served
under Lautrec in the kingdom of Naples, where they
almost all perished. When, towards the end of the year
1528, the Florentines perceived tliat their situation be¬
came more and more critical, they formed, among those
^ho enjoyed the greatest privileges in their country, two
bodies of militia, which displayed the utmost valour for
its defence. The first, consisting of 300 young men of
noble families, undertook the guard of the palace, and
the support of the constitution; the second, of 4000
soldiers drawn only from among families having a right
to sit in the council-general, were called the civic militia;
both soon found opportunities of proving that generosity
and patriotism suffice to create, in a very short period,
the best soldiers. The illustrious Michael Angelo was
charged to su;>erintend the fortifications of Florence:
they were completed in the month of April, 1529.
Lasdy, the ten commissioners of war chose for the com¬
mand of the city Malatesta Haglioni of Perngia, who
was recommended to them as much for his hatred of the

Medici, who had unjustly put his father to death, as for
his reputation for valour and military talent.

Clement VII. sent against Florence, his native country,
that very prince of Orange, the successor of Bourbon,
who had made him prisoner at Rome; and with him that
very army of robbers which had overwhelmed the holy
see, and its subjects, with misery and every outrage. This
army entered Tuscany in the month of September, 1529,
and took possession of Cortona, Arezzo, and all the
upper Val d’Arno. On the 14th of October the prince
of Orange encamped in the plain of Ripoli, at the foot of
the walls of Florence; and, towards the end of December,
Ferdinand de Gonzaga led on the right bank of the
Arno Buotiter imperial army, composed of 20,000 Spa-

FEBRVOOI. 845

occupied without resisjaDCo
Pistoia and Prato. Notwithatanding the immenee gu-
periority of their forces, the imperialista did not attempt
to make a breach in the walls of Florence ; they resolved
to make themselves masters of the city by blockade.
The Florentines, on the contrary, animated by preachers
who inherited the zeal of Savonarola, and who united
liberty with religion as an object of their worship, were
eager for battle: Jhey made frequent "attacks on the whole
line*'of their enemies, led in turns by Malatesta Baglioni
and Stefano Colonna. They made nightly sallies, covered
with white shirts to distinguish each other in the dark,
and successively surprised the posts of the imperialists:
but the slight advantages, thus obtained, could not dis¬
guise the growing danger of the republic. France had
abandoned them to their enemies; there remained not
one ally either in Italy or the rest of Furope; while
the army of the pope and emperor comprehended all the
survivors of those soldiers who had so long been the
terror of Italy by their courage and ferocity, and whose
warlike ardour was now redoubled by the hope of the
approaching pillage of the richest city in the West.

The Florentines had one solitary chance of deliverance.
Francesco Ferrucci, one of their citizens, who had learned
the art of war in the bande nere, and joined to a mind
full of resources an unconquerable intrepidity and an
ardent patriotism, was not shut up within the walls of
Florence : he had been named commissary-general, with
unlimited power over all that remained without the
capital. Ferrucci was at first engaged in conveying
provisions from EmpoU to Florence : he afterwards took
Volterra from the imperialists; and, having formed a
small army, proposed to the signoria to seduce all the
adventurers and brigands from the imperial army, by
promising them another pillage of the pontifical court,
and succeeding in that, to march at their head on Rome,
frighten Clement, and force him to grant peace to their
country. The signoria rejected this plan as too daring.
Ferrucci then farmed a second, which was little less bold.

1550. fbanoesco

niards and Germans, which

S46 HisToay op the Italian ^republics. 1530.

He departed from Volterra, made the tour of Tuscanyj
ivhich the imperial troops traversed in every direction,
collected at Leghorn, Pisa, the Val di Nievole, and in the
mountains of Pistoia, every soldier, every man of courage,
still devoted to the republic; and, after having thus in¬
creased his army, he intended to fall on the imperial
camp before Florence and force the prince of Orange,
who began to feel the want of money, to raise the siege.
Ferrucci, with an intrepidity equal to this skill, led^his
little troop, from the 14th of July to the 2d of August,
15^, through numerous bodies of imperialists, who
preceded, followed, and surrounded him on all sides,
as far as Gavinana, four miles from San Marcello, in
the mountains of Pistoia. He entered that village about
mid-day, on the 2d of August, with 3000 infantry
and 500 cavalry. The prince of Orange, at the same
time, entered by another gate, with a part of the army
which besieged Florence. The different corps, which
had on every side harassed Ferrucci in his march,
poured in upon him from all quarters : the battle in¬
stantly began, and was fought with relentless fury within
the walls of Gavinana. Philibert de Challon, prince of
Qrange, in whom that house became extinct, was killed
by a double shot, and his corps put to flight; but
other bands of imperialists successively arrived, and
continually renewed the attack on a small force ex¬
hausted with fatigue; 2000 Florentines were already
stretched on the field of battle ; when Ferrucci, pierced
with several mortal wounds, was borne bleeding to
the presence of his personal enemy, Fabrizio Maramaldi,
a Calabrese, who commanded the light cavalry of the
emperor. The Calabrese stabbed him several times in
his rage; while Ferrucci calmly said, “ Thou wouldst
IdU a dead man ! " The republic perished with him.

When news of the disaster at Gavinana reached Flo¬
rence, the consternation was extreme. Baglioni, who
for some days had been in treaty with the prince of
Orange, and who was accused of having given him notice
of the project of Ferrucci, declared that a longer resistance

1530. CAPITULATION OF FLORENCE. 347

■was impossible, and that he was determined to saVte an
imprudent city, which seemed bent upon its own ruin.
On the 8th of August he opened the bastion, in which
he was stationed, to an imperial captain, and planted his
artillery so as to command the town. The citizens, in
consternation, abandoned the defence of the walls, to
employ themselves in concealing their valuable effects in
the churches ; and the signoria acquainted Ferdinand de
Gonzaga, who had succeeded the prince of Orange in the
command of the army, that they were ready to capitulate.
The terms granted on the 12th of August, 1530, were
less rigorous than the Florentines might have appre-
hended. They were to pay a gratuity of 80,000 crowns
to the army which besieged them, and to recall the Me¬
dici. In return, a complete amnesty was to be granted
to all who had acted against that family, the pope, or the
emperor. But Clement had no intention to observe any
of the engagements contracted in his name. On the
20th of August, he caused the parliament, in the name
of the sovereign people, to create a balia, which was to
execute the vengeance of which he would not himself
take the responsibility : he subjected to the torture, and
afterwards punished with exile or death, by means of this
balia, all the patriots who had signalised themselves by
their zeal for liberty. In the first month 1.50 illustrious
citizens were banished ; before the end of the year there
were lAore than 1000 sufferers : every Florentine family,
even among those most devoted to the Medici, had some
one member among the proscribed.

Alexander, the bastard Medici, whom Clement had
appointed chief of the Florentine republic in preference
to his cousin Hyppolito, did not return to his country till
the 5th of July, 1531 : he was the bearer of a rescript
from the emperor, which gave Florence a constitution
nearly monarchical; but, so far from confining himself
within the limits traced, Alexander oppressed the people
■with the most grievous tyranny. Cruelty, debauchery,
and extortion marked him for public hatred. On the
10th of August, 1535, he caused to be poisoned his

548 niSIOSY op THE ITALIAN nREPUBLICS. 1554.

■causki, the cardinal Ippolito, who'undertook the de*
fence of his fellow-countrymen against him. He atlaat^
on the 6th of January, 1537, was himself assassinated by
his kinsman and companion in licentiousness, Lorenaino
de’ Medici.

But the death of Alexander did not restore freedom
to his country. The agents of his tyranny, the most
able but also the most odious of whom was ^e historian
Guicciardini, needed a prince for their protector. They
made choice of Cosmo de’ Medici,a youngman of nineteen,
desi^nded in the fourth generation from Lorenzo, the
brother of the former Cosmo. On the 9th of January,
1537, they proclaimed him duke of Florence, hoping to
guide him henceforth at their pleasure j but they were
deceived. This man, false, cold-blooded, and ferocious,
who had all the vices of Filippo II., and who shrank from
no crime, soon got rid of his counsellors, as well as of his
adversaries. Cosmo 1., in 1569, obtained from the pope
Pius V. the title of grand duke of Tuscany ; a title that
the emperor would not then acknowledge, though he
afterwards, in 1575, granted it to the son of Cosmo.
Seven grand dukes of that family reigned successively at
Florence. The last, Gian Gastone, died on the 9th of
July, 1737 .

It was Cosmo I. who abolished the name of republic
at Sienna, as he bad done at Florence. That city, so
long faithful to the Ghibeline party, had evinoed the
same devotion to the emperor in the wars of the begin¬
ning of the century. Charles V. took advantage of it to
introduce into Sienna a Spanish garrison, destined to
overawe Tuscany and the court of Rome; but the
Spaniards showed there, as every where else, ^e charac¬
teristic pride, cupidity, and ferocity which had rendered
them universally odious. On the 11th of August, 1552,
the Siennese, unable to bear with them any longer, rose
against them, drove them out, and introduced a French
garrison in their stead, Cosmo pledged himself to remain
neutral in the war lighted up anew between the French
and the imperialists: he, nevertheless, on the 27th of

1555. CONQUEST OP SIENNA. 349'

January, 1554, attt||:lced, without any declaration of war,,
the Siennese, whose city he hoped to take by sur{)rise.
Having failed in this attack, he gave the command of his
array to the ferocious marquis de Marignano, who un¬
dertook to reduce it by famine. The first act of Marig¬
nano was to massacre without mercy all the women,
children, aged, and sick, whom the Siennese, beginning
to feel the want of provisions, had sent out of the town :
every peasant discovered carrying provisions into Sienna.
wa| immediatelydiung before its gates. The villages and
fortresses of the Siennese, for the most part, attempted
to remain faithful to the republic; but in all those wBch
held out until the cannon was planted against their walls,
the inhabitants were inhumanly put to death. It was then
that the edge of the sword or famine destroyed the rustic
population, particularly that of the coast of Maremma,
covered with forests at this day. The Maremmane fever
overran that desolate district ; and those who at the peace
returned there to reap the inheritance of the victims of
Marignano, soon fell themselves the victims of that
disease. The city of Sienna at last capitulated, on
the 2d of April, 1.555 ; and its capitulation was not
better respected than that of Florence. Death and exile
were the lot of those generous citizens to whom an
amnesty had been promised. The Spaniards retained
possession of Sienna for two years; and did not surren¬
der it to the duke of Florence until the Ipth of July,
1557.

After the subjugation of Sienna, there remained in
Italy only three republics, Lucca, Genoa, and Venice,
unless it may be permitted to reckon San Marino, a free
village, situated on the summit of a mountain of Ro¬
magna, which has alike escaped both usurpation and
history until our own time.

In 1546, Lucca had a gonfalonier, named Francesco
Burlamachi, who formed the bold project of restoring
liberty to all the republics of Tuscany. The militia of
Lucca, in number only 2000, were to be reviewed by
him on a given day, after which he was to lead them.

350 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN fREPVBLICS. 1546.

suddenly across the mountains to Ffsa^ in order to rouse
tbaU warlike city to revolt; detachments were, at the
same time, to be sent to excite similar insurrections at
Pescia, Pistois, Florence, Bologija, Sienna, and Perugia.
Popular governments were every where to be organised,
and the different towns were to form one confederation.

Charles V., then engaged in Germany in combating
the league of Smalkalde, was supposed not to be in a
situation to defend Italy. But the spies of Cosmo dis¬
covered the plot. The duke of Florence demanded the
punishment of <4he conspirators from the magistratSs of
who, trembling at the emperor's displeasure,
Burlamachi to the lieutenant of Charles at
Milan. The first magistrate of a repuldic, calling itself
still free, was tortured, and afterwards beheaded,by order
of a foreign governor. From that period Lucca was
ruled by a narrow aristocracy, called in derision i signori
del cerchiolino; because the magistracies passed among
them from one to the other in rotation as in a circle.
The Martiniana law, proposed on the 9th of November,
1556, by the gonfalonier Martin Bernardini, excluded
from office every man who was not descended from fa¬
milies which had an hereditary share in the sovereignty
of the republic: of those there were not, in the year
1600 , more than I 68 ; and at the last enumeration,
made in 1797, there more than 88. They were,
nevertheless, to furnish a signoria, composed of a gon¬
falonier, nine anziani, a senate of thirty-six members,
and a grand council of ninety. This jealous aristocracy,
hated by the people, could not maintain itself from the
moment it came in contact with the French of the revo¬
lution. These last took possession of Tuscany, on the
15th of October, 1800; on the 25th of December, 1801,
the Lucchese gave themselves a representative constitu¬
tion ; and on the 4th of June, 1805, they demanded of
Napoleon a sovereign of his family. His sister, the
princess Elise, was, on the 23d of June following,
invested with the principality of Lueca, but with
laws which secured to the citizens and people more

Lij^ca;

delivered

I&4i7. coi^nniAGY or fiebcbi. 351

equality and freedcfn Ithan they had for a long period
enjoyed. •

Andrea Doria restored the name of republic to Genoa,
his native country, but with it he restored neither liberty
nor independence. Hp constituted for the government
of the republic a narrow aristocracy, which he continued
to rule with his nephew Giannettino. He, at the same
time, attached his country to the house of Austria, with
a submission which the greater number of Genoese felt
as Jhe deepest humiliation. It was to throw off the
double yoke of the Spaniards and of Doria that Gian
Luigi de’ Fieschi formed a conspiracy, celebrated alike in
history and poetry. Fieschi brought down the vassals
of his vast fiefs in the mountains; he had roused and
inflamed the partisans of ancient freedom : he combined
with aU these the restless spirits which desired only
confusion and a change In fine, he secured the aid of
France; and on the 2d of January, 1547, seized the
port, fleet, and gates of the city. Giannettino Doria
was killed as he endeavoured to appease the sedition.
The aged Doria fled ; the revolution was accomplished:
but Gian Luigi tie’ Fieschi, who should direct its course,
was nowhere to be found. In passing from one galley
to another, he had fallen unperceivcd into the sea, and,
being loaded with heavy armour, was drowned. His com¬
panions, without a chief, knew no longer what was to
be done. Though victors, they already treated with the
signoria as if vanqui.shed; and contented themselves
with the promise of an amnesty. The Dorias did not
observe this pledge; all the conspirators whom they could
seize were executed. It was not till after the death of
Andrea Doria, which took place only on the 25th of
November, 1560, that the Genoese limited, though in a
small degree, the rights of the aristocracy ; they admit¬
ted, on the 17th of March, 1576, a body of new nobles
into the government. They also preserved, with jea¬
lousy, the little that remained of their independence.
The court of Spain repeatedly endeavoured to suppress
the name of republic, and to ot^erawe them bjT a

S5% BISTORT OTF TBB iriiaAii^;&Rpi)Ducs. 1684.

cfttdel; But they twice defeated itft attempt9j*ln 1548
«ad 1^71. ■ •

’ The aristocracy of Genoa was ^ain, in 1628, endan.
gered By a conspiracy. The fadBies'Inscribed on the
gcMeii book, and having the right to sit in council,
including the new as well as ancient nobility, did not
exceed in number 170; but there were in Liguria at
least 450 families equally tioble, decorated with titles,
possessing fiefs, prelacies, commanderies, and hereditary
Wealth, who were excluded from all shafe in the govaffn-
ment. Julius Cesar Vachero persuaded these to aid him
in setting a sovereignty from which they thought 4,hem>
selves wKjtutly excluded. Vachero was a merchant of
immense wealth, who had adopted the Spanish manners,
then predominant in Italy. His palace was always
filled with bravos ; he never walked out without having
numbers in his train; whoever offended him immedia^e^
fell under the dagger of the assassin, who escaped from
justice by intimidating the judges or witnesses with fresh
crimes. All the families not inscribed on the golden
book promised to unite their bravos to those of Vachero.
On the 1st of April, l628, they werR, to make a joint
attack upon the public palace, massacre all the ancient
nobility, and new.model the government, under the
protection of the duke of Savoy: but the plot was dis¬
covered the evening preceding that (j^Btined for its exe¬
cution. Vachero and several of his accomplices were
arrested and executed.

The Genoese in the same century experienced a great
calamity. On the 18th of May, l6'84, their capital was
bombarded the fleet of Louis XIV.; wlw felt his
royal dignity offended by so small a people daring to
resist his will. He demanded the establishment of a
depot at Savona, to provision with salt and ammunitkih
of war his fortress of Casal de Montferrat. The 's^ate
of Genoa refused their consent to an establishment alike
contrary to th^ neutrality and independence. The
mMuesE de Siegnahy punished them, by pouring on
th^dty 14,000 bombs in three days: die public palace

1730, AV811UAy» DKVBI&ntOW OBlfOA. SS9

was mtite than deatroyed; and the whole town
would have been ruined^ if the doge had not con^ftted
to proceed to Paris with four senators to make his
apology to the Mng. #

Dignity and grande]^ stiU characterised the doge,even
in his humiliation; Iwt this proud, and perhaps nahle,
merit was all that remained to the Genoese aristocracy; it
became more and more narrojr and exclusive. It adopted
the manners of the Spaniards, under whose protection it
had risen. Thfe Genoese nobles, like the grandees of
Spain, always kept a band of assassins in their pay; and
it was by the dagger alone that they sought to make
themselves feared or respected. The sovereign ^olnlity,
prodigal and voracious, created by their pomp wanta
beyond their resources; accordingly, they stooped to
the most disgraceful depredations to obtain money.' The
Bta^ could make no contract without being robbed; it
was cheated in the victualling of fortresses, and of the
navy, and in the payment of troops; every place waa
was an object of sale, and justice was venal in the tri-.
bunals. The subjects of the eastern and western coasts,
called the two Jffviere, and of Corsica, frequently re,
volted in order to throw oiT' a yoke which had become
odious to them. In die eighteenth century, the Cor¬
sicans redoubled their efibrts to rid themselves ofi the
tyranny of Genoa^ From the year 17S0 to the 15th of
May, 1768, Corsica maintained an obstinate war agaanat
the republic; which esteemed itself fortunate in prevail¬
ing on France to accept all its rights to that island in
payment of a debt contracted with the French for the
purpose oi>subduiDg its revolted subjects. •

But the spirit of the ancient Italian republicans, was
not extinguished among the people of Genoa as among
the noUes. The two branches of the house of Austria
in Spain and Germany had become^ extinct; and, in
the war of the Austrian successhm^ the Genoese had
matle alliance with the house of Bo^ibon, which dii-
pnted with Maria Theresa the infaw^nce of her father
Charles VI. In this war the Freiwh, united wilh^the

A A

35i HISTORY OF THE ITAUAH jREPVBLICS. 1746.

Spaniards, were defeated and driven> out of Lombardy.
The Austrians appeared before &enoa ; and the senate,
which dared not arm the population, opened their gates
to them, on the 6th of SeptemSbr, 1746. The Aus¬
trians abused, as they have ever udone, the favours of
fortune. They exacted from Genoa a contribution of
9,000,000 of florins of the empire, a sum which that
city was not in a condition ^o pay. They seized all th^
money at the bank, all the plate of the churches, and
even the property of individuals. They emptied 4he
arsenals ; and destined the artillery of Genoa to be em¬
ployed in an attack which they meditated against Pro¬
vence. ^They made the Genoese themselves draw the
cannon of which they robbed them; and expecting to
And in the Italians Austrian baseness and servility, they
urged them in their labour with blows. A heavy
mortar had stuck fast amidst the ruins of a nar|;ow
street, and a German serjeant raised his cane on a
Genoese to make him draw with more force; the latter,
seizing a stone, threw it at the head of the Austrian.
The people collected, calling out, not “ to arms! ” for
Utey had none, but to attack the Austrians with stones.
Thp Genoese from every window showered on them the
stones of walls which they demolished, or the tiles of
houses which they unroofed. In those narrow and
winding streets the soldiers could fln<^ no shelter. They
could present themselves in no imposing masses. They
flred on their assailants ; and more than one house was full
of dead; but as they could not see the fall of those whom
they struck, they did were not cheered by their success.
Meanwhile the streets were soon covered with Austrian
dead. The Austrians tried in vain to set Are to houses,
in the construction of which there happened to be but few
combustible materials. Terror at length seized them:
they fled from the city. It was the 5th of December, 1746.
The populace which had expelled them lost no time in
lining the ramparts and gates with cannon. The mar¬
quess Botta Adorno^general of the Austrians, had esta¬
blished in Genoa alf hk magazines, with his park of

1805i BENOAjvNtTED WITB FRANCE. 355

artillery. The reyolt -which drove him out deprived
him both of arms and provisions ; and in the ^rren
mountains which surround Genoa nothing was to be
procured : he was accft-dinglyj on the 10 th of December^
obliged to repass the Apennines. The peace of Aix-la-
Chapellcj concluded two years afterwards, on the Iflth of
December, 1748, secured to the republic of Genoa the
integrity of its territory, under the protection of France.

*The expulsion of the Austrians was the last glorious
event in the history of Genoa, as well as the last display
of energy by the Italian nation, till the universal convul¬
sion caused by the revolution of France. In the years
1794 and 1795 , the senate of Genoa availed itself of
the importance of its position to preserve its neutrality :
its inclinations, however, sometimes prevailed over its
interest, and not unfrequently exposed the French to
outrages. These last postponed their demand of repar¬
ation, till the victory of Monte Notte, gained by Bona¬
parte over the Piedmontese and Austrians, on the 11th
of April, 1796, placed Genoa at their discretion. From
that time the partisans of democracy began to claim as
a right that all the inhabitants of Liguria should par.
ticipate in the sovereignty. The nobles, seconded by
the clergy, had a numerous party on their side among
the people. On the 22d of May, 1797, they resorted to
armsj and 10,000 of the lowest class, collected by the cry
of Fiva Maria! for a moment triumphed over the friends
of liberty. But this event itself furnished Bonaparte with
an opportunity of interfering: he supported the rights
of the nation against the aristocracy, and made the de¬
puties of the senate sign, on the 6th of June, 1797, the
convention of Monte BeUo, which obliged the Genoese
to adopt the name of the Ligurian republic; the inha-
bitants of Liguria being all admitted to a share in the
sovereignty. The constitution'of this republic was pro¬
claimed on the 14th of June, 1797; it was modified on
the 26 th of June, 1802; and abolished on the 8 th of
October, 1805, by the union of the state of Genoa to
France. Bonaparte had engaged the members of tlic
A A 2

jS6 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN ^EFUBLICS. l6l8.

gOTernment themselves to make the flemand, on the 4th
of Jifne, 1805.

We have now to speak only of the decline and fall
of the republic of Venice, the state in Italy whose exist¬
ence was of longest duration.' As this republic was the
most powerful, the most wealthy, and the most wisely
administered of all the Italian states, it appeared, even
after the year 1530,. when all Italy fell under the yoke
of Charles V., to have preserved some vigour and inde¬
pendence. But the signoria of Venice (lid not shareiin
the illusion which it created abroad : it felt the nation’s
weakness and danger, and knew too well that the vital
principle was gone.

The whole of the l6th century was employed by the
Venetians in repairing the disasters of the league of
Cambrai. They had to rebuild all the walls of their
city ; to recover their reduced population; to re-esta¬
blish their manufactures and agriculture, and to liquidate
the enormous debt with which they were loaded ; be¬
sides being always menaced by the Turks, against whom
they had to support two disastrous wars ; one from
1537 to 1540, which cost them their islands in the
Archipelago, and their last fortresses in the Morea; the
other from 1570 to 1573, which deprived them of the
isle of Cyprus. They appeared in some degree sacred
to the western people, who regarded them as their de¬
fenders against the infidels ; they were moreover united
by an identity of interests to the Roman empire, — like
them, menaced by the Mussulmans : they, consequently,
drew closer their alliance with the house of Austria, and
under that pretext withdrew themselves from every
other participation in the general affairs of Europe.

But in the beginning of the seventeenth century the
Mussulman empire no longer inspired so much terror.
The yoke of Spain continued to grow more insupport¬
able to Italy; while the developement of the protestant
party in Europe showed some prospect of throwing it
off. The policy of the Venetian republic was, in fact,
Donstantly to throw off the yoke of the house of

l6lS. oonIpibacy of bedmar. 357

Austria. But knifwing its own weakness^ and justly
suspicious of allies who would abandon after compro¬
mising them, the Venetians contented themselves with
giving succour to those whom they considered the de¬
fenders of European liberty, without openly making
themselves a party in their leagues.

Venice was the first to acknowledge Henry IV., re-
jefted by the catholic powers, and to negotiate his
reconciliation with the pope. In l6l7, it made alliance
wi&i the Dutch. During the thirty years’ war, it gave
succour to the protestants of Germany, to Bethlem
Gabor, and to Ragotski, in Hungary. It supported the
duke of Savoy against the king of Spain, and the pro-
testant Grisons against the catholics of that canton.

At this period, when the republic was come almost to
open hostility with the court of Spain, Philip III.
was represented In Italy by three powerful noblemen,
ambitious, intriguing, and faithless — Don Pedro de To¬
ledo, governor of Milan; the duke d’Ossuna, viceroy of
Naples; and the marquis de Bedmar, ambassador at
Venice. In l6T8, a project was formed between these
three lords to destroy a republic which stood in the way
of their ambition, and which had always thwarted the
enterprises of Spain. Some French adventurers, who
had signalised themselves in the armies and fieets of the
republic, of whom the most illustrious were the corsair
Jaques Pierre and Jaifier, dissatisfied with the rewards
which they had obtained, offered their services to the
marquis de Bedmar. The marquis encouraged them
to enlist in their service the assassins, bravos, and
robbers who, under the Spanish rule, always formed a
part of the household of men of quality. It was agreed
that, at a given signal, they should massacre the doge,
senators, and nobles; that the city should afterwards
be abandoned to their pillage; and that a general fir^
should veil their crimes. On the other side, it appears
that Jaques Pierre gave early notice of this plot to the
senate; that he carried it on by its order; that the
senate made use of it to hide its secret intdligence with

A A 3

358 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN I^EPVBLICS. l674.

the dvke d’Ossunaj with whom a project was entered into
of nearly the same nature with that which had been
proposed in the preceding century by Morone to Pes¬
cara. It was intended, with the aid of the senate, to
re-establish the independence of all Italy, by driving the
Spaniards out of Lombardy, and giving Ossuna the
crown of Naples. Fresh disclosures of Antoine Jaf-
fier apparently discovered to the Council of Ten that
the conspirators preferred the pillage of Venice to tile
doubtful chances of a revolt at Naples ; and that the in¬
formation which they had given of their plot was destined
only to deceive the vigilance of the state inquisitors. The
republic, however, had embarked itself in intrigues which
could not bear ti;e light. On a certain morning, the
inhabitants of Venice saw with horror the bodies of
Jaques Pierre, Regnault, Boulant, and several others,
hanging in the square of St. Mark. One hundred and
sixty others were, it was affirmed, drowned in the grand
canal ; among them was Jaffier. No motive was as¬
signed for these executions ; no explanation was given
to the public j no recrimination was addressed to the
court of Spain. The Council of Ten desired, above all,
the silence of terror; and the romantic history of this
conspiracy, published by St. Real in l674, and the tragedy
of Venice Preserved,” by Otway, in 1682, were the only
public documents of this catastrophe for a long time.

The Venetians were afterwards forced by the attacks
of the Turks to make advances to the house of Austria,
the enemy of their enemies. Oh the 23d of June,
1645, the sultan Ibrahim unexpectedly attacked the isle
of Candia. The war which thus began was the longest and
most ruinous that the republic had yet sustained against
the Ottoman empire: it lasted twenty-five years. The
Venetians displayed obstinate valour in defence of Can¬
dia. Courageous adventurers arrived from every part
of the west to fight under their banner, as in a holy war.
Their fleet twice destroyed that of the Mussulmans ;
but the forces of the republic were too disproportioned
fo those of the Turkish empire. Candia was forced tu

1714. OF THE UOHEA. 559

surrender on the t6th of September^ I669 ; and the
senate of that colony, the reflected image of the repub¬
lic, returned into the grand council of Venice, which had
given it birth: peace followed this capitulation.

A second war between the Venetians and the Porte
was, before the end of the century, crowned with more
success. The republic engaged in it, in 1682, in con¬
cert with the emperor Leopold and John Sobieski, king
of Poland. It^ conquered the Morea, Egina, Santa
Miura, and several fortresses in Dalmatia, which were
secured to it by the treaty of Carlowitz, signed on the
26th of January, 1690 : but the Turks could not suffer
so feeble an enemy to take from them one of their finest
provinces. They might soon visibly convince themselves
that the Venetians were no longer in a state to make a
last effort to protect their conquests: the supreme power
was concentrated in an oligarchy becoming daily more
distracted. Half the nobility admitted to the grand council
were reduced to the most ex,treme poverty. They lived
on the bounty of the great, to whom they sold their
suffrages. The families from among whom alone was
selected the Council of Ten made everyother tremble and
obey. They regarded the state as a prey to be divided
amongst themselves. .Justice was venal; the finances
dilapidated; the fortifications falling into ruin; the ef¬
fective force of the army did not amount to one half of
what appeared on the roll: every thing was to theVenetian
noble an object of embezzlement and robbery. The
oppression of the distant provinces was so great, that
the eastern Christian subjects of the republic regretted
the dominion of the Ottomans. The sultan, Achmet III.,
informed of this universal disorganisation, sent his army,
on the 20th of June, I7l4‘i into the Morea; and in a
month conquered that peninsula, covered with fortresses,
of which not one made any resistance. On the 27th of
June, 1715, the republic abandoned, under the peace of
Passarowitz, all its claims on the Morea. From that
period it had no further war with the Turks.

, The republic abstained, with the same timidity, firotn
A A 4

360 HISTORY OF THE ITALIAN l(BPtiBLICS. 179^

taking any part in the war of the SLCCession, either in
Spain or Austria^ in the quadruple alliance, or in that
of the election of Poland, which disturbed Italy during
the first half of the eighteenth century. It could not
even .make its neutrality respected. Its territory, always
open to every belligerent power, was often the theatre of
their most obstinate warfare. Venice, with 3,000,000
of subjects, 14,000 troops of the line (of which one half
was composed of excellent Sclavonian soldiers), twelve
vessels of war, and the means of arming 50,000 mfen,
was incapable of making herself respected, or of protect¬
ing her subjects, either by sea or land. Her debt, even
in the bosom of peace, was always increasing; her
manufactures always in decay; her territory was infested
with robbers; every city was divided into factions,
which the senate encouraged, in order to weaken its
subjects. A suspicious and cruel government, which
maintained itself only by the vigilance of spies, which
had promoted immorality to enervate the people, which
made the most profound secrecy its only safeguard,
which did not tolerate even a question on public affairs,
—which deprived the accused of every protection before
the tribunals,—which acknowledged no other hmit to the
right of punishing by the dagger, by poison, or by the
axe of the executioner, than that of the terror of its
rulers;—a government such as this became execrated by
its subjects. It stained with the most odious tyranny
the very name of republic.

The French revolution appeared to the Venetian aris¬
tocracy an enemy destined to destroy it: of all the
governments which divided Europe, the Venetian was the
most opposite in principle to that of the French ; never¬
theless, tire senate refused to enter into the coalition
against France, in 179^* Any display of force would
have augmented its expenses, and diminished the ^ilo
of provinces which the patricians divided amongst them¬
selves. The same parsimony, the same sacrifice of the
public to private interests, hindered Venice, when thq
victories of Bonaparte opened LombsTdy to him, in

1797. vENicJ ATTACKS THE FRENCH. S6l

April, 1796) frtm^iugmenting her army or prorisioting
her fortresses, in order to protect her territory from the
two belligerent powers. The government, adopting a
vacillating policy between the two parties, and awaiting
events, laid aside its arms; this soon brought war into
the states of the republic. The Austrians, always the
first to violate neutral ground, traversed them in every
direction: Beaulieu occupied Peschiera and Verona ;
if'urmscr threw,himself into Bassano, and passed through
Vibenza and Padua ; Alvinzi and the archduke Charles
occupied Friuli and Palma Nova, up to the eastern
limits of the republic. Napoleon successively drove the
Austrians from each of these provinces; but, as the
French occupied them, the spirit of reform in the tri¬
bunals and the laws, the spirit of publicity and equality,
an impatience of every yoke,—the spirit, in short, of
the French,—manifested itself, and the republic was at
last made to understand how much it was detested by ail
those who bad the least elevation of soul or cultivation
of mind.

Others, it is true, of the lowest class, (day-labourers in
towns, and peasants in the country,) completely under the
influence of priests, comprehending only what, exists,
fearing all change, and still deeply excited by the name
of St. Mark, regarded France and every thing French
with horror. The senate, relying on this party, whose
fanaticism it excited, and hearing that Napoleon had
passed the Piove on his march to Germany, on the 11th
of March, 1797, gave orders to arrest at Bergamo
fourteen of the principal inhabitants, who had de¬
clared themselves the most earnest in favour of the
new doctrines. The patriots, warned in time, arrested
the proveditor himself, raised the standard of revolt,
and proclaimed the liberty of Bergamo; a few days
afterwards, a similar revolution broke out at Brescia.
Bonaparte had just defeated the archduke Charles at
the Tagliamento, and was marching on Vienna.
Austrian column, commanded by Laudon, had meanwhdle
penetrated by the Tyrol into Italy; which be inundated

362 BIBTORY OF THE ITALIAN itBPtrBLICS. 1797-

with proclatnatione, announcing the defeat and destruction
of the French armyj and inviting the Italians to take
arms to crush its fugitive remains. The senate, feeling
that its position became daily more critical, believed the
moment come for throwing off the mask and joining the
Austrians. Emili, the proveditor of Verona, after having
conferred with Laudon, ordered the tocsin to be rung, on
the 17 th of April, throughout the whole province; and
joining .S0,000 insurgents to 3000 soldiers, whom he
commanded, every where attacked the French, massacred
all those within his reach, and suffered the infuriated
people to murder 400 sick in the hospitals. The next
day preliminaries of peace between Austria and the
French republic were signed at Leoben; and, on the 3d
of May, 1 797, Bonaparte, informed of the insurrection
which had been organised in the rear of his army, and
of the massacre of his sick, declared war against Venice
from Palma Nova. The oligarchy, in consternation,
implored the court of Vienna, which had drawn it
into this imprudent attack, to include Venice in the
suspension of arms and the negotiations for peace ; but
Austria refused all assistance: she had her own views on
her ally, and Venice fell. The French general Baraguai
d’Hilliers entered the city on the l6th of May, and
planted unopposed the tricolour banner on St. Mark. The
negotiations for peace, however, continued. Austria, be¬
ginning to recover from her panic, disputed the concessions
demanded, and asked compensation out of the states of
her ally. Hostilities were on the point of recommencing ;
but France did not yet find herself strong enough to
liberate all Italy. On the 17th of October, 1797>
Napoleon signed the treaty of Campo Formio, by which
he secured the liberty uf one half of the Venetian ter¬
ritory up to the Adige, which was united to the Cisaljune
republic. The Ionian isles were, at the same time,
united to France. Austria, on her side, took possessioa
of Venice and the remainder of the Venetian states. The
loss of liberty sustained by that part of tlie republic was,
however, of no long duration: at the expiration of

1805. bboAneration of Italy. 363

eighteen months the war was renewed; and, aft^r the
French had made themselves masters of Vienna, they
obliged Austria to restore Venice and all her territory to
the kingdom of Italy, under the treaty of Presburg,
signed on the 26th of December, 1805.

It was thus that the invasion of the French, at the
end of the eighteenth century, restored to Italy all the
advantages of which their invasion at the end of the
fifteenth' had dejirived her. When Charles VIII. en-
teifed Naples with his victorious army, on the 22d of
February, 1495, and overthrew the ancient system of
Italian politics, he gave the signal for all the calamities
which afterwards precipitated the peninsula under the
yoke of the transalpine nations. The Italians continued
to regard themselves as the first people in Europe, but
they had almost every where lost their liberty: of
the five republics which they could stdl reckon, four
were narrow aristocracies, 'l^en Napoleon Bonaparte
was appointed to the command of the French army in
Italy, on the 23d of February, 1796, he began to effect
a regeneration which gave to the Italian nation more
liberty tlian it had lost. It is the participation of
numbers in the government, and not the name of re¬
public as opposed to monarchy, that constitutes liberty:
it is, above all, the rpign of the laws; publicity in the
administration, as well as the tribunals; equality; the
removal of all shackles on thought, on education, and on
religion. Five millions and a half of inhabitants in the
kingdom of Italy were put in possession of a constitution
which secured to them ail these advantages, with a par¬
ticipation in the legislature and in the vote of taxes.
They had recovered the glorious name of Italians; they
had a national army, the bravery of which rendered it
daily more illustrious. Six millions and a half in¬
habitants of the kingdom of Naples received institutions
leas advanced, it is true; but even there the law had
succeeded arbitrary power; public and oral evidence h^
succeeded secret information and the torture; equality, tne
feudal system; education, instead of retrograding,, had

364 HISTORY OP THB ITAMAR iIePUBLICS. 1805.

been ^rendered progressive, and thought, as well as religidUs
conscience, had recovered freedom: finally, 2,000,000
of Piedmontese, 500,000 Genoese, 500,000 Parmesans,
and 2,500,000 Tuscans and Romans,—in all, 5,500,000
Italians,—were temporarily united to France. They par¬
took of all the privileges of the conquerors : they became
vrith them accustomed to the dominion of the law, to
freedom of thought, and to military virtue, — secure that
at no very distant period, when their pplitical education
should be accomplished, they would again be incorporated
in that Italy to the future liberty and glory of which
they now directed their every thought.

Such was the work which the French accompUshed
by twenty years of victory: it was doubtless incomplete,
and left much to be desired; but it possessed in itself
the principle of greater advancement: it promised to
revive Italy, liberty, virtue, and glory. It has been the
work of the coalition to destroy bU; to place Italy again
under the galling yoke of Austria; to take from her,
with political liberty, civil and religious freedom, and
even freedom of thought; to corrupt her morals ; and
to heap upon her the utmost degree of humiliation.
Italy is unanimous in abhorring this ignominious yoke:
Italy, to break it, has done aU that could be expected of
her. In a struggle between an established government
and a nation, the former has all the advantages: it has in
its favour rapidity of communication, certainty of in¬
formation, soldiers, arsenals, fortresses, and finances.
The people have only their unarmed hands and their
masses unaccustomed to act together: nevertheless, in
every struggle during these fifteen years in Italy, between
the nation and its oppressors, the victory has remained
with the people. At Naples, in Sicily, in Piedmont, in
the states of the church, at Modena and Parma, unarmed
masses have seized the arms of the soldiers ; men chosen
by the people have taken the places of the despots in their
places. The Italians, every where victorious over their
own tyrants, have, it is true, been every where forced
back under the yoke with redouUed cruelty by the league

1805,

FBJfSPEDTS OP ITAliY.

365

o£» foreign despotS| Attacked before they could^hare
given themselves a government or formed a treasury,
arsenals, or an army, by the sovereign of another nation,
who reckons not less than 30,000,000 of subjects, they
did not attempt a hopeless resistance, which would have
deprived them of every chance for the future. Let those
who demand more of them begin by doing as much
themselves.

•Italy is crushed; but her heart still beats with the love
of liberty, virtue’ and glory : she is chained and covered
with ’blood; but she still knows her strength and her
future destiny: she is insulted by those for whom she
has opened the way to every improvement; but she feels
that she is formed to take the lead again: and Europe
will know no repose till the nation which, in the dark
ages, lighted the torch of civilisation with that of liberty,
shall be enabled herself to enjoy the light which she
created.

ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL

TABLE

OF THE

History of the Italian republics;

• OR or

THE ORIGIN, PROGRESS, AND FALL OF
FREEDOM IN ITALY.

INTRODUCTION.

Page

Importance of the Study of the Italian Republics; the Science of go.

verning Men for their Advantage began^ith them ... 1

There is nothing to study in the Abuse of Force, or the Oppression of
the vanquished, by Barbarians - . - - 2

The instructive Part of History begins with the Fusion of the Con¬
querors with the conquered for the good of all - - .2

Prosperity of Italy during the middle Ages; her Neighbours, seeking
only her Plunder, are instructed by her Example - . 4

Our Purpose j a Summary of the History of this Prosperity, its
Causes, and its Destruction • - . . -5

CHAPTER I.

STATE OF THE POPULATION OF ITALY AT THE FALL OF THE
ROMAN EMPIRE IN THE FIFTH CENTURY. - SUCCESSIVE IN¬

VASIONS OF BARBARIANS BY WHOM ITALY WAS HARASSED
rOR FIVE CENTURIES. — THE FIRST EFFORTS OF TOWNS TO
DEFF.N]) AND GOVERN THEMSELVES TO BE DATED FROM THE
TENTH CENTURY.

All the Inhabitants of Italy made Roman Citizens
^ when the Citizen had ceased to be sovereign . . ff

Luxury of the senatorial Families at Rome; Poverty
and Idleness of the others - - - 7

Vlll ANALYTICAL AND CHUONOLOGICAL TABLE.

A. D.

476.

800—IMX).
900-1100.

961—1039.

1039-1125.

717—1125.

1073.

452.

S09.

Pagfe

The Italian Cities reflective Images only of Kome; In.
dolence of their Inhabitants; they renounce the Art
of War - . - . .7

Oppression and rapid Decay of the Cultivators of the
Land in the Country, ivhether enslaved or free > K
Decay of the Natron during the apparent Prosperity of
the Reigns of the Antonines - - .9

The Barbarians charged with the Defence of the Empire
pillage, and Anally suppress it ... 10

Odoacre King of Italy; 4Hd, Invasion of the Ostro-
goths; 568, Invasion of the Lombards . - 10

The Lombards divide Italy with the Oroeks j their W’ar
with the Pranks; their Defeat -* - .11

Charlemagne, their Conqueror, determines to restore
the Empire of Civilisation with the Sword of the Bar¬
barian - . - - .12

Successors of Charlemagne, French, Italians, and Bur.

gundians; 051, Otho the great Saxon . - 12

Change in Manners introduced by the Barbarians; feudal
System; fortifled Castles . . -13

Towns raise WaUs around them; their Inhabitants arm
to defend them . .... 14

Towns make themselves Independentof the Nobles, who
enfranchise and armUhe rural Population . - 15

Constitution of the Kingdom of Italy under the German
Emperors; growing Independence* . - - 16

Disputes of the Emperors with the Pope; Quarrel of
Investitures . - . . . 17

Rome governs herself in a State of Freedom, while the
Pope undertakes to govern the Church - -IB
The Wealth of the Clergy tempted Kings to distribute
the Prelacies to their Favourites . -18

Character of Hildebrand, Reformer of the Clergy;

renders them independent nf the secular Power . 19
Fontifleate of Hildebrand,'Gregory Yll.; his Succes¬
sors; Peace of Worms, 1122 » . - SJO

The War of Investitures completes the Dissolution of the
social Tie between the difTerent Members of the
Kingdom of Italy . • - .21

Organisation of Cities; their Militias, their Councils,
their Finances . - • >22

Other free Cities in Southern Italy disengage themselves
from the Ruins of the Greek Empire . .23

Decline of the Greek Power on the Coast of Italy, Ra.

venna, Bari, Genoa,~and Pisa - - - 24

Retreat of the Venetians to their Lagune j 697, their
first Doge - - - . • 25

They found Venice their Capital; they refuse to'submit
to the Western Empire - - . - 26

ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE.

IX

^ A. D. I Page

Kaplee/Gaeta, and Amalfi maintain their Independence
against the Lombards and Saracens for six Centuries Sfi
lOOO^ll^S. Northern Adventurers subdue Southern Italy and its

three Republics . . • • 27

Fisa and Genoa aggrandised by Commerce; their ^ar
with the Saracens - - . . - S8

Venice, Pisa, and Genoa assist the first Crusade with
their Fleets . - . . . 20

The Effect of six Centuries of suffering; Italy finds
• Protection in the Spirit of Association - >20

CHAP. II.

FREnRniCK BARBAKOSSA BETER.MINET) TO BE.STIilCT THE LIBER¬
TIES OF THE CITIES OF HALT.THEIR RESISTANCE,—LEAGUE
OF LOMBARDY. —TRUCE OF VENICE. — PEACE OF CONSTANCE,
WHICH SETTLED THEIR RIGHTS.

1100—1152. Corporations in Towns the only public Force which

maintained Itself in Italy . - - 30

Milan and Pavia direct two adverse Leagues among the
Cities; their Ambition . > >31

Different Leagues between Cities of Piedmont, the
Marches, Tuscany, and Ombria . - - dS

113d—1155. Arnold of Brescia preaches Liberty and Reformation of
Morals at Rome; his Execution . . -

1154. (October) Frederick Barbarossa enters Italy to subdue it

1155. (13th of February) Frederick besieges Tortona; h e takes

and burns that City - . . . 35

1155. Frederick is crowned at Rome, and returns to Germany

without being admitted into the Cities . - 35

The Milanese congratulate themselves on their Resist¬
ance; they succour those who have suffered for them 3G

1158. Second Expedition of Frederick into Italy; he threatens

Milan; hn Treaty with that City . - 37

The Diet of RoncagUa regulates the Rights of the Em¬
pire, without respect to that Treaty - - 39

1159. The Milanese resume their Anns; they are placed

under the Ban of the Empire; their Fields ravaged • 39
(10th of July) Frederick besieges rrstna^ ita hpmin
Resistance and lliiln . .40

1162. (MarcK^'''7l44ac..three Years’ Resistance, the Milanese

surrender at Discretion; their City is razed to the
Ground . . • •. - 41

f Their Example warms the Zeal of the Italians; Discon-

tent exasperated by a Schism - > •

42

SB

X

ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE.

• Papi‘

Iicague of Verona, Vicenza, Fadiia, and Treviso, to re¬
establish Liberty in Lombardy - -• .43

Frederick rc-enters Italy;^traverses it, and finds on
every side the Spirit of Liberty - .43

(27th of April) All the Cities united in the League of
Lombardy rebuild Milan . - - .45

Frederick besieges and subdues Romej his Army is
afterwards destroyed by Sickness . . > 4()

(March) Frederick forced to quit Italy; the Lombards
build Alexandria . - . . 43

The Archbishop Christian, The Emperor’s Lieutenant
in Tuscany - - . - - 47

(April) He invests Ancona; he is forced to raise the
Siege - . - . - - 4K

Frederick besieges Alexandria duriij^ four Months; he
is forced to raise the Siege . . . . 41)

Negotiations to give a Constitution to Italy; the Im.

possibility of coming to an Understanding . >

(Si^th of May) Frederick defeated by the Milanese at
Lignano . - - . _ _ 50

Congress of Venice first Compact in Europe between a
Monarch and his Subjects ; Truce of six Years, during
which all Claims remain suspended . - 51

1U7*^1IB3. Frederick at last acknowledges that his Subjects have

Rights, and seeks Peace m good Faith - .51

1183. (25thof June) Reacc of Constance, which fixes the Rights

of the Cities and those of the Emperors . .52

CHAP. III.

paOGRESS OF THE CITIES TOWARDS INDEFENDEHCE FROM THE
PEACE OF CONSTANCE TO THE DEATH OF FREDERICK THE
SECOND. — RELENTLESS STRUGGLE BETWEEN THE GUELPHS
AND GHIBELINES. — THE FIRST CHIEFS OF FARTXES WHO
RAISE THEMSELVES TO TYRANNIC POWER. 1183—1250,

The House of HohenstaufTen makes an Attempt to in¬
fringe the Liberties granted to. the .Cities by the
Peace of Constance - . ... 53

1183^1187. The Struggle, nevertheless, is renewed, but it is for the

Independence of the Holy See - . .54

Danger to Italy from the Union of the three Crowns
of the Two Sicilies, Lombardy, and the Empire > 55
Troubles caused by the Nobles; Extinction of ^roilies;
ancient Dukes and Marquisses . * . - 56

A. D.
1163.

1166.

1167.

1169.

1173.

1174.

1174, 1175.

1175.

1176.

1177.

ANALYTICAL AND CHItONOLOGICAL TABLE.

XI

A. D.

1197-1216.

1215.

1216—1235.

1226.

1234—1250.

1237.

1239.

1241.

1245,

1243.

1249.

Page

I Division of the Castilian Nobles between the two Leagues
of Guelphs and^hibelincs . , .57

The Nobles become Citizens of Republics j their Quarrels
and Violences . . ... 53

Institution of Podestas, Judges, and Generals, to restrain
the Turbulence of the Nobles . . .58

Wars arising from a double Election' to the Empire ; the
Pope favours the young Frederick II. ” . ~ 59

Innocent III. re-establishes the Monarchy of the Popes,
and opposes it to that of the Emperors . - 60

Fanaticism and Success of. Innocent III, j Conquest of
Constantinople by the Venetians . .61

Constitution of the Roman Republic and Powers of the
Senator independent nflhe Pope . - 62

Innocent forms Leagues between the Cities of the March
of Ombria and of Tuscany . . . .63

Quarrel between the Guelph and Ghibeline Nobles at
Florence; Death of Buondelmonte - . .64

War between the Guelphs and Ghiheiines of Lombardy;

Expulsion of the Nobles of Milan . . . .65

Character of Frederick II.; his Influence on the Italian
Language; his Crusade . . . . Go

(2d of March) Renewal of the League of Lombardy to
protect the Pope against the Emperor; Gregory IX,
forces the Cities to burn the ISaterini Heretics - 66
Frederick, with Saracen Soldiers, attacksthe Pope, who
excites the Emperor’s Son to revolt - - 63

Confldence of Frederick in Eccelino di Romano, Tyrant
of Verona and Padua - - - > Gd

(27th of November) Victory of Frederick} II. over the
Milanese at Cortenova - . . - 70

Gregory IX. excommunicates Frederick; he engages
Genoa and Venice to succour Lombardy . .71

(3d of May) Victory of the Pisans at Mcloria; they
arrest the Prelates on their Way to the Council . 72
(17th of July) Frederick 11. condemned by the Council
of Lyons - - - - - -

Numerous Conspiracies-excited by the Monks against
Frederick - - • - - - 73

Ferocity of Eccelino at Padua; 16th of June, 1247,

Revolt of Parma against the Emperor - .74

(18th of February) The Imperial Army before Parma;

his Camp forced by the Guelphs - . *75

(2d of February) The Ghibelines drive the Guelphs out
of Florence, and raze their Palaces to the Ground - 76

(26th of May) Victory of the Bolognese at Fossalta over
a Hensius, natural Son of the Emperor; his Captivity - 77
Effbrts of Frederick to be reconciled to the Church ; his
Death, on the 13th of December, 1250 - . 78

xii ANALYTICAL AND CBRONOLOQICAL TABLE.

CHAP. *C.

INTERREGNUM OF THE EMITRE. -DECLINE AND SUBJUOATIOH

OF TUK LOMBARD REPUBLICS. «CHARLES OF AHJOU CALLED
TO THE SUPPORT OF THE GUELPllS. •—HIS POWER.—HlS

CKUELXV. — SJCILIAK VESPERS. 1251 — 1282 .

A. D,

The Cities euioyed three Centuries of Liberty, upon which
History is silent - - - ^ - -78

The Struggle between two Factions, originating in
honourable Sentiments, costs thi I/ombards their
Liberty - - - - - 79

Conrad, Son of Frederick, and after him Manfred, Chiefs
of the Ohibeline Party in Italy . . • 80

1331. Ingratitude of the Pope towards the Milanese •, alienates

them from the Guelph Party > . ~ 81

Turbulence of the Nobles at Rome, and in all the Cities 81
1250. (20th of October) The Florentines recover their Liberty,

and create their Militia . - . • 83

Institution of the Signoria at Florence; it recalls the
exiled Guelphs . - • . .84

1254. Year of Vict^y of the Florentines over Pistoia, ,Vol.

terra, Pisa, and Sienna ; the Gold Florin of Florence 84
The Ghibeline Nobles exiled from Florence, with Fail,
nata degli Uberti at their Head; they retire to Sienna 85
1360. (4th of September) Defeat of the Florentine Guelphs

near Arbia ; they evacuate Florence - .86

The Ghibelines determined to destroy Plorence; it is
saved by Fariuata . . . . g 7

1230—1260. Tyranny of Eccelino di Romano at Verona, ;Vicenza,

Padua, Feltre, and Belluna • . .88

Crusade preached against Eccelino; the City of Padua
taken from him - . - .89

1259. (16th of September) Defeat of Eccelino at Soncino; his

Death . , . . . .90

The Turbulence of the Nobles forces the Lombards to
compromise their Liberty in order to control it . 91
They intrust the Signoria to those whom they charge
with the Command of their Army . .91

125 ^ 1361 . The House Della Torre directs the Milanese Guelphs

and other Iximbards . . . .92

1£50_1300. Commencement of the hereditary Power of the House

of £^te at Ferrara, and La Scala at Verona • >93

Ascendancy of the Ghibelines] in all Italy; X^easiness
of the Popes . • . . >94

*1264. Urban IV. calls Charles of Anjou into Italy to oppose

the Ghibelines . ... 95

ANALYTICAL AND CHBONOLOCICAL TABLE.

xiii

Page

(26th of February) Manfred defeated and killed at the
Battle of Graij^ella j Charles King of the Two Sicilies 96
The Guelph Party recovers the Ascendancy in all Italy j
its Triumph at Florence . . .97

Conradin arrives in Italy; Zeal of the Ghibelines in his
Favour; he is defeated, on the 23d of August, at
Tagliacozzo - . . , . 97

1269—1282. Charles of Anjou named bv the Pope ImperialTicar, and

acknowledged Lord by the Towns . - 98

• Gregory X. and Nicholas HI. endeavour to humiliate

Charles, and raise the Ghibeline Party . - 99

127S. The Emperor Rodolf acknowledges the Right of the
Pope over all the Country since become the States of
the Church - . . - - 100

1277. Napoleon della Torre vanquished, on the 21stof Janu.

ary, by Otho Visconti 5 the Ghibeline Nobles return to
Milan > . - . - 101

1281, (22d of February) Election of Martin IV., who favours

with all his Power Charles of Anjou - , 102

1382. (3(Jth of March) Sicilian Vespers, which overthrow the

Tyrannyof Charles of Anjou . . >103

« A. D.
1265.

1268.

CHAP. V. ^

ITALY NEGLECTED BY THE EMPERORS — ABANDONED BY THE
POPES. » COUNT UGOLINO AT FISA. — THE BIAi^'CHI AND NE&I
AT FLORENCE. CLOSING OF THE GRAND COUNCIL AT VENICE.
— EXPEDITION OF THE EMPEROR HENEX' VII. INTO ITALY.

1283 — 1313 .

Italy ceases to be subject to the Chiefs of two Factions
only - - . - . - 104

Weakness of Charles II. King of Napjes; three Em.

perors who do not visit Italy - . - 105

First Examples of the Nepotism of Popes in favour of
the Orsini, Colonna, and Savelli . - - 106

The pontifical Power weakened under CelestineV. and
Boniface VIII. . . . . . 106

Prodigious Prosperity of Italy; Progress of AgricuU
ture . • • - - .107

Beauty of the Cities; Monuments of Architecture;

Commencement of the Fine Arts . . -108

Activity of Commerce and of Manufactures; general
• Wealth - . . - - 109

Grandeur of Pisa; its Rivalry with Genoa; a ruinous
War begun in 1282 - - - - 110

XIV

ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE.

A. D.

1284.

1285.
1292.
1292.

1296-1800.

1301.

1297.

1311.

1308—1313.

1310.

1311.

1312.

1313.

Pae«

(6th of August) Defeat of the I'isans by the Genoese
Meloria i Decline of their Republic > - llO

Ugolino della Ghirardesca, Commander of Fisa; his
Treachery, and cruel Death • . ^ . Hi

Guido di Montefeltro, Commander of Fisa; his Victo¬
ries over the Guelphs of Florence and Lucca - 112

The Gonfalonier of Justice, Chief of the Signoria at
Florence, charged to repress the Turbulence of the
Nobles - - - - - \13

The Nobles excluded by an Ordinance of Law from all ■*
Share in the Government • - - 114

Quarrel of the Cancellieri Neri and Bianchi at Fistoia;

their Discord reaches Florence - " - -115

Boniface Vlll., to reconcile them, calls Charles of Valois
into Tuscany • - - -113

Violence of the two Parties; Kffbrts of Benedict XI. to
reconcile them; the Papal Court transferred to

France - - - - - 117

Greatness of the Venetian Nobles; less turbulent and

more skilful than those of Lombardy' - - 117

Formation in 1172 of Che Grand Council of Venice, at
first annual, and elected by the People . • 116

Successive Development of the Venetian Constitution *
in the 13th Century - - - - -119

(28th of February) Decree for the closing of the Grand
Council of Venice - - - - - 120

Creation of the Councilor Ten, which completes the
Organisation of the Venetian Aristocracy - •121

Reign of the Emperor Henry Vll.; his Expedition into
Italy - - - - • - 121

The Turbulence of the Nobles had thrown all the Cities
of Lombardyunder the Yoke of some Sovereign Lord 122
Henry VII. liberates the Lombard Cities from their
Tyrants, and recalls the Exiles . , - -123

Revolt of the Guelphs of Lombardy against Henry V)I.;

he arrives at Genoa - - • - 124

War of the Genoese against the Venetians; Viutory of
the former at Corzola in 1296 - - -125

The Genoese confer the Signoria on Henry VIL, and

f rwards resume it; he goes to Pisa - - 126

of the Pisans for Henry; Armament of the
Guelphs against him; his Coronation . . 127

(19th of September) Henry VII. threatens Florence;

he is obliged to withdraw himself - • . 127

(24th of August) Death of Henry at Buonconvento;
Suspicions of having been poisoned . -128

ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE.

CHAP. VI.

I

UREATNESS SOME UHIDELINE ClIIErs. -LISORGANISATlDX UF

that pauty by the perfidy and inconsistenl’y op the
EMPEROR EOaiS OF BAVARIA. — EFFORT OF TIJE FLORENTINES
TO MAINTAIN THE BALANCE BEIU'lEN THE POWERS OF ITALY.

— TUFA FALL UNDER THE TYRANNY OF THE DUKE OF ATHENS.

— HIS ENVULSION. 1314 — 1343 .

A.ir

1314.

13 ,^— 1 . 322 .

131(J.

132.'5—1328.

1327.

1328.

1329.

1312—1329.
1330—1338.

1332.

im

1336.

Page

(15th*ot Ortnher) Double Election, to the EmpirB, ti(
Eouis n’. and Kreiienck III. ; Politics of the Pope . 120
Bertrand duPoiet, the Pope’s Legate m Italy, attacks
the House of Visconti - . . . i_,ij

Grandeur of Mattoo Viscontij his Dcathj the 22d of
June, 1.322 - - - .... IJl

CJguccione di PagRiuola, Captain of Pisa, his Victories
over the Guelphs , - - - -132

flOth of April) Uguccione driven from Pisa; Castruocio
becomes Master of Lucca - - - 133

Lucca becomes the Arsenal of the Ghibelioeaj great
Talents of Cattruccio . - - - - 133

Florence at the Plead of the Guelph Party in Tuscany;

Democratic Spirit af that City , . . -134

T)\^Baiia of Flnrenre, all the Magistracies nami'il by
Lot - - - ■" IJj

Victories gained by Castruccio over the Florentines, who
call to their Aid the Duke of Calabria - - - I'Ji';

Louis IV., Conqueror of Frederick HI., enters Italy j
his Character - - - - • 13u

Perfidy of Louis IV. towards the Visconti and Pisans ; he
trusts solely to Castruccio - - . - - 137

Coronation of Louis IV .} he determines to depose the
Pope; Death of Castruccio - - -138

Fresh Pertidy of Louis IV. j he returns to Germany - 13.9
Heign of Can' Grande della Scala at Verona; he con¬
quers Padua; his other Conquests, and Death - 13D
John of Bohemia in Italy; theEnthusiasnil^hich he ex¬
cites; Lordships conferred on him -- - 141

The Florentines resolved to maintain against him the
political Equilibrium of Italy - ... 14-3

(September) The Florentines agree with the Lords of
Lombardy to divide between them the States of John 143
(October) John abandons or sells all his Lordships, and
quits Italy - - ... . 144

•fhe Florentines deceived by the Lombard Lords; con¬
tract an Alliance with the Venetians - -114

XVi ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLO&ICAL TABLE.

' VcZC

Successiye Subjugation of several tVee and Guelph Cities
which detach themselves 0'on)ll^lorencB . .145

(6th of July) The Pisans take Possession of Lucca, to the
Prejudice of the Florentines . . - - 144)

(lit of August) The People of Florence confer the Title
of Captain on the Duke of Athens . . .147

Talents of the Duke of Athens for Intrigue] the Art
with which he opposes one Party to the other . 147
(8th ofSeptember) the Duke of Athens causes himself to
be proclaimed Sovereign Lcurd of Florence - ' > 14H

Growing Tyranny of the Duke of Athens; his Alliance
with the Ghibelines . . . * 148

(26th of July) Revolt of Florence agairjt the Duke of
Athena ] he is driven out of it on the Sdof August . Wj

CHAP, vn;

REVIVAL OP LETTERS. —REVOLUTIOKS ATTEMPTED BY TWO MEN
OF LETTERS. — ITALY RAVAGED BY THE PLAGUE AND BT
COMPANIES OF ADVENTURE. — POWER OF THE HOUSE OF
VISCONTI. — WAR BETWEEN THE MARITIME REPUBLICS. —
DANGER AND FIRMNESS OF THE REPUBLIC OF FLORENCE.

1344—1364.

The Exercise of the intellectual Faculties during the
Barbarous Ages a Source of Suffering in the other
Countries of Ehrope, a Source of Enjoyment in Italy liil

Progressive March of the Arts, and afterwards of scien..

tide Studies .... I'iS

Eloquence makes no Progress ] Poetry; Petrarch and
Boccaccio . . - . ]5o

Zeal for Latin Literature; Commencement of the Study
of Grecian Literature - - -155

1347. Revolution attempted at Rome by Cola di Rlenzo, a

passionate Admirer of Antiquity . .154

He makes use of the Monuments of the Arts to raise
tie.Enthusiasm of the Romans, and to recall their
ancient Glory . . .155

His Hatred of the Nobles; he gets himself named TrU
bune on theSOth of May, and drives them out of Rome 156
He wants Coura^ and Capacity, and suffers himself to
be driven out of Borne, on the 15th of December . 156
13.54 (July) Cola named Senator by the Pope; he is assas.

sinated, on the 8th of October . ^ . - 157

1358. (May) Friar Jacob Bossolari raises Pavia against its Ty.

rants; his tragic End . . , .157

A. D.

1336—1338.

1341.

1342.

1343.

ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. XvU

•A. D.
134 ^ 1364 .

1345.

1343.

1351.

1350—1354.

1353.

1354.

1355.

1.362—1364

Page

Decline of the Authority of the Einperors; Charles IV..

his Expeditftn i^o Italy - . . 158

Popes of'Avignon ; Conquest of Romagna and of the
March by Cardinal Albornoz . - - 159

(13th of September) Joanl. ofNaplea causes her Husband,
Andrew of Hungary, to be assassinated; the Plague - 160
The Italian Population disarmed by their Tyrants ; Form.

ation of Companies of Adventure - - .161

The great Company of the Duke Gusrnieri making War
on all the World - . - . 162

League of the Lombard Lords against the Visconti }
they employ the great Company . -163

Noble Resistance ofthe Florentine Republic to the great
Company - . . • , 163

Power of the Visconti, Lords of sixteen Cities of
Lombardy j Florence stops their Conquests . .164

The Visconti Masters of Bologna; their sudden Attack
on Florence . . - .165

War of the Genoese with the Venetians in the Levant;

Grandeur of Paganino Doria . . 166

(iDth of October) Genoa gives itself to the Archbishop
Visconti; Conspiracy of Marino Falieri - - 167

Division of the different Sovereignties of the Visconti
between the three Brothers; Genoa throws off their
Yoke - - - - .168

Revolutions caused in Tuscany the Fanperor Charles
IV. - - - . 15S

Intrigues ofthe Visconti at Pisa to enslave th|t Republic 169
War between Pisa and Florence; French, English,
and Gascon Soldiers, who cmrry the Plague thither - 170
Giovanni Agnello causes himself to be declared Doge
of Pisa - - - -170

CHAP. vni.

THE FLORENTINES CALL UFOK THE CITIES OF ITALE TO RECOVER
THEIR LIBERTYt—GREAT WESTERN SCHISM.—WAK OF CHIOZ7.A.

— INSURRECTIONS OF THE POPULACE AGAINST THE CITIZENS*

— CONQUESTS OF GIAN OALEAZZO VISCONTI DUKE OF MILAN.

-HIS llEATH. 1365 — 1402 .

Danger which Italian Liberty incurred from Galeazzo
*and Barnabas Visconti; theirperddious Policy . 171
1366. The Pope and Emperor menace the Visconti, who

makes Peace with them . .. - 172

a 2

ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE.

A. D. Pfcge

1368—1370. Charles IV. suffers Pisa to rcpover its Liberty; he is
threatened at Sienna ; restores to Lucca its Inde¬
pendence - . . . .173

The Visconti excommunicated by Urban V. ; Death of
this Pope - . - • 174

1375. (July) The Florentines, betrayed by the Church, carry

War and Liberty into her States - - -175

1376, 1377. Ferocity of the Soldiers of the Church in the War of

Liberty; Massacre of Faenza and C(?sene . . .175

1378. Peace of Florence with the Church, Consequence of the

great Western Schisms - - . 17G

Election of Urban VI. at Rome; he quarrels with his
Cardinals, who raise Clement VII, to bhe Chair . 177
Scandal given by the two Antipopes at Rome and Af*ig.

non - . - - ' . 178

Joan of Naples excommunicated by Urban VI,, and de¬
throned by Charles III. de Durez - - - ITS

War of Chiozza between the two Republics of Genoa
and Venice - - - - 170

Danger which Venice incurs after the Taking of Chi¬
ozza; Carlo Zeno comes to its Aid, 1st January, 1380 - ISO
1360. The Genoese besieged in Chiozza, and forced tosurren-

der at discretion; Peace of the 8th of August, 138L - 181
1378. Discord at Florcnte between the major and minor Arts;

Burgher Aristocracy - - . - 182

Inveteracy of the Florentine Aristocracy against the
Descendants of the ancient Ghibelines ■ . 163

(18th of June) Salvestro de’ Medici, Gonfalonier, appeals
to the People against the Burgher Aristocracy - - ISi

(SOth of July) Insurrection of the Ciompi, the poorest
Artisans of Florence . - -185

Cleverness and Vigour of Michael Lando, Gonfalonier
of the Ciompi j the Populace submits to him - - 185

1382. Division among the victorious Democratic Party ; it is

anew excluded from Power - - -ISC

Rivalry between the different Orders in the other Re¬
publics, Adurni and Fregosi, at Genoa - . - 187

The Mounts of Sienna, three Burgher Aristocracies,
one below the other . - - - 1S7

Opposition between Barnabas Visconti and his nephew
Gian Galeazzo, at Milan - - . 189

1385. (May 6th) Gian Galeazzo arrests his Uncle Barnabas, and

puts him to Death ; Vices of the new Tyrant . 189

He encourages Alberic di Barbtano, Founder of the Art
of War in Italy - - - - 1!K)

1387, 1388. Gian Galeazzo conquers Verona, Padua, and Treviso - 191

1387—1390. All the Princes of Lombardy subdued or disgraced by

the Crimes which Visconti makes them commit - 192

1390. Francis 11. of Carrara, aided by the Florentines, retakes

Padua from Gian Galeazzo - - - 19d

ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE.

•A. D. ^ P^ge

13112. (2l8t of October) Jacobo Appiano raises himself by Assas¬
sination to the Tyranny of Fisa . - li>l

13y5. ^'(ist of May) Diploma of the Emperor Winceslaus creates

Gian Caleazzo Visconti Duke of Milan - . Vjj

1390—>1402. Genoa, Perugia, Sienna, Pisa, Lucca, and Bologna, lose

their Liberty through the Intrigues of Gian Galeazzo ]!;ij
1402. (3d of September) Florence delivered by: the Plague,

which unexpectedly carries ofi' Gian Galeazzo - 197

• CHAP. IX.

AXAHCHY is the duchy of MILAN.-THE VENETIANS CONGlUEIl

TADUA AND VERONA. —THE FLORENTINES, FISA, — FLORI NLE,
MhNACFD IN TURN BY LADISLAUS KING OF NAPLES AND
ITLIPPD MARIA VISCONTI, MAINTAINS AGAINST THEM THE
KyUILIlJRIUM OF ITALY, HOS—1432.

Liberty had, in the 12th Century, produced a great
moral Advancement «• - - . 107

The Return of despotic Governments had, on the con-
trvy, multiplied Crimes and 'f^reasons - -198

The Number of free Stales diminish every Century, and
Virtue becomes more rare - - . 109

In the Idth Century it was Crime that made Princes - 199
111)2—1412. The Children of Gian Galeazzo under the Guardianship

of Condottieri, who betray them • - -200

1404. [IRth of October) The Mother of those young Princes

dies by Poison ; numerous Tyrants in Lombardy - . 201
1412. (inth of May) Gian Maria Visconti assassinated, after

committing atrocious Cruelties . - -202

All the Virtue of Italy at this Period took Refuge in
Florence ... . 202

1404 (7th of April) Francesco da Carrara conquers Verona

from the Visconti . - - -203

(23d of June) Venice declares War against Francesco da
Carrara j Conquest of Vicenza and Verona - -204

1405. (19th of November) Carrara capitulates at Padua ; the

Venetians put him to Death, together with his Chil-
dren . - . - .205

All the Tuscan Republics throw off the Yoke of the
Children of Gian Galeazzo Visconti . - - 20G

The Florentines determine to conquer Fisa ; Resistance
* and Valour of the Pisans .... 207
1496. (9th of November) The Rorentines Masters of Fiia;

great Emigration of the Pisans • - - -207

a 3

^ ANALYTICAL AKD CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE.

A. D.' * I%ge

1400. (March) Council convoked, at Pisa to put an end to the

great Western Schism I . . . - 208

1408. Ladifilaus King of Naples profited by the Schism to

take Possession of the States of the Church - • 209

1409. He attacks Florence; Alliance of the Horentlnes with

I..oui6 of Anjou andBraccio di Montone . - 210

All the Armies of Italy formed in the two Schools of
Braccio and Sforza - - • - 211

1410. (2d of January) The Florentine Army, led by Braccio, en.

ters Rome .... * 212

1414. [6th of August) Death of Ladislaus, which dcUvsirs

Florence fVom great Danger - . - - - 212

1412. (16th of June) Filippo Maria Viicontf, third Duke of

Milan, succeeds his Brother • - - - 21.')

Intriguing Activity and Ambition joined to Timidity
in this Duke ... . -214

1412.—1421. Conquests of Francesco Carmagnola, Visconti’s Ge.

nerai; Civil Wars at Naples ... 215

1424. Death of the Two great Captains, Sforza and Braccio 215
142^1425. War between the Duke of Milan and the Florentine

Republic, which implores the Aid of Venice < • 216

1426. Carmagnola, who had passed over to the Venetians, takes

Brescia from the Duke of Milan ... 217
1427—1430. War in the Milanese between the most illustrious Ge¬
nerals in Italy . ... . 217

1431. Reverses of Carmagnola; Distrust of him by the Ve¬

netians ... . . . 218

1432. (5th of May) Francesco Carmagnola betrayed, arrested,

and beheaded at Venice - - - -219

CHAP. X.

COSMO DE’ MEniCI CHIEF OF THE FLORENTINE REPUBLIC.-

DEATH OF THE LAST VISCONTI. — EFFORTS OF THE MILANESE
TO RECOVER THEIR LIBEKTT. — THEY ARE SUBJUGATED BY
FRANCESCO SFORZA. — CONSPIRACY OF STEFHANO PORCARI AT
ROME, 1431 —1454.

The lower Class of the People again accustomed to Sub¬
ordination . . . . . 219

Liberty ought to be common to all, but Power should
be vested in those only who can comprehend its true
Objects . . . l . 220

Order still maintained in the Italian States which had
lost their Liberty - - - - 221

ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE.

xxi

' A. a • Page

Great Prosperity ^ the Subjects of Venice; their Attache
men t to St. Maim ... - 223

Prosperity of Florence united with more Intelligence
and more Turbulence . . . . . SSS

1381^1434. Glorious Administration of the Albizzi at Florence ;

Chiefs of a moderate Aristocracy . . > S23

Opulence and growing Credit of Cosmo de’ Medici; his
Character ... _ . 0^4

1433. (7th of September)Rinaldo degli Albizzi causes Cosmo de*

* Medici to be exiled from Florence . - . 225

1434. (September) Cosmo de'Medici recalled] Rinaldo degli

Albizzi exiled • - . . . . 22C

1434^1447. AlbizA.takes Refuge with Visconti, who renews the War

with Florence ..... 227
Francesco Sforza and Coleoni in the Service of Florence
and Venice; the Plccininiin that of the Duke • 227

1441. (24th of October) Marriage of Francesco Sforza with BU

anca Visconti; 13th of August, 1447, Death of Visconti 223

1435. (5th of August) Battle of Fonza; Alphonso of Aragon

made Prisoner by the Genoese • . -229

He is set at Liberty by the Duke of Milan, and subdues
the Kingdom of Naples ... .230

1447. (14th of August) The Republic of Milan re.e 8 tabll 8 hed;

Extinction of the Visconti . . - -230

The Doge of Venice, Foscari, and Cosmo de’ Medici
refuse the Milanese their Alienee - - - 231

Ambition of Cosmo de’ Medici; his Enmity to Republics
and to Liberty ... . .231

The Address of Francesco Sforza, who deceives alter,
natcly the Milanese and Venetians . . .232

1448. (18th of October) After having gained many Victories

over the Venetians, Sforza passes over to them - 233

1449. Sforza conquers a great Fartof Lombardy - -234

1450. (26th of February) Milan opens its Gates to Sforza, and

acknowledges him Duke ... . 235

1452. Frederic III. will not acknowledge Sforza Duke - 236
Successive Loss of the Libenies of Rome and the States

of the Church ... . -2.30

1447^1454. The Pope Nicolas V. the Protector of Letters, but an

Enemy of Liberty . . . -237

Efforts of Stephano Forcari to recover the Rights of the
Romans - - ... 238

1453. (5th of January) Conspiracy of Stephano Porcari; his

Execution - . . . - . . 239

XXii ANALYTICAL AND CHHONOLOGICAL TABLE.

CHAP. Xfl.
i

HALT LOSES ALL THE GilEAT MEN WHO SHONE IN THE PKE-
CriJlNR TERIOl). —THE REPL’BLIC OF FLOKE^CE EJ^KLAVUD LV
THE MEVILT. —-WAR OF THE VENETIANS AGAINST THE TURKS.

— CONdUEST OF CYPRUS. 1454 — 1478 .

A D.

1457.

1158.

Ur)5.

1484.

Uj>-1464.

Hv-W—1470.
146G.

1459,

1454—1462.
14G3—1470.
1470—1474.

Page

Alann which the Conquest of Constantinople by the
Turks spread throughout Italy - . -240

Mahomet II proposes to subdue Rome as he had done
Constantinople 241

The Council of Ten at Venice jealous of Foscari i bis
domestic Misfortunes ..... 242

(2jd of October) the Uoge, Francesco Foscari, is deposed,
and di('.<! immediately on leaving the Palace - 243

(£7th of June), Death ofAlphonso of Aragon; Succession
of his natural Son Ferdinand - . -243

Sforza refuses to assist the Anjou Party, who would de.
throne Ferdinand .... 244

Ferdinand treacherously puts to Death Nicola Piccinino 245
(1st of August) Death of Cosmo de’ Medici, after having
destroyed all Equality at Florence . . .245

His Authority till the Year 1455 divided with Nen
Capponi - . • - - 247

Struggle of Cosmo dc* Medici with the Aristocracy wliich
he had favoured ..... 248

Cosmo, in his old Age, favours the Aggrandisement of
Lucas Pitti ...... 249

Building of the Pitti Falace,yhich gives Occasion to nu¬
merous Abuses of Power ... .249

Administration of Pietro de’ Medici; his Incapacity ■ 249
( 8 th of March) Death of Francesco Sforza; Succession of
Galcazzo Sforza . - - ... 250

Lucas Pitti ruined ; Pietro de’ Medici sole Ruler at Flo.

fence ... . . .251

Pietro de’ Medici from Sickness abandons public Bush
ness to five ur six ambitious Intriguers . . 2.51

(2il of December) Death of Pietro de* Medici - - 252

Enslavemoiit of Bologna; Obscurity of Lucca and Si¬
enna; violent Convulsions at Genoa . . 252

Oppression of Illyria and Greece by the Venetians . 25J
Conquest of a Number of Christian States by Ma.

hornet II. . J . . . . . 254

War of the Venetians with the Turks; Death of Pius II.,
and of Scanderbog .... .255

Negotiations of the Venetians with Hussun Cassan ; their
great Travellers . . . . ■ 258

Expeditions of the Venetians in Asia Minor, and their
Cruelties . . > . .257

ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. XxUi

* A. D. * Page

Civil Wars of C^rus; Part taken by the Venetians in
them; Cateriilh Cornaro - - - - S58

14-77, 1478, The Turkish Annies enter Italy; the Venetians make
Peace with them, on the SCth of January, 1479 -

chap. XII.

KUEaUENCY or CONSPIRACIES. —THE LAST RESOURCE OF THE
ITALIAN PATRIOTS. — THEIR ILL SUCCES.S. CONSPIRAC Y OP
J’ilE FAZZI. -AbMINI.STRATION OF LORENZO 1)E* MEDICI.'—

H[s- DEATH. 1'170—14D2.

Despotism supported by all the inert Part of the Nation 259
Nations seem to he attached each to their Government

ill Proportion to its Imperfections - - - Sfll)

The Tyrants of Italy won the Attachment of the Fciu
santry and the Populace • - - • UGl

While the superior Classes detested Tyranny > 2hl

Murders were so common that they inspired no Repug¬
nance .... . - 28

U7U. (fith of April) Conspiracy of JJemardo Nardi; he sur¬
prises Prato; his Execution* . . - - 2fl3

147d, (1st of September) Monarchical Conspiracy at Ferrara in

Favour of Nicolo d'Esle , - - - -2(14

Conspiracy of Jerome Oentili at Genoa - • 2Ui

Conspiracy of Olgiati, Visconti, and Lampugnani at
Milan ... - - -

(2bth of December) They kill the Duke Galeazzo Sforza,
and are in their Turn killed - - - -267

Discontent of the Fazzl at Florence; their Connection
with the Pope Sixtus IV. - - ' -267

Sixtus IV. approves a Conspiracy to restore Liberty to
Florence ... ... 269

1478. Conspiracy ofthePazzi; Distribution of the diffferont

Parts - - - - - • ^

(26th of April) Giulio de' Medici killed j Lorenzo escapes
from the Conspirators - ... 270

Massacre of the Pazzi; Execution of all the Conspirators 271
(Ist of June) Lorenzo de* Medici excommunicated for
having hung an Archbishop ... -272

147D. Revolutions at Genoaand at Milan against the Duchess

Sforza ----- . - 273

^ (5th of December) Lorenzo departs for Naples, to demand
Peace from Ferdinand , . . - 274

1480. (6th of May) Treaty of Lorenzo with Ferdinand; he

sacrifices Slennato him . • • -275

XXiT ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE-

A. D.

14^3^1492.

U89.

1492.

Page

(12th of April) Changefi in 1.4e Constitution of Florence
to augment the Power of Lie Medici . . - S75

(28th of July) The Turks at Otranto; 3d of December,
Peace of Sixtus IV. with the Florentines • . S76

Anarchy at Rome under the PontiBcates of Sixtus IV.

and Innocent VIII. . ... -276

Talents, Character, and Conduct of I/orenzo de* Medici j
Conspiracy in Romagna - - . . .277

G. Savonarola arrived at Florence} Reform of thePiag.

/toni - - * - - 278

Lorenzo sick, asks Absolution from Savonarola, who
refuses it; he dies, the 8th of April . . .279

CHAP. XIII.

INVASION OF ITALY BY CHAKLFS Villi —- PIEIRO, SON OF
LORENZO De’ MEOICl, DRIVEN OUT OF FLORENCE. — REVOLT
AND WAR OF PISA. — POLITICAL AND RELIGIOUS REFORM OF
iAVONAHOLA AT FLORENCE. — HIS DEATH. 1492—1498.

The Independence of Italy must necessarily fall with the
Loss of Liberty - - - . -380

Princes could no longer make Use of the Enthusiasm of
the People f^r their Defence - - - - 280

The Italian Militia brave; but terrified by the Ferocity
of the Transalpine People . > . 281

- All the Provinces of France and Spain united at this
Period under two separate Moiiarchs . .282

Newly acquired Power of the Emperor, of the Swiss,
of the Turks; Pretensions of France to Naples • 283

1494. (August) Entry of Charles VIII. into Italy; the States

of Lombardy favour him .... 283
Pietro I] de' Medici at Florence; his Alliance with the
King of Naples .... . . 284

Alexander VI. at Rome; Ferdinand at Naples; his Son
Alphonso succeeds him, on the 25th of January • 285
Charles VIII. arrives before Ssrzana; Pietro de' Medici
delivers to him the Fortresses of the Florentines < 285
(19th of November) The Medici driven out of Florence,
and the norentines from Pisa . . .286

(17th of November) Charles V11L at Florence; he breaks
his Faith with the florentinsS; he treats with them . 287

1495. (21st of FeAsruary) Charles Master of the Kin^om of

Napi^ without having given Battle . . .288

League to force the French to leave Italy; dth ^of July,
Battle of Fomovo ..... 299

(22d of October) Charles returns to France; the French
again lose all Italy .... -289

ANALYTICAL ANB CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. XXV

• A. D.

liSQ-im.

•149S.

• PaRB

All the Tranealp^B Nationa begio to exeicise Authority
over Italy f * - - . - - 2S0

Three Parties equally balanced at Florence; Formation
of the Council General . - - *291

Influence of Savonarola, rcUgiouB and political Frophn
and Reformer - . . . . .SOI

Irritation of Pope Alexander VT. against Savonarola • 202
Challenge of a Franciscan to Savonarola to pass together
through a burning Pile ... . S90

(17th of April) Scaflhid prepared atFlorence; tempestuous
Ilain prevents the Trial by Fire - > * 21)4

Savonarola, abandoned by the People and condemned by
th« Pope, is burnt alive, on the 23d of May • • 2[G

CHAP. XIV.

IllE FRtNTH MASTERS OF MILAN ANli GENOA,-THE .SPANIARF'l

OF NAPLES. — THE GONFALONIER SOHERINI AT FLOHEKl'E.-

COKtiUKST OF Fl.SA. ~ LEAGUE OF CAMMRAY AGAINST VKMUE.

— THE MEDICI RE-ESTAbMSHED AT FLOSENCE. 1499—1512.

The Transalpine Nations coiftinue to pillage Italy till
they entirely destroy her Prosperity . -295

149B. Louis XII. succeeds Charles VIII.; his Pretensions to

the Duchy of Milan ; Sforza abandoned - ' 29G

^ 14.90. The Venetians attacked by the Turks; form an Alliance

with the French against Sforza ... .297

The Florentines carry on the War timidly against Pisa;

the Pope forms an Alliance with the French . 29ft

(13th of August) Entry of the French into the Milanese,
which they subjugate, as well as Genoa . . - 29ft

1500. (February) Sforza recalled to Lombardy; he is besieged

at Novara and made Prisoner ... . 299

1301. Treaty of Grenada; Partition of the Kingdom of Naples

between the French and Spaniards - . . 300

1502. The French quarrel with the Spaniards; they lose the

Kingdom of Naples in 1503 .... 301

1504. The French Masters of Lombardy; the Spaniards of
the Two Sictliei; the Germans called into the Ve.
netian States by Louis XIL . . . 302

1507. (7th of February) Insurrection at Genoa against the

French, whDi>iaUte the Capitulation . - 303

Genoa subdued and punished; Revotntmofl in the.States
* of the Church ... . . 303

Consequences of the War between Florence and Pisa;
Obscurity and Decline of Sienna and Lucca - 904

XJCTl ANALYTICAL AND CBRONOIA>GICAL TABLE.

A. D.
1502.

1509.

#

1199—1303.

1508.

1509.

1510.

1511.

1512.

Page

(16th of August) The FloreMines nameSoderini Gonfa.

lonier for Life - . S05

f^thof June) Pisa again subdued by theFlorentineSj who
are obliged to purchase the Consent of Trance and
Spain ..... d06

Disastrous War between the Turks and Venetians . 306
Conquests of the Venetians in Romagna; their (Quarrel
with Julius H. . - . . -307

(10th of December) League signed at Cambray against
Venice ... , . -’308

(14th of May) Battle of Aignadel, lost by the Venetians;
all the Terra Firma of the Venetians invaded by
the Confederates .... 309

(S4th of February) The Pope, disgusted with his Allies,
grants Absolution to the Venetians - . .311

The Pope causes th£ French to be attacked by all their
former Allies, in order to drive them out of Lorn,
bardy - - . . - 311

The Pope experiences Reverses; he forms a powerful
League against the French . - . -312

Victory obtained by Gaston de Foix; he is killed
while gaining, the Battle of Ravenna, on the Uth of
April - ... - 313

(June) The French driven out of Italy by the Swiss,
Germans, Spaniards, and Venetians - . 314

(August) Ent)^ of the Spaniards into Tuscany, led by
the Medici; Pillage and Massacre at Prato - . 315

(3l6t of August) Revolution at Florence, which re-esta¬
blishes the Power of the Medici - - .315

CHAP. XV.

CALAMITIES WITH WHICH TU£ FRENCH, SPANIARDS, AND GER¬
MANS OVKRW’HELM ITALY. — PILLA GE AND KUIN OF ALL THE
GREAT CITIES. — OPPRESSION OF THE ITALIAN NATION, AKU
LOSS OF ITS INDEPENDENCE. 1513—1530.

15L3. (2l8t of February) Death of Julius IT., who attempts

in vain to drive the Barbarians out of Italy - . 317

The Reputation of Leo X. little merited; his Levity
and Inconsistency - . . . - 317

The Power of Leo X. unites all the States of the Church
to the Florentine States ... -318

Conspiracy at Florence punished; municipal Liberty
destroy^ in the States of the Church . - - 319

The Republic of Venice ruined by theWarsof the League
of Cambray .... . -319

ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. XXVU

A. D. - * Pago

1514. War had becomemore atrocious with the Prioress of

Civilisation I. . . . . . $20

1513 (Slth of March) Treat; of Alliance between Venice and.

Louis XII. againstthe Germans ^ S21

The French beaten at the Riotta on the 6th of Jup^.
new Calamities of the Venetians . ' '.^1

1515. Francis I. in Lombardy, 13th of September j terrible

Battle at Marignaro, againat the Swiss - . 322

The French regain Possession of the Milanese, and*

* treat with the Pope - . . - , 323

(13th of August) Treaty of Noyon, which puts an End
to the Wars of the League of Cambray - - - 524

1519. Sur#egsiv8 Extinction of the House of Medici in the

legitiroate Branches • • - - -325

1521. (Sth ofMay) LeoX. forms an Alliance with Charles V.

to attack the French, and dies, the 1st of December - 326

1522. (Dth of January)£lectioiriof aFlemislxBope, Adrian VI.;

all Italy subdued by the Transalpine Nations , - 326

(26th of May) The French 'lose all Lombardy; SOth of
May, Genoa pillaged by the Spaniards - -327

1523. (18th of November) Clement VII. succeeds Adrian VI.;

his Difficulties and his Faults - . . . 328

1524. (28th of October) Francis I. besieges Pavia; he is made

Prisoner there the 24th of February, 1525 - . 329

1525. Secret League between the Italians proposed by

6 . Moroni to recover their Independence - 330

The Crown of Naples offered to Pescara, in Concert with
France, which renounces its Claims on Italy . 331

The Confederates betrayed by the Court of France and
Pescara; their Projects defeated - - - 332

1526. (14lh of January) Treaty of Madrid to set Francis T. at

liberty , new Intrigues .... 332

The Duke of Milan besieged in his Castle by the
Spaniards; atrocious Cruelty of the latter - - 333

1527. (30th of January) Bourbon, at the Heart of Spanish and

German Adventurers, marches oh Rome - - 334

(Gth of May) Home taken by assault; Bourbon is killed;

horrible Pillage - - . - . 334

The Pillage to which Rome was abandoned for the Space
of nine Months; the Inhabitants put to the Torture - 335
(August) Another French Army in Italy; Pillage of
Pavia; the Pope joins the French, on the 10th of
November ..... 336

1528. Lautrec enters the Kingdom of Naples with this Army,

and blockades the Capital .... 337
(30th of August) Destruction of the French Army by
Sickness, and by the Spaniards . . -338

* (I2th of September) Revolution at Genoa ; Andrea Doria
re-establishes the Republic • ... 339

ANALYTICAL AND CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE.

A. D. Pa^e

15S9. , Ne^ttations for the TermUliition of the War j SOth of
June, Treaty of Barcelona, between the Emperor and
Pope - - - - .339

(5th of August) Treaty of Cambray, by which France
gives up Italy ...... 340

1529,1590. Treaties of the Emperor with all the Princes of Italy . 340
1590. (32d of February and 24th of March) Charles V. receives

at Bologna the Crowns of Lombardy and of the
Empire - ■ - - -341

CHAP. XVI.

OPPRESSION OF ITALY DURING THE LA.ST THREE CENTURIES. -

.SUCCESSIVE FALL OF ALL THE REPUBLICS. ~ TBEIB LAST
CONVULSIONS.

A. D.

1527.

1529.

♦-

1530.

1331—1537.

1552.

1555.
1556

1556,

1547.

1688.

Page

The Independence of Italy would have been advan-
tageous to France; the Error of France gave Italy
to Charles V. . « - • S41

The Misfortunes of the Italians become now only
Episodes in the History of other Nations - - 342

(17th of May) Florence on the News of the Taking of
Rome, expe^ed the Medici > - ... 343

The Florentines, in their Danger devote themselves to
Arms, which they had till then neglected - - 343

(14th of October) Florence invested by the Annies
which Charles V. lends to Clement VII. . . 344

Frequent Sallies of the Florentines; Projects of Ferrucci
for their Deliverance ... . . 345

(14th of July) to the 2d of August, March of Ferrucci;

his Defeat and Death at Gavinana ... 346
(12th of August) Capitulation of Florence; shame-
lessly violated ..... 347

Tyranny of Alexander de* Medici; he dies by Assassin¬
ation ; Cosmo the first Grand Duke . . 347

(11th of August) The Siennese introduce the French
into their City; Cosmo I. attacks them • - 348

(2d of April) Capitulation of Sienna after atrocious
Cruelties committed by the General of Cosmo . 349
Burlamachi of Lucca attempts to restore liberty to tbe
Tuscan Cities; his Execution . . SM

(9th of November) Martiniin Law, which reduced the
Aristocracy of Lucca, overthrown through the In¬
fluence of the French,25th of December, 1801 ■ 350

(Sd of January) Conspiracy of Fleschi at Genoq. against
the Aristrocracy founded by Andrea Dorla - > 951

(Ist of April) Ctmiplncy at Genoa of JuUbs C^ar Va.
cbero; his Death . . . 352

ANAl^YTICAIi AND CURONUDODIOAL TABIiE.

xxix

•A. D.
158A

1746.

1797.

1530-1600.
IGOl—1645.
1618.

1645—1699.
1700—1798.
I7ia— 1796.

1796.

1797.

1805.

■ Page

(18th of May) Geloa bombarded by the Fleet of I*ouis
XIV. I - - .3552

Corruption of the Genoese Aristocracy} frequent Re.

volts ; Corsica ceded to France, in 1768 . . 35S

(5th of December) An Insurrection of the unarmed Feo.

pleat Genoa drives out the Austrians # . 354

(6th of June) Convention of Monfebello, which giv’es
Equality to the Genoese in the Ligurian Republic . 355
The Senate of Venice, aware of its Weakness, abstains
from all War, except against the Turks . -356

The Venetians, to liberate themselves from the House
of Austria, form an Alliance with the Protestants . 357
Conspiracy of the Marquis of Bedmar against Venice
He seems to hide a Project of freeing Italy from the
Spanish Yoke . ... 3S7

Two Wars maintained by the Venetians against the
Turks - - . . 358

Corruption of the Venetian Aristocracy; its last War
with the Turks - - - - 360

The Name of Republic stained by the most odious Ty.

ranny at Venice - ... 361

The Senate of Venice permits the Austrians to make
their Territory the Theatre of War . -361

(17th of April) The Senate sound the Tocsin for tt)e
Massacred the French even in the Hospital . . 362

(3d of May) France declares Wfr against Venice, which
is conquered, and ceded to Austria - . . 362

(36th of December) Venice restored to the Kingdom of
Italy, and to Liberty • - . 3£3

The Regeneration of 1796 restores more Liberty to Italy
than it lost in 1405 ... . 363

The Coalition of 1814 placed all Italy again under Ae
Yoke which the Nation most detested . . 364

The Italians have, since that Period, repeatedly
triumphed over their own Tyrants; foreign Force
alone enchains them .... 364
There will be no lasting Peace in Europe until the Na-
lion which was the first to become free shall have re¬
covered its Independence ... 3C5

INDEX

A.

A(»mbt Giedir, rfand vizier to
Mahomet II, 2757

Achmet III., pope, 359.

Adolphu') of Nassau, 105.

Adrian IV, pope, 42.

Adrian VI., pope, 027. Death of,
32H.

Agostino Capponi, 319.

Aignadel, battle of, 309.

Aix.la-Chapelle, peace of, 3.5.5.

Alberic, governor of Treviso, 88.

Albert of Austria, 105.

Albert, marquis d’Este, succeeds
his brother in the sovereignty of
Ferrara, to the prejudice of his
nephew Obizzo, whom he caused
to be beheaded with his mother,
192

Alberto Scotto, lord of Placentia,
124.

Albornoz, cardinal, 159.

Alen^on, dui-hess of, 331.

Alexander HI., pope, 43. Con-
tracts an alliance with William
the Norman, king of the Two Si-
cilies; and arms the whole of
southern Italy against Frederick
Earbarossa, 44. Escai)e3 from
Rome; after his escape the Ro¬
mans take the oath of fidelity to
Frederick Barbarossa, 4d. Ar.
rives in Venice to open negotia¬
tions with the emperor, 51.

Alexeniler IV., pope, 94.

Alexander V., pope, 212.

Alexander VI., pope, 284. De¬
nounces Savonarola as a heretic,
and prohibits him from preach,
ing, 292. Desfiatches judges from
Rome vfith orders to condemn

’ Savonarola, with his two friends,
to death, 295. Enters into an
alliance with Louis XI1. of
France, 298. Death of, 304.

Alexander de’Medici, receives a re-
script frompthe emperor, which
gave to Florence a constitution
nearly monarchical, 347. Death
of, 348.

Alexandria, a city founded by the

league of Lombardy in honour of
pope Alexander, 40.

Alphonso the Magnanimous, king
of Aragon, 214. Death of, 250.

Alphonso 11. of Naples,'abdicates
in favour of his snn, 288,

Alphonso d’Este, 340,

Amalfi, illustrious for the found,
ation in the Holy Land of the
hospital and military order of
St John of Jerusalem, for the
invention of the compass, and
the preservation of the conduits
of Justinian, surrendered to the
Normans in 113], 28.

Ambrosio Contarini, 257.

Amedeus VIII., duke of Savoy.
216.

Amiens, the treaty of, 336.

Ancona, marquis of, 52.

Andrea Dandolo, doge of Venice.
62.

Andrea di Pisa, IDS.

Andrea de Pazzi, 251.

Andrea Lampugnani, 266.

Andrea Gutti, 307.

Andrea Doria, proclaims the repub¬
lic, and re-establishes once fnore
thelVeedom of Genoa, 3^. Death
of, 351.

Angelo, Michael, 544.

Annibal Bentivoglio, 232. ;

Antoine Jaffier, 3.^8.

Antonio Fisiraga, 123.

Antonio da Vulterra, ^70.

Antonin Grimani, 307.

Antonio Trivulzio, 230.

Antonio de Leyva, 332. Surprises
the Count St Pol At Landriano,
and makes him prisoner, with all
til e principal officers of tile French
army, 33M.

Antoniotto Adomi, doge of Genoe,
conlers on Charles vI. of France
the signoria of Genoa, 187.

Aquila, the battle of, 215.

Armagnac, count de, 195.

Arnold of Brescia, an eloquent
monk, the disciple of Abelaid,
preaches a twofold reform in the
religious and political orders:

. driven out of Italy by Pc^ Iiauw

ZM»EX.

si»'

cent 11.; recalled to Rome; burnt
alive before Che gate of the ca^itle >|
of St. Aneelo in 1155, 33.

Aator de* Manfredi, i!7K.

Aazo Visconti, lord of Milan, cedes
the government th John of Bohe>
mia, taking henceforth the title
ofhU Vicar only, 142. Death of,

B|ja<et 11., declares war against
Venice,

Baldusar Carducci, 343.

Baldinaccio degh Adimari, 149.

Baldwin, count of Handers, named
by the<bnisader 8 emperor bf Con.
itantinonle, fi 2

Balearic lilcs, the, conquered by
Che Pifiaiis from the Saracens in
Ills, 29.

BarbUnu, count of, fonns a military
company under . the name of
St,' George, iiUo which he ad.
mitted Italians onlv, 19 O.

Barnabas Visconti, 168 Forces the
two legates of the mpe to eat the
parchment, togetner with the
leaden srala and silken strings, on
which tlic bull Dfexcommunic^
tion against him was written, 174.
Carries on secret negotiations
with the holy sec; oRbrs to sacrU
flee to the church the republic of
Florence, 176. Divides his do-

' mlnioni amongst bis children;
Uirown into prison by hii nephew,
Gian peleasso, 1B9. Death of,

SS7.

Bkrtolomeo d’Alviano, 309.

Bayard the chevalier, 329

'Beatrice, wife of Charles of Anjou,
leads an grmy of 30,(JU0 men
Uirough-lbambardy, to aid her
husbandrlp hli entry into Sicily,
95

Bedmar, marGuls de, 357.

Benedetto, Alberti, placed at the
head of the republic of Florence,
186. Exiled from Florence, 187.

Benedict XI.. po^i endeavours to
reconcile the Bianchi and the
Nen*; hlsdeatli, 117

Benedict XII., pope, 143. His cha.
neter, li().

Benedict Xlll., pope, besieged in
tiU palace at Aviginan by the
troops of the king of France ; da.
flUres himte)/ ready to abdicate;
depoiedi^ Ure oecumenical ooun.
at Pua; retires to Aimiol,

funded by ■ Lombard

chief, Sa Divided into tbtree
principahtiea, 37.

Beno de (^zzadini, 81.

Bernardo Guadagnl gMfalonier of
Florence, 235.

Bernardo Nardi surprises the gate
of the Prato, makes himself maa.
ter of the pUbiic palace, arrests
the KIoreolinepoclesta,3^. Taken
prisoneri:^he governor, and be.
headed asiU six of his accom¬
plices,

Bernardo Bandini, 270.

Bertrand de Poiet, cardinal. ISO.
145. ^

Bianca, daughter of the dul^ of
Milan; marriageoA with jPraa.

cesco Sfnrza, 2^.

Bianchi and Neri, the factions of,
ll.*!.

Biandrate, count de, offbrs hireselT
as a m^iator between the Mu
lanese and Frederick Barbuxwva;
obtains terms not unfavourable to
the Milanese, 38. •'

Bocra degli Abati, 86 .

Boccaccio, character of his writangi,
153.

Boccanegra, doec of Genoa, 146.

Bologna, flourishing state of, in the
time ofthe Roman empire,?. Re.-
public of, 143.

Boniface VIII,, pope, his character,
106. Endeavours toaugraent the
power of the Guelphs; arrested
by Philip le Bel in his palaco of
Anagni, and died a few weeks af.
terwards of rage and humiliation,
11 ^.

Boniface IX , pope, S06.

Bonne, duchess of Savoy, r^ent of
Milan, 372. Deprived of the re¬
gency, 273.

Bonmvet, admiral, 328.

Burso, duke of Fensra, 264.

Botta, Adorno, marquess, 354.

Boucirault, onarshal, 206.

Buurbon, the constable de, joins
the ImpeHalists, 329. Receives
from Charles V. the coottnand of
his forrei in Italy, 334. His
death, 334.

Rraccio da Montane, placed by the
Florenlina at the head of their
army, ill. Made governor of
Abrund by Alj^onio, king of
Aragflh; mortaJly wouadoi In
the battle of Aquila, Sl5.

Branealeone d'Andolo, a Bologneee
noble, called by the Rarmans to
the govemmeni 06 their republic
with the title ot senatoar. 81-
Establish ei^ by terror, seeanty in
the streets of Rom^ 82.

Brescia, the nege of, 79.

INDEX,

» ■ I

J

BAnvieiiio, a Dominiun Mar» a
and ftiaciple of Savonarola,
SSfi. Condemned to death ; burnt
allre on the ?3d ofMa^ 14^8, 394.
Buimo da Do&ra, 94

C.

133. Death

Can' Grande della i
of, 139.

Cambr«v, the league of, 308.

Campo r'ormio, the treaty of, 362.

C^tacusene, the emperor, ih6.

Ca^ia, flourUhmK elate of, in the
dboc of the Rotnan empire, 7.

Carlo Zeno, IBI.

Carlo Vuconti, 256.

Caitmcdo Caitracanl, a Ghibeline
noble, thrown into a ciuttgeou by
Uguccione d&Fa^giuola, 132 De¬
livered by the inaufsentt, and
prodaimiM Lord of Lucca, 133.
Hie character and person, 134.
Makes war with Floreni'c •, re¬
turns to Lucca with triumphal
pomp, J36. Intercedes with I<auie
of Bavaria for the liberation^ of
Galcazio Visconti, 137. Aecom-^
panies L^iuia of Bavaria to Home;
made senatdT of that l ily ; cornea
the imperial sword at the corona¬
tion, 133. Death of, 139.

Caterina Cornaro, 2.>8.

Catherine Visconti, duchesj of
Milan, 2UU, Her death, 2U1.

Catherine Sforsa, 277 Marriage of,
With Giovanni de' Medici, inn.

Catterino Zeno,

Cesar Borgia, son of Pope Alex,
ander V]., 29i». Created duke of
Romagna, 3UX Death of, 304.

Celustine V,, pope, 1U6.

Charles, king of the Franks, re¬
ceives from the po{ie the name of
Charlemagne, or Charles the
Great; death of, IS.

Cbarlci, count of Aiyjou, receives
the crown of Sicily irom the
pope i elected senator by the Ro¬
man republic, 93. Enters Naples
at the head of 30,000 men, 9d.
Receives flrom the Florentines
the ugnoria of Florence for ten
years, 97. Named imperial vicar
in Italy duritm the inlarregnum
of the empire, 98. Summoned by
■ Luuls to ican the crusade, 99.
Obliged by the pope to renounce
the bile of vicar imperial and
senator of i^me, lOa Depnved
of the crown of SiciJy^Od.
Death of, 104. ^

Charles IL, of Naples, 104. Hid
character and death, KG.

Charles de Valmf, 116. .

CharlesIV.,of.^nemia,lS8. Callod
by the pope king of the prleeti,
1^. 'Enters Tuscany: encourages
Che malecontents orcbe r^MibUca
of Pisa and Sienna to oi^rtbrow
the exlsliim govemiAeiit, 18B.
Returns to Lucca, 17& RoMvea.
from the doge the tigbOfU' oi
Genoa, 187.

Charles da Duraxso, 179

Charles VI., of France, 179.

Charles Vtl., of France, 257.

CharlesVIlI., ofFrdice, 282. liw
vailes Italy; enters Florence. 287.
Declares himself content with the
subsidy otTered by the republic;
departs from Floreace ^ enters
Rome, 2286. Returns to France:
death of, 289

Charles V.. of Germany^ 3S4. Signs
at Barcelona a treaty of perpetual
alliancoaivith the pope, He.
reives l^om the pope at ^logns.
the two crowns of Lombardy, and
the empire, 341.

Charles, of Austria, 361.

Christian, archbishop of Mentz, 47.

Clement IV , pope. 95. Death of,
98

Clement V., pope, 117. Death of.

itHJ.

Clement VI., pope, 159. Cedes the
fief of Bologna to the archbUhop
of Milan, on condition of recelv.
ing from him an annual tribute
of 12,0UU florins, 165.

Clement Vll., 206. His cha.
racter, 328.

Cola di Hienzo, fe^etUblishM^rc-
publican government at IfnDe,
154. Hii character, 15^ Ap¬
pointed by the Romans the pope's
vicar, ion. Death of, 157.

Conrad, the Salic, of Franconia,
filled the throne of Italy Otm
IfXH to ii)39, 16. Puts an end to
the war between the cllit* and
the nobles, by a constitution which
IS considered the basis of feudal
law, 17

Conrad III., of Germany, 33.

Conrad IV., of Germany, 9U.

Conratl V., of Germany, 60.

Conradin, son of Conrad V., of Ger¬
many, aiiputes the crownof SicOy
withCbarlesof An)ou,96. Tbken
prisoner by ium after the bottle
of Tagliacona, and behesuled In
the market-pMce at Naples, 96.

Coostlio di Credfloj^ a secret coua.
cil appointed by tim porUamcttt of
Milan to assist the gOTcnisQCiil,g2L

CoosUnce, peace of, 5SL

Constance, sole helroM of Nor-

B B

INDEX.

370

man ; marriage of, with
Henry VI., emperor of Germany,
54i

Constantinople, taken by the Turks
ui 1453,

Cortona, cardinal de, 343.

Cosmo de* Medici, 334. His lo4e
of literature, 325. Condemned
to exile by the balia of Florence,
336. Recalled A-om exile, 327.
Seeks to become prince of Flo¬
rence, 333. Becomes daily more
powerful at Florence, 335. Death
of, 245.

Cosmo de’ Medici, duke of Flo.
rence, 348.

Crema, siege, of, 40.

D.

Daimbert, archblsho
Dante, 108. Exiled 1 his coun.
try; 117.

Dino Compagni, the historian, 115.

Eccelino II. of Romagna, 67.

Eccelino HI. of Romagna, placed
by Frederick II. at the head of
the Ghibelinejparty, 68. Named
by the members of the republic
captain of the people, 69. Ob¬
tains from Frederick ll. the ex.
elusive government of the Ve.
ronese marches, 74. His cha-
rac^r, 89. His death, 90.

Egidlo, Albornoz, 157.

ETiie, princess, sister of Napoleon
Bonaparte, Invested with theprin-
cipality of Lucca, 350.

I^te, marquis d', 71. Joins the
party of Beatrice, wife of Charles
of Anjou, 97.

Eugenlui IV., pope, 337.

Fabrizio Maramaldi, 346.

Facino Cane, 201.

Farinata degli Uberti, joins Man¬
fred, king of the Two Sicilies, 85,
Repels with indignation the pro.

. Msitions of the ambassadors of
IhjB and Sienna, 87. Immortal¬
ised by Dante as the saviour of
Florence, 88.

Fodinand I. of Naples, his cha-
rifiter, 344. Signs a treaty with
Lorenio de’ Medici, 375. Death

‘FnJi^&d IL bf Naples, 389.

Ferdinand Of Aragon, marriage 6.',
with Isabella of uaatile, 283.
Ferdinand the Catholic, SCO. Hia
treachery, 901.

Ferdinand of Austria, 931.
Ferdinand de Gonzaga, 3^

Filippo Maria, count of Pavia, £00.
Filippo Maria Visconti, third duke
of Milan, his character, SIS. Ac.
complishes the conquest of Lom¬
bardy, 314. Makes alliance with
Joan II. of Naples, and Louis III,
of Anjou, 315. Death of, S2S.
Filippino Doria, 3S7. •

Horence, ther^ublic of, itsjudlcjal
institutions, 83, The constitutnm
of, 135. State of, in 1432, 320.
’Tomovo, battle of, 289.

Francesco Gambacorta. 1^.
Francesco da Gonzaga, lord of Man-
tua, in a paroxysm of rage and
jealousy, causes hia wife to be be¬
headed, 192.

Francesco daCarraraflord of Padua,
179. Accepts the proffered al¬
liance of Gian Galeazzo Visconti,
191. Re-established in the so-
vereignty of Padua in 1300,203.
Carries on a war with V»iice
with the utmost valour, 204.
Thrown into prison Ind strangled,
with his two sons, by order of the
Council of Ten, 205.

Francesco Carmagnola, a Pied-
montese seddier, placed by the
duke of Milan at the head of his
armies, 214. Excites thejealousy
of the duke by the influence he
obtained over the soldiera, 316.
Basely deceived by th e Venetians,
and executed between the two
columns on vhe square of St.
Mark, in 1433, 219.

Franceschetto Cibo, son of pope In-.

nocent VIII., 276.

Francesco Acciaiuolo duke of
Athens, 354.

Francesco Foscarl doge of Venice,
316. His warlike ambition, 831.
t>epc»ed in 1458, and died while
listening to the tolling of the bell
for the ineuguraticm of his suc¬
cessor, 243.

Francesco Piccinino, SS7.
FrBncescode'PBzzi,868. FVanceseo,
Rlnaldo, and Jacopo, execution
of, 271.

Francesco Balviati archbishop of
Pisa, 269. Executionof, 27L
Francesco Ferrucci, 345. Death of,
346.

FrancMco Burlaroachi goofaloner
of Lucca, 349. Beheaded by
order of the emperor Churies V.,
330.

INDEX.

’FrancftfcoSforiatucctedlBhiBfather '
in the command of nil army> 215.
Forms an intimate ftiendship
with Cosmo de’ Medici, 227- En¬
ters with his army the service of
the republic of Milan, 231. His
perfidy, S3S. Gains a great and
last victory over the Venetians at
Caravaggio,254. i^oclaimedduke
of Milan, 235. Death, of, 250.

Francis II, of Carrara, 193.

Francis of Apulia, a ftlar sent to
Florence by Mie pope to preach
{gainst Savonarola, 293.

Francis 1. of Ffbnce renews the

* treaty of alliance with Venice,
322. Signs a treaty of peace with
the Swiss, which took the name

. of “ Paix perpetuelle." £n.
ters Lombardy, makes himself
master of Milan, 329. Contracts
the treaty of Amiens with Henry
Vlll. of England, 336.

Francois de Bourbon enters T^om.
bardv with a French army, 338.

Frederick Barbarossa, duke of Swa-
bia, receives the crown of Italy
from the Germanic dietassembled
at Frankfort, 33. Enters Italy
with a powerful German army,
34. Plunders and burns the towns
of Chieri and Asti, 35. Crowned
at Rome by pope Adrian IV. 36
Summons his vassals at the feast
uf Pentecost, 1158, to compel
the submission of Italy, 37. Or.
ders the people of Lodi to rebuild
^eir town, 38. a treaty with
the Milanese. 38. Assembles a
new diet of the kingdom of Italy
at Boltina, and places Milan
under the ban of the empire, 39.
Raises the siege of Crema; his
cruel treatment of the inhabit¬
ants, 40. Raises the siege of
Milan, 41. Returns to hta Ger¬
man dominions, 42. Re-enters
Italy, 43. Returns to Germany
to levy an army; marches to¬
wards Rome, 44. Defeats the
Romans with great slaughter, and
makes himsmf master of the
Xieonine city, 45. Leaves Rome,

46. Obliged to suspend for five
yean his efibrts to subdue Italy.

47. Re-enters Italy at the head
of a formidable army, 49. Medi¬
tates a new attack on Milan, 50.
D^erminei to think seriously of
peace; opens new negotiations
with the pope, 51. Concludes a
truce of SIX years with the Lom.
bards; signs the peace of Con.
staace,A2. Hacea hinuelf at the
bead of the third crusade which

371

he led into the Eaat^ylahd, and
died the lOCh of June, 1190, of a
stroke of apoplexy, 55.

Frederick II. of Germany, 59.
Crowned at Aix>.la-Chapelle, by
the German Ghibellnes, king of
the Romans and Germans, 60.
p.eceiveB ftom the pope the crown
of the empire; his love of litera¬
ture; founds schools and univer-
sities. 65. Accused of having
written a book against the three
revelations of Moses, Jesus, and
Mahomet, entitled “ De Tribus
Impostoribusmarriage of, with
Yolanda de Lusignan; exctrni-
mumcated by the pope, 66. Re¬
establishes his power in southern
Italy, 68. Obliged to employ two
years in settling his affairs in
Germany; returns to Italy with
31)00 German cavalry, 69. Raises
the siege of Brescia, 70. Excom¬
municated a secona tima by the
pope,71. Solicits tobereconciled
iothechurch; reAisedbythepop«

* and declared an enemy oi re¬
ligion, 72. Opposes all his strength
of soul against the sentence pro.
nounced against him by the coun.
cil of Lyons, 73 Becomes sus-
picious and cruel; confides Oer.
many to his son Conrad, 74. Re-
sumes his arms at a moment when

^ he was least disposed, 75. Raises
the siege of Parma, 76. Death
of, 78.

Frederick, illegitimate son of Fre.
derick II,, called .by him king of
Antioch, 75.

Frederick III. of Austria, van.
quished by Louis of Bavaria and
made prisoner at Muhidort. 129.
Refuses to acknowledge Fran,
cesco Sforza, duke of Milan, 236.

Frederick da Moatefeltro, duke of
Orbino, 272.

Frederick, king of Naples, £98
Death of, 301.

French revolution of 1792, 560,

Gabriel Maria Visconti, 206. Exe-
cution of, 207.

Gabrmo Fondiria, 201.

Galeazzo Visconti, lord of Milan,
131. Deprived of his sovereignty
and cast into a dungeon together
with his sons and hii two bro-
then by Louis of Bavaria; IM
berated at the intercesfiem of
Castrucck), 137.

Galeauo Sfona, 250i Hlf dhanc.^
B O 3

372

TKHKX.

ter, 263. Auatihiated while pro-
cfMiiig to the church of St Ste<
phen in 147& 266.

Galeawo San Iwrerino, 298.

Oaleotto. MsnflredL lord of Faenzs.
278.

Quton de F(^x, duke of Nemours,
dU

Gauls, the, iavade Italy, and com¬
plete the de><tn]ction ot' the Lorn,
bafid monarchy, 11.

Gaulder de Brienne, duke of
Athena, U7. His character, 149.

George Castriot, S36.

Gworg^de Ffundsberg, 333. Death

G^betlnes, the; conspiracy of, to
recover their power in Florence,
d5. Enter Florence, and imme-

I diately abolish the popular go-
yernment, 87. Obtain the as.
cendency in I^cmibardy, 94

Ghiberto da Correggio, lord of
Parma, 124

Giacomo del Verme, 193.

Gtea Maria Visconti, duke of Ml<
Ian, 200. HU ferocious charac¬
ter. 20L Assassinated by some
Milanese nobles on the ISth of
May 1412, 202.

Gian Battista da Montesecco, 270.

Glau Luigi de Fieschi, 3ol.

Giannettino Doria, 351,

Giano della Bei la, 113.

Gilbert de Montpenaier, viceroy of
Nai^es, 289.

Gino Capponi, 208.

Giorgio Scab, execution of, 186.

Giorgio Lampugnani, 230.

Giotti revives the art of painting in
Italy, 108.

Giovanni Villani, 108.

Giovan di Oallura, chief of the
Guelphs of FUa and Sardinia,
111 .

Giovanni Agnello, 170.

Giovanni da Vignati, 201.

Giovanni Bentivogiio, death of, 19S.

Giovanni Oambacorta, 207.

Giovanni de* Medici, 2S4. 249. Re.
ceives a cardinal's hat from the

Giovanni de' Paai, 2^.

Girolamo Gentile, 265.

Girolamo Olgiatl, 266. Put to the
torture for the murder of Ga-
leaxzo Sfbraa, 267.

Girolamo Kiario, 268.

Girolamo Savonsroia, a Dominican
monk of Ferrara, and eloquent
v oratM’i preacheaadoublereform,
> reHffious imd political, at Flo.
I rence, 278. Sent fOr by Lorenzo
I de' Medici when he was dying j

reftlies to wive him Mwerfution,^
279. Pronuses the miraculous
protection of the Divinity, for
the reform of the church, 291.
Limits hU efforts to the reitor-
ation of discipline; the reform,
ation of the morals of the clergy;
and the recall of priests to the
practice of the Gospel pracepts,.
292. Denounced as a heretic by
the pope, and interdicted from
preaching, 292. Holds up to

f iublic rmrobation the scanda-
ous conduct of the pope, 293. *'
Condemned td death by the-v
judges despatched by the pope
and burnt alive, on the 23a ofj
May, im, 295.

Giuliano de* Medici, 252. Death
of, 270.

Guiliano della Rovere, 268.

Gnnzaga, marquis of Mantua, 289.
GnnzaTvo di Cordova, 300.

Grandella, battle of, 96.

Gregory IX,, ^po, 66. Cuivokes
a council at Rome of all the pre.
lates of Christendom, 71. Death
of, 72.

Gregory X., pope, 99.

Gregory XL, pope, his character,
174. His death, 176.

Gregory XII., pope, 2()S. Deposed
by the oecumenical council at
P isa; retires to Aragon, 2U9.
Grenada, treaty of, 300.

Guelphs and Ghibeiloes, union of
the, 45.

Guido Novella, 97.

Guido de Montefeitro, 101.

Guido della Torre, governor of
Venice, 124.

Guiscardo Pietro Santa, podeslk of
Florence, 84.

Gulieimo della Scale, 204.

R

Harmodius, 262.

g assan Beg, 256.

enry II. of BaTarta, 16.

Henry III. of Italy, 17. Obliges
the people to renounce the right
they had in the eleetion of popes,
18.

Henry IV. of Italy, cwapelled by
Hildebrand to do penance before
him in the open coiot of Canosa,
20 .

Henry V, of Italy, 21.

Henry VI,, emperor of OermanY,
marriage of. with Constance, Mie
heiress of the Konaan kings, 54.
His d^kh, 55,

INDEX

. nrjrpprince,fon of Frederick II,
68. Death 69. «

Henry Ill, of England, 95.

Henry VII. of Luxembourg, hu
character, ISl. Crowned in the
churrh of St. Ambroie, 124^ Re.
ceivea the gotden crown of the
empire from the hands of the
tom’s legate, in the church of St.
John deLateran, 127. Death of,
128.

HenrjVIII. of England, 614. Con.
traRa the treaty of Amiens with
Francis 1. of France, for the de¬
liverance of theiKipe, S36.

S enrv, duxe of Brunswick, 368,
ensius, illegitimate son of Frede¬
rick II., called by him king of
Sardinia, and imperil vicar in
Lombardy, 75. Taken prisoner
by the Bolognese, and con lined in
the palace of thepodestk for life,

77.

Hercules I. duke of Ferrara, 264.
Heribert, archbishop of Milan, in.
vents a car in imitation of the
ark of alliance, and causes it to be
adopted in Milan, 22.

Hildebrand, born at Soano in Tus.
cany; sent by his convent to
pursue his studies at Cluiiy, In
France; undertakes to reform the
church, 19. Prohibits the priests
from marrying: concentrates all
the power of the church in the
nope, 20. Ascends the paiml chair
In 107-'i, taking the name of Gre¬
gory VII., 21.

Honorius ill., pope, 64.

Honorius IV.. pope, 105.

Hugo de Mon^ada, S83.

against the church, 77. Entdrt
Milan on the death o&Fredeilck
11. with all thepomp of a triumph,
SI.

Inn^eiit VI., pope, 157. Death of;-^

Isabella of Castile, mmriage, of,
with Ferdinand of Aragon, SHI

IstriB and Dalmatia make sdttaDce
with Venice, 2S.

Italy, state of, in the middle Bge«,1.
Invaded by the French, Gennan,
and Spanish nations, 4. Popula¬
tion of, at the fall of the Roman
empire in the Afth century, 7.
Prosperous state of, during the
entire ages of Trsjan and the
Antonines, 9. Invaded by torba.
riana, 10. Invaded by the Ostro.
goths, under Theodoric, 10. In¬
vaded by the Gauls, 11. State of;
from the f<ill of the ancient Ro¬
man empire to the passing over
of the revived empire to the
Germans, 13. Government of,
towards the beginning of the
twelfth century, Review of,
fVom the invasion of Otho the
Great to the death of Frederlek,
78. Progress of the arts, sciences,
and literature in, 1(I8. R^ival
of letters in, 151. State of the
church in the Afteenth centory,
199. Threatened by the Turka,
241. Invaded by tharlee VllL
of France, SOS.

Tbrdiim, sultan, 35S
Innocent 11^ pope, S3.

Innocent III,, pope, his character';
founds the two mendicant orders
of Franciscans and Dominicans,
and conAdes to them the fearful
powers of the inquisition, which
be instituted, 61. Rouses the
ftnatics of France to exterminate
the Albigenses, 62. Death of, 64.
Innocent I v., 72. Opens in

the convent of ^ Just, at Lyons,
the council of the universal
church; obtains A-om them a sen.
tence ofexcoinmunication against
Frederick 11., 73. Sends the car.
dlnal Oetavlan degli Ubaldini to
the Guelph cities, to engage them'
topunue their victory,and punish
, the imperial party for their revolt

Jaoomo Piccinlnoi, 227.

Jacopo lie’ Bussolari, re.estabUslies
a republican government at Pa-
via, 1.54. Hit character, 157. His
death, 158

Jacopo Appiano, 194.

Jacopo Foscari, son of the doge of
Venice, 242. Death of, 243.

Jacopo Piccinino, 645.'

JacojK) de’ Paizi, 268. Execution of,

Ja^jHi Bracciolinl, execution of;

James IT. of Aruon, 133.

James III. de Lusignan, king of
Cyprus, 2->7.

James de Lusignan, ion of the
former, 857.

Jaquet, count de la Marche, 214.

JaquBs Pierre, 357. tP

Jerome Moroni, chancellor of the
duke of Milan, 330.

B B 3 t

374

INDEX.

Joan, wife of Andrew king: of Hun-
nry, cosaents to the murder of
her husband, and marries her
cousin Louis, the instigator of
in^ the murder, 160. Protects pope
Clement VII., 177. Eacommu.
nicated and deposed by pope Ur.
ban VI,, 176. Surrenders herself

/ toCharIesofDura 2 so,whocBUses
her to be smothered under a fea¬
ther bed, 179.

11., queen of Naples; her cha.
racter, 2lS. Her death, S29.

John da Procida, 102. Visits in dis¬
guise the Two Sicilies, to re-ani-
mate the zeal of the Ghibelines,
103.

John XXII,, pope, 12*'. His proflU
gate character, 130. Death of,
145.

John, king of Rohemia, 141.

John, archbishop of Milan, sue-
cet^B Luchino in the soyereignty
of Milan, 164. Receives from the
pope the def of Bologna, on con¬
dition of his paying him an an¬
nual tribute of 12,0(M florins, 165.
Death of, 166.

John Visconti da’ Oleggio, 165.

John Hawkwood, 170.

John XXIII., pope, deposed by the
council of Constance, 212.

John, king of Navarre, 243.

John, duke of Calabria, 244.

John Sobieski, king of Poland, 3.59.

Josaphat Barbaro, 2^77.

Julius II., pope, 304. His charac-

. ter, 306. Accomplishes a league

S ainat Prance, which was called
Dly, 312. Death of, 317.

Julius Cesar Vachero, execution
of, 352.

LadUlaus, king of Naples, takes
possession of nearly all the states
of the church, 209. Character of,
210. Death of, 212.

1-amba Doria, 1Z5.

Lando, count, 162.

Lautrec, marshal, periisU in reduc.
ing Naples by blockade, 337. His
death, 336.

III., pope, 18.

dk Perego, a Dominican A'iar,
67.

1^ X., pope} his reign and cha¬
racter, 318. Signs a treaty, by
vhioh he restores Parma and
Placentia to the French, .323. In¬
duces ^ancis 1 of France to sa.
criflee the liberties of the Gallican
churchj^l Refuses permission
to the florentlnes to re-establuh

their republic, 325. Death
326. 8

Leonardo della Rovere, 263.

Leopold, emperor, 359.

Lionel, duke of Ferrara, 264.

Lombards, the, invade Italy, and
destroy the monarchy of the Os¬
trogoths, 10. Found a ci^ in
northern Italy, of which Pavia
was the capital, and in southern
Italy the duchy of Benevento, 11.
Conquer the exarchate of Ra¬
venna and the Fentapolis, and de¬
mand that these provinces shoulc^
be restored to |lome, 12.

Lombardy, the league of, 45. •

Lorenzo Ridolfl, 216.

Lorenzo de’ Medici, 252. Aban¬
doned by Italy, places hla hopes
in France, 274 Signs a treaty
with the king of NajMes, 275. Hie
administration, 277. His death,
279.

Louis IV. of Bavaria, successor of
Henry Vll., emperor of Ger.
many, 129. Receives the iron
crown at Milan, 137. Proceeds
to Rome; crowned in the Vati-
can, 138. Returns to Germany,
carrying with him the contempt
and detestation of the Italians,
139.

Louis, king of Hungary, called the
Great, 160. Death of, 179.

Louis of Tarento, 160.

Louis II. of Anjou, disputes the
throne of Naples with Ladislaus,
210 .

Louis III. of Anjou, 214.

Louis XI. of France, 233. Arrives
in Italy, 298. Enters Milan, sa¬
luted by the people as duke of
Milan, 299

Louis XTI. of France, signs the
treaty of Blois, 302. Convokes,
in concert with Maximilian, an'
oecumenical council against the
pope, 312. Attacked by Henry
Vfll. of England; obliged to re¬
call his troops tVom Italy, 314. .

Louis XIV. of France, 352,

Louis de la TremouUle, 299.

Louisa of Savoy, regent of France,
S30

Lucas Flttl, gonfaloner of Flo-
rence, 246. Builds the magnifi*
cent palace which now forms l^e
residence of the grand dul^,
S4a

Luchino Visconti, 154.

Lucian Dorla, 160.

Ludovioo Sforza, sumamed ^e

i Moor, 273. Made regent of Rie
duchy of Milan, 283. ContraeU
alliances with the Venetians, the

S75

fip’s. theking of tipain^nd Max.
imiUan^ 3^8. His deatn, 500.
Luigi Guicciardini, Sal.

Luigi Lioredano, S5J.

M.

Macchiavelli, death of, 543.

Margaret ofAustria signs the league
of Cambray, 308.

Mah'nmtft 11, signs a treaty of peace

. with the Venetian ambassador,
^4. Charges his erand vizier
Akhmet Giedik to auempt aland,
ing in Italy, which he eSects, and
makes himself master of Otranto,
275.

Malatesta IV^ one of the princes of
llimini, 307.

Malatesta Baglioni, .‘144.

Manfiied, natural son of Frederick
II., recovers the kingdom of Italy
from pope Innocent, 60. Killed
on the belli of battle in the plain
of Gmndella, near Benevento, 9r).

Maria Theresa of Austria, ^33.

Margaret of Anjou, 263.

Mariano dl Ghinazzano, a friar, sig.
nalises himself by his zeal in op.
posing Savonarola, 393.

Marino Faliero elected successor
to Andrea Dandolo in the ducal
chair of v'eincc, Iii7. Arrested
by the Council of Ten, and be.
headed, 1116.

Martin IV., pope, excommunicates
Michael Paleologus, the Greek
emperor, 103. Death of, 105.

Martin della Torre, elected podest^
of Milan in 12^, 93.

Martin Bernardini, gonfaloner of
Lucca, .3.‘)U.

Martin Luther, 298.

Mastino della Scala succeeds in ob.
tuning the surrender of Lucca to
himself, 144-

MaUfaias Corvinus, the liberator of
Hungary, 255. Engaged by pope
Pius II., to turn his arms against
the king of Bohemia, 35&

Matilda, countess, 32.

Matteo Visconti exiled by the lords
of Placentia and Parma ; recalled
by Henry IL, and restored to
absolute power, 124. Hu cha.
racter; in his war with the
Lombard Guelpbs takes pos.
sesssion of Pavia, Tortona, and
Alexandria, 130. Compels Phi.
lip de Valois to retreat from Italy;
abdicates in favour of his eon Ga.
leaxio; dies on the 22d of June,
1322, 131.

Matteo Palmieri, 251.

Maximilian, emper of %nnaAy,
signs a truce with Louis Xll. of
France, 396. Raiies the siege of
Padua, 310. Abandons the French
to their enemies, 313. Asserts hif
rights on Verona and Vicenza,
S31. Death of, 325.

Maximilian Sforza re-established
, on the throne of his ancestors,
331, Abdicates the sovereignty
for a revenue of 30,000 crowns,
secured to him In France, 323. ^
Meloria, the battle of, 110.

Michael Angelo, 106.

Michael Paleologus, the Greek em-
peror, 103.

Michele Lando, a carder of wool,
proclaimed gonfaloner of Flo.
rence, 165. His government;
exiled from Florence, 187.

Milan, Nourishing state of, in the
time of the Roman empire, 7.
Rased the town of Lodi, and
obliged the town of Como to de¬
stroy its fortifications, 32. Siege
of, 40. The town of, cased to the
ground by order of FrederickBar.
barossa, 40. Rebuilt, 45^ The Na.
viglio Grande of, begun in 1173 1
resumed in 1357,.and cfirmlnatea
in a few years after, 107. Re.
vival of the republic of, 330, Con¬
quered by the French, 229.
Montferrat, marquis de, 157.

Monza, the battle of, 214.

N.

Napoleon della Torre, chief of the
republic of Milan, taken prisoner
by Otho Visconti, archbishop of
Milan, 101.

NaiKileon Bonaparte gains the vie-
tory of MonteNotte over the Pi
montese anil Austrians; obliges
the Genoese to adopt the name of
theLigurian republic,J55. Defeats
the archduke Charles at Tagiia.
ment)Oj361. Declares war against
Venice, signs the treaty of
Campo Forroio, 362.

Neri Capponi, 247.

Nicholas 111., {lope, undertakes to
humble Charles of Anjou, and to
support the Ghibeline party:
exacts lyom him that he should
renounce the title of vicar of
imperial, and resign the title oi
senator of Home, 100. Sends a
legate to Romagna to compel
Bologna and all the Guelph re.
publics to recaU the Ghibelines,
and astablish peace throughout

INi>EX.

B16

the fBroTince, 101. Death of»
103.

Nicholas TV., pope, 103.

Nicholas V.,j>opef hU seal for the
progress 6 r ancient literarure;
hit character, 3.‘18.

Kicolo Pisani, 1661 .

Nicolo Piccinini) succeeds Braccio
in command of the Florentine
army, 215.

Nicolo d’Este, 2&1
NIcoIo Capponi, 343.

Octavian de Ubalrtini, cardinal, sent
as legate by thepope to the Guelph
cities to engage tiiem to punish
the imperial party for their revolt
against the church, 77.

Od^cer, of the nation of Herull,
c^ief of the meri^narieB who
aerved in Italy, deposes the em.
paror i takes nimselfthe title of
kina; distributes amongst his
•bMlers one third of the land in
^e iBDSt fertile province, 10.

Ot^ns, duke of, in the name of
his mother, advances pretensions
to the duchy of Milan, 233.

Oasuno, duke, viceroy of Naples,
357.

Ostrogoths, the. invade Italy, under
the command ofTheodorii^ 10 .

Otho I. of Saxonv, king or Ger.
many, forces Jberenger IT., in
951, who then resigned, to ac.
knowledge himself his vassal;
enters Italy a second time;
crowned at Rome, with the title
of emperor; sends Berenger to
end his days in a fortress in Italy,
13.

Otho II., 15.

Otho 111., 15.

Otho IV., duke of Bavaria and
Saxony, named king of the
Romans by the Guelphs, 59,
Crowned anew by the Germans;
paisei into Italy to receive from
the pope the golden crown of
the emjdre; death of, 60.

Otho Visconti, archbishop of
MUan, lUl.

P.

Pagan della Torre, the lord of
Valsaasina, 70.

Pi^anlno Dorla,a Genoese admiral,

Pandolpho Malatesta, 201.

Pandotio Petruoal, 30.'i.

Pandriago, the battle of, 162.

Parma, stege of, 76.

Pant 11., pope, 236.

PauluB 11., pope, 256.

Paulo Gulnigi usurps the botb-
reignty of Lucca, 196. Deposed
ann sent prisoner tn Milan, 21B.

Paulo Fregosa, archbishop of Genoa,
253.

Pedro of Aragon, don, the crown
of Sicily transferred from Charles
of Anjou to, 103.

Pelaviclni, the marouis, .340. '

Pescara, marquis, 3^. His death,
332. ^

Peter IV. of SVragon, 166.

Petrarch, character of his wrinngs,
153.

Petrarco del Anclsa, the father of
Petrarch, 117.

Philibert de Challon, prince of
Orange, 346.

Philip 1., duke of Swabia, named
king of the Romans by the GhU
belines, 59.

Philip Ugonl of Brescia, podestk of-
Bologna, 77.

Philip le Bel accused of poisoning
Pope Benedict XI.; succeeds by
fraud in getting a Frenchman
elected pope, 117.

Philip III. of Spain, 357.

Philippone di Langusco, 123,

Pietro delle Vigne. private secre-
tary to Frederick II., conspires
against his master, 74.

Pietro Gradenign, elected doge of
Venice by a grand council, and
carried a decree on the 28th of
February, 1297, famous in the
history of Venice undev the name
of serrata del maggior coneigUo,
120 .

Pietro Doria, 180.

Pietro Gambacorta placed bv the
Pisans at the head of their re.
public, 194. *

Pietro de Lana, 204.

Pietro de’ Medici, 246. Death of,
252.

Pietro Minerbetti, 251.

Pietro Mocenigo, 257.

Pietro Riario, 268.

Pietro II., named chief of the re.
public of Florence; his chaiacter,
2^. Learning that the French
were arrived at Sarsana, departs
to meet Charles VIII.; surrenders
the fortresses of Sartana and Sar.
lanello, 285. Refused admit¬
tance into the Bignoria; leavrt
the city with hii brothers by the
gate of San Gallo, and hwes with,
out a struggle a sovertignty
which their iamily had exeraiod
sixty years, 286.

INDEX.

S71

TiS^ Cspponi, S87. .

Pi«tro SoUeriiii, created ^onfaloner
of Venice for life; &u characterj
S06.

Pietro Boscolii 319.

Fiia, the republic of, compelled to
surreiiiler to the Normans, S8.
The first to make known to the
world the riches and power which
a smaU state might acouire by
the aid of commerce and liberty,
109. ^trnducea into Tuscany
the arts that ennoble wealth, 110.
ifeites tile love of liberty with
the sentiments ofGhtbeline party;
gitks the command of her militia
to Uguccione d^ Faggiuula; revo¬
lution of, liiii. 169.

Plus II., causes a crusade to be
preached in ail the Latin coun¬
tries i death of, Soj.

' Bracciolini, the hUtoriao,

Fompeo Colonna raises in the papal
state 8000 armed peasants; sur-
' prises the Vatican: pillages the
palace; constrains the pope to ab«
mre the alliance of Prance and
Venice, 333.

Pontida, the convent of, 45.

Raphael Riano, S69.

Ravenna oonquered by the Lom¬
bards, S4.

Raymond de Cardona, 131.

RenO II, duke of Lorraine, S74.

Richard, earl of Cornwall, 80. Death
of, 99.

Rinaldo deal! Alblzzi summons
Cosmo de'Medici to appear before
the gonfaloner of Florence; 225.
Summoned to appear before Do-
na^, president ofthe6ignoria,2S6.
Condemned to exile, m. Seeks
an asylum with Filippo Maria
duke of Milan; presses him to
make war on Florence, 227.

Robert, king of Naples, assumes
the part of champion of the
Guelph party, 126. Agrees to aid
the Florentines, on conditton that
they would confer the signoria
«nnis son the duke ofCalidpria,

- 136. Death of, 160.

Robert of Geneva, acardinal legate,
aent by the pope with a Breton
- rfadvent

>r. w.Boraii V il , 1 / /. X4taDllsne8
hil court at Naples: his death,

m

Robert appointed elector palaUne

of Germany on the depo^tloa of
Wenceslaus, 195.

Roccasecca. the battle ot 21S.

Rwiolph of Hapaburg, founder of
the house of Austria; elected
king of Germany, 99. Persuaded
by tnc pope toxontirm the char,
ters of Louis the Debonaire and
Othol., lAl.

Roger, king ofthe T^o Sicilies, be*
sieges Naples, 29.

Rome, population of in the fifth
century, 7. Becomes again the
capital of the empire, 18. A re¬
public constituted at, 62. Sack
of, 335.

Saint Peter Martyr, 67.

Saint Louis, 99.

Salvostro de' Medici, made con-
faloner of Florence by lot, 1S3.
Passes a law to suspend the pro.
ceedings called admonition which
Albizzi directed against the party,

Salvestro de* Gath, lord of Viterbo,
arrested by Louis of Bavaria, aad
put to the torture, to force him'
to reveal the place where be had
his concealed treasure, 139.

SalucDs, marquis de, 338.

San Bonifacio, count di, 71. Joins
the party of Beatrice, wife of
Charles of Anjou, 97.

Santi Cascesc, received as the head
of the Bolognese republic, 232.

Saracens, the, establish colonies in
Sicily, 27

Sardinia, attacked by the Fisafis in
the year 1017; completely.con¬
quered in 1050, 29.

Scander bashaw, sangiak of Boa-
nia, 297.

Sforza Attendolo, a peasant of Co>.
tignola inRomagna, distinguished
for prodigious strength of body
and undaunted courage; equ^Iy
distinguished in military tactics,
211. Makes himself master ol
Rome, 212. Drowned at Che paa.
sage ofthe Pescara, 215.

SUvestro Marruffl, arrested; led to

E rison, 294. Condemned to death
y the judges; despatched ftom
Rome by the pope; burned alive
on the 23d of May 1498,295.
Sixtus IV., pope, hli dissolute cha.
racter, 268. Promises all tbe^pon.
tifical forces Co restore IJbet^ to
Florence by killing the two bro¬
thers Medici, 2G£L FblmiAatOf «
bull against Lorlnzo de* Medici,
for having hanged the axchblshop

S78

INDEX.

of Plfc, 272. EnjjaBBs the Swiss
of the canton of Uri to declare
war against the duchess of Milan,
S7i Keconi'ilea the republic of
Florence to the church; excom.
xnunicatee the Venetians; his
death, 276.

Soliman invades Austria, 339.

Spoleto, duke of, 62.

Stephen II., pope, confers on the
princes of the Franks the dignity
of patricians, 18.

Stephano Forcari, a Roman noble,
238. Exiled at Bologna by the
poiie, and afterwards hanged from
Ihe battlements of the castle of
St. Angelo, 230.

Stef^no di Bagnone, 270.

T.

Taddeo de PepoU takes possession
of the sovereignty of Bologna;
makes alliance with the Ghibe-
Ilnes, 145.

Tagliacozza, battle of,

Teodoro Bossi, 230.

Theodortc, 10.

Timoleon, 262.

Toledo, Don Pedro de, governor of
Milan, 357.

Tomaso degli Albizzl, 22i
Tomaso Soderlni, 2.51.

Tortona, siege of, 35.

TrivuUio, marshal, 323.

U.

U|DlinDBuzzacherino de Slsmondl,

Ufolino, count, named by the
Piaaiu captain general for ten
years,111. Death of, US.
Uguccione dk Faggiuola,
lAl>an IV., pope, 94.

Urban Vf, pope, 172. , HU de
174. '

Urban VI., pope, 177.

Urban VI1., pope, 179.

V.

V.ilentino Visconti, 230.

Venice, the doge nf, takes the title
of duke of Venice and Dalmatia,
26. r)

Venetian republic founded by^ihe
inhabitants of Upper Italv, 10?

Verona, flourishing state nf, id the
time of the Roman empire,7.

Victor Ill., pope, 13. Death of,
44.

Vieri de Cerchl, 116.

Vittclleschi, the patriarch, prime
minister to pope Eucenius IV.,
237.

Vittor Pisani, 180.

W.

Wcnceslaus succeeds his father,
Cbarles IV. emperor of Ger*
many, 179. Installed duke of
Milan and count of Pavia, 195.

^Villiam the Norman, king of the
I'woSirilies, contracts an alliance
with pope Alexander III., and
arms the whole of southern Italy
against Frederick Barbarossa, 44.

William Brusato, 12.3.

Winsberg, battle of, 31.

Worms, the diet of, 21.

Y.

Yolanda dc Lusignan, heiress of the
kingdom of Jeru>>alem, marriage
of, With Frederick LJ., 66.

THE END.

London :

Printed by A. & R. Spottiswoode,
Kew-StreeuSquare.

THE

CABINET OF HISTORY.

CONDUCTED BY THE

DIONYSIUS LARDNER, LL.D. F.R.S. L.&E.

M.R.LA. F.R.A.S. r.I*& F.Z.S. Hon. F.C.P.8. Ac. Ac,

ASSISTED BY

EMINENT LITERARY MEN.

HISTORY

OP THE

ITALIAN REPUBLICS;

OH; THE

ORIUIN; PROGRESS; AND FALL OF ITALIAN FRSBDOU.
HT

J. C. L. DE SISMONDI.

LONDON:

PBIMTBD POa

LONGMAN, RFFM. ORME, BROWN, GREEN, * LONGMAN,

FATEBNOSTEB-HOW i

AND JOHN TAYLOR,
vfpsb oowbh arurr.

1832.

London:

Printed by A. & R. Spottiaweodc,
KewJStreeU^uAre.

A

13

A

ns

2

AOVEETISEMBItTS.

9r. Cabintt

Price 68. in clot^,

A TREATISE ON THE

PROGRESSIVE IMPROVEMENT AND PRESENT STATE

OF THE

MANUFACTURES IN METAL.

VOL. I. IRON AND STEEL^

BEING VOL. XXIV. OF THE " C YC L 0 P jED 1 A.”

At the time or publicaliou, ^^’c noticeil in laudatoiy terms, tlie volume of
, Dr. Lardner's Cycln[iHidta on Iron and Sled. At a Loriuie delivered in the
’ Mechaulcs’ iuitilutirm, Johnstone, on Tiirsday, evening on that subji'Ct, hy
Mr. Hendeyon, Paisley, he coiicliuloil with the following notice of that work.
* In the course of the nbservaliniis 1 have made on tliis uccasion, you have
teen me freqiitMiilv refer to the lillle volume 1 now holil in my hand, the 34lh
Of Dr. LaiTlner'a Cyclopa'dia, and the first of a scries on the Metallic arts.
iThlsvolame, whieli was published about two months since, 1 wish particularly
to Introduce to ynor notice, as the most important woik that has yet appeared
on the Bubject of Iron and Steel: it not only forms an invaluable addition to
the Library of the Mechanic, but will be found liichly insiriiciive to the philo-
•opher, and, from the style in wl^ch it is wriuen, interesting to the liieraiy
character, and aiunsing to the oiihuHry reader. Before the publication of this
work, which costs only fis. or Os., to obtain any tiling like accurale iiitorinaiioii
on the enbject on which it lieats it wh.k necessary to wade tliroiigli two o\ tliree
quarto volumes, several heavy ocuvos, with a vast variety uf peiiodiral woiks,
•od after all but a very iinperfect idea of the piinciples and practices of the
art could be obtained. For the history uf the iiieial, it wus necessary to cou-
Milt the EncyclopdMiia Briiaiinica; foi the mode of iiieUiiig, iliat of l)r. Brew¬
ster; For the ores, Murray's Chemistry; for the converliiig of iron iutn steel,
(even iu the Eoglish wmks,) the writings of Chapiai, a foreigner. The iin-

f iortaat expertmenis of Faraday and Stodarl, were imperfectly detailed, except
D the philosophical Journals, and fur information uf the lalier pi ugi ess of the
ait, both alhome and abroad, the periodicals of the day, fioin the bioad sheet
dowB to the two-penny numbers of the Mechanics' Magazines, were the only
aoarcea from whence it could be obtained. This volume condenses the whole
of the scattered information refenod to, cuiiiaiiiB mucli imporiaiit matter,
Mrthwly original, and enters on several dcpartmeuls of the art which have
hitherto been kept secret, in a manner, which, from personal observation and
aaperlenee, I hesitate not to say, gives evident proof that ibe iuforuiation on
•iaoit every department treated ot, has been oblaiiied on the spot where the
branch of manufacture is carried on. Another qualiticalion o( the work is,
that it Is writlen In a style widely diderent from the generality of ecientitii^
Jwoha, the authors of which are tou much taken up with the imuortant tiuih
ian<l diMOveriea uf science to study fine compusiiion. Besides iliiSi the deta'
are Ulastrated w'itli well-executed engravings, and ibroiighoat eBl^llisi'
‘with Bumeroua quotation!, both from the ancient and modern classlci.' "

Gkupoui VhronicU, Jois. 13,1832.

Xxmdou I Leaguiut uid Cs. and John Taylor.

ADVERTISEMENTS.

JxtstpuhlUhedy hy Wm. JQY^ 66, St. PauV$ Church Yard,

* Price 4s. neatly boanri, and Mlnslraleil with Maps,

GUY'S GEOGRAPHIA ANTIQUA;

DR, SCHOOL TREATISE ON ANCIENT OEOORAPHV, UPON A NEW PLAN.

By Jos£PH GuYi Jun., nr the University of Dxfurd, Aotbor of the
Ennlisli Schnnl Grnnimar, flic.

The object of the present work Is to facilitate ibr stmly of Ancient Geognt
phy, by artopting a Inciil and practical arvansenieiUi combined with much use*
ful and intcresline information, both geographical and liistoriral.

“This IS one of the very best treatises on ancient geography for the use of
Bclimfls, which has been published. We confldenlly recommend It to students,
and masters of academies.''—A/ornin^t Advertiser.

“ Here is a place well supplied, which has been too long vacant—an excel¬
lent addition to tlie school library. If such a treatise had been in use 40 yean
ago, stores of valiuA)le antiques, and much knowledge of history now consigneil
to oblivion, would have^been spared to posieiity.”— Atlas.

PricL' 4s. 12ino. ne.itly bound,

THE ETON GREEK GRaIMMAR,

FUR THE USE OF SCHOOLS AND SELF-INSTRUCTORS.
Translated into English, with Additional Notes. By G. N. Wright, A.M. &c.

Author of “Tlie Greek Sentences," &c.

The design of the editor in bringing forward this new edition of the Eton
Greek Grammar is two-fiilil; first, to conforin to the ininle of teaching Greek
now most prevalent in our public schools, that is, through the meillum of the
English language; and, secondly, In enable those wbo are inclined Id become
self iiistructitra, to avail ilicinselves more imiiiciliaiely of the assisiance of an ele¬
mentary work, the merits uf which have long stice been tried and acknowledge

In 1 vol. priEu 6s. hoards,

COURS DE LITTERATURE FRANCAISE;

on, A enunSE of fES30>S in FUENCH lITEnATUHR; IN FOUR PARTS,
By J. Row BOTH AM, F.R.A.S. London. Author of' German Le88on8,"&c.

N. B. By these lessons a person may acqtlire a knowledge of the French
language as spoken and written in the present day.

“This work deserves to be aoticed, on account of its judicious adapltlicm
to assist the young French schidar ; the inierlijieary part does not, aa In ibo
Hamiltonian books, consist in the mere Inaertion, word by word, of a llieral
translation, but is accompanicil by short grainiiiatical explanations, withoat
which such a mode of traiislaiiuD seems calculated rather lo poxade than In¬
struct.—Ttm^s, Jan. 19:11.

“ The two great recommendations of this work are its simplicity and conclee*
ness; lli«leading and really useful idioms are pointed out wUb a clearnesa and
brevity that prove the author lo be a skilful and experienced graroiDarUn.****
•fun, Jan. 27, 1931.

In 1 vol. 12mo. price 9«. boards,

DEUTSCHES LESEBUCH;

tLEESONa IN GERMAN LITERATURE,! DIVIDED INTO FOUR FAIlTSt
CONTAINING INTERLINEAR, LITERAL, AND FREE TEAMBLATIUKa.

By J. Roweothan, F.R.A.S. Antbor of a German Gratomar, &e.

*' A work of^real ntility to the German student, 'the use of which ciiidoI
fail to facilitate the acqaisttlon of a Ungaage the moat dlfflcull perhaps of
inudero Enrope."— Timet.

This work is an improvement on the Hamiltonian system of edneation."—.Vww.

EtUibluhed School Booht, printed for

GEOGRAPHY.

A COMPENDIUM or GEO-i
6RAPHY, for Ihe Gse of Schooli,
Private Families, and all those who
reqaire knowledge of Ibu neceesary
Science. By Richual Manonai.l.
Author of " Historical Questioos."
3d edits, roinpletpl> corrected to the
Present Time. 7a, bJ.

I GEOGKAPHYFOB YOUTH,

I adapted to the different Classe.s uf

I Learnera. By tbe late Rev. J. Hart-
LEY. tlth edits, 4s. Od. bd.

By the same Author,

OUTLINES OF GEOGRA¬
PHY, the First Course for Children.
Being an Introduction to the Geogra*
phy for Youth, pth edit. 9d.

A GRAMMAR of general
GEOGRAPHY, beingan Introduction
and Companion to tbe larger Work of
the same Author. By the Rev. J.
Goldsmith. A new edit., improved
and modernised. Illustrated with Vjaews
of the principal Capitals of the World,
and a variety of Maps, &c. 3s. 6d. bd.

By tlie same Author,

GEOGRAPHY on a POPU¬
LAR FLAN, for the nse of Schooi.s
and Youno Persons, containii^ all
the interesting and amusing *Fea*
tares of Geographical Knowledge, and
CsSloiiInted le convey iiistructton by
Means of the atrlklng and Pleasing
Asaoclatioos produced by the peculiar
Ifannwf, Coatoms, and Characters of
ftH N^oni and Countries. A new
edition, Including EKtracis from all
the priocipel recent Voyages end Tra*
veb, with heantlfnl Engravings, repre¬
senting the Dresses, CnstoniB, &c. of
■11 Nations, with Maps, &c« 14s. bd.

The EDINBURGH GAZET¬
TEER ; or. Compendious Geographi¬
cal Dictionary: containing a Descrip-
tion of tbe various Countries, King¬
doms, States, Cities, Towns, Moun¬
tains, Seas, Rivers, Harbours, Ac., of
the World ; forming a coropicle Body
of Geographv, Physical, Political, Sla-
tliticai, and Commercial; brought
down to tbe Present Time. In l large
Vo). 6vo., with Maps. IBa. boards.

An atlas of MODERN
GEOGRAPHY: oonsisting of 22 co¬
loured Maps, from a new set of Plates,
with a complete Index of all the
Names. By Dr. Butler, Head Mas¬
ter of Shrewsbury Grammar School.
Uvo, 12s. half-bounil. ^

By the same Author,

An atlas J5F ANCIENT
GEOGRAPHY, consisting of 21 ro-
JnurLMl Maps ritli a compifte Ac¬
centuated liiilex. Bvn. 12;. Iialf-bd.

A GENERAL ATLAS of
ANCIENT and MODERN GEO-
6RAPHY, consisting of 43 coloured
Maps, and two Indexes. 4to. Price
\l. 4a. half-bound.

The Indexes, now for the first
time appended to these Atlases, con¬
tain the latitude and longitude of all
the places; and in that of the Ancient
Atlas, the quantities are also marked
as a guide to correct pronunciation.

OUTLINE geographi¬
cal COPY BOOKS, in 4lo. with the
Lines of Latitude and Longitude only,
intended as Practical Exercises for the
Pupil to hll up, from Dr. Butler’s At¬
lases of Ancient and Modern Geogra¬
phy, and designed as an Accompani¬
ment. 4s. each, sewed; or, 7e.
together.

OUTLINE MAPS op AN¬
CIENT GEOGRAPHY, being a Se¬
lection, by Dr. Butler, from D'An-
ville’s Ancient Atlas, Intended as Prac¬
tical Exercises for the Pupil to fill up.
On Drewtog Colombler. lu fcdiQi
10«. M.

A SKETCH OF MODERN
and ANCIENT GEOGRAPHY, fv
the Use of Schools. In Bvu. 9th edR

bds.

To Ihe present edition of this Uttle
work, tbe Author has made some very
important additions, chiefly iu the
Modern part of it. |j

AFRICA DESCRIBED in
its Ancient and Present state. By Mrs.
HoPLaNO. With a Map. Qi. balfbtU

Lmgman, Retiy Ormey Brawny Greeny and Longman, 5 i

GEOGRAPHY (CONTINUBU).

A NEW TREATISE ov the

j USE OP THE GLOBES; or, aPlAoso-
phical View of the Earth anri Heavens;
cnmprehenilmg an Account of th?
Figure, Magnitnde, and Motion of th?
Earth ; with the NKtiiral ChangcB of
its Surface, &c. By Thomas Ketth.
With Plates. A new edit., Us* bound.
By the some Author,

A'system Of GEOGRA-

PHY, on an entirely new Plan, in
which the recent Alterations in the
Division of the ConlKient are carefully
attended to. ds. bd. .

An introduction to the
GEOGRAPHY of IheNEW TESTA-
MENT; compiisine: a sDinmwy Chro-
nolo^cal and Geographical View of
the Events recorded reepecting the
Ministry of our Saviour. By Lant
Cahprni'er, LL.D., with Maps, bih
edit., 59. bds.

GEOGRAPHICAL and BIO¬
GRAPHICAL EXERCISES. By the
lateW. Hutlrr, The lUlh edit. By
J. Oldino Butler. 49.

ARITHMETIC, BOOK-KEEPING. TRADE, COMMERCE, 8tc.

The arithmetician ’S
GUIDE; or, a Complete Exercise
Book, for public Schools and private
Teachers. By W, Taylor, 29.

' A KEY TO THE Same. By
W. H. Whits, of the Commerrial
and Malbeniatical School, Bedford, 49.

: A SYSTEM nr PRACTL
CAL ARITHMETIC, applicable to
«lhe present State of Trade and Money
Tian.'jactions; illustrated by numerous
Examples under each Rule. By the
Rev. J. Joyce. New edition, with
the new Weights and Measures. 34.

A KEY TO Ditto, for the
Use of Teachers; to which is subjoined,
t System of Mental Arithmetic. Anew
edit, 3«. bound.

In the Key to Jnyec's Arithmetic, is
given a new and very usefnldiscovery,
by means of which, all Sums in the
Piret Rules of Arithmetic may be ex¬
amined at a glance of the eye.*’

Av INTRODUCTION to
PRACTICAL ARITHMETIC, lu
Two Pans, with various Notes and
occasional Directions for the Use of
Learners. By T. Mui.inkus, mauy
years Teacher of Accounts, Short band,
and the Mathematics, in Macclesheld.
14th edit. Pai| I. 29. 6d. bound. Part
II. 4th edit. 2l. 6d, bound.

KEYS TO BOTH Parts. Price

6d. each. .

ELEMENTS op PRACTI¬
CAL BOOK-KEEPING,bySINGLE
and DOUBLE ENTRY; according
to present jpractlce. To which are
added, a Series of Practical Exercisei
tor the improvement of the Student,
and au Explanation of Commercial
Terms. By Jambs Morrison. A
new Idit. improved, Bs. half-bound.

Also may be had,

MORRISON'S .SETS op
BLANK BOOKS, ruled to corre¬
spond with the Four Sets contained In
the work itself.

By the same Anlhur,

A CONCISE SYSTEM of
COMMERCIAL ARITHMETIC,
adapted to modem Practice. Sd edit.
49. &d. bound.

A KEY TD THE Above, in
which are given the Mode of Arranjge-
ment, and Solution of every Qneitlon
and Exercise propused in that work.
S9. bound.

UNIVERSAL STENOGRA¬
PHY ; or, a Complete and Practical
System of Short Hand. By W,
Mi V OB, LL.D. 69. boards.

A TREATISE on PRAC¬
TICAL ARITHMETIC, containing
all the Latest Impruvumenls id the
Science. By A. NiSBiT, 3d edit.
59. bound.

A KEY TO THE Sams. 5 s.Ik 1 .

6

ADVCaTISEMENTS.

M. DE STSMONDI’S WORKS, IN FRENCFT.

SISMONDI'S (J. C. L. SiMr*NDB db) HISTOIRE deb REPUBLIQUES
ITALIEKNES du MOYEI'J AGE. Noiivelle Edition. 16vols. 8vo. 6l.l68.6d.
-HISTOIRE DES FRANCAISES. Tome 1 i 15, 8^. is.

LlTTERATURfi dv MIDI. 4 vols. 8vo. Nouvelle Erii*

tlon.

' JULIA SEYERA ou 1’ au 48*2. 3 vuls. ISmo. 10#. Od,

IN THE PRESS.

HISTOIRE D£ LA RENAISSANCE d£ la LIBERTE en ITALIE, de
5es progrtfSf de ea decadence, et de sa ctiute, 8vo.

Printed for Treuttel, WUrtz, and nichtcr, SO, Suho Siu^re.* *

AN IMPORTANT IMPROVEMENT.

BEING AN EXCELLENT SUBSTITUTE FOR JHB ORDINARY
QUILL FEN.

BEILBY AND KNOTT, of Bieminoham, and of Bride-Court, New
Bridge-street, London, oflei- the Public a STEEL PEN which they deno¬
minate

. DOUBLY ELASTIC.

The increased elasticity of this Pen gives it the spring and facility for writing
of the ordinary quill pen, in a higher degree than has been clfcrted in any other
way ; it is also less liable to injury than the former kind of Steel Pens, wilh
care it may be kept in use for several monllis.

Bbilby and Knott's DOUBLY ELASTIC PENS are sold on Cards con¬
taining Six Pens and a Handle, at Fifleca Fence; or on Cards wilh Twelve
and a Handle, at Two Shillinga each Card.

In order to suit the various ha'iid-writiiig for which Funs are required, the
following kinds are prepared:—

Doubly Elastic Pens for Gentlemen who write a Jiand of ordl- B. & K.

nary strength, the Fens HI e each marked thus . . G.

Ditto ditto Refined, suitabie fur Gentlemen who wiite a fine £ & ir
hand. This Pen is also adapted fur Ladles, and is disiin* ' ^

gnished by.

Ditto ditto for Bold Writing, suitable for Ledger pusiiug and) B. & K.
Engrossing; they marked.i B.

The Pens as above described, are calculated for the ditfercot kinds of hand¬
writing taught in schools.

If the bottom letter at the end of each kind be affixed to the order, the de¬
scription will be understood; but it is requested that Bbilby and Knott’s
Pens may he expressly inquired for. They are to be had by application to any
of the Booksellers and Stationers In the United Kingdom.

MINKRAL SUCCEDANEUM FOR FILLING DECAYED
TEETH.—Mons. MALLAN and SON, Surgeon-Dentists, No.32, Great Rus-
sell.street, Bloomsbury, grateful for the high and extensive patronage which
has BO eminently distinguished their professional exertions since their ar¬
rival In the Brllisb Meiropolis, respectfully announce to their Friends and
the Public In general, that they still continue to restore Decayed Teeth with
their celebrated MINERAL SUCCEDANEUM, so universally recommended
by the Faculty of London and Faria. The Operation of filUug Teeth
formed in a few seconds, without the slightest pain, beat, or pressure.—They
also fasten loose Teeth of a manner singularly efficacious, and supply whole or
partial sets ut Teeth formed o the above Incorrodible Mineral pr natural sub¬
stances, without wire or other ligatures, and guaranteed toi^answer every
porpcie fur articulating and masticating. The faculty are respectfully invited
to witness the successful result of the Mineral Succbdaneum. Charges as
in Paris.

School Books^ printed for Longman <5* Co.

ART Off READING.

FIRST BOOK FOR CHIL¬
DREN. Ry Lindley Murray. 10th
criit. Qd, sewL'ri.

By tim same Author,

An- ENGLISH SPELLING.

BOOK: will! Readiu^ Lessonsudftpietl
ti> the CripaciliLB of Cluldieii; to teach
Orthi^rapliy and rrununcidtioa toge¬
ther. 3Dih edit. U. 0c{. bd.

INTRODUC'.TION to the
ENGLISH READCR; or, a Selec
tiun of Pieces, in Pi use and Poetry,
A:c. 27th edit. bouiiV

The ENGLISH READER;

or, ]*iece8 in Prose and Poetry, Ye-
IfiMuri fiom the iieat iters, ^ith
ObservaiionB on the Principles of good
Reading. 2l8t edit. 4 b. Od. bd.

SEQUEL TO THE ENGLISH
READER; or, Elegant Selecuons in
Prose and Pueiry. Designed to esl'd-
blisli a Taste inr ju*,t and accurate
Cuiiipositiuii. 7 l1i edit. 45. Od. bd,

An ENGLISH LESSON

BOOK; fill’ the Junior Classes. By
Lucy Aiein. 2s. (id. haU*boiind.

The ENGLISH SPELLING
BOOK, acciiiupanicd by a prugicssive
Series uf u.isy and l'ainili.ii' Lessons,
adapted in the CapaeiticK of Cliildien,
and enibellislied wiili a Variety ol En¬
gravings; the whole intended to t'ur-
uisli, tor (he use of Schools, an im¬
proved Introiliii.torv Book to the first
Elements of the English Language.
By W. Mayor, LL. D. Tbe370tli edit.
1«. 6d, bound.

A SHORT ENGLISH
SPELLING BOOK. By W. Bear-
CROFT, late Master of the Academy,
Kirby Mourside. Is. bound.

PRACTICAL ORTHOGRA-
PHY; or, the Art of teaching Spell¬
ing by Writing: containing an im¬
proved Method of Dictating, with Ex¬
ercises for practice, &c.; intended for
I ancL persons s are desiious of Im-
I proving themsAves in (he practice of
I Composition. By W. Bsahcroft,
2(i edit. 3t. ed, in red.

READING EXERCISES for
SCHOOLS, being a Sequel to MA¬
YOR'S SPELLING, and an Intro¬
duction to the Class-Book, similar in
Arrangement to Brown’s Testament.
By the Rev. Dr. Blair. A new edit,
corrected. 2e. bd.

Thf CLASS-BOOK; or,

Three Hundred and Sixty-five Reading
LESSONS for SCHOOLS of either
Sex; combining the Elements of all
Knowledge, with a greater Number of
Heading Exerctscs, from the best Au -1
thors, than are to be found in any ,
other Work of the same Description ;
every Lesson having a clearly defined
Object, and teaching some Principle
of Science or Morality, or some im¬
portant Truth. By the Hev. Dr. Blair,
A new edit. Ss. bound.

The SCHOLAR’S SPELL¬
ING ASSISTANT. Wherein the
Words are arranged according to (heir
principles of Accentuation. By T.!
Cahoemter. a new edition, im-
provA. ]«. (k2. bound.

By the same Anthor,

An ENGLISH VOCABU¬
LARY, in w'liich the Words are ar¬
ranged indiscriminately ; designed as
a Sequel to the Scholar's Spelling As-
sUtaiii. New edit, in 12mo. 2«. bd.

TiieNEW ORTHOGRAPHI-
CAL ASSISTANT; or, English Ex¬
ercise Book. W'ritten on an improved
Plan; for the more speedy Instiuction
of Young Fersuns in the Art of Spell¬
ing and Pronunciation. The 3d edit.
2f. bd.

The book of MONOSYL¬
LABLES; Ol, an Introduction to the
Child's Monitor, adapted to the Capa¬
cities of young Children, calculated to
instruct by familiar Gradalions in the
first Principles of Education and Mo¬
rality. By J. Hornsey. 1«. Qd. bd.

By the same Author,

The pronouncing EX¬
POSITOR; or, a NEW SPELLING
BOOK. 12th edit. 2«. bd.

8

ADVERTISEMENTS.

24, Tavistock-Strfct, Covent- Card m.

CATALOGUE OF FIVE THOUSAND BOOKS.

(GRATIS, BY AFPLVINC POST PAID).

Ia list of works reduced to half price,

On Sale dy M. A. Nattali.

BRITTON AND PUGIN'S PUBLIC BUILDINGS
I V OF LONDON.

I *•* Tlie Work consists of 144 Engravings in Outline, beautifully executed
by J. Le KsuXi T. RorFC, C. Gladwin, &c. from Drawingi ai^rl Measure¬
ments by A. PuuiN, G. CatteRMOI.k, nud other eminent Artiata. The (Histo¬
rical and Descriptive Accoimts are by J> Bruton, F.S-A., Joseph Gwilt,
F.S.A., j. P. Papwobth, &c.

‘ 'elliiig:for Publlstn-d nt

C d. £ a, d.

2 vols. demy 8 vd. cloth.^ * 12 ti 5 5 0

2 vols. imperial 8vo. large paper, clnlh^. 4-11) 8^ 0

2 vols. 4lo. proofs on India paper, u'kic?i very

few remain, cloth. a 7 7 (i J-"* J4 0

2. NEALE AND LE KEUX’S VIEWS of the COL¬
LEGIATE and PAROCHIAL CHURCHES ofGHEAT
BRITAIN, vrith Historical and Architectuoil Descrip¬
tions, U6 Plalea.

2 vols. j-oyal 8vo. in clotli.2 ID 0 .10 0

2 vols. royal 4lo. pi onfs on India jiaper, T arranging

with Britton's Cathedrals,J in cloth ....5 0 0 10 U 0

3. PARKINSON’S ORGANIC REMAINS of a
FORMER AVORLO; 3 vols. 4lo., wiih .54 coloured

Plates, exhibiting above 700 Fo^ii Remains ....OHO 10100

4. PARKINSON’S INTRODUCTION to hie
STUDY OF FOSSIL ORGANIC REMAINS. It)

Plates, Svn. clulli. 0 12 u

5. Dr. TURTON'S BIVALVE SHELLS of the
BRITISH ISLANDS, systematically arranged, wjili 20

Plates, coloured by SowERBY; 4to. cloth. 2 0 0 4 0 >'

6. WATT’S BIBLIOTHECA BRITANNICA; or

General Index to British and Fdrbign Litera¬
ture; 4 vula. 4to. in clotli. 8 0 0 11 11 0

Odd Parts, to complete Sets, 10a. Qd. each.

r. DIBDIN’S LIBRARY COMPANION, in 1 large

vol. Svo. (800 pages) boards.0 14 0 180

8. HAKEWELL AND TURNER’S PICTURESQUE
TOUR OF ITALY ; 63 Plates, by the Arst Artists.

Royal 4to. cloth.400 7 10 0

Imperial 4to. proofs, cloth.5 15 0 10 10 0

0. SIR WM. DUGDALE’S LIFE, DIARY, and
•CORRESPONDENCE. Edited by W.vi. Hamper,

Estl-i Portraits and Autographs; royal 4to. cloth ... I 4 0 2 2 o

Only a few Copies left.

II. Lord CLARENDON and the Earl op
EOCHESTER'S DIARY and CORRESPONDENCE.

Edhed by 5. W. Singer; 10 Plates; 2 vols. 4to. hnarris 2 12 r S 5 5 n

U. DYER'S PRIVILEGES op tbe UNIVERSITY ^
CAMBRIDGE. 8 vols. 8vo. boards ..... 0 10 0 2 20

Frinted by S. MwbIbv k Co., 4, London-Houii Yard, Bt. Paul'o, Lfliidmi,

THK

CABINET CYCLOPEDIA.

London;

Printed by A & R. SpottUwoode,
New.StreeUSquare.

THE

CABINET CYCLOPiEDIA.

CONDUCTED BY THE

REV. DIONYSIUS LARDNER, LL.D. F.R.S. L.AE.

M.U.I.A. F.RA.S. F.L.S, F.Z.S. Hon.F.C.P.S. &c. &c.
ASSISTED BY

EMINENT LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC MEN.

I^ijStorp*

ITALIAN REPUBLICS;

OR, THE

ORIGIN, PROGRESS, AND FALL OF ITALIAN FREEDOM.
BY

J. C. L. DE SISMONDI.

LONDON:

PRINTED FOR

LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, k LONGMAN.

PATBRN091ER.B0W ;

AND JOHN TAYLOR,

UPPER GOWER STREET.

1832.

.l[irA;LIAK 'IKjfeFWS'JLI e

_nr.TNii A vil-:\v ni'- -niv. ^

.r 'JT A 0 = ] A i '1 ^ Ji £ £ n) © 5 » 11 .

JX-I.-Di: SISMCraiJI.

lt\ 'PNh

uJ^vreimo tpu’ matne vifi3iptum.r
T.’ tAx! of Jior'u‘

JS 3

llond’Dit.

l-ftoSTIKD 7(111 I-OT-lCaiJlEH, EEES (iKbIB.Bao'WN fc JK£Eir.EA3XroiOST«B IloW
AND JOHN TA'OiOR.tTmB (KTWBB. SXILERT

AUTHOR’S PRJEFACE.

“ Would it 'be possible to comprise the- history of
the Italian Rep’ublics in a single volume ? ” This
question, addressed to me by Dr. Lardner, the
learned editor of the Cabinet Cyclopaedia, gave
birth to the present work. It was flattering to me
to be associated, in a great historical undertaking,
with the most distinguished English writers; but, at
a moment when the rights of nations are weighed
anew in the balance of public irpinion,—when diplo¬
macy and war have been invoked, in turn, to give or
take away from nations the faculty of advancing with¬
out limit in civilisation, under their respective laws;

— at such a moment, it was still more flattering and
precious, in my eyes, to lay before the two powerful
nations which glory in being without a master, the
claims of ill-fated Italy to enjoy the same freedonp-
I thus found the opportunity of reproducing, in the
two languages of freemen, the memory of what Italy
was the first to achieve for obtaining the greatest of
blessings, — the memory of the impulse and example
which she gave, and which all others but followed,

— and, at the same time, the memory of those
crimes of her oppressors which have robbed her of
the advantages with which she has endowed the

A 3

Vi PREFACE.

rest of the human race. It, seemed to me that the
more rapid my recital of the starting up of Italy
from her slumber, — of her struggles, her misfor¬
tunes, and her glories, — the stronger would be the
impression, and the greater the facility with which
I could seize, in the history of Italian freedom, that
unity of interest which escapes in the simultaneous
existence of a hundred independent states. I was
already familiarised by long study with this history,
in all its details. After having presented it in six¬
teen volumes, I no longer felt that influence of
novelty by which petty facts often seduce authors
into the belief that every notion which it has cost
them much labour to acquire must have a propor¬
tionate value with the reader. I could sacrifice details
and episodes without regret. I knew, in some sort,
by experience, the vicissitudes which in Italy pro¬
duced lasting results.; and those which, on the con¬
trary, produced none. I undertook, then, not an
abridgment of my great work, but an entirely new
history, in which, with my eyes fixed solely on the
free people of the several Italian states, I have
studied to pourtray, within a compass which should
be compatible with animation and interest, their first
deliverance, their heroism, and their misfortunes.
1 have confined myself within the limits assigned
to me : it is for the reader to judge whether I
have employed them with due advantage.

J. C. L. DE SiSMONDl.

iontion, January, 1832.
