The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses (1880)
===========================================
The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses — English translation (New York, 1880) of the German folk-magic compilation, public domain. The most famous American grimoire of Solomonic seals. Scan via Internet Archive.

Google


*** .P^wJ*!"* *°f* touched the hem of his garment: For she
Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter, be of good
comfort ; thy faith has made thee whole. And the woman was made whole
froirt that hour." (Matt 9, 20-22 ) v .u w« iu>u« wuo«e

'And when Jesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the minstrehi and
the people making a noise, he said unto them, Gire place ; for the maM b not
dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn. But when the peoplo
were put forth he went in, and took her by the hand, and the maid arose. ^

** And when Jesus departed from thence, two blind men followed hhn. etc.
And ^hen he was come into the house, the blind men came unto blra : And
Jesus »aith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this 1 They said unt«
ill"?; «^*A 7^^^' T^en t?"cJ»ed he their eyes, saying. According to your faith
be it unto you. And their eyes were opened." (Matt 9, 27>80.)

The man with the withered hand he healed tbroogh the words :
*' Stretch forth thine hand : and it was restored whole like the other.''
(Matt. 12, 10-13.)

•* And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent
out into all that country round about, and brought unto him all that
were diseased ; and besought him that they might only touch the hem
of his garment : and as many as touched were made perfectly whole."
(Matt. 14, 36-36.) ^ J

The daughter of the woman of Canaan, who was grieyoiiiBly vexed
with a devil was restored through the faith of the woman. (Matthew.
16, 22-28.) - * '

" And great multitudes came unto him, having with them those that
were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them
down at Jesus' feet : and he healed them." (Matthew l6, 30 : Luke.
7,22.) ' •

The lunatic who ofttimes fell into the fire and into the water could
not be healed by the disciples. But when Jesus rebuked the devil he
departed out of him and the child was cured frOm that yery hour.
Jesus said unto his disciples : *' Because of your unbelief, ye could
not cure him. For verily I say unto you. if ye. have faith as a grain
of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain. Remove hence to
yonder place ; and it shall remove ; Howbeit this kind goetb not bat
but by fasting and prayer. (Matt. 17, 14-21.)

Two blind men on the road to Jericho cried unto the Son of David
for help : ''Then touched be their eyes, saying : according to yonr
faith be it unto you. And their eyes were opened." (Matt 9. 27-36.)

He healed the lame and the blind in the temple at Jerusalem, who
came to him to be healed. (Matt. 21. 14.)

He healed the man in the synagogue who had a spirit of an unclean
devil, whom be rebuked, saying, " Hold thy peace, and come out of
him." (Luke 4. 83.)

'' Now when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with
divers diseases brought them unto him ; and he laid his hands on
every one of them, and healed them." (Luke 4, 40.)

"Now when he came nigh to the gate of the city (Nain), behold,


there was a dead man carried ont, the onlj son oi his mother. And
when the Lord Raw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her,
Weep not. And he came and touched the bier. And he said : Young
man> I aay. unto ,thee, Arise. And he that was dead sat up and
began "to vpeak, 'And he deiivered him to his mother." (Luke 7,
12-16.)

, Ifary called Magdalene, out of whom went seven devils, the wife
of Chuza «nd many others possessed of evil spirits were healed and
freed. <Luke 8, 2, 8.)

The man possessed of a legion of devils which were driven into a
herd.<»f swine. (Luke 8, 27-33.)

" And behold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity
eighteeit years, and was bowed together, and could m nowise lift up
herself And when Jesus saw her, he called her to him and said unto
her, Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity. And he laid his
hands on her, and immediately she was made straight, and glorified
God." (Luke 13, 11-13.)

He healed the king^s son at Capernaum who was at the point of
death, through the fttith of the lad's father. (John 4, 47.)

The man who had an infirmity thirty and eight years, whom no one
would carry into the pool at the sheep market, whose waters wheu
troubled by the angel healed all diseases, he cured by the words :
'' Rise, take up thy bed and walk." (John 5, 2-8.)

The man that was born blind he healed with ground clay and spit-
tle, ** He spat on the ground and made clay of the spittle, and he
anointed th6 eyes of the blind man with the claj, and said unto him,
Go, wash io the pool of Siloam. He went his way therefore, and
washed, and came seeing." (John 9, 1-7.)

St Hark relates a still more remarkable cure effected bv Christ on
a blind man : '* And he cometh to Bethsaida, and they bring a blind
man stato him, and besought him to touch him. And he took the blind
man by the hand, and led him out of the town ; and when he had spit
on his eyes and put his hands upon him, he asked him if he saw aught ?
And be looked np and said, 1 see men as trees, walking. After that
be pnt his hands again upon his eyes, and made him look up ; And he
was restored and saw every man clearly." (Hark 8, 22-25.)

He raised Lazarus from the dead through a fervent prayer to the
Father. ** Then when Jesus came, he found that he had lain in the
grave four days already. It was a cave and a stone lay upon it.
Jesav teid. Take ve away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that was
dead, saith unto him Lord, by this time he stinketh ; for he hath been
dead four days. Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thee, that if
thoa wonldst believe, thou shouldst see the glory of God T Then they
took away the stone trom the place where the dead was laid. And
Jesos lifted up his eyes and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast
beard me. And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice,
Laaarus, come forth? And he that was dead came forth, bound hand
•od foot with grave-clothes ; and hit face was bound about with a
napkia. Jesni Mitb ttoto tbem, bQOM Mm Md let Uo| go.'' (^obii|


60 ' tkti ltfA6l(3 6^ *HE tSttAELTfES.


^.^fa.


These are incidental healings performed by our Saviour and re-
corded by the Evangelists. There are other legendary narratives of
wonders performed by Christ which are not recorded by the Evan-
gelists, of which I will mention only one. It ma^ be found iu the His-
tory of Jesas, by Eusefoins (chap. 12, p. 16), from whicli Biisbiug ex-
tracted his *• Weeitly Intelligence for Inquiries into History, Magic
and Learning of the Middle Ages '' (vol. 2. p. 64, Dec, 1817. BreslauJ."
It is also printed in Kosegarden's Legends. As an extraordinary in-
stance ofihe vocation and power of Christ. and his divine mission and
love to man will not prove uninteresting to the friends of Christianity,
we will give the contents of several letters written by Abganis, King
of Edeesa, who lived cotemporary with Jesus.

The extraordinary mission of Christ and the fame f»f ttie vvonders
which he wrought were noised abroad to the.most,distaut lands, es-
pecially his divine power to heal all kinds of diseases. These rumors
also attracted the attention of Abgarus, who was the victim of a se-
vere sickness. On this account he wrote the following letter to Jesus :

'* Abgarus, King of Edcssa, to Je.ous, the compassionate Saviour, who appeared
m the tiesh, in ttie neighborhood of Jerusalem, All Hnil I
"I have heard of Thy exalted virtues and of tlie wonderful cures performed
by Thee without the u»e of medicines or herbs. The report saycth, that Thou
causest the blind to see, the lame to walk, and thou cleansest the leprous. Thou
castest out unclean spirits, and those that arc plagued with grievous diseases
Thou healestj and Thou bringest the dead back to life. As 1 heard tiiese re-
ports concerning Thee, I formed two opinions : either that Thou art God, de-
soeuded from the heights of Heaven, or that Thou art the Son of .God, from
whom all these wonderful works proceed. Therefore I write this unto Thee,
fervently praying that Thou wouldst undertake the trouble to heal me from
the heavy sickness by which I am punished. I am told that the Jcw.s threaten
Thee with great evil, and resist Thee in anger. It is true, I nave but a small
city, but it id well appointed and fortified and celebrated, s^ that it will afford
us everything needful."

Thus wrote Abganis to Christ. Enlightened by divine light, this
short letter contains what is of true worth, being full of power and
virtue. The following answer was sent by Jesus to Abgarus the King,
by the hands of Annanias, who was selected as a messenger :

"'Abgarus ! Blesf>ed art thon, who hast not seen, yet believed on me. It is
written that those which seie me believe not on mc, that those who see me not
may believe on me and be saved. As thou writest to me, I must of necessity
fulfill those thincs for which I was sept into the world ; after I have accom-
plished all these fhinffs T shdU again be taken up to liim who sent me. As soon
B8 I shall have ascended, I wilt send to you one of ray disciples, who will heal
you of your painful disease, so that your life and the lives of yours may be
preserved."

After the nscenston of Christ into heaven, Judas, who was also called
Thaddeus. one of the seventy disciples, was sent to Abgarus, who tar-
ried over nisrht on his journey at the houpe of Tobias, tho son of Tobit
Abgarus heard that th« dimple whom Jesus had promisjed to send to
mm, had arrived, for Tobias had told Abgarus that he had entertained
a mighty man of Jerusalem, who healed many diseases in the name of
Jesus. •* Bring him In to me," said Abgarus. Tobias went imme-
diately to Thaddeus and said : ** Abgarus the kingr trends me to you,
and dmku (hftt I should lead you to him, in order that you may


TM kAGlCJ OP 1?fite teftAELlfES. 61


remove the disease by whicb he. is tormented." "Let as go,'' an-
swered Thaddeus, *'For d^ his account was I senl here." On the
morning of the next day, Tobias took Thaddeos with him and they
went to Abgarus. Upon nia arrival the lords of the castle stood ready
to defend Abgarus. but when the disciple entered, Abgarus observed
a bright light in his countenanoe. As Absarus saw this he humbly
worshipped Thaddeus. The astonishment of all present was most com-
plete, for they could not see the strange appearance which Abgarus
saw. "Thou art' indeed the disciple of Jesus, the Son of God, who
promised me in his letter when be said : ** I will send you one of my
disciples, who will heal your infirmity, and give yon your life and the
lives of those belonging to you !'' Hereupon Thaddeus replied : ** I
have been sent to you because of your trust in Jesus who sent me."
And further : *^ If the faith you have in him increases more and more,
Chen the desire of your heart will be fulfilled according to your faith."
Abgarus answered: **I have faith in Him to this extent, that if the
Roman power did not hinder me, I would annihilate thje Jews who
crucified Him, with my hosts." Thaddeus said, ** The Loi-d our God,
Jesus Christ, fiilfillcd the will of bis Father, and when bis will was
accomplished, he was taken up to his Father." Then said Abgarus,
'* I believe in Him and in bis FaUier." Thaddeus answered : *' There
fore I lay my hands upon thee, in the name of Jesus," and as he did
80, Abgarus was made whole from that very hour.
~ To this belongs the tradition which relates to the sending of the pic-
ture of Christ to Abgarus. According to some authors, principally the
Damascenes, Abgarus sent a painter to Jerusalem to paint a likeness
of Jesus ; but the painter was not able to finish a portrait of him be-
cause of the splendor of his countenance. Then the Lord stamped his
likeness on his mantel through divine power, and in this manner sat-
isfied the desfre of Abgarus. According to others, Jesus impressed
his features on a linen kerchief and sent it to Abgarus. Be this mat-
ter of finishing and sending of this picture as it may, the Damascenes
show through later circumstances that such a picture was at Edessa
at some time or other, otherwise we should be compelled to reckon the
narrative describing the siege of the city of Abgarus by the Persian
king Kosroes as among discoveries that cannot be authenticated. Ac-
cording to thiB legend the walls of Edessa. built of the wood of the
olive tree, were surrounded by Kosroes with a funeral-pile of poplar
wood, in order to burn them. The then reigning king of Edessa, who
is not named, had recourse to the linen shroud upon which were im
pressed the features of Christ and which was sent to Abgarus. Here-
upon (divina vi) a terrible whirlwind arose which blew the flames awav
from the city, igniting the funeral pile of poplar wood, by Which all
in its immediate vicinity were consumed.

That the promises respecting Christ, namely, that he would heal
the sick,^were fulfilled, is proven by the additional wonders which
were wrought by the apostles, who healed diseases in the same man-
ner that their Master did :—

** And a eertain man lame from his motker^i womb wai carried, whom they
laid daily at the ((ate of the temple which U called BeaUUfttl, to ask alms of


TH^ Uagic) (^ iTHii tsfuetites.


1


them that entered into the temple, who, leeini; Peter and John about to go
into the temple, asked an alms. And I'eter^ fastening his eyes upon him wlUi
John, said, Look on ua. And he gave heed unto tliem, expeetfug to reteive
something from thorn. Then Peter said, Silver and goid have I none? but i

such as I na ire give 1 thee : In the name of Jesus ChrUt of Nazareth rise up ]

and walk. And lie took liim by the right hand and lifted him up, and imme-
diately his feet and aukleboties received strength, and he, leaping up, ^ood
and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walkinjr and leapmff.'and
praisiugOod. (Aets8,2-8.)

** And believers were the more added to the Iiord, multitudes both^of men
and women, inasmuch as they brought forth tl^ sick Into tlie streets, and laid
them on beas and couches^ that at the least ttit shadow of Peter passing by
might overshado w some of them. There eame also a multitude out of the clities
round about unto Jerusalem, bringing sick foli^, and them which Were ?«xed
with unclean spirittf : and they were healed every one." (Acts 6, 14-10.)

The history of Simon, the sorcerer, who, on account of his knavery eould
not perform these wonders, and who attempted to buy the gift to work tnest
wonders from the apostles with money, is espeeially remanable. This Won-
derful story is also applicable to the Simons of our day. ** But there was a
certain man called Simon, which beforetime in the same city used sorcery

i magic), who was converted under the preaching of Philip and was bapt^d.
Lnd the apostles gave unto the new eonverta the Holy Spirit. Then they laid
their hands on tliem« and ttiey received the Holy Ghost And When Slnfeon aaw
that through laying on of the apostles* hands the Holy Ghost was given, he
oflTered them money, saying. Give me also this power, that on whomsoever
I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost But Peter said unto him,
Thy money perish with thee, because thou haat thought that the ^ft ot

God may be purehased "*

matter : for thy heart i

this thy wickedness, and ymj uwl., .. i^^.^.^^ ...« ».»«...• v> .u^ «<«•(• hm/
be foifiven thee. For I perceive that thou art In the gall of bittemett and in
the bond of iniquity. '* (Acta 8, 0-8a) See also the hiitory of £neas, who had
kept his bed for eicht years and was sick of the palsy. (Acts 9, S3~-S4 ; 89-41.)

Of the same kina are also the wonderful Works of Paul, Who challenges our
wonder on account of his strengtii of spirit and his power in all things. ** And
there sat a certain man at Lystnt, impotent in his leet, being a cripple fktHil hli
mother's womb, wlio never had walked; the same heard Paul speak, who«t#ad-
iiMtly beholding him and perceiving that he had faith to be healed, said with a
loud voice. Stand upright on thy feet And he leaped and walked (Acta 14, 8-10 )

** And God wrought special miraclee bv the hands of Paul, so that from hia
hody were brought unto the sick handkerchiels «r aprons, and the dlsehsei
departed from them, and the evil apirits went out of them." (Acts 19, lUH.)

The young man named Butychus. who fell from the third story and Was
taken up dead, was restored by Pdul in the followini['manner : *'And Paul
went down, and fell on him, and embracing him said, Trouble not yourtulVes,
for his life Is In hira. When he therefore was come up again, and bad brolcen
bread and eaten, and talked a long wliile. even till break of dav «o he departed.
And they brought the young man ante, and were not a little eomforted.'*
(Acts 20, 8-12.) ** And it came to past, that the father of Pnblius lay sick 6f a
ft ver and of a flux : to whom Paul entered In, and prtyed, and laid his hands
on him and healed hha. So when this was done» othem also, who had tfis-
eases in the island, came, and were healed." (Acts 38, 8-9.)

Having alreadv spoken about the import of Christian healing and gfvea
more or less of a historical character. I will submit the mattisr to each resider
to form hi* own eonelusioas to tiiefr sptoial Movliarlties, In order that he may
select that which is most instructive. One thing must not be omitted, in eon-
einslon, and that Is, we must first become Christians before we can perform
cures by Christian methods. Very few are really Christians who oan them«
•elves such ; they are only Christians In name and appearanoa. f

The art of heaUuff, according to scriptural prineiplei. detanras spatial
mantton tn thia pIbm. In more than on« respeot, not only haoMitf Mouthlnff
truly Mgietl ta&i plftoa tbtrtih. but bfMUiie tjripttrfti htallvf It •fit7rt,

fiiMM tlM voir «rii# M» T)ii|flwlplti«f«WiMr»«nmataf ksTfbHil


THE MAGIC OF THE ISRAELITES. 63

tvAlj ^ftebUthed «coordinc to certain dMlaratioiu Mid deetrinea of the Btt>ie.
(See Levitleiu 26, 14 ; Deateronomy 28, 15-22, eto. ; Exodos U, 20 ; also,
loeleriMtioiu 38, 9 ; FMlnu 107, 17-20.^

!■ thie nubntter, therefore, there exists a higher medical eeience than the
ordinary one, and otl^er pious persons than phvsioians can heal diseases.
" Tlie believinf phy8i<;ian,^' says uarcarins, ''is like unto God, but the medi-
cal body belongs to the heathen and to the unbeliever." But according to the
wise saying of iUrach. the physician is entitled to honor, for he says : '* Honor
a ptMrsieian with the nonor due unto him for the use ye may have of him, for
the Lofd hath created him, and lie shall receive honor of the king. The skill
of the physician shall lift up his head, and in the sight of great men he slatl
be in admiration." But he too believes that ftlie physician is made only for
the sinner : <* He that sinneth before his Maker, let him fall into the bands of
thephysiciftn." (Sirach88. 15.)

In the New Testament also diseases generally are ascribed to sin. Jesus
said to the paralytic when he healed him : " Thy sins are forgiven thee *' and
he was made whole. And when he healed the man at the pool of Bethesda,


insiited npon first curing the patient morally, for a true restoration of the dis-
eased boay and spirit can only be effected by a return to God. It is truly
remarkable that the wise men of the East, Zoroaster, and all the advocates of
the doctrines oi emission (system of emanation), the Kabbalists, as well as all
later Theosophists. all of whom possesses extraordinary power to heal dis-
eases, defended this doctrine. By some of these, diseases are charged directly
to Sin, while others attribute them to evil spirits, with whom man becomes
associated through sin. That evil spirits are the cause of diseases, destroying
and vitiating the healthy sap of the system, no one with less spiritual views
than the Theosophists ^possessed will deny ; these are the true bands which
8aton has bound. (Lufe 13, 16 )

The originally pure doctrine of Christianity, howerer, was prepared in early
times by the advocates of the system of emanations, which was much more
destructive through misrepresentations hf model Christians than was in-
tended. Satuminus, Basilides and Karpokrates stood at the head of those
aocording to whose theory everything proceeded from the Aeon (heavenly-
powers.) Christ himself was to them an Aeon of the first rank, who, by a
rigid restraint fh>m sensualism subdued demons (evil spirits), and he who Lives
as Christ did can subdue them likewise. "Out of Aeon, the chief outlet,**
says Basilides, " heayen was brought into existence." According to Valen-
tine, one of the most celebrated teachers of that day, the Aeons were divided
Intoolaases, even into male and female classes. Thus, the chief female Aeon
was tlie Holy Spirit By laying on of consecrated hands the subject waa
made the recipient of this Aeon and was sent out to heal demoniac diseases.
Notwithstanding that this digresslpn created a variety of ideas, differing from
the original doctrine, the effort to heal diseases according to scriptural princi-
ples continued for a great leiu(th of time a ruling struggle for moral improve-
ment and perfection. If a being is in earnest to live in unconditional obe-
dienoe towards God, and becomes conyerted to Grod through living, activa
faith, then God becomes bis physician, and he no longer requires the services
of an earthly doctor. As soon as the soul is in a perfectly healthy condition,
it ia stated, so soon will this health be communicated to the body, or rather,
the snlTerings of the body can not be regarded as disease— these sufferings can
not «ffect the soul which has been elevated to heayen. But if a manls not
capable of such a self-cure, then let him turn to the phvsician, for " God
crested him, and he h%th given men skill, that he might be honored in his
manrellous workn." (Sirach 28, 6.) The particular manner in which the phy-
sician is to heal aocording to scriptural principles, is apparent in the foreg^g.
He must in the first place, become a truly Christian physician, that is. a phyn-
eian priest. He is able to help the sick only through his own health, espe-
oially tb/d health of his own soul» and then only when ne himself is pure. He
moat heal the inner man (the soul), for without rest in the soul (inward peace)
there can be no real cure of the body ; it is therefore indlstpensable that a
trua pbyaioiaD must also be a true prioati


64 THB MA6I0 OF THE ISRAELITES.

The qnestion, whether a soriptttrsl physician is above the neoessity of udng
medicines, or whether he tnay at times avail himself of their use in healing
diseases^ can also be easily answered scripturally, and it stands in the same
relations as does the question i^hether a magnetic physician reqnircs any med-
icines ? Generally he must possess the power as a scriptural, and more espe-
clallY as a Christian physician to heal diseases through prayer and the Divine
word, and without medicines ; and only in certain cases and when he himself
does not possess this power in a sufficient measure, can he avail himself of the
use of medicinea They are not made In vain. '* FOf medicine comes ttom the
Most Uigh.*> " The Lord hath Created medicines out of the earth, and ke is
wise that will not abhor them. With such doth he heal men and taketh away
their pains.'* (Slrach 38, 4, 7.) Medicines are good, but they are seldom sum-
cient *'Go up into Gilead and takie balm," says Jeremiah, "iu vain shalt
thou use many medicines, for thou shalt not be cured.'* (Jeremiah 46, 11.)
There are in the meantime also examples in the Bible where, in rare instances^
recourse was had to physical remedies. Moses, by casting wood into the
waters of Marah, made them sweet. (Exodus 16, 25.) His cure for leprosy by
washing, purifying, etc, was truly remarkable. EliaA threw salt into the bit-
ter spring, and it Became wholesome ever Hfterwards. He also cast meal into
the pot, wherein was dcath^and the vegetables became harmless. Isaiah laid
figs on the glands of King Heiekiah and healed him Tobias cured hia blind
father with fishgall, a cure that was shown him by an angeL And even Jesus
anointed the eyes or the blind man with spittle and clay, and told liim to wash
in the pool of Siloam, etc. As for the rest, according to the Bible, only out-
Ward remedies were used in healing, and these of the simplest and most un-
studied kinds. Internal remedies were not used. The means of cure consisted
in spiritual purification, in conversion from sin, in prayer to the Father of
Life— the physician of the believer. So we read in James 6, ia-16 : ** Is any
among you afflicted ? let him pray. Is any merry ? let him sing psalms. Is
any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church, and let them
pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord. And the

grayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up ; and if he
ave committed sins they shall be forgiven him. Confess your faults one to
another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The efi'ectnal fer-
vent prayer of the righteous man availeth much. In St. Mark, 6, 12, we read :
"And they went out and preached that all men should repent And they
cast out devils and anointed with oil many that were sick and healed them.

But the scriptural physician does not always heal, and the disease is not
always an evil. If temporal enjoymeiit and earthly felicity were the destiny
and end of man, for which the great msjority are striving, then should we be
justified in regarding sickness as a great misfortune and a heavy punishment,
which many will not admit of having deserved. But this planet is not a place
of undisturbed peace— not the abode of beings who shall rejoice in a final hap-
piness. Light and shade, day and night, rest and activity, love and hate, peace
and war, joy and sorrow, fortune and misfortune, health and sickness, life and
death, are the constant changes of this world, and they are not due to acci-
dent, out are arranged with caution by a higher hand, to serve as a touch-
stone, that we may through affliction and suffering, by overcoming evil and
purifying ourselves fVom sensualism, prepare for a better existence. The
main object is the health of the soul and the spirit ; the health of the body is a
secondary matter. If the soul is in a state of health the body will become
healthy as a consequenee. " His flesh shall be fresher than a child's ; he
shall return to the days of his youth." (Job 83, 26.) If such a strong soul
should not become well he will not feel bodily suffering, because he* already
eigoys a foretaste of the blessedness of the other world. True happiness and
perfect rest cannot be found on earth ; therefore we should not wonder, but
neither should we weep, because of the evanescence of quiet, unmixed pieas-
ure..H)f purest love, because it is so soon overcast by dark clouds and driven
away by fierce storms— -neither should we mourn because true happiness eaa
only be found in another world, because true health exista only in the soula
of those who are truly united with Ood, and because help, consolation, ana
blessing come only X^om the Father in heaven.


^w


END VOL. h


VOLUME n.

or THB

SIXTH AND SEVENTH

BOOKS OF MOSES


FORMULAS

OF TUB


MAGICAL KABALA;


0B| THB


OF THB

SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES,

TOGETHER WITH

AN EXTRACT

FROM THB OENUINB AND TRUE

WMA OF SOLOMOH W me or ISRAEL


WEIMAR: I595t'


y


V


i


NOTE,


FRIENDS OF THE MAGICAL KABALA.

Tbk CiUtion-Formiiliw ooQUined in tbis book muat onl; be pro-
DOiniCfd in tbe Hebrew Ungiiage. tnd in no otfaer. In any olher
langnnge the; lisve no power whatever, tinil tbe MHSt«r c»n never be
inre of his oaaae. For all theee words and Torins were IhuH pio-
Dounced bj th« Great Spirit, and have powt-r 00I7 iu the Ilebruw


Extract from the Hagieal Kabala
Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses.


BREASTPLATB


These Hebrew words are pronounced as follows;

Jehova, a«er Ebeje Gether Eleioti Eheje.
Tbe Most High, whom no eye halh aepn, nor loiiguu Rpok« ;
Spirit, which did great aets and p«ifornieJ great wonders.
TUb Breastplate and Heltnet pronounced mean Holiness.


ai«bel BUffl actitu bifm dontne uiwroh.


4 "■*»" SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS Of* tlOflEfl. .

Thene are (ha names which the old Egypllana used Inatead of the
unutterable name of AsBer Criel, aBd are called " The Fire of God,"
ftnd " Strong Kock of Faith." Whoever wears them on hU perMn,
on a gold plate, will not die a endden death.


BRZIABTPIiATD OF AABttM.


Sadiuai amara elon bejiana vananel pheoktm «lNMe1 nMat
That U, a Prince of Mlena, the other leads to Jebova.
Ihia God spaka to Hoses.


MAQICAI. I. OF MOOOft


Aita hlmel >«Hra{Je haralioB.

Tbese vords are terrible, and will MMnble devils or spirits, or fktj
Kill caose the dead to appear.


Eliaon joena ebreet eloijela NJel agoni aoehadoD.
These words are great and migbi^. They are Kames of the Oraator
and the cbaract«ra on Ibe Ark of tbe Covenant.

CONJURATIOIT

SIiEAZAR,

tJniel dilatan Sad^ paneim oMmigarai calipboi i


StXTH ANb SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSB§. 5

These names, if any one desires to accomplish anything through the
four elements or any other things connected therewith, will prove
effective, but they cannot be translated into English.


DISMISSION OF EtEAZAli
AAROXrS SON;


Leay yli Ziarite zelobabe et negoramy Zien latebm damn mechfi td-

meti ozira,

I'hrough this dismission all things dissolve into nothing.


CITATION OF GERMUTHSAt


OB,

IiEVIATHAN.


Lagumen Emanuel therefor! mecbelag laigel yazi Zaiael.


With these natpes Eleasar bound and unbound the spirits of the
air.


DISMISSION OF LEVIATHAN.


Malcoh, Sadaij, cubor Damabiah menkie lejabel maniah ijejavai.

That is : Strong, mighty spirit of hell, go back into thine works, in
the name of Jehova.


BALAAM'S SORCER7.


Meloch, hcl alokim tiphret hiod jesath.

€

This brings vengeance upon enemies, anid must not be disregarded, >
because it contains the names of the Seven Tables of the Ark of the
O^venant*


eisra ahc sEVEtfrii books of uosbs.


B O Y F T.


Tankbtatn dnatea pngnij nijolo usqU hicbaifiile matae hnbonr bijc«ni.

With tbe«e words Moses spake to Ihe soi'cerera in Rgypl. They sig-
nify : '■ Ibe Lord appeared to Lia B"i-TOiit in Ibf flw, uiavti Ibe eurth
in lU four qaartera, aad tlie uutb< r eurtb.


COWDRATION OF THE LAWS OF
HOSES.


AIJCOD dniuanas pethanir thrijgnir ijon cijna naterlavis pfitoin.
If yon wish to pronounce Ibcse words voa
you can perform woiidera thiTovvith. they
BOCOotit of the Hebrew obanicten-


QENERAL CITATION OF MOSES OS ALL
SPIRITS.


Elton foena adonaij cailnii pbrp'i. elo'i \ dn nfripl. nijnni metindnn,
e«8iiBeiw Elohtm. deiiinn jaii I'lijiiln, driin j;iri Zaaael Palielniad,
Umiel, onala dllatiim Sadalj, aima Jod Jai^I Tljiimn.

Tbu citation Is greai and miKhly ; Ihoy are the names of the Crea-
tor, Mid the names of tbe two Chi-nibini un Ibe Mercj-seat, Zarall and
JaeL


DISHISSIOH OF HOSES.


WaMBtUn buhknda neiabbad Jebod Elohlm mkt ebctfe Zalla.


r AKD SEVENTH BOOKS OF 1


QBNERAL CITATIOIT OF HOSBS ON
ALL SPIHITS.


Abezeraije comitejoD S«de Icji thomoe Stumagala b(j nl IjotM J<nui

Eluij Zawaijoi.

These are the high nni powerful iitterancea which Moeea employed

in the awaltening or the Leviaihan, in order to compel him to serve

bis Lord. The Hmt cannot be utttirpd and (rus used b; the first inhab-

" ts of earth as a might; Lord. The wlinle is good, but not every

—u obtain it in perfection without severe di«:ip]ine.

GHAKAGTERS
the left side of the Aril of
the Covenaut of the Uost
High.

CHARACTERS ON THE RIGHT SIDE.


Ee*t, ob, bnal, the Lord our God is God aloae.


THE CONJUSED SPIRIT APPEARS IN A
PILLAR OF FIRE.


Hiqa otTabij Zien. Jeramije Lntitbi damRJeBano noli Iljotj Le^] gl^ yra
£^Io|j liecle loate liUi Eli mecharamethy rljbitu

sa fu anira reacha. .

TbiioitBtioD names the twelve evil spirits of man, through the help I

of the Father, or the Hebrew Eli j it is terrible. !


SIXTH AMD SBVESTE BOOKS OF M0SB8.


THE SPIRIT APPEARS IN A
PILLAR OF CLOUD.


Kahai couor anuheo Zelobae zole hebei ede nego raneij babtibe gizMO.

Appendix to the Ooneua Citatton of Moaea on all SplrlU.

We N. N., in tbis circle, conjure and cite this spirit Fatenovenia,
*tUi toll Ua iat^reaU. to appear bare ia Ibis spot, to ta\6\ our degirei,
in tbe n«m8 of Ibe three holy AngBla. Soboii^jen Sbtiiiam, RobBJoU
AvaraiD, Kaniile, firwbat Chaijdalic, Ladabas, Labnl, Raragil, Ben-
ool, ia iiie name of God. Amen 1


THREE SEW SIGNS WITH FBOGS,
LICE AND PESTILENCE.

Ablon, agelBtoo, Zoratan, Jurao, Doadieras portatpbins pogaij a


I THREP NEW SIGNS AT CATTLE, PESTt

LENCE, BLACK SMALL-POX AND

HAIL.


GBAS^OPPE£B AND DARKNESS.


THE SPIRIT APPEAES IM THE BPBH- '
ING BUSH,


fiiXTfi Amy sE^mn sooes of mossi^. . ^


Baba cnci hiebu ziadhi elenehet na vena vie achya salna.
The spirit which appears here is Grod himself.


3 r "1/r '■*' ^.\


[MOSES CHANGES 'TOE STAFF INTO
A SERPENT.


Hicrata raepi Sathonik petbanisch, pistan Qttinge^hijgatign gghizian
temgaroQusiiia castas Lacias astas ^eeon o^na ealtera Caphas.

MOSES CHANGES WATER INTO
BLOOD.


AWo'fiUla maaadel slapBiebas mi^in fai^atii biaadosclii jbmttf
i»]»e6l amphia, 4eiaisrael maeHe l«aggat waaailMk


.Q0>.


Principal Citation on all Ministering Spirits of the Air and of Earth*
the like of which Manasses utd Solomon used as the

true Key of Salomonis Regis Israel . ,. . ,

EXTRACT

FR03I THE * . .

TRUE CLAVICULA tf $OtOM«N m OF THE URDLE' Of mOnF

bequeathed as a testament to all the wise Magicians, whiolr all^tlne old
Fathers possessed and employed, to have and' fulfil all tbin]^ throngh
the illustrious power of the mipflity God Jehovah, as He, tb« great
Monarch, gave to His creatures, who worship him day afv^tiight with
reverence and in fear, who call loudly upon his name in secret, and
sigh to him as their origin, as of him and from him existing reasonable
beings, as on the point of being enviroi.ed with the pains of the ele-
ments, who strive after the highest being to and with God. To these
He has given this, who will not forget him in the pleasures of this
world, who, still bearing suffering without forgetting the reality, nor
the perishing lustre of the world.

Tou must stand upon a prominent rock, hold a pHlm-twig in your
right hand, and wear a wreath of laur^ aronnd the temple. Then
turn towards the East and say : \

Alija Laija Laumin Otheon !

upon this a halo of light will surround you, and when you become
sensible of this light, then fall upon your knees and worship. Then
■ay in an audible voice, slowly and distinctly :


BDtTH ASD AEtfENtH SOOSB 6P ItOSlS.


EIIbib joena Bdoaai cadua ebreel elojsU sf^el, a7om Mchadon
OHOBdH elOTin de liomir eljnla lella yaxi zaEall nnuel ovela dHatau
Soday alnik pMii^B) al;in canal Aeunj iiaami yasas ealipi ealfai Mitui

"b ladnja aglaU paDtomel amriel azten phanaton sarae penerioQ j%
■ ' ' ■ ' amphia tbaDdomlrael alowin.


ija aglaU pe
Jodjalaph


B A m n UiIm aU phonfia agaloyes pyol paerteoD Ibeserym.

Vni^C aR bastrnd JmI barionla.

apiolet ceoet


SIXTH AND 3EVENTH BOOKS OF UOSES. 11

BI BLI A,

Arcana Magica Alexander,


Tradition of Uie Sixth and SeveaUi Books of MoMa,


MAGICAL LAWS.


Ex Verbis Revelatis (11) Intellectui Sigii-
latis Verbis.

Ndho Apostoligi i^ Cohikobatiohi

jn SOTO CONFIRMAtO.

Script, de Ellbio.


12 SIXTH AHD 3Bf ENTa BOOKS OF HOSBS.

TREATISE OF THE SIXIB BOOK OF HOSISS.

CaiPTBB L-r^THE 8PIBIT APPEARS

TO MOSES IN A BaBNING

BUSH.


I CsAP. II. -HOSES CHANGES THE
STAFF INIO A SERPENT.


Chap. IV.- THREE NEW SIGNS WITH
FEOGS, LICE AND PESWLENCE.


Chap, v.- TBRBE. SIGNS ON CATTLE,

PESTILENCE, BLACK SMALL-FOX

AND HAIL.


Chap. VI.— THREE SIGNS OF GRASS-
HOPPEBS AND DARKNESa


CuAF. VII.-GENERAL CITATION OP
HOS&S ON ALL SPIRITS.


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF HOSES. IS


JhiB ar Twm Sixth Book of Hobks.

TItELA.TISE SI03Sr.
The Seventii Book of IKwes.


CH1PI»I.-THS SPmrP APPEARS IS A
FDXAfi OF FIRE BT KIGHT.


obap. a— the spieit appears in a

~ PILLAB of cloud BT PAT,


14 eiZTH AKD BEVENTU BOOKS OF H08BB,


Chat. IlL— BALAAM'S SORCEKY.


Chap. rV.-^BGYPT.


Chap. V.~C0NJDRATION OT TBB
LAW OF MOSES.


Chap. VI.-GBNERAL CITATION OP


Chap. VII. — GENERAL CITATION OF
MOSES ON


DISMISSAL.


8IXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OP MOSES;


as


Chap. VII.— CONJURATION OF
ELBAZAR.


DISMISSAL.


:)'f-


-)i:^


Chap. VIIL— CITATION OF QUERNITHAY

OB LEVUTHAN,


DISMISSAL*


jS-jD — by


Chap. IX— MAGICAL LAWS OF MOSES.


Chap. X.— HELMET OF MOSES AND
AARON.


-^ f- sA ♦, »^ ^


Chap, XI. — BREASTPLATE OF MOSES.


Chap. XII.— BREASTPLATE OF AARON.


Kin--
ivmm


16 SIXTH AKD SGVBHTB BOOKS Of KOraK


Chap. XIII.— THE CHALICB fflT
HOLINESS.


FOR THE LEFT HAND.


FOR THE BIGHT HASD.


i'gRyinr-


SEPTfl AM) SBVElWtt BOOKS OP M08ES. It

m.

EXTRACT

FROM THB

MAGICAL. KABALA,

OF THI

SIXTH AND SEVENTH

BOOKS OF HOSES.

mr

S. T. N.

tMoiteted fot tlie first lime from the Gnthaii-Samaritan Langua^

into Englisli,


ANNO MDGCXXYI. / t


■fhi


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.

SiNCi the Oriental transcript of this work waa imperfect in many
fUkHf tke translation of it had to be talcen accordiug to the great
original book, on account of the purity of its text, and, therefore, it
Won for itself the advantage of understanding and completing the
exercises with serenity and confidence. The translator, in the mean-
time believes, that no one, who feels honestly called to these things^
etti eter be made the subject of ill-fortune, or be deceived by the
ii^es and deceptions of the old serpent, the inevitable fate that will
aad mast fall to his lot under any other exorcisms, and that he may
4m0tMiy and safely move thence, because only the angels of CM
wiU perform the service requured by Him.


18 SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OP MOSES.

The Testibale of the Entrance.— The language and manuscript
of this rare and eternal monument of Ught, and of a higher wisdom, are
borrowed from the Cuthans, a tribe of the Samaritans, who were called
Cuthim in the Chaldee dialect according to the Talmud, and they were
so called in a spirit of derision, They were termed sorcerers, because
they taught in Cutha, their original place of abode, and afterwards, in
Samaria, the Eabala or Higher Magic (Book of Rings). Caspar,
Melchior, and Balthasar, the chosen arch-priests, are shining lights
among the eastern Magicians. They were both kings and teachers —
the fiKst Priest-teachers of this glorious knowledge, and from these
Samaritan Cuthans — from these omnipotent priests of the fountain of
light, who were called Nergal, according to the traditions of Talmud,
originated the Gypsies, who, through degeneracy, lost the coosecra-
tion of their primordial power.

LAWS OF ENTRANCE.

1. Before you can enter the temple of consecrated light, yon must
purify your soul and body during thirteen days. -

2. As a brother and disciple of the new covenant, or as a Christian,
▼ou must receive the holy sacrament for the glorifioatioD of 4he three
kings — Caspar, Melchior and Balthasar.

3. Three holy masses must be read as often as you make nse of this
Book in your priestly service with your intention fixed upon the three
glorified kings.

4. You must provide yourself with a ram's horn, wherewith to call
together the angels and spirits. This horn must be included in your
intentions of the holy mass.

6. You must wear a breastplate of parchment, ten inches high and
ten inches wide, inscribed upon it the names of the twelve apostles
with the five-fold name of Schemhamforasch, in the same order that it
is placed on the last leaf.

6. You must draw a circle aronnd yon upon white paper, or upon
sky-blue silk. Its circumference shall be thirteen feet, and, at th^
distance of each foot, one of the following names must be written,
viz. : Moseh, Messias, Aaron, Jehova, Adoni, Jesus^ Christus, Caspar,
Melchior, Balthasar. Al. Al. Al.

7. Between each name you must place the holy symbol of Horet, —
namely :-|.+-.o^^--|..

8. The breastplate must be included in the intention of the holy
mass.

9. Through consecration with h^\y triple kingV water and with
three burning wax tapers, you must finally pronounce a benediction
over this book, the horn, the breastplate, and the circle, after reading
a well-selected mysterious ritual.

10. Yon may enter alone, or begin this great work with two com-
panions, by day or by night, but always from the first to the thir-.
teenth of the month, and during the thirteenth day, and through the
whole night of the new moon, and also during full moon, when the
three planets, Saturn, Mars and Jupiter, are visible in the beaveiMl
on the day of exorcism, eitl^er singly or together.


- SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OP MOSES. 19

11. Ton mast always stand with yoar face toward ZioD, or toward
the rising of the sun.

. 12. He who refuses a copy of this book, or who suppresses it or
•teals it, wiU be seized with eternal trembling, like Cain, and the
angels of God will depart from him. •


-000-


INTRODUCnON AND BBGINZIlNa.

i

»

BREASTPLATE OF MOSES. I

. Schedtt^i, Weduse, Tiwisi.— ^ have sinned, I shall sio.

' Prayer*— Eternal God of our all ! Our God ! hear our voice, spare
and have mercy upon us. Accept onr prayer in mercy and with
pleasure. I have sinned. I have committed transgressions, I have
sinned before Thee ; I have done that which is displeasing unto l%ee
here in the earth. For the sake of Thy great name pardon me all the
sins and iniquities and transgressions which 1 have committed against
Thee from my youth. Perfect ag^in all the holy names which I have
blemished, great Champion, terrible, highest God, eternal Lord,
God Sabaotb.

HELMET OF MOSES AND AARON.

Wochntu, Tukal, Bcschufa, Gutal, If I shall sin, I shall blow with
the great horn.

Here the horn must be blown, three times in succession, toward the
four corners of the earth, or toward the f<7ur quarters of the earth.

For the ram's horn, in the old covenant, is the symbol of omnip-
otence and of purification, or of beauty, truth and holiness.

BREASTPLATE OF AARON.

Dehtttu, Euwsaltu, Bescholam. — Tou have sinned. I shall sin in
peace.

Frayer.— The Lord, King of all Kings, holy and praised is He, the
Father, God, Soii of God, the Holy Spirit of God are three in one
among these three. In the power of Thy might and Thy right, release
those that are bound, receive the prayer of Thy people, strengthen us,
pnify us, oh, terrible Hero, us who worship Thy only name. Protect
them as the apple of Thine eye, bless them, cleanse them, repay them
always in mercy and justice. Mighty, holy Lord, reward Thy con-
gregation with Thy great goodness. Thou, the only and exalted
God, appear unto Thy people with Thy holy name ; receive and re-
member our prayer ; hearken unto our cries, Thou who knowest all
leorets and who knowest our desire.

Here the horn must be blown as before.

MAGICAL LAWS OF MOSES.
Katft-Al, Lewuwat,— We are great \ Our hewrts I


ZM HIATH AUD BKVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.

t

Prayen — Oh, Lord, arise, that mine enemies may be destiroyed and
that they may fly ; that those who hate Thee may be scattered like
smoke — drive them away. As wax meltoth before the fire, so pass
away all evil-doers before God, for God has given Thee the kingdom.
Pour out Thy wrath over them. Thy wrath seize them. Thou shaH
stand upon leopards and adders, and Thou shalt subdue the lion ^iid
dragon. With God only can we do great things. He will bring them
under oar feet.

THE CHALICE OF HOUNESd.

Al, Al, Al. Arise, Thou eternal Angel I

This must be repeated three times in a loud voice, and also through
the symbol of the horn, for he is an angel of the sanctuary.

Prayer. — ^Thou, that art, and wast, and wilt be in the old and mw
covenant 1 Eternal, Jehovah, Jesus Christ, Messia, All-beautiful, All-
true, All*holy! All-loving and AU-merciful in the old aqd in the
new covenant. Thou hast add : Heaven and earth shall pass awi^,
but* my words shall not pass away. Thou haflt said : I came not to
destroy the old covenant, but to fulfil it Thou hast said : He who seen
me sees the Father. Thou hast said : If ye have true faith, ye can perr
form the wonders which I have done, yea, ye will perform yet miu^k
greater wonders than I have done. Come also to me Ipr the sake of
my faith, come also unto me for the sake of Moses, Thy meaaeogec of
faith. Reveal also to me Thy mysterious name from Jehovah, as Thoa
once did to Thy fire prophet Moses, in solitude ; come, and say unto
me in love, through the heart of Mosea a^ with iha tongue of Aaion:

Scahebual ! I shall come !

THE CONJURATION OF ELEAZAR.

Duwatu, Buwatie, Bemaim.— I cone to jqu oil the wat^r!
Bring me up N. N. 1

DISMISSAL OF ELEAZAR.
Orum, Bolectn, Ubajom. — Cursed by night and by day I

CITATION OF QUEftNITHAY OR LEVUTHANS.

These,.as well as the following exorcisms, contain only the p^Miliar
names of the angels who will permit the conjured spirits to appear, or
will compel them by force to appear. Here the three angels of om*
nipotence will be called up to drive forth the monsters of hell, nanwly:
Eliibatel, Ebuhuel Atuesuel !

Each name must be repeated three times.

DISMISSAL.

I beseech and copjure thee« angel Elubatel, conduct N. N, from mf
presence.

Each angel's name must be called three times toward the four quar«
tera ot the earth, and tbi*«e times mopt be blown with the horp.


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES. 21

Chap. III.— BALAAM'S SORCERY.

Gnu, Baschba, Niscboaz Hueretz. — In the name of Grod I conjure
the earth.

Chap. V. — CONJURATION OF THE LAWS OF MOSES.

Keisehu, Nischba, Lawemso.— How to be God, do swarest Thou to
our parents.

PraTer.— Eternal of Eternals ! Jehovah of Light, Adonai of Truth !
Messiah of the All-merciful! Jesus Christ the beloved and All-
redemption and love ! Thou bast said : Who seeth me seeth also the
Father. Father, eternal Father of the eld and new covenant ; triune
Father, triune Son, triune Spirit, our Father. I beseech and conjure
Thee by the eternal words of Thy eternal truih.

And now the seventeenth chapter of John, or the prayer ef Jesas,
most^ be prayed;

Closing Prayer of the Conjuration of the Law.-^tenMtljGkid>

Jehova, Thou hast said : Ask and it shall be given you. I pray that
Thou mayest hear Thy servants Caspar, Melcbior and Balthasar, the
arch-priests of Thy fountain of light! I pray that thou mayest bid
Thy angels to purify me from all sin ; that they may breathe upon
me in love, and that they may cover me with the shadow of their
wings. Seiid them down ! This is my prayer in peace !

Chap. VL— EGITGIM.

Conjuration of threee angels, Gebril! Meachuel! Nesanel ! By
the lamp of the three-fold eternal light, let N. N. fippear before me.
Three calls with the voice and three with the hern.

Chap. VII. — GENERAL CITATION OF MOSES ON ALL

SPIRITS.
Tubatlu ! Bualu ! Tulatu ! Labusi ! Ublisi !— -Let there »ppeAr and
bring before me the spirit of N. N.

Each of these five omnipotent angels must be called three times
toward the four corners of the world, with a clear and powerful voice,
and when the name of each is pronounced three times, then three
sounds must be made by the horn. The name of each angel there-
fore, must have three calls with the voice and three with the horn.

DISMISSAL OF MOSES.

•

Ubelntusi! Kadukuliti! Kebutzi! — Take away iirom my presence
the spirit, of N. N.
Twelve calls with the voice, and twelve with the horn, for each name.

FOR THE LEFT HAND.

These signs were used at the time of burnt-<^eriDg is th^ holy
temple.


SIXTH AND SBVENTB BOOKS OF M08B8.
FOR THE RIGHT HAND.


These are aiw Bjmbolijat of the pUguea of Fbaraoh to Bgjpt.
Schema Israel Adonoi MbiKgno, Ekat. — Hear, oh, lanel, the Loid
out God ii God aloOe.


THE SEMTH BOOK OF HOSES.


Chip. I— THE EEVELATION OV ZION.
THB SPmiT APPEAE8 IN A PILLAB OF FlitE BY NIGffn
Talobdl Lstabueit Ealubaai! Aliieil
Arire and bring me Ihe Pillar of Fire that I may gee.
The name of ench anfcel moEt i^aln have three calls by the voio*
directed to ibe four niiarterE of Ihe earth and an equal Dumber bj tlM


Adiilall Abnlall LeboBll

Arise and bring before me the spirit N.

C»lla with the jgiee aud born m klreAdf known.


SIXTH. AND SEVENTB fiOOES OS" MOSES. 23

Hara fblknm th».pMitagoa, or, the Omnipotont FlT*Garaan.


nil mytXerioan flgure matt b« written berore th« ezoTciiin. In tha
op«n •ir,aDd in tbe ground, with coneecmted chaltor with tbe fnfex
flug«r oir the right hand dipped in bol; three- kings- vater, the tAme m
It a writtCD up OD thn paper, but each line must be thirteen feet in
length. The conjuror theu lineels io the centre of the ettir, with an-
covered beoA and with taae turned towHi'd Zion, nnd calls fint in a loud
Toice, coming from tbe heart, tbe narneH or Cafipar. Belchior and Bal-
thasar, thirteen times, and afier c tiling these thirteen times, he mast
alio the call the name ol hif^h and sacred name of Elokim 373 limes
with equal fervor and fnith. iiut on); as has already been stated in
tbe Laws of Entrance, No. 10, in the flrst three daje or nights of the
nev moon, or full moon, or when Saturn, Hars and Jupiter appear
hi Um beaveni.

Owi-. IV. — THREE NEW SIGNS WITH FROGS, HICE. LICE
AND SlMILAa VEKUIN.
Adnil Baachur ! Arbu! Uliil
Progs, mice, lice and similar vermin arise in our service.

Caw. V. - . ^

SdALL-POX AND HAIL.
Aboil, Baa I
FeaUlence, black small pox, etc., arise in our service.

Ch*p. VI.— THKEE SIGNS WITH GRASSHOPPERS AND
DARKNJiSS.
Ardnii 1 Oainsi I

GraiahopperB. Darkness, arise in our service.
These are the plagues which the Cathiaus oftea emplofed Io tbalr
tKOTciems for punishmeuL ,


Revelation of the Sixth Book of Moses.

Chap, I.— THE SPIRIT APPEARS UNTO MOSES IN A

BURNING BUSH.

CX)NJUBATIOSr. .

Kaluku ! .Ubesii I Lawisa t — Arise and teach me.
Galls with voice and horn as is already known.

Chap. II. — MOSES CHANGES THE STAFF INTO A SERPENT.

Tuwisu ! Kawisu I Lawisa l—A^ise and change this staff into a ser-
pent.
Calls with voice and horn as nsaal.

MOSES CHANGES WATER INTO BLOOD.
Akanatinl Tawalul Labatal — Arise and change this water into

Calls with voice and horn as usual. i

Here follows the Latin title of this book, from which these magical
fragments are extracted.

BIBLIA ^

Areana Magiea Alexandri (Magi),

ACOORniNO TO

(BETSAIED) TRADITION OF THE SUTH AND SETEfFH

BOOKS OF HOSES.

TOQETHER WITH THE

MAGICAL LAWS.

Ex Verbis H. (human) Intellectui Sigillatis Verbis.
Nunc Apostolica 9^ (Anctoritate) Consecrata de Novo Confirmata

•{4 9^ p^ (Licentia.)

Script de Eppbio.


ANNO MOOCXXXVTII.


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OP MOSES. 25

Now Moses appears on the right of the silk, in a simple priestly
garb, holding the tree of iife, which has fojor lenyea la the right hand,
and the ram's horn in the left.

Upon his heart rests the cross ; a wide, white band flows over his
shoulder and breast, a broad, white girdle graces his loins. He stands
upon a kind of hat, which is decorated with three fiowers. On the
right hand of the hat reposes a dove having a ring in her bill, on the
left side and over the head of Moses a three-fold tripod with magical
hieroglyphics thereon rises upward.

1. Upon the leaves of the tree of life yon read the worde:
Besulol BedunimI Labatell

That is, if you are not pure, or if you do not become pure at a vir-
gin through the two angels Bunedreim and Lebutal, you cannot reach
toward the tree of life.

2. A hat adorned with three flowers, upon which Moses stands, and
from which a dove with ring in her bill appears to descend, that is :

If you preserve faith and hope with .holy Q&re,. the spirit of omnip-
otence will emanate from you.

3. A three-fold intertwined triangle, extending from the feet to t))e
hoad, having inscribed upon it the names of the three angels, M^-
chuel, Labatel, Kautel, that is : And the three angels of the triuiie
God, Meachuel, Lebatei, Ketuel, will surround and carry you up^n '
their hands.

On the reverse side of the pictnre of Moses, or rather on the fl^t
leaf, according to oriental reckoning, appears the elevated, winding
and crowned serpent, holding a ring in her teeth. Around the ser-
pent may be seen the moon, the stars, planets, water and many other
magic Jiieroglyphical signs. On the left side of the tail may be seen
seven nails, on the right side are magical hieroglyphics making the
name of Schemhamporasch. To see Jesus Christ with the ca^oss, that
is to say : Jesus Christ, through his love and by his seven wounds
and through bis death on the cross, for his love's sake, has overcome
the kingdoms of this world, and thus took again from the old serpent,
the devil, the seal-ring of human omnipotence, or the happiness ^f man
to all the eternal eternities, in order to fulfil the old covenant- in the
new covenant, for the eternal glorification of the eternal Father in the
eternal Son, through the eternal Spirit. Amen.

BUA ARGANA MIGA ALEXANDEII,

ACCORDING TO THE TBADITION OF THB

SIXTH AND SETENTH BOOKS OP MOSES,

TOGETHER WITH THE MAGICAL LAWS.

E?( Terhi^ (H) Intellectui Sigillatis Verbis Nunc ApodtQU^i^ •^
Consecrat de Nove Confirmati ►Ji 9^

SOBIPT Dh £!L8TR0t
XOCOLXXXUL


SIXTH AKD SEVENTH BOOKS OP HOSES.
BKEASTPLATE OF MOSES.


HELMET OF MOSES AND AAEON.


BREASTPLATE OP AARON.


FOE THE LEFT HAND.


sjsra AifD beventh &oo^ of uoses.

FOR THE BIGHT HAND.


Tradition of the Sixth Book of Moses.


Chip. L— THE SPISIT APPEABS IK A BCEKINa BUSH.
CITATION OF UOBES.


Chap. n^HOBES CHANGES THE STAFV INTO A SIRFENT.


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OP M0SE9.
Chap. IIL-MOSES CHANGES WATER INTO BLOOD.


Sixth and seventh books of moses.


IvD OF TBB Si:


3d SlfFH JlHO eBTBHta BOOES OF IIOSGS.

Tradition of the Seventh Book of Moses.


Cbat. m.— BALAAM'S 80BCERY.


BIXTH iSD SEVENTH BOOKS OF UOfiEg.


Cbat. IV.-GGIFGIU.


Chap. V. — CONJUBATION OF THE LAWS OP UOSBS.


82 BTXTH AND BEVXNTH BOOKS OF H0SE8.\,


BIXTH AMD 8&VBHTH BOOKS OF UOBBfl. St

DIAGRAM

ILUBnUTDIO TBX

SVJtBOLS EMPLOYED BY THE ISRAELITES


.84 KZTH AND SBTENTH BOOKS OF HOSES.

SYXBOL W t^ eHOWSE* SBKPENT
MACtlCAJ. MLBJiO aLTSBI-CS.


COSjyRA'nON of ELEAaAB.


DISMISSAL OP Et.EA2AR.


GITA,T10N OF QUERUILLAH OR LBTUTBAN.


sfrra and SEfEifTtf MbKa oP uoaiA.

DISMISSAL OF QUERMILLAT OR LEVIATHAN.


A.FF»ENr)I2C.


HogicBl (SpiritOommatIo) benide the Blaok Raven,
fl od Arcanum FontiScatus imter Popet Aleznnder VI., printed
«iid Mno (Cbtieti) M. D. L


FBEFATIO.
Qnism per ILLVBTBEU et Generoaam D ARNOLDVH comnitem
fiemtbemi TicheleDburei-Hteinfordii Domtnum in Rhoed WiTelhovsB
nft^ca A[c«DB originall celeberrimi D. Jouuia PAUSTI in Oeminta
ex Kundting oriiudl Bironi HESMANNO in Hom Btpa and a«ldr(H
llnea BatotmTgieo Bpiacopo fldeliter admannats et anno qnadraBeaimo
...,._, , ^ ™, -"""-oEioUII N08-

Iftoculi
a Vatl-
n impritnantur neqtie inde transportentur, si vero quiscnnqna
lemere contra agere anauB fuerit, DIVINAM maledlotionem latae ten-
tentisB ipBo facto afrratia. Nobis aolis reservandis oa incnnuniai
Bciat, Ita mandamua et coDBtitiiimiis Virtnte ApoBtolioa. Ecoleelae
JESn CHRIST! 8ub pcena Excommnntcationia «t aupn Abdo Msanda
Vicariatua Noatrt. ROMAB VERBl IKOABNATl Anno H. D. I.
ALEXANDER VL

D. G. FOHTiFn,
F. Fleoolomepiu CatdinallBCaMelL
APPEOBATIO.
tmmniet Inatractio Taticaoa SapienU paucit mudna praetersa »tt9-
tntator a aua Sanotitate desuper faoto Oooaecratio Canouioa.


fiSttt Aifb StSt^*ra BOOfeS OF MOSM. d1


LECTOR.

Ne spernas librum, si non intelligis esto,
Si contra captnm est, satis esti, quod vota secundet.
Fri}(idu8 in pratis cantaudo rumptiur angiiis. Ec. 8 virg.
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit acqaa potestas
Hoc lege lector opus sacra beec moanmenta polorum
Bine optata farss hsec te (ua vota docebant,
Fide cave, sapienter age, et virtute labora,
Sioque beabit opus pia GONSEGRATIO facta,

•^ •J* •J*


D. I. F.

INSTBUCTIONS.

If 700 want to cite and compel spirits to appear visibly before you
and render 70a obedience, then observe tbe following instmctions :

1. Keep God's commands as much as yon can possibly do.

2. Baild and trust solely upon the might and power of QoS. ; be-
lieve firmly on his omnipotent help in your work, and the spirits will
become your servants and will obey you,

3. Continue your citations, and do not cease, even if the spirits do
not appear at once. Be steadfast in your work and faith, for the
doubter will obtain nothing.

4. Take especial notice of the time, viz. :

Monday night, from eleven until three o'clock.
Tuesday night, from ten until two o'clock.
Wednesday night, from twelve until three o'clock.
Thursday night, from twelve until two o'clock.
Friday night, from ten until three o'clock.
Sotarday night, from ten until twelve o'clock.

The Sabbath keep holy to the Lord Sabaoth, Adonai, Tetragram*
maton.

6. It must, at the same time, be new moon. IPerhaps you may say,
" Why these hours and signs — are tbey not all the days of the Lord i"
It is true : but not all hours, and all signs, are favorable to rule over
tbeir spirits.

6. Complete the following circle, described in this work, on parch-
ment, written with the blood of youog white doves. The size of the
circle may be at your own option.

. 7. If yon wish to undertake the .operation, be sure to consecrate the
circle previously.

►Ji >}» iji

(See this Circle. Fig. 24.)

Bkfo K. N., consecro et benedico istnm Circalum per. Nomina Del
Aioiidiiii in 90 Scripta, ut sit nlhi et omnibus Soatmn at Protectip


Dei Fortissimi Elohim TnvinerHHe coiiftra omnes malignos Spiritiis,
gernrmqae Potesti^tes. In NomiDe Dei Patris Dei Fiiii Dei Spiritus
Sanoti. Am«n.

Upon yomr entrance into this Circle spenfc its foiled : Tetpajprramr
maton.'i'h^o^, l8chiro8,Athanat6j^. Messias, Imaft, KyrieEleison: Amen.

After 70a have entered the Circle begin your operation with the
following prayer from the Ninety-first Psalm.

He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Moat High sihaVI^ abide
under the shadow of the Almighty. I wilF say of the Lord. He> is my
refage and my fortress, my God, in Him will I fnis^. Supply hie shall
deliver me from the snare of the fowler and from the noisome pesti-
lence. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings
Shalt thou trust Hia truih nh all^ be ihy shiuld-and buckler. Thou
shalt not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow thai flieth
by day. Because thou hast made £he Lord, which is my refuge, even
the Most High, thy habitation. There shalt be no evil befall thee,
neither shall any plague come near thy dwelling. Because he hath
s^^fiii 1t»Vfr upon me. th(>r«fOFe will i deliver htm. I wfHr^geft tei'^vn
high B^ e awae he batk known my name. Hewii^ call 41^1011 «« «ui(|;l'-
will answer- himr; I will be with Inm in trouble ; I wil-l deUver.Jiim
aodrheaerv With long-life- will I satisfy him and show him my &%lvj^-
tionvoven so help me and all them that seek thy holy ajf God tile r
Father •{« God the Sou aj* God the Holy Ghost. Ameu.


■eov


($itati«tt

OF Tn»

SEVEN GREAT PRIMSES • - "

FROM TUB

Biactih acoA Se^entii Bookii of Mchses Bitilfa McfgicaL


OITATIO AZTELIS. .

Agla Oa4el6, Sambit Cacl(*m. Awenhato^coro. A2i«M, ZorWOtlto*'
Yzewoth, Xoro, Quotwe, Tbeosy, Mew«th, Xosoy. Yaehyres,' Gntiav^
Hagay^ 3taworo, Wyhaty. Ruoso Xuatho, Rum, Ruwotb, ZylNMf'
Qaaylos, Wewor, Vegath, Wysor, Wu2oy, Noses,* Aiiel.*

CITATTO ARIELIS.

Yschyros, The'or Zebabth. Wyzeth, Yzatho.*^, XyJso, Xy<*ethorttwtfy,
Xantho, Wiros, Rurawey, Ymowe.- Noswathosway. Wirvnothowesy,'
Zebaoth, Yvmo, Zv8wethono^ve. YschjTioskay, Ulathos, Wyaoy,
Yrsawo, Xyzeth, DurobiJCbtfos^WuiJoWeibnS^ Yeweoy, Zaday, Zy waye,
B«t|HMiwM,' YachyiOfl, Imas, Tetragramntalon, Ariel.


8IXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES. '39


CITATIO MARBUELIS.


>. sJbdQiiaf, Jebova. Zebaoth. Theos, Yahathoroswe, Wih<(By90|i^Q8,

*'f8lqr»yghoroy, Veprorym, Abaij, Wogos, aijgbUm, Ze^pj^ %op9iPB,

^othyra. Rijzwe. Uijwoth, Omegr«s, Hehgewe, Zebaon, Wezator,


£f8iqr>irghoroy, Veprorym, Abaij, Wogos, aijgbUm, Ze^pj^ ^op^ipo,
Wothyra. Rijzwe. Uijwoth, Omegr«s, Hehgewe, Zebaon, Wezator,
Zibuo, Bijbetbo, Ythos, Zeatijm, Wovoe Sijwoijmwethij, Poanr^, Ze-


wor, Wefgos, Ruben, Hvbatboroos, Stawows, Zyen, Zgwowy, aiiOB,
Worse, Yzwet, Zebaotb, Agia, Marbuel.

CITATIO .MEPHISTOPHILES,

Messias, Adonaij, Weforus, Xathor, Yzewe, Soraweijs, Yzaron,
Wedi|u:l^> Zljbalor, Wegbaij, Wesoroo, Xoxywe. {^yKqhwfijKBthO;
lUjAielB^tho, Zebaotb, Adqiiaij, Zijwetbo^ Agjajj, mj^WieliJi^fiil
Zijebo Xostboy, Alhlato, Zsewey, Zyxyzet, Yscbe, Sarsewu, Zjzyrn
Deworonhatbbo, Xyxewe, Syzwe, Theos, Yscbaos, Worsoubefgosy
Gefgowe, Hegor, Quaratho, Zy we, Jiessias, Abarabi, Mephistophiles

CITATK) BARUUELI8,

Yscbiros, Imns, Zebaotb, Otheos, Kuwethosorym, Zylohym, Zadayt
Yscbowe, Qiiyos, Zenhatorowav, Yzwesor, Xywoy, Yzyryr, Zaltjmo,
Zabaoth, Adonaii. Messios, Aglaabaij, Stoweos, Hijwetbo, Ycoros,
Zijwetho, Uwoim, Ghamoweo. Zijzobeth, Sotho, Emnohalj, Zedije,
Huwetbos, Obory, Yzquoos, Lijraije, Weghoijm, XUzor, Waijos, Ckn
fatjoie, Toroswe, Yeijros, Emanael. Imas, Barbuel.

CITATIO AZIABELIS.

Tboeoli. Ygweto, Yzgowoij, Quiseo, Wijzope, Xoraoij, Nowetho,
Yxose^fiaflratbon, Xoro, Theos. Magowo. Wijzo8<H'WOtbe, JCaroshaij,
Zebaotb. Emanuel, Messla. Yzijwotho, Zadaij, Xexhatosijuiei}, Biiwa-
tho. j«ewet, Xijrathor, Zijbos. Malhaton. Yzos, Uzewor, Ragnil, We-
wot^'Yflwewe, Quorhijm, Zadob, Zibathor, Weget, Zijzawe, HJtjzor,
Trelrag^luniiiatiHi, AziabeU

CITATIO ANIQNEUS.

l%^eo8. Aba, Aaba. Aba, Agatboswatj. Yzorog. Ywetho, Qnardos,
QasdNMkt Uscbjjros, Cijmoe, Qowathim, Grefoij, Zarobe, Wegba^ Ohe-
gatbiyniwalj, Hesows, Xalose. Waghtborsowe, l^Tephatho, Yiebp. Sto-
rilw0^NH>aij, Qaoratbon, Sijbo, Mepbor, Wijbose, Zaloros, Biietbo,
Zeba^iponaijwos, Zijwetb,. Ycarij, Buwethonowe, Ruiathosonraij Ze-
baotb, MMmMf AniqueL

[19«ir follow the four leaves— Figs. 24, 25, 26, 27,^8.]


40 SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OP MOBES.


CIRCLE WRITTEN ON PARCHMENT


BLOOD OF WHITE TOTJNG DOVES.


BIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF HOSES. it

+. ^ * '

AZIELIS '

Seal or Ouracter.for Coercion and iefUenca:


49' SIXTH "AND SBVZNTR BOt^S OF HOSIK'

^ •{(■ •{«■

ARIELIS

Ma teacter lor Cms ai ffliiinp


-SIXTH -AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOWS. >48

MAIIBUELIS

M:ei! tenter for Getru aai ObtaiB,


44 arxTH and sbvehtr books of mosbs.

■^ •!• *

MEPHISTflPHILIS

Seal {ff-Glaractar k Coerdoi and OUenca


BIXTH AMD SEVENTH BOOKS OP MOSEa. 45

* -J- -J-

BARBUELIS

Seal (h Character k Coercion ani Oktece.


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OP HOSES.

AMfiEliS


Birra. AMD SBVMtH books of M03ES. i1


M or. Gkrtcter far Coercion anit OUence.


48 StXTd AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSfiS.


?i-» ►> 'i'

NOTE.


THE USE OF THE SEALS.
When these great priDces do not appear immediateVy on the fore-
going Citations, or if they hesitate in thetr obedience, then take frank-
incense and myrrh, and cast them upon burning coals, and when the
smoke arises, place the spirit-s^al thereon, with the following myste-
rious words :

Ex VI. and VII. Libro

MOSIS.
Bibliae Arcano

1IA©S€AE.

ALTISSIMA DIB VERBA.

SPIBlTDnM CACTIVA MOSIS AASON ET 8AL0MOIMS.

Zgmuorsobet, Noijm, Zavaxo, Quehaij, Abawo. Noquetona|j, OasaQ,
"Wuram, Thefotoson, Zijoronaifwetho. Mugelthor, Yasxe. AgiopuaO,
Huzije, Sarbatijm, Sowe, Oxursoij. Zijbo, Yzweth, Qitaij. Salartbon,
Q^Ut Qeahaij, Qijrou, Sardowe, Xoro, Wugot'hoswerhy, Kaweko,
Ykquos, Zehatho, Aba. Amen,

Apparttio, or ram Appa&itiov,

Is almost instantaneous upon these ipysterious words and procedure.
As soon as they appear, however, address them and compel them to
obedience with the following coaciionis

BINDING OF MOSES.

Zebaoath, Abalho. Tetragrammaton, Adonaij, Abathoij, Xijhawe^
Aglaij, Quohowe, Agia, Muijrosheweth, Phalowaij, Agla^ Theos. Mes-
sias, Zijwethororijm, Feghowo, Aba, Mowewo, Choe, Adonay, Cewoe
Christohatos, Tetragrammaton.

*A •J^ m tj* c fcj* n. *

INSTRUCTIONS.

Since the spirits will now appear qnickly, bring your desires for-
'^ai^ honestly, as if before your fellow-man, without fear, for noth-
ing can harm you, much rather, all must serve you and yield obe-


dience and serve jou according to jour wishes. In this connection,
bd careful that jou do not compromise in any degree with the spirii
for all this power, aii4'Word.of might, which Moses, Aaron and Solo-
mon used according to the revelations of €K)4, are sufficient to com- :
: p^ the spirits to reveal to you the treasures of the earth and sea, and •
to give them to you wylhout harai and di^eption. . ^

« Mih^; FaustdufC^rede (»J<^ ExperiiL^ ^

b;!eAarks. .


ferocious dog. He commands the lost treasures of the land and sea,

iCARBUEL ay||Biipiirtkei4>rn9 ^f aq old Itoiv Mm delivers the
trtasures of the water and' the land, and assists in obtitming all secret
knowledge and honors. >

MEPHISTOPHILES is ready to serve^^'flod appears in the form of
a youth. He is willing to help in all skilled arts, and gives the spiritus
S^q^-otb<}rwlse fi^lM' <* fawttiups.?; He hdngs treasures from
thfe earth and from the deep very qiiiclcly.

JBARBUEL is « BMiier;of ailavts and «11 tibcu^i knowledge, a great
mtAter of all treasure. He is very accommodating, and appears with
alacrity in the form of a wild liog.

AZIABEL -is a prince 'ot tke water ahd momitalik-flpirits and their
treasures. He is aniiable, and appears with a large crown of pearls.

ANITUEL appears in the form .of k serpent of Paradise. He con-
fers great wealth and konofa aepordkig to fiv^. •.,

The Sbatt dr (SehCTtfl-TOa^tel/of^the* sl«rei €^fe«t I*l-iti"oes of
Spirits must be written upon virgin .pf^chment, with the blood of but-
terflien, rf^ the time of fv^l moon i besides this, know that the Seven
Great rrmces of ^rits have among them some of ^ legions of
crown-spirits which were- expelled from Hesvon^ itk ex iVevelatinoe
Traditio. VI. et VII. libri Moiisi iltM^. fff

i*'-' ' lliMqidfa tter em4ilfa > .: '

Me pie«iim4ieii4nliere,
Sed me teqiie Deus
' ' -' . IS9 lllo castodiftt amn^^ -

D. I. F.
VALBa)ICTIO OR DISMISSAL OF tHE SPIRITS.

Suee the spirite h«9» now forrcd |Uml ftcoording to your wish, dis-
miss and discMkrge tktmai foltows :.

Zebaoth, Tkeos, Ysekyres, If essias, Imas, .Wegliaymnko, Quoheos,
Roveyni^ Ohrittdze, Abay^ Xewvfiuraym, Agla.

And now depart in the name of God ; praiae, live and thank God to
the

E. N. D.


50


BUSK' 'ANB' sanavrr'woar ar momti


^mmmMmmmmmA^^M^m x tti >^^ftMmm0t0tmm^i^ft^m0t^^0^l(fiM^0mfVn'!9f»0j^¥>fi^ V ^ff' ^ '*»f M ( v ^'tit^f^»t^m0^


Peter. JameflL. Joboi. .Aiidkecr. Pldb^', IftOtlw:,

• ■ ■ /

Jeh.=OT^a


.. . . .1 1 wi.i'i ^.^I'lHl t. A :.,> J.W.. ....re


33^


■**«M


TAMfiL'ftS'SAnnEairAK

lUiQUV IX^ftAS-el^ HIGASAB CTl^nd ^ QSMftlMGr"

ROMAdikif

VatieMio ad Aitanam PontMrilM ■■§» BiptiiiiHiidef YI, pristoi


l <) ■ {! y ,J


CITATIO 0EIIERALI9«MII»;*>AAiMim^ BT SALOMONIS CAN

ONIZATA ABn^LfCXi^DRO VI.

Aba, A||^l)iiMm^«WOS)iif«^^ Qiieo,

Ziiwe»>t, Rumoy, RiiW(»te6, "^QinoMi; I3by. Xeta lllii m ^' lMi nwtrii,
Xofibt fB^iteii^HKhMMi/i a<lN«l|^ iAgiiy,yfehrag<iMiii»iiyAAwMiy,
Theo^, YMhyroroae^, ZumqaFos,: Vf9^iJUAmtAmi^:fini^^%^fhaika

liroi. Zu7» ZTw«thoroBto«^ >BtflraK|^aU«]r«k^'XpMve^ g^ftatf^ W ftWiK a

Pronounce the name of the good or eyil ftt spiHt distliietly^ whouli
he will appear yery saddeoly ; .^a^tei^ then address him.


I


r


*" * ■■ I ■■ ■■ . 11 ■ ■■■■■» .11 ■ 1 ^

OOARGTIO OBHfflB%l!lMl9#OF SPIRITS.
^ "nwwI^til^f^ ^y ^^llti li opp^ yyBj Ii Mll liPl iii . Amen.

A^BluMigelns AomI, Angelua PMig.

lOiNrtiM (obo wiiliaQt Mid '
^ •^eta^ SMMte^ San^lpis. . .

. mP wrre tMn in All things, as well as theionowing :

pbjnebj, AdNM>r» Tiaael, Xomoy. Asmdy. 0leii!«,JMior,J^rfofle,
fci iay, Ow w s^ O tewr , X w iw^ Qi "

ttt

Hlviabommnl sFiDpqirs

Etmi^iidagli Efi( they an stfU JlbUiardr«histnBr4^^^ Mid

Beady te Serve.

'iNSTftncT;q|r.

, e ..- ^hfa»^ltfe?tfaA>a»t all good spiriti il_

befeited wheo the m6 l t f^ ^ fcjj | >i,Pri»| »i ^4 > » (UL.) Choir of |aigela


t^oneemiiig the tfagta Albfa^'lri&elriatflb, dftt all good spiriti imist

behsited wheo the moMM^yj|i»^ripf9i. '

ask^l f» j^,gAod)pi(B)MiH|i^ ^

n%^%rm lake iolfe

iiHi«Nr^WK», Mh^^isidl/^iMlB;' JM oit^d the

i4d«ii«r4i»«a9ii«4«r«t«itHi tpp^ <^<f^ .in

ifllte ieiaete 3«lia^K4eMdfbed.^s ^QiCfilKe


the kagi%^^gfh, lake iolfe^, ttMlttiTYIl. Mbobss of


hiljVfrili.

^^^^AUmOTKM^l 4MSIflSSAIi»

ffAtfi


leffHiy* vRslM%ef jHaay^oMMMMiMBalMMiBf #weiiiy


>roB, Taheto, Thyym, Quoi»t |rg >hi i i y^p| i in rt» i i l i H ia p ii in B|aton.

Kow pfbnoancSl|ie AM90 ^TSEPJ^I i^i 1^ ttlW deput In pe«90.
Hens Prinoipiiiai ef jftwi


52


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF K06E8.


(FMBl«i4»«*Fi^.»l


TREASURE


jam


SPIRITIIAL REDEl(IPTI01l.

^ High Donustifti

B A M B ERG.


a I ■■ ! ■■ !■ y* I t»Ji>o»<i.»»-ii.»— i—^lp— y^»y»in»^ H t H ,


k^^^M*^M^ri


a. 18. «. vw,

ADOYAH. ^ ^
Ohananyaii.
Ahmen ^


Tbe Fftth^r f^S}o\ tt^ Son^i^^ vj" Crod&e Holy S|^rit.ifi

nS GHATA H8TH ^"^ RACfiMYEL AYSC^ilB. .
Tbe Innocent, hoTy Mood of JeMii Christ, tbe Son of €kid,
cleanses qb from airsin Mid giv^iyou t^^lrits^ oterasl
rest and peace through Jesum Christum »{« the Sqn of . .
God. .• AWfiL.....*c...;«l^HEYE.

Tb^ibrr, aiay the apiritft^f Jeaug ObHst fddoem yoa fron^
all ^^kcL and suffering, and giye 110 the treasures that are
here, tiirMigb the shod Mood of 1. N. &. L jBel Eljoi^
Jims CkrM Bheyoba. Amao*


^wi"*»


< M 4


Optimo Sa^pes^u Remli»uiii«


♦ •* ♦


8TXTH AKD BETENTH BOOKS OP lifOSBS. 53


From the Arcan B

P. HOFFMAK

CompoEed id ]

L. HISCBINSEY, at BA


eiKm AND SBVEIfTfl BOOXA Of fUBfB.

SCHEMHAMPHDRAS,
. Mto. 1.


gent BejaueefftjOa-ikto DtvinaNbrnma^in-lkiffua
Hebraic, detwtani semper Nomen^islve^antuT a
prtwsipld JIme v^kuiiixtr^aTU aonistris frunt^ue in- ,
gentta virtutia.


eit¥tf Aim bevbsth BOOKS OP MosEa. "^^


M fillTB AltD 6EV£KTfl fiOOSS OF* ttOSBS.


III.

SEUFHOMS Al SGHEiUIFOBAS

KING SOLOMON,


W]KkL,' liuisPBltRG AND FRANKfrOR^r

PHnfced and Published bj Jbtik^V^^fflSPi Licensed Bookseller in;

the above Cities,


1686.


An HuiCBLS Piuni wosl vm ArriTNiaicrT' ov 1|iQ>ou and Undbh-


**For the Ldrd givethy is^om^ o^ of life moo^ Oli^tKlcnowledgej
and under8|4idi»g.^^PiovigaBa^ fi. 6, ' ' /" ' * \ i

»* If any iA^oa lacl^ Wi^oih let him ask of G^, tURt givkh to all \
"" -^'jUg^^d upbralieth noU"— Bpjbtmc o* JAJttsJfcf ,,. A

trw Fafh^r aiid Lord of all goodness, who^ didst ^reke all!
f Thy Wold, and Irho didat |)repare man in thy wieifom l^rule
Ctvatorgs tnat Were made by Thee, that he should jtf|A\)ver:
the WQriJLyrith holiness aad rigbteoosaess, and judg^KWtMi an a|frlght
heart ^Pl^-ttnto ne that wisdom that Is consiaatlj^^vwid |rhy
throne, % nd e ast jpe not bat from amou^ Thy okU^ren. For I am
Thy sciV^, and th^^son of Thy hand-mSden^ a, wesJc' drMfare of a<
short exlatanfi^r^md toe weak in nnderstandhig, iO'«||^1^ndm thei
law. Seftd Tt down from Thy high heaven and fra^ ^hlbrane of;
Thy glot^.tlMi^ may ab>de with me and labor with 't(i%49t t may^
know and do '^ihinn that tfrt pleasing unto TbH ^itft^y wis-
dom knowelb OT ni^iferstandfeth ail things, andUet it^|M* me in my
works and proiev^jk^ iaits tflory, and n^ labors will be acceptable
unto Thee. W2^ t was y^ \% m^ yont^ I te^ht wisdom without
fear in my prayer. I pra|«d f4ir it in the #m^, afut'will seek it to
my end. My heart tijpiaeth oyer k as when thif ^Fdting grapes ripen.'
Thou art my Father, my God, and my Shefyherd, who helpest me.
Thy hand created and prepared me ; teach me that I may learn Tby^
eommandments ; open my eyes thai I may behold the wonders of Thy.
law. Remember, Lord, Thy covenant, and teach me what to say and'
think. Instruct me and so shall I live. Lord, show me Thy ways,,*
lead me in Thy truth, and teach me. I am Thy servant, teach mej
that I may nnderstand Th^ evidence. Console me again with Thy
help and let the happy spirit sustain me. Thou lover of life, Thy im-
mortal apirit is in all thtngs. Teach me to work in a manner that is


glXTH AND SEVEaffTH BOOKS OF MOSES. 67

< well pleajding anfo Thee, for Tlion art in^ God. Let Thj good spirit
\ea^ me in pleasant paths, - With Thee is the living fountain and in
Thy light we see the light. Let my goings be establishel, and let no
' unnghteonsDess mle over me. Teach me wholesome manners and
' enlighten me, for I believe Thy commandments. Lead me in Thy
trnth and teach me. for Thon art the' God who belps me, and I wait
daily before Thee. Let Thy countenance shinj^ upon Thy servant and

• teach me to know Thy justice. Let me behold 'Riy glory, for Thou,
' Lord, art my light, and Thon writ turn ihy darkness into day. Wilt

Thou join* Thyself with me in eternity, and trust me in righteousness

and In judgment, in grace and mercy, yea, wilt Thou join me- in faith

' that' I* may (now Thee, the Lord. Lord, let tny tfbraplainti come

• before Tliee. - Instruct me according to Thy word. Let my prayers
CQme More f hee, rescue me according to Thy word, ^ow me Thj

' wajrs^ .6h,Ldrd', that I may walk in Thy truth. Keep nliy heart in
sfngleness that; f may fear Thy name.' I will remember Thy nairie
fhnu ctttldhood,' therefore, «U people will thank Thed for ever and
ever. ,^Amen. , •

In the name of the highest; almighty Creator. I,^ing Solomon, hold
to the interpretation of the name of (God) Seiistphbras, itt other wordb,

' the Fifst and the Greatest, the oldest and hidden mystery of great
power and virtue, to. obtain all that which is asked of God, for God
must be worshi^t)ed in Spirit and in truth, which consists not In many
and vain woi^s, because each word and naimi of God Is'self^xistent,
and ilkerefore the name and prayer must agree, and no strange name
must' be used unnecessarily If anything fearful or wond^ful is ih-
tended io be accomplished, in order that the divine qualify may

-,pour into' our soul and spirit His grace and gifts — that is the ooh-

'scibusness of God fn His* name through which he comes near and
abid^s .with those who know His name. Therefore, this name mufct
be held in the highest honor and should be hidden from all frivolous
and unworthy persons, since- God says himself in Exodus : Out <>f all
places will I come unto thee bud bless thee, because thou rem^mber-

• est my mime: ' Therefore, have the Hebrew Maccabeeis seventy-two
names for God,. and named and wrote Schembamphora, the flame of
seventy- two letters.

First, it must be known that the names of God cannot <be taught
and understood except ohlv in the Hebrew language, neith^ can we
pronounce them in any otner dialect,' as they were revealed to lis
thrx)ugh the grape of God. For they are the sacrament and emanation
of divine omnipotence, not of man, nor of angels, but they are insti-
tuted and consecrated through the (generent) of God, to instil divine
harmony in a certain manner according to the characters of his im-
' movable number and figure, and of which those that are appointed
over the heavens are afraid. The angels and all creatures honor
them and use them to praise their Creator, and to bless Him with the
greatest reverence in His diyine works, and whosoeyer will apply them
properly with fear and trembling and with {ira^er, wilt be powerfully
enlrghtened by the spirit of God — will be jqined with a divine unity —
will b« might/ according to (he wiUof Og4-^lm( Mwff^ormmij^t'


« »


xM Auxisa ASi> amEtem wok^xOf-jioms.


■»i


HbwBi4 iMW Ji nwW^ d il»ft thipgft Qf otlitt^if^eB^PMi^^Ali^^MjIiiyE^tflt-
iK»4^jH»ifli..|l^acf(.i4l Ui«iiivpe^<gitrGQdJU|B MMfTt^nUffiro^JEPi
riani, Notariacam iMid Geometriam.
•J«)v>Yab tbft viafBOjruftabte Cri^ajUir of Uw w<yla»>4lMoigt>^*Brwil#<>l><i»

.aQivUwii»^ilKW^lMofi>»tMf<Mreilk><i. O^hkiMKtDttbajvQ^dvluwAlpo

vfotir«4ilgel» 4JMt'^U#dtraPi»^>fov.cgrncoot<liea:vpii4 IftM^-nie

|lkte9liJtlHi)liael>-€kibriel, .yriel ;.4Qar apgela «iaod tQr41ie4df n^miti,

fall oTvUni Uglit of God.

oSall #Bd ^imMK oT fbfarth. and .^cforcopUoi^.AoA ,4)baii|;ilij(ii(B.JG9^^

In the third part of the work are the elements 9pdf4)F^97thmJlll4
•liriiiNnliiMl^'^ftam, ii^>|i^h k ^kfh^mnJ^-motHffVuit^^rBfi.f^n
nlMt ^fiD4w;4tomatii.>.wUhip hiia. Aoima ^ , iftytbe., hmUpt^ j^fi^toa ;
^Spifi|Ma.j0^w tMyliea9t«.»odof0ri^t«s thi;«ug|i.the,|u^ Gmpais

itUio.wiliole >bod(^'.with the veina; Ckoiiu, a ifpai^c of 4n, iAtinrtSMdd-
wo^^^m^ ft^yiww >b»cth. He r,hae four. fl|>kitiuil.^d ^t^pof ,wai;|(iw
)fi«e«Uie8, luw/aeiiltaHiP aetloi^es, or -siuritum iw .hU AmipMi, Jdli^
• (JH^tMf aU*, iGknitiona, The «oi»l baaviQwa,rd. aeoaea. aajBenmm. ccymitt-
^oell0,;c|A wbioh 6^iU^ tt^cm-hol^ fi9 t^deg)i^wi o^car. jwjwiwh imtliif jCMw
tiBtthethrain.

3» iIiB(i«i«ftft(Uk tlietiiUiiasiiiaapn tM<mi oft»r y> qli<»p#qM*p|t.j»r,pkiff*
.>liite4^J>hkfc>dwwM^pip»*lw of Pfiwpr,ia)d{/M»>»i»plwhwilJ,tjbiiifi. ,

■a44to<4v4wPtH» MfMM^B ihOrSpiBaiM Qm,tb*i||iQd. xm f^Up^i^SLjfifd


.»


sffftfvAim mmatm nocm^ or .'Monaa^ s»


Itn l« JMTfc^Mh— fcjawWW*—


facnliiet sod oflerationw'ol tiipe^vitvfto brltlg^tttl «E|ietiMeMiB» 'et*
Stflii i Bt ^4lrotigh ;«giktiM*of tbe sm^m lUe nenwv^of^ tlM 'htniAii

wilhia itaeir foar vlrtUM ^ InslMlk^ Teti|MVMli«;FNrd«Btfai, EoHHiidoi '

Af^NMitlto^ieiMllfaniv^f tlurMlatal^spliitiiid'fteiioil Mid ^finMr !!«• »
tb«iiQrMt«MJ«M0rlis^<4Mi'^«09M'«ioti^ cttratHwiy M|ipeH Mid*^
■ubnatmiee ; the proper spirit of strength and sap lies in the kidaey^'

llM l»d9BlNw4«iir «teflieMi^ wMMljr, sfirtl; ftrnitiltoste^wrf ft ow » ^
fon^^eiMftplnitolHrr'er ieispMvMMitii;' wtMn«^^pet,'4ryji a t i M i Um ig
prodatfed^jr wartwtli, dtyHea*^ dtaycai $ mI fftlMiti«Jii»^fodiMetdinf .*>
co Matt fc-wid ^ tjjiy cwr U^tt^aetto %3rfMH«flliiMid «e(^ 4df«iiito«h >

i«'lh«^ltaiiartli>''^pMK40r'of tiie »»rtd thare^tydarimeirt'l iw I Hut e d i^
eo nd aia n a lteo i» urnkCli «(ad fer p iniai i Mcurt i FoCtr'^^riAo^ of dev4lf •■
are i^jiirioiis in the four elements r ga i t a fll / As«w»^ Asael, MeiNNeMV; •
foiH^prfiMMF^Nknili «^e^tlivlb«f'^1«ner»^ tb0 4«iahf^O!»iett%9^-
moii,'^8g|M{^ABi«fett -

Th^^^flrst SeriniphenMr ki tet^oT Adam, %eeMiBeiw«piflto irl<h^tlM^<^
CMlov4ottiradtae.H

The second Semipfaoru, beoanse he flpME9 irfthpaag^t^and^aplrith^'*

TIMI <hi>>,^ hinMii ii ' %» spoke wtl»«ftt«i;

The ^ttrth, because he spoke with the ofeaiavai «f 'tkc^fovt'flift'^
m^ilB^ llie«liiMi94«i«^flBftai^ih« antttMOa, and 4he etae|flB|f Iklilg^^
the eai*th.

The fifkhr'teMMarkeipok^^itkfflaaiaiiia^fA!^
treMfnadf^'itl^egetaittoai ^

The sixth; because he spoke with the #lf»M.

T k t i t^atiy ne aiwiii r htf sgkrfteiattk 'the^iiiBraioaii'attd sistft* ^
Bj the power of the seTen Semiphoras he could creMieimA' du i tmy ^
all<Mdaafi<«A. --■ ■

The first Semiphoras was acknowledged bj Adam, since God<lfM^^'
aMMa aidf|iiaetf<i litt IftPaiMlMv w^ci^^e WaaalloiNfiAilo^reaaan
onlj aeTen hours. The nsfeae it Jove^ which- aaaie akast'De ilrdM*)
B0i<li<id^'aiity4»tha greatest need) and- theadaly wMi "the mosf <d^ '
Tont feelings toward the Creator, In this case yotf #tlimd> grace ^tUA »

Thj^ saeeirii^ g e m p te w as ', ia %hM Adam spdke* lri«li^«ngiilii^'«ii*^
whfi*^gati Mai Ihirexpreisfcm; yeeeniye,4hat4sj CM ^ithaat^fieglH^^
niog^'Mid ^irHMlt^ tndr'ttttlil b» Bre«<rtineed when speaking' #i«kr
aiM^^aad^lifellf toardueillearwtil' be aukw^Md 'Sttd'TenrwisM
fatHad.

The third Semiphoras, in which Adam spoke wflh thes^Miiief Iha
diffNMieit aad'ii^^hM'^ tUeiBf who gaire Maf satisfaefefy a awp ats
nf««ii^tka»4Mffd, ^Adaaiff •Mywitil» eadaa adooaymnata }> these "we id a
fllnilf%a QtlSiM^efi yea wish" to eottetft wiads^ aphrHi or dettMiaii
Aday, Btdaiioth, amara.
if^rUi fliMttlpllofav, Uymtiit XhTit MO) IftT«gellajB| !«?««


:I-S


*•


\*


%.".


60 SllT^ Am SfiVMTti feOO^S OP MOSE^.-

■ 11 ■■ I 11 II ■■!■- .1 I. - ■■. . II ■ ■ ■■ ! - 1 ■ . I . J 1 11 1 . ■ . - I . . ^

quiri, Lavagola, Lavatasorin, Lay&Ua6u, Lyafaran ; with this name
be boiiDd and unbound all aiiimaU aud spirits.

The fifth Semiphoras, Lyaebaot, Lyalgema, .Lyafaran. Laalfacah,
Lebara, Lebarosfth Layarat^alus ; if yOii wish to biivl equals, aa trees
and -seeds, 'yen must pronouiiee tho above v^ords.

The sixth Semiphoras is great m Toigbt and vtrtne.; LetainniQ, Le-
tayloge, LetasyDin, LebaganariUlif Le^rniniiii Letagelogio, Loiafa-
losio. Use- these whea yoo desire the eleflneatft oia winda, to. fulfil your
wishes.

The seventh Semiphoras is gre«t aad mighty. . They, ieire th^ names
ot the Creator; n^ich miist.be'proitoitnqeditt the begiuuii^g of each
nndertaiiiiig t BiUaonyo«aiir«douay ea4aii ebteel, c^y.^aug^U ^yoni.
Saobsdo, essuselae eloyra, diilioii ianelyi^la, deliu, yazi, Zazael, paliel
man, uquel, onela dilatan saday alma paoeioi .&1yin» canal dejis Usami
yarns calipix calfiis sasna saffasaday aylata panteomel .atiriel arion
phaintfton seeafe panerioiiys eraaqtiel Joth Jalapb anipbia^ than dem-
israel ma all .le JLeaKyas ala pb«>nar aglacyei qyol patiriteiio^ thefe-
roiym barimel, jael haryoa. ya aploLeil eebet.

These holy name* pronoiMtce at each llaie. iii i;eFer«»iee toivriird God*
when you desire to accoinplish something through >tl)e tilementH or
sonfethldg cOuneotfd tberew^h,' andyjouv wish<^ will hu. fulfilled,
and what is to be destroyed will be destroyed, for/God viU be with
you because, yon koojw his DA)n«.

J^* The following is another name of Semiphotaa which God gaye
to JfoaeslnsbvftB parts. *

I'he firsi is» wbeo Moses oonce^led bi^iself 9^d ^poke witn God,
when the fire burned in the forest without consuming It.

The seooiidv as he spoke with the. Creatoi? on <the'mo<u|ttaiD..

The third, when be divided the Red Sea, an^ passed th^V"gl^ with
the whole people of Israel, eto.- , ,.

The fourth, when hi» Bt<aff was turned into, a sec pent wbicb devoured
the other sierpents.

The fifth, are the names which were written on the for^ead of
Aaroq; ' • • • * - •• ,.^ • •.. .^ ^

The sixth, when he made a brazen serpent and burned the goldan
calf to divert pestilence' from the iBraelites. - . ,- v.- >

The seventh, when manna fell in the wilderness ap0 wh^ii wtter
giisbed from the rock.

In the first are the words which Moses spake as he wen^ on the
mountain, when he. gpoke-tothe flames of five ; Mayu^ 4ffaby, 2»ien,
Jaramye, yne Latebni dumaa yrsano, noy lyloo Lhayjly ]{i^ .£ylvi
Zya'Lyelee, Loatf, lideloy eyloy, mecha riunethjf r^bitiBUiwi ^'^.a^iry
SQihiu rite Z»\Q\kA\>e, vete hel^c.^de ni^yo ramy rab^bt^ (^o/^x} f|Dubec).
If you pray (his word to God devoutly your undertaking will be ful-
filled witboat a doubt. -.

In the seeond are the words wbieb God spake to Moscf ag be went
on the raoufttain : Abtan, Abynistans Zorataii Juran Doudiei^tpotarte
fi^ijs alapeina pognij podaij sacroQciiiip, In these words the prophet
spoke to the angels with whom the four quarters of the earth are
H^Mf through wbicb the temple wa« founded Bosal«. If you with


t6 pronounce' these you shonld fast three days, be chaste and pttre,
and then yon can perform many wonders. *

' Iir the third are words which Moses spake in order to divide the Red
Sea : ^nn clalie saijec holomotnaatl ; bekahn atjdlo Inare asnia haene
bieh^ iifale raalieha arnija.^remi^holona qiieleij, Lin^no, feijano, goije
nfatac fl^boira nethee hfjcere. ' If yon have lost favor of your master,
or if yon wish to gain the ^od-will of some one, speak these worda
with ferrof and humility, etc.

In the fourth are words which Moses spake when he changed his
st4(f ihtc^a serpent : Micrato, rnepijsathonich petanith pistan ijttn ijer
hijgaritt tfgnittoifi''teiiiayrou<iiijeoH dunsnas castas Lacias astas ^jecon
cijna caihera natu facas. Pronounce these names when you wish to
haSre y6or defclres fitlfilied.

In'the flflh are the wrlttiin names of the forehead of Aaron as he
spake ^ith the Creator : Stjdaij baijives Lucas elacijns jaconi hasihiiia
Qein ino, sep.actitas barne lud doncmj eija iehhn reu, vaha, vialia,
eije. Vie haija hoij ^aija salni^ hahai, Qiici, ijaija. Elenebe], na vena ;
aetna. ¥he ftamed irh powerful in satisfying each request .

In the sixth are names which were written upon the staff of Moses,
w%en ' he made the brazen serpent and broke the golden ci^lft Tane
nHire s^m, abljl- ala, imno, •hQa acienal tijogsis Qfino, eloim ^a nehn
Ijane haij yanehn, ahijaco mea. Wf th this tame destrpy all . sorcery
and evil. You must not pronounce it with levity in your works.

lu the seventh are words which Moses employed in leading the Is-
raelites out of Egypt, with which he brought manna from, heaven and
caused the water to flow fift>m the rock : Sadaij amara elon pheneton
eloij eneij ebeoel messias. ijahe yehu hejiane, ijanancUelijpn. Pro-
nounce these words' when you desire to do something wonderful, or

when you are in great need,, and. call earnestly on God, etc.

< • . ' .. «. . '..... . . . ■ J '

PRATER.

Oh, thou living dlo4) tlon great, titronf, ihig^ty, Roly and' pure
OlMltir Ml ^f'tMM^y^-*^ blessed Ltrrd of all things ; praised 1^ thy
name. I implore Thee, fulfill my desire. Thou canst >york. Permit
Ii*lo4ic0o«fplish)hfs'w6i^ki >ClrA»t us tfry^graceand giv^ us thy di-
vine blessing^ that we may happily fulfil thi^ wor£ Thou, holy,
roareiful a«d*gmdlotis (}od, have mercy upon ns. Tlg^ name, Jese-
nire be adored forev^ and e^er. Amen. etc.

In the name of the Almighty Creator, I, Solomon^ hold, to the dec-
laration of the divine names : .Agla. Thou art a mighty God to all
etornily. fie ^llo'l^rs iipon his person this name, written upon a
fold iMate, will never die a sudden death. Antrita— a beginning of
att irnity. Ahen— thoii solid rock, united with the Son. Amen, etc.
TIm>ii« Lord, ^a tro^ kiAg. perfect it, etc,

•'Tfate nAmeS coatoist of the begiiming of Ihe chapters Adonay, which
tlie HalMira ttmde vm of instead of the unutterable name, Asser
Eaerki.- ■

The sevem vrfghty names may be obtained at a fSivorable hour and
plaeoi Gomitefioii, sedeaij,- thrutomas, saamaga^ bil^l yeoa.

Tkt four iiamta ol iba Oreator t J^a, Joiia, eloq, Jena; ^a wbo


eaUt^oftdn npm God in. &ith tad .with feu, ^nd^^s^l^ wUh h||D&^.4
gblden lefiers, will never want for d^n honoralil^ fttbiUiiOM.M^dLeMjjl..
elotUn^. ^The^ame.wlUch Adam utteifed at thaenit|p«(i ^ bel^k»
mep^ena^ phatom & who bain this Aamo^wtth\:nUnUaQoon^tter-^
able. *' i

11i« Aamft wUcli Gbd'vomdiiuiicated, to Uj/H^oa U^Ba^Bmdrtt^
Oedion^ wlU put ^w^F ^^ cau9eB for 401701^ . y „>. •

Tne name wblcfir Joshua prajed when the. aiin ttodd tHHf HVirrfc,
hcllid^« di^ah^tf.Jbyringifr venmafe «poi| eaeiui^

The, ten name9 oftSepiroifc, I«Mom<w, w^keiii nf pfiMc to Qmt^n
andiie gUTe me w|8^nn,| £thor, ]9<>«)uBaI,,Mw^bf0Mdr €kb«il^ (
thiph<^f, niumii, hod Jebod jnaionitfN

Now fo\\6yk Che ten names of God : fiaeie, |a^»>y»gniiiwiMWr^i^fe 1
r^^ramiQiM»«'Sal»o|h^ olohka.SikbflMa(!L Sf|d«^

ten letters. Tetragramniaton^Vedftib have ^Ight lei^^ra. '«EMe« IIm»^
aelf-exi«tenee of Gddr AjrerHe Ater. fthefe) the ii4nMt:«l. (Sod oC.w^pivf
letters. »

Eeeli, tiMdJ>7 Ifoait As tht fire ol €M« ttte |iMt4 MIm |n»4i.
tfaej Mt «!} Hebifew cha^»<^tei«.

EmtlOi^ &e .tnie CM; ^ <^« a®*!* U«I Mn^RM^oil^ol 40i^p^
Bime* Of God and l^e tea Sephirotb,iitg(vf|iiiaCk>ii90l^glii|P^^
occulta fh&oflopbl»« Lib. ^ Om^JIQ>

HiicatH^' ur hbfy and a4tore$£iddL

Ha, lilmw^llf the power of (he JDeiix^

Hoa« JM^ & dljine beinr;

Jah, i just God^ comparlni hifliself wltb omui, .n

Inoti.

Jesub*; the Heiidah"w.in oOme'ln the gol^od tfe, .-

JauH, he who Created tbelig^i

Isala, wittrthtf ttaab ESlj hssembfes Ihe changed erti (each maAenp
of 31.)

Mett^tMivfiMr SpM Mohr4Mi9e «mfoti4»f (M^

naioeJjfho^

Ifaepm. M ' J

N«i tbe nan||.y Gpd.shimld be prad|« trib»l«4Uw>Af|d jO|p#iM(Mlu^'

Oroniiasim, Mitrlm, Ara|rtinefti> iigntfj Goda^ tUft^StWkf. '1 > iii i T
are Ihree prinoea of, the worl^

Ptfle» be who werketh wonders, fie. * .

tbeae namet masi be atleeted ont^ef -eMJi >l|fctiff . IWnHHUbjiijtht?!
work, for ihe ficcompliBlynenl of w^d^:^,be)f ^C4S«d flmklt 6 Im^n
plored. Similar to a oevtaMi tez^ in E^Eodot U, eon^Mig of tiiMt i
Teraet whfcb* are alwaya written witb WTenijy-iwq l^^m^^bW^QiNTi*
wMhj«ie ihrvf waiFdt; TAyf9^'>^4d«^ y^ yb#ii>»bi> o4! ti

a lioei one and three, fr^m Inft to. figMrf tbfi mmmdm^^fmm'^
from the right to the left, as in a reverse order, constitutes one qoMM^
the aerealyriffo lottery of whioMi«' J > » < 4 gobQsihffppJbiBHn >-

tf now. the dirbio iianMi» Bl or J«d(« tco «ddedi« ^Mut wi^lM r

ptftMitir^w^ MOict of CMi MCb 9f ihMi'^IMIiirMil ii wriHOTi


IV


^^9^SS"«S"


oni l^iii Ufa; lor |fef^iMi«4irlil kl«i. >
ii—'wiimj iiiiiiiiliitiniiii rf Uwi^ri'itpMrlmMiiiiofriwawin; 41
».llWBinmMlin«iiiiid i«ign<t, ^4 1 ■n i— n j ifcotiy fcn#li<w%J»o<riiiy
witk tft rtiJiirty^^tt^Maipha *oi iChriit* ^^Ani^l Hdtiis ;«iia iwelbod

iHMiMbiwritlM. jiniilQMill trtnt irniii liiiftfc li iliftiBntMliifciwiiiiii


fiM^ BiMiit -Ai^iife JtJMrteli^ ,Crii^' fM»nto^.t AMirtM IjUk^mh

t «■ ■wirfixaiiiliiMriifaiiwl li«^iJM<»^.yiimt^-.»«aiil, Ifiili 1111 1
iliiiiiwiijflliBtoiTMc|«ndi< Mah— I iliiiritfrtiiiirnWrii titoifciit, fiiMridi.

rltoll
letters.


ankaMi t«illiB)lwMB iifH ofciiivffcr ■i>ait% uniiwp-
■eqaenllj into all the senrants and instramentB A tMitmmnt j jp i i i Hie


a liH rti l ii t y^ fft ii iMfl yi i iiaii» J u rtnV liiffciM*l*i^ Hi iiiili 4gft the
MttkA pjwihwitaBi^jfniwiaiitgiiMIt iMtt to gtoiiHwri— imitifn


.<-■< ■ Hi, <!WJ


tnT unp

— ^11 V *^nT^ -» — 7 -


are moved by some or^lMr^iNmiOiVOiliMfftAcm^^ A»i.


image and likenefls ,of ttod, ^fi uujgmi mtikin/mw^j^mAlBS


64 SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.

under the Hror of God, he will obtois: hit desire tbroiigli Criih iod
wiedom : ftnt, from tiM sten and from tbe heftveni by the mykional
refleetiooe of ffis a^rh ; fecond, bnr the aaimal kioffdom, Utrough
hit aeuees ; third; bV Ibe eloBfeati, throagh bis fonrftrid body.

Therefore, man biada mil oreatarn through oompatiaoo. by ballliig
npdn tie bilker powers thnmgh the name and power whs<^ goteroa
one tbittg; and thenaAar. tlnroiigfa tbe lewvr thinga tbenaetvea, ete.'

. And now, bo #ho deairea to beooow biaater of ibe w^Hciilg of Ibe
soul, must become familiar witb tbe order of aU' tbilga, jbat aa ^bmj
are oMaWed by CM In- tbefar proper state, firom Ibe bij^heat to the
lowest, tbfoai^ natural ooriheetlons, that be may deatenl aa H ftaan
a ladder. On this acooant the Heathens eodtmilttiBd tbto emir bf
worsbipiplnif the ^daaets :and taM statft,'not because tbey.heatd but
beeaaae they were moved by 1^ powers wbiah-foteDied. tbea a6d
wer^ at tbe sann tiase, Impelled theretb by the^ infio^ne^ of: tMr
foaodef and ereatoe. ▲nd.ift tbia mantief, likewue; Cbrlatian aatites
have committed the error of paying bbmige to dented taints aid
riviiigbodbr tb ibe ereiftare wbibh belongs only to theCrealor,a&dGod
it a jdtlotis'CXod bnd will no^ permit the woiship of idola» Tbe prayer
of fUth, theiefete, in proper language, and for proper objects; ia inti-
mately relatad to tbe nttme of 6^, from which we descend by- words,
from one to ftie nther, following eacJi otber out of a natiual velation-
ship, in order to accomplish something.

Tbe' son,' th t freloce; prdtoAs' u^n the Ibtbe^ that be may support
him. although tfeife father 4Hiy n(^ do so willingly ; still since he Is
bis oflbpring he mnst oalenlata to maintain him. How much greater
care our heavenly ffatber nmst feel for us, if we serre bim in a
prefer manner t

He wbb ^esfernr tbe inflaenoe^ of tbe^sun, mnst not only direct bis
eyes toward it, bat be nraat. elevate bb aonl«pdwec to the sool-power
of the -saai; which' to '6kift biiiasU; bairHig previoosly made, blmsolf
equal ta'Xj<>dv.by.fhstiog, pnriflDation and good wo^ks. but be. mast
also pray in the name of the Mediator, with fervent love to God, and
his fellow-man that he may come to the* sun-spirit, so that he may be
filled with its light and lustre, which he may draw to himself from
heaven, and ttbt^elmajltbiisonie ^ftednithbeavenly giiUalsd^b^tain
all the desires of his Iieart j and as soon as, he grasps the higher Ught
and atHyee at a stiate tif perfection, being gSled #ra[ lopefhainral
iatelilg^e; be'witl also obtain snpei^attiral iblgfat and poWei', For
this reason, wftboAt godliness, man will deby his foltb fn Qhritt, and
wiA become unacceptable to God, tfaereiHtb often filing a prey to the
evil splrita agaibflft irbom there is no better protection' than uie ftar
of tbe Lord and fervent love to €rdd abd man.

Hoet people wbo are shSlted in divine works, and wbo'ptmless the
right to ooihmahd spfrits, teust be worthy bv natitre 6r becoAe wor-
thy by education and dUdpline for their oatling<-must keep alt their
woflpi secret, but may not conceal It from a true and piodif person.
Plgnity of birth comes from station, but it is due to SAbiilMh, B6l,
Mereurium or ICaflem that be is made prospcrowi— ^M? h<e ul le^itned
in PbfiiOib IMip^yM bwt Vtmlegf.


laXTH AND SBYSHIS BOOKS OF MOSES. 65

If a man has a knowledge of Crod, as the ftrst great cause, be must
also acknowledge other causes or oo-operatiye spirite, and determine
what ollcial station of dignitjand honor to.aocerd to them ; and
without which knowledge their, presence, and help cannot be enjoyed.
Such honor and dignity must not be.sbown.for the sake of the spirits
bat lor the sake of their Lord^ whose servants they sre. In this man-
ner the angels* of God will encamp aiiouad those who fear and love
tjie Lord, aod^as Aligustinits eays: '* Svery thing po88assee;,a predes-
tined angel-power«'^ For thia leaaon the Hebrew the<riiiigiatt, Mecu*
baes and Gabalists, named ten principle diTinenameejaampmbers of
Qodyand ten Numerationes or^phiro^as minietttand instruments oJT
the Creator* through which he is loftse^ inta allUs crealures, accord-
ing to. tiia ordered tile: ten, ABgelloiaad ten princely spiril^oin,
from which all things derive their power and quality.

: 1. Thto n«ae l»Slfi, lisev Etele, iU aAtnlier Gether elloo, one Lo^^
Is the simplest Deity, which no eye haa Aoen, is ascribed to God the
Father, gives influmee through the order Seraphia haiath, heisdoseh,
gate of holiness or of life, tbal^lmnmiils hfe to evervthing through
Elieic.. From this. he. flows in through, prenuim nMide-ei^ that all
things most eidst— thai the heovena nmt revolve. every twenty-four
hoars. This wondeiful bettor is ^ailotolliguaia Mett^tron, that
is, a prince of feces. His office is to lead others into the presence of
the Sovereign, and through him G^ spike to Moses.

2. JEHOVAH, iTod, vel Jah, hk number Ohoohmar-wisdom:
The Deity full of spirit. The first-born son through whom the Father
redeemed- man from his. curse, is infused tJl^coogb the.order of Cheru-
bim, Hebrew Ophaoim, of the forss or CouaeiL From these . he flows
into the star-bedoiSked heavens, and produces there many figures.
Chavs of creatures, Grod, Jo4, Tetragrammatoii, through the peouliar
Intelligentia^m rhzietem, who was a representative of Adanv^eto.

8. TETRAGRAMMATON SU)HUiC; his number is called Binah«
That is, caution or sense, and signifies, pardon and reel, oheerfulness,
repentance And conversion— the great .trumpet, the redc^mption of the
world and life in time to eom^ is adapted to the Holy Spirit and flows
in his might through the ordec of Hii^onorBin, which is called Arabim
in Hebrew— that is, the great, strong and mighty angola, from thence
through the 'Saturtal ^haeram it iives td liquid matter the form
Stopsle, which w«i no IptolUgtRtia 209Mtiel, was Noah's vepresen-
tative, and anoihor IvtelKgeotiaJFophiel, Sbeoi'a representative, and
these aco the three JMghest aod greatest Numerationes, las a throne of
the divine Pevsouf, tilroiigh whose eomaonds everythiOg takes place,
aod which is completed by the odier sevon» which, ia this account aro
called NuoMBtftloQSS fhhrioi. otc; r.

4. £1, his aonber Hoeied, that js, grace or goodness, and ia called
nMirey,^!^, great poirec sqepter^nd right hand, and flows in through
order 0ominationum, Hebrew Hasmalin — confers peaceable justice
tlproiigh Spaeicam Joyis and hftslows in: a general manaor special In-
telligentia: Zadkiel, Abraham's representative.

h. EL09m. QU^Mttf « itfoog Qod, «ho pnnishes tiie giult of the wick?


§6 SIXTH ASD fisvrarrB bmks of mmbs.

jAdffBMt He ittMto |HittWnMit Vifough Ufan pmrd «ii« tliwiigh
wttm. !r9iKi8«ft«id«l tte jutefiMMi^^Mirt «f €M, tin ^Mto-ofHw
Uwd, a ttnttrdi aiiitTtrftijam ;: Ad ftn > io 4,tth<l- \M,kmt Mom G»d|

Mid from tbmiMJtbfougli (th« Cffcaorai UmrtA9^ vlueh Jim ipM* wt
and Ari»«iktipn-i»ioye^a»^tlfnBti mmoMa^j* His p«wtliar itftel-

liflriailiii Glnwilnl, ifiiioB'i wyimfHwHrt .

beMrtjr, rfliniBHnVhiq>ylaiia*iid^yteMiiK ligDitet^tt^^word ef ilifc
add iowsiiKiluKM^k 4iw outer ^MifliiM^iiAiiob to JMtaw ii HMft^
ofifea: fhia anc^ tkroMh teji a afiia Bolla, ciMa ifers]»ieiiltr Md
life, and wwSu lafii. Hia fat«l«i1lr iiite%e«iiih fttidMisI, w^
tl9e.iiq^iaMiilat%iaoff«aaoiaMltif ^w^^ntMil 1»Mi8)aiii Mte^ww
tbe representatiTe «f Jafob.

of HoiM. <«HiB'«ini^w ia •il€«iiftli» tiurt ia/4rlaiii|Jk«iU^ i4cllanr ; 4o
h'ua)laiMealrdad Ih* tig^ fitteryViiA tigoMM^imiilyv tba JwHiaavf
G«il,<aad a» w nyjt >; bo 4o«ft ia Ikf^it^ 4lto Ofdar of Priiioi|)at«ai ^
Ibrooi^ Ihe ilahtcw fltokam, that lis^ ^Ood io «p«iaaraBi Teocrii,
lam «Qd jottloa. «Ha' waiiMaaaH'VvnelaMa irairtfa «Dd Ma'peoii-
liar :ipteH ig i B# a Utmmf ♦aid* tfcaifgrf(aig—ii3 to Dwrifl^ raprwaa-

8. ELOHIM SABiMVB,iQad <ir »a«lii, Ml oT wa* ov^mtOiv %iit
of ftity^ ftpHia4itoMUi4MMMa aaid gtm >beibfa Jlto^ioeii. MU«anb«r
ir.aAlled >Bod, 'that ^ia^ i wti gW ifc i ii • aaafwaJony oroaaitilt' aad reavini.
Tokimiaaoeorded^lhalirfltMllarviaod ilko towi la tlwough the avAar
olj%f«baa gal afaBi»%afoB»'< h ai ga d» ■■ 6|» h ai ra ai iiaiaaf I, adovaowi^
safety aiad noaninltf , aad ^Mtgt -larth^-aaiwils; iiiia faoaUariatal-
li{|Mitia»MiohMl^ >^km tgarmalatlw «f Solwaoa.

9. S A^4J^ Iha AtaiiKlitgri «ha do«B'«ll Hwags aij^aodaally, aaa Bl-
bji^, ibfttiii^ 4ba^livia9><dod. Hb ttmdber n cattad i«aod, that Is^m
fonadittMnv laadlfd mn a ii a a t^d ga ad ■a a et ^ w d aaiyttcia «Riid vaei. Ha
flaws Sa Ibtaayh ^a oidMr -of AaMlonm, ia Hatwaw CkeCttHia ia
SpbaeraailjaiMi; la iao fa i e iaad itoieaia «U -t hl ait o^ sappaitB «iid
caairifoatat'lba gealas -^ Maa: M jatetligcaiiai ^Qaiwiefc affepta-
seaEtatmaf ioatpk. <gai4 m i; aad -Daalalw

lit. A0OMAT If BidPOHi' tiMit ii, « iuanft a«d Ktag. «• naailMr
i«^aUad«ifal6lMt41«tv|s,im litaipliHii aad ^aaHaiott^ aad itIaHaad IIm
Gbaacb aad boaaa-af €M,«ad4ba4aor'llo«ft la lbrMm|li«be«»d«r^
Aniawwtleuai af itba ibatiaateg a a a i t ngabiaas ib»Hfe af ftflMNM,
sod ibef-aw iafeilor ^'tlifablMraivbjr- l^brf *«A>rd ^Miraaiiiaa'to
tbe ebildrea at ataa^af .Aa^ amndaMd Hblngs oT %«aiwie%a, §«aid
them against prophesies. For their AnlMa IJBiilab M<miik» m^mdtf^
ing to <)lhava;tbe iafMiganHaHeimwa, m¥Mk la <iMll«d ^ba'^fiiM
cne ata w ■ 4b a aaat af ifea^a#ld^ la lh» twaiegBrtadva af JiiMBSf llift
foantttla a£aU life.

•^fl!lMiiafiH»> attdbe^iMHMavrCM'awl ttie lMiaepUr«l,iira<«iibiaMl
in tbe Afobetjpvm.

4a aiadd#4alMllgilMtttM«ioMed^lie maa ^Aiobw^tlia «tg«te, «
■^ywedwy Jid »iwyali>^ ti» lii J itoi n d ii i i i i i


&itftt A)n> dfiVmrtt Hoots 0^ Uo&BR. 61

" "t'/ Sinpliln p 2r divriiblni ; S. Thront ; ♦r DenlDAttonto ^ 5: Po-
te<l irfl >i > t «^ Virtalifl^ 7.>PfteMp»t«r; 81 Ar^lnfagM ; •; AAgeli ;
w^Mk Antuiao Pwitii^

Andim; HaiiiMMi]|>; 6«rapM»7 iUMUm^HkaMm; Mb flloliili;
€ti0r«biniT iHiiti;

Thr<e»' it|BiK^ i U liyfr ■n aiHii m n : MaM^ni Jmplmi^, acphkie!)]


1 i «ii .' .!.»


!pia J^ol^ dGiota ol Anfj^ Swi/S» UtieolbiQr into l!&r«e


iMttlito iM< MotrmII9e> AM liie' iMMliiait OlMtaWtif «i# TMMMf.
These more than eeletlial Bpifito are called giii«^^or«b» Mwrofi tlie
gods, because they coniiBtta Uy b e hold th e order of divine provideoee.
Being- fewaet-ia 4he^goe d a tf ii* of Qgdr^h«|i jsraiM»Hii»«oee#8ingly
and' pray for ns.' 1*he second Id the beiiig ofGodi according to form,
■Mlitbfe tbtMMftflbe^MoririefKMh mh^immmmtMr^ff^^GM'.

Is tti»miWy< i > wwi iii y <w%:tiw^Poilin l i i M Ki ^ y^ tH t ^M^ iVtrtuthB,
l»«|*ritr<lf -NitoUlgetMiei t»tide lhe« whole world: Tlie'fliwl'««mMnd
«iha* »» a«lMi«i>effterrii^ Tkerseeliiid'«lMr< Aal'wMiahinleffAn) w4th
Uw Hmtof €lodi TbelhM' <»teiiwe ihl» lMM««Si and ewrmienalty
IMTfoHti: grsaCrwonditiL ThMe ebci «i>iivi' of •pMta> onrnevw leit
«po«r-lile«hrlii - *

In the lower hierarchy are the Prlncipatue, ArchaiifeNtelt angetf,
wMdi WM ^dltibitlf^iiig'il|Nrifee td^wfrende waNliiyaflhiMi ■

Thrilvet,< in^fesen*! piweide forprlaai w a h d t— | ii Hiw >! B ;.an^ oKito
f»pliirigdoaK wnd'^eeiuilvidb^iettBh <aii lili'own'etlMoraNfiiievw. ae Mones
deehneo te Mir* «on|r, iMlrtfkzfk « : '*Wli#»(thr-MiMl^HI|^diviid«d
«»4he wtlMil <iheto ia4MV>Hailde,'. when km eep a e al a A t ho ahda af^Adaii,
hemlitliete m iiiel ihtp<»pl0 a ee dwi i l iy>ta^»»adiior of the-ehil-
deea of Iirafeh» Aad /Dtolel > mtf^ oh^p. tt^ 1^ ^ SnifiM) prinee of
Ihs? MtagAov^of *PdiMa^wMtotMA ne* tirewly-orie' dayii3< And 'Jesus
Sifaeh beats ^mtwisy thai' eaek noMl hawile dapeltai^a director,
ll isw i B mt d id^'thd H a jaai w a^wM «imAa4iivfte«4he angeh of '4lnlr deim-
IryV m t^^ofeodd iw s w i gii tadi a^diirfciO T t gMm *>«iHittawuidnfeyi-
late-Hv wtorMiip»of' Qoi m aea g l att>ntimt dnd^ |nisrtin»lhot jiriTort,
oihfiiige'alitflpiolrof wMrtorflkA & ThrllilrdrieedoroN •iMig^ Of
Khwr h O) p o t t Bn ee» aad'eooh OPO'M i|i|l»llB<tlM i^yt oiu otto n iowy^


ForiMsiff«MHii«4ho«tiir«biMhramhy:«Bf» OdAid i^thefattMr^s Ihe
■noti of hsii>wnlybodle»^ Aaloww 0« s p o i,uu i-€ eh' si4i ln <*4he iortstof
iieiveto,ivel«iior«a*'an(yof!tho MMrtiviinii They ftrsl^ oootrol the
lighl. aadi<tho*inibieoeoof tbr-stooogrStf^tha^.tMr powe^;■lhytpi!0-
c«sd f^om God to the lower regions. The sec ond are tlio ohosen
MNile of^tfao. iddhevoC Thh third' lOw the nodH of: the tonooeni «iar-
«f M andi MidWen^f^ Oodt «hb oflsotd «p^lhii^1lt•■) 'oaid poteood.
fttft^ttaift onl^f Ifl'voAoiOodi ^.

dhwe 8od thr nttber gavt to tho 8oq^ oor Mfedlnto? , gofiovr and
RdAeMdrf tU powvrhilwfliiM ml fiftkidif te Mgili of tif


^S &i^n A^ S£f£!llTM Books OF U0&1&


i ii I I ■■■■»■


great name of God and JesoS) wfaioli Ib the irat might in €(od, it
fluwB, aceordingly, into the twelve angels and twelye sigoB, throagh
which it spreads into the seven pianeta^ and, as a natoral consequence,
into all other aerraats; and ioitninients af God, until it penetratiss
into the lower regions, so that even an insignificant herb may develop
fi peculiar power, even if it la decayed, and so the angel of man ap-
pears before Grod at all timea betolng hia prayers into lua preienoe.

Without the name of Jesus the old H.ebrew cabal ists can accomplish
nothing in the j)re8ent.day, with old arts as they were used by the
Fathers. Therefore, it is,* that all tsreathVes frai^ andhDnor Mm. M\
men who believe in him ai^'enlightenNl through his brightness, our
souls ai^ united with^him, and the divine power emnnat^ from him
is communicated to tiB. i

OP THE MOVEaiENT OF THE HEAVENLY POWERS,

The first course in MnndoOeolesti watobei day aad^ght. Primnm
Mobile ReoJMt Hl^allaliin. It eontinnea from morning until night.
From these the Heathen8»'divided the angels into thirty-three ordeta.
The first great light, eonHaunioates light, life and statite out of tiie
first course, and op po a ea otiiera is the Saphaera Zodiaci; canaea sum-
mer and winter, the spring of all 4he things of the elements : Hebrew
Masloth, goes from evening to morning according to the twelte signs
of the heavens. -

But even if all things have their existence from Gcd^ the great First
Cause, we should not despise other causes, according^ to changes in
time, in the year, in the month, day and liour, neither should we re-
gard these causes exclusively, and forget Grod, for in this manner
heathen idolatry was institnted. For this reason God does not regard
time, because it robs him of his honor.* For the heafiiens experieneed
that the heavenly spirits were not united with their bodies, as our
souls are united with our foodies, hut the^ could, rejoice in the pres-
ence of €rodr and prepare their bodies without much labor to work
with the lower creatures of God. They regarded the celestial spirits
as gods, and conferred divine honors upint them. Very often the Jews
turned away from Qod and worshipped the hosts of heavM, and
therefore the wrath of God was kindtod against them. But on account
of the order of all things, God has aet them before u« aa his instra-
ments, and which we, on account of their honorable office, are to regard
as the noblest creation of God, and that we should 'honor them, next
to God, aoooTding to their.atation, not aa gods but as creatures, which
he has appointed as twelve princae over the twelve gates of heaved,
that they may admit what they received from the divine name, trans-
posed twelve times,

Ezekiel Writes : ** The laws of the twelve tribes of Israel were thus
written, and God Tetragrammaton ruled over thenik Thus it is writ-
ten in Revelations, that the stones in our heavcilly city are planted
in the ground, or that the Church of Christ is represented by the
twelve names of the Apostles, Including twelve attf^els and of the|n
tbe name of Jesus, who received all the power of the Fatberi ao that


&!^td Ai7D beyMth B6df § 6P ttOSEd. ^d


the heairenswill reeeiveirlmt the angels give to them aocording to
the will of God. If then aa IntelUgentia is ascribed to each faeaTen,
each star and department of heaven must have a distinct and separate
power and influence and, therefore, must also have a disHnct IntelH-
gentiam. Therefore, tht^re are twelve princes of angels, who repre-
sent the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and thirty-six, who represent so
many Decuriis, fAid s^entytwo angels, who represent so many Quin-
ariis of heaven, of the sev^ty-two nations and languages of man.
Likewise seven angels of the hosts for the seven heavens of the seven

Planets, to rule the world, etc. Also, four angels who represent the
ripUcitatibtts of the twelve signs of the Zodiac and the four elements.

All of these have their names and signs which ihe philosophers
need in their works, signs, images, clothes, mirrors, rings, cards,
wax-figures, as if they had a snn-work before them, and they called
them the names of the sun and his angels, and likewise of others, etc.

In the third place, they designated the lowest angels as servants.
These they distributed over the world, and named them after the seven
planets, and these have their special course after the four elements
and after the foar parts of the air and earth-^-of the daytime several
Dtumos, several Nocturnes, several Merailianoe, not that they aire
subordinate to the influence of the stars as the body whfoh they rep-
resent, but that they are more nearly related to the stfir-body-kkid-
time than others, otherwise they might be everywhere, as each human
being has three angels, for Grod has ordained that each human being
shall have his good angel as a protector, who also strengthens ihe
spirit and nrges and exhorts os to what Is good and commendable,
that we may fly from what Is fati malignitatem. And so every man
has also an evil spirit, who controls the desires of the flesh and awakens
the lusts of the heart ; between these two angels there is a constant
struggle for supremacy, and to whichever man gives the preA^rence,
he will receive the victory ; and if the evil angel triumphs, then man
becomes his servant ; should the good angel prove the stronger, then
he will cleanse the soul and save man from destructlom The angel
and his impulses come from the stars. In the third place are the
€renii of man who govern birth, and are joined to each perfection iu
man. These are recognized from the star which is the Lord of the
btrtlis. The Chaldeans seek this Crenium in the sun and mooa.
Astronomers would have the good Crenium oat of the eleventh house,
which, on this account, they call bonnm Gknium. The evil one out
of the Aixth house. But each one will learn to know him through
natural inclination, to which every one was inclined from his youth.
On this account he is called the birth-angel, who is sent into the world
by God. Of this the Psalmist says : '* Thou hast made the spirit of
man as a flame of flre." For experience teaches ns, that the flame of
fire and the spirit of birth may be separated without injury to man,
that we can learn hidden things from him if he is good and true. But
he is powerless over the members of birth. If, however, a virgin or a
companion becomes marriageable, he may be liberated from the glass,
ftod onr time of life will be extended.

UoxwYWf GKmI l»M endowed nan with » diyine ohAmoter, throaifh


the m i aM r FWiad-^Uie l«ftrliaad swofd of Gfxi; Ihrmigli w^h
»«a IbeeoaiQt: » eiifw to »U crQulnree. And tht^ ft^m be hta
another chanoter in ibo luimhA^ of €ro4, Hesod — the rifht wntk wef-
tro of Oodr thcoiigh which b^'^nds favor in the siiirht'of God fknd«ll
hii orealiMrofl. An evii oooMdeHee is the- ju4g0 of moii; but a giiod'
coiiMueiico is his haf^piuosfi. Therefore, tlvroitgh the olber divine
Bunborsi and threuf|h ibe angefs 'Ond fttam a maii. heoonutt iBtpreaMsd
wUh vigasandoharaotere of eonsoieooot which oaaauahinto be bappj
atona tiaM aBd'ttohaf^py at^anotlMMr.

Oa this acooHftt, if a waa has oominiilod murder, tbtfft,- or tag^ olber
aot which h|9 ooaacioace condetiina, be can be brought to a coiifiH«ioo
of his f(Mii thsoagh poMistoat oaliing^ apoii the name of God, for bie^on-
Mioaco will thea^ive him na rest until be rotarns what hehss stolett,
ortaatU ho hoo suflered the piiaishineiit due to bis cvftme. Tborofon*,
iox the naoio of the Father, Sou and Holy Spirit^ hike three smidl
pioossof voodffom the door-sill ov««r wbieb Ibe thief pmmed iii-lVav-
iog^ tha> piaoe where he oommitted the theft, place them wilhio a
Trngcrn rhuT*. and« tbon through the bub of the wheel say thefoUow-
iag .voids : 'M pmytheo, thou Holy Trinity, that thoa niayest cause
Af who> stole fvom me U^ a, C, to have no rest or peace nfttti he again
restarea mo that which he has stolea.*' Tarn the wheel ronnd three
tisMs aad vaplaos it again on the wagAn. Nevertheless. 4ll t^ioos
ChristiM%'Who« have any regard for tbeir future bappinem, sbooM
oacsfiiliy' avoid all siiperHtitioHs miUters and should hew^noof usinig
the M^ nam* orGk>d aaworthiiy, bi>)4lMig it in the greatest reverence
lesi theyrhring upon Uieroselvea eternal paoishment. It a man knows
himself- and roaiizes thst he is ocieated in tba image and likeness oif
(vod, he will acknowledge God the Creator l>efore all things, and
sllmrward tha world and aM its cieatares. From the big^ spints,
aog#la~and'ibe. heaveos^'he has hirt portion, and finua th«^ elements,
animals, vegetation aiid stones, be has withia bim«elf everythiag^-thttt
ho desires to obtain-.

If a man knows how to appropriate tlte particular place, time, order,
lH|lk« proportion and mental oi'gtMiiz ttion of auy one, he eaa.uttraet
and draw themt just as a magnet at tracts iron : but he mostiirstbe pro-
paraph j^st asihe m^a^iniust be fashiontnl by the ftlcand ohaiged'wkh
eleetrictty^ To this end the soul must first l>e purifiedwaud dettieatad
to God through faith.; a pure heart au^l constant joy i« the spirik^ape
requisites^ Be miwt posMiss love to Gttd mid bis fellowHRaa, and
then he maf arrive at. a perfect state and become like nnto the Stm of
God. He will become uuiteil with God, and will once more be< liko
bimv U is not given to angels mnr to any creature to unite with God,
but only to man^ sud. he imy become- his son ; ami when this takes
plae^^iDthat he overcomes • bimself, he overcomes and can dnvw to
him all other croatures and command their oltedtenee.

But our spirit, word and act, have no power in magic and knoiF-
ledge, if they are not every where strengthened by Ibe wosdof Gnd,
whiob^ we shouM bear often. We must prsy to God wHhoat' eoaaisff,
live a sober, temperate and unstained life 2 we miiKt llvcia m^^nnUa^
wA iliW^ NymtMiw, giv« AlmtMdhtftp th»paortfor€lirla iiM


' SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES. Tl

not laid in vmq : '* Muke uato yoa irieo4» wUk tkr iiuri^tMMui Mmb-
UMAf BO that he will receive yon lata eteriml habitatioiM," that la,
apply your wealth and abuundance to the support of the poor, that
they laay receive tMr dalty bread from yea aod be aatiafied. Christ
BS$* : \' What ye have done uafco Uie least of mine, that have ye also
done unto me.'' These are the friends that wilt lead w te a divine
abode in heav^, where we sbaU receive a thoufliiid-fold and life eter-
nal. On the other hand there are others wlN) will be rejected. For
Christ also says : ''I was hungry and thirsty and je gave me no meat
and driok^ depart from^me ye workers of iniquity, iato o«tar dark*
ness,"

f bieirefoTef by IhitiBg, praying, giving alma, preparing tiie fimiia df
the believing for the temple, we may bt^came eu-beira of heavetniy
gMtey whii0h'tbe Meet Bigh will, confer upon us in thia iife.if we kxmw
how to ttse them properly.

Since ail things have their life aad bein^ from God, sa the froper
name of everything was iiAx9 from the bemg of that 4hi«g, and aH
thtags ctsrive as intuence from the Creator if they hatve bM af^n^-
priately named, lur aa God brings forth all things through the luiiii-
enec iof heaven «nd the operation of the plaaeta, eves aa the namea>ol
all things Imre been given In accordanoe with some <|iiaUt|r'Of tlie
thing 4iaaed by hhn who oemkis the stars* And thus iSod led 4dl
citeatiires to iidimi in' order to have them named, and th4ir nmmrs in-
dleatcd snme peculiar qwality or part possessed by each. Tbesefete,
each name that has ■ a .meanings shiows by eomparisoli with the he^«
eiily tiiflaettee an inherent qualificadorn of tbe object, althnogh it to
ireqanivtly changed. Wbeo^ bowever, both m on n i nga of the name-
bamioAlze, then thn will-power anN| natnrai power beeome identical:
Ifopeover, ibe celestial jolice i^ which nan is ordnined hgr G«d. ^en-
dows him with power to confer life, and tells him what to eneonrage,
what to Alernte, what toasnppifess tn bk cause Sphaem, and to per-
form w^nderfbl woite irith fit II devotion towards God* «to.


Wluift Xta BiecdTeft from the Oirder of Angeb.

'Matt becomes strengtbeneiS with #onderfhl pemsr Hspoim^ Hm stAsr
of 'ftBg^, «o thai be delays tke divine will.

From the Seraphim, that we cling with fsrvvnt loi«.

'9r^Mn1fbe'€taet1A>im, enligllt«inment of the irind, pemr and wMom
otw t he'eanttted flgures and binges, tllroogb wbleh we«an gmM^ npon
diTine things, etc.

"From Ae TbfcfHfs, a ktioWMg« of how wo nre ninda end ooMHtn^ei,
tHni Wd'maf 4UMet aunt thvnglits opon etetval tbings.

From Dominationbius, assistance to bring into snhjectton'Oifr dally
enettiicM, ifbom we ^rry iHth ns constantly, aad enabling tm to attniQ
ssl^nflion.

'nNmi F^ftMtntibiie, proteetton against bmnaneuMiilea of )Hb.

#rotti'?^tltttnAts^ 0od infuses strength into «s» wmblittg m to con-
t0iift^ngaiWt.4beHsnemiM of troth and reward, 'that we may Mill Ibo
covno of ottrnataral lifoi


12 ISIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.


From PrincipatibiiB, that all things become subject to man, tbat he
may grrasp all power, and draw iiuto himself all secret and supernat-
ural knowledge.

From Archangelis, that he may rule over all things that God has
made subject to him, over the animals of the field, over the fishes of
the sea, and over the birds of the air.

From the Angelis he receives the power to be the messenger of the
Diviue will.

What Man may Obtain from the Twelre Signs.

As each creature receives its spirit, namber and measure from CM,
so also each creature has its tiftie.

>In the Ram, the vegetables of earth obtain new vigor, the trees
sap, and females become better adapted to propagate the human spe-
cies. In this- sign the fecundity of all creatares is limited and rega-
laled. It has Sunday for its peculiar time and end.

In the Bull, all transactions and enterprises are prospered and fos-
tered, so that they may go forward according to the will pf God, but to
this endtconstant prayers are necessary, and particularly on Sup^day.

In the Twins, the angels have power over bodily changes and travel
from one place to another over the heavens and through the course
of the stars-^have power over the motion of tira waliers m rivers and
in the sea, cause love between brethren, friends and neighbors, and
give warning against dangers, persons and objects.

In the 8i(K>rpion, ^ angels rule over legacies and riches, over
treasure and treasure-seekers — are calculated by nature to confer
power, the art of speaking, and to enlighten the mind ia holy things,
in like manner as did the iq»ostles in &eir uneeasiag prayers to €kd
at Pentecost

In the Lion, the angels have power to move every living thing, to
multiply their species, to watch, and in certain manners to jndge«v
And through the gift of €rod they confer Fhysicam, Hedicinam and
Alchymiam.-

In the virgin, the spirits have |y6wer to inbvert kingdoms, to reg-
ulate all eo&itioAs, to discrimhiate between master and servant, to
command evil spirits, to confer perpetoal health, and give to man
Husicum, Logicam and Ethicam.

In the Balance, the angels derive from Grod great power, inaamaoh
as the sun and moon stawl under this sign. Their power controls the
friendship and enmity of all creatures.

They have power over danger. Warfare, over quarrels and slander —
lead armies in all quarters of the earth, cause rain, and give to man
Arithmeticam, Astronomiami Geometriam*

In the Scorpion, the angels have power over suffering and terror,
over which man makes against God, over common privileges. They
compel the Conscience to obedience, and also force devils to keep their
agreements with men, and oice tvr^a. They govern the life and deaUi
of all creatures^ have power over departed booIb, and giy^ tQ
Tbeolosiam, Metaphjsioam and Geomantiam,


Sirffi AND 6EVESt H ftOOKS OP MOS^. ' ^3

Id the Archer, they have power over the four elements, lead the
people from, one far country to another, regulate the changes of the
elements and the propagation of animals.

In the Goat, the angels give high wordly honors, worthiness and
virtue, such as Adam enjoyed in Paradise in his innocence. They
also enlighten the understanding and confer human reason.

In the Aqiiitarius. angels keep man in good health, and teach him
what is injurious to him, make him contented, and teach him through
the command of God the mysleries of heaven and of nature.

In the Fish, the angels compel the evil spirits to be9ome suhjept to
niftQ, prbtoet the pious, so that the great euen&y cannot harm hikn.


Th^ Twelre Sl^ns Are Diyided Into Four Triplidtstes. '

The twelve angels, which represent the twelve signs, are called in
the Apoc. Malchidael, Asmodel, Anabriel, - Muriel, Yerohiei, Hamaliel,
Zuriel, Barbiel, Aduachiel, Hanaeb, Gambiel, Barebiel. Over t^s
the angels also received names from the stars over which they rule as
the twelve signs : Teletial, Zariel, Tomimil, Sartimei, Ariel, Batalif^,
Masuiel, Aerabiel, Ehesatiel, Gediel, Doliel, Dagymel, which means
the same as if expressed in Latin : Ariel, Tawnel^ GieminieU Gaocriel,
Leonial, Virginiel, Llbricl, Scorpiel, Sagitariel, Capriel, Aquariel,
Pfsciet.

This method of obtaining all kinds of things with peculiar power,
in the twelve signs, is desprtbed in many kinds of books. The seal qf
Hermetis . teaches how the powers of the heavenly ififliience may be
obtained nnder each sign in a crystal or gem ; that they are constel-
lated, and then, at each p(^iod of the twelve signs the appropriate
character of each is divided into four parts, each of which is repre-
sented by an angel. Therefore, each of the twelve stories in the
badge of ofBce of Aaron (Solomonis) was conatelUted, and the Amor-
ites possessed a constellated stone for each idol, and to this end they
consecrated the book.

Further, King Solomon teaches a hidden Almadel or a Geometrical
figure bearing upon the twelve signs of heaven, which be calls heights,
and gives to each height seven or eight names of princes. There are
also many other methods for seeking after the powers of heaven in the
twelve signs, which, for good reasons, must not be mnde known, be-
cause they are not mentioned in the Holy Scriptures aad were kept
secret

The Planets hare Seyen Heights and Seyen Angels.

The heights are named as follows :

1. Samaym. 2. Raaquin 3. Taaqnin. 4. Machonon. 6. Mathey.
6. Sebul. %. Arabat.

Of the operations of these, and their angels, office, order, number
and measure, an account may be found in a work by Rasiel, which
constitutes the Sixth Book Pbysicuro Salomonis and Elementia Hagica
Petri de Alano, page 674. From this book the book of the angel


U fliifH ^tB^ SEWMfi BeMB 0p msm.


Tractota «ak« itR wurce. (2 Uorael. Agriffift, Uk 8, puge 2* ; Pkil-
Mophiae Ooeal, S77, 675.)

iWre are wreo exalted Thraae Asgela, whkh e^Mvto tha eoai-
manda of Poleatatea, via. :

1. OpbanieL 2. Tjchagara. 3. Barad. 4. QneUaift. 6. Ana-
idmar. 6. Fuchar. 7. Boel.

Tlwia. are naiaed with the naoie of Grod, through which thay win
crealady aiid beloag to the firsi heaven.

SCHAMATM, GaBBISL.


The aaeoiid haavea, Raaqniae, haa twelve hmia^^r
of angels, who are placed over all. Zachariel, Raphael.

The third heaven, Saaqain, has three prinoea, JabnleU BahlM^el,
DalqpM f thcjmta over ire, and >aach haa hia anhofdinafte angeL
The principal prince of angels in Um hiMght is calM «if ^^^*^^'
▲vaheL

The fourth heaven, Machon, hj his angels leads Ihe sun bf 4lj% and
through other angels hy night The chief angel is called HCohJpX

The tIfCh heaven, Matthey. aly Machon, has tha prince SaoRael wko
Is served by two millions of angels These aee divided among Ae
ftmr qpnarters of the world f in each quarter three, who oonirol Ihs
twelve months, and over these are twelve chief angds.

n* sixth heaven, Zebnl, has for its i^rince, Zachiel, with two adl-
lions of angels. The angel Zebul is placed over theae dofim^ (he day,
•Bd another ang«l; Sabath, daring the night They nUe over kinffi,
€i«ate fhar, an^ give protection from enemies.

Arabath, the seventh heaven, has for its prince the angal Caaslek

The names of the angels of the seven planets aie as follows :

Zaphlel (Saturn), Zadkiel (Jupiter). Ganael (Man), Raphael (Sua),
Baniel (Venus), Michael (Mercury), Gabriel (Moon). -

There are seven princes who stand continually before €*od* to whom
mte given the splrihnames of the planets. They are called Sabathiel,
Zedelriel, Madimid, Semntlel, or Semisbia, Nogahel, Ceahahlnth or
Cochabiel, Jareahel or Jevanael, for the planets are cidled fin them-
selves:

Sabaehsiy, through which God sends hunger and tribulation upon
the earth.

Sodeck, through him come honor and favor, right and holiness of


Modym; throngh him wrath, hate, lies, and war.

Hamnia, from him comes light, and the power of distinguishing be-
tween time and life.

Noga, from him food and drink, love and consolation.

Gochab, from him proceeds all trade and oonameroe.

I^avahan, oauaes all tbinga to iiicreaae and decrease.

I, Solpmon, acknowledge Hhat in the hours Sabachay* Madviii it ii
burdensome to labor, but in thehonrsZadeek and Noga labor m light
During other hours labor is middling, sometimes good and. tiooasioB-
ally bad.

Some writei% as for example, Cornelius Agrippa, Occult VbBm,


SIXTH Al^D SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOfifiB. 75

L4b.3, cbap. 16. call the fteveii region te of the worH by dtlier names,
^feiohnre distributed among tlu$ nowere of other vtareMOrfvbi^l. Ze-
cbartel, Samael, Micbael, Atiael, Uapbnel. Gabriel, and each -of theve
nil«*8 the world three hundred and fifty^fonr yeafv «nd fowr monliha.
A few give^lbe Angel-year at three hundred and Btxiy-Are years-— as
many years as there are days in onr yimr. Others, one bundled 'and
forty-five years, Apac, tweuiy-one Spiritii, Bttptem in Oeaflpe^tt Dei
Tbroni snnt qnos reperi etima pre8id4»re Plam^iis.
;9he tMiMs of the seven angels over the seven heftTens mast be ot-
tered firatf^attd afterwards the names of those over the seven planehi,
over the seven days of the week, over the seven metids, over the seven
eoiofs^^tiiMi fliittt be uttered in 'the mormng of'eaeb day-of^heweA.


IttToeation of Angeb. •

Oh, ye aforeftaid angels, ye^tbat exeoate the comiimii^ of i^ Oie-
ator ; be willing to be preeent^wtith me in the work whidi I'b»Ve mi-
dectaketi ai>tins tiine, and help me to fiiiiffh it, and beye tuy afUenlUre
bearers and assistants, that the honor of God and my own welfafe'ttay
he prowtrd.

Oreritfats tbere are twenty^efgbt angvls who role ov«r >lbe tiveiilir.
eight houses of the moon, viz : Asariel, Oabiel, DiMobiel^ Sefaetwl,
AmnodM. Amixiel, Ardesiel, Neriel, Abdizriel, /azeriel, GitgeAtel,
Ataliel, Aaerntel, Adrtel, Amiitiel. Iciriel. Bethuacl. CMidl, itequlel,
Abrtfaael, Auel, Tagried, Abhviel. Aranixiel. And eaeh moor hm
her own guardian and ruler, and these are deeeribed Hi t«lb. 8,
Razielis.

A man must also know how to divide the mooAs, days Mid boon
iato fovr parts, for God has ordained that all things ead btel -be (per-
fected on suitable days and at proper hours.
'*a'h6 ^ngfds ptaeed over the four parts «f beaiwii' are : .iSeta#li,
Gabriel, Cabrael^ AHraol. Madiel, Boamiol.

Alscius, Loquel, Zanicl. Hubaiel. Baccanael, Janael, Garpatiel.

Elael, Unael, WalTum, Vasans, Hialjel, Usera,'6taijeU

Ducaniel, Baabiel, Barquiel, Hanna, Anael NahijmeL

In the second heaven, Kaquie, the following aQgels serve.

Nathan, Gatroije, B<Maitb«t

Teseraije, Tuacon :

Thiel, Jareael, Tanael, Venetal, Vebol, Abuionij, Yeiameil.

Milliel, Nelepa, Baliel, Calliel, fiolg, Batij, Jeli.

There are also, over the four quarters of the globe, four high angels.

Over thewoTmng winds, Mi^ael rules.

Over the evening winds, Ra^ba^l ruLaa.

Over the midnight winds, GwbHel rules.

Over tin noonda/ winds, Nariel or Uriel mlea.

wa AiroBui or thb ■lu»mt8 abb :

Of the ail!, Cteiill. Of the water, 33MtiiB.,

Of the earth, Ariel. Of itiie Are, Seraph m Nathaniel.

Tbese are |U1 great princes, a^4 ea^h has nanjr legione of ^ge]a


76 BISTB AMD SBTBNTH BOOKS OF U08E8.

under him ; they have great powar in gorerni
■igns of tins year, month, da;, and hour, and ii
and trlnd.

In the third heareQ, SaaqniD, ths Angels are ;

Sarqiiiet. Qnadtmn. Curaolnl, Tarkscorat. Amael, Bum«1.

Turiel, Coniel, Bablel. Kadie. Ualtiel. HuFaitiel.

Fantel, Penaal, Penac, Kaphaet. Carniel, DeramieL

Porna, Saditel. E;niel, Samuel. Vaioauiel, Famiel,

In the fourth hsaven. Uachoo. Ibe Ang«l of the DirlBlotM serTei :

Carpiel, Beatiel. Raciel. Ragoel, Alttit, Fabriel, yioQatrsbk.

Anabel, P^liel, llBlael, Hiiroat, Sucerattw. Cababili.

In ths Qfth heavea, Uachijn, the foUowiug Angela serve in four
diTJsioDs :

Friagne, Cnael, Dimoel, Calzaa, ArragOD.
' Lacana, Astrgna, Lohqiiin, Soiiltas, Jael, Jasiael, NaeL

BabiHiiiel, Jahijniel. B;iijel. Seraphiel, Mathiel, B«ra«l.
. Sacriell,'Maianiel, GHiliet. Uoaaei, Vianiel, EraBllel.

In the Bizth heaven, Zebul ; and teventb, Arabat, OTer the fifth

Sbonld DO Spiritua AerU or divlslooi be fonnd, then pronounce jo
the diteotlau of the four qiiartera of the norU. the following words :
, Oh, great exalted and lidored God, from all eternity.

Oh, wise God, da; and night I praj unto Thee, oh. moet mercifal
Qod, that I ma; complete m; work to-da;, and that I ma; nnder-
ataud it perfectly, through our Lord Je bub Ciiriat, 'lliou ti>at tiTeat^nd
reigneat, true Gnd from vternit; to elernit;.
Oh, ilrong God, might; anil without end.
: Oh, powerful and merciful God.j

- On iiatiirda; call upon God in the words which he gave In Paradba
In which u the name of God.

Oh, hoi; and nercirul God of lBra«l. the highest terror and fear of
Paradise, the Creator of heaven and earth (as before).

*I* 'i' *£* Qusf^ ^oe Bignum.


End or tbb FinaT DtnsioH,


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES. 1*1


SECOND DIVISION.


■ • 1

I.

Sepher Schimmusch Tehillim;

OR,

Use of tliG Psalms,

FOR THB FHYSlCAIi WSLF ABE OF HAN.

A Fragment out of the P&actical Kabala, together with aa Extrao
r : from a fev other Kabalittioal Writings. With Five Illus-

tralioH nj^oB Fonc Tablet.

TmaUted bj Godfxrt Skuo, Leet Fubl. Acad, Lipa. : 1788.


" ' • • V 4-

Hie eminent pablieher and tnuuUtor faiBiate atringently that only
peraooa of a moral chftraoter oaa expeet anooeBS in the use. of the
, ftiregoiag method.


FBOX THB PREFACE OF THE TRANSLATOR.

It cannot be denied that trniB, wise and enlightened Kabalists lived
at one time, and tbnt some stiU live. But such do not wander from
place to place, offering their art for sale, in order that they may accu-
molate wealth, but they are satisfied to remain quietly in the pillared
palace of Solomon, where they are constantly employed in gathering
divine wisdom, eo that ^aa the^^ express it), they may finally become
worthy to receive the hidden gifts from above. I myself know such
a man, who obtained exalted wisdom from the Kabala, and who, not-
withstanding his extreme poverty, never undertakes a Icabalistic
process for money. When I once asked him why he refused to
write a desired amulet for a noble lord, who offered him a large sum
for his services, he answered me with an adage from the well-known
Pirke Awoth (Extract or Fragment from the Fathers) :

** Deitschtaramasch fietaggo Chalof,'^ tbftt is to say, ^* whosoever
accepts the crown for his xeward, will perish suddenly. Not for all
the money in the world would I do such a thing. But if I can assist
my needy neighbor therewith, then I will do what I can, trusting in
the omnipotence of the Most Holy, without lookin^r for a reward. For
my necessary support I do not feel any concern, for the Almighty has
methods to support me. if I trust in Him. Why, he even cares for
the sparrow.

It is particularly remarkable that the greatest and most genuine
Kabalista of the Jewish nation were nearly all followers and disci-
plfl of tM blMo^ gavioi^ ^f t)ie world^ and the^ are bo still, aa I oao

.cy has


'7j8 sixth and seventh books of MOSES.

prove satisfactority, 15y nnin^roui ilMitgtis ifH^fB <|beir writiniirs and
prayers. Let ihin soffioe for thia one kiad of men. But that Kabal-
iHto live and still .Hve^ who engaged in experiments, and who pi^r-
formed wondnrfiil works, and who Will yet do wondf rful things, is
also an un4enica|»l9'f{ict,4inleas we are p»;far«)4 to condeimi all thai
was ever si|ia-BpoA this sul>}Mei by nmowued inen^of'Wladna.

The celebrated and well-known Prussian Hussar, Lord of Archen-
wood declares, in a description of London, that there lives a man in that
city,4BhaiMMi4nK' ia Uuct«rlalcoiujrho lfi|Kiow|i>to l)e a great Ka^ilkk
an^ «bftJ«'lSHllMA jam: 6uttiiilto4 .Jb^,tb<)^os^J^iierai4|i? ad'd Jt^^-
ge.nt people <o| LQHtipp. , He |tates further, that this same Dr.Talcbn,
lived not very long isinee in BriiAseU -trader- itie«ame ^ Jlide Ghnyim
Sc|uiiurf!all^.wi»a,fiqpQrding tQ th^ ^vidence.jof .the French Duke of
Nancy, injijs pul^liaiied me£aoirs of kabaHBticat processes, pcrfonbt^-
the roost astomshlirg -fisats.

I confidently hope aod .tniat^ aoi I «a» MMtt withont heritatlon»
thatf9|rrH^t)e.t^9k oaniipi, have ^«« tendency to foster superstition,
Tak^ it for granted that one of my readers «iOfri1«cl>#ofle'ie^4i|i9p)ny
one of the methods described in these pages in order to accomplish a
desired objeot^ kla •agcraiMa to satisfy «afioBi*y.will.^oB4dlMi|»pcM^
when -bo^akea* into ooftrida»at)aa ilhe iiagd itermaand «tnQiflM)caiity
which are required to avail himielf of them in .Mdflrito.jAHiiNt.any
b en e fit or be s uoo eas fu l ia their use.

Before concluding my preface^ it is necessary to give the reader
some instrlMittoii«<|j^tiqi»;|ting Hif arraiiga^NfAt of tk|ia>i!ol«ipieu rWe find
ip it,, for Instance* single words* names, sentences, and indeed entire
experiments, printe4 tn tfie Hebrew and ChaMasn Ifingpiages. Wi$
fact Ishoutd not prevent any one from piifebashig Ihe look. Beeattaa
aU the words printed tnlfebrew anrd vhaldate, iiFfaick ace tniradtid 46
be impressed .upon the Qiind, are also printed in fin|*lwh 4n plain
terms, and. they hare^ been care Ai^ly translated. So faF4tff Ni» Hi*bi!i»w
passages ace coneerped. the roeaninj^ of each pasaage aiHl ^experisMtttt
follows immediately i|) Biigtish, or it ia plaeed btmecMb the Hebrww
expressing. I have nMM)e this ar^ngediefll in^ ooinptlafioe wWh a m-
quest from a number of promlneiii persons, to ttaice siife Ifaat fthe
translation is ^eitiilue and correct. Tbe Ashapier and verse of -iiitly
Scripture, where all passages quoted may be foiHidraTe iilao oorredly
rrcorded.

EKTRAfiT FRIM THE PREFACE OF THE MML^Tld^UBLISHHr.

It is universally known and acknowledge* thtttwe are naiHed Mfter
t)ie most holy name of the Raler ot th<) World, and that wt* rHU!4Ve
the hf4y decalogue or the written law from him. it is further wHl
kn(tw9 that in addition to the laws which he gave to Moses mn^uven
upon stonjB. he also gav«.to him certain vetba) laws, by which, through
hi.H protracted May upon the mountain Si rmi. where all .doctriires, «^x-
plfivaa^iopa of .n^s^eri^^. holy names of Qod and th^ angels, and par-
ticularly hpw to appiy Ibis knowledge to the best interest of man,
Ki^re entrusted to him. .All these doctrines, irhl<;h God proooniietNt
«:obd, buturhtcli were*llot geofrrsHy iiuid0 kd9WB,«tt4 IV^HA iifr Ihv.


nam jma^mmmm wtms » mim. ¥»


p^W» ^^m» mmeimM^Whi^mM\mf or VrailtiiHUi; Mc i W cotitaiii-
miMf 4mm9h\»m, tc* h i fc— ^bii tu M Bwui. Jodiiw bonded
Aiem#v«»to tkAoldMs, tfce^ rti t n i g> ii>tii<»^<li»>idKq»,fcn^ from
i^ M^S9» ili9j^4€Be«ad«l to tbr pr^fafalft^ Tlw|ir«^li«te eatrfiiivd
. t)ieBi»i9 tlifrmeii «r te gfwt ^mafoga^ aai* itKum §iii^ thuaB^'auto
tlw wive Buen, Md so^tlM K«MftiiM» handad doomr'tarn'OBeto^ tbe
otiiar— fiKiiit oKMUli ta MMtk^tA 4lia fmient ■ daf « Tlwrefon. do we
Xwm tbii^ in teltem am naay naana of tliei ]fort>HMand Ms
angels, besides deep aiyalaitea, aditefti majr ba-afifiied to the welfbte
«r nuiii,, Imi wlilch, 00 aaeotti* of tW y M f uf Bo u oia of kmnaiiilj^'and
m gniM^d igataat IMr abaaa, haircbaaa Inddoalram tWffveailiiiass
of luunan beiofi.

BiF^MT/Uiini. tlial I haiio beca^aittM is aa«loapaa fbo mn, aad aee^s
no AivtWpioofTapd it it«mall4f cioac aad^ iacosteovartMe tlist te
4Ul.ineceifia gafaft»Th«cakftebegiaMB|ptoc^faaaHtollM Ibe^ioiei--
ei^ «f tlie tont aadr ibo* kidjr of ana at Hio^iaao tfmti Vhoiafore bas
iSod eadovodlnr w<tb «i»l4adfalmiia, imffM; aad Hrtaaa tbat; with
« saUonalnse^ hor, aMBi May p w i t a at i i hniwfl f faoai daager mhw no
etber bolp ii at band and aa«e Uteetf tbtatftyhf utliiliiir ^ wordiB
of tbe Uviiag CM. Oathta aoeosiife, tbe ecpreaskMK "Foritli tby
Ufe, " ooewa fteqaaatlf in tba Tbon; Aad .9oloaMM» ngra In Mr Ppo^
erbs. vi. 22 : '* Wbea UM«f iipMtlMbail lead tbao; and wiban dM>u sleeps
eat it sball l|ae|^ Hk^eJ* Tbal the Piatei and the-Thora a«e eqnal in
boUoese aad worfthinaMi. wffl sot be caMed in ^fiaeatiaa.* Out wiee laeai
delate, '« He who wiH daHy lire aloasr to Giodi who dteeneet to iiatte
b|s eoHl wUb Hiia« aail w%o le iHUIaflr ^ K«e^ Hi th« otaieat ooomimiioB
%iih himv sbeiild oltea pray tbe Pjudwe witk feK^nr aad deTOtioa*
^apf f the mao vbo data tbia daU jr and boaaly, fov bit rewafd' will
bo g^eat." Tba Psalm are fbrnwd and divided into Inro books, jaiit
iike the Thora. We eaa^ therelbfe<iaqMic«^l7 tanst ht the deatriaee of
the enligbteoed Kabalieti, «he» tbar aeaatt tbat the Alwigbtj aedord-
ed e^fuil taletfts and powen la tba PsalaM-aa badid to the 'Pbora^ aad
that IB them maay aaiaea of tba Maati High Majesty of €M and hie
angels, beeidee, many mjataitai^ aia biddea.

Yes, dear veadea, jau aiittiaat'donbt Thraagba pkmfr Hfe and by
a rational aw of the Paakna yaa bm^ obtain the groee of €M', tbfe
favor of princes and magistrates and the !•«« of yoar fbUow^men. Ton
will be enabled 'to-protoot yodfsetf Ibom dagger, -to eaeape auflbring,
ao4 to promMo yiottnoara wa ifara, .

lliaitbts Is all' ttna, theeoatents af< tbe pmyarvwltli wbieb weend
each Fsalm, and wbieb mm are in d*ty bound to pvay^ WiU'iimply de-
moustvate. Bnt tha oorveotnasa^ef it.ia stey frtatiiisbnd by tba tftaob-
ingf air tbe T«^«d and>of iba oti wise mum, wbo^assiifa as; that taany
of oitr faaioua fbreMieiar aaiailad i h eaaw il rar of appapentty snpep-
natural raeana from time to tina^ ta^ paoteet tbair bait iaaafesis. the
truth of this I can eetabllab by tbaaaoit tnistwaaty wHiieiie i a ; yea, I
could even oieiilian some' g^reat a^n, wibo, by a prapor ase of 'the
Psaims, performed great woHtt. Siiab exaa^ibM are rare. Let it
ittflloe I present yon with a few passages out ot standard books;
tbrongh which you will become folly convineed tbat tbe Almighty baa


80 SIXTd AKD dEl^£l99tt ftOOltS Of MOSMS.


given hit revelled word true and unexampled talenti and power,
and that, in an extreme ease of neoemi^, we are permfUed to make
use Qf this gift of God, for osv own and oiir Mighbor's welfare. As
for example, to east oat evil spirits, to •relieve deep melaooholy and
to cure grievoQB discheeo ; to set firee prisoners woo liave been oil-
justly imprisoned ; to arrest and resist enemies, opponents, murder-
ers and highway roUbeis ; to Quench the flereest tres ; te resist floods
of water, to delis^d imi6cenee and to reveal It) and to fester ifood for-
tune, well-being and peaoe in a general manner.

Read the treatiae on this 8#>jeet, of Che ezoellent BabbI Scblmscheli
bar Abrahsai,.in bis book entitled '* Responslones RflSobaba»"^ fit-
amine the words of the enlightened Rabbi Jochananlwn Sadrss in bto
Treatise of the Tolaind aad Sinbedrin, Ch«p. 2f, where he treats of
magioai coqjiinatieBS;>iMid whevi be asyerts and proves, that it is al-
lowed, in daagevoufl^and ineorable diseases^ te tkake use of words
and passages in the Holy Scriptare for their ciire. You will find
more or less similar refefences in tbd treatise of Ss^bath in the Tal-
mud, as well as in the Responsonibtts, by Zemaeb. son of Simonis, lb
which the NlnetyfseGond Fsalm, with certain preeeripiions added, are
highly recommended :as a certain means to Atoid suffering and dan-
ger, even in cases of war, fiite and similar* InHtances, enabling us to
escape uitharmed, free, seevre and without hindl*anee.

Under such happy circumstances, it Is sarety rig^t and proper, that
such wholesome knowledge, which up to this dav was known but to 4
few men, and they only the learned, was yei free to all, but found
only in the libraries and cabinets of the great, altbongb not generally
known, should at least, in some degree, be brought to light.

Since, however, I cannot gain mf objject in any other way than hr
giving these pages to the world in a printed form, and since they will
unavoidably fall into mtclesn bands, I feel myself constrained, in order
to prevent an unworthy nse ef them, to extend this prefboe, which
might otherwise, very properly have ended here, in laying down a
few rules aod Umita Do not, however, be diioenraged for I am really
endeavoring to promote yoinr besflnterests and shield yon from barm.

1. If you are- wHKng <o avail yourself of the means indicated, I
warn you not to attempt it in a case of extreme necefnity! and wheli
there is no other help at hand.

2. If this be so, fn experimenting, place your trust in the goodness
and power of the Most High and ever blessed God, upon whom yon
may perhaps have hitherto called under an unknown holy name.

8. The ordained -Psalm, for this or the other undertaking, besides
the appropriate prayer, yon must pray with a broken and contrite
heart to God, and in addition to this keep in mind^the added holy
name with its letters, which are given the wise Kabalistis. At the same
time you mnst have your undertaking continually before your eyes,

4. I mnst say to yon, if you wish to console yourself with this help,
that you must live in snch a manner that no crime or willful sin can
trouble your conscience, for it is well known, that the prayer of the
ungodly is not acceptable to God. And herewith I commit you to the
protection of the Most High.


BlXTfl. AND ^EVfeNTtt feOO^d 0^ kOSES. 81


THE USE AND EFFICACY
OF


AND

THE MANY PUBFOSES TO WHICH THEY MAY BE APPLIED.


Psalm 4« — When a woman in pregnant ftnd fears a premature
delivery, or a dai^eroua conftnemenLshe should write or cause to be
written, on a piece of parchment prepared from the pure skin of a
deer, the three first verses of the above Psalm, together with the hid-
den holy name and appropriate prayer contained therein, and place it
in a small bag made expressly for that purpose, and suspend it by a
string about the neck, so that the bag will rest against her naked

body.

The holy name Is called Eel Chad, which signifies, great, strong,
only God, and is taken from the four following words : Aschre, verse 1;
XiO, verse 4 ; Jatzliach, verse 3 ; Vederech, verse 6.

The player is as follows :

May it please thee, 0, Eel Chad, to grant unto this woman, N.,
daughter of B-t that she may not at this time, or at any other time,
have a premature confinement ; much more p^rant unto her a truly
fortunate delivery, and keep her and the fruit of her body in good
health. Amen t Selah I

Admonition of the Translator.

Before I proceed further with the translation of the Psalms, it is
necessary to insert in this place an admonition, which the author,
who wrote only for his own nation, deemed unnecessary, and which,
nevertheless, should be addressed to every one.

** Each human beiuff,'' says the celebrated Kabbalist, Babbi Isaac
Loriga, ** except only 3ie ignorant idolater, can by a pious and virtu-
ous life' enter into the consecratod temple of the true Kabl>ala, and
can avail himself of its benefits without being able to speak or under-
stand the Hebrew language. He can pray, read and write everything
in his mother tongue ; only the holy name of God and the angels that
may occur in the experiment, must, under all circumstances, be
written and retained in the mind in the Hebrew tongue <for they must
in no case be uttered), because, on the contrary, a wrong direction
might otherwise easily be given to the exp<>riment, and coosequently
it would lose all its holiness, worth and c^ciency.

With this pronnnciation we must all be well satisfied, and, there-
fore, I must write all similar words and names, from the letters of
which the holy names are taken, in Hebrew. In order, however, that
the reader may read all similar occurring names and words in hia


82 ^ SIXTH AND SEVENTB B()0KS OP ITOSES:

miod and retain them, I have written all Ihe Hebrew words with
English letters together with their meaning.

Psalm 2«~Sboiild 70a be exposed to dangler in a storm at sea, and
your life threatened, then recite Chfii Ptolm wfUlout delay and wkh
becoming reverence, and think respectfally of tin holier name con-
tained therein, namely, Schaddei (which means,* mighty God), then
immediately utter the prayer belonging thereto, after which write
everything together on a fragment of a pot, and in full confidence in
the Omnipotent, who fixes tfie boandaky of the Ma and rcslMiili- Its
power, throw it into the foaming waves, and you will see marvelous
wonders, for the waves will instantly cease their reariiig aad the
storm will be lulled.

The words, the letters of which constitnte this holy name, are taken
from Rageschu, verse I ; Noesedu, verse 2 ; and Jozes. verse 9.

The prayer is as follows: '*Let it be. Oh, Schaddei I (Almig^bl^
God !) Thy holy will, that the raging of the storm and the roaring of
the waves may cease, and that the proud billows may be stilled.
Lead us, oh, all merciful Father, to the place of our destination in
safety and in good health, for only with Thee is power andr might.
Thou alone canst help, and Thou wilt surely help to the honor aa4
glory of Thy name. Amen 1 Selah !

This Psalm is also an effectual remedy against raging beadadie.
The direction is as follows : Write the first eight verses of this Psalm
together with the holy name ^nd appropriate prayer, upon pure
parchment, and bang it upon the neck of the patient ; then pray ovef
him the Psalm with the prater arranged for it Do thn in humbU
devotion, and the sufferer will be relieved.

Psalm 8- — Whopoever is subject to severe headi^he and baekachot
let him pray this Psalm, with the leading holy names and appropriate
prayer contained therein, over a small quantity of olive oil, anient
the head or back while in the act of pn^er. This will afford imme-
diate relief. The holy name is, Adon (Lord), and is found in the
wordH, Weatta, verse 3 ; Baadi, verse 3 ; Hekisoti, verse 5 ; and
Hascheini, verse 7. The prayer is as follows': Adon (Lord) of the
world may it please ibee to be my physician and helper. Heal me
and relieve me from my severe headache and backache, becanse 1 can
find help only with Thee, and only with Thee is coutisel and action
to be found. Amen I Selah Selah 1

Psalm 4«— If yon have been unlucky hitherto, in spite of every
effort, then you should pray this Psalm three times before the rising
of the sun, with humility and devotion, while at the same time yon
should impress upon your mind its ruling holy name, and each time
the appropriate prayer, trusting in the help of the mighty Lord, with-
out whose will not the least creature can perish. Proceed in peace to
execute your contemplated undertiddng, and all things will resnlt to
your entire satisfaction.

The holy name is called : Jiheje, (He is and will be.) and is com-
posed of the four final letters of the words. Teppillati, verse 2 )


I^XTfl AND SEVENTH :M0KS OF MOSES. 83

» >■

»— — ■ I « ■■! I ■ ;< 11111 ,1 11 11 ■

Selah, verse 5; Jebovab, vmtb^S; and 'TofliehiweDi, verae 9. . The
piftyeriB «a fcAlewa: lf»7 U.f»l«Me Tliee< oii, Jiheje, to prosper mj
«A|r8.i8tept and^oiogs. Oniiit tiMkI my d^aire jpaay be am^y fqlfilied,
iiid'let«iy»rwbeajbe«atMiiad«v»ii{tlii»daf^l9r tha9^ke of. Tby groat,

nirtlity «idx|>raiM!WArtliy oiuae. i^men 1 — ^ Sel»h I

Jf .you wish tQ.iaMompiuhtiin «iuiefite)uQg l^y or (brojugb Anolber,
pracMed.in oAX febiugs «B«lrQadyi8t4lod fikbove, wUh ibis exeeption :
yea ipnii chai|gB.tbe;pM^v M follows : l^t.n^ find grace, favor and
nier<^jrn the eyes of N.^soo of R./80 that he may grant mypetUion. etc.
. :A(0iR|it If grow bive a fffms^lio b«i»8 'bQfor« ki^ ma^istcittes or
prioMS, yoa fluut pjjri^ tbiftPMlin «nd the Aloelqg prayer Arranged
for it, sevoD times io succession be|ar«4ia riffiog ol' thO/Siw.

JBt t&A Trnrmlat'^r

I mast he permitted in this place to insert anotber oaqMon. Wliea
it le «aid K., son or dpigtitariOf N., it mtst be iioderakood that we
rnosl ftpst meotioii Ihe namft of tbe person by whom «re wish to be
served, «iid aflenvmrd tk»4i»me of bi« raolber, ae, for exumple, Isaac,
son of Sarftb, or Dinah dangfaSer of Leah.

Pflitet 5«— 'If you have business to transact with your magistrates
or Mritb your princes, nod desire to obtain their special favor, then
pray this Psalm early at the riung of the sun and in the evening at
aansat. bo this three ;tofs ever pure olive oil, wbile at the same
time yon think unceasingly, npon the holy name of Chananjah (mer-
oiful God>« Aooint-your Stoe, bands and feet with the oil and say : Be
merciful uato me, for the sake of thy great, adorable and holy name,
Cbaniii^ah, turn the iMMirt of my prince to me. and grant that he may
regaid me with gracious eyes^ and let me find favor and courtesy with
him. Amen I Selah !

Tbe holy name is found in the w^rds ; Chapez, verse 5 ; Nechini,
verse 9 ; .jNecbona, verse 10 \ Hadichemo, verse 12 ; and Kazlnna,
vjerse 14.

. Still aoolbor peculiarity of this Psalm is, when you find notwtth^
fltaudii^ the utmost- industry and care, your business does not pros-
per^ 1^4 you . have reason to fear that an evil Masai, that is, an evil
star^ spiril or destiny is opposing you, then pray this Psalm daily,
aveivtoihe laiitivcr^e wii^ great devontness, and you will soon find
yourself in more fiivorable circumstances,

PSfllffll 4.— ^Ith tbisFsalm alldiaeavs of the ey# may be healed.
Read the Psalm for three days successively, and pray the prescribed
prayer seteii times stost^ly, in a low torie, and with devotion, and with
fiiis keep oontinufallT te year mind the holy name of Jasch^jah (which 1^^^
meims nel^ is wHb the Lord) ; Mieve wi&out a doubt that tbe Lord s^
can ttad wilt lielp y^u The prayer is as follows : Jehovah my
Father, may It please Thee, for the sake of ^ great, mighty, holy
and adorable name, Jescbi^ah Baal Bataohna, that is, Help is with
tbe Lord, |for he is the Lord of help, he can lielp,) which name is
contained in this Psalm, heal me from my diseases, in&rmities, and
from the pun of mj ejeB, for ^ne is the power imd the help, and-


84 SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.


thou alone art mighty enough to help ; of this I am certain, and there-
fore I trust in thee. Amen t — Selah t —

Further it is said : If a traveler encounters danger by land or sea,
he shall, when there is no other help to hope for, pray this Psalm
seven times, and each tim% with fall confidence in the mi|pl|ty and
sure help of the Almighty, andadd ttiereto : Jeschijan, Lord of help!
may it be thy holy will and pleasure to assist me in this extremity
and to avert this danger from me. Hear me for the sake of thy great
and most holy name, for thine is the power and the help. Amen ! —
Selah!— *^

The five letters of this holy name contain, according to the prayer,
the words ; Jehovah al, verse 2 ; Schuba, verse 6 ; Osoheeofaa, yerse 8;
Bewosbn and Yejibbahaln, verse 11.

Psalm 7«— When evil persons conspire to render you unfortunate,
if your enemies watch for an opportunity to overthrow you, if they
pursue you in order to harm you, then take upon the spot where you
stand a handful of earth or dust, pray this Psalm and keep in your
mind the holy name of Bel Elijon, great, strong, highest God ! then
throw the dust in the direction of your enemies, uttering a prayer
prescribed for this case, and you will find that your enemies will
cease their persecutions and leave yeu undisturbed. The letters of
the holy name are found in the words : Aisher, verse 1, Ode, verse 18,
(according to the order of Al, bam, and the letters must be trans-
posed), Hoshenei, verse 2 ; Eli, verse 7; Jadin, verse 9 ; Jashuf, verse
13. Elijon, verse 18.

The prayer is as follows : Oh, Eel Elijon ! great, strong and highest
God ! may it please thee to change the hearts of my enemies and op-
posers, that they may do me good instead of evil, as thou didst in the
days of Abraham when he called upon Thee by this holy name. (Gren.
xiv. 22.) Amen !— Selali I—

If you have incurred the ill-will of an enemy, whose Cunning power
and vengeance you have reason to fear, you should fill a pot with fredi
water from the well, and pronounce over it the twelve last verses of
this Psalm, namely, the words : ''Arise, Jehovah ! in thy wrath I" Pro-
nounce these four times, and at the same time think of the holy name
of Eel Elijon, and of your enemy, and pray each time. '* Humble
and overthrow, Oh ! Eel Elion, mine enem^^ N., son of R., that he
may not have the power to provoke or to injure me.'^ Amen I After
this prayer, pour the water upon a spot at your enemy's residence, or
at a place where he must pass over it, and by doing this you will
overcome him. ;

If you have a case to decide before the court, and you have reasons
to fear an unfavorable or partial verdict, then pray this Psalm slowly
before yon appear in the presence of the judge, thinking at the same
time of Eel Elijon and of the righteousness of .your cause, and as you
approach the judge pray as follows : Oh, Eel Elijon! turn thou the
heart of the judge to favor my best interests, and grant that I may
be fully justified when I depart. Give unto my words power aa4

Strength fui4 l^t me ^4 fiiyorf Aineft!— S^tebH


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OP MOSES. 85

^i— — '■ ' ' ■— *■— ■ » I M i n i I I II .1 II . II

Pgalni 8. — If you wish to secure the love and good will of all men
in your business transactions, you should pray this Psalm three days
in succession after sundown, and think continually of the holy name
of Rechmial, Which signifies great and strong God of love, of grace
and mercy. Pronounce at each time the appropriate prayer over a
small quantity of olive oil, and anoint the face as well as the bands
and feet. The letters composing the holy name are foand in the
words : Addir, verse 2 ; Jareaoh, verse 4 ; Adam, verse 6 ; Melohim,
verse 6 ; Tanischilehu, verse 7. The prayer readB as (ollows : May it
please thee, Oh, Rechmial Eel, to grant that I may obtain love, grace
aiid fhyor in the eyes of men according to thy holy will. Amen I—
Selah!—

Psalm 9* —The principal attribute of this Psalm according to the
precept is, that it is an unfailing remedy in the restoration of male
children, who are feeble in health, when no medicines and help are at
hand. This Psalmshould also be prayed against the power and ma-
lignity of enemies. In the first instance write this Psalm, with its
holy name, upon pui^e parchment, with a new pen, and hang it around
the patient's neck. Afterwards repeat the prayer with reverence,
and think at the same time of the holy name of Eheje Aischa Eheje,
that is, I am he that will be, and utter the following prayer : All-
merciful Father ! for the sake of thy mighty, adorable and holy name,
£beje> Aischer Eheje, may it please thee to take away from N., son of
E., the illness [here name the disease] from which he sufl'ers, and re-
lieve him from his pains. Make him whole in soul, body and mind,
and release him during his life from all plagues, iiyary and danger,
and by tbdu bis helpJBr. Amen.

In the second case repeat this Psalm and pray devoutly : May it
be agreeable to thy will for the sake of thy most holy name Eheje
Aisher Eheje, to release me from the power of my enemies^ and op-
posers, and to protect me iVom their persecutions, as thou once didst
protect the Psalmist from the enemies who pursued him. Amen. —
Selah !

The letters of this holy name are in the words : Ode, 2 ; Haojeff,
verse 7 and verse 16, and in alphabetical order in the At Basch.

Psalm 10* — ^If any one is plagued with an unclean, restless and
evil spirit, let him fill a new earthen pot with water from the spring,
and, in the name of the patient, pour into it pure olive oil, and pro-
nounce over it this Psalm nine times, keeping in mind constantly the
adorable name of Eel Mez, wbfch means Strong God of the oppressed,
and at each ending of the Psalm : May it be thy most holy will. Oh,
Eel Mez, to heal the body and soul of N. , son of R., and free him from
ftll his plagues and oppressions : wilt thou strengthen him in Bonl and
body and deliver him from evil. Amen I — Selah !

The holy name may be found in the words : Alah, verse 6 ; Lamma,
Anawin, verse 16, and Haasez, verse 17.

Psalm 11« — Whoever prays this Psalm daily with feelings of devo-
tioni )m4 witft it Iteeps constantly in Qiind ^ holjr name of fel^,


86 SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OP MOBES.

tliat is, Wonderfal, and who besides ii4fteps a aitifeabto pmyertoO^*
he will be safe from all persecutioa. and will Boitave any |pt«kt evi'
to fear.

The holy name is ta the words : Ofel, Terse 2 ; Paal, vane 3« and
Adam. The closing prayer may be as ibliows : AdoraUe, nigbty
and holy Grod Pole ! wiUi thee is advice, aeli«fi and ipower, mod «iily
thou canst work wonders. Turn away fraoi me «ll that is e;?ili aad
protect me from the persecation of evil meo, fer the sake nt l^e
great name Pole. Amen.^^—Sefta.

Psalm 12«'^Thid Psalm powesses similar power, aotio^^mdwoHh
as the foregoing. The holy name is Aineel, which means^-Stfetig.
God ! my Father! and is found in the words .of the. sixth rerseof
Bwjonim, Akum Lo. The prayer Is as follows : Almighty 7afber,
my God Aineel ! grant that all conspiracies agatiiiK me may be set at
naught ; turn away from me all danger and injury, and ttiloff it the
lungdom and the power. Ameit.«*Selah ! '

Pgalm 13« — Whoever prays this Psalm diiily^itb d«voti«ii, Idge-
ther with the proper prayer belonging thereto, and -thinks at 9ie
same time of the powerful name of Eteiel, that is, 'tfy hetp is; the
mighty God, wili be safe for the next twenty-four hours from an un-
natural death and from all bodily sufferings and ^mnishments. the
primer is as follows : Protect me according to thy good iHll and
pleasure from violent, sudden and unnatural death,and from ikU other
evil accidents and severe bodily afflictions, ibr thou art inv li«lp tmd
my God, and thine is the power and the glory. Amen.— ^lah.

According to tradition this {^^aUe is also »>goo& cure ior dangerous
and painful diseases of the eyes. The patient must procure a plant
that IS good for the eyes, and with this must pray this, Psalm with a
snitable prayer, trusting firmly in the oertaiahetpof the ttugb^ Bs-
siel, and th«*n bind the plant upon his eyes The lettera com|K»8ing
this holy namo are contained in the words : Ezoth, verse 3, Mismor,
verse 1 ; JTarum, veri^e ^ ; Aaeni, <VQrsc 4 ; Qiewi, verse.S^ and Xfigpl,
verse 6.

PSftlni 14. — ^WhoBO prays this Psalm in childlike faith /and. ^uat^in
the most holy name, Eel enunet, that is. the true Gad^ or 6od4>f Tnttb,
and prays the prayer belonging to. it daily, will fiod favor with all
m<*n, and will be free from slander and miatroai. The pr^^yer is as
follon^s : '^ May it please thee. Oh I Kel mimmet, to -grant me icraee,
love and favor with all men whose help I need. Grant that all may
believe my words, and that no slander may he eflf^tive against roe to
take awfi^ the confidence of men. Thou canst do this, for thou tam-
est the hearts of men according to thy holy will, and liars and . slan-
derers are «D abomination to thee. Hear me for rtiie sake of ikj
name. Amen.— Selah!

The letters composing this holy name are found 2n the words 8lo-
him, verse 1 ; Maskicl, verse 2 } &bad| vorcw I \^ Amm^ ^^9^ ^i MiA


mm AKB sfeVEsmr books of ifosis. 87


16»— ^gtiost Uie j^reseoee of as eWl* Bfnrit^ hisuiity aud
melandloly, pny this PaahD with the pniTer belonging io it, and tbe
- holy ttano Iiii. wtiicb means : My Lord ! or. Tbe Lord, too, w mine,
OTer a«ew pot filled with wetl^water tbaft wae draws for this express
' pmrpoae, and^witb this water bathe tbe body of the patient. The
pniyeff whieh mast be repeated during the procem of washing, is as
(bllowi : Ifar H be thy wHt, O Grod, to restore N., son orR., who has
bMtt foUMd of bit senses, and is grieTonsly plagsed h^y the devil,
and onHgfMeft his mind for tiie sadce of thy holy name lali. Amen.->-
Selali.

The ifaie^letien of this holy name are found in te words : Jagur,
Ten» 1 ; l^igaly yeme ft, apd JimnM^, yerae 6.

He who otherwise prays this Psalm with revereace will be generally
neeifsd with greai fav«r.

ftelHi IC— Hilt PMdiii is important and ean be profitably em-
ploy«d^ Uk diflreVMii asdertakings. As for example, 1st, If any one
has been robbed, and wishes to know the name of the robber, be
most proceed as follows : Take mud or slime and sand out of a stream,
mix them together ; then write the names of all suspected persons
vpes s^mll slips of paper and apply the mixture on the rererse side
of the slips ; afterwards lay them In a large and clean barfn. filled for
, tl|is porpose with f^esh water from tbe*8tream — lay them in the water
. one by one, and at the same time pray this Pealm over them ten times
with the prayer adapted to it keeping in mind at the same time tiie
name of Caav, that is. Living, which name is found in the words of
aixth Terse, as follows : Chabalim, and Alei, and if the name of the
real thief is written upon the slips, that npon which his name is writ-
ten will rise to -the surface. The prayer is as follows : Let it be thy
wilV ShI Caar. the Living God to make known the name of tbe thief,
who stole from me (here name that which was stolen). Grant that
the name of the thief, if it Is amoue the names, may arise before thy
eyes* and thoa be made known to mine and all others who are present,
that thy name may be glorified : grant It for the sake of thy holy
name. Amea.— Selah !

2, Whoever prays this Psalm daily with reverence, and io childlike
trust upon the eternal love and. goodness of God, directed to circum-
ataooea, will have an his sorrows changed into jov.

FiaalVf it is said, that the daily praying of this Psalm will change
enemies inta friends, and will disperse all pain and sorrow.

pgibi 17«— A traveler, who prays this Psalm eariy in the morn-
ing, with ardor, together with the proper prayer, to the name of Jah,
wm be secure from all evil for twenty-four hours. The prayer is as
follows : Bfay It be thy holy w!H. Oh, Jah, Jenofa, (o make my joor-
nev proaperoiia, to lead me in pleasant paths, to protect me f^om all
eyfl, and to brhig me safely back to my loved ones, for thy mighty
and adorable namo-s sake. Amen.

Tbe two letters of the holy name Jah are taken from tho words,
Shoddini, verse 9, and Mirmah, verse 1.


Fsalin 18* — If robbers are aboat to attack you, prav Uiis Pialm
quickly but fervently, with the prayer belonging to it, with con-
fidence in the holiest name of Eel Jah, that is, mighty, ali-mercifi|l
and compassionate God, the robbers will leave you suddenly, with-
ont inflicting the slightest injury upon you. The letters necessary to
make the holy name of God are contained in the words, Aisher, vene
1 ; Shoal, verse 1 ; Tamin, verse 33, and Haol, verse 47.

The prayer is the following : '* Mighty, all-merciful and compas-
sionate God, Eel Jah ! may it be pleasing to thy moat holy wil^ to
defend me against approaching robbers, and protect me against all
enemies, opposers and evil circumstances, for thine is Hie p6w^ and
thou canst help. Hear me for the sake of thy most holy name. Eel
Jah. Amen.--Selah t

Is there a sick person with you, with whom the utstal. bodily rem-
edies have failed, fill a small flask with olive oil and water, pronounce
over it, with reverence, the eighteenth Psalm, anoint alt .^ liinhs
of the patient, and pray a suitable prayer in the name of Eel Jah, and
be will soon recover.

Psalill 19« — During a protracted and dangerous confinement talce
earth from a cross-roads, write upon it the five first verses of this
Psalm, and lay it upon the abdomen of the parturient ; allow it to
remain until the birth is accomplished, but no longer, and in the
meantime pray this entire Psalm seven timers in succession, with the
proper holy name of God and the appropriate pmyer. The holy
name of this Psalm consists of two letters from the most holy name
Jehovah He^ which, according to the tradition of the Kabbalists, are
of great power, and which embrace the so-called ten Sepiroth or
reckonings and other deep mysteries.

The prayer is as follows : Lord of heaven and earth ! May it
please thee graciously to be with this parturient, N., daughter of R.,
who is fluctuating between life and death ; ameliorate her suflbrings,
and help her and the fruit of her body that she may soon he deliv-
ered. Keep her and her child in perfect health and grant her life,
for the sake of the holy nanie, He. Amen. — Selah !

Do you desire ypar son to possess an open and broad heart, so that
he may become an apt student and understand^ the lessons placed
before him readily, then speak this Psalm over a*cup filled with wine
and honey, pronounce also the holy name and an appropriate prayer
over it, and let the lad drink of it, and your desires will be realized.

Finally, it is claimed that this Psalm is efi'ectual in driving awa^
evil spirits; It is necessary, however, to pray this Psalm, with the'
holy name and an appropriate prayer, seven times over the person
possessed of the evil spirit. The letters of the name He are contained
in the words Hai^amaijim, verse 2, and Begoaeli, verse 6.

P&abn 80«— Mix }n a vessel, rose-oil, water and salt, pray oyer it
seven times in the most holy name Jeho, this Psalm and a suitable
prayer, in a low voice and with reverence, then anoint with this oil
your face and hands, and sprinkle it on your clothing, and you will
remain free from all danger and suffering for that day.


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES. 89

^ , ;

Are ^oa sammoned to appear before the judge in person, in a judi-
cial trial, 70.U should avail yourself of the above means shortly
beforehand, and by so doing you will surely be justified and depart
without restraint. The prayer in the last case is as follows : Lord and
judge of all the World I Thou boldest the hearts of all men in thy
power and movest them according to th^ holy will ; grant that I may
find grace and favor in the sight of my judges and those placed above
me in power, and dispose their hearts to my best interests. Grant
that I mav be favored with a reasonable and favorable verdict, that
I may be justified by it, and that I may freely go from hence. Hear
me, merciful, beloved Father, and fulfil my desire, for the sake of thy
great and adorable name, Jeho. Amen.--Selab.

The letters of the holy name Jeho are contained in the words :
Jaanab, verse 2 \ Sela^ verse 4, and Korem, verse 10.

. Psalm 21. — ^During an existing storm at sea, when there is danger
at hand,' mix rose-oil, water, salt and resin, pronounce over it slowly
this Psalm, and the holy name Jehaen, and then pour the consecrated
salve into the foaming sea while uttering the following prayer : Lord
of the world ! Thou rulest the pride of the foaming and roaring sea,
and calmest the terrible noise of the waves. May it please thee, for
the sake of thy most holy name, Jehach, to calm the storm, and to
deliver us mercifully from this danger. Amen. Selah I

The letters of this holy name are contained in the words : Jehovah,
v#r8e 2 ; Duma, verse 14, and Ki, verse 13.

If ydii have a petition to present to the king, or to some other per-
son in high power, pronounce this Psalm over a mixture of olive oil
and resin, and at the Same time think of the holy name of Jehach,
anoint your face, and pray in faith and in confidence a prayer suitable
to your circumstances, and then you may comfort . yourself with the
aaanrAaoe'tibiat you will be favorably received and receive grace.

Fisahn 22« — If a traveler prays this Psalm seven times daily, with
the appropriate divine name, Aha, and a prayer arranged according
to surrounding circumstances, in full trust in the mighty protection
of onr exalted and most merciful €rod, no misfortune will happen to
him. Should he travel by water neither pirates nor storms can harm
him, and if he travels by land he will be safe from harm, by beasts
abd men.

The letters of this holy name are found in the words : Eli, verse 2 ;
Assah, verse 33.

PSaJm SS.'—ShonId you desire to receive reliable instructions in
regard to something through a vision or in a dream, then purify your-
self by fasting and bathing, pronounce the Psalm with the holy name
Jah seven times, and pray at the end of each repetition : Lord of the
World I notwithstanding thy unutterable mighty power, exaltation
and glory, thou wilt still lend a listening ear to the prayer of thy
humblest creature, and wilt fulfil his desires, Qear my prayer also,
loving Father, and let it be pleasing to tiiy most holy will to reveal

ttaW ia« ia a OreAm, wbcitber (h^re tb^ affiuf o( wtob ft g«n«Qi know*


90 SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSOBS.

— — II I ■ I ^— — — ■^.^ n_

ledge is ^eserred must be plakily statai) «i thto diM «ft»ii rwnial
tbrongh dveanuB the fate of our foreCatliers. Gradt mt mj pelilleB for
the sake of tby adorable name, Jab. Aneo. Selab !

The letters of the boly nane Jab, oontaia^Ae words : Ji^ovidr, ▼efw
1 ; Napsehi, verse S, a^ aecordiag to Abe alpbabcftieal Ordtir Aaiob
Becfaar, according to which the letters He and Jhio beMme tinM
posed.

Psalms 24 and 25. —Although the contents of these tWoPAHldls
differ materially, in respect to their mystical uses, they are Oqitat and
alike in power and action. Whoever repeats these nttTnw dally In
the morning with feelings of devotion, wili escape th>m the .i^rsjfOtfBt
danger, and the devastating flood will not barm hikn.
> The holy name is called Eli, and is found in the words of the tWffltty-
fifth Psalm ; Elecha, verse 1 ; Lemaan, verse U, and ICt, TWtfs^tt.

•

Psalm 26.— When imminent dangers threaten, wbe€berliy%nid or
by water, or if some one should be called upon to undergo sevete
imprisoument, he should pray this Psalm with rae hidtcsted holy hame
of Elohe, and with an appropriate prayer, and then he may cottH-
dently look forward to an early release from prison.

Tou will find the letters of this holy name in the wot^s : Alwbetr,
verse 10 ; Lisebmoa, verse 7 ; Lo, verse 4 (after the order of Atr
Basch), and Ghattaim, verse 9.

Psalm 27«— If you wish to be well and kindly ftoeived ia> «.-
strange city, and desire to be hospitably «otertaiaedv repeal thiaPsslia
upon your journey again and again, with revereaee, and kk fall eoa-
fidence that €rod wili dispose the hearts ef men to gmmf9 and «iter- :
tain you kindly.

Remaik by the Tranabiter.

Since the author has neither a boly name nor prayer fer-ttM Hbcwi '
Psalm, it may be presumed that the frequent repetitioo of the PMlm
is sufficient for all purposes intended.

Psalm 2$. —Do you widi your enemy to bece a w reeiaaellei to
you, pronounce this Psalm, with the a|»propriate hely nuns -He* and
a suitable prayer, trusting in the power and readiness of the 'Great
Ruler of hearts, and so your wish will be fully realiied*

The two letters of this holy name are contained In the wofda i
Ledavid, verse 1, and Haolam, according to the order i>f At Bneh.

Psalm 29. —This Psalm is highly recommended ftnr eieliiif otft
an evil spirit. The manner of proeeedhig is at fallows : leaker e^Riii
splinters of the osier and seven leaves of a date fnlm tbat never bore
fhiit, place them in a pot filled with water n^^en which the euii tmr^r
shone, and repeat over it in the evening, this Pst^m wUh the ^lest
holy name of Aha, ten times with g;«eaft reverenee ; aad then in fttll
trust in the power of God, set the pot npon the earth in the «q^ air,
and let it remain th^re until the foUowhig evening. Aftpr wards pour
the, whole of it, at thp door of the possessedi aad Sie Bttodl Rdah, that
is, the evil i^irit, will surely depart*


J


msm akd sfivtstitH Booicd of iiosfis. dl


The tw« leltefs of (his holy name are contained in the words Jeho-
vah, Terse 11, atid according to the alphabetical order called Ajack
Beehar and Habre^ yotm 2.

Rismarki bj tlM Translator.

With this Psalkn also there is no prescribed prayer given.

fIgldMi M.— Whoever prays this Psalm daily, shall be safe from all
evil occurrences. The holy name is Eel, and may be found in the
words : Aroaaiidhat verse 2, and Lemaan, verse 12.

B7 the Translator.

This Psalm and the following are also without a preseribed prayer.


$!• — Would yon escape slanders, and are yon desirous
that evil tongues may do. yon no harm or cause you vexation, repeat
this Paalm in a low voice, with commendable devotion, over a small
quantity of pure olive oil, and anoint your face and hands with it in
the name of Jah.

The letters constituting this holy name are found in the words :
Palteni, verse 2, and Hammesachlim, verse 22.


The translator regards it necessary to remark once for all. that
prayers espeoiaily adapted to these as well as many of the following
FSalflM are wanting, and that the author undoubtedly thought that the
prayers atreedy giv#n would enable each one. to extemporize a suit-
able prayer. This presumption is the more probable, since we find
further on in the work, tliat the author exhorts all to engage in prayer
to God, without prescribing any particular form. Another circum-
statioe, however, relates to the holy names, and if these are wanting it
was so ordered by the ancient Kabbalists, and on this account it
slionld be particularly noted at all times.

Fnlm 82* — Whoever prays this Psalm daily receives grace,
Lov» aod nerey; Wltb this Psidm wiU be found neither holy name
Dor pfftyen

PMlm S8*— Have you been nnfortnnate in respect to the constant
death of your children at birth, pronounce this Psalm with the holiest
name Jehovah^ over pnre olive oil and anoint your wife therewith,
and the children born to you thereafter will live.

At the time of a general famine, the inhabitants of the afflicted dis-
trict should pray this Psalm with united hearts and powers, and they
will sarttly be heard.

The letters of this holy name yon will find in Li^ehovah, verse 2,
Hoda, verse 3, Asath, verse 9, and Hejoaser, verse 14.

Piafatt S4« — Have yon resolved to visit a prince or another person
high in authority, pronounce this Psalm and the holy name pple. that
is. Wonderftil, briefly before appearing in their presence and you will
ke reeelred pleaMotly ind ftiui feYOTi


9^ stxTi Airt> fefiVfiiftH feoo^a 6P ttOSfiS.


The letters of this holy name are found in the word?, Patfde, Terse
23 ; Lifne, verse 1. and Kara,^ verse 7.

Even so this Psalm is highly recommended to eaoh traveler, far if
he prays it diligently be will surely finish hia journey in safety.

Psalm S5« — Have you a lawsuit pending in which you are opposed
\}y unrighteous, revengeful and quarrelsome people, thon, pray this
Psalm with its holy name Jah, early in the morning for* three aticces-
sive days, and you will surely win your case.

The letters composing this- holy name are contained in the words :
Lochmi, verse 1 ; and in Wezinna, verse 2.

Psalm S6« — Against all evil and slanderous libels ^ay this
Psalm, and they will cause you no injury.

The holy name of this Pnalm is found in the words : Arveo, verse € ;
Hischpatecha, verse 7 ; and Tehom, verse 7.

Psalm 37« — If any one has drunken so much wine as to lose his
reason, and in consequence, fears are entertained for bis safety, then
quickly pour water iuto a pitcher, pronounce this Psalm over it, and
bathe his head and face with the consecrated water, and give him also
to drink of it.

Psalms 38 and 39«— If yon have been so much slandered that
the king and the oflScers of the law have been turned against you,
and are taking measures to punish you, arise early, at the break of
day and go out into the fields. Pray these Psalms and their holy
name seven times with great devotion, and fast the entire day.

The holy name of the first Psalm is Aha. and of the second He, taken
from the words Hascha, verse 14, and Amarti, verse 2.

Psalm 40* —The principal characteristic of this Psalm Is, that we
can, by its use. free ourselves from evil spirits, if we pray it daily.

The holy name is Jah. and is found in the words : Schauaiti, v€fk«e
2, and Chuscha, verse 14.

Psalms 41 to 43. —If your enemies have despoiled you of credit
and caused vou to be mistrusted, and thereby reduce yonr earnings,
or perhaps, oeprive you of your office and installed another in your
place, you should pray these three times a day for three successive
days, together wi!h a prayer that is appropriate to your circuni-
stances, and by doing this you will perceive incredible things. Your
enemies will be put to shame and you will be unscathed.

The 42d Psalm posse^^ses this peculiar characteristic. If you wish
to be sure in regard to a certain cause, and desire to obtain informa-
tion through a dream, you must fast one day. and shortly before re-
tiring to rest you must pray this Psalm and the holy name, Zawa,
(which means the Lord of Hosts,) belonging to the Psalm. Seven
times, making known yonr desires, each time, in an appropriate
prayer, in which your wishes should be plainly named.

Psalm 44«— If you wish to be safe from your enemies the frequent
praying of this Psalm will, it is said, answer yonr expeotationi.


6l*Pfl aSd s^v^ifTH 600K3 0^ rfosfeS. ii

Psalim 45 a&d 46* — These two Psalms are said to possess the vir-
tue of making peace between man and wile, and, especially, to inme
cross wives. The saying is, namely : Whoever has a scolding wife,
let him pronounoe the 46th Psalm over pure olive oil, and anoint his
body witb i^* when his wife, in the future, will be more lovable and
friendly. But if a man has innocently incurred the enmity of his
wife, and desires a proper return of conjng.il love and peace, let him
pray the 46th Psalm over olive* oil, and anoint his wife thoroughly
with it, and, it is said, married love will again return.

The holy name is Adojah. (this name is composed of the first sylla-
bles of the two most holy names of God, Adonai and Jehovah.)

The letters are in the words : Elohim, verse 2 ; Meod, verse 2 ;
Jehovah, verse 8. and Sela, verse 12.

Psalm 47«— Do yoa wish to be beloved, respected and well re-
ceived by all year fellow-men, pray this Psalm seven times daily.

Psalm 4S« — If yoa have manv enemies without cause, who hate you
out of pure envy, pray this Psalm often, and with it think of the holy
name Sacb, which means Pore, Clear and Transparent, and your ene-
mies will be seized with fear, ten*or and anxiety, and in future they
will no more attempt to injure you.

The letters of the holy name are to be found in the words : Achasa-
taai, verse 7, and Ki, verfee 14.

Psalms 49 and 50«— Is one of your family burdened with a severe
and perhaps incurable fever, then take a new pen and ink prepared
for this purpose, and write the 49th Psalm and the first six verses of
the 50th pBalm, together with the appropriate holy name Schaddi,
which signified Almighty, and which belongs to these Psalms, upon
pure parchment prepared for this particular case, and hang it around
the patient's u^ck with a silken string, •

The letters composing the divine name, Schaddei. can be found in
the words of the 49lh Psa.lm, Schimma, verse 1 ; Adaw, verse 3, and
Wikas, verse 8.

Remarks by the Translator.

(Should some one choose to write and wear a talisman such as is
described abovei we would kindly advise him to procure parchment,
ink and pen from a Jewish writer of the ten commandments.)

It is asserted that whosoever wears the 50th Psalm, written as
above described, upon his person, will be safe from all danger, and
escape from all the machinations of robbers.

The holy name is Chai, which signifies. Living, and the letters are
taken from the words : Sewach, verse 5 ; and Anochi, verse 7.

Psalm 51«— Is any one tronbled with an anxious and restless con-
science -on account of the commission of a heavy sin, then let him pro-
nounce this Psalm with the word Dam connected .with it in the mind,
three times a day, namely, early at noon and in the evening over
poppv-oil, and at the same time utter a prayer suitable to the occa-
sion in which the evil deed must be mentioned in deep humility and


94 mvtn km> siivekth iboo^ 6p Mose^.


^


sorrow, which must be obtained from the jast yet mereilutJudge-of
all men through a contrite heart, thien let him anoint iiimaelf with the
consecrated oil over the body, and he will find in a few days thai h«
has found grace and that the heavy burden has been removed.

The letters of the word Dam, through the transposition t>f the B and
M In the words Parim, verse 20, and Bebo, verse 2. ure takep acoovi^
ing to the order of the alphabet, Al Bam, in which the B is tafceii
for M.

Psalm 52. — He who is so nnfortuiiate as to be disturbed througli
frequent EPlauders is advised to utter this Psalm daily in the morning,
and no B|>ecial prayer or holy name is needed to obtain the benefit of
the Psahn.

Psalms 53 to 55«— These three Psalms are ordained to be uttered
by him who is persecuted without ^ause by open and secret enemies.
If he desires only to quiet his enemies, or fill them wfttfa fear, he muH
daily repeat the prescribed 53d Psalm with the holy name Ai. The
letters of this name are the first letters of the two blessed names of
God, Adonai, Jehovah, and are found in the words Amar, verse 2, and*
Jiszmach, verse 6.

If, however, he wishes not only to be secure from their malice, but if
he also desires to revenge himself upon them, tiien he must repeat the
54th Psalm with the prescribed holy name. Jah. The letters of this
are found in the last words of this Psalm, Eenl, and in the word
Imraenu, verse 2, and indeed according te the Kalribftliitic rule Gk-
Inatria, inasmuch as the letter He, when it is written out signifies six
in number, aiid in this manner may very easily be taken for the
letter Vav, which, in counting, also numbers nt.

Should he desire to render his enemies evil for evil, h« shall repeal
the 55fh Psalm with the name Yah, which oontains both of th« final
letters of the name Jehovah. The letters of this name are* fouad in
the words: Weattah, verse 12, and Haasimtd, verse 2.

Psalm 56. —This Psalm is recommended to him. who is desiroas
of freeing himself from the bonds of passion and of sense, and who is
anxious to be delivered from the so-called jeaer Hocra, which means,
the evil lusts or the desire to commit sin.

Psalm 57.— Whosoever wishes to be fortunate in all his under-
takings should pray this Psalm daily after the morning prayer in tho
church, and with it the holy name Chai, signifying Living, which
name he should keep constantly in his mind.

The two letters of this name are contained ia the words : Chonnoit;
verse 2, and in Elohlm, verse 6.

Psalm 58. —If you should be attacked by a vicious deg, pmy this
Psalm quickly, and the dog will not harm you.

Psalm 59*— Would yon be entirely free from the Jpsor Horrai
that is, from the inclination whielr all men possess to do evlh and thi
plnlU) appetites and paralons wbj^li often oreroomo ibemi then pn|


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OP MOSES. 95


ibis Psalm from the second verse tc the end, for three days in sue-
cesrion, at earlj noon and in the evening, and the holy name belong-
itg thereto, namely, Paltioel, which signifies Strong God, My Res-
eoer and Saviour ; also, pray the prescribed prayer, and you will
become aware of the most wonderful changes within yourself.

The prayer is as tbllows : Lord, my Father and the Father of mine,
nlil^ty God I May it please thee for the sake of thy great, holy and
flUmble Dane, Palttoei, to release me from the Jezer Harra (from my
evH desires and passions and from ail evil thoughts and acts), as thoa
didst 'the auther of this Psalm w^n be prayed to thee. Amen. —
Selah!—

' Tlie letters ef llie faiolyten^ of Paltioel may be found in the wofds,
Pisehii, verse d ; Elohtm, wise 6 ; Ghattati, verse 3 ; Jehovah, verse
8 ; Aeehir, vecee 15, and Mascbel, verse 14.

« Psalm 60< — Tfyou are a soldier in an army, and are about march-
ing into the field, repeat this Psalm, keeping in mind the holy name
of Jab. and at the condlnsion of each repetition of the Psalm, utter a
suitable prayer in full reliance upon the endless omnipotence of Him,
who can grvB ttte victory where he will, aad you will be- enabled to
rttom to jom ttonie mifi^fired.

The iim> lelteM of the beOy name Juli. are ceotained in the word
Zarenu, verse 14, as the last word of this Psalm, and in Lehuamed,
verse 1.

Pteln 61«— When you are about taking possession of a new
dwelling, repeat this Psalm just before moving in, with a suitable
prayer, trusting in the name of Schaddei, and you will experience
blessing and good fortune.

Tne letters composing t|;iisname are taken from the words Schimmn,
verse 2 ; Ken, verse 9 ; and Jom, the last word of this Psalm. It
should, however, be remarked that both the last letters are selected
acjcording to the alphabetical order of-Ajack Beefaar.

Psalm 6S«— Speak this Psalm with prop^ reverence on Sunday
ivmediately «fter the evening prayer, and on Monday after vespers,
aad at the same time ihink of the holy name Ittami, which means
"eoncealed, bidden, or iavisible " (which most probably refers to the
invisible God, who covets the transgressions of penitent sinners), and
utter 4he following prayer; Great, mighty and merciful God I may it
be thy holy will to pardon me all my sins, transgressions and offences;
wilt tbon oover them; end Met them out as thou didst the sins and
transgressionf) of him who uttered this Psalm in thy presence wilt
thfoif do this for the sake of the adorable name of Ittami. Amen —

f The letters of this name may be fomid in (Ire words : Adii verse 2 •
Jes^nate, vecse ^; SbmI, :fene 3 ; Lelohim, vefM 6, and Ldwih'


FMmn*—irym have reason to believe that your bnsiness-part-
Jfl? 2I!l??2?*i? °"^*'' advantage of yon, and that you will suffer
MB iHnmgli -tDem/ium if you desk^j on this account, 4o Withdraw


96 SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.

from the firm, repeat this Psalm, and with it think of the holy name
Jach, and you will not only be able to withdraw without loss, bat
you will obtain further good fortune and blessings.

llie letters of this holy name are contained in the words Jafjmach.
▼erse 11, and Jecfauda, verse 1.

Psalm 04.— In reference to this Psalm it is only necessary to say, that
seafarers who daily pray it with devotion will complete their voyage
without accident, and reach their place of destination in good health.
As for the rest, neither holy name nor especial prayer have been'con-
sidered necessary.

Psalm 6^ — Whosoever utters this Psalm with its appropriate name
Jah, persistently, will be fortunate in all his undertakings, and every-
thing he attempts will result to his best advantage. It is particularly
recommended to one who has a petition to prefer, for it is asserted
that be will certainly obtain his desires.

The two letters of this holy name are taken firom the words Jos-
chiru, verse 14, and Dumijah verse 2.

Psalm 66. — If aoy man is possessed of a Ruack Roah (evil spirit),
write this Psalm on parchment and hang it upon him ; then stretch
your hands over him and akj : Save me, God, for the waters are
come into my souL Psalm Iziz. 2,

Psalms 67 and 68«— Both these Psalms contain the divine name of
Jah. The letters composing it are found in the.first Psa-lm and are select-
ed froni the words : Jechonnenu, verse 2, and from the last word of the
fifth verse, Sela. In the second, on the other hand, from Jakiim,
verse 2, and from Aoira, verse 36. The first should be prayed in a
protracted case of fever, or in severe imprisonment. The second, on
the contrary should be prayed over a vessel filled with water upon
which the sun never shone, in a low voice, and in the name of the
patient, and then work bis body with the water, and the evil spirit
will depart from hiin.

Psalms 69 and 70. —The first of these Psalms should be uttered daily
over water, by the libertine and sensualist, who is so confirmed in his
e^l habits, as to become a slave to them, and who, however much he
may desire to escape these habits, is unable to do so. After having
prayed this Psalm over the water he should drink of tfei

The second should be prayed by him who desires to conquer liii
enemies.

Neither of these two Psalms have prescribed holy name or prayer.

Psalm 71.— With this Psalm there is likewise neither holy name nor
prayer, but it is said to have the power to liberate any one from
prison, who will for a time pray it reverentially seven times a day.

,PfeMi]m 72.«— Write this Psalm with the name Aha,in the usual manner,
upon pure parchment, and suspend it around your neck, and you will
become a universal favorite, and find favor and graoe from all men ;
you may then live unconcerned, for you can never come to. poverty.

Tbe letters of the holy name are t^k^n from tbe words : £lolumi
T0rao 1, and JcftBBbroha) rene 17«


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES. 97

I

PmIhis 78 to 78* — Since these eleven Psalms have neither holy
names nor particular closing prayers, I shall, in order to economize
space, record lUie peeollar virtues ascribed to each one for the good
of maiikind.

the 73d Psalm should be repeated reverently seven times daily by
those who are compelled to sojoArn in a heathen, idolatrous or in^Qdel
co«ftte3r,«iid by. doing so» no one need fe«l alxaid that he will be ia«
duosd to deay hb faitht

Tlie'frei^eat aBdeariiiMt prayer of the 74th Psalm is said to defeat
th«fenM»tion'«aibitter0d by enemiesv and will frustrate the oppre»-
Bio«i tff.tlicrt-Belf adglijgrr- we«ltb*seekiiig» hard-hearted people, and
will at the same time bring them to a terrible end.

TMjiovini^ yra^tir^^ the^^th^Psaln will effect the forgiveness of

Th^fttlf Pialili Is siiid to be the qoiolcest and most effective defence
against danger from fire and water.

Whosoever prays the 77 th Psalm daily will not be overtaken by
wsAit Of dtugor.

WM^oev^ prays the 78th Psahn earnestly and- often, will be be-
lot'M fttid^flBspected by kings and princes and will reoevve favor from

tMn.

'th^ freffnent prayer of the 79th Psaim, it is said, is fetal to enemies
and-oppotieats:

The constant and industrious prayer of 80th and 81st Psalms is said
to be « happv means of saving men from falling into unbelief and
saves them also from other errors.

I'he prayer of the 82d Psalm will assist an envoy to transact his
boMBees to the satisfaction of his employers, and his business affairs
will s ooceed and prosper.

TpiK sboiUd write the 83d Psalm properly,, upon pure parchment,
and suspend it around your neck, and by so doing yon will abide
safely la was; avoiding defeat and captivity. If you should, however,
be/Oveiaoine» your captors will not harm you, for even in captivity
no'lMyrflroaa befal yoa.

Pfludii 84,— Wfi^fi H' itta», thrbtiglr a severe and protracted illness,
has rao^iued m repulsive, disgusting and bad odor, he should pro-
nounce this- Psalm With the prescribed holy name of Af, which means
W^Xktx, over a pot ct w«ter upon which the sun never shone, and
theor pour the. water all over himself, and then the bad smell will
leave him.

The letters of the holy name Af, are found in the words : Zebarth,
verse % and in Bach, verse 6.

^ PMlmSS*— Do vou wish that your former friend, but who now
lives at enmity witn you, should again be reconciled to you, if voa
can discover tto disposition on his part to make it up with yon, then
go out into an open field, turn your fkce toward' the South, and pro-
oounee thls'PWiln), with its prescribed holy name Yah, seven times ia
WCWwOb, ftn4 W WlU ftpprof^^ mi WO^Ire you }n great frien^sMpt


U-


98 SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.

P^uilms 86 to 88. —These three Psalms again are left without a
holy name, and there is nothing further said about them, than tiiat a
person should accustom himself to pray them often, becaase by so
doio^ much good can be done and much evil avoided. The frequent
praying, of the 8dth Psalm especially, is said to promote the welfare
of the community and the congregation^

P^uilm 99. — Shoiiid one of your own family or dear friends waiite
away so rapidly, in consequence of a severe illness, so that they are
already nearly helpless and uselete, speak this Psalm over olive oil
and pour the oil over the wool that has been shorn from a wether or
a ram, and with it anoint the body and limbs of the patient, aad he
will speedily recover.

If your friend is under arrest, and yon desire his liberation, go into
an open field, raise your eyes toward heaven and repeat this Psalm,
with a prayer suited to the circumstances, which should b^ uttered in
full confidence in Qod.

Psahn 90. — Should yon accidentally encounter a lion in the forest,
or - should you be deceived, cheated or plagued by an evil spirit or
ghost, tlien grasp in your mind the name of God (Scbaddei) and repeat
this Psalm, and they will withdraw themselves. But you will be
still more secure when snch a danger should arise, if you pray the
following dlst Psalm in connection with the 90th, at one and the same
time.

Psalm 91«— The holy name of this Psahn is El, which means Strong
God. After speaking ihis Psalm, and the preceding one, over a person
tormented by an evil spirit, or one afflicted bv an incurable disease,
in the name of Eel Schaddei, then pray humbly : Let it be thy holy
pleasure, oh my God ! to take from N., son of B., the evil spirit by
which he is tormented, for the sake of thy great, mighty and holy
name El Schaddei. Wilt thou presently send him health and let him
be.'perfectly restored. Hear his prayer as thou once did that of thy
servant Moses wheh he prayed this Psalm. Let his prayer penetrate to
thee as once the holy incense arose to thee on high. Amen. Selah !

The two letters of the name Eel are contained in the words Jeschuti,
verse 16, and Orech, verse 16.

Again write this Psalm in connection with the last verse of the
previous Psalm upon cleao parchment, and conceal it behind the door
of your house, and you will be secure from all evil accidents.

Kabbalists ascribe to this Psalm when taken in connection with the '
above verse, the most wonderful virtue, when it is used in accordance
with the nature of existing circumstances, and w^en it is combined
with other scriptural passages, holy names of angels, characters and
prayers, it is said, for example : ,

Prayer through which all distress, danger and sutTering may be
turned aside. If any one should be in danger of his life, or become
distressed, be it what it may, such as being attacked by an incurable
disease, pestilence, fire or water, overwhelmed by enemies or mur-
derers^ in ])t^t^Ut 9i^eBf robberies, close imprisonment, etc., let him


sam JlHO bsvektb books of itosss.


dd


oonfeM his rins first of all, and then speak the Yihi Noamprayer (the
name by which the 91si Psalm with the aforesaid verse is usually
known), ninety-nine times, according to the number of the two holiest
names of God, Jehovah Adonei. Kach time when he comes to the
fourteenth verse, ** Because he hath set his love upon me,'' etc , he
shall keep in mind the hoi v name, and then pn^y devoutly each time :
"Thou art the most holy, king over all that is revealed and hidden,
exalted above. all that is high, sanottly and glority thy adorable name
iti this thv world, so that all the nations of the earth may know thnt
thine Is the glory and the power, and that thou hast secured me from
all distress, but especially out of the painful emergency (here the
<>bject of the prayer must be distinctly stated), which has overtaken
me N., son of B. And I herewith promise and vow that I will now
and ever after this, as long as I shall live upon the earth, and until I
return to the dost from, which I was taken.'' (Here the vow must be
verbally stated, — stating what we will do, perform or give in the ser-
vice of our Creator. The vow m:iy consist in fasting, giving alms,
or in the daily reading of several chapters of the Holy Scriptures,
Psalms, of the Sohar or of the Talmud, releasing of captives, nursing
the sick and burying the dead.) " Praised be Jehovah, my Rock and
my Salvation. Thou wilt be my representative and intercessor, and
wilt help me, for thou helpest thy poor, feeble and humble creature,
and in time of need releasesit from fear and danger, and dealest merci-
fully with thy people ; merciful and forgiving, thou hearest the
prayer of every one. Praised art thou, Jehovah, thou who hearest
pniyer." (The last words should be repeated seven times at each
ending of the prayer.)

And now, whoever will punctually observe the foregoing in^truc-
Aons three days in succession, in full trust in the mighty help of God.
he may rest assured of the assistance which he desires.

Kabbalists, and especially the celebrated Rabbi leiiac Loria have
asj*urcd us that in a time of pestilence or general emergency, the Vihi
Noamprayer should be prayed seven times daily, connecting with it
in the mind the figure of the golden candlestick, when it is composed
of the forty-one holy and important words and names of this Psalin.
with which we should especially consider the holy names in their
order. The following are the names :


Yean, Aim,

Mm Tmol,

Im, Retflik,

Aki, Lakad,

Aab, Schin,


Blch, Iba,

Veal, Ktaz,

Beto, Lir,

Mill, Ibak,


Wich, Ika, Aan,

Ila, Mehoh, Imi,

Uma, Ima, Miz,

Rul, Leta, Afcham,


Aki, Acchu, Kack, Vetat, Raasch,
Ana.
(Sm Fif . A.)


Beni,

Becha,

Mehi,

Pesch,

Jauby


c. •' ■ *


»• (


^t±TH AKD BBVEilTH BOOiCS OF UMC&


After this ahmld b« ipoken reran 21-SS. chapter xU. of bodoi,
•nd with tbem Iceeping in mind the nunes coatalned in tte ISd and
2etlk Teraea, in Ui« rollowing order :

Ami, Jalud, Ito, Hi^ BmA, Akn, Ibd, TiL

Ai also Vohn, Dbft. Bub, Bali, Zel, Bolo, Tewp, end flBall; Uie
holy nuns : NiwhMtiwk a

And now, be who obaerrca «U tbe« Ouagi to the tctj leHer, ud
who can keep in bla memory kit lb* letter*, points or Towell, be *»ll
be fix thim all danger, luid shall be as strong aa >ted, M that no
flt«arnu eaa harm bin. The certaiotj of this is shows bj tb« K^ba-
liats. because the letter Se^id is not to be found in the entire Pealm,
ud elnoa the word Sp^in or Kie Sru'iQ embraces within its tneaniog
all deadly wetpons, this cooclusioo is enUrelj coirect

Rwiuiks hf t^ Aaualator.
Tba ezlraordtnary powm ascribed to the Slsi Pnhn m^ all ba
tiSfal and prmer enoaih, bnt it is to be rcgratted thai the Madsr
owiDOt avail binweir of its beoetts. espeeiallT in Ibe last experiment,
bwwiae all the recorded bolj uanea oonsiat'or Ibe tnt tetter of all
the words of th« 91tt Psaln. and Ukewise of tbe 33d and iStfa t


It is, theretoTv, iHpoarible to uooonnm tUi naae prap^y. itei|her
oan it ba trantlatM Into EoflMi or Into any other hngnan. And
bow Aall wo tbM mewiriM (be Brst lettna of e^ word itf Ae Psalaa
togotber with Iha poiatt or vowels helon^f to IhevT If any one,
aati^tbttaDdlBX tb« diOoBitim attaDdiBg Ae wa of tUa Pnlm,
SboxidAMin toanUhiMMlfaf ltsrittwi,thea In ■«* aitdartolw


SIXTH Airt) SE^^EMh 860KS Of MOSfiS. 101

lr

the burdensome task of learaing the Hebrew language, or he must
write it, and wear it upon his heart as an amulet.

Psalm 92* — He who desires to attain to high honors, let him take
with this object in view, a new pot filled with water Place in it myr-
tle and vine leaves, and pronounce over it, with perfect trust, the
following Psalms, namely, the 92, 94, 23, 20, 24, and 100, three times
in succession, and at each time let him wash himself out of the pot
and afterward anoint bis face and whole body with the water ; then
turn his face toward the north, pray to God for the fulfilment of his
desires, and he will see wonderful things. He will be astonished with
his ever-increasing good fortune. He will also, in a wonderful mah-
ner, advance from one post of honor to another.

Psalm 93* — There is nothing special recorded of this Psalm, other
than that it is highly recommended to any one who has a suit with a
8t«rn and unjust opponent. The proper use of this Psalm, it is said
will surely win him^ his cause. *

Psalm 94* — If you have a hard, unyielding and bitter enemy, who
oppresses you sorely and causes you great anxiety, repair to an open
field on Monday, take some incense into your mouth, turn with your
face toward the East and West, and repeat first the 94th Psalm and
then the 92d, seven times, keeping in mind at the same time the holy
name Eel Kanno Taf, which signifies great, strong, zealous and good
God, and pray each time at the ending of these Psalms: '*May it
please Thee, O great, strong, zealous and good God, to humble my
enemy N., son of R., as thou once did the enemies of our great teacher
Moses, who rests in peace, and who completed this Psalm to thy glo-
rification. Let my prayer arise to thee as did the sweet smell of
incense from the altar of incense, and let me behold thy wonderful
power. Amen !— Selah I —

Psalm 95.— The appropriate holy name of God peculiar to this
Psalm is Eel, which is, great, strona: God, and the letters are found in
the words : Eel, verse 3, and Lezur. vei-se 1.

The pious believer should pray this Psalm for his erring and un-
believing brethren.

Psalms 96 and 97* — ^The holy name of these two Psalms is Jaht
and the letters of the first are found in the words, Jeschuato. verse 2i
and Hawn, verse 7, and those of the other in the words, Jismechu,
verse 1, and Atta, verse 9. Whosoever will pray these two Psalms
three times daily, will cause his family great joy and contentment.

Psalm 98* — The holy name of this Psalm is also Jah, and should
be pronounced in order to establish peace and unity between families.
The letters of the holy name are taken out of the words : Israel, verse
3 ; and Haschiah, verse 1.

Psalm 99. — ^Witb this Psalm there is no holy name recorded, and
all who wish to become really pious are advised to pray it often witU
proper devotion.


102 . SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OV MOSES.

PmIih 100« — ^The holy name Jab, so often meutioned already, is
also appropriate to this Paahn, aud whoever prayH it several days suc-
cessively seven times, will overcome all his enemies. The two letters
of this holy name are recocii'ed in verse 3. and in Aetodah, terse 4.

Psalm 101* — Whoever^ bears tliis Psalm in addition to the 68th
tipoti his person, written 'upon .parchment, is secure from the persecu-
tion of evil spirits and vindictive persons.

Psalms 102 and 108*— Both these Psalms are paid to be very
good tor barren women by the use of which they may receive grace
and favor from God. The holy name of the one is called Jab, and is
taken from Anneni, verse 3, and the tiame of the oth'T one is Aha,
and is taken from the word Adonai, verse 12, and from S^la, verse 20.

Psalm 104. — The frequent and earnest prayer of this Psalm is said
to be attended with such great power, that through it the Masick may
be destroyed. ,

Remarks cf the Translator.

The word Masick signifies, according to its root, only something
hurtful, something that will cause harm, it may be by spirits, beings
or animals. Crenerally, however, the Jews understood the term to
mean the Devil, and with its connections in this place the word must
mean original sin and the propensity to commit ciii.

Psalms 105 to 107« — To these three Psalms the holy name of Jah
is ascribed, and according to the original writing, it is said, that tl|^
105th Psalm will cure three days' fever ; the praying of the lOtith
P.Ha1m will cure the (our days' fevtr. and finally the praying of the
107th will cure the daily fever.

The letters ot the holy names are taken from Lejaikof, verse 7. and
Hodu, verse 1, and further from Sochn'iil, verse 4, an<l from Tehiliato,
verse 2 of the 106tb Psalm, and finally from Jischlach, vei-se 19, and
Verinna, verse 21.

Psalm 108. — Write this Psalm with its proper holy name. VI, (two
letters from the most holy name of Jehovah, in which Rabbalists
seek through its many divisions, great secrets), upon clean parch-
ment, and bide it in a secure spot l>ehind the door of your house, and
then your going and coming will bt^ blessed, and you will be success-
ful in all your business tmnjiactions.

The two letters of the holy name Jehovah, by a transposition of
Vav and Jod, are contained in the words : Zarenn, verse 14. and in
Nachon, verse 2.

Psalm 109. — Have you a mighty enemy, who plagues and oppresses
you, fill a new jug with new, sparkling wilu^ add some mustard to it,
and then repeat this Psalm three days successively, while at the same
time you keep in mind the holy name of KeH (great and strong God),
and afterward ponr the mixture before the door of your enemy's
dvelUng. Be oareflil, however, that you do not sprinkle a single
4rop upon yourself wben In tbe act of pouring H qut,


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES. 103


I


The letters of the name Eel are found ia the words, Elohim, verse 3,
and in Ki Jamood, verse 5.

Psalms 110 and lll.~Tbe first of these Psalms is marked with
the holy name Jah. and by its frequent use in the form of a prayer,
and a man may compel all enemies and opposers to bow to him
and beg for quarters and peace.

Through pray kg the Ulth Psalm a man may acquire many friends
without the necessity of keepiug coustantly in mind any special holy
name.

Psalms 112 and 118.— By praying the first of these Psalms a man
will increase in might and power from time to time, and by praying
the second devoutly it is possible to check growing heresy and infi-
delity. Neither of these Psalms has a peculiar holy name.

Psalm 114.— The holy name of this Psalm consists of two letters,
taken together from the names Adonai (Lord), and Jehovah, namely,
Aha, which may be found in this Psalm in the words Jiszraoel, verse
I, and Jehuda, verse 2. If you desire success in your trade or busi-
ness, write this Psalm with its appropriate holy name upon clean
parchment, and carry it about your person constantly in a small bag
prepared especially for this purpose.

Psalm 115. — If you are determined to dispute with infidels, here-
tics and scoffers at religion, pray this Psalm devoutly beforehand.

Psalm 116.— Whoever prays this Psalm d(dly with devotion, trust-
ing fullji in God, will be safe from violent death, neither will he be
overtaken by a sudden death.

Psalm 117. — Did you make a vow to obtain a certain command-
ment or perform a good work, and fail in the performance of them
through forge tfulness or carelessness, as soon as you recollect your
remissness pray this Psalm with a broken and contrite heart.

Plsatm 118« — If yon pray this Psalm often and devoutly, yon will
be able to silence all free-thinkers, scoffers of religion and heretics,
who labor to lead you astray.

Psalm 119. — ^This it is well known is the largest of all the Psalms,
and consiste in the Hebrew of eight alphabet^, but in such a manner,
that each letter appears in undisturbed regularity, and through this
there arose twenty -two special divisions, which are included in each
eight verses, because a particular power is ascribed to each division,
which I cannot present to the reader in clearer manner than by placing
each letter before him which forms the particular division*

iieph. — The eight verses of this letter, which all begin with Aleph,
should be pronounced over a man whose limbs shake and quiver, and
if this be done in a low and even ton« of voice, he will be relieved.
If any one has made a vow, which has become bufd^osome to fulfil)
It wiU be ?apy jor Mm to keep his promi99f


104 SIXtH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.

Beth. — It is said that through the second dIvisioD from the ninth
to the sixteenth verse, a man, may obtain a good memory, an open
heart, desirous to learn, and an extended intelligence. Whosoever
desires to attain this must begin as follows : Remove from a bard-
boiled egg the shell deftly and cleanly, so that the inside shall remain
uninjured, and write upon it the above eight verses as well as the
fourth verse of Deuteronomy, xxxiii., and eight verses of Josbim, i.,
and also the holy name of the angels Chosniel, Scbrewntel and MupieL
The translation of these three angel-names it is net necessary to know,
because they must not be pronounced, but since it will be of interest
to the reader to know the meaning of them, it will not be-superfluoua
to give them here. Chosniel, signifies Cover, or overshadow me,
mighty God ! (namely, with the spirit of wisdom and knowledge.)
Schrewniel, turn me, again, mighty God ! that is, change me, convert
me into a better man or woman, as David once said, '' Create in me,
oh God," etc. Mupiel means : Out of the mouth of the mighty God
(namely, let me attend upon the decrees of thy laws, as if I heard and
received them from the mouth of God himselt). Finally, the follow-
ing must also be written upon the egg : Open and enlarge my heart
and understanding, that I may hear and comprehend everything that
1 read, and that I may never forget it All this must be done on a
Thursday evening, after fasting the entire day, and then the egg
must be inserted whole into the mouth, and when it is eaten, the four
first verses of this division must be repeated three times in.succeiBsion*

GlmeL— The division of the third letter, verses 17 to 24 should be
prayed seven times in succession, in a low, solemn tone and with full
confidence in the omnipotence of God, over the seriously injured
eye of a friend, so that the pain may cease and the eye restored.

Daleth- — By the earnest praying of this division, verses 25 to 32,
a painful injury of the left eye can be cured in the first pla^t in the
same manner as is described above, and in the second place, if a man
is engaged in a lawsuit, or is vexed by a change of occupation, or
residence, or if he desires to make an advantageous selection, or makdi
a resolution, he should repeat these eight times in succession. On
the other hand, however, if a man must avail himself of the advice
and assistance of many persons in-order to accomplish an undertaking
successfully, he should repeat this division ten times.

He.— The division of the letter He, verses 3H to 40, is said to make
people refrain from committing sins, A sinful being, who has be-
come so much accustomed to commit sin and vice, that he cannot re-
frain from them, notwithstanding his best resolutions, should write
these eight verses upon parchment prepared from a clean deer skin,
(or cause them thus to be written.) place it in a bag prepared for
this purpose and hang it around his neck, so that he will carry It coQ«
tinually upon his breast.

Van.— Speak these eight verses, 41 to 48, properly over water, an<|
giye it to your servant or dependeat to driak,'aQd thea jxm t^t ioA


power over him will become easy and agreeable, and he will serve
you willingly.

Zain. — To the seventh division, verses 49 to 66, two different efRjcts
are ascribed. It is said, for example : If one of your friends. or ac-
quaintances is afflicted with melancholy, or becomes splenetic, or. has
severe stitching in the side, write this division, with the holy name
Raphael, which signifies, heal, mighty God, properly upon a smnll
piece of clean parchment, and bind it upon the *patient where the
, spleen is situated.

If you have been led into an undertaking that promises evil repults,
through the misrepresentations of evil counsellors, repeat this division
eighteen times, and you will find means to withdraw from the under-
taking without injury to yourself.

€]ietll«-TSpeak the division of this letter, verses 67 to 64, seven
times over iyiQe, and give a sick person, who has severe pains in the
UPpet part of the body, to drink of it, and he will' soon find relief.

Tefh* — The division of the letter T«th, verses 66 to 72, is an easy,
quick an^ tried remedy to core the severest case of kidney or liver
complaints, or to take away pain in the hips, f ronoaaee t&ese eight
verses properly, specially, aud reverently over the sick person and he
will convalesce.

Jod«' — ^Would yon find grace and fever wkh God and man, pray at
the close of each morning prayer the division of this letter, verses 70
to 80, trusting fully in the mercy and grace of God, and your prayer
#ill be heard.

Capll* — If one of yours has a dangerous sore, or a burning swell-
ing on the right side of the nose, pray the eight verses of this division
verses 81 to 88, ten times, in a low and conjuring voice, over the sore,
and you will perceive to your astonishment and joy, that the other-
wise incurable sore will be healed.

Lamed. — If you are summoned to appear personally before the
Judge in a lawsuit, pray on tlie preceding day, just after the evening
prayer, the division of the letter Lamed, verses 89 to 96, and you
will obtain a favorable hearing, and will be permitted to leave the
court justified.

Mem* — For pain in the limbs, and especially for paralysis in the
right arm or hand, a man should pray this division, verses 97 to 104,
seven times for three successive days, in a low conjurinf? voice, over
the affected arm, and the pain will cease and the arm will he healed.

Nnn.-T'Have you a mind to travel, pray this division, verses 106 to
1,12. which begins with the words : " For thy word is a lamp to my
feet," a few days previous to starting upon your journey, each time
after the morning and evening prayer, and you will accomplish your


106 SnCTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OP MOSES.


Sameoiu— If you have a favor to ask of a superior, pray, before
preseating year petition, or before you attempt to ask the favor
verbally, the eight verses of the letter Samecb, versed 113 to 120, and
you will not go away unheard.

j^jl^ — ^In the same way and manner as the prayer of the division of
the letter Mem, heals pain in the right arm, so also the praying of the
eight verses of the letter Ain, verses 121 to 128, will cure pain in the
left arm and hand.

Pe«— The prayer of this division, verses 129 to 136, will prove of
the same eflfect in the case of a boil or swelliug on the left side of the
nose, and the proceedings in both cases must be the same to effect a
core.

TsaddL—Since it frequently happens that persons in an official
station are induced, through misrepresentations and other circum-
stances, to give a wrong and uqjust decision, even against their better
knowledge and desire, they are kindly advised to pray the eight verses
of this Tetter, verses 137 to 144, three times devoutly before giving
their decision, at the same time asking the help of the Judge of all
Judges, to enUghten their minds.

Kopiu— The mysterious operation of this division, verses 145-152,
relates to the cure of a dangerous and painful injury at the left leg.
These eight verses should be pronounced in a low and conjuring voice
over a quantity of rose-oil and the injury anointed with the oil.

Besh— Are yon burdened with a painfnl, constantly running boil
in the right ear, prononnce the eight verses of the division of the
letter Resh,^ verses 162-160, in a low and conjuring voice, over onion-
water or juice, and let one drop run into the ear, when you will expe-
rience immediate relief.

Schin*— Against severe and burning headache speak the division
of this letter, verses 161 to 168, in a low conjuring voice, three
times over pure olive oil, and anoint the place where the pain is the
most severe.

Tan.— The last division of this Psalm, verses 169-176, should be
used in the same manner as the division of the letter R'mh. that is, it
should be spoken over onion-water, and by its use a boil in the left
ear may be cured.

Finally, it is stated at the end of this F»alm. that whosoever is
afflicted with a tearing pain in both arms, in the sides, and in the legs
at one and the same time, should repeat this whole Psalm in the fol-
lowing order : 1. The eight verses of the letter Aleph ; of Tan and
Beth. 2. Those of the letter Schin. 3. The division of the letter
Gimmel. 4. The eight verses of the letter Resh. 5. The division
of the letter Daleth. 6. That of the letter Knf. 7. The eight verses
of the letter He. 8. Those of the letter Zain. 9. The division of
the letter Yau. 10. The eight verses of the letter Pe. 11. The


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES. 107

^— ^— ^— «— — ^^— — — ^^— ^— ^-^— «^^^— ^^^■^— ■^-— — — I ■-^-^— »— ^— — — ^ii— ^— — ^^j^-^^— .^^^i—

division of the letter Zaid. 12. The division of the letter Ain-
13. The eight verses of the letter Obeth. 14. Those of the leis-
ter Tamech. 15 Those of the letter Teth. 16. Of Nun. 17. l*he
eight verses of the letter Jud. and finally, 18, the division of the
letters Mem, Caph, and Lamed. This remedy has been tried, and has
proved infallible. Should any one become afflicted with tearing
pains in the loins, make for him, at the conclnsion of this Psalm,
knots, combinations, or magical knots in water, with or undt*r the
names of : Adam, Seth, Enoch, Canaan, Mahalleel, Jared, Methusa-
leh, Lamech. Noah, Shem.

[The translator is compelled to admit honestly, that be does not
comprehend this latter clause, and much less is he able to give any
directions in regard to the method employed in making magical-
knots, he does not presume that any one will be interested in this
matter.]

Psalm 120«— If you must appear before the jadge, repeat the
Psalm beforehand, and you will receive grace and favor.

If a traveler should find himself in a forest infested with many
poisonous snakes, scorpions and other poisonous reptiles as may
easily happen, and thus be exposed to danger, let him pray this Psalm
as soon as he comes in sight of the forest seven times, and he will be
able to proceed on his journey without any harm.

F&alm 121.— Are yon compftlled to travel alone by night, pray
ihis Psalm reverently peven times, and you will be safe from all acci-
dents and evil occurrences.

Psalm 122. — If you are about to address a man high in station,
repeat this Psalm thirteen times beforehand, and yon will be received
graciously and find favor. Also, pray this Psalm each time that yon
are present in church, and you will obtain a blessing.

Psalm 123. — ^Tf your servant or journeyman has run away from
yon. write this Psalm, together with his name, on a leaden or tin
plate, when he will return to you.

Psalm 124. —If yon are about to cross a swollen stream, or un-
dertake a journey by water, pray this Psalm before entering the ship,
and then you may commence your .journey without fear.

Psalm 126.— Tf you are compelled to travel in a conntry, where
you have avowed enemies whom you have reason to fear on account
of threatened injury to yourself, then take, before entering the coun-
try, both your bands full of salt, pronounce this Psalm seven times
over it, and then scatter it into the air toward the four quarters of the
globe, and by so doing, not one of your enemies will be able to bring
any harm against you.

PSalm 126. — Are you so unfortunate, that yonr children are taken
away from you in their infancy, and that you are not able to raise any
of them, then, when yonr wife again becomes pregnant, writ« this
Tialm upon four amulets made out of clean parchment, aod ad4 to


108 SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.


the last line of each amulet the names of the following angels : Sinui,
Siusuni, and Semanglaf, and afterward hide the amulets in the four
walls of your house, when your child Will live.

Psalm 127. — Write this Psalm upon pure parchment, place thia
amulet in a clean bag, and hang it about the neck of a new-born son
immediately after birth, and no evil will ever befall him afterward.

Psalm 128.— Write this Psalm upon clean parchment, and hang it
upon a pregnant woman, when she and the fruit of her body will
always be secure from unlucky accidents, and she will have a fortu-
nate confiuement.

Psalm 129.— Whoever accustoms himself to repeat the Psalm daily
after the morning prayer, will finally prepare himself to live piously
and virtuously, and will be able to carry out many remunerative and
good works.

Psalm 130. —If you are living in a besieged city, to and from which
no one can go without danger, and if you have urgent businetis, so
that you feel constrained to venture on a journey, then, just as you
are about to leave the city, pray this Psalm in a low and abjuring
voice, toward the four quarters of the earth, and then you will be able
to pass all the sentries without being seen or harmed. A beayy sleep
will overcome them, so that they will not be conscious of your
presence.

Psalm 131* — He who is so strongly possessed of the evil spirit of
pride that he regards all other people with scorn, but who, upon sober
reflection, desires to occupy a middle path, if his intolerable pride
would only permit him, is advised to pray this Psalm reverently
three times daily, after the morning and evening prayer. His pride
will receive a certain check.

Psalm 132.— If. you have sworn to perform anything punctnally,
and notwithstanding your oath you neglect to perform your obliga-
tion, and in this manner have perjured himself, you should, in order
to avoid a future crime of a similar kind, pray this Psalm daily witii
profound reverence.

Psalm 133.- Whoever prays this Psalm daily, will not only retain
the love and friendship of his friends, bat he will also gain many
more friends.

Psalm 134. — This very short Psalm, consisting of oply three
yerses, should be repeated by every learned man, and especially by
every student before entering college.

Psalm 136.— Whoever is desirous of repenting sincerely from tin,
and of consecrating his life to the service of God, should pray thia
Psalm daily after the morning and evening prayers, and then his heart
and spirit will be daily renewed, and he will become iQore closely
Qnite4 witU @od from da^ to day, ^».


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OP MOSES. 109


Psalm ISft. — WhoBoever desires, on account of wilful sins and
traDBgressions, to make a penitent confession of his misdeeds, should
pray this Psalm beforehand, and then make his confession with m
humble and broken heart and with great reverence,

FMlm 1117.— The praying of this Psalm, it is said, will root out
of the heart the mnst inveterate hate, envy and malice.

Fudm 1S8.— Praying this Psalm, it is stated, will produce lovo
and friendship. |

Fudm 189.— This Paalnt should be prayed to increase and pre-
serve love among married people.

F8|]m 1M»— Praying iMs Psalm, is said to be a powerful means to
rem^egrowing hatred between man and wife,

Ptalm 141,— Whoever is often oppressed with heartfelt fears
should pray this Psalm frequently.

Fftafans 142 and 148.— Praying of the first of these two Psalms
will cure pain in the thighs, and praying the other will remove tear-
ing pains m the arms.

Paalm 144.-* When anyone breaks an arm this Psalm should be
prayed, and ihe perfect eure of the arm cannot be delayed or inter-
rapted by natoward oiroamstancea.

Psalm 145.— He who fears ghosts and evil spirits, shonld pray
this Psalm in connection with the 144th, with reverence, for the
praying of tiieie Psalms will drive away all ghosts and appaj^^tiona
instantly.

Psalm 148.— Whoever has been dangerously wounded by a sword
or other deadly weapon, he shall, during the time he is receiving sur-
gical assistance, pray this Psalm reverently daily, and especially
when the wound is being dressed and the bandages renewed, and he
will shortly find reaaon to rejoice in a perfect restoration from his
injuries.

Psfdm 147.— For,the cure of dangerous and deadly wounds, bites,
stings of a salamander, lizard, snake, scorpion or other poisonous
reptile, the earnest prayer of this Psalm is said to possess the same
power of healing as the former Psalm, already described.

Fudms 148 and 149.— These two Psalms are said to possess the
desirable virtue of checking fire, when they are prayed iu childlike
trust on the unfailing help of the Almighty.

Psafan 150.— This happy Psalm of Praise shonld be uttered by j
every God-fearing, thankful being, after having escaped a great dan- .

SiTf or received a peculiar grace in answer to a prayer to the Lord of
cists, and it should be repeated with a thankful heartHo His praise
and giofy.

5ND OF THE PSALMS.


. no SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.


SUPPLEMENT.


Finally, the author adds the followiog as a supplement :

I. -

Whoever prays the five appended verses daily and hourly to God,
will receive grace from God and man, and will obtain pruspcrity aiiU
blessing in all his undertakings.

The verses must be spoken in the following order :

Psalm 121, verse 2 ; Psalm 66, verse 23 ; Psalm 37, verse 37 ; Ptttlm
37, verse 3; Psalm 118, verse 13.

II.

A truly mysterious wonder-working' formula is contributed by the
celebrated Kabbalist Raf Amram, which is said to possess the enptf-
cial virtue to protect and defend him. who, after the morning prayer,
prays it with proper reverence during a whole day of twenty-four
houra^ whether at home or on a journey, from all evil power or iicci-
dent, from robbery, murder, and injury by guns, or other ueHpouH.
No man will be able to attack him or to injure him, and uu guu cuu
harm him. This wonderful saying is as follows :

See and know, that I am He I 1 am He, and besides me there Is no
other God. I am He, who can kill and make alive ; I wound, and I
am he 44)at can heal, and no one can escape my hand or ray power.
For I stretch out my hand toward heaven (that is, J swear by heaven),
and say : I am He that liveth forever.

Animon, Animon, Alimon, Rirvtip, Taftianl The Lord can and
will watch and keep. Amen Aflera man has uttered this three tim«*8
in succession, and with it has kept in mind the three names of angels
added thereto, he should say the following : Happy art thon pimple
of God ! Who is like unt.o thee ; a people whose help is Jehovah.
He is the breastplate of thy help, and the stron^r sword of thy pride.
Thy enemies will deny themselves before thee (that is, will hide them-
selves or retreat from thee), but thou wilt stand in their high pl«c«»s.
Lord of the earth let it be aprreeahle to thy holy will to command
thy angels to protect me and defend me in all my ways. Amen !

Remarks by the Tramlator.

The above Hebrew words are R'lbbalistic names of angels, and are
very hard U) understAnd, and yet harder to translate. Thu« for
example, the letters of the word Alimon, mean Eel Leolam. J-ho-
vah, Melech Waaed, Nelzach. that is, J»*hovah Is an eternal God I
he is a victorious king to all eternity. This prince or king accordinpr
to the belief of Kabbalists. is entrusted with the superin tendency of
all weapons and guns in the whole world, for the letters of the woni
Alimon, aocording to the signiQcation of numbers aggregate 137, »d4


snrrH and b&vknth books of hoses. ill

the two small words Klo Snyia, under which all kinds of guns and
weapons are understood, likewise eontained, according to the signifi-
cation of number, 1S7 letters, viz. :

Aleph 1 Beth 20

Lamed 80 Lamed 30

Jod 10 Jod..... 10

Mim 40 Zani 7

Vav 6 Jod 10

Nun 60 Jod 10

— Nun 60

137 —

187

According to this, there are under the power of this field-general
all cannons, howitzers, mortars, gans, rifles, pistols, all lances, spears,
sabres, swords, and dirks in the whold world, and whenever he thinks
proper, none of these will be able tb do the least ham. Whoever,
therefore, knows how to obtain the favor of the mighty Alemon, it
will be very easy for him to make himself iuvnlnerable against gun-
shot wounds and against ^arp instruments of all kinds. The words
Reivtip and Tafthi are also full of mysterious meaning and are the
names of two angels who are servants of Alimon.

The letters of the holy name Animon, are contained in the words
Ani, Nelech, Raaed, Ne-Zachim, that is, I am King from Eternity to
Eternity I Generally this angel claims a mnch higher rank than the
angel Alimon, for he is first named, and is called upon twice in suc-
cession, through which he takes, aeeording to the signification of
nnmbers 314, letters, or as many as the holy name of the Schadai,
the name of the Almighty


I here present yon (writes the celebrated Rabbi and great Kabbalist
Moses, son of Nochman, who is also known as Ramban), a great and
useful remedy, Leraue, Weacuo, Nirch, which means, that a man,
(especially upon a journey) may see everything and yet remain invis-
ible himself. It is said, that through this mysterious means a man
may be able to see and know all watching or hidden enemies, perse-
ciitorR. thieves, robbers and murderers, without being seen by them,
and he may remain invisible to them. This means has been tried
and tested, says the author, "and I have tried it myself on occasions
and at places where my life and limbs were in danger, and at each
trial, with the help of God, I escaped without injury. It is truly a
blessed remedy ! you must know, however, that the power of this
means will last only from the morning until after vespers, (evening
prayer.)

THE REMEDT IS!

After you have ofl^ered your devoted traveling prayer to God. early
belbre commeneinR: your journey, leave your lodging or dwelling,
and when you arrive on the highway upon which you intend to


112 SIXTH AND SSTESTTH fiOO^ OTM^^^.

travel, stand still and cover your eyes with th« fingero of jour right
hand in the following manner : Lay the index fioger «ii the rig^ eye,
the midde finger on the nose, and the third finger on the Uftjeye^oand
then say three times : Through the worci of Almighty God. 9ut then
also th6 following passages from the holy scriptures, Genesis, ohap. i.
verse 1: "In the beginning God created heaven- and earth.'* Deu-
teronomy chap. xxxiv. and last Terse : ** And in allihat-mighiyhand,
and in all the great terror which Moses showed in -the «ight of all
Israel." Genesis, chap: xxxii. 1, 2 : '* And Jacob weot on' bis way,
and the angels of God met him. And whenr Jacob raw them; be saiil,
This is God's host , and he called the namQ of that place Mahanaim,"
that is, two hosts or camps, namely, God's- and his own. Deuteron-
omy, chap, xxxii. 1, 2 : *' Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak ;
and hear, O earth, the words of my aioatii. MydATtviiiefMV drop
as the rain, my speech shall distil aa iho dewv ii§>tk» eijiiaU mXn v^oa
the tender herb, and as the showers upon the igpa§»." Nufi^rs,
chap. X. verse 35. And it came to |Mb8, wh«B thft«rk<Mt* forward,
that Moses said, Rise .up, Lord, and let tiiin» eneaiies bersoattened,
and let them that hate tboe flee before thee. And wb«B^it reetedfihe
said, Return, O Lord, unto the many th^usanda of israel." Njiiab«rs.
chap. ii. verse 6. " And his host, and those that were suaibered
thereof, were fifty and four thousand and four huBdi'ed. All that
were mustered of the oamp of Ephraim were a hmidtfed.-thoQsand,
and eight thousand and a hundred throughout tbeir oriaicp^ and t^ey
shall go forward in the third .rank." Here iollow sepr^ral auigle
verses from the Psalms, namely : Psalm 4 6, 46 : *'Tbft God of- hosts
is with us ; the God of Jacob is our refuge." *' I^ord oCWtsl bleared
is the man whose dependeneo is up on thee." '^ He^p l4>rd I the Kkig
will hear us, when we call upon him" *^ J«^Tab wiU give- Bright
tinto his people, the Lord will, bless .his people in peace-" Ppalm 19.
14 : '* Let the words of my mautht ^ud the meditation of my heart
be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength and my redet^iper."
And now take your fingers from your eyes, and repeat ilie followuig
Psalms with devotion — Psalm 121 ; Psalm 67 and ^itahn-Ol — com-
bined with the last verse of the 90th Psalm, and repeat the -last verse
of the 91st Psalm twice. Have you strictly eomplM with all the
instructions in the mighty protection of God, and yon ^may proceed
securely and without fear, for no evil will befall yoa, and neither
robbers nor murderers will attack you.


Here is another mysterious means of protection for travelers fiir-
nished by this author, but -in a different manner. If yon should see,
says Ramban, in a dangerous locality, (for example, in forest,
or wilderness.) heathens, robbers, or hostile troops approaching
you, stand suddenly still, make a circle around you, and repeat from
Kxodus, chap. xi. verse 8 : *' And all these thy servants shall come
down unto me, and bow themselves unto me, saying, Get thee out,
and all the people that follow thee, and after that. I will go out."


fiom A^) siEsV^T^ Boolts 6f uokltk. 113


ASTROLOGICAL INFLUENCE UPON MAN

—AND—

MAGICAL. CURES

OF THB

OLD HEBREWS.


From Dr. Gideon Br^hee's work : " The Transcendental. Maggie and Magical

Healing Art in the Talmud." Vienna : 1850.]


AErrBOIiOOICAIi INIXTTENOES.

Thst the Gosinos constitutes an organic whole, whose 8q;>arate
parts ^»arate upon and in opposition to each other, was well
known to tii« ancients. Man, as the highest individuality on the
earth, which served the ancients as the centre of the universe,

• refleets in his being as a microcosm, the macrocosm. The book
of Jeziro (a division of the Talmud), accordingly parallelizes
three factors of the Cosmos, namely, the earth, tima and man,

> eorresponding with the cardinal numbers and the elements of

- words (lett«»). Ja that place it is said : Three principal letters,
Atoph, Mem, Schin, eorrespond in the earth with air, water and
fire; in man with the breast, belly and head; in the year with

- mild temperature, cold and heat. The seven compound letters,
Beth, Gimmel, Daleth, Khaf, Pe, Besch and Tau corrrespond

^ in the earth with Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Bun, Venus, Mercury and
Moon; in man with wisdom, riches, dominion r life, amativeness,

' blessing of children and peace ; in the year to Saturday, Thurs-
day, Tuesday, Sunday, Friday, Wednesday and Monday. The
remaining twelve simple letters correspond in the world with
^es, the Bull, the Twins, the Crab, the Lion, the Yii^in, the
Balance, the Scorpion, the Bowman, the Goat, the Waterman, the

• Fishes; in man, the organs of sight, hearing, smelling, speaking,
. tasting, copulating, to put things in motion (the hands), to feel

anger, to laugh, and to sleep ; and in the year to the twelve
months. The Tali with the boundary of the earth, the book of
Jeziro states further, is like unto a king upon his throne. The
spheres of the years is like a king in the country ; the heart of

- man is like unto a king in battle.


114 SIXTH Ain) SflVSKTH SOOSfl Of ICC618.

The Tali, the ecliptic, and the heart, are the points of concen-
tration and digression of the primum mevens of the Makro and
Microcosm. The Tali, already mentioned, is declared by all
the ancients, and among others by Babbi Jehuda Hallawi, to be
the Dragon known in astronomy which the Arabs call Bashar.
(The supposition is that it is the eccentric orbit of the moon
against the orbit of the sun.) The Gymnosdphists termed the
distance of the moon at the point of her intersection in the
ecliptic, Fatona Chandera : ** The offended dragon" which, how-
ever, seems impossible, for the book of Jeciro gives the Tali as
the primum movens of the whole universe. It would be more
reasonable to understand by it an assiuned tone outside of the
zodiac, on which account it appears like a king upon a throne
who holds all the threads of the combined kingdom in his hands.
Accordingly the Tali can be nothing else thfi^ the world serpent
Beschat (Adischen Wasughl) of the ancient Hindoos, which served
them as a symbol of the Divine protection and of eternity.

We have much less to do with the question how man as the
Microcosm, through his spiritual powers, which he can bring into
action through his will and through the mighty word operates on
the whole universe, than with the phj^sical and especially with
the magical influence of the whole universe upon man as the
part of nature.

Even Babbi Jehuda Haleni calls attention to the wonderful
phenomenon that even the elemente and powers of nature which
contribute to the maintenance of the human oiganism which man
receives within himself, transforms and assimilates io reproduce
the wasted particles of his body, and by which ha preserves his
corporeal integrity, that even these elemente after a cwtain cycle
of years, will exercise on their part an iniml<^l and destrujO-
tive influence upon the human oi^anization, Until man dissolves
through an individual death, and he returns agiMn unto the ele-
mente and chemistry of the general matter of ii'ature. Admitting
this constant struggle of man with surroundiog/naiure, the book
of Jeziro compares as already steted, the heart, as the fountain
of life, to a king in battle, who in the beginning overpowers and
subdues his enemies, but who notwithstanding, succumbs to the
strife in the end.

That the whole universe, the sun, the moon, and the rest of the
planete and heavenly bodies exercise a certain influence upon the
earth, and consequently upon man as a part of it, and thus pro-
duce many and diversified effects, was no unconunon conclusion
on the part of the anciente, for they were led to these conclusions
by obvious visions and appearances, and they were oompelled t^
discover the sidereal influences by close observation. The moon,
especially, with her periods of twenty-seven and twenty-eight
days, made her influence upon man and his condition felt in an
unmistekable manner. Among these may be classed, menstru-
ation in women, the different phases of worm diseases according
to the different phases of the moot), the increase and decrease of


SIXTH XSD SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES. 115

I I " > I ..II.

certain ;^utaBeous diseases, etc., after these phases ; the influence
of the moon upon certain bodily diseases. Beil mentions, that
the indfluence of the moon in causing dysentery has been recog-
nizecL by many eminent physicians, who, it is said, have observed
that the attacks of dysentery are more frequent in new moon
and full riioon than at any other periods. Others declare that
I>estilence is miich more severe at the time of new moon. The
Brahinins also give warning against the new moon. Kant says :
"It is A strong argument in favor of the hypothesis, that the
moon influences diseases, from the fact that the deaths from
fever in Bengal were greatly multiplied during an eclipse of the
sun, et6k, because the attraction of the moon at this time unites
with tkat of the sun, whose power to operate upon bodies on the
earth ha» been established beyond a cavil.*' Finally, belong in
this place the critical days, and the moon's power of attraction
upon travelers by night.

The influence of the light of the sun and the moon upon hu-
manity must have been evident in the earliest perio«| and it was
soon admitted that it affected mightily both the well-being of
man, and his frame of mind, as well as the exhibitions of the
various temperan^pnts. This knowledge was extended by obser-
vation of local diseases during the different seasons of the year
and the changes in the weather, the beneficial effect of the rays
of the sua in {minful and diseased parts of the body, and the in-
fluenc«^of daytime upon births and deaths. Acknowledging the
injurious effects of the sun and moon, the Psalmist says : *' The
sun will not harmi by day, neither the moon by night." The Tal-
mud ascribes healing powers to th e sun. Abail says :The pro-
phet speaks of the healing sun, for the rays of the sun possess
healing powers. ' The Talmud says : ** God hung a precious stone
around the neck of Abraham ; all they that were sick and gazed
thereon became well." But after Abraham died, God took the
precious stone and hung it up in the sphere of the sun.

But the Ancients also recognized a physical influence of the
rest of the planets and the whole host of stars upon man. The be-
lief that the heavenly bodi^ were gifted with life, and that they
with being endowed with higher powers, could exercise an influ-
ence upon man by means of mysterious magical influences could
regulate his temperament, his disposition and his term of life,
was spread from the Ganges to the Tiber and to the pillars of
Hercules. The Talmud likewise teaches this astrological faith,
with this difference, that the Israelite is placed under the imme-
diate guidance of God, and notwithstanding the iron astrological
necessity and predestination, concedes the possibility, that
through the omnipotence of God good may be brought about in
spite of the constellations. This is expressed in the Talmud by
the words ; "The Israelite has no constellation." Kabbi Joham
successfully establishes this fact against Babbi Ghanina, who
asserts that, "Wisdom and riches are the gifts of the constella-

Uoos;" tQV sa^s BabbI Joham, it is r^oordQ4 in Jeremiah 10, 2;


116 SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.

»■ n il ■ III! - I ^

" Be not afraid of the heavenly signs as the Heathens who fear
them." Bab says: Abraham spake before God: Lord of the
earth ! shall my servcmt be my heir ? €rOd said : No, thy son
shall be thy heir. Abraham cmswered : My horoscope has shown *
me that I shall be childless. Then spake God and said : Get
thee away from thy astrology, the Israelite is not subjected to
the constellations.

On the writing table of Babbi Jeheschna was f oimd wril^ben says
the Talmud ; " Whoever is bom on Sunday will be distinguished -
above others." Upon this Babbi Asche says: Both Dime bar
Kakustha and I were bom on a Sunday ; I became the principal
of a school, and he became a captain of robbers.- Light and dark-
ness were created on the Sabbath. He who is bom on Monday -
will always be a passionate man, for on this day the waters were
divided. Whoever is bom on Tuesday will become rich and -
given 1R> pleasure; on this day all herbs were created. Whoever
is bom on Wednesday will be wise and happy : on this day the *
stars of the firmament were created. He who is bom on Thurs-
day will be instantly employed in works of love. ' Whoever is •
bom on Friday will become active in good works. Whoever is
bom on the Sabbath will also die on the Sabbath, because the
Sabbath was desecrated on his account. Baba, the Babbi Schila '
adds : He will be called holy. Ohancna said to his pupils : Gt>
to the son of Levi, and say : Not the constellation of the day has
an influence but the stars of the hour of birth. He that is bom
under the influence of the sun is gifted with beauty, eats and
drinks of his own possessions, but his secrets will become known ; -
should he become a thief, he will be unlucky. If any one is bOm
under the influence of Venus, he will become rich and voluptu-
ous, because the (flre) of love is bom in him. He who is bom
under the influence of Mercury will become enlightened and pru-
dent, because Mercury is the secretary of the sun. He who is
bom under the influence of the moon will learn to bear hard-
ships. ■ He builds and moves in, moves in and builds, eats and
drinks of the possessions of the stranger ; his secrets remain
hidden, and as a thief he will be fortunate : he who is bom under
Mercury will find all his plans perverted and defeated. The
plans of others against him, however, will also be defeated:
Whoever Is bom under the influence of Jupiter will become a
just man. He who is bom under the influence of Mars will be- '
come a shedder of blood. Babbi Asche asserts this. He will
either become a robber or a butcher. Abam adds, or a judge.

We observe that the Talmud regards the sidereal nature of mail
as a hypo-tatical being of itself. This siderealism, pre-existing
in the constellation of man, he denominates Masol. The most
distinguished persons were their own star, and thus, according to
the Talmud, the star of the field-general Sisra was called Meroz.
Judges 6, 23. The siderealism of the proselytes was present at
Sinai.

JJpoQ thQ 90Qste}Mon, sa^s BabSi depend— t^^ bl^gsin^ o(


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF H06KL 117

children, longevity, success in life. Job cursed hl& constella-
tions.. Since the fate of man Is fixed beforehand by the constel-
lation, no injury can take effect upon him, neither can an acci-
dental death come upon him. If, therefore, a man meet serpents
or scorpions by which he is attacked, if he destrpys them, then
let him be assured that they were predestined to be destroyed by
him, although he may regard the act as a miracle.

Beings who are bom under the same constellation stand in
close relation and magical sympathy with each other. The Tal-
mud even sets up a problem from these premises as to whether
such persons have the same marks, as moles, for instance.

The conjimction of the planets, eclipse of the sun and moon,
exercise a great influence upon vegetables and upon man. Samuel
teaches when the spring equinox happens upon the hour of Jupi-
ter, the strength of the fruit tree will be broken. Should the
winter solstice fall upon the hour of Jupiter, then the grain will
wither ; but with this the new moon must also fall upon the hour
of Jupiter or the moon. The first hour of Saturday evening (be-
tween six and seven o'clock) is that of Mercury. The second is
that of the Moon. The third that of Saturn. The fourth that
of Jupiter. The fifth that of Mars. The sixth that of the Sun.
The seventh that of Venus. The eighth hour, again, is that of
Mercury, etc.

The Babbis teach : That an eclipse of the sun is an evil sign
for all people. It is as if a king prepared a feast for his sub-
jects, and placed before them a brilliant light; should he be an-
gry with his subjects, however, he commands bis serviuits to re-
move the light; in order that they might be in darkness. Babbl
Meir taught, that eclipses of the heavenly bodies were an evil
sign, for the Israelites especially, because they were accus-
tomed to misfortune. If the master enters the school with a rod
in his hand, who is afraid? only he who receives daily punish-
ment. The Babbis teach, that an eclipse of the sun is an evil
sign also for the rest of the nations ; an eclipse of moon for the
Israelites, for they reckon their time from the moon and other
nations from the sun. If the eclipse is in the East, it is an evil
omen for the inhabitants of the East ; if in the western heavens,
then it is an evil omen for the inhabitants of the West ; if in the
middle of the firmament, it is a bad sign for all the inhaMtants
of the earth. When the sun appears blood red it protends war.
If the sun has a grayish appearance it is a sign of famine. When
an eclipse occurs at sundown it is a sign that the Judgment is yet
far off ; if at sunrise, it is an omen of the near approach of the
Judgment. According to others, these omens signify the reverse
of what is stated above. A general calamity never overtakes
a people in which their heavenly prince (protecting spirit) does
not suffer defeat with them. If, however, Israel walks accord-
ing to the will of God, it will have nothing to fear of this kind.

The Babbis teach further : On account of sin the sun will be
df^|^.9Q^ wh^ the presiding judge diee^ and Is not properljr


118 SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES.

mourned ; when a young woman in a city, who is engaged, cries
in vain for help when violence is offered to her ; and on accoont
of the simultaneous murder of two brothers. The other heav-
enly lights will be darkened on account of the making of coun-
terfeit money ; on account of false witness ; when forcible pos-
session is taken of a stranger's property, or when fruit trees are
unnecessarily cut down.

To this belongs the dies nefasti, in r^ard to which we give the
following passages from the Talmud :

Samuel teaches, that the time for blessing is Sunday, Wednes-
day and Friday. No man should allow himself to be bled on
Monday or Thursday, for Mars says : Only he who can enjoy the
savings of his parents should be bled on Monday and on Thurs*
day, bscause on both these days the earthly and the heavenly
courts are in session. On Tuesday a man should not be bled,
because on this day Mars rules the hour. Baoht explains this in
the following manner : Mars has the supervision over wars, pes-
tilence and ail kinds of accidents. The paired (exact^ number is
likewise an ominous omen, since with it the demons nave power
(Pessach 110), and accidents are imminent. The order of the
planets is : Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon.
The order of hours in which they rule, b^ins with the creation
of the heavenly lights, namely, in the first hour Wednesday (with
US' between six a^d seven o'clock). In this hour Saturn rules, in
the second Jupiter; in the third, Mars, etc., thus seven planets
in- seven hours. This cycle continues forever. According to
this order we find that the planets rule in the first hour of each
night in the following order ; Mercury, Jupiter, Yenus, Saturn,
S\m, Moon, Mars, namely, in the first hour at the dose of Sun-
day. Mercury, the first hour -of ttie night on Monday; Jupiter,
etc. According to this order, in the first hours of the week days
ai-e ruled further by the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Ve-
nus, Saturn. . The first hour, on Sunday morning is ruled by the
sun ; the flfrst hour on Monday by the moon, and Tuesdjay morn-
ing by Mars. Mars will rule again on the same day in the eighth
hour, a direct hour. On other days his rule will not occur on a
direct hour, but only during the night when it is not customary
to be bled. Upon the remark of the Talmud that Mars rules in
a direct hour on Friday, Baschi says : In the first hour on Fri-
day Venus rules. This planet is followed in regular order by
Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars. The last rules also
in the sixth hour, upon follows the answer, that on Saturday
many people are in the habit of being bled, and " God protects
the simple."

Samuel teaches further, that he who is the fourth, fourteenth,
or twenty-fourth, cannot be bled with safety, that is, on a Wed-
nesday fourth, fourteenth and twenty-fourth of the month. So
likewise on a fourth, which has no four after it, that is, on a
Wednesday after which no four days will intervene until new
ixl90n. At new moon, ^^d tixre^ days thereafter, bleeding i^


arm AK1> S1SVSKTH &X)SS O^ MOSBd. 119


enemrating ; on the third day after new moon it is known to be
dangerous.

OF MAGICAL REMEDIES IN GENERAL.

As in the ancient world diseases were regarded as the work of
the angry gods and malicious demons, so there were, as in the
present day by nations In a state of nature, but few magical rem-
edies employed to secure the assistance of demons or to render
them harmless.

Sanchuniaton declares that the children of the Kabirists could
heal the yenomous bite by their songs. The Brahmins regarded
diseases as a punishment for sins committed in the present life
or in earlier life. The cures consisted of expiation through
prayer, alms, exorcisms, but also rational means. The Vedas
contain hymns and prayers, to which magical powers are as-
cribed, and on this account they are used, without understand-
ing them, as forms of exorcism. All diseases, says the Brah-
min, are the result of evil demons, and can only be healed by
purification, through sorcery. Ormiizd awakened the great
prophet Horn, from whom all the magicians originated. He
healed all diseases through the word of Ormuzd and by a plant
that bears his name. Many cures, it is said in the ten books,
are brought about by means of trees and herbs, others through
the agency of the knife, others through the world, but perfect
cures result only through the Divine Word. Even if the old
Greeks cured with natural means, the common people still
believed that a rapid convalesence was obtained through magical
formulas, songs and incantations. The medical heroes of the
Grecian primitive world were at the same time poets, lawgivers,
generals and astronomers.

Of the cures of spiritual men and prophets we have already
spoken. The prophets were unanimous in applying natural means
prayer and blessing. Babbi Jitzchak said : Four things destroy
the evil passions of man, namely, alms, prayer, change of name,
and repentance. According to other authors, also, change of

Elace. Josephus writes in reference to king Chiskia, God gave
im the power, through fervent adjurations, to reconcile the
Deity, and to cast out the evil spirits which are the cause of
evil diseases ; and this method of healing, continues Josephus,
is the prevailing one among us at the present day. Josephus adds :
I was an eye witness to a cure which the prophet Eleazar, in the
presence of the Emperor Vespasian, performed upon a man pos-
sessed of demons. He made use of a root that was recom-
mended by King Solomon as being effectual against demoniacal
disease, when the root was inserted into the nose of the patient,
at the same time pronouncing the name of Solomon and the
magical formula which this king taught. The Gnostics herein
followed the example of the prophets. The theosophical-medical
sect of the Escucans sought out the power of roots, herbs mid


120 fflXTR AiffD mmtm books op moscs.

■ .. I. ... I ... I.I I I I I IMI IM ■ . ■ ,

stones for healing purposes, and at the same time attempted to
heal diseases by living a devout life and by a total surrender of
themselves into the idea of God, and by this means they also
sought to perform wonders. The substantial word of God, which,
as a mark of preference is called the Angel, the Monas, World of
Light, Bread of Life, First Bom of all Creatures, the Physician
of all diseases, lives in the Epopts and causes them to partake of
the Divine nature, so that they may heal diseases and perform
wonders of all kinds. The magical Logos, who derives his
analogy or origin from the exalted and holy word Oum of the
Brahmins, we find again in the Book of Jeriza, where we read
(1, 8) : "One, the Spirit of the Living God, voice and Spirit and
Word." "And this is the Holy Spirit.'* TheDivine number, the
Divine Word, the Divine Scriptures, says Babbi Jehuda Halcive, -
in his illustration of the Book Jezira, is one and the same with
the reality. That which God thinks and wills has at the same
time reality. Only man makes a distinction between the will
and the act ; with God these two are identical. Babbi Jehudah
Halewi continues : " We can form some conception of this when
we, in thinking of and pronouncing a name, at the same time
form an image of the* subject named in our minds. Among the
languages and writings this peculiarity may be noticed, that
some specify the existence of things particularly, while others do
so in a general manner. The holy language, however, with which
God called the universe into being, demonstrates the prime ex-
istence of all things with the utmost deiiniteness. Whoever,
therefore, is acquainted with the original signification of the
scriptures, and grasps with pure thought the existence of the
thing intended, he can, in accordance with his thoughts and his
will, will the things into being. Thorough knowledge of the
holy word and of the transposition of its letters may, as the
Talmud says, enable man to perform wonders and even create
things. Babbi Jonathan says: "The time will come when the
pious will bring the dead to life." Baha says : " If the pious de-
sire to do so, they can create a world." It is reported of this
Babbi th9>t he created a man, and of the Babbis Chanina and
Oschaja, that they were occupied every Friday with the book of
Jezira, and that they created a fatted calf which they consumed.
Gechasie caused the golden image of the bull to speak, by im-
printing upon his lips a "name." Solomon gave to Benajahn
ben Jehojada a chain and a seal upon both of which he engraved
a "name" with which to bind the demon king Asmedi. Of
Bezalel, the builder of the temple tent in the wilderness, it is said :
"He understood the transposition of letters by which heaven and
earth were created." Abischai uttered a holy name, and thereby
suspended David between heaven and earth.

The word which expresses the being of the prototypes and the
idea of the intelligentia may operate through these through the
whole chain of being down to the most minute, causing changes,
reYQrses and new creations, and may also conquer demons.


.i


SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSES. 121


" Babbi Chanina bar Papi was required by a matron who became
enamored of him, to fulfil her amorous desires. He uttered
something, and his body was covered with scabs and boils. She
also did something and he became whole ; then he fled and con-
cealed himself," etc.

But since there are holy words, whose literal ideas and their
transpositions are countless modifications of existence, so there
are also unholy words which give the prototypes of the dark side
of the spirit world. And now, if the profane use of the holy name
is forbidden upon pain of losing future happiness, so the use of
unholy names, which Abraham transmitted to the^ children of his
concubines is the most terrible, because they lead to the sins of
idolatry, through which man acquires evil principles and becomes
possessed of demons^

The Talmud, in general, forbids sorcery, heathen superstition
and heathen usag^. To these belong the changing of wounds
and injtiries, wit^ whichj notwithstanding the exor<38m» a verse
of the Bible was made use of ; the charming of snakes and scor-
pions. The following usages especially, were given as being
heathenish. 1. To suspend the egg of a grasshopper on the ear
to cure earache. 2. To carry the tooth of a fox to promote
sleep ; the tooth of a dead fox was used to prevent drowsiness,
and the tooth of a living fox caused sleep. 3. The bearing of
a splinter from a gallows, to cure a wound caused by iron. 4.
The proverb, *' Good fortune! and be notweary day nor night,"
probably a saying to obtain good luck. ** Gad means luck, and
it is the name of the idol Belus (Isaiah 65, llj. 5. In order to
obtain good luck the man assumes the name oi the woman, and
the woman the name of the man. 6. The saying, ** Be strong,
O my barrels !" to increase the wine blessing — Dan is the name
of an idol. (Amos 8, 14.) 7. To have luck, people call to the
male raven: "Shriek T* and to the female raven: ** Croak!"
and turn unto me your tail for luck. 8. If any one says : •• Kill
this cock for he crows late in the evening, or kill this hen, for
she crows like a cock." 9. I drink and leave some over ; I drink
and leave some over (so that the wine may increase.) 10. Who-
ever dashes the shells of eggs against the wall (out of which the
young chickens have already crept, so that they may not die.)
11. He who stirs in a crock before the young chickens for the
same purpose. 12. Whoever, for the same purpose dances before
the chickens and counts seventy-one chickens. 13. Dancing
during the preparation of a meal. To command silence during
the boiling of the lentil. To cry out during the boiling of grain.
To urinate before the pot to facilitate cooking.

Rabbi Acha says : Before bleeding we should repeat the fol-
lowing prayer : May It be thy will, O Lord ! that this healing
operation may Hasten my convalescence, etc., for no one should
seek the assistance of the physician, but should look for a return
of health only to God. To this Alias objects, because Babbl

Jtecbmael teotCb^ei ana bocnuee be deduce firom Ui« Thosa (Ss*


122 SIXTH AND SEVENTH BOOKS OF MOSEB.

odus 21, 19), The physician shall have an unconditional right to
heal. The Talmud not only adopts this view of Alaie*8 but it
forbade to dwell in a place where no physician could be met with.
If again, on the other hand, we read in the Talmud that King
Ohiskia, suffered the Book of Healing to be destroyed, and for
this act was praised by the Babbis, then that book, as is supposed
by, Maimonldes, contained simply superstitious astrological and
idolatrous remedies, which the pious king sought to consign to
oblivion, of which, however, a large portion found their way into
the hands of the people, and in time also became a oommoii ben-
efit to the more enlightened.


OF THE MAGICAL CURES IN PARTICULAR.


1.— -HEAIiINa BX AHUIiETS.

Th amulet Kamea was used as a remedy against diseases and
especially against sorcery. This amulet was either a written
parchment, properly called Pitka, or a small bundle of plants.
The words written on the amulet were of a diversified character ;
among the contents, however, were to be found verses from the
Bible. Proof ♦*♦ is called an amulet, since cures have been
effected through it three times, whether it was written or whether
it consisted of roots. In reference to the Sabbath (whether or
not it might be worn on that day or not), it must still be regarded
as reliable, because it was made and perfected by a oonnolBseur.
An amulet may prove effectual in healing a human being, while
it is of no effect in the case of an animal, because in man the
constellation operates in conjunction with the amulet. If it is
expected to be effectual, it must have reference to the name and
number of the demon. Thus, for example, the demons of the
caper-tree are called spirits ; of a service-tree, Schedim ; in the
gardens, Bispe. At the caper-tree not less than sixty Schedim
congregate, and the amulet must therefore have reference to this
number.

A string made of the seeds of the madder was hung upon
children as a protection against certain diseases. The nurse of
Abbaii taught him : Three grains will check the disease, five will
cure, and seven will prove effectual against sorcery. Babbi Acha
bar Jacob remarks : The last is true only when the bewitched
person is not exposed to the light of the sun or mo«n, or to rain,
and when he does not hear- the ringing of iron, the crowing of
the cock, or the sound of footsteps. Babbi Nachmann bar Jits5«

chak says that this remedy was already forgotten In bis time.


^¥3 Am> h]m^& Boo^ 6£> ilodiEg. l^S


2. — HEAIiINa BY Ghabms.

The mirse of Abbaii taught him : "All numbering (naming ?)
should be done in the name of the mother (N. son of B.), and
all external passages must be made on the left side of the body.
Abbaii 0ays fitrther : If the number is fixed it should be strictly
. adhered to without deviation ; if the number is not fixed, it is
forty^one.

As anti-heathenish customs the four following things are
allowed: .1. To place the splinter of a mulberry-tree or frag-
ments of glass into the pot, in order to make the mess boil
more readily. (The Babbis, however, forbade the fragment of
glass on account of the danger of swallowing in with the food.)
2. The drinking toast : Wine and life cheer the Babbis ! Babbi
Akiba repeated this toast with every vessel of wine used at the
marriage feast of his son. Against intoxication : Anoint the
palms of the hand and the soles of the feet of the drunken per-
son with a mixture of oil and salt, and say : As the ointment be-
comes pure, so may the senses become clean ; or, lay the bung
of a biorel in the water and say : As the bung becomes clean,
etc.

Charm against suppuration : say for instance, Bas, Basia, Mas
Masia, Kas, Kasia, Scharial and Amarlia, the angels, who came
out of the land of Sodom to heal painful boils. Let the color
not become redder ; let it not spread further, let the seed be ab-
sorbed in the bowels. And as a mule does not propagate its
species, so may this evil be not propagated in the body of N.,
eon of B.

Charm against small-pox: For example; Drawn sword and
pointed sling. His name is not Jacob, the pain rages.

Against being possessed, as follows : Cursed, crushed and ban-
ished be the demon, by name Bar Tet, Bor Tama, etc.

Charm a^^Eiinst injury inflicted by demons of by-places : Upon
the head of the lion, and in the nose of the lioness, I found the
demon Bar Schirk a Panda. I threw him into a fish-bed and slew
him with the jawbone of an ass.

To makeevU dreams good, three men recited certain consoling
verses firom the Bible. ** Whosoever had a bad dream, should
hasten in the morning, as soon as he awakens, to repeat a verse
from the Bible, the coiftents of which should be favorable to
him, and this must be done quickly, before a verse comes into
the mind with an unfavorable meaning to him."

He that is upon the point of entering a city and fears the evil
look, let him put his right thumb in his left hand, and his left
thumb in his right hand, and say: I, N. N., am of the lineage
of Joseph, over whom the evil eye can have no power. He makes
the glance of the evU eye bftrmleaa ; the tail of a fox was hun^

upoo the boree«


•J *

I ~i

3. — Bemedies and Chabms against Sorcebt.

Ben Asai says : Do not irritate your' anus while sitting down
In order to obtain a passage from the bowels, tor he who does
this will be attacked by sorcery, even though he were engaged in
Bpain. If a man, however, has done so in a mistake, after an
evacuation, let him pronounce the following charm :

'* Ye cannot approach, neither Tachimnor Tachtum, not all
of you, not any of you, neither the enchantment of the sorcerer
nor the charm of the sorceress."

Kabbi Chanina says : To drink one-eighth ounce of ass*s milk,
which is forty days' old, is effective against the sting of a wasp ;
one quart against the sting of a scorpion ; one-half quart against
sorcery, and the drinking' of fluids that have been open and
exposed.

Babbi Jochanan said : A chief among witches told me : If you
meet witches you should utter the following charm : ** Hot dirt,
in perforated baskets, in your mouths, ye enchanting women.
May your heads become bald; may the wind blow away your
bread crumbs ; may it scatter your spices ; may the fresh saffron
which ye have in your hands fly away. Witches ! so long as men
were gracious to me, and I was careful, I came not in your
midst ; now I did, and you are not agreeable to me."

The Babbi taught : There are three things between which we
should not pass, and so, also, that two persons walking side by
side should not allow to come between them. These three things
are — ^a dog, a palm, and a woman. Some add also a hog, and
others, a snake. Should this happen notwithstanding, what shall
a man do to escape uninjured? Babbi Papi says: **Bepeat a
veree from the Bible. that begins and ends with the same letters."

If women are seated facing each other on opposite sides of the
street, there is no doubt that they are engaged in witchcraft.
How shall a man escape them without injury ? He should avoid
them and go another way. If this is not possible, then he shall
take some one by the hand and pass by in his company. If there
is no one at hand, he must say: "The demons of sorcery have^
already been killed by arrows. A rat Assia, Belussia, are the
names of the demons. Baschi."

The Babbis teach : A man should not drink water in the night,
either from a stream or from water that is standing still. Who-
ever does this, his blood be upon his own head, because by so
doing he will render himself liable to become blind: How can
we make drinking at night safe ? If there is some one present
he should be awakened and addressed as follows: "I drink,
water!" If you are alone, rattle with the lid of the drinking
cup and;say to yourself ; * * N. , son of B., thy mother said to thee J:
Guard thyself against Scbabriri, briri, riri, iri, ri, in a whit^
pitcher (Baschi), this is a magical charm." As the syllables ol
the word Schabriri decrease, so the demon will withdraw. Tli<
Targum of blindness (Genesis 19, 11), in Bchabriri,


SIX'FH AKI> SEVENTH BOOKS OF MoSES. 125

In reference to paired nnmbers, of which we have already
spoken, Babbi Papa says: "Joseph, the Demon, told me that
through two we kill, through tour we only inflict injury. In the
number two the evil will follow, whether we have done a thing in
r thift number intentionally or accidentally. In the number four
only when the thing is done intentionally. If we have acci-
9 dentally partaken of a meal or drank out of a paired plate or
- i^tcher, number, how shall we avoid the fatal consequences ?
We must take the thumb of the right hand into the left, and the
thumb of the left into the right hand, and say : You and I make
three. If answered, is returned: You and I make five. If we
again hear the answer : You and I are six, we must again an-
swer : You and I are seven. It happened that some one carried
this on to the 101st time, until finally the demon burst with
chagrin.

IPPtlCATlOli OF THE CHARMS AND THE REMEDIES.

We insert the passages oi the Talmnd which treat of the sub-
• Ject, on account of their coherence, in all that extent, although
' it may not properly belong in this place, becase in several cases
in the following remedies the natural cures as well as the magical
charms are prescribed, and because these passages from the
Talmud otherwise offer many interesting matters. They treat of
proceedings again snakea and other remarkable occurrences.

He that has swallowed a snake, let him eat ivy and then walk
three miles. Babbi Bime bar Asche saw a man who had swal-
lowed a snake. Babbi Sime fell upon him like a warrior, gave
him ivy and salt to eat, and then drove him three miles
before him, when the snake came from him in pieces. Others
state that Babbi Sime himself swallowed the snake, when the
prophet Eli came in the form of a wild warrior, gave him ivy and
Bait to eat, etc., etc.

If a man be bitten by a snake, let him take seventy-nine hairs
from the tail of a white she-ass, tie them with a silken thread, and
he that is bitten sit upon them. The she-ass must, however,
have been free from Trefa (an organic disease). An official in
Pumbedithat was bitten by a snake. Sow, there were found in
Pumbedithat thirteen bearing white she-asses, which were opened
one after another, but all were found to have been afflicted with
Trefa. It was also known that in a distant part of the city
there was another she-ass, and messengers were sent to bring
her. But meanwhile a lion had eaten up the she-ass. Then
spoke Abaii : Perhaps the snake of the Babbins have bitten him,
against the bite of which there is no remedy. The pupils an-
swered, Yes ; so it is, master ; for when Bab died, Babbi Jitz-
seckak bar Bina prohibited the use of myrtle and palm leaves for
a whole year. This officer, however, paid no attention to this
prohibition.

If a soake should wind around a person, he should go into the


water and take a basket which he should hold above the head of
the snake, then lower the basket in such a manner that the rim of
it shall come between him and the snake (to grasp the snake
with the hands would be dangerous, because it might become en-
raged and wound the person). When the snake is in the basket,
throw it quickly into the water and hasten away.

Should anyone be pursued by an angry snaite (where the snake
follows the person by scenting his tracks) he should suffer him-
self to be carried a short distance by a person, if any one should
be present (through the stranger's foo^teps the snake will lose
his tracks) ; if no one is with him he should spring across water
or seat himself over a fountain. On the following night he should
place himself upon four barrels, so that the snake cannot easily
reach him, or let him rather sleep in the open air, so that it can-
not come to him through the roof, then let him tie four eats to
the barrels and make a noise with straw or bushes, so that the
oats, when the snake comes, may fall upon her and eat her up.

Should any one be pursued by a snake, let him seek safety be-
tween two beehives.

Babbi Jochanan says : The root-drink described in the Mischna,
consists of Alexandrian gum, pulverized alum and fine saffron,
each of the weight of a Sus (a small coin). To oure jaundice two
of them are taken in beer.

The following remedies are also recommended in cases of
female weakness : Take the tops of three Persian onions, boil
them in wine and let the woman drink of it, .at the same time
saying to her : Becover from thy sickness !

Another remedy : Take a handful of caraway, a handful of saf-
fron, and an equal quantity of foenugrek, boil them together in
wine, and let the woman drink of it, saying : Becover from thy
sickness !

Another remedy : Take sixty bungs of wine barrels, soak them
in water, and give the woman of the water to drink, and say to
her at the same time : Becover from thy sickness I

Or, take a quantity of the growth of tendrils, boil them in
wine, and let the woman drink of it, and speak to her as above.

Or, take the plant that grows beside the thorn, and bum it to
ashes. The woman should carry the ashes upon her person in a
linen patch in the summer, or in a woolen patch in the winter.

Or, dig seven holes In the ground, and bum in each of them
young grape vines not over three years* growth. Let the woman
take a cup into her hand^ and seat herself over the first hole
and drink : then rise up and seat herself upon the second hole,
etc., etc. Each time speak to her : Becover, etc.

Or, anoint the lower part of her body with rose-water.

Or, take a wreath of f eath«», burn them to ashes. These ashes
the patient should carry in a linen bag In the summer, and in a^
woolen bag in the winter. \

Or, open a oaak of wine expressly for heri She sboal4 drink ^,
0iuob wine. <


SIXTH AND SEVENTH 300ES OF Mg(^ 127
■ ^

Or, take a groin of barley that was fouira in the stable of a
white she-ass. If she holds this one day in her hand (the right
hand) , the ailment will cease for two days. If she holds , it
during two days, It will cease for three days. If she holds it
three days It will cease forever. According to others : if she
takes one grain in her hand, etc. ; if she takes two grains in her
hand, etc.

5.— Magicajj Bemkdies AaAiNsr Yabious Dlsbases anb

OONDITIONS.

Abobttts — The actitee (eaglestone), rattle-snake stone-natone
of retaining, remaining) was worn by women as a prevention
against abortion.

BiiOOD-IiETTiNa. — ^If you have eaten fish, you must not be bled
on the following day. If you have been bled, you must not eat
fish on the following day. On the third day both would be dan-
gerous

The Babbis teach : After blood-letting, a man must not, on the
same day, drink milk, eat cheese, onions or vegetables. If a
man, however, has eaten of these things, he should mix, says
Abaii, one quarter measure of vinegar, and one quarter measure
of' wine, and drink it. If a motion of the bowels ensues, the
evacuation should take place without and on the east side of the
town, for the exhalation of such is injurious.

Diseases of the Eye. — The saliva of a first-bom on the male
side (not of the female side) is effective in the cure of eye dis-
eases.

Bab says : A degenerate eye is dangerous to life, for the vision-
power of the eye is closely connected with the pericardium.

Bapid traveling impairs the sight of the eye ; but it may be
restored by uttering the blessing of consecration of the Sabbath
on Friday evening.

Blindness. — Against blindness at night, take a string made
out of the hair of an animal ; tie one end of it to the foot of the
patient, and the other end to the foot of a dog, and then let the
children make a noise behind the dog, and say : ** Hold the dog,
fool the rock." Then take seven pieces of meat from seven dif-
ferent houses, and let the inmates of each house hang a piece of
the meat at the door-post of the patient. The dog must eat this
meat In an open place. Then let the patient unbind the hair-line
and let some one say ; Night blindness of F., son of B., leave N.,
son of B., and perforate the pupil of the dog.

AaAiNsT Bat BijIndness.— -Take seven pieces of spleen from
seven heifers, and lay them upon the vessel used by the physician
to catch the blood when bleeding a patient. The patient must
be seated In a chamber. A man must be stationed on the out-
side, who must say: <* Blind onel give to me that I may eat."
The patient answers: *'How can I open? Come in and eat!"
After eating he must br^dk the plftte or he wlU himself become
bUnd.
