Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula, Vol. 1 (Walter William Skeat and Charles Otto Blagden, 1906)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/paganracesofmala01skea). Vol. 1 of the great survey of the Semang, Sakai and Jakun - physical anthropology and material life of the peninsula's aborigines.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

^w*(jws^; 

.IRRARY 

JK..-C ilTY 9f 
C. UFORItlA 

IAN DIEGO 

Htbrary 

4fi Nnrtlr SIob iloblpfi 

THE UNIVERSITY LIBKAHY 
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA. SAN DIEGQ O ^ 

LA JOLLA. CALIFORNIA r^cT 

S7 

PAGAN RACES 

OF THE 

MALAY PENINSULA 

PAGAN RACES 

OF THE 

MALAY PENINSULA 

BY 

WALTER WILLIAM^KEAT, MA. 

LATE OF THE FEDERATED MALAY STATES CIVIL SERVICE 
AUTHOR OF 'MALAY MAGIC ' AND ' FABLES AND FOLK-TALES FROM AN EASTERN FOREST' 

AND 

CHARLES OTTO BLAGDEN, MA 

LATE OF THE STRAITS SETTLEMENTS CIVIL SERVICE 

WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS SPECIALLY TAKEN 
FOR THE WORK 

IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. II 

ilontion 

MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited 

NEW YORK : THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
1906 

All tights reser-ved 

CONTENTS 

PART III.— RELIGION 

CHAPTER I 

PAGE 

Birth-Customs and Beliefs . . . . i 

CHAPTER II 
Maturity Customs and Beliefs . . . .28 

CHAPTER III 

Marriage Customs and Beliefs . . . -55 

CHAPTER IV 
Burial Customs and Beliefs . . . -89 

CHAPTER V 

Music, Songs, and Feasts. . . . .117 

CHAPTER VI 
Natural Religion and Folk-lorl . . . ■ ^71 

CONTENTS 

PART IV.— LANGUAGE 
CHAPTER I 

PAGE 

Present State and Future Prospects . . . 379 

CHAPTER n 
Taboo and Other Special Forms of Speech . -414 

CHAPTER HI 
Past History and Relation to Other Languages . 432 

APPENDIX . . . . . -473 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF ABORIGINAL 

DIALECTS . . 507 

Supplementary List ..... 765 

Grammatical Notes ..... 769 

PHOTOGRAPHS ILLUSTRATING LOCAL GROUPS . 777 

INDEXES . . .831 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

Hot Spring in the Selangor Jungle . . . Frontispiece. 

TO FACE PAGE 

Sketch by Baron Miklucho-Maclay of Semang Heads (by him 

called " Sakai "), the Central One showing Face-Paint . 38 

Sakai of South Perak, showing Face-Paint and Nose-Quill . 39 

Drawings by Wray showing Difference of Pattern between Sakai 

Man and Woman . . . .42 

De Morgan's Drawings, showing Types of Face Decoration (Sakai 

and "Semang") . . . . . .43 

Sakai of South Perak, showing Face-Paint (two specimens) . 44 

Sakai Child having Face-Paint applied . .45 

Engaged Sakai Children with Uncle . . . .60 

Young Sakai Girl . . . . . .61 

Newly-married Couple, Woman with painted Head- Band and 

Nose-Quill, Ulu Itam, Perak . . . .64 

Dancing at Che Tupei's (the Squirrel's) Wedding, Rantau Pan- 

jang, Selangor . . . . . .65 

Party with Musical Instruments at the Squirrel's Wedding, Rantau 

Panjang, Selangor . . . . . .65 

Party of Aborigines dressed (in Malay Clothes) for a Wedding . 70 
Large Bell-shaped Mound of Clay used in the Mound-Marriage 

Ceremony ..... .71 

Marriage Decorations of plaited Leaf Strips . . .71 

Sakai Man's Grave (S. Perak) . . .96 

Sakai Woman's Grave (S. Perak) . -97 

Besisi Soul- Wallet . . . . .108 

Jakun Graves at Kumbang . .114 

Semang Jews' -harp . . . .122 

Fan-shaped Palm-leaf Beaters used by Semang . . .122 

Pangan Group in Dancing Dress, Kuala Sam, Ulu Kelantan 123 

Sakai Men playing Nose- Flutes . . . . .136 

Sakai using various Musical Instruments . . ■ ^Zl 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

NEGRI SEMBILAN 

PAGE 

Man, Wife, and Child, Jakun Type, Hills north of Seremban, 

Sungei Ujong . . . . .812 

A Jukrah (Subordinate Chief), Hills north of Seremban, Sungei 

Ujong . . . . .812 

Jakun, Hills north of Seremban, Sungei Ujong . . .813 

Jakun Women, Hills north of Seremban, Sungei Ujong . .813 

Jakun, Hills north of Seremban, Sungei Ujong . . .814 

Group taken in Jungle, Jelebu . . . . .814 

Jakun Boys, Hills north of Seremban, Sungei Ujong . .815 

Jakun Women, Hills north of Seremban, Sungei Ujong . .815 

Jakun Group from the Langkap Pass . . . .816 

MALACCA 
Group of Jakun, Malacca District 

817 

JOHOR 

A Group of Jakun, Ulu Batu Pahat, Johor 
Ulu Batu Pahat, Johor . 

Three Jakun Women, Ulu Batu Pahat, Johor 
Jakun Children, Ulu Batu Pahat, Johor . 
Three Jakun Boys, Ulu Batu Pahat, Johor 
Young Jakun, Ulu Batu Pahat, Johor 

818 
819 
820 
821 

822 

SELANGOR BLOWPIPE PATTERNS 
Rubbings from Besisi and Blandas Blowpipes 

824-829 

MAPS 

Sketch Map showing the Distribution of the Languages of the 

Aborigines of the Malay Peninsula . . To face page ■^Zb 

Sketch Map of Principal Sakai Districts . . 394 

Sketch Map showing the Position of the Mon-Annam Dialects of 

Eastern Indo-China ..... 440 

Sketch Map showing the Position of the various Groups related 

to the Mon-Annam Family .442 

Sketch Map showing the Distribution of the (Aboriginal) Numeral 

Systems . . . . .454 

Map of Southern Indo-China 

To face page 8 3 1 

ERRATA TO VOL. II. 

Page 399, line 7, insert " rather " at beginning, and delete " for instance " at end. 
416, note t^i for " Mogondou " read " Mongondou." 
428, line \%,for "presented" ^ea(f "represented." 
511, line 9, col. 2, for " peninag " read "peninga." 

516, last line, col. 2, for " hopa " read " hopal." 

517, line 2, col. i,for '' popall " read " popal," 
552, line 37, col. \,for '■'Jac." read '■'■ Jak." 
564, line II, col. 2, for " hcok " rt-at/ " chok." 
569, line 26, col. l, for ^^ ar" 7-ead ^^ or." 
572, line 16, col. i, for "after-" read "After-" 
599, line II, col. 2, for " sengo : (soiio) " read " sengo (soiio)." 
655, line 36, col. i,for " mong " read "mong." 
708, line 34, col. i,for " huj " read " huj' " 
748, line 34, col. 2, add P 253. 

757, line 12, col. i, "kem-nyiim," to de />ronoieneed " ktmnyom." 
757, line 14, col. i,for "berep" read "berep." 

RELIGION. 

PART III. 

CHAPTER I. 

Birth-Customs and Beliefs. 

By far the most important and interesting contribu- 
tion hitherto made to our knowledge of the birth- 
customs of the three wild races dealt with in these 
volumes, whether Negrito, Sakai, or Savage Malayans, 
is contained in the remarks of H. Vaughan-Stevens 
upon the means by which (according to the Semang) 
the body of the living but unborn child is provided 
with a soul. The word "living" is used in order to 
distinguish between the "spirit of life" ("jiwa") and 
the soul (" semangat"), which latter (it may be helpful 
to say at the outset) is used throughout this book (as 
throughout Malay Magic) in the cultural sense of 
Tylor's definition (which agrees far more closely with 
our own mediaeval ideas of the soul than with its 
modern conception as transfigured by the ideas of 
Christianity). Although Vaughan-Stevens' account 
still awaits corroboration from explorers among the 
Semang (and is therefore printed in small type), it 
is none the less eminently credible, for the idea of 
comparing the soul to a bird, or of identifying 
it in some way with a bird, is of world-wide dis- 
tribution,^ and is well known to the Malays, who 
call the soul the " pingai " bird, and in their magical 

^ For references, see Rev. de PHist. des Religions, xxxvii. 385. 
VOL. II B 

BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

invocations address it with the word " kur," used in 
calHng chickens. The Semang woman is said to carry 
about with her a bamboo receptacle, in which she 
keeps the soul-bird of her expected progeny ; this bird 
is really the vehicle of her child's soul, and she is 
expected to eat it to enable the soul of her child to be 
developed. The whole of this part of the subject is 
fraught with great interest, and would reward the 
most careful investigation by future observers. 

Among the Sakai a professional sage-femme is to 
be found, who enjoys certain special privileges, and 
is the owner of a species of medicine-hut to which 
any of the expectant mothers of the tribe may retire 
when their full time has come. Another point about 
the birth-customs of the Sakai is that a special water- 
receptacle of bamboo called " chit-nat," which is 
decorated with a special design, is employed in the 
purification of mother and child. 

Finally, among the Jakun, or aboriginal Malayans, 
we find the greatest development of the custom of 
" roasting " the new-made mother over a fire (an Indo- 
Chinese practice which is general among the Malays, 
by whom it is called " salei-an "), as well as a system 
of birth-taboos which regulate the diet and the move- 
ments of both parents. 

I. — Semang. 

Among the Semaiig of Kedah the mother was 
usually placed at birth in a sitting posture, and 
was then preferably treated with a decoction made 
from the root of a creeper called " chenlai," which 
had to be sought upon the loftiest mountain ranges ; 
but in default of this, a potion was concocted from the 
leaves of the " Icngkuas " and Citronella or lemon 

CHAP. I GENERAL REMARKS 3 

grass. The afterbirth (" uri ") and appurtenances were 
buried in the leaf-shelter close to the family hearth.^ 

I may add that at birth a measurement is taken 
from the infant's navel along the umbilical cord to 
its knee, at which point the cord is severed with a 
sharpened sliver of Eugeissona or " bertam," 

Both on the east and west coast the great majority 
of the names given to the children were of Malayan 
origin, and were taken from natural objects, especially 
from trees and plants, though they occasionally took 
the form of attributes appropriate to the individual, 
e.g. " Panjang," i.e.'' Long." " 

The following is the account given by Vaughan- 
Stevens of the Perak Semang : — 

Birth and the Name-tree.^ 

Birth is usually an easy matter. An old and experienced woman assists the 
mother. A bamboo or young tree-stem is cut short at a height of about i^ or 
2 metres from the ground, and placed so as to lean diagonally either against the 
hut-roof or any other suitable object. A log of wood or thick segment of bamboo 
is then deposited at the foot of the sloping stem, so as to serve as a seat for the 
patient, who rests her back against the stem. There is no application of pressure 
or manipulation, only the sage-femme (" til-til-tapa-i ") presses the patient's hands 
a little behind her back flat on the ground. 

When the child is born, it is received by the sage-femme, and a knife made 
from the blossom-stem of the bertam ( ' ' chin-beg " = Eugeissona tristis) palm is em- 
ployed to sever the umbilical cord, at a distance of a " span's-breadth " (" tapa ") 
from the body. The child's name will have already been decided by the 
father, who takes it from some tree which stands near the prospective birth-place 
of the child. As soon as the child is born, this name is shouted aloud by the 
sage-femme, who then hands over the child to another woman, and buries the 
afterbirth, usually — and formerly always — underneath the birth-tree or name-tree •• 
of the child. As soon as this has been done, the father cuts a series of notches in 
the tree, starting from the ground and terminating at the height of the breast.'' 

The mother generally rests for three days, but even after two days begins to 
move about again. No bandages, etc., are used. 

The posture of the mother is said to be " imitated from that of Kari," and 
the sloping tree-stem is "the tree against which he leans." The cutting of the 

^ V. Appendix. — Anderson, _/./.^. vol. iv. p. 427. 

^ " A more simple and natural mode ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 112-113. 

of bestowing names cannot well be im- ^ The name-tree cannot be identical 

agined than that adopted by the Semang. with the birth-tree, which is different 

Theyarecalled after particular trees; that for males and females {ib. 116), and 

is, if a child is born under, or near a coco- contains the unborn souls ; whereas the 

nut or durian, or any particular tree, name is selected from any tree at will. 
in the forest, it is named accordingly." ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 112. 

BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

notches is intended to signalise the arrival on earth of a new human being, since 
it is thus that Kari registers the souls that he has sent forth, by notching 
the tree against which he leans. These notches are called " tangkor." ' 

Trees thus " blazed " are never felled. Any species of tree may be a name- 
tree for a child of either sex. The Western Semang, who live in clearings 
where there are no big trees, take such names as " Pisang" (Banana), " K'ladi " 
{Calcuiium or yam), " Kuang " (an abbreviation of Mengkuang), " Rambei," 
" Rambutan," "Durian," etc., for the most part Malayan fruit names, although 
they frequently also take the corresponding names in Semang. The Eastern 
Semang (Pangan) take only Semang (Menik) names, and in this respect have plenty 
of choice, as their dialect has a name for every species of tree in the forest."'' 

The child must not, in later life, injure any tree which belongs to the species 
of his tree. For him all such trees are taboo, and he must not even eat of their 
fruit, the only exception being when an expectant mother revisits her birth-tree. 

Among the Eastern Semang (Pangan) it was an ancient custom for an 
expectant mother to visit the nearest tree belonging to the species of her own 
birth-tree, and hang it about with fragrant leaves and blossoms, if she hap- 
pened to be able to reach its branches, or deposit them at the tree's foot, if the 
tree was too big for them to be suspended. This, however, was mere custom, 
and in no sense compulsory. 

The Soul-bird.3 

In depositing the flowers at the foot of the tree, she takes care that they are 
not laid upon the spot where the afterbirth had been buried. The reason for this 
(as given by the Eastern Semang or Pangan) is that the soul of the expected 
child, in the form of a bird, will recognise the tree by the aspect of this very 
spot, and will there wait until it is killed and eaten by the mother. 

Even thougli the real birth-tree itself may be many miles distant, yet every 
tree of its species is regarded as identical with it. The bird, in which the child's 
soul is conveyed, always inhabits a tree of the species to which the birth-tree 
belongs ; it flies from one tree (of the species) to another, following the as yet 
unborn body. The souls of first-born children are always young birds newly 
hatched, the offspring of the bird which contained the soul of the mother. These 
birds obtain the souls from Kari. If the woman does not eat the soul-bird 
during her accouchement, her child will either be still-born or will die shortly 
after birth. To explain bodily malformation the Semang declare that the bird 
" chim-iui " or " til-til-tapa " must, when it was being killed, have fallen upon 
a kind of fungus called the " ' tigress'-milk ' fungus"* (Mai. " susu harimau"), 
which is the young soul of a tiger which rests quietly in the earth until the 
tigress has cubs, when it springs up and is eaten by the tigress, who thus obtains 
the souls of her cubs.^ 

The souls in the " tigress'-milk fungus " (" susu harimau ") ^ are always a pair, 
male and female, so that one fungus suffices.'' If the bird (" chim-iui ") falls 
upon one of these fungi the tiger-souls escape, and since they are in their 
natural state inimical to man, they remain so in the bird. Thus when the 
woman eats the soul-bird, the tiger-souls and the human soul battle together 
in the unborn body, which thus becomes crippled or dies outright. Yet even 

* "Tangkor" is probably a cock- * Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 114. 
neyfied spelling of " tangkok " = Mai. ^ "Susu harimau," in Malay = 
■' takok " (notch). tigress' milk. In Semang =" napas- 

2 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 113. taiyo " or tiger-soul (V.-St.). 

3 Ibid. 1 1 3- 1 17. 7 According to the Sakai (Blandas) 

* According to Vaughan-Stevens it is as well as the Semang (Menik) the 
a "mushroom," but it is in reality'the tigress always produces a pair of cubs 
" sclcrotium of a fungus," Z'/i/(j Ridley, (V.-St.). The same notion is found 
J.»., which view is here followed. among the Malays. 

NEGRITOS OF PERAK 

5 

when the embryonic human body dies in consequence of a fight of this kind, 
the victory as between the souls nevertheless remains with the one that is human. 
The tiger-souls in these fungi are not the souls of tigers already deceased, but 
newly-developed souls derived from a stock which Kari has created and scat- 
tered abroad upon the earth like seeds.' 

All creatures that are inimical to man obtain their souls from poisonous fungi, 
whereas harmless creatures obtain their souls from harmless fungi. 

When an adult man (or a woman who is not pregnant) partakes of a poison- 
fungus, containing the soul of a harmful beast, the beast-soul attacks the human 
individual quite as violently as if tlie attack were made by a creature that was 
adult, but in the case of an expectant mother, the beast-soul attacks the soul of 
the un-born child because it is the weaker. If the soul-bird falls upon a poison- 
fungus, which contains a beast — the soul of some beast or reptile, other than 
that of a tiger — such as, for instance, that of a snake — the latter bites the body 
of the unborn child, but it is not certain whether the child will necessarily die or 
not. Some slight protection is afforded by the appropriate design upon the birth- 
bamboo carried by the mother, this design being capable of repelling such 
attacks, although during the birth a tiger-soul thus repulsed may revenge itself 
upon the mother. Hence in cases of difficult birth the Puttos were always 
called in to assist, since they were able, by means of special charms, to avert 
these attacks as well as the others. 

Phosphorescent fungi, such as give light by night, contain the unborn souls 
of night-beasts, and give out light in order to show the female where to find the 
soul she is looking for. Many kinds of beasts have many young at a time, 
and for these whole groves of fungi shoot up when required. 

The West Semang no longer believe in the soul-bird, and even employ the 
bird itself as food ; but the East Semang (Pangan) only kill the bird on behalf of 
their women-folk. In addition, they believe that the souls of Malays, Chinese, 
and Siamese were obtained from another kind of birds corresponding to the 
physical peculiarities of these several races. Before they leave the presence of 
Kari the souls sit in the branches of a big tree behind his seat and there wait 
until he sends them away. What their shape is the Semang do not know ; they 
only know that it does not resemble the human form, and that this latter is only 
attained in the body. After the death of their human embodiment the souls 
which possess a human shape can no longer return to Kari to pass into new 
bodies, but have then to wait in a different place. Since the soul never dies, 
the soul-birds themselves do not die until they have fulfilled their mission ; nor 
can they be shot by mistake ; the arrow will miss them, until their predestined 
slayer should happen to shoot at them.^ 

According to another tradition, the souls of fish are contained in riverside 
grasses and bushes, every species of fish having its corresponding species of plant. 
The same is the case with sea- beasts. Birds fly behind the mountains when the 
sun goes down and into the country of the Sen-oi ; there they eat certain 
unknown fruits, and in this way obtain souls for their eggs. The only excep- 
tions are the birds called " chim-iui '' and " til-til-tapa." These need no souls, 
since they themselves are human souls in the visible shape of birds. When they 
require life for their eggs, i.e. when they are ready to fetch more human souls, 
they eat the fruit of the man's or woman's birth-tree, as the case may be. When 
one of these birds dies a natural death, it is because of the death of the child in 
the womb, but opinions are divided as to what may be the fate of such an 
undeveloped soul. Some, however, think it returns to Kari, and becomes re- 
embodied in another bird, the eating of whose flesh brings twins to another 
Semang woman, just as if she had eaten the soul-bird with an egg. 

Whenever an East Semang (Pangan) dies, his birth-tree dies soon after. If, 

^ Vaughan-Stevens. iii. 114. - Ib:d. p. X14. 

BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

however, the tree dies first, this is a sign that the owner's death will follow. 
Hence big and strong trees are selected as birth-trees. And when one Semang 
kills another, except in war, he avoids the other's birth-tree, for fear it will fall 
on him. ^ 

The Birth-bamboo.2 

The birth-bamboo (as has already been said), is an internode, or hollow shaft 
of bamboo (minus the knots or "joints") which is covered with magical designs 
intended to serve as charms against sickness and nausea, and is carried by 
pregnant women, hidden under the girdle, in order to prevent any strange man 
from seeing it. The magical designs on it are incised by the husband, and an 
enceinte woman without a birth-bamboo is regarded in much the same way as a 
woman in Europe would be who lacked a wedding-ring. 

The patterns of the birth-bamboo represent the child in the mother's womb. 
They are described more fully in the chapter on " Decoration." 

Within this receptacle (the Ijirth-bamboo) the expectant mother keeps the 
bird, her eating which is believed to introduce the soul into her unborn child. 
The expression used by the Semang of Kelantan to describe a woman who has 
hope of offspring is " machi kawau," i.e. "she has eaten the bird."^ The flesh 
of the bird in question, however, is not eaten all at once, but piecemeal, being 
kept in the birth-bamboo and replaced when eaten by one or two bones, until 
the child is born, when they are thrown away. 

" Til-til-tapa," the bird which brings male souls, is the smaller Argus-pheasant ; 
that which brings female souls is called "chim-iui," [which probably stands for 
" chim yui," or the "bird that brings" (the soul)]. Twins arise from eating the 
soul-bird with an egg. In such a case there is only one birth-tree.* 

The severance of the cord may be effected either by one of the women or by 
the child's father. It is performed upon a block of soft "jelotong" (" juletong'") 
wood called " potong pusat."^ 

No implement of iron may be used for the purpose, a bamboo knife called 
"sembilu'"" being the instrument generally used, though knives called " tapa " 
("tappar")^ are also manufactured (for this purpose exclusively) from the leaf- 
stem of the bertam-palm. In former times a white (spiral) shell was employed. 

The East Semang (" Pangan "), like the Sakai, sling 
their children from the bough of a tree, when they 
are working close by, but not when they are working 
at any great distance.^ 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. ii6, 117. place Vaughan-Stevens described these 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 115, 116. knives as being made from the stem of 

Cp. Griinwedel in V. B. G. A. xxiv. the bertam-palm, in another (as here) 

466, 467. from the Blatt-haut or leaf - stem - 

3 Literally, "cat bird." (midrib of the leaf). The latter is of 

'' Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 116. course correct, the bertam being, as 

'■' This is a Malay expression signify- Bartels rightly remarks, a stemless 

ing " cut navel " {i.e. cut navel-string), palm. He adds that the Semang call 

which of course is a name describ- this palm "chin-beg," that Vaughan- 

ing the action, not the implement. Stevens had sent five specimens of the 

" According to Vaughan - Stevens "tappar" {v. Fig. 6), and that they are 

" sumilow " {sic) which is merely the narrow slivers sharpened at the point 

Malay "scmbilu," a "sliver" or like a pen-knife, and measuring from 

"splinter," mis-spelt and slightly 16.2 cm. to 19 cm. They are all of 

modifie<l in course of borrowing. Semang origin. Z.f.E. xxviii. 190. 

' Bartels here remarks that in one ** Ibid. p. 201. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 

Tembeh.i 

The Tembeh (Temia or Tunimiyoi) in the intervals between the times for 
feeding them leave their children by themselves on the floor of their airy 
dwellings. 

Very often, however, tliey depcjsil them in a hammock consisting of a stretched- 
out " sarong " (Malay = cloth skirt, or wrapper) and sling them up under a screen 
of leaves, which can be completely constructed in about twenty minutes. This 
is partly done to set the mother free for cooking and preparing meals, but more 
so because such a position makes it pleasanter and more comfortable for the 
child, who is besides much better protected from the attacks of land-leeches, 
ants, centipedes, and scorpions. It is therefore prompted by care for the child, 
and is not due to any carelessness or neglect. At night the child's swinging 
cradle is never (even among the Orang Taut) suspended from a tree, for fear of 
leopards. 

According to Vaughan-Stevens (iii. 102) the average number of children bor 
to a Tembeh cannot be put higher than two per man. 

II. — Sakal 

A Sakai (Blandas) sage - fe^nme is, as might be 
anticipated, more reluctant to give information about 
her art than even the magician, although the latter is 
far more secretive than the ordinary tribesman, the 
getting of information from whom is in itself a suffi- 
ciently hard task. The following account is from 
Vaughan-Stevens : ^ — 

The sage-femvie's house is easily recognisable, since it is invariably built on a 
level with the ground, whereas all the other houses of the tribe are raised from 4 
ft. to 6 ft. (1.2 m. to 1.8 m.) above the soil.^ If she has a husband still living 
(which very seldom happens), she has two huts, one of the ordinary type in which 
she and her husband live together, and the other which serves as her medicine- 
hut and which is invariably built upon the ground. No man may on any pretence 
enter her medicine-hut or even approach it too closely, and even in passing it he 
must do so at a little distance. Women, however, may enter it whenever they 
happen to be invited, but children again are forbidden to do so, for fear of their 
doing some mischief.* 

Nevertheless these huts are not intended solely for the sage-femme, since they 
also serve as a special retreat for women at child-birth, and the latter are allowed 
to remain there for fourteen days after delivery. In the days when the Sakai 
were more numerous, these medicine-huts were much larger. 

^ Z.f.E. xxviii. 201. in order to distinguish it from other 

- Ibid. p. 164-197. houses and so protect it from trespass. 

2 Ibid. Y). 165. Various reasons were Vaughan-Stevens further remarks that 

given to Vaughan-Stevens for this, e.g. the door (in this class of hut alone) 

(I) that the sage-femme was old and was lower than the head of a grown- 

weak; (2) that when the hut was built on up person, and that the walls and roof 

the ground, the demons ("hantu") could were contracted in size and thick, to 

not insinuate themselves under the floor. prevent men from seeing into it. 
More probably, however, it was so built * Z. f. E. xxviii. 165. 

BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

The profession of the sage-femnie was to some extent honoured by her being 
freed from taking any share in the work of the tribe, although she nevertheless 
obtained her full share of the produce. One of her duties consisted in taking care 
of children of the tribe in the absence of their mothers, for although none of the 
children might formerly venture to enter, their mothers would bring them into 
these huts whenever they had jungle-work before them and had a burden to 
carry upon their homeward journey. 

If the settlement did not possess a hut of this kind, the children were often 
slung up above the ground to keep them out of mischief. ^ 

The sage-femme was a person of little importance as compared with the 
magician, except when performing her official duties. Nevertheless, she shared 
with the magician the privilege of being allowed to put on the white points in 
the face-painting, it being held that any unprivileged person who did so Avould be 
killed by lightning. 

Again, the midwives of the Sakai, Besisi, and Kenaboi tribes further had an 
identical face-painting which they were privileged to wear whilst discharging 
their functions, the pattern differing from the usual one which they wore in their 
private capacity. ^ 

Up to the commencement of confinement, the Sakai women make no change 
in the routine of their daily life. An enceinte woman is treated as being in a 
respectable and enviable condition ; she mingles openly with the men, even when 
in a state of advanced gestation, and apparently lacks any sort of perception of 
the propriety of retirement, though at the same time this publicity does not imply- 
any immodesty on her part, or the least intention of making her condition 
known to the bystanders.^ 

When she has gone some months a Sakai woman girds herself with a band which 
is called "anu," and which is carried round the waist and fastened at the back.'' ^ 

Among the Sakai women miscarriage in the third or fourth month was fairly 
general. Whenever this happened the remains were simply buried without 
ceremony. 5 

When a Sakai woman feels the first pang ("t'ran"), she lies down, and does 
not get up again until her child is delivered.*^ 

When her time has come, the sufferer lies upon her back with a cushion or 
bundle placed under the knees, so as to raise them slightly. A female friend (or 
the husband, when no other assistance is obtainable) squats down close beside 
her on the right. Another woman squats down at the sufferer's feet to receive 
the child, the latter resting her heels upon the floor and pressing them against 
the knees of this second assistant.'' 

There is no professional* sage-fe?ntfie.^ 

At the instant the cord is severed the child is given its name. The child is 
then washed with " merian " water, wrapped in a cloth, and handed back to the 
mother, i** 

1 Z.f.E. xxviii. 1 66. ^ Bartels observes, that from the 

^ Ibid. xxvi. 1 54 scqq. For further description it is clear that the second of 

information regarding the face-painting the two assistants does not squat but 

'<f the midwife and her charges, see must kneel upon the ground. 

below, p. 48 (under '• Body-painting "). * Bartels points out that this con- 

3 Z.f.E. xxviii. 184. tradicts what we have already been 

* Ibid. p. 185. told, viz., that 'Vaughan - Stevens 

* Ibid, p. 186. obtained a good deal of his informa- 

* " Delivery " is called, according to tion from professional sage-femines, and 
Vaughan-Stevens, "anak kasih k'luar. " that they possessed a special kind of 
This, however, is merely bad (ver- hut. 

nacular) Malay, meaning to "bring " Z.f.E. xxviii. 188. 

a child forth " {Z.f E. xxviii. 188). '" Ibid. p. 192. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 

The sage-feinnie possesses a special receptacle called "chit-nat," which 
serves at one and the same time for the purification of the child and its 
mother. 

This "chit-nat" is a segment of Ijamboo, which has had a piece amounting 
to about half its circumference cut away both at top and bottom. The remaining 
halves have in each case been left, forming projecting spouts, which are rounded 
off at their free ends, and have their straight edges "toothed" or indented. 
One edge of each of these projections has six, and the other seven such in- 
dentations. The body of the tube is so chosen that the two dividing cuts are 
made next to {i.e. above and below) two adjacent nodes, one of which serves as 
the bottom of the tube, whilst the other (at the top) has been excised. The 
tube has a circumference of 22 cm., and a length of 56.5 cm. excluding, and a 
length of 76 cm. including, the two projections. These latter are decorated with 
two rows of zigzag lines, whilst two double longitudinal stripes run from end to 
end of the body of the tube. One pair of these double stripes is distinguished 
by horizontal cross-lines ; the other pair is connected by a zigzag line. Be- 
tween the adjacent sides of two pairs of stripes further zigzag lines are intro- 
duced. The outlines are distinguished by black and white dots.^ 

A special kind of bamboo receptacle, which is equally decorated, is employed 
for filling the "chit-nat" with water (Fig. 11). 

[Bartels remarks : " This bamboo is only 29 cm. in length by 13. 3 cm. in 
circumference. At the top it is cut horizontally through the node ('between 
two adjacent internodes '), at the bottom just below the next adjacent node, so 
that the node forms the bottom of the receptacle. For half its circumference at 
the top it is cleanly cut, for the other half it is cut in sharp scallops. The 
upper portion (of the tube) is plain, the lower covered all round with black 
and white dots as big as peas. Vaughan-Stevens gives a description of the 
pattern which he says he found on this 'chit-nat,' but which, in fact, is not 
to be found on it. He must have confused it with something else. His 
description, however, runs as follows: 'The figures on this " chit-nat " are the 
"riong" and "betong"(?) rattans of the Tabong-story. Commencing at the 
open end, the triangular figures are Tuhan's finger-prints. The flat {/iegcndeii) 
crosses with the line bisecting them are the thorns of the " rotan bStong" 
("butong"). This figure represents the "rotan belong," the spirals which run 
along it representing the thorns, and the cross -lines combine the idea of a 
quantity with that of a plant thus crossing itself Above this in the middle is a 
row of "betong" thorns, and below that the "rotan riong." The latter's 
prickles are naturally much shorter. Spirals of white and black (or red) dots 
were scattered throughout the entire pattern, according to custom, but no 
explanation was obtainable.' "] 

A very peculiar implement is employed by the Sakai (Sen-oi) for severing 
the umbilical cord. Three specimens in the Berlin Museum resemble what is 
called a "fox-tailed" saw, only that they are much smaller, their length being 
8.4 cm., 9.3 cm., and 9.2 cm. respectively. They are cut out of wood, and 
have an elegant handle, which diminishes down to a small " talon "-like pro- 
jection, united to a wooden blade, which is furnished on one side with rough 
saw-like teeth from 0.6 to 0.7 cm. deep. One of these knives has a double row 
of saw teeth. This implement is called "semika" ("smee-kar "), and is also 
used for decorating the "chit-n-At," as described above. ^ 

The second of the two assistants now lays the patient upon a clean mat and 
then goes out. Her companion meanwhile takes the afterbirth, and (should the 
child prove to be a boy) ties it up in a cloth and suspends it upon a tree, where 
it is left. If, however, the child happens to be a girl, the afterbirth is buried 
somewhere without further ceremony in the neighbourhood of the house. The 

1 Z.f. E. xxviii. 193. 2 ji)ij^ p_ igj_ 

BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

reason given for this difference of treatment is that the women are obliged to 
remain in the house, whereas the men lead an open-air life, and do not remain 
in one place like the women. ^ 

In order to accelerate her recovery the patient has for ten successive days to 
take a warm infusion called " merian sejok." In some cases a bandage of 
beaten tree-bark is applied in the same manner as the ordinary bark loin-cloth. 
This, however, is not always the case.'^ 

For ten days she is forbidden either to drink, or wash in, cold water. For 
her purification she uses another kind of " chit-nat," though this too has to be 
filled from the bamboo receptacle described above. ^ 

[Bartels adds, that this "chit-nat" is furnished, like the preceding one, with 
projections at each extremity which extend more than halfway round the 
circumference of the bamboo. The free edges are carved into elegant double 
curves. The bamboo is cut through, as before, in close proximity to the nodes, 
though in this case the receptacle is made from a piece of three internodes 
instead of one. The upper node and the three central ones are excised right 
up to the circumference of the bamboo, the vessel thus forming a simple tube 
as before. The fourth node is retained and serves as the bottom of the vessel. 
It contains a small hole which is, however, probably unintentional. Its length, 
with the projections, amounts to 177 cm., without them to 153 cm., and its 
circumference is 193 cm. The projections in this case are plain, but from end 
to end of the body of the vessel run two longitudinal stripes, one of which is 
barred with horizontal lines, the other is crossed by zigzags. Both bars and 
zigzags each contain four parallel and longitudinal rows of dots, in the 
outer rows the dots being white, whereas in the two inner rows they are 
black.] 4 

The extremity of the umbilical cord falls from the newly-born infant after a 
few days, and is then simply thrown away. 

For a whole lunar month, however, the child is washed every morning with 
water out of a special "chit-nat" (Fig. 14), which is filled from the bamboo 
receptacle already mentioned. 

[Bartels adds: "This particular 'chit-nat' differs from the rest in being 
furnished at the lower end with two long prongs. Each of these prongs 
measures 11.4 cm. in length by only 1.7 cm. in breadth, whilst the remainder 
of the vessel measures but 23 cm. in length, with a circumference of 13.8. This 
' chit-nat ' is cut exactly like those which are formed from a single internode, 
except that it has no projection at the top, and in place of the projection at the 
bottom has the two aforesaid prongs. These latter are plain, but the remainder 
of the vessel is covered with vertical rows of black and pale red dots about as 
big as the tips of the fingers."] 

For the mother's purification a second " chit-nat " is filled (with water) from the 
bamboo filler, and the sufferer washed with a warm infusion of "merian."^ 

[I5artels adds: "This 'chit-nat' is the longest of them all. Like the 
former, it is cleanly cut round half of its circumference only (at top and 
bottom), and hence it possesses similar projections to those already described. 
These two projections do not exactly correspond to the same two halves of the 
circumference respectively, and hence their long axes do not meet, but run 
parallel to each other. With these projections the receptacle is 185.5 '^™- ^'^ 
length, without them 157.5 cm., its circumference being 23.5 cm. The free 
edges of the j^rojections are carefully carved and adorned with delicate indenta- 
tions. In other respects, except that of ornamentation, it exactly resembles the 
receptacle already descriljed. As regards its ornamentation, the projections are 

' Z. f. E. xxviii. 195. the Malays. — Ridley. 

- [bid. p. 196. " MC-rian " is Dis- ^ Z.f. E. xxviii. 196. 

sochiita hracteata, and is also used by ■* Ibid. p. 197. " Ibid. p. 194. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 

decorated with cross -lines, which have oblique lines running between them, 
whilst a longitudinal stripe, interrupted only by the cross-lines, runs from end to 
end of the body of the receptacle on either side. As in other cases, the 
outlines are distinguished by black and white dots."] 

Should the mother die during confinement, and the child be either still-born 
or die immediately afterwards, they are both wrapped in one shroud and laid in 
one grave together, the child being placed on the mother's breast, with its face 
downwards. ' 

For the five or six days following her confinement the patient is only per- 
mitted to eat Caladim/is or yams,^ rice, and bananas. Chillies and hot highly- 
spiced broth are very strictly forbidden. 

The mother, after delivery, is usually able to move freely about the house 
again within five or six hours. After three days she is fit to go out again as usual." 

The Sakai (Blandas) mothers often pluck out the wing and tail-feathers of 
young hornbills which the men have procured, and give their infants the quill- 
ends to suck. This not only entertains and quiets the children, but in some 
undefined way is believed to bring them good luck.'* 

For travelling short distances the children are carried astride the mother's 
hip.^ The Sakai sling up their small children on the hut-wall (in a basket or 
hammock made of bast ^) for two or three hours together, so long as there is no 
fear of tigers.^ 

For sleeping the mother lays her infant across her breast, taking care, how- 
ever, to make the position as comfortable as possible for the child.* 

Of the fruitfulness of Sakai women, Vaughan-Stevens remarks that it appeared 
to be a general rule that out of about six children one would be still-born, and 
two of the remainder would die within the first three years. 

Those women who have only one or two children, especially if one of the 
latter is born after a long interval, are, however, as a rule, successful with them. 

The largest number of children (in one family), to take a single example, was 
sixteen, out of which twelve died before they reached maturity, and of these 
seven died before they were a year old. Five of them were boys and eleven girls. 

Child-bearing generally continues up to the age of about forty-two years, 

' Z. f. E. xxviii. 196. [It is not Sakai ceremony described by Vaughan- 

quite clear whether this refers to the Stevens as following birth is the 

Sakai or to some other tribe.] fumigation of the child by swinging it 

2 Vaughan-Stevens here has " kadi," through the smoke of a large fire. See 

a mistake for " k'ladi," a kind of Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 107. 

yam. ^ Z.f. E. xxviii. 200. 

■^ Z. f. E. xxviii. 197. ^ For a description of a Sakai ham- 

Bartels here adds that, as Vaughan- mock - cradle, see Vaughan - Stevens 
Stevenshas already told us that the Sakai in Z. f. E. xxix. 190. Vaughan- 
wonien remain out of sight for fourteen Stevens attaches, however, a quite 
days after delivery, he may be speak- exaggerated importance to the fact 
ing here of some former custom. It that the pole from which the cradle 
may, however, I think, be safely said was slung was not made fast, but 
that there rarely is a fourteen days' oscillated to and fro on the top of the 
limit amongst any of these savage partition walls. This arrangement is 
tribes. The husband's difficulties are, found in many parts of the Peninsula, 
in his wife's absence, so much in- and, so far from being at all extra- 
creased, that he would certainly not ordinary, is simply due to the exercise 
permit so unnecessarily protracted a of common sense, there being no reason 
seclusion, even if the woman herself whatever why the pole should be made 
desired it, which she would certainly fast, 
not do. ^ Z.f. E. xxviii. 201. 
Z.f. E. xxviii. 201. Another * Ibid. p. 202. 

BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

though there was one case in which a woman gave birth to a child at fifty. * 
Elsewhere we are informed that the average number of children in a Sakai family 
is four.'^ 

Name-giving. 

In writing of the " tuang-tuang " ("tuntong") ceremony as performed by the 
Sakai, Vaughan-Stevens says : "The children received their names from their 
parents in accordance with dreams, in which there appeared, for instance, either the 
floor of a hut, the track of a tiger in the jungle, a tree, insect, river, or the like."' 

According to the same authority, the name of each individual is represented 
by the pattern of the headband which he (or she) wears. His account, however, 
is neither altogether clear nor altogether consistent. He says: "The patterns 
painted on the headband (worn by the Sakai) represent the name of the indi- 
vidual. They are worn by men and women alike, but not by those who are 
unmarried, and who are not yet therefore entered into the tribe." ^ 

Name-burning. 

The magician exercised great power over the tribe through the fact that he 
could deprive a recalcitrant member of the tribe of his (or her) "name." In 
such a case the magician went in full state to the house of the offender, and there 
solemnly burned the headband of the person concerned, who by this means was 
completely excluded from the clan. Should, however, the rehabilitation of the 
offender be desired, the medicine-man, after first painting a new headband with 
the same pattern as before, went (accompanied by all his colleagues then living 
in the settlement) into the house of the penitent, who afterwards gave a feast. 

Formerly there were many figures for the patterns, which followed, however, 
no fixed rule. The objects represented were those offered by the jungle, but the 
exact forms were very much left to fancy, and the colour of the patterns was 
fugitive. The bands thus painted were only worn for one particular festive occa- 
sion, and were then thrown away.* 

In speaking of some fifteen Sakai women, whom 
he saw at Kampong Langkor on S. Kerbu, De la 
Croix says that ahnost all of them carried a child 
astride of their hips.^ 

' Z.f. E. xxviii. 202. because they very often accompany the 

- Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 102. men on the chase in order to bring 

3 Z.f.E. xxvi. 161, 162, where we home the booty or to seek roots on the 

read: "As the painted headbands way; and whenever they stay at home 

might only be worn on special occa- they are recognised by the demons, 

sions, the black lines (or ' demon '- who have previously seen them in 

lines) were not retained on the head- their husbands' company, as protected 

bands of the lay members of the com- by the patterns of the latter" (!). 

munity (of either sex), and only the red And yet again, on p. 162, we are 

pattern with black dots was alloTved." told that the women wore headbands 

Ijut, on the other hand, cp. p. 163, though only on occasion. 

where we are told that ^^ the women ^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 163. 

wear no figures on their headbands, ^ De la Croix, p. 336. 

SAVAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — Of the birth-customs of the Blandas no 
account is yet to hand. I have, however, at different 
times, when visiting their encampments, taken down 
some of the charms employed against Birth-demons, 
of which the following are specimens : — 

Charm against the Langsuir. 

Langhui, Langhua ! 

Your beak is stumpy, 

Your feathers are cloth of silk. 

Your eyes are " crab's-eye " beans, 

Your heart a young areca-nut, 

Your blood thread in water, 

Your veins the thread for binding on cock's-spurs, 

Your bones twigs of the giant bamboo, 

Your tail a fan from China. ^ 

Descend, O Venom,- ascend Neutraliser, 

Neutralise the Venom in the bones, neutralise it in the veins, 

Neutralise it in the joints, 

Neutralise it within the house, neutralise it within the jungle. 

Descend, O Venom, ascend Neutraliser, 

And lock up this Langsuir. 

Descend, O Venom, ascend Neutraliser. 

Whilst repeating this charm rub the sufferer 
("sapu-kan orang sakit itu ") with the leaves or the 
root (" isi ") of the " kelmoyang." ^ 

The Langhui is a birth-demon corresponding to 
the Malay Langsuir (there probably being a close 
philological connexion, if not identity, between the 
two names). The Malay Langsuir is believed to be 
a demon which has sprung from the ghost of a woman 
who has died in child-birth. The description appears 
to fit some kind of night-hawk or owl. 

Another charm which I obtained from the Blandas 
was indended to subdue not only the Langsuir, but 

1 The idea is that a spirit may be ^ May be either Chaincecladoz , 
controlled if the elements of its (sup- Homalomena, or Alpinia conckigera, 
posed) origin are known. Griff. {Sdtamineiz) ; probably the 

2 I.e. pain. latter=:Mal. " lengkuas ranting." 

14 BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

the Bajang, a familiar spirit well known to the Malays 
and Blandas alike. 

Charm against the Bajang. 

OAI, O Bajang Langsuir, 

Thou sprangest from a woman that died in childbirth ; 

O Bajang Langsuir, 

Thou betel-quid of Baginda Ali. 

The reference to Baginda Ali is due to the super- 
ficial Mohammedan influences, which have reached 
the Blandas through the medium of the Malays. 

Yet another charm given me by the Blandas was 
intended for exorcising the Polong, a familiar demon 
which is classed with the Bajang and Pelesit of 
the Malays. 

Charm against the Polong. 

As the chisel is broken, as the adze-helve is broken, 

Broken in chiselling this fallen tree-trunk, 

Even so break the bones of your jaws, the strings of your tongue, 

And [only] when I retire, may ye go forward. 

Ye who came from the sea, return to the sea. 

Ye who came from the crags, return to the crags. 

Ye who came from the soil, return to the soil. 

Thence is it that ye sprang, O Familiar Demons. 

The Pontianak is a birth - demon of a different 
kind, and this charm too I picked up from the 
Blandas. 

Charm against the Pontianak. 

O Pontianak, still-born one. 

Die and be crushed 'neath the banked-up roadway ! 

[Here are] bamboos, ^ both long and short, 

For cooking the Pontianak, Jin, and Langsuir. 

Remain, Pontianak, among the Tree-shoots ! 

Remain, O Jin, among the Epiphytes ! 

And lodge not here, O Langsuir ! 

Lodge not here, O Jin ! 

Lodge not here, O Pontianak ! 

' A comparison with Malay charms, a child who has died at or before birth, 

from which this is evidently borrowed, The two bamboo-vessels, the long and 

shows that "buloh"( = bamboo) is prob- the short, are naturally required, the 

ably the correct reading. The Lang- long one for cooking the liver of the 

suir is, as has been said, the ghost of mother, the shorter for that of the 

a mother who has died in childbirth ; child, the "Jin" being probably inter- 

the Pontianak or Matianak, that of polated. Cp. Malay Magic, p. 320. 

CHAP. I SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 15 

Lodge not here, O Deep-forest Demon ! 

Lodge not here, O Jungle Demon ! 

O Jungle Demon, return to thy jungle, 

O Deep-forest Demon, return to thy Forest-depths. ^ 

The last of these charms collected from the 
Blandas was employed for exorcising the " Caul- 
demon," when the caul was being removed. 

Charm against the Caul-demon. ^ 

Shoots of Salak-palm, shoots of Ranggam-palm ; 

Caul like a bridle. Caul like a casting-net ; 

Caul that art bound, now be thou loosened ; 

Caul that art tied up, be thou unloosened ; 

Caul that art noosed, be thou unloosened ; 

Caul that art anchored, be thou unloosened ; 

Caul-fiend that lodgest here, be thou unloosened ; 

O fiends and devils, be ye unloosened ; 

O fiends from the Forest-depths, be ye unloosened ; 

O fiends from the Per'pat Rock, be ye unloosened ; 

O fiends from the Banyan Hill, be ye unloosened ; 

O fiends from the Kempas-tree, be ye unloosened ; 

O Caul-spirit, Demon that cam'st from the ocean. 

From Levin and Lightning, from drizzling and mizzling Rain, 

Return to Malim Putih, to Malim Sidi,-^ 

'Tis not by me that this caul is unloosened, 

But by Malim Putih, by Malim Sidi. 

Besisi. — Among the Besisi (of the Kuala Langat 
District) the traditional hire of the sage-femme was 
two dollars in money, " or a white jacket." If no 
person of professional experience was obtainable, her 
place would be usually taken by the invalid's mother 
or even her husband. The mother's mosquito-curtain 
was decorated all round with the leaf-hangings used 
on all ceremonial occasions, and when the child was 
born the mother underwent a ceremonial bathing, and 
would then be brought out from time to time and 
seated with her back to the fire and kept extravagantly 
warm — " roasted," as it is called, a practice which is 
found among the Malays. An infusion was also made 

1 Cp. i. 153. 2 The Caul-demon was believed to lick up the sufferer's blood. 

^ Both known to the Malays in connexion with To' Batara (or "Petala") 
Guru, the Malay name of Shiva (see Malay Magic, p. 85). 

i6 BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

from the roots of a creeper called " akar merian," ^ 
and was administered to her as a potion, and this 
course was continued for about five or ten days, after 
which the woman would resume her ordinary avoca- 
tions. 

Mantra. — Upon the birth-customs of the Mantra 
Borie remarks that their children are delivered and 
cared for in the usual manner ; a few days after birth 
the head of the child is shaved ; it is not the object 
of any superstition until it is old enough to be able to 
distinguish its father and mother. If the child is ill 
they rub it with lime and turmeric. As to the mother, 
she remains in the house several days after her con- 
finement. When she is strong enough to resume the 
ordinary occupations of the household, she must first 
purify herself by bathing, and by doing so she acquires 
the right to re-appear." 

In addition we are told by Logan that when a 
Mantra mother was in labour, a cup of water was 
charmed and administered to her. The juice of 
certain leaves ("pamanto" and "pamadam") was given 
to the child, while a charm was repeated.^ A name 
was given to the child at the moment the umbilical cord 
was cut, and this was retained until marriage, when a 
second name ("gelar") was bestowed, which was 
ever afterwards used in lieu of the first. These 
customs, however, were not infiexible. The birth- 
name was sometimes superseded (as being unlucky) 
before marriage, when misfortunes happened to the 
child, and the second name of the parents frequently 
gave place to the name of the eldest child with the 

^ Dissochfe/a hracieata. which is in the Mantra dialect, is 

2 Borie (tr. Bourien), pp. 80, probably not quite accurate, and the 

8 1. sense is therefore uncertain, though a 

^ Logan's version of this charm, good deal can be made out. 

SA VA GE MALA YS OF MALA CCA 1 7 

prefix Pa' (Father) or Ma' (Mother). The latter 
was considered a pecuHarly pleasing mode of address, 
parental feeling being no doubt found, in many cases, 
to be stronger than personal vanity. A similar 
custom prevailed amongst the Malays of Naning, 
Rembau, and the states of the interior, and had been 
probably imported from Sumatra, from whence this 
portion of the Peninsula was directly colonised. In 
this connexion Logan observes that the importance of 
proper names in carrying us back to remote times 
in a people's history, is well known to the antiquary 
in Europe. Amongst those aboriginal tribes of the 
Peninsula whose native language has nearly dis- 
appeared before the modern Malay, the inquirer often 
finds in the names of places and men the principal 
monuments of antiquity. It is probable that these 
names are really words of a language once spoken, 
although the significance of most of them has been 
lost.^ The examples of names which he collected 
(and which included the names of all the relatives and 
acquaintances of his informant) Logan regarded as 
an additional proof of the fact that neither Hinduism 
nor Islamism has impressed these tribes, save in some 
cases in a slight and superficial manner. No people 
ever zealously embraced these religions, without the 
names of the gods of the former and the prophet and 
apostles of the latter being largely appropriated by them. 
Lists of Malayan names exhibit many Mohammedan 
and a few Hindu ones, but the greater number are 
pure Malayan or ante-Malayan." 

Finally we have evidence of the Malayan practice 
of " roasting " the mother in the statement that the 

1 /. /. A. vol. i. p. 323.* 2 Ibid. pp. 323,* 324.* 

VOL. II C 

i8 BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

Mantra placed the wife near the fire in order to drive 
away the evil spirits who were believed to drink 
human blood whenever they could find it.^ 

Benua-Jakun. — Of the Benua we are informed that 
the wife's mother generally acted as midwife, but 
when absent the husband himself supplied her place. 
At birth a string to which pieces of turmeric, "bunglei," 
etc., were fastened, was bound round the neck of the 
infant as a charm. During the third month of preg- 
nancy the magician or " Poyang " visited the mother, 
performed certain ceremonies, and bound a charm 
round her waist in order that all might go well with 
her and the child. On the occasion of the birth of 
the first-born child a feast was generally given by the 
tribe.^ 

By Vaughan-Stevens we are told that the magician attending at a birth 
crouches beside the reclining woman and massages her, repeating an incantation 
as he does so. ^ 

From the same authority we learn that a decoction believed to alleviate 
birth-pains was made from three roots the "white" and the "black ramuyan," 
and the " peranchu," which are boiled and administered as a potion. Vaughan- 
Stevens adds that the Benua women were, as a rule, three days in labour ; and that 
after delivery they were required to lie down for ten days, during which time they 
were attended by other married women. One child out of ten in the present genera- 
tion was said to die within three days ; and nearly half the remainder (especially the 
girls) before puberty. The supply of milk from the mother was very small indeed, 
and the child continued to suck until the mother's breasts were dry.* 

The knife used by the Benua for severing the umbilical cord was made from the 
hard exterior of a segment of bamboo. It was a sliver measuring 36. 5 cm. in length 
by I cm. in breadth. At one end the sliver was indented and truncated just above 

' J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 270, 271. This continuedat intei^vals until the accouche- 

practice is also found among the Besisi ment is over. In protracted cases, the . 

\q.v. ante, p. 15). woman is laid upon her stomach, and a 

2 J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 270, 271. Cp. fire kindled near her to excite the pains. 

Newbold, vol. ii. pp. 406-407: "No In order to facilitate the expulsion of 

assistance is rendered, except occasion- the afterbirth, she is made to stand over 

ally by the husband, if present, during the fire. Seven days afterwards, the 

the act of parturition ; not even by one mother performs ablutions, and returns 

of the sex ; nor is any preparation made to her conjugal duties." " Puar " is 

to alleviate the pangs. . . . An extract the name of many wild gingers (Scita- 

only, procured from the root and leaves miitcu-) : see p. 13, ;/. 3, ante. For "sa- 

of a shrub called, by the Jakun, luseh" read "salusoh," cp. p. 25, //y^a. 

'saluseh,' or ' puwar,' is given towards ^ Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 143. 

the end of the period of gestation, and * V. B. G. A. xxiv. 468. 

CHAP. I SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 19 

an internode ; at the other end it was cut through at right angles to its axis and 
sharpened at the edge. Vaughan-Stevens adds that the operation was performed 
by a woman of the tribe without any special ceremony.' 

Name-giving. 

Names are sometimes given at birth, but in such 
cases are changed at the age of puberty.^ 

Treatment of Children. 

Benua mothers carry their children in a sling of 
bark-cloth, which is passed over the child's back, over 
one of the mother's shoulders, and under the other, 
the ends being knotted.^ 

When the child is too small to hold on by embracing 
the mother's neck with its arms, it is carried behind 
her back, with its legs clasping her body. It is never 
carried on the hip, except in cases where the practice 
may have been learnt from the Malays.* 

The food (of the Benua children) was eked out with 
hog's grease from about the third or fourth day of 
their existence. This might be owing to the habit of 
not weaning children till they were two, three, or even 
sometimes four years of age. It was no uncommon 
spectacle to see an infant of a few weeks and a fat 
nursling of two years at the breast together. Indulged 
as the children were during their infancy, they had no 
sooner arrived at an age when their labour was of the 
least use, than they were made to assist their parents 

' Z.f.E. xxviii. 190. In the same "^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 271. 

context a wooden knife, assigned ^ Z.f. E. xxviii. 201. 

to the " Orang Utan," and used for the * Ibid. But this begs the question, 

same purpose, is described. It had the If the Benua -Jakun, as there seems 

general shape of a common kitchen every reason to believe, are mainly of 

knife, and measured 26.5 cm. in length, Malayan origin, there seems no reason 

its blade was 1.6 cm. in breadth, and why the custom should not be in- 

the back of the blade was 3 cm. thick. digenous among them. 

20 BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

in different employments. The effect of this train- 
ing was that the young Benua men and women were 
highly robust and active compared with the Malays, 
and capable of enduring with cheerfulness an amount 
of labour from which the latter would shrink/ 

Jakun. — We now come to the Jakun, properly so- 
called, of whose birth-customs, Captain Begbie, an 
old writer on the Peninsula, observed that when a 
woman was in labour, the Jakun took a round piece 
of wood, which they fastened at both ends in a shed. 
The woman was laid upon this, face downwards and 
pressing upon the abdomen, until the child was born. 
Meanwhile the husband kindled a fire before her, 
which was supposed to be of essential service, and 
performed the office of midwife ; and after the child 
was born, the woman was put close to the fire. To 
this account the same writer added that the Jakun 
named their children simply from the tree under which 
they happened to be brought forth." 

On the other hand, Favre has recorded that no 
assistance was ordinarily given to lying-in Jakun 
women ; their physicians or Pawangs were not per- 
mitted to appear in such circumstances, and midwives 
were not known amongst them. It was reported that 
in several tribes, the children, as soon as born, were 
carried to the nearest rivulet, washed and brought 
back to the house, where a fire was kindled, upon 
which incense or benzoin was thrown, when the child 
was passed over it several times. Favre adds that 
we know from history that the practice of passing 
children over fire was in all times much practised 
among heathen nations ; and that it is still practised 
in China and other places. A few days after the birth 

• J. I. A. vol. i. p. 267. - Begbie, pp. 13, 14. 

CHAP. 1 SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 2i 

of the child, the father gave him a name, which was 
usually taken from the name of some tree, fruit, or 
colour.^ 

Food-taboos. 

A considerable number of food-taboos are found 
among the Jakun ; e.g. among the tribes dwelling on 
the Madek River in Johor, of whom D, F. A. Hervey 
has related a curious superstition that prevailed among 
them, which, so long as the children were unable to 
walk, prevented their parents from using as food 
certain fish and animals, but as soon as the little ones 
had acquired the use of their legs, this restriction was 
removed, and the parents were once more able to 
indulge in what had so long been forbidden (" pan- 
tang "). Should this superstition fail to be complied 
with, and should any parent eat of any of the forbidden 
creatures during this period of restriction, the children 
were supposed to be liable to an illness called "busong," 
which arises, according to the Malays, from " swollen 
stomach " (" prut kembong ")." The following was the 
list offish and animals which were forbidden under the 
above circumstances : — 

Fish. — The " nom," the " begahak," the " seng- 
arat," the " toman," and the " sebarau." 

Animals. — Deer of all kinds, both the sambhur 
(" rusa ") and roe-deer (" kijang ") ; chevrotins, e.g. 
the mouse-deer ("p'landok"), and the " napoh " ; 
the wild pig (the " jokot " and the " babi ") ; fowls and 
eggs ; the lace lizard ("biawak"), the large water-lizard 
('* ggriang ") ; the land-tortoise (" kura-kura "), and a 
variety of the preceding called "baning," which is larger 

' J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 264. dropsical inflammation of the stomach 

' Hervey describes this as a species (ascites), the symptoms being accurately 
of diarrhoea. It is, however, rather a described by the Malay phrase. 

22 BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

and has a flatter shell ; the " biuku," resembling the 
" penyu tuntong " {^sic, ? the freshwater turtle), a small 
tortoise called " jahuk," etc.^ 

The rest of this account of Jakun birth-customs is 
taken mainly from the German publications embody- 
ing the work of Vaughan-Stevens. 

BlRTH-CUSTOMS.2 

Enceinte Jakun women, unlike the Sakai, withdraw when strangers (even if 
members of their own race) are present, and hence, though not perhaps in- 
tentionally, they attract much more attention than the Sakai women, who do not 
trouble themselves about their condition.^ 

A Jakun husband, if he can avoid it, never goes out of the sight of his wife, 
when she is in this condition. This circumstance often causes difficulties when 
men are wanted either as bearers or guides. Through the presence of the man the 
well-being of the child in the mother's body is believed to be somehow furthered. 

A Jakun woman during pregnancy occasionally carries with her a shell-shaped 
piece of wood to protect her unborn child.'* 

Another Jakun custom was that a bundle of ijok (" ejoo ") fibres were hung 
up in a public place, in order to warn passers-by that there was a woman in 
travail in close proximity. These ijok fibres consist of the black fibrous covering 
of the base of the leaf-stalk of the sugar-palm {Arenga). Bundles of these fibres, 
as big as a child's head, were always kept by the women in readiness for such a 
purpose. Any man who saw this sign would at once turn back again. ° 

The treatment of the umbilical cord consisted in measuring it off from the 
child's navel to its knee, and there tying it fast with a string (preparatory to 
severing it).'' 

1 J. R. A. S., S. B., No. 8, p. Bartels does not seem to have quite 
I20. caught the point of Vaughan-Stevens's 

2 Z. f. E. xxviii. 185-198. remarks here. The meaning of the 
^ Vaughan - Stevens adds that the passage (as personal investigations have 

Jakun women during pregnancy are in shown) is that the exact point at which 
no way restricted as to diet. This the cord ought to be severed is deter- 
statement, however, is certainly in- mined by measuring off it a length 
correct, the fact that their diet is re- equal to the child's thigh-bone (hip to 
stricted having been observed by D. F. knee) — this standard of measurement 
A. Hervey and others. giving the point required. I may add 
Vaughan - Stevens seems to have that it is not at all clear from the con- 
considered this "shell-shaped" piece of text of what tribe Vaughan-Stevens is 
wood as something unusual, but there here speaking. The remark has been 
can be little or no doubt that what he introduced with other matter concerning 
saw was the ordinary "waist ornament" the O. Laut, but evidently in error, 
(shaped like a fan-shell or a heart as as it contradicts the statement about the 
the case may be, made either of wood, O. Laut on page 191 (line 18). It 
coconut-shell, or silver, according to must, however, as it is identical with 
the parents' means) that is worn by the Malay custom, either refer to some 
female children up to the age of five Malayizing or Malayan tribe, probably 
or six, and which may easily have to the Jakun. I think, indeed, there 
been carried by the mother as a can be very little doubt that it refers to 
charm in anticipation. these latter, as it thus gives effect to 
'' '/..f. E. xxviii. 1 88. the otherwise pointless remark on 
" Ibid. p. 189. page 191 of the same passage. 

CHAP. I SAVAGE MALAYS OF JO HO R 23 

If the child be a boy, the umbilical cord is then tied to one of his father's 
"throwing stones," preferably to one with which his father has already killed 
an enemy. It is then dipped in sea-water and washed, and hung up to dry in 
the smoke. When dry it is carefully guarded, together with the stone, until the 
boy is grown up. At his marriage the stone is made over to him to be carefully 
kept, since such a stone never misses its mark.' 

Sex Omens.- 

In order to ascertain the probable sex of an expected child the Jakun women 
wait until they dream of a certain number, a circumstance which invariably 
occurs, since they retire to rest filled with expectation of it. 

For the (successive) number of nights thus dreamed of (commencing with the 
next night that follows that of the dream onwards), the woman sits up the whole 
night (in company with as many female friends of riper years as she likes) until 
(between sunset and sunrise) she hears the cry or note of some particular bird or 
beast. The first cry plainly heard by the entire company decides whether the 
expected infant is to be a boy or a girl. If the cry is heard on the right side of 
the company, it will be a boy, if on the left, a girl. If, on the other hand, the cry 
clearly comes from the front and not from the sides, great tribulation prevails, 
since the child will not live to grow up. Since, however, the wish is father to 
the thought, this is seldom, if ever, reported as occurring. But worst of all is 
the cry heard from behind, which indicates that the child will either be still-born 
or will die shortly after birth. In such a case an exclamation of pain from all 
present warns the husband to rise and drive away the unwelcome originator of 
the cry. When this has been done and the cry is heard again either on the right 
hand or the left, the danger is averted.^ 

Since, however, according to the older rules, the houses of the women always 
had the sea behind them, the younger people would declare positively that it was 
the sea that had made the noise in question, and that the women had made 
a mistake. Or else the husband entered his boat and rowed in the direction of 
the cry, and since it could only have been that of a bird, he hunted it back for 
some distance towards the side, so that it might be heard from the side again, 
and the expectant mother might be calmed. The husband had the power of 
averting the evil, so long as he only drove it sidewards away from the front, 
should it happen that his wife would not accept the well-meant fictions of her 
female friends, to the effect that the cry came from the required direction.* 

If, as may be taken for certain, the Jakun once really believed in these 
omens, they have certainly outgrown them in most cases at the present day. 
It is quite possible that they may still trouble some of the women, but from the 
fact that these well-meant fictions on the part of the woman's friends are admitted 
to be such, it may be inferred that the retention of the ceremony at present has little 
more than the strength of ancient custom. Moreover, its retention may perhaps 
be further favoured by the fact that on the following day there is given a small 
feast to which all the neighbours are invited. This feast is called the " Little 
Forage," whilst the richer and more complete banquet which follows the birth of 
the child is called the " Big Forage." The marriage feast again is called, inter 
alia, the "Double Forage," and the funeral repast the " Last Forage." ^ 

Before leaving this subject it is interesting to record the Jakun belief that 
phosphorescent jelly-fishes in the sea were the wandering souls of men awaiting 
the impending birth of a child in order to try and enter its body.^ 

The practice of abortion was well understood by the Jakun women. It was 
procured in order to avoid the labour which the bringing-up of the child would 
entail. It was, however, very seldom practised, for if it was discovered by the 

1 Z.f.E. xxviii. 195. 2 jiid, p. 185-187. 3 Hid, p. 185. 

4 Ibid. 5 Jifid. G Jlid, p. 187. 

24 BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part iii 

husband, he had the right of giving his wife a sound drubbing with a club, and if 
in such a case he accidentally killed her, he was not brought to justice for doing 
so. In the case of a premature delivery, a sort of council of sagc-femmes or 
elderly women might be called to try whether the woman had procured abortion. 
If she were found guilty, she was delivered over to her husband for punishment. 
He was not, however, compelled to punish her, and if he forbore, she escaped 
without a penalty.^ 

When an unmarried Jakun girl had recourse to procuring abortion, she 
entirely lost all position and status in the clan. She was despised by the other 
women, and scorned as a bride by the men ; and finally she exposed herself to 
the disgrace of being chastised by her parents. ^ 

No cranial deformation is practised by the Jakun. " The heads of the 
children are left in their natural shape and are not compressed in any way."^ 

The average number of children born to a Jakun is three.'* 

Treatment of Children.^ 

The Jakun never leave their little children alone, as the other tribes do. 
Wherever the parents go, the mother carries the child, the father helping her 
when there are several children, and she has no female relation or friend at hand 
to assist. 

The Jakun women carry their children slung at their backs in a sling made 
either of cotton stuff' or bark-cloth. The sling is passed round the lower part of 
the child's body and back and over the mother's breast, an additional strip being 
frequently passed round the mother's forehead. 

The child's legs are turned upwards towards the front, in line with the 
mother's hips. 

If the child wants to suck, it is pulled round to the breast, and not fed (as 
among the Sakai) by throwing the breast over the shoulder — except perhaps in a 
ver)' few cases when the breasts of a Jakun mother who has given birth to a 
very numerous progeny have become abnormally developed. A Jakun child 
may also be seen sucking with its head pushed forward under the mother's arm. 

The Jakun women declare that in former times they never carried their 
children on their hips as the Sakai and Malay women do. Now, however, they 
have adopted the practice, which they have borrowed, as in so many other cases, 
from the tribes in their vicinity.*' 

The Jakun seen by Vaughan-Stevens declared that they (like the O. Laut) 
had never seen twins. If twins were to be born, they would be regarded as an 
advantage, since later on there would be two children to help with the work. 
The father, however, would feel an uncertainty, as to whether some other man 
had not helped him.^ 

Vaughan-Stevens describes another almost obsolete custom of the Jakun 
women, which is still, however (he says), occasionally practised. This is that 
whenever a Jakun woman loses her first-born, if the latter happens to be a boy, 
she pulls off the wrapper of cloth which she wears by way of undergarment and 
puts on a loin-cloth of tree-bark in its place. Over this bark girdle cotton-cloth 
might be worn, but the bark-cloth must be worn immediately next the skin, and 
that until a full month had elapsed since the child's death, after which it might 
be discontinued.** 

' Z.f.E. xxviii. 1 86. mentioned, however. 

^ Ibid. ' Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 102. 

•' Ibid. xxix. 180. From tiie con- ^ Z.f.E. xxviii. 199-201. 

text this passage appears to apply to " Ibid. p. 200. 

the Jakun. The name of the race " Jbid. 

referred to in this connexion is not "^ Ibid. p. 199. 

CHAP. I MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 25 

Oran(; Laut or Sea-Jakun, 

0. Laut, S'letar.— The solitary statement that we 
possess as to the birth customs of the Orang Laut, 
S'letar is to the effect that their children were only 
welcomed to the world by the mother's joy.^ 

0. Laut, Sabimba. — Logan informs us that among 
the Sabimba the husband alone assisted at births. 
To aid parturition a decoction of " salusoh " leaves 
was administered, and blowing out of the mouth 
(" semboran ") was also practised as among the Malays. 
A fire was kindled near the mother to scare away 
evil spirits. A decoction of the leaves of the 
" mengkuas " was also given to the mother. The 
umbilical cord was cut with a knife or sliver of rattan 
(" sembilu rotan "), and powdered turmeric applied. On 
the third day the mother was bathed in water mixed 
with a decoction of " kamaso " leaves, followed by an 
application of the juice of limes. She then resumed 
her wanderings in the jungle in search of food, her 
child being bound closely under her arm with its mouth 
to the breast. It did not receive a name till it was a 
few months old. The children of the Sabimba were 
never beaten.' 

0. Laut, Muka Kuning". — Of the Muka Kunings we 
are told that a midwife ("bidan") assisted at births, and 
received four thousand rattans on the first occasion of 
the kind in the family, three thousand on the second, 
two thousand on the third, and a thousand for any 
subsequent birth. The only medicine employed was 
a decoction of the bark of " kayu pangar," which was 
administered to the mother, and a decoction of the 
root which was given to the child.^ 

1 /. /. A. vol. i. p. 344*. 2 jfjid, p. 298. 3 ji,ia_ p, 338* 

26 BIRTH-CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part in 

0. Laut, Beduanda Kallang". — At child-birth among 
the Beduanda Kallang the mother drank a decoction 
of the leaves of mangrove trees (" bakau ") that had 
fallen from the trees and floated on the water, and 
the child was given a little of the expressed juice of 
the fruit of the " k'luna." ^ 

Orang Laut (no locality specified). — The rest of this 
account of the birth-customs of the Orang Laut in 
general is taken from Vaughan-Stevens, who gives no 
means of identifying the tribe. 

Each family group of the Orang Laut contains one or more old women who 
follow the profession of sage-femme. Their status varies, and they are paid by 
means of a present. ^ 

When delivery took place on board a boat, the space available was naturally 
very restricted. Hence the patient was either supported in an upright position 
or laid face downwards upon one of the boat's transoms which had been tem- 
porarily broadened by the addition of cross-pieces. Behind the patient squatted 
a woman, who held her fast at the back, whilst a second, whose duty it was to 
receive the child, and also to wash it as soon as it was born, sat in the bottom 
of the boat. ^ 

The Orang Laut cut off the umbilical cord shorter than the Jakun. Their 
standard of measurement is three "breadths" of the bamboo knife used for the 
operation, the blade of the latter being required to be of the same breadth as the 
sage-femme'' s middle finger.'* 

Among the Orang Laut the mother half an hour after her confinement washes 
herself in the sea, and after a few days returns to her duties. In a case which 
they regard as being so natural, the Orang Laut apply no special treatment ; 
for about a month, however, the mother has the region of the abdomen bound 
round with a cloth skirt ("sarong") in place of the loin-cloth which up to that 
time she had been wearing.^ 

A considerable amount of noise is made by the O. Laut as soon as a child is 
born to them. All present unite in shouting and in beating anything which will 
make a noise, the greater din that it makes the better. The hubbub lasts for about 
ten minutes at the shortest to half an hour at the longest, and is especially intended 
to scare away any evil spirits which might otherwise attack either mother or child. 
As soon, however, as the cord is cut, the demons are thought to have lost their 
opportunity. In the intervals of the din the old woman who has assisted at the 
delivery blows upon the child, but this, however, is no charm, or at least is not so 
regarded by the O. Laut." 

According to the Orang Laut, the flying lizards of the Peninsula look out for 
births, and cause young newly-arrived souls to enter into the bodies of new-born 
children, by which means they at once obtain possession of their future 
embodiments. They regard these flying lizards as subordinate to the great blind 
Flying Lizard of their legends, which keeps watch over the [Life-] stone, for 

1 /. I. A. vol. i. p. 300. ^ Ibid. p. 198. 

'^ Z. f. E. xxviii. 164, 165. " Ibid. p. 192. Sic. The practice of 

' Ibid. p. 189. blowing upon the child is, of course, 

'' Ibid. p. 191. a wide-spread magic ceremony. 

CHAP. I MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES V} 

which express purpose the Creator made it. They have the power of flying from 
earth to the unknown Void in order to make arrangements with this Lizard-chief 
of theirs. No Orang Laut will kill these small reptiles, since its companions (he 
believes) would be sure to avenge its death, by refraining from pointing out the 
next born child of the offender to the soul which had been appointed for it.' 

Moreover, these small flying lizards have the power of turning themselves 
into crocodiles at will. The crocodile and the shark are regarded as brothers, 
and whenever a flying lizard learns from its Chief that any person's stone (re- 
presenting his soul) is soiled and buried, the former is commissioned to convey 
the order for the death-penalty to the person concerned, and to execute it. This 
mission it accomplishes either in its own shape or in that of a snake (whose form 
it can assume at will when on land), in that of a crocodile (when it is in the water), 
or through any other agent whatsoever. Hence whenever an Orang Laut dies 
from the bite of a snake, or is seized by a crocodile or shark (the most probable 
forms of death according to their manner of living), or sucked down and drowned 
through some invisible agency, the Orang Laut all agree that it was the doing of 
the small flying lizard acting under the orders of the big blind lizard (that 
watches the life-stone). - 

The Orang Laut women when suckling their children do not throw the breast 
over the shoulder, though they often pass it sideways under the mother's arm. 
Like the Jakun mothers, they do not wean their children until their breasts 
are diy. There is seldom too little milk at first. In such an event the child 
would be fed by one of the mother's friends or relations, though this would not 
be held to constitute a closer relationship between the foster-child and the 
children of its foster-mother. The women do not retire out of sight when the 
child is being suckled. ■* 

The birth of a child is signified by means of a split stick, in the cleft of which 
a leaf is jammed. If the child is a girl, the stick retains its bark, if a boy the 
stick is peeled.* 

No steps were taken to procure abortion. Such an abomination would have 
been considered impossible.''' 

The Orang Laut deny that child-murder has ever been practised among or even 
been charged to them. They are amply supplied with food, and the children are 
early taught to forage for themselves, so that they were not subjected to any 
such temptation. As among the Jakuns, twins are almost unknown.^ 

1 Z.f.E. xxviii. 187. -* Ibid. p. 198. 

2 Ibid. p. 188. 5 /^/^. p_ 186. 
2 Ibid. p. 201. ^ Ibid. p. 200. 

CHAPTER II. 

Maturity Customs and Beliefs. 

If we differentiate as we ought the practice of 
tattooing {i.e. of decorating the person with punctured 
designs filled with pigment) from the various forms of 
scarification and raised cicatrices or keloids, we shall 
feel a considerable measure of doubt as to the extent 
to which any form of tattooing, properly so called, 
exists among the tribes of the Malay Peninsula. It is 
true that several writers of some authority employ 
(loosely, as I think) the word "tattooing" in speaking 
of the face-decoration of some of the Semang and 
Sakai tribes of Perak ; and it is true that one of these 
writers (Miklucho-Maclay) even describes the opera- 
tion as being performed with a needle,^ but in none of 
these instances, not even in the latter, is the modus 
operandi described, and in default of evidence of this 
kind, we can only say that there is no adequate state- 
ment of tattooing as known to these tribes.- Of the 
practice of skin-scarification, on the other hand, as 
well as of face-painting, there is abundant evidence, 
and, unless the contrary fact can be proved, it is safest 
to suppose that most of the writers mentioned above 

' /. R. A. .S'., S. B., No. 2, p. 214. effect that "among the Perak Sakai 
- Since penning the above, Mr. lattooitrj^ is met with," though all 
Leonard Wray has written me to the details as to its form are still wanting. 

28 

CHAP. II GENERAL REMARKS 29 

have carelessly used the word "tattooing" as the 
equivalent of skin-scarification, a confusion which it 
would be easy to parallel from the writings of travellers 
in other savage countries. If this explanation, which 
to me appears to be the one that will best fit all the 
facts, be accepted, the next question to be considered 
is whether such " tattooing " as exists should properly 
be classified as a custom of Negrito or Sakai origin. 
That it is not a custom of Jakun origin may be 
taken as certain, since none of the purer Jakun 
tribes, so far as our information goes, ever practise it. 
It therefore almost certainly originated either among 
the Semang or among the Sakai, and the balance of 
evidence seems to show that it is not indigenous 
among the Semang. Of all the Negritos that I saw 
in Kedah and Kelantan, only one (a woman who 
displayed some traces of Sakai admixture) showed any 
evidence of it. And if we go further afield, to the 
nearest spot whence collateral testimony as to the 
customs of the Negritos may be obtained, i.e. to 
the Andaman Islands, we find that none of the tribes 
there practised this method of decorating the skin of 
the face, and that the "Jarawa" tribe apparently did 
not tattoo any part of the body.^ On the other hand, 
the cultural focus of this practice appears to be in 
the valley of the Plus in Ulu Perak, a district mainly 
under the influence of the Sakai. 

To return to the former question, that of real 
tattooing, I may quote in support of a similar con- 
clusion the opinion expressed by Mr. L. Wray, who 
has recently written me that with regard to the place 
of its origin, he believes it (as I do) to be a Sakai, 

1 Cp. Man's Andamanese, p. 113, note to p. iii, "the Tarawa do not 
" the face is never tattooed " ; and also tattoo." 

30 MATURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

and not a Semang custom — firstly, because he has 
never seen it on a Semang, and secondly, because 
tattooing would not show on the nearly black skin 
of the Negrito.^ 

Of the prevalence of some form of tattooing or 
scarification in Pahang I have not yet been able to 
get corroborative evidence, but one or other of these 
practices was certainly found among the Sakai tribes 
of Ulu Langat in Selangor, who were not long since 
described as a " tattooed " race." 

On the whole, therefore, it seems best to conclude 
that both these customs, whether tattooing or scarify- 
ing are of Sakai origin, and that even where we find 
them established among the Semang, they are really 
exotic. 

It may, I think, be very reasonably suggested that 
most forms of body-paint employed by these tribes 
may have originated in the application of (i) magical 
designs to the body ; and that out of the most commonly 
used forms developed, on the one hand, (2) the so- 
called " tribal marks " (where indeed these can be pro- 
perly established), and (3), on the other, merely deco- 
rative designs." The bulk of our information on the 
subject comes from Vaughan - Stevens, but it is 
admittedly an eclectic account, and it would certainly 
be the height of rashness to attempt to build upon this 
flimsy foundation until the necessary material comes 
to hand for checking it. Quite apart from any ques- 
tion of his methods, Vaughan-Stevens himself declares 

1 This second reason is not by itself, above, but class {b) is not wide 

of course, conclusive. enough, some of the designs employed 

'■^ J. A. G. Campbell, p. 241. being undoubtedly love - charms in- 

3 Vaughan - Stevens classifies these tended to make the person of the 

designs as follows : — (a) Tribal marks, wearer attractive; it is also probable that 

(*) charms against spirits, (c) mere magical designs (V. -St. 's class (i5) ) pre- 

decoration. This classification is very ceded tribal marks (his class {a) ), which 

much on the same lines as that given were probably developed out of them. 

GENERAL REMARKS 31 

(p. 150) that it is now a very rare thing to meet 
with the old and correct designs. Here and there in 
remote tribes the women are still in the habit of 
painting their faces, but the patterns are very often 
employed solely for ornament, and are either a mere 
improvisation of the individual, or incorrect or 
abridged imitations of the old original design, while 
frequently the private totem i^sic) of the family has 
replaced the original pattern of the tribe/ 

This custom (of body-paint) is of much wider 
distribution than that of scarification. This may per- 
haps be due to the fact that the marks of the latter 
are indelible, whereas the painted designs can be re- 
moved at a moment's notice should there be any 
apprehension (always a lively one in the hearts of 
these timid aboriginal races) of ridicule on the part of 
strangers who do not practise it." 

Accordingly we find that there are very few, if any, 
wild people of the Peninsula who do not, on special 
occasions at least, indulge in the practice, many of 
them being tribes which no doubt formerly practised 
scarification or tattooing. 

It is to be seen among Semang, Sakai, and Jakun, 
but more especially among the Sakai. The colours 
used are black, white, red, and occasionally yellow, 
which last two appear to be of equivalent value from 
a magical point of view. 

By the same method of weighing the evidence, I 
should be led to classify the custom of perforating 
the nose-cartilage (with the wearing of the nose-bar 
or nose-quill) as a Sakai practice, for in this case too 
the Andamanese evidence is of a negative character,^ 

^ Cp. Z.f. E. xxvi. p. 150. ^ "In this [non-perforation of the 

2 Ibid. nose-cartilage] the Andamanese differ 

32 MATURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part in 

whereas this identical custom is certainly found almost 
everywhere among the purer Sakai tribes, even in the 
east coast states {e.g. Pahang, where a nose-ring is 
sometimes substituted for the quill), and as far south 
as Ulu Langat in Selangor, where the Orang Bukit 
were described by Campbell, in the passage referred 
to above, as a race that " put skewers through their 
noses," ^ and probably yet further south as far as Negri 
Sembilan. On the other hand, the practices of filing 
and blackening the teeth are widely-spread customs 
which are found (generally speaking) throughout the 
whole of the Malayan region, and the custom of ear- 
boring is practically universal. 

Shaving the head, with the exception of a top- 
knot, which is often temporarily removed at puberty, 
may be seen among the Semang, but so rarely that 
it may be regarded as borrowed from the Malays, 
amongst whom it is common enough. With regard 
to the Sakai and the Jakun there is very little 
evidence, though, if we may judge from photographs, 
the latter certainly practise it to some extent. The 
apparent system of totemism reported by Vaughan- 
Stevens, which is given below (p. 62), rests on most 
unsatisfactory evidence, which can only have come, I 
think, from the use of " leading questions."^ 

I. — Semang. 
Nose-boring. 
Kedah Semang. — The boring of the nose-cartilage 
is, as already explained, most probably a Sakai custom 

greatly from their neighl)ours the Nico- enable them by the time they are full- 

barese, who not only flatten the occi- grown to insert a wooden cylindrical 

puts of their children in infancy, but Instrument three-quarters of an inch 

from the period of puberty, blacken thick." — Man's .-Im/amanese, p. 115. 
their teeth, and perforate the lobes of * J. A. G. Campbell, p. 241. 

their ears to such an extent as to ^ Cp. pp. 258-260, in/ra. 

NEGR/l'OS OF KEDAH 33 

which has been borrowed by the few Semang who are 
now found practising it.^ It was not practised at all by 
the Semang of Kedah, nor did we see any examples of 
it among the Pangan of Kelantan. I was told, how- 
ever, that some of the Belimbing tribes (Pangan) were 
in the habit of passing pieces of stick or stems of 
grasses through a perforation in the cartilage. None 
of the Negritos, however, that I saw, either on the 
east or west coast, showed the slightest trace of it. 

Perak Semang. — It is also said to occur among the 
Semang of Perak. 

Ear-boring. 

Kedah Semang*. — This is a custom of both sexes. 
It is said to be performed in the case of girl-children as 
soon after birth as possible, the lobe being bored with a 
porcupine's quill, or some such article, and the hole en- 
larged by inserting a rolled-up strip of cloth or banana- 
leaf on ordinary, and of licuala (" palas ") leaf on festive 
occasions. ■^' Boys also occasionally have a hole bored in 
one lobe only, in which they carry the native cigarette, 
as is the practice, I believe, in Burma and elsewhere. 
I did not see any of the Kedah Semang actually wear- 
ing an ear-quill, though it has been recorded in Perak. 

Tooth- filing. 

Kedah Semang". — In Kedah the teeth were fre- 
quently filed, the six front teeth of the upper jaw being 
thus treated, as among the neighbouring Malay tribes. 
This filing is performed by means of a smooth piece 
of sandstone from the nearest brook, and is said to be 

1 Vide p. iz,o, ante. this custom, the roll of "palas" is called 

2 In the Belimbing district of Ulu "gerinching." The Pangan of Jelei (Pa- 
Kelantan, where the Pangan practise hang) wear incised bamboo ear-plugs. 

VOL. II D 

34 MATURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

performed at the age of puberty irrespective of sex, 
probably not long before marriage, as is the practice of 
the Inland Malays, from whom they learnt it. 

The six front teeth of the upper jaw of a Semang 
skull brought home by the writer were filed, the filing 
being of the " concave " kind (in which the front part of 
the teeth is filed away, so that the teeth thus treated 
become concave instead of convex). 

In the Ulu Kelantan district the various Pangan 
tribes are also alleged to practise tooth-filing,^ and some 
of them are even said to blacken the teeth. I think, 
however, that with very little doubt, both this Pangan 
practice of tooth-filing and that of blackening the teeth 
(especially the latter) must have been of Malay origin. 
This last practice, at all events, is exceedingly rare 
among the wild tribes, though it is common enough 
with the Malays. Most of the Semang that we 
measured had had their teeth filed as described, but 
not one had them blackened. 

Other Forms of Initiation. 

All the Semang without exception deny that they 
ever circumcise or incise, except of course when they 
become converts to Mohammedanism. 

Scarification or " Tattooing ^ 

Kedah Semang". — The actual practice of tattooing 
properly so called {i.e. skin-puncturation) is, so far as 
I was able to ascertain, unknown to the Negritos 
of Kedah, and even with regard to scarification the 
evidence is of the scantiest character, and it would 

1 V.-St. mentions that he saw filed Pangan or Eastern Semang" — Z.f. E. 
teeth among some " very black people, xxix. p. 180. The filing is performed in 
who lived on the boundary of the Kelantan, as in Kedah, with sandstone. 

CHAP. II NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 35 

perhaps be nearest the truth to surmise that such 
of the Perak Semang as practise it, have adopted it 
from neighbouring tribes of Sakai. At Behmbing 
in Ulu Kelantan, however, I was told that among the 
Pangan of those parts certain " marks " (scarifications) 
were worn on the face, the design being scratched in 
on the skin by means of a thorn (" duri "). The 
marks on the forehead were more or less vertical, and 
those on the cheek horizontal ; but sometimes the 
design is only temporarily marked out with charcoal. 
I did not, however, see any Semang who were so 
marked, though I saw a large number who were not. 

At Siong (in Kedah) the wife of the tribal chief 
(who, however, came from the Plus district in Perak and 
had Sakai blood in her) had four distinct scarifications 
upon the left cheek, with similar faint marks on the 
right cheek also. These marks, which were not quite 
horizontal but slightly divergent, started from the nose 
and were carried across the cheek, each of them form- 
ing a dark-red (almost black) stripe across the skin, 
looking like the cut of a whip-lash. She told me 
that these marks on her face were made when she was 
quite young and living in the valley of Ulu Plus. The 
finely serrated edge of a sugar-cane leaf was drawn 
lightly across the skin excoriating it, after which soot 
or powdered charcoal was rubbed into the incision. 
She assured me at the time that it was a tribal mark, 
the object of which was that any member of the tribe 
who bore it might be known to their friends whenever 
they met in a distant part of the country. 

Although, however, marks of this kind may often 
merely be (as is indeed indicated by my informant's 
reply), of the nature of local " fashions," such as serve 
to distinguish the people of one district from the 

36 MATURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part ii 

people of another, not only in Asia, but in most parts 
of the world, not even excepting the continent of 
Europe, this need not preclude their use as magic, 

Perak Semang*. — The foregoing information, which 
was given me by the Kedah tribes, tallies closely with 
De Morgan's account of what he calls " tattooing," 
which from the importance of the subject is worth 
quoting verbatim : " The Semang and Sakai tattoo 
themselves differently " ^ (for a fuller account see 
twelve illustrations in L' Homme, ii. 555). " Some 
draw (parallel or divergent) black lines upon their 
faces, starting from the nose and continuing across the 
cheeks or the forehead. These designs are frequently 
unsymmetrical : frequently too they are only found on 
one side of the face. These adornments are as frequent 
among men as among women, and are indelible. They 
are produced by lightly raising the skin and intro- 
ducing beneath it colouring matter such as soot or 
powdered charcoal." ^ 

Body-paint. 

Kedah Semang*. — The custom of painting the body 
is indulged in rather for purposes of magic than for 
those of mere adornment, as it so often is among the 
Sakai. The facts are as follows. Among the Semang 
of the east coast in Ulu Kelantan I was told that the 
Pangan of Belimbing had the habit of tattooing or 
scarifying both their cheeks and their foreheads, but 
that occasionally, in lieu of this, they merely marked 
out the design with charcoal. 

1 Elsewhere this same writer (viii. <^^r^ "), and do not necessarily imply any 

296) states that the Semang women identity of design. 

tattoo and paint themselves "in the ^ ^ De M. vii. 412 ; Z'//^;//w£, ii. 581 ; 

same manner" as the Sakai. The words, a.v\A/. K. A. S., S. B., No. 2, p. 214 

however, are very vague ("elles se (of the Pangan, whom M.-Maclay mis- 

tatouenl et peignent de la rneme inani- calls Sakai). 

CHAP. II NEGRITOS OF KEDAH yj 

Further, in Kedah one of the women of the tribe 
in explaining to me that the decorative designs of the 
bamboo combs worn by Semang women were intended 
for repelHng various evil influences, volunteered the 
information that similar patterns were sometimes 
painted on the women's bodies, for a similar (i.e. 
magical) object, these latter being not therefore solely 
the outcome of local whims or fashions. 

I saw, besides, among these Kedah Semang, a 
species of yellow unguent (said by the wearer to be 
pure coconut-oil) applied to the cheeks, the tip of 
the nose, etc., by the men, who informed me at the time 
that they only wore it by way of decoration. At the 
same time, in describing the love-charm called 
" chindwai," they explained that the application of oil 
to the face and breast was for purposes of magic, and 
this I believe to have been the original motive of all 
body-paint practised by the Semang, 

In substitution for the yellow colour when coco- 
nut-oil is unprocurable, the Semang obtain a similar 
pigment from the wild " saffron " or turmeric. Among 
the Pangan of Ulu Kelantan this latter is converted 
(by mixing with lime) into a sort of burnt-red ochre. 

Hence we see that at least three colours, black, 
yellow, and red, are certainly used by the Negritos, 
and to these white (obtained by slaking a little shell- 
lime) should be added. 

On the other hand, it is not clear, from our 
existing information, whether any kind of red ochre 
is obtained among the Semang (as among the 
Sakai), by the grinding down of lumps of iron ore 
or hematite, 

Perak Semang. — In the account of Semang traditions 
there is perhaps an allusion to the supposed origin of 

38 MATURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

body-paint in the story of the charred stick which 
Kamoj, the ruler of the damned, is said to have 
adopted as his emblem, in place of the burning brand 
which he received from Kari.^ 

So too Vaughan-Stevens records that the Semang 
were in the habit of marking their bodies with charcoal 
for medicinal, {i.e. magical) purposes, wherever any 
pain might be felt." 

With reference to the Negritos of Perak, De 
Morgan mentions the fact (referred to above), that they 
both "paint and tattoo themselves in the same manner" 
as the Sakai, but his phrase is extremely vague, and 
he gives no further details. Vaughan-Stevens, on 
the other hand, declares that " to the Negritos, both 
painting and tattooing are unknown."^ 

II. — Sakai. 
Nose-boring. 

Perak Sakai. — Colonel Low has informed us that the 
perforation of the cartilage of the nose (through which 
porcupine's quills are worn) is the distinguishing 
characteristic of the Orang Alas {i.e. the Sakai) of Ulu 
Kinta"* in Perak.^ 

From other sources we learn that the Sakai of 
Perak are in the habit of perforating the septum of 
the nose, through which they insert the quill of a 
porcupine or a bar of some other material (wood or 
bone) which is not unfrequently decorated with in- 
cised rings. 

It appears further that they occasionally wear in 
the same way a rolled-up piece of banana-leaf. This 

' Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 131. * In original "UluKantu." 

2 Ibid. ^ J. I. A. vol. iv. p. 429 ; cp. 

3 Ibid. J. R. A. S., S. B., No. 4, p. 30. 

.S7. ritoto ('<'., Sin^afioc. 
SAK.Xr 1)1- SoUllI I'l.kAK, SlIinVINC. I' At K-1'.\1.NT AND XOSE-QUILL. 

/ 'ol. II. /. 39. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 

39 

latter, however, is not worn for ornamental purposes, 
but is intended, as in the case of the ear-hole, to 
enlarge the perforation of the cartilage.^ 

Ear-boring. 

Perak Sakai. — The women sometimes wear a porcu- 
pine's quill passed through the perforation in the lobe 
of the ear. Wooden and other ear-studs or plugs and 
ear-rings are, however, not uncommonly substituted.^ 

The foregoing account is corroborated by Colonel 
Low, in the passage quoted above, and Hale, who 
states that they also " wear the same things " {i.e. 
porcupine's quills, etc.) in their ears, and there appears 
to be a tendency to enlarge the perforations, Mr. 
Hale observed two women wearing rolls of cloth as 
large as his little finger, and he found great difficulty in 
abstracting one of these rolls, which fitted very tightly.^ 

So, too, in a recent letter to me, Mr. L. Wray 
observes that ear-studs or plugs made of decorated 
bamboo, and with a diameter of \\ in. (31 mm.), are 
worn by the Sakai of Perak, who occasionally insert in 
them both leaves and flowers. 

Tooth-filing. 

Perak Sakai. — There is some doubt as to whether 
the practice of filing the teeth obtains among the 
Perak Sakai. De Morgan says that the teeth (of 
the Perak Sakai) were magnificent and were never 
filed, and that he frequently inquired of Sakai chiefs 
whether this practice existed, but that they as often 
denied it."^ 

1 Vide vol. i. p. 156. ^ Hale, p. 293 ; cp. Rev. d'Ethn. 

^ De Morgan, vii. 414 ; V Homme, i. 44. 
ii. 586; and for the kind of earrings, ^ De Morgan, vii. 412; U Homme, 

etc., which are worn, vidcsoV i. p. 156. ii. 582. 

40 MATURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

In sjDite of this evidence it would, of course, be 
strange if the Sakai had in no case picked up what is so 
common a custom of the Malays. But I have not so 
far found any mention of it by other authors. 

Mr. L. Wray, however, writes me that he has seen 
at least one Sakai woman whose teeth were filed after 
the manner of the Malays. She was living with a 
tribe of Sakai near Chenderiang, but as she had once 
been a slave in a Malay house, it might have been 
done by Malays, In the same district he saw a woman 
whose teeth had been blackened. 

Other Forms of Initiation. 

There is no record either of circumcision or any 
kindred rite among the unconverted Sakai. 

Scarification and Tattooing, 

Perak Sakai. — There appears to be very little 
evidence of the practice of tattooing proper among the 
Sakai, beyond Mr. L. Wray's statement already quoted, 
but De Morgan's account almost certainly holds 
good at least of the methods adopted for scarification. 
The same author goes on to explain that the face- 
marks to which he refers are found among the wilder 
tribes only, their more civilised kinsmen (who are in 
closer touch with the Malays), having long dis- 
continued the practice. De Morgan himself observed 
it (in Perak) among the hill-Sakai of Changkat 
Kerbu, and also among those of Changkat Gochan,^ 
as well as in other places. Baron Miklucho-Maclay, 
on the other hand, remarks (though in reality he 
only saw Pangan), that while he saw no " Sakai " or 

1 De M. viii. 225. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 41 

Semang man tattooed, he found most of the " Sakai " 
women so adorned, and always in the same style. 
Figure 2, Plate III. [of M.-Maclay's article] shows 
the arrangement of the simple design with which in 
childhood they embellish their cheeks and temples. 
The operation is performed with a needle, and the 
design is first marked out with resin. ^ Maclay's 
account certainly describes a method which may refer 
to regular "tattooing," though we must not be led too 
hastily to conclude (from the mere fact of a needle 
being employed) that puncturation, and not scarifica- 
tion, was the method actually practised. 

Vaughan - Stevens, again, though he must have 
had ample opportunities of studying the question, is 
far too uncertain as an observer for us to feel sure to 
which process he actually refers. All the information 
that he gives is contained in the meagre statement that 
in the case of the Sakai (Senoi), Besisi, and Kenaboi 
the chiefs had the same pattern as the ordinary man, 
and that the chiefs of the Tembeh had, when their 
clan - mark (?) was tattooed, a further special tattoo- 
pattern denoting their rank " tattooed " upon the breast 
or the arm. They alone were tattooed, whilst to the 
Negritos {i.e. Semang and Pangan) both tattooing 
and body-paint were unknown.- 

Of other authorities upon the Sakai of Perak, (i) 
Hale, though he could hardly have failed to see it, if 
it was there, unfortunately in his paper makes no 
reference whatever to the subject. 

(2) De la Croix relates that, of some fifteen 
Sakai women belonging to Kampong Chabang whom 
he met at Kampong Langkor (S. Kerbu), some of 

^ M.-Maclay iny.i'?.^..S'., S.B. ,'No. Batang Padang Sakai did not tattoo or 
2, p. 214. Ace. to Fasc. A/a/. 37, the scarify. 2 Z./. £. xwi. 157. 

42 MATURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

them had Hnes tattooed^ upon their cheeks, which he 
thought might be tribal marks. Two of these Hnes 
were parallel, and were drawn from the top of the ear 
to the nostrils ; two more started from the bottom of 
the ear, and terminated at the corners of the mouth ; 
and besides these there was a small vertical tattoo 
design between the eyebrows.^ Some Sakai men 
from another Sakai village close to Kampong Chabang, 
had the same tattoo-marks on the face that he had 
noticed among the women. ^ 

(3) To these may be added the statement of De 
Morgan, viz., that at Changkat Riam (in the interior 
of Perak) he " first saw people who were actually 
tattooed." The tattoo-patterns " of the men were 
less elegant than those of the women, who were 
sometimes entirely covered with indelible black lines 
and red paintings." * 

On the other hand, we have the first clear and 
decisive account from Colonel Low, who remarks that 
the Malays of Perak divided the Sakai into three 
classes— the " Tame Sakai," the " Hill Sakai" of Ulu 
Bertang, and the Alas ("Alias ") of Ulu Kinta.' This 
last tribe differed from the other two in having adopted 
the custom of . . . tattooing the face and breast by 
means of a sharp piece of wood, and filling the 
punctures with the juice of a tree.*^ 

The next really reliable statement upon the 
subject comes from Mr. L. Wray, who in writing to 
me recently remarked as follows : — " The Sakai of 
Perak practise tattooing, the lines being made by 

^ By "tattooed" may be meant *' ColonelLow.y./. ^. vol. iv. p.429. 

"scarified." Mr. CerriUi has also since written me 

^ Dc la Croix, p. 336. ^ Ih. p. 33S. that the skin is " pricked " with a 
* De Morgan, viii. 211. "Ijcrtani" thorn, and powdered char- 

° In original "Kanlu. " coal rubbed in. 

^ 

l^ ' 

'\ 

rt ~ 

o 

nJ - 

1. Voung Sakai mail of " Lobou Kela"(S. Kinta). 2. Young Sakai man of Changkat Korbu 
(S. Korbu). 3. Voung Sakai mail of Changkat Kiam (S. Korbu). 

4. Voung .Sakai man of Changkat Chano (.S. Korbu). 5. ^'oung Sakai man of Changkat Gochang 
(.S. Korlni). 6. Voung man (.Sdmafi) of Changkat Pnngora (S. Piah). 

7. Voung Sakai woman of Changkat Riani. 8. Voung Sakai woman of Changkat Chabang 
(S. K.aya). 9. ^'ouIlg " Semaiig " girl of " Changkat Poiigor.a " (,S. Piali). 

10 II i:-' De .'^fo>xan. 

lo. Young " .Scniang " woman of Cliangkat Pongora. it. Sakai woman of Changkat Korbu. 
12. " .SKiiiang " woman of " Changkat Piingora." 

Dr, Moiu;an".s Uk.wvings, siiovvin(; Tyi'ks ov V.\cv. Diccokation (.sakai and ".Skmang") 
v.'/. If. A 43. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 43 

pricking the skin with a thorn, and then rubbing in 
powdered charcoal. I was told by a Malay that a 
tribe at Sungei Raya in Kinta employed red lines as 
well as the bluish ones produced by the charcoal, but 
he did not know what pigment was used. The lines 
are mostly to be seen on the face, but sometimes 
rings are tattooed round the fingers. The marks are 
usually confined, however, to a few lines on the 
forehead. A favourite device is a diamond -shaped 
pattern in the centre, with one or two vertical lines 
on each side, though often there is only one line, 
running from the roots of the hair down to the tip of 
the nose. I enclose some sketches I made in Batang 
Padang, All were on the forehead where not other- 
wise shown. The marks do not appear to be tribal, 
since members of the same family have different 
designs. I have certainly never seen scarification on 
a Perak Sakai. Raised cicatrices on the bodies of 
some of them I have seen, but there was nothing to 
lead one to suppose they were not the result of 
accident." 

In spite of this apparently strong consensus of 
evidence, I must still repeat the warning that 
(although there clearly is some form of real tattoo- 
ing, i.e. skin-puncturation, practised in the Peninsula), 
yet what many of the observers from whom I have 
quoted are wont to call tattooing, is certainly no 
more than scarification, or even perhaps nothing 
but mere face-paint after all. 

Body-paint. 

With regard to body-paint, the information to 
hand is more satisfactory. Its existence among the 

44 MATURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part iii 

Sakai of Perak is noted by Hale, Swettenham, De 
Morgan, Vaughan-Stevens, and others ; ^ and among 
the Senoi of Pahang by Clifford and Martin. The 
pigments used agree pretty well, as to the colours 
used, with those employed by the Semang, but are 
made of varying materials. 

De Morgan states that the Sakai of Changkat 
Gochan and S. " Krou" (in Perak) used to manu- 
iacture their white pigment from lime obtained from 
the shells of the Melania, and that they usually ap- 
plied the product thus obtained in a circular stripe on 
the right cheek.- When black, the pigment is ob- 
tained from charcoal, when red, from the fruit of the 
anatto or Bixa orellana, which is cultivated for the 
purpose.^ 

The anatto (Mai. "kasumba"), however, being 
of modern introduction, cannot have been the original 
object from which the red pigment was obtained, and 
there is accordingly some question as to what sub- 
stance may have preceded it. Vaughan - Stevens 
describes it, somewhat vaguely and from tradition 
only, as a species of red earth, but in his Cave-dwellers 
of Perak Wray refers to the apparent use of hematite 
in this way, and there can I think be very little doubt 
that this conjecture is correct, and that a species of 
red ochre, obtained from some of the numerous forms 
of iron-ore so widely distributed in the Peninsula, 
originally formed the red pigment of the Sakai. 
Hematite does in fact to this day form a very popular 

^ De Morgan, viii. 211 ; Swett. p. charcoal, a vegetable red, and white 

228 ; Hale, p. 243. china clay. These are mixed with oil, 

2 De Morgan, viii. 225. and the faces and sometimes the breasts 

^ Cp. Wray's Cave-dwellers, p. 43, of women, and occasionally the men, 

for an almost identical statement : are painted with patterns with lines and 

"The three colours used by the modern dots. This is only done on occasions 

.Sakai for painting their persons are when they wish to add to their charms." 

acS" 

4 ■'rf 

SaKAI ("mi. I) II WING I- ACl -I' AIN I' AI'I'LIIOD. 

yo/. //./. 45. 

CHAP. II SAKAI OF PERAK 45 

red body-paint with the Peninsular Malays, who give 
it the name of " Batu Kawi." ^ 

On the other hand, there is yet one other (un- 
recorded) means of manufacturing red pigment, by 
treating wild turmeric with lime — a process which 
has already been mentioned in dealing with the 
Semang. 

A general description of the designs is given by 
De Morgan, who observes that the Sakai of Changkat 
Riam, more especially the women, were sometimes 
entirely covered with indelible black " tattoo "-marks 
and red paint. This paint would dissolve in water, 
and was only applied on feast days. Some of the 
women had their bosoms covered with concentric red 
circles, whilst others painted their bosoms all over and 
applied simple designs, consisting of straight or broken 
lines, to their cheeks, arms, and thighs." 

The remainder of this account of body-paint is 
taken from Vaughan-Stevens : ^ — 

The Sakai, Besisi, Kenaboi, and Tembeh declare that they are descended 
from one and the same stock, but that their separate tribes had each inhabited an 
island before the joint migration to the Peninsula, under the " Chief with the 
Iron Finger-nails " (" Berchanggei Besi "), took place. From this joint migration 
must, however, be excepted the Tembeh, who had long before migrated separately 
to the Peninsula. 

1 In corroboration of this view. This statement is correct, with the 

cp. Z. f. E. xxvi. 152 : "As re- exception of the statement — assuming 

gards the materials with which the the identification made above to be 

painting was effected, the Sakai are correct — that the material for the 

unanimous in saying that the red pig- original red pigment was not obtain- 

nient now in use is of recent intro- able in the Peninsula. I myself have 

duction, and that they formerly used a more than once met Selangor Malays 

red earth, which was not, however, who imagined, from the name of this ore 

obtainable in the Peninsula. The ("Batu Kawi" or "Kawi stone"), that 

anatto has long been in use, but is it was imported from the "Langkawi" 

described as an inferior substitute for Islands, north of Penang, and some 

this earth-pigment, the colouring pro- similar belief may easily lie at the 

duced by the anatto being alleged to root of this reported statement of the 

fade in about the course of an hour. Sakai. 

The black (pigment) is prepared from " De Morgan, viii. 211 ; cp. 

charcoal, the white from lime, both UHomme, ii. 555 (for illustrations), 

being mixed with the sap of plants." "^ Z. f. E. xxvi. 150-157. 

46 MATURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

The tradition of this tribe is very vague, yet it is agreed that they lived for a 
long time separated from the other branches of the tribe. It appears that during 
this interval they learnt "tattooing" from another race, and afterwards substi- 
tuted face-paint for "tattooing."' 

For each of the three tribes (Sen-oi, Besisi, and Kenaboi) there existed a par- 
ticular pattern, which was identical as regards the design and the materials 
employed, but which varied in form. In each of the three tribes one and the 
same tribe-sign served for all the members of the tribe, from the chief downwards. 
Only among the Sen-oi there was a special breast-pattern both for men and 
women. Moreover, among the Sen-oi, too, the magician, the midwife, and 
their patients were excepted from the rule. Thus the following rules became 
established : — 

(i) The magician or medicine-man in each of the three tribes wore, during 
an exorcism, paint suitable for the occasion ; at other times he wore his ordinary 
paint, each of the three tribes having a special one for the purpose. 

(2) So, too, the midwives wore a special face-paint whilst in discharge of 
their office, but at other times the usual one of their tribe. 

On the other hand, the midwives of all three tribes wore, whilst in discharge 
of their office, one and the same pattern. 

(3) The young mother and her new-born child each wore, according to the 
day and the condition of their health, a series of face-paint, which in the case 
of all three races was the same.- 

The three curves on the cheeks of the Besisi are only variants of the ancient 
tribal mark of the Besisi and Sen-oi, which consisted of three stripes. 

The magicians constructed variants from the old pattern of the Besisi which 
corresponds to the present Sen-oi pattern (No. 9), only the Sakai (Sen-oi) pattern 
lacked the stripe which goes from the under lip to the chin. 

The Sen-oi magicians afterwards added this stripe to the old pattern (No. 9). 
The Besisi then went further afield and chose the tiger pattern (No. 5), whilst 
the Kenaboi took the three curves worn by the laymen of the mother tribe 
(No. i), and applied two of them in front and over the third, which remained in 
the old position that it had among the Sakai (No. 8). 

The patterns of the medicine-men (sorcerers) were only put on when they 
were in office ; on every other occasion they wore the painting of the lay members. 

In the case of the Sen-oi, Besisi, and Kenaboi the chiefs wore the same 
pattern as the ordinary man, but the chiefs of the Tembeh wore, since their clan- 
mark was " tattooed," a special tattoo-design in addition, to denote their rank, 
punctured on the breast or the arm. They alone were " tattooed." 

Tlie Sen-oi magicians wore no breast-pattern, neither did the midwife nor the 
new-made mother.^ 

In addition to the above information, Vaughan- 
Stevens procured drawings of the following pat- 
terns : — 

(i) Pattern of a KenaVjoi man — three narrow black stripes on white ground — 
a variant of the three red stripes of the Sakai man-pattern \q.'j.) 

(2) Pattern of a Besisi man and woman. 

(3) Pattern of a Kenaboi magician (as well as that of a Sen-oi). 

(4) Face-patterns of children of all three tribes, etc., etc.* 

' Z.f.E. XX vi. 150. ^ Ibid. p. 157. 

2 Ibid. p. 151. ■' Ibid. ; cp. also IJ Homme, ii. 555. 

CHAP. II SAKAI OF PERAK 47 

Elsewhere^ we read that : — 

The red colour is always laid on with the finger, and the breadth of the stripe 
is therefore always less in the case of a woman than in that of a man. 

The black and white stripes are produced by dipping into the paint the little 
sticks which serve as brushes. 

The longer sticks (" chin-karr "), which are 4^ cm. long, are used for 
painting on the black lines, two or three of which are applied in close proximity 
by means of two or three sticks which are held in the fingers simultaneously. The 
smaller stick (" ching-al "), which is 5^ cm. long, and has four teeth, is used to 
put on the white points ; it is held vertically between the fingers. The black 
pigment (charcoal) and the white (lime or earth) are mixed with the sap of a 
creeper, which makes the colours stiff and sticky so that they do not run. 

The implement with which the magicians and midwives apply the white points 
is called "smi-kar." When anyone but the magician or the midwife uses this 
instrument, he will be struck by lightning. One of these instruments obtained by 
Vaughan-Stevens was made of tortoise-shell, and was 4 cm. in breadth ; the other, 
which was long and saw-shaped, was of wood, and measured 6 cm. in length.' 

With this implement the points are more regularly produced than is possible 
with the brush, but the alternate black and white dots which are sometimes met 
with are applied so carelessly and irregularly, that without exact information as to 
what the pattern should be the design which is intended can hardly be recognised. 
This arrangement does not appear in face-paints, at least not in the old tribal 
patterns, although many families have adopted them for their patterns. The 
coloured stripe which, running along the bridge of the nose, forms the centre of 
the pattern, is carried down on to the upper lip, if there is no moustache to hinder 
it, but otherwise it ends at the tip of the nose, leaving the septum free. 

The beard indeed seldom interferes with the carrying out of the design, as the 
Sakai have very little, and frequently pluck out the few hairs they possess, but 
where the hair of the beard does hinder, the red pigment only is applied, and the 
white and black are filled in in imagination. 

When the occasion for which the pattern was applied is past it is perhaps 
washed off, but more often what part of it has not already disappeared is rubbed 
off. The red disappears completely in a single night, the white dots fall off, and 
the black streaks only make the face, which is dirty without them, a little darker. 
The face-paint of the child is only washed off by the midwife so long as her 
help is required ; whether it is afterwards washed off or not depends on the 
mother. 

The dead should never have any paint left on the face. In the case of 
anyone who had died whilst the face was painted, the colour had to be washed 
off before burial could take place ; the mourners at funerals did not paint their 
faces. 2 

Face- and Breast-paint of a Sakai ^ Man. 

The paint applied to the breast of the Sakai men represented a fern (a sort 
of polypodium). During the marriage ceremony (whether of the Sakai, Besisi, 
or Kenaboi) the fronds of this fern were bruised in water and squirted over the 
bride and bridegroom, and this assured the pair many children. The fact that, 
although the marriage ceremony among all three of these tribes was the same, the 
Sakai alone adopted this painting of the breast as their tribal sign, might lead us 
to infer that the Sakai face-paint was really the ancient paint of the Sakai race. 

The dots and line of the face-paint represent another fern, with the juice 
of which the youths were sprinkled before they entered the ranks of men and 
might marry. 

^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 152-158. ^ " Senoi " {i.e. Central Sakai) in 

2 Ibid. p. 153. original, throughout this passage. 

48 MATURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

Face-paint of a Sakai * Woman. 

With regard to the five streaks which the face-paint of the Sakai women 
shows in contradistinction to the three streaks of the men, there is a tradition 
explaining this difference.^ 

The breast -paint of a Sakai woman may be appHed by the mother, but 
only after the midwife has given up her charge ; generally speaking, the children, 
whether boys or girls, often wear till marriage the red stripes with which they 
paint themselves, often with the help of a mirror obtained by barter, though 
they may not apply the black streaks and white dots themselves. 

As regards the breast -paint of the Sakai women, it should be mentioned 
that the streak running downwards is generally carried yet further down, so as to 
follow the natural development of the breast. The pattern represents the same 
fern as the pattern of the men.^ 

Old women, who are past child-bearing, omit the lower stripe running from 
the under lip to the cheek, as well as the breast-paint, since these designs re- 
present hope of children. 

The differentiated pattern of the midwife — who is always an old woman — was 
invented because, "although she is old, she is always seeing to children." 

Face-paint of a Young Mother. 

A Sakai woman who has just brought forth a child paints her face every day, 
commencing from the child's birthday, until one lunar month be past. If the 
moon is invisible, the days are counted approximately. Whenever a .Sakai 
mother applies the particular pattern designated for this purpose, the breast- 
paint appropriate to a Sakai woman is omitted. 

Face-paint of a Midwife. 

A Sakai midwife paints her face when she awakes from sleep, just as does the 
new-made mother whom she is tending, the time during which her services are 
required being usually three or five days. On every other occasion a midwife 
bears the face-paint of her tribe ; only that she omits the breast-paint as soon 
as she enters on her functions as midwife. 

When another woman, not a midwife by profession, helps during a confine- 
ment, she too puts on the face-paint of a midwife, so long as she is discharging 
a midwife's functions, but as soon as her help is no longer required, she again 
takes on the full paint of the woman. 

The Sakai women are the only ones that paint the breast.^ 

Face-paint of Children. 

The patterns of the children — which were stripes carried from the eyebrows 
to the tip of the nose, black in the case of girls, red in that of boys ; in the latter 
case there were also two slanting red streaks from the under lip to the chin — were 
applied by the midwife only as soon as the child was born ; so long as the midwife 
was in attendance the painting was renewed every morning, but it ceased as soon 
as she went away. The mother could then, if she wished, apply the ordinary 
tribe pattern, with the addition of the black nose-line in the case of a girl.^ 

The children may not wear tlie narrow black lines till they are married — 
through marriage, according to ancient custom, the youth becomes a man — for the 
children might become unlucky should they pluck up the ferns along with other 

* " Senoi " in original. - Z.f.E. xxvi. 154. 

3 /bid. p. 155. ■* ll'id. ^ Ibid. p. 158. 

CHAP. II SAKAI OF PERAK 49 

plants in playing, and as they would thus break the peace which the magicians 
in ancient times had made with the spirits of the fern. 

This account was obtained from the lay members of the tribe, but the 
magicians only affirmed that the custom had been introduced to make a dis- 
tinction between the unmarried and the married. In the councils of the race in 
old times an unmarried male might not take part, as he was not " man " ; but in 
days when it became a more difficult matter to obtain a wife, the contempt of the 
bachelor was forgotten, as well as the original intention of the face-paint. In 
order to impress upon the children, however, that they might not pluck up the 
said fern, they were told, according to the version of the magicians, the story 
given above. 1 

Elsewhere " (in his description of the " tuang- 
tuang " or '' tuntong " ceremony) Vaughan- Stevens 
writes of the Sakai (Blandas) as follows : — 

Whenever the bamboo "stampers" are to be used for an exorcism the whole 
clan collects together. The men sit upon the ground around the magician, who 
stands in the centre facing towards the rising sun or moon. For, very frequently, 
although not always, these assemblies are held at night-time and by firelight. 
The women and children sit behind the men. The men have their faces painted 
and their hair pushed back from their faces, so that the demons may see the face- 
patterns, and in consequence retire. 

Before leaving the Sakai, it should be remarked that the Sakai women keep 
themselves very much apart during their monthly purification, and all of them 
remain at home on such occasions, or at least as near home as possible ; many of 
them even close the house-door. This is not, however, for shame, since the 
husband is always admitted. They themselves do not know why they do so, and 
the custom is probably derived from some forgotten superstition.^ 

To this it may be added that they employ a special kind of bamboo receptacle 
called " chit-nat " (" chit-nort ") for their purification upon such occasions."* 

Of the pattern of the bamboo receptacle just described we are told that 
its decoration represents a plant, which, according to the sage-femme, does 
not grow in the district now inhabited by the tribe. In former times it was laid 
in the water employed for purification. At the present day the pattern of this 
flower is only used to "destroy" {i.e. to neutralise) "the blood." If the blood 
be not thus " neutralised," the Blood Demon (" Hantu Darah ") would spring 
from it and creep forthwith to the woman's body and stop her courses, and so 
prevent her from bringing healthy children into the world. -^ 

^ Z.f.E. xxvi. 157-174. receptacle (or cup). The whole area 

2 Ibid. p. 148. of its outer surface is painted with an 

^ Ibid, xxviii. 170. ornamental design, consisting of two 

* Ibid. p. 171. Bartels adds narrow stripes with right - angled 

that the receptacle figured in the interior counter - projections, between 

illustration is only 38.5 cm. in length which are inserted irregular five-rayed 

and 18.3 cm. in circumference. It is stars. The outlines of the pattern 

a circular segment of bamboo, which are formed by alternative black and 

has been cut short just below a node white dots. Vaughan - Stevens has 

at the top (so that the upper end of copied the "orthodox" pattern on a 

the vessel is left open), and again just piece of bamboo with the aid of a 

below the next node at the bottom (so medicine -man, but the pattern is not 

that the lower end is closed). Hence quite identical with that produced. 

it is well suited for use as a water ■'' Z. f. E. xxviii. 172. 

VOL. II E 

50 

MATURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

The men have nothing to do with the Hantu Darah,i and say, "We know 
nothing about it, ask the sage-fenime." Even the magicians, who are responsible 
for all other medicines which the latter employs against the demons, would not 
acknowledge this antidote against the Blood Demon. No Sakai man will touch 
this receptacle (" chit-nat "), which is usually kept planted in the ground by the 
waterside. It can be made very quickly when required, and the pattern is very 
quickly washed off by the rain. They have no great objection to the "chit-nat" 
being seen by strangers. ^ 

Unmarried Sakai girls employ for their purification a water-vessel called 
" ka-pet " (" karpet"). Since these vessels, in order to be fully efficacious, should 
have been incised by a magician of the old school, they are only found among 
the wild Sakai tribes who do not speak Malay. ^ 

III. — Jakun. 

Besisi. — I never once heard of a single case of 
tattooing, scarification, nose-boring, circumcision, or 
even of incision, being practised by the Besisi, 
although I made the fullest inquiries among them. 

They related to me, on the other hand, a tradition 
explaining their reason for not adopting the practice 

1 Literally, " Blood Demon" = Malay 
"Hantu Darah." 

2 Z.f. E. xxviii. 172. Bartels adds 
that the painting is performed with 
the instruments used for severing the 
umbilical cord. The ornamentation of 
the other "chit-nats," of which more 
will be said later, is the exclusive 
privilege of the magicians, who em- 
ploy in making them a special kind 
of instrument, closely resembling a 
curry-comb. They are cut out of a 
flat piece of horn (Fig. 2), and have a 
hole at the top for suspending them 
when they are being carried. They 
broaden out towards the bottom, and 
their lower edge is furnished with 
rough, tooth - like projections. The 
greatest width of the larger one is 5.3 
cm., and its height is 5 cm. ; the 
smaller one being 3.5 cm. by 4.6 
cm. 

3 Z.f. E. xxviii. 173, 174. Bartels 
adds here that Vaughan - Stevens has 
sent two specimens of this vessel, one of 
them (Fig. 3) being obtained from the 
Senoi (pure Sakai tribes), and the 
other (Fig. 4) from the Kenaboi. The 

former is a short segment of the stem 
of a bamboo cut short just below 
a particular internode (at the top), 
and again just below the next, so that 
the vessel thus formed is open at the 
top and closed at the bottom. It 
measures 28 cm. in length, and 13 
in circumference, and its surface is 
decorated by three narrow parallel 
stripes formed by a kind of leaf- 
pattern. The second is like the first, 
a simple segment of bamboo measur- 
ing 39.5 cm. in length by 17.1 cm. in 
circumference. It is also decorated 
with three stripes, of which only two, 
however, are formed by the leaf- 
pattern, the third apparently represent-' 
ing a downy leaf- stalk. The design 
represents a plant whose root-end is 
shown near the mouth-opening of the 
vessel. The discrepancy in the designs 
shows that a design does not lose its 
efficacy through slight mistakes of the 
f)perator, such as may be caused by 
hurry, even though the identification 
and explanation of the pattern may be 
made much harder through such slips, 
if not absolutely impossible. 

CHAP. II SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 51 

of circumcision, which they ascribed to the invulner- 
ability of one of their tribal ancestors. 

Ear-boring, on the other hand was, as among the 
Malays, freely practised, the stalk of a flower, such as 
the fragrant " champaka," being not infrequently 
inserted in the perforation. 

Face-paint, however, was very generally employed 
by them, and the pigments used for it appeared to be in 
the main identical with those adopted by the Semang 
and Sakai, i.e. white, obtained from lime ; yellow, 
obtained from turmeric ; and red, obtained from the 
juice of the anatto. 

The only form of paint that I have myself seen 
among the Besisi consisted in daubing the face with 
the aforesaid pigments (white, yellow, or red), these 
being manufactured, in addition to the usual materials, 
from such others {e.g. "bedak" or rice-powder) as the 
growing familiarity of the Besisi with Malay civilisation 
might suggest. No special pattern was employed by 
them, and I never saw any distinct traces of the elaborate 
system of body-paint described by Vaughan-Stevens. 
The latter, however, as usual, gives no localities or 
any other facilities for checking his statements, and I 
can only suggest that he probably got his ideas about 
the Besisi from some other tribe in their neighbour- 
hood with whom there had been more Sakai admixture. 

I give his account, nevertheless, for what it may be 
worth, in the hope that it may assist some future 
investigator to work out the subject more completely 
in the future. 

It runs as follows : ^ — 

The Besisi magician puts on a pattern borrowed from the leaf of the 
" chindweh rimau," or "tiger chindweh," which is a small, juicy, robust plant 

1 Z.f. E. xxvi. 156. 

52 MATURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

not yet fully identified. When rubbed to a pulp and smeared on the body, 
especially the breast, it is believed to give a man the power to overcome a 
tiger. 

The fresh leaf with its peculiar markings gives an exact replica of the face- 
paint of a Besisi magician. The veining on the upper side of the leaf is of 
such a pale yellowish-green that it almost has the effect of white, and thus forms 
a sharp contrast to the very dark greenish-gold stripes of the leaf. 

No one leaf is marked exactly like another. The patterns are manifold ; in 
some cases stripes traverse the entire leaf. In a good light the ground colour of 
the leaf appears, as has been said, of a greenish-gold, but on the under side of 
the leaf the corresponding parts appear a dark reddish-brown ; held up to the 
light the green of the upper side merges into the reddish-brown. 

The under side of the leaf is very soft and smooth, but the upper side is 
plentifully covered with very fine hairs. 

The dark reddish-brown lines which glimmer through from the under side 
correspond in fact to the red and black of the face-paint designed for the tiger 
in conjuration ceremonies, and at the same time to the recognised face-paint 
of the Besisi. 

These stripes are said to correspond to the stripes on the skin of the tiger, 
the red colour not being distinguished from yellow.' 

Mantra. — There is very little information on the 
subject of maturity customs available with regard to 
the Mantra of Malacca, Logan, however, records 
the fact that the teeth of the bride and bridegroom 
were filed with a stone before the day of marriage.^ 

Montano states that the Mantra (Sakai) usually 
file the lower edge of the upper canine teeth, but 
does not connect it with any ceremony.'^ 

Jakun of Johop. — D. F. A. Hervey, in writing of 
the Jakun on the Madek, says that one chief 
characteristic which distinguished the Madek tribe 
from other Jakun tribes was the absence of any 
rite resembling circumcision ; whilst the Sembrong 
tribe practised incision, but did not circumcise.* The 
Madek people, however, relate that they used once 
to observe the custom, but it was given up owing to 
certain untoward circumstances, which befell the tribe 
two or three hundred years ago, as follows : on one 
occasion when the rite was observed, several of the 

' Z.f.E. xxvi. 156. * A. D. Machado tells me that in- 

2 Logan in J. I. A. vol. i. p. 323*. cision is still practised among the Jakun 
2 Rev. iV Ethn. i. 44. of Ulu Batu Pahat, in Johor. 

MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 53 

tribe died of the effects. It was ascertained that the 
knives used for the purpose had been accidentally 
placed in a vessel containing upas poison (" ipoh "), 
the poison with which their blowpipe arrows are 
habitually tipped ; and from that time forward the 
observance of the rite was discontinued,^ 

Corroboration of the foregoing account may be 
obtained from the statement of Logan, who in 
writing of the Benua (or Jakun) of Johor, remarks 
that circumcision was not practised by them. A 
single incision or slit was made by the Benua, but 
not by the Berembun tribes."^ 

Names were sometimes given at birth, but these 
were changed at the age of puberty. The teeth 
were filed like those of the Malays and the Berembun 
tribes.^ 

Orang Laut or Sea-Jakun. 

Orang Laut, S'letar. — Of the Orang S'letar we are 
informed by Thomson that they did not practise circum- 
cision, nor any other Mohammedan customs. It was, 
moreover, related to Thomson that many years ago 
when they had a Malay as their great chief or Batin, 
all the men now of the tribe were induced to undergo 
the rite of circumcision, though such a practice was 
no longer conformed with.^ This is probably a refer- 
ence to some such story as that related above by 
Hervey. 

Orang- Laut, Sabimba. — Of this Orang Laut tribe 
we are told that they were not in the habit of filing 

^ Hervey m J. R. A. S.,'bio. 8, pp. but this was probably a borrowed 

118, 119; cp. p. 544, ante. custom. Ear - boring was rarely 

^ Logan in J. I. A. vol. i. p. practised by the men, and the lips and 

271. nose were never pierced (Z. f. E. 

^ According to Vaughan - Stevens, xxix. 180). 

the Jakun used to blacken their teeth, ■* /. /. A. vol. i. p. 344*. 

54 MA TURITY CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

their teeth, and that the practice of perforating the 
lobe of the ear was equally unknown to them.^ 

In addition, we are informed (of the same tribe) 
that they did not practise the rites either of circum- 
cision or incision. - 

Orang- Laut (no locality specified). — To the fore- 
going may be added an account given by Vaughan- 
Stevens " of certain Orang Laut customs which he 
does not attribute to any particular tribe : — 

Among the Orang Laut a woman during menstruation was, theoretically 
at all events, treated as unclean, though in practice it made no appreciable 
difference. 

The women alleged a belief on the part of the men that if they were to touch 
a woman in such a condition, their virility would suffer. The men themselves, 
however, would make no admissions, and in practice, as I have said, little notice 
of it was taken. 

Nevertheless, a woman in the condition referred to would avoid touching 
anything that a man might eat afterwards ; it was, however, considered a sufficient 
purification to peel any roots which were supposed to have been thus defiled. 
On such occasions the wife would avoid cohabitation and sleep as far away from 
her husband as possible. 

She would, moreover, avoid dipping her drinking bamboo in the common 
water-pot, but would dip it into a drinking-shell of her own, which she would 
keep separately, or else into a vessel made of a short segment of bamboo. 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. p. 298. - Ibid. p. 344*. 

5 Z.f. E. xxviii. 171. 

CHAPTER III. 

Marriage Customs and Beliefs. 

Among all the wild tribes of the Peninsula, as indeed 
among the Malays, an important ingredient of the 
marriage rite is a form of ritual purchase, commonly 
followed by a repast which is shared between bride 
and bridegroom, with their relatives and the chief of 
the tribe as witnesses. 

Among the Negritos these two ingredients appear 
to constitute the entire ceremony, though even the 
act of purchase alone is said to be regarded as 
sufficiently binding, so long as it is performed before 
proper witnesses. It must not, however, be supposed 
from the meagreness of the ceremony that the marriage 
tie is not regarded by the Semang as in the highest 
degree binding, the reverse being the case. The 
Semang are, as far as I could learn, habitually mono- 
gamists, and I failed to obtain any sort of evidence 
in support of the statement that has been more than 
once advanced, viz., that their women were in common 
like their other property.^ This idea of the laxity of 
the marriage-tie among the Negritos may possibly 

1 Similarly erroneous notions as to indeed, in all Mohammedan countries, 

polyandry among the Andamanese were tell us that a lord of the harem can only 

comhated in Man^s Andamanese, p. "/ 1. exist in cases where there is wealth 

As regards polygamy, on the other to maintain such an establishment ; 

hand, the teachings of actual experi- jungle races and the races who live the 

ence, supported by what we, see in simplest lives are commonly, from the 

India, Egypt, the Malay Peninsula, and, exigencies of the case, monogamists. 

55 

56 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part m 

arise from the great antenuptial freedom which 
appears to be allowed, but there is every reason to 
believe that when once married the Semang of both 
sexes are in the highest degree faithful to each other 
and that cases of unfaithfulness are exceedingly rare. 
That conjugal infidelity is strongly discountenanced 
is shown by the penalty assigned to it. 

With regard to the Sakai, there seems to be a 
certain amount of evidence in favour of their being 
to a limited extent polygamists, though here again 
our information is too scanty to enable us to form an 
opinion as to how far the custom is general. On the 
other hand, with regard to the actual ceremony, the 
most important elements, according to one authority,^ 
are the painting of the man's face and the squirting 
of fern-seed over the bride and bridegroom, as a 
means of ensuring them a numerous progeny. 

I may add that among the Sakai marriage is 
preceded by a form of initiation, at which the man's 
face-paint is applied for the first time. 

Miklucho-Maclay heard from Malays and members 
of the Catholic Mission at Malacca that communal 
marriage existed among the Sakai i^sic, ? Mantra). 
Some days or weeks after marriage the girl was said to 
leave her husband with his consent and take up with 
the men of his family in turn. She then came back to 
her husband, but kept up these irregular liaisons, 
which were regulated by chance and her own wishes. - 

The Jakun or Malayan tribes again (including the 
Blandas and Besisi of Selangor), are as a rule fairly 
strict monogamists, and their post-matrimonial fidelity, 

' See p. 64, infra. such a custom, and resting as it does on 

2 J. R. A. S., S. />., No. 2, p. 215. second-hand evidence or worse, cannot 

This is, h()we%'er, ihe only notice of he accepted without due corroboration. 

CHAP. Ill GENERAL REMARKS 57 

while it varies in degree apparently from tribe to 
tribe, is certainly remarkable, although in their case, 
too, it appears to be considered compatible with con- 
siderable freedom before marriage. 

Of the Jakun ceremonies, that of eating together from 
the same dish is one which is found throughout South- 
eastern Asia. But the most remarkable part of all 
these customs are the Jakun {i.e. Malayan) " marriage 
carnival " and the unique race round the mound or 
"ant hill," for which, among some branches of the 
Sea Tribes, a race in canoes is sometimes substituted. 

The peculiar shape of the mound, which has come 
down from an entirely unknown origin, may perhaps 
be held to show that the mound ceremony is the 
older form of this peculiar rite, but in any case we 
have here a custom which will assuredly repay any 
student of ethnography who decides to work out the 
entire question for himself. 

The effect of intermarriage between Malays and 
aboriginal women is one which at first would hardly 
be expected, viz., that it is the higher race — the 
Malay — that is chiefly affected by it. This fact, 
however strange it may seem, is clearly brought out 
by Logan, who, in writing of the Benua, observes that 
many of the Malays had Benua wives, who of course 
became converts to Islam. The Benua on their part 
were debarred from seeking wives amongst the Malays, 
and this must always have had considerable influence 
in checking the natural growth of population. The 
first Malay adventurers were probably more numerous 
in males than females. In many places the Chinese 
tend to absorb the Malays in their turn. The more 
civilised and wealthy races thin those below them of 
their women, and necessity drives the latter to make 

58 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

up the loss wherever it is possible to do so, in some 
measure at the expense of those still lower. This is 
one of those fundamental facts of ethnography which 
should be borne in mind in speculating on the 
gradual extinction of aboriginal races, when com- 
paratively civilised colonies come into contact with 
them. A considerable proportion of the Malays in 
the Peninsula behind Malacca are descendants of 
women of the aboriginal tribes, and the Malays in 
their turn gave wives to the immigrants from China, 
so that the greater portion of the Chinese of Malacca 
have Malayan blood in their veins. ^ 

I. — Semang. 

Pang'an. — I have never met with any published 
account of a Semang wedding, but while in Kelantan 
I acquired some information about the marriage rites 
of the Eastern Semang in the Belimbing district. 

The " marriage settlements," according to my 
informants, consisted of the blade of a jungle-knife or 
chopper, which had to be presented by the bride- 
groom to the bride's parents, and a coiled girdle of 
great length called " salek," that was said to be manu- 
factured from the fibres of the sugar-palm (" urat 
hijok "), but that doubtless more or less closely re- 
sembled the girdle of rock-vein fungus, which has been 
described in an earlier chapter. This girdle had to be 
presented by the bridegroom to the bride, who would 
never, it was said, consent to part with it for fear of its 
being used to her prejudice in some magic ceremony. 

There was also a good deal of chaunting (" siwang " 
or " bcr-siwang " = invocation of spirits) at these 

^ Logan mj. I. A. vol. i. p. 291. 

CHAP. Ill NEGRITOS OF KELANTAN 59 

Pangan marriages, but beyond this no further infor- 
mation was obtainable. 

Kedah Semang". — Later on I was informed by the 
Semang of Kedah that adultery was punishable by 
death (although in practice it might be commuted for 
the usual blood-fine of forty dollars). This fine, how- 
ever, was payable in kind, and would doubtless in 
practice be adjusted to the means of the culprit. 

The only information I have met with in regard 
to the married life of the Semang, is Newbold's 
observation to the effect that the Semang women 
were in common like their other property.^ 

What truth there may be in this sweeping state- 
ment it is very hard to say, though from what I saw 
and heard of their domestic life I find it most difficult 
to believe (with regard to the Semang of Kedah at all 
events), that the charge was well founded."^ Certainly, 
as has been remarked above, it appears quite incom- 
patible with so severe a punishment for adultery as 
was exacted by the customs of this very tribe. 

Perak Semang.- — ^To the foregoing may be added 
the following notes of Vaughan-Stevens on the Semang 
of Perak : — 

When a Semang commits adultery with the wife of another (which very rarely 
happens), and the fact remains concealed until the death of the injured husband, 
the latter's soul acquires knowledge of the offence, and seeks to revenge itself 
upon the children of the transgressor, by sending a Disease upon them. In such 
cases the Disease (the same that had killed the man) attacks the children 
independently of Karl's commands.^ 

In order to avert this danger, the trangressor, as soon as he hears of the 
husband's death, takes the children by the arms and swings them through the 
fire, at the same time "jumping" them up and down upon the charred wood so 
as to blacken the soles of their feet, by way of protecting them. If the Disease 
comes afterwards when the child has been replaced upon the ground, the child 
remains unharmed. Even if the child were somewhat affected before being 
swung through the fire, the Disease is yet forced to retire in order to escape 

1 Newbold, ii. pp. 379-381. Cp., xxviii. 166, observes that in their 

however, UH. ii. 558, where the men (good) treatment of their women, the 

are credited with polygamy. Semang ranked next to the Sakai. 

^ Vaughan-Stevens in Z. /. E. ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 132. 

6o MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part in 

being burnt, and as long as the soles of the child's feet remain so blackened, 
the Disease is prevented from returning. Moreover, the Disease cannot in any 
case kill the child without Karih's command ; nor can it, in any case, make a 
long stay, since it has to be back with the Death-messenger beside the corpse, as 
soon as ever the " Penitah " is cut. The children are only attacked as a means of 
bringing the transgressor to justice, by attracting the superior chief's (the Futto's) 
attention, either from the children's getting the same Disease as the husband or 
from the transgressor's betraying himself by swinging them tlirough the fire. 
The superior chief, in such cases, pronounces the penalty. ^ 

By the same -writer we are told that — 

The Semang have an aphrodisiac called "chin-weh" or "chindweh" 
( = "chinduai").2 This name is probably borrowed from the Sakai, but as the 
plant used in this case is altogether a different one and is not employed by other 
magicians, it may be regarded as a discovery of their own.^ 

II. — Sakai. 
Perak Sakai. — De Morgan, in his account of Sakai 
marriage customs,^ remarks that the conditions required 
for marriage were few. In the first place, there was 
no fixed limit of age. The consent of the woman was 
required, together with that of her father (if living), but 
if otherwise, that of the eldest surviving member of 
the family. The future husband made the application 
in person with the consent of the father. The wife 
brought no dowry to her bridegroom, but the latter 
made a present to his prospective father-in-law of 
certain specified articles, e.g. a knife or hatchet or 
yams, "according to his means."'' Commenting on 
the foregoing, De Morgan remarks that it might be 

* Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 132. band generally paid ten dollars (" ring- 

- Cp. Z.f. E. .\xviii. 183. git") = 50 francs to the father ; a chief 

^ V. B. G. A. xxiv. 468. paid up to thirty dollars ; but M. Lias 

*' De Morgan, vii. 422. adds that "this was the highest price, 

^ According to Maxwell {J.K.A.S., and that it appeared to him the biggest 

S.B.fNo. I, p. 1 12) the price i)aid for sum of money that the Sakai, even 

a wife included a " piece of iron, some those educated by contact with the 

roots, and some flowers." According Malays, could conceive." The sums 

to Hale (p. 291) the presents consisted mentioned were doubtless paid in kind, 

of"sarongs,"or bill-hooks("parangs"), but even then there is, I think, little 

purchased from Malays, or the bride- doubt that this last figure (as M. Lias 

groom might clear one or two acres of himself seems to have inferred) was 

jungle, plant them with tapioca, sugar- exaggerated, perhaps for "swagger," 

cane, etc., and present them to the owing to the presence of the Malays 

parentsof the bride. According to Krau that he had brought with him. The 

de St. Pol Lias (pp. 279, 280) the hus- nominal price of a Sakai wife, among 

h>\(;.\i;i-.ii Sakai ('iiilukkn wrrii UNCLt. 

Vo/. II. p. 60. 

&rf£t£^>1 

1 4\ -,v*f^9i>?lS 

VtilNt; SAKAI (ilKI.. 

Engaged to be married al the next I'rah fruit season— the usual marrying time of the Sakai, 
L'hi Slim, reral<. 

Vol. ri. A 61. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 6i 

called an example of marriage by purchase, but that 
the fact of purchase is to some extent modified by 
the smallness of the price paid, and that all that 
actually remains is a purely formal substitute for 
marriage by purchase, which was once a wide-spread 
custom in Southern Asia. Continuing, De Morgan 
adds that the form of marriage was extremely 
simple. The bride and bridegroom repaired, accom- 
panied by their relatives, to the house of their tribal 
chief, where the latter in converse with the two 
families inquired into the prospects of the joint 
manage, after which, if no obstacle presented itself, he 
formally declared them married, and all was over.' 
The newly married pair were required to build a hut 
and form a clearing, and in the interval that must elapse 
before it could bring them in a return, they lived at 
the charge of their families, who provided them with 
yams and maize, and everything else that they might 
require for their maintenance. 

An account of the Perak Sakai by Colonel Low, 
in the Journal of the Indian Archipelago, gives the 
details of the religious ceremony, which are omitted 
in De Morgan's description : — 

A young Sakai man pays his addresses in 
person. If the girl approves, he makes a present to 
her family of spears, knives, and household utensils, 
and a time being fixed, the relations of both sides 
assemble at the bride's house. The betrothed 
parties eat rice together out of the same dish, and the 
little finger of the right hand of the man is joined 

the Sakai themselves, cannot be greater Z.f.E. xxviii. 177. 
than about the value of ten dollars paid 1 De Morgan adds [loc. cit.) that 

in kind, for the simple reason that there was "no religious ceremony"; 

no ordinary Sakai bridegroom would but as will appear from the next ac- 

have more property than this to pay count, this statement of his is certainly 

with. Cp. also Vaughan-Stevens in mistaken. 

62 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

to that of the left hand of the woman. These two 
last observances are found with some slight modi- 
fications amongst the Malays on like occasions. The 
eating together is also a Burmese and Peguan custom. 

The parents on both sides then pronounce 
them married persons, and give them good advice 
for their future conduct. As an example of the 
actual words used, Col. Low gives the expression 
" Mano klamin che dada," an admonition or wish that 
they might be fruitful.^ 

It would appear from some accounts that the 
Sakai men occasionally take more than one wife. 
Thus De la Croix says that a Sakai married, or rather 
bought, a wife, or even two, if he were rich enough.' 

Marriage and [alleged] Totemism. 

According to Vaughan-Stevens, the Sakai (whom he calls " Senoi "), Besisi, 
and Kenaboi, were sub-tribes of one single people, which also included at a more 
remote date the Tembeh and Jakun. Each of these three sub-tribes was 
divided into clans,^ distinguished by the pattern of the face-paint (termed by 
Vaughan-Stevens " totems.")* The Thorn, Tiger, Snake, Fish, and Leaf totems 
were the primary ones. In the course of time, the components of the tribes 
becoming widely scattered, new settlements sprang up in various parts of the 
Peninsula, and it became the practice for each local group to adopt some variant 
of the totem-mark and house. Thus, among the sub-clans of the Snake totem, 
were Pythons, Cobras, Hamadryads, etc.^ 

In the olden days intermarriage between the clans was forbidden. The 
penalty for disobedience was expulsion firom the clan. The people thus 
expelled formed new clans (Musang or Civet-cat, Crocodile, Scorpion). A member 
of the primary clans who married into one of these secondary clans lost his status 
in his old clan, and became a member of his spouse's clan. With the rise of sub- 
clans these quasi-endogamic rules do not seem to have been changed ; choice was 
not restricted to the members of the sub-clan. No definite information is given 

^ J. I. A. vol. iv. pp. 430, 431. Thomas, who has made totemism his 

According to Cerruti, the Sakai marriage special study. — W. S.] The account is 

season was at the ripening of the confused, the editor has not distinguished 

" prah "-fruit. tribe from clan, and speaks in one place 

2 Rev. (TEthn. vol. i. No. 4, p. of the totem mark as a tribal pattern. 
339- Cp. Brau de St. P. Lias, pp. It is stated that the clan patterns went 
279, 280 : "a Sakai marries two out of use owing to the scattering of 
wives." the members of the tribe, and were 

3 Apparently forming local groups. replaced by the sub-clan patterns. Of 
Z.f. E. xxvi. 160. the origin of the clans nothing is said. — 

* Z.f. E. xxvi. 150, 151. [I owe N. W. T. Sed 7j. ante, p. 32, et infra. 
this summary of Sakai marriage and 258 ; and cp. Martin, 863. 
totemism to my friend, Mr. N. W. ^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 150, 151. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 63 

by Vaughan-Stevens as to the rules of descent as regards sub-clan names, but 
paternal descent appears to be the general rule. From the fact that the sub- 
clans were local in their character, we may also infer that in respect of the sub- 
totems the rule was to take them from the father. The children of a Batin 
formed an exception to the ordinary rule. Only the elder took his father's 
totem ; the next four belonged each to one of the remaining primary totem-clans.' 

The rule of descent as regards the sub-tribes wgs as follows. If a Besisi man 
married a Sakai woman, she and her children became Besisi. In the case of the 
Batin, however, an exception was again made. For three generations the sul)- 
tribe ^ of the Batin was prepotent, and the man who married into it lost his own 
tribal name, and took that of his wife.^ 

We have no information as to whether members of the same clan or sub-clan 
are regarded as akin, or whether the sub-tribe is by the Sakai regarded as the 
kinship group. Nor is it clear how far kinship is a bar to marriage. Vaughan- 
Stevens remarks that the customs of the Sakai and Pangan are very similar to 
those of the Jakun and Orang Laut, who were compelled to take a wife from 
another community.* In the same passage, however, he expressly says that the 
Pangan are not restricted as regards their choice of wives, thus contradicting 
the assertion that local exogamy is in force among them. The evidence is there- 
fore worthless. 

As regards the Sakai, however. Hale says that the Kinta Sakai generally 
went a considerable distance to seek their wives — to a tribe who spoke quite a 
different dialect. Elsewhere Vaughan-Stevens says,^ the Sakai usage was for the 
son-in-law to build his house on his father-in-law's land, but this of course does 
not exclude the possibility that he belonged to the same local group. ^ We may 
perhaps infer that the same custom prevailed among the Tembeh. Vaughan- 
Stevens tells us that although no definite rule appeared to exist, the son-in-law 
and mother-in-law avoided one another in practice as much as possible. '^ This 
may of course mean that the son-in-law and mother-in-law belonged to the same 
local group ; we cannot infer a custom of exogamy from it, but it points to the 
two families being in close proximity. 

In estimating the value of the account given by Vaughan-Stevens, we must 
bear in mind that he is inclined to group his facts from the standpoint of a 
hypothesis for the adoption of which he can give no sufficient reason.^ We are 
expressly told ^ that it was only after lengthy observation that he arrived at the 
results given above, and that the system here displayed is his theory, based on 
many single observations, and not a connected traditional account handed down 
by the Sakai. Such a traditional account would probably not be entirely 
reliable ; an observer like Vaughan-Stevens, with no knowledge of scientific 
terminology, and not much critical sense, i** would have done better to give us his 
data rather than his conclusions. In his account, summarised above, traditional 

' Z.f.E. xxvi. 160. " Z./;Z;'.xxviii. 180.; cp. p. 203, ?«yra. 

^ Here again the word totem is used ® Cf. his treatment of the question of 
by Griinwedel (or Vaughan-Stevens) to patterns. ^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 150. 
mean sub-tribe. As both husband and '** Vaughan - Stevens explains else- 
wife were of one clan, he could not where {Z.f. E. xxviii. 175) that he 
change his clan ; a change of sub-clan means by exogamy, marriage outside 
would be possible, but seems to be the family, not marriage outside the 
excluded by the context. tribe. He suggests (Z./". E. xxvi. 160), 

2 It does not appear whether this that all three sub-tribes, Sakai or Senoi, 

was accompanied by the removal of the Kenaboi, and Besisi, were a sub-group 

husband to his wife's group, and his of the Leaf clan. Against this may be 

incorporation in it. set the statement that the original 

* Z.f. E. xxviii. 174. purpose of the totem marks was to 

P. 291. distinguish articles of property {loc. cit. 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 90. p. 151). 

64 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

narrative, present-day facts, and inferences, seem hopelessly and indistinguishably 
intermingled. 

Elsewhere Vaughan- Stevens gives the story of twins who married the same 
woman. Their "totems" were "musang" and "palm-leaf," and their child 
should have followed the father's " totem," but this being uncertain, it was given 
a new " musang " totem. It is not clear that the twins were children of a Batin.' 

Again, the breast-paint of a Sakai (Sen-oi) man represented a fern (a sort 
of polypodium). The fronds of this fern being bruised in water and squirted over 
the bride and bridegroom at marriage assured the pair many children. The dots 
and lines of the face- paint represented another fern, with the juice of which 
the youth was sprinkled before he became man and might marry. 

The face-paint of the Sakai man consisted of three lines or stripes, whereas 
that of the woman consisted of five. ^ 

The tiger and " musang " patterns represented these animals, but are now 
only used as blowpipe marks. Formerly they were patterns for face-paint.* 

Yet in Z.f. E. xxvi. 1 50, the face patterns are spoken of by Vaughan-Stevens 
as being all of one type. 

With regard to the age of the contracting parties, 
M. Brau de St. P. Lias states that the women were 
often married when mere children.^ 

In the account by Colonel Low, from which I have 
already quoted, we are further told that polygamy 
was permitted among the Sakai, but was not common, 
and that the men seemed to care little about their 
wives leaving them. 

The men appeared, nevertheless, to treat them 
well. But should a man choose to resent the 
infidelity of his wife, he might kill her and her 
paramour without any fear of the result, further than 
the possibility of their relatives avenging the deed.^ 

To this we may add the fuller account given by 
De Morgan, who tells us that the husband acquired 
absolute power over his wife, and would not shrink 
from beating her if the provocation were great 

1 Ethnol. Notizblait, i. 4-6. ^ngia, as these latter would not only be 

- Z.f. E. xxvi. 154. Mr. II. N. rather brown than black, but would beef 

Kidley (of Singapore) suggests that these a uniform colour. ^ Notizblatt, i. 4-6. 

alleged fern-spores (as represented in the ■* Cp. Vaughan-Stevens in Z. f. E. 

face-paint of the Sakai) are more prob- xxviii. 174, where we are told that 

ably copied from the black and white the age among the Sakai was fourteen 

fruit-seeds which are found in the Sakai for the girl and from fifteen to sixteen 

necklaces and armlets. They are prob- for the man. 

ably not meant for fern-seeds or spor- ^' J. I. A. vol. iv. pp. 430, 431. 

Cemi/i. 
New LY-MAKKIED COUPLE, WOMAN WITH PAINTED HeAD-BAND AND 

NosE-QuiLL, Ulu Itam, Fekak. 

Vol. 11. /. 64. 

Dancing at Chk Ttpei's (the Squirrel's) Wedding, Rantau Panjang, Selangor. 

W:iJikS^ 

McGregor. 

I'Airrv urrii Mu.sic:ai, Instkl'mknt.s at Weddinc; of Cue 'I'urKi, Ramai' I'anjang, Selangoi- 

M;il;iy gongs, tlruiii>, t.-uiil«)Ui iins, :iinl IkIiUl-s. (.See p. 70.) 
Vol. II. /. 65. 

CHAP. Ill SAKAI OF PERAK 65 

enough. A form of divorce was allowed among the 
Sakai, the reasons for which it was permitted being, 
in the case of the husband, grave misconduct, such 
cases being settled by a fine, or separation, the 
woman keeping the children. In the case of the 
wife, a refusal to take her proper share in house- 
keeping, planting, hunting, and other tasks necessarily 
incidental to her position, was regarded as a reason. 
The aggrieved husband, in the latter case, lodged a 
complaint with the tribal chief, who communicated it 
to the woman's family ; if no good results followed, he 
insisted on separation, sending the woman back to 
her own family, but always, however, retaining the 
custody of the children — a point of great importance 
among these tribes where children were regarded as 
a source of profit, the possession of children actually 
making his re-marriage easier.^ The paternal authority 
ordinarily lasted during the father's lifetime, but 
otherwise ceased as soon as a married child left its 
father's roof. The adoption of orphan children by 
childless people was also occasionally practised.^ 

We are told by Maxwell (in his account of the 
Perak tribes) that the punishment for adultery 
was death, and that it was usually carried out by a 
relative, who invited his victim to a hunting excursion, 
and after tiring him out, beat his brains out with a 
club while he was asleep, and left him to rot upon the 
earth, denying to his remains even the rough sepulture 
given to those who died in an honourable way.^ 

1 " Divorce was permitted by the amounted to thirty dollars each, the 

Sakai, but was extremely rare among woman's fine being paid by her father 

them. Adultery was regarded as a or brothers." — Brau de St. P. Lias, 

great crime (' salah besar'), To' Lila pp. 279, 2S0. - De Morgan, vii. 422. 

told me, and often gave rise to a fight. ^ Maxwell in J.R.A.S., S.B., No. 

The guilty parties were made to pay a i, pp. 1 1 1, 1 12. It should be noted 

fine to the husband, which generally that Maxwell in his account, which is 

VOL. II 1" 

66 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS i-art hi 

A different account of the method adopted by the 
outraged husband for the punishment of the guilty 
parties is given by Vaughan-Stevens as follows : — 

The punishment prescribed by the Sakai for the adultery of a wife was very 
seldom really carried out. The husband, however, if he wished to enforce it, 
would bind his guilty wife hand and foot and lay her down upon the ground at a 
short distance from his hut. He then armed himself with three wooden spears 
of bamboo or palm-wood ("nibong"), and took up his station among the brush- 
wood in the vicinity. The woman was allowed neither food nor water, but was 
kept there perforce until she died either from the bites of ants or from ex- 
haustion. Meanwhile, however, her paramour was expected to wait for an op- 
portunity to cut through her bonds and take her back to her husband's house. 
The husband, on the other hand, was allowed from his concealment to launch 
each of his three spears once at his rival. If he succeeded in killing him, he 
might if he pleased let his wife lie there till she died, or else if he were now more 
inclined to mercy, he might release her and send her away. If, on the other 
hand, her paramour's attempt succeeded, the husband could take no further steps, 
though he could if he desired send away his wife when her paramour had 
brought her back to the hut. If, on the other hand, the paramour refused to 
make the attempt, the husband might bring him up before the chief for punish- 
ment, in which case the husband himself was allowed to name the penalty. He 
applied in such cases to one of the subordinate chiefs, who could apply to the 
Batin for confirmation of the sentence, if he considered it just. He need not, 
however, do so if four of the older men advised him that the punishment was 
excessive. 1 

The Batin had the power of delaying the proceedings by postponing the 
sentence for an indefinite period. Nevertheless private quarrels, ending in 
wounds or death, frequently arose from cases which had been postponed on 
account of some mitigating circumstance, which limited the penalty to be paid to 
public discussion of the case." 

A wife could not bring her offending husband to the Batin for punish- 
ment, since he need only announce that conjugal rights had been intentionally 
withheld from him, to obtain condonation of his infidelity, and a separation 
could then be obtained at his own instance. In former days, before the present 
intercourse with the Malays, divorce was not regarded with such indifference as 
nowadays, but was highly disapproved of and very seldom actually occurred. 
Moreover, a man would not put away his wife when he was sure both of losing 
his children and of having much trouble to come by another wife. But when a 
woman absconded from her husband, and after the lapse of a month, he did not 
think it proper to take her back, whether on account of her laziness, or her 
clumsiness, or her evil temper, both parties in that case were regarded as free, 
and were allowed to remarry at will. The husband, however, in this case had 
the right of retaining the children, and of making them work for him.^ 

otherwise sufficiently accurate, confuses follow her paramour, when the latter 
the Sakai with the Semang — a con- has to pay $25, or unless the woman 
fusion of which, however, he is by no is a chief's wife, when $25 may be the 
means alone guilty. minimum. Children may follow either 
^ Z.f. E. xxviii. 179. ''■ Ibid. parent by choice, but usually prefer to 
' Ibid. p. 180. In a letter just follow the father. Misconduct of a 
received. Dr. Luering says: "Among man with his brother's wife would 
the Sakai of Bertang, in Perak, the i)roduceaquarrel,but not necessarily en- 
punishment for adultery is a fine of tail a fine. Wives are generally chosen 
^6.50, unless the woman wishes to within the tribe." 

CHAP. Ill SAKAI OF SELANGOR 67 

Before leaving this subject, mention should be 
made of the account given by Vaughan-Stevens of 
Sakai love-philtres, which runs as follows : — 

Among the Sakai love-philtres were employed by both sexes, one of them 
being called " mong dar " (?). It consisted of the blossom of a creeper which 
grew upon the hills. If a little of the dried blossom were steeped in water and 
drunk, it was alleged that it would produce stimulation in the men, but would 
have no effect upon women. ' 

Another love-philtre, called " chin-weh " ( = " chindwai ") was only used by 
women, and that in the same way as the one just described ; the only difference 
being that the entire plant was taken, as must necessarily be the case since the 
plant was of a fungoid character. It was very difficult to obtain.-^ 

Under the name " chinweh kasih"^ various plants were used as aphro- 
disiacs by the Sakai women. The Sakai magicians, moreover, knew of a certain 
plant, which they kept secret, and which procured them especial deference. 

Even at the present day only the magicians of the old school have any know- 
ledge of this plant, which was besides of great rarity. From one such magician 
Vaughan-Stevens obtained his specimen. In order to conceal its identity from 
the lay members of the tribe, the plant was crushed into water, which was 
purchased at a high price by Sakai and Malay women, who employed it as a 
love-potion.* 

The Sakai women also employed an expedient which was believed to impair 
the virility of the men. For this purpose they took the "senggulong" ("sengu- 
long "), a kind of wood-louse \sic ? millipede], and burnt it in the fire until it was 
charred. At the same time they burnt a small piece of cloth which had been 
used for washing a dead man's body. The ashes of the two were mixed together, 
and whenever a woman succeeded in introducing these ashes into the food of her 
intended victim, the latter was believed to have lost his virility for ever.** 

Selang-or Sakai. — The late Mr. J. A. G. Campbell 
of Selangor, in writing of the wedding customs of the 
Ulu Langat Sakai, describes a peculiar ceremony, 
which must be very trying to a nervous bridegroom. 

Their marriage ceremonies (he says) were very 
simple; one custom was for the relations on both sides to 
sit on the ground round an ant-heap, and for the bride 
or her father to question the bridegroom as follows : *^ — 

1 Z.f.E. xxviii. 183. report. A thick fleshy calyx divided 

Bartels {loc. cit.) remarks that "this into several sections or 'flower-leaves' 

' mong dar ' is not, as Vaughan-Stevens then appears ; its colour being black 

formerly supposed, the Rafflesia, but a varied with spots of peculiar shades, 

smaller though similar blossom. It is from dark brown to purple." - Ibid. 

a parasitical climber, which possesses ^ Ibid. The specimens sent could not 

no leaves, but only big claviform buds be identified. " Kasih "= " love." 

which appear to be either thrown out * Z.f. E. xxviii. 183. 

at intervals from the stem itself, or to " Ibid. This is also a Malay belief 

grow on a very short stem. These (C.O.B. ). 

buds open suddenly with a distinct " J. A. G. Campbell, p. 241. 

68 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

" Are you clever with the blowpipe ? " 

" Can you fell trees cleverly ? " 

" Are you a good climber ? " and 

" Do you smoke cigarettes ? " 

If these questions were answered in the affirma- 
tive, the bridegroom then gave a cigarette to the 
bride and lighted one himself; they then ran round 
the mound three times ; if the man succeeded in 
catching the woman the ceremony was completed, 
and they were declared married, but if the man failed 
to catch the woman he tried again another day.^ 

Of the same Sakai tribe, Campbell adds that their 
marriage settlements consisted of saucepans, frying- 
pans, jungle- knives, hatchets, beads, and blowpipes. 
The woman, however, gave nothing in return, A 
man could not have more than one wife. 

Sakai (Orang- Tanjong) of Selangor. — Writing of 
another tribe in Ulu Langat, the same author tells 
us that the women of the " Cape Tribe " (" Orang 
Tanjong ") were allowed to have more than one 
husband, and that one woman who lived at Bandar 
Kanching formerly had four. These women (he adds) 
used to seek their own husbands.^ 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — The qualifications required of the 
Blandas (Kuala Langat) women, at their wedding 
ceremony, which was similar to that described above, 
were their ability to hammer tree-bark (" menitek 
t'rap ") ; to roast or " burn " (" bakar ") bananas, sweet 
potatoes, and yams ; and to make betel-leaf wallets 
(" bujam "). It may also be worth noting that both 

' J. A. G. Campbell, p. 241. Al- .Sakai, this particular ceremony is un- 
thouj^h this tril)e must he classed as douhtedly of Malayan origin. ^ Ibid. 

CHAP. Ill SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 69 

parties change their names after the birth of their 
first - born child, whose name they take. Thus Pa' 
Bijan, Ma' Bijan, or " Father of Bijan," " Mother of 
Bijan," were the actual names of a married Blandas 
couple whose eldest-born child was called Bijan. 

Besisi. — Upon one occasion when I inquired of the 
Besisi in Kuala Langat how a man would address 
a woman whom he wished to marry, and who was not 
unwilling to accept him, one of them repeated as a 
specimen, the following address.^ It took the form 
of an imaginary dialogue, which ran as follows : — 

Man. Are you willing to take me, say ? 

Woman. What mean you ? I merely follow you. How can I refuse ? 

Man. I wish that too. 

Wo/natt. How can I refuse ? It is the man with whom it rests. I merely 
follow you, since I am but a woman. As I am a woman, I merely follow you. 

iMan. If that is truth, so be it. 1 will be father and mother to you, rest 
assured. 

IVoinan. What mean you ? I follow you for a single day, but not for long. 

3/an. That is also my desire. 

Wotnati. If you are savage, overbearing, harsh-spoken, if you are like that, if 
you are like a hornet, I shall be unable to endure it beyond to-morrow. 

Here the man, after pushing the betel-stand to- 
wards her, says : 

" I desire to seek somewhat of yours, a stand for betel ; 

I am looking for a filly, yearning greatly to obtain her ; 

I am looking for a sea-canoe. 

If it have no mast, I will supply a mast for it, 

If it have no sail, I will supply a sail for it, 

I have sought it by sea till now, but have not found it. 

I have now reached your land, I have scented a blossom, 

I have scented it thus far oversea. 

Weary am I indeed with roaming so far. 

But here verily is such a blossom, and such scent has reached me, that I 

follow it. 
Pick it up ? I will indeed pick it. 
Is it still to seek ? I will indeed seek it. 
Desired I not its fragrance, I had not sought it ; 
But my craving for its scent is very great, I ask but to own it. 
Should I find it not, I will seek — yea, until I find it. 

Great is my yearning — yea, even if in a month I find it not, I will not return 
Until you grant me my Heart's Desire." 

1 In ordinary cases the man's request as among the Malays themselves. Cp. 
would be addressed to the girl's parents, Malay Magic, pp. 364-365. 

70 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part in 

As regards marriage itself, the existence of a dis- 
tinctive law is perhaps more than might be expected 
of this unsophisticated race, yet it not only exists but 
is recognised as binding, and is, moreover, pretty 
strictly observed, and it is noticeable that there are in 
the Besisi dialect special terms for both "husband" 
and " wife." 

A remarkable fact is that the Besisi commonly 
have a regular carnival (at the end of the />adz or rice 
harvest) when (as they say) they are " allowed to 
exchange " their wives, a practice which recalls the 
wedding law of ancient Peru, by which there was 
established one universal wedding - day annually 
throughout the land. 

The marriage settlements brought by the man 
consist of such objects as are best calculated to con- 
tribute to the satisfaction of the bride and her parents, 
as, for instance, a string of beads, four cubits 
("hasta") of white cloth, a plate and a drinking- 
cup, and in some cases a ring ; but at the same time 
the husband is expected to provide a hut, cooking- 
pots, and other necessary articles such as will suffice 
to enable house-keeping to be started with reasonable 
comfort. 

The usual ceremony (as now practised by the 
Besisi) is of a very simple description, and is usually 
performed by the Batin, who is a priestly chief, and, 
as a Besisi man once put it, " who takes the place of 
an Imam " (the Malay Mohammedan priest).^ 

' "The marriage ceremony is per- exchani^c of " sirih " (betel-leaf chewed 

formed either by the Batin or the with areca-nut) they are pronounced 

Jinang. The contracting parties stand man and wife. A feast is afterwards 

on each side of him, the girl on his held, to which all the members of the 

left and the man on his -right. He tribe are invited." — Bellamy, p. 227. 

then joins their hands, and after an Cp. _/. /. .4. iii. 490. 

^ o 3-= H 
H g = .2 n 

3 i; £ ^ O 

S 3 i/i *; 3 

~ ^ /■ o a 

C ^ _ J. 

!Z (A >i 5 iS 

■/I c = ^ o 

•- 5 "^ ^ .« 

— tjj ^ i; 

« '5 5 Hi £ 

8 

S/) 

_rt 

o 

o 

rt 

._- 

u 

'J 

Ml 

7; 

n 

li! 

- 

't: 

j{r-t 

CHAP. Ill SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR -ji 

This simpler form of wedding (as practised by the 
Besisi of Sepang in Selangor) was celebrated in the 
following manner: — In the first place, the bridegroom 
would bring to the house of the bride's parents the 
presents required by custom — say five cubits of white 
cloth, five quids of betel-leaf, five cigarettes, and a 
copper ring. 

On the bridegroom's arrival all present partook of 
food, and the bride and bridegroom then ate rice off 
the same plate. After this meal the gifts were 
presented to the bride's parents, and the Batin or 
one of the minor chiefs of the tribe {e.g. the 
" Penghulu Balei ") then inquired : " What about 
these children of ours } Are we to make them 
one ? " To this the parents replied in the affirmative, 
and the head of the tribe then gave both bride and 
bridegroom a new name. 

The parties might then disperse at leisure. 

The really remarkable rite called the " ant-heap " 
(properly the " hillock " or " mound ") ceremony, re- 
ferred to above by Mr. J. A. G. Campbell as a custom 
of the Ulu Langat Sakai, appears to be now very nearly 
obsolete among the Besisi, so far as I could ascertain. 

I once had the good fortune, however, to witness 
it when it was being performed at Ayer Itam (in the 
Kuala Langat district of Selangor) by some Besisi 
who had just returned from Batu Pahat (in Johor, 
where they told me that the old custom was still kept 
up). I will therefore describe the ceremony that I 
saw as carefully as possible. I attended the wedding 
at the invitation of the Besisi themselves, w^ith whom 
I was on very good terms. Shortly after my arrival 
at the village a small pit was dug by Penghulu Lempar 
(of Batu Pahat) in front of the door of a special palm- 

72 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

leaf building (a Balei or Tribal Hall, built on the plan 
of the letter T) which had been erected for the 
occasion. With the earth, or rather clay, thrown up 
from the pit Penghulu Lempar constructed a mound ^ 
about the height of a man's waist and in the shape of a 
truncated cone, surmounted by a small globe and knob, 
so that it was not unlike a gigantic bell and bell-handle. 
In the morning, just before the ceremony, I saw 
Penghulu Lempar decorating it with flowers, and when 
I asked him where he learnt how to make the mound, 
he replied that he was quite used to doing so in Johor.^ 
The flowers were arranged as follows :■ — First, round 
about the mound were planted half a dozen long stems 
of what Lempar called the "Owl-flower";^ to these 
were added several blossoming stems of the wild red 
" Singapore " rhododendron, "* and to these were again 
added some young shoots of fan-palms and other kinds 
of palms. ^ Into the mound itself Lempar stuck some 
stems of a common blossoming reed.*' 

To these, the natural products of the jungle, he 
added a bunch of the following artificial "flowers" 
manufactured from strips of fan-palm " leaf. These 
were intended to represent the sun ; ^ coconuts,^ 
nooses or " earrings ";^'^ the blossom of the wild " seal- 

1 The Besisi told me that the mound ever, that the custom is more widely 

was always artificial and always of the spread. Cp. Maxwell,y. A'. A. S., S. B., 

same remarkable shape. The reason of No. I, p. 112. 

its being called an ant-hill is merely that ^ " Bunga ponggoh," called by the 

the Malay word ("busut") means a Langat Malay who accompanied me 

" mound " of any kind (whether natural, " satawar hutan," or "wild sata- 

e.g. an ant-heap, or artificial), so that war." 

the confusion arose easily enough. '' Mai. " kedudok "' ; Bes. " kodok." 

The shape of the mound is not •'' I.e. "nibong"and "kepau." 

necessarily phallic; I have not been '" " SC-ndayan," or "senderayan." 

able to discover any parallel ceremony. ' " Kepau." 

^ I mention this because the Batin ^ Bes. "met are'," or " tongkat 

afterwards told me that the custom was langit." 

only kept up among the tribes of Ulu " Bes. " niyu." 

Batu Pahat. It seems certain, how- '" Bes. "subang." 

CHAP. Ill SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 73 

ing-wax " palm/ and the blossom and fruit of a re- 
markable wild tree-nut with boat-shaped sail, called by 
the Malays the " sail-fruit " or " fill-cup," the latter title 
being due to an extraordinary property on the part 
of its seeds, any one of which, if placed in a cup of 
water, will fill the entire cup with a substance resem- 
bling a brown jelly, which is eaten with avidity by the 
Malays.^ 

I may add that each representation of the " sun " 
was crowned with a little spike, on which was spitted 
a blossom stripped from a newly-plucked spray of the 
wild ("Singapore") rhododendron. This bunch was 
inserted into the knob-like summit of the mound, and 
a plait or festoon of the same material, decorated with 
long streamers, encircled the mound just below the 
upper rim of the truncated portion. 

The preparations were completed by depositing 
on the flat top of the truncated portion a dish contain- 
ing two portions of rice and wild betel-leaf^ and a dish 
of water, which were to be shared later on between 
the bride and bridegroom. 

About half-past nine the beating of drums at a 
distance announced the approach of the bridegroom's 
party. On its arrival the bride (who was staying in 
the house of the tribal chief or Batin, whose guest I 
was) was carried outside (on the shoulders of a matron, 
if I remember rightly), and stationed close to the 
mound, so as just to leave room for the bridegroom 
and his supporters to pass. A lengthy catechising of 
the man (who was coached by the Batin) followed, the 
questioning being undertaken by the Penghulu Balei 
(one of the inferior chiefs) on the part of the woman. 

* Bes. "chongoi meri"== Mai. " pinang raja." 
2 Mai. " salayer," or "kembang samangkok." '^ "Chambai." 

74 

MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

Penghulu Balei (for the bride). Have 

you bought plates and cups ? 
Batin (on behalf of the man). I have. 
P. Have you bought pots and pans ? 
B. I have. 

P. Have you bought clothing ? 
B. I have. 

P. Have you bought a jungle -knife 
(chopper) ? 

I have. 

Have you bought a hatchet ? 

I have. 

Have you built a hut ? 

I have. 

Have you made steps for it ? 

I have. 
P. Have you formed a clearing ? 
B. I have. 

Have you made a rice-spoon ? ^ 

I have. 

Have you made a water-bucket ? 

I have. 

Have j'ou planted yams?- 

I have. 

Have you planted sugar-cane ? 

I have. 
P. Have you planted rice ? 
B. I have. 

Have you planted bananas ? 

F. "Pun!" Sweet potato, 

P. 

B. I have. 

P. Do you know how to fell trees ? 

B. I do. 

P. Do you know how to climb for 

fruit ? 
B. I do. 

P. Do you know how to use the blow- 
pipe ? 
B. I do. 

P. Do you know how to smoke cigar- 
ettes?^ 
I do. 

Do you know how to find turtle- 
eggs? 
I do. 

Is all this true ? 
It is true. 

I could purchase a hill at Singa- 
pore, Malacca, or Penang, 
I could purchase a hill in Selangor 

or Perak ; 

Plow much more then somebody's 

daughter.* 

P. Is this true, so a tree fall on you ? " 

B. Speak not of somebody''s daughter ! 

Monkeys of all kinds'' do I search 

for and capture ; 
How much more then somebody'' s 
daughter. 

Pun ! " 

B. 
P. 

B. 
P. 
B. 

Thus we Jakun plant sweet potatoes ! 

" Ratified,"'' says the Batin, say the chiefs of the tribe !** 

" Ratified " [say] both young and old ! 

Round the mound and round again ! 

At this stage of the proceedings the bridegroom 
(who was dressed, Hke the bride, in Malay apparel) 
was conducted seven times and the bride once round 
the mound, and they were then stationed side by side, 
when they were together given rice to eat from the 

^ I.e. 2. rice-spoon of wood or coco- 
nut shell. 

- I.e. "have you got a yam-patch ? "' 
etc. etc. 

^ The phrase used may also mean, 
" Can you make" or " have you made 
cigarettes ? " 

^ Lit. a daughter of people (perhaps 
the wild people or the tribe). But it 
may equally well mean the daughter of 
a person, or "somebody's daughter." 

" The jjhrase here used ("tempa' 

kret ") lit. means "fall upon (your) 
body," i.e. " so may (a tree) fall upon 
you," which is the strongest form of 
asseveration used by these forest-tribes, 
among whom the terror of falling trees 
is very real and present, and perhaps 
more feared than any other danger. 

'' Lit. "chikahs" and "lotongs" 
(two kinds of monkey). 

^ Lit. "true" (Bes. "hoi"). 

^ Lit. Batin, Jinang, Jukrah (titles 
of chiefs). 

CHAP. Ill SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 75 

plate and water from the dish. All parties then 
adjourned to the " Balei " or tribal " Hall," where a 
feast was in course of preparation, and where the bride 
and bridegroom were made to eat and drink from the 
same dish, and shortly afterwards time compelled me 
to leave. 

I may add, however, that during the entire night 
before the wedding from dark to dawn the Besisi 
never ceased beating their drums and playing on 
their rude bamboo flutes and stringed bamboos 
(" banjeng "), 

I may add also that the bride and bridegroom 
looked little more than children, and that there is no 
apparent limit of age for marriage among these people. 

Before we departed one of the Batins remarked to 
me that the mound by which we were at the time 
standing was the emblem of his religion, or (as he 
put it) the " priest of his tribe." ^ There can, I think, 
be little doubt as to the meaning of this statement, 
and given some such sacred emblem, the procession 
around it would be natural enough. Whether the 
I'ace or the walk round it was the older institution 
must remain a moot point, until further evidence on 
the point is obtainable ; most probably the walk is the 
survival. 

With regard to the age at which the Besisi women 
are married, we are told by Logan that among the 
Besisi a child of a few years old was not unfrequently 
betrothed to her intended husband, who took her to 
his house and brought her up.- 

1 The expression employed (in Malay) * J. I. A. vol. i. p. 270. Logan 

was "kita-punya Imam," i.e. "our compares this with the custom of the 

priest." The statement was a purely vol- "Dayaks" near Banjermassin, where 

untary one, and not in response to any betrothal takes place at the age of four 

question of mine. In Pahang a fire takes or six years. A similar custom occurs 

the place of the mound (p. 82, hifi-a). in Java. 

76 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

It is said that a Besisi man will occasionally take 
to himself two wives, but never more than two ; as a 
matter of fact, however, I do not remember a single 
case in which a Besisi man had more than one. On 
the other hand, no Besisi woman might have more 
than one husband, although cases of polyandry have 
certainly been recorded among the Sakai of the neigh- 
bouring district of Ulu Langat. 

Before leaving the Besisi marriage customs it should 
be recorded that at their great annual carnival or drink- 
ing feast (" main jo'oh "), during the rice-harvest, there 
was (as in some other savage lands ^) a sort of "game 
of exchanging wives." This is the same ceremony 
as that which Logan terms the " Tampoi Feast," 
a fuller description of which will be given below. ^ 

Mantra. — In an interesting account of the marriage 
ceremony as performed by the Mantra, Logan informs 
us that marriages among the Mantra were not ordi- 
narily made with the haste of the "Tampoi Feast." 
When a young man was desirous of marrying a girl, 
he would communicate his wishes to his own father, 
who communicated in turn with the father of the girl. 
If the latter agreed to the match, from four to eight 
silver or copper rings were presented to him, and a 
day was appointed for the marriage. When it arrived, 
the bridegroom was conducted by his parents and 
relatives to the bride's house, where a large feast had 
been prepared. On entering he paid his respects to 
the near relations of the bride. If the Batin did not 
reside at a great distance, he always attended, and 
presided at the ceremony. Betel-leaf and its usual 
accompaniments having been placed ready upon a 
sieve (" nyiru "), the bride took up one of the small 

' E.g., even, by latest reports, in Greenland. - See pp. 169-170, infra. 

CHAP. Ill SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA -jj 

packets of betel-leaf and presented it to the bride- 
groom, who presented another to her in return. The 
father of the bridegroom then addressed him, en- 
joining him to cherish his wife, to be kind to her, on 
no account to beat her or behave harshly to her, but, 
if he should ever be offended by her, to complain to 
her parents. The father of the bride then laid a 
similar injunction upon her. The company were then 
feasted, the bride and bridegroom eating from the 
same plate, a custom which is common to most of the 
Indo-Chinese and Malayan races. The bridegroom 
remained for the night. ^ 

It should be added that the teeth of the bride and 
bridegroom were filed with a stone before the day of 
marriage."' 

A form of the mound-ceremony found among the 
Besisi is also practised by this same tribe, and 
Borie, in describing it, remarks that when all the 

1 J. I. A. p. 323*. chiefs, which were thankfully accepted. 

2 Ibid. M. Borie (tr. Bourien), in A plate containing small packages of 
giving a description of a wedding among rice wrapped up in banana-leaves then 
the Mantra, informs us that the bride, having been presented, the husband 
who was clothed by her companions in offered one to his future wife, who 
her best attire, was conducted to the showed herself eager to accept it, and 
centre of the assembly, where she took ate the contents ; she then in her turn 
her place close to her future husband, gave some to her husband, and they 
who, bowing, saluted every member of afterwards both assisted in distributing 
the company, shaking hands with each the remainder among the other mem- 
of them in turn. According to old bers of the assemblage. The Juru 
custom, the three chiefs made speeches Krah having received a ring from the 
upon the obligations of matrimony — husband, returned it to him, and he 
not forgetting to enjoin upon the hus- then placed it on the finger of the left 
band that in return for the submission hand of his future wife. The bride 
that his wife owes him, he should having also received a ring from the 
punctually day by day supply her with Juru Krah, placed it upon the finger 
betel-leaf to eat and tobacco to smoke. of the right hand of her husband ; the 
The Juru Krah (one of the three marriage was then declared complete, 
chiefs), who was conducting the mar- and copious plates full of rice with 
riage, then demanded the pledges of vegetables having been served round, 
their prospective union, and the bride all set to work to satisfy their appetite, 
and bridegroom professing to be unable M. Borie remarked that the bride 
to comply, addressed themselves to M. and bridegroom still ate from one dish. 
Borie, who gave them two handker- (Borie (tr. Bourien), pp. 81, 82.) 

7?. MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

guests were assembled, the bride and bridegroom 
were led forth by one of the old men of the tribe 
towards a circle of varying size, round which the girl 
commenced to run, the young man pursuing a short 
distance behind her ; if he succeeded in overtaking 
her, she became his wife, but if not he lost all claim to 
her. At other times a yet larger area was appointed 
for the trial, and the bridegroom pursued the bride in 
the forest/ 

In addition to the foregoing, we learn from Logan 
that the Mantra did not mix socially nor intermarry 
either with the other Benua tribes, nor yet with the 
Malays," and further that they were strict mono- 
gamists.^ 

Adultery was a capital crime if it could be proved 
by witnesses. The sentence of the Batin was carried 
into execution by the Penglima. The offenders were 
laid prostrate in the nearest brook, and their heads 
were kept under water by placing a forked stick over 
their necks and driving the points into the bed of the 
stream. When the husband was satisfied of his wife's 
infidelity, but was unable to prove it, he might desert 
her, but was obliged in that case to leave her in pos- 
session of the house and clearing, and also to pay her 
ten cubits (lo "hastas" = 5 yards) of white cloth, thirty 
cents in money, and eight silver rings. The children 
remained with the wife, who might not, however, 
remarry until the husband took to himself another 
wife in her place.** 

The right of the husband to beat his wife for any 
cause whatever was not recognised by the Mantra, 

1 Borie (tr. Bourien), p. 8i. Cp. "^ J. T. A. vol. i. p. 330. 

also Miklucho-Maclay in /. R. A. S., ^ Ibid. p. 270. 

S. B., No. 2, p. 216. " ^ Ibid. p. 268. 

CHAP. HI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 79 

and such was also the custom of the Benua, and 
probably of all the other (Jakun) tribes. Should 
a Mantra woman offend her husband, he might 
complain to her parents, who would themselves 
chastise her. The wife, on the other hand, had a 
reciprocal right to appeal for protection to the parents 
of her husband. Should the husband commit any 
serious offence against his wife, her relatives might 
complain to the Batin or chief of the tribe, who 
would authorise them to deal summarily with him. 
They would then repair to the offender's house and 
strip it of every article that it contained. The goods 
thus summarily appropriated were carried to the 
Batin, who would give one portion to the wife's 
relatives, and distribute the remainder between him- 
self and his officers.^ 

Benua-Jakun of Johor. — Among the Benua Logan 
states that betrothal was the rule, and sometimes took 
place, among most if not all the tribes, at a very 
early age on the part of the unconscious girl. The 
Malays declared that when a marriage had been 
arranged amongst the Benua, the relatives of both 
parties would assemble at the house of the bride, 
who was then placed in a canoe by herself, supplied 
with a paddle, and sent down the stream. When she 
had been given a start of one or two reaches, the 
bridegroom entered a canoe and gave chase. Should 
he succeed in overtaking the fair one, she became his 
wife. If he failed, the match was broken off. But since 
most of the young women had good stout arms, and 
could make good use of the paddle that was given them, 
it must be supposed that love usually unnerved them, 
and gave the victory to the bridegroom." According 

* J. I. A. vol. i. p. 267. '^ Logan here adds that he is seep- 

8o MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

to members of the tribe, the union was arranged by 
the parents, and the ceremony consisted simply in the 
parties eating from the same plate. After partaking 
of a repast, the relatives of the bridegroom departed, 
leaving him to pass the night in the bride's house. 
Next day he carried her home. A small present was 
sent to the bride's parents previous to the marriage. 
The Batins and their families would send as much as 
forty plates (" pinggan ") on such occasions, and other 
persons as much as twenty plates. If the lady had 
already been married, no ceremony whatever was 
used. She repaired to the house of her new husband, 
and installed herself as mistress.^ Most of the Benua 
had one wife only, but some had two, and there did 
not appear to be any rule on the subject." The 
husband might not beat his wife for any cause what- 

ever.^ 

No marriage was lawful without the consent of the 

tical as to the real existence in his day The young couple then approach each 
of the practice described, but in view other, join hands, and the sylvan cere- 
of all the evidence, it may be taken, I mony is concluded. It varies, how- 
think, as substantially accurate. ever, in different tribes. Among some 
^ Logan here adds that amongst the there is a dance, in the midst of which 
Berembun tribes the husband either the bride elect darts off, a la galope, 
took up his residence in the house of into the forest, followed by her inamo- 
his wife's parents or made one in their rato. A chase ensues, during which, 
clearing. should the youth fall down, or return 

2 /. /. A. vol. i. p. 270. unsuccessful, he is met with the jeers 

3 Jljid. p. 267. and merriment of the whole party, and 
Newbold gives a graphic account of the match is declared off. It generally 

a wedding among the Benua, but un- happens, though, that the lady con- 
fortunately it is not clear to what tribe trives to stumble over the root of some 
he refers. His account is as follows : — tree friendly to Venus, and falls (for- 
" On occasions of marriages the tuitously of course) into the outstretched 
whole tribe was assembled and an arms of her pursuer ! 
entertainment given, at which large " No marriage is lawful without the 
quantities of a fermented liquor, ob- consent of the parents. The dower 
tained from the fruit of the Tampoi, usually given by the man to the bride 
are discussed by the wedding guests; is a Malay hatchet (' beliong '), a copper 
an address is made by one of the elders ring, an iron or earthen cooking vessel, 
to the following effect : ' Listen, ail a chopper or parang, a few cubits of 
ye that are present, those that were cloth, glass beads, and a pair of arm- 
distant are now brought logetlier, those lets ; the woman also presents a copper 
that were separated are now united.' ring to her intended. Polygamy is not 

CHAP. Ill SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 8i 

father. A man might not have more than one wife at 
once. A man who divorced his wife lost the dowry 
given to her, but if the divorce came from the side of 
the woman, she was bound to return the dowry she 
received from the man.^ 

Any married person surprised in adultery might 
be put to death. But if a woman so surprised could 
prove that she was seduced, she would not be put to 
death, but would be sent away by her husband. After 
divorce the man and woman might marry again with 
other parties.^ 

A father could not sell his child, but might give 
him to another, always provided that the child would 
consent, no matter what its age might be.^ 

If children were left orphans, their nearest relatives 
would bring them up, unless, with their consent, some 
other person agreed to do so.^ 

Although the Benua women were generally faith- 
ful, adultery appeared to be neither infrequent nor 
held in sufficient detestation. The Malays asserted 
that it was not difficult to obtain favours of Benua 
women, and these latter themselves admitted that 
husbands sometimes changed their wives, and wives 
their husbands.^ Divorce was simply a putting away 
of the wife.*^ 

permitted, but a man can divorce his With the foregoing should be further 

wife and take another. The form of compared theaccount given by Vaughan- 

divorce is that the parties return their Stevens in V. B. G. A. xxiii. p. 833, 

copper wedding-rings ; the children which does not however add anything 

generally go with the mother." of importance. 

In some tribes it is customary to ^ Favre iny. /. A. vol. ii. p. 269. 

deck out the bride with the leaves of - Ibid. 

the Palas-tree, and to cut off a part of ^ Ibid. 

her hair, a custom also observed by ■• Ibid. 

Malays, and termed ' ' andam " (New- " This is doubtless at the annual 

bold, vol. ii. pp. 407, 408. Cp. also "carnival" or " Tampoi Feast," and 

vol. i. chap. v., and vol.ii. pp. 394, 395: it is not fair on that account to ta.x the 

" Adultery is punishable with death if Benua with infidelity, 
the parties are caught in the act." ^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 268. 

VOL. II G 

82 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS i'Art hi 

Jakun of Johor. — Logan states that among the 
Jakun, marriages were ordinarily celebrated about the 
months of July and August, when fruits were plentiful. 
The bridegroom frequented for some time the house 
of his intended, and when he had obtained her con- 
sent, he made a formal demand for her hand to her 
father. A day was then appointed, and preparations 
made for an entertainment, the scale of which varied 
according to the means of the two contracting parties, 
and their rank in the tribe. When the day for the 
marriage had arrived, the bridegroom repaired to the 
house of the bride's father, where the whole tribe was 
already assembled. The dowry to be given by the 
man to his bride was then delivered ; it must consist 
at the least of a silver or copper ring, and a few cubits 
of cloth, and if the man were able to afford it, a pair of 
bracelets. To these gifts a few other ornaments and 
articles, e.g. furniture for the house of the new family, 
were added. Sometimes the woman also presented 
some gifts to her intended husband. The bride was 
then delivered by her father to the bridegroom, and 
the solemnity began. Some stated that among some 
of the tribes there was a dance, in the midst of which 
the bride elect darted off into the forest, followed by 
the bridegroom. A chase ensued, during which, should 
the youth fall down, or return unsuccessful, he was met 
with the jeers and merriment of the whole party, and 
the match was declared off. A slightly different 
ceremony was ascribed to the Benua of Pahang, viz., 
that during the banquet a large fire was kindled, all 
the congregation standing as witnesses ; the bride then 
commenced to run round the fire ; the bridegroom, who 
was obliged to run in the same direction, following her ; 
if he succeeded in catching her the marriage was valid, 

CHAP, m SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 83 

if he could not, it was declared off.^ No marriage 
was lawful without the father's consent. Conjugal 
faithfulness was much respected among the Jakun ; 
adultery being punishable by death. It was especially 
remarkable that among the Jakun, although they were 
surrounded by Mohammedans and heathen races, all 
of whom were so much addicted to polygamy, it was 
not allowed to keep more than one wife, and that 
Logan met with only one who had two wives, and he 
was censured and despised by the whole tribe.'- The 
only difference, in fact, between this form of mono- 
gamy and that practised by Christian nations was that 
amongst the Benua a man might divorce his wife and 
take another. The rule was that if the divorce was 
proposed by the husband, he lost the dowry he had 
given to the woman ; but that if the woman asked to 
be divorced, she must return the dowry she had 
received at marriage. The children followed the 
father or the mother according to their own (the 
children's) wishes ; if, however, they had not yet 
arrived at the age of reason, they followed the mother.^ 
Udai. — The only reference to marriage among the 

1 On this Favre remarks that all the had allowed a man to pay his addresses 

Jakun he questioned on the point de- to her, the parties proceeded to a hillock 

Glared that they were not at all aware round which the woman ran three times, 

of the practice, so that if the story pursued by the man ; if the latter suc- 

were true, it must be ascribed to a few ceeded in catching her before the ter- 

tribes only {J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 264). mination of the chase, she became his 

[This conclusion, however, does not wife, but not otherwise (Begbie, I.e. 

necessarily follow from the premisses. pp. 13, 14). It is worth noting that the 

The Jakun frequently deny the existence object round which the chase took 

of practices which they fear will be place is here accurately described as a 

laughed at by strangers, and the very hillock and not as an ant-heap. 
Jakun who took part in the mound ^ Cp Begbie, I.e. pp. 13, 14. 

ceremony had previously denied its Polygamy among the Jakun is not 

existence to me.] allowed, and is punishable. 

A yet older authority for the Mound ^ J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 264. For the 

ceremony than Favre, is Captain treatment of the Jakun women by their 

Begbie, who states that the marriage husbands, who regard them as mere 

ceremony of the Jakun was [ante 1S34) chattels, but are otherwise not unkind 

as follows : — When a young woman to them, see Z.f. E. xxviii. p. i66. 

84 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

Udai is that made by Newbold, who records that they 
are said never to intermarry with the Jakun, who accuse 
them of devouring their own dead and of cohabiting 
with the beasts of the forest/ 

Orang Laut or Sea-jakun. 

Orang" Laut, S'letar. — Of the marriage customs of 
the S'letar tribe we are informed that a mouthful of 
tobacco and a single " chupak " of rice handed to the 
bride's mother confirmed the hymeneal tie. The 
S'letar women intermarried with the Malays, this 
custom appearing to be not unfrequent ; they were also 
sometimes given to Chinese, and an old woman stated 
that she had been united to individuals of both nations, 
at an early period in her life.^ 

Orang" Laut, Sabimba. — Before marriage the bride- 
groom, prepared a hut of his own to which he carried 
the bride, on the day of marriage, from the house of 
the Batin where they were united. Twelve cubits 
("hastas") of white cloth, and some betel-leaf and areca- 
nut were delivered by the bridegroom into the Batin's 
hands for presentation to the parents of the bride. 

The children of brothers might not intermarry, but 
those of sisters and of a brother and sister might do so. 
Adultery was punished by a fine of looo rattans, 
seduction of a virgin by compelling the man to marry 
her and to give the customary present to her parents.^ 

To the foregoing should be added the declaration 
of the Sabimba that they had no actual ceremonies 
at marriage ; the preparation of a shed, open on all 
sides, and measuring about 6 ft. x 4 ft. (1.8 m. x 1.2 m.), 

' Newbold, ii. 381, 382. -J. LA. vol. i. p. 347*. 

^ Ibid. p. 297. 

CHAP. Ill MALA VAN SEA-GIPSIES 85 

erected over a few branches and leaves strewed on the 
ground, comprised all the bridegroom's care. The price 
of a wife was stated to be ten needles, three hanks of 
thread, sixteen cubits of cloth, and three "reals." The 
Sabimba women did not intermarry with the Malays, 
nor would they part with their offspring for any con- 
sideration.^ 

Orang" Laut, Beduanda Kallang-. — Previous to mar- 
riage the bridegroom was expected to provide himself 
with a boat of his own. Members of the same family 
might not intermarry, however remote the degree, 
though at the same time no doubt the traces of 
relationship would tend to be soon lost and forgotten. 
Widowers and widows were not in the habit of 
marrying again. Polygamy and adultery were both 
unknown." 

Orang Laut, Muka Kuning".— As soon as the breasts 
of a girl were of the size of an areca-nut she was con- 
sidered marriageable.^ When a marriage had been 
agreed upon, the parents of the bridegroom sent to 
those of the bride 3000 rattans, a piece of cloth, a jacket, 
and two silver rings. The marriage, which took place 
at the house of the bride, in presence of the Batin or 
tribal chief and several guests, consisted in the bride 
and bridegroom being placed side by side, and made 
to join hands, while the parents enjoined them to be 
kind to each other and avoid disputes. A feast followed, 
at which the newly married pair ate from the same 
plate or leaf. Singing and dancing to the tambourine 
(" rebana ") followed. The Batin received as his fee 
a present of 2000 rattans.* 

1 /. /. A. vol. i. p. 347*. ^ Ibid. p. 300. 

3 This is also the standard followed by the Malays. 

4 /. /. A. vol. i. pp. 338* 339*. 

86 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS i'art hi 

If a husband was not pleased with his wife, he 
might return her to her parents, and after the lapse of 
a month the parties might form other connexions. 
Polygamy was unknown. The children of brothers 
might not intermarry.^ 

Orang" Laut, Akik. — The only remark I have met 
with in reference to the marriage customs of this 
particular tribe was to the effect that although a 
Jakun could take an Akik woman to wife, the Akiks 
were not permitted to marry with the Jakun females.^ 

The remainder of this account of the wedding 
ceremonies of the Orang Laut is taken from Vaughan- 
Stevens, and is of general value only, no names of 
tribes or localities being given :— 

At marriage the son commonl}' undertook to build a boat for himself, unless, 
as was usual, he already possessed one. But both he and his wife could live in 
the boat of cither's parents, whenever his assistance and that of his wife might 
be required. Marriage took place at a very early age, at fifteen or sixteen years, 
but now since there are fewer women available, it takes place later. ^ 

The customs relating to the choice of wives among the Orang Laut are very 
similar to those of the E. Semang (Pangan), Sakai, and Jakun. ^ The men of 
one community could only take a wife from another community (not their own), 
in the days when they lived upon the sea.'' If the two communities were at 
feud, and the young people had no opportunity of making a choice, matches 
were effected by capture, and both the women and their dowry taken by force. ^ 
But these organised attacks never take place in the interior of the country, 
since the Eastern Semang is unrestricted in his choice of a spouse, and the 
Sakai is bound by his totemistic {sic) code." Communal marriage, in which the 
woman is free to all the men of the community, or its milder form, family-marriage, 
in which the woman becomes the spouse of all her husband's brothers, did not 
occur ; and both polyandiy and polygamy were equally unknown.* 

' J. I. A. vol. i. p. 339*. case of four communities of the Orang 

- Newbold, ii. 413, 414. Laut of which A, B, and C, were of 

•* Bartels in Z. f. E. xxviii. 174. pure blood, and D a mixed tribe of 

* As the customs of the three races Orang I^aut and Jakuns, the first tribe 

are very different, this sweeping state- A, could take wives from B or C, B 

ment seems meaningless and indefen- could take wives from A or C, and C 

sible. from B or A, but none of them could 

'■ On p. 175, Vaughan-Stevens ex- take a wife from the mixed tribe D. 

plains that by exogamy he means ^ Vaughan-Stevens in Z./". ^. xxviii. 

marriage within the different branches p. 174. 

of the same race, not intermarriage with " //'id. V. ante, p. 62. 

strangers or foreigners. 'I'hus in the * Ihid. 

CHAP. Ill MALAYAN SEA-GIPSIES 87 

Orang Laut children belong not to the father but to the mother. Thus, 
supposing a woman belonging to a community A, marries a man belonging to 
a community B, the children would belong to A, and at the father's death would 
be taken by the mother to her original home.^ Perhaps this may be the reason 
(remarks Battels) why the Orang Laut man cares so little about his children and 
treats both mother and children so badly.- Vaughan-Stevcns continues, that when 
he said to some of the Orang Laut, " The fact appears to be that you can be sure 
who the mother is, but not who the father may be," they laughed and agreed 
with him.'' 

Among the Orang Laut the exact value of the present to be made to the bride's 
parents depends partly upon the bride's qualities and partly upon the circumstance 
whether she was desired in marriage by one or more suitors. In the case of 
captives being taken as wives, this present was naturally omitted.* 

Apropos of the so-called " ant-hill " ceremony, Vaughan-Stevens remarks that 
in spite of many inquiries he was unable to substantiate it except in a restricted 
area near Malacca, where he believes it was " introduced by half-breeds." " 

Vaughan-Stevens goes on to say that it was the custom for the youths of the 
tribe, at the wedding-feast, to engage in various games, the object of which was to 
e.xcite the bridegroom to pursue his bride, but that though it was certainly 
unnecessary for him to catch her, he was mercilessly bantered if he failed of his 
purpose. This was, however, by no means a necessary ceremony, and did not 
take place at every wedding.*"' 

The position of the women among the Orang Laut is pitiable, being much 
worse than among the other tribes. ^ Vaughan-Stevens says, " I have often seen 
an Orang Laut man take all the fish and roots which had been collected by his 
family in the course of the day, and silently devour the whole, leaving nothing but 
the heads and refuse for his wife and children to feed on." And when by any 
chance an Orang Laut is compelled to traffic either with the Sakai, Jakun, or 
Malays, these latter not unfrequently insist upon his giving a share of the food 
which he gets from them \.o his wife and children. The Orang Laut are, in fact, 
the lowest of all the aboriginal tribes,* and are the only tribe of which the men, 
upon all occasions, eat before their womenfolk are allowed to do so. Among 
other tribes the men on special occasions eat before the women, but that is because 
somebody has to look after the food, and not because they are considered too much 
beneath their husband for them to be allowed to eat with him.^ 

Even when ^^aughan-Stevens gave food to Orang Laut women they never 
dared to eat it when their husband was present, and so long as another man, even 
if he were not their husband, was present, they would always retire from his 
presence before eating it or giving any of it to their children. ^^ 

The Orang Laut were originally divided into families, recognising a special 
locality or district as their home, and since they invariably lived in scattered parties 
in their boats, they described themselves as belonging to such localities. Marriage 

1 Z.f.E. xxviii. 175. ascribed to the Orang Laut, I believe 

2 Ibid. to be quite unmerited, and mainly due 
^ Ibid. The custom here described to the fact of their being wilder and 

appears to be analogous to the " Adat shyer than the other races in the Pen- 

Perpatih'" of the Malays of Rembau insula, and hence apparently more 

and Naning. stupid and brutal. 

* Z. f. E. xxviii. 176. * It is not true that they are the 
^ Ibid. This scepticism as to the only tribe of which the men eat before 

prevalence of the custom is, I believe, their women-folk, and even if it were, 
quite unnecessary (for the reasons before it may be doubted whether the in- 
given, and others). ference here deduced can be justly 

* Z. f. E. xxviii. 176. drawn from it. 

^ This character of brutality so lightly * Z.f.E. xxviii. 167. ^^ Ibid 

88 MARRIAGE CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

did not affect the situation, and the invariable rule held good that men and women 
belonging to the same locality might not marry, but that each must seek a spouse 
in another locality. This rule, however, like many others, fell into disuse when 
the domain of the Orang Laut became restricted to its present area. But never- 
theless the spouse is still chosen from as distant a locality as possible.' 

Among the Orang Laut monogamy was the rule, the only exception being the 
so-called "Levirate." For whenever the man's brother died, the former 
frequently supported the widow, on the ground that he took her as a kind of 
second wife. This at least is said to have been formerly the custom, until the 
women discovered later that as there were more men than women, they could 
very easily obtain a husband of their own.''^ 

When the widow was taken over by the brother of her first husband, the 
children were allowed to choose, should they be old enough to do so, between 
remaining with their mother, and leaving her establishment.^ 

Vaughan-Stevens asserts that the custom of [? mother-in-law] avoidance does 
not exist among the Orang Laut, nor were any names "taboo," though they 
had heard of the custom.* 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, I.e. p. 174. ^ Z.f.E. xxviii. 177. 

3 Ibid. Ibid. 

CHAPTER IV. 

Burial Customs and Beliefs. 

This is a most intricate subject, and the best hope of 
an adequate solution seems to lie in observing the 
divergent mental attitudes of the three wild races 
when confronted with the death of a member of their 
small community. 

The Negrito, for instance, exhibits little dread of 
the ghosts of the deceased, from which the Sakai, on 
the other hand, flee far aloof in terror. The Jakun 
again certainly display a dread of the ghost, but in 
their case the result of this most powerful motive, 
which inspires all similar burial customs, takes the 
form of a religious care for the dead man's spirit. 

Hence it is not surprising to find that, though the 
Semang now employ a simple form of interment, their 
more honourable (and therefore older?) practice was 
to expose the dead in trees, whereas the Sakai simply 
leave the body to rot, and even desert standing crops. 

The Jakun devote their first efforts to making 
things comfortable for the spirit of the deceased, and 
do not as a rule desert the place until after their 
month of mourning has expired. 

Of the various rites observed by these tribes there 
are several that will prove of interest to students of 

90 BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

ethnology. Among these are mere desertion of the 
corpse, as practised by the Sakai ; the exposure of dead 
wizards in trees, ^ attributed to the Semang ; platform 
burial in a modified form, as practised by some of the 
Sakai of Selangor ; the lighting of a fire on or near 
the grave, as is done both by the Sakai and most of 
the Jakun ; the scrupulous solicitude shown by the 
Jakun for the deceased's spirit, which is provided with a 
furnished hut to live in, and provisions to feed upon, 
(as in the interesting burial-customs of the Besisi),- and 
even with a trench full of water on which to paddle its 
canoe (as in the case of the Jakun chief recorded by 
Hervey) ; and finally, the practice of fixing a bamboo 
in the grave in communication with the mouth of the 
corpse for the purpose of feeding it, a custom of which 
we have among the Jakun of Berembun a mere survival. 
To this we may add the use of the " burial bamboo " 
ascribed to the Semang by Vaughan-Stevens, which 
is said to be deposited in the grave to serve as 
credentials for the dead man's spirit to show when it 
comes before the universal Judge ; and the atrocious 
custom attributed to the Udai, which is explained by 
a Pangan tradition that I collected in Kelantan. 

^ The Andamanese expose the body cornered hutch of lattice - work, in 

facing east on a small stage of sticks which offerings of small value, chiefly 

and boughs 8-12 ft. above the ground, rice and flowers and fruit, are de- 

usually in the fork of a tree ; this is posited immediately after the funeral, 

thought more complimentary, as in- and subsequently at certain intervals, 

volving more labour. — Man's And. pp. These offerings are for the purpose of 

76-77. propitiating the Butas (the demoniacal 

^ The soul - hut of the Selangor beings who infest places of burial 

Besisi is strongly reminiscent of the especially), lest they should attack the 

"three-cornered hutch," which is soul of the deceased. The grave is 

erected by the side of the grave in then surrounded with a fence or hedge. 

Bali. At the burial of a commoner in Those who are buried in this way 

Bali, we are told that when the body cannot enter heaven ; they then assume 

has been committed to the ground, all sorts of shapes" (especially that of 

there "is fixed in the ground by the the half-wild dogs which are numerous 

side of the grave a bamboo, on the in Bali). — Misc. Papers relating to hido- 

top of which there is a sort of three- China, second series, vol. ii. p. 138. 

CHAP. IV NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 91 

I. — Semang. 

Pangan. — The Pangan or Eastern Semang of 
Kelantan informed me that the bodies of the lay- 
members of the tribe were buried in the ground (in a 
way which I shall presently describe), but that the bodies 
of their great magicians (whom they called " B'lians ") 
were deposited in trees in order that they might be 
able to iiy over the head of the fearful figure which they 
believe blocks the narrow way that leads to the Jungle- 
men's Paradise. They further informed me that the 
dead body of one of these magicians had actually been 
deposited in a tree on the banks of the Kelantan river 
(above S. Sam), but the place described already lay 
a considerable distance to the rear of our expedition, 
and it was not then possible to reascend the river in 
order to investigate. I may add that the Pangan, like 
the Sakai, are entreated at death to " think of their de- 
parted ancestors alone and forget their living friends." 

Kedah Semang". — I will now describe the grave of a 
Semang which may be taken as fairly typical, and of 
which I was able personally to obtain the full par- 
ticulars. At Siong, in Kedah, I persuaded the Peng- 
lima or head of the Semang tribe, with a great deal 
of difficulty, to allow me to purchase the bones of a 
relative of his own who had been buried in the jungle 
not far from the settlement. The Penglima con- 
ducted one of the local Malays and myself to the site of 
the grave, which was in the depths of the jungle, and 
which we could never have found without assistance. 

A couple of stout bamboo poles which had been 
used to form the bier by means of which the remains 
had been borne to the spot, lay crossed above the 
grave, which was partially defended by a low fence of 

92 BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS i'art hi 

prickly palm - leaves and branches. The grave was 
that of one " P'landok " or " Mouse- deer," who 
was said to have died about a year before, leaving 
behind him a son called " Padang " or " Flatland," 
whom I met in the settlement. We opened the grave 
together, and found it to measure about three feet 
deep by about five feet in length. There was nothing 
left of the body but the skeleton, which lay upon the 
right side in a huddled-up position, with the head and 
knees turned towards the right, and legs doubled back,^ 
so as to bring them within the limits of the grave. 

Three coconut -shells, which had been used for 
holding small portions of rice, were still to be seen, 
one of them being just behind the head, and the 
other two at each side of the body. At the foot was a 
coconut-shell still partially filled with water. The body 
rested on a mat which covered a roughly-made floor 
or platform of sticks,- and had evidently been wrapped 
up in a red cloth (" sarong "), pieces of which were still 
here and there visible. A row of short stakes had 
been driven diagonally into one side of the grave-pit, 
the lower ends meeting the side of the pit about half- 
way down, a foot (30 cm.) above the body, and the upper 
ones reaching to the upper edge of the opposite side 
of the pit. The roofing to the grave thus formed had 
been covered with palm-leaves (bertam) laid longi- 
tudinally, and the whole arrangement formed a sort 
of screen which would keep the earth from falling 
on the body when the grave was being covered in. 

An infant child of the dead man (" Mouse-deer") 
had been buried in a tiny grave a short distance 

• As among the Andamanese, who ^ This platform had no doubt, with 

are buried with "knees brought up to the two bamboo poles referred to above, 

the chin, and fists to the shoulders." formed the bier on which the remains of 

— Man's Autl. pp. 75-76. thedeccascdhadbeencarriedtothegrave. 

CHAP. IV NEGRITOS OF PERAK 95 

away from that of " Mouse-deer " himself, but nothing 
was to be seen there at the time of my visit beyond 
a slight depression in the surface of the ground show- 
ing where the burial had taken place. 

These were said to have been the only deaths that had 
occurred since this tribe had arrived in the Siong district, 
where they had lived, they said, for a couple of years. 

Pepak Semang-. — Mr. L. Wray writes me, that in the 
Piah Valley he once camped in a large clearing contain- 
ing a crop of Indian corn, nearly ripe, besides vege- 
tables, etc. This clearing had been recently abandoned 
in consequence of two deaths. The graves were in the 
clearing and the houses were still standing. Lower 
down the valley Mr. F. Lawder, about four years previ- 
ously, had seen a case in which the house had been shut 
up with the dead body in it. The skull and some of the 
bones from this house are now in the Perak Museum. 
In the same valley Mr. Wray saw another huge clear- 
ing with growing rice abandoned because of a death. 
In this instance, however, he did not see the grave. 

The following account, which generally speaking 
agrees with what I have observed myself, is taken 
from Vaughan-Stevens.^ It gives, however, the only 
account I have met with of the burial bamboo, which 
is one of the important subjects connected with these 
tribes still awaiting further investigation. 

On the occasion of a death the Pangan silently fetch the timbers required for 
the grave, and betake themselves to any suitable place in the jungle. Here they 
dig a grave with straight sides, deep enough for a man to stand in up to the hips, 
and then return to fetch the corpse. The Sna-hut meanwhile examines the corpse 
and gives it the burial bamboo or " penitah "(" peneetor "), a bamboo written over 
with signs, which is to serve as testimony on the other side of the grave to the 
behaviour of the man in the present life. 

The burial bamboo is inserted in the girdle of the deceased, with the node 
uppermost, the hollow pointing downwards ; the deceased lying meanwhile upon 
the ground. A slight bier is then fashioned out of a few bamboo poles, which 
are bound together with rattan or other creepers. The corpse is laid upon it, 

i Vaughan-Stevens, iii. X19-122. 

94 BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part mi 

and as many men and women as have any interest in the dead accompany 
the remains to the grave. On arrival the corpse is deposited in the grave in 
a supine position, without any sort of orientation. A few stakes are then 
planted slanting-wise in the soil of the grave on each side of the corpse, so 
that they cross each other gable-wise above the corpse, a pole of bamboo or some 
other material is laid upon the ridge thus formed, in a line with the body, and 
leaves and branches are employed to cover the sloping sides. As a general rule 
the earth is shuffled back again into the grave witli the feet, a small mound is 
heai^ed up over it, and some brushwood laid on the top, in order to prevent the 
pigs from digging the body up again. 

The method of burial now employed by the Semang on the west coast of 
the Peninsula is no longer the old one. In the southern parts of the west coast 
the Sakai methods are imitated, only the preparation of the grave is much more 
careless. The peculiar diagonal hollow for the reception of the corpse is always 
present. In the north of the west coast the Semang roughly imitate the manner 
of burial of the local Siamese who do not practise cremation : even idols stolen 
from their Siamese jungle companions are not forgotten.^ The Semang say that 
they never expose a corpse.^ 

The Pangan (Eastern Semang) do not as a rule revisit the grave, but they 
have not the least fear of doing so, because, as mentioned above, they do not 
believe in Hantus ; the Semang of the west coast only do so in order to free the 
grave from underwood. 

If there is no minor chief (Sna-hut) in the neighbourhood, the dead man is buried 
without a burial bamboo, but the latter is afterwards lowered into the grave through 
a deep hole bored with a grave-stake. The soul must in that case remain in the 
body until the burial bamboo arrives, as it is conscious that it has done nothing 
which might cause the latter to be refused. It is true, however, that if the soul does 
not leave the grave soon enough, Kari is sure to become impatient, and send 
thunder and lightning in order to hasten the tarrying soul, and although the exact 
effect of this is uncertain, the Pangan tliink that the soul must expiate this. Hence 
no time is lost in obtaining the burial bamboo, of which the Sna-hut keeps a supply 
in hand, and when the deceased person is an adult man he also cuts the name- 
mark on the bamboo, before he gives it to the mourners. In former times the Sna- 
hut was never very far away, and was always called in, but later the signs became 
better known, and the men in urgent cases cut the signs themselves. Many had 
their burial bamboo prepared during life, as the Sna-huts lived very scattered. 

When an innocent soul was deprived of its burial bamboo by any accident or 
through malice, it might demand restitution from Kari, and if the Sna-hut held 
the burial bamboo back unjustly, Kari's lightning would strike him and hurl 
him down to the infernal region (Kamoj). 

Beside the corpse of a woman were deposited, in addition to her own burial 
bamboo, all her combs. These combs were placed in her hair if possible, if not, 
as many as possible were so placed, and the rest laid upon the breast of the 
corpse. This was in accordance with " Simei's command." 

Similarly beside the corpses of men were deposited all their quivers and 
charm-bamlioos and bamboo strings, with charm-patterns against Diseases. Their 
blowpipes, however, were not so deposited. 

The .Semang of the west coast often put a little food into the grave before they 
leave it, and kindle a fire in the neighbourhood ; this, however, is in imitation of 
the custom of the Sakai. The Pangan do not do this. 

If the l)ereaved relatives really feel sorrow, they do not show it openly, even 
a mother does not weep openly over her child. ^ 

1 This is probably a solitary case; ■* Vaughan - Stevens, iii. pp, 121, 
it is not true of the Kedah Semang. 122. Vaughan-Stevens adds, somewhat 

2 This was contradicted by the E. obscurely, that on the west coast the 
Semang. up]ier structure of tlie grave is either 

CHAP. IV NEGRITOS OF PERAK 95 

It may still be a moot point whether the Semang 
ever bury the corpse in a sitting position or not. For 
although we are informed by Maxwell that the remains 
(of those who die in an honourable way) are laid upon 
a log of wood, in a sitting posture, and buried a foot 
or two under the ground, we have no account of any 
such custom at first hand from an eye-witness, and it 
is hence always possible that a statement of the kind, 
if not in the present instance, may yet sometimes 
arise from the vagueness of a native trying to de- 
scribe the position of the corpse (with its legs drawn 
up under it), such as actually occurs. More exact 
information upon this point may therefore be awaited.^ 

Ascribed to the Semang is a yet more extra- 
ordinary practice, the tradition of which, although 
totally devoid of foundation at present, may possibly 
have originated in some obsolete Semang custom.' 
This is the idea, found among the Malays, that when 
a Semang dies the body is eaten, and nothing but the 
head interred.^ 

II. — Sakai. 

There is no satisfactory description of a Sakai 
burial, with the exception of one by Vaughan-Stevens, 
whose accounts as a rule require much independent 
corroboration. 

made after the manner of the Malays, the Andamanese, who used to exhume 

etc., or a bertam leaf is placed slanting the bones of relations after three 

across it like the summer huts which months and clean and break them up 

they make for themselves. to form necklaces, with the skull as 

1 Maxwell, /. R. A. S., S. B., No. pendant. — Man's J ml p. 78. 
I, p. 112. 3 Newbold, ii. 377-379. Since the 

It should be pointed out that Max- above was set up (in the text), I have 

well confuses the temis Sakai and met with evidence that seems to sub- 

Semang, but that in other respects his stantiate my view. — Vide p. 228, infra. 
account is accurate. The Jakun of Johor make a similar 

'^ Especially likely does this seem charge against the Udai, whom they 

when we remember the extraordinary " accuse of devouring their own dead." 

customs of other Negrito races, e.g., Newbold, ii. 38 1, 382. 

96 BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

We are told, however, by Hale that the Sakai of 
Perak were in the habit of burying along with a 
man his tobacco wallet, bead necklace, or timber-box. 
Similarly her comb, necklace, or bracelets were buried 
along with a woman. The house in which the death 
had taken place was invariably burnt down and the 
settlement deserted, even at the risk of the loss of 
standing crops. ^ 

On the other hand, two Sakai graves in Batang 
Padang (Perak) described by Wray' were raised 
like Malay ones, and well taken care of, and on 
them were the remains of fruit, flowers, Indian corn, 
coconut-shells, bottle-gourds, roots, etc., which had 
been placed there probably as offerings to the dead.^' 

This last description, though puzzling, is of no 
small interest, for although the graves described were 
undoubtedly in the heart of the Sakai country, the 
evident care with which they were tended sounds more 
like the work of tribes under Jakun influence, who like 
other branches of the Malayan race are most particular 
in this respect. From all we know of the genuine 
Sakai, they have so intense a terror of the ghosts of 
the deceased that they burn down the house, and even 
sometimes the village, in which a death has taken place, 
and never return to it. Can it be that deaths from 
epidemic diseases inspire this terror among the Sakai, 
whilst those from old age or other milder causes do 
not ? I confess that I see no satisfactory explanation. 

To the foregoing account Mr. Wray now adds, 
that at Kuala Dipang, in Kinta, he saw the grave of 
Toh Sang, the chief of the South Kinta and a portion 

1 Hale, p. 291. In a MS. note are thought to disappear and become 

Clifford says that the medicine-nicn tigers. For others there is no ceremony. 

(" ha-la") of the U. Kerbat Sakai are 2 l_ Wray in /. R. A. S., S. B., No. 

exposed after death in huts, when they 21, p. 125. 

'f. ^ 

o 

CHAP. IV SAKAI OF PERAK 97 

of the Batang Padang Sakai. It was a raised grave of 
the Malayan type, and was built up with earth thrown 
up within his house, for which purpose the flooring had 
been removed, and the walls continued down to the 
ground. His widow and children were living in a 
house near by, and it was they who took Mr. Wray to 
see the grave. 

The account given by Vaughan-Stevens contains 
(as usual) no localities ; it runs as follows : — 

The old form of Sakai (" B'landas ") grave is very peculiar, but has now become 
rare. In places where tlie Sakai have mixed with Malays and Chinese the old 
methods of burial have ceased with the love of the old customs. The grave is made 
wall-sided, as it is then (says Vaughan-Stevens) found easier to dig {sic). The 
corpse is washed by friends or relations and dressed in clean clothes. The site 
for the grave is chosen by the wife or nearest relation and one of the subordinate 
chiefs (Penglima) ; it is always distant from another grave, road, river, or house. 
The digging of the grave, for which no payment is made, is performed by two or 
more persons, old tools being used in preference to modern (Chinese) ones. 
The corpse is laid out with the hands close to the hips, and bands or strips of 
bark or cane are bound round the arms, wrists, and ankles. The eyes are 
closed, but the lower jaw is not bandaged ; and the body having been rolled up 
in a mat (a modern substitute for bark-cloth), is firmly bound round in three 
places. A new wrapper of tree-bark (large enough to surround the corpse) is 
then rolled round it and tied again with three bands of cane or tree-fibre and 
slung from a carrying pole, the ends of wliich are borne by two men upon their 
shoulders. Only one woman (the wife) may follow, but as many men as like 
may do so. At the grave the bark wrapper is removed, and the corpse laid upon 
its back in the grave with the head towards the west. There is no "consecrat- 
ing" ceremony.i 

I omit the rest of Vaughan-Stevens' description 
of the Sakai grave, as it possesses no further interest 
from the Sakai point of view. The form of grave 
described is a mere copy of a common Arabic grave- 
type which has been borrowed by the Mohammedan 
Malays, and adopted from them in turn by the Sakai 
without any interesting variations to recommend it. 
Those who wish to see it, however, will find it under the 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 136, 137. finger to that of the outstretched 

The length of the grave is fixed by thumb). The standard for the depth of 

measurement ; the standard being a the grave is the hip-joint of the digger, 

man's length plus a span or "jengkal" [Among Malays it is usually taken to 

(reckoning from the tip of the middle be the ear of the digger. — W. S.] 

VOL. II H 

98 BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

reference given. The only remaining point of interest 
in the account is the use of the Sacrificial Tray (Sak. 
" anchap " = Mai. " anchak "), which contains the " food 
and water" that are offered to the "Grave-.spirit" (Mai. 
" Hantu kubor "),^ for whose benefit also the fire on 
the grave is lit. The soul (" semangat ") proceeds to 
the Infernal Region (" Neraka ") or Paradise (" Pulau 
Buah " or " Fruit Island "), as his case may require ; 
but his Evil Deeds remain by the grave in the form 
of a " Hantu Kubor," incessantly seeking a fresh 
embodiment. 

To the foregoing may be added Vaughan-Stevens' 
description of a ceremony observed by the Sakai on 
the occasion of a death. 

A dying man lies with head towards the west. The magician holding a 
censer ("sungkun") in his hand, takes up the usual crouching position at the 
feet of the patient, a little to the right side, and raises himself up slowly till he 
is "breast high." He then waves the censer seven times horizontally over the 
body, and placing the coconut-shell (bowl) at his feet, bends down and says 
softly in his ear : " O dying one, do not remember any more your father, mother, 
children, or relations. Think only of your ancestors already dead and gone to 
another place. Your living (friends) will find food."^ 

The embers in the coconut - shell are kept in a 
glow till the man is dead. 

The alleged reasons for the use of incense in this 
ceremony are that smoke " mounts upward and then 
vanishes " ; also that " good spirits love its smell and 
bad spirits hate it." '^ 

Selangop Sakai. — Of the Sakai tribes in the Kuala 
Lumpur district of Selangor, my friend Father 
Letessier has given an account in which he says that 
when a death occurred, the body was washed, and the 

' Vaughan-.Stevens, ii. 140, 141. been wearing must be washed off before 

To the above may be added Vaughan- burial took place. Also that no face- 

•Stevens' remark that among the paint was employed by the mourners 

Sakai (" Senoi ") face-paint was never at a funeral (Z. f. E. xxvi. p. 153). 

ajiplied after dcatli, and that any face- - Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 144. 

paint that the deceased might have ^ Ibid. 

CHAP. IV SAKAl OF SELANGOR 99 

hair oiled and combed carefully. Then, after being 
once more clothed in its best garments, it was 
entirely covered with a shroud. The dead man's 
dagger (" kris ") or his chopper ("parang") was laid 
upon his breast, together with his betel-leaf wallet. 
When all was ready the deceased was carried out 
upon an improvised bier to a place pointed out by 
his nearest relation. The trench, which was broad 
and deep, was lined at the bottom and sides with 
planks or billets of wood. As soon as the corpse was 
lowered into the trench, tobacco and betel-nut was 
offered — " ' for the last time,' they say." Everything 
having been placed beside the body, the grave was 
carefully covered over with planks which were then 
covered up with earth. 

The same day rice and cakes were placed there, 
" not to feed the dead," a young Sakai hastened to 
explain, " but to obtain from the Lord forgiveness for 
his sins " (" lepas dia-punya dosa ")} On the third, the 
seventh, and the hundredth days following, a similar 
offering was laid upon the tomb," which was then 
raised and tended carefully,^ 

Another form of burial which is perhaps more 
characteristic is that practised by some of the 
Sakai in the Ulu Langat district of Selangor, which 
appears to be a modified version of some old custom of 
" platform burial " — about halfway between regular 
" platform " burial and interment. Of this method the 

' This explanation may have been upon the third, seventh, and hundredth 

given by a convert or have been merely days respectively is, I think, the clearest 

diplomatic, but there can be little doubt evidence of either Malay or Jakun in- 

as to the true interpretation of the rite, fluence. The careful washing of the 

agreeing as it does so closely with the corpse (with the oiling and combing of 

spirit of Sakai funeral rites in places its hair) and the laying of the dead 

where the influence of Christianity has man's weapon upon his breast are 

not yet penetrated. equally Malayan customs. 

2 The attention given to the tomb ^ Letessier, p. 102. 

BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

late Mr. J. A. G. Campbell of Selangor, in describing 
the customs of the Ulu Langat Sakai, wrote that, 
whenever a death occurred in a house, they would erect 
a platform in front of it, whereon they would place 
the body, leaving it there for a day, and would then 
either burn or desert the house, after burying the 
body. This same writer adds that the whole settle- 
ment was frequently deserted on account of a death. 
Burials were attended by the friends of the deceased, 
and the blowing of pipes and singing were the only 
ceremonies at the funeral. The body was not, as a 
rule, buried more than two feet deep.^ 

III. — Jakun. 

Tasau (? Sakai-Jakun) of Selangor. — There was a 
solitary family near Sepang, in the Kuala Langat 
district of Selangor, who were said to belong to the 
Tasau tribe (described as being " halfway between 
the Sea and Hill tribes"). They were said to 
practise a peculiar funeral rite, the story being that 
whenever a member of this tribe died he was 
carried some distance off into the jungle and there 
laid to rest in an actual hut erected for the purpose. 
Here he was watched for seven days by his son or 
nearest relative, who made daily excursions to the 
spot for that object ; after this he was believed to 
disappear, and the watcher's visits were discontinued. 

Jakun (0. Bukit), N. Sembilan. — But by far the best 
account of a Jakun burial is the description of the 
funeral of a woman by Rowland," who remarks that 
she was called Sulam by name, and that she was about 

* J. A. G. Campbell, p. 242. - Rowland, pp. 71 1-7 13. 

CHAP. IV SAVAGE MALA YS OF NEGRI S EM B I LAN 

forty years of age, having died upon the 12th July 
1897. She was small and thin ; her hair was curly, in 
strands, slightly grey. The eyes were dark with the 
remarkable bluish opalescent glitter at the outside edge 
of the iris, which all old people among the Land Jakun 
and the Malays themselves have. The woman, accord- 
ing to the statement of her husband, had died of fever 
and a cough, and she had been dead three hours 
already and was quite stiff when Rowland came to her 
funeral. She lay in one of the newly-built huts in 
which the tribe were then living. In the middle of 
this hut lay a piece of tree-bark, which served as a 
species of carpet ; on the right of the small entrance 
a fire was burning, which burned faintly the whole 
day, and round about were to be seen the usual 
primitive household objects. The corpse lay on its 
back at one side of the hut, covered with a white 
cloth ; and billets of wood had been pushed under 
its head and feet, so that they might not rest on the 
earth. The husband, an odd - looking person, with 
long, black beard, sat apathetically beside it ; in his 
face was expressed not exactly sorrow, but a certain 
dull despondency. 

Rowland had arrived, somewhat late, at five o'clock 
in the afternoon, and the people told him that it was too 
late for the funeral to take place that day. He therefore 
came again about eleven o'clock the next morning, 
summoned by the son-in-law of the dead woman. 
The corpse and the man still remained exactly in the 
same position as on the day before. 

First, the corpse of the deceased was carried out 
of the hut by her daughter, a well-formed young 
woman of about twenty, and her husband, a fine 
fellow of the same age, after which, covered only 

BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

about the hips by a sheltering cloth, it was laid upon 
its back on a large piece of tree-bark,^ 

Though the corpse did not as yet show any traces 
of decomposition, the cheeks and the eyes were 
somewhat sunken, the eyes still remaining half open. 
It was remarkable that on the under surface of the 
hands and feet, where the colouring is (at all events 
in the living Land Jakun) very faint, the skin of the 
corpse had become quite of a milky white, though 
it had never been noticeable in the same person 
during life. 

Several children and women now brought water 
in vessels of coconut-shell, and the deceased's daughter 
and an old woman began to wash the corpse thor- 
oughly. Rowland noticed that both women showed 
great delicacy of feeling, and, e.g., never exposed the 
pubic region, but, in order to wash it, merely wetted 
the loin-cloth from the outside or slightly lifted it in 
order to pour water underneath it. The younger of 
the two women before beginning the work had pushed 
her " sarong," which otherwise was always worn over 
the breast, lower down and round the hips. Before 
strangers this is never done, and they explained later 
that this was a sign of special confidence. 

After this washing the hair of the corpse was 
combed, and a silver needle, which the husband had 
first to fetch from his betel-case, was then inserted " 
through the usual knot of hair at the back of the 
deceased's head. The daughter then called one of the 
children standing by and had a piece of yellowish 
(curcuma-like) root "' brought ; this she bruised a little, 

^ Rowland, p. 711. 

- Probably as n ch:\rni against evil spirits. Cp. Malay Magic, p. 327. 

•^ Probably turmeric. 

CHAP. IV SAVAGE MALA VS OF NEGRI SEMBILAN 103 

and then made little crosses with it on the under 
surface of the hands and feet, leaving a yellow trace 
behind ; it was at the same time explained that when 
the deceased awoke in the grave she would look at 
her hands and feet and see from the yellow crosses 
that she was really dead. This was the custom, they 
said. Next the husband and the daughter laid the 
corpse on a mat, which again in its turn lay upon a 
long piece of tree - bark. The husband closed his 
wife's eyes, not without reverence, crossed her arms 
over the breast, and arranged the head so that it 
looked straight upwards. Next, two long pieces of 
white cloth were laid upon the body one over another ; 
and in the lower one, which was nearer the body, the 
son-in-law cut a hole with his chopper (" parang "), 
explaining that this was done in order that she 
might breathe. In the outer cloth, however, no 
opening was made. The bark was then rolled to- 
gether round the body, laced and relaced with rattan, 
and carried by two men to the grave, which had 
been dug, deep in the jungle, in a clearing cut out by 
other people. 

The pit was almost i metre deep, and remarkably 
long and narrow ; on the left (the lower) side the 
soil lay in a long narrow heap ; it was banked up 
away from the hole by two strong beams, which lay 
one above the other, and were held in position by 
two pickets. 

The corpse was laid on the ground upon the other 
(the higher) side of the pit, and the bark unwound 
from it ; husband and son-in-law then grasped it by 
the shoulders and the feet, another man supported 
the head, and thus it was laid in the grave, face 
upwards, the feet towards the west, the hillock on the 

I04 BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

right, distinctly on the right side of the pit ; to the 
left of it a space remained free, which would have 
sufficed for a second person of equal size.' 

The husband now crouched down at the foot-end 
of the grave and took from his betel - wallet half-a- 
dozen little thin silver rings and brooches such as the 
Sakai women like so much to wear on the " kabaya." 
He gave one of these rings to a young boy, her son. 
The others, together with the betel-wallet and some 
green betel-leaves, he laid upon the breast of the 
corpse ; the two last, however, he took away again 
later and laid them close to the deceased's left hand. 

Near the grave lay a quantity of pickets, measur- 
ing about I metre in length; these were now placed by 
those present close together into the grave so as to 
form to some extent a sloping roof of pickets, over 
which tree-bark was then laid. While the bark was 
being laid upon the pickets, several of those present, 
among them all the women, took earth in their hands, 
rubbed it between them, and then let it fall with 
some care between the pickets fixed above the 
corpse. 

Great pains were taken that no opening should be 
left anywhere, and that all was well covered with the 
tree - bark. Then three men, together with the 
husband of the dead woman, threw the earth back 
into the grave with hoes (" changkul ") and stamped 
it firm under their feet. When a mound began to be 
formed, one of the two beams on the lower side of the 
grave towards the right was taken and a shorter piece 
of wood cut for the head side ; all were then secured 
by means of short pegs (pickets), and between them 
the earth was heaped up in the usual way, as in 

' Rowland, p. 712. 

CHAP. IV SA VAGE MALA YS OF NEGRI SEMBILAN 105 

a three-sided frame of timbers. The foot end remained 
outside this barrier. 

The husband had already, when the corpse 
was laid in the pit, placed the midrib of a bertam- 
palm leaf upright in the corner, on the right at the 
deceased's head ; in the bark-roof a slit had been 
cut expressly for it, and even when all the earth had 
been heaped up, the little shaft still rose a foot above 
the hillock. That was the sign that the woman had 
died by herself, and had not by means of the same 
disease summoned with her one of her children or 
relations. All leaves and pieces of wood were then 
carefully removed from the earth of the grave mound. 
Two dishes of boiled rice were then laid on some 
large leaves, the one at the foot, the other in the 
middle of the mound ; one was for the woman herself, 
the other for the spirits (" hantu ") of her parents 
and relatives, who now came to visit her. At foot 
and head were then inserted a couple of rudely-carved 
pegs (as in the case of Malay graves), and these were 
bound with a strip of white material — this was the 
custom (" 'adat "), and no more could be learnt 
about it.^ 

Blandas. — There is no record of a Blandas funeral, 
but I may mention their " Hantu Pawul," which was a 
kind of grave-demon (Mai. = " Hantu orang berkubor "), 
and was exorcised by means of the following charm : — 

Shoots of the Convolvulus, leaves of the Convolvulus I^ 

Pass by me at the full length of the house-floor ! 

For one month, yea, for two months, 

Avaunt ye to the left hand, avaunt to the right hand ! 

May I be fatal-to-meet, 

And you, O Pawul, be carrion. 

1 Rowland, p. 713. 

- Malayan charms often begin by reciting the materia inagica used in the 
ceremony, for which they thus form an aid to memory. 

io6 BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part mi 

Besisi. — The Besisi informed me that their dead 
are not laid in the grave in one invariable posture, 
but that though generally placed in a supine posi- 
tion, they are sometimes laid upon the right side 
(as among the Malays), and also, very rarely, with 
the knees drawn up to the chin and the hands 
clasped in front of the knees, in a sort of sitting 
position. This position, however, was explained by 
the Besisi as being only adopted for the saving of 
labour, and there seems no reason why this should 
be doubted. 

The house in which the deceased lived, and some- 
times the whole of the settlement, will be occasion- 
ally deserted or burnt after a death. This practice, 
however, is now less common among the Besisi than 
the Sakai, perhaps owing to the fact that the former 
live more by agriculture. As regards the hut for the 
soul, I was once (before I had ever seen it) discussing 
this custom with the three Batins of Ayer Itam in the 
presence of some men of the tribe, when one of the 
Batins gave instructions that a model should be made 
for me ; and in not more than twenty minutes a 
rough but perfectly intelligible and cleverly made 
model had been constructed from strips of the leaf- 
stalk of the ranggam palm, pinned together with the 
formidable thorns of the " nibong " (a hardwood 
palm), and filled with the diminutive furniture which 
will presently be alluded to. 

It was an almost inconceivably difficult thing 
to see anything of the burial customs of the 
Besisi except by accident, and it was in fact by 
the pure accident of being on the spot when a death 
occurred that I at last saw one of these funerals. 
Iwen then no Besisi breathed a word to me about 

CHAP. IV SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 107 

the intended ceremony, and it was from a friendly 
Malay that the information came which enabled me 
to see it. 

A young Besisi woman, named Sauma, had died 
the night before my arrival, and it was between 8 
a.m. and 9 a.m. that I heard of the preparations for 
her burial, which had been kept a profound secret. 
Fortunately, however, there was still time, and one of 
my Besisi friends taking me up the river in his 
"dugout" canoe for a considerable distance, we 
arrived at the burial place, about a hundred yards in 
from the river, just before the commencement of the 
funeral proceedings.^ 

The deceased was brought to the spot with her 
own "sarong" (a sort of plaid skirt or long kilt worn 
by the Malays) girt about her waist, but was wrapped 
besides in a new shroud of white cloth. The shroud, 
in turn, was wrapped up in a couple of new mats, the 
whole being lashed to a pole for ease of conveyance. 
When I arrived, the body, still lashed to the pole, 
was lying near the grave, the digging of which had 
just begun, and which when completed was a 
very narrow oblong pit no deeper than the digger's 
waist. 

A yard or two from the foot of the grave was 
erected the triangular hut (no larger than an average- 
sized doll's house),'- to which reference has already 
been made, but instead of its being thatched in the 
ordinary way, three leaves of the fan-palm (" kepau "), 
with long stalks, were placed upright so as just to lean 
over the framework of the hut. I was told that this 

' This burial ground must have ^ The posts of this hut were about 

been the greater part of a mile away, 3 ft. to 3^ ft. high (91 cm. to 1 20 cm.), 

allowing for the windings of the and the sides measured about i ft. 

river. 6 in. (45 cm.) each way. 

io8 BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

was done to save time, but I noticed near the foot of 
another grave close by the ruined framework of a 
similar hut which had evidently, from the remains of 
the fan-palm leaves, been roofed in a similar manner. 
A ladder, consisting of an inclined stick, was added 
for the soul to climb up to its hut by. The hut had 
just been furnished (before my arrival) with models 
of the " sentong " (a long basket made of a kind of 
fan-palm leaf, which is strapped to the back and 
generally used by the Besisi women in this district 
for carrying jungle produce),^ a small closed rice-bag 
(" sumpit ") filled with seed-rice, and an open wallet 
(" bujam ") containing young shoots of the wild betel- 
leaf (" chambai "), one of the edible kinds of marine 
bivalve called " lokan," and a piece of newly-woven 
matting about 9 inches square, on which had been 
deposited the smallest possible "portions" of boiled 
rice, fish, acid fruits (" asam kelubi "), water, and 
sugar (but no salt). 

The deceased's father now unloosed the fasten- 
ings of the mats and the shroud in which the body 
was wrapped, and stripped the latter of its selvage.'^ 
Next he wetted the deceased's face and breast with 
the midrib of a banana - leaf dipped in water, and 
removed her own garment (" sarong "), which was laid 
aside to be burned. Then the shroud was re- 
adjusted and the body laid in the grave, with the 
head pillowed upon the banana-leaf rib. A plank 
made of some soft wood (probably "jelotong," not 
unlike deal), resting against sticks put ready to 
support it, was then placed in a sloping position 

• The articles deposited in the hut ^ This is a Malay custom, the 

are always, I was told, distinctive of strips of selvage (taken from the shroud 

the sex of the dead : thus for a man, itself) being used to tie up the dead 

choppers, etc., would be used. body. Cp. Malay Magic, p. 401. 

iSaam^i^ 

Skeai Coileciioii. 

Besisi Soul-Wallet. 

Wallet left in Besisi soul-hut (near the grave of deceased), containing small models of 
various utensils and implements used by deceased during life. 

Vol. II. A io8. 

CHAP. IV SAVAGE MA LAVS OF SELANGOR 109 

over the body, so as to protect the latter from 
falHng earth during the re-fiUing of the grave-pit/ 

The earth was now filled in and four poles put down 
rectagonally to mark the edges of the grave. Then 
two of the elder men took their stand on the opposite 
sides of the grave, and each in turn held out at about 
the height of his breast a couple of jungle knives 
(choppers) horizontally crossed. These each of these 
two men let fall (still crossed) seven times running 
upon the centre of the grave (where the girl's breast 
would be) — a strange custom, of which those present 
would only tell me that they did it in order that their 
own lives might not be endangered, but which (as 
other Besisi afterwards more fully explained to me) 
was intended to fix the deceased's ghost in the tomb, 
and keep it from feeding upon the living. 

The elders then planted round the edges of the 
grave some yams (Bes. "yet"), some roots of the 
citronella or fragrant lemon grass (Mai. " serai "), 
some roots of the sweet potato (Bes. " tila' " or 
" hila' "), and some roots of a purple-leaved plant — a 
kind of coleus (Bes. " torek " = Malay, " ati-ati "). 

Next the seed-rice was taken out of the hut and 
sown broadcast over the grave. Water was sprinkled 
over it, and I was told that the rice wa« to serve 
when it grew up for the deceased's soul to live upon. 
Finally the deceased's garment (" sarong "), the two 
mats, and the strips of selvage were collected together 
and consumed to ashes in a small fire which had 
been kept burning since the ceremony commenced. 

I must add that, as it was approaching mid-day 
before the preparations at the grave were complete, 

^ No doubt in imitation of the Malay form of burial, known as " papan sa' 
keping " (the single plank). 

BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

there was some hesitation on the part of those 
present as to whether it was not actually noon, in 
which case they said the burial would have to be 
postponed till the afternoon, since the shortness 
of their shadows at noon would (sympathetically) 
shorten their own lives. Fortunately I was able to 
reassure them, and the ceremony proceeded. No 
invocations were employed nor any set forms of 
words, so far as I could observe, although the 
chiefs and some twenty to thirty members of the 
tribe were present. The grief of the mother was 
especially distressing, since she broke down and 
sobbed aloud, but no emotion was shown by the rest. 
Mantra. — M. Borie, in writing of the burial 
customs of the Mantra, states that the body was 
enveloped in a white sheet and bathed ; it was then 
left until the friends of the deceased had had time to 
arrive, when it was bathed again, and carried by two 
friends to the grave. The other friends and relations 
might either follow or precede the cortege. Arrived 
at the place of burial, the deceased was deposited in 
a tomb dug in a lonely place, sometimes in a reclining 
position, sometimes sitting, and sometimes standing. 
If it was a child, in either of the last two positions 
and with the face to the east, and if an adult, with the 
face to the west. At the side of the deceased was 
placed a spear and a chopper (" parang "), and 
generally some rice, dishes, and old clothes.^ Near 
the tomb flowers and fruit-trees were often planted, 
and this, they said, was the ancient custom of their 
forefathers. At the foot of the tomb a fire was kept 
burning for three days, after which no more visits 

' Ace. to Montano ( Voyai^e, p. 22), ;i deposited, a cho}iper being added in the 
betel-box, rice-pot, and calabash were case of a man. Cp. J^ev. cfEihn. i. 53. 

CHAP. IV SA VA GE MALA YS OF MALACCA 1 1 1 

were paid to it. The Mantra did not wear any signs 
of mourning, and deaths were rarely wept over. 
The house of the deceased was abandoned by the 
survivors, and as a rule the entire village emigrated.^ 

Elsewhere we are told, by Logan, that a Mantra 
grave was not protected by a roof like that of the 
Benua of Johor, though it in other respects resembled 
it. Above it the Mantra kindled a fire [of logs] 
(" ungun "), so that the soul (" semangat ") or spirit 
of the deceased might warm itself, and not weep and 
wail on the grave from the cold. On the grave were 
also placed some unhusked rice or padi, some 
plantains, sweet potatoes, yams, betel-leaf, areca-nut, 
gambler, lime, tobacco, a peeling - knife made of 
wood, and a blowpipe that the survivors had pre- 
viously broken to pieces, — praying the soul ('* sem- 
angat ") to seek no more from them.^ After a death 
in the clearing, nothing more was planted there, and 
when the crop or plants on the ground had been 
gathered, it was abandoned.^ 

Berembun Tribe.— Among the Jakun of Berembun 
a fire was burnt above the grave for three or seven 
nights to prevent the " hantu " or ghost of the 
deceased from crying in the grave. A still more 
singular custom consisted in placing the end of a 
bamboo close to the nose of the corpse, the other 
end projecting above the grave. This practice was 
said to be confined to the graves of children who 
died young, and the reason given for it was that the 
gases accumulating in the body, and having no outlet, 
would cause it to swell and burst,* and that by some 

^ Borie (tr. Bourien), p. 82. survival of the use of the tube or pipe 

2 Cp. pp. 91, 98, a7ite. which among some races is fixed in the 

•^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 325*. grave for the purpose of conveying 

* This is doubtless a misunderstood food to the deceased. 

BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

sympathy between it and the body of the living 
mother, the latter would be affected in the same way/ 

Benua-Jakun of Johor. — On the day succeeding a 
death the body was wrapped in cloth and deposited 
in a grave dug near the hut, together with some 
of the clothing of the deceased, and his chopper 
("parang"), if he possessed one. No ceremony was 
observed, but a framework of wood, resembling a 
(shallow) box without top or bottom, was placed 
above the grave."^ This was filled with earth, a piece 
of carved wood was stuck at each end, and frequently 
the whole was covered over by a roof.^ 

Jakun of Johop,— The preparations made by the 
Jakun for their funerals were few and simple. If the 
decease took place before noon, the body was buried the 
same day, if after noon, the funeral was deferred until 
the day following. The corpse was washed, wrapped 
in cloth, and interred by the relations and neighbours 
in a grave about four or five cubits deep. The blow- 
pipe, dart- quiver, knife, etc., of the deceased were 
buried with him, together with some rice, water, and 
tobacco. The only reason given for burying such 
things with the deceased was that this was the custom 
practised by their ancestors and followed by them. 

* y. /. A. vol. i. p. 271 ; cp. the the pilgrim on his long and dreary 

account in Newbold (vol. ii. pp. 408- journey to the west. No sort of 

410), which runs as follows : — service is recited. 

The preparations for funerals are On the seventh day after inter- 
few and simple. The corpse is ment, a fire is kindled over the grave 
stripped, washed, and wrapped in to drive away evil spirits. Some of 
cloth of "t'rap" bark, or in a piece of the tribes turn the head of a male 
white cloth, and interred, among some corpse to the east, of a female to the 
of the tribes, in a sitting posture, in a west. The house where a person has 
grave from three to six cubits deep ; died is generally deserted and burnt, 
the cooking dish, blowpipe, dart- - This is the usual custom among 
([uiver, chopper, knife, flint and steel Peninsular Malays. Cp. Malay Magic, 
of the deceased arc buried with him, p. 40S. 

along with a little rice, water, and a ^ J- ^- ^- vol. i. p. 271. This is 

few "smokes" of tobacco, to serve also a Malay custom. 

CHAP. IV SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 113 

Like many other people, the Jakun considered white 
as a sacred colour, and it was a peculiar subject of 
comfort when, in their last sickness, they could 
procure for themselves some white cloth in which to 
be buried. When they were too poor to obtain it, the 
body was wrapped in tree-bark. It was alleged that 
amongst some of the tribes on the frontier of Pahang, 
the corpse of the deceased was burnt, as amongst the 
Hindus and Siamese ; also that the place where a Jakun 
died was deserted by his comrades, and the house 
itself burnt ; but this practice was confined to a few.^ 

Jakun of the Madek (Johor). — Of the Madek Jakun 
we are informed by D. F. A, Hervey that on the death 
of a man tobacco and betel-leaf were deposited upon 
his breast, his relations weeping and wailing, and at 
the same time knocking their heads against the wall ; 
whilst the women would tie a cloth round their necks 
" as if to strangle themselves " ; the men, however, 
would nowadays invariably interfere before any harm 
was done, although, in former times, the women are 
said, on such occasions, to have actually put an end to 
their lives. The burial usually took place next day, 
but sometimes on the second day if there were any 
reason for delay. All the property of the deceased, 
comprising his weapons, cup and plate, and clothing, 
were buried with him, together with some rice. The 
depth of the grave was up to the breast. An axe, 
torch and torch-stand, coconut-shell gourd, and pan, 
were placed on the top of the grave." 

The great magicians (" poyang besar ") of the tribe 
were believed to be able either to reach heaven by 

1 J. I. A. voL ii. p. 265. Mr. the head, which protruded from the 

Blagden was told by a Mantra that ground. 

he had seen a Jakun buried in a sit- - Hervey, J. R. A. S,, S. B., No. 

ting posture, a fire being Hghted round 8, p. 119. 

VOL. II I 

114 BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS 

disappearing without dying, or else, on sickening for 
death, to arrange to have incense (" kemnyan ") burnt 
over them for two days after their apparent death 
(instead of their being merely wept over and buried), 
and then to return to life again/ 

In a further account of some Jakun graves in 
Johor which was contributed some years ago to the 
same journal, Mr. Hervey states that he once found 
two or three Jakun tombs at the back of a small settle- 
ment containing five Jakun rattan-gatherers' huts in a 
tapioca plantation running down to the river's edge. 
Of one of these he attempted a sketch ; it was the tomb 
(" pendam ") of the " Juru-krah," one of the subordinate 
Jakun chiefs, and the head of this particular Jakun 
settlement, who had died of fever nine days before. 
The body lay about three feet under ground, the 
tomb, which was made of earth battened smooth, 
rising about the same height above the surface. A 
little ditch ran round the grave, wherein the soul of 
the deceased chief might paddle his canoe. The body 
lay with the feet pointing towards the west. The 
ornamental pieces at each end of the grave corre- 
sponded to tombstones and were called " nesan," 
which is the Malay word for such stones. On the 
other side of them were to be seen the small, plain, 
upright sticks, which are called soul-ladders (" tangga 
semangat "), which were intended to enable the soul 
to leave the grave when it desired. There were 
also to be seen four horizontal timbers on each side of 
the grave, which were joined together to form a 
framework,- consisting of sixteen beams in all, which 

^ J. R. A.S., S.B., No. 8, p. 119. call it " kalang dapor," or "hearth 

- This framework is the same as frame." Cp. Malay Magic, p. 408. 

that constructed by the Mantra and It may be a survival of hut - or 

Iksisi ; as well as by the Malays, who hearth-burial {v. pp. 100, 1 1 2, ante). 

P"lG. 2. 

Jakun Graves at Kumbang. 

Hcrvey. 

Fig. I. — a-a. Grave-posts (" nesan ") of carved wood, equivalent to tombstones. /'-/'. " .Soul- ' or ' spirit- 
steps" (" tangga semangat "). c. Torch-stand ("kaki damar "), holding the end of a " damar ' torch. 
d. Coconut shell (" tempurong "). c. Jungle basket (" ambong "). 

Fig. 2. One of the grave-posts (" nesan ") at the foot of a woman's tomb. 

Vol. II. p. 114. 

CHAP. IV SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR iiy 

was laid on the top of the grave, and thus formed a 
sort of enclosure, within the precincts of which were 
placed, for the use of the deceased, a coconut-shell to 
drink from, a torch ("damar") fixed in a rattan stand 
("kaki"), an adze handle, and a cooking-pan ("kwali"). 
Outside this framework was suspended an " ambong " 
(which is a back-basket with shoulder-straps, made of 
the bark of " meranti " or some other kind of tree) for 
the deceased to carry his firewood in. Close by the 
tomb of the Juru-krah was that of his niece, between 
which and the former there were three points of differ- 
ence to be noted : the first was that the framework on 
the top of the niece's grave consisted of but three hori- 
zontal timbers instead of four {forming a total of twelve 
beams instead of sixteen) ; the second, that one of 
the ornamental head-pieces was roughly shaped like a 
human figure, whilst the other resembled the " nesan " 
of her uncle ; the third, that the only objects inside the 
framework were a coconut-shell, a torch and torch- 
stand, and a little sugar-cane. Not far distant was a site 
marked off for a child's grave, by means of a coconut- 
shell and some cloth hung upon sticks. I n another direc- 
tion was the half-finished grave of another child, the 
lower framework being already in position, whilst the 
earth had been loosely heaped up in the enclosed space, 
and a small framework, intended for the top, lay close by.^ 

Orang Laut or Sea-jakun. 

Orang- Laut, Sletap. — At death the deceased (of 
the Sletar tribe) were wrapped in their garments 
and committed to the parent earth. " The women 
weep a little and then leave the spot," were the simple 
words of the narrator of the ceremony.^ 

1 Hervey in /. R. A. S., S. B., No. 8, pp. 97, 98. "- /. /. J. vol. i. p. 344*. 

Ii6 BURIAL CUSTOMS AND BELIEFS part hi 

Orang" Laut, Sabimba. — Logan tells us, that when- 
ever a member of a Sabimba family died, the body- 
was washed, wrapped in cloth, and buried in a grave, 
an excavation being made in one side of the pit to 
receive it.^ Above the grave was placed some rice, 
a pot, an axe, a hatchet, a knife, betel-leaf and areca- 
nut, the deceased being meanwhile exhorted not to 
call the survivors or require anything from them in 
future. A fire was kindled at the side of the grave. 
On the third and seventh days the grave was visited, 
and a month later the house was abandoned and a 
new locality selected for the survivors. The property 
of the father descended to his sons." 

A later account by Thomson differs slightly from 
the foregoing, as we are told that on any of their 
tribe being near death the Sabimba would leave the 
hut until they thought that all was over ; they then 
laid the corpse upon a plank and removed it, shrouded 
in its own clothes, to a grave in which were buried, 
together with the body, the utensils of the deceased, 
such as his blowpipe, chopper, adze, cooking utensils, 
etc. ; these were placed at the side of the grave, and 
the survivors then left the spot and wandered to 
other parts. ^ 

Orang Laut, Muka Kuning-. — The dead were buried 
i-g- ft. (45 cm.) deep in graves near the house. A 
blowpipe was placed upon the grave of a male, and a 
knife on that of a female. In about a month after 
the burial the family abandoned the hut and con- 
structed another in a distant place. ^ 

1 This is the " liang lahad" of the ^ Thomson in J. LA. vol. i. pp. 

Malays, which is borrowed from the 348*, 349* Cp. Malay Magic, p. 

Arabs. Cp. Malay Magic, p. 404. 405. 

* Logan iny. /. A. vol. i. p. 297. * J. I. A. vol. i. p. 339*. 

CHAPTER V. 

Music, Songs, and Feasts. 

The musical instruments of the three races include 
one primitive stringed instrument, two or three kinds 
of wind instruments (flutes), drums and other instru- 
ments played by percussion, and a primitive kind of 
Jew's-harp. It is a curious fact that all the regular 
instruments except the drum are made of bamboo in 
some shape or form. Of these the distribution appears 
to be fairly general, with the possible exception of the 
drum and the " banjeng " (the stringed instrument 
referred to), which seem to be rarely used by the 
wilder Semang tribes. They at least belong to a 
rather more developed class of instruments, found 
everywhere among tribes of Malayan stock, and 
were probably borrowed by the Semang from the 
Jakun. 

The most interesting of the flutes, the nose-flute, 
is so called because it is played through the nose 
instead of the mouth. It has a wide distribution in 
South-east Asia and the Malay Archipelago, but I 
never heard of its being employed by the civilised 
Malays of the Peninsula, who themselves regard it as 
peculiar to the aborigines. 

The Jew's-harp is also widely distributed in the 
same region, is found among all the jungle tribes 

117 

ii8 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

of the Peninsula, and most probably came in with 
Malayan culture/ 

The chief point in which the Jew's-harp of these 
tribes differs from that used by the Malays is in 
respect of the handle, which among the aborigines is 
frequently made from the bone of an animal. 

It may be noted here that the drum is not used by 
the Andamanese, and that, speaking generally, it is 
hardly portable enough as an instrument to be adopted 
by nomadic tribes. Hence, wherever it appears as a 
Semang instrument, it should almost certainly be 
regarded as borrowed from other (probably Malayan) 
tribes. 

The bamboo harp or guitar of the Semang, as it 
has variously been called (though it does not perhaps 
correspond very exactly to either of those instruments), 
is also not found among the Andamanese, and was 
most probably in the first instance of Malayan origin. 

The music of these races appears to be similar 
to that which is common throughout China, Indo- 
China, and (formerly at least) Java, and which gener- 
ally consists, except where modified by foreign 
influence, of the five tones C D E G A. 

Dress. 

In the matter of dress, the trappings worn by the 
Semang dancers (in all cases which came under my 
observation) presented a strong contrast to those 

' While Baron A. von Hugel was that it is simply due to a more primi- 

showing me some Jew's-harps (? from tive (clumsier) form of manufacture, 

New (iuinea) one day I noticed that it being easier to cut out the tongue of 

the lower extremity of the instrument ihc instrumen( if the end is split. I 

had been split and subseciuently tied liave never observed this peculiarity, 

up. Other specimens from the same however, among the Jew's-harps of the 

region showed the same peculiarity, Peninsula, either among the jungle 

and I think there can be little doubt tribes or Malays. 

CHAP. V GENERAL REMARKS 119 

worn by the Sakai and Jakun {e.g. the Besisi). For 
whereas the Negritos usually employed both leaves 
and flowers in their natural state, just as they were 
gathered in the jungle, both Sakai and Jakun wore 
artificial leaf decorations consisting of long white strips 
of palm-leaf plaited up into various fantastic shapes, in- 
tended to represent flowers, fruit, krisses, and nooses 
which (according to Vaughan-Stevens) are specially 
designed to entrap any unwary demons which might 
attempt to attack the wearer during the performance 
of the dance. Bunches of these " demon-traps " were 
inserted in the girdle and head-band of the dancer. 

Songs and Mimetic Dances. 

From the accounts of De Morgan, Hale, and other 
writers, it might be inferred that the song-and-dance 
performances of these tribes were not invested with 
any special meaning, and had no object beyond that 
of whiling away an idle hour. In some instances, no 
doubt, it is so, and it may even be conceded that in a 
few instances the songs themselves may merely consist, 
as is alleged by these writers, of words strung together 
at random. It cannot, however, be admitted that 
performances of such a kind are in any way typical, 
any more than it could be admitted that the burden of 
a music-hall song adequately represented the songs 
of Europe, As I shall presently be able to show from 
the specimens I myself collected, the songs of both 
Semang and Jakun generally possess a very definite 
meaning, which is only difficult to make out, in some 
cases, on account of the differences which exist be- 
tween the sung and the spoken dialects, the former of 
which sometimes contains what are probably archaic, 
as well as rare and distorted forms. 

MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

The Semang chanted songs descriptive of animals 
and reptiles, birds and fruit, but there was nothing 
actually mimetic in the performances that I witnessed. 

Among the Jakun [e.g. Besisi and Mantra), how- 
ever, the songs are often distinctly mimetic, and in 
such cases are acted by the performers, who take 
much pride in their performance. Moreover, from 
an analysis of the songs themselves, taken in conjunc- 
tion with the dress of the performers, and the subjects, 
and often the actual words of the songs themselves, it 
appears to me at least an arguable hypothesis that 
they may have been instituted mainly for the purpose 
of increasing the kindliness of nature,^ as the food- 
producing ceremonies of the Intichiuma are thought 
to have been among the Australian Blackfellows. 
There are also, however, among them songs that are 
performed for other motives and in other moods, the 
most important of which are the genealogical songs 
called " Trumba," which commence by describing 
the early wanderings of the chiefs of the tribe, and 
conclude with a recital of the various spots successively 
occupied by its ancestors. 

Of the actual performances of these songs, as dis- 
tinct from the subjects of which they treat, there is 
not much that requires to be said. It may, however, 
be noted that among the Semang, and apparently also 
among the Sakai, the chief if not the sole performers 
are the women of the tribe, whereas among the Besisi 
most of the dancing was actually done by the men, 
and it was only with much difficulty that the women 
could be persuaded to perform, except indeed at the 
great annual banquets after the rice-harvest. The 
performance took place after the evening meal, which 

' For a fuller statement of the case, see Skeat, Folklore Journal, vol. xiii. 

CHAP. V NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 121 

among the Jakun was on the occasion of their great 
annual feast-days accompanied by much drinking of 
freshly-brewed fermented liquors, and terminated with 
what can only be called their " game of exchanging 
wives," the whole performance being evidently regarded^ 
as having some sort of productive influence not only upon 
the crops, but upon all other contributing sources of food- 
supply. I may add that in all cases that I have seen 
(both among the Semang and the Jakun), as well as, I 
believe, among the Sakai, the dancing of the women 
is usually confined to a sort of curtseying step, which 
consists in bending the knees and modulating the arms 
and hands in time to the music. The dance-action of 
the men was much more free, but as far as I can 
remember, the mimetic dances (representing animals, 
etc.) were always performed by the men alone. 

I. — Semang. 
Musical Instru7nents. 

Kedah Semang. — The simplest form of Negrito 
music (if it may so be called) consists of various simple 
ways of " beating time." One of these methods is 
to take a couple of hardwood sticks or bamboo slivers, 
which are held in the two hands, when one of them is 
struck upon the other in the air. 

This method of beating time was employed by the 
Semang of Siong, who made use of it to accompany 
their songs. '^ 

Another method of obtaining a musical note from 
the percussion of bamboo, employed by the Semang 
of Siong, simple as it is, has not been yet recorded. 

1 v., e.g., p. 152, 1. 40; p. 156, 11. (p. 162). 
33-35; P- I5^> II- 46, 47; p. 159, " A similar method is employed both 

11. 42, 43 ; and the Fish-trap Song by the Sakai and the Jakun. 

122 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

It consists in beating the open end of a long bamboo 
internode of large calibre with a palm-leaf fan. The 
bamboo employed measures from about three or four 
feet in length, and has a diameter of three or four 
inches. The lower end, which rests on the ground, 
is closed by the node, and the upper end is cut off 
evenly and left open for the beater. The beater is 
made by folding the leaf of the " palas palm " [Licuala) 
into the shape of a fan and lacing and relacing it across 
with a strip of rattan to stiffen it, and keep it in its 
proper shape. It measures about one foot in length 
by five inches at the broadest part, and struck sharply 
against the upper (open) end of the bamboo, which 
latter usually rests upon another piece of wood or 
else upon the knees of the performer. This instru- 
ment, like the last described, is used by way of 
accompaniment to the songs of the tribe. ^ 

A small variety of Jew's-harp is a favourite musical 
instrument with the Semang, though it is of course 
not used as an accompaniment. It consists of a small 
strip of bamboo (about five inches long by one inch 
in width), in the central portion of which a small 
free tongue is cut, in such a way as to allow it to 
vibrate easily when the instrument is played. To 
effect this the performer takes the instrument in 
his left hand, the left thumb resting upon a slight 
depression at the lower end of the harp. In his right 
he takes the handle (which is attached by a short 
string to the upper extremity of the instrument). By 
giving the handle a sharp tug or jerk, he sets the tongue 
of the instrument in vibration, producing a loud twang- 
ing note, which can be heard at some distance, but 

' I have not yet heard of this instruineni lieing used by the Sakai or by 
any of the Jakun. 

Skeat CoUcctioii. 
Skmang Jews'-har]'. 
Made of bamboo witb hanule of monkey's bone. (Uhi Siong, Kedah.) 

skcat Collection. 
I- A\-SHAP1J) PaI.M-I.KAF l-iKATKRS. 

Used for striking the ends of long bamboos to cause a musical note. (Ulu Siong, Kedah.) 

Vol. II. /. 122. 

A". H. Yapp {Skeat Expeditio)i). 

Pangan Gkoui' in Dancinc; Drk.ss, Kuai.a Sam, Ui.u Kki.antan. 

Vol. If. />. 123. 

NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 

which is by no means unmusical. In order to increase 
the volume of sound the body of the instrument is 
generally held between the teeth of the performer, or 
else over the hollow of the bamboo case in which it is 
sometimes kept. 

The string by which the instrument is attached to 
the handle is generally of twisted vegetable fibre, and 
the handle itself the rib of a small monkey. In all 
other respects, however, it is very similar to the Jews'- 
harp of the Peninsular Malays, 

The flutes used by the Semang of Kedah are of 
two kinds, the common bamboo mouth-flute and the 
nose-flute. Both are occasionally though rarely used 
to accompany their songs. 

The common flute is usually about a foot long and 
is made of a segment of young bamboo. It usually 
has three holes, apart from the mouth-hole, and is 
often decorated with incised patterns. 

The nose-flute, which has a similar number of holes, 
was about twice the length of the common flute used 
by the same tribe. There does not appear to be any 
record of the plugging of one of the performer's 
nostrils with grass or leaves (as is done by other races 
who use this instrument), but my impression is that I 
saw this done by a member of this tribe. The practice 
certainly obtains among the Sakai, though as when a 
pair of nose-flutes is played both nostrils may be 
used simultaneously, there should not be any special 
necessity for plugging the unused nostril when a 
single flute is used. 

The stringed bamboo or " guitar " is occasionally 
found among the Semang (in fact I myself obtained a 
specimen from the Semang of Kedah), but it appears 
to be very rarely used by them, and is probably not a 

124 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS part hi 

Negrito instrument. In its simplest form it consists 
of a big segment of bamboo — usually from about 2 ft. 
to 3 ft. (60 cm. to 90 cm.) in length, with a diameter 
varying from 2-4 in. (5 cm. to 10 cm.). This segment 
comprises an internode with its two adjacent nodes or 
joints, the strings in my specimen being made by raising 
several thin parallel strips of the outer skin of the inter- 
node with a sharp knife, and inserting under them at 
each end small wooden wedges or bridges (called 
"pillows" in Semang) in order to stretch the strings 
to the required extent. By moving these wedges the 
instrument can of course be tuned. A strong rattan 
ring is also passed over each end, partly to keep the 
instrument from splitting, and partly to keep the strings 
themselves from breaking away at their extremities. 

Perak Semang. — The only authority for the use of 
the drum among the Semang is the account of De 
Morgan, who gives, under the heading of " Negrito 
Songs," an account of the way in which an alleged 
Semang drum was made.^ But as he often confuses 
them with Sakai, and even - describes the method of 
manufacturing a Sakai drum in identical words, I think 
his statements must, in the absence of corroboration on 
the part of other writers, be taken as referring to a 
tribe that was mainly (if not wholly) Sakai. 

Kedah Semang-. — On festal occasions both sexes 
adorned the person with white bands of Licziala leaf 
in place of the ligatures usually worn. Bunches or 
tassels of fragrant leaves and flowers were inserted 
under these bands, in the girdle, on the crown of the 
head, and at the back of the neck, and the head 

' De Morgan, vii. 430. ^ Ibid. viii. 281. 

NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 125 

itself was bound with a Licuala-\^2S. fillet. In the 
case of the men the fillet was simply carried round 
the head,^ but among the women in some cases 
two bands were carried over the crown of the head 
from ear to ear, the first just behind a narrow fringe 
of hair in front, and the second at the back of the 
region of the top-knot, whilst a third was carried 
round at the back of the head. In other cases only- 
two bands were worn, corresponding to the first and 
third of the bands just described, the central one 
being omitted. A small roll or scroll of Licuala-leaf 
was also inserted in the ear-holes. 

In addition a couple of leaf-festoons were worn 
crossed like bandoliers upon the breast, and bunches 
or tassels of leaves similar to those which are in- 
serted in the fillet were worn in the girdle, and were 
also sometimes inserted in the armlets and knee- 
bands. A woman at Siong wore one of these tassels, 
which was made by shredding (with the thumb-nail) 
the leaves of the Retut, probably a kind of wild 
ginger (perhaps Homstedtia hemispheric a). It would 
appear that they are worn, not for mere ornament, 
but as charms against diseases. The one here 
described was worn as a protection against pains in 
the back. The leaves are usually picked and worn 
green, but dried leaves are occasionally employed. 
The black coiled girdle of " rock-vein " fungus was 
also usually worn upon these occasions, but a girdle 
of coiled cane with alternate knots of Licuala-\^2S. 

1 This was, I believe, the customary men at Siong wore a sort of wreath 

dance-fillet prescribed on such occa- manufactured by shredding the leaf 

sions for the adornment of the men. of the Zalacca palm (Salak) with a 

Occasionally, however, a fillet made of knife ; this form of head-dress being 

" urat batu " (the "rock-vein" fungus believed to avert headaches. Another, 

described in an earlier chapter) were with the same object, wore a wreath 

also worn. One of the Semang of Lycopodium cernunm. 

126 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

and " chalong " leaves dependent from it, was also 
sometimes worn by the Pangan women of Kelantan, 
though the rest of their attire differs but little from 
what has already been described. 

Songs and Dances. 

Both in the neighbourhood of S. Mat Sam (a 
tributary of the Kelantan river) and in Kedah I 
witnessed performances of the Semang choral dances 
(called Siwang), the performers in both cases being 
females. Indeed I was told by the Kedah Semang 
that their women alone were in the habit of dancing. 

In the former case the dance was performed by 
two Pangan women, to the accompaniment of a some- 
what monotonous chant and a bamboo guitar, the 
latter of which was played by one of the men. 

In the other case, at Siong, two or three Semang 
women and a girl were the performers, and there was 
quite an extensive orchestra, consisting of two men 
who beat the long bamboos described above, a man 
who performed upon the nose-flute, and one or two 
men who beat time by knocking sticks together. 
Sometimes the musicians chanted songs ; sometimes 
they merely played the accompaniment. When the 
former was the case, there was invariably an old man 
who "conducted," and from whom the rest of the 
performers caught up the words of the song, even 
though in some cases they evidently knew the words 
so well that they might easily have dispensed with 
his services. The step danced by the women was a 
graceful one, the knees being bent, the body turned 
partly round, and the arms either hanging loosely and 
slightly swaying from side to side or else stretched 

NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 127 

forward and swayed in time to the music. The 
Pangan women when dancing kept slowly moving to 
and fro, and round in a small circle, but the Semang 
women of Kedah did not move from where they 
stood. In the latter case the performance took place 
by daylight at my special request, but night-time is 
regarded as the proper time for such ceremonies. 

The song-dialect of the Negritos was described to 
me by the Semang themselves as being different 
(probably more archaic) than their spoken language, 
and as being harder to understand and to explain. 
Certainly the songs which I took down were extremely 
hard to make out, the words being frequently 
lengthened by one or more syllables to suit the 
music, and the difficulties were not lessened by 
the fact that, although I had them repeated fre- 
quently in order to make sure of the words, the 
lines themselves would constantly be repeated in 
a different order, fresh lines being inserted and 
others omitted, even though the words in the 
repeated line did not vary. Nevertheless, with a 
considerable amount of labour and repeated checking, 
I succeeded in discovering the meaning of about a 
dozen of these songs, which I recorded at the time 
upon a phonograph (taken with me up-country for 
the purpose), and thanks to my father's old friend 
and my own. Dr. R. J. Lloyd of Liverpool, it has 
been possible in a few cases to initiate investigations 
both from the phonetic and the musical point of view. 
I may add that some of these phonograph records 
were exhibited at one of the Royal Society's soirees 
in 1 90 1. 

In Ulu Raman a number of Semang songs were 
performed for my benefit by an aged Semang (named 

128 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS part hi 

To' Gelugor), several of whose songs I took down 
as he sang them. And here is one of the songs that 
he sang. The subject of it is a monkey called " Kra " 
{Macacus cynomolgus), and every line ends (by way of 
a burden) with the monkey's name. 

The Semang Monkey Song. 

He runs along the branches, Kra ! 

Carrying off (fruit) with him, Kra ! 

He runs to and fro, Kra ! 

Over the seraya-trees, Kra ! 

Over the rambutan-trees, Kra ! 

Over the live bamboos, Kra ! 

Over the dead bamboos, Kra ! 

He runs along the branches, Kra ! 

Peering forward, Kra I 

And dangling downwards, Kra ! 

He runs along the branches and hoots, Kra ! 

Peering forward, Kra ! 

Among the young fruit-trees, Kra I 

And showing his grinning teeth, Kra ! 

From every sapling, Kra ' 

Peering forward, Kra ! 

He is dressed for the dance, Kra ! 

With the porcupine's quill through his nose, Kra ! 

Dr. Lloyd's note upon the phonographic record of 
this song is that it is sung to a very simple tune, like 
the " Song of the Fruit-buds," but that it has a 
monosyllabic refrain. 

The last two lines appear to be merely a " make- 
believe " invitation to the monkey to come and join 
the feasting and dancing of the tribe. 

Other songs of a similar kind (of which the follow- 
ing are free and tentative translations) were taken 
down by myself either at Jarum or at Siong in Kedah. 

The Song of the Fruit-cluster. 

The fruit-cluster turns in the wind, 
The fruit-cluster at the end of the spray ; 
The fruit-cluster turns in the wind. 
The fruit-cluster that we climb for. 
The fruit-cluster turns in the wind, 
The fruit-cluster waves to and fro. 

CHAP. V NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 129 

The fruit-cluster whose pulp is acid, 

The fruit-cluster sways to and fro ; 

The fruit-cluster turns in the wind, 

The fruit-cluster that spins round and round. 

Upon the " record " of this song Dr. Lloyd 
remarks that it shows a different type of chant. The 
lines of the original have four accents each, but the 
invariable part of the line occurs at the beginning, and 
the variable part at the end of the line. Each part 
carries two accents, and the lines sometimes rhyme, 
but without regularity, and apparently without design. 
This song shows well the unorganised character of 
these compositions, and the singer's habit of bringing 
in the same lines repeatedly, and in any order, ad lib. 

The Song of the Wild Ginger Plant. 

Its stem bends as its leaves shoot up, 

Down to its root it bends and sways, 

Bends and sways in divers ways ; 

Its leaves are chafed and lose their stifi'ness ; 

On craggy Inas it is blown about, 

On craggy Inas which is our home. 

Blown about in the light breeze, 

Blown about with the mist, blown about with the haze, 

Blown about are its young shoots. 

Blown about in the haze of the mountain. 

Blown about in the light breeze. 

It nods and nods upon the mountains, 

Mountains of Beching, mountains of Inas, 

Mountains of Malau, mountains of Kuwi, 

Mountains of Mantan, mountains of Liiniu', 

On every mountain which is our home. 

Dr. Lloyd remarks that the " Song of the Wild 
Ginger Plant " is not marked by any regular refrain, 
though the love of repeated words and sounds shows 
itself in one way or other in almost every line ; other- 
wise, however, its only quality as verse is that of 
possessing four accents to the line. 

The Song of the Fruit-buds. 

They swell and swell, the fruit-buds ! 
To and fro wave the fruit-buds ! 
Blown about are the fruit- buds ! 

VOL. II K 

I30 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS part hi 

In the wind, the fruit-buds ! 
In the Hght wind, the fruit-buds ! 
Spinning round and round, the fruit-buds ! 
Swaying to and fro, the fruit-buds ! 

Dr. Lloyd's note upon this song is that the music 

^■^ is simplicity itself, and that the time 

^ Tf'T ^ is well kept, the four accented syllables 

o-iyui wongbakau ^f ^^^j^ y^^^ comlng In on the exact 
beat of the music, with the regularity of marching. 

An attempt to reduce the music of this song to 
paper, from the record of the phonograph, is given 
herewith. It was kindly sent to me by Dr. Lloyd, 
with his comments on the songs. 

The Song of the Ripening Fruit. 

Plump grows the fruit at the end of the spray ! 

We climb and cut it off at the end of the spray ! 

Plump is the bird at the end of the spray ! 

And plump too the buck squirrel at the end of the spray ! 

Of this song Dr. Lloyd remarks that it exhibits a 
somewhat different style of metre. It possesses six 
accents to the line, of which four belong to the variable 
part of the line, and two to the invariable refrain. 

Dr. Lloyd sums up his remarks upon these Semang records by observing that 
both as to music and metre they are very much on a par with the simplest of my 
Malay (east coast) records. The versification is based always upon the possession 
of a given number of accents in the line, and nearly always upon the repetition, 
either at the beginning or end of the line, of certain invariable words or phrases. 
The incidence of accent is, however, totally difterent from that of the Malay 
songs. The Malay lines usually end in, and are rhymed on, unaccented syllables, 
but the Negrito lines never end on an unaccented syllable, and though lines often 
end in identical words, actual rhymes never seem to be sought for. The thoughts 
expressed are of the extremest simplicity, and almost every line is complete in 
itself. The lines rarely have any special sequence, and most of them can be 
recited in any order, without injury to the poem, and it can be heard in the 
phonograph that the singers are (juite alive to this, and freely alter the order of 
the lines. Accent appears less steadfast than in Malay, or perhaps licence is 
greater ; at least it will be observed that the same word appears in different 
places with a different accentuation. The final syllable, which so seldom carried 
the accent in Malay, here carries it oflener tlian any other. 

In conclusion I should add that, from what I was 
told by the Pangan of Kelantan, the " full " dress of 
the Negrito men on festal occasions was the same 

CHAP. V NEGRITOS OF PERAK 131 

as that of their women, with the exception of the 
different girdle (" tah' gel ") and the combs that were 
worn by the latter. The men's dancing dress con- 
sisted, as a rule, of a loin-cloth ("penjok"), two 
crossed leaf-festoons or bandoliers (" chiniwok "), and 
a stick or dance- wand (" cheb chas "), which was carried 
in the hand. 

Perak Semang". — The performances of the Perak 
Negritos have a strong family likeness to those of the 
tribes of Kedah. Of the former, Maxwell's account 
tells us that singing and dancing (Mai. " ber-sempul ") 
were still in a very early stage of development, and 
that dancing was confined to the female sex.^ 

Sitting together in a circle and facing inwards, the 
five men (whose performance Maxwell is describing) 
commenced a series of long chants or recitations in 
quick time. The instruments on which they accom- 
panied themselves were made of pieces of bamboo. 
One man held in each hand a short tube of bamboo 
(green and recently cut) in an upright position on a 
horizontal wooden log. These tubes were raised and 
then brought down on the log alternately, producing 
a ringing and not unmusical sound, which had some- 
thing of the effect of the beating of a tom-tom.- Two 
others struck pieces of bamboo held in their left 
hands with other pieces held in the right, after the 
manner of the Malay " cherachap " or castanets. 
There was no hesitation or difficulty about recollecting 
words ; the man who led was followed by the other 
four, who were generally about a note behind him. 
The general effect was monotonous, the performers 
sometimes chanting rapidly on the same note for 

1 Maxwell in/. R. A. S., S. B., No. 4, p. 48. 
2 Cp. the same instruments as used by the Besisi. 

132 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

nearly a minute together. Their whole range most 
probably did not exceed three or four notes/ 

The first song was the " Tune of the Gias-tree " * 
(" Lagu Gias "). This was an enumeration of fruit- 
bearing trees, and of the favourite mountains and 
forests of the tribe. It was said to be held in great 
veneration, and might contain some of the germs of 
the traditions of this singular people. Next came 
the " Tune of the Tiger-spirit " (" Lagu Chenaku "). 
" Chenaku " (or " B'lian ") is the name given to a 
man who conceals his identity as a tiger under the 
semblance of a human form (Malay " Jadi-jadi-an "), 
this belief being widespread among the Malays as 
well as among the aboriginal tribes. The next song 
was the "Tune of the Prah-tree " ("Lagu Prah "), 
sung when the " prah " fruit is ripe, no small occasion 
of festivity among the forest tribes. The fruit is 
sliced up and mixed with other ingredients (" rojak,") 
and then heat-dried in bamboo tubes (" lemang ").^ 

The performance concluded with the " Tune 
of the Durian-fruit " (" Lagu Durian "). This, like 
the others, was unfortunately unintelligible, though it 
may be presumed that their estimate of this fruit was 
a high one. 

But the most remarkable performance yet attributed 
to the Perak Semang is undoubtedly the Dance-drama 
related by De Morgan, who was an eye-witness of it, 
and describes it as follows : — 

A young girl entered the circle and began to dance 
in the middle. She advanced slowly at first with a 

' Maxwell in/. A'. -'/. .V., .S'. B., No. confuses together the names " Sakai " 

4, p. 49. ^ (?) "(jayns." and "Semang," but that his account 

•• Ibid. It should be noted that is otherwise suljstantially correct. 

Maxwell, in tiic account quoted above, /. A'. A. S., .V. B., No. 4, ;i. 49. 

NEGRITOS OF PERAK 133 

sort of polka step, but without turning round ; then 
she commenced to wave or modulate her arms, and 
directed her hands behind her back. In this way- 
she went two or three times round the circle. (This 
was explained to mean that she was looking for a 
husband in the forest.) A suitor soon appeared and 
danced round her, singing of flowers, birds, and 
insects. She moved backwards, followed by the 
suitor, who pressed for her hand in vain. Then a 
second and a third suitor appeared, each being re- 
pulsed in turn like the first, and at this point three 
other young girls arrived on the scene, and her late 
suitors deserted her to make up to her rivals, by 
whom they were promptly accepted, dancing round 
with them and talking. The first arrival then went 
from group to group trying to regain her late con- 
quests, but was too late, and was compelled to remain 
an old maid, whereupon she stopped in the middle 
of the circle and uttered the most lamentable cries, 
repeating again and again the words Death, Male- 
diction, etc. After dancing round her for about ten 
minutes, one of the men of the rival groups returned 
to her, when she humbly agreed to accept the 
humiliating position of a second wife.^ 

' De Morgan, viii. 282, where other they would repeat the words, Death, 
performances of this kind are described. Decay, Fire, and the name of the 
Elsewhere {op. cit.) De Morgan says deceased, etc. If they were feeling 
that the Negritos of Perak were happy, they would sing of flowers, 
in the habit of singing words strung birds, and small insects. This, how- 
together at random, their joy or ever, is only a general rule, and 
sorrow being distinguished solely by often they would string words together 
the nature of the words and the air. with reference to sound only, and not 
If they were feeling dull, they would to their meaning. If the word was 
go through the names of all their too short for the measure, they pro- 
rivers, mountains, and hills. On re- longed it by adding long drawn-out nasal 
turning from the chase they would syllables such as ang, eng, ong, ng, 
sing words suited to wild animals, the (the latter after words ending in a 
forest, and their weapons. hard consonant such as g or k, or a 

After a death of one of t!ie tribe, vowel). 

134 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS part hi 

II. — Sakai. 
Musical Instruments. 

Perak Sakai. — As among the Semang, the simplest 
form of music takes the form of beating time. Thus 
De Morgan describes the Perak Sakai as using small 
slivers of bamboo, whose flat sides were clashed 
together with a sound like that of castanets.^ 

Another simple form of percussion music is made 
by using a number of short bamboos (which are open 
at the upper end only) as " stampers," the bamboos 
being held in the hand and struck upon the floor or a 
piece of wood at regular intervals. This method of 
beating time, which has been only once recorded 
among the Semang," is mentioned both by De Mor- 
gan,^ and Hale. A full description of these bamboos 
and the methods of using them will be found in the 
part dealing with the Besisi. 

The bamboo harp or guitar (already described 
as in use among the Semang) is also found among the 
Sakai. Thus Hale ^ describes one that he saw, 
among the Perak Sakai, as possessing three strings 
stretched upon a large joint of bamboo. This guitar, 
however, was probably not in the first instance a 
Sakai, but an aboriginal Malayan instrument. 

In a recent letter Mr. L. Wray states that the 
Sakai of both Kinta and Batang Padang use frets 

' Cp. Z. f. E. xxvi, 172. "At the Siamese for so simple an inven- 

timcs two bamboo sticks called 'sok tion. 

yet,' measuring 38 cm. in length by - By Maxwell, v. p. 131 mite. 

3 cm. in breadth, are employed in the ^ According to De Morgan (viii. 

" Tuang-luang " ceremony among the 281), it is the length of these bamboo 

Sakai. One stick is held in each hand, lubes that causes the alteration of tone, 

and they are struck together. The The most usual method, however, is 

Sakai say that this custom is borrowed by varying the diameter of the tube. 

from the Siamese." There is, how- Cp. De Morgan, vii. 430. 

ever, apparently no reason whatever ' Hale, p. 298 ; cp. De M., L' H. 

why the Sakai should have gone to ii. 619. 

CHAP. V SAKAI OF PERAK 135 

made of small pieces of wood or pith stuck on to the 
bamboo under the strings of their guitars, but not 
touching them until pressed down by the fingers. 

Of wind instruments the Sakai use various forms 
of flute, ^ which are similar to those manufactured by 
the Semang. Hale mentions their use of a " long 
bamboo flute with three holes " in it, as well as a 
species of bamboo whistle. 

Mr. L. Wray writes me, that the nose-flute in 
Ulu Batang Padang is about 18 in. (45 cm.) long, and 
has four holes, the first being 9 in. {23 cm.) from the 
blowing end, and the other holes at distances of two 
fingers' width from each other. The holes are made 
by taking a small dry stick, lighting one end in the 
fire, and then blowing out the flame and applying the 
glowing charcoal point to the bamboo, blowing with 
the mouth meanwhile to keep it alight. Mr. Wray 
had never seen more than one flute used at a time. 
If two are used, they must, he thinks, be of difl'erent 
construction, as those he had seen had to be held so 
that the wind from the nostril passed almost at right 
angles to the length of the flute. 

Whistles are rare, but what are usually called by 
this name by most writers, are in reality short flutes. 
They have one end closed by the node of the bamboo, 
except a small hole in the centre, the other end being 
open. They are played with the mouth like a flute. 
The palm of one hand is held over the open end, and 
the thumb of the left hand over the small hole in the 
other end. They thus give three notes. The hole 
blown through is not circular, but shaped like that of 
a whistle. 

1 De Morgan, viii. 281 ; UH. ii. tells me that the Sakai often plug one 
619; Hale, p. 298. Mr. Cerruti nostril with grass. 

136 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

The nose -flute is also certainly known to the 
Sakai, and the Jews'-harp is mentioned by Hale.^ 

A drum, which De Morgan obtained at Changkat 
Kerbu in Perak, was made by hollowing out the 
trunk of a tree, and " heading " the barrel thus ob- 
tained with the skin of a black monkey.^ According 
to Hale, this hollowing of the barrel is effected by 
burning as well as by chopping, the process being 
continued until the barrel is only about half an inch 
thick. Across one end the skin of a gibbon (siamang), 
or some other small animal, is stretched, and tightened 
up to the required pitch by means of rattan cords and 
wedges. Hale further describes a tune played upon 
one of these drums as being in what he calls " one-two 
time."^ 

Mr. L. Wray writes me, that there is a Sakai drum 
in the Perak Museum, from Batang Padang. It is 
about I ft. (30 cm.) in diameter, and 2 ft. 6 in. (76 cm.) 
long. It is made of a tree-trunk hollowed out, and 
has on one end a siamang skin head. Mr. Wray 
bought it for $2. 

Dress. 

On festal occasions the attire of the Sakai (for 
both sexes) does not materially differ from that 
of the Negritos. The same leaf- festoons, fillets, arm- 
lets, knee-bands of Licuala-leaf are worn as have been 
described already, and the same bunches of fragrant 
leaves ■* and flowers are also worn wherever there is a 

' Ilale, p. 296 ; cp. Z'//. ii. 619. been only headed at one end (like that 

2 De Morgan, viii. 281. But see also mentioned by Hale). See VH. ii. 619. 

De Morj^an, vii. 430, which conflicts -^ Sic. Prohalily in " common " time, 

with this. There can, however, be Hale, p. 296. 

little doubt that the account assigning * Usually the leaves are picked and 

this drum to the Sakai is the correct one. worn while green, — but dried leaves 

The drum n,-fcrred to appears to have are not excluded (De Morgan, vii. 414). 

SAKAI MEX PLAVINf; Xosk-Flutes. 
Near Kiui'a Ko,- about six miles from Tapah, Batang Padang, Peral<. 

ll^ray. 

P'ol. 1 1, p. 136. 

SAKA! OF PERAK 137 

chance of fixing them. The only important differ- 
ences appear to consist in the different type of head- 
dress, and (frequently) of girdle, worn by the Sakai. 
Of the head-dress Hale says that on the occasion of 
special festivities, e.g., at their dances, the Perak 
Sakai wear a sort of high turban made of bark-cloth, 
or a wreath of sweet-smelling grasses or leaves/ 

The Dance. 

Hale, in describing a Sakai dance which he 
witnessed in Ulu Kinta, says, that after about five 
minutes' beating of the drum one or two men got up 
and commenced a dance, "the principle of which was 
a sort of curtsey made to every beat of the drum " ; 
and that, at the same time, "grotesque gestures were 
made with the hands." After about half an hour's 
dancing the men sat down to rest and commenced 
chanting one of their songs, which consisted of a 
mere " repetition of the names of a number of moun- 
tains, rivers, etc.," all of which were in the Kinta 
watershed (the " Sakai country ") between 4° 30' and 5° 
N. lat. One of the places referred to was Tambore (.'*), 
"now a Malay village with coconut palms at least 
twenty years old," and which must, as Hale points 
out, have been in the possession of Malays for that 
time at least, "as the Sakai do not plant coconuts."^ 

After about an hour's chanting (Hale continues) 
the women came forward to perform. It "could 
scarcely be called a dance," as they did not move from 
place to place, but only went through certain evolu- 
tions as they stood. First they clapped their hands, 
for a few bars, in time to the beats of the drum, 

^ Hale, p. 293. - Ibid. 

138 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS part mi 

repeating cries that sounded like " Sough, sough, 
sough," and then " Chaep, chaep, chaep." This was 
repeated some six or eight times, and at the same time 
they made a deep curtsey once to every drum-beat. 
Then the arms dropped to the sides, and the body 
was turned from side to side (from the hips upwards), 
the arms being allowed to swing round loosely with 
it, once to every beat of time ; at the same time a 
deep curtsey was made as before ; this being re- 
peated about six times. This had a very pretty 
effect, as it was done by a graceful swaying move- 
ment. After this they stood still (with the exception 
of the curtseying), and placing one arm akimbo, held 
out the other with the palm open, and in time to the 
drum the forearm was turned so as to present the 
hand with the palm alternately upwards and down- 
wards with a very slight but at the same time grace- 
ful movement, continued till the end of the song.^ 

In the same connection, Hale says that each line 
(or word) was first chanted by the leader of the 
song and then repeated in chorus by the rest. Most 
of the expressions used were, however, well known to 
them, and they often picked up the words to some 
extent as they went along.' 

Words of the Songs. 
Apart from the words of the song given by Hale, 

' Hale, ]). 299. De la Croix, in a Croix, p. 339). Cp. also Brau de 

similar account, adds, "At times the Saint-Pol Lias, pp. 269-271. 

musical phrase dies away only to revive ^ Hale, p. 299. Hale adds that a 

suddenly and terminate in a long-drawn similar invocation or "prayer" was 

howl which is lost in the night. The addressed to the Spirits of the Forest, 

wild and profound poetry of the per- the mountains, the rivers, and the wind, 

formance produced a captivating effect the Spirits of Ancestors, the Spirits of 

in the midst of the great forest sur- Disease, the Spirits of Wickedness, and 

rounding us on every side" (De la Trouhle of all kinds (Hale, p. 300). 

Sakai \\'(.)Mkn and Child Performing Danck-Music. 
Note ihe head-dresses and girdles. (S. Perak.) 

Cerruti. 

Sakai \\ci.mf.\ Uaxcinc. iS. I'i.kak, i 

Vol. 11. p. 13S. 

CHAP. V SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 139 

which is a mere list of place-names/ we have few trust- 
worthy records of the words of Sakai songs, with the 
exception of the account by Colonel Low, where we 
are told that their " Mampade," or airs were much in 
the Siamese style (which last undoubtedly takes the 
lead amongst the musical compositions of the Indo- 
Chinese nations), and that their songs had an inter- 
mixture of Malay, as in the following specimen which 
was sung somewhat in the Siamese mode : — 

Pirdu salen kinnang ingat sampei 
Yari mola asa] nyite gyijen 
Ayer ambun umbun moli 
Kiri baju layang mayep singi. 

No satisfactory translation could be got of this 
fragment, but the greater part of the words are 
Malay.'-^ 

Selangfop Sakai. — The Sakai of Ulu Langat (as 
also those of Perak) are very fond of " wind-organs," 
which are long bamboos with a slit in each inter- 
node, which are lashed to the top branches of trees, 
and which give out musical tones when the wind 
blows over them.^ 

III. — Jakun. 
Musical Instruments. 

Blandas. — The chief musical instruments of the 
Blandas were their so-called bamboo "guitars," flutes, 
Jew's-harps, and drums.* 

A drum which I purchased with not a little 
difficulty from a chief of the Blandas tribe, whose 
encampment was situated in the swampy jungle 

1 Hale, p. 296. 2 J /_ ^ vol. iv. p. 431. 

^ H. J. Kelsall mJ.R.A.S., S.B., vol. xxiii. p. 69. For details, v. Perak 
Mus. JV., iii. p. 74. * For Blandas songs and charms, r'.App. 

I40 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS part hi 

on the right bank of the Langat is now in the 
Cambridge Museum. It is about 2^ feet in length by 
5 inches in diameter, and was made out of the trunk 
of a big screw-pine headed at each end with the 
skins of mouse-deer, which were held in their posi- 
tion by strong rattan bands or rings. To the edges 
of each skin, on which a certain amount of the 
hair was still left, were fastened rattan strings, under- 
neath the ends of which wedges were driven to 
brace up the skins (or drum-heads) before playing. 
This drum was played by the hand only, tambourine- 
fashion. Martin and I, on our visit to the Blandas, 
also found a dance (.'*)-mask representing a tiger. 

Musical Instruments, 

Besisi. — Among the Besisi, as among all the 
aboriginal tribes of the Malay Peninsula, the beating 
of time by means of wooden sticks was no doubt 
one of the earliest forms of music. 

The first advance in the development of musical 
instruments among the Besisi appears to have arisen 
from their observing the harmonious properties of the 
hollow stem of the bamboo, from whose long inter- 
nodes (by various forms of percussion) musical notes 
were elicited. In the simplest form short segments 
of bamboo internodes of varying diameter are used as 
"stampers," each tube being open at the top, but cut 
off just below the node at the bottom, the scale of 
notes proportionately descending (like that of the 
pipes of an organ) as the diameter of the internodes 
is increased. To elicit the notes the player holds a 
tube vertically in each hand and drums lightly with 
the lower end either upon the ground or upon any 
piece of hard wood that may be at hand. 

CHAP. V SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 141 

These bamboo tubes were called " ding tengkhing," 
or "quarrelling bamboos," and the ceremony "Rentak 
Balei," i.e. " Stamping on (the floor of) the Tribal 
Hall," evidently a reference to some form of beating 
time. On the occasion of a Besisi feast at which I 
was present, the two performers sat in the middle of 
the chiefs room. The bamboo tubes were six in 
number (two sets of three each), and each performer 
held one, I believe the one which produced the 
higher note, in his right hand, and the other in his 
left. Each set was of gradually diminishing sizes. 
The two biggest tubes, which gave the deepest notes, 
were called " male " (lemol) or " father " (kuyn) ; the 
two intermediate ones were called " female " (kedol) 
or "mother" (gende'), and the two smallest were 
called " child " (kenon) or " grandchild " (kentot .^). 
The utility of these " child "-tubes was not very clear. 
I was told that they were mere supernumeraries, to 
replace any others that got damaged ; and it is possible 
that this may have been the case, as this would 
account for their being smaller than either of the 
others. At the performances at which I was present 
the performers, holding one of the tubes in each hand, 
struck them in rapid succession upon the central floor- 
beam of the house, producing a simple musical 
rhythm, which was distinctly harmonious.^ One of the 
tunes played by the Besisi consisted of one high note 
(struck by the right hand) followed by three low notes 

^ According to De Morgan (vii. 430), though it is possible that by some 

it is the difference in length of these tribes both length and diameter are 

cylinders that causes the variation in varied simultaneously. Elsewhere (viii. 

the note; but as the note really de- 281) De Morgan himself says that 

pends upon the volume of air set in both are varied. Yet the tubes 

vibration within the cylinder, the re- that I brought home were all 

quired note is obtained less clumsily, almost (to a fraction) of the same 

and I believe much more commonly, length, though varying greatly in 

by varying the diameter of the tube, diameter. 

142 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

(struck by the left hand), in common time, the first 
note being the loudest. 

The next Besisi instrument deserving mention is 
the bamboo " guitar," which is very similar to that 
employed by the Semang. A point of some interest 
lies in the fact that this instrument, according to 
a Besisi tradition, was imitated from the stick insect, 
to which the Besisi gave the same name ("keranting," 
from "ranting," a twig or "stick"). Unfortunately, 
however, for this attractive theory, there are only 
too good grounds for regarding it as a mere instance 
of popular etymology ; for the name of the instrument 
varies greatly according to the number of strings it 
bears, and such forms as " keruntong," " kerotong," 
and others show pretty clearly the fallacy of the 
suggestion. The name is undoubtedly onomatopoeic, 
intended to suggest a twanging sound. 

But the drum is perhaps the most " important " of 
all the musical instruments used by these tribes. It 
is, I believe, usually found only in the houses of tribal 
chiefs, and may doubtless be regarded to some extent as 
their insignia of office. If so, this fact would sufficiently 
account for the extreme reluctance that its owner 
exhibits when asked to part with it, as it would then 
be the exact counterpart of the sacred drums and 
gongs used by Malay Rajas for calling together their 
retainers. It differs but slightly (in material and to 
some extent in shape) from the ordinary drum of the 
Peninsular Malays, to which it has evidently close 
affinities. 

Of the Besisi wind instruments, their flutes were 
of bamboo, and differed but little from those used by 
the Semang and Sakai. The Besisi nose-flute was, 
however, very much shorter than that used by the 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 143 

Semang ; those that I obtauied in Selangor being, 
in fact, little more than half the length of the nose- 
flutes I got in Kedah. A kind of bamboo whistle was 
also sometimes employed by the Besisi. 

The Besisi were very fond of what are generally 
called " yEolian bamboos," or "wind-organs" — long 
bamboos lashed vertically to the tops of trees, with 
slits cut in them which produced musical notes when 
blown upon by the wind. Several of the trees near 
Besisi dwellings at Klang were fitted with these instru- 
ments, and they could be heard at a distance of 
upwards of a mile when the wind blew strongly.^ The 
bamboo Jew's-harp is also found among the Besisi. 

Feasts. 

The man's head-dress on festive occasions consisted 
among the Besisi of a plaited palm-leaf [LicMa/a) fillet 
or head-band, from which depended a row of long 
fringe-like streamers (called " centipedes' feet "), so 
that his face was almost entirely hidden as he danced. 
Besides this, he wore a similar fringe round about his 
waist, and a third slung like a bandolier over the 
shoulder and across the breast. Finally, he had a 
bunch of artificial leaf-ornaments, consisting of imita- 
tion flowers, pendants, nooses, and daggers, inserted 
in his head-band, and another at his waist, and carried 
a curious dance-wand, which will be described more 
fully below. 

Altogether his get-up reminded me irresistibly of 
our own Jack-in-the-green, and might well have owed 

1 Mr. H. N. Ridley informs me this. They were of practical use 

that these wind-organs can be stopped as well as being harmonious, for the 

at will by turning them round with Jakun used to find their way home 

their backs to the wind, and that through the jungle by listening to 

the Jakun used occasionally to do them. 

144 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

its origin to a similar motive, viz., an attempt to make 
the new year more productive by an abundant display 
of greenery. 

The woman's head-dress on similar occasions 
consisted of a plaited palm-leaf head-band, lacking the 
streamers, in place of which it was furnished with little 
upright spikes, on which were spitted sweet-smelling 
flowerets or leaves, whose fragrance thus became 
pleasantly diffused throughout the room. The rest of 
their attire was similar to the men's. ^ 

As regards the season at which their feasts took 
place, the Besisi informed me that the chief of these 
were held annually, first when the rice began to 
bloom, and again at the beginning, middle, and end of 
the harvest." 

On these occasions, the members of the entire 
settlement having been summoned, fermented liquor 
is brewed from the jungle fruits of the season and a 
banquet spread in the house of the chief. The latter 
presides and opens the proceedings with the burning of 
incense and the chanting of an invocation, which is 
usually addressed to the ancestors of the tribe, as well 
as to the wild beasts and demons that attack the crops.^ 

The feast then begins, the freshly-brewed liquor is 
drunk, and, to the accompaniment of strains of their 
rude and incondite music, the jungle-folk of both sexes 
deck themselves freely with flowers and fragrant leaves 
and indulge in dancing and singing throughout the 
night. This ceremony is called " Berentak Balei," 

• A beautifully-plaited girdle of a not before the sowing, as among the 

fine species of cane was also formerly .Malays (Bellamy, p. 227). 
made by the Besisi, probably for special '^ On the occasion of one of these 

occasions. I obtained two specimens harvest feasts at which I was present, 

of it, but understand it is now obsolete. the invocation was addressed to the 

'■^ Mr. Bellamy adds that a feast took Elephant, Deer, and Wild Big, as well as 

place after the planting out of the rice, to insect pests. See vol. i. p. 363, ante. 

1^ V'"'^ \ 

ix>-*»- 

i^:.: 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 145 

or "Drumming upon (the floor of) the Tribal Hall," from 
the use of the bamboo instruments described above. 

The songs are not always merely chanted, but are 
often really acted (as well as sung), the dancer being 
frequently provided (as already mentioned) with a 
special head-dress, which differs for men and women. 

I have also seen the dancer at the ceremonies of 
this same tribe carrying a curiously carved dance-wand, 
one of which I was fortunately able to purchase, I 
have never heard of any similar object being used 
by any other tribe, though Borie mentions the use 
of wooden swords (probably Malay fencing-sticks) in 
the dances of the Mantra, a kindred tribe. 

According to the testimony volunteered by the 
Besisi themselves, these banquets used formerly to 
conclude with a drinking bout,^ which was followed by 
a kind of " game," at which the men of the tribe were 
traditionally allowed, if they pleased, to exchange 
their wives. All performances of this kind are now, 
however, of very rare occurrence, though there is no 
doubt as to the earlier prevalence of the custom. 

Words of the Songs. 

The songs chanted on these occasions are generally 
rude improvisations, consisting of certain well-known 
and continually-recurring phrases. The tunes to which 
they are sung are very simple and quaint. These are 
generally mere chants, of three or four notes only, but 

1 Traces of such drinking bouts are and Tributaries," J. R. A. S., S. B., 

to be found among the Malay races. 1882, No. 8, p. 16), where he gives 

The wild people are not, however, "jo'oh" as meaning "to drink," and 
as a rule, inclined to drink. This remarks that the same word is used 
drinking festival is called by the BCsisi in the taboo - language of camphor 
"Main jo'oh," the meaning of which is (I'antang Kapor) with the same mean- 
probably "Drinking game" {vide D. ing {/. R. A. S., S. B., No. 3, p. 
F. A. Hervey's paper on the " Endau 113). 

VOL. II L 

146 MUSIC, SONGS, AND J-'EASTS vart mi 

yet have a weird kind of melody of their own, and are 
sung with a wonderful spirit and verve, which prevents 
them from becoming tedious. Of these songs I was 
able to form, among the Besisi, an important collec- 
tion ; and as I know of nothing that could give a better 
general idea of the life, ideas, and customs of these 
wild tribes than these songs (which are a veritable 
storehouse of such facts) are likely to do, I give 
them in extenso, in the hope that something of their 
spirit may survive in spite of what is lost in the 
translation. I should perhaps add that I was told, 
inter alia, that the songs I had collected should, 
properly speaking, be sung in a certain order. Neither 
my informants, however, nor any other members of 
the tribe, could give me the order of any except the 
first ten, as given below. It would be a point of great 
interest if they should turn out, on further investi- 
gation, to be in any way analogous to the Malay 
" Rejangs," corresponding to the " lunar mansions " of 
the Hindus; and it would also be very interesting to 
know whether the "lunar mansions" of the Hindus 
were ever treated as the subjects of ceremonial songs 
in a manner at all resembling the primitive chants here 
described. In any case, however, this manual of the 
jungle would well repay study. 

The proper order of the first ten songs, which 
are, however, in the following pages, more con- 
veniently grouped, was said to be as under : — 

1 . Siamang. The gibbon. 

2. Pulai. A soft-wood tree. 

3. Merbau. A hard-wood tree. 

4. Kluang. The flying-fox. 

5. Hangkong. A wild jungle-fruit. 

6. (labang. ,, ,, 

7. Kedan. ,, ,, 

8. Kledang. 

9. Kabau. ,, ,, 

10. Mah hcdft hum. The little folk's bathing song. 

Skeat Collection. 
HEAUDKliSS OK BESISI MAX (ON LEFT), WoMAN (ON RIGHT), WORN TO 
CONCEAL THE FACE AT CeRE.\IONL\L DANCES. 

iism^^^s^^mm^s^ 

Skt-at Collection. 

Strange Wooden Dance-Wand carried bv Besisi Man at Ceremonial Dances. 

lieneath it is a flute, and also a no'ie-flute, used on similar occasions. 
(See p. 145.) 

I'ol. II. p. 146. 

A' Xami, thk Laie Bati.n of the Besisi, Kuala Lamjat, Seeangok. 

It was from this Jakun chief (here shown in full Malay dress) that I took down most of the 
Hesisi Jimt;le Songs given in the text. 

To/. //. /. 147. 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 

M7 

The following 
the " Lang," which 

have no ascertained order, except 
always comes last : — 

II. 

Bio'. 

The coconut-monkey. 

12. 

Liikah. 

The lish-lrap. 

Ij- 

Rimau. 

The liger. 

14. 

Gajab. 

The elejihant. 

15- 

Bertam tcnung. 

The solitary l)ertam-pah'n. 

16. 

Katak rengkong. 

The toad. 

17. 

Badak. 

The rhinoceros. 

18. 

Kijang. 

The roe-deer. 

19- 

Baning. 

The tortoise. 

20. 

Ular sawa. 

The python. 

21. 

Kanchil. 

The chevrotin. 

22. 

Plandok. 

The chevrotin (another species), 

23- 

Buaya. 

The crocodile. 

24. 

Rusa. 

The sambhur deer. 

25- 

Babi utan. 

The wild pig. 

26. 

Ungka. 

The ape. 

27. 

Ayam hutan. 

The jungle-fowl. 

28. 

Biawak. 

The lace-lizard or "monitor." 

29. 

Bruang. 

The l)ear. 

30. 

Lang. 

The kite. 

Other alleged .songs, whose names were given but 
the words of which were not given me, are — 

Bachang. 

Pipit. 

Buan. 

Sikah. 

Lotong. 

Kra. 

Musang. 

Kuching utan. 

Srigala". 

Tikus. 

Enggang. 

Kuau. 

The hoise-mango. 

The finch or sparrow. 

The rambutan, a wild jungle-fruit. 

A kind of monkey. 

The civet-cat. 

The wild-cat. 

The jackal or wild dog. 

The mouse or rat. 

The hornbill. 

The Argus pheasant. 

It is just possible, if the " Rejang " theory be 
established, that some of these songs may belong to 
a second series of " Rejangs," just as in Malay we 
find at least three different sets of "Rejangs" co- 
existing. The translations run freely as follows : — 

The Elephant. 

An Elephant trumpets at Bukit Peralong, 
A Herd Elephant to the Lone Wild Elephant. 
'Tis the herd that precedes the Old W'ild Elephant, 
The Sacred Elephant, the Shrunk-foot Elephant, 
The Magical Elephant from the land of Johor, 

MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

The Elephant that descends to the salt sea yonder, 

The Elephant that sports on the sandy l)eaches, 

And thence returns to the Upper Langat ; 

That climljs the hills to the sacred country. 

And tramples the hills, till they sink in ruins, 

And tramples the trees, till their trunks snap asunder. 

And stamps in his spoor and stamps in his foot-tracks, 

Until the whole land to mire is trampled. 

Now that at length he has reached his sanctuary, 

See that ye slay not the Sacred Elephant ; 

Eor if you do, you will die of sacrilege. 

Burn ye then incense, and pay )our vows to him. 

The Sacred Elephant loves his grandchildren. 

And in their clearings he will not forage. 

Nor will he forage among their coconuts. 

Roam then, O Elephant, o'er hill and hill-slope, 

Roam then, O Elephant, to cave and hollow. 

See, he has passed to the Upper Langat. 

An Elephant is drawn, by a host of jieoplc, 

Is drawn away to a far-off countrj'. 

But roam thou, O Elephant, to the I'resh-water Lake-side, 

Till thou diest, O Elephant, at the Fresh-water Lake-side. 

Thp; Rhin'oceros. 

Tmpit — ijiipit ! there calls a Rhinoceros, 

The Herd Rhinoceros to the Lone Rhinoceros. 

She calls her mate to search for sustenance. 

The Rhinoceros that roams and climbs the mountains. 

The Rhinoceros that roams when dew dries on the out-crop. 

What skill have I to strive with the Rhinoceros ? 

I call to my comrades, but all are ajjsent. 

Affrighted I climb up into a forest-tree, 

But the Rhinoceros waits at the foot of the tree-trunk. 

I break off a bough and cast it down to him, 

The Rhinoceros champs it and passes onwards. 

Then I descend and run back home again, 

But reaching home, the Rhinoceros follows nie. 

I then take a gun and shoot the Rhinoceros. 

The bullet has hit him. The Rhinoceros has fallen. 

See that ye singe then and quarter the Rhinoceros, 

And give to eat a little to every one ; 

But sell the horn to the Chinese foreigners.' 

Tup: Tkiek. 
A Tiger roars at the end of the river-point. 
What does he want ? Lie wants to be feeding. 
To feed on jungle-fowl, to feed on wild-boar. 
To feed on sambhur, to feed on chevrotain ; 
The striped Tiger that crosses the salt seas.^ 

' The horn of the rhinoceros is greatl)' time swim acro.ss the narrow strait 

prized among all races in the Mala)- (about three-quarters of a mile i") tliat 

Peninsula, as possessing extraordinary separates Johcr on the mainland of 

magical virtues. The Chinese, as a rule, .Asia from the island on which Singa- 

ari: tlie best customers of the aborigines. pore is built. 

- Probably in allusion to the known Eor these songs see also notes to 

fact that tigers do from time to Appendix. 

CHAP. V SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 149 

Do not forget this in (he telling — 

The heatllands — they are the Tiger's country. 

The Tiger has sworn an oath against Somebody, 

The Tiger whose bound is full five fathom. 

Dodge we the Tiger and leap to the right hand — 

The Tiger walks up a fallen tree-trunk. 

The Tiger looks for a hill that is lofty. 

The Tiger sleeps (there) at height of noontide. 

And then arises to roam the forest. 

The Tiger hunts for his living (juarry. 

The Tiger roams as far as Mount Ophir.' 

That is the place of the Tiger's origin. 

There is his jinang, there is his Dato', 

There is his Jukrah, and there his Batin, 

There dwells the ' Great Chief of all the Tigers — 

The Tiger dies at the house of his Batin. 

Thk Beak. 

IVak, wall, wah ! there calls the lloney-bear, 

The l)ear called ' Panggong,' the bear called ' Ilijak," - 

The bear that for food doth rend wild-bees' nests, 

That climbs the bee-tree to seize the wild-bees, 

That roams to the crags and descends to the salt sea. 

That yearns to devour the wild-bees utterly, 

That climbs up the mangrcjves, and rends them open. 

Thai climbs up the ' kCmpas '-trees, and rends them open. 

Sharp indeed are the 1 loney-bear's tooth-points. 

Mamat the First-born, seize your chopping-knife. 

He is nearing the ground ! He has dropped, the Honey-bear ! 

Chop at him now, you, Mamat the First-born. 

He has reared upright ! He turns to attack you ! 

Dodge now the Bear, O Mamat the First-born ! 

He dies ! Oho, you have killed the Honey-bear ! 

Now take his spleen to doctor the fallen.^ 

The SAMBHrR-DEER.* 

A'eng — berdcugkcng! there bells the Sambhur ! 

What do you do in the middle of the knoll there? 

We are but looking at Somchodyi' s clearing, 

A clearing that's ruined, devoured by Sambhur. 

The slot there that's left is the trail of the Sambhur, 

From the hoofs of the Sambhur, so sharp and pointed ; 

The Sambhur whose tail is short and tufted. 

The Sambhur whose ears are pricked and jiointed, 

The Sambhur whose horns spread massively branching. 

The Sambhur whose neck is so slim and slender : 

Such a stag is the magic Sambhur. 

1 Mount Ophir (or ' Gunong Le- J. R.A.S., S. B.,^o. l,^'^. \\o-i\\). 

dang" — 4000 feet), in the interior of - Different kinds of bear. 

Malacca, is a traditional site of the "^ The bear being able to fall a 

"Tiger city" of Malay legend, where considerable distance without injury, 

the posts of the houses consist of men"s it is thought that his spleen will be 

bones and the thatch of women's hair good for people who have fallen, like 

(Skeat, Fables and Folk -tales from a him, from trees. 

Far Eastern Forest, p. 26; compare ^ Or " Sambar " {Rusa aristotclis). 

ISO MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

A man bent with age, whose [leg] was ulcered, ^ 

'Twas he that became yon sacred Sambhur, 

Yon many-tined Sambhur, yon vast-bulked Sambhur, 

Yon Sambhur of palm-twigs, yon Sambhur of palm-husks, 

Yon Sambhur of palm-shoots, yon Sambhur of tubers, 

Yon Sambhur that eats the shoots of the ' klorak,' 

Yon Sambhur that feeds on the shoots of the "cow-itch," 

That feeds on the "cow-itch" till his head is itching; 

When his head is itching he rubs his horn-fjoints. 

He rubs his horns and the horns drop off again — 

The golden Sambhur, the stag of magic. 

See now, how near to the toils he wanders, 

Rouse him and drive him, for all his belling, 

The Sambhur that roams among the leaf-heaps. 

The Sambhur that couches among the leaf-heaps. 

See, the Sambhur starts and the toils have choked him. 

Oho, Sir Deer-wizard, spear me yon Sambhur, 

And when you have stabbed him, cast out the Mischief.'- 

Oho, -Sir Deer-wizard, here's a Sambhur to quarter ! 

The Roe-deer. 

Efiipef — empcp ! there calls the Roe-deer, 

The Roe-deer that roams to the knoll's far-end there, 

And wanders back to the knoll's near-end here. 

That dwells mid the crags of the Upper Langat. 

The Roe-deer that feeds on shoots of wild cinnamon. 

Rise up, oho, there ! Mamat the First-bom, 

Rise up, oho I and take your squailer,^ 

Take your squailer and stab the Roe-deer. 

Watch veiy carefully, the Roe-deer is running. 

Oho ! Lift him up, the Roe-deer has fallen I 

Bear him now homewards and cook my Roe-deer ; 

And when you have cooked him, quarter my Roe-deer, 

And give unto each an equal portion. 

Come hither, my sisters, young ones and old ones, 

And feast on the flesh of this my Roe-deer. 

And when your belly is gorged with feeding, 

Rise up, oho, there I Mamat the P'irst-bom I 

Make nierrj* with drink within the Balei, 

The broad-floored Balei, the long-floored Balei. 

'Tis the young folk's custom to "dance the Roe-deer," 

To please the men-folk and please the women. 

Young folk so many within the Balei. 

To-morrow and ever be years of plenty. 

Plenteous our fruit, our rice-crop ])lenteous. 

Fruit . . . Fruit ! Fruit ! Fruit, oho I 

^ A Malay legend traces the origin is driven out by spells before their dead 

of the deer from a metamorphosed man bodies are touched (cp. AhiL J/a.i,'". 427). 

whose leg was ulcered— doubtless in •' /.<?. the throwing -stick used by 

allusion to the marks on the deers' legs. many of these tribes for killing small 

Cp. Malay Magic, p. (71. mammals. It is simply a short slick 

- I.e. the evil influence believed to be of some hard wood sharpened at one 

inherent in all wild animals, and which (or both) ends. 

SA VA GE MALA YS OF SELA NGOR 1 5 1 

TllK Chkvkotin (Bes. ' Kancmki."). 

Nyau — ^^anyau ! there calls the Cheviotiii ! 

The Chcvrotin seeks the fruit of forest-trees, 

The Chevrotin seeks the fruit of the ' fan-palm,' ' 

The Chcvrotin feeds when dew dries on the bedrock. 

The Chevrotin eats the leaves of the 'Uulai,''"' 

The Chevrotin eats the sweet-potato leaver, 

The Chevrotin feeds upon the yam-leaves, 

The Chevrotin shrinks from the falling thunderbolt. 

The Chevrotin shrinks from the wild-beasts' on-rush. 

The Chevrotin shrinks from the bite of the serpent, 

The Chevrotin roams both by day and night-time, 

The Chevrotin sleeps at the height of noontide, 

The Chevrotin sleeps amid the brushwood, 

The Chevrotin sleeps in the fallen palm-leaves, 

The Chevrotin sleeps mid the tangled grasses. 

Come hither, you there, to seek the Chevrotin. 

Set ye the noose to snare the Chevrotin. 

The catch has slipped, ho ! we've caught the Chevrotin. 

Now we have captured him, bear him homewards. 

And when ye are home again, see that ye singe him. 

When ye have singed him, cut him in quarters. 

When ye have quartered him, make ye the cooked-meat. 

And give unto each his ecjual portion. 

The Mouse-deer (Bes. 'Pandok'). 

Krusaii — k}-iisau ! there calls the Mouse-deer ! 
The Mouse-deer that eats the shoots of the ' ludai,' 
The Mouse-deer that eats the fruit of the 'k'ledang,' 
The Mouse-deer that eats the fruit of the ' fan-palm," 
The Mouse-deer that eats the fruit of the ' mangostin,' 
The Mouse-deer that eats the fruit of the 'durian.' 
On the Mouse-deer's scent a dog goes barking. 
He has got the scent of a milk-white Mouse-deer, 
He follows the scent of a milk-white Mouse-deer.^ 
The milk-white Mouse-deer descends to the water. 
The dog has seized it within the water. 
Lo now, he has killed the milk-white Mouse-deer. 
Carry ye homewards the milk-white Mouse-deer, 
And cut into quarters the milk-white Mouse-deer, 
And give unto each his equal portion. 

The Wii.o-Pk;. 

Drgt, drit, dret '. there grunt the Wild-Pigs, 
The Wild-Pig's litter that feed on sugar-canes, 

' ' Kepau,' Livistona Kingii, Hook. or by tapping on the ground with a stick 

fil. {Pa/mce), a fine fan-palm. to imitate the stamping of the buck's 

2 The leaves of the 'ludai' are the forefeet in rutting-time. ' Ludai ' is vS"a- 

favourite food of the two chief kinds pium baccatum, Roxb. {Euphorbicuea). 

of Traguhis ('p'landok' and 'kanchel'). ^ White is the sacred colour of these 

They are caught by rattan noose-traps, tribes, as among the Malays. 

152 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS part hi 

That eat up our yams and our sweet potatoes. 

Till utterly eaten is our plantation. 

The Boar, whose feet are sharp and pointed, 

The Boar, whose shoulders are sloping and slanting, 

The Boar, whose bristles are stiff and stubborn. 

The Boar whose eyes are crossed and squinting, 

The Boar whose ears are pricked and pointed, 

The Boar whose chaps are fat extremely, 

The Boar whose tail is crisp and curly. 

The Boar has gone down to feed in our rice-fields. 

Take then your blowpipe scored with patterns — 

Whiz — and it sticks, and the Boar goes floundering. 

Watch very carefully, the Boar is running ! 

The Coconut-monkey. 

Kok, kok, kok ! says the Coconut-monkey, 

The 'Gantang' monkey, the ' Rangkak ' monkey.^ 

The ' Buku ' monkey, peering and prying. 

The monkey whose muzzle is creased and crinkled, 

The monkey whose fingers are curved and crooked, 

The monkey whose haunches are bent and bow-shaped, 

The monkey whose tail's like a bending sapling, 

Who feeds on fruit, the fruit of the ' durian.' 

He is shaking the trees, see, rise up again there, 

Rise up, oho ! and take your blowpipe. 

Stalk him most warily, watch most carefully. 

Whiz — and it sticks ! The dart has hit him I 

The monkey has run off helter-skelter. 

The monkey has run off retching and vomiting — 

Thud — thump — thump — the monkey has fallen. 

Pick him up, oho ! you, Mamat Solong, 

And bear him homewards, with back bent double. 

Bear him homewards and there throw him down again. 

Aunt Solong, I pray you, singe me this monkey, 

And you, Mamat .Solong, cut up this monkey. 

And give unto each an equal portion. 

And when your belly is gorged with eating. 

Rise up, oho ! then, Mamat the First-born ; 

Rise up and drink within the Balei, 

The broad-floored Balei, the long-floored Balei. 

To-morrow and ever [be years of plenty], 

Chant ye 'the monkey,' that fruit be plenteous, 

Fruit . . . fruit, fruit, fruit, fruit ! 

The Siamang^ or Gibbon. 

Along, mong, mong! there calls the Gibbon I 

The Gibbon that barks at the sun half-risen, 

The Gibbon th.at chatters on the Upper Kali. 

Up gets the Gibbon on the Upi)er Luar, 

Crash ! there he leaps through the sprays of ' mcranti ' I ■' 

' Different kinds of Macacus nemc- - Ilylobates syndactylus. 

strinui — the difference is j)robably ^ ' Meranti,' a name given to many 

confined to the colouring. Shoreas {Dipterocarpeit). 

CHAP. V SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 153 

Crash ! there he (lings through the sprays of ' ludan,' ' 

Now the dry fruit-hHsks we hear him munching. 

Stalk him, there, warily, watch your sharpest, 

Mamat the First-born, Maiiiat the next-born ! 

Warily, Ijrothers, our Gibljon's escaping. 

Warily, brothers, now pick up your blowpipes, 

Your bamboo blowpipes, scored with patterns. 

Try now, both, to plant the venom, - 

Try now, both, to insert the venom. 

There, he is hit ! the dart has got him. 

Warily, brothers, now ; watch our Gibbon. 

Cough, cough, cough, just hark to his retching ! 

See, there our Gibbon goes tumbling downwards. 

Warily, brothers, our Gibbon has fallen. 

Carry him home, with back bent double, 

Carry him homewards, our Gibbon yonder. 

Seek ye and search for dry ' ludan ' branches, 

.Seek ye and search for dry ' changgan ' •* branches, 

Search ye for fue-logs to singe our Gibbon, 

Search for and seek hot leaves of ' chanchang,' ^ 

Search for and seek the pungent 'jintan.'^ 

The firewood crackles, now stir ye all merrily. 

There, it is roasted, now carve it thoroughly. 

And give unto each an equal portion. 

See that the flesh for all suffices. 

Let each have a portion, both big and little. 

The Ape ('Ungka' or 'Wa' Wa').« 

IVoHg, wong, woitg ! just hear tlie Ape cry ! 

The Ape that plays mid the sprays of ' kepong,' '' 

The Ape that plays mid the sprays of ' seraya,' ^ 

The Ape that plays mid the sprays of 'jeiotong.'^ 

Crunch, crunch, crunch, the Ape is feeding. 

On the ' anggong ' '" fruit the Ape is feeding. 

On the ' rambai ' i' fruit the Ape is feeding. 

And the fur of his body is white as cotton, 

The fur of his face is black and silky, 

His brow is trimmed as a maid's with the ' Bride-fringe,' 

His stern is at once both hard and flattened. 

Take now your blowpipe of ' Klampenai,' i- 

Stalk him most warily, watch very carefully. 

For the arms of the Ape are long and slender. 

And the legs of the Ape go swinging together. 

Rise up, oho, there ! watch very carefully. 

[The rest is the same as in the song of the Siamang.] 

^ Unidentified. * ' Seraya,' a name given to several 

2 This, of course, refers to the Shoreas {Dipterocarpeir). 

poison on the dart-point. '■' '■]i:\oX^o\\'g,'' Dyera iiiaingayi,'ilooV. 

2 Unidentified. hi., and D. costulafa. Hook. fil. 

* Unidentified. "* Unidentified. 

^' ' Jintan,' cummin. " 'Rambai,' Baccaurea tuotleyanu, 

*^ Ilylobates conrolor. Hook. fil. {Euphorbiacea), a common 

" ' Kepong,' Shorea macroptcra, fruit-tree. 

Dyer (Difierocarpeii). '^ Unidentified. 

154 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS part rii 

The Crocodile. 

IVak, wak, wak ! there bellows the Crocodile ! 

The * bay ' Crocodile to her mate of the reaches, 

The Crocodile whose head is knobbed and lumpy, 

The Crocodile whose tail is like a sword-blade. 

The Crocodile whose teeth are clenched together. 

In ever}' river-pool there dwells the Crocodile, 

The Crocodile that's fierce, the Crocodile that's savage, 

That climbs up to bask on the bank of the river. 

And enters the waters to search for sustenance. 

The Crocodile that ' gazes ' ^ at our reflections. 

If our head is gone, he will get him sustenance, 

If our head is there, he will get no sustenance. 

There sits a monkey upon the timber, 

The Crocodile s\\ eeps him ofi" into the water ; 

The Crocodile smothers him within the river-mud. 

And when he is dead, it bears him shore-wards, 

And batters him on timber, to kill him thoroughly, 

And swallows him whole, when dead completely. 

The Lace-Lizard or Monitor. 

The Lace-Lizard's head is knobbed and knotty. 
The Lace- Lizard's eyes are small and narrow, 
The Lace- Lizard's snout is sharp and pointed. 
The Lace-Lizard's bell}' sways and swaggers, 
The Lace-Lizard's footprints are spreaded widely. 
The scales of its back are like the sting-ray's, 
The Lace-Lizard's tail is like a sword-blade, 
The Lace-Lizard's teeth are thorns of the screw-pine. 
The Lace- Lizard's tongue is a tongue that's double, 
Like to the man's that speakelh falsehoods. 
The Lace-Lizard's chief is now the crocodile. 
He was once the crocodile's younger brother. 
The land crocodile, with the salt-sea crocodile, 
One upon land, and one in the water. 
Watch very warily, and slay the Lace-Lizard. 

The Pvjhon. 

Seng, seno-, sett,:;! there calls the Python ! 

The Python coiled in the tops of forest-trees, 

The Python coiled on the topmost brushwood. 

The Python coiled in the tangled grasses. 

The Python that enters the hollow tree-trunk. 

The spotted Python that men call ' Sawa,' 

The Python whose tail is like a peg-top, '- 

The P)thon whose tongue resembles garlic, 

The Python whose teeth are thorns of the screw-pine, 

' ' Gazes,' in allusion to the belief he can safely attack the person thas 

that the crocodile ascertains the designated. 

identity of the human beings destined - /.(•. "gasing."' But 'gasing- 

to become his prey by 'gazing' or gz.^mg,'' = Cissampelos Parura, L., also 

divination. Whenever this process re- Pericampylus incanus, Miers {Meni ■ 

veals to liim the figure of his prospective spennaceic). Slender climbing plants, 

victim without the head, he knows used medicinally. 

SA VA GE MA LA YS OF SELANGOR 1 5 5 

The Python whose cheeks with fal are swollen, 
The Python whose head is like a ladle, 
And on whose head the scales are golden, 
That walks on ribs one hundred and forty, 
Whose body is big as the stem of the coco-palrn. 
The hungering Python that swallows the wild-boar. 
Swallows the wild-boar and seizes the mouse-deer. 
Swallows the mouse-deer and seizes the sambhur. 
Swallows the sambhur and seizes the tiger. 

The silk-skinned I^ython, the bediamonded Python, 

The silk-skinned Python that groweth sacred. 

The Python that came from tlie springs of water. 

Whose body is big as the stem of the coco-palm. 

'Tis he that we call the Horned Serpent. 

'Tis the silk-skinned Python that crept down seawards. 

And fought against the old Sea-Python,' 

Until the broad seas turned to narrow. 

The old Land- Python since time's beginning. 

That is the Python ihat was defeated, 

The old Land-Python that fights no longer. 

The old Land- Python tliat craved for pardon, 

"Tis he, that came from the land, was vanquished, 

And he, that came from the sea, was victor, 

'Twas he that possessed the stauncher spirit. 

Put the dead Land-Python ascended skywards. 

And turned to the Fire we call the Rainbow, 

For his horn was ta'en by the old Sea- Python. 

Watch very carefully, step not over it, 

F'or if you do, you'll be crushed as a rebel. 

Round your limbs will twine the I'ython-sickness. 

Be sure that you this in your soul remember. 

To-morrow and ever may Fruit Vjc plentiful ! 

The Tortoise. 

Tortoise ! Tortoise ! Tortoise ! 
Tortoise whose fore-paws are bent out sideways. 
Tortoise whose hind-feet are shaped like adzes. 
Tortoise whose head is sharp and pointed. 
Tortoise whose back is like a spice-block, 
Tortoise whose liver is black of the blackest, 
Tortoise whose fat is green of the greenest. 
Rise up, oho ! now, Alamat the First-born, 
And take your knife and your bamboo blowpipe, 
And take your throwing-spear '^ to roam the forest, 

1 This battle of two snakes, serpents India and elsewhere, see, e.g., "The 

or dragons, is one of the most fruitful Legend of Merlin," by Dr. M. Gaster 

themes in Oriental art. In China it {Folklore, xvi. 414, 422). In the 

appears as iwo dragons fighting for a present case it furnishes us with this 

pearl. In the Malay region it is some- fine Jakun myth of the origin of the 

times a couple of dragons as in China, rainbow. 

and sometimes a couple of snakes - I.e. the pointed hardwood stick 

engaged in fighting for a magical or 'squailer' used for killing small 

snake-stone. It is also common in game. 

156 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

And search for the Tortoise ; see, here are its footprints I 

This is the feeding-t^round of the Tortoise. 

The Tortoise that feeds on the shoots of the ' chemeh.' ' 

There, did you see it, Mamat the First-born ? 

There, did you see it, among the buttresses ? 

Now you've expelled it, Mamal the First-born, 

Carry it homewards, Mamat the First-born. 

Mamat the First-born, now cut up your Tortoise, 

Chop it up small and let it be roasted ; 

And when it is roasted, serve it on leaf-]ilates,'^ 

And give unto each an equal portion. 

Ho, Mamat Solong ! ho, Mamal Alang I 

Come, now your ljelly"s full, drum on the liall-floor. 

The Toad. 

Kok, kok, kok ! that's a Toad that's croaking ! 

A Toad that's croaking his very loudest. 

The Toad that dwells at the foot of the forest-trees, 

The Toad that dwells on the Upper Langat, 

Jumping up-stream, and jumping down-stream. 

There goes the Toad, whose waist is so tapering. 

And whose chest is one of the very deepest ; 

The Toad whose eyes are mightily goggling. 

The Toad whose fingers are crushed and crumpled. 

The Toad whose feet are spread and splaying, 

The Toad whose skin is rough and knobbly. 

The Toad whose body with slime is venomous. 

The ' Rengkong ' Toad that feeds on centipedes. 

The ' Rengkong ' Toad that feeds on scorpions, 

The ' Rengkong ' Toad that swallows gravel. 

Eat ye not then the Toad called ' Rengkong,' 

For poisonous to eat is the Toad called ' Rengkong.' 

Chop then with a knife at the Toad called ' Rengkong,' 

And if he walks off again, be not frightened. 

From the times of old till to-morrow and ever 

May there remain this rite and memorial, 

This rite remain that Vxrni be plentiful. 

The Kite. 

Sck-sek-leait ! there mews the Fishing- Kite ! 

The Kile that soars above the cloud-belt, 

The Kite that glides above the cloud-belt. 

The Kite that nesis in the tall ' jClotongs,''"' 

And seeks to breed in the tail ' jelotongs.' 

'J"he Kite that nests in the sjjrays of the 'kCmpas,' 

And seeks to breed in the sprays of the 'kc'mpas.' 

Soon as begins her children's sickness, 

High and low the Kite goes soaring, 

And catches the 'siakap' fish to feed her young onrs. 

And catches snakes to feed her young ones. 

' Unidentified. ally those of the ban.nna-tree. 

2 I.e. leaves used as plates — gencr- ■' / '. \>. 153, n. 9, nii/e. 

cuAi'. V SAVAGE MALAYS OF S ELAN GO R 157 

The Kite glides past to the Rock of Lalau, 

The Kite glides past to the Hill Precipitous. 

The Kite glides past to the crag called ' White-Kock.' 

The Kite glides past to the Rock Perhambang — 

At Perhambang Rock the Kite sinks earthwards, 

To search for the ' Love-plant ' ' upon the mountains, 

With which to cure her children's sickness. 

Thus we find the ' l^ove-jilant ' upon the mountains, 

And our spirit yearns within our body- — 

The Kites own ' Love-plant,' go bear it homewards, 

To make you well within your spirit. 

Rise ye then warily, [watch] the Kite's young ones, 

This heart of mine is ravished greatly. 

Now that I know where to seek the simple.-.. 

Do not hesitate, do not dally, 

Do not dally in the Clarden of Flowers, 

But fly direct to the Garden of Fruit-trees. 

So shall remain, as from aforetime. 

Unto the Kite's 3'oung a debt of gratitude. 

And this be a token to childing women. 

The Jungle-fowl. 

Nang chcnaiigkas ! there crows the Jungle-fowl ! 

The Jungle-fowl upon the knoll there. 

Whose name is called the milk-white Jungle-fowl, 

Whose name is called the Jungle decoy-fowl. 

By strange Malays who set bird-nooses. 

By strange Malays 'tis made a decoy-fowl. 

Fly hither then, O milk-white Jungle-fowl, 

No fowls of the Jungle can resist you, 

O milk-white Fowl, that art their chieftain. 

The milk-white Jungle-fowl now flies homeward. 

Na7ig chcnangkas ! there crows the Jungle-fowl ! 

Hark to a tale of days that are gone by. 

To-morrow and ever may Fruit be plenteous. 

The Flying-i'ox. 

PJ . . . Idinpc-loinpc I there flaps the Flying-fox ! 

That is the flip-flap of the Flying-fox, 

The Flying-fox from o'er the water, 

The Flying-fox from the side of the forest. 

The Flying-fox from out the islets, 

The Flying-fox from o'er the channel, 

The Flying-fox that eats the fruit-buds. 

That goes about to search for tree-fruits ; 

And flies unto the upper reaches. 

And flies unto the lower reaches. 

The F"lying-fox tribes are many and various 

That feed upon the fruit of the ' ranibutan,"- 

That feed upon the fruit of the 'duku,'^ 

1 I.e. the ' chinduai,' the most pheliitin /appau/n, L. {Sapindac<:<£), a 
famous love-charm of the aborigines. common fruit-tree. 

- ' Buan ' (Mai. ' rambutan '), Nc- '^ ' Duku,' a well-known fruit-tree. 

158 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS pari in 

That feed upon the fruit of the ' durian.' ' 

Flip-flap go the wings of the Flying-fox, 

Flish-flash go the wings of the Flying-fox. 

This we call the ' Rite of the Flying-fox.' 

Take now your blowpipe scored with patterns, 

Take your blow-pipe and shoot the Flying-fox. 

Whiz — and it sticks ! The dart has hit him. 

Rise up, oho ! the Flying-fox has fallen ! 

Plimp-plump ! the Flying-fox has fallen ! 

The Flying-fox vomits mightily retching. 

Carry the Flying-fox home and singe him, 

And when you have singed him, cut him in quarters, 

And call ye every one to the Balei. 

Feed ye your sisters, both young and old ones, 

Give ye to each his equal portion. 

Then when your belly's full, stand ye upright. 

O Mamat Solong, O Solong Sidai, 

Step ye forth for the drinking and singing, 

And drum with your heels on the long-floored Balei, 

Drum with your heels on the broad-floored Balei ; 

Let all in the Balei make them merry. 

Fruit of all kinds, may Fruit be plenteous, 

Every day may Fruit be plenteous. 

Every month may Fruit be plenteous, 

Every year may Fruit be plenteous. 

Such a year is a year of plenty. 

Fruit . . . Fruit, Fruit, Fruit ! 

The Ki.edang Fruit.2 

Take your knife, O Alamat Solong, 

Such to you is Aunt Solong's message, 

Such to you is Aunt Tengah's message : 

They yearn to eat the fruit called Kledang. 

Climb then the tree, O Mamat Solong, 

Where the Kledang fruits are swaying o'er you. 

The Kledang fruits, lo ! are strewn and scattered. 

Each of you, children, go gather a little 

The Kledang fruits that are ripe lo bursting. 

Go bring the Kledang fruits, bring them homewards, 

And throw tliem down upon the hut-floor. 

Come hitlicr ye gaffers, fathers, uncles, 

Come hither ye sisters, aunts, and cousins, 

These Kledang fruits are for ycju to feast on. 

Crave ye no more for the bursting Kledang, 

Crave ye no more for the crow-black Kledang. 

Rise lo your feet, then, Mamal Solong, 

And unto your hut go summon the little ones. 

Let the little folk drink within the Balei ; 

Thai is the token of fruit tlial's plenteous. 

Plenteous be 'durians,' plenteous the ' rambulans,' 

Plenteous the ' rambai ' and plenteous the ' pulasan,' ^ 

' 'Durian,' Durio zibethtKtcs, L. Roxb. (Urticacea). 
{Malvaceir). ^ ^VvAasmn,' Neffieliuf/i »i:t(abi/e,^\. 

^ ' Kledang,' Artocarpui lanceafoHa, (Sapindaefa), a well-known fruit. 

CHAP. V SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 159 

Plenteous the ' tampoi ' ' and plenteous the ' kundang,' -' 
So may all manner of fruit be plenteous, 
So, for nine years may fruit ne'er fail us. 

Thk Redan. 3 

Take your jungle-knife, Maniat Solong, 

And climb yon tree, yon tree called Redan. 

Lop oft its branches, and glide down groundwards. 

Let every one gatlier the fruit of the Redan, 

Gather the fruit of yonder Redan. 

When you have picked it up, bear it homewards, 

And serve it up for all the people. 

May the Redan fruit feed both big and little. 

To eat the Redan is our little ones' custom. 

Let none in the Balei still go craving, 

But when your belly is gorged with feeding. 

Rise up and dance, O Mamat .Solong, 

Rise up and drink within the Balei. 

And let all people then make them merry, 

And you, my children, may naught you startle. 

The Kabau Tree.'' 

The Kabau tree waves this and that way. 
The tree whose stem creak-creaks so loudly, 
The tree whose bark is grey and mottled. 
And with whose bark are made our choppers,^ 
And mid whose twigs are bred the borer-bees. 
And mid whose leaves are bred the swallows ; 
Whose blossom falls like scattered rice-meal, 
Whose blossom falls like rain in sunshine. 
The tree whose fruit nnist not be eaten. 
Whose fruit is poisonous when eaten. 
Do not forget this in the telling. 
But chant of the Kabau now and always. 
Then hie to drink within the Balei, 
Tramp-tramp, make merry within the Balei, 
The Balei that's broad, the long-floored Balei. 
Let all the little ones be performers. 
Along with all the men and women, 
'Tis this that pleases all the people. 
Plenteous is the year and fruits are plenteous, 
Let us then eat the fruit of the ' rambutan,'*" 
Fruit of the ' mangostin,' fruit of the ' durian ' ; 
Thus eat we Fruit, both big and little. 
Eat we, O sisters, both big and little. 
Make you merry now, O Mamat Solong, 
And Fruit be plenteous every season. 

' 'Tampoi,' Baccajtrea malayana, ^ 'Redan,' Nepheliuiu maingayi. 

Hook. fil. {Euphorbiacca) ; also a Hiern (^Sapindacecz). * Unidentified, 

common fruit. ° The meaning of this, and the next 

* ' Kundang,' ? Bonea inacropJiyl/a, two lines, is very obscure. 

Griff. {Anacardiac(a), a kind of small '• ' Rambutan,' Nepkelium lappizutn, 

plum. L. {Sapindaceii), a well-known fruit. 

i6o MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

The Gahang Fkiit.' 

Take now your chopper, O Mamat Solong, 

Take it to lop off the fruit of the Gabang, 

The Gabang fruit that is scattered earthward. 

First lop ye ofl the bending twig-ends, 

And lop off next the midmost branches, 

And after lopping glide down earthwards. 

See, we are gathering the fruit of the Gabang, 

Bring me your baskets, and bring me your wallets, 

And bear ye home the fruit of yon Gabang. 

Then go and call our folk together, 

And give to each an equal portion. 

When you have eaten the fruit of yon Gabang, 

Rise to your feet, O Mamat Solong, 

And drink and make merry within the Balei, 

As was the custom of your grandfathers. 

The little ones sport within the Balei, 

And all the men-folk are fain to watch them, 

And all the women are fain to watch them. 

Come hither then with unbound tresses, 

And take your combs and smooth your tresses, 

And make your tresses as fine as possible 

To catch the eyes of all the men-folk ; 

Then take ye rice and take the rice-pot. 

And cook the rice for all the people. 

Take too a pan to make )'Ou cooked meats. 

That is the work that falls to women. 

Eat ye last the rice that is left for you, 

Eat it, nor be o'er-slow in eating. 

And when you are filled, lie down and slumber. 

Thk Solitary Bertam-Pai.m.'- 

The Single lJt;rtam at Langkap Berjunlei, 

The Single Bcrtam on the Upper Langat — 

'Tis the Bertam whose fruits bend over outwards ! 

We have gathered them and brought them homewards. 

We have split them and given to each his portion. 

Be there Btrtam fruit both now and always. 

From the Single Bertam upon the Hill-tops, 

That is the token of fruit that's plenteous, 

That is the sign of a year of plenty. 

Come ye, my little ones, make you merry. 

Make each of you merry within the Balei, 

And when you have eaten and gorged your belly, 

Rise to your feet, O Mamat Alang, 

Drink and make merry within the Balei, 

The Balei that's broad, the long-flooretl Balei. 

And call our folk to dance and make merry. 

And call our folk to drink and make merry. 

That is a year when fruits arc plenteous. 

' S. kind of wild 'rambutan." 
- ' Bertam,' Eugeissona iris/is, Ciriff. {Palniu). 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR i6i 

The Merbau Tree.^ 

Flak -plan ! there falls the Merbau ! 

The ' ivory ' Merbau, the ' cabbage ' Merbau, 

The ' saffron ' Merbau that's split with wedges. 

Chentong the Carpenter, ho ! fell me this Merbau. 

Lofiily sways and falls the Merbau. 

Bring me a chisel, and bring me the planing-adze. 

Now we have split it, make we a grating, 

Make we a gallery, make we a deck-house. 

Make we oars, and make we an awning. 

Load we our ship with wax and eagle- wood,'- 

Load her with benjamin,^ load her with resin. 

Load her with gutta, with ' gutta taban.' ■* 

Hoist up your mast and sail forth seawards, 

And shape your course to the sea of Mambang ; 

Drop your anchor and climb up shorewards, 

And barter your goods at the people's houses. 

See, our boat points to the land of Malacca, 

Our anchor drops just off Malacca, 

To barter wax and barter resin, 

To barter benjamin, barter gutta, 

And salt and rice to take as cargo. 

Now points our boat towards our country, 

And off our own land drops the anchor. 

Now call we comrades, big and little. 

To carry our wares up to the houses. 

And give of them to each his portion. 

The Pulai Tree.^ 

Kik, kik, kik ! there creaks the Pulai ! 

Its bole a-rock with the brisk-blown breezes. 

Thick, umbrageous, pendulous, wavy, 

Are its leaves and airy streamers, 

Roots in the earth, and roots on the surface, 

Its surface-roots like struggling serpents, 

Its buds that rival a virgin's nipples, 

Its leaves with sap like milk of a virgin. 

Its stem whose hue is grey and mottled. 

Its shoots that are like the peak of a head-cloth, 

Its shoots that look like scroll-work finials, 

Its buttresses whose height is dizzy, 

Its blossom strewn like scattered rice-meal, 

Its blossom strewn like rain that drizzles. 

Thus men are wont to sing the Pulai. 

1 ' Merbau,' Afzelia palembanica jamin, Styrax benzoin L. (Styraceie). 
Bak. [Leguminosis), one of the finest The gum is obtained by cutting the 
timbers in the Peninsula, used in boat- bark. 

building. * 'Gutta' (or 'getah') 'taban,' /^zV-^- 

2 Eagle-wood or ' gharu,' ^^?^//ar^a opsis gutta Benth. {Sapotacece), the 
malaccensis Lam. {Thymelacea-), pro- best kind of gutta-percha. 

duces the well-known incense wood ^ 'Pulai,' Alstoiiia scholaris Br. 

lign-aloes, which fetches a remarkably {Apocyiiacece), a tree whose surface-roots 

high price in the Far East. furnish the cork used for the floats of 

3 Benzoin or ' kemnyan,' gum ben- fishing-nets, etc., in the Peninsula. 

VOL. II M 

i62 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS part hi 

We take an adze and fell the Pulai, 
And build a canoe to trade to Malacca ; 
To barter goods and sell our coconuts, 
Then homewards turn our boat of Pulai ; 
Beach we it then, and overhaul it thoroughly, — 
Sell to a Chinaman for a hundred dollars ! 

The Fish-trap. 

Ting, ting, hat ! that's the small-waisted Fish-trap ! 

The trap that was made by Mamat Alang, 

The trap that is set in the river yonder 

For the fish, the scale-clad fish, to enter. 

Fish so many and fish so various ! 

The ' tapah ' ^ fish, and the fish ' sabarau,' 

The ' 'ruan ' fish, and the fish called ' bujor,' 

The ' lembat ' fish, and the fish 'pepuyuh,' 

May all of them enter the small-waisted Fish-trap. 

Bear them home, throw them down on the hut-floor, 

And slice them up, these fish so many ; 

Stew them and cook them very very carefully. 

And when you have cooked them, call your comrades. 

And give to each his equal portion. 

And when your belly is gorged with eating. 

Rise to your feet, O Mamat Solong, 

And drum on the long floor of the Balei, 

Drum on the broad floor of the Balei, 

Big sisters and little are fain to watch you. 

That is our rite of the small-waisted Fish-trap. 

Children's Bathing Song. 

Go, little people, go a-bathing. 

So may you cool your heated bodies, 

So may you cleanse your little bodies, 

And rub with care your little bodies. 

And leave no stain on your little bodies ; 

Then haste back home and take your hair-combs. 

Take your combs and comb your tresses. 

Comb them until they be smooth and glossy — 

Such is the way at small folk's bathing. 

Go, little people, into the Balei. 

Creak-creak ! there sounds the floor of the Bale 

The long-floored Balei, the broad-floored Balei. 

For all the women are fain to watch you 

Dance, little folk, within the Balei. 

And fruits be plenteous, the season plenteous, 

Fruits be plenteous, fruits that are various. 

Every day shall be fruit in plenty. 

Every month shall be fruit in plenty. 

Every year shall be fruit in plenty. 

Go not back from the solemn promise. 

From the rites that within the book are written. 

Fruit . . . fruit, fruit, fruit, fruit ! 

' Of these si.\ tish I have only been able to tind record of two as being 
identified, the ' sabarau,' probably = Za/«o boggii, and the '"ruan' or 'aruan' = 
Ophiocephalus punctatus. 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 163 

Such is the custom of jungle-dwellers, 

Our custom when we with drink make merry. 

The Bangkong Fruit.* 

Hong Kati Barak Hong t 
Thus we pluck the Bangkong.''^ 
Reach for them, Father Tunang. 
Reach for them, Father Sayang. 
Reach for them. Father Odong. 
Thus we pluck the Bangkong, 
We pluck the ' Bangkong kudes,' 
We pluck the ' Bangkong kateb,' 
We pluck the ♦ Bangkong mengoh,' 
We pluck the ' Bangkong palas.' 
Go forth, O Father Odong. 
Go forth, O Father Tunang. 
Go forth, O Father Sayang. 
Go forth and pluck the Bangkong. 
Now we've got the Bangkong, 
Haste we to bear them homewards, 
And call to Mother Tunang 
[And call to Mother Odong, 
And call to Mother Sayang] 
To haste and split the Bangkong. 
Take a chip-edged rice-pot — 
That's to boil the Bangkong, — 
Don your palm-leaf tassels, 
And follow, follow homewards, 
Follow us. Friend Gentoi, 
And wave your palm-leaf tassels.^ 
I wave them round, I wave them, 
I wave the sprays a little. 
The holy Basil's planted 
Within a hollow tree-trunk ; 
If Love desert the body 
It then remaineth lonely, 
And what remaineth further? 
'Tis our grandparents' custom 
That all the younger people 
Make merry in the Balei ; 
All, all, both men and women, 
'Tis our grandparents' custom, 
And that of Mother Kalis, 
For sharp was Mother Kalis, 
Yea, sharp — and very stupid. 
Stupid was Mother Geboi. 
Rejoice then in the Balei, 
And what remaineth further 
For all now go rejoicing 
For joy that fruits are plenteous. 
For a season that is plenteous ; 

1 This song in the original is of a different metre to all the preceding ones, 
having but three beats to the line, as in the translation. 

2 ' Bangkong,' a wild fruit-tree, unidentified. 

3 I.e. the tassels or bunches worn in dancing. 

i64 MUSIC, songs; AND FEASTS part iii 

Though many are our people, 
Yet fruitful are our rice-fields, 
And fruitful all our fruit-trees. 
Then tread we all and trample, 
And drum upon the Hall-floor, 
The Hall-floor made of Bertam, 
Of Bertam. What remains else ? 
And what shall we do further ? 
To-morrow still be plenteous. 
Be plenteous all our fruit trees ! 
He-e-e-e ! 

The following song, in irregular metre, exhibits 
other moods — the first part is pathetic, the second 
joyful : — 

The Song of the Sick Child. 

Expanded are the buds of the ' bharu,' ^ 

And thick and ever thicker grows the ' tembesu ' 2 blossom 

Give no thought more to me, ah Granny : 

Cast me away, me the outcast ! 

Make no more mention of me, ah Granny ! 

Nought but the fruit-calyx is left, ah Granny ! 

Nought but the print of my hands is left, ah Granny ! 

Nought but the print of my feet is left, ah Granny ! 

Nought is left me but to sing my chant, ah Granny ! 

My heart yearns for the Hills, ah Granny ! 

Hearken to my chant in the hut, ah Granny ! 

I will get me up and go, Granny, wrap up my rice-bundle, 

I will roam the forest and snare me wild-birds ! 

Lo, I have set my snares but have caught nothing, ah Granny ! 

I have nothing to hope for, ah Granny ! 

Your child is not strong enough to climb aloft, ah Granny ! 

I have brought mv wallet, but even its cords are broken, ah Granny ! 

Lo, I have picked up a Hornbill and brought it home, 

'Tis a fat bird and a heavy one, oh Granny I 

Now I am home again, cook me the Hornbill, oh Granny ! 

And partake of the Hornbill, oh Granny ! 

And give to each one a little portion. 

Go a-craving no more for the Hornbill's flesh, oh Granny I 

But partake of the Hornbill, oh Granny ! 

Come and partake, oh little sisters and big ones, brothers- and sisters-in-law. 

The Besisi Trumba. 

A song of a very different sort was the Besisi 
Trumba or Song of Tribal Origin, which has a special 

1 ' Bharu,' Hibiscus tiliaceus Linn. (^A/alvaceie), a common sea-shore tree. 
* ' Tembesu,' Fagraa Jragrans Koxb. {^LeguminoscE). 

CHAP. V SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 165 

interest of its own as representing an attempt on the 
part of this race of jungle-dwellers to keep some 
sort of record of their history. 

The Besisi who gave it me was an old man 
named Bedoh, of Sepang Kechil. Part of this 
Trumba at least seems to preserve the traditions of 
old tribal boundaries, and I believe it really supplies 
the clue to the long strings of (generally contiguous) 
place-names that are so often described as occurring 
in the songs of the Semang and Perak Sakai, The 
following version is a little freer than that given else- 
where in this book :— 

Besisi Song ov Tribal Origin. 

From Gobang Gubin,i from ' Buluh Bohal,' 

From the land of Jati,^ to the land of Endau,^ 

We came to the land of Johor the ancient, 

To Tengki-tengkel and olden Jeram. 

At Naning-naneng * dwelt chieftain Baruis,^ 

And chieftain Banggai ^ at the hill of Nuang. 

At Boatpole Hill " and the Hill of the Elephant 

Dwelt chieftains Mara, Barai, Suntai. 

Then chieftain Galang ^ came down from inland, 

1 ' Gobang Gubin ' is very obscure. ^ ' Tanah Hendau ' is the district of 

One explanation given me by the Besisi the Endau river (on the borders of 

was that it stood for " lobang Gubin Pahang and Johor). 
di - buluh Bohal,"' i.e. the hole of ■^ 'Naning' is the district of that name 

' Gubin ' in the Bamboo of Bohal, this near Malacca, best known from two 

latter being explained as referring to the (British) punitive expeditions which 

(mythical) giant Bamboo from which were sent against it, the first of which 

the founder of the race miraculously proved abortive. 

issued, and which apparently gave its ^ 'Batin Baruis' ( = Newbold's 'Batin 

name to part of the insignia of the Breyk ') is here mentioned as the 

Jakun chiefs. A further explanation founder of the Naning tribes. 
was that ' Gubin ' meant a dog, as in- ^ 'Batin Banggai' is locally famous as 

deed it does in the Blandas dialect of the founder of that branch of the Besisi 

Selangor, and that the passage there- tribe that dwelt near Sepang Kechil 

fore meant ' The Dog's Hole in the in Selangor. We here learn that he 

Ancestral Bamboo,' in which case the came from Bukit Nuang or Benuang, a 

explanation doubtless rests upon the hill near the headwaters of the Labu, 

traditions which connect the dog with an important tributary of the Langat. 
the mythical ancestor. It is probably ^ iguj^ it Galah" was said to have taken 

a place-name, either of some place in its name from a boat-pole near its foot, 

the south of the Peninsula or Sumatra. to which the Chinese used to moor 

For this song see also notes to App. their boats ' when the sea washed the 

'- 'Tanah Jati ' is a place-name, base of the hill,' now far inland, 
though I cannot say where it is. * 'Batin Galang,' i.e. B. Merak 

1 66 

MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS 

tART III 

And pushed to the sea, and made the Sea-P'olk, 

And the Sea- Folk grew into the Pirates. 

The Coco-palm chief dwelt at Selayan,i 

The Betel-palm chief dwelt at Selayan, 

With Cherteng, Perting,^ Tagun,^ Brego,* 

And the ' Watcher's-Stump ' ^ on the Upper Langat, 

With Ching,^ Berdnang/ Pejam, Gebok,* 

The Hanging Langkap-palm,** Bangkong Menggoh.i** 

The Ivory Bangkong, Kechau, Lang-lang,^' 

Galang, was a well-known Jakun chief 
frequently mentioned in tradition. 
He was said to be a son of Moyang 
Siamang. [Merak has been con- 
jectured to be the old Cambodian title 
Preah (Brah).] 

^ ' Selayan,' t'. /. 'Sarayon.' This is 
obscure. Selayan (? Selayang) is the 
name of a place, possibly an abbrevia- 
tion of Pantei Layang-layang, a Jakun 
settlement in the same district, ' Batin ' 
dropping out owing to its similarity to 
the word ' Batang.' Or it may well be 
that we have here a reference to the 
two chiefs (Batin Gomok and Batin 
Mahabut) who are connected with the 
legend of the poisonous coco-palm and 
the betel-palm of Bukit Nuang and 
Bukit Galah respectively in this very 
neighbourhood (cp. i. 687, n. i). 

^ ' Cherteng ' and ' Perting ' (or ' Pa- 
teng' ) are names of places on the Ulu 
Langat River. Pateng is no doubt the 
same as Perting, a name which has 
been given to several rivers in various 
parts of the Peninsula. 

2 ' Tagun' was said to have been the 
name of a Batin in Ulu Klang, but if so, 
it here refers to a river which was named 
after him — no doubt the Tarun, near 
Bergul, on the Selangor-S. U. frontier. 

^ ' Brego ' was explained to me as = 
'Batu Ber-grak,'or the 'Rocking Stone,' 
the name of a rock in Ulu Klang ; but 
I think erroneously. It is probably a 
place called Bergul or Bregul in Ulu 
Langat, for which see n. 3, above. 

*» ' Tunggul Si Jaga,' the 'Stump of 
the Watcher,' was the name of a stump in 
a commanding position, near the River 
Langat (a little above Subang Ililang), 
from which a look-out used to be kept 
by pirates in the days when they 
infested the Langat River. The spot 
is still well known. 

" 'Ching' is the name of a small 

stream flowing into the Langat near the 
mouth of the Beranang. It was said 
to be short for ' Kuching ' or the ' Cat,' 
and that the name was given in conjunc- 
tion with that of 'Beranang,' or 'the 
Swimmer ' ; the two streams getting 
their respective appellations from a cat 
that once swam across there. This 
story, however, is no doubt a plausible 
piece of popular etymology. 

^ The ' Beranang ' is a well-known 
tributar)' of the Upper Langat, giving 
its name to a portion of the district. 

^ ' Pejam ' or ' Batang Pejam ' and 
' Gebok ' (or Ribok) are said to be the 
names of two small streams near Setul, 
a place in S. Ujong territory quite near 
the Selangor frontier. The first is 
beyond Setul, the second just below it 
(3 m.). 

^ ' Langkap Berjuntei. ' The 'Pen- 
dulous Langkap'-palm, a spot a long 
way up the Langat River. 

10 ' Bangkong Gadeng.' Thereare two 
or three spots connected with various 
kinds of Bangkong, which is a kind of 
wild 'chempedak' fruit— (l) Bangkong 
MenggohjOr the place of the 'Bangkong 
Menggoh' fruit ; (2) Bangkong Gadeng, 
the place of the ' White (/zV. Ivory) 
Bangkong ' fruit, near Bukit Tong- 
goh, at K. Labu ; (3) Tegar- Bangkong 
(or Tegabangkong), the ' Bangkong 
Rapids.' 

'1 'Kechau, Lang-lang.' According to 
one version these two place-names were 
also given in conjunction = Kachau 
'Lang-'lang or the ' Place of the Quarrel- 
ling Kites.' This explanation, how- 
ever, is no better than the Kuching and 
Beranang one, Kechau and Lang-lang 
being the names of two streams in 
the Ulu Langat district, the latter now 
better known as Sungei Lalang or 
' Jungle - grass River,' though it was 
formerly known as Lang-lang. 

SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 

167 

The Rock of Jamun, Rock of Lalau,i 

Pra' Charek, and Rock Bergentel.- 

From the Lace-bark Merbau,-* we reached the Lake-side, 

The Swaying Bees'-nest, the Brooding Bertam,'' 

The Mango-tree Pass, and Palm-wood Flooring,^ 

And passed to the Halting-place Umbrageous,^ 

To the hills of the Halting-place Precipitous,^ 

To the Headland of the Leaf-clad Boulder.* 

Who was it made the land Semujong ? 

Sister Nyai Techap and Gaffer Klambu '* 

Together made the land Semujong. 

They who donned the ' round coat,' ^^ became retainers, 

And mixed with strangers, Malays of Rembau : 

They who donned the 'split coat,' speak 'Besisi.' 

' 'Batu Jamun' and 'Batu Lalau' are 
the names of two inaccessible ' peaks ' 
among the hills of Ulu Klang ; cp. the 
lines ' Ada chengkuoi di-atas Bukit, 
Batu Lalau di-ulu Klang,' i.e. ' There 
grows the Love-plant upon the hills, At 
Lalau Rock in Ulu Klang.' 

2 * Pra' Charek,' the name of a hill, 
said to be near Ulu Tekar. A some- 
what similar name, Pra' Lantei, is 
that of a Besisi settlement on the right 
bank of the Klang River, quite near 
the town of Klang. ' Batu Bergentel ' 
means Elephant Rock, locality un- 
certain, but probably in Ulu Klang. 

^ ' Merbau Ber-subang ' or ' Merbau 
Karawang.' There seems to be a spot 
called Merbau Ber-subang (the Pierced 
Merbau Tree) as well as one called 
Merbau Karawang (the Merbau -tree 
with the laced bark), both near the 
banks of the Pejam, already referred to. 
Sometimes one form is used in this 
context, sometimes the other. 

* ' Lebah Bergoyang,' the ' Swaying 
Bees'-nest,' said to be the name of a 
spot where a bees'-nest, depending from 
the branch of a tree, swayed miracu- 
lously to and fro without even a wind 
to rock it. ' Bertam Tenung.' Name 
of a place called after a solitary (lit. 
'brooding') Bertam - palm, locality 
uncertain. 

5 'Ginting Pauh.' "Wild Mango- 
tree Divide," and Lantei Nibong are 
said to be near Bangik, on the Upper 
Langat, not far from P'rentian Rimpun. 

^ ' P'rentian Rimpun ' is given as in 
the Ulu Semunyih, not far from S. 
Lalang (in Ulu Langat district), and 

said to be a point on the S. Ujong 
boundary. 

^ ' P'rentian Tinggi. ' Described as on 
the boundary between Rembau and S. 
Ujong (?). There are, however, several 
places of the name, and it is said to be 
one name for the Ginting Bidei Pass 
from Selangor into Pahang. 

* ' Tanjong Batu Berdaun ' is de- 
scribed as being in Malacca territory. 

^ 'Adek Ber-techap. ' A better reading 
is Nyai Techap (or Tichap), Nyai being 
an old Malayan title (now obsolete) which 
was applied to respectable women. 
Nyai Techap was the younger sister of 
the Mosquito-net Chief (To' Klambu), 
the latter of whom ' now lives at 
Durian Chabang Tiga, beyond Rahang ' ; 
Nyai Techap herself resided near 
Pantei Layang-Layang, or ' Swallow 
Beach ' (?= Selayan or Selayang), which 
is now the residence of the To' Klana 
of S. Ujong. 

'" ' Round coat.' This seems to be a 
Jakun nickname for the undivided coat, 
i.e. a loose jacket with the opening a very 
short way down the front, just enough 
to admit of the garment being easily 
put on and off. The ' Baju blah ' or 
divided jacket, on the other hand, is 
one which is divided all the way down 
the front. Evidently the legend here 
refers to the different costumes of two 
separate Malay tribes whose customs 
they severally borrowed, possibly those 
who followed the customs of the Te- 
menggong and Perpati respectively. 

The Besisi to this day wear the 
divided jacket commonly worn by the 
]\Ialays of Selangor and Malacca (who 

1 68 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS part hi 

The songs hitherto given are more or less definite 
compositions recognised by all the members of the 
tribe ; ^ I will now give a specimen of what I believe 
to have been an actual improvisation, and which 
certainly possessed no recognisable metre : — 

Song of the Monkey-hunters. 

Go now forth into the forest, 

Taking with you a blowpipe, 

A poison-case, and seven darts, 

For shooting young coconut-monkeys. 

One has been shot, struck to the heart, 

And has fallen to the ground. 

Cut a creeper wherewith to bind it. 

Bind it on to your back and carry it home. 

On reaching home, singe off its fur. 

And poke off its skin. 

Quarter it and give a portion to everybody. 

And go craving for cooked meat no longer. 

Put not in the ' asam kelubi ' fruits, for they are poisonous. 

Put in ' kulim ' leaves, turmeric, ginger, 

' Kayu-k'lat ' leaves, and spices, and ' kesom. ' 

Take a rice-spoon and skim off into a palm-leaf. 

And let eveiy one eat together, each taking a little. 

And go craving for the coconut-monkey's flesh no longer. 

After eating your fill, rise and get cigarettes. 

And when you have finished them, lie down and rest. 

And when you have rested, sleep. 

Mantra. — We are informed by Logan that the 
musical instruments used by the Mantra were the 
' salong,' -^ and the bamboo ' guitar ' or ' keranting.' ^ 

The tambourine (' rebana ') and drum (' gendang ') 
were, however, also employed by them, and their only 

were certainly in the main a colony from interpolations and omissions, and also 

the Rio-Lingga (Johor) region, whereas occasionally by alteration in the order 

the N. Sembilan, Naning, and Rembau of the lines, the general tenor and 

Malays came over directly from Suma- form of these songs does not appreciably 

Ira (Menangkabau, etc.). vary. 

'Juanda' (retainers) is a Jakun per- - .S'iV=' suling ' (?). 

version of Mai. Beduanda, which is to -^ On this latter instrument, Mr. 

this day the name given to the mixed Blagden informs me, a special tune 

descendants of the Malays and the was played by the Mantra of Malacca 

Jakun in the state of Rembau, the to attract their game. Similarly the 

tradition being thus ara])ly corrobor- Jew's harp ('rcngoin') was used for 

atcd. imitating the note of the ' chcbau ' 

' Although somewhat modified by bird. 

CHAP. V SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 169 

resource, when troubled in mind, was to comfort them- 
selves by singing,^ 

But by far the best and most complete account 
of a Mantra festival is that given by Logan, who tells 
us that, at these feasts, a large Balei having been con- 
structed, and abundance of Tampoi wine " prepared, 
all the members of the tribe from the whole country 
round were invited, — all the families under one par- 
ticular Batin being the feast-givers. A string made 
of rattan or some similar material, with knots tied in 
it to indicate the number of days assigned to the 
feast, was sent to each of the other Batins. Each of 
these Batins then assembled all his own people, men, 
women, and children, who repaired in their best 
clothes to the place of the feast. If any Batin failed 
to attend, he incurred a fine of twenty rupees.^ The 
Penglima received them at the door of his Balei or 
Hall with a cup of Tampoi wine, and took from them 
their spears and other weapons. They then entered 
the Balei, and danced round it thrice with their arms 
akimbo, after which they sat down and partook of 
betel - leaf. A meal of rice, yams, and the flesh 
of wild hogs, monkeys, fish, coconuts, etc., was 
then served. When this banquet was over the 
Tampoi wine was again brought forward, and all 
partook freely of it, with the exception of children 
under six or seven years of age. Dancing then com- 
menced, and was kept up all night, and often to the 
middle of next day, those who were exhausted lying 
down to sleep in the Balei, husband and wife to- 
gether. During the dance they were cheered with 
the music of tambourines, drums, and flutes. The 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. p. 330*. 
^ The fermented juice of the fruit of the Tampoi tree. ^ Sic, quare 'dollars.' 

I70 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS part hi 

women danced together in the centre of the Balei, 
each grasping the arm of her neighbour, and the men 
danced round them. One of the men sang or chanted 
a stanza, generally impromptu, and one of the women 
answered. The dancing consisted of a peculiar shuff- 
ling and stamping of the feet, and the only noticeable 
difference between that of the men and the women 
was that the latter kept swaying the hips to and fro 
at every step. An abundance of sugar-canes and 
plantains were hung round the Balei, and every one 
helped himself when he chose. These feasts were 
kept up for weeks, and even for months, and, in fact, 
only came to an end when the supply of Tampoi 
wine failed. Guests came and went while it lasted. 
Parties daily repaired to the forest in search of game 
and fruits. During the Tampoi feast many matches 
were made, and as little negotiation, and less cere- 
mony, was needed, it sometimes happened that a pair 
who had no thought of marriage in the morning, found 
themselves at night reposing side by side in the 
chains of wedlock, while the dance and song were 
kept up beside them.^ 

M. Borie adds, that the favourite instrument 
among the Mantra women was a sort of guitar called 
' k'ranti,' and which, in practised hands, gave forth 
sweet and varied music." They also play the (Malay) 
violin.^ 

But no account of the musical instruments of the 
Mantra would be complete without some mention of 
the ingenious ' yEolian bamboos,' already mentioned 
in the account of the Besisi. On this point M. 
Borie says, that the month of January was the one 

^ J. I. A, vol. i. pp. 260, 261. ^ Misc. Ess. rel. liido-China, sec. 

2 Borie (Ir. Bourien), pp. 79, 80. sen vol. i. p. 294. 

S/. ea t Collection . 

Model made roR mk kv a Besisi Chief to ii.eustratk the Songs, 

and in that respect perhaps unique, representing the pursuit of game (hornbills, pigeons, 
monkeys, etc.), by Besisi with the blowpipe. The man on the right is supposed to be 
using the blowpipe, and the man on the left to be climbing ;i tree after a wounded bird or 
monkey. (See Besisi Songs, pp. 147 el seq.) 

P'ol. //. />. 170 

Group of Abukigines with Fiddles, Chabau, Malacca. 

Tlie man in the centre is the Malay Peiighulu of the village. 

(tKOUP OI' .\U()RIG1NK.S with I'iDDI.l'.S, ChAHAU, M.\LACrA. 

Pa' Makaiii (on the left) is the '' neiiek " (///. " grandfather ") of the coinmunity. \'a I.inggi^ 
with the gun, is a tigerjhiiiiter. 

y,>/. II. f-. .71. 

CHAP. V SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 171 

in which the Mantra gave themselves up to the en- 
joyment of music. At that season the wind blows 
strongly, and the Mantra would place on the tops of 
the highest trees in the forests long bamboos with 
holes of different size between the nodes, so that the 
wind passing over these holes might produce musical 
sounds of various tones. The stronger the wind, and 
the larger the bamboo, the louder was the music. 
At other times they would make a kind of fife, with 
small pipes of bamboo, which they would also place 
on the tops of the trees, after the manner of a 
weather-cock.^ 

M. Borie adds that on their days of rejoicing (after 
sowing or gathering in the rice), a festival would be 
given, at which, after the banquet, two men, armed 
with long wooden swords, would engage in mock 
fight ; advancing, retiring, thrusting, parrying, and 
making the most ludicrous gestures and contortions 
At other times they would simulate a hunt of 
monkeys." 

Jakun of Johor. — The Jakun had some knowledge 
of music. They had several songs which they had 
received from their ancestors, or which they had 
made themselves, entirely by the ear, for they had 
not the remotest idea of any musical notation. These 
songs of theirs were generally rude, and agreed 
perfectly with the austere aspect of their habitations ; 
they might even, too, be heard singing in a melan- 
choly tone during the night. But these songs, though 
rude, were not altogether disagreeable to European 
ears, if the latter were not too delicate. It was 
surprising to find that though they were entirely 

1 Borie (tr. Bourien), pp. 79, 80 ; cp. Misc. Ess. rel. Indo-China, sec. ser. 
vol. i. pp. 293-294. 2 Jljid. 

172 MUSIC, SONGS, AND FEASTS part hi 

ignorant of European music, which they had never 
heard, yet, in a great many of their songs, they 
proceeded by thirds and fifths, assuredly without 
being aware of it, but guided only by the ear ; a 
fact which confirms the opinion of those European 
musicians who hold that the third, the fifth, and the 
octave are found in nature itself. Some authors speak 
of a kind of violin, and of a rude flute used by the 
Jakun, who also use two kinds of drum resembling 
those of the Peninsular Malays.^ 

Orang Laut or Sea-Jakun. 

0. Laut Akik. — The only remark that I have met 
with in reference to the music of the Sea-Jakun is 
that of Newbold, who states that the Orang Laut (of 
the ' Akik ' tribe) were passionately fond of music, 
especially that of the violin.- 

^ J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 251. love of and aptitude for music than the 
- Newbold, loc. cit. ii. 413, 414. Malays, and that the tunes they play 
On the above passage Mr. Blagden are more pleasing to the European ear 
writes me that, "speaking generally," than most oriental music. Their tunes 
he thinks "the Jakun tribes, and would be worth collecting and study- 
particularly the Mantra, have a greater ing. "" 

CHAPTER VI. 

Natural Religion and Folk-lore. 

The question of the religious beliefs of these races, 
subjected as they have been to such a fire of cross- 
influences, is surrounded by so many difficulties, that 
I may perhaps be excused for stating these first 
before setting down my own conclusions. At present 
the information that we possess on this most intricate 
of questions is not only very partial and incomplete, 
but also, in some cases, self-contradictory. 

Many discrepancies must, I fear, in the first 
instance be attributed to ignorance of the value of the 
scientific terminology which has in recent years grown 
up around the subject of religion, using that word 
in its widest sense. Ignorance of this kind often 
prevents the ordinary untrained observer from re- 
cognising as a God anything that does not exactly 
correspond to the monotheistic conceptions of Chris- 
tianity. On the other hand, a no less serious 
difficulty is created by those who (generally, I am 
sure, in all good faith) read into their observations 
the religious ideas by which they are most in- 
terested, or who rely upon informants who are simply 
saying what they think will please. The most 
remarkable instance of this kind is that of M. Borie 
(a French Roman Catholic missionary at Malacca), 
who stated of the Mantra, that " their religious books, 

173 

174 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

which had long since been lost, appeared to have been 
in all particulars according to the religion of Raja 
Brahil (still called by the Malays * Nabi Isa,' or 
' Tuan Isa,' the Lord Jesus)." Raja Brahil, however, 
which is a corruption of " Raja Jebrail," is in reality 
the Archangel Gabriel (who is sometimes regarded 
as the special protector of these tribes), the phrase 
being borrowed directly from the Malays, and in- 
directly from Arabic sources. It is also impossible 
to believe, from what we know of them now, that the 
Mantra (in spite of M. Borie's ingenious supposition) 
ever had any religious books, or that they even knew 
the use of the alphabet, whilst the idea of pronouncing 
them to be a broken sect of Christians is nothing 
short of absurd.^ An additional difficulty lies in the 
extraordinary shyness and timidity common to all 
the Peninsula races, which in many cases is scarcely 
surpassed by anything of which we read among savage 
tribes in other parts of the world. 

It is therefore hard to devise any analysis that will 
show at a glance the state of the case, but I believe 
when all the evidence is weighed and the errors 
eliminated, it will be found that generally speaking — 

{a) The Semang religion, in spite of its recognition 
of a "Thunder-god" (Kari) and certain minor "deities," 
has very little indeed in the way of ceremonial, and 
appears to consist mainly of mythology and legends. 
It shows remarkably few traces of demon- worship, 

' See Vanhille on " Radja Berail," Borneo, and corruptions of words of 

{Ind. Gids, 1 902), and compare the Sanskrit origin are also occasionally 

AraViic " Firman " (" Decree of God "), found in the Peninsula, e.g. the Jakun 

which (say the Malays) takes the " Jewa - jewa " (= Malay " Dewa - 

form of "Firman" or "Pirmal" among dewa"), which is used in the sense 

some of these tribes, and the obvious of a minor deity. The tradition of a 

"Allah Ta'ala'," mentioned by Mr. lost book is an idea common among 

Fkllamy. Similar corruptions of the the tribes of Indo-China ; cp. vol. i. 

Arabic attributes of Allah occur in pp. 378, 391, 536, and infra, 347. 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 175 

very little fear of ghosts of the deceased, and still less 
of any sort of animistic beliefs. 

(<^) The Sakai religion, whilst admitting a great 
quasi -deity, who is known under various names, 
yet appears to consist almost entirely of demon- 
worship ; this takes the form of the Shamanism so 
widely spread in south-east Asia, the Shaman or 
Medicine-man ('* hala ") being the acknov/ledged link 
between man and the world of spirits. In the words 
of Mr. Hale, it is a form of " demon-worship in which 
demons (Hantu) are prayed to, but not God (Allah)." 

{c) The religion of the Jakun is the pagan or pre- 
Mohammedan (Shamanistic) creed of the Peninsular 
Malays, with the popular part of whose religion (as 
distinct from its Mohammedan element) it has much 
in common. It shows no trace of the tendency to 
personify abstract ideas found among the Semang, 
and its deities (if they can be so called) are either 
quite otiose or a glorified sort of tribal ancestors, 
round whom miraculous stories have collected. The 
few elements that it has in common with the Semang 
religion are no doubt due to cultural contact. 

Of this pagan creed J. R, Logan has remarked that 
there can be little doubt that the Benua have derived 
their theistic ideas from a Hindu or Islamised race. 
The basis of their religion and religious practices is 
Poyangism, in itself a species of milder Shamanism, 
and this they have united in a very remarkable manner 
to a mixture of theism and demonism ; the one either 
of Hindu origin, as is most probable, or borrowed from 
the Arabs through some partially converted tribe of 
Malays ; and the other having a considerable resem- 
blance to the primitive allied religions of the Dayaks 
of Borneo on the one side, and the Bataks of Sumatra 

176 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

on the other. The mode in which the three systems 
have been united so as to be amalgamated into a 
consistent whole is deserving of consideration. 
Poyangism remains almost unimpared, or rather the 
Poyang, while assuming the character of priest, and to 
a certain extent abandoning that of wizard, retains in 
effect his old position. He still commands the 
demons by incantations and supplications, and their 
power rather than his own has been subordinated to 
the deity. At the same time this idea of an ultimate 
and supreme creator has not greatly altered their 
conceptions of the demons. Originally, impersona- 
tions of the vital and destructive forces of nature — or 
the recognition in nature, through the first union of 
reason and imagination in faith of a spiritual power 
which animates, destroys, survives, and perpetually 
renews the visible forms and forces of the world,— their 
presence was still allowed to fill the sensible ; and 
nature herself both material and spiritual was 
subjected to God. That extramundane theism which 
pervades many higher religions, adapted to the ancient 
belief, left the demons in the possession of the world, 
and if it rendered their power derivative instead of 
self-subsisting, it also entirely excluded men from the 
presence of the deity. While by his supreme power 
and omniscience he could control all things, he 
remained to them a God afar off.^ 

Similarly amongst the Berembun tribes we 
recognise a pure Shamanism, with its accompanying 
charms and talismans ; a living faith fresh from the 
ancient days of eastern and middle Asia — preserving 

^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 280. As re- in his Introduction and notes to the 
gards the Indian element, Vaughan- Materialen, points out all the facts 
Stevens' editor, Grlinwedel (one of the which appear to him to indicate Bud- 
greatest living authoritieson Buddhism), dhist influence. 

GENERAL REMARKS 177 

its pristine vigour and simplicity even in the present 
century, — untouched by the Buddhistic deluge which 
has passed over the vast regions of south - eastern 
Asia, and has sent so many waves to different parts ot 
the Archipelago, and resisting the pressure of the 
Islamism which surrounds it.^ 

The Poyang and Pawang of the various Jakun 
tribes, the B'lians of the Dayaks, and the Dato' and 
the Si Basso of the Bataks, are one and all the 
Shaman, the Priest-medicineman, in different shapes."^ 

Analysis of Chief Deities of the Three Races. 

The most important points in the description of 
the character of the chief god of each of the three 
races may be stated as follows : — 

I. KARI.^ 

(1) He is of supernatural size and has fiery breath, but is now invisible (?).* 

(2) He is not described as immortal, though a belief of this kind may perhaps 

be inferred from the fact of his having existed continuously from before 
the creation. 

(3) He created everything except the earth and mankind, and when Pie had 

created the latter Kari gave them souls.^ 

(4) If not omniscient, he at least knows whenever men do wrong, and his will 

is omnipotent. 

(5) He is angered by the commission of certain acts, but sometimes shows 

pity and pleads with Pie on man's behalf when the latter (their actual 
creator) is angry. ^ 

1 The following remarks by Logan of the Mantra is the primitive heathen- 
apply to the Jakuns in general: — "Here ism of Asia, which, spreading far to 
I only remark, with reference to the the east and west, was associated with 
incantations, charms, and other super- the religions of the eldest civilised 
stitions of the Mantra, that the greater nations, for it flourished in ancient 
part appear to be essentially native Egypt, before the Hebrews were a 
[the Arabic portions having been added people, in Greece and Rome, and bids 
or substituted by Malays] — that is, they fair to outlast Hinduism in many parts 
have not borrowed from the Hindus or of India" (Logan mJ.I.A. vol. i. pp. 
Arabs, but have assumed their peculiar 329* 330*, and cp. ibid. pp. 279-282). 
form from the state in which the tribe ^ J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 282, 283. 
has existed on the Peninsula from time ^ Another form is " Kare " (" Thun- 
immemorial, while, in substance, they der"), but V.-Stevens has " Kayee " 
have been transmitted directly from the ( = " Kayi "). 

same common source to which a large * Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 132, 133. 

part of the inhabited world must refer ^ Ibid. 117. 

its earliest superstitions. The religion ^ \'ol. i. p. 421, supra. 

VOL. II N 

178 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part ni 

(6) He is the supreme judge of souls, and as he is the giver of life, has how- 

ever also to destroy it. When he is angry he slays men by means of 
lightning direct, ^ or by means of a beast called Tinjui. 

(7) This, however, appears to be of very rare occurrence, as he usually leaves 

the killing to be done by his messengers.- 

(8) He requires at intervals the sacrifice of blood, ^ but does not, however, 

make any use of it. For the offering of this sacrifice a form of address is 
prescribed, though this is the only direct example of any sort of prayer 
being addressed to him. 

(9) His servants are Sentiu and Chini ^ (which pace Vaughan-Stevens may 

possibly = Chin-oi), " Ta' Ponn " and "Minang."" 

To sum up, Kari possesses many attributes 
usually ascribed to a deity, but since he lacks (with 
one doubtful exception) an actual cult, it would 
perhaps be best to regard him as a mythological 
person, analogous to the patron saints of Europe. 

Of Pie much less is known than of Kari. Pie 
was, however, the creator of the earth (under Kari's 
direction), as well as the first actual creator of the 
human race (as represented by the Semang), on whose 
behalf he pleads with Kari when the latter is angry. 
Unlike Kari, Pie has no acknowledged form of cult 
whatever, unless perhaps we may recognise in the 
story of the woman who when a tree was falling upon 
her shrieked to Pie to save her, some faint re- 
miniscence of a cult that has long ceased to exist. 
In addition to the foregoing there are several other 
great spirits of whom the chief are Ta Ponn and 
Minang. 

n. TUHAN. 

An analysis of the character of the Sakai " God " 
under his various names (Tuhan, Pirman, or Peng),** 
shows that he occupies very much the same place in 

' Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 117. "God" of the Andamanese (Man's 

'' Vol. i. p. 421 supra. And. p. 89 seq.). 

■* Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 107-109. '' " I'eng " — sic Vaughan-Stevens. 

■• Ibid. pp. 132, 133. It may be doubted whether the first 

•'' For this whole description cp. two names at least are not rather of 

Man's description of Puluga, the Malay or Malayo-Arabic origin. 

CHAi'. VI GENERAL REMARKS 179 

the Sakai cosmogony as is occupied by Kari and 
Pie in that of the Semang. 

(1) He is of supernatural size and invisible (?). 

(2) He is immortal (?). 

(3) He is not definitely mentioned as the creator, but presides over the 

existing universe, having the power of life and death over the human 
race and the spiritual world alike ; ' he appears as the champion of man 
against both demons and wild beasts.'^ 

(4) No statement is made as to his omniscience, except that he invariably 

knows when man does wrong. 

(5) He is angered at the commission of certain acts ("the Sakai think they 

must have done wrong before he lets the demons attack them "), but 
may also show mercy. ^ 

(6) He is the supreme and final judge of souls (Granny Long-breasts applying 

the preliminary test by washing the souls in hot water).'* He alone 
has power either to grant life or refuse it both to man and demon. 

(7) His punishments are inflicted by means of his agents, the demons.'- Man 

is described as appealing to Tuhan for help in difficulties. 

HI. TUHAN DI-BAWAH.'' 

The more advanced in civihsation the tribes with 
whom we have to deal, and the closer their connection 
in particular with the Malays, the harder becomes the 
task of eliciting from them any definite statements 
with regard to their own belief in a deity. For by 
far the most part of the Jakun tribes when questioned 
upon this subject are accustomed to reply that there is 
a God whose name they give as " Tuhan " or " Tuhan 
Allah," the God of their Mohammedan neighbours 
the Malays. Among the Mantra, however, and 
doubtless among other Jakun tribes, if the matter were 
more thoroughly investigated, there does undoubtedly 
exist a belief, shadowy though it be, in a deity, and 
this independently of Arabic sources. There are in 
fact, as among the Semang, traces of a dualistic 
system, wherein two great mythological powers are 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 131. This precludes the drawing of a hard-and- 

account and the name "Gendui Lanjut "' fast line between the races in his case, 
are Malayan (Jakun) in character, but the - Ifiid. ^. \6t,. 

general lack of precision and the mixed •* Jl/id. pp. 130, 131. ■* Jbid. 

nature of Vaughan-Stevens' material, ^ Ibid. p. 131. 

which in more than one case is admitted, ^ I.e. "Lord of the Lower World." 

i8o NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

recognised, a Lord of the Upper and a Lord of the 
Lower World. It is the latter to whom the creation 
of the earth is attributed, and who intervenes to 
protect mankind from the starvation consequent upon 
their own over- rapid increase, a result which he 
eventually achieves by the creation of Death. 

Suinmary. 

To sum up, it is evident that the deities recognised 
by these three races do not by any means adequately 
fulfil the common definitions of deity ; for to take the 
test of " worship " alone, the only one of the three 
religions apparently possessing anything approaching 
a form of prayer addressed to a deity is the Semang, 
and even this only happens in a single instance (that of 
the Thunder-charm addressed to Kari). There is a 
tradition, but no proof, of an appeal to Tuhan on the 
part of the Sakai, but of prayers addressed either to 
Allah or Tuhan Di-bawah on the part of the Jakun 
there is hardly even the tradition. Yet there does not 
appear to be any reasonable doubt that three of these 
great spirits (at least Kari and Pie and possibly Tuhan 
Di-bawah) may, in consideration of the wideness of the 
gulf that separates them from the lesser spirits and 
demons (who are always dependent on and are in one 
case at least actually described as being created by 
them), be dignified (otiose though they are) by the 
higher title of Gods. But taking into account the 
effect of cultural influences, the most probable ex- 
planation of the present state of things may perhaps 
lie in the fact that the pressure of alien religions 
introduced by more strenuous races has driven the old 
heathen religion into the background, and that where 

GENERAL REMARKS i8i 

it has partially at least stood its ground, it has been 
first neutralised and then welded into one with the 
pervading elements of Hinduism and Islam. There 
have no doubt been other contributory causes ; there 
may even have been a general tendency, as amongst 
many other races, to increase indefinitely the number 
of spirits who might be invoked, in the hope of obtain- 
ing more powerful succour, but in the medley of races 
that have gone to fill the Malay Peninsula, the former 
cause has probably been the more important. 

Analysis of Chief Spirits and Demons. 

We now come to the question of demonology, 
in which the souls or ghosts of the deceased still play 
a considerable part, since both the Sakai and Jakun 
are in the habit of deserting their encampments, and 
even in some cases their standing crops, upon the 
occurrence of a death from any violent sickness, so 
great is their terror lest the ghosts of the deceased 
should prey upon their own living bodies. 

In this respect there is a wide gulf between the 
religion of these two races and that of the Semang. 
Among the latter demonology takes such a very mild 
form that it might be practically non-existent for all 
the effect that it has upon their movements. Vaughan- 
Stevens indeed declares in more than one passage, 
that the Semang do not believe in spirits at all, and 
though such a statement goes beyond the truth, it 
may at all events be safely said that the Semang very 
rarely allow themselves to be terrified by them. 

In the following table an attempt is made to 
classify the spirits and demons of all three races 
according to their nature and origin : — 

1 82 

NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

Classification. 

Semang. 

Sakai. 

Jakun. 

I. Nature-spirits — 

(a) Atmosphere - 

Kari and Pie and 

Rain-spirits [V.-St. 

Bes. — Jin Saribu, or 

spirits — 

their servants [ v.- 

ii- 135]- 

the Thousand Demons 

(i) Sky-spirits. 

St.]. 

(Mai.) [W.S.]. 

(2) Wind-spirits. 

Ta' Ponn [W.S.]. 

Jin Angin or Wind- 

Bes. — Jin Angin, the 

Demon 

Wind - demon (Mai. ) 

[Hale, 300]. 

[W.S.]. 

(3) Sun-spirit (,sic). 

Jin Malctok [Swett]. 

Heat-spirits \ibid.\. 

{b) Earth -spirits — 

(I) Spirits of the 

Ya' Takell[W.S.]. 

(not'specified) 

Bes. — Jin Sarapat, or 

soil. 

[Hale, 300; V.-St. 

the Garotting Demon 

ii- 135]- 

(Mai.) [W.S.]. 

(2) Spirits of hills 

(kind not sjiecified) 

Lake-spirits [V.-St. 

and moun- 

[Swett]. 

ibid.\ 

tains. 

(3) Spirits of the 

I. H. Siburu [\'.- 

I. Bes.— H. Siburu, or 

swamps. 

St. ii. 135]. 

the Demon Huntsman 
(Mai.) [W.S.]. 

2. H. Tinggi [V.- 

2. Bes. — H. Tinggi, or 

St, ii. 13s]. 

the Tall Demon (Mai.) 
[W.S.]. 

3. H. Baunan [V.- 

3. Bes. — Orang Bunyan 

St, ii. 135].' 

[W.S.], also connected 
with shrines in different 
places [W.S.]. 

(4) Spirits of the 

(not specified) 

Stone-spirits [V.-St. 

forest. 

[Swett]. 

ibid.\ 

(5) Tree-spirits. 

Disease-spirits em- 

" Each tree has its 

I. Bes. — H. Gharu, or 

bodied in trees. 

special variety of 

the Eaglewood Demon 

[W.S.]. 

demon (Hantu)" 

(Mai.) [W.S.]. 

[V.-St. ii. 135]. 

2. Bes. — H. Kapor, or 
the Camphor Demon 
(MaL) [W.S.]. 

3. Bes. — H. Getah, or 
the Gutta Demon 
(Mai.) [W.S.]. 

(6) Crop-spirits. 

(not recorded.) 

H. Juling or the 
Squinting Demon 
(Mai.) [V.-St. 
ii- 135. 152]- 

(not recorded.) 

(7) Fire-spirits. 

As shown by alleged 

See Heat - spirits. 

(not recorded.) 

fire-taboos 

supra. 

[W.S.; cp. Swett]. 

(8) Water-spirits. 

(not specified) 

(not specified) 

Bes. — H. Sungei, or 

[Swett]. 

[Hale, 300]. 

" River Demon "(Mai.) 
[W.S.]. 

' .Sic ? Bunyan. Il may be (jueslioned whether these spirits of Vaughan- 
.Stevens are not rather Malayan, as their names appear to show. On the other 
hand, in .several cases they agree with those recorded by Hale, who writes of 
undoul)led Sakai. 

GENERAL REMARKS 

J83 

Classification. ! 

Semang. 

Sakai 

Jakun. 

II. Man-spirits — 

{a) Birth-demons. 

(not recorded.) 

I. BeS. — Jin Kuwak 
(harmless) [W.S.]. 

2. Jin Mati-Anak. 

2. Bes. — JinMatiAnak, 

[V.-St. ii. 145]. 

or the Still-birth Demon 

(Mai.) (deadly) [W.S.]. 

3. Bes. — H. Langhwe 

(Mai.) (deadly) [W.S.]. 

{b) Demonsofsin- 

(not recorded.) 

I. Gambling-demon 

(not recorded.) 

fuHusts(ofthe 

[Hale, 301]. 

dead, etc.) 

2. Opium - demon 
[Hale, 301]. 

3.QuarrelIing-demon 
[Hale, 301]. 

4. H.Kubur [V.-St. 

4. Bes. — H. Kubur, or 

132]. 

the Tombs - Demon 
(Mai.) [W.S.]. 

(f) Demons of 

(not recorded.) 

I. (of fatigue) H. 

I. (?) 

sickness and 

Jemoi [V.-St. 1 35]. 

discomfort. 

2. (of headache) 

2. Bes. — H. Kembang 

[Hale, 301]. 

Buah (Mal.)[W.S.]. ] 

3. (of stomach-ache) 

3. Bes. — Jin Grotak 

[Hale, 301]. 

(Mai.) [W.S.]. 

4. (of mosquitoes) 

[Hale, 301]. 

5. (of fever, elephan- 

tiasis, ulcers, and 

rheumatism) 

[V.St. 135]. 

(d) Ghosts of the 

Pang. — Ghosts of 

I. Hantu Degup 

dead. 

the dead become 

[V.-St. 132]. 

Storm- or Water- 

2. " Lost souls ex- 

2. Bes. — Hantu Kemuk 

spirits [W.S.]. 

pelled by G. 
Lanyut work upon 
the living through 
the agency of rain, 
heat, in moun- 
tains and lakes, 
rocks and trees " 
[V.-St. ii. 135]. 

(Mai.) [W.S.]. 

Myths. 

Creatio7i of Man. 

In some cases the Semang and Jakun legends 
bearing on the creation of man show a common 
impress, which is probably mainly due to the same 
" savage-Malay " element, of which there are such 
abundant traces in the dialects of both races. Among 

1 84 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

both races, for instance, we find the idea that man at 
first multipHed so fast as to make the earth too 
crowded, Kari the Thunder-god (in the Semang 
story) slays them with his fiery breath, and thus 
reduces the number of mouths to be fed. In the 
Jakun legend, on the other hand, Tuhan Di-bawah, 
the Lord of the Underworld, turns half of them into 
trees for the same purpose. In both stories this check 
to the population proves insufficient, and Death is 
accordingly instituted by way of relief. By both races 
the same proverb is worked into the argument, viz., 
that it is better for the parents of each generation to die 
" like the Banana-tree," leaving their children behind 
them, than to have them increasing continually like 
the stars of the sky for multitude, as they are supposed 
to have done before the institution of Death. 

This particular creation -legend is one of great 
interest, as it may possibly contain certain elements 
of real Semang mythology disseminated among the 
Jakun of Johor by the Semang tribes now largely 
absorbed by the Jakun in the south of the Peninsula. 
It is at all events interesting to note that, as far as 
the evidence of our records goes, the Semang are in 
the habit of personifying abstract ideas, such as Death, 
Hunger, Disease, and so forth, but that the pure-bred 
Jakuns (i.e. Malayans) are not. The racial factor in 
the two types of legend is in fact so different, that if 
only a sufficiently large number of both kinds could 
be collected, I am confident they could as a rule 
be separated without much difficulty. 

A few legends will of course always be difficult to 
classify, and amongst these may perhaps be included 
the Jakun story that the mother of the first pair of 
men (Mertang and Belo) was called " Clod of Earth" 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 185 

(" Tanah Sa-kepal "), and their father " Drop of Water" 
(" Ayer Sa-titek "), of which all that we can say is that it 
seems to have originated in some story to the effect 
that the first parents of the human race were formed 
from clay. 

Ostensibly Semang, on the other hand, is the 
legend that Kari created everything but man, whose 
creation he desired Pie to effect, and that when Pie had 
done so, Kari himself gave them souls. The Semang 
story of the dialogue between the baboon and the first 
parents of the human race may quite possibly be 
distantly connected with the widely prevalent Jakun 
legend ascribing the origin of mankind to a pair of 
white apes. 

Another interesting legend on the same subject 
was the Land-Jakun (Mantra) myth that in the early 
days of the world man did not die, but grew thin with 
the waning of the moon, and waxed fat as she neared 
the full.^ 

In yet other Jakun stories, which however are 
probably, in the main at least, of Malayan origin, 
the founder of the race is described as a person who 
" fell from heaven," or who was discovered in some 
miraculous way, e.g. in the interior of the stem of a 
giant bamboo. 

Before quitting this subject, I may perhaps mention 
the Jakun references to miraculous forms of birth, such 
as the Mantra tradition of a certain race of Demons 
(" Setan ") whose children instead of being born in the 
ordinary way, were "pulled out of the pit of the 
stomach." Akin to this was the Jakun legend of the 
first woman " whose children were produced out of 
the calves of her legs." 

1 J. R. A. S. No. 10, p. 190. 

i86 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

World- Cataclysms, 

The same remarkable parallelism that we found in 
their legends of the creation appears in other Semang 
and Jakun traditions of floods, which though at first 
sight might be thought to be Deluge-legends, may be 
more correctly classed as myths of the "origin of the 
sea " type. According to the Semang legend of the 
Rainbow, a great dragon or snake in ancient times 
broke up the skin of the earth, so that the world was 
overwhelmed with water. According to the Mantra 
it was a giant turtle that brought the water up from 
below through a hole in the ground, from among the 
roots of a " pulai " tree, thus causing a flood which 
developed afterwards into the ocean. ^ A Benua 
account, which is the fullest of the three, refers besides 
to a kind of vessel in which the first parents of the 
race are alleged to have effected their escape from 
drowning. According to the traditions of both 
Semang and Benua, moreover, it is the mountains 
that give fixity to the earth's skin. 

It is perhaps worth remarking that the various 
allusions to the destruction caused by fire seem to point 
to the former prevalence of some myth of an universal 
conflagration from which the ancestors of mankind 
escaped with difficulty, and which was more or less 
analogous to the tradition of the flood."- 

Natural PhenoiJiena. 
The firmament or sky, in the opinion of the 
Semang and the Jakun, is built in three tiers, the two 

' For the Mantra version see p. 339, Moon - Man's nooses and impending 

iti/7-a. The Benua version (p. 356) fall of the sky-pot of the Mantra (319, 

ascribes the breaking up of the skin of infra), the hatching of the stone eggs 

the earth, and the consequent deluge of the Sakai World-eagle (237, infra), 

which ensued, to Pirman, i.e. Tuhan. and perhaps the Man v. Demon battle 

•' Of Last-Day beliefs, we have the of the Tembeh (App. )• 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 187 

Upper tiers, which are regarded as the Paradise of the 
blest, being filled with wild fruit-trees, whilst the third 
or lowest tier contains the low and brooding clouds ^ 
that bring sickness to mankind. 

All three races have versions of the widely-spread 
tradition of the Paradise-bridge, which leads across a 
boiling lake into which the souls of the wicked are 
precipitated. - 

The entrances of heaven and hell (according to the 
Semang legends) are close together in the west, and a 
third place (a species of Hyperborean region) which is 
also found in them, is described in the traditions of 
some Jakun tribes as well. There are separate hells 
for various races of mankind, and yet others for 
animals and snakes. 

As might be expected, a good deal of the mythology 
of these tribes is taken up with the traditions of the 
heavenly bodies, all of which are alike personified, 
many of the stories dealing with the marriages or 
conflicts of the sun and moon, and the chequered 
fortunes of their children the stars. 

In one of the Mantra stories the sun is described 
as not having been created till after one of the floods 
to which 1 have referred. 

The moon is by some of these tribes {e.g. the 
Besisi) identified with the Island of Fruit (the Jungle 
Paradise),^ which, if we take the evidence of one of 
the songs of the same tribe, is preceded by a " Garden 

* "Kelonsong Awan"(p. 207,/;//;-a). Sakai. Among the Besisi he is called 
'^ A form of this Bridge-myth is found "Gaffer Engkoh" or Jongkoh. Its 
among the Andamanese, who describe guardians take different shapes accord- 
it as a bridge of invisible cane through ing to the imagination of each particular 
the sky (see Man's And. p. 94). tribe — a baboon, or demon, among the 
' The chief of the Heaven of Semang, a dog among the Jakun, etc. 
Fruit-trees is called Penghulu by the The choicest heaven is reserved not 
Semang, but this clearly corresponds for the good, but for the old and 
to the Granny Long -breasts of the wise. 

i88 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

of Flowers." It is the moon, again, into which Gaffer 
Engkoh is said to have climbed, and which in several 
traditions is described as the habitation of the Jakun 
" Man in the Moon " (" Nenek Kabayan "). 

Fire. 

The Sakai regard Fire as a mystical emanation 
from the power of Tuhan, which owing to its divine 
origin is the destroyer of evil. The Sakai point of 
view is best expressed by their tradition of the wash- 
ing of the wicked souls ^ in boiling water. They 
have learnt that whilst Fire annihilates. Water softens 
and purifies, and hold therefore that Tuhan showed 
mercy in mitigating with Water the effect of the Fire, 
which would have destroyed the soul itself in destroying 
its sin-spots. As things are, however, the Fire only 
destroys the collective wickedness of the souls washed 
in the copper, which latter resembles, according to the 
Sakai, "a red-hot cauldron, in which a remnant of 
Upas-poison is burning away." ' 

Animal Myths and Beliefs. 

Of the tiger's origin we have no account from 
the Semang side, though several different stories 
are told by the Jakun of the way in which it was 
metamorphosed out of various inferior animals. The 
most usual version of the story appears to be the 
Jakun one, which derives the tiger's origin from a 
dog belonging to a chief (the dog being, as a rule, the 
only animal domesticated by the Jakun). 

So too Hervey in his Mantra Traditions relates 

* According to the Besisi it is only ("sumbang") that are thus treated, 
the souls of those who commit incest ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 130. 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 189 

that Belo (one of the first ancestors of mankind) kept 
a dog at his house ; from this dog came the tiger 
that devours mankind (the " Smooth-skinned " race) 
as contrasted with animals (the " Furred " or " Rough- 
skinned " )} 

To the wild bull (Seladang) there is a solitary 
reference in the collection of Mantra traditions which 
we owe to Hervey. The same remark applies to 
the mouse-deer (Kanchil), who was promised by To' 
Entah (as its reward for rescuing him from the giant 
turtle), the leaves of the sweet-potato (K'ledek). The 
tapir and the manis are referred to in the Semang 
legends, the crocodile in the Blandas account of the 
origin of the tiger, and many other animals in the 
Besisi songs. 

We find among the Jakun a curious pre-Darwinian 
version of the evolution of man from the ape, the 
ape selected for this distinction being the Hylobates 
syndactylies, which, as a matter of fact, is really nearer to 
man than Macacus or even than the " Orang-outang." 

Borie'' informs us that he had several times been 
" quite seriously " assured by the Mantra that they 
were all descended from two white apes (" ungka 
putih "). These white apes, having reared their young 
ones, sent them out into the plains, and there they 
" perfected " themselves so well that both they and 
their descendants became men ; whilst others, on the 
contrary, who returned to the mountains, still re- 
mained apes.^ 

^ A grosser fable ascribing the origin among the Benuasappearstoberegarded 

of the tiger to the frog and Baginda . . . as a sacred colour. The former 

AH is also given by Hervey (y. A'. ^.6'., have their white siamang, their white 

S.B., No. 3, 110-112). - Page 73. alligator, and their white ungka " (New- 

3 An identical story is given by bold, ii. 395, 396). Cp. also the 

Newbold, who relates that their chil- Semang story of the baboon and the 

dren were four in number. "White first parents of mankind. 

I90 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

The white siamang or "ungka" is, moreover, one 
of the embodiments in which the soul of a deceased 
chieftain is beHeved by the Sakai to take refuge. 

The Macacus or baboon is also referred to in 
Semang traditions. There is, for instance, the baboon 
who acted as adviser to the first parents of mankind, 
as well as the gigantic baboon which by some Negrito 
tribes is believed to guard the Paradise-bridge, and 
which according to another Semang account was " as 
big as a hill " and prevented unauthorised souls from 
entering Paradise to steal the fruit. 

Of the smaller animals may be mentioned the dog 
(a reddish -furred wild dog, Canis rutilans), which is 
not only believed by the Jakun to have been the 
prototype of the tiger, but is also among some Jakun 
tribes {e.g. the Besisi of Selangor) believed to guard 
the bridge that leads to Paradise. 

The big old "monitor" or "lace" lizard, which 
is called " Bagenn " by the Semang, is credited by them 
with being the originator of a proverb which among 
the Jakun is assigned to Belo, one of the first 
progenitors of the human race. Moreover, according 
to a Jakun tradition (given by Borie) it was on the 
skin of a monitor that their (mythical) sacred books 
were said to have been written. One of the small 
grass-lizards or skinks (as we are told by Hervey in 
his collection of Mantra traditions), is connected with 
the returning to life of this same Belo, the reptile 
being mutilated by Mertang, Belo's brother.^ 

Of the squirrel (" tupai ") there does not seem to be 
any special tradition, though tufts of squirrel tails 

1 This may be a Malay idea, or be connected with the soul (^.;,^ of a 

held by the Jakun in common with deceased medicine-man or magician), 

the Malays. It evidently refers to Cp. Malay Magic, p. 325 ; and see 

the belief that the lizard is somehow also Birth-customs, p. 26, ante. 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 191 

are worn on necklaces, probably for reasons of 
magic. 

To the flying-fox there are also one or two refer- 
ences. It is when roasted a favourite dish of the 
Sakai, and it forms the subject of one of the tribal 
songs of the Besisi. The bone of a flying-fox was 
also included in a list of royal insignia belonging to 
the hereditary Chief of Jelebu, who was said to be 
descended in part from Jakun ancestors. 

There is no trace of totemism among the Semang.^ 

Transformation. 

The power of self- transformation (into the tiger) 
claimed by a few of the more accomplished medicine- 
men, as in many other parts of the world, is probably 
not to be connected with the transmigration theory, 
whereby it is held that the soul of a dead chief may 
enter a tiger. The B'lian is the tiger in the Peninsula 
as in Africa the hyena is the wizard. There does 
not appear to be any trace of such a belief among 
the Andamanese, but as it is almost universal among 
the other tribes of the same region, I am inclined 
to ascribe this merely to the absence of tigers from 
the Andaman Islands. On the other hand, it is a 
fact worth noting that a small " tiger's-claw knife," 
called " b'ladau," such as is used by the " leopard-men " 
of Africa, is still in use both among the Sumatran 
and the Peninsular Malays, and it may possibly be that 
these wild (Peninsular) tribes first "made believe" to be 
tigers with the object of impressing their more civilised 
neighbours with all the fear they could, an object in 
which they obtained a considerable measure of success. 

1 See p. 260, infra. 

192 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

Birds. 

But the most interesting of all the Semang myths 
are those representing various birds as vehicles for 
the introduction of the soul into the new-born child, a 
full account of which will be found under Birth- 
customs, The Argus-pheasant, on the other hand, 
is connected by the Sakai with lunacy,^ the ground- 
dove appears in one of the Semang creation-myths, 
and finally there is the white cock into which the 
soul of a deceased ancestor is believed by the jakun 
to have migrated. But taking all references to birds 
into consideration, it is certainly remarkable that so 
little in the nature of divination by birds or augury 
has yet been recorded of any tribes whatever in the 
Malay Peninsula. 

Legends and Ideas about Plants and Trees. 

Among the Semang plant-legends is that of the 
flowers that were planted by Pie to serve as models 
for the designs of Disease patterns. Another is that 
of the epiphyte, upon which the Diseases were laid by 
the Winds who were carrying them. Yet another is 
the Semang legend of the origin of the blowpipe 
patterns explaining why some trees have smooth 
and others prickly fruits, and why some fruits are 
sweet and some are acid. To these may be added 
the Mantra tradition of the period when one-half of 
mankind were turned into trees by Tuhan Di-bawah, 
and the Semang " birth-tree " and " name-tree," for 
which see " Birth-customs." 

In the legends of the Jakun we are told that the 

' Z.f. E. xxvi. 169. 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 193 

ark was made of " pulai " wood. This is a very light 
wood obtained from the roots of a species of Alstonia, 
which forms the native substitute for cork in these 
regions, and is used by the Malays for the floats of 
their fishing-nets. 

It is upon a "pulai" tree, moreover, that the 
Birth-demons called "Lang-hue" are supposed by 
the Blandas to sit at night. 

The proverb about the banana- tree (" pisang ") 
should be referred to here.^ It is found both among 
the Semang and the Jakun. 

The Semang practice of wearing leaves and screw- 
pine blossom upon the head as a safeguard against 
falling trees is explained by an appropriate myth. 

In the legends of Kari we are told^ that the 
Semang soon got numerous by living on fruits. 

Of Pie it is related that he ate fruit and threw 
away the seeds, which grew up into trees and bore 
fruit in the course of a single night, and this is not the 
only story connecting the name of Pie with fruit. 
Elsewhere, for instance, he is associated with the 
account in which the origin of certain red and white 
jungle fruit is described. 

The " kenudai " fruit is connected in the traditions 
of the Blandas with the origin both of the tiger and the 
crocodile. 

The large, prickly, uneatable fruit with which 
the giant baboon pelts the would-be invaders of the 
Land of Fruit - trees, is a kind of " false " {i.e. 
" valueless") durian called " durian aji." 

Other ideas about plants which may here be 
mentioned are the belief that the breast-painting (of 
a Sakai man) represents a sort of Polypoditmi, the 

1 Seep. 1S4, ante. ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 132. 

VOL. II O 

194 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

sporangia of which were bruised in water and squirted 
over the happy pair on the occasion of the wedding 
ceremony ; and also that the patterns of the face- 
painting represented another fern, with the juice of 
which the Sakai youths were sprinkled at adolescence. 

The Sotil} 

The Eastern Semang (Pangan) of Kelantan in- 
formed me that each man possessed a soul which was 
shaped like himself, but that it was " red like blood " ^ 
and " no bigger than a grain of maize." It was passed 
on by the mother to the child, but in what way they 
could not explain. 

The Eastern Semang further informed me that 
the soul of a B'lian (priest, chief, and magician) entered 
after death into the body of some wild animal, such 
as an elephant, tiger, or rhinoceros. In this embodi- 
ment it remained until the beast died, when it was 
admitted into the Upper Heaven (of Fruits). 

The souls of ordinary people were variously repre- 
sented as being compelled to cross the boiling lake by 
means of a tree-bridge (from which the wicked slip off 
into the lake below them), and as being sent to a 
different and a far less inviting Paradise.^ 

But the most novel soul-theory ascribed to the 
Semang is that recorded by Vaughan-Stevens, who 
states that according to the Semang belief all human 
souls grew upon a soul-tree in the other world, whence 
they were fetched by a bird, which was killed and eaten 

^ Not the soul as understood by is the Malay " semangat." 

modern Christians, but the soul of ^ q^ Man's And. p. 94: "The 

magical (pre - Christian and extra- colour of the soul is said to be red, 

Christian) ideas, which may be seen in ... and though invisible, it partakes 

old English woodcuts escaping in the of the form of the jx-rson to whom it 

form of a mannikin from l)ctween the belongs." 

neck and shoulders wf the dying. It •' Man's And. p. 94. 

GENERAL REMARKS 195 

by the expectant mother. The souls of animals and 
fishes were conveyed in a somewhat similar way, i.e. 
through the eating by the parent of certain fungi and 
grasses. 

Of Sakai beliefs concerning the soul our records 
are of the scantiest description. It will probably be, 
however, found that the Sakai conception of the soul 
does not appreciably conflict with that of the Semang, 
and that the real difficulty in treating Semang and 
Sakai religion will be to discover their points of 
difference. 

" To ask whether the soul is immortal appears," 
says Letessier, "the height of strangeness — 'And 
how could it die ? It is like the air ! ' " was the answer 
of an old Jakun of Bukit Layang, to whom he put this 
question. 

The Sakai, like the Semang, attach much weight 
to dreams, and are firm believers in metempsychosis. 
The soul after death is repeatedly washed by " Granny 
Longbreasts," in order to purify it from its stains, in a 
cauldron of boiling water, after which it is made to 
walk along the flat side of a monstrous chopper with 
which she bridges the cauldron, the bad souls fall- 
ing in and the good escaping to the land of Paradise.^ 

The beliefs of the Jakun and Orang Laut appear to 
be very similar to those of the civilised Malays, but very 
little indeed has been hitherto collected about them. 

In a Besisi legend both people and animals are 
described as having seven souls, a number which 
agrees exactly with Malay ideas on the same subject. 

The same tribe closely connect the soul with the 
shadow, and build little hutches beside the grave for 
the soul to dwell in when it issues from the earth, and 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 130. 

196 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

in other ways certainly carry to a far greater degree 
than the Semang, and perhaps even further than most 
Sakai tribes, the arrangements beheved by them to 
be necessary for the soul's maintenance and comfort 
throughout the period during which it lingers in the 
neighbourhood of the grave. 

The Priestly Office. 

As among the Malays, the accredited intermediary 
between gods and men is in all cases the medicine- 
man or sorcerer. In the Semang tribes the office of 
chief medicine- man appears to be generally com- 
bined with that of chief, but amongst the Sakai and 
Jakun these offices are sometimes separated, and 
although the chief is almost invariably a medicine- 
man of some repute, he is not necessarily the chief 
medicine-man, any more than the chief medicine-man 
is necessarily the administrative head of the tribe. 
In both cases there is an unfailing supply of aspirants 
to the office, though it may be taken for granted that, 
all else being equal, a successful medicine-man would 
have much the best prospect of being elected chief, 
and that in the vast majority of cases his priestly 
duties form an important portion of a chiefs work.^ 

The medicine-man is, as might be expected, duly 
credited with supernatural powers. His tasks are to 
preside as chief medium at all the tribal ceremonies, 
to instruct the youth of the tribe, to ward off as well 
as to heal all forms of sickness and trouble, to foretell 

^ "They have neither a king nor a of priests {sic), their only teacher being 

chief, except that title be applied to a the Poyang, who instructs them in all 

person called Poyang (' Puyung '), who matters pertaining to sorcery, evil 

decides on every case laid before him, spirits, ghosts, etc., in which they 

and whose opinion is invariably adopted. firmly believe" (Begbie, pp. 13, 

Having no religion, they are destitute 14). 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 197 

the future (as affecting the results of any given act), 
to avert when necessary the wrath of heaven, and 
even when re-embodied after death in the shape of 
a wild beast, to extend a benign protection to his 
devoted descendants. 

Among the Sakai and the Jakun he is provided 
with a distinctive form of dress and body-painting, 
and carries an emblematic wand or staff by virtue of 
his office. 

Sacred Spots and Shrines. 

We have as yet no record of the use of *' high 
places " or shrines among the pure Negritos, and 
perhaps naturally so, since the idea of regarding a 
specific locality as sacred could only grow up with the 
greatest difficulty among tribes who are so essentially 
nomadic that they never stay more than four or five 
nights in a single spot. 

By the Sakai and Jakun, however, such sacred 
spots are certainly set apart, incense being burnt there 
and vows registered, invariably, I believe, in the 
hopes of obtaining some material advantage.^ 

In addition to these shrines, however, there are 
also to be seen, in the districts inhabited by the Sakai 
and Jakun, what may be termed medicine- houses. 
These houses either take the form of solitary cells 
erected in the depths of the forest (in which case the 
magician keeps a selection of his charms and spells 
in them), or (more frequently) that of diminutive 
shelters made from the leaves of a palm called " dem- 
pong," which are built to screen the medicine-man 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 141. 

198 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

and his patient from view during the performance of 
the ceremony of exorcism.^ 

Nature of the Rites. 

The main divisions of the magico - religious 
ceremonies of these wild Peninsular tribes may be 
enumerated as follows : prayers and invocations, 
sacrifice, abstinence, possession, divination, and self- 
transformation. 

Prayers and Invocations. 

Among all the Peninsular tribes both prayer (in 
the wider sense) and invocations still remain in the 
un-ethical stage in which material as distinct from 
moral advantages alone are sought for. 

Among the Semang, however, with the rarest 
exceptions," they appear to have scarcely reached the 
stage of fixed forms, the petitioner generally content- 
ing himself with expressing his wish in a quasi-con- 
versational phrase, addressed to the great spirits or 
deities of the tribe. 

Among the Sakai the conjuration of the spirits of 
deceased ancestors and demons of all kinds is more 
freely employed ; but most of all among the Jakun, the 
Besisi addressing invocations not merely to animals 
but even to insects and inert objects which they 
believe to be the embodiments of the spirits whose 
aid they are invoking. 

All branches of these tribes, as is usually the 
case with autochthonous races, are credited by the 
immigrating Malays with the knowledge of charms 
of the most marvellous potency. 

' ^■auf;han-SteverlS, ii. 142. - E.i^. that of the Thunder-charm, q.v. 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 199 

Their love-charms in particular (such as that used 
in the " Chinduai " ceremony), are believed to be quite 
irresistible, and they are credited with the power 
of making themselves supernaturally beautiful or in- 
vulnerable at will. By means of " sendings," or rather 
" pointings " (" tuju "), they are believed to be able to 
slay their enemies at a distance, and many a Sakai 
has paid the penalty for sickness and trouble falsely 
ascribed to his malevolence by excited and not over- 
scrupulous Malays. 

Offerings. 

The only common form of offering, which consists 
in the burning of incense (benzoin), is found among all 
branches of these tribes, other kinds of offering being 
comparatively rare. The practice of drawing blood 
from the region of the shin-bone and throwing it up to 
the skies is a Semang sacrifice addressed to Kari. On 
the other hand, many of the Jakuns (especially the 
coast tribes) expose in the jungle small sacrificial trays 
upon which are deposited various kinds of food (boiled 
rice, meat, and fruits), together with small vessels 
containing water. These trays are called " anchak " 
(Vaughan-Stevens, " anchap "), and correspond very 
closely both in name and form to the sacrificial trays 
similarly employed by the Malays. 

I have also seen among the Besisi, on the occasion 
of their rice-harvest feast, a small quantity of boiled 
rice deposited on the top of a low tree-stump, and 
offered by way of a compliment to all the enemies of 
the rice, as represented by noxious insects and the 
wild beasts of the jungle. Here we see the idea of 
sacrifice in one of its most rudimentary stages, that 

200 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

of a mere complimentary present intended to establish 
a truce with avowed and acknowledged foes. 

Abstinence. 

Of fasting and other forms of abstinence among 
these races not very much is known, though instances 
do undoubtedly occur. One of the most usual forms 
of abstinence occurs at Sakai child-births, when the 
mother is required by the unwritten laws of the tribe 
to refrain from eating various kinds of food. 

Sakai and Jakun medicine-men also to some extent 
practise abstinence in order to acquire the power of 
seeing visions. 

Possession and Exorcism. 

About the forms of possession practised by Semang 
medicine-men we know next to nothing. It would 
appear, however, from a ceremony that I myself 
witnessed among the Semang of Kedah that some 
form of possession is certainly believed in by them, 
though I am inclined to think that it is probably of 
a more simple kind than that practised by the Sakai 
and Jakun ; and that whereas among these latter the 
magician invokes the aid of a friendly demon to enable 
him to overcome the demon that is tormenting the 
patient, the Semang magician trusts rather in the 
strength of his own spirit to exorcise the adversary. 

Divination [Diagnosis). 

Of divination among the Semang our records are 
again almost non-existent, though among the Sakai 
and Jakun divination is clearly employed as the 
counterpart in magic of our own medical "diagnosis," 

GENERAL REMARKS 

There appear to be two distinct ways of performing 
divination, one being by means of a tribal ceremony 
such as our latter-day spiritualists might perhaps call 
a seance, and the other undertaken by the medicine- 
man alone. Divination in either case frequently only 
forms part of an exorcising ceremony, as the possessed 
medicine-man, after replying to the usual questions 
concerning the origin and nature of the patient's 
malady, and prescribing the remedies required to 
restore him to health, is frequently asked questions 
of more general import, which need not necessarily 
have anything to do with the condition or fortunes of 
the patient. 

Dreams and General Beliefs. 

Both Semang and Sakai, but especially the latter, 
appear to attach much weight to dreams. 

Thus we are informed,^ for instance, that among 
the Sakai the new-born infant receives its name in 
accordance with a dream. - 

A similar strong belief in dreams is also found 
among the Jakun. 

Annulets and Talismans. 

Amulets and talismans form a fairly numerous 
class of objects among all the wild tribes. 

Among them may be reckoned coins strung on 
necklaces (as charms for the eyes). The custom of 
stringing on necklaces tufts of squirrels' tails, teeth of 
apes, monkeys, and wild pig, small bones of birds 
and various animals, and similar objects, which De 
Morgan calls " trophies of the chase," may be com- 

1 Z.f.E. xxvi. 1 6 1. 2 /^/^. p_ 158. 

202 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part ni 

pared, their use being probably due, as in other parts 
of the world, rather to magical ideas than the mere 
pride of capture. The bristles, teeth, and claws ot 
tigers are all certainly used much more for magical 
than for merely ornamental or decorative purposes. 

I. — Semang. 
The Heavenly Bodies. 

The sun is believed by the Semang to possess an 
actual human figure (that of a female), and is further 
alleged to possess a husband, whose name was given 
me as " Ag-ag, the Crow." 

On reaching the west the sun falls suddenly, 
it is believed, into a great hole or cavern, which 
according to some Semang legends is identified with 
hell. According to another version, it goes down 
behind a range of mountains on the western border 
of the earth, which is believed to be fiat, and there 
gives light to the Senoi. 

Similar ideas were entertained about the moon, 
the name of whose husband was given me (in Kedah) 
as " Ta Ponn," a mythological personage of whom 
more will be said later. 

The stars were regarded, I was told, as the moon's 
children/ 

1 Swettenham says (p. 228): "They" petition to the sun or the moon," 

(the Negritos) "call the sun a good though it certainly has not the least 

spirit." In J. A'. A. S., S. B., No. 5, foundation in fact. A similar and 

p. 156, he mentions a "good female equally inaccurate statement (from 

spirit in the clouds." Symes) was quoted by Anderson (ib.) 

Ncwbold (pp. 377-379), in speaking about the Andamanese (v. Man, p. 93, 

of the Semang, says: " They worship for the ddmenti). In both cases the 

the sun." He appears to have taken idea probably arose from the same 

this statement from Anderson's Consid. cause, viz. the ceremonial treatment 

(.\pp. xxxvii.), where the Semang of an eclipse. Cp. z\%o /. I. A. iv. 

are described as " offering \\\> a hasty 427. 

NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 

Eclipses. 

Among the Semang there is the greatest fear of 
eclipses, which are beheved to be due to the attempt 
of a gigantic serpent or dragon to enfold or swallow 
the obscured luminary. The name of the serpent 
that is believed to enfold the moon was given me as 
" Hura' " ; but I was told that, although it assumed 
the guise of a serpent, it is in reality the moon's 
own mother-in-law, and is only attempting to embrace 
and not to swallow it. The moon, however, shrinks 
from the proffered embrace, from whence we may 
perhaps conclude that the moon is sometimes also 
regarded as a man, the confusion being probably due 
to the conflict of cultures.^ The only alternative is to 
suppose " mother-in-law — daughter-in-law avoidance " 
of some kind. The serpent that swallows the sun is 
"a different one," and is believed to attack it in 
deadly earnest. 

The Rainbow. 

According to my Semang informants, the rainbow 
is called " Hwe-a." It is believed to be the body 
of a great serpent or python, and the spots where it 
touches the earth are regarded as very feverish and 
bad to live near. 

We are further told (by Vaughan-Stevens) that 
the sun on setting behind the western mountains 
gives light to the Senoi, and that under the heaven 
called Tasig, beneath Kari's seat, begins the 
gigantic body of the rainbow-snake, " Ikub Huya" or 

1 According to the Khasia the moon according to the Eskimo the (female) 

is a man whose mother-in-law throws sun smears with soot the face of her 

ashes in his face when he pursues her brother, the sun, when he presses his 

once a month (Latham, i. 119). And love upon her (Peschel, p. 256). 

204 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

'Hoya,'^ which extends to the regions of hell. It 
lets water from the nether deep through to the earth 
at Pie's command for the Semang to drink by push- 
ing its head through the fiat earth-crust, and thus 
causing springs of water (" met betiu ") to rise. The 
light drizzling rain that falls when a rainbow is visible 
is the sweat of the reptile, and if it happens to fall 
upon any one who is not wearing a particular kind of 
armlet, it causes the sickness called ' lininka ' (?). 

Women wear by way of protection armlets of 
Palas {Lu7tala) leaf, and men wear armlets of the 
" Rock-vein " fungus (" temtom," or Mai. " urat batu ") 
on the left wrist. These bands are called " chin- 
ing-neng." - 

Storms. 

During a storm of thunder and lightning the 
Semang draw a few drops of blood from the region of 
the shin-bone, mix it with a little water in a bamboo 
receptacle, and throw it up to the angry skies 
(according to the East Semang or Pangan, once 
up to the sky and once on the ground, saying 
"bo','' i.e. "stop"). On my inquiring further, one of 
the women offered to show me how to do this, and 
drawing off a drop or two of blood into a bamboo 
vessel by tapping with a stick the point of a jungle- 
knife pressed against her shin-bone, she proceeded to 
perform this strange ' libation ' ceremony in the 
manner just described. 

If a man is in the least degree too familiar with 
his mother-in-law, thunderbolts, said the Semang to 
me, will assuredly fall. For this reason (if for no 

^ "Jekol)"= snake in the Semang dialect, and " hwGa' " = rainbow. 
- Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 126. 

NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 

Other!) the contingency never arises. But they also 
assured me that they of the jungle were far more 
distant and circumspect in their dealings with their 
mothers-in-law than was the case with their neigh- 
bours the Malays.^ 

To the foregoing I may add that according to the 
Eastern Semang, the ghosts of wicked (or ignorant ?) 
tribesmen, on leaving the dead body, fly up to the sky 

1 ^'aughan-Stevens s account is as 
follows : — ■ The so - called " Kor-loi- 
melloi,"' or "Blood-throwing" cere- 
mony, is now completely forgotten 
on the west coast of the Peninsula 
[I did not find it so. — W.S.], and 
even in Perak, but is quite universal 
in the east coast states. In order 
to appease the angry deity men and 
women (of all ages) are in the habit 
of cutting the skin covering the 
shins to obtain a few drops of blood. 
One cut is usually sufficient, so that 
on the whole very little blood is 
drawn. The cuts are made diagonally 
across the axis of the leg, are from 
6 to 10 mm. in length, and are said 
to have been formerly made with a 
stone knife (?), though now with the 
ordinary iron jungle-knife or parang, 
which was knocked with a piece of 
wood until blood was drawn. The 
blood — it need only be a drop — is 
either sucked out or dropped directly 
into a long bamboo receptacle, and a 
quantity of water (sufficient to half 
fill the bamboo) is poured in with it. 
The Semang then turns in the direction 
of the setting sun, and doling out 
the liquid with a special bamboo 
spatula, throws it straight up into the 
air, calling out with a loud voice, 
" Blood, I throw towards the sun ; 
I draw blood, curdled blood ; I throw 
blood towards the sun," or words to 
that effect, the invocation being 
repeated each time that the liquid is 
thrown, up until all is finished. 

When the storm is very severe the 
bamboo may be refilled with blood and 
water and a fresh ceremony take place. 
The bamboo vessel used for the pur- 

pose is, as a rule, fresh and roughly 
cut, and was usually not decorated — 
doubtless owing to the fact that there 
would be no time to do so during a 
sudden tropical storm, the vessel being 
cut for the purpose on each occasion, 
and thrown away after use. 

Kari himself makes no use of the 
blood thus sacrificed, but is pacified 
by this sign of his children's repentance 
and ceases to hurl thunderbolts, and 
to continue his complaints of their 
misdeeds to their creator Pie, at least 
until they again give him occasion to 
do so. 

Pie, however, employs the blood of 
the Semang in order to create certain 
red jungle fruits which serve as food 
for man, such as, for instance, the 
well-known " rambutan " {Nepheliian 
lappaiim). 

The Puttos themselves did not cut 
themselves, but instead of doing so 
threw their secret remedies (which 
they preserved in bamboo cases), into 
the air. From these Pie created 
certain white jungle fruits. 

When the periodical wind or mon- 
soon brings no rain, very few fruits 
appear, and the Semang then say 
that this is because they had not 
thrown up enough blood, since the 
frequency of the blood - throwing has 
an influence on the quantity of rain. 
[From this it would appear that the 
ceremony may after all perhaps be 
mainly a rain-making ceremony. — 
W.S.] — Vaughan - Stevens, iii. 107- 
109. Cp. Newbold, ii. 386, 396 ; 
and /. R. A. S., S. B., No. 4, p. 48, 
where women only are stated to draw 
blood. 

2o6 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

(along with the vital principle, or "Nyawa") and 
become storm-spirits {i.e. spirits of thunder, lightning, 
etc.). Hence, in the blood-throwing ceremony, part of 
the blood is thrown upwards, in order to propitiate them 
and persuade them to return to the upper heavens. 
Sometimes, however, the ghost, on leaving the body, 
proceeds downwards and becomes a water - spirit. 
And hence, in the same ceremony, part of the blood 
is thrown down upon the earth. 

A remarkable explanation of the phenomenon of 
lightning was given me in Kedah by an aged Semang, 
who explained it as the flashing (in heaven) of the 
top-cords of the dead medicine-men (or B'lians) of 
the tribe, who were believed on such occasions to be 
engaged in the diversion (which in the East is shared 
by adults) of top-spinning. To the same cause was 
attributed the sound of thunder, which was believed 
to be the murmuring noise of the tops as they spun. 
Other informants of the same tribe, it is true, admitted 
sharing in the almost universal fear of Heaven's 
anger caused by thunder and thunderbolts ; it is 
hard, however, in such cases to distinguish the 
original ideas from those obtained from foreign 
sources, though the less original and unique the idea, 
the less likely it is to be indigenous. 

Lightning is produced by Kari when he is 
wroth. He takes a flower and shakes it over the 
sinner and the lightning darts forth. The bell-like 
flower -cups of the (unknown) plant strike each 
other and cause thunder. The echoes are Pie's 

• Cp. vol. i. p. 451. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF PERAK AND KEDAH 207 

Winds. 

Kari's servant Sinai is himself one of the winds, 
and carries a whip in either hand to compel the 
obedience of the other winds. The monkey Aii 
chastises the winds when they are too slow in their 
movements.^ 

The Heavens and Paradise. 

The Kedah Semang informed me that the 
heavens^ consisted of three tiers or layers. The 
highest heaven is filled with fruit-trees which bear 
luxuriantly all the year round, and is inhabited 
by certain of the greater personages of Semang 
mythology. 

The second or central heaven also contains wild 
fruit-trees, and is defended against unauthorised pil- 
ferers by a gigantic baboon, which pelts all would-be 
stealers of the fruit with certain hard, prickly, and 
uneatable fruit (of the kind called false durians).'' 
The third or nethermost heaven, on the other hand, 
contains nothing but the low and brooding clouds ** 
which bring sickness to mankind. 

When I asked the Eastern Semang (Pangan of 
Kelantan) about the fate of the soul after death, they 
declared that the souls of the old and wise proceeded 
to a Paradise in the west wherein grew fruit-trees of 

^ Cp. vol. i. pp. 451, 457. ^ I.e. the "Durian Aji." According 
2 Called in Semang, according to to Vaughan-Stevens, it is a gigantic 
Vaughan-Stevens "Seap"." Sed qu. figure resembling a Semang, named 
"Seak"" or "Seap""." There is no such Kanteh, that keeps the door of Para- 
combination as " p" " in any Semang or dise, and has animals as assistants. Cp. 
Sakai dialect, and if "Seak"" is right, it vol. i. p. 453. 

perhaps ="Seag''" or "Seng" (pr. * Cp. the Malay phrase (used by 

"Sek"") in "Seng Ketok," which Sakai tribes) " Kelonsong awan " (the 

means "west" in all the Semang "husks" or "hulls" of the clouds) 

dialects of which I have had experience. (V.-St. iii. 106, 125). Seep. 187, anie. 

2o8 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

every kind (those mentioned as examples were the 
Bangkong, Rambutan, Durian, and Tampoi), but 
in order to reach it they had first to pass across a 
bridge consisting of the fallen trunk of a colossal tree. 
This tree-bridge would have been easy enough (for a 
Semang) to cross, but for the fact that at the further 
end there sat a gigantic figure (" Berhala'," i.e., idol or 
image) with only a single nostril, huge ball-less eye- 
sockets, two immense tusks in each jaw, exceedingly 
curly hair, and enormously long finger-nails crossed 
upon its breast. Many of the souls were scared by this 
horrible demon to such an extent that they straightway 
fell, panic-stricken, into the vast boiling lake beneath 
it, up whose sheer smooth sides they tried in vain 
to clamber. Here, therefore, they swam desperately 
about, clutching at the sides, for three long agonising 
years, after which, should the Chief of the Heaven of 
Fruit-trees then think fit, he would let down his 
great toe for them to catch hold of, and so pull 
them out ! The old and wise {e.g. the B'lians) were 
for this very reason buried in trees, viz., so that 
their souls might be able to fly over the head of this 
fearful figure. 

According to the Western Semang, whilst the souls 
of the dead B'lians proceeded to the Island of Fruit- 
trees, those of the lay members of the tribe went a 
long way across the sea, to a Land of Screw-pines and 
Thatch-palms,^ where was the hole into which the sun 
fell at night. If they had committed any wicked 
act, however, although they started by the same road, 
they did not arrive at the same destination, but were 
compelled to turn northwards aside across the sea to 

* t^x^^in — Nipa fruticans, low - growing palms found only in salt-water 
swamps. 

CHAi>. VI NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 209 

a land which had two months of day and a month of 
night ^ alternately. 

The account given by Vaughan - Stevens is as 
follows : — 

All souls, whether of Semang or of beasts, go straight to Kari to receive their 
sentence. Good souls proceed to the region of sunset, but the entrances both to 
Paradise (Seap") and Purgatory (Belet) are close together. 

The entrance to Purgatory is called Sunset (" Met-kat ok blis"). Purgatory 
itself is a vast cavern, shut in by rocks, in the mountain-chain (" Huya ") '^ which 
forms the world's end. Good souls pass these ramparts of rock and reach the 
other side of the world, where they dwell with the Chinoi, the servants of Kari. 
The ruler of Purgatory is one Kamoj (a black, gigantic, and frightful form), who 
beats wicked souls as they wander, cold, hungry, and thirsty, with a heavy 
club.-* 

The door-keeper of Paradise is a spirit resembling a gigantic Semang. His 
duty is to prevent the souls belonging to other races of mankind from entering 
into the Semang Paradise. 

By his side stand Kangkung, a beast of immense strength, which keeps watch 
to prevent the entrance of the souls of tigers ; Jelabo, a beast whose duty is to 
keep out the souls of wicked Semang ; and Kangkeng, a beast which keeps out 
the souls of snakes and scorpions. 

In addition to the foregoing are Champa and Chalog, two brother giants, of 
whom Champa is the elder, and who are represented as the guardians of Tuhan's * 
{sic) Paradise called "Tasig. " 

These two are armed with bamboo-spears, and keep watch over the "light- 
ning-hiding" (blitzbergende/i) flowers which belong to Kari.^ 

The Semang Deities. 

Although I had many conversations with the 
Semang (both Western and Eastern) on the subject 
of religion, they continually pretended entire ignor- 
ance of any supreme Being, until one day when one 
of them exclaimed (in an unusually confiding mood) 
" Now we will really tell you all we know," and im- 
mediately proceeded to inform me about Ta' Ponn 
(" Gaffer Ponn "), a very powerful yet benevolent 

1 Probably a slip on the part of the * Tuhan is usually the name given 

speaker for "a month of day and two to the god of the Sakai (V.-St.). 
months of night." ° Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 122-124. 

- Huya is Vaughan-Stevens"s way All these guardians of Paradise are 

of writing " Hwea' " or " Hweya' " represented on one of the bamboos 

= the Rainbow-snake, i].v. called "gu," for description of which 

3 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 117. see " Decorative Art " (vol. i.). 

VOL. H P 

2IO NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part lU 

Being who was described as the maker of the world. 
This information was accompanied by the statement 
that Gaffer Ponn was " Hke a Malay Raja ; there was 
nobody above him." In addition to this, I was in- 
formed that he was the moon's husband, and lived in 
the eastern heavens, together with " Ag-ag," the Crow, 
who was the *' husband of the sun." " Ta Ponn " (said 
my informants) looks "just like a man," but is "as 
white as cotton" (Mai. " kapas "). 

" Ta Ponn has four children, two male and two 
female, whose names are Rayadd and Harau (male) ; 
Rahh-rahh and Brua' (female).^ When you hear the 
noise of the Riang-riang (cicada or ' Knife-grinder 
insect ') in the jungle, that is the voice of Ta' Ponn's 
children. Ta' Ponn's mother is called Yak (Ya') 
Takell. She is the old Earth-mother, and lives under- 
ground in the middle of the earth." According to the 
account of another informant, Ta' Ponn's father was 
one Kuka', about whom, however, I could find out 
nothing further. 

Ta' Ponn has, moreover, a great enemy named 
Kakuh, who is very dangerous and who lives in the 
West." He (I was assured) is " very black, blacker 
than we are," — as black, in fact, " as a charred fire-log." 
" That is why the east is bright and the west dark." 
The heavens are in three tiers, the highest being 
called Kakuh. In the heaven where he lives, there 
is (according to a Pangan of Teliang) a giant coconut- 
monkey " (B'ro'), " as big as Gunong Baling " ( = Tiger 
Peak, a big limestone hill in the neighbourhood of 

^ Probably different kinds of insects here between the name of Ta' Ponn's 

(cicada, etc.). adversary and the place where he lived. 

'^ But Kakuh is the name of the •* The coconut ■ monkey (Macaciis 

highest tier (of the heavens), and tietnestriiiiis) appears in the Besisi 

there may have been some confusion Songs (vol. i. p. 152). 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 211 

Siong in Kedah), who drives back any one who is 
found (as the B'lians sometimes are) attempting to 
enter the heavens in order to help themselves to 
the fruit which grows there. This monkey-monster, 
on discovering any such would - be pilferers, pelts 
them with a large prickly jungle -fruit (already 
mentioned), by means of which he hurls them down 
headlong. I was further told of this monkey that 
when the end of the world came, everything on earth 
would fall to his share. 

The account of the Semang religion given by 
Vaughan- Stevens includes, however, not only Ta' 
Ponn (disguised by Vaughan-Stevens as " Tappern "), 
but two superior divinities named Kari (spelt Kiee, = 
Kayee, by Vaughan-Stevens, and Keii by his editors) 
and Pie, neither of whom I was able to identify among 
the Semang of whom I made my inquiries. Neverthe- 
less the fact that one person out of these three (viz. 
Ta Ponn) was so readily identifiable, establishes, to 
my mind, a presumption in favour of the general 
accuracy of the rest of Vaughan-Stevens's account of 
the Semang religion. At the same time, the frag- 
ments of Semang religious belief that I was able to 
rescue, in spite of all difficulties, exhibit such in- 
teresting variations from the accounts related to 
Vaughan-Stevens, that it is evident that a rich mine 
of information still remains to be worked. 

Legends of the Semang Deities. 
Legend of Kari the Thunder-god. 

"Kari created everything except the earth, which he ordered Pie to complete 
for him. When, therefore, Pie had created man, Kari gave them souls." . . . 

When Kari {sic) had created men, they were very good. Death was not yet 
established, and the Semang living on fruits prospered and soon got numerous. 
But Kari saw they were getting too numerous, and came down to the Jelmol 
Mountains to look nearer, and consider what was to be done. The Semang 

212 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

crossing the mountain did not see him, for none can see him, and ran over his 
foot like ants. He blew them away, but his Breath was fiery and burnt them all 
up throughout the neighbourhood. Seeing this, he ordered his Breath to collect 
and conduct their souls to heaven. He then continued his meditations, and seeing 
their numbers were still too great, he commissioned his Breath to go and kill more 
Semangs whenever they again became too numerous. Kari's Breath had now 
separated into the winds, and these were to be watched by Kari's two servants, 
Sentiu and his wife Chini, with Ta' Bonn (" Tappern "), and Minang ("Min- 
nung "). Sentiu now begged that his own servant, or the latter's wife, should alone 
remain active on earth, and kill only a few Semang ; for if he himself and his wife 
did so, none would be left. Kari, however, refused this, and Sentiu himself 
remained with his wife, and they killed all they could reach, Kari being wroth 
at the disobedience of mankind. So the race dwindled away. For Kari had sent 
the wicked souls to the infernal regions (Belel), and had created Diseases to destroy 
them in his wrath. Pie, however, pitied them, and, having come to an agreement 
with their chiefs (Puttos), got Kari to turn these winds into lightning (Kelos), 
and stopped them from slaughtering the Semang, except in special cases when 
Kari's wrath was provoked. When Kari sends them now, they kill the 
Semang in a body, but the death -messengers only kill certain individuals by 
Kari's command. Pie also arranged with Kari in what cases souls should be 
sent to Paradise (Seap") or to the infernal regions (Belet), whence arose the 
system of burial bamboos. Pie himself (and in his stead the Putto of the 
district) was to write his decision upon the burial bamboo to be shown to Kari, 
by whom it was executed. Pie also got power given him to avert Diseases by 
charms. These were good against every Disease, so long as the sin which 
provoked the Disease was unintentional, or had been forgiven by the Putto. 
Pie had taken, as already related, the flowers growing near Karih's dwelling and 
planted them on the mountains (Jelmol), and assigned them as remedies for the 
various Diseases. He also brought the drawings of each flower, and instructed 
the Putto about its use. He also agreed with Kari that his Breath should be 
substituted for Kari's (since it was less fatal), and should only kill individuals. 

Thereafter when the winds waited for the burial bamboo to be given to the 
deceased (before which time the soul could not leave the body), they laid the 
Diseases on a parasite on one of the trees, because its roots did not enter the 
ground, and the Diseases waited there until the soul was ready to go to Kari. 
Pie also created a wind which sat on the mistletoe, and told Pie all tliat passed. ^ 

Now that Pie no longer dwells upon earth, this wind goes, according to the 
opinion of the Semang, who are not, however, unanimous about it, either to 
Kari or perhaps direct to Pie. When Pie had thus apportioned the Diseases, 
the vegetable kingdom was exhausted. But soon afterwards some very deadly 
Diseases, which had been sleeping whilst Pie had been breathing upon others, 
tried to obtain a resting-place upon various epiphytic plants. The plants, how- 
ever, had all been given away, and that is the reason why to the present day 
smallpox, cholera, and other epidemics, of which the Semang stand in the 
greatest terror, but which are hard to identify from Semang descriptions, have no 
rest, but as soon as they have killed one man, fall straightway upon another 
even before the soul of the first has left the body.- 

Legend of the Firebrand, 

According to the views of the Semang, when Kari selected Belet (in the " Sun- 
set" region) as the abode of the damned, he gave Kamoj a firebrand. This 
brand was burnt in two before Kamoj had nearly had time to arrange Belet as his 

* Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 109, 132, 133. 
2 Ibid. pp. 133, 134. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF PERAK 213 

sphere of action. Therefore Kamoj hung one portion with the charred end down- 
wards before Relet, and kept the other as an emblem of his power and jurisdiction. 
The brand hanging over the entrance stopped the once-entered souls from return- 
ing, the upper uncharred end allowing the souls to come from Kari's judgment- 
seat. Hence a charred stick serves as a protection against Diseases. The Disease 
which caused a man's death was fetched by the winds at Kari's command ; and 
the winds had to accompany the soul and the Disease to Belet, but dared not 
enter, since if they had, they would not have been able to return (for fear of the 
brand). The Puttos then adopted, as eml:)lem of their power, a charred stick 
about six feet long. With this stick they could expel Diseases, and if they could 
not go themselves, would send it by a servant to the sick man, upon whom it was 
laid. But if a Putto wanted to kill a man, he touched him with the unburnt 
end, and all the Diseases near by entered the man's body. If to heal, he 
touched him with the burnt end, and all diseases were driven out of him.^ A 
Semang will still close up a path by suspending a charred stick across it, though 
he himself could not inflict Diseases with it, and only the Putto could — by 
marking his stick in charcoal with his secret sign, which varied with the object 
he had in view. Thence in time were derived the charm-bamboos (Gar's), 
which at first were sticks marked with charcoal, but later sticks which had 
designs incised upon them, into which the charcoal was rubbed. For these finally 
were substituted light and convenient bamboos, which were also available for the 
flowers and herbs appropriate to the charm in question.'-^ The original marks on 
the fire -sticks have disappeared with the Puttos who employed them, but the 
old patterns are revived in the quivers and charm-bamboos, the magic combs of the 
women, and the blowpipe. At the end of the Semang quiver is a spot where 
the skin of the bamboo has been scraped off, and the place blackened with 
charcoal. The end thus marked, which hangs downwards, represents Kamoj's 
fire-stick, and hence serves as a charm against Diseases. If a Semang is unlucky 
in hunting, he stands still, makes a fire, and rubs a little charcoal upon the 
mouthpiece of his blowpipe, and upon the conical butt-ends of his darts. Sick 
persons mark themselves with charcoal where the pain is felt. Formerly this 
was the duty of the Putto, who employed a special sign which always healed.^ 

Legends of Pie. 

Pie and his sister are " the central figures of Semang mythology." 
Kari created everything except the Earth. He told Pie to complete this 
part of his work, and Pie did so ; Pie made men, and Kari gave them souls 
(life), and Pie lived among them with his sister Simei in the Jelmol Mountains 
in Perak. Under Pie and Simei were the Puttos, each of whom ruled a district. 
No one knows who Pie's wife was ; but his sister did the work of one. 
They both resembled the Semang in shape. Simei gave light to the fire-flies, so 
that they might accompany her by night when she visited sick Semang women, 
especially those in travail. In those days the men only awaited the advent of 
her messengers the fire-flies, and then withdrew into the jungle, leaving the place 
free to her and the women. Since Pie and Simei disappeared, the fire-flies keep 
seeking for them among the bushes. They must therefore never be harmed. 
Simei was accompanied by day by a bird called Me-el, apparently a kind of crested 
dove,^ and either she or Pie was always at home when the other was out. 

1 Vaughan-Stevens relates (p. 131) full development of the Semang magic 
that frequently when he was resting designs did not take place until after 
at night in the jungle, one of the old they had had dealings with the Sakai 
Semang people would hang a firebrand {ibid. ). 

near his head, to drive away fevers, ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. pp. 131, 132. 

etc. ■* It was believed that in former days, 

2 Vaughan-Stevens considers that the when Simei was on earth, this bird 

214 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

Kari retained his power of punishing mankind, wherefore Pie, who pitied 
them, went to the land of the Chinoi, the servants of Kari, on the other side of 
the world. These servants had the task of making hanging flower-ornaments, 
and Pie collected all the flowers and planted them near the mountains, and there- 
from evolved the patterns which are now in use as charms against Diseases. 

Simei helped him. She it was who invented the special set of designs which 
serve as charms against the sicknesses peculiar to her sex, and which are copied 
on their combs. 

The Puttos copied the patterns on bamboo, and Pie then deposited them in 
a cave, and turned them to stone, so as to be always ready when wanted. The 
Puttos also prepared another set for each Sna-hut, whose duty it was to see that 
•every man had the proper kind of charm that he required. At the same time the 
Puttos inscribed a set of charm-bamboos with the mythology of the Semang, and 
Pie turned these also to stone ; the Puttos alone knew where they were. 

Of the leaves and blossom of the screw-pine (pandanus) worn on the head as 
a charm against falling trees, the following is related : — 

Pie (in the form of an old man) and Simei would appear when called, and 
after helping, disappear, the former helping the men, the latter women. Pie used 
to ask for fruit and throw away the seeds, which grew up into trees and bore 
fiiiit in a single night. Thus, and thus only, the Semang knew that Pie had 
been present. 

Pie once met a man and woman carrying fruit, and asked for it. The 
woman denied having any, and as usual (when Pie caught a Semang lying) a tree 
fell upon her. As it was falling she shrieked to Pie (not knowing of his presence), 
and he threw some pandanus leaves upon her head, whereupon the tree returned 
to its erect position as soon as it touched them, leaving only an impression on 
the leaves where it fell. Pie subsequently ordered all women to wear leaves, 
thus marked, as charms against falling trees. The Puttos therefore designed 
patterns for various trees which easily fall. These leaves are stuck in the hair- 
combs of the women, but no pattern is used on the pandanus leaves if the wearer 
feels innocent, unless a twig falls on her head, when it is at once added. 

Pie often appeared as a Semang, but with long thick bushy hair covering 
his body. Some say he returned to Kari with Simei, others that he sleeps 
in the Jelmol Mountains, and will yet return. ^ 

To the foregoing may be added (from various 
portions of Vaughan-Stevens's account) the following 
allusions to the history of Pie : — 

Like Kari, Pie appears to require blood-sacrifices. Thus in his account of 
the blood-throwing ceremony Vaughan-Stevens says ^ that Pie uses the blood 
(thrown up to the skies to disjiel the thunder) for making the red jungle fruit 
called Rambutan. And a little further on he says that Pie made white fruit of 
the storm charms which the Puttos threw into the air for a like reason. Vaughan- 

could not die, and that when it was they are afraid to do for fear of losing 

killed, and e.g. its head and legs their virility. Formerly if a Semang 

removed, and its body left lying in the man saw one of these birds, he would 

jungle, its mate would come and carry go out of its way, while a woman would 

the body to Simei, who would give it sit down, since it was a sign that Simei 

a new head and legs. These birds was near (Vaughan-Stevens, iii. iia). 

were probably the messengers of Simei. ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 109- 112. 

The Eastern Semang will on no account I'^or Pie's relations with Kari, see the 

kill them, but the half-ljlood Semang account of Kari (supra). 

only stop short of eating them, which - Ilnd. pp. 107-109. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF PERAK 215 

Stevens describes how Pie turned himself into a stick-insect and sal on a twig, 
and when the elephant tried to destroy his plantation of magic flowers, caught it 
by the nose so that it stretched and became a trunk. 1 

A little later he describes how Tie turned himself into a manis (jNIal. 
" tenggiling") to defend the Semang against the elephant, and how his scales 
ran into the elephant's foot and wounded him.- 

Again he describes how Pie was attacked by the tiger and the snake, and 
how he put his foot ujion the snake's hood and told the rhinoceros-bird to drive 
away the tiger. 

In the Legends of Kari we learnt ^ how Pie got the winds (Kari's Breath) 
turned into lightning in order to stop their indiscriminate slaughter of the Semang ; 
how he arranged with Kari the system of burial bambof)s as a means of deciding 
whether souls were to go to Paradise or to the infernal regions ; how he got 
power to avert Diseases by charms ; and how he brought the flowers from Kari's 
dwelling and apportioned them as antidotes to the several Diseases ; and how his 
Breath was substituted for Kari's as being less fatal, and how he created a wind 
to sit on the mistletoe and tell him all that passed. 

The Semang Soul-theory. 

According to the Eastern Semang or Pangan, each 
man has a soul which is shaped exactly like himself, 
which is " red like blood," and as small as a "grain of 
maize." 

According to Vaughan-Stevens, the Semang sup- 
pose that souls are supplied in a variety of ways to the 
young of human beings, tigers, and other noxious and 
harmless wild beasts, night-beasts (as a separate class), 
birds, and fish.^ 

The " Til-til-tapa " and the " Chim iui " need no 
souls; for they are the souls of human beings in the form 
of birds ; when they need life for their eggs they eat of 
fruit of the male or female birth-trees. If one of these 
birds dies a natural death, it is because an unborn 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 137. called "Hlomdon"; they believe an 

- See below, p. 222. infant has no soul, and hang a wax 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 133. puppet up in the forest. As soon as a 

* Evidence is required in support of stick-insect (?) settles on it the sorcerer 

these statements. Cp., however, the wraps it in a cloth ; the insect is shaken 

Malay superstition which connects the out on the child, which then gets its 

Burong Pingai or Pingai bird of the soul. — Missions Catk., 1893, p. 140. 

Malays with the soul ; and our own According to the Guarani (South 

nursery make-believe of child-bringing America) the humming bird brings the 

storks and other animals (Cp. Folklore, souls and takes them back after death. 

xi. 235). The Bahnar have a ceremony — Alencas, 0. Guarani, ii. 321. 

2i6 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

foetus has died. Some say these undeveloped souls 
go into another bird, and the woman who eats it 
becomes the mother of twins, just as if she had eaten 
a bird with its ^g%} 

An expectant mother visits the nearest tree which 
happens to be of the species of her own birth-tree 
and hangs it with fragrant leaves and flowers, or lays 
them beneath it (avoiding the place where, in her own 
tree, the after-birth was buried), " because her child's 
soul (embodied in the bird) will recognise the tree by 
it." The bird which conveys the soul sits on the tree 
and is killed and eaten by the woman. The souls of 
first-born children are young birds newly hatched, the 
offspring of the mother's soul-bird.^ 

Fish -souls com.e from grasses, bird -souls from 
their eating certain fruits. Each species of animal has 
a corresponding soul-plant. The " susu rimau " ^ con- 
tains the soul of an unborn tiger cub. The tiger eats 
it, and thus the soul is conveyed. When the soul- 
bird (human) falls upon one of these fungi the souls 
fight and the child is crippled or dies. But in any 
case the human soul is victorious. 

Souls of beasts noxious to men are conveyed by 
poisonous, and harmless by non - poisonous, fungi. 
Phosphorescent fungi convey souls of night-beasts. 
The idea of the soul-bird, however, is obsolete except 
among the Pangan. The Malays, Siamese, and 
Chinese are thought to have different birds, to 
convey their souls. 

' Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 1 1 6. This (Tjiber Return) of Rumph. (Hei-b. 

can of course only refer to children of Aviboin. vi. ). It is largely used in 

the same sex. ^ Supra, pp. 4-6. native medicine, e.i^. for consumption, 

•' The"tigress-milk"fungus, or"susu and was supposed by the Besisi to wax 

rimau," is the sclerotium or resting- and wane with the moon, so that it 

stage of a fungus, which has been was thought best to gather it when the 

identified by Ridley as l.entinus sp. moon was full. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF PERAK 217 

The new souls sit in a great tree behind Kari's 
seat till he sends them forth. They never return to 
him after death, after they have become human. 
"She has eaten the bird" is the expression used by 
Kelantan Semang of a pregnant woman. The soul- 
bird is not eaten up all at once, but sometimes kept in 
a bamboo called " tahong " (? " tabong ").^ 

The bird which conveys men's souls is the small 
Argus-pheasant (" Til-til-tapa") ; the bird which con- 
veys women's souls is " Chim iui." 

Twins result (as above indicated) from eating the 
soul-bird with an ^%^r They have the same birth- 
tree. 

With the dead was interred the " penitah " or burial 
bamboo, which had to be produced by the soul when it 
came before Kari, on penalty of condemnation.^ Both 
by Semang and Pangan the soul was believed to cross 
over into Paradise by means of a tree-bridge, from 
which the souls of the wicked fell into a boiling lake 
beneath, through fright of a monstrous figure that 
mounted guard over the bridge. A fuller account of 
this, however, has already been given. ^ 

The ideas of the Eastern Semang (Pangan) with 
regard to death and the future life are as follows : — 

There are two Death-spirits, one for men which is called Sentiu, and one for 
women called Chin-ni. Sentiu has a male servant ("hala") called Ta' Ponn 
("Tappern"), and Chin-ni, a female servant called Min-nang. All these are 
invisible spirits. Of their own unaided power they cannot take away life from 
any one, but on their wanderings among the Eastern Semang they see here and 
there persons who in their opinion are fit to be called away from life. In such 
a case either Sentiu or Chin-ni send their servants to the Putto of the 
district, and the latter sends his servant to the Sna-hut, and sets forth eveiything 
that concerns the life of the Semang in question. The answer returns by the 
same road until it reaches Pie, who proceeds to bring the matter before Kari by 
word of mouth. If Kari decides that the man should die, Pie then commissions 
his servant to inform the Death-spirits about it. These latter (Sentiu or Chin-ni, 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 11 2- 114. ^ Ibid. p. 116. 

2 Cp. vol. i. p. 460 ; and vol. ii. p. 93. * P. 208, ante. 

2i8 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

as the case may be) then send forth the "Death-wind" ("Bewa kabis"), which 
blows over the doomed person, causing death. No spells have the power to 
ward oft the Death-spirits, as Diseases may be warded off". On the other hand, 
when Kari is wroth with any one he slays him with a flash of lightning, and not 
through the agency of the Death-spirits.^ 

In Paradise the souls eat fruits alone, and the children's souls are able to 
move about unassisted. All the souls are visible to each other though invisible to 
mortal eyes. They do not change, nor do they marry, but remain for ever in Para- 
dise and never return to earth again. The bodies of the dead do not rise again. 

The souls of innocuous beasts go after death to a place near Paradise which 
is called " Kena-luong " ; but the souls of tigers, snakes, scorpions, etc., go to 
Purgatory (Belet), where they torture and feed upon the souls of the damned. 
According to a different tradition, however, the souls of tigers go after death, 
like the souls of all other beasts, to Kena-luong, which is an immense cavern. 
There they are no longer able to feed upon flesh, but on fruits and plants ; and 
have no power of harming the souls of the harmless beasts that are with them. 
Only, along with snakes and scorpions, they take pleasure in showing themselves 
at an opening of the cave called "Belet, "2 and thus scaring the souls of men. ^ 

Common people were buried in the ground, but Belians (the great chiefs who 
were believed to have the power of turning themselves into tigers), were deposited 
in trees.'* 

Legends and Ideas about Human Beings. 

The Semang say that the first woman, seeing that 
all other animals had children, was desirous of 
having children of her own, but did not know how to 
obtain them. At length she and her husband took to 
carrying a brace of fire-logs under the armpits by way 
of " make-believe." One day the coconut monkey 
(B'ro') noticed what they were doing, and gave them 
advice, as the result of which they obtained two boys 
and two girl children. In the course of time these 
four grew up and had children likewise. One day, 
however, the ring-dove ("tekukor") met them and 
warned them that they had married within the pro- 
hibited degrees of consanguinity. It was, indeed, then 
too late to undo the mischief already done, but the 
ring-dove advised them, nevertheless, to separate and 
marry " other people," in which case (it said) the 

' Vaughan-Steveiis, iii. 117. 

- P'rom this it would appear that Kena-luong and Belet are contiguous. 

•' Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 1 17-118. ' Cp. page 91, ante. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 219 

children of these fresh marriages might intermarry- 
without impropriety. 

Among the Semang vague ideas about a big 
conflagration seem to take the place of the wide- 
spread myth of a big flood. 

Thus, in explanation of the " fuzziness " or " frizzi- 
ness " of their hair, they told me that a very long 
time ago their ancestors were near a clearing in 
the forest together with the ancestors of the Malays. 
But one day some Siamese priests (" Sami ") set fire to 
the clearing (which was overgrown with jungle-grass), 
the result being a conflagration from which both they 
and the Malays escaped with difficulty. The Malays, 
however, were a trifle the quicker in getting away, and 
in the confusion which followed contrived to annex 
both the clothes and the rice-spoons of the Negritos. 
The latter, on the other hand, only succeeded, 
with great difficulty, in saving their blowpipes and 
quivers, and in effecting even this their hair got so 
singed by the fire that it has never since recovered 
from the crisping that it then received.^ 

This same story, with a few variations, is re- 
corded by Vaughan- Stevens,^ who suggests that it 

1 Among themselves I believe they also the Kra and the B'ro' (two kinds of 
really admire a thoroughly woolly head monkey — the afje-kings Hanuman and 
such as not a few of them possess, but Sugriwa of the Indian poem). The 
in meeting people of a higher grade of battle began. " Pram " fastened fire- 
culture, such as the IMalays, they are brands to the tails of the apes, which 
perhaps naturally somewhat ashamed ran over the leaf-roofs of the jungle- 
of it, just as they would be of their men's houses and set them on fire, 
blacker skins. The fire reached the jungle, and 

2 The account given by Vaughan- the jungle-men fled into the forest. 
Stevens (iii. 99), runs as follows : — As, however, they ran through the 
" In ancient times they had straight burning jungle their hair curled, and 
hair and lived in Kampongs. Their remained curly ever afterwards. But 
Rajas were the gigantic Gergasi's. after they had once fled into the 
"Pram" (Siamese, Phra Ram), a depths of the primeval forest they 
Siamese Raja, wished to destroy the never returned to the civilisation which 
Gergasi's, and for this purpose led an they had once possessed. During 
army into Kedah. In this army were their flight the coconut-monkey called 

220 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

may be taken from a Siamese version of the Ramd- 
yana. 

Other Seniang Traditions. 

One of the Semang traditions ^ given to De Morgan was to the effect that an 
officer of the Raja of Johor, named Nakhoda ("Nada") Kassim, exiled by his 
master, and setting sail, arrived after a few days at the mouth of the River Bruas, 
and there landing, proceeded on foot through the jungle till he struck the 
Perak River near Kuala Kangsar. Here he met with a Semang village and 
exchanged presents with the inhabitants, and stayed there for some time. One 
day, however, two little daughters of the Semang chief were quarrelling over a 
stick of sugar-cane, each of them attempting to break it in turn, when another 
child snatched up a knife and severed the sugar-cane, at the same time, however, 
cutting the hand of one of his sisters, at which milk-white blood immediately 
issued from the wound. 

Nakhoda Kassim, who was a spectator of the scene, thereupon demanded the 
sale of the child from the Semang chief, in order that he might make her his 
wife. The chief agreed, but persuaded Nakhoda Kassim to remain with him, 
and in course of time the marriage came off, but for four years they had no chil- 
dren. One day, however, his wife going down to the river to bathe found upon 
the bamboo raft a new-born infant couched in moss. She therefore took the 
child back to her husband, who adopted it and gave it the name of Putri Busu 
('Pouteh Buisseh ! ') 

Now about this time a dog belonging to one Gaffer Long-nose (" To' Hidong "), 
a relation of the Raja of Pahang, took to barking every day at the same hour in 
the direction of the sunset, and one day Gaffer Long-nose let the animal loose 
and followed it. In seven or eight days he reached Yang Yup in Ulu Plus, and 
the dog coming to a clump of bamboos began barking all round it. Gaffer Long- 
nose took his knife and slit up one of the stems, and therein found, to his great 
surprise, a new-born (male) infant, which he at once extracted and took along 
with him on his journey. 

A few days later Gaffer Long-nose met with the Semang, and hearing from 
them of Nakhoda Kassim, went to meet the latter, and showed him the child, 
whom he had named Mouse-deer Hill (' Bukit Pandok.') A few years later 
the two children were married, and Nakhoda Kassim died. Mouse-deer Hill 
having discovered by looking through his father's papers that his father had 
received from the Raja the right to select for his own whatsoever part of the 
country he would, proceeded to Pahang, but finding himself incapable of govern- 
ing it, he went to Johor and requested the Raja to appoint one of his sons in his 
stead. The Raja first sent his two youngest sons, the elder of whom, however, 
slew the younger and then himself at Tanjong Batu. The Raja then sent a god- 
son of his, named Salam Balik, to take charge, but shortly afterwards a son 
being born to Mouse-deer Hill, Salam Balik had the child killed, and a desperate 
conflict ensued with the Semang, who employed poisoned arrows. The struggle 

out angrily, ' Dia lari sarupa Semang.' 255 ; and the account in Livy, as 

They run like Semang." well as the Ramayana. 

Vaughan-Stevens says he could not ' In addition to this legend, which is 

find out what this allusion means. [It is clearly from Malay sources, a very in- 

proVjably a pun on Siamang. — W.S.] coherent account by Vaughan-Stevens 

(V.-St. iii. 99, cj). ii. 99, lOO.) of Semang wanderings is to be found in 

For the firebrand incident, cp. Judges N'aughan-Stevens, iii. 128, 1 29, but is 

XV. 4; Hyde, Vet. Pers. Keligio, p. not worth quoting. 

NEGRITOS OF PERAK 

lasted some years, and Malays from the Nicobars came over to assist the Semang, 
among the latter being Megat Terawis (" Meccah Travcs," sicl)^ who had brought 
with him a wonderful gun, on the bullets of which he wrote his name. Salam 
Balik being wounded by one of those, agreed to make peace, and gave his daughter 
to Megat Terawis in marriage. In course of time Megat Terawis obtained a 
daughter, and Mouse-deer Hill having married again and obtained a .son, the two 
children were wedded, and their offspring became the royal family of Perak.' 

Legends and Beliefs about Animals. 

The elephant, as being one of the largest and 
most important of the animals, is naturally one into 
which the souls of chiefs are believed to migrate 
after death, and has euphemistic and propitiatory 
names by which it is known to the Semang and other 
wild tribesmen. The following story in explanation 
of the strained relations now supposed to exist 
between the elephant and the stick-insect and the 
tapir is told by the Semang : — 

The elephant originally had no trunk and instead four big teeth, and greatly 
harassed the Semang by stealing the fruit out of their back-baskets or dossiers, 
even turning up the flowers that Pie had planted. The Semang therefore 
begged Pie to help them, and he turned himself into a stick-insect and perched 
on a twig, and when the elephant came to feed on the fruit of the tree 
on which he sat, he knocked the elephant's lower teeth out and caught him 
by the nose. At this the elephant naturally drew back, so that his nose got 
stretched and became a trunk. The elephant, however, then begged for mercy, 
so he was allowed to go, but was obliged to keep his trunk by way of a 
reminder. 

The elephant next met the tapir, who could not refrain from expressing his 
surprise at seeing the elephant's altered features, whereat the latter tried to bite 
him as if he still had his teeth, and would have done so but that the tapir slipped 
behind a rock. The elephant caught at the rock and used his tusks like a boar, 
but the tapir said that he would have nothing to do with a "pig." At this the 
elephant stretched out his trunk, caught the tapir by the nose, flung him down 
on" the ground, and said if he met him again on the hills he would tear his head 
off. Since then the tapir has stayed by the river-side, avoiding the elephant that 
lives in the hills. And the elephant has a long trunk, and curved teeth in the 
upper jaw only, and he gets angry whenever he is called a "pig"; and strikes 
every branch that he eats either against a tree or his own foot, in order to drive 
away any chance stick-insect that may have settled on it. If he fails in doing so 
and eats the stick-insect, he goes mad at once and goes to search for the tapir.- 

This story is on the lines of local Malay stories 
in some parts of Kedah and also on the east coast, 

1 De Morgan, i. 59-61. - Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 137. 

222 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

where the stick-insect is called by the curious name 
of "elephant's fish-poison,"^ the east coast Malays 
firmly believing that if an elephant accidentally 
swallows a stick-insect with any leaves that he may 
be eating, he will die as certainly as if he had eaten 
the well-known fish-poison called "tuba." 

On one occasion when I was travelling by elephant 
in Kedah my mahout referred to this story, and in 
order to test it I got him to give the elephant some 
wild ginger leaves (of which the elephants are fond) 
on which a stick-insect was sitting. The elephant 
looked them over, and seeing the stick-insect, promptly 
tossed the leaves aside. 

The story of the breach between the elephant 
and the pangolin or manis is told as follows : — 

The elephant once attacked some Semang sleeping in the jungle, who 
called to Pie for help. Pie turned himself into a manis,- and meeting a pair of 
youno- elephants, rolled himself up and was kicked out of the way by the male. 
The female called to the male to follow, but the male replied, "Wait till I have 
killed this thing." " What thing is that ? " replied the female. " A live stone," 
said the male. " Swine," said the female, "stones are never alive, bring the 
thing here." "I am afraid to do so," said the male. "Swine!" cried the 
female, and the male, losing his temper, seized the manis with his trunk to fling 
it at his wife's head. But Pie rolled himself up and fastened on to his trunk, 
and the elephant trj'ing to shake him off, and failing, trod upon it, so that the 
scales ran into his foot, Pie meanwhile shouting " Kro-o-o-ok." The elephant 
recQc^nisinf' Pie's voice, asked and received mercy, but the elephant since that 
day has a finger at the end of his trunk, and fears the cry of the manis and 
always holds up his trunk when he meets anything likely to hurt him. 

The inland Malays say the elephant cannot endure the manis, and are hard 
to ride when they hear it, and Semang elephant-hunters drive him by imitating 
the cry of the same animal.^ 

The tiger (like the elephant) has many names, 
and is one of the more important animals into which 
the souls of dead chiefs are supposed by the Semang 
to migrate after death. 

Tigers and snakes had always been good friends, and when Pie once drove off 
a tiger which was attacking a man, the tiger henceforth became the enemy of Pie 

1 Mai. "tuba gajah " or elephant's ^ V.-St. iii. 138; cp. p. 293, infra. 

tuba ("■ \.\iha." = Derrts ellipttca). Vaughan-Stevens' editor compares the 

' Mai. " Icnggiling." Kakkala Jataka, B. iii. pp. vi. vii. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF PERAK 223 

and the mistletoe, and tried to destroy the latter. The snake took the part of 
the tiger. But the rhinoceros-bird seized the snake by the nape of the neck and 
flew away with it. Then came Pie, and the bird beginning to speak, the snake 
fell to the ground and I'le put his foot upon its head and ordered the bird to 
drive away the tiger. The broad hood of the snake was produced by Pie's 
treading upon it, and the marks in its neck came from the bird's beak. Hence 
the rhinoceros-bird now kills the snake when he sees it, and makes a great noise 
when he sees a tiger, to drive it away. That is why the feathers of the rhinoceros- 
bird are used for tiger-arrows (as charms) and for those only.i- 

Vaughan-Stevens states that the dead bodies of tigers (as well as of poisonous 
snakes) were sometimes ceremonially treated on animistic principles. The Pangan 
of Kelantan, according to his statement, would formerly deposit a charred stick 
either upon the body or before the jaws (of a dead tiger or snake), and in the 
case of a tiger the stripes would even be touched with charcoal in several places. 
This was to prevent their souls from going near the Semang on their way to 
their own place. ^ On the other hand, tigers were sometimes said to show them- 
selves (with snakes, etc.) to souls in Belet in order to frighten them for their 
wickedness. And yet other accounts declare their souls to be admitted even to 
Paradise, when however they are believed to change their habits and become 
graminivorous, or in some other way to be prevented from attacking their 
natural prey. 

From what I myself heard, I may relate that, accord- 
ing to the Semang, if forest leeches (Sem. " lawai "), 
such as are abundant in the jungle, are picked off 
from the person and burnt in the fire outside the 
shelter, tigers will be sure to scent the burning of the 
blood and will hasten to the spot. 

Another certain way of provoking the aggressive- 
ness of the tiger-folk is to follow after any member of 
the tribe who has started on a shooting expedition in 
the jungle with his blowpipe, no matter whether with 
the object of accompanying or of recalling him. 

Monkeys. 

The coconut monkey is the subject of more than 
one tradition. It is a gigantic coconut monkey, for 
instance, that is one of the guardians of Paradise, 
and it is a coconut monkey too that is represented 
as offering advice to the parents of the race. 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 134. ^ Ibid. p. 132. 

224 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

Snakes. 

Snakes and serpents of various kinds (more 
especially the python and the cobra) have a fairly 
important role to play in the mythology of the 
Negritos. The most important is the python, which 
the Semang connect with some of their ideas about 
nature, e.g. with their theory of eclipses (in which they 
distinguish a python enfolding and seeking to devour 
the sun and the moon), and Ikub Hwea (Vaughan- 
Stevens' " Huya"), the great world-snake of which the 
rainbow is believed to be the visible portion. 

The origin of the cobra's hood and of the cobra's 
quarrel with the rhinoceros-bird has already been 
related in connection with the tiger. The same ideas 
are held about the souls of snakes as are held about 
those of tigers. 

Birds. 

Birds also occupy a somewhat important position 
in the religious life of the Semang, as will be seen in 
the chapter on the soul, though they do not appear 
to be regularly watched for purposes of augury. 
They are, however, believed to convey the souls 
of new - born children, and among the Kelantan 
Negritos a mother who has hope of offspring is 
required to eat this soul-bird ; and the phrase " she 
has eaten the bird " has become tantamount to saying 
" she expects to become a mother." 

The bird which according to some Semang 
versions conveys men's souls is the small Argus- 
pheasant. Besides this, there is the bird which 
conveys women's souls, and the bird Me-el, which 
is the inseparable companion of Simei. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF PERAK 225 

Yet another bird which figures in Semang myth- 
ology is the ring-dove ("tekukor"), which is repre- 
sented as admonishing the first ancestors of mankind. 

Insects. 

Of insects, the stick- insect is perhaps the most 
important from the point of view of Semang folk- 
lore, and the strained relations between the latter 
and the elephant have been set forth above. It is 
called (as by Malays) the Malacca -cane Spirit, but 
the noise attributed to it is probably made by a small 
frog. Fireflies again are connected with the Pie 
traditions (as given above), and the noise made by the 
cicadae is said to be the voice of Ta Ponn's children. 

Beliefs about Trees. 

In accordance with Pie's command, a tree is believed to fall on a Semang who 
tells a lie. The leaves of the screw-pine are employed as a charm against falling 
trees. ^ 

Children's names are derived from trees near the place of birth. The after- 
birth is buried under the birth- or name- tree. The father then cuts notches in it, 
and Kari does the same with the tree on which he leans. ^ 

Any tree can be a name-tree. The family (birth-) tree is taboo ; it is not 
injured, nor is its fruit eaten except by an expectant mother. A woman with 
hope of children among the Eastern Semang (Pangan) used to visit the nearest 
tree belonging to the species of her birth-tree and decorate it with flowers. The 
soul-carrying bird always sits on the same kind of tree.^ 

The birth-tree on which the notches are cut dies soon after the death of its 
owner, but should the tree die first, its death forbodes that its owner will soon die 
also. The tree of a murdered man is believed to fall on the murderer.* 

N.B. — There appears to be some confusion in Vaughan - Stevens' account 
between the name-tree and the birth-tree ; except by chance they cannot be 
identical. 

The soul-bird is said to rest only on trees of the same species as the birth- 
tree, all of which are regarded as identical. 

Magic — The Medicine-man or B' Han. 

Among the Semang by far the most important 
member of the tribe was almost invariably the 
Shaman or Medicine - man (called B'lian).^ These 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 112. * Ibid. p. 117. 

^ V. supra, p. 3. ■'" Sem. " hala." " B'lian " is of 

3 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 1 1 3. Malayan origin. 

VOL. II O 

226 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

B'lians are of course of varying status, but I believe 
that under ordinary circumstances the chiefs of the 
Semang tribes are always B'lians of more or less 
repute, who take (among tribes more or less in 
touch with Malays) the Malay titles of Pelima 
( = Mai. " Penglima") or Pengulu ( = Mai. " Penghulu"). 
The chief of the Kedah Semang (at Siong) was 
called " Pelima," but would not admit that he was a 
B'lian until I had seen him charm the evil spirits 
out of one of the women, when he admitted that 
he knev/ something of the medicine-man's art.^ One 
of the men seen by Mr. Laidlaw and myself on the 
east coast had also the reputation of being a notorious 
B'lian, who had moreover the power of turning him- 
self into a tiger at will. 

The B'lians themselves obey certain prohibitions 
which are not observed by the lay members of the 
tribe. They will not eat goat or buffalo flesh, and 
but rarely (it is said never, but I have seen it) that of 
fowls. I was further informed that the oldest and 
"best" of them, that is to say, in their own words, 
" those who know all the magic of the tribe," receive 
a special form of burial, the body being deposited 
in a rude tree -shelter built among the branches, 
together with a modicum of food and water, a 
jungle - knife, etc. This method of tree - burial is 
believed to enable them to enter into Paradise 
(which is not the Paradise of their lay fellow- 

1 B'lian is naturally a title of respect turned. Thus we read in Newbold 

(as Bomor and Pawang are among the (ii. 416) of the "treacherous" B'lian 

Malays), and as such is occasionally "that watches over the tigers, and 

used by the Malays, the result being which is sujiposed on rainy nights to 

that confusion sometimes arises as to visit the abodes of men, and under pre- 

ils exact meaning. The name B'lian text of asking for fire, to seize and tear 

again may be applied both to the man themintopieceswithitsenormousclaws." 

who can become a tiger and to the In Sarawak the word is always female, 

tiger into which he is believed to have it appears. Cp. p. 149, n. i, ante. 

CHAP. V NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 227 

tribesmen), by flying over the demon that scares the 
latter. They are moreover beHeved to be able to 
proceed, in trances, to the Fruit Paradise and bring 
fruit back with them ; they can drive out devils ; 
they alone know the love- charms which never fail; 
and they are able to slay men at a distance by 
means of their " sendings," which are more feared 
by the Malays than any magic of their own. 

Above all, they can turn themselves into tigers 
during their lifetime, and after death their souls 
not infrequently enter into wild beasts, such as the 
elephant, tiger, and rhinoceros, and there abide until 
their animal embodiment dies, when they duly proceed 
to their own Paradise.^ 

The Were-tiger Ceremony. 

One of the most interesting episodes of the 
Cambridge Expedition in 1899- 1900 was our meet- 
ing, at the little Malay hamlet of Ulu Aring in the 
far interior of the Peninsula, with a B'lian named 
Pandak who possessed a great reputation as a 
dangerous were-tiger. 

The Malays waited for his departure before 
giving me this information, but although I was not 
aware of his reputation at the time, I had fortunately 
asked him a good many questions about B'lians and 
their reputed powers, and he had given me a good deal 
of interesting information. From what he told me 

' Mr. N. W. Thomas writes me that man does not, it is true, take the form 

most probably this common feature of of his maniio, but practically the 

Shamanism first arose from the belief familiar is the matiito of the Shaman, 

that animals are cleverer than men. At all events this power that the B'lian 

The Shaman's magical powers are claims of becoming a tiger seems clearly 

supposed to be due to the aid of the to account for the painting of his face, 

animal, and he takes its form to put on solemn occasions, with the tiger's 

them into practice. The manito (in- stripes, which are supposed to make other 

dividual totem) is another case. The tigers [and men? — W.S.] afraid of him. 

228 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

it appeared that he had (or believed that he had) 
the power of turning himself into a tiger at will, in 
which guise he would feast upon bodies of his victims 
(whether dead or alive), always, however, excepting 
and burying the heads} " When a B'lian wishes to 
become a tiger," said Pandak the B'lian, " he takes 
a handful of incense {i.e. benzoin) and says, ' I am 
going to walk' ('Ye chop'), and sets off into the 
hilly parts of the forest, often two or three valleys 
distant from his shelter of leaves. There he kindles 
the incense, and dipping his right hand into the 
smoke (to collect the fumes in it), he holds it just 
above the level of his right shoulder funnel-wise, 
and blows the smoke through the funnel thus formed. 
This process he repeats a second time in front of the 
left shoulder, and again just in front of his face, — at 
the same time invoking the spirits of the mountains 
to grant his wishes. He then recommences, and 
collecting more smoke in his fist, blows through it as 
before — this time, however, close to the ground. He 
next squats on his haunches and leans forward on his 
hands, turning his head quickly to left and right. 

" Presently " (I tell the tale in his own words) " his 
'skin changes, fur grows, and a tail appears.'^ Thus 
he remains from seven to twelve days, during which 
time he raids the neighbouring cattle-pens till his 
craving is fully appeased, when he returns to the 
spot that he started from, squats down as before, 
and turns himself back by means of saying simply, 
' I am going home ' (' Ye wet '). Throughout the 
period of his absence, however prolonged, his wife, 

' This claim of the Semang medicine- Customs," p. <j^, ante. 
man is evidently the foundation of the ^ According to Mr. H. N. Ridley, 

.itrocious custom attributed by the the tail, in one version of the story, 

Malays to the Udai ; see " IJurial is the first part to appear. 

/'. /'■. Laidlaiv (Skcat Expedition). 
Pandak thk Were-Tigek (u.n Tnii Right). 
(Ulu Kelantaii.) 

Vol. II. /. 22S. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 229 

sitting at home, must keep the fire always burning 
and from time to time burn incense. Otherwise he 
would disappear entirely. On regaining his human 
form, he is usually extremely sick and vomits up 
the still undigested bones that he had swallowed 
in his tiger-shape." It is, I was told, impossible to 
shoot him, as would otherwise be done, in this stage, 
as he invariably disappears before there is time to 
fire a shot. 

Medicine. 

We now come to the subject of medicine and 
exorcism, which latter forms the most important part of 
the Semang medicine-man's ritual. In the estimation 
of the Semang, Diseases are not caused by demons, 
but are demons, and require to be exorcised as such. 

I will therefore describe an actual case in which 
I was by good luck enabled to see one of the Semang 
methods of" casting out devils " from a person believed 
to be possessed. 

One of the women in the Semang encampment at 
Siong in Kedah suffered terribly at times from severe 
pains in the limbs, and one day while I was there she 
was seized with one of her paroxysms, and after much 
weeping and crying suddenly got up and rushed out 
into the jungle at the back of the encampment, shriek- 
ing as she went. The sight was a very distressing one, 
as I could not make out anything for certain from her 
exclamations except the fact that she had great pain 
in her limbs, and as I had come over from the nearest 
Malay village, which was some miles distant, early in 
the morning, and had left my medicine-case behind 
me, I had no means of alleviating the poor woman's 
sufferings. However, when all the Semang in the 

230 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE i-art hi 

encampment had one by one slipped out after her, 
I too followed in order to see whether anything could 
be done for her, or whether she was about to die in 
the jungle, as some of her tribe assured me. On 
reaching the spot I found her sitting down with her 
legs stretched out in front of her, whilst the chief 
(Pelima) was digging away as if for dear life with a 
pointed stick to try and uproot the stump of a sapling 
a few yards away from her back. After a good deal 
of hard work, which caused the perspiration to stand 
out upon him like beads, he succeeded in uprooting 
the stump, and thereupon taking some soil from the 
hole he rubbed it upon her back and stomach. He 
then showed me the identical stump, the stem ot 
which was pinched in — a sure sign, he declared, of the 
late presence of the demon of which it had been the 
embodiment.^ He then dug up a second root, which 
proved to be that of a creeper whose roots had grown 
across each other in a manner suggestive of the man- 
drake ; this too he declared to be the habitation of 
a dangerous demon, and soil taken from the hole from 
which it had been uprooted was rubbed on the woman 
in the same manner as before. By this time his 
patient had commenced to recover, and he informed 
me further that the cleared space where she happened 
to be sitting had been the site of a previous encamp- 
ment, and that he had thus been exorcising these two 
evil spirits from the spot where she used formerly 
to bathe (the inference being that they had attacked 
her while bathing). The roots being extracted, the 
Pelima proceeded to perform the peculiar rite known 

' One of these roots (the stump) gut kli "( = " Beard of the K'li fish''), 
belonged to a sapHng of the " Peng- and the other that of a creeper called 
ling" tree, called by the Malays "jang "awe kembong "( " k. creeper"). 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 231 

to the Malays as " sembor sirih," ^ and to conclude the 
ceremony two of the audience picked up a couple of 
dead and fallen saplings and hurled them forcibly into 
the surrounding jungle, in order (as they explained) 
that the evil spirits might go with them. By this time 
the woman had, strange to say, for the time, at all 
events, perfectly recovered, and in the course of about 
half an hour she was able to walk back to the encamp- 
ment, two males of the party working off their emotion 
by running up a couple of forest trees (placing the 
flat of the foot against the trunk), and shouting for joy. 

On coming away I begged of the Pelima the two 
queer stumps which had given him so much trouble 
to uproot, which are now at Cambridge. 

According to Logan, the Semang not infrequently 
imposed upon the superstitious Malays, when they 
wished to procure a supply of tobacco and had no 
products to barter, by presenting them with medicines 
which they pretended to derive from particular shrubs 
and trees in the woods, and which they represented 
as efficacious for the cure of headache and other com- 
plaints.^ 

I may add that we learn from Vaughan-Stevens 
that charred sticks and the blackening of the feet 
with charcoal were regarded as effective charms 
against disease,^ also that the body is painted for 
magical purposes.^ 

The women also wear combs inscribed with magic patterns against disease.-'' 
The wind-demon is believed to deposit the disease upon the forehead, hence the 
importance of having the charm upon the head. In the huts the combs are not 
worn. 

1 " Sembor sirih." To perform this "^ J. I. A. vol. iv. p. 426. 

rite the Malay medicine -man ejects •* Cp. supra, p. 59. 

chewed betel -leaf accompanied by a * Cp. supra, p. 38. 

charm upon some part of the patient's ^ The Pangan women ot Ulu 

person, which in this case was the Kelantan wear "huchong" leaves 

stomach and small of the back. stuck in their combs as charms. 

232 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

The men had a corresponding set of charm-patterns for their quivers and 
charm-holders, the latter having been substituted, as more convenient, for the 
partly charred sticks originally given by the Putto.^ 

The women also had the " tahong," or birth -bamboo worn for magical 
purposes during pregnancy.^ 

Love-char7ns. 

I now come to the famous love-charm of the wild 
tribes which is called " Chinduai," and appears to be 
very widely if not universally known to them, though 
its actual origin is quite uncertain. 

The Chinduai is said by the Semang to be the 
name of an exceedingly small and rare plant, a few 
inches only in height, and possessing a very small 
white blossom of extraordinarily powerful fragrance. 

When the plant is met with it is pulled up by the 
root (and burnt ?), and a few drops of oil are dropped 
upon it, after which a little of the oil from the plant is 
smeared upon the forehead and breast, and the follow- 
ing mystical formula repeated : — 

En-en Bonn, 
Ta-ta' noi, 
Nai ka-bleb, 
Chuang boi, 
Chepoi dooi, 
Tug-tug loi. 

I spent a good many hours in endeavouring to dis- 
cover the exact meaning of the words, with, however, 
only partial success. It may therefore serve as a 
problem to be worked out at leisure by those who 
enjoy such linguistic enigmas. It is only fair, how- 
ever, to say that I doubt whether it is in the ordinary 
Semang dialect. The Siong people told me that they 
themselves could not explain it properly, because the 
language of their charms was harder to understand 
than what they usually spoke. It quite possibly 

1 See vol. i. p. 437. - Vol. i. pp. 458, 459. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 233 

belongs (as do so many charms in Malay and most 
other languages) to a more archaic dialect. 
A tentative version runs as follows : — 

Look, look, comrade ! 
As this oil drips, 
Alone by yourself 
Approach towards me, 
(And) yearn towards me 
(As this) oil spreads upwards. 

Sendings or " Pointings T 

The following information concerning the bamboo 
sendings or rather "pointings" (" tuju ") used by 
the B'lians of their tribe was furnished me by the 
Semang themselves. 

The ordinary "tuju" is a mere slip or sliver of 
bamboo about two inches long. This is laid upon the 
right palm, and commanded to go and kill its intended 
victim. It thereupon flies through the air, and on 
reaching its victim pierces him to the heart. ^ The 
" tuju " with the nick in it was (they told me) far the 
more deadly than the one without, as on reaching its 
victim it would " twist itself round his heart-strings." 

One form of the ceremony is as follows : — Wax 
from a deserted bees'-comb is taken and fashioned 
roughly into a taper. This taper is lighted, and a 
little incense burnt. The sliver (" tuju ") is then 
commanded to proceed directly, turning neither to the 
right hand nor to the left until it reaches its destined 
victim. 

When I asked some members of the tribes at how 

^ The nicked " tuju " may very arrows of the combatants are repre- 

probably, I am inclined to believe, sented as a kind of small serpents or 

represent a degenerated bamboo arrow, dragons which did not require to be 

the nick still carrying on the tradition shot with the bow, but flew of their 

of the barbs. It must be remembered own accord to the mark, directed 

that in the version of the Ramayana, as merely by the magic power, or will, 

modified by Malay shadow-players, the of those who owned them. 

234 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

great a distance one of these sendings could be ex- 
pected to take effect, I was told "as far as from 
here (Siong) to Ulu Selama," a distance of probably 
two days' journey across country. 

The Malays especially fear the power of these 
" pointings," which are, they believe, almost invariably 
fatal. 

II. — Sakai. 

The beliefs of the Sakai, whether concerning 
celestial or terrestrial phenomena, have been very 
imperfectly described, and the scanty details that have 
been collected on this subject, except perhaps for the 
materials collected by Luering, are in no way charac- 
teristic, though they appear, so far as they go, to be 
very similar to those of the Semang. 

Sakai Legend of Early Man — Origin of the Blowpipe Patterns. 

Originally man and beast lived on fruits alone, and every tree and plant (even 
rattan and bamboo) bore sweet and wholesome fruit. Demons ("Hantu"), 
however, dwelt in all of them, and hence men, whenever they desired to fell a 
tree, used to knock upon its trunk to warn the Demons to leave it. The land, 
however, was full of apes, who used to break off twigs at random through mere 
wantonness and thus incurred the wrath of the Demons ; so that many trees took 
to bearing seeds only, or protected their fruit by means of hard or prickly shells ; or 
else bore but sour or noxious fruits. Then famine commenced, and Tuhan^ ordered 
the people to slay wild beasts also for food, and taught them the use of the 
blowpipe. Whereupon certain trees and plants offered to make their sap 
poisonous and lend it to man, so that they might be revenged upon the apes. 
The bamboo Demons, however, soon became wroth with man as well, because so 
many stems of bamboo were used, and entering the blowpipes either diverted 
the darts, or licked off the dart -poison to spoil their shooting. Then they 
applied once again to Tuhan for help, and Tuhan grasping in his red-hot hands a 
clump of "Seven Bamboos" (into which the Demons had crept), forthwith 
turned the Demons themselves into stone. 

The Batin,''^ who had fallen asleep, now awoke, and Tuhan (seeing the 
Demons in his Ijlowpipe stretching out their necks) called to him and told him 
to put the Demons into the fire by means of a long rattan (cane). So did the 
Batin, and so did they all, and thus many demons were killed. 

After that Tuhan had annihilated the Demons, he observed, on his way, that 
the Batin and his people were suffering greatly from hunger and thirst. Therefore 
he touched the ground where the .Seven Bamboos had been growing, until there 
shot up a number of fresh young bamboo sprouts, such as are willingly eaten by 

' Tuhaa is of Malay or Malayan to southern (probably Jakun) influence, 
origin. The title of Ijatin, too, points ^ SeeVaughan-Slevens, iii. 128, 129. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 235 

the Sakai, and indeed by all native races of the Peninsula — as well as full-grown 
bamboos, which contained water. Thus all the chiefs obtained enough to eat, 
and lienceforth they cooked the sprouts of bamboo in the internodes of the full- 
grown stems themselves. And since the thorns of the rattan had scratched the 
interior of the tube, each headman gave his own tribe the marks which had 
appeared on his own bamboo, as a magic design to protect them against the 
Demons, and hence each clan derived its own so-called " pichod "-mark. 

Then each of the headmen made a quiver for himself out of one of the 
internodes of the Seven-fold Bamboo, and out of the abnornal growth, by 
drilling a hole through it, a buckle for his own girdle, in which he carried the 
quiver. Later, people took to burning into their quivers patterns representing 
the various marks that had been left by Tuhan's red-hot hands upon each separate 
part of the bamboos, no two tribes selecting exactly the same pattern, since each 
demon was most easily quelled by the particular design which had slain his own 
relative. 

And when Tuhan had given them a complete series of charm-patterns, each 
tribe followed the graining (" Baris hidup ") of the node which fell to its chief. 

This is the reason that the "Orang Sakai" are fond of ape's flesh.' 

World-beliefs. 

The Sakai of Ulu Bertang say that Rahu is a 
monster which appears to resemble a dragon, since it 
" swallows like a serpent." It is seen to crawl across the 
heavens, and its colour is at once both green and black 
(" bla-ur bl-ak "). The moon sees Rahu approach 
and becomes very red (" rengan "), perhaps from fear. 
To help the moon, people strike drums and bamboos 
(" awad ") together, and scream out to frighten Rahu. 
This is what they shout and sing : 

The moon has been eclipsed by Rahu, 

We call out to the moon, we call out to Rahu, 

O Rahu, let loose my moon, oh ! - 

" Then the moon is let loose (' berhol ') by the 
monster, and we are all glad, for if the moon were 
not it would be very dark. We do the same when 
Rahu tries to swallow the sun." 

World-legends — " I\lang B'lok'' the World-eagle. 
On the east side of Gunong Renduai, in Ulu 
Bertang, in the Kinta district of Perak (near Sungei 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 128, 129. Ha chngru gicha, chngru Rahu, 

2 Ya kilip gicha ya Rahu, O Rahu berhSl gicha eng, oi ! 

236 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

Siput), the low-lying reaches of which are now known 
as S. Batu Putih, or "White Rock River," there is a 
hollow ("gugup") in a steep and inaccessible wall of 
limestone, at about half its height. This is the nest 
of the " K'lang B'lok," a giant eagle, which at one time 
nearly succeeded in destroying all human beings.' 
Only two persons had managed to escape, both the 
youngest members of their respective families, a boy 
called Ba-lut {i.e. " youngest son "), and a girl called 
Wa-lut {i.e. " youngest daughter "). These two owed 
their safety hitherto to the possession of a magic 
knife (called "jehud paung "). When they found 
that they had alone escaped with their lives, the 
youth approached the maiden saying, " Marry me ? " ^ 
The girl replied, "All right! if you will cause the 
K'lang B'lok to die, I will be your wife." The boy 
replied, " I will kill the K'lang B'lok.'" After saying 
this he climbed to the cave and waited for the return 
of the giant bird. It was then about noon, but 
suddenly the sky became dark, and the sun dis- 
appeared behind the wings of the bird, the rustling 
of which was like the sound of thunder (" 'ngkuh "). 
Ba-lut then stretched out his right arm with the magic 
knife, which proved to be so sharp that in its flight 
the approaching bird cut its own neck against it and 
died. Then Ba-lut married Wa-lut, and they two 
became the ancestors of all the people now living in 
this world. 

To this Dr. Luering of Perak, who sends me the 
foregoing tale, adds that he was informed, not by the 

' " Mai lik gi-chii" (Mai. " manusia " K'lang " may bean archaic form of 

haljis di-makan "). Mai. " helang " = "kite," "hawk," 

^ "Guy ru eng"="]ive (///. sit) "fish -eagle." Cp. Vocabulary, H 

with me." 54; " Balog " (in Kedah Semang) = 

^ "liuli eng pcrdat K'lang B'lok." "stone." 

SAKAI OF PERAK zyj 

teller of this story but by a third person, that there 
could be no doubt that the cave which was pointed 
out to Dr. Luering himself was really the nest of the 
K'lang B'lok, because many years ago, no one knows 
how many, a man succeeded in climbing up to it, and 
there he saw two very large eggs of the K'lang B'lok, 
which, however, had been turned into stone, and 
could not therefore be hatched. " Oh, if they ever 
were hatched, this world would come to an end, and 
we should all be eaten up. No one can withstand 
the might of K'lang B'lok." This was the exclama- 
tion made by Siamat, the man who recounted the 
story, when asked whether he had ever heard of the 
eggs of the K'lang B'lok having been seen. The 
cave can only be reached by rope-ladders. 

Another bird connected with Sakai beliefs by Dr. 
Luering is the Coucal (" but-but " = Mai. " bubut "), 
which has the power of healing the broken legs of its 
young ones. People go and find the nest, if they 
have good luck, for one may search for a lifetime and 
never find it. When the bird has young, if you break 
the leg of one of them, its cries will attract the 
mother, who will come and see what is the matter, 
and when she has found it out she will fly into the 
jungle to find the plant called " akar temu urat," or 
"creeper with the meeting leaf-ribs," which she will 
rub upon the injured limb. Next morning if one 
returns to the nest it will be found that the young 
bird is quite well again. This medicine has some- 
times been obtained by frightening the mother-bird so 
that she drops the plant, but the Sakai know how to 
find it in the jungle, and some Malays also know the 
plant. ^ To prepare it for use you have but to steep it 

' Cp. p. 157, ante. 

238 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

in oil, and rub it upon the affected part, when it will 
join even broken bones and heal all manner of 
wounds. Dr. Luering's authority said that he was 
shown the plant some years ago, but unfortunately 
had never found it since, and his informant had died, 
but he remembered distinctly that his informant broke 
the growing plant about two inches from the ground, 
and joining the broken pieces again, tied them with 
a string. The next morning the two pieces had 
again grown together, so that there was no sign of 
them ever having been broken. It was also im- 
possible to break them at the former place, though 
they could still be broken elsewhere. Seeing this 
was believing. 

To return, the Sakai are said to indulge in a 
ceremonial exorcism of the spirits of thunder, during 
the prevalence of which they go out of their houses 
and brandish their poles and arms, to frighten away 
the evil spirits.^ 

The forces of nature are thought to possess the 
souls of certain evil spirits or demons, which cause 
them to harm people. The forces themselves are not 
demons. The harm which is sometimes caused by 
wind and lightning is the work of demons. If a 
demon is banished by a powerful charm, he dare not 
in such a case cause (for instance) the lightning to 
deviate from its destined goal, e.g. to set the jungle 
on fire, in order to do harm of another kind by striking 
a man. The winds are believed to be seven in number, 
each one lying above the other ; seven, like three, 
being a mystic number to the Sakai. The whirlwind 
— a product of several meeting winds (called " Angin 
Puting B'liong ") — is cone-shaped like the haft of an 

1 J. I. A. vol. iv. p. 430. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 239 

adze ( = Mai. " puting "). This name is said to be 
taken from the cone-like shape assumed by leaves 
when they are being rolled up by the wind in question.^ 

The earth, moreover, is regarded as a thin, flat 
crust floating upon a nether ocean. The heavens 
consist of several layers or tiers, the lowest of 
which may probably be identified with the traditional 
region of " Kelonsong Awan " (lit. " Husks, or Shards, 
of the Clouds"), beyond which lies the Sakai Island of 
Fruit-trees.^ 

The inhabitants of the upper heavens consist of 
Tuhan or Peng,^ the "god" of the Sakai, and a 
giantess named " Granny Long-breasts " ('* Gendui 
Lanyut "), whose task of washing human souls will 
be described more fully in the succeeding section. 
Both men and women go to this Paradise, but children, 
instead of undergoing the ordeal, are allowed to go 
and play in a place called " Noon,"* which lies under- 
neath the aforesaid " Cloud-husks." 

Sakai Soul-theories. 

About the appearance and attributes of the soul as 
conceived by the Sakai, we have at present no in- 
formation whatever. 

After death, however, the Sakai say that " Granny 
Lanyut" or "Long-breasts" ("Genowie Lanyoot"),the 
Queen of Hell, washes their sin-blackened souls in hot 
water.^ All men's souls must be purified,*^ and after 
death they proceed to Neraka (the Infernal Regions), 

1 No. It is really from the Malay ^ Perhaps to be identified with the 

word for water-spout (from its conical Semang Ponn, q.v. 

form). The passage may perhaps refer * The original has " Tingha Howi," 

to " B'landas " beliefs, at least to some which I take probably to = Mai. 

of Malayan origin. — Vaughan-Stevens, " Tengah Hari," i.e. "Noon." 

ii. 148, 149. '" Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 130. 

- Ibid. These too are Malayan beliefs. ^ Ibid. This is also Malayan. 

240 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part ni 

where they come before the aforesaid personage, who is 
described as a giantess with pendulous breasts, which 
she throws over her shoulders. Elsewhere she is 
described as sitting in the usual posture of a Sakai 
woman, sideways, with the feet drawn up to the left, 
and with her hands resting on her knees, except when 
she was engaged in washing the souls. She makes 
the souls (after their purification) walk along the 
horizontal edge of a monstrous chopper, which hangs 
with point turned away from her over a big vessel, 
to the middle of which it nearly reaches. The 
water in this vessel is kept at boiling point. Granny 
Lanyut herself stoking the fire. A block of wood 
(" tras lepong " ?) juts out from the opposite side of the 
copper so as nearly to meet the point of the blade, 
and the souls have to spring across the intervening 
gap. Bad souls fall in, good ones escape, the latter 
proceeding along the block of wood in the direction 
of the Island of Fruit-trees. Here they wait till 
Tuhan sends them a friend of the same sex to show 
them the way to the " Husks of the Clouds." 

If they have no friend, they must wait for the 
arrival of another soul who has a friend there. Upon 
this journey the two sexes are separated, and none 
but adults are allowed to proceed ; all children (" with- 
out limit of age or sex ") stay with Tuhan instead of 
proceeding to Granny Lanyut. When eventually they 
go to the place called "Noon" (?) they spend their 
time in play, and (like their elders) do not require to 
eat. 

The souls that fall in are fished out by Granny 
Lanyut as soon as they are clean enough, when they 
are rubbed, and set upon the block of timber. 

If they then require further purification, they are 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {'BLAND AS') 241 

thrown in a second time, and if necessary a third 
time, and so on up to seven times, when if they still 
remain black, they are cast out by Granny Lanyut to 
wander on earth again as demons (of the kind most 
appropriate to the sins they have committed).^ Two 
such "lost-soul" demons are the Degup Demon and 
Grave Demon, to both of which we shall presently 
revert. 

The Sakai Deity. 

Tuhan, the Sakai (" Blandas ") god, and Kari, the 
Semang Thunder-god, are (says Vaughan-Stevens, 
without, however, giving any proof) quite different 
persons. 

About Tuhan we are unfortunately told very little. 
We gather, however, that he is the supreme judge of 
the souls of men, who are sent before him by Granny 
Lanyut, and that the demons are the agents of 
his punishments. And elsewhere we are told that 
whenever the Sakai have done wrong, Tuhan gives 
the demons leave to attack them,^ and that against 
his decree there is no contending.^ He is not prayed 
to, as his will is unalterable. 

The name of the chief spirit or god of the Sakai 
is, however, in other places given by Vaughan- 
Stevens as Peng ; e.g. in that writer's account of the 
" tuang-tuang " ceremony,* where Peng's power over 
the demons is described. 

Spirits and Demons. 
Of Sakai demons (" Nyani ") in general we learn 
from Vaughan-Stevens that there are both male and 
female demons, but that there is no intercourse between 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 131. " Peng " is uncorroborated. 

- Ibid. Note that the name at least ^ Ibid. p. 132. 

of "Tuhan" is Malay. The name of * Z.f.E. xxvi. 163. 

VOL. II R 

242 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

them, and consequently no propagation of the species. 
They prefer, nevertheless, to live in pairs like human 
beings. Peng (or " Allah ") is able to annihilate 
them, and can also increase their numbers, but 
nobody (else) can kill them. The magician alone is 
in a position to keep them at a distance, when they 
want to inflict injury upon any one, and that only if 
Peng himself has no reason for permitting them to 
cause it, as otherwise the power of the magician is 
ineffectual. We are also told that demons, especially 
the male ones, are not afraid of women ; and that at 
the " tuang-tuang " ceremony they enter the ring from 
above and pass out of it through the ground.^ 

Of other spirits and demons Vaughan-Stevens 
gives the following information : — 

The demons into which the souls that cannot be 
purified are changed vary from those which are 
merely shut out of the " Cloud-Husks" to the Hantu 
Degup or Ghost Demon, which suffers from cold, 
thirst, and hunger. 

The Sakai think (as has been already mentioned) 
that they must have done something wrong before any 
demon (with the exception of the Degup Demon) gets 
permission from Tuhan to attack them. In any case, 
however, they consider that all demons should be 
avoided "like the tiger," and when sick (though not 
when dying) they seek to frighten them away (or 
oppose them by means of spells), just as if they were 
human beings." 

1 Z.J'.E. xxvi. 163. idea of prayer is quite foreign to the 

2 Hence when Vaughan - Stevens Orang Ilutan" is due to a similar em- 
declares (ii. 132) that there is no trace ployment of popular phraseology. See 
of i\v.mon - worship, he is evidently J. 1. A. vol. iv. p. 430. — "The Sakai 
using the word "worship" in its deprecate the Nyani or superior spirits, 
narrow (and popular) sense. So too and the Pateh or inferior ones, which 
on pp. 135, 136, his remark that "the are male and female." 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {'BLANDAS') 243 

There are four chiefs of the world of demons, 
viz.: a Batin, Jinang, Jurukrah, and Penglima.^ 

The symptoms of a man killed by the Degup 
Demon resemble those caused by snake-bite in the 
foot. Men can easily escape from a demon by running, 
because both its feet are reversed. If, however, they 
are overtaken, the demon shakes them and they soon 
fall dead. All deaths by demons are permitted by 
Tuhan, who decides how long each man ought to live. 

The Degup Demon. 

The Degup Demon is a lost, but immortal soul, 
which being so spotted that Granny Lanyut is unable 
to purify it even after seven times bathing it in 
boiling water, has been expelled by her from hell, and 
is undergoing punishment on earth for its sins. It is 
visible, and always slays ^ all whom it meets, without, 
however, causing them pain. It cannot go far from 
the spot where its body is buried, but seeks for 
warmth and comfort in the vicinity of the grave. 
Even, however, when it finds what it seeks, it derives 
no benefit. " Unbearably tormented, it seeks relief 
and finds none, except on the grave, and when it fails 
to find the latter (the grave) it may be heard at night 
shrieking " Gup ! gup ! gup ! " (Vaughan - Stevens 
declared that he had often heard it, by night only, 
but attributed the cry to a small owl or gecko.) 
When it finds the grave, it cowers down upon it, tak- 
ing the form of an old man or woman whose feet are 
turned backwards (as is the case with other demons).^ 

^ Vaughan - Stevens, ii. 134. A soever it met, it might only frighten them, 

proof of Malayan influence. •* In his account of the "tuang-tuang" 

2 Yet (pp. 133, 134) v. -St. says that ceremony, after stating that the soul of 

though (unlike other demons) it had a magician could not be damned, whilst 

power from Granny Lanyut to kill whom- that of a Batin could, Vaughan-Stevens 

244 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

The Sakai will leave any place at once where even a 
single evil-doer dies, the whole tribe moving on and 
rebuilding their village, and never returning to the 
deserted site. The number of deaths, however, does 
not matter if the deaths may be attributed to other 
causes (than the Hantu Degup), nor if all the deceased 
bore good reputations. Hence the Sakai avoid Malays, 
who always have (with them) a bad reputation, 
although they maintain that dead Malays go to a 
different place. 

The Grave Demon. 

Of the Hantu Kubur (or Grave Demon) Vaughan- 
Stevens says ^ that the use of the anchak ("anchap"), 
or sacrificial tray, which is suspended over Sakai 
graves, is to receive food and water destined for the 
Grave Demon. ^ It is again for the Grave Demon 
that the fire on the grave is lit. The soul (Mai. 
" semangat ") of the deceased has already gone to the 
nether regions (" Neraka"), but his wicked deeds con- 
tinue to wander about near the grave in the form of a 
grave demon in order to find some human embodi- 
ment into which they can enter. A good man gives 
them, no opportunity, but a bad one allows them to 
enter, and becomes worse in consequence. If the 
Grave Demon finds no such new place of abode, it 

continues as follows : — " If the soul of ment (since as a Batin he was accustomed 

a Batin was damned, the punishment to having food brought to him). But 

consisted in this, that his soul was ordinary people fled before him, and 

turned away by Granny Lanyut as the magician, whenever he came upon 

unwashable, and returned to the earth him, struck at him with his fearful 

as a (jhost Demon or Hantu Degup. stick : the stick with the triple tiger's 

Anhungered, he saw an abundance of claw-like growth, from the stem of a 

fruits on every side ; thirsty, he saw kind of rattan, which the Malays call 

water everywhere, yet could not reach Dahan, and which inflicts exceedingly 

it either, so that his soul wandered painful wounds" [Z.f. E. xxvi. 148). 
about continually in order to find ' Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 141. 

somebody who would bring it nourish- - Cp. supra, p. 98. 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {' BLANDAS') 245 

must return to the grave in three days' time. 
The use of the fire is to show it the way. If 
after the three days it finds no new home, it sits by 
the fire at night, eating and drinking the contents of 
the " anchak " or tray, and sleeping throughout the day- 
time, and having continued in this state for seven 
days, it dies outright and vanishes for ever. Hence 
after seven days no more food is put in the tray. 
While it is alive and being fed it is harmless, and 
does no harm to the survivors, who visit the grave 
either to bring it food or to attend to the fire. As the 
Grave Demon is invisible, no one can tell whether 
the deceased left behind him a Grave Demon or 
not. Therefore the fire is lit and the food offered 
on behalf of all the members of the tribe, both big 
and little.^ 

Deinons of the Atmosphere. 

In Vaughan- Stevens' class of invisible demons 
there are many kinds of demons of the atmosphere 
which work through the agency of rain, heat, moun- 
tains, lakes, stones, and trees. These are, however, 
not very dangerous, and seldom kill. 

The Demon Huntsman (Hantu Seburu) is a lost 
soul that has been excluded from the " Cloud-Husks " 
(" Kelonsong Awan "), and sent back to earth by 
Granny Lanyut. Like the " Lofty Demon," it re- 
sembles a jungle-man, and disappears from sight the 
moment it is seen. It is never far from water, and 
is sometimes swallowed in drinking and thus intro- 
duced into the blood. It also resembles the Baunan 
Demon, except in form, which in the case of the 
latter is that of a huge black human figure. 

1 Vaughan-S levens, ii. 141. Cp. ib. 83 «., for a " Hantu " with " vampire " 
proclivities. 

246 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

The Mati Anak (or Stillborn-child Demon) has 
two forms, that of a frog and that of a bird. Like the 
other three demons, it is a soul expelled from Paradise 
by Granny Lanyut, and resembles such souls in all 
other respects. 

The Jemoi Demon resembles a black dog, which 
disappears as soon as it is met with. It is seen in 
bushes after a long day's journey, and seems a sort of 
personification of fatigue, the sight of it bringing 
great bodily prostration, and the legs of the victim 
swelling up until he is unable to move from the 
spot. In other respects it resembles the foregoing.^ 

There are also many tree-spirits which belong to 
the class of invisible spirits, but are not very dangerous, 
and seldom kill." Also the crop-spirits belonging to 
the same class, chief of which is the Hantu Juling or 
Squinting Demon, which is exorcised with so much 
care at the harvesting of the rice.^ 

Before leaving the subject of demons, reference 
should be made to the Sakai custom of hanging up 
the jaws of apes (that have been shot with blowpipe 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 135. the head of the hatchet in the helve 
2 Before a tree is cut down, a Sakai and returned it to its owner, sub- 
taps three or four times on the trunk sequently doing the same for the other 
with the back of his implement. The tools. The ceremony of burning the 
legendary explanation is that this cere- felled timber was likewise accompanied 
mony is a notice to quit to the Hantu by magical ceremonies. At the plant- 
of the tree. Vaughan-Stevens could ing of the rice the magician performed 
never get a satisfactory explanation. — various ceremonies intended to make 
V.-St. iii. 128. the rice grow short, to protect it from 
•^ The process has already been de- wild animals and evil spirits, and to 
scribed, but may here, for convenience' make the seed fertile. Care had to be 
sake, be in brief recapitulated. Before exercised not to awake the mouse- 
felling the trees for a padi-clearing all demons. 

the tools had to be charmed. Women Before the commencement of harvest 
and children might not be present on a magical ceremony was performed to 
account of the dangers from evil spirits. secure the soul of the rice ; this was 
Saplings were cut and erected at followed by a feast, after which the 
sunrise and the handle of a hatchet labours of the harvest, till then in the 
hung from them. After repeating a hands of the women alone, were con- 
number of charms the magician reijlaced tinued. Supra, vol. i. p. 344^7/' 

SAKAI OF PERAK 247 

darts and eaten) from the roof of the house/ This is 
done in order to keep away the ape-demons, which 
cause epileptic fits. This form of madness ("gila"), 
as the Sakai call it {i.e. the grinning and showing of 
teeth that is seen in apes as they fall from the 
tree after being shot, and before the hunters kill 
them with the parang or chopper), is inflicted upon 
the hunter by the ape -demon, if the latter is not 
diverted from the object of its revenge." 

Dr. Luering of Perak writes me, that the spirits 
which most afflict the Sakai of Ulu Bertang are the 
following : — " Nyani' manus," the tiger spirit ; " Nyani' 
s'rak," the jungle or forest spirit ; " Nyani' tiu," the 
river or water spirit. These three spirits can more 
or less be overcome by the skill of the Sakai, either 
by charms or medicine, but another spirit called 
" Nyani jehiV," or the tree spirit, is so quick in 
working mischief that no help is possible. He comes 
down from the trees when no man knows, and before 
any one suspects it, has slain his victim.^ 

Dr. Luering inquired after the elephant spirit, 
which is so much feared by the Perak Malays, and 
which, the Malays believed, had quite recently killed 
one of the greatest chieftains of the state (the Dato' 
Penglima Kinta, who died of dropsy), but the Sakai 
knew nothing of any such spirit. Questioned as to 
small-pox (Mai. " champak " = Sak. " ginas "), they said 
that it was a " Nyani' gop " or Malay spirit, which 
was very hostile to the Sakai, while it treated the 
Malays kindly. The chieftain of the Sahum tribe re- 
marked that he used to estimate his tribe at about three 

1 The Perak Sakai similarly suspend 21, p. 162. ^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 169. 

the(Iower)jawsof civet-cats("musang") •* For the offerings made in expelling 

and other animals, as well as bunches of these spirits (the " Balei Nyani"), v. 

hornbill skulls. — -J.R.A.S., S.B., No. Fasc. Mai. p. 46. 

248 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

hundred souls, but within the last year twenty-four had 
died of small-pox. Dr. Luering's informant added : — 

" We believe in * kramats ' or sacred places, at 
which we worship like the Malays, burning incense 
(' kemenyian '). We learnt this from our ancestors. 
Of course, some of these sacred places belong to 
Malay spirits (' Nyani' gop '). In case of sickness we 
make vows there (' berkaul '). We have no other 
word for making a vow. 

" These spirits have sometimes been seen : Malay 
spirits look like Malays, others look like ourselves. 
There is a sacred spot on Gunong Banglang,^ near 
the steep rock-wall there. I have never seen it, but 
our people go there to make vows. Another is on 
Gunong Renduwai, where the K'lang B'lok was 
killed. Of course there are many more, and some 
are very powerful, but there is no name for them 
except that of the place where they dwell." 

According to Vaughan-Stevens (in his account of 
the " tuang-tuang " ceremony), the term "physic" is 
somewhat misleading, for it is only in very few cases 
that the magicians act to any extent as physicians. 
They are really magicians pure and simple, the corre- 
sponding profession in the case of the southern tribes 
being rather that of medicine - man (or " Poyang "). 
As the latter, however, has not been formally initiated 
into the mysteries of the magicians, as preserved by 
the wilder tribes of the jungle, a new profession has 
arisen there, viz. that of healing diseases with infusions 
of herbs applied inwardly. 

The ancient demon- or devil - man is something 
quite different. Through the magic power bequeathed 
to him by his ancestors, he exorcises all kinds of 

' Or " BalaiiLj " (Malay), south-east of IJatu Pipis. 

SA KAI (' BLA NBA 5 ') 249 

demons and diseases, and the few plants that he 
employs are applied outwardly either in pressed form 
or in that of an infusion.^ 

The Sakai magicians in ancient times exercised an 
influence far exceeding even the prerogative of a 
chief. On every occasion their counsel was required, 
and even the Batin - did not undertake any action of 
importance, such as a migration or a war, without 
their approval. Moreover, they filled an important 
role both at births and at marriages, though not (it 
appears) at funerals.^ 

The chief power of the magician consisted in his 
universally recognised attribute of being able to 
assure the health of his clientele, and to provide for 
them the means of nourishment and the like by virtue 
of his charms. The magician of the wilder tribes is dis- 
tinguished from his colleagues of the south by the fact 
that he still believes firmly in the power of his charms. 

Besides this, the magician could punish any 
persons who offended him by permitting the demons 
to torment them and make them ill, this result being 
attained by his refusing them his protection against 
the demons that were always ready to torment man- 
kind. He had, moreover, the right to step into a 
house and take away the charms that were hung up 
in the house, and any one who hindered him from so 
doing was compelled to suffer the penalty of being 
killed by means of his club. The supreme god 
(Allah, Tuhan, or Peng) alone had the power and the 
right to dictate to the demons on whom they should 
inflict their injuries. No demon could injure a 
magician, and the latter's death (no matter from what 

1 Z.f. E. xxvi. 145. Cp./. /. A. vol. iv. p. 430. 
2 A Malayan official. '' Z. f. E. xxvi. 147. 

250 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

cause) was regarded solely as the act of heaven. The 
chief reason alleged for this belief was that the power 
of the magician had been developed to its utmost {i.e. 
that he had learnt everything that magic had to teach 
him), and that he was therefore entrusted by Allah 
with the charge of caring (in an unrecognised way) 
for the souls of the dead, whether in heaven or the 
Isle of Fruits. The soul of a magician could never 
be damned, but that of a Batin could. ^ 

The trappings of a Sakai magician consisted of his 
headband, necklace, girdle, kneebands, and staff. 

His headband was painted " in black colour and 
without dots " (to distinguish it from the red pattern 
with black dots worn on ordinary occasions by all 
members of the tribe). 

His necklace (" koy-iss ") consisted of a "string 
of seeds of a kind no longer procurable,' to which 
was attached a tortoise - bone pendant, with tiger's 
teeth or beads on both sides." 

His girdle consisted of tassel - like bunches of 
" s'lowk " (.-*) leaves. 

His kneebands consisted of " linok " or squirrel- 
tails, strung as closely together as possible. 

His hair was allowed to fall down to its full 
length (for it was never cut !) over his face, so that 
his features were all but hidden. 

His loin-cloth (unlike that of his fellow-tribesmen) 
was entirely plain and undecorated. 

The emblem of his dignity — a staff — was made 
from Satambun (" Tamoon ") wood, and was said to 
have been originally the emblem of a Batin, ^ which was 

' Z.f. E. xxvi. 147. V. n. 3, infra. that had died out, nor is it likely that 

^ This statement is scarcely crcdilile. any formerly imported seeds have ceased 

It is not at all likely that the seeds to be imported. 

could have belonged to plants or trees ^ This and similar statements ap- 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {'BLANDAS') 251 

adopted at the time of the first influx of Malays, in 
place of the ancient mark of the magician, viz. a rare 
deformed growth or " sport " of the bamboo, which was 
incised with powerful charms for quelling evil spirits. 
None but the magicians might bear this staff, which 
it was believed would injure any one else who tried to 
do so.^ 

One of these staffs which was collected by 
Vaughan- Stevens measured 62 cm. in length, and 
bore, firstly, a charm designed as a protection against 
the " P'wlli " (.?), or "Vampire of Shake-Net Island" 
(which was the traditional first home of the race) ; 
secondly, a charm against the ape spirit or epilepsy ; 
and thirdly, a charm against the argus-pheasant spirit 
or lunacy.^ 

In addition to his staff, the Sakai magician also 
occasionally employed a sprinkling - brush named 
*'chen-ow," with which, in the performance of certain 
ceremonies, he sprinkled the demons.^ 

It may be here further noted that all the Sakai, 
whether magicians or not, whenever they find them- 
selves compelled to handle any magical object, are in 
the habit of taking a leaf into the hand, to prevent the 
demon (Hantu) that resides in the said object from 
passing directly into their persons.^ 

I may add that iron may not (according to 
Vaughan-Stevens) be used for cutting either the 
hair or the finger-nails.^ 

pear to point to the fact of their having "P'wUi" may be a corruption of 

originated amongst tribes under the " Pawul," a Blandas Grave Demon, ?■. 

influence of Malayan culture. p. 105, attte. 

1 Z.f.E. xxvi. 166-169. 3 y^^v/. p. 166. < /^/,/_ p_ 157 

2 Ibid. p. 169 ; cp. p. 264, i)ifr. ^ Ibid. xxix. 178. 

252 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part ni 

Medicine- huts. 

We are also informed that a special type of 
medicine - hut was formerly owned by the Sakai 
magicians (in addition to their own private dwelling- 
hut),^ that the latter stood "deep in the forest," that 
it was built on the level of the ground, and that it 
was protected against intruders by means of a post, 
which was planted in the ground in front of it, and 
hung about with a medley of bones, leaves, and 
flowers. 

The shape of these huts is said to have originally 
been round, and none but magicians were allowed to 
enter them, or to see their contents, which consisted 
of bamboos incised with special charms.^ 

Vaughan-Stevens was only allowed to enter such 
a hut once (and that only after a sort of ceremony of 
admittance into the tribe, which consisted in fern- 
seed bruised in water being poured over him). The 
walls and roof of the house were hung with tufts of 
dried plants, and bamboos of all sizes lay scattered 
about upon the ground and in every corner, all of 
them being covered with incised patterns.^ 

Exorcism or '' Tuang-tuang'' Ceremony {'' Kuwet-niss''). 
" Kuwet-niss " is, as it appears, the older name for 

1 Vaughan - Stevens adds that the Sibylism. An arbour of thorns is 

Sakai magicians of the present day framed, into which a man and his wife 

employ their own dweUing-houses as are put. The neighbours perform a 

medicine - huts ; though even now a chant outside, and a strange noise is 

cave will sometimes be fitted up to do then supposed to be heard, which is 

duty for this [Purpose. believed to be a sign that the spirit 

- Z.f.E. xxvi. 145. Strong confirm- they have invoked has possessed the 

ation of this statement of Vaughan- jiair enclosed in the arbour. The 

Stevens with regard to the Sakai latter then come forth, and whatever 

medicine-huts is to be found in they utter is regarded as an expression 

J. I. A. vol. iv. p. 430 : "They (the of the will of tlie spirits alluded to." 
Sakai of Perak) practise a sort of •' Iliid. p. 144. 

CHAP, vr SAKAI {' BLANDAS') 253 

the ceremony of exorcism, which is also called 
" tuang-tuang," The first expression is employed by 
the Sakai among themselves, and the second appears 
to be especially used by the civilised {i.e. Malayising) 
tribes. The latter is applied not only to the act of 
exorcism, but also to the bamboos employed for that 
purpose.^ Since only a thoroughly skilled magician 
is in a position to bring the ceremony to a quite 
successful completion, it is now somewhat rare, the 
magicians who possess the old tradition sedulously 
avoiding the Malays on the ground that their 
" medicine-hut " would be defiled if it were entered 
by a stranger.'- 

The ceremonial headbands of the men, or " lat," as 
distinguished from those of the women, "rib" ("reeb"),. 
were stiff bands of bark-cloth, and were always worn, 
whereas the headbands of the women, though made 
of the same material, were only worn on occasion. 
The hair of the men was allowed to fall down after 
the example of the magician, and was merely bound 
by the headbands, whereas the women bound up 
their hair in some kind of knot, which they employed 
the headbands to fix. 

The patterns painted upon these headbands were 
alleged to represent the owner's name in each case. 

These patterns, as has been said (together with 
the face-painting and blowpipe patterns), might not 
be employed until the Sakai youths were married 
and had thus been admitted into the tribe. 

Since the painted headbands might only be worn 
on special occasions, the black patterns were not 

1 These "tuang-tuang "were bamboos notes. They were intended for use as 

decorated with magical patterns and amuletsagainstdisease, spiders, drought, 

struck on the ground during magical etc., or as rain-charms. Supra, vol. i. 

ceremonies, so as to produce musical p. 472, seq. '^ Z. f. E. xxvi. 144. 

254 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part ni 

retained on the headbands of the lay members of the 

tribe, and only the red pattern with black dots was 

allowed. 

The black patterns were called " demon " patterns, 

because they afforded protection against the demons, 

who, as soon as they saw them, were obliged to flee. 

The magician who presided at the ceremony wore 
his own pattern in black and without dots.^ The 
object of this was partly to hinder the demons (who 
had been invoked by the bamboos of his servant) 
from entering the circle in the middle of which he 
himself stood, and partly so to lead the demons round 
the circle as to confront them with the patterns of all 
who were present, so that during the ensuing chase 
they should know which persons might not be injured 
by them. But in order to avoid terrifying them too 
much, and thereby hindering them from imprinting 
the patterns on their memories with sufficient exacti- 
tude, the Sakai purposely let fall their hair over their 
faces, so as to prevent the black stripes in their face- 
painting from becoming too noticeable. The magician 
and his attendant did the same. In this way it was 
possible for the demons to approach the headbands 
and observe the patterns. In order to make them 
plainer to the demons, the dots of the red pattern 
were made black instead of the recognised white, 
since white dots against the dull " anatto " red were 
difficult to distinguish. In former times, when a 
species of red ochre was employed, the dots were 
white, as in the case of the face-paintings,^ 

These preparations having been made, the magician 
after a short silence strikes the end of his bamboo 

' For the customs of face-painting ployed for purposes of magic), cp. 
ami body-painting (which were em- supra, " Maturity Customs." 
^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 162. 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {' BLANDAS') 255 

(" tuang-tuang ") a few times upon the ground, the 
pupil accompanying him with one of the decorated 
bamboos in each hand. Soon after this all the men 
join in with due solemnity, and continue for about 
an hour ; so long, in fact, as the magician himself 
continues. As soon as he ceases, all of them stop, 
and laying their bamboos behind them, proceed to 
the particular business (whether hunting or fishing or 
whatever it might be) for which this strange cere- 
mony was preparatory. 

Meanwhile not a word was spoken, and little, if 
any, gesticulation was used. In some cases two 
bamboo sticks called " sok-yet " (38 cm. x 3 cm.) were 
used at the ceremony ; one stick being held in each 
hand and struck upon the other in the air. 

In former times the women might use none but 
" smooth " {i.e. undecorated) bamboos in contra- 
distinction to the men.^ 

Women and children were obliged to attend the 
ceremony, since it was considered unsafe for them to 
be far from the men when so many demons were 
being invoked. 

The women took their places in the circle, each 
woman sitting behind her husband, with her children 
in turn behind her. Between the two circles (of 
men and women) there was a broad space left vacant 
for the passage of the demons, so as to enable the 
latter to look at the headbands of both men and 
women simultaneously. The demons, especially the 
male ones, are not afraid of women, and hence the 
women did not allow their hair to hang down over 
their faces, the black stripes on their face-painting 
being thus left visible. This device prevented the 

1 Z.f. E. xxvi. 172. 

256 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

demons from breaking through between two women 
and attacking the unprotected children. 

The demons entered from above into the space 
between the men and women, but as soon as the 
beating of the bamboos was at an end, and escape 
was possible, they went down through the earth in 
obedience to the magician's will. 

It was alleged that the women wore no designs 
on their headbands, but were recognised by the 
demons who had previously seen them in their 
husbands' company, and protected by the charms 
inscribed upon their husbands' headgear.^ 

The idea that lies at the bottom of the ceremony 
is the following : — 

The painted bamboos of the pupil are to call 
together all the demons to see what the magician is 
doing. The decorated bamboos of the other men are 
intended by means of their patterns to render the 
demons powerless for the ensuing day. At the 
same time, if Allah {i.e. Tuhan or Peng) intends a 
man to be injured, there is no remedy against it. 
Each individual man now knows how to cut the 
charm-pattern to suit his particular case, but he may 
not employ the general charm-pattern for himself 
alone, as he would then conjure up all the demons 
against himself, without any chance of self-protection. 
On the other hand, if a man should (as he properly 
might) incise either the tiger or snake-charm for 
himself alone, and thereupon sound it, he would 
certainly be safe if the tiger and snake-demons heard 
the sound, but as certainly not if they did not hear 
him. Since, however, the chase was only undertaken 
as a rule by fairly large parties, there was usually little 

^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 163. 

CHAP. VI SAK'AI {'BLANDAS') 257 

danger for any particular individual, so that the charm 
if employed was almost uniformly successful. And 
since every member of these hunting parties had to 
be equipped with the charm-leaves, the prizes and 
rewards that fell to the magician were great/ 

Another Form of Exorcism [Sawai). 

This consists of an incantation, or rather spell, 
which is performed on behalf of an invalid when all 
else fails. The exact words employed are not known 
as yet, but the form of the ceremony itself is known to 
every Sakai." The patient is laid with the head towards 
the west under cover of a roof or screen made from 
the fresh leaves of a palm, which resembles the areca- 
palm, and is called " dampong." An opening is left 
through which the magician (or Pawang) enters. This 
entrance can be closed so as to conceal both the patient 
and the magician from observation. The latter takes 
a censer (" sungkun " or " sangkun " ?) with him, which 
consists of a half coconut-shell containing burnt resin 
(benzoin). He then squats down at the feet of the 
invalid, and raising himself breast high swings the 
censer seven times over the patient's couch. Next he 
seizes a leaf of the " dampong "-palm, and therewith 
belabours the invalid, or rather the demon by which 
he is possessed, with the object of driving it either 
into the network of loops or a cage which hangs over 
the head of the patient.^ 

The loopwork varies greatly, both as to form and 
material, probably according to the demon it is in- 
tended to catch, 

^ Z.f.E. xxvi. 173. ceremonyshows more Malayan influence 

2 In orig. " Orang Hutan." This than the last. 
^ Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 141, 142. 
VOL. II S 

258 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

The magician now stamps his feet and dances 
wildly, shrieking and shouting until the demon, to 
escape its chastisement, takes flight by entering into 
the cage. The magician then stops and murmurs 
certain magic words, which are believed to prevent 
the demons from escaping. 

Then he goes out with the loopwork, which he 
takes home and hangs up there. If it comes in half, 
the demons escape, and return to their original dwell- 
ing place. This particular process is called " Tekan 
Badan Sawai." Yet another spell, called "Tekan Badan 
K'luar," or Birth-blessing, belongs to the original 
duties of the magician's profession, and as it is not 
kept secret, it can be performed by any man or woman 
who chooses. The magician generally imparted this 
incantation (like that for the dying) to the Penglima 
of the place and his wife, so that in urgent cases they 
might be able hastily to take his place. ^ 

Alleged Totemism? 

Unfortunately Vaughan-Stevens does not seem to 
have found any consistent theory on the subject, and 
his notes, which, as his editor tells us, were gathered on 
many different occasions, so often confuse the clan with 
the tribe that it is impossible even to gain any clear 
conception of the Sakai traditions on the subject. It 
seems, therefore, useless to attempt any reconstruction. 
The only facts to be gathered are the following : — 

In dealing with the face -patterns of the Sakai, 
Vaughan-Stevens gives an account of an alleged clan- 
system. The Sakai are said to compose five original 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 142, 143. must add that to me the evidence (!) 

^ Cp. pp. 32, 62-64, ante. I am appears to be of the text-book order 

indebted for this summary to Mr. and to conflict with all we yet know 

Thomas, an exjjert in Totemism. I of the Sakai. — W.S. 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {'SENOP) {' BLANDAS') 259 

groups, which formed sub-groups, when the tribe 
ceased to inhabit a single locality, each of which 
adopted a name closely allied to that of the parent 
group. The alleged five main groups, found among 
the Senoi, the Kenaboi, and Besisi, were the Snake, 
Fish, Leaf, Thorn, and Tiger clans. The sub-groups 
of the Snake clan take as their eponymous species the 
Python, the Cobra, the Hamadryad, and so on. The 
original purpose of the crest of the sub-groups was as 
a property mark on blow-tubes and as a pattern for 
face - painting, according to the account given by 
Vaughan-Stevens. He does not, however, seem to 
have been able to collect any examples of the former 
sub-groups.^ As to the latter, which he distinguishes 
from the patterns, none of which he gives, he says he 
was able to get them from the magicians, though 
they were no longer used owing to the clan (" tribal ") 
assemblies having fallen into desuetude.^ 

The Sakai marriage regulations were said to be 
based on this clan-system, but instead of being exo- 
gamous, they were strictly endogamous, marriage out- 
side the clan involving expulsion from it, a practice that 
gave birth to new clans — Civet-cat, Crocodile, Scorpion, 
etc., which soon attained a numerical superiority. 

In the absence of any information as to the 
sacrosanctity of the eponymous species, it is premature 
to use the term totemism in speaking of this system. 
At the same time the fact that a quasi-totemic nomen- 
clature is found in conjunction with a marriage system 
resembling that of the mythical period of the Arunta, 
renders even this alleged Sakai organisation of extra- 
ordinary interest and importance. 

^ Probably because there were none to collect. — W.S. 
2 Z.f.E, xxvi. 150-152. 

26o NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

Among the Semang there is no trace of totemism. 
As to the Jakun, the only fact pointing in the 
direction of totemism is one recorded by Favre,^ that 
some " tribes " of Jakun abstained from eating elephant 
flesh, alleging that it caused sickness. This, in form, 
very totemistic belief, is, however, an isolated case. 
In the absence of further information it is simpler to 
suppose that some Jakun groups had, owing to 
contact with Malays or other tribes, given up one of 
their old tribal beliefs, or, possibly, that those which 
respected the elephant had acquired from outside a 
belief in its sacrosanctity. 

Charms as^ainst Wild Beasts. 

Sakai. — A charm against tigers is made in the 
following way : — A bundle of " s'lowk " leaves is rolled 
up to represent the tiger's body ; this is transfixed with 
imitation bamboo arrows made of thin strips of bertam- 
bark, on the ends of which are tassels of split " s'lowk " 
leaves. To the " tiger " is fastened a strip of rattan, on 
which is hung a leaf painted with magical patterns in 
dragon's blood." After various other magical additions,, 
including a water-vessel, a flower of the Latoom-plant, 
etc., had been made, the whole was hung up in the house. 

When a man fell ill of dysentery or colic, it was 
attributed to the tiger-spirit. He was sprinkled with 
water from the water -vessel, and the spirit was 
believed to be thereby transferred to the Latoom- 
flower, in which it was believed to be imprisoned by 
the " s'lowk " tassels. Vaughan-Stevens found these 
charms among the Central Sakai (Senoi), Besisi, 
Kenaboi, but not among the Jakun or Benua-Jakun.^ 

' Favre in Ann. de la P. de la Foi, xxii. 303. 

2 Cp. Z.f. E. 1894, p. 152. "S'lowk " qu. =:"sela' "(" leaf") ? 

3 Elh. Notizhlatt, i. 1-4. 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {'BLANDAS') 261 

Interpretation of Dreams — the Dream Ceremony. 

The Sakai attach great importance to dreams, 
bringing formal reports of them to the magician or 
the midwife ; the man to the former, the woman to 
the latter. The dreams of the lay members of the 
tribe are of no special interest, but the magicians in 
dreams receive inspiration from spirits that are well 
disposed.^ Of special significance are those dreams 
regarded which are awaited by all magicians and the 
whole tribe on important occasions, the Batin being 
the chief person involved. These gatherings were 
held on the highest accessible mountain summit in 
the territory of the tribe, and occupied several days' 
time, since it was required that each of the dreams 
should be repeated upon three successive nights. 

There has been no such gathering since the dis- 
appearance of Berchanggei Besi ; all that the present 
magicians know with regard to such ceremonies being 
that the Batin invoked the help of Tuhan in some 
form now forgotten, and that the Batin then fell im- 
mediately asleep and the dreams came to him in a 
disguised form, and after his awaking were interpreted 
by the magicians.^ 

Sakai children are named in accordance with 
dreams, in which there appeared the track of a tiger, 
a tree, an insect, etc.^ 

Use of Love-philtres. 

The Sakai, like the Semang, have a great reputa- 
tion (especially among the Malays) for love-philtres, 

' Z.f.E. xxvi. 158 {c). The men- [lit. "Iron Claws"), v. p. 265, infra. 
tion of these officials suggests Malayan '^ Ibid. p. 1 58. 

influence. For "Berchanggei Besi" ^ Cp. supra, p. 12. 

262 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

the most famous of which is made from a plant 
called " Chinduai," which grows on the Perak moun- 
tains.^ 

It is with this plant that a tale collected for me by 
Dr. Luering among the Sakai of Ulu Bertang in 
Perak is connected. It runs as follows : — 

Dato' Jaja' (? Yahya) was the wife of a Malay 
trader living in the Kampong of Sungei Siput, Kinta, 
which then was near, or nearer than now, to the sea. 
As is still the case, the Sakai, on arriving from the 
far-off Bertang, were accustomed to drop in and call 
at Malay houses to chew "betel." One day when 
Jaja's husband had gone to sea, some Sakai from 
Bertang came to the house, when Jaja', repelled by 
their ugliness and dirtiness, received them in a very 
unfriendly mood. She told them that she could not 
afford to give them any " betel," for her husband was 
away, and she did not know when he would return, — 
in fact she had not the means to feed her own 
children, and how could she be expected to supply 
" betel " to outsiders, especially to Sakai ? The 
Sakai went away crestfallen, but vowed that they 
would revenge themselves. One of them who was a 
medicine-man (" Pawak "), as soon as he had returned 
to Bertang, made " chenduwai " or witchcraft, which 
caused the Malay woman Jaja', though so far away, to 

1 Cp. Wray in J. R. A. S., S. B., called " buluh perindu" or "yearning 
No. 21, p. 127 : "On the rocks near bamboo," he says: " The small 
the summit, a quantity of a plant called bamboo called by the Malays ' buluh 
"Chinibuai" (52V) grows. This plant is perindu' is, on the other hand, ex- 
much valued by the Malays, as it is tremely plentiful on Berumban, and corn- 
supposed to act as a love-philtre. It paratively scarce on the other hill. I was 
probably belongs to the Ophioglossacete, fortunate in being able to collect flower- 
and is a delicate rush-like plant about ing specimens of this elegant little 
three inches high, having its spores in bamboo, which is credited with mystic 
little tassels on the tops of the leaves. " properties by the natives, and is in much 
And cp. also the same writer in ibid. pp. request by love-lorn swains, whose mis- 
1 58, I 59, where, in referring to the plant tresses are cold and irresponsive." 

SAKAI OF PERAK 263 

fall violently in love with him. She seemed to have lost 
all her reason, for she fled into the jungle calling for 
her Sakai lover, whom, after days of wandering in the 
wilds, she at length found at his home in Bertang. 
Jaja' had had two children by her Malay husband, 
called Kulop Perak and Si Mat respectively ; and 
now by her Sakai husband she in due time had two 
children, who grew up in Bertang as Sakai. When 
her Malay husband returned from his trip to the sea, 
he at first made vain endeavours to have his wife 
restored to him, but failing to recover her, he gave up 
the search. Nevertheless her Malay sons, Kulop 
Perak and Si Mat, felt the reproaches of the villagers, 
that their mother had gone to live as a Sakai, very 
much. They therefore went to Bertang where they 
found their mother with her Sakai family. It took a 
great deal of persuasion to bring her away from 
there, but at last they succeeded, and she left in the 
company of Kulop Perak and Si Mat, leaving her 
Sakai husband and children (whose names are now 
forgotten) behind. But the nearer she approached 
her former home, the more reluctant she became to 
proceed. The thought that the villagers would 
reproach her for her escapade began to be more and 
more oppressive to her, and therefore, when almost 
in sight of her former home, she drowned herself in a 
little rivulet which they had to cross. Her body was 
easily recovered by her children, and she was buried 
close by, but her name is still attached to the river, 
which goes under the name of Sungei Jaja'. Her 
Sakai children became the ancestors of the Sakai, who 
related this story, and who attribute the high stand- 
ing of their family to their partly Malay descent 
through Jaja' the Malay. 

264 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-I^ORE part hi 

The woodlouse (?) is related by Vaughan-Stevens 
to be used as a charm by the women for impairing a 
man's virility.^ 

The Sakai (" Blandas ") Traditions} 
The following traditions are assigned to the Sakai 
("Blandas") by Vaughan-Stevens, though (by his 
own admission) they were taken from very mixed 
sources. They "depend," says Vaughan-Stevens, 
"upon accounts given by some hundred individual 
members of the races concerned, and only those 
accounts which are practically universal have been re- 
tained"(!). In parts they resemble the Mantra legends. 
The oldest of these traditions concerns an island 
called Guntong Penyaring ("Shake-Net^ I."), said to 
be situated across the sea in the direction of the rising 
sun. In the interior of the island was a mountain 
with two summits. Between these lodged at night 
great flocks of fruit-bats, which were in the habit 
of repairing to their feeding-places on both sides of 
the mountain from thence. By day they remained 
suspended from the trees near the saddle of the 
mountain. The Sakai drew nets across the 
entrance to the gorge in a diagonal direction by means 
of long cords, and shook them down during the day- 
time. Frightened, and blinded by the sun, the bats 
flew into the nets, and the Sakai ate them. The 

' Cp. siipra, p. 67. Probably a ihat Vaughan-Stevens has here tried to 

large millipede ("gonggo'"). The compile an eclectic account covering all 

Malays have a similar idea. the " branches of the race from Johor 

2 The name " Sakai " stands for to Kedah " (p. 279), in conformity with 

"Blandas" throughout these legends. his views (vol. i. p. 26). They form a 

In part they are certainly Mantra, but considerable part of Vaughan-Stevens' 

the numerous references to Selangor work, and as such have been included, 

and Perak, and especially the stale- in preference to omission, 
ment as to the many settlements of ■'' =Mal. "guntang"; i.e. " gun- 

" Kenaboi " (counted as " Blandas " by chang [ptn-]jaring" — a folk-etymology. 

Vaughan-Stevens) "near the sources of Vaughan-Stevens has "Guntong Pin- 

the great Perak river," show, I think, jarring." 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {' BLANDAS') 265 

tradition terminates by describing how a great ship 
was wrecked upon the island, and how the water sank 
and left the ship stranded high and dry upon the rocks. 
The captain and crew got to land and were kindly 
received by the Benar-benar, or Benua, a branch of 
the Orang Laut, or Sea Tribes, who lived upon the 
coast, whereas the Sakai dwelt in the forest. The 
Orang Laut belonged (according to the Sakai) to 
an inferior branch of their own tribe, though others 
say they originally formed a separate race which mixed 
with the Sakai by intermarriage. All accounts, how- 
ever, agree in saying that they stood in some close 
sort of relationship to the Sakai. This tribe informed 
the Sakai Batin, who allowed the shipwrecked people 
to come and hospitably entreated them. 

Nevertheless, it is related, some of them went off 
in the ship's boat, and were heard of no more. 

The captain and the rest, however, remained and 
were well cared for, and soon after the old Batin him- 
self died, leaving no son.^ 

The Sakai then assembled to elect a new chief, 
and choosing the captain of the shipwrecked vessel, 
gave him the title of Batin Berchanggei Besi (lit. 
the Chief with the Iron Claws). ^ 

This name is said to have been given to the Batin 
on account of his great personal strength. He once 
(it is said) called twenty people together to cut down 
a certain tree, and when they failed to perform it, he 

^ V.-St. ii. 83, 84. Other Sakai Artificial finger-nails of great length 

("Blandas")traditionsaregiveninV.-St. are still worn by Malay women when 

iii. 97-100, but they are of no real value. performing with a theatrical troupe, and 

'^ Or " nails " : " changgei " =: a long also occasionally by highly connected 

finger-nail, which has been allowed women at weddings, as in the case 

to grow to an abnormal length (as by of the late Haji Gayah of Selangor. 

Chinese mandarins). They were They are made of various metals — gold, 

formerly worn by Malay chiefs. brass, or as here, of iron. 

266 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

felled it unaided, splitting, however, his long finger- 
nail in doing so. 

Batin Iron-claws built a novel kind of house for his 
subjects upon the summit of a hill, its roof being made 
of fire-burnt earth, and its foundation-posts, in some 
cases of exceptionally hard wood, and in others of a giant 
grass which was as thick as a man's leg, and which 
possessed a hard outer cuticle, but a soft interior — a 
form of timber unknown in the island. The roof-tree 
was not straight, but depressed in the centre, and it 
had greatly projecting gable-ends. Finally, the walls 
were of glass. 

Sometime afterwards it happened that the son of 
a Raja fell from heaven, and, staying with the Batin, 
married his eldest daughter. Later on this prince 
persuaded many of the Sakai to give up eating swine's 
flesh altogether. 

Now the old Batin, the predecessor of Iron-claws, 
had a brother who had died before Iron-claws came, 
and who had left two sons, the eldest of whom was 
called Abang (" elder brother"), and the younger, Adik 
(" younger brother ") ; and Abang ought to have been 
Batin. But once the two were crossing a stream by 
means of a tree -trunk, the eldest in front as was 
customary. Half-way across the trunk broke under 
Abang's feet and both fell into the water, the elder in 
an upright posture, the younger in a sitting attitude. 
And when the younger found he was unhurt he called 
out in the Sakai (" Blandas ") dialect, " Usui." 

The brothers continued their journey, but inquired 
of a medicine-man when they reached home what this 
omen meant. The medicine-man said that the elder 
should always be on his feet and never find rest, whilst 
the younger should be seated like the Malays and give 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {'BLANDAS') 267 

up wandering. The younger brother then determined 
to seek a place where he might be enabled to fulfil the 
prophecy, and went to Menangkabau. But Abang 
remained in the country. 

But before the younger son's departure Iron- 
claws prepared a banquet of all kinds of flesh, and 
at the banquet the younger son and a number of his 
friends remarked that although the meat was cooked 
with swine's fat, the head had not been served. On 
inquiry they found that through some neglect the 
head had not been cooked. They then went to the 
Batin and asked for it to be given them. But Iron- 
claws finding it had been forgotten made excuses. 
At this the guests were very angry and said that if 
the Batin kept back dishes for himself they would not 
eat any of his banquet, and went away. Then the 
younger son and all his friends who had refused to eat 
the swine's flesh went to Menangkabau. Hence arose 
the custom of exhibiting the produce of the three 
days' harvest to the guests in order to prove that the 
entire amount of the rice has been prepared for them. 

When Iron-claws heard that the grave demons 
(" Degup ") had taken to killing the Sakai, he convened 
an assembly and proposed to found a new settlement. 
His son-in-law (the prince who fell from heaven) and 
a number of the Sakai would not agree to this, but the 
others assented. Iron-claws then broke up his house 
on the hill, and re-erecting it on the sea-coast, 
fenced it with a palisade and called it Pagar Ruyong 
(Palm-stem Fence). He then gave a great feast. At 
one end were the dishes containing swine's flesh, at 
the other end those that did not ; the whole tribe 
was invited. Those who did not eat swine's flesh sat 
in one place together, and vice versa, and after the 

268 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

feast Iron-claws and all who ate swine's flesh pro- 
claimed their determination to leave the island. The 
son-in-law received the Batin's house at Pagar Ruyong 
and there remained, no further mention being made 
of him in the traditions. But when the building was 
ready the elder brother died, and Iron-claws desired 
the Benua (or Benar-Benar) to complete the palisade. 
Afterwards, however, he left it and built a number of 
boats, in which he, his friends, and all of the Benua who 
ate swine's flesh and obeyed his orders left the island. 

In due course Iron-claws and his people arrived 
at an uninhabited island, to which they gave the name 
of Pulau Pasir (" Sandy Island "). Many of his party 
stayed here, but Iron- claws and the rest went still 
further, and on reaching a second uninhabited island, 
called it Pantai Layang. Here too some of the Sakai 
were left behind. 

Next Iron-claws reached a yet larger island (which 
was also uninhabited) and called it Jawa ("Jowar") 
or Java. Here his youngest daughter remained with 
several of her following of Sakai, and Iron -claws 
and the rest, proceeding still further, arrived at 
Malacca, which was then uninhabited (as was all that 
region) and covered with thick forest. Here they 
made a clearing and called it Pengkalan Tampoi, and 
Iron-claws, setting off with his Penglima and some 
companions to explore the interior, arrived at the 
place where Klang now stands. Here Iron- claws 
vanished from the sight of men and was seen no more, 
his people returning to Pengkalan Tampoi, 

In view of his own departure. Iron -claws had 
made Hang Tuah the Batin of Pengkalan Tampoi, 
and the latter proceeded to build a house on the hill 
overlooking the present town of Malacca. A great 

SA A' A I (' BLA NDA S ') 269 

colony soon grew up here, and in a few years had 
spread to Mount Ophir (Gunong Ledang). A marshy 
place was used by the new settlers for yam-culture, 
and thence called Paya Kladi. Not far off stood a 
large orchard (" Dusun Besar "), whose fruit, which 
was in full bearing, had been planted by the Sakai 
a few years before.^ 

When Hang Tuah saw that the country was too 
small to contain the Sakai, he went southwards one 
day to Johor to have a look at the land there. The 
Benua had spread southwards along the river Muar, 
which debouches a little south of Malacca. Hang 
Tuah here looked round for a little, and then made a 
great clearing near the place where the town of Muar 
now stands, and called it Benua Dalam, and a smaller 
one on the sea-coast, a few miles south of the large one, 
the smaller receiving the name of Benua Laut Jagun.-^ 

Many of the forest-dwelling Sakai went to Benua 
Dalam, but the Benua (Benar-Benar) spread them- 
selves partly in the forest-clad country and partly on 
the coast. One day a Malay prahu was proceeding up 
the coast from Kedah. They were looking for new- 
land, and when they saw the clearing at Pengkalan 
Tampoi they landed and begged for water and vege- 
tables. They were well received by the Batin in his 
house, and when they departed one of them asked 
the Batin to tell him the name of the colony. As the 
question was asked both were standing near a large 
tree. The Batin thought he was being asked for the 
name of the tree, and answered " Kayu Laka"^ (or 
" Laka Tree "), giving the name by which the tree in 
question was known to the Sakai. 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 85, 86. ' A popular derivation of "Malacca." 

There is a Pengkalan Tampoi neav 

2 Or " Jagong." Ibid. Jugra (Selangor). 

270 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

The Malays then went on board their vessel and 
returned to their own country, though only to give their 
own Raja a glowing description of the beautiful land 
they had seen. They soon reappeared with a flotilla 
of prahus, and their leader demanded the land pos- 
sessed by the Sakai. As this was refused, a battle 
ensued, in which the Sakai were beaten. They fled 
to the country where Malaka Pindah now stands ; 
next morning they continued their flight in a northerly 
direction. 

At Dusun Besar the Batin rested on a great stone 
and took food. To show that the land was his own, he 
called a medicine-man, and made, deep in the stone, 
an impression of his foot and also of the bottom of his 
betel-leaf pulper, both of which may be seen to this 
day. The Batin had two full - grown sons, called 
Hang Jebat and Hang Ketuwi {i.e. Kasturi) respect- 
ively; these sons were Jenang, or subordinate chiefs, 
and were in charge (under their father) of the sur- 
rounding settlements east and north of Pengkalan 
Tampoi. At Muar dwelt Batin Alam, a grandson of 
Batin Iron-claws. 

The fugitive Sakai now arrived at the place where 
Johol now lies, and here a daughter^ was born to 
Hang Tuah.- 

Hang Tuah now wished to make provision for all 
his children, and as he intended to give the colony of 
Johol to his daughter by way of inheritance, he left 
the child in the care of his Penglima and went to 
what is now Sungei Ujong. On the way, Hang 
Jebat and Hang Ketuwi quarrelled as to who should 

1 Vaughan - Stevens here remarks of the Negri Sembilan. Hang Tuah, 

that this Hang Tuah, his daughter, and however, is really the celebrated Malay 

his two sons are the " Undang Vang hero mentioned in the Malay Annals. 
Ampat," or four great lawgiving chiefs ^ Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 86, 87. 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {'BLANDAS') 271 

possess the country through which they were then 
travelHng, and the dispute ended in a combat which 
proved mutually fatal. As Hang Tuah was thus 
deprived of both his sons, he declared he would not 
wander further to seek a new dwelling-place, and there- 
fore called the river by which he stayed Sungei Ujong 
(" River of Termination ").^ For a time indeed he 
tarried there, but again in fear of the ghosts of his 
dead sons he proceeded to Klang, and here a son was 
born to him. 

There is no account of any attack after that upon 
Pengkalan Tampoi. 

Some years later this last-born son of Hang Tuah 
was crossing the river by means of a tree-trunk, 
chewing sugar-cane as he went, and blowing the trash 
out of his mouth. Some of the latter fell upon the 
tree and some into the stream, the latter being carried 
away by the current, so that it was eventually seen 
by the son of a Menangkabau Raja, who was coming 
upstream at the time in a little boat, the ship in which 
he had arrived being at the mouth of the river. 

Now this new prince had brought a casting-net 
for fish, but had caught nothing, and was therefore 
suffering from hunger. A chief who was with him 
saw the trash floating down the river, and concluding 
that some people or other must be dwelling in the 
vicinity, pushed on until -he reached the tree-trunk. 
Here he observed the rest of the trash, and following 
up the track, came at last to the house of the Batin. 
One of the people who accompanied him proved to 
be a descendant of one of the younger brother's com- 

1 This is a popular etymology. The Jong, a name which is still sometimes 
real name of the country before the heard, and which I have seen on old 
British entry seems to have been Semu- official seals. 

272 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part rii 

panions, who had gone to Menangkabau, and this 
ensured a friendly welcome to the new arrivals.^ 

As, therefore, they were sitting in the verandah 
and chewing sugar-cane, the Malay prince turned his 
eyes to an opening in the side-wall of the house, and 
through it was able to distinguish one of the Batin's 
daughters. 

With the idea of making her his wife, he 
asked the Batin if he would exchange presents with 
him. The Batin, however, said he was a poor man, 
driven by the Malays from his rightful possessions, 
and that he now had no possessions. The guest, 
however, replied that he possessed a daughter, whom 
he would much like to make his wife. The bargain 
was quickly concluded, in accordance with Sakai 
custom, and the guest sending his Penghulu to the 
ship for his own presents, went home again, and in a 
few months returned to marry the Batin's daughter. 

Sometime afterwards the pair had a son, and 
according to Sakai custom the mother inquired of the 
father what name the child should bear. The 
father answered that if it were a boy it should be 
called To' Mantri. So the boy was named To' 
Mantri, and since that time the Sakai of the west 
coast near Sungei Ujong and Malacca have been 
called Mantra. 

The girl who was born to Hang Tuah in Johol 
remained there till she was of marriageable age. 
According to Sakai custom she became Batin (or 
chief of the tribe) for a whole year, after which she 
married a Malay from Menangkabau. From the time 
of her Batinship arose (so say the Sakai) the title of 
Pangku {i.e. " Vice-") Penghulu. 

^ \'aughan-Stt;vens, ii. 87. 

CHAP, VI SAKA! {'BLANDAS') 273 

The story runs on in this way to a great length. 

The Penghulu of Inas (a small semi-independent 
district of Johol) came into possession of the wooden 
chopping-board on which the bats were cut up at 
" Shake-Net Island," and a spoon of old Sakai make, 
manufactured from the skull of a bat/ 

The Sakai at that time had no fixed boundaries, 
such as now exist. These are of later date, and were 
originated by the Malays. 

Eventually the last - born son of Hang Tuah 
became Batin of Sungei Ujong, and since that time 
the Sakai consider all the land which now belongs 
to Sungei Ujong, Klang (Selangor), Johol, and 
Malacca as their own especial fatherland. 

After Hang Tuah and his race had died out the 
Sakai never had a regularly elected Batin again. 
When a number of Sakai wished to found a new 
settlement they chose a Batin for themselves ; there 
was, however, no head Batin who could confirm the 
new appointment, and thus the power of the Batin 
shrank and his duties also, so that at last each man 
of the community was almost his equal. 

From another side arose a power superior even to 
that of the Malays, viz. the Beduanda, who very 
quickly became the masters of the Sakai. 

As the Malays flocked into the country In in- 
creasing numbers to seek for land, they merely 
communicated with the chief of the Beduanda, be- 
tween whom and the Sakai Batin there was at first 
still some sort of understanding, but after a time the 
Beduanda chief ceased to consult the Sakai Batin, 
and gave his Malay kinsmen all that they wished by 
virtue of his own authority." 

1 V,-St. ii. 87, 88. Cp. the Jelebu regalia, p. 291, infra. 2 ji^{j_ ^ gg_ 

VOL. II T 

274 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part ni 

Only in three districts (Sungei Ujong, Klang, and 
Johol) did any bargaining take place between the 
Sakai Batin and the Malays, and even these did not 
relate to the land, but to the fruit-trees, which, accord- 
ing to Sakai custom, each member of the tribe was 
required to plant on the land that he possessed. 
This custom still exists. It is most closely followed 
by the dwellers in the jungle, but even in small 
stretches of waste land, here and there, the Malay- 
ising Sakai, though they know well that in the course 
of a year or two they will be far removed from their 
present home, still plant coconut-palms^ and fruit-trees 
of various kinds, the fruits of which they will never 
gather. This custom was due to the care taken by 
the old Sakai laws for the welfare of the future race, 
and the only terms that the Sakai made with the 
Malays were (i) that no tree planted by a Sakai 
might be felled by a Malay, and (2) that, later on, no 
Sakai who wanted fruit from the trees should be pre- 
vented from having it." 

Thus the Beduanda obtained the extensive terri- 
tory to which they naturally afterwards laid claim. 
But they do not belong to the original Sakai stock, 
although they are connected with them by blood. 
They are a mixed race, and are considered as such 
both by Malays and the purer -bred Sakai. They 
exhibit, moreover, all possible stages of admixture, 
varying from people who are almost like Malays to 
people who cannot be distinguished from the Sakai. 
These Beduanda lay claim to a definite fixed territory, 
whereas among the nomad Sakai tribes each man 
desires only so much land for his own as a cock's 

' This statement is open to question. ever, planted by these tribes. 
The coconut -pahn is very seiflom, if - Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 89. 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {'BLANDAS') 275 

crow can be heard over, and that only for so long as 
he stays ; and, moreover, he lays claim only to the 
products of the trees that he happens to have planted 
during his temporary sojourn.^ 

Before the battle with the Rawa men, the Bataks, 
or the Lubu men " (as the Sakai called them), an 
attack was made on the Sakai from outside. 

The Sakai had spread out alongside of the Malay 
settlements when the attacks of the Bataks began. 
These latter lasted for some years, and the outer 
settlements in Perak had encountered them first. The 
Sakai now report that their kinsmen were eaten by 
the Bataks, and that it was from fear of this enemy 
that they fled hither and thither in the jungle. 

In this hasty flight their various tribes and families 
were united. The pursuing Bataks went east to the 
sources of the great Pahang river. Here lay many 
settlements of the Kenaboi, and the Batin of the 
latter determined to expel the heathen interlopers. 
He therefore called all his fighting men together, hid 
most of them in ambush in the jungle, and then 
entered into negotiations with the leader of the 
Bataks, and invited him and his companions to a 
great feast. The Bataks came, but the crafty Batin 
had mixed the poisonous fruit of the P'rah - tree ^ 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 89. gestion or colic ; but probably this 
" The Rawa men, the Bataks, and danger is lessened when it is cooked. 

the Lubu men are all Sumatran tribes, Mr. L. Wray also writes that he 

the Bataks being cannibals. was warned by some Batang Padang 

2 The fruit of the P'rah-tree, which Sakai not to eat " buah p'rah." They 
resembles that of the Spanish chestnut, said it was poisonous unless it was 
is certainly not poisonous under all cooked. Mr. Wray adds that he had 
conditions, and it is in fact a favourite eaten them roasted many times. The 
food of the Jakuns, though I myself P'rah-tree belongs to the ^/(-//i^/'^/ari^i^, 
was one day warned by Jakuns of its many members of which order are 
"poisonous" properties when tasting poisonous. The bright red young 
it. I believe the fact is that it is ex- leaves of the P'rah-tree are cooked and 
tremely liable to produce violent indi- eaten by the Sakai as a vegetable. 

276 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

among the dishes which were placed before the 
Bataks, so that many died immediately. The rest 
succumbed to a hail of javelins rained on them 
by the ambushed Kenaboi. The rest of the Bataks 
in consequence left the country, and the Batin 
was called Batin P'rah in remembrance of the 
event. ^ 

The second attack came from the Bugis, whom 
the Sakai call Rawa," and who are described as having 
come from an island situated not very far off. 

The story runs that one Guntar (?) was at that time 
the Batin of the Beduanda in Sungei Ujong, and the 
Sakai used to bring their wares out of the jungle and 
sell them to Guntar, who thus became a middleman 
between them and the Malays, one Kelanong being 
named as the Malay chief. After a time the Malays 
went further west from the Pahang in order to trade 
with the jungle tribes of the interior, especially in 
eagle-wood and ivory, which they in turn sold to the 
Chinese and Siamese of the eastern seaboard. And 
as the eastern Malays offered the Sakai much higher 
prices than Guntar, they therefore sold their goods 
to him no more. 

Being vexed at this, he threatened the Sakai, who 
called to their aid the fighting men of the Senoi, 
Kenaboi, and Besisi, and went in a crowd to Guntar's 
house. Frightened at the crowd, the leader of the 
Beduanda dissembled, and invited the Batins of the 
Jungle-folk to a council.^ These agreed, and leaned 
their blowpipes against a coconut-palm, and the tree 
was thrown down by their great weight. As Guntar 

' Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 91. came from Sumatra, which is only just 

'•^ Sic. The "IJugis" are inhabitants across the Straits, 

of Celebes, which is a very long way ^ Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 91. 
off the i'eninsula. The Kawa really 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {'BLANDAS') 277 

yielded in every point and withdrew his threatenings, 
the Sakai again dispersed. 

Raging at this check, Guntar, while he simulated 
friendship for the Sakai, made secret overtures to the 
Rawa, who for a long time had carried on trade with 
the west coast, without having any regular settlement. 
Guntar promised to give the Rawa the land of the 
Sakai and certain presents if they would drive them 
away. The Rawa accepted, and soon many of them 
came to the Peninsula and attacked the Sakai in 
their own homes at night, thrusting their spears up 
through the floor and killing the men as they hurried 
out. Women and children they sold to the Malays, 
who must therefore have known of the design. The 
Sakai sought to drive the intruders out of Selangor. 
Many battles took place, in one place with success. 
They had taken up a position at Bukit Guling Batang, 
and rolled rocks and stones from the screes down on 
the attacking Rawa, who were obliged to retreat. 
Since the Rawa had better weapons, they killed many 
and took many into slavery, and in the confusion the 
Sakai fled in all directions into the jungle, where the 
Rawa did not venture to follow them. 

This is the cause of their wide dispersal, the de- 
struction of their race, and the difl"erence that shows 
itself in the customs of the separated branches of the 
race. 

Here and there one finds in the remote hill- 
country small settlements of Sakai of comparatively 
pure race, but on the whole their original mode of 
life and early customs have either been given up or 
very much modified.^ 

According to tradition, enmity broke out in the 

* Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 92. These legends cannot, of course, be taken as history. 

278 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

end between Guntar and the Rawa, after which all 
the Sakai men who had not been made slaves fled 
far away. Guntar is said to have broken his word, 
on which the Rawa attacked the Beduanda, and took 
away many of their children to be sold. Then most 
of the rest sailed back to their land, only a few remain- 
ing in Perak and Selangor. 

The example once given was not forgotten, and 
for many generations the Malays of the Peninsula 
were wont on occasion to take the children of Sakai 
parents and sell them as slaves, although they made 
no further organised attack on them. 

Here follows the history of the " Orang Jakun " (!). 
When the Malays of Kedah attacked Pengkalan 
Tampoi, the Benua united themselves both with the 
Benua Laut Jagong and with the Benua Dalam 
people, and Batin Alam withdrew with them to the 
mountains of Johor. When he heard that the 
Sakai men had not been again attacked, but had 
settled in Sungei Ujong, Johol, and Klang, he decided 
to unite with them ; but this plan was opposed 
by the Benua. In the end, however, he set off with 
those who wished to follow him, and united himself 
with the Sakai at Klang. 

The Orang Benua who had remained behind in 
Johor resolved to go southwards, while the rest of 
the Sakai who could not bring themselves to unite 
with Batin Alam's people returned to Muar, where 
soon afterwards wanderers arrived from Menangkabau. 
Tradition mentions them no more. 

The Orang Benua arrived at Batu Pahat in 
Johor, which was then unoccupied. Here they were 
afterwards attacked by men in boats. These were 
not Malays, and it is not known who they were. 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {^ BLANDAS') 279 

The Orang Benua fled along the coast, and reached 
the east end of Johor. As they found the country 
unoccupied they turned towards the interior, and 
settled on the river Sembrong. Here they lived 
long in peace, working their way step by step 
through the forest towards the north-west. Here 
they met with some people who were fleeing from the 
Bataks. The fugitives were received as friends, and 
stayed with them for a time. A few years later 
came a great host of Sakai fleeing from the Rawa 
towards Johor. Many of them stayed with the 
Benua. 

The Benua themselves afterwards took their way 
westward along the Strait of Johor, and fell in with 
a race of the Orang Laut, and intermarriages took 
place. Physical proof of the mixture is said to exist 
in the projecting teeth which can be seen in so many 
of the Benua, and through them also in the Mantra of 
Malacca.^ 

The Benua dwelling on the west coast of the 
Peninsula belong just as much to the main Sakai 
stock as the other branches of the race from Johor 
to Kedah. On the east coast the type of the people 
is more deeply marked, and the various branches 
differ less from one another.'- 

The traditions of the Benua themselves are very 
poor, but agree in the main with the usual stories of 
the Sakai. 

The Kenaboi folk had wandered far both from 
the Sakai (" Blandas ") of Sungei Ujong, when they 
found themselves checked in their march by the 
Kenaboi river, one of the tributaries of the main 
stream of the Pahang. 

1 This is, of course, a mere tradition. ^ Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 93. 

28o NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

They found the country attractive, and settled at 
Kenaboi (the Mengiri river/ where the best bamboos 
grow for blowpipes being not far away). This circum- 
stance determined their choice of a settlement for a 
long time, when they pushed gradually further down 
the Pahang to the Pekoi, or, as the Malays called it 
when they reached it, the Senoi (" Sinnoi ") river. 

These two settlements perished through the 
invasion of the Bataks and the Rawa ; their in- 
habitants were dispersed, and united afterwards with 
other tribes. 

From Klang a great host of Sakai (" Blandas ") 
including those who had attached themselves to 
their companions after the attack on Pengkalan 
Tampoi, had gone to a place east of Sungei Ujong, 
which they called Kring,^ as their first settlement. 
Later they spread to the north and east. In con- 
sequence of the attack of the Bataks this section of 
the race — known merely under the name of " Blandas " 
— went further towards the north. 

When, however, the Kenaboi men under Batin 
P'rah had beaten back the Bataks, the greater part 
of the now so-called Besisi came back. 

Broken up, however, into separate family groups in 
the time that followed, they ceased to form a separate 
race, and scattered themselves among the Besisi 
at Sungei Ujong, Perak,^ and especially Selangor. 
Their countrymen in these places remarked that half 
of the new arrivals brought with them a foreign 
dialect. In addressing the inhabitants of Perak, 
Selangor, and Sungei Ujong they all spoke the Sakai 
tongue ; among themselves they talked half Sakai, 

' Sic, ? Nengjj;iri. - I'robably Triang or Tring. 

•* One of V.-St.'s characteristic inaccuracies. There are no Besisi in Perak. 

SAKAI {'BLANDAS') 281 

half an unknown language, whence they were called 
Besisi, which means " a foreign language." ^ 

[The remainder of the chapter is taken up with 
the merest speculations as to the origin of the tribes 
and their distribution.]^ 

Legend of the Origin of Sakai Face-fainting, 

When the Senoi had decided to leave the main 
stem of the Sakai stock in order to seek a new home 
in the eastern part of the Peninsula, the magicians 
took counsel together to decide what form the new 
patterns of body-paintings ^ (which were to distinguish 
the. Senoi) should properly take. A decision with 
regard to the breast-painting was soon reached ; but 
this was not the case with regard to the face-painting, 
some magicians wishing to change the pattern at the 
eye, others not. At this stage, however, the wife of 
one of the magicians who had hidden herself to hear 
the discussion, put her head into the room uninvited, 
and took part in the discussion. Her husband, who 
stood near her, had smeared his fingers, like all the 
others, with " anatto," in order to be able to apply 
the red streaks. Incensed at his wife's intrusion, he 
struck at her with his red-dyed fingers, and as they 
left five marks upon her face, the assembly decided 
that the women should in future bear five lines upon 
their face, but the men only three.* 

Traditions of Abnormal Races and Cannibals. 
The " Orang Ekor," or Tailed Men, who are 

1 Vaughan- Stevens, ii. 93, 94. This ^ See Vaughan-Stevens, vol. ii. pp. 

derivation of "Besisi" is certainly 94 to end. 
inaccurate. ^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 154. * Ibid. p. 155. 

282 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

spoken of all over the Malay Archipelago as if they 
were real human beings, are described as appearing 
from time to time in various parts of the Malay 
Peninsula. They are said to resemble human beings, 
and are not believed to be dangerous ; but they will 
have nothing to do with men, and vanish at once 
into the forest as soon as they are seen. They wear 
nothing but a loin-cloth of tree-bark, beneath which 
may be seen a short tail. Both the men and women 
have tails, but they are not numerous, and their 
children are never seen.^ 

Other traditions of abnormal races are as follows : — 

1. A race of gigantic women, or Amazons, who 
live unmarried. The Sakai, it is said, sometimes 
find beautifully decorated blowpipes of great length 
belonging to one of these Amazons, either lying on 
the ground, or leaning against a tree. In some cases 
they have been rash enough to carry them away, but 
had not gone far before they were struck down from 
behind. Those who were not killed and could 
observe their aggressor, described her as a gigantic 
woman who vanished immediately upon the recovery 
of her property. Nothing more is known of them, 
though they are described as being real human beings.' 

2. The Sakai (the " Blandas " of Vaughan-Stevens) 
apply the name " Sakai " to a fabulous race of little, 
hairy, desert-dwelling people, who are now but rarely 

1 Cp. M. Maclay in/.i^..-/..S'., 5./>\, Cp.Z./i5'.,Index,5.z/. "Geschwanzte 

No. 2, p. 2i6 ; and the explanation Menschen." I may add that when the 

given by Treacher, who in No. xxi. Malay members of the staff of the 

pp. loi, I02, of the same journal refers Cambridge Expedition went on board 

to a tribe of the Muruls, in Borneo, ship at Klang (on their way to Bang- 

who in addition to the usual loin-cloth kok in 1899), they were warned by 

wear on their backs only the skin of a their Malay friends to take care on 

long-tailed monkey, the tail of which reaching their destination that they 

hangs down behind so as to give the were not eaten up by the Tailed Bataks 

impression at a short distance that it (Haiak berekor). 

forms jiart and parcel of its wearer. - Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 82. 

SAKAl (' BLAND AS') 283 

seen, are very shy, and possess so fine a sense of 
smell as to know when a human being is approaching.^ 

These " demon Sakai " (Hantu Sakai) have a sharp 
blade - like bone in their right forearm which they 
use in the felling of trees. To gather the fruit from 
the topmost sprays of a tree they climb the stem, and 
seat themselves upon a branch, whilst they cut the 
spray through with this sharp blade. Although 
they fall to the ground together with the branch 
they never hurt themselves." 

De Morgan states that he was informed by one 
of his men (Ibrahim) and the Sakai Penghulu (" Pa 
Pinang"), who was travelling with him, on reaching 
Sungei Kandis, that the part of the country through 
which they were passing was too cold for the Sakai 
to live in, but was inhabited by other tribes who 
were short of stature, and whose only garment was 
a cincture of leaves attached round the waist. They 

^ It is a curious fact that meat-eating they have a piece of sharp iron which 

Europeans are said to have a (com- serves the double purpose of an arm and 

paratively) strong rank smell, in this a cleaver for cutting wood. Anderson 

differing from that of (and noticeable mentions another savage race, according 

by) the rice-fed native. to the Malays called B'lian, who are 

^ This agrees with the Malay tradi- covered with hair, and have nails of 

tions of the "orang-outang," or extraordinary length. Their principal 

" Mawas," sometimes called Hantu occupation is said to be tending the 

Mawas. Begbie (pp. 5, 6) speaks, tigers, which are their peculiar flocks, 

however, of the Mawas as a wild tribe as the buffaloes are of the Malays, 

of human jungle - dwellers whose They are represented by the Malays 

chopper has been confused with the as sometimes coming to their residence 

arm that wields it. on rainy nights and demanding fire, 

Cp. also Anderson, who states that, which those who are acquainted with 

according to Malayan legends, there is a their savage disposition prefer to 

race of wild people said to be found in hand them upon the extremity of the 

the interior of Bernam ["Burnam," the sumpitan, or blowpipe, or on the 

boundary between the states of Perak point of a sword, since were they to 

and Selangor], designated Tuah Benua present it with the hand, they would 

\_sk ? Hantu Benua] by the Selan- inevitably be seized and devoured by 

gorians, and known in Kedah by the the savage monster, a fate which the 

name of " Mawas." They are repre- Malays firmly believe has befallen 

sented as bearing a strong resem- many. See pp. 225-229, ante. 
blance to the Mawah, or long-armed A "mawas bone " obtained by the 

gibbon, but instead of having a Expedition, proved to be part of an 

bone in the lower part of the arm, old iron implement of peculiar form. 

284 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part m 

were further described as having frizzled hair, and 
as talking an incomprehensible dialect, as living in 
caves and feeding on wild plants, and as being 
entirely ignorant of metal, for which they substituted 
stone implements. The entire range of mountains 
between Perak, Selangor, and Kelantan was said to be 
inhabited by them. They were alleged to flee from 
the approach of men. De Morgan was unable, un- 
fortunately, to obtain confirmation of this statement, 
but says that he considers it to be probably true.^ 

3. There is also said to be an invisible, huge, 
man-like being, who, though never seen, leaves foot- 
prints a yard (or " metre ") long on soft and clayey 
ground. This, however, is all that is known of it, 
and Malays in the Peninsula maintain that otherwise 
normally formed jungle - folk have been known to 
possess these huge feet.^ 

4. The giants (" Gergasi ") are believed to be 
represented by two huge black men with projecting 
tusks in both jaws. They are said to devour those 
who lose their way in the mountain chains of the 
north of the Peninsula.^ 

Fuller accounts assert that southern Siam was 
once invaded by man-eating giants with dark skins 

1 De Morgan, vol. i. p. 19. The gested a way in which he thinks the 

description appears to answer best to tradition may have arisen, viz. through 

that of the pure-bred Semang, as tliey the practice (common to many of these 

might be described by the Sakai. wild people) of binding leaves or 

'^ Vaughan - Stevens, ii. 82. Cp. branches onto their feet when crossing 

M. Maclay in J.R.A.S., S.B., No. swampy ground, either for the purpose 

2, p. 216: "The Malays of Pahang of preventing themselves from sinking 

relate that the wild men on the in the mud, or of concealing their 

river Tekam have feet half a metre tracks from possible enemies, 

in length." The idea of wild men ^ Vaughan Stevens, ii. 81, 82. Cp. 

with abnormally long feet is a wide- M. -Maclay, who in /. R. A.S., S.B., 

spread tradition among Mohamme- No. I, p. 216, describes the "Gergasi" 

dans, and probably reached the as dwelling on the borders of Kedah 

.Sakai through the Malays, although and Singora. Their (Sanskrit) name 

Vaughan-Stevens has elsewhere sug- points to Indian (Hindu) influences. 

CHAP. VI SAKAI {' BLANDAS') 285 

and two projecting teeth resembling the canine teeth 
of tigers. The Raja fought with them, and in a single 
battle killed all but seven, who fled to Southern Kedah, 
where each of them sought for a hill for himself to 
dwell In. Here they henceforth dwelt In caves. 
According to some they had many heads, or elephants' 
ears, or large wings. By the poorer Malays they 
were believed to bury treasure, and In many parts of 
Kedah a Malay who has dreamt of such a treasure 
will go and dig for it. At length, however, they died 
out, and if they were killed and their blood fell on the 
earth, leeches arose, but if it fell upon the grass it 
turned to mosquitos.^ 

The stories of cannibalism perpetrated by Bataks 
in the Peninsula are very common, and although 
probably much exaggerated, it Is not unlikely that such 
traditions may possess some remote foundation of fact. 

The charge of cannibalism may possibly have been 
transferred to the wilder jungle-folk from the Bataks of 
this invasion.^ None of the former, however, are 
cannibals, and there is no proof at all that cannibalism 
has ever, at least in historical times, occurred among 
them. 

TEMBEH. 

Gods and Natural Phenomena. 

The Tembeh give the name " Sam-mor " to the 
Supreme Being, of whom as a God they seem to have 
very vague notions. The custodian of the region to 
whom " Sam - mor " sends wicked souls Is called 
" Naing-Naing."^ 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 100. Pahang Malays charge the wild men 

2 Cp. M. Maclay, who inJ.R.A.S., on the river Tekam with being can- 
S.B., No. 2, p. 216, says that the nibals. ^ Globus, Ixix. 1 18 (1896). 

286 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

Heaven lies "somewhere on the other side of 
the world"; Hell (" Ni - nik ") in a cavern or dark 
region in the interior of the earth. The chief of 
the nether regions does not altogether correspond 
to our own " Devil," for though he is a friend of 
Darkness and cannot endure Light, yet as receiver of 
the souls of the wicked Tembeh he appears rather to 
fill the place of some lesser divinity. To him {i.e. to 
" Naing - Naing "), who continually seeks to injure 
mankind when they do not humbly obey him, the 
Tembeh address fair words, praying him to stay far 
away from them, etc., whereas they never pray to 
" Sam - mor " who always remains (they declare) 
friendly-disposed towards them.^ 

Before the creation of the Sun, the Earth was like 
a flat board, beneath which centipedes, ants, and 
scorpions swarmed. In a hole beneath this board 
(the earth) dwelt Naing, whilst Sam-mor was en- 
throned high above it. Sometimes Sam - mor de- 
scended to the board (the earth) in order to take 
exercise, and on one such occasion Naing let him be 
stung by a demon in the shape of an ant. 

Then followed a battle between Sam-mor and 
Naing in which the latter was defeated ; Sam-mor 
threw Naing back into his hole and piled up the biggest 
rocks which he could find like a mountain on the top of 
him and over the hole, so as to make it impossible for 
him to come out again. Finally Sam-mor threw the 
whole board, mountain and all, into the air, wherein the 
whole world has since remained suspended. After- 
wards he rolled fire which he had brought down 
with him into a ball (the sun), which still revolves 

1 The reduplicated form " Nainf^- specific meaning, the form "Naing" 
Naing" does not appear to have any being indifferently employed by V.-St. 

CHAP. VI SAKAI 287 

round the mountain {ix. the earth) to keep watch 
over Nalng.^ 

Magicians. 

Among the Sakai each magician could perform any 
charm that he wished, but among the Tembeh, on the 
contrary, the magicians were divided into the seven 
following classes, with the proviso that the members 
of each class should only learn and be allowed to 
practise one particular form of magic. 

1. The three Demon-charmers or Head Magicians. 

2. The Disease-charmers or medicine-men who 
banished sickness by means of charms and drugs. 

3. The Field and Forest-charmers (for agriculture, 
hunting, and fishing), with whom should be classed the 
Weather-charmers. 

4. The Diviners of Dreams, who interpreted the 
dreams of the uninitiated as well as individual dreams 
of supernatural events. 

5. The Diviners of Omens, who interpreted 
omens, and knew the auspicious and inauspicious 
days, etc. 

6. The Diviners of Crimes, who tried charges of 
felony and decided whether the accused was innocent 
or guilty. 

7. The Assistant Magicians or pupils, who carried 
out the magician's orders, and lived in closer com- 
munication with the laity.^ 

Traditions. 

The following is the gist of the Tembeh traditions 
given by Vaughan-Stevens : ^ — 

i Globus, \y:\^. 118 (1896), H. V. S. 2 /^,-^_ 

2 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 98. 

288 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

The Tembeh were of the same stock as the Sakai when the latter dwelt in 
Pulau Guntong Penyaring, although they themselves (the Tembeh) dwelt upon 
another island, called Tembeh (" Tumior "'), which was far distant from that of the 
Sakai (Blandas). Long before the time of Batin Iron-claws, the Tembeh had 
been attacked by the inhabitants of another island, who were cannibals, and the 
sur\avors had fled to Borneo (Negri Brunei). 

For their subsequent departure from Borneo various reasons are given ; e.g. a 
quarrel, the hostility of the Dayaks, and the dream of a white bird which they 
were to follow. The upshot, however, was that they reached I'erak and wandered 
inland. A foreign conquest of the Peninsula followed, driving them permanently 
into the mountains. 

Exo7xisin of the Cholera Demon. 

The cholera charm here described was alleged by 
the Tembeh to have been identical with one formerly 
practised by all the Sakai tribes, at the time when 
there still existed among them a real hereditary class 
of magicians. The fact that the Sakai magicians 
were once acquainted with a special charm against 
cholera was frequently asserted by them, but none of 
them were able to state for certain whether it was or 
was not identical with the ceremony practised by the 
Tembeh/ 

The ceremony commenced by the magicians 
giving a signal, at which every one but himself was 
compelled to withdraw into the small tree -huts in 
which this particular tribe was living. After their 
retirement he proceeded to enclose, by means of four 
shallow furrows drawn with a pointed staff [at right 
angles to each other], an open space, the size of which 
depends on the (anticipated) number of spectators — in 
this case it measured about 30 m. — and which has 
previously been cleared and levelled for the purpose. 

It is here that there takes place the expulsion of 
the Cholera Demon, who is called " Rak " and is 
apparently exorcised like the Smallpox Demon by 

1 Globus, Ixix. 1 18 (1896). 

Markings ok Men kki'kesenting Demons in the Tembeh Cekemonv 

FOR exorcising THE ClIOI.EKA DEMON. 

o o o o o o 

i-'-- 

o 
o 
o 

O o O O O O 

/ 'iin^/ian-Sfeve»s {Giofius). 
Plot of Grouni) marked out for the Ceremony of 
exorcising the cholera demon. 

(For explanation see Appendix.) 

N, E, S, W. Points of the compass. 

Y = Corner at which the spear-ljearers entered the plot, their track being 
denoted by dots. 

#=ljamboo sprays planted in centre of plot, from which spears were 
fashioned. 

00= Positions takeji up by spear - bearers to await attack ot the white- 
striped men (demons). 

Voi. U. />. 288. 

CHAP. VI SAKAI OF SELANGOR 289 

means of a dance, during which certain magic formulse 
are chanted by the magician/ 

SAKAI OF SELANGOR. 

Ceremonies and Charms. 

Records of the reUgion of the Selangor Sakai are 
extremely rare. It is therefore very interesting to 
learn from the late Mr. J. A. G. Campbell that the 
Sakai of the Ulu Langat district " had a ceremony at 
which they used all to sit down, blow bamboo pipes, 
and sing to demons (or ' Hantu ')," though whether 
to drive them away or to ask blessings of them he 
had not, when writing, been able to learn. - 

Yet more interesting is the Ulu Langat version of 
the famous love-charm called " Chinduai," According 
to Campbell, the plant called "chinduai" " is extremely 
rare, and almost unobtainable. The charm is a white 
flower of three petals, which is supposed to be only 
procurable in almost inaccessible places, such as very 
steep cliffs. It grows out of the rock and possesses 
no leaves or stem, but exhales a strong perfume. If 
placed in a house it is supposed to make all the 
inhabitants so enamoured of the owner that he can do 
anything he likes with them." Mr. Campbell con- 
tinues, " I am told that there is a hill in the interior of 
Malacca where a ' chinduai ' is supposed to grow. 
The Sakai are said to be able to climb these steep 
cliffs by the aid of devils. I have never seen the 
' chinduai.' "^ 

1 Globus, Ixix. 118 (1896). The in the Appendix to this volume, 
detailed description of this ceremony ^ j_ \ q_ Campbell, p. 240. 

(from Globus, Ixix. 137- 141) is given ^ Ibid. 

VOL. II U 

290 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

III. — Jakun. 

Jakun of Sungei Ujong*. — The following story of the 
transmigration of the soul of a deceased tribal chief, 
or " Batin," of a Sungei Ujong tribe was contributed 
to the Selangor Journal by a French Roman Catholic 
missionary, the Rev. Charles Letessier : — 

" On the summit of the Hebang mountain, at the 
foot of which dwells the Batin Lepeng, there lives in 
solitary retirement a beautiful black ape of the 
Siamang species. It is known to all the Sungei 
Ujong tribes under the name of ' The Sacred 
Ape ' (' Siamang Kramat '), a title which recalls its 
mysterious origin. A Batin having died, the mourners 
repaired to his tomb as was customary seven days 
later in order to make it up, but on their arrival were 
unspeakably astonished to find no traces remaining of 
the deceased save his clothing and his shroud, when 
suddenly they perceived a ' Siamang ' swinging from 
branch to branch of the great tree that overshadowed 
the grave. As a ' Siamang ' had never been seen at 
Bukit Hebang before, they came to the conclusion 
that it could be nothing else but the deceased Batin, 
especially as they never succeeded in their attempts 
to drive it away. They assert that on a sub- 
sequent occasion, when wounded by the dart from a 
blowpipe, he transformed himself for a moment into a 
tiger, striking such terror into his would-be assassin 
that the latter expired not long afterwards.^ This 
' sacred ape ' is of the size of a child of six years, 

^ This is a very interesting point, as by the Malays of the Tembeling river 

it shows that the deceased ancestor in in Pahang of a bear that one of the 

animal form is believed to be still able leaders of a previous expedition to the 

to turn himself from one shape into Tahan Mountain had shot at and 

another at will. So, too, I was told wounded, and which had forthwith 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALA YS OF NEGRI SEMBILAN 291 

and is covered with long jet-black fur. It is never 
known to descend to the ground, but whenever one 
of its tribe climbs the mountain it hastens to meet 
him, springing from tree to tree, and accompanying 
him to the summit, expressing its delight the while 
by means of cries and gestures ; and in conclusion 
those who relate the story never forget to say that it 
foretells, three days in advance, the approaching death 
of their existing Batin."^ 

Jakun of Jelebu. — It is an interesting fact that the 
ancient Malay regalia of Jelebu, one of the states of 
the Negri Sembilan, are declared by Malay tradition 
to have been of Jakun origin. 

The list of articles composing it was given me as 
follows : — 

1. The ivory ear-studs, or " Subang Gading." ^ 

2. The ebony-wood ear-studs, or " Subang Kayu 
Arang." 

3. The "monkey" bone, or " Tulang Chikah." 

4. The "flying-fox" bone, or "Tulang Keluang." 

5. A mouse-deer's eye-tooth, or " Taring P'landok." 

6. A slip of " male " rattan, or " Sega Jantan." 
The following tradition is also told about the 

origin of these Jelebu tribes : — 

Batin Salengkur 'Alam (the ancestor of the tribe) 
descended from heaven. He is said in Malay tales to 
have been the hero of the " bamboo episode." There 
once grew a giant bamboo (which according to one 
account was called Buluh Bohal), upon Gunong Hijau, 

transformed itself into an ape. Such itself into an animal at will, and be- 
at least was the legend which I myself came a man when fired at." 
heard on the Tahan, but on my ' Letessier, p. loi. 
mentioning it to Mr. H. N. Ridley '^ "Subang" is a Malay word 
(one of the leaders of the expedition signifying the ear - stud, which is 
in question), he wrote : "It was rather worn by Malay maidens as a sign of 
a demon which was believed to turn virginity. See also p. 313, infra. 

292 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

and the Batin is said to have stirred it thrice with his 
foot, in spite of the mysterious protestations which 
issued from it each time he did so. On the third 
occasion a Princess, Lindong Awan, issued out of it, 
and was married on the spot to a Prince of Johor 
named Raja Ma'atham. The ceremony was performed 
by a mosque official (" Kathi ") and the requisite 
number of witnesses (four), all of whom descended 
from heaven for the purpose of performing it. Sub- 
sequently, we are told, the Batin " disappeared," and 
the young prince and his miraculously provided 
spouse together ascended the throne of Johor.^ 

BLAND AS. 

Natural Phenomena and Paradise. 

Blandas of Selangor. — According to the Blandas of 
Kuala Langat the earth was originally the shape of a 
particular kind of betel-box, which is called " sodok- 
sodok " by the Malays, and which is flat and oblong. 
The nether deep or ocean was the shape of a tobacco 
receptacle of the kind called " lopak - lopak " {i.e. 
globular), and the heavens which were round and over- 
reaching were like an umbrella ( = Mai. "payong"). 

The traditions of the Blandas Paradise are very 
similar to those of the Besisi in the same district, 
which latter will be set forth more fully below. A well- 
known old Blandas chief told me that in the " Island 
of Fruits " (the Blandas Paradise) the souls of " old 
people" became "young" again;'" that there was no 
pain or sickness there, and that there was such an 
abundance of " well water " there that it formed seven 
ponds or lakes. ^ 

^ Cp. pp. 343, 344, Jnfra. (di-I'ulau Buah)." 

2 " Orang sudah Ix'sar halik kcchil '■'• " Ayer tclaga bangun kulam tujoh." 

CHAP. VI SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 293 

He added that it was possible for a medicine-man 
to send his soul to visit the Island of Fruits in a 
trance (" ber-sawai "), and that if he and his people 
" sat down in a line " that extended all the way there, 
any one who thus visited it could bring back enough 
" rambutans " (a favourite jungle fruit) to feed every 
one of them. He added that the way to it led along a 
plank (" meniti papan "), and that any great medicine- 
man, if he wanted to kill an adversary, could do so by 
" sapping the plank" in question (" tetas papan "). 

Animal Beliejs and Traditions — the Elephant. 

One of the nicknames given to the elephant by 
the Blandas of Selangor is that of " Babi Rebong," or 
bamboo-sprout {v. p. 222) boar, i.e. the wild pig that 
lives on the young bamboo shoots, these being the 
favourite food of the elephant in the Malay Peninsula. 

A form of the " manis " story, as related by the 
Semang, also occurs, for I was one day told by an old 
Blandas chief of the same district that once when the 
elephant had incautiously pushed his trunk through 
a hole (in a tree), a manis caught hold of the tip of it, 
and thus effectually prevented the elephant from with- 
drawing it again. This, no doubt, is the reason why 
the elephant's trunk has become so elongated, as it is 
also the reason why the elephant still goes in fear of 
the manis. 

The story here told is the counterpart of numerous 
stories very familiar to the Malays. In some of 
these the manis bites the elephant's foot, in others it 
rolls itself round the elephant's trunk and so suffocates 
it ; in yet others the manis licks a wild banyan-tree 
(" jawi-jawi "), and the tainted tree is for ever avoided 
by the elephant and all his descendants. 

294 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

The same (Blandas) tribe also had a story about 
an elephant - stone which possessed certain magic 
virtues, and which had been obtained by a member of 
the tribe from an elephant killed by a spring-spear trap 
(" b'lantek "). The stone was called " Batu' Badui," 
or " Elephant-stone," and appears to be an analogue 
of the magic stone which the Malays believe may some 
times be obtained from the head of a snake (cp. our own 
" toad-stone "). 

The Tiger. 

The tiger's stripes are believed, among the Blandas, 
to have resulted from contact with the " kenudai " 
fruit, which fell upon the tiger's skin and caused its 
markings.^ But this effect was only caused by the 
" kenudai " fruit that fell upon the land ; and that 
which fell into the water is believed to have been 
in some way connected with the origin of the 
crocodile," 

The following is a Blandas charm which is believed 
to have the power of crippling a tiger. It was given 
me by a member of the Kuala Langat tribe : — 

Tiger-crippling Charm. 

Trong wet ! Trong wau ! 

Stick fast i' the tree-stumps, where thou prowlest ; 

The weighting charm is said already. 

Refuse thou then men's heads, O Tiger. 

And be your hind-feet slow, earth-loaded, 

And slow, stone-loaded, be your fore-feet. 

A sevenfold rampart now surrounds me, 

The weighting-charm I've just repeated. 

1 Mr. H. N. Ridley calls this fruit break and leave a stain or smear on 

" kenidai," which maybe Malay, but anything with which it came in 

"kenudai" was the name used by the contact. 

Blandas. Mr. Ridley tells me that it - The exact connection was not ex- 
is a Glochidion (possibly Bninmufn), plained, but I believe it to have been 
and that it is a "shrub with pulpy that they developed into the knob-like 
fruit growing on wet river - banks. " projections on the top of the crocodile's 
The pulpiness of the fruit may doubt- head (over his eyes), which are very 
less have helped the story, as the result conspicuous, and are alluded to in 
of its falling would naturally be to Malay stories of the crocodile's origin. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 295 

A second Blandas tiger-charm, which ran as given 
below, consisted of a couple of stanzas of the Malay 
" pantun " type : — 

Tiger-charm. 

Though the young tobacco bends in the breezes 

'Tis planted in a rock-walled cranny. 
Pull ye the cord, clap hands together, 

So from the sun the moon's defended.^ 

Grant me a ladleful of water, 

A ladleful ta'en from the wellside, 
It shields me like the king's umbrella,- 

It shields me like unto a P'airy. 

A charm for snaring the souls of monkeys has 
already been given. ^ 

Exorcism. 

Exorcism is called in the Blandas dialect " ber- 
sawai," which is the equivalent of the Besisi " ber- 
salong " or " tisi'." 

The directions for exorcism of the Blandas 
magicians, given me by themselves, were as follows : — 

Make a shelter with Nibong-palm leaves, big 
enough to contain the Pawang or magician and any 
one else who wishes to be present. Lay the sick 
man inside it on his back. Burn benzoin or incense, "* 
and summon the spirits (Hantu) of either tigers or 
elephants or monkeys (" lotong ") and the like, to 
descend and enter into your body. Wave (" ber- 
limbei ") a bunch of "licuala" leaves, and as soon 
as he (the spirit just invoked) descends and 
"twins" with you,^ brush the patient downwards 

1 The allusion in the fourth line of ^ Supra, vol. i. p. 215. 

the first stanza refers of course to the * Called " cho'ong" (or "cho'okn ") 
belief that the sun is, on tlie occasion in both the Blandas and Besisi dialects, 
of an eclipse, bent upon devouring the " Cho'ong " lit. means to "burn" or 
moon, from whom he has to be "kindle," — "incense" being under- 
frightened away by the din raised by stood, 
the inhabitants of the earth. ^ " Kalau dia turun bekembaran 

2 The umbrella of Malay royalty kita." 
is, of course, the one here meant. 

296 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

from head to foot seven times in succession (with 
the bunch of leaves) repeating at the same time the 
following charm : — 

Exorcising Spell. 

One, two, three, four, five, six, seven ! 
All seven heads of you, begone now. 
But let not go the soul i' the shadow ; 
Let go the demons and the devils 
That dwell within this flesh and sinews, 
And let the Hot grow cold and frigid. 
Descend ye now, all Venoms, 
Ascend ye, Neutralisers. 
Lo, thus I neutralise all Venoms, 
Ascend ye, Neutralisers. 

Another form of exorcism practised by the Blandas 
consisted in casting out demons by means of a 
ceremony called " berjin," which appears to be 
analogous to the Malay ceremony which goes by the 
same name. 

The requisites (" kalangkapan ") for the ceremony 
consist, they told me, of " serdang " leaves, for making 
the so-called ear- studs or " subang " (which is the 
name given to the pendent leaf- ornaments used by 
these people in all their ceremonies) ; " bertam "-palm 
leaves, for waving (Mai. " pelimbai ") ; and lastly, 
" legum " leaves to make the leaf-chamber (" salong ") 
itself in which the performance takes place. 

The charm runs as follows : — 

Spell for exorcising Diseases. 

0 Spirit-guides, both all and sundry, 

Both big and small, and old and young ones, 

1 crave your help in healing sonie one 

Who's sick i' the veins \or bones, joints, or soul, etc.]. 

By the Blandas charms and spells are employed 
against the Langhui (birth-demon), the Polong, the 
Pontianak,^ and the " Uri "- demon. 

' Cp. supra, pp. 13-15. By many with the Langsuir, and not, as it 
authorities the Pontianak is identilied should be, with the Matianuk. 
^ Lit. "afterbirth." 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 297 

The Blood-throwing Charin. 

The Blandas informed me that they did not now 
practise the actual throwing of blood, but always 
threw water instead. At the same time, however, 
leaves of the " bunglei " were burnt, and the following 
charm (which is principally directed against the 
Spectral Huntsman) repeated by the magician : — 

Charm against the Wild Huntsman. 

Oho, thou Demon Hunter, 

Accept this bowl of blood we offer, 

And use it up to cook your mushrooms ; 

But go a-hunting here no longer. 

Hunt only in the Slough of Ali, 

And in the Swamp of the Mahang trees. 

With your good hound whose name is Tampoi,^ 

Your hound whose name is Koing, 

Your hound whose name is Sukum, 

Your hound whose name is Langsat. 

Lo, here I draw my jungle chopper 

To cut the Neutralising Creeper, 

To cut in twain the Giant Creeper, 

And snuff out thus the Demon Hunter. 

Come thou a-hunting here no longer. 

But hasten back to where thou cam'st from. 

Return unto the Slough of AH. 

Charm against Cramp. 2 

Crack-crack ! creak-creak ! 

That's the banyan with its streamers ! 

Your beard is long, your eyes are scarlet. 

The web hangs down : why, children, bring it ? 

E'en as I snap this staff of rattan,^ 

Be snapped and broke your jaws, O Demons ! 

And like to them be yours, O Giants ! 

Like hammered iron, like Indian iron, 

Be snapped and broke your jaws, O Demons ! 

Be all to-broke your jaws, O Giants ! 

I neutralise your jaws, O Giants ! 

It is not mine, this Neutraliser, 

But it is that of Malim Putih. 

For _y(7Mr jaws is it meant, O Giants ! 

1 The dogs' names are those of ■' Lit. "snap this ' Rotan manau,' " 
certain wild jungle-fruits. this being a special kind of rattan 

2 Mai. " Semut Buta." specially used for staffs, etc. 

298 NATURAL RELIGION AI^D FOLK-LORE part in 

The Blandas also attribute souls to maize and 
banana-trees, and also, like the Besisi, bring back the 
soul of the rice, and suspend it from the rafters,^ 
holding a great feast afterwards. 

BESISI. 

Celestial Phenomena. 

Concerning the ideas of the Besisi on the subject 
of heaven, Mr. G. C. Bellamy reported in 1886 to the 
Selangor Government that the souls of the departed, 
according to their own notions, passed away to an 
Island of Fruit-trees, where they spent eternity. 
This Fruit Island was, as far as he could ascertain, 
nothing more or less than the moon, and on the occasion 
of an eclipse they considered the shadow of the earth 
on the moon's surface to be a spirit or demon (Hantu) 
annihilating their moon-ancestors {" Nenek 'Bayan "). 
This belief occasions the greatest possible terror in 
their minds, and they proceed into the jungle with 
great lamentations and beating of tomtoms, and, 
striking the trees with their jungle-knives ("parangs"), 
beseech the God of the Malays (" Tuhan Allah") to 
release their moon-ancestors. All this I can myself 
confirm from inquiries made in the same district, 
but they are very shy about referring to it in 
conversing with a stranger, and in such cases usually 
remark evasively that they cannot say where this 
island lies, since nobody has ever seen it. Yet to those 
who have gained their confidence they will insist upon 
its reality readily enough, their descriptions of it 
forcibly recalling the poet's island-valley of Avilion, 

^ Supra, vol. i. p. 362. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 299 

" where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow, nor ever 
wind blows loudly," — a land unfailing of durians and 
rambutans and mangostins and all the varied fruits 
of the jungle ; ^ a land therefore of perpetual feasting, 
where the simple jungle-men may lie reclined, playing 
upon their rude instruments of music. None but the 
good will be admitted to it, the bad will have no place 
there, but mourn, " blown along a wandering wind " 
(as was the ghost of Gawain). It is only reached by 
crossing a fallen trunk which serves as a bridge, and 
from which the ignorant and wicked when they go the 
wrong way fall into a great water, generally said to 
be a boiling lake, contained in a vast caldron. This 
only happens, however, to those who allow themselves 
to be frightened by a big and fierce dog which sits at 
the parting of the ways by which the souls must go. 

Another account, from the Besisi near Sepang in 
the same district, was to the effect that as soon as 
the survivors retire seven paces from the freshly-dug 
grave in which they have laid a newly-lost comrade, 
there comes a sound of thunder, which is the recep- 
tion accorded to the soul of the deceased as it ascends 
the heavens and reaches the Island of Fruits. There 
is to be found every kind of fruit that grows, and there, 
too, are many straight roads planted on each hand 
with avenues of banana-trees and pine-apples. Here, 
also, said my informants, are tigers and other wild 
beasts, but Gaffer Engkoh withholds them from 
molesting any one who goes there. The magicians of 
the tribe are reputed to be able to visit the Fruit-tree 
Paradise in a trance and bring fruit back with them. 

1 Mr. Bellamy rightly remarks thai the loud shout of "Pie" = "Fruit," with 

this is just what one would expect from which many of the songs of the Besisi 

their way of living, one of the great fea- conclude). I should add that " Nenek 

tures of which is their passion for fruit (cp. 'Bayan" = Mal. "Nenek Kabayan." 

300 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

Of the divine ancestors of the Besisi this Gaffer 
Engkoh (or Jongkoh), of whom the following in- 
teresting story is told, is the chief Gaffer Engkoh, 
I was informed, once upon a time fell from heaven 
(together with his dog) in the neighbourhood of the 
Besisi settlement at Sepang Kechil, on which occasion 
one Porang ^ Atiyau became possessed and remained 
unconscious for seven days and nights. In this un- 
conscious state he plaited a festoon, which soon be- 
came a ladder reaching to the moon. By this ladder 
Gaffer Engkoh reascended, and when he had gone 
up, and Porang Atiyau with him, the latter quietly 
slipped down again and pulled down the festoon with 
him. And thus Gaffer Engkoh now dwells in the moon 
and protects from wild beasts dead souls that visit the 
Island of Fruits. 

Now Nenek Kabayan (" Si Bayan ") dwelt in the 
(upper) tier of the heavens in which the sun is, and 
he cursed Gaffer Engkoh because the latter (when 
on earth) had felled the sea-coconut palm" ("pauh 
janggi "). Then Gaffer Engkoh in wrath (as he could 
not retaliate) adjured his dog, whom he had left behind, 
saying "Thou shalt eat the Rough-skinned^ (lit. 
' furred ') and the Smooth-skinned * shalt thou devour." 
And with that Gaffer Engkoh's dog became a sacred 
tiger, ^ whose footmarks may to this day be seen at 
Bukit Bangkong near Sepang Kechil. And so to this 
day Gaffer Engkoh is chief of the Besisi Paradise, and 
the guardian of the soul-bridge among them is a dog. 

A number of other beliefs and traditions, such as 

^ Sic, ? " Poyang." Heart of the Seas. — Cp. Malay Magic, 

2 «'Pauh janggi," the coco-de-mer or p. 6, note. 
double coconul-palm, found in the ^ " Vang ber-bulu." 

Seychelles, and believed by Malays ^ " Yang ta' ber-bulu." 

to grow on a sunken bank in the '^ Cp. Hervey in the Mantra Beliefs, 

midst of a great whirlpool in the p. 337, infra. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 301 

the myth of the origin of the Rainbow, and beUefs 
connected with various animals and reptiles, will be 
found in the Besisi Songs, 

Spirits and Demons. 

The following notes on the spirits and demons of 
the Besisi were collected by the writer among the 
Besisi of Selangor : — 

The Wind-Demon (Jin Angin) lives on a white rock 
near Tanjong Tuan (Cape Rachado). "It is a male 
spirit and harmless, and once came to me " (the speaker) 
" in a dream and invited me to visit its abode." 

The " Legion of Demons " or " Demonic Legion " 
(Bes. "Jin Sa-ribu ") dwell in the earth and feed 
when possible upon human victims. They are as 
tall as the loftiest trees, and measure more than a 
fathom across. They have scarlet eyes, and very 
long black hair, which in the case of males is grown 
down to the waist, but in the case of females falls 
down below their feet (" lebeh kaki "). They have 
conical heads, and walk with the greatest swiftness, as 
swiftly, in fact, " as a fire-ship {i.e. steamer) can sail." 
As they go, they make a shrill whistling noise, "that 
sounds like shi-i-i-i." At the full of the moon their 
bodies are perfectly white, as white, in fact, as a sheet. 

The demon garrotter (Jin Sa-rapat) lives in the 
hills. He is of the size of an ordinary person, but 
carries a small pocket-knife (" pisau b'landa ") with 
which he slits the weasand of his victim. 

In addition, there are the Hantu Kembang Buah 
(" bagei lanjut ") and the Jin G'rotak, of which nothing 
more than their names is known. 

There is also a strong belief in animal spirits and 
in vegetation spirits of various kinds as well as in 

302 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

spirits of inert objects. As regards vegetation spirits, 
I have seen a fruit-tree (mangostin) decorated with 
palm-leaf festoons which I was told were used in a 
ceremony for promoting the fertility of the tree, and 
there was also, as among the Malays, a strong 
belief in the spirits inhabiting trees yielding gutta 
(Hantu Getah), eaglewood (Hantu Gharu), and 
camphor (Hantu Kapor), all of which were treated 
ceremonially and surrounded with taboos. 

The " Orang Bunyan " live in swampy places. 
"I" (the speaker) "once met two of them near 
the Pelkun in the Siak district (Sumatra). They 
wore madder-coloured jackets and flowered skirts of 
the kind called ' batek ' ; beautiful women they were, 
both of them, with pale skins, open features, and 
black hair rolled up on their heads, and trimmed with 
a fringe (like that of a bride) over the brows. They 
asked me what I was doing, and I said I was ' collect- 
ing gutta.' They replied, ' All the gutta here is ours. 
If you collect any, give it to us.' At this I turned 
back, and when I had gone but two paces, they 
vanished. When I got back, my comrades said, * Why 
did you abandon all that gutta ? ' Sol told them of 
the two women I had met, and what they said. And 
that night my two comrades died without a trace of 
sickness. Afterwards I met a gutta-tree magician and 
told him my story. So he would try too. He got 
as much as two pikuls and sold it, and had just re- 
turned to get more when his son-in-law died. 

" One of these same ' Orang Bunyan ' called 
Gaffer Blue-Heron (Bes. ' Dato' Si Puchong') lives at 
a Sacred Place near Sungei Kroh (close to Sepang), 
and another at a Sacred Place on the way to Labu 
(Bes. ' K'ramat To' Kemarong '). Whenever we pass 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 303 

their shrines we have to burn incense there and say, 
' Grandfather, harass me not, I am your grandson,' or 
we should be destroyed by their attendants. Each has 
two attendants, an elephant and a tiger, both of whom 
have one of their feet formed like the foot of a man." 

The Demon (or "Spectre") Huntsman (Bes, 
" Hantu si Buru ") is full ten feet high, and his face is 
very hairy (with beard and whiskers). From nightfall 
onwards at the full of the moon he goes hunting deer 
and pig. He has two hunting dogs, both of them 
small and with reddish fur. One of them, the redder 
of the two, is called Sokong (Mai. "Sukun "), and the 
other Ko'ing i^. Mai. " K'ruing "). He carries a spear 
with which he stabs people, and its shaft is six cubits 
long, and as big as two hands may grasp (" besar dua 
tangan "). He whistles as he hunts, and his dogs 
go barking " weh, weh ! " " Relatives of mine " {i.e. 
of the speaker) " have however repeatedly made friends 
with him. If they want to meet him, they restore to 
its erect position a half-snapped tree-stem. (Any but 
a gutta-tree will do.) At this he appears, and says 
' What do you want ? ' And they reply, ' I want my 
father.' To this he answers, ' I will be a father to 
you ; if ever you are sick, send for me and I will come 
to you.' This promise he keeps, and when they are 
sick they invoke him, and he comes and cures them 
with his charms," 

The Spectre Huntsman described above, dangerous 
as he is, corresponds in scarcely anything but name to 
the terrible Demon who is regarded as such a scourge 
to the forest-dwelling Malays in the same district. 

The River Spirit (Bes. "Hantu Sungei ") haunts 
the sources of the rivers. 

The Demon of fatal Birth-sickness (Bes. "Jin 

304 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

Mati Anak," with which however it has scarcely any 
points in common), is of two kinds. The one which is 
harmless is called Kuwak. It is believed to resemble 
a dwarf human being, being only three hand-spans 
high. It has a white body and goes naked, " barking 
like a deer " (" ke-e-e-eng ") in the very dead of night. 
The more dangerous kind has long nails (like claws), 
is covered from head to foot with long bushy hair, and 
goes lolling its long tongue out " like a thirsty dog." 
Sometimes it enters people's bodies, and then they go 
mad ; at others it enters into water, and no harm is 
done. This demon sprang from a woman who died 
in giving birth to her youngest child. 

Of the Hantu Lang-hwe (Mai. " lang-suir," which 
is often associated in Malay mythology with the Mati 
Anak) very little was told me. I learnt, however, that 
it lives in the Pulai-tree, is about the size of an owl, and 
makes a noise which sounds like " kok-kok-kok-kok." 

Of the Grave Demon (Hantu Kubor) there are 
two kinds. The first enters into the bodies of wild 
beasts, such as deer and tigers. When you see a 
deer or tiger with its head turned round (looking 
backwards), it is because its body has been entered 
by the Grave Demon. 

The other kind, which is called " Kemuk," ^ has 
a globular body like the fruit of the wax- gourd 
(" kundor "). It is pallid in colour, and chases people at 
sight, rocking itself after them, and making a noise 
which sounds like " nuh-uh-uh-uh." When it enters 
people they get "all abroad" and feverish, and little 
by little it " steals their life." 

Before leaving this part of the subject I may 
perhaps as well record the fact that among the Besisi, 

' ? Vaughan-Stevens' "Hantu Degup.' 

CHAP. VI SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 305 

it Is " pantang " (prohibited) to gather quartz, and 
that the practice if persisted in was believed to cause 
both fever and a swelling of the legs. 

Transmigration of Souls. 

In addition to the foregoing information, I may add 
that the transmigration of souls is also one of their 
religious tenets, and they firmly believe that the souls 
of their deceased Batins now find a resting-place in 
the bodies of tigers, deer, pigs, and crocodiles. ^ 

This testimony extends the list of animals into 
which the transmigration is believed to take place 
beyond the limits of mere beasts of prey, and shows 
that the idea is based on more general grounds than 
might otherwise have been supposed. To the fore- 
going list, again, monkeys or apes, the elephant, and 
the rhinoceros should be added. 

The Tio;er. 

The Besisi had several names for the tiger, whom 
they used to call " Tueh " (Tuweh) and " Malap " as 
well as "a a'." They told me that the tiger had a 
song of its own, and that what it said was : 

Teng wet bong 
Teng wet bong 
Merutup kapala chuchu ; 

which might almost be translated, on the analogy of 
one of our own nursery rhymes : — 

Fee foh fum ! 
Fee foh fum ! 
Crack goes your head, my grandchild ! 

1 I may mention in this connection told a wild pig (in which it was implied 

that I myself well remember being that the deceased's ghost was embodied) 

shown a grave near Sepang in Selangor was believed to have issued. This 

of which the earth had partly fallen in, idea, was I believe, due to the Chinese, 

leaving a hole in the centre of the but it is perhaps worth quoting as a 

grave or mound out of which I was local parallel. 

VOL. II X 

3o6 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

These lines evidently afforded them considerable 
amusement. They may very possibly be one of their 
own children's rhymes, in which case they would 
naturally amuse the grown-ups.^ 

The wooden "scapegoat" images of the Besisi 
will be dealt with later (pp. 374, 375). 

Divination {'' ber-sawai''). 

The most usual form of medium-making among 
the Besisi is the ceremony called " Seoi," or more com- 
monly, perhaps, " Sawai " (Mai. " ber-sawai ") ; i.e. the 
" chanting " ceremony. " 

I was once present at a performance of this sort 
near Ayer Itam, in the Kuala Langat district of 
Selangor. The ceremony is performed usually for the 
benefit of sick persons, but there was no sick person in 
this case, and the Besisi informed me that the use of 
the performance was not confined to cases of sickness, 
but that the medium who falls into the trance in such 
cases was able to answer any questions affecting the 
welfare of any individual or individuals for whose 
benefit the ceremony was performed. 

The ceremony took place about an hour after sun- 
down. All lights having been carefully extinguished, 
so that the house was plunged into complete darkness, 
the assembled company, which included women as 
well as men, sitting in a wide circle close to the outer 
walls of the hut, commenced to chant a weird kind 
of incantation, to the accompaniment of bamboo 
"stampers" ("ding tengkheng "), which were played 

1 Two more lines about the tiger, of Lit. " Chawong the elder, is his 

which I could not, however, get the elder brother, Chawong the younger, 

exact meaning, were — his yoimger brother." 

"Chawong abang, abang-nya, ^ "Seoi," lit. = to sing or chant (in 

Chawang adik, adik-nya." Besisi). 

CHAP. VI SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 307 

by performers sitting in their midst. Two of the 
performers, each holding one of these "stampers" (in 
each of his hands), struck these instruments in rapid 
succession upon the central beam of the house-floor, 
producing thereby a musical rhythm by no means 
unpleasant to listen to. At the same time incense 
(benzoin) was kindled in an improvised brazier of 
coconut-shell. As the incantation (which consisted 
of an invocation to the spirits) proceeded, one of the 
spirits commenced to give evidence of his descent, by 
taking possession of one of the company, who presently 
fell down apparently unconscious. While he was in 
this state (of possession) questions were put to him, 
apparently by anybody desiring to do so. The 
required information having been given, the possessed 
person was restored to consciousness by the inhaled 
smoke of the burning incense, which, I was assured 
by one of the company, will always " restore him 
immediately." 

I only succeeded in obtaining a portion of the 
words of the incantation, which proved to be a descrip- 
tion of the preparations required for the ceremony. 

I would attempt to translate it, somewhat roughly, 
as follows : — 

Part of Charm used by Besisi Mediums. 

" Right," we cry, One, Two, Three, Four ! 

" Right," we cry, Five, Six, and Seven ! 

Hang up the ivory ear-studs, 

Hang up the leaf-fringed pendants, 

Stretcli out the leafy festoons, 

Stretch out the festooned fringes, 

Count up your "smooth-coat" lime-fruit. 

Count up your " rough-coat " lime-fruit, 

Stamp on the leaf-cell's flooring, 

The flooring of the Balai. 

To the foregoing a few words of explanation 
should perhaps be added. 

1 For this ceremony, cp, pp. 257, ante ; 359, mfra. 

3o8 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

The use of the word "right " (Bes. "hoi" or "nahol" 
= true, ratified, or approved, i.e. "right!"), together 
with the short numerical formula or category which 
follows, is clearly parallel to the use of the same word 
at a Besisi wedding, described at p. 74, ante. 

The " ivory ear-studs " are ring-shaped decorations 
or nooses made of white (dried) licuala-'^'Avci leaf, which 
together with long fringed festoons of leafwork, are 
hung about the house by the Jakuns at all their 
religious ceremonies to snare the spirits. 

The words " stamp (or drum) on the floor," etc. 
refer to the beating of time by means of the " ding 
tengkheng " or " quarrelling bamboos " just described. 

The reference to the leaf-cell or leaf-chamber is 
important, owing to the rarity of any such allusion. 
I was however told by the Besisi (independently of this 
statement), that for the purpose of divining a person's 
sickness the magician often makes a small leaf-chamber 
or cell for himself, called " Balei bumbun." This cell is 
erected close against the walls of the sick person's 
dwelling, and the magician conceals himself within it 
during the performance of the ceremony in which the 
treatment required for the patient is divined. 

The Malays firmly believe that the performance 
of this " bersawai " ceremony (as they call it) on the 
part of these tribes is infinitely more efficacious than 
any ceremony of which their own medicine-men are 
capable. Hence the Besisi kept it a very close secret. 

The following charm is employed by the Besisi 
for exorcising the Demon of Pain, or as they call it. 
Venom (Tawar Blsa) : — 

Charm for neutralising Venom. 

Dishevelled are your locks, O Demon, 
Your spear too, sire, is weak and fragile. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 300 

Harm you the shoot, I'll show the Antidote, 
Harm you the leaf, I'll show the Antidote, 
Cross me, and I'll display the Antidote, 
Point at me, I'll display the Antidote, 
Enter, and Til display the Antidote, 
Oppress me, I'll display the Antidote, 
Strike me, and I'll display the Antidote, 
Harm me, and I'll snatch forth the Antidote. 
Descend, O Venom ; ascend, O Antidote ! 
It is not I that am skilled in Antidotes 
It is my Masters, the old magicians. 
O Bird men call Chinchili', bring me 
Wherewith to foil attacking Demons. 
O skilful Master, bring the flour-paste 
To heal this Anguish in the sinews. 

Inwalling Charm. 

The'^following is one of the so-called " inwalling " 
{i.e. prophylactic) charms used by the Besisi ( = Mai. 
" Pendinding "). 

Si'ELL FOR Self-protection. 

Tii' Ki'iisaii ! On Batu Putih, on Ladun the lofty, 

I tread the lemon-grass,^ the Iron Pestle, ^ 

To inwall me against foul fiends so many. 

The Seven Hill-crags have I uprooted. 

The long cane's split ; walk ye o' the one side, 

O fiends, whilst I walk on the other. 

Comrades, may Light become your rampart. 

Be mine a rampart of thick Darkness. 

Charm for driving out Devils. 

One, Two, Three, Four, Five, Six, Seven ! 
Be cool, O Fever, cool and frigid. 
In flesh and bones and joints and sinews 
Pluck-forth, expel all Fiends and Devils, 
Be opened, loosed, ye Fiends and Devils, 
Drive forth, I beg, all Fiends and Devils. 
Busu, bring thou the sucking Flour-ball, 
Busu, bring thou the flour-paste Antidote, 
To allay these pangs i' the flesh and sinews. 
And thou, O Fever, be thou cooled. 
And all the Fiends and Devils forth-driven 
From out the heart, from out t'ne spirit. 
Busu, bring thou the Tenglang blossom, 
And chant in the leaf-cell, the leaf-chamber. 
Bring, Busu, all these Fiends together, 

1 Doubtless in allusion to the legend - This no doubt refers to some 

of the seven magical clumps of citronella special geological feature of this partic- 

grass which are believed by the Malays ular crag. There are places so named 

to grow upon the peaks of some of the in the mountains in other parts of the 

highest mountains in the Peninsula. Peninsula. Cp. p. 344, infra, n. 4. 

3IO NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

And drive them forth before your knife-blade 
Unto the Rock that's called Perimbun, 
And there remain they, at Perimbum ; 
Foul be Perimbum with them ever. 

Charm against Devils. 

Hong Hang become Foam, 

And Foam become Rock, 

And Rock become Foam ! 

Dash them down, to left and right. 

Dash them to ground, these devils divers. 

Hong Plese',1 that from the first wert Plese', 

The pot's a-boil, the copper's boiling, 

And lo, to left and right I brim it, 

I brim it up with devils divers ! 

The following charm is used by the Besisi for 
exorcising the Spectre Huntsman {v. p. 303, ante), an 
Oriental counterpart of the "Wild Huntsman" of 
the Harz mountains, so familiar to us in European 
literature: — 

Charm against the Spectre Huntsman, 

Headlong I fly to seize a peeling-knife 
Wherewith to peel yon hairy betel -nut. 
I've drawn my sword and walked the tree-trunk, 
And sharpened me seven stakes of bamboo 
To pierce thy chin, O Spectre Huntsman ! 
Avaunt to the left, avaunt to the right hand ! 
Avaunt, avaunt, thou Spectre Huntsman ! 

Love-charms. 

The Besisi have two or three very famous love- 
charms, which are, however, sometimes confused in 
native accounts. The first of these, the " Buluh Per- 
indu"(Bes, " ding dioi " ?) is described as a kind of 
dwarf bamboo, which grows, like its no less famous 
rivals the "Chinduai" and "Chingkwoi," on the steepest 
and most inaccessible mountain peaks. 

It is said that" in former days the members of the 
travelling theatrical troupes, still a feature of the 

' The Plese' (=Mal. " PclesTt ") is sucks the blood from its victim's 
also called Pemprat by the liesisi, who body, 
describe it as a kind of vampire, which ^ Skeat, Sel. Joitrn. v. 379, 380, 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 311 

Peninsula, were in the habit of obtaining from the 
Jakun some minute splinters or slivers of this plant, 
and of slipping them in between their teeth, in the 
belief that this would render their voices irresistibly- 
melodious ; when successful they kept all their hearers 
at their mercy, and made use of their power to extort 
anything and everything that took their fancy. Hence 
in some parts of the Peninsula the mere possession of 
a splinter of the "Yearning Bamboo" was formerly 
an offence punishable by death. 

The Chingkwoi, which may or may not be identi- 
fiable with the Chinduai, is a fragrant rootlet about a 
palm's-breadth long, which has minute efflorescences 
and fine threads about it, and is said to possess a 
more delicate and refined fragrance than any other 
flower in the world. The most widely accepted ver- 
sion of the story says that it grows underneath the 
ledge of an overhanging crag on the top of one of the 
mountains in Ulu Klang (near the sources of the 
Klang river), ^ and that a Jakun when he wishes to 
obtain it has to ascend this hill and there build a 
shelter wherein to keep his fast beneath the crag 
until a kite, which builds upon the crag and uses the 
Chinduai as medicine for its young, drops a piece of 
the plant in flying over him. I have in my possession 
two minute rootlets which purport to have belonged 

1 According to Campbell, the Chin- " Chop not at the ' Telang ' Bamboo, 

duai is also reported to grow in the If you chop at it, its splinters will 
interior of Malacca, but is not equal to strike you. 

the Chingkwoi. Set not your foot upon the Klang 

According to another account, it is mountains, 

the Chingkwoi which grows upon a crag If you do so, their love -charm (lit. 
called Batu Lalau in Ulu Klang. It yearning) will strike you." 

is described, like the Chinduai, as a 

root about a palm's-breadth long, with The story reminds us of old English 

fine threads about it. legends of the cinnamon, a plant of 

A local quatrain of the Selangor wonderful virtues got from the nest of 

Malays ran as follows : — the phoenix. 

312 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE pakt in 

to the Yearning Bamboo and the Chinduai respectively. 
Unfortunately they cannot be identified, as they pos- 
sess no leaves or stem, but it is noteworthy that one 
of them at least answers to the description which is 
given above, and a faint and indescribable perfume 
always seems to arise whenever the bamboo receptacle 
wherein they are kept is opened. In any case, the 
Chinduai of Ulu Klang has a wide reputation as the 
rarest and most potent love - charm known in the 
Peninsula. It is usually carried in a pouch attached 
to the girdle. 

Besisi Traditions — Si Nibong. 

One of the most remarkable of the legends told 
by the Besisi, though unfortunately I could not succeed 
in getting anything like a perfect version of it, was 
the following story of Si Nibong, which, from what I 
was told by the narrator, an old Besisi man, was 
founded upon a story known to the Blandas.^ 

The story relates to a Jakun chief named Si 
Nibong, (or " Nibong-palm "),- who lived apparently 
in a house constructed entirely of materials obtained 
from the palm after which he was named. ^ This house 
was described as being situate at or near the village 
and holding of his overlord, Busu Baba' (Mai. " Baba," 
the youngest born), who was described to me as having 
been in former days the greatest chief of all the Jakun 

' As the story is incomplete, I only yang Nibong, or the "Nibong -palm 

propose to give here a short sketch of Flower - spathe," who lived at Ulu 

the several portions, but a completer Chembong in Rembau, and that the 

version will be found in the Ap- " ancient J ukrah "here mentioned lived 

pendix. on Gunong Berembun, near an estate 

2 A Sungei Ujong Malay informed of Mr. T. II. Hill, 
me that in a Malay version of the same •' The posts, thatch, and flooring of 

story there were three brothers called the house were all to be of nibong, 

iVfiang Salei, or the "Single Sword- and it was constructed by Jakuns at 

blade," Sa-bentak Alang (?), and Sama- the order, apparently, of Busu Baba'. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 313 

chiefs of Johor, The village in question, with its seven 
betel-palms, seven betel-vine props, and betel scissors 
made from a mouse-deer's eye-teeth,^ was deserted, it 
would appear, in consequence of certain incidents 
related in the tale. At the opening of the story 
Nibong-palm's younger brother, Bujang Semangan, 
is represented as urging him to don his best apparel, 
in order to pay a visit to the house " of certain people," 
the reference being to an " aged Jukrah," the father of 
two princesses, one of whom Nibong-palm at the time 
evidently desired to marry. Before he sets out on 
the journey, however, he has to make an inspection 
of the " Five Times " — in other words, he must divine, 
by astrological means, the most propitious moment 
for his departure. This performance is, it may be 
presumed, satisfactorily completed, and he afterwards 
completes his attire, amongst which prominently figures 
a head-cloth of the finest silk, the value of which is 
expressly stated to be one hundred and ninety-five 
dollars,^ as well as a sword called " Sweeper of the 
Courtyard " (because he wore it trailing on the 
ground), and a kris or dagger called " Sweeper of 
River-reaches " (because it was stuck in the belt at 
his side).^ The journey is then described, and half- 
way they meet with the two sister princesses, Princess 
Tepong (or " Rice-flour ") and Princess Adah (the 
aged Jukrah's daughters), who are being escorted by 
the Mantri (a minor chief) on their way to the house 
of the aged Jukrah, 

1 The regalia (" kabesaran ") of at p. 291, ante. 

Jelebu is said to have been first de- ^ This number points doubtless to 

rived from an old Jakun chief, and to Malay influences. 

consist of the eye-tooth of a mouse- ^ The first of these reasons is clear 

deer ("taring plandok"), together enough ; the second is one that was 

with several other magico - mystical also given me, but is not so ob- 

objects, a list of which will be found vious. 

314 NA TURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part m 

The party now arrives at a place where there are 
five cross-roads/ one of which leads to the Garden of 
Flowers, and another to the Island of Fruit (the Jakun 
Paradise). Opposite the house of the aged Jukrah 
they find two different species of lime-trees growing, 
and " by the hot ashes lies a savage dog," which for 
the time (like the dog on the road to Paradise) effec- 
tually bars further progress.^ They escape from their 
dilemma, however, by requesting the Mantri to give 
them some " medicine " to harden the skin of their 
hands, by which means they think to grasp the glow- 
ing embers, and throw them at the dog so as to drive 
it away. Their request is granted, the Mantri pro- 
viding them with certain stones called "dew-stones" 
(probably hail, which is occasionally, though rarely, 
seen in the country), by using which they are able to 
pick up the embers and dispose of their adversary. 

In this way they get to the house of the "ancient 
Jukrah " and sleep there, Nibong-palm pairing off with 
Princess Rice-flour, and Bujang Simangan presumably 
with Princess Rice-flour's younger sister. 

Next morning, however, desolation reigns supreme, 

^ In the usual version there are only ing to the Island of Fruits and the 

two, or at the most three, cross-roads, Island of Flowers ; it shows the way 

and it would be interesting to ascertain to the souls of the pious ("kramat"), 

whither these five roads were supposed but bites the wicked, who in trying 

to lead. Moreover, the first part of to escape from it fall into the boiling 

the road takes the form of a bridge or water in the great copper beneath 

fallen log, which is said to be called and are killed (according to some 

Batang Kelandan. accounts). I was told by a Malay 

I may add that this reference to the who knew the Besisi remarkably well, 

Garden (lit. compound) of Flowers that on this account, whenever one of 

occurs elsewhere, and may point to their dogs dies, they wrap him in a 

some further subdivisions of the Jakun shroud and bury him in a grave like a 

" Eden," as in some Irish myths — human being, and also that when 

the '* Island of Fruits," " Island of people are dying all their dogs are 

Flowers," etc., of Tennyson's poem, collected and brought close to the sick 

the " Vogage of Maeldune." man, and are requested to assist him 

'•^ There appears to be an allusion to recover. I have not, however, had 

here to the dog which is believed to any chance either of confirming this or 

sit at the parting of the ways lead- otherwise. 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 315 

for in the early morning " Big Brother Nibong " is 
found to have stolen away from his lady-love during 
the night, and to have sailed away for ever, directing 
his course towards the Sea of the Burning Island. 
The reason for this sudden desertion is not given, and 
this is perhaps the most obscure part of the story, but 
on his way the faithless lover suffers shipwreck, his 
vessel going aground on " the island of Kedong,^ which 
is off the sea of Pahang." Like Dido, the princess 
is " left lamenting," and the tears she sheds are " as 
big as the stones that support the cooking-pot." 

An Upas-tree Legend. 

In the Labu district (Selangor) I came across a 
form of the upas-tree legend now long regarded as a 
typically daring attempt to "gull" the home-staying 
Briton.^ There were once two Jakun chiefs or Batins, 
one of whom (Batin Gomok) was called the " One- 
Cocopalm Chief," and the other (Batin Mahabut) the 
"One-Betelpalm Chief." The former took his name 
from a solitary coconut palm, which is still alleged to 
grow in the depths of the forest on Bukit Galah (or 
Boatpole Hill). It is described as possessing a 
black stem, and its fruit is poisonous ; indeed, it is 
believed to exhale so poisonous an effluvium as to 
kill every green thing that grows within a radius 
of ten yards around it. Its nuts are so plentiful 
and look so tempting that on one occasion a Jakun 
persisted in eating one of them, in spite of all the 
remonstrances of his friends, the result being that 

1 ? " p. Keban " or " Kaban," just almost sacrilege to suggest that it may 

off the Endau. possess some germ of foundation in 

^ The Upas-tree Legend has ranked native experience ; see above, and 

so long with the Sea-serpent and the vol. i. p. 263, for instance. 
Giant Gooseberry that I feel it is 

3i6 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

before he had gone ten yards from the tree he dropped 
down dead. There can be no doubt that the other 
chief (Mahabut) derived his name from this same 
legend, but unfortunately I was unable to obtain 
further information, except that his full name was 
Batin Mahabut, and that he was still living (in 1895). 
He had resided all by himself on Bukit Nuang, ever 
since Batin Banggai abandoned it for Sepang Kechil. 
I may add that this legend came to me through a 
Besisi source, and that for want of other evidence I 
have classed it as a Besisi tradition. 

Besisi Tradition of early Migrations. 

The following tradition of the early history of the 
Besisi was taken down by me from a young Jakun 
who was credited with knowing all the traditions of 
his tribe, though this knowledge, on being put to the 
test, did not carry him very far : — 

" We came from a land at the edge of the sky, 
in the country where the sun comes to life (' mata- 
hari hidup '), beyond the country of Siam, at a dis- 
tance of more than a man's lifetime (' mati balik 
hidup '). Thence we went south till we reached 
Johor, whence, however, we returned hither again, 
through fear of a cruel Malay Raja. At the 
edge of the sky (' tepi langit ') stood one of our 
ancestors, who was a great giant, and whose duty 
it was, by order of Tuhan Allah, to guard the pillars 
of the sky (' tongkat langit ')} By way of food 
he devoured the clouds which kept falling down- 
wards at the edge of the sky, cutting off the over- 

^ But "tongkat langit" (///. pillar dialects also the name for the sun itself, 
or prop of heaven) is in many of these possibly through some popular confusion. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 317 

hanging " sprouts " with his knife. ^ In those days we 
were taller than we are now, and slept in caves of the 
rocks. The country then was a plain and was called 
Padang Masah ; '" it had no grass or trees growing on 
it, as no rain fell there and it contained no rivers. 
In this country there lived besides the Head or 
'Prophet' of our own Religion (Nabi Melaikat), the 
' prophets ' (Nabi) respectively of the White Man, 
the Chinese, the Indian, and the Malay, but this 
was a very long time before Mohammed, and even 
before the founding of Mecca. In the sky there 
were then to be seen no less than seven suns, 
seven moons, seven stars, and seven rainbows, but 
the seven rainbows were only the seven snake-souls 
of the serpent called Naga Melaikat. This snake 
lies there with his head reaching to the gate of 
Heaven. There too were seven birds of the kind 
called Roc (' geruda '), and a solitary elephant of 
immense size. This latter, however, was not really 
alive, but only an elephant-soul. 

" The plain itself did not resemble earth, but shone 
like silver.^ The * prophets ' of the different races 
could, in those days, still understand something of each 
other's language, and they all called the earth ' menia.' 
The ' prophets ' who got on best together were those 
of the White Man, the Malay, and the Jakun ; the 
White Man's 'prophet' (Nabi Isa) was the elder 
brother of the ' prophet ' of the Jakun (Nabi Melaikat) 
and protected him accordingly as his younger brother. 
The Malays were sea-folk and came overseas from 
Rum and Stambul, Sham {i.e. Syria), and Mecca ! 

^ Cp. the Mantra tradition given 10 Mohammedan tradition, is the new 

below, p. 319, which shows it to be a earth that is to be after the day 

" Last -Day beHef." of judgment. 

' Padang Masah. This, according •^ ? One of the salt plains of Central Asia. 

3i8 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

" The next place we came to was Padang Berimbun 
( = P. Berambun, ' the plain of dew '), where the surface 
of the earth was covered with deep dew, which was 
bitterly cold. Here also we slept in caves of the 
rocks. Next we reached the mountains of Kelun- 
tong (which were very near the sky, and had no 
trees or grass growing on them). Here there were 
the souls of a sheep, a saddle-pony, and a ' gajah 
mena,' ^ as well as the dragon whose head lay at the 
gate of Heaven and whose tail reached to Keluntong, 
a distance of about ten years' journey, reckoning like 
a Malay. All these animals had seven souls shaped 
like themselves (Mai. ' tujoh semangat '). From the 
mountains of Keluntong we next proceeded to the hills 
of Kelantan and thence to the hills of the Giants 
(Gunong Gasi-gasi), the Seven Hills (Gunong Mentu- 
joh), Bukit Saguntong Guntang, Ulu Pahang, and 
finally Johor. And in Johor we first encountered the 
Malays. 

" The titles of our chiefs (Batin, Jinang, Jukrah) 
were first given among the seven hills (Gunong Mentu- 
joh) which lie beyond the country of Slam. Before 
we came to Johor we passed Ayer Tawar, and there 
a Raja called Lumba-Lumba Putih ('The White 
Dolphin '), who came from Pagar Ruyong, drove out 
our Batin Siamang Putih "^ (' The White Ape ') ; 
wherefore our chief fled to Sungei Ujong, and there 
his daughter married and became the mother of the 
Toh Klana of Sungei Ujong. 

" From Sungei Ujong we continued our journey 
to Selangor, where we then settled and have ever 
since that time remained. 

1 Lit. a sea-elephant or leviathan. than Penghulu, and still used in Sri 

2 "White Ape" is the title of an Menanti and Negri Senibilan. So, 
officer of the Sultan, of lower rank too, probably was " White Dolphin." 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 319 

" Our language and customs have not changed 
much since we arrived here, but the Malay Peninsula 
has greatly altered, the straits extending in old days 
as far inland as Ulu Klang ; Bukit Galah and Bukit 
Menuwang were both formerly on the sea-coast, and 
the former took its name from a post to which a 
Chinaman, named Si Pakong, made fast his boat 
during a storm which occurred on his way to Riau. 
At the same time there was dry land where the 
straits are now." 

MANTRA. 

Beliefs concerning Natural Pheno7ncna. 

The Mantra have not, to any great extent, acquired 
any of the Malayan ideas respecting the form of the 
earth, motion of the sun, etc. The dark spots in the 
moon they believe to be a tree, beneath which sits 
the Moon-man, Moyang Bertang, who is the enemy 
of mankind, and who is constantly knotting strings 
together to make nooses wherewith to catch them, the 
only reason for his not succeeding in doing so being 
the fact that some pitying mice are no less diligently 
employed in biting through the strings.^ They do not 
know how or whence the winds arise, but believe that 
through their incantations tempests are made to sub- 
side. They do not, like the Malays and Chinese, 
believe that eclipses are caused by the attempt of a 
dragon to swallow the sun or the moon, as the case 
may be, but, like some of the Polynesians, that an 
evil spirit is devouring or destroying it. Many of 
them, however, have a different notion. They 
believe the sky to be a great pot suspended over the 
earth by a string. The earth around its foot or edge 

' Cp. Malay Magic, p. 13. This is properly a "Last-Day" belief. 

320 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

(" kaki langit "), is constantly sending up sprouts 
which would join the sky and entirely close it in over 
us if an old man did not cut and eat them. On the 
other hand, should the string by which the pot is sus- 
pended break, everything on the surface of the globe 
would be crushed.^ The sun is a woman who is tied 
by a string which her lord is always pulling.' The 
moon is another woman who is named Kundui ^ and 
is the wife of Moyang Bertang,^ who dwells in the 
moon and is the maker of the nooses for snaring man- 
kind. The stars are the children of the moon, and 
the sun had formerly as many. But since they feared 
that mankind could not support so much brightness and 
heat, they each agreed to devour their children. The 
moon, however, instead of eating her stars, hid them 
from the sight of the sun, who, believing them to be all 
devoured, ate up her own,^ No sooner had she done 
so, however, than the moon brought her own family 
out of their hiding-places, and the sun on seeing them 
was filled with despair and rage, and gave chase to 
the moon in order to kill her. This chase has con- 
tinued ever since, the sun sometimes succeeding in 
getting near enough to the moon to be able to bite 
her, and thus causing an eclipse. The moon still 
hides all her children during the day when her 
pursuer is near, and only brings them out at night 
when she is distant.'"' 

From another source we learn that, according to 

1 C-p. Malay Magic, ^. 13. ^ =Be.sisi "Gendui," z.if. "Granny." 

- For the "sun-rope myth" amony ■• Doubtless the same as Mer- 

the Maori, v. F. L.J. vi. 106 ; and tang. 

Gill, Myths and Sojigs, p. 62. For ^ Identically the same myth is 

an analogous myth among the Bella found among the IIos and Uraons of 

Coola, V. Orig. Milt, der hgl. Mus. zu Chota Nagpore (Latham, ii. 422; 

Berlin, 1886, ]). i/O; cp. Tylor, Triibncr's Record, 1889, p. 75). 

Early Hist. p. 350. " /. LA. vol. i. pp. 2S4, 285. 

SA VA GE MALA YS OF MA LA CCA 3 2 1 

an old belief of the Mantra, the sun was once sur- 
rounded by an army of stones, and when it had eaten 
them up, it took to pursuing the moon, which conceals 
its children from the sun, but during eclipses runs the 
risk of being bitten by it.^ 

To this we may add that both fogs and clouds are 
the sweat of the sea at flood-tide.^ 

The Future World. 

Unlike the Benua of Johor, who apparently have 
no belief in the existence of the soul after death, 
the Mantra possess a peculiarly positive faith in 
another world. The semangat, or in other words the 
soul {i.e. the unsubstantial but sensible body which 
is permeated by the spirit, and which, according to 
some informants, may be preyed upon by demons), 
leaves the gross earthly body at death, and is carried 
by Bayang Lasa,^ through the air to a place called 
Ngangnari'* or Pulau Buah (Fruit Island), which lies 
far away in the region of the setting sun. There the 
souls (semangat) of all the dead dwell together in 
constant harmony and enjoyment, for the great island 
is full of trees, of which there are none that do not 
bear pleasant fruits. There, too, the souls marry and 
have children, as in the present world, but pain, dis- 
ease, and death are unknown.^ The souls of men 
who have died a bloody death do not, however, go to 
Pulau Buah, but to a place called Tanah Merah (Red 
Land), which is a desolate place and barren, and 

1 Atisland, 1873, P- 534- o'l P- 322, infra, and perhaps cp. 

^ /. L A. vol. i. p. 283. Vaughan - Stevens' " Tingha Howi " 

^ Cp. Besisi Nenek Kabayan or (sic, ? " Tengah Hari " or "Noon"), 

Nenek 'Bayen, the Man (or rather for which see pp. 239, 240, ante. 

•' ancestor ") in the Moon. ^ J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 325*, 

* Probably the same as " Nyayek," 326*. 

VOL. II Y 

322 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part ni 

thence the souls that inhabit it repair to the Fruit 
Island to procure their food/ 

The Mantra Deities and Demons. 

The traditions of the Mantra (collected by Hervey) 
give Tuhan Dibawah, or the " Lord of the Under- 
world," as the name of the creator of the earth. His 
dwelling is, in fact, beneath the earth, and even 
below the " Land of Nyayek " (Tanah Nyayek),^ 
which represents the underworld, and by his power 
he (Tuhan Dibawah) supports everything above him. 

The first two men belonging to the human race 
were Poyang Mertang and B'lo (or Belo) his brother, 
and the former had so many children that he com- 
plained to their creator, who turned half of them 
into trees. Later on, at B'lo's suggestion, when this 
proved too mild a measure, Tuhan Dibawah institutes 
Death, to give some relief to overcrowded humanity. 

Borie says the Mantra recognise a Supreme God 
(Tuhan Allah), at whose command Raja Brahil \i.e. 
" Gabriel "] created all living things, God himself 
creating the firmament. They have also a " day 
of judgment " belief, yet their religion is mainly 
Shamanistic. 

All diseases are believed to be caused either by 
spirits * or by the spells of men. Amongst the spirits 
or demons of disease (" Hantu Penyakit ") the most 
powerful are the Hantu Hamoran, Barah Sisip demon, 
and Barah Terkilir demon. ^ These demons are those 

* It is the slain, not the slayer, •* It would be more correct to say 

who is excluded from Ngangnari ; for that all Diseases are believed to l>e 

the pagan Mantra have no belief in Spirits, 

future rewards and punishments. ^ The Malay phrase " barah sisip " 

2 Cp. p. 321, ante. means an "abscess under the ribs," 

3 Alisc. Ess. rel. Indo-China, sec. and " bara terkilir" external ulcers 
ser. vol. i. pp. 298-301. (which spread over the surface). 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 323 

that cause the greatest mortality. The Smallpox 
Demon (Hantu Ka-tumbohan) is held in such dread 
that the Mantra have a repugnance even to mention- 
ing it by name. The Swelling Demon (Hantu 
Kembong) haunts the abodes of men whom it afflicts 
with pains in the stomach and the head. The " Crav- 
ing Disease" (Mai. " Kempunan ") causes pains and 
accidents to persons who have had a desire to eat of 
any particular article of food, and have not been able 
to get it. The Hantu Sa-buru/ or Demon Hunts- 
man, dwells in lakes and river-pools. His body is 
black, and he has three dogs named Sokom, or 
Black-mouth. When any one of these dogs passes a 
hut, the inmates make a great noise, by beating 
pieces of wood together, to frighten him away, and 
the children are caught up and held tightly by their 
elders.- This Demon Huntsman causes his dogs to 
chase men in the forest, and, if the victims are run 
down, drinks their blood. At the upper extremity 
(" ulu ") of every stream dwells the Lofty Demon 
(Hantu Tinggi). In the ground lives the Hantu 
Kamang who causes inflammation and swellings both 
in the hands and feet, so as to deprive his victims of 
the power of locomotion. The Hantu Dondong 
resides in caves and the crevices of rocks, and kills 
dogs and wild hogs with the blowpipe, in order to 
drink their blood. The Hantu Penyadin^ is a Water 
Demon, with the head of a dog and the mouth of a 
crocodile. It sucks blood from the thumbs and big 
toes of human beings, thus causing death. From 

^ This = V.-St.'s Hantu Saburu, a night-bird named Berek - berek. 

though he (V. -St.) "was not told about Whenever it is seen near a house as 

his dogs" ( V. B. G. A. xxviii. 307). much noise as possible is made. 

- The Malays have a similar belief. ^ Sic, ? " Penjadian " or Protean 

But with them Sokom is preceded by Demon of the Malays. 

324 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

the time when it first leaves its watery abode, it 
wanders about incessantly in search of food, until it is 
at length satiated, when it returns home.^ The Wood 
Demons (Hantu Kayu) frequent every species of 
tree, and afflict men with diseases. Some trees are 
specially noted for the malignity of their demons. 
The Hantu Dago'- haunts graves, and assumes the 
shape of deer, and whenever any one happens to pass, 
it calls to them. When a person is wounded, the 
Hantu Pari fastens upon the wound and sucks the 
blood, and this is the cause of the blood's flowing. 
Amongst the other demons are the Hantu Chika, 
(who produces yet more excruciating pains in the 
abdomen than the Hantu Kembong), the Hantu Jimoi,^ 
Hantu Salar, and Hantu Swen.* To enumerate the 
remainder of the demons would be merely to convert 
the name of every species of disease known to the 
Mantra into that of a demon or Hantu. If any new 
disease appeared, it would be ascribed to a demon 
bearing the same name.^ 

The Malayan demons called " P'leset," " Polong," 
" Bajang," " Pontianak," and Penanggalan," are not 
demons among the Mantra, although the latter, from 
intercourse with the Malays, are in many cases 
acquainted with their names and attributes.^ 

Animal Beliefs. 

The tigers are the slaves of the magician or 
Poyang. Although the Mantra believe in this, as well 
as in the immortality of tigers, they nevertheless do 

1 J. I, A. vol. i. p. 307. Vaughan-Stevens, p. 246, ante. 

2 = Vaughan - Steven's " Hantu * Sic, ? " Sawen " (Mai. "sawan"), 
Degup," vide Vaughan-Stevens in convulsions. 

V. R. G. A. xxviii. 307. * /. /. A. vol. i. p. 308. 

■' Probably the " Hantu Jcmoi," cp. ' Ibid. p. 330*. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 325 

not scruple to kill and eat the cubs whenever they 
find them.^ 

From Father Borie, Cameron learnt that the 
jakun (by whom M. Borie probably means the 
Mantra) have a fixed and singular superstition con- 
cerning tigers, ninety-nine men out of every hundred 
believing it, even in the face of their Christian teach- 
ing. They believe that a tiger in their paths is 
invariably a human being, who having sold himself 
to the Evil Spirit, assumes by sorcery the shape of 
the beast to execute his vengeance or malignity. 
They assert that invariably before a tiger is met, a 
man has been or might have been seen to disappear 
in the direction from which the animal springs.^ 

Omejts. 

Much attention is paid to omens when a new 
clearing is to be made, and charms are used for the 
expulsion of evil spirits. The head of the family cut 
a little of the new rice and after the feast of the 
"New Year's Day of Rice" each of the guests 
received a little to take home.^ 

Hzo-A Places of the Mantra. 

We now come to the sacred or "high places" of 
the Mantra, concerning which we are told in an 
account from Logan, that there is a famous Wishing 
Rock in Klang called Batu Tre, to which the IMantra 
have, from time immemorial, been in the habit of 
resorting. A person going there must not carry fire 

1 Logan iny. /. A. vol. i. p. 277. 
■^ Cameron, Our Tropical Possessions, p. 394. ^ Cp. supra, vol. i. p. 365 sq. 

326 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

with him, because if a spark should fall upon the rock 
it would immediately take fire and be consumed. 

On the rock grows a flower called " chingkwi " 
[sic, ? " chingkui "), which is not found elsewhere, 
and can only be gathered by women. Whoever 
possesses even a little of this plant acquires great 
power, since if a woman, she is followed by men, 
and if a man, by women. It is carried in a small 
bamboo vessel, which is kept in the ear lobe or 
fastened by a string round the waist. If any person 
wishes to obtain a portion he must sleep with the 
woman who has it, and take it by stealth, and in 
the morning he must place eight or ten silver rings 
upon her fingers. When she awakes and sees the 
rings, she knows that the flower is lost beyond 
recovery. If the flower be carried to sea, its virtue is 
lost. It is much sought after by the Malays, who are 
greatly addicted to the use of aphrodisiac charms and 
substances.^ 

There is also a Wishing Place on the summit of 
Gunong Berembun, which is much resorted to by 
the Mantra in the neighbourhood. Other mountain 
summits are also Wishing Places, because each has 
its good spirit. When a person goes to a Wishing 
Place he carries with him a couple of white fowls, and 
samples of various articles of food in use. The latter 
he places in a sort of flat tray or basket " made of 
rattan, which he either suspends from a tree or places 
on the highest peak of the summit. He then kills 
one of the fowls and deposits it in the tray, setting the 
other free. He next silently addresses to the spirit 
of the mountain the wishes that he has most at heart. 

1 J. /. A. vol. i. p. 319. 
2 The "anchak" or sacrificial tray of the Malays (see Malay Magic, p. 414). 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALA YS OF MALACCA 327 

This done, he prepares and eats a meal upon the 
spot. If what he has desired at the Wishing Place 
does not come to pass, he revisits it a second and 
even a third time ; after which, if his wish still remains 
ungratified, it is considered that the spirit is not 
favourable to the wisher, and he therefore repairs to 
another mountain.^ 

The Mantra Magicians. 

The magicians (Poyangs), and a few others only, 
have the power of afflicting and destroying men by 
spells. These latter are of various kinds, and operate 
in different ways, in some cases rapidly, and in others 
slowly. The most noted form of these is the Tuju 
or Pointing Ceremony." The magician first takes a 
little wax that has been found in an abandoned bees'- 
nest (" Lilin sambang "), and after muttering a spell 
over it awaits his opportunity to perform the ceremony 
(" menuju "), because to ensure its success he must not 
only be able to see his intended victim, however 
distant, but there must be a strong wind blowing in 
the direction of the latter's residence. When such a 
wind arises, the magician takes the wax, places a 
vessel of water, with a lighted candle or two, before 
him, mutters an incantation and fixes his eyes intently 
on the water [until he discerns therein the image of 
his victim], after which he throws the wax into the air, 
and the wind instantaneously transports it to the 
victim, who feels as if he were struck by something. 
Sickness follows, which is either prolonged or induces 
speedy death, according to the exigency of the spell. 

But it is not upon every one that the spell will 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 319, 320. Cp. on Logan's account, to which it refers. 
Misc. Ess. rel. Indo-China, sec. ser. ^ Mai. " tuju," " menuju," literally, 

vol. i. p. 301, which is clearly based to "point." 

328 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

Operate. Many persons, by supernatural skill, or by 
counter-spells or charms, surround themselves with an 
invisible fence or wall, which not only renders the 
spell inoperative, but even prevents the magician from 
seeing their image in the water. The use of invoca- 
tions and charms of this and other kinds to avert evils 
and counteract evil powers, both natural and super- 
natural, to nullify incantations, to inflict maladies and 
calamities, and to excite love and regard, is common. 
The first kind of these invocations consist, in general, 
of " Inwalling " charms (Mai. " pendinding "), called by 
the Malays " Do'a pendinding," or Inwalling prayers^ — 
from the Malay " dinding," a wall — which must be 
repeated seven times at sunrise and seven times at 
sunset. Examples of these charms as used for pro- 
tection against the maleficence of various enemies are 
given below. - 

Forms of Disease, Medicines, Drugs, Amulets, etc. 

The fatal diseases most prevalent among the 
Mantra are sickness from "pointing" (" sakit mati 
di-tuju orang "), sickness from unsatisfied "cravings" 
("sakit punan "), sickness from " barah sisip," and 
sickness from "barah terkilir " (two kinds of abscess). 

Mineral medicines are unknown, and the only 
animal substance used as a remedy is the oil of the 
boa-constrictor.^ 

Amulets are much used. They are composed of 
pieces of turmeric (" kunyit ") or " bunglei," and other 
substances which are strung on a shred of artocarpus 
(" t'rap ") bark, and worn round the neck, wrists, or 

• The proper meaning is "the in- - /. /. A. vol. i. pp. 308, 309. Cp. 

wailing invocation or charm."' Borie, I.e. ^ Ibid. p. 330*. 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF MALACCA 329 

waist. They are regarded as prophylactics against 
demons, bad winds, and generally against all kinds of 
evils. 

There are also spells which are believed to have 
the power of rendering the person who uses them 
invulnerable, though the fortunate possessors are 
careful not to impart them to others. There were 
(in 1847) several men amongst the Mantra, ^.^. Luit 
at Semunyih, Pre at Beranang, Hambang at Lobo, 
the Batin at Klang, Tongging at Semantan, the 
Penghulu at Jibba, Kaka and Mempis at Pengawal, 
who were reputed to be "invulnerable."^ 

The following are specimens of actual spells used 
by Mantra magicians : — 

(I) Inwalling Spell. 

Hong ! O Horn, Shoot of Iron, offering of the wise to the forest in solitude.^ 
I am walled round with rock, I recline walled round by the earth with 
my face downwards. Cover me, O Air ; may my enemies be ever as the 
Selaguri plant. Tear off the husk within. Hang a thick mist before the 
eyes of him who looks at me. Come, thick mist, the concealer, and 
render me invisible to all enemies, opponents, and assailants. Thou 
that art the true and holy instructor, descend, and pray that I may touch, 

• J. I. A. vol. i. p. 319. Semunyih beyond God, and an appeal to it for 

and Beranang are in the Ulu Langat power which God has not granted to 

district ; Lobo may be for Labu or for man. It is used in Javanese invoca- 

Lubok Batu, the old Malay name of tions, and a Javanese explains it to 

Sepang. Klang and Semantan are mean Embryo of Being, Primeval 

well known. There are no Mantra in Essence, so that Sir T. Raflles's con- 

Selangor. jecture that it is the Hindu Om (Aum) 

- Logan here remarks: '■'■Hong! is probably correct." — History of Java, 

no Malay can explain the meaning of vol. ii. p. 369. 

this word, further than that it is used Horn. Chula (instead of tandok) 

in original Malayan invocations in the is the name given to hard horns or 

same way as the Arabic Bismillah in horn-like parts of animals, believed to 

the modern or modified ones. It is possess magical or medicinal properties, 

deemed a very unhallowed word, of The Malays cannot affix any definite 

great power, and so panas (hot), that if meaning to the first two lines. Instead 

any man uses a Hong invocation three of the rendering given above a better 

times nothing that he undertakes /or one would perhaps be "(magical)science 

himself vi'xW succeed, and he will live for protection when alone in the forest," 

powerful and miserable, able to afflict or "to make the offerer alone as when 

or assist others, unable to help himself. surrounded by a forest." [The latter 

It appears to be considered as a recog- is probably correct.] — -J. I. A. vol. i. 

nition of an Essence or First Principle p. 309. 

330 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

by the invocation of invisibility, all the eyes of my enemies, opponents, 
and assailants. 

(2) Inwalling Spell. 

Ho, Iron, thou that art named Pisamin. I dwell within a fence of Angels, 
eleven on my left. I dwell within a fence of Angels, eleven on my right. 
I dwell within a fence of Angels, eleven behind me. I dwell within a 
fence of Angels, eleven before me. If Muhammad be oppressed, then will 
I be oppressed. If the sun, moon, and stars, be not oppressed, may I 
not be oppressed either. And if earth and heaven be not oppressed, may 
I not be oppressed either. If the corpse within the grave be oppressed, 
may I be oppressed also [but not otherwise], by virtue of the granting of 
the prayer of my religious instructor. Grant it, Muhammad ! Grant it, 
royal Prophet of God ! and grant, too, that by virtue of my using the 
prayer of a thousand lives, I may not be oppressed at all by anything that 
breathes within this world. ^ 

Charms to gain the affection or goodwill of the 
person charmed are also much used. They are 
termed " Pengasih " (Mai. " kasih " = love or affec- 
tion). The following is a specimen : — 

Mantra Love-spell. 

Oil I stir and stir. I pour it out. May I stand erect like the royal 
Umbrella. May I be greater as I walk than the sons of all mankind, by 
virtue of my using the prayer that causes affection ! Love (me) entirely 
all mankind, who have two feet and are five-fingered. Speak not of 
men, when even grass, twigs, and trees of all kinds, both of Earth and 
Heaven, bow down in sheer affection. Let all so bow in affection, bow 
in love, towards me.^ 

The " Pemanis " (from " manis " = sweet) renders 
the person using it universally agreeable. 

Dulcifying Spell. 

Dulcifying shoots, dulcifying leaves, I cut, running the while. Even as I sit 
may I be exceedingly sweet ; as I stand may I be exceedingly sweet ; 
sweet in the sight of all mankind, two-footed and five-fingered, even as 
the moon and sun together. Exceedingly sweet to look upon be the 
brightness of my face. Grant that I, through using this dulcifying spell, 
may have a sweet lustre rise over my face.^ 

Subjugating Spell (" Penundo' "). 

A nail, a low nail I deposit in this kerchief (" sibei "). Though I sit amongst 
many may I be counted among the greatest, O Prophet of God ! Grant 
me the good fortune to cut that which is called Mamu.* When I am 

^J.I.A. vol. i. pp. 309, 310. forwhich this would be the Mantra form, 

- Ibid. pp. 310, 311. and the stem of which, when misgrown in 

^ Ibid. p. 311. a particular manner, was credited with 

' Qu. " Scmambu " (Malacca cane), the most consitlerable magical virtues. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 331 

seated, may all mankind who breathe bow in complete subjection. Make 
them bow, O God ! Make them bow, O Muhammad. Make them bow, 
O royal Prophet of God ! Grant that I, by using this subjugating prayer, 
may cause to bow down all men, two-footed, five-fingered. Grant it, O 
God ! Grant it, O Muhammad ! Grant it, O royal Prophet of God ! 
Grant that I, through using this subjugating prayer, may stand and 
confront the living (ones) of all mankind, two-footed, five-fingered. ^ 

Pacifying Spell ("Chucha"). 

Seluso' padaiig s/lasa. 

My throwing-stick is of holy basil. 

May the heart that is angry be shut. 

May the heart that is kind be opened. 

AJe eje eche echa. 

As the young jungle-grass springs up in moist ground. 

Though I am wicked, may I be applauded. 

Though I do wrong, may I be reverenced. 

Speak not of mankind. 

Two-footed, five-fingered, 

When even the white elephant. 

The streaked elephant from beyond the sea. 

Reverses its hair, reverses its tusks. 

Reverses its trunk, reverses its feet, 

Reverses its flesh, reverses its blood, 

Bows down reverentially to the little toe of my left foot. 

My oil is pressed out and runs down at the side of the door. 

Though the young hornbill - sit upon the topmost bamboo spray. 

May I yet hit it with my blowpipe. 

For the sun is lifted upon my eyebrows. 

And my tongue is as the swell of the ocean. 

And my lips are as ants pursuing each other. 

Abase them, O God ! abase them, O Muhammad ! 

Abase them, O royal Prophet of God ! ^ 

Tongue-breaking Spell ("Pematah lidah "). 

Dry betel-nut, seed betel-nut, 

Split by the foot of an elephant. 

His heart's blood I lock, his bones I break, break. 

Hail, O God ! Hail, O Muhammad ! Hail, O royal Prophet of God ! 

May this tongue-breaking prayer be granted 

That I may break the tongues of my enemies, foes, and assailants. 

May they be soft, may I be hard. 

There is no god but God, by virtue of my use of the tongue-breaking prayer.* 

Mantra Hate-spell (" Pebinchi "). 

Shoots of the Hate -plant, leaves of the Hate -plant, I pluck seven stalks of 
you, seven leaves of you. I cut them seven times, and cut the heart of 

^ J. LA. vol. i. pp. 311, 312. be the meaning, as the tree here 

2 Logan here has a note: "This mentioned is a bamboo, which never 

bird frequents the upper branches of grows so high as to be beyond the 

the highest trees, and is probably in reach of a blowpipe dart.] 
general beyond the reach of the ^ J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 313, 314. 

blowpipe." [This, however, can hardly * Ibid. p. 314. 

332 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

the son of Somebody.^ Look upon that person as you would look upon 
ashes, as you would look upon a swamp. Sitting, hate ! Sleeping, 
hate ! Walking, hate ! Eating, hate ! Bathing, hate ! Drinking, 
hate ! Come, shadow of Somebody. Until three days are past, hate to 
look upon Somebody. Look upon me alone as surpassingly sweet, as if 
you saw that which shone brightly in my face. Twelve days, when the 
sun descends, let your soul descend together with it, and when the sun 
rises, let the soul oi Somebody rise together with it.- 

Another Hate-charm. 

Shoots of Beruwang intermix with leaves of the Hate-plant. By faith and 
sacrifice carry away the heart within with excessive hatred. Standing, 
hate Somebody ! Walking, hate Somebody ! Sleeping, hate Somebody ! 
Speak not of mankind, when even grass, twigs, and trees altogether hate 
to look upon Somebody ! May brightness descend upon my face. If the 
night brighten, then indeed shall the face of Somebody brighten. But if 
the night do not brighten, then shall not brighten the face of Somebody ! 
I make descend the oil of sweetness. I make to rise the invocation of 
hatred. Hate ! all ye people, all mankind ! Descend ! O Sweetness of 
Soviebody ! Rise ! O prayer of Hatred in the face of Somebody ! Hate 
entirely, all ye things that breathe, to look upon the face of Somebody, 
yea, to hear the voice of Somebody.'^ 

SPpLL FOR driving OUT THE MISCHIEF. 

Hong ! Quake, O Mischief, quake ! I wish to cast down. I wish to strike. 
Swerve to the left. Swerve to the right. I cast out the Mischief, quake. 
The Elephant murmurs. The Elephant wallows on the opposite side of 
the lake. The pot boils, the pan boils, on the opposite side of the point. 
Swerve to the left, swerve to the right, swerve to thy wallow, Mischief of 
this our Grandfather,-* I unloose the finger of my hand. 

Another exorcising Charm. 

My Grandfather's to me, mine to my Grandfather ; my smell [be only the] 
smell of water ; my smell [be only the] smell of leaf ; my smell [be 
only the] smell of earth ; my smell [be only the] smell of mud ! Through 
eating this areca-nut mixture, I close thy nose, O Grandfather. If you 
raise your hind foot, be your hind foot heavy ; if you raise your fore foot, 
be your fore foot heavy, as [heavy as] if it were a split rock ; suspended, 
as if it were a suspended water-jar. When this rock moves, then and 
then only move thy feet, O Grandfather ! Move ye all together ! move, O 
entrails ; receive the hand and fingers of thy grandchild, O Grandfather ! ^ 

Storm-quelling Charm. 

Rafubotii; pL-rango'an batang! The Elephant gathers all in together. It 
the Elephant should wallow, may it wallow on the opposite side of the 
sea ! Withdraw to the right, withdraw to the left ! I break the 
hurricane ! ^ 

' Here the name ot the person ^ J bid. pp. 315, 316. 

against whom the charm is directed ■* I.e. the Elephant, 

should be mentioned by those who re- ^ J. I. A., vol. i. pp. 316, 317. 

peat it. - /. /. A. vol. i. p. 315. 6 j^^^ p, 217. 

CHAP. VI SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 333 

Demon-quelling Charm ("Tangkal"). 

Swerve to the left, swerve to the right, all ye my enemies, opponents and 
assailants ! Mayyour gaze be thrust aside away from me. May I walk alone.' 

Charm for exorcising the Wild Huntsman. 

For protection against the Hantu Saburu, or 
Demon Huntsman, the following charm is repeated : — 

Spell for banishing the Wild Huntsman. 
What is your name, O dog ? Sokom is your name, O black dog, and your 
master's name is Water. Your master's name is Redang.^ Your master's 
name is Forest. Begone, depart, and take away your dog. What do 
you hunt here ? There are no hogs, no deer. Your nostrils are shut, the 
smell of your nose have I charmed. My smell the wind carries away.^ 

Charms for exorcising Fever Demons, etc. 
The Kapialu Demon and the Kembong Demon 
are exorcised by means of the following spells : — 

Charm against Fever. 
Hong ! First of Fevers. Fever that fliest as I pluck out this beluntok- 
shrub, may the counteracting charm be uttered. I cast this charm for 
Fever upon my head. I throw it upon my head. As the Fever is lost 
may it too be thrown away from above my head.* 

Another Fever-charm. 
First essential life ! Primitive life ! The devil's life have I counteracted. 
The life that lodges have I counteracted. The life that is affected have I 
counteracted. I cast out the hard-souled (evil) life. Let your spirit, the 
spirit of your life, rise and be lifted up ; and may all the life in your 
belly, in your body, spring up, and be drawn out. Lo, I replace all 
your life [or, cast away all spirits].^ 

Madness. 
When a Mantra becomes mad, his parents are 
obliged to kill him, in order to prevent him from 
killing other persons. A sharp sword of wood must 
be employed.*^ 

Traditions of the Mantra. 
The Mantra do not appear to possess any more 

^ J. I. A. vol. L p. 317. ^ Ibid. pp. 318, 319. Sic Logan, 

- Lit. *' swampy jungle." but "jiwa" (here trans, "life") prob- 

^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 318. ably = Mal. "dewa" (an inferior deity 

* Ibid. The reading of the second or spirit). 
sentence is doubtful, v. Appendix. ^ Ibid. p. 255. 

334 NA TURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

precise traditions respecting their origin than other 
tribes such as the Besisi. They all believe, however, 
that they are the original occupants of the country, 
"You know," once said a Besisi, "that this is the 
Great Island (' Pulau Besar ') which belongs to us, 
and not to the Malays, who have intruded into our 
country." The Mantra have the same notion as 
the Besisi, and some of them add that the " Great 
Island" is of such vast size that in former ages their 
ancestors were for many generations employed in 
endeavouring to circumambulate it, but since each new 
generation met with a new country, the last of their 
nomadic forefathers settled where the race now lives. 
They were not now, therefore, in continual motion, 
but each generation, after advancing a considerable 
distance, rested, and the succeeding one, when grown 
up, resumed the journey. 

The Mantra possess the following tradition respect- 
ing the origin of their Batins or great tribal chiefs. The 
first of all Batins, and indeed of all rulers, was Batin 
Changgei Besi, whose nails, as his name imports, were 
of iron. H e lived at a place called Guntong Penyarong ^ 
in the Menangkabau district of Sumatra, and by him a 
Raja was placed over Menangkabau, a Bendahara over 
Pahang, and, at a later period, a Penghulu over 
Ulu Pahang. Batin Iron-nails, in the course of time, 
died, leaving in his place his son Batin Krat Tiga, 
or Chief Cut-in-Three-Pieces, who derived his name 
from the following circumstances. The Bendahara 
of Pahang was greatly offended at the fact of a 
Penghulu having been placed in charge of Ulu 
Pahang, but dared not show his resentment openly 
during Batin Iron -nails' lifetime. The latter was 

' Or Penyaring (?). Cp. Vaughan-Stevens in V. B. G. J, xxviii. 307. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 335 

well aware, however, of his feelings, and on his death- 
bed enjoined Batin Three-Pieces not to receive any 
complaints nor seek anything from him. The Benda- 
hara therefore, finding that Batin Three -Pieces, on 
succeeding his father, was not disposed to afford him 
any opportunity to open intercourse or provoke a 
quarrel, resolved to take the initiative himself. He 
therefore sent to the Batin some of his Penglimas 
or war-chiefs, and these having requested presents 
of various kinds from him, and having received a 
refusal, set upon him and cut him down. But every 
wound which they inflicted immediately closed, and 
the Batin remained alive and scathless. The war- 
chiefs therefore reported the circumstance to the 
Bendahara of Pahang, who hastened to Menangkabau 
in person, and there ordered the war-chiefs, in his 
own presence, to cut the Batin in three. This having 
been done, each piece as it was severed was carried 
to a little distance and there deposited. But no 
sooner were they placed on the ground than they 
flew together and became reunited, whereupon the 
living Batin stood before them uninjured as before. 
The Bendahara therefore took counsel with the Raja, 
but the latter advised him to desist from his attempts 
to molest the Batin. ^ 

The best aboriginal traditions yet published in 
the Peninsula were those related to D. F. A. Hervey, 
formerly of the Straits Civil Service, by Batin Pa' 
Inah, who claimed to be the head of all the Batins of 
the Mantra tribes. He had resided in Johol for 
fifteen years or so. His original name was Koloi, 
and his native place was Tanah Tasek in Jelebu. 
They are given in the following pages. 

^ J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 326*, 327*. 

336 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

The Creation of Man. 

The Lord of the Underworld (Tuhan Di-bawah) 
made the earth, and Hves beneath it. The earth is 
supported by an iron staff, which is strengthened by 
iron cross-bars ; and beneath these again is a place 
called the Land of Nyayek^ (Tanah Nyayek), which 
is inhabited by a race of fiends (Setan), whose children 
are not born in the ordinary way, but pulled out of 
the pit of the stomach ! This interesting race was 
visited by Mertang, the First Magician (Poyang), 
who brought back this account of them. 

The Lord of the Underworld (Tuhan Di-bawah) 
dwells beneath the Land of Nyayek, and by his 
power supports all above him. 

It was through Mertang, the first Poyang, and 
Belo (or B'lo), his younger brother, that the earth was 
first peopled. Their mother was called " Handful of 
Earth" (Tanah Sa-kepal), and their father "Drop of 
Water " (Ayer Sa-titik). 

They came from a place called " Rising Land " 
(Tanah Bangun) in the sky, and returned thither, 
taking back with them, however, a house from the 
sources of the Kenaboi river, on the further side of 
Jelebu, which flows into the Pahang. B'lo having 
died and been buried, a skink or grass-lizard (" meng- 
karong ") approached the grave, and Mertang threw 
his jungle-knife or parang at it and cut off its tail, 
whereupon the skink ran away leaving its tail behind, 
and B'lo came to life again forthwith, and left the 
grave and returned home to his own house. - 

When Mertang took his house away with him 

1 Cp. Tanah Nangnari, p. 322. 2 Hervey in Jotirnal of the Royal 

Mertang or Bertang is the Moon-man, Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, N(x 
cp. p. 319, ante. 10, pp. 189, 190. 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF MALACCA 

to " Rising Land," a dog, the first of the species, 
appeared on the spot where the house had formerly 
stood, but was prevented by Mertang's power from 
attacking mankind. Then a dog appeared at the 
house of B'lo ; and from this dog came the tiger, 
which devours mankind as well as animals. We are 
also told that when Mertang left the earth for " Rising 
Land," he flew away, house and all, through the air. 

When B'lo went to " Rising Land " he crossed 
the sea on foot ; for he was so tall that the water 
only just reached to his knees. 

Originally the sky was very low and near to the 
earth, but B'lo raised it with his hands, because he 
found it stopped his pestle whenever he raised the 
latter in husking his rice. 

Mertang took his youngest sister to wife, and 
from them the Mantra are descended. B'lo married 
the other sister, but they had no offspring. 

In course of time the descendants of Mertang 
multiplied to such an extent that he was forced to 
go to the Lord of the Underworld and represent the 
state to which things had come, and the Lord of the 
Underworld remedied it by turning one-half mankind 
into trees. 

In those days men did not die, but grew thin at 
the waning of the moon, and waxed fat again as she 
neared the full, and hence when their numbers had 
again increased to an alarming extent. To' Entah, a 
son of Mertang and the First of the Batins, brought 
the matter to his father's notice. The latter wished 
things to remain as they were, but B'lo said it would 
be better if they died off like the banana (" pisang "), 
which leaves its young shoots behind it, and die 
leaving their children behind them, and the matter 

VOL. II z 

338 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

was submitted to the Lord of the Underworld, who 
decided in favour of the view held by B'lo, so that 
ever since men have died and left their children 
behind them as B'lo proposed. 

In the earliest times there used to be three Suns 
— husband, wife, and child — and hence there was no 
night, since there was always one Sun left in the sky 
when the others had set. In those days, too, people 
slept as they felt inclined, and there were no divisions 
of time. 

After a long time To' Entah ^ thought the heat 
was too great, and he devised a plan for reducing it, 
in pursuance of which he went to the Moon, which 
in those days gave no light, and told her to summon 
Bintang Tunang, the Evening Star (her husband), 
and the other stars her children, and to put them 
into her mouth, but not to swallow them, and to 
await his return. When she had carried out his 
wishes, he then went to the Female Sun, and by 
representing that the Moon had swallowed her own 
husband and children, induced her to swallow (in 
reality) her husband and child — the other two Suns 
— likewise. " Lord-knows-who " having thus gained 
his end, returned to the Moon and told her that she 
might now release her own husband and children, 
which she did by flinging them out into the sky again. 

As soon as the sole remaining Sun discovered 
the deception that had been practised upon her, she 
waxed very wroth and withdrew in dudgeon to the 
other side of the heavens, declaring that when the 
Moon came across her path she would devour her, 
a promise which she still performs at the season of an 
eclipse." 

' Lit. " Gaffer Lord-knows-who." ^ Hervey iny.A'.^.^., S.B., No. lo, p. 190. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 339 

It was from this period — this separation between 
the Sun and the Moon — that the present division of 
time between day and night, and the rule of the 
Moon and the Stars over the latter first took place. 

The Origiii of the Sea} 

Till the time of Batin Lord-knows-who men never 
used to drink, no water was to be had, and the 
sensation of thirst was quite unknown. It came about 
in this way. One day Lord-knows-who having shot a 
monkey with a blowpipe, made a fire, at which he 
cooked and ate it. Sonie time after he became sensible 
of a desire to imbibe something, and went about in 
search of water, but found none, not even a water-giving 
liana or monkey-rope ("akar"), for lianas did not 
produce water at that time. At last, however, he 
came upon an old stump of a tree called "jelotong," 
and on listening at a hole in it heard the sound of 
water trickling down below. He therefore fastened 
a liana (of the kind called " rotan manau " ~) to the 
top of the tree outside, and by this means let himself 
down into the hole until he reached the water, where 
he slaked his thirst. He then made his way out 
again by means of the creeper, and just as he was 
leaving the spot saw a large white river-turtle ("lelabi" 
or " labi-labi ") issue from the hole, accompanied by 

' This is really a form of the Folklore, p. 367 sq.). Lough Shulin 

" water - reservoir " myth, and not a {loc. cit. p. 394) was formed by the 

deluge myth, or at most inter- waters of a well on which a woman 

mediate between that and a deluge forgot to replace a flagstone. She 

myth. Cp. Dawson, Australian fled from the deluge and was cut down 

Aborigines, p. 106. For a deluge by a man, after she had run seven 

myth of this type, cp. Brett, Indian miles, in order that the water might 

Tribes of Guiana, p. 378 seg. Several advance no farther. 

Welsh and Irish lakes are said to ^ "Rotan manau " is a large rattan 

have been formed by a cover being which is often used by the Malays as a 

left off a spring or well (Rhys, Celtic sort of walking-stick. 

340 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

a vast body of water, and begin to chase him. Lord- 
knows-who therefore ran for his life, and called to the 
elephant for help, but they were both driven back by 
the rush of water. Lord-knows-who then encountered 
a tiger, whose help he likewise begged, and the tiger 
attacked the turtle's head, but failed to produce any 
impression. Lord-knows-who therefore continued his 
flight until he met a wild bull (" seladang "), whom he 
implored to come to his rescue, and the bull proceeded 
to trample upon the turtle, but all to no purpose. Lord- 
knows-who next begged the aid of the rhinoceros, but 
equally without effect, as both of them were compelled 
to fly from the turtle. At length Lord-knows-who 
was forced to apply for the intervention of a mouse- 
deer (" kanchil "), which is the smallest of all the deer 
kind,^ and not so large as a hare — whereupon the 
mouse-deer said : " What good can be done by small 
creatures like ourselves.-* " Lord-knows-who said : " I 
have asked all the others and they have been able 
to do nothing." Then said the mouse-deer: "Very 
well, we will try; do you therefore get to one side." 
But the mouse - deer forthwith called together an 
army of mouse-deer, in fact the entire race, and said : 
" If we do not kill the turtle, we all perish ; but if we 
kill him, all is well." 

Then they all jumped on to the turtle, which was 
of great size, and stamped on him with their tiny 
hoofs until they had driven holes through his head 
and neck and back, and thus killed him. 

But meanwhile the body of water which accom- 

^ The mouse-deer or "kanchil," a the Underwood. The " Brer Rabbit " 

small chevrotin, is very prominent in of Uncle Remus cannot, of course, be 

many of the tales told by the I'enin- a true rabbit, but either an American 

sular tribes. It is, in fact, a sort of hare, or, perhaps, as the late Miss 

•' IJrer Rabbit," and is called in Malay Mary Kingsley once suggested, the 

" Mentri B'lukar," or the Vizier of African tree-cony. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 341 

panied the turtle had increased to a vast extent and 
formed what is now the sea. 

After the destruction of the turtle, the mouse-deer 
asked Lord-knows-who what was to be his reward for 
the service he had performed, upon which he replied 
that he would take for his part the root of the sweet 
potato (" kledek "), and the mouse-deer could have the 
leaves for his share, wherefore they have ever since 
been the food of the mouse-deer.^ 

To' Entail s Descendants. 

From the sources of the Kenaboi river Lord- 
knows-who proceeded to Pagar-Ruyong ^ (in Sumatra), 
and his son To' Terjeli came across again thence and 
settled in Jelebu. 

To' Terjeli had eight sons — Batin Tunggang 
Gagah, who settled in Klang ; Batin Changgei Besi 
(or Iron-nails), who lived in Jelebu; Batin Alam, 
who settled in Johor; Batin Perwel, who crossed the 
Straits to Pagar-Ruyong ; Batin Siam, who went to 
Siam ; Batin Minang, who crossed the Straits to 
Menangkabau ; Batin Pahang, who settled in Pahang ; 
Batin Stambul, who went to Stambul (Constantinople); 
and Batin Raja, who ruled over Muar. 

Penghulus, or tribal chiefs, were first appointed 
by To Terjeli, who placed one in charge of Beranang 
in the Klang {i.e. Selangor) country ; the To' Klana 
Putra in charge of Sungei Ujong ; To' Aki Saman ^ 
in charge of Jelebu ; and in charge of Kuala Muar 
To' Mutan Jantan (Male Rambutan), a woman, whose 

1 J. R. A. S. No. 10, pp. 191, 192. Raja's palace was made {Areca 

2 "Ruyong" was explained as nibong). 

signifying the "nibong" or hard palm ^ ="Akhir Zaman," a N. Sembilan 

wood, of which the fence round the title ? 

342 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

husband, Jauhan Pahlawan Lela Perkasa, he removed 
to Johol. Hence, to preserve the memory of the 
first female ruler of that state, ^he Dato' of Johol 
always wears his hair long, down to the waist. 

The To' Klana Putra of Sungei Ujong established 
the States of Rembau and Naning, placing his sons 
over them. 

Lukut was also established by the To' Klana. And 
the Dato' of Johol founded Terachi, Gunong Pasir, 
Gemencheh, Jempol, and Ayer Kuning. Jelei 
originally formed part of Johol, but afterwards broke 
away from it.^ 

After the death of " Male Rambutan," the female 
ruler of Johol, the succession passed to her nephews, 
and has since been held by males, though always pass- 
ing through the female side, as in Naning. To' Mutan 
Jantan was succeeded first by To' Ular Bisa ("The 
Poisonous Snake "), then by To' Maharaja Garang, and 
then by To' Tengah, To' Nari, To' Bunchit (" The Pot- 
bellied "), and the present Penghulu, To' Eta. 

The first Raja ever appointed was Salengkar 
Alam of Bukit Guntang Penyaring - (in the interior of 
Menangkabau). The name Guntang Penyaring was 
said to be derived from " guntang," which was 
explained as signifying the shaking of the "jaring" 
(or fowling-net), which was used to catch the fiying- 
fox (" keluang ") for the feast at which Salengkar Alam 
was proclaimed Raja.^ After the feast they descended 
the hill (of Guntang Penyaring) and cleared the 
settlements of Menangkabau for the Raja. But the 

' Hervey mJ.K.A.S., S.B., No. merely popular. Guntang Penyaring 

lo, p. 192. is really a Malay legendary name (cp. 

- Cp. " Pulau (nuUontj Pinjarring," the " Sejarah Maiayu," or Malay 

mentioned by V'aughan-Stevcns. An>iah^ where we find Mount Sa- 

** These etymologies appear to be guntang Mahameru). See p. 264, ante. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 343 

Batin Minang previously mentioned remained in the 
jungle. 

The Bamboo Princess. 

Khatib Malim Seleman, the son of Salengkar 
Alam, once came over to Bukit Peraja (in Ulu 
Jempol) with a jungle - knife ("parang"), an adze 
(" patil "), a chisel (" pahat "), and a pair of betel-nut 
scissors ("kachip"), in pursuit of a beautiful princess, 
and after searching in vain for food, went to sleep 
beside an enormous bamboo whose stem measured a 
fathom in diameter. During the night the princess 
for whom he was seeking appeared and cooked him 
some food, and passed the night with him, but dis- 
appeared at dawn. 

The Khatib attempted in vain to cut open the 
bamboo (in which the princess had told him he would 
find her), using each one of his implements in turn. 
The one that he last tried was the pair of betel-nut 
scissors, which he used upon the topmost shoot of the 
bamboo with success, after which he was able to split 
it downwards, whereupon the princess fell out of the 
stem and he secured her. She did not disappear 
again, but was escorted on horseback by many 
followers in company with her husband to Bukit 
Peraja, where, however, they both disappeared 
together. And there they both live invisible to this 
day, and their horses in full trappings are occasionally 
visible at certain favourable seasons. If their aid is 
invoked by the burning of incense (" kemnyan ") they 
will come and perform whatever is required of them 
("bechara"), and then disappear again. The princess 
(it was added) was quite fair in complexion and her 
hair was white and measured seven fathoms in length. 

344 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

All the different tribes of aborigines were said to 
be merely subdivisions of an (assumed) original 
Mantra stock, who were also alleged to exist in the 
country of Menangkabau, unless (says the Batin) they 
have possibly turned Malay/ 

Another Version of the Creation of Man. 

According to another version of the creation 
(recorded by Borie), the Mantra were all descended 
from two white apes (" ungka putih"). These having 
reared their young ones, sent them forth into the 
plains, where for the most part they developed so 
rapidly that they and their descendants became men. 
Those, however, who returned to the mountains still 
remained apes," Others say that apes are degraded 
men.^ 

Legend of the Peopling of the Peninsula. 

In an age gone by, of which they do not even 
know the century, a Mantra chief, named Batin Alam 
(" King of the Universe "), constructed a large and 
beautiful vessel and set sail for [sic ? from) Rum {i.e. 
Constantinople).* This ship not only sailed with 
great rapidity but possessed the wonderful property 
of propelling itself It anchored, after several days' 
voyage, in what was then a small port (since named 
Malacca). In this ship had been brought all the requi- 
site materials for founding a colony. The immigrants 

' Hervey '\x\ J. R. A. S., S. B., No. built by God, which was set floating 

lo, pp. 193, 194. Cp. p. 291, ait/e. on the waters of the earth. The ship 

^ Borie (tr. Bourien), p. 73. sailed with fearful rapidity round and 

3 Misc. Ess. rel. Indo-Chhia, sec. about the earth till it grounded on one of 

ser. vol. i. p. 288. the mountains of the peninsula, where 

* Of a "Mantra tribe behind Mt. they declare it is still to be seen." — Our 

Ophir" John Cameron writes : " They 'Jropical Possessions in Malayan India, 

say their fathers came originally from j). 113. A limestone cave legend. 

heaven in a large and magnificent ship Cp. Hervey in Man, 1904, 14. 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF MALACCA 345 

were divided into five parties ; one of which was 
directed to the foot of Johol and Rembau ; another 
ascended the river Linggi to its source, and there 
settled ; and two others, penetrating still further into 
the interior of the country, established themselves at 
Klang and Jelebu respectively. 

Batin Alam (with the fifth party) established him- 
self upon the sea-coast, but reserved for himself the 
sovereign power, the chiefs of the other four parties 
being only his vassals. It may be remarked that the 
chief Batin, when visited several years ago, still 
assumed to himself the rights of a suzerain. 

Batin Alam's ship was not destroyed, but still 
exists (they say) underneath one of the mountains of 
the Peninsula. As long as Batin Alam lived, the 
Mantra remained in undisturbed possession of the 
country. It was not till long afterwards that the 
Bataks came over from Sumatra and slaughtered and 
destroyed a great number of the Mantra. There 
was, however, among the latter a courageous chief 
who succeeded in re-uniting his scattered countrymen. 
In great haste he constructed a ship, in which he em- 
barked with the remainder of his people. They made 
sail for Rum, where they arrived in a few days. The 
Batin, whose name was Merak Galang, here dis- 
embarked his people in safety and started for Malacca 
once more by himself. The news of his return to 
Malacca spread like lightning ; the Bataks gathered 
together once again in great numbers, in order, as 
they said, to roast the old man. The latter, how- 
ever, had become invulnerable, and when Merak 
Galang threw himself among them they were never 
able to arrest him or wound him. Upon this he 
turned towards his enemies and said to them, " Even 

346 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part m 

your arms respect my person ; tie your weapons 
together in bundles and throw them into the air, and 
if they are able to fly, I will admit myself to be your 
prisoner for ever. If, on the contrary, your weapons 
fall down upon the earth, and if mine only have the 
privilege of flying, you will obey the laws of your 
conqueror." This challenge by Merak Galang was 
accepted ; but as soon as they had put it to the test, it 
was found that his weapons alone could fly. They, how- 
ever, flew by themselves, felling the trees in the neigh- 
bouring forests, and then returning to the astonished 
Bataks,^ whom the chief forthwith cut to pieces. 
Indeed, all the invaders perished, with the solitary 
exception of one individual, who saved his life by 
making his submission. Left in undisturbed possession 
of the country after the defeat of the Bataks, Batin 
Merak Galang returned to Rum, whence he returned 
with his people a short time afterwards. These he 
divided, as Batin Alam had done, into five colonies, 
over each of which he appointed chiefs, on the under- 
standing that they should continue his vassals. A 
long time after the death of Merak Galang the Bataks 
again invaded the Peninsula, and this time Batin 
Changgei Besi, or Iron-nails, who was then governing, 
was completely driven back, with all his following, into 
the interior." 

Tradition of Lost Books. 

In addition to the foregoing, the Mantra possess a 
tradition relating to the loss of certain religious books, 
said to have been lost during the reign of Batin Alam 
or Merak Galang ; but most of the Mantra agree 

' Might this be some faint tradition Compare Borie in Miscellaneous Essays 
of a boomeranj^ ? ;■(■/. Indo-China, sec. ser. vol. i. pp. 

2 Borie (tr. Bourien), pp. 73-75. 288, 289. 

CHAP. VI SA VAGE MALA YS OF MALACCA 347 

that some fragments existed in the time of Changgei 
Besi. These, however, only served as a reminder, 
since at that time they had forgotten how to read. 
The only record which then remained was the skin of 
a lace-lizard (" biawak "), on which there were certain 
characters written, which, however, nobody could 
understand. It was Batin Changgei Besi who 
destroyed this skin, and thus destroyed the religion of 
Raja BrahiV alleging as an excuse that that religion 
had become incompatible with their mode of life. 
According to other informants, however, Batin Iron- 
nails respected this monument, which was destroyed 
after his time by a dog.^ 

Mantra Doom-mytk. 

The following doom-myth is possibly of Christian 
origin. The human race having ceased to live, a 
great wind will rise, accompanied by rain, the waters 
will descend with rapidity, lightning will fill the space 
all around, and the mountains sink down ; then a great 
heat will succeed. There will be no more night and 
the earth will wither like the grass in the field ; God 
will then come down, surrounded by an immense 
whirlwind of flame ready to consume the universe. 
But God will first assemble the souls of the sinners, 
burn them for the first time, and weigh them, after 

1 M. Borie has, as already shown, only what they have picked up (not 

quite misunderstood this name, which always perhaps very intelligently) from 

is borrowed from the Malay form Raja the Roman Catholic missionaries, of 

Jebrahil (or Jibrahll = Gabriel, ante, whom M. Borie himself was one. 
174 ; Mai. A/ag. 638, n., and ibid. 641, 2 Borie (tr. Bourien), p. 83. Similar 

ccii.), which is taken from Mohammedan traditions are current in various parts 

sources. It should hardly be necessary of the Malay Peninsula and are not 

to add that the expression has nothing confined to the Mantra alone. See 

whatever to connect it with the vol. i. pp. 378, 391, 536; and cp. the 

worship of Nabi Isa (Jesus Christ), or Karen practiceof eating dogs in the hope 

with any form whatever of the Christian of regaining the lost knowledge. — See 

religion, of which the Mantra know _/./.^. vol. v. p. 346; cp. vol. iv. p. 316. 

348 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

having collected their ashes by means of a piece of 
linen cloth. Those who will have thus passed the 
first time through the furnace without having been 
purified will be successively burned and weighed for 
seven times, when all those souls which have been 
purified will go to enjoy the happiness of heaven, and 
those that cannot be purified, that is to say the souls 
of great sinners, such as homicides, and those that 
have been guilty of rape, will be cast into hell, where 
they will suffer the torments of flames in company 
with devils — there will be tigers and serpents in hell 
to torment the damned. Lastly, God having taken a 
light from hell, will close the portals, and then set fire 
to the earth. ^ 

BENUA-JAKUN. 

Benua-Jakun of Johor. — It is a curious fact that 
the fables relating to the personification " of the sun, 
moon, and stars are identical amongst the Benua of 
Johor and the natives of Macassar and several other 
eastern races, as well as amongst the Kols of India.^ 

Beliefs concerning Natural Phenomena. 

The Benua believe the world to be globular in 
shape and enclosed in the sky. " The sun and moon," 
once remarked a Benua, "move round the earth, so 
that now, whilst we are in darkness, it is light on the 
other side of the earth where the sun is shining." 
Clouds and rain they believe to be produced from the 
waves of the sea by the action of the wind. When 
thunder is heard to the north or south, the Benua say, 

' Cameron (Trap. Pass.), p. 122. here, but of such a fact there is no 

^ Logan uses the term deification trace whatever. 
^J.I.A. vol. iv. p. 333. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 349 

" The North " (or South) " tree is sounding." ^ The 
only explanation that they could give of this was that 
in the extreme north and south were the two extremi- 
ties of a great beam ; the northern extremity being 
twenty days' journey beyond Boko, where there was a 
great hill from which the north winds issued.' 

Belief in a Deity. 

Speaking of the Benua belief in a deity, Logan 
remarks that, so far as he had been able to ascertain, 
the Berembun tribes had no idea of a Supreme 
Deity, and he had taken it for granted that he would 
find the Benua equally atheistic. His surprise there- 
fore was great when he discovered that they had a 
simple and, to a certain extent, rational theology. 
They believed in the existence of one God, Pirntan, 
who made the world and everything that is visible, 
and at whose will all things continued to have their 
being. This Pirman ^ dwells above the sky, and is 
invisible. He is unapproachable, save through the 
mediumship of Jewa-Jewa.^ 

Intermediate between the human race and the 
heavenly powers are the Jin (or Genies), the most 
powerful of whom is the "Jin Bumi," or Earth Genie, 
the minister of Pirman. He dwells on earth, and 
feeds upon the lives of men and all other living things. 
It is the Earth Genie who sends the various kinds of 
sickness and causes death ; but his power is entirely 

1 "Berbunyi poko' Utara" (or "Sela- angin" = the body of the storm (or 

tan"). "Poko'" = (i) main body or wind), i.e. cloud-rack, 
principal part of anything, as in "poko' - J. I. A. vol. i. p, 283. 

wang" = the principal (of money laid '^ "Pirman" was derived through 

out at interest) ; (2) especially as here in Malay from "Firman" (the Decree or 

the phrase " poko' ribut," c^r " poko' Word of God). Cp. 174, aw/f. 
* J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 275, 276. 

350 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

derived from Pirman. Each species of tree has its 
Genie. The rivers also have a spirit connected with 
them, but this spirit is the Earth Genie, who haunts 
them with his power. The mountains are similarly 
animated by him. He does not, therefore, appear to 
be entirely a personification of the destructive power 
of nature, but is, to some extent, identified with its 
living force also.^ 

The Soul. 

Although the Benua have a conception of the spirit 
(or rather the soul) of man as distinct from the body, — 
and their belief that the souls of their magicians are 
carried in music to heaven," whilst their animate bodies 
remain beside them, even shows a high degree of im- 
materiality in their conception of its nature, — they 
appear to be without any glimmering of faith or hope 
in its permanent indestructibility, or rather in its 
retention of individuality. 

It is believed to be fashioned by Pirman of air, and 
when the Earth Genie is commissioned to dissolve its 
union with the body, it relapses once more into the 
airy nothing from whence it came.^ 

The Magician. 
To avert death recourse is had in sickness to a 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 275, 276. It l3y most of the tribes of the Indian 
should be noted that though the word Archipelago. It is to prepare the 
"Jin" is of Arabic origin, the spirits traveller for this journey that the 
to which the name is applied by the weapons and cooking utensils used by 
Jakun are almost certainly of native him in life, and a pittance of food, are 
origin, in spite of their thin disguise. buried along with the corpse. The 

2 Newbold, writing of the Benua, souls of the bad are to lie devoured by 
says : — " The better informed of the sjiectres, who approach the graves for 
Benua have a confused idea that after that pur])ose on the seventh day after 
death the spirits of good men travel to- interment, on which fires are kindled 
wards the west and are absorbed into to drive the evil spirits away " (ii. 
the effulgence of the setting sun, ' the 389, 390). 

eye of day,' as he is poetically termed ^ j^ /_ ^^ vol. i. p. 279. 

SAVAGE MALAYS OF JO HO R 

351 

magician (Poyang), no other person being supposed 
to have the right of imploring mercy from Pirman. 
These magicians are an order of men combining the 
functions of priest, physician, and sorcerer. The 
Malays (who appear to be more superstitious than the 
Benua) have a greater faith in the efficacy of the 
supplications of these Foyangs, and a greater dread 
of their supernatural power. They are believed not 
only to be able to cure the most virulent maladies, but 
to inflict disease and death upon an adversary,^ and 
the Malays have recourse to them for both purposes.'^ 
Even the tigers are believed to be subject to them, 
and every magician has one in constant attendance 
upon him.^ When a man falls a victim to a tiger he 

1 By means of the Tuju (or Pointing 
ceremony). ' ' The Poyangs are imagined 
to be adepts in the Tuju, or the art of 
killing an enemy, however distant, by 
the force of spells, and by pointing a 
dagger or sumpitan in the direction of 
his residence ; in performing the in- 
cantations termed Bersawai ('Besawye') 
and Chinduai (' Chinderwye '), and in 
discovering mines and hidden treasures. 
They are imagined to be endowed with 
the power of curing the most grievous 
sicknesses, by causing their familiars to 
appear and minister to the sufferers. 
The incantations are carried on by 
night : fire, incense, together with 
many herbs and roots of peculiar virtues 
are employed. The Bersawai (ceremony) 
consists in burning incense, muttering 
midnight spells over a variety of herbs 
and plants, among which are the Palas, 
the Subong Krong, the Lebar, and the 
Bertam, and in calling upon the spirit 
of the mountains. Should the process 
be successful, the spirit descends, throw- 
ing the exorcist into a trance, during 
which the knowledge he wishes to 
obtain is imparted" (Newbold, pp. 389, 
390). 

2 y. /. A. vol. i. p. 275, 276. 

■^ Compare the account given by 
Newbold, who says that the soul of a 

Poyang after death is supposed to enter 
into the body of a tiger. This metem- 
psychosis is presumed to take place 
after the following fashion. The corpse 
of the Poyang is placed erect against 
the buttress or "strut" at the root of 
a large tree in the dep^h of the forest, 
and carefully watched and supplied 
with rice and water for seven days 
and nights by the friends and relatives. 
During this period the transmigration 
(believed to be the result of an ancient 
compact made in olden times by the 
Poyang's ancestors with a tiger) is 
imagined to be in active operation. 
On the seventh day it is incumbent on 
the deceased Poyang's son, should he 
be desirous of exercising similar super- 
natural powers, to take a censer and 
incense of Kemnyan wood, and to 
watch near the corpse alone ; when the 
deceased will shortly appear in the 
form of a tiger on the point of making 
a fatal spring upon him. At this 
crisis it is necessary not to betray the 
slightest symptom of alarm, but to cast 
with a bold heart and firm hand the 
incense on the fire ; the seeming tiger 
will then disappear. The spectres of 
two beautiful women will next present 
themselves, and the novice will be cast 
into a deep trance, during which the 

352 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

is supposed to have been sacrificed to the malevolence 
of some magician whom he has offended. When the 
aid of a magician is sought on behalf of the life of a 
sick person, presents are carried to him, and he 
repairs to the house where his patient lies, taking 
with him a musical instrument named "gelondang," 
which consists of a long bamboo suspended in a 
horizontal position under the roof and struck with 
small sticks. When night comes on, the magician 
commences to chant his incantations, at the same time 
waving a white cloth to and fro, whilst one of his 
attendants (frequently his wife), beats the " gelondang," 
and another burns incense (benzoin). The chants are 
invocations addressed to Jewa-Jewa,^ who resides in 
heaven, and through whom alone Pirman can be 
approached. They are chanted to different airs the 
whole night long, and sometimes for three or four 
nights in succession, until the magician is able to 
announce either that he has received medicine to cure 
the disease or that the deity is inexorable. The more 
powerful magicians do not need to prolong their 
invocation beyond one or two nights. The explana- 
tion given of the object of the invocations, and of the 
mode by which they reach the deity, is this. When- 
ever a person becomes sick, it is believed that Pirman 
has ordered the Earth Genie to " eat his life " (" makan 
dia-punya nyawa "), and that death will certainly ensue 
unless Pirman revoke his mandate. But as Pirman is 

initiation is presumed to be perfected. spirit of the deceased, it is believed, 

These aerial ladies thenceforward be- will re-enter for ever the body of the 

come his familiar spirits, ' the slaves of tiger, and the mantle of enchantment 

the rin",' by whose invisible agency be irrevocably lost to the tribe " (ii. 

the secrets of nature, the hidden S^Z-jSg)- 

treasures of the earth, are unfolded to ' Sometimes pronounced Dewa- 

him. Should the heir of the I'oyang dewa. It is, of course, 2, plural, from 

omit to observe this ceremonial, the the Sanskrit " Deva " (through Malay). 

CHAK VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 353 

inaccessible to mortals, Jewa-Jewa must be supplicated 
to intercede with him. The fumes of the incense rise 
to the heavenly abode of Jewa-Jewa, who, pleased with 
the fragrant smell, is disposed to welcome the spirit or 
soul of the magician which ascends to him in the 
music of the " gelondang." Jewa-Jewa inquires of 
the magician's soul what his errand may be. The 
latter then informs the minister of heaven of the 
condition of the sick person, and solicits medicine.^ 
If Pirman pleases, Jewa-Jewa gives medicine to the 
magician to cure the disease, e.g. the juice or root of 
a plant, a flower, etc.^ The Malays outside the limits 
of the country of the Benua, were not aware either 
that the Benua believed in a God, or that the 
magician's power was considered to be derived from 
Him and entirely dependent on His pleasure. On the 
contrary, they declared that they had no religious belief, 
and that the magicians cured diseases and inflicted 
calamities by means of spirits which they kept.^ 

The Benua (as has already been remarked) are 
much less superstitious than the Malays, and the more 
sensible among them even doubt whether the Poyangs 
of the present day can really attain supernatural power 

^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 276. decoction of Lawong - wood ; if the 
- Of Herbalism among the Benua, chest, the patient should drink a decoc- 
Newbold writes as follows: — "The tion of Kayu tikar leaves. Such 
Benua are celebrated among Malays recipes as these, of which there is 
for their skill in medicines, and, it is abundance, are not, however, sup- 
said, know the use of venesection in posed to be fully efficacious without 
inflammatory disorders. The following the incantations of the Poyangs. 
is a specimen of their rude receipts : A Guli;^as, stones extracted from the 
person with sore eyes must use a heads and bodies of animals, particu- 
coUyrium of the infusion of Niet-niet larly the porcupine, and the Rantei 
leaves for four days. For diarrhoea, Babi, which is imagined to be endowed 
the decoction of the root of Kayu yet, with powers equivalent to those of the 
and Kayu panamas ; for sciatica, celebrated Anguinum of the Druids of 
powdered Sandal - wood (?) in water, Gaul and Britain, hold a high place in 
rubbed on the loins ; for sores, the the Materia Medica of these rude 
wood Kambing. If the head be tribes " (ii. 408-411). 
affected, it must be washed with a •* /. /. A. vol. i. pp. 276, 277. 

VOL. II 2 A 

354 ^A TURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

or aid. " Not one in a hundred reaches Jewa-Jewa," 
said an old man. " The only one I ever knew to do 
so was a Poyang who died when I was young. His 
spirit was seven days in heaven. I have never had 
recourse to them in sickness, but always allow diseases 
to take their course. If Pirman is determined that a 
man shall die, he must die. If Pirman thinks fit to 
grant him an extension of his life, he must recover."^ 

Treattnent of Diseases. 

To ascertain whether fever exists, the patient is 
directed to take " Chuping"" leaves mixed with lime, 
rub them together in the hand, and squeeze the juice 
into a cup. If it hardens, the patient is pronounced to 
have fever. The most common of the remedies are for 
fever the leaves of the " Sedingin,"^ and for fever and 
ague the growing shoot (" umut ") of the " Semambu." 
The " Akar Butut " is used for jaundice in the case of 
young children, and the " Akar Balaksini " for pains 
in the loins. '^ After child-birth a decoction of " Puar " 

1 y. /. A. vol. i. p. 277. the tooth of a wild bull (" Seladang" 

2 Unidentified. —Bos gaurus) is grated with water 
^ This is probably Btyophyllum upon a stone and applied to the injured 

calycinum, Salisb. (Crasste/acecr). part. 

^ According to Vaughan- Stevens, For cuts a fruit called " Langyang " 

"on the breaking of an arm or a leg, is used in the same way. 
the Benua magicians are in the habit of For diarrhoea, benzoin ("Kemnyan") 

killing a ' large black bird with brown is scattered on a fire, and the region of 

wings ' (whose name was not given). the stomach fumigated with it. 
The patient is fed with some of the For indigestion the fruit of a kind of 

boiled flesh; and one of its bones is rattan called "Jernang" or Dragon's 

then moistened and grated upon a Blood [Calamus draco) is boiled and 

stone, and the liquid applied to the the liquor drunk. Or the tooth of a 

injured part." porcupine is grated with water upon a 

The gall-bladder of snakes (e.g. of stone and applied to the region of the 

the python) is worn round the neck in stomach. 

order to heal fever. Also the wood of For abscesses the bark of a tree 

certain trees (^.^. the " Pcradang ") or called " Samung " is boiled, and the 

orchids (e.g. the Dipodiiim pain- infusion rubbed on the inflamed part 

dosuni) is boiled and the fluid drunk. by means of a piece of bark in place of 

When a thorn has entered the flesh, a brush. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 355 

leaves is administered to the child, the mother being 
treated with an infusion of various kinds of " Merian," 
such as " Merian api," " Merian padi," " Merian batu," 
and " Merian igi." ^ 

The Orang Laut believe that small-pox is a 
separate malignant spirit which moves about from 
one place to another, and those of the tribe that 
were located on the east side of the island (Pulau 
Tinggi) closed all the paths that led to the western 
with thorns and bushes, for, as they said, he (the 
spirit) can get along a clean pathway, but he cannot 
leap over or pass through the barrier that we have 
erected. - 

Traditions of the Benua-Jakun^ 

The origin of the country and race of the Benua 
was thus related : " The ground on which we stand 

For rheumatism the painful part is supernatural powers ; such, for instance, 

well rubbed with bees'-wax. as the Pikats of Java, who are said to 

For bruises dry roots of Citronella dwell on the summits of hills, and to 

^xz.'s&{Andropogotitiardus)'&x^\z\A\x^ov\. intermarry with the Siamangs ; the 

a fire-log, and the smoke used for fumi- Pangans and the cannibal Benangs, 

gating the bruise ( V. B. G. A. xxiv. who, like beasts, cohabit with their 

467, 468) nearest relatives ; the malignant Mawa 

For ailing children (in general) the that mocks the laugh of a human 

leaves of the "Kemunting" {Rhodo- being, with its iron arm and body 

niyrtus torinentosa) are boiled, and the covered with shaggy hair ; and the 

child washed all over with the infusion. treacherous B'lian that watches over 

As aphrodisiacs the roots of the the tigers, and which is supposed on 

" Tangkorali " (?) or " Tongkatali " and rainy nights to visit the abodes of men, 

the dried bark of " Perugas " are used ; and under the pretext of asking for 

they are chewed when the sun has fire, to seize and tear them into pieces 

passed the meridian. [The Tongkat ali with its enormous claws" (ii. 416). 
may be a grass called " Rumput Tong- Elsewhere we are told by Newbold 

kat AW" = Paiiicwn Sarmefitositm, or that "in the beginning of the world a 

Grewia tiinbellata, or perhaps a fern. — white Ungka and a white Siamang 

Ibid.'] dwelt on a lofty mountain ; they co- 

^ /. I. A. vol. i. p. 277. habited and had four children, who 

2 Ibid. vol. V. p. 141. descended from the mountain into the 

3 According to Newbold, " there are plain, and became mankind. From 
many idle tales current among Malays them sprang four tribes. In after 
of the existence in the woods and times the heads of these tribes, Nenek 
mountains of malignant races, half Tukol, Nenek Landasan, Nenek Jelan- 
men, half monkeys, endowed with dong, and Nenek Karah, were invested 

356 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iir 

is not solid — it is merely the skin of the earth (' kulit 
bumi '). In ancient times Pirman (the Deity) broke 
up this skin, so that the world was destroyed and 
overwhelmed with water. Afterwards he caused 
Gunong Lulumut, together with Chemundang and 
Bechuak (hills in Johor), to rise out of the water this 
low land which we now inhabit being formed later. 
These mountains in the south, together with Mount 
Ophir (Gunong Ledang), the mountains of Kaf 
(Gunong Kap), ' Flute-pillar' Hill (Gunong Tongkat 
Bangsi), and Gunong Tongkat Subang (lit. ' Earstud 
pillar' Hill) on the north, give a fixity to the earth's 
skin. The earth still depends entirely upon these 
mountains for its steadiness. The Lulumut moun- 
tains are the oldest land. The summit of Tongkat 
Bangsi Hill is within a flute's-length (one foot) of the 
sky; that of Tongkat Subang Hill is within an ear- 
stud's length ; and that of the Hills of Kaf is in 
contact with it. When Lulumut had already emerged, 
a ship (' prahu ') of ' pulai ' wood, completely covered 
over and without any opening, was left floating on the 
waters. In this Pirman had enclosed a man and a 
woman whom he had created. After the lapse of 
some time the vessel no longer progressed either with 
or against the current, and ceased to be driven to and 
fro. The man and woman therefore, feeling it to be 
motionless, nibbled their way through it, and standing 
upon the dry ground, beheld this our world. At 
first, however, everything was obscure. There was 

by an ancient king of Johor with the Balang ; the second ascended the 

honorary titles of To' liatin Kakanda Samawa or Linggi river, and founded 

Unku, To' Batin Sa-ribu Jaya, To' Sungei Ujong ; the third proceeded to 

Batin Johan Lela l'erkasa,and To' Balin the hill of Lantei Kulit, and founded 

Karah. The first founded the state of the State of Johol ; and the fourth to 

Klang, and possessed the canoe Sampan Ulu Pahang" (ii. 376-37S). 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 357 

neither morning nor evening, because the sun had 
not yet been created. When it became Hght they saw 
seven small wild rhododendron ('Sendudo') shrubs, 
and seven clumps of the grass called ' Sambau.' They 
then remarked to each other, ' In what a condition are 
we left, lacking both children and grandchildren ! ' 
Sometime afterwards, however, the woman conceived, 
not however in her womb, but in the calves of her 
legs. From the right leg came forth a male, and 
from the left a female child. Hence it is that the 
issue of the same womb cannot intermarry. All man- 
kind are the descendants of the two children of the 
first pair. When men had much increased, Pirman 
looked down upon them and reckoned their numbers 
with pleasure." ^ 

In addition to the foregoing, Logan further re- 
marks that in crossing the Lenggiu at the upper part 
of the ravine in which it rises, a long flat granitic slab 
covered with thickly-growing moss, and called " Batu 
Bekachong," is pointed out as the first couch of the 
parents of the human race. 

They look upon the Gunong Lulumut group with 
a superstitious reverence, not only connecting it with 
the dawn of human life, but regarding it as possessed 
of animation itself. Lulumut is the husband, Che- 
mundang his old wife, and Bechuak his young one. 
At first the three lived together in harmony, but one 
day Chemundang, in a fit of jealousy, cut off Bechuak's 
hair.^ The young wife retaliated by kicking Chemun- 
dang's head with such force as to force it out of its 
position. Lulumut, seeing his mistake, stepped in 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. p. 278. own inquiries enable him to confirm 

- Hervey in quoting this tradition Logan's account {v. J. R. A. S., S. B., 
verbatim from Logan, remarks that his No. 3, p. 105). 

358 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE tart in 

with his huge body between them, and has ever since 
kept them separate.^ 

From an old Portuguese writer comes the follow- 
ing interesting passage : — 

"Queen Putri (" Putry "), spouse of Permi^uri, 
founder of Malacca, was said to inhabit a cavern on 
Mount Ophir (" Gunoledam "). Here the Benua 
were said to learn magic. Without seeing any one 
they heard the magical qualities of plants revealed by 
mysterious voices. They drink a decoction of the Erba 
vilca in order to put themselves into communication 
with the evil spirit or with Putri, who was said to 
take the form of beasts and birds. The Benua by the 
same spells and charms transformed themselves into 
tigers, lizards, crocodiles, and other animals ; they then 
became gifted with divination and communicated with 
persons at a distance. The Benua were said to come 
to Malacca at night in the form of tigers, and to kill 
women and children." - 

"In the forests of that country [Johor] dwelt the 
Benua, wild races who . . . lived on Mount ' Guno- 
ledam ' {i.e. Ophir, or Gunong Ledang), where resided 
a certain Queen Putri, a magical enchantress who 
. . . collected herbs and plants possessing medicinal 
virtues, and transformed herself from the human form 
(of a woman) to that of a tigress, and of other animals 
and birds."" "Putri" is the Fairy "Princess" of 
Mount Ophir legend. 

^ J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 278, 279. called Saletes, inhabiting Malacca 

'^ Goudinho dc Eredia, p. 11b. before the Malays. Of the Malays 

3 Ibid. p. 1 1 ; cp. Malaca, L' hide he says: "The witches employ many 

Meridionaleet le Cathay, ls\^. ... i\(tQ. roots, plants, trees, and animals for 

de E., reproduit en facsimile et tradiiit their charms, and above all spells, 

par Leon Janssen. Bruxelles, 1882. especially those who kill children before 

Goudinho de Eredia wrote in 161 3. Ijaptism, on the fifth day after birth, or 

He also speaks of a " cannibal "(!) race in some cases before birth. The 

SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 359 

BEREMBUN TRIBES. 

The Berembun tribes, like the Malays, attribute 
the magician's power to his command over spirits 
which possess and inspire him. The spirits of the 
rivers (Hantu Sungei) are evil, inflicting diseases, and 
feeding on the human soul (or " semangat "). On 
the other hand, the spirits of the mountains (Hantu 
Gunong) are harmless. Every magician has several 
disciples who attend him when he visits a sick person. 
A small hut called " sawai " is constructed near the 
house, and in this the incantations are performed, 
everybody being excluded save the magician himself 
and his disciples. Incense is burned, and invocations 
chanted to the accompaniment of music, until the 
magician is possessed by the spirit, which answers 
through his mouth the questions put by the disciples 
respecting the mode of treating the disease. When 
a river spirit enters a man and he begins to waste 
away through its evil influence, the magician has 
power to exorcise it. The tigers are his slaves.^ 

JAKUN OF JOHOR. 

Belief in a Deity. 
A great part of the Jakun know and acknowledge 

natives regard the fifth day after birth reason hostile to man. But they are 

as critical, and keep watch with their rather demons, for they have their sides 

friends and relatives. open and inflamed." — Goudinho de 

" These witches, pupils of the Benua Eredia, p. 38. 
of the caverns of Gunoledam, subdue " At the equinox, especially the 

bycabalisticwords crocodiles, elephants, autumnal, on the day called " divaly " 

tigers, and serpents. Others transform [5?V, evidently the S. Indian or Tamil 

themselves into lizards, etc., to do evil. feast called Thivali], trees, herbs, 

[As to lizards, v. p. 373, infra.\ plants talk and disclose the remedy for 

"There is another kind of witch every malady. To hear them people 

called 'ponteanas,' who usually reside hide in the forest." — Ibid. p. 38^^. 
in tall trees such as poplars and 1 y. /. ^. vol. i. p. 277. "Sawai" 

' bondas.' People say they are women is the name of the ceremony, not of the 

who died in child-bed, and for this hut in which it is performed. 

36o NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part iii 

the existence of a supreme being, whom they call 
by the Malay name " Tuhan Allah," the Lord God. 
Many of those in Johor also admit their belief in a 
punishment for sin. With some of them it is only 
a general admission, and they have no idea by what 
means it is to be executed ; but some few others 
declare openly that sinners will be thrown after 
death into the fire of hell, though even these do not 
know of any reward for good men and good works. 
Those of the Menangkabau States, probably on 
account of their more frequent communications with the 
Malays, have more knowledge of religion, some of 
them speaking of God as the creator of everything, 
of i\dam as the first man, of Abraham, Moses, David, 
Solomon, though very confusedly, and there was not to 
be found amongst them any real knowledge either of 
Christ or the Christian religion.^ The more learned 
of them are called magicians or " Pawang," and those 
of Malacca are the most ignorant of religion. They 
do not worship the sun or the moon or any idols. 

Spirits and Demons. 

In demons (or "Hantu") the Jakun devoutly 
believe, but unfortunately little or nothing has been 
collected on the subject. Hervey's account of the 
Jakun belief concerning the " Hantu Semambu " is 
however, I think, worth quoting here. "The noise," 
he says, " that a certain species (of cicada) makes is 
almost unearthly and quite disagreeable. There is 
only one other sound in the jungle at night - time 
which, though otherwise different, resembles it in 
this peculiar way — it is that made by the 'Hantu 

' Favrc in_/. /. A. vol. ii. p. 249L Aljraliam, Moses, David, and Solomon 
are known to all good Moslems. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 361 

Semambu,' ^ which is very weird, consisting of three 
or four long-drawn notes rising and falHng slightly ; 
but the effect it is impossible to describe. The Jakun 
say that it is a weather guide."" 

We are further told that some Jakun regard jelly- 
fish as human souls waiting to be born,^ 

The offerings of rice laid on graves to appease 
the demons have already been mentioned.'* 

The Magician. 

Of the paraphernalia used by a Jakun " Poyang " 
or magician, Hervey writes that the " Kayu kelon- 
dang " (or " Gelondang," as it is also called), which 
is struck by the magician's attendants when the latter 
is exercising his skill on behalf of a sick man, must 
among the Jakun of the Madek people be made of 
wood from the Merawan tree, and no other. Whilst 
his attendants are striking the instrument in question, 
the magician waves a spray of a tree called " Chawak," 
and at the same time proceeds with his incantations.^ 

Treatment of Diseases. 

The knowledge of the Jakun in the art of physic 
is very limited. They use very little medicine, and the 
sick lack almost every form of assistance, the sickness 
being ordinarily abandoned to the ordinary course of 
nature. Notwithstanding, the Malays consider them 
clever physicians, and in their stupidity believe them- 
selves very fortunate when by giving them either 
money or clothes they succeed in obtaining from them 
some medical prescriptions.'^ Some of the Jakun, 

^ The noise is probably made by a * Cp. supra, vol. ii. p. 105. 

small frog. 5 Hervey,/. 2?. A. S., S. B., No. 8, 

'^ J. JR. A. S., S. B., No. 8, p. III. pp. 119, 120. 
2 Z.f.E. xxviii. 187. " y. LA. vol. ii. pp. 249-251. 

362 NA TURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

though not very many, and only those who are styled 
" Pawangs," pretend to some knowledge in physic 
as well as to a knowledge of the secrets of nature ; 
but their actual acquisitions in that respect are not 
so great as is ordinarily reported, and in fact they are 
very little more clever than the others.^ 

We are also told that some "tribes" of Jakun 
refused to eat the flesh of elephants, alleging that it 
would occasion sickness.^ 

The Malays believe that when a Jakun hates any 
one, he turns towards his victim's abode, and strikes 
two sticks together, one upon the other, and that in 
such a case, no matter how great the distance between 
them, his victim will fall sick, and even die, should he 
persevere in this performance for a few days.^ 

H. W. Lake, in writing of two Jakun who had 
been brought in very badly mauled by a tiger, 
remarks that, according to their statement, they had 
been attacked whilst asleep on a sandbank some 
distance up the river. One man's scalp - wounds 
appeared to be of a fatal nature ; the other, a 
youngster, w^as badly bitten in the fore-arm. Both 
refused to be treated by a European, and later in 
the day they could be seen lying in the blazing sun 
with their wounds well smeared with wood ashes and 
wrapped in leaves.^ 

Fire-making. 

In addition to the foregoing, an account of cere- 
monial fire - making among the Jakun is given in 
Vaughan-Stevens : — 

' Logan iny. LA. vol. ii. p. 251. imply lotemism. Cp. p. 260, ante. 

- Ann. P. F. xxii. 303. Ihe word •'* J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 274. 

"tribe " here doubtless merely signifies ■* H. W. Lake in y. K. A. S., S. B., 

a local group, and the fact does not No. 25, i)p. 3, 4. 

SA VA GE MALA YS OF JOHOR 363 

Whenever a company (of Jakiin) were on their travels and desired either to 
change their camp or to prepare for a longer stay there, a new camp-fire was 
lighted " for luck " by an unmarried girl with a fire-drill. 

The girl selected was usually the daughter of the man who happened to be 
acting as the leader of the company. Such a selection was regarded as specially 
fortunate ; but the leader's daughter could only be chosen if she were of an age 
just before puberty. And this custom is especially remarkable, since the Jakuns 
on their wanderings always carry with them a smouldering rope-end of tree- 
bark. 7 

Here, however, we have a survival of an older custom. The fire is obtained 
by means of the drill from a block of soft wood of the kind which the Jakun 
use for making the handles of their choppers ("parang"). A small block of 
this wood is generally carried either on the person, or more especially inserted 
in the headband of tree-bark, " exactly like the charm on one of our own watch- 
chains." It was shaped like the marine bivalve which they say their ancestors 
employed before they had learned the use of iron to cut up their fish, as well as 
for determining the spot for their encampment when they happened to be upon a 
journey. 

When the fire was about to be kindled the girl took this block of soft wood 
and held it on the ground, whilst her father or some other married man worked 
the vertical shaft which served as the drill. When the spark appeared she 
fanned it to a flame either by blowing upon it or by whirling the block round in 
her hand, for which purpose she surrounded the spark with a heap of shredded 
cloth and exposed it to a current of air.- 

From the fire thus kindled were lighted the other fires, for every successive 
night, and to it were ascribed good-luck in the matter of cooking, and a greater 
power of warding off wild beasts {e.g. the tiger) than was possessed by the first 
fire of an encampment when it was kindled by means of the smouldering rope- 
end of tree-bark. At the same time there was no hard and fast rule that this 
fire-kindling must be performed by a girl, since any person whatsoever, man, 
child, or woman (unless, in the case of the latter she were having her monthly 
discharges) might do it if it happened to be more convenient. -^ 

Taboo Languages. 

Amongst other industries the collection of various 
forms of gutta and camphor obtainable in the forests 
of the Peninsula is practised by the Jakun, who, whilst 

^ A specimen was sent with the women generally carried such shell- 
notes (Bartels). shaped blocks about with them, there 

- Z. f. E. vol. xxviii. pp. 168, 169. was no obligation for them to do so. 

[Bartels here remarks that it is not From this passage it would appear 

clear from the context whether it is that it was the shell - shaped block 

the block of wood used for kindling that the girl used in this case for 

the fire that is shaped like a shell, fire - making. On the other hand, 

or whether it has no special shape. Vaughan-Stevens says later that these 

According to Vaughan - Stevens the shell - shaped blocks are of extreme 

leader's daughter obtained the block rarity, and are now never carried for 

of wood from her father, for the blocks their original purpose, viz. that of 

carried by the unmarried girls and fire-making, since the custom had long 

boys for fire-making have no special become obsolete.] 
shape; and although the men and ^ Z.f.E. xxviii. p. 169. 

364 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

at work in this way, employ a peculiar dialect usually 
called the Camphor (or Gutta) Taboo language^ 
(" Pantang Kapur," etc.). As to the origin of this 
dialect there has been a good deal of speculation, but 
whatever its origin, the Jakun attribute great efficacy 
to its employment, as well as to certain strange 
ceremonial practices. Logan, for instance, mentions 
the eating of earth as a concomitant of the use of 
the Camphor Taboo language, as well as complete 
abstention during the prosecution of the search 
both from bathing and washing. Without these 
accompaniments of the superstition the " Pantang 
Kapur " would hardly be complete, and they would 
readily be suggested by the magicians themselves, 
to whose cunning and influence over the Malays 
Logan bears striking testimony. As some proof of 
the complete confidence the Malays possess in their 
powers, it may be recorded that the Malays at Kuala 
Madek, for instance, asserted of the Juru-krah resi- 
dent there, that he used to walk round the village 
(or kampong) at night and drive away the tigers 
without any weapons.^ 

I may add that many restrictions as to diet (or 
"food-taboos") were observed by the parents in the 
months preceding a birth, and that divination was 
employed to determine the probable sex of an ex- 
pected child. ^ 

The Jakun Traditions. 

The following is a Jakun tradition entertained 
by several tribes, and formerly related by a Batin 
of Johol : — 

1 This question of the Taboo 2 Hervey,/. /?. ^. .S"., 5. j9., No. 8, 

dialects will he fully treated of under p. 103. 
"Language." •* Cp. pp. 21, 23, ante. 

CHAP, vr SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 365 

God created in heaven, in former days, a man and 
a woman. They were Batins (that is, a king and a 
queen) of course, but had no kingdom or subjects. 
History does not say how long this couple remained 
in heaven ; but only that one day they descended 
to earth and were discovered in the neighbourhood 
of the river of Johor, in the southern part of 
the Peninsula. There this celestial Batin and his 
consort begat a numerous family, who peopled all 
the Peninsula. Those of them who embraced Islam- 
ism are now called Malays ; and those who remained 
faithful to the manners and customs of their ancestors 
retained the name of Jakun.^ 

Another legend (collected by Hervey) is that of 
Bukit Penyabong, near Kelesa' Banyak. The legend 
is that a cock-fighting match once took place here, 
between Raja Chulan and another Raja of old times, 
that the defeated bird flew away to his house at 
Bukit Bulan, whilst the victorious bird was turned 
into stone and still remains a mute but faithful 
witness to mark the spot where the tremendous 
conflict took place. The Dato', or chief of the 
tribe, stated to Hervey that he had himself seen 
the figure on the top of Bukit Penyabong ; it was a 
good deal above life-size, he said, and just like a cock 
in white stone ; " he added that the top of the hill was 
bare and that a good view was to be had from it.^ 

A similar legend is told of a Jakun Batin whose 
soul migrated into a white cock. 

The " Batu Hampar," or "outcrop rock," which 

^ J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 271. known in the Peninsula. 

- Hervey suggests that the hill it- ^ Hei"vey in Journal of the Royal 

self may possibly have been lime- Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 

stone, in which case it would be 3, p. no; cp. Ma]t, 1904, 14, and 

the most southerly limestone hill supra, p. 344, /;. 3. 

366 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

gives its name to this place, is a shrine ("kramat"), 
a sacred rock in the river, on which the devout spread 
the mat of prayer ; it owes its sanctity, according to the 
legend, to the execution carried out upon it (by order 
of the Sultan of Kota Tinggi) of one Jit, a Jakun 
chief, who had been detected in necromantic practices. 
When they came after the execution with the burial 
garments to take away the body, it had disappeared. 
Three months after Jit was met by his son on the same 
spot alive and well, which from that period onward 
he used to haunt. He was also said to assume at 
times the form of a white cock ; and when met in 
human form he disappeared, and a white cock was seen 
vanishing in the distance.^ 

Tradition of Tribes tvith Great Feet. 

Finally it may perhaps be worth while to refer to 
the explanation given by Vaughan-Stevens'^ of the huge 
foot-prints attributed to certain of these jungle tribes, 
more especially the " Eastern Jakun." According 
to Vaughan-Stevens, the great size of the footsteps 
of these Jakun, at certain seasons, is due to their 
binding the leaves of the Bertam-palm upon their 
feet, in order to avoid sinking in the deep mangrove 
mud when they are forced to traverse it in search 
of jungle produce, etc., the bad land which requires 
this special provision to be made being said to extend 
in patches as far north as Pahang. There may be 
something in this explanation ; on the other hand, it 
must not be forgotten that, as has already been 
pointed out, this legend of tribes with great feet is 
a widely spread Mohammedan legend, which is found 

1 Hervey iny. R. A. S., S. B., No. 3, p. 97. 
2 Z.f. E. xxix. 195 seqq. 

CHAP. VI MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 367 

in Other countries besides the Malay Peninsula, and 
this is perhaps the more probable explanation. 

Orang Laut or Sea-Jakun. 

Principles of Religioji. 

Orang- Laut, Sabimba. — The statement that the 
Sabimba have no religion, believe in no demons 
(" Hantu ") or other supernatural beings, hardly any 
medicines, and no magicians (" poyangs ") ^ can 
hardly be accepted as final, even if the word 
" religion " be confined to the narrow sense in 
which it was, till recent years, so frequently em- 
ployed. The converse statement would probably 
come nearer the truth. The present writer has on 
more than one occasion, without going out of his 
way to look for them, met with a variety of demons 
and charms believed in by the Orang Laut, and he 
thinks there is very little doubt that when it is 
adequately investigated the Sabimba religion will 
prove to be the old religion of the pagan (pre- 
Mohammedan Malays) which was most probably a 
form of demonology or Shamanism, overlaid with a 
slight Hindu veneer. 

Dreams. 

Dreams, we are informed, are greatly dreaded, and, 
when bad, suffice to keep the dreamer in a state of 
uneasiness for several days. A Sabimba man of old is 
said to have dreamed that he would be killed by a 
tiger, and within two days his dream was fulfilled.^ 

Again, they declare that their ancestors were 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. p. 298. Cp. also ibid. p. 348*. 
^ Ibid. p. 298. 

368 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

warned in dreams that if the race took to bathing 
they would be visited by tempests. Hence they 
abstain as religiously from bathing as they do from 
eating the fowl. The only punishment which the 
Malays threaten them with, or ever inflict, is to 
duck them in water, and of this they have so great 
a horror that they say they would prefer being killed 
at once.^ 

Sabimba Traditions. 

Before the Sabimba were transported to Johor by 
the Temenggong of that State, they inhabited that 
portion of the island of Battam which is traversed by 
the stream called Sabimba and its tributaries. 

They are entirely a forest people, having no 
clearings or cultivation of any kind, and also (we 
are told) no boats. They are therefore in a lower 
plane of civilisation than the Benua. According to 
their own traditions, however, they have not always 
been so rude of habit. They declare that they are 
of Malayan race, and give the following account of 
their arrival at Battam. Their forefathers lived in 
the land of the Bugis [i.e. Celebes), and were, like 
the Malays, of agricultural and maritime habits. 
In voyaging, however, from Celebes to the west- 
ward, a vessel containing a party of them and a 
Bugis Raja was lost off the coast of Battam. Some 
of them succeeded in reaching the shore, and having 
no means of returning to their native country, re- 
mained on the island. In the course of a few 
generations their numbers increased, and they lived 
in comfort, making clearings in the forest and 
gradually regaining the easy condition in which 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. p. 297. 

CHAP. VI MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 369 

their shipwrecked ancestors had Hved before they 
left their native land. At this stage, however, they 
unfortunately attracted the attention of pirates and 
their settlements ("kampongs") were ravaged. New 
clearings were made and their houses rebuilt, but 
once again they were visited by the pirates. They 
then removed to another locality, but their merciless 
and persevering assailants yet again discovered them, 
and continued to repeat their attacks every few years. 
At last, when their settlements had been destroyed for 
the seventh time, they gave themselves up to despair, 
abandoned their ancient habits, and sought safety by 
wandering in the forest and restricting themselves to 
such food as it yields spontaneously. To prevent 
any desire to return to the comforts of civilisation 
from exposing them again to plunder, slavery, or 
death, the whole tribe then and there made a vow 
that they would never again form any clearings, live 
a settled life, or even eat the domestic fowl, the 
crowing of the cock having sometimes betrayed their 
dwellings to the pirates. 

Whatever be the foundation of this tradition, it 
is certainly descriptive of the condition in which 
they now live.^ 

0. Laut, Sletar. — To the impulses which govern 
the actions of the Sletar, only a long acquaintance 
with their prejudices and domestic feelings could 
afford a clue. Of a Creator they did not appear to 
have the slightest comprehension, and even when 
the greatest care was taken over the investigation, 
the result was still entirely negative. They neither 
knew the God nor Devil of the Christian or Moham- 
medan, though they confessed they had been told of 

' /. I. A. vol. i. pp. 295, 296. 
VOL. II 2 B 

370 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part in 

such, nor any of the Hindu demigods, many of whom 
were recounted to them. In the three great epochs 
of their Hves {i.e. at birth, marriage, and death), we 
consequently find no rites or ceremonies enacted. 
Of the Pari, Dewa, Mambang, and other aerial 
spirits that are assigned to every mountain, rock, and 
tree in Malay mythology, they did not even know the 
names, nor had they anything to be afraid of (as they 
themselves said), except the " Gallang Pirates," who 
were men like themselves.^ 

0. Laut, Biduanda Kallang*. — They have a Bomor or 
physician who chants in order to summon the demons 
to give them medicine. 

For swellings they bruise the leaves of the "Baru,"" 
and rub them over the affected part. Cuts or wounds 
are rubbed with the juice of the "Akar lale urat." 
For pain in the bowels they employ ginger. For 
headache they drink the juice of a tree called 
" Kapielu {sic, ? Kapialu) angin."^ 

0. Laut, Muka Kuning". — The Orang Muka Kuning 
have derived some obscure and distorted notions of 
a Creator from the Malays, but otherwise appear'^ to 
have no religion or superstitions. Allah Ta'ala 
(the God of the Mohammedans) is the creator of all 
living things, and Nabi Muhamad (the Prophet 
Mohammed) is his wife, ^ who destroys all living things. 
They dwell together above the sky, and have two 
children, a male and a female, whose names and func- 
tions, however, are unknown. The Orang Muka 

' J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 343, 344. Sabimba already mentioned. 

^ ^^lidiTn" = Hibiscus tt/iacetis,'L\Ti\-\. '' This idea is perhaps the most 

(Afalvacecz). striking proof that could be imagined of 

' J. I. A. vol. 1. p. 300. that absolute superficiality of the Mo- 

* The italics are mine. For the hammedan element for which I have 

same remarks apply to them as to the contended. 

CHAP. VI MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 371 

Kuning have no idea of the soul as existing separately 
from, or surviving the body. It is probable that their 
belief in a male creating and preserving, and a female 
destroying, deity was derived either from Hindus or 
Hindu Malays in the pre-Mohammedan era, and that 
the Muka Kuning have merely altered the names, a 
practice which appears to be common in the Archi- 
pelago, and one, indeed, of which the history of almost 
every nation furnishes examples.^ 

0. Laut, Temiang". — A special form of arrow-release 
is said to be employed by the Orang Temiang in shoot- 
ing lire at the spirit of sickness. According to the 
description the bow is perforated in the centre (the 
"handle" of the bow), and the arrow has a shoulder 
near the distal end, which prevents it passing through 
the hole, and the nock is fastened to the string.^ 

A ball of inflammate . material is loosely placed on 
the end of the arrow, and when the arrow is released, 
it is suddenly checked by its shoulder striking the 

1 Logan here remarks, in a quaint ing out the ancient creed ; it only 

note, that in the eastern parts of changed many of the subjects, which 

Bengal, which have a distinct ethno- maintained, and do still to this day 

logical connection with the Indo- maintain, their place among us. What 

Chinese peoples, instances of this kind had been religious observance subsists 

occur. The successive changes that as popular superstition ; the cross of 

the religion of Europe has undergone the Saviour only replaced the hammer 

were accompanied by a similar con- of Thor, and the spells which had once 

fusion of names. "The memory of contained the names of heathen gods 

the pagan (classic) creed was not were still used as effective, having been 

speedily eradicated in the extensive christened by the addition of a little 

provinces through which it was once holy water, and the substitution of the 

universally received ; and in many par- names of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, 

ticulars it continued long to mingle Tobit, St. Peter, and St. Paul " (J. M. 

with, and influence, the original super- Kemble's Introdtu'ion to the Anglo- 

stitions of the Gothic nations. Hence Saxon Dialogue of Salomon and 

we find the elves occasionally arrayed Saturn, p. 7). — -J. I. A. vol. i. p. 

in the costume of Greece and Rome, 338. 

and the Fairy Queen and her attendants " Mr. L. Wray informs me that the 

transformed into Diana and her nymphs, form of bow here described is employed 

and invested with their attributes and V)y Malay Pawangs, or magicans, in 

appropriate insignia" (Sir W. Scott's Perak, and that there are several 

Introduction to the Tale of Tamlaiie). specimens of it (that came fiom Larut) 

"Christianity never succeeded m root- in the Perak Museum. 

372 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE iart ui 

bow, the fire-ball being projected into the air by its 
momentum. 

To effect this " release " the first finger is passed 
above the string and under the arrow, ^ the thumb 
being straightened, and the arrow grasped between 
the thumb and finger. - 

Traditions of the Orang Akik. 

0. Laut, Akik. — Dato' Klambu,^ a man of some 
power in former days, employed a number of Jakun 
in the building of an Astana or palace. He had an 
only daughter, a young and beautiful damsel, who, 
once upon a time observing the primitive costume of 
one of her father's workmen, was seized with an un- 
controllable fit of merriment. Thereupon the irri- 
tated Jakun commenced the incantation " Chinduai," 
and pursued their way to the forest, followed by the 
spellbound princess. Dato' Klambu despatched mes- 

1 Professor Morse adds, "This is a 'Kubur,' or tomb, of Dato' Klambu. 

most awkward and inefficient release, This was a Mohammedan saint of 

and as the description of this and the considerable odour, who crossed over 

previous release were given me by an from Achin to the Malay Peninsula, 

old man, it is possible that they may and who, during his lifetime, 

have been incorrectly described.'" selected this spot for the inhumation 

[The fact that these releases were of his remains. It is situated on 

described by an old man some years the summit of a steep mound near the 

ago is, however, rather in favour of bank of the river, and having a small 

their being correctly (not incorrectly) stream winding round its foot. The 

described. It is the younger (town- structure has nothing peculiar in it, 

bred) generation in the Peninsula that being built after the usual fashion of 

is the less reliable. Is it not possible, the Malayan Mussulmans ; it is about 

too, that the weakness and inefticiency of twenty yards long by two broad, and 

the release may have been intentional, is visited liy most Mussulmans passing 

as a strong release could hardly up the river, wlio repeat a prayer and 

be required by the circumstances ? ] offer an oblation for the peace of the 

- Internal. Archiv f. Ethn. vol. \\. Mavhum. There is neither date nor 

p. 278. inscription on it, with the exception of 

•^ Lit. Mosquito-net Chief. "About a few sentences of the Koran, and the 

two and a half miles up the Linggi, names of some of the devotees, which 

after passing the mouth of Sungei have been rudely scrawled on it in 

B^sar, the voyager arrives at the charcoal." — Begbie, pp. 400, 401. 

MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 373 

sengers to bring back his daughter, but she refused 
to return, and eventually became the spouse of one of 
the Jakun chiefs. Dato' Klambu, on receiving intel- 
ligence of this occurrence, dissembled his resentment, 
and invited the whole tribe to a sumptuous entertain- 
ment on pretence of celebrating the nuptials. In the 
midst of the feast he fired the palace in which the 
revels were carried on, and the whole of the Jakun, 
except a man and a woman, perished in the flames. 
These two Jakun fled to Rawang, a marsh near the 
seashore, and from them sprang the Rayat Laut, some- 
times termed Orang Rawang or Akik, who, not daring 
to return into the interior, have ever since confined 
themselves to the coasts and islets. The truly char- 
acteristic tradition among the subjects of the sea 
themselves, is that their first parents were a white 
alligator and a porpoise.^ 

Belief in Spirits. 

Orang: Laut (unspecified). — The Orang Laut, for 
instance, believe (we are told) that the flying lizard 
looks out for births and causes the soul to take up its 
abode in the new body. It is the subordinate of the 
mythical lizard, the guardian of the Stone [of Life], 
and can leave the earth to go to its master. If an 
Orang Laut killed one of these lizards, the others would 
refuse to bring the soul of his new-born child. The 
flying lizard can transform itself into a crocodile ; the 
crocodile and the shark are brothers and carry out the 
death sentence on a man whose Stone of Life is soiled 
and buried, if the lizard does not do so in person.'' 

1 Newbold, ii. 412, 413 [cp. the tribe is not stated. For the belief in 
J. T. A. vol. ii. p. 278]. the power of the Jakun to change into 

- Z.f.E. xxviii. 187. The name of lizards, cp. p. 358, ante. 

374 NATURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE part hi 

Again, the time from birth to the cutting of the 
umbiHcal cord is the critical period, and all present 
unite in shouting to drive away the evil spirits.^ 

The Orang Laut do not fear sharks. " They are 
our own brethren, they are Sea Pirates (' perompak 
laut ') like ourselves," said one of them to Thomson,'^ 

Use of Wooden Images . 

Before leaving the Orang Laut I must not omit 
to mention a valuable contribution to they. R. A. S., 
S. B., in No. 41 of the Society's Journal, by Dr. 
Abbott, who writes that in July 1903 he discovered 
among the Orang Mantong of Sanglar Island, two 
wooden images representing women, in a cave near 
the seashore, not far from Kampong Telok Lanun. 
Each image was about 3|- feet high, and one of them 
had three wooden horns about 6 inches long pro- 
jecting upwards from the head. These horns were 
serrated along one edge. This figure also had straight 
rudely-carved arms of soft wood much decayed. 

The teeth were represented by pieces of broken 
shell. A blackish line extended diagonally across the 
chest, meeting a horizontal one extending across just 
above the breasts. The region of the heart was 
marked by a blackish spot. The other figure was 
very rudely carved of soft white wood, and was with- 
out arms. 

The figures were lying face downward on the 
fioor of the cave, and had evidently not been disturbed 
for months, as roots were growing over them, and the 
wood was beginning to decay. 

No information in regard to the use of the images 
could be obtained. Everybody questioned by Dr. 

* Supi-a, p. 26, ante. ^ J. I. A. vol. v. p. 144. 

CHAP. VI MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 375 

Abbott denied the existence of such things, not know- 
ing that Dr. Abbott had already found them. 

No true Malays live on the island, and all the 
inhabitants eat pig. 

Dr. Abbott concludes, I think quite rightly, that 
these images c:innot be regarded as true " berhala " 
or idols, and that most probably they are a form of 
scape-goat (" sakat buang ") for use in sickness. Dr. 
Abbott adds that when an Orang Laut is ill, a wooden 
figure of a bird, snake, fish, or other animal is made, and 
as soon as the medicine-man (" pawang " or " bomor ") 
has exorcised the demon (" hantu ") in the sick man, 
and has driven it into the figure, the latter is then 
carried out to sea and thrown overboard. In the 
same locality (during the previous year) Dr. Abbott 
picked up the floating image of a bird. Very likely 
(says Dr. Abbott) these human images were similarly 
used. They resemble the "adu-adu" of the Nias 
Islands. 

To this (already mentioned) testimony I may add 
my own, for I myself once picked up on the Kuala 
Langat coast, close to the regular haunts of the local 
group of Orang Laut or Besisi, a large wooden figure 
representing a coconut -monkey or " b'ro." As in 
the case of Dr. Abbott's specimens every kind of 
information was rigidly withheld, but in view of these 
later discoveries, I have now little or no doubt that 
my own specimen should be explained in the same way. 
As somewhat analogous, I may add that at a shrine on 
the Bird's Nest Islands in the remarkable " Inland 
Sea " ( Tale Sap) of Singora, visited by the Cambridge 
expedition under my guidance in 1899, a (human) 
image of wood occupied a central position, between 
the skull of a rhinoceros and that of a crocodile (this, 

376 NA TURAL RELIGION AND FOLK-LORE chap, vi 

however, being the nearest approach to an idol that I 
have seen among the natives of the entire Peninsula, 
offerings of edible bird's-nests and broken clay images 
of animals, etc., being placed before it). During the 
same expedition, at a later date, I picked up on the 
river bank near Jambu in Jering (one of the seven 
modern subdivisions of Patani) a large wooden 
elephant (with mahout), which had been used, in 
place of the more usual " lanchang " or spirit-boat, 
during the ceremony of casting the spirits of evil out 
of the village in the preceding year. 

Summary. 

As is evident from the foregoing, the religions of 
these native tribes are made up of mixed elements, 
in which native notions greatly preponderate and form 
the basis, with details from Indian and Mohammedan 
sources superadded. (For the former see especially 
p. 1/6, ante.) Much of the Indian element seems to 
have been introduced direct, but some of it also 
appears to have come through an Indo-Chinese 
channel, though the exact manner of its introduction 
is still uncertain, in view of the vagueness of our 
knowledge of the early history of the Peninsula. 

A detailed comparison is outside the scope of the 
present work, but still it has to be largely kept in 
view in forming an estimate of the extent to which 
even these rude jungle tribes have been influenced 
by their more " civilised " neighbours in the obscure 
twilight of their unrecorded past. 

LANGUAGE. 

PART IV. 

CHAPTER I. 

Present State and Future Prospects. 

The languages spoken by the aboriginal tribes of the 
Malay Peninsula present various problems of un- 
common Interest as well as of exceptional difficulty. 
They are split up into a large number of dialects, all 
of which are of course unwritten, as these tribes^ 
have never attained to the level of civilisation which 
a knowledge of the art of writing implies ; and in the 
greater part of the Peninsula each of these dialects 
is confined to a relatively small area, and it often 
happens that a little clan, or even a single family, 
uses a form of speech which, though more or less 
related to the dialects of its neighbours, is neverthe- 
less sufficiently differentiated from them to be practi- 
cally unintelligible to all except the members of the 
little community itself. 

A necessary consequence of this state of things 
(which itself results from the natural segregation of the 
tribes into small clans nowadays to some extent cut 
off from one another and surrounded by settled Malay 
communities'") is that most of the aboriginal dialects 
are now, and have been for some generations past, in 

1 In the neighbourhood of Malacca some of the Perak tribes write on 

a few individuals have been taught to leaves, remains unconfirmed, 

read and write by the Roman Catholic - Cf. Cliftbrd m Journa} of the Royal 

missionaries; but Newbold's hearsay Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, "^o. z^, 

statement {op. cit. vol. ii. p. 417), that pp. 14-16. 

379 

38o PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

process of decay. Being of no use except for the 
very restricted intercourse for which they serve, they 
have hardly ever been thoroughly learnt either by 
Europeans, Chinese, Malays, or even, it may be 
supposed, by members of other tribes or clans : and 
nearly all communication between the aborigines and 
the outside world has therefore, for a considerable 
time past, been carried on in the general lingua 
franca of the Peninsula, that is to say, in Malay, more 
or less modified by the national and personal idiosyn- 
crasies of the speaker. 

Accordingly, in such parts of the Peninsula as 
have been at all exposed to outside influences, the 
dialects of the aborigines have for some generations 
been maintaining a precarious existence in constant 
competition with the invading Malay language, and 
in some parts they are now almost entirely superseded 
by it. All the dialects, so far as they are known to 
us, contain a considerable, though very varying, pro- 
portion of Malay loan-words, and the number of these 
is daily increasing. There can be no doubt that this 
tendency has been accentuated of late years by the 
establishment of peace and order in the Peninsula. 
The aborigines, who, in many districts, were formerly 
hunted like wild beasts, and whose well-founded dis- 
trust and fear of their Malay neighbours kept them in 
the jungles, have now learnt that the existing govern- 
ment will protect them. The consequence is that 
they now often visit Malay villages for purposes of 
trade and barter, and naturally they learn to speak 
Malay and imitate Malay customs.^ The number 
of aborigines who are thus bilingual, having learnt 
enough Malay to carry on a limited conversation on 

' Cf. Luering \x\ J.R.A.S., S.B., No. 35, pp. 91, 92. 

DECAY OF THE DIALECTS 381 

ordinary subjects, must be increasing in most districts, 
even where the tribes to which they belong are 
stationary or dwindHng in numbers. 

The way is thus being prepared for the gradual 
absorption of these wild tribes by their more civilised 
neighbours, and it must not be forgotten that this 
process is for them really a rise in the social scale, so 
that they are under a constant temptation to cast 
themselves adrift from all. that is most characteristic 
in their customs and language. Accordingly there is 
a strong tendency for these dialects to die out and to 
be replaced by a Malay patois, differing little from 
ordinary Malay. 

This process of assimilation, though accelerated in 
recent times, has been at work for several generations, 
and in the extreme south of the Peninsula it has 
reached such a pitch that almost all the dialects of 
that region are now practically obsolete. Already 
in the middle of the last century, when Logan ^ made 
his exploratory journey through Johor, he found that 
the Jakun aborigines of that State used Malay even 
in speaking amongst themselves, and that the only 
traces left of their extinct dialects were a broad and 
rather uncouth pronunciation of Malay, a few words 
which appeared to be survivals of their older tongue, 
and a peculiar, half-artificial jargon used by them 
while engaged in the search for certain jungle pro- 
ducts (especially camphor), when the use of their 
ordinary Malay vernacular was for the time being 
tabooed. - 

Miklucho-Maclay,^ Hervey,^ Lake and Kelsall,"^ 

^ J.I.A. vol. i. p. 2S9. No. 2, p. 21S. 

- Ibid. p. 263. •* Ibid. No. S, pp. 99-101, 112, 120. 

3 _/. K. A. S., S. B., No. I, p. 39 ; ^ Ibid. No. 25, p. 3; No. 26, p. 40. 

382 PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

and Machado/ who have since Logan's time reported 
on these southern tribes, all agree with his account of 
their condition in the matter of language. 

Similarly Emeric" states that the Sakai along the 
Klau river in Pahang speak only Malay, with " a faint 
soupfon of the guttural brogue that enables one to 
recognise aborigines within earshot, even if dressed 
like Malays and speaking Malay " ; and Clifford, in 
his manuscript notes communicated to me, records 
having met a clan of Sakai between Tras and Bentong, 
in the same part of Pahang, who spoke only Malay 
even amongst themselves, and explained it by claim- 
ing to be descended from a Rawa^ Malay ancestor, 
who, being invulnerable from his birth, could not be 
circumcised and had therefore to go and live in the 
jungle with the wild aborigines. No doubt the legend 
was invented to account for the fact of their speaking 
only Malay, but curiously enough some members of 
the clan were themselves circumcised, though it is not 
stated (and does not appear likely) that they were 
converts to Islam. 

So too Lawder'* in 1887 wrote, with reference to 
Kuala Selangor, that the very few Sakai in that 
district spoke only Malay ; and about the same time 
Turney ' wrote of the Klang Sakai, that they them- 
selves asserted that their language was Malay. 
Similar statements have also been made as to the 
Ulu Selangor Sakai.'' 

Yet words have been recorded quite recently in 
the last-named district which prove that the old dialects 

' J.R.A.S., S.B., No. 38, p. 31. situate about lat. o° 40' S., long. 100° 
- Calcutta Review, January 1904, E. (of Greenwich), adjoining the Man- 
No. ccxxxv. p. 59. deling Batak country. 

3 1 believe these Rawa people come '^ Sel.Joiirn. vol. iii. p. 224. 

from an inland region in Sumatra, " Ibid. " Ibid. vol. v, p. 398. 

LOCAL SURVIVALS 383 

are not entirely extinct there ; and the present writer 
can vouch for the fact that some at least of the Klang 
aborigines speak a dialect closely allied to, if not 
identical with, Besisi, for he obtained similar words 
to the Malacca Besisi, which he knew, from a planter 
whose acquaintance with Sakai was limited to a few 
words of the dialect of some of the aboriginal coolies 
employed on his estate near Klang. 

In fact, the assertion that a particular clan of 
aborigines speaks Malay exclusively is often rashly 
made on evidence which really only goes to show 
that the members of it all know Malay, but does not 
negative their having a special dialect of their own 
as well. The aborigines like to be thought civilised, 
and are extremely shy of displaying any of their 
tribal characteristics to an outsider who may be un- 
sympathetic. Moreover, in the south of the Peninsula 
the matter is complicated by the fact that there may 
often be some doubt whether what is spoken by the 
aborigines is really a roughly pronounced form of 
Malay or a closely allied dialect of separate develop- 
ment, influenced by, but not directly derived from, 
the civilised Malay language of the country. 

Nevertheless the process of decay which these 
dialects are undergoing is now in most parts of the 
Peninsula advancing at such a rate as to justify the 
presumption that in a few generations there will be 
little or nothing left of them, except, possibly, in the 
two or three remote tracts where at present bi- 
lingualism has hardly begun to appear. 

It follows that any research that is to be made 
into these peculiar forms of speech, must be made at 
once before the inevitable extinction with which they 
are threatened makes all further collection of materials 

384 PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

for ever impossible. These tribes, surrounded as 
they are by men of different faiths and alien races 
who despise them and regard them as little better 
than brute beasts, have no recorded history ; barely 
a few allusions to their mere existence are to be 
found in Malay literature, and practically nothing 
whatever is on record that can throw any light on 
their origin and antecedents. It is to their physical 
structure, their customs, and above all to their 
languages that we must turn if we would gain any 
insight into their past.^ 

Such is the somewhat pathetic interest which 
attaches to the languages of these forest-dwellers ; 
and though the study of them is not likely to be of 
practical use to any living soul, yet, embracing as 
they do the modes of speech of some of the least 
developed and most thoroughly wild and uncivilised 
members of our race, it is perhaps natural that they 
should form a fascinating subject of inquiry. 

Apart from this, however, they are of considerable 
importance in relation to the study of language in 
general, and of the languages of South-eastern Asia 
in particular, for they are connected in a peculiarly 
intricate way with several groups of these languages, 
some of which have hitherto been almost entirely 
neglected or at least very inadequately studied. 
Situated at the extreme end of a vast continent, these 
"aboriginal" tribes of the Malay Peninsula represent 
the disjecta membra of several distinct portions of the 
human race, and their languages are a curious blend 
of the most strangely amalgamated constituents. 

' Cf. Logan, y. /. A. vol. i. pp. 290, 291. 

SEMANG, SAKAI, AND JAKUN 385 

Classification and Distribution. 

Before, however, dealing with this point, it will be 
advisable to explain how the different dialects are 
distributed within the Peninsula, and to give some 
few specimens of the differences which exist between 
them. The terms Semang, Sakai, and Jakun will not 
be used in this section of the work to indicate merely 
the languages spoken by the tribes which anthropo- 
logically fall under these respective divisions as 
defined in Part I. of this work, but will bear a more 
strictly linguistic meaning. In arranging the materials 
which are embodied in the Comparative Vocabulary 
appended to this volume, it soon became evident that 
there was a typical Semang group of dialects, best 
represented by the speech of the aborigines in 
Central Kedah and the adjoining state of Raman, 
and contrasting strongly with a typical Sakai group, 
of which the best specimens came from Southern 
Perak and the adjoining parts of Pahang.^ These 
two types clearly differed in some important points, 
of which the most obvious were a considerable diver- 
gence in phonology, and the existence in the Semang 
type of a whole series of quite common words which 
appeared to be entirely absent in the Sakai type. 
Around these strongly contrasted types have been 
grouped the intermediate and outlying dialects, and 
thus the dialects of the north and centre of the 

1 This classification has been admir- pp. 528-537, which for the first time 

ably done by Schmidt in his excellent established on purely linguistic grounds 

article "Die Sprachen der Sakei und the existence of a Semang group 

Semang auf ATalacca und ihr Ver- distinct from the Sakai group, 
hjiltnis zu den I\lon-Khmer-Sprachen," The new material given in the 

in Bijdragen tot dc Taal- Land- en present work confirms and justifies 

Volkenhinde van Nederlandsch- Indie, Schmidt's classification in its main lines, 

6th Series, Part 8 (Part 52 of the whole), while extending it in some particulars. 

VOL. II 2 C 

386 PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

Peninsula have fallen more or less satisfactorily into a 
series of groups and subdivisions. 

In the south there are not the same clear distinc- 
tions ; for reasons which have already been in part 
indicated, there is no such good representative of the 
Jakun type as still exist in the case of Sakai and 
Semang. Nevertheless, the remaining dialects of the 
Peninsula have been classified and will be referred to 
as Jakun, both for convenience and because they may 
be ultimately derived from a common stock, and are 
at any rate distinct from both the Sakai and Semang 
types. 

The pages of the Comparative Vocabulary will 
amply illustrate the leading differences which exist 
between these types ; but for convenience, and as 
some indication of the divergences which occur, I 
here subjoin a short list of words which will serve as 
a specimen.^ 

Semaui, 

Sakai. 

Jakun (i). 

Jakun (2). 

Ant 

keso' 

laish 

pha' 

meret 

Bird 

kawod 

chep 

sabu 

burong 

Child 

wong 

kenon 

chaai 

enek 

Day 

keto' 

jlsh 

seri 

hari 

Egg 

maka' 

tap 

buntat 

kepoh 

Fisli 

begjag 

ka 

rayap 

ikan 

Hand 

chas 

tok" 

rawet 

tangan 

Snake 

ekob 

taju 

lllih 

ular 

Thunder 

kare 

engkuh 

aba 

ge rent ah 

Tooth 

nyus 

lemon 

cherah 

gigi 

Water 

torn 

teu 

par 

ayer 

' It must be understood that these 
words are selected, in some cases, 
from a number of variants, for which 
reference can be made to the Com- 
parative Vocabulary. The list is 
intended to be typical, but by no 
means exhaustive. Further, it often 
happens that the " Sakai " word 
appears (generally with some modifica- 
tion of form) in a number of Semang and 

Jakun dialects ; while there are several 
series of words, belonging to several 
distinct families of speech which run 
more or less through all three groups. 
These will be discussed later ; the above 
short list merely illustrates a few of the 
verbal differences between the groups. 
In view of the apparent internal 
diversity of the Jakun group, it is here 
represented by two lists. 

; 

ICO- lo.' loa" (OS- ,o." 1 

~C 

\ / 

Jalor \ 

e 

\ / 

EMANG \ 

SK. Kelantan 

•::i„, \ 

V ^"^ 

& 

5' 

Penana " 

Belimbing ^ 

^TonkN AND 

KfiiBring 1 e Tpniongoh 
'SJlah \Ptus 

GAN ^Sr~:KeiJar 
Jlu KeUntan \ 

\ 

L S^Amjii ' ' 

NORTHERN " 

Nwiggiri 

SAKAI Htot. 

Senoi 

CENTRAL 
TapA 
SAKAI 

U.Tembeling " 

EA STERN 

UCheres » 
P.Guai . 

■\ 

\ 

fAtX "* 

Mala, 

SAKAI "^""' 

king H^dM 

\ K Patumg 

«• 

I KLumpor ' 

„a\ southern 

Knuboi 
SAKAI . B.r.1 

Ara 

CA ra."g ^ 

Itan Syt^esisi 1 o BcUndaa 

Beduandd \ PaJan^ 

V^ tl<S 
ndau ^ i p 

0 

Malacca T 

ilmpai S^mbo-Qng ^ 

SKETCH MAP showing the 
distribution of the Languages of the 
Aborigines of the Malay Peninsula. 

T.Sagenlmg \ 

---- — 

Lenggiu 

Malay. SpeaJung 
s^ JaKun Tribes \ 

,;\ 

The small circles indicate the chief ascertained 
Localities where vocabularies have been recorded. 

Approximate boundaries of groups and subdivisions 
are marked, and outlying dialects underlined, thus; 

Semang Sakai Jakun 

>r^l^ 

^V/^^-YSingapore ^^ 
OrangLaut^-^ r;; 

\^§<zJ 

U=JU/ ^Vx 

I ^ -^^^ 

'^^' 
-.^ 

.02- 105° 1 

CHAP. I GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION 387 

As a matter of fact, the relations which exist 
between these different types are exceedingly com- 
plex, and cannot be satisfactorily discussed without 
referring to the other families of speech in South- 
eastern Asia with which the dialects of the Peninsula 
are connected, or by which they have been modified. 
But before entering into the consideration of these 
difficult problems, it is desirable to explain the geo- 
graphical distribution of the dialects, and to indicate 
at the same time the subdivisions into which they 
fall ; for these subdivisions, though based on linguistic 
data, do in fact agree to a considerable extent with 
the territorial arrangement and geographical relations 
of the several tribes. 

Roughly speaking, then, the dialects fall into groups 
which correspond, though not accurately, with the 
anthropological varieties of the aboriginal races. In 
the north of the Peninsula are the Semang dialects 
(called on the eastern side of the main mountain 
range by the name of Pangan) ; in the centre the 
Sakai ; and in the south the very mixed and broken- 
down dialects which are here grouped as Jakun.^ 

Semang". — The Semang dialects, including those 
of the Pangan tribes, are spoken in an irregular tract 
extending from at least as far north as lat. 6° 30'' to 
about lat. 5" 5' on the western side of the Perak river, 
and about lat. 4° 45' on the eastern side of the main 
range in the States of Kelantan and Trengganu ; and 
lying between longs. 100° 40' (though a century ago 

1 A reference to the map here given outside these lines, while within them 

will illustrate the relative position of some of the recorded dialects may have 

these groups. The boundary lines become extinct. 

drawn on the map merely indicate ^ Except where otherwise stated, 

roughly their limits as evidenced by all latitudes are north. All longi- 

the actual data of dialects recorded. tudes are east of the Greenwich 

It is quite possible that others exist meridian. 

388 PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

the limit was near the actual coast-line, about long. 
lOO'' 20') and 102'' 45'. Outlying members of the 
group have been recorded beyond these limits : 
Miklucho-Maclay ^ heard of Negritos, presumably 
Semang- speaking ones, though nothing is said on 
that point, as far north as the mountains of Patalung 
(probably about lat. 7° 35', long. 99° 45'), and he also 
saw two captured boys of that race in the house of 
the Raja Muda of Singgora. Again, Warrington 
Smyth "^ states that a small tribe of about four hundred 
Negritos inhabit the district of Chaiya (lat. 9° 20', long. 
99°), but he too says nothing as to their language ; 
on the other hand, Clifford records the presence of a 
single Semang-speaking family, apparently not of pure 
Negrito stock, as far south as Sadang (lat. 4" 30^ long. 
100' 53'), and in Pahang, though no specimens of 
their dialects have been recorded, it is probable that 
a few Pangans wander at least as far south as this, if 
not farther.^ 

Throughout almost the whole of its very extended 
range, the Semang language is curiously uniform as 
compared with the Sakai. This may with much 
probability be ascribed to the relatively more nomadic 
life of the Negritos, which leads them over a con- 
siderable tract of country, keeps up communication 
among the several clans, and checks the process of 
local differentiation. There is no clear linguistic line 
of demarcation between Semang and Pangan ; in fact, 
the Semang speech of Central Kedah and the Pangan 
of Southern Kelantan, though more than 120 miles 

1 J.R.A.S., S.B., No. I, p. 207. they go as far as Pulau Tawar (lat. 

He calls Patalung " Madelon." 3° 51', long. 102° 27'), and a pen- 

•j [.[ve years in Siani, vol. ii. pp. 76, c;hulu informed Enieric that they were 

77. to he found on the tributaries of the 

•' Kmeric reports, on the authority Semantan (about lat. 3° 30' or 3° 40', I 

of i-'rost, District Ofticer, Pekan, that presume); but this awaits confirmation. 

CHAP. 1 SEMANG AND PANGAN DIALECTS 389 

apart, resemble one another more closely than do some 
Sakai dialects which are near neighbours. 

The following short list, which could be consider- 
ably amplified if necessary, will suffice to illustrate 
this close resemblance : — 

Semang of Ke 

dah. 

J 'an » an of Kelatilan. 

Black 

beltek 

hellek 

Father 

e 

ah 

Hand 

chas 

chas 

Lip 
Shoulder 

tenud 

klajieh 

tenoyt 
k"Iapa 

Stomach 

chiintj 

chcing 

Stone 
Thunder 

balog 
kaye 

bahi 
kare 

On the other hand, the Semang and Pangan 
dialects have a long border-line where they march 
with members of the neighbouring Sakai group, and 
on both sides of that line there has been some inter- 
mixture and mutual influence. While all Semang 
dialects, so far as at present recorded, have many 
words in common with Sakai, several of the Semang 
dialects near the Sakai border, especially the dialects 
of the Plus and Galas valleys, contain a few Sakai 
words and forms which do not occur in the more 
typical Semang further to the north. But this is only 
what might have been expected, and it does not 
amount to much. 

In a few instances the Pangan dialects seem to 
prefer a different word from the Semang ; but in such 
cases it usually happens that one or both synonyms 
occur also in Sakai : — 

Semang. 

Pangan. 

Sakai. 

Cold 

hangit 

tengked 

sengiit, dekat 

Female 

mabe 

yalu 

Hot 

pcdih 

bekud 

bekat 

Water 

beteu, ho, 

gel 

torn 

teu, hong 

The following short list of words will suffice to 

390 PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

show that the Semang dialect of the Plus is distinct 
from the Sakai dialect of the same valley : — 

Sejna}!i;- of /'his. 

Sakai of Phis. 

Big 

boo 

menu 

Child 

wong 

kuod 

Dog 

«od 

chuor 1 

Good 

boded 

meg 

To give 

eg 

ok 

Even when, as in the last instance, the Semang 
and Sakai languages use the same word, there are, as 
a rule, characteristic differences of form which show 
that the phonetic tendencies of the two races diverge 
considerably. The following are a few instances : — 

Semang. Sakai. 

Bone 

iyeng 

jaak 

Eye 

med 

mat 

Foot 

chan 

jukn 

Leaf 

hali' 

selak 

Moon 

keche' 

geche' 

Skin 

keto' 

getuh 

Tail 

hatek 

sentak 

Thorn 

hill' 

jerlak" 

Tongue 

lit!' 

lentak 

Low-country Semang". — A more substantial ex- 
ception to the general uniformity of the Semang 
language consists in a small group of dialects, now 
probably extinct, but formerly spoken in the extreme 
south of Kedah and in the upper part of the valley of 
the Krian, the boundary river between the States of 
Kedah and Perak. This little subdivision seems to 
correspond with the Semang Paya, or low- country 
Semang, of Anderson and others ; and, in spite of its 
probably very limited range, it appears to have con- 
stituted a distinct subdivision of the Semang family, 
for it sometimes differs from the other dialects even 
when these agree with one another. It appears to 

* Perhaps this should be chn&. 

CHAP. I THE SEMANG-SAKAI BORDERLAND 391 

have more words in common with Sakai than the 
typical Semang has; thus for "hand," it uses long, 
Sakai tok", instead of the typical Semang chas ; and 
yet it occasionally has a different term where most of 
the other Semang dialects have a word corresponding 
with the Sakai equivalent, e.g. " ear," pol (pul, pun) 
as compared with the usual Semang hitbng {inteng, 
anting), Sakai kentok {'ntak, etc.). Sometimes, though 
it has the same term, it differs somewhat in form, e.g. 
" to eat," chw , as against the usual Semang ckt , 
Sakai cka ; " shoulder," kapuch [kapwek), as against 
klapeh [k/apok), Sakai gelpaul, etc. 

Pangfan-speaking" Sakai. — Included among the more 
typically Semang dialects are two, collected by Clifford 
in the Lebir valley in Kelantan, and the Kerbat in 
Trengganu respectively, which are spoken by tribes 
whom the collector, a careful observer, describes as 
being physically Sakai. If that is so, it is clear that 
these tribes must have adopted the speech of their 
Negrito neighbours, or they may have been originally 
Negritos whose physical type has been modified by 
crossinfj with a Sakai strain. 

Sakai-speaking" Negritos. — Conversely, the Negritos 
of the region of Kenderong, Kenering, Sungei Piah, 
and Temongoh (or between lats. 5° 25' and 5° 5', and 
longs. 101° and 101° 20') in Northern Perak speak 
dialects which, though containing a few Semang words, 
must nevertheless be classed as Sakai. In this dis- 
trict it is evident that the Sakai speech has en- 
croached at the expense of Semang, a view supported 
by Semang tradition, which, according to Clifford, 
lays claim to Mt. Korbu (lat. 4" 41', long. 101° 20'), 
as being part of the old Semang territory. 

It will be noticed that, with slight exceptions in 

392 PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

Perak (and formerly Province Wellesley), all the 
Semang dialects hitherto recorded are comprised 
within the States politically subject to the Siamese 
suzerainty ; that is to say, Kedah, Raman, Jalor, 
Teluban (or Sai), Ligeh, Kelantan, and Trengganu. 

Sakai. — The Sakai group occupies the central 
mountain tract of the Peninsula, with the headwaters 
of its principal rivers, and extends, approximately, 
from long. ioi° in Perak to long. 103° in Pahang, and, 
on the western side of the main range, in Northern 
Perak, from lat. 5° 25', and, on the eastern side of the 
range, from lat. 4° 50', to lat. 2° 25', approximately, 
where it ends in a few outlying and obsolescent 
dialects on the Pahang- Johor border. Almost the 
whole of the group is comprised within the limits of 
the Federated Malay States under British protection;^ 
that is to say, Perak, Pahang, Selangor, and the Negri 
Sembilan. 

With such a wide range it is not surprising that 
this group of dialects should be characterised by con- 
siderable internal diversity, especially when it is 
borne in mind that the tribes which speak them are 
for the most part broken up into small clans inhabit- 
ing the upper parts of valleys in a mountainous 
country, and to some extent confined each to its own 
little district. Unlike the Semang tribes, the greater 
part of the Sakai clans are no longer engaged merely, 
or even mainly, in hunting and in gathering wild fruit. 
They tend to settle down into small temporary 
villages, and to practise a rude kind of agriculture ; 

* The only exceptions I know of waters of the Dungun river in the 

are the Sakai of the Ncn^giri valley in same stale, a few Besisi in Malacca, 

Kelantan, a straggling tribe in the and the above-mentioned tribes along 

Ketiar valley in Trengganu, another the northern frontier of Johor. 
which occasionally resorts to the head- 

SAKAI DIALECTS 393 

and though they do, from time to time, change the 
location of their clearings, it is probable that they 
hardly ever shift into a valley inhabited by another 
clan,^ for such an act would be regarded as a form 
of trespass ; nor are they always on perfectly friendly 
terms with their neighbours.-^ 

Apart from this, the Sakai group borders on two 
long frontier lines with the Semang and Jakun groups, 
both of which, especially the latter, it overlaps and 
has probably encroached on, so that it is in part 
made up of dialects which have retained or absorbed 
elements derived from one or both of these two alien 
sources. 

It is only, therefore, in a relatively small tract, 
approximately between lats. 4° 30' and 4°, and longs. 
loi' 15' and 102', that the really typical Sakai is 
spoken ; while just to the north of this is another 
region, extending to the Semang - Sakai frontier, 
where the dialects, besides differing in some other 
respects from their southern neighbours, are evidently 
somewhat affected by Semang,^ and appear to be 
spoken by tribes of mixed descent, with a consider- 
able though varying percentage of Negrito blood. 

The map here given shows with sufficient precise- 

^ Leech \xyj. R. A. S., S. B., No. 4, their vocabulary ; but they have a few 

p. 29, says: "The common idea that special words (which do not seem to 

they wander at large all over the hills occur in Central Sakai) in common 

is certainly a mistake ; each particular with Semang, if.^'-. "alive,'' goish, 

tribe keeps exclusively to its own Tembi ; gosh, Sakai of Korbu ; 

valley . . . their habits are migratory " arrow," /<??;§•, Sakai of Plus ;" bow," 

in their own districts, but . . . they dg, Sakai of Plus ; " pig,"' napag, 

seldom leave their own valley.'" Semang (so-called, but really Sakai) of 

2 Leech, loc. cit., speaks of them Kenering ; for which compare the 

as being frequently at feud with their Pangan gas ; Semang loig (and loyd), 

neighbours on either side. I do not eg, and napeg. This last apj^ears to 

think, liowever, that actual fighting be a typically Semang word, being 

occurs nowadays, if it ever did. recorded only in dialects that are un- 

^ The .Semang influence is more doubtedly .Semang and two others 

traceable in their phonology than in that adjoin the Semang area. 

394 PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

ness the localities where the chief Sakai dialects have 

S.PIus 

Lasak 

+ 
+ 
+ 

NORTHERN + 

Ulu Plus -f 

•f 

SAKAI T E^M B E 

Gunong Korbu S 

Kuala Batu 

S. Korbu 

S. 

NenggM 

Ulu Kinta 

Ipoh 

Tanjong 
Rambutan 

Blanja 

(Lenakuas) 

v. 

-It. - - 

§• Gunong ^ 
CImbangT 

+ 
+ 

S. 
Setau 

S. Raya 

0j?3;tU o 

Gajah Gopeng 

Ulu Kampar 
Kuala Dipang- ^ Ulu Bertang o'i''"l'E 

+ 

Gin. _ 
Berumbaii 

S. Kampw 

S. Telom 

S E N O I 

S. Jelcci 

S. Chanderiwig 

Tapah 
o 

S.Batang Padang 

CENTRAL -^^ 

X 

Ulu X 

Tapah Tapah x 

X 

+ 

Slim y. 
% 
S.Bidor Ulu Gedaiig ■/. 
:h 

Ulu Sunghai 

SAKAI oiu 

S. Sungkai gg,.^^ \ 

Approximate boundary between Northern and Central Sakai. _ .___ 

Approximate position of Perak frontier and main mountain )'ange...+++++ 
S.= Mai. Sunyai ("riuer") 

Skktcii Map of Principal Sakai Districts. 

been recorded in the central reg-ion where these two 
subdivisions adjoin. This is described by Clifford as 

CHAP. 1 NORTHERN AND CENTRAL SAKAI 395 

the one true Sakai district of the Peninsula, the 
only permanent inhabitants being all of aboriginal 
race, and comprises the headwaters of the rivers Jelai, 
Telom and Serau in Pahang, Batang Padang, Bidor, 
Kampar and Plus in Perak, and Galas ' and Nenggiri 
in Kelantan. 

Northern and Central Sakai. — I shall call the two 
subdivisions of the Sakai group which are represented 
in this region by the names Northern and Central 
Sakai, which correspond respectively to the Tem-be' 
and Sen-oi of Clifford, who was the first to point out 
the distinction between them.- They are separated 
by a line^ drawn from the neighbourhood of Blanja 
(lat. 4 30', long. 100' 55') on the Perak River, in the 
direction of east by a little north, passing between 
Ipoh and Gopeng, then north of the Sungai Raya 
valley but south of Tanjong Rambutan, Ulu Kinta, 
and Mt. Korbu (and probably of Mt. Chabang) to the 
Serau valley in Pahang, across which it seems to run 
somewhere about lat. 4' 35'. According to Clifford, 
the line continues to Kuala Nenggiri, lat. 4° 45', long, 
loi" 53', but I have no data as to the nature of the 
dialect spoken by the relatively numerous Sakai 
population of the Nenggiri valley ; probably it falls 
into the northern subdivision of the Sakai group. 

The dialects of Blanja, Sungai Raya, and the 
Serau valley are border dialects falling into the 
central subdivision ; those of Tanjong Rambutan, 
Ulu Kinta, Korbu, and the dialect specifically called 
Tenibe' (or Tembi) are their immediate neighbours 

' Part at least of the Galas valley nioditied, and with additional detail 

is inhabited by Seniang - speaking supplied from more recent data. It is 

aborigines. noticeable that this line cuts straight 

2 /. R. A. S., S. £., No. 24, pp. across the main mountain range of the 

14-16. Peninsula and has no relation to any 

"• This is Clifford's line, slightly political or physiographical frontier. 

396 PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

on the north ; and it is certain that Northern Sakai is 
unintelligible to the clans speaking the central 
dialects/ just as Semang is unintelligible to the 
Northern Sakai, 

To the south the Central Sakai extends con- 
tinuously as far as the Slim valley in Southern Perak, 
probably about lat. 3 50', after which there is a gap 
in the record, the only other known specimen to the 
southward being the dialect of the Orang Tanjong, 
or " men of the river reaches," in the Ulu Langat 
district of Selangor, about lat. 3' 10', long. 101° 50'. 
As to this outlying clan, one can only wonder how it 
got so far away from the main body to which it 
belongs and from which it is now separated by tribes 
speaking dialects of a different type. 

Southern Sakai. — The tract of country extending 
from lat. 3° 15' or thereabouts to about lat. 2 25', and 
between longs. loi' id and 103° 15^ is pre-eminently 
a mixed district inhabited by a motley crowd of tribes, 
some of Sakai and others of Jakun speech. Some 
aborigines in this region (e.g. the Besisi) speak Sakai, 
but are physically Jakun, and vice versa some {e.g. 
the Belandas) appear to be of Sakai origin, though 
they do not speak Sakai dialects. This puzzle may 
perhaps be in part explained by the habit which these 
clans have of seeking their wives from a stock different 
from their own ; anyhow, it is a very mixed district. 

With the exception of the Ulu Langat dialect 
mentioned above, the Sakai dialects here spoken 
constitute a distinct southern subdivision which is more 
allied to the Central than to the Northern Sakai, but 
is quite distinguishable froni ])oth. They are best 
represented by the Besisi of Southern Selangor and 

• \j\mnz,J.R.A.S., .S.B., No. 35, p. 92 ; Clifford, I.e. 

SOUTHERN SAKAI 

397 

the Negri Sembilan (especially Sungei Ujong), a 
scattered tribe speaking a relatively uniform dialect, 
and extending even into the British territory of 
Malacca. Other cognate dialects have been re- 
corded in the Serting valley of the Negri Sembilan. 
the Bera valley in South Pahang ; and also on the 
Upper Palong and Endau (or Indau) in Northern 
Johor, where, however, they are obsolescent, if not 
extinct. 

This southern subdivision of Sakai can be further 
split up into two subgroups, a south-western and a 
south-eastern one, the former comprising, in addition 
to Besisi, the dialect of the Orang Bukit (" hill men ") 
of Ulu Langat and the somewhat mixed dialect 
collected somewhere in Selangor by Daly, the latter 
subgroup including the remaining dialects just men- 
tioned, and perhaps also the so-called Beduanda 
dialect of Chiong in Johol, which, despite a consider- 
able Jakun element, seems to have a larger percentage 
of words in common with Sakai than with the Jakun 
dialects with which its name would incline one to 
classify it. Of the occasional differences that justify 
this division of Southern Sakai into two subgroups 
the following words (not all of which are really of 
genuine Sakai origin) may serve as specimens : — 

South-western- 

South-eastern Subgroup. 

Subgroup. 
Besisi. 

Beduanda 
Chiong. 

■' Serting. 

Bera. 

Ulu 
Indaji. 

Banana 

hentok 

kentok 

tlok 

... 

diokl 

Belly 

eot 

lepon 

lepot 

leput 

lopot 

Eye 

mat 

man 

mot 

muat 

mot 

House 

dong 

dol 

dol 

dol - 

Water 

doo 

dak 

dak 

dak 

dak •■' 

Wife 

gado 

tempim 

kempun 

kempung 

kompotn 

1 Besisi collected at Nyalas (Malacca) 

■i Also 

in 

Ulu Palong. 

The Ulu 

has fol; 
'^ Also in 

Indau dialect 

; also has dimi ; Orang 

1 Ulu Palong. 

Hutan of 

(Northern) Johor, 

, diao. 

398 PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

Occasionally the south-eastern subgroup has forms 
more nearly akin to those of the other Sakai sub- 
divisions than the Besisi equivalents : e.g. " big," 
Serting ikoi, Senoi e7ttoi, but Besisi kadui; "nail," 
Serting chcros, Korbu cheros, Orang Tanjong of Ulu 
Langat chinros, Besisi kokdt (a Malayan word common 
in the Jakun dialects). But, as a general rule, the 
two subgroups agree pretty closely together. 

Probably all the tribes of this southern subdivision 
know Malay and speak it pretty frequently, and their 
dialects have been much mixed with Malay and 
Jakun elements. Dealing, as we often have to do, 
with mere lists of words without specimens of 
sentences or grammatical information, it is impossible 
to draw a hard-and-fast line here between Sakai 
dialects and Jakun, as the two seem to have in- 
fluenced each other to a considerable extent, and 
many mixed vocabularies are recorded. 

Eastern Sakai. — Returning now to the northward, 
we find in Pahang, to the east of the central sub- 
division, a number of dialects scattered over a tract 
extending between lats. 4' 40' and 3° 30', and longs. 
102^ and 103° approximately. The dialects here re- 
corded, which I have classed, somewhat tentatively, 
as the eastern subdivision of Sakai, fall into two sub- 
groups, viz. an inner subgroup located in Central 
Pahang, comprising the dialects spoken about Kuala 
Tembeling, Pulau Guai, Kerdau, and the Krau 
valley ; ^ and an outer one, consisting of the speech of 
the Sakai tribes of Ulu Tembeling and Pulau Besar(who 
also occupy or resort to Ulu Dungun in Trengganu), 
and of the Sakai of Ulu Cheres in Ulu Kuantan. 

' A vagrant branch of the Krau valley in Trengganu, about lat. 5° 10' 
tribe has wandered to the Kctiar to 5°, long. 102" 35' to 102° 40'. 

CHAP. 1 EASTERN SAKAI 399 

Both these subgroups, though having much in 
common with Central Sakai, occasionally favour the 
Northern type. They both contain a sprinkling of 
Semang words, which thus extend much further south 
in the eastern part of the Peninsula than they do on 
the western side of the main mountain range. It is 
curious, for instance, to note that whereas, for instance, 
in Perak the word for " sun " is the Sakai madyis 
{mat jisk) as far north as lat. 5° 25' at least, in 
Pahang the Semang mat ketor (kcta probably) extends 
as far south as the Krau valley in lat. 3" 40'.' 

The outer subgroup also approximates in some 
particulars towards the Southern Sakai, e.g. " belly," 
lepoch, Ulu Cheres ; cf leput, Bera ; Icpot, Serting ; 
lopot, Ulu Indau, as against the typical Sakai, kut : 
" sun," 77iotbri, Ulu Tembeling ; cf matbri, Ulu 
Palong, as against the typical Sakai mat jish : 
" tongue," Icpes, Ulu Tembeling ; Icpek, Ulu Cheres ; 
cf lepds, Serting ; iipcs, Ulu Indau ; typical Sakai, 
lentak : " to climb," yUl, Ulu Tembeling ; hlal, Ulu 
Cheres ; cf. yal, Besisi and Serting ; typical Sakai, 
hut : " to go," S7m^, Ulu Tembeling ; chuak, Ulu 
Cheres ; cf szuag, Ulu Indau ; c/iok, Besisi ; this word 
apparently occurs also in the other Sakai subdivisions, 
and in Semang and Pangan, but the typical Sakai 
work is chip. As the above instances indicate, the 
connection is mainly with the south-eastern subgroup 
of Southern Sakai, while some of the words also occur 
in the Jakun dialects of the same region and possibly 

1 Perhaps this Semang element is Palong; kukeatt, Semang: "mouth," 

traceable even in the Southern sub- «2</, Ulu Indau ; .w?</, Orang Hutan of 

division of Sakai, but the instances are Johor (2nd list) ; //«;^/, Semang : '"nest," 

not numerous, and it is not quite gesurii, Besisi of Kuala Langat ; kesun, 

certain that they are specifically Semang Bera ; sum, sam, Semang ; ctisobn, Se- 

words : e.g. "banana," keikei, Ulu mang (really Sakai) of Kuala Kenering. 

400 PRESENT STA TE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

a few of them are Jakun loan-words, not originally 
Sakai at all. 

With all this internal diversity, the two subgroups 
have perhaps enough in common, and are sufficiently 
distinct from the other forms of Sakai, to justify their 
inclusion in a subdivision of their own. In spite of 
their foreign elements they are undoubtedly Sakai 
dialects, though of a mixed and somewhat degenerate 
type. 

I append a few words illustrating the sort of 
resemblances and differences which exist between 
the four subdivisions of the Sakai group : — 

Comparative List illustrating the Main Types of Sakai. 

NorthcDi. 

Central. 

Southern. 

Eastern. 

Ant 

las 

laish 

pos 

petom ' 

Banana 

telui 

telai 

hentok 

Big 

menu "^ 

entoi 

kadui 

mena' "^ 

Bird 

chap, chem 

chep 

chibm, chim chem 

Child 

kuod, kon 

k^non 

kenon 

iwa',1 enkon 

Day 

iis 

jish 

chohoi 

ketor,! tengngi, 
bri 

Dog 

chuo 

cho' 

cliau 

cho' 

Egg 

tap 

pelok" 

kepoh •'■ 

entap 

Eye 

mat 

mat 

mat, mot 

mat, mot 

Foot 

juk" 

juk" 

jotng 

Jong 

Hand 

tik, ling 

tokn, tak 

t!h, ti 

teng, ti 

House 

diiSng, deh 

dokn, diik 

do^ng, dol 

siet 

Leaf 

sela 

sela 

plong 

sela' 

Man 

sdnoi 

sSnoi, mai 

mah, sema' 

jah, ma', 
sSma 

Many 

biga, kup" 

jeoi, kop" 

'nom 

ba'lo 1 

Nose 

mu 

nioh 

muh 

moh 

Pig 

gaur 

gau 

ketuS 

rap 

Tongue 

Icntag 

lentak 

lepas 

lepes, lentak 

Water 

ag^ 

teu 

doo, dak 

to, torn ' 

Jakun. 

— The Jakun ' group 

now to 

be considered 

' Cf. Semang pelum, won^s;^ k^to\ 
bald, torn. 

- Occurs also in some I'angan dia- 
lects, «..^. mend, Pangan of BclinibiiiL;. 

^ Perhaps a Jakun word. 

^ (Occurs also in lovv-counlry Semang, 
e.j;;. hoh, Semang of Juru. 

^ Though for convenience I call the 
whole of this mass of dialects by this 
name, I must point out that the name 
Jakun is really properly applicable to 
the tribes falling into the Jakun sub- 
division of the group, and would be 
repudiated by all the rest. 

JAKUN DIALECTS 401 

is the most difficult one to deal with ; the materials 
available are far more fragmentary than those which 
represent the Semang and Sakai groups, and no 
previous attempt has ever been made to classify 
them/ The one certain thing about them is that, 
though they embody some words of the Sakai and 
Semang types, they cannot as a whole be classified 
in either of those groups. 

The group extends as far north as the neighbour- 
hood of Rasa in the Ulu Selangor district, lat. 3" 30', 
long. loi' 2^"]', but here, so far as our information 
goes, there is merely an outlying patch, perhaps 
consisting of a single clan, severed from the main 
body. The next members of the group are met with 
about lat. 2' 50', long. loi 30', in the Kuala Langat 
district of the same State. From that point it extends 
in scattered communities known as Belandas, Bedu- 
anda, Mentra, and Jakun (intermixed down to about 
lat. 2' 25' with portions of the Southern Sakai sub- 
division), as far as lat. 2^ long. 103" 45', approxi- 
mately, in Johor. A separate subdivision, so strongly 
differentiated from all the rest that it ought perhaps 
to be formed into a distinct group by itself, is found 
in several localities in the Negri Sembilan, but 
judging by its name of Kenaboi would seem to 
have had its real home in Jelebu, in the valley of the 
Kenaboi or Kenabui river, lat. 3' 10' to 3" 5', long. 
101" 58' to 102'' 8' or thereabouts. 

The Jakun group is thus characterised by con- 
siderable internal diversity, so that much doubt must 
remain whether it can be considered as a unity at all. 

1 Schmidt's classification, excellent deal with Jakun, of which, however, 

(so far as it goes) as regards the Sakai very scanty materials were at that 

and Semang groups, fails entirely to author's disposal. 

VOL. II 2D 

402 PRESENT STA TE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS iart iv 

In the mixed district north of lat. 2 25', being over- 
lapped by Southern Sakai, the dialects of the Jakun 
group are much mixed with that form of speech ; to 
the south of 2 25' very few words appear that have 
anything in common with the Sakai group. On the 
other hand, throughout its whole range, the Jakun 
group has been so much mixed up with Malay that it 
is often impossible to say whether a particular dialect 
is to be described as Jakun much overlaid with Malay 
elements, or Malay embodying a few remnants of 
Jakun, One consequence of this state of things is 
that collectors of vocabularies, on the search for the 
non-Malayan elements in these dialects, finding that 
almost all words in ordinary use were obviously of 
Malay affinity, were driven to push their inquiries 
further afield, and sought for out-of-the-way words^ 
such as the specific names of particular trees, the less 
known animals, and the like. As they worked in- 
dependently of one another, they naturally did not all 
inquire about the same species, etc., and so it happens 
that they have left us for the most part very frag- 
mentary, scrappy vocabularies, which offer singularly 
few points for comparison.^ 

South of latitude 2 (with one or two exceptions 
which will be mentioned hereafter) it is clear that 
practically nothing specifically Jakun survives in the 
speech of the Jakuns of the interior ; ^' and almost the 
same is true of the dialects of the Orang Laut who 

1 Sometimes the jungle - men in Sayong Jakun (lat. i° 45' to 1° 55', 

response to a request for out-of-the- long. 103° 33' to 103° 43'), a man of 

way words, have evidently given words great age (over eighty apparently, 

of their taboo jargon, which have thus J. A". -•/. -S'., .S'. B., No. 3, p. loi) had 

to some slight extent crept into several no recollection of a dialect peculiar to 

of the lists. liisown race ( /. A'. A. S., S./>., No. 8, 

'•^ Thus Ilervey (in liS79) found that p. loS). Cf. Logan, J. /. A. vol. i. 

the old liatin of the Lenggiu and p. 289. 

JAKUN DIALECTS 403 

roam about in their boats among the Httle archipelago 
of islands south of Singapore to about lat. i S. (where 
they also have a few settlements on the Sumatran 
coast), ^ and who resort from time to time at least as 
far north as lat. i' 50^ on the west coast of Johor, 
and 3" amongst the islands to the east of Johor and 
Pahang, if not farther. 

The difficulty of dealing with the dialects of this 
group is increased by the fact that in part of the area 
occupied by them, inland of an irregular line running 
at some few miles' distance from the coast in South 
Selangor, the Negri Sembilan, and Malacca, the 
Malay speech by which they have been influenced is 
the Menangkabau dialect (from inland and western 
Sumatra), which differs considerably from ordinary 
Malay, and has never been thoroughly studied in the 
Peninsula. Sometimes where the Jakun dialects 
differ from ordinary Malay, it is merely because they 
have adopted words or forms from the Menangkabau 
Malay of their immediate Malay neighbours. 

Most of the Jakun tribes, then, speak dialects 
which, on the face of them are Malayan : they contain 
only small residuary percentages of words peculiar to 
themselves, and it is these small residues which offer 
the only basis of classification.^ 

Kenaboi subdivision. — Kenaboi is recorded only 
in two ^ vocabularies, representing apparently two 
different dialects, both collected by Hervey, the one 

* There are also Orang Laut, known them in a series, with the almost 

as Sekah, in Billiton. They speak a entirely non- Malay Kenaboi at one 

Malay dialect, hut are excluded from end, and the practically unmixed 

this work by reason of their geo- Malay of Southern Johor and the 

graphical position. Their name Sekah islands at the other ; but that would 

is probably not connected with Sakai, be no real classification, 

but a special form of Siiku (with the ^ I neglect Vaughan-Stevens' scanty 

meaning " clan " or " tribe "). contribution, as it contains nothing, 

^ One could, of course, arrange distinctive. 

404 PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

numbering about 200 words, the other about 80, 
and amounting together (as the lists have a common 
element) to a total of about 250 words. 

The specifically Kenaboi words common to the 
two lists include the important words of relationship, 
*' father," sangkat \ "mother," hapet\ "child," ckadt\ 
"elder brother," moholok \ "younger brother," thk\ 
"elder sister," tcmai; "younger sister," inojong \ 
"father-in-law," lahik, lahik\ and also the words for 
"ear," cheliah, chc/lok; "gibbon" (monkey), Jeun, 
jhigon} but hardly anything else. But as their 
divergences are due in most cases to one of them 
using a Malay, Sakai, or other identifiable synonym, 
these differences are not perhaps a sufficient reason 
for refusing to classify the two lists together as allied 
dialects. 

Assuming, then, that they constitute a unity, we 
have about 250 Kenaboi words to classify ; and of 
these I find that nearly half stand quite alone ; at 
least, I have not succeeded in tracing a connection 
between them and any other language whatever. 

Of the remainder, excluding words of Malay 
affinity and a few that are related only to languages 
outside the Peninsula, a greater percentage appear to 
be connected with Sakai than with Jakun, while a 
small minority appear to point to Semang. But 
Kenaboi is so thoroughly different in its general type 
from both Sakai and Semang, of which two groups 
we have a large mass of materials available for 
comparison, that it cannot possibly be classed with 
either of them. On the other hand, the other Jakun 
vocabularies are, as already stated, so fragmentary 

' Excepting the last one, Uiese words have no certain parallels in the other 
dialects. 

KENABOI 405 

that it is not surprising that a large proportion of the 
fairly long Kenaboi list should be incapable of being 
traced in them. Confining our attention to the fifty 
or sixty cases where the materials available enable a 
comparison to be made, I find that Kenaboi agrees 
with one or more of the remaining Jakun dialects in 
about a fourth or a fifth of these cases and differs in 
the rest from them all, even where some of them 
agree together. 

As there is no striking divergence in general type 
and phonology between Kenaboi and the other Jakun 
vocabularies, and as no grammatical information 
whatever is available that would modify the position, 
I leave Kenaboi as a possible Jakun subdivision. It 
may be that before their decay, the other Jakun 
dialects resembled it more than they do now : para- 
doxical as it may seem, Kenaboi must be regarded 
either as the best specimen of Jakun recorded or else 
as not being Jakun at all ; and I doubt whether, on 
the existing evidence, it is possible to be quite certain 
as to which of these two conclusions is the right one. 
The Kenaboi problem awaits further investigation on 
the spot ; the collection of a few sentences and some 
additional words may perhaps solve it.' 

Beduanda subdivision. — I give the name Beduanda 

' There is another possible sug- taboo jargons, which show considerable 

gestion, namely, that the Kenal)oi lists uniformity amongst themselves, and 

embody either (i) a mere made-up (4) the fact that they were collected by 

jargon, or (2) something in the nature a most careful observer, who would 

of a taboo language. This I reject, have recorded their taboo character if it 

because (i) the (partial) congruity of had existed, go some way towards ex- 

the two lists, which were apparently eluding this hypothesis in its alternative 

collected separately, (2) the evidently form. It must, however, be admitted 

genuine nature of the Sakai element that some of the Kenaboi words do 

they contain, seem to me to negative look like taboo words ; but then such 

the suggestion that they are merely isolated cases also occur in Beduanda 

artificial, while (3) their dissimilarity and other Jakun dialects, as already 

from the recorded specimens of the stated. 

4o6 PRESENl^ STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

to this subdivision of the Jakun group because, besides 
being the name under which two or three of the 
dialects have been actually recorded, it is claimed as 
of right by the Mentra as well.^ I am not aware that 
the Belandas, who are included in this subdivision, 
claim the title ; but they are closely connected with 
the other members of this subdivision, which includes, 
besides the Belandas of Kuala Langat and Rembau, 
the Beduanda of several unnamed localities of the 
Negri Sembilan, and the Mentra who are the leading 
aboriginal tribe of Malacca territory. 

The dialects of all these agree together sufficiently 
well to warrant their inclusion in one subdivision. 
They contain a variable percentage of Sakai words, 
but the Jakun element on the whole preponderates. 
Into this subdivision also falls the mixed dialect 
collected near Rasa, which (after excluding words of 
doubtful connection and words of Malayan origin) 
consists for the most part of Jakun and Sakai in the 
proportion of three to two approximately. The Sakai 
element in this dialect is apparently related more or 
less to all the Sakai subdivisions ; but in general the 
Beduanda subdivision, when it agrees with Sakai, 
shows most affinity with the Southern Sakai spoken 
in its neighbourhood. 

The following words will serve to illustrate this 
last point : — 

Jakun Group. Southern Sakai. Central Sakai. 

Blood 

maham 

maham 

behim 

Ear 

tong 

King 

entak 

Fire 

us 

us 

ois 

Snake 

tija 

lijau 

laJLi 

Tree 

long 

(lelong 

jolog 

' It is also the name of the leading and claimed by them in virtue of 

Malay tribe of "land inheritors" their alleged descent in the female 

(yl/a/. waris) of the Menangkabau- line from the aboriginal lords of the 

speaking districts u^ the reiiinsula, soil. 

CHAP. I BEDUANDA AND JAKUN 407 

I append a short list of words showing the con- 
nection between several dialects of the Beduanda 
subdivision, and also illustrating the existence of 
apparently Jakun words in the Southern Sakai sub- 
division, which are not found in Central Sakai : — 

Belandas. 

Beduanda. 

Men Ira. 

Soiilheni .Sakai. 

Brother, elder 

geek 

geak 

gee 

yek 

Egg 

kapo 

kepoh 

" Gibbon," 

timo' 

temo' 

timo' 

tembo" 

monkey {Mai. 

ungka) 

Grandmother 

genoi 

genoi 

genui 

gendoi 

Sister, elder 

gau' 

gau' 

gau 

gau 

Tiger 

meje 

majli 

mejeh 

Yam sp. {Mai. 

... 

yet 

yiit 

keladi) 

Jakun subdivision. — The dialects specifically termed 
Jakun are spoken by the tribes to whom this name 
properly belongs. With the exception of the Malacca 
dialect, which, though its most marked connections 
are with the other Jakun dialects, yet agrees occasion- 
ally with Kenaboi and Beduanda, besides having a 
few words apparently peculiar to itself, the Jakun 
dialects are found only in Johor, and are more closely 
related together than those of the Beduanda sub- 
division.^ 

This greater uniformity is partly due to the Jakun 
dialects having fewer elements in common with Sakai 
than the other two subdivisions in general have, 
though some of the Mentra dialects are also relatively 
free from Sakai elements. 

In this subdivision, on the slender evidence of two 
or three words," may be classed the remnants of the 

1 The Mentra claim to be the Johor. The latter, on the point 1)ein<T 

Malacca aborigines par excellence, and put to them, did not dispute it. 

state that the Besisi belong properly - "Come here," ka-kian, Orano- 

to Sungei Ujong, and the Jakun to Laut of Galang ; klydn, Barok ; kiyan. 

4o8 PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

dialects of the Orang Laut of Singapore and the 
islands to the southward. Here too, so far as it 
embodies relics of the obsolescent Jakun dialects, 
falls the taboo language of the Johor Jakun, which 
is used apparently throughout the greater part of the 
interior of Johor, even by tribes that no longer retain 
any trace of Jakun words in their ordinary speech.^ 
But this taboo language is a very mixed product, and 
cannot be classified among the ordinary dialects ; it 
must be discussed separately. 

Much the same observation applies to the taboo 
language of the Mentra, of which, however, only very 
few words have been recorded. One or two of these 
correspond with Beduanda, to which subdivision it 
probably belongs : but the list is really too short to 
admit of classification. 

I append a list of words showing the connection 
of the subdivisions of the Jakun group amongst 
themselves, and with the Johor taboo language : — 

Comparison of the Jakun Vocabularies. 

Kenahoi 

Beduanda 

Malacca 

Johor 

Taboo 

Subdivision. 

Subdivision. 

Jakun. 

Jakun. 

Language. 

Cold 

sedek 

sedek, siap- 

'■ sedek 

siap 

Come here 

inta', machan 

chian 

kiani 

kiah, kian 

kian 

Dog 

amun, ketok 

amun 

koyok 

koyok, 
menchor,-^ 

mgnchor ^ 

Elephant 

gentul 

gental 

gantir,- 
bringkil 

seganlu 

sagantel 

Go away 

songsang 

chiun 

kiuh 

kiyiin 

kium 

Hand 

rawet 

koki')t 

kokot 

kuko-^ 

"1 penganah. 

Finger 

rilwet 

kokon 

kukat 

J pgngolek 

Kalang ; kian, Jakun of Kuala Le- 
makau ; kiani, Jakun of Malacca ; hut 
chidii, c/ian, Belandas and Mentra. 
.Similarly "go there," "far off," is 
klyun, kiyoh, in Orang Laut and 
Jakun, the Beduanda subdivision 
having chiun or chicn, 

' Logan found the same tai)oo 
language in use on the Sedili, Indau, 
and Ijatu I'ahat rivers. It has been 

traced by Hervey in the Upper 

Lenggiu and Madek ; and by Lake 
and Kelsall at Kuala Lemakau on the 
Indau, on the Madek, and at Simpai 
(Ulu Batu Paliat, Sembrong). 

- Benua of Newbold. 

•'' Cf. Sakai cho'. 

' Only in the short unclassed voca- 
bulary from Tanjong Sagenting, as to 
which see pp. 411, 412, infra. 

JAKUN SUBDIVISIONS 

409 

Comparison of Jakun Vocauularies — con/imni/. 

Nail 
Monkey 

[sp. ungka) 
Monkey 

(s/> kekah) 
Pig 

Porcupine 
Rainbow 

Rhinoceros 
Spider 

Keimboi Bediianda Malacca 

Siihdi7'isioii. Subclivisioii. Jakiai. 

rlsi'k kokat 

jeun, jeng'in liiiiiV, temo" je'un 

Johor 

Jakiiii. 

tawok - 

roit ■' 
sdn'ii 

tekht) 

basreh 

jageh 

Taboo 
/.aii'^!iajj;L'. 

risim, 

rC-sain, ' 

jokot ^ 

jokut,** 

tebong, 

jongkat.i 

scmungkor 

ketu " 

chongkor, 
tebong, 
ketur 1 

puntu, joi 

puntu, sonoi 

sebuntu 

... 

bdhota 

... 

bohuta, 
kawat 

reseki 

sengkrat 

sengkrat 

... 

tevvc'iwoh '^ 

tewowoh '' 

... 

Summary of Classification and Dish'ibution. 

The principal dialects and subdialects of the 
aborigines of the Peninsula, so far as represented in 
this work, may now be grouped under the main heads 
mentioned above. 

I. Semang Group. 

( I ) Main Semang and Pangan subdivision — 
Semang dialects of Kedah (Mt. Jerai, Yan, and 
Siong), Ulu Selama, Ijok, Jarum," Plus, and the 
Jehehr (or " Sakai Tanjong ") of Temongoh ; Pangan 
dialects of Jalor, Sai, Ulu Patani, Teliang, Belimbing, 
Sam, Ulu Kelantan, Lebir, Galas, Kuala Aring, Ulu 
Aring, and Kerbat ; also the " Hill Semang " dialect 
of the Maxwell MS.. 29 of the Royal Asiatic Society's 
collection. 

1 Benua of Newbold. 

■' Cf. Semang taivuh, Sakai of 
Serting tdwCi; cf. "spider." Is it so 
called because of its long and slender 
limbs ? 

•^ Besisi rot. 

"* Perhaps cf. Sakai changgak. 

•^ Besisi ketitr. 

^ Semang tawali. 

'' The Jarum dialect might with 
equal propriety have been called 
Pansan. 

4IO PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

(2) Low-country Seniang subdivision : — 

Semang dialect of Juru, Begbie's Semang, Semang 

words in Newbold's Orang Benua list, and the 

"Swamp Semang" dialect of Ulu Krian of the 

Maxwell MS. 

Pupier's Semang words and those of the Semang 

of Sadang probably come into this subdivision, but 

are too few to admit of classification. 

II. Sakai Group. 

( 1 ) Northern Sakai subdivision — 

Sakai dialects of the ** Semang " of Kenderong, 
Grik, Kenering, and Sungai Piah, of the Po-Klo (or 
" Sakai Bukit ") of Temongoh, of the Sakai of Plus 
Korbu, Ulu Kinta, Tanjong Rambutan, and of the 
Tembe' or Tembi. 

(2) Central Sakai subdivision — 

Sakai dialects of Blanja (Lengkuas), Sungai Raya, 
Ulu Bertang, Ulu Kampar, Mt. Berumban, Jelai, 
Serau, and the Senoi of Ulu Pahang ; the Sakai 
dialects of Chendariang, Tapah, Ulu Gedang, Sungkai, 
and Slim ; and the dialect of the Orang Tanjong of 
Ulu Langat. 

(3) Southern Sakai subdivision — 
i^d) South-western subgroup — 

Daly's Selangor Sakai, the dialects of the Orang 
Bukit of Ulu Langat, and the Besisi of Kuala 
Langat (Ayer Itam and Sepang), Negri Sembilan, 
and Malacca. 

{Jy) South-eastern subgroup — 

Sakai dialects of the Bera, Serting, Ulu Palong, 
and Ulu Indau (and perhaps also the mixed Beduanda 
dialect of Chiong, Johol). 

SUMMAR V OF CLA SSI PICA TION 4 1 1 

(4) Eastern Sakai subdivision — 

[a) Inner subgroup — 

Sakai dialects of Pulau Guai, Krau and Kuala 
Tembeling, of the Krau men of Ketiar (Trengganu), 
and of Kerdau. 

{b) Outer subgroup — 

Sakai dialects of the Ulu Tembeling and Ulu 
Cheres. 

III. Jakun Group. 

( 1 ) Kenaboi subdivision — 

Two Kenaboi dialects (of the Negri Sembilan). 

(2) Beduanda subdivision — 

Dialects of the aborigines of Rasa, Ulu Selangor, 
of the Belandas of the Kuala Langat district and 
Rembau, the Beduanda of the Negri Sembilan and 
the Mentra of the territory around Malacca ; to which 
may be added the Taboo language of the Mentra. 

(3) J<^kun subdivision — 

Dialects of the Jakun of Malacca territory, Ulu 
Batu Pahat, Sembrong, Simpai, Kuala Lemakau, and 
Madek, Johor ; and of the Orang Laut of Singapore, 
Galang, Temiang, and Barok (of Singkep, Lingga) ; 
to which may be added the Camphor Taboo language 
of the Johor Jakun. 

Unclassed Dialects. 

There remain two unclassed dialects, spoken by 
the Orang Laut of Muh Island near Trang, lat. 
f 24', long. 99^ 25', and the Orang Rayat of Tanjong 
Sagenting, Johor, lat. v 48', long. 102° 54', respec- 
tively. These are recorded in two lists of about a 
dozen words each, and too short therefore for purposes 

412 PRESENT STATE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS part iv 

of classification. The most that I can say of them 
here is that, judging from the specimens recorded, 
these are both Malayan languages in the wider sense. 
They are not merely Malay subdialects, nor do they 
fall under any of the subdivisions of the aboriginal 
dialects of the Peninsula, though they have, of course, 
by virtue of their Malayan element, more in common 
with the Jakun group than with the other two. The 
connection of the dialect of the Orang Laut of Trang 
with those of the Selungs of the Mergui Archipelago 
(who, as not being geographically appendant to the 
Malay Peninsula, are excluded from the scope of this 
work ^) would be worth investigating, if a more 
extensive vocabulary of the Trang dialect could be 
obtained. 

Language Frontiers. 

It is impossible to say with any approach to 
accuracy of statement how many different dialects 
and subdialects are included in the classification that 
has been given above. The materials are in 
many cases too scanty, and in some too inaccurate, 
to serve such a purpose. Having given the main 
lines of classification, I think it safer to avoid prob- 
lematical subdivisions, and merely to point out that 
there are among the dialects of the Peninsula a 
number of striking instances of sharply defined 
linguistic frontiers between contiguous but mutually 
unintelligible forms of speech. 

Such, in the north of the Peninsula, are the border 
lines separating, 6\^. (i) Semang from Northern Sakai, 

1 See Anderson, Se/nui^s of the Privter (1846) mentioned ibid. pp. 
Merf^iti A>r/iipe/ai;o (1890), especially 18, 36, cjf which a copy exists in the 
pp. 39-47, and the Se/nnL; Languai^e India Office Library. 

CHAP. I LANGUAGE FRONTIERS 413 

(2) Pangan from the outer subgroup of Eastern Sakai, 

(3) Northern Sakai from Central Sakai. 

In the south of the Peninsula the boundary lines 
are less definite but more numerous ; for instance, the 
absolutely distinct dialects of the Central Sakai of the 
Orang Tanjong of Ulu Langat, the Southern Sakai 
of the Orang Bukit of the same, the Belandas and, 
probably, the Kenaboi, are crowded together in an 
area which can hardly be more than 50 miles long 
and 35 broad. So, too, Besisi, Mentra, and Jakun 
jostle one another in the 660 square miles of Malacca 
territory ; and again between the Sakai dialects of the 
Upper Palong and Indau and the adjoining Jakun 
dialects of Johor there must have been a strong line 
of demarcation, which, however, is probably now- 
obliterated by the almost total extinction of both sets 
of dialects. 

It is worth noting that nearly all the tribes still 
speaking peculiar dialects live at some distance from 
the coast and from the main navigable rivers. The 
only substantial exception in our own day, among the 
tribes whose dialects have been classified above, are the 
Besisi, who are in part coast-dwellers and even some- 
times go short distances by sea and have relations 
with the Orang Laut of the Johor coast. This state of 
things is probably more marked than it was about the 
beginning of the last century, when a Semang clan 
lived close to Kedah Peak and another came down 
into Province Wellesley (at that time a strip of land 
extending only four miles from the seashore). At 
the present day, however, nearly all the tribes are 
essentially landsmen, and are even more cut off from 
communicating with one another and the outside 
world by sea than they are by land. 

CHAPTER II. 

TABOO AND OTHER SPECIAL FORMS OF SPEECH. 

The Camphor Taboo language of Johor has often 
been referred to. It was first dealt with by Logan/ 
after him by Miklucho-Maclay,"^ then by Hervey/ and 
lastly by Lake and Kelsall/ who have contributed the 
greater part of the materials on which our knowledge 
of this curious form of speech is based. Hervey has 
also published a few words of the taboo language 
used by the Mentra of Malacca territory and the 
surrounding region when engaged in searching for 
eaglewood and gold.'' 

Logan appears to have regarded the taboo 
language as a purely artificial production ; Miklucho- 
Maclay considered it to be a survival of the otherwise 
obsolete Jakun dialects, stimulated by the fact (which 
is in itself probable) that the more primitive and 
remote tribes of the interior of Johor would be the 
most likely both to preserve their old language and 
to retain an intimate knowledge of jungle-craft. His 
inference is that these expert camphor-gatherers found 
it to their pecuniary advantage to keep outside 
competitors at a distance by consciously setting up 

' /. /. .-/. vol. i. pp. 263-266. •• Ibid. No. 26, pp. 39-56. 

- y. A'.^.-S",, .S'.Z?., No. I, pp. 39, 40. ''Notes and Queries, No. I, pp. 

•' Ihid. No. 3, pp. 112-I15; No. 8, S, 9, issued with No. 14 of the 

pp. 100-102, 118; No. 9, pp. 167, 168. /. A". A. S., S. B. 

414 

CHAP. II TABOO LANGUAGE 415 

a fictitious connection between successful camphor- 
hunting and their esoteric knowledge of the obsolescent 
dialects, which thus became a sort of craft mystery 
whereon they deliberately traded. 

Hervey and Lake and Kelsall, while recognising 
the partly artificial character of the language, agree 
as to its probably embodying some relics of the old 
dialects, and Hervey accepts Miklucho- Maclay's 
rationalistic explanation of such partial survivals. 

While admitting that these views go some way 
towards explaining the Camphor Taboo language, I 
do not consider them an adequate account of the 
whole matter. This taboo language does not stand 
alone in the world ; in many places, especially in 
Eastern Asia and the Indian Archipelago, there are 
analogous modes of speech which throw light upon its 
principles of construction. 

Linguistic Taboos in General. 

The Malays have several such taboo vocabularies 
appropriate to different purposes ; thus there is a list 
of words which must be used in speaking to royalty 
and under no other circumstances ; and there are 
linguistic taboos applicable to fishing, fowling, mining, 
warfare, and other occupations, besides a " spirit 
language " used by magicians.^ Closely resembling 
these last in principle, is the Sasahara, a jargon used 
by the Sangirese (of the islands north of Celebes) 
when at sea, to conceal their plans from the malice of 
the water-spirits." Somewhat less analogous are the 

^ Skeat, Malay Alagic, passim : the spirit language are given on p. 646. 
the references are collected in the - Adriani, Satigireesche Spraakkttnst, 

Index, s. v._ Language, and specimens of pp. 7, 53-65. 

4i6 SPECIAL FORMS OF SPEECH 

various forms, Krama^ and Krama Inggil, of the 
ceremonial, or rather "high chief," language of the 
Javanese,- and the Basa Sangiang or sacred tongue 
in which the Balian (priestesses and dancing-girls) of 
the Dayaks of Borneo chant their invocations and 
legends ; ^ and there are no doubt many other more 
or less similar forms of speech elsewhere in the 
Indian Archipelago/ 

I cannot therefore agree with Hervey' when he 
says that the Jakun " may prima facie be assumed 
to be unequal to the coinage of a special language," 
and consequently can only have turned their own old 
dialects to account in the search for camphor by repre- 
senting to their Malay competitors in the trade that 
without its use all search would be unavailing. On the 
contrary, if (as is almost certain) the Jakun are, at 
least in part, of Malayo - Polynesian ancestry, the 
presumption would be in favour of their having 
inherited the widespread and therefore certainly very 
ancient tendency of the Malayo- Polynesian races to 
specialise their language in particular cases of this 
kind ; and it is by no means certain that in this 
instance the process began only under the direct 
impulse of Malay competition. It may have been 
going on from a very remote epoch, when the Jakun 

' Pronounced Krama, in accordance English readers unacquainted with 

with a rule of Javanese phonetics, Dutch. 

whereby final -a, and a in a previous •* liardeland, Versiuh einer Gram- 

open syllable of a word ending with -a, inatik der Dajackschen Spracke, pp. 

are sounded as a. 4-6. 

^ See especially Brandes, Bijdrai^c ^ Brandes points out the existence 

tot de Veriiclijkeiide Klankleer dcr of "high words" in Balinese, Ma- 

IVcsUrsche Afdecling van dc Maleisch- durese, Sundanese, and Bolaiing- 

Polynesische Taalfamilie, pp. 79- Mogondou. There are also in Sangir 

95. Crawfurd in his Grammar and certain " high words," besides the 

Dictionary of tlie Malay Langiiai^c, Sasahara. 

vol. i. pp. xxvii.-xxxv., gives some •' /. A\ .1. S., S. B.,Ko. 8, pj). 10 1, 

specimens which may be of use to 102. 

PRINCIPLE OF TABOO LANGUAGE 417 

dialects were still generally spoken ; or even before 
the Malays had gained a permanent footing in the 
Peninsula at all, when they perhaps merely visited it 
temporarily as traders. The search for camphor has 
been going on for many centuries ; it was known 
at least as early as the sixth century/ and though 
the best known source of supply was North-west 
Sumatra, it is mentioned as a product of Johor in the 
Chinese history of the Ming dynasty (a.d. i 368- 1643),'- 
and may have been found there much earlier for 
aught that is known to the contrary. If the taboo 
language was used by the Jakun while their own 
dialects were still commonly spoken, it cannot in its 
original form have been identical with their ordinary 
speech, but judging by the analogy of other taboo 
languages, it is pretty sure to have been some modi- 
fication of it. 

The root - idea in all these taboo languages is 
simple enough : it is merely the avoidance, in an 
indeterminate number of cases, of the ordinary every- 
day word, and the substitution of something different 
and out of the common. The primary motive is not 
pecuniary gain or a desire to exclude possible com- 
petitors, but a respectful fear of the superior powers, 
human, natural, or supernatural, as the case may be, 
which creates and enforces as a matter of etiquette, 
amounting almost to law, the use in their presence, 
and sometimes even when referring to them, of a 
special honorific terminology.^ In the case of the 

^ J. R. A.S., S. B., No. 26, p. 36. Nicobar Islands, there is a converse 

- Groeneveldt, " Notes on the Malay form of taboo which enjoins that the 

Archipelago and Malacca " in Mis- names (or jmrts of the names) of high 

cellaneoiis Papers relating to Indo- chiefs, relations by marriage, or 

China, and series, vol. i. p. 254. deceased ancestors must not be pro- 

3 In some parts of the world, e.g. nounced in common speech. This, in 

Polynesia, South Africa, and the some languages, from time to time 

VOL. II 2 E 

4i8 SPECIAL FORMS OF SPEECH 

Jakun it is the Camphor-tree Spirit which has to be 
propitiated ; and the use of the taboo jargon is only- 
one part of the necessary ritual, which also includes 
abstinence from certain kinds of food, and from 
washing and bathing, as well as the offering of 
portions of each meal to the spirit. Moreover, during 
the camphor hunts, the taboo language must be used 
not only by the hunters absent in the jungle, but also 
by the men and women left behind in the village or 
settlement.^ All this points to its being a genuine 
traditional usage of ancient date. 

Methods of Formation. 

Speaking generally, the various devices by means 
of which these peculiar jargons seek to avoid the 
forms of common speech may be classified under 
the following heads : — 

(i) Use of an archaic form of the ordinary word, 
where such a " doublet " exists. 

(2) Deliberate modification of form, sometimes 
according to a definite system, perhaps originally- 
based on the analogy of some particular pair of 
" doublets," and therefore in some cases not easily- 
distinguishable from (i). 

(3) Use of a rare or obsolescent synonym, entirely- 
distinct in form and origin from the ordinary word. 

(4) Use of a synonym derived from a foreign 
language ; sometimes this is further modified by the 
application of the method of (2). 

involves the temporary or permanent that it is ultimately based on the same 

abandonment of many ordinary words principle as the other, viz. the 

in favour of synonyms coined or deliberate severance of sacred things 

adapted to meet these exigencies. from things of ordinary everyday life. 
With this form of taboo I am not ' J. R. A.S., S. B., No. 8, p. 103 ; 

otherwise concerned than to point out No. 26, pp. 39, 40. 

CHAP. II METHODS OF FORMATION 419 

(5) Metaphor : this again it is hard to keep quite 
distinct from (3). 

(6) Descriptive periphrasis : a method closely 
allied to (5). 

(7) Lastly, a secondary form of metaphor or trans- 
ference of meaning, sometimes adopted when a word, 
already imported into the taboo language by one of 
the preceding methods, has its application further 
extended by some strained analogy to cover a number 
of new significations more or less allied to its primary 
taboo signification. 

No doubt Schmidt,^ when he complains of the 
Malay words and "mystifications" contained in Lake 
and Kelsall's Camphor Taboo vocabulary, is referring 
particularly to the forms which may be classified 
under Nos. (5), (6), and (7) ; but this peculiar feature 
is a perfectly genuine characteristic of these ceremonial 
jargons, and not due to any caprice or error on the 
part of the collectors or their native informants. It 
serves to show that we are not entitled to treat the 
Camphor Taboo language as if it were an ordinary 
aboriginal dialect, to be judged by the same standards 
as any other, for it belongs to a class apart from 
common speech. 

Descriptive Pei'iphrasis. 

If one may hazard a conjecture, it would seem that 
the adoption of descriptive periphrasis is due to the 
want of other material and the poverty of invention ; 
at any rate it is by far the most widely used method. 

^ " Die Sprachen der Sakei und Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- eti 
Semang auf Malacca und ihr Ver- Volkciikimde van Nederlandsch- Indie, 
haltnis zu den Mon-Khmer Sprachen," 6° Volgreeks, 8^ Deel, p. 404. 

420 SPECIAL FORMS OF SPEECH part iv 

Thus, in the Camphor Taboo language, to give a few 
instances out of many, the ear is " the hearer," the 
eye " the seer," the nose " the smeller," the mouth 
" the chewer," fire " the heater," the wind is " the 
blower," mat and umbrella are " the thing that 
unfolds," salt " the saline," pepper " the pungent 
thing," tapioca " the poison-wood " (some kinds, as is 
well known, contain a poisonous element which has 
to be washed out before they can be eaten), the 
scorpion is " the pincher," the pig is " short legs," a 
medicine -man is "he who sees through (or sees 
straight)," the goat is " the be animal," the buffalo 
" the wong animal " (no doubt from their respective 
noises), beans are " the fruit of the climbing rattan," 
rice is " the fruit of grass," and so on. Similarly in 
the Mentra taboo language the snake is " the long 
animal," the elephant " the big animal," and a fish is 
" the glistener of the sand." 

In these and many other cases the expressions are 
perfectly intelligible, being derived from words of 
Malayan affinity (though not in all cases necessarily 
from Malay itself). In other instances, as va pengayal, 
"the intoxicator," i.e. tobacco, pcmunto I, "the white 
thing," i.e. silver, the root-words themselves are not 
obviously intelligible through the medium of Malay, 
but their primary sense is preserved in the Camphor 
Taboo language itself or in some other Jakun dialect. 
So too it is pretty clear that the sea is " the salty 
water," honey " the water of the bees," and the 
elephant " big bones " (or " big and stout ") in one 
periphrasis and " the big thing " in another. Similarly 
" to weep " is " to have water in the seer," and thunder 
is " the far-sounding noise in the sky." 

In other taboo jargons precisely the same method 

PERIPHRASIS AND METAPHOR 421 

obtains : thus in Malay mining taboo the elephant is 
" the tall one that turns himself about," the cat is 
"that which turns itself about in the kitchen," and 
metallic tin is " white stone " ; in fishing taboo the 
fish are " sea-rubbish " ; in war taboo a stockade is a 
" transverse log (or shed) " ; in the spirit language, as 
in the Camphor jargon, a pig is " short legs," fish, as 
before, are " sea-rubbish," and the cat is " the kitchen 
tiger." Similarly in Krama iron is " the hard thing," 
sugar-cane " the thing with knots," the duck is " that 
which floats," and the pig is " the black thing " or 
" the low thing " ; in Krama Inggil the grave is " the 
flowery place " (flowering shrubs being usually planted 
there); and in Sasahara water is "the cooler," the 
dog " the hunter " and " the barker," the pig " the 
long-haired thing," the cat " the scratcher," the goat 
" the bleater," teeth are " the flashers," hair is " that 
which is combed," and so forth, the examples being 
very numerous in this particular form of speech. 

Metaphor. 

Instances of the use of distinctly metaphorical 
language are less frequent. In the Camphor Taboo 
the scorpion is " the hoop," the snake " the climbing 
rattan," hair is " leaves," a coward " the intoxicated 
one," and " manner " or " conduct " is " a cutting," 
which is seemingly derived from the idea of a line 
cut through undergrowth or jungle, and hence a line 
of conduct or mode of procedure. Similarly in the 
Malay spirit language the eyes are "the stars," and 
betel-leaf is apparently " the soaring peacock " ; in the 
fowler's charms his nooses are called " King Solomon's 
necklaces and armlets," and all his apparatus is given 

422 SPECIAL FORMS OF SPEECH part iv 

similar fanciful names, while the birds themselves are 
addressed as princesses ; in mining jargon the snake is 
" the climbing rattan " or " the live rattan," the 
centipede is " turmeric," and tin-ore is " the fruit of 
the grass" or "the flower of the grass"; in fishing 
jargon the fish are " tree-leaves," the snake is, as 
before, "the climbing rattan" or "the live rattan," 
and the crocodile is a " tree-log " ; and in war taboo 
a bullet is a "white beetle," the ball of a swivel-gun a 
" black beetle," a cannon is a " trunk of bamboo (or 
of the cotton tree)," and a cannon-ball is a " coconut." 
So too in Krama, it would seem that the teeth of 
royalty are spoken of as " steel," and the eye of a king 
is a " gem " ; while tobacco is " the cock " (which is a 
curious parallel to the "peacock" mentioned above). 
Similarly in Krama Inggil, nasal mucus is termed 
" ivory." 

Secondary Metaphor. 

Instances of secondary metaphor are very numerous 
in the Camphor Taboo language ; thus a word bintoh, 
which apparently properly means " sick," has to do duty 
for " to hate," " angry," " tired," and perhaps also " to 
fight" {bcbintoJi). Another word, /£72rt:/{'cm, serves for 
the allied meanings of " back," " afterwards," " waist," 
" rudder," and " boat-pole." A third, bisan, stands 
for " woman," " bird," " the camphor-spirit," and, in 
combination, for " cat," " mankind," " marriage," 
"fowl," "mother," "widow," "child," and "musket- 
ball," so that it is difficult to attach any more definite 
meaning to it than " creature," with a tendency 
towards " female." On the other hand, in some cases 
where the primary meaning is distinctly traceable, 
the transference is also very remote ; thus kuning. 

CHAP. II ARCHAISMS AND SYNONYMS 423 

" yellow," is used for " gold," which is an obviously- 
descriptive periphrasis, sometimes further modified in 
form to pemuning or pec ken kuning, " the yellow thing." 
Then, apparently, the word is transferred to the 
meaning "debt" and "order," while its presumed 
derivative nmning means " to buy," and another 
derivative berhming " to swear " (perhaps originally 
" to wager money "), and the River Mas (which in 
Malay means " gold ") is naturally called phiguning. 
As the instances of this kind of secondary metaphor 
are collected together under their several root-words 
in the Comparative Vocabulary, I need not further 
enlarge on them here, the more so as in most cases 
it is not possible to be quite sure what the primary 
meaning of these transferred words originally was. 
One thing which is very noticeable is that the transfer 
in meaning is often accompanied by a differentiation 
by means of Malayan formative prefixes and infixes, 
and, occasionally, suffixes. 

Archaisms and Synonyms. 

The methods of which examples have been given 
account for by far the greater part of the Camphor 
Taboo language. Of the use of synonyms it is 
difficult to speak precisely. It would seem that the 
Malay Taboo languages resort occasionally to Arabic 
{e.g. kelbii, " heart," for " life "), Sanskrit [eg. bayzi, 
" wind "), and archaic Malay [eg. htlu, " head " ; tohok, 
"spear"). Krama and Krama Inggil depend largely 
on Sanskrit, and considerably on archaic Javanese, and 
perhaps also on Malay. The Basa Sangiang adds 
Malay words to its native archaisms, and the 
Sasahara contains archaic words that no longer occur 
in ordinary Sangirese. 

424 SPECIAL FORMS OF SPEECH pari- iv 

The difficulty in the case of the Camphor Taboo 
language is that we know too little of the ordinary 
Jakun dialects to identify with certainty the cases 
where an archaic synonym may have been used in the 
ceremonial vocabulary. While these dialects were 
still in common use it is possible that the Camphor 
Taboo was eked out with synonyms borrowed from 
Malay ; at any rate it seems to contain a few words 
like hcah, "fruit," and Jiadap anak, "a railing to 
prevent children from falling down the ladders of 
houses " (if these are really used in the taboo 
language), which have nothing to distinguish them 
from ordinary Malay, while others, like lepen, " eight," 
are at any rate derived from a Malayan dialect. On 
the other hand, when in any given Jakun tribe the old 
dialect had begun to be superseded in everyday usage 
by Malay (or a Malayan dialect closely resembling it), 
any obsolescent Jakun word, of whatever origin, would 
become qualified for admission into the specialised 
taboo jargon ; hence, doubtless, the acceptance in the 
Camphor Taboo of such words as sengkrat " rhino- 
ceros " ; slap, " cold " ; jokuty " pig," and the like, 
which are reported to be still preserved among some 
of the Jakun tribes in their everyday speech. Such 
words are relatively few in number, and to this limited 
extent only can it safely be said that the taboo 
language represents the old Jakun dialects. 

In fact, however, it becomes at this point ex- 
cessively difficult to draw a hard-and-fast line between 
the Camphor Taboo and the obsolescent remnants of 
the ordinary dialects. The circumstance, remarked 
on by I lervey, that Miklucho-Maclay's vocabularies, 
which purport to represent the old ordinary language 
not the Camphor Taboo, nevertheless contain one or 

MODIFICATION OF FORM 425 

two undeniably taboo periphrases, is to my mind not 
evidence, as Hervey seems to have thought, that 
the taboo language is a relic of the old ordinary 
language,^ but rather that the two have become 
mixed up, and that collectors in search of out-of-the- 
way words amongst a tribe which in modern times 
and in its everyday life speaks only or mainly Malay, 
inevitably pick up a mixed lot of samples containing 
a few taboo expressions. The taboo periphrases 
telur semuty "ants' eggs," for rice, in one of Hervey's 
Beduanda vocabularies, and Miklucho-Maclay's/^^/;«cr^ 
{i.e. pcningok), " the seer," for eye, illustrate the 
point clearly enough. As the old dialects dwindle 
into mere relics, no longer in everyday use, they 
tend, in fact, to become esoteric jargons and to be 
confounded with the taboo language." 

Doublets and Modification of Fortn. 

Some little assistance towards unravelling these 
knotty problems may perhaps be afforded by a 
peculiarity which has been more than once noted in 
some of the ceremonial jargons, namely, their use of 
words which differ from their ordinary equivalents by 
some definite modification of form. Sometimes this 
is due to the survival of a genuine old doublet, some- 
times to the artificial creation of one according to 
more or less ascertainable rules. 

I have not thought it worth while to point out 
how closely all the previously mentioned methods of 

^ J. R. A. S., S. B., No. 8, p. a few specimens of what was evidently 

118. a " back -slang," e.i^. iigilah, "sky" 

2 On one occasion when I was (from Mai. lan;^if, quasi ti_!^tt-Ia), iiati, 

trying to collect Jakun words in "earth" (from Mai. taiiah, with a 

Malacca territory, I was at first given suggestion of the Besisi //). 

426 SPECIAL FORMS OF SPEECH 

taboo usage correspond with phenomena observable 
in European languages ; how, for instance, when we 
want to avoid words which are considered too sacred 
or too indecent for conversational use, we get round 
them by a periphrasis, a metaphor or a Latinised 
synonym. Sometimes, especially in oaths and expletory 
epithets, we merely modify the form of the ordinary 
word/ Similarly in the Malayo-Polynesian ceremonial 
languages there is a system, carried out somewhat 
more consistently than in Europe, of modifying the 
form of common words to make them suitable for 
special occasions. In certain cases it would seem - 
that there really existed two genuine forms of the 
same word, being either in different stages of develop- 
ment, or dialectically differentiated, and one has been 
selected to serve for ceremonial purposes, while the 
other was left for everyday life. 

One set of these "doublets" in Javanese is 
differentiated by the vowel sounds which in the 
ceremonial form are c — a, while in the common form 
they are ti — ii, both being ultimately referable to a 
more primitive e — c (or e — a). An instance is the 
word suruh, in Krama seda/i, which is equivalent to 
the Malay sij^ik, " betel." ^ Words of this class seem 
to have served as a basis for the analogous artificial 
creation of others by heightening one or more of the 
vowel sounds, in the order u, o, a, e, e, i; but in its 
origin this differentiation was, at any rate in some 
instances, quite unartificial. 

Whether the same can be said for certain other 

' I need only instance the ex- ^ gee Brandes, op. cit. pp. 84-95, 

pressions "by Jove," "by George," on which a good deal of what follows 

" Cireat Scott," "the deuce," "the is i)ased. 

Dickens," and the like in English, ■* Here the consonants also happen 

and " diauh-e,'' " morbleii" and to differ, but they also only represent 

'■'■ saprisli,''' in French. different stages of natural variation. 

SPECIAL FORMATIONS 427 

methods of modification which involve a change or 
addition of consonants, I do not know. At any rate 
there are several such in Javanese. One only need, 
however, be noted here. Its formula seems to be 
this : given a word with an open penultimate syllable 
(and a final syllable preferably open and generally 
ending in -a), to turn it into a Krama form, close 
both syllables with a nasal (or the final one more 
rarely with a liquid), modify the initial consonant of 
the final syllable to suit the nasal which now closes 
the penultimate, and change the vowel of the final 
syllable (as a rule to c, which, however, may become 
a, z, or ti). As this is probably not very intelligible, 
I will make it clearer by examples : — 

To think 

kira 

kinten 

Pardon 

apura 

apunten 

Sea 

segara 

seganten 

Evening 

sore 

sonten 

Coconui 

kalapa 

karambil 

Seganten, being from the Sanskrit sdgara, is a good 
illustration of the fact that this change is, at any 
rate in some cases, made quite consciously and 
artificially. 

But the curious thing is that in other Malayan 
languages similar forms occur, without, however, any 
ceremonial or specialised meaning. Thus in Sun- 
danese, dantcn, " a hen that has not yet laid an ^%^,'' 
" a female buffalo that has not yet had a calf," corre- 
sponds with the Malay elara, " virgin"; and conversely 
it would seem that the Malay jantan, " male," is a 
quasi -Krama form of the Sundanese /.a;/?^, while the 
Malay v^ords pant ang, "taboo," 2iX\d pantun, " eclogue," 
appear to be quasi- Krama forms of two words which 
appear elsewhere as p{ent)ali and pali, and the same 
seems to be the explanation of such " doublets " as 

428 SPECIAL FORMS OF SPEECH part iv 

the Malay antan and alu, " pestle." Evidently, unless 
these forms have been deliberately moulded on the 
Javanese Krama, which seems unlikely, this formula is 
either in its origin unartificial, like the method of vowel- 
modification, or at any rate it is of very ancient date. 

The reason why I have mentioned, with perhaps 
too much detail, these two leading Javanese forms of 
doublet-formation is that both of them, the one with 
mere vowel change and the other with consonantal 
modification as well, are found in the aboriginal 
dialects of the Peninsula (including the taboo 
language). Thus in Besisi the polite {bchasa halus) 
word for "long" is jcla^'ng, and for " deep,"y6V^/^, of 
which the vulgar {beJiasa kasar) forms -ax^ jelo^ng and 
jcrok respectively, thus affording a precise parallel, 
both in form and meaning, to the Javanese Krama 
and Ngoko differentiation by vowel change. Similarly 
"black" is presented by a double form hwa^m and 
hird'ni ; and though in this instance we are not told 
that the one is considered politer than the other, yet 
it may be presumed that there is a shade of difference 
in their use corresponding to the slight difference in 
form.^ Probably further inquiries would result in the 
discovery of additional doublets.- 

Of the differentiation by consonantal change 
examples also occur, but no specialised meaning has 
been distinctly recorded in connection with them. 
The following, however, are so closely analogous to 
the Krama forms that it seems worth while to draw 
particular attention to them. 

' The word, moreover, is Malayo- has pointed out, probably a mere 

I'olynesian, being identical with the variant. 

Kawi hirlfn;:; (originally probably - Compare, for instance, the Besisi 

liidcin), of which the Malay hiiaiit ^s^eiitah and Beduanda i^iWiitij/i, with 

(from an older hit/ni) is, as Kern the Malay .?//»//o-, " thunder." 

CHAP. II A 

BORIGINAi 

L ANALi 

OGIES 4 

Wild cattle 

sapi 

s^lapodn 

Coconut 

kelapa 

karambil, keramil 

Crocodile 

baya' 

bayul 

Dog 

asu' 

(anjing), nyaiig 

Wild dog 

sfirigala,' 

■ segala' ' 

seranggil 

Elephant 

gajah ' 

gentui, gentiil, 
sagantel 

White 

putih 

pC-ntol 

429 

The quasi-Krama form for "coconut" also appears 
in Malay, whence it may therefore have been borrowed, 
but the other words in the third column are not 
susceptible of this explanation : even if nyang is the 
same word as the ordinary Malay anjing, it cannot be 
derived from it. I imagine that both go back to a 
form anjeitg or anyeng, which may conceivably be 
formed from astir' 

Although in the above cases nothing is definitely 
recorded which would justify us in attaching a 
ceremonial meaning to these forms, there is one 
circumstance which tends in that direction. Most of the 
larger animals have a variety of names, some of which 
are evidently honorific synonyms, while others must 
not be used while the animals are supposed to be in 
the neighbourhood, and especially while they are 
being hunted ; the Comparative Vocabularly, particu- 
larly under the headings "elephant," "pig," "rhino- 
ceros," and " tiger," illustrates the great variety of 
such animal synonyms. It may safely be said that 
the tiger must never be spoken of as "tiger" when 
he is supposed to be within earshot. Similarly the 
Mentra word rlsim must not be used of the wild boar 
by the hunters while engaged in tracking one. There 
is therefore some inherent probability in the con- 
jecture that the quasi-Krama formation of the names 

^ These are words of Sanskrit of the first one is segawon. 
origin. The Javanese Krama form - See Brandes, I.e. p. 88. 

130 SPECIAL FORMS OF SPEECH 

for "wild cattle," "wild dog," and "elephant," really- 
had a ceremonial basis, ^ and though their formation is 
not absolutely according to rule, it seems to me 
sufficiently near to the Krama formation to illustrate 
the widespread tendency of this particular trick of 
language amongst the Malayo-Polynesian races and 
the tribes which have fallen under their influence. 

In a few instances it would appear that the 
aboriginal dialects have retained forms which represent 
theoretical Ngoko {i.e. vulgar) equivalents of words 
which Malay possesses only in a quasi-Krama shape. 
I put forward this suggestion with some diffidence, 
but it appears to me to be a possible explanation of 
such forms as e.g. keclio, keckoit, " small," sedokon, " a 
little," and kochoi, " to urinate," when compared with 
the Malay equivalents keckil, sedikit, and kenching. 
This, however, is hardly more than a mere conjecture. 

Poetic Forms. 

Too little is known of the poetic diction of the 
aborigines to enable us to make any very positive 
statements on the subject, but it is asserted by the 
Semang," and I have heard it said of the Sakai, that 
in their songs they use words and forms differing 
from those of their colloquial dialects ; all these points 
call for further inquiry. 

1 In the case of the "crocodile," peculiarity takes a final -/ to correspond 
the close analogy to the Javanese with the final consonant of the root, 
doublets baya — bautl strongly sujjports The form has probably been amplified 
this hypothesis. luttri i^ratul, as in other languages. 

2 Thus te/clwil, in a Semang song, Clifford reports that among the Pangan- 
said to mean " turns round and round,"' speaking tribe of the Kerbal valley in 
is probably an amplified form o{ Iclwil, Trengganu, the medicine-men (/id/a') in 
from the root wil (in Sakai 7ual), " to cases of sickness recite incantations to 
turn," with the prefix te-, which in the spirits in a tongue unknown to the 
accordance with a recognised Semang uninitiated. 

CHAP. 1 1 MALA YO-POL YNESIAN I NFL UENCE 43 1 

The upshot of the whole matter appears to be 
this : there are, throughout a great part of the 
Malayo - Polynesian area, traces of a tendency to 
specialise common everyday language to suit particular 
purposes. The aborigines of the Peninsula seem in 
some degree to have inherited a similar tendency. 
In the south it has taken the shape of a fairly elaborate 
jargon, which has been preserved and enlarged owing 
to its association with a special and more or less 
lucrative employment. Elsewhere the tendency has 
not been developed to the same extent, nor has it 
been as carefully investigated, but traces of it appear 
to exist especially in those dialects which bear other 
evidence of Malayo -Polynesian influence; and in 
some cases the actual mode of specialisation is strik- 
ingly analogous to that of the Malayo- Polynesian 
languages. That it is a mere modern imitation of 
Malay seems extremely improbable ; it is far more 
likely that the tendency, perhaps inherent more or 
less in all races, has been fostered by the influence of 
the primitive Malayo-Polynesian tribes whose early 
presence in the Peninsula is attested by so much 
other evidence. 

CHAPTER III. 

PAST HISTORY AND RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES. 

We possess no data regarding the past history of the 
aboriginal languages of the Malay Peninsula prior to 
the beginning of the last century, since which period 
they do not appear to have undergone any marked 
changes except in the way of further acquisition of 
foreign words and consequent gradual decay. We 
are unable, therefore, to compare their present con- 
dition with any preceding stage of development, and 
are thrown back upon a comparative study of their 
various dialects and an investigation into their re- 
lations with other languages. 

Specifically Malay Element. 

A good deal has already been said as to their 
relations with the Malay language by which they are 
being superseded. There is internal evidence that 
this process has been going on for a considerable 
time : it has repeatedly been observed that many 
Malay loan-words in these dialects are pronounced 
not as the Malays of the Peninsula pronounce them 
to-day, either in the standard speech of educated 
people or the various local dialectic pronunciations, but 
as they appear in the Malay written language, and as 
it would seem, from comparison with other Malayan 

4.32 

MALA V LOANWORDS 433 

languages, they must have been pronounced at the 
period when Malay was first transcribed in the Arabic 
characters in which it is usually written. 

Thus the final -a, which in standard Malay is heard 
as -c (or -0), something like the last syllable of the 
English word better, and the local pronunciation of 
which varies from -a to -e, -a, and -a, is in the aboriginal 
dialects almost invariably a pure -a , with the abrupt 
ending so frequent in final vowels in these dialects. 
Similarly the final Malay ending in -k (or -k^), which 
in the spoken language of the Peninsula has dwindled 
down to the glottal check, is pronounced as a distinct 
-k in the aboriginal dialects, as it must have been 
when Malay orthography was first fixed, and still is 
in some places [e.g. Borneo) in spoken Malay. 
Similarly initial k-, often silent in spoken Malay, is 
distinctly audible in the aboriginal dialects. 

In these cases there is no reason to doubt that 
Logan was right in considering the aboriginal pro- 
nunciation to be a survival from the time when spoken 
Malay still preserved the old sounds that are stereo- 
typed in the written language.'^ Clifford's rejection 
of this explanation, in favour of a supposed phonetic 
law by which in these dialects final -e (or -o) and the 
glottal check are necessarily transmuted to -a and -k ^ 

^ k in Arabic is pronounced further have represented it by the haiiizah. 
back than k. The adoption of the 2 j j j vqJ_ j p 289. 
former, rather than the latter, letter to ^ J". R. A. S., S. B., No. 24, pp. 28, 
represent the Malay final -A- points, 29. In 1887 Clifford had accepted 
perhaps, to the probability that even Logan's explanation : see Notes and 
some centuries ago this final had no Qitei-ies, No. 4, p. loi, issued with 
longer precisely the same force as a /. A'. A. S., S. B., No. 17, in which 
medial or initial /•. But, as a matter of place he adds the interesting state- 
fact, the spelling varies, in some words, ment that a Sakai, when talking 
between -/■ and -i ; and anyhow, if Malay, drops these peculiarities, but 
the final -I- in the spoken language had resumes them immediately when he 
already become a mere glottal check, has to use a Malay word in the middle 
it seems likely that the Arabs would of a Sakai sentence. 

VOL. II 2 F 

434 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES part iv 

finds no support In their phonology, which frequently 
admits the supposed rejected finals in their own 
native words. It is, too, surely more reasonable to 
believe that the original sounds have persisted (as 
old sounds often do persist in isolated dialects) rather 
than to assume that they have been reconstructed. 
These dialects have retained much that is more 
archaic, by hundreds of years, than their Malay loan- 
words, and it cannot therefore be considered very 
remarkable that in some of these they should have 
preserved the pronunciation of a few centuries ago. 

Of the Malay element in the dialects of the 
Peninsula it is not necessary to say more, save to 
point out that it is essentially foreign to them, and 
was originally foreign to the Peninsula itself. The 
Malay language has been introduced into the 
Peninsula from Central Sumatra, where the Malay- 
speaking tribes were trained under Indian influences 
into a more or less civilised condition before they 
sent out the successive swarms of colonists who 
made new homes for the race in the Peninsula. At 
what date this colonising process began is unascer- 
tained, except that it was before the final conversion 
of the Malays to Mohammedanism (a process which 
appears to have begun in Sumatra early in the 
thirteenth century and to have been completed in 
the Peninsula about two centuries later). The early 
emigrations appear to have proceeded mainly from 
the east coast of Central Sumatra. Subsequently to 
the complete establishment of Islam in the Peninsula 
there was a separate movement of colonisation from 
the inland parts of the island (where the Menangkabau 
dialect of Malay is spoken), directed mainly towards 
the territories just inland of Malacca; but the influ- 

CHAP. Ill MALAY INFLUENCE EXTERNAL 435 

ence of this later stream has remained very much 
more local than that of the main stream from the 
Sumatran coast districts, though both continue, in 
diminished volume, even to the present day. 

Together with the genuine Malay words thus 
introduced into the aboriginal dialects of the Penin- 
sula there have, of course, come in a certain number 
of words of Sanskrit and Arabic origin which have 
obtained a footing in the Malay language, under the 
successive influence of the Hindu and Mohammedan 
civilisations. 

At the present day, as is obvious in almost every 
page of the Comparative Vocabulary, Malay loan- 
words constitute a large part of the language spoken 
by the wild tribes ; but it seems unnecessary to 
illustrate them here, as they are after all relatively 
modern accretions on the aboriginal dialects, and do 
not form an essential part of their structure. 

Generically Malayan Element. 

It must, however, be borne in mind that Malay is 
only one of the languages comprised in the vast 
Malayo-Polynesian family, and it must not be assumed 
that every word of Malayan ^ affinity found in ithe 
aboriginal dialects of the Peninsula has come into 
them from or through Malay. In a great number 

1 For the sake of brevity I shall use Easter Island and from Formosa to 
this term instead of the somewhat New Zealand ; it is generally con- 
clumsy "Malayo-Polynesian," when sidered to be subdivided into the 
referring specially to the languages of (i) Malayan, (2) Micronesian, (3) 
the western subdivision of the family, Melanesian, and (4) Polynesian sub- 
which comprises Sumatra, Java, Borneo, divisions; but except as regards the 
Celebes, the Philippines, and a few first and last of these, this classifica- 
neighbouring smaller islands, as well as tion appears to be tentative and 
Madagascar. The Malayo-Polynesian provisional rather than strictly estab- 
family extends from Madagascar to lished. 

436 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES part iv 

of cases, where such words are as closely alike in 
form to their equivalents in a number of other 
Malayan tongues as they are to their Malay equiva- 
lents, their immediate source of oriorin is, for the 
present, doubtful.^ In a certain, more limited, number 
of instances, there is not the slightest doubt that, 
though of r^Ialayan affinity, they cannot have come 
into the aboriginal dialects through Malay at all. 

The following are examples of such words : — 
*' bee," bani dahan ; " belly," bcftng; " black," hiro^tn ; 
"blowpipe," scput ; "buffalo," katidung \ "dead," 
kebus, viantai', "dog," asii \ "elephant," /i?nan; 
" finished," tclds ; " fowl," manitk ; " fruit," zvah, bah ; 
"husband," sdiva ; "knee," toot; "monkey" (spec. 
lotong), baseng; "nail," kokat \ "old," bakes; "rain," 
les^ni; "rattan," azve ; "ripe," tascg; "salt," sia ; 
"spear," bulus, tarok; "to stool," menek; "weak," 
Icnies ; " yam," talis. 

I have instanced only such words as, in my 
iudsfment. are certainlv of Malavan affinitv. A 
number of others, as to the origin of which there 
may be some doubt, are noted in the Comparative 
\^ocabulary, and it is very likely that a more extended 
comparison with the numerous Malayan languages of 
the Indian Archipelago would lead to the discovery 
of a good many which have escaped my notice. 

These words appear to me to suggest the solution 
of a peculiarly interesting problem. While every part 
of the western division of the Archipelago has its 
local Malayan languages, varying in number inversely 
with the state of civilisation of the people, from the 

' A Malayan origin independent of "father "" : rend, "low"; sempit, 
Malay may reasonably be suspected for " narrow," where the Malay equivalents 
such forms as e»ek, "child"; bafai, ^c ana/i, da/>a, rauiah, sempit. 

CHAP. Ill GENERICALLY MALAYAN ELEMENT 437 

two (or three) languages of the highly civilised island 
of Java to the numerous dialects of Borneo and 
Northern Celebes, the Peninsula, though situated 
within the area of this language family, seemed to 
form an exception, as its only known Malayan 
language, viz. Malay, was a foreign importation, not 
a local growth. It would seem, however, that the 
exception is more apparent than real. 

These words, which are Malayan but not Malay, 
do not appear to be referable to any one of the 
existing languages of the Archipelago ; ^ while their 
affinities are mainly with the Sumatran languages, 
especially Achinese, they sometimes differ from these 
and come closer to the dialects of Borneo, and even 
occasionally to more distant branches of the family, 
such as Javanese, Madurese, and the mixed half- 
Malayan dialects of Southern Indo-China, of which 
Cham is the typical representative." Accordingly, I 
think they must be regarded as relics of a group of 
Malayan dialects locally differentiated in the Penin- 
sula itself, for I do not think that their existence in 
the aboriginal dialects can be accounted for by any 
theory of borrowing from casual strangers coming 
from three or four different islands. There is no 

1 Their existence in the aboriginal are not Malayan, I have omitted in 

dialects was apparently observed by the above short list a number of abori- 

Logan, who speaks of Benua {i.e. ginal words which I have identified in 

Sakai and Jakun) dialects containing these languages, but have not, as yet, 

"non-Malay vocables — mostly Suma- traced in other Malayan languages. 

tran, but some have remoter Indo- The following are some of them : 

nesian affinities" {/. R. A. S., S, B., "blowpipe" (outer case), tagii ; "to 

No. 7, p. 86), but no particular atten- break," bekah ; "cloth," dbat^ ; 

tion seems to have been drawn to "cloud," sagfih ; "quick," melagat ; 

them until their peculiar importance "river-bank," terhis ; "sand," aney ; 

was pointed out by the present writer "sleepy," lebod ; "tame," lagi '- 

\n. J. R. A. S., S. B., No. 39, pp. 50, "very," L'/ieL Probably some of 

51. these will be identified as Malayan; 

- Achinese and Cham being mixed but two or three of them are perhaps 

languages, containing elements which of Mon-Annam origin. 

438 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES part iv 

evidence of any intimate intercourse between such 
occasional immigrants and the wild tribes of the 
Peninsula ; and nothing short of prolonged and 
intimate relations could have given these words a 
footing in their different dialects. They point, in my 
opinion, to the presence in the Peninsula, long before 
the Malay conquest, of primitive Malayan tribes (of 
whose existence there is other evidence) ; and as 
these Malayan words are found in all three language- 
groups, Semang, Sakai, and Jakun (though less in 
the purer dialects of the second group than in the 
other two), it seems a reasonable inference that these 
early Malayan tribes for the most part occupied the 
coast-line, and that their influence diminished towards 
the interior of the Peninsula. 

Owing to the fact that in a great number of cases 
it is impossible to decide whether a word of Malayan 
affinity has been introduced into the aboriginal 
dialects from Malay or from this more archaic 
Malayan source, it is difficult to draw any inference as 
to the nature and extent of the influence exercised by 
these primitive Malayan tribes upon their Sakai and 
Semang neighbours. Perhaps the domestication of 
the dog, the introduction of the domestic fowl, and 
the use of salt and of spears, was in some parts of the 
Peninsula due to them ; but the blowpipe, though 
included in the instances given above, has (as will be 
shown later) another and more usual name which is 
not of Malayan derivation at all ; and the same is 
true of most of these words, which in almost every 
case have synonyms of non-Malayan origin.^ 

' The relative importance of this which will have to be compared with 

Malayan element can only be ascer- tlie several Malay dialects spoken in 

taincd by a careful colleclion of new the Peninsula, most of which still 

material from the aboriginal dialects, await systematic investigation. 

MON-ANNAM LANGUAGES 439 

Mon-Annam Element. 

A still more important element in the aboriginal 
dialects of the Peninsula is that which illustrates 
their close relation to the Mon - Annam ^ family 
of languages. 

This important family has, until quite recently, 
been almost entirely neglected, and the comparative 
study of it as a whole is still in its very beginnings.-^ 
It includes, in the first place, the now almost extinct 
language of Lower Burma, which is properly called 
Mon, but is generally known as Peguan, or by its 
Burmese nickname, Talaing ; Khmer, or Cambojan, 
the language of the kingdom of Camboja ; and 
Annamese, the principal spoken language of Cochin 
China, Annam, and Tongking. All these are literary 
languages, the two former being written in alphabets 
of Indian origin, the last in a script based on the 
Chinese ideographic system. To these must be 
added an endless number of unwritten dialects spoken 
by more or less uncivilised tribes inhabiting different 

^ So called by Logan, who was, I - A beginning was made by Forbes 

believe, the first to point out its sepa- [Comparative Grammar of the Languages 

rate existence. More recent author- of Further India, 1 881), and Kuhn 

ities, especially on the Continent, [Ueber Herkioft unci Sprachen der 

appear to prefer the name Men- Transgangetischen Volker, 1883; Bei- 

Khmer, a term that has the advantage, trdgezur SprachenkundeHinterindiens, 

perhaps, of not prejudicing the position 1889). The study is now being admir- 

of Annamese, which stands in a some- al)ly pursued by Schmidt [Die Sprachen 

what peculiar relation towards the der Sakei und Sentang auf Malacca 

other members of the family. As, jtndihr Verhaltnisztiden Mon-Khmer- 

however, in spite of its abnormal Sprachen, 1901 ; Grundziige einer 

development, Annamese cannot be Laiitlehre der Khasi-Sprache, 1904 ; 

severed from the other languages, it Grundziige eincr Lautlehi-e der Alon- 

seems to me that the old name might ICJuner - Sprachen, 1905). See also 

well be retained for the family as a Cabaton, Dix dialectes indo - chinois 

whole, while Mon-Khmer will serve to recueillis par Prosper Odend'hal — • 

denote these languages, when, as often Etude linguistique, 1905, and Grier- 

happens, it is desired to exclude Annam- son, Lingtiistic Survey 'of India, 

ese from consideration. vol. ii. 

440 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES part iv 

KHMU 

Sketch Map showing the position 
of the Mon-Annam dialects of 
Eastern Indo- China. 

TONG KING 

XONG 

(CHONG) SAMRE 

KUY 

* H 1 1 /• 

vIANG SUE 

HiN ^ 

TARSNG KONTU 
^ ALAK 
CHURU ^<> 

.O KASENG 

-NIAHOM- 

KAT ? 

OR SOUl 
KOUl (COUl) 

""^' LAVE ^ 

SUK SEDANG 

HAUANQ RONGAO 

PiADE ^^"^'^^ BONAM 

JARAI RADE 
BRAO I PROUl 

KHMER 

CHAM 

(PROONS) 

PHNONG 

KANCHO 

KHA31 

KAHOV 

S 7 I E N G CHURU 

RAGLAI 
CHAM 

CHAM ° Saig-on 

V^ u-.i' ANNAMESE 

CHAP. Ill DISTRIBUTION OF MON-ANNAM FAMILY 441 

parts of the forest country of Southern and Central 
Indo-China, especially along the borders of Annam, 
Camboja, and Slam, the stretch of mountain country 
running east of the Mekong, mainly between latitudes 
17° and 12°, and elsewhere in scattered patches 
amongst the now dominant populations of the alien, 
mainly Tai and Tibeto - Burman, races of these 
regions. 

Taken together, these languages constitute a 
fairly distinct, and (with the exception of Annamese, 
which has been much modified by direct Chinese 
influence) a relatively uniform group. In the early 
centuries of our era, Mon and Khmer (with their 
allied dialects) were the dominant languages of 
Central and Southern Indo-China, long before the 
Burmese and Siamese had come down from the 
north ; while the Annamese were confined to the 
Tongking delta and its immediate neighbourhood, 
and the south - eastern coastland, which is now 
Annam and Cochin China, was occupied, under the 
name of Champa, by a race called Cham, whose 
language, already mentioned, was a mixture of 
Mon-Khmer with Malayan elements.^ 

Apart from the special interest attaching to them 
as having been the earliest indigenous vehicles of 
literary culture in Indo-China, the Mon- Annam 
languages are of unique importance in connection 
with the past history of South-eastern Asia. They 
are related in various ways to Nicobarese, Khasi, and 
the Munda (or Kolarian) dialects of India on the 
one hand ; they present curious analogies with the 

' This interesting language, together dictionary of it by Aymonier and Caba- 

with a few allied dialects of ruder ton (which, by the courtesy of the latter, 

neighbouring tribes, still lingers on in I have been permitted to use in proof) 

S.E. Annam and part of Camboja. A is in the press, and will shortly appear. 

442 

RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES 

CHAP. Ill RELATIONS OF MON-ANNAM FAMILY 

443 

Malayo- Polynesian family on the other; and yet 
more strangely they have a certain number of points 
of contact with the northern languages of the great 
Indo-Chinese conglomeration which includes the 
Tibeto-Burman, Kareng, Chinese, and Tai families.^ 

How much of all this is genuine original relation- 
ship, how much is due to mere historic contact or 
borrowings from some common source, it is, however, 
as yet impossible to say. So far as the connection 
with Nicobarese and Khasi is concerned, it would 
seem that the relationship is vital, entering as it does 
into the very structure of the languages. In the case 
of the Muncla dialects this has not been proved ; and 
their structure (especially their syntax) presents 
many marked differences from the Mon-Annam.^ 

1 As to the connection with Nico- 
barese, see especially the grammar of 
Nicobarese by Temple, annexed to his 
report on the Census of 1901. 

The best authority for Nicobarese 
itself is Man, Dictionary of the Central 
Nicobarese Language, 1889. The con- 
nection with Khasi is dealt with by 
Schmidt in his Grundziige ciner Laiit- 
lehre der Khasi- Spracke, 1904, where 
it is also shown that the Palaung, 
Rumai, Wa, and Riang dialects of 
Burma and the Shan States are a 
connecting link between Mon and 
Khmer on the one side, and Khasi on 
the other. For the connection with 
Munda, see Grierson, Linguistic Survey 
of India, vol. iv. pt. i. (by Konow), 
which by the courtesy of the editor I 
have been permitted to use in proof. 
Attention was called by the present 
writer in /. R. A. S., S. B., No. 38, 
to the analogies with the Malayo- 
Polynesian group. The relation to the 
Northern Indo-Chinese languages has 
never been worked out, but see Forch- 
hammer, "Indo-Chinese Languages" 
{Indian Antiquaty, 1882). That there 
is some common element in the vocabu- 
laries was perceived by Haswell, who 

in his Gram)naiical Notes and Vocabulary 
of the Pegtian Lans^nage, p. 6, com- 
pares the Mon cha pung (pronounced 
cliic pong), "to eat rice," with the 
Amoy Chinese tsiah png. See also 
that learned but not always quite 
accurate work, Terrien de Lacouperie's 
Languages of China before the Chinese, 
1887. It must, however, be borne in 
mind that in the case of languages which 
are monosyllabic or quasi-monosyllabic, 
the chances of accidental coincidence 
are much increased ; and, until careful 
investigations have established the exist- 
ence of regular laws of phonetic corre- 
spondence, no individual identification 
based on mere resemblance in sound 
and meaning can be safely accepted. 

- The sketch map here given indi- 
cates the relative position, in modern 
times, of the language-groups most 
clearly connected with the Mon-Annam 
family, and illustrates the importance 
of the Mon-Annam races as links in a 
broken chain that extends from the 
district of Nimar in the extreme west 
corner of the Central Provinces of 
India all the way to Johor, or from lat. 
22" long. 77°, to lat. z'TjO' long. 103°, 
approximately. 

444 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES part iv 

Nevertheless it is certain that a considerable common 
element runs through Munda, Khasi, and Nicobarese, 
and this common element is identical with the main 
constituents of the Mon-Annam family. The con- 
nection of the Mon- Khmer languages with the 
Malayo- Polynesian family is most mysterious, as 
there appears to be a considerable resemblance in 
structure, accompanied (despite a certain number of 
common words), by a very distinct diversity in the 
actual materials.^ Their relation to the Northern 
Indo-Chinese languages (including Chinese) would 
seem to point to long contact and considerable 
borrowing, but not to community of origin. 

These peculiarly complex relations may perhaps 
be explained by the former geographical positions of 
these various races. In Indo-China there has been a 
great shifting of populations to the southward. It 
would seem that some two or three thousand years 
ago the southern coast-line was occupied by Malayan 
tribes, and the interior by tribes speaking Mon- 
Khmer languages." To the north of these, in 
Southern China and the adjoining regions, dwelt the 

1 The syntax is almost identical, and a mixture of Gaulish and German, or 

there is a remarkable likeness in some English a blend of British and Latin. 
of the prefixes and infixes in use in the '^ The Chams are sufficient evidence 

two families. The Malayan languages of this former state of things so far as 

also use suffixes, whereas the Mon- the south-eastern part of Indo-China is 

Annam languages do not ; but, curi- concerned. As to the probability that 

ously enough, Nicobarese also to a the centre of dispersion of the Malayo- 

limited extent uses them. When, Polynesian languages was somewhere 

however, De Lanessan {EticyclopiCiiia on the coast of Indo-China, see Kern, 

Britannica, vol. xxvi. p. 513, 1902) Taalkitiidige gegevens Icr hepaliug van 

styles Khmer a blend of Malayan and hct Staiitlaiid ckr Maleisch-Polynesische 

Chinese, he goes completely astray. /'o/Zy;/, 1889. The islands off the coast 

There are in Khmer certain words of Tenasserim up to about lat. 13' are 

which it has in common with Chinese to this day occupied by a Malayan race, 

and certain others which it shares with the Selungs. But as these are mere 

the Malayan languages, l)ut the main sea-gypsies, their present haunts do 

substance of it is neither Chinese nor not help us much to determine their 

Malayan. One might as well call French early location. 

CHAP, in HISTORICAL RELATIONS 445 

ancestors of the Tai and Tibeto-Burman races, which 
within the last fifteen centuries or so have flooded 
Indo- China with successive swarms of conquering 
immigrants, who after receiving through Mon and 
Khmer channels a varnish of Indian civilisation, broke 
up the political organisation of the older races, and 
isolated their various fragments from one another. 

The Annamese, unlike their relatives, fell some 
two thousand years ago within the sphere of Chinese 
political and cultural influence, and, thus strengthened, 
they have taken part in this conquest, the eastern 
coastlands, which constituted the old Hinduised 
Kingdom of Champa, having fallen to their lot. 

It would seem probable, therefore, that for ages 
together the Mon-Annam races occupied a central 
position between the Northern Indo-Chinese in the 
north and the Malayan races in the south. But it is 
also a fairly safe assumption that all three families 
had their original locations still further to the north, 
and probably outside Indo- China altogether. As 
each in turn sent out colonising swarms to the 
southward, it may well have left a remnant behind 
which was absorbed by the next group of races, and 
thus each family would be influenced to some extent 
by the one that had preceded it in its southward 
march. We know that this has actually happened in 
some parts of Indo-China, and we cannot at present 
say from how far north a similar process may have 
been going on in remoter ages. 

Such an hypothesis would not, I believe, be in- 
consistent with ascertained facts, and might perhaps 
serve to explain the curiously complicated entangle- 
ment of languages which South-eastern Asia presents. 
To attempt j^toj discuss it here would, however, be 

446 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES part iv 

entirely out of place. I have only mentioned the 
matter in order to draw attention to the special 
importance of the hitherto much neglected Mon- 
Annam family of languages, and must confine myself 
here to its relations with the aboriginal dialects of the 
Peninsula. 

Mon-Khmer Structure. 

The structure of the Mon-Khmer languages ^ con- 
sists, to put it briefly, in a system of monosyllabic 
root -words, to which can be added prefixes and 
infixes for the purpose of expressing modifications of 
the original idea. This system is best represented in 
Khmer, and may be illustrated by the following 
example : - — 

kat 

to cut 

khnat 

measure 

kumnat (kunat) 

piece 

thkat 

pain 

tamkat (takat) 

suffering 

skat 

to cut off 

sangkat 

division 

pangkat 

to cut, to divide. 

Here, if all these words are related, the root kat 
is modified by the prefixes t-, s-, and /-, and the 
infixes -7i- {-n-, -ng-) and -m- and their combinations ; 
and, besides these, other prefixes (such as k-, ch- (/-), 
/- and r-) and infixes (such as -/-, -r-, and -/-) occur in 
some of these languages. 

All this contrasts with the Malayan system of 
structure, notably in the fact that in the latter, 
although the system of prefixes and infixes is some- 
what analogous, the root-words are dissyllables ; and 

' In Annamese the structure is ticular tone, just as in Chinese, 
strictly monosyllabic, and the meaning - From Schmidt, Die Sprachen der 

of words is bound up with the par- Sakei unci Se»tang, p. 568. 

CHAP. Ill STRUCTURE OF MON-KHMER GROUP 447 

though in some cases it seems to be possible to 
discern in them an original monosyllabic root, yet 
this does not stand out as clearly as in the Mon- 
Khmer languages ; it is no longer (as a rule) capable 
of independent existence, and the normal type of the 
language is dissyllabic. If it was originally mono- 
syllabic, it has long since passed out of that stage, 
and its dissyllabic words are now treated as inde- 
pendent roots for all purposes of comjDosition by means 
of the addition of prefixes, infixes, and suffixes.^ 

The point, however, which mainly concerns us, is 
that a great part of the constituents of the Sakai and 
Semang dialects agree closely with the Mon-Khmer 
languages both in the monosyllabic character of their 
root -words and in the method of composition by 
prefixes and infixes.^ When we exclude the Malay 
and other Malayan elements, we find that the words 
which are common to Sakai and Semang are in the 
main monosyllabic, or capable of being reduced to 
monosyllabic roots. Thus, in Sakai, from the root 
cha (Semang chi), " to eat," we get the verbal 
formations dm-cka\ en-cha\ ka-cha (and in Semang 
■ma-cM), and the substantival lincha (Semang inchi) 
and chana\ " food " ^ ; from yut, " to return," i.e. to go 
back, the transitives tymt and tengyut, " to return," 
i.e. to give back, and so on, quite in accordance with 
Mon-Khmer methods. 

1 As to the probability of an earlier Tagalen tind Madagassen, pp. 48-57, 

system of monosyllabic roots in the 1902. 

Malayan languages, see especially ^ ggg especially Schmidt, op. cit., 

Pijnappel, " Over de Wortelwoorden in where this fact was first pointed out. 

de Maleische Taal," and Vreede, "Over Skeat (in the Selangor Journal) had 

de Wortelwoorden in de Javaansche already drawn attention to the prefixes 

Taal," in Actes du Sixieme Congri's in Besisi. 

International dcs Orientalistes tcnu en 3 Probably an infix formation ( = 

l88j <? Leide, 18S5, and Brandstetter, ch-an-a). 

448 

RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES 

PART IV 

Ordinary Mon-Annam Words. 

But not merely is there this close correspondence 
in structure : there is a very large common element 
in the vocabulary itself. The number of words in 
Sakai and Semang which can be traced in the Mon- 
Annam languages (and in some cases also in Nico- 
barese, Khasi, and Munda) is very considerable, and 
includes many of the most important words of every- 
day life. It would be impracticable to set them out 
here at length ; and I have illustrated this connection, 
as fully as circumstances permitted, in the Compara- 
tive Vocabulary. But the following list of the names 
of the principal parts of the body will serve as a 
specimen of the extent to which this common element 
runs through the ordinary speech of these tribes : — 

Semang. 

Sakai. 

Arm 

beling 

belegn 

Back 

kra 

keru, kenok 

Blood 

mahom 

behim 

Bone 

iyeng 

jaak 

Breast 

tendo' 

ento 

Breast (female) 

tuh 

Chin 

'ngke' 

jengkao 

Ear 

pol, em pong, 

"ntong 'ntak 

Eye 

miid 

mat 

Flesh 

seg 

sach 

Foot 

chan 

juk'i 

Gall-bladder 

kemod 

Hair 

sog 

sok 

Hand 

tong 

tokn 

Head 

kui 

kui 

1 leart 

nus 

Knee 

kaltong 

kaltun 

Liver 

rus 

gres 

Mouth 

ban 

'mpak, pang 

Neck 

kua 

Nose 

mah 

moh 

Thigh 

bio' 

belu 

Tongue 

liti' 

ICntak, lepes 

Tooth 

lanioing 

lemiin 

The above list is not exhaustive, but includes the 

CHAP. Ill 

MON-A NNA M WORDS 

449 

principal words of this category that can be safely 
traced to a Mon-Annam origin. Besides these, a 
number of quite common words such as " sun,' 
" moon," " darkness," " rain," " water," " fire," " earth,' 
''stone," "forest," "tree." " wood," " flower," "fruit,' 
"leaf," "thorn," "rattan," "banana," "centipede,' 
" fly," " louse," " mosquito," " spider," " leech," " fish,' 
"bird," '' ^^'g^' "rat," "tiger," "elephant," etc., and a 
number of adjectives and verbs (as well as some other 
parts of speech) have one or more identifiable 
equivalents in the Mon-Annam languages ; though 
most of them also have synonyms, which have not, as 
vet, been traced to that source. 

Mon-Aimani Culture Wo7'ds. 

More interesting, perhaps, than the foregoing are 
the relatively few words which throw light on the 
stage of development attained by the aboriginal tribes 
independently of any Malay influence : the following 
representative list of these is confined to such as 
appear to be of Mon-Annam affinity : — 

Sakai. 

inuh, hum 

belau 

long 

tohop 

ak 

abat" ' 

kensiet 

Chrt"^' 

cho' 

jeniloi 

kemut 

chcno' 

yat" 

dok" 

• Found in Cham and Bahnar, this word may be of Malayan origin. 
VOL. II 2 G 

Sef/iang 

To bathe 

muh 

Blowpipe 

bclau 

Blowpipe dait 

... 

To boil 

to^ni 

Bow 

ijJ 

Cloth, clothes 

Comb 

To cook 

'nchin 

To dance 

kengsen 

Dog 

Flute 

Ghost, spirit 

k^moyd 

Grandchild 

kancha' 

Grandfather 

Grandmother 

ya' 

House 

dunt: 

450 

RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES 

itcmatig. 

Ivory 

bala' 

Mat 

nos 

Name 

... 

Nephew 

Paddle 

chindwa' 

Pillow 

To plant 

tup 

Poison (for darts) 

Quiver 

Rice (in husk) 

ba' 

Rice (husked) 

heka' 

Rice (boiled) 

inclii ' 

Roof, thatch 

Salt 

empoyd 

Sakai. 

nis, apil 

imu' 

kemon 

chau 

tenui 

tap" 

chfingra' 

16k 

ba, sasa 

rekua', charoi 

chana ' 

kerop 

Somewhat doubtfully identified are the follow- 

ing: 

Semang. 

Sakai. 

Adze 

iek 

Areca nut 

bliik 

Boat 
Chopper 
Debt, price 
Fiddle 

kupon 
choka', weng 

kri''ni 

d5sh - 
kram 

Iron 
To plait 
Pot 

dendan 

pat 

Too much stress must not be laid on these words ; 
the word for " clothes " probably meant no more than 
the wisp of bark-cloth which still constitutes the main 
article of apparel among some of the wilder tribes, 
the " house " was no doubt always a small and rudely- 
built hut, the " dog " may conceivably (though not 
probably) have been the wild, not the domesticated, 
variety, the word for " ivory " by no means implies 
that it was an object of traffic, the word for " pillow " 
is perhaps derived from the word for " head " and 
may have been independently invented,^ as may the 

' These primarily mean " food " 
only. 

- If rightly identified, this is a 
Sanskrit word which has passed 
through a Mon-Khmer channel. 

•* Pillows do not appear to be in 
very common use : see supra., vol. i. 
pp. 178, 180; and Martin, /nlatid- 
std7nnte dcr malayisclic.ii Halhiusel, 
1905, p. 677. 

CHAP. Ill CULTURE WORDS 451 

word for " liute," which has a different prefix from its 
Mon-Khmer equivalents (some of which differ amongst 
themselves) and may have been newly formed from a 
common verbal root. But nevertheless there is here 
sufficient evidence that some at least of the aboriginal 
tribes of the Peninsula do not owe their primitive 
agriculture and general semi-civilisation to Malay in- 
fluences exclusively, but must have retained them at 
least from the time (now some eight or nine centuries 
back if not more) when they were finally cut off from 
all relations with the Mon - Khmer civilisation of 
Southern Indo-China. 

Therefore I cannot agree with Martin when he 
suggests that the Sakai house on piles is borrowed 
from the Malay style of architecture/ or that the 
planting of cereals, especially rice, is due to Malay 
influence.' The house on piles is the typical structure 
in the greater part of Indo-China as well as of the 
Indian Archipelago, and even if the words for " rice" 
originally meant some other cereal, which I do not 
see any particular reason to believe, they are at any 
rate evidence of some, however primitive, cultivation, 
which in itself negatives the view that all planting on 
the part of these tribes is due to Malay influence. 
The true inference, in my opinion, is that, like many of 
the ruder Mon-Khmer tribes, some of the wild tribes 
of the Peninsula have from time immemorial planted 
rice in their jungle-clearings. But they have never 
made the great advance to planting in irrigable 
swamp-land : that, in South-east Asia, is the Rubicon 
which a barbarous tribe must cross before it can fulfil 
the conditions precedent to real civilisation, first in 

' op. iit. p. 670. - Hid. p. 731. 

452 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES part iv 

the material sense of the word, and ultimately in its 
social, moral, intellectual, and other connotations. 

The only possible alternative is that the aboriginal 
tribes have in some past age lived in close contact 
with a more civilised Mon-Annam race, who did plant 
rice and so taught them the words if not the practice. 
But that view also does not find favour with Martin, 
who cannot discover any evidence that they were 
ever under such influence.^ 

Double Relation zvith Mon-Annam Langtiages. 

This leads us to the question whether the relation 
of the Mon-Annam languages to the aboriginal 
dialects of the Peninsula has been one of mere 
external influence or whether the latter can be 
classified as true members of the family. Logan, who 
was the first to notice the presence of Mon-Annam 
words in the aboriginal dialects,- propounded a very 
complicated theory of the relations of the Mon-Annam 
languages with the Malayan family, which it would be 
out of place to discuss here, but apparently held that 
their influence on the aboriginal dialects was external. 
His view was that a civilised Mon - Khmer race 
colonised the Peninsula in early days long before the 
Malay immigration from Sumatra had begun, and 
that during this Mon-Khmer era that people occupied 
towards the aboriginal tribes the same position which 
the Malays now occupy. " The language of the 
Mons and Kambojans," he says, ''would become the 
lingua franca of the districts round their colonies and 
of the rivers on both sides of the Peninsula which 
their praus ■' frequented for barter with the natives, 

' op. cit. p. 999. "^ J. I, A, vol. iv. p. 431. *' I.e. ships. 

CHAP. Ill RELATION TO MON-ANNAM FAMILY 453 

and it would ultimately, in a large measure, displace 
the older dialects of the latter." ' 

This view was again advanced by the present 
writer in a paper dealing with a number of, mainly 
verbal, analogies between the Mon-Annam languages 
and the dialects of the Peninsula.' The possibility 
of their ultimate genuine relationship was not excluded, 
but put aside as not being proved by the evidence 
then under consideration. On the other hand, Kuhn, 
in a very valuable paper on the relation of the Mon- 
Annam languages with the Munda languages, Khasi, 
Nicobarese, and the aboriginal dialects of the Peninsula, 
had already, though only on similar evidence, inferred 
the existence of a common substratum, but still did 
not quite go the length of classifying these diverse 
tongues in one family."' 

More recently Schmidt, in his excellent work 
already referred to, has devoted a much more thorough 
investigation to the question, and has arrived at the 
conclusion that the close correspondence in phonology, 
structure, syntax, and a considerable percentage of 
the vocabulary between the Semang and Sakai 
dialects and the Mon- Khmer languages cannot be 
accounted for except on the view that they are 
essentially members of one family of speech.^ 

It is to be observed that these two vievvs are not 
mutually exclusive ; these dialects may well be distant 
relatives of the Mon -Khmer languages separated 
from them in a remote prehistoric age, and long 
afterwards again influenced by renewed direct contact 
with a Mon-Khmer population. There may be two 

1 /. J\. A. S. , S. B., No. 7, pp. 85-87. Hinterindiem, p. 220. 

- Ibid. No. 27, pp. 21-56. * Die Sprailicn dcr Sakei imd 

■* Beit rage zur Sprachenkunde Semang, p. 58 1. 

454 

RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES 

distinct Mon-Khmer sources, just as there have been 
two of Malayan origin, entering into their com- 

KmcrrWalk.-i 

Skktch Map showing the Distribution oi'- the Numeral Systems. 

position. That this is really the case seems to be 
indicated by the diversity of the numeral systems 
which are found in the Peninsula.^ 

' In the sketch map liere given, 
numerals of Malayan typeare neglected : 
they occur occasionally, es[jecially on 
the outskirts of tlie area inhabited by 
the wild tribes. The boundary lines 

between the four systems are more or 
less hypotlietical. The Arabic numbers 
refer to the following dialects : — 

I. Semang of Mount Jerai ; 2. 
Semang of Ulu Selama ; 3. Semang of 

CHAP. HI SEMANG AND SAKAI NUMERALS 455 

It has often been remarked that the purer dialects 
of the centre of the Peninsula do not possess any- 
native numerals for higher numbers than " three " ; ' 
the following short lists will therefore suffice for a 
general comparison of the different types that exist : — 

//. ///. /J ■ 

I. 

nai 

nei (c;- nc) 

nanu 

mui {or nioi) 

2. 

bie 

nar 

nar 

'mbar 

3- 

(various) " 

ne 

ni 

'mpe' 

Type I. represents the Semang group of dialects ; 
Type II. the Northern Sakai and the inner sub- 
division of the Eastern Sakai; Type III. is co- 
extensive with the Central Sakai ; and Type IV. 
includes the Southern Sakai, one or two mixed Jakun 
dialects, and the outer subdivision of the Eastern 
Sakai. 

Now it is clear that (with the exception of the 
first numeral of Type II. which it has in common 
with Type I.) Types II. and III. are really one 
system ; and this system cannot be derived from 
Type I. or Type IV., nor can these be derived from it. 

Ijok ; 4. Semang of Sadang ; 5. 27. Daly's Selangor Sakai ; 28. Orang 

Pangan of Ulu Patani ; 6. Semang of Bukit of Ulu Langat ; 29. Kenaboi ; 

Plus; 7. Sakai Jeram of Grik ; S. 30. Sakai of Serting ; 31. Orang 

Martin's Semang of Ulu Selama ; 9. Hutan of Ulu Palong ; 32. Orang 

Semang of Kuala Kenering ; 10. I)e Hutan of Ulu Indau ; 33. Besisi of 

Morgan's Semang of Sungai Piah ; 11. Ayer Itam ; 34. Besisi of Sepang : 35. 

Po-Klo of Temongoh ; 12. Sakai of Besisi of Malacca; 36. Sakai of Ulu 

Plus; 13. Sakai of Korbu ; 14. Che res ; 37. Sakai of Ulu Tembe- 

Tembe' ; 15. Sakai of Pulau Guai ; ling. 

16. Sakai of Krau (the emigrant Krau One or two dialects, of which the 

clan of Ketiar is not marked); 17. numerals are imperfectly recorded, have 

Sakai of Sungai Raya ; 18. Sakai of been omitted. 

Ulu Kampar ; 19. .Sakai of Ulu • For higher numbers some of the 

Bertang ; 20. Clifford's Senoi ; 21. aborigines nowadays use the Malay 

Sakai of Serau ; 22. Sakai of Tapah ; numerals. 

23. Sakai of Sungkai ; 24. Sakai of - The various forms given are diu, 

Chendariang ; 25. Sakai of Slim ; pat, and Jmpong. Most of the typical 

26. Orang Tanjong of Ulu Langat : forms above have minor variants. 

456 

RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES 

We have therefore at least two, if not three, ^ different 
systems of numerals to deal with. 

But Types II. and III., which on the face of them 
are so closely allied, are also relatively central, while 
Types I. and IV., especially the latter, are distinctly 
peripheral in their geographical positions in the 
Peninsula. Prhna facie, therefore, the true Sakai 
types, II. and III,, have the best claim to represent 
the old Sakai numerals, while the rest may be 
suspected of having been due to outside in- 
fluences. 

Now Type IV. is the only genuine and authenti- 
cated non-Malayan numeral system in the aboriginal 
dialects of the Peninsula that extends to higher 
numbers than "three" (or at most "four"), which 
fact in itself suggests its derivation from a more 
civilised race than the wild tribes of the Peninsula ; 
and there is no shadow of doubt that it is of Mon- 
Khmer origin, as the following comparison will 
show : - — 

Type IV. Mon. 

Silk. 

Huei. 

I. 

mui (fir moi) 

mwai 

mui 

mui 

2. 

'mbar 

ba 

bar 

bar 

3- 

'nipe' 

PJ 

pe 

pe 

4- 

empun 

pan 

puon 

putjn 

5- 

masok" 

masun 

song 

sung 

6. 

peru' 

tarau 

trou 

treu 

7. 

tempo 

thapah 

pho 

pha 

' It is doubtful whether the Seniant; 
equivalents for "two"' and "three '" 
can lie derived from the INIon-Annam 
type, though with the exception of the 
anomalous diu, " three," it .seems 
likely enough. It is possible, how- 
ever, that they are of independent 
origin. Tiiere is, unfortunately, no 
properly authenticated Semang word 
for "four" except ^a-blli in the 
.Sadang dialect, which is clearly derived 

from "two," and probably means 
" double two."' 

' The geographical position of most 
of the tribes which use numerals closely 
resembling our Type I\'. can be seen 
from the maps which have been given 
al)ove. It is important as giving a 
clue to the region from which this par- 
ticular influence proceeded. This, as I 
C(mjectured \x\J.R.A.S., .S'.Ik, No. 27, 
was pnjbably the Menam valley. 

CHAP. Ill 

MON-KHMER NUMERALS 

457 

Bolo'i'e.n. 

Niahihi. 

Pron. 

A'a. 

moi 

bar 

pii 

puan 

sun 

tarau 

poh 

niuei 

ban 

pe 

piion 

s.ing 

Uou 

pah 

niuui 

moe 

baar 

bar 

pe 

l)eh 

puon 

puan 

chheng 

chang 

trau 

trao 

pos 

pah 

But the numeral systems of the languages of the 
great Mon-Annam-Munda-Khasi-Nicobarese alHance 
(saving only those of the mixed subfamily, best re- 
presented by Cham, which have numerals of Malayan 
origin) are distinctly divisible into two different 
groups : — 

1. The Mon-Annam-Munda group (of which the 
above Mon type agreeing so closely with our Type 
IV. is one subdivision only)/ 

2. A group comprising (a) Khasi ; {b) the dialects, 
such as Palaung, Riang, Wa, and Lemet, which are 
intermediate between Khasi and Mon- Khmer; and 
(c) Nicobarese. 

The following specimens will sufficiently illustrate 
the peculiarities of this second group : — 

' The first four numerals are 
prr.ctically identical in almost all the 
Mon - Annam languages; at "five"' 
the differences begin, and the family, 
regarded from this point of view, 
splits up into a number of subdivisions, 
none of which, however, except tlie 
one of which Alon is typical, need 
concern us here. 

It is remarkable how closely the 
Munda dialects (where they have not 
borrowed Aryan or Dravidian numerals) 
agree up to "four"' with the general 
iMon-Annam type and differ from the 
intervening Khasi, thus :— 

Santali. Kiirku. Kharia. 

mit 
bar-ea 

miya 
baria 

moi 
ubar 

Santali. 

pa-a 
pon-ea 

Kiirku. 

Kharia. 

apia upe 

uphunia i'pon 

See the Lini^niisilc Survey of India, 
vol. iv. part i., especially pp. 12, 24, 
and 242-245. In the higher numbers 
(which, however, do not directly 
concern us) two of the Munda dialects, 
namely Kharia and Savara, agree 
closely wilh the Palaung, Wa, Lemet, 
and Khmu dialects of the second 
group ; a fact (first noticed, I think, 
by Konow in _/. R. A. S., 1904, 
part iii. p. 429) which strongly 
supports the view that all these 
groups of languages are ultimately 
related. 

458 

RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES 

Khasi {Slaiidard). 

Riang. 

En. 

Son. 

I. 

wei 

hak 

tai 

te 

2. 

3- 

ar 
lai 

kar 
kwai 

ra 

loi 

a 
oi 

4- 

sau 

k'pwon 

pun 

wun 

Tai-Loi 
IVa. 

Palaung 
{Rum at). 

Dauaiv. 

Lemet. 

I. 

kali 

hie 

kvit 

mus 

2. 

3- 

la-al 
la-oi 

a 
we 

an 
wi 

ar 
lohe 

4. 

pun 

pwan 

pun 

pun 

Car 

A^kobar. 

Central 
Nicobar. 

Soutkerti 
Nicobar. 

Shorn P} 
Nicobar. ' 

I. 

2. 

3- 

4- 

kahok 
neiit 
lue 
fan 

heang 
A 

loe 
foan 

hog 
a 

lue 
faat 

heng 
au 
luge 
fuat 

Having regard to the geographical position of 
these languages and to their connection, as evidenced 
by a large common element in their vocabularies, it 
is impossible to believe that these resemblances in the 
numbers "two" and "three" are due to accidental 
coincidence, while " four " brings almost all of them 
into close agreement with the Mon-Annam-Munda 
type. If, however, the words for "two" and "three" 
throughout this group are connected, they must re- 
present originally identical roots, merely differentiated 
by different prefixes k-, r-, and /-. 

If that is so, we get back to something like ar for 
" two " and / for " three " as ultimate roots, and these 
will then explain not only the Mon-Annam-Munda 
types b-ar and p-i, but also the Sakai n-a7' and n-i 

' As to Khasi, see the Linguistic 
.SnrTey of India, vol. ii. p. 38. The 
I^einct numerals are of tlie dialect of 
(^hieng Khong (about lat. 21" 30', 
long. 1 00 ' 30), see / 'oyagc if Exploration 
i:n Indo-Ciiine (1873), vol. ii. p. 516. 

For the Nicobare.se numerals, see 
Man, Dictionary of the Central 
Nicobarcse Language (1 889), pp. 240, 
241. For all the rest see the Gazetteer 
of l'p['er Burmah and the .Shan States 
(1900), part i. vol. i. pp. 626-727. 

TYPICAL SAKAI NUMERALS 459 

(or n-e), the roots being in each case the same but 
the prefixes differing, A similar explanation would 
then attach the M on- An nam 7n-wai and the Semang 
n-ai (Sakai n-ei), " one," to the Khasi zvei. 

The Eastern Sakai forms ne-weng, ni-u-e, nfi-e,^ 
and the Central Sakai najtit, "one," may perhaps 
be the same iiai (or nci) with different numeral co- 
efficients welded on to them, as has happened to the 
Malay sain (from sa-\-watu, lit. "one stone")," and a 
similar explanation may be given of the Central Sakai 
variant tiina, " three." 

If the abov^e explanation holds good, practically all 
the properly authenticated numerals in the Peninsular 
dialects are accounted for ; but it follows, as a con- 
sequence, that they derive from two distinct sources, 
both (though not in the same degree of affinity) 
cognate to the Mon-Annam languages. This ex- 
planation of our Sakai Types II. and III. is ad- 
mittedly somewhat conjectural,^ but finds some support 
in the fact that in a certain number of cases where 
words closely allied to the typical Mon-Khmer forms 
occur in the outlying dialects (including those which 
have numerals of the Types I. and lY.), they are 
either not recorded at all in the dialects of the interior 
(which have numerals of the Types II. and III.) or 
else occur in them in forms differing more distinctly 
from the normal Mon-Khmer type. 

The following are representative instances : — 

^ On the other hand, it is not im- for "one"'; this may either be an 

possible that these forms may better abbreviation of iiaiiu or, if the above 

represent the supposed primitive ;/ + wci explanation is wrong, its root, 
(which may have been weng originally -• It was first suggested by Schmidt 

and so connect with the Nicobar- in Dir". Sprachen dc-r Sakei iind Semang, 

ese keng). But this is a mere pp. 524, 580 ; and again in Grundziige 

guess. einer /.aiif/e/nr der Khasi-Sprache, pj). 

'■^ A form noli is, however, reported 759, 760. 

46o RELA 

\TION TO or Hi 

ER LAI 

"^GUA^ 

GES I'ART IV 

Typical 

Outer 

Inner 

Mon-Khmer. 

Dialects. 

Dialects. 

Bamboo 

ding, difi ' 

ding 

Banana 

chek - 

1 iok 

To bathe 

hum 

hum 

Blood 

niaham, phani, 
chham, chhim 

maliani, 

bahom 

behim, bchlp, 
behlt 

Day 

tangai 

tcngngi 

Hand 

ti, tai 

li, thi 

lok", tak 

Heavy 

kejiit, kajcik, 
jiik 

kajoh, h 

tnjut 

nyuh, nyii 

Hill 

bonam, manani 

benom, 
menum 

IjL-num 

Tree 

long 

long, dc 

long 

jclop, jclok 

Water 

dak 

doo, dak 

teu, til 

It would seem, therefore, that there are really two 
distinct strains of the Mon-Annam element, the one 
ancient and remote, the other much more recent, in 
the composition of these dialects, or at least some of 
them ; and in view of the relative importance of this 
element, which seems to run through their whole struc- 
ture, the Sakai and Semang languages in their present 
stage of development, at any rate, may well be classi- 
fied as outlying members of that family. It must be 
remembered that in the case of uninflected languages 
the problem of classification is necessarily very difficult, 
especially when, under the intiuence of alien tongues, 
the vocabularies have been much mixed. Such a 
language as Cham, for instance, can from certain 
points of view be classified as Malayan, while other 
aspects of it are distinctly Mon-Annam, and scholars 
have accordingly differed in their classification of it. 
Much the same difficulty besets the classification of the 
languages of the Peninsula, with the additional com- 
plication that they are numerous and heterogeneous, 
besides being very imperfectly known. 

Uninfiected languages can pass, almost impercep- 

— " Tvibe.' 

- In Khmer only. 

CHAP. iH DIFFICULTIES OF CLASSIFICATION 461 

tibly, from one family into another ; thus some of the 
dialects of the Peninsula at the present day are being 
more and more modified by the influence of Malay, 
and are being transformed into Malay dialects. 
When a language is in such a state of transition (or 
even when its condition is fixed but it is a hybrid 
product), the classification of it will vary according 
to the principles adopted : a hard and fast system 
which looks only to grammar and puts the vocabulary 
entirely aside can hardly meet the difficulty. What 
if the grammar, which may mean nothing more than 
the order of words in the sentence, is similar in the 
two languages of which the hybrid is made up } 
What if a mixed dialect uses the vocabulary of one 
language put in the syntactical order of another "^ 
A classification according to grammar only would lead 
to paradoxical results: the pidgin English of the 
China ports and the Malay of the Singapore bazaar 
would have to be classed as Chinese dialects, although 
there are very few Chinese words in either of them. 

Viewed in this light, the problem of the origin of 
these languages does not, I venture to think, coincide 
precisely with the question of their proper present 
classification. 

The phonetic tendencies of the Semang race have 
exercised a modifying influence over the Mon-Annam 
elements which their dialects have absorbed, soften- 
ing their primitive consonantal hardness and moulding 
them into a more vocalic form,^ The Sakai dialects, 
on the other hand, and especially the purer members of 
that group, have better preserved the characteristic 
harshness of the Mon-Annam phonology ; in fact they 

1 A few instances of this have been found in the Comparative Vocabu- 
given on p. 390 supra ; others will be lary. 

462 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES part iv 

are sometimes more archaic than even the stereotyped 
forms of the Mon and Khmer written languages. 

In the Jakun group, so far as can be judged from 
the fragmentary evidence available, the Mon-Annam 
element is present in a much smaller percentage than 
in Sakai or even Semang, and is of merely secondary 
importance. The Jakun dialects share it in some 
degree with the Sakai dialects with which they are 
intermixed,^ but there can be no doubt that it is not 
an essential part of their composition ; and except 
that the forms in which it appears are sometimes 
modified by the peculiarities of Jakun phonology, 
which has perhaps also affected the neighbouring 
Sakai subdivisions, it seems to require no special 
notice here. 

Unidentified Elements. 

It is certain that the Semang dialects were not 
originally members of the Mon-Annam family. They 
still embody a number of words, of a distinct type, 
which have not been, and I believe never will be, 
traced to a Mon-Annam or Malayan source. Among 
such words are many quite common ones, relating to 
matters of everyday life. The following list may 
serve as a specimen: — "bad," jcbeg \ "bag," 
chog, scneng; "bamboo," /ebek, gcnfin; "banana," 
kukemi\ "bear," telabas \ " beast," ^<5 ; "betel-leaf," 
bed; "big," boo; "bird," kCiwod; "blind," chu; 
"blood," nyap ; "body," ley; "brain," lekem ; 
"broad," men-ey ; "calf" (leg), langut ; "cloud," dl; 
"coconut," herpai; '' ddiy,'' kcto ; " dog," ^/', wok, od ; 
"earth," kelyid; "to eat," yd -gey; '' ^^%^' maka ; 

' It is this element which has been Sakai element occurring in the Jakun 
referred to on p. 406 ^iipra as the group. 

CHAP. Ill UNIDENTIFIED ELEMENTS 463 

" entrails," cjiied \ " female," yalu ; " fever," ke7tgkcini ; 
"fish," begjag \ '' ^y,'' j'clong ; "frog," kch?i; "full," 
ckuok; "girdle," tentdm\'' "good," boded \ "hand," 
chas\ "heart," kclanges \ "lizard (big)," patdaii; 
"long," beteg\ "middle," tahil\ "naked," jcligtin\ 
"neck," tdbog ; "old," bedok, kebcd \ "palm" (hand), 
kdr; "pig," ndpeg; " quiver," ^c'v;^ ; '' s(t&d,'' sa/y-siep ; 
"snake," jckob \ "spear," ad\ "squirrel," zvayd; 
" stone," kti/a ; " tooth," jangko , nyus ; " water," to7n, 
goyd\ '' y2im,'' tdkob. 

The chief point about these words is that their use, 
so far as is known at present, is confined to tribes of 
the Negrito type. These words are therefore pre- 
sumably remnants of the old original dialects of the 
Peninsular Negritos, such as they were before they 
became modified and transformed by foreign in- 
fluences.- A comparison of these specifically Semang 
words, with their equivalents in the dialects of the 
Andamanese Negritos, is naturally indicated by the 
circumstances of the case ; but so far as I have been 
able to make it, it has proved inconclusive, although 
in a few cases I have ventured in the Comparative 
Vocabulary to append the Andamanese equivalents, 
for what they are worth. Until, however, a much more 
extended series of comparisons reveals the existence 
of some phonetic laws connecting the Semang with 
the Andamanese words, their relationship must be 
considered as hypothetical. The structures and 
grammars of the languages at the present day are quite 
different, and can give us no help in this matter. 

There are many words also in Sakai which have 

1 This probably really means the ^ This was first pointed out liy 

fungus-string of which the girdle is Schmidt in Die Sprachen der Sakci 
made. uiid Semang, pp. 563, 583. 

464 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES 

not as yet been traced to any known source, and it 
may still be regarded as an arguable question whether 
the Sakai dialects were originally cognate to the 
Mon-Annam languages. Both groups must be more 
minutely examined than has been possible up to the 
present time before absolute certainty can be attained 
as to their origfinal relations. But there does not 
appear to be in Sakai, as there certainly is in Semang, 
a substantial list of common words in everyday use 
which would betray an alien origin,' and, on the 
whole, the evidence at present rather tends to the 
conclusion that the Sakai dialects were from the first 
related to the Mon-Annam languages in the same 
way as is apparently the case with Nicobarese, Khasi, 
and the Palaung, Riang, and Wa dialects. So far as 
I know, there is nothing in their grammar or structure 
which would negative this conclusion. 

The Jakun group, after deducting the words which 
can be accounted for as Malayan or Mon-Annam, 
leaves us a considerable residue, the origin of which I 
am unable to explain. Some of these have been 
mentioned already,- but it may be convenient to give 
a few specimens here. The following are typical of 
Kenaboi, which contains the largest percentage of 
unidentified forms : — " bird," sabu ; " black," saya ; 
"breast," rapang \ "cloud," lingsd \ "crocodile," 
toko/ \ "dog," kctok \ "fish," rayap\ "forehead," 
c/idid ; "head," tahal \ "moon," /iiita; "pig," scroi; 
'' root,'' j'cldr \ "tooth," chh'dh. The following are 

' If SaUai was originally descciuled therefore, in Sakai of .v-v/i' words which 

from the same mother-tongue as the cannot be found in the Mon-Annam 

.M(;n-Annam languages, it might never- languages does not cause any difficulty, 

iheless possess words which the others in view of the large percentage (in Scnoi 

had lost or which it had evolved since ±35 per cent) of important words in 

the remote date of its separation from everyday use which it shares with them. 

the common source. The presence, - .See pp. 386, 404, 407-409 sup)a. 

CHAP. Ill UNIDENTIFIED ELEMENTS 465 

found in various Jakun dialects, and some of them 
appear even in the neighbouring members of the 
Sakai group : — " ant," 77ieret ; " brother " (elder), 
gcc ; " dog," amun ; " eyebrow," Idlis ; " face," re77zdn ; 
" grandmother, "^<?;2<?z: ; " house," chcrong, jckot ; " pig," 
risim; "porcupine," puntu; "rhinoceros," rescki \ 
" sister " (elder), ^^?7 ; " snake, "/.f/i^/*? ; " tiger," 7;2^<^, 
kohon, mengkolom ; " tired," kdbo. 

More words of this kind will be found in the 
Comparative Vocabulary. A few of the words of 
unknown origin in the Jakun group are also found in 
Semang, but are not recorded in Sakai : ^ these words 
may perhaps be relics of dialects formerly spoken by 
Negritos of the south of the Peninsula and now 
absorbed into the Jakun group, but they are hardly 
numerous enough to support the view that the Jakun 
dialects were originally allied to Semang, 

The origin of the Jakun group is therefore still in 
doubt. Very little is known as to its structure and 
grammatical system, but apparently the latter, at least 
in those dialects which contain a strong Malayan 
element, is of the Malayan type. It would seem that 
the Jakun group, if it is a unity at all, was originally 
of alien origin, but has been for centuries under the 
influence of Malayan dialects, with which it has been 
mixed up, so that it may now be said to be mainly 
Malayan in character and in process of becoming 
entirely so. In their present state, the Jakun 
dialects (with the exception of Kenaboi) may 
fairly be classed as mixed Malayan dialects : in fact, 
some of them have become mere subdialects of 
Malay. 

' See, for instance, in the Comparative M 135, M 151, P 76, P i56,andS 37S, 
Vocabulary paragraphs C 267, L 119, and compare B 215 with B 217. 

VOL. II 2 H 

466 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES 

Language and Race. 

I shall not undertake to correlate the complex 
facts of language here briefly sketched out with the 
physical relationships which connect the wild tribes of 
the Peninsula with the various races of South-eastern 
Asia. It seems to me somewhat premature to do so 
until these races have been more thoroughly in- 
vestigated and more accurately described. But it 
must not be forgotten that in this region there 
are several originally distinct racial strata : first a 
stronger and dominant race, which though varying 
materially in different localities, has the common 
characteristic of being more or less Mongoloid in 
type, and, underlying it, fragments of two other races, 
which were both probably seated in this region earlier 
than the race of Mongoloid type. One of these older 
races seems to correspond with the Sakai type. The 
Mon-Annam languages are spoken to a great extent 
by communities of Mongoloid type, but also by wilder 
non- Mongoloid tribes, and it is still a question to 
which racial type this class of language originally 
belonged. It is somewhat significant that at the two 
ends of the great Mon-Annam-Munda-Khasi-Nico- 
barese alliance, viz. in the pure Sakai and the Munda 
region, the races should be of somewhat similar 
Dravidian or quasi-Dravidian, non-Mongoloid, type. 
It may be that the intervening populations have been 
modified by an intrusive Mongoloid strain, while 
nevertheless retaining their original language : that 
at present seems to be a tenable hypothesis.^ The 

^ This would appear to be Schmidt's lions of Mon-Annam speech are, in spite 

view ; see Din Sprachni dcr Sakel ttiid of slight specific peculiarities, substanti- 

Sema))i;, p. 581, but he does not pointout ally Mongoloid in type. This constitutes- 

the fact that the great bulkof the popula- the main difficulty of the problem. 

CHAP. Ill LANGUAGE AND RACE 467 

Other submerged race above referred to is the Semang- 
or Negrito type, which is much more restricted in 
area than the quasi-Dravidian one. It is still doubtful 
whether the Negrito type can really be traced else- 
where in South-eastern Asia than in the Peninsula 
and the Philippine and Andaman islands, and it seems. 
to have had very little influence in building up the 
races of this part of the world. 

Then there is the further complication that the 
Mongoloid race speaks languages, of various different 
families of speech, which have not yet been satis- 
factorily grouped under one head ; while on the other 
hand the Malayo-Polynesian language-family (like the 
Mon-Annam) coincides with no racial group, but 
includes several diverse types, Mongoloid and non- 
Mongoloid. In short, the question of the relation 
between race and language in South-eastern Asia is 
an extremely complex problem, and all these matters 
still call for much more extended and detailed in- 
vestigation before a really certain conclusion as to 
the early history of these races can be arrived at. 

Language and History. 

It would seem that fragments of these various 
races, probably in small numbers and in a very 
primitive stage of development, independently found 
their way into the Peninsula at various remote epochs. 
It may reasonably be supposed that the Sakai brought 
with them the habit of cultivating patches of ground 
roughly cleared on the hillsides, and so tended mainly 
to occupy the hilly country of the interior, while the 
more savage Semang hunted in the lower levels, and 
the Jakun tribes (or such of them, at least, as spoke 
Malayan dialects) settled along the coast-line. 

468 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES part iv 

At some period after the Mon- Khmer populations 
of Southern Indo- China had become more or less 
civilised through the medium of immigrants from 
India, the central portion of them, inhabiting the 
Menam valley, seems to have extended its influence 
to the southward and to have founded settlements in 
various parts of the Peninsula. This occupation, of 
which there is no distinct historical record,^ is evidenced 
by the local tradition which assigns such a great part 
in the past history of the Peninsula to the Siamese. 
Ancient mines and other workings, remains of forts 
and the like, are generally styled Siamese by the 
Malays ; in fact, " Siam," in the local popular topo- 
graphy, plays the part which in England is shared 
between Caesar and the devil : it serves to explain 
any ancient and striking landmark the real origin of 
which is unknown. As, however, there is not a trace 
of anything really Siamese, i.e. Tai, in the dialects of 
the aboriginal tribes or elsewhere in the Peninsula,' 
and as the Siamese are relatively modern intruders in 
Southern Indo-China, it seems reasonable to suppose 
that these traditions refer to the Mon- Khmer race 

1 It appears from Siamese sources sula from lat. 7° (or thereabouts) south- 
that the Mon race had occupied Ligor wards, that being the region within 
(lat. 8° 24', long. 99° 58') before the which the specimens of aboriginal 
Siamese arrived there : see Low in dialects were collected. North of that 
J. I. A. vol. V. pp. 518-521 ; Bastian, region there has been a, more or less 
Geschichte der Indo-Chincsen, p. 197. mixed, Siamese population for ses-eral 
Further south than this they have centuries ; south of that latitude there 
not been positively traced : Sanskrit was, until quite modern times, no real 
Buddhist inscriptions in alphabets of Siamese penetration or occupation, 
South Indian origin have been found in but merely a traditional and persistent 
Kedah, but it has not been shown that claim to suzerainty over some of the 
tliese were the work of Mon settlers. Northern Malay States. It is only 
The archaeological collections in the during the last hundred years or so 
museums of the Peninsula have never that this purely external suzerainty has 
yet been properly studied, and it is been transformed in some cases into 
possible that they might throw some actual effective occupation, accom- 
new light on these matters. panied in a few districts by the 
^ To avoid misunderstandings, I settlement of a .Siamese-speaking 
must add that this refers to the Penin- population. 

CHAP. Ill HISTORICAL INFERENCES 469 

which inhabited Siam before the Tai came down from 
the north of Indo-China. 

The hypothesis of such a Mon-Khmer occupation 
of the Peninsula is strongly supported by the linguistic 
evidence. If the above attempt to unravel the 
tangled skein of language has proceeded on the 
right lines, it seems clear that the numeral system 
which I have termed Type IV. was introduced into 
the Peninsula by a Mon-Khmer race from the region 
of the Menam valley at a period which cannot have 
been very remote, inasmuch as these numerals have 
hardly diverged at all from the type still current in 
the adjacent parts of Indo-China. The precise date 
cannot be determined, but possibly the Mon-Khmer 
occupation, which may have lasted for hundreds of 
years, began about the fifth century a.d., or even 
earlier. It may have come to an end nearly a 
thousand years ago.^ Since the last seven or eight 
centuries (for here again the precise dates cannot be 
given) the Malays from Sumatra have colonised and 
occupied the Peninsula, and except in the dialects of 
the wild tribes and in the popular traditions already 
referred to there is little trace left of its former 
intimate connection with Indo-China." 

1 The Tai conquest of the Menam Khmer source. If these words have 

valley (as to the precise date of which come direct into this jargon from a 

I have no certain information), and the Mon-Khmer language, this is evidence 

subsequent extension of the Tai race that the Malays of these northern 

to the southward finally cut off the States have been in contact with Mon- 

Peninsula from the Mon and Khmer K'lmer-speaking individuals who had 

regions. acquired the art of taming elephants 

^ There appear to be a few words and imparted it to the Malays. The 

of Mon-Khmer origin in the Malay latter do not appear to have learnt this 

dialect of Kedah, but the matter awaits craft in Sumatra, nor is it nowadays 

further investigation. In the jargon practised in the south of the Peninsula, 

used by the elephant drivers of Kedah This Malay elephant jargon, however, 

and Perak in speaking to their mounts also contains some undoubtedly Siamese 

there are a few words which are al- words and may have come through a 

most certainly derived from a Mon- Siamese channel. 

470 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES part iv 

Language and Ctdture. 

While the heterogeneous composition of the 
languages of the Peninsula is evidence of the fact 
that the tribes which speak them, besides being of 
several different races, have been subjected to various 
alien influences, the number and diversity of the 
dialects into which the several languages fall is also 
eloquent of much. One sees at once that the 
Peninsula has not, in any period within our ken, been 
the seat of a great unifying civilisation, and that its 
aboriginal inhabitants have lagged behind in the 
progressive movement which has affected South- 
eastern Asia generally. 

Here, as elsewhere, we seem to see the different 
stages of social evolution mirrored in the phenomena 
of language. First comes a stage of merely nomadic 
hunting and fruit-gathering, during which it would 
appear that there is comparatively little tendency to 
development or differentiation of speech among the 
•several fragments of a roaming race. Then the 
gradual beginnings of agriculture bring with them 
somewhat less temporary modes of habitation, and 
restrict the wanderings of the clan or tribe within the 
narrower area of a few miles around the huts it now 
more regularly occupies. Its small patches of culti- 
vated ground shift, it is true, from season to season, 
but only within a strictly limited range. This 
necessarily results in local differentiation of dialect 
and consequent difficulty of intercourse with other 
clans or tribes. Next, in the normal course, should 
come the practice of cultivating permanently occupied 
areas, partly planted with fruit trees, partly irrigated 
and periodically sown and planted with rice. This, in 

CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 471 

South-eastern Asia, is the most momentous step in 
advance ; accompanied, or soon followed, by the 
domestication of the buffalo and ox, it allows of a 
great increase and concentration of population in 
certain favoured localities, and thus tribes begin to 
differ in numbers, wealth, and power, according to 
local circumstances. Next come intertribal wars, 
ending generally in the predominance of the most 
numerous and powerful tribe over its neighbours, and 
the imposition of its language on the other tribes 
within a considerable area, thus welding the whole 
into a new unity and laying the foundations of a truly 
national existence. 

But by the aborigines of the Peninsula this stage 
has never been attained : they never took the great 
stride from shifting cultivation to the permanent 
occupation of land, and while they have remained a 
tangle of more or less savage clans, the coasts and 
river-valleys of their native land have been colonised 
by immigrant aliens, who in their own island home 
had already passed this stage and gained the possession 
of a common language and some of the other elements 
which go to the making of a nation. Thus the 
aborigines of the Peninsula find themselves to-day 
in the position of scattered fragments dependent on 
a stronger and far more numerous race, in a distinctly 
higher state of culture. It requires no great stretch 
of imagination to foresee clearly enough that the 
only unity of speech they can ever attain will consist 
in the loss of their own and the adoption of a foreign 
tongue, while their other special characteristics will 
also soon disappear. 

Many of the districts in which aborigines were 
formerly to be found have, even in modern times. 

472 RELATION TO OTHER LANGUAGES part iv 

been deserted by them in their flight from their more 
civilised neighbours. In other districts they have 
been absorbed into the Malay population, which in 
several of the States of the Peninsula has a strong 
strain of aboriginal blood. This process has been 
going on for many generations, and will soon be 
complete. The tribes that have maintained their 
separate existence down to the present time are 
evidently mere remnants, which happen by favour of 
local circumstances to have escaped extinction or 
absorption : and even these few survivals of a past 
stage of human development will in no long time 
become absorbed by their somewhat more advanced 
neighbours. 

APPENDIX. 

APPENDIX. 

PART III.— RELIGION. 

Page 10. 

In Z.f. E. xxviii. 189-196, \'aughan-Stevens (ed. liartels) describes some of the 
birth -customs of the Sakai (whom he calls Blandas). Incantations (wrongly 
called " Powang " ^ by Vaughan-Stevens) are spoken over the sufferer, who is also 
given as potion an infusion of "three plants called ' merian ' (' mirian ')." - There 
is nothing very special to note in the methods of manipulation, which are, how- 
ever, very fully described. 

"Delivery is, as a rule, very easy, and the death of the mother in child-birth 
extremely rare, although still-born children are not uncommon." 

" In the case of protracted delivery, which is generally rare, a second charm 
is spoken over the sufferer and her body rubbed with the fat of the big python, 
a small portion of whose fat is also given her to swallow. " 

" Haemorrhage and ruptured blood-vessels seldom occur, but where they do, 
nature alone must decide the result, since the Sakai know nothing of the art of 
the physician." 

For a similar account of the manipulation employed by the Orang Laut, see 
Z.f. E. xxviii. 196. 

Sakai Love-charms. Page 67. 

Vaughan-Stevens (ed. Bartels) describes the use of a particular plant by any 
Sakai man who wishes to make his wife indifferent to himself in order to further 
his own intrigue with some other woman.-' This plant, which is laid under the 
sleeping-mat, is said by Ridley (who informs me that Vaughan-Stevens himself 
gave him a specimen of it) to be Lasianthiis. 

Sakai women are said to make use of cotton from a silk-cotton tree to secure 
their husband's fidelity. ■* 

Page 287. 

The Creation Myths of the Tembeh (Orang Temia). 

From the manuscripts of Hrolf Vaughan-Stevens, translated into German by 
H. W. Williams. 

The author writes that in vol. Ixix. Nos. 8 and 9 of Globus, this story of the 
creation has already been mentioned, in part reproduced, and that on account of 
its special interest he now gives a translation of the whole of the original. His 
version runs as follows : — 

1 " Pawang," spelt "powang" by the charms by which he works. 

Vaughan-Stevens, signifies a magician - For "merian" see note to p. 10 

or "charmer" (the old-time "con- of text, 

jurer" of west-country folklore), not ^ z.f.E. xxviii. 184. ^ Ibid. 

475 

476 APPENDIX 

" Before the sun was created the earth was like a board ' lying on the ground, 
beneath which swarmed centipedes, scorpions, and ants, in a putrescent mass. 
These creatures are similar to the demons which then lived in darkness. In a 
hole under the board lived Naing, while Sammor had his dwelling high up above 
the board. 

" Sammor often came down on (to the board) to take a stroll. This displeased 
Naing, who ordered the demons to sting and bite the feet of Sammor (as ants do 
now when we tread on them). 

"One day Sammor got very angry and lifted the board up to seize Naing. 
Then they both fought and tried to kill each other. Sammor got the mastery. 
Naing ran away, crawled down into his hole and hid himself. Since Sammor 
knew that Naing could not bear the light, he determined to keep him in the 
hole. During the fight both of them had torn great pieces out of the earth, in 
order to throw them at each other (hence originated the hills and mountains 
which we now see upon the earth). Sammor also sought the largest rocks which 
were to be found, and heaped them on the hole, in order to prevent Naing from 
coming out. Then Sammor went to his own dwelling-place, and took some 
fire out of it, and when he had rolled it into a ball with his hands, he returned 
to the scene of the strife. He threw the board up high into the air and ordered 
it to stay there, and he commissioned the fire-ball (i.e. the sun) to guard the 
mountain-covered hole, so that Naing might never come out again. That is why 
the sun always goes round the mountain, watching it from all sides. Although 
Naing has often tried to push away the mountain from the mouth of the hole, he 
is always obliged to let it fall again as soon as he has raised it slightly, because of 
his inability to bear the light. 

" Now the sun discovered that Naing was doing this on that side of the 
mountain where she herself was not. But Sammor had gone back to his 
dwelling-place, and since the sun could not forsake her duty to obtain advice 
from Sammor, she kindled a fire at the place where Naing was making his 
attempts to escape. She then continued on her way. 

" Every time, as soon as the sun has passed by, Naing stretches his arm out 
of the cavern and attempts to smother the fire with earth. When the moon, 
in the course of its motion, appears before the hole, Naing throws at it a 
handful of earth, until he has at length quite extinguished it, and the sun has 
then to kindle it once more. 

"The stars are the hot embers which are scattered about by the fire every 
time Naing throws a handful of earth at it. These embers are driven towards 
the board, where they remain burning. The sparks thrown out from the embers 
are shooting stars. Naing has often been seen in the act of drawing out a fire- 
brand from the moon. 

"Thus has it always happened ever since. When Sammor hurled the board 
up into the air, it took the form of the heavens above us, and what we see is its 
lower side. 

" On the upper side of this board is the place (heaven) to which the good souls 
pass, but no one knows what sort of place it is, or what the souls do there. We 
only know that there is neither marriage, nor birth, nor death, nor change of any 
kind. Every one has there whatever he wishes. 

" The place of Sammor lies far above this upper surface of the world. 

"Naing, being unable to come out of his hole, dug a great cavern in the 
ground for himself and his demons. During the battle between Sammor and 

* This comparison of the earth to a " talam "), which is described in Malay 
hoard or plank, which afterwards is folklore (z'. il/rz/rtj' .l/rti,'7V, p. 3) as being 
apparently transferred to the sky, looks representative of the original dimensions 
to me somewhat like a confused rccol- of the earth when first created, accord- 
lection of the so-called "tray" (Mai. ing to the account of Malay magicians. 

RELIGION 477 

Naing these demons had run away in a fright. Some ran down into the hole 
and had remained confined there with Naing. The greater number, however, 
hid themselves behind the hills thrown up by the two combatants.' They are 
thus separated from Naing, and still dwell in the same place that is iniiabited by 
men." 

(Here follows the story of the creation of man.) 

" When Naing found that he himself was prevented from coming out, through 
the strict watch maintained by the sun and moon, he tried to get the better of 
them by means of the demons which, at the covering of the hole, remained 
outside on account of the superincumbent mountain. This failed, however, 
because the demons were not strong enough. Naing, therefore, created a great 
number of demons (the Tembeh could not explain how this was done) which, 
however, succeeded no better in stopping the watchful course of the sun and the 
moon. 

" Naing then commanded the demons that dwelt outside, in a body, to heave 
away the mountain from his place of captivity, so that he might come out 
thence by night in order, if possible, to destroy the sun. All the demons then 
joined their forces, and with the help of the demons that dwelt underneath, and 
of Naing, they heaved the mountain slightly upwards and shook it. But when 
Sammor noticed the shaking of the mountain, he came back to see what was 
happening. When the demons saw him they immediately ran away and hid 
themselves in the rocks, trees, and rivers. Thence it happens that the woods 
are everywhere full of demons, and every tree, every rock, every river, has its 
own demon. The demons, however, escaped in a body from the mountain on 
which Sammor stood. In order to prevent the demons from repeating their 
attempt, Sammor determined to create men so that they might fight against the 
demons. He therefore took some sparks of the sun-fire (stars), which Naing 
had broken off from the moon by throwing earth at it, and out of them made 
seven men. He then, however, reflected that the fire would never die, so he 
removed the seven men thence, and afterwards made them into the seven guides 
or messengers who show the good souls the way to heaven. He then took seven 
leaves which grew close by, and from them made men, whom he commanded to 
dwell on the mountain, and to prevent the demons from moving it again. 
Naing, however, went on increasing the number of demons, until it became 
impossible for the seven men to fight with them all. At their request Sammor 
returned, removed them thence, and afterwards made them into the messengers 
who had to lead the wicked souls to hell (because the men made out of leaves 
died within a fixed period, like the leaves from which they had been created). 

"Then Sammor went back to his place and brought thence a man and a 
woman (no one knows of what material they were made), and placed them on 
the mountain to guard it. This pair had at one birth three sons and three 
daughters. When the children had grown up they were given names ; the eldest 
son took the name (and the emblem) of a leaf, the second that of a star, and the 
third that of an ant. Each one married a sister. 

"As the son who had taken the leaf-name was the eldest, he was chief over 
the others. From him are descended all the Tembeh Batins (chiefs) of the 
leaf-clan. 

"The second son, who had adopted the star emblem, was very clever in 
every way and became a magician. All the Tembeh magicians are of this totem. 

"The third son, who had taken the name of an ant, was the father of 
ordinary human beings. The ant-families have always been more numerous and 
more prolific than either of the others. 

" The families of the three sons and their wives increased with great rapidity, 

' These mountains separating man the Caucasus, the "Kaf" Mountains of 
and the demons from Naingare probably Malay legends. See Malay Magic, p. 2. 

478 APPENDIX 

so that, with the help of the incantations and magic given to the second son, by 
the sun, the moon, the stars, and by Sammor himself, the demons were driven 
back to their hiding-places." 

(Since the first man was placed by Sammor on the mountain, the Tembeh 
always prefer to live in the hills.) 

"When Naing discovered that men were guarding the mountain laid on him 
by Sammor, and that he himself could not get out, he tried to build himself a 
road up through some of the other mountains, which had been heaved up and 
torn from the flat earth in the great battle. These attempts have caused the 
huge caverns which are found in so many mountains. 

" Since there were not enough men to guard all these mountains, Sammor 
brought yet more and more men and women from his habitation and placed them 
in various localities. These men who appeared later differed somewhat in form 
and appearance from the first-created Tembeh, hence it comes that in the world 
there are various races of men. 

"The seven men created from leaves watched at first very carefully, but in 
the course of time they became weary of the constant watching and pacing up and 
down, and fell asleep. The demons soon discovered this, and slipped behind 
the trees, and hid in the brushwood, until they were again quite close to the 
mountain, when they began to push it away. When some of them had seen that 
the seven guardians were asleep, they divided themselves into seven companies 
in order to seize them and take them captive. The demons that found them- 
selves among the attacking forces disguised themselves under the shapes of 
animals and insects — each party having a special form. The forms were as 
follows : millipedes, snakes, ants, tigers, leeches, and mosquitoes.^ These 
fought with the seven men, and the noise of the battle and of the demons which 
were trying to overthrow the mountain brought Sammor once again on the scene 
of action. He drove the demons away, and condemned the seven guardians to 
serve as guides to the souls journeying towards Nenek - (Hell) in the darkness." 

Page 289- Details of the Cholera Charm of the Tembeh. 

On leaving their tree-huts, they both painted themselves and helped each other 
to paint themselves with their totem-' emblems (leaf, star, and ant) on stomach 
and forehead. Three magicians were then chosen, who painted each other's 
persons with white lines and devices, according to a prescribed pattern, behind 
a screen of leafy branches erected to conceal them. In this screen was a 
triangular opening formed by two converging uprights with seven rough 
horizontal bars fixed across them. Over these cross timbers were stretched the 
leafy branch of a plant resembling a palm and another resembling a caladium. 
The opening is supposed to represent the triangular figure intersected by 
horizontal cross-lines that the Tembeh are said to employ as a "message 
character" typifying "night" or "darkness," but which here typifies "death" 
and the darkness dear to spirits.* A screen that was erected on the eastern side 

^ There should I)e seven of these and so forth ; cp. vol. ii. p. 321 of 

parties, one corresponding to each of text. 
the leaf-men. — W.S. •' It need scarcely be repeated here, 

^ Or "Ni-nik." This is possibly since it has been insisted upon in the 

identical with the word that appears text, that there is no proof of real 

as the name of Hell or Purgatory in totemism among these tribes, 
the legends of other tribes, in various * For these message characters, v. 

forms, such as " Ngari," " Nyayek," vol. i. p. 414 of this book. 

RELIGION 479 

resembled that on the west, except that the opening on the east formed a 
truncated triangle, typifying "day" or "light," this figure being supposed to 
represent the sun rising behind the mountains. Behind the screen at the 
eastern end stood a post of about 4 metres high, stripped of its bark, and 
beyond this again a roughly built round roofless hut, quite 3 inches high, so that 
nobody could see in except by the door, in front of which hung a mat decorated 
with the leaf emblem plaited in red on a ground of yellow, the natural colour of 
the undyed strips — a device the use of which was confined to the magicians. In 
front of this door was a tire composed of three converging fire-logs.' The plot 
within which the people stood was then measured off by the magician, beginning 
at the north-east corner and proceeding westward. On its completion the 
magician proceeded to the round hut already described. After half an hour's 
wait he raised a fearful din in the hut by blowing into a bamboo of special 
construction.- At this sound the men, each with his jungle knife, hurried to a 
spot in the plot where some days before had been stuck a number of bamboos, 
which were now sticking in the ground as though they grew there. Every one 
now took one of these bamboos and fashioned a spear from it. Meanwhile the 
women up above had begun wailing "Ah-wah," "Ah-wah,"' as soon as the 
blowing of the bamboo in the magician's hut had ceased. On completing their 
spears the men leapt forth brandishing their weapons, and looking in every 
direction as though they expected the attack of some enemy. The concealed 
magician now blew three deep booming notes, when there suddenly appeared 
from behind the western leaf-screen the white-striped men who took the place of 
the seven magicians of the seventh class, that in former times represented the 
demons. Each of them bore a long piece of liana,'' bent in the middle and 
forming a lasso, the two loose ends being held together. With howls and yells 
the spear-bearers now turned round and took to running and proceeding first 
from west to east, parallel to the southern boundary of the plot, and then from 
south to north alongside the eastern boundary (along the line of the dotted 
arrow), finally entered the plot at the north-east corner and took up their 
positions in a row just within the plot's limits with their faces turned outward and 
their spears in wait for the attack of the while-striped "demons." These last 
ran in the same direction as that in which the boundary line had been drawn, all 
round this plot, and attempted at the same time to throw their liana lassos over 
the head of one of the men who were standing within the plot and using their 
spears to prevent the lassos from falling over their heads, and for that alone. 
Occasionally one of the three would let go one end of his liana so that it fell to 
the ground, and poked it to and fro over the boundary line in an attempt to touch 
therewith the legs of those who stood within. But as these latter leapt aside 
and deflected the pliant lianas with their spears, none of them were hit. This 
was a good omen, since any one so hit would soon after have been attacked by 
cholera. Silent themselves, but accompanied by the fearful yells of the men, 
shrill wails of the women, shrieks of the children, and barking of the dogs, the 
"demons" ran round and round the rectangular plot, until suddenly at the sound 
of the tooting of the magician who was in the hut the din ceased, except among 
the children and dogs. One of the three '-demons" had thrown himself on the 
ground, twitching and writhing as if he were in bodily pain. His two companions 
dropping their lianas, ran to the magician's hut, and as they entered the magician 
came forth. The dress of the latter consisted of a bark loin-cloth, together with 
bracelets, neckband, girdle, anklets, and knee-bands, plaited from strips of tree 

1 All fires as kindled by these tribes tuang," as to which vide note to vol. i. 
are commonly of converging fire- p. 472 ante. 

logs. •' By "liana'" no doubt some kind 

2 Probably a " tuntong "" or "tuang- of rattan {Calannts) is intended. 

48o APPENDIX 

fibre resembling grass. ^ The three burnt spots on his forehead were painted 
white, and on his breast the totem emblem in white clay. In one hand he bore 
a bamboo, presumably his staff, but this particular staff showed neither drawings 
nor patterns. He held the staff with the lower part uppermost ; in the hollow 
part, at its lower end smoked some fragrant tree-gum,- which, as I had not noticed 
it before, the magician no doubt must have kindled at the fire in front of his hut 
as he passed by. One of the three who had been left behind was evidently 
rehearsing a part for the first time, as he now quite simply asked the magician 
what more there was for him to do, and the magician had to pull him into the 
proper position with his hands. The magician slowly approached the man, who 
kept rocking himself to and fro as though he had the colic ; he bent over him, 
squatted down, and applied his ear to the man's stomach. Next he knocked the 
burning tree-gum out of the end of his staff, so that it fell within the limits of 
the plot. One of the men who happened to be there caught up a handful of 
earth, collected the burning tree-gum, pressed it quickly upon the earth, and 
then bore the whole round to his comrades, so that each should get a little of the 
smoke blown over him. Meanwhile the magician had been apparently attempt- 
ing to examine all over the inwards of the man lying on the ground for some- 
thing or other ; at last with one hand he applied the upper end of his staff to 
the mouth and nose of the man, and appeared by this means to bring pressure 
upon the thing in the man's inwards to come out at his mouth. When he at 
length had succeeded in this, he uttered a loud cry of joy, and at the same time 
the man who bore the earth and the tree-gum let this fall into the hollow part of 
the bamboo, right on to the cholera demon. The latter being induced to come 
out by reason of the challenge of the spears opposed to him, had, it seems, 
entered into the white-ringed belly of one of the assistant magicians, who then 
being unable, even with the aid of magic, to endure such an accretion, threw him- 
self on the ground and rolled to and fro, till the magician [of class] No. 2, who 
in consequence of this proceeding now knew where the demon was, caught the 
latter and enclosed him in the hollow at the upper end of the staff, where the 
" damar " kept him imprisoned. The magician then went in company with all the 
other men (who up to then had remained within the marked-out plot) to the 
magic hut, laid his staff within, and announced to all present that the demon 
would stay there a month, until he died of hunger and thirst. However, in 
anticipation of that desirable event, all persons able to walk would have to leave 
the encampment for that period, and in the meanwhile reside on the summit of a 
distant hill.'' 

^ Doubtless strips of the "palas" ^ Globus, vol. Ixix. (1896), pp. 

(or Z/cv/rt/rt) palm. - Mai. "damar." 137-141. 

PART IV.— LANGUAGE. 

MATERIALS AND SOURCES OF THE COMPARATIVE 
VOCABULARY. 

The materials on which the study of these dialects must be based are in some 
respects fairly copious, but they are heterogeneous, and the different portions of 
which they consist are of very unequal value. 

For the most part they are confined to vocabularies, some of a few words 
only, others of respectable length running into several hundred words ; in a few 
cases only are there any sentences, and these are for the most part vei-y short. 
Such as they are, these sentences (together with the songs and charms contained 
in the Appendix to vol. i. of this work) are the only means we have of arriving 
at the principles of syntax on which these dialects proceed. 

The vocabularies and lists of words which have been embodied in the 
Comparative Vocabulary represent the collections of many different investigators, 
of various nationalities, including English, French, Russian, German, and, in a 
few cases, Malay. Their modes of orthography differ very considerably in 
consequence, and it is only by checking them inter se that it is possible to arrive 
at a clear idea of the sounds intended to be represented, for in most cases the 
collectors have omitted to give any key to their systems of orthography, and in 
many they have evidently been somewhat inaccurate either in their observation 
or rendering of the sounds. Moreover, not unfrequently, they have evidently 
blundered by giving a wrong meaning to the words they have collected. It 
must be remembered that, with liardly a single exception, the collectors had no 
personal knowledge of the aboriginal dialects, but had to work through Malay, a 
language which was often imperfectly known both to themselves and the aborigines 
with whom they attempted to converse. Sometimes the European collector 
appears to have been practically ignorant even of Malay, and to have gone to 
work through one or more interpreters ; often, as in the case of A'aughan- 
Stevens, his knowledge of Malay is obviously very imperfect. Very seldom does 
it appear that a collector has even a fair knowledge of the aboriginal dialect on 
which he reports. Clifford is one of the rare exceptions to this state of things, 
and, though objections may be made to his rendering of certain sounds, his 
vocabulary of the Senoi dialect is probably a very close approximation to absolute 
accuracy. 

The material embodied in the Comparative Vocabulary resolves itself into 
two parts, viz. : (i) published matter, which has appeared in various books or 
periodicals ; and (2) collections in manuscript and as yet unpublished. By far 
the greater part of the Comparative Vocabulary is made up of hitherto un- 
published matter, partly collected by the authors themselves, and partly con- 
tributed by others, by whose courtesy the authors have been permitted to include 
it in their collection. 

The earliest of our sources for the study of the aboriginal dialects is a short 
list of words of the "Jakong" or "Jokang" (i.e. Jakun) language of Malacca 

VOL. II 481 2 I 

482 APPENDIX 

compiled by Sir Stamford Raffles, and published by him, together with other 
matter, as a sort of appendix to an article on " The Maritime Code of the Malays," 
in the Asiatick Researckes (i8l6), vol. xii. p. 109. It was reprinted in Marsden's 
Miscellaneous Works (1834), p. 87, and again, but apparently independently 
from the original MS., in the Malacca IFeekly Register in 1840. A reprint of 
the last-named version is given in No. 3 of \.h& Journal of tlie Straits Branch of 
the Royal Asiatic Society {1S79), pp. 6, 7. The versions differ slightly inter se. 
The list of words is of no particular importance except as confirming the 
existence of the Jakun dialect in Malacca territory at the beginning of the 
nineteenth century. About half the words (including all the numerals) are 
identical with INIalay. There are only about fifteen words that are not Malay. 

The next vocabulary to be mentioned is contained in John Crawfurd's 
History of the Indian Archipelago (1820), vol. ii. pp. 125-192 (which pages 
consist of a Comparative Vocabulary of some twenty languages or dialects, 
compiled from various sources). The Semang words in this collection are 
expressly stated to be a "specimen of the language of the Samang or woolly- 
haired race of the mountains of the Malay peninsula," collected for Crawfurd 
" by the minister of the prince of Queda " [i.e. Kedah), " a man of very superior 
mind,"' and corrected by Major Maclnnes, who, according to Crawfurd, was, " after 
Marsden, among Europeans, perhaps the best Malayan scholar existing."' They 
number about eighty-six, but a few of them are Malay loan words. In his 
dissertation to vol. i. of his Grammar and Dictionary of the Malay language 
(1852), pp. clxxi. clxxii., Crawfurd repeats about twenty of these words (with 
slight differences), but adds to them the numerals (all of which, however, except 
the first two, are merely Malay). On p. clxvi. of the same dissertation he also 
gives a short list of seventeen words, most of which are contained in his longer 
vocabulary. 

Crawfurd's main object in adducing these specimens appears to have been to 
support his pet theory that there was no such thing as a Malayan family of 
languages by showing that inter alia the Semang did not belong to it. But his 
list is a very good one for all that, and very accurate, as comparison with other 
sources, even the most recent, sufficiently shows ; and it does great credit to the 
Malay official who compiled it. But as it was almost certainly taken down in 
the first instance in the Arabic character, which is ill adapted to the representa- 
tion of the highly differentiated vowel system of these dialects, not much weight 
can be attached to its rendering of these sounds, and it must be controlled by 
the more recent records made by Skeat in the adjacent region. 

In the Journal of the Indian Archipelago (1848), vol. ii. p. 205. Crawfurd 
says that it was in 1811 that he got the list from the minister of the Raja of 
" Queda," and that it was a list of 176 words of the language of the Semang of 
Mount Jerai {i.e. Kedah Peak, a mountain visible from I'enang, which fixes 
definitely enough the locality of the tribe speaking this dialect). He goes on that 
to this list he added 21 words' from Marsden's Miscellaneous Works (1834), and 
of the total 197 he finds that 156 are native, 15 Malay, 2 Javanese, 23 common 
to these two languages, and i word Sanskrit. The numerals, he says, are all 
Malayan, which, however, is not the case with numbers "one" and "two" of 
the list given in his Grammar. It seems evident that this list has never been 
published as a whole, and the unpublished words are no doubt lost altogether. 

Adriano Balbi in his Atlas Ethnographique dn Globe (1826), Tab. xxxvii., 
No. 103, gives a dozen words avowedly derived from the list in Crawfurd's 
History of the Jtidian Archipelago. No account has been taken of these in the 
Comparative Vocabulary. 

' These are the "Juru vSemang " list '\r^\\vt History. The rest belong, 
words, of which, however, one is therefore to a different dialect from 
apparently taken from Crawfurd's own the KSdah dialect. 

LANGUAGE 483 

Klaproth in No. 12 of the Journal Asiatique (1833), pp. 241-243, gives a 

Semang vocabulary, which is for the most part a copy (with some omissions) 
from Crawfurd's longer list, but turned into the French spelling. That it is so 
copied is shown by the fact that he gives a Semang word inos as meaning 
"sans,"/.^. "without"; but in Crawfurd mos is given as meaning "without" 
in the sense opposite to " within," as the Malay hiar in the same column 
sufficiently shows. Moreover, for "gold" Klaproth gives as Semang a word 
volesman, which does not occur in Crawfurd as a Semang word, but under the 
form volermaner as a Malagasy word in the line immediately below where the 
SSmang entry would be if there were one. Obviously the copyist blundered. 
Probably it was not Klaproth himself, for he adduces the Malagasy word, in another 
spelling, as a form to be compared with his fictitious Semang volesman, which 
he could hardly perhaps have done with Crawfurd's Comparative Vocabulary 
before him to refer to. Anyhow, the indebtedness to Crawfurd is not ac- 
knowledged, and does not extend to the whole of Klaproth's words, some few 
of which (including some variant forms given in addition to those where the 
agreement with Crawfurd is close) are derived from some other, unknown, 
source. 

The short lists of Kedah Semang in John Anderson's Political and Corn- 
menial Considerations relative to the Malayan Peninsitla and the British Settle- 
ments in the Straits of Malacca (1824), Appendix, pp. xliv. -xlvii. ; William 
Marsden's Miscellaneous Works (1834), p. 113; Edmund Roberts' Embassy to 
the Eastern Coasts of Cochin-China, Siam, etc. (1837), pp. 413-415 ; and T. J. 
Newbold's Political atid Statistical Account of the British Settlements in the 
Straits of Malacca (1839), vol. ii. pp. 422-434, are confessedly drawn from the 
same source, viz. a vocabulary collected by Maclnnes, of the Semang dialect of 
Ian {i.e. Yan, a village at the foot of Kedah peak), and are substantially identical 
with Crawfurd's materials, or perhaps merely extracts from the "minister of 
Kedah's " original list. Anyhow, the evidence of these sources is not cumulative, 
and differences between them are probably due mainly to printers' errors and to 
some of these authors making slightly different selections from the original source. 
Roberts, however, professes merely to reprint Anderson's list ; and Marsden 
acknowledges his indebtedness to Anderson, but several words appear in his list 
which do not occur in Anderson's book. Of the whole set of sources Crawfurd is 
the fullest and best representative. Taken together, and compared with quite 
recent collections, these old lists tend to show that Semang, though the language 
of a very primitive savage tribe, has not during the last century undergone the 
rapid changes to which savage languages are commonly supposed to be subject. 

A list of ten Semang numerals published on p. 113 of Marsden's already 
mentioned work, and there attributed to James Scott, is embodied in the 
Comparative Vocabulary ; but the numerals are utterly unlike anything collected 
by other collectors, and the fact that they extend to "ten" is in itself suspicious. 
I attach little or no importance to them. 

The next set of sources goes back to Anderson's list (contained in his already 
mentioned work) of some ninety words of the Semang dialect of "Jooroo," 
inland of the Company's territory (as it was in 1824) of Province Wellesley, 
compiled by Mr. Maingay, the Resident of that territory. "Jooroo" is 
evidently the Juru river in Province Wellesley, which territory now extends 
further inland than it did in Anderson's time. No Semangs are to be found 
there or anywhere in Province Wellesley nowadays, and there were none even 
in Logan's time, fifty years ago, nearer than UIu Kerian. Marsden and Roberts 
have reprinted this list, like the previous one, with due acknowledgements to 
Anderson. Newbold has drawn from the same source with acknowledgments 
to Maingay, but omits some of the words that Anderson gives. Here again, 
therefore, there is but one original, and differences are due mainly to misprints. 
Perhaps Roberts and Newbold have corrected a few of the misprints in Anderson, 

484 APPENDIX 

but they have, on the other hand, made a few new ones on their own account, 
so that there is not much to choose between them. Comparison inter se and 
with other sources is generally sufficient to show which is in the right when 
they differ. 

All these versions have been included in the Comparative Vocabulary, but in 
estimating their value as evidence it must be remembered that each group is only 
one source, and that their weight is therefore not in any way increased by the 
number of the versions, which have only been reproduced by reason of the 
variations which occur in them. 

A letter written by the Rev. Father Pupier, dated Penang, the 2nd October 
1825, and printed in the Annahs de la Propagation de la Foi (1826), tom. ii. 
p. 303, contains a few Semang words and phrases also, apparently, from a 
district in or near Province Wellesley, but collected independently from the 
above materials and expressed in a French orthography. This source is of no 
great value, but has never been noticed hitherto, so I have thought it worth 
while to mention it. A diligent search in other missionary records may perhaps 
lead to the discovery of more such material. 

P. J. Begbie, in his rather rare book the Malayan Peninsula (1834), pp. 
14-18, gives a list of about 160 Semang words (including, of course, a few 
Malayan loan words) which was furnished him by an unnamed friend of his.^ It is 
not stated where the dialect was compiled, but it is undoubtedly a Semang 
dialect,- and from a source quite independent of those already mentioned, but 
related more nearly to the Juru than to the Ian (or Kedah) Semang. The 
spelling appears to be rather good, but the list has been badly printed, so that in 
ten cases vowels are left out and represented by turned letters, thus ". This, 
however, is not due to Begbie's own printer, for Begbie apologises for it on p. 
xvii. , at the end of the Errata, and explains that these blanks occurred in his 
original, which (having himself no knowledge of the aboriginal dialects) he was 
unable to correct. It appears, therefore, that Begbie's list is founded on a 
printed source, which I have been unable to trace. 

The same list appears to have been reprinted in the J\/alacca Observer, in an 
article on the missionary journey of the Rev. Jacob Tomlin, mentioned in J. S. 
Vater's Litteratur der Gramniatiken (2nd ed. , by B. Jiilg, 1847), p. 537, and a 
copy of this reprint is preserved in the Royal Library, Berlin. I have not had 
access to it, but from the words extracted from it in Griinwedel's Glossary and 
.Schmidt's work it is evident that it is identical with Begbie's list ; one or two 
minor differences are noted in the Comparative Vocabulary, but otherwise this 
so-called " Tomlin's Semang" is not embodied in it. 

The next list to be considered is Newbold's Vocabulary, headed " Orang 
Benua," printed in his already mentioned work. This is a long list of about 
450 forms (including some trifling variants) being the equivalents of about 250 
English words. In some cases there are as many as five synonyms, generally 
there are two or three. 

In point of fact this list is a heterogeneous agglomeration of at least three 
distinct dialects belonging to three quite different groups. 

As Schmidt points out, one element in it is Semang, of a type so closely 
allied to that of Begbie's list that it must be referred to the same or at least a 
neighbouring dialect ; but the spelling differs from Begbie's, and is somewhat 
less accurate, so that perhaps Schmidt is right in concluding that the two do 
not go back to the same written source. On the other hand, in a few cases 

^ Probably the Rev. C. Thomsen, a Aborigines, 

missionary and scholar, of Malacca and - In No. 27 of the Straits Asiatic 

Singapore, to whom Begbie in p. ix. of Jotirnal I wrongly expressed a doubt 

his Introduction makes his acknowledg- on this point. Probably the dialect 

ments for a paper treating of the was recorded in Southern Kedah. 

LANGUAGE 485 

(^.,^. B 80 in the Comparative Vocal)ulary) Newljold appears to have based his 
version on Begliie or Begbie's printed original, with its printer's errors, which 
he neglected : so that it would seem that, at any rate in some words, Newbold's 
list represents Begbie's unknown original with the spelhng recast into the 
common English style. 

Another element in Newbold's B^nua list is Besisi, and though Newbold's 
spelling (being mostly the old-fashioned English spelling) ditiers from that of the 
more recently collected specimens of Besisi, a comparison shows that this part of 
his list is fairly accurate and leaves no doubt as to its being really Besisi. It 
was probably collected by Newbold himself, for he mentions that he interviewed 
Bfisisi and Belandas ; the latter may perhaps be represented by the strong 
Malayan element in his list ; but this is cjuite uncertain. 

Another element in his list is Jakun, which was collected for him by the 
Munshi 'Abdullah bin 'Abdulkader at Gunong Panchor, near Alor Gajah, in 
Malacca territory, as related by 'Abdullah in his autobiography (pp. 381 -391 of 
the Singapore edition of 1887). 

'Abdullah's account of the matter is worth summarising, as it throws some 
light on the manner in which the words were collected, and goes some way 
towards explaining the fact that a good many of them are quite unintelligible and 
evidently wrong. The worthy Malay was not favourably impressed with his 
kinsmen of the jungle. Their squalor disgusted him, and their language in their 
conversation amongst themselves seemed to him "like the noise of squabbling 
birds," the general effect of it being graphically rendered by him by the 
cacophonous (and meaningless) words, " kakak - kakak kang king cha'ku. " 
" Such was the sound of it," says he, " and I don't know what they were talking 
about, for I didn't understand it." The Jakuns were very much afraid of their 
visitors (especially of Newbold, who was wearing a red coat, which he had to 
take off in order to set them at their ease), but by dint of gifts of tobacco and 
arsenic, and the persuasion of a tame Jakun boy who acted as guide and 
intermediary to the little expedition, their fears were got over. Then New'oold 
said to 'Abdullah, in English, " Go and sit with them here and write down their 
language, numerals, and customs, and I will go and have something to eat," 
and then Newbold and Mr. Westerhout (the local official who had accompanied 
them from Alor Gajah) went to their lunch, and the Jakuns appeared to be 
relieved at their departure, and began to talk and laugh more freely amongst 
themselves. 'Abdullah, who had brought a vocabulary or list of words written 
down ready for the occasion in a pocket-book, proceeded to examine the Jakuns 
as to their language, asking such questions as, "What do you say for 'earth' 
and ' sky ' ? " and they answered him accordingly. Some of the words they gave 
him were "much the same as the Malay words, some were much the same as 
Portuguese," which last astounding statement 'Abdullah supports, however, only 
by the word Dins for "God," whereon he proceeds to found a theory that the 
Jakuns were of Portuguese descent. 1 Then he got a good deal of information 
out of them as to their customs in such matters as marriage, birth, bringing up of 
children, religion, property, the ipoh poison, the names of the different aboriginal 
tribes, their dwellings, and their practice of magic and medicine. At 5 p.m. 
Newbold and Westerhout returned to 'Abdullah, who was still pursuing his 
inquiries, and as they were in a hurry to get back to Alor Gajah he bundled up 
his papers, pen, and ink, and they all left. 

It is evident that Newbold himself took no part in collecting the Jakun 
words, and was not even present when they were written down, and it seems 
probable that 'Abdullah noted them down in the Arabic character, which he 

' Favre has a similar theory {Jour. hood of Malacca a stray " Portuguese" 
Indian Arch. (1848), vol. ii. p. 243), and half-caste or two may have contributed 
it is just possible that in the neighbour- a new strain to the aboriginal stock. 

4^6 APPENDIX 

would naturally use as being the one most familiar to him, though he was 
acquainted with the Roman alphabet as well. If that is so, it may be readily 
imagined that when the words came to be transliterated into the Roman 
character, which may have happened some days or even weeks later, when 
'Abdullah had probal:)ly quite forgotten what they sounded like, mistakes were 
very likely to be made. The Arabic character is such that the presence or 
absence of a dot over a letter may make all the difference : and Malays in 
writing hurriedly frequently put one rather large extended dot to represent 
two dots over one letter, and habitually use one dot instead of three over the 
letter p (a modification of the Arabic _/). As a rule, they do not represent short 
vowels at all. In fact, the Arabic character lends itself to errors of all sorts 
more readily even than shorthand or the Morse code of telegraphic signs, which 
circumstance, I think, goes to explain the anomalies of the Jakun words in 
Newbold's list, a list that includes some quite extraordinary forms, the like of 
which are to be found nowhere else. 

Probably the strange forms beginning with tamar- and taml- represent the 
rough Jakun _r-, which 'Abdullah perhaps rendered by the Arabic letters ghain + 
ra and ghain + lam. In subsequently reading these off he could easily mistake 
them for /- m- r and /- »i- I respectively. 

The next set of sources are those contained in XhQjoiii'7mlof the Indian Archi- 
pelago, a periodical publication which was edited, very ably, by J. R. Logan 
between the years 1847 and 1862, and of which he himself was the mainstay. 

In vol. i. pp. 263-266, appears a list of the words of the "Camphor 
Language " of the Johor Jakuns, collected by Logan himself from tribes who 
except in the search for camphor used the Malay language exclusively. It is 
of interest as being the first recorded specimen of this ceremonial jargon. 

In vol. iv. is a short paper by Colonel James Low on the Sakais of Perak, 
containing, on p. 431, a few words and sentences which have this special 
interest, that they were the first specimens published of a Sakai dialect (except 
the Besisi words of Newbold's Benua list), and that they were till quite recent 
times the only specimen available of the Central or purer Sakai group. 

It appears from a statement in vol. v. p. 230, that Logan had at his disposal 
specimens of the dialects of the following tribes : Benua of Johor, Besisi, Mentera, 
South Sakai, Jakun, Udai, North Sakai, and two dialects of Semang. The last 
two are, from the evidence of the few words he gives, pretty certainly the Kedah 
and Juru dialects, and no doubt from the sources already mentioned, the South Sakai 
is doubtless J. Low's tribe, and the North Sakai is presumably cognate to the Sakai 
dialects of Plus and Kerbu, of which we possess more recent records, the Benua 
and Besisi, and perhaps also the Jakun and Mentera, represent in part Newbold's 
" Benua " list, in part probably other collections made in the same regions, viz. 
Johor and the neighbourhood of Malacca. The Udai dialect is altogether un- 
recorded by other collectors. From other parts of the Journal it appears that 
Logan also had access to a few words of some other dialects, e.g. Sabimba, 
Beduanda, etc. 

Unfortunately, instead of publishing his materials in a full comparative 
vocabulary or a series of separate lists, Logan as a rule merely gives individual 
words here and there throughout his numerous articles dealing with ethno- 
graphical and philological matters, and in short comparative vocabularies 
intermixed with other words of more or less similar meaning and form, drawn 
from all manner of distant and alien languages. The consequence is that it 
is impossible, without sifting practically every page of his voluminous dis- 
quisitions, to collect the specimens which are scattered in them, few and far 
between as they are. I have been at great pains to gather as many of them 
as I could recover, but the result was so incommensurate with the labour involved 
that I had to abandon the task, which I can recommend to some future student 
endowed with ampler leisure than myself. 

LANGUAGE 487 

Possibly some of Logan's manuscript collections may still be in existence, 
either in the possession of his descendants at Penang, or in the Logan Collec- 
tion in tlie Raffles Library at Singapore : if so, they would be worth publishing. 

The short vocabularies of the Malacca Mantra or MfintSra, collected by Borie 
and De Castelnau, call for no special remark. The first was first published in 
an account of the Mantra which appeared in the 'fijihchriji voor Indischc Taal- 
Land- en Volkenkiinde (1861), vol. x. pp. 413-443, and of which a revised 
version was printed in vol. i. of the second series of Miscellaneous Papers 
rela/hi^ io Indo-Cliina and the Indian Archipelago {1887), pp. 303, 304. I 
have preferred the revised version, but added the words contained in the earlier 
version, where the two differed. De Castelnau's vocabulary appeared in the 
Revue de Philologie et d' Ethnographic (1876), vol. ii. pp. 142, 143. The ortho- 
graphy of both Borie and De Castelnau is somewhat influenced by the French 
nationality of the two collectors. 

Somewhere about this period, I think, must be placed the two Semang 
vocabularies contained in MS. No. 29 of the collection of Malay books bequeathed 
to the Royal Asiatic Society by the late Sir W. E. Maxwell. 

Some account of this manuscript was given by me in the Journal of that 
Society for July 1902, pp. 557-566, and a further note (mainly by S. H. Ray) 
on its contents (other than the two Semang vocabularies) will be found in the 
number for January 1903, pp. 167-179. The MS. is partly made up of paper 
bearing a water-mark dated 1850, and I conjecture that it was probably acquired 
by Maxwell in Perak soon after 1875. At any rate it is rather a curiosity, being 
written entirely in the Arabic character, apparently by one or more Malays,^ and 
it contains a comparative vocabulary of Malay, two Semang dialects, Madurese, 
the Tulehu dialect of Amboyna in the Moluccas, and the Makua language of 
South - Eastern Africa. I came across it in making a rough catalogue of the 
Maxwell bequest for the Royal Asiatic Society, and subsequently, by the courtesy 
of the Council, was enabled to keep it for a considerable time with a view to de- 
ciphering and copying the two Semang lists for the purposes of the present work. 

These Semang lists are mostly in pencil and rather badly written, but are 
fairly long vocabularies ; they contain a great many repetitions, Malay loan words, 
and, probably, blunders. Nevertheless they are decidedly a valuable addition 
to the material in hand, and are of special interest, as one of them, a " low 
country " dialect of the " Semang Paya " of Ulu Kerian agrees on the whole very 
well with the type of Begbie's Semang and Juru Semang (a type of which no more 
recent specimen exists, and which is now probably extinct), while the other, a hill 
dialect (" Semang liukit "), agrees with the ordinary run of Semang as represented 
by the dialects of Kedah, Jarum, etc. This second dialect has also a locality 
assigned to it : apparently the hill in qitestion is called Berambar or some such 
name, but I cannot identify it on the map. Presumably it is in Northern Perak 
or in Kedah. I do not think C. Berumban (lat. 4° 20') can be meant, for that 
is in the middle of the Sakai country, and not likely to have been occupied in 
recent times by a tribe speaking a Semang dialect. 

As these two lists are in the Arabic character and roughly (sometimes illegibly) 
written, the transliteration is occasionally doubtful, especially as regards the vowel 
sounds. I have therefore given a double transliteration, which is explained below, 
and will enable the reader, if necessary, to reconstruct the original script and form 
his own idea as to whether my rendering of it correctly represents the sound in- 
tended by the writer. 

Miklucho-Maclay, whose exploratory journeys in the Peninsula took place in 
1874 and 1875, deserves special mention as the first to give us a specimen of a 
Pangan dialect. 

^ It may have been compiled at have succeeded in communicating his 
the instigation of Logan, who seems to enthusiasm to others. 

488 APPENDIX 

From the map appended to his second paper in the Tijdschrift voor hidische 
Taal- Land- en Volkenlninde (1876), it is obvious that he never saw any Sakais, 
properly so called ; his first journey was confined to Johor and the Rumpin 
district of Pahang, where he saw mixed tribes speaking dialects in which a fair 
number of words of Southern Sakai still survived, but who from his description 
were in the main Jakun in physical type ; while in his second expedition he met 
with no aborigines on his way up the Pahang River till he got near the Kelantan 
border, where the Negrito element is already predominant. This explains his 
otherwise inexplicable identification of the Semang and Sakai as physical types : 
he had not seen the latter pure. 

Linguistically he is fairly accurate : his two Pangan dialects are fairly pure 
and relatively well rendered. His Ulu Kelantan dialect was probably gathered 
near the Aring River, his Ulu Patani one perhaps at J arum in Raman (since 
visited by Skeat), or else in Ligeh or Jalor : for, unfortunately, owing to his 
preconceived idea that these tribes are indefinitely nomadic, Miklucho-Maclay 
does not specify the localities where he gathered his dialects, though he does 
mark on his map the places where he met with aborigines. 

It is to his credit that he noticed the common (Indo-Chinese) element which 
runs through his Pangan and Johor vocabularies, but he wrongly attributed it to 
the strain of Negrito blood which is probably present in the mixed tribes of the 
South of the Peninsula. 

He has the further distinction of having collected the completest set of 
undoubtedly genuine non-Malay numerals found in any aboriginal dialect of the 
Peninsula: they extend to "seven" in his Ulu Endau dialect, and though the 
collector modestly queries the last three, there can be no question as to their 
substantial correctness. It is to be regretted that his vocabularies are all very 
short. They were in part reprinted in No. i (1878), pp. 41, 42, 44, of the 
Journal of the Straits Asiatic Society, but I have preferred the lists as given in the 
Tijdschrift, etc. (1876), vol. xxiii. pp. 306-308, 31 1, 312, as being fuller and also 
containing fewer misprints. Miklucho-Maclay was a Russian, but his orthography 
is German. 

Unfortunately the value of a good deal of the material contained in the 
Journal of the Straits Asiatic Society is impaired by misprints. This applies to 
the vocabularies in No. 5 and to Hervey's vocabulary of the Camphor Taboo 
Language in No. 3 (1879), pp. 113, 114 (but not so much to his lists of Jakun 
words in No. 8 (1881), pp. 99, 100, 112- 117, and of the Camphor Taboo 
Language in No. 9 (1882), pp. 167, 168). Hervey himself is extremely accurate 
in rendering the sounds of words, and he consistently employs the Romanised 
Malay orthograjihy. He is especially good on the Malayan element, which is 
such an important factor in the Southern dialects. Hervey's hitherto unpublished 
collections, which he has been kind enough to permit me to embody in the Com- 
parative Vocabulary, comprise no less than thirteen vocabularies, of varying length, 
of which three were collected from the Orang Laut of the Singapore island region, 
and the rest in the territory of Malacca and the adjoining parts of the Negri 
Sembilan (especially Rembau and Johol, and to the exclusion of Sungai Ujong 
and Jelebu, which for some years, from 1875 onwards, were administered 
separately from the rest of the Negri Sembilan, though now reunited to that 
little Confederation of States). I am also indebted to Hervey for a short list 
collected by the late A. M. Skinner from coast aborigines near Batu Pahat, Johor. 

The lists given in No. 5 of the Straits Asiatic Journal (1880) were collected 
by various persons at the instigation of the Society. They are unfortunately very 
incomplete, and the spelling is not consistent throughout. The Kenering (Perak) 
" Semang " (though stated to have been collected by D. D. Daly) is in a partially 
French orthography (possibly "sub-edited" in MS. by the Secretary), as appears 
by comparison with the neighbouring "Perak Semang" dialect. This last has 
neither collector's name nor locality assigned to it, but from internal evidence it 

LANGUAGE 489 

is a Sakai dialect (with Semang admixture) from Northern Perak, and a reference 
to the notes on pp. 153, 154 of No. 5 as compared with pp. 46-50 of No. 4 of 
XhQ Journal, makes it probable that it was collected by the late W. E. Maxwell 
at the Residency at Kuala Kangsar from aborigines who had come down from the 
neighbourhood of Kenderong in Ulu Perak in connection with the recovery of 
some of their children, who had been abducted by Malays. Maxwell observes, 
quite correctly, that in Upper Perak the Scmangs and Sakais of the plains appear 
to mix, both being distinct from the men of the mountains, who are described as 
fairer and better-looking than the others. The Semangs of Ijok ("Ijoh") are 
specifically described by F. A. (now Sir Frank) Swettenham (who collected words 
amongst them) as being Negritos, and a rough sketch of the head of one of them 
bears out the description. Linguistically, two of the six dialects, of which 
fragments are recorded in No. 5 of iht^ Journal, are SSmang (Ijok and Selama), 
one Central Sakai (Chendariang),' and the remainder Northern Sakai, the two 
from Ulu Perak showing special Semang admixture. The original MSS. of the 
two Semang vocabularies are extant, and were kindly put at my disposal by the 
Straits Asiatic Society. They have served to check the printed record. It is 
clear from the MS. that the Ulu Selama vocabulary (collected by R. D. Hewett) 
was "sub-edited" by Swettenham (then Secretary of the Society), who turned its 
old-fashioned English spelling into the modern " romanised " system. 

Here should be mentioned three hitherto unpublished vocabularies preserved 
in MS. in the library of the same Society, and dating from the same period, viz. 
about 1 878- 1 880. Like the above mentioned they are on forms issued by the 
Society about that time for the purpose of recording dialects. One of them, a 
vocabulary of the Sakai dialect of Blanja in Perak, collected by Swettenham, is 
imperfect, the last sheet having become detached and lost ; the other is of a 
Selangor dialect, locality unspecified, collected by Daly. As in those early days 
the State of Selangor was unexplored, and probably only the districts of Klang 
and Kuala Lumpor had been visited, the dialect in question probably belonged to 
one of these two districts, especially as it resembles Besisi pretty closely. The 
spelling, however, unlike that of the Blanja vocabulary, is the old English spelling 
and very erratic. A list of numerals is given, which except for the first three 
numbers, is quite unique and probably spurious. 

The third MS. contains a list of words of the Central Sakai dialect of the 
neighbourhood of the Sungkai and Slim rivers in Southern Perak. The name 
of the collector is not recorded, but the list is accurate and compares well with 
neighbouring dialects. 

As Brooke Low, Errington de la Croix, and Brau de Saint-Pol Lias all deal 
with the same region, which they visited about the same time, it will be con- 
venient to take them all together and to include also De Morgan, so far as he 
deals with the same dialect as the others. All these explorers collected 
vocabularies from Sakais of the Kerbu valley in Perak. De Morgan, who was 
last in point of time and who gives by far the longest list of words, jienetrated 
furthest into the interior of the district. Lias only met the Sakais on the out- 
skirts of this region, near Lasak in the Plus valley, below Kuala Kerbu, where 
they came, by arrangement, to meet him in February 18S1. He only gives about 
a dozen words, a few phrases, and a fragment of a Sakai song (printed in the 
Appendix to vol. i. of the present work) in his book, Fc'rak cl Ics Orangs-Sakiys 
(1883), pp. 270-273. 

Brooke Low's vocabulary was printed in the Appendix to Ling Roth's Natives 
oj Sarawak and British North Borneo (1896), vol. ii. pp. xlv. xlvi. as the dialect 
of a tribe in the Rejang district of Borneo. This mistake was detected by S. H. 
Ray, who pointed it out in i\fa7i (1902), No. 42. There were some errors in it 
as printed in Ling Roth's book, and it has now been revised with the original 

' Or Chanderiang. 

490 APPENDIX 

MS., kindly lent by Ling Roth for that purpose. Like .some of the preceding 
ones, this MS. is written in pencil on a form issued by the .Straits Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic .Society soon after its formation (about 1878), for the purpose of 
encouraging the collection of aboriginal dialects. The form contains spaces for 
115 words (including fifteen numerals), and Low supplied iio. He omitted, 
however, to indicate the locality and name of the tribe : hence the mistake, which 
was made, when, after his death, this vocabulary was found mixed up with his 
Borneo papers. 

Low and Errington de la Croix in January 1881 went together up the Plus and 
Kerbu rivers, and a comparison of their vocabularies shows conclusively that they 
represent the same dialect. De la Croix gathered his words independently, but 
apparently supplemented them by adding some of Low's, in which process he fell 
into a few errors. In Low's manner of writing the letter I the cross stroke is 
often separated from the rest of the letter, and consequently De la Croix took it 
for / followed by a vowel with the mark of length over it ; also Low's final g is 
like a J': this I take to be the origin of De la Croix's lanldy iox lantag, " tongue," 
and lap for tap, " egg." De Morgan (who visited these regions two or three 
years later) appears to have added some words collected by De la Croix to his 
own collection : for he also has lanldi, " tongue," but gives it in addition to the 
form Icntali. I know of no authority for lanldi or lanldy except these two 
collectors, and Low's rather roughly pencilled manuscript appears to be responsible 
for this mistake. 

De la Croix has a few words not given by Low, but omits about twenty words 
that are to be found in Low's list. His orthography is French. His vocabulary, 
and probably also Low's, was collected at Kampong Chabang, De Morgan's at 
Changkat Chano, both being places in the Kerbu valley. 

De Moi-gan's other two vocabularies are of the dialects of Sungai Raya, a 
valley to the south of Ulu Kinta and falling just within the Central Sakai group, 
and a Northern Sakai dialect which the collector calls Semang ("Soman"), 
collected apparently at Changkat Chebong ("Chobofi") in the Sungai Piah 
valley. This last is to the north of the Kerbu region and the Plus valley, but 
not very far distant, being on the left geographical bank of the Perak river, above 
Kuala Kenering (which is on the right bank of the same). According to De 
Morgan the habitat of the Semangs is bounded on the south by the Plus river, 
though a detached clan of a few families remains in the hills south-west of Kuala 
Kangsar : evidently these hills are G. Arang Para and G. Bubu. De Morgan's 
SSmang is not a true .Semang dialect, but must be classed amongst the Northern 
.Sakai, though the tribe is probably in the main of Negrito descent. 

He further enumerates the Perak Sakais, of whom he has heard, in the follow- 
ing order, viz. those of Sungai Kerbu, S. Kinta, S. Raya, S. Kampar, Bujang 
Malaka, S. Chanderiang, S. Batang Padang, and .S. Bidor. And remarks that 
the Kerbu tribe is much larger than the next two ; that the Kerbu and Kinta 
tribes speak the same language ; that the S. Raya and Kampar tribes also inhabit 
Mt. Bujang Malaka, and that a detached fragment of them exists in the 
mountains south-east of Ivuala Kangsar, between the Perak and Kinta rivers 
(these mountains are presumably Gunong Kledang and G. Ijau, between Blanja and 
Ipoh), while the S. Bidor tribes inhabit the upper valleys of the Batang Padang 
and Bidor rivers. Then, says he, come the tribes of Bernam and Selangor : but 
at this point, I fancy, he is getting beyond the range of his own immediate 
observations. 

De Morgan's spelling is based on the French system and is rather too 
elaborate. Unfortunately he does not carry it out with perfect consistency. 
P"urther, he has made some bad blunders in the rendering of some of his words, 
and his lists contain a large Malayan element. They are, however, very full, and 
he evidently took great trouble over them. His method of marking the 
accentuated syllable in the .Sakai words is of considerable value. His specimens 

LANGUAGE 491 

of Sakai prose, consisting of translations of a page of his diary, will be found in 
the Appendix to vol. i. of this work. They are, however, evidently word for 
word translations from the Malay version, and of no great value as evidences for 
Sakai syntax. 

De la Croix's vocabulary appeared in an article entitled " Les Sakaies de 
Perak " in the Keviie d^ Ethnof^raphie (1882), vol. i. pp. 317-341. De Morgan's 
vocabularies were first published in the Bulletin de la SocuHd normandi' de 
Geographic (1885), vol. vii. p. 434 seq.^ reprinted as Kxplo7-ation de la Presqu'tle 
Jllalaise, I.iuguistiqite (1886). Some further remarks of his on these dialects, 
with specimens of words and sentences, are given in L^Homiiie (1885), vol. ii. 
p. 578 seq. 

Hale's paper in ihe. Journal of the Anthropological Institute (1886), vol. xv. 
pp. 285-301, contains very few words. His vocabulary of the Ulu Kinta dialect 
was deposited in MS. in the library of the Anthropological Institute in London, 
but although a search has been made for it, it could not be found. 

Of Vaughan-Stevens' linguistic contributions I would merely say that in the 
aggregate they are fairly plentiful, but that this collector was no linguist, and his 
spelling is so bad that, except where he can be checked by other sources, the 
pronunciation of his words remains in much doubt. The meanings he assigned to 
them are also often wrong. But his editor Grlinwedel has rendered good service 
by being the first to make a comparative vocabulary of these dialects. Stevens' 
worst fault, from the linguistic point of view (next to his imperfect acquaintance 
with the local vernacular), is his habit of jumbling up information gathered among 
different tribes without stating precisely the localities to which each part of it 
applies. His linguistic contributions are mainly Semang, and will be found in 
the glossary and comparative vocabulary at the end of Part 2 of " Materialien 
zur Kenntniss der wilden Stamme auf der Halbinsel Malaka," in I'erciffent- 
lichungen aus dem Kbniglichen Museiuii fiir V'olkerkunde, Band iii. Heft 3-4, pp. 
145-190,1 

The next authority requiring special mention is Clifford, whose paper on the 
Sakai dialects in No. 24 of the Journal of the Straits Asiatic Society (1891), 
pp. 13-29, undoubtedly marks an epoch in the study of these dialects; first, 
because it gives us our first specimens of Pahang Sakai, and secondly, because 
Clifford was the first to point out the distinction between the Northern and 
Central Sakai groups. He also enters into a fairly full account of the charac- 
teristics of these dialects, giving sentences in illustration of their syntactical 
construction, and a good deal of other valuable information. 

The relatively few words contained in this paper have now been supplemented 
by eleven vocabularies in MS. (including one collected by the late E. A. Wise), 
which Clifford has been good enough to put at my disposal for the purposes of 
the present work. Most of these are dialects from Pahang, a few from Perak, 
Kelantan, and Trengganu. 

Clifford's orthography is carefully explained in the above-mentioned paper, 
and follows in the main the system of romanised Malay, modified, however, to 
suit the phonetic requirements of the Sakai dialects. In some of his earlier MS. 
collections, it is true, he has used the old English spelling for certain sounds, and 
these and other slight discrepancies have of course been noted where they occur. 
But taken as a whole, Clifford's material is of exceptional value, and I understand 
that he still has some MS. vocabularies in his possession, which (being packed up 
with other books and stored away) he was unable to lend for the purposes of this 
work. Among these is the short vocabulary of the Semang of Sadang referred to 
in the above-mentioned article. It is to be hoped that all these will in due course 
be published, as their loss would be regrettable. 

Lake and Kelsall's collection of Johor Jakun words in No. 26 of the Straits 

' The stray words in his other reports have not been collected. 

492 APPENDIX 

Asiatic Journal [i^c^Of), pp. 41-56, continues the work of Logan and Hervey in 
this part of tlie Peninsula, and includes a very full list of the Camphor Taboo 
Language, which amply illustrates the peculiarities of that curious jargon. 

I pass over the Malacca words contained in my paper in No. 27 of the same 
Joitrnal, and Skeat's very full Besisi vocabulary in No. 29 of the same, because 
these have all been revised and may be regarded as superseded by the Besisi, 
Mentera, and Jakun material now embodied in the Comparative V ocabulary. The 
same applies to Skeat's linguistic contributions contained in the Selaii;^or Journal 
(1897), vol. V. pp. 378-382. To these lists Skeat has added the te.xt and 
translations of a great number of the jungle songs of the Besisi not before printed, 
as well as some prose specimens, proverbs, and some grammatical notes {e.g. he 
first noticed the existence of prefixes in this dialect). 

The matter published in the Selangor Journal (1895), vol. iii. pp. 227, 228, 
244, 245, was collected by G. C. Bellamy and J. A. G. Campbell in 1886-87 i" 
pursuance of official instructions ; it is of some value, though the spelling is rather 
erratic. One of the vocabularies (that of the Orang Tanjong of the Ulu Langat 
district) is the only Central Sakai dialect recorded in Selangor, and probably marks 
the farthest southern extension of that subdivision of the Sakai family. 

In No. 33 of the Straits Asiatic Jouriial (1900), pp. 248-250, Ridley and 
Skeat give a few words used by the Singapore Orang Laut, who now speak 
Malay only, with a slight residuum of their older dialect occurring in it. 

Luering's paper on the dialect of the Ulu Kampar Sakais in No. 35 of the 
same _/??/;■««/ (190 1 ), pp. 91-104, in addition to other valuable information, con- 
tains a vocabulary which is much the best specimen in existence of the Central 
Sakai dialects of Perak, being both full and extremely accurate. It has since 
been supplemented by some valuable communications in MS. on the dialects of 
neighbouring tribes. 

In No. 38 of the samey(7;<;';/cz/(i902), pp. 31-33, Machado gives a vocabulary 
collected from the Jakuns of the interior of Batu Pahat, Johor. 

The long series of Semang and Pangan dialects collected by Skeat during the 
Cambridge expedition to the Northern States of the Peninsula in 1899 and 1900 
forms a large part of the hitherto unpublished material embodied in the present 
work. His linginstic work in the Negrito region includes sentences, proverbs, 
some grammatical notes, and a number of Semang songs, some of which latter he 
also recoi'ded on the phonograph, the first instance, I believe, of its employment 
in the collecting of aboriginal songs in the Peninsula. Skeat's work has been 
further supplemented, to a limited extent, by some short lists collected by N. 
Annandale and H. C. Robinson in their subsequent expedition. They have 
also furnished a few words of several Sakai dialects of Perak, and of an Orang 
Laut dialect of Trang. 

From R. Martin I have received two vocabularies in MS., a veiy short one of 
Ulu Sclama Semang (differing in some particulars from the one in No. 5 of the 
Straits Asiatic Journal, and in one or two words resembling the type of the Ulu 
K^rian Semang of the Maxwell MS.), and a somewhat longer one of Sakai 
collected at Ulu Gedang, in the mountains some two days' journey from Bidor in 
South Perak. These appear also in Martin's own work. 

The material collected by A. Grubauer and put at my disposal by W. Schmidt 
comprises a vocabulary of the Kcrbu dialect, useful for checking the other collectors 
in that district, one from the neighbourhood of Tapah, and another, collected on a 
subsequent visit to the Peninsula in 1902, near Kuala K(5nering. 

The spelling of Martin and Grubauer is Cierman and suffers from the racial 
incapacity to distinguish between voiced and unvoiced sounds, l)ut is otherwise 
good, and their material is fairly copious. 

To C. D. Bowen of Kuala Kubu I am indebted for a few words collected near 
Rasa in Ulu Selangor ; it is the only specimen on record of a dialect from the 
northern part of the State of Selangor, and as it differs entirely from the Southern 

LANGUAGE 493 

Perak dialects, further investigation in this region would seem to be well 
worth while. 

Last, but by no means least, a fine collection of words and phrases in four or 
five Sakai dialects of Pahang was forwarded to me by F. Emeric (then stationed 
at Kuala Lipis), when the Comparative Vocabulary was already set up in type (as 
indeed was also the case with Bowcn's words and Martin's vocabularies). As far 
as possible, this additional material has been embodied in the vocabulary, the 
value of which is much enhanced therel)y. 

To all the collectors whose materials I have used in this work I would here 
express my great oljligations. I know from personal experience something of the 
difficulties they must have encountered in making their records ; and while I find 
it necessary to maintain a critical attitude with regard to parts of their work, I 
deprecate anything like disparagement of it, for not only do I realise how many 
hardships and how much trouble it has involved, but I find, on a comparison of 
their collections, that the discrepancies between them are in the main due to real 
differences existing between the different aboriginal dialects, not to inaccuracies on 
the part of the collectors. I may add that the somewhat carping attitude which 
some of these explorers have thought fit to assume towards their predecessors and 
colleagues seems to me regrettable and unjustified. 

Perhaps it may not be without value to point out in what respects the materials 
here collected are deficient ; it may guide future collectors in making good the 
deficiencies. In the first place, there is a good deal of uncertainty as to the 
niceties of pronunciation of the aboriginal words, because collectors often omit to 
give a key to their orthography. If they would only say, e.g., «// = English " ow " 
in "cow," az = English "i" in "I,"' and so on, using the commonest English 
words as keywords, it would be far better than nothing at all. Secondly, there is 
often a doubt as to whether the meaning of the words is correctly given ; this is 
especially the case when the aboriginal dialect has been collected through the 
medium of Malay and some of the Malay words used have a double meaning. 
Thirdly, there is a lamentable lack of sentences, the necessary material for the 
study of the grammar of these dialects. 

AH the above remarks have a general application, but must of course be 
qualified as regards particular collectors. A reference to the Comparative 
Vocabulary will show how carefully some collectors have recorded their words. 

As regards the area covered by the vocabulary, some districts are very well 
represented, others scantily, some not at all. The State of Perak is most strongly 
represented, Pahang, Kedah, and Southern Selangor perhaps next, then Malacca 
and parts of the Negri Sembilan. As for the States (other than Kedah) under 
Siamese influence, the dialects collected there were to a great extent recorded by 
one man only, and no doubt much remains to be done. In Chaiya and Patalung, 
where Semangs are known to exist, no record of their dialects has ever been 
made. In Northern Selangor there is a great gap, and there are blanks over a 
great part of Pahang and half the Negri Sembilan. I doubt if much remains to 
be collected in Malacca or Johor, where the aboriginal dialects are on their 
last legs. 

But I would strongly urge every one, in any part of the Peninsula, who has 
the opportunity of collecting a few words of an aboriginal dialect, to do so at 
once, and to make a careful note of the locality and, if possible, the tribal name 
and physical characteristics of the aborigines speaking the dialect, and above all 
to get the facts he has recorded published without delay, however imperfect they 
may seem, taking care to distinguish with a query anything that seems doubtful. 
If this course had been uniformly followed during the last thirty years, we should 
know a vast deal more about these matters than we do at present, for there can 
be no doubt that much valuable material has been lost for ever by being left in 
manuscript, with the intention of getting it completed and published at some 
future date, which never arrived. 

494 APPENDIX 

NOTE ON THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE COMPARATIVE 
VOCABULARY. 

The system on which the vocabulary has been arranged is as follows : — An 
attempt has been made to classify the native words in accordance with their 
apparent relationships. ^ Each separate paragraph so formed has then been 
arranged under English key-words, which latter are printed in the thick type 
known as Clarendon. These key-words alone are in strict alphabetical order, 
and for the rest, where the alphabetical order has been departed from, cross- 
references are given by adding the letter and number of the paragraph to be 
referred to. The numbering begins again with each letter of the alphabet. In 
the arrangement of the paragraphs the dialects, as far as consistent with the 
above principles, run (as a rule) in the order Semang, Sakai, Jakun, ending 
with INIalayan and Malay forms. 

In view of the diversity of the materials drawn upon, it was necessary to 
indicate in the case of every word the source from which it was derived, and for 
this purpose the name of the source, in an abbreviated form, was put after every 
word. A list of these abbreviations is given below. 

When a phrase occurs (of which only one word of course is explained by the 
paragraph in which it is placed) a cross-reference, by letter and number, has 
been given to the place or places where the rest of the phrase is explained in all 
cases where this appeared to be necessary. 

With regard to the use of the vocabulary as an authority, while something 
has been said above as to the respective weight to be attached to the several 
sources, it need only be pointed out that words attested by one source only must 
for the present be regarded as doubtful, while those which are recorded by 
several distinct authorities can be received with a higher degree of confidence. 
By means of this criterion it will generally be possible to form a correct judgment 
as to whether a word can be considered as properly authenticated ; the bringing 
together of the work of many collectors tends to eliminate their individual 
idiosyncrasies, and the Comparative Vocabulary so formed is therefore of far 
greater value than each and all of the several sources from which it has been 
compiled. 

In its compilation the pre-existing Comparative Vocabularies of Griinwedel " 
and Schmidt^ have of course been of much assistance, but reference has always 
been made to the original authorities from which they drew. These authorities 
have been reproduced in their own original spelling,* but inasmuch as their 
systems of orthography differ considerably and no reader could be expected to 
remember them all, the standard orthography adopted in the linguistic part of the 
present work has been added wherever it differs substantially from that of the 

1 The arrangement is, of course, in Maldka (1894), pt. ii. pp. 145-190. 
many cases merely tentative and ■^ Sprachender SakeiiindSejnangauf 

necessarily, in the imperfect state of our Malacca undihr Verhdltuiszti den R'lon- 

knowledge of these dialects, provisional Khmer Spracheu (1901), pp. 415-488. 
only. In some instances paragraphs * The only exceptions are the 

have been recast while passing through following : for Logan's acute accent 

the press ; but to this proceeding there ('), by which he indicates length of 

are obvious limitations. No doubt in vowel, the sign of length (~) has been 

many cases future research will throw substituted. Emeric's 6 (explained as 

new light on the subject and amend the sound of "ought") has been 

the present classification. rendered by a, and (in final syllables 

? Materialien zu?- Keiintniss dcr only) his e (explained as the sound of 

Wildeii Sidmme anf der Halbinsel " her ") by ci'. 

LANGUAGE 495 

original source. In that case the standard spelling is put first, followed by the 
original in brackets. ' In cases of doubt a mark of interrogation is added. 

The Arabic characters of the Maxwell M.S. have been transcribed as follows 
(the true j^ronunciation being, as in the case of the other authorities, prefixed 
when necessary) : — d=fathah, a = alif, d = alif^fathah ; i = kesrah, i=ya, 1= 
ya + kesrah ; ii = dlaminah, ii = 7vait, 27 = waii + d/a/innah ; <? = a hooked vowel 
mark below the line, d=ya with this mark under it ; o = a .similar mark (turned 
hook upwards) above the line ; «. — «///" with this mark over it ; ^/=the 15th letter 
of the Arabic alphabet; h = ha (the 6th); k=kof (the 21st); r=ghain (the 
19th) ; ' = 'aiii (the i8th) ; ' = hainzah ; ch = elm ; g=ga ; iig=iiga ; n = i!ya 
(these last four letters appear in the Malay alphabet, but not in the Arabic). The 
other letters require no explanation, but it may be observed that dots are often 
omitted by the Malay who wrote down the words, so that ' appears for )tga, kaf 
for ga, 1}.a ox Jim for c/ia (and perhaps final wan for kof). 

Observations within square brackets are those of the compiler, while words 
enclosed in round brackets are part of the original ; but the scientific names of 
plants, etc., have been added by the compiler, mainly on the authority of 
Ridley's " List of Malay Plant Names." ^ 

The j\1alay words which in many cases are added to the English equivalents 
are retained for the sake of precision, as the aboriginal words were of course 
collected through the medium of Malay. Moreover, in the case of the two dialects 
of the Maxwell MS. and a great part of Clififord's and Emeric's contributions 
no English equivalents were given at all in the original MS. 

On the other hand, the Malay words which appear in square brackets at the 
end of some paragraphs have been added by the compiler, and, like the other 
foreign words in a similar position, are intended to suggest the etymology of the 
aboriginal words or are given as probable cognates. A list of the languages and 
dialects which have been referred to for this purjiose will be found below. 

EXPLANATION OF THE ABBREVIATED NAMES OF THE 
MATERIALS RELATING TO THE DIALECTS OF THE 
ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF THE PENINSULA EMBODIED IN 
THE COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY. 

Barok. — Orang Laut ("men of the sea") of Singkep, Lingga Archipelago (south 
of Singapore), c. 0° 40' S. x 140° 30'.'^ — Hervey MS. 

1 It is to be observed that Skeat dialects to be fixed approximately and 

frequently gives two spellings, putting to avoid error arising from the exist- 

the second, which is intended to ence, in some cases, of two places 

indicate the pronunciation more bearing the same name. Those marked 

precisely, in brackets preceded by the c. (for. circa) are for the most part 

abbreviation /r. (which means "pro- merely rough approximations, correct, 

nounced "). This system has been however, to within a few miles (per- 

preserved by the compiler, so that in haps 10 or 15 on an average) of the 

all such cases both spellings must be true position, and generally within the 

considered as original. range of the wanderings of the tribe ; 

- J. R. A. S., S.B. (1897), No. 30, those to which no c. is prefixed may be 

pp. 31-283. regarded as accurate to within less than 

^ The determinations of latitude and 5 miles ; a few have been queried as 

longitude, which have been taken from being of even more doubtful accuracy 

the Straits Asiatic Society's map of than the ones to which a (-. is pre- 

1898, are given in order to enable the fixed, 
geographical position of the various Except where the contrary appears, 

496 APPENDIX 

Bed. Chioiig. — Beduanda (or Biduanda) of the region of the Chiong, a stream in 
Johol (Negri Sembilan), c. 2" 40' ? X 102" 20'? — Hervey MS. 

Bedu. I. — Beduanda (probably of Malacca territory), c. 2" 20' ? ;■: 102" 20'? — 
Hervey MS. 

Bedu. II. — The like, another list of words. — Hervey MS. 

Bedu. III. — The like, another list. — Hervey MS. 

Belandas. — Belandas, a few words (from South Selangor), c. 2° 45' X 101° 40'. — • 
Skeat, Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society {\()00), 
No. 33, p. 248. 

Belend. Stev. — Belendas ( = Belandas), locality undefined (probably Negri Sem- 
bilan, between 3° 15' and 2°25'xioi" 40' and 102° 35'). — Vaughan- 
Stevens, Verbffentlichungen aiis dein Koniglichen Museum fiir Volkerkunde 
(1894) Band iii. Heft 3-4, pp. 145-190. 

Ben. New. — Orang Benua (but the list is a jumble of (i) Semang, from the 
north of the Peninsula, locality unknown but probably c. zf 20' ? x 100° 40', 
(2) Besisi, probably from Sungai Ujong, between 2° 50' and 2° 25' X lOl° 40' 
and 102° 2', (3) Jakun, probably from Bukit Panchor, Malacca, 2^ 22' x 
102° 18', and perhaps (4) Belandas, from the same neighbourhood as the 
Besisi. — Newbold, Political and Statistical Account of the British Settlements 
in the Straits of Malacca, etc. (1839), vol. ii. pp. 422-434. 

Ben. Stev. — Orang Benua (locality undefined). — Vaughan-Stevens, op. cit. (see 
Belend. Stev.). 

Bera. — Aborigines of the Bera river valley, South Pahang, between 3° 20' and 
2° 45' X 102° 32' and 102° 40', collected by E. A Wise. — Clifford MS. 

Bers. Stev. — Bersisi ( = Besisi), locality undefined, but certainly between 3° 15' 
and 2° 10' X 101° 15' and 102° 35' or thereabouts, and probably from South 
Selangor, Sungai Ujong or Negri Sembilan. — Vaughan-Stevens, op. cit, 
(see Belend. Stev.), and ibid. Band. ii. Heft 3-4, pp. vi. vii. 

Bes. A. I. — Besisi of Ayer Itam (or Hitam), Kuala Langat district, South 
Selangor, 2° 50' x 101° 22'. — Skeat MS. (partly published in y. Straits 
B. R. A. S. (1896), No. 29, pp. 13-31). 

Bes. Bell. — Besisi of Kuala Langat district, c. 2° 35' x 101° 30'. — Bellamy, 
Selangor Journal (1895), ^ol- "i- PP- 226, 227. 

Bes. Her. — Besisi, locality uncertain, but believed to have been collected near 
Jirat Gunjai on the northern border of Malacca territory, 2° 29' x 102° 10'. 
— Hervey MS. 

Bes. K, Z.— Besisi of Kuala Langat district (see Bes. Bell.) — -Skeat MS. 

Bes. K. lang. — Besisi of Kuala Langat district (see Bes. Bell.). — Skeat, 
Selangor Journal {iS<)'j), vol. v. pp. 378-382, 394, 395. 

Bes. Malac. — Besisi of Malacca territory, collected from aborigines in the 
mukims of Bukit SSnggeh, 2" 23' x 102° 25', and Sebatu, 2° 10' x 102° 27', 
the latter being recent emigrants from Sepang, Kuala Langat district. 
South Selangor, 2° 35' x 101° 40', the former originally from Sungai Ujong 
(see Z>V«. Nezv.) — Blagden MS. (partly published in _/. Straits B. R. A. S. 
(1894), No. 27, pp. 27-40). 

Bes. Sep. — Besisi of Sepang, Kuala Langat district (see Bes. Malac.) — Skeat 
MS. (partly published with Bes. A. J. ) 

Bes. .Sep. A. I. — Besisi words where Bes. Sep. and Bes. A. I. (which are barely 
variations of the common Besisi dialect) agree in the lists as collected. — 
Skeat MS. (partly published, see Bes. A. I.) 

Bes. Songs. — Bdsisi words extracted from the songs published in the Appendix to 

the latitudes are north of the equator ; gipsies, have a much more extensive 

and the longitudes are east of the range tlian the forest tribes, and in fact 

Greenwich meridian. some of them can hardly be said to 

Of course the Orang Laul, or Sea- have a local habitation at all. 

LANGUAGE 497 

vol. i. of the present work and not occurring in (or slightly differing from 

their equivalents in) Skeat's other lists (Kuala Langat district, s<te /I'ds. Bell.) 

— Skeat MS. 
Besisi coll. Nya. — Besisi words collected at Nyalas, Malacca territory, from 

aborigines in a MentSra settlement (see J\/a7itr. Malac. Nya.) — Hlagden MS. 
Blan. Rem. — Blanas ( = Belandas) of I\(5mbau, Negri Sembilaii, c. 2' 30' x 

102' 10'. — Ilervey MS. 
Blaiid. K. Za«^.— Blandas ( = Belnndas) of Kuala Langat district (see Bes. 

Bell.) — Skeat, Selangor Journal [\'!^()']), vol. v. pp. 393-395. 
Bilk. U. Lang. — Orang Bukit ("Hill men") of the Ulu Langat district. South 

Selangor, c. 3" 10' x lOl" 50'. — Campbell, Selangor Journal (1895), 

vol. iii. pp. 244, 245. 
Darat. — Sakai, known to local Malays as Orang Darat ("u]3-country men"); 

collected near "Jeram Star" and Tanjong Gahai, Ulu Jclai mukim, Ulu 

Pahang, c. 4° 18' x loi^ 37'? — Emeric MS. 
Galang. — Orang Laut of Galang island, near Riau, south of .Singapore, o' 45' x 

104" 15' (perhaps collected at Singapore). — Hervey MS. 
Jak. Ba. Pa. — Jakun of the interior of the Batu Pahat region, " at the head 

waters of the Sembrong, the Bekok, and the Simpang Kiri," |ohor, 

c. 2° 15' X 103° 5'-i03'" 20'? — Machado, /. Straits B. R. A. S. (1902), 

No. 38, pp. 31-33.^ 
fak. Lein. — Jakun of Kuala Lemakau, Endau river district, Johor, 2° 30' x 

103° 24'. — Lake and Kelsall, J. Straits B. R. A. S. (1894), No. 26, 

PP- 54-56. 
Jak. Mad. — Jakun of the INLidek river district, Johor, c. 2° 5' x 10 ^° 38', 

perhaps collected near Chendia Bemban, 2" 3'xi03" 39'. — Plervey, 

/. Straits B. R. A. S. (1881), No. 8, pp. 1 1 2- 1 17. 
Jak. Mad. {Pant. Kap.) — Pantang Kapur (Camphor Taboo Language) of the 

Jakuns of the same Madek river district. — Hervey, y. Straits B. R. A. S. 

(18S2), No. 9, pp. 167, 168. 
Jak. Malac. — Jakun of Malacca territory, collected from Jakuns near Jasin, 

2° 18' X 102° 24'. — Blagden MS. (partly published with Bes. Malac.) 
Jak. Raff. — ^Jakong (= Jakun) of "the neighbourhood of Malacca" (Malacca 

town is c. 2" 12' X 102° 15': the Jakuns probably lived at least 10 miles 

away; Malacca territory lies between c. 2° 30' and 2° 16' x 101° 55' and 

102° 36'), collected by RafHes. — Marsden, Miscellaneous Works (1S34), 

p. 87 (a version, with minor differences, of the following). 
Jak. Raff. As. — Jakong (= Jakun) of Malacca: the original version of the pre- 
ceding.— Raffles, Asiatick Researches (1816), vol. xii. pp. 109, iio. 
Jak. Senibr. — Jakun of the Sembrong river district, Johor, collected at Kenalau, 

2" 8' X 103° 20'. — Hervey, J. Straits B. R. A. S. (1881), No. 8, pp. 99, 

100. 
[ak. Sim. — Jakun of Simpai, Johor, 2' 2' x 103'' 17'. — Lake and Kelsall, loc. cit. 

{see Jak. Lem.) 
Jak. Stev. — ^Jakun, locality undefined (probably Negri Scmbilan or Malacca, as 

some of the words are allied to Besisi). — Vaughan-Stevens op. cit. (see 

Belend. Stev. and Bers. Stev.) 
Jehehr. — " Jehehr " (by Malays called Sakai Tanjong, but speaking a Semang 

dialect), mixed Negritos of Temongoh, North Perak, ^' 17'x loi" 22'. — 

Annandale MS. 
Jelai. — Sakai of the Jelai river valley, Ulu Pahang, c. 4° 20' ?-4° 10' ? x 101° 31'- 

102° 13'? — Emeric MS. 
Tok. A'a^— "Jokang" (= Jakun).— Raffles,/. Straits B. R. A. S. (1S79), No. 4, 
pp. 6, 7, a reprint from the Malacca Weekly Register, 1840 (another version 

oijak. Raff. As.) 
Kena. I. — Kenaboi (or Kenabui), originally probably from Jelcbu, c. 3° 8' x 102", 

VOL. H 2 K 

498 APPENDIX 

but collected at Alor Gajah, Malacca, 2° 22' x 102^ 14' from a clan that 

had settled near Gunong Dato', Rembau, 2° 32' x 102° 15'. — Hervey MS. 
Kena. II. — The like, another list, collected at the same place. — Hervey MS. 
Kena. Stev. — Kenaboi, locality undefined, but see Kena. I. — Vaughan-Stevens, 

op. cit. (see Beletid. Stev. and Be7-s, Stev.) 
Kerbat. — Aborigines, stated by Clifford to be Sakai (but speaking a dialect 

which must be classed as Pangan) of the Kerbat river valley, Trengganu, 

c. 4° 55' X 102° 40', but originally from the Kendiam and Sat rivers, Ulu 

Tembeling district, North I'ahang, c. 4° 35' x 102° 30', vid the Lgbir (or 

Lebih) river. South Kelantan, 4° 4o'-4^ 55' x 102° 25'. — Clifford MS. 
Kerdau. — Sakai of Kerdau, Temerloh district, "about three hours above Kuala 

Semantan," Central Pahang, 3° 32' X 102° 22'. — Emeric MS. 
Ki-aii Em. — Sakai of Krau river valley. Central Pahang, c. 3° 40' x 102^ 14', 

but (from internal evidence) some at least of these materials were collected 

beyond Kuala Lipis, in Ulu Pahang. — Emeric MS. 
Kraii Ket. — Sakai of Ulu Ketiar, Kerbat river district, Trengganu, c. 5° 8' X 

102° 35', claiming to have come originally from the Krau district. Central 

Pahang (see Krau Em.) — Clifford MS. 
Krau Tern. — Sakai of the Krau (see Krau Em.) and Kuala Tembeling (4° 5' x 

102° 19') districts. Central Pahang. — Clifford MS. 
Lebir. — Aborigines, stated by Clifford to be Sakai (but speaking a dialect which 

must be classed as Pangan) of Ulu Chaling, Eebir (or Lebih) river district, 

South Kelantan, c. 5° 10' x 102° 27'. — Clifford MS. 
Mantr. Bor. — Mantra ( = Mentera) of Malacca territory [stcjak. Raff.). — Borie, 

Tijdschfift voor Iiidische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde (1861), vol. x. p. 439 

et seq., and Essays Relating to Indo-China, Second Series (1887), vol. i. 

pp. 303, 304. 
Mantr. Cast. — Mantra ( = Mentera) of Malacca territory (see /ak. Raff.) — 

De Castelnau, Revue de Philologie et d'Ethnographie (1876), vol. ii. pp. 142, 

143- 

Alantr. Malac. — Mantra ( = Mentera) of Malacca territory, collected mainly at 

Bukit Senggeh, Malacca (see Bes. Malac.) — Blagden MS. (partly published 

with Bes. Malac.) 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. — Mantra ( = Mentera), collected at Chabau, Malacca, 

2° 21' x 102° 31'. — Blagden MS. 
Mantr. Malac. Nya. ■ — ■ Mantra ( = Mentera), collected at Nyalas, Malacca, 

2° 25' x 102° 30'. — Blagden MS. 
Ment. Her. I. — Mantra ( = Mentera), as "given by two Mentra men named 

Galang and B^lum," probably collected in Malacca territory {%t&Jak. Raff.) 

— Hervey MS. 
Ment. Her. II. — Mantra ( = Mentera) " from a Mentra man named Lang Panas," 

probably collected in Malacca territory (seeyak. Raff.) — Hervey MS. 
Mentr. Stev. — Mantra ( = Mentera ; Stevens has Mantra), locality undefined, 

probably from the same neighbourhood as the preceding seven vocabularies. 

— Vaughan-Stevens, op. cit. (see Belend. Stev. and Bes. Stev. ) 
Or. Berumb. — Sakai, calling themselves Mai Darat, and by Malays called Orang 

Darat ("up-country men") of Mt. Berumban (or Berumbang), on the 

border of Perak and Pahang, 4° 20' x 101° 28' — Annandale and 

Robinson MS. 
Or. Hu. /oh. I. — Orang Hutan (" men of the woods") of the northern part of 

Johor, c. 2° 45' ? X 102° 45' ? (only those words are reproduced which do not 

appear in Pal., of which this is seemingly Init another version). — Miklucho- 

Maclay, Tijdschrift voor Indische I'aal- Land- en Volkenktinde (1876), 

vol. xxiii. pp. 306-308 (also published in J. Straits B. R. A. S. (1878), 

No. I, pp. 41, 42). 
Or. IIu. Joh. II. — Orang Hutan of the northern part of Johor, c. 2" 30' ? x 

LANGUAGE 

499 

103° 10'? (only those words are reproduced which do not appear in U. Ind., 

of which this is seemingly but another version). — Miklucho-Maclay, loc. 

cit. (see Or. Hit. J oh. I. ) 
Or. Latit. — Orang Laut ("men of the sea" or "sea-gypsies") of Kampong 

Roko', Kalang, Singapore, i° 19' x 103" 52'. — Ridley and Skeat, J. 

Straits B. R. A. .S. (1900), No. 33, pp. 248, 249. 
Or. Trang. — Orang Laut Kappir [i.e. Knfir, that is, "heathen sea-gypsies") of 

Pulau Mentia (in Siamese Koh Muh) off Trang (or Tarang), Ligor, 

7° 24' X 99° 25' (the northernmost specimen of Orang Laut included in this 

collection, the Selungs of the Mergui Archipelago having been excluded as 

not being adjacent to the Malay Peninsula, which is usually considered to 

terminate about lat. 10°). — Annandale ^LS. 
Pal. — Orang Hutan of the Palong and Ulu Rumpin river districts (or more 

probably the country lying between these rivers), Johor-Pahang border, 

c. 2° 45' X 102° 45'. — Miklucho-Maclay, op. at. (see Or. Hu. Joh. /.), pp. 

311. 312. 
Pang, Belimb. — Pangan of Belimbing near Tomoh, South Ligeh, c. 5° 40' x 

101° 38', but collected at Jarum (see Sem. Jariim). — Skeat MS. 
Pang. Gal. — Pangan of Galas, South Kelantan, c. 5° x 102° 10'. — Skeat MS. 
Pang. Jalor. — Pangan (calling themselves Hami, i.e. " men ") of Mabek, between 

Bis^rat and Tanjong Luar, Jalor, one of the " Patani States," 6^ 23' x 

101° 8'. — Annandale and Robinson MS. 
Pang. K. Ariup. — Pangan of Kuala Aring, Lebih river district, South 

Kelantan, 4° 56' x 102° 25'. — Skeat MS. 
Pang. Sai. — Pangan of Sai (or Telubin), one of the " Patani States," c. 6° 30' x 

101° 37', but collected at Jarum (see Sein. Jariiin). — Skeat MS. 
Payig. Sam. — Pangan of Sam, near Sungai Sokoh, Central Kelantan, c. 5° 37' X 

102° 5'. — Skeat MS. 
Pang. Skeat. — Pangan, dialect not specified, but one of those mentioned here. — 

Skeat MS. 
Pang. Songs. — Words extracted from the Semang (or Pangan) songs printed in 

the Appendix to vol. i. of the present work, collected at Siong and Jarum 

(see Se»i. Kedah and Sem. Jartcm). — Skeat MS. 
Pang. Stev. — Panggang ( = Pangan), locality undefined, but in the north-eastern 

part of the Peninsula. — Vaughan-Stevens, loc. cit. (see Belend. Stev.) 
Pang. Teliang. — Pangan of Teliang, locality unrecorded, but collected at Siong 

(see Sem, Kedah). — Skeat MS. 
Pang. U, Aring. — Pangan of Ulu Aring (upper part of the Aring river), Lebih 

river district, South Kelantan, c. 4° 47' X 102° 20'.— Skeat MS. 
Pant. Gah. Mant. — Pantang Gaharu (Agila-wood Taboo Language, but it applies 

also to the search for gold) of the Mantra ( = Mentera) of Malacca 

territory (see Jak. Raff.) and neighbouring states. — Hervey, Notes and 

Qiceries (1885), No. i (issued with No. 14 ofy. Straits B. R. A.S.), 

p. 9- 

Patit. Kap. Her,- — Pantang Kapur (Camphor Taboo Language) of the Johor 
Jakuns, apparently collected at Pengkalan Teba, on a tributary of the 
Lenggiu river, Central Johor, c. \° 53' x 103° 37'. — Hervey, J. Straits 
B. R. A. S. (1879), No. 3, pp. 113, 114. 

Pant. Kap. Joh. — Pantang Kapur of Johor Jakuns (words which are not marked 
as being specifically of the Lemakau, Madek or Simpai regions, but it is 
not clear whether they are to be referred to any or all of these). — Lake and 
Kelsall,/. Straits B. R. A. S. (1894), No. 26, pp. 41-54. 

Pant. Kap. Lem. — Pantang Kapur of Kuala Lemakau Jakuns, North Johor (see 
Jak. Lem.) — Lake and Kelsall, loc. cit. (see Pant. Kap. Joh.) 

Pant. Kap. Log. — Pantang Kapur of Johor Jakuns (the same, according to Logan, 
on the SSdili, Endau and Batu Pahat rivers ; apparently, therefore, covering 

Soo APPENDIX 

Central Johor, between (at least) 2' 25' and i" 50' x 103° and 103" 40'. — 

Logan, _/. hidian Archipelago (1847), vol. i. pp. 263-266. 
Pant. Kap. Mad. — Tantang Kapur of the Jakuns of the Madek river district. 

Central Johor [%qq Jak, Alad.) — Lake and Kelsall, loc. cit. (see Pant, Kap. 
Joh.) 
Pant. Kap. Sint. — Pantang Kapur of the Jakuns of Simpai, Johor (see ya/'. Sun.) 

— Lake and Kelsall, loc. cit. (see Pant. Kap. Joh.) 
Po-Klo. — P6-K16, mixed Negrito tribe speaking a Sakai dialect and known to 

Malays as Sakai Bukit, of Temongoh, North Perak {s<:q Jehehi-).- — Annan- 
dale MS. 
Pasa. — Words collected from aborigines near Rasa, Ulu Selangor district, c. 

3° 30' X 101° 38'. — Bowen MS. 
Sak. Bat. Pad. — Sakai of Batang Padang, South Perak, (-. 4" 2o'-4° 5' x 161° 10'- 

101° 20'. — Wray,y. Straits B. K. A. S. (1890), No. 21, pp. 123-165 (there 

are very few, if any, Sakai words in this paper, which is a journal of an 

expedition in the Perak hill country). 
Sah. Blanj. CI. — Sakai of the neighbourhood of Blanja, I'erak, 4" 30' x 100^ 57'. 

— Clifford,/. Straits B. P. A. S. (1891), No. 24, pp. 19, 20. 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. — The like, additional words. — Clifford MS. 
Sak. Blanj. Szv. — The like dialect.— Swettenham MS. in the library of Strait-^ 

Asiatic Society. 
Sak. Br. Low. — Sakai of Kerbu (or Korbu) river valley, Perak, c. 4° 47' x 

101° 16'. — Brooke Low MS. communicated by Ling Roth (printed, with 

some errors, in Ling Roth, Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo 

(1896), vol. ii. App. xlv., xlvi. ) 
Sak. Chen. — Sakai of the Chendariang river district, Perak, c. 4'' 15' x loT" 15'. 

— Paul,/. Straits B. P. A. S. (1880), No. 5, pp. 129-149. 
Sak. Croix. — Sakai of Kerbu (see Sak. Br. Low.) — Errington de la Croix, 

Revue d Ethnographie (1882), vol. i. pp. 328-341. 
Sak. Em. — Sakai of Pahang, locality uncertain. — Emeric MS. 
Sak. Giiai. — Sakai of Pulau Guai, three miles below Kuala Tembeling, Central 

Pahang, 4° 3' X 102' 19'. — Clifford MS. 
Sak. LLalc. — Sakai of Ulu Kinta, Perak, c. 4' 37' x 101° 20'. — Hale,/. Anthro- 
pological Institute (1886), vol. XV. pp. 205-301. 
Sak. J. Low. — Sakai of South or Central Perak, locality undefined. — Low, 

/. Indian Archipelago (1850), vol. iv. p. 431. 
Sak. Jer. — Sakai Jeram (so called by Malays, but calling themselves Semang and 

being really Negritos speaking a vSakai dialect) of Grit (or Gerik), North 

Perak, 5' 27' x 101" 4'. — Annandale MS. 
Sak. Kerb. — Sakai of the K^rbu (or Korbu) river valley, Perak, c. 4" 45' x 

101° 19'. — De Morgan, Bulletin de la Society Nor/nande de Geographie 

(1885), vol. vii. pp. 434 et seqq., reprinted as Exploration de la Presqu'ik 

Malaise — Lingiiistiqiie (1886), from which reprint the words were extracted. 
Sak. AVw/a.— Sakai of Kinta, Perak, c. 4" 40' ? - 4" 2o'?xioi° 8' ?— Speedy, 

loc. cit. (see Sak. Chen. ) 
Sak. Kor. Gb. — Sakai of the Kfirbu (or Korbu) river valley, collected at Kuala 

Batu, 4° 53' X 101° 12'. — Grubauer MS., communicated by Schmidt. 
Sak. Korb. Lias. — The same dialect, but collected at Kampong Lasak, 4" 59' x 
1 01" 8', from Sakais who had come there by appointment.— De Saint- Pol 

Lias, Pt!rak et les Oratigs-Saklys (1883), pp. 270-273. 
Sak. I.engk. — Sakai of Lengkuas, near Blanja, Perak ; evidently the same 

dialect as Sak. Blanj. C/.—ll. C. C. (^Clifford), Notes and Queries (1887). 

No. 4 (issued with No. 17 of the/. Straits B. P. A. S.), pp. 102, 103. 
Sak. Martin. — Sakai ("Senoi'") of Ulu Gedang, in the mountains two days" 

journey from Bidor, South Perak, c. 4° 7' x 101'' 20'? (staled by Martin to 

be about 4° 2' x loi' 7', but that can hardly be right). — Martin MS. (also 

LANGUAGE 501 

printed, with slight modifications, in Martin's Die Inlandstainvie der 

Malayischen Halhinsel, j)p. 989-992). 
Sak. Morg. — Sakai, but not stated whether Sak. Kerb, or Sak. Ra, — Dc Morgan, 

loc. cit. (see Sak. Kerb.) 
Sak. Plus. — Sakai of the This river valley, Perak, c. 5" 3' - 4' 46' ? x lOl" 8'- 

101° 28'. --H. C. C. ( = Clifford), loc. cit. (see Sak. Lengk.) 
Sak. Plus Cliff. — The same dialect, additional words. — Clifford MS. 
Sak. Ra. — Sakai of the Sungai Raya river valley, Kinta district, Perak, (■. 4° 35' x 

lOi" 10'. — De Morgan, Ipc. cit. (see Sak. Kerb.) 
Sak. Sel. Da. — Sakai of Selangor, locality undefined, probably Kuala Lumpor or 

Klang district, c. 3" i5'-2° 57'?x 101° 2o'-ioi" 45'? — Daly MS. in library 

of Straits Asiatic Society. 
Sak. Slim. — Sakai of the Slim (Selim) river valley, South Perak, c. 4° 12'- 3° 

49' X 101° 22'-ioi° 33'.- — Clifford, loc. cit. (see Sak. Blatij. CI.) 
Sak. Sung. — Sakai of the neighbourhood of the Slim and vSungkai rivers, South 

Perak, c. 4°?xioi" 25'? — Anonymous MS. in library of Straits Asiatic 

Society, 
Sak. 7^an. Rain. — Sakai of Tanjong Rambutan, nine miles from Ipoh, Perak 

(Ipoh = 4° 36' X 101° 5'). — Luering MS. 
Sak. Tap. — Sakai of the hill country about a day's journey from Tapah road, 

Perak, c. 4° 15' ?x 101° 25'? — Grubauer MS. communicated by Schmidt. 
Sak. U. Bert. — Sakai of Ulu Bertang, near Mt. Berumban (or Berumbang), 

Perak, 4° 24' x 101° 20'. — Luering MS. 
Sak. U. A^aw.— Sakai of the Ulu Kampar, Perak, c. 4' 24' x 101° 11', but also 

spoken in Ulu Pulai, Ulu Gopeng, 4" 28' x 101° 11', and the hills around 

Batu Gajah (Batu Gajah = 4° 29' x 101° 3'). — Luering, J. Straits B. R. A. S. 

(1901), No. 35, pp. 91-104. 
Sak. U. Kampar. — The same dialect, additional words. — Luering MS. 
Sak. U. 7«/-— Sakai of Ulu Tapah, Perak (see Sak. ra/.)— Luering MS. 
Sem. Beg.- — Semang, locality undefined, but probably c. 5° 2o'?xioo' 30'- 

100° 55'? — Begbie, J\lalayau Petiinsula (1834), pp. 14-18 (it would seem 

that Begbie, who did not collect this vocabulary himself, was indebted for it 

to the Rev. C. Thomsen, see op. cit. p. ix.) 
Sem. Buk. Max. — Semang of Bukit Berambar (?), North Perak (?) (the locality 

has not been identified ; it cannot be Berumban or Berembun). — Anonymous 

Malay MS., No. 29 Maxwell bequest in library of Royal Asiatic Society. 
Setn. CraiiK 6'raw.— Semang of Mt. Jerai ("Kedah Peak"), Kedah, 5° 50' x 

100° 27' (collected by the Malay "Prime Minister" (Dato' Mentri ?) of 

Kedah). — Crawfurd, Grammar and Dictionary of the Malay Language (1852), 

vol. i. pp. clxvi., clxxi., clxxii. 
Sem, Cratv. Hist. — The same dialect. — Crawfurd, History of the Indian 

Archipelago (1820), pp. 125-191. 
Sein. Ij. — Semang of Ijoh (or Ijok), North-west Perak, c. 5° 8'xioo° 40'- 

100° 55'. — Swettenham, loc. cit. (see Sak. Chen.), and also his MS. in 

library of Straits Asiatic Society. 
Sein. Jarum. — Semang (or perhaps, more consistently, Pangan) of Jarum, South 

Raman, " Patani States," 5° 51' X 101° 2'.- — Skeat MS. 
Sem. Jar. And. — Semang of Juru (the " mountains of Jooroo ") behind Province 

Wellesley (as bounded in 1824), c. 5° 20' x 100° 35', collected by Maingay. 

— Anderson, Political and Commercial Considerations relative to the Malayan 

Peninsula, etc. (1824), App. pp. xliv.-xlvii. 
Sem. Jur. Mar. — A reprint of the last, with slight differences. — Marsden, 

Miscellaneous ^For/'j- (1834), p. 113. 
Sem, Jur. New. — The same. — Newbold, op. cit. (see Ben. Ne'M.) 
Sem. Jur. Rob. — The same. — Roberts, Embassy to the Eastern Courts of Cochin- 
china, Siam, and Muscat (1837), pp. 413-415. 

502 APPENDIX 

Sei>t. K. Ken. — Semang (but really a northern Sakai dialect) of Kuala Kenfiring, 

collected at " Kambugie - Ongbal," North Perak, c. 5" 14'xioi'' 3'. — 

Grubauer MS. communicated by Schmidt. 
Sem. Ked, And. — Semang of Ian (i.e. Yan, at the foot of Mt. Jerai), Kedah (see 

Sent. Craw. Gram.), collected by M'Innes, — Anderson, op. cit. (see Sem. 
Jur. And.) 
Sem. Ked. Mar. — A reprint of the last, with slight differences. — Marsden, loc. 

cit. (see Scin. Jur. Mar.) 
Sem. Ked. Rob. — The same. — Roberts, op. cit. (see Sem. Jiir. Rob.) 
Sem. Ked. Ne'v. — The same. — Newbold, op. cit. (see Ben. New.) 
Sem. Kedah. — Semang of Ulu Siong, near Bukit Sabfilah, Kedah, 5° 44' X 

100° 45'. — Skeat MS. 
Sem. Ken. — Semang of Kenering, Perak (printed as "Perak Semang"), (see 

Sem. K. Ken.), really a northern Sakai dialect. — Daly, loc. cit. (see Sak. 

Che7i. ) 
Sem. Klapr. — Semang, locality undefined, but the list is evidently in part derived 

from Sent. Crazv. Hist. — Klaproth, Journal Asiatiqne (1833), vol. xii. 

pp. 241-243. 
Sem. ^l/ar/z«.— Semang of Ulu Selama (or Selamar), North-west Perak, c. 

5° 16' X 100° 51'. — Martin MS. (also printed with Sak. Martin). 
Sem. Pa. Max. — Semang Paya (lit. "swamp Semangs " or "low-country 

Semangs") of Ulu Kerian, Perak-Kedah border, c. 5° 20' x 100° 45'. — 

Anonymous Malay MS. (see Sem. Buk. Max.) 
Sem. Per. — Semang (speaking a Sakai dialect) of (North) Perak, probably of the 

neighbourhood of Kenderong, c. 5° 29' x 101°. — Maxwell (?), /<7r. cit. (see 

Sak. Chen. ) 
Sem. Plus. — Semang of the (northern portion of the?) Plus river valley, North 

Perak, c. 5° 6' x 101° i5'-ioi° 30'? but collected at Ulu Siong, Kedah 

(see Sem. Kedah). — Skeat MS. 
Setn. Pupier. — Semang, locality undefined, but evidently of a region near 

Province Wellesley (see Sem. Jur. And. and Sem. Pa. Max.) — Pupier, 

Annates de la Propagation de la Foi (1826), vol. ii. p. 303. 
Sem. Sadang. — Semang of Sadang, near Blanja, Perak, c. 5° 29' x 100° 54'. — 

Clifford, loc. cit. (see Sak. Blanj. CI.) 
Sem. Scott. — Semang (numerals only), locality undefined, collected by Scott. — 

Marsden, loc. cit. (see Se?n. Jur. Alar. ) 
Sem. Skeat. — Semang, dialect not specified, but one of those mentioned here. — 

Skeat MS. 
Sem. Stev. — Semang, locality undefined (but presumably Kedah or North Perak). 

— Vaughan-Stevens, loc. cit. (see Belend. Stev.) 
Sem. Toml. — A few words where this source differs from San. Beg. (of which it 

appears to be a mere reprint). — Malacca Observer, article on Tomlin's 

missionary journey, 6 pp. 8vo, copy preserved in Royal Library, Berlin 

(embodied in Griinwedel's Glossary, see Belend. Stev.) 
Sem, U. Sel. — Semang of Ulu Sclama (or Selamar), North-west Perak (see Sem. 

Martin). — Hewett, loc. cit. (see Sak. Chen.), and also his MS. in library of 

Straits Asiatic Society. 
.Semilai coll. A'ya. — Scmilai tribe, locality unknown, words collected from 

MCntcra at Nyalas, Malacca territory (see Mantr. Malac. Nya.) 
Seti. CI. — Senoi, i.e. Sakai of the Central group, precise locality undefined, but 

no doubt collected in Ulu Pahang between c. 4° 45' and 4° 10' x 101° 30' 

and 102°. — Clifford, _/. Straits B. R. A. S. (1891), No. 24, pp. 16-29. 
Sen. Cliff. — The same, additional words. — Clifford MS. 
.Sen. Et/i. — The same dialect. — Emeric MS. 
Serati. — Sakai of the Serau river valley. North Pahang, c. 4° 4o'-4'' 20' x 

101° 50'. — Emeric MS. 

LANGUAGE 503 

Serting. — Sakai (so-called) of Tinjau, Sorting river valley, Negri Sembilan, 

c. 2° 50' ?x 102" 1 8'- 1 02" 29'? — Hcrvey M.S. 
Sertiiig coll. Nya. — The same dialect, collected from MSntera at Nyalas, 

Malacca territory (see Mantr. Malac. Nya.) — Blagden MS. 
Sin. Stev. — Sinnoi ( = Sfinoi), locality undefined (but see Sen. CI.) — Vaughan- 

Stevens, loc. cit. (see Belend. Stev.) 
Slim. — Soman ( = Scmang), a mixed Negrito tribe speaking a Sakai dialect, of 

the Sungai I'iah river valley. North Perak, c. 5° 10' x 101° 8'. — De Morgan, 

loc. cit. (see Sak. Kerb.) 
'Jan. Sag. — Orang Rayat ("subject people") of Tanjong Sagenting, Balu 

Pahat, Johor, i" 48' x 102° 54', collected by A. M. Skinner. — Hervey MS. 
7 an. U. Lan^. — Orang Tanjong ("men of the river reaches") of the Ulu 

Langat district, South Selangor (see Buk. K. Lang.) — Campbell, loc. cit. 

(see Buk. U. Lang. ) 
Tern, CI. — Tembe', i.e. Sakai of the Northern group, precise locality undefined, 

but probably of North-west Pahang, c. 4° 4o'?xioi' 35°-ioi' 50°. — 

Clifford, loc. cit. (see Sen. CI.) 
Tembi. — Tembi or Tembe', the same dialect, of the Pahang-Kelantan border- 
land, c. 4° 42'?xioi'' 35'-i02°? but collected at Kuala Beltek, Serau 

river valley (see Serau) from Tembe' who had come there to work for the 

Sdnoi of that region. — Emeric MS. 
Te>niang.—Orsir\g Laut of Temiang (an island in the archipelago south of 

Singapore, 0° 18' x 104° 23'), probably collected at Singapore (see Or. Lant). 

— Hervey MS. 
Turn. Stev. — Tummeor ( = Temia, the same as Tembe'), locality undefined, but 

see Tent. CI. and Tembi. — Vaughan-Stevens, loc. cit. (see Belend. Stev.) 
U. Cher. — Aborigines (speaking a Sakai dialect) of the Ulu Cheres river valley, 

Ulu Kuantan, North-east Pahang, 4° 3' x 102° 57'. — Clifford MS. 
U. Ind. — Orang Hutan ("men of the woods") of the upper reaches of the 

Indau (or Endau) river, Johor- Pahang border (see Or. Hii. Joh. II.). — 

Miklucho-Maclay, loc. cit. (see Pal.) 
U. Kel. — Pangan of Ulu Kelantan (locality undefined, but probably collected in 

the Aring or Lebih river valley, see Lebir, Pang. K. Aring, and Pang. U. 

^r/«j^).— Miklucho-Maclay, loc. cit. (see Pal.) 
U. Pat. — Pangan of Ulu Patani, locality undefined, but probably collected 

somewhere near Jarum (see Seni. /arum). — Miklucho-Maclay, loc. cit. (see 

Pal.) 
U. Tern. — Aborigines (speaking a" Sakai dialect) of the upper reaches of the 

Tembeling river, and Pulau Besar, North-east Pahang, and the upper 

reaches of the Dungun river, Trengganu, c. 4° 36' -4° 24' ? x io2' 30'- 

103°?— Clifford MS. 

LIST OF LANGUAGES REFERRED TO AT THE END OF PARA- 
GRAPHS OF THE COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY, FOR COM- 
PARISON WITH WORDS OF THE ABORIGINAL DIALECTS. 

3Iun(fa Languages. 

Santali, Mahle, Alunclari, Birhur, D/iai?ggar, Koiiva, Kurku, Nahali, 
Kharia, Juang, Savara, Gadaba (a few words only), from the Linguistic Sui-vey 
of India, vol. iv. pt. i, 

Santali, Bkninij, Kol, Juang, Miindari, K'urku. — Campliell, Specimens of 
Languages of India (1%"]^), pp. 78-91, 94-107, 112-123. 

504 APPENDIX 

Khasi and Afon-Aiinajn Languages.^ 

Khasi. — A few words, mainly from the Linguistic Sut-vey of India, vol. ii. 

Palaung. — Bigandet,_/. /. ^., N. S. (1857), vol. ii. pp. 223-229; Anderson, 
Mandalay to J\Io>/iien (1876), pp. 464-473. 

Palaimg (or Riimai), Riang, VVa (or Vii), Wa (of Kengtung State), Danaw, 
En, Son, Tai Loi Wa (or Wa Kiif), Amok (or Hsen-Hsuni), Angkii, Loi (or 
Tai-Loi of Mong Lwe). — Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States (1900), 
pt. i. vol. i. pp. 626-727. 

RIon. — Haswell, Grammatical Notes and Vocalnilary of the Pegiian Language, 
(1901, 2nd ed., ed. Stevens) ; Stevens' Vocabulary, English and Peguan (1896). 

Khmer. — Aymonier, Dictionnaire Khmcr-Fraiicais (1878). 

Stieng. — Azemar, Diction)iaire Stieng (1887). 

Bahnar. — Dourisboure, Dictionnaire Bahnar-Fran/;ais (1889). 

Ka (of the mountainous borderland between Laos and Camboja) [apparently = 
Phnong\, Chong (of the district inland and east of Chantabun). — Crawfurd, 
Embassy to Siam and Cochin China (1828), ad fin. 

Old Khmer, Samre, Xong (or Chong), Cedang (or Sedang), Hud (of Attopeu), 
Cat (or Kat, of Attopeu), Souc (or Suk, of Attopeu), Soue (or Sue, of Saravan 
and Phong), Hin (of Saravan), Proons, Annamese, So (of Lakon), Nanhang (or 
Nanang, of Sang Kon near Kemarat), Mi (of Xieng Cang = Chieng Kang), 
Khmous {Khtnu or KAmus, of Luang Prabang), Lemet (of Chieng Khong and 
Pak Ta). — Lagree and Gamier, Voyage cTExploi-ation en Indo-Chine (1873), 
vol. ii. pp. 498-517. 

Samrt', Por, Cuoi (Kui or Koui), Phnong, Prou (also called Brao and 
Braott), Cancho (or Kancho), Rode (also Rack or Radaih), Chrcai {also fa rat). — 
Moura, Le Royaume du Cambodge (1883), pp. 440-447. 

Tareng, Kaseng, Kon Tu, SuJ, Halang, Boloven, Cedang (or Sedang), 
Churu, Jarai. — Odend'hal, Vocabulaire Compart (lithographed, since printed, 
with additions, m. Journal Asiatique, Mars-Avril 1905, pp. 265-337). 

Boloven, Niahon, Alak, Lave, Kaseng, Halang, Sedang, Jarai. — Lavallee, 
Vocabulaire Compart des Dialectes Sauvages du Bas-Laos (MS.). 

Rade (or Radaih), Kha Bi (or Kha Pi), Kuy Dek, Chain, Raglai, Chrau, 
Chziru, Braou ; also Khmer, Bahnar, Stieng, etc. — Cabaton, MS. notes. See 
also Cabaton, " Dix Dialectes Indo-Chinois, " yij^/r^rt/ Asiatique (Mars-Avril 
1905), PP- 265-337. 

Nicobarese. 

Central, Southern, Shorn Pe (Inland Southern), Teressa (and Bompoka), 
Chowra, Car Nicobar. — Man, Dictionary of the Central Nicobarese Language 
(1889). 

Andamanese. 

Aka Biada, Aka Bojigiab, Aka Kede, Aka Chariar, Onge. — Portmaii, 
Manual of the Andamanese Languages (1887). 

Aka Beada (or Pea), Akar Bale, Puchikwar, Akcl Jtnuoi, Kol. — Portman, 
Notes on the Languages of the South Andaman Group of Tribes (1S98). 

See also Temple, " Grammar of the Andamanese Languages," being Chapter 
iv. of part i. of the Census Report on the Andaman and Nicobar Islattds, 1902. 

' Schmidt's Spracken der Sakei und einer Lautl. der Mon-Khmer Sprachen 
Setnang (1901), Gmndz. einer Lautl. (1905) have been of great assistance in 
der Khasi Sprache (1904), and Gtttndz. connection with these languages. 

LANGUAGE 505 

British Borneo Dialects. 

Sea Dayak (of Rejang and ]5atu Lv\par), A'anowit, A'ayati, Bijitiilu, Punan, 
Matii, Bninai Malay, Bisaya, Mitnit Padas, Mnritt Tmsan, Dali Ditsuni (near 
Limbang), Malaiian (of Mukat district), Piilopetak Dayak, Karaugan Dayak, 
Sindiiii^ and Meratei Dayak, Kajan Dayak, Sait Dayak, Biilan Dayak, J\Ieri 
Dayak, Litndu Dayak, Bintitlit Dayak, Milanati and Muka Dayak, Beran;:; and 
Sabungo Dayak, Btikar Dayak, Saittan and Gtirgo Dayak, Siiian Dayak, Siinipo 
Dayak, Budanok Dayak, Staiig Dayak, Sibugau Dayak, Ttthbia Dayak, Sabti/an 
Dayak, Sering, Giigit, and Mataii Dayak ; Kayati, Kcnniah, Pitimii, Kalabit, 
NaroiH, Sibop, Kayaii (of Bintulu and Rejang rivers), Sadong, Lara, Sibtiyan, 
Salakaii, Liindii, Malati, Milatmu, Pakatan, hia'an, Adang (Murut), Lamin, 
Dayak (of Sentah, Sarawak), h-ainin, Ditsuii, Biilitd Opie, Sitlie, Alan Dayak 
(? Kayaii), Puiiait Dayak, Melano Dayak, Bukutan Dayak, Land Dayak, Balau 
Dayak. — Ling Roth, Natives of Sarawak and Brilis/i Nort/i Borneo (1896), vol. 
ii. Appendix, pp. i.-clx. 

Long Kiput (of Long Tutau, mouth of Tutau river), Naront (of Claude 
Town), Lelak (of Long Tru, formerly of Luak Lake), Punan [Bok, of Bok river, 
Tinjar), Sea Dayak (general in Sarawak territory), Barawan (of Long Tisam, 
Tinjar river), 7>//(7;/i;^ (lower and upper part of Tutong river), Sarawak Malay, 
Malang (of Long Simitan, Tinjar river), Sibop (of head of Tinjar river), Lepu 
Anan Kenyah (of Long Pangan, head of Tinjar), Ba Mali (of Mt. Dulit), 
Kalabit Biiang (Bear, of Long Panah, Tinjar river), Lirong (Orang Lobok Bay, 
Upper Tinjar, Long Movai), Maloli Kalis (of Upper Kapuas), Pabiin (of lower 
Madalam river, near Limbang), Kayau (U;na Belubo, of Baram district generally), 
Ltpii Saltan {Long Pana, of Tinjar river), Long Ulai (Lepii Pun, of Baram river), 
Punan Nibong (of Nibong branch of Lo bong river). Long Pokun {Long Sulan, of 
Dapoi river) ; Madang (of Tinjar river), Kajaman (of Baloi), Murik (of Baram 
river), Britnai Malay, Miri (of Mira river), Bintulu (of Bintulu river), Muka (of 
Muka xwQx),Uina Poh Kayaii (of Upper Apoh river, Baram), Lepu Tail Kenyah 
(of Silat river, tributary of Upper Baram), Bakatan (of Baloi river or Upper 
Rejang), Orang Biikit Bekiaii (of Tutong river, near Nyamok river), Lemeting 
(of Upper Balait river, formerly Marudi), Murut (of Trusan river), Dali (of 
Singallas on Sibuti river), Grogo (of Upper Sarawak river), Batii Blah (of Tutau 
river), Pitgaii Dayak (of hills between Kapuas and Batang Lupar) ; Taiijong (of 
Rejang river, above Kanowit), Pliit (of Upper Limbong and Tutau originally), 
Lepu Puliun (Baram Kenyahs), Kadayan (Orang Bukit, of Upper Balait and 
Tutau), Madang {Badaiig of Silat — a doubtful source), Ake {^Long Ake, of Baram 
river). Long Pata (of Baram river), Bisaya. — S. H. Ray, MS. vocabularies. 

Sulu. — Haynes, " English, Sulu, and Malay Vocabulary," y^ K. A. S., Straits 
Branch, No. 16, pp. 324-3S4, and No. 18, pp. 193-239. 

Dusun (of Kimanis). — Luering, "Vocabulary of the Dusun Language of 
Kimanis,"y. A'. .-V. .S'., Straits Branch, No. 30, pp. 6-29. 

Dutch Borneo Dialects. 

Satnpit, Katingan. — Tiedtke, Woordeiilijst der Saiiipitsche en Katingansche 
Taal (1872). 

Biaju Dayak, Lawangan, Many an {Maanjan), Siang, Tidiing, Solok. — Den 
Hamer, Proeve eener Veigelijkende Woordeiilijst van Zes in de Z.O. Afd. v. 
Borneo voorkomende Taaltakken. 

Tidung. — Aernout, Een Woordenlijstje der Tidoengsche Taal. 

Ngaju Dayak. — Hardeland, Da^acksch-Deutsches Worterbuch, 1S59. 

5o6 APPENDIX 

Other Malayan Languages. 

Selling. — Anderson, The Sellings of the iMergtii Archipelago (1890), pp. 

39-47- 

Achinese. — Van Langen, Woordenboek der Atjehschc 7'aal, 1889. 

Billiton Malay. — Vorderman, Bijdrage tot der Kennis van het Billiton 
Maleisch (1891), Tijd. Ind. Taal, xxxiv. pp. 376-389. 

For Batak, Minangkabaii Malay, Lainpong, Sitndanese, Javanese, Kaivi, 
Aladurese, Balinese, Bugis, ISIaiigkasar {Macassar), Bisaya, Tagal, Malagasy, 
etc., various published authorities have been followed, including, besides 
vocabularies (or dictionaries) of some of these languages, Kern's De Fidjitaal 
veigeleken met hare ve>~ivanten in Indonesia en Polynesic (1886), and the same 
author's Over de Verhouding van het Mafoorsch tot de Maleisch-Polynesische 
Talen (1884), and Brandes' Bijdrage tot de Vergelijkende Klatikleer der 
Westersche Afdeelingvaii de Maleisch-Polynesische Taalfainilic (1884). 

The Malay words added for etymological comparison have been checked for 
the most part with Klinkert's Nieuiv MaUisch-Nedcrlandsch Woordenboek (1893), 
but the English spelling usual in the Straits Settlements has been adhered to. 

In general an attempt has been made to render the spelling of words from all 
these authorities uniform with that adopted as the standard for the aboriginal 
dialects, but in some cases (especially in cases of doubt) the original spelling has 
been added (in brackets) as well. The native spelling of Mon and Khmer is put 
in square brackets, to draw attention to it, as it usually represents an older stage 
of the language than the modem pronunciation.^ 

Owing, however, to the diverse nature of these sources, and the fact that the 
systems of orthography used by the several authors are often left unexplained, it 
has not been possible to secure absolute certainty or uniformity throughout, 
especially in the vowels. 

It need hardly be said that no attempt has been made to illustrate_/«//i' the 
relationship which the aboriginal dialects of the Malay Peninsula bear to all 
these other languages. Apart from the fact that this would have necessitated a 
much deeper study of these various tongues than the time at the writer's disposal 
permitted, considerations of space would have made it quite impossible to 
embody within the limits of the present work all the results of such an extended 
research. Where the Malay equivalent of a word in an aboriginal dialect of the 
Peninsula seemed to be a sufficient explanation of it, no other has been added ; but 
this must not be taken to imply that in every such case the word is a loan-word 
from Malay. In a very large number of instances, as mentioned elsewhere, there 
is a strong probability that some other local Malayan language, now merged in 
the aboriginal dialects, is to be credited as the real source. Where the aboriginal 
word was a Malayan word not found in Malay, a small selection has been made 
from the cognate Malayan languages. Words connected with the Mon-Annam 
family have been somewhat more fully illustrated, but even here a selection had 
often to be made. It will be observed that in some cases where the Malayan 
and Mon-Annam families appear to have words in common, and it is doubtful to 
which of them the aboriginal word should be referred, both sources have been 
indicated. Nicobarese and Khasi, Munda and Andamanese have been drawn 
upon to a very small extent only. Altogether, it must be clearly understood that 
this part of the work has no pretensions to completeness, and does not claim to 
be an etymological dictionary of the aboriginal dialects of the Malay Peninsula. 

' The cerebral letters are distinguished by a dot under them ; h in Mon) is a 
sort of nasalized h. 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY 

OF 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS. 

507 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY 

OF 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS. 

1. Abandon, to : ja (dje), Sdtn. D 123? 

2. Abandon, to : pela (pela), Sak. 
Kerb. [? Cf. Sedang, Jarai loi, " lo 
abandon " ; but more probably Mon 
bAlah, "to let alone"; Khmer leah 
[lah ■ lah], "to quit."] Cf. R 201? 

3. Abandon, to: m6ninggal(moningal), 
Sak. Ra. [Mai. mgninggal]. 
Ability : A 187. 

4. Able: kahun [e.g. k. gah, "able to 
fell trees"), Bes. A. I. To be able : 
hun ; kahun, Bes. K. Lang. Can 
(vb. ) : kahun, Bes. K. Lang. Strong : 
hun, Bes. A. L Weak : hun ngot, 
Bes. A. L N 66. 

Able : C 20 ; C 48. 
4A. Abortion (?) ; miscarriage (?) {Mai. 
tegugoran) : bihak", Jelai. 

5. Above : pe, Sem. Stev. ; kepeng, 
Setn. Craw. Hist. , Sem. Klapr. , Sem. 
Ked. New. ; (keseng) Sem. Craw. 
Gram. ; kaping, Sem. Stev. ; M 199 ; 
W 30, Above, on top (Mai. di- 
atas) : ha'-kepeng (ha' kping), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; A 178. Top ; that which 
is at the top {Mai. yang di-atas) : atoh 
kfipeng (atuh kping), Sem. Pa. Max.; 
A 6. F"ormerly ; first {Mai. dahulu) : 
di-kaping, Sem. Buk. Max. Up- 
country {Mai. ulu) : keping (kping), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; M 199 ; W 30. 
[Alak pong ; NiahM niing piion ; 
Bahnar kopong, "above"; Alak 
piing ; Halang trong peng, ' ' up- 
stream."] 

6. Above ; towards the top of {Mai. 
ka-atas) : ka-kentok (or ba-kentok?). 
Sem. Jarum ; ka - kentok {or ba- 
kentok?). Sem. Plus; A 178; A 

176. Above ; on top ; upwards {Mai. 
atas, di-atas, ka-atas) : hatoh (hatuh), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; W 109. Towards 
{Mai. pada dia) : ha'toh (ha'tuh), 
Sem. Pa. Max. To precede ; to go 
before {Mai. dahulukan, pergi dahulu): 
chgna hatoh (chna hatuh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; B 146. Headwaters of river ; 
upstream {Mai. ulu sungai): ha'toh 
(ha'tuh), Sem. Pa. Max. To ascend ; 
to go upstream {Mai. mudik) : ya- 
tog, {e.g. tog ba.-kStok, "to go up" 
(forwards?)), Pang. U. A ring; tug 
(or tugg), Sem. Kedali ; to', Pang. U. 
Aring; butii. Pang. Belimb.; beketok 
or bSkSntok, Pang. U. Aring; tog 
(terg), Lebir, Kerbat. Across : kentii 
(kn-tii), Sak. U. Kam. Inland ; up- 
country : ta'. Sen. CI. ; meta, Sak. 
Martin ; mata' (matakh), Darat, 
Jelai. Upstreamwards (Mai. ka-ulu) : 
ma' ta', e.g. eng hot chip ma' ta', " I 
am going upstream," 5e«. CI.; mata' 
(matah), Darat. To go upstream 
(Mai. mudik ka-hulu) : galah mata' 
(galakh matakh), Serau ; U 26A ; A 
176. To rise : t^to (te-to), Sak. 
Kerb. ' ' How far have you been up 
river?" he chip ma' ta' sSng-kat lor. 
Sen. Cliff. [? Cf. Mon latu, " above," 
"over," "upon," "upper"; Ka 
unte, "above" ; cf. Bahnar ti, toti, 
" above," " up there'"] 

7. Above : kSngkmer (kngknier), Sak. 
U. Kam. On ; on the top of : kg- 
mil, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Above : kemil, 
Kran Em. Top of a waterfall : kemil 
jerep", Serau [or Tcmhi ?]. 

8. Above, on (Mai. atas) : \a) sft-i, Sen. 
Cliff. Above (A/«/. di-atas): ken-sfi-i, 
Seti. Cliff. From above ; from the 

509 

5IO 

COM PARA TIVE VOCABULAR V OF 

top [Mai. dgri atas) : keii-sui, Se?i. 
Cliff. ; A 177. Above ; to the top ; 
on to {Mai. ka-atas) : ma' sfi-i, Sen. 
Cliff. ; masrik", Jelai ; masrinta (?), 
Darat ; A 176. 

[b) Cloud : sui, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; su-i, 
Sak. Blanj. CI. Heavens ; sui, suy, 
Sak. U. Katn. Sky : sui, Sak. Blatij. 
Sw. ; sui, suy, Sak. U. Kain. ; sui' ? 
(snik), Sak. Cheti.; suit, Sak. U. Bert. 
Clouds : chueh? (tsiouf//), Sak. Kerb. 
9. Above : balong. Pang. Songs ; bal- 
ingte, Tembi ; malbalik^, Seraii ; 
baleSng (baleg'n), Sem. K. 

Ken. ; kulok, Bes. A. I. On top : 
gua - long, Sak. Guai. Up aloft : 
kulong, Bes. So?igs. Upwards : ku- 
long, Bes. K. Lang. ; A 178. Handle 
or hilt [Mai. ulu) : tSlong, Pang. 
U. Aring ; Pang. Satn, Pang. Gal. 
Up-country (Mai. ulu) : lun, Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; cf. S 198 ? To go upstream 
{.l/al. mudik) : te-lor, 17. Cher; te- 
lol, U. Tern. ; cf. A 155 ? [? Cf. 
Khmer Ibk, "to raise" ; long, "to 
ascend"; lb, "upon"; Stieng lu, 
alii, "above"; liik, "to raise"; 
Chong paling, "above"; Bolovcn 
lung; Niahon niing, "upstream"; 
cf. A 132.] 

10. Above : atas, Be7i. Neiu. \^Mal. 
atas] ; F 29 ; N 25 ; S 198. 

11. Abscess: tes ; teh, Bes. Sep. ; tes 
or teh, Bes. K. L. Boil : tes ; teh, 
Bes. Sep. [? Cf. Mon p'tah [ptuih], 
"pus," " puioilent matter"; Stieng 
protiet , ' ' abscess. ' ' ] 

12. Abscess ; boil ; pustule ; ulcer [Mai. 
bisul) : teka' (tka'), Setn. Pa. Max.; 
tSko' (tku' and tku'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Boil : tfika (tek-kor), Sem. 
Stev. ; {Mai. bisul), dfika (de-kor), 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff.; {Mai. barah tite'), 
tfiko' 'Sm (tku' 'm), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
B 385 ; teka' bo' (tka' bu'), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; B 386 ; {Mai. barah 
kCIalawar), tSko' kfililwar (tku' klauar), 
Setn. Buk. Max.; teka' lida.' (tka' 
lid'), Sem. Pa. Max.; cf. A 141? 
{.Mai. barah siib?), t6ko' sib (tku' 
sib), Sem. Buk. Max ; t6ka' kut 
(tka' kut), Sem. Pa. Max. Abscess 
of the teeth : tlka' lemuing (tika' 
Imuing), Sem. Pa. Max. ; T 170 ; 
cf. B 143 [?cf. Bahnar kbkSt, " pus- 
tule "]. 

13. .'Vbscess ; ulcer {Mai. puru) : cho-ik 
(tcho-iVt), Som.; cho-i (tchoi), Sak. 
Kerb. [?cf. 1 45]. 

14. Abscess ; ulcer : chiil (chel), Sak. 
Kerb. 

15. Abscess ; barah, Som, ; bara, Sak. 
Ra. Leprosy : barak, Jak. Ba. Pa. 
[Mai. barah]. 

16. Abscess ; ulcer : puru, Jelai ; puru 
(pourou), Sak. Ra. Ulcer {Mai. 
puru): terok, Bes. K. L. [Mai. puru]. 

Absent : N 69. 
Abundant : F 290. 

17. Abuse, to {Mai. mgmaki) : ya-16ng 
nyal (doubtful), Pang. U. Aring; 
{Mai. bermaki), elal? (el-arl), Sak. 
Plus Cliff. Angry {Mai. marah) : 
yoyal or 'yal. Pang. U. Aring; jal 
(jel), Kena. I. Angry ; swift : wal 
(ul), Sem. Pa. Max. To be ill- 
himioured : wal? (ul), Sem. Pa. 
Max. To insult : nCIhal (nol-hal), 
Som. To oppose, to fight with {Mai. 
lawan) : ya' niyar {more correctly 
nyiyar?) or nyiyal. Pang. U. Aring. 
To quarrel : wal (u'l), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; wSl-wai (u'l-), Sem. Pa. 
Max. To fight: hul?(hool), Sem. 
Beg. To roar : menal (menarl), 
Tembi. [? Cf. Bahnar hul, "to 
get angry"; but cf. also Khmer 
damniel [taniel], "blame."] 

18. Abuse, to {Mai. mgmaki) : ya- 
berasek. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
[? .Mai. bSrasak, "to press"]; A 
80 ; A 87 ; I 30, 31. 

19. Accept, to : C 48. 
Accompany, to : C 221 ; C 228. 
Accost, to : S 361. 
Accurate : S 483. 

20. Accuse, to : cheyag ? (ts^yfeg), Sak. 
Kerb. [? cf. Cham yak, " to accuse "]. 

21. Accuse, to : tudoh (toudoh), Som.; 
tud6h (toudoh), Sak. Ra. [Mai. 
tudoh]. 

22. Accustomed : baban {e.g. b. meri, 
' ' familiar with the forest " ?), Bes. 
A. I. 

23. Accustomed : dasa", Bes. Sep. ; 
biasa', Sak. U. Kam. To re- 
member; to know: biasa' (biasa'). 
Son. Buk. Max. Unaccustomed to ; 
unaware of: bia' biasa' (bia' biasa'), 
Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
y 121 [Mai. biasa, "accustomed"]. 
Ache : S 187. 

24. Acid {Mai. masam) : prod. Pang. 
U. .Aring. Dry: pr6d°, &'ra?< [? cf. 
Khmer ^ray, "salted, salty"]. 

25. Acid ; sour : a - sap, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; asam (assam), Som., Sak. 
Ra. ; asam ; masam, Sak. IK Kam. 
Salt: rhalmm, Kena. II.; sfimsam, 
Kena. I. ; pfngas^p, Bed. Chiang. 
Tamarind .' (spec. Mai. asam kum- 
bang) : sem ? (sini), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

511 

(slim), Sent. Pa. Max. [A/a/. asam ; 
kasam ; masam]. 
Acid : S 349, 350. 
Acquainted : K 61. 
Across : A 6. 

26. ACKOSS ; athwart : kclindeng (klin- 
ding), Set>i. Buk. Max. Across ; 
athwart ; breadth : hglinteng (hilri- 
ting?), Sem. Pa. Max. \Mal. lin- 
tang]. 

Act, to : D 135. 

Adam's apple (in the throat) : N 23 ; 

N 26 ; N 28. 

27. Add, to (/'>. "ajouter"; Mai. 
tambah) : taboh, Soin. ; tabuh (ta- 
bouh), Sak. Kerb. ; tamah (tamS,h), 
Sak. Ra. ; tama', Sak. U. A'at/i. 
More ; still : amtabuk (hamptabouk), 
Sak. Kerb. [Cf. Mai. tambah ; but 
cf. a.\so Boloven, Niaho/i buok ; Alak 
buk; Lave buk, "to accumu- 
late."] 

28. Addled (Mai. tSmbelang) : mendul 
(mndul). Seta. Buk. Max. [Mai. 
mandul, " sterile "]. 

Adjoining : J 9. 

29. Adjuta,nt-bird [Mai. burong babi), 
Leptoptilus javanicus : tutul (tutul), 
Scm. Pa. Max. 

30. Adjutant-bird : ranjau ; chim 
ranjau, Bes. K. L. \ B 216. 

Adolescent : Y 41. 

31. Adultery (.1/a/. madu, "after mar- 
riage"): truk, Sen. Cliff. ; C 242. 

32. Advice ; counsel : buguru(bougourou) 
Som., Sak. Pa. ; hugoro {boi/gort), 
Sak. Kerb. [Mai. berguru, ' ' to 
have a teacher "]. 

33. Adze [Mai. beliong) : gak (ghek), 
Som. ; kekn, Tenibi ; jek°, Tembi, 
Serau, Jelai, Sak. Em. ; jek", 
Darat ; j6k, Tern. CI. , Sen. CI. ; 
jek, Sak. Plus Cliff., Tan. U. 
Lang. ; jiik (djek), Sak. Kerb. ; jien 
(djien), Sak. Ra. Axe. (Mai. kapak): 
jak (diek), Sak. Kerb. ; noh gak 
(noh ghek), Som. ; gap, Sak. Ra. 
Chopper (Mai. parang), heg (haig), 
Setn. Stev. [? Cp. Chain jiong, 
"hoe," chdng, "axe"; Bahnar 
nik (nhik) ; Jarai ochong ; Sttd 
kachok, "hoe"; AViw^;- chhek, "to 
cut in pieces " ; and perhaps Bahnar 
hak, " to split, to tear " ; Stieng hek, 
"to tear," jik, "to cut (e.g. 
brushwood) " ; Khmer chik [jik], " to 
hollow out."] 

34. Adze (Mai. beliong) : dabob, Sem. 
Kedah. 

35. Adze: tatok (?), Bes. K. L. [? = 
A 34]- 

36. Adzk (.Mai. btliong), chai, Sem. 
Plus [? =A 33]. 

37. Adze : biong, Bes. K. Lang. [.Mai. 
bSliong]. 

38. Adze : puting. Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Large axe : puting, Pant. Kap. Log. ; 
pemuting, Pant. Kap. Her. Axe : 
puting penuyar (puting p'nuyar). 
Pant. Kap. Mad. ; puting peniiiag 
(puting p'ningar). Pant. Kap. Lem. ; 
puting bepgninga, Jak. Mad. (Pant. 
Kap.). Small axe: puting pfininga 
(puting peninga), Pant. Kap. Ller. ; 
(puting pininga). Pant. Kap. Log. 
[Mai. puting, " pointed end," for in- 
sertion into anything]. 

Adze : B 303 ; P 127. 

39. Adze-handle (Mai. pgrdah) : per- 
anihat. Pant. Kap. Ijjg. ; pgrmat, 
Jak. Mad. (Pant. Kap. ) ; B 303. 

40. AUZE, shaped like an : patul-patul, 
Bes. Songs, [cf. Mai. patil ; Jav. 
pStel, a kind of adze]. 

Affection: L 146-149. 

41. Affectionate : mesel, Jak. Mad. 
Afraid : F 48-51. 

42. .\fraid ; to run away ; to stray ; to 
lose : libun, Paiit. Kap. Joh. To 
run : bSlIbun (b'libun). Pant. Kap. 
Joh. To hide : libun behawal, Pant. 
Kap. Joh. [? cf. Cham lamong, 
" frightened "]. 

43. After (in place or time) : chSnih, 
Bes. Sep. ; chini, chTnih, Bes. A. I. 
Future ; futurity (Mai. akhirat) : 
chlnih, Bes. Sep. A. L [? cf. Central 
Nicobar enyah, "after," "after- 
wards "]. 

44. After : pintal, Kena. /. ; B 5 ; 
F 125. 

Afterbirth : N 42 ; P 121. 

45. Afternoon : raos? (ra-erse), Bers. 
Stev. ; D 17 ; D 19 ; D 33 ; 
D39. 

46. Afterwards: tekoh (tkuh), Sem. 
Buk. .Max. ; kat tekah (kt tkh) ; 
katekah (ktkh), Sem. Pa. Max. Be- 
hind (Mai. kemdian) : tekoh (or 
tekdhh), ex. chan tSkoh (Mai. jalan 
kemdian), "to follow after" (I am 
not sure of the form " chan"), Sem. 
Kedah. Next or subsequently (Mai. 
kgmdian) : tekoh, Pang. U. A ring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Future 
(.Wal. yang kgmdian) : bS-tekoh, 
Sem. Plus ; G 42 ; R 60 [? cf. Stien^t; 
koi, akoi, " behind," "after," "after- 
wards ' ' ; and cf. B 4]. 

47. Afterwards ; now : debingkai 
(d'binkai). Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Afterwards : B 4 ; B 6. 

512 

COM PARA TIVE VOCA B ULA RY OF 

48. Again : pula, Seran [.\/n/. pula] ; 
A 71 ; M 170-172. 

Against; A 178. 

49. Age ; lifetime : 'unior ( 'niur), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; (oumour) Sak. Ra. 
What is your age ? : marok umor ha' 
(hak), Temhi. What is his age?: 
brapa tahut" li umftr (umilrii), Jelai ; 
Y 23 [.1/(7/. Ar. 'umor] ; A 57 ; L 
130 ; P 117 ; W 112. 

50. Agila wood {Mai. gaharu), Aqui- 
laria malaccensls : klim, Sem. Pa. 
Max. [Cf. Khmer khlem (short e) 
[khlim] ; Stieng klin ; Balmar alieng, 
" heart of wood."] 

51. Agila wood : tebal, Pa7ig. U. 
A ring ; tabak, Pant. Gah. Mant. ; 
'long tabak, Bes. Sep. ; T 207. 
\_Malav Taboo language izbak, "agila 
\foodr J.R.A.S., S.B., No. 18. 

P- 359-] 

52. Agila wood: gShayu' (khaiu'), Sem. 
Buk. Max.; ga-lu", Sen. Cliff. [Mai. 
gahani]. 

Agree, to : P 217. 

53. Aim, to: nuju ?(noudyes), Mantr. 
Cast. ; tuju', Sak. U. Kam. To 
procreate : mgnuju (m'nuju), Jak. 
Ba. Pa. Sending {Mai. penuju) : 
tuju or tuju', a small slip or sliver 
of bamboo which is "sent" to go 
and injure or kill an enemy, Sem. 
Kedah [Mai. tuju, " to aim"]. 

54. Air : hawa (haoua), Sak. Ra. 
Breath: hawa', Bes. Sep. [Mai. Ar. 
hawa] ; B 256 ; B 389 ; S 479 ; W 
109 ; Win; W 113. 

55. Alight, to ; to perch {Mai. hinggap): 
kenab (knb), Sem.. Pa. Max. [? = C 
48]. 

56. Alight, to ; to perch : C 52. 
Alike : S 138. 

57. Alive : {a) agos, Sem. Per. ; gos 
(gose), Se7n. Ken. ; gos, Kcrbat ; 
gas, Pang. U. Aring; gosh, Leliir, 
Sak. Plus Cliff., Sak. Br. Low, 
Sak. Croix ; gosh (goch), Sak. 
Kerb. ; goish, Tembi ; ggmos 
(gumos), Sem. U. Sel.\ gfimas t^rgils, 
Se7n. Plus ; pungas, Kena. I. Age : 
gosh (goch), Sak. Kerb. Life : 
gamas, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. 
New., Sem. Jur. Rob.; pengambus, 
Ben. New. To live : gas, Sem. A'. 
Ken. ; gftmas, Sem. Beg. ; gamas, 
Ben. New. To cherish ; to take care 
of (Mai. piehera) : ya-pi-gos (//-. ])i- 
goss). Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam ; 
ya'-pigoz {pr. pi-gozz), Pang. Gal. 
[Some of these forms are derivate, 
being formed from ' ' gos" by means of 

59 

the infix -em- and the causal prefi.x 
pi-.] [Schmidt suggests A'y^/«graiaus 
[ayus], "age," "life," " e.xistence " ; 
sed qucrre as to this being an Indian 
loan word ? Qucere as to possibility 
of identification with next group ; for 
interchange of g- and r- cf. Ij 
291.] 

{b) Ahve : r6s, Sak. Blaiij. Clijf., 
Bttk. U. Lang. ; ris, Bes. Sep. , Seri- 
ing ; ris, Bes. Her. , Bes. Malac. ; 
aris, Bes. A. /. ; t6rf, Bes. Malar ; 
mari (?) ; Rasa. To protect : pri, 
Bes. Sep. A. /. [Balmar erih ; Stieng 
reh (short close e) ; Khmer r6s [ris], 
" to live," " alive."] 
Alive : chu-i ; chd-i, Sen. Cliff. ; 
sui, sCiy, Sak. U. Kam. ; esui, Tan. 
U. Lang. ; hisui ; suwi; suwi, Darat; 
isui ; sui, Serau ; isol, Sak. Sung. 
To seek a livelihood : ke hisui, Serau 
[? cf. Mon kyaing [gyuing], ' ' liv- 
ing"]- 

Alive : hidop, Mantr. Malac., Jak. 
Malac. ; D 142. To rear : hidop, 
Mantr. Malac. [Mai. hidup] ; B 91 ; 
B 388-389 ; W 112. 

60. All [Mai. semua) : nengkdm (/;-. 
nengka^'murneng-ka^m), Sem. Plus ; 
neng? (naing), Mant. Stev. Whole 
{Mai. sSmua ) : nom-kom, Pafig. 
Sam [cf. M 46 ?]. 

61. All ; altogether : bobelo' ?, yobeio' ? 
(ioblu' ?), Sem. Buk. Max. ; nalo' 
(nalu', nlauk), Sem. Pa. A/a.v. [? — 
U 40]. 

62. All; together?: kenul (konoul), Som. 
It is enough {.Mai. sudah chukup) : 
hoi kSnul (hoi'-konoul), Som. 

63. All : dikdik, Sak. J. Low ; di-diit, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; doyt {often pr. dlyt) ; 
nadoyt {ofte?i pr. nadiyt), Bes. Sep. 
A. I. Done ; has ; finished {Mai. 
sudah) : dit, Sen. Cliff. ; dit", Jelai. 
Empty: smadik", 5t'rrtz/: ; A 64. To 
finish : yad//, Sak. Ra. Finished 
{Mai. habis): bl-dik", Sen. Cliff'.; 
doyt ; nadoyt, Bes. Sep. A. /. Done 
for : doyt, Bes. Songs. No more : dit, 
Sak. Ra. ; F 122. [? Cf. Balmar 
di, "finished," "all," "entirely"; 
dik, "only"; Cham di, "only"; 
Stieng di, "one," "only"; dech, a 
particle indicating the past, the 
completion of an action. But cf. 
also Bahnar taet (toet), "end," 
"finished," "dead" [? cf. D 48]; 
Mon toe [tuai], particle of comple- 
tion ; Ka ted, " all."] 

\ll : s6ma (soma), Sak. Ra. ; 
amohon, Mantr. Malac. All to- 

64. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

513 

gether: s2muha (somouhi ; sbmou- I 80 
hd), Sak. Ra. [Mai. samua]. | 

All : A 79; F 117; M 42 ; W 102- 

103- 

65. Allow, to {Mai. biar) : pra', Sen, 
Cliff. 

66. Allow, to : biar, Sak. U. Kam. \ 
IMal. biar]. 
Alluvial deposit : W 30. 

67. Almost: nia.li (iiiah), Sem. Diik. 
Max., Sem. Pa. Max. 81 

68. Alone {Mai. sa'orang) : Iiirnor 
(lour-nom), Sak. Ra. 82 

69. Alonk : gfnar, Bes. A. I. 

70. Alone : deri (d^ri), Sak. Kerb. 
\Mal. diri, "self," as in sa'orang 
diri, "alone by oneself"]; E 3; 
O 27 ; O 34. 
Already: F 123. 83 

71. Also : klo, Bes. Sep. Again ; and 84 
then; too: klo, Bes. Songs. Again: 85 
kla', Bes. Songs; lii', 15', e.g. "he is 86. 
well again," yabor lii", Sak. U. Bert. 
[?=M 172]. 
Also: M 172 ; T 85. 87. 
Alternately : I 29 ; T 257. 
Altogether: A 61. 

72. Always ; for ever : jSmah, Bes. 
Songs [? cf. D 36]. 

73. Always : ila-lu ; ilalii, Sem. A'. 
Ken.; salalu" (salaluk), Serau; selalii 
(solalou), Som ; sSlalu (slalu), Sak. 
U. Kam.; s5lal6 (solalo), Sak. Ra. 
Immediately or forthwith : sSlalu 
(slalu) ; ex. kfibok birang pedbod 
slalu, "pack up(?) the . . . (?) fruit 
forthwith," Pang. Teliang [Mai. 
s61alu]=P 39; M 42. i 88. 

74. Ambaloh (tree), (also known as | 
balau, enibalau) : iyoh ambaloh (aiuh 
ambaluh), Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. \ 
enibalau]. ' 89. 

75. Among : 'ngiing, Sak. U. Kam. 90. 

76. Amusement ; enjoyment ; festivities : 1 
hgse' (hsi'), Sem. Pa. Max. [?cf. : 91. 

!•' S6]. 

Ancestor : G 86. j 

Ancient : O 14-15. 
Tj. And ; with : ki-kui (ki-koui), Som. 
[? = A 178]. 

78. And ; with : aydt, Sak. Kerb. 

79. And ; with : sama (sama), Sak. Ra. 
To assemble ; to bring together : 
sama (sama), Sak. Kerb. All : chip 
sama (tchip-jam^), Sak. Kerb, [means 
''to go with"]. Together; all: 
chip sama (tchip sama), Som.; G 42. 
Equal: sama(sma), Sem. Buk. Max. 
With : saniS,, Sak. Ra. ; sama, Ben. 
New. To take shape (?) : sSma' 
(sma"), Sem. Pa. Max. [Mai. sama]. 

VOL. II 

Anger: {a) chlnching, Sem. Beg.; 
cheng or macheng, Sem. Jarum ; 
kachi, Bes. Sep. A. I. Rage ; to be 
angry ; to rail at ; to abuse : kachlh, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. 

(b) .\ngry : teken (tekfiii), /ak. Mad. ; 
tekeng (t'keng), Jak. Lem., /ak. Ba. 
Pa. ; teken (teken), Jak. Sim. 
[Khmer kheng [khing], "anger," 
"angry"]. 

Anger; angry: kil^ (kil^), Sak. 
Ra. 

Angky ; wroth {Mai. marah) : get- 
had, Sem. Plus. Burning embers : 
gehad (g^hird), Sak. Ra. [Probably 
there is here a confusion between the 
Malay equivalents, marah, "angry," 
and bara, "embers."] 
Angky : hi-ro', Sen. Cliff. 
Angry : biliis, Sak. U. Kain. 
Angry : seah (st5-eh), Bes. Her. 
Angry: nggridn, Serting; ngfirin, 
Bedu. II. Bad : ngSrin, Kena. II. 
\Mal. ngSran, ngeren, "angry. "J 
Anger ; angry : ha-marah, Som. ; 
mara, Sak. Kerb. ; marah (mighah), 
Barok. To be angry : inmanaiA; in- 
manaia, Sem. K. Ken. To abuse : 
menaia, Sem. K. Ken. Cruel : mahra, 
Sak. Kerb. Bad : maras (mar4°s), 
Kena. I. [Mai. marah, "angry"; 
? cf. Murui Padass, Mu?-ut Trusan 
maraht, "bad"; but this is prob- 
ably a distinct word, connected with 
B8(^).] 

Angina pectoris : H 64. 
Angle : B 175 ; C 244-245. 
Angle, to : mepas, Jak. Mad. ; 
T 107. 

Angry : A 17 ; A 80-87 ; G 42 ; 
S 189. 

Animal: jo-6n, Kena. II. 
Anim.xl : pa'la", Serting. Beast: 
p^-loh, Bera. 

Animal : {a) mSchang, Kena. I. ; 
(1^) men^t^ng, Barok ; binatak, Sak. 
U. Kam ; na'tok (na'-terk), Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. ; 'ndtang. Bed. Chiong; 
net^ng, Bedu. II. ; neteng, Bes. Her. , 
Blan. Rem. , Bedu. I. ; neteng, 
Mantr. Cast. Beast : meneteng, 
Ment. Her. I. ; netSng, Mantr. 
Malac.; netan ? or netS? (netain), 
Mant. Bor. Wild beast : benatan 
(bonatan), Sak. Ra. Insect (any little 
animal): mSnatak (monatik), Sak. 
Ra.; menatan (monatan), Sak. Kerb. 
Elephant : binatang gedang, Pant. 
Gah. Mant. [= " big beast"]. Snake: 
binatang panjang. Pant. Gah. Mant. 
[="long beast"]; [Mai. binatang, 

2 L 

514 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

"animal"]; B no; B 118-120; 
F 218. 

92. Anjang (name, a proper) : Anjang 
(Andjang), Sak. Kor. Gb. [This is 
\Ialay, and is probably a corruption 
of panjang, "long," i.e. " tall " = 
L58.] 

93. Ankle: (?) jogo' chan, 5«r;«. y<i;'i//«, 
Sem. Plus ; F 220. 

94. A.NKLK : buku lalih, Bes.. Sep. A. I. 
[Mai. buku lali] ; K 40 ; W 147. 
Anklebone : F 220. 

Anklet : A 139. 
Another : O 28, O 60-62. 

95. Another : asik, Sak. U. A'am. 
Divers; sundry, sieng-mayeng, i?fj. 
Songs. Other, another, i.e. different : 
aseng, Bes. Sep. Difference : aseng 
(asing), Sem, Buk. Max. [Mai. asing]. 

96. Answer, to: kluad(/r. kluadd ) , t'jr. 
6' kluad kenlok bS.ber (e.xpld. —Mai. 
jawab( bunyi-nya ) yang bharunikah. 
" he answers that he is newly 
married "), iV/«. Kedah. To answer ; 
repartee : mSkahat (mkaht), Sem. 
Buk. Max. To be ill - humoured : 
mftkahat (mkaht), Sem. Buk. Max. 

97. .Answer, to {Mai. balas): ya-per- 
b6d(/r. porr-bodd), /"i^^o-. U. A ring. 

98. .\nswer : blahlag (blah-leg), Sotn. 
[IMal. balik, with infix -el-]. 

99. .Answkir : jawab (djaou3,b), Sak. 
Kerb., Sak. Ka. Toanswer : bijawab, 
Sak. U. Kam. [Mai. Ar. jawab]. 

100. .\nswer, to : jahut, Mantr. Malac. 
[Mai. sahut]. 

looA. Answer, to : banta, Sem. K. 
Ken. [Mai. bantah]. 

1 01. Ant: kesub, Sem. Jur. .4nd., Sem. 
Jur. .\ew. , Sem. Jur. Koh. ; kaso' 
(kasu'), Sem. Pa. Max.; P 207. 
Black ant (.l/(z/. semut hitam): k6so' 
biltong (ksu' blltung), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; B 233. Ant {Mai. semut 
gatal) : kfeo' hakat (ksu' hakt), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; S 50 (Mai. s. 
gila) ; k6so' ngiau (ksu' nglio), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; D 160 {.Mai. 
karengga); kasa' tawan (kasa' 
tauan), Sem. Pa. .Max. [? of. Central 
Nicobar kahoa, " large red ant "]. 

102. Ant : pS-tom, U. Tern. , LI. Cher. ; 
{.Mai. s6mut api) : kasa' petum 
(kasa' ptum), Sem. Pa. Max. ; A 
loi ; {Mai. kclengkiak) : katop, 
.Mantr. .Malac. 

103. Ant : hiiib (hieb), Som.; hiab, Sak. 
Kor. (lb. ; hieb, Sak. Br. Low ; 
(ni(ib) .Sak. Croix [no doubt a mis- 
print for hieb"], 

J04. A.nt : les, Sem. Craw. Hist., Sem. 

Klapr., Sem. Ked. And., Sem. 
Ked. \'ew. , Sem. Ked. Kob. ; les 
(lis), Sem. Buk. Max. ; les, e.g. les 
pas = .l/<7/. s6mut api, or "fire"-ant, 
les ketani = .l/fl/. semut lada, or 
"pepper"-ant, Sem. Plus; les, e.g. 
iGs bas=:s6mut api, or "fire "-ant, les 
jabe = semut lada, or "pepper "-ant, 
Sem. Kedah; les, Pang. U. A ring; 
Pang. Sam; (les), Kerbat; lez. 
Pang. Gal. ; lass, Sem. U. Sel. ; 
las, Sak. U. Kam.; las, Sem. Per., 
Sem. K. Ken. ; Sak. Blanj. Sw. , 
Serau, Jelai ; las, laas, Sak. Em. ; 
lesh, Lebir ; laish. Sen. Cliff.; laish. 
Sen. CI. ; (beisch) Sak. Kerb, [no 
doubt a misprint for leisch, but see 
supra\ Large ant : laas, Tan. U. 
Lang. White ant : lash, Sak. Ka. 
[given with meaning "to hold" 
{tenir), but should probably be op- 
posite to the ne.xt entry, viz. "ter- 
mites "]. Black ant {Mai. semut 
hitam): les beltek (lis bltik), Se7n. 
Buk. .Max. ; B 233. .Ant [.Mai. s. 
gatal), les sian (lis sian), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; {.l/al. s. gila), les ngau (lis 
ngu), Sem. Buk. .Max. ; D 160 ; 
{Mai. karengga), les suich (lis 
suich), Sem. Buk. Max. ; {.Mai. 
semut api), les petum (lis ptum), 
Sem. Buk. .\/ax. ; A 102 [A'on Tu 
le, " ant "]. 

105. Ant : poss, Sak. Sel. Da. ; pos, 
Ben. New., Bes. Her.; pas; poys, 
Bes. Sep. A. L Ant {.Mai. kar- 
engga) : poys kingga', Bes. Sep. 
"Wax" ant : poys lilin, Bes. Sep, ; 
W 51. Ant (species various) : poys 
ma-et, Bes. Sep. ; .\ 106 ; poys podoi, 
Bes. Sep. ; poys podoi kiak, Bes. 
Sep. ; poys podoi kintog, Bes. Sep. ; 
poys podoi ta'a'^ng, Bes. Sep. 
"Fire "-ant: poys ush, Bes. Sep. ; 
poys uis, Bes. Sep. ; V 124. 
"White" ant: poys anai, Bes. 
.Sep. ; Am. 

106. .Ant: meret, Jak. Mad., Jak. Semb. ; 
meret (m'ret), Jak. Ba. Pa.; (m'set) 
Jak. Lent. Small ant : brat (braet). 

Tan. U. Lang. 

107. .Ant: bet, Tembi; phak (p'hak), 
Kena. L [cf. A 105 or 106?]. 

108. Ant : sfeinut (semut), Ben. .\ew. ; 
(sbmout), Sak, Ka.; s6mut, Mantr. 
Malac, Jak. Malac. ; [Mai. sSmut, 
"ant"]. 

Ant : S 30. 

109. -Ant, L.-^rge {.Mai. semut tfimeng- 
gong) : belinang, Jak. Malac. , 
Mantr. .Malac. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

515 

110. Ant, White {Mai. anai-anai): 
a\vun (aun), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
'run, Jak. Malac. ; garui (ga-roui), 
Som. ; garui (garoui), Sak. Kerb. 
[this last is given with meaning "to 
hold" {ti'/iir), but should be oppo- 
site the next entry, viz. "termites"]; 
groit", Ji'ldi. Ant ( spec. Mai. 
kf'lengkiak) : mfiraung, Jak. .Malac. 
[.\Jo/i grun ; Centr. Nicobar daiin 
\pr. dAuin?), " white ant. "] 

111. Ant, White: anai-anai, Mantr. 
Malac. ; inau, Serau \Mal. anai- 
anai] ; B 143. 

112. Ant, Winged? {Mai. kalakatau) : 
kikas (kiks), Sein. Buk. .Max. [a 
Malay word ?]. 

113. Ant-eater : pangolin {Mai. tCng- 
giling), Manii javanica ; mftnteh 
(mntih), Sim. Buk. Max. ; (mantay), 
Sem. Stev.\ mantoih (mntuih), ^SV/«. 
Pa. Max. ; mantoi. Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; mantoi or mantep, 
Sem. Kedali, Sem. Plus ; mant6i 
(mandoi), Sem. K. Ken. ; man. 
Pang. U. A ring. 

114. Ant-EATEK : konda , Bes. .1. 1. 

115. Ant - E.\TER : tengongong, Jak. 
Malac. [of. Mai. tfinggiling]. 

116. Ant-hill; mound: busut, Bes. K. 
Lang. \Mal. busut]. 

117. Antidote (against ipoh poison) : 
chuping (chooping); chupeng, Ment. 
Stev. 

118. Anus: kit, Sem. Buk. Max. ; kid 
(kid), Sem. Pa. Max. ; dang? kit 
(dr? kit), Sem. Buk. Max. Bottom: 
kit, Sem. Pa. Max. Buttocks : kit 
Sem. Buk. Max.; ket, Sak.U.Kam.; 
tit (doubtful). Pang. U. A ring. 
Anus : holket", holket" Serau ; 
M 199; senioSng kat (seniog'n- 
kad), Sem, K. Ken. ; H 107. 
Pudendum muliebre : kit, Sem. 
Plus ; hayang kit or kit. Pang. 
U. A ring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal.; 
M 199. Bottom : hengkit (hingkit 
or hngikit), Sem. Buk. Max. ; M 
I99(?). Pudendum muliebre: kit- 
hanoi, U. Pal. ; C 242. [Mon 
taket ; saing [suing] taket, "anus." 
For the last word, if it is not con- 
nected with the rest, cf. Khmer 
konduci [kantuey], "vagina," 
" vulva."] 

119. Anus : pfeltu (pltu), Sem. Pa. A/ax. 
Buttocks: punchuk (puntschuk), (J. 
Pat.; [? cp. Cham tak, "anus"]; 
H 107. 

J20. Anxious: bimbang (bimban), Som. ; 
bimbang (iimbko.), Sak. Ka. ; bim- 

bang-ati {bimba/T-ati), Sak. Kerb, 

y.Mal. bimbang hati]. 

Any more : M 172. 

Apart : B 145 ; O 62 ; S 104. 

121. Ai'AkT ; aside; different {Mai. 
asing): moi. Sak. Plus Cliff.; M 
26. Enemy : bim6i, Sak. Kor, Gb. 
Other : nioi ; pimoi, Som. ; uba 
niamoi {ouhk mamol), Sak. Kerb. ; 
A 144. To translate : ko-ma-moi, 
Sak. Kerb. ; cf. S 364? \.Mon kmui, 
tnmi [ knmai ; tmuai ] ; Bahnar 
tijmoi, " stranger "]. 

Ape : M 73. 

122. Api-api (tree spec): itil (aitll), 
Sent. Pa. .Max. 

Apoplexy: F 155. 

1 23. Apparently : bo, e.g. mi^ng bo, 
" apparently near," Bes. Sep. 
Appear, to : S 138. 

Apple (of throat) : N 23 ; T 102. 
Approach, to : C 217-225 ; G 42 ; 
T 86. 

124. Approach, to {Mai. bertennu) : 
lemah or lembah {pr. lemahh or 
lembahh). Sem. Plus. To get 
{.Mai. dapat) : ya' lemah <;/- lembah, 
Sem. Plus. To meet {Mai. bert6mu): 
ya' lim-bah {pr. lim-bahh), Sem. 
Plus. 

Approve, to : H 29 ; T 238 ; 
T 240. 
Arched : R 160. 

125. Areca nut: bliik, Sak. U. Kam., 
Sak. U. Bert. ; blok", bluk", blok^, 
Tembi; blek", Darat; blok", Serau, 
Jelai. [? Cf. Stieng mlu ; Khmer 
melu [mluw] ; Halang lamlii ; Sud 
malua ; Kaseng blu ; Moii jablu ; 
Bahnar bolou (bolau), " betel."] 

126. Akeca nut : lakun, Ben. New. ; 
P 102 ; U 20-21. 

Akixa nut cutter: K 47 ; P 106. 

127. Areca p.m.m : chongoi, Bes. Sep. 
W'ild areca palm : chongoi, Bes. 
K. L. "Sealing-wax" palm {Mai. 
pinang raja) : chongoi m6ri, Bes. 
K. Lang. ; F 234. 

128. Arkca NUT: pinang. Bland. K. 
Lang. , Ben. New. Areca (spec. Mai. 
pinang lechoh ?), peneng laking 
(pnng Ikng), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
S 334 ? ; (spec. Mai. pinang mabok), 
peneng tuin ? (pning tun), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; \' 24 \Mal. pinang]. 
Argus pheasant : B 216 ; D 181. 

129. Akgus PHEASANT : Vosson^, Pang. 
U. Aring ; kusiKng (kuag'n, 
" deep a"), Sem. K. Ken. ; kft-ok°. 
Sen. Cliff. ; chep kuok, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; B 216 ; kuau, Mantr. 

5i6 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Malac. , Jak. Malac. ; pawau, ex. 
chim pawau ((Jrkawau?), Bes. K. L. ; 
B 216. Bird, spec. (A/al. burong 
siol) : kohiiu, Mantr. Malac. , 
Mantr. Malac. Cha., Jak. Malac. 
[Mai. kuang ; kuau, "Argus 
pheasant "]. 

130. Akgus pheasant : spec. (Mai. 
kuau cherniin) : bungkui Mantr. 
Malac, Jak. Malac. 

Arise, to : A 156 ; A 190 ; G 15 ; 

s 429-430- 

131. Arise, to ; to awake [Mai. 
jaga or bangkit) : (a) kigiu, Setn. 
Jarziin ; ya'kijou, ex. ya' kijoii, ya' 
gSteg (il/i?/. aku bangkit d6ri tidor), 
"I wake from sleep," Sent. Kedah ; 
ya' kijiili, Se7n. Plus. To rise [Mai. 
bangun) ; ya-kijiu, Sent. Plus ; 
kasi-au, Sem. Beg. ; kasio, Ben. 
New. To stand : kijau (kidjau), 
U. Pat. 

{b) To arise ; to get up : kia'in, 
Sent. Pa. Max. To stand : ki-ei, 
Sent. Beg. ; (kiri), Ben. A'ew. ; [? = 
S 429]. 

{c) To arise (to get up) ; to rise 
(Mai. bangkit): be-k(ii ; be-kd-i. 
Sen. Cliff. To rise (get up) : kui, 
kuy, Sak. U. Kam.; (Mai. bangun) 
bekut", bekuit", Serau. 

(d) To get up ; to rise : bahi (bhi), 
Sem. Bilk. .Max. To rise (Mai. 
bangun): ya - bihe (pr. bi-heJ"), 
Sem. Kedah. To watch : bihe (bee- 
hay), Sem. Stev. 

(e) To rise : kosh (kosch), Sak. 
Ha. To rise, of the sun, lit. to 
"emerge": kah or kahh, ex. 
6mpai kah, "new-risen,' Bes. K. L. 

132. Arise, to : lek, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
To get up (from sleep) : lek, Bes. 
Sep. A. I. \ lik, Bes. Malac. To 
rise (Mai. bangkit) : lek, Bes. Sep., 
e.g. lek jong, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
S 429 ; liak, Ben, Nerv. ; ? of. 
B 399. " Rise, get up, go (you) ! " 
etla de ha, Sak. U. Bert, [^h'hnter 
loeuk (pr. lok) [Ibk], "to lift," "to 
raise," cf. A 9; A 155; F 163? 
? cf. Baltnar lech, lek, "to go 
out," " to rise" (of the sun).] 

133. Arm: (a) bdang, Sem. Jtir. .And., 
Sem. Jin: Roh. ; blin, U. A'el. 
Forearm: boling, bC-leng ? (bling), 
Sem. Pa. .Max. , Sem. Bvk. Max. 
Arms (.Mai. It5ngan): baling, Sem. 
Beg. Upper arm : belang, Sem. 
Jur. New. ; beling, Sem. Stev. , 
Ben. Ne^v. ; bgling, Pang. Jalor ; 
b'ling. Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, 

Pang. Gal. ; bling (probably also 
applied, like Malay " 16ngan," to 
whole arm), Sem. Kedah, Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus ; bling, Sem. 
Martin ; bli8ng (blig'n), Sem. K. 
Ken. ; bSl^gn, Serting ; bleg'*, Bes. 
Malac. 

(3) Calf (of leg): balang, Sem. 
Martin; pgmaling? (pummaling), 
Ben. New. Leg: balang, Sem. 
Beg., Ben. A'ew. Leg (from knee 
to ankle): je' balang (ji' balng), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Calf of leg : sail 
balang (sait balng), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Shin: ja' balang (ja' blng), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Shin-bone ; tibia : balang 
(balng), Sem. Pa. .Max. [Jiz/f hbleng, 
bleng, " arm " ; cf. T 60]. 

134. Arm : (a) tenrin, U. Pat. ; kgngrid 
(kngrid), Sak. U. Kam. Upper 
arm : kangri (kanri), Sak. Pa. ; 
kendri. Tan. U. Lang. Forearm 
(Mai. lengan) : ken-rit. Sen. Cliff. ; 
kendrit", Serau ; kendrit°, Jclai. 
Biceps : kendrit, Darat ; kendrit", 
Jelai. Upper arm ; lower arm : 
kendrifi, Serau. Hand : kinrf 
("sharp" r), Sak. Martin. 

(b) Forearm : chindring, Sem. 
Jarum ; chin - deng, Sem. Plus ; 
cheneng, Sem. Stev. ; cheniaSng ? 
(dscheniag'n) Sem. K. Ken. Wrist: 
chgndeng (chnding), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; (Mai. buku tangan) gfihal; 
chindeng, Sem. Kedah ; W 147. 
Wrist: chendrek, chendrik, Tembi; 
chendraing tok°, chendraing tok^, 
Serau ; chendreng tok°, Jelai. 
Forearm : chendreg tik^i, chendreng 
tik", Tembi ; chendreng tok"!, Darat; 
H 15 [cf. E 42]. 

(c) Forearm: charak (tche-rek), 
Som. ; charek (tcher^k), Sak. Kerb. ; 
cherak (tchorek), Sak. Ra. ; cherag 
or cher(^g (tscherag or tscher^g), 
Sak. Kor. Gb. 

135. Arm (forearm) : (a) chembe, Bes. 
Sep. ; chemli, Bes. Malac. ; (chumair) 
Ben. New. Lower arm : ch6b6. 
Serting ; chebe, Bedu. If. ; jSboh, 
Bedu. II. , Bedu. III. Upper arm : 
jebiih (jt5beh), Bes. Her. ; chSbih 
(chC'boh), Blan. Rein. 

(b) Forearm : per-ber (pr. p6rr- 
biirr), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
pdbiel (pr. pebiell). Pang. U. 
.4 ring. 

(c) Upper arm: sapal (8S,pal), Som. ; 
sdpal, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; sapal, Sak. 
Kerb. , Sak. Ra. , Sak. Tan. Ram. 
Biceps : sapfd, Tembi. [Jarai hopa, 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

517 

tong4n (the second word = Mai. 
tangan, "hand"); Cham popall 
" arm "]. 
[d) Upper arm : rapct, Kena. I. 

136. Arm ; forearm : huftl (whai), Pang. 
Jalor. Upper arm: rhuah, A'<?«a. //. 
[? VA. Central and Southern Nicobar 
koal ; Shorn Pe kowau ; Teressa kdr 
(kor) ; Car Nicohar kel — " arm. "] 

137. Arm : \v6ngan (wungiin), Jok. Raff. 
As. Forearm : lengan, Mantr. 
Malac, Jak. Malac. Upper arm : 
Ifngan, Galang, Bedu. II. ; 
rongan (zongan), Ben. New. [J/a/. 
lengan, "arm," esp. "forearm"]. 
Arm : F iii ; H 15; H 18. 

138. Armlet: sal(sel), AV/z^/. Bracelet: 
sei-keno^m? or sei-kena^m? (sei- 
kenob'n), Sern. K. Ken. 

139. Armlkt : g&lak (glak), Sak. U. 
Kam.\ gglak (clak?; klag?), Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; glak", Jelai. Anklet : 
glangjuk", Jelai ; F 220. Lines on 
the hand : gelang (king), Sent. Buk. 
Ma.x. Worm {Mai. chaching): 
geleng, Sent, /arum ; gelang (or 
gglaSng), Sem. Plus. [Mai. gelang, 
"armlet"; gelang-gelang, "worm," 
spp. ; Achin. geleng,' "bracelet" ; 
gelang, "worm"; Selu/tg k'lang, 
"bracelet"; glang, "worm."] 

140. A KM LET : simpai, Bedu. If. 
Rattan binding of blowpipe: simpai, 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. Rattan bind- 
ing of quiver : simpai, Bes. Malac, 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. , Jak. Malac. 
Scorpion : simpai, Pant. Kap, Lem. 
[Mai. simpai, "hoop"]. 
Akmlp:t : R 133. 

141. Armpit {Mai. kgtiak) : {a) ledS' 
(lid'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 16da (Id'), 
Sent. Buk. Max. ; leda', Sem. 
Kedah, Sem. Plus; cf. A 12? 
Wing of bird {Mai. sayap) : loda" 
(doubtful), Pan^. Sam, Pang. Gal.; 
H I. 

{b) Armpit {.Mai. ketiak) : kram- 

dok. Sen. Cliff. ; kimd6g, Sem. K. 

Ken. 

Arms : I 36 : K 47 ; W 65. 

142. Aroid {Mai, birah, bira) : biah 
( bill ), Sem. Pa. Max. ; brak, 
bragmo, Tembi ; brak°, Serau ; 
brakn, Darat {Mai. birah; birak] ; 
L 32. 

Arotrnd: O 67 ; R 160; R 192; 
T 256. 

143. Arrack: tuak (tuak), Sem. Pa. 
Max., Sem. Buk. 'Max. [Mai. 
tuak]. 

144. Arrange [?], to [Pr. ranger) : uba- 

manah (ouba-manah), Sak. A'a. 
Other : ubah (oubah), Sak. Ka. ; 
A 121 [Mai. ubah, "to change"]. 

145. Arrive, to {Mai. sampai) : ched 
{pr. chedd), Sem. Kedah ; ched or 
chet {pr. chedd or chett), Sem. 
J arum, Sem. Plus, ex. ched lawe' 
{Mai. sampai ka-rumah)= "to reach 
home" (?), Sem. Plus; cf. A 154. 

146. Arrive, to {Mai. sampai) : ya-ldo 
(iirleau?), Pang. Sam., Pang. Gal. 
To arrive (at the top) : Id'i, Sak. Ra. ; 
cf. A 155? 

147. Arrive, to : anduih, Sem. Pa. 
Max. To arrive at : dos, Bes. 
A. I. 

148. Arrive, to : tiba, Sak. Per. {Plus 
or /Jni,^k.7) 4 N.Q. loi ; tiba (tiba), 
Sak. Ra.;G 42; W 81 [.Ual. tiba]. 
.Arrive, to : C 217-225 ; G 29 ; 
G 42 ; T 86. 

Arrow: B 261; B 263; B 291- 

304 ; B 354 ; B 356 ; B 360 ; 

K83. 

Arrow, point of: E 65. 

Arrow, shaft of: B 183. 

•Arrow, to dip (in poison) : D 112- 

113- 

Arrows, quiver for : Q 17-29. 

Arrow case : B 31 : N 42 ; Q 20 ; 

Q 24 ; Q 26-27. 

Arrow poison: P 163-175. Arrow 

poison receptacle, P 175. 

149. Arsenic : wang (uang), Sem. Buk. 
Max. [A/al. warangan]. 
Artery: M 219. 

150. .Artery ; pulse: jo' (ju'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

151. Artery ; pulse: kaeng (kaing), 
Sem. Pa. Ma.v. 

152. Aruan, fish, spec. Channa orient- 
alls: bakib, Sem. Buk. Max. ; bakap, 
Bes. Songs. 

152A. Aku.\n : hauen (hauin), Sem. 
Pa. Max. [Mai. aruan ; haruan]. 
Asam durian : D 189. 

153. Asam gfilugur (fruit), Garcinia 
atroviridis: nayo' (na iu'), Setn. 
Buk. Max. ; boh no'(buh nu'), Sem. 
Pa. .Max. ; F 284. 

Asam paya (fruit) : S 11. 

154. Ascend, to {Mai. naik) : (<:) chuoh 
{pr. chu-ohh); ya-chuoh, ex. chuoh 
ha-dong = .l/rt/. naik ka-rumah, " I 
enter a house" ; chu-oh ba-chebak 
= Mal. naik gunong, " to climb a 
hill," Pang. U. Aring; ya-chuoh. 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. To climb 
up ; to ascend : chuo, ex. chuo 
kftbadong {Mai. naik ka-rumah) = 

' ' enter the house, " Pang. K. Aring, 

Si8 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

To land?; to go up-country? (Mai. 
naik darat) : chuoh (pr. chu-ohh) 
ka-hop, Pang. U. A ring; chuoh 
ba-hop, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
F 231. 

(b) Ascend, to (Mai. naik) : ya' 
hijahh (pr. hi-jahh), (of climbing a 
hill), Sem. Plus; hechhoi (hetchhoi), 
Sak. Kerb. To climb a hill : 
hechhoi (hetchhoi), Sak. Kerb. [? 
cf. Khmer chou [jau], " to rise " (of 
the tide)]. 

(c) Climb, to (^fal. panjat) : ya' 
chawad kebok, " 1 climb for fruit." 
Sem. Plus. To climb with feet 
straight : chidwad (chidward), Sem. 
Stev. [? = A 156]. 

(d) Ascend, to (Mai. mendaki. 
naik gunong) : chat°, Sen. Cliff. 
To ascend ; to climb : pftchun 
(pchun), Sern. Pa. Max. ; cf. A 145 
[cf. Bahnar shuon (.Kuon), "to 
ascend "]. 

155. Ascend, to, or climb (Mai. naik) : 
ya' lu-\veg (pr. lu-wegj), e.g. to 
climb a tree, Sem. Jarum ; ya' 
luweg (pr. lu-wegj ) : ex. luweg 
kebok, "to climb for fruit," Sem. 
Plus. To climb : luwik or luwi', 
ex. luwi' jo'u', "to climb a tree," 
Pang. Belitnb. ; luig (looig), Sem. 
Stez'. ; luei (loo-ei), Sem. Beg. ; 
(looi), Ben. Xe-w. ; lu-it, Kerbat. 
"To climb ; to ascend : mlluit (mluit), 
Se7n. Buk. Max. To climb a tree : 
luig kayu, Lebir. To go up ; to 
ascend ; to rise : lued (luid), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; luet (luit), Sejn. Pa. 
Max. To jump : luih, Sem. Pa. 
Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. ; b4kiih 
(baiuulih), Sem. Pa. Max. ; bAluih 
(bluih), Setn. Buk. Max. ; belueh 
(bluih), Sem. Pa, Max. To jump 
up ; to start up : lued (luid), Sern. 
Pa. Max. ; ? cf. A 9 ; A 132 ; A 
146 ; F 163 [? cf. Khmer long, 
" to ascend," or cf. A 156]. 

156. AsCKNi), TO ; to climb [go up a hill] : 
(a) oig-mat^, Som. To ascend: 
wet, Sak. Guai. To climb : u-wet, 
Krau Tern. To climb a tree ; wet 
t^kiih ncho' (wet te-korh nfi-ho'), 
Krau Ket. To go up-country \or 
to land?] (Mai. naik darat) : uit ga 
long, Kcrdau ; A 9. To awake (Mai. 
bangkit): ya-wiig, Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam. , Pang. Gal. To awake : 
inwag, Sem. A'. Ken. To rise ; to 
arise ; to get up (A/al. bangun) : 
ya-w6k. Pang. U. A ring. 

\b) Ascend, to (Mai. naik) : bi-h(ij, 

Sen. Cliff. ; bi-hfit ; hfit, Sen. Cliff. 
To ascend ; to go up (Mai. naik) : 
huj ; hfit. Sen. Cliff. To climb 
(Mai. panjat) : hHj, hfit, bi-hfit, 
bi-hfij, Sen. Cliff. ; hut", Serau. 
I climb : en huut", Jclai. To go 
up a ladder : hut, Serau. [Hence 
the following: "May I enter this 
house? Yes, \'ou may. No, you 
may not": bule an hut" (or hot) 
dong he? bule ha hut (or hut). 
Ga hut (or ga hot), pe bule (or pe 
bule), jelai.'l To go up: hu^n 
(hun(d)), Sak. U. Kam. 

157. Ascend, TO: nai, Sak.Ra.; naik, 
Bcdu. II. To climb : naik, Bedu. 
II. To climb (a hill) : nai, Sak. Ra. 
\Mal. naik] ; A 6 ; C 165-167. 
Ash : A 159-161 ; F 129 ; R 12. 

158. Ashamed: aiep. Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[Mai. Ar. 'aib]. 

158A. Ashamed : hesol (hdsbl), Sdm. ; 

engsal (ensel), Sak. Ra. To be 

ashamed: ensAl (ensal, "deep a"), 

Son. K. Ken. ; D 122. 
1 58B. Ashamed : sagur, Tembi, Serau 

[cf. and dist. D 122 ; F 49]. 

159. Ashes (Mai. abu) : (a) pom (pr. 
po^m), Se?n. Jarum ; tapip, Sem. 
Craw. Hist., Se7n. Ked. And. , Sem. 
Klapr, , Sem. Ked. A'ew. , Sem. Ked. 
Rob. ; tep-ip, Sem. Kedah ; tSpip 
(tpip), Sem. Buk. Max. 

(b) tebut, Setn. Jur. And. Sem., 
Jur. Neiv. . Sem. Jur. Rob. [? Cf. 
Andamanese Kede yir pat ; Chariar 
yir bat ; Beada ig- bug-da ; Bale 
id-buk, "ashes."] 

160. Ashes: pahpu, habu, Ben. Ne7v. ; 
abo", Bes. Sep. Fireplace (Mai. 
dapor) : a-bu, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
pengabur (p'ngabur). Pant. Kap. 
Joh. [but cf. S 25], [Mai. abu 
" ashes "]. 

161. Ashes: kechil (kchil), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; R 12. 

Aside : A 121 ; O 62 ; S 198. 

162. Ask, to; to inquire (.1/a/. tanya): (a) 
pSko' (pku'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; ya.' pe-ka', ex. ye 
pe-kil' blab (Mai. sahya tanya 
s^haja), " I only asked," Sem. Plus. 
To ask for ; to demand (Mai. 
niinta'): mShko' (mhku), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

(b) Ask, to; to inquire: ya' ha-gu', 
Sem. Jarum. To ask for : ya' 
hfi-gfi', Sem. Plus; ya- ha-gu', 
Pang. ('. A ring. Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; hagu', Pang. Belimb.; 
hfigoh, Sem. Beg. To beg: hagoh, 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

519 

Ben. New. To beg for : hage'. 
hagek, e.g. hage' be muntek, "ask 
for a little rice," Bes. Sep. ; S 282. 

163. Ask for, to (a thing) ; to beg : 
aye, Sak. Kerb. [? = A 162]. 

164. Ask, to : ajol, I'ant. Kap. /ok. 
Come in here : ajol d-ini, Pant. 
Kap. Joh. Dress : ajol de-un, 
Pant. Kap. Joh. 

165. Ask, to (a question) {Mai. tanya) : 
sO-nian, Sen. Cliff. ; (es)sniaan, 
Tembi. To ask for [A/al. niinta) : 
ya' semaii (pr. se-man), Sem. Kedah; 
ya' se-maii, Sent, /arum ; se-man, 
Sen. Cliff. ; s6man (sman), Sak. U. 
Kam. ; semain, Darat. I ask for : 
an semain, Darat; en seman, Jelai. 
To ask for [Mai. tuntut) : smainlah, 
Serau. Don't ask for more : ga 
simain le, /elai. Ask the news : 
siman ga, /elai. To pray : seman 
(sman), Sak. U. Kam. To wish ; 
to desire ; to long for : '\^n semain 
(it'n s'main), Sem. K. Ken. [clearly 
means "I ask"]. To request: 
semna-hin, Sem. K. Ken. [Perhaps 
formed with the infix -m- and con- 
nected with A 166?] \A'Ion semiin 
[siman; sman], "to ask (a 
question)."] 

166. Ask fok, to : sooi ; chooi ; hooi, 
e.g. chooi kih-oi, " I ask for a 
little " ; soi ; nosoi, e.g. soi uis ha' 
oyn, " asked us for a light " ; kasoi, 
e.g. kasoi hangkih, "ask him (for 
it)," Bes. Sep. A. I. \Tarevg se ; 
Khmer saum [sum] ; Kaseng sanou, 
"to ask for"; but ? cf. Khmer 
suor ; Stieng chuor " to ask 
(questions) "] ; G 29. 

167. Ask, to (inquire) : tanya (tania), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; tanj'a (tana), Sak. 
Kerb. ; eng tanya (efitana), Sak. 
Ka. [it means, apparently, " I ask "] 
\^Mal. tanya]. 

168. Ask for, to (a thing) : penintas 
(ponintas), Som. To demand (ask 
for) : mintai, Mant. Bar. \Mal. 
pinta' ; minta']. 

169. Ask, to ; to question {Mai. tanya) : 
ya-mesa, Pang. U. A ring; prensa 
(pronsa), Som. ; pre'sa (pr^ssL), Sak. 
lia. [Mai. pereksa] ; G 29 ; Q 4. 
Aslant: S 244-246 ; S 265-266. 
Asleep : S 250 ; S 257. 
Asphyxiation : D 50. 

Assault, to : S 495-497. 
Assemble, to : A 79 ; O 30. 

170. AssKMBLic, TO ; to bring together 
(/<>. assembler) : nimput (nimpout), 
So/n. [Mai. himpun]. 

Assistance : H 73. 
Assuredly : V 12. 

171. Asthma: isek (aisik), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; isa' (aisa'), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[.Mai. isak] ; B 380. 
Astonished : D 56 ; S 522, 523. 

172. Astonished, to bk ; to jump 
up(?) : mftjajat (mjajt?), Sem. Biik. 
Max. [cf. .Mai. peranjat ?]. 

173. Astray: uyoi^ng ; yo^ng, Bes. Sep. 
^L /. , e.g. yo^^ng mfiri {Mai. sSsat 
dalam hutan), "astray in the 
forest," Bes. Sep. A. I. To forget : 
yong, Bes. Songs. To omit : yo'^ng, 
Bes. A. I. 

174. At : da, Sem. S/ev. 

17$. At; on: pft. Sen. CI. [?=B 200; 
? cf. Afon pha, "with"]. 

176. At : mo, Som. To ; towards : 
ma*. Sen. CI. , Tern. CI. ; A 6 ; A 8 ; 
F 231. 

177. At ; in ; on {Mai. di) : ken, e.g. 
he gui kgn te nyun dijk'i (derk'i) jih, 
" sit you upon the ground near this 
house," 5f«. CI. From {.Mai. dfiri) : 
kgn, e.g. dng pai hoi kenrS, " I have 
just arrived from downstream," ^6'«. 
Cl. ; A 8. 

178. At : {a) ku (kou), Sak. Kerb. To: 
guu [?], Sak. Guai ; ku-ai, Sak. 
Giiai ; A 9 [perhaps — A 77]. [Man 
ku, ko [kuiw], "to" ; Bahnar ko, 
"to," "for," "in," etc.; cf. Stieng 
kou ; Mon kam [kuim], "with."] 
{b) To : ka, /ak. Stev. , Bes. Songs 
[Mai. ka, "to,"] 

{c) At ; in : ha, Bes. K. Lang. ; 
A 5, 6. To: ha, Bes. Malac. ; ha, 
e.g. jon ha oyn, " give to me" ; (to 
indicate the object, in some cases) 
e.g. Batin padoys ha oyn, ' ' the Batin 
ordered me," Bes. Sep. A. /. ; R 84. 
Towards : ha, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
With : ha, Bes. Malac. With ; 
against : ha ; hang, e.g. hang ki- 
ke, "with him," Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
T S3- To want(?): ha, e.g. oyn 
ha-chok mSri ha-nechit chim, " I 
want to go to the forest to snare 
birds," Bes. K. Lang. 
At : A 5. 
At once : B 145. 
Atap : R 164-168. 

179. Atap chuchok (palm spec): barai 
Mantr. Malac. Xya. 

180. Atap minyak (palm spec. ): lempet, 
Mantr. Malac. \'ya. 

Athwart : A 26. 
i8i. Ati-ati,daun (plant spec. )C(3^i<j(?): 
torek, Bes. K. Lang. 
Atrophy : T 70. 

520 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Attach, to ; B 213. 

182. Attack, to [Mai. melanggar or 
menyamok) : ya-johu', Pang. U. 
A ring \ ya-johu', e.g. nyah o'-johu' 
(Mai. rimau mfingrkam), " the tiger 
springs," Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal.; 
ahjiop (ah-djiop), SOm. ; serup 
(soroup), Sak. A'a. 

183. Attack, to : deri (d^ri), Sai. Kerb. 

184. Attack, to: lander; langger, ^^j. 
Sep. l-Ual. langgar]. 

Attic : B 100. 
Attitude : F 246 ; G 63. 

185. Augment, to; to increase: toko, 
Mant. Bor. To increase : toko, 
Alantr. Cast. [J/a/. tokok]. 

186. Aunt : gomd' (gomok), Bes. Her.; 
gomoh, Bes. Sep. ; M 192-194 ; 
O 23 ; S 282. 

187. Authority: segat (sogat), Sdm. ; 
segaat (.(ogaat), Sak. Kerb. Power; 
abihty : segao ; segaw, Sak. U. 
Kam. Because : sfigat (sogat), 
Sdm. 

187A. Authority: kuasa (kouasil), Sak. 
Ra. [,1/a/. kuasa]. 

188. Average in size or looks [Mai. 
sederhana) : kSche' mole' (kchi' 
mulik), Sem. Buk. Ma.x. ; S 284 
\y Mai. kechil, "small"; molek, 
" beautiful "] ; G 63. 

189. Await, to : dedoi ; dudui, Bes. 
Sep. To wait : dudui; dfidoi, Bes. 
Sep. A. I. [?.!/«/. dudok, ' ' to sit "] ; 
W5-9. 

190. Awake, to [Mai. chelek): ya-p6h, 
Sem. Kedah. To open the eyes 
[Mai. chelek) : ya-pin [pr. pii^n), 
ex. chii med pin [ = trans, of Mai. 
prov. si buta (bharu) chelek], "the 
blind man opens his eyes," Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. To rise ; to get up 
(Mai. bangun) : ya-pipoh. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. To rise; to arise 
(Mai. bangun): ya-pong (pr. poEng), 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

191. Awake, to (Mai. chelek) : ya- 
chingwang, Se7n. Plus. To wake ; 
to open the eyes (.Mai. chelek ): ya' 
chengwang med (pr. medd), Sem. 
Jar urn, Sem. Plus ; E 83. To 
watch (.Mai. jaga) : ya' chengwang, 
Se>n. Jaruin ; ya' chi-wang or 
chi-wang medd, Sem. Plus ; E 83. 

192. Awakk, to : ngak, Setn. Beg. 
[Man nguh, "to awake out of 
sleep " ; Khmer phfieak [bhnak], 
"to wake up with a start," from 
nCak [iiakj, "sudden movement"; 
Alak ngo, " to awake"] ; A 131, A 
156, W 10. 

193. Awake, to be: ja'-ga', I^bir; 
Kerbat ; ja-ga' , Sen. Cliff. To live : 
jaga, Ben. New. To mind (beware): 
jaga', Sak. U. Kam. To watch: 
jaga, Ben. New. [Afal. jaga] ; W 10. 

194. Axe : ka-pak, Kerbat ; ka-pak, U. 
Cher. ; ka'-pak. Sen. CI. ; kapok, 
Tembi ; kapak, Sak. Em. ; kapok", 
Jelai ; kapak. Da rat ; kapsah, 
Sak. Ka. [Mai. kapak] ; A 33, 
A 38. Handle of axe : A 197 ; 

B34S- 

195. AxE, STONE : dan, Sem. Stev. ; 
S 466. Flat side of stone axe : 
B 147. Round side of stone axe : 
S 466. 

196. Axe, stone battle- : san, Setn. 
Stev. 

197. Axe-hanule, peculiar kind of: 
gandi-u (gan-di-oo), Sem. Stev. 
[the -u is probably the 3rd pers. sing, 
pronoun]. Back of the blade of a 
weapon: ganne (gannay), 5t;«. Stev, 

B 

Baby: B 448 ; C 101-108. 

1. Bachelor; unmarried; single (Mai. 
bujang) : ju-leh. Sen. Cliff. [? Cf. 
Khmer liv [liw] ; Central and Southern 
Nicobar Wn, "bachelor."] 

2. B.\CHELUR ; unmarried : lang-ash, 

Kerbat. 

3. Bachelor ; unmarried man : pe- 

nganting, Jak. Ba. Pa. [A/al. pe- 
ngantin, " bridegroom "]. 

4. Back (A/al. belakang): (a) kra, Sem. 
Plus, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal., Pang. 
U. A ring; knlk or kra' , Pang. Belimb. ; 
kSro (koro), Sdm.; keru (korou), Sak. 
Kerb. Backbone : keru (kerou), Sak. 
Ra. Behind ; at the back of (Mai. 
di-beiakang) : krii'. Pang. U. Aring; 
bS.-kro' orbS-kra', Sem. Jarum ; krok", 
Tembi ; F 220. YTareng, Sue krong ; 
Halang horong ; Sedang bongrong ; 
Bahnar, Jarai rong, "back"; ? cf. 
Bahnar kodCi, " back " ; kodroi, " one 
after another" [for k-on-roi?]; Alon 
krau, Khmer kroi, "after," "after- 
wards." The original root may possibly 
be found in A 46.] 

(b) Back : ki-ah, Sem. Beg. ; kiah, Ben. 
Ne-w. ; kia or ki-y.l', Sem. Jarum ; kio' 
( k iu' ) , Sem. Buk, Max. , Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
tio' (tiu'), Sem. Pa. Max. Backside ; 
buttocks: kio' (kiu'), Sem. Buk. Max., 
Sem. Pa. .Max. Back of sword : ki& 
(keor), Sem. Stev. Blade of sword : 
kiii-u (keor-oo), Sem. Stev. Back (part 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

521 

of body) ; back of bow : kahir, Sent, 
Stev. Behind ; backwards : kio, Sem. 
K. Ken. Behind ; at the back of : 
ha' kio' (ha'kiu'), Sem. Fa. Max.; 
kakio' (kkiu'), Sem. Huk. Max. ; D 124; 
P"22o; H 14,15; S185. \(Zi. BoliTcen 
kii, Niah'on kou, ' ' back " ; but Sematig 
often has -/- for -r-. ) 

(c) Back : iyuk, Sem. Craw. Gram. 
[perhaps a misprint for kiyu ?] 

(d) Back : ke-nok, Sak. lilanj. Cliff. 
Behind: konin, Sak. Ra. Afterwards : 
kenit",Z?flrrf/. To walk behind; kenit", 
chibkenit", 5(;,^. Em. [A'/f/«i;rkhnang 
(//■. khnang )?[khnang], "back"; ?cf. 
Mon knat [knat], "end"; Bahnar 
konit, " lower end of spine."] 

. Back: chelot ?(djfel6t), .S"«/i'. .l/c/Vzw; 
chglon, Bes. Malac; chelon (tcholon), 
Sak. Ka. ; chelon, e.g. chelofi hau, 
"back of a chopper," Bes. Sep. 
A. I. \ K 47. After (place): chelo'^n 
(ch61on(d) ), Sak. U. Kam. Behind 
{Mai. di-bfilakang) : chfilaut", Serau ; 
(Mai. ka-belakang), machelot", Jelai ; 
ba' cheloyn, Bes. A'. L. ; [Mai. di- 
belakang), chilohar, Ben. Nezv. Back- 
bone : chelot", Jelai. [A'aseng Ion, 
"back"; 'Ion, "behind"; Alak 
Ion, " behind."] 

. Back ; afterwards ; waist ; rudder ; 
boat-pole : (a) penakan (p'nakan), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. To go downstream : 
kebSnaga' (k'b'nagak) ; kebfinanyo' 
(k'b'nanyok). Pant. Kap. Joh. Ebb : 
badagang, Be7i New. 
[b] Back: beldkang, Manir. Malac., 
Jak. Malac. [J/a/. belakang] ; B 165; 
H 14-15 ; R 84 ; S 169 ; S 171. 
Back (of blade) : A 197. Back of 
neck : N 32. To carry on the back : 
C36. 

Backbone : B 4, 5 ; B 336 ; B 339. 
Backwards: B 165. 
Bad : bel6g, Sem. Plus. [.See P 143.] 
Bad : (n) j6-big, Kerbat ; jfibeg, 
Lebir ; cha'bek, U. Tem. ; ja' boit, 
Krau Ket. ; ja'-bot, Sak. Guai; jin-a- 
bot, Krau Tem. Bad or ugly : j6- 
blg, Pang. U. A ring; jebeg, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. [? Cf. Madur. chuba. ; 
but cf. Andamanese Beada jabagda ; 
Bale jabog , " bad . " ] 
{b) Bad : jiot (jieut), Galang ; jiyet, 
Barok ; jehet, Bes. Sep. A. 1. ; jehat 
(jehent), Bes. Her. ; jehat (jehei't), 
Bedu. II. ; jahat, Jak. .Malac. ; (djahdt), 
Sak. Kor. Gb. [Mai. jahat]. 
Bad : bajau, Bes. Sep. A. I. Ugly : 
bajaii, Bes. Malac. Wicked : bajau 
(bajow), Bes. Bell. 

10. Bad : salah, Bes. Bell. Fault : 
salah, Sak. Ka. ; sal^h, Sak. Kerb. ; 
tesalor (t'salor), Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Mistake; wrong: salah, Sak. U. 
Kam. \Mal. salah] ; see also B 484. 
Bad: A 86, 87; G 65 ; G 67-68; 
S 190 ; W 1 03 A ; W 150. 

Bag: S I. 

1 1. Bag or wallet (for betel, etc. , = Mai. 
bujam sirih): chog [pr. chogg) 
Sem.. Kedah. 

12. Bag : s6neng, ex. sGneng bed beng 
kad, " wallet for betel-leaf and areca 
nut," Sem. Plus; B 189; U 21 
Rice -bag {Mai. sum pit ) : seneng, 
Sem. Jaruvi ; seneng, Sem. Plus. 

13. Bag for betel : tapa, Som. ; apok 
bulo (apok bouli)), Sak. Kerb. Betel- 
box : tapong langkop (tapon lan- 
kop), Sak. Ra. [Mai. tabong lang- 
kap?]. Rice-bag: tab6k, Sak. Tap.; 
tapok", Darat ; tapok" chendroi, 
Jelai. [7 a. Cham, tabik, "rice-bag"; 
or cf. Mai. tepak, "a small box," or 
tabong, ' ' internode of bamboo used 
as a receptacle." But cf. also Kon 
Til poh ; Boloven kapum, " basket."] 

14. Bag; rice-bag [Mai. sumpit):kay- 
ong, Sem. Kedah. Mat sack: kaiyol^ng 
(kaijok'n), Sem. K. Ken. [Mai. 
karong], 

15. Bag; wallet: bujam, Bes. K. Lang. 
Betel- wallet : bujam, Bes. K. L. [Mai. 
bujam]. 

16. Baggage : pechem pechem. Pant. 
Kap. Joh. Clouds: pacham tatengel, 
Pant. Kap. Log. ; H 83. Elephant : 
pechem, Jak. Ba. Pa. ; pechem bfisar, 
Jak. Semb., Jak. Mad. ; (pechem 
b'sar), Jak. Sim. ; B 210 ; Y 26. 
Bake, to : B 468. 

17. Bald : sekueh (skuih), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; chekoh (chikuh), Sern. Pa. 
Max. [? = S 334]. 

18. Bald: laikim? (Hakim?), Sem. Pa, 
Max. [? = S 334]. 

19. Bald : pah6I, Mantr. .Malac. 

20. B.\LD : sola, Mantr. .Malac. [Mai. 
sulah]. 

Ball, musket : G 130. 

21. Bamboo: iCbeh, Pang. Jalor; labeh, 
Sem. Craw. Hist. ; lebeh (pr. Ifebehh), 
Sem. Kedah ; {Mai. buloh belong), 
Dendrocalamus Jlagellifer (?) : ISbeh 
(laWh), Setn. Buk. Max. ; lebuih 
(Ibuih), Sem. Pa. Max. ; {Mai. b. 
duri), lebeh lie' (Ibih aili'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; T. 94 ; (.Mai. h. 
kasap), Ochlandra Ridley i : lebeh 
ek (Ibh aik), Sem. Buk. .Max. ; 
D 137; lebueh or Ifibuas, patek ? 

522 

COM PA RA TIVE VOCA B ULA RY OF 

(Ibuas patik), or 1. latek ? ( 1. 
latlk?), Sent. Pa. Max. [probably 
the former, meaning ' ' dog bam- 
boo," compare the corresponding 
Sem. Buk. Max. expression — evi- 
dently lebuih or lebuas is the proper 
word for "bamboo"]; {Mai. buloh 
minyak), Oxytenarithera sinuata : 
lebeh minyak (Ibh mink), Sem. Buk. 
Max.; {Mai. b. t61or), 1 Schizosta- 
chyum Zollingcri:\i:heh tSlo' (Ibh tlu' ), 
Sem. Buk. .Max. ; E 37 ; for the 
species -1/a/. b. rembau(?), b. tilan, b. 
China, Sem. Pa. .Max. and Sem. Buk. 
Max. , add the Malay epithets to 
lebuih and lebeh respectively. Re- 
ceiver (for collecting upas poison), 
lebeh, Sem. Kedah. 

22. Bamboo: le-u', L\ Tern.; le-u, 
U. Cher. ; leyu, Tan. U. Lang. 
Bamboo pot [Mai. priuk buloh) ; le-u 
Sen. Cliff. ; p6-o' le-u, Sen. Cliff. ; 
B 24 [?=B 21 ; cf. Boloi'ev la; 
Tareng Iftt, "bamboo"; Sui la, 
" female bamboo "]. 

23. Bamboo : sinlan (sinlawn), Or. 
Berumb. [Cf. B 261? or B 22? 
Perhaps cf. Cuoi srang ; Kon Tu 
sarang, ' ' bamboo "]. 

24. Bamboo {.Mai. buloh) : p6-o', Sem. 
Cliff. ; poo' (pook), Scrau ; pau' 
(pauk), Serau (?) ; p6' (pok), Sak. 
Em. ; B 22. Bamboo cluster {Mai. 
rumpun) : piwo' (piuu'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

25. Bamboo : genung, Jehehr ; gSnun 
{pr. genunn), Sem. Jarum, Sem. 
Plus; genuor genah, Pang. Belimb.; 
gnu, U. Kel. Bamboo receiver (for 
collecting upas), genua dog, Sem. 
Plus ; B 232 [? cf. Phnong khnam 
" bamboo "]. 

26. B.\MB(« (spec. .Ma!, b. duri). Bam- 
busa Bhnneana : kida' (kida'), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; (spec. Mai. b. teior), 
Schiiostachyum Zollingeri {}) : kida' 
mSko' (kida' mku'), Sem. Pa. Max.; 
K 34- 

27. B.\mb(jO, a kind of : yeh, Sem. 
Stev. ; yar, Sem. Stev. ; a special 
kind used for the outer case (yu') of 
a blowpipe is called yar {pr. yarr), 
Sem. Plus. Bamboo Hute: yar-hor, 
Sem. Stev. Case of blowpipe : ya', 
Sem. Plus ; yeoh, Sem. Stev. ; yo, 
Som. Inner tube of blowpipe : you, 
Sbm. 

28. Bamboo, kind of : semeng, Sem. 
Stev. A special kind, used for the 
outer case or sheath of the blowpipe 
(ya), is called tcming {? = Mal. temi- 

ang), Sem. Kedah. ; awan tfiming 
(aoiian tomin, aouan tomin), Sak. 
Ra. ; B 29. Blowpipe : tfimiang, 
Serting, Ken a. 11. , Bedu. I. , Bedu. 
II., Ment. Her. /., Ment. Her II. ; 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. , Jak. Mad. , 
temiang, Jak. Malac. ; (temiang), 
Jak. Lem., Jak. Ba. Pa., Jak. Sim. ; 
(tumiang), Mantr. Cast., Mantr. 
Bor.; {ieam'O.ya.n), Ment. Stet'. Outer 
tube of blowpipe : tgmiang, Mantr. 
Malac. ; B264. Innertubeof blowpipe: 
lQm\-3.ng, .Mantr. .Malac. Cha. Arrow 
[clearly a mistake], temiang (tamian), 
Jok. Raff. As.; (tornan), Jok. Raff, [a 
misprint of the preceding]. Muzzle of 
blowpipe : kapdwa - temiang, Jak. 
Malac. ; H 53. Blowpipe : temiang 
dign. Bed. Chiong; B 31. Inner tube 
of blowpipe : anak^ temiang, Mantr. 
Malac. Nya. ; anak temiang (anak 
tumiang), Mantr. Bor. ; C 106. 
\_Mal. temiang, bamboo spec. ; cf. 
Lemcf smin, "bamboo,' with the 
first word above.] 

29. Bamboo : awaat°, Tembi ; a-wat, 
Sak. Plus Cliff., Sak. Blanj. Cliff.; 
a wad, Sak. U. Kam., Sak. U. 
Bert. ; aw4n (aouan), Sak. Kerb. ; 
awen (aouen), Som. ; awen (aoueil)i 
Sak. Ra. ; aul'ng (oul'ng), Sak. Jer., 
Po-Klo ; auin-haui, Sem. K. Ken. ; 
B 30 ? Water-bamboo : awat. Sak. 
Tap. Bamboo (spec. Mai. aur, a 
big kind) ; hau-ur, (pr. hau-urr, 
prob. = Mai. aur), Sem. Kedah ; 
auach ? (adach ?), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
B 28 ; B 30. [Seli/ng kaoan ; Mai. 
aur, a species of bamboo]. 

30. Bamboo (a kind of) : suwor, Sem. 
Stev. Bamboo (the blow-gun kind) : 
awen suor (aou^n soubv; aouen 
sonox), Sak. Kerb. ; B 29. 

31. Bamboo: di^^ng, Bes. Sep. Arrow- 
cases in quiver : dig°. Bes. Malac. 
Blowpipe: ding, Bera. "Borneo" 
blowpipe : ding klampenai, Bes. 
Songs; B 28. Bamboo (spec): 
di^iig b'lau, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; (spec. 
jMal. buloh sumpitan or kasap) 
Bambusa Wrayi or Ochlandra 
Ridlcyi : ding bfilau, Bes. Songs ; 
B 261 ; (spec. .\fal. b. aur), ding 
haur, Bes. Songs ; (spec. .Mai. b. 
betong) Dcndrocalamus flagellifcr : 
ding betong, Bes. Songs ; (spec. Mai. 
b. \.i\'xw%)l Cigantochloa hctcrostachya: 
ding telang, lies. Songs ; (spec. ?), 
ding gunggu, Bes. Songs. Aeolian 
bamboo: dil^ng dioi, Bes. Sep. Dwarf 
bamboo (magic): ding dioi, Bes. A'. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

523 

Lang. Small bamboo : dil^ng gapen 
or d. giiphen (//■. gap-hOnn), Bes. 
A. I. I3amboo (spp. ) : dii^'ng boi 
gade'^ng ; and the following (dil^ng 
being used before each specific 
name) : china", gadel^ng, gunggor, 
hau gade'^ng, kadui, kasap, mawes, 
minyak, sulal^ng, tepos, Bes. A. I. ; 
B 131 (?) ; B 373. {Man tun [dun], 
"bamboo"; Baknar, Jarai ding; 
Clirdu din ; Sfiea^ din (dinh), 
"tube." In Man pUing tun [plang 
dun] means "blowpipe." ? Cp. 
Seltcng\ibd\xnl (k'doon), "bamboo."] 

32. Bamboo (small kind) : briish (brech), 
Sak. Ka. Bamboo, knot or joint 
of : K 40. Bamboo case : Q 23. 
Bamboo floor : M 62. Bamboo 
flute : F 194-196. Bamboo musical 
stringed instrument : M 221-230. 

33. Bamboo shoots : abbong or ibong ? 
(abbung or aibung ?), Sefn. Buk. 
Max. ; rgbok, Sak. U. Bert. \Mal. 
rfibong]. Bamboo sliver (for upas 
poison) • S 264. 

34. Bamboos, split (for bed) : echoh 
(etchoh), Sak. Kerb. 

35. BAMB00.S, split : ire (ir^), Sak. Ra. 
[? Cf. Man kftrek, t.lrek, "to split," 
"to divide," e.g. tun [dun] kSrek, 
" split bamboo."] 

36. Bamboos, split : pelupo (piiloupo), 
Som. [J/(7/. pelupoh]. 

37. Bamboo-box (to hold ipoh poison) : 
sent, Se}n. Stev. 

38. Bamboo tongs : tin-teb, Sent. Stev. 
[? Cp. Bahnar tep (tep), "to take 
between the thumb and first finger" ; 
or .5fl/7«(7/-khep ; il/cw dflkep ; Khnier 
tangkiep, "tongs."] 

Bamboo tubes used for magical 
purposes : Q 17. 

39. Bamboo-rat (.!/«/. d6kan) : hayum 
{pr. hayu^m), Sem. Jarum ; hayam 
{pr. haya^m), Sem. Plus; {Mai. 
tikus buloh), um (um), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; om, Sem. Stev. 

40. Bamboo - rat : dekin, /^a;/". U. 
Aring. ; R 33 \_Mal. d5kan]. 

41. Banana ; plantain {.Mai. pisang), 
Musa sapiciitium : (?) ku-keau, Sem. 
Kedah ; kukeau (kukiftu), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; kukeu. U. Pat. , U. Kel. ; 
keikei. Pal. ; {Mai. pisang anak 
iSbah), kukeau luweh (kukiu luih), 
Sem. Pa. .Max. ; B 137 ; {Mai. 
pisang bgrangan), kukeau berangan 
(kukiu brangn), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
(Mai. pisang gigi buaya), kukeau 
lemun buayuih (kukiu Imun buaiuih), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; T 170 ; C 270 ; 

{Mai. pisang jarum), kukeau jum 

(kukiu jum), Sem. Pa. Max. ; {.Mai. 
pisang pinang), kukeau peneng (kukiu 
pnng), Sem. Pa. .Max. ; {Mai. pisang 
raja), kukeau heja' (kukiftu hija"), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; {.Mai. pisang 
tandok), kukeau bala' (kukiAu bala'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; H 126 [? cf. Laos 
ku6i, " banana "]. 

42. Banana ; plantain : kelui? (geliii or 
glui), Sak. A'or. Gb. ; t51uwi or 
kCluwi, Sem. Jarum ; teiui, Sem. 
Kedah ; (telui), Sak. Br. Low. ; 
(telonille)[?misprintfortelouille],i>w«. 
Ken. ; (A'loul), Som. ; (tbionl), Sak. 
Kerb.; {\.\o\ii), Sak. Croix; telui, teloi, 
Tembi ; telei, Se?-au ; telei, /elai ; 
teli, tela!, Darat ; teli, Sak. Em. ; 
telu, Sem. Per. ; telai, tiilay, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; tSIai, Tan. U. Lang. ; tlai, 
tlay, Sak. U. Bert.; tlai, Sak. Sung.; 
tt'-le. Sen. Cliff. ; kle, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; 
(spec. Mai. pisang mas) telei mas, 
Serari ; (species unidentified) telui 
puntuk ; telui Jelei \_i.e. of Jelai], 
Tembi. \Southem Nicobar talui, 
"plantain"; Khtni/s tut taloi (tout 
taloi), " banana tree " {tut appears to 
mean "tree"); Palaung kloai, 
" plantain."] 

43. B.\nan.\ ; plantain : joon, Rasa ; 
ticik (ti6rk), Serting; diok, U. Ind. ; 
yok, Besisi coll. A'ya. [Khmer chek ; 
Annam chuo'i, chuok, "banana."] 

44. B.'VNANA (spec, .^/al. pisang jarum): 
tongto' (tongto*), Sem. Buk. .Max. 
Wild plantain (.Mai. pisang hutan) : 
tog, Pang. U. Aring; B 45. 

45. Banana : ken-tok, Sak. Sel. Da. ; 
kentok. Bed. Chiong ; kentoh, Buk. 
U. Lang. ; hentok, Bes. A. I., Bes. 
K. Lang. ; 6nt6'^, kento^^, Malac. 
Bes. ; enta ? or entiik ? (entok), Bes. 
Her.; 'ntor ; h'ntor, Bes. Sep.; sit6k, 
Kena. /. Plantain : kantuk, Ben. 
New. Petal (fruit-tree), {Parkia big- 
la>idulosa7); hentu (hntu), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Wild banana : h'ntor 'tok, Bes. 
Sep.; B 44. Banana (spp. ) : h'ntor 
ambun, Bes. Sep. ; and the following 
(preceded in each case by the generic 
h'ntor) : bakar, brangan, bCdu', 
bunga. cheroi, habu' , gadii^ng, jelo^ng, 
jengka" buaya', klat, klat kedoyt, 
klil^ng, minyak, nangka", pinal^ng, 
raja', rindah, royt, tintol^'ng, tusu', 
Bes. Sep. [? = B 44]. 

46. Banan.\: ch^bong. Bland. K. Luing. 

47. Ban.\n.\ (plantain) : senoyon, A'c«a. 
//. Coconut : sgnayon, Kena. //. 

48. Banana (Mai. pisang) : ajoi, Sem. 

524 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Plus ; teiui jai (toloui djai), Sak. 
Kerb. ; B 42 ; pisang jii (pissang 
dje), Sak. Ra. ; B 49. \Bahnar 'iQ\, 
ju ; Stieng'yi, " wild banana. "] 

49. Banana : piseng, Sent. Craw. Hist. ; 
Sent. Craw. Gram. ; piseng (psing), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; pisang [in MS. 
originally pesang], Sem. U. Sel. ; 
pisang, Mantr. Malac. , Jak. Malac. ; 
pisang to (pissang to), Sak. Ra. ; 
B 44, 45; [-1/a/. pisang]; F 284; 
H 126 ; U 20. 

Band (round the head) : H 57, 
Bandolier: R 133. 

50. Bandy-legged: kengkang (kngkng), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [cf. Mai. pengkarj. 

51. Bangkong (a kind of wild fruit-tree): 
tekah, Pang. U. Aring ; deko', 
Serau. 

52. Bangkong: romeng, Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. 

Bank (of river): R 145, 146. 

53. Barau-barau (bird spec. ) : bachau, 
K'ena. I. [^Mal. barau-barau]. 

54. Bareheaded : oichul, Bland. K. 
Lang. 

55. Bark (of tree) kfeliipak, Jak. Mad. ; 
(k'lupak), Jak. Lem. ; \_Mal. kelupak]; 
S 234-237 ; T 211. 

56. Bark, stripped : koyak, Jak. Lem. 
[? Mai. koyak, "to tear"]. Bark 
cloth : C 171-182 ; T 217. 

57. Bark, to (as a dog) : u' ambong ? 
(u'ambong ?), Sein. Buk. Max. [cf. 
B 58 or D 147?]-, 

58. Bark, to : kebo, Sak. Kor. Gb. 

59. Bark, to: jol? (jul), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; ya-jol \pr. joll), e.g. nyang 
o'-jol {Mai. anjing mfinyalak), " the 
dog barks," Pang. U. Aring; ya- 
jol (?r jiil, ex. asu' jfibeg o'-jol = .l/a/. 
anjing jahat menyalak (sehaja), "it 
is a bad dog, (always) barking," Pang. 
Sa?n, Pang. Gal. ; jol, Bcs. Sep., e.g. 
chau jol, " the dog barks" ; jol, Bes. 
Songs ; kijan, Sak. U. Kam. To 
bark aloud: kijal-jal, Sak. U. 
Bert. 

60. Bark, to : nalak, Mantr. Malac. 
[Mai. salak]. 

61. Barter; exchange: nedchbt (ned- 
tchot), Siirn. [? cf. Khmer juoh or 
chuon, " to trade"]. 

62. Bartkk ; exchange : tukar (toukfix), 
Sak. Ra. To exchange : tukar, 
Serau [.Mai. tukar] ; B 485 ; G 29. 
Baru (tree) : N 50. 

62A. Basket : chuGl, Darat. 

63. Baskkt, for carrying on the back : 
kin-bur, Sem. SteiK 

64. Basket, for carrying on the back : 

hineom, Sem. Stev. ; sentong, Bes. 
Songs. 

65. Basket {Mai. ambong) : r6-lok", 
Sen. Cliff. ; rglokn, Tenibi. 

66. Basket (.1/a/. raga): gaXzi , Sak. U. 
Kam. 

67. Basket : charok, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. 

68. Basket: gareng; grenyeng, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. [Mai. garing]. 

69. B.vsket ; wickerwork : ra-ga', Sen. 
Cliff. ; raga' (ragak), Jelai. Back- 
basket {Mai. ambong), raga' (ragak), 
Tembi, Serau, Darat. Cage: raga 
(r&gk), Sak. Ra.[Mal. raga, "wicker- 
work "]. 

70. Basket : bakul, Sak. U. Kam. , 
Jelai ; (bakoul), Som. ; (bakoul), Sak. 
Ra. , Sak. Kerb. [Mai. bakul] ; C 34, 

35 : R 133 ; R 136- 

Bast : S 149, 150 ; S 236. 

71. Bastard {Mai. gampang) : m6-n6- 
le'. Sen. Cliff. 

72. Bat {.Mai. kelawar) : hoymeng 
(doubtful). Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Swallow {Mai. layang-layang), hoy- 
men {pr. hoymenn) (doubtful), Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. [? = B 74]. 

73. Bat: paleg? (palik), Se/n. Buk. 
Max. ; paieg? (plik), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; paliig? (balag), Sem. K. Ken. 
[Cf. S 376 : perhaps the word means 
" spider," there having perhaps 
been a confusion between the Malay 
equivalents " kelalawar" and " laba- 
laba."] 

74. Bat: hapet; sapet, Bes. Sep. A.I, 
Flying -fox : hampet, Bes. Songs. 
Cry of flying-fox : pe lompe-lompe, 
Bes. Songs. [Bahnar shamet (xa.mit), 
hamet, " bat."] 

75. B.\T : sekk' , Jak. Malac. 

76. Bat, Fruit-, (flying -fox): kawet 
(kowet), Sem. Stev. ; kawet (doubtful), 
Pang. U. Aring; kawed (kauid), 
Sem. Pa. Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
kawiit (ganilt), Sem. K. Ken. Flying 
lemur {Mai. kubong) : kayi', Sem. 
Kedah, Sem. Jarum. [Kaseng kSt 
(cat); Mon kawa, "bat," or Stieng 
uot, "a small kind of bat"; but 
? cf. also .Andamanese Biada Wilt-da ; 
Bojigiab wat-da ; Kedc wAt ; Chariar 
wot, "bat"; Mai. kelawar, kelala- 
war, "bat" ; cf. B 74 (?).] 

"JT. B.\T, Frujt-, (flying -fox): kompoi, 
Jak. Malac. [Mai. kolompang is 
noted as the eq<iivalent in B 79 ; but 
I cannot find the word in the diction- 
ary.] 

78. Bat, Fruit-, (flying-fox): kua^ng. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

525 

Bes. Sep. ; kluang, Mantr. Malac. 
Nya. [.1/<z/. ki?luang]. 

79. Bat, Fruit-, (small kind) : kglasa 
(Mat. kolonipang), Mantr. Malac. 
Nya. 

80. Bathe, tOJ-lAzA mandi): ((7)enlayfr 
enley, Sem. Kedah ; ya-'nlai, Setn. 
Plus ; anlai, U. Pat. ; ilai, U. Kcl. ; 
r6-lai, Lcbir; ya-nai, Pan^. U. 
Aring; Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
nai, Kerbat. To, trickle(?) : minlai 
(miniai), Sem. Buk. Max. To swim: 
anlai ? (anli), Sem. Pa. Max. Wal- 
low; to wallow : ilai (aiiai), 6>;«. /"a. 
Max. 

{b) Bathe, to: jelai? (j^l . .). 'S'cvw. 
Beg.; (jail), /)'(.■«. Arw. [Probably the 
same word as " enlai " : the form in 
Sem. Beg. indicates that two letters 
have been omitted in printing : prob- 
ably they were " ai " or "ei," and 
the word ought to be "jelai." Tomlin 
and Newbold copied the error. ? Cf. 
Central Nicobar kolai'-''^, kolaiJ, "to 
bathe." F'erhaps S 544 is the same 
word. ] 
8r. Bathe, to {Mai. mandi) : ya-ma- 
muh, Sem. Kedah. ; mamu; mamu, 
Setn. K. Ken. ; mahmu (mah-mou), 
Som. ; mah-mo, Sak. Ra. ; mamuk, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; mamut, Sak. Tap. ; 
wa'-mSr, Krau Kef. ; mod, U. Tern. ; 
muh, Sen. Cliff. ; (mouh), Sak. Kerb. ; 
meh, U. Cher. To pour out (?) : 
hSmoh (hmuh), Sem. Pa. Max. To 
water ; sprinkled : ammuh ; muh, 
Sem. Pa. Max. [? Cf. Stieng muich, 
"to plunge into water"; Khmer 
mQch [much], "to dive"; Bahnar 
moat, "to undergo the ordeal by 
water." But cf. also Canton Chinese 
muk ; Peking mu, "to wash," to 
bathe."] 

82. Bathe, to : hum, Bes. Malac. ; 
hum, e.g. chok hum, "to go and 
bathe" ; hum doo, Bes. Sep. ; W 30. 
[Bahnar, Chun/ hum ; Tareng horn ; 
Boloven h6m ; Sedang hum ; Halang 
loum ; Stieng um ; Mon hum dai' 
[hii dak] ; also Boloven, Niahon, 
Lave, h6m ; Alak, Kaseng uam ; 
Halang um ; Sedang hum, "to 
bathe."] G 43 ; W 34. 
Bathing-place : T 213. 

83. Batter, to : lempeh, Bes. Songs ; 
P 203. 

Bawl, to : S 175-178. 

84. Bawung (fish spec.) Dangila lin- 
eata : katim (katim), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

85. Bay ; gulf {Mai. tfilok) : lekuit 

(Ikuit), Sem. Buk. .Max., Sem. Pa. 
Max. 
8sa. Bay : tuol (doubful). Pang. U. 
Aring [? cf. Mai. telok]. 

86. Bayas (palm spec), Oncosperma 
horrida : tedo' (tduk), Sam Pa. Max. , 
Sem.. Buk. .Max. ; tadup, Pang. U. 
Aring ; P 22. 

87. Be, to : wek, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Klapr. To be ; is: wo? (wer), 
Lebir ; (wSr'), Kerbat. To be; to 
become ; being : oe' (auei'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; W 92. To be : o", 
Sak. Cruai. There is (J/tz/. ada-nya): 
we, Sem. Kedah, Sem. Plus ; we' or 
we, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; wo'. 
Pang. K. Aring. Some or there is 
{Mai. ada): wo'. Pang. U. Aring; 
N 67. Was {Mai. sudah) : lawek, 
Sem. Craw. Hist. , Sem. Craw. 
Gram.; B 89. [A'a wik, "to be"; 
? cf. Bahnar uof (uS.y), oof (oay), 
oei, oai, "to be," "to sit," "to 
remain" ; Sedang 01, "to remain" ; 
? = L no ; cf. also D 133.] 

88. Be, to : mo-ah, Sem. Beg. ; moa, 
Ben. New. To be ; to become ; 
being : mo' (mu'), Sem. Pa. Max. 
To become : mo, Sak. Kerb. To 
be ; to have : mo, Som. ; mo, mo, 
Sak. Kerb. To be: moh, Tem. 
CI. Is ; has : moh, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
mong, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. To be: 
mgng? (mung). Sen. CI. To be; to 
have: mong (moii); mang (mail), 
Sak. Ra. ; maung, Sak. Martin. 
To have ( = past aux. —Mal. ada): 
mang (mail), Sak. Ra. To be; 
there is {Mal. ada) : moh, Tembi ; 
mong, Serau, Darat, Jelai. Not to 
be ; there is not \Mal. tiada) : to 
moh, Tembi ; to pe mong, Jelai. 
Not to be ; there is not ; there is no 
more {Mal. tiada ; habis) : pe mong 
[original seems to read, he mong], 
Darat. I have: 6ng nioam, Sak. 
Tap. To become : beng ; beng. 
Sen. Cliff. To be born : meng, Kena. 
I. Remain in the house: mang pa- 
diik, Sak. U. Kampar. To sit : 
moin, Tembi. [Khmer m^an [man], 
" to be, to have"; ^c^mi, maimi, "to 
have"; Mon mang [mang], "to 
remain " ; Niahon mang, " to 
stop."] 

89. Be, to {Mal. jadi): ya-lam (doubt- 
ful), Sem. Plus. Was {.Mal. sudah): 
lim, Sem. Craw. Gram. Have (as 
sign of past tense = /J/a/. sudah or 
habis): lem, ex. lem ye chi' ( = Mal. 
sudah sahya makan, ' ' I have eaten") ; 

526 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

cp. leni he' cheg u' (=Ma/. sudah 
kita tikani dia, "we have stabbed 
stabbed him "), Sem. l\edah\ B 87; 

"^ 41- 

90. Be, to ; to remain : ke-di, Sen. Cliff. 
To do: kedi(kidde),^.^. tabarkidde 
taleh, "it is improper to do so," 
Sak. J. Low. To do {Mai. buat): 
ya' de", ex. bra' yede (orya' de'), "it 
was not 1 who did it," Sem. Kedah. 
To make (Mai. buat): ya' de', ex. 
ya' de' dong or ya' dC hapoi, " I 
make a hut," Sem. J arum ; ya-di', 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; ya-di', 
ex. di'-dong = J/(i/. buat pondok, 
" to build a hut," Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. To cultivate: di , Bes. Songs. 
Work(.l/a/. kerja): de, Sem. Plus; 
W, 77. 

91. Bk, to; there is; have: (a) dah, 
Bes. A". Lang. , Bes. Songs. To be : 
da' U. Tern. ; da, U. Cher., Bcra, 
Bes. Malac, Ben. New. Alive: 
dah, Sak. Sel, Da. Yes: da', U. 
Tern. 

{d) To be; to have(?) : ada, Sai. 
Jia. [.Mai. ada ; but the forms be- 
ginning with d- are nearer to Mon 
tah [dah], "to be"]. 

92. Bk, to: loh, .Mant. Bar. e.g., loh 
orang tai, ' ' there are people. ' ' To 
have: laog, Mantr. Cast. 

93. Be, to; to have: issi. Mant. Bor. 
To be: isi, Mantr. .Malac. 

94. Be, to : ha, Mantr. Malac. , e.g. 
the master has come (or is here) : 
tuan nin ha, Mantr. .Malac. Here 
he is : nin ha, .Mantr. Malac. 

95. Be, to ; is ; there is : ti, Sak. V. 
Kam. ; R 67. 

Beads: E83. 

96. Beads, black (in necklaces) : kayel, 
Sak. Kerb. 

97. Beads, black (in necklaces) : seli 
(soil; soli), Som. ; dila (dlle), Sak. 
Morg.; dilt;, Sak. Ra. [cf. .Mai. jOlai]. 

98. Beads, white (in necklaces): sadok, 
Sem. Stev. ; sado, Som. ; sado, 
Som., Sak. lia. ; sadua (sadou&), 
Sak. Kerb. [? cf. A'on Tu kadung, 
" bead "]. 

99. Beads, in necklaces : mani, Sak. 
hta. ; nianik, Jelai. Necklace : 
manik,/A?n;/[.l/a/. manik, " bead"]. 
Beak : S 329. 

100. Beam (Mai. lutup tiang) : bar&, 
Sak. Kerb. Party wall (of a house) 
(Mai. dinding) : bara, Sak. Pa. 
Kitchen-rack ; attic (.Mai. para) : 
bara' (barak), Serau. [? Cp. .Mai. 
parapara, "kitchen-rack"; Achin. 

para, "garret," "loft," "ceil- 
ing-"] 

101. Beam (.\Ial. tutup tiang) : alang 
(alafi), Sak. A'a. Long piece of 
wood (.1/fl/. kayu panjang): halang, 
Serau [.IA2/. alang]; B 129; D 5 ; 
1> 192 ; P 195-197- 

102. Beans (.Mai. kachang): ta-jo', Sem. 
Kedah; kachang, .SV/-(//c ; (spec. J/a/. 
kachang parang), Canavalia ensi- 

for mis : kachang bahan (kachng 
bhan), Sem. Pa. .Max. Nut: 
kachang (katchaii), Som., Sak. 
Kerb. , Sak. Pa. [.Mai. kachang] ; 
V 284. 

103. Bear : kawal (kaual), Sem. Pa. 
.Max. ; kawab (kauftb), Sem. Buk. 
.Max. ; kawem (pr. kawe^m), Sem. 
Kedah, Sem. Jarum ; kawjib, Sem. 
K. Ken. ; kauip, Sak. Kor. Gb.\ 
kawib, Tembi. Otter : kawab 
(kauab), Sem. Pa. Max. [apparently 
a mistake]. 

104. Bear : dampul, Sem. Jarum, Sem, 
Plus ; sfimpaynn ; sempayn or 
sempan, Sem. Jarum ; semil, Sak. 
Tap. ; sam-iu [?], Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
[? cf. Lampong gemol, jamal, names 
of two species of bears. ] 

105. Bear : telabSs, Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam ; telabaz, Pang. Gal. 

106. Bear: chegiiam , /«>(•. .Mad. (Pant. 
Kap. ). [? Cf. Cham chagau ; Achin. 
chag6e [chagu] ; Bahnar hogau, 
shogau (xogau) ; Chruu sh'kau 
(x'kau) ; Annam gau ; y^ /a/t chakao ; 
Lave chogao, " bear."] 

107. Bear : deho', Jak. Malac. ; daho ; 
hoahoa, Ben. A'ew. ; heho', Mantr. 
Malac. Xya. ; seh(5, Jok. Raff. As. 

108. Be.\r : penlepok. Pant. Kap. Her. 
108A. Bear : talSk", Tembi. 

109. Bear: b(}rhuang(bSkhtiang), .fiaro/J/ 
bruang, Ben. New. , .Mantr. Malac. ; 
puyang, Mantr. .Malac. Nya. ; brokn, 
Jelai [Mai. beruang] ; T 133. 

no. Bear : chuwei pangpang, Pant. 
Kap. Log. Bee : chuwei dhan, 
Pant. Kap. Log. Buffalo : chawer 
wong or won, Pant. Kap. J oh. 
Goat : chawer bek, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Rhinoceros : chuwei jankrat, Pant. 
Kap. Log. [Cf. .Mill, cheweh, an 
expression used in the Malay 
Pantang language of the east coast 
fishermen = ' ' beast. ' ' ] 

111. Bear, cry of: wah-wah-wah, 
Jics. ,^ongs. 

1 1 2. Bear, to ; to support (.Mai. 
tahan) : dak, .Sen. CI.; B 396; 
H 66, 67. To bear children: C 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

527 

101-103; C 106; C 109-111; T 
198. 

113. Bearcat or Hinturong (Mai. 
binturong) : gantih or ganteh, Sem. 
Kcdah ; kanteh, Sem. J arum. 

114. Bearcat: lungan, Sem. Jarum, 
Sem. Plus. 

115. Bearcat: chepag, /'anf. U. A ring, 

116. Beard: sabau (sabow), Sem. Slev. 
Lips : sftbak, Sem. Bcif. Whisker : 
sabang, Sem. Stev. Rattan edging 
of baskets : saba (sab-bor), Sem. 
Stev. [? Cf. Tiduiig sanibang, 
' ' whiskers " ; ? cf. Seluug bului 
ch;imii(booloee chaumaw), ' ' Vieard " ; 
Tareng habouh ; Cham balfiu cha- 
buai, "moustache" ; or ? cf. Sui 
sok bhu, " beard" ; H i.] 

117. Beaki) : janghap (djanghap), Sak. 
Ra. [? cf. .Mai. janggut, but cf. 
C 113]; D 98; H I. 2'; M 198. 

118. Beast or brute (Mai. binatang); 
tiger (.Mai. rimau) : ab, Pa>ig. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. 

119. Be.\st (or dragon?): rfiman, Jai. 
Mad. Pig: reniien, /y//i^. 17. Lang.; 
re-mang, Sak. Sel. Da. ; reman, 
Kena. II. [? cf. Kon Tu riniol, 
' ' wild boar. ' '] 

120. Be.\st, wild : merga, S'om. [.l/a/. 
merga] ; A 90, 91 ; Bug; F218; 
T 139- 

Beat, to : C 295, 296 ; S 495-497. 

121. Beat, to; to spear; to prick: 
kepang (k'pang), Pant. Kap. Jok. 

121 A. Beautiful: oh, Sem. Pupier; 
G 63 ; G 65. 

122. Because : y6, Sak. Kerb. 

123. Because: sebab (sob&b), .Sa^. /?<?. 
[.!/<//. Ar. sebab] ; A 187 ; B 152 ; 
H 39 ; T 54 ; W 77 ; W 79. 

124. Beckon, to: leweh? (lluih?), Sem. 
Pa. .Max. 

125. Beckon, to: mejing (mjing), 
Sem. Buk. Max. 

126. Beckon, TO: garnet, .Mantr. Malac. 
[.Mai. gamit]. 

127. Become, to: jadi (djadi), Sdm.; 
jadi (djfi,di), Sak. Pa. [.Mai. jadi] ; 
B 87, 88. 

128. Bed, or sleeping-place (when of split 
bamboos): penong, &■;«. Kedah. 

129. Bed, or sleeping-place (of split bam- 
boos) : karob (pr. karobb), Sem. 
Plus; D 4; S 250, 251. Cross- 
pieces of bed [Fr. traverses 
de lit) : charu (tcharou), Sak. 
Kerb. ; chiara (tchiara), Sak. Ra. 
Beam (Fr. solive) : cherup, 
(tch^roup), Sak. Ra. Cross-beams 
(.Mai. gelt'gar) : charo' (charokh), 

Serau. .Small rafters : cherak", 
Serau. Rafters (.]Ial. kasau atap) : 
chc-rak, Sen. Cliff. ; (.Mai. kasau 
runiah), chelAk", Sak. Em. [? cf. 
R 167]. 

130. Cross-sticks used as supports of 
bamboo sleeping - place : {lelayen, 
Sem. Keda/t, 

131. Cross-sticks used as supports of 
bamboo sleeping - place : kOding, 
Sem. Plus [?=B 31]. 

132. Cross-pieces of ted (Fr. traverses 
delit): g\ogM, Sdm. [.Mai. gelfigar]. 
Bed, to be brought to : W 93. 
Bed (of river) : W 41. 

133. Bfidukong (fish spec): tikuk ? 
(tikuk), Sem. Pa. .Max. 

134. Bee: gala, Sem. Craw. Hist., Sem, 
Klapr, ; galu, Sem, Ked. And., 
Sem. Ked. New., Sem, Jur, And., 
Sem. Jur. New. , Sem. Jur. Rob, 
[This word is doubtful.] 

135. Bee : padau, Sem, Kedah, Sem, 
Jarum; tadau, Sem. Plus. Honey: 
padau, Sak. Kor. Gb. [? Cf. An- 
damanese Bale woato ; P uchikwar 
\vi\te-da ; A'o/ wAtfl.-che, "bee."] 

136. Bee: tebol (tfi-beri), Sen, Cliff.; 
tebol, Jelai, Tembil ; tetel, Serau; 
tebol. Pes. Sep. ; (tebul), Ben. New, 
Bee (spec. Mai, kelulut) : tabel 
(tablil), Sem. Buk. .Max. Honey: 
tabal, Sak. Br. Low. ; teb5'l (tebeul), 
Sak. Croix ; teb61. Pes. .Maine. ; 
tebol (tbhol), Scim. ; gula' tebol, 
Bes. Sep. ; S 512. 

137. Bee (Mai. lebah) : (a) lueh (luih), 
Sem. Pa. .Max., Sem. Buk. .Max. ; 
linve, Sem. Kedah, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal, ; luwe, Sem. Jarum ; 
lawe, Sem. Plus ; luei, Tembi ; B 41. 
Honey : luwe, Pang. K. Aring ; 
lebbh , Pang. Belimb. Bee (spec. 1/a/. 
lebah kukusan) : lueh kiikus (luih 
kkus). Sent. Pa. Max.; lueh kiam 
(kliam), Sem. Buk. .Max. Young 
of bee: wang lueh (uang luih), Sem, 
Pa. Max. ; C loi. Honey: gulah 
lueh (kulh luih), Sem. Pa. .Max.; S 
512; tuliJi, Sem. Per. ; munisang-lui, 
Sem. U. Sel. ; H 122; H 119; 
N 42 [Churu lue, lueh, "bee"]. 
(b) Honey: ayu ISbah, Plan. Rem.; 
ayer lebah, Bedu. II. ; ayer lebah, 
Jak. I^m. ; ayer l^b^h, Barok ; 
W 33 ; manlsan lebah, Bedu. II. ; 
manisan lebah, Jak. Semb. ; H 122 
[.Mai. lebah, "bee"]. 

138. Bee: banidahan. Pant. Kap. Her.; 
B 350. Honey : sempeloh bani 
dahan (s'mp'loh bani dahan), Pant. 

528 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

139 

140 

141 

142. 

143. 

Kap. Lent. ; R 76 ; W 34. {^Batak 

uwani ; Bugis awani ; Mangkamr 

bani ; Timor, Rotti fani ; Bima 

km ; Katingan banyi (banjie) ; 

Sampit binani (binanie) ; Jarai 

honi ; Ackin. unoi, "bee"; Cham 

hani, haning, "honey."] 
, Bei:: kC'rulud(kerzulud), /?(?«. AVw. ; 

kelulut, Jak. Ma/ac. Honey : ayer 

kelulut, Jak. Malac. [.1/a/. kelulut, 

a small wild bee]. 
, Bee, small wild: (sp. Mai. 

kelulut), Trigonia: shuht, Bes. A. I. 

[Bahnar shut (.\ut) ; Bo/oven, A'ia- 

hlin, Alak shtit (.vut) ; Sedan g sut ; 

Kaseng siit ; Halang siit ; Stieng 

sut ; Chrau shut (.xut), shuet (xuet), 

" bee."] 

Bee : B no ; H 135 ; W 25. 
, Bee, Borer- ; beetle {Mai. kum- 

bang) : talong, Sem. Jarum ; 

talong {pr. talogn), Sem. Plus; 

temleng ( tniling ), Se/n. Buk. 

Max. ; talok, Siim. Millipede {Mai. 

gonggo') : talong (talung), Sem. 

Pa. .Max. 

Bees'-wax : W 47-51. 
Bee-tree {Mai. tualang): gul, Sem. 
Kedah ; tegul, Tcmbi ; teragul, 
Serau. 

Beetle : («) kemor (komor), Sak. 
Kerb. Insect : kemor (komor), 
Som. ; k6m6r (komor), Sak. Kerb. ; 
kgniiir, Serting. Insect ; worm 
(.l/(z/. ulat) : V.?in\kx, Tembi\ kemor, 
Serau. Maggot: kemung (kmung), 
Sak. U. Kam. White ant : kemuan, 
Tembi ; kemot^, Serau [or Tembi\ 
[b) Caterpillar; worm: {Mai. ulat), 
kgmai (kmai), Sem. Pa. Max., 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; (spec. Mai. ulat 
bulu) : kemai sok (kmai suk), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; kemai sog (doubtful). 
Pang. U. Aring \ S I. ; kamai 
{pr. kamaiy) or kamai jelik, Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus; ile' k6mai ? 
(aili' kmai), Sem. Buk. Max., [this 
last must surely be for kemai ile', 
else it means "hairs of the cater- 
pillar"]; T 94; (spec. Mai. ulat 
nangka), kemai nftngka' (kmai 
nngka'), Sem. Pa. Max. Abscess 
of the teeth: k(5mai pgnek ? (kmai 
pnik?), Sem. Buk. Max. ; T 168 ; 
T 170. [There are a number of 
insect names which appear to be 
in some way connected with the 
above : e.g. Khmer khmor [khnmr], 
"cricket"; khmaut [khmut], "black 
winged insect which gnaws wood " ; 
Bahnar kumot, "moth" {Fr. 

ciron) ; Chrau komosh (komox), 
komoh ; Stieng V.om\eX, "maggot" 
{Fr. charan9on) ; Stieng komuon, 
"beetle" {Fr. espece de cerf-volant); 
Man thma, "beetle"; khSmha, 
chma, chami, "insect"; Bahnar 
shamot (xamot), "bug"; Achin. 
kamuwe, "white ant"; and cf. 
M 180 and W 25.] 

144. Beetle : kumbang, Tembi, Sera?/, 
Jelai ; kumbang (koumbin), Sak. 
Ra. \_Mal. kumbang ; B 143 {a) 
may possibly be connected]; B 141. 

I44.\. Beetle : harang-hdrui, Sem. K. 
Ken. ; cf. A 1 10 ? 

145. Before : chiang ( tchiang ), Bes. 
Her. ; cha'chok, Serting. First ; 
in front : chiang, Bes. Malac ; 
{.\fal. hadap), chiang, ex. chok 
ba' -chiang {Mai. jalan ka-hadapan) 
= " to proceed, go forward," 
Bes. K. L. To precede ; to go 
before : chong (chung), Sem. Buk. 
Max. A moment {Mai. sakejap) : 
ochang, e.g. dudui ochang, " wai, 
a moment," Bes. K. L. ; ocha'^ngt 
Bes. A. I. At once: chiang; siang, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. Apart ; separate 
{Mai. asing) : ka-seng, ex. chop 
ka-seng {Mai. jalan dahulu), "go 
on by yourself" [it is also said to 
mean "in front"], Sem. Kedah. In 
front: chia^^ng; sial^ng, e.g. chokleh 
chia'^ng, "walk in front," Bes. Sep. 
A. I. Go first : cho'lah chiang, 
Bes. Malac. Formerly ; first (?) : 
ka'-seng (ka'sing), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
kasing, Sem. Stev. Past : former 
{Mai. yang dahulu) : bi-seng {lit. 
forwards), Sem. Plus. Previously 
{Mai. dahulu): ba-seng, Pang. U. 
Aring, Pang. Sarn{?), Pang. Gal.{?) 
Formerly; yesterday: hanu seing (?) 
(hanou sein), Som. ; N 67 [? = E 63]. 

146. Before: chano (tchano), Sai. Ra. 
Before ; in front of {Mai. di-hadap) : 
chin-ah, Pang. U. Aring ; A 6 ; 
G 42. Go first ; go on ahead ! 
chanu' (chanuk), Serau; cheba' 
chanu' (chebakh chanuk), Sak. Em. 
Let me go first : en chanu en chip. 
Darat. Face (-lA?/. muka) : chin-ah 
{pr. chin-ahh). Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Formerly: 
cha'nu, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; chanu 
(tchdnou), Sak. Ra. Long ago : 
chanu' -chanu', e.g. "old folks of by- 
gone davs," mai 'ngra' chanu-chami, 
Sak. U'. Bert. Half (;1/<7/. siiparoh): 
china'ah or chiniih (doubtful). Pang. 
U. Aring. Breast : chenha (chen- 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

529 

har), Sent. Stev. ; chCnammah 
( chnammh ), Sent. Buk. Max. ; 
S 186. Breastbone [Mai. tulang 
dada) : chen-ah (/;-. chen-ahh), 
Sent. Kedah; chSnuna', Sem. 
Plus. Collar-bone {Mai. tulang 
selangka) : jin-had {pr. jin-hadd), 
Sem. Kedah ; jen-luk, Sem. Jarum ; 
chgnup or chin-up, Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Neck 
[Mai. leher) : chin-ot (pr. chinott), 
Sent. Plus : jJnok (jnuk), .SVot. 
Buk. Max. ; cht-ng-ok, Sen. Cliff.; 
chengak", Jelai. Nape of the neck: 
chendat (chndt), Sem. Buk. .Max. ; 
chtSndftd (chndd), Sent. Pa. Max. 

147. Before: adip, Setn. Craw. Gram.- 
hadap, Ben. Neiv. Chest ; breast : 
hadap, Pant. Kap. Mad. Face : 
hadap, Pant. Kap. Jolt. Door (rail- 
ing to prevent children falling down 
ladder) : hadap anak, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. Flat side of stone axe : adap, 
Sem. Stev. [.)/«/. hadap, "front"]. 

148. Before: dahulu' (dahulu"k), Z^/a;/. 
Rem. ; dahulu' (dahilluk), Bedu. I. 
\Mal. dahulu] ; B 380 ; Y 31. To 
go before : A 6. 

Beg, to : A 162-168. 

149. Beginning or foot [Mai. pangkal) : 
tebong (doubtful), Pang. U. Aring. 
[? cf. Khmer dambaung [tapung], 
" first," " beginning."] 

150. Beginning or foot: je-is (/;-. 
je-iss). Pang. Satn, Pang. Gal. 

151. Beginning or foot : toPm ; torn, 
Bes. Sep. ; t^Pm or tabm, Bes. K. L. 
[Probably identical with T 203, 
which see.] 

152. Beginning : mola, Sak. Kerb. 
Because; cause: muli' (mul'), 5ew. 
Buk. Max. \Mal. mula]. 

153. Beginning: ahwal (a/^oual), ^cv/z. ; 
(ahoual), Sak. Ra. Far ; a long 
time: awal, Pant. Kap. Joh. Near; 
new : b$h awal, Pant. Kap. Joh. ; 
F 121 \Mal. Ar. awal]. 
Beginning : R 176 ; T 203. 

154. Behind: dong yo, Sak. Kerb. ; 
ti-nuvo (ti-nouvo), Som. ; A 46 ; 

B 4-5- 
154A. BSlandas ("untattooed Belen- 
das"): au (ow), Sem. Stev. [This 
cannot be a name applied to real 
Beiandas, as they live a long way 
off from the Sfimangs. Probably it 
refers to Sakais of the northern 
group. Stevens appears to have 
misapplied the term Belandas to the 
Sakais generally.] 

155. Belch, to: keni'ob (kniu'b), Sem. 

VOL. II 

Buk. .\'Iax. ; chC-ndo' (chnduk) 
Setn. Pa. Max. 

156. Belch, to: get- m, Sak. U. 
Katn. 

157. Bfilianwangi (tree spec. ), Dichopsis 
obova/a: cheh (chih), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
(.Mai. belian chcpis?), cheh wangi 
(chih uangi), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
M 78. 

158. Belief; to believe: pachaya' 
(pachaia'), Sem. Buk. Max. To 
believe : ya' chaya' or pSchaya", ex. 
)-e mengid tfipSchaya', " I don't 
believe (it)," Sem. Kedah; perseria' 
(persria'^), A' rati Em. To disbelieve: 
pe he perchaya' (perchayak), Krati 
Pin. Religious belief : pgrchaya 
(pertchaya), Sorn.; pfirchaya (per- 
tchayS,), Sak. Ra. ; pSrchayo 
('p&r\cha.yo), Sak. Kerb. Doubt; to 
doubt : bie' pftchaya (bii' pchaia), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. ; F 121 [Mai. 
perchaya, "to believe"]; M 71; 

T77- 
158A. Believe, to: interas ; keraas, 
Dara'. 
Bellow, to : D 74. 

159. Belly: {a)c\\eong,Set?i. Craiv.Hist., 
Sent. Ked. A tid. , Sem. Ked. Rob. , Sem. 
Ked. New. [Newbold has the word, 
by a misprint, opposite "blood" in his 
list]; (cheong), 5sw. Craw. Grant.; 
(tcheong), Sem. Klapr. ; chung 
(tchoung), Sem. Klapr. ; chong 
(chung), Sem. Buk. Max. ; cheg" 
(tscheggen), U. Pat. ; chong 
(cherng), Lebir, Kerbat; e? chong 
(aichong), Sem. U. Sel. [? cf. 
B 161]. Entrails : chSong or 
chong (chong orchaung), Setn. Buk. 
Max. Stomach : tchang (tchting). 
Pang. Jalor \ chong (pr. chogn). 
ex. piyass or penyass chong (Mai. 
sakit perut), lit. sick stomach, i.e. 
diarrhoea. Sent. Kedah ; chong. 
Pang. K. Aring, Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam., Pang. Gal. ; chung 
(choong), Sem. Stev. ; echong, Sem. 
Kedah. Gizzard (Mai. ampedal ; 
but it is given in the section 
relating to the human body) : 
a'chong (a'chung?), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Intestines (Mai. tali p6rut) : urit 
chong, Pang. if. Aring; ured 
chong, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
S 186. 

(b) Belly : ratoan, Be?i. New. 
[? Cf. Cham tyan ; tean ; Cancho, 
Rodi tean ; Chreai kajean ; Bisaya, 
Sangir tian ; Iranun, Dusun, 
.Stilu tian (Sulti ace. to Haynes 

2 M 

530 

COMPARA Tl VE VOCABULAR Y OF 

tian) ; Menado tijan, "belly"; cf. 
Achin. tien, "foetus."] 

1 60. Belly : [a) koad, Sem. Jur. And., 
Sem. Jur. Rob. [^Sem. Jur. New. , 
by a misprint, has it opposite to 
"blood"]; kod, Sem. A'. Ken. ; 
kut (koot), Sent. Beg.; (kiit), Sem. 
Per. ; kut, Ben. New. , Sem. Pa. 
Max. , Sen. CI. , Tern. CI. , Jclai ; 
kot, Sen. Cliff. ; kot (kert), Krau 
Ket. , Krau Tern. ; kot'i, Teinhi, 
Serauy Da rat \ krot? (krut), Sak. 
Blanj. Sw. ; kid, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
pot (pert), U. Tern. ; [but ? cf. 
B 164]. Stomach {Mai. perut), 
kud, Pang. Gal. ; kot (kert), Sak. 
dual ; kut, Tem. CL, Sen. CI. ; 
kat (kot or koat), Sak. Kor. G/'. 
Big belly ; paunch : kut nebo' (kut 
nbu'), Sem. Pa. Ma.\:. Stomach- 
ache (?) : besa kut (bsa kut), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Mother's womb ; 
pregnant : ket, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; 
G 117 ; S 185 ; S 187 ; S 197. 

(b) Belly : kius kichut (?), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; cheot, Buk. U. Latig. 
Big belly ; paunch : chekat (chkat), 
Sem. Buk. Max. 

161. Belly : eg, Sak. Br. Low, Sak. 
Croix ; aik, Sak. S;ing. ; et, Tembi ; 
iet, U. Kel. ; chut, Ben. New. ; 
u'ut, Bes. So/igs ; e-iiit, Bes. Her. ; 
eot ; 6ot, Bes. Malac. Breast : 
ahig, U. Kel. Liver {Mai. hati) : 
et, Serau. Stomach {Mai. p6rut) : 
eg {pr. iigg), Sem. J arum ; eg (/;-. 
jigg), ex. petiss eg {Mai. sakit perut), 
//.'. sick stomach, i.e. diarrhoea, 
Sem. Plus ; S 187 ; u'ut, Bes. Sep. 
A. J. [Central Nicobar aich, 
"belly."] 

162. Belly : {a) bulang, Kena. I. [? cf 
Sibop, Ba .Mali, Lirong, Long, 
Pokun bure, "belly."] 

{b) Belly : betCng, Tan. Sag. 
\.\Ialang, Kenyah {Lepu), Kalabit 
batak ; Malok, Lepu Sauar bAtftng ; 
Biaju Dayak benteng ; Tid/ing 
banteng ; Javan. w6tSng ; Sunda. 
bjtong ; Bugis watang ; .V/angkasar 
batang; Lampong hatang, "belly."] 

163. Belly : dendak, Tan. U. Lang. 

164. Belly: {a) le-poch, IJ. Cher. ; 
icpot, Serting; lopot, U. hid. ; 
lOpon, Bed. Chiong. Stomach : 
le-put, Bera. [Has been e.xplained 
by Hervey as by metathesis of 
pC-rut, (y«aii = re-put : sed <Jua're.']■ 
(b) Belly: perb"*, Sak. .Maiiin ; 
pt-rhot (ptkhot), Barok ; perut, 
Mantr. .Malac, Jak. .Malac., 

e.g. "my belly is pinched with 
hunger," pgriit gfnting o-eh lapar, 
Jak. .Malac. [.Mai. pSrut] ; G 75 ; 
H 116; I IIS ; ^J 18. 
Belly-ache : S 185-187. 
Beloved : D 57, 58. 

165. Below : (a) kiyum (kiyoum), ^SV;«. 
A'lapr. ; kiyom, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Craw. Grain. ; kiyom or 
kyom, Sem. Kedah, Sem. Plus ; 
krop, Seti. Cliff. ; {Mai. di-bawah), 
nun kerop (noun korop), S'om. ; 
ken-krop, Se^i. Cliff. ; krop" Krau 
Em. ; mC-krop, Serau ; (.Mai. ka- 
bawah), ka-kiyom {or ba-kiyom), 
Sem. Jarum ; ka - kiyom {or ba- 
kiyom ?), Sem. Plus ; ma'krop, Se7i. 
Cliff. From below {Mai. deri bawah ) : 
ken-krop. Sen. Cliff. Back : kyom, 
Pang. K. A ring. Backwards : 
ba-kyom, Pang. K. A ring. Back- 
wards or behind : ba-ka'un, ex. ham- 
phess bil-ka'un {.Mai. tinggal ki-bla- 
kang), " left behind," Pang. Belimb. 
[Having regard to the meaning, I 
have put this word here]; but the 
form suggests T 51. See R 60.] 
Downstream {.Mai. ka-hilir) : ka- 
yom (kiyom?), e.v. ye chop ka-yom, 
"I am going downstream," Setn. 
Kedah. Lower waters of river : 
kiyam (kliam), .St'w. Buk. ALax. 
To go downstream : ki-om, Lebir ; 
ki-ong, Kerbat. Below the wind ; 
leeward : menjo' kiam (mnju' kiam), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Lower eyelid : 
krup, Tembi. To bring {.Mai. 
bawa) : kerup", Tembi [clearly an 
error, due to a confusion between 
Mai. bawa and bawah] ; F 29 ; 
M 199 ; R 83 ; S 236. [Khmer 
krom ; Lave krom ; Halang krum, 
"below" ; cf. also Stieng koniim, 
" below " ; krum, " the space below 
a house which is raised on piles" ; 
Baknar konam, "below"; kram, 
"to sink"; pokram, "to sub- 
merge"; krom, " lower part."] 

{b) Below ; underneath ; lower 
waters of river: hayam ? (haim), 
Sem. Pa. .]/ax. Formerly ; past 
{Mai. sudah lalu) : sudah him (sudh 
him), Sem. Pa. .Max. ; W 109. 

166. Below {.Mai. di-bawah) : tfi-pa", 
i^amr. I J. Arin^, Pam^. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. 

167. Below : di bawa (di baoua), Sak. 
Ra. [.Mai. di bawah] ; B 400 ; 
!•: 1 2. 

Belt : B 214 ; (i 25-27 ; R 38, 39 ; 
R 183. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

531 

171. 

172. 

173- 

174. 

175- 

168. Bki.t, for blowpipe (juiver : chus 
(chors), Sin. Stev. 

169. Bki.t, for blowpipe quiver : tiin, 
Tiiin. Stev. 

170. Hki.t for quiver : boguang, bognan 
(/'('giian, /■('gnan), Sak. h'a. 
B^mban paya (shrub) : amin gul 
(aniin gul), Scm. Pa. Max. ; H 113. 
Bkmban puteh (tree), ? CUnogyne 
spec: talah (talh), Sent. link. Max. 
BSmban paya (shrub) : talah gul 
(talh gul), Sem. Btik. Max. ; H 113, 
Korthe spec. Mai. bemban jechak(?), 
I), kampong, Sem. link. Ma.v. adds 
the Malay epithets to the generic 
word talah. 

Bead ; curve : antioh (antiuh), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Reach of a river : 
aiitiau (antiau), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[MaL rantau, ' ' bend or reach of 
river "] ; C 24, 25. 
Bend, to (intrans. ) : yam ; lang 
yam, Bes. Sof/j^s. 

(a) Bend, to; round; arched: 
kC'ladong (kladng), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Corner ; angle (Mai. baliku) ; 
crooked ; round ; arched ; circle : 
keladong (kladung), Sem. Buk. 
Ma.v. Bent ; crooked ; curved ; to 
bow down : kelbong (klbung), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Crooked (.!/«/. bengko'): 
klengrong or kleng - rong, Sem. 
Jarum. Hollowed ; pitted with 
holes : keluhum (kluhum), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Frizzled, of hair (.l/<z/. 
kreting) : kelangol, Fang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. 

[b) Crooked : kion (kion) ; kiun, 
Sem. Pa. Max. Curly ; crooked : 
kio'an (kiu'n), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
kewan? (kiuan), Sem. Fa. Max. ; 
S 221. Curly : tenyut (tnut), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; truan, Sak. U. Kam. 
To crawl: kTwed? (kluid?); khvet 
(kiuit), Sem. Pa. Max. Coiled : 
gewet-gewet ; klewen, Bes. Songs. 
Crooked (Mai. bengko') : klah-wah, 
Sem. Plus ; keleh-wa' , Sak. Plus 
Cliff. Crooked (of limbs?) : kiawil 
(kiauil), Scm. Buk. Max. Knotted: 
kiwel (kiuil?), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Swelling of the joints : saii klewed ? 
(si-ee klewed), Sem. S/ev. 
(c) Bent ; crooked : wAak", Tembi, 
Darat ; wA4k, Serau [or Tcmhi ?] ; 
biwok", Serau. Curvature : uan 
(ouan), Sak. Fa. Hunchbacked : 
uan (ouan), Sak. Fa. [Cf. Ackin. 
kiwang-kiwot ; ' ' kivvieng-kiwot, ' ' to 
move in curved lines " ; kiwing, 
"bent"; Moti wen, "crooked," 

"to be crooked"; kAwen, "to 
curl " ; waing [wuingj, " a hoop " ; 
Bahnar urn, "curve"; pijuin, "to 
bend"; hauen, "with distorted 
limbs"; uing, "turning," "mov- 
ing in a circle " ; uit ; uit uing, " to 
roll into a round shape " ; pouit, 
pouing, "to take a roundabout 
path"; u5ng, "bend" (in a road 
or stream) ; Khmer on, " to bow"; 
vieng [wieng], " way round, ' "sin- 
uous" ; vien [wien], "in coils"; 
khvien [khwien], "spiral"; Boloveii 
taviin ; Niahon tuwiin ; Alak tfl.weii, 
" curve" ; cf. V 24.] 

176. Bend, to; curly: ke' (ki'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

177. Bknd, to; bowed: («) pako'-pako', 
Bes. Slings. Crooked : beng-kong, 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Curvature (Fr. 
courbe) : bengko (benko), Sbm. ; 
bingko (binko), Sak. Kerb. [Mai. 
bengkok]. 

(b) Hunchbacked : bakandd, Sak. 
Kerb. ; pangkhan, Bes. K. L. ; 
bongko (bonko), Som. Crooked : 
bungkd, Sak. Kor. Gb. [.!/«/. 
bongkok]. 

(c) Covered with lumps ; knobby : 
tungku-tungku, Bes. Songs. 

178. Bent and bowed: rongko' -royon, 
Bes. Songs. 

179. Bent out sideways : juntul-juntui, 
Bes. Songs. 

180. With twisted feet : pia chan di 
ye' .^ (pia? chndlii' ?), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; F 220 ; I i ? 

181. With twisted feet : herud chan 
(hirud chan), Sem. Pa. Max. Dis- 
torted in the legs or feet : herut 
chan (hirut chan), Sem, Pa. Max.; 
V 220 [A/al. erut]. 

Beneath : B 165-167 ; E 12. 
i8i.\. Bengku? (tree spec): lemb^^t, 
Bes. Songs. 

Bent: B 175 -181; S 226, 227; 
S 541 ; W 21. 

182. Bferangan babi (tree spec) : 'long 
brC-h ; bres, Bes. Sep. 

183. BSrtam palm, Eugcissona tristis : 
chembag (chmbak), Sem. Fa. Max. , 
Sent. Buk. Max. ; chinbeg, Sem. 
Stev. Shaft of blow-gun dart (made 
of bertam stem) : chinbeg, Sem. 
Plus. 

i83.\. Bekta.m palm : pedoh (pedoh) ; 
beltop pedoh, Serau ; pedAr belt&k", 
.Sak. Em. ; B 184. 

184. Bi^KTAM palm : bfiltap, Sak. U. 
A'iim. .Atap (thatch) : bfirtam 
(brtam), Sak. Fa. [Mai. bertam]. 

532 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

185. 

187. 

189. 

190. 

191. 

192. 

193' 

194. 

I95' 

196, 

197 

B6rtam, burong (bird spec): 
mua", Mantr. Malac. 
Bkkta.m bird : kerorong, Jak. 
Malac. 

Bfirumbong (tree spec): tLTpiii 
(trpn), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Beside : R 100 ; S 198. 
B6sisi (tribal name) : 'Sisi, Bcs. K. 
Lang. 

Bespatter, to : S 409. 
Best : G 65 ; G 68. 
Betel : E 27. 

Bf.tf.l-leak [Mai. sirih) : bed [fr. 
bedd), Sem. Plus; be", Pang. 
Bclimb. ; B 12. 

Betel : j6-rak, Sen. Cliff. ; jereki^, 
jerag, Tembi ; jerak", Jelai ; jerak, 
Serau, Darat ; jerak, Sak. Em. ; 
jerag, e.g. ' ' do you plant betel 
here? " mang he chod jerag pedih? 
Krau Em. 

Betel : (a) chamai, Des. Malac. 
chcibi? (tjali), U. Pat. Betel-leaf 
jambi, Ben. New. Wild betel 
chambai, Bes. A'. Lang. , Bes. Sep. 
chamai, Mantr. Malac. \_L.ampong 
jambai]. 

[b) Pepper (spec Mai. lada china), 
Piper chaba : chabe (chabi), Sem. 
Bilk. Max. [.1/(7/. chabei, "pepper 
spec."]. 

Betel : piandaii, Sak. Ra. 
[? Hindus/, pandan, " betel-tray "] ; 
cf. B 198 (?). 

Betel: sih (sih), Sem. Pa. Max., 
Sem. Bui'. Max. Betel-leaf {Mai. 
sirih): si-yeh, Sem. Kedah; siri, 
Som. ; sirih, Ben. Netv. [Mai. 
sirih]. 

Betel -leaf: krekap, Pajif. Kap. 
Logi Carved design ? : krakap, 
Mantr. .Malac. Clia. [J/<z/. kerakap]. 
Betel -leaf: kCnayek (k'nayek). 
Pant. Kap. Mad. Gambier : ka- 
yed [pr. ka-yedd), Sem. Kedah 
[? cf. Man phyat [phyuit], "astrin- 
gent " ; see S 349]. 
BETEL-leaf: p6m6das? (pimadas), 
Pant. Kap. Log.; (pemedas). Pant. 
Kap. Her. ; p6medas daun (p'm'das 
daun). Pant. Kap. Lem. ; L 35. 
Pepper : p^das, e.g. pSdas cho^ng, 
"black pepper," Bcs. Sep. A. L ; 
R 37 ; pgrnil-das? (pimadas), Pant. 
Kap. Log. ; pomcdas buah (p'm'das 
buah). Pant. Kap. J oh. [Mai. pedas, 
"pungent" ; cf. F 260 ; see also 
H 140]. 
, BiiTEL, wild : S(?luaiig .Mantr. 
Malac. .\'ya. 
Betel-bag: B 11-13 ; B 15. 

198. Betel-box : pfinanam (ponanam), 
.Siim. ; cf. B 192 ? ; B 13 ; E 27. 
Betel-nut : A 125-128. 
Betel-nut cutter : K 47 ; P 106. 
Betel wallet: H 11-13; B 15. 
Betrothed : V 90. 

Better : G 65, 66 ; G 71. 

199. Between : M 100. 

200. Between : pa, Som.. [? = A 175]. 

201. Beiween: enchop (if;//chop), Sak. 
Kerb. ; E 76 ; I 72 ; M 99 ; S 198. 
Beware, to : A 193. 

Beyond : R 83 ; S 198 ; T 51. 
Biceps : A 134 ; A 135 ; E 42. 
Bidan (bird spec.) : H 78. 

202. Big (Mai. besar) : 'bok or tSbok 
(/;-. 'bo' ortSbci'), Sem. Kedah; boo 
or t6-bo6 (the 00 is a complex vowel 
sound passing from 6 to pure o), 
Sem. J arum, Sem. Plus ; boo, 
Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; bo. Pang. Beli7nb. , 
Pang. K. Aring ; (bo), Lebir ; bbu 
(ber-u), Kerbat; bad, Se7n. Martin. 
Broad [Mai. luas) : 6n-ba', Pang. 
Sajn. , Pang. Gal. Coarse ; thick : 
tebo' {thu), Sem. Buk. Max. Great: 
naba'h, Seyn. Beg. ; naba, Ben. New. ; 
H 14 ; S 310 ; S 465; W 29 ; W 109. 
To increase : nfiba' (nbak), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Large: nebo' (nbu), Se7n. 
Pa. Max. ; tebo' (tbu'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; teboo (terbur), Sem. U. Set. 
hibu (h/bou), Som. ; bo, Sak. Kerb. 
Loud (of noise), {.Mai. bgsar bunyi): 
tebok (/;-. tfibo'), ex. tSbo' amed 
kling baling {Mai. bSsar amat bunyi 
rimau), "loud indeed was the roar 
of the tiger," Sem. Kedah ; tSboo, 
Sefn. Jarum, Sem. Plus. To grow 
(of plants) ; to rise : nfibuok 
(nobouok), Som. Leper : nSba' 
(nba'), Sem. Pa. Max. Leprosy: 
the "great sickness": meje' n$ba'? 
(niji' nba'), Sein. Pa. Max. ; S 187. 
Tall; big (of body): tebo' besar i* 
(tbu' bsr), Sem. Buk. Max. ; B 210 ; 
tfibud neba' (tbud nbak), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; H 87. 

203. Big : menak. Pang. K. Aring ; 
mSna', Pang. Belimb. ; mgnfi 
(m5-nar), Krau Tern. ; nig-na', 
Krau Ket., Sak. Guai. Big; fat: 
mgno' (menok), Tembi. Fat(plump): 
menu (;«('nou), Sak. Kerb.; {.1/al. 
tambun, in orig. tumbun) ; mSno' 
(mgnok ; menok), Tembi. Great ; 
big : m5-nu, Sak. Plus Cliff. Large: 
mc-nfi. Tern. CI. ; menu, Sak. Br. 
Low ; (menou), Sak. Croix ; W 30. 
Speak loudly ! chakap menu, Tembi. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

533 

Thick [Mai. kasar) : na niCnu' 
(namenuk), Tcnibi. A big boy ; a 
youth : iiitinu (rnCnuk), Tcinhi. 
Forest (.l/(z/. riiiiba): menug", Tumbi 
[probably this should go under 
H91]; seeF43. [?Cf. -J/t;// jCmnok 
{from j nok ) , " great. ' ' ] 

204. Big : pa - gab, U. Tern. Big : 
pa'o? (pa'-er), (J. Cher. Fat: 
pa' oh? (pa'-erh), U. Cher. 

205. Big: (a) 'ntuch (ntout'y^) ; 'ntui 
(ntoui), Sak. Na. ; en-toi, Se//. Cliff. ; 
6ntoi, Teinhl, Darat ; entoi, Serau; 
'ntoi, 'ntoy, Sak. U. Kam. ; t6i, 
Sak. Tap. ; entOr, Sak. Martin. 
Fat ; thick : entoi, Seraii. 
Great: 'ntoi; 'ntoy, .S"-?,^. U. Kam.; 
kedui, Ben. New. Large : ntong, 
Sak. Sunsi. ; Sntoi ? (nutoi), Sak. 
Chen. ; nto^ (the e is very softly pro- 
nounced), Sak. Ka. ; en-toi, Sen. 
CI. ; en - tui, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
entuai, Tan. U. Lang. ; thdi (t'h6i), 
Serting. Chief of village {.Mai. 
kapala kampong ; penghulu) : 
maintoi, Jelai ; M 23 ; R 7. 
[Southern Nicobar omte, "large" ; 
Bahnar, Boloven, Niahon tih ; 
Stieng tlh ; Lave tlh tlh ; Kat, Suk 
ti ; Kaseng, Halang teh ; Phnong 
te? (t6s) ; Prou ti ? (tis) ; Xong, 
Old Khmer, Samrc, For tak (tac), 

' ' big " ; Chong tak, ' ' great. "] 
{b) Big : kadue (kadooay), Bes. 
Bell.; kadui, Bes. Sep. A. /. 
(it is "politer" than B 207); 
kadai, Mantr. Malac. Cha. 
Large : ka-do-ih, Sak. Sel. Da. ; 
kaduai, Buk. U. Lang.; kadui, Bes. 
K. L. ; kadoi, Bed. Chiottg ; kadai, 
Bes. Her. ; kada, Bes. Malac. 
[? Cf. Khmer kantol [kftntul], 
"thick," "stout"; Annam to, 
"thick," "fat." But cf. Centr. 
.Nicobar karu, kadu, "large," 
"big," "great," " much " ; endua, 
" larger" ; Shorn P'e dui ; Teressa, 
Chccora 'ka.rvi, "large."] 

206. Big; large: kori. Pant. Kap. Lem. 
Elephant : kori penegap (kori 
p'n'gap). Pant. Kap. Joh, ; cf. 
B 210, 212 [?=B 205]. 

207. Big : kadam, Bes. K. L. ; kadam 
{pr. kadaPm), Bes. Sep. A. /. 
( ' ' bhasa kasar, " as dist. from B 205 ). 

208. Big: ra'-tul, Bcra [? connected 
with B 205]. 

209. Big ; large : bandong, Kena. /. 
[connected with B 210?]. 

210. Big: bgsar, J/a«//-. Malac. Large: 
besar, Mantr. .Malac, Jak. Malac.; 

bdsor (bfiseur), Galang. F.lcphant : 
bCsar penegap. Pant. Kap. Her. 
[Mai. besar]. 

211. Big : D 66 ; F 35. 

212. Large : bagin, Pant. Kap. .Mad. 
Wide ; stout : bagin, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. F^lcphant : bagin penfigap 
(bagin p'n'gap). Pant. Kap. Joh. ; 
(j 43 ; cf. B 206 ; V 20 [connected 
with R 209, 210 ?]. 

213. Bind, to : bbk ; beek", Serau ; bak, 
Sak. Em. ; bok ; kabok, Bes. Sep. 
A. /. ; (kabuk), Ben. New. To 
attach (make fast to) : ncg - buk 
(nogh-bouk), Som. ; iibuk (ebouk), 
Sak. Kerb. ; rinibok, Sak. Pa. ; 
b6k, Sak. Pa. To build : bok 
(berk), Sen. Cliff. To entwine 
(=tie up) {.Mai. lilit) : kabuk, Bes. 
A'. L. To join ; to splice (Mai. 
ubong) : bok, Bes. A'. Lang. To 
make ready (A/al. siap-kan) : bok ; 
bok he'no'^ng {prob. = " to tie up"), 
Bes. Sep., e.g. bok he-nong = 
"get ready" or "gird yourself," 
Bes. A'. L. To tie: bok (b6rk), 
Sen. Cliff. Bark binding for stone 
axes : bot (bert) ; bet, Sem. Stev. 
Rattan {Mai. rotan): ken-bok, Sem. 
Kedah. A special kind of rattan 
{Mai. rotan seni') : awe kenbok, 
Sem. Kedah ; R 39. [.An?iam buok ; 
Stieng buot ; Central Nicobar pak- 
hata(p6k-hata), "to bind"; Boloven, 
Niahlm, buk, "to attach," "to 
bind " ; Lave buk, " to attach."] 

214. Bind, to : jgkod (je-kerd), Krau 
Tern. ; ya-iked or iket. Pang. U. 
Aring. To tie or fasten : ya' iked 
{pr. ikedd), Sem. Jarum. Knot in 
a string (of stringed instrument?): 
nekfit, Sem. Stev. To tie : chekat, 
Sak. U. Kam. Belt : ikat mam- 
bong. Pant. Kap. Joh. ; H 116. 
Rattan binding of adze {Mai. krawat 
bfeliong) : pikut", Mantr. Malac. 
Nya. [d. Mai. ikat, "to bind," 
from which some of these words are 
certainly derived, while the others 
appear to be ultimately related. But 
cf. also Bahnar kOt ; kot (kat) ; 
Stieng kot; Sedang kot, " to bind"; 
Alon dakat, " to tie in a knot."] 
Binding (of axes, blowpipes, quivers, 
etc. ) : A 140 ; B 213, 214 ; R 39. 
Binturong : B 1 1 3. 

215. Bird {.Mai. burong) : kawod {pr. 
ka-wodd), Sem. Kedah, Sem. 
Jarum; kawod, Sem. Plus; kawo* 
(kawof), U. Pat.; kawau, Sem. 
Craw. Gram., Sem. Plus, Sem. U. 

S34 

COM PA RA TIVE VOCA B ULA RY OF 

Sel. [the MS. of this last originally 
read " kawow "], Sent. Maiiiji, 
Pang. Be limb. ; Pang. K. A ring, 
U. Kel.; (not generally used with 
names of birds), Pang. U. Aring ; 
kawau (kauau), Se/n. Buk. Max. ; 
kawau (kauaau), Sein. Pa. Max. ; 
kau - au, Sent. Beg. , Kerbat ; kau- 
wau. Lebir ; (kow-wow), Sem. Stev. ; 
kawao, Sem. Ked. Mar., Sem. Jnr. 
Mar. ; kuau(kuou), Ben. Nerv. ; G i6. 
Fowl : kawao, Sem. Craw. Hist. , 
Sem. Klapr., Sem. Ked. And. ; 
Sem. Ked. New., Sem. Jur. And., 
Sem. fur. Rob., Sem. Jur. New. 
[Probably ' ' bird " is really meant. 
For other words for "fowl," i.e. 
the domestic fowl, see that heading.] 
H I ; P 56. 
216. Bird: chiap, Sak. Br. Loiv; chap 
(tchap), Sak. Korb. Lias, Sak. 
Croix ; chap (tschap), Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; (tchep), Sak. Kerb. ; chap 
(tschap), Sak. Martin ; chep, 
Sak. Tan. Ram., Sak. U. Kam.; 
(chep), Tetn. CL, Sen. CI. ; cheep 
(chaiep), Tan. U. Lang. ; chep, 
Sak. Plus Cliff., Sak. Blanj. Cliff, 
Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; chip (tschip), 
Sak. Tap. ; chep? (chgp), Or. 
Beruvib. ; cheki*, chep^, Tembi ; 
chep°, Jelai ; chep", cheep, Darat ; 
cheepii, Sak. Em. ; chip? (chip — 
i long), Sak. Sung. ; cha^m ? 
(dschab'n), Sem. K. Ken. ; cham 
(tchem), Sak. Ra.; chem (cheym). 
Sem. Per. ; (tch^ni), Sbm. ; (chem), 
Krau Tern. ; chem, Krau 
Kef.. Sak. Sel. Da.; (tchem). 
Sem. Ken. ; chim, Bnk. U. Lang., 
Bes. Bell. ; chim {pr. chhiPm), 
Bes. Sep. A. I.; chibm, Bes. Her. ; 
chibm, Sertivg; chim (chim), 
Bera. , Bes. Malac. Birds : chip- 
chip (tschip - tschip), Sak. Tap. 
Owl: chem (tch6m), 5(i'w. Pigeon: 
chem (tchem), Som. ; chiip ; chep 
(tschdp ; tschap), Sak. Kor. Gb. 
Female Argus plieasant : chimeoi, 
Sem. Stev. Swallow : chim, Bers. 
Stev. Ugly ; rotten (.V/al. burok) : 
cheep, Seran. [Clearly a confusion 
arising from similarity of sound of 
Afal. burok and burong.] [.Mon 
kichim [gachc]; Rod^, .\nnam,('lmm 
chim ; .Xchin. chichim ; Cancho .xim 
(/;-. chim?); Chrt'ai kchim ; Jarai 
chim ; Sedang, Halang, A'asengchbm ; 
Sue hem; liahnar shem (.\em); 
Cuoi chem-tu ; Phnong sum ; Prou 
chOm ; Boloven, Niahiin, Lave chiim ; 

Alak chim ; Stik kiem ; Xong, Htiei 
chiem; .S"//V// <>■ chum ; Traoswn; Kha 
BizMxn ; .SV/«y/^kekyOm ( keckyoam) ; 
sisom, "bird." A7/wt'r chap [chap], 
"sparrow," probably goes with 
T 349. Car A'icobar chechon, 
"bird," may perhaps belong here, 
but the equivalents "shichua ' in the 
other dialects (S/mni Pe sichua) 
make it at least doubtful. Un- 
doubted cognates are Khasi 
[Standard and Synteng) ka sim ; 
Lyngngam sim; War ka ksem ; 
Palaung hsim, sim, "bird" ; San- 
tali sim, " cock."] 
2i6a. Bird : kalobok. Rasa [? cf. 
B 215 ; but cf. also B 482]. 

217. Bird : sabu, Kena. I. [? cf. B 215]. 

218. Bird: ungeh, Jak. Malac. {Mai. 
unggas] ; F 257. 

219. Bird: burhdng (bukhong), Barok ; 
burong, Ben. Neiv., Mantr. Malac. 
[-1/(7/. burong] ; F 257 ; W 132. 

220. Bird, species of: chebau, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. 

221. Bird (sp. ): kalau ; chim kalau, 
Bes. K. L. 

"211. Bird (sp. ) : chim kalongkoit 
(described as the tiger's jackal : they 
say that if it sings " kalo'^ng-kalo'^ng 
kwom " the tiger is at hand, but if 
"koit-koit chongg5'," it is only a 
pig. The bird is said to sit upon the 
tiger's back), Bes. Sep. 
Bird (unidentified, perhaps = chim 
kwiyau) : kukeau ; chim kukeau, 
Bes. K. L. 
Bird (sp. ) : kung-kung, Bes. Sep. 

•2.1^. Bird? (sp.): seg-wog (a kind of 
bird?), ex. surau halug, siu^au 
segwog, "the lizard cries, the — 
bird cries," Pang. Sai. 

'2'2.(i. Bird (sp. ) : tenabol, ex. kawau 
tenabol woug babarr, ' ' the tSnabol 

bird has ( ?) young ones, " Pang. 

Teliang. 

Birth : C 101-106. 
Birth demon : D 91. 
Bison : C 54-58. 

Bite, to {Mai. gigit) : {a) ya' lahet 
(/;•. la-hett), Sem. Plus [but see 
S 144]. 

[b) Bite, to : lihap, Kena. L To 
eat : jahdp, Kena. /. \_Por hap ; 
Old Khmer, Xong hob, " to eat."] 
Bitk, to {.Hal. gigit) : ya' kab 
[pr. ya' kabb), Sem. /arum ; ya- 
kab (also used of snake-bites, tiger- 
bites, etc. ), ex. jekob o'-kab chyas 
ye kete halftt, ' ' a snake has bitten my 
hand and I shall die," Pang. U. 

223. 

224. 

227. 

228. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

535 

Aring; ya-kab, Paug. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; iikilp (iikop or 6kop or 
ekoap), Sak. K'or. Crb, ; kap, 
Seran. To bite ; to gnaw : 
kab (kb), Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. 
Ihik. Max. ; mSkab (mkb), Sem. 
Bilk. .Max. To chew: inkab; in- 
kab, Sem. K. Ken. To devour (J /a/, 
makan) : k.ib, ex. bo' ye o'-kab 
(or ja-6'-kab) ka-baleng [Mai. niak 
sahya di-makan de' riniau), " my 
mother was eaten by a tiger," Sem. 
Plus. To eat (.l/<z/. makan) : ngab- 
ngab {bhasa kasar}), Sem. Kedah. 
Tooth : kap-kap, Sak. Ra. \^Ackin. 
kab; Laos kop, kob; Central iVicodar 
opkap-hata ; Chrau kap ; Balinar, 
Stie/ig, Doloven, A'iahihi, .4lak, 
Lave, Kaseng, Halang kAp ; Khmer 
khclm (kham) ; Cham kaik, "to 
bite."] 

229. BlTK, Tt) : gadn, Serting ; kagel^ng, 
Bes. Sep. ; kage, Bes. .Malac. [? = 
B 228]. 

230. BiTK, TO (Mai. gigit ; unggis) : 
hepong, Mantr. Malac. Nya. ; 
M 61 ; T 170. 

231. Bite, to (of a snake) : katop ; 
petot, Bes. Sep. [Mai. patoh ?]. 

232. Bitter: {a) kadeg, Sem. Craw. 
Hist. ; kadeg, Sem. Klapr. ; kedeg 
(pr. ke-degg), Sem.. J arum., Sem. 
Plus; kgdeg, Pang. if. Aring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; kfidag (kodeg), 
Sak. Kerb.; kfidek (kdik), Sem. Pa. 
Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. ; kSdak 
(kodek), Som. ; k^diit (kbdet), Sak. 
Ra. ; k^det, Sak. Tap. ; kedetn, 
/elai ; kfidoyt (usually kedeg?), Bes. 
K. L.; kedoyt, Bes. Sep.; kedag? 
(getag), Sem. K. Ken. ; techedeg, 
ex. tgchedeg pSsakau dekamparr. 
Pang. Teliang. Salt (adj. ) ; salty 
(.Vial, masin ; asin) : kedet (kdit), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; S 339. 

(/') Upas poison (Mai. ipoh) : dak 
(dak), Sem. Pa. Max. ; dok (duk), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; keteg (/;•. ketegg), 
Sem. Kedah ; gendok (gndok), f'. 
Kel. ; dog (pr. dogg), Setn. Phis ; 
dog or dok, Pang. U. Aring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; dok, Pang. 
Be limb., Sin. Stev., U. Pat., Jak. 
Stev. ; dop, Som. ; do, Sak. Kerb. ; 
B 25. Dart - poison : dag (dag, 
"deep a"), Sem. K. Ken. ; dok 
chSngrak (dok-chngrak), Sak. Tan. 
Ram. ; P 163. Blowpipe poison 
board ; iu-dok (ee-00-dogk), Sem. 
Stev. ; T 211 ; S 358. 
(c) Gambier : ketet? (ketait), Ben. 

S'eiv. [Central Nicobariz.Tik (teak); 
? cf. Bahnar, Stieng tftng ; Mon 
katang ; Annam dang, " bitter."] 
Bitter : G 7. 

233. Black (.Mai. hitam) : beltek, Sem. 
Kedah, Pang. U. Aring ; beltek 
(bltik), Sem. Buk. Max. ; biltek, 
Sem. Stev. ; bil-tek, Lebir; belteg, 
Sem. U. Sel. ; beltag, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; balteng, Sem. Craw. 
Hist. ; baiting, Sem. Klapr. ; belt- 
ing, Sem. Ked. And., Sem. Ked. 
Rob. , Sem. Ked. A'ew. , Sem. Ked. 
.Mar. , Sem. J/ir. .Mar. ; belteng. 
Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Rob., 
Sem. Jur. Nero. ; blSteng, Sem. Ij. ; 
beltilng? (beldang), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
berteing ( brteiii ), Som. ; bfitung 
(btung), Sem. Pa. Max. : teng, 
Krau Tem. ; B 249 ; T 129. 
Grey : betung pitau (btung pitu), 
Sem. f^a. Max. ; beltek mechampor 
piltau (bltik mchmpr pltu), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; W loi ; B 249 ; 
R 120 [? cf. Javan. buteng, 
"dark."] 

234. Black : bSl-het, U. Tem. ; blShen 
(blohen), Sak. Ra. ; bela"^, Sak. 
Martin; bglak (bl-ak); bSlak (bl-ak), 
Sak. U. Bert. ; blaak, Sak. Tap. ; 
me-ak, Sak. U. Kam. " Black and 
blue " (with a bruise), (Mai. lebam): 
blaak, Tembi. 

235. Bi..\CK : (a) guweg, Sein. Plus ; 
gowed (pr. go-wedd), Sevi. Plus, 
(b) Black : gecheh, Sem. J arum ; 
gri-yah, U. Cher. 

236. Black: \^n\&\\(\6xi\&a), Sak. Kerb.; 
leni^, Sak. Croix; lengoh (?) ; 
lengah ? [MS. reading doubtful ; it 
might be " lengerh," probably mis- 
read " lenyerh " by De la Croix, 
whence his and De Morgan's forms 
above ?], Sak. Br. Low ; renga 
(reiigEl), Sak. Kerb. ; rfnga, Sak. 
Kor. Gb.; rengah, Tembi, Serau ; 
jonga'? (jSrngak), Daraf. Black (and 
any dark colour generally) : re-ngah. 
Sen. CI. Blue : "re-ngah. Sen. Cliff. 
Red: 16-gih, Lebir; renga (rena), 
Sak. Ra.; rengan (rngan), 5(z,^. U. 
Bert. ; elnani, Sak. Tap. Mist ; fog: 
renga (rnga), Sak. Kor. Gb. [cf. 
R 54. 55]- [? Cf. Khmer rongit (?); 
ngongut [ngangit], "dark."] 

237. Black : sekai, Sem. Per. 

238. Black : sayS (saya"), Kena. I. 

239. Black : cheratap. Tan. U. Lang. 

240. Black : d&mSrzed ? (dummerzed), 
Ben. New. Black ; charcoal : 
mSrgsik (m'r'sik), Pant. Kap. Joh. 

536 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Charcoal : zemzed ? ( zumzaid ) 
Ben. New. ; [see H 65 ; H 116]. 

241. Black : (<?) heram, Bes. Bell. 
hiraPm ; hiroPm, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
hiriini, Bes. Malac. [cf. Kawi 
hiring ; Javan ireng]. 

{b) Black : hitam, Ben. New., Bes. 

Malac. , Mantr. Malac. , Jak. Malac. 

Blackness: hitam, Ben. New. [Mai. 

hitam, a variant of the last]; G 114. 
241A. "Black and blue," as a bruise 

{Mai. lebam) : dur, Temhi. 
24 IB. " Black and blue " : lebam, Jelai 

IMal. lebam]. 

242. Blade (of weapons, knives, etc.), 
[Mai. mata) : em-pak", Sen. Cliff. 
[?=M 202] ; B 4; C 125. 
Blear-eyed : E 83. 

Blight : I 24. 

243. Blind: koh (kuh), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
chof (0/' chof met). Pang. U. .4 ring; 
chii raed, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
chu met (or med), Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; chid bSkun (chid 
bkun), Sem. Pa. Max. ; W 98 ; 
{Mai. buta chelek), koh chele' 
(kuh chli'), Sem. Buk. Max. ; kfituk 
(ktuk), Sem. Pa. Max. Blind : 
chichuk man? (tschischukmau), Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; E 83 [? cf. X'/i/mr 
khvak, "blind"]. 

244. Blind: lipach? (lipanch), Panl. 
Kap. Joh. 

245. Blind : buta', Sak. U. Kam. ; buta' 
(butak); buta' (butak), Temhi; buta, 
Serau \Mal. buta] ; D 22 ; E 83 ; 
W 98. 

246. Blisters {Germ. Schwielen) : ting- 
lit (ting-leet), Sem. Stev. ; H 15. 

247. Blood {Mai. darah) : nyap, Sem. 
Plus; yap, Pang. U. A ring; yap 
(or yab?). Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Red (Mai. nierah) : yap, Sem. 
Plus ; nyap or tyap, Sem. Plus. 
Wound (Mai. luka) : yap, Sem. 
Kedah ; nyap, Sem. Jarum. 

248. Blood : lot, Tembi ; 16t, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; lod, Sak. Br. Low ; bSlfld [?], 
Sak. Blanj. Sw. [This last may 
possibly (even probably)be "b&hid" 
= B 249.] Dysentery: hamb-lod, 
Sdm. 

249. Blood: muhum, Sem. Jur. And., 
Sem. Jur. Kob., Sem. Buk. .Max., 
Sem. Jur. .Mar., U. Kel. ; (moo- 
hooni), Sem. Stev.; mohum [in M.S. 
originally ' ' mohoom "], Sem. U. Sel. ; 
m.ahuin (mhum), Sem. Pa. Max.; 
(inahoom), Sem. Stev. ; mahum, Sem. 
Ken.; mahiim, (pr. mahci^'m), Sem. 
Kedah ; mohom (merhum), Sem. 

Stev. ; mahani, Sem. Per., Ben. 
New. , Bes. Her. , Kena. II. , Serting, 
Bed. Chiang, Bedu. II. ; maham, 
Bes. Malac; mahaPm, e.g. m. mah, 
" human blood " ; m. ketur, "pig's 
blood," Bes. Sep. ; bahom (pr. 
baho'^m), Sem. Jarum ; bahcim, 
Sem. Plus ; buhum, U. Pat. ; 
behim (b6him), Sak. Ka. ; b6hip°, 
Serau ; behip (beheep), Tan. U. 
Lang. ; briep-n, Sak. Sung. ; 
bihit°, Sak. Em. ; behit, Sak. 
U. Kam. ; be-hir. Sen. Cliff. ; 
bShi, Sak. Bhnij. Cliff. ; 16him, 
Sak. Guai; S 468 ; S 470 ; T 106; 
U 27 ; V 24. Orange (colour) : 
mahum (mhum), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Red : mahum (mhum), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; R 51. Black (venous) blood: 
mahum bfiltek (mhum bltik), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; mahum beltuin (mhum 
bltum), Sem. Pa. .Max. ; B 33. 
Red (arterial) blood : mahum 
tahueng (mhum thuing), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; mahum paham (mhum 
pahaam), Sem. Pa. Max. ; R 51. 
Menses : mShum kib (mhum kib), 
Sem. Pa. .Max. ; maham pa'hari, 
Bedu. II. Dysentery : cheret 
mahum (chirit mhum), Sem. Buk. 
Max. [Man chhim; A'hmer chh6a.m 
[jham] ; Stieng maham ; Bahnar 
phani ; Bahnar Rongao maham ; 
Sedang mehiam ; Tareng aham ; 
Sue ham ; Alak baham ; Niakon, 
Lave, Halang pham ; Boloven pom. 
Kuhn cites San thai mayam, Ho 
maium, Mundari mayom — all 
meaning " blood." R 51 is perhaps 
connected. Cf. also Central Nicobar 
mahani, "menses"; Car Nicobar 
mam, "blood"; and possibly 
Choivra Nicobar paheoit, "blood," 
explains some of the Sakai forms.] 

250. Blood : che-nah, Sak. Sel. Da. ; 
chahS., Kena. I. ; za, zais, Ben. New. 
[? cf. B 249]. 

251. Blood : daia, Sem. K. Ken. ; 
derha (dekhe), Barok; dara, Sdm.; 
darS,, Sak. Kerb. ; darat, Buk. U. 
Lang. ; darah. Bland K. Lang., 
.Mantr. .Malac. , Jak. .Malac. [Mai. 
darah] ; S 32. 

Blood-vessel : M 219. 

252. Bloom, to : babo, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
Blossom : B 445 ; B 448, 449 ; 
V 186-193. 

253. Blotches on the skin; leucoderma? 
{.Mai. sopak) : sila' (silk), Sem. Pa. 
.Max. 

254. BLOTCHKSon theskin(.l/rt/. panau): 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

537 

panau (panu) ; Sein. Fa. Max. ; 
\Mal. panau Iji^ngkarong), panau 
madang (panu nuidng), Si-m. J\i. 
Max. ; L iii ; {Mai. panau besi), 
panau bdsi (panu bsi), Setn. Pa. 
Max. ; I 39. Smallpox [Ger. 
blattern): panuu (banau), Sak. A'ur. 
Gb. \.\Ial. panau]. 

255. Blow, to : nya (nja), Sak. Kor. Gb. 
[?=B39oJ. 

256. Blow, to [Mai. puput): (</) ya-pot, 
Pang. U. Aring\ ya-pijd, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; pu'la (pun (d)), 
Sak. U. Kam. ; G 42 ; tepos ; tepiiss 
or tepoas, ex. o tepos wong bSkau, 
"they blow about (?), the young 
flower - blossoms," Pang. Tcliang 
[meaning doubtful]. Blowpipe : put, 
U. Tein. ; sC-put, U. Cher, 'ro shoot 
with a blowpipe : puh or yi-puh, 
Pang. Beliinb.; putput (pout-potlt ; 
pout-pout), Sak. Pa. ; ampetput, 
Darat ; put", e.g. " please show me 
how men shoot with the blowpipe," 
choba tgrniol en relok mai put", 
Jelai ; hi-pilt ; hi-piit, Sc7i. Cliff. ; 
G 42. To extinguish : teput 
(topout), Som ; naput (napout), 
Sak. Kerb. Breath [Mai. nafas) : 
pod {pr. podd), Sein. Jarum. To 
winnow (J/a/. tampi), ya-pot, Pang. 
Skeat. Air : pas, Sak. U. Kam. 
Storm: p6sh, 5^,6. ^rz. ; pois, Tembi; 
pbs or poos, Seraii ; paii (pd^), 
Sak. Pa. [This word is given as = 
Mai. ribut, but the collector uses 
the PYench word gale, which means 
scabies, and is clearly wrong.] 
Wind : pus (pouss), Som. ; hipoi, 
Tembi; poi, Darat, Sak. Sung., 
Kraii Em., e.g. "this wind is 
pleasant," poi bAr dih, Krau Em.; 
p3.i ; pui, Sak. Em. ; poih ? (boih), 
Sak. Martin ; poh6i, Kena. I. ; 
poieh, Tan. U. Lang. ; poa (poe), 
Sak. Ra. [These words seem to be 
ultimately connected with .-ichin. 
put, Mai. puput, "to blow," but 
they are not Malay loan-words ; cf. 
.Man paik [puik], "to blow (as the 
wind) " ; Stie/ig pok ; Khmer bik 
[pr. bak?) [pak], "to fan," "to 
blow " ; cf. Bugis sapu' ; Mang- 
kasar sapu' ; Bulu seput ; Ngaju 
Dayak sipet, "blowpipe"; and cf. 
Boiuven, Niahlin, Lave, Halang 
pat ; Alak apat ; Bahnar pat, 
topat, "to extinguish"; and see 
also B 390.] W 112. 

{b) Blowpipe : sumpitan, Kasa. 
[.\/al. sumpitan]. 

257. Blow, to (a blowpipe) : (a) lalah ; 
nalo, Bes. Sep. To shoot (with 
blowpipe) : n9.16, Bes. A". Lang. ; 
lo, Bes. Songs ; senlu (sonlou), 
Som. ; chahlu (cheh lou), Sak. 
Kerb. ; cf. B 261 ? To fight : 
baluh, ex. chok baluh {\hil. pCrgi 
V)(?rklahi), "to go and fight," — 
in rapid speech abbreviated to 
" chobluh " [i.e. cho' b'luh), Bes. 
K. L. To shoot with the blowpipe 
{Mai. nienyumpit) : ya' ha-luh {pr. 
ha-luhh), Sem. Plus ; haluh, Pang. 
U. A ring; YaXvih.Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; nen-luh or hen-luh, ex. aneg 
ohh hijob hen-luh {or nen-luh), 
"this child knows how to shoot," 
(?alsohaluh?),.S'e/«. A't'</(z/i; G42. To 
go shooting ; cho' naleh, Bes. Malac. 
To kill : blu, Sak. Kor. Gb. To 
hunt: baluk, Bes. Malac. To pursue 
(chase) : halau, Bes. A. L ; chok 
balii, Bes. A. L [It seems doubtful 
whether all these words are con- 
nected. ? Cf. Bahnar blah, " to 
wage war " ; Halang teblah ; Se- 
dang bla, "war"; cf. Mai. halau, 
" to drive."] 

{b) To extinguish {Mai. padam) : 
ya' pfelit, Sem. Jarutn, Sem. Plus ; 
ya-pldd, Pang. U. A ring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; pil6t, Sak. Pa. ; 
bl-lut, Sen. CI. ; bi-iat, Sen. Cliff. 
To put out (fire): lat, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
plot us {or uis), Bes. Sep. \^Mon 
plat [pluit], "to be extinguished " ; 
Khmer lat ? [lut ; Iftt], ' ' to ex- 
tinguish."] 

258. Blow the nose, to : kahes, Bes. 
A. L To sneeze : kendas (knds), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; kenchas? (kend- 
schass ; kendschas), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
gichas (gitschas ; gitschass), Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; chesh, Kena. IL ; mekis, 
(mkis), Sem. Buk. Max.; nehe, Bes. 
K. L.; nehe(?), Bes. A. I. ; bfirnis, 
Bes. Her. [There appear to be 
distinct words here : cf. Khmer 
nos [nos] ; Achin. hies ; Centr. 
Nicohar hehil-haifie, "to blow the 
nose" (? cf. Khmer kies ; Stieng 
kieh, khieh, "to snuff a torch"); 
and Khmer kandas [kantas] ; Stieng 
kondeh, "to sneeze."] 

259. Blow the nose, to {Mai. hingus), 
ya-batog (?), Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. [J/a/. batok, "cough"]. To 
blow: C 253; W 97 ; W 112. 
To blow up the fire : B 467. 

260. Blowpipe : p6nichul, Sem. Plus. 

261. Blowpipk : {a) belau, Sem. Ij. ; 

538 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

belau, Sak. Br. Low ; belao, Sak. 
Croix ; be-la-oh, Sak. Sel. Da. ; 
belau, Pang. K. Aring ; bS-lau, 
Sen. Cliff. ; b6l3.u, Bes. Malac. ; 
belau, Bes. Her. ; bS-lau, Sen. CI., 
Lebir; belo [biAo), Sak. Ra. ; 
bla-hu. Tern. CI. ; b'lahu, b'lau, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. ; blaue. Sin. Stev., 
Bes. .Stev. ; blau, Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; blad, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; b'lau. Pang. Belimb. , 
Bilk. U. Lang., Tan. CI. Lang. ; 
blau. Sent. Phis, Sent. K. Ken. , 
Sak. Tan. Ram. ; blau, Sem. Per ; 
blau, Sem. U. Sel., U. Pat., U. 
Kel. , Kerbat, Sak. Blanj. Szv. , 
Sak. Sung., Seraii, Darat{>) ; 
blaung, Tembi ; blao, Som. , Sak. 
Kerb. ; (blao), Or. Berumb. ; blao, 
Sak. Jer. , Po-klo, Jehehr, Som. , 
Sak. Kerb. , Sak. Maiiin ; belau 
(blao, blaw), Sak. U. Kam. ; b'lau 
(blou), Bes. Bell. ; blahau? (blahan), 
Pal. ; malau? (malan), /ak. Stev. 
Outer case of blowpipe : bSlo (Mo), 
Sak. Ra. ; 16, Sak. Kerb. Inner 
tube of blowpipe : blao, Sak. Kerb. ; 
belo [bci\o), Sak. Ra. Blowpipe dart: 
ke-non belau, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
C I02. S^Khmcr kSmphloh [kubhloh], 
"blowpipe" (apparently from phlSh 
[bhloh], "twin," "double," in refer- 
ence to the mode of construction).] 
{b) Blowpipe : selau, Kena. /. 
Blowpipe mouthpiece : cheluh 
(ch^louh ; chelouh), Sak. Kerb. ; 
chiilu (chelou), Sak. Ra. Outer tube 
of blowpipe ; inner tube of blowpipe : 
senlu (senlou), Som. [of. B 23 ; 
B257?]. 

262. Bi.owiMi'E : sC'ligi semamu' (seligi 
sgmamfik), Blan. Rem. [.Vfal. 
seligi, " javelin " ; sftmambu, 
" Malacca cane "]. 

263. Blowpipk : pSmeralis (p'm'ralis). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Blowpipe dart : 
pt5ranis (p'ranis). Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Bi-owi'ipi: : B 28 ; B 30, 31; B 256. 
Carvings on blowpipe : D 157 ; 
L 130 ; R 133. Cleaning rod of 
blowpipe : L 32. Inner tube of 
blowpipe : B 27, 28. Joint of outer 
case of blowpipe : J 7. Longer 
part of inner tube of blowpipe : 
M 20. Mouthpiece of V)lowpipe : 
P 223. Muz7,le of blowpipe: B 28. 
Outer case of blowpipe : B 27, 28. 
Ring on blowpipe: R 133. Shorter 
part of inner tube of blowpipe : 
F 63 ; F 220. Tube of blowpipe : 
D 66. 

264. Blowpipe, outer case of : tago ; 
'go, Bes. K. Lang. ; tagu, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha.; (tagur), Mantr. Bor.; 
tagu (targoo), Mentr. Stev. Stem 
of blowpipe : tago ; 'go, Bes. Sep. 
Outer tube of blowpipe : tagu 
tSmiang, Mantr. Malac. Nya ; B 
28 [cf. Cham taguh, "small tube 
of bamboo used as a float in fish- 
ing "]■ 

265. Blowpipe, outer tube from junction 
to carved part of: cha-nam-pah,6>;;z. 
Stev. Carved part of outer tube of 
blowpipe : chanampahi (cha-nam- 
pah-ee), Sem. Stev. Long bamboo 
sheath or collar which is slipped over 
the end of the inner blow-gun tube : 
chenampa', Sem. Kedah ; jgnabi, 
Sem.. Plus. 

266. Blowpipe, middle piece of inner 
tube of : chemat, /?«. K. Lang. Thick 
part of inner tube : chfimat, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. Shorter part of shaft : 
sen^mar, Sem. Stev. 

267. Blowpipe, junction of tubes of : 
chaihaib (chihibe), Sem. Stev. 
Junction of inner tube?: chaihaib 
tah;a (chihibe trthar), Sem. Stev. 

268. Blovvi'ipe join (esp. the join of the 
outer case or sheath of the blow- 
pipe) : chSnertim [pr. chgnerrtim), 
Sem. Plus. 

269. Blowpipe tube (the bamboo tubing 
which is fitted over the two middle 
ends of the inner blowpipe tube to 
join them) : charem [pr. chare^m), 
Sem. Plus. 

270. Blowpipe, longer part of inner 
tube of : isi (iss-ee, esee), Setn. Stev. 
Short part of inner tube : isi-u (is- 
ee-00 ; esee-oo), Smi. Stev. [?cf. 
F 170]. 

271. Blowpipe mouthpiece : akong, 
Sem. Stev. [? = P 223]. 

272. Blowpipe mouthpiece : [a) tamim 
(made of resin), Sem. Stev. ; tam- 
eng, Sem. Kedah ; tambam. Pang. 
U. .4ring. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
tcmbun (tomboun), Sak. Kerb. ; 

(//iwboun), Sak. Ra. ; tembung 
(Awboun), Sak. Ra. ; tSbong, Bes.K. 
Lanz-; tebo^ng, Bes. A. /.; tibdg^, 
Bes. .Malac. ; tgbog", .llantr. Malac. 
Cha. ; tC'bogn, .Mantr. .Malac. Nya. ; 
tebong, Matitr. Malac, /ak. Malac. ; 
tabong? (tabon ; X■^h\l), Mantr. Bor. 
[? = M 100]. 

(/') Wood for mouthpiece of blow- 
pipe : teboh (/(iboh), Sak. Kerb. 
\r\ Bracelets: ta-ben [pr. ta-be<'n 
(i/-tabedn). Pang. U. Aring. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

539 

273. Rlowi'ipk, carved ring - marks 
round the outer case or sheath 
of : ner-ner [or nger-nger) [pr. 
niirr-niirr or ngiirr-ngiirr), Sem. 
Kcdah. Nick round the shaft of 
a blowpipe dart just above the 
ipoh, which enables the point to 
break off in a wound : nger-nger 
(//■. ngjir-ngiir), Sem. Kcdah. 

274. Blowpipe, carvings on : grSt, lies. 
.\falac. 

275. Blowpipe, muzzle of: gala', lies. 
Malac, Mantr. Malac. ; geloi, 
Matitr. .Malac. Cha. 

276. Blowpipe, inner rim at end of : 
lengai', Mantr. Malac. Cha. ; (ling- 
hite), Menfr. Stev. 

277. Blowpipe, ring of rattan at mouth 
of: chul, Iks. A. I. ; chul, Bes. K. 
Lang. Inner rim a few inches from 
end of blowpipe : chol, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. 

C78. Blowpipe, second inner ring of : 
sengla', Mantr. Malac. Nya.; s$ng- 
liik (sunglork), Mcntr. Stev. 

279. Blowpipe, cleaning-rod for : ken- 
bas (//•. kenbass), Sem. Kedah. 

280. Blowpipi", cleaning-rod : bendrad, 
Scnr. Plus ; bingrot, Be7i. Stev. , 
Matcrialien, pt. i. p. 103. 

281. Blowpu'E cleaning-rod: mgneyap? 
(munneyyap), Sem. Stev. ; jgnghSk, 
Bes. K. Lang.; jeng-hek, Bes. A. /. 

282. Blowi'Ipe cleaning - rod : kalto ; 
kaltO, Sak. Kerb. 

283. Blowpipe cleaning-rod : roknang 
(roknan), Sak. Ra. 

284. Blowpipe wadding [Mai. rabok) : 
ISmol, Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; samul, Turn. Stev. ; 
sehno'tl, Sak. Ka.\ sTlimul (sillimul), 
Sin. Stev. 

285. Blowpipe wadding (Mai. tukas) : 
pasul (passul), Sem. Stev. ; basul 
(bassoul), Slim. 

286. Blowpipe wadding {Mai. tukas) : 
nal ; 'ndal ; hCndal, Bes. Sep. A. /. 

287. Blowpipe wadding : rabo, Sak. 
Kerb. ; rabo*^, Jak. Malac. ; rabok, 
Mantr. Malac, Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. ; {Mai. rabok tukas), barok, 
Bes. Skeat. \\''adding put in the 
quiver to protect the arrow-heads : 
yabo (jabo), Sem. K. Ken. [J/a/. 
rabok; cf Biigis, Mangkasarh3.rvk.; 
Buhl waruk.] 

288. Blowpipe, tree yielding wadding 
for : jilk (diek), Sak. Kerb. 

289. Blowpipe wadding : gete (ghot6), 
Sak. Ra. 

290. Blowpipe wadding : kabong (ka- 

Shaft 
(ron), 
(lelor- 
grog; 
mang- 
; dart 

bofi), Som. [.1/a/. kabong, Arenga 
saccliarifcra\ 

291. Blowpipe arrow (or dart) : ko- 
orr, U. Tern. ; ko-ong, U. Cher. ; 
gon, U, Pal. ; rong (rofi), Sak. 
Ka. ; 'r6h, Sak. Martin ; rok. Sen. 
Cliff. ; roek, Tan. U. Lang. ; rok, 
Sak. Sung. ; rok", Seran, Darat ; 
rrauk" (rVowkun), Sin. Stev. ; 
s6rang (serafi), Kena. I. 
of blowpipe arrow : rong 
Sak. Ra. Blowpipe : lelak^ 
ken), Tum. Stev. Dart : 
e.g. poisoned dart : grog 
chenghi' (grog mangchngrii') 
without poison : grog ti ta' bt-che- 
ngrii' (grog ti ta' b-chngra'), Sak. U. 
Kam.\ P 163. [Cf. Bahnar mrom; 
Sedang mrom ; Jarai mrom ; Cham 
bram ; Churu baram ; Khmer 
pruon [bruon] ; and Bahnar, Se- 
dangarfing ; Lave drang, "arrow. "J 

292. Blowpipe arrow: bel, Sak. Sel. Da. 

293. Blowpipe arrow : damilk, Pang. 
Be limb, (the shaft of the dart is 
made of the leaf-stalk of the langkap 
palm, and the butt-end of the heart 
(pulur) of the "hawk rattan" 
(rotan lang) ) ; damok ; lomok, Bes. 
Malac. ; damok, Mentr. Stev. ; 
domok, Kena. //. ; domok, domo', 
Bes. Sep. A. /.; d6m6k, Bes. Her ; 
d\xmu\<.{doomoo\i), Bers. Stev. ; damo 
(dammer), Bnk. U. Lang.; damak, 
Blan. Rem., Bed. Chiang,. Ment. Her. 
L ; damak, Rasa, Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. ; dama', /ak. Malac, Mantr. 
Malac. ; dama. Pal. ; lamaka, Ben. 
A'eui. ; ia.ma.ka, Sem. Beg. [.1/fl/. 
damak]. 

294. Blowpipe arrow : segar, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; segar, Tcmbi, Serati ; sigar 
(seegar). Turn. Stev. ; sggal (wgal, 
soghal), Sak. Kerb. Shaft of blow- 
pipe arrow : segal (.foghal), Sak. 
Kerb. ^Tid-rib of leaf : segSh (sgh), 
Sem. Buk. ^fax. [.!/«/. segar, ' ' hard 
spike (of a species of palm)."] 

295. Blowpipe arrow, point of: ng- 
nyess, Sem. Stev. Shaft of blowpipe 
dart : layos {pr. layoss) (it is made 
of bfirtam stem), Sem. Kedah. Point 
of a sword : inges-u (ing-ess-00), 
Sem. Stev. [The -u is probably 
the 3rd pers. sing, pronoun.] 

296. Blowpipe arrow, point of : ngo ? ; 
nyo ? (no), Som. 

297. Blowpipe arrow, point of : choi, 
Sak. Kerb. 

297A. Blowpipe arrow, point of: ran- 
chap, Rasa. 

540 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

298. Blowpipe arrow, shaft of: g6igir, 
Jak. Malac. Arrow : klikir, Ben. 
New. 

298A. Blowpipe arrow, shaft of: men- 
das, Rasa. 

299. Blowpipe arrow, shaft of : (<z) 
kenio'^ng or keniogng ? (keniok'n ; 
keniog'n?), Sem. K. Ken. 

[b] aj'ong, Sent. Stev.\ huyang, Bes. 
.Malac, Mantr. Malac., Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. [Possibly connected 
with Mai. hujong, E 65 ; cf. Cham 
hajung, " point."] 

300. Blowpipe, wood of which the 
arrow -shaft is made: langkap, 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. [Mai. lang- 
kap]. 

301. Blowpipe dart, lightwood head of: 
brul (because made from awe brul = 
rotan lang), Sem. Plus ; brul. Turn. 
Stev. , Sin. Stev. ; behul, Bes. Malac. 
Butt of blowpipe arrow: beol, Sem. 
Stev.; biol, Sem. A'. Ken. A special 
kind of rattan {Mai. rotan lang) : 
awe brul, Sem. Plus; R 39. 

302. Blowpipe arrow, butt of: paha- 
bong, Mantr. Malac. ,Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. , Jak. Malac. ; pahbong, Rasa. 
Arrow : pahabong, Bland. K. Lani;. 

303. Blowpipe arrow, butt-end of : beli- 
bok C7rb&lib6', Pang. Belimb. ; libut, 
libiit (libofit ; libout), Sak. Ra. 
Adze-handle (explained as = .Mai. 
basong perdah) : pelibut", Mantr. 
.Malac. Nya. Wood for mouth- 
piece of blowpipe : lebut, Ben. 
Stev., Materialien, pt. i. p. 103 
[cf. Batak lebut]. 

304. Blowpipe arrow, butt of : basso, 
Som. ; baZQ, basst, Sak. Kerb. 
Butt of blowpipe arrow (made of 
pulai): pasuk (pasook), Tu7n. Stev.; 
bfisukn (barsukan). Sin. Stev. 
Mouthpiece of blowpipe: basong, 
.Mantr. .Malac. Nya.; basung (bas- 
soong), Ben. Stev., .Materialien, 
pt. i. p. 103 [.Mai. basong, "a 
soft kind of wood "]. 

Blowpipe arrow poison: P 163- 
175. Blowpipe arrow poison spatula : 
S 355-358. Blowpipe arrow poison 
tray : T 201. Blowpipe arrow 
quiver: Q 17-29; S 234. Arrow 
cases in C|uiver: N 42. Cap of 
(juiver: .S 234. To shoot with the 
blowpipe: B 256, 257; S 163. 

305. Blue {.Mai. biru): letsat, Setn. 
Kedah. 

306. Blue : 'mper, .S'^^'. U. Kain. ; 
her-oi, Setn. Plus; brau, Sem. Plus; 
bipu (birou), Som. ; biru (birou). 

Sak. Ra. Dark blue : biru bido' 
(biru biduk), Sem. Pa. Max.; O 15. 
Light blue : biru kejuh (biru kjuh), 
Sem. Pa. .Max.; Y 41 [see Y 258]. 

307. FiLUE: tras ha.tn ,Bedu. II. ; B 236 ; 
RS4. 55 ; W98. 

308. Blunt [Mai. tumpul): belut (?) or 
bel-tit(?), Sem. Kedah ; belut (blut), 
Sem. Buk. Max.; (blut, bluh?), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; mfiliid, Pang. U. 
A ring. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
gilot-n (gilot'n), Setn. K. Ken. ; bel- 
oii, Sem. Plus ; blog", Tetnbi ; 
bluk°, Serau ; belok (blok), Sak. 
U. Kain. Smooth ; greasy : b€luih 
(bluih), Sem. Pa. Max. [?=F 261 ; 
Bahnar lot; lot (lat), "blunt."] 

309. Blunt: bekut; bgkuyt, Bes. Sep. 
A. I. 

310. Blunt : chemphol^ng, Bes. Sep. 
A. I.; chemphong, Bes. K. L. [cf. 
.Mdl. tumpul?] 

Boar, wild : P 73-90. 

311. Board: papan, Sak. U. Katn. 
[Mai. papan]. 

312. Boat: kupon, U. Kel. [? Cf. 
Man k'bang [kbang], "ship"; 
Seluiig k'bang, kebang ; and per- 
haps Car Nicobar kopok, " boat."] 

313. Boat : re-nong, U. Cher. 

314. Boat: chilokoi(chee-lo-koih),^a^. 
Sel. Da. 

315. Bo.\t : bidu' (doubtful), Pang. U. 
Aring; bidah, Or. Laut. [Mai. 
biduk, "a kind of fishing-boat. "] 

316. Boat: jengkeng, Or. Laut. Dug- 
out boat : pahu jongkong, Bes. 
Songs; B 319. [Mai. jukung, "a 
kind of fishing-boat. "] 

317. Boat: {Mai. prahu): lopeh, /'aw^. 
Kap. Log.; {.Mai. jalor, "dug-out 
boat"), lupek, lopek, Patit. Kap. 
/oh. Ship; boat: \6Y>ek, Jak. .Mad.; 
{Pant. Kap. ). [Mai. lopek, ' ' a kind 
of boat. "J 

318. Bo.\T : sampan, Ben. New., Jelai ; 
(sampau), Sem. Beg. [.Mai. sampan]. 

319. Boat : pahu" (pahuk), Setn. Craw. 
Hist., Setn. Ked. New.; (pahouk), 
(pahak), Sem. Klapr. ; paha, e.g. 
yal ^ p. "to embark, "Z?t'J. Sep. A. I. ; 
pahu, Bes. Sep. ; pahu, Bes. .Malac; 
piyahu, Sem. Per. ; pahu, Sem. U. 
Sel. ; diahu, [/. Pat. ; pra'-hu", 
Lebir, Kerbat ; prahu' ? (prahQk), 
Bes. Her. ; pra-hfi, U. Tetn. ; prahQ, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; praha, Sak. 
Blang. Sw. ; prahu, Sak. Br. Low; 
prahu, Serau, Darat , Jak. .Malac. ; 
praoh, Sak. Croix ; prahuk", Jelai. 
Ship; boat: prahu (prahhou, Som.; 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

541 

prahii (prahou), Sak. Kerb. ; prahu 
(prahou), Sak. Ra. Ship : prahAu, 
Or. Tratig. Big boat: prahu untoi, 
Jelai ; perhu ntoi, Darat. Boat 
(Mai. sampan) : prahu tinibong, 
Darat; B 316 [Afal. pfirahu] ; S 
160. 
Boat-pole : B 6. 

320. Body: pi (pee), Sent. Jur. And., 
Sem. Jur. h'euK , Sem. Jur. Rob. 

321. Body : le>' or ley, Sem. Jarum, 
Sem. Plus ; li. Rang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; (li), Lebir; 
ling, Kerbat ; W 78 ; til ? [MS. 
reading doubtful; it might be " Hi," 
in which case it would agree with 
the preceding], Sak. Br. Low. 

322. Body : e-kur, Sak. Plus Cliff. 
[Cf. Mon chaku [jAku], "body"; 
numeral coefficient of persons ; see 

T5-] 

323. Body : brok°, Jelai ; (br6k°). Sen. 
Cliff. ; brok (brohk). Or. Berumb. ; 
brok, Sak. L\ Kain. ; bro', Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. ; bfiro, Sak. Blanj. Sw. 

224. Body : dil, Krau Ket. ; del, Krau 
Tern. 

325. Body: kre' (kri'), Setn. Pa. Max. ; 
krep, kret, e.g. kadui kret {Mai. 
besar badan), " big of body" ; kete' 
(orkete') kret {Mai. kechil badan), 
"small of body," Bes. Sep. A.I. ; 
kret, Bes. Sefi. ; (kreyt), Ben. New. ; 
kriit, Bes. Malac. ; ge-r6t, Sak. Sel. 
Da ; S 237 ; W 30. Flesh : kra*, 
Bes. Malac. Life : krgp, e.g. nahol 
tempS." krep, "is it true, on your 
life?" [lit. "true (so may your) 
body be stricken?"], Bes. K. Lang. 

326. Body: V^6' ,Serting; \.vi}ao\\, Bed. 
Chiong, Mantr. Malac, Jak. Malac. , 
Jac. Letn. \^Mal. tuboh]. 

327. Body: {nrzm, Ben. A^ew. [Doubt- 
ful.] 

328. Body : bahan, K'ena. /. ; badS,n, 
Sak. Kerb. ; badan, Tcmbi ; bedan 
(beden), Barak \_Mal. Ar. badan]. 

329. Body : nyawa' (nyawak), Galang, 
Bedu. IL, Bedu. I/f. E.xpired: tus 
nyawa' (tus naua'), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[A/al. nyawa, "life"]; F, 170; 
M 23 ; S 169. 

Body (of musical instrument : 

M 228. 

Boil : A II, 12 ; A 15 ; T 248. 

330. Boil, to (.!/«/. rebus) : ya' chlt3,h 
{/>r. ya' chltahh), Sern. Jarum; ya' 
chitah {pr. ya' chltahh), Sem. Plus; 
ya-t^h {pr. tahh) or chi-tah, ex. chi- 
tah tom {Mai. = mSrSbuskan ayer), 
" to boil water," Pang. U. A ring. 

To boil rice {A/al. masak nasi) : ya- 
chC-tah, ex. ning ta-hu {or tod-ed) ye 
chfitah, " I am not clever at cook- 
ing," Pang. (J. Aring. [Possibly 
connected with the next word ? 
? Cf. Bahnar t6, "hot"; pot5, 
" to heat."] 

331. Boil, to {Mai. rCbus): tom {pr. 
tol'm) orhatom, Sem. Skeat. ; tohop, 
Sak. Ra. \_Mon to {pr. tom) ; 
Khmer ddm [tarn], "to cook by 
boiling"; Kon Tu doni, "to 
cook."] 

332. Boil,, TO ; vegetables : subai ; su- 
bay, Sak. U. Katn. Dish of food ; 
cooked food ; curry [the original 
has "plat, cuisine," Afal. kari] : 
subai (soubai), Som. ; subai (soubai), 
Sak. Kerb. [^Cham habai, ' ' to cook 
a stew " ; Jarai hobai, " to cook " ; 
? cf. Bahnar, Halang pai ; Sedang 
p6, "to cook," especially "to 
boil" ; and see B 334.] 

333. Boil, to : ma'ah ; mo'oh, Bes. 
A. I. 

334. Boil, to, (food other than rice): 
bas, Kena. /. To boil : rSbus 
(robous), Som., Sak. Kerb. [A^al. 
rebus ; but, for the first word, cf. 
also Boloven, Niahon buch ; Alak 
bfit ; Mon bah [buih], "to boil"; 
and B 332.] 

335- Boil, to, (rice) : bertanak, Jak. 

Malac. {Mai. tanak] ; B 468 ; C 

238. 
336. Bone : {a) ja'is (ja'is), Sem. Pa. 

Max. ; jehi(gehee), Sem. Jur. And., 

Se7n. Jur. Rob. ; (gehe), Sem. Jur. 

New.; S 187. Backbone; spine: 

jl'is tio' (j'is tiu'), Sem. Pa. Max. 

Loins?: jaskia' (jaskia'), Sem. Pa. 

Max. Midrib ; spike (of palm leaf) : 

jas kio' (jas kiu'). Sent. Pa. Max. 

Thigh-joint? {Mai. kunchi paha) : 

jah kfth (jah kh), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 

R 103. [JA'T? jut, "bone."] 

{b) Bone: ai-eng, Sem. Craw. Hist. ; 

aieng, Sem. Ked. And., Sem. Ked. 

New., Sem. Ked. Rob. ; aying. Sent. 

Klapr. ; i-yeng, Sem. Kedah ; e- 

hing, Sem. Stev. ; iaang, Sem. Per. ; 

je-eng {pr. je-eSng), Sem. Jarum. ; 

je-eng (/;•. je-eSng), Se7n. Plus; 

je'ing. Pang. U. Aring, Pang. 

Sam, Pang. Gal. ; jahang, Ben. 

New. [also zuhang, Ben. N'ezv. , a 

misprint?]; jahang (diahaii), Sak. 

Ra. ; jaang, Kena. IL , Bes. Her. ; 

ja'ang, Bes. Malac. ; jS-ang, Ser- 

ting ; ja'a^ng, Bes. Sep. A. L; 

jiaSng (diag'n), Sem. K. Ken. ; 

542 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

chaang, Darat ; jaak", Teiiibi, 
Jelai ; ja-akn, Sak. Sung. ; jaak, 
Serau ; ja-iik, ja-ak, Sen. Cliff. ; 
jahak, Tan. U. Lang. ; jSa', Sak. 
U. Kain. ; je-a, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; 
S 169. Ankle : jiaSng kaldoeng 
(diag'n kaldog'n), Se>n. A'. Ken. ; 
K 40. Breast-bone {Mai. tulang 
dada) : je'ing chenup, Pang. U. 
Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
ja'a^^ng genos, Bes. Sep. Backbone 
[Mai. tulang belakang) : i-yeng kiil' 
or kiya', Sein. Kedah ; jeng-kra', 
Sem. Plus ; je'ing kra', Pang. U. 
Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
jaSng kio (djag'n-kio), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
jaak chelok" ; jaak chelok", Serau ; 
ja'a'^ng khol^'ng, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
Rib: jiaEngchiyos? (diag'n dschios), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; R 102. Shin-bone 
{Mai. t. kring) : je'ing bo'ong, Pang. 
U. Aring; je'ing langut, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; jiaSng kodel^ng 
(diag'n kodek'n), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
jang kemong, Seran; jaang kSmong, 
Jelai ; C 5. Skull ; cranium : ieng 
kui (e-eng-koee), Sem. Stev. ; N 
29 ; R 103. l^Khmer cha'ing 
[chhaing] ; Klimus cheang ; Lemei 
siengang; Annam sheong?(xu'o'ng); 
Sedang siong ; Bahnar shiong (?) ; 
Kuy Dek anghang ; Sud hang ; 
Boloven hang ; Tareng ngang ; 
Central Nicobar ong-eng; Kolh 
jang, jang ; Halang kasieng ; Se- 
dang koseng ; \Va hsa-ang ; Rumai 
ka-ang, "bone." Cf. F 220.] 

337. Bone : b^-lul, Sak. Sel. Da. 

338. Bone : gus, Kena. I. [? Cf. 

B336(«)-] 

339. Bonk : tuleng (tuleng), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; toleng, Sem. U. Sel. ; tulak 
(touldk), S'om. ; tuldg, Sak. Kor. 
Gh. ; tulag, Sak. Br. Lmu ; tola, 
Sak. Kerb. ; tulak", Tembi ; 
tulang, Bland. K. Lang., Mantr. 
Malac. , Jak. Malac. Backbone : 
spine: tulang kio' (tulng kiu'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; tulang kong, 
Manlr. Malac. Shin-bone; tibia: 
tulang kuah (tulng kuah), Sem. Buk. 
Ma.x. \.\hil. tulang] ; H 32. 
BoM". (of nose) : N 98. 

Border (of nails) : N 3. 

340. Bore (a hole), to : {Mai. gerek) ; 
ya' hor {pr. ya' horr), Sem. Plus. ; 
{.Mai. korek), hor, Serau. 

341. BoKi-; (a hole), to: gak6, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. 

342. Bore, TO (hollow out): puk(pouk), 
Sbm. ; petpuk (/>t/pouk), Sak. Kerb. 

[? Cf. Bahnar b6k, ' ' to hollow 
out " ; and perhaps St ieng puk, 
"to peel" ; Mon put, "to exca- 
vate."] 

343. Bokk, To: koye' (kui'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [Mai. korek] ; C 296 ; D 107, 
108. 

343A. Bom : igoi ; igoy. Sak. U. Kain. 
To be born : B 88. 

344. Borrow, to : pinjam, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
pinjap", Serau [.!/«/. pinjam] ; B 
484. 

Bossed : S 541. 
Bottle, water : P 234. 
Bottom : A 118. 

345. Bough: (a)teboa, Sem. Jur. And., 
Sem. Jur. New., Sem. Jur. Rob. 
Fork (of tree): ta.ba, Sak. Ra. ; T 
211. End of handle : tabbok, Sem. 
Stev. Handle of stone axe : tabag-u 
(tab-ag-00), Sem. Stev. \u probably 
= 3rd pers. sing, pron.] [Lave 
tabo ; /arrt? tobang, "branch."] 
{b) Branch (of tree) : chabang 
(chabng), Se7n. Buk. Max. Fork 
(of tree) : chabang (tchaban), Som. ; 
chabak (tchabak), Sak. Kerb. 
Forked : chabang, Bes. Songs [Mai. 
chabang]. 

346. Bough (branch): deng-d6k°, Sen. 
CI. ; deng-dok". Sen. Cliff. Branch; 
twig (of tree) : jiildol (tschaldol or 
dschald5l), Sak. Kor. Gb. Branch 
(of a river or tree): chedang Jak. 
Se/nbr. Branch : silang, Kena. /. 
Bridge {.Mai. titi) : jernol dendauk, 
Serau. Stem of tree {Mai. batang): 
dengdilk", Krau Em. [cf. B 303]. 
[Niahon (&x\g, "branch."] 

347. Bough of a tree: {a)roh,Ben.New.\ 
rah (roh), Serting, Bes. Her. ; rah; 
rak, Bes. Sep. ; rhilk, Bes. Songs. 
Branch: yah {pr. j'ahh), Sem. 
Kedah ; yoh {pr. yohh), Pang. 
U. Aring; yoh (iuh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Twig : riih ; ro' , Bes. Sep. ; 
raweh, Bes. Songs. End or top 
{Mai. ujong), yah (doubtful), Pang. 
U. .{ring; yah. Pang. Sam. 

{b) Bough of a tree : rasa, Ben. Xe7v. 
{c) Branch : echak, Tati. U. Lang. ; 
{.Mai. dahan), ichak, Darat ; chang 
jchu*^, Jelai ; T 21 1. 

348. Branch: lenibong, Bes. Songs. 
348A. Branch : chempati (tchempati), 

Sak. Kerb. 

349. Branch: rangkcing? (rankeinz) ; 
ranting (rantiii), Sak. Ra. Twig: 
rnntik", J<!lai [.Mai. ranting]. 

350. i5ranch : dOhi^n, Barok ; B 138. 
.Spear: perdahan, Pant. Kap. Her. ; 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

543 

pindahan, Pant. Kap. Log. ; pCna- 
han, Jak. Mad. (Pant. Kap.) ; 
(p'nahan), Pant. Kap. Joli. [.Mai. 
dahan, " branch of tree."] 

351. Biancli; twig: hcreiigis (h'rengis) ; 
rengis, Pant. Kap. Joh. Twig : 
rangas, Darat, Jelai. Branch ; 
tines (of deer) : ranggas, Bes. Songs 
[cf. Mai. ranggas ; rengges] ; L 32 ; 
T 207 ; T 21 1 ; T 262. 

352. Branched : jerokak -jgrokih, Bes. 
Songs. 

Bought : B 485. 

353. Bow [Mai. panah) : ig (?) Sem. 
Kedah ; ig, Sem. Ij. [in the MS. 
only] ; eg, Sem. Plus ; ag, Sem. 
K. Ken. ; (arg), Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
ak, Som. Back of bow : ig, Sem. 
Stev. [Z^met ak (ac) ; Chrau a, 
"bow" ; Stieng ak, a tool used in 
preparing cotton before spinning it ; 
Danaw ak ; Kiang ak, "bow"; 
.ilak -ak, "cross-bow."] 

354. Bow [Mai. panah) : [a) loyd [pr. 
loydd), usually made of "temakah" 
wood, Sem. Plus ; loid, Sem. Stev.; 
loids, [/. Pat. ; lo'l (lod'), U. Kel. ; 
lo-i, Sem. Beg.; loi, Beti. New. 
Bow and arrow : laig (laig), Sem. 
K. Ken. 

[b) Arrow, of bow [.Mai. anak 
panah) : loyd (pr. loydd) (doubt- 
ful), Sem. Plus; loig, Sem. U. Sel.; 
laut ? t^rlitt? (laut), Sem. Per.; \bAor 
lelad, Setn. Ij. Arrow-point : loi, 
Som. Arrow : loig, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. Arrow, of bow [Mai. anak 
panah) : wong loyd (it has an iron 
head and is winged with a hornbill's 
feather), Sem. Plus. [It seems 
probable that ' ' loid " properly means 
"bow," not "arrow"; cf. Mai. 
panah and anak panah.] 

[c) Arrow, of blowpipe : tinlad 
[pr. tinladd), Sem. Kedah, Sem. 
Plus ; tin-lad. Pang. U. A ring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; tenloyd 
[pr. tenloydd), Sem. Plus ; ten-laj, 
Lebir ; tfin-lait, Kerbat ; tenlai, U. 
Pat. ; teiai'. Pang. Belinib. ; tela, 
U. Kel. ; penlaig, Sem. Stev. ; sin- 
laut? or sinlat ? [cf. supra [b)\ (sin- 
laut), Sem. Per. ; senloit, Sem. K. 
Ken. ; senloi, sen-loi, Som. ; met 
sin-loyd [or tinloyd), Sem. Kedah ; 
sluk, Sak. Tan. Kam. Arrow- 
head : tenlai, Sem. K. Ken. Butt- 
end of blowpipe arrow : sig-loid, 
Sem. Stev. ; Q 17. \Seda71g lok, 
"bow"; Mon leau [lau], "arrow." 
But the following Andamanese 

words are curiously similar : Biada 
tirlech-da ; Bojigiab tol;\ ; Kede 
tirleich ; Chariar tirlCit, "sharp 
wooden arrow."] 

355. Bow of bamboo : wuo(woo6), Sem. 
Stev. [? Mai. busur ; Jav. wusu]. 

356. Bow : panah, Tembi. Arrow of 
bow : anak panah, Sak. Blanj. 
Sw. [Mai. panah, anak panah]. 

357. Bow (with string) : klichan, Sem. 
Stev. 

358. Bcjw (without string) : klepob, Sem. 
Stev. 

359. Bow, long point of: neowa (neo- 
war), Sem. Stev. Short point ot 
bow : neowa-u (neowar-oo), Sem. 
Stev. [This must be one of Stevens' 
blunders. The -u is probably the 
3rd pers. sing, pronoun.] 

360. Bow, arrow of, (unpoisoned): chent-- 
kis (chen-ne-kis), Sem. Stev. 

361. BtJW (feathered part of arrow of) : 
prag (preg) ; preg, Som. 
Bowstring : R 38 ; R 173 ; R 183. 

362. Bowstring, knot in a ; notch in a 
bow for the string : chelos, Sem. 
Stev. [cf. (for the latter meaning) C 
296]. 

363. Bowstring, to string a [?] : mop- 
ing, Sem. Stev. To shoot with the 
bow : S 164. 

Bow down, to : B 175 . 

Bowl : C 201, 202 ; C 290, 291 ; 

^"^ 153- 

Bowstring : B 357 ; B 362, 363 ; 

R 38 ; R 173 ; R 183. 

364. Box : peti (poti), Som., Sak. Kerb., 
Sak. Pa. ; peti (pbti), Sak. Kerb. ; 
(peti), Darat ; petik" ? (petik"), 
Seraii [.]/al. peti] ; B 37 ; S 222. 
Box, to : S 497. 

365. Boy : san yen, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
seng yen, Sak. U. Kam. ; san-yet, 
[e.g. s. ma'-chut= "small boy"). Sen. 
Cliff. ; suniid kr(jil, Sak. Tap. ; 
sangit kral, Sak. U. Kam. A youth 
[Mai. budak) : san yen, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. ; said kral, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
Big boy : senyen drak", Jela.i ; O 19. 
Small boy : sainyat machAt, Jelai. 
Girl : sangit kerdol, Sak. U. Kam. \ 
suniid ktidor, Sak. Tap. ; said kre- 
dor, Sak, Blanj. Cliff. 

366. BoY : kolop, Jack. Ba. Pa. [.Mai. 
kulop] ; C 101-108; M 15, 16; M 
iS ; V 42. 

Bracelet : B 272 ; R 133. 

367. Brackish (water): payoh (paiuh), 
Sem. Pa. .Ma.x: [Mai. payau] ; W 
30- 

368. Brain [Mai. otak) ; Ickem, Pang. 

544 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

370 

371- 

U. A ring. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
lekim, Sent. Stev. Brain ; marrow : 
lakim (Ikim), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
lakim (lakim), Sem. Pa. A/ax. [? cf. 

S 334]- 
369. Bkain : utak (outak), Sai. Ra. 
[.l/<7/. otak] ; H 46 ; H 48 ; I 27. 
Branch: B 345-351; L 32 ; T 
207 ; T 211 ; T 262. 
Branched : B 352. 
Brave: bani' ? (bn'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; I 39 ; S 465 ; biani, Sem. 
K. Ken. ; brani", Sak. U. Ka7n. ; 
(branik), Scrau [Mai. berani] ; H 
116. 

Breadfruit tree (spec. Mai. kflur), 
Artocarpus incisa : hatoh (hatuh), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [doubtful ; see A 
6]. 
Breadth : A 26. 

372. Break, to (Ma/, patah) : ya' peleg 
(in sense of snapping of timber, 
etc.), Son. Jarum, Sem. Plus; 
peluk (polouk), Sak. Kerb. ; poluh 
echilk (polouh 6tch^k), Sak. Kerb.; 
C 296. 

373. Break, to [Mai. pechah); ya-chel, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. To break 
across (Mai. patah) : ya-chel, Pa>tg. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. To break; broken: 
chel (chil), Sem. Buk. Max. ; chal 
(chl), Sem. Pa. Max. To break : 
tal, K'ena. I. Fracture : chel ?, 
chal? (chl), Sem. Buk. Max. ; chel 
(chil), Se7n. Pa. Max. ; chel-chel 
(chil'^), Sem. Buk. Max. Break; 
split ; tear : chel'her. Pant. Kap. 
/oh. Firewood : che-leher, Jak. 
Mad. ; chel-'her, Jak. Lcm. ; chel- 
h6r, Sak. Pa. Ba. Distorted in the 
legs or feet : chel chan (chil chn), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Black mark made 
with charcoal :chenel-us(chen-t'l-oos), 
Sem. Slev. Part of bamboo with 
the skin stripped off for blackening : 
chenal-us (chen-al-oos), Sem. Slev. 
Firestick (hanging): chenil (chen- 
eel), Sem. Stev. ; C 296. 

374. Break, to (Mai. putus) : ya' 
kCtis (//-. ya' kfitiss ; of the parting 
of thread), .'^em. Jarum ; ya" kC'tis 
(of the parting of thread) (pr. ketiss), 
.Se/n. Plus ; ya-ketos (pr. k6toss), 
Pang. Sam ; ya-k6toz (pr. kfitozz). 
Pang. Galas ; kc'tok, ketok, Bes. 
K. Lang. To break (intrans.): 
ketok, lies. A. I. Easily broken ; 
frail : kit6ig? (gitoig), Sem. K. Ken. 
[Central Nicobar hentoish - nga, 
hentak-nga ; Bahnar kotek ; Stieng 
tL-ch, "to break" (as a string); 

? cf. Khmer dach [tach], "breach "] 
[? cf. S 185] [? cLMal. putus]. 

375. Break, TO.(.\Ial. pechah): (a) ya' 
bekah (of breaking in pieces), Scfn. 
Jarum ; ya' bgkah (of breaking in 
pieces) (pr. bSkahh), Sem. Plus ; 
be-kah, Sen. Cliff. ; bfika (^oka,), 
Som.; bekah, Scrau ; bekah, Temhi, 
Serau. To break (into little pieces) : 
bekah (bkh), Sem. Pa. Max., 
Sem. Buk. Max. To break up : 
bekah (bkh), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Fracture : bekah (bikh), Sem. Pa. 
.Max. To tear (Mai. koyak) : be- 
kah. Sen. Cliff. To hatch out (of 
eggs) : u bekah (aubkh), Sem. Buk. 
Max. [The u is the 3rd pers. sing, 
pronoun.] \_Achin bekah, ''to 
split " ; ? cf. Mai. pgchah ; Man 
pakaw, " to break."] 

(b) To break and scatter: p6chah- 
pichit, Bes. Songs [Mai. pechah] ; 
C 296 ; R 60 ; T 112. 

376. Break, to, the neck of a fish : 
kleng, Jak. Mad. ; k'leng, Jak. 
Lem. To kill : kleng, Jak. Ba. Pa. 

277- Break, to, out into buds (?) ; to 
swell (said to = A7al. ber-buku-buku 
or berputik) : telelpul, ex. telelpul 
wong bakau, "the blossoms break 
out (or swell)," Pang. Teliang. 

378. Break, to, wind : pahom (phum), 
Sem. Bui. Max. ; paham (phm), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [Khmer phom ; 
Bahnar pham (phom), same mean- 
ing-] 

379. Breakers; broken water: suangan, 
ex. o mude' tengah suangan, "he 
(the crocodile) ascends the stream 
amid the breakers," Se7n. Kedah. 

380. Breast (Mai. dada) : (a) sop, Sem. 
Beg., Ben. New.; hub (houb), Sak. 
Ra. Heart : hub, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
hupf , Tembi. Asthma : sub, Sejn. 
Buk. Max. [? Cf Mon ka.sa' ; 
Khmer suot ; Stieng ns6h ; Bahnar 
shoh (.\oh), "lung."] 

(b) Breast : dugdog, Sem. Plus ; 
tutup, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; tutop (toutop), 
Sak. Kerb.; tendo' (tndu'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; 6ntu (ntou), Sak. Ra. ; ent6 
('nte), Sak. U. Kam.; ento (en-ter), 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff.; en-ta. Sen. Cliff. ; 
entiih, Jelai ; entoh, Darat ; untoh, 
Scrau ; S 187. Breast-bone : dug- 
dog, Setn. Plus. Chest : Sntok 
(entohk). Or. Berumb. To the 
front : ma entoh, Jelai. [Bahnar, 
kotoh, " breast."] 

(c) Breast: dado, Som.; da' -da', 
Lebir, Kerbat, U. Cher. ; dada, 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

545 

Mantr. lilalac, Jak. Malac. Chest 
(male): dadaengkot^nfdadaengod'n), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; M 15. Before, in 
front of {Mai. di-hadap) : kft-dadil', 
Sem. Jarum; bS.-dada', Sem. Plus; 
endada, Tembi. [ .Mai. dada, 
" breast."] 

381. Breast (/!/«/. dada): dg-ni, U. Tern. 

382. Breast : genos, Bcs. Sep. ; ganus, 
Ben. New. ; nga, Bes. Malac. 
Female breast : gnokampotn, U. 
Ind. ; F 67. 

383. Breast : rapang, Kena. 1. 

384. Breast: penhalas ? (punhallas), 
Ben. New. 

384A. Breast ; chest (.Mai. dada) ; 
karob, Tembi. 

B 146, 147 ; B 161 ; C 89 ; G 13 ; 
H 64 ; S 186, 187. 

385. Breast : {a) am (ahm), Bang. 
Jalor. Female breasts: 'am ('m), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; am, Lebir, Key- 
bat ; am, Pang. U. Aring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Breast nipple : 
am, Sem. Stev. ; A 12. Breast nipple: 
met 'am (mit 'm), Sem. Bnk. Max.\ 
met am. Pang. U. Aring, Pang. 
Sam, Pajig. Gal. ; E 83 ; ujong 
'am (aujng 'm), Sem. Buk. A/ax. ; 
E 65. Milk (Mai. susu) : am, ex. 
6' letehh, am-6' bra' = ' ' she is tired, 
she has no milk" (of a woman 
feeding her infant), Sem. Plus ; 
am. Pang. U. Aring. Milk : leng 
•am (ling 'm), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Woman's milk: leng am, Sem. Stev. ; 
H 119. To suckle : ma'ek am ; ek 
ma'am (ma'ik amllk ma'm), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; G 29. 

(b) To drink (Mai. minum) : ya' am 
or y' am, ex. y' am toni= " to drink 
water, to drink," Sem. Plus; ya- 
am, Pang. U. Aring; am. Pang. 
K. Aring, Pang. Belimb. ; am, 
Sem. Kedah ; amtom, U. Pat. ; 
ami-ong, Sem. Per. 

(c) Breast : m6m, Or. Berumb. 
Bosom : mam, Sem. K. Ken. 
Female breasts (Mai. susu) : min, 
Tembi ; mem, Serau, Darat, Jelai ; 
mem, Sak. Ma7-tin. Teat ; 
female breast (Mai. kopek) : 
mem, Sen. Cliff. ; chi-t^mSm, Sen. 
Cliff. Teat : man-mam, Sem. K. 
Ken.; E 83. Milk: mam, ^Vw. A'. 
Ken. ; te-u mem, Sen. Cliff. To 
suck (Mai. isap) : mem, Sen. Cliff. 
[Ba/inar mom, mom toh (mam, 
mam toh) (toh =" the teat"); Se- 
lung mam; Achin. mom, "female 
breasts " ; Cham mum ; Mo7i mau, 

VOL. II 

"to suck"; Selung ma-am, ma'am, 

" to drink."] 

(d) To drink : mong, Kasa [? cf. 

386]. 

386. Breasts, female : (a) bu, Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; bot, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; bot^, 
Tembi. Milk : bu (boo), Sem. Jiir. 
A nd., Sem. Jnr.Rob., Sem. Jur. New. ; 
bot, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; taik bu' (taik 
h\i'), Sem. Pa. Max. Nipple: bau? 
(bow), Sem. Jur. And.; (bou), Sem. 
Jur. Kob. ; A 12 ; met bu', (mit bu'), 
Sem. Pa. Alax. ; E 83 ; iijong bu' 
(aujng bu'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; E 65. 
Talon (Mai. susuk taji) : bu', Sem. 
Pa. Max. [This is clearly a mistake.] 
To nurse ; to give suck : ek bu' 
(aik bu' ; aik buk), Sem. Pa, Max. 
(b) To drink: mabu' (mbu'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; ma-bu', Sem. Kedah ; 
b(i, Sem. U. Sel. [in MS. originally 
' ' boo ": this was intended to repre- 
sent the u sound, and was accord- 
ingly changed to bu by the Straits 
Asiatic Society's secretary] ; bu 
bateu? (bu-batsu), U. Kel. ; bol^ng, 
Bcs. Sep. A. 1. [? Cf. Khmer bau 
[pau], " to suck."] 

387. Breasts, female : (a) tuh, Bcs. 
Malac. Milk : tuk, Pang. Belimb. ; 
tuh, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; thuh, Bett. 
New. [iVIon tah [tah] ; Khmer doh 
[toh] ; Stieng t6h ; Bahnar toh ; 
Central Nicobar toah ; Southern 
Nicobar toah ; Shorn Pe toa ; 
Teressa, Chowra toh ; Car Nico- 
bar tah, " female breast " ; Boloveti, 
Niahon, Alak, Lave, Kaseng, Ha- 
lang, Scdang toh ; Stieng kot6h, 
"teat" ; Mon daik tih [dak tah], 
"milk."] 

Breasts, female : (b) susu, Mantr. 

Alalac. , Jak. Malac. ; suso' buas 

(susokbuas), Pant. Kap. Joh. \_Mal. 

susu]. 

Breast-bone : B 146 ; B 336 ; B 

380 ; S 198. 

388. Breath (Mai. nafas) : lejog (pr. 
Ifejogg), Sem. Plus. To breathe: 
keni juk (kni juk), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
G29. Desire? (Mai. nafsu): nekjuk 
(nkjuk), Sem. Pa. Max. [Confusion 
of nafsu and nafas ?] Expired : 
putus ngjok (puts njuk ? <>;-nmbuk?), 
Sem. Buk. Alax. Heart (disposi- 
tion?): ngjuk (njuk), Sejn. Buk, 
Ala.x. Alive ; breathing : hunjong 
nekjuk (hunjung nkjuk), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Life : nt^kjub (nkjub), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Impotent : ketis nfejuk 
(ktis njuk), Sem. Buk. Alax. ; 

2 N 

546 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

B 374 ; G 29. \Chavi yuk, ayuk, 
"to blow"; Bahnar hiup, "to 
blow " (with the bellows) ; Stieng 
hip, " to breathe."] 

389. Brkath [Mai. rafas) : (a) lef-hof 
(//-. leff-hoff ), San. Kedah ; nufof, 
Pang: Skeat \ naham ; lahdm, Sak, 
U. Kant. ; nehoni, Tembi, Dam/. 
henum, Sak. Kor. Gb. Breath ; 
life [Mai. nyawa ; nafas) : lehom; 
Seran. I breathe : henum y^, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. Soul : laham ; naham, 
Sak. U. Kant. [? cf. Khmer dang- 
hom [tanghom], " breath "]. 

(b) To breathe : nihhueh (nihhuih) ; 
nihueh (nihuih), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
ying ma'ihai ? (iing miihai), 
hihai (hihai), Sem. Bi/k. Max. ; 
nashos, Sem. Pa. Max. Alive ; 
breathing [Mai. hidop bgrnSfas) : 
nes-hus (nes-hus or nehus), Sem. 
Pa. Max. [I doubt the 5. .s in these 
two words : they are possibly a mere 
device of writing, for ik, eh. ] 

(c) To breathe : kaha, Bes. A. I. 
Air : kohoi (ko-hoi), Sd?n. ; (ko-hoi), 
Sak. Kerb. 

(d) To yawn [Mai. nganga) : ha', 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; hihdi, 
Serting; ma'ihai? (miihai), Sent. 
Buk. Max.; uhai, Kena. /. ; wohai, 
Bes. Sep. A. /. ; nihoi, Sem. K. 
Ken. ; A 54 ; B 256. [Khmer, 
Moti ha; Stieng, Bahnar ha, "to 
open " (especially the mouth).] 

390. Breathe, to: (a) hanoi, Bes. A. I. 
Life : annoi, Ben. Neiv. [? = B 389]. 
[b) Wind: pi-noi. Sen. Cliff.; pi-nui, 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; pinui, Sak. 
Blanj. Sw. ; pinui ; pinuy, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; pinoi, Serau [? = B 255 or 
connected with B 256 ?]. 

390A. Brf..\the, to : slod, Sem. K. 
Ken. ; B 388, 389 ; C 253. 
Breathing : V, 388. 
Breeze ; W 109. 

391. Bridge : nesduk (nes-doukh), Som. ; 
[Mai. titi), dorr. Sen. Cliff. To 
cross by a bridge [Mai. titi) : he 
dAr, K)-au Em. ; ' ' you can cross 
this way," niang hem dor rend;\k" 
di, K'rau Em. ; B 393 [? cf. Mon 
khatitn [khadan], " bridge"]. 

392. Bridge: lu (lou), Sak. Kerb. [? = 

B 391]- 

393. Bridge : serendong (s'rendong), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Bridge made of a 
fallen tree-trunk [Mai. titian) : tek- 
hong, Bes. K. L. [cf. B 346]. 

393A. Bridge : jenoois (jenoois), Sak. 
Em. [cf B 346]. 

394. Bridge : titi, Sak. Ra. To cross 
(a river) : titih or bfl-titih, Pang. 
Belimb. ; pipe', Pang. U. Aring. 
To cross over : bSdichep (?), Pang. 
K. Aring [cf. Mai. titi?]. Bridge 
(of musical instrument) : P 100. 
Brightness : D 41 ; L 74 ; L 78. 

395. Brightnkss ; shining : lija' 
(lijak), Sem. Buk. Max. "To 
dissolve : llja' (Iljak), Sevi. Buk. 
Max. Liquid (adj.): lija' (lijak), 
Setn. Buk. Max. [One of these 
meanings is doubtless a blunder : I 
do not know which is the right one, 
probably "brightness," Mai. cha- 
haya, which has been confused with 
Mai. chayer, "liquid."] 

396. Bring, to : [a) ya' yQi or yoi, ex. 
yoi ba' oh = "bring here," Sem. 
/arum; iyoi(ijOi, ijOr), Sent. Martin. 
To bear : yoe (yoe), Sem. Craw. 
Hist. To carry: iyoi, ex. tangke bah 
o'-iyoi, "the fruit-spray is carried (?) 
by him," Pang. Teliang. To put 
down : yoe (yoe), Sem. Klapr. To 
lay down : huei (houei), Sotn. ; F 
124 \Shom /"eyau-me, " to bring"]. 

[b) To bring: en, Sak. Pitts Cliff., 
Sak. Kerb.; en, Tern. CI., Sen. CI., 
Sak. Blanj. CI. ; an, Sak. Ra., 
Sak. Slifft., Bes. Sep. ; ain (?), 
Sak. Martin. To bring [Mai. 
bawa) ; to carry [Mai. dukong) : 
en, Serau. To carry: en (eu), Sak. 
Lengk. ; [Mai. angkat), an, Bes. Sep. ; 
ka'an, Bes. Songs. To take : 'an, 
Bes. K. Lang. Bring here : en 
beh, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; en ba de, 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Bring my things : 
en bram pa eng, Krati Em. From : 
ka'an, Bes. A. I. To take away: en, 
Sak. Plus Cliff. ; ka'an, Bes. Sep. 
A. I. ; an chu, Bes. Sep. ; en chip 
chip, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. To take 
out : en ba' be, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
To take up : en-ok, Sak. Plus Cliff. 
With : 'an, Bes. Songs. [Stieng 
an, "to carry on the back" (? cf. 
also Stieng an; Bahnar in, "to 
give" ; but see G 32).] 

[c) To bring : jing-ing, Sem. Beg. 
To lift [.]/al. angkat) : ya' jeng, 
Sent. Kedah. To lift or pick up 
[Mai. angkat) : ya' jeng, Sent. Plus; 
ya-tanjeng. Pang. Sam, Pang Gal.; 
3'a-tanjing, Pang. U. Aring. To 
take [Mai. ambil) : ya' jeng. Sent. 
Jarum. To take up [Mai. angkat): 
jo? (j(?r), Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; G 32. 
[Central A'icobar yiang-tare, " to 
bring"; cf. Khmer yok [yak]; 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

547 

Baknaf i5k, "to take"; hut see 
C 28.] 

[d) To take; to take away {Mai. 
anibil): nyorig (njong), Sak. Martin. 
Take (imper. ), niang, Sak. Tap. ; 
G 42. [I am not sure that (a), [b), 
[c], (d) are all related, but cf. I i 
and 13.] [I doubt the connection 
of Mon neang [nang], " to bring. "] 

397. Bring, to : patap (p^t^p), Som. ; 
ma' te', Sak. Plus Cliff. To take 
away : ma' te' chip, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. ; G 42. 

398. Bring in, to [Mai. bawa masok) : 
tgr moig, Sak. Plus Cliff. To put : 
termoit, Sak. Plus Cliff. 

399. Bring, to(?) : klet, Bes. A'. Lang. 
To carry on the back : klek, Bes. 
Sep. A. I. To lift : klet. Bes. 
Malac. To pick up : klek, Bes. 
Songs [A 132 ?]. 

400. Bring, to ; to take : hambin. 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Below : hamben. 
Pant. Kap. Joh. To carry {Mai. 
pikul) : m'-en ; m'hen, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. To pick up : 'mben ; umben, 
Pant. Kap. Joh. To receive : 
hambin kfikok (hambin k'kok), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. To lay by : 
ambin, Pant. Kap. Log. ; hambin. 
Pant. Kap. Her. \_Mal. ambin, "to 
carry on the back."] 

401. Bring, to : bah, Jak. Malac. ; 
bawai (bavai), Mentr. Bar. ; bawa' 
(bawak), Ben. New. To carry {Mai. 
dukong) : miba' (mba'), Sent. Buk. 
Max. ; ba' (ba'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
bo', Sen. Cliff.; bo'? (bogh), Teynbi; 
bo' ? (bokh), Serau. To take away: 
bate, Sak. Kerb., Sak. Ra. 
Phyllanthus urinaria {Mai. dukong 
anak) : ba' wang (ba' uang), Seni. 
Pa. Max. ; C loi. \_Mal. bawa, is 
related to some of these words ; cf. 
Achin. ba, " to bring," " to carry" ; 
Selung bah, bak, "to carry"; 
Cham ba, " to bring," " to give " ; 
Stieng bah, "to give"; ba, "to 
carry (a child in the arms) " ; 
Bahnar bak, "to carry (hanging 
from the neck) " ; Khmer po [ba], 
" to carry in the arms."] 

To bring : F 124. 
To bring together : A 79. 
Brinjal : S 339. 
Bristle : T 94, 95. 

402. Brittle ; fragile : yapoh (iapuh), 
Sem. Buk. Max. \_Mal. rapoh]. 

403. Broad {Mai. luas) : men-ey, Sem. 
Jarum ; mahai, ex. beteau tani 
mahai {Mai. ayer itu luas), "that 

river is broad," Sem. Plus. Gap; 
intervening space ; wide ; broad ; 
width ; size : mehai (mhai), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

404. Bro.mj {.\/al. luwas) : lawes {pr. 
la-wess). Pang. U. Aring; angloas, 
Sem. K. Ken. To spread ; to 
stretch : lueh (luih), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Wide : lewas (loouass), Sak. Kerb. ; 
luas (louass), Sak. Ra. [Mai. luas, 
luwas]. 

405. Broad : bidang, Bes. Songs [Mai. 
bidang]. 

406. Broad ; wide {A/al. lebar) : lebar, 
Sak. Ra. ; libai, Som. Wide ; 
width : Icbe (Ibi), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[Mai. lebar] ; B 202 ; M 46. 

407. Broken ; decayed (of teeth) : 
giweng? (gliulng), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
R 373 ; C 296 ; T 168. 

408. Brood on, to (eggs) : sipet (sipit), 
Sem. Buk. .Max. 

409. Brood on, to (eggs) : awam ? 
(auuam), Sem. Pa. Max. [Mai. 
eram]. 

Brook : W 27-30. 
Broom : F 2 1 . 

410. Brother: inak, Sem. Ked. And., 
Sem. Ked. Rob. Elder brother : 
inak, Sem. Craw. Hist., Sem. 
Klapr. Uncle : inak, Bedu. lU. 
[? Cf. Mon anai [anaai], "uncle" 
(elder brother of parent)]. 

411. Brother: tuh, U. Pat., U. Kel. 
Elder sister {Mai. kakak) : to (?), 
ex. to ber {Mai. kakak adik), " big 
and little sisters," Sem. Plus; to'. 
Pang. U. Aritig, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; to', Kerbat, Lebir. 
Sister : tuh-yalu (tuh-jalu), U. Kel. ; 
F 60. 

412. Brother or sister, elder : au (ow). 
Pang. Jalor. 

413. Brother, elder {Mai. abang) : {a) 
bah {pr. bahh), Pang. U. Aring, 
Pa>/g. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; ba, Sem. 
Plus. Brother or sister {Mai. 
sudara) : be, Pang. U. Aring ; 
ySbeh or y3,be. Pang. Belimb. 
Elder sister : ibah (eebah), Bes. 
Bell. [? Cf. Mon bhoa ; ibhoa 
[bhai ; ibhai], "elder sister"; or 
Selung bie (beeai), " brother."] 

{b) Brother, younger {Mai. adik): ber 
(/;-. barr), Sem. Kedah, Sem. Jarum; 
ber {pr. barr), ex. o tS-h&r = Mal. 
dgngan adik jantan-nya, ' ' he and 
his younger brother," Setn. Plus ; be, 
Se!n. Craw. Hist., Se7n. Ked. New. ; 
be, Lebir; bi, Setn. Klapr. Younger 
brother (or sister) : bel, Pang. K. 

548 

CO MP A RA TIVE VOCA B ULA RY OF 

Aring; be (beh), Pang. Jalor. 
Sister {Mai. adik) : ber [pr. barr), 
Sem. Jaritm, Sem. Pins. Younger 
brother (.1/fl/. adik): ber (/r. barr) 
temkal, Pang. Sam, Pa?ig. Gal. ; 
be tem'kal, Pa?ig. U. Aruig; M 15. 
Younger sister {Mai. adik) : ber 
(/;-. barr) yalu, Paiig. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; be yalu, Pang. U. Arin^. ; 
F 60. 

(c) Brother : tobe (tobai), Sem. Jur. 
And., Sem. Jur. Rob. Younger 
brother : tobe (tobai), Sem. Jur. 
Neio. [? A combination of B 411 
and B 413, or cf. supra o te-ber^ 
"he and his younger brother."] 
Comrade : be-e (beh-eh). Pang. 
Jalor. 
414. Brother : pah, U. Pat. Elder 

brother : 

pa^^ 

or pa , 

Sef?i. 

Jarum ; pa, Sem. Plus. Elder 
sister : pak {pr. pa ), Sem. 
Kedah ; pa', Sevi. Plus. Younger 
brother : po, Som. ; p6, Sak. Kerb. ; 
pb? (per), Sak. Plus Cliff. Younger 
sister: po? (per), Sak. Plus Cliff. 
Younger brother or sister : pok", 
Tembi. [Perhaps two distinct 
words : cf. Kkmer bong [pong], 
"elder brother"; and Khmer 
phaaun ; paaun [pha'un ; pa'un] ; 
Mi pung (poung), "younger 
brother."] 

415. Brother, elder: ploh, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. ; kl6, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; klo, 
Som. ; k616 (kbl6), Sak. Kerb. 
Elder brother [perhaps also elder 
sister] : kelokn, Tembi. [? Cf. Mon 
kalu [kalo], "relative"; Khmer 
kelo [klo], "friend," "comrade."] 

416. Sister : pertoye, Ben. New. [Is 
this for po {per) to ye, ' ' my elder 
and younger sister," B 414 + B 411 
+ 1 I?] 

417. Brother, elder {Mai. abang) : t6- 
ne. Sen. Cliff. ; tfina (tone), Sak. 
Pa. ; tgna', Sak. U. Kani. ; tg-nai, 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; tenet^, Serau. 
Elder brother ; elder sister : tenet, 
Jelai. Elder sister: tdmai. Ken a. 
I., Kena. II. ; tgni' kni', Sak. U. 
Kam. ; F 64. 

418. Sister : ma, Sak. Kor. Gb. Elder 
sister : mo', Sak. Tan. Ram. Elder 
sister-in-law: ma-no', Sak. U. Bert. 
Younger sister : mojong, Kena. I. , 
Ke?ia. II. [?=H 419]. 

419. Brother, younger: mg-nang, Sen. 
CL, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; mfnan 
{m6nKD.),Sak. Ra. ; menang; nicnang 
'ngsil,^'*?/!'. U.Kam. Younger brother 

or sister : menang, Serau, Jelai. 
Younger sister : m6 - nang, Sen. 
CL, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; m6nang 
kni', Sak. U. Kam. ; F 64. Little 
girl : mining {or menang or mi- 
ning?) bab6, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; F61. 
Brother-in-law {Mai. ipar) : m6- 
na-i, Sen. Cliff. Younger brother- 
in-law; younger sister-in-law: m6nai 
(mnai), (more distinctly) m6nai 
(mnai) kral ; mgnai k6rdol (mnai 
krdol), respectively, Sak. U. Bert.; 
M 15 ; F 63. Son : mend, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. Mother-in-law : doi-hoi 
meniif. Or. Berumb. 

420. Brother : piatn, U. Ind. 

421. Brother: i-6k, Serting; gea' (ge- 
ek), Bedu. II. ; gehek, Mejit. Stev. ; 
kSnga, Bes. Malac. Elder brother : 
ye' ; yek, Bes. Sep. A. I.; y6k, Bes. 
Her. ; yek, Bes. Sep. ; ge-^k, Blafi. 
Rem.; g^ek. Bed. Chiong; gt-'sl {%t- 
ek), Bedu. III. ; geha(g6he), Mant. 
Bor. ; geh6, Mantr. Cast. ; ge6h, 
Jak. Malac. ; gee, Mantr. Malac. ; 
ja, Bes. Malac. Elder brother : 
ke'e' or ye ; yek, Bes. K. L. Brother : 
yeh adi (yeh adee), Bes. Bell. Sister: 
kfinga, Bes. Malac. Elder sister : 
yl-et, U. Tern. ; yi-et, U. Cher. ; kfina, 
ex. kena ye' = " my elder sister" (?), 
Pang. Belimb. Husband : gai, U. 
Kel. 

422. Brother, elder: moh61ok, Kena. I. , 
Kena. II. 

423. Brother, younger : tEk (te^k), 
, Kena. I.. Kena. II. 

424. Sister: nau, U. Pat.; gahu (gahoo), 
Ment. Stev. ; gau (gow), Bes. Bell. 
Elder sister : ga-u' (giuk), Alent. 
Her. I. ; ga-Q' (gauk), Bes. Her. ; 
(ga-fik), Serting, Blan. Rem.; (ga- 
uk), Bedu. II. ; ga-6' (ga-6k), Bedu. 
III. ; gau (gafi), Bes. Malac. , Mantr. 
Malac. ; gau ; gau', Bes. Sep. 
A. I. ; gaho, Mantr. Cast. , Matii. 
Bor. 

425. Brother: abong(abeung),Ga/a«^; 
habang, Barok. Brother-in-law: 
ha'-bang, I.ebir[.Mal. abang, "elder 
brother "]. 

426. Brother, elder: kaka, Ben. New. 
Elder sister : kaka', Jak. Malac. 
\Mal. kakak]. 

427. Brother : sedorhah, Mant. Bor. ; 
siidara te' (sudar ti' ), Sem. Pa. Max. , 
Sent. Buk. Max. ; M 16 ; sudara 
kera.1, Sak. Martin; M 15. Sister: 
sudara mabeh (sudar mabh), Sem. 
Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. Max. ; C 
102 ; F 62 ; sudara krCdOr, Sak. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

549 

Martin ; F 63 \_Mal. sauclara, 
sudara]. 

428. Brothkk, younger : adi", Bes. Sep., 
Jak. Malac. ; adi, Bes. Malac, 
Mantr. Malac. Younger sister : 
adi, Mantr. Malac., Bes. Malac. ; 
adi', Jak. Malac; adek, Sertitjg ; 
adi' kedur, Bes. Sep. ; F 63 [Mai. 
adik, adek]. 

429. Sister, younger [Mai. adik) : ajoi, 
SeiiT. Plus. 

430. Brothek : ka-um? (kaum). Pant. 
Klip. Joh. Malay man : ka-um ? 
(kiium), Pant. Kap. Lem. Sister: 
ka-um? (kaum) bisan. Pant. Kap. 
Joh. Soldier: ka-um? pedas (kaum 
p'das). Pant. Kap. Joh. ; V 260 
[Mai. Ar. kaum]. 

Brother : C loi ; C 107 ; O 18 ; 
Y41. 

Brother-in-law: B 419 ; L 21 ; 
L 25-28. 

431. Brow : (a) tanam (tanm), Sem. 
Bilk. Max. Eyebrow (J/rt/. kgning): 
ta-nam [pr. ta-na^m), Sem. Kcdah; 
H I [? cf. Man t'neng-mat [dneng- 
mat], ' ' eyebrows "]. 

{b) Brow : chengchSng (chngchng), 
Sem. Pa Ma.v. Eyebrow (Mai. 
kSning ) : king - chang ? ( king- 
dschang ), Sem. K. Ken. ; ching- 
ching, Pang. U. .4 ring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; chincheng, Sem. Plus ; 
chingcheng(tchin tchen), Sak. Kerb. ; 
chechet? mat (cecct mat). Tan. U. 
Lang. ; E 83 ; H i. [Khmer 
chenchom [chanchom ; chanchom] ; 
Sticng kechom, ' ' e)'ebrows. "] 
[c) Eyebrow : tengkang, Kena. I. ; 
kfintegn met, Bes. Her. ; keling- 
kang mata' ( kelingkang- matak), 
Blan. Rem. Eyelash : kenting 
met, Bes. Sep. A. I.; E 83. 
(rf) Brow : kenfng, Jak. Malac. 
Eyebrow : kening (kuning), Ben. 
New. ; (kening), Serting; buwu- 
kgning, Jak. .Malac. [.Mai. bulu 
k6ning]. Forehead : kSning, Kena. 
II., Bes. Her., Bed. Chiang, 
Bedu. I., Bedu. II., Jak. Mad. ; 
(kening), Jak. Ba. Pa. ; (k'ning), 
Jak. Sim., Jak. Pa. Ba. ; kening 
dahi', Blan. Rem. ; B 433. [Mai. 
kening, "eyebrow"; cf. (n) above, 
and Mon k'neng [kneng], "fore- 
head."] 

432. Eyebrow : lalis, Jak. Mad. ; lalis, 
Jak. Sim. 

433. Eyebrow : dahi. Bed. Chiang ; 
dahi', Bedu. II. Forehead : dei' 
(deik), Barok ; togi (t6r-gi). Sen. 

Cliff. ; tahagi"^', Serau ; tahagik", 
Jelai. [.Mai. dahi ; but cf. also 
Stieng tangahi ; Khmer thngas, 
" forehead."] 

434. Brown colour : sot (sert), Sem. 
Stev. [Cf. Stieng suich "black," 
"brown"; Bahnar shut (xut), 
"red."] Rs3. 

435. Bruised : gesd, Mantr. Malac. ; 
B 241A, B. 

Brush, to : W 124. 

436. Brush past, to : chok blenchong, 
Bes. Songs ; G 43 [cf. Mai. lintas]. 

437. Brushwood ; secondary jungle 
(Mai. belukar) : tepes (pr. tS-pes), 
Sem. Kedah ; ta-wes (pr. ta-wess), 
Sem. Plus ; pabol, Serau. 

438. Brushwood : bush or scrub (Mai. 
seniak) : hon-ii'. Pang. U. AHng, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

439. Brushwood (Mai. semak) : behor 
(pr. bghorr), Sem. Plus ; mg-hing, 
Sen. Cliff. ; mehal, Serau [ or 
Tcmbi ?]. Brushwood and thorns : 
mehal dan jerlak, Serau. A road 
much overgrown : nong kom mehal, 
Krau Em. 

440. Brushwood (Mai. semak): hSdek, 
Sem. Kedah. 

440A. Brushwood (Mai. sSmak) : ySb- 
yub, Tembi. 

441. Brushwood: chempok(tchempok), 
Sak. Ra. [? Mai. semak]. 

442. Brushwood (il/a/. s6mak): 16mat, 
Bes. K. L.. Bes. Sep. A. I. ; (Mai. 
belukar ) Ig-muk, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
lemug, Tembi. 

443. Brushwood: rambun, Bes. Songs. 
To clear away brushwood : C 149- 
152. 

Brute: B 118 

Buah pfirah (fruit): P 57, 58. 

444. Bucket of palm cloth (Mai. bang- 
kor): tebal. Pang. U. Aring; timba', 
Sak. U. Kam. ; (timbak), Bes. K. 
Lang. To draw (water) [rather to 
ladle or bail, with a hollow vessel] : 
nimbai, Mant. Bor. [Mai. timba] ; 
H 116 ; S 149 

445. Bud; blossom: gariet, Sak. Kerb. 
Fruit (Mai. buah): ken-lod (/r. ken- 
lodd); ken-lod, Sem. Kedah; gSnygt, 
Kena. I. 

446. Bud ; young shoot (of plant) : ke- 
kubad(kkubd), Se7n. Pa, Max. 

/i,i,j. Bud : chinatol or chinator (pr. 
chinatorr), tu'. bekembiing chinatol 
lang rengal, ' ' ? the buds swell along 
the stalks," Pang. Teliang. 

448. Bud; blossom: pute' (poutg), Som., 
Sak. Ra. Small ; young : putek, 

550 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Pant. Kap. Joh, Baby ; young : 
putek mambong, Pa7it. Kap. Joh. ; 
H Ii6. [J/a/. putek, " fruit bud. "] 

449. Bud; blossom (unopened) : kutum 
(kutm), Sent. Pa. Max. Flower: 
kuntom, Kena. I. [Mai. kuntuni] ; 
F285. 

450. Buffalo : katidung, Ben. New. 
[Bugis, Mangkasar, t^dong, ' ' buf- 
falo. "] 

451. Buffalo : padarike (padarikay), 
Beti. New. 

45 1 A. Buffalo : sia, Pant. Gah. Mant. 
[Probably from Mai. sial, "un- 
lucky," the animal being taboo 
{e.g. in mines).] 

452. Buffalo : kebao, Se7n. Craw. 
Hist., Sem. Ked. And., Setn. Ked. 
New., Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jnr. 
New., Sem. Jur. Rob.; kibao, Sem. 
Klapr.; kebua? kebau? (kbSu or 
kbua?), Sem. Buk. Max. : kiban, 
Sem. Klapr. ; k6buii ? kebuin ? 
(kbuin), Sem. Pa. Max. ; kerbau, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; (kurbou), i?if«. New. ; 
kerbou, kerbau, Tembi ; kerbo, 
Tembi, Jelai ; kerbo, Darat ; ker- 
bau, Serau ; kreb6, krebo, krbo, 
Sak. Tap.; kiyau, Sem. Plus (?). 
Wild cattle [Mai. seladang) : kerbo, 
Tembi IMal. kerbau]; B no. 

453. Bug (-1/a/. pijat kapending): Igntib? 
(Intlb?), Sem. Pa. Max. 

454. Bug: bug, Sak. Kor. Gb. 

455. Bug: kapinding, Bes. Songs \_Mal. 
kapending]. 

Build, to : B 213; C 296 ; D 132, 
133; D 135. 

456. Bujok, fish spec, Platyglosus 
scapularis (?) : beto', (bto'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; bCto', bgtu' ? (btu'), 
Setn. Pa. Max. ; buntok, Bes. Songs 
[cf. Mai. bujok]. 

Bull, wild : C 57. 
Bullet : S 466. 
Bullfrog : F 269. 

457. Bullock : lembu, Sak. U. Kam. 
Cow: lembo' ? (lembok), Sem. Craw. 
Hist., Sem. Klapr., Sem. Ked. 
And., Sem. Ked. Rob.; 16mboh ? 
(lemboh), Se7n. Jur. And., Sem. 
Jur. Rob. ; 16mbu (lunibu), Sem. 
Beg. ; 16mbu, Sak. Tap. ; (lembu), 
Ben. New. ; 16mbu iknan, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; F 64. Ox ; cow (Mai. 
16mbu) : 12mbu' ( iCmbuk ), Jclai 
[.Ifal. 16mbu]. 

458. Bullock's heart (fruit), Anona re- 
ticulata: nuna kftprl (nuna kpri), 
Sem. Pa. Max. \Mal. nonah or 
nona kapri (?)]. 

459. Bundle ; thing ; packet : balei, 
Som. [Mai. bClit]. 

460. Bundle : ar4b dol, Sak. Kerb. ; 
aram, Sak, Ra. ; P 1-3. 

461. Bungor ayer (tree spec), Lager- 
strocmia sp. : bungu bSteuh (bungu 
btiuh), Sem. Buk. Max. ; Mai. 
bungor IGmukut, Lagerstivemia sp. 
bungu lemukut (bungu Imukt), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

462. Burial ; to bury {Mai. tanam) : 
dun, Sem. Plus. Screen or cover- 
ing of smoke hole: dun lang as, Se7n. 
Plus ; D 107. 

463. Bum, to [Mai. bakar) : ya-jb', 
Pan^. U. Aring; job, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. 

464. Burn, to : ongoyd {pr. ongoJdd), 
ex. ongoydd ass dong ye, ' ' my house 
(was) burnt with fire," Sem. Jarum ; 
bl-ngut. Sen. Cliff. [? Cf. Mai. 
hangat, hangus ; or (more prob- 
ably) Niah'dn g6ch ; Lave ngoch, 
" to burn."] 

465. Burn, to, or roast {Mai. bakar- 
kan) : ya' po'ol {pr. po'oU), Se7n. 
Plus ; poi ; poy, Sak. U. Kam. 
[? cf. L 86]. 

466. Burn, to (roast) : emperut (emp6- 
rout), Sak. Ra. To roast : para, 
Sak. Kerb. Smoke : mapohut (ma- 
pohout), Sak Kerb. Plant (? plan- 
tation): perut (p(^rout), Sak. Ra. 
[Does this mean to clear land for a 
plantation by burning ?] 

467. Burn, to: metut(mtut), Setn.Buk. 
Max. ; katut Bes. Sep. ; tuht ; tut, 
e.g. t. rebak, "to burn a clearing," 
Bes. Sep. A. I.; tat (tat), Se7n. 
Pa. Max. ; t4d (tord), Sak. Plus 
Cliff. ; tot, Sen. Cliff. To burn ; 
to roast ; t6t, So/n. ; tf/-tod, Sak. 
Ke7-b. Burnt : katut uis, katiat us, 
Bes. Sep. A. I.; F 124. To burn 
{Mai. bakar) : teh-chul, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. [Perhaps this should be 
divided, tech-ul ?] To blow up the 
fire : thod as, Sak. U. Ka7n. To 
kindle (fire): tiit, Bes. Sep. A. /. ,, 
e.g. tut us, tut ui's. [Tarcng atut 
( Fr. attiser ) ; Bahnar tok, tiik ; 
Sedang tik uin ; Chrau tiik ; Stie?ig 
duk; Annam d6l, "to light afire" ; 
A/on tu ; Khmer dot [tut], "to 
burn" (transitive); cf. ■zS.so Achi7i. 
tuj, " to light, " " to set fire to."] 

468. Burn, to (trans.): {a) cho'ol^ng, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. ; cho'ong, Bes. K. L. 
To bake : cho'ong, Bes. Maine. 
To boil rice, mencha-6ng, Bedu. II. 
To roast: charong, Kena. I. To 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

551 

roast : cho'o'^ng, e.g. cho'ol^ng kah, 
"to roast fish," Bes. A. I. [? cf. 
Mon chgrung [jrung], " to bake"]. 
{b) Fire [Mai. api), bachom (ba- 
chot>m), ex. ba-chom 15-bbo [mean- 
ing not given : ?= "abig fire "], Son. 
J arum. To light (a fire): nemchom 
(neni-tchom), Sam. ; j'a' chilm [pr. 
cha^'m) ilss, Scin Plus ; ya chom 
{pr. cho^m) &s, Pang. U. A ring, 
Pang. Sam ; ya-chom ilz, Pang. 
Gal. ; chom os yeh 'ng, Sem. Stcv. 
[Mon ch^ng [chang] ; Sfieng chhu ; 
Ba/inar \oh (pr. shoh), "to burn" 
(trans.) ; Khmer chheh ; "to 
burn" (intrans. ); Alak, Lave, 
Niahon choh, " to light (a fire)."] 

469. BuKN, to: C 237; F 124; S 
42-44. 

470. BuK.v, TO : lagat ; melagat 
[m\^g?L\), Pant. Kap. Joh. To light 
a lamp : lagat, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Quick ; sharp : mSlagat (m 'lagat), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. [The connection 
in meaning is obscure. For the 
last cf. Achin. Iggat, "quick."] 

471. Burnt {Mai. tgrbakar): res {pr. 
ress), Sem. Kedah. 

472. Burnt ; scalded : kentho^^ng, Bes. 
Sep. 

Burong siol (bird spec.) : S 219. 
Bursting into leaves : L 32. 

473. Bury, to : ya-tanem. Pang. U. 
Aring [Mai. tanam] ; B 462 ; D 66; 
D 107, 108 ; H 116 ; P 132. 
Bush : B 438-443. 

474. But : tedoh (todoh), Som. 

475. But : imok, Sak. Kerb. 

476. But : ketapi (kbtapi), Sak. Pa. 
[Mai. tetapi]. 

But : W 77. 

Butt (of arrow): B 302-304: H 

21. 

Butt, to (with a horn) : H 126. 

477. Butterfly {Mai. kupu-kupu) : ma- 
peng? (maping?), Setn. Pa. Max. 

478. Butterfly : chgmenlom {pr. che- 
menlo^m), Sem. Plus. 

479. Butterfly : awak (aok or iiuk), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Large butterfly : 
awak, Bes. A. I. ; awak or awa', 
Bes. K. L. 

480. Butterfly : b'lga (bega), Sak. 
Kerb. 

481. Butterfly : tawag {pr. ta-wag), 
Sem. J arum ; tawag, Sem. Plus ; 
tawag. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
tsbag, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; tawak 
(taouak), Som. ; tauang, Sem. K. 
Ken. Any small butterfly : tawong, 
Bes. K. L. Dragon - fly : tabiSng 

(tabog'n), Sem. K. Ken. ; ? cf. 
S 378. 

482. Butterfly : kC-rbak, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; ( Mai. rama-rama ) k6rba 
(kijrba,), Sak. Ra. ; kgrguap, Serau. 
Large butterfly : klobok kadui, Bes. 
Sep. .-L J. Small butterfly : klobok 
kenin, Bes. Sep. Moth : kladok, 
Bes. A. I. 

483. Buttocks [Mai. punggong) : nj'Sn- 
tal, Sen. Cliff. ; ental ( enttal ), 
Serau; ta'ln ? (dad'n), Sem. K. 
Ken. ; chantong, Mantr. Malac. 

483A. Buttocks : jangap, Darat, Jelai; 
A 118, 119 ; L 127 ; T 5 ; T 60, 61. 
Button : E 75 ; Q 29. 
Buttress-root: R 37 ; R 178-181. 

484. Buy, to : menyeleh, Jak. Mad. 
{ Pant. Kap. ) ; menileh bgsilih 
(menileh b'silih), Pant. Kap. Joh. 
To exchange ; to substitute ; to 
hire ; to lend ; to borrow ; value ; 
reward ; wrong : selek. Pant. Kap. 
Joh. [in the sense of "wrong" = B 
10]. To reward: beselek (b'selek), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. To sell : beseleh, 
Pant. Kap. Her. To shift : selek- 
kan, Pant. Kap. Joh. Dear: ningkat 
selek, Pant. Kap. Joh. ; C 30. To 
exchange for {Mai. ganti) : sileh 
(/;-. si-lehh), Sem. Plus ; E 23. 
[Mai. silih, "to replace," "to 
compensate."] 

485. Buy, to: menli (wonll). Som.; 
bell (boll), Sak. Kerb., Sak. Ra. ; 
bli, Sak. Kor. Gh., Sak. U. Kam. ; 
Tembi, Serau ; bli, Bes. K. Lang. 
Bought : terbll (terbli), Bes. K. 
Lang. To barter {Mai. tukar) : 
bli' (blik), Tembi. To sell : bell 
(boli), Sak. Kerb. [Mai. beh, "to 
buy"; but cf. Cham blei, "buy," 
pablei, "sell," corresponding to 
Achin. bloi, publoi, respectively.] 
E 23 ; S 95 ; Y 26. 

By: K 31. By reason of; W 129. 

c 

Cabbage-palm : P 22-24. 
Cackle, to : C 281. 

1. Cage : sangka (sanka), Sak. Kerb. 
[Mai. sangkar] ; B 69. 

2. Calf (of leg): kgjol, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
kejol, Bes. Malac, Ben. A^ew. 

3. Calf (of leg) : gehgl or gih^l? 
Sak. Kor. Gb. Lower part of leg : 
gihir {gh\ -hirr), Som. ; gor {pr. 
gorr), Sem.. Plus. Calf of leg {AJal, 

55- 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

jantong betis), seg gor, Son. Plus ; 
F 170 [? cf. \\^ 147 ((z)]. 

4. Calk (of leg), {Mai. bStis) : langut, 
Po'ig. U. Ariitg, Fang-. Sam, J^ang. 
Gal. Lower part of thigh : langa, 
Sem. K. Ken. Bend of the knee : 
langot {fr. lang-ott) kaltong, Se7n. 
Kedah, Sem. Ja7-iim, Sem. Plus. 
Calf of leg {Mai. jantong biJtis) : set 
langut, Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Safn, 
Pang. Gal. ; F 170. 

5. Calf (of leg): keniiing, Sak. U. A'atn. ; 
ekemong, Tan. U. Lang. Lower 
part of leg {Mai. bfitis) : kemong, 
Jelai; (komon), Sak. Kerb. ; kemong 
Sera?/, Darat ; (k^mongh), Sak. Ka. 
Calf of leg {Mai. buah betis) : ke- 
mong, Sen. Cliff. Thigh : kmung, 
Sak. Tan. Ram. [? Cf. Khmer kom- 
phuon chong[kubhuon jong]; Central 
Nicobar kenmoana-Iah, " calf."] 

6. Leg ( Mai. betis ) : keteng, Sc7n. 
Kedah, Setn. Jarntn. Lower [part 
of] leg : keting, Sem. Stev. Leg 
(from knee to ankle), {Mai. bStis) : 
sS.keting tin (skting tin), Sem. Duk. 
Max. Calf of leg ( Slal. jantong 
betis ) : segj keteng, Sem. Kedah ; 
ase' keting? (asik ting), Sem. Btik. 
Max. ; F 170. Heel : kfiting, Bcdn. 
I. " Tendon of Achilles" : k6ting 
kaki, Bed/i. II. ; F 222 ; T 60. 
[5e/z^7?^ k'teng, k'taing, "leg"; Mai. 
keting, "the part between heel and 
calf."] 

7. Calf (of leg): \x\\s.Mantr. Malac., 
Jac. Malac. Lower part of leg : 
betis (botia), Sak. Ra. Leg : betit. 
Or. Hu. J oh. I. [MaZ. bStis] ; A 133; 
T 61. 

Calf, wild : C 57. 

8. Call, to : makul (mkul), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; ya-kul, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal., Pang. U. Aring; kul, Sem. 
Pa. Max., Pang. K. Aring, U. 
Pat. ; kun, U. Kel. ; iikan or ^kan, 
Sak. Kor. Gh. To wink ; to make 
signs to : kul, Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
mStkul (mkul), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[Stieng kuol, "to call," "to in- 
voke"; Ph7iong kuor (cuor) "to 
call." The connection of the follow- 
ing seems more doubtful : — Mon kok ; 
Tareng koi ; Sue keu ; Samri khe ; 
Por kheu; Prou klou (clou) ; Cancho 
krau(crau); Ilalangkvtio, "to call"; 
cf. /Sahnar kuiil, "to bark" (of a 
hunting dog) ; kuel (kuOl), " to de- 
mand " (insisting upon it).] 

9. Call, T(j : de or yft-dc, " to call or 
summon," Pang. Belimb. [? Ct. 

Andamanese Kedc um tei, "to 
call."] 

10. Call to : cherun (tchuroun), Sak. 
Ra. ; 6n-ch§-ret, Sen. Cliff. ; serhoy, 
Mantr. Cast. To call ; to order 
{Mai. suroh tgriak) : serhue(serhoue), 
serhoi, Mant. Bor. To shout : 
cherikn, Serau ; cherikn, Jelai ; en- 
ckerek", Darat. We call out to the 
moon, we call out to Rahu : ha 
chengru ( chngru ) gichii, chfingru 
( chngru ) Rahu, Sak. U. Bert. 
\Khmer srek, "to call out," "to 
shout."] 

11. Call, to : inho, Sem. K. Ken. ; 
neho (nbho), S'om. To hail [call to], 
paho, Mantr. Cast. 

12. Call, to: bikai ; bekai, J/flw/r. 5or. 

13. Call, to {Mai. panggil) ; to send 
for ; to invite {Mai. jSmput) : y(im- 
ptit, Sen. Cliff. [Mai. jemput]. 

14. Call, to : panggil (panghil), Sak. 
Kerb. To send for : pangil, Sak. U. 
Kam. [Mai. panggil]. 

To call : G 42 ; G 49 ; S 175-178. 

15. Call at, to : singa', Sak. U. Kam. 
To hit a mark: singgah. Pant. Kap. 
/oh. [Alal. singgah]. 

Call out, to : C 285. 

16. Call to mind, to ; to think of: ki', 
Sem. Buk. Max. 

Calladium : Y 1-12. 

17. Calm; quiet {Mai. tedoh) : sot, Sak. 
Ra. ; S 222 ; S 305. 

18. Caltrop : seauti ? (se-owti), Sem. 
Stev. ; H 137 ; S 141 ; T 94. 

19. Calyx : tempok, Bes. Songs [Mai. 
tampok, "covering"]; 8550. 

20. Can; to be able to: (a) bulo (boulo), 
Sak. Ra. ; bule (boul6), Sak. Kerb. ; 
boleh, Sak. U. Kam. ; N 69. 

{b) To procure : menule (monoul6), 
Som. [cf. il/ff/. buleh, "can"; beruleh, 
"to get" ; from W 129]; A 4; G 
14; N 66. 
Canal: T 103. 
Cancer : I 45 ; U 8, 9. 

21. Candle : dian, Sak. U. Kam. 
Resin : dian, Bes. Malac. [Mai. dian, 
" torch."] 

Cane : R 36-41. 

22. Cap : kopiah, Sak. U. Ka7n. [Alal. 
kopiah] ; I' 100. Cap of quiver : 
Q 25 ; S 234. 

23. Capable [?] : larat, Som., Sak. Ra. 
[7 Mai. larat: so given in original, but 
I cannot find the word in the diction- 
aries to which I have access.] D 66. 

24. Cape ; bend of river : shimpah 
(schimpah), Sak. Ke/-b. 

25. Capk ; bend of a river : tanjong 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

553 

(tandjon), Som., Sak. Ra.\ (tandjon), 

Sak. Nil. ; taiijuk", Seran [A/aL 

tanjong, " cape "]. 

Care, to : M 109. 

Care, to take : A 57; S 79; T 11. 

Carefully : (i 67 

26. Careless : (<;) lenga' (linga), Sem. 
link. Max. ; lenga (lefia,), Sak. Ka. 
Slow : Iciigah, Sak. U. Ka»i. \_Mal. 
lenga, " to loiter "]. 

(3) Careless : langgap, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. To forget : langap, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. 

27. Careless : lamat, Sak. Kerb. 
\Mal. lanibat,"late," "un punctual"]. 
Carrion : S 292. 

28. Carry, to : tinja' (Unjak), Sem. Bttk. 
xUa.v ; china, Sem. Pa. Max. 
To carry away : amjut (anidjout), 
Sak. Kerb. To lift ; to carry : {Mai. 
angkat), tai-6t, Sen. Cliff. ; taiot", 
Serau. [? Cf. Khmer yok [yak] ; 
Bahnar iok, "to take"; but see 
B 396.] 

29. Carry, to : C 52. 

30. Carry, to : angket (ankdt), Sak. 
Kerb. ; angkit (ankit), Sak. Ra. To 
get up ; to stand ; to go up : ningkat, 
Pant. Kap. Joh. To set (a snare) : 
ningket, Bes. A. I. To take {Mai. 
ambil) : ya' angked {pr. angkedd), 
Sem. Kedah ; angkit, Sak. Guai. 
To take up {Mai. angkat) : ang-kit, 
Sak. Plus Cliff. ; angkit", Seran. 
To take up ; to climb: tSngkat 
(t'ngkat). Pant. Kap. Joh. ; B 484 
[Mai. angkat]. 

31. Carry, to: tanggong (tngkung), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. [Mai. tanggong]. 

32. Carry, to : tateng, Bedu. I. To 
hold up : tating, Mantr. Malac. To 
take up : tateng, Bedu. II. To carry 
(in the hand) : benteng, Bedii. II. 
[Mai. tating]. 

33. Carry, to {Mai. tating) : buka, 
Pant. Kap. Joh. ; B 396 ; B 399- 
401 ; C 48. 

34. Carry, to: tarek, Sak. U. Kam. 
To carry in an " ambong " (a sort of 
knapsack) : jaras, Ke/ia. I., Bedu. II. 

35. Carry, to (in an "ambong"): 
anambong, Serting [Mai. ambong]. 

36. Carry, Tofontheback), {Mai. pikul): 
klam, Serting. 

37. Carry, to (on the head), {Mai. 
junjong) : t^n-duh, Sen. Cliff. [?cf. 
Mai. tandu, " litter," " palanquin "]. 

38. Carry, to (on the head), {Mai. 
junjong) : sCrkap atas pSningol (s'rkap 
atas p'ningol), Pant. Kap. Joh. ; P 
100. 

Carrying- pole : P 177. 
Cartilage (of nose) : N 98. 

39. Carve or decorate, to {Mai. ukir) : 
ya-kuched {e.g. a blowpipe or quiver). 
Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. To write {e.g. on blowpipe), 
{Mai. tulis) : kuched. Pang. U. 
A ring. 

40. Carve, to (designs or objects) ; 
makaii? (inakiee), Sem. Stev. To 
cut rings(in something?): met-tl(met- 
tee), Sem. Stev. [cf. M 14 or C 295]. 

41. Carve, to, or scratch designs : 
din, Sem. Stev. 

Carve meat, to : C 299. 

Carved design: B 194; D 157; 

K 133- 

42. Caryota ( palm which produces blow- 
pipe wadding), [Mai. " merdin "]: ri, 
Sem. Stev. 

43. Caryota griffithii: ch3.-ching, Ment. 
Stev. 

43A. Cash down {Fr. comptant) : bor- 
S(?nyi (borsoni), Sak, Ka. [? = G 65 
4-Q 16]; E 24; G 66. 
Cast (in the eye) : E 83. 
Cast away, to : F 120 ; R 60 ; T 
106-114. 

44. Cast out, to : sunteng, Bes. Songs. 
Casting-net : N 43, 44. 

45. Cat {Mai. kuching) : miu or m^u. 
Sem. Jariim ; m^au or m^o, Sem. 
Plus ; M 98 ; nyau, U. Cher. [Ono- 
matopceic from M 98 ; but cp. Cuoi, 
ng^au; Kaseng, Kon Tu, Su^, Halang, 
Bolove7i, Sedang, Stieng, Chrau, 
Bahnar mQo; Chatn mby&n ; Chnrv, 
Jarai meo ; Annamese kon (con) 
meo ; Selung meao, miii (meaw), 
miyaung (me-young), "cat."] 

46. C.\T : kuching, Sem. Beg., Bev. 
New. , Mantr. Malac. , Bes. Bell. ; 
(koutchiii), Sak. Ka. ; ku-ching, U. 
Tern.. ; kuchin (koutchin), Sak. Kerb. ; 
kuchikn, Tembi; (kuchik"). Sen. CI. ; 
kii-chik", Sen. Cliff. ; kuchik", Tembi, 
Serau ; kuchik, Sak. U. Kam. ; (kiits- 
chlk), Sak. Kor. Gb. ; (koutchik). 
Som. ; kuchik (kutschik), Sak. Mar- 
tin; kuchi-kuchi (kutschi-kutschi), 
Sak. Tap. Kitten : kuod gu-chik- 
de, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; ke-non kuchik^, 
Sen. Cliff. ; ke-non kuchik, Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. Tiger-cat {Mai. rimau 
akar): kuching utan, Tembi. "Cat's- 
eye " (fruit), (spec. Mai. buah mata 
kuching), {Nephelium malaiense): 
boh met kuching (buh mit kuching), 
Se?n. Pa. Max. [Mai. kuching, 
" cat."] 

Cat: W 132. 

554 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Cat, wild : T 129-133; T 135; 

T 140. 

Cataract (in the eye) : E 83. 

" Cat's-eye " fruit : C 46 ; U 21. 

47. Catch, to [Mai. tangkap) : ya- 
pag, Pang. U. Arini;, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; pak, Kcrbat. [Perhaps 

= P5i-] 

48. Catch, to: [a) kap p/- ye-kap, ex. 
ye-kap kashak, ' ' I catch deer, " Pang. 
K. Aring; kip, Lcbir; bikap, /f/a/; 
nachanakab, Tenibi ; ikah, Ben. 
New. ; iket, ex. iket kashak, ' ' to 
catch a deer," Pang. Belimb. ; higap, 
Des. A. /. ; S 242 ; kakoni, Bes. K. 
Lang. ; kom, Bes. Songs. To be 
caught : ki-b&rkap, Sak. U. Bert. 
To hunt [Mai. memburu): ya' kop, 
Sem. Plus. To seize ; to snatch : 
lekub, likab (leikub, llikb), Scm. Buk. 
Max. Able, adj. [Mai. kuasa): kom, 
Pang. U. Aring. To find : kom, 
Sak. Ra. ; hekbpii, (he-kerpn), Sen. 
Cliff. ; enkbp°, Serau ; hikup", Kraii 
Em. ; kop (kerp), Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
To get : kop (kerp), Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; kom, ex. dah 03'n kom tipu' 
dah [Mai. sahya sudah kena tipu), 
" I have got cheated," Bes. K. L. ; 
bekom, Bes. K. Lang. To possess : 
pakom, Bes. Songs. To procure : 
kom, Sak. Ra. ; S 78. [Cf. Stieng 
kop, "a trap," "to accept"; 
Khmer rongkop, "trap." Perhaps 
connected with Mai. tangkap, per- 
angkap. But especially Centr. 
Nicobar kom, kom-ashe, ' ' to obtain," 
"to receive," "to get"; kom-hata, 
"to find" (after a search); ?cf. Piso. ] 
{b) To carry away : kot, Sak. Ra. 
To take: makon, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Klapr. ; kod. Tern. CI., Sak. 
Plus Cliff., Sen. CI., Sak. Bla?ij. 
Cliff. ; katn; kot, Serau; kot, Sak. 
Ra. ; nedkot (nodkot), Som. ; amp- 
kot, Sak. Kerb.; kat ? (got; goat), 
Sak. Kor. Gb. To accept : 'ngkan, 
Sak. U. Kam. To obtain : ma-ken, 
Sem. Stev. Take his things ! kut- 
lah [or kotlah) barang ni loe, Jelai. 
Do not take my things ! gagot 
barang en, Jelai ; je akot barang 
leta, Tcmbi. Do not take : we 
gagot, Sak. Em. [Mon ket, "to 
take " ; An7iam. kit ; Achin. kuet, 
" to take away" ; Stieng kftn, " to 
take," "to accept"; Khmer kAn 
"to hold"; ? cf. Stieng k6h, "to 
seize," " to arrest."] 

49. Catch, to (Mai. tangkap) : (a) ya' 
chep, Sem. Jarum ; ch6p, Sem. Beg. ; 

(chaip), Ben. New. ; ch6p, Krau 
Tern. ; chep, Krau Ket. ; chap, Sak. 
U. Kam. To catch ; to seize : chiap 
tchi^p), Sak. Ra. I catch : en 
chap, Jelai. I arrest you [?] [Mai. 
tangkap awak) : chap le de het ne, 
Darat. To fish ( XIal. tangkap 
ikan), ya' chep beg-jag, Sem. Jarum. 
To hold : chab, Sem. Stev. ; chab 
(tchab), Som. ; chap. Sem. Beg., Ben. 
New, Sen. Cliff. ; chap, Sak. U. 
Kam. To hold ; to take hold of; to 
seize : mSchab (mchb), Se>n. Buk. 
Max. ; cheb (chib), Sem. Pa. Max. 
To seize: chiap (tchiap), Sak. Ra.; 
chap, Sak. U. Kam. To seize (the 
handle of a weapon) : macheb, Sem. 
Stev. To shake hands : chab tong 
(chb tung), Sem. Pa. Max. To 
touch: cheb (chib), Sem. Pa. Max. 
To take in the hand : cheb (chib), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; machib (machb), 
Sem. Buk. Alax. ; G 42. Hand (from 
wrist): chap, Sem. Stev. Dance-stick: 
cheb chas, Pang U. Aring. [Khmer 
chap [chap] "to seize," "to catch"; 
Bahnar chep (short c), "to carry, 
or hold in the hand" ; Stieng chap, 
' ' to take, accept " [a Cambojan loan- 
word, according to Az^mar]; Phnong 
chhok (chhoc) ; Caneho, Rodi jek 
(jec) ; Chrdai phchis ; Chrau chap ; 
Stieng giep, "to take"; Bahnar 
chup, ' ' to take with the finger-ends 
all together." But cf. P 68 ; ? cf. 
Stieng chop, " to hunt."] 
[b) Catch, to (birds) [Mai. rachik) : 
ngchit, Bes. K. Lang. [? cf. P 68]. 

50. Catch, to : rot, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
ahrod (eh-rod), Som. To catch ; to 
seize : krod, Sak. Kerb. To seize : 
rot, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; ahrod (eh-rod), 
Som. ; krod, Sak. Kerb. To em- 
brace : kerAp'^, Jelai, Serau. To 
draw towards oneself (?), [Fr. attirer; 
but the Mai. equivalent given is 
pakeian, "clothes"): krot, Sak. 
Kerb. ; cf. E 76 ; P 227 [? cf. P 230]. 
[It is not certain that these words are 
all connected. Some may be formed 
with the infix -;•- from other roots, 
e.g. C 48. Cf. Baluiar krAp (krop), 
"to hold in one's embrace (lying 
down). "] 

51. Catch, to: t6-long, U. Tem., U. 
Cher. To find: tClong, Bes. K. Lang. 
To look for : tclong, Bes. Songs. To 
seek: t61ong, Bes. K. Lang. ; tSlo^ng, 
Bes. Sep. A. /. 

52. Catch, to [Mai. tangkap) : bat 
(bort). Sen. CI. To be caught 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

555 

{Mai. kSnakan) : bad, ex. lez kSbez 
bad giila' (trans, of Mai. proverb, 
mati sfimut kgna gula), "ants die 
caught in the sugar," Pang. Sam, 
Fang. Gal. To take (.l/i//.' ambil) : 
bot, Lebir\ bdt (bort), Kerbat \ ya' 
chebod (/;-. ch$bod ), ex. angked 
chfebod {Mai. ambil-lah), " pick it up 
and take it away," Sem. Fins ; C 30 ; 
j'a-bod {pr. bodd), Fang. U. A ring.; 
ya-bod (pr. b6dd), Fang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. To pick: but; but;mut;mut, 
Bes. Songs. To pick up : boht, Bes. 
K. Lang. ; bAt, Bes. Songs. To 
carry : chepat (tchopat), Stim. To 
perch {Mai. hinggap) : ya-bad, Pang. 
Skeat. To perch ; to alight {Mai. 
hinggap) : tebit (tbit), Sem. Buk. 
Max. [Is there a confusion here 
between Mai. "hinggap" and some 
other word? But ? cf. Siieng bQt, 
"to perch," "to hang on to" (of 
bats on a tree), "to attach oneself 
to"; ? cf. Chrdu bat, "to hold"; 
Niahcn bot ; Bolove7i tabot ; Halatig 
ba ; Lave nge pot, " to touch" ; Mon 
pat [bat], ' ' adhesiveness ' ; khabat 
[khabuit], " sticky. '] 
Catch, to : S 242. 

53. Caterpillar : keting (k'ting). Son. 
Stcv. ; B 143. 

54. Cattle, wild {Mai. seladang) : keh 
(kih), Sem. Pa. Max. 

55. Cattle, wild: chengkham (cheng- 
k'ham), Kena. I. 

56. Cattle, wild : se-la-daki^. Sen. 
Cliff. ; sSladang, Mantr. Malac. ; 
(sladang), Serau ; seladak (sladak), 
Tembi ; seladak" (sladak"), Serau 
[or Tembi ?]. I shoot [or have shot?] 
a seladang : ko emdil sladak" {or 
sladak), Serau [Mai. sfiladang]. 

57. Cattle, wild : selapon {pr. sgla- 
po^ln), Sem. Kedah ; selapi, Sem. 
Plus ; sapid, Fang. Sam, Fang. Gal. ; 
sa-pi', Lebir; sapi, Som., Sak. Kerb., 
Sak. Ra. Cow : sapi, Sem. Klapr. 
Wild calf: sapi kuat menh^ng (sapi 
giiat menh^ng), Sak. Kor. Gb. ; C 
i02;B4i9(?). Wild bull : sapi babG, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. Wild cow : sapi 
babo, Sak. Kor. Gb. [Mai. sapi]. 
[Some of these forms are curiously 
analogous to Javanese Krama forms. 
There are other instances of such 
apparently anomalous formations ; 
cf. C 200 ; D 149 ; E 51 ; W 50 ; 
Wioi.] 

58. Ox, WILD {Mai. sSladang, sapi) : 
slei, Sak. Tap. Wild cattle, B 452 ; 
D 68. 

59. Caul? {Mai. kulit bOrkulit) : kejib, 
Sem. Fa. Max. 

60. Cause ; motive : tegal ; agal, Mcfil. 
Bor. [Mai. tfigal] ; B 152 ; W 
78, 79- 

61. Cave {Mai. gua batu) : nendem, 
Sem. Kedah, Sem. Jariim, Sem. 
Pins ; nom-dom. Pang. U. Aring 
[? cf. Mon tham [thuim], " cave"]. 

62. Cave : lup. Sen. Cliff. 

63. Cave ; hole : humo (houmo), Sak. 
Kerb. ; C 296 ; D 66 ; H 107 ; H 
III ; M 199. 

Cavity : D 66 ; H 107 ; H no ; 
M 199. 
63 A. Cent (copper coin) : sen, Darat, 
Jelai [Mai. sen]. 

64. Centipede {Mai. lipan) : sed-a 
(doubtful), Sem. Kedah. 

65. Centipede : tos, Fang. Stev. 

66. Centipede : keeb or ke-eb, Sem. 
Jarnm ; keeb", Tembi ; keeb", Serau 
[or Tembi?]; keepn, Jelai; keep, 
Serau ; (kech), Sak. Em. ; ke-ep, 
Sem. Plus ; kahap (kehep), Som. ; 
kehep (k^h^p), Sak. Ra. ; kg'ap, 
Sak. U. Bert. ; ke'ip. Fang. U. 
Aring; ke-ip, Fang. Sam, Fang. 
Gal. ; kaki'ik (kaki'ik), Se7n. Fa. 
Max. ; kl'ib ( kl'ib ), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; ki'ip ; ki'it, Bes. Sep. A. /. ; 
kiip, Bes. Malac. [Khmer 'kkep {pr. 
kclep?) [kaeb] ; Stieng kiiop, kop ; 
Bahuar keep ; Centr. Nicobar kaeap 
— " centipede." The connection of 
Mon dhgi seems more than doubtful.] 

67. Centipede : lipan, Sak. Kerb. ; 
halipan, Mantr. Malac., Jak. Malac. 
[Mai. halipan]. 

68. Centipede (spec. Mai. "taylong" ) : 
jelantu? (jeluntoo), Jak. Stev. ; M 
104. 

Centre : M 99, 100 ; N 16 ; N 18. 

69. Ceremonial function? : gayii', Bes. 
Songs. 

70. Certain ; to make certain : tuntoh 
(tuntuh), Sem. Buk. Max. Certain : 
tentu' ? (tentuk), Serau. Certainly: 
tontu (tontou), Sd?n. ; (tontou), Sak. 
Kerb. , Sak. Ra. Doubtful ; uncer- 
tain : ta-tontu (ta-tontou), Som. ; to- 
tentu (to-tentou), Sak. Kerb. ; to- 
tentii (to-tbntou), Sak. Ra. [Mai. 
tentu]. 

A certain (indefinite sense) : T 51. 

71. Chain: rante, Sak. Kor. Gb. [Mai. 
rantai]. 

Chamber : R 170-172. 

72. Chameleon (. 1/(7 /. sumpah-sumpah): 
dalang (dalng), Sem. Fa. Max. ; 
dalong, ex. surau dalong, surau 

556 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

halug, ' ' the chameleon cries, the fly- 
ing lizard cries," Pang. Sai. Toad 
(spec. Mai. kodok belong or katak 
betong): dalong (dalung), Son. Biik. 
Max. [cf. L 114, 115]. 

73. Chameleon (.l/a/.sumpah-sumpah): 
{a) changhai, Sem. Jarum ; jongkoi, 
Bes. A. I. ; s6dengkuil, Jak. Malac. ; 
sgdengkui, Mantr, Malac. Nya. ; 
senengkoi, Maiitr. Malac. ; seneng- 
koi, Mantr. Malac. Cha. ; senui^ng- 
poi, Bes. Sep. Lizard (black and 
orange variety) : dangkui, Jak. Mad. 
[Mon dakui [dakuai], "chameleon" 
sp. ; cf. Khmer bangkuoi [pSngkuoy], 
"small arboreal lizard"; Bah?iar 
bokuei (bokuey), "lizard"; Stieng 
pekei, " grey chameleon " sp. ; Centr. 
Nicobar koah, "tree lizard"; and 
perhaps Mon kap kai [kap kaai], 
"lizard"; ? cf. Madurese brokay, 
" monitor-lizard."] 

[b] Frog ( Mai. katak ) : changkai, 
Sem. Jarnm, Sem. Flits. Toad {Mai. 
kodok): changkai. Pang. U. Ai'ing \ 
changkhai, Pang. Sam, Patig. Gal. ; 
kongkS,', Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus ; 
tangka', Sem. Kedah, Sem. Jarum; 
tungkueh ( timgkuih ), Sem. Biik. 
Max. \_Khmer kingkok [gingguk] ; 
kingkOk [kftngguk] ; angkok [angguk], 
"toad"; Achin. changguk, "frog."] 

74. Toad : kudog, Sem. Jarum [Mai. 
kodok]. 

Ch.\meleon : L 114, 115. 
Change, to : T 257. 

75. Changgan (tree) : changgan, Bes 
Songs. 

Changing : I 29 ; T 257. 
Channel : T 103. 

76. Character ; disposition : tabi'at 
(tb't), Sem. Buk. Max. \_Mal. Ar. 
tabi'at]. 

77. Charcoal : («) anggu, Sem. Jur. 
A'cw. ; (auggu), Sem. Jur. And., 
Sem. Jur. Rob. ; jengka? (jeng-ha), 
Sak. Plus Cliff. ; jeng-kah, Sak. 
Bla7tj. Cliff.; nying-kah, Sen. Cliff. 
{b) Charcoal : hangung, Sent. Pa. 
Max. Burning embers : ingung us 
(aingungus), Sem. Buk. Max. ; Sngong 
osh (onofi-och), Sotn. ; reng-hong- 
osh, Sak. Plus Cliff., Sak. Blaiij. 
Cliff. ; renghon (renhon), Sak. Kerb. 
Fire : ramangaye, Ben. Neiv. Fire- 
wood : ungun api, Jak. /.em., Jak. 
Ba. Pa. Firelogs : anggeng. Bes. 
Songs. Ebony [.Mai. arang pSra), 
hangung pCra (hangung pra), Sem. 
Pa. .Max. [AV/wcvrongbk (rongoeuk) 
[rAngiJk], " burning emlwrs "]. 

80, 

85 

{c) Charcoal : hannying, Se^ti. Craw. 
Hist., Sem. Ked. New.; (mannying), 
Sem. Ked. And., Sem. Ked. Rob. ; 
hayeng (haing), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Ebony (Mai. kayu arang, Maba 
bttxifolia or Diospyros lucida) : jehu 
aheng (jhu ahing), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
iyo', wi'u, haeng (aiu', wai'u, haing), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; [Mai. arang p6ra), 
hayangpaya' ( haing paia'), Setn. Buk 
.Max. [Mai. arang] ; B 240 ; B 373. 
Charm : M 76 ; P 128 ; R 133 
Chase, to : H 176-178. 
Chatter, to : menenteng, Bes. Songs. 
Chatter, to: merbo', Bes. A. I. 
Chattering of teeth : bgrkSba' (brk- 
bak), Sem. Pa. Max. ; S 360. 
Chattering (of the teeth) : C 79 ; T 
172. 

Chaunt, to : S 211-213. 
Cheap : E 23. 

Cheat, to (J/ff/. tipu): gom, Tembi; 
D 62 ; F 23 ; G 68. 
Cheek (of the face), (Mai. pipi) : 
kebang (kbng)? Setn. Pa. Max., 
Sent. Buk. Max. ; kaba or kapd? 
(kabba ; kapd?), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
kap5? (kapong) or kapang, Tembi ; 
kapo, S'om. ; kapa (kapa ; kapo), 
Sak. Kerb. ; gobuk, Bes. A. I. Face: 
kapo or kapau (kapo (au)), Sak. Br. 
Lo7u. [? Cf. Ktty Dek tabatn ; 5'^- 
lung ta-bong ; Central and Southern 
Nicobar tapoa ; Khmer thpeal [thbal], 
" cheek."] 

Cheek : kami, Sak. Ra. 
Cheek (Mai. pipi) : pen-al, Sem. 
Kedah. Temples (Mai. pelipis) : 
penal (pnl), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Cheek [Mai. pipi) : (a) peng-peng, 
Sem. Plus ; peng-peng. Pang. U. 
A}'ing, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Temples (Mai. dahi) : pSngpeng, 
Sem. Plus. 

(b) Cheek : meng, Sen. CI. ; meng, 
Bera. ; ming Serau, Darat, Jelai ; 
di ming (?), Serau ; H 2. [Cf. Achin. 
ming, "cheek," "border," ? cf. 
N 21 ; Cham amidng, " cheek."] 

(c) pipi, Ben. Neiv. ; pipi", Jak. Ba. 
Pa. [Mol. pipi] ; M 202. 
ChSmdkian, buah, or buah patu (a 
(s[)ecies of plant) : bua patu' (bua 
patu'), Sent. Buk. Max. [Mai. buah 
patu]. 

ChCmpaka (flower), Michelia Cham- 
paca : jitnipn, jdrnpakah (jmpa ; 
jnipakh), Sem. Btik. Max. ; (spec. 
Mai. ch. merah) : jampa tdhuing 
(jmpa thuing), Sent. Buk. Max. ; 
(spec. Mai. ch. puteh) : jimpakah 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

557 

piltu (jnipakh piltu ), Scm. Buk. 
Max. \Mal. chgnipaka]. 

87. Ch£nip£dak (fruit, tree) {Artocarpus 
Maingayi) : mtnOlang (mnlng), Son. 
Buk. Max., Scm. Pa. Max. 
Ch^Zigal (tree spec. ) : D 188. 

88. Chengkeii (a kind of wild fruit-tree): 
ploni, Paiii^. U. Ariiig; plim, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. 

Cherish, to : A 57. 

89. Chest ; breast : kawat, Pant. Kap. 
Sim. Old ; iron ; iron pot : kawat, 
Pant. Kap. /ok. Cubit or span : 
kawat pendek, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Fathom : kawat panjang, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. To wink : kawat pgningok 
(kawat p'ningok), Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[Several distinct words seem to have 
"run together" here; cf. Mai., 
Jav. kawat, "wire"; Jav. kawak, 
"old"; kawan, "a measure of 
length for thread " ; see also R 16. ] 
CHE.ST : B 380-387. 

90. Chew or quid (of betel) : pia'. 
Pang. U. A ring. 

91. Chick, new-born : sSl^t, Kena. I. 

92. Chick, new-born : netas, Bedu. II. 
[Mai. tetas, "to break (the shell)."] 
Chicken : C 102 ; F 255-258. 
Chicken-pox : S 289, 290. 

93. Chief ; leader : senahut (sna-hoot), 
Sem. Stev. 

93A. Chief (Mai. penghulu): rana, 
e.g. bo' (bok) li rana tedih, " who is 
the chief of this village" [probably 
simply " here"], Krau Em. 

94. Chief ; king : eja (edjah), Sem. 
Klapr. King : eja, Sem. Craw. 
Hist. ; raja' (rajak), Jelai. Small 
kingfisher {Mai. raja hudang) : uju. 
Pang. U. A ring \Mal. raja]. King- 
fisher : jiilftng (julng), Sem. Buk. 
Max. \Mal. raja udang]. 

95. Chief ; leader ; captain : panghulu 
(paiighoulou), Stim. ; pangulu (pa- 
ngoulou), Sak. Ka. ; to penghulu, 
Jelai \_Mal. penghulu]. 

96. Chief, superior (Jakun and Besisi) : 
batin, Bes. K. Lang. Superior and 
vassal chiefs : batin, Mantr. Bor. 
Chief : batin. Or. Laut. [Mai. batin, 
a title in the Sejarah Malayu applied 
also to Malay chiefs of the south of 
the Peninsula.] 

97. Chief, subordinate ( Jakun and 
B6sisi) : jinang, Bes. K. Lang. ; 
(jennang), Mantr. Bor. Superior 
chief: jenang, Or. Lard. [Mai. 
jenang, a title subordinate to 
batin.] 

98. Chief, deputy (Jakun and BSsisi) : 

jukrah, Bes. A'. Lang. ; juru-krah, 
Mantr. Bor. [Mai. juru-kerah]. 
99. Chief: x\\.-\M{r\\.-hii\i), Pang. Jalor. 

100. Chief: pali-m6n, Po-Klo; palinia? 
(balima), Sem. K. Ken. [Mai. peng- 
lima] ; B 205 ; O 23. 

101. Child: un. Pang. Jalor ; wung, 
Sem. Kcd. Keiu. ; (woung), Sem. 
Klapr. ; wong (wohng), Jehehr ; 
wong, Sem. U. Sel. , Sem. Ij. ; 
wong, ex. wong ye', "my child," 
Pang. Belimb. ; wong? (voug), 
Sem. Pupier ; wong (pr. wogn ), 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; wogn, U. 
Pat. ; wang, Sem. Stev., Sem. 
Martin. Child (or young of any- 
thing ), (Mai. anak) : wong ( or 
wogn ), Sem. Plus ; wong ( or 
wo8n), Sem. Jar urn ; awak. Pang. 
K. Aring ; awa'. Pang. U. Aring; 
a-wa', Lebir, Kerhat ; i-wa', Krau 
Ket. ; ?hi-wa', U. Tem. ; io-war, 
Krau Tem.; <i-a', Sak. Gtiai; eng- 
wa, U. Cher. Child (Mai. kanak- 
kanak) ; rewa' (rewak), Kerdau ; 
T 165 ; W 30. Infant : wang, 
Sem. Jur. A?id., Sem. Jnr. Rob. 
Young of animals : iu - wa' , U. 
Tern.; B 137; Y 115. Birth; 
generation: balo' awang (balu' au'), 
Sem. Bilk. Max.; baia' awang (bal' 
auang), Sem. Pa. Max. Young 
shoots of plants ; 3'oung trees (?) : 
wong-wong, as pi. of wong (?), ex. 
wong-wong tangoi, Sem. Kedah ; 
R 22. Male child : awang, Jak. 
Mad. To bear children : ber-io- 
war, Krau Tem. ; F 155. Child : 
wunganeg, Sem. Craw. Hist. In- 
fant : wanganeg, Sem. Ked. And., 
Sem. Ked. Rob. ; C 106. Child : 
awa kanit (auva kanit), U. Kel. 
Small child : io-war kweng, Krau 
Tem. Female child ; daughter : 
awang mabeh (auang mabh), Sem. 
Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. Max. 
Daughter : wang mab^. Sent. Beg. ; 
wong mabe (wong mabay), Ben. 

New. ; un badon. Pang. Jalor. 
Girl: iwa' kon (i-wa' kern), Krau 
Ket. ; hiwa' gado (hi-wa' ga-der), U. 
Tem. Male child ; son : awang te' 
(auang ti'), Sem. Pa. Max.; awang 
temkal (auang tmkl), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Son : wang tongkal, Sem. 
Beg. ; un tengkal (un tunkahl). 
Pang. Jalor. Boy : i-wa' koin, 
Krau Ket. ; hiwa' lipo? (hi-wa' li- 
per, hi-wa" li-per), U. Tem. ; 
M 17. Brother : awunta tik, Ben. 
New. Sister : wan-ku-man, Se^n. 

558 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

J in: And., Sem. Jiir. Rob. Sap- 
ling (?) : pengwong or pengwong, 
ex. sagSneb pengwong, " every sap- 
ling," Sem. A'eda/i; C 128; F 220; 
H 14, 15 [? cf. Mai. awang, "a 
youth "]. 
102. Child : ken. Pang. Sam. ; kC'n 
(god'n or goid'n?), Sem. K. R'e?i. ; 
kon, Se>n. Per. ; k6han (kohun), 
Sak. Jer. ; k6hat (kohut), Po-Klo ; 
kuod, Sak. Pins. Cliff. \ (kouod), 
S'om. ; kwod, Tern. CI. ; kuad, Sak. 
Br. Lmu ; (kouad), Sak. Croix, 
Sak. Kerb. ; kfi-nod, Seyi. CI. ; 
kenoch (knotsch), U. Ind. ; ke- 
nong, Bera. ; k'non, Bes. Malac. ; 
knon, U. Ind. ; kenan (kendwn). 
Or. Berumb. ; kenOn, Sak. Martin; 
kenon (knon), Sak. U. Kam. ; 
ken6n, Serting ; ke-non, Sen. 
Cliff. ; kenon, Bes. K. Lang, ke- 
non ; ke-nun, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
kenon, kSnun, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
keniin, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; ke-nun, 
Sak. Sel. Da. ; kenun, Jelai, Buk. 
U. Lang. , Tan. U. Lang. , Bes. Sep. , 
Bes. Her., Bed. Chiong \ engkan? 
(engkau), Ment. Her. IL ; W 30. 
Baby : kinun (keenoon), Bes. Bell. 
Boy (or girl) : ken, Lebir ; ki-yen, 
Kerbat. Daughter: kenun (kbnoun); 
Sak. Ra. Grandchild ; kanun, Ben. 
New. [means "child"]. Birth: 
keruat {kromX), Sak. Kerb. To 
bear children : be-kuod, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. ; be-ke-n(in, Sak. Bla?ij. 
Cliff. ; berkenun, Jelai ; bekgnun, 
Bes. Sep. ; bekfinon, Serting. Grand- 
child : kenun tiri. Tan. U. Lang. 
[A/a/, tiri]. Littlechild: ke-nongket, 
Bera. Youngest child ; youngest of 
a family: kenon luj (k6-non liidj), 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Bastard : ke-non 
mfir-gas, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Daugh- 
ter : babuh keuat (babouh koouat), 
Sak. Kerb, [wrong order ? it should 
be kSuat babo] ; kuit babo (guat 
bab6), Sak. Kor. Gb.\ kuod ba'-bu', 
Sak. Plus Cliff. ; knot babo (kouot- 
babo), Som. ; kenun kido (kbnoun- 
kid6), Sak. Ra. ; kenun kedur, Bes. 
Sep. ; k6-non kgr-do', Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. Girl : gn-kon ke-doh, U. 
Cher. ; ki-yen ia-lu, Kerbat ; ken 
yalo (ken ya-l(5r), Lebir ; ko<in ? 
bab6 (god'n babo'), Sem. K. Ken. 
Son : kuot babuh (kouot-babouh), 
Som. ; kuod babo (kuod ba-ber), 
Sak. Plus Cliff.; ke-non kral, Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff.; kunun ? kia (konoun- 
kii), Sak. Ra. ; kenun Icniul, Bes. 

Sep. Boy (male child) : kuat babo 
(guat babo), Sak. Kor. Gb. ; ken 
tem-k^l, Lebir; ki-yen tgng-kal, 
Kerbat ; en-kon i-put, U. Cher. 
Maiden ; virgin : ken la-gi, Lebir. 
Nephew : kuod kamun, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. ; kuot kemon (kouot komon), 
Sdk. Kerb. ; kfinon sodara' (kenon 
sodarak), Seratt ; N 41; k6nun 
sudara (konoun j-o«dara), Sak. Ra.; 
B 427. Birth: bekun (bokoun), 
Som. ; palbukgnun (palboukonoim), 
Sak. Ra. Chicken : ko'^n es6n ? 
(god'n es6n), Sem. K. Ken. [this 
appears to = Mai. anak kgchil ]. 
Young {Mai. muda) : ken (pr. 
ke^^n), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
B 261 ; F 220 ; H 15. \_Mon kon, 
"child" ; Khmer kaun {pr. kon ?) 
[kun], "son," "issue"; Bahnar 
kon, "child," konon, "number of 
times a woman has borne chil- 
dren ' ' ; Stieng kon ; Pluiofig kuon 
chha ( cuon chhfe ) ; Huei kuon 
(kouon) ; Kat, Souc (or Suk), 
Annam. kon (con) ; Samri, Par 
khen ; Cuoi kan (can) ; PhTiong 
kuon (cuon) ; Prou kuon ; Rod^ 
kom (com) ; So kon (con) ; Boloven 
kuon ; Niahon, Sedang kuan ; 
Lave kuen ; Alak, Kaseng, Ha- 
lang, Chrdu kon, " child " ; 
Kaseng, Sutf, Halang kon (con) ; 
Boloven kuon (cuon); Sedang kua.Q 
(cuan), "son"; Central Nicobar, 
Southern, Teressa, and Chowr a Nico- 
bar koan ; Car Nicobar k5n , ' ' child, ' ' 
"young offspring of animals." I 
doubt the connection of Khmer, 
Stieng kot, " to be born."] 

103. Child ; infant : opayet, Jok. Raff. 
As. To bear a child : hempau 
(hmpeu), Kcna. /. 

104. Child : derunkt, Ben. N'eza. [? a 
misprint or corruption for dSmit, 
which in the Malay spirit language 
= " child " {.Malay Magic, App. p. 
646)]. 

105. Child: chaal (cha-aiQ), Kena. /., 
Kena. II. ; [? cf. S 282 or S 284]. 

106. Child : hanak, Barok ; aneg, Sem. 
Kedah, Sem. Klapr. , Sem. Ked. 
New. ; iinek (enek), Bedu. III. ; 
enek, Blan. Rem. ; Sn^k, Bedu. II. ; 
enek, Mantr. Malac, Jak. Malac. ; 
anak. Pang. Jalor; ■A.n?\i,Be7i. New., 
Jak. Mad. ; B 28; anak bisan, Pant. 
Kap. Job. ; W 132 ; kannak, B&n. 
A'no. [.Mai. kanak-kanak]; tanganet, 
(J. Pat. Son : enek ; eneg, Mantr. 
Bor. Young {.Mai. muda) : anek 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

559 

(anck), Sem. Beg; T 85. To bear 
children {Mai. bgranak) : ber-neg 
[pr. berr-negg), Sent. Kcdah; C 110; 
berenek, Bedti. I. ; berenek, Kcna. 
II. , Blan. Rem. , Bedii. //. ; bfirhd- 
nak ( bekhinak ), Barok [ ^[al. 
bdranak]. Birth : be eneg, Scm. 
Stcv. ; C no? [.'1/fl/. anak, "child."] 

107. Child: budek, Bcs. Sep. A. /. , 
Bcs. Malac. ; bodo, Jak. Malac. ; 
merbodo, Jok. Raff. Infant; younger 
brother: budik, Boi. Xcw. Orphan: 
budek hap n'uyn hap gade', Bes. 
Sep., ht. a child (that has) no father 
(and) no mother. [The word for 
"father" (n'uyn) here is not the 
ordinary word,] \_Ma/. budak] ; B 
137 ; t'76 ; F 132 ; H 15. 

i07.\. Child, female : keng oi. Rasa ; 
F 76. 

108. Child, male ; son : pinang ? 
(pinng), Sent. Biik. A/ax. 

io8a. Child, male : leng. Rasa. 

Child-bearing: C 101-106; C 
109-111 ; P 209 ; T 198. 
Child-in-law ; L 35. 

109. Children, to beak : hi-6it ; hi- 
oit, Sen. Cliff. [Probably = P 209.] 

no. Children, to beak : ya' ma-ber 
(//-. ma-biir), Sem. Janim ; ya' 
ma-ber (pr. ma-biir), ex. ja' ma- 
ber (p. p.); ma-ber [pr. ma-berr or 
ma-bjirr), Sem. Plus. ; C 106? 

m. Children, to bear : ya' len-inn, 
Sem. J arum ; C101-106; P 209 ; 
T 198. 

H2. Childless: ku-mgy, Sem. Plus. 
C'nili : P 56. 

113. Chin: (<z) engkwo (ung-kwo), 
Sem. Beg.; engkwu (ungkwu), Beu. 
i\'ew. ; angka' (angka'), Sem. Bui-. 
Max. ; angko' (angku'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; ingket (in-ket), Sem. Stev. ; 
'ngkek or 'ngke', Sem. Kedak ; 
ny6ng-ka'. Sen. Cliff. ; nyengka' 
(nyengkak), Jelai ; nengka' (neng- 
kak), Seraii ; ninkah, Tau. U. 
Laug. ; yaka (jaka), Sem. K. Ke?i. ; 
jangko', Pa?tg. U. A ring. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; jSngkau (jngkao, 
jngkaw ), Sak. U. Kani. ; jaka 
( diaka ), Som.. ; cha'ka', Sale. 
Blanj. Cliff. ; chaka (tchaka), Sak. 
Kerb. ; (tchaki), Sak. Ra. Chin (?): 
bawa angka' (bau angka'), Sern. 
Bick. Max. ; yftmtaik? (imtaik), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Lower jaw : jeng- 
ka', Bes. Sep. ; 'ngke (ng' kay), 
Sem. Stev. Beard: chaka' (chakak), 
Tembi. Fork, of a stick : jongka', 
Sem. Kedah; H i ; H 2. [Cf. Achin. 

juiigka, "jaw"; Khmer changka 
[changka], "chin" ; and ? cf. 
Central and Southern Nicohar en- 
kaiii (en - koin) ; Shorn Pe koid ; 
Stieng kuani ; Annam kSm ; Bah- 
nar kang, "chin." Is the first 
syllable of some of these words 
connected with B 336 ? For a 
possibly cognate root cf. M 121.] 
\b) Chin : gengop ; dengop, Bes. 
Songs. 

(r) Chin : dago, Sak. Ra. ; dago, 
Jak. Ba. Pa. ; daga, Mantr. 
Malac. ; dagu, Ben. New. {^Mal. 
dagu]. 

114. Chin : gnum gnum, Ben. New. 

115. Chinchilik (bird): chinchilik, Bes. 
Songs. 

Chinaman : M 23 ; M 28. 

116. Chinese : china' (chinak). Bland. 
K. Lang. \^Mal. China]. 

117. Chipped: gompong, Bes. Songs. 

118. Chipped ; the part where a "piece 
has been chipped off: telas (tis), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; lus, Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

Chirrup, to : S 363. 
Chisel, stone : S 466. 

119. Choke, to ; to eat greedily? {Mai. 
chekek) : saksek (sksik), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [? ? cf. Mai. chekek]. 

120. Choke, to : kelko' (klku' ? kltu" ?), 
Sent. Buk. Max. 

Cholera : V 22. 
1 20 a. Choose, to ; chenlas, Serau. 
120B. Choose, to: pilih, Serau [Mai. 

pilih]. 

121. Chop at, to : kabong (?), Bes. 
Songs ; C 295-297. 

122. Chopper or jungle -knife {Mai. 
parang) : {a) pol or p&l {pr. poll or 
pall), Setn. Kedah ; G 94. War- 
club (weapon) : pel. Sent. Stev. 
Mallet (for making bark-cloth made 
of "tengar" wood) : pel {pr. pell), 
Sem. Plus [? cf. S 356]. 

(<^) Chopper : bah, Sak. Em. 

123. Chopper or jungle -knife {Mai. 
parang) : {a) choka', Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. Stone knife : chaket 
(chorket), Sent. Stev. [Sedang soke, 
" knife "]. 

((^) Knife: pukep, Sem. Beg., Ben. 
A'ew. ; tungkoi, Sem. A'. A'en. 

124. Chopper (jungle-knife or cutlas = 
Afal. parang) : weng (/;-. weSng), 
Sem. Kedah ; weng, Se7n. Plus, 
Le.bir, Kerbat. Knife : weng, 
Kerbat ; wen, Pang. U. Aring ; 
wen, U. Pat. ; wuen(wuen'), U. Kel. 
Blade of chopper : met weng, Lebir, 

560 

COM PARA Tl VE VOCABULAR V OF 

Kcrbat ; E 83. \Mon bun, 
"knife."] 

125. Chopper: nyeni, Krau Tern., 
Sak. Giiai. Knife : nyem, A'rau 
Tern. Blade of chopper : mat 
nyem, Suk. G»ai. ; E 83 ; H 
21. 

126. Chopi'er : pahang, Or. Laut\_Mal. 
parang] ; A 33 ; C 152 ; H 21 ; I 
36 ; K 47- 

127. Chopper, ornament in front of: 
putok (pootok), Sent. Stcv. 
Chuchok (palm spec.) : R 164. 
Chunam : L 102. 

128. Cicada (?) {Mai. riang-riang) : 
harau, ex. kejbh harau, mawong 
harau, " males of the cicada, young 
of the cicada," Pang. Sai. 
Cicatrice : G 41 ; S 37. 

129. Cigarettes : mu-dut, Krau Tern. 
To smoke (native cigarettes): mudut, 
Bes. K. Lang., Bes. K. L. ; nachar 
mudut, Bes. Sep. ; E 27. \Mal. udut, 
" to smoke."] 

130. Cigarettes: ro'-ko", Lebir. To 
smoke \i.e. tobacco] : nyor roko', 
Sak. U. Kam. [J/d/. rokok] ; D 
165 ; N 64 ; S 303. 

131. Cinnamon, wild (?) : peranchun, 
Bes. Songs. 

Circle : R 160. 
Circular : R 190. 

132. Citronella grass? [Mai. sSrai?), 
Andropogon schcEnauthus : sSmiai 
(smiai), Sem. Buk. Ma.x. 

133. Civet-cat [Mai. musang) : (a) 
nicheg, Sem. Sicv. 

[b) kensing. Pang. U. Aring. 
\c) chengkot. Bland. K. Lang. 

134. Civet- CAT : reshfta ? (reichfia), 
Sak. Kerb. 

135. Civet-cat : 6mpak, Bes. K. L. 

136. Civet-cat: ilong, Sem. K. Ken.; 
(spec. .Mai. musang jgbat), aliyu 
(elsewhere given as a kind of big 
squirrel, which is probably wrong). 
Pang. Sam. Big kind of squirrel : 
aliyu. Pang. U. Aring. 

137. Civet-cat : musang, Tembi, Sak. 
Martin ; musang, Jelai ; ( spec. 
Mai. musang jebat) : museng 
(musing), Sem. Pa. Ma.v., Sem. 
Buk. .Ma.v.; (spec. Mai. m. akar) 
museng aweh (musing auih), Sem. 
Bnk. Max. ; museng lataik (musing 
lalaik), Sem. Pa. Max. ; for spec. 
Mai. m. bulan, m. tfenggalong, Sem. 
Pa. Max. adds these specific terms 
to the generic [ Mai. musang ] ; 
S 420. 

Claiv, N 3 ; S 53. 

138. Claw, to (stick out the claws) : 
kwoPm, Bes. Sep. 

139. Clay : hempo, Sak. Kerb. ; E 12. 

140. Clean {Mai. chuchi): dig; dig, Sett. 
Cliff. 

141. Clean : ta-kod or ta-kodd, Sem. 
Jarum ; G 63 ; W 35. 

142. Clean, to : sud, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
suud", Serau. To wash : suut, 
Setau ; sut (sout) ; sot, Sak. Ra. ; 
ya' sayd {pr. siydd), Sem. Kedah ; 
ya' sayd or sayt {pr. saydd or 
saytt), Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus ; 
mesuij ? (masluj), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
nigsoi (nigh-soi) ; sui (soui), Som. ; 
esui (essoul) ; chiii (choui), Sak. 
Kerb. To peel {Mai. kupas) : sot, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. To clear ground 
(for planting): pangsoi, ex. pangsoi 
ra' tek-ah, lit. " cleared at -least 
ground - that," i.e. that piece of 
ground is thoroughly cleared, Bes. 
A'. L. Clean ; neat : tabichui-6s ? 
(dabidjui-6s ; dabidjuios), Sem. K. 
Ken. [? Cf. Bahnar shat (xat) ; 
Mon sah, "to clean"; Central 
Nicobar et - shach - hanga, ' ' to 
clean " ; et - shJich - ngamat, ' ' to 
wipe clean" ; and R 194.] 

143. Cle.AN, to: konlot? (kon-Iont?), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. To wash : lab, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. 

144. Clean, to: chuchi, Sem. Beg., 
Ben. New. ; chuchi (tchtitchl), Som. 
[Mai. chuchi] ; G 65, 66 ; W 22, 

23- 

145. Clean the teeth, to {Mai. sugi) : 
ya-chengkas {pr. chengkass), Pang. 
U. Aring. 

Cleaning - rod (of blowpipe): B 
279-283. 

146. Clear ; transparent : jSranih, ch6r- 
anih (jranis, chranis), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; jerneh (jerneh), Serau ; W 
30 [.\/al. jerfinih] ; G 66 ; W 30 ; 
W 98. 

147. Clear proof; evidence: nySta' 
(fita'), Sem. Buk. Max. Yes : nya'- 
ta', Lebir [.Mai. nyata]. 

148. Clear proof; evidence: soh (suh), 
Sem. Pa. ALix. [A/al. Ar. .sah] ; S 

75- 

149. Clear away brushwood, to {Mai. 
tebas) : k6-6rr. Sen. Cliff.; kerkor, 
Serau [? cf. C 295]. 

150. Cle.\R away brushwood, to : 
tembas, Serau [Mai. tfibas]. 

151. Clear jungle, to: natau (natow), 
.Menlr. Strv. [.Mai. natar]. 

152. Clear, to (one's way), or cut (one's 
way) through the jungle {Mai. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

561 

merinchasormgrintas) : ch.is, Pang. 
K. Aring. Chopper {Mai. parang): 
piranchas, Pant. Kap. Log. ; peran- 
chas, Pant. Kap. Her. Chopper : 
knife ; iron ; a mark : pgranchas 
(p'ranchas), Pant. Kap. /oh. Iron; 
peranchas, Patit. Kap. Her. To 
cut wood : manchas, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. Manner ; condnct ; p6ran- 
chasan (p'ranchasan), Pant. Kap. 
Joh. Quite : sfiranchas (s'ranchas), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Work: mSranchas 
(m'ranchas), Pant. Kap. Joh. Small 
knife : piranchas kicho, Pant. Kap. 
Log. Sword : piranchas panjang, 
Pant. Kap. I^og. To wound : 
leteko' pgranchas (I't'kok p'ranchas), 
Pant. Kap. Joh, [Alal. rOntas ; rin- 
chas, ' ' to cut one's way "] ; C 301 ; 
G68. 

153. Clearing (in the jungle), a: leba'; 
reba' (lebak ; rgbak), Bes. A. I. ; 
16ba' (lebak), Bes. K. Lang. ; 16ba', 
Bes. K. L. Plantation : 16ba' 
(lebak), Bes. Songs [A/al. rgba]. 

154. Clearing: cherakn,5<;«.C/. Planta- 
tion on high ground (A/at. ladang) : 
chg-rak". Sen. CliJJ. Daylight 
{MaL siang): ch6-rang, Lebir; trang, 
Jak. Malac. Light (opp. to 
dark) : tgrhang (tgkhang), Barok. 
Dawn : chS-prak°, Sen. Cliff. 
Morning : chSrang (cherung), Bes. 
Bell. [Cf. Alal. terang, "clear."] 

155. Clearing in the forest (large) : 
uma (oomar), Metitr. Stev. Planta- 
tion (on high ground): huma, A'lantr. 
Malac, Jak. Malac. \_Mal. huma]. 

156. Clearing (small) : umpal (oom- 
pal), A'lentr. Stev. [connected with 
the preceding?]. 

157. Clearing (one, above the other): 
sepangkat, Alentr. Stev. [Mai. 
sapangkat, "in one row"] ; F 94 ; 
V20. 

158. Clenched together: kanching-kan- 
ching, Bes. Songf. [? cf. A/al. ken- 
chang, "stiff," or kanching, "a 
bolt."] 

159. Clerodendron velutinum : chapa- 
neng, Ment. Stev. 

160. Clever: lek, Sak. Kerb. ; laglag 
or legl^g, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; elek", 
Tembi. To understand : ye lak^i, 
Tembi. I don't understand : toi 
ilek" ; ta ilek"!, Tembi. To know : 
inliep (inlieb), Sem. K. Ken. ; [Fr. 
savoir, Mai. tahu), lag (leg), S'om. ; 
ilek, Sak. Kerb. ; {Fr. connaitre, 
Mai. kgnal), taha lak {\.z.ha lek), 
Som. To understand : halek, Sak. 

VOL. II 

Kerb. \^Alon lep ; Bahiiar klek, 
klech, "to understand," "to be 
skilled in a thing"; Central Nicobar 
iSap, "to understand," "able," 
" competent " ; paiyuh - ta - laap, 
"skilful" ; ? cf. Bahnar lele, "to 
know"; Annatn lieu, "to under- 
stand," " clever."] 

161. Clever : pcnitek (p'nitck), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. Stupid : beh pfinitek 
(beh p'nitek). Pant. Kap. Joh. 

162. Clever : kedai (kodel), Sak. Ra. ; 
pa-dei, Scni. Jarmn ; pa'-n6', Sen. 
Cliff. ; panel, Serau ; enpani, 
Jelai. Cunning : pa'ni, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. Sly : pana-panS 'ia, Sein. 
K. Ken. To know {Fr. con- 
naitre ) : ng, Sak. Kerb. To know : 
panel, Serau. Not clever ; don't 
know ; pe panel, Serau. I know : 
pan^h, Sak. Tap. I don't know : 
peh-pan6h, Sak. Tap. ; pe empane, 
Jelai ; pat panit", Sak. Em. Don't 
know ; not accustomed to it : mo 
pe pane, Serau. Not proper [?] : 
pe panel, Serau. Not clever : pe 
mampani, Darat. Are you in the 
habit of going to Lipis ? : mang heb 
pane cheb a Lipis? Krau Em. I 
am not clever at writing ; pe en 
pandei bertulis, Krau Em.; F 121 ; 
M 76. To understand : empanel, 
Serau. I don't understand : pe 
empanel, Serau. To tell (inform) 
(MaL bri tahu) : ok pa-ni (oak-pa- 
ni), Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; G 29. 
[Some of these are certainly con- 
nected with the Mai. pandai ; others 
perhaps not ; see K 56. ] 

163. Clever : tukang (tou-kan), Som. 
[Alal. tukang, "artificer"]. 

164. Clever ; wise man : sfiniring 
(sneering), Mant. Stev. ; G 91 ; 
K 56-58 ; S 278 ; S 363. 

165. Climb, to : yar, Serting ; yal, e.g. 
yal p'lg, "to climb for fruit," Bes. 
K. Lang, ; j'al, e.g. y. lol^ng, "to 
climb a tree," Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
ial, e.g. " to climb a hill," ial 'n 
chong, Bes. Alalac. ; i W 30. 
To climb a tree : yal ga dSlong 
(yarl ga d6-long), U. Tetn. ; hial 
6ng-o' IS-long, U. Chre. 

166. Climb, to: tSm-bun, e.g. tem- 
bun, po-ku' ka-yu, "to climb 
a tree," Kerbat ; ya-tenbun 
{pr. tenn-bunn), Pang. U. A ring ; 
ya-timbun, ex. mdh ta-hu {or 
tod-ed) timbun, "you are clever 
at climbing," Pang. U. Aring ; 
chin-bon {pr. chinn-bonn), e.x. tang- 

2 O 

562 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

ke b§Ji o' chin-bon = J/fl/. tangkai 
buah di-panjat, "to climb for 
fruit " (?), Pang. Teliang. ; tabong, 
Kena. I. To climb, on the fiat of 
the feet : tin-ban (tin-born), Sem. 
Stev. To ascend : tabong, Kena. 
I. ; cf. F 174? [?cf. Mai. timbul]. 

167. Climb, to (with a rope) : ? tinfing- 
gan (teenungarn), Sem. Stev. \} Alal. 
tunggang] ; A 154-157 ; C 30. 

Climber (rattan) : R 36-41. 

168. Clitoris : kSnalsib (knl sib), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

169. Clitoris : ngul, Sem. Pa. Max. 

170. Close together ; to bring close 
together : yapet (iapit), Sem. Buk. 
Max. [Mai. rapat] ; N 19, 20 ; S 
280 ; S 234. 

170A. Close, to (the eyes) : kesip, Bes. 
A. I. \ kSsip ; k6sip met, Bes. 
K. Z. [? = S 346]. 

171. Cloth: (ff ) panjuk, Sem. Craw. Hist. ; 
(panjak), 6'(?;«. Ked. And.; (panzah), 
Sem. Ked. Rob. ; pinjo, Se7?i. Stev. 
Bark - cloth : pinjor, Sem. Stev. 
Clothes : panjuk (pandjouk), Sem. 
Klapr. ; (panjak), Setn. Ked. New. 
Man's loin-cloth (Mai. chawat): pen- 
jok (this seems to be the commonest 
word for the " chawat " among the 
Pangans), Se?n. Kcdah; penj^', Sem. 
Plus ; pgnjok or pgnj^'. Pang. U. 
A ring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Waist -cloth: p6ny&h (pfinyauh), 
Pang. Jalor. 

{b) Trousers : pirso, Pant. Kap. 
Log. ; pgrso' ajol (p'rsok ajol), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Trousers ; coat : 
persok, Jak. Afad. {Pant. Kap. ). 
Coat : p6r6so' Isi (p'r'sok isi), Pant. 
Kap. Sim. 

(c) Jacket : penyurop, Pant. 
Kap. Log. [Some of these words 
are possibly remotely related to 
Mai. kanchut, " a ragged old piece 
of cloth " ; ? cf. Centrala.x\6. Southern 
Nicobar kanyut ; Chowra hanyut ; 
Car enyut, ' ' coat. "] 

172. Cloth (bark): sul(sool), 5^^. Stev. 
Waist-cloth [for men, MS.] : sul, 
Sem. Ij. Loin - cloth : soi ; sui, 
Bes. Sep. A. L 

173. Cloth; (a) a-bat", Tern. CI., Sen. 
Cliff. ; a-bat. Sen. CI., Sak. Blanj. 
CI. ; a-bat, Sak. U. Kam. ; abad, 
Sak. Tan. Rain. ; aban ? (tl-bau), 
Sak. Slim CI. ; abat°, Temhi ; 
ahat", Tembi, Sej-au ; abak", Jelai ; 
aban, Darat \ ibak^? (ibk"), Sak. 
Em. Cloth ; clothes : abat ; abat, 
Sak. Kerb. ; aban ; abd.n : Sak. Ra. 

White cloth [in orig. black, which 
must be wrong] : aban biok (aban 
biok), Serau. Skirt {Mai. sarong) : 
aban kSbu, Serau. [Cham aban ; 
Bahnar hah&n, " cloth skirt."] 
{b) Cloth : bbdbod (budbud), Sem. 
Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Rob., Sem. 
fur. New. ; bebat (bubat), Ben. 
New. Clothes : bobot (bubbflt), Sem. 
Beg. Waist or loin cloth {Mai. 
chawat), ped-bod, Sem. Kedah 
[Mai. bebat]. 

174. Cloth ; clothes : {a) wag (oueg), 
Som. Clothes : weg (oueg), Som. 
Man's loin-cloth {Mai. chawat) : 
newar (/;•. ne-warr), Sem. Kedah; 
weg, Se/n. Plus. Waist-cloth : uag, 
Sem. K. Ken. ; wet, Sem. Per. ; 
wet (wet or web ?) Sak. Br. Low ; 
wat, Sak. Sel. Da. ; uwel(?), Kena. 
/. ; uwat, Kena. L , Kena. I/. 
Ragged old piece of cloth (Mai. 
kanchut) : weed°, Tembi. [Schmidt 
compares Khmer au ; Bahnar, 
Stieng ao ; Annam. ao, " clothes " ; 
Mon yat, "cloth." But cf. 
Khmer kra.wat, "to gird," "to 
wrap "(?).] 

(b) Waistcloth : chawat, Mantr. 
Malac. [Mai. chawat]. 

175. Cloth : pembaloh, Ben. New. 
[Mai. balut; pfmbalut]. 

176. Cloth: kendi? (kaindi), Ben. New. ; 
ni (nee), Bes. Bell. Clothes : h'ndi ; 
k'ndi, e.g. h'ndi lek, "worn-out 
clothes," Bes. Sep. A. L Clothing: 
hendi, Bes. K. Lang. Waist-cloth, 
hndl, Bes. Her. ; 'ndi, Bes. Malac. 
[52^//^ kandit, "waistcloth."] 

177. Cloth : pompoing. Pant. Kap. 
Log., Pant. Kap. Her. ; pompoin, 
Jak. Mad. (Pant. Kap.); pampoin. 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Red cloth : pam- 
poin mSlakat (pampoin m'lakat). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. 

178. Cloth ; waistcloth : bfingkong, 
Serting, Bcdu. I/. , Jak. Mad. [Mai. 
bSngkung, ' ' girdle "]. 

178A. Waistcloth : serat. Rasa. 

179. Cloth : khain. Or. Laut. Waist- 
cloth : kain ggnding, Jak. Semb. ; 
kain panjang, Galang [Mai. kain] ; 
P 252. 

180. Waist-cloth for men (of "terap" 
bark) : keb, Sem. Stev. 

i8i. Waist-cloth for women (of " tgrap" 
bark) : net-doid, Sem. Stev. 

182. Waistcloth : tidiako (said to -be a 
Malay word), Mikhicho Maclay, 2 
Straits J . 214. 

183. Clothes : tun, U. Cher. ; C 50 ; 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

563 

C 171-182; E76; P227(?); V •Z'^'2\ 

U 31. 

To put on clothes: E 76 : P 249-253. 

184. Cloud [Mai. awan) : al [pr. all), 
Sent. Kcdah, Sent. Jarum. Haze 
[Alal. kabut) : al [pr. all), Sem. 
Kedah, Sem. Plus. Sky : al, Sem. 
Buk. Max. Total darkness : al 
hekut (al likut), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
D 16. 

185. Ci.OUD [Mai. awan) : yem-yem 
[pr. ye^m-yebm), Sem. Plus. 

186. Cloud, cloudy sky: meiSto ? (mltu' 
or mlnu ?), Sem. Buk. Max. 

187. Cloud : lingsa, Kena. I. 

188. Cloud : anchelik, Beti. New. 

189. Cloud: miga, Sem. Jur. And., 
Sem. Jur. Nerv. , Sem. Jur. Rob. 
\Mal. mega]. 

190. Cloud : awan (aouan), Som. ; 
(aouan), Sak. Ra. Rainbow : 
awan (aun), Sem. Pa. Max. \AIal. 
awan] ; A 8 ; B 16 ; D 16 ; D 22 ; 
D 39 ; R 168 ; S 242, 243. 
Clouded over: D 16 ; D 19; D 22. 
Club : C 122. 

191. Coat: penyirong(p'nyirong), /"d///. 
Kap. Sim. 

192. Coat: bajoi, Sak. U. Kam.\ baju, 
Tembi, Serau, Jelai \JMal. baju] ; 

C 171. 

Cobra : S 317-319. 

Cock : F 255 ; F 257, 258 ; M 18. 

193. Cockroach [Mai. lipas) : hApa 
(h^ipa), Sem. Pa. Max. ; hipit(hipit), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; pempes [pr. pem- 
pess) (doubtful), Pang. U. Aring. 

194. Cockroach: tese, Bes. A. I.; tese', 
Bes. K. L. [? Cf. Central Nicobar 
tama-sha, " small cockroach."] 

195. Cockscomb : chek (chik), Setn. 
Buk. Max. 

196. COCK.SCOMB : balong, Mantr. 
Malac. , Jak. Malac. [Mai. balong]. 

197. Coconut [Mai. niyor) : her-pai (/;-. 
herr-pai), Sem. Plus; hi-pai, Sem. 
Kedah ; hipai, Sem. Per. ; ipai, 
Sem. Ken. 

198. Coconut : [a) cherupii, Darat ; 
chgro' (tchoro'), Som. \ che-nah, 
Sak. Sel. Da. ; j6ho (djoho), Sak. 
Ra. ; jS-§r, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; lo-ur 
[pr. lo-urr), Sem. Jarum, Sem. 
Plus ; F 283. 

[b) nyor [pr. nyorr, ) Sem. Kedah ; 
nyor, Tembi; (nor), Sak. Br. Low; 
nior, Sak. Kerb. ; nior, Bes. Malac. , 
Jak. Lem. ; pie' nior (plek nior), 
Jelai ; F 282 ; nyorh (nyokh), Barok ; 
nyS(nj6), Sak. Kor. Gb.; niS(ni6'^), 
Blan. Rem. ; mk (ni6), Bes. Her. ; 

niyu, Bes. K. Lang; niu, Bedu. 1 L , 
Manlr. Malac., Jak. Malac, Jak. 
Setnb. ; (spec. Mai. kglapa dadi) 
nyor hiab bo' (nur hiab bu': the b 
has no dot), Sem. Pa. Max.; (spec. 
Mai. kclapa gading), nj'or bala' (nur 
bala'), Sem. L^a. Max. ; (spec. Mai. 
kSlapaserCndah; k. pagi), njorrgndS 
(nur rnd), .SVw. Buk. Max. Coco- 
nut-shell (.lA'/. tCmpurong): kgtong- 
niu, Mantr. Malac. \.\lal. nior, 
nyior ; but for some of these forms 
cf. Cham lau.] 

199. Coconut : tmol, Tan. U. Lang. 
[? = C 200]. 

200. Coconut: karambil. Bed. Chiang; 
kfiramil, Bedu. I/. [Mai. kerambil, 
kSlambir: a variant, on Krama prin- 
ciples, of kelapa ; cf. C 57 ; D 149 ; 
E SI ; S 285 ; W so ; W loi] ; B 
47; F 282-284 ; W 34. 

201. Coconut-shell: dasar, Jak. Lem. 
Coconut - shell bowl : dasar Jak. 
Mad. 

202. CocoNUT-SHKLL (used as a bowl) : 
sebo (sobo), Som., Sak. Ra. \} Mai. 
sabut ; but this means the outer, 
fibrous husk] ; S 153 ; S 236. 
Cohesive : R 132. 

203. Cold : gun ? (guu) ; amad, Sem. 
Jur. And. ; gun, amad, Sem. Jur. 
Rob. ; gun amad, Sem. Jur. New. 
[?=C205 + Vi3]. 

204. Cold : ah (oh), Kena. IL 

205. Cold: (^)nget?(;rngit?(ngit),5^w. 
Pa. Max. ; henget? ^;?'hanglt?(hngit), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; hangit, Sem. 
Phis ; hengid, Sem. Jarum, Sem. 
Plus ; henged, Sem. U. Sel. ; sSngit, 
Sak. Chen. ; singat (sifi^t); singet 
(siiiet) ; sSngat (sonet), Sak. Ra. ; 
sengit, Sem. Per. ; sgngei ? or 
senei ? (senei, ei "nasal"), Sak. 
Martin ; chaniik (tchantik), Som. ; 
sSneke' ? (s'nekek). Tan. U. 
Lang. ; S 66 ; W 30. Luke- 
warm : ia' mali ia' hingeh (ia 
mali ia' hngih), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[Dusun asagit ; Sulu hagkut ; but 
also Bahnar tongiet ; Sue changet, 
chngeat, sngeat ; Cuoi chgngak 
(chngac) ; Kat iigeat ; Tareng 
ngheat ; Kan Tu ngiai ; Halang 
noat, tonoat, teniet, "cold"; Stieng 
longot, Bahnar .xangieo [pr. shan- 
gieo), "cold,' "cool"; ? cf. also 
Bahtiar ngach, "to get cold"; 
nget, " (rice) that has got cold."] 
[b] Get well ; in good health : han- 
get (hangit), Sem. Buk. Max. Well 
[Mai. sggar badan), hangit Pang. 

564 

COM PARA TIVE VOCABULAR V OF 

U. Arhig. Well (in health): ged- 
gnget ? (ged'ngent), Sem. Beg. 
[These words seem to be connected 
with the preceding.] 
[c] Cold: dekat",Z)rtra/; de-kat, 5^;z. 
Cliff. ; dekat (dokat) ; dekat, Sak. 
Kerb. ; dekat, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; dekad, 
Sak. Br. Low ; tekad, Sem. Ken. ; te 
kat, Serting, Bedu. II. ; (tokat),.So;«. 
(tkat), Or. Hu. Joh. I. ; tfiket, Buk. 
U. Lang. ; tSkSt, Bes. Songs; teket, 
Sak. Sel. Da., Bes. Sep. A. I., Bes. 
Malac. ; tengked, Fang. U. A ring; 
tengked; temket, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal.; temekek, Pang. K. A ring ; 
tgmfikeh, Pang. Belimb. It is very 
cold : singet dikit, Sak. J. Low. 
{d) Fever {Mai. demam) : tekat, 
Ben. New. ; tSmekeh, Pang. Belitnb. 
{e) To tremble : 16dglt (lod-ghit), 
Som. ; dekat (dokat), Sak. Kerb. 
\_Kaseng \.'zk.h\.; Phong V'skz.t (cacat); 
Khmus kat (cat) ; Chraii ndkat, 
tkat ; Alak takSch ; Kaseng takech, 
" cold." Schmidt also gives Stieng 
takatna.] 

206. Cold: ((z)sedej? {%QA.2i]Q),Ben.New. ; 
sedek, Jak. Malac. ; sed^k, Kena. /. 
sfidSk, sedek, Jak. Sembr. ; sidek, 
Jak. Ba. Pa. ; di6, Sem. K. Ken. 

(b) siyai, Sem. Kedah ; slap, Pant. 
Kap. Joh. ; siap. Pant. Kap. Log. ; 
siap. Pant. Kap. Her. , Ben. Neiv. 

(c) sejop, Ben. New. ; s6jok, Jak. 
Mad. ; sejuk, Jak. Malac, Mantr. 
Malac. ; sejiik, Bes. Her. ; hejuk, 
Bes. Malac. ; jok, Bes. Songs. 
Healthv: sc^jii? (sidiu), Sem. K. Ken. 
[Mai. sgjuk]. 

207. Cold : bingin, Bes. Songs ; dingin : 
Sak. Sel. Da., Mantr. Malac. Cha. 
\j\Ial. dingin]. [Perhaps ultimately 
related to C 205 ?] ; S 66. 

Cold (in the head) : N 98. 
Colic : S 185 ; S 187. 
Collar-bone : B 146 ; S 169. 

208. Collide, to (?) : tfikang (tkng), Seyn. 
Buk. Max. [Mai. terakang is given 
as an equivalent, but I cannot find 
the word in my dictionaries.] 
Colourinn; (of the face) : F i. 

209. Comb {.Mid. sikat, decorated with 
" huchong" leaves, worn by women): 
chlnilas (/;■. chln-ilas), Pang. U. 
A ring. 

210. Comb: tinlcg? (tinlaig), Sem. Stev. 
Use of comb as a charm (?): tela 
(t«lar), Sem. Stev. 

2io.'\. Comb: konsiet, Sem. K. Ken. 
[Khmer set [sit], "to con\b " ; snet 
[snit], " comb."] 

210B. Comb : kenaing, Sem. K. Ken. 

211. Comb : shudip (choudip), Sak. 
Kerb. [Mai. sudip, "ladle"]. 

212. Comb: jungko(djounko), Sak. Ra.; 
jungkasOg, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; Hi. 
[Mai. jongket ; Javan. jungkat ; 
Batak jongke, " comb."] 

213. Comb : hikat, Bes. Songs ; sikat, 
Som. ; sikdt, Sak. Ra. [Mai. sikat]. 

214. Comb, decoration on (of the " pu- 
hcok rSbong " or " chevron " orna- 
ment) : k'let, Pang. U. A ring. 

215. Comb, crossing lines on : ten -wag, 
Sem. Plus ; ten-wag or ten-weg, 
Sem. Kedah [? cf. R 133]. 

215A. Comb pattern (?) : kSnayt, Pang. 
U. Aring\J cf. S 159]. 
Comb, cock's : C 195, 196. 

216. Come, to : nyong, Sak. J . Low ; 
W 78. Ford : nong niunun (nofi 
mounoun), Som. Path : nung ; 
nong, Sak. U. Kam. ; nong. Tern. 
CI., Sen. CL, Darat, Krau Em. ; 
chin-dering, U. Tem. ; tS-rong, U. 
Cher. Road : proki^ (prokn), U. 
Ind. To walk : nong (non), Sak. 
Ra. To v.'ade or walk through ? 
{Mai. harong): rok°, Sen. Cliff. ; P 
155. [It is not certain that all 
these are connected. For some of 
them cf. Bahnar, Stieng trong ; 
Halang trong ; Boloven truong ; 
Sedang troa, "path" or "road." 
For others perhaps cf. Tareng 
nyong, "to pass" ; Bahnar nam, 
" to come," " to go " ; and possibly 
Mon klung, " to come."] 

217. CoMK TO ; to arrive : yak (yek), 
Sak. Ra. 

218. Come: eng, U. Cher. Come here: 
eng ga nor, U. Cher. To come : 
ah-mg, Sak. Sel. Da. ; W. 85. 

219. Come, to : {a) nahuill {nahovibY); 
nahuol (.vrthouol), Sak. Kerb. ; 
hual, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; hoi, Sen. 
Cliff. ; hoi ; ohol, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
hau, Kerbat. ; ehuel pai, Tembi. I 
come : en hoi, Jelai. I have come 
[from?] there [?], {Mai. datangsitu): 
ye hoi nong nak, Tembi. Whence 
do you come? : krenong ha hol, 
Sak. Matiin. Why haven't they 
come ? {Mai. mCngapa orang 
bSlum datang) : jati pe mehol, 
Scran. To arrive : nahuol {tia- 
houol), Sak. Kerb.; hual? (bwal), 
Sak. PlusQX Lhigk. (?), ^N. Q.xo\ ; 
h61, Sen. CI. ; T 10. To arrive 
at: hooi, hoi? Bes. A. I. From 
( = to arrive from): hoi, e.g. hoi 
Ji3hor, " to arrive from Johor, " Bes. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

565 

A. 1. '!"o come 
(nol-houal), S'dm. 
nglhual (w('7-houal) 
nglhual (»(V/-huS,l), ' 
mih nfilhual {ii'ol - 

hack : nelhual 
To go away : 
e.g. aye (ay6) 
' we go away "; 
huai), "T go 
enter {Mai. 
'. U. A ring, 
Gal. To 
; to return : 
Sotn. To- 

away," Som. To 
masok), ya-hol, Pang. 
Pang. Sam, Pang. 
recover (find again) [?] 
nelhual (nol-houal), 
wards ; to (Mai. sanipai): hot, Sak. 
Ha. ; hoi, Sak. Kerb. Until: bela- 
huol (bel-ahouol), Som. [? cf. T 9]. 
(b) Come {imfer.): o-huh ; o-hok, 
e.g., o-hok siang, " come at once," 
Bes. Sep. A. I.\ orsok, Orang Tre?!g 
of Sungei Ujong [so stated by Besisi 
Sep. or A. /.]; hosok, Ben. New.; 
hunniu, Ben. New. ; C 222 [but ?cf. 
T 85] [? cf. LemctY^oX, " to go "]. 

220. Come : gueh, Sak. Gnai. Come 
(here): ge-da', Kraii Ket. 

221. Come (J/a/.mari): (rt)ya-pe(/;-. pey 
or pey), Sem. Kedah ; 3'a pe [pr. peJ 
()rpey), ex. pebadih= "come here," 
Sem. Phis ; peh, Sem. Ij. To 
approach [Mai. bSrdekat) : ya' 
pej' (? = il/a/. sampai), Sein. Kcdah; 
ya' pey {pr. peJ), Sein. Plus. 

[b] Come : ber, Krau Tern. ; beh, 
Sak. J. Lmu ; be, Tern. CI. ; bei, 
Sak. Croix; bai, Sak. U. Kam.\ bei; 
bai, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; b^'i madoh, 
Sak. Br. Low; bey madi. Tan. U. 
Lang. To come {Mai. datang): ya- 
boyt, Pang. U. Aring; h€i, Sak. 
Korb. Lias ; baimad6 or beimad6, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; bei-mado, Som. ; 
ba-do-i', Lebir. Come here : h€\ 
mado, Sak. Korb. Lias ; bi mad^h, 
Sak. Tap. ; beh badeh, Sak. J . Low; 
ber glie dah, Kraii Tern. Come 
along ! {Mai. marilah) : be madi, 
Darat. To accompany : bei'-mado, 
Sd7n. To approach : bih - la^s^do, 
Som. ; W 77. [Bolo7'en, Niahon 
biih ; Alak boh, " to come."] 
22i.>\. Come {Mai. mari) : do, U. Pat.; 
da. Sen. CI. ; dorch-tu, Sem. Ken. 
[this last is clearly misprinted or 
corrupt ; perhaps = dah tu?] ; deno, 
Sem. Per. [? connection of this last]. 
To come : dao, Se7n. Piipier. Come 
here ! : yu [or ya. ?] da mado, 
Tembi ; da mado, Sak. Em. ; da 
madi' (da madik) ; da madi, Jelai ; 
da madi (da maddi), Scrau. [Cf. T 
86 ; but I believe there is a true verb 
here besides the adverb "hither" ; 
cf. also G 44, which seems to be a 
distinct word.] {Central Nicobar 

d5k-ta (dak-ta) ; Kaseng dang, "to 
come."] 

222. Come : mari, Ben. New. ; mai 
(mai"), Plan. Rem. ; mai, Mantr. 
Malac. ; bai'? (baik). Rasa. To 
come : mai, Mentr. Bor. ; may, 
Mantr. Cast. Come {imper.): mai 
hon6, Bes. Malac. ; mai hoiio' (mai 
honyd^^k), Bes. Her. , mai ohok, Bes. 
Sep.A.L; C 219 orT 85? ; machan, 
Kena. IL Come here : mai chian, 
Mantr. Malac., Ment. Her. /. ; 
mai chian (maixian), Mantr. Bor. ; 
T 90 ; mai sinin, Mantr. Malac. ; 
T 89. \Ahil. mari ; Cham mai, 
" come."] 

223. Come, to : hipo, Mantr. Cast. 

224. Come: intd'(int6k), A'^«(7./. Come: 
tid no', Serti7!g[l = T 86]. 

225. Come : datang, Bedit. /. , Bedu. //. 
To come; to arrive: datang (dataii), 
Sak. Ra. ; T 90 [.l/ff/. datang] ; 
A 164 ; G 42 ; R 83, 84 ; T 85, 86 ; 
T 90 ; W 81. 

To come back : R 83-87. 
To come down : D 95, 96. 

226. Come here: sika, e.g. sika makan, 
"come here and eat," Or. Laut; 
[? cf. Javanese s&ka, "origin," a 
variant of t£ka, "to come"]; G 
42. 

To come out : 1 43, 44. 
Comet : S 436. 

227. Comfortable (or well in health) : 
{Mai. senang) ; j5-mi', Kerbat ; E 
22 ; G 65. 

Command : O 52-57. 
Command, to : O 52-55. 
Commencement : T 203. 
Compact : N 42. 

228. Companion (Mai. kawan) : goen, 
Sem. Beg. ; kawan, Ben. New. 
Companion ; friend : kaban, Sak. 
Ra. ; kawan (kaouan), Som.; kawat, 
(kaouat), Sak. Kerb. Friend : ka- 
wac'n (kawan(d)); kabad, Sak. U. 
Kam. Friend or comrade : kaben 
orkabenn. Pang. K. Aring; kaben 
(pr. ka-benn). Pang. U. Aring. 
To accompany: bSkaban (bokab&n), 
Sak. Ra. I [ist p. s. pron.] : 
kaban, Kena. L \_.Mal. kawan, 
" companion."] 

229. CoMP.VNioN (comrade) (Mai. sain) : 
bom, bonn ? or bong? [doubtful], 
Sem. Kedah [? = C 228]. 

230. Companion ; friend : tewan, Jak. 
Ba. Pa. ; teman, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; tgman (t'nian), Jak. Lem. 
To accompany : teman (A>man), 
Sak. Kerb. \Mal. tSman]. 

566 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

231. Compare, to: banding (bnding), 
Sein. Buk. Max. \_Mal. banding]. 

232. Complain, to : s61ab (solab), Sak. 
Kerb. 

233. Complain, to : adu (adou), S'dm. ; 
ado, Sak. Ra. [A/a/, adu]. 
Complete, to : F 115-117 ; F 120. 
Complexion : F i. 
Comprehend, to : U 14-17. 
Comrade: B 413; C 228-230; 
F 263 ; M 28. 

234. Confluence of streams : nikus ? 
(hikus?), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Confused : M 119. 

Confusion, in : F 11, 12. 
Congregate, to : M 84. 
Consciousness, loss of : F 8. 
Consent, to : F 212. 
Consider, to : K 63 ; S 78. 
Consume, to : F 116 ; F 118. 
Consumption : T 70. 
Contact, in: N 19, 20; T 192, 193. 
Contend, to : Q i. 
Convenient : G 68. 

235. Conversation; to inform: bJchaya' 
(blchaia'), Sem. Buk. Max. Talk : 
bichara' (bchar'), Sem. Buk. Max. 
\_MaL bichara]. 
Convulsions: F115. 

236. Cook, to : kohoi, Sivn. [? Cf. 
Khmer chS.mh6i [chahuy], " to 
cook by steaming."] 

237. Cook, to : chat (tchet), Sbm. ; 
(tschat)orchet(tschet), Sak.Kor. Gb. ; 
chehet ( tch^het ) , nahchiat ( nahchiet ) , 
Sak. Kerb.; berchiit? or brechilt? 
{hx^X.c\\h'i),Sak.Ka.\ berchet", /<?/«/ ; 
bichetn, Darat ; chetn, Seti. Cliff. ; 
cheep'^, Seraic; chechap (/c//t'tch^p), 
Sak. Kerb. ; chiahem (tchiehem), 
Sak. Ra. ; cheham (tch6heni), Sak. 
Kerb. ; (tch^hem), Sak. Ra. ; inchen 
(in tch^n), So/n. ; gn-chSn, Krau 
Tern. ; ya-mfichin or ma,-chinn ? 
Pang. U. Anng ; 'nchin, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 'chin ; machin, 
Bes. Sep. ; machin, Bes. K. Lang. ; 
'chin, Bes. Malac. To cook (rice) 
[Mai. tanak) : bSrchet"^, Jclai ; 
bichC-t", Darat. Cooked : in- 
chiiidn ? (indiad'n ; indiiit'n), Sent. 
K. Keii. To burn or roast : chehcn 
(tch^hen), Sak. Ra. Ripe {Mai. 
masak) : 'nchen, Sem. Jarum. 
\Kaseng, Alak, Niahon chin ; Sul', 
Halang, Boloven ch^n ; Lave chen ; 
Churu cheah, "to cook"; Mon 
chin ; Bahnar ^\\w{yiYC\) ; Sliengsin ; 
A7//«6'rchhacn [chha'in], "cooked," 
"thoroughly cooked " ; Annam 
chay, "to roast"; cf Ccntr. Nico- 

(5a;- ishian-hata, "cooked."] B332; 
G 109 ; H 147 ; R 137. 

238. Cook (rice), to [Mai. bgrtanak): 
am-gap°, Se7i. Cliff. ; tagak, Bes. 
Her. , Bes. Malac. ; nage', Z?«. A. /. ; 
giip chana, Sak. Tap. [? cf. B 335]. 

239. Cook with oil, to ; to fry : lendok, 
Bes. A. /. Dish of cooked food : 
rendang (rndah), Sak. Ra. To 
fry : rgndang, Sak. U. Kam. \Mal. 
rgndang]. 

240. Cooked meat : gule, Bes. Songs. 
[Mai. gulai] ; B 332 : G 109 ; H. 
147- 

Cooking-pot: P 198-201. 

241. Copper : tembaga, Sak. Croix ; 
timbaga, 6^(3>«. , Sak. Kerb; timbaga, 
Sak. Ra. Silver: t6maga'(t6magak), 
Ke7ta. //. \_Mal. tembaga, "cop- 
per"]. 

242. Copulate, to : lim-oi, Sak. Plus 
Cliff'. ; ni-noi. Sen. Cliff., Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; noi, Kerbai. To copulate (of 
animals) : hSnoih (hnuih) : Sem. 
Pa. Max. Copulation ; se.xual inter- 
course: ya-ma'noi (ya-mak-noy), 
Sem. Stev. [i.e. " I copulate "]. 
Adultery : nenoi (ng-noi), Som. ; 
(nenoi), Sak. Kerb. ; nanoi (nenoi), 
Sak. Ra. Pudendum muliehre : 
noih(nuih), Sem. Pa. Max. ; A 118. 

243. Copulate, to (of animals) : t6m- 
pal (tmpl), Sem. Buk. Max. [? cf. 
Mai. tampal; tempel] ; F 66 ; P 219. 
Copulation : S 249. 

244. Corner ; angle {Mai. baliku) : kg- 
dakut chah (kdakut chh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

245. Corner; angle: machub(mchub), 
Sem. Buk. Ma.x. Square ; triangle ; 
three-cornered: menja' (mnja'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. 

246. Corner : tSrosok (t'rosok), Pant. 
Kap. J oh. ; B 175. 

247. Corpse : paban (pban), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; cf. T 211 ; U 2; D 48 ; 
D 50; G 16; U 3 ; W 143. 
Correct : S 483. 

247.\. Cotton : kabu, Tembi ; kabu' 
(kabuk), Jelai [Mai. kabu]. 

248. Cough : cheta (chit-tor), Sem. Stev. 
Dry phthisical cough: chetoh(chtuh), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Slight cough : 
sStoh (stuh), Sem. Buk. Max. 

249. Cough {A/al. batok) : sih. Sen. 
Cliff. Dry phthisical cough : hik ? 
king (slik king or hlik king), Sefn. 
Pa. Max. Slight cough : yik (lik), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [Stieng chick ; 
Churu shit, " to cough."] 

250. Cough : lakilp, Bes. K. L. To 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

567 

cough (as a consumptive person) : 
lak5p ; lakup, Bes. A. I. \^Bak?ia?- 
akuk, " a cold."] 

251. Cough, to: ya-6h {pr. ohh), 
Pang. Sam, Pa/ig. Gal. {Central 
Nicobar o-6ah ; Souther7i Nicobar 
hooah ; Shorn /-"? oah, "cough"; 
see V 22.] 

252. Cough, to : suiin ; su-un, Sem. 
K. Ken. ; ju-wad [?], Sak. Plus 
Cliff. 

253. Cough, to: kohol ? (gohol), Sak. 
A'or. Gb. ; kSng-hol, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; kenhol, Tembi ; kChol, 
Serau ; akon, Bes. A. I. ; pantol, 
Kefia. I. To blow ; to exhale 
(breathe) : kenhal (kenhdhl ; ken- 
hfil), Sem. K. Ken. To blow [Mai. 
tiup) : tohol, Serau [? of. W 97]. 
Counsel : A 32. 

254. Count, to : gi - lak, Sak. Blatij. 
Cliff. To say : bilak, Sak. Kerb. ; 
bilang, Bes. K. Lang. ; (bilan), 
Sak. Kerb. ; bilan, Sak. Ra. To 
tell [Mai. bilang) : ya-bileng, Pang. 
II. .1 ring [Mai. bilang]. 
Countenance : E 83. 

255. Country : negri (n^gri), Som. ; 
nSgri (nogri ; ngri), Sak. Ra. 
[Mai. nggSri] ; E 12, 13; H 153. 

256. Cover, to : k5i (koi), Som. 

257. Cover, to: tudo (toudo), Sak. 
Ra. To shut : tenudu (tonoudou), 
Som. Eclipse : tlidong bSnum, 
Blan. Rem. [Mai. tudong, "to 
cover "] ; S 183. 

Cow : B 457 ; C 57. 

Coward : I 34 ; to be a coward : 

F48. 

258. Crab : [a] kardun, Sem. Ked. New. , 
Sem. Jur. New. ; kandun, Sem. 
Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Rob. 

[b) kertah, Ben. New. 
(tr) (spec. J/a/. kStamangin): kSntem 
bua' (kntim bua'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
(spec. Mai. ketam batu) : kentem 
batu (kntim batu). Sent. Pa. A/ax. ; 
(spec. Mai. kStam bendang?) : 
kSntem bSndang (kntim bndng), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; (spec. Mai. kStam 
paya) : kSntem gul (kntim gul), 
Sem. Pa. Ma.v. [.Mai. ketam ; but 
also Mon khatam [khata] ; Khmer 
kedam [ktam] ; Bahnar kotam ; 
Stieng tarn, ' ' crab. "] 

259. Crackling (onomatop. ): kriok- 
kriak, Bes. Songs. Creak (onoma- 
top. ) : kik-kik-kik, Bes. Songs. 

260. Craftily ; warily : sgloloyn, Bes. 
Songs. 

Cramp : O 17 ; S 197. 

Cranium ; B 336. 

261. Crash -crash (onomatop.): plak- 
plau, Bes. Songs. 

Crave for, to : R 59. 

262. Crawl, to : maieh (mlih), Sem. 
Bilk. Max. To creep {Mai. lata) : 
ta-lag. Sen. Cliff. 

263. Ck-WVL, to : resani, Bes. Sep. ; 

B 175- 

Crayfish : P 207. 

Creak : C 259. 

264. Crk.mc-creak (onomatop.): gerdah- 
gerdah, Bes. Songs. Crunching (?) 
(onomatop.): berdak-berdong, Bes. 
Songs. 

Creep, to : C 262. 

265. Creeper (? stem of wild betel) : 
kalong, Bes. K. Lang. Creeper 
(rattan) : R 36-41. 

Crescent : M 161 ; M 166. 

266. Cricket (?) [Mai. changkrek) ; 
kt-deiut? (kdlut?), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Crimson : R 53- 

267. Crocodile : j/lhel. Son. Stev. ; 
tohol, Kena. /. 

268. Crocodile : seha' ? (s'hak;, 
Serting. 

269. Crocodile : langkau ? Bes. Malac, 
[Probably wrong.] 

270. Crocodile [Mai. buaya) : bayul 
(doubtful), Pang. U. Aring; bayul, 
Pang. Sam, Pa?ig. Gal. ; baul, U. 
Kel.; bayueh? wbaiweh? (baiulih), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; bayoh. Pang. 
Gal. , Sem. Plus ; bayeh, Sem. 
Plus, Sem. /arum ; bai, U. Pat. ; 
bay a', Bes. Songs ; buayji (buiye), 
Barok ; buyah [in MS. originally 
booyah], Sem. U. Sel. ; boya, 
Sem. Per. ; bongheia, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; buaya, Sak. Blanj. Sw., Bes. 
Malac., Mantr. Malac. ; bahaya' 
(bahayak), Bes. Her., Bed. Chiong; 
Alligator [properly crocodile] : 
bahaia, Sak. Br. Low. [Mai. 
buaya ; Javan. baya, bajul ; Siang 
baju ; Kanffwit, Kayan baia ; Matu 
baiah ; Achin. , Cham buya ; Bahnar 
bia ; Churu bva, hva, etc., " croco- 
dile."] B 41 ; F 138 ; L 119 ; 
L 121 ; M 75. 

271. Crocodile, cry of: wak-wak- 
wak, Bes. Songs. 

272. Crooked : rimpang-rimpang, Bes. 
Songs ; B 175-177. 

Cross, to : B 391 ; B 394. 

273. Cross, to (a river) : pintas, Som. ; 
mintSLS, Sak. Ra. To swim: min-tas, 
Sak. Plus Cliff. : mate' ? (mtik), 
Sem. Bui. Max, [Alal. pintas ; 
mSmintas] ; C 296 ; G 42. 

568 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

274. Cross, to, the hands the one over 
the other: ma'gfisichas (mk gsichs), 
Sem. Bilk. Alax. 

275. Cross, to, the hands the one over 
the other : ch61ah tong (chlh tung), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Cross-roads {Mai. 
sempang) : cher - lah. Sen. Cliff. 
Cross-piece (of musical instrument) : 
M 223. Cross sticks (used as bed): 
B 129-132. 

276. Crow: egal? (eghail), Sem. Jur. 
And., Sem. Jur. New., Sem. Juy. 
Rob. 

277. Crow (.1/a/. gagak): wiikag(ukag), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; chep oak ? (chep 
er-ark), Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; aag, 
Tembi ; gaag, Serau ; gaak (giak), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; daak, Ben. Neiv. ; 
da'ak, Bes. A. I. Jungle-crow [Mai. 
dendang) : da'a ; chim da'a', Bcs. 
K. L. ; (spec. Mai. dendang aver) : 
wukag betueh (ukag cruukag btiuh), 
Sem. Pa. Max. The Crow (which 
in Semang mythology is the husband 
of the Sun) : Ag-ag, Sem. Skeat. 
\AIo7i khadak ; Khmer kaek ; 
Annam. ak ; Bahnar ak ; Boloven 
ak ; Jarai ak ; Kaseiig hak (hie) ; 
Halang hak (hac) ; Tareng ha ha ; 
Koti Til trak ; and cf. Mai. gagak ; 
Selungka; ak, "crow," probably 
all onomatopceic. ] 

278. Crow {Mai. dendang) : pemba 
(pmba), Sem. Pa. Max. 

279. Crow {Mai. dendang): tajah? 
(?tajh or tabt?), Sem. Buk. Max. 

280. Crow : dendang, Ben. New. ; 
dfinang, Mantr. Malac. ; (spec. 
Mai. dendang aver) : dfindang 
bSteoh (dndng btiuh), Sem. Buk. 
Max. \Jav. dandang, Madur. dang- 
dang, Mai. dendang.] 

281. Crow, to (as a cock): nadur ; 
nadOr, Sak. U. Bert. 

281A. Crow, to: yaku? (iku) ; chgko' 
(chku'), Sem. Pa. Max. To cackle 
(as a hen): b6kuto'(bkutok; bekuto'), 
Sak. U. Bert. [? cf. Mai. kukuk ; 
but probably onomatopoeic.]' 

282. Cruel : bongis (bonis). Sow. ; 
(bonis), Sak. Ra. \Mal. bGngis] ; 
A 87. 

283. Crumpled : cherpe, Bes. Songs. 
Crunching : C 264. 

284. Cry, to {i-f. weep), {Mai. mfinangis): 
ya-kuyag {pr. ku-yagg), Sem. 
Kcdah ; kayang, Kena. I. [Possibly 
identical with the next form, with a 
prefi.x ku-, ka- added?]. 

285. Crv, to : ya-jim, Sem. Plus ; jam 
(j-m), Sem. Beg. ; (jam is given in 

Sem. Toml.) ; imya^im (imiab'n), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; yabm, Serting ; 
jap, jinjap, Sak. U. Kam. To 
weep : jum, Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
majam (mjm), Sein. Buk. Max. ; 
ya-jim, Pang. U. Aring; jap°. 
Sen. Cliff. ; jap ; jinjap, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; unyab (unjab), Sak. Maiiin; 
yam, Bes. Sep. ; yaap°, Tembi;)^]^^^ , 
Krau Em. ; jemnam, Serau. To cry 
aloud {Mai. bSrtriak) : ya' jim, Sem. 
Kedah, Sem. /arum. To cry out ; 
to scream ; to shout : jim, Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; majim (mjim), .'iem. Buk. 
Max. To call out : jap ; jinjap, 
Sak. U. Kam. To howl ; to roar : 
jim (jim), Sem. Buk. Max. To 
shout : jam (jm), Sem. Pa. Max. 
To roar : majam ? (mjm), Sem. Buk. 
Max. To scream : jinjap, Sak. U. 
Kam. [Mon yem [y^]: Khmer y km 
[yam]; Samre i&m; Por']€?Lm.; Cuoi 
fieam (nh^am) ; Phnong iiom 
(nhom) ; Boloven, Niahon iiiiom ; 
Lave niim ; Alak nim ; Halang niem ; 
Prou iium (nhum) ; Sue, So, 
Nanhang iiam (nham) ; Khmus, 
Lemet yam ; Stietig rixva. (nhim) ; 
Baluiar num (nhum), fiem (nhem) ; 
Churu mn\ ; Kuy Dek nam ; Chrau 
riam ; Palaung yam ; Central a?id 
Southei-Jt Nicohar chim-hata ; Shorn 
Pi chim ; Teressa chiam ; Khasi 
iam ; Ho yam ; Korku yam, jam. 
All meaning " to weep" or " cry."] 

286. Cry, to : nangis, Bedu. II. [J/c/. 
tangis ; menangis] ; S 175 ; W 34. 

287. Cry, to {i.e. shout) : b^lhap 
(bolhep), Som. ; belhag (belh^g), 
Sak. Kerb. 

288. Cry, to (shout) : ingar (inar), Sak. 
Kerb. To speak : ango, Mant. 
Bor. ; mgniga {moni^k), Som. 
[? cf. N 91], [Mai. engar, " to make 
a noise"] ; S 175-178 ; W 97. 
Cubit : C 89. 

289. Cuckoo, a kind of (?), {Mai. 
burong bot-bot) : pompong ; chim 
pom pong, Bes. K. L. 

289A. Cucumber (.1/a/. timun): setemun 
(stC-mun), Scriiu [Mai. timun]. 
Culinary vegetables : V 4-7. 
Cultivate, to : B 90 ; C 296 ; 
D 132 ; D 135. 
Cunning : C 162. 

290. Cup ; bowl : selek (s'lek). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. [? Cf. Mon slaing [sluing], 
" metal cup."] 

291. Cl'I>: mangkuk", Tembi; mangko', 
Serau ; mangko, Bes. K. Lang. 
[Mai. mangkok]. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

569 

292. Cure (medical remedy): hendek (?), 
Bcs. A. I. 

Cure, to : G 68. 
Curly : B 175, 176. 
Current : k 29 ; T 127. 
Curry : C 332. 
Curse : I 31. 
Curvature : B 175-177. 
Curve : B 173. 
Curved : B 175. 
Cushion : P 99-102. 

293. Custom: adat, Sinn., Sak. Ra. ; 
adat, Sak. Kerb. [Mai. Ar. 
■adat]. 

294. Custom : perinta' (p'rintak), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. A ruler : orang meren- 
tah, Pa7it. Kap. Her. [Mai. pgren- 
tah, "rule."] 

295. Cut, to [Mai. kerat ; potong): kah, 
Sen. CI. ; ka ; mak& (kor ; ma-kor), 
Sent. Stev. ; kosh (?), Krau Tern. ; 
kho', Sak. U. Katn. ; pake. Pal. ; 
nako. Or. Hit. Joh. I. ; tgk61, 
Serting; {Mai. potong), chingket 
or chingked, Sem. Kedah ; ya-keg, 
Sem. Plus ; ya-keg {ar kig), Pang. 
U. Aring; {Mai. kgrat) : ket, Krau 
Tern. To cut {e.g. sticks) : ket, 
Pang. Belimb. To cut ; to kill ; to 
hit : kuh, Serau. Hit him ! kuh, 
Serau. To cut {Mai. potong) : 
koh, Sak. Em. Cut down the 
tree : kah jahii jl, Sak. Em. To 
chop (to cut across the grain = 
Mai. kSrat) : ya-keg, Pang. U. 
A ring. To gash : kah, Sen. CI. 
To divide ; to separate : kus, Sem. 
Pa. Max. To beat : kii, Sak. U. 
Kain. To hammer out {Mai. 
pukol) : ya makoh {pr. ma-kohh), 
e.g. ya makoh penjok, ' ' I make a 
bark loin-cloth, "5^/«. Plus. To kill 
{Mai. bunoh): kuh. Sen. CI. ; kosh(?), 
Krau Tern. To smite : nako, Or. 
Hu. Joh. 1. To stab : koh (kuh), 
Sem. Pa. Max. To strike {Mai. 
pukol) : kuh, Sen. Cliff. ; ako or 
eko, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; kosh (?), Krau 
Tern. To peck ; to strike (as a 
snake): ka ;- (ka?), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Reaping knife ; to reap: ka' kutum 
(ka' kutm), Sem. Pa. Max. [A/on 
kut, dakut, "to cut off"; Khmer 
kap, kat ; Cham\i\h; Sui, Halang, 
Chrau koh ; Chjiru kau ; Stieng 
kat, k6h ; BahnarV.ii\.,\.o\i ■, Achin. 
koh, "to cut"; Mon phakoh, "to 
whittle"; Lave, Halang 'koh, "to 
carve"; ? cf. Stieng khah, "to 
cut a path in the forest " ; Mon 
kah; Khmerko, " to shave. " (There 

are evidently several distinct, but 

possibly allied, roots here. )] 

296. Cut, to : chop (tschop), Sak. Kor. 

Gb. ; chatebo (tchatebo), U. Pat. ; 

chak we" (tschakwen'), U. Kel.\ 

C 124. To cut across the grain (Affl/. 

k6rat) : ya chah (of hut-poles), 

Sem. Plus. To cut in two or 

through : chahh, Pang. Belimb. 

To chop at {Mai. chinchang) : 

ya - chah. Pang. U. Aring, 

Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. To cross 

a river {Mai. m6ny6brang) : (?) ya' 

chog (/;-. ya' chogg), Sem. Jarum ; 

ya' clibg ba-titeb {pr. ya' chogg 

ba-titebb), Sem. Plus. To build a 

hut {Mai. buat pondok) : ya' chah 

jeieng {pr. chahh), lit. "cut (poles 

and) plant (them)," Sem. Plus. To 

break : chehuh (tch^houh), Sak. 

Pa.; {Mai. pgchah) : cheeh, Serau. 

Broken {Alal. putus) : li-chat. Sen. 

Cliff. To destroy : gechat (go- 

tchat), Sak. Ra. To hurt ; damage : 

cheoh (tch^oh), Sak. Ra. To fell 

trees {Mai. tgbang) : ya' chohh, 

Se}n. Plus ; ya-choh {pr. chohh). 

Pang. U. Aring ; ya-choh. Pang. 

Sam, Pang. Gal. ; emchah (em- 

tchah, Sak. Ra. To bore : mSchuk 

(nichuk), Sem. Buk. Max. Cave ; 

hole : chania, Sak. Ra. To hit 

(in shooting = Mai. kSnakan or 

dapat), cheg. Pang. U. Aring. To 

kill : cheg, Sem. Craw. Hist. , Sem. 

Kcd. New., Lebir; (tcheg), Sem. 

Klapr. ; chek, Kerbat ; bogchag ? 

(bogdschag ; bog-dschag), Sem. K. 

Ken. ; negchop (nog-tchop), Som. ; 

ahchilok (^htchilok), Sak. Kerb. 

Murder : chagluk (tche-gliik), Sak. 

Kerb. To peck ; to strike (as a 

snake): (ma)niedchoh (mmd chuh?), 

Sejn. Buk. Max. To pierce ; stab ; 

penetrate : ichek or yS-ichek, Pang. 

Belimb. ; choh, e.g. tihang choh 

ngot ha te', "the post will not 

enter the ground," Bes. A. I. To 

pierce : tio' (tiuk), Sem. Buk. Max. 

To plant : chad, Sak. U. Kam. ; 

chot (chert). Sen. Cliff. ; chodn, 

Serau [or Tembi ?] ; chef^, Serau ; 

chidnid. Sen. Em. To plant a 

stake {Mai. chachak ; tikam den- 

gan galah): chop?(cherp; chfirp), 

Sen. Cliff. ; kachek, Bes. Sep. ; ya- 

pachag. Pang. U. Aring ; ya- 

pachag, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

Plant [? plantation] : chenut {tchd- 

nout), Sak. Kerb. ; chednad {tched- 

nad), Sak. Ra. To cultivate : 

570 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

chadchud (tched - tchoud), Sak. 
Kerb. Pointed : chCbut (chbut), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Pointed or dotted 
pattern on the blow-gun : pichod, 
Sem. Stev. To prick : chelok 
(tsch^lok), Sak. Kor. Gb. ; cheiak", 
Serau. To sew [Mai. jahit) : ya' 
chas [pr. chass), Se7n. J arum, Sem. 
Plus ; hi chak, Sak. U. Kam. 
Sharp: chohh, Bes. A. I.\ chS-bat, 
Sen. Cliff. ; chebat, Tembi ; chgbat, 
chebat, tembat [?], Serau ; chemak, 
Sem. Jarmn ; chetegnimoh, Tembi. 
To sharpen : chSbut (chbut), Sejn. 
Pa. Max. ; chebat, Seraii ; chema' 
(chma'), Sem. Buk. Max. To 
spear : chohh, Bes. Songs. To stab 
[Mai. tikam) : cheg, ex. lem he' 
cheg ti' ; Mai. sudah kita tikam 
dia (? better, lem Q' cheg ka-he'), 
"we have stabbed him," Sem. 
Kedah ; ya-cheg. Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sa)n, Pang. Gal. ; ya' cheg 
(pr. chegg), Sem. /aru?n ; ya" cheg 
(pr. chegg), Sem. Plus ; mScheg 
(mchik), Sem. Buk. Max. ; chok, 
Krau Tern. ; chok, Sen. CI. ; chok°, 
Serau. To beat [Fr. battre) : chung 
(tchoung), Sem. Klapr. To quarrel: 
chSnig-chog? (dschnig-dsch6g),5(;»z. 
K. Ken. To fight : chog^^, Serati. 
To put in (Mai. isikan) : chap°, 
Serau. To strike : chong (ch5ng), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; chang (chng, 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; cf. B 372, 373. 
[These numerous forms have been 
provisionally collected here on 
account of the difficulty of sorting 
them under their several roots. 
In the cognate languages there are 
a number of very similar roots, e.g. , 
Kktner chak, ' ' to pierce (a hole) " ; 
chet [chit], "to cut"; char [char], 
" to engrave "; chhak, " to cut with 
a knive"; chek [chik], "to peck," 
' ' to bite (as a snake) " ; Mon chang, 
"to make a hole in or through"; 
chat [chat], " to sting," " to prick " ; 
chaik [chak], to tear " ; chai [chaai], 
"to strike with the fist"; Stieng 
chang, "to hew"; chah, "to 
split"; choeh, "to clear a path 
(through jungle)"; chat, "to tear 
(by accident)"; choh, "to peck," 
"to bite (as a snake)"; chuk, "to 
wound"; chich, "to pierce (the 
ears)"; chir, "to dig"; siet, "to 
mince"; Bahnar chah "to cut 
(brushwood)"; chet, chiet, " to cut 
small"; chot, "to cut in slices"; 
chou (chiu), "to penetrate"; 

chong, "to clear jungle"; shoch 
(xoch), shoet (xoet), "to sting"; 
choh, "to dig"; chok, "to cut a 
notch"; chSr, "to split"; tochoh, 
"to mince" (cf. choi, "to sow"; 
cf. Tareng cMt, "to cultivate"); 
Achin. chang, "to strike with a 
sword"; Boloven, Niahon, Lave 
chah ; Halang chier, ' ' to hollow 
out" [Fr. creuser) ; Boloven tiau ; 
Lave tshu ; Niahon cho, ' ' to 
pierce " ; cf Boloven kSchet, 
Kaseng, Alak kasit ; Bahnar, 
kochit ; Mon gichot [gachuit] ; 
Stieng ponchot, "to kill," but this 
is from a word meaning " to die."] 

297. Cut, to : katoyt, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
{Mai. kfirat) : toyt, e.g. toyt chol'ng. 
Alal. kSratkan akar, "to cut a 
creeper," Bes. K. L. To cut (sever) 
[Mai. kerat) : toyt, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
To chop ; toit, Bes. Malac. ; M 106. 
\Mon tilt [tat], " to cut off "; Stieng 
tah ; Kaseng tich, tit ; Boloven 
Niahon tiet, "to cut." Schmidt 
also g\\&s Kh7ner toh, " to cut off" ; 
cf. Central Nicobar o-taih-hata, 
" to cut (with a knife)."] 

298. Cut, to : mgtas, Kena. I. To 
cut open : midas, Bes. Songs. To 
cut cigarettes : antas rokok, Krau 
Em. 

299. Cut, to ; to carve (cut up) ; to 
quarter, e.g. an animal's flesh (for 
food) [Mai. bantei) : (a) konthok, 
Bes. A. I.; kontok, Bes. K. L. To 
reap [i.e. to cut the heads of rice 
with the Malayan reaping- knife, 
ketam or tuei) : tok, e.g. tok be' = 
Mai. mgnuei padi, Bes. K. L. ; 
ngtbk, e.g. n. be, "to reap padi," 
Bes. A. I. Sharply tapering : katok, 
Bes. Songs. To notch (with a 
chopper) : katol'ng, Bes. Sep. 

(b) To chop: chilong, Bes. Alalac. To 
chop at : chfitol^ng ; keto'^ng; te- 
to'^ng, Bes. A. I. ; t6tong, t'.^. luru 
tetong = Mai. p6rgi chinchang 
(musoh) = " to chop at, " Bes. K. L. ; 
luru tgto'^ng, Bes. A. I. 

(c) To cut : tetak, Jak. Malac. [Mai. 
t5tak]. [B 297 - 299 are perhaps 
ultimately related.] 

300. Cur, to: kago', e.g. "to cut 
wood," kago' long (or logi'), Zj'c.v. 
Malac [?=F 20]. 

301. Cut, to : kCrat, /ak. Malac. ; krat 
(grat), Sak. Kor. Gb. To cut (wood): 
krdt, Sak. Kor. Gb. To chop (to 
cut across the grain = yl/a/. kgrat) : 
ya-krod (pr. krodd). Pang. Gal. ; 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

571 

kerat, Jak. Malac. To clear jungle: 
krat, Kena. Stev. [Mai. kSrat]. 
Cut, to : pahuk, Mantr. Malac. 
To cut {Mai. potong) : pot, Bes. 
Sep. ^. /. ; G 41 ; C 152 ; F 59 ; 
G 41 ; G 68. To cut notches : N 

103- ^ 

Cut open, to ; tongka', Bes. 

Songs. 

Cutlass : I 36. 

302 

303 

304 

Cutting : T 103. 

Cyclone : hujuwag (hoojoowag), 

Sem. Siev. 

D 

1. Dagger(i1/a/. tumbok lada): gulo^^ng, 
Bes. A. I. [? Mai. gclok] ; K 47 

2. Dam [Mai. ampang) : sengkat, Sak. 
Plus Clijf. 

3. Dam : nampak, Sak. Plus Cliff. 
[Mai. ampang]. 

4. Dam : bSntong, Bedu. II. [? Mai. 
benteng]. 

5. Dam : bSndul, Kena. I. Wooden 
part of bed [Fr. bois de lit ) : bondul 
(bondoul), S'om. , Sai. Kerb. , Sak. Ra. 
Beam : nifindol, Serau [Mai. bendul]. 

6. Damage : chachat, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[Mai. chachat] ; C 296. 

7. Damage, to : mayosa' (miusa'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. To hurt (do damage to) : 
yussak (youssak), Som. To spoil ; 
to destroy: yosa' (iusa'), Sein. Buk. 
Max. ; rosak", Tembi ; dusak, Serau 
[Mai. rosak] ; D 50. 

8. Damar laut (treespec. ),Shorea ufilisl: 
tionga kunying ? Sent. Buk, Max. 
Dammar [Mai. damar) : R 72-80. 
Damp : W 73. 

9. Dance, to [Mai. tari) : ya' kengseng, 
Sem. Jarum ; ya' kengsen crkengseng, 
Sem. Plus ; kongsing, Pang. U. 
Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; kgng- 
sing, Lebir ; kSn-sing, Kerbat. [Mon 
kachhing, "dancer"; BaAfiar sho^ng 

■ (xoSng), "dance" (ceremonial, at 
funerals and when a buffalo is killed. )] 

10. Dance, TO : kanyar, Serau; ka-nyar; 
k6-na-nyir ; k6-nan-nyir, Se?i. Cliff. ; 
jadi ; jaj (diadi ; djadj), Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; da'-ne". Sen. Cliff. To dance 
ceremonially (?) : tenden, e.g. b6- 
tenden or bgrtenden, Bes. K. L. 
D 165 ; S 211. 

11. Dance : le-ek. Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[? Cf. Mon leh, " to dance."] 
Dance-stick : C 49. 

12. Dandle, to ; to hold in the arms and 

play with : machgdum (nichdum), 
Sem. Buk. Max. 

13. Danger: bahylk,, Sak. Pa. [Mai. 
bahaya] ; D 50 ; F 48 ; R 87. 

14. Dangling : berjurei, Bes. Songs. 
Waving about : berjihai, Bes. Songs. 
'Jo sit with legs dangling : F 220. 

15. Dark : tin ; amea, Sem. Jur. And., 
Sem. Jur. Rob. ; tin aniea, Sem. 
Jur. Ne2v. [Very doubtful.] 

16. Dark [.Mai. gfilap) : [a) herkot vr 
herkod [pr. herrktitt or herrkbdd), 
Sem. Plus ; helkud. Pang. Galas. 
Dark; darkness: hekut (hekut ; hikut), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Darkness or night : 
reka'. Pang. Belimb. Night [Mai. 
malam) : her-kut [pr. herr-kutt), 
Sem. Kedali ; herkod, Sem. Jarum ; 
herkut ; her-kod [pr. herr-kodd) ; 
hakod, Sem. Plus; hekut or haikut ? 
(hikut), Sem. Buk. Max. ; hg-kut, 
Kerbat. To-night [Mai. malam ini) : 
herkod or herkot ta', Sem. Jarum; 
herkod tah, Sem. Plus; ho-kud te' [?], 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Yesterday 
[Mai. samalam) : ho-kud ; her-kud, 
Sefu. Plus; ho-kud, Pang. U. Aring. 
Dawn : tgngah (tngh) hai kud nadih, 
Sem. Buk. Max. Midnight; late in 
the night : hikun na' ih, Sem. Buk. 
Max.; C 184. 

[b) Dark ; clouded over [Mai. rSdup): 
hingiill, Bes. Sep. Dark : hang-ep, 
Lebir ; hang-et, Kerbat ; sfingiit, 
Kena. II.; bSsenget, Serting; songoi 
(sonoi), Sak. Ra. ; gn5n, Sem. K. 
Ken. Darkness or night : hangep. 
Pang. K. Aring. Night [Mai. 
malam) : hangep, Sern. Plus ; Pang. 
U. Aring; hang-ep, Lebir; ahengot? 
(ahungut), Sem. Per. ; sengat, Buk. 
U. Lang. ; s6ng-at, Krau Ket. ; 
sengat, Kerdau ; besenget,^ Serting^ ; 
sSng-orr, Sen. Cliff. ; sgngCir ; sengOr 
(sngQr; sngor), Sak. U. Bert. ; sengOr, 
Sak. Martin; gn5n? (gno'n), Sem. 
K. Ken. ; seng-an, Sak. Guai ; 
sinyong, Tan. U. Lang. ; sgngui 
(sonoui ; soiioui), Sak. Ra. ; mgng&d 
(mngad), Sak. U. Kam. ; (m'ngdd), 
Sak. U. Bert. To-night: hangep 
te', Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. To- 
day: ahgngot? (ahungut), Se7n. Per. 
Evening: senOng, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
Yesterday; last night (J/a/. samalam): 
sgng - orr-ne' , Sen. Cliff. Yester- 
day : sengonne, Darat ; singum, 
Tan. U. Lang. ; sia (si6), Kena. I. 
[Khmer wgongViX [ngitngit], "dark," 
"darkness"; 67z>«o jongou, "dark."] 

[c) Cloud : sagub, Sem. K. Ken. ; 

572 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

sagdb, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; sagup (sagoup), 
Sak. Kerb. ; sagup (sagoup), Sak. 
Ra. Clouds; mist : sagup, Sak. U. 
Bert. Fog; mist: sagup (sagoup), 
Sak. Ea. Dark : hagam ; hagom, 
Bes. A. I. [AcAtn. sagob, " fog."] 
(d) Evening : yup (yoop), Sem. Beg. 
(gup), Ben. New. ; lemyom {pr. 
lemyomm), Se7n. Kedah. Sunset : 
nayup, Sak. Kerb. [Khmer yup, 
"night," "darkness"; Bahnar ip, 
iUp, "shadow"; Khmus yopa, 
' ' night " ; cf. Cham shup, ' ' night " ; 
dayop, ' ' evening twilight. "] 

17. ?2vening : {a) atap (a/ap) ; atob 
(atob), Sak. Kerb. ; top, Som. after- 
noon {Mai. petang) : dun-tfip" ; dun- 
topn (dun-tup"), Sen. Cliff. Midnight : 
ualtam (oual-tam), Sak. Ra.; M 100 
[? cf. T 251]. Two nights : nar top, 
Sak. Tap. 

{b) Then {Mai. tetkala itu) : p6tum 
{pr. petu^m) kali (doubtful), said to 
really mean ' ' last night," .1/(7/. petang 
bharu, Pang. Galas. Formerly : 
hatop, Sak. Kerb. ; ntam, Sak. Ra.\ 
set&pi^ (stapD), Tembi ; entok", 
Serau [or TembH\ Yesterday; 
formerly : 'ngtam (iitam), Sak. 
Ra. Yesterday : ta^'m ? (dab'n, 
"deep a"). Sent. K. Ken. ; hatap, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; hatab, Sak. Br. 
Low ; hatob, Sak. Croix ; chimtflm 
[in the MS. originally chimtoom], 
Set)i. U. Sel. ; nintobm, Serting. 
Yesterday ; formerly : hatop, Sak. 
Kerb. Yesterday {Mai. samalam) : 
cham petom {pr. pSto^m), Scm. 
Kedah ; nano tarn, Sem. Per. The 
day after to-morrow {Mai. lusa) : 
nartop? (nurdop), Sak. Matiin; T272. 
[On the analogy of the Malayan way 
of indicating past time by reference to 
nights, these words have, I believe 
rightly, been placed here ; but as to 
some of them, with the meaning 
"formerly," etc., see under B 151 
and T 203.] A week : tujuh patam, 
Sem. Beg.; S 123. \_Mon bfitdm 
[btam ; bta] ; Southern and Central 
Nicobar hatom ; Teressa, hatam ; 
Cho-iura hatam; Car Nicobar, hotam, 
"night."] 

{c) Afternoon : peting, Mentr. Stcv. 
Yesterday : kepiitang, Galang \^Mal. 
petang, "afternoon"]. 

18. Dark : layiik (layek), Som. ; layet 
(lay6t), Sak. Kerb. ; selit, Bedu. II. ; 
silitah, Ben. New. Midnight: layek, 
Sak. Kerb. Night : laiak, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; layiik (layek), Sum., Sak. Kerb. ; 

layet (layette), Sak. Croix ; lai-it 
(laiit), Sak. Br. Low; plit, U. Tern. ; 
pS-lit, U. Cher. ; s^llt, Mantr. Malac. ; 
s61ft, Kena. I. ; selit, Bedu. I. ; 
selft, Bedu. II. ; selip (selipe), Mantr. 
Cast. Night; darkness: selit, Mantr. 
Bor. It is getting late : na' sfelit, 
Mantr. Malac. 

19. Dark : d6-i, Bes. Her. ; dhui, Ben. 
New.; dummeluk, Z^^«. AVk;. Dark; 
darkness : tueh (tuih), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Dark ; clouded over {Mai. 
rgdup) : tuyi (tuii), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Afternoon : dui (dooee), Bes. Bell ; 
ya-dui, Sak. U. Kam. ; {Mai. 
pgtang): dui, Darat, Sej-au. Evening: 
du (dou) ; dui (doui), Sak. Ra. ; 
nidui, Sem. K. Ken. ; nihdu (nih 
dou), Som. Night {Mai. malam) : 
tuwoi, Sem. Kedah ; tuwi, Sem. 
Jaru77i ; de-i, Bes. Her. ; duyi, Ben. 
New. ; doi, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; doi, 
Bes. Malac. ; pidoi, ex. tfingah pidoi 
{Mai. tSngah malam), "midnight," 
Bes. K. L. Last night {Mai. 
samalam): mendoi (or menoi), Pa«^. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Long ago {Mai. 
lama sudah) : men-oi or ja' mSnoi, 
Pang. U. Aring; man-ah. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Then {Mai. 
tetkala itu) : men-oi. Pang. Sam. 
Yesterday: kadui, Sem. Phis. To-day: 
nidiii, Sem. K. Ken. ; tumdeh, Tan. 
U. Lang. ; do-hi, Sak. Sel. Da. 
To-night : doi kedim, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
Evening {Mai. pStang) : bSr-oi, Sem. 
Plus ; bor-oi, Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam. ; "W j2l 

20. Night: porong ? (peu-rong), Sak. 
Sel. Da. 

21. Evening : kendim (kndim), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

22. Dark : {a) kabus, Ben. New. 
Darkness (shadowy or cloudy) : 
kabut, Sem. Buk. Max. Dark ; 
clouded over : kgbis (kbis), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Sky: kabut, Be7i. New. 
Twilight : kabus (kabus), kSmehus ? 
(kmhus), Sem. Buk. Max. Cloud : 
kabut, Kena. II. , Blan. Rem. ; kabut, 
Ben. New. Fog : kab6t, Sem. K. 
Ken. Shady : kabut kabut, Tembi. 
{b) Darkness : tfimbut ? (tumdout), 
Sem. Beg. ; tambut, Ben. New. 
Night : tambut (tmbut), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; tembut? (tunbot), Se7n. Beg.; 
tembdt ; lenbdt, Sei?i. Martin. 

{c) Cloud or mist {Mai. awan, or 
kabut?) : ka'ilh, Bes. K. L. Cloud; 
haze : kaTdi, Bes. A. I. Night : 
kahftt [in the MS. originally kahoot], 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

573 

Sem.U.Sel. Dark: kuyek (kflye"k), 
Bed. Chioiig. 

((/) Blind : kabul, Serau. [Ngaju 
Dayak kabul, "obscure," "misty" ; 
kavvus, kabus, "misty," " &3.x\i," e.g. 
kawus matae, "impaired vision." 
Cf. Mai. kabur, "imperfect vision," 
" misty " ; kabus, " dark," " misty" ; 
kabut, " dark. " ? Cf. also D 50 and 
Boloven ngbiih ; Lave nbiih ; Niahim 
bfih, "evening."] 

23. Dark ; eclipse : jSlum, Kena. I. 
Shady : jgrlueg ; jerlueg, Serau [or 
Tembi\ [?::=D 24 or D 29]. 

24. Dark : gSlop (gfileup), Galang ; 
gel^p, Barok. Night : g61ap, Jak. 
Malac. Dark ; night : glap, Serau. 
\_Mal. gSlap, "dark."] 

25. Evening {Mai. pfitang) : jelud {pr. 
j61-udd), Sem. Kedah [?:=D 23]. 

26. Evening {Mai. pfitang) : na-hod [fr. 
na-hodd), Sem. /arum, Sem. Plus. 

27. Evening : rawas, Ben. New. 

28. Evening : go' uis, Bes. A. I. Night : 
naiguel (naigouel), Se7n. Klapr. 
[? = D 16]. 

29. Night; klam, Sak. Chen., Bjik. U. 
Lang. ; klani, Sak. U. Bert. \_Mal. 
kelam, connected with the following? 
and with D 24 ?] 

30. Night : nelap". Da rat ; malam, 
Mantr. Malac. \_Mal. malam]. 
Yesterday : demawam, Jak. Malac. 
[Mai. samalam]. 

Dark (colour) : B 236 ; O 15. 
Daxkness : C 184. 
Dart : B 291-304. 
Dash, to : P 202. 

31. Datura : h61e' kachubong (hli' 
kchubng), Sem. Pa. Alax., Sem. 
Buk. Max. [Mai. kachubong]. 

32. Daughter : jah, Ment. Her. IL ; C 
101-106 ; F 63. 

Daun baru (tree spec.) : L 32. 
Daun payong (palm spec.) : P 44. 
Dawn : C 154 ; D 16 ; D 42. 

33. Day {Mai. hari): katoh, Sem. Klapr. ; 
ketok, Pang. Belimb. , Pang. K. 
Ari?ig; ke-tor, Kerbat, Krau Tern., 
Sak. Guai ; kfi-to", Lebir. Day- 
light : to', Krau Ket. Sky {Mai. 
langit) : kStok, Sem. Kedah, Sem. 
Jaruni ; kStSJc, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal.; ketd', Setn. Plus; kS-to', 
Kerbat;Si^yg. To-morrow(yl/a/. esok): 
kStdk or kftil', Sem. Kedah ; ketdk 
(the rest of the days in the usual 
category are lusa', tulad {or tuled), 
tubin, and telung). Pang. U. A ring; 
ketiik, Pang. Satn, Pang. Gal. ; 
kS-to' b6n-dai, Lebir. To-day 

{Mai. hari ini) : kgtok tah, Sem. 
Kedah ; k2tok ta' , Sem. Jamm ; 
kStak te'. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
ke-to' tek, Lebir. Sun {Mai. mata- 
hari) : kit-ketok, Sem. Jarum, Sem. 
Plus; kit ketak {or kgtiV), Sem. 
Plus; kit ketok, Pang. U. Aring; 
kit k6-tor, Kerbat; kirkto, U. Pat., 
U. Kel; milkatok (mitkatok), Sem. 
Craw. Gram. ; (mitkatok), Sem. 
Craw. Hist., Sem. Ked. New., Sem. 
Ked. Mar. , Sem. Jur. Mar. , Sem. 
Jur. New., Sem. Jur. And. ; (mil- 
katok), Sem. Ked. And., Sem. Jur. 
Rob., Sem, Ked. Rob. ; mit katoh, 
Sem. Klapr. ; mett kgtok, Sem. 
Kedah ; met kStok, Pang. U. Aring; 
metkatok ; m^-tkatop, Sem. Stez\ ; 
mcjdkata. Sent. Beg ; merketo, U. 
Pat. ; met kg-to', Lebir; mekator, 
Sem. U. Sel. ; mak-tok, Sem. Ij. ; 
mat ke-to' Kj-au Ket. ; mat ke-tor, 
Krau Tejn. , Sak. Guai ; m6k6to or 
makgto' (mktu'), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
mektoe or miketoe' (maktui' or 
mkatui'), Sem. Pa. Max. Sun's 
course: chub makgto' (chub mktu'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; ha matkgto' (ha 
mtktuk), Sem. Pa. Max. Sunrise 
{Mai. matahari naik) : kit-k6tok 
chewe, Se7n. Plus ; met-kgtok luweg, 
Sem. Kedah ; tgbit makSto' (tbit 
mktu'), Sem. Buk. Max. ; har 
maketo' (har' mktu'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. East {Mai. timor) : seng- 
kgtok (?=" front of sky"), Sem. 
Jarum ; B 145 ; kStok chuoh. Pang. 
U. Aring; met-kgtok {or kit-ketok) 
chueh, Sem. Plus ; med kgtok chuoh, 
Pang. Sam. Morning {Mai. pagi) : 
kgtdk chuch, /"flw^. U. Aring. Early 
morning : tengah luit makgto' (tngh 
luit mktuk), Sem. Pa. Max. Fore- 
noon : tengah makgto' (tngh miktuk), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Noon : kil bgkik 
makgto' (kn bkik miktuk), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; peketop, Kerdau. After- 
noon : usa makgto' (ausa miktu'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; tgyun makgto' 
(tiun mktuk), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Sunset {Mai. matahari masok) : 
metketok jglod {pr. jglodd), Sem. 
Kedah ; kit-kgtok b'lis, Sefn. Plus ; u 
bglas makgto' (aubls mlktu'), Sem. 
Buk. Alax. ; belus maketo' (blus 
mktuk), Sem. Pa. Max. West {A-Ial. 
barat) : torn kgtok (? = " back of 
sky"), Sem. Jarum; met-k6tok tebglis 
{Mai. matahari jatoh) = sunset, lit. 
sun-fall, Sem. Plus ; med kgtok bios, 
Pang. Sam ; kgtok bios, Pang. U. 

574 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Aring. "Gate of hell" : metkatok 
blTs (metkatok blees), Sem. Stev. 
"Where the sun sets": metkato' 
blis (metkatop blees), Sem. Stev. 
North {Mai. utara) : lintang kit- 
kgtok ; e.g. chop man lintang = " to 
cross the sun's path, go northwards." 
(Is man a fuller form of n\a. = Mal. 
handak ?), Pang. U. Aring. South 
(Mai. selatan) : lintang kit-ketok, 
"to cross the sun's path," Pang. U. 
Aring. Eclipse of the sun : kab 
hau makfetoe (kb hau mktui), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Sunshine : chahi maketo' 
(chhi mktu'), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
chahia maketo' (chhia mktuk), Sem. 
Pa. Max.; D 41. Sun's rays ; sun's 
brightness : sinar maketo' (sinr 
mktuk), Sem. Pa. Max. ; S 310 ; 
S 385 ; T 106. [Possibly cp. 
A ndamatiese Kede Xko ; Chariar tauo, 
"sky." The met- prefix is un- 
doubtedly E 83, " eye."] 

34. Day . [Mai. siang) : kelepah, Pang. 
U. Aring. Daylight ; light (opp. 
to darkness) : krel - pah, Kerbat. 
Midday : girp-rat, Sem. Beg. ; girp- 
rat, Ben. New. Sky : kamper {pr. 
kamparr), Setn. Plus. 

35. D.J^Y : eshhis (eshhiss), Sak. Kerb. ; 
iji (idji) ; iji (idji), Sak. Pa. ; jish, 
Sen. Cliff. ; lis, Sem. K. Ken. ; Is, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. Daylight : his, 
S'dm. ; ish, Sak. Kerb. ; jlsh. Sen. 
CI. Daily ; every day : nei-his, Sd>n. ; 
hish-doh (hich-doh), Sak. Kerb. 
Noon ; midday : keligi (kolighi) ; 
keiiji (kolidji), Sak. Ra. ; madiis-a, 
Sem. K. Ken.; M 100. New moon : 
nei hish, Sak. Kerb. [Hi. "one day," 
i.e. "the first day of the lunar 
month"; O 27]. To-day: his 6no 
(his ono), Som.. ; hish-doh (hich-doh), 
Sak. Kerb. ; isto ; fst6, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; aji-ade (adji-ad6), Sak. Ra. 
Sun : ish, Sak. Br. Low, Sak. Croix; 
fs, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; his, Sak. Kerb. ; 
madiss, Sem. Ken. ; madiis, Sem. 
K. Ken. ; madyis, Sem. Per. ; mad- 
yis, S'dm. ; matjis, Sak. Kinta ; 
matjish, Sen. Cliff. ; matjis, Sak. 
Blanj. Sw. ; majis (maglse), Tan. 
if. Lang. ; mat-jl (mat-dji), Sak. 
Ra. ; mat-ji', Sak. U. Tap. ; majl', 
Sak. U. Kam. Sky : madyis, Sem. 
Per. ; mad - yis, Som. Midday ; 
noon : uish (ouish), Sak. Croix. 
Sunset: madyis kCbus (mad-yis- 
kobous), S'dm. ; matji chong (mat- 
dji -tchon), Sak. Ra. ; gi-tiu, Seri. 
Cliff. East {i.e. sunrise) : majl 

ya, Sak. U. Kam. West {i.e. sun- 
set): majl' tibS,', Sak. U. Kam.; 
S 119. [Possibly cf. Chinese jib 
(older "jit" or " iiit "), "sun," 
"day."] 

36. Day : chgnmuih (chnnmih), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Daytime ; daylight {Mai. 
siang) : chSnmuih (chnmuih), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; (jnmuih), Sem. Buk. 
Max. To - morrow {Mai. esok) : 
ch6m&', Setn. J arum ; chamak or 
cham&', Sem. Plus; chamok-leloi, 
Sem. Per. ; chama ? (dschama) ; 
chama ? (dschama'n, with soft 
resounding «), Sem. K. Ken. [? = 
A 72]. 

37. Day : apeng, Sem. Per. Day after 
to-morrow (.l/a/. lusa): ningpen.^^OT. 
Jarum ; nipaSng? (nibag'n), Sem. K. 
Ken. Third day from to-day : tubin, 
Pang. U. Aring. East (il/a/. timor): 
nenben or nen-benn (?), Sem. Jarum. 

38. Day : tfing-ngi, U. Cher. ; t6nyl, 
Serting. Daylight {Mai. siang) : 
teng-ngi, U. Cher. ; tgnyi, Serting. 
Sun : mat tfing-ngi, U. Cher. [A/on 
t'ngoa [tngai] ; Khjner thngay ; 
Samri, Par thngi ; Cuoi tangay ; 
Samri tne ; Kong tnei ; Sedang 
menhi ; Huei thnay ; Kat, Suk 
matnay ; Proo?is matanai ; Lemet 
ngay pri ; Ka, Prou tangai ; Chong 
tangi ; Kuy Dek ngay ; Churu 
dngay, tangai ; Boloven, Lave 
thangai ; Niahon niiei ; Halang 
mat ngai. The connection of 
Palaungsengei; Kkasi sr\g\; Lakadong 
sngoi ; Amwee junga ; Kolh sing, 
singi, seems probable. All the above 
mean "sun." The following mean 
"day": Kaseng, Kon Tu, Sui, 
Boloven tangai ; Tareng meingai ; 
Annam ngay ; Boloven thngai ; 
Alak, Kaseng thangai ; Lave thngfti ; 
Halang TigsS. ; Niahon ngiiei ; Churu 
dngai ; Jarai yan ngu6i ; also the 
Mon and Khmer forms supra.'\ 

39. Sun : tungkat (tunkat), U. 
Ind. ; tongkat, Pant. Kap. Her. ; 
tongkat langit, Bes. K. Lang. ; 
tongkat tgrang (tonkat trang). Pant. 
Kap. Log. Sun ; day : tongkat 
trang. Pant. Kap. Joh. Afternoon : 
tongkat lasop. Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Clouds : tongkat cheleS (tongkat 
cheleo"), Jak. Mad. {Pant. Kap. ). 
Sky : tongkat chcleau ? (tongkat 
ch'lean), Pant. Kap. Joh. Lightning : 
pCliling tongkat (p'liling tongkat), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Moon : tongkat 
geiap "(tonkat glap), Pant. Kap. Log. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

575 

Moon ; night : tongkat g'lap, Pant. 
Kap. Joh. Last night : sa tongkat 
g'lap, Pant. Kap. Joh. Noon: tengah 
tongkat, Pant. Kap. Joh. Star : 
anak tongkat, Pant. Kap. Her., 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Year : tongkat 
bagin, Pant. Kap. Joh. Yesterday : 
tongkat ch'Iek, Pant. Kap. Joh. ; 
G 130. [This appears to be a taboo 
word and its origin is obscure. In 
Malay, tongkat means " to prop up "; 
hence " a prop," " a walking-stick." 
Possibly the word contains an allusion 
to the pillars (or other supports) of 
the firmament. I do not believe it is 
connected with D 33 or D 38. ] 

40. Day : tabiah. Tan. U. Lang. 

41. Day: chahai? (cha.ha.), Sein. 
Beg. ; (chahar), Ben. New. ; chOhSi, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. ; chohoi, Bes. Songs ; 
ch'hoi, Bes. Malac. ; (tch'oi), Bes. 
Her. To - day : chehoi, Darat. 
Day ; daylight : [Mai. siang) : 
chohoi, Sem. Jarum ; ch6h6i, Kena. 
//. ; choi (tchoi), Bes. Her. Light 
(opp. to dark) : chohoy, Ben. New.; 
chahai, Sem. Jur. And., Sejn. Jur. 
New. ; cha hai, Sem. Jur. Rob. ; chahas 
? (dschahas), Sem. K. Ken. Light; 
brightness : chShi, chahi (chhi), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Flame ; flaming : chfthi 
(chhi), Sem. Pa. Max. ; bechahi 
(bjhi), Sem. Pa. Max. White {Mai. 
putih): chohui, Sem. Kedah. Bright- 
ness ; shining : chahia or chahSya 
(chhia), Sem. Pa. Max. Flame : 
nocha (no-tcha), Som. ; chia (tchia), 
Sak. Kerb. [Cf. Mai. Sansk. chahaya, 
"brightness," but I doubt if this 
explains all these forms ; cf. D 42. ] 

42. D.\Y : (a) jungiah, Sak. Br. Low ; 
iuniat (djouniat), Som. (djouniate), 
Sak. Croix ; chinah, Buk. U. Lang. 
Noon [Mai. tSngah hari) : chin -he 
or ch6-he, Se^n. Kedah. Dawn : 
cheh6d (dschehod) or chghoi (dschg- 
hot), Sem. Martin [ ? = D 41]. 
[ ? Cf. Central Nicobar chu-ngai'''', 
"light"; Teressa, Chowra ong- 
aich, "day."] 

[b) Day: haioh (haiu'h?), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; eh, Sem. Ij. Day ; daylight 
[Mai. siang): i-a', Sen. Cliff.; yah, 
Darat ; ya'^, Serau. Daylight : 
ya, Sak. U. Kam. Light ; day : 
ya', Sak. U. Bert. To-day [Mai. 
hari ini) : hai-oh [pr. hai-ohh), Sem. 
Kedah ; haieh ? (hie) [in the MS. 
hiey], Sem.. U. Sel. Light: hSnhai? 
(hn.hai), Sem. Beg. [Sein. Tom- 
lin apparently has — hu,hai. ] To- 

day [Mai. hari ini) : unoi (/;-. 
un-oi). Sent. Plus; unui (doubtful), 
Sem. Jarum. Early in the morning : 
yS,, Sak. Lia. \ nahia, Sihn. ; jon- 
yah [djon yah), Sak. Kerb. Early 
morning : y^hyah, Sak. Kerb. 
Greeting (" good -day ") : ndhy^ ; 
nahy^, Sak. Kerb. The day after 
to - morrow : yahna, Sak. Kerb. ; 
muya, Serau ; niuya' (niuyak), Darat. 
Two days after to - morrow [Mai. 
tulat) : noiya, Serau. [Cf. Mon yah 
(?/r. yeh), "to shine"; and its 
derivations Igyah, "light"; pSyyah, 
" bright light " ; ggyah, " morning " ; 
liyah ; yah gSta, ' ' the morrow " ; and 
? cf. Sedang hi, "day."] 
[c) Day: mo -hi, Sak. Sel. Da. 
[Some of these words are perhaps 
connected with the following.] 

43. DAY:((z)bri, U. Tern. Sun: motbri, 
U. Tem. ; matbri, Pal. [Afi mat 
pri ; Khmus matpri ; Lemet ngay 
pri, ' ' sun."] 

(1^) Day : s6ri, Ke7ia. /. ; hari, 
Mantr. Malac, Jak. Malac. ; are' 
(arek), Bes. Songs ; arikn, Dai-at ; 
nuhari, Serau. Daylight ; light 
(opp. darkness) : hari, Sak. Ra. 
To-day : hari ika' (hari-ikak), Galang; 
ari ho (ari' h6"), Bes. Her. ; nin- 
hari', Bedu. L ; nin-hari', Bedu. //. ; 
nin-hari, Mantr. Malac. [Mai. ini 
hari). To-morrow: sarii' (sarek), 
Serting. Daily ; every day : sahari 
(s'hari), Sak. Ra. [Mai. sa-hari, 
"one day."] New moon : nu hari 
(nouhari), Sak. Ra. ; O 28. Forenoon: 
tengah hai muda (tngh hai muda), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Early morning : 
tengah hai (tngh hai), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Noon : tengah hai bfitul (tngh 
hai btul), Sem. Buk. Max. ; M 100. 
Yesterday : hari' malam, Bedu. L 
Sun : men-ari', Bes. Her. ; met are' 
(met arek), Bes. K. Lang.; m^t hari, 
Sak. Mariin ; mathari, Bes. Malac. ; 
matahari, Darat, Ben. New., 
Mantr. Malac, Jak. Malac. Sun- 
rise : matahari timbol, Mantr. Malac. 
Solar eclipse : matahari nyeh, Sert- 
ing ; matahari' sakit, Bedu. II. 
mata hari tangkak rgmafi, Jak. Mad. 
matahari tfilan bulan, Galang. Noon 
tgngah hari' (tengah harik), Serau. 
[Mai. hari, "day."] 

44. Day : ching [in the MS. originally 
cheeng], Setn. U. Sel. Day or 
light [Mai. siang) : chuang, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Daylight : siang, 
Jak. Malac. [Mai. siang]. 

576 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

45. Daylight [Mai. siang) : be-ngah, U. 
Tern. 

Bay after to-morrow : M 178 ; T 
158, 159. 

Daylight : C 154 ; D 33-45 ; L 74 ; 
L 76. 

46. Dazzled (with light) : la'ngit (I'ngit), 
Sem. Bitk. Max. ; H 140. 

47. Dead [Mai. mati) : ^b (//-. abb), 
Sem. Kedah. 

48. Dead : (a) haled, Pang. Sam. ; 
hal-At, Pang. K. Aring, Pang. U. 
Aring; ha-lut, Lebir \ ha'-lut, Ker- 
bat; julat, Ketia. I. [Sedatig 'la; 
Bahnar Eet (loet), "to die," and 
perhaps cf. also Central Nicodar lea.t, 
"finished"; Central and Southern 
Nicobar leat-kapah ; Teressa leat- 
kapah, " dead."] 

[b] Dead : dat", Daraf, Serau [or 
Tembi^; dati^, Sak. Em. \ (datn). 
Sen. Cliff. ; dat, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
hadit, Tan. U. Lang. ; idat, Sak. 
Sung. ; ladat, Sak. Marti7i ; hidatn, 
Darat ; &nd2k^, Jelai; h\da.n, Serau. 
Dead man ; corpse : dat^^, Serau. 
To die : dan, Sak. Ra. ; dat, Sak. 
U. Kam. ; dat (dart) or dot (durt), 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Poisoning : dan, 
Sak. Ra. To kill : pre-dat (prer- 
dat), Sak. Blanj. Cliff'. ; pidan 
(pidan), Sak. Ra. To slay : perdat, 
Sak. U. Kam., Sak. U. Bert., e.g. 
"I will kill the giant eagle," buli 
eng pgrdat k'lang b'lok, Sak. U. 
Bert. Murder: pidan ? (pi - dam), 
Sak. Ra. [Cf. A 57. The prefix is 
causal in effect, like the prefix pft- in 
Man, pS-, pu- in Achi?iese, which 
also occurs (as pa-) in Madurese, 
Mangkasar, Bugis, etc. , v. Kern, De 
Fidjitaal (1886), p. 57.] [The 
connection between groups [a) and 
[b) is doubtful. ? Cf. also A 63, and 
Bahnar \.k'i.X.{lde.\.), "end," "death."] 

49. Dead ; to die : na-nam [?], Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. [Possibly = D 48.] 

50. Dead {Mai. mati) : kfibis. Pang. 
Sam ; k6bis {pr. kebiss), Sem. Plus ; 
kebis, Sem. U. Sel. ; kSbis or k6biss, 
Fang. Belimb. ; kebiss, Sem. Ij. ; 
kebeish, Tembi ; kabis, Sem. 
Jut: Mar., Sem. Ked. Mar. ; 
kebez, Pang. Gal. ; kfibos {pr. 
keboss), Sem. Kedah ; kebos, Bes. 
Ma lac. ; (ke-buss), Sak. Sel. Da. ; 
kgbos, Serting, Buk. U. Lang. ; 
kebds, Sem. K. Ken. ; keboss, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; kaboss, Sem. Ken. ; 
kebus, Pang. K. Aring ; kebus 
(kbus), Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. 

Max. ; (kobouss), Som. ; kgbus, Bes. 
Sep. A. I. ; kabtis, Sem. Per. ; kobs, 
Or. Hu. Joh. I. ; tebus, Sak. Br. 
Low ; teboss, Sak. Croix ; hmb6s, 
Bes. Her. ; 'mbos, Bes. Malac. 
Corpse : kebds, Sem. K. Ken. 
Death : kebis [pr. kebiss), Sem. 
Plus ; kabis, Sem. Craw. Hist. , Sem. 
Klapr., Sem. Ked. And., Sem. Ked. 
New. , \Se7n. Ked. Rob. gives it as 
the equivalent of " teeth," a misprint 
as shown by its position in the list 
next to "life"], Sem. Jur. And., 
■ Sem. Jur. New. ; kabus, Ben. New. ; 
keneh kSbus (knih kbus), Sem. Pa. 
Max. To die {Mai. mati) : ya' 
kebis {pr. kebiss), Sem. Jarum, Sem. 
Plus ; kebOs, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; ke- 
bus, Sak. Gjiai ; ke-bus (ke-bus), 
Sak. Plus Cliff. ; keshbus (kesh- 
bouss), Sak. Kerb. ; kabus, Sem. 
Beg. , Be7i. Neiv. Dead by asphyxia- 
tion : kebus hok (kbus hok), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; kebis het (kbJs hit?), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Smothered? {Mai. 
mati bungkus) : kebus habo' (kbus 
habu'), Sem. Pa. Max. Starved ; 
dead of hunger : kebus blab (kbus 
hiiab), Sem. Pa. Max. ; k6bus kel- 
mat (kbus klmt), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Danger ; peril : kenbus (konbous), 
Som. To hurt ; to spoil ; to do 
damage to : kebush {koboMoh) , Sak. 
Kerb. Murder : himbus (himbouss), 
Som. Poisoning : tishbush (tich- 
bouch), Sak. Kerb. ; P 53. [Land 
Dayak kabtis ; Melano D. ktlbilh ; 
Bukutan D. bukawoh ; Punan D. 
mukoboh, "dead." Cf. also D 
22.] 

51. Dead: mati, Mantr. Malac, Jak. 
Malac. Dead child : mantai, Jak. 
Mad. , Jak. Lem. , Jak. Sim. Father 
of dead child : mantai, Jak. Ba. Pa. 
Mother of dead child : indong mantai, 
Jak. Ba. Pa. [Mai. mati ; Sulu, 
Selung matai ; Ngaju Dayak matai, 
etc., " dead."] 

52. Dead : mojo', Bed. Chiong; (mago), 
Jak. Raff. [A variant of D 51 ? or 
? cf Jav. {Ki-ama) pejah, "dead."] 

53. Dead: pantus, Pant. Kap. Log., 
Pant. Kap. Her. Dead ; empty ; 
to finish ; to kill ; to put out a lamp : 
pantus. Pant. Kap. Joh. ; W 132. 
Ghost : orang pantus, Pant. Kap. 
Lem. [Cf. Mai. putus ? and B 374 ? 
but it might be a q\ia.s\ - K rama 
variant of panti or pati=:D 51.] 
H 116 ; W 104. 

54. Beginning of the death agony : 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

577 

hongkabkab ? (hungkbkb ?), Sem. 
Pa. Max. [ = B 228 or C 48?]. 

55. Beginning of the death agony: maiat, 
Sem. Bilk. Max. \Mal. Ar. niaiat, 
' ' corpse' ']. [Obviously a mistransla- 
tion, if the suggested etymology is the 
right one.] 

56. Deaf: (a) dai (dl), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
dol, Pang. U. A ring; dul, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal., Sem. Buk. Max. 
Astonished ; stupefied ; swelling of 
the ear (?) : dul, Sem. Buk. Max. 
Wax in the ears : ajdul, Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; D 114. 

{b) Deaf: tuli, Sem. K. Ken. ; tuli' 
(tulik), Tembi ; tijli' (tiilik), Serau ; 
tuli, Mantr. Malac. \AIal. tuli]; E 6 ; 
H 62. 

57. Dear ; beloved : bedbod? (bed-lod), 
Som. ; petpud (petpoud), Sak. Kerb. 

58. Dear ; beloved : rindu (rindou), 
Sak. Ra. \_Mal. rindu, "passionate 
desire."] 

59. Dear ; expensive : mahal, Som. ; 
mahal, Sak. Kerb. ; niahill (mah&l), 
Sak. Ra. [Mai. mahal] ; B 484. 
Death : D 47-55, esp. D 50. 

60. Debt: dosh? (docsh), Som. ; dosh, 
Sak. Kerb. Price : doshie? (dochi^), 
Sak. Kerb. [? cf. Mai. dosa, " fault "]. 

61. Debt : otak, Som. ; utak (outak), 
Sak. Ra. Price : hutak", Darat 
[Mai. hutang] ; Y 26. 

Decay, to : S 292. 
Decayed : B 407 ; S 292. 
Deceitful : F 23. 

62. Deceive, to : tipu (tipou), Som. ; 
(tipou), Sak. Kerb. ; tipo (tip6), Sak. 
Ka. ; tipu, Serau [Mai. tipu] ; F 23. 

63. Decide, to : selise' (slisi'), Setn. 
Buk. Max. [Mai. selesai]. 
Decorate, to : C 39. 
Decoration : C 214. 

64. Deep ; precipitous {Mai. tubir): p6r- 
hog. Pang. Sam, Pa?ig. Gal. 

65. ? Deep or ?high: chanting (chnting), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [The Mai. equiva- 
lents are tubir, tfibing : probably it 
means " bank "or " shore "=S 65.] 

66. Deep : je-ri, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; ji- 
ru, Krau Tem. ; j6-ru ; Krau Ket. ; 
je-ruh, U. Cher. ; jerik, Serau ; jerok; 
jerok, Tembi \ jfiro^ng ; jgrok ; 
jerak (this last is the " politer" word), 
Bes. Sep. A. I. \ jfirok ; jerak (bhasa 
halus, as distinct from jerok (bh. 
kasar)), Bes. K. L. ; jero', Bes. 
Malac. Deep; [in; inside?] "(^l/a/. 
dalam) : je-rSt, Sen. Cliff. Big : 
jur6(djur6 or diuro?), Sak. Kor. Gb. 
Capable [?] : jgro [djort), Sak. Kerb. 

VOL. II 

[Probably wrong meaning ; Alal. 
larat is given as equivalent ; see 
C 23.] Far : jer6', Sak. Tan. Ram.; 
jCro (djijro), Sak. Kerb. ; jeru' (jeruk), 
Tembi. To go far : chib jerok, 
Tembi. How far is it to your 
village ? magi jeruk ma lak teneen ? 
Tembi. High : jfi - ru, Krau Ket. ; 
j6-ruh, U. Tem., U. Cher. ; jg-rok, 
Tem. CI. ; jero (dj^ro), Sak. Kerb. ; 
jSre? (ghir6), Som. ; ch6rak, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; chC'rekn, Tembi ; cherok", 
Jclai ; (chfe-rCik"), Sen. CI. ; ch6rong 
(tchoron) ; chfirang? (tsoran), Sak. 
Ra. ; serong, ex. beh serong 
{= Mai. buat tinggi), "to elevate 
or raise," Bes. K. L. High : jelong, 
Bes. Malac. ; jel6 {dii\o), Sak. Kerb. 
Lofty ; chero'^ng ; sero'^ng, Bes. Sep. 
A. 1. Tall: cherokn (che-rukn), 
Sen. Cliff. ; jelong, Bes. Malac. ; 
jelek, Bes. Sep. [This last apparently 
means "short"; L 151.] Long: 
jero (djoro), Sak. Kerb. ; jfiruk, 
Tembi; jgro' ? or chfiro' ? (tschero), 
Sak. Martin ; yerak (ygrek), Som. ; 
cherak, Sak. U. Kam. ; chSrang 
(tchorang), Sak. Ra. ; cherak 'i, Sak. 
Em. ; cherekn, Serau [also Temhil'], 
cherok^^, Sak. Em. ; chbng (chSrng), 
Krau Ket. ; jfilong (in conmion 
language), Bes. K. Lang. ; jelb'^ng ; 
jilol^ng, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; je-leng, U. 
Cher. ; je-long, Bern. ; jelong, Bes. 
Bell. ;jelang (/r. jela^^ng), a "politer" 
word than jelong ; jelo^^ng, Bes. Sep. 
A. I. ; jelang, Bes. K. Lang. ; je- 
nang, U. Tem. Lengthy : jelong, 
Bes. Songs. To stretch : cherok", 
Serau. Hole ; cave : jelo (djolo), 
Som. To plant [Mai. chachak) : ya' 
jeieng (planting hut-poles in the 
ground), ex. jeleng je-hu, "to plant 
a pole," Sem. Plus. To plant or 
bury [Mai. tanam) : ya-j61eng, Sem. 
Kedah. Tube of blowpipe {i.e. the 
hollow or bore) : serong, Bes. Sep. ; 
serong, Bes. K. Lang. Pit (especially 
for use as a trap), (Mai. pglubang) : 
serong, Bes. Sep. Pit : sero^ng [or 
rol>'ng) dalam te', Bes. Sep. A. /. 
Cavity in a rock : sero^ng biitu', Bes. 
Sep. A. /. There : jorok (dj5'rok), 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; H 90 ; H 94. 
[Following Schmidt, I have put these 
various words together, but with 
much doubt as to their relationship. 
Cf. Man jerbh [jruih] ; Khmer chrou 
[jrau] ; Stieng jorCih ; Bahnar jorCi ; 
Boloz'en, Niahon, Lave jru ; Alak, 
Halang jro ; So chru (chrou) ; Sue 

2 P 

578 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULAR\ OF 

tru (trou), "deep"; Boloven, 
jirong ; Alak jrong ; Niahon 
jruong ; Lave jrung, "high"; 
Moil slung, " high " ; kling 
[gling], "long"; jeiing, "length"; 
Alak jrong, "long"; Bahnar 
sholung (xolung), "ditch"; Khmer 
r6n [run]; roang [riang], "hole in 
the ground " ; rong (rung), " big " ; 
rung, liing, "to make a hole"; 
Stieng choroh, choreh, "to make a 
hole," " to evacuate. " But it seems 
that in Javanese there is also a word 
jgro, "deep," "inside." See V i.] 
Deep : E 12 ; F 29 ; H 84 ; I 15. 

67. Deer, sambhur [i\/al. rusa) : ? pran- 
seau ; ? kanseau, Set?!. Kedah ; 
tamsiu, Scm. Jariim. 

68. Dekk [Mai. rusa): (rt)kashak, Pang. 
Bclimb. ; kashak, Pang. U. Aring; 
kasak or kashak, Sem. Plus ; kasak, 
Sem. Craw. Hist. , Sem. /arum, Sem. 
Klapr. ; ka'-sa', Lebir ; ka-sa', Ker- 
bat ; kasa, Sem. Stev. 

(b) sau, Sem. Jzir. And., Sem. Jiir. 
Neiu. ; (san), Sem. fur. Rob. ; sok, 
Sem. Beg., Ben. New. ; sok (suk), 
Se}n. Pa. Ma.v., Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
sug [in MS. originally soog], Sem. U. 
Sel. ; sok (sSrk), Krau Tern. ; sog 
(serg), Kraii Ket. ; sik^, Tembi ; sig, 
Sem. Per. ; jisok, Serting ; je-so', 
Bera ; rajak, Kena. I. Stag ; big 
deer : sok nfibo' (suk nbu'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; sok gedang (suk kdng), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [Cf. En, Tai-loi VVa 
hsak ; Wa jak ; Riang tyak, ' ' sam- 
bhur" {i.e. stag); but Angku ka 
sit ; Tai-loi k'sat ; Amok hsat mean 
" barking deer" [i.e. roedeer).] 

(c) Deer : rusog, Sem. Kedah ; ru- 
sha'? (riishak), Tembi; rusa' (rusak) 
Tembi, Darat , Jelai ; (rusak), Sein. 
Ked. And., Sem. Ked. New., Sem. 
Ked. Rob. ; (rusak), Bes. Her. ; rusd', 
Bes. Sep. ; rusa, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
ru-sa', Sen. Cliff.; rusa', Bes. Malac, 
Mantr. Malac, Jak. Malac. ; 
mSnahar rusa' ? (rusak), Serau ; 
rusa, Sak. Br. Low, Sak. Blattj. 
Sw. , Ben. New. , Sak. Sung. ; 
(roussa), S'om. ; rusft, Sak. U. Tap. ; 
rhusii (khuse), Barok. Stag : rusa', 
Sak.l7.Kam. Fawn (of deer) : kuod 
rusa, Sak. Plus Cliff.; k6-non rt!isa', 
Sen. Cliff. : kC-non ru-sa, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; kC'nun rusa', Bes. Sep. Cattle 
(wild): rusa'- tinggi, Jak. Malac. 
[Mai. rusa], 

69. Dkek (.1/rt/. rusa): penguin, Sak. Br. 
Low; {p6ngu'mc). Sak. Croix; penggin 

(penghin), Sak. Kerb. ; pangko 
(pawko), Sak. Kerb. ; laka pangga 
(laka panga), Sak. Ra. ; bahangip, 
Sak. Kitita. Black deer : poh 
pank6h, Sak. Tap. ; D 76. Deer 
{Mai. rusa) : ripong, Ben. New. 
Xapu (deer) : pengunong, Ben. New. 

70. Deer {Mai. rusa) : kerono, Sak. 
Chen. 

71. Deer : liencherok, Tan. U. Lang. ; 
jelok. Rasa. 

72. Deer {Mai. rusa) : chengkiau, Bes. 
A. L ; chengkeau? (said to be used 
for the deer (rusa), but really the 
noise made by the deer), Bes. K. L. ; 
Stag : chengkiau, Bes. A. L 

73. Deer : sabaliu. Pant. Kap. Log. ; 
sebaliu, Pant. Kap. Her. ; sSbalioh 
(s'balioh) or seblioh (s'blioh). Pant. 
Kap. J oh. 

74. Deer, cry of: keng berdengkeng, 
Bes. Songs. Bellowing : berdeng- 
keng [Mat. dengkeng]. 

75. Deer, i.e. roedeer {Mai. kijang) : 
bohol, Scm. Jarum, Sem. Plus; b6hol 
{pr. beholl), Pang. U. Aring ; be- 
hol, Kerbat. Mouse - deer {Mai. 
kanchil) : be-hol, Lebir. 

76. Deer, i.e. roedeer {Mai. kijang) : 
pas, Sem. Pa. Max. ; pis (ps), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; pas, Sem. Stev. ; 
puais [?], Tembi ; puus, Tembi, 
Jelai; pous, Serau [or Tembil'\; 
poos, Darat ; mgnahar pous, Sej-au. 
Mouse-deer {Mai. pelandok; kanchil): 
p6s, Sak. Tap. [Riang, Tai-loi IVa 
puss ; En, Palaung po ; Mon pill 
[pah], "barking deer." Cf. Mon 
peh, "mouse-deer."] D 69 ; T 26. 

76A. Deer, i.e. roedeer {Mai. kijang) : 
penyantil, Rasa. 

77. Deer, i.e. roedeer {Mai. kijang) : 
klol (?), Bes. A. L; klol? (prob- 
ably the noise made by the kijang, 
and hence the kijang ; doubtful in 
latter sense), Bes. K. L. 

78. Deer, i.e. roedeer {Mai. kijang) : 
sesunggong. Pant. Kap. Her. ; sun- 
gong, Pa?it. Kap. Log. ; sessungrong, 
Pant. Kap. Sim. ; bisan sSsSrong, 
Jak. .Mad. {Pant. Kap.); (bisan 
s's'rong), Pant. Kap. Mad. ; chewo? 
serong (chewer s'rong). Pant. Kap. 
Lem. ; B no. 

79. Deer, i.e. roedeer: kijang, Beii. 
New., Mantr. Malac, Jak. Malac. 
[Mai. kijang]. 

80. Deer, cry of kijang: 6mpep-empep, 
Bes. Songs. 

81. Deer {Mai. rusa): {a) ma-sinh, Sak. 
Sel. Da. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

579 

{b) Roedeer [Mai. kijang) : 

paj6ii, Silk. Tan. Ram. Mouse-deer : 
[Alal. napoh): bechong, Sem. Jarum, 
Sem. Plus ; {Mai. pclandok): chok", 
bechok", Temhi ; bechok", Jelai ; 
bechauk", Serau [or Tcmhi ?] ; 
b€chokon, Darat ; bichok (bitschok), 
Sak. Martin ; menahar bechog", 
Serau ; mSnahar bgchog", Sak. Em. 
Roe [Mai. kijang) : baduot, Ben. 
A'ejo. Deer : bech6p, Sak. Tap. 
[Selungh\chong (beetyong), "mouse- 
deer."] 

(c) Mouse-deer [Mai. napoh) : ch61a- 
chal'ng (?), Bes. A. I. ; chelachang?, 
the noise made by the napoh (and 
hence the napoh?), Bes. K. L. 
Mouse-deer [Mai. pfilandok) : chiong 
(tchion), Sak. Ra. 

82. Deer, i.e. mouse-deer {Mai. napoh): 
napu, Ben. New. ; nappo. Merit. 
Stev. ; napoh, Tenibi [and Serau ?], 
Mantr. Malac. [J/a/. napoh]. 

83. Deer, i.e. mouse-deer {Mai. pelan- 
dok): paseg, Sern. Jarum, Sem. Plus; 
pacheg, Sem. Stev. ; pachek (pachik), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; panch6k, Sem. Beg. ; 
{Mai. kanchil), pa'-chek, Krau Ket. 
" Mouse-deer (eye) fruit" {Mai. buah 
(mata) pSlandok), Ardisia creiiata : 
boh pachek (buh pachik), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [connected with D 81 or 86?]. 

84. Deer, J. f. mouse-deer : iasua(?), Z?«. 
A. I. ; usau ? (said to be used for 
the ' ' pfilandok," probably on account 
of the noise it makes, " usau " being 
intended to represent the noise), Bes. 
K. L. Cry of pelandok : krusau- 
krusau, Bes. Songs. 

85. Deer, i.e. mouse-deer {Mai. p61an- 
dok): ^2L\\d.o , Bes. Sep. A. I.\ pelano 
(polano), Sak. Kerb. ; pSIando 
(plando), Som. ; plandok, Ben. 
New., Krau Ket. ; plan-dok, Lebir 
[Mai. pSlandok]. 

8sA. Mouse-deer {Alal. kanchil) : anyin. 
Rasa. 

86. Deer.j.^". mouse-deer (il/(z/. kanchil): 
kanchel, Bes. Sep. A. I., Merit. Stev. 
Mouse - deer (smallest) : kanchil, 
Serau, Mantr. Malac. , Jak. Malac. 
[Mai. kanchil], [connected with 
D 83? but see M 143]. 

87. Deer, i.e. mouse - deer {Mai. 
kanchil) : kike (?), Bes. A. I. ; ke'- 
ke' (?), the noise made by the kanchil 
(and hence the kanchil?), Bes. K. L. 

88. Deer, cry of kanchil : nyau-ganyau, 
Bes. Songs. 

89. Deer, to make a noise like a {Mai. 
mendengking) : ihing ('ilhling), Sem. 

Pa. Max. ; u kihing ? (aukihi'j, 
.SV///. Buk. .Max. 
89A. Defeated, to be {Mai. alah): alah, 
Serau [Mai. alah], 

90. Delay, to : ga'-pa'-ji, Sen. Cliff. 
Delude, to : F 22. 

Demand to : A 162-168. 

Demon : U loi ; G 16-21 ; S 385- 

388. 

91. Demon, birth- (A/n/. langsuir) : ka-u 
Sem. Kcdali. Familiar demon {Mai. 
pelesit), ko'oi, Sem. Kedah. 

92. Deny, to ; to disavow : mQngker ; 
mamungker (mmngkr ; mngker), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. Ar. mun- 
kir ; mungkir]. 

Depress, to : D 95. 

93. Descend, to {Mai. turun) : {a) mlsa 
(mftsfta), Sem. Buk. Max.; sa, fx. sa 
torn {Mai. turun ka-ayer), "go down 
to the water," Pang. U. A ring ; 
shal ; sal, Krau Tern. ; sar, Sak. 
Guai ; sar, Serting. To fade (lose 
colour) : m6sa (msa), Sem. Buk. 
Max. To go down ; to descend : 
mana? (manfta?), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 

S57. 

{b) Go out ! (used in e.xorcism) : tar, 
Ben. Stev. To walk along {Mai. 
meniti) : ya' tar-tar {pr. ya' tarr-tarr), 
Sem. Kedah ; ya' ter-tar {pr. ya' 
terr-tarr), Sem. Jarum. 

94. Descend, to {Mai. turun) : ya-gos 
{pr. goss), Sem. Jarum : ya' gos 
(between goss [German <>'] and guss 
[French 2^]), Sem. Plus. 

95. Descend, to: cheiui, Bes. K. Lang. , 
chelui ; chului, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
cheloi ; chela, Bes. Malac. To 
come down : chiloh (tchiloh), Sak. 
Ra. To go down : ch61u', Sak. U. 
Kam. ; chengloi, ex. chengloi beh 
hate'= " to depress or lower " {Mai. 
buat rendah), Bes. K. L. To bring 
back[?]: ch61obate(tcholobat6), Sak. 
Kerb. , Sak. Ra. [This is a mis- 
translation ; the true Malay equivalent 
is not ' ' turun bawa, " "go down and 
bring," but "turun bawah," "go- 
below."] To fall down as a water- 
fall : chilok batu (tchilok batou), 
Sak. Ra. ; R 102 [? cf. F 13 {b).] 

96. Descend, to ; to come down : 
regrik, Sak. Kerb. ; rig ma te (righ- 
mat6), Som. To descend : tra-ap, 
Sak. Hale. To go down (descend), 
{Mai. turun) : cherog" ; cherog, e.g. 
chiblah cherog, "come down," 
Serau ; chSrog (chS-rgrg), Sen. Cliff. 
Downstream: reh, Sen. CI., Tem. 
CI. ; re, e.g. ^ng pai hoi k6n re, "I 

58o 

COM PA RA TIVE VOCA B ULA RY OF 

have just arrived from downstream," 
Sen. CI. The country downstream 
{Mai. hilir) : re, Sen. Cliff. Down- 
streamwards {Mai. ka-hilir): ma' re. 
Sen. Cliff.; mari, Darat. To go 
downstream {Mai. hilir): bu-yih {pr. 
bu-yihh), ex. haleb bu-yih {Mai. 
hanyut ka-hilir), "to drift down- 
stream," Sem. Plus ; bu'-ih ; bii-ih, 
Pang. Belimb. ; pru-ut, U. Tetn. , U. 
Cher. To fall to the ground : proh 
ha-teh, Bes. Songs. South : mar^, 
Sak. Kerb. ; lira (lire), Sak. Ra. 
Underneath : mat6 r6, Sak. Kerb. 
Below : matere' (materekh) Tembi. 
Waterfall : rig-mat^, Som. [? it only 
means "descend," "comedown"]. 
To fall down as a waterfall [?] : 
marak (marek), Sak. Kerb. ; cf. 
F 15 ; F 18. 

97. Descend, to : ketok, Kena. I. 
Downwards [Mai. ka-bawah): 
matik, Darat ; matik^, Sak. Em. 
Down river : teh, Sak. Plus ; 4 A^. ^. 
102. Downstream [Mai. hilir) : top, 
Sak. Guai ; gun-tog, Krau Tern. 
To go downstream : be-tiah. Sen. 
Cliff. ; betuk", Jelai ; betek (betekh); 
betuk (betukh) ; betok mari' (bfitokh 
marikh), Serau ; betok, Darat, Krau 
Em. To jump down [Mai. terjun): 
tuukii, Serau. [AfAin. toh, "to fall," 
"let fall."] 

98. Descend, TO; to go down: tSyun?c)r 
tuyun ? (tiun), Sem. Pa. Max. Hair : 
penurun (p'nurun) ; pgmurun (p'mu- 
run). Pant. Kap. J oh. ; penQrun 
(peniiran). Pant. Kap. Her. Beard : 
penurun pemamah (p'nurun (p'ma- 
mah). Pant. Kap. Joh. Leaf ; 
foliage ; rope ; tail : penurun (p'nu- 
run), Pant. Kap. Joh. Feather : 
pgnurun bisan (p'nurun bisan), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. ; W 132 [J/a/. turun]. 

Desert, to : A i ; L 108. 

Design : W 146. To carve designs : 
C 40, 41. 

Desire : B 388. 
Desire, to : L 148 ; W 14-19. 
99. Destroy, to: pagai? (paghei), 
Smn. 

100. Destroy, to : pfinasa (ponasa), 
Sotn. ; pSnyasa (poiiasa), Sak. Kerb. ; 
bfinasa [bouazk), Sak. Ra. ; binask, 
Sak. Kerb. [.1/a/. binasa] ; C 296 ; 
D 7 ; S 395. 

Determine, to : K 81. 

1 01. Devil ; choleng, Jok. Raff. As. ; 
c holing, Jok. Raff. ; G 16-21 ; S 
385-388. 

Devour, to : B 228. 

102. Dew : t6ng-m6ng, Sak. Plus CliJ.\ 
t6ng-at, Sen. Cliff. 

103. Dew: le-lush[?], Sak. Blanj. Clifi.\ 
W 30. 

Diarrhoea : S 187. 
Die, to : D 47-55. 
Difference : A 95. 
Different : A 121. 

104. DifS.cult [Mai. susah) : dgpak, 
Sem. Kedah. 

105. Difficult: karu' [pr. ka-ru'), 
Sem. Jarum. 

106. Difficult ; to make a noise : 
gagor, Pa?it. Kap. Joh. ; R 31. 

107. Dig, to [Mai. gali) : [a] ya' bai, 
Sem. Jarum ; ya' bai, ex. ya' bai ta- 
kobb or hoo, ' ' to dig for roots 
(tubers)," Sem. Plus; ya-bai, ex. 
ya-chop ya-bai takub [Mai. sahya 
pergi 'nak gali ubi), "I am going 
to dig for roots," Patig. U. Aring ; 
ya-bai. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
bai", Kerbat. To bore through ; 
to dig through : bai tins, Se}n. Pa. 
Max. ; bae tios (bae tios), Se7n, 
Buk. Max. Burial ; to bury [Mai. 
tanam) : bai, Sem. Kedah. Digging 
stick for yams: pi-bai (pee-bie), 
Sem. Stev. 

[b) To dig : Wgb6g-ta, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. To root in the ground 
("wiihlen"): ebok-fa, Sak. Kor, 
Gb. ; E 12. [? Cf. Mon that)aing 
[thabuing], "a moat"; Khmer 
pong [bong], ' ' to hollow out. " 
{Andamanese has somewhat similar 
forms, derived from bang, "hole," 
e.g. Beada banga ; Bale boang, ' ' to 
dig up.")] 

108. Dig, to: [a) choop", Serau; 
chauk", Krau Em.; kachohm, Bes. 
K. Lang.; chom ; kachom, Bes. Sep. 
A. I. Dig some yams : chom bSkoi, 
Krau Em. To bore (hollow out) : 
chiom (tchiom), Sak. Ra. To 
bury : chom ; hi-chom, Sen. Cliff, 
Spade [Mai. pSnggali), [presumably 
a digging stick] : chup lut, Tembi. 
[b) To bury : koPm ; kakoPm, Bes. 
A. I. To plant ; to implant : 
kakijm, Bes. Songs. 

109. Digging stick with four points : 
ap-teh, Se?n. Stev. ; D 107, 108 ; 
T 211. 

no. Diligent: lasek, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
To be diligent : enrajit", Serau 
[Mat. rajin] ; 1 17. 
Diminish, to : L 61 ; R 58 ; 
S 280. 

111. Dimpled: rimai-rimai, Bes. Songs, 

112. Dip the arrow in the ipoh juice, to: 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

581 

piita, A'i'/ia. I. [? cf. Mai. putar, 
" to turn "]. 

113. Dip the arrow in the ipoh juice, to: 
chdhk ; fil6h, Dcdu. II. [? cf. Mai. 
cholek, cholit] ; P 164. 

Direct : S 481. 
Directly : S 282. 

114. Dirt; dung {Mai. tahi): i (ai), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; ^t, Sen. Cliff. 
Mole ; dark freckle on the skin : eh 
nyglong? (? alh fiulng), Sem. Buk. 
Max.; 1 jglong (ai jlung), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Slime ; alluvial deposit : ik? 
b:\toh (aik batuh), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Weed (spec. Ala I. rumput tahi 
babi), Veronia cinerea : ? I napek 
(ai napik), Sem. Buk. Max. To 
stool [Mai. berak) : eg, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. ; ma'ot, Bes. A. I. ; ma 'oyt, 
ex. ma'oyt maham, "to void blood," 
i.e. to suffer from dysentery, Bes. 
IC. L. ; D 56 ; S 436. [Alon ik ; 
/<^AmerS.ch[a.ch]; AcAin. ek; Chain 
aih ; Chum eh ; Ktiy Dek iy ; 
Central Nicobar aSk, z\'^^, "dung" ; 
Stieng ech ; Bahnar ik, ich, 
"dung," "to stool"; Boloven, 
Niahon, Lave Ich ; Halang ek ; 
Jarai eh, " e.xcrement " ; Khasi eit, 
"dung."] 

115. Dirt; dirty (yl/^z/. kotor) : bi-chot ; 
bS-chot, Seti. Cliff. Dirty water : 
buchot (boutchot), Sak. Kerb. ; 
[cf. Jarai sat, " dirty" ; cf. W 75] ; 
W 30 ; M 214-218. 

116. Dirt : kama (gama), Sem. K. 
Ken. Dirty [Mai. kotor) : kamah, 
Sem. Plus ; kama, Se?n. K. Ken. 
Filth ; dirt : kamah (kamh), Setn. 
Buk. Alax. ; kama (kama), Sem. 
Pa. Max. [La mpong kama, "filthy"; 
Bahnar kom6, "dirt," "dirty"; 
Man kmu, "mould"; Boloven 
khemo ; Lave, Alak kftmo ; Sedang 
me, "dirty"; ?cf. Cham kama, 
"scale"; kamai, "crust," 
" mucus " ; Khmer krema [krimS], 
"dry bark," " scab."] 

117. Dirty: charap (tchar^p), Som. 

118. Dirty : sanul (sinoul), Sak. Kerb. ; 
G 68 ; S 54 ; U 5 ; W 29 ; W 74. 
Dirty; D 115-118. 

Dirty, to : S 337. 

119. Disappear, to; to be lost {Mai. 
hilang) : ya'ker-leb {pr. kerr-lebb), 
Sem. Plus. To err : kilap, Sein. 
K. Ken. To forget {Mai. lupa) : 
ker-lip {fr. kerr-lipp), Sein. Jarum, 
Sem. Plus ; inkiliip, Sem. K. Ken. 

120. Dis.\PPEAR, to ; to lose [Mai. 
hilang) : ya-jelwel, ex. awa' manog 

jehvel bo' (trans, of Mai. proverb, 
anak ayam hilang ibu, ' ' a chicken 
that has lost its mother"). Pang. 
Galas; F 12 ; F 115; F 117; 

P39. 

121. Disaster (the word is also used as 
a "swearword"): chilaka (tchillaka), 
Sihn. ; chilaka (tchillaka,), Sak. Ra. ; 
chokoh (tchokoh), Sak. Kerb. \_AIal. 
chilaka]. 

Disavow, to : D 92. 
Disease : E 5 ; Eg; E 83 ; S 185- 
197 ; T 168 ; T 170 ; W 140. 
Dish of food : B 332 ; C 239. 

122. Dislike : sggen (sgin), Sem. Buk. 
Alax. Ashamed : sSngen, Te7nbi ; 
singen (^men), Sak. Kerb. [? cf. 
A 158A]. To dislike; to hate 
{.Mai. benchi) : se-gat°. Sen. Cliff.; 
en segat", Serau. Idle ; lazy : 
sSga^n ? (segdtn), Sem. K. Ken.; 
segaat, Serau; s6gdn, Manlr. 
Ala lac. Very lazy : segar pun, 
Sak. Em. [A/al. sSgan]. 

123. Dislike {A/al. ta' suka) : ye' en, ex. 
ye ye' en chi' bab, " I don't care to 
eat," Pang. U. Aring. To hate 
(A/al. bgnchi) : ya' yl', Sem. Jaruir. 
To forbid : ma' yi' (ma'Ik), Se7u. 
Buk. Max. ; ya yi', Sem. Plus ; 
ya-ye' or ye', Pang. U. Aring; 
ya-je' or je', Pang. Sam, Paiig. 
Gal. To refuse {Mai. ta-mahu) : 
ya' yen or ye' ("yen" maybe short for 
"ye' en," the first part of the word 
being used as a shortened form ; 
both forms are used), Sem. Kedah ; 
ya' yen or ye' (I suspect 'ye' " to be 
a shortened form of "yen," which it 
seems maystand for "ye' en "), ex. ye 
ye' en chi' bed, "I don't want (to) 
eat betel," Sein. Plus ; ya-ye'. Pang. 
U. Aring; ya' yi' {A/al. ta' mahu), 
lit. "don't want (it), ' Sem. /arum ; 
nya ( fie), Sak /ia.\; ija {id]k), Sak. 
Kerb. ; jaya-neg-ok, Som. ; cf. Ai ? 
Don't want : nyah ; 'nnyah, Sak. 
U. Kam. ; nya (nja), Sak. Alartin ; 
injE (indiii), Sem. K. Ken. ; engeJ", 
Krau Em. I don't like it {A/al. 
ta' hendak) : en ye' (en ye"^), Krau 
Em.; {A/al. ta' suka), heng e>', 
Krau Em. Don't {Mai. jangan) : 
yi' or yi-leh, Sem. Plus ; ye', ex. 
di' jebeg ye' s'kali (trans, of Mai. 
proverb, buat jahat jangan sakali), 
"do no evil whatsoever," Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; je'. Pang. 
Belimb. ; ja', Pang. K. Aring ; 
je, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; ye', e.g. do 
not go away : ye' ge chop (ye' gS 

582 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

cherp), Lebir ; je', e.g. do not be 
afraid: je kentong (je ken-terng), 
Kerbat; je', U. Tern. ; (jel^), 
Tembi. No ( " very precise " ) : 
nyenyu (n^-iiou), Sak. Ra. Not 
to be ; is not {Mai. tiada) : chi o', 
Sak. Guai. [ ? = N 68 ; cf. 
Bahnarngoh (ngonh), " to dislike " ; 
?cf. Stieng ach, "to disdain," "to 
refuse."] 

124. Dislocated: kleche', Bes. Sep. A. I. 
Paralysis : klin-chang-keok, Sem. 
Siev. ; B 4. 

125. Dislocated: pick, i?«. Sep. A. I. 
Disport oneself, to : P 139-142. 
Disposition : C 76. 

Dissolve, to : B 395. 
Distant : E 76 ; F 29. 
Distorted : B 180 ; B 373. 
Diverse : A 95. 

126. Divide, to; to split: ya-sih? (i'sih 
o/'b'sih?), Se?>i. Buk. Max. 

127. Divide, to; to separate : michai? 
(mchi), Sem. Bjik. Alax. To 
divorce : ch6rhe (chfikhe), Barok. 
Divorced : silai (silei), Jak. Mad. 
Divorced man : silai, Jak. Ba. Pa. 
Divorced woman : indong silai, Jak. 
Ba. Pa. Divorced person : rei, 
Tembi. \AIal. chgrai]. 

To divide: C 295 ; G 29. 

128. Divorce, to : cherang lonan, 
Serting. 

129. Divorce, to : lungkah, Kena. I. ; 
D 130. ^ 

130. Divorcee [Ala I. janda cherai) : 
tgr-nu-es. Sen. Cliff. Divorcee [or 
widow?] (Mai. janda) : ternuis, 
Tembi, Jelai. To divorce ; to 
separate [Mai. chgraikan) : wehiwes, 
Jelai ; D 127. 

131. Do, to [Mai. buat) : kas (/r.kass), 
Sei>i. Jaruin. 

132. Do, to: t6-el, Sak. Plus Cliff. 
To build : te el, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; 
e.g. ' ' do you build houses in the 
jungle?" mo' ham te el diik ma bak 
t&, Sak. Tail. Ram. To make : el, 
Tetn. CI. To work [Mai. bfikerja) : 
tg-61, Sak. Plus Cliff. To cultivate : 
tahal (teh^l), S'om. 

133. Do, TO : fi-i. Sen. Cliff. ; i\\, Sak. 
Martin; u-i, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; ui, 
e.g. "do thus," ui redekho, Tembi ; 
ui, e.g. "do thus," ui reji, Serau. 
To make: ii-i. Sen. CI. To work: 
fi-i, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. To act : ui, 
Sak. U. Kam. To build : ui, Sak. 
U. Kam. Build a house : o6id 
durs, Sak. Tap. [sic'] ; H 153 ; 
[? cf. B 87]. [Central Nicobar wi, 

"work"; wi-hanga, "to do"; 
wi, wi-hata, "to make," to work."] 

134. Do, TO ; to make : poi ; poi ; puoi, 
Bes. Sep. A . I. To hurt : poi 
gohup, Bes. Sep. A. I.; S 186. To 
plant dry rice: poi huma', Bes. Sep. 
To make : pehau (pehow), Mentr. 
Stev. [Mon pa, "to do," "to 
make"; ?cf. BahnarY'O'ni, "to do."] 

135. Do, TO [Mai. buat) : [a) hkh or 
tebilh [pr. bahh or t6bahh), ex. mat 
tepa)' tebuhh [Mai. apa de'-mu di- 
buat), "what are you doing?" Sem. 
Jariim. To act : bii', Sak. U. Kam. 
To build : kabeh, Bes. K. Lang. ; 
ba*, e.g. to build a house : ba* 
dugii, Bes. Malac. To make : bii, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; kabeh ; 'beh, Bes. 
Sep. A. I.; bat, Bes. Malac. [?Cf. 
Bahnarh'6, "to touch," " to do " ; 
Chrau bii ; A tinam. biia, ' ' to work " ; 
Lave, Niakbn bom ; Boloven biim, 
"to do."] 

[b) To act : pSmuat (p'muat), Pa?it. 
Kap. Joh. To cultivate : buat 
(bouat), Sak. Ra. To do ; to 
make : buat, Sem. Beg. To make : 
buat, Ben. Nezu. [Mai. buat]. 
Do, TO : B 90 ; M 14 : W 138, 

139- 

Do not : D 123 ; F 121 ; G 42 ; 

N 72-76 ; N 85. Do not want : 

D 123. 

Doctor : S 76. 

136. Dodge, to : elak, Bes. So?igs [Alal. 
elak.] 

137. Dog: ek, Sem. Craw. Hist., Sem. 
Craw. Gram., Sem. Klapr., Sem. 
Ked. And., Sem. Ked. New., Sem. 
Ked. Rob. ; ek ('ik), Sejn. Buk. 
Alax. ; aeh, Sem. U. Sel. ; e, U. Pat. 
Dog (hunting or wild) : e', Sem. 
Kedah. Otter: ek bSteoh ('ik 
btiuh), Sem. Buk. Alax. ; W 30. 
[? Cf. Selung oii (oiee) ; aai, " dog "; 
but cf. D 138, 139.] 

138. Dog: wau, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. 
Jiir. New. ; (wan), Sem. Jur. Rob.; 
woh, Sem. Beg., Ben. A'civ. ; uwui? 
(audi, the -i apparently correcting 
a -d), Sem. Pa. Alax. [cf. the 
following]. 

139. Dog: cod, U. Pat. Dog (hunting): 
od [pr. odd), Sem. Jarum ; 'od or 
'ot [pr. 'odd or 'ott), Setn. Plus. 
Wild dog [Alal. anjing utan) : hX 
[pr. iltt), Sem.. Kedah. 

140. Dog: patek (patlk), Sem. Pa. 
Alax. [found only in name of a 
bamboo spec, B 21, and the read- 
ing is doubtful], [Madur. patt^]. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

583 

141. Dog : gubin, Bland. K. Lang. 

142. Dog: dupan, Pant. Kap. Log., 
Pant. Kap. Sim. Worm ; maggot : 
dupan ; hidupan, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[? Mai. hidopan, in the sense of 
" food " : if so, from A 59.] 

143. Dog: [a) chiok ? (chioke), Sem. 
Ken. ; chft, Sem. Per. ; chua 
(tchouS,), Som. ; chiiua, (tchuoua ; 
tchuoud), Sak. Kerb. ; chuo (tchouo), 
Sak. Korb. Lias ; (tchouo), Sak. 
Ra. ; chuo, Sak. Br. Low ; chu-o', 
Krau Tern. ; (tschu6), Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; chuwo'(chuwo'^) ; chua' (chuak), 
Tembi ; chu-or, Tern. CI. ; chu-6r, 
Sak. Plus Cliff. ; chor, U. Tent. ; 
(tsch6r), Sak. Tap. ; chor ; chooh ; 
chu, Ben. New. ; ch6-6h, Sak. Sel. 
Da. ; cho (tscho), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
choh, Bes. Bell. ; chh6, Sak. Blanj. 
Sw. ; cho', Sak. U. Kam. ; cho, 
Sak. Lingk., Sak. Sung.; cho'. Sen. 
CI. , Sak. Blanj. CI. , Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff., Sak. Slim. CI., U. Cher., 
Krau Ket. ; cha, Bes. Malac. ; 
(chau), Bilk. U. Lang. ; (ch6), 
Bedu. IL ; (tch6), Serting; chia 
(tchio), Bes. Her. ; cho' (chok), 
Serau [or Tembi?]; chauk", Serau; 
chau ; ch5, Bes. Sep. A. /. ; chau, 
Bes. Sep. ; chau' (chouk). Tan. U. 
Lang. ; chiau (tchiau), U. hid. ; 
(tiau). Pal. ; jiaun? (diaun), U. Ind. 
Otter : chau do6, Bes. Sep. Puppy : 
kuod chu-or, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
ke-non cho'. Sen. Cliff. , Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; kenon chau ; kenun chau, 
Bes. Sep. 

{b) Dog : minchu. Pant. Kap. Log. ; 
mincho. Pant. Kap. Her. ; minchor, 
Jak. Mad. [Pant. Kap.) ; (m'nchor), 
Jak. Levi., Pant. Kap. Lcm. 
\Samrd, Phnong, chha; Prou, Ciioi 
cha ; /"orchhaklchhac) ; Ka, Chong 
cho ; Sid, Halang, Boloven, Sedang, 
An?iam ch6 ; Kaseng cho; Churn 
sh6 ; Tareng ach6 ; Old Khmer, 
Sedang oho (\.c\\.o); Huei, Sud, Hin 
chor ; Kat, Suk cho ; So, Nanhang, 
S^^d'achor ; Alak, Niahon, Lave, cho ; 
C"Ara« sh6(x6); Stieng sou; Kha Bi, 
Radaih sau ; Rodd, Chriai, Mi, 
Khmus, Lemet so, "dog." Perhaps 
also of Kon Tu chiike ; Khmer 
chhke. But the Cham asau, 
Cancho asou, and Jarai asa,o=D 
146. Are the Indo-Chinese and 
Malayan forms ultimately related ?] 

144. Dog : koyok, Jak. Mad. (and Johor 
Jakun generally), Jak. Sinib., Ga- 
lang; koyok, Jak. Malac. , Jak. Sim. , 

Jak. Ba. Pa., Or. Laut ; koybk, 
Barok ; (koyak), Ben. New. ; koyop 
(koyope), Jok. Raff. As. ; kayap 
(kayape), Jok. Raff, ; koih, Ben. 
Neiu. \Lamp. kuyo ; Mai. koyok, 
( = "cur").] 

145. Dog : k6t5k (ket6"k), Kena. IL 

146. (rt)Dog: nyang, y"fl//§'. U.Aring; 
niang, Kcrbat ; nian, U. Kel. 
The dog walks : ler nyang, Serau. 
Puppy : a-wa' niang, Kerbat. [This 
is possibly a variant of " anjing. "] 

[b) Dog : asu', Pang. U.Aring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; a-su', Lebir; 
asu. Tan. Sag. ; (assu), U. Pat., U. 
Kel. Dog (hunting), asu', Setn. 
Jarnm. Dog (wild) : asu', Sem. 
Plus. Puppy : wong a-su', Lebir ; 
cf. M 148. ["Asu" is the commonest 
Malayo-Polynesian word for " dog," 
e.g. , Javanese, Biigis, etc. asu ; 
Iranun, Bulud- Opie asu ; Cham, 
Melano Dayak asau ; Bukutan 
Dayak ahau ; Dusun iasu ; Nias 
nasu; ^c/;/««£?as6e (written "asu"), 
etc. Possibly " asu " and "anjing" 
are variants of one word : see 
Brandes, Bijdrage, etc., pp. 87, 88.] 

[c) Dog : anjing, Mantr. Malac. 
\Mal. anjing]. 

147. Dog : amun, Ke?ia. L ; amun. 
Bed. Chiong. [cf. B 57 ?]. 

148. Dog (wild): chelong, Sc7n. Kedah, 
Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus; (chelong), 
Sem. Stev. Wild dog ; jackal : 
chaiaung (chal3.u'), Sem. Buk. Max. 

149. Dog (large wild) : (a) s6gala', 
Mantr. A Lilac. 

(b) Jackal {ALzl. serigala): sCranggil, 
Pang. U. A ring; asu' seranggil, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. [ALil. 
sgrigala, "jackal"]. [The Malay 
word is of Sanskrit origin. These 
two forms appear to bear the same 
relation to each other as " kelapa " 
and "karambil" (coconut); C 200.] 

150. Dog (wild): merteng ; berte^^ng; 
bete^ng, Bes. Sep. A. /. Small 
wild dog : merteng, Mantr. Malac. 
A small dark-coloured wild dog : 
merteng ; chau bSteng, Bes. K. L. 
Dollar : M 124 ; S 209 ; W loi. 
Done : A63; F 116; F 118; F120; 
F 122, 123. 

151. Door; window: pintu Tembi; 
(pintou), Sak. Ra. ; pintu' (pintuk), 
Serau [Mai. pintu, "door"]; B 
147 ; I 27 ; Li. 

Dot : P 152, 153. 
Dotted : C 296, 

152. Doubt : sa, Siim., Sak. Kerb. ; sS,, 

584 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Sak. Kerb. [MaL Ar. shak] ; B 158. 
Doubtful : C 70. 

153. Dove : berba, Mantr. Maine. \_Mal. 
merbok] ; P 92-98. 

Down : B 165-167 ; D 93-98. 
Downstream : B 165 ; D 96, 97. 
To go downstream : B 6 ; D 96, 
97 ; R 83. 

154. Drag along, to : sengit (sngit), 
Sein. Bilk. Max. ; eyet (aiit), Sem. 
Pa. .Max. [-1/(7/. eret; seret] ; P226; 
P 229. 

Dragon : B 119. 
Dragon-fly : B 481. 
Dragon's-blood rattan : R 41. 

155. Draw, to : trek, Bcs. Songs \^Mal. 
tarek] ; P 105 ; P 227 ; P 229 ; P 
231. To draw towards oneself: 
C 50 ; (E 76 ; P 227). To draw 
water : B 444. 

156. Draw, to ; to write {Mai. ukir) : 
tenhel (tenhel), Som., Sak. Kerb. ; 
tenhel ; tenhel), Sak. Kerb. 

157. Draw, to : huker (houk6r), Sak. 
Ra. Carved ring-marks round the 
outer case or sheath of a blowpipe : 
henuker [pr. henukarr), Sem. Plus. 
Carvings on blowpipe : okeh, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. ; ukir, Jak. Malac. 
IMal. ukir]. 

Drawing : W 149. 

158. Dream, to {Mai. niimpi) : 'mpa' 
or em-pa', Sem. Kedah ; em-pa', 
Lebir; (gm-pak), Kerbat; em-pua', 
Krau Tern. ; ompa ? (om-ba, 
" deep a "), Sem. K. Ken. ; 6m-po', 
Sefi. Cliff. ; bgrnpii ? (bum-por), 
Sak. Guai ; piinO or banO, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. To rave ; to talk in 
one's sleep {.Mai. mgngigau) : bra'- 
po'. Sen. Cliff. \_Mon lapil [Ipa] ; 
Central and Southern Nicobar 
enfua ; Teressa enfi^ (enfo) ; Chowra 
omfa, (omfe), "dream"; Stieng 
mboi, "dream," "to dream"; 
Bahnar p6, apo, apo ; Kzty Dek 
ambau bech, "to dream." A 
possible connection suggests itself 
with the Malayan words, e.g. Mai. 
mimpi : sed qiicrre. ] 

159. Dream, to: ba'-kit. Sen. Cliff. 

160. Dream, to : ngau, Sem. /arum, 
Sem. Plus. Epilepsy {Mai. gila 
babi) : ngau napek (ngu nSapIik), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. ; P 73 ; ngau 
badai (ngilu badfti), Sem.. Pa. Max.; 
P 86. Faint from loss of blood ? 
(iVIal. mabok darah): agauh, Sem. 
Buk. Max. Hysteria? {Mat. gila 
bayang-bayang) : ngau k51bo' (ngu 
klbuk), Sem. Buk. Max. ; ngau 

baeng (ngu baing) Sem. Pa. Max. 
Dumb (.1/(7/. bisu): nau, Pang. U. 
Aring. Mad {Mai. gila) : hau. 
Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal.; naho {■az.-ho), Som. Madness: 
tau (tiu), Sem. Buk. Max. ; ngau 
(ngftau), Sem. Pa. Max. ; A loi ; 
A 104 ; [?cf. Mai. igau]. 

161. Dream, spirit of a : si-on, Sem. 
Stev. God : sian, Sem. Klapr. 
[Schmidt compares Stieng jang, 
"spirits"; and Cham yang ; 
Bahnar iang ; but these last repre- 
sent the Malayan yang, "deity," 
and the connection is dubious. ] 
Dress : .\ 164 ; C 171-183 ; E 76 ; 
P 252; U 31. 

Dress, to : E 76 ; P 249-253. 
Drift : F 175, 176. 

162. Drift, to: haleb(/>;-. ha-lebb), Se^n. 
Plus. 

163. Drift, to : wid, Sak. Plus Cliff. 

164. Drift, to: gul, Sak. Blaiij. Cliff. 

165. Drink, to {Mai. minum): {a) eikii, 
Tembi; nyo' (nyok); nyoV, Serau; 
anyonyokn, Z)rt;-rt^; amnyom, Serau; 
nyiik, Sen. Cliff. ; ngun, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; ngut ? or nyut? (nout), Sak. 
Ra. ; ngflt (ngort), Sak. Sung. ; 
ngot, Sak. Martin ; ngiut. Tan. 
U. Lang. ; tegut ( te-goot ), Sak. 
Set. Da. ; tungat (tunget), Kena. I. 
To smoke cigarettes : anhot baku, 
Darat. Come let us smoke cigar- 
ettes : da lah hem enhid bakau, 
Krau Em. ; C 130. To taste: 
inangad, Sem. K. Ken. ; W 30. 
\Cuoi ngoch ; Kuy Dek ngaach ; 
Tareiig, Kon Tu ngoi ; Sui ngoai ; 
Churu nu ; Chrdii, Stieng niet 
(nhiet) ; Plmong, Prou niet (nhigt) ; 
Lave niet ; Bahnar et ; Teressa 
nyu-hata ; Southern Nicobar on- 
yushe, " to drink " ; Kon Tu ngot ; 
Boloven, Z.flt'<r niet, "to smoke."] 
(1^) To drink : mfijehud (mjhud), 
Se7n. Buk. Max. ; jehud (jhud), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; ja-hul, Bera ; jgoi, 
e.g. ku hgnak jSoi, " I want to 
drink," /rt/^. Malac. ; jo-oi (jo-oie), 
Jak. Stev.; ja-6h, Serting \ diao, 
U. Ind. ; jo-ho, Jak. Ba. Pa. ; jo&h 
(jo-6h), Bedu. II. ; jo-6h, Jak. Mad. ; 
jo'oh, Pant. Kap. Log. ; jo-oh, Jak. 
Sim. To sip: joh6t, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
To suck : jghud (jhud), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; mftjfihud (mjhud), Sem. Buk. 
Max. To kiss (in Oriental fashion); 
to smell {Mai. chium) : jg-hSt, 
Sen. Cliff. To smell (a flower) : 
jehot", Serau. To suck : hiub, Sem. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

5S5 

Pa. Max.. Sem. liuk. Max. To 
dance : bejuhoh ; bejohoh (bed- 
yohoh), Mant. Bor. To feast (with 
drinking, etc. ) : main jo'oh, Des. 
Sep. , Bes. K. Lang. To smoke 
(Mai. makan roko'), chi jod, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; jot roko (dj6t 
(roko)), Sak. Kor. Cjb. To smoke 
cigarettes (Mai. makan roko') : ya' 
jod (pr. jodd), Sem. Kedali; ya' jiit 
(pr. ya' jiltt), Sem. Plus. Native 
cigarettes (Mai. roko'), jod, Pa7ig. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Tobacco (Mai. 
tSmbakau) : jen-hud, Sem. Kedah ; 
jin-hbd (/r. jin-hodd), 5'e;«. Jarti-m, 
Sem. Plus; menyop (pr. men-yopp), 
Sem. Kedah. To suck : mflchut 
(mchut), Setn. Buk. Max. \^Hala>ig 
hot, hut ; Boloven h6t ; Sedan g 6, 
6, ao, " to drink " ; cf, Stieng hut ; 
Bahnar huch, "to suck up"; 
Tareng ch6t ; A'ase?ig lot ; Sud 
hut ; Halang hut, hut ; Jarai hot, 
"to smoke"; Boloven hut, hut; 
Kastng, Kon Tu Sue', Halang hut ; 
Tareng, Bahnar hot ; Sedang, Jarai 
hot, "tobacco"; cf. also Stieng 
jut, jup, "to sip," "to suck up."] 
i66. Drink, to : uoh (auuh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; wo (wSr), Ki-au Tern. ; wok 
(werk), Sak. Guai ; mong. Rasa. 
[?Cf. Annam uong, to drink."] 

167. Drink, to : bini, Buk. U. Lang. 

168. Drink, to: benong ; beng-ong? 
Sem. K. Ken. ; menum. Pant. Kap. 
Her. ; minum, Manfr. ALilac. [Mai. 
minum]; B 385, 386 ; E 27 ; E 29 ; 
W 29. 

169. Drip or drop, to (JMal. mgleleh) : 
ya-bog-bog. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

170. Drive or hunt, to (ALal. halau or 
niemburu) : ya-yes (pr. yess). Pang. 
U. Aring. 

171. Drive, to (Mai. halau) : hanchat, 
Bes. Sep. [? cf. Mai. inchit; hinchit]. 
Drizzle : R 6 ; R 8 ; R 12 ; R 15 ; 
W73. 

172. Drongo, the racquet-tailed ; shrike 
(Ahil. chgnchawi) : tua^ng ; chim 
tua^ng, Bes. K. L. ; t6ntong 
(t'ntong), Jak. Lem. 

173. Drongo: radem, e.^. kfijohsegwog, 
kSjoh radem, " young of the segwog 
(bird), young of the drongo," 
Pang. Sai. 

Drop, to : D 169 ; F 17. 

Drought : D 177. 

Drowsy : S 250 ; S 253-256. 

174. Drum : a species of primitive drum 
used by Sfimangs at Siong consists of 
a bamboo joint (gSnun = bamboo), 

the open end of which is struck by a 
beater (pSnmkol) made of " palas " 
leaves bent into the shape of a small 
fan and stitched together with rattan. 
They are called pen-uhh, Sem. 
Kedah. 

175. Drum : gentang, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
[Mai. gfindang]. 

176. Drum, to (on the floor) : rentak, 
Bes. Songs [ = F 52]. 
Drum-beater : D 174. 

Drunk ; to get drunk, V 24. 

177. Dry [i\hil. kering) : bo'ong or le- 
bo'-ong, ex. penjok lebo'ong, "a dry 
loin-cloth," Sem. Kedah; ba'ong, 
Setn. Jarum ; bo-ong, Pang. U. 
Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Drouth ; drought (Mai. kgmarau) : 
bo-ong (/;-. bo-oSng), Pang. U. 
Aring [ ? = D 178]. 

178. Dry : bg-hoj. Sen. Cliff. ; gahan, 
Bes. Malac. ; chShoi, Kena. /. ; 
tehfi, Serting. [Khmer huot, "to 
dry" ; Stieng suot, "dry" ; ? cf, 
Cham ghang, moghang, " to dry."] 

179. Dry : kesit, ALmt. Bor. Ebb : 
keset, Bes. A. /. ; [see M 114]. 

180. Dry : (a) kSraha', Jak. Malac. 

(b) Dry: kerhing (kekhing), Barok; 
ki^Sng ? (gi^g'n), Sem. K. Ken. 
Dry ; to dry : king, Sem. Pa. Max. , 
Sem. Buk. Max. Shore ; kering 
(k'ring). Pant. Kap. Joh. [Mai. 
kfiring]. 

181. Dry, to (intrans.): til (dil, dill), 
Sak. Kor. Gb. To dry in the sun 
( Mai. jgmorkan ) : till, Serau ; 
t61-til. Sen. Cliff. ; tSltil (tlti'l), Sak. 
U. Kam. Male argus pheasant : 
teltil tapa (tel-til-tappar), Sem. Stev. 
Midwife: teltil tapa-i (tel-til-tappar- 
ee), Sem. Stev. [There must have 
been some misunderstanding here 
on the part of the collector.] [ ? Cf. 
Bahnar teng (tgng) "to dry (in 
the sun)."] 

182. Dry; shallow; ripe; thin; lean: 
riukai. Pant. I-Cap. Joh. 

Dry : A 24. 

Dry, to : D 180, 181 ; H 141. 

Dry season : S 66 ; S 68. 

183. Duck : pe ? (pey), Ben. A^ew. ; 
pepet. Pant. Gah. Mant. [ ? Cf. 
Jav. bebek, "duck."] 

184. Duck: itek, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Klapr., Sem. Ked. Atid., Sem. 
Ked. New., Setn. Ked. Rob., Sem. 
Jur. And., Sem. fur. New., Sem. 
Jur. Rob. , Ben. iVew. , Tembi, 
Darat ; itek, Tembi ; itek", Jelai 
[Mai. itek]. 

586 

CO MP A RA TIVE VOCABULAR Y OF 

Dug out (boat) : B 316. 

Dukong anak (plant spec. ) : B 401. 

185. Duku (fruit-tree), Lansium domesti- 
CHiii var.: lagium, Sem. Biik. Alax., 
Sem. Pa. Alax. 

186. Dumb {Mai. bisu) : k'la' or kela, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; kalo' 
(kalok), Serau. [Mai. k61u ; but also 
Men klau, "dumb."] 

187. Dumb : bisii, Sem. A'. A''en. ; bi'su, 
Sai. Kor. Gb. \_Mal. bisu] ; D 1 60 ; 
K 63. 

Dung : D 114. 
Durable : H 31. 

188. Durian (fruit-tree), Durio zibethi- 
nus : pendok (pnduk), Sem. Pa. 
A/ax. ; penek (pnik), Sem. Bui. 
Max. ; (spec. Alal. d. kachapuri) : 
penek kahub (pnk kahub), Se?n. 
Buk. Alax. ; F 231 ?; (spec. Alal. d. 
kapala gajah): pgndok kuih ta'menol 
( pnduk kuih ta'mnl ), Sem. Pa. 
Alax. ; H 46 ; E 44 ; pgnek duan 
(pnkdusn?), Sem. Buk. Alax. [? cf. 
E 46] ; ( spec. Alal. kikir ? kulit ) : 
penek kikir kulit (pnik kikr kulit), 
Sem. Buk. A/ax. ; pendok balik 
kulit (pnduk balik kulit), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; (spec. Afal. d. lumper) : 
pendok sengkuit? (pnduk sngkuit), 
Sem. Pa. Alax. ; penek lumper (pnik 
Impur), Sem. Buk. Alax. ; (spec. 
AJal. d. nasi rendam): penek nase' 
rendam (pnik nasi'rndm), Sem. Buk. 
A/ax. ; (spec. A/al. d. tfimbaga): 
pendok tembaga (pnduk tmbak), 
Sem. Pa. A/ax.; penek tuing (pnk 
tuing), Sem. Buk. A/ax. Unripe 
durian {A/al. d. mangkar) : penek 
belulung or bfilunang? (pnk blulung 
or blunng ), Sem. Buk. A/ax. ; 
pendek mingkar (pnduk mngkr), 
Sem. Pa. A/ax. Wild durian (spec. 
A/al. d. daun), Durio oxleyanus: 
pgndok tie' (pnduk tiu'), Sem. Pa. 
A/ax.; penek kahub? (pnik kahui ? 
or kahub), Se)ii. Buk. A/ax. Chen- 
gal tree, Balanocarpus maximus ; 
sSraya tree ( spec. A/al. seraya 
bunga), ? Shorea or //opea spec. : 
p€nek (pnik), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
{ spec. A/al. sSraya batu ) : p6nek 
batu (pnik batu), Sem. Buk. A/ax. ; 
(spec. A/al. sgraya tandek) : penek 
bala' (pnik balk), Sein. Buk. A/ax. ; 
H 126. 

189. DuKlAN : hampak, Sem. Craw. 
Hist. ; shempa, Sak. Kerb. ; sem- 
p&h, Som. ; sempa (sompS,), Sak. 
Ra. , sem-pa', A'rau Tern., Sen. 
CI. ; s6m-pa', Sen. Cliff., Krau 

Ket. ; s6mp^? (s6mb^), Sak. Martiii; 
sempah, Tembi, Serau ; sempa' 
p6kat" (sempak pekat" ; sempak 
pekatn), Tembi. Flower [probably 
a mistake ] : sempa' ( sempak ), 
Tembi. Asam durian: asap" sempol, 
Serau. [The durian being a great 
source of food supplies for the 
aborigines, this word may conceivably 
be identified with Stieng sompa, 
sopa, "food (to be eaten along with 
rice)," which is from sa, " to eat " ; 
E 27 : sed t/uare.] 

190. Dukian: peiediyan, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
Durian fruit : tuang, Jak. Ba. Pa. 
Fruit of the durian aji or haji : kfi- 
bbk tuweng, Sem. Kedah [Mai. 
durian]. 

190A. Durian darat ; durian daun 
(fruit-tree), Durio oxleyanus ; ngel, 
Tembi ; shanggel, Serau [or Tembi\ 
During : I 28. 

191. Dust : chakah (tchakah), Som. ; 
S 23, 24 ; S 26, 27. 

192. Dusty : bekol, Bes. Sep. ; bekol 
[dist. from W 98], Bes. K. L. 
Dwell, to: I 18; L 108-110 ; R63; 
S 221, 222 ; S 439 ; S 477. 
Dwelling-place: H 1 51-159. 
Dyeing, plant used in : P 130. 
Dysentery : B 248, 249 ; S 185 ; 
S 187 ; S 468. 

E 

1. Each ; every {A/al. tiap or tiyap) : 
reng-sing or reng-seng(?), Sein. Plus. 

2. Each: \.i:xw^\\.{\.m'^\\.), Sem. Buk. Max. 

3. Each (man) : mulih, Bes. K. Lang., 
Bes. A. I. Alone : mulih, Bes. A. /.; 
O 27. 

4. Eagle ; kite : (a) chep kglak, Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. ; ke-lak", Sen. Cliff. ; 
{Mai. lang), klaakn, Tembi; klak, 
Serau. Kite: k'rang. Pang. U.Aring. 
White-headed eagle : kelang (king), 
Sem. Buk. A/ax. [Ac/iin. kleng, 
"kite"; Khmer khleng, " aigle 
pecheur " ; Bahnar klang ; Stiejig 
klang, "epervier"; Khasi kling, 
" kite " ; Alon hil klaing [haw kluing], 
"eagle."] 

{b) Eagle : hSlang, A/antr. A/alac. ; 
lang, Jak. A/alac. [A/al. lang (older 
form "helang"), "eagle," "kite."] 
Eaglewood : A 50-52. 

5. Ear : {a) pol, Sem. Beg., Ben. Aleiv., 
Sew. Jur. New. ; (pal), Sem. fur. And. , 
Sem. Jur. /^ob. ; ptil, Sem. A/artin ; 
pun, Sem. Pa. Max. Outer ear (A/al. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

587 

daun teiinga) : le' pun (li' pun), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; L 32. Ear-lobe : chaping 
pun (chaping pun) ; pingkul li pun ; 
kit pul (kit pul), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Swelling of the ear : niako pul (mku' 
pul), Sem. Pa. Max. ; E 34. 
\b) Ear : 6mpong or 'nipong, Pang. 
Belimb. ; mpong, Pang. K. Aring. 
[Dolot'e/i ^nn ; Ha /ang p&t, "ear."] 
6. Ear: (a) kSnto'^ng or kSntogng ? 
(kentok'n; kentog'n?), Sei/t. K. Ken.; 
kantak, Sem. Per. ; kent6k, Sak. Tan. 
Kam. ; gnintok (ghninto'k), Sak. Ra. ; 
gnSntok or genantok, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
ngentok, Sak. Br. Low ; entok", 
Tembi; entak", Tembi, Serau, Darat; 
entak", Jelal ; entak (entank), Se/i. 
Cliff.; gntftk, Or. Bcriimb.; "ntak, 
Sak. U. Kam. : 'n-tap, Sak. Bla?!j. 
Sw. ; tak, Sak. Sung., Tan. U. 
Lang. ; ntokn, U. Ind. ; tog'i, Bes. 
Malac. ; (tegn), Serting, Bes. Her. ; 
te-i. Bed. Chiang; teng; tong, Bes. 
Sep. A. L; teng, Bera; long, Bedu. //., 
Buk. U. Lang. ; tohong (to-hung), Sak. 
Sel. Da. ; tang, Krau Ket. ; en-tang, 
Kraii Tern. ; entong {ii\\-\&x\\g),Lehir, 
Kerbat; 'ntong [pr. entong). Pang. 
U. Aring; anteng (anting), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; anten, U. Pat. , U. Kel. ; 
inteng, Sem. Stev. ; Inteng, Sem. IJ. ; 
ele-enteng [in MS. originally elley 
enteng ], Sem. U. Sel. ; anting, 
Pang. Jalor ; anting, Sem. Craw. 
Hist., Sem. Craw. Gram., Sem. 
Klapr., Sem. Ked. Rob., Sem. Ked. 
New. ; (auting), Sem. Ked. And. ; 
'nting (pr. enting), Pang. U. Arif/g; 
dang, Ben. New. Lobe of ear : garni 
tog", Bes. Malac. ; chaping anteng 
( chaping anting ) ; pingkul anteng 
(pngkul anting); le' anteng (li' 
anting), Sem. Buk. Max. ; L 32 ; 
yon kentol^ng? (yon kentok'n ?), Sem. 
K. Ken. Orifice of ear (in original 
given as "shell of ear"): seniaSng 
kSntol^ng (seniag'n kentok'n), Sem. 
K. Ken. ; H 107. Gill (of fish) : 
'ntak, Sak. U. Katn. \_Mon. ktow ; 
Cuoi khtor ; Phnong tuor ; Sue kotol ; 
Bahnar don ; Sedang doan ; Tareng 
porton ; Koti Tu poton ; Stieng tur ; 
Kaseng toh ; Kuy Dek la -khtor ; 
Ckuru thor ; Chrau t6r ; Alak ntoh ; 
Khasi kashkor ; Lyngngam iSkur 
(lykur) ; Riang ka-tik ; Danaw tun ; 
Santali, A'oiwa, Korku, Kharia, 
lutur ; Malhe, Mundari, Dhanggar 
lutur ; Birhar lutur ; Juang nutur ; 
Gadaba lintir, "ear."] 
(i5) To hear: tSngi? (tngi), Sem. Pa. 

Max. ; ting-oi, Krau Tem., Sak. 
Giiai; (ting .), Sem. Beg. [final 
letter omitted in the original print], 
(c) To hear : ger-tek, Sen. CI. To 
hear ; to listen : gertuk, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
gertik", Serau, Darat [?]. 1 hear : 
engertek",/^/a/. Deaf: ta-mungant6k 
{or ta-mungent6k), Sak. Kor. Gb. 
\Bahnar tijng ; kotijng ; Stieng tang, 
" to hear " ; Central Nicobar hateng, 
" to hearken " ; Sedang tiJng (teung); 
Nanhang chong, "to listen"; Alak 
tong ; Lave nadong, " to hear."] 

7. Ear: chfiliah (chglioh), Kena. /. ; 
ch6ho' (cheliok), Kena. IL [Perhaps 
a variant of the next ? but cf. S 78. ] 

8. Ear : kelinga' (kfilingak), Bedu. IL; 
teringa, Jak. Malac. ; tfilinga, Mantr. 
Malac. ; telinge, Barok [Mai. tfilinga]; 
H 62. 

9. Ear, a disease of the : hoig, Sem. 
Stev. Swelling of the ear : D 56. 
Wax in the ear : D 56. 

Early : D 42 ; M 175-179. 

10. Ear-ring: pel-wel, Pang. U. Aring; 
pelwel. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 

R 133. 134- 

11. Earth, the [Mai. bumi) : kelyid, 
Sem. Plus ; kliet, U. Kel. 

12. E.'VRTH {Mai. tanah) : {a) tek, Sem. 
Craw. Hist., Sem. Ked. Mar., Sem. 
Klapr., Pang. U. Aring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal., Bes. Her. ; (tekh), 
Tembi; tai' (ta'i'^), Krau Em. ; ti, 
Darat ; tai'k, tik, Sem. Klapr. ; teh, 
Sem. Per., Sem. Ij., Sem. U. Sel., 
Sak. U. Kam. ; ta, Sem. K. Ken. ; 
ta', Sak. Tan. Ram.; te', Sem. Plus; 
te, Sak. Br. Low ; te, Tem. CI. , Sak. 
Plus, 4 A^. ^. 102, Sak. Blanj. Sw., 
Sen. CI., Sak. Lengk., 4 N.Q- 103 ; 
te' (ti'), Sem. Buk. AL2x., Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; te', Bes. A. L ; te', Lebir, 
Kerbat, Krau Ket. ; tei, U. Pat. ; 
te ; tl, Bes. Malac. ; dui, Ben. New. 
[the connection of this form, which 
is unsupported, is doubtful ; cf. 
Central Nicoharcse du, "soil"; 
Khasi 6&\i., "ground, earth"]; atei, 
Pal. ; ata (ate), Serting ; a-tS, U. 
Tem. ; ate^ (atel"), at6, U. Ind. ; 
a-teh, U. Cher. ; kateh, Sem. Klapr, 
Earth ; land : t^, Tem. CI. , Sen. 
CI. Earth ; land ; country: t^h, Sak. 
Ra. Earth (world): t6h, Sak. Croix. 
Earth (substance) : teh, Buk. U. 
Lang. ; tehghen. Tan. U. Lang. 
Ground: teh, Sak. U. Kam., Bes. 
Songs. Soil (earth) : tek, Bes. Her. ; 
teng, Kena. I. ; teh, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
te, Sem. Plus; Hie, Serting. Country 

588 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

{Mai. ngggri) : tyek, Sem. Kedah; 
tah (tfeh), Som., Sak. Kerb. ; ta, 
(te), Sak. Kerb. ; t6, Sak. Kerb. 
Land : tek, Sem. Stev. ; teh, Sem. 
Kcd. And., Sem. Ked. New., Sem. 
Ked. Rob., Sem. Jur. Netv., Sem. 
Jur. Rob., Ben. Neto. ; S 310; 
W 109. Land : teh, Bes. Songs ; 
teh karmau ? (teh karmow), Sem. Jur. 
And.; (teh karmon), Sem. Jur. Rob. ; 
(teh karmoiv), Sem. Jur. Neiv. ; tela- 
sah, Ben. New. Soft earth; clay: te' 
liat (ti' lit), Sem. Pa. Max. ; te' chas 
(ti' chas), Sem. Bitk. Max. Clay : 
ta latang (te-latafi), Som. ; ti gabing 
(tigabin), Sak. Ra. Pipe-clay: te' 
peltau (ti' pltu), Sem. Biik. Max. ; 
ta'i? (t'i or ti ?), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Mainland : te' tebo' (ti' tbu'), Sem. 
Buk. Max.; te' nebo' (ti'nbu'), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Plain (land) : teh haita, 
Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Rob. ; 
teh, haita, Sem. Jur. New. ; te' yata 
(ti' iat or rat?), Sem. Buk. Max. ; te' 
rata (ti' rat), Sem. Pa. Max. ; L 62 ; 
Sand : te' peltau (ti' pltu), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; te-umai, Bes. Malac. Valley 
(?land): to, Sak. Ra. Earthquake: 
talilu, Setn. Jur. And.; (talila), Sem. 
Jur. Rob. [? cf. Bat. renur ; Sund. 
lini ; Bal. linuh ; Jav. lindu ; Bis. 
linog ; Tagal. lindol ; Form, ninug, 
"earthquake"]; te' gunchang (te' 
kunchng), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[b] Below (under) : guu-te (?), Sak. 
Guai. Below ; beneath : hate, Bes. 
Sep. ; diltR ; da-tR, Sem. K. Ken. 
Below ; underneath [Mai. di-bawah ; 
ka-bawah) : kate' (katk), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; kate' amik (katk amik), Sem. 
Buk. Max. On the ground {Mai. di- 
tanah) : kgn-te, Sen. Cliff. ; katek or 
tekatek, ex. me' ngog takatek {Mai. 
mu dudok ka-tanah), "do you sit on 
the ground" ( = "sit down"), Sem. 
Jariim. Earthwards or groundwards 
{Mai. Va.A&n:ihy.hA-X.e\f.,Pang.Belimb. 
Low {.Mai. rendah), ka-tek, Sem. 
Plus; katek or tCkalek, ex. yohh tani 
tekatek {Mai. poko' itu rSndah), 
"that tree is low," Sem. Plus; kuti' 
(kutik), Tembi ; kuti' (kutik), Jelai ; 
ka'-ti', Kerbat; ka'-te', Lebir ; ko-te. 
Sen. Cliff. ; pate', Sak. U. Kavi. ; 
hate', hSnte', Bes. Sep. A. I.; i-che', 
U. Tern. ; U. Cher. Low or shallow 
{Mai. tohor): katek, Patig. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Shallow 
( Mai. tohor ) : katek, e.g. bateau 
katek {.\fal. ayer tohor), "shallow 
water," Sem. Plus ; ka'-ti', Kerbat ; 

ka'-te', Lebir ; a-che", U. Tern. ; 
a-che', U. Cher. ; 6n-che', Sen. 
Cliff. ; S 282. Deep : blio deti 
(blio-d^t^), Som. ; bota (bote), Sak. 
Kerb. Short : kuti' (kutik), Serau 
[or Tembi7~\ ; kuti' (kutik), Serau ; 
kutik", Sak. Em. [A'dtubate; Chong 
pata, "below"; and cf. S 282 (c).'\ 
{c) In : kate, Sak. U. Kam. ; kato ; 
katu (katou), Sak. Ra. Into {Mai. 
kadalam) : ka'-te', Sen. Cliff. In 
front of: nto, Sak. Ra. To enter: 
motkHto, Sak. Ra. ; E ']']. [It may 
be doubted whether these words {b) 
{c) are connected with the forms 
given under (a). For some of 
them, compare L 150 and S 
282.] \Mon ti ; Khmer dgy 
[tiy] ; Xong te ; Bahjiar teh ; Siieng 
teh (short e) ; Sue kate (cat6) ; Lemet 
kett^ ; Khrnus pett^ ; Sue, Nanhang 
kothe (cothe) ; Tareng kotheak (co- 
theac) ; Kon Tu thiak {\.h\a.c); Boloven 
tha ; Ho, Mundari ote ; Korku wate, 
"earth." It is not clear whether 
the forms Kaseng taneh ; Halang 
taneh ; Sedang tone, are to be con- 
sidered infi.x-formations or to go (with 
the Jarai tonah) with Mai. tanah. 
Perhaps the latter (with its Malayan 
equivalents) is also an infix-formation 
derived from the same root ? For {c) 
cf. Sfieng tu. "at," "in."] 

13. E.\RTH ; land; country: tengge' 
(tngki'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 16ngge' 
or lenggi' (Inggi'), Sem. Buk. Max. 
The world ; the earth : langi' , Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

14. E.VRTH : ka-chom, Sak. Sel. Da. 
The earth : chok, Bes. Sep. 

15. Earth : kahu. Tan. U. Lang. 

16. Earth : biikfi, Kena. I. 

17. Earth : lapang. Galang. Plain 
(.l/rt/. padang) : lepan. Pang. U. 
Aring; rapang? (zafang), Ben. New. 
[J/rt/. lapang, "space."] 

18. E.\RTH : i^.m.h, Mantr. Malac, Jak. 
Malac. Ground : tanah, Sem. Beg. 
[Mai. tanah]. 

19. Jungle: darat, Sak. Martin, Tan. U. 
Lang. Land : daratan ( daratn ), 
Sem. Pa. Max. On top : ka-darat, 
Mantr. Malac. \_Mal. darat.] Earth: 

L7. 

Earthquake : E 12. 

20. East: kleng (very doubtful, as kleng 
= Mai. kadalam ," inside, " elsewhere) , 
Sent. Kedah, Setn. Plus ; D 33 ; 
D 35 ; D 37; W 112. 

21. Easy: giihiil (ghehel); gehjil (gh6h61) 
Sak. Kerb, [doubtful ; op. T 145]. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

22. Easy or comfortable {Mai. s6nang) : 
lego, e.\. 16go dah { — Mai. sfinang 
sudah), "to be comfortable," Bes. 
K. L. [perhaps = '!' 14]. 

23. Easy : muda (niouda ; moud^), 
Sak. Ra. Cheap : mudek, Mantr. 
Malac. ; muda selek, Pant. Kap. 
Jok.\ B 484. [J/(z/. miidah, "easy," 
and of. morah," cheap."] 

Easy : s6nang (sonan), Som. ; 
(senang), Serau. Cash down : 
sfinang (soman ; sonan), Som. 
Happy; lucky: sonang (sonan), Som. 
[Mai. sCnang, "comfort."] 

25. Eat, to {Mai. makan) ; ya' mut, 
Sem. /arum. [? Cf. Javaii. chamuk, 
fiamuk, " to chew."] 

26. Eat, to : ya' gey, Sem. Janim ; ge, 
Pang. Belimb. ; egeh ; egegeh, Sem. 
Per. ; gig^i, Sem. A'. Ken. ; to-gei, 
Sem. Ken. ; ya' ge' bab (R 106), ex. 
oi ja' ya' ge' ka-unn, "1 have just 
eaten there" (?), {Mai. kawan sudah 
makan), Sem. Jari/m. Food : gigei, 
Sem. K. Ken. 

27. Eat, to: {a) machi', iV?;?. Buk. Max. ; 
machi, Sem. Ij. ; (machee), Sem. 
Siev. ; achi (atji), U. Kel. ; ya' chi", 
ex. ya' chi" nasi', "to eat rice" 
(«>. "have a meal"), Sem. Plus; ya- 
chi', ex. chi bab, lit. " eat rice." i.e. 
"have a meal," Pa fig. U. Aring \ 
chi, ex. chi bab, "to eat rice," 
Pang. K. Aring ; chi [in the MS. 
originally chee], Sem. U. Sel. ; 
chi, Kerbat; (tji), U. Pat. \ chi', 
Lebir; chio' (chiu'), Sem. Pa. Max.; 
chioh, Sem. Beg. ; chio, Ben. New. ; 
cha, Sak. Br. Low, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
(cha), Serting; cha, Krau Tern., Sak. 
Sung., Tan. U. Lang., Bern; (tcha), 
Sak. Korb. Lias, Sak. Croix ; cha' , 
Kra7i Ket., Tem. CI., Sen. CI., e.g. 
eng cha' cha'-na', " I eat rice," Sen. 
CI. ; am -cha'. Sen. CI. ; chaa, 
Tembi ; cha' ? (chak), Serau, Rasa ; 
chak, Sak. U. Tap. ; en-cha", U. 
Tem. ; en-chah, U. Cher. ; incha 
(intia), U. Ind. ; 'nche, (ntie) U. 
Ind. ; 'ncha (ntia), Or. Hu. Joh. I. ; 
'nja (ndia). Or. Hu. Joh. IL; nachd, 
Bes. Malac. ; nachar, Bes. Songs ; 
engcha (ngcha) [?="weeat"; E37], 
Sak, U. Bert. ; W 96 ; chi-cha, Sak. 
Guai ; checha (tch^-tcha), Som. ; 
(tch^tchU), Sak. Ra., Sak. Kerb. ; 
checha, (tsch^tscha), Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
ch4-cha, Sak. Tap. ; chacha (tschei- 
tscha), Sak. Martin ; cha-cha, Biik. 
U. Lang. ; chacha, Ben. New., Bes. 
Her. ; chacha ; nacha, (chachar ; 

nachar), Bes. Sep. A. /. ; chacha- 
pren (chachar- pren), Bers. Stev. ; 
unchacha, ancliacha, Darat ; ka- 
chiik, Sak. Sel. Da. ; kachar, 
Bes. K. Lang. ; kachah, Bes. Bell. ; 
kachd, Bes. Malac. We want to 
eat : eng hot la chachah, Darat. 
Come let us eat : da ton chacha, 
Serau ; F 124. Food : ancha 
(^ntcha), Sak. Ra. ; inchih, Sem. Beg; 
'nchecha (;/tch6tch^), Sak. Kerb. ; 
pgn-cha', Krau Tem. Food (boiled 
rice) : inchi, Ben. New. Provisions : 
nachar, Bes. Sep. A. /. [I ask you 
to] give me a little food, my belly is 
hungry : o ingek anchak (tiranchak"), 
choang kut, Jclai. To invite to a 
feast : kacha, Ment. Her. II. To 
masticate : machi', Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; cha' drat? (chak (drat) [j?V]), 
Serau. Betel : checha (tche-tcha) 
Sak. Kerb. Betel - bo.x : tampat 
checha (tampat tch^-tcha), Sak. 
Kerb. \^Mal. tSmpat, "place"]. 
To drink : chucha, Ben. New. ; 
cha' doo, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; cha-de-u, 
Bes. Her. ; chadeu, Bes. Malac. ; 
chedo, Be7i. New. \lit. "eat water," 
W 30]. Hunger: machi kebes(niachee 
kebess), Sem. Stev. Pregnant : 
machi kawau (matji kowau), Sem. 
Stev. [lit. "eat bird," i.e. the soul- 
bird ; B 215]. [.Mon, Taretig cha ; 
Samri! chha ; Cuoi, cha ; Phnong 
chha ; Stieng, Chrau sa ; Prou cha ; 
Kaseng, Kon Tu, Sutf chk ; Bahnar 
sha (xa) ; Khmer si [siy] ; chey 
[chiy] ; chhey [chhiy] ; Churn shau, 
" to eat."] 

{b) Boiled rice {Mai. nasi) : cha'-na', 
Tem. CI., Sen. CI. ; chana Sak. U. 
Kam. ; chiana (tchiana ; tchiana), 
Sak. Ra. ; chana (tchana), Sak. 
Korb. Lias. Boiled rice ; food : 
chachana, Darat. Rice [state un- 
certain] : chfiana, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; 
chahna (tchah-na), Sak. Ra. [Mon 
chana, chanacha ; Bahnar shbna 
(xona), " food."] 

28. Eat, to : kSchem ; ngechem. Bed. 
Chiong. 

29. Eat, to : kaduku, Beri. New.; tiko; 
miniko, Pattf. Kap. Log. ; menekoh 
Pant. Kap. Her. To eat ; to drink : 
neko' (n'kok), Pant. Kap. Joh. To 
drink : ni6nekoh sempeluh, Jak. 
Mad. {Pant. Kap. ); S 30 ; W 34 
[? cf. Billiton Malay tegok, " to 
swallow "]. 

30. Eat, to : makan, Mantr. Malac. . 
Jak. Malac. Food : kgnkan. Tan. 

590 

COM PA RA TI VE VOCA D ULA RY OF 

Sag. Food (boiled rice) : kankot, 

Ben. New. [Mai. makan, " to eat" : 

the root of which is kan ; cf. Madur. 

kakan]. 

Eat, to : B 228 ; C 129 ; F 124. 

31. Ebb: siut, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. 
Jur. New. ; (suit), Sejn. Jur. Rob. 
To ebb : suit, Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
suyut (suiuut), Sem. Buk. Max. 
\Mal. surut] ; B 6 ; D 179 ; W 27 ; 
W 30. 

31A. Ebb, to : najo, Tembi; jo, Seraii 
[or Tembi->\ 
Ebony: C 77. 

32. Echo : pemoh (pmoh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

Eclipse : C 257 ; D 23 ; D 33 ; D 
43 ; M 161 ; M 164 ; S 242 ; S 
526. 

Eddy : W 30. 

33. Edge : tepi' (tpi'), ^6';;/. Buk. Max. 
\Mal. tepi] ; N 23. Edge of sword : 
E83. 

Edging, rattan : B 116. 

34. Egg: maku, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. 
Jin: A'ezcK, Sem.. Jur. Mar.; (mahu), 
Sem. Jur. Rob.; makti', Sem. Kedah ; 
ma-ka. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal.; nia- 
ka'. Pang. U. Aring; makau [in the 
MS. originally makow], Sem. U. 
Sel. ; B 26 ; R 20 ; W loi. To lay 
eggs : make' (maku), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; niako' (mku'), Sent. Pa. 
Max. Germinating : mftka' (mka'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; mako' (maku'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Pregnant : mftko' 
(mku'), Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; ma'ko', Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
mako, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; mako' (makok), 
Jelai; E 5. Rounded; stout : meka' 
(mka'), Sem. Pa. Max. [Perhaps 
connected with F 34.] Fish - roe : 
mako' ikan (maku' aikn), Sem. Buk. 
Max.; mako' ikAn (mku' aikn), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Womb : mako' (makko), 
Serau. 

35. Egg : kapoh, Serting ; kapo, Bed. 
Chiang ; kgpok, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
kepoh, Bes. K. Lang., Ben. New. ; 
kep6h, Bes. Malac. ; g6p6h, Bes. 
Her. ; T 187. [?Cf. Teressa, Cho^vra 
Nicobar peu, ' ' egg. "] 

36. Egg : tab, Sem. Per. , Som. , Sak. 
Kerb., Sak. Korb. Lias ; (dab), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; tap, Sak. Br. Low, 
Sak. Tan. Ram. ; tAp, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; (lilp), Sak. Croix ; taap, 
Tembi ; buntat, Ketia. I. ; kOtut, 
Sem. Plus. Fowl : kutat, Sem-. Plus. 
Testicles : ngentap, Sen. CI. ; 
entap, Serau ; entab (aintb), Sem. 

Buk. Max. ; entib? (endab), Sem. 
K. Ken. ; entab (antb), Se7n. Pa. 
Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. ; ontap 
(erntap) ; 6n-tap, U. Cher. : Sn-tap, 
U. Tem. ; ntep ; 6ntep, Pang. U. 
Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
tap, U. Cher.; plo 'ntap? (plSr^tap), 
Krau Ket. ; pleh nggntap, Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. ; k6-bun tep, Lebir ; ke- 
bun en-tep, Kerbat. Hernia : nSbua' 
gntab (nbua' antb), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Penis? [Mai. tangkai peler) : tangke 
entab (tngki 'intb), .Sem. Buk. Max.; 
tangke entSb (tngki antb), Sem. Pa. 
Alax. Scrotum : keto" 6ntab (ktu' 
antb), Sem. Buk. Max. ; tSmpat ? 
entab (tmph antb), Sent. Pa. Max. ; 
H 2. \_Bahnar kotap, " &%%," 
"to lay"; Churn tap ; Kaseng 
kotap ; Halang takat ; Sedang kota ; 
Phnong khtap ; Shoin Pe Nicobar 
kateab ; Lemet x\\.?im, "egg"; Slieng 
tap, " egg," " male sexual organs. '] 

37. Egg : (a) penglong-pok, Sak. Chen.; 
F 255 ; panglung (panloun), Sak. 
Pa. ; peiokn (p6-16rkii). Sen. Cliff. ; 
pfiluk, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; pgngliip 
(pngliip), e.g. "we eat the eggs of 
the tortoise," 6ng-cha pgngliip kura' 
(ng-cha pngliip kura'), Sak. U. Bert. ; 
penglii' (pnglii'), Sak. U. Kam. ; 
p'lti, Sak. Martin; epunlur. Tan. U. 
Lang. ; penglok, Sak. Sung. Fowl's 
egg : pangldk°, Sak. Em. ; pSlong 
pup", Jelai. Bird's egg : penel, 
Bedu. n. Testicles : kdleg, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. [Strange forms, but prob- 
ably variants of the .Mai. Pol. word: cf. 
A mboyna mantelu ; manteru ; Mafoor 
penor, etc., in Kern, De Pidjitaal, 
p. 199. Vex^i'^-^sci. Boloven, Niahbn 
kla ; /.izi/t' kale, "egg."] 

(/?) Egg : klor, Sem. Stev. ; teror 
(tezor), Ben. New. ; tel6r, Mantr. 
Malac., Jak. Malac; tfilorh (tel6kh), 
Barok ; B 21. Fowl's &g%, : telor, 
Bedu. IL Rice {Mai. b6ras?) : teiur 
semut, Bed. Chiang. [This sounds 
like a Pantang (taboo) periphrasis : 
lit. = " ant's eggs."] [.Mai. t51or ; 
Selling k'loen , Sulu Iklog, etc. , ' ' egg." 
These are variant forms of the same 
word as those referred to, and cited 
under (a). The word is exceedingly 
anomalous in its variations.] 
Egg : F 284. Snake's eggs : S311. 
Egg-plant : S 339. 
Eggshell : S 236. 

38. Egret ; stork, Ciconia capcllata (?) 
(Mai. bangau) : {a) bahau ; chim 
bahau, Bes. K. L. ; banghau, Mantr. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

591 

Malac, Jak. Malac. ; chep banga? 
(chep bangor), Sak. lilanj. Cliff. 
\b) Egret: benuftl (bnu'l (^r bn'ul ?), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; chep begiag (chep 
bfigi org), Sak. Plus Cliff^ [cf. Mai. 
bangau]. 

39. Eight ; lunto Sem. Scott. 

40. Eight : ho-it, Sak. Sel. Da. [Roth 
probably fictitious ; no other dialects 
have corresponding numerals. ] 

41. Eight : dclapan, Sem. U. Sel. ; 
dSlapan, Son. Per.; lapan, i"tv«. //'. , 
Sak. Br. Lena ; lepen, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. \_Mal. dglapan]. 

42. Elbow : kayong (kaiung), Sem. Diik. 
Max.; {V.\yovi.%), Sem. Stev.; kayong, 
Sem. Kcdah, Sem. Plus ; kayong 
(kiung), Sem. Buk. Max. ; kaim or 
kanyftm ? (kaim or kanm ?), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; kening, Sem. /arum ; kan- 
yong (kanofi), Som. ; (kanion), Sak. 
Kerb. ; kaniong, Sem. A". Ken. ; 
kanong (kanon), Sak. Ra. ; kanang, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; k^n-ang ; kan- 
nang, Sen. Cliff. ; kanang, Scrau, 
Darat, Jelai. Biceps ; kanang, 
Tembi. Forearm: kayong? (gajong), 
Sem. Martiji ; kanang. Tang. U. 
Lang. Thumb : kanang tok" (kan- 
dng terkn), Sen. Cliff. [Cf. A 134 ; 
? cf. Lawangan kanang ; Biaju Dayak 
penang ; Maarijan apenang, ' ' upper 
arm " ; or cf. Central jYicobar ong- 
kSang, "funny bone"; Central, 
Teressa, and Ckotura Nicobar det- 
ong-kaang ; Southern Nicobar gut- 
ong - kjiang ; Shorn Pe angke-ak ; 
Car Nicobar sakong, ' ' elbow. ' '] 

43. Elbow : penghunjur, Ben. New. 
[? ,1/(7/. unjur, " to stretch"]; W 147. 

43A. Eldest (of family) : solong, Bes. 
Songs [J/rt/. sulong] ; N 50, 51. 

44. Elephant : tangal, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
tanghel ; taer [?], Tembi ; tamfinul 
(taninul), Sem. Pa. Max. ; taminda 
(ta-meen-da), Sem. Jur. And., Sem. 
Jur. New., Sem. Jur. Rob. ; D 188 ; 
I 46 ; S 152 [? cf AVzwt'r damrey 
(/;-. domrei, tSmrei) [tariy], "ele- 
phant " ; but this seems improbable]. 

45. Elephant : nipah, Sem. Jarum. 

46. Elephant: (rz) tu-wan, 56'ot. Kedah; 
diwan (doubtful), Pang. U. Aring; 
tawai, U. Pat. ; atek, Sem. Stev. ; 
anton [pr. anto'^n), Sem. Plus; aton, 
U. Pat. ; ah-dong, Sem. Ken. ; adon, 
Sak. Br. Low ; adon, Sak. Kerb. ; 
adcn, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; (ad6ne), Sak. 
Croix ; adan (adorn), Som. King : 
adOn, Sak. Kor. Gb. [clearly a mis- 
take ; the word = ' ' elephant ' ']. 

(/') Elephant : niaintong. Sak. 
Kinta ; mant6i, Sak. Tap. ; ba-don- 
ih, Sak. Sel. Z^(7. [perhaps to be read, 
ba-dou-ih? = badui] ; bangtang. Tan. 
U. f.ang. ; badui, Bland. K. Lang. ; 
[Schmidt compares Annam tu'o'ng 
and some of the words given under 
E 49. But cf. B 205.] 

47. Elephant: bringkil, Jak. Malac, 
Ben. New.; (brinkil), Jok. Raff. As.; 
(berengkel), Jok. Raff. 

48. Elephant: pCmalign, >SVr/?«§- [? cp. 

A 133]- 

49. Elephant: chi [e.g. "rogue ele- 
phant," chi ng tungal), Sak. U. 
Bert. ; S 341A ; chio (tchio), Sak. 
Ra. ; chik, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; sheong, 
Rasa. "The elephant (is) not (a) 
good (one)," chik ta bar, Sak. J. 
Low. \_Mon ching ; Tareng hachom ; 
Cuoi chi6ng ; Sue, Kon Tu tieng ; 
Szie, Hin, So thiang ; Sue [Phong), 
Nanhang achang ; Mi sang ; Khmus 
sechang; /.t'wtr/kesang — "elephant."] 

50. Elephant : bSrat, Kena. IL ; 
hmerat, Bes. Her. ; mgrat ; m'rat, 
Bes. Sep. A. L ; 'mrat, Bes. Malac; 
(marat), BeJi. N'ew. [? cf A/al. bSrat, 
"heavy"; but this seems improb- 
able, as the word is not a Pantang 
word]. 

SOA. Ei,EPHANt: liman, Tembi. [Javan.. , 
Lampong, Bulud Opie [Borneo) liman; 
Cham limon ; Chriai romon ; Rode 
enian ; Cancho leman ; Jarai roman 
— "elephant." It is an old Malayo- 
Polynesian name for the animal, and 
probably derived horn lima, "hand," 
whence also F 160.] 

51. Elephant : [a) gauii, d. Kel. ; 
gago, U. Kel.; gaja, Sem. Beg., Ben. 
Nezv. , Sem. U. Sel. [in the MS. this 
last originally had gaga], Sem. Ij. ; 
gajah, Tembi ; gajah, Darat, Jelai ; 
gajah, Serau [or Tembil'\ ; mgnahar 
gajah, Serau; gajah, Sem. Per., Sem. 
Cratv. Hist. , Sem. Ked. A fid. , Mantr. 
Malac. ; (gazah), Sem. Ked. Rob. ; 
(gadjah), Sem. Klapr. ; gajeh, Sem. 
Ked. New. ; gejah (gejeh). Bar ok 
\_Mal. gajah]. 

\b) Elephant : kasOt, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; gosel, Bland. K. Lang. Rhino- 
ceros : gu-sil, Sak. Sel. Da. 
[c) Elephant : gantir, Ben. N'ew. ; 
gentul, Kena. /. ; gental (gSntel), 
Bedu. If. ; sagantel, Pant. Kap. 
Log. ; segantu, Jak. Sim. [Possibly 
formed anomalously on quasi Krama 
principles from gajah ; cf. C 57 ; C 
200; D 149; W 50 ; W loi.] B 

592 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

i6 ; B 206 ; B 210 ; B 212 ; T 

173- 

52. Elephant's cry (to its companions) : 
uh-uh-kang, Bes. Sep. 

53. Elephantiasis : teium (tlum), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

Elevate, to : D 66. 

54. Eleven ; sahandib, Sak. Sel. Da. 
[Probably fictitious ; it stands alone, 
and such high numerals are suspect 
in these dialects, except where cor- 
roborated ; but perhaps cp. T 44.] 

55. Eleven : n^iblas, Sak. Korb. Lias ; 
ney-blas, Sak. Croix ; n6-blas, Sak. 
Br. Low ; niblas, S'6m. Fourteen : 
ampat-blas, Sak. Croix. Thirteen : 
n6-blas, Sak. Croix ; nablas (neblas), 
Sak. Korb. Lias. Twelve : nelblas, 
Siim. ; julblas (djoulblas), Som. ; nel- 
julblas (neldjoulblas), Som.; nal-blas, 
Sak. Croix ; nal-blas, Sak. Br. Low ; 
narblas, Sak. Korb. Lias ; narrblas, 
Sak. Ra. ; narrblas (naiirrblas), 
Sak. Kerb. [All formed with help 
of Malayan sufifix " -bfilas," in imita- 
tion of Malay; F 254 ; O 27; T 99 ; 
T 272.] 

Embers : A 82 ; C 77 ; F 124. 
^6. Embrace, to : kuim, Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

57. Embrace, to : makawal (mkaual), 
Sem. Buk. Max. To shake hands : 
makawal (mkaul), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
C 50. 

Emerge, to : I 43- 

58. Emigrate, to (to wander) : bangko? 
(banco), Maiitr. Cast. [? Mai. bong- 
kar]. 

59. Empty [Mai. hampa) : mengkong, 
f.r.chbngyemengkong = -l/(z/.perut-ku 
lapar (kosong), " my belly is empty," 
Pang. U. Aring: mgngkong. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Hungry : mgng- 
kong, Lebir, Kerbat. 

60. Empty : hawai (?), Jak. Malac. 

61. Empty ; to empty : penin (pnin), 
Sem. Buk. Max. 

62. Empty : kusat (kust), Sem. Buk. 
Max. [cf. Mai. kosong] ; A 63 ; D 
S3 ; H 117. 

63. End ; point {Mai. ujong) : saeng 
(saeng), Sem. Pa. Max. ; sen ; 
Chen, Bes. A. L Point : sen ; chen, 
Bes. K. Lang. Point (of a weapon, 
etc.): chhen ; chen, e.g. chendoo 
(=Mal. ulu ayer), " headwaters of 
river"; chhen gulol^ng, "point of 
a dagger," Bes. A. L Headwaters 
of river : sendoh, Bes. Songs ; W 
30. [? Cf. B 145 ; Stieng chung ; 
Khmer ch6ng [chung], "end," 

"top" ; Mon ching-sngi, "ridge of 
roof." Achin. chung(?), "top."] 

64. End ; pochok. Pant. Kap. J oh. A 
shoot (of vegetable) : puchok, Bland. 
K. Lang. To pierce : pucho (pout- 
cho), Sak. Ra. \Mal. puchok]. 

65. End ; tip : hujong (hujng), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; ujong (aujng), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Point of arrow : ujong 
(oudjon), Sak. Ra. ; B 299 \Mal. 
hujong ; ujong]. 

End : B 347. 

End of sword : S 550. 

To stand on end : S 432. 

66. Endure to ; to bear : pgnchfimat 
(p'nch'mat), Pant. Kap. Joh. 

67. Endure, to : tahan, Som. ; tahan, 
Sak. Kerb. ; tahat, Sak. Ra. To 
set (a trap) : tahan, Bes. Songs [Mai. 
tahan]. 

68. Endure fatigue well, to : huje ? 
(houg^), Sak. Kerb. ; S 503. 

69. Enemy: musu (moussou), Som. ; 
muso (mousso), Sak. Ra. [Mai. 
musoh] ; A 121 ; F 97. 
Engaged : F 90. 

Enjoyment : A 76 ; G 74. 

70. Enough ; sufficient : hama, Bes. 
A. /. 

71. Enough (Mai. chukup) : geneb, 
Pang. U. Aring. Sufficient (Mai. 
chukup) : geneb (/;-. genebb), Sem. 
Kedah. Insufficient (Mai. kurang) : 
brak 6' geneb (.Mai. ta'-nya chukup), 
lit. "it's not enough," Sem. Kedah. 
[Mai. gfinap, "complete."] 

72. Enough : chukup, Tembi ; (tchou- 
koup), Sak. Ra. Too little ; insuf- 
ficient : bia' amat chukub (biak amt 
chukb), Sem. Buk. Max. That is 
enough ! je chukup sudah ! Tembi ; 
F 116 [Mai. chukup]. 

73. Enough, proper (Fr. " assez con- 
venablement ") : patot, Som., Sak. 
Ra., Sak. Kerb. Proper : patut, 
Jelai. Not proper : pe patut, Jelai. 
[The word should have been entered 
under "proper."] [Mai. patut, 
" proper. "] 

74. Enough, it is (.\hil. sudah): gah, 
Mantr. Malac. Nya. [ ? Cf. Mon kip 
[gap] ; Stieng gap ; Bahnar, Jarai 
gap; Halang ngap, "enough," 
"sufficient"; Khmer, keap [gab], 
" proper."] A 62 ; F 115 ; F 122. 
Enquire, to : A 162-169. 

75. Entangle, to : penyangkot (p'n- 
yangkot). Pant. Kap. Joh. Bone 
button of belt of blowpipe quiver : 
senangkot (sonankdt), Sak. Ra. [Mai. 
sangkut]. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

593 

76. Enter, to : [a) mabgleh (mblih), Son. 
link. .Max. ; ya' bCloh (/r. belijhh), 
Scin. Janim ; ya' b6li\h {pr. between 
bSliihh and bolohh ; almost, but not 
quite, beiahh), ex. belah bakleng 
haya', "enter into (the) shelter," 
Sem. Plus ; bilo' (biluk), Sem. Fa. 
Max. Between ; inside : baleh, 
Sent. Klapr. Within {Mai. dalam): 
baleh, Sem. Craw. Hist. 

[h) To enter : pelet", Jclai ; plot 
(plCrt), e.g. plot ka'te' dok" (plert 
ka'-te' derkn), " enter into the 
house," Sen. Cliff. ; nebltip, ^7;;//. ; 
lep, Bes. Sep. ; lep, ex. lep harong, 
" to set (of the sun)"; lep-lep, Bes. 
K. L. ; tenglep, Bes. A. I. \ tenglep 
( =.1/(7/. niasokkan, from " lep, " with 
transitive prefix ; op. tengyut or t3'ut 
= Mal. pulangkan, from "yut," R 84), 
Bes.K.L. Toenter; to puton (clothes): 
lep, Bes. K. Lang. Dress (?) \_Mal, 
pakaian (= dress) is given, but with 
Fr. "attirer" as the translation; I 
suspect a confusion with the Eng. 
"attire"] : kfinlip (kon-lip), Sinn. 
To put on (clothes) : lok, Sak. U. 
Kam. Finger-ring : nebliip (nob- 
liip), S'dm. Far : lep ? or lop ? (lup), 
Bes. Bell. ; lop, Bes. Malac. Far ; 
distant : lop, Bes. Sep. A. /. Far 
off: I6p-l6p, Bes. Songs, 
(c) To put on {Mai. masok kain) : 
ya' len (//-. lenn), ex. ya' lenn penjok, 
"to don the loin-cloth," Se)?i. Fins. 
To put on clothes : len shag, Lehir ; 
Ian sa'buk, U. Tern. To wear [Mai. 
pakai) : ya-len [pr. le'^n), Fang. 
Sam, Fang. Gal. To wear a loin- 
cloth : len or ye len [pr. lenn), Fang. 
Sam, Fang. Gal. Man's loin-cloth 
{Mai. chawat) : (?) nenlen {pr. nen- 
lenn), Sem. Fins ; len, Lehir. 
Waist-cloth : laf^, Serau ; lat. Tan. 
U. Lang. ; lat, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; 
tinllah, Buk. U. Lang. ; len pgn-jok, 
Kerbat. Cloth (of bark) : len pen-jok, 
Kerbat \ C 171 ; galut". Sera?/. 
[Mon lup ; Sfieng, Fhnong lap, ' ' to 
enter"; Stieng lum, "to enter, to 
pass through"; Balinar \om, "in." 
Perhaps cf. Bahiiar klech, klek, ' ' to 
penetrate." (There is also an 
Andavtanese word lat, "to enter.")] 

77. Enter, to : amoi (emol), Sak. Kerb. ; 
enmild, Tembi \ niait, Serau. [Bali- 
nar, Chum, Jarai, Frou, Cancho 
mut ; Sui mtit ; Sedang m6t ; Tareng 
hemot ; Cuoi mot, Annam mo' — " to 
enter."] A156; C 219; E 12; F 
12 ; G 43 ; L 31. 

VOL. II 

78. Entrails [.\Ial. tali pgrut) : ejued or 
ejuwed, Sem. Kediih ; B 159. 
Entwine, to : B 213. 

Envelop, to : W 144, 145. 
Epilepsy : U 160 ; F 155. 
Equal ; A 79. 
Err, to : F 23. 
Escape to ; R 198 
Estimate, to : T 79. 
Estuary ; R 149. 
Eternal : F 1 3 1 . 

European : M 23 ; M 26 ; M 28 ; 
W lox. 

Evening : D 16 ; D 19 ; D 21 ; D 
25-28 ; L 15 ; T 263. 
Evening star : S 436. 
Ever, for ; A 72 ; O 21. 
78.\. Every : tihap, Bes. Songs \_Mal. 
tiap] ; E I, 2. 
Evidence : C 147, 148. 
Evil-smelling : S 292. 
Exceedingly : V 10-13. 
Exchange, to : H 61 ; B 484 ; G 
29. 

Excrement : S 468. To void 
excrement : S 467-472. 
Exhale, to : C 253. 

79. Expand, to ; to open out (intrans. ) : 
yuwi ();'riwi? (iuwi or riwi), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

80. Expand, to: rSkan? (rkn), Sem. 
Fa. .Max. 

Expensive : D 59. 
Expired : H 329 ; B 388. 

81. Explain, to (?) : s§ke' (ski'), Sem. 
Buk. .Max. 

Explosion, noise of: V 15. 

82. Extinguish, to : sSp™, Jak. Malac. ; 
B 256, 257 ; D 53. 

Extract, to : P 231. 
Exude, to : O 66. 

83. Eye: {a) med, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Craw. Gram. , Sem. Ked. And. , 
Sem. Ked. New., Sem. Ked. Mar. 
Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Mar., 
Sem. Jur. New., U. Fat., U. Kel. ; 
(meda), Sein. Jur. Rob. ; med (mid), 
Sem. Fa. Max. ; med, Sem. Ij. ; 
mit ; mid, Sem. Klapr. ; m6t. Sent. 
Beg. ; met, Setn. Keti., Fang. U. 
Ariiig, Fang. Sam., Pang. Gal., 
Sem. Sfev. , Lebir, Kerbat, Biik. U. 
Lang., Bes. Sep. A. I. ; (met). Pang. 
Jalor ; met or med [pr. mett or 
medd), Sem. Kedah ; med (/;-. 
niadd), Sem. Jarum ; met or med 
{pr. miidd or matt), Sem. Plus ; 
met (mit), Sem. Buk. Max. ; met, 
Bes. Sep. ; mat, Bes. Malac. ; (mSte), 
Sak. Sel. Da. ; mah (mayh), Bes. 
Bell. ; met, Seyn. Martin ; mad, 

2 Q 

594 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Sak. Br. J.mu, Sak. Croix, Tembi, 
Serau ; maat, mad, Tembi ; mat, 
Sak. U. Kam., Darat ; (mat), 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; (mat), Sak. Ra., 
Sak. Kerb. ; mat, Son. Per., Ben. 
New. , U. Cher. , Krau Ket. , Krau 
Tern., Sak. Guai, Sen. Cliff., Sak. 
Tan. Ram., Sak. Blanj. Sw., Or. 
Berumb., Jelai, Sak. Sung. ; mfl.t, 
-Sak. Martin ; emat, Tafi. U. Lang.; 
mu-at, Bera ; m6t, Sertlng; mot, 
U. Tern. ; U. hid. ; man, Sem. A". 
Ken., Som. ; man (men), Bes. Her., 
Bed. Chiong ; monat, Sak. Ra. ; 
W 30 ; W 121. Eyeball : mat, 
Sak. Plus Cliff., Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
Countenance : man, Sem. K . Ken. 
Face: mid, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. 
Jur. New., Sem. Jur. Rob. ; mad, 
Tembi ; ma - had, Som. ; maat 
(maat), Sem. U. Sel. ; mat, Sem. 
Per. , Sen. Cliff. ; matmoh, Sak. 
Blanj. Sw. ; matmoh, Jelai [ = 
"eye and nose," N 99]; cp. F4? 
Impudent [by mistake given as 
imprudent] : mad, Som. [This looks 
like a translation of the first half only 
of the Mai. muka tebal, which is 
given as the equivalent.] Black eyes : 
met bSltek (mit bltik), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; .net bitong (mit bitung), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Fair eyes : met 
plltau (mit plltu), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
med pitau (mid pitu), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
\V 101. Cataract (?), (Mai. mata 
bSrbunga) : met aji met (mit aji mit), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; met bfilkuin (mit 
blkuln), Sem. Pa. Max. Eyeball 
{Mai. biji mata) : kgmalig med, Sem. 
Kedah ; kalil met, Sem. Plus ; kril 
[pr. krill) met. Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; {Mai. 
pohon mata) : tom med (tum mid), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; T 203 ; chenbun met 
(chnbun mit), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Eyebrow : sentol - man, Som. ; 
sentol-mat, .'iak. Ra. ; sentol mat, 
Serau ; naning mat, Jelai ; chernir 
mat, Serau ; chamieng mad, Tembi. 
Eyelash (.Mai. bulu mata) : sog 
med (pr. sogg mcdd), Sem. J arum ; 
sog met or med ([)r. sogg iiiett or 
medd), Sem. Kedah, Sem. Plus ; sok 
met, Pang. U. .Aring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; sok-met (suk mit), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; sftk-met (sk mit), 
Sem. Pa. .Max.; sempoi-nian, Som.; 
scmpoi mat, Serau ; sentdl man 
(sendiil man), Sew. A'. Ken. ; sentol 
mat, Suk. Blanj. Cliff. ; sentol-mat, 
Sak. Ra. ; sCntul mat (sntol mat), Sak. 

U. Bert. Inner corner of the eye : 
pangkai met (pngkl mit), Sem. Buk. 
.Max. ; baho' met (bhu' mit), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Lens of the eye : bato 'met 
(batu' mit), Sem. Buk. Max. Eyelid : 
kfito' met (ktu' mit), Sem. Buk. 
.Max. ; kid met (kid mit), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; chingob (or jingob?) man 
(tschingob-man ; dschingob - man ?), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; k'lopok met. Pang. 
U. Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Eyelids : keldal mat, Serau. Eye- 
lashes ; eyelids : keldal mat, Jelai. 
Outer corner of eye : hate' met 
(hati' mit), Sem. Buk. .Max. ; hite' 
met (hiti' mit), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Pupil of eye (Mai. biji mata) : kfibo' 
met (kbu' mit), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
mido' met (midu' mit), Sem. Pa. 
Max.; kenun met, Bes. Sep.; k6-non 
mat, Sak. Blanj. Cliff.; (Mai. orang- 
orang mata), awak met. Pang. U. 
.Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Blear-eyed (Mai. mata gfilap) : tueh 
ha' met (tuih ha' mit), Sem. Pa. 
.Max. ; hikut met (hikut mit), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; (Mai. mata bilis), met 
bllis (mit blis), Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. 
Buk. Max. Blind : klabii-man, Sem. 
K. Ken.; bekah mad, Tembi ; B 375 
orW78(?); (Mai. mata kabus), met 
kabus (mit kabus), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Blind in one eye (.Mai. buta sabelah): 
koh met menglang (kuh mih mnglng), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Blind ' ' like a 
fowl" (Mai. buta hayam): sabu me" 
(sabu mik?), Sem. Buk. Max. ; met 
che' mano' (mit chi' manu'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Disease of the eye : pias met 
(pias mit), Sem. Buk. Max. ; meje' met 
(mji' mit), Sem. Pa. Max. Disease 
of eyes? (Mai. mata tumbu) : met 
tumbu (mit tumbu), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Faint (Mai. gelap mata) : her-kod 
met (pr. herr - kodd mett ; lit. 
"darkened sight"), Sem. Plus. A 
form of salutation : tabek met ; jaga 
met, Bes. Sep. Scjuint ; cast in the 
eye : pillang met (palAng mit), Sem. 
Buk. .Max. Tears : leng met (Ing 
mit), Sem. Buk. Max. ; H 1 19 ; ag mat 
(org mat), Sak. Plus Cliff ; bSteu 
med (btu? mid), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
tu ? man (diiman), Sem. A'. A'en. ; 
tc-u mat. Sen. Cliff. ; teu mat, Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. ; doo met, Bes. Se/>. ; 
W 30. Whitish discoloration of the 
eye: met bular (mit bulr), Sem. Pa. 
A/ax. ; V 124 ; F 220 ; P 53. 
(b) Seed (.Mai. biji) : ma'at or miit, 
Sem. Plus; maut, Sem. Per. ; matu. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

595 

Jnk. l.em. ; mido' (niidu'), Sem. Pa. 
Max., Sem. link. Ma.v. ; niatan, 
/ai. .Malac. Covering of seeds 
[Mai. ulas) : niTdo' (niidu'), Sicm. 
Pa. Ma.v. ; F 124. 
{(-) A piece {Mai. biji) : man, .Siim. 
Point (.Mai. ujong) : mat, Soin. 
Spring (of water) : met, lies. So/igs. 
Arrow of bow {Mai. anak panah) : 
met ningpeng, Sem. h'edah. Tooth 
of a comb: ma.6., Sent. Sfev. Sword: 
met, Sem. Stev. lidge of sword : 
tabal-met, Sem. S/e-'. Black beads (in 
neckhices): met-iss, Sem. S/e-<\ ; C 124, 
125 ; I 36. [.1/(W mat [mAt], "eye," 
" precious stone," "cutting edge " ; 
Tare//{f, h^ase/zi;, Kon Tii, Sui, Ha- 
lang^Boloven, Stieng, liahiiar. Churn, 
Chrd/i, Kuy Dek, An nam mftt ; Ci/oi, 
Plinong, Proit, Ka, Chong, -\'ong 
mat ; Samri, Pot; Khmiis mot ; 
Sedang mat, mS, ; Centr. , Southern 
Nicohar oal-mat ; Shum PS hogmai ; 
Teressa amejit ; Chowra 61-met ; Car 
Nicohar mat ; Khasl ka khmat ; 
Santall ma*; Malhe,^Birhiirvci&^\ 
.Mundarl, Dhanggar ma'' ; A'orwa 
met ; A'orku med, met ; Kharia 
mod, mo' ; Sawara aniad, mad ; 
Juang, emor ; Gadaba moo, ma, 
" e3'e " ; Cnoi, Tareng mut ; Stieng 
mus mat ; Prou mu mat ; Su^ 
ummftt ; Annam xnki, "face."] 
((/) Eye : mata, Mantr. Malac. , Jak. 
Malac. ; matii (mate), Barak ; pemata, 
Ben. Nciv. Eyebrow : bulu mata' 
(biilu matak), Bedn. II. Eyelid : 
kelopok mata, Mantr. Her. I. 
{e) Shaft of arrow (of bow) : bata, 
SiUn. Spear {Mai. lembing) : ma-ta' 
Sem. /arum ; matai, U. Pat. Wooden 
spear : batS, - dak, Sak. Pa. ; baja 
(badjia), Sak. Kerb. Point of lance 
or spear : bata ; batS,, Sak. Ka. ; 
baja (badjia), Sak. Kerb, 
(f) Sun: pemataan, Ben. .\ew. [Mai. 
mata, "eye," "blade of weapon," 
etc.] 

84. Kyk : lang, Kena. I. Eyeball ; 
pupil : kenldeng (kenlag'n), Sem. K. 
Ken. ; [? cf. Rode' lak (lac), "eye"]; 
F 220 ; S 76 ; S 86. 

To open the eyes : A 190, 191. 

To shut the eyes : S 247. 

Eyeball : E 83, 84. 

Eyebrow : B 431-433 ; E 83 ; Hi; 

H 4 ; N 98. 

Eye-fly : F 199. 

Eyelash ; B 431 ; E 83. 

85. Eyel.-VSHE.S : siempoi, Sak. Kerb. ; 
sempoi, Tembi ; E 83. 

Eyelid : E 83. 
86. Eyelid, upper : engpak, Tembi. 
[Cf. Khmer trebak [trapak], ' ' mem- 
brane. "] 

1. Face : an, Sem. Biik. .Ma.v. Com- 
pltxion; colouring of the face : bateoh 
an (btiuh an), Sem. liux. Max. ; W 30. 
Front ; face ; in front : han, Sem. 
Buk. .Max. [? cf. M 199]. 

2. F.\(:i'; ; forehead : = F 228 and cf. 
F 277. 

3. F.-\CK : sojjT (sod-jee), Sem. Ken. 

4. Fack : reman, Bedii. II. ; emen ? 
(emain). Tan. U. Lang. [?=IC 83]. 

5. F.\CE : rangop ? (tamlangop), Ben. 
AVw. Head : rangik ? (tamlangik ; 
tanilanjik), Ben. .\\~o. [These are 
inexplicable : probably they are faulty 
transcriptions of words collected for 
Newbold by a Malay in the Arabic 
character : cp. Hikayat 'Abdullah, 
chapter on the Jakuns ; cp. F 221 ; 
T 166 ; W II.] 

6. Face : muko (mouko), Sak. Kerb. ; 
muka (mouka), Sak. Ka. ; muka, 
Sak. U. Kam., Sak. Sung., Mantr. 
Malac, Jak. Malac. ; mukha' 
(muk'ha'), Serting ; muke, Barok. 
Forehead : muka, Zyt't/^. //. Impudent 
[by mistake given as imprudent]: muka 
(mouka), Sak. Ka. ['I'he proper 
adjective has been omitted here ; muka 
only means " face. "] [.Mai. nuika] ; 
B 146, 147 ; C 81 ; E 83 ; F 277 ; 
M 202 ; N 99 ; S 85. 

Fade, to : D 93. 
Faded : W 61 ; W 131. 
Faint : D 160 ; IC 83 ; V 24. 

7. Fai.vt, feeling; giddy (J/a/. pening): 
lu-ikn, Sen. Cliff. [? = V 24]. 

8. Fainting ; loss of consciousness : 
pengsan (pingsn), Sem. Pa. Ma.v. 
[.Mai. pengsan]. 

Fair : W loi. 

9. Fair weather : lilung, Sem. Buk. 

.lA.M-. 

10. Fall, to : perelsel, ex. pcrelsel wong 
bekau, " the young tiower-bud falls, " 
Pang. Teliang. 

11. Fall, to {Mai. jatoh) : ya' dahes 
{pr. da-hiiss), Sem. Plus. To fall 
down: has? (h-s [.f/f]), Sem. Beg. 
To fall down ; to stumble : has 
(hauss), Sem. Stev. To fall ; to 
spill [.Mai. jatoh ; tumpah): hes (his); 
haet (halt), ^>w. Pa. .Max.; mahflch 
(mahch), Sem. Buk. Max. To 

596 

CO MP A RA TI VE VOCA BULA R V OF 

slip ; lying down ; fallen ; 
upside down ; in confusion : hes 
(his), Se/?i. Pa. Max. To pour 
{Mai. tumpah) : ya - hayd (pr. 
haydd), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Spilled : hach (hch), Sem. Bnk. 
Max.; haye' (haii'), Sem. Pa. Max.; 
cp. W 73. [I am not sure that I have 
sorted all these words correctly as 
between the two paragraphs.] To 
fell trees [Mai. tSbang): ya' has-choh 
{pr. hass-chohh), Sem. Jarinn; C 295. 
To clear (jungle), [Mai. t6bas) : (?) 
ya'-has, Sem. /arum. [See W 73.] 

12. Fall, to {Mai. jatoh) : ya' blis, 
Sem. Jartmi, Sem. Plus. To fall ; 
to spill : mablis (mbls), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Lying down ; fallen : memblis 
(mmbls), Sem. Buk. Max. To 
disappear (?) or enter [e.g. of sunset) : 
bis-lis, ex. bis-lis kleng t§belkun, 
" disappears among the foliage "(?), 
Pang. Teliang. Upside down ; in 
confusion : mabli mali ang (mbli mli 
ang?), Sem. Buk. Max. To repose; 
to go to rest [Mai. masok tidor) : 
blyuwis [pr. bl^uwis), ex. ya' kijiiii 
ya' bl}aiwis [Mai. aku bangkit deri 
tidor), "I arise from sleep," Sem. 
Plus. South: benlis [pr. ben-liss) 
(doubtful), Sem. Kedah ; ben-liss or 
bang -liss, i^). Sem. Plus; F 155. 
[? Cf. A'hmer lich, " to plunge into "; 
lech [lich ; liych], "west."] 

13. Fall, to : {a) ke6, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
To fall (of ripe fruit) : kai (kai), Scin. 
Buk. Max. ; ka, Bes. Malac. To 
fall down [Mai. rgbah) : kol, Sen. 
CI. ; (Mai. tumbang) : kol, Tembi ; 
k&l, Seranl or Tembi 7 ; koi, Serau ; 
{Mai. jatoh) : kuke' (kukek), Serau. 
To pour : ka (tii), Sak. U. Kam. 
\sic: "tii" probably = W 30]; koh, 
Serau. [? Cf. Bahuar kai ; Stieug 
kol, "to fell."] 

{b) To fall : kglo (ko-lo), Som. ; kelu 
(Mou), Sak. Kerb. [?=D 95]. 

14. Fall, to [Afal. jatoh) : ya' t6bol 
{pr. teboU), Sem. Plus. To fall (ot 
a tree) : bol^ng, Bes. A. I. 

15. Fall, to [Mai. jatoh) : ya-po-6p, 
Pang. Galas ; ya-p6p. Pang. Sam ; 
pog (pnirg), Lebtr ; prom, Bes. Songs. 
To fall to the ground : pog ba te' 
(perg bate'), Lebir; cf. D 96 {Bali- 
nnr pok, " to fall "]. 

16. Fall, to (.1/rt/. jatoh): yok'^, Serau; 
biiik", Krau P.m. ; yoh ? ivyon ? Sak. 
Ka. ; i-ok". Sen. CI. ; i-ok" ; i-ok". 
Sen. Cliff. To fall (of ripe fruit) 
{Mai. gugor ; jatoh) : ha' yioh? (ha' 

iiuh or ha' biuh?), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
{Mai. gugor) : jinjinjol (jinjinjgrl), 
Serau. Don't fall down [Mai. jangan 
jatoh) : mongiok°, Jelai. 

17. Fall, to (of a tree) : bedgl^ng ; 
bedok, Bes. A. I.; bgdo"^, Bes. 
Malac. To drop ; to fall : bedok, 
Bes. K. Lang. ; bSdok, Bes. Songs. 
[? Cf. Moil tum [do], " to fall " (as a 
tree).] 

18. Fall, to [Mai. jatoh): griip, U. 
Cher. ; grok (grerk or gSrk), U. 
Tern. ; groyn ; groft, Bes. Sep. ; grun, 
Bes. Sep. To fall to the ground : 
griip ga teh ; griip a-teh, U. Cher. ; 
grok a te (grerk [or gerk) a-te), U. 
Tern. ; cf. D 96. [Cf. Man g^roh 
[gftruih], " to fall down in pieces"; 
charoh [charuih], " to pour " ; Khmer 
chruh ; chrus [jruh ; jrus] ; Bahuar 
ruh, joruh ; Sfieng joruh, " to fall " 
(esp. of leaves) ; ruh, aruh, "to get 
loose and fall."] 

19. Fall, to [Mai. jatoh): chero? or 
choo? (chSr-er), Krau Ket. To fall 
to the ground : cho gen te' (ch6r 
gSn-te'), Krau Kef. ; cf. D 96. To 
spill [.\fal. tumpah) : saru ; suri, 
Serau [?=F 18]. 

20. Fall, to [Mai. jatoh) : ya-gol, 
Pang. U. A ring; gol (gerl), Kerbat. 
To fall to the ground : gol ba' te' 
(gerl ba' te'), Kerbat. To fall (of a 
tree), tegot, Bes. Sep. [but cf. T 112]. 
To fell (trees) : gagu, Sak. Kor. Gb.; 
gegu (ghdghou), Sak. Ra. ; gfi. Sen. 
^l^ff- I gag' ; ganikn, Serau ; gah 
(/;•. giihh), Bes. Sep. A. I. ; goh, 
Bes. K. Lang. ; kagah, Bes. Songs. 
To cut : ganik'^, Serau. People fell 
here and there : magi' (magik) mata' 
(niatakh), magi' (magik) madi, 
Serau [? = C 300]. 

21. Fall, to ; to let go ; to throw away; 
to spill ; to live (at a place) ; loss : 
telahor (t' labor). Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Broom : penlahor (p'nlahor), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. To go down : melahor 
(m'lahor). Pant. Kap. Joh. To re- 
main; to shove; to throw; to spread - 
out ; labor, Pant. Kap. Joh. To 
sink : tglahor ke sempeloh (t'lahor 
k's'mp'loh). Pant. Kap. Joh.; W 34. 
[? Cf. Mai. labuh, "to fall," "to 
let fall" (especially an anchor); 
Sundan. labur, " to pour out."] 

To fall: D 96; P 147; S 119. To 
fall down ; D 95, 96. 
21A. Fall on, to ; to strike : tempa', 
e.g. nahol tcm[xi' krcp, "it is true, 
or may (something) fall on my body" 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

597 

(a form of asseveration), Des. K. 
Lang. \Mal. timpa]. 

22. False [Mai. karut): [a] bar {pr. 
barr), Sem. /arum. To lie (Ma/. 
m6mbohong) : ya-bar (//•. barr), 
Sem. Plus. 

{b) False : boi (boi), Som. ; biiiin' 
(baiidt'n ; bii-adt'n), Sem. K. A'c/t.; 
(Mai. karut): boyj (//-. boydj), Sem. 
Jarum ; m5-boycl (/r. niC-boydd) (the 
mO may represent the 2nd pers. pron. ), 
Sem. Plus. Lie (falsehood) : li-bus, 
Tem. CI. \Khmer phut [bhut], "to 
lie."] 

23. False ; deceitful : [a] mclenun, Sak. 
U. Kam. To speak lies : linglod, 
Sak. U. Kavi. 

{b) To deceive ; to delude : gilhoit ; 
gil-hoit, Sem. K. Ken. To cheat 
(.Ual. tipu or kecheh) : p6lot or p'lot, 
ex. jebilh p'lot ra' (Mai. orang dagang 
tipu sahaja), "the strangers do 
nothing but cheat," Bes. K. L. To 
err (Mai. silap) : jeloit", Sak. Em. ; 
jeruad, Tembi. [Ba/inar lut, "to 
get cheated " ; polut, " to deceive " ; 
Stieng luich,, . ' to cheat"; luech, 
"theft"; Moti klat [klftt], "to 
steal"; Khmer luoch [luoch], "se- 
cretly," "to steal"; and perhaps 
Bahnar plach, " to lie."] 
(c) To lie : jalii (djal-hi), Sem. K. 
Ken. [Halang leh, ' ' to lie "]. 

24. False ; falsehood (Mai. bohong) : 
eny4', Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. To lie (tell falsehoods): 
ya-nya, Pang. U. Aring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Lie (falsehood): 
dam-ya' [?], (J. Tem. ; put-enja', 
Kerbat. Mistake (Mai. silap) : ker- 
jer (pr. kerr-jerr), Sem. Plus. 

25. False: bohong (bohon), Sak. Ka., 
Sak. Kerb. To lie : ya-biyawun (pr. 
biawunn),^?/«. Kedah\Mal. bohong; 
but cf A"^/«t'/- prevail [prawan], "to 
cheat."] 

26. Lie, a : pli-au, Sem. Beg. ; pa'-ro', 
Lebir ; pa'-ho'. Sen. CI. To lie : 
pa'-ho', Sen. CI. Wrong: ple-au, 
Sem. Beg. [? Two different roots. 
For one of them cf Khmer kahak ; 
Stieng kohok, "to lie." For the 
other ? cf. F 23 or F 24.] 
Familiar : A 22. 

Familiar spirit : D 91 ; S 387. 

27. Fan: kipas. Bland. K. Lang. To 
wag (tail), [Mai. mengipas) : hipa' 
(hipk), Sem. Buk. Max. ; pat, Sem. 
Pa. Ma.x. l.Mal. kipas]. 

28. Fan-palm (spec. .Mai. kor): helab, 
Pang. U. Aring. 

29. Far (.Mai. jauh) : (a) menji', 
Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, I^ang. 
Gal. ; men-ji, Lebir; nien-ji', Kerbat. 
Far or distant : mCji', Pang. K. Aring; 
mejo'. Pang. Belinib. ; niCjo' (mju'), 
Setn. Pa. .Max. ; nienje' (ninji'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; B 165. Distant (Mai. 
jauh) : menji' (pr. nien-jl'), Sem. 
Kedah, Son. Plus ; menji' (pr. men- 
ji'), Sem. Jarum. To go away : 
mC-nje' (mnji'), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[Hut this may be connected with 
.)/(//. inchit.] Deep: mfiji'. Pang. 
K. Anng; m6jok. Pang. Belimb. ; 
menjo', Sem. Plus ; mgnjo', Pang. 
U. .4ring; menjog (men - j5rg), 
Lebir; minjo' (min-jer"), Kerbat. 
Deep or high (.Mai. dalam) : mgnjo'. 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Deep and 
narrow : mejo' (mju'), Sem. Buk. 
Max.; W109. High: majoh?(maja'h), 
Sem. Beg.; (majuh), Ben. A/era. ; mgjok. 
Pang. Belimb. ; menjok (m6n-j6rk), 
Lebir ; minjb' (min-jer'), Kerbat ; 
mgji', Patig. K. Aring. High (?) : 
ga?o/-ja? (ghe), Sak. Pa. High; tall: 
menjo' (mnju'), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Tall: niajoh?(niajn'h),.S"t'w. />«'. Tall; 
lofty (.Mai. tinggi) : menjo', Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus. Above ; on top : 
upwards : mfinjo' (mnjuk), Sem. Buk. 
.Max. Top ; that which is at the 
top : menjo' amik (mnjuk amik), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Uneven ; high 
and low in turn : m6njo' kate' (mnju' 
kati), Sem. Buk. Max. ; udam 
mfjo' ; udam menja? (audm mju' ; 
audm mnja), Sem. Pa. Max. In ; 
inside [deep?] : menja' (mnja'), Sem. 
Pa. .Max. ; menjo' (mnju'), Sem. 
Buk. .Max. The inside ; inside ; into : 
menjo' (mnju'), Sem. Buk. .Max. 
(b) Far : nya' ? (nyak), Serau, Darat ; 
nya.' , Sen. Cliff.; nyak", /<•/«/ ; nyah; 
'nnyah. Sak. U. Kam. ; nya (nja), 
.Sak. Martin ; n)-a, Darat ; (na), 
Sak. Ra. [To] go far : nya' (nyak), 
Serau [or Temhil\ How far is it to 
such and such village ? magen nyanak 
ma kampong (or kapong) niaita? 
Jelai; W 78. [A7/;«tv, C«r)/ chhngai; 
Kaseng, Suil chongai ; Samn', Prou 
chengai ; Ka changei ; Sue chngai ; 
Por sngai ; Kongao Bahnar shbngai 
(.\ongai) ; Lemet sngay ; Sedang 
siinge ; Mon jangoa or hoa [jngai] ; 
Boloven, tangai ; Halang angai ; 
Chrau, Phnong, Stieng ngai ; .-innam 
ngai ; Central .Vicobar hoi — " far."] 
B 153; D 66 ; E 76; O 21; 

598 

COMPA RA TIVE VOCA B ULA R V OF 

30 

31 

32 

34 

Fashion ; manner: moi (moi), Sai. 

Kerb. 

Fashion ; manner : macham (mat- 

cham), Sam. ; macham (matchiLni), 

Sak. Ra. [.lAz/. macham]. 

Fast: Q 5-15- 

Fast, a ; God : penadah (p'nadah), 

Pant. Kap. Jok. 

Fast, to make : B 213. 

Fasten, to : B 213, 214. 
33. Fat (subsf.), {Mai. lemak) : toydj 

(//•- tii>'dj), Sem. Kcdah ; toyd [pr. 

toydd), Sem. Plus ; toed (toid ?), 

Sem. Buk. A/a.r. ; tatid, Sem. Pa. 

Ala.v. ; lentoyt, Bes. Song's. Fat 

{adj.) {Mai. Igmak) : tutij (ttiutrj), 

Sem. Bilk. Ma.x-. [? cf. Khmer thot (?) 

[dhat], "fat" {adj.)]. 

Fat ; plump (of body) : mencho' 

(mnju'), Sem. Buk. Max. ; mencha' 

or mencho', Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 

m6n-chok, Lcbir ; bechok or becho', 

Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus; be-cho', 

Sen. Cliff.; be-chu', U. Tem.;h&ch\i , 

Bes. Sep. A. I. ; bi-cha', Kerbat ; 

bfichok", Jelai ; Sncha'? (ancha'), 

Setn. Pa. Ma.x. Plump ; solid {Mai. 

pejal) : meche' (mji), Sem. Pa. Ma.w 
Fat ; big : cheke (tche-k6), Slim. 

Large : cheke ? (chekai), Sem. Per. 

Full moon : chakii (tche-k6), Sbm. 

Fat ; plump : lohui (lohoul), Sak. 

Ra. ; a-hu^n (a-hud'n); ahu'^n ? 

(ahud'n ?), Sem. K. Ken. ; mahit^ 

\or mohit" ?], Daraf. 

Fat ; plump : g^mii' ; 'mu', Bes. 

Sep. A. /. \_Mal. gemok] ; B 204, 

205 ; R 125. 
38. Father : kan (kn), Sem. Pa. Ma.w ; 

kan, Sem. fur. Rob. ; (kau), Sem. 

Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Netu. ; ikuii, 

Bes. Malac ; ikuin (ekuin), Biik. U. 

Lang. ; ikon (eekon). Bes. Bell. ; 

ikugn, Bes. Her. ; ikun, Bes. Sep. 

A. I. ; ikun, Bed. Chiong; ikun, Ben. 

Ne-iC. ; kuyn ; kun. Bes. 

Father-in-law : ikugn, 

\Samre, /"i);- kuii (kunh) ; 

(kuny) ; Xong kun (koun) ; Cuoi kon 

(conh) ; I.emet un (ounh), "father," 

possibly connected witli M 15?] 
Fathkr : do (doh), Sak. Jer., Po- 

Klo ; (do), Sem. Per. Father-in- 
law : do (doh), Po-Klo. 
40. FA'i'MiiR : buk (bouk), Som. ; buh 

(lK)uh), Sak. Kerb. ; bu (bou), Sak. 

Croi.v ; bciu (boeu), Sak. Br. Low ; 

bo, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; (ber), Tem. CI., 

Sak. Plus Cliff. ; bo? orhKl (ben), 

Sem. P II pier ; bijh, Tembi ; be' ? 

(bek), Sak. Sung. ; bi" (bik), Serau ; 

35 

36 

37 

K. Lang. 
Bes. Her. 
Clwiii' kuii 

39- 

bi. Sen. CI. ; bi ; bi. Sen. Cliff. ; 
beh, Tail. U. Lang. ; abuh (iibouh ; 
abouh), Sak. Ra. ; abii, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; i - be, Sak. Guai ; ibu ; 
ibu kotol. Pant. Kap. fall. ; 
embei ; mbei, /ak. Sembr. ; mbai, 
Or. Hut. Joli. /. ; mbai, U. Ind. ; 
bai, /(//■. Ba. Pa. ; mba. Pal. ; 
wa, Bes. Malac. Father - in - 
law : ba' ayah, Bedu. //. Grand- 
father {Mai. dato'): be' (?), Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Title given to 
married men : ba. Or. Berumb. Pre- 
fix used before names of men: ba-. 
Sak. Chen. Stepfather ; adoptive 
father ; uncle : bah, Serau. Uncle 
{ALil. pa' sudara) : bah {pr. bahh). 
Pang. U. Aring ; be'eh ; ?h&h, Sem. 
J arum; beh, Sem. Plus; ba, Sak. Jer. , 
Or. Berumb. ; ba, Sak. Ra. ; ba'. 
Sen. Cliff. ; ibah, Bes. Sep. A. L \ 
ibah, Bes. Her. ; ibah, Bed. Chiong; 
bo nyuk (ber-nyuk), Sak. Plus Cliff. 
[Cf. Khmer apuk [abuk] ; Phnong 
ambok (amboc) ; Prou bok (boc) ; 
Sue bu, apu, mpu ; Annam phu ; 
Lave bo ; Niahon bi ; Ha- 
lang, Bahnar ba ; A chin. ba, 
"father" ; Stieng ba, prefix used 
before names of elderly men, cf. M 
18; Bahnar bok, "grandfather," 
"male ancestor." But the names 
for "father" and "mother" are 
alike in many languages.] 

41. F.vrHKR : ita, I'. Ind. [Eta was 
the secret name of the late Date' of 
Johol. It was never mentioned : so 
stated by .VIr. Abraham Hale, for- 
merly District Officer, Tampin. ] 
Grandfiither {.\'Ial. dato') : tak [pr. 
ta'), Sem. /arum ; tak {pr. ta') ; ta', 
e.g. ta' Ponn or ta' Pon ( =grandsire 
Pon), Sem. Plus; ta," Pang. U. 
Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; ta? 
(da), Sak. Kor. Gb. ; ta'ta', Sak. 
Plus Cliff. ; tata', Sak. U. Bert. 
Old man : tata, Tembi [? cf. G 86 or 
G 83.] {Mon ita, "father" ; Khmer 
ta[ta], ' 'old man," " male ancestor. "] 

42. Fathkr : sangkat, Kena. I., 
Ken a. If. 

43. Father : meni, Or. Berumb./, mf- 
ni, Sak. BlanJ. Cliff. ; vnQna.h, Sak. 
Martin. Uncle: mfi-na', 6'c?/6. BlanJ. 
Cliff. [?=B203]. 

44. Fathkr: (a) pha' ? (phak), Sem. 
Klapr.; pa' (pak), 'femiang ; pa', 
Pang. K. .{ring. Pang. U. /{ring; 
pa, Or. 'Prang; pa. Or. Berumb. ; 
pa', Kerbat ; i-pa', U. Tem. ; apa', 
Sak. U. Kam. ; apa, Sak. BlanJ. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

599 

Sw.\ ape' (;\p6k), .SV;-//;/"'. Father-in- 
law: ape' (apek), Serlim;; V 132. 
[Cf. Mon apil; Sedamr p;"!; K'/imer-pH, 
So inpa, " father" ; and see F 40.] 
(b) Feather: Ijapai, B/an. Rem., Bedu. 
II., Moit. Her. /., Ment. Her. 1 1. ; 
(bd-paei), Sak. Sel. Da. ; (bapi). 
Merit. Stev. ; bapai, Bedu. II. , 
Mant. Dor. , Alanfr. .Malac, , Jak. 
Malac. ; bapong, Rasa ; bapu, Beti. 
Nciv. ; bapa, Jak. Mad. ; bepe' 
(bfip^k), Barok. Father - in - law : 
bapai, Bedu. II., Bedu. III. Uncle: 
bepe' suderhe (b^pek sudekhe), Barok. 
\Mal. bapa, pa', "father."] 

45. F"ather : ai, Sem. Craw. Hist. , Sem. 
Ked. And., Sem. Ked. A'eiu., Sem. 
Ked. Rob. , Pang. Belimh. , Sem. 
U. Sel. [the MS. originally had 
aye] ; eJ", Sern. Kedak, Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus ; e, Sem. Kedah, 
Sem. Plus, Pang. Belhnb. ; (6), 
Lebir; (eh). Pang. Jalor; (ay?) [see 
F 46], Sem. Klapr. ; 6hl, Jehehr ; 
ah, U. Pat., U. Kel. 

46. F'ather : shah, Sem. Beg. ; zaza, 
Ben. Nei.u. ; yah(?) [he has; ay, 
yah : it is not clear whether they are 
two words or one], Sem. Klapr. ; 
ayah, Mantr. Malac. [Mai. ayah]. 
Father of first-born child : F 132. 
Father-in-law ; F 30-40 ; F 44 ; 
G 86 ; L 21-25. 

Fathom : C 89. 
Fatigued: T 145-151. 

47. Fault : neglik (negh-lik), Sdm. ; 
B 10. 

Fawn : D 68. 

48. Fear : antong (antung), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Fear ; afraid ; fright ; fright- 
ened : tueh (touA ; touch), Siim. ; 
to, Sak. Kerb. To fear : antong, Ben. 
Netii.; intiisng? (indug'n), Sein. K. 
Ken. ; endang (undang), Sem. Beg. ; 
etukn, e.g. "don't be afraid," je 
ettuk"[.f2V], Tern hi; itu (itou), e.g. ka 
itu (ka itou), " don't be afraid," Sak. 
Korb. Lias. Fear ; to be a coward : 
ma'antuni (ma ntum), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Cowardly: intuSng? (indug'n), 
Sem. K. Ken. Afraid ; to 
fear: entong (en-terng), Kerbat. 
To be afraid : antong (anteung 
Sem. Beg. Afraid : ha tdk, e.g. 
" don't be afraid " ; je ha tcik 
Sak. Tan. Ram. Frightened {.Mai. 
takut) : 'ntong or entong (explained 
as being the same word as that for 
"ear"), ex. kom ye 'ntong {=AIal. 
sahya banyak takut), Pang Sam, 
Pang. Gal. To be frightened : 

'ntong (n'tung) ; entang, Sem. Stev. 
To tremble (with fright), {A'fal. 
genietar) : ya nia' antong (ia ma' 
antung), Sem. Buk. .Max. Danger ; 
peril : hatu (hatou), Som. ; to ; tak 
to (tek to), Sak. Kerb. [Sue' tuang ; 
LaTe aduong, "fear"; Samre taang ; 
Par tang ; Cuoi tuong ; Prou dong, 
" to be afraid."] 

49. F'kar ; afraid ; fright ; frightened : 
S(?ngo: (sono), Sak. Ra. Afraid (.l/a/. 
takut hati) : hagid kelangez, Sem. 
Plus. .Afraid : sengil (snga), Sak. 
U. Kam. To fear ; to be afraid : 
sgng-oh, Sen. Cliff.; sgngoh, Serau ; 
(sengoh), Jelai. Do not be afraid : 
pe singoit ? (peh si n6it), Sak. Tap. ; 
ui gai sengo' (sengok), Serait ; ga 
sengo' (gassengok), Jelai ; F 121. 
I am afraid to swim here : eng 
sengoh (sengoh) b6h \or boh?] 
meliloi, K>-aii Em. Frightened : 'gi' 
or hendggi', Pang. Belimb. [Mon 
samnga, "fear"; Bahnar shonit 
(xonit), "afraid," "to take fright " ; 
Khmer noiibk [flafiok] ; fionbch 
[ninoch] ; nofiot [fiafiot], "afraid."] 

50. Fear, to : geli, Mantr. Malac. ; gli, 
Bes. Songs. Afraid : gli (glee), Bes. 
Bell. Frightened : gli, Bes. Songs. 
[? Cf. /'//wo//^'" klach (clach) ; Bahnar 
lit, "to be afraid " ; Hagu (Bahnar) 
hli, " to fear."] 

50A. Fear, to : pa, Sak. Martin. 
[Doubtful : the Malay equivalent 
given is tidak ( = "no").] [? Cf. 
.Mo?r phek, " to fear."] 

51. Fear, to : takut, Mantr. Malac. 
l-Mal. takut] ; F 48. 49. 

Feast, to : D 165. 

52. Feast, to (with drinking, etc.): 
beranta balei, Bes. Sep. [lit. "stamp 
(on the floor of) the hall "],'[/!/«/. 
rL'ntak = D 176]. 

53. Feather : ding, Buk. if. Lang. ; do- 
it, Sak. Sel. A?. ; D 98 ; H I ; H 4 ; 
W 119. 

Feathered part of arrow : B 361. 
Feeble : S 272 ; T 145 ; T 147 ; 
W 57-64. 
Feed, to : G 29. 

54. Feel, to [Mai. rasa) : ya-hoko', 
ex. hoko' chyas yQ = Mal. rasa tan- 
gan sahya, "my hand felt (feels) it," 
Pang. U. .{ring. 

55. Feel, to : bo, Sak. Kor. Gb. 

56. Feel, to : si' Sen. Cliff. {Sen. CI. 
has si', " to fell " ; probably this last 
a misprint] ; serik", Serau [? cf. 
A 76]. 

57. Feel, to : iniasa, Sem. K. Ken. 

6oo 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

To feel ; to touch : hasa' (hask), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; rasa' (rsii'), Sent. 
Buk. Max. Feeling: hasa' (hasa'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; masa' ? (niasa' ?), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Feeling ; to feel ; 
to touch : wasa' (uasa'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. To taste ; to try the taste of : 
hilsa' (hasa'), Sem. Pa. Max. [J/a/. 
rasa]. 

58. Feeling [Mai. rasa'an) : na' (na'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. To taste : na? (no), 
Sak. Kor. Gb. To think {Mai. 
fikir) : ya' nah (/r. nahh), Sem. 
Plus ; [cf. R 66 ?]. 

Fell, to : A 4 ; C 296 ; F 1 1 ; F 20 
(Fs6?). 

59. Fell trees, to: {a) bantel. Pant. 
Kap. Log. ; niemantil. Jak. Mad. 
(Pant. Kap.); niembantil. Pant. 
Kap. Her. To cut wood : mantil ; 
niemantil (in'niantil). Pant. Kap. 
J oh. To grow : niemantil (ni' mantil). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. [cf. Mai. bantai ; 
banting]. 

[b] To lie down : mantil, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. [cf. Mai. banti]. 

60. Female {Mai. betina) : yalii, Pang. 
K. A ring; Pang. U. A ring; yalu. 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Woman : 
yalu (jalu), U. Kel. ; (ia-lu), Kerbat ; 
yalo (ya - ler), Lebir. Wife : leh, 
Temhi. 

61. Female : bobo, Sem. Per. ; babak 
(//-. baba'), Sem. Plus; babo', Sem. 
Plus, Pang. Belimb. ; babo, Sak. 
Br. Low ; babo, Sak. Croix ; ba'-bo', 
Tern. CI. ; F 257 ; P 74. Woman : 
bab6h, Sak. Jer. ; baboh, Po-Klo, 
Jehehr ; gob -bobo, Sem. Per. ; 
senghoi - babS (sen hoi -babo), Sbm. ; 
senhoi babo (senhoi - babo), Sak. 
Kerb. ; sen-6i bab6, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
M 26 ; baboh ; babo' (babok), 
Tembi ; bong, I)a>-at. Girl : bong, 
Serau ; baboh? (babogh), Tembi. 
Woman ; maiden ; virgin : babok", 
Tembi. Hen : boh, Temhi. Wife : 
gob-bob6, 6V/«. /"t'/-. ; M28; bobo^^ng, 
Bes. A. I. Girl {Mai. budak betina): 
bong, Sen. Cliff. Mother-in-law : 
babdh, Sak. Jer. ; C 102 [? cf. 
M 192]. [? Cf. .Mon bhu [bhO ; 
bho'] ; Stien^h&ng, "female."] 

62. Fe.male {Mai. betina) : mabii (/;-. 
ma-bil), Sem. Kedah ; mabeh (mabh), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; (mablh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; mabO (marb6 [in the MS. 
originally marbey]), Sem. U. Sel.; 
(mad^), Sem. Beg.; be (bay), Sem. 
Stev. Nubile; adult: mabeh (niabih), 
Sem. Pa. .\[ax. Wife ; woman : 

mabe (ma-bay), Sem. Stev. Woman : 
maba, Sem. .Martin ; mabeh, Sem. 
I J. ; mabeh (mabh), 6V;«. Buk. Max. ; 
(mablh), Sem. Pa. Max.; mabtJ, Sem. 
Beg.; mabe, Ben. New.; mabe(marbe 
[in M.S. originally marbey]), Sem. U. 
Sel. ; mabei, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. 
Jur. Rob. , Sem. Jur. Neio. ; Ifimabeh? 
(turn -ah - beh), Sem. Ken. [? Cf. 
1 ranun babei, "female"; Sulu babai ; 
Tagbenuah^h-s\, "woman."] 

63. Female : kerdol, Sak. U. Kam., 
Serau ; (krdol), Sak. U. Bert.; (krg- 
dol), Sen. CI., Sak. Blanj. CI., Sak. 
Slim CI. ; kredo' , Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
Vft6.o\,Bes. K. Lang. ; kedul, Bes. Bell. ; 
kerdor, Jelai; kedur, Bes. Sep. ; kedor, 
Serting ; kfido, Bes. Her. ; kGdd, Bes. 
Malac. ; sedok, Kena. L Wife : 
kedoi, Sem. K. Ken. ; kedol, Sak. 
Br. Low ; kedol, Sak. Croix ; ked61 
(kodol), Sak. Kerb. ; kedul (kedul), 
Bes. Bell. ; kg-dor, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
kedor (kodor), Som..; kadoi-in (kad6i- 
in), Sak. Jer. ; gado' (gadok), Bes. 
Her. ; (gadok), Buk. U. Lang. ; 
gad6, Bes. Malac. Daughter : kodo 
kanit, U. Ind. ; .S 280. Woman : 
kerdol, Sak. U. Kam., Sak. Em. ; 
(kre-dol), Se7i. Cliff. ; kedol, Sak. 
Br. Lmo, Sak. Croix ; kod61, U. 
hid. ; kodol (kodol'). Or. Hu. 
Joh. L ; kridbl, Darat ; kgrdu, 
Sak. Sung. ; kedu, Ment. Her. 
1 L ; kardur, e.g. ' ' a handsome 
woman," kardur nyani bar (kardur 
nyanee bar), Sak. J. Low ; kerdor, 
Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; kfidor ; kedur ; 
kedol, Bes. Sep. A. L ; kedor, Sak. 
Tan. Kam., Serting; kgdor, Buk. 
U. Lang., Tan. U. Lang. ; (kedor), 
Ben. New. ; ke-doh, U. Cher. ; 
kedo, Bes. Her. ; kedd, Bes. Malac. ; 
kodo, U. Ind. ; sed6k, Kena. L ; 
gado ? (ga-der), U. Tem. ; senhoi- 
kedo (senhol-kedo), Sak. Pa. ; M 26. 
Maiden ; virgin : krg-dol na* - ne'i 
Sen. Cliff. ; G 28. To marry : gigu, 
sama kerdol (giguy sami krdol), Sak. 
U. Kant. Shorter part of inner tube 
of blow-gim : kedol, Bes. K. Lang. 
\1-Hihnar kodri, "woman," "wife"; 
Scdang kedri, kodri, "woman"; 
Bahnar adruh, "adult (nubile) 
female."] 

64. Fem.vle : kena' (kna'), Sak. U. 
Kam. ; kC'-ncng, Sen. Cliff. ; kong 
(kerng), Sak. Guai. Female (of 
animals) : iknan, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
i-kenan, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; m6-iko 
(me-i-ker), U. Tem. ; F 255 ; P 74. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

60 1 

Woman : kfine (kenay), Sem. Stev. ; 
k6nS, Sak. Martini ; kna', Sak. U. 
Kam. ; kinnah, e.g. "a handsome 
woman," kinnah bar, Sak. J. Lmv ; 
kogn, U. Pat. ; kakbng (kil-keng), 
Sak. Guai ; kakong, Kerdau ; 
takcin (ta'kgrn), Krau Kef.; krakong 
(kra-kerng), A'rau Tern. ; pgkanial 
(pekannial), Ben. .Wezv. ; mai-kgnah, 
Or. Berumb. Young woman : kena, 
Sak. Tap. Girl : kna', Sak. U. 
Kam. ; ka-kt5ng, Sak. Guai. Wife 
{Mai. bini) : kfinde, Pang. U. A ring; 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; kfin-deh, 
Kerbat; kfineh orkendeh, Sem. J arum, 
Sem. Plus ; kfineh (knh), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; (knih), Sem. Pa. Ma.v. ; kS- 
neh, Lcbir; (keneh), Sem. Pupicr; 
kene (kenay), Sem. Stev. ; (kener 
[misprint for kene : the MS. originally 
read keney]), Sem. U. Sel. ; 
(kne), U. Pat. ; kgnie (knie), U. 
Kel. ; kln-nieh. Pang. Jalor; kgni, 
Jehehr ; kS-nah, Sen. Cliff. ; kenah, 
Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; kg-nah, Tem. CI., 
Sen. CI., Sak. Plus Cliff., Sak. 
Blanj. CI. , Sak. Slim CI. , Sak. Guai, 
Krau Tem. ; kgnah, Tan. U. Lang. ; 
(konah), Sak. Ra. ; kenah, Darat (?); 
ken^^, Jelai ; kenau, Sak. Sung. To 
marry ; marriage {Mai. kahwin) : 
bg-kgneh or be-kendeh, Sem. Plus. 
To marry: be-kna', Sak. U. Kam. 
[Central, Southern, and Ckowra 
Nicobar kan ; Teressa kean ; S/wm Pe 
akea, "wife." Centi-al zMd Ckcnvra 
Nicobar enkana ; Teressa enkeana ; 
Car Nicobar kikana, "female," 
"woman." Bahnar akiin, "female," 
"woman," "wife"; Tareng akai ; 
Kon Tu akan ; Sui kan ; Mi cham 
kun ; Khmus chom kon (keun), 
"woman." 5//<^ kandeh ; Hin kan 
(can); KasengVxa., "wife."] 

65. Woman : miniah, Sem. Klapr. Old 
woman : m6ra, Sak. Tap. 

66. Woman : badon, Pang. Jalor ; 
badon, Sem. Craw. Hist., Sem. 
Klapr., Sem. Ked. And., Sem. 
Ked. Rob., Sem. Ked. New. ; (ba- 
donn), U. Pat. To copulate : ba- 
dong, Mantr. Malac. Nya. [? cf. 
F 68]. \Jav. wadon, "woman." 
But this word is supposed to be from 
the Sanskrit.] 

67. Wife : kem-pung, Bera ; kgmpiin, 
Setiing; kompotn, U. Ind. ; tgm- 
pun. Bed. Chiong ; B 382. Woman : 
tempun, Bed. Chiong ; prompuan, 
Mant. Bor. ; prgmpuan, .Mantr. 
.Malac. [Mai. perampuan. 1 regard 

the k-, t-, forms as also composed, 
with different prefi.xes, in the same 
way as pC-rampuan, from the same 
root-word anipu, Cmpu, "master," 
"lord."] 

68. Wife : hodong, Bes. K. Lang. ; 
odokng (?), Bes. Sep. ; M 49 ; [? cf. 
F 66].' 

69. Woman : malau (malow), Ben. New. 
Wife : nialaulau (malowlow), Ben. 
New. [? (Jf. Selung [dcIow, plao, 
"wife." But this may be only the 
Mon preau [brau] : and possibly cf. 
F 90 and some of the words under 
M 21.] 

70. Fkm.m.e : lidi, Kena. //. 

71. Woman : kasil, Kena. II. 

72. Fem.M.K : bgtina', Mantr. Malac, 
Jak. Malac. ; (betinak), Jak. Mad. ; 
betina, Mant. Bor. ; tina' (tinak) : 
Barok. Girl : betina' (bfitinak), Sak. 
Mad. Woman : bgtina', Mantr. 
Malac, Jak. Malac. ; (betinak), 
Ment. Her. I. ; Bedu. II. , Jak. Mad. , 
Jak. Semhr. ; betina, Temiang; rhang 
tene' (khang tenek), Barok ; M 31 ; 
mi-tunang, Sak. Sel. Da. \J\hil. 
bgtina, ' ' female."] 

73. Wife: ha -bini, Barok; b!ni. Or. 
Trang; bini, Mant. Bor., Mantr. 
Malac, Jak. Malac. Woman: nibinl, 
Or. Trang. [Selung bynnai ; Cham 
binai, "female"; Mai. bini, "wife."] 

74. Female : wa-. Sak. Chen. [A 
prefix used before proper names of 
women.] \_Achin. wa, mode of ad- 
dressing an old woman whose name 
one does not know.] 

75. Virgin : pettobut, Ben. New. [? cf. 
.1/1)// wut, "virgin," "young woman." 
But the Benua word is doubtful.] 

76. Fem.\LE child : davang, Jak. Mad. 
Girl : dai-ying, Sak. Ba. Pa. Un- 
married girl : dai-ang, Jak. Ba Pa. 
Woman : oyang, Jak. Ba. Pa. [Mai. 
dayang, "maiden"]. 

77. Wife : ta - au (taou), Po - Klo. 
Female : F 255 ; F 257, 258. 

78. Fence, a : sasak, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[Mai. sasak]. 

79. Fence: pagar, .Sak. U. Kam. Fence; 
palisade : rendad payo ( rended- 
payo), Sak. Ra. [Mai. pagar]. 

80. Fern : heler, Bes. Sep. 

81. Fek.n : pakau. Pang. U. A ring. 
paku' (pakuk), Serau ; paku, Darat, 
Jelai [Mai. paku]. 

82. Fern (spec. Mai. paku lipan): abia? 
(aiia o/- abia?), Sem. Pa. Max. 

83. Fern (spec. Mai. paku piai): kgchil 
(kchil), Sem. Pa. Max. 

6o2 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Festivity : A 76 ; G 74. 

84. Fever \Mal. dC-mam) : kengkiim, 
Sem. Kcdah, Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus; 
makungkung (inkungkung), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; king kong ; ka-tam, 
Sem. Sfei'. Malarial fever : mftkung- 
kung kgpialu (mkungkung kpialu), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Hot fever : 
makungkung pedih (mkungkung 
pdih), Sem. Buk. Max. Cold fever: 
mSkungkum pias (nikungkum pias), 
Sem. Buk. Max. 

85. Fkver : ma (ma), Sem. Pa. Max., 
Sem. Buk. Max. (?) ; maa, Sem. Jiir. 
And., Sem. Jur. Nexu. ; Sem. Jur. 
Rob. Cold fever : ma aung (ma 
aung), Sem. Pa. Max. Hot fever : 
ma pedih (ma' pdih), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Malarial fever : ma kepialu (ma 
kpialu), Sem. Pa. Max. 

86. Fever : lininka, Sem. Stev. 

87. Fever : pong, Sem. Stev. 

88. Fever, intermittent? {Mai. pelih kura 
kembang) : kura (kura), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; F 170 [J/rf/. demam kura]. 
Fever : C 205 ; S 187, 188. 

89. Fever-heat : siyau, Bes. Songs. 
Feverish : S 187. 

Few, a: Q 5 ; S 281. 

90. Fianc^ : seglok (soglok), Sak. Kerb. 
FianctJe : soglok, Sak. Kerb. 
Betrothed ; engaged : bg-pung-luk, 
Sak. Blaiij. Cliff. [? = M 21]. 

91. Ficus ; fig-tree [Mai. ara) : lu-a, 
Sak. Plus Cliff. ; {Mai. beringin), 
Ficus benjamiiia : luS.' (luuS.'), .Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

92. B'lCUS {Mai. ara) : sawet {fir. sa- 
wett). Pa// if. Skeat ; wi, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff, [cf. Mai. jawi-jawi]. 

93. Ficus, a large, with small leaves 
{Mai. jawi-jawi), Ficus rkododendri- 

folia : jenang, Bes. K. L. ; jena^^ng, 
Bes. A. I. 
Fiddle : M 226. 

94. Field: s§lai (slai; slay), Sak. Tan. 
Ram., Sak. U. Kam.; e.g. "men and 
women work in the plantation," ui 
slay kral krd61, Sak. U. Kampar. 
Field ; garden ; plantation ( Mai. 
ladang) : selai (solai), Som.; (sola!); 
solai, Sak. Kerb.; sSlai ; s6la( (solM; 
solai), Sak. Ra. Clearing ; planta- 
tion {Mai. ladang), se-lai. Sen. Cliff.; 
(slai, slay), .S'd/J'. U. Ka/n.; e.g. "to 
make a [)lantation," bii slay, Sak. 
U. Kam. ; selai ; slai, Te/nbi ; slai, 
Serau. To make a clearing : gan 
islai[?]; kraja' slai, .A-A?/. .Abandoned 
plantation : se-lai, Krau Te/n. Age: 
selai (w-lal), So/n. [An evident con- 

fusion of the Malay equivalents : 
huma, " field," and 'umor, "age"] 
[? Cf. 6'«/soray; .4nnam ray; Cham 
re, "field" (for dry rice cultivation).] 

95. Fierce : chongka' Mantr. Malac. 
\_.\Ial. chongkak]. 

Fig: F 91-93. 
Fight : S 189. 

96. Fight, to : A 17. 

97. Fight, to : bSr-prak, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; prang, Ben. New. War: prak 
(brak), Sak. Kor. Gb. To war : 
parang, Sc/n. Beg. Enemy : senghoi 
baperak ( seiihol, bapbrak ), Sak. 
K'!rb. [.l/rt/. perang]. 

To fight : A 17 ; B 257 ; F 260 ; 
Q I ; S 496. 

98. File, to (to file the teeth = .1/(j/. 
berasah gigi): chingkil, Sem. Kedah; 
[cf. Mai. chongkil ; kikir] ; S 144. 

99. Filed down {Mai. iSntik): kacheng 
(kaching), Se/n. Buk. Max. 

100. Filed down : lenti' (Inti'), Sem. 

Pa. Max. [Mai. Igntik]. 

Fill, to : F 170 ; F 290. 

Filled : F 290. 

Fillet : R 133. 

Filthy: D 116. 
loi. Fin (.1/(7/. sirip) : pias ? chong 

(plos chung), Se/n. Buk. Max. ; 

chu, Se/n. Pa. Max. ; dichiir, Sak. 

U. Kam. 

102. Fix : selaka', Pang. Sam. 
Finch : S 354. 

103. Find, to ; to procure : mo', Sak. 
Ke/-b. To receive : mo, Sak. Kerb. ; 
senmeng? (son-men), S'6/n. To 
recover (find again), {Mai. pulang) : 
miihrna (meh-ina), Sak. Kerb. To 
go away? \sic : apparently it means 
" to return " or "to go home"]; 
{Mai. pulang) : mahma (mehmS,), 
Sak. Kerb. To return {Mai. balik); 
mehmang (mehm^?^), Sak. Kerb. 

104. Find, to : dapat, SS/n. [Mai. 
dapat] ; C 48 ; C 51. 

105. Fine ; thin : sSlih (slih), Se/n. Pa. 
Max. [? Mai. seni] ; S 280 ; S 282 ; 
S 284 ; Y 40. 

106. Fine ; finely comminuted ; in small 
pieces : sub, Sem. Buk. Max. 

107. Fine ; finely comminuted : luloh 
(lulh), Sem. Pa. Max. [Mai. luloh]. 

108. Finger : kayii (kaye), Sak. Kerb. 

109. Finger (or toe) : jaras, ja-ras. 
Sen. Cliff. Finger : darahh 
(darah'), Sak. Ra. ; jaras, Serau ; 
jaras tok", Jelai ; jara tijk", Darat; 
jaras tig, Sak. Br. I.mv ; jaras 
tok° (jaras terk"). Sen. Cliff.; 
jarat toCk, Or. Be/-umb. ; jaras 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

6o3 

tot (djarastot), Sak. Martin ; 
jSret ? (grete), Sak. Sel. Da. 
Thumb : jaras teh, Tan. U. Lang. 
Toe : chCrok (tchorik), Sak. Ra. ; 
jarat juk, Or. Hcrtimb. ; jAras jflng, 
Sen. Cliff. ; jaras jCikn, Jclai ; jaras 
juk", Seraii ; jaras juk", ^S"(7,^. Em. 
[? Cf. Bahria r shodr^ng (xodrang), 
" finger," " toe. "] 
(b) Finger: jahi, Sem. U. Sel. ; jarc', 
I'-es. A. I. ; jarC, Bes. Her. ; jarf, 
Serting\]^x'i! , Sak. Tan. Ram.; jari, 
Sak. Blanj. S^v. , Mantr. Malac. , 
Jak. Malac. ; jerhl (jekhi), Ba?vk ; 
jai chas, Sem. Kedah; jari t'hi, Ben. 
Nao. ; jari-the, Bes. Malac. Length 
of index-finger : jaii (jiee), Sem. Sief. 
Forefinger : jare' sitlSh, Bes. A. I. 
Thumb : gende' jari', Bes. Sep. 
Toe : jari-jok", Bes. Malac. ; jare" 
jol^ng, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; chere jok" 
(tschere-diokn), Or. Hi/. Joh. I. ; 
tamarafaik jari, Ben. New. ; F 221 ; 
jari kaki, Mantr. Malac, Jak. 
Malac. Little toe : jare' kale'^ngke'^ng 
jo^ng, Bes. Sep. A. I. [.Vfal. jari, 
" finger," " toe."] 

no. FiNGKR : raan. Or. Hu. Joh. //. 
Thumb : rohan (zohan) ; lohan ; 
lun, Ben. Neiu. 

in. FiNGKK ; hand ; arm ; to hold : 
pengolek(p'ngolek), Pant. k'ap. Joh. 

112. FiNGKK : nglng-chash ( nglng- 
tchash), Rang. J a lor. Toe : nglng- 
chSn (nging - chun). Rang. Jalor. 
Finger (or toe) : kik", Tembi. 

113. Forefinger: jematok t'hi, Ben. 
Neiu. ; S 179. 

113A. Forefinger: tSni' lek(?), Sem. 
Rlus [? cf. H 15]. 

114. FiNGKR, little: penutol (penutole), 
Ben. XeT.v. 

Finger : H 14, 15 ; H 17 ; N 1-3 ; 

P 155 ; s 179 

Finger, to : H 106. 

Finger-joint : K 40 ; W 147. 

Finger-nail : N 1-3 ; N' 98 ; 

S 141 ; S 236. 

Finger-piece 

ment) : M 229. 

Finger-ring : R 133- 

115. Finish; past: ((z)hod, ^Stz/-. U.Kam. 
To finish : jihos (dji-hos), Sotn. ; 
hoi', Sak. Kerb. Finished : jos 
(djos), Sem. K. Ken. Enough : 
jos? (dios), Sem. A'. Ken. ; jush 
(djousch), Sak. Kerb. No more : 
jiis (djiiss), S'dm. 
no more : jos 
Sem. K. Ken. ; 

(of musical instru- 

saXt or ya' say^ [pr. sayt), Sem. 
Kedah. Done ; finished {Mai. 
habis) : bihus, Jelai. It is done 
{.\Ial. sudah habis) : sudah hos, 
Da rat. [There appear to be two 
roots here. Cf. f/a la ng set ; Kaseng 
sa, "finished"; and Khmer hoi 
[hoy], "finished," "done" ; Stieng 
hoi, a particle indicating the [)ast 
tense ; ? cf. Khmer huos, ' ' to pass. "] 
(b) To disappear ; to be lost {Mai. 
hilang) : ya-hod (/r. hodd), Rang. 
U. A ring; ya-hod, ex. awa' manog 
hod naii-o' (trans, of Mai. proverb, 
anak ayam hilang ibu, i.e. "a 
chicken that has lost its mother"). 
Rang. Sain. To disappear : seh, 
Bes. Sep. To lose : seh, Bes. K. 
Lang. ; sih, Bes. Songs. To forget : 
Sep, Sak. I/. Kam.; engsip", Serau; 
hiseip", Kraii Em. To miss : sa, 
Sak. U. Kam. To miss (in aiming), 
{Mai. ta' kena) : setn, Sen. Cliff, 
{c) No ("very precise"): hoi, 
Sak. Kerb. No ("vague"): hoi? 
(hoV, "with a nasal sound"), Sak. 
Kerb. No: hot (h6rt), Krau Tem. 
Not yet : hiit-hiit, Sak. Giiai. To 
lose : hoi' ; nahui (nahoui), Sak. 
Kerb. \Q,{. Central Nicobar, Teressa, 
Chotvra hat, "not"; ? cf. Bahnar 
hoai, "no," " it is nothing. "] 
116. Finish, to: lak ? ( aliaiak ? ), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. To finish ; to con- 
sume {Mai. habiskan) : j-ag, ex. 
na' ye yag taio' {Mai. mak sahya 
habis de' rimau), or taio' on yag u' 
leau na' ye. (Cp. also yak kelyeng, 
Mai. habis kadalam, which should 
no doubt be yag kelyeng, 
the g having perhaps been 
affected by the k of kelyeng), Sem. 
Kedah. Done ; finished : yak, Sem. 
Craw. Gram. To finish or com- 
plete (J/rt/. habiskan): yft-jak (more 
commonly jag ?), Rang. U. .4 ring. 
Done ; done with ; have {Mai. 
sudah ; habis) : ja' (used as an 
auxiliary verb ; e.g. G 75 ; but also 
used in an adjuratory sense, e.g. oi 
ja', "come here, will you," Mai. 
mari juga or mari sudah), Sem. 
Kedah; ja', ex. ja' ye chi' bab = 
Mai. sudah sahya makan nasi, "I 
have eaten," Pan^. U. A ring ; 
E71 ; F 117; G7S ; R 60 ; W68. 

Have 

I have 

Empty ; there is 
laloi (djos-laI6i ), 
V 118. To finish 

or complete {Mai. habiskan) : ya" 

eaten," ku oa'*'' makan, Jak. Malac. 
[Cf. Bahnar jl, auxiliary of past 
tense; Stieng jet (jet), "done," 
" finished."] 

6o4 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

117. Finish, to ; to complete (Mai. 
habiskan) : ya' hap, Sent. Jarum, 
Sent. Plus ; hab (hb), Sem. Pa. 
Max. To finish ; to make an 
end of: hab (hb), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Finished ; completed ; done with 
(Mai. sudah or habis) : jahap. 
Pang, Beliinb, Have (Mai. 
sudah) : ja-hiib, e.g. ja-hab tfi-he' 
chi', " we have eaten," Sem. Kcdah; 
F 116. All (.1/iz/. semua) : ten-hap 
(doubtful, hap usually has an 
opposite sense ; the correct form 
1 believe to be nengkilm; A 60), Sem. 
Kedah. No: nyap, Mantr. Malac; 
niap, Mantr. Cast. ; sam, Ben. 
New. Not : niap, Mantr. Bor. ; 
niaba, Ben. New. : hap, Bes. Bell. 
Is not: niap, Ment. Her. I. ; nyap, 
Mantr. Malac. Nya. hap, Bes. K. 
Lang. ; hap? (hamP), Bes. Malac. To 
lose : 'nyap, Sak. U. Kam. ; nyap ? 
(iiamp ; niamp) ; Sak. Ka. Not 
to be ; there are not : resap, Mant. 
Bor. Death: kahanniap, Z)V//. .V««. 
To disappear: lesap (lesa^p), Ment. 
Her. I. ; sSnyap (sfip), Sem. Buk. 
Max, Wanting ; lacking : hap, 
Bes. Sep. A. /. [It is very doubtful 
whether these words are all con- 
nected. The same applies to D 
115, 116. They have been collected 
here because it is difficult to draw 
the line between them. Some of 
the words in D 117 appear to be 
connected with the Mai. lennyap. 
But cf. /ya/^«(/;-nap (nhap), "dead" 
Stieng nap (nhap), " (sun) set."] 

118. Finish, to; to consume (Mai. 
habiskan) : leau, ex. na ye l^au 
ka-ong (Mai. mak sahya habis de' 
rimau), "my mother was eaten up 
by a tiger," Sem. Kedah. Done; 
finished (past auxiliary) : leau. Pang. 
Teliang. [? Cf. Andamanese Beada 
ar-lu ; Kol ii-liwa ; Chariar ara- 
Ihvu, "to finish."] See R 190. 

119. Finish, to; to make an end of: 
pedong (pdung), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
A 63 ; D 53 ; F 115. 

120. Finished; complete (.l/(z/. sudah): 
(a; Ijru, e.g. brfi wii, "unfinished," 
Bes. Sep. A. J. ; brah, e.g. woh 
brah, "not yet finished," Bes. 
Malac. Done or finished ; there 
is none (or there are none) left : 
b'ra'. Pang. K. .4 ring. Not to l)e; 
is not (.Mai. tiada) ; no (Mai. 
tidak) : bra', Lehir. There is not : 
brak (or bra), Sem. Kedah; bra', 
Sem. Plus. There isn't any ; there 

aren't any (lit. lacking or wanting) : 
bra'. Pang. Belimb. Without : 
b'ra', Pang. U. Aring. Never 
(.Mai. ta' pernah) : brak ya' de, 
Sem. Plus. Nothing whatever 
(.Mai. tiada lalu) : brak laleau (it 
is not quite clear whether laleau 
should be classed with the Malay 
lalu ; la or lah might also represent 
the ordinary enclitic iiitensifier, and 
leau = Siamese leau, meaning done 
with or finished or completed), 
.Seifi. Kedah. Not yet (Mai. 
belum ), brak lagi, Sem. Plus. 
Unimportant (Mai. tid'apa) : bra' 
long (//-. loSng), Sem. Kedah. 
(h) To reject ; to cast away (Mai. 
buang) : ya' pra', ex. ja' pra' = 
"rejected or cast away," Setn. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus. Cannot ; will 
not (point-blank refusal): pra", 
Pang. Belimb. 
121. FiNiSHKD : bek, Jak. Ba. Pa. 
No : beh, U. Tern. ; beh, U. Cher. , 
Jak. Ba. Pa. , Jak. Lem. , Jak. Sim. ; 
bieh, Jak. Sim. ; B 153 ; B 158 ; 
pd. \or pa?], Sak. Maiiin. No 
("very precise"), (Mai. bukan): babe 
(beb6), S'dm. Not yet : bia' (bia'), 
Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
A 23. Do not : be, Krau Ket. ; 
Krau Tern. ; bo', e.g. bo' jon, 
"don't give," Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
boi (ber-i), U. Cher. ; peho 
(peheu), Ment. Bor.; wih, Sen. CI.; 
e.g. wih ga jarr, ' ' do not run 
(away)," wih seng-oh, "don't be 
afraid"; wih ga' bet, "^don't go 
to sleep," Sen. Cliff. ; F 49 ; 
ue, Jelai. Don't [? want] : beh 
mot. Pant. Kap. Joh. Never : 
besiiah, Jak. .Mad. Not yet : bi'- 
la', Sak. Blanj. Cliff. No matter 
(Mai. tid'apa): h\%&\\., Mantr. Malac. 
Nya. No ; not ; is not : bia' (bia'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. No ; not (Mai. 
tidak) : pe. Sen. Cliff. Not : be, 
Jak. Mad. Not to be ; is not (Mai. 
tiada) : beh, U. Tern. ; pet, Jak. 
Malac. ; beh -da' -da', U. Cher. ; 
pe-mung. Sen. Cliff. I have not : 
bet top, Sak. Tap. Do not know : 
beh-na-hoh, Jak. Lem. ; be nahu' 
(be-na-huk), Jak. Ba. Pa. ; K 63 ; 
W 60 ; W 64. Not yet : pasek, 
Sak. U. Kam. Not got : pohtls, 
Jak. Lem., Jak. Sim. ; p6h6s, Jak. 
Ba. Pa. Not get ; unsuccessful : 
po-hfis, Jak. .Mad. Unpleasant : 
po'us or po'uss, Bes. K. L. Not 
yet : wA, e.g. bru wA, ' ' not yet 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

605 

finished," lies. A. I. ; woh, e.g. " not 
yet finished"; woh brah, AVv. 
Malac. [AcAi». be', " do not " ; cf. 
Bahiiar Rongao bi, " not. "] 

122. Finished ; done (auxiliary of past 
tense) : 'dah, lies. K. Lang. (Past 
auxiliary) : ndah, 'dah, e.g. doyt 
'dah, " completel)' finished," Bes. 
Sep. ; A 63. Enough ; sufficient : 
da'-do'. Sen. CL; da -do', a -do'. 
Sen. Cliff. No : do, Sak. A'or. Gi'. ; 
dad (da-a, "second a deep"), Se7». 
A'. Ken. ; da (dar). Be/end. Stev. 
Not in the least {Mai. tidak sakali): 
dor (pr. dorr), Sem. Kedah. Cannot; 
impossible {Mai. ta' buleh) : dail ? 
(da-a), Sem. K. Ken. [It is doubtful 
whether this word (and several of the 
others) should not have been put 
under N 69. ] 

123. Finished {Mai. habis) : tflas ? 
(telas), Jelai. Has ; past ; done 
(auxiliary), {Mai. sudah) : te-las, 
e.g. heh tS-las kuh ka' jih, " he has 
killed that fish," Sen. CI. ; telash 
(tolash), Sak. Ka. After : na telas 
(na-tolass), Sam. ; tolash (tol4chh ), 
Sak. Kerb. ; tfilaiih (/(>laeh), Sak. 
Ka. Just now {Mai. terlC-pas tadi): 
tfilas? (telas) anini, Darat. Already 
(J/rt/. sudah): lah ; s^l, Mant. Bor. 
It is enough : telaash (tol^ch), Sak. 
Kerb. ; tCla (tol4), Sak. Ka. [Acliin. 
teles (/;-. tele) ; Mai. telah, 
" already," auxiliary of perfect.] 
Finished : A 63 ; F 115-119. 

124. Fire: has, Setn. Beg.; (hus), Ben. 
A'e7i<. ; as (ass), Sem. Ken. ; as, 
Sak. Em. ; as, Sem. Kedah ; as or 
ass. Pang. K. Aj-irig \ -ks {pr. ass), 
Sem. Kedah, Pang. U. A ring, 
Pang. Sam. ; as, Sak. U. Kavi. ; 
(aus), Sem. U. Sel. ; az {pr. iizz), 
Pang. Gal. ; iihh or ass ; also ai'ss. 
Pang. Belimh, ; os (oss), Sem. Ij., 
Rasa ; os, Sein. Pupier, Sak. Tap. , 
Sak. Blanj. Stv. , Kerbat , Sak. Kor. 
Gb., e.g. "fire burns," 6s nagdit, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; F 126 ; 6s, Sem. 
Per. , Krau Ket. ; 6s, Sem. K. Ken. ; 
OS? (oas) ; &s, Sak. Maiiin ; os 
(oss). Pang. Jalor, Or. Berumh. ; 
b6s (o^ss), Sak. Jer. ; olss, Po- 
Klo ; oii'ss, Jehehr ; 00s, U. Kcl. , 
U. Pal. ; osh, Sak. Br. Low ; 
(osh), Sak. Plus Cliff., Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff., Krau Tern. ; (och), Sovi. ; 
(osch), Sak. Ka. ; osh, Lebir ; 
(och), Sak. Ka., Sak. Kerb. ; oish, 
Temhi ; fts ; ois, Darat ; ois, Tern. 
CL, Sen. CL ; ois, Sen. Cliff. ; 

u (oil), Sak. Croix ; u^ (us'). 
Pal., U. Ind. ; us (aus orivs), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; us, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Craw. Gram. , Se7?t. Klapr. , 
Sem. Ked. And. , Sem. Ked. New. , 
Sem. Ked. Mar., Sem. /7/r. 
Ahir., Sem. Jnr. And., Sem. 
Jur. A '«<'. , Sem. Jnr. Rob. , 
Sak. Sling., Bera, Bedn. IL, 
Bes. Her. ; us (uss), Bes. Bell. ; iis, 
Serting ; us, Buk. U. Lang. , Bes. 
Sep., Bes. Malac. ; ((is). Ken a. 
//. , U. Tem. ; (oos), Sem. 
Stev. , Bers. Stev. , Sak. Sel. Da. ; 
hus, Bed. Chiong ; afls. Tan. U. 
Lang. ; u' (ul'). U. Ind. ; ush, U. 
Cher. ; ush ; uis, Bes. Sep. A. L ; 
med-us (mid 'us), Sem. Buk. Ma.x.\ 
E 83; OIS push, Seran. Roast it at 
the fire : job ma os(y;'oi), Kran Em. ; 
R 196 ; S 297-300 ; S 302 ; S 310 ; 
S 385 ; S 404 ; S 465. Flame : 
OS, Se/n.} Stev.? ; 6s-ja? (6s-dscha), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; ? E 27. To burn 
(intransitive) : kachar uis ; kachar 
us, Bes. Sep. A. L; E 27. " Bring 
firebrand " : yoi us (yoie <;os). Sent. 
Stev.; B396. Firebrand {Mai. pun- 
tong api): pgnoyd {pr. pSnoydd) as, 
Sem. Phis ; penoih us (pnuih us), 
Sem. Bnk. Max. Burning embers : 
mo' us (mu' as), Se)n. Pa. Max. 
Firebrand {Er. tison) : palo osh 
pal6-6ch), Som. Firewood : grung- 
us, Bes. Malac. ; kyung as, Sem. 
Kedah ; jg-h(i chS ois. Sen. Cliff. 
Flint (lit. fire-stone) : batu us, Se7n. 
Buk. Max. Matches : panchais, 
Tembi. Spark {Mai. bunga 
api) : chang - us (chng 'us) ; 
biuiga us (bunga us), Sem. Buk. 
Ma.v. ; bunga us (bunga aus), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; bonga osh (bona och), 
Sak. Ra. ; mad osh (niAd och), 
Scim. ; E 83. Thunder: as, Set7i. Per. 
[Cnoi us ; Kaseng uin (uinh) ; Kon 
Til ui ; Su^. hfl ; Halang hiil ; 
Boloven hun (himh); Phnong. P7V11, 
Bahnar m\ {\i\\\\) ; Stic7ig un (unh) 
or uifi (uinh) ; Chraii un, uin (unh ; 
uinh); Chiiiii ngui; Sedangww (oun); 
Sue uij (ouidj) ; Proons un (ounh) ; 
Ka un — " fire. " (?Cf. Khmer och 
[uch], "to set on fire"; 6s [us], 
"firewood"; .l/t»;/oh, "fuel," "fire- 
wood " ; Central Nicobar 6h (onh) ; 
Satni-i, Cuoi us ; Par os ; Cancho ju ; 
Rod^, Chrdai ]ws,, "firewood").] 
125. Fire : api' (api'k), Ment. Her. /. ; 
ape, Mantr. Malac. ; api, Ben. 
New., Jak. Malac. ; ap-i, Or. 

6o6 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Traiit;. Matches : cholek api, 
Serau. Fire - steel : api, Teinhi \ 
saapi, Scrau [or Tcmbi}'], [Mai. 
api]. 

126. FiRK : tagoyn {pr. tagoy'^n), Sent. 
Kedah. Firebrand ; tire-log (Mai. 
puntong api) : tago' api? (tkuk api), 
Seiii. Pa. Ma.v. ; tagong, Pang. 
Belimb. Firewood (Mai. kayu api): 
tanggong [pr. tanggoSng), Sein. 
Plus. 

127. FiRK-LOG : potong, ex. potong ils, 
Pang. A'. Aring [Mai. puntong]. 

128. Fire, materials for making : ped- 
bied (ped-bee-ed), Sem. Slev. 

Fire : B 373 ; B 468 ; C 77 ; H 
147 ; R 194. 

Firebrand : F 124 ; F 126 ; T 214. 
Firefly : S 437 ; W 121. 
Fire-log : C 77 ; F 126, 127. 

129. Fireplace: wal, Sak. Kor. Gh., 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; wal, Sen. Cliff. 
Ash : uhal (ouhal), Som. ; wal (oual), 
Sak. Ka. ; wal (oual), Sak. Kerb. 

129A. Fireplace : dapui, Sem. K. 
Ken. [Mai. dapor]. 
Fireplace : A 160. 
Fire-steel : F 124, 125 ; S 444. 

130. Firestick : larak, Jak. Ba. Pa. ; 
larak, Jak. Lem. [? of. Mai. larek, 
" to turn (as in a lathe) "] ; B 373. 
Firewood : B 372 ; C 77 ; F 124 ; 
F 126. 

131. Finn ; to fix firmly : titab (titb), 
Son. Buk. Ma.x. Eternal : tetap 
(t'tap) birajol. Pant. Kap. Juh. 
[Mai. tetap, "firm"]; H 31. 
First : A 5 ; B 145. 
First-born (child) : N 50, 51. 

132. First-born child, father of : pemiot 
(p'niiot), Jak. Ba. Pa. Mother of 
first-born child : indong miot, Jak. 
Ba. Pa. [? cf 8 281]. 

133. Fish. (.\Jal. ikan) : begjag, Scin. 
Jaritin ; begjag or bejag, Sem. 
Plus. 

134. Fi.SH : ai (doubtful); ai, c.\. ai 
boo, " a big fish," Pang. IJ. Aring ; 
ai. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

135. F:sH : segnuk ka (segnouk ka), 
Sak. Kerb. ; F 138. Fresh fish : 
sek-nuk, Sak. Tan. Ram. 

136. Fish : rayap, Kena. 1. 

137. FiSll : cheriih (church), Serting; 
cher6, Bed. Chlon^i. [? cf. Khmer 
trC-y [triy] ; Ka tre ; Tareng truoi ; 
Prou tro ; Huci, Snk thro (threu) ; 
.S'l; chia ; .\ an hang lea., "fish."] 

138. Fish : (a) kaa (kaa), Sak. Br. 
Imw; ka, Bes. Malac. ; (ka), />'/ 1. 
Her., Sem. Per., Som., Sak. Ka. ; 

(kar), Sem. Stev. ; (ga), Sem. K. 
Ken. ; kah, Sak. Croix, Sak. Sel. 
fJa. ; Buk. U. Lang., Tan. U. 
Lang. ; kah, Sem. Ken. ; Bes. Sep. 
A. /. ; kd, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; ka, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. , U. Cher. , Sak. 
Blanj. Sw. , Sak. Tap. , Ben. New. ; 
ka' , Sen. CI. , Kraii Ket. , Krau 
Tem.; (kak), Temhi, Serau, Darat, 
Sak. Em. ; kfi' (kiik), Jelai; ke 
(kek), Temhi ; kaah, Sak. Sung. ; 
kii, Sak. U. Kam. Fish spp. 
(.Mai. ikan katak) : ka' (kak) juk, 
Serau; (.Mai. ikan bagoh, "black 
in the middle"): ka' (kak) bel, 
Serau ; (Mai. ikan nesing) : ka' 
(kak) paas, Serau ; (Mai. ikan 
toman) : ka' (kak) payah, Serau ; 
(Mai. ikan bador) : ka' sfelok'' 
(kak slokn), Serau ; (Mai. ikan 
baung) : ka' sona' (kak sonak), 
Serau ; (Mai. ikan klak) : kah 
bwingut[?], .!>a/^. E.m. [.Mon, Stieng, 
Khmus, Lemet, Bahnar, Chrdu, 
Kahov ka ; Kat , Sue, Cuoi, Phnong 
ka (ca) ; Kaseng, Sue', Llalang, 
Boloven ka (ca) ; Sedang ka (c?i) ; 
.'i««flw ka (ca); PalaungV.a; Churu 
kah; AV/ai/kha; Central, Southern, 
Teressa, Chmui'a and Car Nicobar 
ka6 (kaa), "fish."] 
(h) Fish : kajib ; kajep (kajaip), 
Ben. New. Monitor lizard : kajib, 
Mantr. Malac. Cha., Jak. Malac. 
Crocodile : kajib-ayer, Jak. Malac. 
[Mai. aj'er, "water"]. 

139. Fish : ika, Sem. Jaruin ; ikan, 
Sem. Craw. Hist. , Sem. Craw. 
Gram. , Sem. Klapr. , Sem. Kcd. 
And., Sem. Ked. New., Sem. Jur. 
Mar., .Sem. Ked. .Mar., Sem. Jur. 
.And., Sem. Jur. New., Sem. Beg. ; 
Ben. Nno., Sem. U. Sel. [the MS. 
of this last originally read ekan], Sem. 
IJ. , .Mantr. .Malac. , Jak. Malac. ; 
(ikam), Sem. Jur. Nob. ; hikan, 
Sem. Klapr. Dried fish : ikan, 
Sak. Tan. Kam. Dried fish (pre- 
pared for food) : ikan pfinangat, 
Sak. Tan. Kam. River Indau : 
ikan lumpat, /\iu/. Kap. J oh. ; I 16 
[Mai. ikan]. 

140. Fish : pehompang (p'hompang), 
Pant. Kap. .Mad. ; pcngumpan 
(p'ngumpan), Pant. Kap. Lem. 
[Mai. umpan, "bait"]. 

Fish : S 24. 

141. Fish, fresh-water spec. : begahak, 
Jak. .Mad. 

142. Fish, fresh - water spec. : nom, 
Jak. Mad. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

607 

143. Fish, fresh-water spec. : seiigarat, 
Jak. Mad. 

144. Fish, to : kado, Sak-. Kor. C,b. , 
C 49 ; T 107. 

144A. Fish with a hook, to : tendroit", 
Teiiihi ; tendrots [t/V], Serau. 

145. Fisii with a hook, to : kikbdt, 
Ser/iiiir; kibiit (kibot), BeJii. II. 

146. Fisii with a hook, to : ngedek, 
Galaiig. 

147. Fish with a hook, to : ngayel, 
Bedu. I. , Bcdu. II. [.I/a/, kail ; 
mgngail]. 

148. Fish with a spear, to : sOranipang, 
Scrtiuii yMiil. serampang]. 

149. Fish with a spear, to : sfinak, 
Bedu. I. ; siinak, Ikdu. II. ; S 369 ; 

•'^ 373. 374- 

150. Fish with a " tanggok " (a kind of 
rattan net ?), to : palong, Kena. I. 

151. Fishing-basket: segel, ./a/t. Mad. 
151A. Fishing-u.\skkt : sfintapok, Jak. 

Mad. Fish-trap made with ' ' onak " : 
sentapok (s'ntapok), Jak. Sim. 

152. Fishing-place : gunii (goune), Sak. 
A' a. 

Fish-roe : E 34. 
Fish-trap : F 151 ; F i5i.\. 

153. FiSH-TK.\p made with rattan thorns 
(onak) : basok, Jak. Sim. 

154. FiSH-TKAi' made of rattan thorns 
(onak) : tuar, Pant. Kap. J oh. 
Fist, to hit with the : S 497. 

155. Fits ; convulsions : saban (sban), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Apoplectic (?) fits 
{Mai. sawan sesak) : saban sesak 
(sbanssk), .ir6'w./'a..l/a.i-. Epileptic(?) 
tits [Mai. sawan tgrjun) : saban 
bglus (sban blus), Sciii. Pa. Ma.v. ; 
F 12. Puerperal fits (Mai. sawan 
peranak) : saban mawang (sban 
mauang), Sent. Pa. Max. ; C loi 
{Mai. sawan]. 

156. Five: chij-yang, Sak. Scl. Da. ; [? = 
F 158]. 

157. Fivf: : sa jumpa, Pc-klo. [Both 
this and F 156 are very doubtful.] 

158. Five : m6-saun, U. Tern. ; me- 
shong, U. Cher. ; mesogn. Seeing; 
massokn, U. hid. \Mon mason or 
mfesoifi [masun], pason, pesoifi 
[pftsun] ; Ciioi song ; Huei, Suk, 
Sue, So sung (soung) ; Hin, Nan- 
hang chung (choung) ; Pareng, Kon 
Tu, Boloven son ; Sut! son ; Prou 
chh6ng ; Ka chang ; Boloven song ; 
Niahon, Lave song ; Khinus pfuong 
(pfouong) ; Lemet pan ; Palaung 
phan ; pohn (and variant forms in 
neighbouring dialects) ; Khasi san, 
" five."] 

159. ]*"ivi': : lepang, Sem. Scott. [V'ery 
doubtful.] 

160. FiVK : limah, Sem. Ij.\ lima', 5«/('. 
U. Kam. ; lima', Bes. Songs; lima, 
Sem. U. Scl. , Sem. Per. ; Hma, 
Sak. Jer. ; lima, Som. , Sak. Kerb. , 
Sak. Br. I.orv, Sak. Pa. , Bes. Her. , 
Ben. New. [Mai. lima] ; T 99. 
Fix, to : F 131. 

161. Flame ; fiaming : jalat (jalt), Sem. 
Buk. Max. J'"laming : mechalat 
(mchalt), Sem. Buk. Max. ; [cf. 
Mai. nyala?]. 

162. J'"lamk : gor-hoe? (ghorho^^), Sak. 
Ka. ; D 41 ; F 124. 

163. Flame, to; to flare up: lok, ex. 
uis lok dah, " the fire has flared up," 
/>',■.. K. L. [? Cf. A 132, A 155 ; 
but perhaps cf. Bahnar un (unh) 
16k, "glow-worm"; lech un (unh) 
16k, "to see stars" (on receiving a 
blow in the eye).] 

Flaming : D 41 ; F 161. 
Flank ; R 100 ; R 102, 103. 
Flap, to : F 177. 
163A. Flap - flap : sibang - sibut, Bes. 
Songs. 

Flare up. to : 1^' 163. 
Flash (of lightning) : L 92. 

164. Flash - flash : kilat - kilau, Bes. 
Songs {Mai. kilat, "lightning"; 
kilau, " to shine "] ; cf. L 97. 

165. Flat (-!/(//. samarata) : panchul, 
Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. 

166. Flat (Mai. pipeh) : chepeyt, Bes. 
Sep. [? Cf. Mai. pepat. ] 

167. Flat (Mai. pepat): keting? 
(kting?), Sem. Buk. Max. 

168. Fl.\t and hard : tonibat-tombat, 
Bes. Songs. 

Flat : L 62 ; S 481. 
Flat country : S 57. 
Flat (of hand) : H 14. 

169. Flea (Mai. kutu) : chi'. Pang. U. 
Ari/ig, Pang. Sam ; chi, Bes. A. I. 
Louse: cha? (dschii), Sem. A'. 
Ken. ; (Mai. tunia) : chi', Sem. 
link. Max. ; (Mai. kutu) : chi 
(chi'), Sem. Pa. .Max. ; che (tch6), 
Som. ; che' (chek), Jelai ; cha 
(tche), Sak. Kerb., Sak. Ka. ; chet, 
Scji. Cliff. ; ch6-no', Sen. Cliff. 
Mosquito larvie (Mai. jinti') : che'? 
betoh (chi'? btuh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; W 30. \Mon choa [chai] ; 
Khmer chay [chai] ; Bahnar \\ 
(pr. shi) ; Stieng sih ; Chrau shih 
(xlh) ; Churn sai ; Annam chi ; 
chay ; Nalang chai ; Boloven, Alak, 
Lave chei ; Niahon che, ' ' louse. ' ' 

6o8 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

The expression for "flea" in several 
of these is " dog - louse," as in 
Mai. kutu anjing is used. Central 
A7ft)(^a;-shRi, "flea."] L 144, 145. 

170. Flesh : [a) sech (sich), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; sach (saty), Sak. U. Kam. ; 
segj, Sem. Kedah, Sem. Jarum ; 
sag, Sem. Plus, Sak. Blaiij. Cliff. ; 
sed {pr. sedd), Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; set, Se/i. Cliff. ; set (sit), 
Setn. Pa. Max. ; set [pr. sett), 
Pang. U. AHng; sdi or s6 - i ?, 
Sem. K. Ken., si (see), Sem. Jur. 
And., Sem. Jnr. New., Sem. Jur. 
Rob. ; si' ; is!', Bcs. Sep. A. I. 
Goose-flesh? {.\Ial. daging kura) : 
sech kura (sich kura), Sem. Buk. 
Max.; F 88. Body: ns^g, Som.; 
sot, Bes. Malac. ; sfi-it, Bcs. Her. ; 
isikn, Darat ; isik [better esik ; 
in MS. originally essik], Sem. 
U. Sel. ; (esek), Tan. U. 
Lang. ; isik or isi', Sem. Kedah ; 
usi, Se7n. Per. ; isi, Sejn. /]., Sem. 
Ken. ; isi ; issi, Sak. Pa. ; isi. Pang. 
Jalor. External view of body : esi 
(es-ee), Sem. Stev. Body (entire, in- 
ternally) : esl-u (es-ee-oo), Sem. 
Stev. ; of. B 270 ? [One of Stevens' 
blunders, probably : the -u can only 
be the third person singular pro- 
noun.] Fruit : sek (se"k), Kena. 
II. Interior of fruit [Mai. isi) : 
seg, ex. tangke bah seg masam = 
Mai. isi masam, " branches of fruit 
with unripe interior, " Pang. Teliang. 
Meat: sig (sigh), 5oot. ; sach (saty), 
Sak. U. Kam. ; sat (set), Sak. Ra. 
Gums (of mouth) : si suing, Sern. 
Pa. Max. ; G 128. 
(i^)Body; flesh: isi. Pant. Kap. 
Joh. F-ntrails : isi' nSbo' (aisi' nbu'), 
Sem. Pa. .Max. Heart : isi dalam, 
Jak. Mad. (Pant. Kap.); I 15. To 
fill: \s\' {2t.\s\),Sem. Pa.Max. Wood: 
isi, Sak. Kor. Gb. Tapioca plant : 
isi mabok. Pant. Kap. Lem. ; N 10. 
[Some of these words are certainly 
derived from Mai. isi "interior," 
"contents," "to fill"; but those 
which do not begin with a vowel 
(and perhaps a few of those that do) 
are probably connected with Khmer 
sach [sach], "flesh." As it is 
difficult to separate the two sets of 
words, which have somewhat similar 
meanings, they have been grouped 
together here. i'erhaps also cf. 
Bahnar shek (xek), "lean meat" ; 
/J A; /fe sach, "meat."] 

171. P"LKS!i : rulo?(zulo), Ben. New. 

172. Flesh : daglk (tagfk), Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; daging, Ben. Nerv. , Mantr. 
Malac. , Jak. Malac. Flesh ; meat : 
dagik, Sak. Kor. Gb. Meat : dagin, 
Sak. Kerb. \^Mal. daging] ; B 325. 

Flexible : s 336. 
Flight : F 203-205. 
Flint : F 124 ; S 462. 

173. Float, to : uit (auit), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

174. Flcj.at, TO : telumul (tlumul), 6'<?;7?. 
Pa. Max. To arrive : nimul, e.g. 
a common form of salutation is mani 
nimul hinol^ng, "where have you 
come from now?" Bes. Sep. [Mai. 
timbul, "to rise to the surface"]. 
[Perhaps = C 166.] 

175. Flo.\t, to; to drift: lampong 
(impung), Sem. Pa. Max. [Mai. 
lampong]. 

176. Flo.'XT, to ; to drift : bSngkas 
(bngks), 5c';;?. Buk. Max. ]} Mai. 
bingkas, "elastic."] 

177. Float, to (in the air) ; to flap in 
the wind [Mai. kibar) : do' (du'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. 

Float, to : L 79. 

178. Flood ; inundation : ba' (bak), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. ; ba-ak, Sofn. ; 
bah^, Sak. Kerb. ; bah^, Sak. 
Ri. ; ba' juk (bak juk), Sern. Pa. 
Max. ; ong-bag, Sem. A'. Ken. ; 
\N 29 [Mai. bah] ; W 74. 

179. Flood (tide) : haniur, Ben. A'eiv. 
[} Mai. hanyut, "to drift"]; L 89 ; 
W 27 ; W 30. 

1 80. Floor : kgping, Kena. I. ; cf. 
P 36. [? Mai. keping, ' ' a sheet or 
piece. "] 

181. Floor : lantei, Som. ; lant^, Sak. 

183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 
187. 

Ra. Floor planking 
Kerbat [Mai. lantai] 
M 62. 

Flooking : ching-karr, 
ching-karr, Sen. Cliff. ; 
Serau. To make a 
changkar, Sak. Em. 
tikar, " mat "] ; M 62. 
Flow : T 127 ; W 27 
to : hubuin. 

Ian - te, 
H II ; 

Sen. CI. ; 
; chengkar, 
^ flooring : 
[? cf. Mai. 

Sem. Buk. 

Flow, 

Max. 
Flow. 
Max. 
Flow, 
Gb. ; \V 
Flower 
Sem. Kedah. 

Flowkr : bakau. Sem. JPer. 
(bak-ow), Sem. Stev. ; bekau, Sem 
Plus ; bekau. Pang. U. Aring 
bCkdu, Serting; be-ka-au, Sem 

TO : paling, Sem. Buk. 

to : tt^u-tras, Sak. Kor. 
30 ; P 206 ; T 232, 233. 
[Mai. bunga) : hapong. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

609 

pabohoi ? (pabohoyi-), 

Ken. ; bakau : said to be especially 
used of fruit - blossom, ex. telelpul 
wong bftkau, ' ' the young fruit - 
blossom is budding " (?) ; Fang. 
Teliatig ; name of a disease-pattern 
(on comb), bakau timon (bakaw 
timon), Sem. Stcv. \^Khmcr phka ; 
Kaseng pakao ; Moti kau ; Fhnong 
kau (cau) ; Stierig kao ; Fod'' ka ; 
Alak phXnixo, "flower. "J 
i88. Flower: hurut(?), Bcs. A. f. 

[? = Fi93]. 

189. Fi.owKR : 
Beti. New. 

190. F'lowek : ha buag6, Barok ; 
bungei, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jin: 
New. , Sem. Jur. Rob. ; bunga' 
(bungak), Bcs. K. Lang. ; bunga, 
e.g. "the tree blossoms" (lit. has 
flowers), a ogniol^ng (ogniok'n) wa 
(wa, "deep a") bunga, Sem. K. 
Ken. ; bunga, Sak. Tap. ; bunga 
(boufia), Sak. Ra., Sak. Kerb. ; 
bunga, Sem. U. Sel. [in the MS. 
this last originally had boonga], 
Sak. Br. Low, Sak. Blanj. Szv. , 
Ben. New. , Alan/r. Malac. , Jak. 
ALalac. ; bongna (bongna), Slim. ; 
lebunga' (lebungak), Darat ; 
libunga' (libungak), A'/a? ; bulwan ? 
(bull-wan), Sak. Sel. Da. ; F 124 ; 
H 147 ; S 45 \_Mal. bunga]. 

191. Fi.oWKK : maiong, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. [J/a/. mayang, " flower-spathe 
of palm "] ; B 449 ; D 198 ; F 283. 

192. Flower - spathe (of palm) {Mai. 
mayang) : tindo' (tndu'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; tanan, Ma?itr. Malac. 
\_Mal. tandan, "cluster of fruits" ; 
and tandok, "horn."] 

193. Flower, centre of: ^I'ld, Sem. 
Stev. [?=F 188]. 

Flower, pistil of: P 115. 

194. Flute [Ahil. s6ruling) : pen-sul 
[pr. pen-suU), Rang. U. A ring; 
pen-sol {pr. pen-soil), Rang. Sam, 
Rang. Gal. 

195. Flute : jSniloi (jniloi, jniloy), Sak. 
U. Kam. [Cf. Bahnari\SX\iS; Khmer 
khiai [khluy] ; Mon talot, " flute" ; 
? cf. Khmer srelay [sral^y], " trum- 
pet."] 

196. Flute (of bamboo) (Mai. seruling): 
huchoo, Bes. K. /.. ; ding hu-choo, 
Bes. A. L ; B 27. 

196A. Flute (or rather Pan's pipe) : 
bunun gio^ng (bunun-giog'n), Sem. 
K. Ken. Bamboo flute : penyoig" 
(penyoighn), Sem. Stev. [? cf. J 6]. 

197. Flute, holes in : penbok, Sem. 
Stev. [? cf. O 41] ; M 199. 

VOL. II 

198. Fly (Mai. lalat) : ilong (ailung), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; jSlong (jlung* 
Sem. Ra. Max. ; eloSng (elog'n, 
Sem. K. Ken. F^arge fly (spec. 
Mai. langau) : lioug biaeng (ailung 
biaing?), Sem. Buk. Max. 

199. Fly (Mai. lalat) : \€rM, Jelai ; 
roai, Tembi ; roi, Tembi\or Seran'i\, 
raui, Serau ; rul, Sak. Em, ; ru6i ; 
r6y ; roi, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; roi, Bes. 
Sep. Eye- fly : yui, Bes. A. L 
Insect spec. (Mai. lebah lalat) : 
lerei, Serau. [Kuai is also given as 
the equivalent in Serau of Mai. 
salamat, evidently by confusion with 
lalat. ] \ALon rui [ruai] ; Radaih, 
Chui~u ru6i ; Ckrdu ruoy ; Cham 
rui ; Khmer rCii [ruy] ; Stieng 
ruei ; Bahnar, Kaseng, Sui, Halang, 
Boloven, roi; Annam r\x6\ — ^"fly," 
"house-fly." Perhaps also Jarai 
jai, "fly"; and Central Nicobar 
yiie, "house-fly," belong here.] 

200. Fly : lalat, Ma?itr. Malac. Cha. ; 
wawat, Jak. Malac. Moscjuito : 
Idlul, Sak. Tap. [Mai. lalat] ; 
H 138, 139 ; M 183. 

201. Fly ; greenfly : jangau, Bes. Songs. 

203. Fly, to: kapo-ei, Sem. Beg.; kapoi, 
Ben. New. ; kgpuih (kpuih), Sem. 
Ra. Max. , Se7}t. Buk. Max. ; ya- 
kipoi. Rang. U. A ring ; ki-pui, 
Lcbir; kipoin (ki-pgr-in), Kerbat. 
To fly ; flight (Mai. katfirbangan) : 
kepuih (kpuih), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
tekepuih (tkpuih), Sem. Ra. Max. 
[? cf. W 118, and (if so) cf. Sunda. 
ngfipak, "to flap the wings"; 
Madur, ngappSr, "to fly " ; but cf. 
also Stieng, Churn par ; Bahnar 
pir, apftr, topSr ; Cham, Jarai por ; 
Achin. por ; ALon p& [pS.w] ; Sue 
pal ; Sedang pa, " to fly. "] 

204. Fly, to: (a) neg-heng (nog -hen), 
S'dm. ; kiheng (kihen), Sak. Ra. ; 
heghiik (h^ghek), Sak. Kerb. ; 
heekn, Tembi. \7CL Khmer ho; Cen- 
tral Nicobar heh-hanga, " to fly."] 
(b) gull, Tern. CI. ; gi, Sen. CI., 
Sak. Blanj. CI. , Sak. Sli?n. 

205. Fly, to : t;i'ht ; tilht, Bes. Sep. A. 
L ; W 119. 

Flying-fox : H 74 ; H 76-78. 

206. Foam : W 42. 
Foamy : W 42. 

Fog : B 236 ; D 16 : D 22. 

207. Fold, to : R 87. 

208. Foliage ; leaves : te - belkun. e.g. 
bis-Iis kleng tfi-belkun (yr t6bel-kun), 
"disappear among the fohage," 
Rang. Teliang; D 98 ; F 12. 

2 R 

6io 

COM PA RA TIVE VOCA B ULA R V OF 

209. Follow, to [Mai. ikut) : ya-gubgab, 
Pang. U. A ring; ya-p6rgab, e.g. 
pSrgab keianges halod ( trans, of 
Mai. proverb, ikut hati mati, "to 
follow one's inclination is deadly"). 
Pang. Sam ; ya-pergab [pr. perr- 
gabb), (doubtful), /'(7«o; Sam, Pang. 
Gal. 

210. Follow, to; to pursue: bahai? 
(bahi). Sent. Pa. Max. ; pahai ? 
(pahi), Setn. Pa. Max. ; ya' hai, 
Sem. Jarum ; ya-hai, Sem. Plus. 
To follow : ahho ( ^hho ), Sak. 
Kerb. [? = H 176]. 

211. Follow, to [Mai. ikut) : j6-i, Sen. 
Cliff. ; jet, Bes. A. I. ; kajet ; jet, 
Bes. K. L. To obey : jet, Bes. A. I. 
To guide : jedjiit (djed-djiit), Sak. 
Kerb. \_Stieng iet, " to obey " ]. 

212. Follow, to : bgso (bosso), Sdm. 
To consent ? (Mai. turut) : bgsush 
(bossouch), Sdm. 

213. Follow, to : ikot, Sak. Pa. [Mai. 
ikut]. 

214. Follow, to : nurut, Mantr. 
Malac. ; turut (tooroot), Mantr. 
Stev. [.Mai. turut] ; G 43 ; G 48. 
Fond of: L 146-149. 

215. Fondle, to: pSdueh (pduih), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

216. Fontanelles? {Mai. sua'): tio' 
(tiu' ?), Sem. Pa. Max. [perhaps to 
be read b6to' (btu') = F 228 ; F 224. 

217. Food : pikmoi (pik-moi), Sbm. ; E 
26, 27 ; E 30 ; R 113. 

218. Food eaten along with kice 
(Mai. lauk) : menghar (mng-har), 
Sak. U. Tap. [But the root mean- 
ing appears to be "beast," and it 
may perhaps be derived from H 
176.] Animal ; beast (Mai. bina- 
tang) : menahar, Serau ; menahar, 
Serau[ox TembiT\. Pig: menahal, 
Tembi. Stag: mSnghar (mng-har), 
Sak. U. Kam. Monkey ( spec. 
' ' chingka " [sic — Mai. chikah] ) : 
benar, Sak. Em. [ used b6fore 
animal names, e.g. R 90]. 

Fool : S 506. 

219. Foolish : bodoh (budh), Sem. 
■ Buk. Max. ; budo' (budok), Tembi, 

Serau ; bodoi, Jelai. Silly : bodo' 
(bodok), Ben. New. I do not 
know : bodo' (bodok), Jak. Mad. 
[Mai. bodoh] ; K 63 ; S 205-207 ; 
S 506, 507. 

220. Foot: chan (chan), Sem. Pa. 
Max., Sem. Buk. Max. ; (chfm), 
Kerbat ; chan ? ( djan ), Sem. 
Martin; chan, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Craw. Gram. , Sem. Beg, Sem. 

Jur. Rob. , Sem. Kedah, Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Ij. , Sem. U. Sel. , 
Sem. Plus, Pang. Belitnb. , Pang. 
K. A ring. Pang. U. A ring. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal., Lebir; (chau), 
Sem. Jur. And. , Sem. Jur. New. ; 
(tchan), Sem. Ken. ; (chun). Pang. 
Jalor; chong (chung), Ben. New. ; 
jong, Krau Ket. , Krau Tern. , U. 
Tern., U. Cher., Sak. Guai, Bera, 
Buk. U. Lang. , Bes. K. Lang. , 
Bes. Songs, Bed. Chiong; jong? 
(jung), Bes. Bell. ; jaung, Bes. 
Malac. ; jo'^ng, Bes. Sep. A. /. ; 
(jokn), Bes. Malac. ; (diokn). Or 
Hu. Joh. /. ; jogn, Serting, Bes. 
Her., Bedu. IL ; (jo-gen), Sak. Sel. 
Da. ; juk" ; juk" ; jong, Tembi ; 
juk", Darat, Jelai, Serau ; jukJ^, 
Serau ; jeok, Sak. Sung. ; jling ; 
juk^i, Sen. Cliff. ; jul^ng (djuk'n), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; jug, Sak. Br. 
Low ; (joug), Sak. Croix ; ju' ; juk, 
Sak. U. Ka7n. ; juk, Sak. Tan. 
Ram. ; (djuk ; djuk), Sak. Martin ; 
juk, Tan. U. Lang., Or. Berumb. ; 
jup (djoup), Sdm. ; jau, Kena. L ; 
yok ( yohk ), Sem. Ken. ; ifik, 
Sem. Per. Foot ; leg : chan, Sem. 
Stev. ; yokn (jokn ), U. Pat. ; 
gog, U. Kel. Hoof : jong, Bes. 
Songs. Leg : chan (chan), Se7n. 
Pa. Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. ; chan, 
Sem. Ked. Neiu. ; jok°, Bes. 
Malac. Lower half of leg (from 
knee down), (Mai. betis) : ju, Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. Short part of inner 
tube of blowpipe : chan, Sem. Stev. ; 
Thigh : chan (tchas) : [a misprint], 
Sem. Klapr. Toes : ju^ng or 
d'yul^ng? (djuk'n; d'juk'n), Se^n. K. 
Ken. Horizon : juk (djouk), Sak. 
Kerb. [cf. Mai. kaki langit]. Top 
of the foot ; instep : kio' chan (kiu" 
chan), Sem. Buk. Max. ; kr& chan, 
Pang. U. Af-ing; krd' chan. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; B 4 ; kfiping 
chan ( kping chan ), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; kulit jo^^ng, Bes. Sep. A. /.; 
S 237 ? Ankle-bone (Mai. mata 
kaki) : met chan (mit chan), Setn. 
Pa. Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. ; E 83 ; 
jgra'-jflng. Sen. Cliff'. Instep: buku 
jo^^ng, Bes. Sep. A. L Sole of 
foot (Mai. tapakkaki): tampa jong, 
Bes. Sep. ; tampar jol^ng, Bes. Sep. 
A. I. ; taper juk, Tan. U. Lang. ; 
tapai jul^'ng (labai-djuk'n)^ .S^/w. A'. 
Ken. ; pal jilng, Sen. Cliff". ; pal- 
jukii ; jsaljuk", Tembi ; paljuki", 
Serau, Darat, Jelai ; pal juk°, 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

6ii 

Serau; tS.pa' chan (tpa' chan), Sem. 
Fa. Max. , Sem. Bui. Max. ; tapal 
juk, Sa^. Kur. Gl>. Foot: tapaljuk, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; tapar jok (tapar 
diok), Sak. Kerb. ; tapar jong (tapar 
djon), Sak. Ra. ; separjok, Sak. 
Blanj. Sw. Toe : tapaljuk, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. [really =" sole"]. Heel 
(Mai. tumit) : chenong juk", Jelai. 
Toe : wing-chan, Sem. Stev. ; wong 
chan, Sem. Jur. Rob. ; (wang chau), 
Sem. lur. And., Sem. Jur. New. ; 
C loi. Toes : kenun juk. Tan. U. 
Lang. Big toe: kSneng juk", /e/ai. 
Little toe : kenon juk", Jelai ; C 
I02. Big toe: bo chan (bote chan), 
Sem. Stev. ; hibo' chan (hibu' chan), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; ibu chan (aibu 
chan), Sefn. Buk. Max. ; b6-n& 
jfing. Sen. Cliff. ; ggnde' jo^^ng, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. ; M 190 ; M 192 ; 
M 195. To sit with legs dangling : 
buai chS,n (bui chin), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; goyang chan (guing chan), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; B 180, 181 ; N 
3 ; P 20 ; S 187 ; S 489 ; 
W 147. \AIon jong [juing] ; Stieng 
j4ng, jong ; Samrc sing ; Por sm. 
(sinh) ; Cuoi, Cancho, Prou jung ; 
Phnong, Rode jong, ' ' foot, " ' ' leg " ; 
Khmer chong [jong]; Z>a,^«rtr jong; 
Kaseng, Sud, Boloven iiing ; Halang 
long ; Sedang jen ; Old Khmer 
sang ; Sue juing ; Proons yung 
(young); 7?i7i/i^ jiong ; C h ra. u ch'on; 
Annatn cho'n ; Khmus nchong ; 
Lemet chieng, ' ' foot ' ' ; Tareng 
uin ; NiahoH jing ; Boloven, Alak, 
Lave, Kaseng jiing ; Halang jong ; 
Lemet yang, "leg" (cf. Santali 
jangga ; Mallu: jangga ; Palaung 
jan, "foot"); cf. B 336.] 

221. Foot: tom^n, Jok. Raff. As. ; 
tamen, Jok. Raff. Feet : tamara- 
faik; tamarpat, Ben. Nezv. ; S 141. 
[These words are very doubtful ; 
perhaps they are to be interpreted 
asrapek, rapat respectively; cf. F5.] 

221A. Foot : poh. Tan. Sag. 

222. Foot; leg: khakhi, Or. Laut ; 
kaki, Mantr. Malac. Leg : kaki, 
Jak. Malac. Hog : kakipanda, 
Pant. Kap. Log. ; S 167 \Mal. 
kaki] ; B 149-151 ; L 50 ; P 21. 

Foot (of tree) : T 203. 
Footprint : G 41 ; P 118 ; T 195. 
Footstep : P 21. 

223. For [Fr. car, pour) : fassal, Sak. 
Ra. ; fassel, Sak. Kerb. \Mal. 
Ar. fasal] ; W 78. 

For ever : A 72 ; O 21. 

223A. Forbid, to: bohO, ,iVw. A'. Ken.; 

D 123. 

Force, to : H 31. 
223H. Ford : nicniak tiu (nieniak tiou), 

Sak. Kerb. ; [? cf. C 273] ; C 216 ; 

T 213. 

Forearm: A 133-137; E 42 ; H 

i.S- 

Forefinger : F 109 ; F 113, 113A ; 

H 15; 1' 155 ; S 179. 

Forefoot : His. 

224. Forehead [Mai. dahi): awas (aoos), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; wo'* peti (woos' 
Y>\S.), U. Pat.; F228. Fontanelles ? 
{Mai. sua'): aos? ( aos ), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Temples ( Mai. dahi ) : 
wfts {pr. wftss), Sem. Kedah. 

225. Forehead [Mai. kSning) : krg-her : 
Sen. Cliff. 

226. Forehead : chala, Kena. L 

227. Forehead : labud, Ta7i. U. Lang. 

228. Forehead : p6tu? (betii), Sem. 
K. Ken. Face ; forehead : bSto' 
(btu'), Sem. Pa. Max. Head: 
petdn (poton), Sak. Kerb. Temples 
(Mai. dahi) : p6tok, Sem. J arum, 
Pang. U. A ring; p6tu'. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; peti (pti), U. 
Kel. ; pStiin? (botunor betun), Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; pen tong Tembi ; F 224 ; 
H I. 

Forehead : B 431 ; B 433 ; F 2 ; 

Foreigner : M 28. 
Forenoon : D 33 ; D 43. 

229. Foreskin : cheh (chih), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

230. Forest : te-o, Sem. Beg. ; teo, Ben. 
New. ; W 109. 

231. Forest ; jungle : (a) hop, ex. chuk 
b;1-hbp, "go to the jungle," Pang. 
K. Aring; hop. Pang. U. A ring; 
(herp), Lebir, Kerbat ; hop or ba- 
hop (N.B. M-hop =" towards the 
jungle, into the jungle"), Pang. 
Belimb. ; kahop, Sem. Phis; kahab, 
Sem. U. Sel. ; kib, U. Kel. ; dagib, 
U. Pat. ; ghi, U. Kel. Land- 
wards : ba-hop (of landing from a 
boat, ascending the bank of a river, 
etc.). Pang. Belimb. Outwards 
( Mai. ka-luar ) : ki-hop ( or ba- 
hop?), Sem. Jarutn, Sem. Plus; 
A 176 ; G 42 ; M 24, 25 ; N 39. 
(b) Forest ; jungle : sS-rok, Tern. 
CI. ; sengrok, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; 
sfi-rak°. Sen. Cliff. ; serak". Sen. 
CI. ; sSrok", Tembi ; masrak", 
Serau, Sak. Em. ; masrop ; masro'p, 
Sak. Kerb. ; massrop, Sak. Croix ; 
masrok, Sak. Br. Low. [The first 

6l2 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

syllable in these last few words is j 
probably A 176. This view is sup- 1 
ported by the following : To the 
jungle {Mai. ka hutan) : niasrak", 
Darat.] Country; land: masrak", | 
Krau Em. Land {Mai. darat) : I 
serak (srak), Sak. U. Kam. ; s6-rak", i 
Sen. Cliff. ; M 23. \^Khmcr sruk 
[sruk], " country," " village " ; 
Satnrc, For, Cuoi srdk {sroc); Fruii 
chrok (chroc), "country"; Suesmk. 
(srouc), "village"; Lave tshruk, 
' ' country " ; ? of. Mon krop [gruip], 
"forest."] 

232. Forest ; jungle : bak, e.g. in the 
jungle ; 6m bak, Sak. Tan. Ram. 
Thicket {Mai. hutan kechil), ba, Sen. 
K. Ken. 

233. Forest ; jungle : tali, Sak. Kerb. ; 
dol, Kena. /. [but cf. H 100 ?] 

234. Forest ; jungle : tSpI' or tgpik (?), 
Sent. Kedah ; cf. B 437 ; debi, Se7n. 
Per. ; debri (debri), Jak. Ba. Pa. ; 
(dobrl), Soni. ; (d'bri), Jak. Sim. ; 
bre', Krau Tem.\ bri, Serting, Pal., 
U. Ind. ; mberi, Bes. Her.; 'mbri ; 
mgri, Bes. Malac. ; meri, e.g. mah 
mgri, "jungle-man," Bes. Sep. A. I.; 
(meri), Bes. K. Lang. ; (murree), 
Bes. Bell. Wood \i.e. forest]: bf, 
Setn. K. Ken. ; F 257 ; P 82. {Old 
Khmer, Bahnar, Stieng, Xong, 
Phnong, Proii, Chrau, bri ; Khmer 
prey[braiy] ; Par, Lemet pri; Boloven 
brei, prei ; Khmus mpri ; Niahbn, 
Alak, Lave, bri, "forest."] 

235. Forest : lano [the word seems to 
be only used in the expression 
senghoi lano (senhoi lano), which is 
said to mean literally ' ' men of the 
woods" {hommes des bois)\ Sinn. ; 
M 26. 

236. Forest : ma-lang, Sak. Scl. Da. 

237. Forest : hutan, Jak. Malac. ; 
utan, Ber/. iVew. [Mai. hutan]. 

238. Forest : rima, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
rimba,, Sak. Ra. ; rimba, Man/r. 
Malac, Jak. Malac. Forest ; 
jungle ; wilderness ( Mai. hutan 
bSsar): yema (jema), Se7n. K. Ken. 
Old forest {Mai. rimba): re-ba', 
Sen. Cliff. ; P 73 ; [Mai. rimba]. 

239. Wood \i.e. forest] {Mai. rimba) : 
bluk(i, Sem. Beg. [Mai. bglukar, 
"secondary jungle" of relatively 
recent growth] ; A 22 ; H 86 ; H 
90 ; Q 16. 

240. Forest — B 442. 

241. F0RE.ST, secondary {Mai. belukar) : 
p6-oh. Sen. Clijf. 

242. FORliST, secondary {Mai. belukar) : 

243- 
244. 

245- 

246. 

247 

248 

249, 

2^0 

252 

253 

254 

sa-iam, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; H 437- 

443- 

Forget, to ; jekilb (jkb), Sem. Pa. 

Max. 

Forget, 10 : lali'. Pang. Sam, 

Pang. Gal. [Jav. , Siind. lali ; cf. 

Mai. lalai. ] 

Forget, to: lupa' (lupa'), Sem. 

Buk. .\[a.x. [Mai. lupa] ; A 173 ; C 

26 ; D 119 ; F 115. 

Fork (of tree or stick) : B 345 ; C 

113- 

Forked : B 345. 

Form ; outside ; attitude {Mai. 

sikap) : mSsakab? (nisakb?), Sem. 

Buk. Max. {Mai. sikap] ; G 63. 

Formerly : manginchol ? (niahin- 

tchol), Sak. Ra. ; A 5 ; B 145, 146 ; 

B 165 ; D 17 ; N 50 ; P 39 ; T 54. 

Fornication ? or rivalry in love ? 

{Mai. madu "before marriage"); 

mol, Sen. Cliff. 

Foul : W 74. 

Four : nos, Sem. Stev. 

Four: hfimpudn (hmpudn), Seiiing; 

em-pun, U. Tem., U. Cher. ; npun, 

U. Ind. Two : potn, Pal. [Clearly 

wrong; it means "four."] [Mon 

pan [p&n] ; Old Khmer, Samre, 

Cuoi, Chong pon ; Kny Dek pon ; 

Su^, Xong pon ; Kaseng pon ; 

I^met pun (poun) ; pon ; Samre, 

Par phoon ; Khmer boon [puon] ; 

Prou, Churu, Phnong puon ; Snk, 

Su^ puon (pouon) ; Chrau pu6n ; 

Stieftg puon ; Huei, Hin, So, 

Nanhang, Khmus puon (pouon); 

Sedang puon ; Bahnar puon ; 

Tareng, Kan Tii, Halang, Boloven, 

Ka, Churu puan ; Annam bo'n ; 

Lave pu6n ; Alak pon ; Palau?ig 

phon, pon (pone), (and variant 

forms in neighbouring dialects) ; 

Santali pon; Malhe, Birhar, Dhang- 

gar pon ; Munciari upun ; upun-ia ; 

Kurku uphunia ; Kharia i'pon ; 

Ce7itral Nicobar foan ; Southern 

Nicobar {&a.t; Shorn Pei\ia.V, Teressa, 

Chowra fodn (foon) ; Car Nicobar 

fan, " four."] 

, Four : lemang, Sem. Scoff. 
. Four: lebeh (lebe). Po-Klo[7Ma!. 

lebeh, " more" ; but see 'J' 270]. 
. Four : man-lang-keh, Sak. Sel. 

Da. [D 251-253 are more than 

doubtful. ] 
. Four : ampan, Sak. Jer. ; ami)it, 

Sem. Per. ; mpat, Sam. ; 'pat, Bes. 

Songs ; 6 mpat, Bes. Her. ; 'mpat 

(m'pat), Sak. Martin; ampat, Sak. 

Ra. ; anipat, Sem. U. Sel., Sem. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

613 

//. , Sak. Kerb. , Sak. Br. Low ; 
Sak. Croix, Tembi, Serau, Sak. 
U. Kam. , Ben. Nnv. Square : 
ampat jong, Hes. Sep. [lit. ' ' four 
feet"; F 220), [,!/«/. ampat]; 
S 231 ; I" 270. 
Fourteen : K 55. 

255. Fowl (.!/<;/. ayani) : pfik, Se/i. 
i'liff.. Tan. U. Lang. ; puk, Sen. 
CI. , Sak. Leiigk. , Sak. Blanj. CL , 
Sak. Slim, Sak. Sung. ; pflk, 
Sak. Ahirtin ; pok^, Sak. Em. ; 
puk" (pul^"), pup, Tembi ; pup, 
Darat ; pup", Jelai ; pup, Sak. 
Tap. ; p6, Sak. Ra. ; p6k, Sak. 
U. Kam. ; pok, Krau Ket. ; ra-pok, 
U. Cher. ; keok ( ke6»k ), Bed. 
Chiang : karu-pokn. Pal. Small 
chicken [AL!/. anak ayam) : kc-non 
puk. Sen. Cliff. ; kenong piip", 
Jelai ; dng-vva' ra-pok, H. Cher. 
Cock : puk i-lie, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
pok ibii', Sak. Li. Kam. ; ra-pok 
i-put, U. Cher. ; pug libi, Jelai ; 
pok, Or. Berumb. Hen : puk i- 
kgnan, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; pok 
iknan, Sak. U. Kam. ; pug likfineng, 
Jelai ; ra-pok kSdoh, U. Cher. [?cf. 
Chcnvra Nicobar ta-fak, " fowl "]. 

25b. Fowl : be, Kena. 1. 

257. Fowl: (>z) nianok, Sent. U. ScL, 
Sak. Br. Loto, Sak. Croix, Rasa ; 
(monok), Sem. Beg. ; nian6k, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; manok, Sak. Kerb. ; ma- 
nok, Sak. Scl. Da. ; manok (manuk), 
Sem. Pa. JLax. , Sem. Biik. Max. ; 
manuk, Sem. Per. , Sak. Tan. Ram. ; 
ma'nuk, Tern. CI. ; manuk, Sak. 
Plus, 4 N.Q. 101, Sak. Lengk., 
4 N.Q. loi ; ma-nuk, Sak. Plus 
Cliff., Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; mano, 
Sak. Korb. Lias ; (maanoh), Sak. 
Blanj. Siv. ; (manow), Sem. Ken. ; 
manu', L'ang. Belimb. ; manu, 
U. Kel. ; (manou), Sorn. ; banuk ; 
manu ungeh (manu ungay), Ben. 
New. ; B 218 ; I 46. [Newbold 
means "bird." The domestic fowl 
he calls "common fowl."] Bird: 
manok, Sem. Klapr. Jungle-fowl : 
manu-b(, Sem. K. Ken. ; F 234. 
Cock : manii engko'^n ? ( manu 
engod'n), Sem. K. Ken. ; man6k 
baby, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; ma'nuk bo 
(ma'nuk ber), Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
ma'nuk i-b^, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
manuk be, Sak. Tan. Ram. Hen : 
mami bab6, Sem. K. Ken. ; manuk 
bok, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; ma'nuk 
ba (ma'nuk bor), Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
ma'nuk i-kenan, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 

Chicken : huat manuk, Sak. Tan. 
Ram. Padi bird ( Mai. ayam 
padi) : manok-manok (manuk 2), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [Ira nun, Dusun, 
Bnhid Opie, manok ; Sulic, Balau 
Dayak, Sampit , manok ; Tagbenua, 
Dusun of Kimanis, Kalingan, Biaju 
Dayak, Sulok, Javanese, Sundanese, 
Butak, manuk; Manyan or .Uaattjatt 
[Borneo), manu ; Nias manu ; 
Achinese manok, mano' — "fowl." 
The word is found (with the mean- 
ings "fowl" or "bird") all over 
the Eastern Archipelago in dialects 
too numerous to be set down here. 
It occurs also in liido-China, e.g. 
Cham, Raglai,Jarai mbnuk; Radaih 
mijnu; Cancho, Rod^ xni^nnk^mexiMc); 
Kha Pi menuk ; Selung manok ; 
men^k (may-nauk) — "fowl"; but 
is not in use in the Malay of the 
Peninsula. ] 

{b) Fowl : menong, Bedu. IL ; 
m^ndong. Pant. Gah. Mant. [Cf. 
Mai. "spirit language" mendong, 
" fowl," J /a/a I' Magic, App. p. 64. 
A quasi-Krama form of manuk?] 

258. F'owL : ayam, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; 
a-yam, Lebir; hdyam, Seiiing ; 
hayani ( ha"yam ), Bes. Her, ; 
hayam, Ahintr. Malac., Jak. Malac. 
Common fowl \_i.e. fowl]: ayam,.5^«. 
New. Chick: wong a-yam, Lebir; 
a-wa' ha 'yam, Kerbat. Cock: 
a-yam tgm - kal, Lebir; ha'- 
yam teng-kal, Kerbaf. Hen : ayam 
yalo (a-yam ya-lgr), Lebir; ha'-yam 
ya-lu, Kerbat ; H i [.l/(z/. haj'am ; 
ayam] ; B 215 ; C 91, 92 ; E 36, 
37 ; W 132. 

259. Fowl, jungle- : de-na', Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; dena', Bes. Songs ; dena", 
Mantr. J\Lalac. [^Mal. dSnak], 

259A. Cry of jungle-fowl : nangchenang 
kas, Bes. Songs. 
Fox, flying- : B 74 ; B 76-78. 
Fracture ; B 373 ; B 375. 
Fragile : B 402. 
Fragrant : S 293. 
Frail : B 374. 
Freckle, dark; D 114. 

260. Free : pedas (p'das). Pant. Kap. 
Joh. To fight : pfedas (p'das), 
Pafit. Kap. Lem. Soldier : orang 
p6das (orang p'das). Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[In form identical with B 196, of 
which it is probably a figurative use 
in the sense of " brave"; see H 116 
for an example.] 

261. Fresh, of water [Mai. tawar) : 
belhid, Sem. Jarnm ; belhod, Sem. 

6i4 

CO MP A RA TIVE VOCA B ULA R V OF 

Flus. Insipid ; tasteless ; fresh (as 
opposed to salt) : bglhud (blhud), 
Sent. Buk. Max. ; bglhut (blhut), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; bloitn, Jelai [? = 

B 308] ; N 50 ; W 30. 

Friction : R 194-196. 

262. Friend : sabah (sa.beh = sawbeh), 
Jak. Mad.; sabat ; bessabat, Mentr. 
Bor. [Ma/. Ar. sahabat] ; C 228- 
230 ; M 28. 

263. Friend ; comrade (as a mode of 
address) : o-ne ; o-neh, Or. Laut. 

Fright : F 48-51. 
Frightened : F 48-51. 

264. Fringes (of urat batu, a plant) : 
kan-neot, Setn. Sfcv. 

Frizzled : B 175. 

265. Frog [Mai. katak) : kam [pr. 
kii^m), Sem. Kedah ; kam, Sein. 
Jarum ; kom (kome), Sem. Stev. 
[?cf. Central Nicobar\A.x\g, "frog"]. 

265. Fkog : sempilh, Sem. Jaru?n. 

267. Frog : I6bah-lik (lobah-lik), Som. 

268. Frog : tabek, Sak. Kerb. ; tabag, 
tabeg, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; tabag, Sak. 
U. Kam. ; bat (ba°t), Kena. I. ; 
b6bap, Jak. Mad. ; (b'bap), Jak. 
Ba. Pa. Frog or toad spec. : 
katak bak, Bedu. II. Small frog : 
bebap (b'bap), Jak. Lem., Jak. 
Sim. Toad: bua' (bual^), Mantr. 
Malac. ; F 272 [? cf. L 120]. 

269. Frog: cheal? (ch'^), Kena. II. 
Bull-frog : bachel, Bes. Sep. 

270. Frog ( Mai. katak ) : lingkung, 
Pang. U. A ring; chikong, Jak. 
Ba. Pa. Toad : katak besSkong 
(katak b's'kong), Jak. Lcm. ; reng- 
kong, Bes. Songs. Frog or toad 
spec. : katak kingkong, Bedu. II. ; 
F 272 [? cf. Mai. rangkung, ' ' to 
squat " ; but cf. C 73]. 
Frog : bihong, Jak. Ba. Pa. , Jak. 
Lem. Frog or toad spec. : katak 
bihong, Bedu. II. ; F 272. [? Cf. 
Cham hinghong, apparently name 
of a species, Callnla pulclira.'\ 
Frog : kata, Sak. Ra. ; katak or 

kat^k — four kinds are mentioned : 
(i) k. bStong bgsar (described as 
of great size) ; (2) k. bCtung kSchil 
(small one with big note) ; (3) k. 
nyok ; (4) k. buak or buii", Bes. K. 
L. ; F 268. Frog or toad (species 
various ) : katak bfirtong ; katak 
gdrok ; katak h^rang ; katak kiiak ; 
katak ru - rfiak ; katak s6nggan, 
Bedu. II. \_Mal. katak] ; C 73. 
272.\. Frog ; toad ; segmi, Sem. K. Ken. 

273. From (.Mill. dCri) : yg, Som. 

274. i''KuM : hatot (hctot), Sak. Kerb. 

271. 

27 

277. 

279. 

280. 
281. 

275. From : jinjak, Sak. U. Kain. 

276. From : dfiri (dori), Sak. Ra. ; de', 
Bes. Songs. Since : dri, Sak. Ra. 
[Mai. deri, "from"]. 

From : A 177 ; B 396. 

From above : A 8. 

Frond : R 178. 

Front : F I. 

Front ; face : balo' (balu'), Sem. 
Pa. Max. [? cf. F 22 8]. 

Front, in : ha'hio' (ha'hiu' ?), 
SeTn. Pa. Max. 

Front, in : ngar, Sak. U. Kam. 
{Mai. ka-dgpan); ba'ngar, Bes. 
K. L. ; B 45-1417 ; B 380 ; G 42. 

Fruit : R 22. 

Fruit : brong, Sern. Plus ; brgk, 
Sak. Tan. Ram. 

282. Fruit: pelf, Bes. Her., Bed. 
Chiong; (p'li), Bes. Malac. ; (blee), 
Bes. Bell. ; (p'tie), Buk. U. Lang. ; 
(plie), Bers. Stev. ; pie. Sen. Cliff. ; 
pie, Sak. U. Kam. ; pie, e.g. "there 
are no fruits (on it)," tata' i pie, 
Sak. U. Bert. ; pie, Sak. Blanj. 
Sw. ; pleh, Sak. Blanj. Cliff., Bes. 
Songs ; pldh, Sak. Sel. Da. ; pglg, 
Bedu. II. ; pSle' ; p'le", Bes. Sep. 
A. I. ; p61e, Serting; pie' (plek) ; 
plo' (plok), Tembi ; pie' (plek), 
Darat ; p'lah, Sak. Martin ; p'le, 
Bes. K. Lang. ; plo (pier), Krau 
Tem. ; plo? (plSrn), Krau Ket. ; 
tahutpleh. Tan. U. Lang, [ap- 
parently means the "fruit season," 
Y 23]. Coconut : pie' (plek), 
Tembi. Stone of a fruit : pleh, 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Pregnant : pele' ? 
(pelek), Kena. I. ; V 23. [Khmer 
phle; Kaseng, Sui, Halang, Boloven, 
piei ; Sedang pli long ; Bahnar 
plef (pley) ; Stieng plei; A'o«_d- phle 
nich ; Khmus phl6 sohong ; Lemet 
phli kg ; Chrdu, Churu phle ; 
Niahon phle ; Alak plai ; Lave 
plei ; Tareng kolai ; Kon Tu kolai, 
" fruit."] R 137. 

283. Fruit: kgbok. Pang. Skeat; (kg- 
berk), Lebir; kgbok, ex. kgbok 
birang (?), Pang. Teliang ; kgbo', 
Sem. Plus; (kgbgr'), Kerbat; kgbuk 
(kobouk), Sak. Ra. ; kgbu (kobou), 
Sak. Kerb. ; kgbii', Sem. Kedah ; 
kgmbo (kumba), Sem. Per. ; kgma? 
(gema, " deep a "), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
kg-but 16-long, U. Cher. ; T 207 ; 
kba' jghii, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; T 
211. Seed (of plants) r- kab& 
(kabor), Sem. U. Sel. \ kgbuh 
(kobouh), Sak. Ra. ; kgbo (kebeu), 
Sak. Br. Low, Sak. Croix ; kgbii", 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

615 

Sak. U. Kam. ; nied kgbok, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; biji kCbiJh (bidji 
koboh), Sak. Kerb. [.1/a/. biji, 
"seed"; S 89]. Flower: kgbo', 
Se7n. Phis. Unhusked rice {Mai. 
padi) : (?) kSbok, Sem. Kedah. 
Boiled rice (Mai. nasi) : kfibog, 
Sem. Kedah. Tail, in enumeration 
{Mai. ekor) : kgbok, ex. nianQ' tiga' 
kfibok, lit. "three tail of fowls," 
Sem. Kedah. Coconut : koboh-i-oh 
[in MS. originally koboh e-oh], 
Sem. U. Sel. ; C 198 or T 211. 
[? Cf. Stieng ba, " pip " (of fruits).] 
284. I'"ruit : buh, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
.Setn. Ked. Neio., Ben. New. ; 
(bouh), Sem. Klapr. ; baho' (bahu'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; bilh (bh), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; b3,h, ex. tangke bUh lang 
rengal (Mai. tangkai buah sgblah 
ujong), "the fruit-stalks at the end of 
the branches, " /'a«^y'. Teliang; boh, 
Sem. Beg. ; wah, ex. pi bai wahh Igla- 
y3,hh, ' ' go and dig for the fruit of the 
salayer (?) " /^a«o". Teliang; buah, 
Ben. New. , Mantr. Malac. , lak. 
Malac. , Pant. Kap. lok. , Sak. Br. 
Low ; bua ( boua ) , Sak. Croix ; 
ha bu6h, Barok. Fruit ; seed : 
buo' (bouo'), Som. ; S 66 ; U 20. 
Fruit of tree : bfiah dg-long, U. 
Tern. Egg : woah, Sak. Sel. Da. 
Kidney: boh (buh), Sc7n. Pa. Max. 
Banana : buah suguh, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. Beans: buah akar. Pant. Kap. 
Joh. Coconut : buah piilau. Pant. 
Kap. Her. ; buah pulau, Pant. Kap. 
loh. ; buah pulo. Pant. Kap. Log. ; 
W 30 [? cf. C 198 ; cf. Cham 
lau] ; buah kukor, Pant. Kap. Log. 
Gourd (Mai. labu) : buah lulok, 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Lime (fruit) : 
buah tomang, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Rice (Mai. padi) : buah rum put, 
Pant. Kap. Log. Rice : buah rum- 
put, Pant. Kap. Log., Pant. Kap. 
Joh. Seed: pSningok buah (p'ningok 
buah). Pant. Kap. Lem. [Alal. 
buah ; Jav. woh ; Achin. boh ; 
Cham, Raglai, Jarai bah ; Raciaih 
mb6h, "fruit" (variants are found 
throughout the Eastern Archipelago) ; 
in Achin. boh is used for ' ' egg, " e.g. 
bohmanok, "hen'segg. "] 
285. Fruit ; or bud? : kepal (or kapal): 
e.v. ye sewe ka-k2pal, kepal chan, 
kgpal gemaling, kepal tangkul, 
kgpal soyn, " I chant of fruits (or 
buds?), \.hs chan fruit, the ghnaling 
fruit," etc., Pang. Teliang; B 445; 
D 190 ; F 170. 

286. Fruit spec. , prized by the wild 
tribes : dau'. Pang. U. A ring. [For 
other fruits see the specific names.] 
Fruit-bat : B 74 ; B 76-79. 

287. Fry, to : goreng, Sak. U. Kam. 
[Mai. goring] ; C 239. 

Fulfil, to ; M 71. 

288. Full (Mai. pcnoh) : chu-oh, Pang. 
U. Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

289. Full: sSbem, Sem. Plus [?.— F 
290]. 

290. Full : (a) iping (aiping), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

(b) Full : habun (hbun), Se?n. Buk. 
Max. ; habun (pr. ha-bu<^n), Sem. 
Kedah ; 'mbun, Bes. Malac. ; am- 
boyn, Bcs. Stp. ; tebun ? or l&- 
bung? (toboun), Sak. Pa.; tCbfik, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; tebik", Serau ; 
tebik (/y-bik), Sb7n ; tgbik (tobik), 
Sak. Kerb. Abundant : hlbun 
(hbun), Sern. Buk. Max. To 
fill: piba', Se7n. Buk. Max. Full; 
filled : tobi^ng (tobik'n), Sem. K. 
Ken. Filled; loaded (A/a/. bSrisi) 
tS-bek, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Full-ripe : 
gmboyn, Bcs. Songs; W 30. [Stieng 
biing ; Bahnar ben (benh), beng ; 
Mofi peng ; Khmer pen [ben] ; 
Chrdu ben (benh) ; Boloven, Niahon 
bifi ; A lak. Lave bing ; ? cf. 
Central Nicobar posh, push, bush, 
"full."] 

(c) Full ; full to overflowing ; abun- 
dant : anipoh (ampuh), Sem. Pa. 
Alax. 

•zi^x. Full ; full to overflowing : kim, 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; G 75. 
Full moon : F 35 ; L 74; M 161 ; 
M 165. 

292. Fungus (Ahsi. kulat) : betis, Serazi ; 
(spec. .Mai. kulat susu) : betis mem, 
Serau ; B 385 ; (spec. Mai. kulat 
sisir) : betis chfinoi, Serau ; P 192 ? 
A kind of fungus that looks like 
tobacco : betis babo, Serau ; F 61 
[perhaps the fungus mentioned at 
G 25] ; petis, petih, Bes. Sep. 
A. /. ; spec. " tiger's milk," petis 
aa', Bes. Sep. A. /. Other species 
are : petis gla^^'ng, p. bebet, p. 
banyat, p. kok, p. kuku, p. busut. 
Bes. Sep. A. /. [Man patah 
[ptuih] ; Tareng, thia : Su^, ttio, 
"mushroom" ; Stieng chet tatuich. 

' ' mushroom " sp. ] 

293. Fungus ; mushroom : kulat (kult), 
Sem. Pa. Max., Son. Buk. Max. ; 
(spec. Mai. chgndawan hiring) : k. 
biring (kult hiring), Sem. Pa. Max.; 
k. tale' (kult tali'), Sem. Buk. Max.; 

6i6 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

(spec. Mai. chgndawan bulan) : k. 
amiiah (kult amilh), Sem. liuk. 
Max. ; k. bulan (kult buln), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; (spec. Mai. chgndawan 
busut): k. ampa Ifindu (kult ampa 
Indu), Sem. Buk. Max.; (spec. 
Mai. chendawan kapas): k. atSng- 
bauk? (kult atngbauk ?), Sein. Buk. 
Max. ; (spec. Mai. chSndawan 
kakuran?): k. siyar? (kult sir), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; k. asak (kult ask), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; (spec. Mai. 
chgndawan kglamir - kelamir?), k. 
lakin (kult lakin, Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
k. tuhun (kult tuhun), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; (spec, Mai. chendawan 
tiong?), k. tenglftt (kult tnglt), 
Se7n. Buk. Max. [Ma!, kulat] ; 
G25. 

294. Fungus spec. " Elephant soul," 
"Tiger soul": nteh, Sem. Stev. 
[? = F 292]. 

295. Fur (of an animal), to remove the 
(preparatory to cooking): kokos, 
Bes. K. L. [?Cf. J/rt/. kupas, "to 
peel."] 

Future : .\ 43 ; A 46. 

296. Future, the ; hereafter : bahare' 
(chinih) [j/V], Bes. K. L. ; A 43. 
f? = D 43 or N 52 or Mai. akhirat.] 
Futurity : A 43. 

G 

1. Grabang (fruit-tree spec. ) : R 28, 
Gaharu : A 50-52. 

2. Gain: utuk (outouk), Sivn. Profit : 
untok'i, TemU; untong, .Sak. U. Kam. 
[Mai. untong]. 

3. Gain : bSrupas (b'rupas). Pant. Kap. 
J oh. Pay ; wages : upah, Tembi. 
[Mai. upah, "pay."] 

Gale : ^ 478-480 ; W 109. 

4. Gall-bladder: kgmet (kmit), Setn. 
Buk. Max. ; kgmod {pr. kgmcidd), 
Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sain, Pang. 
Gal. ; kgniut (kmut), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [/?fl//«(//-komat ; Khmer paxn^l 
[pftmat] ; pramat [prftmat]; Stieng maX 
klom (the second word is "liver," and 
possibly the first is "eye"); Chrau 
khlom mat [sic^ ' ' gall bladder " ; Mon 
klang km&t [klftng km.1t], " gall."] 

5. Gambier : asse. Pant. Kap. Log. ; 
aiisc ? (ansc (nasal)), Pant. Kap. Her.\ 
anse, Pant. Kap. Joh. [? cf. A 25]. 

5A. Gamhiek : k.i-chuk, Sem. Plus. 
Gambier leaf : kachu, Tembi, Darat ; 
knchu' (kacliu''), Seran ; kachu, Jelai ; 
selak kachiu, Tembi ; L 32. [Prob- 

ably the same word as "catechu," 
the Indian " cutch " (Afal. kachu) ; 
but cf. AV/;;;?;" chiiw [juw], "sour."] 

6. Gambiek : gammal, Boi. New. ; 
gamir, Tembi, Darat , Jelai ; gambir, 
Tembi, Serau [Mai. gambir]. 

7. Gambiek : kapait. Pant. Kap. Log. 
[Mai. pahit, "bitter"] ; B 195, B232. 

8. Game [Mai. main) : peng-gu, Pang. 
U. Aring; H 116 ; P 139-142. 
Gangrene : I 45 ; U 8. 

Gap : B 403 ; T 54. 
Gape, to : M 199. 

9. Garden : dusun. Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Grove (of fruit-trees): dusut", Tembi; 
dusuf^, Serau; dusuf^, Jelai. Village 
(Alal. kampong) : dusut°, Darat 
[Mai. dusun, "fruit-grove"]; F 94. 

Gash, to : C 295. 

10. Gather, to : chechet. Bland. K. 
I^ang. 

11. Gather, to : petho ? (put 'her). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. [Mai. pfitek]. 

12. Gather together, to {Mai. kum- 
pulkan): gem-gam (<?;- gemm-gamm): 
Setn. Kedah. [?Cf. Mai. ggnggam, 
" fi.st," "to hold in the hand."] 

13. Gay: iihop (ehop), Sak. Kerb. [? cf. 
B 380] ; G 65 ; G 71. 

Gaze at, to : S 75. 
Gecko : L 116, 117. 
Germinating : E 34. 

14. Get, to {Mai. bulih) : ya' jid {pr. 
jidd), ex. ja' jid da' ye (Mai. sudah 
bulih ka-aku), "I have got (it)," 
.Sem. Kedah. [Also = ' ' can, ' ' e.g. J 8 ; 
L 119 ; W77. ? Cf. .l^"^z«. jid, "to 
become," cf. B 127.] .\ 124 ; C 48. 

15. Get up, to; to rise: bangkis(bngkis), 
Sem. Buk. A/ax. [A/al. bangkit] ; 
A 131, 132 ; A 156 ; .\ 190. 
Gharu : .\ 50-52. 

16. Ghost (Mai. hantu) : sa-rok (7rsa-r6', 
Sem. Plus. Corpse (Mai. maiat) : 
sar&' (lit. = hantu), Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal.; (Mai. bangkai): ens-4', Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; cf. U 3. Owl 
(Mai. burong hantu) : kawau sar&', 
Pang. U. Aring. 

17. Ghost : (Mai. hantu) : nyani^ 
(nyanik), Serau ; nya'-ne'. Sen. CI. ; 
nyS-ne', Sen. Cliff. Owl : ch^p 
nya-ne", Sen. Cliff. ; chep nya-ni', 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Spirit : nya' ni, 
Sak. U. Kam. [? cf. G 19 ; perhaps 
= S 187, diseases being identified 
with demons.] 

18. (jHost (.Mai. hantu) : kgmoyd (pr. 
kf-moydd), Sem. Kedah, Sem. J arum ; 
ke-moit, Kraii Tern. The lord ot 
hell: komoj, Sem. Stev. The grave : 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

tiy 

kgmut ; kgmuyt, Bes. Sep. A. J. ; 
kgmit, Kena. I. ; G 107. Good 
spirit : k6mut, Bera. ; 1' 155. 
\Khincr khmoch , ' ' corpse, " " ghost ' ' ; 
Chrdu khmoch ; Stieris^ komiioch, 
"corpse"; Sri^ kaniut (canuit), 
"devil"; Old Khmer, Samre, Xotig 
kamoi, "demon"; also (ace. to 
Schmidt) Cham kamoit, "devil"; 
7(3nv/f komui, "grave."] 

19. Ghost; devil; spirit {Mai. hantu) : 
ajes ; ajeh, Bes. Sep. A. I. [? = G 17]. 

20. GHO.ST : sekok (s'kok), Pant. Kap. 
Mad. Oath : bgsekok (b's'kok), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. One hundred : 
sfisgkok (s's'kok), Pant. Kap. Joh. 

21. Ghost; devil: hantu', Bes. Sep. 
.4. I. A kind of ghost which haunts 
graves: hantu' dSguk, lies. Sep. A. I. 
Other ghosts are the hantu tinggi, 
bajang, buru-buru, pontianak, lang- 
weh, lanjing, and huton (the ghost o'' 
a species of monkey (ungka)), Bes. 
Sep. A. I. Moon : hantu jahat ( ' ' the 
bad spirit"), Jak. Raff. Evil spirit 
(which blasts the produce of theearth), 
hantu bilir, Jok. Raff. As. [Mai. 
hantu]. 

Ghost : D 53 ; S 385-388. 
Giddiness : H 46. 

22. Giddy : salut, Kena. /. ; F 7 ; S 187; 
S 193. 

23. Gills of a fish [Mai. ensang), kenyal. 
Pang. Sam, Pa?ig. Gal. ; kgnnya 
(knfia) ; kgnja (knja), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
kenja (knja) ; klnja (kinja), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; E 6. 

24. Ginger, probably the wild kind = 
(rlobba spp. [Scitatnj naceee), eaten 
with rice by the Bgsisi: lia", Bes. K. L. 
\MaL halia]. 

25. Girdle, woman's [Mai. ikat ping- 
gang) : tentam [pr. tentd^'m), (so 
called when made of " urat batu "), 
Sem. Kedah, Sent. Plus. The rhizo- 
morph of a fungus, used for making 
women's girdles and necklaces, etc. 
[Mai. urat batu) : tentam, Pang. U. 
Aring ; temtom (tum-tom), Sem. 
S/ev. Waist-cloth [for women, MS.]: 
temtom, Sem. Ij. 

26. Girdle (woman's girdle, of twisted 
fibre of " bfirtam ■' shoots), ndem, 
Sem. Kedah ; nenben, Sem. Plus. 
Girdle (of coiled cane), 'ndem or 
Ondem, Pang. U. Aring; ndem or 
t'ndem. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

27. Girdle of t6rap bark (or fibre ? ) 
pgnyali (pen-yalee), Sem. Ster: [Mai. 
jalin ?]. 

28. Girl: ala', Sak. Tan. Ram. Maiden: 

minalij, Sai-. Kor. Gb. ; menalo 
(men-a-ler), Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
na'-ne'. Sen. Cliff. ; niang, Sak. 
Tap. ; F 63. Virgin : menalo (men- 
a-l6r), Sak. Plus Cliff.. Sak. Blanj. 
Cli£. ; menaleh, Jelai ; na'-ne. Sen. 
Cliff. Young (of females) : nienilo, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. Girl : B 365 ; B 419 ; 
C loi, 102 ; F 61 ; F 64 ; F 72 ; F 
76 ; M 6. 
29. Give to [.Mai. beri) : eg {pr. egg), 
ya' eg (pr. egg), ex eg ba-ye, "give 
me," Sem. Kedah ; ya' eg [pr. ya' 
egg), Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus ; ya- 
eg [pr. egg), e.g. eg ba-ye' (or ka-ye') 
[.Mai. bSri-lah), "give me, "Pang. U. 
Aring ; ya-eg. Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; ag, e.g. , ' ' give fire, " ag yeh 
OS, Sem. Stev. ; eog, Tembi ; og, 
Serau ; ag ; og, Sak. U. K'am. ; ek, 
Lebir, Kerbat; ek ? (-k [.fzV:]), Sem. 
Beg. ; ok, Sak. Kor. Gb, ; (ock), Sak. 
Tap. ; ok, Sen. CI. , Te?n. CI. , Sak. 
Guai, e.g. 6k i-6dzeng ma' hS, "give 
my chopper to him," Sen. CI. ; (oak), 
Sak. Plus Cliff. , Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
(6ak = in sound Eng. " oak " 
[?iik]), Sak. Martin ; (ock), 
Sak. Ra. ; hok, ngghok (nog-hok), 
S6>n. ; a ? (orrii), U. Tern. ; ho, e.g. 
" give all," ho dik dik, Sak. J. Lmv ; 
ho, Sak. Kerb. ; et (?), Pang. U. 
Aring. Give me : ek bi yek (Sk bi 
6k), Pang. Jalor ; penyak-ye (penak- 
y(!), Sak. Kerb. ; 5k-en (6ck-en), 
Sak. Ra. Give here ! [Mai. b6ri 
kasini) : og manak, Tembi; og madi' 
(madik), Serau [or Tetnbil'\ ; [Mai. 
unjok-lah) : 6g-lah, Tembi; 6g-la' 
(oglak), Serau [or Tembi ?]. Answer ! 
oglah, Tembi ; 6g-la' (6glak), Serau 
[or Tembi?'\ ; ohlah, Serau. I give: 
enydk°, Jelai. I want to give you 
tobacco : an [or en) og baku ha he, 
Jelai. To give to people [Mai. bagi 
ka orang) : og mg - lumom, Krau 
Em. To ask for : ek (aik), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; ok (o'ck), Sak. Ra. 
To ask for : og, e.g. ' ' I ask to be 
allowed to use it," og im pakai, 
Tembi. I ask for tobacco : o akau, 
Tembi ; aug [?] bako, Jelai. He 
asks for it[?]: og in ni [?], Tembi. [Ob- 
viously the word, throughout, means 
"give."] To divide; to split: ek (aik), 
Se7H. Pa. Max. To feed : aok ; a-ok, 
Sem. K. Ken. Barter ; exchange : ^k 
hok, Sak. Kerb. Greedy : ok (6k), 
Sak. Kerb. To give pleasure : mSek 
nfjuk (ma'ik njuk), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
B 38S ; ek, Sem. Pa. Max. [means 

6iS 

CO MP A RA TIVE VOCA B L'LA R V OF 

merely "to give"]. To lend: ok 
en kale (oak en-kale), Sak. Plus 
Cliff. To present : ag ; og, Sak. U. 
Kam. To reach ; to arrive at : ek 
(aik), Sem. Pa. Max. To share [z.^. 
give another a share of something] : 
ok, Som. ; nok (nok), Sak. Kerb. ; C 
162. 

30. GivK, TO (Mat. bgri) : ya-oi', ex. 
oi' kane' bab [Mai. beri sSdikit nasi), 
"give me a little rice." (Does not 
this word rather = " bavifa " ?), Pang. 
U. Aring[? = B 396]. [Khmer oi, 
"to give."] 

31. Give, to: do, Sai. Ra. [?=:T 86. 
But cf. Sui do ; Boloven, Niahon 
doi, "to pay"; Kon Tu d6ng ; 
Tairng edong, ' ' to give. "] 

32. Give, to : jon, Bes. Malac, Bes. K. 
Lang. ; kftjdn, Bes. Sep. ; kajon, 
Bes. K. Lang. ; kajin ; jon, e.g. 
"give to him," jon kih-keh, Bes. 
Sep. A. /. ; kajin (kathdgin), Bes. 
Bell. Give me : jon ha on, Bes. 
Malac. To pay : kajon, Bes. K. L. 
To present : joyn ; jon, Bes. Sep. 
A. /. [Mon jon-ka [juin-kuiw], " to 
vouchsafe " ; Khmer chun [jun], " to 
offer" ; Lave jun, "to give back," 
cf. S 99 ; see also B 396.] 

33. Give, to : ga (gar), Bers. Stev.. 

34. Give, to : ba (bar), Belend. Stev. 
ban, Jak. Stev. [?=B 401]. 

35. Give, to: jiPorgi? (gee), Belend. 
Stev. [? = G 33]. 

36. Give, to : unyup" (unup"), Jak. 
Malac. 

37. GlV'E, to : kasih, Ben. New. \_AIal. 
kasi]. 

38. Give, to : bri (brie), Mentr. Stev. 
[Mai. beri]. 

Gizzard : B 159. 
Glad, to be : G 66. 

39. Glance at, to (sideways) : mideng 
makeleng (mding mklng), Setn. Buk. 
Max. ; S 75. To glance sideways : 
kgleng (kling), Sem. Buk. Max. To 
peer: serling-serling, Bes. Songs [Mai. 
kerling]. 

Glitter, to : S 158. 
Globule : (^ 77. 

40. Glossy : linyang, Bes. Songs. 
Gluttonous : G 75 ; G no, in. 
Gnat : M I Bo. 

Gnaw, to : B 228. 

41. Go, to(.l/'^/. berjalan) : har(/r. harr). 
Pang. U. Aritig. Track ; path : 
hii, .Sem. Pa. Max. Road : ha, 
Sem. Jvr. .4nd., Sem. Jvr. Rob., 
Sem. Jitr. A'eiv. Path ; road {Mai. 
jalan) : hobou (this looks like a mis- 

take for ho or har (?) ba-u = A/a/. 
jalan kamana, " where are you 
going?" the usual word for jalan is 
har (/;-. harr)). Pang. U. Aring. 
Road : harbau, U. Kel. ; h6r-bu, 
Lebir; ha'bo-na (ha'-bSr-na), Kerbal. 
Footprints : hal, Kerbal. Tracks ; 
mark ; scar : hal, Setn. Pa. Max. 
Mark of a scratch : hal, Sem. Pa. 
Max. Cicatrice ; scab of wound : 
halpa (hapa or hi pa), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; W 142 [cf. P 20?] [harbau, 
etc., probably = har + B 202]. 
42. Go, to : ma-chop ? or ma-chop ? 
(matchope), Sem. Pupicr ; ya-chop. 
Pang. U. Aring; chop(ch6rp), Lebir; 
ch6p, Kerbat ; chup, Sem. Ij. , Sem. 
U. Set. [in the Sem. U. Sel. MS. 
originally choop] ; (tchoup), Sem. 
Klapr. ; chup (tschtip), Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; chiop ? (chi-tip), Sem. Beg. ; 
chiop, Ben. New. ; chip, Se?n. Ken. , 
Sen. CL, Tern. CI. ; e.g. " to go up- 
stream" [Mai. mudik), chip ma' ta', 
Sen. Cliff. ; nebch)p(nob-tchip), S'dtn. ; 
chip ; echip, Sem. Per. ; chip, e.g. "do 
not go," duk gu chip, Sak. J. Loiv; 
chip, Sak. G?cai, Krau Ket. , Krau 
Teni. ; (tchip), Sak.Korb. Lias; chlb, 
Sak. Br. Loio ; chib (tschib), U. Pat. ; 
ya-chib? (ja-schib), U. Kel.; 'nchl'b? 
('ndjib), e.g. "whither are you 
going?" memong 'nchib ('ndjib), 
Sak. Mat-tin ; chip - chip (tschip- 
tschip), e.g. " I will go," i^n mi- 
chip-chip (it'n-mi-tschip-tschip), Sem. 
K. Ken. ; chichep, Sak. U. Kam. 
Go (imper. ) : he chep ? (heehep), 
Tan. U. Lang. To go ; to walk : 
chub, Sem. Pa. Max. ; mftchub 
(mchub), Sem. Buk. Max. Go away 
[imper.): chib (tchib), Sak. Croix. 
To go away : chub, Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
nebchip (nob- tchip), Som. To go 
out : nebchip (neb-tchip), Som. Go 
in : bgchap, Sak. Tan. Ram. To 
arrive : chip (tchip), Sak. Kerb. To 
come ; to arrive : chip (tchip) ; chip 
(tcliip), Sak. Kerb. To pass by 
[Mai. lalu), ya-chop. Pang. U.' 
Aring. To walk: chup, Sem. Craw. 
Gram. ; chiub, Sem. Pa. Max. ; chi- 
ap, Sem. Beg; ya' chop, Sem. Jaruin, 
Setn. Plus ; chip -chop (? = chop- 
chop = Mai. bSrjalan-jalan), Setn. 
Kedah; chip chip, Sak. Plus Cliff. , 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. To walk fast : 
chub? (jub), Sem. Pa. Max. ; S 276 ; 
S 436 : T 54 ; T 86 ; T 157 ; W 77, 
78 ; W 81 ; W 83 ; W 127. I go : 
yeaichip? (yeeidschip), Sak. Kor. Gb. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

619 

You (=thou) go; he, she goes: ship 
hA, Sak. Kor. Gb. We go : ship 
samua-ha, Sak. Kor. Gb. [In both 
these cases the MS. leaves it doubtful 
whether aichfp (eidschfp) should 
be added as well.] Who goes? chip 
nuilo (tschip mdlo), Sak. Kor. Gb. 
Come let us go there (up-country) : 
bei ham chap chip rna ti', Sak. Tan. 
Ram. We will go : jo' chap-chfp, 
Sak. Tan. Ram. To go about steal- 
ing : chub pftduih (chub pduih), 
Sefti. Bilk. Max. Yes, yes ! go on, go 
on ! (words used by women dancing 
or posturing) : sau ! sau ! sau ! chap ! 
chap ! chap! (sough! sough I sough! 
chaep ! chaep ! chaep !) Sak. Hale. 
Go away : chip matui (tchip matoui), 
Sak. Korb. Lias ; T 54. Go (and) 
bring water : chep niang t^oh 
(tschep nidng t^oh), Sak. Tap. To 
go in front : chep-chep neing-neing 
(tcheptch^p neing - neing), Sak. 
Kerb. ; chepchip chanu (tcheptchip 
tchS,nou), Sak. Ra. Go there : chip 
gue tui, Kraii Tern. ; T 54. I am 
going to Tapel : eh chep Tapel, Sak. 
Tap. ["Eh" appears to mean "he," 
not " I. "] I wish to go there : en mau 
chip diteh, Sak. I. Low. Where are 
you going? chop ba' lo (cherp ba' 
ler), I^ebir. To go shooting with the 
blowpipe : chepchip put put (tchep- 
tchip poutpout) Sak. Ra. ; B 256 ; 
chapchip senlu (tcheptchip sonlou), 
Som. ; L5 257. To cross a river : 
chepchip m6na tiueh (tcheptchip mo- 
ne-tioU(?h), Sak. Kerb.; C 273? To 
approach : chip ? ba da (tchibade), 
Sak. Ra. Come : chip ? ba doi 
(tschibadoi), U. I\cl. Come here : 
chop ba doi' (cherp ba do-i'), Lebir ; 
chep ba'doi, Kerbat. To come ; 
to arrive : nepchip diano (neptchip 
di^no), nepchip diiino (neptchip 
ditoo), S'd7n. ; chiba (tchiba), Sak. 
Ra. [?cf. Mai. tiba ; A 148]. To 
bring back [?] : chip? bil tah (tchi- 
beteh), Som. [This word has turun 
bawa, "go down and bring," given 
as the Malay equivalent, but it should 
be turun bawah, ' 'descend" ; cf. D 95. ] 
Permission : nfipchip? («<;/ -tchip), 
Som. To take away : nepchip {nep- 
tchip), Som. ; B 397. [But perhaps 
this word should go under C 48. ] 
Angry; swift : mftchub (mchub), Setii. 
Buk. Max. To call : chip bash, Krau 
Tern. To call for : chip, Sak. U. 
Kam. To issue [Mai. keluar) : ya' 
chop ba-hop, lit. "walk into (the) 

\wx\^e.," Sem. Plus; F231. Toreturn 
{Mai. pulang) : ya'-chop ba-t6kbh, 
Pang. U. A ring; A 46. Up- 
country (/1/a/. ulu): chip ma' te (tchim- 
mote), Sak. Ra. [="go inland"]. 
Road: tib, U. Pat. Path: chepchiip 
(tcheptchep), Sak. Ra. ; chepchep 
(tch($ptchep), Sak. Kerb. ; (tchep- 
tchep), Sak. Ra. ; nep-chip-chi kui 
(7Z('/-tchip-tchi koui). Slim. To walk 
{Mai. jalan kaki): chip nep juk'i. Sen. 
Cliff. To walk with a long stride : 
chub bgtuid (chuub btuid), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; L 130. 

The following have come to hand 
too late to be inserted in their 
proper places : — To go : ichip, 
Sak. Sung. ; chip, Darat ; chip". 
Serau, lelai. Go ! chip, Tembi, 
Darat ; chip", lelai. Go away ! 
chiplah, Darat. Go, young man ! 
yob bapi chip, Darat. Go quickly : 
chib kakuat, Serau. Come here : 
chip lano? (tschip lano or tschip 
lano'n, "with soft resounding //"), 
Sem. K. Ken. To walk : chipi, 
Serau; chepchib, 7tv«/5/ ; chapchap ; 
chipchip, Sak. Em. I walk : en 
chip", lelai. [I] want to walk : 
chepchip, Serau ; chichip, Kerdaii. 
To obey : chep l6so, Darat. Where 
are you going? ech chib, Tembi. 
They are going thither : bichik mata, 
Jelai. Slowly ! echchip plahat", 
Sak. Em. I want to go to Telom : 
en chi ma Tglop", Krau Em. When 
will the master [Mai. tuan=:"you") 
go? hu lole hen chip", Darat. Let 
us go ! koh loi (orlah) hem chechip^i; 
madilah hem chip", Krau Em. Let 
us go across [i.e. the river) : he 
makati' (makatikh) chiblah, Serau. 
I command you to go there : eng 
suro chip he mati, Da}-at. [Mon 
chop [chuip], "to arrive"; Old 
Khmer, Samre, Xong jib ; Phnong 
chhet, "to come." ? cf. Bahnar 
chop, " to walk on tiptoes," and the 
words under G 43.] 
43. Go, TO : chuk or ya-chuk, Pang. 
Belimb. ; chok, Sak. Sel. Da., Bes. 
K. Lang. ; chok, e.g., "go there, 
chok-a-kit, Bes. Sep. ; chohok, Ben. 
New. : chiiak, (7. Cher. ; su-ak, U. 
Tern. ; swag, U. Ind. ; joh, lak. 
Lem. ; jo (djo), Sak. Ra. , Sak. Kerb. ; 
jok, lak. Ba. Pa. ; jok, lak. Mad. ; 
bgjok. lak. Mad. [Pant. Kap. ) ; 
W 12 ; W 84. Go [impcr.) : ch& ? 
(chau), Buk. U. La?ig. To go or 
walk : chuk orchu'. Pang. K. Aring. 

620 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

To go out : bechot (bijt-chot), Sak. 
Ra. To enter : chu' or bah-e-chu' 
( probably to be explained as = Mai. lari 
hamba masok, "I run in" — where 
i is a contraction of ye' or yl=l), 
Pang. Belimb. To follow : jok, 
Pant. Kap. Mad. To go away : 
kijo, Sak. Ra. To walk : chtl (chor), 
/'V;-j. Stev. ; chok, Bes. Songs. To 
wander : chok, Bes. Songs. To re- 
move (intrans. ) : chuk, Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; juk, Sem. Buk. Max. Go 
(imper. ) : cho' hukf, Bes. Malac. ; 
chiok huki (tchiok huki), Bes. Her. 
To go away : jo chepchep (djo tch^p- 
tch^p, .Sak. Kerb. ; j5 chipchip (djo 
tchiptchip), Sak. Ra. ; G 42. Where 
are you going ? chok hani or hamani ; 
chok mani hi, Bes. Sep. A. I. I 
want to go out : cho' hoi luar, Bes. 
Malac. To go about stealing : 
juk saik, Sem. Pa. Max. \ S 440. 
Go to bathe : cho' hum, Bes. Malac. 
To go to shoot : cho' naleh, Bes. 
Malac. Go slowly : cho' hip6i, Bes. 
Malac. ; W 5. Good - bye : chok 
lePm lePm lePm, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; G 
67. Come (imper.): chS,? (chau), 
niho, Bilk. U. Lang. ; bfijok klan 
(b'jok kian). Pant. Kap. JoJi. Come 
here : cho' ho joe, Bes. Malac. Re- 
peatedly : chok yui, chok yut (///. 
"go (and) return"), Bes. Sep., Bes. 
K. L.\ R 84. Road : cheruk ? 
(cherook), Sak. Hal. ; suak, Semilai 
coll. Nya. ; swag, Pal. ; jok bagin, 
Pa7it. 'Kap. Jok. ; B 212. To walk: 
cho' i;\, Bes. Malac. ; jok pfengunyls 
(jok p'ngunyis), Pant. Kap. /oh. 
[Samrc cheo ; cho (cheu) ; Kong 
chea ; Czioi cher ; Halang cheu ; 
Koti Tu giii, "to go"; Kon Tu 
choi ; Sac chu (chou), "to come" ; 
Tareng cho, "to go out " ? cf. Mon 
kwaik [kwak], " to walk."] 
4^. Go, I ; I am going: dtip, Sak. Tap. 
To i-un : dfth, Sem. Beg.; doh ; duh, 
Bes. Sep. ; do' (du'), Sem. Pa. Max.; 
m;\do' (mdu'), .S>w. Buk. Max. ; 
dad6, Sak. Kor. Gb.; dadu' (daduk) ; 
dado' (dadok), in the phrases "run 
off! "em da dok [«c], and "don't 
run away," cd da dok \sic\ Tembi ; 
flu', Bes. Malac. ; p6-lg-do', e.g., be 
kor pg-le-do' [f/V], "do not run 
away," Krau Tern. ; palo, U. Ind. ; 
R 201. \^Mon teau [dau] ; Chnru 
dao ; Sticiig du ; Bahnar kodou 
(kiidftu) ; kodu, "to flee," "to run 
away " ; Boloven ndu ; Nialion, Alak 
du ; J.avc tnitlu ; Halang kadao, 

"to flee"; cf. also Boloven, Lave 
dok, "to walk," "to go"; Prou 
dak (dac), "to go"; Khmer tou 
[dau], " to go away."] 

45. Go, TO : ba (bar), Jak. Stev, 

46. To walk : k6n (k'n), Jak. Stev. 

47. Go, TO : moh, Rasa, Mentr. Bar. 
Go over there: moh chiun ? (moh 
xioum), Mentr. Bor. 

48. Go, TO : betroh. Pant. Kap. Her. ; 
bitro. Pant. Kap. Log. To follow : 
t^roh (t'roh), Pant. Kap. Lem. To 
learn : bgtroh (b'troh). Pant. Kap. 
J oh. Go: bCtrau?; bf-troh (b'tran ; 
b'troh), Pant. Kap. J oh. [? Cf. C 
216; ? cf. Halang irdh ; Jarai truh, 
"to come"; Bahtiar truh, "to 
arrive."] 

49. Go : deloh, Serting ; b€kaloI 
(bkalo-i), Pafit. Kap. Mad. To 
call : keioi (k'lo-i). Pant. Kap. Jok. 
Path : kiah, Bes. A. L Track ; 
path : kluang, Setn. Buk. Max. 
Road : kloh, Bes. Bell. ; keloh, Ben. 
New. [Cf. Khmer phlauv [phlQw] ; 
Bahnar glung ; .Mon klong [glang], 
" road."] 

50. Go, TO : jalan, Ben. Neiv. Road : 
jalan, Mantr. Malac, Jak. Malac. 
IMal. jalan]. 

51. Go: songsang. Ken a. /. 

52. (jO away, to : pe, Bclend. (or Bers.) 
Stev. ; gi (gee), Bers. Stev. [A/al. 
pgrgi]. 

53. Go, inability to : chichil (chee-cheel), 
Sem. Stev. [Stieng chol, "to go 
lame."] 

Go (imper.) : T 51 ; T 53. 

Go, let us : W 14. 

Go away, to : C219; F29; F103; 

G 42, 43 ; G 52 ; T 51. 

Go before, to : A 6 ; B 145, 146. 

Go down, to : D 93 ; D 95-97 ; 

F 21. 

Go downstream, to : B 6 ; R 83. 

Go first, to : B 145, 146. 

Go home, to : R 83-87. 

Go in, to : K 76 ; G 42. 

Go out, to : D 93 ; G 42, 43 ; 

0 40; O 66, 67 ; T 9. 

Go shooting, to : B 257 ; G 43. 

Go up, to : A 154 ; A 157. 

Go upstream, to : A 6 ; A 9. 
53.1. Goat : bebck, Pant. Gah. Mant. 

[onomatopa;ic ; cf. Cham pabaiy ; 

Khmer popfi [bftbe] ; Bahnar bobe ; 

(ihuru, Jarai, Kha Bi be ; Stieng 

beh, beih ; M071 pilbe' [bftbea] ; 

also found in languages of the 

Indian Archipelago]. 
S3B. GoA r : kamik", Tembi ; kambik", 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

621 

Serau, Darat, lelai ; kambik°, Sak. 
Em. ; kgrnbiap"! (or kgmbrap"?), 
Tembi. Wild goat: kaiubik", 'renilii 
[Mai. kambing]. Goat : B no. 

54. Goat, wild {.Mai. kambing gurun) : 
hyes or hes {pr. hyess or hOss), Seiii. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus. 

55. God : bi-in (bee-in), Beleitd. Slev. 

56. (JOD : deus, lok. Raff. ; d(5os, I ok. 
Raff. As. ; deus (dius) Jakun of 
Malacca in Hikayat Abdullah 
[Portuguese deos] ; D 16 1 ; F 32 ; 
N 39 : ^ 385. 386 ; T 1 16. 

57. Goggle-eyed, with projecting eyes : 
plat {f.!{. chilli plat (a kind of owl?), 
and the chini kuwayt or kalong 
kuwayt, which is also described as 
goggle-eyed), Bes. A'. L. Squinting: 
pglat-pelat, Bes. Songs. Eye? (.Mai. 
raata) ; plat-chut, Sen. Cliff. [Prob- 
ably the epithet has been omitted 
in the Malay equivalent, by inadvert- 
ence. ] 

58. GoGGLE-EYEU ; protrutling ; chelap, 
Bes. Songs. 

59. Gold : sue (su-ay), Sa/:. Scl. Da. 
[? From Sanskrit suvanna, like the 
Burmese word for "gold," which is 
shwe. But in Khmer spean [sban] 
means ' ' copper."] 

60. Gold : pSnchilai (penchflei). Pant. 
Kap. Her. 

61. Gold : volesnian, Sem. Klapr. [cf. 
Malagasy vulamena; Bugis ulawiing; 
MangkasarhxiSaL^itw^. This is almost 
certainly a mistake : in Crawfurd's 
list the Malagasy word (given as 
" volernianer ") occupies the ne.\t line 
after the Seniang, which is blank 
here. It may be assumed that the ; 
copyist who supplied Klaproth with ! 
his S6mang words accidentally intro- i 
duced the Malagasy equivalent. ; 
Klaproth himself notices the close i 
likeness between his ' ' SSmang " word j 
and the Malagasy word for "gold," \ 
which he appends for comparison.] 

62. Gold : amas, Sem. Beg. ; mas, Sem. j 
Per. , Sak. Br. Low, Sak. Blanj. Sw. , 
Tembi, Serau, Ben. New. ; (mass), | 
Sak. Croix, Sak. Kerb. ; mas, Sem. \ 
K. Ken. ; (mfts), Som., Sak. Ra. ; 
mos, Som. [Mai. fenias] ; Y 26, ' 

63. Good (Mai. baik) : (a) bed-ed or \ 
bod-ed (pr. bod-edd), Sem. Jan/m, \ 
Sem. Plus ; bgde'et, Pang. K. j 
Aring ; b6d - et, Kerbat ; bit - et, ! 
Lebir. Good to the taste (Mai. I 
s6dap) : bit-et, Lebir. Good or 
beautiful (Mai. baik) : bod-ed, Pang, j 
U. Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

Beautiful (Mai. molek) : bed-ed or 
bod-ed (//•. bod-edd or bod-odd), 
Sem. Plus; bfde'e. Pang. K. .irin^. 
Pang. Belimh. Handsome : bit-et, 
Lebir ; bed-et, Kerbat. Clean (Mai. 
chuchi) : bikl-ud or bod-ed, Sem. 
Plus ; \' 13. 

(b) VjooiI (Mai. baik): abiJd i/;- abun 
(/;-. abij'ln), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal.; 
W 23 ; abu-an, Sem. Beg. ; biian ? 
(baian), Ben. A'ew. ; ba^n (bSt'ii), 
Sem. K. Ken. Beautiful : bu'ud 
(buu'ud), Sem. Buk. Max. ; bR^n 
(bii'tn), Sem. K. Ken. Handsome : 
haban, Sem. Beg. ; aban, Ben. Neiu. 
Average in size or looks ( Mai. 
sederhana) : form ; outside ; attitude 
(.Mai. sikap) : habuan, Sem. Pa. 
.Max. 

64. Good : a-gan, Krau Ket. , Krau 
Tern. ; a-gan, Sak. Guai. 

65. Good : bor, Sak. Tap. ; b5r, Sak. 
U. Kam. ; bor. Sen. Cliff. ; bar, 
Sak. J. Low ; bSr, Tembi [or Serau?] 
Good ; beautiful : b5r, Sak. Martin. 
Good ; pretty : bor. Sen. CI. Good; 
well : bor, Serau. Good to eat : 
bor, Sak. Ra. Beautiful : bor, Sak. 
Ra., Sen. Cliff. Handsome : bor, 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff., Serau; bor 
Darat ; boor, Jelai ; bar, Sak. J. 
Low. To clean : bor, Sak. Ra. 
Comfortable (J/rt/. sfinang): bor. Sen. 
Cliff. Gay : bor, Sak. Ra. Pleasant 
to the taste, etc. (^Mal. sedap) : 
bor, Serau. Very good : abor-bor ; 
b5r mfinanang, Sak. U. Kam. Good : 
bor menanan (bor monanan), .S'(z,^. 
Ra. Better : bor munanan (bor- 
niounanan), Sak. Ra. Best : bar 
sakali, Sak. J. Low. Bad ; not 
good_: pe bor (peh-bor), Sak. Tap.; 
pe bar, Tembi [or Serau ?] Pleased ; 
pleasure : bir noi, Serau. Pleasant 
in sound : jibor, Serau. Take care : 
jaga abor, Jelai. To recover one's 
health : bor, Sak. Ra. He is well 
again : ya bor lii' (or lo'), Sak. U. 
Bert. ; H 63 ; M 107. [Khmer vor 
[war],." beautiful" ; cf. Achin. boh, 
"it is well," "yes."] 

66. Good : mang, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; meg, 
Sak. Plus Cliff. ; meg, Simi., Sak. 
Kerb. , Sak. Ra. ; mag (meg), Sak. 
Ra. ; niedn ; met, Tembi [ ? cf. B 
63]. Good; pretty: mfing, Tein. CI. 
Good to eat : meg, Som. , Sak. Kerb. 
Good to the taste : meg, Sak. Kerb. 
Beautiful : meg, Som. , Sak. Kerb. 
Better : meg, Sak. Kerb. Cash do\vn : 
meg, Sak. Kerb. To clean : meg, 

622 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Sak. Kerb. Clear water : mekg, 
Sak. Kerb. Handsome person : 
meetD ; med", Tembi. In sound 
health : mak or mek, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
To recover one's health: miig (meg), 
Sak. Kerb. It is well {Mai. baiklah): 
meg, Sak. Kerb. Well [Fr. bien, 
adj. Mai. baik) : meg, S'dm. , Sak. 
Kerb. ; mag (m^g), Sak. Ra. Plain 
{Mai. padang) : meg, Sak. Kerb. 
To be glad or pleased (Mai. suka- 
hati): migih, Bes. K. L. ; meg hupo, 
Tembi. It will do {Mai. jadi-lah) : 
be niSg de (be morg de), Serau [?cf. 
Bah7iar mok, "sufficient"]. 

67. Good : lePm, Bes. Sep. A. I. \ lem, 
Bes. Sep. ; limah, Ben. New. Hand- 
some : lSb°. Bes. Malac. Very good : 
lem nene, Bes. Sep. Of good stock 
{Mai. bangsa baik) : na' lem, Bes. 
Sep. Bad: lem ngot {lit. "good 
not"), Bes. Sep. A. I. Pleasant 
{Mai. s6dap) : 16'om {or lo'omm), 
Bes. K. L. Carefully: lem - lem ; 
berlemlem, Bes. Songs. Pleased : 
lebm, Serfing; liman, Ke?ia. I. 
Well (in health) : lebm, Bes. Her. ; 
Vi 43. \Bahnar liem (li6m) ; long ; 
Churn neim ; Stietig klen (klenh), 
' ' good, " ' ' beautiful " ; Alak, Kaseng, 
Sedang lem ; Halang liem ; Lcmet 
15 (leu); "beautiful"; Kkmus 16 
(leu); Lemet lok (loc), "good"; 
Lave niem ; HalangWexn, "clean" ; 
? cf. Bolovett lieng ji ; Lave, Niahon 
niem ji ; Alak Mm ajl, "to recover 
from sickness."] 

68. Good ; nice ; convenient ; to cure : 
nyamon, Pant. Kap. Joh. Best : 
terlampat nyamon. Pant. Kap. Joh. 
To cheat : akar tiada nyamon, Pafit. 
Kap. Joh. Dirty; ugly: bSh nyamon, 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Quite bad : p6ran- 
chas beh nyamon (p'ranchas beh 
nyamon), Pant. Kap. Joh. ; C 152 ; 
F 121 ; H 116. \_Selii?ig amon, 
amoong, "good"; Sampit, Katingan 
nyaman (njaman), "good to the 
taste. ' ' ] 

69. Good ; well : lSs6i, Kena. I. 

70. Good : bagali. Or. Hu. Joh. /. 

71. Good : baik, Jak. Malac. ; bai^, 
U. Tern. ; be-6k, Barak. Good 
to the taste ; to recover one's 
health : bahhiik (beh - hek), S'dm. 
Belter : ubek (oub-ek), Som. Gay (?) : 
bak (b^k), Sotn. Perfect (?) (/«>. 
parfait, toujours ; Mai. sSmpSrna) : 
baha. (Ij^h^), Slim. ; chabehih 
{tchabi^x'Ca.), Sak. Kerb. Pretty : 
hMk, U. Tern. It is well {Mai. 

baiklah) : ba^la, S'dm. ; ba^la, Sak. 
Ka. Wicked : chada baik, Jak. Stev. 
[Mai. tiada baik, "is not good"], 
IMal. baik, "good" ; but see also 
G 75, with which some of these 
words may be connected, with the 
meaning "satisfied."] 

72. (ioOD : 6-lok, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
eloh, Sak. J. Low ; i-loh, U. Cher. 
Pretty : i-lo', U. Cher. Well (in 
health): ilok, Blan. Rem., Bed. 
Chiong; ilok, Bedu. //. [A/al. 
elok] ; H 63. 

73. Good to the taste : bi-sa, Krau 
Tern. 

74. Good to the taste : sfidap (jodap), 
Sak. Ra. ; sgdap, Jelai. Not good 
to the taste : pe sedap, Jelai. Enjoy- 
ment; festivity: sSdap (sdp), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Nice; tasty: sSdap, Sak. U. 
Kam. \_Mal. sedap. ] See P 143, 144. 
Good-day : D 42 ; G 115. 
Good-bye : G 43. 

75. Gorge, to (Mai. makan kenyang) : 
ya' bohud {pr. bohudd), Sem. Kedah. 
Gluttonous or greedy (Mai. jglojoh) : 
bohud (pr. bo-hudd), Sem. Kedah. 
Gorged ; sated (Mai. kenyang) : 
bi-hi', Pang. U. Aring ; bihi'. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Full (of food) : 
bihi ; lihi, Bes. Sep. A. I. Satiated 
(Mai. kenyang): behik ; behik", 
Te?nbi ; b6-het, Krau Ket. ; be-het, 
Krau Tem., Sak. Guai; behe' (bhi'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; b6-hi, U. Tem. ; 
bg-hi, U. Cher. ; bS-hi", Lebir, 
Kerbat ; bi-hi, Bera. ; bihi, Bes. 
Malac. ; bihi ; lihl, Bes. Sep. A. L ; 
bihih, Bes. Songs. Satisfied ; well- 
filled {Mai. kenyang) : bihi', ex. ja' 
bihi' (Alal. sudah kenyang), "I've 
had enough," Sem. Plus; F 116. 
Full of sap : bahat or behet, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. Belly : bihi (bi-hee), Sak. 
Sel. Da. [? cf. Mai. bgsing ; Batak 
bosur, besur ; Kawi bSsur ; Dayak 
bSsoh ; Menado Harafura, Sangar 
wSsu, "satiated" ; but most of the 
words appear to be more closely 
allied to Mo?i phoa [phai], "satis- 
fied," " full " ; Bahnar, Halang phi ; 
Boloven pha ; Lave, Niahon phe ; 
Alak bahei, "satiated"; Central 
Nicobar pahae, "satisfied with 
food."] S 34, 35. 

76. Gouge (used for making incision in 
gutta trees) : chelong bleng (ch'long 
bleng). Pant. Kap. Joh. 

Gourd : F 284 ; P 232-236. 
Gout : K 88. 
Grain : S 88-90. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

623 

77. Grain, a ; globule : nai, Sem. Buk. 
Max. [? = O 27]. 

78. Grandchild : ya', Kerbat. 

79. Gkandchild : (a) ch6 - nuh, t/. 
Cher. ; chtn-o', iV«. 6'/?^ ; che-no', 
U. Tetn. ; chSn&? (chiin-or), Sak. 
Jilanj. Cliff. ; chfinii' ; chencS', e.g. 
"grandson," chgno' kral ; M 15; 
" grand - daughter, " chfino' kurdol 
( krdol ), Sak. U. Bert. ; F 63 ; 
chfn-ok, Se?i. Cliff. ; cheno' 
(chenok ), Jelai ; chenok", Serau. 
Son of son-in-law, son or daughter, 
chgnS,' ; chtSnd', Sak. U. Bert. 

{b) Grandchild : kanchil', Sem. Plus, 
Pang. U. A ring, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; kan-cho', Lebir ; kinchu, Bes. 
Songs. Great - grandchild {Mai. 
chichit) : kanchil'. Pang. U. Aring. 
(c) Grandchild : chachd' ? (chachok), 
Tembi; chncha.' , Sem . Kedak; chuchu, 
Mantr. Malac. [^Mal. chuchu]. [The 
two types above appear to be in some 
way related to this last. One suspects 
a root "chau," which by means of 
the infix -6n- gives rise to the {a) 
forms, and by a prefix ken- (possibly 
the word for child) the (b) forms, 
while the [c) forms are built up by 
simple repetition of the root. Cf. 
G 82. The supposed root appears 
inA/o«chau, "grandchild" ; Bahnar 
shou(xau), "grandson"; StiengVbn 
sAu (sau), "nephew," "grandson."] 

80. Grandchild, great- {Mai. chichit): 
miang, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

81. Grandchild, great- {Mai. chichit): 
16, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 

82. Grandchild, great- : {a) kinchet, 
Bes. Songs. 

{b) Great-grandson: chietchiet (tchiet- 
tchiet), Mantr. Cast. [Mai. chichit.] 
[See G 79, and cf. also Man chaik 
[chak], "great-grandchild."] 
Grandchild : C 102. 

83. Grandfather : tan. Pang. Jalor. 
Wife's grandfather : ta.n-at. Pang. 
Jalor. 

84. Grandfather : le (leh), Po-Klo. 
[A/on lea [la]. ] 

85. Grandfather : toki, Sdm. Grand- 
father ; grandmother : dekh6i, (d6k'- 
]i6i), Kena. I. 

86. Grandfather : ator, Sak. Ra. 
Ancestor : atS,', Sak. U. Kam. 
Mother : attok. Or. Berumb. You : 
atok, Jak. Ba. Pa. Father-in-law ; 
mother-in-law : dato. Bed. Cliiong. 
[Mai. dato', "grandfather," etc. ; 
but ? cf. F 41 or G 83, and Mon itah 
[itah], "grandmother."] 

87. Grandfather : yaak", Tembi ; 
yak°, Serau ; yak, Sak. Kerb. ; 
yat". Sen. Cliff. ; yat", Sen. Cl. ; 
i-or, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Great-grand- 
father {Mai. nenek) : yang, Sem. 
Kedah. Grandmother {Mai. dato') : 
yak {pr. ya"), Sem. Jartim, Sem. 
Plus ; ya' , Sem. Plus, Pang. U. 
Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; ya, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; jak. Sen. Cliff. 
Old man: yat, Tembi. [Prou, Chrcai 
jak (jac), "grandfather"; .l/ow ja, 
"great-grandfather"; Bahnar ia, 
" grandmother."] 

88. Grandfather : sagob, Sak. Jer. ; 
bekoph, Tan. U. Lang. 

89. Grandfather: nmt^k, Blan. Pem., 
Serting; nen^k, Bedu. II. ; nenek, 
Ben. Nnu. ; nene', Mantr. Malac. ; 
neni, Bes. Malac. [Mai. nenek] ; 
F 40, 41. 

90. Grandfather : gendue (gendooay), 
Bes. Bell. Grandmother : gendoi ; 
gendui, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; gend6i, 
Serting; ggnoi, Bedu. II., Blan. 
Rem. ; genoi, Mantr. Bor., Bes. 
Malac. ; (guenoil), Mantr. Cast. ; 
gSnui, Mantr. Malac. Grandparent : 
ggn6i, Bedu. III. A mythological 
female character : Genoi Lanyut 
(Genowie Lanyoot), Bele?id. Stev. 
[? = G 89 or M 190]. 
Grandfather, great- : puyong, Ben. 
Netv. ; moyang, Ben. New. Grand- 
mother: moyang, Bedu. II. Clever; 
wise-man : puyong, Ment. Stev. 
[prob. = wizard] ; [cf. Mai. moyang, 
poyang, and pawang ; M 79A]. 
Grandfather, great- {Mai. mo- 
yang) : dotn, Se?i. Cliff Grand- 
mother {Mai. nenek) : dotn, Jelai. 
Grandfather, great- : munchi, 
Ben. New. 

Grandmother : G 85 ; G 87 ; G 90- 
92. 

94. Granite : pol, Kena. I. [?cf. C 122]. 

95. Granite, chenas, Serting. 

96. Grass : {a) sS-tu, Krau Tern. ; 
toyu? (toiu or io\d7), Setn. Pa. Max. 
{b) nyo or nyoa (njo or njoa), Sak 
Kor. Gb. ; nyenan, Sak. U. Bert. 
[Bahnar fiet (nhet) ; Halang fiat ; 
Seda?ig flat, ' ' grass. "] 

97. Grass : ip-nub, Sen. Cliff. ; ibiup, 
Tembi. [? Cf. Central Nicobar 
opyijap, a species of grass.] 

98. Grass : lumbun, Bes. Songs. Tangle 
of grass : lumbun {or rambun) rum- 
put, Bes. Songs [7 cf. Mai. rimbun or 
rumpun]. 

99. Grass : yumpuh (iumpuh), Sem. 

91 

92 

93 

624 

COM PA RA 1 7 VE VOCA B ULA R V OF 

lOI 

I02 

107. 

108. 

109. 

Buk. Max. ; yumpiit (jumbut), Sem. 
K. Ken. ; rumput, Serau ; (spec. 
Mai. kumpai) : huniput, Sent. Pa. 
Max. {Mai. rumput] ; S 513. 
Grass, jungle- [Mai. lalang), 
[mperata cylindrica : laleng (laling), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. ; lalap, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. [Mai. lalang]. 
Grasshopper : ch6k, Or. Beruinb. 
Grasshopper: bg-la-lak, Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. {Mai. bilalang]. 

103. Grasshopper of the kind known 
as " hantu sfimambu" : riup, Me?it. 
Her. I. [ = the stick -insect, see 

S 455]- 

104. Grater : lagan, Jak. Mad. 

105. Grave [Mai. kubur), kfipun [pr. 
kepu<ln). Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
[? cf. Mai. kubur]. 

106. Grave: pfindam, Jak. Mad., Jak. 
Sevih., Jak. Lem., Jak. Sim. {Mai. 
pendam]. 

Grave : jirat kemuit (jirat kS- 
miinit), Bes. Her. ; G 18 {Mai. 
jirat] ; G 18 ; G 21 ; H 116. 

Grave -stone {Germ. Grabscheit) : 
eong, Sem. Sfev. 

Gravy : juma', Bes. Sep. ; juma', 
Bes. K. L. ; jumah, Bes. Songs. 
Cooked meats : jumak, Bes. Songs. 

Greasy : B 308 ; S 306 

Great : B 202-212. 

Great-granchild : G 79-82. 

Great-grandfather : G 87 ; G 91- 

93- 

Great-grandson : G 82. 
no. Greedy: nigemag" ? {nigomsiim.), 
Sak. Ra. [? Cf. Khmer komnaii 
[kunan], "miserly."] 

111. Greedy or gluttonous: musak or 
musa', e.g. musak neneh mah-h&, 
"that man is very greedy," Bes. 
K. /.. ; G 29 ; G 75 ; H 172. 

112. Green {.Mai. hijau) : (a) rohog, 
Sem. Jarum ; erhoit, Sak. Marti?) 
[? = Y 24 or Y 25B]. Yellow (J/a/. 
kuning) : r2hog, Sevi. Kedah \) — 
Y25]. 

{b) Green [Mai. hijau) : rogoi (rog- 
oi), Sem. Jarum. 

113. Green : padii, Kena. I. 

114. Green: ijau (idjao), Sak. Ka. ; 
kichau, Kena. II. Black : hejeau 
(hedj^aow), Jak. Raff. {Mai. hijau, 
"green"]; R 55 ; W 98. 

Green (unripe) : U 20, 21. 
Greenfly : I" 20 1 . 
Greet, to : O 6. 

115. Greeting, "good -day": tabii, 
Sbm.., Sak. Ra. ; tabek, Jelai 
{Mai. tabek] ; D 42. 

: ya-jinod, Pang. Sam, 
[a) ya-chambah, Pang. 

Grey : B 233. 

116. Grin, to: tSkelachoyn, e.g. t6kS- 
iachoyn kra, "you show your 
grinning teeth, O Kra," Sem. 
Kedah. 

Grind, to (the teeth) : T i68 ; T 
170. 

117. Griping (of the belly): kfidapulas 
(kdapuls), Sem. Pa. Max. [Prob- 
ably this should be ked [or kCt) 
pulas ; B 160.] {Mai. pulas. ] 

n8. Groan, to: t^ngoh (tnguh), Sem. 
link. A/ax. ; (tu'uh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. {Khmer thngor [thngiir], ' ' to 
groan."] 
Groin ; U 27. 
Ground : E 12 ; E 18. 
Grove : G 9. 

119. Grow to [intr.), [Mai. tumboh) : 
o'-kanah [pr. kgn&hh or kan&hh), 
ex. (?) 6' kenah las, "the tubers 
are growing," i.e. filling out, (of a 
particular kind of tuber called the 
Elephant's - head Tuber), Sem. 
Plus. 

120. Grow, to 
Pang. Gal. 

121. Grow, to 
U. Aring. 
[b) katumbo' (ktumbu'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; tumbu, Sem. Pa. Max. 
{Mai. tumboh] 

122. Grow, to : belol^ng, Bes. Sep. 
A.I. [? Cf. T 207 ; but ? cf. jSr>4;««- 
long, "to ascend," which also 
means " to grow " ; cf. A 9, A 132.] 

123. Grow, to (of children): y6no', Sl^m. : 
B 202 ; F 59. 

124. Growl, to [Germ, knurren) : grit, 
Sak. Kor. Gi\ 

125. Growl, to (of a dog) : nglehi, Bes. 
Sep. 

126. Grunt, to: begum -begam, Bes. 
.Songs. 

Guava : R 184. 
Guide : S 179. 

127. Guide, to : pangdo? (pando), Sak. 
Ra. ; F 21 1 ; P 154. 

Guitar : M 225. 
Gulf: R85. 
Gullet : N 28. 

128. Gums [Mai. gusi-gusi) : sing-sing. 
Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; linsit", Serau. [Mon 
chong ngek [juing ngek] ; Khmer 
chcJng thmeii [jong dhmen], 
"gums."] F 170; P i8. 

129. Gun : be-dil, Kerbat ; bedfl, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; be-dil, Lebir, U. Cher. 
Gunpowder : bek'u [or biiliii) bedll, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. {Mai. bedilj. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

625 

130. Gun : p^njauh bunyi (p'njauh 
bunyi), Pant. K'ap. Joh. Musket : 
jaubuni, Pant. Kap. Log. Musket- 
ball : ana besan jaubuni, Pant. 
Kap. Log. ; C 106. 1 bunder : 
jauh bunyi ; jauh bunyi tongkat, 
Pant. Kap. Joh. ; U 39. [Ma/. 
jauh, "far"; bunyi, "sound."] 

Gunpowder : Ci 129. 

131. Gush out, to; nul), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

Gutta : S 31, 32 ; T i ; T 211. 

132. Gutter (on eaves) : paiichurii 
(pantchoure), Sak. Ra. [.!/«/. pan- 
chor ; panchoran]. 

H 

Hail : R 13. 

Hail (a salutation) : P 44A. 
Hail, to (=to call) : C 11. 
I. Hair [especially of the head (Ma/. 
rambut) but not exclusively] : sog, 
Sem. Stev. , Sem. U. Se/. , Sem. Ij. , 
Sak. B/anj. Siv. ; sog (pr. sogg), 
Sem. J arum; Sem. P/us \ sag [pr. 
skgg), Sem. P/us ; sogk, U. Pat. ; 
sok, Sem. Ken. , Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Ga/., U. Ke/., 
Lcl'ir, Kerbat, Krau Tem. , Krau 
Ket. , Sak. Kor. Gb. , Sen. C/. , Sak. 
Tan. Rayn., Sak. Guai, Da rat ; 
sobg, soog, shog, sok'^, Tembi ; 
sSk'i, /e/ai; sookn, Serau ; sa,k(?); soak 
("sharp" s), Sak. Martin ; sogk, Or. 
Berumb. ; sok, Sak. U. Kam. ; (sok), 
U. C/ier.; sok (suk), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
(suk), Sem. Pa. Max. ; suk or sok, 
Pang. U. Aring \ suk. Pang. Be/imb., 
U. ^Tem., Kena. 11., Bes. Her., U. 
Ind. ; s'fik, Sei'ting ; sdyut, Kena. /. ; 
so', Bes. Ma/ac. ; isa' ? (esauh). Tan. 
U. Lang. ; sak, Sem. Beg. ; saa, Sem. 
Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Mar., Sem. 
Jur. Rob. ; saar, Sak. Sung. ; tsuk ; 
chuk, Bes. Sep. A. /. ; chok, Sak. 
Ra. \ cho, Sak. Kerb. ; sop, S'om. ; 
so-op (soop), Sak. Br. Low ; sum. 
Bed. Chiong; suk? (luk), Ben. New. 
[misprint? but v. infra]; B 143. 
Body - hair (human): sok (suk), 
Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
sok, Pang. U. Aring, Partg. Sam, 
Pang. Ga/., Kerbat; sup, Bera ; S 
310; T 3. Body-hair (of animals) : 
sok (suk), Setn. Pa. Max. ; sok-sok 
(suk-suk), Sem. Buk. Max. Hair of 
human head : s6k-kuih. Pang. Ja/or ; 
saku{, Sem. Martin ; s^k-kui (skkui), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Crest (on head of 

VOL. II 

animals, etc.): sak-kui (skkui), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; H 46. Feather : sog, 
Sem. Stev., Sem. U. Se/. ; s'tJk, 
Serting ; siut, Kena. /. ; sok kawau, 
/^ang. U. Aring; B 215. Head : sok? 
(loke), Sak. Se/. Da. [apparently the 
word for "hair" is intended]. Beard : 
sok angke' (suk angki'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; sog 'ngke', Sem. Keda/i ; sog 
jangka', .Sem. P/us; sok jangka', 
Pang. {/.Aring; to chaka (to-tchaka), 
Sak. Kerb. ; C 113. Eyebrow: sok 
tanam (suk tanm?), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
B 431 ; sak chengchilng (sdak chng- 
chng?), Sem. Pa. Max. ; V 228; 
sog petok [pr. sogg p6tok), Sem. 
J arum ; H i. Hair of the arm-pit : 
sak lada' (sk lad'), Sem. Pa. Max., 
Sem. Buk. Max.; sak 16da' (sak Id'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; sok kCleda' (suk 
kid'), Sem. Buk. Max. ; A 141. 
Mane ; hair of neck : sok jSnok (suk 
jnuk), Sem. Buk. Max. ; B 146. Mous- 
tache : sog kanut (sog kan-noot), 
Sem. Stev. ; M 203. Cock's feather 
[Ma/, buluayam) : sok a-yam, Lebir ; 
sok" pOp, Tembi ; sok pup, Sak. 
Em. [A/on, Kaseng, Bo/oven sok ; 
Sedang sok ; Sud, Churu s6h ; Stieng 
sok, more rarely chok ; Klimer sak 
{pr. sak ?) [sak] ; 0/d Kilmer suk ; 
.'innam t6k, "hair"; Balina r shok 
(.xok), "hair," "feathers." Cf. 

Centr. , Soufiiern Nicobar, ydk ; Shom 
Pi juo, joa ; Teressa, C/ioivra heok, 
"hair"; Tareng sok (soc) ; Sedang 
siok, " feather."] 
2. Hair (generally) (Ma/, bulu) : sental, 
Tetnbi ; sental, Darat ; sen-tol, Sak 
B/anj. C/iff. Body-hair (Ma/, bulu 
roma) : sgn-tol. Sen. C/iff. Beard : 
sengtuin ? (sentouln), Sak. Ra. ; sentoi 
jaka (sentoi- diaka). Sum. ; sentoi 
nyengka' (sentoi nyengkak), Serau, 
/e/ai; C 113. Feather: sental 
(sental, "deep" a), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
sentoi, Sak. Br. Low ; (sentoi), Sem. 
Per. ; sen - tol, Sak. B/anj. C/iff. ; 
sintol, Sak. B/anj. Sw. ; sintaiil. Tan. 
U. Lang. ; sentul, Tembi. Cock's 
feather : sentoi pup, Darat ; sSntil 
pup", /e/ai. Lip : sentlr, Tembi ; 
s6nt6r, Sak. Tan. Ram. Lips : senior, 
Som.; shengtor (chentor), Sak. Kerb. 
Hair of head : sen - tol kui, Sak. 
B/anj. C/iff. ; santal-kiii, Sem. Per. 
Occiput [«V] : sentul kiii (sendal-gui), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; H 46. Pubes ; hair 
on male pudenda : sentdl klaii ? 
(sendal-glau or sendal-gla-u?), Sem. 
K. Ken. ; P 53 ; sentoi ng6n-tap, 

2 S 

626 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; E 36. Moustache : 
sentol ninyoi, Serau, Jelai ; sintoh 
linyon, Or. Beruinb. ; M 201 ; s6n- 
lol ren - tak, Se?i. Cliff. ; T 165 ; 
shentol (chentol), Sak. Kerb. ; shentar, 
Teinbi, Whiskers (.Mai. chambang) : 
sentol niing, Serau ; sSntol ming, 
Jelai ; C 84 [? cf. T 3]. 

3. Hair (of head) : rambut, Maiitr. 
.Malac. ; R 27. Small hair on fore- 
head : gigi rambut, Jak. Mad. ; T 
172 [.lAz/. rambut]. 

4. Haik : buluh, Ben. NeT.i.K\ buluutah, 
J ok. Raff. As.\ bulu-ulah, Jak. Raff.\ 
R 26. Hair of head : buwu kapawa, 
Jak. Malac. ; H 53. E3-ebrow : bulu 
ruma' (biilu rumak), Bedu. I.; bulu 
halis, Jak. Ba. Pa. Feather : bulu' 
(buliik), Be.';. Her. ; bulu, Mantr. 
Malac. , Jak. Malac. [Mai. bulu]. 

Haik : D 98 ; H 46 ; L 35 ; T 3. 

5. Hair-knot at back of head : bags 
(bag-ee), Sem. Siev. 

6. Hair - KNOT : sSnangdn ; snangdn, 
Sak. Tan. Ram. Knob at end of 
handle (of implement) : sanghul 
(sanghool), Se?n. Stev. [Mai. sanggul, 
" hair-knot "]. 

7. Hair-tuft (of men) : jamul, Sem. Ij. 
Roll of hair (Mai. sanggul) : jebol, 
Res. Sep. A. I. Pine-apples : sejambol 
(s'jambol), Pant. Kap. J oh. \Mal. 
jambol]. 

8. Half (Mai. saparoh): 'ndut t^r endut, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; h'ndol ; 
hendol ; 'nol, ex. 'rak h'ndol (Mai. 
tinggal sa-k6rat), " there is half left," 
Bes. Sep. A. I. [There seems to be 
two words, in -t and -I : cf. Halatig 
penuot ; Stieng ngol ; Boloven nal ; 
Lave nau ; Niakon no, "half" ; and 
? cf. Khmer kandal [kantal] ; Stieng 

konol, "middle."] 

9. Half (Mai. saparoh) : tempat, 
Krait Em.; pa^ngkah (?), Bes. A. l.\ 
M 164. 

10. HALK(.l/fl/. saparoh): sa' (doubtful), 

Pang. U. Aring\ B 146; M 100; S 

198. 

u. Hall; shed: balei, Bes. K. Lang.; 

balai, Kerdau. Floor : balei, Sak. 

Kerb. [.Mai. balai, "shed"]; H 153. 

12. Hammer: pCngapan (p'ngSpan), 
/\!nt. Kap. Joh. 

13. Hammer-out, to : = C 295. 

14. Hand ; chash (tchash). Pang. Jalor ; 
chas, .SVw. Cra7o. Hist., Sem. 
Craw. Gram., Sem. Ked. And., 
Sem. Ked. Mar., Sem. Ked. New.. 
Sem. U. Sel., Sem. Ked. Rob. 
[gives it by a misprint opposite to 

"nipple," which is just above "hand" 
in his list]; (tchas), Setn. Klapr., 
Sem. Ken. ; chas ; chas (chs ; chas), 
Sem. Buk. Ma.x. ; chas (pr. chass), 
Pan^. U. .4 ring, Pang. Sam ; chas 
or chass, Pang. K. A ring; chass, 
Sem. Ij. ; chas or chyas (pr. chJass 
or chass), Sem. Kedah, .Sem. Plus ; 
chyas (pr. chJass), Sem. Jaruin ; 
chi - as, Lebir, Kerbat ; chaz (pr. 
chazz), Pang. Gal. ; pias, U. Pat. , 
U. Kel. Hand or finger : chas or 
chass. Pang. K. A ring. Finger : 
chas, Sem. Stev. ; M 219 ; N 3 ; P 
20 ; V 8. Back of hand : kio' chas 
(kiu' chas), .S'tfw. Buk. Max. ; B 4. 
Flat of hand (Mai. rata tangan) : 
eta' chas (aita" chas), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; L 62. Palm of hand (Mai. 
tapak tangan) : tapa' chas (tapa' 
chas), Sem. Buk. Max. Finger 
(Mai. jari) : ta-bok chas (? thumb), 
.Sem. Plus. Thumb : ba chas, Sem. 
Kedah ; tab4 chas, Sem. Plus ; bo' 
chas (bu' chs), Sem. Buk. Ma.v. ; 
bo' chas, Pang. U. .A ring; chaz 
wo' (doubtful order, v. ' ' little 
finger," infra), Pang. Gal. ; M 
1 92 ; mal - chas, Sem. Stev. ; W 
148. Second (middle) finger : j6ring 
chas (?), Sem. Plus. Third (ring) 
finger : tangwe chas (?), Sem. Kedah. 
Fourth (little) finger: ka-we chas, 
Sem. Plus. Little finger (Mal. 
kelingking) : chaz wong (? right 
order; but cp. "thumb," supra). 
Pa tig. Gal. ; C loi A measure- 
ment ; four fingers : en-chas, Sem. 
Stev. 
15. Hand : tong (tong), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; tong, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. 
Jur. Mar. , Sem. Jur. New. , Sem. 
Jur. Rob. , Sem. Martin ; tung. 
Ben. New. ; (toong), Sem. Beg. , 
teng, Sak. Guai ; ting, Sem. Per. ; 
Krau Ket. ; tiKng (tig'n), Sem. K, 
Ken. ; tik" ; ting, Tembi ; tik, Sak. 
Tan. Ram. ; tig (tig (i)), Sak. Br. 
Lo2v ; tok", Serau, Darat, Jelai ; 
(terk°). Sen. Cliff. ; (terk"), Sen. 
CI. ; teok, Sak. Sung. ; t6k, Sak. 
Blanj. Sw. ; tak, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
tofek. Or. Berumb. ; tein, U. Ind. ; 
tin, Krau Tern. ; tih, U. Cher. ; 
tih, Bes. Sep. A. L ; (teeh), Buk. 
U. Lang.; ti-hi, Sak. Sel. Da.; t'hi. 
Bes. Her. ; t'hi, Serting, Ben. N'ew. ; 
ti, U. Tern.; ti (tee), Bes. Bell.; the, 
Bes. .Malac. ; pih. Tern. CI. ; kih, 
Bera ; wi' ? (ui' ?), .SVw. Buk. Ma.x.; 
datin, Sem. Buk. .Max.; chet6m, 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

627 

Bed. Chiang; cham (?), Patig. 
Beliinb. ; N 3 ; N 98. Hand or lingers 
(also sometimes fool or toes?) : hate' 
or hati', Pa/it;. lielimb. Arm : tiKiig 
(tig'n ; dig'n ?), Sem. K. Ken. Pore- 
foot of animal ; arm (of monkey) : 
tih, Hes. Songs. Hand : tapa tong 
(tapa-ton), Sak. Ra.\ tapar-ti, So/n.; 
tabatf or tapati', Sai. A'or. dp. 
Palm of hand : tapa' tong (tapk 
tong), Sem. Fa. .Ma.x. ; t.'ipa-tong, 
Sem. Martin ; tapah teh, Tan. U. 
!.a.ng.\ pal tijk", Seraii \ pal tok^, 
Jeiai, Darat ; (pal terk"), Sen. 
Cliff. Back of hand : kia" tong 
(kia' tiing), Sem. Pa. Max. ; B 4 ; 
tapdi ijt'ng (dapdi-tig'n), Sem. K. 
Ken. [should mean ' ' palm of hand "]. 
The hand outstretched [Mai. pancha 
tangan) : p6ncha tong (pnja tung), 
Sem. Pa. .Ma.x. Finger: datftm ; 
tarn (dtm; tni), Sem. link. Ma.x. ; 
ting, Sem. Per. , Sem. Ken. ; tig" 
(tlghn), Som. ; tig? (dig), Sak. A'or. 
Gb. ; tii, Or. Hi/. Joh. 1. ; awang 
tong (auang tung|, Sent. Pa. Max. ; 
wantung, Sem. Jiir. And., Sem. 
Jur. A>7i'. , Sem. Jur. Rob. ; C loi ; 
kCJnun tang (/tonoun-tafi), Sak. Ra. 
First finger: kfinunte? (kunan teh), 
Tan. U. Lang. ; C 102. Second 
finger : thi pengluot (t'hi pengluote), 
Ben. .Vt'7*'. Middle finger (Mai. 
j;iri tengah) : tarn tengah (tm tngh), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; t'hi penglokit, Ben. 
.\ew. Third finger : awah teh, Tan. 
U. Lang. Fourth (ring) finger : ta.m 
munis (tm mans), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Little finger : anak tarn (ank tm), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; kenun? tok° 
(kenun tok" ; kemun tok"), Seran ; 
keniing tok", Jclai ; C 102 ; teng 
triang. Tan. U. Lang. Nail : tep, 
Sak. Sal. Da. Thumb : bu tiik, 
Sak. U. Kam.\ ba' tong (ba' tung), 
Sem. Pa. Ma.x.\ bo ting? (boating), 
Sem. Jur. And.; (boaling), Sem. Jur. 
Rob. ; tabu tok", Serau ; ibi tok", 
Darat ; M 192 ; keneng tokt^, Jelai ; 
tih-gendek, Bes. K. L.; ganni t'hi, 
Ben. \eii).; M 190. Arm: tein, U. 
Ind. Forearm : tong (ton), Sak. Ra. ; 
tha (fa"), Kena. L [J/ow toa [tai] ; 
S/ieng, Bahnar, Par, Phnong, Prou, 
Kong, Site, Proons, Old Khmer, 
Niakofi, Alak, Lave, Kaseng, Halang, 
Chrau ti ; Churu te, ti ; Bolct'en tei ; 
Samre t6 ; Cuoi de)' ; Khmer day 
[tai] ; Atuiam tay ; Kuy Dek tay ; 
Centr. Nicobar kanetai ; Shorn Pe 
noai-ti ; 7V/vrjJrt niah-ti ; Car Kicobar 

el-ti ; Khasi kti ; Palaung tai ; tae 
(tau) ; Saniali ti ; .Mahle, Birkdr, 
Konva, Kurku ti ; Kharia ti' ; Juang 
it! ; .Mundari, Dhanggar tihi ; 
Gadaba titi, " hand." Cf. also Tareng 
ati ; Kaseng, Churu ti, "arm," and 
a number of compounds in various 
dialects, usually on the ' ' child of 
hand" principle, for "finger." 
Unless the original root of all these 
words was something like tafi. it 
seems doubtful whether the ones 
ending with a guttural can be classed 
together with those that end in a 
\o\vel. Cf. Khmer dang [tang] ; 
dong [tong] ; Stieng tong ; Mun 
taw, " handle."] 

16. H.wn : manengto - kaek. Tan. U. 
Lang. 

17. Hand ; finger : rawet, Kena. L 

18. H.^NIJ : penganah (p'nganah). Pant. 
Kap. Sim. Hand : tangan, Mantr. 
Malae. Lower arm : tangan, Galaitg 
[-1/(2/. tangan]. See L i [b). 
Hand : A 134 ; C 49 ; C 274, 275 ; 
Fin; N 3 ; P 21. 

19. H.\ND, lines on the, or lines round 
the wrist? [Mai. gelang tangan): 
keraha ping (krahaping), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [? = A 139]. 

Palm of the hand : P 19. To 
shake hands : C 49 ; E 57. To 
take in the band : C 49. 

20. Handkerchief, ke-to-pong, Bera. 
Handle : A 9 ; B 345. 

21. Handle (of weapon) : [a] dal, Sem. 
Stcv. ; dul. Sen. CI. ; e.g. dul i-6dz, 
" handleof awoodman's knife" [Mai. 
hulu parang); I 36; dul wa-li, 
" liandle of a knife," Se7i. Cliff. ; K 
46. Handle of chopper : giil nyem, 
Sak. Gudi; C 125 [? cf. T 7]. 

[b] Handle (of an adze or hatchet) : 
bentol, Bes. A. /. , Bes. K. L. Butt- 
end of arrow : bentol, Bes. Malae. 
Wooden handle for the stone imple- 
ment " chittai " : paddar, Sem. Stcr. 

22. Handle, wooden, of chopper 
(parang) : kiong-u (keong-oo), Sem. 
S/ez'. [Here, as elsewhere, the -u is 
probably the 3rd pers. pron. ::= " its."] 
[? = B4.] 

23. Handsome : hiinal, Mantr. Malae. 
.VVi/. ; G 63 ; G 65 ; G 67. 

24. Hang, to [A/al. gantong) : ya' si- 
gud (//'. si-gudd), Sem. J arum, Sem. 
Plus. 

25. Hang, to: {a) jol ; jel-jol, Sen. 
Cliff. ; jel-jol, Sen. CI. ; mSnjo' 
(mnju' or hnju' ?), Sem. Buk. Max. 
To hang downwards (?) : jinjon or 

628 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

jingjong, ex. 6' jinjon kra, " the ' kra ' ' 
hangs downwards," .SVw. Kedah. 
\_Stieng juiig ; iung ; Buloven yong ; 
Niahbn yuong ; Alak yo ; Lave dung 
yung, "to hangup."] : 

(b) Hang : iniot, Pant. Kap. Joh. ! 

26. Hanging ; to let hang : kio' ngai 
(kiu' ngai), Sent. Fa. Max. \ 

27. Hanging ; to let hang : ni6ngulor ; 
(mngulr), Sem. Buk. Max. S^Mal. | 
ulnr]. 

28. Hanging ; sitting with the legs 
hanging : juntai (junti), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [.1/rt/. juntai]. 

29. Happy : gema (guma), Mant. Bor. 
To like ; to approve of : gemar, 
Maiitr. Stev. \_Mal. gemar]. 

30. Hai'PY [Mai. suka hati) : rame? 
kelangez, Sem. Plus ; H 64 [? = H 
29] ; E 24 ; P 145. 

31. Hard [Mai. keras) : tegoh. Pang. 
U. Arhig; tSgoh (tguh ; tkuh), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; tega? (dega, ' ' hard a"), 
Se?ii. K. Ken. ; te-goi ; t&-goi, Sen. 
Cliff. ; chige? (tsige), Sak. Ra. ; 
cherdl (tcherdl), Sak. Kerb. [? cf. 
Q 7 ;] chugot (tschugot ordschugot), 
Sak. Kor. Gb.\ cheko' (chkuk), 5f»z. 
Pa. Max. ; cheking [pr. che-kil^ng), 
Sem. Plus. Stiff: tSgoh (tguh), 
Se7n. Buk. Max. Thick ; durable ; 
firm : teg^? (teg6), Sem. K. Ken. 
To force : cheko' (chkuk), Sem. 
Pa. Max. To strengthen : cheko' 
(chkuk), Sem. Pa. Max. Weak : 
bia' tegoh (bi' tguh), Se7n. Buk. 
Max. ; ta' mechfiko'? (ta' mchku'), 
Sem. Pa. ^[ax. Lock-jaw? [Mai. 
kgrasan terkanching gigi) : cheko' 
tin? (chkuk tin), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[Cf. Mai. tegoh ; but several of these 
words are not derived from it.] 

32. Hard ; strong : tegaplt'gap), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. Stout ; strong : tggftb 
(tkb), Sem. Pa. Max. Leg ; bone ; 
shoulder : pent-gap (p'n'gap), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. [Mai. tegap]. 

33. Hard : [a) kak, Sem. Jkg. \_Halang 
khii; Jarai khang, " hard " ; Bahnar 
khAng, "dry," "hard."] 

(b) Hard : krl, Mantr. Malac.; krign, 
Ment. Her. I. [Cf. Mon krang 
[krang], "stiff," "hard"; but cf. 
D 180.] 

(t-) Hard: keras (krass), Som.\ kra, 
Ben. Neiv. [.Mai. kf-ras] ; F 168. 

34. Harm : pantangkon. Pant. Kap. 
Joh. [? .Mai. pantang]. 

Has : A 63 ; F 1 15-123. 
Haste : ^) 5. 

35. Hatch out, to (eggs) : bena' (bna'), 

Se7n. Pa. Max. Shooting up (of 

plants) : bena' (bn'), Sem. Pa. Max. 

To hatch out : B 375. 

Hatchet ; A 34-37. 
36. Hate, to [Mai. b§nchi) : ya' males 

[pr. ma-less), Sem. Kedah. 
yj. H.-^TE, TO : ya-kiildon or kuldon 

kglanges ( = J/a/. bSnchihati): Pang. 

U. Aring \ H 64. 

38. Hate, to : [a) ya' bese', Sem. Kedah. 
Miserable ; unhappy [Mai. susah 
hati) : bese' akel, Sem. Kedah ; 
bese' kglangez, Sem. Plus ; H 64. 
[? Cf. Bahnar boshe (boxe), "to 
tease," " to vex."] 

[h] To hate : he menchik°, Krau 

Km. [Mai. benchi]. 

Hate, to: D 122, 123 ; H 64 ; S 

189. 

Have, to : B 88, 89 ; B 91-93 ; F 

116; F 123. 

Hawk, to (in spitting) : S 391. 

Haze : C 184 ; D 16 ; D 22. 

39. He [Mai. dia) : a' or 5', Pang. U. 
Aring. He ; she ; it [Mai. dia) : o' 
Sem. Plus ; 6, Pang. Belimb. , Pang. 
K. Aring; u', Scjn. Kedah. They 
[Mai. di' orang) : u', Sem. Kedah. 
Because [Mai. s6bab), said to be 
ii', but I doubt this, as I think this is 
a mistake for 6' [Mai. dia, "he"), 
Pang. U. Aring. 

40. He ; she ; they : diop, Som. He : 
she ; it [Mai. dia) : jat^, Sen. Cliff.: 
jin (?), Lebir ; yoh (yerh), Krau 
Tern. 

41. He ; him ; she ; her : iliii ; iliiy, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; haluy, Sak. U. 
Bert. 

42. He : moh, Kerbat ; i-nia', Krau 
Ket. He ; she ; it : mi, SeTn. K. 
Ken. 

43. He ; she : lengan, Kena. II. 

44. He; she; they: haft? (han), Sak. 
Kerb. ; ha (he), Sak. Ra. He ; she ; 
it : hi, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; heh. Sen. 
CI. ; hah. Tern. CI. ; he ; hi [this 
last appears to be right], Bes. Songs. 
He ; they : hi, Bes. Malac. ; Y 34 ; 
hado, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; T 86 [Sui! ai, 
"he"]. 

45. He : [a) die (dii^), Barok ; dia' 
(dial^), Bcdu. I.\ dia, Mantr. Malac; 
dia ika' (dia ikak), Galang; T 93. 
He ; she : dian, Blan. Rem. They : 
dia itu' (dia-ituk), Galang [Mai. 
dia]. 

[b) He ; they : na, Jak. Malac. ; ye, 
Jak. Malac. They : nya orh^ng 
(nya okht5ng), Barok [Mai. nya] ; T 
52, 53 ; t'86. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

629 

46. Head [Mai. kapala) : kai, Scm. 
Craw. Hist., Sew. Kcd. Mar. ; kai, 
Sen. Craw. Gram., Sem. Kcd. And., 
Sem. Ked. Nob.; (kai), Sent. Klapr.; 
(kay), Sem. Ked. yjexv. ; ko-i, Sem. 
Heg. , U. Cher. ; koi, Sak. Martin ; 
koi, Krau Ket., Krau Tern., Sak. 
Cuai, Bes. Sep. A. I., Bes. Malac, 
Ben. .\'e7u., U. Ind. ; koi, U. Tern.; 
k'hoi, Serting; k'hoi, Bes. Her. ; 
kShoi, Bed. Chiang; koe [better koe ; 
in MS. originally coey], Sent. U. 
Sel. ; koie' (koiek), Bi/k. U. Lang. ; 
ekoie' (ekoiek), Tan. U. Lang. ; 
kue (kway), Bes. Bell. ; kiue? 
(kiouvay), Sem. Klapr. ; kui ; kuy, 
Sal:. U. Kam. ; kfii, Sem. Ij. ; 
(kiii), Sem. Per.; kcii, Sem. Martin ; 
(kil-i), Tern. CI., Sen. CI. ; (kooie), 
Sem. Stev. ; (gui), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
ku-i, Bera; kui, Sem. Biik. Max., 
Sem. Kedah, Sem. Jaruni, Sem. 
Plus, Pang. K. A ring. Pang. U. 
A ring. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal., U. 
Pat. , U. Kel. , Lehir, Kerhat, Sak. 
Blanj. Sw., Jelai ; (koui), Scin., Sak. 
Ra. ; kdih, Pang. Jalor ; kuih, Sem. 
Pa. Max., Or. Berumb. ; kala kuyi, 
Sem. Jnr. And. ; kula ; kuyi, Sem. 
Jur. Rob. ; kala ; kuyi, Sem. Jur. 
Mar. ; kala ; kuya, Sem. /nr. New. ; 
ku, Pang. Belimb. ; kill ; tekui, 
Tembi ; kui, Serau; kowi ? (kohwi), 
Sak. Sung. ; P 192. Hair : kui' 
(kuik), Tembi ; ko-ih, Sak. Sel. Da. 
End or top [Mai. ujong) : kiii, Pang. 
Gal. Top: kuih, Sem. Pa. Max.; 
kebo' kuih (kbuk kuih), Sem. Bnk. 
.Max. Brain : kui, Tembi ; omok- 
kui (omok-koui), Som. Giddiness ; 
vertigo : jA'kui ? (j'kui), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Headache : meje' kui (mji' 
kui), Sem. Pa. Max.; ji kui, Tembi; 
S 187 ; piis kui (pids kui), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; puut kui, piut kui, 
Tembi ; pehut kui, Jelai ; S 186 ; 
temerekoye, Darat. To shave the 
head : berchukor kakui, Sak. Em. 
Headland : koi teh, Bes. Songs. 
[Centr., Southern, Shom Pe, Teressa, 
Chmvra Nicobar ko-i ; Car Xicobar 
ku-i ; Halang ko ; Huei, Proons tui 
(toui) ; Ka tuwi ; Prou toi. Possibly 
connected with Bahnar koi ; Kat 
ngkal (ncal) ; Sedan g gol (gheul) or 
go; Kaseng go, "head"; (but not 
Jarai oko ; Cham akauk ; Kha Pi 
ak6k ; Radaih ko). The Khmer 
kebal [kpal] is an Indian loan-word = 
H 53. All mean "head."] H i, 2. 

47. Head : =:F 228. 

48. Head : chauog, Sak. Br. Low ; 
(tschau6g), Sak. Kor. Gb. Brain : 
chauok (tchaouok), Sak. Kerb. I'eak 
(of ni<;untain) : chauok (tchauok) ; 
chauak (tchaouak), Sak. Kerb. 

49. Head : tahal, Kena. L 

50. Head : buj, Ben. Mew. [?Cf. Chrdu, 
Stieng buk, ' ' head. "] 

51. Head : tilonibong, Pant. Kap. Log. 
Headkerchief : tilonibong, Pant. 
Kap. Log. 

52. Head : bubun, Jak. Sim. ; bubon, 
Or. Hu. Joh. IL; pCniohbun (p'nioh 
bun) ; pfimubun (p'muljCin), Pant. 
Kap. Lem. Head of father or 
mother-in-law : honibubu, Jak. Ba. 
Pa. Crownof the head; fontanelIes(?): 
yabun (iabun), Sem. Pa. Max. Head- 
cloth : ikat niubun, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
To kneel : pilmobun seniungkol 
(p'mobini s'munkol), Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[Mai. ubun-ubun, " crown of head."] 

53. Head : kapawa, Jak. Malac. ; B 
28 ; kapdla, Mantr. Malac. ; kepale, 
Barok ; H 4 ; P 195 [Mai. kapala]. 

54. Head : kulu, Tan. Sag. ; L 35 
[Mai. hulu ; ulu]. 

55. Head : utah, J ok. Raff. As. ; ulah, 
Jak. Raff. ; (retah), Jok. Raff. [I do 
not know whether B 369 or H 54 is 
intended here ; but cf. Punan, Buku- 
ian Davak vXoV; Selung Sitah, atak, 
"head.'"] F 5 ; H i. 2 ; H 4; 
P 100. 

56. Headache : pelig (p'leeg), Sem. 
Stev. 

57. Head, band round the : pap-an, 
Sem. Stev. To carry on the head : 
C38. 

Headache : H 46 ; H 56 ; S 187. 
Headcloth : H 52. 
Headkerchief: H 51 ; P 100. 
Headland : H 46. 
Head-scratcher : S 50. 
57A. Headstring, a : kefuul [?], Serau. 
Headwaters (of river) : A 6 ; W 30. 

58. Heal, to ; vol (j51), Sem. K. Ken. 
Health, in sound : G 66. To 
recover one's health : G 65, 66. 
Healthy : C 206. 

59. Heap, a : jeko' (jku'k), Sem. Pa. 
.Max. [?=H 31] 

60. Hear, to : {a) mSkejeng (nikjing or 
mmkjing?), Sem. Buk. .\fax. ; ya" 
kejeng, Sem. J arum, Sem. Plus ; ya- 
k^jing, ex. ye bra* kejing 'ntong 
[Mai. telinga sahya tada dengar), 
" 1 cannot hear with my ear," Pang. 
U. A ring; kejing. Pang. K. Aring 
(b) enioSng (eniok'n ; eniog'n), Sem. 
K. Ken. 

630 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

[c) k^ok, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; k(5-yok, 
Tern. CI. ; kayok", e.g. kayok" ngot 
beh, "I can't hear," lies. Malac. ; 
N 66. \_Central Nicobar yang ; 
Southern and Shotn Pe hang ; Teressa 
heang ; Chaivra heang ; Car Xicobar; 
hang, " to hear."] 

((/) miong, lies. A'. Lang. ; piol^ng ; 
pyol^ng, lies. Sep. A. I.\ piriong, Ben. 
New. [? Cf. Mon ming, " to hear."] 

61. Hear, to : penyepok (p'nyepok). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. 

62. Hear, to: rangar (zangar), Ben. 
New. ; dengar, Jak. Malac. Ear : 
perdangaran, Ben. .Xeiv. ; pendengar. 
Pant. Kap. Her. ; peningar. Pant. 
Kap. Log. ; peningar (p'ningar). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Deaf : lipach ? 
pfiniugar (lipanch p'liingar). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. To hear : peningar 
(p'ningar), Pant. Kap. Joh. Ruler : 
piningar, Pant. Kap. Log. \^Ma/. 
dengar, " to hear "] ; E 6. 

63. Heart (anatomical), [Mai. jantong) : 
ros (//'. ross). Sent. Jarum, Sem. 
Plus ; ros or 3'os (/;-. ross or 
yoss?). Sent. Kedah ; niias, Jelai ; 
noi, Seraii. Heart {Mai. hati ; 
kelbu) : hius (hius), Sem. Pa. 
Ma.x. Heart : yis (jis), Sem. K. 
Ken. ; nus ; iniis, Sak. U. Kam. 
Heart (really " Hver "), {Mai. hati) : 
noi, Sen. CliJf. Liver (or spleen ?) : 
rus, Pa?ig. U. A ring, Pang. Sam ; 
ruz, Pang. Gal. Mind ; intellect : 
iyus (alius), Sem. Pa. Max. ; iyos 
(aids), Se>n. Bnk. Ma.v. Mind ; 
sense : nus ; inus, Sak. U. Karn. 
Sensible : bor nus, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
G 65. Wise : bernus, Sak. U. Kam. 
Pretty [Mai. chantek) : b6rnoi, 
Tembi. Ugly [Mai. burok) : pi 
bernoi, pi bernoi, Tembi. Good 
news [Mai. khabar baik) : ga bernal 
Kraii Em. Good or not good ? 
susah kah bernal kah ? Krau P.m. ; 
J 12. \_Stieng nulh ; Chraii nijsh 
(niix), "heart"; Bahnar nQih, 
"heart," "courage"; ? cf. Bahnar 
bonoh, "heart," (figuratively) "affec- 
tions." Probably the words with 7i 
are distinct from the rest ; those with 
r, hi, iy, v, perhaps go with H 64 
[b). But cf. M 62.] 

64. Heart [Mai. hati) : (^7) kelanges, 
Pang. Sam. ; kelangez. Pang. Gal. ; 
kelangis (klangis), .SVw. Buk. .Max. ; 
kalangih, Pang. Bel i nib. ; selangis, 
Sem. Stev. Heart, as seat of emotions 
(Mai. hati) : kelanges or kelangez 
(/;-. kOlangess or kiMange/.z), Sem. 

Kedah, Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus ; 
kelanges, Pang. U. A ring; (Mai. 
uluhati): kaes (kaes), .SV;;?. Pa. Max.; 
(Mai. suduhati): kanyis (kanis), Sem. 
Pa. A/ax. Breast : klangis, L/. Pat. 
Stomach (more properly the "heart," 
or rather the "liver"): kalangih. 
Pang. Belimb. ; H 30. Heart [Mai. 
jantong) : k$bo' kelangis (kbu' klan- 
gis), Sem. Bnk. Max. ; [Mai. ulu 
hati): tali kglangis (tali klangs), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Angina pectoris (?) : 
pias ulu kanges (pias aula kangs), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; m&je' kanyes (mji' 
kafis), Sem. Pa. Max. 
(b) Heart (liver?) : gres ; greh, 
Bes. K. Lang. Hate: greh (or gres) 
gohup [lit. "heart-sick"), Bes. Sep. 
A. 1. [see H 63]. \JMon kroh[gruih], 
" li\ er. "] 

65. Heart : meresit. Pant. Kap. Her. ; 
H 116 [?cf. B240]. 

66. Heart : tungkul, Ment. Her. //. ; 
B 380 ; B 388 ; F 170. 

Heat : H 140-150. 
Heavens : A 8 ; W 109. 

67. Heavy : takai (takl), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
tekol (tkul), Sem. Pa. Max. 

68. Heavy : (a) hSnjut, Pang. Gal. ; 
henjut (hnjut), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
henjud (hnjud), Sem. Buk. Ma.v. ; 
jud ();• han-jud, Sem. Jarum, Sen:. 
Plus; nyuh. Sen. CI. ; nyiih ; nyul:, 
Sen. Cliff. ; nyii', Sak. U. Ka?n. ; 
inyS? (iniii ; inie?), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
'nj6h, Bes. Malac. ; henjohh, Bes. 
Sep. ; kajoh, Bes. K. Lang., Bes. 
Songs. Important ; serious : nyii', 
Sak. U. Kam. To sink [Ahil. teng- 
gglam) : ya-hajud, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. [K'aseng kejiit ; Alak kajok ; 
Lave ka-}'uk ; Nialwn juk ; Stieng 
jak (jak) ; Chrcht njok ; Mon sjaing 
[sjuing], "heavv'. "] 

[b) Heavy : bechot ? (b'chont) ; 
chSnot (chen-ont). Pant. Kap. Joh. ; 

R 139. 

69. Heel(.lA7/. tumit): duldul(chan) \sic\ 
Pang. U. .Iring, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal.; duldul, Sem. Pa. Ma.v. ; duldu. 
Sem. Buk. Ma.v. ; deldul (deldool), 
Sem. Stev. ; deliil, Sem. A'. Ken. ; 
dudol, Bev. Neiv. ; (doodol). Sen:. 
Beg. ; tiiltnl ; teltnl, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
tentol, Mantr. Malac. ; kent-hol, 
Bes. K. I.. ; chentiil, Kena. //. 
\Cham f.\\\6\, kaduol; Central, Teressa 
and Cho~ivra Nicobar kentbla-lilh, 
"heel." The Andanianese forms 
are curiously similar, e.g. Beada tar- 
kudul-de ; Kol 6n-kOtel-che.] 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

631 

70. Hkel : kenol. Tembi ; keriol juk", 
Darat; kCnul juk" (ke-imrl juk"), 
Sen. Cliff.; tanyfi, AV«(7. /. \^Achin. 
kt5nu61 (kenoeSI) ; Bahvar konol ; 
Sticrii^\Mno\, "heel." ?=H 69.] 

71. Hkkl : tuinit, Ues. Sep. .\. I. ; 
tumbit, Jak. Sim., Jak. Mad., Jak. 
Ba. Pa. [Mai. tumit] ; C 6. 
Height, at its ; R 4. 

72. Hell : belet, Sem. Stn\ ; I) 33 ; Ci 
18. 

72,. Help ; assistance : tulok (toulok), 
Sak. A'a. ; tuloiig (toulon), Siim. , 
Sak. Kerb. Help ! tulok", Tembi ; 
tolAk" toiak" ; tulok niarong jela, 
Jelai. To help : tulong (toulon), 
Sak. Ra. , Sak. Kerb. [Mai. tulong]. 

73 A. Heli* ! yo yo ! Darat. 

74. Helter - skelter : tenggong - preng- 
gong, Bes. Songs; chongkeng-chang- 
keng, Bes. Songs. 

Hen : F 25s ; F 257, 258. 
Hence : T 85, 86. 

75. Henna, water- (spec. Mai. inai 
ayer) [? = water - balsam, Hydro- 
cera triffora'] : inai bftteoh (aini 
btiuh), Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. hinai ; 
inai]. 

76. Here : ebiln, Sem. Craw. Hist. ; 
(eban), Sern. Craw. Gram. ; eban, 
Sem. Klapr., Sem. Ked. New. [A 
doubtful word; it only occurs in these 
authorities, who all derive from one 
source.] R 84 ; S 439 ; T 51 ; 
T 85, 86 ; T 89, 90 ; W 78. Here 
and there : T 54. 

Hereafter : F 296. 

77. Hernia : tiimbong (tmbung), Sem. 
Bilk. Max. ; E 36. 

78. Heron [Mai. ruwa'-ruwa') : anik, 
Sem. Buk. Max. Bird (spec. Mai. 
bidan) : ya' anik ? (ia' anik?), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

Hesitating : L 30. 

79. Hiccough : sintak, Keiia I. [cf. Mai. 
sintak, " to snatch "']. 

Hide : S 233 ; S 236. 

80. Hide, to [Mai. sembunyi) : ya-od 
(/;-. odd), Pang. U. Aring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; ya-od or ot. 
Pang. Skeat. 

81. Hide, to: kendo' (?), Bes. .4. I.; 
A 42. 

82. High : kangin ( kaiiin ) ; kanging 
(kanin), Sak. Ka. 

83. High : tinggih, Ben. Xexv. To 
raise : tingikon (tingikeun), Ment. 
Bar. [Mai. tinggi, "high"]. High: 
B 16 ; D 65. 66 ; F 29 ; H 84 ; L 130. 
High water : W 30. 

84. Hill : chibak, Sem. Ij. ; chSba' 

(chba'), Sem. Buk. Max., Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; chSbfi", Pang. U. Aring. 
Mountain : chubuk. Sem. Craw. 
Hist. ; (tchoubouk), Sem. Klapr. . 
chubak, Sem. Ked. A'ew. , Sem. Ked. 
h'ob. ; H 86 ; cheba (dscheba), Sem' 
.Martin ; chiba, Sem. U. Sel.\ chSba, 
(chba'), Sem. Buk. Max.; (che-bar)- 
Sem. Stev. Peak ; rocky hill ; moun- 
tain (Mai. gunong) : chgba', Sem\ 
Plus. Deep; high (?) {.Mai. tubir ; 
t6bing)[.v/6-]: cheba' (chba'), ^'tfw. Buk. 
Max. Mountain top ; peak : chCba' 
kemuncha' ? (jba' kmiiju'), Se?n. Buk. 
Max. V'olcano : chgba' muncha' (?) us 
(chba' mnju' us), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
H 95 ; F 124. 

85. Hill : midap, Sem. Beg. Moun- 
tain: maidap, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. 
J74r. New., Sem. fur. Pob. ; midap, 
Sem. Beg. ; midap, Ben. Neiv. 

86. Mountain : tabing, Sem. Craw. 
Hist. , Sem. Ked. New. ; Sem. Ked. 
Rob.; (jabing), Sem. Klapr.; tabing 
chubak, Sein. Ked. And. ; H 84. 
Forest : daven, U. Pat. [? Mai. 
tgbing; but this means "high bank"]. 

87. Hill [Mai. bukit): [a) jelmol, Sem. 
Kedah; jSlmol, Sak. Plus Cliff., 
Serau ; jgrmol, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; 
jelmul, Darat. Hill or mountain : 
jelmol, ex. jelmol BSching, jelmol 
Siong, Pang. Teliang. Moun- 
tain : jelmol (djelmol), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
jelmol, Sak. Br. Loiv ; (djelmol), 
Sak. Croix, Som. , Sak. Kerb. ; 
jilmul, Sem.? Stev. [Stevens appears 
to have taken this to be the proper 
name of a particular mountain] ; 
jerlemoi ? (jerlemoi), Sak. Hale; 
W 78. Rocky mountain : giilmol, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. Great mountain : 
tebul (toboul), Som. [? = B 202]. 
Shoulder : jel-mol. Sak. Plus Cliff. 
[? = S 169]. ^ 

[b] Hill : garbo or gerbo. Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; jgrebu? (jerreboo), Sak. Hale; 
bii (ba, the a = "guttural Bavarian a, 
very similar to o"), Sem. K. Ken. 
Hill ; mountain : gerbu, Tembi. 
Mountain : ger, Tembi. Mountain 
(of earth) : giirbo, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
[? = H 84 ; see also V 16]. 

88. Hill [Mai. bukit) : trap. Sen. Cliff. ; 
trab, Sak. Ra. 

89. HiLi. i.Mal. bukit) : chenan, Sen. 
Em.; (chen-au; chin-au), Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. 

90. Hill : ch'ogn, Bes. Her. ; cho^ng ; 
chong. Bes. Sep. ; chong. Bes. K. 
Lang. ; seng. Pant. Kap. Log. 

632 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Mountain : chong, lies. Malac. ; 
ch'hogn, Setting; chok" (cheukn), 
Sak. Blanj. Sic. ; seng, Jak. Sim. ; 
ch'ogn cherfign, Bes. Her. ; D 66 ; 
seng awal, Pant. Kap. Joh. Gunong 
janing (a particular mountain) : seng 
tumang or tumbang, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. Jungle : seng, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[Ph/iong juk (juc) ; Rodd chuk 
(chuc) ; Chriai chik (chic) ; Cantho 
chot ; Cham chok ; Prou chentu [H 
90 +H 100?], "mountain"; Stieng 
sing, "hillside," "hill";cf. Central 
Nicobar c\\bx\^, "high."] 

91. Hill : bgniim, Serting. Mountain 
(Mai. gunong) : bfinom, Pang. U. 
Aring; benum (benum), U. Kel., 
Or. Hu. Joh. II. ; (bnum). Pal. ; 
(benun), U. hid. ; menum (mnum), 
Sem. Pa. Ma.x. Volcano : menum 
us (mnum aus), Sem. Pa. Max. ; F 
124. \_Khmer, phnoni [bhnam]; Stieng 
bonam (bonam); Ka manam ; Churu 
binom ; Palaung pan an g ; Old 
Khmer, Samre, Por, Xong, Chong 
nong, "hill," "mountain."] 

92. Hill : redam, Kena. I. 

93. Hill : pa-u, Sak. Jer. Mountain : 
pau, Sem. Per. ; H 95. Horizon : 
pa, Sbm. 

94. Mountain : ke-lesh, Sen. CI. ; lot, 1 
Sak. Tap. ; loat, Sak. Martin ; lo-ot, 
Sak. Sung. ; lut, 7a«. U. Lang. ; 
lup, Sak. U. Bert. ; lup, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; je-logum, Sak. Set. Da. ; 
longsing, Ben. Ne-uK Mountain ; 
mountain top : lun (loun), Sak. Pa. 

[? cf. S 489]. Hill: loat machot? 
(loat madjot), Sak. Martin ; S 282. 

95. Mountain : buchak (butjak), U. 
Pat.; tunjak, Kena. I. Great moun- 
tain: mojak-pao (mbrdjak-pao), Sak. 
Ra. ; H 93. Mountain top ; peak : 
kamuncha mgnum (kmncha mnum), 
Sem. Pa. Ma.x.; H 84. [Lamp, pun- 
chak ; Ackin. puchak ; Mai. ke- 
munchak, "top," "peak."] 

96. Hill : bukit, Bes. Bell. ; bukau. 
Bed. Chiong. Hill foot (?) : bukau, 
Bes. Songs. Mountain : bukit, Blan. 
Rem., Bedu. II. ; buhu, Sem. Ij. 
Peak (of a hill) : obon bukit, Mantr. 
Malac. [.Mai. bukit, "hill"; (there is 
also a form liukau).] 

97. Peak ; rocky hill ; mountain (Mai. 
gunong) : goyal, ex. goyal Hi- 
nass, Sem. Plus ; goyal, ex. temped 
ye goyal Hinas (Mai. tempat sahya 
(junong Inas), " my place is Mount 
Inas " (in Perak), Pang. Teliang. 

98. Mountain : gunong, .Mantr. Malac. , 

Jak. Malac. ; (gounong), Sak. Ra. \ 
gunung (gounoung), Sem. Klapr. 
\Mal. gunong]. 
99. Peak ; rocky hill ; mountain (Mai. 
gunong): ten-la, Sen. Kedah. 

100. Mountain ; tu' (tul'), U. Pat. 
Summit or peak of hill (Mai. 
puchok) : tul. Pang. U. Aring; H 
loi. [Cf. Mon to [duiw], "moun- 
tain"; A'^wfrtuol [duol], "hillock," 
"ant-hill."] 
Hill: V 18. 
Hillfoot : H 96. 

loi. Hillock ; mound : mang (mng), 
Setn. Pa. .Max. ; tulmin, Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; H 100. Hillock : mong 
alas? (moug-alas), Sak. Hale. 
Hilt : A 9. 

102. Hip : gal, Sem. K. Ken. ; sakiel, 
Tan. U. Lang. 

103. Hip-bone : awul or ? je'ing awul, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; B 336. 

Hire, to : B 484. 

104. Hiss: (onomatop. ) seng-seng-seng, 
Bes. Songs. 

105. Hit, to (Mai. kena) : te-rou. Sen. 
Cliff. [Cf. Khmer tr6u [truw] ; 
Bahnar tro, "to hit"]; C 15 ; C 
296 ; S 495-497- 

105A. Hit, to : kgna' (kenak), Tembi ; 

(kena), Serau [.Mai. kena]. 

Hither: G 43 ; R 83 ; T 52 ; 

T 85, 86 ; T 88-90. 
105B. Hoe : changkui, Tembi [Mai. 

changkul]. 

Hog : F 222 ; P 73-90. 

106. Hold, to : pggak, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
(pogak), Sak. Kerb.; pe-gakii. Sen. 
Cliff. ; pegang (pbgan), Sak. Ra. 
To seize : pSgak, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
pS-gak", Sen. Cliff. To take hold 
of: p5gong, Bes. Malac. To touch; 
to finger: pegaSng ? (begag'n), 
Setn. K. Ken. [Mai. pegang] ; 
C 49 ; F III. To hold in the 
arms : D 12. To hold up : C 32. 
To take hold of : C 49. 

107. Hole : hendueng (hnduing) ; h6n- 
deng (hnding), Sem. Pa. Max.; 
hendueng (hnduing); hCnueng (hnu- 
ing), Sem. Buk. Max.; hgneng, 
Sem. Kedah; seniilSng (seniag'n, 
"deep" <t), Sem. K. Ken. Hole; 
opening (used of various orifices of 
the body) : heneng (hning), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; hendueng (hnduing), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; E 6 ; M 199 ; N 98 ; 
U 27. Anus : htndueh (hnduih), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; hfineng kit (hning 
kit), Sem. Buk. .Max. : senioKng 
kad (seniog'n kad), Sem. K. Ken. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

633 

Hole; cavity: hfinuing kio' (hnuing 
kiu'), Sem. Buk. Max. Nostril : 
hgneng (hning), Sem. Buk. .\/a.x. ; 
N 98. I'ores (of the skin) ; hen- 
dueng sa' kficng (hnduing sa' kaing), 
Sem. Pa. .Ma.v. ; honing chas (hning 
chas), Sent. Buk. Ma.v. Cave : 
anduing, Sem. Pa. Max. Hole in 
axe to fit the handle into : neng-u 
(neng-00), Sem. Stev. [The last 
syllable is the 3rd pers. sing, pro- 
noun =: " its."] [The word H 107 is 
probably a derivative from M 199 ; 
and perhaps Mon saing [suing], 
"hole," represents the root of the 
word.] 

108. Hoi.E {Mai. lubang): einpong, 
Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus ; ipong, 
Pang. Belimb. ; N 98. [? Cf. 
Andamanese , Kede, and Chariar 
aka pong; Puchikivar pong- da; 
Juwoi pong-lekile ; Kol pong-che, 
"hole."] 

109. Hole : li-en, Krau Tern. Mouth : 
lian, Sem. Ij. Nose: liang, Kcna. 1. 
Smoke-hole, in hut : lang as, Sem. 
Plus ; K 124. [?.)/a/. liang, ■ ' hole. "] 

no. Hole; cavity: hlal ? (lill), Sem. 
Pa. Max. 

111. Hole; cave: lubang (louban), 
Sak. Ra. [Mai. lubang]. 

112. Hole, deep (in a stream), (Mai. 
lubok) : wal. Sen. Cliff.; wal, Scrau. 

113. Hole, deep (in a stream) (Mai. 
lubok): gol ? (gul). Sen. Cliff. 
Hole under a waterfall : gol, Sak. 
Ra.,Sak. Kerb. Swamp: gul (gul), 
Sem. Pa. Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
B 171, 172. 

114. Hole under a waterfall : tuhil 
(touhil), Som. 

115. Water -hole in a swamp (.Mai. 
kubang): lo'-rufikn, Sen. Cliff. 
Swamp : harop, Bes. Sep. 

116. Hole; belly; rotten: mambong, 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Belly: mambong. 
Pant. Kap. Log., Pant. Kap. Her.; 
mambong panjang, /ak. Mad. (Pant. 
Kap.); B 214. 1: kemambong 
( k 'mambong ), Pant. Kap. Joh. 
My : kemambong punya (k'mam- 
bong punya), Pant. Kap. Joh. One: 
semambong (s'mambong), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. Two : dua mambong, 
Pant. Kap. Joh. To bury: p6mam- 
bong (p'mambong), Pant. Kap. 
Joh. Leaky: bemambong (b'mam- 
bong), Pant. Kap. Joh. Bucket : 
mambong sempSloh (mambong 
s'mp'loh) ; Pant. Kap. Joh.; W 34. 
A grave : pfemambong orang pantus 

(p'mambong orang pantus), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. ; D 53. A lake : mambong 
delem, Pant. Kap. Joh. ; I 1 5. Heart : 
mambong mirisit, Pant. Kap. 
Lag.; mambong mfresik (mambong 
m'r'sik), /'ant. Kap. Joh.; H 65. 
Jealous : mambong mCresik bell 
nyamon (mamViong m'r'sik b6h 
nyainon). Pant. Kap. Joh. ; G 68. 
Brave : savage : pudas mambong 
(p'das mambong), Pant. Kap. Joh.\ 
V 260. To like : maek ? mambong 
(maek mambong), l^ant. Kap. Joh. 
.\ game : peniaek mambong (p'miiek 
mambong), Pant. Kap. Joh. Sad : 
gadoh mambong, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Satisfied : puas mambong, Pant. 
Kap. Joh. 

Hole : C 63 ; C 296 ; D 66 ; M 199. 
Hole (in flute) : F 197 ; A'l 199. 

117. Hollow; empty: gAmbu, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. [? cf. Mai. hanipa]. 
Hollow (of mouth) : P 18. 

117A. Hollow (in a wall of rock) : 
gugup, Sak. U. Bert. 
Hollowed : B 175. 
Home, to go : R 83-87. 
Homewards: H 153. 

118. Honey (.l/(z/. madu) : (a) tajom(//-. 
tajo'^m). Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
(b) cheng chong. Rasa. 

119. Honey: leng, Sem. Plus; leng-ak, 
Sem. Jarum; lengu (lingu?), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; leng luwe, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; temalogn, Serting ; 
lahieh, Tan. U. Lang. ; bfiliau, 
Kcna. IL [See B 385 ; E 83, where 
leng means " liquid."] 

120. Honey : (a) sem-pok°, Sen. Cliff. 
(b) sed6t, Kena. /. ; sarak, Sak. 
Blanj. Su<. 

121. Honey : kuwah, .Sem. Kedah, 
\i .Mai. kuah, "sauce."] 

122. Honey: nisan, Bed. Chiong; 
(nee-san), Sak. Sel. Da. ; pemanis 
(p'manis), Pant. Kap. Mad. ; B 
137. Sugar : pimanis, Pant. Kap. 
Log. ; pemanis. Pant. Kap. Her. 
[Mai. manis, "sweet"; manisan, 
" sweets. "] 

Honey : B 135-139 ; W 30. 

123. Honeycomb (Mai. indong madu) : 
kim (kim), Sem. Buk. .Ma.x. ; (Mai. 
kapala madu) : kuih kim (kuih kim), 
Sem. Buk. .Max. 

124. Honeycomb (Mai. kapala madu): 
kui madu (kui madu), Se/n. Pa. 
Max. [.Mai. madu]. 

Hook, to fish with a: ¥ 145-147. 
Hoot, to: S 178. 

125. Hope, to : harap, Bes. K. Lang. 

634 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

I hope : en harap, Jelai ; hi ber- 
haraplah, Darat [J/(z/. harap]. 
Horizon : F 220 ; H 93. 

126. Horn (of animal): (rt)balarig(balng), 
Sem. Fa. Max.; B 41 ; D 188. To 
butt with the horn : wftt balang 
(lit balng), Sem. Fa. Max. [wftt=: 
Stieng uat, "to butt"]. Ivory: 
bala'h, Sem. Beg.; bala, Ben. New.; 
bala', Sem. Kedah. Ivory ; tusk : 
baia' (bar). .SVw. Bnk. Max. 
\_Khmer phh'ik [bhluk] ; Stieng 
bk'ik ; A'aseng blok ; 5//./ boI6 ; 
Halang mila ; Sedang boli ; Jarai, 
Bahnar bola ; Cham bala ; Tareng 
talo ; Kon- Ti/ pal6 ; C/iratt bla ; 
Boloven, Niahon, Alak, Lave blok, 
"ivory."] 

[b) Banana (spec. .Ma/, pisang tan- 
dok): balfi' becking (bla' bduiig), Sem. 
Buk. .Max. Pumpkin ? (spec. .1/17/. 
jDcriagading): bala' (bal'), Sem. Buk. 
Ma.v. [It is doubtful whether these 
words are connected with the above : 
cf. Kajaman baiilt ; Tanjong balat ; 
Sibop, Ba Mali, Li rang baiak ; 
Lepii Puhun, Fi/nan, Funan Nibong, 
Long Pokiin, Bintt/lti, Matii, Ka- 
noiait, Milanaii balak, etc., all 
meaning "banana" or " plantain."] 

127. Ivory (.1/rt/. gading) : selor [fr. 
s61-orr), Sem. Plus. 

Horn : P 100 ; R 98. 

128. Hombill [MaL enggang) : halong, 
Fang. ['. .i}-ing. 

129. HoKNBii.l, : tates, Bes. A'. Lang. 
Hornbill (the lesser) : tateh ; tat^, 
Bcs. Sep. 

130. Hornbill : ngang, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. "Rhinoceros-bird": yagaSng 
(jagag'n), Sciii. K. [\en. \Mal. 
enggang]. 

131. Hornbill. Pied [MaL kekek): 
keiekeng, Fang. U. Aring; keng- 
keng ; chim kengkeng, Bes. K. L. 
[.l/a/. kekek]. 

132. A black bird {.\La/. kekek) : 
karais'\ Jai: Malac. A bird 
described as resembling the pied 
hornbill, but darker in colour : 
karat ; chim karat, Bes. A". L.. 

133. Hornbill, Rhinoplax (.!/«/. burong 
tf'bang mentua) : tekem, Fang. I'. 
Aring ; kawau tekut (/;-. te-kutt), 
L^ang. .Sam, Fang. GaL Rhinoceros- 
hornbill : tekub (tekoob), 5^w. Stev. 
A kind of bird {.MaL burong bot- 
bot) : kawau tekup, Sem. Fins (?). 

134. Hornbill, thi; rhinopla.\ {MaL 
tcbang mentua) ; rangkai ; chim 
rangkai, Bcs. K. L.. 

135. Hornet {^LaL tabuan) : cing, Sem. 
Jarum; awang? (auang), Sem. L-'a. 
XLax. ; en ('in). Se7n. Buk. Max. ; 
eng {pr. eSng), Sem. Flus; eng- 
wukn [?J, Tembi ; 6k°, Sen. Cliff. ; 
ok", Serau, Jelai ; liong, Bes. 
Songs. Young of bee : awang wa' 
(aung u'), Sem. Buk. .Max. [prob- 
ably corrupt, or cf. C loi and B 
137?]. \Jiahnar ong. "wasp"; 
Mon haing [huing], " large hornet."] 

i35.\. Hornet {.Mai. tabuan) : (a) 
toog, Serau. [.Mon tho [thow], 
"a species of hornet"; Ccnt7-al 
Nicobar tao, " yellow wasp."] 
((5) A smaller variety than the toog : 
tengchok", Serau ; tengchok°, Sak. 
Em. ; (spec. Mai. naning) : tentok°, 
Tembi, Sei-au ; tentok^, Jelai. 

136. Hornet ; a kind of hornet or wasp 
(spec. Mai. naning) : nangjeng 
( n;\ng jing), Sefn. Buk. Max. ; 
jinjeng. Fang. C. Aring [? cf. Mai. 
naning or H 135A] ; W 24-26. 
Horrible : S 4 ; U 2. 

137. Horse : kuda, Sem. Beg. Caltrop 
(Mai. ranjau) : kuda", Bes. Sep. 
[Afal. kuda, "horse"; but Mai. 
sudar ; .-Ichin. suda, "caltrop."] 

138. Horse-fly [MaL pikat) : chaput 
{pr. cha-putt). Fang. U. Aring. 

139. Horsk-fly: rajob, Fang. Sam, 
Fang. Gal. ; jop. Sen. Cliff. ; 
joob", Tembi {and Serau7']; toyo^ng, 
Bes. A. I.; M 183. 

140. Hot {Mai. hangat) : petes, Sem. 
Kedah ; pgdis, Sem. Jarum ; pedih, 
Sem. Kedah, Sem. Plus ; pedih 
(pdihl, Setn. Fa. Max., Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; pedi (pedee), Sem. Jur. 
And., Sem. Jur. N'ew., Sem. Jur. 
Rob. ; pgde [in the MS. originally 
pedey], Sem. U. Sel. ; R 12. 
Dazzled (with light) : pedih (pdih), 
Sem. Fa. Max. Noon : tengah- 
pedi, Bes. Malac. [cf. S 185? and 
possibly B 196?]. [Cham padyak ; 
Cancho pedeak (ped6ac) ; (and per- 
haps) Mon k'tau ; Khmer kedau 
[ktau] ; Cuoi khdau ; Boloven, Sud 
katao, " hot."] 

141. Hot {Mai. panas ; hangat) : {a) 
be-ket, Sen. Cliff. ; beket. Tan. 
U. Lang. ;, bukiit (bouk^t), 
Sam. ; bekiit. Sak. Martin ; 
b€ngkat (hnket). Sak. Ra. ; bekak, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; bek6-ad, Sem. 
Ken. ; bC-ked, Fang. U. Aring ; 
beked or bOkcid, Sem. Plus ; bSkud, 
Fang. Sam, Fang. Gal. ; bfka' or 
beko". Fang. Belimb.; beko', l^ang. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

635 

A". Aring ; mengkit", Darat ; be- 
keet, Seraii [the equivalent given 
to this last is A/a/, panah, 
" bow," an evident error for panas, 
"hot"]. To dry in the sun 
{Mai. junior) : ya - hekud, Pang. 
Sam, Pafiif. Ga/. Sweat : bSkat ? 
(bogivt ; bog(?t), Sak. K'or. Gb. To 
sweat: bCkat (boket), Sak. Kerb. ; 
(begad ; bogRd), Son. A'. Ken. ; 
be-kep, Sak. Plus Cliff. Noon 
(Mai. tcngah hari) : tcngah bengkot 
{pr. bengkijtt), Se>n. Plus ; ya-kod 
(pr. ya-kodd), Sein. Kedali. 
\b) Hot : gohob", Jak. Malac. ; 
go-hop, Sak. Sel. f)a. ; gohom, 
Hii. Joh. II. ; khob. Or. Hn. 
J oh. I. 
\i,-2. Hot: but (but) .Sew. l'er.\ (bout), 
Sak. Kerb. ; bud, Sak. Br. Low ; 
(boud), Sak. Croix ; (boudh), Sak. 
Kerb. Hot ; warm : bud, Sem. 
K. Ken.; W 30. Very hot : bak", 
Sak. Em. [? Cf. Baltnar buh, 
"to burn," " to roast "; ?cf. S 535.] 

143. Hot : je-^s, Bes. Her. 

144. Hot: ((^) miang, Bcdu. II. [? Cf. 
Mai. miang, a kind of itching. ] 

(^) deming? [o/- daning ? MS. read- 
ing doubtful], Sak. Sung. 

145. Hot ; heat : radang, Ben. New. 

146. Hot: periit (peret), ^t'r/'/'w,^; persit, 
Bedu. II. ; pasang, Kena. I. ; 
pengering, Pant. Kap. Her. ; pinir- 
ing, Pant. Kap. Log. ; penTreng 
(p'nireng). Pant. Kap. Joh. Hot 
(perspiring) : poset, Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. Heat : pengrak (pngriik), 
Sak. U. Kain. 

147. Hot: hangat, lies. Malac, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. Fire : hangoi, Kena. 
I. ; pehangat, Jak. Mad. {Pant. 
Kap. ) ; (p' hangat), Pant. Kap. Joh. ; 
pengangat, Pant. Kap. Her. ; 
piningat. Pant. Kap. Log. Lamp : 
pghangat (p'hangat). Pant. Kap. 
Mad. Spark : bunga pfihangat 
(bunga p'hangat), Pant. Kap. Joh. ; 
F 190. Cooked (as food) : penan- 
gdt, Sak. Tan. Ram. [.Mai. hangat, 
"hot."] 

148. Hot: panes. Pang. K. Aring; 
panas, Bes. Malac, Mantr. Malac. 
To feel hot : panas rasa tuboh, Jak. 
Lent. [Mai. panas]. 

149. Hot, to be(?): ipheng or ya- 
ipheng. Pang. Belitnb. 

150. Hot, to kk (of the sun) ; heat (of 
the sun : che'^nghek, lies. Sep. 

151. House; hut; dwelling-place: hAleh 
(hlih), Sem. I'uk. Max. ; hiinlueh 

(hnluih), Sem. Pa. Max. Hut 
(Mai. rumah) : ha-le, .SVw. Kedah ; 
(Mai. pondok) : han-oi, Sejn. Plu-i 

[? cf. L 31]. 

152. Hou.se : si-et, Sak. Gnai ; si-et, 
Krau Ket. ; siet, Kerdau ; sieh, Krau 
Tern.; si-ar, U. Tern.; si-au, V. 
Cher. Hut (Mai. pondok) : yi.eh, 
Setn. Beg. ; chfinia' (ch'niak), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. ; chendeya (tschendeya), 
U. Ind.; (tschendejia), Or. Hu. Joh. 
II. Leaf-shelter (Mai. pondok) : 
he-ya', Sem. Kedah ; haya', Sem. 
Plus. [Cf. ll'a, Danaivnya.; Lemet 
na (nha) ; Halang nii ; Annam na 
(nhi) ; Chrdu, Alak, Kaseng, Stieng 
ni ; Seda?ig hei, hi ; .Mon sngi (in 
some dialects pronounced hii) ; 
Southern, Shorn PS, Tcrcssa , Choivra 
and Central A'icobar fil ; Phnong 
hi ? (nhis), " house."] 

153. HouSK : (a) deh, Tem. CI. ; dag ; 
deg, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; e.g. " three 
houses," na? buadiig (ma-bua-dag), 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; daak, Sak. Em. ; 
d6ik, Sak. Korb. Lias. ; diik, 
Tembi ; dik, Sak. Ra. ; dSk, Sak. 
U. Kant. ; diik, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; 
dug, Serau ; duk, e.g. "a good 
house, ' ' eloh duk [the order appears to 
be inverted], Sak. J. Loiu ; duk, e.g. 
"how many houses?" duk mrep ? 
"three houses," ni deni'i duk, Sak. 
U. Bert. ; dikn, Sak. Kerb. ; ding 
(din), Som. ; d8k>' (derk" ; derk"), 
e.g. dbk" (derk") eng be ma' -chut, 
" my house is very small," Sen. CI. ; 
dokn, Serau, Jelai ; dong (derng), 
Lebir, Kerbat ; dong (don), Sak. 
Ra. ; dul^ng ; hado-^'ng ; doling. 
Bes. Sep. A. I. ; dung, Bes. K. 
Lattg. ; (doong), Bes. Bell. ; 'ndoP, 
Sak. .Martin [? = H 159]; dol. 
Bera ; dol, Serting ; scrodong, 
Kena. I. House ; hut : dung or 
ba-dung (X.B. ba - dung = home- 
wards). Pang. Belim. ; dong. Pang. 
K. Aring; kui daSng (kuidag'n). 
Sent. K. Ken. [?="to live in a 
house " ; S 222]. Hut : dfik, Sak. 
U. Kam.; dBk" (derki'). Sen. Cliff.; 
dong. Pang. U. .{ring; dong (/;-. 
do^ng), Sem. Skeat; badong<;;-d6ng, 
ex. oi' dong tani maken gob? (Mai. 
rumah itu siapa orang), "whose 
hut is that ? " Ye'-lch tepunya dong, 
" It is my hut, " Sem. Kedah ; dug", 
Bes. Malac. ; dign, U. Pat. ; digos, 
U. Kel. ; do, lies. Malac. ; dol, U. 
Ind., Pal.; dol (dol'). Or. Hu. Joh. 
I. ; tol (tor). Pal. Place : d6k, Sak. 

636 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Kerb. ; {Mai. tenipat) dol, Bes. 
K. L. Country ; (place?): dol, Bes. 
Songs. Shed ; hall {Mai. balai) : 
dek, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; de, Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. Village : dayak, Sent. 
Klapr. Homewards : ha dong, 
Bes. Sep. ; W -jj. [.4fi//am dang ; 
Tareng, Sui diing ; Suk dung 
(doung) ; Nanhatig, Cuoi, Kon Tu 
dong ; Samrc, Por tang ; Old 
Khmer, Sam re, Xon^ tong ; Khmer 
phteah [phdah], "house." The 
connection of Stieng tuk ; Moii 
than, "place," seems doubtful, as 
also that of Cham ihang (=sang) ; 
Chriai chhang ; Jarai sang ; 
Cancho, Kodif sa.ng, "house" : these 
appear to go back to a form sarig, 
distinct from the words in d- and 
t- above ; but cf. Mon dong [dung], 
"city."] 

( <^ ) To keep : dii {dh), Sak. Ra. ; 
dol, Sak. Kerb. To lay down : de, 
Sak. Ra. ; dol, Sak. Kerb. ; dol, 
Sen. Cliff. To put (.1/a/. buboh) : 
dol ki, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; ya-pi- 
dul [pr. pT-dull), Pang. U. Aring. 
Put there : dii pas6, Sak. U. Kam. 
To set down ; to place : dol, Se7i. 
CI. [? cf. S 477]. [Cf. Bolcroen da ; 
Niahon, Tareng do ; Annam de ; 
Khmer dak [tak], tB [do], ' ' to put 
(or put down)"; Mon phdaik 
[phduik], " to put, or place, upon "; 
Bahnar d6ng, "to put down (or 
away"); Annam thong, "to put 
down."] 

154. HOUSK : jekot, Bcdu. II. 

155. House: sergul. Bland. K. La?ig. 

156. Hut: cherong, Jak. Malac. ; 
(cher6ngue), Jok. Raff. As. ; (cher- 
ingu), Juk. Naff. 

157. House: rumah, Sem. J^eg., Ben. 
.\'czv. [J/(z/. rum ah]. 

158. House : [p ?] ono [initial letter torn 
off in MS.], Tan. Sag. Hut: 
pondok, Mantr. Malac. ; pondong, 
Ment. Her. 1. [Mai. pondok]. 

159. House: sapa? (sapan), Sem. 
Pupier. Leaf-shelter (.!/<;/. pondok): 
hapoi, Sem. Plus. Slats, of thatch : 
hapoi, Sem. Kedah. [Bintulu, Kat- 
ingan, Biaju Dayak, A'gaju Dayak 
sapau ; Laivangan, Siang sapo ; 
Many an [Maanjan] hapau ; Kay an 
apo, "thatched roof"; Mangkasar 
sapo, "house"; .I/12/. sapau, "hut."] 

House : B 90 ; .S 221. 
How : W 77, 78 ; W 89. 
How far : W 78. 
How many : W 78 ; W 80. 

|How much: M 169; W 77, 78; 
W 80 ; W 89, 90. 
How much more : T 85. 

160. Howl, to {Mai. melolong), of a 
dog : ya-to-hcil. Pang. I J. Aring. 

161. Howl, to; to roar: anghuang, 
Sem. Pa. Max. To howl (of a 
dog) : ma'o'^ng, Bes. A. I. [Cf. 
Mai. aum ; the word is probably 
onomatopoeic ; cf. Central Nicobar 
ho-ang, " to howl as a dog."] 

162. Howl, to [Mai. melolong), of a 
dog : ya-ulong {pr. ulofe'ng). Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. [Mai. lulong ; 
lolong]. 

162A. Howl, to; lajiin? (ladschan), 
Sein. K. Ken. ; C 285. 
Huge : B 202-212. 

163. Hum, to : bol, Sak. Kor. Gb. 

164. Humming (sound) : i>61ut (plut), 
Sem. Pa. A/ax. [? cf. B 257]. 

165. Hum.ming (sound) : dosing (dsing), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [Mai. desing]. 

Hunchbacked : B 175 ; S 541. 

166. Hundred, a : chuni (chia-nee), Sak. 
Sel. Da. [Very doubtful ; probably 
fictitious.] 

167. HuNiJKED, one: niratus (ni-ratous), 
Som. ; neiratus (neiratous), Sak. 
Kerb. ; naratus (naratous), Sak. 
Ra. ; ^'moi - ratus, Bes, Malac. ; 
saratus, Sak. Br. Low, Mantr. 
Malac. , Jak. Malac. ; seratu 
(seratou), .S'(7/('. Croix. Two hundred: 
neiratus (neiratous); neljulratu (neld- 
joul-ratou). Som.; T 272 ; narratus ? 
(nafiratous), Sak. Kerb. ; narratus 
(narratous), Sak. Ra. Three 
hundred : neratus (n6-ratous), Som. ; 
niratus (niratous), Sak. Kerb. ; 
naratus (neratous), ,Sak. Ra. [Mai. 
ratus] ; G 20. 

168. Htmger; hungry: kulmot, Sem. 
Stev. Hungry : kelmot (klmut), 
Sem. Buk. Max. 

169. Hunger : {a) ch6rA {tchox-h), Som. ; 
chero' {tchoxo), Sak. Kerb. [.' Cf. 
Boloven, Niahon tshra ; Lave tshra 
tshro, " thin."] 

(b) Hungry : se-leh, Bera ; s6H, Bes. 
Malac. ; uut s'leh, Bes. A. /. ; B 161. 

170. HuxcKR : chuang (tchouafi), Sak. 
Ra. Hungry: chu-ak. Sen. Cliff.; 
chuam ; chenak, Tembi. [Boloven 
nuiifi chong ; Niahon nguin chong ; 
Alak mh chong ; Lave ngoin chong ; 
Halang vah chong ; Stieng ji ching 
(jichang), "to be hungry"; (ji = 
S 187).] 

171. Hunger: \?i.-^m, Jak. Malac. [Mai. 
lapar] ; D 50 ; K 27 ; V. 34. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

637 

172. Hungry : hlab (hiiab), Scm. Pa, 
Max. Greedy : heu (h^6»«), Som. 
[? = Hi7o]. 

173. HuNGKV : got, Kraii Ket., Krau 
Tern. ; gat (gort), Sak. Gitai ; 
pogbt (p6r-ggrt), U. Tern. ; r6g8p 
(re-gfirp), U. Cher. [Bahnar 
pongot ; Tareng ngot ; S/ietig 
pongSt ; Halaiig [langot ; Bolove.n 
pangot ; Sui! pagia, ' ' to be hungry. "] 

174. Hu^■GK^■ : bolur, Pant. Kap. /ok. 
[Afal. bulur, "famished"]; E 59; 
H 168-171. 

175. Hunt, to (-Ua/. memburu) : ya- 
pantu', Paug. I'. .4. ring. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. 

176. Hunt, to (.Mai. buru) : had, Sem. 
Beg. [misprinted "hurt"; as the 
Malay equivalent burn shows] ; had, 
Ben. Xezv. ; had (/;-. hadd), ex. 
bo' tenlad pi hadd, "gird on (?) 
your arrows and a-hunting," Pang. 
Teliang ; he-hor, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
u-mal, Sen. Cliff.; ani-orr, LL Cher. 
[This last word is probably rightly 
placed here, the Malay equivalent 
given being bum, but as it appears 
in the MS. list next to chantek, 
"pretty," it would seem probable 
that the collector intended it for 
burok, "ugly."] I hunt: him 
berumal, Darat. To hunt [with ?] 
dogs : berumal cho' (chSk), Serau 
[? =F 210]. [It is doubtful if all 
these are connected : for some of. 
Cham amal, " to hunt."] 

177. Hunt, to(?): siip, U. Tern. 
[The Malay equivalent is bum, but 
I am doubtful whether there is not 
a confusion with bnlu, " hair " ; cf. 
Hi.] 

178. Hunt, to : men-j6l, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; B 257 ; C 48 ; D 170 ; 
S 427, 428. 
Hurl, to : 
Hurt, to 

D 134- 

T 106-114. 
C 296 ; D 7 
Hurt, to be : S 186. 
179. Husband : sawa, Kena. I. ; awa" 
(awak), Sak. Sel. Da. Wife : 
awa' (awak), Kena. II. \_Kayan 
hawa; Z)«j'«;? asouwah, "husband," 
"wife"; Tagal, Bisaya asaua, 
" spouse " ; Milanau Dayak sawah ; 
Kanowit sawan ; Kian [Kayan ?) 
oang-hawah ; Tagbenua magasawa, 
"husband"; Sampit, Katingan 
sawtih ; Kancnvif sawah ; Sulu 
asawa ; Land Dayak sawun ; Pulo- 
petak Dayak sawa ; Sumpo Dayak sa- 
wan ; Malanaii saua ; Biaju Dayak 
saw6 ; Lawangan ■i.TiO, "wife."] 

180. Husband •. oi, Ketw. II. Wife ; 
oi, Kena. I. ; h6-ei, Sak. Sel. Da. 
Thou ; you : ui, .Manir. Malac. 
[In colloquial Malay (Malacca) there 
is a word ui or ueh used as a mode 
of address between man and wife.] 

HusiiAM) : H 421; M 15, 16; 
M 19-22. 

Hush : L 31 ; S 203. 
Husk : P 47 ; S 236. 
Hut : H 151-159 ; S 221. 
Hydrocele : s 194. 
Hydrosaurus : 1. 120. 
Hysteria : D 160. 

181. Hysterical [Mai. latah) : lata', ex. 
penemng lata' dog, i.e. "sick and 
hysterical with u[)as-poison," Pang. 
Teliang. Ticklish ; lat6, Sak. Ra. 
[.Vial, latah]; S 193. 

1. I (Mai. sahya ; aku, etc.): yam. 
usually contracted to ya', ye, or ye', 
Sem. Kedah, Sem. /arum ; ye' or yd.. 
Pang. A'. A ring; ye' or ye. Pang. U. 
A ring; ye', Pang. Belitnb. The full 
form is yam, but this is contracted to 
ya- or ye, Sem. Kedah, Sem. Plus, Sem. 
J a rum. Pang. U. A ring. Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; ye, Sem. Craw. Hist. , 
Sem. Craw. Gram. , Sem. Klapr. , 
Sem. Ked. New. ; yeh, Sem. Stev., 
Lebir, U. Cher. ; yeh, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. ; y^, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; ye' 
(yek) ; ye, Tembi ; ye', Kerbat ; ye' 
(ii'), Sem. Buk. Max. ; ayo' (ayu' 
or yu' ?), Sem. Pa. Max. [these two 
words are given, with the meaning 
aku, among the verbs ; the compiler 
appears to have taken them to mean 
" to acknowledge," " confess " ; but a 
comparison with the other dialects 
makes it clear that they mean aku, the 
ist personal pronoun] ; eyu. Hen. 
New. ; ayil (aye) ; ay6, Sak. Kerb. ; 
i-ha', Krau Ket., Krau Tetn. I, we; 
me, us : yeh, Tern. CI. We : ay6, 
Som. ; y6, Sak. Kerb. ; yei, Tembi ; 
yabum, Sem. Craw. Gmm. [? = I 3]. 

2. I ; me : mih, Som. 

3. I : \^n (it'n), Sem. K. Ken.; an, Sak. 
Ra. ; en, Sak. /. Ltnv, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff., /elai ; en; eng ; hen, Darat; 
en (eu), Sak. Litigk. ; ain ; eng ; 'ng, 
Sak. U. Kain. ; eng, Sak. U. Beit. . 
Sak. Martin ; 6ng, Sak. Tap. ; 6ign, 
Bes. Her. ; on, Bes. Sep. ; oyn ; oyn, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. ; oyn, Bes. K. Lang. ; 
odn, Serting; o'n, Bes. Malac. ; on. 

6^,8 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Bis. Mahic; (ern), U. Tern. 1 ; we: 
6ng ; eng, Sen. CL; yun, Ben. .Veio. 
We : eng, Serau ; ha eng, Krau Em. 
Me : ain ; eng, Sak. U. Kam. Mine : 
yun punia, Ben. New. [Chang eng ; 
Khmer an ; Bahnar in (inh) ; Alak 
al ; Boloven ai ; Lave Si ; Ka ae ; .l/o« 
oa [ai]; Sedang s.\ Niahonk; Halang 
ao ; Siieng hei, i, "I."] 

4. 1: aku' (akuk), Galang; aku", i^f^t/. 
Chiang. Bedu. II.\ (aku^), ^fcTw. /. ; 
aku, Kena. II. ; ku', 5/<z«. Rem. ; 
ku, i?^«. New., Bedu. II., Jak. 
Malac; ko'. Bed. Chiang; aho, 
Z'cw. 5(7jf. We : aku, Manti: Malac. 
IMal. aku, "I."] 

5. I : awak, Majitr. Malac. You (2nd 
pers. sing. ) : awak, U. Cher ; awah, 
Maiitr. .Malac. [Mai. awak, which is 
used both of the 1st and 2nd persons] ; 
C 228 ; H 116. 

6. Ibul palm. Omnia tnacracladns : 
kitah (kith ar kit? ar ktih?), Sem. 
Buk. Ma.v. 

7. Ibul : bu (?), Sem. Pa. Ma.w ; tembo? 
hibol (tonbo hibol), S'dtn. [Mai. ibul]. 
Idiot : S 206. 

Idle : D 122. 

8. If {Mai. kalau): wag-bod, 6'.»-. wagbod 
beded, wagbod bra' (Mai. kalau baik, 
kalau tidak, "if good or not") 
(doubtful), Sem. Kedah. 

8a. Ik : kalu, Serau [Mai. kalau]. 

9. Ignorant : relus, Pant. Kap. J ah. 
Iguana : L 1 18-125. 

Ill: S 185-193; W 63. 
Ill-humoured, to be : A 17 ; A 96. 
Illness : S 185-197. 

10. Immediately ; in a moment from 
now : sAbCnteh (sbntih), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Presently: sebingte(sebingtay), 
Mant. Stev. [Mai. sabentar]. Im- 
mediately : A 73 ; S 282. 

11. Immerse, to : jum, Sem. Buk. Max. 
Implant, to : D 108. 
Important : H 68. 

12. Impotent (sexually) : kedi' (kdi'), 
Sem. Buk. .Max. [Mai. kedi] ; B388; 

P53- 

13. Impudent [by mistake given as 
iniprudi-nt] : tcngluh ? (tegnlouh), 
Sak. Kerb. ; E 83 ; F 6. 

14. In : hru', Bes. K. Lang. ; hru' ? 
or s6ru? (hruk or sruk), e.g. hru' 
te'? (hruk te'), "in the ground," 
Bes. K. L. Within : h'ru, e.g. h. 
tek, "underground," lies. Sep. 
Near : ru (rou), e.g. ru osh (rou 
osch), "near the fire," Sak. Ra. ; 
'rd'', Sak. Martin ; tC-taro', Sak. Tan. 
Ham. 

-Vcw. 
Deep : 
F 170 ; 

B 90; 
; I 27 

15. In : dalam, Ben. 
dalam, Ben. New. 
(daiam), Sak. Ra. ; 
[.Mai. dalam]. 

In : .\ 177, 178 ; 

E 12 ; F 29 ; F 232 

In front : F i ; F 277-279. 

In, to (;o : F, 76. 

Inability to go : G 53. 

16. Incantation : jampi, Sak. U. 
[Mai. jampi]. 

Increase, to 

Indau, river 

Indian com 

17- Industrious 

bo-gul or ber-gul 
Pani<. Sam, Pan 

Belly: 
dalam 
H 116 

D 66; 
O 26. 

Kam. 

A 185 ; B 202. 

F 139. 

M 8-13. 

diligent {.Mai. rajin) : 

Pang. U. A ring. 

Gal. 

Infant : C 101-108. 

Inform, to : C 163 ; C 235 ; K 59 ; 

S 360 ; S 365. 

18. Inhabit, to : {.Mai. diam) : ya, an, 
Sem. Beg. 

19. Inheritance : ishtabi (isch tabi), 
Sinn. To settle down(?), (/♦>. 
s'^tablir) : ish tabi (ich tabl), Som. 

20. lNHKRiT.\NCi: : /(Wika, Sak. Ra. ; 
saka, .'^ak. Kerb. [Mai. pusaka]. 
Inland : W 30. 

21. Insect (any little animal) : chena 
(tcho-ne), Sam. [?=:F 169]. 

22. I.NSECT : jangkau, Kena. I. 

23. Insixt : hulat (hulilnt), Bes. Her. ; 
hukit, Blan. Rem. ; hiilat, Bedu. II. ; 
ulilt (oul4t), Sak. Ra. [.Mai. hulat, 
" worm, ' etc.] ; A 91 ; B 143. 

24. lNsi:rT blight : jisek, Bes. Songs. 

25. Insert, to (?), (.Mai. chebur ; sorong- 
kan) : mesoh (msuh), Setn. Buk. 
Max. [Mai. masok?].' 

26. Insert, tu (?), (.Mai. chebur; so- 
rongkan) : sila' (silk), Sem. Pa. Max. 

26.\. Insert, to : benam, Bes. Songs 
[.1/(7/. benam]. 

27. Inside (.Mai. didalam) : (a) kelyeng, 
ex. " to be inside," ja-hab kelyeng 
(=Mal. sudah habis kadalam) ; yak 
kelyeng was also given, but is 
doubtful : yag seems to be the proper 
form, .Sem. Kedah ; (.Mai. kadalam): 
kel-yeiig, gen. abbrev. to kgleng or 
k'leng, ex. pog kelyeng (= .Mai. 
buboh kadalam), "to put into," 
Sem. Kedah. The inside : ha'kleng 
(ha'kling), Sem. Pa. .Max. To be 
inside : ya' kelyeng (doubtful), Sem. 
Kedah. Into : keleng (kling), Sem. 
Pa. .Max. Inwards {.Mai. kadalam): 
kil-kleng (ar ba-klong?), Sem. Jarum, 
Sem. Plus. In : ekeloi (6k()loi) ; 
engkt-loi (enk'<Afii), Sak. Kerb. ; 
klukom (kloukOm), Som. Between : 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

639 

kelo (kolo), Sak. Ra. Door : k6lu 
(itylou), Som. [Stiefig klung, 
"middle," "between"; Kon Tu 
akalun, " inside."] 
(b) Brain (Mai. otak) : ktlo' (kelok), 
Serau ; kelom kui, /elai ; H 46. 

28. Insidk (Mai. di(lalam) : jindrting, 
Pang. U. A ring. During ; whilst 
(Mai. didalani pada) : jeiidrong, ex. 
jendrong ye chi' bab, .Mai. didalani 
pada (/.f. satengah)saliya makan nasi, 
" whilst I am (or was) eating" (of past 
events). Pang. U. A ring. Inwards 
(Mai. kadalaiTi): b;"! -jendrong (doubt- 
ful), Pang. U. .4 ring. Outwards 
Mai. df-ri dalani) ; nang (orl lang) 
jendrong, f.f. bijt nang jendrijng, .lAz/. 
datang deri dalam, "to come from 
inside " (doubtful), Pang. U. Aring. 
\Mon jSreng, " in the presence of."] 
Insidk : D 66 ; E 76 ; ?' 29 ; O 67. 
Insipid : F 261 ; K 44 ; U 21. 

29. Instalments ; small fractions : 
hidid, Sctn. link. Ma.x. Alternately; 
changing : hidid, Sem. liuk. .Ma.x. 

30. Instead of : atui (atoui), Sam. 
Instep : F 220 ; K 40. 
Insufficient : E 71, 72 ; L 106. 

31. Insult, to : nyumpa (fioumpa), Sak. 
Kerb. To curse : ? hampai lot, 
Bes. K. L. [.!/«/. sunipah]. 

32. iNSUl.T, TO : niaki, Sak. Ra. \_Mal. 
niaki]. 

Intellect . H 63. 

33. Intend, to : saja' (saja'), Sem. Buk. 
Ma.x. [Mai. sahaja ; saja] ; O 38. 
Intercourse, sexual : C 242 ; F 66 ; 
P 219 ; .S 249. 

Internal disease : S 192. 
Interior: F 170; I 14, 15. 
Interwoven : N 42. 
Intestines : B 1 59. 
Into : E 12 ; F 29 ; I 27 ; O 67. 

34. Intoxicating: kayal, Mantr. Malac. 
.V>a. Coward: pengayal (p'ngayal). 
Pant. Kap. .loh. Tobacco : p6- 
ngayal (pengayal). Pant. Kap. Her. ; 
(p'ngayal). Pant. Kap. Joh. ; pe- 
ngail. Pant. Kap. Log. 

Inundation : F 178 ; W 74. 

Invite, to : C 13 ; E 27. 

35. Invulnerable (Mai. k6bal): bekfitok, 
Sem. Plus. 

Inwards : 1 27, 28. 
Ipoh : P 163-166. 

36. Iron (Mai. bSsi) : (<;) jiiwoyd (pr. 
juwoydd ) : Sent. Plus ; ju'ad (pr. 
ju'-add), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
juet (djoudt), Sak. Kerb. ; i-(it. Sen. 
Cliff. ; hie, Sem. U. Set. Arms 
(.Mai. senjata) : yet (doubtful). Pang. 

U. Aring; yed (doubtful), Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Hal. Weapon : ayud 
(aj'oud), Siim. Chopper (.Mai. 

parang ) : jewad ; juat", Tembi ; 
ju-hoi ( djou-hoi ), Som. ; i-6dz. 
Tern. CI., Sen. CI. ; i-6dz ; i-odz. 
Sen. Cliff. ; ayot (eyeot), Tan. I'. 
Lang. ; iait, Sak. Em. ; yut", Serau; 
yeit", Jelai ; yCVt, Darat ; yut ? 
(yub), Sak. P.m. ; yut (yout), Sak. 
Ra. ; ju b( (djoubi), Sak. Kerb. ; yoht- 
channt, Or. Berumb. Knife : juat ; 
chuat? (djuot ; tschudt?), Sak. Kor. 
Cib. ; yod, Sak. U. Kam. ; y6id, .S'^X'. 
Tap.; yuad me, Teinbi; yut machol, 
Serau; yut machiang(yout matchian), 
Sak. Ra. ; sawud (saouc/cfj'), Som. ; 
uait, Sak. Tan. Ram. Large knife : 
jehnd. Sak. U. Beii. Little knife : 
yod, Sak. U. Bert. Cutlass (.Mai. 
pisau klasi): yut landii, Serau \>); 
yeit landa, Darat ; yd lando, Jelai. 
A certain magic knife : jfihud paung, 
Sak. U. Bert. I ask for that 
chopper : min chut", Sak. P.m. ; 
H 21. [Griinwedel suggests from 
Sanskrit AyViA\\:\., " weapon," through 
.Siamese : sed qurerc. Perhaps it may 
be from this source, through a Mon- 
Khmer channel.] 

(b) Iron : wai, Serting. Chopper : 
pu-ai, U. Tem. ; riwai, Kena. /. ; 
uwai, Bedu. IL ; woi, U. Cher. ; 
wai t'hoi, Serting. Blade of chopper : 
mat woi, U. Cher. ; E 83. 

37. Iron : pet, Sem. Per. ; pat -pal? 
(biit-bilt), e.g. "the iron is rusty," 
piit-pat? a kayat nan (biU-bat a kajat 
nan), Sem. K. Ken. ; pah (poh), 
Kena. L [? Cf. Alak, Niahoti. 
Boloven piet ; Kaseng piet, piat ; 
L.avc pit ; Kon Tu pie ; Churu pih ; 
Khmer kombet [kupit] ; Stieng peh ; 
Selung p&l (pait), "knife."] 

38. iKO.N : che-tong, Sak. Sel. Da. 

39. Iron : basi (basi), Sem. Craw. 
Gram. ; besf, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; b6si 
(besi), Sak. Br. Low, Sak. Croi.x ; 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff., Ben. .Xew. ; 
(bossi), Siim. ; (bossl), Sak. Ra. ; 
(bisi), Sak. Blanj. Stv. ; (desi), Sem. 
Beg. ; besi' (besik), Serau ; besi'. 
Plan. Rem., Bes. Her. Magnet: 
besi" bSni' (bsi' bni'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; B 370. .Steel, for striking 
fire : Ixjsi' as, Sem. Kedah ; F 124 ; 
[Mai. besi]. 

Ikon : C 89 ; C 152 ; S 466. 

40. Irregular; notched (of teeth?) : 
kelis? (klis), Sem. Buk. .Max.; lus(?), 
Sem. Pa. Max. 

640 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

41. Island: chumok, Ben. New. 

42. Island : pulau, Sak. A'or. Gb. ; 
pulao, Sent. Jiir. New. ; (palao), 
Scin. Jiir. And. ; (paloo), Sem. Jur. 
Rob. ; pulo, Be)L. New. \_Mal. pulau]. 

43. Issue, to {Mai. kaluar) : ya-bod, 
Pang. U. A ring; we' or bah-e-awe, 
Afal. kaluar, ' ' to issue or emerge ' ' 
(probably to be explained as bah-ya- 
'we' = .l/tf/. lari hamba kaluar, "I 

run out," where e in the first ex- 
ample stands for ye' or ya="I"), 
Pang. Belimb. 

44. Issue, to ; to spout : bikut, Sem. 
Bilk. Max. ; bgkut (bkut), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [? cf. O 66 ; X 22]. 

Issue, to : G 42 ; S 403. 
It : H 39-45. 

45. Itch ; rash ; pruritus {.Mai. miang) : 
beseh (bsih), Sem. Pa. Max. Itch 
(scab) : bicha (bee-char), Sem. Stev. 
Ulcer {Mai. puru nasi) : bachud, 
Sent. Pa. Max. Ulcer ; cancer ; 
gangrene {Mai. puru haidl ; puru 
jahat) : bachud, Sem. Pa. Afax. 
[Ac/tin. bechuh, bichoh, "a rash."] 

46. Ringworm : gii, Sai. U. Kam. 
Skin - disease ; scabbiness {Mai. 
kurap) : gas (gs), Sem. Pa. Max., 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; gas, Sak. Lingk. ; 
gas, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; gas, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; gai' (gail^), Tembi ; kosh, 
Krau Tem. ; chekos (ch'kos), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. ; {Mai. kurap ayam), gSs 
manok (gs manuk), Sem. Pa. Max., 
Sem. Bilk. \[ax. ; F 257 ; {Mai. 
kurap gajah), gfts tamenol (gs tamnl), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; E 44 ; {Mai. kurap 
lusong), gas lusong (gs lusng), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Bad with the itch (?), or 
a bad kind of itch (?) {.Mai. jahat 
kurap) : duulgash, Tembi. \Bahnar 
gach, gai, "scab" (affecting young 
cattle). ] 

47. Itch ; skin-disease {Mai. kurap) : 
u-mit, Sen. Cliff. ; umit, /elai. 

48. Itch ; skin disease {.Mai. kurap) : 
ba'-lai, U. Tem. 

49. Itch ; skin disease {Mai. kurap) : 
l(i-song, Sen. Cliff. ; losong, Jak. 
Lem. Ringworm {.Mai. kurap): 
losong (losonq), Ink. Ba. Pa. \^Mal. 
losong]. 

50. Itch {Mai. kudis) : kudih (kudih), 
Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
kudis, Tembi; kudis, Jelai ; {Mai. 
kudis api) : kudih 'fts (kudih 's), 
Sem. I'a. Max. ; kudih us, Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; F 124 ; \_Mal. kudis]. 

51. Itch {Mai. kudis buta) : monft' 
(mn'), Sem. Pa. Max. 

52. Psoriasis ( Mai. kudis ) : pgngatal 
(p'ngatal). Pant. Kap. Joh. [Mai. 
gatal]. 

53. Itch ; ski n- disease ; rash? {Mai. 
biring) : pihong (pihung), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [?.]/«/. biring] ; T 124. 
Itch, to : S 50. 

Ivory : H 126, 127. 

54. Izora (flower spec): pawUr (paw- 
aire), Sem. Stev. 

J 

1. Jack (fruit, tree) : nangka, Serau 
\_.Mal. nangka]. 

Jackal : D 148, 149. 
Jacket : C 171. 
lA. Janggut k61i( tree spec. ): pengling. 
SfDi. Kcdah. 

2. Janti (fruit) {Baccaurea spec. ?) : boh 
pih (buh pih), Sem. Pa. Max. 

3. Jarak, white (plant), ? Ricinus: jari' 
p6ltau (jar' pltu), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[Mai. jarak]. 

Jasing, river : T 256. 
Javelin : S 367. 
Jaw, lower : €113. 
Jawbone : M 121. 
Jealous : H 116. 
Jealousy : S 5 ; S 524. 

4. Jdlutong (tree), Dyera Maingayi, D. 
costulata : badang (badng), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; badong. Pang. U. A ring ; 
bedag", Serau. 

5. JSring (fruit), Pithecolobium loba- 
turn (?) : jlng (jing), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[Mai. jgring]. 

6. Jews'-harp: ang-oin,5'^w. Stev.; ren- 
goin, Mantr. Malac. Cha. ; ggnggong 
gemerenchong ( g'nggong g'm'ren- 
chong), Pant. Kap. Joh. Small flute- 
like instrument : yango^n (jangod'n), 
Sem. K. Ken. [Mai. genggong]. 
Johor, Sultan of : P 33. 

7. Join ( especially the join of the 
outer case or sheath of a blow-gun), 
henubong, Sem. Kedah. Navel : 
penghubsong, Ben. New. [? pgnghu- 
bong, "that which joins," sc. the 
infant to its mother ], [Mai. hubong]. 

8. Join, to {Mai. hubongkan) : ya-kdl, 
if.v. ketbs iiwe, ye jid k41 (translation 
of Mai. proverb — putus tali, bulih di- 
hubong, " if a rope is snapped, it can 
be spliced "), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

9. Join, to : mftchud (mchud), Sem. 
Buk. .Ma.v. ; chiad, Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
cheriit", Serau. Adjoining : chiud, 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; chiat, Sem. Pa. 
Max. [? Cf. Man chan, "to bind 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

641 

together " ; Khmer chang, chong, 

"to bind"; ?cf. Moti chhak, "to 

join."] 

Join, to : B 213. 

10. Joint; sinews: \\n\6, Mantr. Malac. 
Joint (of bamboo) : K 53, 54. 

11. Joke with, to [Mai. tcrtawa ) : 
chingdan, ex. ma-chingdan chelali 
gin kiadah, " to joke with the young 
maidens," Sent. Kedah. 

12. Joy; pleasure: sfika hati' (suk hati'), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. ; suka hati, Jelai ; 
sukaan nos, Serati ; H 63. To 
please: hukah, lies. Songs. Pleased : 
suk(5, Barok ; suka-gris, Bes. Her. ; 
H 64 ; [.i/rt/. suka] ; L 17 ; P 145. 

13. Jump, to ; to leap [Mai. lompat) : 
ya' ter-jeh, Sent. Jaritm ; ya' ter-jeh. 
Sent. Plus. 

14. Jump, to : hong, Jak. Malac. 

15. Jump, to : ma-hamo, Mantr. Malac. 
[J/a/. mfinghambor is sometimes 
used in this sense.] 

16. Jump, to : ya' lumped (/;-. lum- 
pedd), Sem. Kedah; ya-lomped, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; lompat, 
Serau; lompat^, Krau Em. ; lampi, 
Mantr. Cast. ; F 139 [Mai. lompat]. 

17. Jump, to : jangkar, Bes. Songs [cf. 
Mai. jangkit?] ; A 155. 

18. Ju.MP B.^CK, to: jaling, Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

ig. Jump down, to [Mai. tSrjun] : tau, 
Sen. Cliff. 

Jump up, to : A 172. 
Jungle : E 19 ; F 230-242 ; H 90 ; 
Q 16. 

Jungle-fowl : F 259. 
Jungle-grass : G 100. 
Just : S 483. 
Just now: F 123 ; N 50-52 ; N 114. 

K 

Kabong (palm spec.) : S 516, 517. 
Kajang (sort of covering made of 
palm-leaves) : M 68 ; R 168. 

1. Kapas, buah (fruit, tree), Xantlio- 
phyllum ohscurum : boh kaeng (buh 
kaing), Sem. Buk. Max. ; F 284. 

2. K^chapi (fruit), Sandoricum radia- 
t//m : boh ketapl (buh ktapi), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; F 284. 

3. KSdondong (tree spec.) : kepang 
(kpng), Sem. Pa. Max. 

4. Keep, to {Mai. taroh) : ya' boh (pr. 
bohh), Sem. Jariim, Sem. Plus, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 3'a' boh (pr. bohh), 
ex. boh banglang (/!/«/. taroh sabelah). 

VOL II. 

"put it on one side, " Pang. C. Aring 
fcf. Mai. buboh]. 

5. Kkp:p, to : ofi ; oyn ; ka'on, e.g. 
naho ka'on, " keep this," Bes. Sep. A. 
I.; pfirhun (p'rhun), Pant. Kap. /oh. 
To retain : on ; oyn, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
To place : ka-oyn ; ka-on, Bes. Sep. 
A. I. To set (food for a meal) : on ; 
oyn, Bes. Sep. A. I. [? cf. B 396]. 
\1 Ci. Bahnar kvi[b\\), " to hide, " "to 
keep secret."] 

6. Keep, to : taroh. Pant. Kap. Joh. 
To lay by : bStaroh, Jak. Mad. {Pant. 
Kap. ) [Mai. taroh]. 

7. Keep, to: scnimpat (soninpat), So?n. 
[Mai. simpan] ; H 153. To keep in 
the mouth : AI 208. 

K€ladi (yam spec.) : Y 1-12. 
S. Kfilantan man : sang penomok (sang 

p'nomok), Pant. Kap. Joh. ; W 112. 
9. Kfilasu, burong (bird spec): kasu' 

(kasuk) ; chim kasu' (chim kasuk), 

Bes. K. L. [Mai. kglasu]. 

10. Kfilat tree, Eugenia spec. : karo^^ng, 
Bes. A. I.; karong, e.g. plong karong, 
"leaves of the 'k.,"^Bes. K. L. ; U 
20, 21. 

11. K61edang iiret), Artocarptts lancece- 
folia : chavvas (chauas), Sem. Pa. 

Max. 

12. Keledang : sereki>, Serau ; serS, 
Bes. Malac. ; sero, Jak. Malac. 

13. K£led.\ng: ]i\&da.ng, Ma7tir. Malac. 
[Mai. keledang]. 

14. K61i (fish spec. ), Clarius magur or 
Teysmanni : chiu, Sem. Pa. Max. 

15. K£li : limbet? (llmbit), Sem. Buk. 
Max. [Mai. lembat, another species 
of fish]. 

16. K61inti' nyamo^ (fruit spec), Deca- 
spertuunt paniculatum (?) : boh teneh 
(buh tnih), Setn. Pa. Max. 

17. KSlubl (palm spec.) : baySm (baim), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [? Mai. bayam, 
" spinach " ; S 383.] 

18. Kei.ubi, asam (a thorny swamp- 
palm with very acid (edible) fruit 
eaten by the Bfisisi with rice), Zalacca 
conferta : kapays (or kapois) kubi', 
Bes. A'. L. ; kubi, Bes. Songs [Mai. 
kelubi] ; cf Six. 

19. Kfimbang samangko' (fruit), Ster- 
culia scaphifera : boh changi (buh 
changi), Sem. Pa. Max. 

20. Kfimpas? (tree spec, which has 
exceedingly hard timber), Cumpassia 
Malaccensis : balong, Sem. Kedah. 

21. Kfiranji (tree spec): krem, Bes. 
Songs. 

2i.\. KfiRANji : kranji, Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. [Mai. kSranji]. 

2 T 

642 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

24 

25 

27. 

29. 

22. Kfirata tangga? (tree spec. ): tiloh 
(tiluhj, Sem. Pa. Max. ; tilu (tilu), 
Sem. Buk. Max. 

23. Kick, to : [a) tSjah (tjah), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; ti-nyuk° ; ti-nyuk°, Sen. 
Cliff. ; kgnyut, Kena. I. ; kSnyl^is, 
Blati. Rem. [? Cf. Mori khnik, "to 
kick."] 

[b) chegSg, Sak. U. Kani. 

\c) inurhtendiang ( mukh-tfindiang ), 

Barok [cf. Mai. tfindang]. 

Kick, to ; to trample : kuso' (kusu"), 

Se7n. Bilk. Max. 

Kick, to ; to trample : matoh 
(mtuh), Sem. Buk. Max. ; ta, Sem. 
Pa. Max. To knock : matul (mtul), 
Sem. Buk. Max. 
26. Kick backwards, to : sipak, Blan. 
Rem. [.1/a/. sepak] ; P 242. 
Kidney : F 284. 

Kill, to (Mai. bunch) : ya-sa-kel 
(/>/-. sa-kell). Pang. U. A ring. 
Kill, to : kap6ng, Bes. Sep. A. I.; 
kapong, Bes. Malac. ; kapung, Be?i. 
New. To murder ; kapa'^ng, Bes. 
Sep. A. I. [?Cf. 5t'/?/«^' mepang, " to 
kill"; m'eppong, " to murder. "] 
Kill, to : bunch, Ben. New., 
Mantr. Malac. , Jak. Malac. To 
murder : bunch, Sem. Beg. \J^Ial. 
bunch] ; B 257 ; B 376 ; C 295, 
- 296 ; D 48 ; D 53 ; S 496. 
3c. Kill with a kris, to : salang, Jak. 
Sim. \Mal. salang]. 
Killed by a tiger : tap du' ka o', 
Kerb at. ; T 128. 

Kind ; sort ; species : jgnis (jns), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. Ar. jinis]. 
Kindle, to (fire) : B 467, 468 ; B 
470 ; L 83-90 ; R 194 ; R 196. 
King : C 94 ; E 46. 
King-crab [Mai. bSlangkas) : gin- 
choh, Bes. A. I. 
34. Kingfisher: bekaka' (b'kakak), Jak. 
Lem. [.Mai. pekaka]. 
Kingfisher, big, or "halcyon": 
(Mai. pfikaka) : salah ; chim salah, 
Bes. K. L. 
36. Kingfisher, small, or " alcedo " 
[Mai. raja udang) : cheng ; chim 
cheng, Bes. K. L. ; C 94. 
Kinta (district in Perak) : to Gonla, 
Sak. Ra. ; E 12. 
KiSB, to : D 165 ; S 294. 
Kitchen-rack : B 100. 
Kite : E 4. 

38. KiiE, cry of: sek-sek-leac, Bes. 
Songs. 

Kitten : C 46. 

39. Knead, to : t)ian or bien, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. [?=P 106 or P 209B]. 

31- 

32- 

33- 

35- 

37- 

40. Knee: [a) krotong, Sem. Beg.; kal- 
tong, Sem. Stev. ; kaltong or keltong, 
Setn. Kedah, Sem. Jaritm, Sem. Plus; 
kaltcng (kltung), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
kaltung, Pang. U. A ring. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; kfilfitong. Pang. 
K. Aring ; kaltcm (kltum), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; kal-tun, Bera ; k&.togn, 
Serti7ig. Kneecap [Mai. t6mpurong 
lutut) : keitong (kltung), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; h5' kaltung. Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; ha' kaltong 
(ha' kltung), Sem. Pa. Max. Knot 
(joint) of bamboo (Mai. ruas) : k61- 
tung-o' (kltungu'), Setn. Pa. Max. 
[The last vowel probably = 3rd pers. 
singular pronoun.] Stick or wood 
with knots : katuk (katouk), Sak. 
Kerb. Knotted string (used to assist 
the memory) : katui, Bes. A. I. 
Ankle [Mai. buku lali) : katong 
chan, Pang. U. Aritig, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. Finger-joint {Mai. buku 
jari) ; wrist {Mai. buku tangan) : 
katong chaz. Pang. Galas. Tc sit in 
a sort cf kneeling posture {.Mai. 
bertimpuh) : kaltum (kltum), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [Cf. Achin. katok, 
" ankle " ; Stieng kuk tang ; Bahnar 
kul tang [? see K 42], "knee."] 
(b) Bend of the knee : kadcg (kadcg, 
"deep a"), Sem. K. Ken. Lower 
part cf leg (Mai. betis) : kadok, 
kadok, Tenihi. Shinbone (Mai. 
tulang kemarau): dul kadok'*, Tembi. 
Leg : kodel^ng (kodek'n) ; kodeSng 
(kodeg'n), Sem. K. Ken. Instep : 
kaldoSng (kaldoSng), Sem. K. Ken. 
[cf. B 175]. 

{c\ Ankle (Mai. mata kaki): katik, 
Tembi. [Cf. also C 6, but I believe, 
though there tnay be a distant con- 
nection between the words, the pre- 
sent grouping is justifiable.] 

41. Knee : kayal (kajal), Sem. K. Ken.; 
kar61, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; karcl, Sd7n. ; 
karol, Sak. Kerb. ; karol ; kurol 
(kcurol), Sak. Ra. ; kurol, Tafi. 
U. Lang. ; ku-rul, Se7i. CI. ; kurul, 
Serau, Da7-at, Jelai ; karol ; tek- 
rul ; tekuul [?], Tembi ; kuron, 
Sak. U. Ka7n. [Perhaps cf. Bulu, 
Tonsea, Tonda/io kurur ; but, if so, 
the word is a mere variant of K 43. 
But cf. also Sedang krung krong, 
" knee."] 

42. Knee : tSngkhu (tengk'hu), Ke7ia. 1. 
[Javan. dengkul, jCnku, "knee"; but 
Kaseng toko, Ko7i Tu trokol, Sui 
takol, have the same meaning ; and 
the Bah7iar has a word as tc which 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

643 

it is not quite clear whether it is to be 
read " tangkul " or " kultaiig. " If 
the latter, it should no doubt be 
referred to K 40.] 

43. Knee : [a] to'ot, Jak. Mad. ; to-ot, 
Jak. Sim. ; to-ut, Jak. Lent., Jak. 
Ba. Fa. 

{b) Leg : lutat, Or. Hu. Joh. I. 
\Achin. tfiut (t6oet), " kneecap" ; 
Selung tact ; Madur. toot ; Siarig 
tuut ; Soliik tuhud ; Sadong bak tucd ; 
Ida' an, Tidiing atud ; Blajii Dayak 
utut ; Mai. lutut, etc., "knee" — all 
variant forms of the same word.] 

44. Knee : sejak, Ben. New. To kneel : 
ge!juk(goldjuk),.Va/i'. A'c;-. i'.b. {}Mal. 
Ar. sujud, " to genuflect. "J 
Elneecap : K 40 ; T 178. 
Knee-deep ; L 150. 

45. Kneel, to: meiangung? (mlngung) 
kla? pias? Sem. Buk. Max. [J/i//. 
ranggong ?] ; H 52 ; K 40 ; K 44. 

46. Knife {Mai. pisau) : wa-li, Sen. 
Cliff. ; H 21 ; cf. I 36. 

47. Knife : {a) pis5 (pisso), Sak. Kerb. 
[b] Arms (weapons) : hau, Bcs. Sep. 
Chopper {Mai. parang) : hau, Bes. 
A'. Lang. ; hau ; 'sau, Bes. Sep. A. 
L ; sau ; hau, Bes. Malac. Also 
generically with specific names : e.g. 
keris : h. kres ; sword : h. peda^^ng ; 
spear : h. tohok or toho' ; dagger : 
h. badik ; peeling-knife {Mai. raut) -. h. 
pahut ; cutlass (J/tfA golok): h. goUlk 
(golok) ; long knife with curved point : 
h. sewa ; scimitar {Mai. chenangkas): 
h. nunik ; betel-scissors : h. kachip. 
The various knives known to Malays 
as pisau: (i) katok or pandak, (2) 
lidah ayam lipat, (3) beianda, (4) 
chandong, (5) kgchil, (6) ali-ali, are 
respectively called " hau " — (i) katok, 
(2) katek, (3) banda', (4) chandol^ng, 
(5) keme'^ng, (6) ali, the generic 
" hau " having been prefixed in each 
case, Bes. Sep. [Mai. pisau] ; C 
122-126 ; C 152 ; I 36. 

48. Knife, stone: panit (pan-neet), Se/n. 
Sfet'. [? Cf. Khmer banneak [pan- 
nak] ; preneak [prftnak], ' ' knife to 
cut areca nuts with."] 

Knob : H 6. 

49. Knock, to: kgto' (ktu'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. \Mal. ketok] ; K 25. 

50. Knock up against, to : penguih 
(pnguih), Sem. Pa. Max. 

51. Knock up against, to : matadong 

(mtadung), Sem. Buk. Max. 

52. Knocking, noise of : lediud?(ldiud?): 
Sem. Pa. Max. 

Knot : B 214 ; B 362. 

53. Knot of bamboo : teking, Bes. Sep. 
A. /. ; tukong (toukong), Mantr. 
Cast. ; tekog" buluh, .Mantr. Malac. 
Nya. Joint (of bamboo) : tfiking, 
Bes. Sep. A. L Bottom end of quiver: 
t&kog", Mantr. Malac. Cha. 

54. Kn<jt (joint) of bamboo : Idas (luas), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Rattan : roas, Ben. 
Ne7v. [.1/a/. ruas]. 

Knot of bamboo : K 40. 
Knot of hair : H 5, 6. 

55. Knot ; stick or wood with knots : 
bongkul (bonkoul), Sak. Ka. [Mai. 
bongkol, possibly connected with 
buku, bengkok, bongkok, liengkak] ; 
K 40 ; T 211. 

Knotted : B 175 ; S 541. 
Knotted string : K 40 ; W 145. 

56. Know, to {Mai. tahu) : tod-ed, 
ex. ye tbd-ed {.Mai. sahya-lah tahu), 
"I know," Sem. Kedah. Clever 
{.\hil. pandai) : tod-ed {pr. tod-edd), 
Sem. Plus. To understand {Mai. 
tahu) : ya' od-ed (contracted to 
y'od-ed or ya' 'ded), ex. bra' ya' 
'ded {Mai. ta tahu), "don't under- 
stand," Sem. Kidah ; S 363 [? cf. C 
162]. 

57. Know, to {Mai. tahu) : ya-sined ; 
ya-sinet {pr. sl-nett). Pang. U. 
Aring. Clever {Mai. pandai) : sined 
or sinet. Pang. U. Aring. To under- 
stand : singi, Krau Em. [? cf. 
Ks6l. 

58. Know, to {Mai. tahu) : herob, e.g. 
o hferbb or o t6-hgrob {Mai. dia- 
lah tahu), " he knows," Sem. Kedah; 
sro, e.g. sro ngot, "I don't know," 
Bes. Sep. A. /. To understand : 
sfiro' ; sfiro ; hfiro, Bes. Sep. A. /. 
Very clever ; really clever : h'ro 
neneh ; s'ro neneh, Bes. Sep. A. /. 
[? Cf. Khmer chreap [jrab], "to 
penetrate," "to learn."] 

59. Know, TO {Mai. tahu): hijob, ^.^.aneg 
oh hijob nenluh {Mai. anak ini tahu 
menuympit), "this child knows (how) 
to use the blow-gun," Sem. Kedah. 
To know ; knowledge : ha'ub (?), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; hiub, Setn. Buk. Max. 
To understand : hiub, Sem. Pa. 
ALax., Sem. Buk. A/ax.; hup(houp), 
Som. To inform ; to tell : ya-hiub 
(ia hiub), Se7n. Buk. Max. [possibly 
= K 58 ?]. 

60. Know, to {Fr. connaitre) : k6n- 
dap (kondap), Som. To recognise 
{Mai. cham) : kgdap. Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. 

61. Know, to {Fr. connaitre) : kSn- 
al (konal), Sak. Ra. To be ac- 

644 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

quainted with : pengenal (p'ng'nal), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. [.l/<z/. k£'nal]. 

62. Know, to [Fr. savoir) : seda (soda), 
Hak. Kerb. Memory ; remembrance : 
masedeh (msdih), Sem. Buk. Max. 
To remember : sedeh (sdih), Sem. 
Buk. Max. {Mai. sSdar]. 

63. Know, to {Fr. savoir) : tahu 
(tahou), Sak. Ra.; pfinaho (p'naho), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. To talk : penaho 
(p'naho) ; pSnahul (p'nahul), Pang. 
Kap. Joh. Dumb ; foolish ; stupid : 
ta pfinaho (ta p'naho), Pant. Kap. 
Joh. To see : toi, Mantr. Cast. ; 
(toi), Mant. Bar. ; nahoi, Mantr. 
Cast. Seen : tahoi (tahoie), Mant. 
Stev. To see ; to consider : tauhua 
(talihoue), Mant. Bar.; F 121 \NIal. 
tahu]. 

To know : A 23 ; C 160-162. 

64. Know, not to : lebehkan, Mantr. 
Bor. ; F 219 ; N 68 ; N 77-79 ; N 86. 
Knowledge : K 59. 

65. Knuckle : ramis, Tembi ; kemat, 
Tan. U. Lang. 

Kris or keris (Malay dagger) : K 

47 ; S 141. 

Kuau chermin (bird spec) : A 130. 

66. Kulim (tree spec), So/vdocarpies 
Borneensis : kulim, e.g. p'long kulim, 
"kulim leaves," Bes. K. L. \Mal. 
kulim]. 

67. Kurau tree : 'long sampan, Bes. 
Sep. [?T 207 + B 318]. 

Labia pudenda : P 222.\. 

1. Ladder; stair (Mai. tangga) : (a) 
rang-kal. Sen. Cliff.; rgngkal (rngkal), 
Sak. U. Kam.\ rgngkal (rgnkal), Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; rengka (renka), Sak. Kerb. ; 
longkar (lonkSx), Sak. Pa. ; rengka' 
(rengkak) ; langkal, Tembi ; rangkal, 
Tembi, Serau. Door : rengka (r^nka), 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; rengka (renka), Sak. 
Kerb. 

{b) Ladder: pgnganah (p'nganah). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Steps (ladder of 
house) : tangga' (tanggak), Bes. K. 
Lang. Stairs: tanga? (danga), Sem. 
K. Ken. Step : tanga, Serting [J/a/. 
tangga]. See H 18. 
U) Step : t&lgn, Kena. /. 
i.\. Laddf.r ; stair : s6nSrpip (.tonorpip ; 
sijnorpip), Som. [Probably a blunder 
caused by confusion between A/al. 
tangga and panggang ; see R 154.] 

2. Laijoick, rung of {Mai. anak tangga): 
s r-lok, Sen. Cliff. 

3. Laka, kayu (tree spec. ) Phyllanthus 
emblica or P. pectinata : kik (kik), 
Sem. Pa. A/ax. 

4. L.\KA, kayu : lakah (lakh), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [Mai. laka]. 

Lake : H 116 ; S 59. 

5. Lame ; paralysed : kebat (kbt), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; kSma (? kma), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

5A. Lame {Mai. tempang) : tanjel, 
Tembi ; kanjofi \or kanjat" ?], Darat 
[or Tembil^ ; [? of. D 124]. 

5B. Lame : lenghak, Serav ; S 189. 
Lamp : H 147 ; R 76. 

6. Lampam (fish spec), Puntius Schwa- 
tiaseldi {?): kawin (kauin), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

Lance : S 367-372. 

7. Land : benua, Beti. New. \_Mal. 
benua] ; E 12-19 ; F 230. 

Land, to ; A 154. 
Land breeze : W 109. 
Landing stage : T 213. 
Landwards : F 230. 

8. Langkap palm (.£. Coast Mai. laka"), 
Arenga obtusifolia : ta', Sem. Kedah ; 
taha (/(7-har), Sern. Stev. ; taak, Sak. 
Tin. 

9. L.'^NGK.xp palm : langkab, Sem. Plus 
\_Mal. langkap]. 

10. Langsat ; lansat (fruit, tree), Lansium 
domesficum : bongko^ng, Bes. A. /. 
Wild langsat {Mai. langsat hutan) ; 
bongko, Mantr. Malac. Cha. 

loA. Langsat ; langat, Tembi [Mai. 
langsat]. 

11. Language : pemeseng (p'meseng). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. ; S 364. 

12. Lanjut (fruit, tree) : kenchoh 
(knchuh), Sem. Pa. Max. 

13. Lap : riba (riba), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[Mai. riba]. 

Large : B 202-212 ; F 35. 
Larynx : N 26 ; T 102. 
13A. Lascivious : lobii, Sem. K. Ken. 

14. Lase (?), to [so in original, ? leave ; 
cf. A 42] ; libam, Pant. Kap. Log. 
Last night : D 16 ; D 19 ; D 39. 

15. Late, in the evening {Mai. pgtang- 
pgtang) : nooys, ex. are' nooys, Bes. 
K. Z.. ; D 16; D 18. 

Lately : N 50 ; N 108 ; N 114. 

16. Laugh, to (Mai. tertawa) : ya-pll- 
ngal, Pang. U. A ring. 

17. Laugh, to : lup, Tem. CI. ; luk, 
Sen. CI. ; 15k (lock), Sak. Martin ; 
lag-lug, Sem. K. Ken. ; leglQg or 
leglQk, Sak. Kor. Gb.; luglug (lug'-l, 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; ya' lug-lug, Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus; ya- lug -lug. 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; ggklok, 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

645 

Seriiiig ; niagglud (niglud), Sein. 
Buk. .Max. ; hilug", Krati Em. ; 
ginyot, Kena. I. To love : liig-lug, 
Sem. K. Ken. To be pleased , joy 
[Mai. suka) : luk, Sen. Cliff. ; lug, 
Tembi; englug'*, Serau ; helug", A' ran 
Em. ; perlogn. Not to be pleased ; 
not to like [Mai. ta' suka) : teluk", 
Temhi. [Onomatop. ; cf . Mai. gelak. ] 

18. Laugh, to: melahin (m'lahin), 
Paul. Kap. Joh. [? connected with 
preceding]. 

19. Laugh, to : tetawa' (ttStawak), 
Bedu. IL IMal. tSrtawa]. 

20. Laugh, to ; the sound of laughter : 
cheha (che har), Scm. Stev. [Ono- 
matop.; Braou shtlhilu, "to laugh."] 

21. Law, father-in- (Mai. ni^ntua) : kin- 
ad (//-. kin-add), Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; k6n-ad, Lebir ; ken-ait, Kcrbat. 
Mother-in-law (Mai. mentua) : 
kSnayd (pr. kSnaydd), Sent. Kedah ; 
ken - ad, Pang. U. A ring ; Pang. 
Satn, Pang. Gal. Elder brother-in- 
law : ki-nun, Sai. U. Bert. 

22. Law, father-in-: bla. Or. Berumb.; 
blaii (blati), Sak. Jer.\ be-lor ; be-lo', 
Sen. Cliff. ; blok", Serau. Mother- 
in-law : bla, Or. Benimb. 

23. Law, father-in- : lahik, Kena. /. ; 
lahik, Kena. II. Mother-in-law : 
lahfk, Kena. I. ; lahik, Kena. II. 
[? = L 22]. 

24. Law, father-in- : mentuha, Mantr. 
Malac. ; kua mgntue, Barok. Mother- 
in-law : mentuhah, Or. Trang [Mai. 
mentua]. 

25. Law, child -in-: (a) pesau, Scfn. 
Craw. Hist. Son - in - law (Mai. 
mgnantu) : mSnsau, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; men-sau, Sen. Cliff. ; 
mfinsauh, Serau; mengsau? (meng- 
san), Sak. U. Bert. Father-in-law 
(Mai. mgntua) : mfinsau (doubtful), 
Pang. U. A ring. [? Cf. Khmer presa 
[prSsa], "son- (or daughter- )in-law."] 
(b) Brother-in-law : ba'-hu', Ker- 
bat. 

26. Law, brother-in- : rfi-nop, U. Tern. 

27. Law, brother-in- : sfimondo. Bed. 
Chiotig \Mal. sSmanda]. 

2S. Law, brother-in-: ipar, Mantr. 

Malac. \JMal. ipar]. 
29. Law, sister -in- (?) : dual, Bes. 

Songs. 

Law, father-in- : F 38-40 ; F 44 ; 

G 86. 

Law, mother-in- : G 86. 

Lay by, to : B 400 ; K 6. 

Lay down, to : B 396 ; H 153 ; P 

248. 

Lay eggs, to : E 34. 

30. Lazy (Mai. malas) ; reluctant ; hesi- 
tating (Mai. sC-gan) : brut. Sen. 
Cliff. Lazy : buut ; embuut, Serau. 

31. Lazy : ajol, Pant. Kap. Joh. Malay 
man : ajul, Pant. Kap. Mad. To 
sit : birayah : Jak. Sim. ; birayal, 
Pant. Kap. Lug. ; berajul, Pant. 
Kap. Her. Tired ; silent ; hush 1 ; 
to stop ; leave off ; to touch at ; to 
enter : birajol, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Tired : bCrajul, Jak. Mad. (Pant. 
Kap. ) ; peng4jul, Pant. Kap. Her. 
Untrue; a lie: pt5ngajol (p'ngajol). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. 

Lazy : Yi \2-2. 

Leader : C 93-100 ; O 23. 

32. Leaf: le' (li'), Sem. Pa. Max.; \<t\\, 
Sem. Beg. ; (lai), Ben. Xew. ; hli ? 
(klee), Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. 
A'ew., Sem. Jur. Rob. ; hSle' (hli'), 
Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
hele [ in MS. originally helej' ], 
Sem. U. Sel. ; ha-li', Lebir, AVr- 
bat ; hali' (pr. ha-li'), Pang. U. 
A ring; hali', Setn. Pins; halik or 
hali', ex. hali sirih, " betel - leaf , ' 
Pang. K. Aring ; halik or hali', 
Pang. Belimb. ; h61it (h'leet), Sem. 
Stev. ; sela, Sem. K. Ken. ; s61d, 
Sak. Br. Laiv ; (soli), Som ; sela', 
Sem. Kedah ; sfela, Sem. Per. ; 
(s6-la), Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; (sla), 
Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; (sela), Sak. Croix; 
(sola), Sak. Kc7'b.; sSla, Sak. Sung.; 
(sola), Sak. Ra.; sg-la', Krau Tern..; 
(selah), Sem. Ken. ; s'la, Sak. 
Martin ; sla, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; 
s614 (sla), Sak. U. Kam. ; sfilak, 
Tan. U. Lang. ; s6-lak, Krau Ket. ; 
s6-lak ; s6-lak. Sen. Cliff. ; sglak, 
Tembi ; selak, Tembi, Jelai ; selar, 
Darat; salak", e.g. "take a leaf," 
guts [j^V] salak", Sak. Em.; lalbk? 
(laluk), Ben. New. ; H 151 ; S 310 ; T 
2.14. Leaf(of tree): selajoh6(s61a-djo- 
hoh), Sak. Kor. Gb. Branch (of tree) : 
sla jehup (sla-djohoup), S^im. Burst- 
ing into leaves : champor le' (chmpur 
li'), Sem. Pa. Max. Aroid, spec, 
"rhinoceros' tongue," Pothus latifolia: 
hele' lidah badak (hli' lidh badk). 
Sem. Buk. Max. Blowpipe cleaning- 
rod (made of akarmempelas): helit yiis 
(hleet-yoos), Sem. SZ-jv. ; T io3. Plant 
(spec. Mai. daun baru) : h61e' baru 
(hli' baru), Sem. Buk. Max. Parasite? 
Mai. daun tumboh di daun is given 
as hele' tunibo' di hele' (hli' 
tumbu' d hli'), Sem. Pa. Max., 
Sem. ■ Buk. Max. \_Mon sla, Iha ; 

646 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Bahnar hla ; Stieng, Leinet, Khmj4S, 
Halang la ; Annatn la ; Tai'eng, 
Kaseng la ; Sii£, Boloven hli ; Jarai 
hola ; Samre, Poi- slaa ; Cuoi sla ; 
Phii07ig loha ; Prou chha ; Rode 
hala ; Chrdai hola ; Cham hala ; 
Cancho ch^lok (cheloc) ; Khmer slgk 
[slik] ; A'AiZiz slak, " leaf. " Possibly 
Z^rtA«fl/"hlak, and J/17/, hfilai, numeral 
coefficients for "cloths," etc., are 
connected with these words. ] [? cf. 
H151.] 

33. Le.\f : jetong (jaytong), Sak. Sel. 
Da. 

34. Leaf: plol^ng, Bes. A. I. Roof: 
p^long, Bes. Malac. ; plung, Bes. 
Songs ; (ploong), Bes. Bell. Thatch- 
roof {Mai. atap) : plu-ong, Krati 
Tern. ; plag^, Seraii ; pl6k°. Sen. 
Cliff. ; paluk, Sak. Em. ; plok, Sak. 
U. A'am. ; ploh, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
plong, Bes. Sep. A. I. \ e.g. thatch 
(of fan-palm, Mai. serdang) : plong 
kerpau, Bes. A. I. ; (of nipah leaves) : 
plong nipa', Bes. A. /. ; N 64. 
[? Cf. Stieng plop, numeral coefficient 
for leaves, etc.] 

35. Leaf : [a] rayang, Kena. I. 

[b) dau<in, Bes. Malac. ; daun, 
Bland. K. Lang. , Mantr. Malac. , 
Jak. Malac. ; (doun), Ben. New. ; 
deun, Barok. Hair : daun. Pant. 
Kap. Log. ; dahun kulu, Tan. Sag. ; 
H 54. [jl/a/. daun ; Jav. ron ; 
Malagasy rawlnft ; Mangkasar raung ; 
Many an {Maanjan) rawen ; Bintulii 
raon ; Idaanr's.\vM\, "leaf"] 

36. Fallen leaves : sersap, Bes. Songs. 

37. Leaves which are stuck into a 
woman's girdle (by way of a 
charm?): k61awe. Pang. U. Af-ing. 
Leaf : D 98 ; F 208 ; P 137, 138. 

38. Leaf-cell : salong, Bes. Songs. 

39 Leaf-chamber: bumVjun, Bes. Songs. 
Leaf- shelter : H 152; H 159. 
Leaf- snake : S 310. 
Leafy : T 59. 
Leaky : H 116. 
Lean : D 182. 
Leap, to : J 13-18. 
Learn, to : G 48 ; T 30. 
Leave, to: L 14; L 108; R 60; 

R 62, 63 ; VV 78. 

Leave off, to : L 31. 

40. L6ban tandok (tree spec), Vitcx 
piihescens: hulaban (hlabn), Scm. Pa. 
.Max. \_Mal. l(5ban ; hglCban]. 

41. Leech is (ees), Setn. Stev. Forest- 
leech (Mai. pachat) : is (ais), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

42. Leech, forest- (.lA;/. pachat): lawai, 

Pang. Bclinib. ; lawai, ex. lawai 'nte 
jadi' jekob — translation of the Malay 
proverb : pachat 'nak jadi ular, " the 
little leeches want to become snakes," 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

43. Leech, forest- (Mai. pachat): pglum 
(plum), Sem. Pa. Max. ; peloni 
(polom), Sak. Ra. ; pl6p", Sen. 
Cliff. ; plubb, Sak. Tap. ; pglop 
(polop), Som. ; (polop), Sak. Kerb. ; 
pglap (plap), Sak. U. Kam. ; kl5Pm, 
Bes. Sep. ; klom, Bes. K. L. [Mon 
klam [kla ; kkim] ; Bahnar, Stieng, 
Boloven, Niahbn, Alak, Lave, 
Kaseng, Sue plom ; Jarai plam ; 
Tareng plom ; Kon Tu, Halang, 
Sedang plem ; Cham plom — ' ' forest- 
leech."] 

44. Leech, forest [Mai. pachat); pachet, 
Pang. K. Aring \_Mal. pachat]. 

45. Leech, swamp- (yl/<z/. lintah): kelah? 
(keilh or kenilh ?), Sem. Bnk. Max. 

46. Leech : alu, Sem. Pa. Max. ; jel-6. 
Sen. Cliff. \Khmcr chlbng [jhlbng] ; 
Stieng, Chrdu glu ; Niahon gliau, 
" swamp-leech."] 

47. Leech : lintah, Sak. U. Kam. [Mai. 
lintah]. 

Leeward : B 165 ; W 109. 

48. Left (opp. to right), [Mai. kiri) : 
mieh, Pang. Jalor. 

\b) Left : wet. Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal.; \ve\. Sen. Cliff.; dawSl; da-wal, 
Sen. A'. Ken. ; wel, Tembi ; mawil, 
Jelai ; sa-win, Bera. Right [Mai. 
kanan): we, ex. ba-we' (Mai. ka- 
kanan), "towards the right," Sem. 
Jarum ; we", Sem. Plus. [A con- 
fusion, no doubt, the meaning should 
be "left."] [Cf. Achin. wil ; Mon 
fwl [jwi] ; A'Awcrchhvgng [chhweng] ; 
"left."] 

(c) Left (opp. to right) : yal or yel 
(jiil or jel), Sak. Kor. Gb. ; kuhiiel 
(kouhiiel), Sak. Ra. ; nahuyel (na- 
hou-yel), Som.; matingyel ? (matin- 
yel), Sak. Kerb. ; A 176 ; H 15. 
[Cf Boloven yau ; Niahon jiau ; 
Alak, Lave yau ; Halang ngiau ; 
Jarai, Bahnar ngieo ; Stieng gio, 
giou, " left."] 
48A. Left : kani' (kani^), Serau. 

49. Left : kiri, Bland. A'. Lang. [Mai. 
kiri] ; R 128. 

Left, to be : R 60 ; R 62. 

50. Legs ; feet : ano konipo, C. Itid. ; 
A 133 ; B 180 ; C 2-7 : F 220-222 ; 
H 32 ; K 40 ; K 43 ; T 60-64. Calf 
of leg : C 2-7. 

51. LSmbat (fish spec): dagon, Bes. 
Songs. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

647 

52. Lemon or citron? (described as 
smaller than the pununelo ) : biawas 
Mantr. Malac. [This is a Malay 
fruit-name, applied to a kind of 
guava, "jambn."] 

53. Lemur, Hying ( Mai. kubong ) : 
pamak (//-. pama'), Sent. Plus. 

54. Lemur, spec, "flying squirrel"; 
kobong, Mantr. Malac. , Jak. Malac. 
\Mal. kubong]. 

55. Lemuk, spec, "flying squirrel" (large 
kind) ; sanong, Jak. .Malac. 

56. Lemuk, spec, white "flying squir- 
rel " : kanau, Mantr. Malac. Cha. ; 
B 76 ; S 417. 

Lend, to : B 484 : G 29. 

57. Lfinggadi? (tree spec), Diospyros 
li/cida or Langgadi ? Bnigiiiera 
parvijlora : putat (putt), Sein. Pa. 
Max. \1 Mai. putat, various kinds 
of Barringtonia.l 

Length : L 130. 

58. Lengthen, to : pemanjang (p'man- 
jang). Pant. Kap. J oh. ; A 92, 
\Mal. panjang, "long"]; L 130. 
Lengthy ; D 65. 

Lens (of eye) : E 83. 
Leopard: T 129-133. 

59. Leper ; kusta (kust), Sem. Buk. 
Ma.x. yMal. kusta] ; B 202. 

60. Leprosy ; pengundim (p'ngundim), 
Jak. Ba. Pa. ; pfingundum (p'ngun- 
dflm), Jak. Lein. ; A 15 ; B 202 ; S 

239- 
5i. Less : kurak (kourak), Sak. Ra. To 
diminish (trans. ) ; to reduce ; kuang, 
Sem. Pa. Max. To want {i.e. to be 
in want of) : korang (koraii), Sak. 
Ra. YMal. korang] ; M 40 ; N 69 ; 
S 281, 282. 
Let go, to : F 21. 
Letter ; W 149. 

62. Level : («) datar, Mantr. Malac. 
{b) Level ; flat ; smooth ; yata' 
(lata'), Sem. Buk. Max. Plain 
(land) ; rata (ratsl), Sak. Ra.; E 12 ; 
H 14. [Mai. datar ; rata ; two 
forms of one word.] 

63. Level; smooth: rfimbalo' (rmbalu), 
.Sen:. Buk. Max. 

Liane : R 36-41. 

64. Lick, to: but (but), Sent. Pa. Max.; 
bSht, bot, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; botbud ; 
bot-bud, Sem. K. Ken. 

65. Lick, to : lat (It), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[? Mai. jilat ; but cf. Khmer lit 
[lit], " to lick."] 

Lie : F 22-26 ; L 31. 
Lie, to : F 22-26. 

66. Lie down, to : niAkleing (ma-klay- 
ing), Sem. S'ev. Prostrate (?) : 

maie'eng? (maii'eng), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

67. Lie down, to : pcl-bah, Lcbir. 
67A. Lie down, to ; jaji ; jajit, Serau ; 

F" II, 12 ; F 59 ; S 248-250. 

68. Lie, to (on the back) ; supine, face 
upwards: kCngai, Bcs. A. I. [Khmer 
phnga [phnga], ' ' lying on the back " ; 
Mon laktftnga, " supinely."] S 520. 

69. Lie, to (on the face) : pindop, 
Bes. A. I. Prone: pSdop; pgndbp, 
Bes. A. I. [?Cf. Mai. hadap, 
"front " ; cf L 70.] 

70. Lie, to (lying face downwards) : 
mahayab(milhaiab), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[cf. Mai. tiarap]. 

71. Lie, to (lying face downwards): siput 
(sliput), Sem. Pa. Max. Prone : 
keput, Bes. A. I. [? Cf. Khmer 
phkap [phkap] ; Bahnar shokup 
(xokup), " lying face downwards."] 

72. Prone {Mcil. tfirtiarap) : bum-bum. 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

73. Lie, to (on the side) : bgnak, 
Bes. A. I. 

Life: A 57; B325; B329; B388- 

390. 

Lifetime : .A 49 ; L 130. 

Lift, to : B 396 ; B 399 ; C 28 ; 

T 10. 

74. Light, i.e. daylight {Mai. siang) : 
penadeng, Sem. Plus. Moonlight ; 
full moon ( Mai. bulan t6rang ), 
pgnadeng. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Light ; brightness ; to make clear : 
padeng (pding), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[cf. S 75] ; [? cf. Jav. padang, 
"clear "]. See P 124. 

75. Light {Mai. siang) : pehit, Sem. 
Kedah ; pihoi (pi-hgr-i), Lebir. 

76. Light, n.w- ; sun ; nyantang, 
Kena. I. Sky : lengseng, Kena. I. ; 
jonjogn, Serting; ah-toign, Sak. Sel. 
Da. Sun ; ing-song, Sak. Sel. Da. 

TJ. Light ( adj. , opp. to dark ) : pe- 
muchot, Ben. New. 

78. Light; brightness: tate' (tati'), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; C 154; D 33 ; D 38 ; 
D41 ; D 44; S 75. 

79. Light (opp. to heavy), (.l/a/. ringan) : 
ha-tob, Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus ; 
hatom {pr. hato''m), ex. jfi-ing hatom, 
kud henjut (trans, of Mai. proverb, 
ringan tulang, b6rat pSrut, ' ' if the 
bones are light, the belly will be 
heavy "), Pang. Gal. ; hai-6' ; hal- 
ts', Sen. Cliff. To rise to the sur- 
face ; to float {Mai. timbul) : ya- 
hatob or hatom {pr. hato^im). Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. 

80. Light (opp. to heavy): p5sal (psl), 

648 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

90, 

91 

92 

93 

Sent. Pa. Max. ; p6seoh (pseuh), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [? Achin. pghui, 
"light."] 

Light (opp. to heavy) : hampong, 
Bes. Sep., Mantr. Malac. [cf. Mai. 
h6mpa]. 

Light (of the wind) : mer-gel 
{pr. merr-gell or mell-gell), ex. 
angin mer-gel wong bekau, "in the 
light wind (play) the fruit buds," 
Pa ng. Telia ng. 

Light, to, a fire : ehuk (^houk), 
Sak. Kerb. 

Light, to, a fire: p6dar &S, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; p6dar os, Sak. Tap.; F 124. 
\1 Mai. putar, "to turn" ; but cf. 
Mon pden, " to light a fire."] 
Light, to, a fire: roop os, Sak. Tap. ; 
F 124. 

Light, to, a fire : tehol (tohol), 
Sak. Ra. ; (Mai. pasang) ; tg-hol, 
Sen. Cliff. [? cf. B 465]. 
Light, to, a fire : tungkun, Matiir. 
Malac. ; tungkon ; tungkon (toung- 
kon), Ment. Bar. [? Mai. tunukan]. 
Light, to, a fire : tek6b, Jak. 
Malac. 

Light, to, a fire : pasang (passan), 
Sak. Pa. ; W 30. Flood ( tide ) : 
pasing, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. 
Rob. ; (passing), Sem. Jur. New. 
[Mai. pasang]. 

Light, to, a fire (by friction) : ya- 
pusar as, Pang. U. Aring; F 124 
[Mai. pusar] ; B 467, 468 ; B 470 ; 
R 194 ; R 196. 

Lightning [Mai. kilat) : kacha' or 
kachak, Setn. Plus; S 465 [? cf. 

D41]. 

Lightning- (a) luyau, Sem. Kedah ; 
la-icht \sic\ Sak. Sel. Da. Lightning 
flash : ? laich (laich or lilchi or lidch 
or llcha?), Sem. Buk. Max. [? Cf. 
Mon lali, "lightning" ; and possibly 
Khrner phlii [bhli], "bright," 
"light," or Bahnar glaih ; Tareng 
blai, "thunder-clap" [Fr. foudre). ] 
[b) Lightning : bled, Sak. U. Kam.; 
blit, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; [Mai. panah 
halilintar) : blit kibgrla', Sak. U. 
Bert. Lightning (stroke) [Mai. 
p€tir) : kabCnit ? (kabTnt or kabnit?) 
Sem. Buk. Max. [?Cf. Bahnar 
komlat, "lightning flash that comes 
before the thunder" (but this prob- 
ably = L 97).] 

. Lightning : nieught \sic\ Sak. 
Chen. 

Lightning : mengong, Ben. New. 

Lightning : unga, Ben. New. ; 
singat, Kena. 1. 

[b) kap, Sak. 
Kam. ; kop, 
Tembi ; kip, 
Jelai ; kokn. 

96. Lightning : chilau (tschilau), Sak. 
Kor. Gb. [Mai. silauj. 

97. Lightning: \ie\os, Sem. S lev. ;]s.\\&<1 
(pr. kiladd), Se?>i. Jarum ; kilat, 
Sem. Beg., Ben. New., Sem. Jur. 
And., Sem. Jur. New., Sem. Jur. 
Rob. , Sem. U. Sel. , Darat, Bes. 
Malac. , Jak. Malac. ; kilau. Rasa ; 
henilar [pr. henilarr), Sem. Plus. 
To lighten: kilat, Serau[Mal. kilat]; 
cf. F 164. 

98. Lightning : liling, Pant. Kap. Joh. 

99. Lightning : lintai, Sem. Per. ; 
gintal, Jak. Ba. Pa. [Mai. halilintar]; 

D39- 

100. Like [Mai. sarupa) : s6rah (doubt- 
ful). Pang. U. Aring; T 51-54; 
T 85, 86. 

Like, to : H 29 ; H 116; L 17; 
L 146-149 ; W 14. 

101. Lime [Mai. kapor) : [a) tapun (pr. 
ta-punn), Sem. Kedah; kapor, 
Som. ; kapor, Sak. Kerb. [Mai. 
kapur]. 

Ra. ; kap, Sak. U. 

Serau ; kop ; kib, 

Sak. Em. ; kop", 

Darat. [? Cf. Mon 

kaw ; Khmer 'ks.w [kzy/l, "glue."] 

102. Lime (chunam) : chunambu, Ben. 
Nerv. [Tamil chunnambu] ; S 151, 

152- 

103. Lime (fruit-tree) : limau, Serau ; 
(var. Mai. limau susu). Citrus acida: 
limau amkiau (limu amkliau), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; B 385 (?) ; Hmau bo' 
(limu bu'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; B 386 ; 
pummelo [Mai. limau jambua), 
Citrus decumana (?) : limau tebu 
(limu tbu or tiu), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
B 202 ; limau-abong, Jak. Malac. ; 
[Mai. limau, "lemon, lime"]; F 284. 
Lines (on the hand) : H 19. 

104. Lips : =M 201. 

105. Lil'S : biber, Sak. Ra.; bibir; bibir? 
(bikir) [sic : a blunder?], Ben. New. 
Lower lip : bibir mulut, Mantr. 
Malac. ; M 205. Mouth : bibir, 
Jak. Ba. Pa., Or. Hu. Joh. I., Jak. 
Sim. [Mai. bibir]. 

Lip : B 116 ; H 2 ; M 201 ; M 203; 
S 236 ; S 329. 
Lii', upper : N 100. 
Liquid : B 395. 
Listen, to : E 6. 
Little : S 280 ; S 284 ; Y 40. 

106. Little, a ; too little ; insufficient : 
pi'et (pi't), Sem. Pa. Max. 

107. Little, a [adv.l): kih-oi? Bes. 
Sep. A. I.; M 46; O 34; Q 5 : 
S 280-282 ; S 285 ; W 73. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

649 

Live, to [i.e. to be alive) : A 57 ; 
A 193. 

108. Live, to {i.e. to dwell), {Mai. 
diam) : pipol. Pang. U. Ari?tg\ 
W 77. To desert ; to leave {Mai. 
tinggal), pipo, Pang. (J. A ring, 

109. Live, to {i.e. dwell) : haus, Sak. 
U. Kam. 

110. Live, to {i.e. dwell) : iii ; iiy, Sak. 
U. Kam. [?=B 87; cf. Bahnar 
uof (uiy), ooi (oay), oei, oai, "to 
be," "to remain," " to be sitting. "] 
F 21 ; I 18 ; R 63 ; S 221. 
Livelihood : A 58. 

Liver : H 63, 64. 

111. Lizard (J/<7/. bCngkarong) : madang 
(madng), Sem. Pa. Max. ; manong 
(manung), Sent. Buk. Max. ; men- 
drok", Scran [or Tembi ?] ; men- 
drag, Serau; tarok'i, Tembi. (^rass- 
lizard(.l/fi/. mengkarong) : manrong, 
Sem. /arum, Sem. Plus, Pang. U. 
A ring; man - rong. Pang. Sam, 
Pa7ig. Gal. ; B 254. 

112. Lizard (.1/a/. bengkarong) : kadal, 
Jak. Malac. {Mai. kadal] ; C 73 ; 
F 138. 

113. Liz.\RD, edible: karut, Mantr. 
Malac. Cka. 

114. Lizard, flying {Mai. kubin) : 
halS,g, Sem. /arum, Sem. Plus ; 
halug, ex. surau halug, surau segwog, 
' ' the flying lizard cries, the segwog 
(bird) cries," Pang. Sat ; halog, 
Sem. K. Ken. Chameleon {Mai. 
sumpah-sumpah) : halu', Pang. U. 
Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. [cf. 
C72]. 

115. Lizard, flying: tolong, Bes. Sep. 
A. I., Mantr. Malac. Cha.\ tolog'', 
Mantr. Malac. Nya. ; cholok, Mcnt. 
Her. I. Chameleon : chalak (chalk), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [Possibly C 72, 
L 114 and L 115 are connected 
together.] 

T16. Lizard, house {Mai. chichak) : 
kap-ag, Sem. Plus ; abag, Sem. 
/arum. 

117. Lizard, house: pachat", Tembi; 
chichak, Sak. U. Kam., Sera?^[Mal. 
chichak ; but cf. also A/on kachak 
[gftchak], "gecko."] 

I J 8. Lizard, monitor: mudan, Sak. 
/er. 

119. Lizard, monitor {Mai. bewak ; 
biawak) : bagen {pr. bagenn), ex. 
pengseng bagenn, wong me' kam, 
bed-ed t61ui, kSbiss bo', gass {orwe) 
wong, kfebiss bo', we (orgiiss) wong, 
bra' majid Jul hatek=:.l/(7/. kata 
bewak, " .-\nak-mung banyak, baik- 

lah pisang, mati mak, hidup-lah (or 
ada-lah) anak {repeat), 'nak sorong 
ekor ta' bulih " (a proverb) — "Says 
the monitor lizard : you have many 
children, better (is the fate of) 
the banana ; when the mother dies, 
the children live {or there are children 
left). One can't wag one's tail " 
[for the explanation of this, see 
p. 184, supra], Sem. Kedah ; bAgen 
{pr. bftgenn), Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; bagen {pr. bagenn or hage^n), 
Pang. U. Aring; bagen {pr. bag- 
e^nn), Sem. /arum, Sem. Plus. 
Crocodile: bagin, /ak. Lcm., Pant. 
Kap. /oh. [But see also B 212.] 

120. Lizard, monitor {Mai. biawak or 
bewak) : bab, Sem. Plus ; bab 
(bab), Se7n. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. 
Max. Hydrosaurus : bap (barp), 
Sem. Stev. Monitor lizard (spec. 
Mai. biawak pasir) : bab pasir (bab 
pasir), Setn. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; S 24 ; [? cf. F 268]. 

120A. Lizard, monitor: tangan, Tembi. 
120H. Lizard, monitor : payot, Serau ; 

payan [or payau ?], Tembi. 
120C. Liz.^RD, monitor : haring ; grik", 

Serau [? = L 124]. 

121. Lizard, mom\.ov:']a.\vAV., Bes. Songs; 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. ; biawak, A/a«/;'. 
Malac. Lizard spec. : biawak, /a/i. 
Mad. ; b6rwa', ex. surau berwa", 
surau dalong, ' ' the monitor lizard 
cries, the chameleon cries," Pang. 
Sai. Crocodile',: jawak. Rasa ; ja- 
wak, Sak. Sel. Da. [Mai. biawak, 
" monitor lizard," and cf. C 270.] 

122. Lizard, monitor {Mai. biawak 
ponggor) : kabok, Bes. K. L. 

123. Lizard, big {Mai. geriyang) : 
pach^au, Payig. U. Aring; pat^au. 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Iguana 
[really monitor lizard]: patiu(patew), 
Sem.Sfev. [Cf Andama?iese Bojigiab 
petie-da, Puchikwar patye-da ; Kol 
patche-le ; Kede te5 ; Chariar teS, 
" iguana."] 

124. Lizard, large water : ggriang, 
/ak. Mad. Water iguana {sic] : 
geriang, Meiit. Her. II. Monitor 
lizard : giak, Bes. Malac. [Mai. 
ggriang]. 

125. Land iguana [5/c]: kahariu; kakfui 
(kakau"), Ment. Her. II. 
Loaded : F 290. 

Loadstone : S 465. 
Lobe (of ear) : E 5, 6. 
Lobster : P 208. 
Lockjaw : H 31. 
Lofty : D 66 ; F 29. 

650 

COM PA RA TI VE VO CA B ULA R \ ' OF 

127. 

129. 

130. 

126. Log [Mai. batang kayu) : langging, 
Des. Sep. ; [? cf. F 126] ; S 449. 
Loin-cloth: C 171-183; E 76; 
G 25-27 ; P 251. 

Loins ( Mai. pinggang ) : wak", 
Tcmhi; huk", Darat; hok", Sevan ; 
hok", Scran, Jelal ; hok, Soi. Cliff. 
Buttocks : huali (huah), Sent. Pa. 
Max.; uhk(oohoT),Sem.Sfev.\ hawe, 
U. Pat. ; hau, U. Kel. Rump : hawa 
(hauwa), Pang. Jalor. Thigh-joint : 
hiiwuh (huuuh), Sent. Buk. Ma.x. 
Waist : huah, Sent. Pa. Max. ; 
ewak. Tan. U. Lang. ; M 219. 
Disease of the loins; sciatica (?): 
meje' huah (mji' huah), Son. Pa. 
Max. ; S 187. 

. Loins: chawukib?(chauukib), 5^w. 
Buk. Max. 

Loins : pembentok, Ben. Neiv. 
[?.!/«/. bentok, "rounded"; cf. 
R 191]; W3, 4. 

129A. Loiter, to: berbueh, /a,^. Malac. 
[-1/(7/. bSrbual, " to gossip. "] 
Long (Mai. panjang) : {a) bokit, 
Son. Beg. ; bokit, Ben. New. ; beteg 
(pr. be - tegg), Sem. Plus ; beteg 
(//'. be-tegg). Sent. Jarum ; b§-teg, 
Lebir; betig (/;-. bS-tigg), Pang. 
U. Aring ; bfitig. Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; bete'. Pang. A'. Aring, 
Pang. Belijnb. ; be-ti', Kerbat. 
(h) Long (time) : petut (ptut), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; betut ? (bnut?), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Long and slender : 
b€tut nipis (btut npis), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Long ; length : betut (btut) 
Sem. Bilk. Max. ; Sem. Pa. 
Alax. Measure of length : ukor 
bgtut (aukr btut), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
ukor utut (aukr autut), Sem. Buk. 
Max. High; tall: betut? (bnut?), 
Sem. Pa. Max. High : bt5tot 
(botot), Sak. Kerb. Lifetime ; 
age : bgtut (btut), .Sem. Pa. Max. 
Slender : betud (btud), Se?n. Buk. 
Alax. To stretch ; to lengthen : 
betud jamid (btud jamid), Sem. 
Bilk. Max. Carving on part of 
shaft near mouthpiece of blowpipe : 
betud (betood), Sem. Stev. ; G 42 ; 

N3- 

Long and slender : keto' hiteh (ktu' 
hitih), Sem. Buk. Max. ; kantau- 
kantau, Bes. Songs ; D 66 ; G 42. 
Long ago : bo-os? (boe-os), Menf. 
Sir-'. ; 1) 19 ; N 51. 
Long time, a : sal, lies. Malac. ; 
15 153 ; O 21. 

Long (a proper name), (Mai. 
Sulong) : Long, Sak. A'or. Gb. 

131- 

132. 

133- 

134- 

135. Look, to (Mai. tengo') : ya' el {pr. 
ya' ell), Sem. /arum, Sem. Plus. 
[? Cf. Stieng iol, iol, "to look" 
(into the distance) ; Khmer yol 
[yal], "to see" (figuratively), "to 
understand" : see U 15.] 

136. Look, to : kuawa (kooawa), Jak. 
Stev. ; G 39 ; P 49 ; S 75 ; S 82 ; 
S 85, 86. 

Look at, to : S 75, 81. 

137. Look back, to: chekal (chkl), 
Sem. Pa. Max. To look round ; 
to look sidewavs : sikal (sikl), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

Look for, TO : C51; R67; S60- 
64. 

138. Look upwards, to: nyilai nuling 
(iialai nuling), Sem. Buk. Max. 

139. Look upwards, to: we' (ui'), 
Sem. Buk. Alax. 

Loose : O 41 ; R 61. 

140. Lose, to (generally), (A-fal. hilang) : 
rej-a-roj, Se?i. Cliff.; jSjelot", 
Serau. To lose one's way (Alal. 
sesat) : rSj-a-roj, Sen. CI. 

141. Lose, to : hilang (hilaii), Som. 
[A/al. hilang] ; A 42 ; D 119, 120 ; 
F 115 ; F 117. 

Loss : F 21. 

142. Lost, to be (Alal. sesat) : chblong, 
Pi!>ig. C. Aring [ = 7 L, 140]. 

143. Loud. : chemrap, Bes. Songs ; B 302 ; 
P 72. 

144. Louse (Alal. tuma) : mSdueng 
(mduing), Sem. Pa. Max. ; (Alal. 
kutu) : meneng? (mning?), Seyn. 
Buk. Max. Crab-louse : mSnia'^n ? 
(meniiid'n), Sem. K. Ken. Vermin 
( especiall}' insects infesting the 
human body) : mon-dr6, Sojn. ; 
mongring ( mofirifi ), Sak. Ra. ; 
tr^g, Sak. Kerb. 

145. Louse (spec. Alal. kutu tanah) : 
hueng (huing), Sem. Pa. Alax. ; 
[?--=Li44]; F169. 

146. Love : sa-ing, Sem. Beg. ; sayang, 
Ben. New. Affection ; love : mSna- 
hong (mona-hoii), Sotn. To love : 
sa-ing, Sem. Beg. ; sayang, Ben. 
New. Fond of : hayang, Bes. 
Songs. Longing : bayang, Bes. 
Songs [A/al. sayang]. 

147. Love ; affection : sgkian (sokian), 
Sak. Kerb., Sak. Pa. [? Cf. 
Cancho keang, "to love," "to 
want"; O^w? kii3ng ; Jarai\C\dj\%, 
" to want."] 

14S. Love, to (Mai. berahi) : ya' ban- 
hed (pr. ban-hedd), Sem. Kedah ; 
ya' bahed (/;•. bahedd), Sem. Jarum. 
To love or desire (Alal. kasih or 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

651 

hcndaki: y\--\^M\\ , l-'aug. L'. A ring. 
To want (Mai. mahu) : ya-pani', 
Pang. U. A ring. [Perhaps these 
are corruptions of the .Mai. equiva- 
lent Vj(?rahi ?J 

149. Love, TO ; to like (J/;//, kasihkan): 
ya-rajin [pr. ra-jinn), Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal.; ya.-ra.d\ , Pang. L'.. I ring. 
To love : gadek, Sent. A'lapr. 

LovK, TO : L 17 ; W 14. 

150. Low (opp. to high, tall): [a) 
nienchas (mnchs), Seni. Pa. Max. ; 
niitchis. Sent. Beg. ; machis, Be?i. 
.\'ew. Shallow : nienchas (ninchs), 
Scm. Pa. Max. ; niAchis ^nichis), 
Sent. Pa. Max. Shallow ; knee- 
deep: incho; enchls, J>V;v7//. Preci- 
pice; steep descent: milchis (nichis), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Steep; precipitous: 
nienchas (ninchs), Scm. Pa. Max. 
(h) Low : dekis. Pes. Sep. A. I. 
(t")Low: m\-'p\s,Krai( Ket. Shallow: 
&ni-pis, Kra/i Ket., Kraii Tcm. 
Short: emp§is, Tem/n? or Serate? 

151. Low: leng, Sak. L'. Kam.; 
gelek ; jele', Pes. Sep. A. /. ; jel6' 
(jel^l^). Pes. Malac. Short: gele' ; 
j61e', Pes. Sep. ; yt\€ (jel^"^). Pes. 
Malac. ; j6-le', U. Tem. ; jS-leh, 
U. Cher. ; jele' (jelay), Bes. Bell. 
Small : hali^k, Scm. Beg. ; (halka), 
[? misprint for halak], Ben. New. 
\_Khmer keley [kliy] ; Mon kle' 
[gle] ; Stieng gleh (gleh) ; Halang 
kela ; Niahon, Alak lala ; Lave 
lala ; Boloven \a., "short."] 

152. Low : renS, Mantr. Malac. ; 
rendah, Ben. Neiu. \^Mal. rendah] ; 
E 12 ; F 29 ; S 280 ; W 30. 

153. Low tide ; low water : iping 
(aiping), Sem. Btik. Max. [doubtful; 
cf. F 290] ; W 30. 

Lower, to : D 95. 

Lower waters of river : B 165. 

154. Lucky [Mai. bgtuah) : lej-lej [pr. 
leSj-leBj), Sem. Janim, Sem. Plus; 
E 24. 

155. Ludai (plant spec), Sapium bacca- 
tittn: ludai, Bes. Songs S^Mal. ludai]. 

156. Ludan (tree spec): ludan, Bes. 
Songs [.1/(7/. ludan]. 
Lukewarm : C 205. 

Lyre : M 225 ; M 228, 229. 
Bridge of lyre : P 100. 

u 

1. Mad (Mai. gila) : mamafi, e.g. chau 
manian, " mad dog," Bes. K. L., 
Bes. A. I. 

2. Mad : mabok, Panl. Kap. /ok. 
[.\/al. mabok, "drunk"]. 

3. Mad : gila', Sai. U. Kam.\ gila 
(ghil4), Sak. Ra. ; gilo (ghil6). Salt. 
Kerb. ; gilak", Jelai \_.\Ial. gila] ; 
D 160. 

Madness : D 160. 
Maggot ; B 143 ; D 142. 

4. Magic ceremony for relief of sick- 
ness ; to perform magic : bSrsawai, 
Bes. K. Lang, [see S 213]. Magic 
root : R 182. 

Magnet : I 39. 

5. Mahang (tree), Macaranga sp. : 
maheng (maheng), Sem. Biik. Max. ; 
niilheng (mhing), Sem. Pa. Max. 
\.Mal. mahang]. 

6. Maiden : chCmom (ch6m-erm), Ker- 
bat ; C *02 ; F 63 ; F 75 ; G 28 ; 
V41. 

7. Maimed; mutilated: k6mput(kmput), 
Sem. Pa. Max. \^Mal. kumput is 
given as one of the equivalents, but I 
cannot find the word in my diction- 
aries]. 

Mainland : E 12. 

8. Maize (Mai. jagong): ra-ge; ra-ju', 
Scm. /arum. 

9. M.'MZE : eng-ed {pr. eng-edd), Sem. 
Kedah. 

10. Maize ; klahob or kla-hop {pr. klil- 
hobb or klahopp), Scm. Plus. 

11. Maize: kSmdng, Kena. /. 

12. Maize: pengtial, Bedu. IL 

13. Maize : jag6k, Sak. U. Bert. ; ja- 
gok". Sen. Cliff. ; jagong, Ben. New. ; 
Mantr. Malac. Nya. ; jagong, Serau 
[Mai. jagong]. 

14. Make, to: kai(?), ma-kai? (ki; ma-ki), 
Sem. Stev. [probably = C 40] ; B 90 ; 
U 132-135. 

Malacca cane : R 36. 

Malay: B 430; L 31 ; M 23 ; M 26; 

M 28 ; M 30. 

15. Male {Mai. jantan) : {a) tongkal, 
Se7n. Beg., Ben. Neiu. ; temkal (tmkl), 
Setn. Btik. Max. ; temkal, Sem. 
Plus, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
tSm'kal, Pang. U. A ring; tgmgkal 
or tongkal (?). Pang. K. A ring ; 
tSm6kar, Pang. Bclimb. Male (of 
persons) : tC-nikal (tumkal), Sem. U. 
Sel. Man (male, opp. to woman) : 
tSngkal (tflnkahl), l^ang. /alor; tgng- 
kal, Kerbat; temkal (tmkl), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; t6m-kcd, Lebir; tamakal, 
Sem. Klapr. ; temkal, Sem. Ij. ; 
timkal (timkal'), U. Pat., U. Kel. ; 
tSmkal (tumkal), Sem. Stet'., Sem. 
Craw. Hist., Sem. Ken., Sem. U. 
Sel. , Sem. Ked. AVw/. ; ( toumkal ), 

652 

COM PA RA ri VE VOCA B ULA R V OF 

Sem. Klapr. ; (teunkal), Sent. Ked. 
And., Scni. Ked. Rob., Sem. Jur. 
New. ; (lumbal), Sem. Jur. And., 
Sem. fur, Jiob. ; tomkal (tomkdhl), 
Jehehr; tongkal ? (tongal), Sem. 
Mariiti. Husband : tfingkal (tun- 
kdhl), Pang. Jalor. 

[b] Man : tikarut, Ben. New. 

[c) Male : {Mai. jantan) : bangka, 
Sem. Kedah. 

(fl") Male (of persons) : ongkon, Sem. 
Per. ; kon, Sak. Guai. Man (male, 
opp. to woman): ung-koi-in (unkoiin), 
Sak. Jer. ; engkoin ? (engoin), Sem. 
K. Ken. ; ta' koin, Krau Ket. Boy: 
engkoin? (engod'n) or engkoi<^n ? 
(engoid'n), Sem. K. Ken. ; kra-kon, 
Sak. Guai ; C loi. Husband : 
gob ongkon? (gob-onghon), Sem. 
Per.; M 28; kuyn, Bes. K. Lang. 
[? cf. M 49]. \Stieng kuang ; 
Phnotig angkuang (angquang) ; Cen- 
tral Nicobar enkoina ; Shorn Pe 
akoit ; Car Nicobar VW-kTi-a., "male" ; 
Kon Tn koin, "man" ; Central 
Nicobar koin, "husband"; Alak 
koin (kolnh), "man" {i.e. male).] 
{e) Male {Mai. jantan) : kraal, Serau, 
Jelai; kral, Tembi \ (krahl), Or. 
Berurnb. Male (of persons) : kral, 
Sak. U. Kam., Sak. U. Beii. Man 
(male, opp. to woman) : kraal, Sak. 
Sung. ; kral ; kral, Sen. Cliff. ; kral, 
Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; krai. Tan. U. 
Lang. ; senhol kiai, Sak. Ra. ; M 26 ; 
mai kral (mai krahl), Or. Berumb. ; 
M 23. 
16. Male (of mankind) : te' (ti), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Male : taii, Sak. Tan. 
Ram. ; lito, Sen. Cliff. ; kotol. 
Pant. Kap. /oh. Man {i.e. male), 
kotol. Pant. Kap. Joh. ; W 132 ; 
te' (ti'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; teh, Sem. 
Beg. ; teh, Beti. New. Husband : 
te' (ti'), Sefn. Pa. Max. ; ti (tee), 
Se7n. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Rob. ; 
toh, Sak. Kerb., Sak. Croix; tau, 
Sak. Br. Loav ; tao' (taok), Tembi. 
Boy : ata-u, Sak. Tan. Ram. Young 
(of males) : li'tau, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
Young man ; big boy ; youth : litong, 
Tejnbi. [? Cf. Southern Nicobar 
otohC (otaha), "male" ; ? cf. Khmer 
phdey [phiiy], "husband."] 

17. Malk (of animals) : i-par, U. Tem. 
Man (male) : li-pOr, U. Tem. 

18. Mali:: babO ? (Ijaboeu), Sak. Br. 
Loru; (babeu), Sak. Croix. Male (of 
animals) : i-bS, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
ibii', Sak. U. Kam. Man (male) : 
bcih? (bogh), Tembi; sen-6i bab5', 

Sak. Kor. Gb.; senhoi babuh (senhol 
babouh), Sak. Kerb. ; senghoi 
babush (seiihoi babouch ), Som. 
babOs Po - Klo. Man : ba. ? ( beng 
Sem. Pupier. Son : babuh ( babouh S 
Sak. Kerb. Boy : baboh ( babogh), 
Tembi. Cock : booh (boogh), 
Tembi ; F 257 ; P 74 [cf. F 40]. 

19. Male (of persons): 'ngsil, Sak. 
U. Kam. Man {i.e. male, as 
opp. to woman ) : onser, Sak. 
Martin. Man [the meaning given is 
"man" (in general), but the word 
almost certainly means "man" as 
opposed to "woman"]: sil, Sak. 
Br. Low ; (sil). Sak. Kerb. ; (sil), 
Sak. Croix ; kanchu, Ben. New. 
Husband : sirr, Tem. CI. ; 'ngsir, 
Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; en-sirr. Sen. CI. ; 
en-sirr ; nggn-sirr. Sen. Cliff. ; ning- 
sar. Tan. U. Lang. : k6-sirr, Krau 
Tem.; kesiy (k^ssij), U. Pat.; kfisuih 
(ksuih), Sem. Buk. Max. ; kesui 
[ in the MS. originally kessui ], 
Sem. U. Sel. ; kgsui, Sem. Plus ; 
kesoi, Sem. J arum, Sem. Plus, Pang. 
U. A ring. Pang. Sam, Pa?ig. Gal. ; 
ling ensir, Darat ? Married (of 
a woman ) : mong ensir, Serau ; 
B 88. 

20. Male : lemo^ng ; lemol, Bes. Sep, 
A. I.; Iem61, Bes. Malac, Bes. K. 
Lang. ; (lemol), Bes. K. Lang. ; 
lemul, Bes. Bell. ; rfimdl, Bes. 
Malac, Kena. II.; remAl (rgmo'^l), 
Serting ; rfimol (rem6°l), Bes. Her. 
Man {i.e. male) : lemol, Bes. Songs ; 
lemon, Ben. New. ; limo, U. Ind. , 
Pal. ; simo, U. Ind. ; jambul, 
Bland. K. Lang. ; dmul, Ment. 
Her. II. ; remien, Buk. U. Lang. 
Husband: rem61, Serting; lemul, 
Bes. Bell. ; limo° (limon'), U. Ind. ; 
limo. Pal. ; simo. Pal. Son : limo'^ 
(limon'), Or. Hu. Joh. I. Longer 
part of inner tube of blowpipe : 
lemol, Bes. K. Lang. [ Khmer 
chhmol or chhmoul [jhmol], " male " 
(of animals); OM«' tamo, "male."] 

21. M.-\.LE: (rt)s6ng!6h, Kena. I. Man: 
s6ngl6h, Kena. I. Husband: h§lok ; 
keiok, e.g., mani hala' hglok hinong, 
' ' where did your husband go to just 
now?" Bes. Sep. A. I. ; helok ; 
helok, Bes. K. Lang. ; kinglak, 
Buk. U. Lang. ; malS.u, Bes. Her. ; 
ma'lau, Bes. .Malac. ; M 23 ; [? cf. 
F 69 and F 90]. [Selung, kallak, 
k'lak, "husband"; cf. C/iong sa.Tn- 
long, " man."] 
(b) Man (male) : chSlaki, Or. Trang. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

653 

Husband : laki, Mant. lior. , Mantr. 
Malac. , Jak. Malac. {Mai. laki]. 

22. Male : jantang, Mant. Bor. ; jan- 
tan, Merit. Her. /., Mantr. Malac, 
Jak. Maine. ; jenten, Barok. Hus- 
band : jantan, Galang \ rhang jenten 
(khang jenten), Barok\^Mal. jantan]. 
Mai,e ; F 255 ; F 257, 258. 
Mallet : C 122. 

Man : {i.e. male person, as opposed 
to woman) ; M 15-22. 

23. Man [spec, mankind, not in relation 
to se.\] {Mai. orang): hftmrne. Sent. 
Craw. Hist., Sent. Jur.Mar.; (hana), 
Sern. Klapr. ; h&mme' (hmmi'), Scm. 
Pa. Max. ; hame' (hmi), Scm. Buk. 
Max. ; h6mi', ex. (i) hemi' hop, a 
jungle-man ; (2) hinu Jawl, h6mi' 
Siem, hdmi' Chawaydd or Chuwaydd 
= a Malay, a Siamese, a Chinaman, 
respectively, Sent. Kedah ; mi (mee), 
Sent. Stcv. ; sSmiah, Or. Trang ; 
sS-ma', U. Cher. ; sgma' ? (smak), 
Serting; hgma' ? (hma"k), Bes. Her. ; 
mah, Bcs. A'. Lang. ; mah ; meh (?), 
Bes. Sep. A. /. ; e.g. mui kur mah, 
" a single man " ; ma'ikur mah, "two 
together"; 'mpe 'kur mah, "three 
together " (kur = -!/«/. ekor), Bes. SeJ>. ; 
ma', Bes. Malac. ; (mak), U. Tent. ; 
mai, Sak. U. Bert., Jelai; moi, 
Seran; M 21. Person (man): hami. 
Pang. Jalor; sime, Sem. Pupier ; 
m(J'h, Sem. Beg. ; mai-ji, Or. Berumb. 
People: mai, Sak. U. Kam., Sak. 
U. Bert. , e.g. ' ' mankind were being 
utterly eaten up" [by the giant 
eagle], mai lik gi-cha, Sak. U. Bert. ; 
mai, Sak. Martin; m'a.h, Bes. Songs; 
P 114. Stranger (of aboriginal 
race), sema lio (soma-lio), Sinn. ; 
O 21. Manof the inland districts (il/a/. 
orang ulu) : mai betOr, Sak. Martin. 
Body : s6-ma', U. Tern. , U. Cher. 
Chinaman (il/a/. orang China): h6mi', 
Chuwayd {pr. Chu-waydd), Sem. 
Kedah ; mai China (mai tschina), 
Sak. Tap. European {lit. "white 
man"), mai bi^k, Sak. Tap. Malay 
{Mai. orang Malayu) : hgmi' Malayu, 
Sem. Kedah ; mai y6p, Sak. Tap. ; 
mai gop ; mai ga, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
M 28. Sakai {lit. people of the 
country or of the jungle) : mai srak, 
Sak. U. Kant. ; F 231. Siamese 
{Mai. orang Siam): hemik (orhemi') 
Siem, Sem. Kedah ; T 53. I want 
to meet the Jelai men : en baloh ? 
(balokh) mai Jelai, Jelai. 

24. Man {Mai. orang) : mgndf, Sem. 
Martin. Man (gen.) ; Negrito : 

menik (meneek), Sem. Stev.; mCnik ; 
mSnik hop. Sent. Kedah ; F 231. 
[This is the name by which the 
Negritos (or some of them) call them 
selves.] [? Cf. Khmer Tn(:x\\i,s [mnus]; 
Mon mSnih [mnih] ; Stieng binlh ; 
Lave benu ; Halang mono, monol ; 
Bolovcn pauni, phnuih ; Niahon 
nuih ; Tareng meina ; Sui mona, 
noi, "man." Rut some of these 
are of Aryan origin.] 

25. Man, i.e. Negrito {Mai. S6mang or 
Pangan) : mendrak {also mendrak 
hop) = wild SCmang, e.g. Orang Pius ; 
whereas menik {or mgnik hop) = 
Pangan (? tame tribes, e.g. Orang 
Siong, O. Jarum), (so explained by 
Orang Siong), Sent. Kedah. [Perhaps 
M 24 and 25 are derivatives from 
M23.] 

26. Man ; a person {Mai. orang) : gin. 
ex. gin kgradah, " a maiden " (1 have 
only heard it used of females), Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus ; Y 41. They : 
gon un ( = Mai. orang itu). Pang. 
U. A ring. ; T 51 ; M 28 ; Y 41. 

{b) Man : seng6n (sng-6n), Sak. U. 
Kam. ; senoing, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
senghoi (senhoi), Sbm. ; senho'i, Sak. 
Kerb. ; senhoi, Sak. Pa. ; sen-6i, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; s6n-oi, Sak. Tan. 
Ram. ; senoi ; senoi, Sak. Mar- 
tin ; s6noi ; senoi', Tembi ; senoi, 
Sei-au, Darat. Man (of the Sakai 
race): s6n-oi. Sen. CI.; senoi, Krau 
Em. We[«'f]: sinoi, Jelai. Person 
(man): sgngdi, Po-Klo. Old man: sen- 
oi en-d6-rar, iVw. CliJJ. Young man: 
sen-oi nyilm. Sen. Cliff. European :' 
senghoi gop blag ( senhoi- gop-bieg), 
Sotn. ; senghoi biag (senhoi'-bieg), 
Som. ; sgnoing bi6k, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
Sakai (tribal name of) : sen-oi. Sen. 
CI. , Tern. CI. [each tribe so calls 
its own members]; senghoi pla (senhoi 
pie), Som. De Morgan's "Somang": 
senghoi lano (seiihoi lano), Som. ; 
[said to mean literally "men of the 
woods"; F235]. Stranger: senhoi 
moi', Sak. Kerb. Stranger (of abori- 
ginal race) : senghoi moi (senho'i-mo'i), 
Sak. Kerb.; A 121. Stranger (Malay): 
senghoi gop (senho'i -gop), Som. \ 
M 28 ; F 61 ; F 63 ; M 15 ; M 18. 
{c) Man {Mai. orang) : hole. Rasa. 
■Woman : hole aji. Rasa. 

27. Man {Mai. orang) : batek, e.g. 
batek hop ( J/a/. orangutan), "jungle 
man," Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
ba-tek, Lebir [? cf. Batak, the nanu- 
of certain Sumatran tribes]. 

654 

CO MP A RA TI VE VOCA B ULA RY OF 

29 

Man {Mai. orang) : [a] gab, Sem. 
Plus ; gob, Sem. Per. ; gup°, 
Tembi. Person (man) : gob, 
Sak. Jer. Man (other than a 
Sakai): gob, Seti. Cliff. Foreigners : 
goh or gob ? Bcra. Stranger (Malay, 
Chinese, etc.): gob [e.g. gob Chi-na, 
gobMaiayu, "Chinaman," "Malay"), 
Sen. CI. ; gob, U. Tem. A'rau 
Tern. ; gop, So in., Sak. Ra., Sak. 
Kerb. A stranger (lit. person (?), and 
hence a Malay) : g^p, Pang. Belinib. ; 
gop, Pang. K. A ring. Malay {Mai. 
orang Malayu) : gub or gon gub. 
Pang. Satn. ; M 26 ; gob, Lebir, 
Verbal, A'rau Ket., U. Cher. ; gop, 
Sak. Kerb. , Sak. Pa. , K ran Em. ; gub 
Jawl', Sem. Plus ; M 23. Friend or 
comrade {Mai. kawan): gu' (prob. = 
gob or gub as applied to Malays), 
Pang. Belimb. Chinaman : gob 
Chi-na', Lebir; gob China', Kerbat ; 
gub Si-wiing, Sem. Plus. European: 
gop biiig (gop bieg), SiUn. ; gob 
bi-ug, Sen. CI. ; W 98 ; F 61 ; 
M 15. 

[b) Man : ge-eh, Sak. Sel. Da. 
\^Bahnar go^ (gap), gau, " stranger "; 
Achinese goh, "man," "person."] 
Man : jah, Krau Ket., Krau Tem.; 
ja', Sak. Guai. 
30. Man (stranger esp. Malay) : jeboh, 
Bes. K. Lang.; jebah ; jobah, Bcs. 
Sep. A. L Mankind {Mai. orang) : 
jobo, Bes. Bell. Term used in ad- 
dressing Malays : joboh-ye (joboh- 
yey), Ben. New. ; jobo (djobo), 
Mant. (?) Bar. 

Man : urang, Jak. Mad. ; orang, 
Kena. IL, Jak. Malac. ; orhang, 
Mantr. Malac. ; Mant. Bor. ; (o- 
khang), Barok ; b66rang ? (b'orang), 
Jak. Ba. Pa. Person (man): orang, 
Jehehr ; F 72 \Mal. orang] ; P 55. 
Mankind : som, Kena. /. [? Cf. 
Centr. Nicobar shorn-, "inhabitant, 
native, people," used in compounds 
only, e.g. shom-mattai, " aborigines," 
shom- China, " Chinaman, Chinese 
people," etc.] 

Max-tigek {Mai. jadi - jadian) : 
kfinayau (described as able to speak, 
and as wearing bracelets {Mai. 
gelang), and as having teeth shaped 
like an adze - haft {Mai. puting 
bOliong)), Sem. Kedah. 
Mane : H i . 
34. Mango, Mangifcra Indica : mam- 
palam, Sein. Craw. Hist.; memplam, 
Serau [Mai. mfimpfilam]. 
34A. Mango, "horse-", .Mangifera 

31 

32 

33- 

faetida (spec. Mai. embachang) : 
sSpop'^, Tetnbi. 

35. Mango, wild (spec. Alal. kuwini), 
Ma?igi/era odorata : baching bfito' 
(bachng btu' or tbu?), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Fruit spec, prized by the wild 
tribes : matang, Pang. U. A ring. 
Horse -mango, Mangifera fxtida; 
machak", Serau. [Mai. embachang, 
"the horse-mango. ' '] 

36. Mangosteen (fruit), Garcinia 
tnangostana : masta' (mastak), Sem. 
Craw. Hist. ; pie sSmfeta', Sak. U. 
Kam. [Patani and Kelantan Mai. 
mgs'ta (? mSs'tar or setar), ? from 
Mai. manggistan, of the dictionaries, 
which, however, perhaps = manggis 
setar.] 

36A. M.\NGOSTEEN : gamus, Serau ; 
gamush, Darat [? cf. Mai. manggis]. 
Manis javanica : A 113-115. 
Mankind : M 30. 
Manner : F 30, 31. 

37. Mantis, praying : ketiau, Serting. 

38. Mantis, praying : kadok, Bedu. //. 

39. Mantis, praying : panchong, Kena. 
/. ; b€lalang kanchong, Bedu. //. ; 
G 102. 

40. Many: ba'-lut, Krau Ket. ; ba'-lo 
(ba'-ler), Krau Tein, ; ba'-la', U. 
Tem. ; ba'-le", U. Cher. Many ; 
much : balo' (baluk), Sem. Buk. 
Max., Sem. Pa. Max.; balu (balloo); 
balo (bailer), Sem. Stev. More : 
balo' (baluk), Sem. Buk. Max. Less; 
smaller : bia' ma' bale' (bia' mma' 
baluk), Sem. Buk. Max. ; F 121 
[?=A 61]. [? Cf. Central Nicobar 
lak, "many"; Cancho, Rodi lu ; 
Chriai lo, "many," "much"; 
BahnarXo, "many," "numerous."] 

41. Many; much; pungkal (pungkl), 
Sem. Buk. Max. 

42. M.\NY; much: ((7)biga; \J\%k,Sdm.\ 
biga ; biga, Sak. Kerb. More : 
blga (/;2ga), Sak. Kerb. Very {},Lil. 
amat) : bi ga', Sak. Plus Cliff. All 
together ; together ; all : ebah ga 
(6beh ga), Sak. Kerb. Always : 
bi'ga jan6n (biga djanon), Sak. 
Kerb. 

{h) Much : banvak, Jak. Malac. 
[Mai. banyak]. 

43. Many ; much : cha'-tuk", Tem. CI. 
Many ; very : chan-teng ; cha-tuk, 
Sak. Plus Cliff. 

43 A. Many ; much : ch^rok (tscherSk), 
Sak. Martin [? = D 66]. 

44. M.VNY : je'oi ; je'oy ; jengoi (jngoy), 
Sak. U. Kam. ; j6ng6i (j'ngoy), ^a^. 
U. Bert. Much : jcoy ; jfingoi 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

655 

(jng5y), Sak. U. A'ain. Many ; 
much : jS-oi, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
jahoi (dj4-hol), Sak. Ka. ; jahoi 
(dja-hol), Sak. Ra. Very {Mai. 
amat) : jC-'oi, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
Very {Mai. banyak) : j6-oi, Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. Often : ha'in, e.g. 
timbul ha'in, "always turning up," 
Bes. Sep. [Alak, K'ase/ig jio ; Lave 
on, " much.']' 

45. Many : 'nom, Bes. Sep. ; hnom ; 
hSnom, Bes. Songs. Much: h'nom; 

nam, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 'nom, Bes. 
Sep.; num, Bes. Malac. ; V 13. 

46. Many : kom, Lebir, Kerbat ; kon, 
Pant. Kap. Log. Many ; much : 
kop" (kerpn), Sen. CI. ; ku'p" ; kup°, 
Tempi ; kop", kep"!, Serau ; kep" 
lilidini [?], Darat. Numerous {Mal. 
ramai): enkup'i ; aikup lalu, Tembi ; 
kop", Serau\or Tembif\ Much (.!/«/. 
banyak) : kom, Sem. Jaruin, Sent. 
Plus, Pang. Beliinb. , Pang. K. 
Aring, Pang. U. Aring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Much or broad : 
y!k-Vom, Pang. Belitnb. Much; rich: 
kon, Panf. Kap. Joh. ; W 73 ; W 
77-79 ; W 89. Rich {Mal. kaya) : 
kam hak-6' (///. "great is his pro- 
perty " ; hak is a Malay word — from 
Arabic — meaning "property," and 
6' is the 3rd personal pronoun), 
Seni. Plus. Little : beh kon, Pant. 
Kap. Joh.; F 121. Are there many 
people in your house ? Not many : 
mong (mung) sSn-oi kbp° (kerpo) 
ma' dok° (dfirk") he? pe kbp" 
(kerp"), ma'lor ka' kbp" (kerpi), 
Sen. Cliff. [Cliong kep, "many" ; 
? cf Stie?tg kop, "every," "all." 
Mark: C 152 ; G 41 ; P 118 ; T 
196. 

47. Market : pfikan, Sak. U. Kam. 
\Mal. p6kan]. 

48. Market : pasar, Sak. U. Kam. 
[Mal. pasar]. 

49. Marriage : gun (goon), Setn. Jur. 
And., Sem. fur. Rob. ; nankhuna, 
Ben. New. Marriage : kuyn-hodong, 
Bes. K. Lang. To marry : kun- 
odo'^ng, Bes. A. I. ; kuii-odong (///. 
man-wife?), Bes. K. L. ; F 68 [? = 
M 15]. 

50. Marriage : karyit, Ben. New. 
[} Mal. Pers. kawin] ; W 132. 

51. Marriageable (of boys) : mawong 
[pr. mawoBng), Sem. Kedak. 

52. Marriageable (of girls) : bale or 
bale, Sem. Kedah \Mal. Ar. baler] ; 
Y41. 

Married man : B 368. 

53. Married, newly {Mal. b^haru 
nikah) : babe {or babcr) kc-niam, 
Sem. Plus. 

54. Marry, to ; to be married to : piloi, 
Pang. Belimb. 

54A. Marry, to : pgrglok", Jelai ; 
ampSrjok" \or amperjek"], Darat. 

55. Marry, to : ja-di, Krau Tem. 

56. Marry, to : sabit, Kena. L 

57. Marry, to : nikah, Blan. Rem. ; 
nik6h, Barok [Mal. Ar. nikah) ; F 
63, 64 ; M 49. 

Marriageable: M 51, 52. 

Married : R 368 ; M 53. 

58. Marrow : sTm (sim), Sem. Buk. 
Ma.\. ; siim (slim), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Marrow of bones : sem {pr. se^m). 
Pang. U. Aring ; sem (/;-. se^m). 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Pith {Mcil. 
mfimpulor) : sup. Pang. U. Aring ; 
sob (j6hu') \sic\, Sem. Kedah ; T 211; 
B368. 

Marry, to : F 63, 64 ; M 49-57 ; 

S 222. 

Mas, river : Y 26. 

59. Mason -bee {Mal. angkut) : lingu 
(lingngu), Se?n. Buk. Max. 

60. Mason-bee : pena' (pn'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

Mast : P 192. 

61. Masticate, to; to bite: mamah 
(mamh), Se>n. Pa. Max. Mouth ; 
to read : pfimamah (p'mamah), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. \_Mal. mamah]. To 
masticate : E 27. 

62. Mat {Mal. tikar) : nos {pr. nbss), 
Sem. Kedah, Sem. Jarvm, Sem. 
Plus ; nos or ners, Pa?ig. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam ; noz or nerz. Pang. 
Galas ; n5s? (nus), Sem. U. Sel. ; nus ? 
(tus), Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Bjik. 
Max. Bamboo floor : nos, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. Floor : nish (nisch), Sak. 
Ra. Flooring : nis, Tem. CI. ; nis, 
Tetnbi ; res, Sak. U. Kam. [Niahon 
ngiiot, " mat. "] 

63. Mat: {a) pil, Sem. I^er., Som. ; 
(bil), Sein. K. Ken. ; (pille), Sem. 
Ken. ; apil, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; apil, 
Sak. Br. Low, Sak. Croi.v ; apfl 
(apil), Sak. Kerb. ; apil, Tembi. 
[Ci. Boloven biel ; Alak, Kaseng be ; 
Kon Tu mber ; Sui kabiar, ' ' mat " ; 
Man khaphew, ' ' coarse mat made of 
reeds"; Palaung empe (emp6), 
" mat. "] 

{b) Mat : chapeng, Sem. Kedah ; 
jgmpas (jgmpes), Kena. IL 

64. Mat: lin-da (?liu-da), Kraii Tem. 

65. Mat : {a) chgrukn, Jelai ; cherukh, 
Serau [or Tembi\; chSru? (chern), 

656 

CO MP A RA TI VE VOCA B ULA RY OF 

Da rat ; (chru), Sak. Sung. ; chgru" ; 
jeru', Sak. U. Kam. ; chgrti, Sak. 
Blanj. Sw. ; cherii, Sak. Chen. ; cheru, 
Tan. U. Lang. ; ch^ru (tsch^ru), 
Sak. Tap.; ch6r6 (tchoro), Sak. Ra. 
{b) Mat': siak, Rasa. [Cf. BitlM 
Opie serrah, "mat"; Sm Dayak, 
serak, ' ' a fold," ' ' a layer. "] 

66. Mat : pengemang (p'ng'mang), 
Pant. Kap. Lem. ; pengumbang 
(p'ngumbang), Pant. Kap. Mad. 

67. Mat : tikar, Mantr. Malac. Nya. , 
Jak. Malac. [Mat. tikar]. 

68. Mat (MaL kajang) : kajak, Sak. U. 
Kam. Kajang : kajak^i, Darat, 
Jelai. One kajang : sabidang kajang, 
Serati [-1/(7/. kajang] ; P 3 ; S 250. 
Plant used in mat-making : P 131. 

69. Mata daching (fish spec. ) : iso' 
(aisuk?), Sem. link. Max. 

Mata kuching 1 fruit spec. ) : C 46. 
Mata pSlandok 1 fruit spec. ) : D 84. 

70. Matches: gra'api, Sak. U. Kam.; 
F 125 [.!/(?/. goris api]. 

71. Matter : salor, Pant. Kap. J oh. 
To fulfil : salorkan buat pengunjis 
(p'ngunyis). Pant. Kap. Joh. To 
reach : salor, Pant. Kap. Joh. To 
trust ; to believe : tgsalor (t' salor). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. 

72. Mattress : tilam, Sak. U. Kam. 
\MaI. tilam] ; P 3. 

Mauve : W 98. 

73. Mawas ; mias (ape spec. ) : ma 
bajas (explained as meaning "the 
man with nostrils turned upwards," 
the belief being that the rain gets 
into them and forces him to make a 
screen of leaves), Bes. K. L. ; mah 
bajils, Bes. A. I. ; M 23 [.1/a/. 
mawas ; maias (this last form is used 
in Borneo)] ; M 140. 

May be : P 60, 61. 

74. Measure, to? {Fr. alligner \_sic\): 
emtewach (emt^oullch), Sak. Ra. 
[Khmer veas ? [was]; Niahbn wa ; 
Alak, Lave va, " to measure (the 
length of a thing) " ; ? cf Mon b;\t 
[bat], ' ' to measure with a rule or 
line."] 

Meat ; F 170-172. 
Cooked meat : C 240. 

75. M6dang (tree spp.), (spec. Mai. 
medang buaya), Cryptocarpa GriJJith- 
iana or KurrimiaMaingayi: mCdang 
baiyueh (mdng baiuih), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; C 270 ; (spp. .Mai. mgdang 
gatal? ; m. keladi), Helicia robusta (?) 
or Litsea myristiccefolia, medang 
hakat (mdng hakt), Sein. Pa. Max. ; 
S 50 \Mal. medangl. 

76. Medicine or charm {Mai. ubat) : 
penley, Se7n. Plus. Medicine : {>eng- 
lai (pnglai ; pnglay), Sak. U. Kam., 
pe-lai, Sen. Cliff.; piilai ? (balai or 
belai), Sak. Kor. Gb. ; p€nglay 
(pnglay), e.g. "I do not know 
about medicines," p6nglay (pnglay) 
pa panai, Sak. U. Bert. ; F 121 ; 
C 162 ; pelai, Sak. Martin. To be 
treated medicinally : hi-pgrlay, e.g. 
' ' a sick man is being treated with 
medicine," mai nyi hi-perlay, Sak. 
U. Bert. ; M 13 ; S 187. 

77. Medicine: ubat, Sem. Beg., Ben. 
New. ; ubet. Pang. U. Aring 
ubed. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
hobat, Sem. A'. Ken. [Mai. ubat] 
M 4 ; P 165. 

78. Medicine-man (.Mai. bomor) : hald, 
Pang. Sam; ha-la', Kerbat ; hala, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; hala' (halak), 
Tembi, Darat. BSlian wangi (tree 
spec), Dichopsis obovata: hala' (hal'), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. ; (spec, belian 
chepis?): hala' chepis (hal' chps), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [These last are 
apparently due to confusion between 
the two meanings of the Mai. word 
" belian."] 

79. Medicine-M.-\N : bli'an, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; blian, Seran[Mal. bSlian]; S 76. 

79A. Medicine-max : pawak, Sak. U. 
Bert. ; pawang ? (pavan), Mantr. 
Bar. [Mai. pawang]. 

80. Meet, to [Mai. jumpa) : bii ; bu ; 
hi-bu ; hi - bu, Seji. Cliff. ; hibabu 
(hi-ba-bou), Sak. Kerb. ; bg-bu-ru, 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff.; I 14. I wish to 
meet the Tembi (Sakai) : pa ibu 
Senoi, Tempi. 

81. Meet, to : chenrot ? (tsen-rot), 
Som.; cheroh, Be.<:. Malac. ; chohoh ; 
chShuh, Bes. A. L To meet a man : 
cheroh ha 'ma', Bes. Malac. [cf. J 9]. 

82. Meet, to (Mai. bertfimu) : ya-soh 
{pr. sohh). Pang. U. Aring; ya- 
s5h (or soh). Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
besua, e.g. lah besua, "to have 
met," Mant. Bar. [Mai. sua]. 

83. Meet, to : jumpa (djoumpa), Sak. 
Ra. [Mai. jumpa]. 

84. Meet, to (congregate) : kamin, 
Sak. U. Kam. [? cf Mai. kSlamin] ; 
A 124. 

85. Melancholy? or to mutter? (Mai. 
ngangut?): y6li? (ili), Sem. Pa. Max. 

86. Melon [^h^l. m^ndikai), Cucurbita 
citrullus('>) : tSmikai (tmikai), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; kemikaii, Serau [Mai. 
tSmbikai, t^mikai, etc.]. 

Melt, to : B 395. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

657 

86a. Melt, to : tu (too), in the magic 
formula : tu (too) mahum (mnhoom) 
nia-loi k(zping inctkatop, yeh ma-kor 
mahum (mrthoom), tu (too) mahum 
(mahoom) ; yeh ma-loi mahum [ma- 
hoom) pe metkatop, rendered by 
"melted blood (I) tlirow up against 
the sun ; I cut blood ; melted blood, 
I throw blood against the sun," Sem. 
Stev. (Mater, ii. 108). \Stieng tu, 
"to melt (honeycombs)."] 

87. Memorial (?) : jaman, Des. Songs 
[1 Mai. Ar. zaman, jaman, "time"]. 
Memory : K 62. 

88. Mfimpglas leaves, used as a sub- 
stitute for emery powder (? Tetracera 
spec. ) : chengat, Bes. K. L. 

89. Mend, to [Mai. baik-ki) : ya-b'la 
(doubtful), Pang. U. Aring \y Mai. 
bela]. 

Menses : B 249 ; M 161. _ 
89.\. Menstruate, to: bohiya (bohija; 
bohii-ja, "deep a"), Sen. A'. Ken. 
[? = B 249 + F 16]. 
Menstruation: P 219. 
Mention, to : S 360. 

90. Mfiranti (tree), Shorea spec. ? : 
mSnesa' (mnsa), Scm. Buk. Max. 

91. Meranti : pahioh (phiuh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [For the varieties which the 
Malays call m. puteh, m. benut 
m. bunga, m. darah, Sem. Pa. Max. 
adds pitu, benut (bnut), bunga, 
darah, and Sem. Buk. Max. piltau, 
bgnut (bnut), bunga, aung (au') to 
the respective generic names, M 90 
and M 91.] 

92. Mkr.-^NTI : klai, Mantr. Malac. Cha. 

93. Mer.\nti : b'ranti, Bes. Songs ; 
banti, Bes. Sep. \Mal. meranti]. 

94. MSrbau tree, Afzelia Palembanica : 
[a) berebau, Serau ; merbau, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. ; mSrbau gading, Bes. 
Songs. Afzelia coriacea : mSrbau 
kunyet, Bes. Songs [Mai. merbau]. 
(i) Mfirbau: (spec. Mai. m. tandok), 
Afzelia coriacea: mfiluai (niluai), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; lamglih (I'mmlih), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; (spec. Mai. m. bunga): 
mgluaih bunga (mluih bunga), Scm. 
Pa. Max. ; lamfilih kom ? (I'mmilh 
ku'm), Sem. Buk. Max. ; (spec. 
Mai. m. darah): meluaih darah (mluih 
darh), Sem. Pa. Max. ; lamelih mahum 
(ISmmlih mhum), Scm. Buk. Max. ; 
(spec. Mai. m. tanglong ?) : meluaih 
tanglong? (mluAih tnglung), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; lamglih tanglong (I'mmlih 
tnglu), Sem. Buk. Max. 

95. MErbau : long apel [or apell), Bes. 
Songs. 

VOL. II 

96. MErbau, a forest tree, said to be 
the : rempeg, Sem. Kedah. 

97. M^rtanah? (tree spec.) : niAtAnah ? 
(matanh?), Sem. Buk. Max. 

98. Mew, to : ys.-wa.u, Pang. [/.Aring; 
ya-wafi (wau), ex. kuching jfibeg o' 
wau [Mai. kuching jahat mSngiau 
(sehaja)), "it is a bad cat, (always) 
mewing," Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
ayau, Bes. Sep. A. /. Sound of 
mewing : 'yau-'yau, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
[Onomatop. cf. C 45 and Mai. 
mi5ngiau ; Cham, moyau ; Khmer 
ngav [ngaw], "to mew."] 

Mias : M 73 ; M 140. 

Midday : D 33-35 ; D 42, 43 ; H 

140, 141 ; M 100. 

99. Middle or centre (.)/(//. tcngah) : 
ta-hll, Setn. Kedah ; tahil (thil). 
Sem. Pa. Ma.v. In the middle of ; 
between: ha' tahil (ha' thil), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

100. Middle or centre [Mai. t6ngah) : 
(?^ kg-pedek, Sem. Jarum. Central 
[Mai. di - tSngah sakali) : kgpedi'. 
Pang. U. Aring; pedi', Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. Between : em-pa-di, 
Sak. Plus Cliff. ; O 26. Half : pedi 
(podi), ^'(';«. Midday: padid, Ben. 
New. ; pedi (pedee), Bes. Stev. ; pedi- 
his (/c'i/?-his), Sdm. ; (podihiss), 
Sak. Kerb.; D 35 ; pgdih are ; pfidi' 
are, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; p6di' are' 
(pedr arSk), Bes. Songs; D 43. 
Midnight: pgdi - tob {podi-\.oh]. 
Sdm. ; D 17. [N 19 is similar in 
form and perhaps related. Cf. 
Bolot'cn khadei ; Niahon di ; Laze 
khadi, "middle" ; ? cf. Mon pdoa 
[pdai], "in"; Palaung kadai, 
" between."] 

In the middle of: S 198. 
Midnight : D 16-18 ; M 100. 
Midrib (of palm-leaf) : B 294 ; B 
336. 
Midwife : D 181. 

loi. Milk ; raking, Ben. A'ew. ; B 385- 

387- 

102. Millet, Chinese (il/a/. ekor kuching); 
sekua, Sak. Bat. Pad. (21 I.S.B. 
163) ; sekoi jawa' (sekoi jawak), 
Tcmbi [Mai. sekoi]. 

103. Millipede {Mai. gonggo') : lalus 
(IjIus), Sem. Buk. Max. ; kfilui, 
Bes. Malac. , Mantr. Malac. [Khmer 
khlos, " a small species of centipede 
that does not sting " ; ? cf. Bahnar 
lola, " cockroach."] 

103A. Millipede : kaM<in (kabad'n), 
Sem. K. Ken. 

104. Millipede : gongo', lak. Malac. ; 

2 U 

658 

COM PA RA TI VE VO CA B ULA RY OF 

105. 

106. 

107. 

L09. 

ggrgok (gr-gok), Jak. Lem. Centi- 
pede [really millipede] : gungo, Jak. 
Sicv. [.I/a/, gonggok] ; B 141. 
Minah (bird spec. ), Mainatus ; 
? Gracula rdigiosa : niong, Tembi; 
tiong ; tiuk", Serau ; chem tiok°, 
Jelai ; yong ; chim yong, Bes. K. L. 
[Mai. tiong, and of. Bahnar jong] ; 

S 353- 

Mince, to : hohoyt, Bes. A. I. 
[? cf. C 297]. 
Mind : H 63. 

Mind ; sense : akal, Sak. U. Kam. 
Sensible : bor akal, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
G 65 \_Mal. Ar. 'akal]. 
108. Mind [in original "mine," but it 
comes directly after ' ' body "] : eng, 
Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Rob. 
[Very doubtful ; perhaps there is a 
misprint in the Semang as well as in 
the English rendering. I do not 
think it means "mine" or can be 
put under I 3 : that paragraph 
contains no Sgmang forms. ] 
To call to mind : C 16. 
Mind, to : peduli (pduli), Sak. U. 
Kam. \Mal. Ar. peduli] ; A 193 ; 
R 67. 

Never mind : N 66 ; N 69. 
Mine : kelian (klian), S'om. ; kglian 
(klian), Sak. Ra. \Mal. kelian ; 
galian.] 

Mine : parat (paret), Sak. Kerb. 
\Mal. paril, " ditch "]. 
, Mirror: ch6rmin(tchormin), 5o>«. , 
Sak. Ker, Sak. Ra. [Mai. ch6r- 
min]. 

Miscarriage ; premature (and ab- 
normal) labour (in childbirth) : 
kebangan (kbangn), Se>?i. Buk. 
Max. [.Mai. kabebangan]. 
Miserable : H 138. 
Miserly (Mai. kikir) : kfsid, Sem. 
Kedah [see D 179]. 
Miss, to : F 115. 
Mist : P> 236 ; D 16 ; D 22. 

115. Mistake : B 10 ; F 24. 

116. To be mistaken: silap, Sak. Ra. 
[Translated in original " to see," but 
this is clearly wrong.] [Mai. silap.] 

117. Mix, to [Mai. gaul) : ya-kaluwayt, 
I'aiii;. U. A ring; ya-haluwed {pr. 
haluwedd), Pang. Sam, Fang. Gal. 
[? Cf. Central Nicobar kal&awa, 
" to mix (fluids)."] 

It 8. Mix, to: haro-galo, Bes. Songs. 
[Cf. Mai. haru, " confusion," and 
gaul, " to mix."] 

Mix, to: (a) pachu, Serau. Do 
not mix (the things) : ui pi pachur, 
Serau. 

113- 

114. 

119. 

(b) To mi.x : champur, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; champor, champor, Tembi. 
Confused : champo' (chmpu'), Setn. 
Buk. Ma.v. [Mai. champor ; cham- 
pur]. 

120. Mock, to : majeh (majih), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [Mai. ajok]. 
Moderate : T 43. 

121. Molar; lower jawbone: t6mgim 
(tmgim?), Sem. Buk. Max.; T 170. 
[Khmer thk^am [dhgam] ; Stieng 
gam, "jawbone"; Stieng gam 
(gam); C hrdu l^gkm, "molar."] 

Mole : D 114. 
Mollusc : S 151, 152. 

122. Moment, a: bramos, Sak. U. 
Kam. Presently : bramos ; brami, 
Sak. U. Kam. 

Moment : B 145 ; Q 5. 
Moment, in a : I 10. 

123. Money: ibis, Sak. U. Kam.. 

124. Money: ting, Bes. Bell. Dollar: 
teng, Bes. A. I. ( probably = "chink" 
or money). [Onomatopceic] 

125. Money: wang, Sem. Beg., Ben. 
New. Silver : wang, Sak. Sel. Da. 
[Mai. wang, "money"]. 

126. Money : duit, Sak. U. Kam. [Mai. 
(from Dutch) duit]. 

Monitor lizard : F 138 ; L 118-125. 

127. Monkey: munyet, Bes. Sep. A. I.; 
(munyits), Be7i. New. [Mai. mon- 

yetj. ' 

128. Monkey: apong? (ab6ng), Sem. 
K. Ken. Coconut monkey {Mai. 
bgrok) : apong, Sem. Jarum ; 
poong, Tembi. 

129. Monkey, coconut [Mai. bSrok) : 
dakn ; dok^, Tembi ; dokn, Jelai ; 
Serau[ox Tembi']; dokn, Sen. Cliff.; 
dok, Sak. Bla?ij. Clijf., Darat; 
nienahar dok, Serau ; d3,k, Sak. U. 
Kam. Monkey : dok, Sak. Korb. 
Lias ; dok, Sak. Tap. [Stieng duk ; 
Chrdu dok ; Bahnar d6k ; Halang 
modok ; Sedang do, "monkey."] 

130. Monkey, coconut (Mai. bgrok) : 
ko'? (kok), Kena. 11. , Bes. Her., 
Bes. Sep. ; kd", Bes. Sep., Bes. K. 
L. ; k&, Bes. Malac. ; (spec. Mai. 
b2rok bgsar) : ko", Bes. Sep. A. I.; 
species are kok gantang, kok 
rangkak, kok buku, Bes. Songs. 
Cry of monkey : kok-kok-kok, Bes. 
Songs. [? cf. Mon keang [ging], 
"ape."] 

131. Monkey, coconut (Mai. b2rok) : 
kopd', Ma?itr. Malac. Cha. 

132. Monkey, coconut (Mai. bSrok) : 
bongkar ; mungkar, Bes. Sep. A. I.; 
puntal. Jak. Malac. 

ABO RIG IN A L DIA LEC TS 

659 

133. Monkey, coconut [Mai. b^rok) : 
ludik, Bland. K. Lang. 

134. Monkey, coconut Mai. bgrok) ; 
[a) bawag (bowag), Sem. Stcv. ; 
ba'-wach, Kerbat \ bawa^'d (//'. 
bawaydd). Sent. Kedali ; bawaJ'd 
(almost but not quite bawaydj), Scm. 
Plus; bawad (/r. bawadd), Fang. 
U. Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal.; 
bawat, Pang. A'. Aring. ; biiwet 
(baulit), Sem. Buk. Max. ; bawe' 
(baui'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; bawe', 
Pang. Belimh. ; U 20. Monkey 
{Mai. munyet) : bit. Sen. Cliff. 

{h) Coconut monkey : b6r6k, Manfr. 
Malac. ; bJruk, Bed. Chiong [.lA?/. 
bSrok]. 

135. Monkey [Mai. chikah [? = kekah]): 
kaldos ; kados. Pang. U. Aring; 
kados. Pang. Sam ; kadoz. Pang. 
Gal. Monkey (Mai. kCra) : keretos, 
k'ena. I. ; rSdo', .Mant?: Malac. 
Cha. Squirrel or tupaia {Mai. 
tupai), kodes, Mantr. Malac, 
Mant): Malac. Cha. Small squirrel 
or tupaia : kodes, Mantr. Malac. 
Nya. 

136. Monkey {Mai. kfikah) : (a) roit, 
Kena. I. ; rot, Bes. Her. ; [Mai. 
sikah) rut, Bes. Malac. Monkey : 
rut, Be?i. New. 

{b) Monkey {Mai. kgra) : tarau, 
Sem. Plus ; t6rau, Serting ; mfinahar 
rauh, Serau ; ra' (rak), Tembi ; 
rauh, Serau [or Tembi\ Darat, 
Jelai ; ruh, Sak. Em. ; rau, Sen. 
Cliff. ; rati, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; rao, 
Sak. Ra. ; r6uh (reo///^), e.g. aye 
(ay6) mo ni xixs!a^{vkouh), "we have 
a monkey"; mih mo ni r6uh 
{liiouh), "I have a monkey " ; mih 
r6uh {r%oi/h) mo kebus (kobouss), 
"my monkey is AsaA," Som. ; reu 
(r^uou), Sak. Kerb. Long- tailed 
monkey : rao, Sak. U. Kam. 
Monkey {Mai. monyet) : rauh, 
Darat. 

{c) Monkey {Mai. kfira) : penrok 
(pfin-rSrk), Kerbat ; {Mai. seneka 
\^sic : prob. = chikah) : menahar 
prut, Serau ; {Mai. monyet) : prot 
(prodt), Sak. Tap. Squirrel {Mai. 
tupai): prubk (pru-erk), Krati Tern. ; 
pr6g°, Serau [or TcmbiT\; prok^, 
Sak. P.m. ; proh chimal. Tan. U. 
Lang. Rat : pro, Sak. Ra. Mouse : 
pl&k, Sak. U. Kam. Rat ; mouse 
{Mai. tikus) : prok. Sen. Cliff. ; 
praukii, Serau. Young rat : krut, 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. A kind of otter 
{Mai. anjing ayer) : kreh-dooh, Bes. 

K. L. [Mon prip ; Bahnar prok ; 
Cham prM< ; Khmer kCmprOk 
[kupruk], "squirrel" ; Stieng pr6h, 
"small grey squirrel"; Sidung 
kaprah, " large black squirrel."] 

137. Monkey {Mai. kekah) : bage, 
Bedu. If. ; bag^h, Blan. Rem. ; 
bageh, Serting; bageh, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha., Jak. Malac. ; {Mai. 
seneka : v. M 136) : belkes [?], 
Serau [or Te/nbi?]. 

138. Monkey {A/al. chikah) : tanjang, 
Bland. K. Lang. 

139. Monkey {Mai. chikah) : sikar, Bes. 
Sep. A./.; sikah, Bcdu. L , Bedu. IL ; 
sikah, Bes. K. Lang., Mantr. 
Malac. , Mantr. Malac. Cha. ; 
chikah, Kena. IL ; k6kah, Bed. 
Chiong ; {Alal. lotong) : kakah. 
Pang. K. Aring; kgka' (k'kak), 
Jak. Lem. ; chako' (chaku'), Sem. 
Pa. Max. [Mai. chikah ; sikah ; 
kekah] ; F 218. 

140. Monkey (J/a/. kekah) : ai (fu), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; (al), Setn. Buk. 
Max. ; {Mai. lotong) : aii (aiee), 
Sem. Stev. Orang utan {Mai. 
mawas) : awi (auii), Sem. Pa. Max. 

141. Monkey {Mai. kera) : da'ong (/>;-. 
da'oSng), Sem. Kcdah; da'ong, Sem. 
J arum. 

142. Monkey {Mai. k6ra) : jayoh 
(jaiuh), Sem. Buk. Max. ; jaihau 
(jihovv), Sem. Stev. ; mgjo' (mjuk), 
Scm. Pa. Max. ; jeleau. Pang. U. 
Aring ; jeliu ? (jelevv), Tembi. 
Monkey : jayo, Sem.. Craw. 
Hist., Sem. Ked. And., Sem. Jur. 
And., Sem. Jur. New., Sem. Jur. 
Rob. ; (djayo), Sem. Klapr. ; jauh, 
Sem. Beg. ; jau, Ben. New. 

143. Monkey {Mai. kera) : kanchel (?), 
Sem. Kedah, Sem. Jamim ; [cf. M 
138? but in form the word agrees 
with D 86 : perhaps both are allied 
to S 284]. 

144. Monkey {Mai. k6ra) : chenawan, 
Bland. K. Lang. 

145. Monkey (il/fl/. kera): k6ra' (kgrak), 
Bedu. L ; kra', Majitr. Malac. Cha. ; 
(krak), Bes. Sep. A. L, Bedu. IL ; 
kgrha' (kekhak), Barok [Mai. k6ra]. 

146. Monkey {Mai. lotong) : tabong 
{pr. taboSng), Sem. Kedah ; tabong, 
Sein. Jaruni ; tabong, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; tabong ; taba, Pang. 
Belimb. [cf. M 152]. 

147. Monkey {Mai. lotong) : talug ; 
talu'. Pang. U. Aring. 

148. Monkey {]\Ial. lotong) : baseng 
(basing), Sem. Buk. Max. ; baseng. 

66o 

COM PA RA TI VE VO CA B ULA RY OF 

Bedti. II. ; baseng, Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. ; bateng, Kena. I. ; asSg {pr. 
a-sogg), Sem. Plus. Monkey (a 
small species) : baseng, Mantr. 
Malac. Nya. Monkey : basing 
(bassing), Ben. New. [Cf. D 146, 
which Brandes compares with it, 
Bijdrage, p. 88. Javan. bajing ; 
Boladng Mongo?idou bosing, 

' ' squirrel " ; Sea Dayak basieng, 
" small squirrel" ; Balinese Krama 
basong, "dog"; Murut Trusan 
basuk, "monkey."] 

149. Monkey [Mai. lotong) : ser6, 
Kena. II. ; cheloi, Serting. 

150. Monkey [Mai. lotong) : lotong, 
Bes. Sep. A. I., Bes. K. Lang., 
Mantr. Malac. Nya. ; lotong ; 
rotong (zotong), Ben. New. ; otong, 
Jak. Malac. [Mai. lotong] ; S 310.. 

151. Monkey [Mai. mawah or ungka) : 

(a) tawah [pr. tavvahh), Sent. Kcda/i ; 
(Mai. mawah) tawah (pr. tavvahh), 
Sem. /arum. Gibbon : tawa (towar), 
Sem. Sfev. ; taw6k, Jak. Ba. Pa. ; 
(Mai. ungka) : tawoh (tauh), Sem. 
Pa. Max. , Sem. Biik. Max. ; tawa 
(tawo), Se)iing\J cf. S 378]. 

(b) Monkey (Mai. ungka) : teh- 
mok ; temb4' ; tembo' , Bes. Sep. 
A. I. ; temo' (temdk), Bedu. I., 
Bedn. II. ; timo', Bes. Malac, 
Mantr. Malac. ; timo", Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. ; timo' (timok), Blan. 
Rem. , Bes. Her. Long - handed 
gibbon ; "wahwah" : temo' (temok), 
Merit. Her. I. 

(c) Monkey, spec. " wawa " : mawa' 
(mawak), Sak. Em. 

152. Monkey (Mai. mawah) : kahoJ'nn 
or ka-bon, Sem. Jaru??i ; (Mai. 
ungka; "wahwah") kebon, Pang. 
U. A ring [cf. M 146]. 

153. Monkey (Mai. ungka) : kweu, 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. [? cf. M 152]. 

154. Monkey (Mai. ungka): jeng6n, 
Kena. II. ; je'un, Jak. Malac. ; jeuii, 
Kena. I. 

155. Monkey (Mai. ungka) : ungka, 
Bed. Chiang; cf. M 160 [Ma/. 
ungka]. 

156. MfJNKEY, cry of ungka : wong- 
wong-wong, Bes. Songs. 

157. Monkey (Mai. siamang) : bateyil, 
Pang. U. A ring; bateoh (bateoh), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; (batiuh), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

158. Monkey (Mai. siamang): hoi. 
Sen. CI. ; hul, Sak. .Martin. 
[Khmer sva khol fswa ( = "ape") 
khul], " a species of monkey."] 

159. Monkey, black (Mai. siamang) : 
amang, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; amang, 
Sak. Korb. Lias ; siamang, Bed. 
Chiang [Mai. siamang]. 

160. Monkey (Mai. siamang) : unt6, 
Kena. II. [cf. M 155]. 

160A. Monkey, cry of siamang : mong- 

mong-mong, Bes. Sotigs. 
160B. Monkey, long - tailed (Mai. 

monyet) : biduot ; bidnot? Sak. 

Martin [? = M 134 or M 157]. 

Mons veneris : N 18. 

Monsoon : R 14. 

Month : M 161 ; M 164. 

161. Moon : kachi' (kachik), Sem. C7'aw. 
Hist., Se7n. Ked. N'ew. ; (katchik) ; 
(kachin), Sem. Klapr. ; (kachit), 
Sern. Ked. And., Sem. Ked. Rob., 
Sem. Ked. Mar. ; (kachil), Ben. 
New. ; kechek or k^che', Sem. 
Kedah ; kfiche', Sem. Jarum, 
Sem. Plus ; kiche' (kichek), 
Sem. Ij. ; kichi (kitchi), U. Pat. ; 
gg-chet, Sen. Cliff. ; gfichek, Sak. 
U. Kam. ; gechek. Tan. U. Lang. ; 
guchah, Sem. Ke?i. ; gicheh ; gucheh 
(ghicheh ; ghucheh), Sak. Br. Low ; 
guche (goutch6), Sak. Croix ; ge- 
che'. Tern. CI., Sen. CI., Sak. 
Blanj. CI.; ggche, Sak. Blanj. Sw.; 
(gechai), Sern.^Per.; ggcha ; gecha; 
geche (gotscha ; getscha ; getschg), 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; gecha (gotche), 
Sak. Kerb. ; gencha (gontch^), Sak. 
Ra. ; gich^, Sak. Kinta ; gicha, e.g. 
' ' the moon is caught by Rahu ; 
Rahu is black, my moon is red," 
gicha ki-b6rkap ya Rahii [another 
version is : ya kilip gicha ya Rahu]; 
belak (bl-ak) Rahu, rengan (rngan) 
gicha eng, Sak. U. Bert. ; gicha 
(gitscha), Sak. Martin ; ginchi ; 
gechik, Darat ; bgcha', Sak. U. 
Tap. ; bi-che' , Sak. Slim. ; che ? 
(chi [better che : in the MS. 
originally chey]), Sem. U. Sel. ; 
makgche' (mkchi'), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Month : geche' (gechek), Serau ; 
ginchi, Darat. Bright moon : 
makeche' pAding (mkchi' pSding), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; makeche' piding 
(mkchi' piding), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Crescent moon : makgche' kuling 
(mkchi' kuling), Sem. Buk. Alax. 
Decrescent moon (?) : makgche' tio' 
(mkchi' tiu'), Sern. Buk. Max. 
Lunar eclipse (Alal. ggrhana) 
kcche hfiyu' (lit. "sick-moon"?), 
cp. Hura' 6 - hilodd keche' (lit. 
" Hura is swallowing the moon," 
there is an eclipse), Sem. Kedah ; 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

66 1 

h& hilud makgche' (hahilud mkchi'), 
Sejn. Bilk. Max. End of the 
waning moon : padung kache' (pdung 
kchi'), Son. Buk. Max. YvlW 
moon : makgche' pgrnama (mkchi' 
prnam), Sem. Buk. Max. ; guche 
pgrnama (gutchg - prnama), Sak. 
Ra. ; gicha bab (gitschii bab), Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; pgnoh geche (ponoh 
ghgtchg), Sak. Kerb. Half-moon : 
makfiche' katit (mkchi katit), Scm. 
Buk. Max. New moon ; first day 
of the month : sahari makche' 
(s-hari mkchi), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Moonrise : kache' timbul (kchi' 
tmbul), Sem. Buk. Max. Moon 
with a halo: makfiche' pagar (mkchi' 
pkr), Seyii. Buk. ,l/(7.v. Full moon? 
(or moon with a halo?), {Mai. bulan 
bfirpayong): makfiche' m&ko' (mkchi 
mku'), Sem. Buk. Max. Menses: 
chan kSche' (chn kchi'), Scm. Buk. 
Max. \Sue kaosai ; Hin kachai 
(cachai) ; So mechiai ; and ? of. 
Khmer khe ; Kat, Suk kai (cai) ; 
Proons kai ; Lemet, Sedang khe ; 
Bahnar khey ; Stieng, Clirau khei ; 
Boloven, Kaseng, Halang khai ; 
Niahon kha ; Lave khei ; Alak 
kahai ; Central and Southern Nico- 
bar kah'a ; Teressa kahai ; IVa 
kyi, " moon."] 

162. Moon: chawen (/;-. cha-wenn), 
Sem. Plus [? cf. Lampong 'k&na.wa.n]. 

163. Moon : linta, Ke7ia. I. 

164. Moon : {a) bunthak, e.g. pangkah 
bunthSk, " half- moon," 5«. A. /. ; 
New moon : bintaSng (bintag'n), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; [? = S 438]. 
\Mal. bulan, "moon," and bulat, 
"round," are apparently both re- 
presented by a form which is 
(possibly) capable of explanation on 
quasi-Krama principles. But see 
R 191.] 

{b) Moon : bila" (bee-lah), Sak. Sel. 
Da. [? cf. Sibop blilek ; Ba Mali 
bSlilek ; Lirong belTleak ; Long 
Pokun bllTleak ; Punan Nibong 
bililSk, " moon."] 
(c) Moon : bulan, Sem. lur. 
And., Sem. Jur. Mar., Sem. 
lur. New. , Sem. Jur. Rob. , Sem. 
Beg. , Ben. New. , Bes. Malac. , 
Mantr. Malac. , Jak. Malac. ; 
(boulan), Sdm.\ bula^n? (bulatnah), 
U. Ind. ; bulen, Barok. Month : 
bulan, Ben. New. , Bland. K. 
Lang. ; sabulan, Sem. Beg. Bright 
moon : bulan jumpai (buln jumpai), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Lunar eclipse : 

bulan nveh, Serdng; bulan s^kit, 
Bedu. IL; bfilan tangkak rSman, 
Jak. Mad. ; kab hau bulan (kb hu 
buln), Sem. Pa. Max. ; bulan tClan 
rahu' (bulan telan rahuk), Galang ; 
biilan ggrheni (bfilan gekh^ni), 
Barok. End of the waning moon ; 
no moon : hab bulan (hab buln), 
Sern. Pa. Max. Half-moon : bulan 
beiang (buln blng), Sem. Pa. Max. 
IMal. bulan]. 
Moon : D 39 ; G 21. 

165. Moon, full (?) : per-as, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. 

166. Moon, new : hual, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
Crescent of moon : huan, Bes. A. I. 

167. Moon, new: nigmoi (nigh-moi), 
S'om. [cf O 27 ?]. 

168. Moonlight : L 74. 

169. More : dayop, S'om. How much : 
doyop, Sam. 

170. More: jere (djgrg), Som. More? 
again?: chfira (tchora), Sak. Ra. 
[This last is very doubtful ; it may 
mean "when it was daylight" : it 
is taken from De Morgan's very 
imperfect " text " of the Sakai Raya 
dialect.] 

171. More : nSn, Sak. U. Kam. Again: 
nen, Sak. U. Kam. [? Cf. Man 
nem [nim], " 3'et," " still " ; Tareng 
nge ; Sui nang ; Boloven nung, 
" again."] 

172. More : iSd, Sak. U. Kam. ; alo, 
e.g. jon alo, " give more," Bes. Sep. 
A. /. ; S 346. Again ; (any) 
more ; also (?) : alo, Bes. K^ Lang. 
[? = A 71]. [? Cf. Khmer los [los], 
" more."] 

173. More : lebe ; lebT (lobd ; lijbi) ; 
lobg, Sak. Ra. [Mai. lebeh]. 

174. More ; still : lagi (laghi ; lagi), 
Sai. Ra. [Mai. lagi]; A 27 ; M 
40 ; M 42 ; N 87. 

More, no : A 63 ; N 83. 

175. Moniing (Mai. pagi) : henlob {pr. 
henlobb), Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus ; 
hanlop, Sem. A'. A'e>i. ; hublo' 
chenmuih (hubluk chnmuih), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; po glap, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
lorn, Jak. Ba. Pa. To-morrow : ia- 
lok, Sen. CI. ; yah-lok. Sen. Cliffy ; 
herlop, Tan. U. Lang. ; yah heibp 
(yah h6-lerp). Sen. Cliff. ; yahelep", 
Darat ; ya helek (ya helekh) ; lub, 
Serau; kon-lot ? Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Early : tengkalom (t'ngkalom^. 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Early in the 
morning : hobelbl^ng (hSr-be-lSrk'^), 
Sen. Cliff. ; heblukn, Serau. Day 
after to - morrow {Mai. lusa) : 

662 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

yahalupi, Serau [or TeinbiV^. [Cf. 
Moil phalaing-yeh [phalhang-yah], 
" first dawn of day."] 

176. Morning: supol? (subol), Sak. 
Kor. Gh. Early morning : selupo 
{sd\0MY'0),Sdm.\ pohupu(pohoupou), 
Sak. Ra. To - morrow morning : 
s6lupo - his (soloupo - his), Som. ; 
hupo ; hupul (houpo, houpoul), 
Sak. Ra. 

\Tj. Morning [Mai. pagi-pagi) : gaglh, 
Sem. Beg. ; pagi pagi (paggi paggi), 
Ben. New. To - morrow : pagi, 
Se?n. U. Sel. \Mal. pagi]. 
Morning: C 154; D 33 ; D 42, 

43- 

178. Morning, to-morrow : siakal, Sak. 
Kerb. To - morrow : kal, Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. ; yakal (jakal), Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; yakal, Sak. Br. Low, 
Sak. Croix. ; biakal, Tembi. Day 
after to-morrow {Mai. lusa) : yakal, 
Tembi. 

179. Morrow : {a) kisam ; nisilm ; 
minsdm ; teng-sham, Bes. A. I. \ 
tangsum, Ben. New. To-morrow : 
nisobm, Bes. Her. ; nisom (nee- 
some), Sak. Sel. Da. ; nisum, Bick. 
U. Lang. Early {Mai. pagi-pagi) : 
tengsam or tengham, Bes. K. L. 
Yesterday : langsom (langsome), 
Sak. Sel. Da. [? Cf. Selurtg 
tsitsun (tseetsoon), "to-morrow."] 
{b) Morrow : iso'^ng, Bes. A. /. 
To - morrow : isok, Jak. Malac. ; 
bengsak (bengsok), Kcna. L WTien : 
isok, Mantr. Malac. [doubtful, 
probably wrong] \JMal. esok, 
besok]. 

Morning-star : S 436. 

Morrow: M 175-179. 
179A. Morsel; remnant: susa', Sem. 

Pa. Max. {Mai. sisa] ; T 33. 
1791). Mortar {Mai. 16song) : guul, 

Tembi ; tergul, Serau [? cf. H 113]. 

180. Mosquito {Mai. nyamok) : {a) 
ke-mit, Se?t. Cliff. ; kc-mit, Sen. 
Cl.\ kSmot, Pang. U. A ring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; kamet, Sak. 
Sung.; kemit", Tembi, Jelai; kCmun, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; kamos, Sak. Sel. 
Da. ; kumus, Rasa ; kemus, Bcdu. 
/., Bedit. IL, Mantr. Malac. 
Mosquito ; sandfly : kemit", Sak. 
Em. Kill that mosquito : pak 
kemet he'i, Jelai. 

{b) Mosquito : kcbok, Bes. Sep. 
A. L\ kSbo' (kbu'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
keba, Jies. Malac. Sandfly {Mai. 
agas) : kC-bikn/'kC-bil', Sem. Kedah ; 
kfibo' (kbu'), Sejn. Buk. Max. 

{c) Mosquito : sabet, Setn. Per. ; 
sfibet, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; seb^t, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; sebit (cebit). Tan. U. 
Lang. ; sSbik (iobik), Som. ; seb6g, 
Sak. Croix ; sebeg, Sak. Br. Low ; 
sSbeng (sbing), Sc7n. Buk. Max. ; 
(sben), Sem. Ij. ; (sobeng), Sem. 
U. Sel. ; sSm6n, Jak. Malac. ; 
sSmon, Serting. Mosquito ; sand- 
fly {Mai. agas) : s6bit", Serau ? or 
7V/«i5/(?);soit", Tembi. Gnat:sewedn 
(sewed'n), Sem. K. Ken. Sandfly 
{Mai. agas) : sfebeng, Patig. U. 
A ring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
sebit^i, Jelai ; ch6-bit. Sen. Cliff. 
[Mon gSmit ; Khmer mus ; Stieng 
m6e ; Annam muoi ; Bahnar 
shomech (.xomech) ; Chrdu moch, 
" mosquito. "] 

181. Mosquito : gatao (ghatao), Sak. 
Kerb. 

182. Mosquito: rengit, Jak. Ba. Pa. ; 
rengit, Jak. Mad. ; rgngit, Jak. 
Semb. ; (rengit), /a^. Lent. ; renget, 
Galang; tgnget (teng^^^t), Kena. /. 
Sandfly ( Mai. agas ) : tfinget ( t6ng6°t ), 
Kena. I. \Iranun ranggit, "mos- 
quito "; Mai., Achiti. rengit (a kind 
of small sandfly).] 

183. Mosquito: pfihorong (p'hdrong), 
Pant. Kap. Mad. Fly ; horsefly : 
pShorong (p'horong). Pant. Kap. 
Joh. 

184. Mosquito : agas, Bes. Her. Sand- 
fly {Mai. agas) : agas, Bes. Her. ; 
agem, Bedu. //. [J/a/. agas, 
" sandfly "]. 

185. Mosquito: namu? (nam6u), Sak. 
Ra. [Mai. nyamok] ; F 200 ; S 30. 
MosQUiTO-larvae : F 169. 

1 85 A. Mosquito-net; mosquito-curtain: 
klamu, Jelai [Mai. kglambu]. 

186. Moss : topo (to-p6), Sak. Kerb. 
[?Cf. Central Nicobar pu\, "moss."] 

187. Moss : tosil (to-sil), Sak. A'erb. 

188. Moss : lahem (lehem), Sak. Ra. 
[M 186-188, especially the last, are 
doubtful, as the Malay equivalent is 
wrongly given lembut (lombout), 
which means "soft." With M 188 
cf. S 334; "moss" in Malay is 
lumut.] 

Moth : B 482. 

189. Mother: ong (oeng), Sak. Br. 
Low (eung), Sak. Croix; (ongh), 
Sak. Kerb. ; ngiong, Sak. Jer. ; 
kgniing, Sak. U. Kam. Parents : 
kfiniing - m^niing, Sak. U. Kam. 
[? Cf. Bahnar i6ng, "mother"; 
" female that has borne young."] 

190. Mother : ggndek (ghendek), Bes. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

663 

Bell. ; gade', ggnde', Bes. Sep. A. /. ; 
gende', Bes. K. Lang. ; gadeh, 
Buk. U. Lang. , Bes. K. Lang. ; 
gadek, Bes. Bell. ; gidik, Bes. Her. , 
Bed. Chiang; gadi, Bes. Malac. ; 
W 30 ; ga - dok, Sak. Sel. Da. ; 
gado, U. Ind. ; ido ? (i-der), Sak. 
Guai. Mother - in - law : gadi' 
(gadik), Bes. Her. ; F 220 ; H 15 
[? cf. F 63 ; G 90]. 

191. Mother: hapet, R'ena. /. , Kcna. 
IL 

192. Mother : bok or bo', Sem. 
Jarum. Sem. Plus ; bo', Sem. Plus; 
bi\', Pang. Belimb. ; bo' (bu'). Sent. 
Pa. Max. ; boh? or b5k? (b5kh), 
Tembi ; bo, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; bo, 
S'om., Sak. Kerb. ; boh, Sem. Jur. 
And., Sem. Jur. New., Sem. Jur. 
Rob., Tetn. CI. ; hin {bin), Jekehr; 
bSh, Sem. Beg. ; ba, Ben. New. ; 
bii (bii), U. Pal. ; H 14 ; O 23. 
Aunt (Mai. mak sudara) : bo'. 
Pang. U.Aring; bo avva (b6-aoua), 
Soin. Thumb: tab6? (dab6), 5ew. 
A'. Ken. ; tabok°, Tembi,; F 
220. [These words may possibly 
be ultimately related to Mai. ibu ; 
M 19s : but words of relationship 
are often so similar in different 
languages that the inference from 
similarity of form is almost worth- 
less ; ? cf. F 61.] 

193. Mother : nak (/r. na'), Seyn. 
Kedah ; nak, Sem. Klapr. ; na', 
Pajig. U.Aring; na, Sem. Per.; na', 
Kerbat; na (n'), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
nah, U. Kel. ; ngah, Sem. U. Sel. ; 
gna., Pang. Jalor ; nda' ; 'nd&', (cp. 
gnda' Semang (Mai. colloq. phrase), 
also Sndok S6mang), Pa?ig. K. 
Aring; nan. Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal, ; nan, Lebir; nau, U. Pat. ; 
nyil? (\\\y6x'), Po-Klo. Aunt: ngah, 
Temiang ; Ina' (inak), Serting, 
Blan. Retn., Ment. Her. L ; (inak), 
Bes. Songs, Bedu. IL , Mant. Bar. ; 
ena' (enak), Bes. Songs. Younger 
aunt : Ina' (inak), Ment. Her. IL 
Mother-in-law: nya? (niyor), Po- 
Klo ; W 104. \Sulii inak ; Iranun 
ina; Bulud Opie ina; Melano Dayak, 
Nias, Tagbeniia ina ; Bukutaii 
Dayak inai ; Balau Dayak indai ; 
Cham inb, "mother" (cf. Mai. 
induk) ; F 132 ; but cf. also Mon 
inai [inaai] ; Bahnar na, "aunt" 
(elder than the parent); and5«^aneu 
(aneou) ; Lemet ne, ni, " mother."] 

194. Mother : mak, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Ked. And., Sem. Ked. New., 

Sem. Ked. Rob. , Serting, Ment. 
Her. I. ; ma' Mantr. Malac. ; ma, 
Ben. Neiv. ; ma. Or. Trang ; moi 
(mt-r-i), U. Tem. ; m6i, Bedu. IL ; 
(moi), Mantr. Bor. ; moi, Bedu. III. , 
Mantr. Malac, Jak. Malac; mboi, 
Ment. Her. II. ; miii, Blan. Rem. ; 
moi? (mayi), Ben. New. ; moi? 
(moie), Rasa ; me' ? (mek), Sak. 
Sung.; mek", Jelai ; anieng, Serau; 
n\&. Sen. CI. ; ama (am6), Sak. 
Ra. ; ame', Sak. U. Kam^. ; time, 
Sak. Martin ; ame, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; 
ameh. Tan. U. Lang. Mama : 
mek, Sem. Klapr. Mother-in-law : 
mak, Seiiing; moi, Bedu. II., 
Bedu. III. Adopted mother ; 
foster mother : mak angkat, 
Serau. Aunt (Mai. ma' sudara): 
mak, Se7n. Jarum, Sem. Plus. 
Aunt: amai. Bed. Chiang; amai, 
Jak. Ba. Pa. ; moi tuha' (moi 
tuhak), Bedu. I L, Bedu. III. Elder 
aunt : ma' tuha' (mak tuhak), Ment. 
Her. II. [Mai. tuha, "old"; ma', 
6mak, "mother."] Aunt: moi 
muda' ([moi] mudak), Bedu. 
IL ; ma' - ano' (mak - aneuk), 
Galang; ma' suderhe(mak sudSkhS), 
Barok. Woman : amai. Pal. ; 
amai (amei), Jak. Mad. ; moi, 
Buk. U. Lang. [All these words are 
no doubt ultimately connected, and 
it is practically impossible to separate 
the aboriginal forms into Mon- 
Annam and Malayan. Tentatively 
it may be suggested that those which 
have the vowels e and oi, especially 
the Sakai and Bgsisi forms, are 
probably to be classed more with 
the Mon-Annam, while the forms in 
a and ai are closer to the Malayan ; 
but there can hardly be any certainty 
in the matter. Mon mi ; Khtner 
m§ ; Stieng mei ; Samri, Par min 
(minh) ; Cuoi, Rodi mik (mic) ; 
Cancho amik (amic) ; Phnong x\\€ ; 
Ch>-i!ai me (mes) ; Prou mok (moc) ; 
Bahnar me (mfi) ; Annam me ; 
Chong xiwxh (muny) ; Huei, Ka 
mai ; Chrau mS ; Kuy Dek may ; 
Churu vi\h ; Radaih ml ; Kha Bi 
ami ; Boloven mo ; Mi ma ; Alak 
ma ; Lave, Kaseng, Sedang me ; 
Xong ming ; Suk, Jarai mi ; Sui 
mbe ; Sue mpe ; So mpi ; cf. Mai. 
emak ; mak, "mother."] 
195. Mother : ibu bisan, Pa7it. Kap. 
Joh. ; F 220 [Mai. ibu] ; F 132 ; 
G 86 ; O23; \V131A. Mother of 
first-born child : F 132. 

664 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Mother-in-law : B 419 ; F 61 ; 

G S6 ; L 21-24 ; -^I 19*^ ; ^^ i93i 

194. 

Motion, to have a : S 468. 

Motive : C 60. 

196. Mottled : bechang, Bcs. Songs. 
Mound: A 116; H loi. 
Mountain : H 84-100 ; S 465. 

196A. Mountain chain or range : daka, 

Son. K. Ken. 
196B. Mourn, to : dalal, Setn. K. Ken. 

Mouse ■. M 136 ; R 32-35. 

197. Mouse, small jungle- : 16bong, 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. 
Mouse-deer: D 75 ; D 81-88. 

198. Moustache : misei (missei), Som. ; 
bisiii (bissei), Sak. Ka. Beard : 
misai (missei), Sevi. K. Ken. [A/a/. 
misai] ; H i, 2 ; M 203. 

199. Mouth: {a) haeng ^haeng), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; haing (hding? or 
honing?), Sem. Pa. Max. ; hang, 
Pang. J alar; hayn. Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; hayn (/r. hafi), Pang. 
U. A ring ; hayn or han {pr. haynn), 
Sem. Kedah ; han [pr. haynn), Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus ; hein, Sem. U. 
Sel. ; hain, Sem. Ken. ; ha^^ (han'), 
U. Pat. ; han, Lebir; an, Sem. Klapr. ; 
P 18. To gape : ang, Bes. Sep. 
Hole: bhayang, Pang. K. Aring \ 
hoSng (hog'n), Sem. K. Ken. ; hoi, 
hal, Serau. Hole ; cavity : hayang. 
Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam. 
Cave : hoSng (hog'n), Sem. K. Ken. 
Tooth: han, Kerbat ; ha'' (han'), 
U. Kel. ; han, Pang. U. Aring; 
tulang han, Lebir. Top row of 
teeth : hayn chang-kerpeng, Sem. 
Skeat ; A 5. Bottom row of teeth : 
hayn chang-kiyoni, Sem. Skeat; 
B 165 [?cf. F i'; H 107]. 

{b) Mouth: nyiagn? (niangn), Som.; 
nyiak? (niak), Sak. Kerb. ; nyak, 
Sak. Tan. Ram. ; nyak (njank or 
niank), Sak. Kor. Gb. ; na-ag 
(naag), Sak. Br. Low; nyag, Tembi; 
nyung, Sak. U. Kam. ; minyun, 
Tembi. Hole in a flute : nSnag" 
(n'naghn), Sem. Stev. 
{c) Mouth : re-ang, Keiia. //. ; cf. 
H 107. \Chong raneng ; Niah'on 
mruen, " mouth."] 

200. Mouth : johap (jd'hop), Kena. /. 
f? = M 199]. 

2or. Mouth : nyiui (nyiuy), Sak. U. 
Kam. ; nyinyoi, Jelai ; minyoi, 
Darat ; minyOr ? (minjor), Sak. 
Martin; nyunyo neh ? (nunjoneh). 
Tan. U. Lang. Lip : ninyoi, 
Serau ; beng ninyoi, Jelai ; C 84. 

Lips : nyinyoi, Sak. U. Bert. ; 
ingot, Ben. New. ; H 2 [ ? = 
M 199]. 

202. Mouth: ban, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Ked. And., Sem. Ked. New., 
Sem. Ked. Rob. , Sem. Klapr. ; 
(bani), Sem. Craw. Gram. ; bong, 
Bes. Bell.; 'm-pak, Sak. Blanj. 
Sru. ; empakii, Serau ; paling, 
Bes. Sep. A. /. ; pagn, Bes. 
Her. ; pa'ng, Bes. Malac. ; p9.ng, 
Buk. U. Lang.; pang, 5f(f. Chiong; 
pahen, Sak. Sel. Da. Cheek : 
bang (barng), Sem. Stev. Face : 
pahang, Sak. Sel. Da. Talkative : 
'nom pang, Bes. Sep. ; M 45. [Mon 
paing [pang] ; Central and Chowra 
Nicobar oal - fang ; Teressa afang ; 
Phnong ambong, "mouth"; cf. 
B 272. The Andamanese equiva- 
lents, Biada aka bang-da ; Kede 
ta pong, etc., are strangeh' similar.] 

203. Mouth : lanud, Sem. Beg. ; 
lanud, Ben. New. ; t6-nut, U. 
Cher. ; (tenut), Sem. Jur. And., 
Sem. Jur. Rob. ; (temut), Sem. 
Jur. New. ; teno*, Sem. Martin ; 
ke-nut, U. Tem. ; snut, Or. Hu. 
Joh. IL ; nut, U. Ind. ; tinim, U. 
Kel. ; tenin, Sem. K. Ken. Lip 
(Mai. bibir) : kgto tfinSt (kg-tSr 
te-nert), Kerbat; tgnut, Sem. Kedah; 
tfinoyt. Pang. U. Aring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; S 310. Lower 
lip : tSnud haim (tnud haim), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; tenin kiol*m (tenin- 
kiob'n), Sem. K. Ken. Upper lip : 
tfnud hatoh (tnud hatuh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; kfito' tfinud (ktu' tnud), Sem. 
Buk. il/fl.v. ; tenin kipaSng? (tenin 
gibag'n), Setn. K. Ken. ; A 5. Lips : 
tenin, Sem. K. Ken. Moustache : 
tgnut, Pang. Jalor. Snout of 
animals : tfnud (tnud), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; H I. [? Cf. Khmus thno, 
" mouth."] 

204. Mouth : pengachap, Ben. New. 
[? Mai. uchap, " to speak "]. 

205. Mouth : mulo'. Pang. Belimb. ; 
mulut, Mantr. Malac. ; (moulout), 
.Sak. Ra. ; mil - ut, Jak. Malac. 
\Mal. mulut] ; H 109 ; L 105 ; 
M 61 ; T 168. 

206. Mouth of river : ch6-ba', Sen. 
Cliff. ; temba', Bes. A. I., e.g. 
tembil' doo heram = il/fl/. Kuala 
Ayer Itam, Bes. A. /. Mouth of 
large river ; mouth of small river : 
cheba (tchtiba), Sak. Ra. ; W 30. 
[? Cf. Bahnar bah, "mouth of 
river. "] 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

665 

207. Mouth of river : kuala (kualng 
(?rkual'?), Sem. Pa. Max. \Mal. 
kuala] ; R 149, 150 ; W 30. 

208. Mouth, to keep in the (like a 
quid) : kamftm (kamm), Scm. link. 
Max. [Ma/. kC-mam]. 

209. Move, to [transitive) (to push = 
Mai. sorong) : Jul, Sem. Kedah ; 
L 119 ; T 3. 

210. Move, to [Mai. bfirgerak) : yin- 
yok (yin-y6rk), Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
To move (remove) : hi at, Sak. U. 
Kam. 

211. Move to, to: 'lor, Bes. Songs 
[? cf. A/al. undor]. 

212. Move, to: gia', Sem. Fa. Max. ; 
giak, Sem. Buk. Max. To rock to 
and fro : gia', Seyn. Pa. Max. \_Mal. 
ggrak]. 

Much : M 40-46 ; M 169 ; W 73 ; 
W 77-79. 

213. Mucus; phlegm: kfthak (khak), 
Sern. Buk. Max. Phlegm : kerhak, 
Sak. U. Bert. [Mai. kahak ; dahak]; 
N 98. 

214. Mud (Mai. lumpur) : na-pag (/;-. 
na-pagg), Sem. /arum, Sem. Plus ; 
lebak", Temii. 

215. Mud ; dirt : latak, Som.. Mud ; 
slime : latak, Som. Muddy : luchar- 
luchar, Bes. Sougs. Mud (Mai. 
lumpur) : chicha' or chichak, Sem. 
Kedah [? cf. D 115 and W 75]. 

216. Mud: s6keni? (skkni' ?), Scm. Pa. 
Max. 

217. Mud : paya' (payak), Sak. U. 
Kam. ; payah, Serau. Mud ; dirt : 
paya (paya), Sak. Kerb. Mud ; 
slime : paya (paya), Sak. Kerb. 
Wet ricefield (Mai. sawah) : paya' 
(payak), Teiiihi. [Mai. paya, 
" swamp."] 

218. Mud; dirt: lumpor (loumpor), 
Sak. Ra. Mud ; slime : lumpor 
(loumpor), Sak. Ra. [Mai. lumpor]; 
S 528. 

Mudcrab : P 208. 

Muddy : M 215 ; W 30 ; W 36-38. 

Multiply, to : S 541. 

Murder : C 296 ; D 48 ; D 50. 

Murder, to : K 28, 29. 

219. Muscle (Mai. urat) : so-sa, Sem. 
Kedah; sa.-so , Sem. Plus. Muscles; 
nerves ; veins (Mai. urat) : sa'so' 
(sa'su'), Sevi. Buk. Max. ; so'so' 
(su'su'), Sem. Pa. Max. Biceps 
muscle (Mai. kuching - kuching), 
SO-S&', Sefn. Kedah, Sem. Jarum. 
Strong: soso' (so'so'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; sSsoh, Setn. Beg. Muscles 
of the loins (Alal. urat buah 

pinggang): so'so' huah (su'su' huah), 
Sem. Pa. Alax. ; sa'so' pinggftng 
(sa'suk pingkng), Sem. Buk. Max. 
i'enis? (Mai. urat kinching) : sa'so' 
keiiom (sa'suk knum), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; so'so' kenam (su'su' knm), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Veins (of wrist) 
(Mai. urat nadi) : sa-so' chas, Se^n. 
Plus. Arteries ; blood - vessels : 
sa'so' tajo' (sa'su taju'), .SVw. Buk. 
Max. ; so'so' kaeng (susu kaing), 
Se7n. Pa. Max. [Cf. Khmer sasay 
[sftsey], "thread," "nerve," "vein."] 
Mushroom : F 293. 

220. Music : lagii (lagou), Sihu. ; lago 
(lago), Sak. Ra. [Mai. lagu, 
" tune "] ; S 364. 

221. Ijamboo musical instrument : 
haihau (hi-how), Sem. Stev. 

222. Slit in the tube of the " hihow " : 
n/k-pek, Sem. Stev. 

223. Crosspiece in the "hihow" : tenuna 
(tenoonar), Sem.. Stev. 

224. Bamboo stringed musical instru- 
ment : banjeng, Bes. K. Lang. , 
Bes. Sep. 

225. Bamboo musical instrument : ding 
tengkhing, Bes. K. Lang. Strings of 
bamboo stringed musical instrument 
(banjeng) : kerante^ng (so called on 
account of resemblance to the 
' ' stick-insect " ?), Bes. Sep. Musical 
instrument (Mai. kgrantingo/'kerun- 
tong) : kuntong. Pang. U. A ring. 
Three - stringed lyre : kgranting, 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. Kind of 
guitar : kranti, Mantr. Bor. [Mai. 
kfiranting]. 

226. Musical instrument made of a 
bamboo joint with a strip of the skin 
raised to act as a string : krlm 
(kribm), Sem. Kedah. ¥\M\e(Mal. 
biola) : kropi^, Tembi [and Serau ?] 
kr&m, Seiau. Bamboo zither : 
krob, Senoi (Martin, Inlandstamme, 
p. 911). [Perhaps cf. Moii tra 
[draw] ; kr;l [grftw] ; Khmer tro 
[dra], "fiddle."] 

227. String of the "krlm" : harau, Sem. 
Kedah. 

228. Bamboo body of lyre : gungu, 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. 

229. Finger-pieces of lyre : balan, j1/(7///n 
Malac. Cha. 

230. Bamboo musical instruments (small 
size) : kentot, Bes. K . Lang. 

Musical instrument : M 221-230. 

Musical instrument, bridge of : 
P 100. 

MUSIC.-^L INSTRUMENT, Stick tO 

tighten strings of : S 450, 

666 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Musket : G 130. 
Musket-ball : S 466. 

231. Mustard, white {Mai. sgsawi 
puteh) : sesawi plltau (ssaui piltu), 
Sem. Buk. Max. \Mal. sfisawi]. 

232. Musty ; tainted [Mai. basi) : bari' 
(barik), Serau ; bariki, Jelai ; 
bibari, Darat. \Sund., Mangkasar, 
Batak, bari ; Biigis wari.] 
Mutilated : M 7. 

Mutter, to : M 85. 
Mythological persons : F 41 ; 
G 90. 

N 

1. Nail [e.g. of finger), {Mai. kuku) : 
chen-drul, Sen. Cliff. ; chendros {pr. 
chendross), Son. Plus ; chendros, 
Tembi ; chendnis, Darat ; chendruus, 
Serau, Jelai ; chSng - rfls, Sak. 
Blanj. Sw. ; chengros (chngros), 
Sak. Tan. Ram. ; chinros. Tan. U. 
Lang. ; chenyaus, Setn. Per. ; charos, 
Sak. Br. Low ; cheros (tsch^ros), 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; chSros, Sei-ting. 
Toe-nail: chgngros (chngros), Sak. 
U. Kam. Nails of fingers and toes : 
kenios, Sem. K. Ken. Second finger: 
chinriis? (chinroos), Tan. U. Lang. 

2. Nail : risik, Kena. /. [? Cf. Khmer 
krechak [krachak], "nail."] 

3. Nail: {a) teka (tka'), .Sfw. Pa. Max.; 
tekoh chas (tekoh chass), Sem. Ij.\ H 
14. Finger-nail : teka' ting (tka' ting) 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; tSka tong (tika tong) 
Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. New. 
(tiku tong), Sem. Jur. Rob. Fingers 
teka' tung (taka'h toong), Sem. Beg. 
H 15. Toe-nail : teka chan (tika 
chau), Sem. Jur. New. ; (tiku chan), 
Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Rob. Toe: 
tfika' chan (tak a'hchan), Sem. Beg. ; 
F 220. Nail of extra length : tSka' 
tong b5tut (tka' tung btut), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; H 15 ; L 130. 

{b) Nail : teiako' (tlaku'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; toloko, Sem. U. Sel. ; 
kulakut (koulakout), Sem. Klapr. 
Nail (of fingers or toes) : kelkok (kul- 
cock), Se7n. Ken.; kalko', Sem. Kedah, 
Pang. U. A ring. Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; kal-ko', Lebir, Kerbat ; S 239. 
Finger-nail: tClako' chas (tlaku' chas), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; kelka' chas, Sem. 
Kedah, Sem. Plus; kalkot chas (calcot 
chas), Sem. Stev. ; H 14. Toe-nail : 
kalkot chan (calcot chan), Sem. Stev. 
Border or edge of nails : sirat telako' 

(sirt tlaku'), Sem. Buk. Max. Claw 
{Mai. kuku) : kalko', ex. kalko' nyah 
{Mai. kuku rimau), "tiger's claw," 
Pang. U. A ring; {Mai. kuku; taji) : 
kglko' chan (klku' chn), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; F 220. 

{c) Nail : koklit, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
kokat (kokot), Bedu. III. ; kokat, 
Bes. Malac. ; kokot, Ment. Her. //. ; 
k6k6t, Bedu. II. ; kukut, Bes. Her. ; 
kilkut, Ment. Her. I. Toe-nail: kokot 
jo^ng, Bes. Sep. A. I.; F 220. Finger: 
kukat ; Ben. New. ; kok6n. Bed. 
Chiong. Hand : kokot, Jak. Malac. ; 
kok6t, Jak. Raff. ; kokut, Ben. New. ; 
kuko'. Tan. Sag. Palm of hand : 
tapak kokot, Bedu. II. 
{d) Nail (of finger or toe) : kuku, 
Mantr. Malac, Jak, Malac. [Mai. 
kuku]. [All these words are probably 
ultimately related together and to 
the Malayan forms. In some of the 
above the infix -el- is clearly present. 
Cf. Madur. kokot, "claw," "hoof"; 
Achin. kuku5t (koekoeSt), "hind foot 
of bullock " ; Selung kekoe, kekoee ; 
Cham kakau ; Radaih kau ; For- 
7nosa?t kalongkong ; Bulu, Bugis, 
Mangkasar kanuku ; Jav. {Krama 
Inggil) kenaka, "nail."] H 15; 
S 141 ; S 234 ; S 236. 

4. Nail {Mai. paku) : pementek (p'men- 
tek). Pant. Kap. J oh. [Cf. Mai. 
pantak, " to drive a pointed thing in."] 

4A. Nail : paku, Darat. Iron nail : 
b6si paku [J/a/. paku]. 

5. Naked {Mai. telanjang): jeligun, 
Pang. U. Aring; jeligun. Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. 

6. Naked : {a) chip-chip si-ha (tschip- 
tschip si-ha), Setn. K. Ken. ; G 42. 
{b) siloyt : Bes. Sep. A. I. 

7. Naked : kacho', Bes. Sep. A. I. [? cf. 
P 221]. 

8. Name : ken or kenn, ex. ma-ken? or 
ma-kenn? (.lA;/. apanamaini?=: "what 
(is the) name (of this?), " Pang. Belimb. ; 
ken-mah {pr. ken-mdhh), ex. mai-6' 
ken-mah met, "what is his (tjr your) 
name?" Sem. Jarum; kin-mdh, ex. 
allu kin-mah dek {Mai. apa nama ini), 
' ' what is this called ? " Pang. U. A ring ; 
k(5n-m3, ( kon-ma ) : ton-mo, Som. ; 
N 9 ; kgnon (konon), Sak. Kerb. 

9. Namic : ISmo (lomo), Sak. Kerb. ; 
5mo ; imo (im6 ; imo), Sak. Ra. ; 
imu', Sak. U. Kam. ; mu ; moh 
(mCrh), Se7i. Cliff. ; moh Serau. 
What is your name? jilu mu, Serau ; 
yun amin amoh (amogh), Kerdau ; 
N 8 ; W 77, 78. {Mon yniu (/;-. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

667 

ySmu?) ; Khmer chhniouh [jhmoh] ; 
Korku jijniu, juma, " name."] 

10. Namk : isik, Pant. Kap. Joh. [? cf. 
V 170] ; S 359. 

11. Narrow : perting, Bes. Songs. 

12. N. ARROW : {a) kepid, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. 

[b) s6mpet, Mantr. Malac. [.1/a/. 
sfimpit]. 

13. Narrow : suntog, Pang. U. Aring 
[cf. Mai. suntoh, "narrow": so in 
original, the word is not in my dic- 
tionaries ; cf. also Khmer sdong 
[stiJng], "slender"]; F 29 ; N 19; 
S 280. 

Nausea : V 22-24. 

14. Navel : bius (biuss), Pang. lalor. 

15. Navel : dut, Sent. Plus. 

16. Navel : lus, Sem. Pa. Max. , Sem. 
Buk. Max.\ lus, Sem. Kedah; (loos), 
Se7n. Stev. Navel ; centre : lus, 
Sem. Pa. Max. Navel-string; um- 
bilical cord: tale'? lus (nali' Plus), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; R 183. [? Cf. 
Mon ponglot [pongluit], or ponglaik 
[pongluik], " navel "]. 

17. Navel: pa-ring, U. 7em.\ pa'ring, 
U. Cher. ; panisng? (banig'n), Sem. 
K. Ken. ; puni', Bes. A. I. 

18. Navel: {a) seg, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal., Lebir; shok. Sen. CI.; shwftg, 
Temhl ; soog, Serau ; sok"! Jelai, 
Darat. Belly : sig (sigh), Sak. Pa. 
Mons veneris : set (seit or set), Sem. 
Pa. A/ax. Pudendum muliebre : set, 
Sem. Stev. ; [F 170 is probably a 
distinct word]. \Khmer phchet 
[phchit], "navel"; but cf. also 
Khmer s6k [suk] ; Mon suk, ' ' pla- 
centa "; Moil kftsuk, tS.w suk, " navel- 
string."] 

(b) Navel ; centre : puset ( pusit ), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Whorl of hair : 
puset (pusit), Setn. Buk. Max. ; pusa' 
(pusa'j, Sem. Pa. Max. [Mai. 
pusat ; but the meaning ' ' whorl of 
hair" is that of Mai. pusaran.] 
[These words, both Mon-Annam and 
^[alayan, appear to be ultimately 
related, and probably they bear some 
relation to the Malay words meaning 
"to turn," pusar (L 90), putar, 
pusing. ] 
N.wel : J 7. 
Navel-string : N 42. 

19. Near [Mai. dgkat ) : p6d-ah or 
ped-oh, Sem.. Plus ; pSd-oh, Sem. 
J arum ; p6d6h, Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; pCdbh 
(p6-dgrh), Lebir, Kerbat ; dildai ; 
da-dai, Sem. K. Ken. Near or 

close : pedoh or pedohh. Pang. K. 
Aring; pC-dih, Tembi. Near; close 
to ; in contact with : duih, Sem. Pa. 
Max. Narrow (?) : pCdi' ? (pdik?), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [M 100 is similar in 
form and perhaps related. ? Cf 
Stieng x\dio\\, doh, "near."] 

20. Near; close to: dapa' (dpa', dapa'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Close ; in contact 
with : dapa', Sem. Buk. Max. 

21. Near : ming, Bes. Bell., Bes. Songs; 
pamil^ng ; 'mil^ng, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
Quite near : paming, Bes. Songs 
[? cf. C 84]. 

22. Near : d6ket, Mantr. Malac. 
Neighbour : dekat, Tembi [Mai. 
dekat]; B153; I 14; S198; S 280. 
Neat : C 142. 

23. Neck: (a) ngot, Sem. Beg., Ben. 
A'eii'. ; ngud. Pang. U. AHng, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Edge : 
ngut, Sem. Pa. Max. ; H i. [? Cf 
Stien^ ngun, "nape of neck" ; see 
N 27O 

{b) Neck : leng^k, Serting ; lingeh, 
Tan. U. Lang. Adam's apple (in 
the throat) : laguk, Serau. \Teressa 
en - linga ; Central Nicobar ong- 
langa; Andamanese Puchikwarlbngo- 
da ; Chariar ot - longo, "neck," 
are probably chance resemblances. ] 
(c) Neck: bagong, Kena. I. ; marokn, 
U. Ind. Throat: ggrgok? (girgok), 
Tan. U. Lang. Necklace {Mai. 
tali leher) [generally of a creeper 
called tentdm ; G 25] : negog, Sem. 
Plus. Necklace made of fruit-seed : 
gog, Sem. K. Ken. Apple of throat 
( Mai. tekum ) : prenggong, Sem. 
Jarum; prenggong (/r. prenggoSng), 
Sem. Plus. [? Cf. Batak [Dairi) 
bSrgfing ; Su?id. bohbng ; Bal. baong. 
But there appear to be several dis- 
tinct words in this paragraph.] 

24. Neck ( Mai. leher ) : ta-bog {pr. 
ta-bogg), Sem. Kedah ; tabok, Sem. 
Stev. ; tebak (tbak), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
S 186, 187 ; tabzan, Ben. iVew. 
[This last form is doubtless corrupt; 

qucere taboan ?] 

25. Neck : amih (?), Pang. Belimb. 
Above ; on top : amik, Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

26. Neck : kua', Sak. Tan. Pam. ; kua 
['koMa.), Som. Neck; throat: sakog? 
(sagog), Se7n. K. Ken. [? = N 23]. 
Throat: hakkok ? (hkkuh?), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; ke6, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
Adam's apple (in the throat) : kowok, 
Tembi. Laryn.x : s6ngko' (sngku'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [Mon kd' [kia] ; 

668 

COMPA RA TI VE VOCABULARY OF 

Khmer ka ; Stieng kou ; Bahnar 
ako ; Annam ko; Churn k6 ; ? cf. 
Halang takue ; Jarai tokoi ; Cham 
takuei ; Achin. takug ; cf. Siam kli;l, 
" neck."] 

27. Neck : tangiin, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
tangen? (tangn), Sak. Ra. Nape 
of neck [Mai. tgngkok) : tangbn, 
Tembi. Throat {Mai. kerongkong) : 
matung {pr. matuSng ) ngud, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; N 23. \_Stteng 
ngun, " nape of neck."] 

28. Neck : gloh (gloh), Sak. Kerb. 
Gullet : kalar, Sem. K. Ken. Throat : 
giilo (ghfelo), Sak. Ra. Adam's apple : 
kalar-sakog? (kalar-sagog), Sem. K. 
Ken. ; N 26 or N 23 ? 

29. Neck: teng-kog (/;-. tengkogg), 
Sem. Jarnm ; tengkok (tenkok), 
U. Kel. ; tengkAk, Serau ; tengkop", 
Jelai; tenkop, Dai-at; jaSng tengkok? 
(djag'n denkok), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
B 336 \Mal. tengkok]. 

30. Neck : pSnggsoPm ? or peng6s5p ? 
(p'ng'somp), Pant. Kap. Joh. 

31. Neck: leher, Mantr. Malac, Jak. 
Malac. [.1/a/. leher]. 

32. Neck, back of the : jengkeng, 
Kena I. ; B 146 ; H i. 

33. Necklace [Mai. tali leher) : beg [pr. 
begg), (generally of a creeper called 
tentam, Mai. urat batu), Sem. Kedah. 
[/arfl/ ba.k, "necklace."] 

34. Necklace: benghiir (beng-hair), 
Sem. Stev. 

35. Necklace: menulang (menoolang), 
Sem. Stev. 

36. Necklace: gogo", Bes. Sep. [cf. Mai. 
agok]. 

37. Necklace : d6k6h, Bcdii. II. ; 
dokoh, Serting \Mal. dokoh] ; N 23; 
R 133 ; T 170 ; and see B 96-99. 

38. Needle : jarub (djarub), Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; jarup (djaroup), Som. ; jariim 
(djaroum), Sak. Kerb., Sak. Ra.; 
jarup", Serau. To sew : jarup", 
Tembi, Serau ? \_Mal. jarum, 
" needle " ; B 41.] 

39. Negrito [Mai. SGmang or Pangan) : 
The wild Semangs are called Pie hop 
(/;-. almost F^la) ; F 231. They are 
said never to eat rice or see strangers, 
and live in Ulu Plus and Ulu 
Ayer Temengor, North Perak, Sem. 
Kedah. Name of a Sfiniang deity : 
Pi2le (P'lay), Sem. Stev. 
XF.fjRiTo : M 24, 25. 
Nsighbour : N 22 ; S 198. 

40. N6nggiri (districtin South Kelantan): 
Brok, Sen. Cliff. [It is inhabited 
by Sakai tril^es, whom the other 

Sakais call S6noi Brok. Recent 
estimates, possibly exaggerated, have 
put the numbers of the Sakais in- 
habiting this single district as high 
as 10,000. No specimens of their 
dialect are at present on record.] 

41. Nephew : temun (tomoun), Som. ; 
C 102. \_Bahnar mon ; Khmer 
kemuoi [kmuoy] ; Mon kmin ; Cham 
kamiioch, kamiion, kamiibn; Radaih 
mu6n; KhaBi mon, moni, "nephew," 
" niece" ; Stieng mon " nephews " ; 
Achin. kSmun agam, "nephew"; 
Kgmun inong, "niece."] 

Nerve : M 219. 

42. Nest : [a] sam, Sem. Jur. And. ; 
Sem. Jur. New. (s'am), Sem. Jur. 
Rob. ; sim (sm) , Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
sum, Sem. Buk. Max. ; enso^m 
(ensob'n), Sem. K. Ken. ; gesum, 
Bes. K. L. ; k6-sun, Bera. Bee's- 
nest : slm lueh (sm luih), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; sum lueh (sum luih), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Spider's web : sS,m laba- 
laba (sm laba''^), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
sum pele' (sum pli'), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Afterbirth ; placenta [Mai. uri 
kechil): silm (sm), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
[Mai. uri tfimbuni): s^m (sm), 
Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk Max. 
Skin of placenta ? [Mul. sarong 
bersarong) : sum. Son. Pa. Max., 
Sem. Buk. Max. Navel-string ; um- 
bilical cord : tali sftm (tali sm), Sem. 
Buk. A/ax. ; R 183. Closely com- 
pact ; closely interwoven (?) : sim 
(sm), Sem. Pa. Max. ; sum, Sem. 
Buk. Max. Interwoven like a 
nest (?) : sum, Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
mumsam (mumsm), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[Stieng chuom ; Chrdu, 6nsh5m 
(n'xom), " bird's nest."] 

[b) Nest : charong, Ben. New. ; sdrak 
or sarag, Sak. Kor. Gb. Arrow 
cases in blowpipe quiver : saran, 
Sak. Ra. Crownlike arrangement 
in blowpipe quiver (to keep the 
wadding in its place) : sarang selmoil 
( saran se\moil ), Sak. Ra. [ Mai. 
sarang]. [Some of these words seem to 
represent sarong rather than sarang.} 

43. Net, casting-: pgnibar (p'nibar). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. [Mai. tebar, "to 
cast (a net)."] 

44. Net : jala', Sak. U. Kam. ; jala, 
Serau ; [Mai. jala]. To fish with a 
net : F 150. 

45. Nettle (spec. Mai. jfilatang gajah): 
kib, Sem. Stev. 

46. Nettle (spec. Mai. j61atang 
gajah) : wap, Sem. Stev. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

669 

Never : F 120 ; N 67 ; N 69-71. 
Never mind : N 66 ; N 69. 

47. New {Mill, baharu): ka-bil {pr. 
ka-bill), Sent. Kedah. 

48. New: ka'un [pr. ka-unn) ? Son. 
Plus. 

49. New : ri' or rik, Pang. U. Aiing, 
Pang. Sam, Pa?ig. Gal. ; ru' or ri", 
(? = rek or rik), Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. Newly (recently) : areh, Pes. 
Sep. Now: areh nong, Bes. Malac; 
N 108. [? Cf. Bahnar haroi (haray) ; 
harei, harey, "now."] 

50. New: pa-h6, Sdm.\ p^ (poe or 
pae), Sak. Ra. ; pai Sen. Cliff. ; 
pai, Sak. Plus. Cliff., San. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; nipai, Bes. K. Lang. ; 'mpai 
e.g. h6ndi 'mpai, "new clothes," 
Bes. Sep. ; pgtipai (ptipai), Sak. 
Kerb. Haru tree (probably Hibiscus 
tiliaceus or Thespesia populnea ) : 
6m pai, Bes. Songs. Fresh (new) : bai 
or bei, Sak. Kor. Gb. Eldest of a 
family (J/a/. sulong) : pai. Sen. Cliff. 
Formerly; past (J/a/. sudah): iS-pai, 
Sen. Cliff. Lately : pai, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. , Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Recently ; 
just: pai, Tetn. CI., Sen. CI., Sak. 
Blanj. CI. , Sak. Slim. [? Cf. Lam- 
pong ampai, "new." It is doubtful 
whether these words are all con- 
nected. ] 

51. New : nte' (nte"k), Kena. L Just 
now; gntai (untai) ; tai, Mant. Bor.\ 
tai, Bes. Songs. Now : entai, Bedu. 
I., Bedu. IL; 'ntai, Mantr. Malac; 
tai, Mantr. Cast. Long ago ; the 
past {Mai. dahulu kala) : tfimai, 
Bes. K. L. Once ( — formerly ) : tfimai , 
Bes. Sep. A. L The past : tfimai- 
temai, Bes. Sep. A. L Since days 
of old: tfimai-temai, Bes. Songs. 
Eldest child ; first-born ; eldest of a 
family : tai, Sak. Plus Cliff. [It is 
doubtful whether these are all con- 
nected.] 

52. New : bai}ai (baijii), Se/n. K. Ken. 
New; to renew : bayu' (baiu"), Se7n. 
Buk. Max. ; bu' [?], Sem. Pa. 
Max. Just now ; recently : bayu' 
(baiu'), Sem. Buk. Max. News ; 
rumour: po' bah (pu' bah), Se^n. Pa. 
Max. [Mai. baharu] ; B 153. 

53. News : he-ap, e.g. jelbk (jelSrk) 
he-ap, "what is the news?" or "how 
do you do?" Sen. Cliff.; W 77 
[? = S 263]. 

54. News : habar (hubbur), Sak. J. 
Loiv; kabar, Bes. Sep. \_Mal. Ar. 
khabar] ; N 52 ; S 360. 

Good News : H 63. 

Next : A 46. 

55. Nibong (palm spec), Oncosperma 
tigillaria : moh, Bes. Malac. ; mok, 
Bes. A. I. ; 'mok Bes. Songs. 

56. Nibong: sanggang. Bland. K. Lang. 

57. Nibong : bayas, Mantr. Malac. Cha. 
[Mai. bayas]. 

58. Nibong {Mai. nibong kapor) : kSnilb 
(knb), Se7n. Buk. Max. ; kenib 
(knlb;), Sem. Pa. Max. ; {Mai. 
nibong padi), Oncosperma sp. : keiiab 
padi (knb padi), Sem. Pa. Max. , Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

Nice : G 68 ; G 74 ; P 143, 144 ; 

R 125. 

Night : D 16-30 ; D 39. 

Night, last : Y 30. 

Night-bird : S 525. 

59. Night-jar (bird), (J/rt/. berek-berek): 
oyok, Bes. Sep. 

60. Nine : hotek, Sak. Sel. Da. 

61. Nine : lang, Se^n. Scott. [Both these 
are probably fictitious.] 

62. Nine : semilan, Sem. Ij. ; sembi- 
lang, Sem. Per. ; sSmbilan, Sem. U. 
Sel. ; sgmbilan, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
sembilen, Som. ; sambilan, Sak. Br. 
Lozv ; semel (s'mel). Pant. Kap. /oh. 
[Mai. sembilan]. 

63. Nipah (palm), Nipa fruticans : 
hapai (hapai), Sem. Pa. Max. , Sem. 
Buk. Max. [but see C 197]. 

64. Nipah: bachap, e.g. "nipah palm- 
leaf," plo^ng bachap, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
Tree of which the leaves are used as 
cigarette wrappers : bachap, Matttr. 
Malac. Nya. 

65. Nipah : nipa', Bes. A. /. [Mai. 
nipah]. 

Nipple : B 385, 386. 

66. No {Mai. tidak) : menged, Sem. 
Jarum ; menget, Sem. Plus ; mengit, 
Pang. Belimb. ; ngot ; ngut, Bes. 
Sep. A. I.; ngot, Bes. Malac. Not: 
ngot, Bes. K. Lang. ; ngot ; ngut, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. ; ngot, e.g. " I 
can't hear," kayok" ngot bSh, Bes. 
Malac. Never mind : ngahi ngot, 
Bes. Sep. ; A 4. 

67. No {Mai. tidak) : ning or neng. 
Pang. U. Ari/ig; neng, Kerbat. 
No ; not : ning, ex. ning tahu', 
"don't know," Pang. K. A ring. 
Not-at-all {Mai. tada) : neng, e.g. 
neng di' {Mai. tada-lah buat), "did 
not do it," Pang. U. .4 ring. Never: 
neng peneh {or preneh). Pang. U. 
Aring; N 70. Not to be; is not 
{Mai. tiada) : neng wo' (neng w6r'), 
Kerbat. Without {Mai. tada): neng 
wo', Pang. U. Aring; B 87. Not 

670 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

yet [Mai. bfelum): neng i^r neng . . . 
seng, ex. neng ye chi' bab seng, 
Mai. sahya b61um makan nasi, " 1 
have not yet eaten (rice)," Patig. 
U. A ring; B 145. 

68. No : e'en ; en, Bes. A. I. No ; not 
{Mai. bukan): ayang, Pang. U. 
Aring. Not: In, Bes. Malac. It is 
doubtful, i.e. I don't know {Mai. 
entah) : ayang, Pang. Belinib. [? cf. 
D 123]. 

69. No ("vague"), {Mai. tidak) : to, 
Sotn. ; tato to (teto-to), Sak. Ra. No ; 
not {Mai. tidak) : to'. Sen. Cliff. Not : 
ti t4', Sak. U. Kam. Not yet (.l/a/. 
belum) : ti? (tor), Sen. Cliff. Not ; 
ta, Sak. J. Low; t&, Sak. Ra. Not; 
there is not : tatd (te ta), Sak. Ra. 
There is not : tah, Seraii ; tok", felai; 
{Mai. tada ; habis) ; bet ok, Da rat. 
Cannot : ta' boleh, Sak. U. Kam. 
[Mai. ta' buleh]. Never: to-ilek, 
Sak. Kerb. Absent : ti ta", Sak. U. 
Kam. Never mind : ta' ma, Sak. 
U. Kam. Never : tiada jaeng (tiad 
jaing), Sem. Buk. Max. Less ; 
wanting : tiada pSnchongkop (tiada 
p'nchonkop), Pant. Kap. /ok. [These 
words have been grouped together as 
some of them are and all fnay con- 
ceivably be related to the Malay nega- 
tives ta', tiada, and tidak ; but as 
regards some the probability is that 
they do not come direct out of 
Malay ; cf. Khmer te [de] ; Lave \.&, 
" no."] 

70. Never: taprgna (taprona), Som. ; 
(ta-prona), Sak. Ra. ; prenah {or 
pgnah) 'ngot, Bes. Sep. {Mai. tiada 
pernah] ; N 67. 

71. Never: mo' (mu), Sem. Pa. Max.; 
mgnung? (mnu'), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[? = N 67]. 

72. Don't {Mai. jangan): aked, ex. 
aked hagid, "don't be afraid"; 
aked kass or aked t6b&hh, "don't 
do it," Sem. Jarutn. [?=N 73]. 

73. Do not : duk gu, Sak. J. Low ; 
duagu, Sak. U. Kam. ; aga, e.g. 
aga cha (tcha) nado, "don't eat this," 
Sak. Korb. Lias ; ago, e.g. ago chip 
(tchip), "don't go away"; ka, e.g. 
ka itu (itou), "don't be afraid," Sak. 
Korb. Lias. Particle used in con- 
junction with wih, "do not" ( F 
121) : ga. Sen. Cliff. 

74. Do not : udoh, Bes. Malac. ; iJdo, 
Bes. Sep. A. /., Bes. K. Lang.; 
odo', explained as = ;l/fl/. sabar = to 
have patience or " endure," as well as 
= Mal. jangan, "don't," Bes. K. L. 

75. Don't : swam, Jak. Malac. 

76. Don't: jangan, e.g. "don't stop 
here," jangan di-tunggui dgni, Jak. 
Malac. {Mai. jangan]. 

jj. I don't know {Mai. ta' tahu ; fintah) : 
achuh. Pang. Belimb. 

78. I don't know : lek or yd-lek. Pang. 
Belimb. [?. cf. C 160]. 

79. Uncertain [ the word is used in 
answer to questions, and means "I 
don't know "] : en-ta (un'-tar), Ment. 
Stev. [Mai. gntah]. 

80. Not to want ; not to wish : ti ; 
tim (tee ; tim), Belend. Stev. 

81. Don't like; don't want: 6mboh, 
Bes. Songs. 

82. Don't want : nggnin (n'gnin), /ak. 
Ba. Pa. Not to wish ; unwilling : 
gan, Mantr. Cast.; gan, Mant. Bor. 
[Mai. gnggan, "to refuse."] 

83. No more : yul (youl), Sak. Kerb. ; 
A 63 ; F 115. 

84. There is not: k6si ? (kussi), Mant. 
Bor. 

85. Not yet : ka'fin (ka'n), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Do not : kaehen? (kiiehen), Sem. 
Craw. Gram. [? cf. D 123 or N 68]. 

86. Not yet {Mai. belum); I don't 
know {Mai. gntah) : e-(i, Sen. Cliff. 

87. Not yet: chedah, e.g. "I have not 
eaten yet," chedah oas*" makan; 
"it is not yet cooked," chedah oasl^ 
masak, Jak. Malac. Not yet {Mai. 
belum ) ; more ; still ( Mai. lagi ) : 
ja-ti. Sen. Cliff. 

88. Nowhere in particular : cha' tiba, 
Jac. Malac. [in answer to the question 
" where are you going? "] ; W 82. 
No : D 123 ; F 115 ; F 117 ; F 120- 
122. 

No matter : F 121. 

No more : A 63 ; F 115. 

89. Nod the head, to : piikSnguk 
(pknguk), Sem. Buk. Max. [? Cf. 
Mai. anggok, "to nod" ; or Bafinar 
ngul, ' ' to nod the head affirmatively. " 
See also B 177 and S 221.] 

90. Noise {Mai. bunyi) : kling, Sem. 
Kcdah ; klong. Pang. U. Aring 
klong (/;-. kloKng), Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; W 77 ; kyaong, Bes. Sep. 
A. L To roar {Mai. mgndgram), 
o' kiun (aukiun), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[The first syllable o' or u' is the 3rd 
person singular pronoun.] Sound (of 
voice) : kelong (klung), Sem. Pa. 
Max. To speak or talk {Mai. cha- 
kap) : ya' kengring, Sem. Kedah ; ya' 
kengling, Setn. Jarum. Noise ; 
sound : nyuse' kle' (nusi' kli'), Sem. 
Pa. Max. [Boloven klieng ; Halang 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

671 

ling, "to shout " ; cf. Central Nicobar 
leang, "sound."] 

91. Noise : {a) ruh, Des. Sep. A. I. 
Cry : ru', Bes. Songs. To roar (as a 
tiger): ru, e.g. a'a' ru, "the tiger 
roars," Bes. Sep. A. I.; ru", Bes. 
Songs. To roar (of a tiger = iV/rt/. 
mengaum) : ya-iyiii, Pang. U. A ring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. To roar 
(Mai. mgngaung) : o' a'eh (u'a'ih), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [The o' or u' is the 
3rd person singular pronoun.] To 
snore : kanggru', Bes. A. I. ; tgrok, 
Kena. 1. [Mon pSru [bilru], ' ' noise, 
"sound"; phiru, tftmru [dftmru], 
"sound"; Khmer rou [ro], "to 
roar" (? cf. Mon krAh, trih [drah], 
"to roar"); Niahon kruo ; Lave 
brau, "to shout"; cf. Achin. 
ggro-gGro, "to snore," "to snort."] 

[b] Noise [Mai. bunyi) : eng-a-rok, 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. To say : ngro, 
Sak. Ra. ; nar-ro' , Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
teigro (teighro), Sak. Kerb. ; eng-a- 
rok ; b6-eng-a-rok, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
To speak: r6, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; ngro, 
Sak. Pa. ; b6-ngro', Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
To talk: eng-a-rok, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. [? cf. C 10]. 

(c) Noise : liok, e.g. liok budek hi, 
"this boy is making a noise," Bes. 
Sep. A. I. Noise ; sound : liah, Se?n. 
Buk. Max. ; K 52; T 51 ; T 115 ; 
V 15 ; V 21. 

92. Noisii of water boiling ; noise of 
thunder : gaboi, Bedu. II. 

93. Noise, to make a : be-chip, Sen. 
Cliff. ; D 106 [cf. S 359]. 

Noon : D 33-35 ; D 39 ; D 42, 43 ; 
H 140, 141 ; M 100. 

94. Noose {Mai. jSrat) : ? tanjol (really 
a Mnlay word usually applied to a 
small noose at the end of a rod and 
line), Bes. K. L. [Mai. tanjol]. 

95. North : ben-lad [pr. ben-ladd) said 
to —Mai. utara, " north," but doubt- 
ful), Sem. Kedah ; ben-lad or bang- 
lad {pr. ben-ladd or bang-ladd)? 
Sent. Plus. 

96. North: kgnfa (konia), Som. [?cf. 
H 82]. 

97. North : 'tara', e.g. buah 'tara, 
"north wind," Bes. A. I. \_Mal. 
utara] ; D 33. 

98. Nose: mok? (mohk). Or. Berumb. ; 
muk, Sem. Crazv. Hist., Sem. Crazv. 
Gram., Sem. Ked. New., Sem. Jur. 
New. ; (muck), Sem. Jur. And., 
Sem. Jur. Mar., Sem. Jur. Rob. ; 
(neak), Sem. Ked. And., Sem. Ked. 
Rob. ; (neak ; muk), Sem. Ked. Mar. ; 

miih (mu°h), Serting; (mu"h), Bes. 
Her. ; muh, Buk. U. Lang., Bes. Sep. 
A. I. ; mu (mu"), Bed. Chiang ; muh, 
Bera.^U.Cher.; (mo\i\\).Sdm.; (mooh), 
Sak. Sel. Da. ; mu, Bes. Malac. ; 
(mfi), Sem. /-"er. ; 'nmu ; mu, Sem. K. 
Ken. ; mu, U. hid. ; (mou), Sak. 
Kerb. ; moh (merh), Sak. Br. Low ; 
(mer), Sak. Croix; moh (muh), 6V;«. 
Buk. Max. ; moh, Sem. U. Sel., 
Sem. Ij. , U. Pat. , Kerbat, U. Tem. , 
Sen. Cliff., Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; emoh. 
Tan. U. Lang. ; 6mo, Sak. Martin ; 
m3? (m6 "nasal"), Sem. Martin ; mo, 
U. Kel. ; m6a, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; md-uo 
(niaiift). Pang. Jalor; ma, Sak. U. 
Kam.\ mah {pr. mahh), Sem. Kedah, 
Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus ; mih, Pang. 
U. AHng, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
(morh), Lebir; mah, Sem. Beg., Sem. 
Ken. ; mah (mih), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
ma (mar), Setn. Stcv. ; mang (man), 
Sak. Ra. ; (mung), Ben. Nezv. ; ma 
(ma"), Sak. U. Bert. ; mok°, Tembi ; 
moh, Serau, Darat ; moh [or m4h], 
Jelai; P178. Nose ornament: m6a, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. Eyebrow : muh, 
Kena. II. Face: mSh, Darat; E83. 
Snout (of animals): mah (mah), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Trunk of elephant : mu, 
Bes. Sep. Point {Mai. ujong) : m&h, 
Pang. U. Aring. Einger-nail : mu 
tak, Sak. U. Kam ; H 15. Nostrils 
{Mai. lobang hidong) : 'mpong {or 
empong) mdh, Sem. Plus ; H 108 ; 
hendeng mah, Sern. Kedah ; hendu- 
eng mah (hnduing mah), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; seniaSng 'nmu(seniag'n-'nmu), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; H 107; holmoh, Scraz/. 
Nostril : hayang moh (hajan-moh), U. 
Kel. Nose-ornament (usually a porcu- 
pine quill) : hayang mo (hajanmo), 
Sem. (?) Miklucho-Maclay, 2 Straits 
J our II. 214. [This seems wrong, cf. 
M 119.] Nostril : anman mo ? 
(annmanmno), U. Ind. ; rug-mu, 
Bes. Malac. Part between the nos- 
trils : chr6ng-mu, Bes. Malac. Car- 
tilage or bone of the nose : kiong 
mah (kiung mah), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
kiong mu (kiung mu), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Tip of the nose : kumbun 
'nmii (kumbun n'mii), Sem. K. Ken. ; 
hujong mah (hujng mh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. : ujong ammoh (aujng ammuh), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Cold in the 
head ; mucous discharge from the 
nose : hamoh (hamuh), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; hemah (himh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Mucous discharge from 
the nose : hemah (hemh), Sem. Pa. 

672 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Max., Son. Buk. Max. [Mon muh, 
" nose," " end of a cape or promon- 
tory " ; Bahnar muh, "nose," 
" point"; Boloven, Niahon, Alak, 
Lave muh; Kaseiign\\x\\; Sue, Stieng, 
Halangmi\\\; Tare7ig m6h; Sedang 
moh; Phiwng, Khm us mo; Annam 
mui; Lemet mu (mous); Cuoi, Prou 
mu (mus); and the compound forms 
Stieng tromuh ; Khmer chremSh 
[chrimuh]. The connection of the 
following has been doubted, but seems 
probable : — Central and Southern 
Nicohar moah ; Shorn Pe mahQ ; 
Teressa Chowra m6h ; Car Nicohar 
el-meh. Cf. Khasi ka khmut ; 
Santali mu; Kurku mu — allmeaning 
' ' nose "; cf. Mon khamo [khamhow], 
" nasal mucus."] 
99. Nose: kelongo. Tan. Sag. ; kalun- 
jong, Ben. New. 

100. Nose : kamatlng, Ben. New. ; 
monchong, Kena. II. Upper lip : 
monchong mulut, Mantr. Malac. 
\Mal. monchong, "snout."] 

loi. Nose: penchium (penchium). Pant. 
Kap. Log. ; (penchium). Pant. Kap. 
Her.; (p'nchium), Pa7it. Kap. Joh. 
[.1/rt/. chium, " to smell "]. 

102. Nose : findang [?], Scm. Klapr. ; 
hidong, Mantr. Malac. , Jak. Malac. 
Nostril : lobang hidong, Mantr. 
Malac, Jak. Malac. [J/fl/. hidong]; 
H 109. To blow the nose : B 258, 

259- 

Nose ornament : N 98. 
Nostril : H 107 ; N 98 ; N 102. 
Not : A 4 ; D 123 ; F 117 ; F 120, 
121 ; G 68 ; N 66-68. Do not : 
N 72-76 ; N 85. Not to know : 
K 64. Not yet: F 115; F 120, 
121 ; N B5-87 ; T 86. There is 
not : N 66 ; N 84. 
io2.\. Notch in an axe for the handle : 
ta'ana (ta-annar), Sent. Stev. Notch 
in a bow for the string : B 362. 
Notch, to : C 299. 
Notched : I 40. 

103. Notches, to cut (in a tree) : tank:! 
(tankor), Scm. Stev. [cLMal. takok]; 
C 299 ; I 40. 

Nothing : 1'" 1 20. 

104. Now (Mai. sakarang), isa" (aisa'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. 

105. Now : chiS-hol, Sen. Cliff. ; chiho;i 
(lchi\\oh). Sail. Ka. 

106. N(JVV : dii' hn, Sal-. U. Kam. At 
present : da hn, Sak. U. Kam. 

107. Now : dudish (doudisch), S'dm. ; 
dehi, Kena. I. [? cf. D 35]. 

108. Now : hinol^ng, Bes. Sep. Lately : 

hinong, e.g. namah kabar hinong, 
"what news lately," Bes. Sep. ; N 
54 ; N 49. 

109. Now : hgnah (hneh), Serting. 

no. Now : klen ? (klaine), Mantr. 
Cast. ; klak, Jak. Ba. Pa. ; kglak, 
Blan. Rem. , Ment. Her. II. ; nahQ' 
kleh (nahiin' kleh), Bes. Her. 
Yesterday : klak. Rasa. 

111. Now: \ik\, Sak. Kerb. [?Cf. Khmer 
kal [kal] ; Stieng kal, " time " ; but 
this is an Indian loan-word ; cf. 
Mai. kala; ? cf. M 178.] 

112. Now: tadin, Kena. II. \_Mal. 
tadi]. 

113. Now : sakarhang (sakakhang), 
Barak ; sakarang ika' (sakarang 
ikak), Galang ; T 93 \_Mal. sakar- 
ang]; A 47; N 49 ; N 51 ; Q 5 ; 
T 86. 

114. Now, just ; recently ; ? beranin 
(bran'in?), Se7n. Pa. Alax. 
Nowhere : N 88. 

115. Numeral coefficient: denu', e.g. 
" three houses," ni' dfinu' duk, Sak. 
U. Bert. [? cf. Centr. Nicobar 
danai (dan6i), num. coeff. of 
"ships," etc.] F 283; H 153; 
M 23 ; M 68 ; O 27 ; O 29 ; P 
193 ; T 3 ; T 5 ; T 99. 
Numerals : see One, Two, etc. 
Numerous : M 40-46. 

Nurse, to (in the lap) : T 60. 
Nut : B 102. 

116. Nutmeg, Myristica fragrans : pala 
(pal'), Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. pala]. 

o 

1. O (vocative interjection) : ai, Bes. A'. 
La>ig. 

2. Oak (spec. Mai. bSrangan babi), 
Quercus enclei socarpa : biangSn (bi- 
angn), Sem. Buk. Max. (so for other 
species Sem. Buk. Max. has b. padi', 
b. lotong, which have corresponding 
Malay names) [Mai. bgrangan]. 

Oar : P 4-8 ; S 399. 
Oath : G 20. 
Obey, to : F 211. 

3. Oblique: sampi ? (smpi), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

Observe, to : S 72 ; S 83-85. 
Obstacle : O 4, 5. 
Obstinate : P 64. 
Obtain, to : C 48. 
Occiput : H 2. 

4. Occupied (.!/(//. aral[.f?V]): ngonaIa[?J 
(iionala). Slim. 

5. Occui'iED : ara,l, Sak. Ra., Sak. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

673 

Kerb, [,1/rt/. .4;-. 'aradl. The Malay 
equivalent given for O 4, 5 means 
"obstacle," not "occupied."] 
Ocean : S 55. 

Odour : S 40, 41 ; S 292-294. 
Offal (of grain) : P 116. 

6. Offer, to : sembah (seunibah), Manl. 
Bor. To greet : semna. Sent. K. Ken. 
[Afa/. sembah] ; cf. P 44A. 

7. Often : gala (ghala), Sak. Ra. 

8. Often: kCngiang? (ko-nian), Siim. 
Rare : kfinia (konia), Sotn. [There 
has probably been some mistake 
here.] M 44 ; Q 5. 

9. 0\\{Mal. minyak): hap-yet (doubtful), 
Sem. Kedah ; supo, Sak. Sung. 

10. Oil : kfteg or ketag, Sem. Plus. 

11. Oil: s6-num. Sen. Cliff.; sinum, 
Ta7i. U. Lang. 

12. Oil : choh, Sak. Sel. Da. 

13. Oil : chglai, Ken a. I. 

14. Oil : minyak, Sem. Per. ; minyak, 
e.g. m. long, "wood-oil"; m. tek, 
"kerosene," Bes. Sep.; minj'ak, /ak. 
Malac. ; (miniak), Sak. Blanj. Sw. 
[Mai. minyak] ; T 207 ; W 30 ; W 

34- 

15. Old : bedok, Sem. Beg. ; bedo' 
(biduk), Sem. Buk. Max. ; (biduk), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; {Mai. tuha 
mangkal) : bedo' (biduk), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; (bidu'), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Dark (shade of colour) : bedo' 
(bid6k), Sem. Buk. Max. ; bSdo' 
(bduk), Sem. Pa. Max. Rotten (of 
texture) : peto' (pituk), Se7n. Pa. 
Max. ; B 306. 

16. Old : bakes or bakess. Pang. K. 
A ring; bakes {pr. ba-kess). Pang. 
U. Aring; bakes {pr. bakess). Pang. 
Sam; ba'-kes, Kerbat ; ba'-kesh, 
Lebir; bakez {pr. ba-kezz), Pang. 
Galas. Widow : ba'kesh, Lebir. 
\Sampif, Katingan {Borneo) bakas, 
"old."] 

17. Old : kgbed or te-kebed, Sem. Plus ; 
V.€o^ , Pang. Belitnb.; P117. Cramp 
(stiffness in the limbs) : ka-beb, Sem. 
Stev. 

18. Old : kSbrob, Sem. Jarum. Brother 
{=Mal. sudara, of an old man): 
kabrog or kabrob, Sem. Kedah. 

19. Old : dingrS-', Sak. U. Kam. ; Sn- 
dS-rar, Sen. Cliff.; biendgrah? (bien- 
derah), Da rat ; raak, Tembi. Old 
man: ma endfira' (ina enderak), Jelai; 
M 23 ; M 26. Old, ripe (of fruit) : 
bindrak", Jelai ; M 26. [Bahnar 
kra, kodra ; Stieng komra ; Boloven, 
Niahon, Lave kra ; Alak kSra, 
"old."] 

VOL. II 

20. Old : jaja (djadja), Sak. Kor. Gb. 
[? Cf. Khmer chas [chas] ; Stieng 
cheh, " old."] 

21. Old: li', Bes. K. Lang.; \V Bes. K. 
L. ; li, Bes. Sep. or A. I. ? Old 
(ancient) : Huh [\xozih), Som. ; liu 
(liou), Sak. Ka. Worn out {e.g. 
clothes) : lek, Bes. Sep. A. L Far : 
lio, Sem. K. Ken. ; lio (llo), Som. ; M 
23. Forever (?); so long as ? {Mai. 
salama) : loh (luh), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Long (time): ISk, Serting; ling, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; lahun, Kena. /. ; 
(Mai. lama) : liu, Tembi ; li-u, Sen. 
Cliff. Day after to-morrow {Mai. 
lusa), li-ah, Sen. Cliff. Two days 
after to-morrow {.Mai. tulat), li-li-te', 
Sen. Cliff. [Cf. Man \k [la, laa], 
" a long time."] 

22. Old : {a) s6r6h ; horoh, e.g. mah 
horoh, "an old man," Bes. A. /. ; 
horo, Bes. K. Lang, [cf O 19]. 

{b) Old {Mai. tuha ; lama) : suah. 
Sem. Buk. Max.; {Mai. lama): su-ah, 
Setn. Kedah. 

23. Old : tuha' (tuhak). Se?n. Craw. 
Hist. ; (tahak), Son. Klapr. ; t<a-ha' 
U. Tem. ; tu-ha', U. Cher. ; to'ha, 
Krau Tem. ; tuh6, Mantr. Malac. ; 
tuhe' (touhek), Sem. Klapr. Chief; 
leader : tuwoh (tououoh), Sak. Kerb. 
Uncle (older than father or mother 
respectively) : tua' (tiiak), Menf. Her. 
IL Uncle: uha' (Cihak), Kena. /. , 
Kena. IL ; wa' (wak), Bedu. IL ; 
wah, Jak. Ba. Pa. Aunt : ua or 
wa (oua), Sak. Ra. ; uha' ((ahak), 
Kena. /. , Kena. IL ; bo-awa (bo- 
aoua), Som. ; M 192. Stepmother 
{Mai. mak tiri) : wa' (wak), Serau. 
[Probably all ultimately from Mai. 
tuha, "old"; there is a Malay 
word wa meaning "uncle," which is 
apparently an abbreviated form of the 
word in a specialised sense. ] 

24. Old {Mai. lama): ka-dui, Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus. 

25. Old {Mai. lama) : manah. Pang. 
U. Aring. Old (ancient) : mana, 
Sak. Kerb. 

Old : B 306 ; C 89 ; F 41. 
Old man : G 87. 
Days of old : N 51. 
Omit, to : A 173. 

26. On ; up : en, Bes. Malac. ; 'ng. 
Jak. Malac. In : 6m, Sak. Tan. 
Ram. ; M 100. To : 'ng, Jak. 
Malac. On; on the top of: oij, 
Sak. Plus Cliff. 

On : A 5-8 ; A 175 ; A 177. 
On the ground : E 12. 

2 X 

674 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

On to : A 8. 

On top : A 7 ; A 7 ; E 19 ; F 29 ; 

N 25 ; O 26. 
Onak : T 94. 
Once (formerly) : N 51. 

27. One: nai, Sejn. Craw. Gram., Sent. 
Kedah, Sem. Plus, U. Pat., Sem. 
Sadaiig; (nai [in the MS. origin- 
ally nigh]), Sem. U. Sel. ; (ni), 
Sem. Stev. ; nei, Sak. Kerb. ; 
n6i, Sak. Korb. Lias ; n&y, Sak. 
Croix ; nS, Sak. Plus, 4 N. Q. 
102 ; ne, Sem. Martin ; ne (neh), 
Po-Klo ; (n6 ; nay), Sak. Br. Lo7v ; 
neh, Tetn. CI. ; ni, Som. , Sem. K. 
Ken. ; e.g. "one tooth," lemoin 
hat-ni, Sem. K. Ken. ; nii-§, Sak. 
Guai ; ni-u-e, Krau Tem. ; ne-weng, 
Krau Ket. ; naing (nlng), Sem. 
Stev. ; G 77 ; H 167. The first : 
n^i, Sem. Stev. Alone ; solitary 
{Mai. sa' orang) : 6' nai {lit. "he, 
one"), Sem. Plus; nei-sama, Som. 
Each ; one by one : nai, Sem. Buk. 
Max. One man : na deri, Tembi ; 
A 70. [See pp. 458, 459, siipra.'\ 

28. One : na'-nu. Sen. CI. ; na-nu. 
Sen. Cliff. ; nanu, Sak. Martin, 
Serau, Sak. Sung. ; (nanou), Sak. 
Ra. ; nanu', Sak. U. Bert. ; nanu', 
Tembi, Sak. U. Kam. ; nanu' (nanuk). 
Tan. U. Lang. ; nano, Sak. Clien. ; 
noh, Sak. Tap. Another (?) : lain 
nano, Sak. Ra. ; O 61 [O 60 is 
probably distinct]. Pair : nanu 
klamin, Sak. U. Kam. [Mai. 
kglamin, "pair."] [? = O 27 + N 

115] 

29. One : 'imoi, Bes. Malac. ; moi 
(mo°i), Bes. Her. ; moi, Kena. /. , 
Serting; moi. Pal., U. hid. ; moih, 
Sak. Sel. Da. ; moe, U. Tem. ; mui, 
Bes. Sep. A. /. , e.g. mui 'kur mah, 
"a single man," Bes. Sep. ; (mooi), 
Ben. A^ew. ; (mooee), Bers. Stev. ; 
mu-e, U. Cher. ; mueh, Buk. U, 
Lang. ; H 167 ; S 346. [ilfon muk 
[mwai] ; Khmer mui [niuy] ; mo 
[ma] ; Stieng muoi ; Bahnar mSii 
(monh), ming ; Phnong muoi ■,^,Alak 
moei ; Boloven, Niuhon muei ; So, 
Nanhang mufii ; Chrdu mu6y ; Mi 
mue ; Ka, Chang moe ; Samrc moe, 
mooi ; Halang moi ; Tareng, Kaseng, 
Kon Tu, Sui, Sedang, Par, Xong 
moi ; Lave, Cuoi, Prou, Khmus, 
Huei, Hin mui; Lemct niu? (mus), 
mo ? (mos), ' ' one."] 

30. One : {a) sGniiir, Sak. Jcr. 

{b) One ; sa wang, Sem. Ij. ; sang, 
Sem. Scott [doubtful]. 

{c) One : sa-, Bland. K. Lang. ; sa, 
Sem. Per., Jak. Semb. ; sa (sar), 
Ment. Stev. ; so (ser), Sak. Br. Low ; 
s&-ai, Pang. Be limb. ; su, Sak. /. 
Low ; H n6 ; H 167. 
{d) One: sato' (satok), Galang ; 
satu, Ben. New. , Mantr. Malac. , 
Jak. Malac. [other numerals as in 
Malay also], Lebir, Kerbat. To 
assemble : b6satu (bosatou), Sak. 
Ra. ; chatu (tchatou), Som. [Mai. 
sa- ; satu]. 

31. One : kahung (kahoung), Sem. 
Klapr. [doubtful]. 

One (indefinite sense) : T 51. 

32. Onion : pemauh (p'mauh), Pant. 
Kap. J oh. 

33. Onion : bawang, Serau ; (spec. Mai. 
bawang merah), Allium cepa: bawing 
pahong (baung phung), Sem. Buk. 
Max., Set?i. Pa. Max. ; R 51 [Mai. 
bawang]. 

34. Only {Mai. s6haja) : blap ; bla', 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; F 11. 
Solitary ; alone {Mai. sa'orang) : ye 
bla', Pang. U. Ariitg; ye-bla'. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Self {Mai. diri) : 
ye bla' {lit. " I only"), cp. m4h bla', 
he -bla', 6' bla', etc.. Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. A little {Mai. sadikit) : 
bleb, e.g. hagu' bab bleb, ' ' I ask 
for a little rice," Pang. U. Ari?tg; 
bleb or bleb-bleb. Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; W 73. 

35. Only {Mai. sShaja) : ken (apparently 
short for nengken), Sem. Plus. 
Single ; solitary {Mai. sa'orang) : 
nai neng-ken= "only one," cp. 
duwa ken, "only two," and tiga' 
ken, "only three," etc., Sem. Plus. 

36. Only : hadao {pr. hadao(u)), Sem. 
A'. A'en. ; ha (he), Sak. Kerb. 

37. Only : n^ya (no-ye), Sc>?n. [Mai. 
hanya]. 

38. Only : saja (sadjS,), Sak. Ra. [Mai. 
sahaja]. [Cf. I 33 for another 
meaning of the Malay word, or a 
homonym.] 

39. Only ; unintentionally : habat ; 
abat, e.g. chakap (.xiakap) abat, "he 
only says so, " Majit. Bor. ; R 63. 

40. Open, to : wall, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
ya' kiwah (//'. kiwahh), Sem. Jarum ; 
ewok (eouok), Sak. Kerb. To go 
out : awok (touok), Sak. Kerb. 
[Stieng uak, " to open."] 

41. Open, to: {a) ya' pag {pr. ya' 
pagg), Seyn. Plus; nekpok ? (neuk- 
pok), Som. [Khmer bok [pok] ; 
Stieng, Alak, Boloven, Kaseng, Lave, 
Niahon pok ; Sui bo ; Chuii4 pb ; 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

675 

Cham poh ; Jarai pih ; Mon pAk 
[pak], " to open."] 
(b) To open : buka' (bukak), Tciiibi, 
Serau. To untie : bukai (boukai), 
Ma7it. Bor. \_Mal. buka]. 

42. Open, to : pral^ng (?), lies. Sep. ; 
p'rang(?), Bes. K. L. 

43. Open, to : tak", Sen. Cliff. ; kii- 
tahh, Bes. K. L. 

44. Open, to : ya-ui (//•. u-i), Pang. U. 
A ring. To take-off {Mai. buka) : 
ya'oi {e.g. penjok ; C 171), Sent. 
Kedah. To untie ; undo {Mai. rom- 
bak or buka) : ya-u-i. Pang. Sam ; 
(Mai. rungkei) : ya-ure, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. Loose; hanging loosely: 
ueh (auih), Setn. Pa. Max. [Mai. 
urai]. 

45. Open, to : raiat ; raiap ; mfiraiap 
(m'raiap), Pant. Kap. Juh. 

46. Open, to : so, Sak. Pa. To open 
{infratisiiive) : E 79, 80. 

47. Open, to, or swell (of a blossom) : 
ch^rabong, Bes. K. Lang. 
Opening : H 107. 

Oppose, to . A 17. 
Oppress, to : P 210. 
Orang utan : M 73 ; M 140. 
Orange (colour) : B 249 ; R 51 ; R 

53- 

48. Orchid {Mai. sakat) : chin-loi. Pang. 
U. Aring. 

49. Orchid {Mai. angggrek) : langeng 
(langing), Sem. Pa. Max. 

50. Orchid : tete^ng, Bes. Sep. 

51. Orchid, spec. Anmdina densa : 
pehanyar (p'han3'ar), /ai. Lem. 

52. Order; command; e' (ali'), Sem. 
Bilk. Max. To command: vad\, Sem. 
K. Ken. To order: ta' oyn, Bes. 
Songs. 

53. Order ; command : mupioh (niu- 
piuh), Sem. Pa. Mux. To order ; 
to command : mupioh (mupiuh) ; 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; (mupiu'h), Sem. 
Buk. Max. To order {Mai. suroh): 
ya'-pa-agg? (/;-. ya' pa-agg), Sem. 
J arum. 

54. Order, to : ya' ol (/;-. ya' oil), 
Sem. Plus. To command ; to order 
{Mai. suroh) : ya-pe'-ol. Pang. U. 
Aring \ ya-pe'-or (/r. pe'-orr). Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. 

55. Order, to : padoys, Bes. A. I. ; 
{Mai. pSsankan or sampaikan) : 
dois (doys) or doih (doyh) ; padaJ's 
or padoys, e.g. Batin padoys hS,-5n, 
" the Batin ordered me," Bes. K. /,. ; 
To command : padoys, e.g. Batin 
padoys ha' oyn, "the Batin ordered 
me," Bes. A. I. 

55A. Ordp;r, I ; I command : en suroh, 
Jclai [yl/(z/. suroh]. 

56. Order; command : che' loi-en. 
Pant. Kap. Joh. 

57. Order: command: ukum (oukoum), 
Sak. Kerb., Sak. Ra. \^Mal. Ar. 
hukum] ; Y 26. 

Order, to : C 10 ; O 52-55 ; S 

101. 

Orifice ; H 107. 

Origin : R 176. 

Ornament : C 127. 

58. Orphan : reg-r6g, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
bi-rek. Sen. Cliff. 

59. Orphan : ke-non r6-ni, Sak. Blavj. 
Cliff. ; C 107. 

60. Other : nana-ner, Sak. Kerb. [Prob- 
ably distinct from O 28, which 
belongs to a different group of 
dialects.] [?Cf. Mon tftnah [tSnah] ; 
Bah7iar z.wA\, nai, "other."] 

61. Other : lain, Serau, Sak. Ra. \Mal. 
lain] ; A 95 ; A 121. 

62. Other, an- : teloi, Sak. Tap. 
Other ; aside ; apart {Mai. asing) : 
te-lui, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 

63. Otter {Mai. anjing ayer or brang- 
brang) : banai. Pang. U. Aring; 
manai. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
manhai (manhl), Sem. Stev. 

64. Otter : bi\ho' (bhu'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. : k6-bokD, Sen. Cliff. [? Cf. 
Mon. phe' [phea] ; Khmer \i\\^ [bhe] ; 
Cham, bhei, bhai ; Bahnar phdi 
(phay), " otter."] 

65. Otter, a kind of: jfirong, Bes. 
K. L. ; B 103 ; D 137 ; D 143 ; M 
136. 

Our : W 52. 

66. Out ; outside : koh, Bes. A. I. To 
go out : koh ; kuh, Bes. Sep. To 
e.xude : koh, e.g. koh geta, "to 
exude sap," Bes. A. /. 

67. Out : luar, Bes. Malac. Outside 
{Mai. di-luar): lueh (luih). Sent. 
Buk. Max. ; {Mai. ka-luar) : luwe, 
ex. ken lu\s'e = Mai. ambil ka- 
luar (doubtful), Sem. Kedah. Out- 
side ; to turn out : lueh (luih), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Inside ; into : lueh (luih), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [? = outside]. I go 
out {Mai. sahaya ka-luar) : en kluar, 
Jclai [.l/<7/. luar]. 

68. Outside : wih ? (uilih), Setn. Buk. 
Max. [? cf. S 104]. 

69. Without {Mai. luar) : mos, Sem. 
Craw. Hist. , Sem. Klapr. [Klap- 
roth gives "sans" as the mean- 
ing, having apparently misunderstood 
Crawfurd, who gives "luar" as the 
Malay equivalent of his "without," 

676 

COMPARA TIVE VOCABULAR V OF 

/.^. = " outside. " But the word is 
doubtful, anyhow ; cf. S 550.] 
Outside : F 246 ; G 63 ; O 66-69 ; 
S 236 ; T 54. 
Outstretched : H 15. 
Outwards '. F 230 ; I 28 ; T 53. 
Over : A 5-10. 
Over against : S 198. 
Over there ; T 52-54. 
Overflow, to : P 206. 

70. Owl : ok? (auk), Sem. Pa. Max. 

71. Owl : kela (Ma), Sai. Kerb. 
[A'fljtv/j' klang, "owl"; cf. E 4.] 

72. Owl : 'ngko (nko), Sak. Ra. \Stieng 
kou, "owl."] B 216; G 16, 17. 
Ox: B457. 

1. Pack, to ; bundle : chiom (tchiom), 
Sak. Ra. Parcel : cha ilm, Sak. U. 
Kam. 

2. Pack, to ; bundle : sapot, Sak. 
Kerb. [A/a/, saput, "to cover"; cf. 

P47I 

3. Pack, to ; bundle : tenungkus (to- 
nounkous), Siim. [Menang. Mai. 
tungkus {pr. tungkuih), " bundle, 
pack " ; the ordinary Mai. is bung- 
kus.] Mat; mattress: bungkusan, 
Ben. New. \_Mal. bungkusan, ' 'bundle, " 
" wrapper."] 

Packet : B 459, 460. 

4. Paddle {Mai. pengayuh) : chindwa', 
Sem. Kedah. [Cf. Khmer chreva 
[chriwa] ; Lave chreva ; Alak seva ; 
Boloven hkwa., "paddle."] 

5. Paddle : {a) chau (chow), Sak. Sel. 
Da. ; chuer. Pant. Kap, /oh. To 
swim : bgrchuer (b'rchuer). Pant. Kap. 
loh. To go upstream : bechuer 
pgningol (b'chuer p'ningol). Pant. 
Kap. /oh. [Khmer cheu [chew], ' 'oar, 
"to row standing"; Aima?n cheo ; 
Bahnar, choa, "paddle"; Stieng 
cheo, "to row standing" ; ? cf. Mon 
kasu, " paddle."] 

[b) To paddle : ngayoh, Bcs. Sep. 
A. I. Paddle : pengayu, Sem. U. 
Sel. ; (p^ngayon), Sak. Croix; p6nga- 
yoh, /ak. Malac. ; pengaioh, Sak. 
Blanj. Sw. ; kayu-pengayu, Sem-. Per. 
[Mai. kayoh]. [For the curious 
relation between groups [a) and {b) 
cf. T 21 1 and P 164. Is it fortuitous ?] 

6. Paddle : jxlpar, Bes. A. I. To 
paddle {Mai. kayuh) : papar, Bes. 
K. L. 

6a. Oar : pengowet (pingowet). Pant. 

Kap. Log. ; pengueh. Pant. Kap. Her. 
[Mai. 'wet ; see O 9.] 

7. Oar: p6maut, /ak. Mad. {Pant. Kap. ); 
(p'maut). Pant. Kap. /oh. [Mai. paut]. 

8. Oar : gidai, Bes. Sep. To row with 
an oar : gidai {Mai. bSrdayong), Bes. 
K. L. [cf. Mai. kirai?]. 

9. To use the paddle as a lever, with the 
side of the boat as a fulcrum, especially 
in steering a canoe {Mai. 'wet) : chu- 
kang or chokaug, Bes. K. L. ; chu- 
kal^ng, Bes. A. /. 

10. Paddle, to {Mai. kayuh) : kabeau 
Sem. Kedah. To paddle with a draw- 
ing motion of the paddle, especially in 
steering a canoe : ka'ut, Bes. K. L. ; 
ka'ut, Bes. A. /. [cf. Mai. kabir]. 

Paddle : S 399. 
Paddle, to : P 5. 6. 
Paddy ; padi : R 104-108, 
Paddy-bird ; padi-bird : F 257. 

11. Pagar anak (tree), Ixonanthes 
obovata : long penanchang, Bes. 
Sep. 

12. Pahang man : pSngapang (p'nga- 
pang). Pant. Kap. /oh. ; W 112. 
Sultan of Pahang : P 33. 

13. Palilawan(a kind of tree), Tristanial 
spec. : hgrlop. Pang. U. A ring. 
Pail : S 149- 

Pain: S 185-187. 

14. Pain, sharp: pret, Mant. Bar. To 
suffer : prhet, Mantr. Cast. Wound : 
prosh, Kraie Tern. ; pris, Bes. Malac. ; 
ris ; pres, Bes. Sep. A. L [? cf. Mai. 
pfirih, or = S 186 (a)]. 

Painful : S 187. 

15. Paint, to: hichit chat, Sak. U. 
Kam. [Mai. chat, "paint"]. To 
stick : p&chit ; lechip, Bes. Songs 
[?cf. C49]. 

Pair : O 28. 

16. Palas (fan-palm), Licuala paludosa : 
pales (palis), Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. 
palas]. 

17. P.\L.\s : cha-char, Sem. Stev. 

18. Palate ; roof of mouth : hingkoh 
(hngkuh), Sem. Pa. \ A/ax. ; hangke' 
(hngki), Sem. Buk. Max. Gums (of 
mouth) : angke' (angki'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Hollow of mouth {A/al. teka'): 
pongka' hftngke' (pungka' hngki), 
Sem. Buk. A/ax. 

Palisade : F 79. 

19. Palm (of hand) : kgng (k'ng), Se7?i. 
Stev. 

20. Palm (of hand = A/al. tapak) : bar 
chas, /^ang. Sam ; har chaz, Paug. 
Galas. Sole of foot {A/al. tapak) : 
har chan, Pang. U. Aring; hal or 
har chan {pr. hall or harr), (doubt- 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

677 

ful), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. [cf. G 
41?]. 

21. Palm (of hand) ; sole (of foot) 
{Mai. tapak) : pal, Sen. Cliff. ; 
pak, Kena. I. Palm of hand : 
tapak, Sem. Stev. ; tapar, Tenibi. 
Hand : tapar, Sak. Kerb. Sole 
(of foot) : tapak, Sem. Stev. Span : 
tapa (tappar), Sem. Stev. Foot : 
pfinapah (p'napah). Pant. Kap. 
Joh. Footsteps : tapang, Bes. Songs. 
To slap : tapa, Kena. I. ; {Mai. 
tampar) : pak. Sen. Cliff. To slap ; 
a slap : pak (pak), Sem. Pa. Max. 
To slap with the hand : mSpa' chas 
(mpa' chs), Sem. Buk. Max. ; pak 
long (pk tung), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[Cf. Mai. tapak, "palm, sole"; tam- 
par, " to slap " ; but it must not be 
assumed that all these forms are 
derived through Malay. Cf. Stieng 
pang; Cham tapong ; Bahnar 
topang, "palm," "sole."] F 220; 
H 14, 15. 

Palm (of hand) : N 3. 

22. Palm-cabbage {Mai. umbut) : ta', 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; ta', ex. 
ta' ikdn =Mal. umbut bayas. Pang. 
U. Aring; B 86 ; tajo' (taju'). Sent. 
Pa. Max. [? = B 86]. 

23. Palm-cabbage : chgmbek (chmbik), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; chengkeh (?), Bes. 
A. I. [See B 183.] 

24. Palm, young (edible) : runiiik, Sak. 
Tap. [no doubt palm - cabbage is 
meant] ; [? cf. Mai. umbut]. 
Palm-cloth : S 149, 150. 
Palm-sheath . S 149, 150. 

25. Palpitation {Mai. bSdebar) : men- 
yabal ? (mnabl), Sem. Buk. Max. 

26. Palpitation : linya (lina), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

27. Pandanus {Mai. mgngkuang) : buyu 
(buyoo), Sem. Stev. A plant used 
for mat -making: puyu (pouyou), 
Sak. Ra. 

28. Pandanus {Mai. pandan) : hakek 
or hake', Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Screw -palm {Mai. mgngkuang) : 
hake', Pang. U. Aring; hake'; 
haki', Bes. Sep. A. I. Various 
species are {Mai. mgngkuang), hake' 
habel ; {Mai. pandan), hake' pandan, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. Other spp. : 
hake' chongoi, Bes. Sep. ; hake' 
heram, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; hake' jakas ; 
hake' yah, Bes. Sep. ; hake' tut, Bes. 
A. I. 

29. Pandanus; screw-palm; " screw - 
pine," Pandanus atrocarpus: bSng- 
kueng (bngkuing), Sem. Pa. A/ax. ; 

mengkueng (mngkuing), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Sedge (spec. ^1/fl/. menderong), 
Scirpusgrossus : mCngkueng (mngku- 
ing), Sem. Pa. Max. \^Mal. mgng- 
kuang]. 

30. Pandanu.s (spec. Mai. rasoh ayer), 
Pandanus russ07V {?) : rasu bateoh 
(rsu btiuh), Sem. Buk. .l/ax.; W 30 
[.Ual. rasau ; rasoh]. 

Pangolin : A 113-115. 
Panther : T 129-133. 

31. Papaya (fruit), Carica papaya : 
betek, Mantr. Malac. ; f>etik ; pie' 
petik (plek pgtik), Tembi ; (plek 
petik), Serau ; pie' pgtikn (plek 
petikn), Jelai ; (plek petik"), Darat ; 
F 282 \_Mal. bgtek]. 

32. Papaya : kuntaia, Jak. Ba. Pa. ; 
kepaya, Jak. Malac. [Mai. papaya]. 
Paralysis : D 124. 

Parang (chopper) : C 122-126 ; C 

Parang-parang (fish) : S 140. 
Parasite : L 32 ; P 129. 
Parcel : P 1-3. 

33. Pardon, to : kesungkok (k'sunkok), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Sultan of Johor : 
orang sungkok pengftlat? (orang 
sunkok p'ngalat), Paut. Kap. Joh. 
Sultan of Pahang : orang sungkok 
pengapang(orangsunkok p'ngapang), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. 

Parents : M 189. 

34. Pari lang (fish spec), Aetobatis 
narinari : payi' (paii'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. \_Mal. pari]. 

35. Part ; piece ; portion : chape ; chapa 
(tchape; tchape), Sak. Kerb.; chiape; 
chiapii (/t/^/ape ; tchiz.'^h), Sak. Ra. 
[?=P36]. 

36. Part ; piece ; portion : kgpik (kopik), 
Som. \_Mal. keping] ; cf. F 180. 
Partly : S 198. 

37. Partridge, Malay, Rhizotkera : gun- 
teng ; chim gunting, Bes. K. L. 
\_Mal. sau-lanting or burong sorong 
lanting]. 

38. Pass, to : broyt, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
To pass {trails, and intrans.) : 
brayt ; broyt, Bes. Songs. 

39. Pass, to : lalu, Sak. U. Kam. To 
disappear : lalu', Sem. Pa. Max. 
Formerly ; past : mglalu' (mlalu'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. \Mal. lalu]. =A 73. 
To pass by : G 42. 

Past: B 165; F 115; F 123; N 
50, 51 ; P 39. 

Path: C 216; G 41, 42; G 49 ; 
S 280. 

40. Path, mark indicating the [ap- 
parently something serving as a sign- 

678 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

post, " wegweiser "] : penoig, Sem. 
Stev. 

41. Patience : rusing (rousin), Som. ; S 
222 

42. Pattern ; picture : achu, Sak. U. 
Kara. {MaL achu]. [ = T 243P..] 
Paunch : B 160. 

Pay : G 3. 

43. Pay, to : meneyar (wi'Wd'yar). Som. ; 
bayax; Sak. Ra. ; bayar, Sak. Kerb. 
\_MaL bayar]. 

44. Payong, daun (palm spec), Teys- 
mannia altifrons : sagaluk, Alent. 
Her. II. 

44.\. Peace be unto you ! hail ! (a prefix 
to prayers addressed to spirits = J/a/. 
salamat) : sfimbat? (sumbat), Sak. 
Hale. [ Probably = Mai. sembah ; O 6.] 

45. Peacock: jahot? (jahote), Ben. New. 

46. Pe.^cock : mah, Sem. Jur. A7id., 
Sem. Jin: Rob. ; chim-m6rak (chim- 
marrak), Ben. Neiu. [.!/«/. mSrak ; 
but cf. also Mon miraik [mrak] ; 
Cham a mrak ; Tareng am rah ; San- 
tali mara'^, " peacock."] 

Peak : H 48 ; H 84 ; H 95-97 ; H 

99, 100. 

Peck, to : C 295, 296. 

47. Peel ; thin husk : selupat (slupt), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Skin : selompot, 
Kena. I. {Mai. selupat] ; cf. P 2. 
Peel, to : C 142. 

48. Peeled (by rubbing) : lalueh (la- 
luih), Sem. Pa. Ma.x. [Mai. 161as]. 
Peeling-knife : K 47. 

49. Peer forward, to (?) : yob-yob, ex. 
o yob-yob kra (explained as=:jeng6', 
"to peer forward"; "he, the k^ra 
monkey, peers forward"), Sem. 
Kedah. 

50. Pelican (spec. Mai. burong undan), 
Pelicaiii/s onocrotalus or Malaccensis : 
pipau?(pipak()rpipau), Sem. Pa. Max. 

51. Penetrate, to [i.e. to stick into = 
Mai. lekat) : ya'-mpeg. Pang. U. 
Aring ; y a - h e m peg , Pa ng. Sa m , 
Pang. Gal. [Perhaps = C 47.] 

52. Penetrate, to : rentang. Pes. 
Songs. ; C 296. 

53. Penis : lokn, U. Ind. ; lak, Pang. 
U. Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
la (lar), Sem. ^ Stev. ; la, U. Kel. ; 
la', Lebir, Kerbat; la' (1'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; lo'. Sen. Cliff., U. Tern., 17. 
Cher. ; lu-o', Krau Ket. ; klau ? 
(glau; gla-u?), Sem. K. Ken.; metla, 
U. Pat. ; E 83. Sexually impotent : 
la." kebus (1' kbus), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
D 50 ; H 2. [Bahnar lo ; Stieng 
klau, ' ' male sexual organs " ; Bahnar 
klao, "testicles," "male jnidenda." 

Kuhn also compares A'/%a.fz tloh, 'loh; 
Santali lai'h ; Ho I06 ; Mttnda loe, 
' ' penis. " It may be doubted whether 
these are in any way related to the 
somewhat similar words meaning 
" male," "man." The connection 
of Khmer keda {pr. kgda?) [kta], 
" penis," seems doubtful.] 

54. Penis : butoh (buth), Sem. Bnk. 
Max. [Mai. butoh] ; E 36 ; M 219 ; 
U 27. 

55. People (?) ; men (?) : lumam (lou- 
mam) ; lumom [loumom), Sak. Ra. 
[? cf. W 77 (f)] ; M 23. 

56. Pepper: lada (lads.), Som. ; (ladA), 
Sak. Kerb. ; lada (ladS,), Sak. Ra. ; 
lada' (ladak), Serau, Sak. Em,. 
Wild pepper {Mai. lada burong) : 
Mda, Sak. Kor. Gb. Chili pepper 
(spec. Mai. chili padi ; lada kSn- 
chang?) : lada' kawau (lad' kauau), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; B 215 [Mai. lada] ; 
B 191 ; B 196. 

57. P6rah, buah (fruit spec): suing, 
Sem. Bilk. Max. 

58. Per AH, buah : piah (pih), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; pra', Sak. U. Bert. A food 
made from the seeds of the pgrah 
tree: serum prah, Sak. Hale ( ' ' serum" 
is explained as meaning anything 
squeezed into a joint of bamboo) 
[Mai. perah]. 

Perch, to : A 55, 56 ; C 52. 
59- PfirSpat tree, Cupania Lesseriiana{l): 

kurak, Bes. Sep. Suckers of the 

per^pat tree : S 508. 

Perfect : G 71 ; V 12. 

Perfume : S 295. 
60. Perhaps ; may be : kSnid ji', Sak. 

U. Kam. 
6r. Perhaps: hoi, Sak. Plus Cliff. 
61A. Perhaps : jala (djalt), Sem. K. 

A' en. ; W 78, 

Peril : D 50 ; F 48. 

62. Perinseum? or urethra? (Mai. tali 
ayer) : kenjong (knjung), Se7ii. Pa. 
Max. : R 183. 

Permission : G 42. 

Person : M 23-31. 

Perspiration : S 533-537 ; W 30. 

63. Perspire, to (?) : kaiueh (kluih), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. [Doubtful and 
probably wrong, being no doubt 
merely the first word of Mai. kaiuar 
peloh ; cf. O 67.] 

64. Perverse, to be : peheau (?), Bes. 
A. I. 

64A. Pestle ( Mai. antan ) : rentik, 

Tembi. 
64B. Pestle: kenoh; kenu'? (kenukh), 

Seraic. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

679 

Petal (fruit-tree) : B 45. 

65. Pfetaling (tree), Ochanostachys aiueri- 
tacea : awal ? (aual ?), Scm. Pa. Max. 

66. Petaling : sayilin ? (saim), Sem. 
link. Max. 

Phlegm . M 213. 

Pick, to : C 52 ; P 68 ; P 148-150. 

67. Pick up, to : chfikat (chkt), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; mftchekat (inchkt), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

68. Pick up, to : hi chod, Sak. U. 
Katn.\ {Mai. pungut): ch5d, Tembi; 
lechued", Serait. To pick {Mai. 
petik) : tot&yt, e.g. totiiyt bunga, 
"to pick flowers," Bes. K. L. To 
pluck : totoyt, Bes. Sep. A. I. To 
pluck out {A/al. chabut) : ya-tos {pr. 
toss). Pang. U. Aring. [? Cf. 
Bahnar duot, " to pluck out."] 

69. Pick up, to : lebes ; sebes, Mant. 
Bor. [The last appears to be a mis- 
print, as the first occurs in the revised 
copy. I doubt the connection of 
this word with S 63.] B 396-400; 
C 52 ; P 149. 

Picture : P 42. 

70. Piece: tio' (tiu'), Sem.. Buk. Max. ; 
E 83 ; P 35. 36 : S 280. 

71. Pierce, to : lun, Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
C 296 ; E 64 ; T 103, 104. 

72. Piercing (sound) : nyarCng (narng), 
Sem. Pa. Max. YMal. nyaring]. 

73. Pig : napak, Sem. Per. ; napag, 
Sem.. Ken. ; napek ; na-pek, Se)n. 
Stev. ; napeg? (napik), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; napeg, Sem. U. Sel. Wild 
pig {Mai. babi hutan) : napeg, Sejti. 
Ktdah. Boar: napag ima(nabagimA), 
Se7n. K. Ken. ; F 238. 

74. Pig : {a) gor, Sbm. ; gaur. Tern. 
Cl. ; (gour), Sak. Plus Cliff. ; gSo, 
Sak. Kinta ; gahu. Tan. U. Lang. ; 
gaQ, gaii, Sak. Martin ; mSnahar 
gau, Serau ; F 218 ; gau. Sen. Cliff.; 
gau, Sen. CL, Sak. Slim, U. 
Kel. , Lebir, Sak. Bla?iJ. Cl. , Sak. 
Blanj. Sw. , Serau ? or Tembi ?, 
Darat, Jelai ; (gow), Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; ga-un, Sak. Sung. Wild pig 
{Mai. babi hutan): ga-u, Sem. 
Plus; gau. Pang. Belimb. ; gau hop, 

Pang. U. Aring; gau sfirak (gow 
se-rak), Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Hog : 
gaur bo (gour ber), Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
gau ibe (gow i-be), Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
M 18. Sow : gaur ba (gour bor), 
Sak. Plus Cliff. ; F 61 ; M 192 ; 
gau ikenan ( gow i-k^nan ), Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. ; F 64. 
(b) Pig : degoh. Rasa. Wild hog : 
degah. Bland. K. Lang. 

75. Pig : rap, Krau Kef., Krau Tern. 
rap, Sak. Guai. ; grum, Sak. Em. 

76. Pig : tfibong, Bedu. //. Wild pig : 
teb6ng, Jak. Malac. Hog: tuban(?) 
(tubaw), Se7n. Jur. And. ; tuban, 
Sem. Jur. Rob. Swine : tuban 
(tubaw), Sem. Jur. Mar. Porcu- 
pine : tebon, Bes. Malac. 

77. Pig : bis, U. Pat. [?^P 88]. 

78. Pig : lu, Sak. U. Kam. ; lu (lou), 
Sak. Ra. Many pigs eat the sugar- 
cane (here) : kom be loy [?] becha' 
(bechak) boi, Krau Em. [? = P 83]. 
[5«<^ li, "pig"; li, "wild boar"; 
Tareng aliii ; Sue li, ali ; So alik 
(alic) ; Nanhang ali ; Cvoi lik (lie), 
" pig" ; Palaung le (16) ; Mon klik, 
"hog."] 

79. Pig : iu (iou), Sak. Ra. [Probably 
a misprint for P 78.] 

80. Pig: {a) cha-gak, Sak. Tan. Ram.; 
changgak, Tembi, Sak. Br. Low ; 
changgei {tchahghei), Sak. Kerb. ; 
jokot, Jak. Ba. Pa. ; jokot, Jak. 
Mad. , Jak. Sim. ; jokflt, PaJif. Kap. 
Mad. Swine : chongkor, Jak. Raff. 
Wild pig : changga (tckanga), Sak. 
Croix. Wild hog : chonkokh, Jok. 
Raff. As. ; chang khok, Jok. Raff. ; 
jonkat, Ben. Ne7v. Cry of the 
"tiger's jackal" bird, indicating 
that a pig is near by : koit - koit 
chonggo', Bes. Sep. [Bahnar shake 
(xake), hake ; Stieng cherkei, rokei, 
rokei, "wild boar"; Chrau ch'ke, 

"pig-"] 

{b) Hog: samungko. Pant. Kap. 
Log. ; semungkor (s'munkor). Pant. 
Kap. Lem. ; samungko pemenggei, 
Pant. Kap. Her. ; s6mungkor pSnyiku, 
Jak. Mad. {Pant. Kap.). [? cf. Bugis 
chamugu, samugu, "pig."] 

81. Pig : kumo, Pal. ; kumokn. Or. 
Hu. Joh. IL ; kmokn, U. Ind. 

82. Pig : kgtuh ; kftur, e.g. ketur m6rl, 
"jungle pig, wild pig," Bes. Sep. 
A. /. ; ketur, Bes. Sep. ; k6tu 
(ketiin), Bedu. IL ; kfitu, Bes. Her., 
Ment. Her. L Wild pig : ketii, Bes. 
Malac. Wild hog : ketur, Ben. 
New. Wild boar : ketur m6ri, Bes. 
Sep. Hog : penyiku kotol, Jak. 
Mad. {Pant. Kap.). [? cf. Billiton 
Malay gaduk utan, " wild pig-"] 

83. Pig: ja-lo', Bera; jalu, Serting. 
Wild pig : jalu, Alantr. .\hilac, Mya. 
[? = P 78 or P 90]. 

84. Pig : s6r(5i, Kena. L 

85. Pig : risim, Bed. Chiang. Wild 
pig : risim. Bland. K. Lang., Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. ; risfm, Mantr. Malac; 

68o 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

risim, Mantr. Malac. Nya. [the term 
must not be used when hunting 
them]. Wild hog : igsam (russam), 
Be?i. New. [? cf. Tarcng ruisol, 
" wild boar."] 

86. Pig: badi (badi), Sem. Pa. Max., 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; ba-di, Kerbat. 
Hog: badai, Sem. Jtir. And., Sem. 
Jur. Rob. Swine: badai, Sem. Jur. 
Mar. Wild pig? [Mai. babi 
hutan) : badiyu, Pang. K. A ring. 
[This word, or an identical one of 
unknown meaning, occurs in a Malay- 
charm used by hunters of the elephant 
and rhinoceros. Malay Magic, 
Appendi.x, p. 603.] Wild pig (spec. 
Mai. nangui) : badi (badi), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [Mai. babi]; B 119; 
F 218. 

87. Pig, wild : dal, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
[?=P 82]. 

88. Pig, wild : mes. Bland. K. Lang. 

■ [?=P77]- 

89. Pig, wild : tekil, Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. 

90. W'ild hog : j61an, Sem. Beg. ; jelan, 
Ben. New. Wild pig (spec. Mai. 
nangui ) : jahn ( jalin ), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [?=P 83]. [? cf. Madur. 
cheleng (tj^l^ng), "wild pig."] 

91. Pig, cry of wild : dret-dret-dret, 
Bes. Songs. 

92. Pigeon (spec. Mai. p6rgam): pegaPm, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. [Mai. pgrgam]. 

93. Pigeon (spec. Mai. punai): menyun, 
Pang. U. Aring; mengyu (mngyfi), 
Sak. U. Kam. ; weyau, Bes. Sep. 
A. I. Wild pigeon, spec. : chim 
weao (orweau), Bes. Sep. ; B 216. 

94. Pigeon [Mai. punai) : kochok, Bes. 
Sep. A. I. Wild pigeon : kochok, 
Bes. Sep. [Cham "kaXauk, "dove."] 

95. Pigeon ( Mai. punai ) : punei 
(pounei), Sak. Pa. ; (pounei), Sak. 
Kerb. ; chem punei (tchfim-pounei), 
Som. : B 216 [Mai. punai]. 

96. Pigeon, spec.(?) : chim janggol^'ng, 
Bes. Sep. ; B 216. 

97. Pigeon, spec. (?) : chim janghui; 
chim jangsi, Bes. Sep. ; B 216. 

98. Pigeon, spec. ? : me-el, Sem. Stev. 
[Supposed, ace. to V. -Stevens, by the 
S6mangs to be the companion of a 
mythical female divinity called 
" Simei," sister of "Pie."] B 216 ; 
D 15.^- 

Pillar : P 191-195. 

99. Pillow (.V/fl/, bantal): tun. Pang. U. 
Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

100. Pillow (Mai. bantal) : (a) nelgul 
{pr. nellgull), Sem. Kedah, Sem. 

Jarum ; nelgul, Sem. Plus. Bridges 
of musical instrument, M 226, in- 
serted under the string at each end 
to raise and tighten it: nelgul, Sem. 
Kedah. 

[b] Pillow : kg - nel - chol (pr. 
kgnellcholl), Sem. Plus ; kgnechul, 
Sem. Kedah. [? Cf. Bahnar\x)Vi<j\, 
"pillow" (apparently from kol, 
"head." There is another word 
konon from akon, " to lean upon "); 
cf. P loi, and H 46?] 

[c] Pillow: chfing-kol, Tern. CI., 
Sak. Plus Cliff., Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
chankulan, Ben. New. ; chgkoan, 
Jak. Malac. [? a compound from 
the root of H 46]. 

[d] Pillow : tinggul. Pang. U. 
Ari?ig; tengol, Mantr. Malac. ; 
peningol pgmubun (p'ningol 
p'mubun), Patit. Kap. Joh. Bridges 
of lyre : peningol, Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. Head: pgninggol (peninggol), 
Pant. Kap. Her. ; pSningol 
(p'ningol). Pant. Kap. Mad. ; 
(piningol), Pant. Kap. Log.; C 38 ; 
W 112. Cap: sapu f)6ningol 
(sapu p'ningol). Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Headkerchief : sapu tinggol, Jak. 
Mad. (Pant. Kap. ); sapu peninggol, 
Pant. Kap. Her. Horn : pengSrep 
pgningol (p'ng'rep p'ningol). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. ; T 173. [The root 
meaning, apparently, is "head," 
cf. P -.] 

loi. Pillow: te-nfi-i. Sen. CI. [? = 
P 100]. [Khmer khnoi [khnoy], 
from koi [koy], "to lean on " (?) ; 
Stieng konei ; Man keni [gni], 
" pillow" ; cf. P 100 ((?).] 

102. PiLL(jw : bantal, Mantr. Malac. 
Nya. {Mai. bantal]. 

103. Pinang balk (tree spec), Vatica 
Curtisii : pal? baik (pi baik), Setn. 
Pa. Max.; (Mai. pinang peragam?): 
pal peragam? (pi prakm), Sem. Pa, 
Max. 

Pinch : P 108. 

104. Pinch, to (Mai. chubit) : ya- ton, 
(•v. ton bSlu 'wet = .!/«/. chubit paha 
kiri ( proverb), lit. ' ' to pinch the 
left leg," i.e. it affects the right one 
also. Pang. Galas. 

105. Pinch, to : chuet (chuit), Sem. 
Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. Max. ; ch<i-6t, 
Sen. Cliff. ; chu-aet, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. To pinch ; to squeeze : chuet 
(chuit), Sem. Pa. Max. To wipe 
off (Mai. palit) : chuet, Bes. Sep. 
To draw : chubet (tchoubet), Mantr. 
Cast. [Mai. chubit]. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

68i 

1 06. Pinch, to : chfipen (tchopen), 
S'dm. ; pit, Sak. Ra. To pinch ; 
to squeeze : mftchepit (mchpit), Scyn. 
Buk. Max. Prawn ; betel-nut 
cutter : pfinyipet (p'nyipet), Fant. 
Kap. Joh. Scorpion : penipet 
(p'nipet), Pant. Kap. Mad. \Mal. 
sgpit ; but of. also Baknar chopet, 
pet, " to pinch (with the fingers) " ; 
Stieng piet, apiet, "to get the 
fingers pinched " ; Khmer tebi6t 
[tpiet], "to hold (by pinching)" ; 
chhpit [chhbit], "holding with the 
tips of the fingers (?) " ; and see 
P 209 B. ; ? cf. also P 105.] 

107. Pinch, to: pinyat? (pignet), ^o/J. 
Kerb. ; kechit, Ma?iir. Malac. [Cf. 
Baknar ne\. (nh6t), niet, " to squeeze 
with the fingers" ; Mai. pichit, "to 
pinch."] 

108. Pinch, to ; to squeeze [Mai. 
apitkan) : keta' (?), Bes. Sep. A 
pinch (Mai. jgntik) : kgltus (kltus), 
Sem. Pa. Ma.v. ; kfiltis (kltis) Sem. 
Buk. Max. [? Cf. Khmer kedech 
[ktich], " to pinch slightly."] 

109. Pinched: gfinting, e.g. " my belly 
is pinched with hunger," perut g6n- 
ting o-eh lapar, /fli. Malac. Valley: 
genting, Bedti. II. \Mal. genting]. 

110. Pineapple : sol4, Mantr. Malac. 

111. Pi.xeapple: nanas, Serau, Kraii 
Em. , Maiitr. Malac. ; nenas, Sak. 
U. Kam. \^Mal. nanas] ; H 7. 

112. Pipe for water, etc. : tSnglor 
(tnglur), Sak. U. Kam. 

Pipe, to : W 97. 
Pipeclay : E 12. 

113. Pirate: bajau, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
\^Mal. Bajau, name of a piratical 
tribe of Borneo]. 

114. Pirate: mah kompa', Bes. Sep. 
A. I. ; M 23 ; [J/a/. rompak]. 

115. Pistil (of flower): tepi (tepee), 
Sem. Sfev. [Doubtful: cf. E 33.] 
Pit : D 66. 

Pit of stomach : S 460. 
Pitch : R 80. 

116. Pith: kol. Sen. CI. Offal (of 
grain)? {Mai. ftmpas) : kol. Sen. 
Cliff. [? Cf. Khmer khuor, "mar- 
row."] 

Pith : M 58 ; S 234. 
Pitted with holes : B 175. 

117. Pity {Mai. kasihan) : god (?), ex. 
ja god 6' te - kebed {Mai. kasihan 
tuha-nya), "pity his age," Sem. 
Plus ; O 17. 

118. Place {Mai. tempat) : {a) til, Pang. 
U. Aring. Track: til, Bes. K. Lang. 
Spoor; tracks; footprints: U'W, Bes. 

Songs; til, e.g. hk til a'a', "these 
are tiger tracks," Bes. Sep. A. I. 
Footprint : tai, Sak. Guai. Foot- 
prints : til, Sejn. Pa. Max.; mgntin 
(mntin), Sem. Buk. Max. Tracks ; 
marks : til, Sem. Pa. Max. Tracks; 
mark ; scar : til, Sem. Buk. Max. 
Mark of a scratch : tel, Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

{h) Tracks ; footprints : del. Sen. 
Cliff. ; dil juk, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
F 220. [Stieng til ; Bahnar del ; 
Anna7n X\<:.\\, "tracks," "mark."] 
{c) Spoor or track {Mai. bekas) : 
tgrtoh (//-. terr-tohh), e.g. tfirtoh 
nyah, " tiger's track," tgrtoh kasha', 
" deer track," /'«;;cr. U. Aring. 

119. Place : temped {pr. tGmpedd), 
Sem. Plus ; tampS,t, Sak. Ra. [Mai. 
tgmpat]. 

120. Place (once occupied, now empty): 
tempok, Bes. K. Lang. \Mal. 
tampok] ; H 153 ; S 221 ; V 19. 
Place, to : H 153 ; K 5. 

121. Placenta ; afterbirth {Mai. uri 
kfichil) : uri bale' (auri bali'), Sem. 
Pa. Max. [Mai. uri] ; N 42. 

122. Plain (land) ; surface : tebal, Sem. 
Stcv. [? Cf. E 12 ; and Khmer 
veal [wal]; J/o« wea [wa], " plain."] 

123. Plain (land) : plema (ploma), 
Sbm. [? Mai. lembah]. 

124. Plain : padeng (pading), Scyn. 
Buk. Max. ; padang, Ben. New. 
[Mai. padang] ; E 12 ; E 17 ; 
G 66 ; H 14 ; L 62 ; S 57. 

125. Plait, to : emberiareh (emb6ri^r(5h), 
Sak. Ra. 

126. Plait or weave, to {Mai. aniam) : 
ya' dendan (/;-. den-dann) {e.g. in 
making baskets), Sem. Plus. [? Cf. 
Khmer bandaii [pantaii] ; Ka tatan, 
' ' to wea\'e ' ' ; Stieng, Bahnar tail 
(tanh) ; Boloven, Niah'oti, Alak 
tan; Lave tSii ; Halang tin, "to 
plait," " to weave. "] W 66. 
Planet : S 436. 

127. Planing-adze : rimbas, Bes. Songs 
[Mai. rimbas]. 

Plant : B 466. 

128. Plant spec. : a fragrant stemmed 
plant with an aroid-like dark mauve- 
coloured leaf, whose stem is shredded 
up with the thumb-nail, to within a 
few inches of the base of the stem, 
and worn in the girdle to avert 
' ' sakit bglakang ' ' ( back-ache ? ) , 
rStut, Sem. Plus. 

129. Plant, parasitic, spec. {Mai. 
" tippus krowie " ?=tepus kerawai): 
kem, Sem. Stev. 

682 

COM PARA TI VE VOCA B ULA R V OF 

130. Plant used for dyeing yellow : 
deem, Sem. Sfcv. 

131. Plant used for mat -making: 
sahlak (sahlek), Sak. Ra. 

132. Plant, to ". tap", Tembl ; p6t6m, 
Bes. K. La?ig. ; metong ; pgtong ; 
nietoPm, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; me- 
tong, Bes. Malac. To plant or 
bury [Mai. tanam) : ya-tam, Sem. 
Plus. To sow [Mai. tabor) : ya' 
tub (/;-. tiibb), e.v. ya' tub bab, 
"to sow rice," Sem. Jarum; ya' 
tiib or ya' tup (/;-. tubb or tupp), 
ex. ya' tup ba', " to sow rice," Sein. 
Plus. Plant [plantation?] {Mai. 
tanaman) : nomtap, Som.. \_Boloven 
top ; Mon ta [tuiw] ; Niahon ndSm ; 
Lave dam ; Alak ntftm ; Khmer 
dam [tarn]; Bah>tar potam, "to 
plant"; Stieng tam, "to plant," 
" to sow " ; Bahnar top (tap), " to 
thrust into the earth," "to make 
holes for seed" (cf. Alak tap; 
Bahnar tom (tam), "to pierce"); 
cf. Mon tap [tuip] ; Stieng tap ; 
Chrdu top ; Tareng kettip ; Kasetig 
tiip, "to bury." There are ap- 
parently two allied roots, with some- 
what similar meanings : top and 
tcm. ] 

133. Pl.\nt, to [Mai. tanam) : ya' 
ta-j6', Sem. Jarum. \Jarai tojuk ; 
Tareng tochot, " to sow."] 

134. Pl.-\NT, to : chengara (tchengare), 
Sak. Ra. [? cf. C 296] ; D 66 ; D 
108 ; D 134. 

Plantain : B 41 - 49 ; F 284 ; 
H 126 ; U 20. 

135. Plantation: gloku' (glokul'). Or. 
Hu. Joh. /.; C 153; C 15s; F94; 
P 132. 

136. Plate : pingadn (pingan(d)), Sak. 
U. Kam. ; pinggan, Bes. K. Lang. ; 
{Mai. piring) pingat, Serau \Mal. 
pinggan]. 

136.\. Plate : piring \^Ial. piring]. 

137. Plates, leaves used as, by the 
wild tribes in Kelantan : ternok, 
Pang. U. A ring. 

138. Plate or tray, banana - leaf or 
palm-leaf used as a : jambar, Bes. 
A". /,., Bes. Sep. To serve (food) : 
jambar, Bes. Songs \AIal. jambar]. 

139. Play, to: knin-ka, Som. 

140. Play, to: chachi (tchatchi), Sak. 
Kerb. 

141. Play, to : niun, Tembi ; mSnman, 
Serau ; manman, Sak. Martin ; 
minman, Sak. Kor. Gb.\ menman, 
Sak. Kerb. , Sak. Ra. [Mai. main- 
main]. 

142. Play, to; to disport oneself: de, 
ex. o' 'de, 6' 'de, 6' sayong sigfingb 
jelmol, "he disports himself, he 
soars (?) on every mountain," 5e»z. 
Plus [? .Mill, sindir ; but this seems 
improbable]. 

143. Pleasant {.\/al. sedap): belog {pr. 
be-16gg) (dist. from bel6g="bad," 
B 7), Sem. Plus. 

144. Pleasant : s6r6t, /ak. Mad. [? cf. 
G74]; G65; G67; R 125; SS39. 

145. Pleased : gilrau, Kena. //. \^Mal. 
gurau] ; G 65-67 ; J 12. 

To be pleased : G 66 ; L 17. 

To please : J 12. 

Pleasure : G 29 ; G 65 ; J 12 ; W 

107B. 

Pleiades : S 436. 

146. Plenty : rejak, Bes. So?igs. 

147. Plimp - plump (onomatop. of 
falling) ; jibang-jibuk, Bes. Songs. 

147A. Plough : tenggala (tenggalak), 
Tembi [;!/«/. tenggala]. 

148. Pluck, to : merimpa', Bes. Songs. 

149. Pluck, to ; to pick : mamos or 
m^mos, Sak. Kor. Gb. To pick 
up {.Mai. pungut): imois [a^/a' imrois 
(j/V)], Tembi ; P 67-69. 

150. Pluck out, to : ang-kob, Sem. 
Stez'. [? cf. C 48] ; P 226 ; P 230. 

150A. Plug in a flute : senumi (senwmee), 
Sem. Stev. 
Plump ; F 34 ; F 36, 37. 

151. Pock-marked : poh (puh), Sem. 
Pa. Max. 

Poem : S 213. 

152. Point ; dot : keto' (ktuk), Sem. 
Pa. Max. 

153. Point; dot: angke' (angki'), 6V»2. 
Buk. Max. ; E 63 ; E 65 ; E 83 ; 
N 98 ; P 212. 

Point of arrow or sword : B 295- 

301 ; B 354. 

Point of shoulder : S 169 ; S 171. 

154. Point, to {Mai. tunjok) : (a) sSlSh, 
Bes. .4. /. ; siM or solo, Bes. K. L. 
{b) To show; to teach: tula? 
(toule) ; tonla? (tonle), Som. To 
teach : tela, Sem. K. Ken. To 
guide : tonle (ton-16), Sam. 

155. Point, to: ya-pSnyal {pr. pe- 
nyall), Pang. U. A ring. To show ; 
to point out {e.g. the way) : terniil, 
.Sak. Em. Show me the way ! 
terniol nong am nem, Krati Em. ; 
C216. Forefinger: tanial (tanliaal), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; tCni' yal, Sem. 
Kedah. Second (middle) finger ; 
tc'ni' yal kfimut (?), Sem. Kedah ; 
G 18 ; H 15. [Probably a deriva- 
tive from U 15.] 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

683 

156. Point out, to ; to show {Mai. 
tunjok) : p6disa', Fang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. To show : 
pgrdisah, Jak. Malac. , e.g. ' ' do not 
show it," jangan di-p5rdisah, lak. 
Malac. 

157. Pointed: anchib? (anchb), Scm. 
Ihik. Max. \Mal. lanchip?]. 

158. Pointed: tujah-tujah, Bes. Songs; 
C 296. 

159. Poison {A/al. rachun) : ken-mob 
(/>f: ken-mobb), Sem. Kedah. 

160. Poison [Mai. rachun) : kgnSlep 
(.^w/ylep), Som. 

161. Poison {Mai. rachun) : ren-chug 
{pr. renchugg), Sem. Plus ; rachun ? 
(radjun), Sak. Kor. Gb. [Mai. 
rachun]. 

162. Poison, blowpipe arrow-: pSnlash ? 
(punlash). Turn. Sf.ev. 

163. Poison, arrow- : [a) chSngra' 
(chngra'), Sak. U. Kain.\ chingra ? 
{tsinxk), Sak. Ra. ; B 232 ; B 291 ; 
(spec. Mai. ipuh akar) : chingra 
chiong chiong? (tshJih tsioh tsion), 
Sak. Morg. [prob. Sak. Ka.'\ ; R 37 ; 
{Mai. ipuh kayu) : chingra ? jehu 
{tsiflxh djehou), Sak. Morg. {Ra. ?); 
T 211. Poisonous: mangchgngra' 
(mangchngra') Sak. U. Kam. [Cf. 
Boloven prei ; Niahbn pre ; A lak 
pftrei ; Halang pojrei, " arrow- 
poison."] 

{b) Arrow-poison : ternek, Belend. 
Stev. Either Antiaris toxicaria or 
Giietum edulel used as an ingredient 
in arrow-poison : ches tenet, Bes. 
A. I.;V 164. Ingredient of arrow- 
poison : tenet, Bes. K. Lang. 
" Blay " kfichil, Gnetum scandensl 
an ingredient in arrow - poison : 
kannet, Pang. Stev. Arrow-poison : 
ipoh tennik or kennik, Newbold, ii. 
399. Ipoh : tgnak, Sak. Martin. 

164. Poison, arrow- : (a) chish, Bers. 
Stev.; chih, Ment. Her. II.; cheh, 
Bes. Malac. Ingredient of arrow- 
poison (Mai. ipoh) : ches, Bes. A'. 
Lang. Upas : ches ; cheh, Bes. Sep. 
A. I. Ipoh (poison-tree) : ches ; 
cheh, Bes. A. I. To dip the 
arrow in the ipoh juice : chah 
(ch^h), Serting. \Clirau jueh ; 
shueh ; Khmer chhv^s [chhwes ; 
chhwis], chhvgh [chhweh], "arrow- 
poison."] 

{b) Arrow-poison : kayas (kyass), 
Kena. Stev. Upas tree : kayas, 
Mantr. Malac. Cha, [Brao?( kais, 
" arrow-poison."] 

165. Poison, arrow- : ipoh, Sotn., 

Mantr. Malac. , Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. , lak. Malac. ; ipo. Pal. 
Upas climber plant : ipoh, Ma7ttr. 
Malac. Cha. Medicine ; ipoh 
(Antiaris) : upas, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
\_Mal. upas ; ipoh]. 

166. Upas sap (Mai. ggtah kayu ipoh) : 
kSrui, Mantr. Malac. Nya. Lopho- 
petaliim pallidum : kroi ; ches 
kruoi, Bes. A. I. ; P 164. In- 
gredient in arrow - poison : kroi 
(kroie), Mentr. Stev. Arrow-poison: 
ipoh krohi, Nei-vbold, ii. 399. [? Cf. 
Siieng krou, ' ' to poison fish with 
the bark of a bitter liane. "] 

167. Strychnos : ham, Sem. Stev. 

168. Poison plant, blowpipe (spec. 
Mai. lekheer), (prob. likir, Amor- 
phophalhis Pf-ainiana) : tada 
(t(zddar), Sem. Stev. 

169. Poison plant, arrow- (Mai. 
"lekhyer"); also (apparently) the 
professional poison-maker amongst 
the Pangans : kinel (kinell), Pang. 
Stev. 

170. Poison plant, arrow- (spec. ALal. 
ringhut) : kai-whor, Sem. Stev. 

171. Poison tree (spec. Mai. "tapoah"): 
pera (p'rar), Sem. Stev. [? = P 58]. 

172. Creeper whose sap is mi.\ed with 
upas poison : tunjuni. Pang. U. 
A ring. 

173. Poison, ingredient of arrow- ; 
" blay " besar, prob. Strychnos sp. : 
talun (taloon). Pang. Stev. 

173.^. Poison, ingredient of arrow- ; 
"blay" hitam, prob. Strychnos sp.: 
gria (greear). Pang. Stev. 

174. Poison, ingredient of arrow- : 
malai, Bes. K. Lang. ; P 164. 
Aralidium. pinnatijidiim or Tke- 
vetia neriifolia ? etc. [see vol. 
i. p. 600] : malai ; ches malai 
or balai, Bes. A. I. ; P 164. 
Arrow-poison: ipoh malai? (ipoh 
mallaye), Newbold. ii. 399. Perhaps 
also cf. the ingredients of the 
Pangan arrow - poison, ' ' blay 
bgsar, b. kechil, b. hitam, of 
which the Pangan names are said 
to be "taloon" P 173, "kannet" 
P 163, and "greear" P 173.'^ 
respectivelj'. Pang. Stei'. For other 
names of ingredients of arrow- 
poison, see vol. i. p. 598 seq. ; T 

245- 

175. Poison, receptacle for arrow-: 
jelok, Bland. K. Lang. Sliver for 
arrow-poison, .S 264. Spatula for 
arrow-poison, S 355-358. Tray for 
arrow-poison, T 201. 

684 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

176. 

177. 

178. 

179. 

183. 
184. 

185. 

186. 

187. 

190. 

191, 
192. 

Poisoned : P 176. 
Poisoning : D 48 ; D 50. 
Poison-maker: P 169. 
Poisonous [Mai. bisa) : bisa', ex. 
o'-tek bisa' o'-un bra' bisa', "this 
one is poisoned and that is not," 
Pang. Sam, Fang. Gal. Poisoned : 
(.Mai. tfirkgna bisa) : tebang bisa 
(tebng bsa), Sent. Buk. A/ax. [A/al. 
bisa] ; P 163 ; T 211 ; V 23. 
Pole, carrying- : pSnganar (pung- 
an-ar) Menf. Stev. \^Mal. kandar, 
" to carry " with such a pole.] 
Polypus [in the nose ?] : chimpid 
ma (chim-peed-mor), Sem. Stev. ; 
X 98. 

Pomegranate : bah delima (bah 
dlima), Sem. Pa. Max. ; ba delima 
(ba dlima), Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. 
dalima]. 

Poor {Mai. miskin) : pawes (pr. 
pa-wess). Pang. U. Aring; pawes 
{pr. pawess), Pang. Sam ; pawez 
[pr. pa-wezz). Pang. Gal. 
Poor: koslas (o;- kesles), Sak. Kor. 
Gb. [? Cf. Alak loch ; Lave fll 
llch (?) ; Ch7-du\6'6\, "poor."] 
Poor : kere (keray), Ment. Stev. 
[Khmer kra ; Stieng kro, ' ' poor. "] 
Poor : paieng, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Poor, ver}- : mokos, Ment. Stev. ; 
R 123. 

Porcupine : ku-ish, Sen. CI. ; kush, 
Serau. [Cf. Selung koh, "brush- 
tailed porcupine."] 
Porcupine ; kzneg, Sem. Stev. ; 
landeg, Sent. Kedah ; lanag, Sem. K. 
Ken. ; landeg? (Indik). Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
landak, Mantr. Malac. ; lant3,h, 
Sem. Plus, Sem. Ja>-um. Large 
kind of porcupine : landak, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha, Alantr. Malac. Nya. ; 
[Mai. landak]. 

Porcupine : sebuntu, Jak. Ba. Pa. 
Large kind of porcupine : puntu, 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. ; puntu, Jak. 
Malac. 

Porcupine (spec Mai. landak 
batu) : joi, Mantr. Malac. Cha. 
Small porcupine: joi, Mantr. Malac. 
Nya. 

Porcupine, small kind of: son6i, 
Jak. Malac. [?=P 188]. 
Porcupine : chengk6th, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. ; P 76 ; S 165. 
Pore (of skin) : H 107. 
Portion : P 35. 36. 
Possess, to : C 48. 
Post (.\hil. tiang) : mentod, Som. 
PO.ST : ch£--noi, Sen. CI. Post (of 
house) : chenol, Serau ; chen^l, 

Sak. Em. ch6no-i (tchenoi), Sak. 
Ra. Mast : chfenong, Sak. U. 
Kam. Principal beam : ku chgnang 
(koutchonaA), Sak. Pa. ; H 46. 

193. Post : {a) tekah [Mat. tiang), e.g. 
tSkah behdung(.l/(2/. tiang buat pon- 
dong), "posts for building a hut," 
Bes. K. L. Post (of house) ; pillar 
(of house) : tekah, /fej. A. L The 
stem of anything (Mai. batang) : 
tekih ; a post, etc., also a numeral 
coefficient, e.g. dama' tujoh tfikdh, 
" seven arrows," Bes. K. L. Tree : 
tS-koh, Ki-aii Tern. ; tekiih (t6k6h), 
Bes. Her. Trunk of tree : tekoh, 
Bes. Sep. A . L Base of tree : 
tekah, Bes. Songs. [Cf. Mon thaka' 
[thakuia], num. coeff. of "guns," 
etc.] 

(b) Post : tegak, Kena. I. [? Cf. 
Mai. tggak, "upright."] 

194. Post : tongul ? (tonghoul), Sak. 
Kei'b. [Mai. tunggul]. 

195. Post (of house) : teheng (thing), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; tihang, Bes. A. L, 
Bedu. IL, Mantr. Malac. Princi- 
pal beam : kapala tiang (kapala 
tiaii), Sd)n. Beam (Mai. tutop 
tiang) : totop tiang (totop tian), 
Sotn. [Mai. tiang]. 

196. Principal beam [Mai. kapala 
tiang) : (a) tugnuh (toughnouh), 
Sak. Kerb. [? = P 194]. 

(b) Principal beam : tangnong? 
(tangnon), Sak. Kerb. [? Mai. tang- 
gong, "to support" ; but cf. also 
Mon taing [tuing], "post"; cf. P 

I95-] 

197. Principal beam : kekuahlo (ko- 
kouah-lo), Sak. Ra. 

Post : T 211 ; U 23. 

198. Pot: lia; lie, Sak. Kor. Gb. Cook- 
ing-pot: liah (li^h), Sak. Kerb. ; 
lie, Som. Iron cooking-pot (Mai. 
kuali) : \\,Sak. Kerb., Sen. Cliff.; ila 
(ile). Sak. Ra. Pot (Mai. pgriok) : 
li kgmong (likomofi), Sak. Ra. 
Cooking-pot : li kemu (likomou), 
Sak. Ra. [? Cf. Khfner lu [luw], 
" large jar."] 

199. Pot (Mai. periok) : kS-ding, Bera. 
[?=B3i]. 

200. Pot (Mai. periok) : priok, Tembi ; 
priuk, Serau ; piok, Bes. K. Lang. 
Rice-pot : piok, Bes. Songs [Mai. 
pgriok]. 

201. Pot: banga', Bes. Malac, Bes. 
Songs ; (bangak), Bes. K. Lang. 
Cooking-pot : blanga (blafia), Som.; 
(.^/al. kuali) ; blanga' (blangak), 
Tetnbl ; blango' (blangok), Serau. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

685 

Earthenware pot : blanga", Sak. U. 
Kam. Earthen pot : pakan, Pant. 
Kap. Joh. [MaL bglanga] ; B 22 ; 
C 89. 

Potato : Y 21. Sweet potato : 
Y I ; Y 16-19. 

202. Pound, to (e.^. rice = il/a/. tum- 
bok) : ya-tsoh (/>r. tsohh, Pang. U. 
Aring; ya-s6h {pr. sohh), Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. To pound to 
pieces [Ger. zerstossen) : ajdk ; ejAk 
(adjik or edjak), Sak. Kor. Gb. 
To pound ; to dash upon (like a 
wave) : mAdftk (mdk), Sem. Btik. 
Ma.x. 

203. Pound, to : 'ntom, Bes. Malac. 
To pound or batter : hentom, Bes. 
K. L. To strike [Mai. pukol) : j'a- 
tbm, Pang. U. Aring. [Mai. han- 
tam ; hSntam ; but cf. also Baknar 
teni, " to hammer."] 

204. Pour, to {Mai. tumpah) : ya-bo', 
Pang. U. Aring. 

205. Pour, to: tele', e.g. tele' doo, "to 
pour water, " Bes. A. I. [? = T 106]. 

206. Pour, to {intrans.), or flow in a 
thin stream or jet [Mai. chuchor) : 
tub, Sem. Btik. Max. To overflow ; 
to trickle: henub (hnub), Sem. Buk. 
Ma.x. To pour {Mai. tuang) : 
jetup, Serau. 

To pour : F 1 1 ; F 1 3. 
To pour out : B 81. 
Power : A 187. 

207. Prawn ; crayfish : klo' kfisub (klu' 
ksub), Sem. Buk. Max. ; {Mai. 
udang merah) : klo' kesub tihuim 
(klu' ksub thuim), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
R 51 ; {Mai. udang rimau) : klo' 
kSsub rimau (klu' ksub riniu), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [cf. A 101]. 

208. Prawn : udang, Sak. U. Kam. 
Lobster ; mud - crab {Mai. udang 
getah) : uda'^ng ketas, Bes. A. /. , 
Bes. K. L. [Mai. udang] ; P 106. 
Pray, to : A 165. 

Precede, to : A 6 ; B 145. 
Precipice : L 150 ; S 445. 
Precipitous : D 64 ; S 445. 

209. Pregnancy ; child-bearing : kayut 
(kayoot), Sem. Stev. Pregnant : 
kehot? (k'h6t), Se>iing. [Probably 
= C 109.] 

Pregnant : B 160 ; E 27 ; F 282. 
Present, at : N 106. 
Present, to : G 29-38. 
Presently : I 10 ; M 122. 
209A. Press, used in the construction of 
the wooden blowpipe of certain 
tribes: kahon, Ben. Stev., Materi- 
alien, pt. i. p. 103. 

209B. Press, to : be^n ; pe^n, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. [? Cf. Man pdt [pit] ; 
Stieng pat ; Bahnar pit, ' ' to press " ; 
and cf P 106.] 

210. Press, to: tSkan, Sak. U. Kam. 
To oppress: kenan, Bes. Songs. To 
strangle : tekoPm, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
[Mai. tCkan, "to press."] 
Pretty: G 63 ; G 65, 66 ; G 71. 
72 ; H 63. 

2io.\. Previous: pehamai pghemai, 
Bes. A. /. [? cf. N 50, 51]. 

211. Price: hfirga (horga), Sak. Pa. 
[Mai. harga ; herga] ; D 60, 6r. 

212. Prick ; sharp point {Ger. Stachel) ; 
tang, Sem. Stev. ; B 121. 

Prick, to : C 296. 

213. Pricked up : triang-triang, Bes. 
Songs. 

214. Pricked up : chanchang - chan- 
chang, Bes. Songs. 

215. Probably: toleiloi, Sak. Kerb. 

216. Probably: brangkali (brankali), 
Som. , Sak. Pa. [Mai. barangkali]. 
Proceed, to : B 145. 
Procreate, to : A 53. 

Procure, to : C 20 ; C 48 ; F 103. 
Profit : G 2. 

217. Promise, to : janji, Sak. U. Kam. 
To agree ; to make an agreement : 
janji (janjik) ; berjanji' (berjanjik), 
Seran. I agree : en berjanyit, 
Jelai [Mai. janji]. 

Prone : L 69-72. 
Proof: C 147, 148. 

218. Prop; to support: suyo' ? or 
suyong? (?suiu'), Se7n. Btik. Max. 
Prop ; support : mesiong (msiung), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; S 452, 453. 
Proper : E 73 ; S 482. 
Prostrate ; L 66. 

Protect, to ; A 57. 
Protruding : G 58. 
Provisions : E 27. 
Pruritus : I 45-53- 
Psoriasis : I 46-53. 
Pubes : H 2. 

219. Pudendum muliebre : tek, U.Kel.\ 
teng, Lebir ; teng, Kerbat ; ton ? 
(don ; do'n ?), Sem. K. Ken. To 
copulate : teng, Lebir. Menstrua- 
tion : teng, Sem. Stev. [Cf. Cham 
ating ; Siieng \.i.x\\.'\ 

220. Pudendum muliebre : i-let, Sak. 
Cliff, [either Plus or Blanjd] ; let, 
Sen. Cliff.; le', Krau Ket., U. 
Tern. ; le, U. Cher. Vagina [but 
probably = vulva] : leek, Seran. 

221. Pudendum muliebre; female 
organ : kache, Jak. Ba. Pa. Vagina : 
kache" (katchen"), U. Ind. ; (kat- 

686 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

schen'), Or. Hit. Joh. I. [?=N 7]. 
[? Cf. A7?werangkacheat [angkajat], 
" genitals."] 

222. Pudendum muliebke : puki, Sem. 
Buk. Max. l.Mal. puki]. 

222.-\. Labia pudenda : kem6n, Son. K. 
Ken. [perhaps a mistake : see C 5] ; 
A 118 ; C 242 ; N 18. 
Puerperal fever : F 155. 

223. Pulai (tree), Ahtonia scholaris : 
tingku; tengkal ; tengkol, Bes. Sep. 
Sepam ? (tree spec. ) : tingkai 
(tngkl), Sem. Pa. Max. ; tfingkul 
(tngkul), Sem. Buk. Max. Tree 
spec. : tangkul, ex. kfipal tangkul, 
"fruits (or buds) of the tangkul," 
Pang. Teliang. Mouthpiece of 
blowpipe : tengkal, Sent. Plus. 

224. Pulai (tree) : pulai, Bes. Songs. 
\Mal. pulai]. 

225. Pulasan (fruit - tree) ; Nephelium 
mutabile: pahet, Pang. U. A ring; 
R 22; R 25. 

226. Pull, to: nenke (nijnk^), Som. To 
pull ; to drag ; to pull out ; to pluck 
out ; to snatch : making (mking), 
Sem. Buk. Max. To pull; to drag: 
ting, Sem. Pa. Max. To pull out ; 
to pluck out ; to snatch : tek (tik), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [?= P 231]. [There 
are several distinct roots here : ? cf. 
A/on t^ng [tang], " to pull."] 

227. Pull, to : jSk, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
(djek), Sak. Ra. ; jeng, Tembi. 
To pull out : kajuk ; juk, Bes. 
A. I.; e.g., "to draw a knife 
from its sheath," jok, Bes. 
Soni;s. To draw : jiik (di^k), 
Sak. Pa. [The Fr. is "attirer," 
= to draw to oneself, but the Mai. 
equivalent is " pakeian," which was 
probably added subsequently, by 
mistake, perhaps by confusion with 
F.ng. "attire"; cf. C 50; E 76.] 
[? Cf. CArau )&i. "to pull."] 

228. Pull, to : ahir (^hir), Sak. Kerb. 
[? cf. S 492]. 

229. Pull, to ; helai, Mantr. Malac. 
To pull ; to draw ; to drag : hilai, 
Mant. Bor. ; (kilag), Mantr. Casf. 
[perhaps a misprint for " hilay "], 
[Mai. hela]. 

229A. Pull, to : tarik", Serau [or Tem- 
6i7] ; karet, Serau [Mai. tarek]. 

230. Pull out, to: telJvg? (tlk), 
Sem. Pa. Max. To pluck out 
(Mai. chabut) : ya-teglog. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal.; rre-rug; krC- 
riig (?); krCrg, Sen. Cliff. [Rrc- 
nlg appears to be the best attested 
form : probably to be pronounced 

rfirog. Krgrg should probably be 
read rr6rg = rog. Kr6-rug is prob- 
ably a clerical error for rr6-rQg 
[? = C5o.] 

231. Pull out, to : hitak, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; e.g. ' ' to draw a knife from 
its sheath," hentak, Bes. Songs. 
To extract or pull up (Mai. chabut): 
ya' chin-tag (pr. chin-tagg or chinn- 
tagg), Sem. Plus ; ya' sin-tag (pr. 
sin-tagg or sinn-tagg), Sem. Jarum 
[Mai. sentak]. 

Pulse : A 150, 151 ; V 8. 
Pummelo : L 103. 

232. Pumpkin; gourd (Fr. citrouille) : 
(Mai. labu) : sinu (sinou), Sak. Ha. 

233. Pumpkin : tokal, Som. ; tfikal, 
Kena. II. ; tukal, Bes. Sep. Gourd: 
(Mai. labu): Wik'^X, Pang. U. A ring. 

234. Pumpkin ; gourd : labu, Serau ; 
(labou), Som. , Sak. Kerb. , Sak. 
Pa. ; (labou), Sak. Kerb. Water 
pumpkin: labo' wah ? (labu' uh), 
Sem. Pa. Max. White pump- 
kin : labo' peltu (labu' pltu), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; labo' pgltau 
(labu' paitau), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Pumpkin (variety: Mai. labu pering- 
gi) : labo' pahang (labu' pahng), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; R 51. Water- 
bottle: labo, Sak. Tap. [Mai. labu]. 

235. Pumpkin (Mai. labu ayer): jelfing^', 
Mantr. Malac. Nya. 

236. Pumpkin ? (spec. Mai. pgria bu- 
rong) : peria kawau (pri kauftu), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; B 215 [Mai. 
p6ria] ; H 126. 

237. Pungent (Mai. pSdas) : chahueh 
(chhuih), Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

238. Punggai (tree), Ccelosiegia Griffithii: 
bengal^ng, Bes. A. I. ; ben<';ang, 
Bi's. Songs. 

Pupil (of eye) : E 83, 84. 
Puppy : D 143 ; D 146. 
238A. Purple (Mai. ungu) : beragi, 
Tembi, Serau ; W 98. 
Purr, to : S 328. 
Pursue, to : B 257 ; F 210. 

239. Pus : chep (chep), Sctn. Pa. Max, 
To secrete pus : bo' chep (bu' chep), 
Sem. Pa. .Ma.v. 

240. Push, to : nyinohak ? (ui-no-hik), 
Som. ; nawok (naouok), Sak. Kerb. 

241. Push, to : chi5p (tchiop), Sak. 
Pa. To push aside ; to ward off : 
machah (machh), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[? cf C 296]. 

242. Push, to; to thrust (Mai. tolak) : 
ya-tuleg, Pang. U. A ring; tulak, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; (toulAk), Sak. Pa.; 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

687 

tolk, Sak. Kerb. To thrust, shove, 
push {Mai. tolak) : tuleg, Pang- 
Sam, Pang. Gal. To kick : tolek 
(tolik), Sem. Pa. Max. [Mai. tokik]. 
242A. Push, to [Mai. sorong) : suruk", 
Teinbi, Serau ; soruk", Serau [Mai. 
sorong]. 

243. Pustule [Mai. bintat) : pgsit (psit), 
Sem. Buk. Max. 

244. Scab (or incrustation) of wound, 
probably [Mai. kfiruping): kulit ? or 
kumit or kungit [the reading is 
doubtful]. Sent. Buk. Max. 

245. Scab (or incrustation) [Mai. kGru- 
ping) : luji? or yuji? (Ifluji? or 
iiiuji?), Sem. Pa. Max. ; A 12. 

246. Put, to [Mai. buboh) : pog [pr. 
pogg), Sem. Kedah. 

247. Put, to: kompol. Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[Mai. kumpul, "to put together."] 

248. Put, to ; to lay down : pesoh 
(psuh), Sem. Buk. Max. ; bfisoh 
(bsuh), Sem. Pa. Max. ; B 398 ; 
H 153. To put down : B 396 ; 
H 153. To put in : C 296. 

249. Put on, to [Mai. masok kain) : 
ya' ben-ben (penjok, C 171), [pr. 
benn-benn), Sem. Jarum. 

250. Put on, to : pStfk, Serting. 

251. Put on, to: jgrat (jer6t), Kena. /. 
Loin-cloth; waist - cloth : jfi-re', 
Krau Ket., Krau Tern. 

252. Put on, to, clothes : sot tun, 
U. Cher. Cloth : s^seh, Pant. 
Kap. Her. Clothes : shag, Lebir ; 
sa'buk, U. Tern. Piece of cloth 
stuck in the girdle of Semang women: 
kin-sep, Setn. Siev. 

253. Put on, to ; to use [Mai. pakai) : 
orr. Sen. Cliff. ; E 76. To put out 
(a fire or lamp) : B 256, 257 ; 
D 53. To put out (the tongue) : 
S 489. 

Puteh (proper name) : W 101. 
Putrefy, to : S 292. 
Putrid : S 292 ; S 457, 458. 

254. Puyu-puyu or b6to (fish spec.) (?), 
Anabas scandens : kgndub (kndub), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; kendo' (knduk), 
Sem. Pa. Max. 

255. Puyu-puyu [Mai. pgpuyu) : 
cheret, Dei. Songs. 

Python : S 310 ; S 320-323. 

Q 

I. Quarrel: bgklei (beuklei), 5a/J'. AV;-^. ; 
(beuklei), Sak. Ra. To contend with ; 
to fight : gnahei ; gnahi, Bes. Sep. 
A. /. , e.g. g. hang-kike, "fight with 

him." To quarrel : ngahi, Bes. Sep.; 
bCrklahi (berklahi), Serau [Mai. 
kalahi]. 

2. Quarrel : ICnalik (lonalik), Som. 
Quarrel, to : A 17 ; Q i. 

3. Quarter, to : bents, Bes. Songs [Mai. 
bantai] ; C 299. 

Quartz : S 465. 
3A. Quartz or crystal : langseng, Ser- 
ting, Bedu. II. 

4. Question, to : herah ; serah, Bes. 
A. I. ; A 162-169. 

5. Quick : [a) geg, Sak. BlauJ. Cliff. ; 
u-ggg, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; ageg, Sak. 
U. Ka7n. ; a-gek. Sen. Cliff. ; agit, 
Sak. Tap. Fast : ageg, Sak. U. 
Kam. A few; a little: gage (ga-gh6), 
Sak. Ra. ; ge (gh6) ; ga (ghfe), Sak. 
Ra. A little : gage (ga-gh6), Sak. 
Ra. ; gek-gek, Sak. Tap. ; geg, Sak. 
U. Kam ; gugit, Serau. With a 
little in it: gugit, Serau. Less: gugik, 
Serau. A short time ; a moment : 
gaga (ghagh^), Sak. Ra. Moment 
[Mai. sakgjap) : agen (/;-. S-genn), 
Pang. U. A ring; agen [pr. ugenn), 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Quickly 
[Mai. ISkas) : agen, ex. agen him 
chom az [Mai. Igkas s6diklt pasang 
api), "be quick and kindle the fire," 
Pang. Gal. ; [Mai. lekas) : aget, 
Sak. Martin. Haste : geg ; ageg, 
Sak. U. Kam. Now : gagek da, 
Sak. U. Kam. Often : geg (gh^gh), 
Sak. Kerb. Sometimes : igii (ighe), 
Sak. Kerb. Swift ; quickly ( Fr. 
vivement) : agat (aghet), Sak. Ra. ; 
ugot? or ujot? (ougert), Sak. Kerb. 
Swift ; rapid [Mai. laju) : agen (//-. 
a-genn). Pang. U. Aring. Wait a 
bit [Mai. nanti dahulu) : poit" gage, 
Serau. [? Cf. Stieng got, "hasty" ; 
Chrau guei, "quick"; Cliong nva^xX., 
" little," " few."] 

(i^) Quick : Srjus (?), ujos? (ertjoos ; 
oojus), Bers. Stev. Quickly : jos ; 
jojos, Bes. Songs. Swift : jo-jos, Bes. 
Sep. A. I. Fast [ad-'. ) : joh, Bes. 
Malac. ; e.g. go quickly, cho' joh, 
Bes. Malac. Startled [Mai. tSrkgjut) : 
ya-jojes ( =j6j6s or tejojos), Pang. U. 
A ring. 

6. Quick [Mai. lekas) : lekyeng, Se?n. 
Plus. Strong : kiing, Sem. Buk. 
Max. Swift ; swiftness : king mu' 
chub [and kng mu' chub), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; G 42. To walk fast : making- 
king (mkingking), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Quick ! kenang, Tembi. 

7. Quick; rapid: (a) cheldik (/cA^/dik). 
Quick ; swift : cherda [tchordh), Sak. 

688 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Kerb. ; chindik [tchindT^), Sak. Ra. 
[but ? cf. H 31]. [? Cf. Sui dich ; 
Bahnar deh, ' ' quick. "] 
{b) Quickly: chedas, Pang. U. Aring. 
Fast [adj. , adv.): chedas, Jak. Malac. 

8. Quick ; swift : bangat ( bangt ), Sem. 
Pa. Ma.x. ; bangat (bunghut), Kena. 
Stev. \^Mal. bangat]. 

9. Quick ; swift : begas, Bes. Sep. A. I. 

10. Quick ; swift [Fr. actif) : chgpat 
(tchopat) Sak. Ra. \^Mal. chSpat, 
" quick "]. 

11. Quick; swift: chip dras (tchip-dras), 
Som. ; G 42 ; dras, Ment. Stev. 
Swift ; quickly [Fr. vivement) : dSras 
[dbxz&),Sdm. \Mal. deras]. 

12. Quick; quickly: krah, e.g. krah- 
krtlh, Pang. Belimb. Quickly ; 
rapidly ; fast : kriis or iS-kdis or ba- 
kr<1s (//-. krass), ex. chop ba-kras or 
le - kras = Mai. jalan lekas, ' ' go 
quickly," Sem. Phis. \J = Mai. 
keras, " hard," H 33, or =Q 14.] 

13. Quickly [Mai. lekas): med-hit, 
Sem. Kedah; mihid, Pang. U. Aring; 
tenuhoit, Jelai. 

14. Quickly: Igkes, Pang. K. Aring 
\Mal. lekas]. 

15. Swiftness : jonghong fjunghung), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; B 470 ; R 201. 
Quid : C 90. 

16. Quiet : sengoyt, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
sengor (//-. sengorr), Sem. Jarwm ; 
heng-eu (?), Sem. Plus ; hangou, Pang. 
U. Aring; hangii. Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. Quiet; secret (Mai. sunyi): 
s6-nyet, Sen. Cliff. Silence : sega 
(soga), Som.; singa? 0;- sinyii? (.rin^), 
Sak. Ra. Silence ; quiet : hengioh 
(hngiuh), Sem. Buk. Max. Silent ; 
to be silent : sengoyt or hengoyt, ex. 
hengoyt ra', Mai. diam sfihaja, "he 
said nothing, " Bes. K. L. To remain 
quiet : kedd-singa, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
[Mai. diam): kfi-di se-nyet, Sen. Cliff. 
Wilderness ; uninhabited jungle : 
hCngiau(hngngliftu), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[A'/i7«fA'sngat, "silence," "solitude" 
(sngi^m, "silence," "to be silent," 
appears to be from a different root) ; 
cf. also Achin. sengiic, "lonely," 
"quiet"; Mon sngit-jra, "calm," 
"quiet"; Bahnar rongot, ronguo, 
"silence," "solitude."] 

Quiet: C 17; S 202 ; S 204; S 222, 

223. 

Quill (of porcupine) : T 94, 95. 

Quite: C 152 ; G 168. 

17. Quiver (.1/rt/. tfimpat damak) : gah, 
Sem. h'edah ; gdh (in full, g;lh ten- 
larl ; H 354), Sem. Plus ; gS, (gor), 

Sem. Stev. ; go ; (gho), Som. Bam- 
boo tubes [used for several magical 
purposes] : ga (gar) ; gu, Sem. Stev. 
[? Cf. Andamanese Beada gob-da ; 
gop-da ; Bale gop, ' ' bamboo water- 
vessel."] 

18. Quiver, blowpipe: poh, Turn. Stev. 

19. Quiver: banau (ban6u), Jehehr; 
bano', Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; ba'not (ba'-n6rt), Kerbat; 
manok (maneurk), Sem. Stev. 

20. Quiver for blowpipe darts : log, 
Sak. Jer., Po-Klo; (ISrg), Sen. 
Cliff. ; log", Tembi ; lok", Serau ; 
ilok, Darat[}) ; lak, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
lok, Sak. Kerb., Bes. Sep. A. I.; 
lok, Sak. Martin ; (luk), Sin. Stev., 
Bers. Stev. ; 16*^, Bes. Malac. ; lok, 
Sak. Ra. ; luk or lug, Sak. Kor. 
Gb.; teiiik, Mantr. Malac, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. ; taiok (talluk) ; tglok 
(t'luk); tela (t'lar), Ment. Stev. 
Quiver: log (log' ; log'n ?), Se7n. K. 
Ken. Arrow-case [? = quiver]: luk, 
Ment. Her. II. ; tglak, Ment. Her. I. 
[A7iOT£?r klak o;- kelak [klak], "small 
tubular bo.x " ; Stieng kalap, " case " 
[Fr. 6tui) ; ? cf. Mon pSlang, 
" bottle."] 

21. Quiver : tgrihafi, Jak. Malac. 

22. Quiver : tabong. Pang. Belimb., 
Pang. K. Aring [Mai. tabong] ; 
S 234. 

23. Quiver (or case), (applied both to 
a small bamboo tobacco receptacle 
and to the dart-quiver) : gfilumbong, 
Pang. Belimb. 

24. Arrow-case [ = quiver ?] : changkong, 
Kena. I. 

25. Quiver, capof blowpipe-: lekapayer, 
Turn. Stev. 

26. Arrow cases in blowpipe quiver : se 
punei (jt)/)ounei ; sopown^i), Sak. Kerb. 

27. Quiver, arrow-cases in : p'lat, Bes. 
Malac. ; p'lait, Mantr. Malac. ; pe- 
lait, Bedu. II. , Mantr. Malac. Cha. ; 
p'la-it ; p'ra-it, Jak. Malac. ; N 42. 

28. Crown -shaped arrangement in the 
blowpipe quiver (to keep the 
wadding in its place ) : chenyek 
(tchijiiyek), Sak. Kerb. 

29. Bone button of belt of blowpipe 
quiver : peningkel (/onink^l), Sak. 
Kerb. \Mal. singkil]. Bottom of 
quiver : K 53. 

R 

Race : W 62. 
I. Radish, Chinese, Raphanus candatus 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

689 

loaba' (luaba'), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[.1/rt/. lobak]. 

2. Raft : rdkot, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; raket, 
Sak. Ra., Sak. Kerb. ; (rakett), Som.; 
ra'-kit, Kerbat ; rakit, Jelai. Bamboo 
raft: yakit? (jakid), Sem. K. R'e?i. 
[MaL rakit]. 

3. Rafters {A/a/, kasau atap) : B 129. 
Rage : A 80. ■ 

4. Rage, to : kedek ( kede"k ), e.^a: 
kede"k luhh, are' garong ha, "the 
storm rages ; it thunders," Bes. A'. L. 

. At its height (?) : kedek, Bes. Songs. 
Rail at, to : A 48. 

5. Rain (.Mai. ujan) : choh-vvad, Sent. 
Kedah [? cf. Jav. jawah]. 

5A. Rain : pekpig, TemH. Heavy 
rain : p5kp6k raia' (p^kpok raiak), 
Tembi. 

6. Rain : Ifisem [pr. le-se'^ni), Sexi. 
Jarum ; Igsem (/;-. I6se^m), Sem. 
Pius ; 16sdbm, Serting; 16s6m, Bedu. 
II. Fine rain ; drizzle : anchi^m, Bes. 
Sep. Rainy season : liisap ; 16sap, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. \Bekiau rasim; Ida an, 
Dusun, Dali Diisutn rasam ; Diisiin 
of Kimanis yesam ; Disaya lasim, 
rasam; Kadayan&.si.va\ T Ht07ig a.s&.m, 
' ' rain. "] 

7. Rain: (a) mi, e.g. "rain and sun- 
shine at the same time," mi jalaSng 
(mi-djali'ig'n), Se/n. K. Ken. ; mi, 
Som. ; mi, Sem. Per. ; mi', Krau 
Ket. [Bahnar, Stieng mi ; Central, 
Teressa, Chowra Nicobar amih, 
"rain," "to rain"; Phnong mi? 
(mis); Chrdu mi ; SedangnxQ, ' ' rain " ; 
Alak, Kaseng mi; Lave mii "to 
rain" ; perhaps = R 8.] 

[b) Rain : ma'-ni. Sen. Cliff. ; nianC, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; manf, Sak. Martin ; 
manl, Sak. Ra. ; mani. Tan. U. 
Lang.; mani, Sak. Blanj. Sw.; mani, 
Sak. Chen., Darat, Sak. Sung. ; 
mani' (manik), Serau. Heavy rain : 
mani' intoi (manik intoi), Serau ; B 
205 [?=R 7(rt) + infix an]. 

8. Rain : gema, Bes. Malac. ; ggmah ; 
gSmar, Bes. Sep. A. I.; gSma(gemah), 
Bilk. U. Lang., Bes, Bell. ; (geu-mah), 
Sak. Sel. Da. ; (gumar), Ben. New. ; 
gema (g6md°), Bes. Her. ; kemeh. 
Pant. Kap. Her. ; kumeh. Pant. Kap. 
Log. ; rumeh, Pant. Kap. Sim. 
Drizzle: gemar banchi, Bes. Sep. A. I.; 
R 13? [Chong koma; Xong kama ; 
Car Nicobar komrah ; Savire kameaka 
(kameac-a) ; Por kameaka (kam&ca); 
Cuoi, Sue ma ; Ka mea ; Prou mo ; 
Annam miia ; Boloven, Halang miia ; 
Churu m!u ; Kuy Dek mar, " rain " ; 

VOL. II 

Boloven miia ; Niahiin mija ; Halang 

mia, "to rain " ; ? ;= R 7. ] 
9. Rain ; water : par, Kena. I. [Long 

Kiput, Lelak prar ; Narom pSrar ; 

Dali,Lemlftingp&:a.T, "rain"; Ackin. 

pr61, " drizzling rain."] 
10. Rain : pfijur, Jak. Mad. (Pant. 

Kap.); (p'jur). Pant. Kap. Joh. 
ir. Rain: r6beh, Ke?ia II.; R 12. 

[Minang. Mai. rabah ; Mai. rSbas^ 

" drizzle."] 

12. Rain: ujan, Sent. U. Sel., Sem. 
Jur. And., Sem. Jur. New., Ben. 
New., Sak. Br. Low; (ujar), Sem. 
fur. Rob. ; (oudjane), Sak. Croix ; 
hujan, Sem. IJ., Sem. Beg., Mantr. 
Malac. ; huj^n, Barok ; hujat (houd- 
jat), Sak. Kerb. Drizzling rain : 
ujan ketai (aujn ktl), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
Sem. Pa. Max. Fine rain : ujan 
rebas (aujn rbs), Sefii. Pa. Max. ; 
R II. Heavy rain: hujan lebat, 
Ment. Stev. Hot rain [i.e. rain 
and sunshine at the same time], 
(Mai. hujan paoas) : ujan p6dih 
(aujn pdih), Sem. Buk. Max., Sem. 
Pa. Max.; H 140. Slight rain : hujan 
rinyi (hujan reenyi), ALetit. Stev. ; 
R 15. Volcanic rain mixed with 
ashes: ujan kfibal (aujn kbl or kbd?), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; ujan kechil (aujn 
kchil or kchid?), Se^n. Pa, Max. ; 
A 161. Rainstorm : ujan bawa' (aujn 
baua' ; aujn bau'), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
ujan bua' (aujn bua'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; W log. Hail : ujan batu' 
(aujn batu'), Sem. Buk. Max. ; ujan 
batu (aujn batu), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
S 465 \_Mal. hujan; ujan]. 

13. Rain: ritik, Beti. New. Sweat; 
ret^h, Kena. /. [ ? cf. Mai. rintik, 
" drizzling "] ; W 73. 

14. Rains, monsoon: kechau (kt'chow), 
Sem, Stev. 

15. Rain, drizzling: rinyei, Bes. Songs; 
R 12 \AIal. rgnnyai]. 

16. Rainbow : kawat, /«/&. Ba. Pa. ; C 89. 
Rainbow (regarded as a python) : 
hweak, Sem. Kedah ; hoiya' (houlia'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; ekob hoiya (ekob 
hoyyar), Sem. Stev.; S 310. 

17. Rainbow : rfigih, Pang. U. Aring. 

18. Rainbow: behota, Mantr. Malac. ; 
bohuta, Jak. Ba. Pa. ; bohutah, Jak. 
Lcm. ; bouta (booutah), Mantr. 
Cast. ; C 190. 

Rainstorm : R 12. 

19. Raise, to; unjet, Bes. A. I.; D 66 ; 
H 83. To raise oneself : S 429. 

20. Rambai (fruit, tree), Baccaurea mot- 
Icyana (?) : paloh (paluh), Se7n. Pa 

2 Y 

690 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Max. ; peli, Sem. Buk. Max. ; (spec. 
Mai. r. anying ?) : paloh tglur (palu 
tlur), Sem. Pa. Max. ; peii telur (pili 
tlur), Sejn. Buk. Max. ; ? E 37 ; (spec. 
Mai. r. tfelor) : paloh mako' (paluh 
mku'), Sem. Pa. A/ax. ; peli mako' 
(pili mku'), Sem. Biik. Max. ; E 
34; (spec. Mai. r. wangi) : paloh 
wangi (paluh uangi) ; Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; peli wangi (peli uangi), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 
2o.\. Rambai (fruit, tree) : rambai, 
Serau \Mal. rambai]. 

21. Rambai daun (tree spec), Galearia 
phlebocarpa: ya' makan halo' (ia' makn 
halu'), Sem. Buk. Max. [There 
seems to be some blunder here ; the 
words look like a verbal phrase, not 
a specific name.] 

22. Rambutan (fruit-tree), Nephelium 
lappaceum : tanggufi, Pang. U. 
Aring; tangguih ? (tngkuih), Sem. 
Buk. Max. , Sem. Pa. Max. ; tang-ui, 
Kerbat. A kind of fruit-tree ( = the 
rambutan ? ) : tangoi, ex. wong-wong 
tangoi, Sein. Kedah. Wild ram- 
butan (spec. Mai. sanggul lotong), 
Nephelium eriopetalum : jangeh (jan- 
gih), Sem. Buk. Max. Rambutan ; 
rambutan grat (a less hairy kind) : 
changi' (changik), Serau. Pulasan 
(fruit), Nephelium mutabile : chang- 
eh, Sen. Cliff. Rambutan (spec. J/a/. 
r. acheh?): tangguih acheh? (tngkuih 
achh), Sem. Buk. Max., Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; (spec.i1/a/. r. gading): tangguih 
bala' (tngkuih bal'), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
(tngkuih bala'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
H 126; (spec. Mai. r. pachat), Xero- 
spevTnufn noronhianum : tangguih 
pachat (tngkuih pacht), Sem. Buk. 
Alax. , Sem. Pa. Max. Fruit : 
jangoe [a misprint : in MS. originally 
" tangoey " corrected to " tangoe " ; 
the meaning given is clearly wrong], 
Sem. U. Sel. 

23. Rambutan: 16-gos, Sen. Cliff. 
Rambutan ; pulasan [Mai. grat) : 
legus, Serau ; (spec. Mai. ggmutai) : 
Iggus, Tcmbi. 

24. Rambutan : g6n-te', Krau Te?n. ; 
plu gente' (gen-te' (pler^)), KraiiKet. 

25. Rambutan : grat, Lebir. Pulasan, 
Nephelium mutabile: grat. Pang. U. 
Aring; pie grat, Bes. Sep. ; gran, 
Bes. A. I. ; nC-rat, Krau Tern. [In 
East Coast Malay the pulasan is 
called " grat. "] 

26. Rambutan : buan ; pie' buan ; p'lc 
buan, Bes. A. l.\ bluan, Bes. Malac. 
Fruit spec. : buan, Bes. Songs. 

[Probably for buluan, formed from 
Mai. bulu, H 4 ; as rambutan from 
rambut, H 3 ; but perhaps cf. Mon 
babun, " wild rambutan."] 

27. Rambutan, Mantr. Malac.. Jak. 
Malac. [Mai. rambutan] ; H 3. 

28. Rambutan, wild, Erioglossum 
edule (?) : gabang, Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. A kind of fruit-tree : gabang, 
Bes. Songs. 

Rancid : S 292. 
Rapid . Q 5-15. 

29. Rapid, a ; waterfall : jg-rup". Sen. 
CI. ; je-rCip", Sen. Cliff'; jerop° ; 
jerapii, Tembi ; j6rok, Serati ; A 7. 
Current of a river ; rapid : gorCp, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. [Mai. jfiram]. 

30. Rapid, a : talar, Pant. Kap. Le7n. 
Waterfall : lata, Sd7n. ; lat4, Sak. 
Kerb., Sak. Ra. A rapid : T 173. 
Rare : O 8 ; R 31. 

31. Rarely [Mai. jarang): (a) jel hog, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

(3) Rare ; difficult (?) : jaeng (jaing), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Widely spaced ; 
scanty : jaeng (jaing), Sem. Buk. 
Max. , Sem. Pa. Max. Scattered ; 
at wide intervals: jaeng (jaing), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; ja'en (ja'in), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Very seldom : jaeng (jaing), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Seldom : jarang, 
Sak. U. Kam. Rare : jarag, Tet?ibi ; 
jer6 (djoTo), Sak. Kerb. ; j6ro (djoro), 
Sak. Ra. Spread and splayed : 
jarang -jarang, Bes. Songs [Mai. 
jarang]. 
Rash (on the skin) : I 45-53. 

32. Rat : ebu, SeTn. Stev. [? Cf. Sulu 
ambau ; or Tareng abel ; Koti Tu 
bol, " rat."] 

33. Rat: kadongorkadeg, Setn. J arum; 
kadag, Se7n. K. Ken. ; kgdeg, Sem. 
Per. ; kadeg or kane', Sem. Phis ; 
kan6' , Bes. Sep. ; kaneh ; kane' , Bes. 
Sep. A. I.; (ka-ngh), Sak. Sel. Da. ; 
( kanek ), Bed. Chiong ; ( kangk ), 
Serting; kane, Bes. Alalac. ; kani' 
(kanik), Bes. Her. ; kani' (kannik) ; 
kanai (kanye), Ben. New. ; kene' 
(kenek). Tan. U. Lang. Rat : 
kgding, Tembi. Squirrel (Mai. 
tupai) : kgdeg", Tembi. Rat or 
mouse {Mai. tikus), kgdong, Sem. 
Kedah; kgdeg, Sem. Plus; kgnl'. 
Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. Mouse : kanet (kannet), Sem. 
.Stev. ; kane', Bes. Sep. A. I. 
Mouse ; rat (spec. i\Ial. tikustanah, 
t. mondok), Mus decumanus ; also 
generically : kgdong (kdung), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Rat (spec. Mai. tikus 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

691 

ambang bulan ) : kgdong ambang 
bulan (kdung ambng buln ), Sem. 
Buk. Max.; kane' — the following 
rats are mentioned as varieties : 
I. k. 16kan (bamboo rat) ; B40 ; 2. k. 
hula' ; 3. k. grong iku' (or "curly- 
tailed" rat?), which attacks the padi; 
4. k. rfebuk or rebuk or rC'bfi' — Bes. 
K. L. Mouse ; rat (spec. Mai. t. 
padi) : kgdong padi (kdung padi), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. Squirrel {Mai. 
tupai) ; kfideg, Sem. J arum. \J\Ion 
kni, gni ; Stietig konfii ; Bahnar 
kone, "rat," "mouse"; Sedang 
konei ; Sui kenai ; Halatig kanyji ? 
(kanhe) ; Prou, Phnong kane ; Cuoi 
phnay ; Boloven khanii ; Lave khftne ; 
Chrau konat ; ? cf. Khmer kandOr 
[pr. kondor) [kftntur] ; Old Khmer 
kon, "rat." There seem to be 
two words, one with -d-, the other 
with -«-. ] 

34. Rat : langsii (langse), Kena. I. ; 
henchat (hnch^'H), Kena. II. ; 
inSnchet, Bedu. II. ; mgnti, Jak. 
Malac. ; manti', Bed. Chiang ; 
mgtite' ? ( mutitek ), Ben. New. ; 
chochoi, Rasa. Mouse : chaa ? 
(dscha-a), Sem. K. Ken. [AIina?igk. 
Mai. manchit {pr. manchi') ; Bat. 
monsi.] 

35. Rat : tikus, Sem. Jur. And. , Sem. 
Jur. Rob. , Sem. U. Sel. [in the MS. 
this last originally had tekus], Sem. 
Beg. , Ben. New. , Sak. Br. Low, Sak. 
Blanj. Sw., Mantr. Malac; (tikous), 
Sd7n. , Sak. Kerb. \_Mal. tikus] ; 
M 136 ; T 173. 

36. Rattan : lataik (lataik), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; latei, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. 
Jur. New. ; (latei), Sem. Jur. Rob. ; 
(spec. Mai. rotan ayer) : lataik teu? 
(lataik tu), Sem. Pa. Max. ; (spec. 
Mai. rotan batu tunggal), Calamus 
insignis {7) : lataik batu (lataik baatu), 
Sem. Pa. Ma.v. ; (spec. Mai. rotan 
getah ), Calamus didymophyllus: 
lataik kra hSnja' (lataik kra hnja'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; (spec. Mai. rotan 
kawan ) lataik bum (lataik bum), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; (spec. Mai. rotan 
manik) : lataik manik (Itaik manik), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; (spec. Mai. rotan 
rum put ) : lataik nmiput ( lataik 
rmput ), Sem. Pa. Max. ; ( spec. 
Mai. rotan sabut ), Dcemonorops 
hystrix : lataik sabut (lataik sabut), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Malacca cane (;T/a/. 
rotan samambu), Calamus scipionutn : 
lataik kida' (lataik kid'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Rattan (spec. Mai. rotan 

sgmut), Korthalsia scaphigera : lataik 
kgniho' ? (lataik kmhu'), Sem. Pa. 
Max.; (spec. Mai. rotan suki): lataik 
suki (lataik suki), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
(spec. Mai. rotan udang) : lataik 
udang (lataik audng), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Root (?) {Mai. akar) : lataik (lataik), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [Perhaps lataik is 
to be pronounced latai'. ? Cf. Khmer 
loda [lata], "climbing rattan."] 
37. Rattan : (a) choit (tschoit), Sak. 
Tap. ; chok, Sak. U. Kam. , 
Sak. U. Bert. ; chuk, Sak. Em. ; 
chog, Serau ; chok^, Jelai ; 
chok", Darat ; chong, chong, 
Tembi ; chok^. Sen. CI. ; chul^ng ; 
choi^ng, Bes. Sep. A. I.; chiong 
(tchioii), Sak. Ra. ; chong, Bes. Bell. ; 
sang (s^ng), Bedu. II. ; sek(?), Krau 
Tem. ; siau, Kena. I. Rattan (spec. 
Mai. rotan tawar) : sing (sing), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; (spec. Mai. rotan 
ilang) ; chong lag", Tembi ; (spec. 
Mai. rotan tunggal) : chSng tabar, 
Te?nbi. Rattan for stone axes : 
Ichog (ee-chog), Sem. Stev. Cane 
( rattan ) : chok, Sak. U. Kam. 
Climbing rattan: chySng, Bes. Malac. ; 
chok". Sen. Cliff. ; chol^ng, Bes. Sep. 
Onak (climber), Zizyphus calophyllus : 
song ( sung ), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
B 196 ; P 163. Root : chok, 
Sak. Sung. ; chok". Sen. CI. ; 
chol^ng, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; tiogn, Bes. 
Her. ; cho-hang, Sak. Sel. Da. ; 
chong. Tang. U. Lang., Buk. U. 
Lang., Bes. Sep. ; sag, Sem. Stev. 
Rope; string: cho^^ng, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
Rattan rope : chong, Bes. K. Lang. ; 
T 94 ; W 66 ; Y 4. Tapioca roots : 
ubi chien, Sak. Hale ; Y 13. Yam 
( Mai. ubi akar ) : chun ( choun ). 
Sak. Kerb. Yam {Mai. ubi) : chah. 
Sen. Cliff. ; {Mai. kgladi) : chahak 
(tchahak), Sak. Ra. [Mon chuk 
[juk], "rope"; chuk krop [juk 
gruip], "creeper, used for tying"; 
So shan (chanh) ; Lave khashen, 
' ' climbing rattan. "] 
{b) Root : chin chuk, Sak. BlafiJ. 
Sw. ; chin chu, Sak. Blanj. Cliff, 
{c) Climbing rattan : changten ? 
(tchaii - t^ign), Sak. Ra. Root: 
tengtek, Sak. Br. Low; tengtak, 
Sak. Croix; tengtak (tentak), Sak. 
Kerb. ; tendak or dendak, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; chanteng, Sak. Plus Cliff. 
Tap-root : chadeng (chding), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Buttress - root {Mai. 
banir) : chatek" ; chatek", Tembi. 
(d) Root : jemok (jem6"k), Sefiing ; 

6g: 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

jemil, Rasa. Branching root : chlrndk 
or chlmlk (?), Sem. Pa. Max. 
{^Khmus chmo (tchmeu), "rope"; 
Boloven chmo; Lave 'ywvM, "climb- 
ing rattan." It is to be noted that 
the Mai. akar means both ' ' root 
and ' ' climbing rattan. " Hence 
possible confusion. ] 

38. Rattan : {a) de-rS, U. Cher. ; dSra 
(dgre), Serting ; drein, Or. Hu. Joh. 
I. ; de', Bera, \Boloven, Niahon 
ri ; Halang, re ; Bahnar here, bore ; 
Stieng reh (reh), "rattan"; Jarai 
kere, " climbing rattan."] 

[b) Rattan : penSri' ? (penerik), Pant. 
K'ap. Her. ; pengere' (p'ng'rek), 
Pant. Kap. Mad. ; pengre' pgngikat 
(p'ngrek p'ngikat), Pant. Kap. Lein.\ 
B 214, 

(c) Belt for blowpipe quiver : salai (?); 
sarai ? (selai ; serai?), Sak. Kerb. 
Bow-string: chgrai? (chu-ai ?), Sak. 
Plus Cliff. Rope ; string : serai, 
Sak. Kerb. ; sengrai ; sSngray 
(sngrai ; sngray), Sak. U. Bert. 
String: sengrSi (sngroi ; sngroy), 
Sak. U, Katn. 

39. Rattan : awe, Sem. Craw. Hist. ; 
awe. Pang. U. A ring; 3.-we, Lebir; 
aweh (auih), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
a - weng, Kerbat. Rattan ; cane 
[Mai. rotan) : awe, Sem. Kedah, 
Sem. /arum ; awe ; awe, Setn. Plus. 
Rattan or rope : awe, Pang. K. 
A)-ing; awai, Pang. Belimb. Creeper 
or liane [Mai. akar) : awe, Sem. 
Kedah. Creeper {Mai. poke' akar) : 
tarn (or?tdn) awe, Payig. U. A ring; 
T 203. Climbing rattan : a-we, Lebir; 
a-weng, Kerbat ; B 213 ; B 301 ; 
T 199. Rattan binding : awi (owee), 
.Sem. Stev. ; mak& ke awi (mackor- 
ke-owee), Sem. Stev. ; ? C 295. 
Rattan (spec. Alal. rotan akar) : 
aweh akar (auih akr), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; (spec. Mai. rotan ayer) : 
aweh sega bateoh (auih ska btiuh), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. ; W 30 ; (spec. 
Mai. rotan batu tunggal), Calamus 
insignis: aweh batu' (auih batu'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; (spec. Mai. rotan 
ggtah). Calamus didynnophyllus : 
aweh tia (auih tia), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
( spec. Mai. rotan kawan ) : aweh 
kawan (auih kauan), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
(spec. Mai. rotan manik), aweh 
mani' (auih mani'), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
(spec. Mai. rotan rumput) : aweh 
k6nIo' ( auih kniu' ? ), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; (spec. Mai. rotan sabut), 
DcEvionorops ; hystrix : aweh sabut 

(auih sabut), Sem. Buk. Max.; (spec. 
Mai. rotan udang) : aweh sabud 
(auih sabud or sabut?), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; (spec. Mai. rotan s6ga) : aweh 
siapet (auih siapit), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
(spec. Mai. rotan s6ga badak), Cala- 
mus ornatus : aweh sCga agab (auih 
ska akb), Se^n. Buk. Max. ; R 90 ; 
(spec. Mai. rotan s6mut), Korthalsia 
scaphigera : aweh pfila kriu ? (auih 
pla kriu?), Sem. Buk. Max. ; (spec. 
Mai. rotan sfini) : awe s6tog, Sem. 
Plus ; (spec. Mai. rotan suki) : aweh 
tanum (auih tanum), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
(spec. Mai. rotan tawar) : aweh taba 
(auih taba), Setn. Buk. Max. A 
kind of creeper used medicinally at 
birth : awechen-lai, Sem. Kedah ; ? R 
38. A kind of creeper : awe kembong, 
Se7n. Kedah. Plant spec. [Mai. 
" rubus ") : awi-jog (owee-jug), Sem. 
Stev. Root (Mai. akar) : awe, Sem. 
Plus; awe. Pang. U. A ring; awe 
(awai [in MS. originally ahway]), 
Sem. U. Sel. ; aweh (auih), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Rope or string [Mai. 
tali) : awe, Sem. Plus. Belt ; 
girdle [Mai. tali ikat pinggang) : 
awe nem [pr. ne^m) gel, Pang, 
Sa?n, Pang. Gal. [An original Mai. 
Pol. word : Formosan uweg ; Bui. 
ue ; Sund. hoe ; Sampit, Katingan 
ow6 ; Ngaju Dayak owaei ; Bisaya 
ooay ; Tagal ouay ; Kanowit uai 
Kay an, Punan u6 ; Bintulu bai 
Sentah Dayak ui ; Achinese aw6 
Lampong wui ; Cham hawgi ; Jarai 
hawai, " rattan."] 

40. Rattan: rotan, Mantr. Malac, 
Jak. Malac. [J/a/. rotan]; B 213 . 
R 173; R 183 ; V 8. 

41. Rattan, dragon's - blood [Mai. 
rotan jernang), Dcemonorops draco or 
D. propinquus (?): hadlud (had-lood), 
Se7n. Stev. ; ha.nlld, Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
aweh hanlid (auih hnlid), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

41A. Rattan (spec. Mai. rotan udang), 
a red variety : chong hak, Tembi ; 
chong hak°, Serau ; R 37 ; (spec. 
Mai. rotan ular) : haag \or hoog?], 
Tembi. 

41B. Rattan (spec. Mai. rotan tanah) ; 
chong teniukD, Serau ; teniuk", 
Tembi ; R 37. 

41C. Rattan (spec. Mai. rotan sfini) : 
sStftg (stag) ; chong sgtok" (chong 
stok" ; chong stok"), Tembi ; chong 
shc'tog (chong shtog), Serau ; R 37. 

41U. Rattan (spec. Mai. rotan tung- 
gal) : chong riau, Serau ; R 37. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

693 

41E. Rattan (spec. Mai. rotan ma- 
j j^. nang) : manang ; manang, Tembi 

\AIal. manang]. 

•Rave, to : D 158. 

42. Raw {Mai. mfintah) : pSnyas (//'. 
p£nyass), Sem. J arum ; U 19 [? = 

S 349]- 

43. Raw ; green (in taste [.yzV]) : meet 
(me-et), Jak. Scmbr. [? cf. Mai. 
mgntah]. 

44. Raw ; green (in taste [i?V]) : juhUt, 
Jak. Mad. Tasteless (?) ; insipid (?) 
[Mai. tawar) : siut, K'rau Tern. 

45. Rawa, burong (bird spec. ) : bahan, 
Bcs. .1. I. 

Reach (of river) : B 173. 

46. Reach, to [Mai. jijak) : ya' kay&h 
[pr. kayahh), Sem. Jarjt7n. To 
reach out (?) : kau, Bes. Songs ; A 145- 
148 ; G 29 ; M 71. 

Read, to : M 61. 

47. Ready: jug, ex. jug ye chop, "I 
am ready to go " (doubtful), Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. 

48. Ready : siap, Sak. Pa. [A/al. siap]. 

49. Ready ; to make ready : sediyo 
(sidiu), Setn. Buk. Max. [Mai. 
sadia]. 

To get ready : B 213. 
49A. Ready, to make : bencha' 
(bncha) ; bSnchad ta (bnchiid ta), 
e.g. "make rice ready," bSncha 
(bncha) chana, Sak. U. Bert. 
Reap, to : C 295 ; C 299. 
Reaping-knife : C 295. 
Rear, to : A 59. 

50. Receive, to : trima, Sak. Pa. I 
receive : en trima' (entrimak), Jelai 
[Mai. tgrima] ; B 400 ; F 103. 
Receiver (for poison) : B 21 ; B 25. 
Recently : N 49, 50 ; N 52 ; 
N 114. 

Reckon, to : T 78, 79. 

Recline, to : L 66-73 ; S 248-250. 

Recognise, to : K 60. 

Recollect, to : R 64. 

Recover, to : C 219 ; F 103 ; 

R84. 

51. Red: (a) tohon, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Klapr. ; tohan [pr. to-hi,yn or 
to-h&n), Sem. Kedah; tahun (tahoun), 
Sem. Klapr.; tohoit^n ? (dohoid'n), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; tghueh (thuih), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; tohui (to-houi), Som. ; 
U 21 ; W 29. Yellow : tehuin 
(thuin), Sem. Btik. A/ax. ; tohui 
(to-houi), Sd>n. ; W 29. 

(6) Red ; scarlet : pithang (phang), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; P 234 ; S 515. 
Orange (colour) : pahang (phang), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [Possibly connected 

with B 249; cf. the various meanings 
of B 247.] [? Cf. Khmer kraham, 
"red"; krehiim [krahim], "to get 
red " ; Stieng brehi ; Chrau pr6ho, 
prfiho ; Churu phung ; Cham bhong, 
"red."] 

[c) Red : ngSnghang, Tembi [cf. R 
236]. 

52. Red [Mai. merah) : bfir-kait or 
bSkait, Pang. U. Aritig; bgrkayd 
or bfikayd [pr. bCkaydd), Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Yellow [.Mai. 
kuning) : bSrkayd [pr. bgrr-kaydd), 
Sem. Plus. [Mon philket ; b'ket, 
"red."] 

53. Red ; crimson ; orange ; yellow ; 
brown : chgng-ul. Sen. CI.; ch6ng-til, 
Sen. Cliff. Red ; yellow : chengul, 
Serau, Red : ch&ngun, Darai. 
Yellow : chgngul, Tembi. Blue : 
chengul, Sak. Em. [Cf. Stieng jer- 
ngul ; Mon chaingngu [jangngu], 
" red vermilion."] 

54. Red : chanluk (tcheign louk), Sak. 
Kerb. ; nyfilang, Kena. I. ; gg-lip, 
Kran Ket. ; j6-leb, Krau Tern. 
Blue : chfiluk (/r/iolouk), Sak. Kerb. 
[? cf. S 38]. 

55. Red : ran, Sak. U. Kam. Blue ; 
red; green; yellow: su-rat, U. 
Tern.. Black : chirat, Sak. Sung. 
[Palaung ran, ' ' red. "] 

56. Red : ggchang, Bes. A. I. ; rSchang, 
Bes. Malac. 

57. Red : merah, Bes. Bell. [Mai. 
merah]; B 236; B 247; C 177; 
S38. 

58. Reduce, to [Mai. mengurangkan) : 
mahtli, Sem. Buk. Max. ; L 61. 
Reflection (physical) : S 159. 

59. Refuse, to ? [this is wrongly entered 
here: it means "to crave for"]: 
punan, Bcs. K. Lang. [Mai. kgm- 
punan, as to which see Klinkert, s.v.'\ 
To refuse : D 231. 

60. Reject, to ; to cast away [Mai. 
buang) : ya' hempes, Sem. Jarnm ; 
ya' mpes, ex. ja' mpess, "rejected or 
thrown away, " Sem. Plus. ; F 116. 
To break [Mai. patah) : pfts (pass), 
Som. To break up : hgmpa' 
(hmpak), Sem. Pa. Max. To leave : 
hani-phess, ex. ham-phess ba-ka'un, 
"left behind," Pang. Be limb. ; B 
165 ; W 78. To remain ; to be left : 
ya' 'mpes ka-tekoh or ba-tgkoh [pr. 
'mpess ba-tekohh), Sem. Plus; A 
46. [? cf. Mai. hgmpas, but it seems 
probable that we have here two 
distinct words meaning respectively 
(i) to leave, and (2) to break ; the 

694 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

latter may be related to the Malay 

word. ] 

To reject : F 120. 

Relate, to : S 365. 

Release, to : T 9. 

61. Release itself, to {i.e. of a snare) : 
pies, Bcs. A. I. [Cf. Achin. ploh 
(plos), "to make loose"; Bahnar 
leh, " to release itself" (of a snare). 
Reluctant : L 30. 

62. Remain, to ; remainder ; what is 
left over : yan (ian), SeiJi. Pa. Max.; 
yan (in), Sem. Buk. Max. 

63. Remain, to: karak, Bes.K.Lang., 
Bes. Songs. To remain behind : 
kara", Bes. Sep. To reside : kara', 
e.g. kara' meri, ' ' to live in the 
jungle," Bes. Sep. To dwell : kara', 
e.g. mani hi kara', "where do you 
live?" Bes. Sep. A. /. To leave: 
karak, Bes. K. Lang. Only : 'ra' 
[prob. for kara'], Bcs. Sep. 

To remain : B 88-go ; F 21 ; R 60 ; 
S 222. 

Remainder : R 62. 
Remedy : C 292. 

64. Remember, to : lenoka (lonoka), 
Som. 

65. Remember, to : Ipod, Sak. Kerb. 

66. Remember, to : kfinang {km3ia.), 
Sak. Ra. ; kenang, Bes. K. Lang. 
[.1/a/. kenang, "to remember with 
longing"]. 

67. Remember, to : [a) ya' enah (/;-. 
enahh), Sem. Plies [cf. F 58]. To 
remember ; to recollect {Ma/, ingat) : 
inged, e.g. inged kelanges (Ma/. 
ingat hati), "to remember in one's 
heart," Pang. Sam ; ingat, Krau 
Em. To mind (think of) : ingat, 
Sati. U. Kam, [Ala/, ingat, "to 
remember."] 

{b) To look for : pSringat (p'ringat) ; 

mfiringat (m'ringat). Pant. Kap. Jo/i. 

To be : mgngringat (m'ngringat). 

Pant. Kap. Joh. [The connection of 

these last words seems doubtful.] 

To remember : A 23 : K 62. 

Remembrance : K 62. 

Remnant : M 179A ; T 33. 
63. Remove, to : hC-ndeh (hndih), Sem. 

Bull. Max. [? Ma/, undur] ; G 43 ; 

M 210 ; T 107 ; T 113. 

Rend, to : T 32-39. 

Renew, to : N 52. 
69. Rgngas laut (tree spec. ), Melanorlwa 

sp. (?) : hangas? (hangs?), Sem. Pa. 

Max. [Ma/, rgngas]. 

Repartee : A 96. 

Repeat, to : R 70. 

Repeatedly : G 43. 

70. Repeatedly ; to repeat ; to 
frequent : uleng (auling) Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; ulang (aulng), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [Ma/, ulang]. 

Repose : F 12 ; R 82 ; W 5. 

71. RSsak (tree spec): putpat (putpt), 
Sem. Buk. Max., Sem. Pa. Max. 
Reside, to : R 63. 

72. Resin {Ma/, damar) : gun, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Ga/. ; goit", Tembi. 
Torch {Ma/, damar) : gun, Sem. 
Kedali; gung ; gun (?), Pang. Be/imb. 
[Possibly some confusion : B 291.] 

73. Resin {Ma/, damar) : kio' (kiu'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Resin (spec. Ma/. 
d. batu) : kio' alueh (kiu' aluih?), 
Sem. Pa. Max. " Cat's-eye " resin 
{Ma/, damar mata kuching) [perhaps 
from Pac/iynocarpus VVa//icfiii or 
Hopea g/obosd\: kio' met kuching (kiu' 
mit kuchng), Sem. Pa. Max. Wax 
(spec. Ma/, damar kSlulut) : kio' 
kueh ? (kiu' kuih ?), Sem. Pa. Max. 

74. Resin {Ma/, damar) : {a) tayong 
(taiung), Sem. Buk. Max. Resin 
(spec. Ma/, d. batu): tayong kueh? 
(taiung kuih?), Sem. Buk. Max. 
"Cat's-eye" resin [from Pacfiyno- 
carpus I VallicJiii or Hopea g/obosa (?)]: 
tayong met kuching (taiung mit 
kuching), Sem. Buk. Max. Wax 
(spec. Ma/, damar kSlulut) : tayong 
lekong? (taiung Ikung?), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Resin spec. : damar tuyum 
(damar tooyoom), Orang Ktianta?i, 
V. -Stevens, Materialien, pt. i. p. 113. 
{b) Resin : tarum, Kerdau ; tarek", 
(tarekh"), Tembi. 

75. Resin {Ma/, ggtah damar) : langkin. 
Ken a. L 

76. Resin ; damar : soloh, Pant. Kap. 
Jo/i. Lamp : suluh. Pant. Kap. 
Lem. Wax : soloh bani dahan, 
Pant. Kap. Jofi. ; B 138. [Ma/. 
suluh, " torch."] 

77. Resin, from Ma/. kangar(?) tree: 
tinghe (tinghay), Sein. Stev. 

78. Resin, from A/a/, kgdondong tree : 
chabok (cha-ar-bok), Ment. Stev. ; 
damar chabo', Mantr. Ma/ac. Cfia. 
[used for varnishing arrows] ; R 80. 

79. Rksin, from the kSdondong tree 
{Mai. damar kijai), which is put on 
the end of the blowpipe : s§ngklt, 
Mantr. Ma/ac. Nya. 

80. Resin ; pitch : damar, Sak. U. 
Kam. Resin (used to coat the muzzle 
end of the blowpipe, from the sCraya 
tree) : damar pa'ang, Mantr. Ma/ac. 
Cha. ; ? cf. M 202 [Ma/, damar] ; 
C21; T 175. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

695 

81. Resolve, to ; to determine : sudi', 
Sctn. link. Max. [A/a/, sudi]. 

82. Rest ; repose : ngfnhal (non-hel , 
Siim. [? = S 222 + infix -t^n-] ; W 5. 
To go to rest : F 12. 

Rest, to : S 222 : 8 477. 
Retain, to : K 5. 

83. Return, to {Ma/, pulang) : ya' weg 
{pr. wegg), Sem. Kedali ; ya-vveg ; 
weg, ex. ye ina-weg {Ma/, sahya 
'nak pulang), " I am going home " ; 
ya-wet, Pang. U. A ring. To return ; 
to go home : jawek, Pang. Be/imb. To 
turn ; to return {Ma/, balik): mftwek? 
(muik), Sem. Buk. Afax. ; u wek ? 
(auuTak), Sem. Pa. Max. To go 
downstream {Ma/. hilir) : wot, 
PaTig. U. A ring; wed or weg {pr. 
wedd or wegg), Sefn. Kedak. To go 
down (backwards?): ya-wod (or wot 
= wet?) ba-kyom. Pang. Skeat; weg 
ba-kyom (///. Ma/, pulang ka-bla- 
kang, i.e. balik), Pa?ig. Sam, Pang. 
Gal.; B 165. Come: weg-bade [in 
the MS. originally weg-badey], Sem. 
U. Se/. Beyond {Ma/, balik sana) : 
wet-un. Pang. U. A ring; T 88. 
[Schmidt connects this with some 
words given under G 43, and com- 
pares Man kwaik [kwak], ' ' to 
walk." But of. Andamanese Beada 
and Ba/e, wij, "to return." There 
is also Balmar uih, "to return"; 
but perhaps i\\\s = Kfimer vinh (//'. 
win?) [win], "again."] 

84. Return, to {Ma/, pulang) : juk, 
Sak. J. Low ; jiik ; jiig, Sen. Cliff. ; 
kijo (kidjo), Sal:. Ra. ; 'njfik, SaJi. 
U. Kam. ; yut, Bes. A. I., Bes. A'. 
Lang. ; (yeut) Bes. Be//. ; (yoot), 
Bers. Sfev. ; tuyut, Bes. Ala/ac. ; 
ajish (arjeesh), Jali. Stev. I return : 
eng gdp, Sa/z. Tap. Let us return : 
bei ha juk, Sak. J. Loiv. To return 
(irajis.): tyut ; tengyut, e.g. tyut 
hang kikeh, "return it to him," Bes. 
A. /. ; A 178 ; T 53. To go home : 
'njiik, Sak. U. Ka?n. Back {adv. ) : 
ayut, Bes. K. La?ig. Back ; return 
home {Ma/, balik) : jlig, Sen. Cliff. ; 
G 43. Come : yut, e.g. ' ' come here, " 
3'ut da'na', U. Tern. To come back : 
kijo (kidjo), Sak. Ra. To recover 
(nnd again) : kijup {^idjoup), Sak. 
Ra. To return {Mai. balik) : jibju, 
Sak. Em. To go home {Ma/. 
pulang) : perjuk", Seran. I want 
to go home presently : am jup chahoi 
poing gage, Serau. [We] want to 
go home : hem jug jug, Krau Em. 
To-morrow I am going home : hal 

jib juk, Sak. Em. In a little while 
longer we can go back ; koh lah 
hem chip hem jub \or jug?], Krau 
Em. Take this bag to the house 
downstream : en juk° de an pula ta 
hok", Serau. Away ; gone {Ma/. 
pSrgi) : jo (djo), Sem. K. Ken. [? = 
G 43]. [? Cf. Man chhut a, "to go 
backwards " ; Bahnar shut (xiit), 
shit (xit), (and perhaps .Man chau ; 
Su^ chu), "to return."] 

86. Return, to: b6baleh (beubaleh), 
Menir. Bar. ; ? cf. T 255 [Ma/. 
balik]. 

87. Return, to: bellpat. Pant. Kap. 
Log. To return ; to turn : mglipat 
(m'lipat). Pant. Kap. Jolt. To go 
home : bfilipat (b'lipat). Pant. Kap. 
Joli. ; mglipat balik, Pant. Gah. 
Mant. Danger : lipat, Pant. Kap. 
Jail. To fold : lipat, Teinbi, Serau{7); 
sipat (sipt), Sem. Buk. Max. [Ma/. 
Hpat, " to fold."] 

To return : C 219 ; F 103 ; G 42 ; 
T 253, 254. 
Revolve, to : T 257. 
Reward : B 484. 
Reward, to : B 484. 

88. Rheumatism or gout? {Ma/, sen- 
gal kaki) : lebeng? (Ibing?), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

89. Rhinoceros : karas, Sem. P/us ; 
kara** (karas'), U. Pat. ; tatagash, 
Sak. Kerb. ; koltos ? (coltos'), U. 
Pat. ; kr^tah ; kredah, Sem, Martin 
[? cf. R 92]. 

90. Rhinoceros : kagoi, Sein. Jarum ; 
hagoi, Sem. Kedafi ; kawap, Sem. 
Stev. ; hagap, Sem. Keda/i ; hagap, 
Sem. Plus, Pang. U. A ring, Sak. 
B/anj. Sw. ; (ha-gap), Kerbat ; hagap 
(ha-ghap), Sotn. ; a-g9,p, Sen. C/., 
Sak. B/anj. C/. ; &-gap, Sen. C/iff., 
Tern. C/.; (ah-gap), Sak. P/us C/iff., 
Sak. B/anj. C/iff.; agap, Sem. Beg. ; 
hagab (hakb), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
hagab, Sak. Kerb. ; hagab, Se7n. U. 
Se/., Pang. Sam, Pang. Ga/., U. 
Ke/. ; hagap ; hagab, Tembi ; 
hagap ; menahar hagap, Serau ; 
agab, Sem. Toml. , Sak. Br. Low ; 
(agabe), Sak. Croix ; agab, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; ah-gam, Sem. Ken. ; gSb (gb), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; arak, Ben. New. ; 
se-jap, Sak. S/im ; sajap, Sak. 
Sung. ; sejap (sijup), Tan. U. Lang. 
Female rhinoceros : hagap, Sem. 
Per. ; R 39. [Schmidt compares Mon 
serit, etc., Khmer rom^as (rSmas), 
etc. ; but the connection is by no 
means obvious. Nor does an alterna- 

696 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

live connection, which might be 
suggested, with the Javanese warak, 
Mai. badak, seem much more hkcly. 
Schmidt's juxtaposition of the serit 
and ramds groups seems to pre- 
suppose that the latter are infix 
formations from a root ras of 
which there seems no evidence. His 
further comparison with Chain h'mon, 
etc. , is clearly wrong, this being a 
Malayan word properly meaning 
" elephant," from lima, " hand," as 
to which see E 50A.] 

91. Rhinoceros : bachi - kop, Sak. 
Kint. [? = R 90]. 

92. Rhinoceros : s^ngkrat, Pant. Kap. 
Her. ; sengkrat (s'nkrat), Pant. Kap. 
Joh.,Jak. Ba. Pa. ; sSngkrat (s'nkrat), 
Jak. Lem. [Possibly (but doubtfully) 
cf. Moti serit [srit] ; Khmus ret ; 
Lemet\\&., "rhinoceros"; ?cf. R89.] 

93. Rhinoceros : j61-a-un, Lebir. 

94. Rhinoceros : r^s6ki, Jak. Malac. ; 
rSseki (ruski), Befi. New.; (risaki), 
Jok. Raff. As.\ (vesaki), Jok. Raff. 

95. Rhinoceros : tekh6(tek'h6), Kena. 
I. ; k6kol(?), Bes. A. /., Bes. K. L. 

96. Rhinoceros : baddsng (badag'n), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; badag, Sem. Per. ; 
badak, Bes. Malac. , Mantr. Malac. ; 
bS.dak, Bes. Her. ; bada, Sak. Ra. ; 
bodok (beudeuk), Galang; bed6k, 
Barok [Mai. badak] ; B no ; E 51. 

97. Rhinoceros, cry of: impit-impit, 
Bes. Songs. 

98. Rhinoceros horn : chumbu, Bes. 
Songs [.!/(//. sumbu]. 
Rhinoceros-bird : H 130, 

99. Rhododendron, dwarf : kodok, 
Bes. K. Lang. [Mai. kSdudok]. 

100. Rib {Mai. rusok) : pau, Sem. Plus. 
Riks or side (Mai. rusok) : pa-u, 
Ser?i. Jarian, Sem. Plus. Beside ; 
at side of (Alal. sabSlah) : bl-pau, 
Sem. Plus. [? Cf. Man. pha, 
" side."] 

101. Rib (Mai. rusok) : bengkah, Pang. 
U. Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

102. Rib ; side (Mai. rusok) : cherosh, 
Tembi ; chC-ris, Sen. Cliff. ; ch&ris, 
Jelai. Armpit : cheris ; ch6ris, 
Seraji. Rib (of human body) ; side 
(of hill) : chfirus (tchorous), Sak. 
Ra. ; B 336. Side (of a hill?): 
chelo (tcholo), Sak. Ra. [The 
word is doubtful : probably it means 
"to descend"; D 95.] 

103. Ribs; side (Mai. rusok): t6-bal 
(pr. t£-ball), Sem. Kedah'. Side (of 
body) ; flank : tCbal (tbl), Sem. Pa. 
Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. Rib : 

yaing tSbSl (iaing tbl), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; ja'is tebal (j'is tbl), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; B 336. False rib? 
(Mai. rusok muda) : tuleng tfibal 
(tuling tbl), Sem. Buk. Max. ; B 
339 ; tebai muda' (tbl mud'), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; Y 43. 
103 A. Ribs (Mai. rusok) : klaap, Serati. 
Spleen (Mai. kura) : klap, Tembi ; 
S 187. 
Rice : E 27 ; E 37. 

104. Rice in the husk (Mai. padi) : 
nestus (? = boiled rice), Sem. Kedah. 

105. Rice (Mai. padi) : sfimd, Sak. Jer. 
[?=R 106]. 

106. Rice (Mai. padi) : (a) ba', Sem. 
Plus; ba. Sen. Cliff., Sak. Korb. 
Lias ; bar, Sak. Tap. ; bah. Tan. 
U. Lang. ; \>2ih., Sera2i, Darat; ba, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; ba', Sak. Tan. 
Ram., Krau Tern.. ; (bak), Krau 
Em. ; ba'-ba', Bera. ; baba' (babak), 
Seiiing. [Alak, Bah?iar, Stieng 
ba ; Kasengvsxh?!. ; SuihvUa. ; Sedang 
bau, mau ; Sedang, Halang mao, 
" rice (in the husk)."] 

(b) Rice (Mai. padi) : be ; beh, Bes. 
Sep. A. L; be, Bes. K. Lang.; be' 
(b6k), Bes. Her. ; bi' (bik), Ben. New. 
Husked rice (Mai. beras) : h€ , Bes. 
.Malac. ; bi (bee), Sak. Sel. Da. ; 
Rice [state undefined] : bei, Sem. 
Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Rob., Sem. 
Jur. A-cw. [the last gives ALal. bfiras as 
the equivalent, i.e. " husked rice "]. 
[Cf. Phnong, Prou phe ; Ka peh, 
"rice"; Boloven, NiahSn pha; 
Lave pha ; Stieng phei ; Sedang 
phei ; Halang pe, peh ; Alak pHhei ; 
Bahnar phe, pha ; Kaseng pai dik, 
" husked rice " ; Churn phe ; Chrau 
phe ; Proons pe, " rice in the husk. "] 

(c) Boiled rice (Mai. nasi) : ba', 
Setn. Plus ; bab, Se7n. Jarum, 
Pang. U. Aring; bab, Pa?ig. K. 
Aring; E 26, 27 ; G 30 ; O 34. 

107. Rice (in the husk) ; si, Som., Sak. 
Kerb. ; sasa (sass^), Sak. Ra. ; 
chahai, Kena. L ; che' (chek), Ben. 
Ne7v. ; sahasi. Rasa. [Lave, Niahcn, 
Bolovc7i cha, " rice (in the husk)."] 

108. Rice (in the husk) : padil, Sem. 
Craw. Hist. , Sem. Ked. New. ; 
padi, Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. 
A/ax. ; padi ; paddi, Ben. New. ; 
F 283, 284 ; (spec. Mai. padi 
anak ikan) : padi 16bek (padi 
Ibik), Sem. Buk. Max.; padi nung- 
kal ? (padi nungkl), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; (spec. Mai. padi bentang 
alas ?) : padi sentap (padi sntp), Sem. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

697 

Buk. Max. ; (spec. Mai. padi chinta 
kaya?) : padi b6rai (padi brai), Sem. 
Buk. .Max.; (spec. Mai. padijawa?): 
padi ong? (padi ao'), Sevi. liuk. 
Max. ; (spec. Mai. padi kemer- 
bang?) : padi tiong? (padi tiung), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; (spec. Mai. padi 
kgras) : padi maeng 16ko' (padi 
maing Ikuk), Se7n. Buk. Max.; padi 
cht'ko' (padi jkuk), Sem. Pa. Max.; 
H 31 ; (spec. Mai. padi Sglangor) : 
padi bSncha (padi bncha), Sc?n. 
Buk. Max. ; (spec. Mai. p. Sultan 
Mahniud) : padi langsat? (padi 
Ingst), Sem. Buk. Max. ; (spec. 
Mai. padi t6rong s6ni?): padi 
ampaifindo' (padi aniplndu' ?), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; padi hian (padi hian), 
Sejn. Pa. A/a.v. [Mai. padi]. 
Rice in husk : y 88. 

109. Rice, husked (Mai. bgras) : 
mangkayd [pr. mangkaydd), Sem. 
J arum. 

no. Rice, husked [Mai. bfiras) : bi-on 
(/r. bi-o<in), Sem. Skeat; biyfln, 
Sem. Per. [? = R 113 ; or cf. 
Niah'dn, puan ; Chrau, Slten^; pieng ; 
Churu biang ; Mon pong [pung], 
"cooked rice"; Tareng ap6n, 
" husked rice."] 

111. Rice, husked [Mai. beras): he-ka", 
Sem. Plus ; ung-kuok, Krau Ket. ; 
r6-kua', Kraii Tern. \Chong ruko ; 
Samre, Por rokho ; Cuoi angkau 
(ang cau), "rice" ; Palaung lakau 
(lakow), rekao ; KhasiVhdM.; Khmer 
angka [angkftr?]; Khtnus rongko 
(rongco) ; Rmnai ta-kao ; Wa kao, 
"husked rice"; Sue rangkao 
(rangcao), " rice in husk. "] 

112. Rice, husked (Mai. bSras) : 
chfingrong (chngrong), Sak. U. 
Kam. \ chen-er-oi, cheng-goi, 
ng-roi, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; chSn-da- 
roi, Seti. Cliff. ; chendar6i, Sak. 
Tap. ; chendroi, Serau, Darat, 
Krau Em. ; jaroi (djaroi), Sak. 
Korb. Lias. ; charoi (charoi), Sak. 
Br. Low. Cooked rice : cha-roy, 
Sak. Tan. Ram.. Rice [state un- 
defined] : charoi (tcharoye), Sak. 
Croix; (tcharoi), Sak. Kerb. ; 
chindroi, Sak. Sung., Tan. U. 
Lang. [?Cf. Mon sro (pr. sr5?) ; 
Khmer sriuv (or sr6v) [sruw] ; 
Annam. hia, "rice in the husk."] 

113. Rice, husked (Mai. bgras) : (a) 
pren, Bcs. A. /. Boiled rice : pran 
(pren), Bedu. IL Food (boiled 
rice) : p6rin (pughin), Ben. New. 
Rice : pren, Bes. Songs. 

(b) Husked rice : kirhit, Ben. New. ; 
kamirahek, Ben. New. 

(c) Seed ; grain (Mai. bfinih) : prat", 
J'cmbi. 

114. Rice, husked: yawum, Ben. 
Neiu. 

115. Rice, husked : bgrds, Jak. Malac, 
.Mantr. Malac. ; bras, Ben. New. ; 
ber^s, Barok ; bayas, Sem. Craw. 
Hist. , Sem. Ked. New. ; bi - as, 
Sem. Beg. ; bias [in MS. originally 
" beas "J, Sem. U. Sel. Rice [state 
undefined] : bayas, Sem. Ked. And. , 
Sem. Ked. Rob. [Mai. bSras]. 

116. Rice, boiled (Mai. nasi): chgras, 
Kena. /. [? = R 115]. 

117. Rice, boiled (.Mai. nasi): ran, 
Krau Ket. ; rau, Krau Tern. [?=R 

113]- 

118. Rice, boiled: brejek, Serting. 

119. Rice, boiled (Mai. nasi): na-s&, 
Sem. Kedah ; nasi, Sein. Ken., Ben. 
New. , Bes. Malac. , Alajitr. Malac. , 
Jak. Malac. ; nazi. Or. Laut ; 
na-i', Sem. Plus ; nasi' (nasik), 
Serau ; chendroi nasi' (nasik), 
Krau Em. ; R 112 ; F 283 [Mai. 
nasi] ; E 27 ; E 30. 

120. Rice, glutinous : pulut (pult), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; (spec. Mai. pulut 
jawa) : pulut haeng or p. hayeng? 
(pult haeng), Scrn. Buk. Max. ; 
(spec. Mai. pulut lidah kgrbau) : 
ptilut jawi bQrong ? (pult jaui burng), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Glutinous black 
rice (spec. Mai. pulut hitam) : pulut 
pelte' (pult plte'), Sem. Pa. Afax. ; 
B 233 [.]/al. pulut]. 

121. Rice, glutinous (spec. A/al. pulut 
merah) : bunga lfl,nsa? (iunga or 
bunga? Insa), Sem. Buk. Alax. [? = 
F 190 ; L ioa]. 

To cook rice : C 238. 
Rice-bag : B 12-14. 
Rice-field, wet : M 217. 

122. Rice-pounder: gul, Sak. U. Kam. 

123. Rich (Mai. ka3'a) : hal. Pang. U. 
Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Poor (A/al. miskin) : o-hal Sem. 
Plus. [Some confusion here : the 
same word can hardly mean" rich " 
and "poor," or else the 0' (usually 
the pronoun of the 3rd person, 
singular), here has a negative sense.] 

124. Rich : kaya (kaja), Sak. Kor. Gb. 
[Mai. kaya] ; M 46. 

125. Rich, in sense of "fat" (A/al. 
16mak) : halig (pr. ha-ligg), Sem. 
Kedah ; haleg (pr. ha-legg), Sem. 
/arum ; leg? (lik), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Nice or pleasant, of food (A/al. 

698 

COM PA RA TI VE VO CA B ULA R V OF 

sgdap) : haleg, ex. haleg-leh bab te' 
(Mai. sedap-lah nasi ini), "good is 
this rice (to eat)," Pang. U. A ring. 

126. Rich (fat) = F 34. 

127. Bidan (fruit, tree), Nephelium 
Maingayi (?) : klkit (kikit), Sem. 
Bilk. Max. ; kitkait (kitkait), Sem. 
Pa. Max. 

127A. RiDAN : lidan, Bes. Songs [Mai. 
ridan]. 

128. Right (opp. to left) : tern (pr. 
te^ni), ex. ba-tem {Mai. ka-kiri) = 
' ' towards the left," Sem. Janim; tern 
(fr. te^m), Setn. Plus ; tim, Pang. 
Jalor; torn. Pang. U. A ring; tim 
(/;'. ti^m), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal.; 
tik, Tembi ; matok", Jelai ; top, 
Se7t. Cliff. ; tup? (dub or dup), Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; tato^m ? (diidob'n ; da- 
dob'n), Sem. K. Ken. ; maXob, Som. ; 
kgntam (kont^jn) ; kontam, Sak. 
Ra. ; sa-tani, Bera ; S 198. \_Mon 
stum [stu, stum] ; Khmer sdam 
[stam], "right."] 

128A. Right (opp. to left) : chenot", 
Serau. 

129. Right (opp. to left) : ma ting mun 
(matingmoun), Sak. Kerb. [A 176 ; 

H 15]- 

130. Right : kanan, Bland. K. Lang. 
\_Mal. kanan] ; L 48. 

Bight (opp. to wrong) : S 482, 
483 ; T 240. 

131. Righteous : ninai, Sak. U. Kam. 

132. Bigorous ; severe : gfiheng, Bes. 
Sep. A . I. Tough or cohesive : 
gSheng, ^.r. tek geheng = J/a/. tanah 
liat, lit. "stiff earth," i.e. "clay," 
Bes. K. L. [?cf. Mai. garang]. 
Bind : S 236. 

133. Eing [Mai. chinchin) : [a) chin 
(doubtful). Pang. U. Aritig; chin- 
druel, Sem. (Plus or Kedah). Arm- 
let (made of " rotan rial" with 
" chanlong " leaves) : chin-os. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Armlets : kin- 
lah or kin-la, Pang. U. A ring; 
ken-la or ken-lah, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. A charm against wind- 
and rain-demons : kenla or kenlah, 
Pang. U. Aring. Bandolier (worn 
by both sexes on festal occasions) : 
chin-iwog, Pang. U, Aring; tin- 
iwag (or tin-wag?), Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. Necklace : t6n-wat 
(? = chin-wat), Pang. U. Aring 
[?cf. C 215]. Bracelet (of palas ; 
P 16) : chin - ing neng, Sem. 
Stev. Spirals (leaf - spirals in- 
serted in ear - holes in default of 
earrings, etc.) : kenleng hall' pales, 

lit. " spirals of ' palas ' leaf," Sem. 
Kedah. Pieces of ' ' palas " hung on 
the ears (against deafness) : kin- 
lang, Setn. Stev. Fillet : chin-kui, 
Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; H 46. Necklace : t(n-a-kau 
(or tin-wad?), Pang. Sa7n, Pang. 
Gal. Carving on mouthpiece of 
blowpipe : tenwad (tenward), Se?n. 
Stev. Straps for back-basket (i.e. 
to put the arms through) : tinbul 
(tinbool), Sem. Stev. Rattan ring 
on blowpipe : chin-os, Sem. Stev. 
[It is by no means certain that all 
these words are connected ; their 
arrangement in one paragraph is 
merely tentative. Some appear to be 
connected with Stieng nchien ; Mon 
kdchin, lachin ; Khmer anchi^n 
[anjien] ; chonchien [jAnjien], 
"finger-ring" ; for others, perhaps 
cf. Khmer kang, "ring," "brace- 
let " ; Bahnar kong ; Cham kang ; 
Su(l kon ; Kon Tu, Churu kon, 
" bracelet."] 

(b) Ring : chinchin, Sak. U. Kam. 
Finger-ring : chinchin (tchin\.<ih\a), 
Sak. Ra., Sak. Kerb. \_AIal. chin- 
chin]. 
133A. Ring: alik", Darat ; alikn (alTkn), 
Jelai. [Lampong ali, ' ' ring. "] 

134. Ring : subang, Bes. K. Lang. 
Spirals (leaf-spirals for insertion in 
ear-holes) : subang sSla' pales, Se7ii. 
Kedah or Plus ? [probably the 
latter, "s61a' " being a Sakai form of 
L 32 and the Plus dialect being a 
border dialect]. Earring : sumbang, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. [Mai. subang]. 

135. Ring : pellsok (p'lisok). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. ; E 76. 

136. Rings in the basket carried on the 
back : tau (tow), Sem. Stev. 
Bingworm : I 46-53. 

137. Bipe (of fruit) : nung, Krau Tern.; 
nong, Tembi ; nep^ ; nom, Darat ; 
nUm, Sak. U. Kam. ; niim, Sak. 
Giiai ; ''num, Bes. Malac. ; 'ndum ; 
gnduPm, Bes. A. /. ; hendum, Bes. 
Songs. Ripe fruit : pie' (plek) nop°, 
Jelai. To cook : nom, Sak. Ra. 
[Bahnar dum, " ripe " (also = 
" red ") ; Stieng ndum, dum ; 
A7/W6Vtum [dilm]; Boloven, Niahon, 
Halang dum ; Lave dum ; Alak 
duam ; Mon duh, " ripe."] 

137A. Rii'K : 'ngka'in? (n'kiid'n), Sem. 
K. Ken. 

138. RiFK : luchar, Bes. Songs. 

139. Ripe : paseg (pasik), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; taseg (tasik), Sem. Pa, 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

699 

Max. ; taseg, ex. taseg kgbok tun. 
"that fruit is ripe," Sem. Plus; 
taseg, Pang. U. Aring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. Heavy? (of a 
flower) : betasap, Bes. K. Lang. 
[Balinese, Batak tasak ; Mangkasar 
tasa" ; Biigis tasft' ; Lampong tasa ; 
Cham, Kawi tasak ; Sundan. asak ; 
Mai. masak, "ripe."] 
Rii'ic : C 237 ; D 182. 

140. Rise, to : bangun (bunghoon), 
Ment. Stev. \^Mal. bangun] ; A 6 ; 
A 131, 132; A 155, 156; A 190, 
iqi ; B 202 ; (i 15 ; L 79. 

141. Rising ground: sematang, Bes. 
Songs [cf. Mai. pgrmatang] ; S 26. 

142. River : alur, Darat ; alur. Tan. U. 
Lang. Stream : aliir? (al our), Sak. 
Hale. [Mai. alor, " bed of river. "] 
S310. 

143. River : sungai, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Ked. New. , Setn. Ked. Rob. , 
Mantr. Malac. , Bes. Malac. ; sung- 
sai (soungsai), Sem. Klapr. ; sungei, 
Sem. Jiir. And., Sem. Jur. Rob. ; 
(sungie), Sem. Jur. New. , Ben. 
New. ; sugnl (sougni), Sak. Ra. ; 
dugne, Bes. Malac. Rivulet : sungie 
wang bak (?), Ben. New. ; W 30. 
Small river : sugnl machiang (sougni 
matchian), Sak. Ra. ; S 282 \_Mal. 
sungai]. 

River : T 242 ; W 27-30 ; W 33, 
34 ; W 39, 40. 

144. River, small : talok, Jak. Malac. 
\) Mai. Ar. ta'lok, "tributary."] 

145. River, bank of: kibo' (kibu'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. 

146. River-bank : tfirbis (t'rbis), Jak. 
Ba. Pa. , Jak. Lent. [? cf. Achin, 
tgrbis (apparently means a sudden 
deepening in the bed of a river, a 
hole with steep sides).] 
Headwater of river : A 6 ; W 30. 
Reach of river : B 173. 

147. River, source of: guntong, Bers. 
Stev. \AIal. guntong]. 

148. River, source of: chaharu (cha- 
haroo), Ment. Stev. ; W 30. 
River-bed : W 41. 

149. River-mouth; estuary (.l/cz/.kuala): 
was. Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam ; 
waz. Pang. Gal. Mouth of large 
river : wash (ouash), Sak. Kerb. 

150. River, mouth of : M 206, 207 ; 
W 30. 

Rivulet : R 143 ; W 27-30. 
Road : C 216 ; G 41-43 ; G 49, 
50 ; S 481 ; W II. 

151. Roar, to {Mai. mSngaung) : bo'gat 
(bu'gt), Sem. Pa. Max. 

151 A. Roar, to {Germ, brausen): barut, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. [? = N 91]. 

152. Roar, to {Mai. m6nd6ram) : 
bInAm ? (binm or iJnm ?), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; A 17 ; C 285 ; H 161 ; 
N 90, 91. 

153. Roast, to {Mai. panggang) : ya- 
hangkap. Pang. U. Aring. To 
roast meat {Mai. panggang) : ya' 
changkab {pr. ya' changkabb), Setn. 
J arum, Sem. Plus. 

154. Roast, to : sfinopip ? (snorpip), 
Som. ; gapit (ghap?V), Sak. Ra. ; 
ma'sgpit, Serting. [Perhaps cf. 
P 106, from the method of roasting 
in a cleft stick ? or cf. A 159 ?] 

155. Roast, to: manggagn, Bes. Her.; 
hamgnggiang, Barok \_Mal. pang- 
gang] ; B 465, 466 ; B 468. 

156. Rock: hel (?), Bes. A. L ; S 461, 
462 ; S 465. 

157. Rock, to : jSlSpak, Bes. Songs. 

158. Rock, to : sending, Bes. Songs. 

159. Rock, to : sengit, Bes. Songs; M 
212 ; S 129-131. 

Roe (offish): E34. 
Roedeer : D 75-81. 

160. Roll, to : lueh (luih), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Around : lueh (luih), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Round; arched; circle: 
lueh (luih), Se/n. Pa. Max. [? cf. 
O67]. 

161. Roll, to: gihk or gdlik, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. To roll (a cigarette) : giling 
(ghili^7), Sak. Ra. Round : gili 
(gilli), Setn. K. Ken. [?=R 192]; 
{Mai. giling]. 

162. Roll, to (a cigarette) : gulon 
(ghoulon), Sak. Kerb. \_Mal. gulong]. 

163. Roll, to : mgnatu (mb-na-tou), 
Som. 

164. Roof ; thatch {Mai. atap) : chem- 
chom, Lebir. Tree spec, described 
as resembling the " bgrtam " palm, 
and used for thatching Pangan 
huts : chenchilm, Sem. Kedah. 
Palm spec. {Mai. "chucho"), [pre- 
sumably Calamus castaneus. Griff.] : 
chin-chom, Sem. Stev. [? cf. Mai. 
chuchok]. 

165. Roof : {a) balisng (balig'n), Sem. 
K. Ken. [? = A 9]. 

{b) Roof : pglias, Kena. L [But ? 
cf. Mai. pglias, " protective charm " : 
it may be originally a Pantang 
word.] 

166. Rook : hatap, Seiiing, Mantr. 
Malac. ; ha'-tep, Kerbat [Mai. 
atap] ; L 34. 

167. Roof ; thatch {Mai. atap) : kg- 
rob. Sak. Plus Cliff. ; karob 

700 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

(k^rob), Som. ; k^rop, Sak. Ra. ; 
k^rop, Sak. Kerb. ; kerop, Sak. Tan. 
Rain, [.l/tiw krop chhu, "shingle"; 
krop ti, "tile."] ? Cf. B 129. 

168. Atap ; kajang : pgrongkop (p'rong- 
kop or prungkop), Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Clouds: pengungkup (p'ngungkup), 
Pant. Kap. Juh. ; serungkup, Pant. 
Kap. Her. \J\Ial. rungkup, ' ' over- 
arching, overspreading."] 

169. Roof, top of { Mai. bubong ) : 
ken-dril, Sen. Cliff. 

Roof of mouth : P 18. 

170. Room : gerempa (gorempe), Sak. 
Kerb. 

171. Room: dini, Sorn. 

172. Room : bile, Sak. Ra. ; bilig, 
Tembi ; bilik, Darat, Jclai \A'Ial. 
bilek]. 

173. Root {Mai. akar) : ayau, Sem. 
Kedah ; yaes, Sem. Per. Bow- 
string : yao, S'dm. Rattan ; rope ; 
string : ya6, Som. Rope or string 
(Mai. tali) : yo or yau, Sem. Kedah. 
[? Cf. A^on roh [ruih] ; Khmer riis, 
" root."] 

174. Root : jSlar, Kena. I. 

175. Root : (a) akor, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
akarh (akakh), Barok. Snake : 
akar, Pant. Kap. Joh. 

(b) Root : jangkar, Des. Sep. A. I. 
Root (below ground) : jangka, 
Mantr. Malac. ; jangkar, Jak. 
Malac. \AIal. akar] ; R 36-41. 

176. Root (below ground), [Mai. umbi): 
bahao' (bha'u' or bh'au'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Beginning ; origin : beho' 
(bhu'), Sem. Pa. Max. 

177. Roots? on the surface: purus, 
Bes. Songs. 

178. Root, buttress-, or strut of tree 
[Mai. banir) : dfepag. Pang. U. 
A ring; de-pak, Kerbat ; dapak 
(danak ? or dapak ?), Sem. Bi/k. 
Max. Palm-frond: tapag( said to = 
Mai. p616pah), ex. tapag tfilentor 
gayor, "the palm-fronds sway to 
and fro," Pang. Teliang. 

179. Root, buttress-: chakih, Bes. K. L. ; 
chaki, lies. A. I. 

180. Root, buttress- : treng, Bes. Songs. 

181. Root, buttress-: bana ( bana ), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; bani, Mantr. 
Malac. , Jak. Malac. \Mal. banir]. 

182. Root, a species of magic : chin- 
duai, Bes. K. I.ang. Witchcraft 
(especially lovo-charms working at a 
distance) : chenduwai (chnduwai), 
Sak. U. Bert. [.]/al. chi'nduai]. 
Root, to : D 107. 

Rope : D 98 ; R 37-41 ; R 173. 

183. Rope ; string : tall, Sak. Ra. 
Rattan : tall, Sak. Kerb. ; ta'-li, 
(J. Tem. ; tali' (tahkh), tali' (talik), 
Tembi ; (spec. Mai. rotan ilang): 
tali lok", Tembi. Belt [Mai. tali 
ikat pinggang) : tali gel [pr. gell), 
Pang. U.Aring. Bowstring: penali, 
Sem. Stev. ; tali, Sern. K. Ken. ; 
Perinaeum? or urethra? [Mai. tali 
ayer) : tali bfiteoh (tali btiuh), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Waistcloth: tale (tahley) 
[in MS. of Sem. U. Sel.^\ N 16; 
N 42 ; W 30 ; [.)/«/. tali]. 

184. Rose - apple (spec. Mai. jambu 
ayer chili), Eugenia caryophyllea ; 
(spec. Mai. jambu ayer merah) : 
jSmbu meri' (jmbu mir'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; (spec. Mai. jambu ayer 
mawar), Eugenia jambos : jSmby 
mawSr (jmbu maur), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; (spec. Mai. jambu bol), 
Eugenia malacceiisis : jambu bar 
(jmbu br), Sem. Buk. Max. ; (spec. 
Mai. jambu perawas) : jambu p6ra- 
was (jmbu prauas), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[Mai. jambu]. 

Rosin : R 72-80. 

185. Rot, to ; tembi, Bes. Songs [Mai. 
timbus ?]. 

186. Rotten (of texture) (?) : beuh ? 
(b'uh), Sem. Buk. Max. [? cf. Mai. 
Iburok, "rotten"; or perhaps 
Khmer puk [buk] ; Bahnar bQk, 
" rotten " (of wood)] ; O 15. 
Rotten (putrid) : H 116 ; S 292. 

187. Rough : klochot, Bes. Songs. 

188. Rough ; uneven : gisa, Sem. Buk. 
Max. [? cf. Mai. kasap] ; T 57. 

189. Round (.1/a/. bulat): (a) terkel (/r. 
terr-kell), Sem. Jarum ; telkil, Sern. 
Plus. 

(1^) bglgul, Tembi [and Seraiil^; 
belnul, Serau. 

190. Round : terleau [pr. terr-leau), 
Sein. Jarum; teliau (tliu ortlliu?). 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; to-lau. Pang. U. 
Aring; tolau. Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. Round ; circular ; spherical ; 
roundness : teliau (tliu), Se>?i. Buk. 
Max. [?cf. F 118]. 

191. Round: ((2)bunthok, Bes. Sep., Bes. 
K. L. [see M 164 ; and cf. Mai. 
bSntok, "curved," "rounded"; 
numerical coefficient for rings and 
the like ; Biaju Dayak bunt^r ; 
Mai., Manyan [Maanjan), Sampit 
Vjuntar; Katingan\m.x\\\x, "round."] 
(/') Round : bulat, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
bulat, Bes. Bell. Whole: bulat, Bes. 
Songs [.\Ial. bulat, "round"]; B 
175 ; R 160. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

701 

192. Round {adv.): kliling, Bes. K. 
Lang. To surround : keliling 
(klilifi), Sak. Ka. [wrongly ren- 
dered "to see"], [.!/«/. keliling]; 
R 161. 

193. Bounded ; stout : kechang (kchng), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Twisted ; spiral : 
kunchang (kunchng), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; E 34 ; R 193. 
Boiindness : R 190. 

Row, to ■. P 5. 6 ; P 8-10. 

194. Rub, to [Mai. gosok) : ya' sor (pr. 
ya' sorr), Sem. Kedah; gersoyd [pr. 
gerr-soydd), ex. o gersoyd tgl6- 
moyn, "when rubbed it grows soft," 
Pang. Tcliatig; gosoyX, Bes. Songs; 
keiasoi (clasoi), Mantr. Cast. ; 
mgngggsi' ? (mngki' or mngksi'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. To stroke [Mai. 
gosok) : ya-sol, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; pusoi, e.g. pusoi kuchil^ng, 
"to stroke a cat," Bes. Sep. To 
rub two sticks for fire : gasing, 
Mc?it. Her. I. [These words seem 
to be remotely related to the Mai. 
gosok ; gesek ; gisar ; gisir. But cf. 
KInner chftt [jut] ; Man jot [juit] ; 
Sticng'yXi, juch ; Bahnar shut (xut) ; 
tshut (txut) ; Tareng suAh ; Jarai 
sot, "to wipe" ; Bolove?i, Niahon 
chut ; Lave silt ; Halang siit sach, 
"to rub" ; and see C 142 and S 
144, 145. Curiously similar are the 
Andamanese Biada jit ke ; Bcjigiab 
ch5t kan, " to rub."] 

195. Rub, to : kulut, Parit. Kap. Joh. 
[? cf. Mai. lulut ; urut]. 

196. Rub, to [Mai. gesek) : linchet, e.g. 
" to get fire by friction," linchet uis, 
Bes. K. L. ; linchet uis, Bes. Sep. 
[cf. Mai. lenchit] ; S 50 ; S 499. 

197. Rubbish : cha'ait, Bes. Sep. 
Rudder : B 6. 

Ruler : C 294 ; H 62. 
Rumour : N 52. 
Rump : L 127. 

198. Run, to [Mai. lari) : ya-kfisot, 
Pang. U. Aring\ ya-pgsod, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; pisit (passit), 
U. Kel. To escape : pSsuit, Bes. 
A. /. 

199. Run, to: bah. Pang. Belimh., 
Pa7ig. K. A ring. 

200. Run, to: jarr ; Sm-jarr, Sen. 
Cliff. ; jar (djarr), Sak. Martin. 
I run : en jaar, Jelai. Run near 
[to something or to the speaker ?] : 
jarat nyon, Jelai. Don't run away 
into the jungle ! aga jor ma' (mak) 
Sftrak^, Jelai. [?Cf. ZJa/rwarjak, "to 
run away."] 

201. Run, to : ya' loi, Sem. Jarum, 
Sem. Plus ; loi, if. Pat. ; tala'. 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; G 44. 
Swift ; quick : loi, Sdm. [? = R 202 ; 
or cf. Taj-eng Ifl ; Kan Tu trolii, 
Su^ sdliih ; Central Nicobar 16, ' ' to 
run " ; see also A 2.] 

201A. Run, to: arai, 5^razi: [?=R 202]. 

202. Run, to : lari, Ben. New., Manir. 
Malac. , Jak. Malac. [il/c/. lari] ; 
A 42 ; G 44. 

203. Run along, to : ting-tung (said 
to = Mal. mfiniti dahan), ex. 6' ting- 
tung, " he runs along (the branches), " 
Sem. Kedah. 

To run away : A 42. 
Rung (of ladder) : L 2. 
Rush, to : T 108. 

204. Rush upon, to: nekam, Bes. Sep. 
[Mai. tSrkam]. 

205. Rust : rojol. Pant. Kap. Joh. 
205A. Rust : kayat ( kajat), Sem. K. 

Ken. [.Mai. karat]. 

206. Rustle, to : prau, Bes. Songs [Mai. 
bfirderau). 

207. Rustle, to [Germ, rauschen) : bos, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. 

Rusty : I 37 ; R 205-205A. 

1. Sack: goni, Sdm. ; goni, Sak. Kerb.; 
goni, Sak. Ra. ; gundi, Serau [Mai. 
goni ; guni] ; B 11-15. 

2. Sacrilege, misfortune resulting from: 

tulah, Bes. Songs [Mai. Ar. tulah]. 

3. Sad ; sorrowful : sorpur (sorpour). 
Sd7)l. 

4. Sad ; sorrowful : oish (oisch), Sak. 
Kerb. Horrible : osh (osch), Sak. 
Kerb. [? Cf. Bahnar oh, ' ' over- 
whelmed with grief."] 

5. Sad : sorrowful : susa (soussa), Sak. 
Ra. To have suspicions ; suspicious ; 
jealousy : sum susah (? sum sush), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; B 380 [Mai. susah]. 
Sad: H 116. 

6. Safe ; to sew : penyimat (p'nyimat). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. [? Mai. Ar. jimat, 
" economy "]. 

7. Sail: tende^ng (?), Bes. A. /. To 
sail : tendeng(?), Bes. K. L.; W 119. 
Sakai : M 23 ; M 26. 

8. Salak (fruit), Zalacca edulis : kuwen ? 
(kuin), Sem. Pa. Max. 

9. Salak, a palm whose shredded leaves 
are used for headdresses to avert or 
cure headaches : da'-ye' or da'-yok, 
Sem. Plus. 

10. Salak : angkam, Bes. Sonss. 

702 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

11. Salak (fruit): salek jantong (salik 
jntung), Sajn. Buk. Max. ; salak, 
Serau. Asam paya (fruit), Zalacca 
conferta: salek (sallk), Sem. Buk. 
Max. IMal. salak]; K 17, 18; U 21. 
Saliva : S 389 ; S 391. 

12. Salt {Mai. garam) : buku', Sem. 
Kedah. 

13. Salt: empaut, Setn. Per. ; ^/«pot, 
Sak. Ra. ; 'mpod, Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; 
nin poid, Sak. Tap. ; 'mpoit (m'poit), 
Sak. Martin ; em-p6ch, Sen. Cliff. ; 
empoig, Sak. Br. Low ; (empoye), 
Sak. Croix; amp4i (ampai), Sem. 
K. Ken. ; empoi. Tan. U. Lang. ; 
em-pOl, Sak. Kerb. ; mpoi, Som. ; 
'mpoi ; 'nipoy, Sak. U. Kam. ; mpoik, 
Sak. Sutig. ; tampoing, Setn. Ken. ; 
pi-hen (pee-hen), Sak. Sel. Da. \ 
paliboyi, Ben. New. Salt, adj. (of 
water) {Mai. masin) : empoyd [pr. 
empoydd), Sem. Jaruni; empoyd (/;-. 
empoydd), Sem. Plus. [? Cf. Man ba 
[buiw] ; Tarcng boi ; Bahnar boh ; 
Kaseng, Kon Tu, Boloven, Siieng 
b6h ; Halang mobSh ; Sedang b6 ; 
Sui\mo\\; Cliam\x)\\; Anna7nm\xQ\\ 
Braou mbc^h ; Phnong ambang-ba ; 
C-uoi poh? (pes) ; Prou boh? (bos) ; 
Niahon, Alak, Lave hoh, "salt."] 

14. Salt : chetniat (tch^tniet), Sak. Ra. ; 
chin-et, Sen. Cliff. ; chenetii, Darat; 
chened, Krau Em. Salty ; sugar ; 
sweet : chin-et or chi-et, Sen. Cliff. 
Sweet : cheet, Darat ; cheet", Jelai. 
[Palaung, tset, seh, "salt."] 

15. Salt: siyak, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Klapr. , Sem. Ked. New. ; siak 
or siya, Sem. Plus; sia', Sem. Plus; 
siyah, Sem. Ked. And., Sem. Ked. 
Rob. ; siah, Sem. U. Sel. Salt, adj. 
(of water), (Mai. masin): siak, Sem. 
Kedah ; W 30 (?). [Selung selak ; 
Brunei Mai. sirah, serah ; Malagasy, 
Batak sira ; Sasak, Sangar, Bima 
siya ; Melatio Dayak, Kanowit, Matu 
siah; iVjaj assioh, "salt."] 

16. Salt : pt-nasin (penassin), Ben. 
New. ; pCmasing (p'masing). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. ; W 30 ; W 34 ; W H2. 
Salty : masin ; asin, Sak. U. Kam. 
[A/al. masin ; asin]. 

17. Salt : geam, Sem. Jur. And. ; 
(glam), Sem. Jur. New. ; (ceam), 
Sem. Jur. Rob. ; garam, Ben. New., 
Jak. Malac. ; gerhdm (g6kh6m), 
Barok [Mai. garam] ; A 25 ; B 232. 

18. S&lt {adj); salty: (rt) keng? (king), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; W 30 ; [ ? cf. 
Katingan, Biaju Dayak kahing, 
' 'salt' ' ; Katingan bakahing, ' ' salty. "] 

[b) koor, Jelai ; S 13-16. 
Salt water : W 30. 
Salty : S 13-16 ; S 18. 
Salutation : D 42 ; E 83 ; G 115 ; 
P44A. 

19. Same : kompol. Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[?A/al. kumpul ' ' assembled together, " 
which is another meaning of Mai. 
sama, ' ' same " ; P 247. ] The same ; 
in the same way : S 138. 

20. Sand {Mai. pasir) : a-ney, Sem. 
Kedah, Sem. Plus. [Ackin. anoi, 
" sand."] 

21. Sand : lakin (Iftkin or llkain?), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [? =S 334]. 

22. Sand : prawi, Ben. New. [Mai. 
pgroi ?]. 

23. Sand : r6boi, A'ena. /. Dust : sib6, 
Se7n. A". Ke?i. [ = S 26]. 

24. Sand : pasir, Tembi ; pasir, Serau ; 
(passir), Sak. Ra. ; pasaiu, Sem. 
Jur. And. ; (passaiu), Sem. Jur. 
New. ; (pasain), Sem. Jur. Rob. ; 
pis6h, Barok ; pashi ? (basji), Sem. 
K. Ken. Dust : pasTr (passir), Sak. 
Kerb. Fish : sakilap pasir. Pant. 
Gah. Mant. [Mai. pasir, "sand."] 

25. Sand : pgnabu (p'nabu) ; penabur 
(p'nabur). Pant. Kap. Joh. [? Mai. 
tabur, "to sprinkle"; but cf. A 
160.] 

26. Sand ; dust : sdmbei, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; sSmbei ( sombei ), Sak. Ra. 
Dust : sabor, Sak. Ra. ; cf. S 25 ? 
Rising ground {Mai. pgrmatang) : 
umbai, Bes. A. /. [Man khSpaik 
[khabuik], thapaik [thabuik] ; Bahnar 
bobui, "dust"; ?cf Alak baach ; 
Boloven, Niahon phach, "sand."] 

27. Sand; dust: pantei (pantei), Som.; 
(partei), Sak. Kerb. [Mai. pantai, 
' ' shore ' ' ; but cf. also Mon peti [bti] ; 
phati, "sand"]; E 12. 

28. Sandbank : tfebing (tobing), Sak. 
Kor. Gb. [cf. Mai. t6bing ; bSting ; 
and cf. H 86.] 

29. Sandbank {Mai. busong): put, 
Sem. Buk. A/ax. 

30. Sandfly : pgnchadok (p'nchadok), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Ant : pgnchodok 
(p'nchodok). Pant. Kap. Joh. Mos- 
quito : penchadok pgneko' isi 
(p'nchadok p'n'kok isi), Pant. Kap. 
Lem. ; E 29 ; F 170. 

Sandfly: M 180; M 182; M 
184. 

31. Sap; gutta {Mai. gStah) : chfeburr. 
Sen. Cliff. ; cheber, Te?nbi, Darat ; 
chcbor, Jelai ; ( spec. Mai. gCtah 
akar) : cheber ch5k°, Darat ; (spec. 
Mai. ggtah sundik) : cheber chiknot ; 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

703 

cheber chingoit, Darat [?]. Gutta- 
percha {Mai. gfitah taban) : cheber 
jahu, Darat; chCbor nyatoh ? (nya- 
tokh), Sak. Em. 

32. Sap ; gutta : gStah ? ( ggtakh ), 
Tetiibi ; gfitah, Manfr. Malac. Cha. 
Blood : g6tah (g'tah), Pant. Kap. 
J oh. \Mal. gStah, "sap"; Jav. 
ggtih, " blood. "] 

Sap : W 30. Full of sap : G 75. 
Sapling : C 10 1. 

33. Satawar hutan (flower spec): bun- 
gah ponggoh, lies. K. Lang. \ F 190. 
Sated : G 75 ; S 34. 35. 

34. Satiated (with food): (a) ke-n6t, 
Sen. Cliff. 

{b) Satisfied ; sated : kenyam or ken- 
yang, ex. tangke bah 6' kenyam, 
Pang. Teliang [Mai. kSnnyang or 
kenj'ang]. 

35. Satiated (with food): iiwln (aulin), 
Se?n. Pa. A/a.v. ; uwingj (auulinglj), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. ; G 75. 
Satisfied : G 75 ; H 116 ; S 34. 
Savage : H 116. 

Say, to : C 254 ; N 91 ; S 359-366. 
Scab : G 41 ; I 45-53 ; P 244, 245. 
Scalded : B 472. 

36. Scales (of fish, etc. ): kglTpeh (klipih), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; pllpeh ? (pllpih), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; S 236. 

Scanty : R 31. 

37. Scar ; cicatrice : bala' (balk), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; G 41 ; P 118. ' 

38. Scarlet : pilu, Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
[? = R54]; R51. 

Scattered : R 31. 

39. Scattered parties, in : tibu-tibar, 
Bes. Songs. 

40. Scent ; smell : wis (wass), Sem. 
Stev. [very doubtful]. 

41. Scent ; smell : rhum (rhoom), 
Mentr. Stev. Odour : lo'om (?), 
Bes. Sep. Scented : ro'uPni, Bes. 
A. I. [Mai. harum, "scented."] 
Scented : S 41 ; S 293 ; S 295. 
Sciatica : L 127 ; S 186. 
Scimitar : K 47. 

Scoop up, to : S 50 ; S 399. 

42. Scorch, to : layu, Bes. Songs. 

43. Scorched : t6k(, Bes. Malac. 

44. Scorched : meranS,, Mantr. Malac. 
Nya. 

45. Scored with patterns : klau bunga', 
Bes. Songs ; F 190. 

46. Scorpion : manghai (mafihai), Sak. 
Kerb. ; manghoi (manhoi), Sak. 
Ra. ; mangai ; mangay, Sak. U. 
Bert. ; mangai, Tenibi, Serau ; 
mangai, Jelai. [? = S 47], 

47. Scorpion : jungai (djungai), Sem. 

K. Ken. ; junai (djou-nal), Som. 
Big scorpion ( Mai. kala ) : juang 
(doubtful), Pang. U. Aring. 

48. Scorpion : chfimata' ? (chmata' ? or 
chmaka'), Sem. Pa. Max. 

49. Scorpion : keiulah (klulh), Scrn. 
Buk. Max. ; kfikala, Alantr. Malac. 
[Mai. kala] ; A 140 ; P 106. 

49A. Scrape, to : gajuAt ? (gadjuat or 
giidjuot), Sak. Kor. Gb. ; S 50. 

50. Scratch : kawait, Bes. Sep. A. I. 
'i"o scratch {Mai. garu) : ya-hakad. 
Pang. U. Aring; ya' kad (pr. 
ya' kadd), Sem. Kedah, Sem. Jarum; 
makait (mkait) ; makait chas (mkait 
chs), Sem. Buk. Max.; H 14; kakayt, 
Bes. Sep. ; kat (kt), Sem. Pa. Max., 
Sem. Buk. Max. To scratch (or 
a claw ? ), ( Mai. chakar ; garu ; 
kait) : kaid (kaid), Sem. Pa. Max. 
To dig : ko-koit. Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Head-scratcher : gehot (gehurt), Sejn. 
Stev. Itch ; itching ; to itch : hakat 
(hakt), Sem. Pa. Max. To rub 
{Mai. gosok) : ya-kad. Pang. U. 
Aring. To rub against (;l/a/. gesel): 
makach (makch), Sem. Buk. Max. 
To scoop up; to scrape {Mai. kaut) : 
ya-kad {pr. kadd), ex. ya-kad te', 
Mai. kautkan tanah, "to scrape, or 
scoop up, earth," Pang. U. Aring. 
Scurf on the head ; itching : hakat 
kueh (hakt kuih). Sent. Pa. Max. ; 
M 75. \Bahnar kach, kai ; Stieng 
kuach, kuahi ; Alak kuech, "to 
scratch" (cf. Khmer kos ; Bahnar 
koih, " to scrape " ; Boloven, Niahon 
koih, " to scratch ") ; Central Nicobar 
ta-kaich, "a scratch."] Cf. S 52. 
Mark of a scratch : P 118. 

51. Scratch, to : katan, Sak. Kor. Gb. 

52. Scratch, to : rais (rais), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [cf. Mai. kais]. 

53. Scratch, to ( or a claw?), {Mai. 
chakar ; garu ; kait) : ujas ches ? 
(aujs chis), Setn. Buk. Max. ; S 50. 
Scream : S 175. 

Scream, to : C 285. 

Screen : B 462. 

Screw-palm (screw-pine) : P 27-30. 

Scrotum : E 36. 

Scrub : B 438-443. 

54. Scurf (of the head) : lage' (Igi'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; S 50. Dirty 
[Mai. kotor): lagek (?), Sem. Jarum. 

55. Sea: tambii, U. Kel. ; lumpii ? 
(lumSpai t^r lumpdi), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
S 65. Sea or ocean {Mai. laut) : 
lebong {pr. leboSng), Sem. Plus; 
tebing {pr. tSbiSng) (?), Sem. Kedah. 
[For this last ? cf. S 13.] 

704 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

56. Sea : nadoih (nah-do-ih), Sak. Sel. 
Da. 

57. Sea : {a) bavvau; bau-wau, Bes. Sep. 
A. I. ; bawau, Bes. Malac. ; V 23. 
(/J) Sea : baruh, Jak. Mad.; baruh, 
Jak. Sim. Plain ; flat country : 
barok, Sak. Tap. ; baru*, Sak. 
Marlin. Valley ( Mai. Igmbah ) : 
baru' ? (baruk), Sak. E?n. Shore 
{Mai. pantai) : baro' ? (barok), e.g. 
sal gum barok, "to go down to the 
shore," Ker J au; D 93. [J/a/. baroh, 
"low ground," "sea-coast," "sea."] 

58. Sea : sabqu ; sabgu, Ben. New. 
[Doubtless misprinted, but what word 
is intended is not clear. Schmidt 
suggests "sabau," cf. S^7,sed qnccre.'\ 

59. Sea: laut, Sem. Craio. Hist., Sem. 
Craw. Gram. , Sem. Ked. And. , Sem. 
Ked. New. , Sem. U. Sel. , Sem. Ken. , 
Sak. Br. Low, Sak. Blanj. Sw. , Sak. 
Martin, Ben. New. , Mantr. Malac. ; 
Jak. Malac. : (lant), Sem. Ked. Rob.; 
(laout), Siim., Sak. Kerb., Sak. J?a.; 
ladt, Sem. Per. ; lawat, Se77i. Jur. 
And. , Sem. Jiir. Rob. , Seiii. Jur. 
New. Lake : laut, Sem. Klapr. ; 
(lant), Sem. Craw. Hist. \Mal. laut, 
" sea. "] 

Sea : W 30 ; W 32 ; W 34. 
Sea-breeze : W 109. 
Sea-green : W 98. 
Sealing-wax palm : A 127. 

60. Search, to ; to look for : kiih, Sak. 
U. Kam. To seek : ya ho-ko' [or 
hb-kop), (said to be used if looking 
for anything close at hand, whereas 
jop is used if looking for things far 
off). Pang. U. Aring; hikep, Krau 
Em. ; kake' (kakek) ; kake, Serau ; 
kah, Sak. U. Bert. ; kaka (kak^), 
Sak. Ra. ; ka (ke), Sak. Kerb. ; ke', 
Se7i. Cliff. I seek: hinkake, Darat; 
jeleheke, Jelai. [? Does not this 
last mean, "what (do you) seek?"] 
A 58. [? = S 82 or S.83 ; ?cf. Mon 
ke [kew], " to aim at."] 

61. Search, to ; to search for; to seek 
[Mai. chahari), ya'lawa', Sem. Plus, 
Sem. Jarum. 

62. Search, to ; to look (for some- 
thing which is far off) : ya-jop. Pang. 
U. Aring. 

63. Search, to ; to seek : in-bas ; in- 
biis, Sem. K. Ken. ; nesSbis (n^sso- 
bis); nesbis, Som. [See P 69.] 

64. .Se.\rch, to ; to seek : pepiong, 
Bes. Songs. [Meaning doubtful.] 

65. Seashore: ch.lntftnglumpii? (chntng 
lm6pii?), Sem. Pa. Max. ; S 55. 
[?=D65.] 

Seasick : V 22-24. 

66. Season: nmsim, Sak. U. Kam.; 
musim {moifi\xa.), Sak. Ra. Cold 
season ; winter : musim ngib, Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; musim hgngich (hngich), 
Sem. Duk. A/ax. ; C 205. Dry 
season : musim puih, Sem. Buk. 
Max. [Probably this should be 
read musim pedih, "hot season," 
H 140. J Fruit season: musim bah, 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; musim tuhun, Seyn. 
Buk. Max. Rice season : musim 
padi', Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. Ar. 
musim]. 

67. Season : ketika (kotika), Som. ; 
tika, Sak. Kerb. [Mai. kfitika]. 

68. Season, dry : b^rak ; b^rak, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. 

Rainy season: R 6 ; R 14. 

69. Sfibarau (sgbaroh orsabarau), (fish 
spec), Barbus hexastichus : slbau ? 
(sbu), Sem. Pa. Max. Freshwater 
fish spec. : sgbarau, Jak. Mad. [Mai. 
s6barau ; sabarau]. 

Secret : Q 16. 

Secrete, to (pus) : P 239. 

70. Sedge (spec. Mai. mfindSrong), 
Scirpus grossus ; ketSmboh (ktmbuh), 
Se7n. Buk. Max. 

71. Sedge (spec. Mai. purun ayer) : 
- purum bgteoh (purum btiuh), Sem. 

Pa. Max. ; W 30 [Mai. purun] ; 
P 29. 

72. See, to; to observe [Mai. tengok), 
ya-tod. Pang. U. Aring. To see : 
pgl-tot [or pel-toi?], Lebir. 

73. See, to : tan-di (?), Krau Tern. 

74. See, to : j6-lai, Sak. Guai ; j6-le, 
Krau Tem. [? = S 78 ; cf. Tareng 
kolai, " to perceive. "] 

75. See, to: [a] dgng, Sem. Beg. ; 
deng, Sem. Martin ; teng, 
Ben. New. ; indaSng ? (indak'n ; 
indag'n), Sem. K. Ken. To stare; 
to gaze at : deng (ding), Se7n. Pa. 
Max. ;-madeng (mdlng), Sem. Buk. 
Max. To look ; to stare : mSdlng 
maji' (mding mji'), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
G 39 ; cf. L 74. [0/</ /v7;;«(f/-dang ; 
Khmer phdang [phtang], pdang 
[ptang] ; Xong tang ; Samre, Por 
teang ; Cham padibng, "to see"; 
? cf Mon theng, "to be visible."] 
[b) To see : ineng ; neng, Serau ; 
neng, Sen. Cliff. ; neng, Sen. CI. , 
Sak. Blanj. CI. ; nen, Sak. Slim ; 
neh, Tem. CI. ; Sak. Plus, 4 A^. Q. 
102 ; nang, Sak. Martin. I jee : 
enneng, Jelai. Seen : panong (pan- 
nung), Kena. Stcv. He is seen {i.e. 
he appears; he looks): hi -nang. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

705 

To look at : ncng, 
\Balnuir wAwg, "to 

Sak. U. Bert. 
Sak. U. Kam. 
look."] 

76. See, to : («) chang-o', K'crbat ; 
dgjgnok (d'j'nok), Pant. Kap. Mad. 
Eye : pinjingo, Pant. Kap. Log. 
[A/al. jengok, "to peer."] 

{i>) Eye : padingo, Or. Hu. /ok. II. ; 
pgningok ( peningok ), Pant. Kap. 
Her. (p'ningok), Pant. Kap. Joh. ; 
W 34. Doctor (medicine - man 

or poyang) : trus pgningok (trus 
p'ningok), Pant. Kap. Joh. ; T 103. 
[A'lal. tengok, " to see. "] 

77. See, to : t61ek (t'lek) ; pgnelek 
(p'nSlek), Pant. Kap. Lem. [Mat. 
tilek ; but of. also S 79.] 

78. See, to : chelSu, Bes. Malac. ; 
chelia (chulia), Ben. Neiv. To see 
(to consider) : jel)-au ; chelyau, e.g. 
"let me see," ko"Pm jelyau [or 
chelyau ), ( koPm = Mai. dapat or 
buleh), Bes. Sep. A. I.\ C 49. To 
look : chgliau, Bes. Songs. [? = 

S74-] 

79. To take care : chSlek (ch'lek). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. ; S 250 \Mal. chfilek or 
of. S 77 or S 78.] 

80. See, to : pegareh, Jak. Malac. 

81. See, to: nya (njo), Sak. Kor. Gb. 
To look at ; to see [Mai. pandang) : 
tS-nyau, Sen. Cliff. ; perjoi, Serau. 
[There is a Malay word tinjau, ' ' to 
look into the distance" (as from a 
watch-tower). Connection doubtful.] 

82. See, to : kai ; kayi' ; kaye', e.g. k. 
dinalop, "seeing a long way off," 
Bes. A. I. ; kayi' (kayik), Bes. Songs; 
kayil, e.g. "do you see or not ? " kayil 
ngot, Bes. Malac. To look : kayi', 
Bes. Malac. ; kaye' (kayek), Bes. 
Songs [? = S 60]. 

83. See, to; to observe: baku (bakou), 
Sak. Ka. 

84. See, to ; to observe : trala, Sak. 
Kerb. 

85. See, to : tampa, Som. To observe : 
tampa (lampa), Soin. To see ; to 
look [Mai. nampak): ya-daped. 
Pang. U. A ring. Face : sampak, 
Kena. I. To seek {Mai. chahari) : 
ya-rampak. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
[Mai. tampak ; nampak]. 

86. See, to: liat (lit), Sem. Pa. Max., 
Sem. Buk. iVIax. To look : rihat, 
Jak. Malac. Eye: nihat, Beti. New. 
[A/a/, lihat, "to see"]; K 63 ; L 135. 

87. Seed (Mai. biji) : sap-siep or sap- 
syep, Setn. Kedah. 

88. Seed : li-mau [should perhaps be 
read li-min], Sen. Cliff. Stone (of 

VOL. II 

fruit), [Mai. biji ; ulas) ; grain [Mai. 
butil) : IS-mat, Sen. Cliff. Rice in 
husk : lumat, Kena. II. [? = E 83]. 

89. Seed : binchat ( been-chat ), Sak. 
Sel. Da. ; bfijek, Bes. Her. ; bijfih, 
Sak. Blanj. Sw.\ h\]eh, Bes. Malac; 
biji, Mantr. Malac; T 143. Grain; 
seed [Mai. b6nih): bgjo (be-jgr), 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; bSjo, Serau [?]. 
Tin : bijih, Ketia. II. [Mai. biji ; 
bijeh] ; F 283. 

90. Seed; grain [Mai. benih): ke-doi, 
Sak. Phis Cliff 

91. Seed : biilat, Ke7ia. I. [Cf. Mai. 
bulir, "ear (of grain)," but cf. also 
R 191.] 

91A. Seed : bgnih, Sak. Sung. [Mai. 
benih] ; E 83; F 283, 284; R 113; 
S 469. Human seed : S 98. 

92. Seed-bud (in coconut) : tombo ho' 
(tumbu huk), Son. Pa. Max. ; S 153 
[A/al. tombong. ] 

Seek, to : C 51 ; S 60-64. 
Seize, to : C 48-50 ; H 106. 

93. Seldom : R 31. 

94. Self : baish, y^k. Malac. ; O 34. 

95. Sell, to : pieh. Pant. Kap. Log. ; 
pieh, Jak. Sim. 

96. Sell, to : jual, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
(djual), Sak. Kor. Gb. ; ajual 
(ajoual), Sak. Ra.; neljul (neldjoul), 
Som. ; joal, Serau ; jual [or jiial) 
telak, Tembi. To buy : ma'ajul. 
Pant. Kap. Her. [Mai. jual, ' ' to 
sell"]; B 484, 485. 

97. S61uang( fish spec): sglueng (sluing), 
Sak. Pa. Max. [Mai. sfiluang]. 

Sgrnang : M 24, 25 ; N 39. 

98. Semen hominis : Ili(aili), Se7n. Pa. 
Max.; ya manli (ia manli), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [probably means ' ' I emit 
semen"]. [? Cf. Q ■z.\'2.'\ 

99. Send, to : a-jud, Sak. Plus Cliff. 
[Boloven, Niahon juon ; Alak jiun, 
"to send"; cf. Stieng jun, "to 
lead," and cf G 32.] 

100. Send, to : ngerug, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. 

101. Send, to : kirib, Sak. U. Kam. 
To send; to order: makim (mkim), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. kirim.] 

102. Send, to, for ( things ) : bSsad 
(bsad), Sak. U. Kam. [Mai. pgsan] ; 
C 13, 14. 

Sending : A 53. 
Sense : H 63 ; M 107. 
Sensible : H 63 ; M 107. 

103. Sfentol {fruit, tree), Sandoricum in- 
dicum : buh hatal (buh hatl), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; buh tul (buh tul), Se7n. 
Buk. Max. [Mai. sentol]. 

2 Z 

7o6 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

119. 

S6pam (tree spec.) ; P 223. 

104. Separate; apart [Mai. asing) : 
wih-vvih (?) ("'gwig(?), Sem. Kedah. 
To separate : ui u, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
B 145 [? cf. O 68]. 

105. Separate, to : bila' ( bil' ), Sem. 
Buk. Ma.v. [Mai. beiah, "to split," 
O)- beda, "difference"?]; C 295; 
D 127 ; D 130 ; S 104. 

106. S6pat (fish spec), Trichopsis tri- 
choptenis : sgkeng (sking), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

S6raya (tree spec.) : D 188. 

107. Serdang (fan -palm), Livisionia 
cochiiichinensis: sail (sail), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

108. Serdang: kfirpau, Bes. A. I. \_Mal. 
kepau]. 

Serious : H 68. 
Serve food, to; P 138. 
\_Note. — There are no Nos. 109-118, 
these numbers having been 
omitted by inadvertence in the 
numbering of the paragraphs.] 
Set, to (of the sun) : tiba, Sak. 
U. Kam. ; D 35. \Jav. tiba, cf. 
Mai. rebah, "to fall."] 
Set, to [trans.): K 5. 
To set a snare or trap : C 30 ; E 67. 
To set down: H 153. 
To set up : S 429. 
Settle down, to : I 19. 

120. Seven : sunto, Sem. Scott. 

121. Seven : pet, Sak. Sel. Da. [Both 
these are very doubtful. ] 

122. Seven : tempo, U. Ind. \Moii 
thapah [tapah, thapah] ; Bahnar 
topoh ; Stieng p6h ; Hiiei pha ; 
Suk pho ; Chum, Kaseng poh ; 
Ka pah; Tare tig p51 ; Kon-Tu, 
Sid tap5l ; Halaiig tape ; Sedang 
tope ; Nanhaiig, Hin, Ciiol thpol ; 
Phnong, Prou pos ; So thpuol ; 
Lemet pul ; Chrdu p6h ; Boloven, 
p6h, pah ; Niahon pah ; Alak poh ; 
Lave poh, " seven."] 

123. Seven : t6i'i, Po-Klo. ; tojoh Be.%. 
Songs ; tiijoh, Sak. Jer. ; t&joh, 
Sem. U. Sel., Sem. Per. ; tujoh, 
Sem. Ij., Sak. U. Kam.\ tujuh, 
Sak. Br. Loiu [Mai. tujoh]. 

Severe : R 132. 

124. Sew, to (with needle) : ydhet (jahet), 
Sak. Kor. Gh. ; jahit", Seraii [Mai. 
jahit]; C 296; N 38 ; S 6. 

Sexual intercourse : C 242; F 66 ; 
P 219 ; S 249. 

125. Shade: tfidu', Sak. U. Kam. [Mai. 
tCdoh]. 

126. Shadow: kalbo, Sem. Beg.; kalbo 
Hen. Ne~v. 

127. 

128. 

129. 

130. 

131 

132, 

133 
134 

135 

136 
137 

138 

139 
140 

141. 

Shadow : wok, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
wok? or wak? (work), Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff 

Shadow: ba'en (ba'in), Sem. Buk. 
Max. [.Mai. bayang]. 
Shady : D 22, 23. 
Shaft (of arrow or spear) : B 183 ; 
E 83 ; S 367. 

Shake, to; to rock [Mai. goyang): 
ya-hi-hai. Pang. U. A ring. Pang. 
.Sam, Pang. Gal. 

Shake, to: 'ngyiik, Sak. U. Kam.\ 
yoh, Serau; ho'go', Bes. A. I. 
To rock : ngeg-ngog, ex. 6' ngeg- 
ngog ka-jelmol, "it rocks and sways 
upon the mountains" (?), Pang. 
Teliang. 

Shake, to ; to vibrate : ma'kuing, 
Sem. Buk. Max. Rocking to and 
fro : kuing chSnde' (kuing chndi'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [Probably to 
be read goyeng, from Mai. goyang ; 
cf. S 531 ; W no.] 
Shake, to: R 157-159; S 529- 
532 ; W no. 

To shake hands : C 49 ; E 57. 
Shall (auxiliary) : W 8, 9 ; W 
14-18. 

Shallow : bot (bii't), Setn. Buk. 
Max. 

Shaleow : rahad, Tembi. 
Shallow : jepe', Bes. Sep. A 1. 
[? cf. Mai. chetek]. 
Shallow: dengkel, Mantr. Malac. 
[Mai. dangkal] ; D 182 ; E 12 ; 
L 150 ; S 280 ; S 282. 
Shame : see A 158. 
Shape [Mai. rupa): re-nis (?), Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. 

, Shape, to take ; to appear [Mai. 
merupa) : yupa' (iupa'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. The same : siupa, Sem. K. 
Ken. In the same way : serupa 
( soroupa ), Som. ; s6rupa juga 
(soroupa djouga), Sak. Kerb., Sak. 
Ra. Alike: serupil' (s-rupa'), Sak. 
U. Kam. [Mai. rupa]. 
Shape: U 6. To take shape: A 79. 
. Share, to : bfibagi (bobagi), Sak. 

Ra. [Mai. bahagi] ; G 29. 
. Shark : kah 'yo' ? (kah 'yok), 
Bes. Sep. A. I. ; F 138. Parang- 
parang (fish spec): yo' pa'eng 
(iu' paing), Sem. Pa. Max.; C 126 
[Mai. hiu ; yu, "shark"]. 
Sharp : kiinajfip, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; 
taja'^m ? (dajab'n), Sem. K. Ken. 
Caltrop [Germ. Fussangel) : ta-jem, 
Sem. Stev. Kris : tajam sengkat. 
Pant. Kap. Log. Finger - nail : 
penajam, Ben. New. Toe-nail : 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

707 

144. 

145- 

147. 

tamarafaik penajam, Ben. New. ; 
P' 221 ; [il/rt/. tajam]. 
Sharp : C 296 ; P 157, 158. 

142. Sharpen, to: tun, Setn. Pa. Max. 

143. Sharpen, to (iMal. asah): ya-tilad, 
Pang. U. A ring. Pang. Sam, 
Pang Gal. [?cf. B 345 (^)]- 
Sharpen, to : sheg, Sak. Plus 
Cliff.; chi, Sak. Blanj. Cliff.; chini', 
Sak. U. Kam. ; johet, Bes. A. I. ; 
sid, Temhi. Whetstone : sidned, 
Tembi. To file (to file the teeth = 
Mai. bfirasah gigi) : la-hid (j>r. 
la-hidd), Sem. Pius ; set, Sak. Tan. 
Ram. \Bahnar shiek (xiek), 
"sharpened."] [It is curious that 
the Andamanese equivalents are 
somewhat similar, e.g. Beada, Bale 
jit ; Puckikwar chet ; luwoi Kol 
cheat, " to sharpen."] 
Sharpen, to, to a point [Mai. 
ranchap) : ya' sor [pr. sorr), Sem. 
larum, Setn. Plus. [} —S 144; 
?cf R 194.] 

146. Sharpen, to ; 3'a' gos (//-. goss), 

Sem. Jarum, Setn. Plus ; C 296. 
Sharp - pointed : ranching, Bes. 

Songs \^Mal. r.unching]. 

She : H 39-45 ; T 52, 53 ; T 86. 
143. Sheath of palm flower spathe [Mai. 

seludang) : ketkoh (ktkuh), Sem. 

Buk. Max. 

149. Sheath, leaf- ( of certain palms, esp. 
areca) : bast ; palm - cloth {Mai. 
upeh) : bangko, Bes. Sep., Bes. 
Malac. Leaf- covering of palms 
which is used for making buckets, 
and hence a "bucket": bangkur, 
Bes. K.L. Pail: bangkur, Bes. A. J. 

150. Sheath, leaf- (of palm) : hape' 
( hapi' ), Sem. Pa. Max. ; upe' 
(aupi'), Sem. Buk. Max. \AIal. 
upeh]. 

Shed: F 52 ; H 11 ; H 153. 

Shell (of mollusc), [Mai. siput) : 
kalu (kalou), Som. ; kalo, Sak. Ra. 

Shell or shell-fish : kalftk, Sem. 
Plus. Shell [or snail] [Mai. siput): 
kalo' (kalok), Sefau [or Tetnhi'i\ 
Snail : kalot or kalo', Pang. U. 
A ring; kaleng, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
Lime (for chewing betel) : kalung, 
Pang. Belitnb. [It is generally made 
by burning shells. ] [? Cf. Man 
klnu, "shell." But the Andamati- 
ese Bale kftia ; Kol kSlok-le, etc. , 
"sea-shell," are curiously similar.] 
152. Shell : siput, Serau, Bes. Sep. ; 
(sipout), Sak. Kerb. Spiral shell 
[Mai. siput putar): siput klel, Bes. 
Sep. ; (spec. Mai. siput puting 

151- 

152 
IS3 

154- 
155- 
156. 

157- 
158. 

159- 
160. 
161. 
162. 

163. 
164. 
165. 

166. 

bcliong) : siput putil^ng biol^'ng, Bes. 
Sep. Shell-fish (spec. Mai. siput 
kapala gajah) : siput kui tamfinueh 
(siput kui ta'nmuih), Setn. Pa. Max. ; 
H 46 ; E 44 ; (spec. Mai. siput 
panjang pasir) : siput bfitueh (siput 
btuih), Setti. Pa. Max. Lime 
[Mai. kapor) : siput (/;-. si-putt), 
Sem. Plus. Snail, Hypocystis : siput 
gatong (sipout gatoii), Sak. Kerb. 
[.!/«/. siput]. 
a. Shell [or snail] [Mai. siput) : 
kakebe, Tembi. 

Shell, hard (of coconut), [Mai. 
tempurong) : ho' (huk), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; ( hu' ), Setn. Buk. Max. ; 
C iq8 ; C 201, 202. Coconut 
shell bowl : ho, Sak. Kerb. [?cf. 
S 309] ; S 92. 
Shell (of tortoise) : S 236. 
Shell or shell-fish [Mai. siput) : 
agang, Settt. larutn. 
Shell-fish : kian (kian), Sem. Pa. 
Max. \AIal. kfirang]. 
Shell-flsh (spec. Mai. lukan) : 
hawab (haub), Setn. Pa. Max. 
Shell-fish : S 151, 152 ; S 154-156. 
Shift, to : B 484. 
Shin : A 133. 

Shin-bone : A 133 ; B 336 ; B 339 ; 
K 40. 

Shine, to : alet ; ale', Bes. Sep. 
Shine, to, or glitter [Mai. kilau) : 
ya' riag [pr. riagg), ex. riag bfiteau, 
" the glitter of water," Sem. Kedah. 
[?Cf. Mai. riak, "to ripple"]. 

; D 41. 

reflection [Germ. 
kenai ? [Vcnigh), 

lekap ? (Ikp?), Sem. 
[?cf. S 247] ; T 225- 

Shining : B 395 

Shining surface ; 

Glanz ; Abbild) : 

Sem. Stev. 

Ship ; sailing vessel : lanchang. 

Or. Laut. \JMal. lanchang] ; B 

312-319. 

Shiver, to 

Buk. Max. 

229 ; V 15. 

Shoot (of plant) : lembong, Bes. 

Songs [? cf. B 33] ; B 446 ; E 64. 

Shoot, to: B 256, 257; G 42, 

43- 

Shoot, to (with the blow-gun) : 
mglayau (?), Mantr. Malac. 

Shoot, to, with a bow : wek, 
Sen. CI. 

Shoot, to (of a porcupine shooting 
his quills) : nyapeng, Sem. larum. 
To shoot in and out : \V 121. 

Shooting star : S 436. 

Shooting up (of plants) : tebet 
(tebt or tbet), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[Mai. tgrbit] ; H 35. 

7o8 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Shore : D i8o ; S 57 ; S 65. 

167. Short: pendek, Ben. New.; pen^k, 
Mantr. Malac. [Mai. pendek]; D 
66 ; F 222 ; L 151 ; S 280 ; S 282. 

Short time : Q 5- 
Shorten, to : S 280. 

168. Shoulder ; wol, Sein. Kedak, Sem. 
Plus. Shoulder blade (.!■/« /. bglikat): 
wol (pr. woll), Se}ii. Jarian, Sem. 
Plies. 

169. Shoulder : (a) kap weh, Sem. Beg. ; 
kapweh, Ben. Xew. ; kapueh (kpuih), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; klapeh ( pr. kla- 
pehh ), Sem. Kedah ; klapeh 
(klappay), Sem. Stev. \ (klapih), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; klapoh [pr. 
klapohh), Sem. Jai-um, Sem. Plus ; 
k'lapa, Pang. U. Ari/ig, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; klapo ? (klab6), 
Setn. K. Ken. ; glapo, Sd7n. ; 
gSlpaul, Sak. U. Kam. ; gelpal, Jelai; 
gSlpol, Darat\ gelpal, Serau ; gr61- 
pal, Sen. Cliff.; gre-pal, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; gerpal, Tan. U. Lang. ; chap^k, 
Ken a. I. Back {Germ. Riicken) : 
kiape (klappe), U. Pat., U. Kel. 
The human body : klapeh (klapih), 
Sem. B/ik. Max. Collar-bone [Mai. 
tulang sglangka) : sang (pr. saSng), 
klapoh Sem. Plus. Shoulder-blade 
(Mai. tulang kipas) : je'ing k'lapft, 
Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; B 336. Point of the 
shoulder : hujong kapueh (huj, 
kpuih), Sem. Pa. Max. ; E 66. 

(b) Shoulder : poh, Sak. Kerb. ; 
pok, Sak. Pins Cliff. ; (bok), Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; pag, Tetnbi. Part be- 
hind the shoulders : pok°, Serau. 
\_Chrdu p'hal ; Churn pam ; Chowra, 
Nicobar koi-pak, "shoulder"; 
Stieng phal, ' ' shoulder-blade. "] 

170. Shoulder: samuy', Pang. Belimh.; 
[? cf. Khmer sma [sma] ; Kaseng 
soma, "shoulder."] 

171. Shoulder : bahu', Bes. Sep.; bahu' 
(bahuk), Ment. Her. II. ; bahu, 
Mantr. Malac. ; (bahou), Sak. Ra. ; 
ba'-hu, Bera ; baho, Bes. Malac. 
Back : bahoi, U. Ind. [Mai. bahu]; 
H 32 ; H 87. 

172. Shoulder, point of the : bayong 
(baiung), Sem. Buk. Max. 

173. Shoulder-blade (Mai. bfilikat) : 
chai, Sem. Kedah. [?Cf. Bahnar 
gosai, "shoulder"; Central Nicobar 
et-shait, "shoulder-blade."] 

174. Shoulder-blade: ulak (?), Bes. 
A. I. ; S 168, 169. 

175. Shout, to (-1/^/. sorak); ya'kukeau, 
Sem. Jarum, Sem. Pins. 

176. Shout: ya-posis (/;-. poss-iss). 
Pang. U. Aring; ya-pos-his (pr. 
poss-hiss), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
To shout ; to raise the voice loudly: 
pa'is (pa'is), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
mdpa'is (mpa'is), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
Scream ; shout : pa'is (pa'is), Se^n. 
Pa. Max. To cry aloud : pa'is 
(pi's), Sem. Buk. Max.; pa'is 
(pa'is), Sem. Pa. Max. To weep 
(Mai. mSnangis) : ya' yis-yis (/;-. 
yiss-yiss), Sem. /arutn, Sem. Plus. 

177. Shout, to : tuning (tning), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

178. Shout, to : tem6h, Bes. Malac. 
To bawl : temokng, Bes. Sep. To 
call ; to cry out : temo'^ng, Bes. 
Sep. A. I. ; To hoot : bertembong, 
Bes. Songs. To summon : temo^ng, 
Bes. Sep. 

To shout : C 10 ; C 285 ; C 287, 
288 ; W 97. 
Shove, to : F 21 

179. Show, to : tunjok, 
Finger : tulunyo ? 
K. Ken. 
Ben. New. 

P 240-242. 

Mantr. Malac. 

(dulumi6), Sem. 

Forefinger : penunjok, 

[The usual Malay word 

is teiunjok. ] Guide (man): tunj6k, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. \^Mal. tunjok, "to 
point."] 

To show : P 154-156 ; T 30. 
Shrike : D 172, 173. 

180. Shut, to [Mai. tutup) : ya-gob, 
Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. 

181. Shut, to: ya-kamboi (? = kamb- 
ui?), Pang. U. Aring. 

182. Shut, to: (fl)ya'tenup,5«w. /arz^w, 
Sem. Plus ; ter-lap, Sen. Cliff. 

((^) Shut, to: tutop (toutop), Sak. 
Kerb. ; tutuk? (diiduk), Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; P 195 [.!/«/. tutup]. 

183. Shut, to: katop, Sak. Ra. ; kantop, 
Serau. To cover : katop, Sak. Ra. ; 
tup (toup), Sak. Kerb. To cover ; 
to shut : kito' (kituk), Sem. Pa. 
Max. \_Mal. katup ; but cf. 
Khmer khtop [kdap ; kdup], 
shut "] ; C 257. 

184. Siamese (Mai. orang Siam) 
ai, Sem. Plus ; M 23. 

185. Sick, in health (J/a/. sakit): pgtes, 
Sem. Plus; petis. Pang. U. Ariiig; 
pgtis or pStiss, Pang. Belimb. ; 
pSt-5s, Kerbat; p6-tish, e.g. "are 
you ill?" jiu (?) p5-tish, Lebir; 
p(5di ? (bodi), Sak. Kor. Gb.; p§dish 
(podish), Sak. Kerb. Pain : pgtis, 
Pang. U. Aring. Wound (Mai. 
luka): k6tis (orpOtIs?), Sem. Kedah. 
Belly-ache ; colic ; stomach-ache : 

also 
" to 

Jing 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

709 

pedih-kud (/odih-koud), Sak. Kerb. 
Dysentery, pfide-kud (/Oi/^-koud), 
Sak. Kerb. ; [? cf. B 374 ; H 140 ?]. 

186. Sick; unwell; disease: (a)pias(pias), 
Son. Bilk. Max. Disease ; illness : 
piasi' (piasi'), Sem. Buk. A/ax. ; 
H 46 ; H 64 ; T 168 ; W 140. 
Pain : piyas, Pang. U. A ring. 
Disease of the chest : pias chenam- 
mah ( pias chnamnih ), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Disease of the genital 
organs? [Mai. sakit ari) ; pias ari 
(pias ari or adi?), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Disease of the neck : pias t&buk ? 
(pias tbuk), Sem. Buk. Max. ; N 24. 
Disease of the loins ; sciatica (?) : 
pias kio' (pia kiu'), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
B4. Venereal disease (?) : pias raja 
(pias raj), Sem. Bnk. Max. Urinary 
disease : pias kfenom (pias knum), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Stomach-ache : 
tapias chbng (ta-pecas chung), Setn. 
Stev. Stomach-ache ; belly-ache : 
piSs chong (piils chung) ; pias 
chong (pias chu'), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Wound (caused by a thorn or 
stone): tepias ( te-pee-yas), Sem. 
Stev. [? cf. P 14]. 

(^)Siok; ill {Mai. sakit): p6-h6d ; 
p6-hut, Sen. Cliff. ; pohat", Darat ; 
pahot, Serau. Stomach - ache : 
pohot kot, Serau ; p6hut kut, Jelai. 
\c) Sick ; ill : gohup : Bes. Sep. A. I. 
Ill : gShop, Bes. Her. Pain : gohup, 
e.g. greh gohup, "angry, sorry," 
Bes. Sep. A. I. ; H 64. To hurt : 
poi gohup, Bes. Sep. A. I. \ D 134. 
In trouble : gres (or greh) gohup, 
Bes. Sep. A. I.\ H 64. 
(d) 111 (sick) : po'um. Bland. K. 
Lang. 

187. Sick: (a) miji, Sem. Jur. A?id.; 
(myi), Sent. Jur. Rob. ; mejeh? 
(mejh), Sem. Beg. ; (mejh), Beti. 
Netv. ; enyi (n'ji), Se7?t. K. Ken. ; 
en-ji, U. Tern. , U. Cher. ; iji, 
Tembi. Sick ; unwell ; disease : 
mfeje' ; mgmgje' ? (mji' ; mmji'), 
Sem. Fa. Max. ; B 202. Disease ; 
illness : mgmeje'? (mmji'), Sein. 
Pa. Max. ; H 46 ; H 64 ; T 170 ; 
W 140. Fever : ji, Tembi. Disease 
of the bones : mgje' ja'is? (mji' j's), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Disease of the 
chest : mfije' t6ndo' (mji' tndu'). 
Sent. Pa. Max. ; B 380. Disease of 
the genital organs? {Mai. sakit ari) : 
memeje' hinam (mmji' hinftm), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Disease of the neck ? 
{Mai. sakit leher) : meje' tabak? 
(mji' tabk?), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 

N 24. Headache : ji tarok", Tembi. 
Urinary disease : mfije' kfinam (mji' 
knm), Sem. Pa. Max. Venereal 
disease (?) : mSje' (?) raja (mmji' raj), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Rheumatism or 
gout? {Mai. sfingal kaki) : mSje' 
chan (mngi' chan), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; F 220. Dysentery ; diar- 
rhoea : je' kut (ji' kut), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Stomach-ache ; belly-ache : 
mCje' kut (mji' kut), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
ji et, Tembi. Swelling {Mai. sakit 
bengkak s6mbab) : meje' lakun (mji' 
lakun), Sem. Pa. Max. 
{b) Sick : nyi'-nya', Krau Kef.\ nyi- 
nya', Krau Tern. ; ni ; nyi, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; nyi [or nya-nyi?], e.g. "a 
sick man," mai nj'i ; "he was sick 
ten days," sapuloh hari iluniu nya- 
nyi, Sak. U. Bert. Sick; ill: nyani? 
(nani), Sak. Ra. Ill : nyeh, Seiiiiig. 
Sickness {Mai. pfinyakit) : nyani' 
(nyanik), Serau. Ache; fever: ni ; 
nyi, Sak. U. Kam. Fever : uini 
(n nearly inaudible), Sem. K. 
Ken. ; nyi' (nyik), Serau ; nyi' 
(nyik), Jelai; nyi, Darat[}'\; ngi, 
Sen. Cliff. ; oh -nyi? (oh-fii), Som. ; 
nyanyi? (iia-ni), Sak. Ka. ; nya'n3'i' 
(nyatnyik), Tembi\ gegi (ghe-ghi), 
Sak. Kerb. ; (spec. Mai. dCmam 
kura) : nyi' klap (nyik klap), Jelai ; 
nya'nyi'klap (nyatnyik klap), Tembi; 
R 103A. Giddy: nyeh, Serting. To 
pain ; to feel pain : ini ; i-ni, Sem. 
K. Ken. Painful : ni ; nyi, Sak. 
U. Ka7n. Belly - ache ; colic ; 
stomach-ache : 6h-nyi (6h-ni), Som. 
nyi kot (ni-kot), Sak. Ra. Stomach- 
ache : ni - kod, Se9n. K. Ken. ; 
nya'nyi' kof^ (nyatnyik kofi), 
Tembi [? = G 17]. [AJon yoa [yai], 
"to be ill," "disease"; (cf. also ki 
[gi], ' ' to ache " ) ; Khmer chhii [jhi], 
"to suffer," "pain," "disease"; 
Bahtiar, Stieng ]\, "sick," "pain," 
" sickness " ; Boloveti jl, chi ; Alak, 
Lave jl ; Kaseng jl, gi ; Halang jl, 
gl ; Sedang jel ; Tareng, Kon Tu 
ai, " sick. "] 

{c) 111 : chuh, Bes. Bell. Fever 
{Mai. demam) : tsiihh ; chahh or 
choh, Bes. K. L. Feverish : chohh, 
Bes. Scf). Fever : hioh (hiuh), 
Sem. Jii. Max. \lVIon fSh [jwah], 
' ' fever."] 

. Sick ; fever : kajet, Ben. New. 
[Possibly connected with the last 
preceding ; but cf. Chinese (of 
Fuhkien) k6a°-ji6t {pr. koaj6t).] 

. Sick : binto, Pant. Kap. Log. ; 

7IO 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

bintoh, Fa7it. Kap. Her. Sickness ; 
to hate ; ansjry ; tired : bintoh, 
Pant. Kap. /oh. Lame : bintoh 
kgmunyis (bintoh k'munyis), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. Fight : bcbintoh (b'bin- 
toh), Pajit. Kap. Mad. 

190. Sick ; ill : sakit, Soni., Jak. 
Malac. ; saket habat ; sakit abat, 
Mant. Dor. Bad : makit, Sem. 
Beg., Ben. New. [This word ap- 
pears in some Malayan languages 
as a variant of MaL sakit, "unwell," 
from which it appears to be formed by 
means of the infix -6m- ( ^semakit) ; 
e.g. Selling maket, "painful"; 
makit, " sick."] 

191. Sick ; unwell [Mai. sakit) : som 
[pr. so'^m), Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. 

192. Sick ; internal disease : tel-boig, 
Sem. Stev. 

193. Sick ; giddy : pgnSning, Pang. 
Teliang ^Mal. pSning] ; H 181. 

194. Disease, spec, hydrocele (Mai. 
pasang-pasangan) : chebauk ? (ch- 
bau'k), Sem. Pa. Max. 

195. Disease, spec. Mai. senggugut : 
ius (aius), Se??i. Duk. Max. 

196. Disease, spec. Mai. tgmbSlok ? or 
tembelok p6ko' (?) : k6n tabak (kn 
tabk), Sem. Pa. Max. ; N 24. 

197. Colic (?) ; cramp in the belly ? [Mai. 
sena' [prob. =s6nak] p6rut) : hoh 
kut (huh gut), Se?n. Pa. Max. 
Sick : L 127 ; U 22. 

Sick [i.e. to vomit) : V 22-24. 

198. Side [Mai. sS-belah) : nglang or 
gnglang, e.g. englang torn [or tim), 
[Mai. sabelah kanan), " on the 
right side, " Pfiw^f. U. Ari?ig; la'^ng ; 
angla'^ng, Bes. A. I. Aside: la^^ng; 
angla'^ng, Bes. A. I. From the 
side of: banglang, Bes. Songs. 
Half: lik, Sen. Cliff. ; 'ngliid, Sak. 
Martin. Half; partly: 'ngluk, Sak. 
U. Kam. Near to [Mai. sabelah) : 
lang, ex. tangke bah lang rengal 
(Mai. tangkai buah sabglah ujong), 
"the fruit -bearing twigs near the 
end (of the branch) " (?), Pang. 
Teliang. Near ; over against : 
nilakn, Som. ; alako (elako), Sak. 
Kerb. Neighbour : nilangn, Som. ; 
n6eld.k («ci-glak), Sak. Kerb. Near : 
nyun. Sen. CI.; nyon, Serau, /elai; 
nyot, Darat. Come near ! (Mai. 
mari dekat) : annyon, /elai. 
Near ; over against ; neigh- 
bour : lun (?) or lung ? (loufi) 
Sak. Pa. Towards : Ion \i)i the 
phrase lebi nya Ion kentam (lobi na 

lijn kont&,m), "further off, to the 
right "], Sak. Ra. ; sed cf. A 9 ; 
nangla' (in phrase nangla' Kglantan 
(? = banglang or nanglang) = 
Mai. sabglah Kelantan ; or is it a 
totally different word?), Setn. Kedah. 
Between ; in the middle of (Mai. 
satgngah) : 'ndang orgndang. Pang. 
U. Aring. Beside ; beyond ; to- 
wards : ha' ba lang o' (ha' blangu'), 
Sem. Ba. Max. Above (Mai. 
di-atas) : lange or lang-e. Pang. 
U. Aring; lang-e, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; cf. A 9 ? Breastbone 
(? = front or face) : lang-buk, Sem. 
Kedah [lang = Mai. sibglah]. [There 
are probably two distinct types here : 
lang and nyun. For the last 
cf. Mon nun [non], "tight," "to 
be crowded " ; fiun ka [hon kuiw], 
"near to," "almost." For the 
other ? cf. Stieng lar, "adjoining," 
" neighbouring."] 

199. Side : ibut (aibut), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; R 100 ; R 102, 103. 

200. Sigh : sgmanek (smanik), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

201. Sigh ; to sigh : setia' (stiak), Sem. 
Pa. Max. 

201A. Sigh, to : loo ; lo-o, Sem. K. 
Ken. 

Sign : S 348. 
To make signs : C 8. 
Signpost : P 40. 

202. Silence; quiet: lahlan? (Ihln or 
Ihn ?), Sem. Pa. Max. ; Q 61 ; S 
222. 

203. Silent ; hush : dui, Sak. U. Kam. 

204. Silent ; quiet (Mai. diam) : pgjak. 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; L 31 ; 
Q 16 ; S 223. 

204.\. Silk : sStera' ? (strak), Tembi, 
Serau (?), /elai \_Mal. sutgra]. 

205. Silly ; foolish : rampah, Kena. 
Stev. 

206. Silly : bingung, Sak. U. Kam. 
Stupid : mingling, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
Stupid ; very unpleasant : bingung, 
Seti. K. Ken. Idiot : ngengao ? 
(ngftao), Sak. Kerb.; mingo (mino), 
Sak. Ra. ; bingu (binou), Som. 
Ugly: bingung (binonn), Sak. Kerb. 
[Mai. bingung ; but cf. also Boloven 
ngok ngo ; Xiahon ngok ngo ; Alak 
nil ngij, "imbecile" ; Stie7tg ]6n^, 
" stupid."] 

207. Silly ; stupid : made' (mdi'), Sem. 
Pa. Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. [? Cf. 
yl/(w toh [duih], "ignorant," "fool- 
ish."] F 219 ; S 506, 507. 

208. Silver (Mai. perak) : eyal, Sem. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

711 

Kedah ; ieal? (iayah [in MS. origin- 
ally eayal]), Sem. U. Sel. [Mai. 
rial, " dollar."] 

209. Silver : yinggit, Sem. Per. Silver; 
tin : yingit (jingit), Sem. K. Ken. 
Silver (dollar = J/a/. ringgit): cheng- 
khid bayd (/;•. baydd) ; chindin 
byau, Sem. Plus. Dollar : ringgit, 
Danitjelai. [JAz/. ringgit, "dollar,"] 

210. Silver: perak, Se77i. Beg., Ben. 
Ne7u., Sak. Br. Low, Sak. Croix, 
Sak. BlanJ. Sw. , Seran ; per-ak, 
Sen. Cliff. ; pirak, Bes. Her. ; 
p6rak, Sak. Kerb. ; perak, Sak. 
Sung. ; p^ra, Som. ; pirS,, 
Sak. Pa. ; p^ro, Som. , Sak. Kerb. 
Tin (Mai. timah) : pegleg, Sem. 
Plus [Mai. perak]. 

Silver : C 241 ; M 125 ; W 101. 
Since : F 276 ; T 51. 
Sinew : J 10 ; V 8. 

211. Sing, to (Mai. nyanyi) : (a) ya- 
loi, Pang. U. A ring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. 

(3)Tosing: ya' Y^en-Xoyn, Se in. J a rum; 
ya' pen-loyn (//-. pen-loynn), Sem. 
Plus ; pin - Ion, Lehir. To sing or 
chaunt (Mai. bgrsewang) : ya' pen- 
loyn (/;-. pen-loynn), Sem. Plus. 
To dance (Mai. mgnari) : pgnloyn, 
Sem. Skeat. 

(c) To sing : jeluak", Tembi ; 
berjulak", Serau ; berjolak", Serau 
[or Tembi ?] ; ju-lak" ; be-ju-lak^ ; 
nyg-lo'-lakn ; nyg-lo-lak". Sen. Cliff. 

(d) To sing; bedodoin, Mantr. Cast. 
■2X7.. Sing, to: baboh? or babor? (ba- 

b^rh), Se7i. Cliff. ; blamor, Sak. 
Ra. ; mepior (m'pior), Pa?it. Kap. 
Joh. To sing or chant (Mai. 
bersewang) : ya' gabag (pr. gabagg), 
Sem. Kedah; bergabag"; bergabak^, 
Tembi. Song : dobokh, Sak. 
Hale. 

213. Sing, to : seoi ; heoi, Bes. A. I. ; 
sihoi, Maiitr. Cast. To chant 
ceremoniously (incantations, songs, 
etc. ), (Mai. sawai ; bSrsawai) : seoi ; 
heoi : Bes. K. L. To chant : 
sewe(?), ex. ye sewe ka-kepal, kgpal 
chan, kgpal ggnialing, ' ' I sing of 
fruits, the fruit of the chan, the 
fruit of the gemaling," Pang. 
Teliattg. Song ; poem : seoi, Bes. 
K. Lang. ; h6oi, Bes. K. Lang. 
[? Mai. sawai ; I cannot find this 
word in the dictionaries. ] 

214. Sing, to : si-wang, Kerbat [Mai. 
sewang]. 

215. Sing, to : surau (Mai. sawai), ex. 
na' lengyang na' surau, "will 

dance (?) and sing," Pang. Sai 
[? Mai. sorak or suara ?]. 

216. Sing, to : dindang, Sak. Kerb. ; 
dindang, Sak. U. Kam. [Mai. 
dendang]. 

217. Sing, to : nanyi (nanji). Sem. K. 
Ken. ; nyenanyi (nt^nani), Som. 
[Mai. nyanyi]. 

Single : B 1-3 ; O 35. 

218. Sink, to : bulit? (built?), Se7n. Pa. 
Max. ; F 21 ; H 68. 

219. Siol, burong (bird spec): geroi^, 
Ma7itr. Malac. ; A 129. 

Sister: B 410-421; B 424; B 
426-430 ; C loi. 

220. Sister, younger: ml -ml, Or. 
Trang ; Y 41. 

Sister-in-law : B 418, 419 ; L 29. 

221. Sit, to: ngak, Se7n. Beg. ; angah, 
Ben. New. ; nguk, Se7n. Pa. Max. ; 
manguk (mnguk), Se77i. Buk. Max.; 
ngok, Pang. K. Ari7ig; ya-ngop. 
Pang. U. Aring; ya-ngob. Pang. 
Sa77i, Pang. Gal. To sit down : 
'nghok, Sem. Stev. ; ya' ngob or 
ngog, Sem. Plus. To sit or dwell : 
nguk, Pa7ig. Beli7nb. ; ngap, ex. 
ngilp kft - baloo, ' ' where do you 
live?" Pang. U. A7-i7ig; W 77; 
Y 33. To sit with bent knees : 
manguk (mnguk), Se/n. Buk. Max.; 
nguk kiwan? (nguk kiuan), Sein. Pa. 
Max.; B 175. Hut (.'l/(z/. pondok): 
nub -dub, Se77i. Kedah. Place : 
menguk (mnguk), Se77i. Buk. Max. 
[Boloven ngok, "to sit"; Stieng, 
Chrau gvi}^, "to be," "to sit," "to 
remain"; ? cf. Bahnar ngoh, "to 
remain long on one spot," "to 
persevere."] 

222. Sit, to : (a) giil, Te7n. CI. ; giil, 
Sak. Plus Cliff. ; galg61, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; gigu, Sak. Em. ; gui, Se7-au ; 
gdx. Sen. Cliff. ; gta-i. Sen. 
CI. , Sak. Blanj. CI. ; go-i or gui, 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff ; goi ? (ger-i), Sak. 
Sli7n. To sit down : gui (goul), 
Sak. Ra. ; gelgiil (ghelgiil), Sak. 
Kerb. (I) want to sit down : em 
gigoi, Serau. I sit down : en goi 
kon ti, Jelai ; A 177 ; E 12. To 
sit ; to remain ; to rest : gigui ; 
giguy, Sak. U. Ka^n. To wait : 
g(ii. Sen. Cliff. To dwell : gii, e.g. 
"where do you live," maloh he 
gii, Serau; gui - an6 or gul-anu, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. Marry me (lit. live 
with me) : gui (giiy) ru eng, Sak. 
U. Bert. To stop : g6lan6, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. [cf. T 51? for the apparent 
suffi.\]. Calm; quiet (il/a/. t6doh): 

712 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

gelgul (ghelghoul), Sak. Kerb. 
Patience : gelgolhe (ghelgholhe), 
Sak. Kerb. Silence: gelhe (golh4), 
Sak. Kerb, [for the apparent suffix 
cf. W 52 or Y 34?]; P 100; ?R 
82. \Churu anggui ; Khmer ang- 
kui [angguy] ; Anjiani ngoi, "to 
sit down."] 

(^) To sit down : ningkoish (nin- 
koisch), S'din. Box ; place to put 
things in : neingkoch (nein-kotch), 
Soni. [? Cf. Palau7ig koi, " to 
sit"; Bahnar kui (kuy), "to lie 
down."] 

223. Sit, to : kot>m (kobn), Bes. Malac. ; 
kum, Be7i. New.; kham, Bes. A. I. 
Quiet : k^m, Bes. Sep. A.I. To 
be silent : kib, Sem. K. Ken. 
\Stieng khom, "quiet," "to do 
nothing," "to be silent," "to re- 
main seated."] 

224. Sit, to: dudok, Mantr. Malac, 
Jak. Malac. {Mai. dudok]. 

225. Sit down, to : besila b61o' iye' ? 
(bsila blu' aii'?), Sem. Btik. Max. 
? T 60 ; I I [Mai. sila]. 

226. Sitting in a bent position : kgnchu 
(knchu), Sem. Pa. Ma.x:. 

227. Sitting in a bent position : 
menungkun (mnungkun), Sem. Biik. 
Max. [? cf. Mai. teleku]. To sit : 
B 88 ; L 31 ; S 251. 

228. Six : chli-nih, Sak. Sel. Da. 

229. Six : sa blang, Po-Klo. 

230. Si.x : puit, Sem. Scott. [.\11 these 
three are very doubtful.] 

231. Six : tem-p6ru, U. Tern. ; pSru', 
Serting ; pru, U. Ind. Four : 
prui. Pal. [This word means 
"six," the tribe having evidently 
mi.xed up its almost obsolete 
numerals]. \Mon, Alak tSrau ; 
Kaseng, Halang, Boloz'en tarau ; 
Niahon, Lave trou ; Ka trao ; 
Pro7i trau ; Sedang todru ; Bahnar 
tbdrou ; Stieng prou ; Chum prao ; 
Pknong -pnwi, "six."] 

232. Six : nam, Bes. Songs ; 
Sak. Jer. ; inam, Sem. 
Se?n. Per. ; anam, Sem. 
U. Kam. [Mai. anam]. 
Size : B 403. 

233. Skin: iek? (ick), Sdm. 
Sak. Sel. Da. Hide (Mai. b61u- 
lang) : cho'yut, Bes. Sep. 

234. Skin: (fl)sengkah, T'^ot^?; ch6-kop, 
Sen. Cliff.; chikop, Sak. Sung.; chun- 
kop. Pant. Kap. Joh. ; jangat, Buk. 
U. Lano. ; girgok. Tan. U. Lang. 
Bark (of -tree) : chakop (tchakop), 
Sak. Kerb.; chGkop (tchokop), i'a,^. 

annam, 
U. Sel., 
Ij. , Sak. 

yi-6t, 

Ra. Pith (of plants) : chfingkub 
(chngkub), Sern. Pa. Max. Cap of 
blowpipe quiver : jgngkok ? (jerrn- 
kok). Sin. Stev. ; chengkop (tchen- 
kop), Sak. Kerb. ; tfingkop, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. Quiver : chengkop 
(tcheii-kop), Sak. Kerb. [This 
last meaning is probably a mistake.] 
Close : chengkop (chonkop). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. Nail of hand : chong- 
kop. Pant. Kap. Joh. \_Stieng 
kuop kup, "skin," "bark"; Man 
kakap [gakuip], takap [dakuip], 
" cover," " lid."] 

[b] Cap of blowpipe quiver : tut5p 
(toutop), Sak. Ra. Quiver : tutop 
(toutop), Sak. Ra. {QucBre this 
last meaning.] [These last may 
be from Mai. tutup, " to shut," S 
182.] Pith (of which butt of arrow 
is made) : tuto, Ma?itr. Malac. 
Cha. 

235. Skin : [a] cheldk, Serting. Bark : 
cheiAk (chSlok), Serting, Bedu. IL 
[? Cf. Boloven shruot (xruot); Niahon 
sruat, "skin."] 

[b) Skin : lihok, Darat. 

236. Skin : (a) lantok, e.g. chok lantok, 
" to poke off [i.e. remove) the skin 
of an animal preparatory to cook- 
ing," Bes. K. L. To skin : lantok ; 
choh lantok, lit. "pierce skin," 
Bes. Sep. A. L Bark (of tree) : 
lantok, Kena. If. ; lantok lo'^ng ; 
T 207 ; e.g. lantok banti, " meranti 
bark"; lantok tengkol, " pulai 
bark," Bes. Sep. ; antok, Bes. 
Songs. 

[b] Bark (of tree): longsong, Kena. I, 

(c) Skin : ketdk or kfito', Sem. 
Kedah ; kfitok, Sem. Jarum, Sem. 
Plus, Pang. U. Aring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; kgto ? (ketfir), Lebir; 
(ke-t6r'), Kerbat ; (keter [in the MS. 
originally keter]), Sem. U. Sel. ; 
kcni (kiti), U. Kel. ; (kgitti), U. 
Pat. ; ketok (ketock), Sem. Ken. ; 
kating, Sem. Per.; keto' (ktu'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; k6-to', Sak. Guai ; W 
30 ; getok", Jelai ; gfito, Sak. Br. 
Lo'ii] ; goto or geto, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
gets [goto), Sak. A'erb. ; gStuh 
(ghotouh), Sak. Ra. ; getii, Sak. 
U. Kam. ; gete, Sak. Blanj. Sw. 
Skin (of animals) ; hide : g^to, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. Skin ; outside ; exterior : 
keto' (ktu'), Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. 
Buk. Max. Skin ; bark : katang, 
e.g. "bast," katiing - sdg (sag, 
"deep" a), Sem. K. Ken. Skin 
(rind, e.g. of sugar-cane) : kfito^^ng, 

A B ORIGINA L DIA LE C TS 

71: 

Bes. A. I. Scales (of fish) : kftong, 
Bes. Songs. Shell (of tortoise) : 
ketong, Mantr. Malac. Nail : 
ketong, Buk. U. Lang. Finger- 
nail : ketong tangan, Mantr. 
Malac. ; H i8. Bark (of 
trees) ; husk (of coconuts, etc. ), 
[Mai. kulit ; sabut) : kgto' (ktu'), 
Setn. Bitk. .Max. Bark (of tree) : 
get6, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; kStok kayu, 
Pang. U. A ring ; katok ; gSto- 
jehu [in original katok goto - 
djohou], S'om. Egg-shell : keto' 
(ktu'), Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. 
Max. Lower lip : kfito' dSkiom 
(ktu' dkium), Sem. Buk. Max. ; B 
165. Xeck : k6to' (ktu'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Leprosy : Smpo kato ? 
(umpokizter), Se}n. Stev. [CAam 
kaduh ; Bahnar kodoh, "bark," 
"skin" ; Scdang kodo ; Jarai 
kbduh, " bark."] 

237. Skin : kulit, Mantr. Malac. ; kuwit, 
Jak. Malac. ; T 211. Skin (of 
body) : kulit kret, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
B 325. Bark (of tree) : kulit logn, 
Bes. Her. ; T 207 ; T 211 \Mal. 
kulit]. 

Skin : C 198 ; P 47. 
Skin, to : S 236. 
Skin-disease : I 46-53. 
237A. Skirt : sarong, Tevibi ; saruk", 
Jelai [Mai. sarong]. 

238. Skull: sgndad? (sndd), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

239. Skull : kalka' kui, Sem. /arum ; 
kalko' kui. Pang. U. A ring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; kelka' kui, Sejn. 
Plus ; H 46. [In form this word 
resembles some of the variants of 
N 3. Cf. also S 151.] 

Skull : B 336. 

240. Sky (Mai. langit) : lapis (/;-. la- 
piss), Sem. Kedah. 

241. Sky: ballk, Sak. Kerb. [? Cf. 
Chong pleng ; Halang, Sedang 
pling ; Balinarpleh (plenh), "sky."] 

242. Sky {Mai. langit): ra-hu, Sen. Cliff. ; 
rahu, Darat, Tan. U. Lang. ; lahu, 
Sak. Br. Low ; (lahou), Sak. Croix; 
lahii [lahonx], Sak. Kerb. Cloud : 
ra-hii, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; ra-hu, 
Tern. CI., Sen. CI., Sak. Sli?n CI. 
Eclipse : igap rahu' (igap rahfli^k), 
Bes. Her. Lunar eclipse : tangka' 
rau' (tangkak rau'), Ment. Her. IL; 
" the moon is caught by Rahu, ' ' gicha 
ki-berkap ya Rahu, Sak. U. Bert. 
[Mai. Rahu, "the eclipse-causing 
demon, or dragon "]. 

243. Sky: langit, Sem. Beg., Mantr. 

Malac; (lanit), 6'a/&. /t'a. ; (langgit), 
Ben. New. ; rangit, Jak. Malac. ; 
lengoi, Mantr. Malac. Cloud : 
la-ngit, Z.e^z>. [J/^?/. langit, "sky."] 
Sky : A 8 ; C 184 ; C 186 ; D 22 ; 
TJ 33-35 ; I^ 39 ; L 76; T 116; 
W 109. 

244. Slanting, to be : kinnya'an 
(klniia'n), Sem. Pa. Max. 

245. Slanting, to be: tfipe' (tpi'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [? = E 33]. 

246. Sla.nting, to be : mCling ? 
(mli'ng?), Sem. Buk. Max. 

Slap : P 21. 

Slap, to : P 21. 

Slats (of thatch) : H 159. 

Slay, to : D 48. 

Sleep : S 247-257. 

To talk in sleep : D 158. 

247. Sleep, to [Mai. tidor) : ya-helikap. 
Pang. U. A ring ; ya - heiekab. 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. To shut 
the eyes [Mai. tidor): ya-lekap 
met. Pang. U. Aring; ya-halekab 
met or med. Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. 

248. Sleep, to [Mai. tidor) : ya-pi- 
bds (/;'. b&ss), Sem. Kedah ; bSt, 
Sen. CI. , Sak. Blanj. CI. , Sak. 
Slim ; bet-b^t, Sak. Tap. ; bit ; 
bubRt, Sak. U. Kam. ; gebiit ? 
(gebaet). Tan. U. Lang. ; bSdbad, 
Sak. Martin ; beet", Serau ; 
budbetn, Jelai. (I) want to sleep: 
biet [sic'], Serau. Can I sleep here? 
bull in bet 6di, Jelai. I am going 
home to sleep : eng je jug am* [sicl 
bed, Krau Em. To lie down ; to 
recline [Mai. baring) : bet, Sen. 
Cliff. [? cf. S 253]. [Stieng bich ; 
Bahnar bit, bich ; Su^ bit ; Tareng 
bi ; Ko9i. Tu pi, "to lie down"; 
Cuoi b^ch ; Phnong p^ch ; Churu 
bit ; Jarai pit ; Node, Chriai pi ; 
Lemet hit — " to sleep. "] 

249. Sleep, to: se-log. Tern. CI. ; 
s&Lok, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; selog, Sak. 
Br. Low ; slog, Sak. Croix ; (slogh), 
Sak. Kerb. ; slog ; slog, e.g. ' ' can 
I sleep (here) ? " bull em slog, "I 
am going to sleep," yahia em 
slog, Tembi ; silap, Kena. /. To 
lie down [Mai. baring): sS-log, Sak. 
Plus Cliff. Copulation : seldg (slog 
or sloag), Sak. Kor. Gb. [Khmer 
lak [lak ; luk] ; Halang lak (lac), ' ' to 
sleep"; (cf. Mon hling and perhaps 
the second syllable of Old Khmer 
tekla ; Xong teklan, and the first of 
Sud lagnet?) ; also Stieng lak, " to 
sleep."] 

714 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

250. Sleep, to [Mai. tidor) : (a) ya' teg 
{pr. ya' tegg), Sem. Jarum ; ya' 
geteg (/;-. getegg), Sem. Kedak ; 
teg, U. Pat.; teg (taig), Sem. Ken.; 
tag, Sem. Per. ; te'ik, Sem. Beg. ; 
Udk, Ben. New. ; \.&k,Lebir; mitek 
(rnut-tek), Sem. Stev.; j6tak (jetfek), 
Serting, Bed. Chiong ; i-tek, U. 
Cher. ; gfitek ; jetek, Bes. Sep. A. /.; 
j6t6k, Bes. Her. ; jet^k, Bes. Malac. ; 
jetek, Sak. Sel. Da. , Bes. Songs, 
U. hid. ; jltek, Buk. U. Lang. ; 
jStik (jettik), Be7i. New. ; (jittik), 
Bers. Stev. ; j6te' (jtay), Bes. Bell. ; 
ietek, Or. Hu. Joh. I. ; letfk, Bes. 
Malac. [Probably a mistake for 
"jetik"]; ya-tyik? (jazik), U. Kel.; 
t6-ti-ek, Krau Tern. ; tet, Kerbat ; 
t6-ti-et, Sak. Gitai ; tek (tik), Setn. 
Pa. Max.; matek (mtik), Sem. Buk. 
Max. To sleep or lie down : tek 
or yatek. Pang. Belimb. ; 'tek, 
Pang. K. A ring. To lie down 
(Mai. baring) : ya-teg, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; tSt, Kerbat. To 
recline ; to lie down [Mai. baring) : 
ya-tek. Pang. U. A ring. To be 
sleepy: ya-mgntek (ia nintik), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Sleepy: angkin ha-itek, 
Bes. A. J. To watch : chetik, Ben. 
New. [? this meaning ; but perhaps 
the word is a misprint for " chelik," 
S 79]. Bed : nek-iot, Som. ; jite' 
(geeteh), Bes. Bell. Bed ; sleeping- 
place : tempat tek (tmpt tik), Sem. 
Pa. Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. Mat : 
je-t6k, Sak. Sel. Da. 
(b) To sleep : imidag'a, Sem. K. 
Ken. To lie down : dadag, Sak. 
Kor. Gb.; dgda', Sak. Blanj. Cliff.; 
dada', Sak. U. Kam. Asleep : dadd 
(^Ma), Sak. Kerb. To copulate : 
dag, Sem. K. Ken. Bed : dSg- 
dag-na, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; dgk-deda 
(ddk-ded4), Sak. Kerb. ; tampat- 
dada (tampat - dada), Sak. Ra. 
[Mon tik, "to lie down"; Khmer 
d6k [t^k], "to sleep," "to lie 
down " ; Samre, Par th^ak (thgac) ; 
Old Khmer tekla ; Xong teklan ; 
Bahnar tep ; Cancho di ; Cham 
dih(?); Centr. Nicobar iteak ; Kol 
giti, gitih ; Santal giti*^*^, "to 
sleep." Cf Centr. A7(:c<^rtr iteakla ; 
Ocw/-« itiakla, "sleepy." All these 
go with the {a) forms : the con- 
nection of the {b) forms is doubtful.] 

251. Slkkp, to; to sit: mSrapat 
(m'rapat). Pant. Kap. Joh. Bed : 
t(5mpat mCrapat (t'mpat m'rapat). 
Pant. Kap. Joh.; P 119. \_Malay 

spirit language m6rapat bintang, 
"to sleep" (where bintang, "stars," 
is a metaphor for "eyes," and 
merapat means "to bring close 
together"; hence =" to close the 
eyes"), v. Malay Magic, p. 646.] 

252. Sleep ; to sleep: chidor, Ben. New. 
To sleep : tidor, Mantr. Malac. , 
Jak. Malac. ; tindok. Rasa. [Mai. 
tidor ; Sea Dayak, Balau tindok ; 
Maloh tindor ; Sibuyau tindoak ; 
Malau tindoh, " to sleep."] 

253. Sleepy {Mai. mfinganto') : l^bod. 
Pang. U. A ring; IS bud, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. To be sleepy 
[Mai. mgnganto') : ya' Ifibod [pr. 
lebbdd), Sem. Plus. To wink : 
ISbut met (Ibut mit), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[Cf. Achin. lebui, " to let the eyes 
close from sleepiness or fatigue " ; 
? cf. S 248.] 

254. Sleepy, to be : pengui (?) or 
pepui (?), Sem. Pa. Max. [? = S 

255]- 

255. Sleepy, TO BE : ng6p-ngop(nge p- 
ngfirp). Sell. Cliff. 

256. Sleepy, to be : anto' (antu'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [Mai. antok]. 

257. Asleep : reilad, Sd?n. ; lana (lena), 
Sak. Ra. [Mai. lena]. 

Sleeping - place : B 128 - 132 ; 
S 250. 

Sleepy ; to be sleepy : S 250 ; 
y 253-256. 

258. Slender : ramping, Bes. Songs 
[Mai. ramping]. 

259. Slender : lengak - lengak, Bes. 
Songs. 

260. Slender : hat, Bes. Songs. Small- 
waisted : h&t, Bes. Songs [Stieng. 
Bahnar hat, "tight," "narrow."] 
L 130, 131 ; S 280 ; T 65-74; 
Y 40. 

261. Slice, to : siang, Bes. Songs. 
Slime: D 114; M 217, 218; 

W 30. 

262. Slip, to : (a) yiok slach (yiok slaty), 
Sak. U. Kam. Slippery : slach 
(slaty), Sak. U. Kam.; slach (slaty), 
Sak. U. Bert. ; b6s61et (b's'let). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Smooth : sgleg, 
Tembi ; (sleg), Serau. [Cf. Mon 
talit, "to be slippery"; kalit, 
"smooth," "slippery" (but also 
khalin, "slimy," and khalot, "to 
slip out ").] 

[b) To slip : s'liyii ; sgliyiTi, Bes. Sep. 
A. I. Smooth : sSliyu, Bes. ^. L.: 
liu, Bes. Sep. 

263. Slip, to : palin, Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[? cf S 262]; F n. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

715 

Slippery : S 262. 

Slit (in tube of musical instrument): 

M 222. 

264. Sliver (bamboo sliver for melting 
upas poison on the upas - spatula) : 
lenis(//'. I6niss), Sem. Kedali ; 16nas 
{pr. 16nass), Sem. Plus. 

265. Sloping : soroi-soroi, lies. Songs. 

266. Sloping ; aslant {Mai. chondong): 
mendong, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
S 244-246. 

267. Sloth; i.e. the animal so called 
{Mai. kongkang) : tampil, 6V;«. 
lanim, Sem. Plus. 

268. Sloth (spec. Mai. kongkang) : 
to'noh ? (tu'nuh), Sem. Pa. Max. 

269. Sloth (spec. Mai. kongkang) : 
hingdid (hing did), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

270. Slow : saqurei, Sem. Beg. ; sapurei, 
Sem. Toml. [who merely copies 
Begbie : quccre is either of them 
right here? Perhaps cf. S 272.] 

271. Slow ; slowly : pgdueh (pduih), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; pedai (pdai), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Slow : wag-dog, 
Sem. A'. Ken. [? Cf. Boloven pen 
di ; Niah'on da dai ;, Sedang adea, 
" slowly."] 

272. Slow ; slowly {Mai. lambat) : 
ha-koi, Sem. Pins. Slowly {Mai. 
p'lahan) : hakoi, Pang. U. A ring; 
goi or goi-goi, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. Sodden (AW. Mai. babir) : 
hakoi, Pang. U. .-Iring. Weak or 
feeble ; to be weak or feeble : hakoi 
or y3.-hakoi, Pang. A'. A ring. 

273. Slow {Mai. lambat) : chetih {pr. 
chetihh), Sem. Plus. Slow ; slowly 
{Mai. lambat): chgtih {pr. chfi-tihh), 
Sem. larum. 

274. Slow, to be : lewar, Bes. Songs. 
[? Cf. Alak lavai, " slowly. "] 

275. Slowly : manon, Sak. Ra. 

276. Slowly : chip diena (tchip-diena), 
S'om. ; G 42. 

277. Slowly : plehen (pleuhen), Sak. 
Kerb. \ 'plahat, Sak. Martin ; 
plalat" \sic\ Sevan ; ech chip 
plahat", Tembi ; chiplehat", lelai ; 
G 42. Slowly ; softly : plahad- 
plahad, Sak. U. Kam. [Mai. 
perlahan-pgrlahan ; Achin. pel6h6n, 
"slowly," "sedately."] 

Slow : C 26 ; T 147. • 

Slowly : G 43 ; S 271-273 ; \\' 5. 

278. Sly : chfirdek, Sak. U. Kam. [Mai. 
cherdek]. 

Sly : C 162. 

279. Small {Mai. kgchil) : jereau (the 
eau or eao is a complex vowel sound 

not unlike English meo7v, but in- 
tensified : like the pronunciation of 
"cow" in East Anglia), Sem. 
Kedah. 

280. Sm.\ll {Mai. kgchil) : kaned, Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal., Sem. U. Sel. ; kanet, 
Sem. Plus; (ka-net), Lebir, U. 
Tern. ; (kanit), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
kanC (//-. kane'). Pang. U. Aring; 
ka'-ne', Kerbat ; ka'-nih, U. Cher. ; 
kgndni', Pang. Belimb. ; kgnen ; 
k6nin (a "politer" word than 
hedet [S 283]), Bes. Sep. A. /. ; 
kenen (" bahasa halus," as distinct 
from hedet, " bahasa kasar "), Bes. 
K. L. ; kwen, Ki-au Kef. ; ka-kueng. 
Krau Tern. ; kg-we', Sak. Guai ; 
kEt (kei>t), Serting. Fine ; thin : 
kanet (kanit), Seiii. Buk. Max. ; 
kaneh (kanih), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Narrow {Mai. sSmpit) : kanod or 
kaned, ex. glong kanod, " a narrow- 
path," .SV/«. Kedah. Slender; thin: 
kanet (kanit). Son. Buk. Max. To 
diminish {act.) : kanet (kanit), Se7n. 
Buk. Max. Little ; a little {Mai. 
sSdikit) : kcinek, Pang. K. Anng; 
kanet (kanit), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Smallest : yang kanet (ing kanit), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Short: kim-ket(?), 
Krau Ket. ; V 63. [Cf. Madur. kene, 
kenit ; Jarai net, neh ; Selung 
nek ; but also, perhaps, Tareng, 
Sui ket ; Boloven khat ; Halang 
ken, khen, "small."] 

{b) Short {Mai. pandak) : chin-hod, 
Sern. Jarum ; chin-had, Sem. Plus, 
Pang. U. Aring; chin-hed, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; ch6n-hat, Kerbat; 
chen - hot, Lebir ; cheno,id \sic\ 
Sem. Beg. ; chSnahS', Pang. Belimb. 
Short ; to shorten : chenhoeh 
(chnhueh), Sem. Pa. Max.; chSnhet 
(chnhit), Sem. Buk. Max. Short ; 
low : chgnhek (chnhik), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; chenhued (chnhuid), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Low: chgnahS', Pang. 
Belimb. Near or close : chenahd. 
Pang. Belimb. Shallow (?) : an-ha. 
Pang. Belimb. A piece : chenhet 
(chnhet), Sem. Buk. Max. 

281. Sm.ALL : chemet, Kena. /. ; 'mm£t 
(mme°t), Bed. Chiong, Kena. IL ; 
meesh ; mis; bu-meshdu[?], Tembi; 
mit, Rasa ; met, Buk. U. Lang. ; 
mat, Mantr. Malac. , Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. Child : kemeis, Te7nbi. 
Small boy (or girl) : mis'' [jzV] ; 
mes, Tembi. Big boy (or girl) ; 
youth : hagmos, Tembi. A few ; 

7i6 

COM PA RA TIVE VOCA B ULA R V OF 

a little : m^s, Siim. ; mes - hu 
(messhou), Sak. Kerb. Less : mash 
(mesch), Sak. Kerb. Speak slowly ! 
chakap mees ! Tembi. To want (/.<?. 
to be in want of) : miish (mech), 
Sak. Kerb. [? cf. Achi?i. migt, 
"small," " little," ? cf. F 132 ; and 
cf. Mon samilt [simat], "young," 
" small."] 

282. S.viALL : (rt) sen, Sem. K. Ken. ; 
eset? (esent), Sem. Per. ; chot 
(tchoDt), Bes. Her. ; chet, Bes. 
Malac. ; W 29. Less : eseng 
(ossen), Sdm. To want {i.e. to be 
in want of) : 6seng (bh-sen), Soni. 
(b) Small {MaL kechil) : kasut 
{pr. ka-sutt), Setn. Kedah \ kangsut 
(or does this mean grandchild?), 
Sem. Kedah ; kachok ? (gadjok), 

• Sak. Kor. Gb. [? cf. S 284]. 
(<:) Short : ni-che, Sak. Letigk. 
(d) Small : mishieng, Sak. Br. Low ; 
meshieng, Sak. Croix ; meshi^ng 
(mechien), Sak. Kerb. ; bachin ; 
bachit, Sak. U. Kam. ; machut, 
Sak. Chen. , Serau, Darat ; ma'- 
chui. Sen. CI. ; mach&t (machort), 
Sak. Sung. ; maehot? (madjot), 
Sak. Martin ; machet. Tan. U. 
Lang. ; machor ? (madjdr), Sak. 
Tap. ; R 1 43 ; \V 30. Fine ; thin 
[Mai. halus), niesheng, Tembi ; 
maehot, Serau. Shallow : monchot, 
Bes. Malac. A little : monchoii, Bes. 
Malac; menchin? (mundthin), 5«. 
Bell. Aunt ; mesheng, Sak. Kerb, 
{e) Small : kete' ; kete', e.g. kete' 
kret, "small of body," Bes. Sep. 
A. L \ hantek, Bes. Sep. ; tetak, 
Bes. Sep. A. /. ; ma'-tek, Bera ; 
E 12. Directly (immediately) : 
mentek ; muntek, Bes. A. /. A 
little : muntet ; muntek ; murtek, 
Bes. Sep. A. /. \ muntet, Bes. K. 
Lang. ; muntet, Bes. Songs. [Achin. 
chut, " small "; bachut, " a little " ; 
Cham asit ; Punati Dayak ishut ; 
Melano Dayak sisit ; Land Dayak 
sha or shiit, "small" ; Jarai oset ; 
Bahnar toshiet (to.xiet), "a little" ; 
cf. Tagal. mongsing, montik. There 
seem to be several distinct roots here. 
Cf. Mai. katik, "dwarfed," and 
perhaps some words under E 12 (^).] 

283. Small : hedet, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
("bhasa kasar " as distinct from 
kenen [S 280]), Bes. K. L.; hedet, 
Bes. Malac. ; hedith, Bes. Bell. [Cf. 
.ichin. (lit, "small," " a little " ; 
Phnong dek ; Rodi, Chr<!ai det ; 
Churu (lech \ Mon dot, "small."] 

283.\. S.MALL : lala' ; Ifila', Sak. U. Bert. 

284. Small : kechil, Ben. New. ; kgchek? 
or keche' (?) (kfich^nk), Bedu. /. ; 
(keche"k), Blan. Rem. ; kfichak 
(kechek), Bedu. IL ; kfechoit 
(kechoint), Jak. Malac. ; kScho 
(kecho"), Jak. Mad. ; W 33. 
Little : kechil, Ben. New. Fine ; 
thin : kichon. Pant. Kap. Joh. 
[Mai. kechil, "small."] 

Small : B 448 ; L 151 ; Y 40. 

285. Little [a?]: sedokon. Pant. Kap. 
Her. ; sgdokon (s'dokon), I-'ani. 
Kap. Joh. ; sidukon. Pant. Kap. Log. 
[Mai. sgdikit]. 

Smaller : M 40. 
Smallest : S 280 ; Y 40. 

286. Small-pox {Mai. chachar) : sgkam 
(/;'. seka^'m), Sem. Kedah. 

287. Small-pox ; wang wik, Ben. New. 

288. Small- POX : champag {pr. 
champagg), Sem. Plus; champang, 
Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Rob.; 
tampang yet, Bes. K. L. [Mai. 
champak]. 

289. Small-pox : katumbal. New. Ben. 
Chicken-po.\ {Mai. chachar ayer) : 
katumbohanbeteoh(ktmbuhn btiuh), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. ; W 30 [Mai. 
katumbohan, " small - pox "] ; B 

254- 

290. Chicken-pox {Mai. chachar ayer) : 
chachar betiu (chajr btu), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; W 30. [Mai. chachar, 
" small -pox."] 
Small-waisted : S 260. 

291. Smeared : liilut, Sem. Pa. Max. 
[cf. Mai. lulut?] 

292. Smell {Mai. bau) : {a) had. Pang. 
U. A ring. Sense of smell ; act of 
smelling ; to give out smell ; smell- 
ing; exhaling odour : penhad(pnhd), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Sweet - smelling 
(of a flower) : bia? penhat (beer- 
pen-hat), Sem. Stev. Evil-smelling : 
haihaid (hi-hid), Sem. Stev. Rotten 
{Mai. busok) : hat, Pang. U. 
A ring; had, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. To decay: ho'uh (hu'uh), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; ho'od (hou'd), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Putrid ; to 
putrefy : ho'ud (ho'ud), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; ho'ut (hu'ut), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Rancid smell ? 
{Mai. hapa') : ho'ut? (hung ut), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Stinking ; putrid : 
ho'ud (hu'udorhuu'd); iau'? (liauk?), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Stinking : rotten : 
him ; hiin ? Sem. K. Ken. [? Cf. 
Khtner het [hit], "to smell" 
(transit.), and v. infra.'\ 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

717 

{b) Carrion [Mai. bangkai) : so', 
Pang. U. A ring. Decayed (A/a/. 
burok): sil', Pang. U. A ring. Fang. 
Gal. Rotten (the Mai. equiv. given 
is busuk which= " stinking ") : s6h, 
Sak. Tap. Rotten : su'ut ; chu'ut, 
Bes. A. I. Stinking: sahiik (s^hek) 
Som. ; sheh^k (sh6hek), Sak. Kerb. ; 
So'Qt, Bes. Malac. ; S 295. Stink- 
ing ; putrid; rotten [Mai. busok) : 
sooh? (soogh) ; nasoh? (nasokh), 
Tembi ; soh ? (sokh), Serau [or 
Tembil^ Rotten or ugly [Mai. 
burok) : soo' noi (sook noi), Tembi; 
H 63; so', Lebir, Kerbat ; kasok", 
Tembi. [Some of these may, how- 
ever, be abbreviations of S 457.] 
[Mo?i stlah [sauih], "decayed," 
" rotten " ; Khmer chhk^h [chhagh]; 
Stieng chilh, "fetid odour"; cf. 
Mon siui [sftuai], "deca)-ed," 
" putrid " ; Khmer sa6i [sauy], " to 
stink" ; [Annajn. hoi) ; ?inA Boloven 
ns6 ; Niahon, Lave sh6 ; Alak as6, 
" rotten " ; cf. also Mon ut, "to be 
putrid."] 

293. Smell [Mai. bau) : meni', Fang. 
Sam. To smell; to sniff: mena : 
mena, Sem. K. Ken. To give out 
smell: m6ni' ? (mni'), Sem. Pa. 
Ma.v. Smelling ; exhaling odour : 
mo'-mgm'? (mu' mni'), Sem. Fa. 
Afax. Fragrant ; scented [Mai. 
harum) : m6ni' or menik, Fang. 
U. Aring; m6nik or m6ni', Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. 

294. Smell : ngui ; nguy ; ingui ; ingoy, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; li-ngoi, Sen. Cliff. 
Sense of smell ; act of smelling : 
uin ? (auin), Sem. Pa. Max. To 
smell (/;-a«j. ), {Mai. chium): ya-on. 
Pang. U. Aring; ya do' on, Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Phis ; kahon, Bes. 
Sep.; ninghoi? (nifi-hoi), Som. To 
smell (a flower) : piong, Bes. Songs. 
To smell [trans. ) ; to kiss (?) : uin? 
(auin), Sem. Pa. Max. ; menguin ? 
(mnguin), Sem. Buk. Max. To 
kiss : inoiSn ? (inoing'n ; inoigh'n), 
Sem. K. Ken: nu-oin(?) o/'un-oin (?), 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; mo' uih (mu' uih), 
Sem. Buk. Max.; uin? (au'en), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; nyui, Serau. To 
kiss or smell [Mai. chium), ya' on, 
Sem. Plus. To sneeze : kahon (?), 
Bes. A. I. {Central Nicobar oi, 
" smell."] 

295. Smell, to [Fr. flairer, sentir) : ba- 
hoy, Mantr. Cast. To smell (ap- 
parently = to give forth an odour) : 
bahoi, Mant. Bar. [? cf. S 294]. 

Stinking smell : bahu cho'ijt, Bes. 
Sep. ; S 292. Smell ; perfume 
[Mai. bau-bauan) : bahu lo'om, Bes. 
Sep. ; S 41 [Mai. bau] ; S 40, 41. 
Smell, to : D 165 ; N loi ; S 292- 

295- 

Smelling : S 292-295. 

296. Smile, to : majujo' (mjuju'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

296A. Smile, to : segat", Krau Em. 
[? cf. D 122]. 
Smite, to : C 295 ; S 495-497. 

297. Smoke : e-el, Sem. Craw. Hist. ; 
e'el, Se7n. Ked. And., Sem. lur. 
And. , Sem. lur. Rob. ; eel, Sem. 
Ked. New. , Sem. fur. New. ; iil, 
Sem. Klapr. ; ayei, U. Pat. ; aye or 
ayeds, Sem. Plus ; eyei 6s (eiei 00s), 
U. Fat. ; ye us (ii aus), Setn. Fa. 
Max. ; yeh us ('iih us), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Smoky: mgyeh? us (m'ih? us), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; F 124. [? Cf. 
Mon yak, "smoke" ; or S 298.] 

29S. Smoke: nyamos (njam-dso/'njem- 
os), Sak. Kor. Gb.; F 124 ; giy^^'m? 
(gi^b'n), Sem. K. Ken. ; chi-jeb, 
Sak. Plus Cliff. ; ching - yep, Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. [Stieng \\ien\ (nhiem), 
" smoke."] 

299. Smoke : asin os (assin-oos), U. 
Kel. ; tsien osh (tsiyen-och), Sd?it. ; 
jet-j6t, Tern. CI. ; bi-chul, e.g. bi- 
chul a-bat" S6n-oi, "smoke is the 
garment of the Sakai " (a Senoi 
proverb), Sen. CI. ; bl-ch(jl, Se)i. 
Cliff. ; bihchul, Serau ; bichul, Sak. 
Em.; chas, Sak. U. Bert.; chas as, 
Sak. U. Kam. ; F 124. [? Cf. 
Khmer phseng, ' ' smoke. ' '] 

300. Smoke : j61ok, Bes. Sep. ; jelok, 
Bes. Sep. A. I., Bes. K. L. ; (jiluk), 
Ben. New. ; dilok-u^ (dilok-us'), U. 
Ind. ; dilok ul (dilok ul'). Or. Hu. 
Joh. I. ; selapa, Ben. New. ; F 124. 

301. Smoke : pengabun, Ben. New. [cf. 
Mai. rabun], " to fumigate. "] 

302. Smoke : asap, Mantr. Malac. , Jak. 
Malac. ; assab, Sak. Ra. ; a-sep, 
Kerbat; a-sap osh, Lebir; F 124 
[Mai. asap] ; B 466. 

Smoke, to : C 129, 130 ; D 165. 

303. Smoke, to, cigarettes (^l/a/. makan 
roko') : ya' mol [pr. ya' moll) (?), 
Sem. Plus. Tobacco [Mai. tgm- 
bakau) : mol, Sem. Plus. 
Smoke-hole : H 109. 

Smoky : S 297. 

304. Smooth : lichau, Bes. Songs ; plusu 
(ploosoo), ;l/t';z/. Stev. To smooth: 
lesai, Bes. Songs [cf. Mai. lusoh] ; 
T74. 

7i8 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

305. Smooth ; calm, of water {Mai. 
tenang) : nu-wed.Paw^. Sa7n, Pang. 
Gal. 

306. Smooth; greasy: kehe (khe), Scm. 
Buk. Max. ; B 308 ; G 40 ; L 62, 
63 ; S 262. 

307. Smooth, to : S 304. 

Smother, to : benam, Bes. Songs. 
\^Mal. benam, " to sink in."] 

308. Smothered? {Mai. mati bungkus): 
kumbi, Scm. Buk. Ma.x. ; D 50 ; 
S.510, 511. 

309. Snail; seg (saig), Sem. Stev. [?cf. 
S 153]; S 151-1S2A. 

310. Snake: ekob, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Craw. Gram. , Sem. Ked. And. , 
Sem. Ked. New., Sem. Jur. And,. 
Sem. Jur. New. , Sem. Jur. Rob. ; 
ikob (aikub), Sem. Buk. Max. ; ikob 
[in the MS. originally ekob], 
Sem. U. Sel. ; ikob, Sem. Kedah ; 
jekob(jkub), Sem. Pa. Max. ; jfikob, 
Sem. Plus; jekop, Pang. K. Aring; 
Pang. U. Aring; R 16 ; T 199. 
Leaf-snake (J/(z/. ulardaun): kop le' 
[for ekob le'] (kupli'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; L 32. Snake spp. {Mai. ular 
kapak api) : jekob kapak as (jkub 
kapk as), San. Pa. Max.; F 124 ; 
{Mai. ular kapak janggut) : jekob 
sak katenut (jkub sak katnut), Sejn. 
Pa. Max. ; H I ; M 203 ; {Mai. ular 
kapak matahari ) : jfikob maketo' (jkub 
mktuk), Sem. Pa. Max.; D 33; for 
spp. Mai. ular kapak rawan, u. k. 
harimau, u. k. mawa, u. k. tanah, 
\\. k. lotong ? Sem. Pa. Max. adds to 
the generic jgkob kapak {or kapa', 
the specific words rawan (raun), 
jfina' (jn'), mawa (maua), te (ti), and 
chekang (chkng) respectively ; (spec. 
Ala I. ular minyak) : ekob minyak 
{aikub miilk), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
{spec. Mai. ular sampah), jekob 
semapah or sampah (jkub smaph or 
smpah), Sem. Pa. Max. ; (spec. 
Mai. ular sendo' ? ) : ko bairn [for 
ekob aim?] (kubaim), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Water - snake : jekob aloh 
(jkub aluh), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
R 142. Whip-snake {Mai. ular lidi), 
jekop b'lidi', Pang. U. Aring; ko 
pelaib [for ekob laib?] (kim pl'ib), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Python : jekop 
boo, Pang. U. Aring; B 202; 
(spec. Mai sawa chindai). Python 
rcticulatus: jekob tuna', (jkub tun'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Green snake with 
reddish tail : engkok, Mantr. .\Ialac. 
Cha. ; S 321. 

311. Snake {Mai. ular): taju', Sem. 

Kedah ; taju', Sem. Jarujn, Sem. 
Plus; taju (ta-djou), Som., Sak. 
Kerb. ; taju, Sak. Br. I^ow; (tadjou), 
Sak. Croix ; taju'. Pang. Belimb. ; 
ta-j(i, e.g. ta-j(i r6lai, "python," 
Sen. Cliff.; S 320 ; tajii (tadjou), 
Sak. Kerb. ; (tagon), Sem. Per. ; 
taju' (tajuk), Tembi ; tajuk", Serau; 
tajiik", Jelai; piji, Sak. Chen., 
Sak. Sung. ; tijih, Sak. Kinta; 
tiji, Sak. U. Kam., Sak. Blanj. Sw.; 
tfgik, Sak. Tap. ; tigi. Tan. U. 
Lang. ; tijo, Bes. Her. ; tijoh, Sak. 
Sel. Da. ; tij&, Bes. Malac. ; (tijor), 
Buk. U. Lang. ; (tiga), Be7i. New. ; 
tija (tijo), Serting, Bedu. //. ; tijau; 
tijoh, Bes. Sep. ; tijau, Bes. Malac. ; 
tayii? (daju), Sem. K. Ken. ; kichon, 
Jak. Lem. Large snake : tijo. Bed. 
Chiong. Snakes' eggs : taju (tad- 
yu), Sak. Jer. Venomous snake : 
tayu ? deliil^ng (dayii deliik'n), Se7n. 
K. Ken. ; ? T 207 ; S 321. 

312. Snake : lilih, Ke?ia. L ; galait 
Kasa. Small snake : jelele, Bed. 
Chiong. 

313. Snake : ular, Mantr. Malac. ; 
ular (oular), Sak. Ra. ; ularh 
(ulekh), Barak; urar? (uzar), Ben. 
New. ; uwar, Jak. Malac. ; S 319 
{Mai. ular] ; R 175 ; T 168 ; T 170. 

314. Snake, black {Mai. ular mura) : 
uwar naga, Jak. Malac. [A/al. naga]. 

315. Snake, green, with white tail : uwar 
kemomul, Jac. Malac. 

316. Snake (spec. Mai. ularkgnang?) 
asun ? or lesun ? (asun or Isun ?), 
Sein. Buk. Max. 

317. Snake, spec, cobra {.Mai. tedong) : 
siyul, Sem. Plus. 

318. -Sn.ake, spec, cobra : along (alung), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; hale' (hali'), Se7n. 
Buk. Max. ; jekop halek. Pang. U. 
Ari7ig; {Mai. tedong selar): elong, 
Se7n. Plus; {Mai. ular tedong abu): 
ekob peiai ? (aikub plai), Sem. Bi/k. 
Max. 

319. Snake, spec, cobra : {Mel. ular 
tedong) : uwar p6n6noh, Jak. 
^hllac. ; S 313. 

320. Snake, spec, python {Mai. sawa) : 
relai, Jelai ; rS-lai, Sen. Cliff.; erloi ; 
6rloy, Sak. U. Kam. ; S 311. 

321. Snake, spec, python {Mai. ular 
sawa) : telen {pr. tele^^n), Setn. 
Kedah ; talon {pr. taloi^n), Sem. 
Jaru/71, Scm. Plus; teiftm (tlm), 
Se/n. Buk. Max. ; jekop talun, Pa7i^. 
U. Ari7ig; jekob teian (jkub 
tin), Sc/n. Pa. Max. ; S 310 ; 
tijau telon, Bes. A. /. ; S 311. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

719 

Water- python (spec. Mai. sawa ) 
rfindain): jCkob t61an rendAm (jkub 
tin rndm), Sem. Pa. Max. ; ekob 
teiam rCndam (aikub tlm rndm), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Python (spec. 
Mai. sawa chindai), Python relic u- 
latus : ekob telSni mfingiye' ? (aikub 
tlm mngii' ?), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[A/on klan [klftn] ; Cham klan ; 
Chrau klan ; Bahnar bih klan ; 
Khmer pOs thlan [bas thlan] ; Slient; 
klan ; Shorn f'e kolain ; Car tulan ; 
Chowra and Cenlr. Nicobar tulan ; 
Achin. uler Ihan.] 

322. SiNAKE, spec, python {Mai. ular 
sawa bfisar) : uwar patu'', Jak. 
Malac. 

323. S.NAKE, spec, smaller python {Mai. 
ular sawa kechil): uwar ripong, Jak. 
Malac. 

324. Snake, water-: manmaii? bgteoh 
(mnnili btiuh?), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
W 30. 

Snap, to : B 372-374. 
Snapped : T 112. 

325. Snare : rachek, Bes. Sont^^s [Mai. 
rachek]. 

- Snatch, to : C 48 ; P 226. 

326. Sneeze, to : champul, Ken a. 1 . 
326A. Sneeze, to: ramcih? (ramogh), 

Tembi \ ramoh, Serau\ B 258; 

S 294. 

Sniff, to : S 293. 

327. Snore, to : ya nerkol {pr. nerr- 
koll). Pang. U. Aring; ya-ner-kol 
{pr. nerr-koll). Pang. Sam ; ya-ner- 
kur {pr. nerrkurr). Pang. Gal. ; 
nlkoh (nikuh), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[cf. Mai. dfingkor]. 

328. Snore, to : {a) semangar, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. [? cf. Bahnar hngor]. 

{b) To snore: s6nd6, Kena. II. ; seno 
(senoi*), Blan. Rem. ; besgnda, 
Temiang, Bedic. II. ; bfisenderh 
(besSnd^kh),5«w/^; b6s6na, Galang; 
besenol, Serting ; bfisSnu, Bedu. 
II. To purr (as a cat): sendoh ; 
bersendoh, Bes. Sep. [Mai. s6n- 
dar]. 
To snore : N 91. 

329. Snout, or beak (?) {Mai. mon- 
chong) : toyong, Bes. K. L. Lips 
{Mai. bibir), toyong, Bes. K. L. ; 
toyo'^ng, Bes. A. I. 

Snout: M 203; N 98. 
So: T 51-54; T 85, 86. 
So long as : O 21. 

330. Soar, to {Mai. nielayang) : say- 
ong, ex. o de, 5' de, 6' sayong 
sagSneb jelmol, "he disports him- 
self, he soars on every hill " (prob- 

aV)ly refers to the kite), Sejn. Plus 
[? cf. Mai. layang]. 

331. .SoAU, to: berbiga', Bes. Songs. 

332. Sodden ; pat, Bes. A. I. ; S 272. 

333. Soft : telCjayn or Ifijoyn or Icjayn 
(? with prefix te-), Sem. Kedah. 

334. Soi"r : {a) seken, Sem. Beg.\ seken, 
Ben. New. 

{b) Soft {Mai. Igmbut) : lekoyj {or 
16koyj), Sem. /arum; l6kodj. Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; IfikoXd {pr. 
iSkoydd), Sem. Plus ; lekod {pr. 
le-kodd). Pang. U. Aring; laken 
(lakin), Sem. Pa. Max. ; lakeng ? 
(Iging), Sem. Buk. Max. Soft (of 
sounds ?) : likeng (likeng), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Soft ; tender : lakeng 
(lakeng), Sem. Buk. Max. To 
become soft (or weak) : jadi' laken? 
(jadi Inkin), Sem. Buk. Max. 

335. Soft: {a) rgnyio ? (rinio), Sem. K. 
Ken. ; Ignyio (lonio), Som. 

{b) Soft : tfilemoyn (? said to = Mai. 
IJmbut), ex. 6' gersoyd tfilgmoyn, 
" when rubbed, it grows soft," 
Pang. Teliang ; ISmeau, Bes. A. I. 
{c) Soft : lumbut, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
lemut, Ment. Her. I. [Mai. 16m- 
but]. 

336. Soft ; flexible : liat (lit), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Tough {Mai. liat) : la'-i, 
Sem. Jarum, Se?n. Plus. Wax : 
liat, Kasa. [Mai. liat]. 

337. Soft; weak: mo - ot ? (mo-ont). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. [? = S 335]; W 
109. 

Softly : S 277. 
Soil : E 12. 

338. Soiled ; to dirty : ata', Sem. Buk. 
Max. [? cf. M 215]. 

339. Solanum (various species of plants; 
especially the one known as 
" brinjal " or "egg-plant"): tiong 
(tiung), Sem. Buk. Max. ; tiong 
(tiung, ting), Setn. Pa. Max. ; 
terok", Serau. Red Solanum {Mai. 
tfirong merah): tiong tehuing (tiung 
thuing), Sem. Buk. Max. ; tiong 
pahang (tiung phang), Se7n. Pa. 
Max. White Solanum {Mai. tfirong 
puteh) : tiong peltau (tiung plltu), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; tiong puteh 
(tiung putih), Se?n. Pa. Max. Sola- 
num aculcatissimum (?), (spec. Mai. 
tfirong perat?) : tiong piat (tiung 
pit), Sem. Buk. Max. Solanum 
(spec. Mai. terong pahit) : tiong 
kedid (tiung kdid), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
B 232. Solanum (spec. Mai. tfirong 
rapoh) : tiong rapoh (tiung rapuh), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [Mai. tfirong]. 

720 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

340 

341 
341 

342 

343 

344 

345 

546 

347 

348. 
349 

B419; 

A. I. 

Lans. ; 

Soldier : B 430 ; F 260. 
Sole (of foot) : F 220 ; P 20, 21. 
Solid ; strong : suing, Seiu. Duk. 
Max. ; F 34. 

Solitary : tenung, Bes. Songs. 
I. Solitary : tungal, in the expres- 
sion, chi ng tungal, ''rogue ele- 
phant," E 49, Sak. U. Bert. [MaL 
tunggal] ; O 27 ; O 34, 35. 
Some : B 87. 

Sometimes : hiiel-hiiel, Siim. 
. Sometimes : kadd-ka.dk'k, Sak. J?a. 
[J/fl/. kadang-kadang] ; Q 5 ; T 51 ; 

T54. 
. Son: hek, 3/enf. Her. II. \ 
C roi-108 ; M 18 ; M 20. 
Song : S 212, 213. 
Son-in-law : L 25. 
Soon : kidiPm, Bes. Sep 
To-day : kidim, Buk. U. 
kinin, Jak. Malac. 
Soon : mui kejap alo, Bes. Sep. 
A. I. [literally "one wink more"] 
\Mal. kejap]. 
Sores : S 541. 
Sorrowful : S 3-5. 
Sort : K 32. 

Soul {Mai. semangat) : ra-bun [pr. 
ra-bu<in), Sem. Kedah ; ro-wai, Sein. 
Plus ; B 389. 

Sound ; sign : pagam, Jak. Mad. ; 
N 90, 91 ; V 21. 

Sour [Mai. masam) : pechas (pr. 
pe-chass), Sem. Kedah, Sem. 
Jarum ; pechus {pr. pe-chuss) 

pSchus (pchus), Sem. 
buchui (boutchoui), 

\_Khmer chat ; Stieng 

Mon phyat [phyuit], 
' (cf. phyah, "sour"); 

Plus; 
Max. : 
Kerb. 
" bitter" 
' ' astringent ' 

Sem. 

Pa. 

Sak. 

chSt, 

see B 195 and G SA.] 

350. Sour : kor (or kohr), Sak. Tap. ; 
A 24, 25. 

Source (of river) : R 147, 148 ; W 

30- 

351. South : 61ier, Sdm. [Mai. hilir, 
" downstream"] ; D 33 ; D 96 ; 
F 12. 

Sow : P 73-90. 
Sow, to : P 132. 
Space : B 403. 
Intervening space : T 54. 
Spade : D 107-109. 
Span : C 89 ; P 21. 

352. Spark : pelp61, Sak. Kerb. ; F 
124 ; H 147. 

353. Sparrow : chia' (chiii'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Minah (spec. Mai. tiong 
saru ?), Eulales Javanensis : chiau 
(chliau), Sem. Pa. Max. White- 
headed sparrow (Afal. pipit uban). 

Amadina maja : chIa' p61tau (chia' 
pltu), Sem. Pa. Max. [Mai. chiak]. 

354. Sparrow : rciyt, Bes. A. I. ; {Mai. 
burong pipit) : chep ret, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; red, Sevan [or Tembi] ; 
\ed^, Tembi. Finch {Mai. pipit) ; 
royt ; chim royt, Bes. K. L. 
\_Palaung simrao, ' ' sparrow. "] 

355. Spatula (.!/«/. sudip): €\gz.d., Pang. 
U. Aring. 

356. Spatul.\ (lor upas poison) : ken- 
pal {pr. ken pall), Seyn. Plus \ pal 
(pr. pall), Sem. Kedah ; pS.1, Sak. 
Kerb. [? cf. C 122]. 

357. Spatula (for upas poison) ; 
genlihar (ghoneher), Sak. Ra. 

358. Spatula (for upas poison) : p6ngo 
dok ? (punger-dok), Ment. Stev. ; 
B 232. 

359. Speak, to : choh, Sem. Beg. ; ichoh, 
Ben. New. To say ; to speak : cho 
(cho ?), Se}>i. Pa. Max. Name 
(Mai. nama) : chok ; chak or cha', 
ex. luwe chok Ib-oh, or lu-we chok 
lo-6hh, "what is the name of 
this " (chok is probably a verb 
meaning "to call" ; i.e. "what (do 
you) call this? "), Sem. Kedah ; chd 
(chor), Sem. Stev. Talk : choh 
(chuh), Sem. Pa. Max. [? Cf. 
Stieng chak, "body," "name"; 
Alak cho ; Bolove?i, Niahon, Lave 
chakmat, "name."] 

360. Speak, to : (a) etu (6tou), Sak. 
Ke?-b. ; yetu' (yetuk), Tembi ; 
ba-to', Sen. Cliff. To say ; bato' 
(batok), Tembi ; batoka, Serau. 

(b) To speak : ndot, Sak. Martin ; 
l3e-doi, Sen. Cliff. ; kedoh, ex. 
kedoh klong gon kahop, ' ' they 
talk like jungle -folk" (doubtful). 
Pang. U. Arijig; bl-doi. Sen. 
Cliff.; bedoi; h^doi, Serau ; peder, 
Sak U. Kam. To say : pSder, 
Sak. U. Kam. Speech ; to speak : 
endok"^, Darat. To chatter, in 
conversation {Mai. bSrgurau) : 
ya-kSdoh, Pang. U. Aring, Pang. 
Satn, Pang. Gal. To inform ; 
to tell : nodor, e.g. nodor ha-- 
oyn ra', "inform me only," Bes. 
A. I. To mention (?) : nodor, Bes. 
K. Lang. To talk (Mai. mgnutor ; 
tutor) : nS,dilr, e.g. vi.kd.kx ha-on ra', 
Bes. K. L. News: sadar. Pant. Kap. 
Joh. To talk: sadak, Pant. Kap. /oh. 

361. Speak, to : lun (loun), Sak. Ra. 
[? cf S 489]. To speak to ; to 
accost : hun, Sem. Pa. Max. [? Cf. 
.Mon kaiean [gSlan], "a word"; 
Stieng lah. " to speak."] 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

362. Speak, to : yap, Sen. CI. ; ibyap, 
Serau ; biap, Krau Em. 1 speak : 
en yz.^), Jelai. To tell (Mai. bilang): 
biapn, Serau. Speak loud ! ya 
b6rkuat ! Jelai. Speak slowly ! ya 
planplahat" ! Jelai. News : yap, 
Darat. Voice : di'ob - minigag, 
Sem. K. Ken. Word : jam-dalil 
(djam-dalil); diam(?), Sem. K. Ken. 
[Andamanese Deada iji-yab; Bale 
idi-yoab, "to speak," are probably 
a chance coincidence] ; cf. N 53. 

363. Speak, to, or talk [Mai. b6tutor) : 

(a) ya-bika', ex. ye lod - ed bika' 
kliing batek chSbak [or hop) (? the 
order) = .l/fl/. sahya pandai chakap 
chara orang bukit, ' ' I am clever at 
talking in the style of [lit. with the 
voice of) the hill (or jungle) men," 
Pang. U. A ring. To chirrup (?) 
(Mai. mgnchiap) : u bika' (aubika'), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. Story : bfe-a-ka', 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. To say ; to tell : 
sangka' (sngka'), Sem. Pa. Max. 

(b) To say: nebkap (nob-kap), 
Som. 

(c) To speak : chakap (tchakap), 
Som. ; S 364 [Mai. chakap]. 

364. Speak, to : barkui, SaA. Plus 
Cliff. ; kui chakap (koui tchakap 
\sic : but probably a comma has 
been omitted between koui and 
tchakap, and the two are to be 
considered independent alternatives; 
S 363]), Sak. Kerb. To talk : 
ba'kui, Sak. Plus Cliff. Don't talk: 
jangan akoin ; wish akoin, Serau. 
Music : kui (koui), Sak. Kerb. 
Speech ; language : ku-i. Sen. CI. 
Speech of the Sakais : kuiri [?], 
Tembi. Voice ; kui ya' (kuiia'), 
Sem,. Btik. Max. ; S 362. 

365. Speak, to, or talk [Mai. chakap) : 
ya' pengseng, Sem. Kedah. To 
tell ; relate ; inform [Mai. bilang) : 
pengseng, Sem. Kedah. 

366. Speak, to; to say: kata' (kta'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. To say : kata, 
Bes. K. Lang. [A/al. kata] ; N 90, 
91. 

367. Spear [Mai. Igmbing) : ad (/;-. 
add), Sem. Kedah, Sem. Plus, 
Pang. U. Aring; ad, U. Pat, U. 
Kel, ; S.t, Kerbat. Bamboo spear : 
ad, Sem. Stev. Javelin (for throw- 
ing) : at, Sem. Stev. Sword or 
rather a sort of short spear : at 
(art), Sem. Stev. Shaft of spear : 
ad-i (ad-ee), Sem. Stev. 

368. Spear [Mai. Igmbing) : belus (pr. 
bu-luss or bg-luss), Sem. Kedah ; 

VOL. II 

bulus, Pang. Sam, Sem. Per. ; 
(boulous), Som. ; bulds, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; (bulousse), Sem. Ken.; buluz, 
Pang. Gal. ; bfi-lush, Tern. CI. ; 
(bloush), Sak. Croix; bulush, Sak. 
Br. Low; bu-lush, Sak. Guai; 
(boulousch), Sak. Kerb. Spear ; 
lance: bulus, Sem. K. Ken. [Selu7ig 
buhl (boo-law) ; Jav. bulus ; Tagal. 
bulos, " spear. "] 

369. Spear : tardk", Sak. Em. ; tar6k. 
Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; ta-rok ; ta-rok, 
Sen. Cliff ; ta - rok, Sen. CI. ; 
tarok, Tan. U. Lang. ; tard, 
Sak. Ra. ; tochoh, Kena. /. ; t6- 
hok, Sak. Sel. Da. ; tohok, Kena. 
IL ; toh6k. Bed. Chiong; to -ho' ; 
tohok, Bes. Sep. A. L ; tohoh, 
Bes. Bell. ; t6 - hok, U. Cher. ; 
tShQk (t'h6°k), Bes. Her. ; tok, U. 
Tern. ; tuk, Ben. New. ; K 47. 
To fish with a spear : tlrok, Bes. 
Her. [Cf. Mai. tirok, "fish- 
spear," "to spear (fish)." Malay 
spirit language tohok ( Malay Magic, 
App. p. 646), "spear." Cf. Javan. 
towok ; Kazoi tgvvek, tgwok ; and 
(?) Mai. tombak, "spear"; Mai. 
tohok, " a sort of harpoon."] 

370. Spear : Igmggn, Serting; Igmbing, 
Bed. Chiong; lembing, Mantr. 
Malac. ; limbing, Sem. U. Sel. 
[Afal. Igmbing]. 

371. Spear : bemban, Bedu. //. [? A<fal. 
bgmban, Clinogyne (from the shape 
of its leaf?)] ; B 121 ; B 350 ; E 

83- 

372. Spear, wooden : kiiyang, Ment. 
Her. /. 

373. Spear : senambong (snambong), 
Rasa. To fish with a spear : 
sirampang, Barok. [A/al. sgrampang, 
"fish-spear, harpoon."] 

374. Spear : nikam, Galang \Mal. 
tikam, " to stab "]. 

Spear, to : C 296 ; S 373, 374. 
Species : K 32 
Speech : L 11 ; S 364. 
Spherical : R 190. 

375. Spices : lempar, Bes. K. L. [cf. 
Mai. rgmpah (variant of G 99)]. 

376. Spider : (a)pglek (plik), Sern. Buk. 
Max. ; N 42. [Cf. B 73, where 
the word is (probably wrongly) 
given with the meaning "bat."] 

(b) Spider : manong, Serau [and, 
perhaps, maneng Tembi7\; deng 
tapung, Jelai. 

377. Spider : klltong (klltung), Sem. 
Pa. Max. 

378. Spider : tawah, Pang. U. Aring, 

3 A 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; tawig, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; tgw6\voh, Jak. 
Malac. ; (t'wowoh), Jak. Ba. Pa., 
Jak. Lem. [? cf. B 481 or S 380, 
and see M 151]. 

379. Spider : jama'^ng, Bes. A. I. ; 
jamang, Bes. K. L. 

380. Spider : alhaba, Mantr. Malac. ; 
gglaba, Manir. Malac. Nya ; N 
42. Spider (large venomous kind) ; 
gglaba bong, Mantr. Malac. Nya ; 
S 381. [Mai. laba-laba, "spider"; 
Achin. gglabah, "cobweb."] 

380A. Spider : glau, Tembi. [? = S 
380]. 

381. Spider's web : bo^ng jamai^ng, 
Bes. A. I. ; bong or bol^ng jamang, 
Bes. K. L. ; S 379. Spider (?) : bong, 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. \_Stieng\)e.x\^ ; 
Khmer ping [bing] ; Mon ayeau 
pheng [ayau pheng] ; yeau phaing 
[yau phuing], "spider."] 

Spike (of palm-leaf) : B 336. 

382. Spill, to (?) : chidut, Bes. K. 
Lang. ; chidut, Bes. Songs; F 11, 
12; Fig; F21. 

383. Spinach, red, Amaranthus gan- 
geticus: bayim mera' (baim mir'), 
^Sem. Buk. Max. ; K 17 \_Mal. 
bayam merah]. 

384. "Spinach, rhinoceros" {Mai. 
bayam badak), Psychotria Malay - 
ana: telipa' ? (tlipa' 6I/- tlinga'?), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

Spine : B 336 ; B 339. 
iSpiral : R 133, 134 ; R i93- 
Spirit : D 161 ; G 16-21. 

385. Spirit of fire (a bad spirit) : jin 
OSS, Sen. Ij. ; F 124. Good female 
spirit (in the clouds) : jin mak tok, 
Sem. Ij. \ D 33 \^Mal. Ar. jin, 
" spirit"]. 

386. Spirit, evil : pa'-re", Bera. 

387. Spirit, familiar : pemprSt, Bes. 
Songs. 

388. Spirit : plese', Bes. Songs \_Mal. 
pelSsit]. 

389. Spit, to {Mai. ludah) : kebed, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; bet (bit) ; 
baid ; bebai'? (baid bbaik), Sctn. Pa. 
Max. ; mabet (mabit), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; bat -hoi, Bes. K. L. ; ya 
mftbet leheng ya' (ia mbt lihing ia') 
(///. " I spit my spittle"), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; S 391. 

390. Spit, to: toh. Sen. Cliff. ; getd', 
Sak. U. Kam. ; gota, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. [? Cf. Mon tiiaii' [ihfta'J, "to 
vomit."] 

391. Spit, to : (a) mSlioh (mliuh or 
mliur?), Sem. Pa. Max. [Mai. liur]. 

(b) To spit : leheng (Ihing), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; lahaKng (lahag'n), 
Sem. K. Ken. Spittle ; saliva : 
leheng (lihing), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
leheng (Ihing), Sem. Pa. Max. 
To hawk (as when about to spit) : 
leheng (Ihing), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
S 389. 
Spittle : S 389 ; S 391. 

392. Splayed : lidun, Bes. Songs 

393. Spleen {Mai. limpa) ; kempll {pr. 
kem-piU), Sem. Kedah; kempal 
{pr. kSm-pall), Sem. Plus. [? cf. 
Mai. hampgdal, "crop (of bird)."] 

394. Spleen {Mai. limpa kechil) : 
meda' (mdk), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
H63. 

Splice, to : B 213 ; J 8. 

395. Split, to {e.g. wood) : bak, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; bahan, Bes. Songs. To 
spoil ; to destroy : poh (puh), Sem. 
Pa. Max. • 

396. Split, to (?) : makayata' ? (mkai- 
atk), Sem. Buk. Max. [Probably 
two words, viz. maka = A/«/. mCraka 
and yatak = il/rt/. retak, which are 
given as equivalents] ; B 373 ; D 
126 ; G 29. 

Spoil, to : D 7 ; D 50 ; S 395. 

397. Spoon : aweg {pr. awegg), Sem. 
Kedah, Sem. Plus. 

398. Spoon : kuar {or cuar), Sak. Kor. 
Gb. 

399. Spoon : chongkeh, Bes. A. I. ; 
chongkhe, Bes. K. L. ; chongkhe', 
Bes. Songs. Paddle : penyungka 
(penjoingke), Kena. II. ; p6- 
nyungkhe (p6nyungk'h6), Bes. Her. 
To scoop up : chongkoh, e.g. 
chongkoh pren, " to scoop up rice," 
Bes. A. I., Bes. K. L. 

400. Spoon : sendoh, Bes. K. Lang. 
[Mai. sgndok] ; S 355-3S8. 

Spoor: P 118; T 195-197. 

401. Spotted {A/al. borek) : ui, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. 

402. Spotted {Mai. churing) : mgjud 
(mjud), Sem. Buk. Max. ; lochoyn, 
Bes. So Jigs. 

403. Spout, to; to issue: hatak (hatk), 
Se7n. Pa. Max. ; 1 44. 

404. Spout fire, to : panchar us 
(pnchr us), Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. 
panchar]. 

405. Spread, to ; to stretch : amgnteng? 
(amnting?), Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. 
bentang] ; B 404 ; F 2X ; R 31. 

406. Spreading : rendang, Bes. Songs. 
[Mai. rendang, "leafy."] 
Spring (of water) : E 83 ; W 
29, 30. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

723 

407. Spring-trap {Mai. bfilantek) : keni- 
bud (/;-. kembudd), ex. keinbud 
kedeg, "a spring- trap for rats," 
Sem. Kedah. 

408. Spring-trap: peh, Bcs. Sep. ; T 
200A. 

409. Sprinkle, to ; to bespatter : keti' 
(kC'tik), Sem. Riik. Max. 

410. Sprinkle, to; to water: chius, 
Sem. link. Max. [? cf. Mai. dirus] ; 
B 81. 

411. Square [Mai. pSsCgi) : tampang, 
Pang. U. A ring. Pang. Sam [A/al. 
tampang]. 

412. Squark: chgpet, Bes. A. I., Bes. 
K. I.. ; C 245 ; F 254. 

413. Squash, to : naduk, Sak. Kor. Gb. 

414. Squeeze, to {Mai. apit) : ya-lam, 
Pang. U. A ring. 

415. Squeeze, to: ch6-mut, Bes. A. I. 
4x6. Squeeze, 'xo{Mal. ggntel ; p€rah): 

pia, Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. perah]; 
P 104-109 ; S 413. 
Squint : K 83. 
Squinting : G 57. 

417. Squirrel: hovvaj (howage), Sem. 
Stev. ; wayj {pr. waydj), Setn. 
Kedah, Sem. Plus ; wayd {pr. 
waydd), Sem. J a rum ; wad (//'. 
wadd), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Flying squirrel : waj, Sem. Stev. 
Squirrel (spec. Mai. tupai kam- 
pong) : wachut (uchut), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

418. Squirrel ; chelak (tchlek), Sak. 
Korb. Lias ; chereh ; cherah, Pang. 
Songs. Small squirrel : chadek. 
Pang. U. Anng. Squirrel (tupaia ?): 
tudar, Jak. Malac. ; (spec. Mai. 
tupai kampong) kadak?; tadak ? 
(kadak or tadak ?), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
S 541 [? cf. S 420]. 
Squirrel: tu-pai, Bes. Sep. A. 
I. [Mai. tupai]. 

420. Squirrel, black ; tupaia? {or civet 
cat ?) : mengkr^' {Mantr. Malac. 
Cha. [? Cf. S 418 ; Stieng krahi ; 
Chrdu krash (kra.x), "squirrel."] 

421. Squirrel, ground {Mai. tupai 
tanah) : chong ; chiteg, Mantr. 
Malac. Nya. 

422. Squirrel, middle-sized : mengas, 
Pang. U. Aring; C 136 ; S 418. 

423. Squirrel (sitting ? Germ, brliten- 
des) : nata (nattar), Sem. Stev. 

424. Squirrel, white : kawak, Jak. 
Malac. 

425. Squirrel ; tupaia (spec. Alal. 
tupai nandung) : ammai (a'mmai), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; 'mmal ('mml or 
m'ml ?), Sem. Buk. Max. [cf. S 498]. 

419. 

426. Squirrel (?) ; a small mammal (?) , 
tfinakbl, ^-.v. ledhud surau tenakol. 
Pang. Sai ; C 136 ; M 135 ; R 33: 
Flying squirrel : L 53-56 ; S 417. 
Stab, to : C 295, 296. 

Stag: I) 68, 69; D 72 ; F 218. 
426A. Stag, a kind of [the word is an 
epithet applied to large animals] : 
mtnuang, Bes. Songs [Mai. bSn- 
uang]. 

Stair : L 1, 2. 

427. S.talk, to, (game) : sobok, Mantr. 
Malac. Nya. 

428. St.\lk, T(; : benchop, Bes. Songs. 
428A. Stammer, to ; to talk slowly : 

giseh (gislh), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
ka'iseh ? (k'isih), Sem. Bux. Max. 

429. Stand, to {Mai. berdiri) : ya' 
penjan, Son. Jarum. ; ya' pen-jah, 
Sem. Plus; ya-henjayn, Sem. 
Plus{}) ; ya-nyan, Pang. U. Aring ; 
he-nyan (he = yl/rt/. kita, "we"?), 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; nyan (njan), 
U. Kel. ; jong, Bes. K. L. ; jol^ng, 
Bes. A. I. ; ]6^, Bes. Malac. ; 
jin-jong [?], Krau Tern. ; jCngjoki^ 
(jgng-j6rk°), Sen. Cliff. To stand 
up : jin juk, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
To raise oneself up ; to stand up : 
hiai (hiai), Sem. Pa. Max. ; m6n- 
jan (mnjan), Sem. Buk. Max. To 
set up ; to make to stand up : hia.. 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; ya mfihenjan (ia 
mhnjan), Sem.. Buk. Max. Up 
right {Mai. tggak) : hajol {pr. ha- 
joll), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Up- 
right ; standing : hSnjan (hnjan), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; hian ; hiai, Sem. 
Pa. Max. [? cf. A 131 {b)\ [Wa 
jong ; Palaung, Ru7nai jang, jung ; 
Cham jiong, jong ; Khmer chho 
[jha], "to stand" ; Bahnar iung ; 
Boloven, Niahon duk Jiang ; Halang 
yuong, " to stand up " ; Lave jong ; 
Sedang seong ; Bahnar hoiung, 
"upright."] 

430. Stand, to : te - tud, Sak. Plus 
Cliff.; tetot? (dedot), Sak. Kor. 
Gb. To stand up ; to arise : t^tut, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. To stop {Alal. 
bSrhgnti) : tud, Sak. Plus Cliff. 

431. Stand, to : bederhi, Manf. Bor. ; 
bgrdiri, Alantr. Malac. ; bgrdiri', 
Jak. Alalac. Steep : badi^, Ser,:. 
K. Ken. [Mai. berdiri] ; A 131 ; S 

445- 

432. Stand on end, to, (of hair) : tsuk 
klete' Bes. A. 1.; Yi \. 
Standing : S 429. 

433. Star {Alal. bintang) : chun-dan 
{pr. chun-dann), Sem. Kedah. 

724 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

434. Star : lang-er [pr. lang-iirr), Sem. 
Plus. 

435. Star : te-nurr, Sen. Cliff. 

436. Star : {a) pgr-lau-i, Sen. Cliff. ; 
perlaul, Tan. U. Lang. ; pg-lau-i, 
Sen. CI. ; pgrlohi, Sak. Chen. ; 
perloi? (berloi), Sak. Martin; pgrloi; 
perloy, Sak. U. Kam.\ (perloi), Sak. 
Blanj. Sw.; (perloi), Darat\ p61uih 
(pluih), Sem. Pa. A/ax. ; pfilo-i 
(poloi), Sak. Kerb.; puloe (poolo-e), 
Setn. Beg. ; puloi, Ben. Ne7v. ; 
paloy, Sak. Br. Law ; (paloye), 
Sak. Croi.x. Evening star ; Venus : 
pgluih barih (pluih barh), Sent. Pa. 
Max. Morning star : pgluih timor 
(plu timur), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Shooting-star : it peluih (ait pluih), 
Se7n. Pa. Max. ; D 114. Planets (?); 
or the stars in their courses (or 
moving?) {Mai. bintang berjalan) : 
peluih chub (pluih chub), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; G 42. Stars of the astro- 
logical seasons (?) or Pleiades (?) ; 
pgluih ketika (pluih ktik), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Comet : peluih hite' (pluih 
hiti"), Sem. Pa. Max.; T 3. [? Cf. 
Mon paieg [paiheai], "to glitter" ; 
and ? cf. Khmer phlii [bhli], " day- 
light."] 

{b) Star : jelat (djelat), Sem. K. 
Ken. 

437. Star : sea, Sak. Sel. Da. ; chiang, 
/ok. Raff. ; cheong, Jak. Raff. ; 
chgong, Jok. Raff. As. ; che6ng, 
Jak. Malac. ; cheong (chaiing), 
Ben. Neiv. Firefly : ichaum, Mantr. 
Malac. ; chgdng, Jak. Malac. [? Cf. 
Chong sum, ' ' star. "] 

438. Star : binten, Sem. Ij. ; binteng, 
Barok, Setn. Kedak, Sem. Plus, 
Sem. U. Sel. ; (bnting), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; binting, Sem. Craw. Hist. , 
Sem. Klapr., Sem. Ked. And., 
Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. Rob. 
[gives it, by a misprint, as the 
equivalent of "stag," ne.\t to 
"moon"]; benting, Sem. Ked. 
Mar., Sem. Jur. Mar. ; bintang, 
Sem. Ked. New. , Sem. Per. , Sem. 
Ken. , Ben. New. , Bes. Malac. , 
Mantr. Malac. ; (bntng), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; (bintan), Sak. Ra. ; bintak, 
Som. ; cf. M 164 \_Mal. bintang]. 

438.\. Star : pCnabor (pinabor). Pant. 
Kap. Log. [? Mai. tabur, ' ' to 
sprinkle " = S 25] ; D 39 ; W 121. 
Stare, to : S 75. 
Start up, to : A 155. 
Startled : Q 5. 
Starved : D 50. 

439. Stay, to : tunggui, e.g. jangan di- 
tunggui dgni, "don't stop here," 
Jak. Malac. ; tungol, Mantr. Malac. 
[jl'/rt/. tunggu]. 

440. Steal, to : seg. Sen. Cliff. ; negsag 
(neg-seg), S'mn.; si-sik, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. ; sised", Serau. I steal : eng 
sit", Darat ; G 43. 

441. Steal, to: mongkor, e.g. "he is 
intending to steal," ye hgnak 
mongkor, Jak. Malac. [? Cf. Batak 
tangko ; Nias manago ; Sampit 
menakau ; Katingan ngakaii ; Sibop 
makau ; Lirong, Ba Mali mekau ; 
Long Poki/n mekau. If this ety- 
mology is correct, it involves the 
existence of a verbal prefix m- 
capable of absorbing the initial 
letter of the root. This occurs i. a. 
in Tagalog and Selung, as well as 
in some of these Borneo dialects. ] 

442 Steal, to : {a) ilek. Pant. Kap. 
Joh. 

{b) To steal : maling. Pang. 
Belinib. ; ya- maling. Pang. Sam; 
ya-maling, Pang. U. Aj-ing; ma'- 
ling? (nea'-ling), Kerbat ; ya-mena- 
ling. Pang. Gal. [Minangk. Mai. , 
Jav. , Siind. , Dayak maling ; Lamp. 
ngamaling, "to steal."] 

443. Steal, to: rampas, Sak. Kerb., 
Sak. Ra. [Mai. rampas, "to rob"] ; 
G 42. 

Steel : I 39. 

444. Steel for striking fire {Mai. 
bgsi) : si-yab {pr. si-yabb), Sem. 
Plus ; slab, Tcmbi ; S 465. 

445. Steep ; precipitous : choyam? (juim), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Precipice ; steep 
descent : choyam (chuim), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Precipice {Germ. 
Abhang) : chinan (tschindn), Sak. 
Tap. [Mai. choram] ; L 150; S 

431. 

Steer, to : P 9, 10. 

Stem : B 346 ; P 193 ; T 204 ; 

T 207 ; T 210 ; T 242. 

Calladium stem (put in the ear) : 

Y 8. 

Step : L I. 

446. Step on, to : bibat, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
{Mai. pijak) jg'-bat". Sen. Cliff. 

447. Step over, to : meinkang, Mantr. 
Cast. [? a misprint for menibrang = 
menyabgrang.] 

Stepfather : U 13. 
Stepmother : O 23 ; Y 43. 

448. Stick {Mai. batang) : lu-dal (lu- 
darl), Sak. Plus Cliff.; lu-dan, 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Trunk of tree : 
ludal (lu-darl), Sak. Plus Cliff., 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

725 

Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Log {^Mal. 
batang kayu) : ludal j6hu' ? (lu-darl 
je-huk), Sak. Plus Cliff. ; lu-dan 
je-hu, Sak. Blanj. Cliff.; T 211. 
Stick : dudao (doud&o), Sak. Ka. 
Long piece of wood : dudao 
(doudao), Soin. 

449. Stick: nei, Sak. Kerb. ; T 21T. 
Digging slick : D 107 ; D 109 ; T 
211. 

450. Stick to tighten strings of a musical 
instrument : penangkil, Sem. Stev. 
[? cf. Mai. ungkil, "to lift with a 
lever."] 

451. Stick, walking- : gasdko/- gesdk, 
Sak. Kor. Ob. 

452. Stick, walking-: chenduk (tchen- 
douk), Soin. Prop or support [Mai. 
tongkat) : chgnidel, Sem. Kedah. 

453. Stick, WALKING-: tongkat (tonkat), 
Sak. Kerb. , Sak. Ra. Prop or 
support : tSnungked, Sem. Plus 
[A/al. tongkat]. 

454. Stick, to : ICkuis, Bes. Sor/gs ; ked 
(kid), Sem. Pa. A/a.v. Stiff: ket 
(kit), Sem. Pa. Max. [Cf. Mai. 
Igkat, "to stick."] 

To stick : P 15. 

To stick into : P 51, 52. 

455. Stick-insect, the noise made by 
the ' ' yup-yup, " supposed to be the : 
ngungut, Bes. K. L. [? cf. Mai. 
rungut] ; G 103. 

Stiff: H 31 ; S 454; S 504. 
Stiffness : O 17. 
Still: A 27; M 174. 
Still (more) : N 87. 

456. Sting, to : nyeket, Bes. K. L. 
\_M(il. sakat, " to annoy. "] 

457. Stinking: busu (boussou), Sak. 
Pa. ; biso' (bisok) ; busok, Seraii 
[Mai. busok], [? cf. S 292 (b)]. 

458. Stinking; putrid (especially with a 
fishy smell), {Mai. hanyir, aring) : 
pelong (plu'ng), Sem. Pa. Ala.x. ; 
S 292 ; S 295. 

459. Stir, to (trans.): julQk, Bes. A. 1. 
Stomach: B 159-164; H 64. 

460. Stomach, pit of the : pessudul, 
Ben. Neiv. [cf. Mai. sudu hati, 
" the point of the sternum "]. 
Stomach-ache: B 160; S 185- 
187. 

461. Stone: kula, U. Pat. Stone; 
rock [Mai. batu) : (?) ku-la', Sem. 
J arum. 

462. Stone : balu, U. Pat. Stone ; 
rock : ba-log (/n balogg), Sem. 
Kedah, Sem. Plus. Flint, for 
striking fire (Mai. batu api) : balog 
ros awa' (pr. balogg ross awa'). 

Sem. Pbis. [? Cf. Chiiru luk ; 
Phnong luk (luc), " stone."] 

463. Stonk : t6-muh, U. Cher. ; te-mu, 
U. Tern. ; tmu, U. Kel. ; gmu, 
Pal. , U. hid. [A/o7i tma [tma ; 
tmaa] ; Stieng tomau ; Xong tmo ; 
Sue, Nanhang tamao ; Tareng, Kan 
Tu, Boloven tam6 ; Bahnar tomo ; 
Kaseng tam6 ; Halang mo ; Chong 
tamok ; Por thmok-o ; Ka tamoe ; 
Prou tama ; Sam re thmo ; Cuoi 
tamau ; Khmer \AvavS.; Chrdu t'mo; 
Alak, Lave ta.mo ; Sedano 'mu, 
hmu ; Palaung mau ; Khasi mau, 
" stone."] 

464. Stone : bungkal, Kena. I. [A'ajvi 
wungkal, "stone," cf. Mai. bung- 
kal, a certain weight.] 

465. Stone : batu, Sak. U. Kam., 
AIa?itr. Malac. , Jak. Malac. ; 
(batou), S'om., Sak. Kerb. ; (battu), 
Be7i. New. ; batu', Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; batii', Bes. Sep. ; (batu!?), 
Serau; (batul^), Sak. Em. ; (batuk), 
Sak. Martin ; batu, Krau Em. ; 
Sem. K. Ken. ; batu, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; ba-tfl, Sen. Cliff. ; (batou), 
Sak. Ra. ; botu"? (botu'k), Sem. 
Beg. ; batah, Seyn. Klapr. ; ha betu, 
Barok. Rocky mountain : batu- 
unba, Sem. K. Ken. (probably = 
"big stone," vide B 202). Load- 
stone : batu' bani' (batu' bni'), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; B 370. Quartz ; fire 
stone : batu osh (batou-och), Sak. 
Kerb., Sak. Ra. ; batu siap (batou 
siap), Sak. Kerb. ; batu osh siap 
( batou -6ch- siap), Som. ; S 444. 
Thunderbolt ( Mai. batu lintar ) : 
batu' ker-chel (or kb-chel). Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; L 91. [Pre- 
sumably this refers to the primitive 
stone weapons sometimes found in 
the Peninsula, which the natives (as 
elsewhere) consider to be thunder- 
bolts.] W'hetstone : batu' tendii' 
(batuk tendrik), Serau [Mai. batu.] 

466. Stone : che-ut. Pang. Kap. Her. ; 
che-6t, Jak. Mad. (Pant. Kap. ) ; 
cho'ot, Pant. Kap. Log. ; besuk", 
Tembi. Stone chisel : seok, Sejn. 
Stev. Round side of stone a.xe ; 
round side of stone chisel : mSsut 
(massoot), Sem. Stev. Stone axe : 
chit-te (chit-tai), Sem. Stev. Iron: 
chaot, Pant. Kap. Log. Iron ; 
stone; tin : cheot? (chen-ot). Pant. 
Kap. J oh. Musket - ball : che'ot, 
Pant. Kap. Her. ; buah che-6t, 
Jak. Mad. (Pant. Kap.); F 284. 
Bullet : cheot penjauh bunyi (chen- 

726 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

ot p'njauh bunyi), Pant. Kap. Jolt. 

Seed : cheot (chen-ot), Pant. Kap. 

Mad. 

Stone : R 12. 

Stone of fruit : F 282 ; S 88. 

Stone knife : K 48. 

467. Stool, to ; to void exxrement [Mai. 
berak) : tudam (tudm), Sem. Biik. 
Max. 

468. Stool, to ; to void excrement : 
enchah (/;-. 'nchahh), (doubtful). 
Pang. U. A ring; mgnchilh? (mnjah), 
Se>yi. Btck. Max. ; ma'cha, Des. Sep. ; 
chah-choh ; choh, Se7i. Cliff.; cha' 
cho', Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; chachoh, 
Darat ; chachoh ; chacha, Serau ; 
chi-chu-ah, Krau Tern. To have 
a motion : chach6, Sak. U. Kam. 
To void : choh, Sen. CI. I stool : 
enchacha ; enchacha, Serau. Aroid 
{Mai. birak) Sjic : but it obviously 
represents Mai. berak, " to stool "]: 
chachoh, /t'/az. Excrement: fincha 
( inchar ), Sem. Stev. ; V 22. 
Dysentery : chio behim (tchio 
belilm), Sak. Ra. ; B 249. [^Bahnar 
cha ik, cha gaih, " to stool" ; ? cf. 
Khmer choh [chuh], " to descend " ; 
but see S 470. ] 

469. Stool, TO (il/«/. berak): ya-jelhoyd 
(?), Sem. Plus [? cf. S 470]. 

470. Stool, to: ejued, ejed[?], Tembi; 
anji kut (anjikut), Seitt. Pa. Max. ; 
? cf. B 160. [? Cf. Khmer chuh 
[juh], " to stool."] 

471. Stool, to : men6h, Jak. Malac. 
[.S'a;«/izVmamanih; Katingan manih; 
Kanowit men^, meni, " to void 
excrement. "] 

472. Stool, to: Io', Bes. Malac; D 114. 

473. Stop {Mai. berhenti) : bo. Pang. 
U. Aring. 

474. Stop : lant6k, Kena. /. 

475. Stop : sidang, Bedn. II. 

476. .Stop, to {intrans. ) : brenti (brontl), 
Sak. Ra. Turn of the tide : ma'- 
bCnti' (ma' bnti'), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[Mai. bfirhgnti]. 

477. Stop, to (intrans.) : biadu 
(biadou), Som. To rest : bfirado 
(brardo), Mant. Stev. [? Cf. Mai. 
bgradu, "to sleep" (a word only 
used of royalty ; but possibly it had 
a different meaning formerly or in 
some other Malayan language).] 
To dwell : bfdu ; bfdo, Sak. Mar- 
tin [? cf. H 153]. [? Cf. also Alon 
to' [duia], "to stop" (=to cease 
action).] 

To stop : L 31 ; .S 222 ; .S 430 ; 
S 439 ; 'I' 90 ; W 5, 6. 

Stork : E 38. 

478. Storm : shfiluhh ; 'luk, e.g. ari' 
sheiuhh, " there is a storm," Bes. 
.Sep. A. I.; D 43; luhh ; s61uhh, 
Bes. K. L. ; heiu (hloo), Bes. Bell. ; 
elhiil (elhoul), Sak. Kerb. Wind : 
helhul ; hiilhul, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
halhul (helhoul), Sak. Kerb.; helhul, 
Tembi [? cf. B 257]. 

479. Storm : sawu, Be7i. New. ; siak, 
Som. ; si', e.g. kgtok si = Mai. hari 
ribut, "there is a storm," or lit. 
" the day (or sky) is stormy," Pang. 
U. Aring; D 33. Wind: siaSiig 
(siag'n), Setn. K. Ken. ; siak, Sem. 
Per. Wind ; air {Mai. angin) : 
se', Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; tse'. 
Pang. U. Aring. Gale? {Mai. 
ribut) : sl-hak, Som. [De Morgan 
gives the incompatible equivalents, 
French " gale," and Malay " ribut. ' 
I prefer the latter ; cf. W 109 {b). ] 
.Surf: siah, Bes. A. I. [Ci. Sampit 
sabakh ; Grogo sabak ; Land Day ak 
sa-bak ; Sentah Dayak sobak-ribut ; 
Lundu sebak, "storm," "wind"; 
but more probably Tareng sieng, 
" storm," " wind. "] 

480. Stokm: yibu^n? (jibud'n), Sem. K. 
Ken. ; ribut, Ben. New. Wind ; 
ribut, Serting. Big wind ; typhoon ; 
storm : ibut (aibut), Sem. Buk. 
Max. \_Mal. ribut] ; B 256 ; W 109. 

Story : S 363. 

Stout: B 212; E 34 ; H 32 ; 

R 193 ; S 501. 

481. Straight ; direct {Mai. b6tul) : 
pelun or tepelun, Sem. Jarum ; 
pelun {pr. pelu^lfi), Sem. Plus ; ex. 
harr tepSlun {Mai. jalan bStul), "the 
straight road," Sem. Jarum, Sem. 
Plus; peluin (pluin), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Flat ( Mai. pgpat ) : la' 
p61uin (la' pluin), Sem. Pa. Max. 

482. Straight : buka', Sem. Buk. Max. 
True; right; proper: buko' (buku'), 
Sem. Buk. Max. 

483. Straight : betril, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
betul (btul), Sem. Pa. Max. j 
(botoul), Som., Sak. Kerb., Sak. 
Ra. Straightness ; straight line : 
bgtul (btul), Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. 
Buk. Max. Accurate ; correct : 
bStul, Sak. U. Kam. Right ; just ; 
true: bgtul (botoul), Som., Sak. 
Ra., Sak. Kerb. \_Mal. bgtul]. 

484. Straight : lurus, Tembi. True ; 
lurus. Pant. Kap. /oh. [Mai. lurus, 
" straight."] 

Straightness : S 483. 

485. Strait, a : sgngpgngaku (s'ngp'ng- 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

727 

alat), Pant. Kap. Joh. \_Mal. 
sglat]. 

486. Stranger : dagang, Sak. Kor. Gh. 
Stranger (especially of aboriginal 
race) : rt'agan, Sak. Ra. [A/a/. 
dagang] ; M 23 ; M 26 ; M 28 ; 
M 30. 

487. Strangle, to : birajot, Jak. Sim. 
To tie a cloth round one's neck vvitli 
intent to strangle oneself (a cere- 
monial lamentation) : bCjirdt, /ak. 
Mad. To be strangled : chfirut, 
Bes. Songs [cf. Mai. chSrut, ' ' tightly 
compressed"] ; P 210. 

Strap : R 133. 
Stray, to : A 42. 

Stream: R 142-145; W 27-30; 
W33. 

Confluence of streams : C 234. 
Streamlet : W 27-30. 
Strengthen, to: H 31. 
Stretch, to : B 404 ; D 66 ; L 
130 ; S 405. 

488. Stretch, to, out the legs : chong 
(chung), Se7n. Pa. Max. [Doubt- 
ful ; it looks like F 220.] 

489. Stretch, to, out the legs : mSlun 
chan (mlunchan), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
F 220. To put out the tongue 
{Mai. julorlidah): lun Igtik (lunntik), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; malun letik (mlun 
Itik), Sem. Buk. Max. 

490. Stretch, to, oneself: ya idiet? 
(indliet?), Sem. Buk. Max. 

491. Stretched? (by pulling?), [Mai. 
gnjut): kabkuat (kbkuat), Sem.. 
Pa. Max. [? cf. C 48]. 

492. Stretched? {Mai. 6njut) : iyo' 
(aiiu'), Sem.. Buk. Max. [? = P228]. 

493. Strew, to : rui, Sak. Kor. Gb. 

494. Strew, to, broadcast {e.g. stones): 
b6is, Sak. Kor. Gb. 

495. Strike, to (/l/rt/.pukol): ya-tangk&h, 
Pang. U. A ring. To tap : ya- 
tangk&h, Pang. Sam., Pang. Gal. 

496. Strike, to : {a) ya' tebah {pr. 
tSbahh), Sem. Jarum. To strike ; 
to beat: ya' teb&h (pr. tebahh), 
Sem. Plus. To kill : tebah or 
tfibahh, Pang. Belimb. 

{b) To strike : tampogn, Serting. 
{c) To strike : puh, Lebir, Kerbat ; 
pout? ( pou^'t, ' ' deep " ), Sak. Martin ; 
peh, Jak. {or Bers. ?) Stev. kapet ; 
'pet, Bes. Sep. A. /. ; kapet, Bes. 
K. Lang. ; kgpit (keppit), Ben. 
New. To assault : kapet, Bes. 
Sep. To beat {Mai. bantai): kapet, 
Bes. Sep. To fight {Mai. berkalahi): 
ya' pin-pen {pr. pinn-penn), {e.g. 
with bows or blow -guns), Sem. 

Skeat. To hit : pet, e.g. " hit with 
a stick," pet ha long (or logo), Bes. 
Malac. ; peh ; pah, Jak. Malac. 
To strike : met (mit), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [Boloven piiat ; Chum pu, 
"to beat"; cf. Stieng p6t, "to 
fight with fists"; Bahnar, Chrau 
peh; Stieng peh (p6h), "to pound 
in a mortar" ; ? cf. Mon p;ln [pan]; 
Sfierrg pen (pdnh) ; Baknar peng ; 
Khmer baft [pan], " to shoot."] 
{d) To strike : baeng, Kena. I. 

497. Strike, to, with the fist ; to 
box: migSsi'? (mgsi'?), Sem. Biik. 
Max. [? cf. Mai. gochoh ; gasak] ; 
C 295, 296 ; P 203. 

String: R 37-41 ; R 173; R 183. 
Strings of musical instrument : 
M 225 ; M 227 ; W 125. 
String, to, a bow : B 363. 

498. Stripes (on the body of an animal): 
ambal (ambl), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[cf S 425]. 

499. Stroke, to (/1/fl/. gosok) : ya-l6med. 
Pang. Sam, Pa?ig. Gal. ; R 194. 

500. Strong {Mai. kuat or gagah) : 
la'amoh, Sem. Jarum. 

501. Strong : gagah (occasionally 
"legagah"), Sem. Kedah. Stout, 
strong : gaga, Sem. K. Ken. [Mai. 
gagah]. 

502. Strong : pgnchong, Kena. I. [? cf. 
Mai. kenchang, "strong"; or 
Bahnar ch&ng, "stiff"]; W 109. 

503. Strong {Mai. kuat) ; swift {Mai. 
deras) : k6-ot. Sen. Cliff. Strong 
{Mai. kuat; kgnchang): kuat, Serau. 
Strong [Mai. 'kuat) ; swift {Mai. 
lekas) : kuat°, Serau. Accustomed 
{Mai. biasa) : kuvvad, Serau. To 
endure fatigue well : kuat (kouat), 
Sak. Ra. [Mai. kuat, "strong."] 
Strong : A 4 ; E 68 ; H 32 ; M 
219 ; P 193 ; Q 6 ; S 340 ; W 109. 

Strut (of tree): R 178-181. 

Strychnos : P 167. 

504. Stubborn ; stiff : gerchas-gerchas, 
Bes. Songs. 

Stumble, to : F n. 

505. Stump [Mai. ponggor) : niensa', 
Pang. U. Aring; T 207; T 211. 
Stupefied : D 56. 

506. Stupid [Mai. bodoh) : lawa', Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus. Fool : lu, Bes. 
A. I. ; lu ? Bes. K. L. 

507. Stupid : chol. Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. Stupid ; foolish : chol, Pang, 
U. Aring. Silly ; foolish : jan, 
Ment. Sfev. [? cf. Bahnar chel, 
"frivolous"]; C i6r; K 63; S 
205-207. 

728 

COM PARA TI VE VOCA B ULAR V OF 

Subsequently : A 46. 
Substitute, to : B 484. 
Suck, to: B 385 ; D 165. 

508. Suckers of the " pfirfepat " tree: 
longkong, Bes. Sep. 

Suckle, to : B 385, 386. 
Suffer, to: P 14- 
Sufficient : E 70, 71 ; F 122. 

509. Suffix, enclitic (to verbs, etc.): 
leh, Bes. K. Latig. [Mai. lah]. 

510. Suffocated {.Mai. lemas) : henget? 
(hngit?), Sejn. Buk. Max. [?cf. C 

205]- 

511. Suffocated : ho'? (huk), Scm. 
Pa. Max. 

512. Sugar: gula, Sak. Tap. ; gula 
(goula), Som., Sak. Ha. ; gula 
(goula), Sak. Kerb. ; gula, Darat ; 
gulo, Jelai ; B 136 \Mal. gula] ; H 
122 ; S 14. 

513. Sugar - cane [Mai. t6bu) : [a] 
men - het (/r. men - hatt), Scm. 
Kedah, Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus. 
Grass? (spec. Mai. serendayan?) : 
nienhed (minhi'd?), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[? cf. S 539]- ' 

{b) Sugar-cane : sau, Kena. I. 

514. Sugar-cane : bos, Serting, Bes. 
Malac. ; bohs ; bois, Bes. K. Lang. ; 
boys ; bays ; b&s, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
bfts. Sen. Cliff. ; bush (bousch), 
Sak. Ra. ; bush ; buus ; bus ; buus 
adu, Tembi ; buush, Serau [or 
Tembi}']; buus, Seraji; buus, Jelai; 
bus, Darat; bus bStak (bouss botek), 
Sak. Kerb. ; buh, Ben. A'ew. ; (spec. 
Mai. tfibu Hat) : buus krauk, Serau ; 
P 78. [? Cf. Mon bau ; Khmer 
ampou [abau], " sugar-cane " ; ? cf. 
S 515. But the connection between 
these word: is somewhat mysterious. ] 

515. Sugar-cane : tebu' (tabuk), Setn. 
Craw. Hist. ; (tabuk), Sem. Ked. 
New. ; (tgbtik), Bedji. II. ; tebu, 
Majitr. Malac. , Jak. Malac. ; tSbu 
bStong (tobou-boton), Som.; tebrau. 
Bland. K. Lang. Red sugar-cane : 
t6bu' pShum (tbu' phum), Sem.. Pa. 
Max. Sugar-cane (spec. Mai. tebu 
betong) : tebu' betong (tbu' btung), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Species t. kapur, 
t. lanjong, t. gggaga', all have 
names corresponding with the 
Malay names, Sem. Pa. Max. 
\Mai. tC-bu]. 

516. Sugar-palm, Arenga saccharifcra: 
bakeh (bakih), Sem. Buk. Max. 

517. Sugar - palm : henau, Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. [.Mai. henau]. 
Sultan of Johor : P 33. 
Sultan of Pahang : P 33. 

Summon, to : C 9 ; S 178. 

Sun: D 33-35; D 38, 39; D 43 ; 

E 83 ; L 76. 
517A. Sun : mehgdah, Sem. Martin. 
[? Perhaps for meketoh = D 33.] 
Sundry : A 95. 

518. Sunflower (spec. Mai. bunga 
niatahari) : kelacha (klacha), Sem. 
Pa. Max. 

Sunrise : D 33 ; D 35 ; D 43. 

519. Sunset : limpas? (limpase), Alantr. 
Cast. ; D 16 ; D 33 ; D 35 ; S 119, 

519A. Sunshine : jelaSng (djelag'n), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; D 33. 

520. Supine (face upwards), {Mai. 
tfeleniang) : taridoi. Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; L 68. 

521. Support; prop : = P 218 ; S 452, 

453- 

Support, to : B 112 ; P 218. 

Surf : S 479. 

Surface : P 122. 

522. Surprised ; astonished : 16, Sak. 
Kerb. 

523. Surprised : kSngirit (konirit), 
Som.; h^ren ; h6ren, Sak. Pa. To 
be surprised or astonished: hanyang, 
Bes. A'. L. [.Mai. Ar. heiran]. 

SiUTOund, to: R 192. 

Suspicion : S 5. 

524. Suspicions, to have ; suspicious ; 
jealousy: kendah? (kndh), Setn. 
Buk. Max. 

Suspicious : S 5 ; S 524. 
Swagger, to : S 529. 

525. Swallow (bird) : gatas (gats), Setn. 
Buk. Max. ; keleteu, Mantr. Malac. 
A species of night - bird : kleteao ; 
kleteau, Bes. Sep. ; B 72 ; B 216. 

525A. Swallow : laiang, Tembi [and 
SerauT\, [Mai. layang]. 

526. Swallow, to {Mai. telan) : ya-log, 
Pang. U. A ring, Pajig. Sam, 
Pang. Gal.; log (Ifirg), Kerbat ; lig ; 
lik, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; klak, Tembi ; 
lip°, Serau (?) ; ha' lud (ha' lud), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; mahelud (mhilud), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; lut, U. Cher. ; 
gSlot (gglert), U. Tem. ; geloyt, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. ; gfiloyt ; geloyn, 
Bes. Songs; not (nSrt), Lebir. 
Eclipse of the sun : hi helud (ha 
hilud or hblud?), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[Khmer l^p ; Bahtiar luon ; Stieng 
luon ; Cham luon ; Tareng, Jarai 
Ion; Su6 liiu ; Chrdu lung, "to 
swallow"; Bahnar holuon, "a 
mouthful " (or quantity which can 
be swallowed at one gulp); cf. Mai. 
telan ; Dayak telen ; Batak, Bisaya 
tolon ; Tagal. lonlon ; Balinese 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

729 

16nl6n, which may contain the same 
root, viz. 16n or Ion ; but Mon ngit ; 
Sedang nontS ; Annant nuot, "to 
swallow," seem to explain some of 
these forms better. ] 

527. Swamp {Mai. paya) : kubang, 
Pang. U. A ring; Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. [Mai. kubang.] 

527A. Swamp {Mai. paya ; sawah) : 
danok°, Sak. Em. [? cf. Biaju 
Dayak, Lawangan, Siang danum, 
' ' water. ' '] 

528. Swamp ; mud : lepek, Pant. Kap. 
Lem. ; letek, Pant. Kap. Mad. [? cf. 
M 214, 215] ; H 113 ; H 115. 

529. Sway, to: buai -berbuai, Bes. 
Songs. To sway and swagger : 
biang-biuk, Bes. Songs [Mai. buai]. 

530. Sway to and fro, to {Mai. 
oling) : wo' (wok). Sent. Pa. Max. 

531. Sway to and fro, to : gayor, ex. 
tapag tfilentor gayor, ' ' the leaf- 
stem (of the tepus) sways to and 
fro," cp. telentor masing gayor, " to 
and fro in various wise," Pang. 
Teliang [cf. Mai. goyang ; S 131 ; 
W no]. 

532. Swaying ; waving : glu-glai, Bes. 
Songs. 

5 32 A. Swear, to : sab, Sem. K. Ken. ; 
Y26. 

533. Sweat : hiwid? (hliiiulid), Sem. Pa. 
Max.; {Mai. p61uh) : sgop" ? 
(se-urp°). Sen. Cliff. To sweat : 
sengop? (seng-erp), Sak. Blaiij. 
Cliff 

534. Sweat : chadum, Bes. Sep. 

535. Sweat : {a) pud, Sem. K. Ken. 
{b) Sweat : bedebuk, Bedu. II. [? cf. 
H 142]. 

536. Sweat : p61oh (plu'h), Sem. Bt/k. 
Max. ; W 34. To sweat : plo, 
Sak. Ra. [Mai. pfiluh] ; H 141 ; 
R 13 ; W 30. 

537. Sweat, to : rroi, Som. [Achin. 
ro6h (or reuh?), "sweat"]; H 141 ; 
P 63 ; S 533 ; S 536. 

538. Sweep, to : sapui, Mantr. Malac. ; 
sapoi, Mant. Bor. ; sapu, Serau ; 
P 100 ; W log [Mai. sapu]. [Is 
W 124 ultimately connected with 
this ?] 

539. Sweet: gahet, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Klapr. ; gahat (kaht), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; gehat (giht), Sem. Biik. 
Max. ; gehed {pr. ge-hedd), Sem. 
Jarum ; gehed {pr. ge-hed), Sem. 
Plus ; gghed, Pang. U. A ring. 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; bahiit, 
Sem. K. Ken. ; tehehft, Sak. Tap. ; 
nit ; nyit, Bes. Sep. A. I. Pleasant 

to the taste {Mai. sfidap) : gghed, 
Pa?ig. U. A ring; gehed {pr. 
gihedd), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
[?cf. S 292 and S 513]. 

Sweet : S 41. 

Sweet potato : Y 16-19. 

Sweet-smelling : S 292. 

540. Swell, to : na - as, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. ; ki-as, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
Swelling ; swollen {Mai. bCngkak) : 
mehis, Tembi ; bl-ais, blais, Sen. 
Cliff. ; bi5s [or bias ?], Jelai. 

541. Swell, to, of buds, etc. {Mai. 
bfirkfimbong) : bgkembong, ex 
bekembong k6bok ye lang rengal = 
Mai. bgrkembong buah sahaya 
sabeiah ujong, "my fruits swell 
along the branches," /"fiw^. Teliang. 
To nmltiply {infr.), ex. bekem- 
bong kejoh (=kerajoh) ch&re lang 
rengal, ' ' the young squirrels multiply 
on the branches (?), " Pang. Teliang. 
Swelling (disease), {Mai. sakit 
bengkak sembab) : kgmeng (kming), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Bossed ; knotted : 
kgming (kming), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
keming kio' (kming kiu'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Hunchbacked ; bent ; bowed : 
kemeng kio' (kming kiuk), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; B 4. Sores (spec. 
Alal. bubul) : kSmang (kmng), Sem. 
Pa. Max. [Cf. Mai. kembong, 
" inflated " ; and cf. also kfimbang, 
"full-blown"; cf. U 10.] 
Swelling : B 175 ; S 187 ; S 541. 
Swelling of the ear : D 56 ; E 5. 
Swift: A 17; G 42 ; Q 5-15; 
R 201 ; S 503 ; W 109. 
Swiftness : Q 5-15. 

542. Swim, to {Mai. bergnang) : ya 
kfinejuaydd, Setn. Plus ; kijuaij 
(keejoo/je), Sem. Stev. [? Cf. 
Central and Southern Nicobar 
kichdl, " to swim."] 

543. Swim, to : ya' si-or (/;-. si-iirr), 
Setn. Jarum. 

544. Swim, to : loi, Sen. Cliff. ; linoi, 
Tembi, Serau (?), Darat ; niloi, 
Serau. I dare to swim here : eng 
berani' (branik) enliloi, Krau Em. ; 
F 49. [Su^, Boloi>en loi ; Jarai 
'loi ; A?tnam loi ; Halang jeloi, 
jaloi ; Bah/iar gloi (?) ; Cham Iwai, 
chaluei, "to swim"; A^on taloa 
daik [talai dak], " to tread water " ; 
perhaps = B 80]. B 80 ; C 273 ; P 5. 
Swine : P 73-90. 

Swollen : S 540. 

545. Swoop, to : berklambau, Bes. 
Songs. 

546. Sword : gabarlik, Ben. New. 

730 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

547. Sword : padang, Sent. Beg. ; 
pedang, Ben. New. [Mai. pSdang]. 

548. Sword : manchong, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. ; pemanchong, Pant. Kap. 
Her. To take hold of : pgmanchong 
(p'manchong), Pa7it. Kap. Joh. [Cf. 
Mai. panchong, "tocut. "] 
Sword : C 152 ; E 83 ; K 47 ; 
S 367. 

549. Sword-guard? {Germ. Seiten- 
zacken des Schwerts) : hing, Sein. 
Stev. 

550. Sword, end of {Germ. Fuss der 
Schwertklinge) ; calyx of flower : 
nios, Scm. Stev. [Doubtful ; cf. 
O69.] 

Syphilis : U 9. 

1. Taban (a kind of wild fruit-tree), 
[presumably the gutta - percha tree, 
Dichopsis gutta'\ : larah, Ternbi, Serau. 
Taban fruit (used as food): plo' (p!i3k) 
larah or larah, Tcmbi. 

lA. Taban : taben, Pang. U. Aring 
[-1/(7/. taban]. 

2. Tagut, burong (bird spec.): tagut ; 
chim tagut, Bes. K. L. [AlaL 
tagut]. 

Tahi babi (weed spec.) : D 114. 

3. Tail: hatek, ex. "to move the tail 
(swing it from side to side)," Jul 
hatek, Sem. Kedah ; M 209 ; hatek, 
Pang. Gal. ; ha-chek {or ha-tek?), 
(doubtful), i°a«^. U. Aring; sentak ; 
sentak, Temhi; sixAdL^, Jelai; sen-ta'. 
Sen. Cliff.; sentah (jo«tah), Sak. Ra.\ 
sentao (sntao ; sntaw), Sak. U. Katn.; 
L 1 1 9 ; S 436. Tail ; hair of the tail of 
animal: hite' (hiti'), Sem. Pa. A/ax., 
Sem. Bilk. Max. ; {Mai. ekor laru 
[«'c]), hIte' (hiti'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
sok-kgte' (suk kti'), Se7n. Buk. Max. 
Tail, used as a numeral coefficient : 
katek, Sem. Plus. [Cf. Mon bata, 
Palaiing seta, " tail " ; ? cf. also H 2.] 

4. Tail : ni, Som. 

5. T.'ML : ekor, Bla?id. K. Lang. ; ikul 
(iko///), Sak. Kerb. ; kur, Bes. Songs. 
Buttock (of "ungka" monkey, which 
is tailless) : iku, Bes. Songs. Used as 
a numeral coefficient : ikur; kur, e.g. ma 
ikur mah, " two men together"; 'mpe' 
kur mah, "three men together," /to. 
Sip. [But see B 322] ; [.1/rt/. ekor] ; 
1) 98 ; S 436. 

Tainted : M 232. 

6. Takat dahan (bird spec): kattog, 
Sem. Stev. 

7. Take, to : gul, Bes. Sep. ; gul, Bes. 
Sep. A. I. ; kagul (kahgool), Bes. 
Bell. ; gol, Bes. Malac. 

8. Take, to : ma-amil Mantr. Malac. 
[A/al. ambil] ; B 396 ; B 400 ; C 30 ; 
C 48-52. 

To take away : B 396 ; G 42, 
To take hold of : H 106 ; S 548. 
To take off; O 44. 

9. Take out, to {A/al. bawa kaluar) : 
hual, Sak. Plus Cliff. To go out : 
ehual, Tembi \ hfirhol \or pgrhol?]. 
Serau. To release : bfirhol or bgr- 
hol, e.g. " O Rahu, let loose my 
moon !" O Rahu berhol gicha eng, 
oi ! Sak. (J. Bert. [?=:C 219]; B 
396. 

10. Take up, to : sayit, Kena. I. ; B 
396 ; C 30 ; C 32. 

11. Take care, to {Mah jaga) ; ya- 
kikad. Pang. U. Aring; A 57. 

12. Talan (tree spec), Saraca sp. (?) : 
kapeh, Mantr. Malac. , Mantr. 
Malac. Cha. 

Talk ; C 235 ; S 359. 

Talk, to : K 63 ; N 90, 91 ; S 360. 

To talk slowly : S 428. 

Talkative : M 202. 

Tall : B 202 ; D 66 ; F 29. 

Tamarind : A 25. 

13. Tame {Mai. jinak) : nad, Pang. U. 
A 7-ing. 

14. Tame : la-gi, Sen. Cliff. ; legl, Bes. 
Sep. A. I. [Achin. raghoi, "tame" 
(of birds).] 

15. Tamic : genii , Pang. Sam., Pang. 
Gal. YMal. jinak]. 

16. Tampinis (tree), Sloetia sideroxylon: 
tepul (tpul), Sem. Pa. Max. 

17. Tampini-S : temakah (tmakh?), 5^»2. 
Bilk. Max. 

18. Tampui (fruit-tree), Baccaurea 
malayatia : berket, /ak. Ba. Pa. 

19. Tampui (spec. Mai. tampui batang), 
Baccaurea malayana (?) : tabeng 
(tabing), Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. 
Max. [For spec. Mai. t. bunga, 
tabeng bunga is given both in Sem. 
Pa. Max. and Sem. Buk. Max. ] 

20. T.\MPUi (spec. Mai. tampui batang) : 
mari^'l', Jak. Malac. 

21. T.VMPUi (spec. Mai. tampui batang): 
lara', Mantr. Malac. Cha. 

22. Tampui (spec. Mai. tampui jintek) : 
kandim, Pang. Skeat. 

23. Tampuni (fruit-tree), Artocaipus 
rigida : pontot, .Mantr. Malac. Cha. 
[?a variant of T 25 on quasi-Krama 
principles]. 

24. T.AMPUNi : pasal, Mantr. Malac 
Cha. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

731 

25. Tampuni : tgmpuni' (tmpunik), 
Scm. link. Max. \_Mal. tampuni]. 
Tap, to : -S 495. 

Tapering : C 299. 
Tapioca: F 170; R 37 ; T 211 ; 
Y I ; Y 4; Y 13; Y 15, 16. 
25A. Tapioca, a food made out of the 
tubers of a wild plant : koyi (koyee), 
Sak. Hale. 

26. Tapir : baret, Sem. Plus ; baret 
[pr. ba-rett), Pang. U. Aring ; 
bayet (biet), Sem. Stev. ; bay oh {pr. 
bayohh), Sent. Kedak ; poh paniek, 
Sak. Tap. ; D 76. 

27. Tapir : chawag, Sem. Jamm, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. 

28. Tapir : kipan, Sak. k'or. Gb. 

29. Taste, to ; to try the taste of : 
nuitek (mtik), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[This is identical in form with S 
250.] D 165 ; F 57, 58. 
Tasteless : F 261 ; R 44. 

Tasty : G 74. 

30. Teach, to : majar (madyar) ; maajar, 
Mantr. Bar. ; ajar, Sera?/. To show; 
to teach : ajor (adj6r ; adjor), Sak. 
Kerb. ; blajdr (bladjar), Sak. Pa. 
To learn : blajar, Serau. I learn : 
ham berlajar ; halnajar, Darat [A/al. 
ajar ; bfilajar ; mgngajar] ; P 154. 

31. Teal, A/ias arcuata : buho' (buhu"), 
Sent. Bilk. Max. 

31 A. Teal : blibis, Kerdau [jV/al. 
bfilibis] 
Tear : E 83. 

32. Tear, to (Mai. ko3'akkan) : ya' 
suiag (pr. suiyagg), Sem. Plus ; ya- 
chag, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; hack 
(haek), Sem. Pa. Max. [?:=T 33]. 
[Mai. suyak, " to tear" ; but cf. also 
Khmer hek ; Baknar hek, hak ; 
Stieng hek, ' ' to tear. "] 

33. Tear, to : ya' wog (pr. ya-wogg), 
Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus ; hok (hok), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Morsel ; remnant : 
hod [?], Sem. Buk. Max. 

34. Tear, to : lun, Sem. Pa. Max. 

35. Teak, to: teng, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
tekteg ; tSktek, Serau. \Central 
Nicobar ok - tek - hanga, ' ' to tear 
cloth (warp-wise)."] 

36. Tear, to : rengka, Mantr. Ma lac. 

37. Tear, to (Mai. koyak) : pit-pet. 
Sen. Cliff. [Ackin. pipet ; pipak, 
" to tear off."] 

38. Tear, to : charek, Sak. U. Kam. 
IMal. charek]. 

39. Tear, to : (a) yabit (iabit), Sein. 
Buk. Max. [Mai. rabit]. 

(b) To tear (intrans. ): ruyt, Bes. A. I. 
To tear (trans.) : tengruyt ; t"ruyt(?). 

Bes. A. I. To tear or rend (trans.): 
tengruJ't (Mai. koyakkan), as dis- 
tinct from ruJ't (inlj-ans.), Bes. K. L.; 
praat, Tembi. To tear open : maroyt, 
Bes. A. I. 

(c) To tear out : r6bak (robak), Sak, 
Pa. ; B 373 ; B 375. 
Tears : E 83. 
Teat : B 385. 
Teeth : T 167-173. 
To cleanse the teeth : C 145. 
Tell, to : C 163 ; C 254 ; K 59 ; 
S 360 ; S 363 ; S 365. 
T6mbe' (tribal name) : T 41, 42. 

40. Tfembusu (tree spec.) : mSso' ? 
(mesok), Bes. A'. Lang. [Mai. tfim- 
busu]. 

41. T6miau, T6mia (Tumior), TSmbe' 
(name of Northern Sakais) : T6m-be', 
Sen. CI. 

42. TEmi.xu : In (inn). Sent. Stev. 

43. Temperate ; moderate : menda- 
hanah (mndahanh), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[Mai. sederhana]. 

Tempest : S 478-480 ; W 109. 
Temples : C 83, 84 ; F 224 ; F 
228. 

44. Ten (i1/ff/. sapuloh) : nteb(o;-enteb), 
(this was twice given me as = ten, 
though the intervening numerals were 
not known, but quiere), Sem. Kedah ; 
hotep, Sak. Sel. Da. [Khmer d&p 
[tap], "ten."] 

45. Ten : pu-un, Sem. Scott ; s6pol 
(s'pol), Pant. Kap. Joh. ; sepuloh, 
Sem. Ij., Sak. Br. Low, sa'puloh, 
Sein. U. Sel., Sem. Per. ; sapuloh 
Mantr. Malac. , Jak. Malac. , sepuloh 
(s-puloh), Sak. U. Kam.; sapulo 
(sapoulo) ; nipulo (nipoulo), Som. ; 
neipulo (neipoulo), Sak. Kerb. ; 
napulo (napoulo), Sak. Ra. ; n6- 
puloh, Sak. Br. Low ; neipulo (ney- 
poulo), Sak. Croix ; ^'moi - puloh, 
Bes. Malac. Twenty : neipulo (nei- 
poulo) ; neljulpulo (neldjoulpoulo) ; 
julpulo (djoulpoulo), Slim. ; T 272 ; 
nalpulo (nal-poulo), Sak. Croix ; nal- 
puloh, Sak. Br. Low; nang-pulo 
(nan-poulo), Sak. Kerb. ; narrpulo 
(narr-poulo), Sak. Ra. ; chia-puloh 
[sic in MS. also], Sem. Ij. [? cf. 
T 273.] Twenty-one : ma-puloh- 
'^nioi, Bes. Malac. ; duapuloh satu, 
Mantr. Malac. , Jak. Malac. Thirty: 
nipulo (nipoulo), Sak. Kerb. ; nepulo 
(napoulo), Sorn. ; napulo (nepoulo), 
Sak. Ra. [Mai. puloh ; sapuloh, 
' ' ten " ; and see O 27-30 ; T 99 ; 
T 270, 271.] 

Tender : S 334. 

732 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Tendon Achillis : C 6 ; V 8 ; W 147. 

46. T6ng6rmato ? (tree spec. ) : kgsoh 
(ksuh), Sem. Pa. Max. ; kfisoh 
(ksuh) ; kesoh nifl.to' (ksuh mtu'), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. 

47. Tfipus (a kind of wild ginger-like 
shrub with edible fruit) : sayang, 
Pang. U. A ring. 

47A. TEpus ( wild ginger ) : apush, 
Tembi ; lempus, Temhi, Darat ; 
Igmpus, Jelai [cf Mai. tgpus.] 

48. TSrap (tree), Artocarpus Kuntsleri : 
mendi (mndi), Sem. Pa. Max. 

49. Tekap : ho' ; o' (huk ; 'uk), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; kemp - h&, ex. bok 
pingang kempha, " a girdle of tgrap- 
bark," Bes. K. L. ; 'lo^ng kempoh, 
Bes. A. /. : T 216. 

Testicles : E 36, 37. 

50. ' ' Tetawar bindang " (tlower spec. ): 
mos, Sem. Stev. ; cf. S 550. 

50A. Thank, to : dahiil, Sem. K. Ken. 

51. That {Mai. itu) : (a) un, Pang. 
Belimb., Pang. K. A ring \ un, ex. 
chop ba'-un = J/a/. pergi kasitu, "go 
thither," Pang. U. A ring; tuk-un, 
Sem. Craw. Hist. ; tukun, Sem. 
Craw. Gram., Seyn. Ked. New. 
There : tuk-un, Sem. Craw. Hist. ; 
tukun, Sei7i. Craw. Gram. ; Sem. 
Ked. Nezu. ; (touk-oun), Sem. Klapr. ; 
R 83. Beyond {Mai. balik sana) : 
yel-un (?), Pang. U. Aring. There 
{Mai. disitu): ba'un, ex. klongyah {or 
nyah) ba-un = Mai. bunyi rimau disitu, 
" there is the noise of a tiger there," 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; T 129. 
Thither {Mai. kasitu) : ba-un (ba- 
unn), ex. chop ba-unn {Mai. p6rgi 
kasitu), "go thither," Sem. Plus; 
ba'-un, Pafig. U. Aring; ba'un or 
ba'unn. Pang. Belimb. Thither or 
there : ka'un or k&'unn. Pang. K. 
Aring. Thence {Mai. dgrisitu) : dai- 
un (/;•. dai-unn), Sem. J arum ; 
dai-un {pr. dai-unn), ex. dai-un ched 
ba-deh {Mai. derisitusampai kamari), 
"from there to here," Sem. Plus; 
nan-un, ex. bod nan-un = .)/a/. sampai 
deri-sana, "arrived from thence" 
(doubtful), Pang. U. Aring. So 
(Mai. bagitu): ma-un {pr. ma- 
unn), Sem. Kedah ; pen-un {pr. 
pen-unn), Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus. 
So ; like that {Mai. bagitu) : pan-un 
(pr. pan-unn), Pang. U. Aring; 
pan-un. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Sometimes (Mai. kadang-kadang) : 
ka-un-ka-un (or ka'un-ka'un), Sem. 
Kedah. They : je-6n, Seriing ; 13 
165 ; P 176. 

(b) That : nun, Mantr. Malac. ; 
'nun, Jak. Lem. There : nun, Mantr. 
Malac. ; d6nu, Jak. Malac. Far : 
nun-tai, Mantr. Cast. 

(c) There : kium, Pant. Kap. Joh. ; 
kiyo (kee-yo), Jak. Stev. ; chiun, 
Ment. Her. I., Ment. Her. II. ; 
(chune), Mantr. Cast. Thither : 
chiun, Mantr. Malac. ; chi^n or 
chyun. Bland. K. Lang. ; kiuh, 
Jak. Malac. Go (imper. ) : kiuh, 
Jak. Malac. ; kio, Jak. Malac. ; 
kiun. Bed. Chiong; kitin, Pant. 
Kap. Mad. ; kiyun, Barok ; chiun, 
Merit. Her. I. ; tyiun, Mantr. Malac. ; 
chun, Bedu. II. Go away (imper. ) : 
ki-kiuh, Jak. Malac. ; kiyun. Or. 
Laut. ; chun, Belandas Skeat. Go 
there (imper.) : chfm or chyun. 
Bland. K. Lang. ; G 47. Far off : 
kiyoh. Or. Laut. [Cf. Billiton Malay 
siun, " there."] 

(d) That (Mai. itu) : tani or ta-ni, 
Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus. There 
(Mai. disitu) : ba-ni', Sem. Jarum, 
Sem. Plus. Thereupon : uni' (auni'), 
Sem. Pa. Max. 

(e) That : nah, Tern. CI. ; ha ni, 
Sak. Kerb. ; nana, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
na-lo, Som. That ; there : nong, 
Bes. Songs. Formerly : nuneing 
(nou-neiii), Som. There {Mai. 
disitu) : nu', ex. ched nu' {Mai. 
sampai di-situ)= "arrive there," 
Sem. Kedah ; nu', Sem. Buk. Max. 
Thence (Mai. dSrisitu): da-nu', Sem. 
Kedah. Since : nano, Som. ; mgnong 
(mnofi), Sak. Kerb. Thus ; in that 
manner: r§-na', Sak. Plus Cliff. 
[? Cf. Bahnarhan^, "there."] 

(/) This : no'-no', Setiing. Here : 
anu, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; ahnu (ah-nou), 
Sbni. ; anu (anou), Sak. Kerb. ; anh,, 
Sak. Kerb. ; R 84 ; S 222 ; T 51. 
(g) Thence ; from there : ha' chfinin 
(ha' chnn), Sem. Pa. Max. 
(h) There : sana, Sak. Ra. [Mai. 
sana]. 

(?) A certain one : anu', Bes. Sep. 
[Mai. anu]. 
52. That : jih. Sen. Cliff. ; jih, Sen. 
CI. , Sak. Blanj. CI. , Sak. Slim 
CI. ; aji (adschf), Sak. Martin; 
y6 ; S-ji, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; aj6 
e.g. "get up and fetch that man," 
etla dS ha mai aj5, Sak. U. Beii. 
That ; this : adjA, Sak. Pa. This : 
hadja ; hadja, Sak. Pa. His ; her 
{enclitic) : aji, Mant. Bor. There : 
aje, Sak. U. Kam. There : jih ; 
ma'jih, Sen. Cliff, [presumably ma'jih 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

733 

= " thither"]. Over there [Mai. 
disitu) : kfin-jih, Sen. Cliff. ; iptijah, 
Sak. Em. ; {Mai. saWrang sana) : 
makateje, Darat \ [Mai. sabfirang 
situ) : makatiji, Sen. Em. Thither 
[Mai. kasitu ; kasana) : ma'jih, Sen. 
Cliff. Thus ; in that way: bu-ji, 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. Don't do [or 
behave) like that ! gau wi rahaji ! 
Jelai. Hither : ho joe, Bes. Malac. 
You [2.nd p. sing.): ajih, Jak. Malac. 
[Cf. Achin. jeh [jih], "that yonder " ; 
ji, jih, " he."] 

53. That : nangkg (nangke°), Bes. 
Her. ; na-keh, Bes. K. Lang. ; 
nakeh, Bes. Songs ; nake', Bes. Sep. 
A. I. ; (nako), Ben. New. ; kiki, 
Serting. They : hma nangke (hma" 
nangkgn), Bes. Her. ; M 23. He ; 
she : ngki', Bes. Her. ; hangke' 
(hangkel^), Krau Em. He ; she ; 
they: 6ngki? (ankki), Ben. New.; 
gngkike? (ankkiko), i?6'«. New. He: 
ki-ke, e.g. hang ki-ke, "with him," 
Bes. Sep. A. I. ; A 178. His; their: 
gngki punya ( ankki punia ), Ben. 
New. Outwards: hangkeh, Bes. A. I. 
There : niki ; akki, Ben. A-cw. ; ta- 
keh, Bes. L. Lang. ; takeh, Bes. 
Songs ; take, Bes. A. /. Over 
there [Mai. bahk sana) : huki, Bes. 
Sep. Thither : a-kit ; huki' ; hoki, 
e.g. chok huki, "going that way," 
Bes. Sep. A. /. Go [imper.): cho' 
huki, Bes. Malac. This : naki, Ben. 
New. Is it in this way? [Mai. 
baginikah) : badikih-keh, Bes. Sep. 
Thou : engki, Bes. Malac. You : 
keh, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; k6, Kena. /. 
His \or that] : -kiah, Bes. Songs. 

54. That : [a) thui, Ben. New. There : 
tui, Bes. A. I., e.g. mah tui, "people 
over there," Bes. Sep. (?) ; tui, Bes. 
Malac. ; tu-i (dui ; du-i), Son. K. 
Ken. ; ntui (ntoui), S'dm. ; ditii', Sak. 
U. Kam. ; niatih, Serau. Here and 
there (?) : chim matui ; chim matro 
(tchim matoui; tchimniatro), [clearly 
for chip matui, etc.], G 42, Sak. Ra. 
There [thither] : matui (matoui), Sak. 
Kerb. ; matu (watou), Sak. Kerb. ; 
chip matui (tchip-matoui), Soyn. ; G 
42 ; matui, Sak. Kor. Gb. [Is given 
as the equivalent of Mai. s6bab itu, 
but rendered by Ger. aus (out) ; 
qucBre a confusion for sabelah itu = 
"towards that," "over there."] 
[The connection of many of the 
following is very doubtful.] Across 
[Mai. ka sabfirang) : makati' (maka- 
tikh), Serau. Formerly: mat6, Sak. 

Kerb. Gap: nate' (nate'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Intervening space : ViZ.\l\, Sem. 
Pa. Max. Outside : ka'gin nati', 
Sem. Pa. Max. Outside [adv.) : 
ha'ginnati', Sem. Pa. Max. Out- 
side ; to turn out : kinnati', Sem. 
Pa. Max. Sometimes (?) : yateh ? 
( iath ) : Setn. Buk. Max. There : 
ha' teh (ha' tih), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
cho' ba-pgri' teh ( chu bpiri' ti ? ), 
Sern. Buk. Max. [appears to mean 
" go . . (?) . . thither " ]. Over there : 
ha' ti ; ha' tih, Sem. Pa. Max. ; G 
42 ; tui he, Bes. Malac; titab (titb), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Thereupon : yateh 
(iatih), Sem. Bi/k. Max. Thither : 
ha' tih, Sem. Pa. Max. ; diteh, Sak. 
J. Low ; chu menuto' (chu mnutu') : 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; G 42 ; mati' 
(matik), Jelai. They : gntoi, Kena. IL 
Yonder : tapt6i? (dabd6i ; dab-d6i), 
Sem. K. Ken. [Palaung patua 
(patoue), " there."] 
[b) That : itii', Bedu. 11. ; itu', 
Blan. Rem. ; (itu^), Bedu. /. ; 
(itiik). Bed. Chiong ; itu' (ituk), 
Gala?ig; itu (itou), Sak. Ra. ; ito', 
Ment. Her. L [Mai. itu] ; T 85, 86 ; 
W 77. 

Thatch : B 184 ; H 159 ; L 34 ; 
R 164-168. 

Then : A 71 ; D 17 ; D 19 ; T 86. 
Thence : T 51 ; T 86. 
There : D 66 ; G 42 ; R 83 ; T 51- 
54 ; T 86. 

There is : B 87 ; B 95. 
Thereupon: T 51-54. 
They : H 39-45 ; M 26 ; T 51 ; 

T 53. 54- 

55. Thick [Mai. t6bal) : kelpih [pr. 
kel-pih), Se7n. Jar^im ; kelpih [pr. 
kelpih), Sem. Plus ; kglepih (klepih), 
kSlepi (klpe or klepi), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

56. Thick : so-ok, Bes. K. L. 

57. Thick : tSbal (tobal), Sak. Ra., 
Sak. New. Rough : tobal? (dobal), 
Sem. K. Ken. \_Mal. tebal] ; B 205 ; 

H31. 

58. Thick, of liquids : kendal. Pang. 
U. A ling [Mai. kental]. 
Thicket : F 232. 

59. Thick-leaved : rampak, Bes. Songs. 
[-1/(7/. rampak, "spreading."] 

60. Thigh : biat (blut), Pang. J alar; 
beiot? (pglot), Sem. Martin [but he 
gives betis as Mai. equivalent] ; 
baiah, Sem. Beg. ; bala, Ben. New. ; 
bio', Sem. Kedak, Sem. Jarum, Sem. 
Plus, Pang. U. A ring, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. ; bglu', Pang. Gal. ;. 

734 

CO MP A RA TIVE VOCA B ULA RY OF 

bfiluh ; beio, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; b61u 
(Mou), Sak. Ra. ; b61o' orh\o' (blu'), 
Sem. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
b616 (Mo), Som., Sak. Kerb. ; bio, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; bio, Som. ; bleu ; 
bio, Bes. Malac. \ blok" ; blok", 
Tembi. Buttocks : bSl5k, Tembi. 
Thigh ; upper leg : bl66 [ur blau ?] 
keting (blowe {and blowe') keting), 
Setn. Siev. ; C 6. Upper part of 
thigh : ble, Setn. K. Ken. ; {Mai. 
pangkal paha) : plngkal b61o' (pngkl 
blu'), Setn. Pa. Max.; T 223. To 
nurse (in one's lap) : makat bglo' 
ye' (makt blu' ii'), Setn. Biik. Max. 
iKhmer phlou [bhlau] ; Stieng, Bah- 
iiar blu ; Kasetig blii ; Sui lu ; 
Halang, Sedang blu ; Boloven plu ; 
Central Nicobar pulS. ; Kurku bulu, 
"thigh"; Khintis mphlu (mphlou) ; 
Z.e;«e/chelu(chelou); Boloven, Kon Tu 
plau ; Sid\\i.\ Sedatzg pih, "leg."] 
-61. Thigh : Igmpao ; 16mpaw, Sak. U. 
Kain. ; lempah, Tan. U. Lang. ; 
Igmpa (lompa), Sak. Ra. ; lempah, 
Darat ; lempak, Serau ; lempak", 
Jelai ; Igmpa? (lemba), Sak. Martin. 
[But the Malay equivalent annexed 
to this last is betis. ] Buttocks {Mai. 
punggong) : lempah, Tettibi. Lower 
part of leg {Mai. betis) : lem-par, 
Sen. Cliff. 

62. Thigh : sapat (sapet), Kena. I. 
[? = T6i]. 

63. Thigh : pu-ak°, Sen. Cliff. ; paha, 
Mantr. Malac, Jak. Malac. [Mai. 
paha]. 

64. Thigh : deriot, Ben. Neiu.; C 4, 5 ; 
F 220. 

Thigh-joint : B 336 ; L 127. 

65. Thin {Mai. kurus) : hamad, Patig. 
U. A ring; ha'-mat, Lebir ; wat, U. 
Tetti. ; oimanak°, Tettibi. 

66. Thin : kin-cher {pr. kinn-charr), 
Sem. Jarum, Setn. Plus [? cf. T 71]. 

67. Thin : yakoh (? = ya-k6h). Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. [? Cf. Bahnar 
hake (hak6) ; Halang rke, " thin."] 

68. Thin : sok". Sen. Cliff. ; sookn, 
Serau ; isok", Darat ; sSt^, Jelai. 

69. Thin : tfimpong (tmpung), Setn. Pa. 
Max. 

70. Thin: kayus? (koius?), Setn. Buk. 
Max. Consumption; atrophy: ku}ais 
(kuius), Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. kurus, 
" thin."] 

71. TiiiN {Mai. nipis) : hgteh (htih or 
hstih ?), Setn. Buk. Max. ; hetc (/;-. 
heta), Sem. Jarutn, Sem. Plus; 
tsei ; tshe'i or chef, Bes. K. L. ; z6. 
Sen. Cliff. ; ns61, Sak. Ra. 

72. Thin : jit ; jet, Bes. Sep. A. I. 

73. Thin : paheng? (p^hen), Sak. Kerb. 

74. Thin : lipis, Sotn. Thin ; smooth : 
lipfs (lippfs), Sem. K. Ken. [Mai. 
nipis] ; U 182 ; F 105 ; S 280 ; S 
282 ; S 284 ; Y 40. 

75. Thing: e-ta', Sak. Plus Cliff. 

76. Think, to {Mai. pikir) : ya bod-lod. 
Pang. Satti, Patig. Gal. ; bodlad ; 
bod-lad, Setn. K. Keti. 

77. Think, to ; to believe : pikir, Som.; 
Sak. Ra. , Sak. Kerb. , Serau, Krau 
Em. ; p6k6r, Sak. Ra. [Mai. Ar. 
pikir]. 

78. Think, to : {a) ya-ko' (doubtful), 
Pang. U. Aring. 

{b) To think ; thought ; to reckon : 
sangka' (sngka'), Setn. Buk. Max. 
[Mai. sangka]. 

79. Think, to ; to estimate ; to reckon : 
aga' (aga'), Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. 
agak]; F 58. 

To think of : C 16 ; R 67. 

80. Thirst : chekat, Jak. Ba. Pa. 

81. THIR.ST : leilo, Jak. Sitn. To thirst : 
bilo, Patit. Kap. Log. 

82. Thirst : thirsty : haus, Sem. Pa. 
Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. To thirst : 
haus, Pant. Kap. Her. [Mai. haus]. 

83. Thirsty : tgraga' (tgrigak), Mantr. 
Malac. {Mai. dahaga] ; T 82. 
Thirteen : E 55. 

84. Thirty : chili-ang, Sak. Sel. Da. 
[Very doubtful and probably fictitious 
word.] T 45. 

85. This {Mai. ini) : oh {pr. ohh), ex. 
aneg oh, " this child," Setn. Kedah ; 
C106; nyu-uh {pr. nyu-uhh; ? = here), 
Setn. Kedah; nyo (iio), e.g. "this is 
gold, this is silver," iio mas, no yingit 
(jingit), Sctti. K. Ken.; hS, Bes. Sep. 
A. L ; iho' ? (Ihok), Kena. L ; naho, 
Ben. New. ; na-h&, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
na-hoh, Bes. K. Lang.; nahii(nahu"), 
Bes. Her. That {adj. ) : hoh, Bes. 
K. Lang. ; nga hk, Bes. Malac. ; 
hA ; nahS, Bes. Songs ; hong, Kena. 
/. Hence {Mai. derisini) : dai-6h {or 
dai-ohh), Sem. Plus. Here {Mai. 
disini) : hara-lihh. Pang. Belimb. ; 
nahah ; nahli', Bes. Sep. ; niho' ? 
(nihok), Ben. New. ; ta-hoh, Bes. K. 
Lang. ; nano ; nano", Sem. K. Ken. ; 
G 43. Hither {Mai. kamari) : ba- 
oh {pr. ba'obh), ex. dih ba-oh or oi 
ba-oh, " come hither," Sem. Jarutn ; 
ba-6h {pr. ba -bhh), ex. deh ba-oh 
or oi ba-oh, "come hither," Setn. 
Plus ; G 43 ; ho'an ? or hon ? 
(hu'n), Setn. Pa. Max. Come 
hither : de ba ijh {pr. ba'ohh), 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

735 

Sem. Jaruni ; C 221A. So : haa (ha-a), 
Sent. K. Ken. 'I'hus {Mai. bagini) : 
ma-oh [pr. ma-iJhh), Sem. Kedah ; 
pen-oh \pr. pen-ohh), Sem. Plus; 
pan - hek or pan-6h, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. Too ; also [Mai. pula) : 
hoh, Bes. K. Lang. How much 
more : naho koh, Bes. K. Lang. 
[BaAnar 4 (6) ; Stieng ou ; kw (au), 
"this."] 
86. This : (a) tah, Sem. Kedah ; tah ortSh 
(between tah and tSh), Sem. Plus ; 
tdn ; ta', Sem,. J arum. He : ta' 
(tak), Sem. Craw. Hist., Sem. Craw. 
Gram. , Sem. Klapr. , Sem. Ked. 
New. She : ta' (tak), Sem. Ked. New. 
Here {Mai. disini) : kgtah, Sem. 
Kedah ; ketoh (pr. kfit-ohh), Sem. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus, 
{b) This: tek or te'. Pa?ig. U. 
A ring; teh, Sak. Lbigk. ; i, N.Q. 
103. To-day: nat^, Som., Sak. Br. 
Low, Sak. Croix. You : te, Jak. 
Stev. Thou {■znd p. s.) : t6i, Sak. 
Tap; P 176. Here (or from here) : 
pat^? (pa-tg), Sak. Martin.^ There 
(or from there) : at6? (a-t6), Sak. 
Martin ; see also T 54. 
(c) This: dek, ex. mai-o-dek? (///. 
Mai. apa dia ini ?), ' ' what is this ? " 
Pang. Belimb. ; dek, Pang. K. 
Aring, Pang. U. A ring; tudeh, 
Sem. Craw. Hist. , Sem. Craw. 
Gram., Sem. Ked. New. ; (toudeh), 
Sem. Klapr.; tQ-dgh (? = there), Sefn. 
Kedah ; a-d§, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; 
ada (ade), e.g. teh ada (t^h ade), 
"this country," E 12, Sak. Ra. ; 
ade, Sak. Martial. This ; here : 
ado, e.g. negri ado (nogri ado), "this 
country," Sak. Ra. This is it ! 
ladih, Sen. Em. Here : d6, Sak. 
Ra. ; deh (dih), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
dih. Sen. CI. ; bad^ (bade), Sak. 
Ra. ; badeh (badih), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; dih ; pft-dih ; ma' dih, Sen. 
Cliff. ; madih, Serau ; made, Sak. 
U. Kam. Hither : badeh, Sak. J. 
Low ; madi' (madik), Jelai. Hither 
or here {Mai. kamari) : kadek. 
Pang. K. Aring. Hither {Mai. 
kamari) : ba-dih, ex. ched ba - 
dih {Mai. sampai kamari) — 
"arrive here or hither," Sem. Jarum ; 
ba - de. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
ba-doi {or bad-oi) ; ba-dui', ex. chop 
ba.-dui = " come hither," Pang. U. 
Aring; ma'dih, Sen. Cliff.; dubadei, 
Se7n. Buk. Max. ; R 83 ; W 78. 
To arrive : da badi, Sem. Buk. Max. 
To come: badih, Sem. Klapr.; ndi. 

Sak. Sung. Come : maddi, Serau. 
Come, young man ! yob {or nyam) 
ben madi, Darat. Hence ; from 
here : ha'deh (ha'dih), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; ueh badi (auih badi), Sc7n. 
Buk. Max. Thence ; from there : 
ue' badeh (aui' badih), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Whence ; from where : ue' 
badeh (aui' badih), Sem. Buk. Max. 
So ; thus : taleh, Sak. J. Lmv. 
Thus {Mai. bagini) : pan-dek. Pang. 
U. A ring. Thus ; in this way : 
hau-mg-gi-4-de [perhaps to be read 
han mggi ade], Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
Not yet ; now : nadeh (nadih), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Then ; until : chub 
nadeh (chub nadih), Setn. Buk. Max. ; 
G 42. There: madi' (madikh), Sak. 
Em. [but cf. T 54]. Up-country ; 
upstream {Mai. ulu) : pedih, Krai/. 
Em. [So given, but clearlj' in error ; 
it means "here"; cf. W 77.] 
When {i nterrog.) : hanadeh (hana- 
dih), Sem. Buk. Max. 
{d) This : do, Som. , Sak. Kerb. , 
e.g. " this country," tah do (teh do), 
Som. , Sak. Kerb. ; nado, Sak. Korb. 
Lias; nadoh ? (nadoch), Sak. Kor. 
Gb. That :' endoh, Jak. Mad. ; 
'ndoh, Jak. Sim. Here : doh, Tetn. 
CI. Hither : mado, Sak. Korb. 
Lias. To approach : madoh, Sak. 
Kerb. There : do, Sak. Ra. Thus ; 
in this way : i-do', Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
H44[?cf. G31]. 

87. This : 'ng, Sem. Stev. ; meng, Bes. 
Malac. 

88. Hitherwards {Mai. balik sini) : wet 
ba-kau (doubtful), P<ing. U. Aring; 
R83[? = T9o]. 

89. This: nin, Kena. //. , Bed. Chiong, 
Bedu. L , Bedu. //. , Elan. Rem. , 
Ment. Her. /., Ment. Her. IL, 
Alantr. Malac; ngnin {nnm), Ment. 
Stev. Here : nin, Mantr. Malac. ; 
nl (nee), Belend. Stev. ; (nie), Jak. 
Stev. ; d6ni, Jak. Malac. ; R 84 ; S 
439 ; sinin, Ment. Her. //, ; si\A, 
Som. ; sini, Jak. Mad. Hither : 
sini, Jak. Mad. [Mai. sini, "here," 
"hither"; cf. Minangk. Mai. inin, 
sinin (given, but not explained, in 
V. d. Toorn's Dictionary).] 

90. This ; come : kia, Jak. Semb. ; kiah, 
Jak. Mad. , Jak. Sim. , Jak. Ba. Pa. ; 
kian, /fl/J. l^m. ; kian, Pant.Kap. Joh. ; 
kiyan, Barok; ka-kian, Galang; kiani, 
Jak. Malac. ; tyian, Mantr. Malac. 
Come ; come here (hither) : chan, 
Belandas Skeat ; kiyan. Or. Laui ; 
chan or chyan. Bland. K. Lang. ; 

736 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

chan datang hinin, Mantra. Malac. 
Nya. ; C 225 ; T 89. Here : kS-eng, 
Jak. Scmhr. ; chian, Merit. Her. I. ; 
thiang, Mantr. Cast. Hither : chan 
or chyan, Bland. K. Lang. ; chian, 
Mantr. Malac. ; G 43 ; kiani, Jak. 
Malac. ; ke-gng, Jak. Sembr. Stop : 
chan, Bedu. II. 

91. This : timi, Ben. New. 

92. This : yak, Jak. Mad. ; jak, Jak. 
Lem. 

93. This : ika' (ikak), Galang; H 45 ; 
N 113. \^Minangk. Mai. ik6, 
"this."] T 51-53. 

Thither : G 42 ; G 47 ; T 51-54- 

94. Thorn {Mai. duri) : {a) hill', Sem. 
Kedah; ile' (aih'), Sem. Bi/k. Max. 
je-li, Lebir; jele' (jli'), Sem. Pa 
Max.; kela? orjela? (gela), Sem. K 
Ken. ; jer-la', Krau Tern. ; jer-lah 
U. Cher. ; jer-lar, U. Tern. ; j6r-lak 
Krau Ket. ; jgrlak, Serau ; (jerlak) 
Sak. P.m. ; jer-lak". Sen. Cliff. 
(tSr-lak" \^sic : probably a misprint]) 
Sen. CI. ; jalak, Tembi ; jgrjer 
lAk, Sak. Em. ; B 21 ; B 143 
Bristle (or quill, as of a porcupine = 
Mai. duri), (they are believed to be 
tipped, like blow-gun darts, with black 
upas poison, and the porcupine is 
believed to shoot them when pro- 
voked) : jeleg ; jSlik, Sem. Ja7-um ; 
keieg, ex. keleg landeg, " porcupine's 
quill," Sem. Kedah; klag - lanag, 
Sem. K. Ken. Caltrop {Mai. sudar): 
jehlah, Sak. Jer. Onak (whip-end 
of growing rattans) : j61i' sung (//-. 
suSng) = J/<7/. duri ujong {lit.), ex. 
kaned, wong, boo, jeli' sung = trans. 
of Mai. proverb kgchil anak bfesar 
onak, i.e. "when small, a child, 
when grown up, a scourge," Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; ? R 37 or E 63. 
[Man jala ; Bahnar jola; Khmer 
banla [pdnla], "thorn" ; Alak jeli, 
"needle"; Stieng krola, "thorny 
bamboo" ; ? cf. Stieng, Chrau lok, 
" thorn."] 

{b) Thorn : nSniar (n'niar). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. 

95. Thokn : bu-chet, Kerbat. Quills of 
a porcupine : chinching lantdh, Sem. 
Plus ; pa'chor. Sen. Cliff. {Stieng 
chor, " porcupine's quill" ; ? cf. Bah- 
nar gushor (goxor), " porcupine."] 
Thou: H 180; T 52, 53; T 86; 
Y 32-38. 

Thought : T 78. 

96. Thread (.!/(//. bcnang): sip, Bes. Sep. 
96A. TiiKKAU : benang, Tembi [.!/«/. 

bC-nang]. 

97. Three : wil-ip, Sem. Scott. 

98. Thrke : diu, U. Pat. [Both words 
doubtful.] 

99. Three : no (n6), Po-Klo ; na (ne), 
Sak. Ra., Sak. Korb. Lias; ne', 
Tem. CI. ; r\€, Som. , Sak. Croix, 
Sak. Br. Low ; ne (sharp) ; neh, 
Sak. Br. Low ; ng, Sen. CI. ; ne, 
Sem. K. Ken., Sak. Plus, 4 N.Q. 
102 ; ne' (nek), Serati ; ni, Tembi ; 
ni', Sak. U'. Bert.; ni, Sak. U. 
Kam., Sak. J. Low, Sak. Martin ; 
ni, Sak. Kerb. ; nir, Sak. Tap. ; 
nina, Sak. Chen., Sak. Sung. ; H 
167 ; T 45. The third {Mai. yang 
katiga) : ne' (ne^), Serau. Three 
houses : ni' dgnii' duk, Sak. U. Bert. 
We three : ai-n^a, Sem. K. Ken. 
Five : ne, Sem. Stev. [No doubt a 
mistake, it must mean " three."] 
[See pp. 458, 459, supra.\ 

100. Three : empong, Sem. Plus ; pat, 
Sem. Sadang ; 6m-pet, U. Tem. ; 
gm-pe', U. Cher.; hgmpa"? (hmpek), 
Serting; gmpe' (empgk), Bes. Her.; 
ampeh, Sak. Sel. Da. ; 'mpe', Bes. 
Sep. A. I. ; 'mpe (npe,) Pal., U. 
Ind. ; 'mpi, Bes. Malac. ; gmpi 
(impee), I3ers. Stev. ; (ampi), Ben. 
Nero. ; be'? (bgk), Kena. I. [Mon 
pi ; Khmer bey [piy] ; Bahnar 
peng ; Stieng pei ; Alak pei ; 
Boloven, H atari g, Sedang pa ; 
Niahon, Lave pe ; Ka, Chong peh ; 
Prou, Phnong pe ; Kaseng ba ; 
Kon Tuhe; Tarenghk, "three."] 

loi. Three: tigai, Pang. Belimb. ; tigo' 
(tigeuk), Galang; tigah, Sem. Ij. ; 
tiga, Sem. U. Sel., Sem. Per.; tfga, 
Sak. Jer. ; tiga, Sak. Br. Low, Sak. 
Gi/ai, Mantr. Malac. , Jak. Malac. , 
Sem. Cra7v. Gram. \AIal. tiga]. 
Three-cornered : C 245. 

102. Throat", {a) Ifikhum (Ikhum), Sem. 
Bi/k. Max. [Mai. Ar. holkum. 
lekum. ] 

{b) Larynx : lohong (luhung). Sen?. 
B//k. Max. Apple of throat {Mai. 
lekum) : lahong, Sem. Kedah ; 
uvula {Mai. anak tgkak) : lahong 
or lahong, Sem. Kedah. [Kaseng 
halong, "neck," klong, "throat"; 
Z>(z//«(7rhal6ng, "throat."] 
Throat : N 23 ; N 26-28. 

103. Through ; tins, Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
dCtius ? (dtius), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
doiiit-telus, Sem. K. Ken. Through; 
to pierce through : tius, Sem: Pa. 
Max. , Sem. Buk. .Max. Channel ; 
canal ; cutting : teus (teius), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [Mai. terus]. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

737 

104. Thkough ; to pierce through : 
pulau (puhlu), Sem. Buk. Alax. 

105. Throw to (?) : lunjan, ex. ma- 
lunjan kleng gin kiadah, " (I want) 
to throw (it) among the maidens," 
Sem. Kedah. 

106. Throw, to [Mai. champak) : ya- 
aloi, Pang. U. A>-ing; loi ; ma-loi, 
e.g. yeh ma-loi mahum (mahoom) 
pe met katop, "I throw blood up 
to the sun" (a magic fornmla 
accompanying the action described), 
Sem. Slev. ; I i ; B 249 ; D 33. 
To throw away [Mai. buang): ya-loi 
(=ya-aloi), Pang. U. A ring, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; lueh (luih), Sem. 
Pa. Alax. To hurl up : ma' luih 
(ma' luih), Sem. Buk. Max. [?=P 

205]- 
T07. Throw, to : huib, Se?n. Buk. 
Max, ; kawen, ex. kawen kayel, 
" to angle," Bes. A'. L. To throw 
away : w©h. Sen. CI. ; weh, Jak. 
Malac. ; e.g. ' ' throw it away over 
there," weh 'ng kiuh, lai. Malac. ; 
mahuet (mhuit), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
kawin, Bes. A. /. To throw away ; 
to remove : huib, Setn. Buk. Max. 
Thrown away : kawin, Bes. K. 
Lang. To throw ; to hurl : iun 
(aiun), Sem. Pa. Max.; ma-iun ? 
(miun), Sem. Buk. Max. ; W 29. 
\Halang kaveng, kaveii, " to 
throw"; Khmer kreweng [krft- 
weng], "to throw away"; Mon 
weng pai [weng paai], " to reject."] 

108. Throw, to: (a) ya-mabih?(imabih 
or iamabih), Sem. Buk. Max. To 
throw away : bos (bers), Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. [Achin. bos, ' ' to 
throw away."] 

(b) To throw : pig, Sak. Kerb. To 
hurl ; to rush : pio' (piuk), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

109. Throw, to [Mai. lempar ) : rem- 
bok, Sen. Cliff. 

no. Throw, to: pangka (paii-k&). 
Sum. To throw ; to hurl : pongkal 
(pungkl), Sem. Buk. Max. To 
cast away ( Mai. buang ) : ya- 
pangka', Pang. Satn, Pang. Gal. 

111. Throw, to: bedal (bdal), Se?n. 
Pa. Max. 

112. Throw, to: gash, Sak. Ra. To 
throw away : gas, Sak. Lengk. , 
4 N. Q. 103; gas, Tern. CI., 
Sak. Blanj. CI., Sak. Slim, 
Serau. To throw far away : gas 
ennya' (gas ennyak), lelai. To 
break [Mai. patah) : gash (gasch), 
Sak. Ra. To break [trans.]: tegot, 

VOL. II 

Bes. A. I. Snapped : tfigot, Bes. 

Songs [but of. F 20]. 

To throw : F 21. 

To throw away : F 21 ; R 60. 

113. Throw away, to; to remove; 
kuang, Sem. Pa. Max. To hurl 
down {Mai. 6mpas [for hCmpas]) : 
machung (mchung), Sem. Buk. Max. 

114. Throw down, to: champak 
pfikil, Bes. Songs. \Mal. champak, 
" to throw away. "] 

Thrust, to : P 242. 

115. Thud, with a: perteng, Bes. Songs. 
With a resounding thud : denting- 
denting, Bes. Songs. 

Thumb: E 42 ; F 109, no; 
H 14, 15 ; M 192. 

116. Thunder: karei (kharei), Sam. ; 
ka-re, Sem. /arum, Sem. Plus ; 
kare [pr. karey), Sem. Plus ; kare, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; ka-ye, 
Sem. Kedah. ; kahe [in the MS. 
originally kahey], Sem. U. Sel. ; 
kaeh (kaih), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
kai, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. lur. 
New. , Sem. Jur. Rob. Thunder ; 
god (of the Pangan) : kaii (kiee), 
Sem. Stev. Sky : kar6, U. Pat. \ 
(kte), U. Kel. ; kael, Sem. Craw. 
Hist. , Sem. Ked. New. ; kail ; 
kael, Sem. Klapr. ; gglal (glarl), 
Lebir. [? Connection of this. ] [? Cf. 
Bah n ar g\a.\h = Pr. foudre. "] 

117. Thunder : tinjum (//-. tin-ju^'m), 
Sem. Kedah ; lemgum [pr. lemm- 
gumm), Sem. Plus. 

118. Thunder: engku, Sak. Br. Low; 
(enekou), Sak. Croix; 'ngkuh, Sak. 
U. Kam. , Sak. U. Bert. ; engku 
(6nkCi), Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; (unku), 
Tan. U. Lang. ; (nugka) [probably 
the original ^J.S. had ungku], Sak. 
Chen. ; endro ungku, Darat. To 
thunder {Mai. berguroh) : engkup, 
Se?-an. Noise of thunder {Mai. 
bunyi gah, guroh) : rah ungkup, 
Serau ; N 91. 

I iSa. Thunder : tagar, Rasa. [Mai. 
tagar, "thunderclap"; ? cf. (more 
remotely) Khmer phkor [phgar] ; 
Mun thako [dhaguiw], " thunder."] 

119. Thunder: kgrgntah, Kena. IL, 
Serting, Bed. Chiang; gSrentah, 
Bedu. IL ; (geruntah), Sak. Sel. 
Da. ; gantar, Ben. New. Thunder- 
bolt : gentah, Bes. A. L Thunder- 
clap {Mai. pgtir) : gerentah, Bedu. L 
[Cf. Mai. guntur, "thunder.] 

t2o. Thunder : {a) garoi^ng, Bes. 
A. /. ; garong, Bes. K. L. To 
thunder : garong, Bes. K. L. [? Cf. 

3 B 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Cham groni ; Braou grem ; Radaik 
gram; ^a/i«ar grom(gram); Kaseng 
kriim, " thunder " ; Halang groni ; 
Jarai grom ; Boloven brao krom ; 
Niahon lii kriim ; Alak brah kriim ; 
Lave kriim kre, = Fr. ' ' foudre. "] 
(6) Thunder : gurhoh ( gukhoh ), 
Ba7vk \ guroh, Bes. Malac, Jak. 
Malac. [J/a/. guroh ; this and 
T 119 may conceivably be variants, 
on quasi-Krama principles, of one 
word. ] 

121. Thunder : sSpeter? (subtair), Bc7i. 
New. ; pateh, Jak. Ba. Pa. [.I/a/. 
petir]. 

122. Thunder: abu, Ke?ia. I. ; F 124; 
G 130 ; N 92. 

^Thunderbolt : S 465 ; T 119. 
[Thunderclap: T T19. 
■ Thus: T 51-53; T 85, 86. 
iTibia : A 133 ; B 339. 

123. Tick: amait, Bes. A. I. 

124. Tickle, to? [the Malay equivalent 
given is kh (for gfili, which has two 
meanings, "aversion" and "to 
tickle")]: bej (bij), Sem. Biik. 
Max. ; bewed (biuid), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Itch {Mai. kudis) : behid", 
Tembi. Itching {Mai. gatal) : 
behefi, Tembi. To itch and wish 
to scratch oneself : gatad behe ; em 
gi behet \or behet°], Sevan. 

125. Tickle, to: ngeri, Mantr. Malac. 
\_Mal. ggli]. 

126. Tickle, to: ketek, Mantr. Malac. 
Ticklish : H 181. 

127. Tide: ayus (aius), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Tide ; flow of the tide : tali ajois 
(tali aius), Sem. Buk. Max.; R 183 
YMal. harus] ; W 27. 

Ebb-tide : W 30. 
Flood-tide : F 179 ; W 30. 
Turn of the tide : S 476. 
Tie, to : B 213, 214. 

128. Tiger {Mai. rimau) : ong, ex. na ye 
leau ka-ong {Mai. mak sahya habis 
de' rimau), "my mother was eaten 
up by a tiger," Sem. Kedah ; ogn, 
U. Pat. ; aum ? (oum), Ben. 
New. ; o, U. Kel. ; o', Kerbat ; 

K31. 

129. Tiger : {a) nyah. Pang. A. Anng; 
nyah {pr. nyahh) or yah, Pang. U. 
Aring; nya', Lebir \ iya ( ija ), 
U. Kel. ; T 51. Tiger-cat {Mai. 
rimau akar) nyah awe, Pang. U. 
Aring. Leopard or panther {Mai. 
rimau kumbang ) : nyah bcltek. 
Pang. U. Aring; B 233. 

{b\ Tiger: j3-'-&'j jo'6', Pang. 
Delimb. ; jo' ? (tscho), Sak. Martin ; 

juho' (djou-h6k), Som. [? cf. Chrau 
jau]. 

(c) Tiger : chiai, Sem. Jur. And., 
Sem. Jur. New. , Sem,. Jur. Rob. 
[A misprint for the following ?] 
{d) Tiger : chinnih, Sem. Beg., Ben. 
New. ; ch6ne' (chni ' ), .Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
jena'?orj6na'? (jn'), Sevi.Buk.Max. ; 
S 310 ; (spec. Mai. rimau balar) : 
jena' pahong (jn' phung), .SV/«. Pa. 
Max. ; (spec. Mai. rimau daun 
pinang) : jgni' hSle' pfining (jn' 
hli' pnng), Sem. Pa. Alax. Wild 
cat (spec. Mai. rimau akar), j6na' 
lataik (jn' lataik), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
( spec. Mai. rimau tSrengkasoh ) : 
jena' trengkasoh (jn' trngkasu), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Leopard (spec. 
Mai. rimau bintang) : jSna' puloeh 
(jnng puluih), Sein. Pa. Max. ; 
(spec. Mai. rimau tSlap) : jena' bglu 
(jn' blu), Sem. Pa. Max. Black 
leopard ; black panther : jena' 
b6tong (jn' btung), Sem. Pa. Max., 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; B 233. [It is 
possible that j- should be read ch- 
throughout ; the MS. often omits 
dots in the Arabic character.] 
{e) Tiger : meje ( medje ), Bland. 
K. Lang. ; mejeh, Mantr. Malac. 
Nya. Small tiger : maja (m^je), 
Bedu. IL; (spec. Mai. rimau akar): 
majii (meje), Kena. I. 
{/) Tiger: diagign. Or. Hu. Joh. I.; 
(djagign). Pal. 
{g) Tiger : tiasma, U. Ind. 
{h) Tiger : jerok! ? (jerokee), Jak. 
Ba. Pa. 

(/') Tiger-cat {Mai. rimau akar): 
yod {pr. yodd), Sem. Plus. 
(J) Tiger-cat {Mai. rimau akar) : 
chang-wod (/;•. chang-wodd), Sem. 
Kedah. 

{k) Tiger-cat : chantel, Bedu. //. 
Wild cat : chakul, Jak. Malac. ; 
(spec. Mai. rimau akar) : chantel, 
Bedu. /. Tiger-cat: sed6t, Kena. /. 
130. Tiger: («) taio', ex. na' ye yag taio' 
{Mai. mak sahya di-makan rimau), 
"my mother was devoured by a 
tiger," Se7n. Kedah; taiyo, Sein. 
Craw. Hist., Sem. Ked. And., 
Se?n. Ked. New. , Sefn. Ked. Rob. ; 
(taiyo), Sem. Klapr. ; (tiyo), Sem. 
Stev. ; tayo' (taiu'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; tayuh (tayouh) Sem. Klapr. 
Black leopard ; black panther : tayo' 
betong (taiu' btung), Sem. . Buk. 
Max. ; B 233. Wild cat : tahom 
(ta-hurm), Sem. Stev. 
{b) Tiger : puteau ; puteau, Sem. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

739 

Kedah ; put6au [pr. put^ao), Sem. 
Plus \ p6t6u(?), Sem. J arum; pato, 
U. Kel. 

131. Tiger : baling, Sem. Kedah, Sem. 
Phis, Patig. Belimb. ; bal(5?ng 
(bal^g'n), Sem. K. Ken. ; malon , 
U. Pat. ; nialap, Ben. New. ; 
blang-naman, /(//'. Malac. ; cf. V 4. 
Panther : marut, Kena. I. 

132. Tiger : gai-it, U. Tern. ; rak", 
Sen. CI. ; rak, Sen. Cliff. ; raak, 
Tan. U. Lang. ; raak", Jelai ; 
raak, Tembi, Darat ; raag, Seraic 
[or TembiT\ ; mCnahar raag, Serau, 
Sak. Em. ; a'-a' ; ra-a, Bes. Sep. 
A. I. ; a-a (i-a"), Bes. Her. ; 
a-a', Blan. Rem. ; fia, Bes. Malac. 
Panther; graak, Sak. Tap. Tiger- 
cat (Mai. rimau akar) ; graak, 
Tembi ; raak ar, Jelai ; a-a chiogn, 
Bes. Her. ; R 37 [perhaps — O 19 ; cf. 
T137]. [?Cf. Tarengrhok, "tiger."] 

133. Tiger: (a) kemon (kmon'), [/. Kel. 
{b) Tiger : koh6fi, Kena. II. , Jak. 
Malac. ; kohangan, Ben. Nezv. ; 
kohang ( kokang ), Jok. Kaff; 
kahoing, Jok. Raff. As. ; kahon 
(kahone), Ben. New. Bear: kahun, 
Ke?ia. I. [The proper pronuncia- 
tion in its fullest form is probably 
kohongfi ] ; [? cf. T 128]. 

(<:) Tiger : po-clong, Bern ; podagn 
(podog"), Serfi?ig\ pod6gn, e.g. 
proverbial curse : cha' pod6gD, 
" may you be eaten by a tiger ! " 
Semilai coll. Nya. Tiger - cat : 
poddgn, Seiiing. 

(rf) Tiger: gelom, Bland. K. Lang.: 
nongkom, Bland. K. Lang. Royal 
tiger: mengkSlom, Bedu. II. Black 
tiger : mengkolom, Bed. Chiong. 
{e) Tiger: toman, Pant. Kap. Joh.; 
tumang, Pa?it. Kap. Her. \_La- 
7oangan timang, "tiger."] 

134. Tiger : wep ? (wep (nasal)), U. 
Cher. [? = T 137]. 

135. Tiger: kla', Krau Ket., Krau 
Tern. ; kra', Sak. Guai. Wild cat: 
kglara, Mantr. Malac. [Mon, 
Bahnar, Sedang kla ; Khmer khla ; 
Kasefig kli, klk ; Su6 kala ; Halang 
klia ; Boloven kloa ; Stietig kiah ; 
Cuoi kola (cola) ; Proii klo (clo) ; 
Braou klou ; Santhal kula ; Blunnij 
kula ; Sinbhum Kol garum kiila ; 
Mundala kiilah, " tiger."] 

136. Tiger : [a] ongkuh, Ment. Her. 
II. ; menahar kenkub, Serau. 

[b] Tiger : mfinahar ngentat, Sak. 
Em. ; mSnahar ngentat, Serau. 
{c) Tiger : ompot. Rasa. 

137. Tiger : duSm, Bland. K. Lang. ; 
tueh, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; tuc, lies. 
Malac. [? Mai. tuan, "master," or 
tua, " the old one." Most of these 
tiger names appear to be merely 
honorifics. ] 

138. Tiger (Bengal): muel (mue"l), 
Bed. Chiong. 

139. Tiger : nianus, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
ma'-nu, Tern. CI. ; manu(?), Bes. 
Sep. ; mamog" ; mamoki*, Tembi ; 
mamuk, Sak. Tap. ; niamii(mamou), 
Sak. Kerb. ; mamu (mamou), 
Sak. Ra. W'ild beast : mamu 
(mamou), Sak. Kerb. [? cf. Selung 
panu (pannoo) ; pnuk, "tiger."] 

140. Tiger (royal) : [a] ramas, Kcfia. I. 
Tiger: imed, Se?n. Kedah; sTlimma 
(silimma). Pant. Kap. Log. 

(b) Tiger : harimau, Mantr. Malac. ; 
rimau, Ment. Her. I. ; rhimau 
(khimau), Barak. Small tiger : 
rimau kumbang Bedu. II. Tiger 
(of the size of a cat) : rimau rumput, 
Bedu. II. ; (of the size of a dog) : 
rimau akar, Bedu. II. ; (of the size 
of a goat) : rimau sgnang, Bedu. 
II. \_.\Ial. rimau, harimau, " tiger"]; 
B 118. 

Tiger-cat: T 129-133; T 135; 
T 140. 

' ' Tiger's - j ackal " bird, cry of : 
P 80. 
Timber : T 207 ; T 210, 211. 

141. Tin: supat, Sem. U. Sel. [? Cf. 
A7//«£fr spean [sban], "copper."] 

142. Tin : tech, Sak. Sel. Da. [? Cf. 
Khmer dek [tek], " iron. "] 

143. Tin : tim^h, Barok ; tima, Sihn. , 
Sak. Kerb. , Sak. Ra. , Sak. Croix ; 
timah, Sak. U. Kam., Sak. Blanj. 
Sw., Serau ; timah? (timesh?), Sak. 
Br. Low ; timah-biji, Sem. Per. [as 
the black o.xide, in granular form] ; 
tima putih, Sak. Kur. Gb. [as the 
metal], [J/a/. timah] ; S 89 ; S 210 ; 
.S 466 ; W 10 1. 

144. Tinder, for striking fire [Mai. rabok 
tukas) : pa-sul (//-. pa-suU), Sem. 
Kedah. Tobacco-cutting appliance : 
pasdng (passorng); pasun (passoon), 
Sent. Stcv. 

Tines (of deer) : B 351. 
Tip : E 65 ; N 98. 

145. Tired: gahal, Sem. K. R'en. ; 
gg-hel, Tei}t. CI., Sen. CI. Weak: 
gg-hel, .Sen. Cliff. Weak or feeble : 
ggha or gShe, Pang. Belimb. ; gehel, 
Serau. Tired from walking : kilhil 
jibjup, Sak. Em. To sit, being 
tired : gehel gigei, Darat [see E 

74° 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

2i]. [? Cf. Khmer khchil [khjil], 
"lazy."] 

146. Tired : kerok, Seiii/ig; kSn6ng, 
Ketia. I. 

147. Tired : kabo, /ak. Ba. Pa. ; 
kaboh, Jak. Sim. ; kabo, Pant. 
Kap. Log. Feeble : kebok, Jak. 
Mad. Slow [adj., adv.): kebo- 
kebo, Jak. Malac. 

148. Tired : litak, Bedu. II. Weak : 
leteh, Jelai ; letteh, Ben. A'eiv. 
[Mai. leteh]. 

149. Tired : pened, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal.; penat (penart), Mcntr. Stev.; 
penat, Jelai [Mai. penat]. 

150. Tired; fatigued {Mai. penat): 
hum, Pang. U. A ring. 

151. Tired ; fatigued : jan ; jayn, Bcs. 
A. I. Weary : jan, Bes. Songs ; 
L 31 ; S 189. 

To : A 6 ; A 178 ; O 26 ; C 219. 

To the ground : E 12. 

To the top : A 8. 

Toad : C 72 - 74 ; F 268 ; F 270, 

271. 

152. Tobacco: menang? (munang), i?6'«. 
New. 

153. Tobacco : rasul (/;-. ra-sull), Sem. 
Phis. 

154. Tobacco : ta'kau, Krau Tem. ; 
bakau, Sem. K. Ken. ; ba'-kau, 
Sen. Cliff. ; bakau, Sak. U. Kam. , 
Serau ; baku, Sak. Em. ; bake, 
Sotn. , Sak. Tap. ; akau, Tembi ; 
ako, Sak. Kerb. ; tembako (tom- 
bako), Sak. Ra.; tSmbakau hu-nia, 
U. Cher. Javanese tobacco : ako 
jawa' (ako jawak), Serau [Mai. 
tembakau] ; C 129, 130 ; D 165 ; 
I 34 ; S 303. 

155. Tobacco - plant of the Semangs : 
poh, Sem. Sfev. 

156. Tobacco (Sakai) : bcr-nol ; ber- 
nor ; brcl-nol, Sen. Cliff. 
Tobacco - cutting appliance : 
'■" 144- 

Tobacco-plant: T 155, 156. 

To-day: D t6 ; D 19 ; D 33 ; 

D 35 ; D 42, 43 ; S 345 ; T 86. 

Toe: F 109; F 112; F 220; 

N 1-3. 

Toe-nail : N 1-3 ; S 141. 

Together : A 62 ; A 64 ; A 79 ; 

M42. 

To bring together : A 170. 

157. TOGETHicR WITH {.Mai. bcrsama- 
sama) : chClah, ex. chClah gin 
kiadah, "together with the young 
maidens," cp. chClah wong sad, 
"among the young .';ad plants"? 
Sem. Kcdah. With ; together with 

[Mai. bgrsama - sama) : sgrah, ex. 
chop sSrah 6', " go along with him," 
Pang. U. A ring. 

To-morrow : A 72 ; D 33 ; D 36 ; 
D 43 ; M 175-179- 

158. To-morrow, the day after : duak', 
Jak. Ba. Pa. 

159. To-morrow, the day after: lusa', 
Pang. U. Aring; lusa (lou9a), 
Sbm. , Sak. Pa. [Mai. lusa] ; D 37 ; 
D 42 ; M 178 ; O 21. 

160. To-MORKOW, two days after : tulad 
or tuled, Pang. U. Aring [Mai. 
tulat] ; O 21. 

161. To - MORROW, three days after : 
tubin, Pang. U. A7'ing[Mal. tubin]. 

162. To - MORROW, four days after : 
telung. Pang. U. Aring. 

Tongs, bamboo : B 38. 

163. Tongue : le-peh, U. Che?: ; 16-pes, 
U. Tent. ; lepas (16pes), Serting ; 
lipes, U. hid. [Stieng lopiet ; 
Kaseng apiat ; Bahftar lopiet, 
ropiet ; Churu lampiet, biat ; Chrdu 
lopiet ; Boloven, Niahon piat ; Alak 
kSpet ; Lave iipiet ; Halang piet ; 
Sedang ropet, ' ' tongue. "] 

164. Tongue : lin, Pant. Kap. Log. ; 
pelen, Pant. Kap. Her. ; pgleng 
(p'leng) or pSteng (p'teng), Pant. 
Kap. J oh. [? Cf. Birhur alang ; 
Santali alang ; Miaidari a-lang, 
" tongue."] 

165. Tongue : {a) htl' (/;-. li-ti'), Pang. 
U. Aring; liti' or litik, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; litig, Sem. Jur. 
And., Sein. Jur. Rob., Sem. Jur. 
New. ; letig, Sem. U. Sel. ; 16tik^ 
Sem. Beg. ; 16ti' (Itik), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; letik (Itik), Se^n. Pa. Max. ; 
lentek, U. Kel.; (lenteck), U. Pat.; 
len-ti, Lehir; lenta (lnt&), Sak. U. 
Kam. ; Untah, Or. Berumb. ; lentah, 
Sak. Kerb. ; l^ntag, Sak. Kor. Go. ; 
lantag, Sak. Br. Low; (lanlay), 
Sak. Croix ; {lanlM), Sak. A'erb. 
[these forms are probably due to 
misreading the form in Sak. 
Br. Low MS.] ; ISntag (lontag), 
Som. ; (lentag), Se?n. K. Ken. ;- 
lentag, Tembi ; lentak°, Serau, 
Jelai ; len - tak, Krau Ket. ; 
lentak, Sem. Per. ; 16ntak (/oTzt&k), 
Sak. Ra. ; lintak, Tan. U. Lang. ; 
lintak, Sak. Blaiij. Sw. ; rfin-tak. 
Sen. CI. ; loi-ten, Sak. Sel. Da. ; 
S 489. Uvula : awang 16tik (auang 
Iting), Sem. Pa. Max. ; wang 16ti' 
(ung Itik), Sem. Biik. Max. ; C loi. 
[Mon Ifttaik [litak] ; Khmer dndat 
(/;-. andat?) [antat] ; Khmus ntak 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

741 

(ntac) ; Central, Southern Nicobar 
kale-tak ; Tcrcasa, kali-tak; Chcnvra, 
kalitak ; Ca r NicobarWiak ; Palaung 
latah, "tongue." ? Cf. these Mon- 
Annam forms with the Malayan 
equivalents, e.g. Javan. lidah ; 
Sundan. letah ; Mai. lidah. ] H 2. 
{h) Tongue : jelil, Kciia. I. [^Narom 
jilir ; Lelak dilir. ] 
[c) Tongue : ledah, Bed. Chiong ; 
ledah, Ben. Ncio. ; li-dah, Kerbat ; 
lidah, Mantr. Malac, Jak. Malac. 
[Mai. lidah]. 

166. Tongue : tamara pok, Ben. iVew. 
[A very dubious word ; cf. F 221 ; 
perhaps to be read rapok ; if so, 
perhaps = T 163; cf. F 5.] 
To-night: D 16; D 19. 

Too : A 71 ; T 85. 

167. Tooth (Mai. gigi) : jangko', Se>n. 
/arum, Se/n. Plus. 

168. Tooth : nyus {pr. nyuss ; nyuss), 
Sem. Kedah ; niyos. Sent. Klapr ; 
nfos (nieuss). Pang. Jalor ; nis, U. 
Pat. ; ius, Sem. Ij. ; yus, Sem. 
Craw. Hist. , Sem. Craw. Gram. , 
Sem. Ked. A nd. , Sem. Ked. 
Mar. , Se7n. Ked. Rob. , Sem. 
Ked. New. ; (yous), Sem. Klapr. ; 
(yoos), Sem. Stev. ; y5s (ios), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; yos (yeuss), Sem. 
Stev. ; use [? better yus ; in MS. 
originally use], Sem. U. Sel. ; L 32. 
Broken teeth : heu heus, Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; bus hius nai (hus hius nai), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Mouth : nis, U. 
Pat. Toothache : pias yus (pias 
slius), Sem. Buk. Max. ; nos-en 
(neuss-en), Sem. Stev. "Teeth 
eaten at by maggots," i.e. caries: 
nya' yus? (ii'ius), Sem. Buk. Max. 
To grind the teeth? [Mai. tSkgrat 
gigi?) : maid yuse' (mki iusi'), Sem. 
Buk. .Max. Poisonous snake : 3'os 
(yeuss), Sem. Stev. ; L 32. 

169. Tooth : chgriih, Kena. I. 

170. Tooth: lemun, Sak. U. Kam., 
Sak. U. Bert. ; (lemun), Sak. 
Blanj. Sw. ; (le-miin). Sen. Cliff. ; 
16mun, Bed. Chiong; IS-mun, Krau 
Ket. ; lemun, Jelai, Serting ; 
(lemun), Ben. New., Sem. Per., 
Sem. Jur. New., Tembi, Serau ; 
(lemum), Sem. Jur. And. , Sem.. Jur. 
Mar. , Sem. Jur. Rob. ; limQn, Tan. 
U. Lafig. ; limun, Or. Berumb. ; 
lemuin, Bes. Her. ; 16muing 
(Imuing), Sem. Pa. Max. ; Ifimugn, 
Bes. Her. ; lemoin, e.g. lemoin nai, 
"two teeth," lemoin ne, "three 
teeth," Sem. K. Ken. ; lemoign. 

Sak. Jer. ; lamo-ing, Sem. Beg. ; 
ICmoing (leu - mo - ing), Sak. Sel. 
Da. ; lemofne, Sevt. .Martin ; lgm6n, 
Bes. Malac. ; IC'mon, Pang. U. 
A ring; Ifimoii, e.g. 16mofi nyus, 
"front teeth" (incisors): 16mon 
tenggam, "molars" or "grinders" 
(Mai. gerham), Bes. K. L. ; ISmon ; 
ISmoyn ; 16moi, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
l6mon nyus, "front teeth"; lemofi 
tenggaPm, " molars," Bes. A. /.; M 
121 ; limo" (limon'), [7. /nd. ; remun, 
Buk. U. Lang.; rgmogn, Kena. II.; 
moin, Som., Sak. Kerb. ; m6in, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. ; moin, Sak. Br. 
Low ; (moine), Sak. Croix ; mon, 
Tembi ; B 41. Tusk (of wild boar) : 
lamuing, iVw. Pa. Max. To 
bite : Ifimuin, Sak. U. Kam. To 
grind the teeth? (Mai. tSkgrat gigi): 
i' ia.muin (al'iLlmSIn), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Toothache : mfije' lamuin 
(mji' lamuin) ; meje' lamuing (mji' 
lamuing), Sem.. Pa. A/ax. Necklace 
made of monkeys' and other animals' 
teeth : lemoin, Se7?t. K. Ken. Snake 
(not poisonous) : limon, Se^n. Stev. 
"Teeth eaten into by maggots" 
(caries of the teeth, so called by 
Malays): kama'cho'? lemuing (kama' 
chu Imuing), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[Khmer thm6ii [dhm^n] ; cf. also 
Khasi Synteng ISmein ; Battoa ka 
ISmafn ; Amwee ka leman ; Lakadong 
kd leman, all meaning " tooth."] 

171. Tooth : rangam, Ben. New. 

172. Tooth: gigi, Ben. j\e%v., Mantr. 
Malac. , Jak. Malac. Chattering of 
teeth: gigi pentas? (gigi pnts), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; H 2 [Mai. gigi]. 

173. Tooth : pengrep, Pant. Kap. Her.; 
p6ng6rep (p'ng'rep). Pant. Kap. 
Joh. ; pingrep. Pant. Kap. Log. ; 
pengerep pgmamah (p'ng'rep 
p'mamah), Pant. Kap. Joh. 
Elephant's tusk : pengerep kon 
penegap (p'ng'rep kon p'n'gap). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. A rapid : pengerep 
(p'ng'rep), Pant. Kap. Mad. Rat; 
a well : penggrep (p'ng'rep). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. [Mai. grep, "to gnaw," 
e.g. of rats]. 

Tooth : A 12 ; B 228 ; M 119. 

Tooth of comb : E 83. 

To cleanse the teeth : C 145. 

Toothache : T 168 ; T 170. 

Top : A 5 ; B 347 ; F 29 ; H 46. 

Top of roof : R 1 69. 

Top of tree : T 216. 

Top, on : A 5-7 ; N 25 ; O 26. 

174. Torch ; tras, Sak. Tap. 

742 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

175. Torch, resin : hanuk (?), Pang. 
K. Aring ; R 72. 

176. Tortoise : awa (owar), Sem. Stev. 
Land tortoise (A/al. kura-kura): 
awa' (auia'), Sem. Pa. Max.; awa' 
(au'), Sejn. Buk. Max. ; {Mai. 
baning): ha-wang, Lebir; ha'-wang, 
Kerbat. Sea-turtle [Mai. tuntong) 
awa' ml (au' mi?), Sem. Buk. Max. 

177. Tortoise : sil (seel), Sem. Stev. ; 
(spec. Mai. baning) : sil (sil), Sejn. 
Buk. Max. ; siil (sul), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; sol, Tembi [or Seraul\\ 
(serl), U. Tern.; seaul (seoul), Sak. 
Jer. 

178. Tortoise [Mai. kura) : gash, 
Pang. Belimb. \ [Mai. baning) : 
koh, Se7i. Cliff. Knee-cap : gash. 
Pang. Belimb. 

179. Tortoise : piled (pzled), Sem. 
Stev. River- tortoise (il/rt/. labi-labi): 
pilet (pili't or pla'it?), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; pais? or pias? (pi's or p'is), 
Sem. Pa. Max. 

180. Tortoise [Mai. baning) : dom 
(derm), U. Cher. 

i8oA. Tortoise (J/(7/. baning): kenok", 
Tembi. [Mo// knuh, "tortoise," 
"turtle."] 

181. Tortoise [Mai. baning) : jujeh, 
Jak. Malac. 

182. Tortoise (spec. Mai. biuku) : 
ba'eng or baning? (ba'ing or 
baning?), Sem. Buk. Max. \_Mal. 
baning]. 

183. Tortoise [Mai. tuntong) : biuku, 
Jak. Ala lac. \_Mal. biuku]. 

184. Tortoise : kura', Sak. U. Bert. ; 
(spec. Mai. kura - kura) : kura, 
Mantr. Malac. [Mai. kura-kura]. 

18.15. Tortoise . ggrenjl, /ak. Malac. 

186. Tortoise (.1/rt/. labi-labi) : onjiinel, 
Jak. Malac. 

187. Turtle (spec. Mai. ISlabi) : jfilSbau', 
Ment. Her. I. [Mai. labi-labi; 
lelabi]. 

188. Turtle: yok ; yah, Des. Sep.; yohh, 
Bes. K. Lang. River-turtle [Mai. 
labi-labi) : yok ; yah ; yah rabi, Bcs. 
Sep. A. I. Turtle-eggs : kepok yah, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. 

189. Tortoise, a small kind of: jahCik, 
Jak. Mad. 

190. Tortoise, a small kind of : 
jnngkeng, Jak. .Mad. 
Tortoise-shell : S 236. 

191. Touch, to : semlji, Sein. Buk. 
Max. ; C 49 ; F 57 ; H 106. 

To touch at : L 31. 

192. Touching; in contact with each 
otliLT ; uab (aoab), Sem. Buk. Max. 

193. Touching ; in contact with each 
other : puh, Setn. Pa. Max. ; N 
19, 20. 

Tough : R 132 ; .S 336. 

194. Towards : dfthluoh(?) (?dhluuh), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; A 6 ; A 176 ; 
A 178 ; C 219 ; S 198. 

Track: G 41 ; G 49 ; P 118. 

195. Tracks ; footprints ; utensil? [Mai. 
Vjekas) : yok (yeuk ; yfirk), Sak. 
Plus Cliff. 

196. Tracks ; marks : kgse (kse), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [Mai. kgsan]. 

197. Track or spoor: bekes or bgkess. 
Pang. Belimb. [Mai. bSkas] ; G 41 ; 
P 118. 

Trample, to : K 24, 25 ; T 202. 

198. Translate, to : sgnalik (sonalik), 
S'om. ; salim, Sak. Ra. To bear a 
child : bgrsalin, Bes. Her. [Mai. 
salin (both senses)] ; A 121. 
Transparent : C 146 ; W 30 ; W 
98. 

Trap : .S 407, 408. 

199. Tr.\p (for birds) : yad awi (jad- 
owee), Sem. Stev. ; R 39. Trap 
(for snakes) : yad ekob (jad-fkob), 
Sem. Stev. 

200. Trap (for mouse - deer) : tabog, 
Sem. Stev. [? = N 24]. 

200A. Trap; spring-trap (J/^'/.bglantek): 
dak, Sak. U. Bert. [Khmer teakh 
[dakkh], "to catch in a snare"; 
Bahnar dak; nak, "spear-trap" ; 
Sedan^ da, "trap"; ? cf. Mon 
tanak [danak], " snare " ; tak [dak], 
" to bind."] 

201. Tray (bamboo tray for upas) : 
chinang, Sc7n. Kcdah, Sem. Plus ; 
P 136-138. 

202. Tread (on) to : jak (djak), Sak. 
Kor. Gb. [Cf. Achinese jak, "to 
go"; .Mai. jgjak, "to tread"; 
pijak, " to tread on."] S 446. 

203. Tree : tom (turn), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
the word used for tree in Aring, Sam, 
and Galas districts is very like the 
word for water (tom). It is, how- 
ever, not the same, and as it was 
not always pronounced quite alike, 
I am doubtful of the correct form, 
but believe it to be turn [pr. tumm), 
e.g. tum d'long = 7l'/fl'/. poko' kayu, 
"a tree." It has certainly an 
"m" and not an "n" at the end 
of it, and in this respect differs 
from Siamese ton, Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal., Pang. Anng;- t&m 
(?t^n) kayu (doubtful). Pang. U. 
.4 ring; B 151; E 83; R 39; 
U 24. [Phnong tom chhi ; Stieng 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

743 

torn chii [v. T 211) ; Proii 
torn lang {v. T 207), "tree." 
Stieng torn, " tree," which also 
means "beginning," "cause"; 
Bahnar torn, "trunk," " begin- 
ning," "origin" (both the last are 
used as numeral coefficients of 
trees, etc. ) ; Lemet kom ke (keum 
k6 ; Xong temne ; Old Khmer 
temni ; Mon tndm [tna] ; Samri 
thnSm yang ; Por thnem nis, 
" tree " ; Khvier dom [torn], 
"trunk," "beginning," "author," 
dom cho [torn jhb], "tree"; cf. 
Mon t4m [ta], " beginning " ; Chrau 
tom, "principle," "origin," "be- 
ginning " ; Boloven, Niahdn tam ; 
Lovelorn, "from" (origin) ; Satnr^ 
phaa thnSm ; Por por thom ; Phnong 
panom ; Prou patom, "formerly" 
(but see also B 151, E 17). It 
seems more than probable that the 
primary meaning is " trunk " or 
"stem" of tree ; and for the 
derivative sense of "beginning," 
"cause," "author," cf. the uses of 
the Mai. pangkal and pokok. ] 

204. Tree: kuing, Sem. Jur. And., 
Sent. Jur. New. , Sem. Jur. Rob. 
[Perhaps this should be kning, i,e. 
kgning. ] Stem of tree {Mai. ba- 
tang) : likening, Jelai. 

205. Tree : tapis gfinelan (a strange ex- 
pression, but confirmed by repeated 
testing ; tapis appears to = Mai. 
poko' and g6n61an = Mai. kayu), 
Sem. Kedah. Wood : ggnelan, 
Sem. Kedah [?= T 207]. 

206. Tree : (a) s§njeh, Kena. I. 

[b) Tree: hfitnat? (h(e)tnaut [^zV]), 
Sak. Sung. ; [Mai. pokok kayu) : 
ednod, Tembi. 

207. Tree : jSlop (djolop), Sak. Kerb. ; 
(djblop), Sak. Ra. ; jelok, Tan. U. 
Lang.; jilok (djilok), Sak. Martin ; 
je-log, Sen. Clijf. ; delokn. Or. 
Hu. J oh. /. ; d616gn, Serting ; 
dftl6ng. Bed. Chiong; 'long, d'long, 
Bes. Sep. ; long, Bes. Songs, Bes. 
Bell. ; log", Bes. Malac. ; ognid^^ng 
(ogni6k'n), Sem. K. Ken. Stem ; 
trunk (of tree): long (lung), 
Sem. Pa. Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. 
Tree, species producing wadding : 
jelo gfite {dji€io got^), Sak. 
Ra. Stem of tree {Mai. ba- 
tang) : luuk", Tembi. Wood : 
gerong, Sak. Sel. Da. ; gS-long, 
Bera. ; Ifi-long, U. Cher. ; d6-long, 
U. Tern. ; d'long, Buk. U. La7ig. ; 
'long ; d'long, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 

long, Ment. Her. If. ; logn, Bes. 
Her. ; log°, Bes. Malac. ; lung, 
Ben. New. Wood ; timber : d'long 
(doubtful), Pang. U. A ring; S 
236, 237 ; T 49 ; W 30 ; Y 4 ; 
Y 13. Wood -oil: doo d'long, 
Bes. Sep. A. L ; W 30. Stump 
(of tree) : jSngleng (jingling), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [? = T 205]. Branch 
of tree {Mai. dahan): kgning luuk^, 
Tembi ; T 204. [Bahnar long, 
' ' tree, " ' 'wood " ; Nanhang]^2i\s.\ong 
(calalong), "tree"; Su^, Sedang, 
Proons long; Kaseng, Boloven 16ng; 
Halang loang, "tree"; Tareng, 
Kaseng, Sue, Halang, Boloven, 
Sedang I6ng; Niahdn, Alak, Lave 
long, "wood"; Phnong, Stieng 
long, "firewood"; cf. also Cuoi 
khnum long ; Prou, Braou, Boloven , 
Niahon tom lang ; Alak, Lave, 
Kaseng torn long, "tree."] ? cf 
G 122. 

208. Tree: {a) tebal, Sem. Ken.; tgnbo 
(tonbo), Som. ; (species Mai. 
terap): t6nbo ngghu ? (tonbo nohou), 
Som. ; tSnbo' tSlbal (tonb6 tolbal), 
Sak. Morg. Tree, species produc- 
ing wadding : t6nbo' kabong (tonb6 
kabon), Som. Tree (species Mai. 
rabok ? [apparently the tree pro- 
ducing wadding]) : tfinbo senlu 
(tonbo sonlou), Som. [? cf. Achin. 
bak, " tree."] 

{b) Tree : hombek. Rasa. 

209. Tree : liu ai? (llu aai ?), Sem. Pa. 
Max. 

210. Tree ; stem {Mai. pohun) : {a) 
truk. Sen. Cliff. 'Stem of tree: tro' 
jehu, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; T 211. 

{b) Tree : chuk, Se7n. Craw. Hist. ; 
(chuck), Sem. Ked. And., Sem. 
Ked. New. , Sem. Ked. Rob. ; 
(tchouk), Setn. Klapr. ; chahh i-hu", 
Sem. Kedah ; thuh, Sem. Ij. 
[possibly to be read ihuh, in original 
MS. : if so = T 211]. 
(c) Wood : nikuku ? (nicuckoo), Sem. 
Ken. [This word is very odd and 
probably corrupt ; perhaps a mis- 
print for nieuhoo = nohu ? cf. 
T211.] 

211. Tree: {a) nguhd, Sak. Jer. ; jo- 
hu, Sem. Per. ; jfthu, Po-Klo,Jehehr; 
j6-hii', Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus ; 
j6hu, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; jehu ; jilok 
jghu, Sak. U. Kam. ; T 207 ; 
kening jghft, Sak. Blanj. Sw.; jihu, 
Sak. Br. Low; j6hu? (djohon), 
Sak. Kerb. ; (djehon), Sak. Croix ; 
jo-ho, Sem. Beg. ; joho, Ben. New. ; 

744 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

i-oh [in MS. originally e-oh], Sem. 
U. Sel. ; ujong, Ben. New. ; poko' 
joho' (pokok johok), Tembi; T 213 ; 
jelob jehup, Darat ; jelog jehu, 
Jelai ; T 207. Wood : jahu', 
Se7n. Pa. Max. ; j6hii', Sem. Plus; 
jg-hfi, Sen. Cliff. ; jehii, Sak. BlanJ. 
Sw. ; (djohou), SaA. Kerb. ; jehu, 
Sak. U. Kani. ; j6-hu, Tern. CI. , 
Sen. CI. , Sak. BlanJ. CI. , Sak. 
Slim. CI. ; (djohou), Sak. Pa. ; jihu, 
Sak. Br. Low ; jed' ? (djeiik), 
Sak. Martin ; chue. Pant. Kap. 
Log. ; jo-ho, Sem. Beg. ; joho, Ben. 
New. ; j6ho' ? (jehok). Tan. U. 
Lang. ; i-hu', Setn. Kedah; i-oh 
[in MS. originally e - ho], Sem. 
U. Sel. ; nuhu, Seni. K. Ken. ; 
nehu (no-hou, Som. ; ne-ho', Krau 
Ket. ; neha (ng-hor), Krati Tern. ; 
hehoh ? (heheuh), Pajig. Jalor; 
jenayoh, Sem. Kedah; P 163. 
Wood or timber : joho' (johok), 
Tembi, Darat ; jehuk", Tenibi ; 
juhu'^", Jelai ; jo - hii. Pang. 
Belimb. ; Y 13. Stump (of tree) : 
johu p6ban (juhu pban), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; C 247. Trunk [Fr. 
"haste") : jehu (djohou), Sak. 
Kerb. Stem {Mai. batang) : lalu 
jihupJi, Darat. Branch : j6hup, 
(djohoup), Sak. Pa. Diggingstick : 
hi-u(hee-oo, Sem. Stev. Post (J/i?/. 
tiang) : jehu' (properly = wood), 
Sem. Skeat. Wooden stick : jehu' ? 
(djohouk), Som ; B 232. Stick or 
wood with knots in it : taba jehu 
{faba-djokou), Som ; B 345. Tree 
(spec, unidentified) : jehuk" keish, 
Serau. [A/on chhu ; Khmer chha?u 
[pr. chb) [jho], "wood," "tree"; 
Churn si ; Phnong tom chhi ; Stieng 
torn chii, "tree"; cf. Khmus che, 
" firewood."] 

(/J) Tree ". kayu. Or. Trang; kayu' 
(kayuk), Ment. Her. /. ; kayu 
inambong ; mambong kayu, Pant. 
Kap. Joh. ; batang - kayu, Jak. 
Malac. ; T 242. Wood : ka'-yu', 
Lebir ; kayu, Mantr. Malac. , Jak. 
Malac. ; kayu. Pant. Kap. Her. ; 
rum pun kayu, Bedu. //. ; kaian, 
Paul. Bark : hCilit kayu, Barak ; 
S 237. A species of gutta-tree 
(Mai. gCtah jClutong) : ka)'u mam- 
bong. Pant. Kap. Joh. Tapioca- 
plant : kayu mabok, Parit. Kap. 
Mad. ; M 2 \MaL kayu]. [If the 
resemblance between groups («) 
and (b) be not merely fortuitous, 
cf. P 5 and P 164.] 

212. Tree: poh6n,A>«a. H.,Bedu.n/.\ 
pohon, Mantr. Malac, Or. Laut \ 
pohon kayu' (pohon kayuk), Bedu. 
//. ; pohun kayu, Jak. Lem. ; Tan. 
Wood : pohol, Kena J. \_AJal. 
pohon, " tree. "] 

213. 'I'KEE : [a) poko, Be?i. New. [Mai. 
pokok]. 

(b) Tree : pangkhal (pangk'hal), 
Blan. Rem. ; T 60. \Mal. pangkal, 
"foot (or thick end) of tree," 
possibly connected with the fore- 
going on quasi-Krama principles?] 

(c) Ford : pgngkalen (penkalen), 
Sak. Pa. Landing-stage : p6ng- 
kal, Bes. K. L. Bathing- place ; 
landing-place : pengkalan ? bisan 
(p'ngkalam bisan). Pant. Kap. Joh. ; 
W 132 \Mal. pangkalan]. 

214. Partially burnt wood (Alal. puntong 
api) : pS,lo, Sak. Kerb., Sak. Pa. ; 
palo osh (pal6-6ch), Som.; F 124. 
Trp:e : P 193 ; S 237. 

215. Tree, large : gul, Sein. Ij. 

216. Tree, top of [Alal. ujong) : rengal 
(said to = J/rt/. ujong poko'), ex. 
tangke bah lang rengal, ' ' the fruit 
boughs near the top of the tree," 
Pang. Teliang. 

Tree, trunk of : T 242. 

217. Tree, a kind of, whose bark is 
used for making cloth : jere, Sem. 
Kedah. 

218. Tree, a kind of, whose leaves are 
stuck in the teeth of women's combs: 
huchong, Pa?ig. U. A ring. 

219. Tree, species producing wadding: 
jek (dj6k), Sak. Kerb. 

220. Tree, specific name of (species 
unidentified): birang, Pa^^. Teliang. 

221. Tree spec : ggmaleng, ex. ye 
sewe ka-kepal, kepal chan, kepal 
gemaleng, ' ' I sing of the fruit- 
buds of the ' chan ' and ' ggma- 
leng,' " Pang. Teliang. 

222. Tree spec : hamang, ex. peng- 
leng kui hamang pi bai, "go and 
dig (?) the saplings of the 'kui' (?) 
and ' hamang,' " Pang, Teliang. 

223. Tree spec. ? : siajoi or chiajoi, 
Pattg. Teliang. [Doubtful mean- 
ing : probably means ' ' to turn ' ' or 
" to dangle. "] 

224. Tree spec : soyn (?), ex. kepal 
tangkul, kSpal soyn, " fruit-buds of 
the 'tangkul' and of the 'soyn,'" 
Pang. Teliang. 

225. Tremble, to [A'lal. m6ngg616tar) : 
ya-legweg, Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

226. Tremble, to : ya-gegged {pr. 
geg-gedd). Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

745 

227. 'I'remble, to : pipoh (pipuh), Setn. 
Bilk. Max. Vibration ; trembling : 
pipu, Sem. Buk. Max. [? Cf. Mon 
khapat [khftpuit], "to twitch (as a 
dying animal)."] 

228. 'J'REMiiLE, TO ; to shiver : kruk, 
Bes. Sep. \Mon knruk [g.truikl, 
" to shake" ; Khmer kilkrok [ka- 
krijk], "vibration," "movement."] 

229. Tremble, to : gStor (ghotor), Sak. 
Ra. [Ma/, gfitar] ; C 205 ; F 48 ; 
1* 25, 26. 

Trembling: V 15. 

230. TrSngganu man : s6ngka!u 
(s'nkalu), /'a/i/. Kap. Joh. 
Triangle : C 245. 

231. Tribe : kal, Sevi. Klapr. [This is 
one of the words that show that 
Klaproth had some other source of 
information besides Crawfurd's list. 
What it was is unknown, and its 
value is more than doubtful.] 
Tributary (stream): W 27-30; 
W 40. 

Trickle, to : mcrepil? (mrpit), Sent. 
Pa. Max. 

Trickle, to : tak-tak? (? taktSnak 
or taktak), Sem. Pa. Max. ; teao ; 
teau, Bes. Sep. A. I.; B 80 ; P 206. 
Trouble, in : S 186. 
Trousers : hual, Bes. Ma lac. , 
Maiitr. Malac. ; sarual, Mantr. 
Malac. ; sfirual (srual), Sak. U. 
Bert. ; serwal, Jelai [Mai. Pers. 
sarual ; saluar]. 

Trousers : sarong bingkai (bing- 
kei), Pant. Kap. Log. ; C 171 ; 

232. 
233- 

234- 

235- 
236. 

237. 
238. 

239- 

240, 

241, 

242. 

S 237A. 

True {Mai. benar or sunggoh) ; 

badin (/;-. ba-dinn), Sem. Jariim, 

Sem. Plus. 

True : eh-wai, Sem. Jariim. 

True : tun, Bes. Sep. To approve 

{Mai. benarkan) : tun an, Bes. Sep. 

True : hoi ; nahol, Bes. A. /. ; 

hoi, Bes. K. Lang. It is true : 

nahol, Bes. K. Lang. Approved : 

hoi, Bes. Songs. 

True ; right ; truth ; truthfulness : 

benueh? (bnuih?), Sem. Buk. Max. 

To approve : b6ne (bini), Sem. Pa. 

Max. ; embenar, Jelai [Mai. b6nar, 

" true "] ; S 482-484. 

Trumpet, to (of an elephant) : 

kre-et, Bes. Sep. 

Trunk (elephant's) : N 98. 

Trunk (of tree), {Fr. haste): batang 

(bataii), Sak. Ra. Stem of tree 

{Mai. batang) : batang, Tembi ; 

T 211 ; W 30. River: batang 

hari, Sak. Blanj. Silk Large river : 

betang arin, Jak. Malac. [Mat. 
batang, "stick," "stem"; batang 
ayer, " stream."] 

Trunk (of tree) : P 193 ; S 448 ; 
T 203 ; T 207 ; '1' 210-213. 
Trust, to: M 71- 
Truth : T 240. 
Truthfulness : 'I' 240. 

243. Try, to {Mai. choba) : ya' ado', 
ex. ado' de' pay {or me') tun, " try 
and do that," Sem. Kedah. 

243A. Try, to : chenoba? (dschenoba), 
Sem. K. Ken. ; choba' (chobak), 
Krau Em. [Alal. choba]. 

243B. Try, to : achu, Serau. Try 
again : achulah sih hela, Serau. 
I will begin {Mai. sahaya bSrmula): 
him ber-hachu, Darat [Mai. achu] 
[=P42]. 

244. Tuba (climber), Derns elliptica : 
kenda' (knd'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
hgle' kgnda' (hli' knd'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; L 32. 

245. Tuba (the root is used as an in- 
gredient in blowpipe an-ow poison) : 
jfinii', Bes. A. L ; (jenu), Bes. K. 
Lang. [Cf. Achin. tuba jenun, "a 
fish poison" (prob. Derf-is).^ 
Tube (of blowpipe) : D 66. 
Tuber : Y 1-21. 

Tuft (of hair) : H 7. 

246. Tufted : kampong-kampong, Bes. 
Songs. 

246 A. Tukas (a tree producing wadding): 
tukas, Bes. Sep. A. L [Mai. tukas]. 
Tumior (tribal name = Temia) : T 
41, 42. 

247. Tuman (fresh -water fish spec), 
Barbus phutunio: tiiman, /«/'. Mad. 
[Mai. tuman]. 

248. Tumour ; boil {Mai. risa) : plait 
(plait), Sem.. Buk. Max. 

Tupaia : M 135 ; S 417-426. 
Turbid (water) : W 30. 

249. Turmeric {Mai. kunyet), Curcutna 
longa (?) : tius (tius), Se?n. Buk. 
Max. 

249A. Turmeric : renet, Serau. 

250. Turn, to {Mai. pusar ; pusing ; 
edar) : bit, Sem. Pa. Max. Twisted : 
habit, Sem. Pa. Max. [? cf. Mai. 
belit, " to entwine."] 

251. Turn, TO : welwal (oueloual), 5a.t. 
Kerb. To turn round (?): telelwil. 
Pang. Tcliang. [Bahnar MiA, "to 
return " ; Khmer vol [wal], vil 
[wTl], "to turn" ; Cham vil; ? cf. 
also Stieng ual, "to bend"; uil, 
' ' to encircle animals with a view to 
taking them." But here the con- 
nection of meaning seems to go 

746 

COM PARA ri VE VOCA B ULAR V OF 

with Bahnar uln, "curve" ; uing, 
"revolving"; uit uing, "rolling 
into a circle or spiral " ; cf. B 175? 
Achin. woi, woil, "to return"; 
Boloven wiel ; Alak wai, wir ; 
Central Nicobar wlal - hata, ' ' to 
turn."] 

252. Turn, to : 'ngku (nkou), Sak. 
Kerb. ; 'ngkuh (nkouh), Sak. Ra. 

253. Turn, to ; to return [Mai. balik) : 
ne-mah, Sak. Plus Cliff. 

254. Turn, to ; to return [Mai. balik) : 
16s, Sak. BlaHJ. Cliff. 

255. Turn over, to {Mai. tgrgolek) : 
ya' berile', Setn. jarutii ; ya' bile', 
Se7n. Plus. To turn round [Mai. 
paling) : ya' bile' {pr. bi-la'), Se??i. 
Jarum, Sem. Plus [?=R 86]. 

256. Turn, to : pusing (poussifi), Sak. 
Ra. Around : bepemusing (b'p'mus- 
ing). Pant Kap. Joh. River 
Jasing : pemusing(p'musing), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. [.!/«/. pusing, "to turn," 
" to wind. "] 

257. Turn, to: mengkesi? (mngki?), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; kisar, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. ; kenesar (konessar), Soni. To 
turn {trans.): kese (kse or kesi?), 
Sem. Bztk. Max. ; kisar, Serau. 
Alternately ; changing : kisi (?), 
Se7n. Pa. Max. To revolve ; to 
change : kiti (kiti), Sem. Pa. Max. 
\_Mal. kisar] ; R 83. 

Turn out, to : O 67 ; T 54. 
Turtle (reptile) : T 176 ; T 
187. 

258. Tusk(of wild boar): tayeng (taing), 
Sem. Buk. Max. [Mai. taring] ; 
H 126 ; T 170 ; T 173. 

259. Twelve : piatuk (pee-a-took), Sak. 
Sel. Da. [very doubtful] ; E 55. 

260. Twenty : cha-chok, Sak. Sel. Da. 
[very doubtful]. 

261. Twenty : ng, Kena. II. ; T 45. 
Twenty- one : T 45. 

262. Twig ; small branch (of tree) : 
hangini (hangim), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
rangani, Tembi \ B 346-351. 

263. Twilight (?) ; darkening (?) {Mai. 
suang selani kabur, kabus): mgma (?) 
(ninia), Sem. Pa. Max. ; D 22. 

264. Twist, to {Mai. pintal) : ya' ser 
{pr. sSrr), e.g. twist string, Sem. 
Kedah. 

265. Twist, to : lamer {pr. IftmUrr), 
o'-lftmer (of the twisted tCrap-barl'C 
used for bowstrings), Sem. Plus. 

266. Twist, to : ya' pin-tcl {pr. pinn- 
tell), Sem. Jarum [Mai. pintal]. 

267. TWLST, TO ; to spin : kSlal (kll), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; kfilil (klil), Sem. 

Buk. Max. ; {Mai. lilit): lakn, Serau. 
[? Cf. Central Nicobar tilain-hanga, 
" to twist (fibres)."] 

268. Twisted ; spiral : lengkeng 
(lingking), Sem. Pa. Max. [cf. Mai. 
lingkar] ; R 193 ; T 250. 

269. Two : wang, Sem. Scott [\'ery 
doubtful]. 

270. Two : uii, U. Pat. ; bi, Sem. 
Plus ; l)e, Sevt. Craw. Gram. ; 
beh, Sem. Sadang; ble [in the MS. 
originally beeay], Sem. U. Sel. [in 
the MS. the numerals above " two " 
are simply stated to be the "same 
as in Malay"]; bie, Setn. Ij. ; bie 
(beay), Sem. Stev. Four : sa-beh, 
Sem. Sadang ; T 273 [? = T 
271]. 

271. Two : mai, U. Tem. ; ma', U. 
Cher., Bes. Sep. ; mah, Sak. Sel. 
Da. ; hma, Bes. Her. ; ma, Bes. 
Malac. ; mar, Ben. New., Jak. 
Stev. ; hnibar ; 'mbar ; mar, Bes. 
Sep. A. I. The second {Mai. 
yang ka-dua) : maar, Serau ; T 45. 
[Mon ba ; Khmer pir [bir] ; Old 
Khmer bar (inscriptions wyar) ; 
Bahnar, Stie?ig, Churu, Chrdu, 
Phnong, Ka, Chong, Tareng, Ka- 
seng, Kon Tu, Su^, Halang, Alak, 
Lave bar ; Boloven bor ; Niahon 
ban ; Braou, Cuoi par ; Prou baar ; 
Sa?nre paar ; Por por ; Sedang 
bah, " two."] 

272. Two: narr? (nanrr), Sak. Kerb. ; 
narr, Sak. Ra. ; nar (narr), Sak. 
Martin ; nar, Po - Klo, Sak. U. 
Kam. , Sak. U. Bert. ; (nar), Sak. 
Korb. Lias ; nar, Tem. CI. , Sen. CI. , 
Krau Ket., Krau Tem., Sak. 
Guai, Sak. Tap. , Sak. Chen. , Sak. 
J. Low, Sak. Sung. ; naar, 
Serau ; nal, Sak. Br. Low ; 
nal, Sak. Croix, Tembi ; nai, 
Sak. Jer., Sem. K. Ken., Sem. 
Martin ; na. Sent. Stev. ; H 167 ; 
T 45 ; neljul (neldjoul), Som. [It 
is possible that this is a confusion 
between Mai. dua, "two," and 
jual, "to sell"; see S 96.] We 
two : ai-nai'a, Sem. K. Ken. ; W 
52. [See pp. 458, 459, supra!] 

T.'ji- Two : sar, Kena. I. ; T 45 ; T 

270. 
274. Two : dual. Pang. Belimb. ; dfia, 

Sem. Per. ; dua, Sak. Br. Lmv, 

Bland. K. Lang. , U. hid. , Mantr. 

Malac, Jak. Malac; dua'. Sorting; 

H 116; dusu' (dusuk), Galang 

[.!/(//. dua] ; V 250. 

Typhoon : S 480. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

747 

u 

1. Ugly (ilA;/. odoh) : meh or me, Sem. 
Jarum. 

2. Ugly : paban, Sem. Beg. [? cf. C 
247] ; papa' (papa'), Sem. Pa. Max.; 
papak (//-. papa'), Sem. Plus ; papa, 
Som. Horrible : /opa,, Sam. [There 
is a Mai. papa, meaning "poor," 
" wretched.'] 

3. Ugly [ = S 292 [b)\ 

4. Ugly : buh ? (b'uh), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; but, U. Tern. 

5. Ugly : ninag? (ni-naig), Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff.; nenet (n^-n^t), Sak. Pa.; nit, 
Darat ; net", Jelai. Dirty : nedniit 
(«t'o?net), Sak. Ra. [A/on nget ; 
Nia/ion nguo, "dirty."] 

6. Ugly in shape : rupa kgje' (rup 
kji'). Sem. Buk. Max. {Mai. kgji] ; B 
8,9; G 68 ; H 63 ; S 206 ; S 292. 

7. Ugly person : uus, Tembi. Not 
good : 6is, Tembi. 

8. Ulcer [Mai. puru nasi) : pius, Sem. 
Buk. Max. Ulcer; cancer; gangrene 
[Mai. puru haidl ; puru jahat) : pius 
manlkeh? (pius ninlkih?), Sem. Buk. 
Max. 

9. Ulcer ; ulceration : sStong (stung), 
Sem. Pa. Max. Syphilis ; cancer ; 
ulcer of the anus : sSdong (sdung), 
Sem. Pa. Max. \_Mal. restong]. 

Ulcer : A 12-14 ; A 16 ; I 45. 
Ulceration : U 9. 
Umbilical cord : N 16. 

10. Umbrella : pengumbang (p'ngum- 
bang), Pant. Kap. Joh. [Mai. kem- 
bang, " to unfold."] 
Unaccustomed : A 23. 
Unaware : A 23. 

Uncertain : C 70 ; N 79. 

11. Uncle : ngiau (ngi6u), Po-Klo ; nyu? 
or ngu? (nou), Som. 

12. Uncle : nahajok (nahadjok), Sak. 
Kerb. 

13. Uncle : mamak, Serting, Blan. 
Rem., Bedu. II., Me?it. ^Her. I. ; 
mamak, Mant. Bar. Uncle (younger 
than father or mother respectively) ; 
stepfather : mamak, Ment. Her. II. 
[Mai. mamak, "uncle."] 

Uncle : B 410 ; F 40 ; F 43, 44 ; 
O 23 ; Y 43. 

Uncooked : R 42-44 ; U 19. 
Under : E 12. 
Underground : I 14. 
Underneath : B 165 ; D 96 ; E 12. 

14. Understand, to [Mai. firti) : tar 
(/>r. tarr), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

15. Understand, to : ihuol [ihouol), 

Sak. Kerb, [see P 155]. [? Cf. 
Khmer yol [yal], "to see," "to 
understand"; baniol [pftnyal], "to 
make another understand."! 

16. Understand, to: 6rti (orti), Sak. 
Ra. ; (rtl), Sak. Ra. ; rethi (reuthi), 
Mant. Bor. [Mai. arti ; firti (some- 
times pronounced rSti)]. 

17. Underst.^nd, to: intaSng? (in- 
dag'n), Sem. K. Ken. To com- 
prehend [Mai. erti) : ya' bcnteng, 
ex. bra' benteng dorr [Mai. ta' 6rti 
sakali-kali), "don't comprehend at 
all," Sem. Kedah [? cf. E 6] ; C 160 ; 

K 56-59- 

Undo, to ; O 41 ; O 44. 
Uneven ; F 29 ; R 188. 
Unhappy ; H 38. 
Unimportant : F 120. 
Unintentionally : O 39. 

18. Unlucky [Mai. ta' mujor) : majar 
[pr. niajarr), ex. majar me' tun (Afa/. 
ta' mujor mu itu), "you aj-e un- 
lucky," Sem. Plus. 

I 8a. Unmarried: bujeng, e.g. "are 
you unmarried?" bujeng na doh? 
Kent an [Mai. bujang] ; B 1-3. 
Unpleasant : S 206. 

19. Unripe [Mai. mantah) : da-ching, 
Bera; enj6h ? (n'dj6h'), Sem. K. 
Ken. Raw ; uncooked : inja (indi4, 
"deep" a), Sem. K. Ken. [? Cf. 
Khmer chhau, ' ' raw. "] 

20. Unripe [Mai. kelat) : kleg. Pang. 
U. Ariiig; keiSch (klch), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Unripe ; green, of fruit [Mai. 
kelat) : kgled [pr. kSleydd), Sem. 
Plus. Young [Mai. muda) : keled 
(/;-. keledd), Pang. U. Aring. 
Areca - nut : pengfilat, Jak. Mad. 
[Pant. Kap.); (p'ngalat). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. ; (pongalet), Pant. Kap. 
Log. ; buah kelat (bilah kt^lat), Pant. 
Kap. Her. ; F 284. Banana (spec. 
Mai. pisang susu ?) : k61at bawat (kit 
bauat). Sent. Buk. Max. ; M 134. 
Kglat (a kind of tree) : kfidet. Pang. 
U. Ari?ig; [Mai. kSlat puteh), 
Eugenia lineal a or R. pyrifolia : 
kelat plltau (kit plltftu), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [Mai. kelat]. 

21. Unripe; green, of fruit [Mai. kSlat) : 
bekad [pr. be-kadd), Sem. Jarum. 
Insipid [Mai. kfilat) : b6kat (bkt), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Areca or betel-nut 
[Mai. pinang) : bengkad [pr. beng- 
kadd), Sem. Plus; B 12. Kelat 
tree spec. , Eugenia sp. : bSkot 
tehuing (bkot tThuing), Setn. Buk. 
Max. ; (spec. Mai. kfilat merah), 
Eugenia lineata or E. pyrifolia : 

748 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

bekot mera' (bkot niir'), Scm. Buk. 
Max. ; (spec. Mai. kSlat puteh) : 
bekot pgltau (bkt pltu), Scm. Buk. 
Ma.x. Salak-palm (it has edible 
fruit, and the shredded leaves are 
used for women's head - dresses to 
avert headaches) : bekod {pr. b6- 
kodd), Sem. Kedah ; bekod, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; bekot, Pang. U. 
Aritig. " Cat's-eye " (fruit), (spec. 
Mai. buah niata kuching), Ncphelium 
malaiensc : bakut, Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
cf U 20. 

Unripe : R 43. 44 ; Y 42-43. 
Unsuccessful : F 1 2 1 . 
Untie, to : O 41 ; O 44. 
Until : C 219 ; T 86. 
Untrue : L 31. 

22. Unwell : mehdap ; mcdap (?), Bes. 
Sep. ; S 185-193. 

Unwilling : N 80-82. 

Up : O 26. 

Up country : A 5 ; A 9 ; G 42 ; 

T 86. 

To go up country : A 154. 

Upas : B 232 ; P 163-166. 

Upper arm : A 134, 137. 

23. Upright, an (post) : pengkong, Sem. 
Kedah ; S 429. 

Upside down : F n, 12. 

24. Upstream {Mai. ulu) : torn, Sak. 
Guai. [See under T 203. The 
connection is doubtful but possible.] 

25. Upstream ; geha ? (g6 - hor'ig), 
Krau Tem. ; A 6 ; T 86 ; W 30. 

26. Upstream, to go {Mai. mudik) : 
mudig (pr. mudigg), Sem. Plus ; 
mu-dik, Krau Kct. [Mai. mudik] ; 
A 6 ; A 9 ; P 5. 

26A. Upstream, to go : galah, Tembi, 
Darat; galah (galakh), Serau. \Mal. 
galah, "pole" (used for "punting" 
boats upstream).] 
Upstreamwards : A 6. 
Upwards : A 6 ; A 9 ; F 29. 
Urat batu (fungus spec. ) : G 25. 
Urethra : P 62 ; R 183. 
Urinate, to : U 27, 28 ; W 29. 

27. Urine [Mai. kenching) : kenoni 
(doubtful), Patig. U. A ring; (kenom), 
Sem. Stev. ; kenam, Sem. K. Ken. ; 
nAm (norm), Sak. Plus Cliff. ; tS-u 
nom, Sen. Cliff.; teu nAm (teunorm), 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; dbo manum, Bes. 
Sep. Urine ; to urinate : kSnam 
(knm), Scm. Pa. Max., Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; S 186, 187. To urinate: 
makCnom (mknum), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
kcntim? (g'nom), Sem. A'. Ken.; 
kanftm ; kanOm, Tembi ; n6mn:\m ; 
ncmn6m Serau ; nom, Scu. Cliff. ; 

ni-num, Krau Tem. ; ungnom, Sak. 
U.Kam.; manuPm, Bes. A. I. Orifice 
of urethra: kenom (knum), Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; hgndueng kfinam (hn- 
duing knni), Sem. Pa. Max. To 
pass bloody urine : k6nam mahum 
(knmmhum), Sem. Pa. Max.; kgnom 
mahum (knum mhum), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Groin : hinam (hinm), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; [Mai. pfisawat) : hinum 
(hinum), Sem. Buk. Max. Penis: 
nom, Serau. [Mon n^m [kna ; 
knam; nam], ' ' urine " ; A'kmer noum 
[nom], " urine," " to urinate " ; 
Bahnar num, "to urinate"; dak 
num, "urine"; Sfieng num, "to 
urinate"; dak num, "urine"; Chrau 
dak nom, " urine."] 

28. Urine ; to urinate : kochof, Jak. 
Malac. \_Mal. kgnching]. 

29. Use {Mai. guna) : chgnara (tchon- 
ara), Som. [Mai. chara. It should 
apparently mean ' ' usage, " therefore]. 

30. Use : guna (gouna), Sak. Ra. ; 
guna (gouna), Sak. Kerb. ; guna' 
(gunak), Tembi. Useful : bgrguna' 
(bergunak), Darat [Mai. guna]. 

31. Use, to: pakei (pakei), Sak. Ra. , 
Sak. Kerb. To wear : pakei (pakei), 
Som. To use [or to wear] {Mai. 
pakai) : pakai, Tembi ; am berhakei, 
Darat. Clothes : pakain, Ben. New. 
[Mai. pakai, "to use," "to wear"; 
pakaian , ' ' clothing. ' '] 

Utensil : T 195. 

32. Uvula {Mai. anak tekak) : kinog, 
Sem. Plus ; T 102 ; T 165. 

Vagina : P 219-222. 

1. Valley : chinered (tschinered), Sak. 
Tap. ; charuk, Jak. Mad. [Cf. Mai. 
chferuk, "hole"; A7iw^rchrak[chrak], 
"pass," "defile."] [? Cf P 66.] 

2. Valley : dalik, Kena. I. 

3. V.ALLEY : lembah {I'omhzh), Sak. 
Ra. [Mai. lembah]; E 12; P 109; 
S 57 ; W 62. 

Value : B 484. 

4. Vegetables (culinary) : burr (bourr), 
Som. ; b51, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; I6bus or 
Igbuss, Bes. K. L. [? cf B 334]. 

5. Vegetables : hui (houi), Sak. Kerb. 

6. Vegetables : sayor, Sak. Ra. [Mai. 
say or] ; B 332. 

7. Vegetable product (apparently) of 
some kind eaten with rice by the 
li(5sisi : kesom (?), Bes. K. L. 

8. Vein or pulse {Mai. nadi) : ured, 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

749 

Pang. Sam. Veins : 6rat, Sak. Kor. 
Gb. Veins (of wrist), {Mai. uratnadi): 
wetchas(/;'. wettchass), Sem. Kedah. 
Tendon Achillis : urit tanggin, Pang. 
U. Aring ; ured tanggin, Pang. Sa7n, 
Pang. Gal. Sinews ; veins : uyat 
(ujat), Sem. K. Ken. ; urat, Serau. 
Rattan : Qrat, Pant. Kap. Log. ; urat, 
Pant. Kap. Sim. [^1/rt/. urat, "sinew," 
" fibre," " root. "] 
Vein : M 219. 

Venereal disease : S 18&, 187 ; U 9. 
Venus (star) : S 436. 
9. Vermin=L 144 ; and see F 169. 
Vertigo : H 46. 

10. Very (in forming superlatives) : 
t6hett or t'het, ex. bfilog t'het, "evil 
truly, wicked truly," Sem. Kedah; 
Y 28 S^Achin. tfihat]. 

11. Very [Mai. amat ; sangat) : b^, Sen. 
CI. [.l/c« bwoa [bwai] ; Khmer 
pek [bek], "very"; Bahnar bok, 
" much."] 

12. Very: mSnanang, Sak. U. Kam.\ 
neneh {e.g. h'nom neneh, "very 
much"), Bes. Sep. A. /. ; neneh, 
Bes. K. Lang. ; nene, Bes. Sep. All 
right : neneh, Bes. Songs. Assuredly : 
nene', e.g. lop nene' {.Mai. jauh 
bSnar), "far indeed," "very far"; 
chelaka nene' {Mai. chelaka benar), 
"verily a misfortune," "truly dis- 
astrous," Bes. Sep. A. /. ; ngani 
(nganee or nyanee?), in the phrase 
kardur nganee bar, " a handsome 
woman, ' Sak. J. Low. Perfect (?) ; 
mgnandn (monanan), Sak. Ra. [It 
is doubtful whether these are all con- 
nected. ? Cf. Khmer n3.s [nas], 
"very."] 

13. Very ; exceedingly {Mai. sangat ; 
amat): anibh, ex. bed-ed amoh, 
"very good," Sem. Kedah [Mai. 
amat]. 

14. Very (superlative =" the most"): 
sakali, Sak. J. Low [.!/«/. sakali] ; 
G 65 ; G 67 ; M 42-44. 

Vessel, sailing : S 160. 
Vibrate, to: S 129-131. 

15. Vibration; trembling: gerahanya' ? 
(krahanyak), Sem. Pa. Max. To 
shiver : keda hfinja' (kda hnja'), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Noise of explosion : 
kedahaya' (kdahaia'), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
kgdahia' (kdahia'), Sem. Buk. Max. 
[? Cf. Khmer noneak [nftnak] ; nonear 
[fiaftar] ; noni [fianiyj, " to shiver. "] 
Vibration : T 227. 

16. Village : gerbS (gorbo), Sak. Kerb. 
[?=HS7]. 

17. Village : tgpasa (topasse), Sak. Ra. 

18. Village : changkat (tchangkat), 
Sak. Kerb. Hill : changkat (tschang- 
kat), Sak. MaHin. \Mal. changkat, 
"hill."] 

19. Village : kampong (kampon), Sak. 
Ra. ; kampong ; kampuk, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; kampuk (kampouk), S'dm. ; 
kampong, Serau ; kanipok", Jelai. 
Place : kambugie, Sem. K. Ken. 
[Probably = kampuk ye, "my (our) 
village."] \_Mal. kampong.] 

20. Village : pSmengeh (p'mengeh), 
Pa7it. Kap. Joh. Clearing round a 
village: pgmengeh bagin (p'mengeh 
hagin), l\mt. Kap. Joh. ; B 212. 
Village : G 9 ; H 153. 

Virgin : C 102 ; F 63 ; F 75 ; G 28 ; 
M 6 ; Y 41. 

21. Voice : sua', Sein. Pa. Max. \^Mal. 
suara] ; S 362 ; S 364. 

Void, to (excrement) : S 467-472 ; 

V 22-24. 

Volcano : H 84 ; H 91. 

22. Vomit, to {Mai. muntah) : ya' ko', 
Sem. Pins ; ya-ko', Pan^. U. Arin^\ 
ko (kSr), Sen. Cliff.; kaho' (kehi"^), 
Sak. Kerb. ; ko' (ku'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; mako' (mku'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; nfiko (no - ko), Sbm. ; 
koh, Tembi, Darat ; kuk ; 
ku', Bes. Sep. A. I. ; kuh ; kuak- 
kuak, Bes. Songs. To be inclined to 
vomit : mako' (mku'), Setn. Buk. 
Max. To cough: ka-kua', Bes. 
Songs. Seasick : kuh, Bes. Sep. A. 
L ; ko' lebong. Pang. U. Aring, 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. Sick {Mai. 
mabok) : ko', Sem. Jarum, Sem. 
Plus. To void {Mai. berak) : ya- 
kok or ko', Sem. Kedah. Cholera 
{Mai. muntah berak) : i-ku' i-cho, 
Sak. U. Bert. ; S 468. \Soiithern 
Nicobar oko-hala ; Shorn PS oko, 
"to vomit"; cf. Boloven, Alak 
kaSk ; Lave kao ; Halang k6ok, " to 
cough." Curiously, Andamanese has 
similar forms, e.g. Puchikwar, Kol 
6m-kuwe, ' ' to vomit. "] 

23. Vomit, to : bul (boul), Sak. Ra. 
Sick: bul, e.g. bul bauwau, "sea- 
sick"; bul pele', "sick from eating 
poisonous fruit," Bes. Sep. A. /. 
Poisonous : bul, Bes. Songs. \_Bahnar 
bul, "drunk," "drunkenness"; 
A'ht/rerpii] [bul], "vegetable poison," 
"effect of narcotics" (and, in com- 
bination, "nausea"); Santali bul; 
Stieng biiiul (binhul), "drunk"; 
Bahnar bonul (bonhul), "poison- 
ous"; Mon babu, "to be intoxi- 
cated " ; Boloven liul ; Niahon bu : 

750 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Alak baftu, "poison," "drunk"; 
Lave bul, "poison" ; Halang bul ; 
Sedangh-\A, bu, "drunk."] 
24. Seasick {Mai. niabok laut) : tuin 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; tuwing (?), Se^n. 
Plus ; tuing laut (tuing laut), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Faint from loss of 
blood? [Mai. mabok darah) : tuing 
mihum (? tu'ing mhum), Sem. Pa. 
Max. To get drunk : luaSng 
(luilg'n), Sem. K. Ken. [? = F 7; 
? cf. Bahnar uing, "turning," 
"giddy" ; A'Amer sreveng [srawing], 
"drunk"; Stieng -amg uai, "giddi- 
ness" ; see also B 175 ; T 251.] 

w 

Wadding : B 284-290 ; C 42. 

Tree producing wadding : T 207, 

208 ; T 219. 
Wade, to : C 216. 
Wag, to : F 27. 

1. Wages ". pSngerek (p'ng'rek), Pafif. 

Kap. Joh. 

2. Wages : gaji (gadji), Sam. \Mal. 

gaji] ; G 3. 

3. Waist {Mai. pinggang) : gel (//-. 
gell). Pang. U. Aring. 

4. Waist: ad. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal.; 
B 6 ; L 127. 

Waist- cloth : C 171-183 ; E 76 ; G 
25-27 ; P 251 ; R 183. 

5. Wait, to {Mai. nanti) : poch, Sc/i. 
Cliff. ; pon, Sak. Ra. ; po'i-ana, S'6m. 
[for the apparent suffix cf. S 222 and 
T 51] ; ep6i (^poi), Sak. Kerb. Wait 
a bit ! {Mai. nanti dahulu) : eponiuet, 
Tembi ; poino' (poinok), /f/(7z ; potnA, 
Darat. Slowly : pepoi, Bcs. Sep. A. I.\ 
hipoi, Bes. Malac. Rest ; repose : 
penpon (nanti) \sic\, Sak. Ra. ; 
pegpoi (nanti) \sic\ Sak. Kerb. 
[The Malay equivalent is given as 
"soman-an," which I do not under- 
stand ; possibly " senang " or " kasen- 
angan " is meant. ] To stop {uifrans. ) : 
iipoi (epoi), Sab. Kerb. ; pon, in the 
phrase, an ok ukum pon siap iji 
sCngui, " I gave the order to stop 
(and) get ready (as) the day (was 
turning to) night," Sak. Ra. \_Bahnar 
p5n, "to rest," "to stop."] 

6. Wait, to : p^rik, Sak. Kerb. To 
stojj {Mai. bSrhenti) : par-et, Sen. 
Cliff. Stop : po-6t, Serting. 

7. Wait, to {Mai. nanti) : huan, Krau 
Ket. 

8. Wait, to : indo ; indo, Sem. K. 
Ken.; lidoi? (h-di-r-i), U. Tevi. ; 
jidoi? (ji-der-i), U. Cher. To wait; 

to await {Mai. nanti) : ta-d&', Sein. 
J arum, Sem. Plus. Wait ; \v\\\{Mal. 
nanti) : tada,', ex. tadd' he' achi' {Mai. 
nanti kita makan), "wait (till) we 
(have) eaten," Sem. Kedah. Ap- 
parently the force of tadd' he' achi' is 
" we shall {or will) eat." 
9. Wait, to {Mai. nanti): 6m -te', 
Lebir; $n-te, Kerbat. To await {Mai. 
nifinanti): ya'-'nte (yr 6nte), Pang. U. 
Aring. Shall or will {Mai. hfindak) : 
'nte or 6nte, ex. 6nte ye chi' bab, " I 
shall or will eat rice," Pang. U. Aring. 
Will {Mai. nanti or mahu) : inte {pr. 
intgy), ex. inte u' ma-mak^' {Mai. nanti 
dia 'nak bertfilor), "it is going to lay 
an egg " (of a fowl), Sem. Kedah 
[cf. Mai. nanti]. 
To await : A 189 ; S 222. 

10. Wake, to : banjin, Bes. Bell. [? cf, 
Mai. bangun] ; A 190-193. 

11. Walk, to: ris, Ben. New. Road: 
tamarit, Bett. New. [Possibly stands 
for rit ; cf. F 5.] [Cf. Achin. rgt 
[rgj], "road."] 

12. Walk, to: id,, e.g. "to go for a 
walk," cho' ia, Bes. Malac. To go 
(to set out on a journey) : yo, SSm. 
To walk : C 216 ; G 42, 43 ; G 46. 
To walk along : D 93. 

To walk fast : Q 6. 
Walking-stick: S 451, 452. 
I2A. Wall : dindikn, Serau \Mal. 
dinding] ; B 100. 
Wallet : B 11-15. 
Wallow, to : B 80. 

13. Wander, to: tyel, ex. ma-tyel 
kleng telejayn, "to wander on the 
soft (ground?)," Sem. Kedah ; E 58 ; 

G 43- 

14. Want, to : ((?) jum (joom), Jak. Stev. 
Let us go : jum, Jak. Malac. To 
want ; to wish for {Mai. mahu) : ya' 
om {pr. onim), Sem. J arum. 

{b) To want ; to wish : 'nghon, Sak. 
U. Kam. To want ; to wish : will 
{aux. ) : hot, e.g. ia-lok mg-nang eng 
hot chip ma' sSrak" bSt (bort) chep, 
' ' to-morrow my brother will go to 
the jungle to catch birds," Sen. CI. 
Will ; shall {Mai. handak ; mahu) : 
hot, Sen. Cliff. ; hot", Jelai ; {Mai. 
mahu) : enhS-d^, Krau Em. I like 
{Mai. sahaya suka) : en hof*, Jelai ; 
en huk" \or en hfik"], Darat. I want 
{Mai. sahaya mahu): en hot", Darat ; 
cnny hot \sic\ Jelai. To love {Mai. 
sayang) : huak, Tembi ; hok, Serau 
[or Tembi ?] ; en hok", Jelai ; 
enhok", Darat. I like (or love) the 
Sakais : huwih Sen - 01, Tembi ; 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

7SI 

enghok ma senoi, Jelai. I want 
tobacco : am hod bakau, Krati Em. 
[There seems to be no connection 
between groups [a) and (^). ] 

15. Want, to: mot, Pant. Kap. J oh. 
To desire ; to wish {Fr. vouloir) : 
gamek, Sem. Klapr. Will (aztx. 
Mai. mahu) : gAmek, Sem. Craw. 
Hist. Want ; will [aux. ?) : na'-mS, 
Krau Tern. [Bahnar met, met, 
komet : Prou moot ; Boloven, Niahon 
mot ; Lave ngOmot, ' ' to love " ; cf. 
Mon mik-ku [mik-gwa], "to desire 
to obtain."] 

16. Want, to ; shall ; will [Mai. mahu ; 
hendak) : au. Sen. Cliff. [? Cf. 
Hala?ig wah ; Bahnar, Sedang oa, 
"to wish," "to want."] 

17. Want, to {Fr. vouloir) : mao, Sak. 
Kerb., Sak. Ra. To will: mo', 
Mant. Bor. Wish (want, aux.): 
mau, Sak. J. Low [Mai. mahu]. 

i3. Want, to: nenok? (n'nok), Me/il. 
Stev. Will [aux. vb.): handa' ; na', 
Mantr. Malac. ; henak ; 'nak, Jak. 
Malac. Want : endAk, Jak. Ba. 
Pa. I want to eat : ku hSnakmakan, 
Jak. Malac. I am going there : 
aho na tikesut, Tati. Sag. \_Mal. 
hSndak]. 

19. Want, to, (desire) : gfigar ; kagar, 
Bes. Sep. A. L To desire : 'gar ; 
agar; kagar, Bes. Songs; A 178; 
G 43 : L 61 ; L 148. 

Not to want : N 80-82. 
To be in want of : S 281, 282. 
Wanting : F 117 ; N 69. , 
War : F 97. 

20. Ward off, to: tepi' (tpi'), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [Mai. tSpis] ; P 241. 
Warily : C 260. 

Warm : H 142. 

21. Warped ; wrinkled : tangu, Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

22. Wash, to : basoh, Sem. Beg. [Mai. 
basoh]. 

22A. Wash, to : lab, Sem. K. Ken. 

23. Wash or clean, to {Mai. basoh 
(?/-chuchi) : ya-j'au, ex. 3'au-leh abod 
{Mai. chuchi-lah baik-baik), " clean 
(it) well," Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
[? Cf. Kon Tu, Su^, Boloven, Jarai, 
Bahnar, Halang rao ; ? cf. Lave 
njiao, "to wash."] G 63 ; C 142, 143. 

24. Wasp = H 135. 

25. Wasp [Mai. penyengat) : (a) amoyd 
[pr. amoydd), Sem. Plus; hanmit, 
Pang. U. Aring; sem tit, Tembi ; 
simut, Jelai ; semuut, Serau ; (spec. 
Mai. pSnygngat hitam) : humuit (hu- 
mQuIit), Sem. Pa. Max. ; hemuich 

(hmuich), Sem. Buk. Max. Bee : 
sennit, Sak. Kor. Gb.\ 
{b) Wasp or hornet {^Lal. kCrawai) : 
oikomud, Tembi ; oikomod, Serau. 
A species of hornet found in brush- 
wood : oikomot, Serau ; akoniot [?], 
Sak. Em. [? Cf. B 143, or more 
probably H 1354-W 25 (a).] 

26. Wasp (Mai. p6nyengat) : hayuh, 
Bes. So/igs ; H 135, 136. 

Watch, to : A 131 ; A 193 ; S 250. 

27. Water : torn (tohm), Jehehr ; torn 
{pr. to^'m), Sem. Jarum, Sem. Plus, 
Pang. U. A7-ing, Pang. Sam, Pang. 
Gal. ; tom, Pang. Belimb., Pang. 
K. Aring, U. Kel., I.ebir, Kcrbat, 
Krau Ket., U. Tern., U. Cher. 
River: tom, U. Cher., Sak. Guai, 
Krau Tem., U. Tern., Krau Ket., 
Lebir, Kerbat ; torn na'. Pang. U. 
Aring; M 193. River or stream 
(J/fl/.sungai): tom, Sem. Plus. Rivulet 
{Mai. anak sungai) : awak tom 
(almost certainly mistake for tom 
awak) [why? it makes intelligible 
sense either way]. Pang. U. Aring; 
tom wong. Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Tributary stream : wong tom (wong), 
[sic in original], Lebir; a-wa' tom, 
Kerbat ; C loi ; k6 - non tom, U. 
Cher. ; C 102. Ebb {Mai, 
ayer surut) : tom sat. Pang. U. 
Aring. Flow or flood - tide {Mai. 
aygr pasang) : tom sSnat, Pang. U. 
Aring ; W 30. 

28. Water {Mai. ayer) : goyd, Sem. 
Plus. River {Mai. sungai) : goyd 
(/;-. goydd), Sem. Plus ; gell, Sem. 
Mart ill ; gir-bauh, Sem. Beg. ; gir- 
bak, Be7i. New. ; ? B 202 or M 192. 
Streamlet {Mai. anak sungai) : gel 
wong, Se>?i. Kedah ; C 101. 

29. Water : h6, Sem. Beg. ; ho, Sem. 
Jur. Rob. ; hoh, Se7n. Jur. And., 
Sem. Jur. Mar. , Setn. Jur. 
New., Ben. New. ; hong (hon), 
Sojn. , Sak. Kerb. ; 6ng, Po- 
Klo ; ong, Sein. Per., Sem. K. Ken., 
Sem. Ken. ; aung (oung), Sak. Jcr. ; 
ak (auk (ork)), Sak. Br. Low ; kg 
(org), Tem. CI., Sak. Plus Cliff. ; 
6g (ohg), Sak. Croix; (ohgh), Sak. 
Kerb. ; an, Sak. Kerb. ; "give me a 
little drinking water," ola ok ong 
ikei sen geming ong, Sem. K. Ken. ; 
F 178. River : ing ? (aung), Sem. 
Per. ; hong (hofi), Som.; hong hibu 
(honhibou), Som.; B202; ong-mend- 
ing, Sejn. K. Ken. ; B 203. Brook : 
ong-s^n, Sem. K. Ken. ; S 282. 
Spring : jai dSng (dscheidg'n), Se?n. 

753 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

K. Ken. Clear water : hong biek 
(hon biek), S'dm. Dirty water: hong 
bak (hoii bak), Slim. Slightly muddy 
water (/■>. eau trouble) : hong to- 
huing (hoii tohouifi), S'dm. ; R 51. To 
drink: hoh, Sem. Beg., Ben. New.; 
6k, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; (ock), Som. ; ok 
(ohk), Sak. Korb. Lias ; im ig (im 
org), Sak. Br. Low ; imog, Sak. 
Croix ; himhong (himhoii), Sak. 
Kerb. ; ami - ong ; ong, Sem. Per. 
To urinate: yun oh (iun atiuh?), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [? Cf. Khasi vcm. ; 
Rumai, Riang om ; Danaw om ; 
Khmus, Lemet horn, "water"; 
Annam uong ; Stieng uon, "to 
drink."] 

30. Water : bateao, Sem. Craw. Hist., 
Sem. Ked. And., Sem. Ked. Mar., 
Sem. Ked. Rob. , Sem. Ked. 
Neiv. ; batiao, Sem. Klapr. ; 
bateau (batean), Sem. Craw. Gram.; 
batau (batau), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
bateuh (bateuh), Sem. Buk. Mak. ; 
bateutom, U. Pat. ;'W zj; he\.e.-\\,Sem. 
Kedah ; beteu [or beteyu), Sem. 
Kedah ; beteu [better betiu : in the 
MS. originally betew], Se^n. U. Sel. ; 
biteii, Sem. Ij. ; betioh (betieuh), 
Pang. Jalor; S 71; S 152; bayo, Sem. 

< Klapr. ; taya, Or. Beriimb. ; tieu, 
Tan. U. Lang. ; tiu, Sak. Tan. 
Ram. , Sak. Sung. ; teu, Darat ; 
te-u, Sen. CI. , Sak. Blanj. CI. , 
Sak. Slim ; teu, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff., Sak. Blanj. Sw. ; t^oh, Sak. 
Tap. ; tauh, Sak. Martin ; tii, Sak. 
U. Kampar; to, Sak. Guai ; tS,? 
(tor), Krau Tern. ; ttieh ; tueh 
(toueh ; toueh'), Sak. Ra. ; ketar 
(k'tar), Sak. Em. ; U 27 ; diao. 
Or. Hu. Jok. /.. Or. Hu. Joh. IL; 
diau, U. Ind. ; dau ? (daii), Be7i. 
New. ; deu, Bes. Malac. ; dS-u, Bes. 
Her.; diu (due), Bers. Stev ; (d'hu), 
Ben. New. ; doo, Bes. Sep. ; do5h, 
Bes. Songs ; doh, Bes. Bell. ; du, 
Buk. U. Lang. ; (dooh), Sak. Sel. 
Da. ; du, Ment. Her. IL ; B 82 ; 
T 207 ; dak, Bera, Serting, Bed. 
Chiong, U. Ind. , Pal. River (Mai. 
sungai) : bSteu, Setn. Kedah ; 
bitefi, Sem. Ij. ; beteu [in the MS. 
originally betau], Sem. U. Sel. 
River or stream [Mai. sungai) : bfiteu, 
Sem. Kedah. Confluence of streams : 
bateuh (btiuh), Sem. Buk. Max. 
River: teuh (t^owh'), Sak. Kerb.; 
t6 - u, Tern. CI. , .SV«. CI. , Sak. 
Blanj. CI. , Sak. Slim CI. ; t6u, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; (t^on), Sak. Croix ; tiu, 

Sak. Br. Low, Sak. Tan. Ram. ; 
• tii, Sak. U. Kam. ; tu (tou), Sak. 
Kerb. ; to, Sak. Ra. ; klont^o, Sak. 
Tap. ; menchol tiu, Serau ; tiu 
(menchol) \sic\, Sak. Em. ; d6-u, 
Bes. Her. ; doh, Sak. Sel. Da. ; dak, 
Serting ; doo ggnde', Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
doh g6nde' (doh gundek), Bes. Bell.; 
M 190. Big river : ti mgnu, Tembi ; 
ti entoi, Serau [or Tembi\ River : 
tiiuh 'Hoi, Sak. Martin ; B 205. 
Sea : dak. Pal. ; U. Ind. Rivulet : 
wangba-tauh, Sem. Beg.; wangbak[?], 
Ben. Neiv. Tributary stream : wang 
bateuh (ung btiuh), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
a wang batauh (auang btuh), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; C loi. Tributary river: 
kuod teu, Sak. Plus Cliff. ; ke-non 
te-u, Sen. Cliff. ; k6-non tiu, Sak. 
Blanj. Cliff. ; kenun doo, Bes. Sep. 
Stream ; rivulet : tu-kun (toii-koun), 
S'dm. Brook [lit. child of water) : 
kenon doo, Bes. Sep. A. I. Stream : 
kenun dak, 5«-/z«j'; C 102. Rivulet 
[Mai. anak sungai) : te-u ma'-chut, 
Sen. Cliff. ; S 282. Stream : kelio' ? 
batauh (kliu' ? btuh), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
cf. W 41 (?) ; batang bateuh (batng 
btiuh), Sein. Buk. Max. ; T 242. 
Small stream : tiu' me (tiuk me), 
Tembi ; ti machot, Serau [or Tembifl. 
Bank of river : tebing teu, Krau Em. 
Mouth of river: bog tiueh (bog- 
tiouA), S'om. ; cheba tiix, Sen. Em. : 
M 206. Mouth of small river : bok 
tu ajat (bok tou adjet), Sak. Kerb. ; 
M 202 or M 206? ; S 282 or O 41. 
Mouth of large river: ti menu (ti 
monou), Sak. Kerb. ; B 203. Brack- 
ish water : batauh pasing ( btuh 
pasing), Sem. Pa. Max. ; bateuh 
pasing (btiuh pasing), Sem. Pa. 
Buk. ; S 16. Clear, transparent 
water : batauh jfirnih (batauh jrnih), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; bateu jernas (btiu 
jrns), Sem. Buk. Max. Fresh (not 
salt) water : batauh bglhut ? (batauh 
blhuh), Sem. Pa. Max.; bateu bglhut 
( btiu blhut ), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
F 261. Muddy water: batauh belkun 
( btuh blkun ), Sem. Pa. .Max. ; 
W 98 ; bateuh lak (btiuh Ik), Sem. 
Buk. .Max. Salt water : batauh 
king (btuh king), Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
bateu king (btiu king), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Brackish water : teu ( tiu) king, 
.Sem. Pa. .Max. Clear water : to- 
nin, Sak. Ra. Cold water : t6u 
singi'it ; t6u sing^t, Sak. Kor. Gb. 
Dirty water : to bgchut (to-botchout), 
Sak. Ra. Drinking water : nok 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

753 

t^oh, Sak. Tap. ; ngot tiiuh, Sak. 
Martin. [These must mean ' ' to 
drink water."] Hot water: K'u 
w^tbut, Sak. Kor. Gb. Fresh (not 
salt) water : doo hanit (?), Bes. Sep. 
Low water : doo kasti (?), lies. Sep. 
Salt water : doo hay it (?) ; doo 
hanyit (?), Bes. Sep. Dew : batauh 
r6mbun (btuh rmbun), Sem. fa. 
Max. ; bilteu rC-mbun (btiu rmbun), 
Sent. Buk. Max. Eddy of water : 
med beteau, ex. kleng med bateau, 
" in the eddy of the water," Sem. 
Kedah. Spring of water : med betiu 
(med betew), Sevi. Stev. Sources of 
stream ; spring of water : met bateuh 
(mit btiuh), Sem. Buk. Max. ; E 83; 
Ebb-tide : bateuh sCiyut (btiuh suit), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; doo surut, Bes. 
Sep. Ebbing of the tide : batiuh 
ma'suyut ( btiuh ma'suiut ), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Flood - tide : doo yal, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. Top of the flood- 
tide : doo yal 'mbun, Bes. Sep. ; 
C 165 ; B" 290. Flood-tide ; high 
water: bateuh pasang (btiuh pasng), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Slime ; alluvial 
deposit: tai' bateuh (tali'? btiuh). 
Sem. Buk. Max. Headwaters of 
river (upstream) : da keping bateuh 
(dakping btiuh), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
A 5. Head-springs or upper reaches 
of a river {Mai. hulu ; ulu) : sen-doo 
or chen-doo, Bes. K. L. Plead- 
waters : chhen-doo, Bes. A. I. In- 
land: sendoo; chen-dbo, Bes. A. I.; 
E 63. Waterfall : doo che-Iang (?), 
Bes. Sep. Honey : d§-u [lebah ?], 
Bes. Her. Oil : dak, Kena. II. 
Wood-oil : doo long, Bes. K. /,. ; 
T 207. Sap : batauh keti ( btuh 
kti), Sem. Fa. Max. ; bateu keti 
(btiu kti), Sem. Buk. Max. Sweat ; 
perspiration : doo kret, Bes. A. I. , 
Bes. K. L.\ B 325. \Stieng, Kuy Dek 
dak ; Alon dai' [dak] ; Braou dak ; 
Ka, Bahnar dak ; Cuoi, Phnong, dak 
(dac) ; Kascng, Halang ddk ; Chrdu 
da'^ ; Tareng, Churu da ; Churu, 
Kon Ttc, Sui da ; Sedang diak, dea ; 
Sud, Nanhang do ; So doi ; Prou 
doak (doac) ; Samrd toak (toac), 
tick ; Boloven tiak (tiac) ; For teak 
(tfec) ; Xong, Chang tak ; Froons 
tok ; Khmer \.\k [pi: t3k) [dik] ; Old 
Khmer trak ; Central and Southern 
A'icobar dak ; Teressa, Chowra rak ; 
Sinbhum Kol, Santhal, Bhutnijdah — - 
' ' water. ' '] 
31. Water : wig weh, Be7i. New. 
[Very doubtful ; perhaps Newbold 

VOL. II 

took it by mistake from the Anda- 
manese column in Anderson's Com- 
parative Vocabulaiy, where " mig- 
way " is given as= " water, "j 

32. Water : rantong (ranton), Sak. 
Ka. Sea : rantau, Kena. /. 

33. Water : i (ee), /ak. Stev. ; yeh6, 
J ok. Kaff. As. ; (yehs), J ok. Kaff. ; 
ya. Tan. Sag. ; ayer, Mantr. Malac. , 
Jak. Malac; ayerh (ayekh), Barok; 
ail (aiee), Ment. Stev. ; ay-i. Or. 
Trang; B 137. River: ^yer, Jak. 
Mad. ; aygr, Kena. II. ; ayer, Blan. 
Rem. , Bedu. II. ; yau, Kena. I. 
Stream : yau, Kena. I. ; ayer kSchah 
(ayer kecheh), Blan. Rem. ; S 284 
[.1/(7/. ayer]. 

34. W.\ TER ; river : sempeloh (s'mp'loh). 
Pant. Kap. Joh. ; B 138. River : 
simpeloh. Pant. Kap. Her. ; simplu, 
Pant. Kap. Log. ; sempeluh, Jak. 
Mad. [Pant. Kap.). To bathe : 
bSsempeioh (b's'mp'loh). Pant. Kap. 
Joh. To cry: besempeloh peningok 
(b's'mp'loh p'ningok), Paul. Kap. 
Joh. ; S 76. Coconut oil : sempeloh 
buah pulau (s'mp'loh buah pulau), 
Pant. Kap. Lem. Sea : sempeloh 
pemasing (s'mp'loh p'masing), Jak. 
Sim. ; s6mp6ioh kemasing (s'mp'loh 
k'masing). Pant. Kap. Joh. ; .S 16. 
A spring : peningok semp61oh 
(p'ningok s'mp'loh). Pant. Kap. 
Joh. ; S 76 ; H 116. [? cf. Mai. 
pSluh, peloh, "sweat"; S 536. ] 
Water : E 27 ; E 83 ; F i ; F 185 ; 
R 9 ; S 324. 

35. Water, clean : lau, Sak. Tap. 

36. Water, slightly muddy : buko 
(bouko), Sak. Kerb. Muddy {Mai. 
keroh) : blaknng, Tembi. 

37. Water, slightly muddy : kro, Sak. 
Ra. Muddy : kru, Serau. [Mai. 
keroh, " muddy. "] 

38. Water, turbid : semir, Sak. Tap. 

39. River : meheng, Sak. Kerb. 

40. River : la'wak, U. Tern. Tributary 
river: i-wa' la'wak, U. Tem. ; C loi. 
Water, to : B 8 1 . 

41. 'Watercourse; bed of river: kSlS- 
hing (klhing), Sein. Pa. Max. 
Waterfall : R 29, 30 ; W 30. 
Watersnake : S 310. 

42. Wave [Mai. ombak) : chabug (/;-. 
cha-bugg), Sem. Kedah. Foam : 
che'bug? (chekbuk), Sem. Pa. Max.; 
cha'bug? (chkbuk), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Foamy : ba'bug ? ( bkbuk ), Sem. 
Buk. Max. 

43. Wave: ombag [pr. om-ba^g), Sem. 
Plus [Mai. ombak]. 

3 C 

754 

COM PA RA TI VE VOCA B ULA R V OF 

44. Wave, to : alai, Bes. Songs. 

45. Wave, to : rai ; kirai ; mengirai, 
Bes. Sof/gs ; ? cf. P 8 [AJid. kirai] ; 
S 529-532. 

46. Wave to and fko, to : keau- 
plakeau, Bes. Soz/gs. 

Waving about : D 14. 

47. Wax {-MciL lilin) : hnot {or henot) 
mit (doubtful), Sent. Kedah; nfttmut? 
(ntniut?), Sem. Pa. Max. ; cf. W 25 
[?:=W 48, with infix -611-]. 

48. Wax: sud, Sciii. Buk. Max., Sem. 
Craw. Hist. ; (soud) Sein. Klapr. ; 
saut, Sem. Per. ; sod [pr. sodd), 
{e.g. the " kelulut " wax (wax of a 
small wild bee) used for affixing the 
end of the ' ' bertam ' ' leaflet to the 
upas tree when collecting "upas" 
Kedah fashion), Sem.Kcdah; sot, Sem. 
Plus, Pang. Sam ; sot (doubtful). 
Pang. U. Aritig ; sah-hok, Sak. 
Sel. Da. Bees' wax : sud, Sem. 
Craw. Gram. [^BolovetisiiX, "wax" ; 
but see B 140.] 

49. Wax : keluai, Sak. Br. Loiu ; k61oi 
(keloye), Sak. Croix ; (koloi), Sak. 
Kerb. ; k'loieh, Tan. U. Lang. ; 
peloi, Seiiing. [Mon plui [pluai], 
" wax."] 

50. Wax : lanchur, Kena. I. [This 
may be connected with the following 
by some such curious relation as that 
which subsists between, e.g., kelapa 
and kerambil, or the Jav. wali and 
wangsul ; cf C 57 ; C 200 ; D 149 ; 
E 51 ; W loi.] 

51. Wax: lilin, Sak. Blanj. Sw., Jak. 
Malac. \_Mal. lilin] ; R 73, 74 ; R 76 ; 
S 336. Wax in the ear : D 56. 

52. We : ai, Sem. K. Ken. ; hi, Sak. 
U. Tap. ; hi, Sak. Martin ; hik, 
Som ; he'. Pang. U. A ring; he, 
Sem. Kedah ; heyho, Ben. New. ; 
he-babar ; he-'mbar (///. "we two "), 
Bes. Sep. A. I. ; he-pape' ; he-'mpe 
(lit. "we three"), Bes. Sep. A. I. 
Our : he-punya', Bes. Sep. A.I. I : 
he, Krau Em. \Sui\\€\, "we."] 

53. We : jo', Sak. Tan. Ram. 

54. We : 'ma, Bes. Malac. [? cf. M 23]. 

55. We : kami, Jak. Malac. \^Mal. 
kami]. 

56. We : kita, Sak. Pa. [.1/a/. kita] ; 
I 1-4 ; M 26. 

57. Weak: bubo (or bubo, arnib ?), 
Sem. Beg. 

58. Weak : arnib, Sem. Beg. [See the 
preceding ; both, being unsupported 
by other authorities, arc very doubtful. 
Is there a confusion V)etween Afal. 
lOteh "weak," and letak "to put" ? 

the word bubo (cf Mai. buboh, " to 
put ") suggests something of the 
kind.] 

59. Weak : m6n-ten, Kerbat. 

60. We.\k: beh alah, Jak. Ba. Pa., Jak. 
Sim. Feeble ; be-alah, Jak. Mad. 
[The first syllable is a negative 
( F 121); so the rest of the word 
probably means "strong"; cf 
W 64.] 

61. Weak: Igmes (/;-. lemess ), Pang. 
U. Aring; Ifima (Ibma), Sak. Ra. 
Faded : l^mba, Sak. Kor. Gb. Soft : 
lemah, Seraii. [Cf. Mai. 16mah ; 
Javan. lemes, "soft," "weak."] 

62. Weak : legop (logop), Sak. Kerb. 
Valley (il/rt/. lembah): legup(logoup), 
Som. ; legop (Ibgop), Sak. Kerb. 
Race (Mai. lomba) : Ifigop (logop), 
Sak. Ra. [There is evidently a 
blunder here, due to the similarity 
of the Mai. words Ifimah, lembah, 
and lomba ; some at least of these 
meanings are wrong. De Morgan 
introduces further confusion by trans- 
lating lomba by the French "race," 
whereas it means the English 
"race," (i.e. competition).] 

63. Weak : lo-has, Som. ; leye', Sem. 
Kedah ; layuh, Kena. I. Ill : layu, 
Kena. I. [? cf. Mai. 16su or layu], 

64. Weak : b6h r6t, Jak. Sim. ; beh 
rot, Jak. Ba. Pa. Feeble : be-rot, 
Jak. Mad.; F 121 [cf. W 60]; 
A 4 ; H 31 ; S 272 ; S 337 ; T 145 ; 
T 147, 148. 

65. Weapon : senj^ato ( siiato ), Sak. 
Ke7'b. ; senjata (sndjata), Sak. Ra. 
[J/rt/. senjata] ; I 36. 

Wear, to : U 31. 
Weary : T 151. 
Weather, fair : F 9. 

66. Weave, to : hidas, e.g. hidaschol^ng, 
"to weave rattan," Bes. Sep. ; 
P 125, 126. 

Web, spider's : S 381. 

67. Wedge : hentong, Bes. K. Lang. 
[Ma/, sentong] ; W 67. 

Week : D 17. 

Weep, to : C 284-286 ; S 175. 
Well ( adv. ) : G 65-67 ; G 69 ; 
G 71, 72. 

68. Well in health (Mai. s6gar) : ja' 
genok, "recovered (from sickness)," 
Sem. J arum. 

69. Wei.e in health : me-som ? (me 
perhaps represents the second pers. 
pron. ), Sem. Jariivi. 

70. Well in health : semboh, Barok 
\Mal. s6mboh] ; C 205 ; C 227 ; 
Ci65. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

755 

71. Well (of water) : telaga (tolaga), 
Soni. \Mal. tfilaga] ; T 173. 

72. West: bangrui ; bangroi (doubtful), 
Sem. Kedah ; bang-rui or t;en-roi, 
Sem. Plus. [? cf. .!/«/. Ijarat, or cf. 
D 19?]; D33; D35. 

West wind : W 1 14. 

73. Wet (.1/'.'/. basah) : lua'ayd, Pung. 
U. A ring; nia'ayd (/;-. ma'aydd), 
Pang. Sam ; ma-ach (nia'ch), Sem. 
Buk. Max. Wet ; damp : main ; 
ma-in (?), Sem. K. Ken. To wet : 
sia' ma-ach (sia' ma'ch), Sem. Duk. 
Max. Rain : o'-hag [pr. o'-hagg ; 
lit. "it rains"), Sem. Kedah \ o'-heg 
[pr. o'-hegg), Sem. /arum, Sem. 
Plus ; hay t or hayd ( pr. haytt or 
haydd), esp. in phrase o'-hayd= " it 
rains" (cp. hayd kam = .l/i:?/. ujan 
banyak, "muchrain," "heavy rain"; 
M 46), Patig. U. A ring; hat, 
Pang. K. A ring; he', Pang. Belimh. 
Drizzle ( Mai. ujan rinyai ) : hayt 
bleb (?), Pang. Sam. ; O 34 [cp. 
F 11]. [? Cf. Bahnar bach, "to 
melt"; hoch, " t(j flow"; hngach, 
" continual rain."] 

{b) Wet : ke-oig, Sak. Plus Cliff. , 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 

74. Wet : [a] teko (tfikdn), Bes. Her. ; 
tekS, Bes. Ma lac. ; tekS. ; tfiklh, Bes. 
A. I. ; tekah (tekoh), Sertiiig; tfekha 
(tgk'ho), Kena. /. Flood (in a river) ; 
inundation : tfeku, Bes. Sep. 

{b) Foul ; tek&m, Bes. Songs. 
74A. Wet : pok, Serau. 

75. Wet [Mai. basah) : [a) becha' (//-. 
bficha"), Sem. Jaritm, Sem. Plus; 
pechak. Pang. K. A ring; percha' 
[or po-cha' ?), Pang. Galas. ; pechek, 
Pang. Belimb. 

[b) Wet ; bl-jog, Sen. CI. 

[c) Wet: ge-set, Sak. Guai; gg-se (?), 
Krau Tem. ; s'ek, Kena. II. [? cf. 
D 115 and M 215]. 

(^)Wet: basah ( basah" ), Ment. 
Her. I. ; basah, Jak. Ma lac. ; bes^h, 
Barok [J/a/. basah]. 

76. Wet : towar, Pa?it. Kap. Joh. 

77. What {Mai. apa) : (;;) luwe' or luwe 
u', Sem. Kedah ; ai-lbo. Pang. U. 
A ring; ai-lbo, ex. klbng ailbo tun 
(Mai. bun)^ apa itu), "what noise 
is that?" Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; 
ai-lu, e.g. "what use (is it)?" ai-lu 
gu-na', Kerbat ; jg-lo' ; jelok ( j6- 
lerk), e.g. jS-lSrk he-ap [—Mai. apa 
khabar [lit. "what news?") "how 
do you? ") ; jfilok mbh (je-lerk merh) 
[—Mai. apa nama, "what (is the, or 
your) name?"), Sen. Cliff.; la; 

niolo, Sbm. ; 16 ; malo, Sak. Kerb. 
What do you sa}'? alo-ho (aloheu), 
Sem. Pupier ; jaroha, Tembi ; jilo lb 
et ne, Darat ; he jeli hebur, Jelai. 
What is the news ? jalug ga, Krau 
Em.. What is your name? jilu mu, 
Serau ; lu ha' ken mu [?], (lu hak 
kenu) ? Tembi. What is the name 
of this ? jelo li muh di ? Serau, 
How [.\Ial. bageiniana) : pan-loo, 
Pang. Skeat ; pan-lo6-un [or pan- 
loo?), ex. pan-lbo-un jin di' [ — Mai. 
bageimana buleh buat ?), " how can it 
be done?" Pang, U. Aring; mfilo 
(mold), Sak. Ka.; malil (mal6) ("final 
vowel between 6 and a"), Sak. Kerb, ; 
maloheng (nialoheii), S'om. How 
much [Mai. berapa) : kom ailbu 
[=Mal. berapa banyak), Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. Why : ai-lu, A'erbat ; 
ai-lbu; ai-16o kedoh, Pang. U. 
Aring; ai-lo6 tedi ( =t6-di') = A/a/. 
apa (fasal) t6r-buat, "why (is it) 
done?" (fromdi',.l/«/. buat, "to do": 
B 90), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Why are you here ? ha jele ha et" ? 
Darat ; jili heba ha [or he) madi, 
Jelai. What do you want of me? 
[ or why are you with me ? ( Mai. 
mfingapa awak dengan sahaya)] : 
he ru en jala' (heruenjalak), Jelai ; 
jala le he boreet", Darat. Where 
[Mai. mana) : lt\ ? (lor). Sen. CI.; 
[Mai. dimana) : ba-lou, ex. jenga" 
ba-lou pipol (orp. ba-lou), "where do 
you live ? " (the usual word would be 
ngog or ngob ; S 221) ; ba-lbo or 
ka-ba-lbo [ = Mal. kamana?). Pang. 
U. Aring; kabalu, ex. mah ngok 
kitbalu, "where do you dwell?" 
[Mai. mu dudok dimana). Pang. 
Belimb. ; ba'lo (ba'ler), e.g. "where 
are you going?" chop ba'lo (chSp 
\)z!\hx], Kerbat ; (ba'ler), e.g. "where 
is your house?" dbng jiu? ba'lo 
(derng jiu ? ba'-ler), Lebir ; Y 33 ; 
isSIo, Sak. U. Kam. ; mal4 (malo), 
Sak. Kerb. ; malft' (malikh), Sak. 
Em. ; maloli, Darat ; malo Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; melo (molo), Sak. Ka. ; 
maloheng ( malohen ), Som. ; kgn-lS, 
(ken-lor). Sen. Cliff Where did 
you sleep just now ? peloh he bed 
anek, Krau Em. Where do you 
sleep?: mau loh he plok hem bet", 
Krau Em. Where do you like to 
live, here or up-country?: pelai [or 
peloi ?] hem goi pedih kah patah, 
Krau Em. Whence [Mai. deri- 
mana) : nang-loo, ex. nanglbo jenga 
bbt [or j.n. bbt) = derimana awak 

756 

CO AT PA RA TI VE VOCA BULARYOF 

datang, " where do you come 
from?"; kd.bal6-un (perhaps more 
correctly bal6-un), Pang. U. Ai-itig; 
kl-balo-un (or bal6-un ?) Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; ken-lA (ken-lor), 
Sen. Cliff. ; nulo ha chip ( nulo 
hadschip ), Sak. k'or. Gl>. [This 
appears to mean ' ' whence do you 
come?" (///. "go").] Whence do 
)-ou come ? liilng 16 ha chib kelo ; 
hftng lo hwal kelo, Tembi [cf. B 415? 
but it is not certain that the word 
kelo forms part of either of these 
phrases] ; ken lo he hfll, Serau (?) ; 
me ken loh hem chip", Krau Em. 
Whither or where : ki-balu [Mai. 
kamana ), ex. ma' ngok kSbalu, 
"where do you dwell?" cp. balu 
dek=:" where is this?" Pang. K. 
A ring. Whither ( Mai. kamana ) : 
ba-lou, e.r. jenga' chop ba-lou, 
' ' whither are you going ? ' ' Pa>tg. 
U. A ring ; ba-loo or ka-ba-loo, ex. 
ba-loo he' nia-chop, Mai. kamana 
kita nak jalan, "whither shall we 
go?" Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; malo, 
Sak. Kor. Crb. ; ma' li (ma' lor), 
e.g. he chip ma' lor, " where are you 
going?" Sen. CI. ; G 42. Whither 
are you going? mola \or molo?], 
he chip", Scran ; mau loh hem 
chip, Krau Em. When do you 
go back? huloh [?] hem jup", 
Serau. When does the master 
( 2.1?. do you) go ? no lak tuan 
chip, Jelai. Who ( interrog. ) ; 
elao, Sem. Craw. Hist. , Sem. Ked. 
Neiv. , Sem. Klapr. [wrongly under 
" oui " instead of "qui"]; letlao 
(let-lough), Sem. Stev. ; ulbuo;'ulo6, 
ex. uloo tun [Mai. siapa-lah itu), 
' ' who's that ? "Pang. U. Aring; ulou 
or\!X6b,Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. ; malo, 
Sak. Kor. Gb. Because ; for : lo, 
Sem. K. Ken. But : lulou ; lulo-u, 
Seti. K. Ken. \Mon alo [aluiw] ; ilo 
[iluivv], "where," "whither"; nulo 
[nfiluiw], "whence"; khaio [khil- 
luiw, "how" ; BahnarVXvo, "what," 
' ' how," " why."] 

[b) How is this? reelok hawi, Tc?nhi; 
di reelok ok, .Serau. What's the 
news? reelok ga, Serau. Of what 
kind? reelok, Darat. What is the 
custom of the hill men ? adat kel \or 
ker?] sunoi (snoi) rclok" [or rek\k"), 
Jelai. Do thus : reelok, Serau. 
[This appears to be wrong ; all the 
other instances are interrogative.] 
(f) What (interrog.) : lou-mon, Som. ; 
15'mon or lemon, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 

leh-mun, Sak. Plus Cliff. Why 
(interrog.): le-mun ga, Sak. Plus 
Cliff [?cf. Pss]. 

78. What (interrog.) : mai, Pang. 
Belimb. ; ma, Sak. U. Kam. ; ma, 
Sak. Martin; (mar), e.g. "what 
news?" ma habir he (mar 
hubbur he), Sak. J. Low ; ma', 
Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; amai to? (a- 
mai-ter), U. Tern. ; a-nu moh, U. 
Cher. ; N 8 ; T 86 ; Y 33. " What 
news?" mei gar, Sak. Tap. Which : 
ml (mee), Jak. Stev. How (Mai. 
bagimana) : mai-den (pr. maidenn), 
Sem. Plus. How man}- ; how 
much (Mai. berapa) : ma' - git, 
Sen. Cliff. ; milgU, Sak. Martin. 
How many ; how much ( Mai. 
berapa banyak) : mai kop" (mai- 
kerp"), Sen. Cliff. ; W 89. How- 
far : ma'-git nya'. Sen. Cliff. When 
(Mai. bila) : ma-piik or ma-pu', ex. 
ma-pu' mai chop ? Mai. bila 'nak 
pergi ? ' ' when do you intend to go ? " 
Sem. Plus ; ma" bib, Sak. Plus Cliff. 
Perhaps [Mai. barangkali) : ma-pu' 
tuwe (I am doubtful of this phrase — 
ma-pu = " when " ? and tuwe or tuwi 
apparently means "night"), Se?n. 
Plus. Where (Mai. dimana) : haba 
or habah, ex. habah leli o' (.Mai. di- 
mana tuboh-nya), "where is his 
body?" Sem. Kedali; habah <pr haba, 
ex. haba jelmol hampes (Mai. dimana 
bukit tinggal), "where did we leave 
the hill ? " Sc7v. J arum ; lebah, 
ex. miii lebah, "where are you?" 
Pang. Belimb. ; kuma, Sak. U. 
Kam. ; temak", Serau. Whence 
[Mai. derimana) : habai, Sem. 
Plus. Whither (.Mai. kamana) : ba- 
mai or bd-mai, ex. ba-mai chop, 
"whither are you going?" Setn. 
Plus. Who [.Mai. siapa) : maken 
u', ex. maken u' te-chop (Mai. siapa 
yang pergi), " who is it that goes ? ' 
Sem. Kedah ; maken 5', Sem. Plus. 
Why [Mai. apa fasal) : mai-pasal o' 
Sem. Plus ; ma' i mu, Sak. Blanj. 
Cliff. Why have you come here ? : 
ma he nyong badeh, Sak. J. Low. 
[?Cf. Man mu, " what " ; Halang^6- 
moi, pomai ; Tareng m6, "where."] 

79. What [interrog.) : nama, Bes. Sep. 
A. /. ; nama, Bes. Sep. ; naman, /ak. 
Malac. Why: nama-s6beb-pon, 
Bes. Sep. Who : tuma' ? (tflmak), 
Bes. Her. ; hii'mah ; su'mah; e.g. 
sQ-mah nake', " who is that (man)?" 
Bes. Sep. ; sumah, Bes. K. Lang. ; 
siamma, Ben. New. Whose : 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

757 

{Se 

siamma punia, Ben. \'ew. 
Dayak, nama, "what."] 
3o. What {interrog.) : {a) napa, Bcii. 
.\'e7u. ; apa, Mautr. Malac. \_Mal. 
apa]. 

(b) How many : b6ra[) i jengSi (brap i 
jngoi), Sak. U. Kain.\ nierep (inrcp), 
e.g. "how many houses?" duk mcrep 
(duk mrep), Sak. U. Beii. How 
many ; how much (Mai. bSrapa) : 
ina'-rip°, Sen. Cliff. ; [Mai. bferapa 
banyak) : ma'-rip" k£m-nyum, Sen. 
Cliff. ; mol rup, Sak. Tap. ; mgrep ; 
b6r6p, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; brim, Sak. 
Ra. ; bfirapa, Bes. Malac. , Manir. 
Malac. , lak. Malac. How many : 
marok kumnum, Tembi. How many 
fowls have you killed (///. cut)? pup" 
marin \or marim ?] he got", Kraii 
Em. How many handfuls of tobacco 
do you want ? mari keninim he hot 
bako', lelai. How many men live 
in this house? marin [or niaria] 
kSmnon senoi dong do, Jelai. How 
many families live here ? he pedih 
marin he goi, Krau Em. [Another 
supposed version of this, which I 
cannot make out, reads apparently : 
tempat dris naar klaniin, Krait Em.; 
it looks like the answer to the pre- 
ceding question.] [No equivalent 
given ; perhaps it means, ' ' How 
many of you are there in the jungle?"] : 
marini he kop om bak, Krau Em. 

How many days' journey is it to ? 

we \or ne?] hari' (harik) marim 
hem chip, Krau Em. How mucli 
do you plant here ? \or how many of 
you plant here ?] : marin he ched 
pedih, Krau Em. What is the price 
of the resin ? mSrum herga taruni , 
Kerdau. When you come to Kuala 
Lipis, come to my house ! marin he 
chip ma chebah Lipis, ma dung eng, 
Krau Em. [? Cf. Mai. berapa, 
" how much."] 

[c) Who : siap6, Barak ; sapan, 
Manir. Malac. ; umpufi, lak. Malac. ; 
ya apa-apa, Kena. II. [Cf. Mai. 
siapa, "who"; apa, "what."] 

;i. What [inierrog.) ; hayo, ayo, 
ayo, Sak. Ka. Where : ha, Sem. 
Buk. Max. ; uha ? (auha), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Wherever : hil, Sem. Buk. 
Max. ; ha' uha (ha' auha), Sem. Pa. 
Max. Whither: ya'ha (ia'ha), 5f;«. 
Pa. Max. Whence ; from where : 
ha' chgnftn hoh (ha' chnn huh), Sem. 
Pa. Max. Who : deachata-6 (///. 
"who this? who comes?"), Sem. 
K. Ken. 

82 

83 

84 

8S 

87 

92. 

93. 

. \X\i&r(i{inierrog.): [a] m\ng,Jak. Slev.; 
menggAsan, Jak. Malac. ; mgnung, 
Sak. U. Kam. [Whither] : m6nong, 
e.g. "where are you going?" md- 
nong eh chep, Sak. Tap. Where are 
you going ? nowhere in particular : 
mcntiban ? cha' tiba, lak. Malac. 
Which: meno', e.g. "which (of the 
men called) Sfinga?" SSnga mgno' 
(Snga meno'), Sak. U Berl. 
((5) Where {interrog.): niani, Bes. 
Sep. A. I., Ben. A'ew. Whither: 
mani, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; liamani ; 
hani ; mani, Bes. Sep. Where are 
you intending to go? kamana awa' 
na' pSgi, Manir. Malac. Where 
are you going? manii hal hal (manay 
hal hal), Bes. Bell. ; nan kamana, 
Or. I.aut. Whence : mani, Bes. Sep. 
[Cf. Mai. mana, "how," "where."] 
, Where [interrog. ) [really ' 'whither "] : 
pat, e.g. "where are you going?" 
chip pat, Krau Kef. [Cf. Achin. 
pat, " where. "] 

Where [interrog. ) [really ' 'whither "] : 
ganon da'na' (ganern da'na'), IJ. 
Tern. Where are you going? suak 
ganon (su-ak ga-nern), U. Tern. 
Where [interrog. ) [really ' ' whither"] : 
anop ; e.g. " where are 3'ou going? " 
a-nop eng, U. Cher. [?=:W 84]. 
Where are you going ? ko na timbo, 
Tan. Sag. [i.e. whither]. 
Where : ekpaak (ekpaak), Sem. 
Craiu. Gram. Whether : pakeh-kek, 
Sem. Craw. Gram. 
Where [Mai. dimana) : tebagel, 
Sem. Plus. 

How [Mai. bagainiana) : ? achin, 
Sem. Kedali. How much [Mai. 
berapa) : maT-si', Sem. Plus ; W 
78 ; sa', e.g. sa' kom [Mai. berapa 
banyak), "how many," Pang. Skeat. 
[? Cf. Achin. soi, "who."] 
How much : romdo, Sak. Kerb. 
When [interrog.): jembftl (jmbl), 
.Se7n. Pa. Max. 

When ? [Mai. bila) : we (doubtful ; 
v,'b = Mal. ada-lah). Pang. Sam, 
Pang. Gal. 

When (was she) brought to bed? 
ampu lalas, Sak. J. Low. Who 
[interrog.): bo. Sen. Cliff.; bo i 
man, Sak. U. Kam. Who is this 
person? bu li [or bu li] mai dfidi' 
(dgdir or dedik?), Jelai. What is 
your name? bu li mal jiji, Serau. 
Which is the rich man's house? bu 
li don [or dek or de) kaya' (kayak), 
lelai. [Bahnar bu ; Siieng bdn, 
" who."] 

758 

COM PA RA TIVE VOCA B ULA R Y OF 

94. Who : kade, Sertin^. 

95. Who : sigun, Kena. I. [? = W 89 
+ M 26]. ' 

When : M 179 ; T 86 ; W 77, 78 ; 
W 91-93. 

Whence : W 77, 78 ; W 81, 82. 
Where : W tj, 78 ; W 3i-88 ; Y 

33- 

Wherever : W 8r. 
Whether : W 87. 
Whetstone : S 144 ; S 465. 
Which : W 78 ; W 82. 

96. Whilst : tengah, ex. tengah te-me' 
chi', "while you eat," Sein. Kedah 
[.]/(//. tengah, "middle," "half," 
etc.] ; I 28. 

97. Whine, to (as a dog) : [a] se-it ; 
sere-it, Bes. A.I. To cry (shout) : 
sSnga (sone), Sak. Ra. [? cf. F 49]. 
(b) To whistle : mahong (mhung), 
Sem. Bilk. Max. ; hole", Sen. Cliff. \ 
huek (huik), Sem. Pa. Max.; hihakn. 
Sera!/. To blow, henong, Tembi. To 
whistle ; to pipe : hanigi-hoit ; henigi- 
hoit, Se7n. K. Ken. Whiz : huat ; 
huet, Bes. Songs. \JMon khyot ; 
Khmer huoch ; Siieng huech ; Bah- 
war hohoch, " to whistle."] 

{c) To whistle : sonsoich ; (sonsoixe), 
Meat. Bar. ; songsoit, Mantr. Malac. ; 
besonsoy, Mantr. Cast. 
Whip-snake : B 116. 
Whisker : B 116 ; H 2. 
Whistle, to : W 97. 

98. White {Mai. putih) : [a) bekon' 
Pang. U. Aring ; bekon, Pang. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. ; bekal (b'kaul), 
Tan. U. Lang. ; bekiil ; bekol ; 
bekayt, Bes. Sep. A. I. \ bggiak 
(bogiek), Sak. Kerb. ; W 30. Blue : 
berkuur, Tembi ; bekiil, Bes. Sep. , 
Bes. K. L. [distinct from D 192]. 
Whiteness ? (a form of disease) : 
belakun (blakun), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Blind in one eye : bSkun sabelah 
(bkun sblh), Sem. Pa. Max. Green : 
begiiik (bogiek), Sak. Kerb. 

(b) White : bi-ftg, Sen. CI. ; bijg 
(biorg), Sak. Br. Lcno ; biok, Sak. 
Kor. Gb. ; biolc, Sak. Croix, Serav ; 
biog, Tembi; biek, Sak. Sung.; bi'ak, 
Sak. Martin ; (biek), Sak. Ka.; biig, 
.Sak. U. Kam. ; biiig, Se7n. K. Ken. ; 
biftg, S'om. ; bi-e, I.ebir; M 23 ; M 26; 
W 29. White (of hair only) : biok, 
Bes. Sep. A. I. Blue; green; mauve: 
bi-iig, Sen. CI. Green : bleg, Som. 
Green ; purple : biug, Serai/. Clear ; 
transparent : biog, Tetnbi. \^Kon 
7"//, Bolovct! , Niahi'm, Lave, Kaseng, 
bok ; Alak bok ; H along tabok ; 

Sni bo ; Chur/i bo*^ ; Braou baak ; 
Prou baak (baac) ; Annam bach, 
"white"; Stieng bok, "white," 
"grey"; konbok, "white," "clean"; 
Bahnar bak, "white" (of skin), 
"clean"; Mon pu [bu], "white" 
(of paper or cloth).] 
{c) White: biek? (blenk), Sak. 
Tap. ; belehak (bfilehek), Kena. 
IL ; balhut, Jak. Raff. ; hut, 
Kran Tern. ; hin - han, U. Tern. 
Blue (Mai. biru) : bel-on. Pang. 
Sam, Pal. Gal. ; bel-ofi, Pang. U. 
Aring; bilon (bil-ern), Lebir; belhoi ; 
bel-hoi (?), Sem. K. Ken. Green : 
balon, Sem. Craiv. Hist.; baion, 
Sem. Klapr. ; bel-on, Sem. Plus, 
Pang. Sam, Pa?ig. Gal. ; bel-bn or 
bel-oyn, Sem. Plus ; bel-on, Pang. 
U. Aring; bel-un o;' bel-uyn, Sem. 
Kedah ; bilu'in, Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
bilon (bil-6rn), Lebir; blahad, Sem.. 
K. Ken. ; blaar, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
blaar, Tembi ; bla-ur, Sak. U. Bert. ; 
blaha, 5rt;^. Tap. Sea-green : bglu'in 
(blu'in), Sem. Buk. Max. Yellow 
{Mai. kuning) : bel-un, Sem. Jariini ; 
bilon (bil-ern), Lebir. [Tareng, 
Kkuy Dek blai, "white"; Bahnar 
bolang, "white" (of cloth).] 
99. White : mambu, Kena. L [? = 
W 98]. 

100. White : selepoh. Pant. Kap. Sim., 
Pant. Kap. Her. 

loi. White: {a) pgletau, Sem. Per. ; 
peltau, Sem. Jari/m; peltaii (?), Se7n. 
Plus; peltao? (paltas), Sem. Craw. 
Hist., Sem. Ked.Mar. ; (paltas), Sem. 
Craw. Gram. ; (paltas), Sem. Klapr. ; 
pletau, Sejn. Ij. ; plltau ? (pTltu), 
Sem. Buk. Max. ; pitau (pitSu), 
Se7n. Pa. Max. ; belta? (beltau [in 
the MS. originally beltaw]), Sejn. 
U. Sel. White of egg : pgltau ? 
(pultu), .S'^w. Pa.Ma.y.; plltau mako' 
(pTlau maku'), Sem. Buk. Max. .-Fair; 
yellowish white : plltau bengu ? (pOtu 
bngu?), Sem. Buk. Max. ; peltau 
kuning (pltii kuning), Se7n. Pa. 
Max. [? Cf Mo7i petaing [ptang ; 
btang] ; but cf. also Bisaya pulau ; 
//o/J'(j pudao ; Ibanagiwx'^Vi, "white." 
All very dubious parallels.] 
(/') White : pentol, /<?/!•. Mad. [Pant. 
Kap.) ; (p'ntol). Pant. Kap. Mad. ; 
pintul. Pant. Kap. Log. ; S 353 ; B 
233. White man : pgntoi (p'ntoi) ; 
p(?ntol (p'ntol), Pant. Kap. Joh. 
.Silver : pemuntol (p'muntol). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. Tin ; dollar ; silver : 
pemuntol. Pant. Kap. Her. [These 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

759 

forms appear to be variants of 

the following, the relation between 

" pentol, pemuntol " (with infix 

-em-) on the one side and " piiteh " 

on the other being like that of 

the Krama and Ngoko forms in 

Javanese. Cf. C 200, etc.] 

\c) White: puteh, Bes. Bell., Bes. 

Malac. , Mantr. Malac, Jak. Malac. 

T 143. Putih (a proper name) 

Piitih, Sak. h'or. Gb. Tin ; dollar 

silver : pemutih, Pant. Kap. Her. 

piniuti, Pant. Kap. Log. [Mai. 

puteh]. 

WniTK : 1)41; U 20, 21. 

White ant ; A 104, 105 ; A no, 

III. 

Whither: V\' 77, 78 ; W 81-88. 

Whiz ; W 97. 

Who : W 77-80 ; W 93-95. 

102. Whole, the : peliuh (pliuh), Sem. 
Pa. Max. 

103. Whole (Mai. semua) : sft-benda', 
Pa?ig. U. A ring [7 cf. Mai. sa-bgnda, 
" one thing "] ; A 60 ; R 191. 
Whorl of hair : X 18. 

Whose : W 79. 
Why : W 77-79. 
I03.\. Wicked ; bad : hai'in ; hau-iin, 
Sem. K. Ken. ; B 9 ; C 71 ; W 150. 
Wickerwork : B 69. 
Wide : B 212 ; B 403, 404 ; B 
406. 
Widely spaced : R 3 1 

104. Widow: ba'-lu, Sen. Cliff.; indong 
balu, Jak. Ba. Pa. ; lebalu' (lebaluk), 
Darat. Widower : balu, Jak. Ba. 
Pa. Dead wife: balu'? (baluk), 
Jak. Mad. Dead woman : baluh, 
Jak. Leni. S^Katui, Bugis, Sangir 
walu ; Mai., Bafak, Mangkas., 
Tagal, Bisaya, etc., balu; Achin. 
bal^e (written "balu") ; Dayak 
balo ; Rotti valu ; Timor banu, 
"widow "; Sampit, A'afinga?; balu, 
"widow," "widower."] D 130; 
O 16 ; W 132. 

Widower : W 104. 

Width : B 403 ; B 406. 

Wife : F 60-64 ; F 67 ; F 69 ; F 

73 ! F 77 ; H 179, 180 ; M 49. 

Dead wife : W 104. 

Wife's grandfather : G 83. 

105. Wild {Mai. liar) : hi-nim, Pang. 
U. Aring. 

106. Wild : kgnol (/;-. ken-oU), Paug. 
Sam, Pang. Gal. 

io6a. Wild : mungak, Sem. K. Ken. 

107. Wild : lie (lie or lei), Sem. Pa. 
Max. [Mai. liar]. 

Wilderness : F 238 ; Q 19. 

107A. Will (Pr. volont6) : maduh (ma- 

douh), Sem. Klapr. 
107H. Will ; pleasure : mejen, Jak. 

Mad. 

Will (auxiliary) : W 8, 9 ; W 14- 

18. 

108. Win, to : mCnang, Sak. U. Kam. ; 
menah, Seraii [Mai. mCnang]. 

109. Wind: {a) bioh, Sem. Jiir. And., 
Sem. Jur. Rob., Sem. Jur. New. ; 
bt5giu or begiyu, Sem. Jarnm. 
Storm or tempest {Mai. ribut) : 
bSgifi, Sem. Jarum, Sein. Plus. 

{b) Wind : parug, Sak. Br. Low ; 
(paroug), Sak. Croix; paruak ? 
(pa-resak), Sak. Plus Cliff. 
Storm (?) : parop, Sak. Kerb. [The 
Malay equivalent is given as ' ' ribut, " 
but the French as "gale," which 
means ' ' scabies "; cf. S 479. There 
is clearly some confusion here, and 
possibly the word = ^'1/(7/. kurap, but 
as the Sakai words were collected 
through the medium of Malay, I 
think it is more probable that the 
meaning " storm " is right, and that 
the French equivalent was subse- 
quently added in error, probably 
with the assistance of an English- 
man whose knowledge of French 
was imperfect.] 

{c) Wind: beriia'?(beruak), Bes. Her. , 
Kena. IL ; bgruah ; bSwAh, Bes. 
Malac. ; bgruah (beu-ruah), Sak. Sel. 
Da. ; berwa (burwa), Ben. New. ; 
biluah, Di/k. U. Lang. ; be-wa', Sem. 
Plus; bewa' {pr. be-wa'), Sem. 
Kedah ; bewa [in the MS. originally 
baywah], Sem. U. Sel. ; (bewar). 
Sem. Stev. ; buah, Bes. A. L; buah, 
Bes. Bell. ; bua', Bes. Sep. Wind ; 
air: bua' or bewa' (bua'), Se7n. Pa. 
Max.; bawa' (baua' ; bauak), 5^w. 
B?/k. Max. Wind ; air ; breeze : b6r- 
wak {pr. berr-wa') or be-wa', Sem. 
Plus. Storm {Mai. ribut) : boha, 
Se7n. Beg. Storm or tempest {Mai. 
ribut) : brua' or bruwa', Sem. 
Kedah. Big wind ; storm : bua' 
nubo' (bua' ntibu'), Se7n. Pa. Max. 
Gale of wind {Mai. angin kenchang 
keiat) : bua' nebo' (bua' nbuk), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; B 202 ; bawa" 
kenchang kgiat (baui' knchng kit), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Strong wind : 
bua' chekok (bua' chkuk), Sem. 
Pa. Max. ; bawa' das (bau' ds), 
Sem. Buk. Max. Gentle wind ; 
breeze : bua' bale' (bua' balik), 
Setn. Pa. Max. ; Y 40 ; bawa' 
lemah (bau' Imh), Sem. Buk. Max. 

76o 

COMPARATIVE VOCABULARY OF 

Mild wind (?) : bua' sapuih (bua' 
spuih), Sent. Pa. Max. ; bawa' 
sapuih ISmah (baua' spuih Imh), Sem. 
Buk. Max. North-west [wind ?] : 
bawa' bayat (bau' bait), Sem. Buk. 
Max. Land-breeze : bawa' te'od 
(bau' tei'ud), Sein. Buk. Max. ; F 
230; bua' hatek (bua'hatik), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; E 12. Sea-breeze: bua' lempa 
(bua' Impa), Sem. Pa. Max.; bawa' 
laut (bau' laut), Sem. Buk. Max. 
Above the wind ; to windward : 
atoh bua' or atoh nabua' ? (atuh 
nabua'?), Sent. Pa. Max. ; m^njo' 
bawa' (mnju' bau'), Sei?i. Buk. Max. 
Below the wind ; leeward : haini nu- 
bua' (haim nubua' ?), Sem. Pa. Max. 
Sky ; heavens : bua' (bu'), Sem. Pa. 
Max. , Sem. Buk. Max. [? Cf. For- 
tnosan wagiog ; Bisaya bagy6 ; 
Adang Murut bario, " storm," 
" wind " ; Miri, Narom barui ; Tu- 
tong. Long Kiput, Lemetifig, Lelak, 
baroi ; Murut, Tabun bareu, 
" wind."] 
no. Wind : gemuyong (gumuyong), 
Ben. Nnv. [? Cf. Mai. goyang, ' ' to 
sway, shake " ; cf. S 131 ; S 531.] 

111. Wind: angin, Sem. Beg., Mautr. 
Malac. , Jak. Malac. Wind ; air : 
anggin, Ben. New. [Mai. angin], 

112. Wind: penfup. Pant. Kap. Her.; 
piniop. Pant. Kap. Log. Age ; 
wind : pfeniop (p'niop). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. East wind : p6niop 
penumpoh (p'niop p'numpoh), Patit. 
Kap. Joh. North wind : peniop 
pgningol (p'niop p'ningol), Pant. 
Kap. Joh. ; P 100. South wind : 
peniop pgngipang (p'niop p'ng'- 
pang), Pant. Kap. Joh. [cf. P 12]. 
West wind : peniop masing (p'niop 
masing), Pant. Kap. Joh. ; S 16. 
Alive : pSniop (p'niop). Pant. Kap. 
Joh. To blow : tiu' ? (tiuk) Serau. 
[.V/al. tiup, "to blow."] 

113. Wind ; air (.Mai. angin) : kad (//-. 
kadd), .Sem. Kedah ; B 256 ; B 
390 ; R 12 ; S 478-480. 

1 14. Wind, west : paienkon. Pant. Kap. 
Joh. 

115. Window: tC-nikas (tonikes), Sak. 
Kerb. 

1 16. WiND(nv : nechong (netchon), Som. 
[? Mai. natang] ; 1) 151. 
Windward : W 109. 

117. Wing (.lA//. sayap) : ken-yet^, Sen. 
CliJJ.; ktnyekn, Tembi ; sinjeng or 
sinyeng, Sem. Plus. 

118. Wing (of bird): [a) pick? (bieg), 
Sem. K. Ken. 

(b) kempil^ng, Bes. A. /. ; kfipak", 
.\Iantr. Malac. \\Ial. kgpak]. 

119. Wing (of the fruit-bat): sayap, 
Mautr. Malac. Cock's feather : 
sa-yap, Kerbat. To fly : bfisayap 
(b'saiap). Pant. Kap. Joh. Sail : 
saiap. Pant. Kap. Joh. [Mai. sayap, 
" wing "] ; A 141. 

120. Wink : ma' belai (ma' biai), Sem. 
Buk. Max. [This seems to be a 
verbal form = " to wink. "] 

121. Wink: kelip met(klipmit), .S>/«./*a. 
Max.; E 83. To shoot in and out : 
kelang-kelub, Bes. Songs. Fire-fly 
[Mai. konang-konang ; kglip-kfelip) : 
ka'la' (ka'P), Setn. Pa. Max. ; 
kulud (kulud?), Sem. Buk, Max.; 
keblep [or kfebleb?). Pang. U. 
A ring. Star : kSlip, Ketia. /. 
[Mai. kelip, "to wink"; kglip- 
kelip, kelam kelip, "firefly."] 
Wink : S 346. 

122. Wink, to: petpet (petpet), Sem, 
Buk. Max. ; C 8 ; C 89 ; S 253. 
Winnow, to : B 256. 

Winter : S 66. 

123. Wipe, to [Mai. sapu) : ya' kuas 
(//-. kuass), Sem. Plus. 

124. Wipe, to [Mai. sapu) : j'a' pos 
[pr. poss), Sein, Jarum. To brush 
or wipe (Mai. sapu) : tamp-h4ss, 
Bes. K. L. ; tamphas ; tampoys, 
Bes. Sep. [Khmtrhos [pos] ; Stieng 
pulh ; Bahnar shopuih (xopuih), 

' ' to sweep, " "to brush. " See also 
S 538, and cf. Mon sapon, "to 
rub with the hand to relieve pain " ; 
sapot, "to stroke gently with the 
hand " ; Bah?iar pot, " to stroke " ; 
Stieng puot, ropuot ; Khmer biut 
[put], "to rub."] P 105; S538. 

125. Wire : dawai, Sak. U, Kam. 
Strings of lyre : dawai, Mantr, 
Malac. Cha. [Mai. dawai]. 

I2S.\. Wise: budi' (budik), Serau; med- 
budi, Tembi ; berbiidi, Jelai. [Mai, 
budi, "wisdom."] H 63. 
Wise man : C 164 ; G 91, 
Wish, to : W 14-19. 
Not to wish : N 80-82. 
Witchcraft: R 182. 

126. With : man (?), Bes. A. /. 

127. With (Mai, bfirsama-sama) : eb 
(pr. ebb), ex. chop ebb ye (Mai. 'gi 
dfingan aku), "go with me" (gu. 
does it mean "follow," Mai, ikut 
aku ?), Sem. Kcdah. 

128. With : bamoyii ; bamay'a or 
bamaye (bamoji'i ; bamajd or 
baniajc;), Sak. Kor. Gb. 

129. With; by reason of: oeh, Jak. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

761 

A/alac. ; P 109 [Mai. uleh] ; A 77- 
79; A 178 ; B 396; T 157. 

130. Withered (of a limb) : kema (knia), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; kebit (kbit), Sou. 
Bilk. Max. 

131. WiTHKKKD ; faded (of leaves, eic. ): 
ul? (jrwfil? (u'l or 'ul?), Sem. Fa. 
Max. 

Within : E 76 ; I 14. 
Without : N 67 ; O 69. 
13 1 A. Woman: bale, Darat\7 cf. F 69]. 
Mother; baloi, Sem. P//pier; F 60- 
67 ; F 69 ; F 71-72 '< ^ 7^ '< ^I i94- 

132. Woman ; bird : bisan. Pant. Kap. 
Joh. Marriage : bgbisan (b'bisan), 
Pant. Kap. Joh. Widow : bisan 
pantus kotol, Pant. Kap. Joh. ; 
D 53 ; M 16. Cat: bisan iaoiig. 
Pant. Kap. Joh, Barndoor fowl : 
bisan jungkar (bisan junkar). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. The Camphor Spirit : 
bisan, Jakun of Johor (Lake and 
Kelsall, 26 J.R.A.S., S.B., p. 
40). [C 106 ; G 130 ; T 213, 
where the word occurs, appear to 
show that it is used in the sense of 
"creature," "person." In D 98 
it means "bird." Mai. besan, bisan, 
the title of relationship of two per- 
sons whose respective children have 
intermarried, seems to be a distinct 
word. ] 

Dead woman ; W 104. 

133. Womb: lenm? (Imu?), Sem.. Pa. 
Max. ; E 34. 

Wood : F 170 ; T 205 ; T 207 ; 
T 210-212 ; T 214. 
Burnt wood : T 214. 
Piece of wood : B loi ; S 448. 
Wood (i.e. forest) : F 230-242. 
Wooden stick : S 453. 
Wood-oil : T 207 ; \V 30. 

134. Woodpecker {Mai. burong tukang): 
belato' (blatu'), Sem. Bzik. Max. 
[Mai. belatok]. 

135. Woodpecker : tintong (tintung), 
Sem. Pa. Max. 

136. Woodpecker : terelom (t'relom), 
Jak. Lem. ; terlom (t'rlom), Jak. 
Ba. Pa. 

137. Work {Mai. kerja) : gesve, Sem. 
Kedah ; nga'oi, Bes. Sep. [? cf. Jav. , 
Sund. gaw6, " to do," " to make " ; 
but cf. also D 133.] 

138. Work; to do: telap (tip), Setn. 
Pa. Max. 

139. Work: kaya' ( kaya'^ ), Tembi \ 
kerja' (kerjak), Serau. Work ; to 
do : ka'ja', Sem. Pa. Max. ; keja' 
(kija'); kaida' (kaid'), Sem. Buk. 
Max. To work : k&ja (k . ja \jic\ 

the original shows that a letter has 
dropped out in printing), Sem. Beg. 
To do : kreja, Ben. New. [Mai. 
kc;rja]. 

Work ; H 90 ; C 152. 
Work, to; D 132, 133; W 138, 

1 39- 

World: E II ; E 13. 

Worm : A 139 ; B 143 ; D 142. 

140. Worm, big : chaching, Bes. K. L. 
Disease caused by worms : pias 
chaching (pias chaching), Sem. Buk. 
Max.; S 186; meje' chaching? (mji' 
cha?), Sem. Pa. Max. ; S 187 
[Mai. chaching]. 

141. Worm, small : nyenyet, Bes. 
K. L. 

Worn out : O 21. 
141 A. Worship, to : sembaiong [Mai. 
scmbahyang]. 

142. Wound: pa (pa), Sem. Pa. AJax. ; 
(i 41. 

142A. Wound : jjluk, Tembl. 

143. Wound : lu-ka'. Sen. CI. ; luka, 
Tembi; luka' (lukak), /^'/az. Corpse 
(Mai. bangkai): loka' (lokak), 
Sera/t [ ? whether connected with 
the preceding], [A/al. luka] ; B 247 ; 
G 41; P 14; S 185, 186. 

Wound, to : C 152. 

144. Wrap up, to : makelab (niklb or 
msklb?), Sem.. Biik. Max. To 
envelop ( Ger. wickeln ) : kal6 ? 
(galo), Sak. Kor. Gb. 

145. Wrap up, to : seni-pul, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. ; sa-pur, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. 
Knotted string : sinipol, Sem. Stev. 
[Mai. simpul]. 

Wrinkled : W 21. 

146. Wrist : = A 134. 

147. Wrist : (a) ngil, Sem. Pa. Max. ; 
yangil ( jangil ), Sem. K. Ken. 
Ankle (Mai. buku kaki or lali ) : 
gehal (pr. ge-hall) chan, Sem. 
Kedah ; F 220 ; A 134 [? cf. C 3]. 

(b) Wrist: kel^iu, Sak. Ra. 
Ankle : kelkil, Sem. Stev. ; kelkel, 
.'^erau ; kelkel chan, Sem. Kedah ; 
kerkel juk", Darat ; kekel^ juk", 
Jelai. Tendon Achillis : kbn jfik" 
(kernjAk"), iVrrt?/; F 220. Elbow: 
kelkel, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; kelkel. 
Tembi. 

(c) Wrist (Mai. buku tangan) : 
kgmkam chas, Setn. Jarum ; kSm- 
kom chas, Sem. Plus ; H 14. 
Finger-joint : kencha (kncha), Sem. 
Pa. Max. 

(d) Wrist : ekolek, Tan. U. Lang. 
Ankle : ekuleh juk, Tan. U. Lang. ; 
F 220. 

762 

COM PA RA TIVE VOCA B ULA RY OF 

148. Wrist : malwok, Sem. Stev. ; cf. 
H 1 4 ; K 40. 

148A. Write, to {Mai. tulis) : hilihiles, 
Darat ; C 39 ; U 156, 157. 

149. Writing: surat, Tcmln. Writing; 
drawing ; design : surat ( sourat ), 
S'om., Sak. Kerb. ; (sourat), Sak. 
Ra. Letter : panchurek, Pant. 
Kap. Joh. {^Mal. surat]. 

150. Wrong {Mai. salah ; ta'betul) : 
kika', Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 
Wicked : bad {Mai. jahat) : che- 
koh, Sen. Cliff. \ (chekoh), Serau; 
B 10 ; B 484. 

Wroth : A 82. 

1. Yam {Mai. keladi) : sod, U. K'el. 
Tuber {Mai. ubi) : so, Pang. U. 
Aring; Y i6. Sweet potato {Mai. 
kfiledek): so' (sook), Tembi. Tapioca 
{Mai. ubi kayu) : kense, Sem. Kedah. 

2. Yam {Mai. keladi) : takob. Pang. 
Teliang; taku, U. Pat. A kind of 
yam which is baked and eaten : takob, 
Sem. Kedah. A kind of edible root 
or tuber: tako'. Pang. Belimh. 

3. Yam ; a kind of edible root or tuber 
{Mai. ubi) : hau, Pang. Belimb. A 
variety which is boiled and eaten {Mai. 
ubi tanjong) : ha-u, Sem. Kedah. 

4. Yam ( Mai. ubi ) : bekoya, Tembi ; 
bekoi, Tembi, Darat, Jelai ; ki-e, 
Krau Tern. ; ku6i, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; 
{Mai. ubi bekoi) : ubi bekoi, Serau ; 
{Mai. ubi akar) : kuoe (kouo6), Sak. 
Pa. Tapioca {Mai. ubi kayu) : kuoi 
(kouoi), Sak. Kerb. Yam {Mai. ubi 
kayu) : ba' koi, U. Cher. ; {Mai. ubi 
akar) : bakhoi-chyung, Bes. Malac. ; 
R 37. Tapioca : bakhoi-Iog°, Bes. 
Malac; T 207. [^//wawkhoai; Mon 
ka.dap kwai [kduip kwaai], "yam."] 

5. Yam {Mai. ubi kayu) : ta'-wi, Sen. 
Cliff. ; {Mai. ubi tawi) : tawi, Serau. 
[? cf. Mai. ubi b6tawi, "potatoes."] 

6. Yam {Mai. keladi) : yot, Kena. I. ; 
yiit, Bes. Malac. ; yet, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; 
yet, Bes. K. Lang. , Mantr. Malac. , 
Mantr. Malac. Cha. 

7. Yam {Mai. ubi kayu) : ra-nie. Sen. 
Cliff. 

8. Yam (caladium) : {a) to-lambo, Sem. 
Stev. The caladium stem inserted in 
the newly-bored ear-holes of children 
to enlarge them : krong lamog, Sem. 
Plus. 

{b) Yam {Mai. kfiladi) : r6b61, Serting. 

9. Yam : bihang. Bland. K. Lang. 

Wild yam {.Mol. kSmahang) : kem- 
hang, Sem. Kedah [^Mal. k6mahang]. 
iQ. Yam {Mai. keladi) : talis, Sem. Pa. 
A/ax. , .S>w. Buk. Max. [Sampit 
talis; Sund.,Jav. tales.] 

1 1. Y.\M {Mai. ubi keladi) : hubi gak 
(houbi-gh^k), Som. ; Y 13 ; gong 
(gofi), Sak Kerb. ; gang (gan), Sak. 
Ra. ; {Mai. keladi) : gang ; gak" ; 
gak^i kergul, Tembi ; gak", Darat ; 
gak°, Serau, Jelai. Yam {Mai. ubi 
kayu) : bigap (big^p ; bigop), Sak. 
Ra. ; Y 13. Sweet potato : gap. 
Tan. U. Lang. [? cf. Y 2]. 

12. Yam : koadi, Jak. Malac. \Mal. 
keladi]. 

13. Yam : ubi' (ubik), Sem. Craw. 
Gram. Sweet potato {Mai. keledek) 
hubi, Jelai. Tapioca {Mai. ubi kayu) 
hubl (houbl), Som. Yam {Mai. ubi 
akar) : ubi (oubi), Sak. Ra. ; hubi 
sela (houbl - seia), Som. Edible 
bulbs (? tubers) : uoi nasi', Sak. Tan. 
Ram.. Tapioca: bi jehu? (bidschi- 
hu), Sak. Tap. ; T 211. Tapioca: 
dbi' deiogn, Serting. Yam {Mai. 
ubi kayu) : bel-og, Sen. Cliff.; T207; 
{Ma!, ubi kayu nieranti) : ubi kayu 
chah, Serau ; {Mai. ubi kayu Lipis) : 
ubi kayu lipis, Serau \^Mal. ubi]. 

14. Y.'^M, a kind of {Mai. ubi kapor) ; 
a poisonous variety which has to be 
pounded fine, and have lime mixed 
with it to become eatable : klab, 
Se??i. Kedah. 

15. Tapioca: ngala' (ngalak), Ment. 
Ht'r. /. ; gala' (galak), Ment. Her. 
//. ; gala' (gala^k), Bedu. //. ; 
gala, Mantr. Malac. Cha. ; jehu 
gale, 5a/&. U.Beii.; T211. Tapioca 
(or tuber generally?): gala; gala', 
Mantr. Malac. Nya. Wood yam 
{Mai. ubi kayu) ; potato {Mai. ubi 
benggala) : ngaldh (ngalh), Sem. Pa. 
Max. ; {Mai. ubi kayu) : malor, 
Tembi ; malor, Jelai ; maler, Darat. 
Wood yam {Mai. ubi ka5Ti ; ubi 
bambu?) : ubi ngalfth (aubi ngalh), 
Sem. Pa. Max. [? Cf. Mai. ubi 
benggala, "potato."] 

16. Sweet - potato : tela' (tila'), Sem. 
Pa. .Wax. ; (telak), Bes. K. Lang. ; 
katelah (ktilh), Sem. Buk. Max. ; 
tila' (tilak), Me?it. Her. L ; (tilak) ; 
hlla' (hilak), Bes. Sep. A. L ; tili", 
lies. Malac. ; (tilak). Bland. K. 
Lang. , Jak. Ba. Pa. ; so tela' 
(doubtful). Pang. U. Aring; Y i ; 
sila' (silak), Bedu. IL ; sila' (silak), 
Tembi ; sila' (silak), Se)-au, Darat ; 
sila, Darat ; toana', Jak. Malac. 

ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

763 

Tapioca : tSgdk, Kena. I. [A/a/. 
katela]. [Cf. j1/o« wunsela, "sweet- 
potato " ; but the connection of some 
of these words is more than doubtful.] 

17. Sweet-potato (il/(7/. kSledek): chok^h, 
Kena. I. 

18. Sweet - potato : jaya', Soiing coll. 
Nya. ; (jayak), Keiia. II. ; jaya^, 
Mavtr. Malac. Cha. [? cf. Y 6]. 

19. Sweet -potato : kgl^dek, Ma?i/r. 
Malac. ; kledek, Bcs. A', f.ang. ; 
klede', Mantr. Malac. Nva. [Mai. 
keledek]. 

20. Yam, wild : kla-wong(/r. kla-woSng), 
Son. Skeat. 

21. Yam, wood (Mai. ubi kayu) ; potato 
(Mai. ubi benggala) : beklndft' 
(bind'), Sem. Bnk. Max. 

21A. Yam (Mai. kSmbili or kemili) : (a) 
kemili (kemili), Tembi, Darat, Jelai ; 
kemili' (kimilik), Serau [Mai. keni- 
bili]. 

(b) kemarung (kemarung), Sak. Em. 
Yam : R 37. 

22. Yawn, to(?): tlmbab (timbab), 
Sem. Pa. Max. ; B 389. 

Ye : Y 32-38. 

23. Year : tahut", Sevan. A year : sa 
taun, Se7n. Beg. ; A 49. [Mai. 
tahun, "year."] D 39 [F 282?]. 

24. Yellow (Mai. kuning) : ho-et (pr. 
ho-ett), Pang. U. A ring; ho-ed (pr. 
ho-edd), Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. 

25. Yellow : pohong (pr. pohoSng), 
Pang. Sam, Pang. Gal. [? =G 112]. 

2SA. Yellow ; a-nli^m (a-niib'n), Sem. 

A'. Ken. 
25B. Yellow : her-oi, Sem. Jannn, Sem. 

Pins [cf. B 306] ; erhoi (" open " 0), 

Sak. Martin [? cf. Y 24]. 

26. Yellow : kuning (kouning), Sak. 
Ra., Sak. Kerb.; W loi. Debt: 
kuning. Pant. Kap. Joh. Order 
(Mai. hukum) : kuning, Pant. Kap. 
Joh. To buy : muning, Pant. Kap. 
Log. Gold : p&muning (pimuning). 
Pant. Kap. Log.; (p'muning); pechen 
kuning, Pant. Kap. Joh. ; B 16. River 
Mas : pfinguning (p'nguning). Pant. 
Kap. Joh. To swear : berkuning 
b'rkuning), Pant. Kap. Joh. [Mai. 
kuning, "yellow": these words ap- 
pear to be derived from its use in the 
figurativesenseof " gold," " money."] 
Yellow : G 112 ; R 51-53 ; R 55 ; 
W98. 

Y'ELLOWISH white : W loi. 

27. Yes (Mai. ya) : he-e, Sem. Jarnm , 
Pang. U. Anng; he'e, Sem. Plus; 
he'-eh, Kerbat; (hi' 'ih), Sem. Bnk. 
Max. ; (he'ih), Sein. Pa. Max. ; 6h- 

6h, Sak. Tap. ; 'ngheng ('ng-hng) ; 
hA (Mn)_ Sak. U. Katn. ; huhu ? 
(huhii, "nasal"), Sak. Martin; ho 
or ha, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; a-a, Bes. 
Sep. A. /.; ou, Se7n. K. Ken. [7a- 
reng ii ; Alak, Niahm, Lave, Kaseng 
6 ; Stieng oh ; Jarai, Sedang hom ; 
Bahnar hom oi (ham oi) ; Clir^ai 
hoi ; Chiiru\\h\\ ; Cham haiy, "yes."] 

28. Yes : na, Ben. New. , Bes. Malac. ; 
nah ; naleh, Bes. Sep. A. I. ; tahatna, 
Sak. Kei'b. ; V 10. 

29. Yes : yai (yi), Kena. Stev.; ia, Sotn., 
Sak. Ra. ; iah, Jak. Lem. ; ya' (yak), 
Jak. Mad. ; yeh, U. Cher., Jak. 
Stev. ; oiye, ALenf. Stev. ; leyok 
(? = Ie-ya'), Pang. Belijnb. [.Mai. ya]; 
B 91 ; C 147. 

30. Yesterday : nCher, B?/k. U. Lang. ; 
nihi, Bes. Sep. A. /. ; nihi (nihi"), 
Bes. Her. Last night ; yesterday : 
nihi, Bes. Sep. A. /. 

30A. Yesterday : padf, Sak. Martin. 

31. Yesterday : kemari' (kemaghik), 
Jak. Se?nb. ; kemari' (kemaghik), 
Jak. Alad. Before: kamoi, A'if.'/fl. /.; 
kemarin, Galang [Mai. kelmarin] ; 
D 16, 17 ; D 19 ; D 30 ; D 39 ; 
D 43 ; M 179 ; N no. 

32. You (A'lal. engkau, hang or awak, 
etc. ) : pay, Sem. Kedah, Sem. Jarum. 
Ye (Alal. kamu) : pa.)', Sem. Kedah. 

33. Thou : bo, Sem. Craw. Hist. , Sem. 
Klapr., Sem. Ked. New.; (be), Sem. 
Craw. Gram. ; (Mai. awak) : ibo' 
(ibok), Kerdau. You (plur.) ; 
bo, Sem. Ked. New. Thou ; you 
(sing. ) : moh, Kerbat ; i-ma', Kran 
Ket. You (Mai. engkau) : mah (or 
m&'7). Pang. U. Aring; (Mai. mu): 
m3,h. Pang. Belimb. ; mah or ma', 
e.g. mok kabalu or mah ngok kabalu, 
(Mai. mu tinggal dimana?), "where 
do you dwell? " Pang. A'. Aring; mui 
or muy, e.v. miu lebah, "where are 
you?" Pang. Belimb. You (Mai. 
engkau, awak, hang, etc. ) : demik 
(N.B. If this is the fuller form, it 
probably = te-me', and 'me' when 
used by itself maybe an abbreviation; 
but cp. tehe', etc.), Sem. Janan; 
me', Se7n. Kedah, Sem. Jarum. Ye 
(Mai. kamu) : me'. Sent. Kedah. 
You : buluk, Sem. Craw. Gram. 
[? Cf. Bahnar bu ; Stieng mei ; bei ; 
Khasi me ; Riang mu, mi ; Angku 
mi, " thou."] 

34. You ( = thou) : hah, Sak. Plus Cliff.; 
ha, Sak. Kor. Gb. ; ha, Sak. Martin ; 
heh ; heh, Sak. Blanj. Cliff. ; he, 
Se72. Cliff. ; he ; he, Bes. Songs ; he, 

764 

VOCABULARY OF ABORIGINAL DIALECTS 

Sak. J. Low ; hee, Jak. Ba. Pa. ; 
hi, U. Tern., Bes. Malac. ; hi', Bes. 
Her. ; {Mai. awak) : lehek" ; ha' 
(ha¥) ; ha, Tembi ; he, Darat \ he' 
(hgl^), Jelai ; hahe' (hahe'^), Krau 
Em. Thou or you : hi, Bai. New. ; 
W 8i ; cf. VV 52. You : he, Sak. U. 
Kam. You (in addressing an equal): 
haha'; ba, Sak. U. Beri. You; he; 
she ; it : hah. Tern. CI. ; hSh, Sen. 
CI. You (thou) ; he ; him : hS, Sen. 
CI. Y'our : hi punia, Be7i. Nctu. 
Ye ; you : hlk ; hi' ; he', Bes. Sep. 
A. I. You (plnr.) [Mai. kamu) : 
he' (hek), Jelai. This is for you 
{.Ual. ini pada mu) : do ha ha, 
Tembi. \Cham ho ; Jarai ha ; Ka- 
seng ai ; Lave hai ; Halang hfl.a, ai, 
Bahnar ^ ; Khtner t:ng, "thou."] 

35. You {.\Lal. awak) : jenga' (explained 
as politer than m^h). Pang. U. 
A ring. 

36. You [Mai. engkau) : jiu (?), Lebir; 
yon, Krau Tem. ; yu (ju). Sent. K. 
Ken. You (in respectful address, to 
a superior) : jun, Sak. U. Beii. 

37. You [sing. ) : ong, Manir. Cast. , 
Aleut. Stev. , Bers. Stev. , Bedu. /. , 
Bedu. LI. ; ogn, Blan. Rem. ; ong-ti, 
Kena. Stev. ; yei ong ge-ek, Kena. 
If. [Probably intended for three 
alternative equivalents. The third 
= B 421, and perhaps also the first : 
but ?cf. Y 36.] You (plitr.) : ong, 
Mantr. Malac. [Cf. Mai. hang, 
which is the common word for the 
2nd pers. sing. pron. in Penang. ] 

38. You [sing. ) : dikau, Temiang ; diko' 
(dikok), Galang \ ko. Tan. Sag. ; 
diko. Or. Laut. Thou or you {sing. 
and phir. ?) : kau (kou), Ben. Neiv. 
You ; your : kau punya (kou punia), 
Ben. New. [.l/c/. Engkau, dikau, 
kau];G86; H i8o;I 5; T52 ; T 86. 

39. Young: jemaga', Pang. Bclimb. ; 
ji-ma'-ga', Lebir. 

40. Young : baleh or bale, Sem. Plus ; 
bakli, Sem. Klapr. ; W 109. 
Youngest of a family {Mai. bongsu) : 
ba'-luit, Sen. Clifi. ; liidj, Sak. Plus 
Cliff. Fine ; thin ; slender : bale' 
(balik), Sem. Pa. Max. Little ; 
small : bale' (balik), Sem. Pa. .]/a.x-.\ 
balek, Sem. Maiiin. Smallest : bale' 
sakali (balik skali), Sem. Pa. Max. 
[? Cf Boloven ploh, "young."] 

41. Young: {a) kejiih? (keja.h {sic 
in original ; one letter dropped out 
in printing]), Sem. Beg. ; kgjoh, 
Sem. /arum ; joh (juh), Sem. 
Buk. Max. .\ youth ; young man ; 

kejoh (kijuh), Sem. Pa. Max.; kiajoh 
(kiajuh), Sem. Buk. Max. ; kiajoh 
or kfrajoh, Sem. Kedah. Marriage- 
able, of boys : kfijoh, Sem. Plus ; B 
306. [? Cf Alak kachar, "young."] 
{b) Young : k6-dah, Kerbat ; kedah 
(kidh), .S>/«. Pa. Max. Maiden : 
gin kiadah or kgradah, Sem. Kedah ; 
kg-dah, Kerbat. Maiden ; virgin : 
kiadah (kiadh), Sem. Buk. Max.; 
kedah (kidh), Sem. Pa. .Max. Virgin: 
kedah, Sem. Jur. And., Sem. Jur. 
Rob. Marriageable, of girls : kSradah, 
ex. gin keradah, "a marriageable 
woman," Sem. Plus ; M 26. To be- 
come adolescent (of youths) : kfidah 
or baro {=Mal. baharu ?) kedah, 
Sem. Plus. To become adolescent 
(of girls) : (?) lem-kiadah d?/-keradah, 
Sem. Kedah. Brother (a mode of 
address to a young man =J/a/. sudara 
or kawan) : kedah, Sem. Jarum. 
Younger sister : kiadah ; keradah, 
Sem. Plus. [? Cf Halang bedak ; 
Jarai do bodriah, "young." Curi- 
ously, Andatnanese has somewhat 
similar forms, e.g. Puchikwar 6- 
kadaka-da, "boy"; ab-kichik-da, 
"girl."] 

42. Young : nyom, Bes. Sep. A. /. ; 
nyom, Bes. A'. Lang. Young ; 
a young man ; a youth ; a big boy : 
nyam, Tembi. Boy : nyam, Serau, 
Darat. Big boy: nyam ^vAqa, Darat. 
Little boy : nyam machut, Darat. 
Young ; unripe? {Mai. muda): nyam. 
Sen. Cliff. ; M 26. Unripe : nyam, 
Tembi, Darat; binyam, Jelai; nyom, 
Bes. Malac. [? Cf Achin. nyen, in 
the expression pinang nyen, " a half- 
ripe areca-nut " ; \Va (of Kentung) 
ka, nyam ; Son kun nyilm, " young " ; 
Tareng pro niam ; Central Nicobar, 
Teressa, Chozura 'ke:r\yu.m, "child."] 

43. Young : mu-da, U. Tem. ; mu-da', 
U. Cher. Stepmother : miida' 
(mudak), Ment. Her. IL Uncle : 
muda, Temiang. Unripe : mu-da, 
Sak. Guai. [J/a/. muda, "young," 
" unripe. "] 

Young : B 306 ; B 448 ; C 102 ; 

106 ; C] 28 ; M 16 ; U 20. 

Yoting (of animals), the : C loi- 

106 ; D 68 ; W 24. 

Younger brother : B 413 ; B 419 ; 

P. 423 ; B 428. 

Younger sister: B 413; B 418 ; 

B 428, 429 ; .S 220 ; Y 41. 

Youngest of a family : C 102 ; Y 40. 

Your : Y 34 ; Y 38. 

Youth, a : B 365 ; M 16 ; Y 41, 42. 

SUPPLEMENTARY LIST 

The following words and sentences have not been included in the Compara- 
tive Vocabulary. In many cases no translations are available. 

Semang of Kedah. 

1. baber, apparently =" recently " [-'. 
A 96]. 

2. chichoi, e.g. o chichoi naya' pagi 
\y. 9 ijifra\. 

3. hamaleng, apparently a kind of 
bamboo, e.g. pcder hamaleng ; v. 11 
infra. 

4. keladeng, apparently = " to wear the 
nose-quill." 

5. kenlok, "married" [? = M 21 ; v. 
A 96]. 

6. lembrem, e.g. ye lembrem purai. 

7. maw^, e.g. lagu mavva. 

8. mawong, e.g. o sinde naya' pagi 
mawong-lah. 

9. naya' {7 = MaL menayak(?)), e.g. 0' 
chichoi naya' pagi, 5' sinde naya' 
petang, "he (the crocodile) awaits 
his prey (?) at early dawn, he dis- 
ports himself in the evening." 

10. nguku, name of a species of tree, 
Mai. seraya (?). 

11. pSder {/>r. pediirr), " over " (?) 
[? = N 19]. 

12. pengasoh, e.g. pengasoh chigar, ex- 
plained as = tom boo, " a big water " 
or " flood." 

13. purai [v. 6 sup>-a]. 

14. selampah = .'I'/rt/. sampah, e.g. selut 
selampah. 

15. seme, apparently a kind of bamboo 
[v. B 28]. 

16. tSchawog, " to hoot " (?). 

17. tSchegwong, e.g. 6 chichoi tCcheg- 
wong lang jelmol. 

18. teladhud, ' ' to dress for a dance " (?). 

Pangan of Sai. 

19. chentur {pr. chenturr), (? = chInator), 
e.g. tenakol ledhud chentur. 

20. lengyang [i/. S 215]. 

21. lenisar [pr. lonisarr), e.g. kejijh 
lenisar. 

22. tenwag, e.g. chentur tenwag, kejuh 
chalag ; v. 28 i?!fra. 

Pangan of Teliang. 

23. ampe', e.g. ye suka' k'leng ampe', 
" I love the sound of the (?)." 

24. babar (/;•. babarr), e.g. kawau tena- 
bol wong babarr. 

25. belukau (?=jelukau, 36 infra) ; v. 
33 infra. 

26. bio', e.g. kenbie' bio' ke-a. 

27. chag [pr. chagg), e.g. chag dog 
kentu' (?). 

28. chalag ; v. 22 supra [? = L 115]. 

29. chelput ; v. 37 infra. 

30. chiangul, " young shoots " (?). 

31. dekamparr, e.g. techedeg p^sakau 
dekamparr. 

32. elap5', e.g. elapo' tejabus. 

33. ewanteng, e.g. ewanteng belukau [:■. 
25 siipra\ ; ewanteng wanteng ka- 
wa-^dd pomon leau. 

34. hewi, e.g. hewi tekeseluan. 

35. jami, e.g. kleng jami ka pinggalong. 

36. jelukau \y. 25 svpra and 47, 57 
infra\ 

37. kakuh, e.g. chelput kui, kui kakuh. 

38. ke-a ; v. 26 supra. 

39. kenbie' ; v. 26 supra. 

40. kentu' ; v. '2'j supra. 

41. kespat [or kaspas ?), e.g. tebelyif 
kespat kui. 

42. lelayAh [pr. lelayahh) [v. F 284]. 

43. pedbod, "to swallow" (?), e.g. 'gi 
pedbcid s'lalu [but see A 73, where 
another meaning is suggested]. 

44. pengleng, e.g. pengleng kui hamang 
pi bai. 

45. pesakau ; v. 31 supra. 

46. pinggalong ; v. 35 supra. 

47. pohod, e.g. pohod nuih jelukau. 

765 

766 

SUPPLEMENTARY LIST 

48. pomon ; v. 33 supra. 

49. sad [pr. sadd), apparently a kind of 
root [probably = Y i], e.g. pi bai sadd 
pi bai takob, ' ' go and dig sadd ; go 
and dig for yams." 

50. tangkos, "to fall from a tree (as a 
ripe fruit) ■'(?) :=.!/<:/. gugor, e.g. o' 
tangkos lang rengal, "it falls from 
the end of the spray." 

51. tebelyif ; v. 41 supra. 

52. tejabns ; v. 32 supra. 

53. tekeseluan ; v. 34 supra. 

54. telentor ; telentor {pr. telenton') ; 
telentul, e.g. telentor batang temen- 
yusun, "the stem bends (?) as its 
leaves shoot up ' ' \Mal. lentor]. 

55. temenyusun, "to shoot up (of 
leaves)" ; v. 54 supra. 

56. tepahot (? = 47 supra), e.g. lunjan 
kleng tepahot. 

s7. tepekong, e.g. tepekong jelukau. 

58. terenjak ; ter^nja', e.g. lunjan kleng 
terenjak. 

59. tingleng, "to look up" (?), e.g. o 
tingleng, o tangkos lang rengaL 

60. turn pes, e.g. tumpes kleng telbtut. 

Pangan of Ulu A ring. 

60A. mah ngog ketu, ye chop, Mai. 
sahaya yang pergi, awak yang 
tinggal, "you are going to stay 
here, I am going away" [cf. S 221]. 

Semang or Pangan [dialect not specified] 
[Skeat). 

61. penguh, " to throw." 

Maxwell' s Semang Dialects. 

62. huldong (huldung), " to gape 
(noisily)" [Mai. tSbelaha'), 6V;«. Pa. 
Max. 

63. kSlhok (klhuk), Sein. Pa. Max. ; 
makihak (mkihk), Sem. Buk. Max., 
"to hawk (in the throat)" [Mai. 
berdahak) ; tulhok (tulhuk), Sem. Pa. 
.Max., Sem. Buk. Max., "to pant" 
{Mai. teseda'). 

64. ma'bo' (ma'bu), " to stammer" (?), 
Sem. Buk. Max. {Mai. gagap(?)). 

65. machetoh (mchtuh), " to gape 
(noisily)," Sem. Buk. Max. {.l/al. 
tebelaha' ). 

66. set (set), "vulva," Sem. Buk. Max. 
[ = N 18]. 

67. ya-nako? (ainaku'), "to hiccough," 
Sem.. Pa. J/ax. {.]/al. s6du) [?=V 
22]. 

Clifford' s Shioi. 

68. chC-nCrug [probably to be read chC- 
nerng=:cheni3ng], no meaning given. 

69. chi-16t°, no meaning given. 

70. go-lap", no meaning given. 

Sakai of Ulu Tlmbiling. 

71. chigar, explained as = teiadas [I do 
not know this word (?=" water- 
fall")]. 

Sakai of Ulu Clieres. 

72. je-rum [=jerom], explained as = 
teiadas [probably =R 29]. 

Sakai of Sufigai Raya. 

73. banding (bandin), " to be visible" (?) 
[? = S75]- 

Specimens from De Morgan in 
" L'Homme" (1885), vol. ii. p. c^yS sei/. 

74. Formerly I killed a tiger : nu-neng 
mih negchop ni juhok (nou-nen mih 
nog-tchop ni djou-hok), Somang ; 
mate aye ahchilok nei mamu (mat6 
ay^ ^htchilok nei mamou), Sakai oj 
Kerbu ; chanu an pidan nanu mamu 
(tchanou an pidan nanou mamou), 
Sakai of Sungai Raya.^ 

75. To-morrow he will eat chicken : 
selupo-his diop checha manu (s6- 
loupo-his diop tch^-tcha ma-nou), 
Somang ; siakal han (?) checha manok 
(siakal han tch^-tcha manok), Sakai 
of Kerbu ; hupul ha checha p5 (hou- 
poul he tch^-tcha p6), Sakai of Sungai 
Raya. 

76. The chief, perspiring, crosses the 
mountain like a monkey : tuoh 
bekit chapchip jelmol moi reuh 
(touch boket tchep-tchip djelmol 
moi reouh), [no dialect specified, 
probably Somang']. 

Words of P'arious Dialects, extracted from 
Martin s ' ' /nlandstdmme. " 

77. aga, " back- basket," Senoi (7), p. 
746[ = B69]. 

78. buluchana(bulu tschiana), "bamboo 
internode in which rice is cooked," 
Senoi, p. 798 [Mai. buloh, "bam- 
boo"+ E 27 {b)]. 

79. chentok (tschontok), " bamboo 
musical percussion - instrument," 

1 De Morgan adds that these sentences are 
given in the Malay order, which is used by the 
Sukais, especially in parts where they frequent 
Malays, but that sometimes the verb with its 
suliject is thrown back to the end of jhe sen- 
tence, f.^. " nuneng ni juliok mih negchop." 
One can also say "nuneng mih ni juhok 
negchop " ; but the word indicating the tense 
always remains at the beginning. 

On this I would observe that these syntac- 
tical observations await confirmation. 

SUPPLEMENTARY LIST 

767 

Senoi, p. 821 [ = Stevens' SSmang 
tuntong (toontong)]. 

80. chiok nioi (tschiok moi), "nose- 
ornament (of bamboo, put through 
the cartilage)," Senoi, p. 696 [? — C 
296 + N 98]. 

81. chiok ta (tschiok ta), "ear-cyhnder," 
S//ioi, p. 696 [? = C 296 + E 6]. 

82. deiok, "tobacco-box," Sdnoi, p. 798 
[?=P 175 ; see also Q 20 and 89 
infra. 

83. dos, "girdle of fringes," Senoi, p. 
684. 

84. dulo OS, "matches," Sc/ioi, p. 740 
[cf. F 124]. 

85. galii, "headband (of bark cloth, 
mostly of Antiaris toxicaria)," Shioi, 
p. 692. 

86. ganto, "poison-box (of bamboo)," 
Senoi, p. 770. 

87. ginas, "small-pox demon," Senoi, 
p. 942. 

88. hantu duri, "axe-haft," Bilandai, 
P- 797 [the expression is Malay, 
presumbly it is the name of the wood, 
not the haft ; 1 Mai. hantu, " ghost "; 
duri, " thorn "]. 

89. jelok, "poison-box (of bamboo)," 
Besisi, p. 770 [ = P 172, and see 82 
supra]. 

90. kiol, "clarionet," Senoi, p. 910. 

91. kleb, "yams prepared into a dough 
and roasted," Semang, p. 723. 

92. krenor, "bast -beater (of palm- 
wood)," Senoi, p. 687. 

93. krul, "married women's girdle (of 
string)," Senoi (Cerrutti), p. 683. 

94. kulut dol, "headband," Senoi of 
Batang Padang, p. 693. 

95. lanchang, " white and black seeds of 
Coi.x lacryma " {Mai. }e\ai), Belandas, 
p. 699. 

96. lat, (i) "ceremonial headband (for 
men)" (Stevens), p. 694; (2) 
"women's loincloth," Senoi of 
Batang Pada?ig, p. 690 [ — E 
76]. 

97. lok-ku, "poison-spatula," Shioi, p. 
770. 

98. rul, " ceremonial headband (for 
women) " (Stevens), p. 694. 

99. sabaring, species of tree the rind 
of which is used for making cloth 
(Favre), p. 688. 

100. selampet (slampet), species of tree 
the rind of which is used for making 
cloth (De la Croix), p. 688. 

loi. s&mikar (smee-kar), " instrument 
used for skin - painting," Stevens' 
Semang, p. 709. 

102. sugu, "hairpin, " Sinoi, p. 702. 

103. sumpeh, 104. sun-tak, " Arnotto, 
Bixa orellana," Sinoi, p. 707. 

105. surei, "women's comb," Sinoi, p. 
700. 

106. ta-kii, species of tree the rind of 
which is used for making cloth 
(Cerrutti), p. 688. 

107. teiu, "bamboo bracelet," Senoi, 
p. 700. 

108. ula, "trap (to catch rats, etc.)," 
Senoi, p. 795. 

Miscellaneous Words and Phrases from 

Skeat's AISS. 

Bisisi. 

109. akar pgnurun tupai, and 110. akar 
samuga', two kinds of leaf-charms 
carried in the quiver. 

111. atam, " to trample, to walk along " 
{Mai. meniti). 

112. ba', "to," e.g. ba' ngar, "for- 
wards " ; ba' chelon, " backwards " 
[A 176]. 

113. ba-a', a species of tree {7 Mai. jela). 

114. babar, "two together," e.g. chok 
babar, "to go, two together" [T 
271]. 

115. balan, " bridge (?) of the musical 
instrument called banjeng " [ = M 
229]. 

116. bangku malang, "poison vessel" 
[S 149]- 

117. bantu', "to assist," e.g. bantu' ha- 
dyn, " help me ! " [Mai. bantu]. 

118. basong domok, " butt-end of dart " 
[ = B304]. 

119. beh hepoi, " to retard " [W 5]. 

120. chemeh, name of a plant (?). 

121. chengat, Mai. mempSlas [ = M 88]. 

122. doi-doi, " to watch " (J/a/. jaga). 

123. hindik, " to shake " (?). 

124. jelok, "poison-case" (see 82, 89) 

[ = Pi75]- 

125. jengroh blau, "rod for boring out 
knots in the blowpipe bamboo " 
[? = B 280 or B 281]. 

126. juk, " to tear up or tear away." 

127. kachek. "to thrust into" {Mai. 
chachak) [cf. C 296]. 

128. ktlh, "to go out," "to depart," 
e.g. 'mpai kah, "just gone out" 
[ = 0 66]. 

129. laheh, "bright" [?=L 92]. 

130. 'mpai lek de' getek, "just got up 
from sleep. " 

131. 'mpak or 'mpa', "civet-cat" [ = C 
135]- 

132. no-ois, " evening," ^.^. are' no-ois 
[? = A 45, cf. D 28]. 

133. pandong domok, "stump of a 
dart." 

768 

SUPPLEMENTARY LIST 

134. pape', "three together," e.g. chok 
pape', "to go, three together" [T 
100]. 

135. pekong, "ulcer" [.Mai. pekong]. 

136. pengkal, " landingplace"[ = T2i3]. 

137. plet, " arrow-cases in quiver " [ = Q 
27]. 

138. pun, apparently an interjection. 

139. tebong, " mouthpiece of blowpipe " 
[ = B 272]; tgbong lok, "cap of 
quiver. 

140. tegot, "to break," "to snap" 
[Mai. putus). 

141. tengsfihni, "morning" [ = M 179]- 

142. tih gende', "thumb"; v. H 15. 

143. tom bentol, "shaft of a dart" 
[B 151]- 

Belatidas. 

144. chelau, "storm" [ = S 478]. 

145. chaboh, "storm." 

146. tabong tela', "quiver for darts" 
[Q 22]. 

De Castelnau' s Mantra. 

147. chochoin? (tchio-tchoine), explained 
by Fr. " plunier. " 

148. gintel, Fr. " rayer. " 

Miscellaneous Words from Logan s 
' ' Journal of the India?! Archipelago. " 

149. ampi, ampe, ampet, "three," 
Bfn7ia, xi. 171 [ = T 100]. 

150. awan, "sky" \or "cloud"?], 
Sabimba, ,\i. 268 [A/t//. awan, 
avvang]. 

151. badara, "gust of wind," Blnua, 
xi. App. 4. 

152. bo, mo, "thou," Simang, N.S. 
iii. 165. 

153. ein, eing, en, " I," Semang, N.S. 
iii. 165. 

154. gir, "hog," Bcsisi, iv. 346 [=P 

74]. 

155. hale, "house," Semang, .xi. 263 
[ = H 151]. 

156. koi, " h&^.<l," Bcnua, xi. 223 [ = H 
46]. 

157. ne, "one," Semang, xi. 174 [ = 0 

27] • 

158. pake, " bird " [or " fov/1 " ?], 
Benua, xi. App. 5. 

159. peng, "mouth," Bcsisi, xi. 227 
[ = M 202]. 

160. weng. "hand," .Semang, xi. 233. 

GRAMMATICAL NOTES. 

The following notes are merely a brief abstract, giving just enough information 
to make the materials contained in the Comparative Vocabulary intelligible. 

Spelling atid Phonology. — The greater part of the materials have been spelt 
by the collectors according to methods based on the system of Romanised Malay 
which has been more or less generally in use in the Straits Settlements during the 
last thirty years, and has recently been put into more definite shape and received 
the sanction of Government approval. 

Vowels. — In this system the vowels in use are a, e, i, o, tt, and e, and the 
diphthongs ai and au.^ The first five are described as having the Italian values ; 
e is the indeterminate vowel (something like the English a in villa, attend, 
German e in Gabe, and French e in le, qne), and the diphthongs are sounded 
much as English / in / and ow in cozv respectively. Though sufficient for the 
practical purpose of writing Malay in Roman letters, this system does not 
adequately represent all the niceties of Malay phonetics. Moreover, " Italian 
values " is an ambiguous description, e.g. it fails to distinguish between open and 
close 0 (and e). 

Rather than invent a completely new orthography, I have preferred to follow 
my sources in adapting this conventional system. For the aboriginal dialects 
the above vowel -symbols are quite insufficient, and the scheme has to be 
expanded somewhat as follows : — a, ii, e, /, «, <?, 7i, d, ii, and /. The ap- 
proximate equivalents in English for the first seven of these vowels are contained 
in \}i\QYjn^\^^oxdi% far, fai)\y), fate, feet, fall, foal, fool ; the eighth probably 
covers several distinct sounds, varying from the sound contained in the English 
/}/;-, through French peiir to French pen, but for the present it has not been 
found possible to separate these in our materials ; ^ the ninth is very near the 
French u, German ii ; the tenth has already been explained. 

Dr. R. J. Lloyd, who has had the advantage of hearing the Semang and 
Pangan songs reproduced phonographically, finds the above vowels -^ in them, 
except ii (which apparently does not occur in these texts), and with the addition 
of a nasalised vowel, f ( = our a), which he describes as very like the French 
vowel vcifin, but somewhat less open in articulation. He identifies the b with 
French eu in feu, and the /with the vowel in the English _/««. De Morgan 
distinguishes, as in French, between two kinds of a, one less open than the 
other ; ^ it has not been possible to represent this distinction throughout (though 
it may be correct) as the other collectors have not indicated it. 

Long and Short Vowels. — The simple vowels (except /which is short) can be 
short or long. In the latter case they are (or should be) marked with the mark 

' Rarely also tii and oi. ^ He remarks that the sounds are 

2 This vowel is very common in purer than in English, as in Italian 

Semang and Besisi, somewhat rare in the and French. 

other dialects. The next is decidedly * He gives a (papa), d (gdteati), a 

rare, but occurs in Sakai and elsewhere. {datte, patte), a [nougat). 

VOL. II 769 D 

770 GRAMMATICAL NOTES 

of length (— ) or (^) ; some collectors use the one mark, some the other, and 
their choice has not been interfered with. When short, these vowels are not so 
easily distinguished as when long ; it is pretty certain that e often does duty for 
the short form of a, and o for that of d. It is doubtful whether the whole series 
really exists with the short quantities. Nor is it known whether ihe short 
vowels agree in quality with the corresponding long ones (as in French) or differ 
from them in being more open (as in English). Some collectors, besides marking 
long vowels with a long mark and leaving most short ones unmarked, put a 
short mark (■J) on very short ones (other than e), thus indicating that there are 
in some dialects three degrees of length. This may very well be the case ; but 
the whole question of quantity requires further minute investigation. It is 
probable that unmarked vowels in closed syllables are to be regarded as short in 
almost all cases. 

Initial e (especially before a nasal followed by an explosive) and medial / 
(especially between an explosive and a liquid) are sometimes, when it is intended 
to indicate that the vowel is hardly audible or that the following consonant is 
really syllabic, represented by some collectors by ('). 

There is very little difference in sound between the open variety of o when 
short and e, but it is not certain that the two are identical. The latter should 
not occur in the (accented) final syllable of a word, but o should be used. 

Diphthongs.- — Dr. Lloyd finds in the phonographic records the diphthongs 
ai, au, and at (which last will generally be found spelt oi in our materials, as in 
English oiPj. But there are others, e.g. oi, perhaps also a real oi, closer than cd, 
tti (and tie), ao (almost, if not quite, the same as ati), eii (or du), bo (nearly the 
same as the last), and probably on, and ei (which are the English vowel sounds in 
so and say respectively). The pronunciation of these diphthongs requires no 
explanation, as it follows from that of their component simple vowels. 

It must not be assumed that, in all cases where two vowels follow in 
succession, they form a diphthong ; but it is difficult to be sure when they do 
and when not. Probably when the second vowel is marked with an accent (of 
emphasis) they do not, but when the first vowel is so marked they do. Luering 
observes that in Ulu Kampar Sakai the finals ai, ao (our an), oi, and tii are 
almost pronounced as if the latter vowel had become the consonant y qi w 
respectively. This description leaves no doubt that these are real diphthongs. 
On the other hand, Cliftbrd's mode of spelling, e.g. ku-i, "head," ku-i, 
" language," seems to indicate that the last word is not a diphthong, even if 
(which is doubtful) the former is. The word for "head" is in several dialects a 
real diphthong, but perhaps not in Clifford's Senoi dialect. 

Skeat sometimes writes the -/ diphthongs with y, to indicate that (like in 
Ulu Kampar Sakai above) the second half is almost consonantal. Occasionally, 
to emphasise this fact, he puts the ^j/ as a small letter above the line. 

The diaeresis ( ") is sometimes used over the second vowel (but not when it is 
0 or n) ^ to negative the idea of a diphthong. 

Nasalised Vowels. — Some of the vowels can be nasalised. Perhaps the 
commonest are a, French an in az'aw/, <? (often written ?-) closer than French 
ill mjin, and &, more open than French oii ; but 1 and ic, corresponding to the 
ordinary i and u, o, almost French uii, and 6, probably a little closer than 
French on, also occur. These nasalised vowels are found both in open and 
closed syllables. The nasalisation appears to be more or less ad lihituin : in 
some cases different speakers pronounce the same word with or without nasalisa- 
tion. The nasalised vowels are common in Semang, Jakun, and Southern Sakai, 
rare in the other Sakai subdivisions. 

' I am not sure that some collectors ^ Probably there is also a true ?, 

have not inadvertently sometimes used closer than a, but the authorities do 
it over o and u. not distinguish these clearly. 

GRAMMATICAL NOTES 771 

Checked Vowels. — As finals the vowels are frequently found in a checked or 
abrupt form. There is a rather sudden breaking off of the breath, which is 
probably checked by contraction of the glottis. In Malay this generally re- 
presents a decayed final -/•, usually still rendered in writing by -k, -k, or by the 
hamzah. In the aboriginal dialects it often appears to be merely the result of 
the forcible throwing of the accent on to the final vowel. Apparently all the 
simple vowels (except ?) can be so checked, and the check can come after a 
long vowel (when so marked), but usually it is after a short one. It is indicated 
in spelling by the apostrophe (') after the final vowel. 1 Under the influence of 
Malay orthography some collectors have indicated it by a -k or -k. This throws 
doubt on the genuineness of many of the final k's in the Vocabulary. 

Consonants. — The consonants occurring in native Malay words are the 
following : — /C-, g, ng, ck, J, ny, /, d, n, p, b, m, h, y, r, /, s, and w. Ng is the 
simple sound in English sing, singer (not the compound sound in finger, which 
is represented by ngg) ; ny is like the French gn, almost the sound written ni in 
English onion ; g is the sound in English give ; ch and j are pronounced rather 
more with the point and less with the blade of the tongue than the English 
sounds in church and judge, but the difference is not very audible ; s is the 
sound in sin (not in his). 

All these consonants occur in the aboriginal dialects. The sonants g, d, b, 
and the palatals ch, j, ny, which cannot be finals in standard Malay, are often 
finals in the aboriginal dialects, and accordingly 7iy has often to be represented 
by fi.'^ These two symbols are therefore to be considered identical.'' It has 
already been observed that final k is to be pronounced as /' (contrary to modern 
standard Malay usage) ; likewise initial (as well as final) h is to be distinctly, 
though not harshly, sounded. 

It is probable that the pronunciation of some of these sounds varies slightly 
in different aboriginal dialects. According to Dr. Lloyd, the Semang and 
Pangan consonants occurring in the text of the songs {k, g, ng, ch, j, t, d, n, p, l>, 
m, h, y, r, I, s, w) are identical with those of the Kelantan and Patani Malay 
dialect (except that the latter apparently had no w), and, on the same authority, 
the (/ and / (and probably the / and ;/) of this Malay dialect are "dorsal " in 
articulation, that is, they are produced by the application of the blade of the 
tongue to the upper teeth, as in French, and not by the application of the tip of 
the tongue to the upper gums as in English. 

The r (in the Patani and Kelantan Malay phonographic records) was well 
trilled, but the record was not crisp enough to show whether the trill was a 
tongue - trill like the Scotch, or a uvular trill as in Parisian French. Skeat 
thought is was commonly uvular. (It is to be observed that there are marked 
differences between the pronunciation of r in diff"erent Malay dialects ; in 
Penang and Kedah it is far more distinctly guttural than in Malacca.) 

In the aboriginal dialects there appear to be several kinds of r. In Sakai 
Clifford and De Morgan notice two, one of which is apparently not far removed 
from a clearly trilled English r (formed therefore with the point of the tongue 
fairly forward in the mouth). The other, which they represent by rr, is 
apparently like the Parisian or German ;-, formed in the throat by trilling the 
uvula. It is apparently somewhat like Arabic ghain (p). In the Jakun and 

Mentra dialects of Malacca I have noticed an r which appears to be formed 
by putting the tongue into the position for the French /and then slightly trilling 

1 It would seem that the glottal preceding vowel into an -i diph- 

check is sometimes heard before initial thong. 

vowels (as in German). In the few ^ There is yet another symbol : 

cases where this has been noted it is before another palatal the collectors 

represented by ('). follow the Malay usage in writing n. 

- The palatals tend to turn the I have left this unchanged. 

772 GRAMMATICAL NOTES 

the uvula (probably). Anyhow it is a very sHghtly trilled sound, and in Jakun 
represents the / of corresponding Malay words. Apparently this is what 
Newbold means by his z. It is near to Arabic gkain, but not identical. Perhaps 
it is identical with the sound described by Morgan (in UHoiiidu) as intermediate 
between / and ;-. 

In Mentra there is a voiceless r which I have written rh. It bears the same 
relation to most 7's that f does to v or zvh to w. It represents the Malay r of 
corresponding words, at least when emphasis is thrown on the syllable in which 
it occurs. It is probably guttural and very near to the Arabic fricative guttural 
kh (~), for Hervey represents it by kh. 

Whether the Arabic sound (-;.) occurs in the aboriginal dialects is doubtful. 

Apparently a strong h (rendered h and hh) like the Arabic h (,_ ) does occur, as 
a final, as well as the ordinary h. ^ 

Sh, found in Sakai, probably partakes of the peculiar character of ch andy, 
and is not quite identical with our sh, but less broad, approaching in sound (if 
not in mode of formation) the German ch (in ich). It often interchanges as a 
final with s. There is no corresponding voiced letter {zh) in these dialects. Z 
andy occur very rarely, the latter as a final in Semang (Newbold's use of it in 
Jakun is probably an error for/), the former as a very rare initial in Sakai, and 
habitually for final 5 in the Galas dialect of Semang. There is no & : an 
occasional v given by some collectors is a mistake for n or w. Ts is a doubtful 
variant of ch and s. Dz appears as a very rare variant of final d. 

Aspirated Consonants. — Unlike Malay, these dialects occasionally aspirate 
/', t, and/. Luering recognised kh and th in Ulu Kampar Sakai, and in Besisi 
(and elsewhere) ph also occurs. These are real aspirates (compared by Luering 
to the sounds in "ink-horn," "ant-hill") not fricatives like the Arabic kh, 
Scotch ch, and English th. It is doubtful whether they have a distinct 
etymological origin or are the mere result of emphatic pronunciation (as in the 
Irish rendering of English). In Besisi I believe I have heard the same word 
pronounced with an ordinary and an aspirated consonant, apparently ad libitum. 
Such combinations as hn, htn are probably syllabic and to be pronounced hen, 
hem, etc. 

Checked or Half-Conso7iants. — Sometimes final consonants are checked in 
the utterance : there is no oft'-glide, only the first half of the consonant is heard. 
These have been represented by small letters above the line. They are hard to 
distinguish from one another (hence the curious mutations of final -k, -t, -p, in 
the various dialects) and from the glottal stop which closes the checked or abrupt 
vowels. I do not know whether Miklucho-Maclay, by his softly pronounced 
finals, means these checked consonants or (as .Schmidt considers) palatalised or 
monilU ones. 

Doubled Final Consonants. — In Semang Skeat often doubles the final con- 
sonant of (accented ?) syllables to indicate that, as in English, it was (as he heard 
it) strongly pronounced and prolonged. (The preceding vowel is probably always 
short in such cases.) 

Disintegrated Nasals. — In addition to the ordinary nasal consonants ng, 
ny (;>), n, and m, there are found (as finals) sounds which may perhaps best be 
described as consisting of a checked or half-consonant which, instead of breaking 
off, turns into the corresponding nasal. Thus the Senoi word tok^, " hand," as 
pronounced by Clifford in my hearing, begins as if one were going to say the 
English word Turk (in standard soutliern English, not Scotch, pronunciation) ; 
and the half-finished /• is changed into a ng, which is not, however, a separate 
syllable. Apparently the proper position of the mouth is taken up, and a sound 
is formed, liefore the nasal passage is opened, instead of these two movements 
being simultaneous as in the ordinary nasals. These latter interchange with the 
disintegrated nasals, which are evidently sometimes directly due to emphasis. 

GRAMMATICAL NOTES 773 

The intrusive half-consonant (as I consider it) appears to vaiy in force in 
different dialects, so that while some collectors (especially in Semang and Besisi) 
have written, e.g., -sng or -^ng, others (especially in Senoi) have written -/("' ; ' the 
nasal part of the consonant seeming to dwindle till, e.g. in some Sakai dialects, 
only a simple -k is left. 

Thus there is a regular series of variants 7ig, 'Jug, ^ng, k" (really /t"^), ^, and 
similarly for n and m. I have left these different spellings unchanged, as they 
may represent slight differences of sound. The disintegrated /ly (h) sometimes 
strikes the observer as '-Ti, '^n, or ^«, sometimes as ng/l (a palatalised ng). 

Etymologically these disintegrated nasals usually represent the Malay and 
Mon-Khmer ordinary nasals. 

The habit of disintegrating the nasals is by no means confined to the 
aboriginal dialects of the Peninsula. The Dayaks of Western Borneo are said ^ 
to use k)i, In, and put for the ng, n, and m of the corresponding Malay words. 
Both there and in the Peninsula these peculiar nasals appear to be a product of 
careless, slovenly articulation. 

In some of Emeric's words the disintegrated nasal represents the simple 
explosive of the typical Mon-Khmer and aboriginal form, and it may be doubted 
whether his rendering is always strictly correct. 

Accent. — The data with regard to accent and emphasis are very meagre. 
De Morgan prints the strongly accented part of a word in clarendon and the rest 
in ordinary type, except " very short " syllables, which he prints in italics.^ Most 
collectors fail to mark the accentuated syllable, but it will often be found 
indicated by an acute accent (') in the spelling I have adopted. As a rule, the 
accent in all the aboriginal dialects appears to fall on the final syllable. This is 
most marked, however, in Sakai,* where the final syllable is apparently the real 
root of the word, but the tendency is also traceable in Jakun, even in words of 
Malayan affinity. This is contrary to Malay usage, but, as in Achinese and 
Cham, is probably due to Mon-Khmer influence. 

In Semang the accent is much weaker than in Sakai, perhaps even weaker 
than in Malay. Dr. Lloyd remarks that in the Negrito songs the same word 
sometimes appears in different places with a different accentuation. Although, 
as in Sakai (with which Semang has so many words of Mon-Khmer affinity in 
common), the accent in Semang is usually on the final syllable, yet in some 
other dissyllables and polysyllables Semang accents the penultimate, and apparently 
in many cases the stress is almost evenly distributed, much as in French and 
Japanese. 

General Characteristics. — Sakai has relatively more monosyllabic or quasi- 
monosyllabic words (of the iambic type, with the accent on the final syllable) 
than either Semang or the Jakun dialects, another instance of the closer ap- 
proximation of Sakai to the Mon-Khmer type. It is also harsher, more 
consonantal, and apparently more emphatically pronounced. 

There is no evidence of the use of tones in these dialects to differentiate 

1 The small n is, of course, merely accent, or what else, appears to be 

a conventional symbol for nasalisation, unexplained. 

and stands for ng, n, or w, as the case * The monosyllabism of pronuncia- 

may be. tion in Sakai insisted on by Clifford 

- J. I. A. vol. ii. p. xlix, where it is (but not by other collectors) is prob- 

also stated that these Dayaks use ng ably to be connected with the prevalent 

for Malay ngg (as do the aborigines of tendency to accentuate the last syllable, 

the south of the Peninsula, who also which thus acquires more relative im- 

have ;/ for nd and nt for vib). portance, and (to a person familiar 

■^ Vaughan-Stevens also puts some with the normal Malay accentuation) 

letters in italics, but whether to indicate suggests a splitting of the word into 

shortness of quantity, absence of two monosyllables. 

774 GRAMMATICAL NOTES 

words of otherwise similar sound, but much the same effect is produced by 
means of their very delicate vowel differentiation and their numerous range of 
final consonants. 

IVord-Stnicture. — On this point see p. 447, supra, so far as words of Mon- 
Khmer affinity are concerned. Typical Semang and Jakun words do not lend 
themselves so readily to the analysis there indicated. 

The precise import of the prefixes and infi.xes, as well as their number and 
origin, require further investigation. The common verbal prefixes are Semang 
ina-, Sakai dm- {em-), ne-, ne + a. consonant anticipating the final consonant of 
the root (this last seems to be typical of Northern Sakai, but appears also to 
occur in Semang, and may be of Semang origin), /li-, ki-, and Besisi ka-. Pa- 
(with its variants//-,//-, etc.) and ta- {tan-, te-, teng-) in several dialects form 
causal and sometimes transitive verbs. In Besisi na- and ta- form adjectival and 
adverbial demonstratives. There appear to be many other prefixes. 

The commonest infixes are -em- {-am-, -iifu-) and -in- {-en-, -an-). It is 
curious that these (like some of the prefixes) are common to the Mon-Khmer and 
Malayo- Polynesian families, still more curious that Semang and Northern Sakai 
frequently use the -in- infix in words of Malayan affinity, though it is as good as 
non-existent in Malay itself. 

The Jakun dialects use Malayan prefixes and suffixes, not, however, always 
absolutely identical with their ordinary Malay forms : jneng- is sometimes re- 
presented by ma-, be)-- by ha-, di- is not necessarily passive in Jakun. 

Reduplication and repetition (regular and with variations) are frequently used 
as modes of word -formation in the aboriginal dialects. 

Apart from these methods of formation, words undergo no changes of form ; 
such matters as gender, number, person, 1 tense,- mood, voice, ^ etc., have to be 
determined, when necessary, by the help of separate auxiliary words, while the 
relations of words to one another in a sentence is to a great extent defined by 
their syntactical order. 

Parts of Speech and Syntax. — The parts of speech are not divided by hard 
and fast lines : many words can be used in several different capacities, the 
syntactical order showing in what capacity they appear. But a word may be 
felt to be primarily of one part of speech. Thus the words used to determine 
gender are normally used as adjectives, being put after the name of the person or 
animal whose gender is to be defined ; but words describing a thing as big or 
small (adult or young) of its kind, being the equivalents for "mother" and 
" child," are primarily substantives and usually prefixed, though they may on 
occasion be put in apposition to (and then follow) the generic name (F 255- 
258; H 14, 15; W 27-30). 

The leading rule of syntax is that the word indicating the chief object of 
thought is put first and is followed immediately by the words which qualify or 
define it. Thus attributive adjectives, and substantives used as adjectives, follow 
the substantive they qualify. The instances are very numerous throughout the 
Vocabulary and the relations very various : e.g. the second substantive may give 
the specific differentia, the description by location or ownership or particular 
purpose or some leading peculiarity, etc.^ Personal pronouns put after a sub- 

1 Semang takes such a concrete view the pronoun of the ist or 3rd person, 

of the verb that it often represents the to the verb itself. 

subject (already expressed by a sub- - E.g. B 89 ; F 116; F 122, 123 ; 

stantive) afresh by means of a pronoun \V 9 ; W 14 ; W 18. 

immediately preceding the verb (A ■' E.g. kotn (C 48) forms a sort of 

182 ; B 59 ; 1< 228). So, too, in passive. 

giving the equivalent of a Malay verb ^ This includes the numerous uses 

(which is abstract and impersonal) a of the genitive (or possessive) and also 

Semang will generally prefix ya- or d\ apposition. 

GRAMMATICAL NOTES 775 

stantive represent our possessive pronouns. The demonstrative pronouns "this"' 
and " that," when qualifying a substantive, follow it like other adjectives. 

If an adjective is defined by a substantive, restricting its reference to a 
particular sphere, the same rule is observed (B 243 ; B 325 ; M 107). 

Like most Far Eastern languages the aboriginal dialects of the Peninsula 
often annex to their numerals certain words which roughly express the genus (or 
some general characteristic) of the things enumerated. The numeral and this 
numeral coefficient then go closely together and form an inseparable word group, 
which may either follow (F 283) or precede (N 115) the substantive that 
represents the things enumerated (see the references collected at N 115). Ap- 
parently the use of these coefficients is not obligatory (as in Chinese) but optional 
(as in Mon). Occasionally the mere numeral is put directly before (M 136) 
and sometimes after (T 170) the substantive. 

In general the subject (with its qualifying words, if any) comes first and 
precedes the verb, which in its turn precedes the object (direct or indirect, or 
both, in that order; A 116), or the instrumental (S 496) or locative (R 63) 
or agent (if the verb has a passive sense ; C 52 ; F 1 18). 

But occasionally the predicate, whether an adjective (B 202 ; G iii ; R 125 ; 
R 139 ; U 18) or verb (C 142 ; F 10 ; F 54) is treated as the leading idea and 
put first. 1 Very rarely is the object thus thrown forward (C 166 ; K 5 ; M 76). 
Adverbs are apparently allowed a good deal of latitude as regards their position : 
they sometimes stand first in the sentence (Q 5), or before the verb (A 177 ; 
B 94), or after it (A 162). When they affect an adjective (or another adverb) 
they sometimes precede (H 153), but more often follow it (V 10 ; V 12, 13). 
Prepositions precede the word with which they are in special relation. Con- 
junctions hardly occur, and though there is a complicated array of demonstrative 
and interrogative pronouns and pronominal adjectives and adverbs, there appear 
to be in Sakai and Semang no true relatives. 

' In interrogative sentences inversion appears to be common. 

PHOTOGRAPHS ILLUSTRATING 
LOCAL GROUPS. 

Kl'.I.AXIAN. 

3 E 

K EDA H -RAM AX. 

Skeat. 

Group of Skmanc; or Pangan at Jarum, Kedah-Raman Border. 

KEDAH. 

Skmanc; oi- .Sihnc, Ki.daii. 
778 

Skcat Collection. 
SlvULL OK SEMANG SKELETON, AS VIEWED FROM ABOVE. 
Procured at Ulii Siontr Kedah. 

Skcat Collection. 

Skull of Semang Skeleton — Side View. 

Belonging to skeleton procured at Ulu Siong, Kedah. 

PERAK. 

Skmang of Grit (ok Jam.\(;). 

*i*>^^i;ii;/&i-;^-^>...^..: 

Skmang of Gkit (or Janing). 

Hit inc. 

780 

I'l'-.RAK. 

Semang of Grit (or Janing). 

Semang of Grit (or Janing). 

781 

r^'l^^mj^ 

8AKAI IJF KKKBU 

783 

784 

Sakai Family, Ulu Bikum, near Bidor. 

78s 

3 F 

Ulu Bkkang, Pkkak. A vkuv old Sakai. 

Asked his age, he said, pointing to some very big durian trees, '■When these diuian trees were planted 

1 was a little boy." 

786 

p^ . 

*.••■'..: I 

••• :-\;^ 

787 

SELANGOR. 

788 

■ifi 

^^i:^ 

789 

^ 

jw-'"^ y 

J. < 

'I'lIK I'.ATIN'S KI.DKST SoN, SUNCKI LKDONG, NKAK KuALA SK.I.IJ 1 , I'll' Kl.ANG. 

790 

(Jkoii' at Pka" Lantki. Klang. 

M'Gresc 

WoMKN AT Pra' Lantki, Klakc 

M'Cregor 

796 

798 

3 H 

m 

802 

8o3 

Macliado. 

Group at Dusun Tia, Kajanc, Sklangor. 

804 

8o5 

8o6 

A', i". Arnott. 

Group ok Blandas, Kiala Lan(;ai. 

Taken on the right bank of the Langat River in Selangor, a few miles above Jugra. 

The woman in the centre is gracefully draped, but in a most unusual manner. 

PAHAXG. 

Gkoli' of Jakln, with (iiikk on kxtki-.mk Right, Ki-antan. 

I /ihtiig-iVcrch. 

807 

Abokkunai. Woman supposici) to mc Skvi;ni'v Vi-:aks Old, 

Kl ANTAN, I'AIIANC. 

p. » . A» 

t 

M'Gregor. 

(iROUP Ol' AllOKlGlXKS, ULU Ki.AU, PAIIANG. 

NEGRI SliMP.lL.W. 

812 

Jakux, Hili.s MiKiH OF Si;ia;M H,\ N , Si .\Gi;i Uj<)N(; 

Knocker. 

r 

•?^r- 

- "fr- "»«.^!5f:vc"!!^ - - : 

lAKUN W'liMi.N, llll.l.-, NDKTU OF SKKEMBAN, Si \c,i:1 r|i)N(,. 

S13 

lAKCX, Hills north of Sekemban, Sungei L'jong. 

(;U()ri' TAKKN IN Jl'NGLK, JkLKHU. 

814 

8i5 

MALACCA. 

817 

3 K 

[QHOR. 

8i9 

A>m 

f^^^^^ 

.>/. 

mh 

■M'* 

p*lv 

'hi I % 

■ ^^■ 

'.■•^Wf-k* 

Jl^' 

^"^ 

*<-r/ 

Ai 

'C'-' 

V f t 

r, V: 

■I'llKKK lAKL-N HoVS, Tl.U liATC l'AI|\T, |.i||,n-' 

Machan'o. 

823 

SELANGOR BLOWPIPE PAITERNS. 

.S'Xvm/ CnlU-ction. 

Rl'hhings from Biisisi and I'h.andas Hi.owpii'es. 

Note. — These rubbings are taken from blowpipes in the Skeat Collection at Cambridge, which are there 
labelled S.I. A., .S. I.B., etc. Here for the purpose of identilication only the differentiating letter is recorded. 
Nos. 5 and 14 (and perhaps No. 7) represent the I.otong monkey. 

1 should perhaps explain that these rubbings were made for me sonic two or three years back by the kind 
favour of the Archiuological Museum authorities at Cambridge, and ihal they are here included as likely to be 
of some assistance to future investigators. At the time of going to press, I have just received rubbings of the 
three .Semang blowpipes since added to the collection. Two of these three are decorated wiih concentric ring- 
lines only (like the Semang arrows). The third also has chevrons roughly indicated by dotted lines. 

., 2. 3, H; 4, 5- (-'; 6, K 
824 

liiili" 

J scal( 

:\ scale., 

Rubbings from Bksisi and Hi.andas Blowpipes. 

J scale. 
Skcat Collection. 

Xote.—l 
lalielled .S. I 

hcse rill 
.A., S.I 

ibiiis;^ are t.ikeii from blowpipes in the Skeat Collection at Cambridge, which are there 
Fi.. etc. Here for the purpose of ideiitificalion only the dilTerentiatin^ letter is recorded. 

i scale. 

Xo/r.—T 
lal.elk-d S.I. 

^m 

mimm 

5 scale. 
S/u'tz/ Colhxlion. 

Ri"nmN(;s i'kdm Ri:.sisi and I'i.anhas I'i.mw nri-.s. 

u'>L- rulibinys arc laUcii fioiii lilow jiiiics in tiiL- Skcat CollcLlion at C'ainl.irid.uie, which arc there 
.\., S.I.I!., etc. Here f'jr the piirpo.-ie of icleiililicatioii only the (liricrentiatiiig letter is recortled. 

14, 15, 16, J ; 17, 18, 19, 20, K. 

826 

5 scale. 

Skcat Collection. 

RlHHINGS from Hf.SISI and Pir.ANDAS Bl.OWI'IlES. 

.V(;('f.— These rubbings are taken from blowpipes in the Skeat Collection at Cambridge, which are there 

labelled S.I. A., S.I.B., etc. Here for the purpose of idenlification only the differentiating letter is recorded. 

N'.B. —No. 30 is a drawing to show the pattern of No. 29, which, as in some other of these blowpipe decorations, 

is so faintly incised as to be very difficult to reproduce distinctly. 

I, 22, K'; 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, L; 28, 29, 30, 31, M. 

827 

36 

i scale. 

4;.; *-»;if*; • ■ '^iM'ri 

J scale. 

«« inn 

f 1 

.^ ■s'JS' 

.', sc.lle. 
RfUBINGS IKO.M lilCSISI AM) BlANDAS BloVVPU'KS. 

S/ccai Collection. 

Note. — These ruV>l)ings are taken from lilowjiipes in the Skeat Collection at t'ainbri(Ij;e, which are there 
labelled S I. A.. S.I.H., etc. Here for the ptn'pose of identification only the ililTerentialing letter is recorded. 

3--^- ^I ; 33j 34> 35. 36, Q ; 37. 38, 39. ^ ; 40, S. 
828 

mi 1 '"ii ' 

J scale. 

SJimi Colleclion. 

RrHlilNGS FKOM BKSISI AND BLANDAS Bl.OWI'Il'KS. 

labelled S. 

These rubbings are taken from blowpipes in the Skeat Collection at Cambridge, which are there 
I.A., S.I.B., etc. Here for the purpose of identification only the differentiating letter is recorded. 

41, 42, 43, 44, 45! S ; 46, V ; 47, 48, 49. ^^'• 
829 

u...-. .,;..-'■'■ 

;;./<"(' 

>■:;;.■■(■'■■' 

' "i:'-'*? SiuUiT L 

/ v2i<?^ 

-r^ 

INDEXES. 

VOL. II 

831 

M 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

Abandonment of goods, i. 502, 505 
Abbreviated titles, list of, i. p. xxv 
Abbreviations, ii. 495 
Abduction, punishment for, i. 497 
Ablution, ceremonial, ii. 15, 16 
Abnormalities, i. 69 
Aboriginal element in Malays, i. 41 
Abortion, ii. 23 
Accent, musical, ii. 129 
Accuracy of blowpipe, i. 299, 305 
Acid fruits as seasoning, i. 123 
Adultery, i. 501 ; ii. 56, 59, 64, 65, 66, 

78, 81, 84 
Adze, i. 304 

.-Eolian harp, see Wind-organ 
Affection, i. 528 
Age at marriage, ii. 64, 75 
Agriculture, Mantra, i. 365 
Air demons, ii. 245 
Amazons, ii. 282 
Ampallang, i. 592 
Amulets, i. 141, 146, 153, 160; ii. 201, 

328. See also Charms 
Angling, i. 205, 210, 218 
Animal myths, ii. 188, 221, 293, 324 
Animals and durian, i. 339; scaring, 344, 

351 : songs about, ii. 147 sq. ; help- 
ful, 340 
Ant-heap ceremony, see Mound 
Ant pattern, i. 479 
Antiaris, i. 143, 263; poison, 2845^., 

300, 311 
Antidotes, i. 267, 287, 294 
Anvil, i. 248, 384 
Ape demon, charm against, i. 473 ; ii. 

246 
Ape pattern, i. 474 
Apes, man's origin from, ii. 344 
Aphrodisiac, ii. 60 

Archaisms in Taboo language, ii. 423 
Areas, tribal, i. 43, etc. ; linguistic, ii. 

387, 391, 400 
Argus pheasant, catching, i. 217 ; charm 

against, 473 ; pattern, 474, 477 ; ii. 6 
Arm-bands, i. 140 sq., 145 

Armlets, i. 152 

Arrow, i. 204, 271, 273 sq., 276; 

feathering, 271, 274, 277 ; decoration 

of, 27s 
Arrow heads, detachable, i. 272 
Arrow poison, i. 272, 279, 284 
Arrow release, i. 253 ; Orang Laut, 

336 ; ii. 371 
Arrow shaft, i. 271 
Arsenic, i. 311, 334 
Art, i. 395 sq. 
Arts and crafts, i. 374 sq. 
Assonance in songs, ii. 129 
Authority in house, i. 513 
Avoidance, ii. 63, 203, 204 
Awning, boat, i. 198 

Babies, ii. 6 ; see also Child, Infants 

Bachelorhood, ii. 49 

Bachelor's hut, i. 86 

Bachelors' sleeping place, i. 64, 78 

Bags, i. 389 ; matwork, 382 ; decoration 
of, 390 

Bait, i. 217 

Bamboo pillows, i. 185, 190 ; vessels, 
113, 130; tube, fire apparatus, 114; 
tobacco tube, 117; shoots, a food, 
118 ; cooking vessel, 121 ; water 
vessel, 128 ; combs, 149 ; pin, 156 ; 
bed, 173, i8i ; hut, 182 ; scoop, 
205 ; tubes, 216, 296, 312 ; weapons, 
247 ; knife, 269 ; ii. 18 ; quiver, 273, 
278 ; shoot pattern, 276 ; tray, 284, 
285, 299, 301 ; spear blade, 296 ; 
scarecrow, 357 ; raft, 383, 387 ; 
charm tubes, 437; music, ii. 121; 
Princess, 343 

Bambusa Wrayi, i. 261, 281 

Banana leaf as nose-pin, i. 157 

Bananas as food, i. 118 

Bangkofig song, i. 670 

Banishment, i. 502, 506 

Barbican, i. 173 

Barbs, arrow, i. 271 sq. 

Bark-cloth girdle, i. 139, 140, 150; dress. 

833 

834 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

157 ; 161 «., 166, 455 ; making, 375, 

380, 384, 389 
Bark hut, i. 184, 196 
Barter, i. 131, 525 ; articles of, 225, 

227, 229, 232, 239 
Basket, i. 191 sq. 

Basketwork, i. 299, 377, 386, 392 
Batin, i. 494 sq. ; descent in family, ii. 

63 ; female, 272 
Bats, netting, ii. 264 
Bat's-wing pattern, i. 321 
Beads, i. 146 
Bean, i. 371 
Bear-cat, i. 418 
Bear song, i. 638 
Beard, i. 147, 576 
Bed, i. 173, 181 
Bee, i. 230 ; spell, 693 
Bee-hive hut, i. 176 
Bellows, i. 384, 390 
Benzoin, i. 225 ; as incense. 345 
Bertam, i. 664 

" Bertam "-leaf pattern, i. 483 
Betel chewing, i. 93, 116, 122, 125, 

129, 133 
Betrothal, ii. 79 
Bibliography, general, i. p. x.xi; linguistic, 

ii. 481 
Bier, ii. 91 
Bird lime, i. 204, 209, 216, 223 ; traps, 

217 ; myths, ii. 192, 224 
Birds, souls of, ii. 5 
Birth bamboos, i. 410, 458 ; ii. 6 ; spell, 

i. 704 ; tree, ii. 3 ; tree as life index, 

5 ; demon, 13 ; name, 16 
Black pigment, ii. 35, 36, 44 
Blackening teeth, ii. 34 
B'lian, see Medicine-man 
Blood money, i. 495 ; ceremony, 699 ; 

ii. 204, 214, 297 ; demon, ii. 49 
Blowpipe, i. 62, 92-93, 207, 215, 224, 

254. 297, 305, 306, 315, 323, 324, 

326, 328, 333, 335 ; in Borneo, 255 ; 

use of, 259 ; range of, 260, 299, 305, 

323 ; parts of, 280 ; making of, 281, 

297, 306, 315, 328 ; varieties, 281 ; 

inner tube, 281, 297, 306 ; outer tube 

of, 307 ; patterns, 412, 461 sq. , 620 sq. ; 

in Peru, 606 ; see also Accuracy 
Blowing as charm, ii. 25, 26 
Blunt dart, i. 327 
Boar, wild, song, i. 644 
Boat dwelling, i. 172, 197 ; building, 

394 
Boats, i. 392 
Body in grave, position of, ii. 92, 106, 

no, 112 n. 
Body paint, ii. 30, 36, 43 
Bone necklace, i. 145, 152; nose. 156; 

rings, 153 ; implements, 242 ; needle, 

269 

Books, lost, ii. 346 

Bow, i. 202, 270, 297 sq. ; use of, 251 ; 
names for parts, 271 ; description 
of, 272 ; range of, 279 ; how held, 

337 
Bowl, wooden, i. 383 
Bowstring, i. 271, 273, 280 
Brass ornaments, i. 153 
Breast, i. 69 ; magical pattern on, 419 ; 

paint, ii. 47 
Bridge of guitar, ii. 124 ; of dead, 187, 

208, 217, 300 
Buceros, ii. 223 
Buprestes, as food, i. 118 n. 
Burial ceremonies, i. 95 ; ii. 89 sq. ; 

bamboos, i. 409, 460 ; customs, ii. 245 
Butt of dart, 283, 298, 306, 310, 317, 

334 

Calendar, i. 393 

Camphor, i. 225, 232, 234 ; language, 

ii. 414 
Camping, i. 173 n. 
Cane girdle, i. 139 sq. ; ring, 299 ; 

wedge, 307 
Cannibalism, i. 54, 566, ii. 285 ; penal, 

i. 501 n. 
Canoe, capacity of, i. 372, 393 ; race for 

bride, ii. 79 
Caoutchouc, i. 229 
Cap, quiver, i. 258 71., 324, 327 
Cassava as food, i. 120 
Casting nets, i. 210, 219 
Catch crops, i. 117, 361 
Cat magic, i. 418 
Caul demon, i. 696 ; ii. 15 
Cave dwellings, i. 168, 173 
Censer, i. 345 
Census of 1901, i. 38, 577 
Cephalic index, i. 28 n., 34, 44-46, 573, 

582 
Character, i. 525, 526, 535, 542, 551, 

558 

Charcoal, use of, ii. 35, 36 

Charm necklaces, bracelets, etc., i. 141, 
146, 153 ; for monkeys, 215 ; honey, 
230 ; arrow feathers as, 277, 278 ; for 
feathers, 278 ; leaf, 314 ; patterns, 
Semang, 409, Sakai, 415 ; 419 ; 
tube, 423 ; tube pattern, 436, 617 ; 
against vermin, 476 ; against ants, 
479 ; ii. 125, 204 ; against tigers, 
260 ; cholera, 478 

Charred sticks as charm, i. 437 ; ii. 59 

Cheating, i. 526, 528 

Cheeks, i. 576 

Cheerfulness, i. 525, 536, 551 

Chevron pattern, i. 472 

Chevrotain song, i. 642 

Chiefs, i. 494 sq., 500, 505, 510, 511, 
513, 516, 520 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

S35 

Chief's hut, i. 183 

Child, carrying, ii. 11, 12, 19, 24 

Child, feeding, i. iii, ii. 19; marriage, 

ii. 75 
Child-bearing period, ii. 11 
Children, treatment of, i. 528 «.; ii, 19, 

24 ; bathing song, i. 669 
Chillies as seasoning, i. 121 
Chin, i. 576, 583, 589 
Chindweh (or chinduai) pattern, ii. 51 ; 

see Love charms 
Cholera demon, ii. 288 ; charm, 478 
Chopper, i, 269 
Chorus, ii. 138 
Cicada, ii. 210 
Circumcision, ii. 34, 40, 50 
Civet cat pattern, i. 418 
Civilisation, visits to, i. 540 
Clans, ii. 62 
Classification of quiver patterns, i. 440 ; 

of patterns, 464 
Clay pellets for blowpipe, i. 259, 304 
Cleaning-rod for blowpipe, i. 310 
Cleanliness, i. 85, 532 
Clearings, i. 343, 346, 366 ; not made, 

373 ; spell for, 706, 714 
Climbing, i. 50, 62, 85, 92 
Clothing, i. 65, 93, 191 
Cloud pattern, i. 474 
Clouds, ii. 207 

Club house, see Bachelor's hut. Com- 
munal hut. Long house 
Coconut drinking vessel, i. 113; water 

carrier, 195 ; mythical poisonous, ii. 

315 
Collecting poison, i. 284, 290, 300, 302, 

312, 332 
Colour vision, Semang, i. 48 
Combs, magic, i. 148, 156, 492 ; 165, 

396 sq. ; patterns, 420 sq., 606 sq. ; 

buried with women, 424 ; making, 

424 ; work of men, 424 ; names of 

parts, 426 
Commensality, i. no, 116, 124, 129, 

355 ; as marriage ceremony, ii. 57 
Communal hut, i. 171, 177, 182 ; 

property, 504 
Condiments, i. 128 
Confiscation of goods, ii. 79 
Contracts, i. 502 
Cooking, i. 112, 120, 126 n. ; vessels, 

120 ; by men, 135 ; fish, 214 ; stones, 

248 
Copper rings, i. 163 
Coral rings, i. 158 
Cork tree song, i. 667 
Corpse, laying out, ii. 97, 98, 102 ; 

marking with cross, ii. 102 
Council of chiefs, i. 515 
Courtship, i. 676 ; ii. 61, 69 
Crabs' legs in necklace, i, 165 

Cradle, ii. 7 

Crafts, i. 374 sq, 

Craipp spell, i. 695 

Craniology, see Cephalic index 

Creation, ii. 336, 344 ; myth, 475 

Creeper pattern, i. 480 

Crime, i. 497- 500, 506, 512, 515, 518 

Cripple, ii. 4 

Crocodile as food, i. 125 ; song, 649 ; 
ii. 27 

Cross-hatching on combs, i. 435 

Crystal rings, i. 163 

Cucumber-seed pattern, i. 419 

Cultivation, i. 93, 338 sq., 365; com- 
munal, 504 

Culture, Semang, summary of, i. 53-54 ; 
.Sakai, summary of, 64-66 ; Jakun, 
summary of, 93-95 ; of Semang, 
Andamans.and Philippines, 586; Mon- 
Annam, ii. 449 ; and language, 470 

Cups, coconuts as, i. 132 

Customs of Semang, Andamans, Philip- 
pines, i. 587 

Cymotrichi, use of term, i. 37 

Dagger, i. 269 

Daily life, i. 384, 388, 391 

Dance, i. 95 ; ii. 126, 137, 169 ; wand, 

i. 145 ; at rice feasts, 364 ; names of, 

364; dress, 364; ii. 118, 131; 

mimetic, ii. 119 
Dart, blowpipe, i. 257, 282, 298, 310, 

327, 330 ; marks on, 286, 331 ; 

making, 331 
Day, divisions of, i. 393 
Death, origin of, ii. 337 
Death-wind, ii. 218 
Debt, i. 503, 519 
Decoration of body, ii. 28 
Decorative art, i. 395 sq. 
Decorum, Sakai, i. 122 n. 
Deer as food, i. 135 ; hunts, 221 ; magic, 

417 ; slot pattern, 417 ; song, 639 
Deformities, i. 49, 105 
Deities, ii. 177 sq. 
Demon, expelling, i. 366, ii. 26 [sec also 

Exorcism) ; Huntsman, 245, 303 ; 

Sakai, 282 
Demons, ii. 181 sq., 234, 238, 241 sq., 

247, 301 sq., 322, 360, 477 
Depilation, i. 148, 164 
Descent, rule of, ii. 63, 87 
Destruction of mankind, ii. 236 
Dialects, Sakai, 396 sq. ; Jakun, ii. 

403 sq. 
Dibble, i. 348, 350. 372 
Dibbling, i. 343, 372 
Diorite implements, ;i. 244 n. 
Diseases of aborigines, i. 100-106 ; cause 

of, 421; magic against, 421, 480; 

as punishment, ii. 59 ; origin of, 212 

836 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

Dishes, i. ii6, 122 

Divination, ii. 154 «., 200, 287, 306 

Diving, i. 224 

Divorce, ii. 65, 78, 81, 83 

Dog, i. 192, 193, 204, 214, 221, 314 «. ; 
hunting, 207, 215, 220, 224 ; breed- 
ing, 373 

Doom myth, ii. 347 

Doublets and taboo language, ii. 405 

Dragon combat, ii. 155 11. ; in eclipse, 
203 ; 235 

Drama, dance, ii. 132 

Draughtsmanship, i. 402 

Dream as omen, i. 365 ; ii. 23 

Dreams, ii. 201, 261, 367 

Dress, i. 53, 137 sq. ; dance, 364 ; cere- 
monial, ii. 118, 124, 136 ; of magi- 
cian, 250 

Drinking, method of, i. no ; vessels, 
no, 113, 132 

Drought, charm against, i. 476 

Drum, ii. 117, 124, 136, 139, 142, 
168 

Dug-outs, i. 390 

Durian, i. 93, 123, 132, 134, 136, 339, 
369 sq. ; trees, price of, 370 

Dwarfs, rarity of, i. 100 

Dying, farewell song to, i. 705 

Eagle, ii. 236 

Eaglewood, i. 225, 239 

Ear, flowers, grass in, i. 155 ; boring, 

159 ; ii- 33. 39. SI 

Early rising, i. 384 

Earrings, i. 150, 156 

Ears, i. 49, 69 

Ear-studs, i. 159 ; ii. 39 

Earth, shape of, ii. 239, 286, 292, 476 ; 

origin of, 286 ; not solid, 356 
Earth demon, charm against, i. 358 ; 

god, 365, 371 ; mother, ii. 210 
Ebony, i. 239 

Eclipse, ii. 203, 298, 319, 320 
Eggs, as food, i. 118 
Election of Batin, i. 517 
Elements, linguistic, unidentified, ii. 

462 
Elephant, as food, i. 126 ; hunting, 202, 

206 ; scaring, 344 ; song, 635 ; taboo, 

ii. 132, 260; myths, 221; 293; stone, 

294 
Emblems on combs, i. 434 
Emotions, expression of, Semang, i. 52 
Endurance, i. 50, 52, 64, 87 
Etiquette of rice feasts, i. 353, 356 
Europeans, knowledge of, i. 559 
Evil eye, i. 162 
Exchange of wives, ii. 76, 121 
Exogamy, local, ii. 63, 87 ; 84, 86 
Exorcism, i. 695; ii. 49, 230, 252 sq., 

257, 288, 295 

Eyes, i. 35, 48, 69, 84, 574, 599 ; shape 

of, 30, 61 
Eyelashes, i. 61 

Fabulous tribes, i. 23 ; ii. 281 

Face, see Physiognomy 

F'ace paint, ii. 8, 45 ■s'i'. , 51 

Face painting, origin of, ii. 281 

Family, i. 504, 512 ; size of, ii. 7 

Fan-palm thatch, i. 182 

Fasciculi Malayenses, note on, by Dr. 

W. L. H. Duckworth, i. 96, 601 
Fattening game, i. 215 
Feast, fishing, i. 214 ; birth, ii. 23 
Feasts, ii. 117 sq., 124, 143, 169 
Feathering of arrows, i. 271, 274, 277, 

278 
Fecundity, ii. 7, 11, 24 
Feet, i. 49, 62, 85 
Felling trees, i. 339, 344 
Fermented liquor, ii. 144 
Fern shoots as food, i. 118 ; pattern, ii. 

47 ; seed in magic, 56 
Ficus bark cloth, i. 376 n. 
Filing teeth ; see Tooth 
Fillet, head, i. 156, 166 
Filter, bark, i. 456 
Fine, i. 497, 506, 507, 515 
Fire, family, i. 178 ; at night, 185 ; 
ceremonial, 347, 362 ; sign for, 473 ; 
as counter charm, ii. 17, 20 ; in 
magic, 18, 20, 25, 213 ; race round, 
82; at grave, no, ii6; 188 
Firearms, i. 251 
Firebrand myth, ii. 212 
Fire-drill, i. 119 ^i. 

Fire-making, i. in, 113, 119, 124, 127 
Fire-rope, i. 133 
Fire-saw, i. 114 
Firstborn, ii. 4 ; death of, 24 
Fish food, i. 113, 131, 135 ; drying, 
205 ; spear, 205, 335 ; poisoning, 
206, 211, 213 ; dam, 209, 211 ; fence, 
211, 223 ; trap, 211, 223, 419 ; cook- 
ing, 214 ; scale pattern, 418, 482 ; 
fence pattern, 473 ; charm against, 
476 ; souls of, ii. 5 ; taboo, 21 ; trap 
song, i. 668 ; ii. 162 
Fishing, i. 200 sq., 205, 209, 213, 217, 

218, 223 
Fishing feast, i. 214 
Fishing-hut, i. 210, 211 
Fishing-rod, i. 205 
Flint and steel, i. in, 114 
Flesh-food, i. 131 
Float, i. 195 

Flood, ii. 186, 219 ; cf. 339, 356 
Floor, raised, i. 182, 196 
Flooring i. 184 

Flowers worn, i. 147, 385 ; in hair, 155, 
163 n. : lightning-carrying, 454 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

837 

Flower theory of art, i. 396 

Flute, ii. 123, 135, 142 

Flying fox song, i. 657 ; ii. 191 

Foetor, i. 48, 60, 602 

Folklore, ii. 173 sq. 

Food, i. 87, 109 sq., 112, 117, 122; 
mode of taking, no; distribution of, 
126 ti. ; preparation of, 127 ; taboos, 
134; ii. 226, 260; taboos of mother, ii. 
II, 21 ; children's, 19; burial of, 92, 
94. 116 

Footprints, i. 50 ; huge, ii. 284, 366 

Forehead, i. 576 

Forest, mode of clearing, i. 342 

Forest pattern, i. 489 

Forge, Besisi, i. 390 

Forging arrow-point, i. 271 ; iron, 383 

Foster child, ii. 27 

Fowling, i. 93, 209, 216 

Fowls as food, i. 116 ; not eaten, 135, 
136 

Fringe, leaf, i. 139, 142 sq., 150; grass, 
150 ; fungus, 382 

Frogs as food, i. 118 «. ; and rain, 479 ; 
pattern, 480 

Frontiers, linguistic, ii. 412 

Fruit as food. Mantra use of, i. 118, 
126 «., 127 «. ; stones, 338 ; gather- 
ing, 342, 360 ; food of Orang Laut, 
372 ; charm on bamboo for, 485 ; 
song, 627 ; ii. 128, 157 

Fumigation of planting sticks, i. 350 

Fungi as food, i. 118 

Fungus bracelets, i. 144, 152 ; girdle, 
138, 142, 151, 380 ; ligature, 146 ; 
tigress milk, ii. 4 

Furniture, see Pillow 

Future life, ii. 5, 205, 207, 209, 217, 
239, 285, 290, 292, 298, 299, 321, 
348. 350 

Gabaiig song, i. 663 

Gable, slope of, i. 187 

Gadong in poison, i. 289, 293, 301, 319 

Gait of Semang, i. 50, 62, 69 

Gambier plants, i. 368 

Game, preparation of, i. 123 ; bag of, 

213 ; fence, 213, 221 
Games, i. 64, 75 
Gardens, i. 117 
Geometrical patterns, i. 402 
Gestation, ii. 8 
Gestures, Semang, i. 52 
Ghost, ii. Ill, 114 
Giants, ii. 282, 284 
Gibbon song, i. 646 
Ginger, use of, i. 123 ; song, ii. 129 
Girdle, i. 138 sq., 150 ; of quiver, 299 
Gods, i. 54 ; ii. 177 ; see also Kari, Pie, 

Tuhan, etc. 
Gourds as food, i. 118 

Grain food, adoption of, i. in ; earliest, 

340 
Grammar, Mon-Khmer, ii. 446 
Granary, i. 171, 179, 342 
Grass girdle, i. 60 
Grater, stick, for food, i. 115 
Grave, ii. 91, 97, 99, 104; offering at, 

92 sq. ; objects in, 92, 96, in, 112, 

116 sq. ; rice sown on, 109 ; demon, i. 

700 ; ii. 244 
Greeting after rice feast, i. 356 
Gutta, i. 225 ; procuring, 233 
Gutta-percha, i. 323 
Gutta taban, i. 233, 239 

Habitations, i. 54, 65, 94, 168 sq. See 
also Houses, Huts 

Hair, i. 31, 34 sq., 46, 58, 67, 79, 92, 
147. 573 ■^?- 591. 599; character, 
classification by, 36 ; washing the, 
155 ; flowers in, 155 ; care of, 159, 
i6i ; Duckworth on, 584 ; of corpse, 
combing, ii. 102 

Hairpin, i. 192 

Hairy people, ii. 282 

Hall, tribal, i. 189 

Hallux, curve of, i. 49 

Hammer, stone, i. 249 

Hammock, child's, ii. 11 

Hands, i. 49, 62, 85 

Harp, bamboo, ii. 118, 123, 134, 139, 
142, 168 

Harpoon, i. 205 

Harvests, number of, i. 344 ; magic 
before, 351 

Hatchet, i. 250, 269 

Hawk's-eyes pattern, i. 276, 417, 418 

Head measurements, i. 44, 56 ; shaving, 
53, 146, 148, 164 ; ii. 16, 32 ; dress of 
men, i. 146, 148, 154 ; ii. 143 ; bands, 
i. 147, 149; ii. 12 ; scratcher, i. 165 ; 
band patterns, 472, 625 ; of victim, 
ii. 228 

Health, i. 190 

Hearing, i. 49, 61, 85 

Hearth, i. 114, 119, 124, 128, 184, 192 

Heat, endurance of, i. 52 

Height, i. 43, 56, 69, 72, 8i, 90-91 

Herbal remedies, ii. 353 

Hieroglyphics, charm, i. 624 

Hill rice, i. 342 ; pattern, 488 

Hillock pattern, i. 486 

Hips, child on, ii. 12 

Historical traditions, ii. 264, 302, 333, 
341, 344, 355, 364, 372 

History and language, ii. 467 

Hog hunting, i. ^2.0, 224 

Honesty, i. 526, 527, 559 

Honey, i. 132, 229, 230, 231 ; charm, 
230 

Honeycomb, i. 133 

838 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

Hornbill ring, i. 158 ; skulls, 184 ; in 
magic, ii. 11 

Horticulture, i. 348, 357, 359 

Hospitality, i. 534, 565 

Hostility of Malays, i. 530 

Houses, i. 194, 196; plan of, on bamboo, 
478 ; description, in song, 684 

Hunting, i. 200 sq., 206, 212, 214, 219 ; 
customs, ii. 223 

Husband, duties of, i. 375 ; as accou- 
cheur, ii. 20 ; authority of, 64 

Husking rice, i. 351 

Huts, i. 63, 94, 169, 172, 198, 586 sq. ; 
tree, ladder to, 63 ; type, evolution of, 
170 ; raised, 186, 191 ; leaf, 189 ; 
burial, ii. 100 ; soul, 108 

Idol (?), ii. 374 

Images, wooden, ii. 374 

Implements, i. 242 sq. 

Improvisation, i. 685 ; ii. 168 

Incense in death ceremony, ii. 98 

Incised patterns, i. 425, 426 

Incision, ii. 52 

Incubation, i. 455 

Independence, i. 528 

Infanticide, ii. 11 

Infants, treatment of, ii. 6 ; care of, 10 

Inheritance, i. 504, 512, 516, 519 ; 

female, 544 
Insanity, ii. 333 
Insect myths, ii. 225 
Insignia of chiefs, i. 510 
Instruments, musical, i. 54, 65, 95 ; ii. 

117 
Intelligence, i. 528, 529, 560 
Intermarriage with Malays, i. 39 ; ii. 57 
Intervals, musical, ii. 172 
Invocation, i. 680. See also Spell 
Invulnerability, i. 496 
Inwalling spell, i. 684, 707 
Ipoh, use of, i. 261 sq., 311 ; effect of, 

on man, 292 
Iron, taboo of, 1. 154 ; ii. 6 ; dart points, 

i. 258 ; knife, 269 
Ironwork, i. 383, 390 
Ivory, i. 227, 229 
Lxora, i, 397, 399 

Jaws hung in house, i. 184 
Jellyfish as souls, ii. 23 
Jew's-harp, ii. 117, 122, 136, 142 
Judicial procedure, ii. 66 
Jukrah, i. 506 
Jungle fowl song, i. 657 

Kabau song, i. 662 

Keloids, ii. 43 

Ki*lubi fruit pattern, i. 416 

Kinship, ii. 62 

Kitchen middens, i. 219 

Kite song, i. 655 
Kledang song, i. 660 
Knife, ii. 9 

Knives, bamboo, i. 249 sq. 
Knot calendar, i. 391 
Knotted headgear, i. 510 

Ladder, i. 175, 179, 184, 187, 196 

Land tenure, i. 548 

Latigsuir, i. 697 ; ii. 13 

Language, camphor, i. 235 ; taboo, ii. 
363 ; 379 sq. ; classification of, 385 ; 
and race, 385, 391, 466 ; areas, 400 ; 
and history, 467 ; and culture, 470 

Languages, summary of distribution, 
etc. , ii. 409 ; history of, 432 sq. ; rela- 
tion to others, 432 sq. ; list of, com- 
pared, 503 

Lashings, i. 250, 269, 326 

Latah, i. 63 

Laws, i. 495 sq. 

Leader in music, ii. 126 

Leaf fringe, i. 139, 142 sq., 150; ear- 
rings, 150 ; fillet, 161 71. ; shelter, 
169, 17.1;, 180 ; of. 190 ; bed, 174 ; 
plate, 214 ; charm, 306, 314 ; wedge, 
307; stopper of blow -gun, 310; 
pattern, 489 

Lease, i. 502 

Leeches, ii. 223 

Leg bands, i. 140 sq., 145 

Lekir in poison, i. 289, 293 

Leprosy, i. 106 

Life inde.x, birth-tree as, ii. 5 

Life-stone, ii. 26 

Ligatures, i. 1405^., 145 

Lightning, i. 451 ; ii. 206 

Lime, use of, with food, i. 115 ; pre- 
paration of, 117 71. 

Linguistic map, Sakai, ii. 394 
Lissotrichi, use of term, i. 37 
Lizard as food, i. 135 ; ornament, 309 ; 

pattern, 491 ; song, 650 ; as soul- 

bringer, ii. 26 
Loans, i. 516 
Loin cloth, use of, i. 143 
Long house, i. 171 
Love charms, ii. 67, 232, 261, 289, 310, 

475 
Lying, ii. 214 

Magic and rice-planting, i. 340, 345 ; for 

animals, 417 ; pillow, 455 ; powers of 

strangers, 539, 564 ; birth, ii. 6 sq. ; 

women and, 50 ; productive, 121 ; 

evil, 233, 362 
Magicians, powers of, ii. 113, 248, 287, 

293, 327, 350, 361 ; functions of, 

248 ; hut, 308 
Maize, iii, 117, 343, 361, 371 ; as 

antidote, 268 ; pattern, 491 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

839 

Mallet, i. 382, 385 

Man, origin of, ii. 218 

Man-hunting, i. 530 

Map, linguistic, Sakai, ii. 394 ; linguistic, 
S.E.Asia, 442; linguistic, Mon-Annam, 
440 ; numeral systems, 454 ; of Ipoh, 
i. 261 

Marks, property, i. 436 

Marriage, i. 54, 66, 95 ; customs, 678 ; 
ii. 55 sq. ; season for, 70, 82 ; age 
of, 85 

Mat, i. 197 

Mat-making, i. 382, 386, 389 

Matwork pouch, i. 121, 158 

Matrilineal descent, ii. 87 

Maxims, legal, i. 508, 689 

Meals, i. 116, 121, 124, 126, 129 

Measure of capacity, i. 231 

Medicine-man, ii. 225. See also Magi- 
cian 

Medicine-hut, ii. , 252, 359 

Medicines, i. 104, 229, 354, 361, 456 

Medium, ii. 252 «. 

Melon-seed pattern, i. 482 

Melon-shell as water- vessel, i. 130 

Men eat first, i. 116 

Men's work, i. 135, 374, 485. See also 
Commensality 

Menstruation, ii. 54 

Mental disease, absence of, i. 103, 104, 

333 

Merbau song, i. 665 

Message characters, i. 414 

Metaphor in taboo language, ii. 421 

Metre, ii. 129, 130 

Mice, charm against, i. 476. See also 
Mouse 

Mice demons, i. 349 n. 

Midwife, ii. 3, 7, 15, 25, 26 ; see Sage- 
femme 

Migration of village, i. 500 

Migrations, i. 522 ; ii. 264, 368 

Milk, mother's, ii. 18 

Millet, i. Ill, 117 «., 340, 341, 343 

Mineral poisons, i. 265 

Mining, tin, i. 388, 392 

Mixture of races, i. 39 ; chief forms, 42 

Mongolian eye, i. 61 

Monitor lizard, ii. 190 

Monkey as food, i. 125, 126, 131, 135 ; 
magic, 215, 418 ; ornament, 309 ; 
song, ii. 128 ; monster, 210 ; coco- 
nut, 223 ; songs and spells, i. 628, 
645, 648, 674, 692 

Moon, ii. 187, 202, 235, 298, 319, 338, 
476 ; ancestors, 298 ; man in, 300, 319 

Mortality, child, ii. 11 

Mortars, i. 128, 130 ; rice, 351 

Mosquitos, origin of, ii. 285 

Mound as tribal emblem, i. 189 ; ii. 72- 
74 ; ceremony, 57, 71, 77 

Mourners' custom, ii. 109 

Mourning, ii. 94 

Mouse-deer song, i. 643 

Mouse demon, i. 350 

Moustache, i. 148 

Mouth, i. 576 

Mouthpiece of blowpipe, i. 257, 262, 

282, 305, 307, 329 
Movements, i. 69 
Murder, punishment for, i. 501 
Music, ii. 117 si]. 
Music at rice feast, i. 364 
Musical instruments, i. 54, 65, 94 ; ii. 

117 j<7. 
Mutilations, i. 49 
Muzzle-block, i. 282, 317 
Muzzle or distal end of blowpipe, i. 308 
Mynah bird, i. 135 
Myth bamboos, i. 448 
Myths, creation, ii. 183 

Name taboo, i. 363 ; mark, 436, 460 ; 

tree, ii. 3 sq. ; burning, 12 ; loss of, 12 
Naming, ii. 12, 16, 19, 21, 25, 34, 53, 

71, 261 
Narcotics, i. 116 

Necklaces, i. \<~,2 sq., 164; spell, 705 
Needle, i. 269 
Neolithic patterns, i. 246 
Net-making, i. 210 
Nets, i. 210, 224 ; weighted, 210 
Network, i. 377, 386, 394 
Noise as charm, ii. 26 
Nomadic character, i. 53, 521 
Noose as snare, i. 209 
Noosing pheasant, i. 217 
Nose depressed, i. 48 ; 58, 76, 576 ; 

sticks, 150, 156, 157 ; boring, ii. 32, 

38 ; pin, 31 ; flute, 117, 123, 134, 

136, 142 ; plugging, 123 
Nudity, 137, 162 

Numbers, i. 37, 42 w. , 74, 81, 523' 
Numeration, i. 394 «., 522, 529 ; ii. 453 
Nurse, ii. 8 

Objects decorated, i. 407 

Offering, ii. 199 

Oil, use of, i. 162, 166 

Omens, ii. 325 ; from dreams, i. 365 ; 

of sex, ii. 23 
Openness, i. 534 
Opium, Sakai use of, i. 122 
Oracle, ii. 252 n. 
Orchard, durian, i. 370 
Ordeal, ii. 66 
Orientation, i. 62, 201 n. ; of grave, ii. 

97. 114 
Origin, tribal, song of, i. 686 ; ii, 

165 
Ornamentation of blowpipe, i. 309 
Other races, dealings with, i. 521 sq. 

840 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

Paddles, i. 390 

Pain, sensitiveness to, i. 52 ; sec also 

Endurance 
Pain demon, spell against, i. 683 
Painting body, ii. 30 ; face, 47 
Palm tinder, i. in, 114; wad, 112; 

leaf hut, 169, '170, 175, 177, 189 ; 

wood cleaning rod, 310 ; wood spear, 

336 ; wood mallets, 382, 385 ; fibre 

fringe, 385 ; fruit panel, 432 ; stump 

pattern, 486 
Panels of combs, i. 397 sq., 426 ; second, 

of comb, 432 ; central, 433 
Partitions in huts, i. 183 
Partridge catching, i. 216 
Parturition, i. 101 ; ii. 2, 16, 18, 20, 

25, 26, 475 ; position in, 3, 8, 26 ; 

hut, 7 ; taboo, 22 
Paternal authority, ii. 65 
Paths, i. 530 
Patterns, classification, i. 406, 464 ; 

comb, 4205(7., 606 sq., ; quiver, 416, 

436, 617 ; blowpipe, 461, 620 ; 

Sakai, 471 ; Jakun, 493 ; blowpipe, 

names of, 620 ; ii. 9, 10 ; face, 43 ; 

body, 45 ; of magician's paint, 253 
Pawang, i. 516 ; soul of, ii. 351 n. 
Pegs, grave ii. 105 
Pellets, clay, i. 259, 304 
Penghulu, i. 494 sq., 499, 500 
Pepper used for betel, i. 122 n. ; wild, 

124 ; in blowpipe poison, 265 
Perfumed necklace, i. 145, 152 
Periphrasis in taboo language, ii. 419 
Persecution by Malays, i. 523, 532 
Petrographs, i. 181 
Pets, monkeys as, i. 204 
Pheasant, see Argus 
Pheasant trap, i. 2.17 n. 
Phosphorescent fungi, ii. 5 
Physical characters, Semang, i. 43, 577 ; 

Sakai, 58, 588 ; Jakun, 66 sq., 595 ; 

Labu tribes, 69 ; Johor tribes, 77 ; 

Orang Laut, 89 ; Duckworth on, 96 

5^. ; Kenaboi, 592 ; Besisi, 593 ; 

Mantra, 593 ; of tribes, 601 
Physiognomy, i. 48, 52, 73, 568 
Pigeon as food, i. 135 
Pigments, i. 195 ; ii. 31 ; mi.\ing, 47 
Pigmentation, see Eye, Hair, Skin colour 
Pile-dwelling, i. 196 ; ii. 451 
Pillow, i. 180, 185, 186, 188, 189, 

195 ; ornamentation of, 195 ; stone, 

455 
Pin, bamboo, i. 156 
Piracy, i. 570 
Pits, game, i. 223 
Placenta, ii. 2, 3, 4, 9 
Plaiting, i. 146 
Plantain, i. 132 
Plantations, i. 193 

Plant-food, i. 113, 115, 117 sq., 123, 
126, 127, 131, 134, 136 

Plant-list, Ridley's, i. 126 n. 

Plant myths, ii. 192 

Plant patterns, see Flower 

Plates, plantain leaves as, i. 132, 214 

Platform burial, ii. 99 

Platters, i. 121 n., 128, 132, 214 

Poetic forms in taboo language, ii. 430 

Pointings, ii. 233, 327, 351 

Poison, i. 115, 279, 284, 299, 311 ; 
charm for detecting, 158 ; components 
of, 264, 295, 602 ; durability of, 266 ; 
effects of, 266, 315 ; antidotes to, 
267, 287, 294 ; application of, to darts, 
285 ; strength of, 286, 331 ; prepara- 
tion of, 288, 295, 308, 332 71. 

Poisoned game, treatment of, i. 123, 
126 n. ; traps, 219 ; wound, treat- 
ment of, 292 

Poisonous food, preparation of, i. 115, 
120 

Polishing blow-gun, i. 315, 330 ; dart, 

311 

Polyandry, ii. 56, 68 

Polygyny, i. 183 ; ii. 56, 64 

Porcupine quills in ear, i. 156 

Pork oil, i. 241 

Portraits, taking, i. 568 

Possession, ii, 200, 252 n. ; in magic, 

295 
Potatoes, i. 117, 118, 122, 126 ?i., 129 ; 

343, 361, 371 
Pottery unknown, i. 378 ; substitutes 

for, 383 
P'rah fruit, i. 118, 121 ; tree, 121 ; 

pattern, 416 
Prayer, ii. 198 

Pregnancy customs, ii. 6, 18, 22 
Prices, trade, i. 238, 240 
Pride, i. 570 
Priests, ii. 196 
Primogeniture, i. 500 
Proper names, age of, ii. 17 
Property, i. 503, 516 
Proverbs, i. 547, 679, 692 
Puberty customs, ii. 28 sq. 
Pumpkins, i. 343 
Purchase, wife, see Wife 
Puttos, i. 437, 451, 455, 457, 460, 494 

sq., 498 
Python pattern, i. 418 ; song, i. 650, 

652 

Quartz taboo, ii. 304 

Quill worn in nose, i. 157 

Quiver, i. 273, 278, 283, 298, 313, 321, 
323, 324, 326, 331 ; blowpipe, 257 
sq. ; decoration of, 276 ; carrying of, 
313; ornament, 321 ; cap, 321, 331-; 
making, 331 ; pattern, 408, 416 sq., 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

841 

436 sq., 617 sq. ; patterns classified, 
440 sq. 

Race for bride, ii. 82; and language, 385, 
391, 466 

Races, dealings with other, i. 521 

Racial affinities, older views of, i. 24 

Radio-humeral index, Semang, Annan- 
dale's figures, i. 98 

Raft, i. 383, 387 

Raids, Malay, i. 538 

Rainbow, ii. 203 

Rain charm, i. 479, 492 

Range of bow, i. 272, 279; of blowpipe, 
260, 299, 305, 323 ; musical, of songs, 
ii. 132 

Rank, marks of, ii. 41 

Rasp stone, i. 248 

Rat as food, i. 125 ; trap, 202, 
204 

Rattan, i. 114, 115, 128, 227, 239, 377 ; 
rasp, 115, 120; snares, 209; binding, 
271 ; bowstring, 280 ; dart butt, 
283 ; whipping, 297 ; cover of quiver, 
314 ; blossom pattern, 416 ; thorn 
pattern, 418, 419 ; pattern, 485, 
490 

Reaping, i. 351 

Receptacles, i. 405 

Redan song, i. 661 

Red pigment, ii. 37, 44 ; hair, 59 

Reed dart-holder, i. 258, 298, 313, 315, 
322, 324, 329, 331, 334 ; bundle in 
quiver, 324, 327 

Regalia, Malay, ii. 291 

Religion a bar to intermarriage, i. 39 ; 
Semang, 54 ; Sakai, 65 ; Jakun, 95 ; 
ii. 173 sq. 

Rembau Malays, i. 41 

Rengas tree, i. 263 

Resin, i. 227, 229, 232, 306, 322 

Rheumatism, i. loi 

Rhinoceros hunting, Semang, i. 203 ; 
horn, 204, 229 ; song, 636 

Rhizomorph girdle, i. 142 

Rhyme, ii. 129 

Rice, i. 93, no, in, 112, 117, 118, 
123, 126 n., 130, 134, 135, 340, 

341 -f?-. 358. 361. 367. 370, 372; 

planting, 345, 347 ; bin, 348 ; soul, 

349 «•. 353. 362, 367; magic, 351, 

355- 389 ; cooking, 353 ; feast, 353, 

362 ; husking, 353 ; boat, 359 ; 

planters' song, 361, 706; harvest, 367; 

spell, 367 ; names of varieties, 368 ; 

grounds, 526 ; planting song, 675 ; 

feast song, 680 ; spells, 694 sq. ; 

reaper's spell, 707 
Ring-barking, i. 380 
Ring in blowpipe, i. 308 ; lines of 

combs, 403 

Rings, i. 153, 154, 158 

Roc, ii. 317 

Rock shelters, i. 173 

Rod, fishing-, i. 205 

Rod fishing, i. 210 

Roedeer song, i. 641 

Roots, preparation of, i. 129 ; on neck- 
lace, 152 ; as food, 372 

Rope, in climbing, Semang, i. 51 ; sun, 
320 n. 

Sacred places, ii. 197, 248, 325 
Sacrificial tray, ii. 98 
Saga, Sakai, ii. 264 
Sage-femme, ii. 2, 7, 26 ; house of, 7 
Sails, i. 394 

Sale, i. 502 ; of land, 548 
.Salt, i. 228 ; not used, 117 ; as anti- 
dote, 268 
Sap as bird-lime, i. 209 
Sayings, traditional, i. 689 
Scale, musical, ii. 118 
Scalp lock, i. 163 n. 
Scapegoat, ii. 374 
Scarecrow, i. 357 
Scarecrows, bamboo, i. 344 
Scarification, ii. 34, 40 
Scaring demons, ii. 26 
Science, knowledge of, i. 560 
Scoop, fishing, i. 205 
Scorpion pattern, i. 477 
Sea, dread of, i. 94 n., 199 ; origin of, ii. 

339 
Seasonal marriage, ii. 70, 82 
Seed necklace, i. 145, 152, 165 ; arm- 
lets, 146 
Seedlings, planting of, i. 338 
Sendings, ii. 233 
Separation of husband and wife, i 

516 
Serpent, rainbow, ii. 203 
Seven times, i. 355 ; ii. 74 
Se.K omens, ii. 23 
Se.xual characters, i. 43 ; magic, ii. 

67 
Shadow, ii. no 
Shaft, palm-wood spear, i. 297 
Sheds, temporary, i. 199, 241 
Shell water- vessel, i. 128 ; necklace, 145, 

152, 165 ; rings, 158 ; ornament, 

165 ; fish, 219 ; knife, ii. 6 
Shells, freshwater, i. 117 71. ; in hair, i. 

163 n., 165 
Shyness, i. 535, 567 
Sick boy song, i. 673 
Sight, i. 48, 60 
Silent trade, i. 225, 227 
Silver rings, i. 163 
Sitting burial, ii. 95 
Skeleton, Semang, i. 582 ; Jakun, 

598 

842 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

Skin colour, i. 28, 34, 35, 36, 47, 60, 

69. 84, 573, 574, 575, 600; diseases, 

100, 102, 103, 104 
Skull, Semang, i. 45, 58, 82-84, 97) 

582 sq., 588 sq. 597, 601 ; dwarf, 83 ; 

Orang Laut, collected by Annandale, 

96, 98 ; hung in house, 184 
Sky, ii. 186, 207, 239, 337 ; pillars, 

316 ; rope, 319 ; pot, 320 ; raising, 

337 
Slavery, i. 529, 533 ; ii. 81 
Slaves, factor in racial problem, i. 42 
Sleep, position in, i. 63, 86 ; hours of, 

185 
Sleeping stage, i. 173, 178, 181, 

194 
Sling for child, ii. 19, 24 
Smallpox, i. 100-105 ; ii. 247, 355 
Smoke-gap, i. 178, 187 
Snahut, i. 460, 494 sq. 
Snake as food, i. 118 «., 125, 130; 

catching, 216 ; poison, use of, 264 ; 

ii. 223, 224 
Snares, i. 202, 207 
Social order, i. 494 sq. 
Songs, i. 95, 627 sq. ; ii. 117 sq. , 126, 

132, 138, 145, 171 ; of rice-planters, 

362 ; dialect, ii. 127 
Soot in tribal mark, ii. 35 
Soul, ii. I, 5, 194, 215, 239, 243, 321, 

350. 373 ; of rice, taking, i. 358, 362, 

367 [^see also Rice) ; of tiger, ii. 4 ; 

bird, 4 sq., 215 ; jellyfish, 23 ; 

brought by lizard, 26 ; hut, 106, 107 ; 

ladder, 114; bridge, 208, 240, 300; 

animal, 221, 305 ; of pawang, ii. 

351 «• 

Sources of vocabulary, ii. 482 

Spatula, i. 115 

Spear, i. 202, 220, 249, 270, 296, 306 ; 
trap, 207 {see also Spring) ; hunting, 
220 

Spectre huntsman, i. 682 ; ii. 303, 
310 

Spell, i. 153, 215, 230, 358, 359, 366 ; 
ii. 13, 14, 15, 232, 294, 295, 296-7, 
307 sq. , 329 sq. \ honey, i. 230 ; rice, 
340, 362 ; against earth demon, 358 ; 
against enemies of rice, 363 ; for clear- 
ing, 366 ; against evil spirits, 681, 
682 ; Mantra, 707 sq. ; against lang- 
suir, ii. 13 

Spice, i. 121, 123 

Spice-blocks, i. 121 

Spiders, charm against, i. 476 ; pattern, 
487 

Spike, quiver, i. 273 

Spirits, kinds of, ii. 182 

Spirit traps, ii. 119 

Spitting as charm, i. 153 

Splicing blowpipe, i. 308, 315 

Spoon, i. 191 

Spring spear trap, i. 207, 212, 219, 

222 
Squailer, see Throwing-stick 
Squinting, i. 61; demon, 349 «. , 

352 
Squirrel as food, i. 135 ; charm, 306 ; 

ii. 190 
Stampers, i. 411, 472 
Stars, ii. 320, 476 
Stature, i. 573 sq. ; see also Height 
Steatopygia, i. 578 
Stick-insect, ii. 214, 293 ; and elephant, 

221, 222 
Stick-music, ii. 121, 131, 134, 140 
Stimulants, i. 116 
Stone implements, i. 242, 296 ; weapons, 

269 
Storm song, i. 675 ; ii. 204 
Strangers, dealings with, i. 521 sq. 
Stringed instruments, ii. 117, 123, 134, 

139, 142, 168, 170 
St7ych7ios ■poison, i. 263, 302, 311 
Succession, i. 500, 506, 517 
Suckling, ii. 24, 27 
Sugar-cane, i. 343, 371 ; as food, 113, 

117, 122, 125 
Sugar-palm, i. 114 
Sun, ii. 202, 320, 338, 357, 476 ; origin 

of, 286 ; rope, 320 n. 
Superstition, i. 550 
Swamp pattern, i. 485 
Swimming, i. 51, 63, 85 
Swords, wooden, ii. 171 
Symbolism, i. 401 
Sympathy, magical, i. 348 ; ii. 112 

Table, i. 194 

Taboo, tree, ii. 4 ; food, 21 ; menstrua- 
tion, 54 ; language, 363, 414 sq. ; for- 
mation of language, 418 

Tailed men, ii. 281 

Tally stick, i. 537 n. 

Tambourine, ii. 168 

Tampoi wine, ii. 169 

Tapioca, i. iii, 113, 115, 117, 118, 122, 

130. 343' 361. 371 
Tapir and elephant, ii. 221 
Tassel as charm, ii. 125 
Tattoo, i. 53, 65 ; ii. 28, 42 
Taxation, i. 546 
Teeth, i. 85, loi, 116; extraction of, 

53 ; filing, 93 ; of comb, 423 ; Jakun, 

595- 599 
Teknonymy, ii. 16 
Temperature, effects of, i. 52 
Terminology of patterns, etc. , i. 404 ; of 

Yaughan-Stevens, 434 
Testamentary disposition, i. 520 
Texts, Semang and Sakai, i. 632 sq. 
Thatch, i. 182, 192, 196 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

843 

Theft [see Crime), i. 497, 501 sq. 

Thieving, use of feet in, i. 85 

Thorn pattern, i. 480 

Threshing, i. 351 

Throwing, i. 51, 92 ; stick, 201, 249 ; 

stone, ii. 23 
Thunder, ii. 299, 348 
Tiger, ii. 188, 191, 222, 294, 305, 324, 

360 ; tongue, i. 283 ; song, 637 ; spell, 

700 ; soul of, ii. 4 ; pattern, 52 ; 

charm against, 260 
Timber burning, i. 345 
Time, measure of, i. 393 
Tinder, i. iii, 114, 119, 120, 124 
Tin rings, i. 163 ; mining, 388 
Toad song, i. 654 
Tobacco, i. 53, 93, iii, 113, 117, 122, 

125, 129, 133, 343, 371 ; love of", 

117; cultivation, 122 «. ; Mantra 

women and, 126 
Toes, use of, i. 63, 85 
Tooth filing, ii. 32, 33, 39, 53, -jj, 

248 
Top, i. 75 

Topknot, i. 147, 584 
Torch-stand, i. 191 
Tortoise as food, i. 117 ; pattern, 

416, 479, 489 ; and rain, 479 ; song, 

653 
Tortoise-shell ring, i, 154 ; in blowpipe, 

308 
Totemism, Sakai, no proof of, i. 65 ; ii. 

62, 258 
Tracking, i. 200, 212 
Trade, i. 95, 225 sq. ; silent, 225, 227 ; 

system, 236 ; prices, 238, 240 
Trading methods, i. 232 
Traditions of Semang, ii. 220 ; Sakai, 

234, 262 sq. 
Trance, ii. 293 
Transformation, ii. 191, 290. See Wer- 

tiger 
Transmigration, ii. 290 
Trapping, i. 200 sq., 206, 212, 214, 219, 

221 
Trap, spring spear, i. 207 
Tree dwellings, i. 170 n., 174, 175, 181, 

186, 192 ; shelter, 174 ; fence, 176, 

193 ; gum, 225 ; felling, 339 ; plant- 
ing, 360 ; pattern, 481 ; taboo, ii. 4 ; 

burial, 91 ; myths, 192, 225 
Trees, songs about, ii. 160 
Tribal names, meaning of, i. 19 sq. ; 

affinities, older views, 24 ; hall, 189 ; 

marks, ii. 30, 42 
Tripang, i. 199, 241 
Trough, stone, i. 456 
Tube to grave, ii. 11 1 
Tug of war, i. 64, 86 
Tuning drums, ii. 140 
Tuntong ceremony, ii. 252 sq. 

Turmeric, ii. 37, 45, 118, 123, 129 
Turtle as food, i. 113 
Twins, ii. 24, 27 ; cause of, 6 

Ulcers, i. 86, 100 sq. 

Ulotrichi, use of term, i. 37 

Umbilical cord, ii. 3, 9, 18, 23, 26 ; 

saw for, 9 
Upas bark, i. 376, 380 ; tree legend, ii. 

315. See Ipoh 
Usufruct, i. 516 

Vampire, i. 473 ; pattern, 474 
Variation of patterns, i. 428 
Vegetables, i. 365 
Vegetation, magic for, ii. 302 
Vermin on Jakun, i. 162 ; charms 

against, 476 
Village, i. 183 

Vocabulary, difference in, ii. 386 
Vow, ii. 248 
Voyages, i. 199 

Wad, i. 112, 259, 298, 314, 334 

Wages of sage-femme, ii. 15 

Walking, i. 92 

War, i. 556 

Water, fear of, i. 51; discovery of, ii. 

339 
Water-melons as food, i. 118, 371 
Water-vessels, i. 128, 130, 383, 387 
Wax, i. 227, 229, 232, 239, 314, 322 ; 

in magic, ii. 327 
Weaning, ii. 19 
Weapons, i. 53, 65, 93, 242 sq., 304, 

335 ; hung from roof, 183 ; use of, 

200 
Weaving, 1. 377 
Wedding customs, ii. 58 
Wer-tiger, ii. 227 
Wet cultivation of rice, i. 368 
W'hetstone, i. 248 
Wliipping of arrows, i. 274, 276 
Whirlwind, ii. 238 
Whistle, ii. 135 
White pigment, ii. 37 ; sacred colour, 

151 n. 
Widow, ii. 88 
Wife purchase, ii. 58, 60, 61, 68, 70, 

76, 82, 84 ; treatment of, 64 ; choice 

of, 86 
Wife's mother, ii. 18 
Wild hunt, see Demon Huntsman 
Wind-brace, i. 177 
Wind-organ, ii. 143, 170 
Winds, ii. 207 
Winnowing stage, i. 188 
Wishing Rock, ii. 325 ; Place, 326 
Witch, ii. 358 n. 
Witchcraft, ii. 262 

844 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 

Woman's charm, i. 419 

Women's work, i. 112, 135, 372, 374 ; 

ii. 68 ; rights of, i. 504 11. ; property 

of, 512, 516 ; position of, ii. 87 ; 

dance, 126 
Wood taboo, huts, i. 193, 225 ; spirits, 

ii. 324 
Work, capacity for, i. 536 ; ii. 20 
World fire, ii. 219 ; eagle, 235 

Worms as bait, i. 217 
Writing, ii. 347, 378 

Yam, i. no, 115, 117, 118, 120, 343, 
361, 365, 367 ; names of, Semang 
115 ; pattern, 491 

Yellow pigment, ii. 37 

Zoomorphs, i. 473 sq. 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 

Note. — I have avoided the "short e" mark (which represents the indeterminate 
vowel in Malay) in all titles and place and personal names. — W.S. 

Ag-ag, ii. 202 

Aii, i. 457 

Akkye, i. 87 

Alas, the name, i. 71, n. 4 

America and Asia, i. 257 

Andamanese, compared with Semang, 
'• 28, 573, 587 

Annandale and Robinson, Fasciculi 
Malayenses, note on by Dr. W. L. H. 
Duckworth, i. 96 ; see General Biblio- 
graphy 

Asia, S. E. , linguistic map, ii. 442 

Australians, compared with Sakai, i. 31, 
574 

Baginda Ali, ii. 14 

Bajau, i. 87 

Batak raids, ii. 275 

Batin Alam, ii. 344 

Batin Gomok, ii. 315 

Batu Pahat, i. 76 

Beduanda, the name, i. 65 ; connotation 
of, 68 ; racial elements, 68 ; physical 
characters, 75 ; 544 

Beduanda Kallang, distribution, i. 88 

Belet, ii. 209, 212 

Belimbing tribes, ii. 33 

Belum, i. 24, 26, 71 

Benar-Benar, i. 153 

Benua, the name, i. 23 ; of Logan, 68 

Benua-Jakun, use of term, i. 23 n. 

Berchanggei Besi, ii. 265, 334 

Berembun tribe, i. 66 

Berhala, ii. 208 

Besisi, connotation of, i. 21 ; name, 72 ; 
physical characters, 72 ; measure- 
ments, 593 ; songs, 635 

Blandas, connotation of, i. 21 ; racial 
position, 66 

B'lo, ii. 336 

Borneo, Negritos in, i. 28 

Bugis, ii. 276 

Bukit Bong, i. 26 

Bukit Penyabong, ii. 365 

Camboja, i. 29 

Cellates, i. 89 n. 

Chalog, i. 454 

Champa, i. 454 

Chaiya, i. 43 

Chinese, trade with, i. 225 ; and Sakai, 

533 
Chinni, ii. 217 
Chinnoi, i. 450 

Dato' Jahja or Yahya, ii. 262 

Dato Klambu, ii. 372 

Degup demon, ii. 242 sq. 

Duckworth, Dr. W. L. H., on Semang 
skull and skeleton, i. 45, 581 ; note 
on Fasciculi Malayenses, 96, 578 

Endau River, i. 76 

Flower, Sir W. , Negrito theory of, i. 27 n. 

Gaffer Engkoh, ii. 299 
Gendui Lanyut [i.e. Granny Long- 
breasts), ii. 239 
Grubauer's Semang skull, i. 44, 581 
Gunong Bluniut, i. 77 
Gunong Lulumut, ii. 357 
Guntar, ii. 276 
Guiitong Penyaring, ii. 264 

Hang Tuah, ii. 268 

Hantu Degup, ii. 243 ; Kubur, 244, 

304 ; Juling, 246 ; Sakai, 283 
Hura', ii. 203 

Ikub, i. 458 

Ikub Huya, ii. 203 

845 

846 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 

Jakun, use of term, i. 21, 23 ; and 
Negrito, 31 ; racial affinities of, 31- 
34, 575 ; and original Malayan speech, 
33 ; compared with Semang and Sakai, 
33> 575 ; compared with Malays, 34, 
575 ; racial elements of, 66 ; tribes, 
classification of, 66 ; and Malay, 
537 ; measurements, 595 ; unidentified 
words, ii. 464 

Jarum, i. 43 

Java, ii. 268 

Jelebu regalia, ii. 291 

Jemoi demon, ii. 246 

Jew-a-Jewa, ii. 351 

Jinang, i. 506 

Jin Bumi, i. 365 ; ii. 349 

Johor River, i. 76 

Kabut, i. 451 

Kakuh, ii. 210 

Kamoj, ii. 38, 209 

Kanteh, i. 453 

Kari or Keii, i. 449, 451 ; ii. 4, S, 177, 
184, 211 

Kedah, i. 43 

Kelantan, i. 43 

Kelantan, stone tools, i. 244 n. 

Kelonsong Awan, ii. 239 

Kemuk, ii. 304 

Kenaboi, use of name, i. 26 ; racial 
position, 67 ; River, 67 n. ; measure- 
ments, 592 

Kena-luong, ii. 218 

Keni, use of name, i. 26 

Kensiu, i. 26 

Khatib Malim S'leman, ii. 343 

Kinta, i. 26 

K'lang B'lok, ii. 235 

Kukii, ii. 210 

Kundui, ii. 320 

Kuwak, ii. 304 

Langhui, ii. 13, 304 
Lenggiu River, i. 77 
Luering, Dr., myths sent by, ii. 236, 

262 ; on demons, 247 
Lulumut, ii. 356 

Madek tribe, i. 82 
Mahommedanism, i. 554 
Mahommedans and natives, i. 544 
Malay names of tribes, i. 22 ; and 
Mongolian or so - called ' ' Tartar " 
type, 33 ; and Sakai intermarriage, 
40 n. ; Negrito type, 41 ; character 
of Jakun of Johor, 77 ; origin of, 91 ; 
the name, 91 ; and Sakai, 532 ; and 
Jakuns, 561 ; element in languages, 
ii. 432 
Mantra, the name, i. 2t ; physical 
characters, 73, 593 

Martin, Rudolf, Iiilandstamme, i. 29, 56 ; 

see also General Bibliography 
Matianak, i. 153 ; ii. 246 
Mawas, i. 21 71. 
Menangkabau Malays, i. 40 
Menik, i. 48 
Merak Galang, ii. 345 
Mertang, ii. 336 
Minang, ii. 178, 212, 217 
Mintera, see Mantra 
Mon-Annam element, i. 29 ; ii. 439 ; 

borrrowings, 448 sq. 
Mongols and Malays, i. 33 
Mon-Khmer occupation, ii. 469 
Moyang Bertang, ii. 320 
Muar River, i. 39 n. 
Muka Kuning, the name, i. 23 

Nabi Muhammad, ii. 370 

Naing-Naing, ii. 285 

Nakhoda Kassim, ii. 220 

Names, list of Proper, i. 717 

Negri Sembilan, i. 40 ; aboriginal popu- 
lation of, 577 

Negritos and Papuans, i. 27 n. ; theory 
of Flower, 27 ??. ; in Borneo, 28 ; of 
Philippines and Semang, 28, 53, 573, 
585 ; elements in Johor, 80 7i. 

Nenek 'Bayan, ii. 298 

Neraka, ii. 98 

Ngangnari, ii. 321 

Ni-nik, ii. 286 

Ophir, Mount, ii. 149 
Orang Akik, i. 87 
Orang B'la, the name, i. 20 
Orang Bukit, the name, i. 19, 21 
Orang Bunyan, ii. 302 
Orang Dalam, the name, i. 19 
Orang Darat, the name, i. 19 
Orang Jinak, the name, i. 20 
Orang Laut, the name, i. 19, 21 ; dis- 
tribution, 87 ; skulls collected jby 
Annandale, 96. See also Sea-Jakun 
Orang Liar, the name, i. 81 
Orang Muka Kuning, i. 88 
Orang Pago, i. 71. See also Pago 
Orang Paya, the name, i. 19 
Orang Pesukuan, the name, i. 87 
Orang Rayat, the name, i. 20 
Orang Sahbat, the name, i. 20 
Orang Sletar, distribution, i. 88 
Orang Tanjong, the name, i. 19 
Orang Ulu, the name, i. 19 
Orang Utan, the name, i. 19, 20 

Pago tribe, i. 67 

Pahang, i. 41, 43 ; aboriginal populati 

of. 577 
Palandas, i. 39 " 

;ion 

ti. 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 

847 

Pangan, connotation of, i. 21 ; dialect, 

ii. 389 
Papuans and Seniang, i. 25 ; and 

Negritos, 27 
Peng, ii. 178 
Perak, i. 43 ; aboriginal population of, 

577 
Peru, blowpipe in, i. 326, 606 
Pirman, ii. 349 

Place and personal names, list of, i. 717 
Pie, i. 102 ; ii. 178, 185, 213, 214, 412, 

422, 449, 452 sq.. 498 71. 
Plese' ( = P61sit), ii. 310 ti. 
Plus River, i. 55 
Polong, i. 700 ; ii. 14 
Pontian River, i. 76 
Pontianak, i. 698 ; ii. 14 
Poyang Mertang, ii. 322 
Preuss, K. T. , on Vaughan-Stevens, i. 

622 
Pulau Buah, ii. 98, 298, 321 
Putri, ii. 358 
Putri Busu, ii. 220 
Pygmies, of Africa, compared with 

Semang, i. 28, 573 ; mythical, ii. 282, 

283 n. 

Rahu, ii. 235 

Raja Brahil, ii. 347 

Rak, ii. 288 

Rawa, ii. 276 

Rayat Laut, i. 87 

Rembau Malays, i. 40 ; position of tribes 

in. 544 
Ridley, H. N. , on substitutes for betel, i. 
122 n.\ on stone implements, i. 244 n. ; 
see also many plant-identifications. 

Sabimba, the name, i. 23 

Sakai, use of term, i. 21, 23 ; the name, 

22 ; racial affinities of, 28-31, 574 ; 

type established, 29 ; compared with 

Semang and Jakun, 575 ; te.xt, 633 ; 

language, area of, ii. 391 ; unidentified 

words, 463 
Sakai-Semang words, ii. 390 
Sammor, ii. 285, 476 
Samsams, observed by Annandale, i. 97 
Sayong River, i. 77 
Schmidt, P. W. , on affinities of Sakai, 

i. 29 ; see also Part iv. 
Sea-Jakun, the name, i. 87 
Seap^i, ii. 207, 209, 212 
Selangor, aboriginal population of, i. 

577 
Semang, the name, i. 21-24 ; affinity 
with Papuan, 24 ; relationship to other 
races, 24-28, 573 ; skull, Grubauer's, 
97 ; and Sakai, transitional forms, 
97 ; capacity for work, 379 ; comb- 
patterns, 420 sq. , 606 sq. ; compared 

VOL. II 

with Sakai and Jakun, 575 ; measure- 
ments, 577 ; compared with Anda- 
manese and Philippine Negritos, 585 ; 
and Andamanese, differences, 587 ; 
text, 632 ; language, area of, ii. 387 : 
unidentified words, 462 sq. 

Sembrong River, i. 76 

Seni, i. 449, 451 sq. 

Senoi, connotation of, i. 21 ; ii. 5 

Sentiu, ii. 178, 212, 217 

Seruyan, i. 500 

Sika, i. 87 

Simei, i. 449, 452 ; ii. 213 

Simpang Kiri River, i. 77 

Sinai, ii. 207 

Si Nibong, i. 702; ii. 312 

Sisi, see Besisi 

S'letar, the name, i. 23 ^ 

Sungei Sletar, i. 88 

Tamils, compared with Sakai, i. 31, 

574 
Tanah Merah, ii. 321 
Tanah Nyayek, ii. 322 
Ta' Ponn, ii. 178, 202, 209, 212, 217 
Tasig, ii. 203 

Tembeh, use of name, i. 26 
Tin-jui, i. 457 
To' Entah, ii. 339 
To' Hidong, ii. 220 
Trumba, ii. 165 
Tuhan, i. 452 ; ii. 9, 178, 234, 241, 

322 
Tuhan Allah, ii. 359 
Tuhan Di-bawah, ii. 179, 322, 336 
Tumior. See Tembeh 
Tu {i.e. To') Puttair, i. 75 
Turner, Sir William, on Semang skeleton, 

i. 46 

Udai, connotation of, i. 21 ; term of 

contempt, 24; use of term, 71 
Ulu Jelai, i. 55 
Ulu Patani, i. 43 
Uraon myth, ii. 320 ti. 

Vaughan - .Stevens on art, i. 396; on 

comb-patterns, 420 ; 
Veddas, compared with Sakai, i. 31, 

574 
Virchow, Prof. R., on Sakai, i. 30 ; on 
Sakai skull, 58, 588 sq. ; on Sakai 
hair, 58, 591 ; on Semang skull, 583 ; 
on Jakun skulls, 597 

Wallace, A. R. , on Jakun, i. 32 

Ward, Prof. M., on fungus girdles, i. 138 

Waris tribe, i. 40 n. 

Wray, L. , on diet of Perak Semang, i. 

116 n., 118 n. ; on lime - making, 

117 71. ; on "gSlugor" fruit, 119; on 

848 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 

tobacco - growing, 122 n. ; on huts, 
170, 175, 180 n. ; on Semang bow, 
204, 272 ; on use of blowpipe, 206 ; 
on stone tools, 247 «. ; on use of clay 
pellets, 259 ; on use of arsenic, 266 ; 
on arrow-heads, 271 ; on bark cloth, 
381 ; on mallets, 382, 385 ; on iron- 
forging, 384 ; on Sakai independence, 

528 ; on tattooing, ii. 29, 42 
boring, 39 ; on tooth-filing, 
graves, 93, 96; on flute, 135 
p'rah fruit, 275 

on ear- 
40 ; on 

Ya' Taken, 

Yapp, R. 

257 n. 

ii. 210 

H., on blowpipe reed, i. 

INDEX OF NATIVE WORDS 

Note. — The references given indicate, whenever convenient, the passage in which 
the meaning (of the native words) has been most fully explained. 

Agar-agar : edible sea- weed, i. 199 
Akar bahar : black coral [///. ' ' root of 

the sea"], i. 158 
Akar kakap : "spy" creeper {Dioscorea 

orbiculata), i. 134 
Akar merian : mCrian creeper [Dis- 

sochcBta bracieata), ii. 16 
Akar p^nurun tupai : ' ' bringer-down of 
, squirrels" creeper (unidentified), used 

as a charm in blowpipe shooting, i. 

314 
Akar samuga' : a creeper (unidentified) 
used as a charm in blowpipe shooting, 

'• 31S 

Anchap (a variant of, or mistake for 
"anchak"): tray (for holding sacri- 
fices or oiferings to the spirits), ii. 98 

Andam : trimmed, cut into the form of 
a fringe (of hair. e.g. that of the bride 
at a wedding), ii. Qx n. 

Anu : the name given to a band worn by 
Sakai women, ii. 8 

Ara : a ' fig '-tree or ficus, i. 143 

Asam k'lubi : name of a tree with edible 
fruit {Zalacca conferta), i. 123, 124 

Babi utan : the wild pig [Sus indicus), 
i. 13s ; ii. 21 ; varieties of, ibid. 

Bagan : a temporary shed ; a landing- 
stage, i. 199 

Bag-i : said by Vaughan-Stevens to be 
the name given to the topknot by 
Semang, scd qucere, i. 147 

Baju : the short Malayan ' ' coat ' ' or 
jacket, i. 160 

Bakau : mangrove, ii. 26 [but ' bakau ' 
also = ' flower ' in Semang] 

Balai : tribal hall, audience chamber of 
a chief (the official meeting- place of a 
village or aboriginal encampment), ii. 
189 

Baning : a large land-tortoise, ii. 21 ; 
varieties of the land-tortoise, ibid. 

Banir : the " strut " or buttress of a tree, 

i. 370 
Banjung : an aboriginal "guitar" or 

stringed bamboo — that used by the 

Besisi, ii. 117 
Basong : light pith - like or cork - like 

wood cut from the roots of the 

" pulai "-tree, i. 306 
Batu akik : the name of a stone (cornelian 

or agate?), i. 158 
Batu kawi : "kawi "-stone (? cinnabar, 

Wilkinson), ground up and used for 

making a red body-paint, ii. 45 
Batu lintar : the " all-dreaded " thunder- 
stone or thunderbolt, really the stone 

implements used by some unknown 

race (not aboriginal) in the Malay 

Peninsula, i. 244 
Bedak : cosmetic (usually made of 

powered rice mi.xed with perfume), 

ii. SI 
Bggahak : a kind of fish (unidentified), 

ii. 21 
Belush : spear (originally of bamboo), i. 

270 n. 
Bemban [Cliiiogyne grandis, dickotoma, 

etc.), i. 377 
Bengarat (sic ? sengarat) : a kind of fish 

(unidentified), ii. 21 
Ber-jin : to be-devil, or rather to exorcise 

one devil through another, ii. 296 
Ber-salong : to perform the leaf-cell cure 

(from ' ' salong " = " leaf-chamber " or 

" cell "), ii. 295 
Bgr-sawai : to chaunt (especially an in- 

invocation to spirits), ii. 295, 306 
Bgr-sisik : covered with scales (especially 

used of fish), an absurd popular de- 
rivation of "Besisi" or "Sisi," i. 

72 
Bgrtam : the bSrtam, a stemless palm 

[Eugeissona tristis), i. 143 
Bgruang. See B'ruang 

849 

850 

INDEX OF NA TIVE WORDS 

Bewak or biawak : monitor lizard [Hy- 

drosaurus salvator), \. 135 
Bhasa kapor : Camphor (taboo) Lan- 
guage. So too "bhasa gharu" = 

Eaglewood (taboo) Language ; and 

" bhasa getah " =gutta taboo, i. 235 ; 

also "bhasa pantang kapor," etc.; 

see ' ' Pantang ' ' 
Bingrot : cleaning-rod (of a blowpipe), 

i. 329 
Biuku. See Penyu 
B'ladau or bgladau : a kind of (tiger's- 

claw shaped) knife, ii. 191 
B'lantek or bfilantek : "spring-spear" 

trap (two kinds described in text), i. 

207 
B'lian or bfilian : Magician or Were- 

tiger, ii. 132 
B'liong or beliong : a (Malayan) adze or 

hatchet, i. 269 
B'lukar or belukar : secondary growth 

or Underwood, i. 119, 369, 516 
Bolos : a spear ; cp. Beliish, i. 270 
B'ruang or beruwang : a bear ( Ursiis 

malayatius), i. 135 
Bujam : a (Malayan) pouch or wallet, i. 

124 
Bukau : a foot-hill, i. 545 
Bukit : a hill, i. 545 
Bui oh kasap : the "rough" bamboo 

[Ochla?idra ridleyi. Gamble), i. 223 
Buluh bgtong : the "big" (or "giant") 

bamboo (? Dendrocalamus flagelUfer, 

Munro), i. 118 
Buluh Bohal : a kind of bamboo ; the 

exact meaning of Bohal is doubtful, i. 

510 

Buluh Perindu : the ' ' Yearning Bamboo, " 
or love-plant, also the " ^olian Bam- 
boo," ii. 170 

Bunglei : wild ginger {Zingiber cassu- 
munaar, Zingiberiacecv), ii. 

Buroh (unidentified), i. 134 

Busong : a form of ascites, ii. 21 

Chalong : a tree (unidentified), i. 
142 

Chambai : a kind of wild ' ' sirih ' ' or betel- 
leaf chewed as a stimulant (? Pellionia 
_;'at/a7zzV« =" chambai batu"), i. 122, 
125 

Champlong. See ChSmp'long 

Chandan : a tree producing a kind of 
eaglewood or lignum aloes ; see Gharu, 
i. 232 

Chawat : a loincloth, i. 160 

Cheb chas : a hand-stick or wand (used 
in dancing), ii. 131 

ChCmat : the connecting piece that joins 
the two portions of the interior tube of 
a blowpipe, i. 307 

Chfimpfidak : a fruit {A rlocarpus poly- 
phema or maingayi), i. 369 

ChSmp'long, chfimpglong, or champlong: 
an aboriginal "dug-out" canoe, i. 
390 

Ch6nchS.m : a palm resembling the b£r- 
tam, but unidentified, i. 177 

Chgnduai. See Chinduai 

Chengat : the polishing (process) applied 
to blowpipes, i. 311 

Chenlai : a creeper used by the Semang 
at parturition, but unidentified, ii. 2 

Chidwad : a (Semang) method of climb- 
ing trees (Vaughan-Stevens), i. 51 

Chika, chikah, or sinekah ; a kind of 
monkey classed with the "lotong," ii. 
291 

Chim-iui : the Bird (that) Brings (souls), 
the soul-bird (unidentified ; Vaughan- 
Stevens), ii. 4, 6 

Chin-beg : the bfirtam-palm, g.v., ii. 3 

Chinduai (also chingkwi, chingkwoi, 
chinweh, etc. ) : the name of an 
exceedingly rare plant, said to be a 
powerful love-charm ; the love-charm 
itself, ii. 289 

Chingkwi or chingkwoi, ii. 311, 326; see 
Chinduai 

Chingkwoi, ii. 311 ; j-^e Chinduai 

Chin-karr : sticks used in applying face- 
paint (Sakai), ii. 47 

Chinweh or chindweh, ii. 60 ; see Chinduai 

Chit-nat : a birth -bamboo (Vaughan- 
Stevens), ii. 2 

Chor : a name-mark? (Vaughan-Stevens), 
i. 460 

Chucho : probably " chuchor atap " 
{Calamus castaneus. Griff), the leaves 
of which are used for thatch, i. 192, 
194 

Dimak : a blowpipe dart, names of 

parts, i. 310 
Damar or dammar : tree-gum or resin 

( ' ' produced by trees of the order 

Dipterocarpecv and a few others," 

Ridley), i. 112, 131 ; torches, 232 
Dapor : a box-hearth (of the Malayan 

type) ; a hearth for a wood-fire, i. 184 
Datoh or Dato' : grandfather, chief, ii. 

302 
Dokoh : a necklace, i. 153 
Durian : a durian {D/i>-io zibethinus), i. 

134 n. 

Gadong : a wild yam [Dioscorea dee- 
monum, or dcsmotia, Dioscoreacecv), i. 

lis «•. 293 

Gah [gar], goh [gor], go' (or ga'?): a 
liamboo receptacle made from a single 
internode, i. 405-406 

INDEX OF NATIVE WORDS 

851 

Gajab : an elephant [Elephas indicus), 

i- 135 
Gantang : a dry measure, varying much 

according to locality, but roughly 

corresponding to a gallon, i. 238 
Caring : a kind of basket, i. 191 
Casing kundc- : a kind of Malayan top 

(game), i. 75 
Gaung : a cave or cavern, a rock-shelter 

or hollow place, i. 545 
CSlar : name or title, ii. 16 
GSlugor : the gglugor - fruit [Garcinia 

atroviridis), i. 119 
C6ndang : a (Malayan) drum, ii. 168 
Ggriang : a large water- lizard (Hydro- 

saurus), ii. 21 
Gfitah : viscous sap, gutta ; the gutta- 

tree, i. 131 ; see Bhasa 
Gharu : eaglewood or lignum aloes ; 

usually produced by Aquilaria malac- 

censis, i. 232 ; see Bhasa and Chandan 
Gila : madness, eccentricity, ii. 247 
Co', goh, gor, gS.', i. 405-406 ; see Gah 
Golok : a Malayan woodman's knife or 

chopper, i. 269 
Gomuto' : the sugar - palm (probably 

Arenga saccharifera, L. is intended), 

i- 385 
Guntong : a hill-locked basin or " tarn, " 

i. 545 

Hantu : a spirit or demon, ii. 301 
Hantu Pfimburu : the Demon Hunter, 

ii. 310 
Hapoi : leaves lashed across the uprights 

of the Semang shelter, i. 177 
Hasta : a cubit, ii. 78 

Ijok : the thick black woody fibres of the 

sugar-palm, ii. 22 
Ipoh akar : the ipoh or upas creeper 

(St>ycknos tieute, Bl. Loganiacecc), i. 

286 
Ipoh kayu (also pohun or poko' ipoh) : 

the ipoh or upas-tree {Antiatis toxi- 

caria), i. 302 
Ipoh, poison, names of ingredients, i. 

318, 602 

Jala : a (Malay) casting-net, i. 219 
Jambu k'lat (or keiat) : a jungle tree 

(^Eleocarpus parvif alius. Wall.), i. 193 
J6hu : wood, timber ; posts or pillars, i. 

177 
jeiok : a small bamboo tube or receptacle 

for the upas poison, i. 312 
Jglotong : a big jungle - tree (Dyera 

maingayi, D. costulaia), i. 321 ; ii. 

108 
Jengroh or jengrok : a boring- rod or 

VOL. II 

spike, used in the manufacture of 

blowpipes, i. 307 
Jfinu' (Malay "tuba"): a well-known 

plant-poison used for stupefying fish 

(Dcrris elliptica), i. 311 
Jinang : the title of a Jakun chief, next 

in order to the Batin, i. 507. 
Jiwa : life, vitality, ii. i 
Jog : the (Semang) custom of breaking 

camp on the fifth day (Vaughan- 

Stevens), i. 173 n. 
Jongka : wooden trestles, i. 178 
Jukrah : an (aboriginal) Malayan chief 

or headman, next but one in authority 

to the Batin, i. 506 

Kabong : the sugar-palm, also called 
" Snau " or " nau " (Arenga sacchari- 
fera), i. 114 

Kachau ; mfingachau : to stir up or 
splash, i. 219 

Kadumpa : sic ? kadampang (Sierculia 
parvijlora, Roxb. ), i. 134 w. 

Kajang : awning (of palm-leaf), i. 187 

Kalana (also kglana and k'lana) : an 
edible root [Dioscorea deflexa. Hook.), 
i. 134, 372 

Kalong : a kind of wild pepper {Piper 
caninum), i. 125 

Kalongkang (unidentified), i. 135 

Kambing : the name of a medicinal 
plant (unidentified), ii. 353 

Kanchil : a tragulus or chevrotin, ii. 340 

Kapayang : (spelt " piyung " by V. -St. ) 
a jungle-tree [Pangium edule, Mig. , 
Bixinecs), i. 120 

Kasar : coarse, i. 59 ; also rough, vulgar 
(of speech) 

Kasi : a tree the leaves of which were 
chewed as a substitute for betel (Gom- 
phia Hookeri, Planch.), i. 133 

Kasum or kesom {^ Polyg07iu7nflaccidum, 
Polygoiiacece) : i. 124 ; also ibid. ti. 

Katapa : sic ? katapang ( Tertnifialia 
catappa, L. ), i. 134 n. 

Kati : a Malay weight; x\ lbs. av. , i. 
238 

Kayu [pass. ) : wood or tree 

Kayu kelondang or gelondang : a sort of 
wooden gong, ii. 361 

Kayu k'lat : the k'lat tree {Eugenia sp., 
of the section Syzygium, and other 
trees resembling them {Myrtacees), 
Ridley) ; k'lat =" astringent," " rough 
to the palate," i. 123 

Kayu Panamas : a herbal remedy (un- 
identified), ii. 335 

Kayu-yet : a herbal remedy (unidentified), 
ii. 353 

Kedal : a skin disease (of the feet and 
hands), i. 106 n. 

:;N 2 

852 

INDEX OF NA TIVE WORDS 

K61a\ve : a tree (?) not yet identified, i. 

142 
KSlmoyang : (either Chamcecladon, Ho- 

malomeria, or Alpinia conchigera. 

Griff.), ii. 13 
Kglondang or gglondang. See Kayu 
Kenaij : ? glitter or brightness (V,-St. ), 

i. 450 
Keng - oin, kening-uin, etc. (variously 

spelt by V. -St. and his editors) : ring- 
lines (decorations), i. 403 
Kense : tapioca-root, i. 115 
Kepah : an edible marine bivalve {Capsa 

sp.), i. 219 
Kepau : a kind of fan - palm [Livistona 

kingii, Hook. fil. , Palmcz), ii. 107 
Kepong : a tree whose bark is used in 

hut - building [Shorea macroptera. 

Dyer, Dipterocarpece), i. 188 
Kgpuk : a rice-bin, i. 348 
Keranting or k'ranting (also keruntong, 

etc.) : a stringed bamboo or " guitar," 

ii. 142 
Kijang : a roe-deer (Cei-vulus nmntjac), 

>• 135 
Kijing : a mussel, i. 219 
Kijuaij (V. -St. " keejooije) " : to swim, i. 

51. See Vocab. S 542 
K'lana. See Kalana 
Kleb : a kind of wild yam, i. 115 
K'ledang or keledang : a wild fruit-tree 

{Artocarpus lajiceafolia, Roxb. , Urti- 

cacea), i. 134 
K'ledek or keledek : the sweet potato, i. 

126 
K'lupent (sic, ? k'lupeng) : a game 

(V.-St.), i. 64 
Koko (unidentified), i. 135 
Kor - loi melloi : the name given by 

Vaughan - Stevens to the (Semang) 

blood-throwing ceremony, ii. 205 tt. 
Kowetniss : the name given by Vaughan- 

Stevens to the " tuntong" (or " tuang- 

tuang") ceremony, i. 411 
Koyi : a preparation of paste made by 

specially treating certain wild tubers 

to remove their poison i. 121 
K'ra or kgra : a monkey (Macacus cyno- 

molgus), i. 13s 
K'rakap chamai : the stem-leaves of the 

" chambai " (wild betel-vine), i. 493 
K'rang or kerang : the " cockle "-shell, 

i. 219 
K'ranti, ii. 170 ; a variant of k'ranting, 

a stringed bamboo (guitar) or " ban- 

jeng," q.v. 
Kuau or kuwau (also kuang) : the argus 

pheasant, i. 216 
Kubong : the flying squirrel (Galeo- 

pithecus), i. 135 
Kudis : the " itch," i. 102 

Kulim : a jungle - tree [Sorodocarpus 
bor?ieensis) whose leaves smell of 
onions, and are used as seasoning, i. 
123 

Kunyit : turmeric (Curcuma longa, L. , 
Scitaininece), i. 195 

Kura-kura. See Baning 

Kurap : a skin-disease, i. 100, 102, 105 

Ladang : a clearing (or plantation) in 

the forest, i. 119, 512 
Lampong : a plant furnishing one of the 

ingredients of the Sakai dart -poison 

(Styychnos maingayi, Clarke), i. 303 
Langkap : a kind of palm (Arenga 

obtusifolia. Mart.), i. 324 
Le'it hubi' (? = Mal. lilit ubi) : lit. the 

coils of a yam-plant, i. 493 
Lekir : a plant used in preparing the 

Sakai dart - poison (Amorphophallus 

prainiana, Hook, fil., and allied 

species, Aroidece), i. 289 
L6mak kgpitrng : " crabs'-fat," name of 

a plant, unidentified, but possibly the 

same as ' ' lemak ketam," which has the 

same meaning (Melochia corchorifolia, 

L. , SterculiacecB), i. 268 
Lgmbing : a spear, i. 270 
Lo'idd (or loydd) : a bow, i. 252 
Lok : a bamboo quiver or case (for 

darts), i. 314 
Lokan : a large edible marine bivalve, 

i. 219 
Lotong : the spectacled monkey (Semno- 

pithecus obscui-us), i. 135, 309 
Loya" or loyak : a plant (unidentified), i. 

188 
Lu-ig (V.-St. "looig"): said by 

Vaughan-Stevens to mean ' ' climbing 

in general," i. 51 

Ma-cheb : said to mean the "grasp of 
the hands" (V.-St.), i. 51 

Main jo'oh : drinking game or feast (of 
the aborigines) peculiar to the season 
when the fruit is ripe, ii. 76, 145 n. 

Malok : according to Klinkert a big 
flying " cat " [yliegende kat], probably 
a flying lemur or squirrel ; not in 
Wilkinson's Dictionary, i. 135 

Mangos (i.e. manggis) utan : the wild 
mangostin, i. 134 n. 

Mata lang : " hawk's eyes," the name of 
a pattern, i. 276 

Memplas rimau : the " tiger's -tongue ' 
(i.e. rough - leaved) polishing plant 
( Tetracera macrophylla. Hook. fil. , 
DilleniacecB), i. 282 

Mc-ndera' : " man "or " men," i. 73 «. 

Mfingachau sembilang : to " splash for " 
sembilang fish, i. 219 

INDEX OF NA TIVE WORDS 

853 

MSranti : a hardwood timber tree, gener- 
ally a Shorea (Dipterocarpece), i. 392 

Mgrian : a plant used at parturition 
(DissochcEla bracteata), ii. to 

Minyak babi : "pork -oil," i.e. hog's 
grease, i. 241 

Mong-dar (V.-St. ) : a plant (unidentified), 
ii. 67 

Mos (V.-St.): apparently a kind of 
flower [Ixora sp. ) ; the name given 
(mistakenly) by Vaughan-Stevens to 
a particular panel of the commoner 
comb-pattern, i. 398 

Musang ; the civet - cat (Parado^iirus 
her77iaphroditus and viverra), i. 135 

Musim : season, i. 393 

Nakhoda : native captain or master of a 

vessel, i. 513 
Nangan or ti-nangan (V.-St. "nungarn" 

or " tee-nungarn ") : to climb with a 

rope, i. 51 
Nasi ISmang : rice cooked and carried in 

a green bamboo, i. 113 
Nibong-palm : a hardwood palm used in 

hut - building [Oncosperma tigillaria, 

Griff., PalmecE), i. 134 n. 
Nom : a kind of fish (unidentified), ii. 21 
Nyani : a spirit or demon, ii. 241 
Nyawa : life or spirit, ii. 206 

Onak : the long thorny ' ' whip " growing 
at the end of the leaf of the wait-a-bit 
creeper or rattan, i. 128 

Orang (Mai. ) : man or person. Ex. 
" Orang Utan"=lit. "man of the 
forest." For a list of combinations of 
this word with others, v. pt. i. ch. i. 

Padi : rice {Oryza saiiva), especially 
unhusked as distinct from husked rice 
("b'ras"), or cooked rice ("nasi"), 
i. 344 ; names of, 368 ^ 

Palas : a kind of palm {Licnala peliata), 
I. 146 

Pantang : privileged or " taboo," ii. 21 ; 
" bhasa pantang," taboo language, 
see Bhasa 

Parang : the Malay woodman's knife or 
chopper, i. 269 

Pasal : Ardisia odontophylla, Wall. 
{^Myrsinece), i. 134 n. 

Pawer (V.-St.) : a flower (unidentified) ; 
the name given (mistakenly) by 
Vaughan-Stevens to a particular panel 
of the commoner comb-pattern, i. 398, 

399 

Pgdas chanchang : a kind of pungent 

seasoning, i. 124 
Pedas jintan : lit. jintan pepper, i.e. 

" cummin," i. 124 

Pglima (short for Mai. penglima ; from 
'Mima," an old Malayan word for 
"hand"): a subordinate executive 
chief, the headman of a Semang settle- 
ment, i. 494 

P(5naga : a hardwood tree {Calopkylluvi 
•f/- ), i- 257, 325 

P^nghulu : a subordinate consultative 
chief; from " hulu," an old Malayan 
word for " head," i. 497 

Pengkong : the "uprights " of a Semang 
shelter, i. 177 

PSnit;\h : a burial bamboo, the ' ' cre- 
dentials " supposed to be buried with 
the dead ; said to be derived from 
Mai. titah (pfinitah )? i. 410 

Pgnurun tupei : ' ' Bringer - down of 
Squirrels," a plant (unidentified), i. 

314. 315 
Penj'u : the green turtle (Chelone mydas), 

ii. 21 ; varieties of, ibid. 
PSrabong : the " ridge - piece " of the 

thatch of a native hut, i. 188 
Pgrgam : the Imperial pigeon, i. 135 
Pgtaling : a hardwood timber - tree 

[Ockanosiachys amentacea. Mast.), i. 

193 
" Pichod," i. 468 
Pijat-pijat : Besisi name for the Gytnnura, 

i. 216 
Pikul : a Malay weight =100 katis ; i. 

238 ; see Kati 
Pinding : the buckle of a native belt, i. 

160 
Pisau : knife, i. 269 
Piyung. See Kapayang 
P'landok or pglandok : the mouse-deer, a 

kind of chevrotin, i. 135 
P'rah or perah : a tree whose fruit is 

edible when cooked (? Mezzettia lepto- 

poda, Oliver), i. 372 
P'rioh (sic) : a kind of esculent root 

(? Peria sp.), i. 134, 372 
P'rual or perual : a plant forming one of 

the ingredients of the Sakai dart- 
poison (Captosapelta flavescens), i. 

303 
Puchok rgbong : growing shoots of the 

bamboo ; the name of a pattern, the 

chevron, i. 276 
Pulai ; a big jungle -tree {Alstonia 

scholaris), i. 186 ; ii. 193 
Pulau : island, e.g. P. Buah, "Island 

of Fruits," ii. 321 
Puleh or pulih : to return to life, i. 267 
Pumpun sarang : lit. the "nesting" 

sandworm, i. 217 
Punai : the "green" pigeon (Osn/atreron 

z'ernan^), i. 135 
Putto : the name of an obsolete order 

of Semang chiefs (V. -St. ), i. 494 

854 

INDEX OF NA TIVE WORDS 

Rambut ayer (V.-St.): lit. "watered" 

(i.e. smooth and wavy?) hair, i. 59 
Ranggam : a kind of palm (unidentified), 

i. 206 
Rantei babi : lit. pig's chain, a fabulous 

chain or talisman believed to be rarely 

worn by the wild-boar, and (when 

obtained by natives) to possess immense 

magical virtue, ii. 353 n. 
Rattan : see rotan, i. 131 
Rebana : a native tambourine, ii. 168 
Redan or ridan : a wild fruit-tree [Ne- 

pkeliutn glabru?n), i. 134 «. 
Rgngoin : the "Jew's-harp" of the 

aborigines, ii. 168 «. 
Rentak balei : to drum (with the feet, in 

dancing, on the floor of) the tribal hall ; 

to dance, ii. 141 
Retut : name of a plant [Hortistedtia 

hemispherica), ii. 125 
Roko' : a native cigarette (in palm-leaf 

wrapper), i. 128 
Rotan or rattan : the calamus (or Dce- 

monorops) the cane-producing creeper. 

The rattans are of many kinds, e.g. 

the "rotan lang " or hawk's rattan, 

"rotan dahan " or branch rattan, 

"rotan sega" (the best variety), and 

' ' rotan jernang " or dragon's - blood 

rattan, i. 146 ; r. lang, 283 
Rusa : the sambhur or sambar deer 

{Riisa aristotelis ), i. 135 

Sabaring : a bark loin-cloth, i. 161 n. 
Sabtal- [sic ? sandal) wood : a remedy 

for sciatica (unidentified), ii. 353 
Salerik tupei : a plant (unidentified) ; see 

PSnurun tupei 
Salek : a coiled girdle (Pangan), ii. 58 
Sangkun (V.-St. " sungkun ") : a censer, 

i- 345 
Sapu-tangan : a handkerchief, i. 160 
Sarong (lit. "wrapper"): the Malay 

national dress, really a sort of long 

kilt, usually of a kind of plaid pattern, 

i. 160 
Satahun angin : a wind-year (lit. "year 

of wind "), i. 393 
Sawa. See Ular 
SC'barau : a kind of fish {Laleo hoggu), 

ii. 21 
Sekoi : millet [Panicum italicum), i. 

Ill 
Seladang : the wild bull {^Bos gaurtis), i. 

17s 
Selampit : a loin-cloth, i. 151 
Seligi : a pointed throwing - stick or 

"squailer," i. 201 n., 304 
SCluar : short native drawers of the 

Malay pattern, i. 160 
S6mbilang : an edible fish found in tidal 

waters and furnished with highly 
poisonous sp\nes (Plotosus canias}), i. 
218 

Sfimbilu : a splinter or sliver, ii. 6 

Sgmbor sirih : to " blow " betel-leaf out 
of the mouth on to the skin of a sick 
person for healing purposes, as is done 
by Malay magicians, ii. 231 

Semeng : a kind of bamboo said to be 
specially used for the manufacture of 
combs (V.-St.), i. 424 

Sfimika' (V.-St. "smee-kar"): a small 
but peculiar form of knife used for 
severing the umbilical cord. It is 
furnished with a double row of saw- 
teeth, and these teeth may give it its 
name ( ' ' sSmika' " = " sika' "or " sikat " 
with infix "m" ?), ii. 9. Cp. Smikar 

SSngkalan : a native spice - block or 
platter, i. 121 

Sentong : a back - basket (for jungle 
produce), i. 191 

SSrdang : a tall kind of fan-palm (Livi- 
stona cochinchinensis), i. 306 

Sgrkap : said to be a kind of " fish "- 
spear ; but usually a kind of basket- 
work hand-scoop for fish, i. 335 

Serum p'rah : p'rah-fruit paste, i. 121 

Sgruyan : title of a Sakai chief, i. 500 

Siamang : a kind of ape, ii. 290 

Simapo : a fruit (unidentified, but 
possibly Simpoh dillenia sp.), i. 134 n. 

S'lowk : according to Vaughan-Stevens 
the name of a plant ; but perhaps a 
corruption of "selak" or "sSla'" = leaf 
(Sakai), ii. 260 

Smikar ("smee-kar") : a comb-like im- 
plement used in applying face-paint ; 
see semika', ii. 47 

Snahut : title of an obsolete order of 
Semang chiefs (V.-St.) inferior to the 
" Putto," i. 494 

Sokyet : short bamboo sticks used in 
pairs and struck upon each other to 
produce the effect of castanets, ii. 

255 

Sorong - lanting or sau - lanting : the 
Malayan partridge, i. 216 

Subang : earstuds (of a Malay virgin) 
discarded at marriage ; leaf-rings (de- 
coration), i. 159 

Suku : division (lit. "quarter"), com- 
pany, clan (in N. Sembilan only), i. 
68 

Sulur lobak : shoots of the lobak (Lowia 
grandiflora), i. 149 

Sumpitan : blowpipe, names of parts, i. 
316-317 

Tabong t61a' : dart- quiver, i. 306 
Tahil : the name of a Malay (originally 

INDEX OF NA TIVE WORDS 

855 

a Chinese) weight, about i^ oz. av. , 
i. 239 

Tahong (V.-St. 's spelling for tabong?) : 
a bamboo vessel or birth -bamboo, 
carried by pregnant women (perhaps 
analogous to the bamboo marriage- 
token worn by women in some parts of 
India), i. 410 

Tampoi : a well-known jungle fruit, also 
used for brewing a species of liquor 
drunk at aboriginal feasts {Baccaurea 
inalayana. Hook. fil. , EiiphorbiacetE), 

i- 134 
Tani-tum =t6ntom, q.v., i. 146 
Tangkal : a charm (especially an amulet), 

but frequently used (as in English) for 

a spoken invocation or spell, i. 153 
Tapa : said to mean a kind of knife 

(V.-St.), sedqii., ii. 6 
Tarek api : matches (lit. "pull-fires"), 

i. Ill 
Tarok : a spear, i. 270 «. 
Tfibong (or Tabong?) lok : the covering 

(or lid) of the Besisi dart-quiver, i. 

314 
T6kan badan k'luar : to manipulate by 

pressure (in child-birth), lit. " press 

body outwards," ii. 258 
Tekub : a rhinoceros - bird (V.-St.), i. 

277 
Temakah : a kind of hardwood tree 

(unidentified) from which the Semang 

bows are made, i. 271 
Tentom : a girdle (Semang) of "rock- 
vein fibre" ("urat batu"), i. 380 
Tenwad : said to mean ' ' blowpipe 

patterns" (V.-St.), i. 465 
Til-til-tapa : said to be the smaller argus 

pheasant (V.-St.), sed qu., ii. 6 
Ti-nangan (V.-St., " Tee-nungarn ") : 

to climb with a rope, i. 51 
Tinbon (V.-St. "tinborn"): to climb 

a tree flat-footed, i. 51 
Tin-leig : said to mean a comb (V.-St.), 

i. 426 
Tin-weg : said to mean the fifth or 

central panel of a comb -pattern, i. 

426 
Tiong : the mynah - bird [Mainatus 

javanensis), i. 135 
Tisi : the Besisi name for the ceremony 

of exorcism, ii. 295 

To' : short for Dato', q.v. 

Toman : a kind of fish, one of the 
Snakeheads [Ophiocephalus striatus), 
ii. 21 

T'rap or tcrap : the tree from which 
bark-cloth is usually made ; a sort of 
wild bread-fruit {Ariocarpns kwistleri, 
Hook, fil., UrticacecE), i. 159, 210 

Tripang or teripang : the biche-de-mer 
or sea-slug {Holothurion), i. 199 

T'rumba or terumba : a tribal genealogy 
in the form of a song or chaunt, ii. 1 20 

Tuai or tuwai ( = pGnuwai): an im- 
plement for reaping rice in the Malay 
fashion, i. 351 

Tuba : the well-known fish-poison of the 
Malays, obtained ho\n Derris elliptica, 
i. 206 

Tuju ; to point ; a " pointing" or " send- 
ing" (in magic), ii. 199 

Tukas : a palm that furnishes the fluff 
or down employed by the aborigines 
as tinder and as a wadding behind the 
blowpipe dart (Caryota Griffithii or 
Caryota mitis), i. 260 

Tuntong or tuang - tuang : a bamboo 
cylinder with a mouth-hole used as a 
conch, i. 411 ; also a kind of turtle 
{Callagur picta) whose shell is some- 
times used as a gong, ii. 21 

Tupai or Tupei : a squirrel, i. 135 

Ubi kapor : a kind of wild yam used for 

food by the Semang, i. 115 
Ubi kayu : tapioca, i. 131 
Ubi takob : an edible root or tuber, i. 

115 
Ubi tanjong : an edible tuber, i. 115 
Ular : a snake, i. 130 
Ular bakau : a "mangrove" snake, i. 

216 
Ular sawa : a python, ii. 154, 155 
Upas. See Ipoh 
Urat batu (in full " akar urat batu"): 

the rock- vein creeper ; really the rhizo- 

morph of a fungus, i. 140, 142 n., 

151 71. 

Uri : a caul, ii. 3 

Wong loydd : an arrow (lit. child of the 
bow), employed by Semang only, i. 
271; 

THE END 

Printed by R. & R. Ci.akk, Limited, Edinburgh. 

UCSOUTHEBN,aS 

111, 

(V/V 000 900 835 0 

,- m mmmm^mmm
