Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula, Vol. 2 (Walter William Skeat and Charles Otto Blagden, 1906)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/paganracesofmala02skea). Vol. 2: the religion, folklore and language of the peninsula's pagan races - shamanism, soul-beliefs and magic.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

!!l^"i^^;^f^^^ 

UNIVL SliY 9f 
CALItORMA 

SAN DIEGO 

JH 

5o- 

ICtbrary 

40 J^ortli SIO0 loblra 

♦'^^H 

THE univ-:r:^ity library. p) c • 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA. SAN DIEGQ T-SV- 

lA JQLLA. CALIFORNIA /- Si 3 

57 

V.I 

f^HAS.E.UAURlAT,;:^^ 

1 

PAGAN RACES 

OF THE 

MALAY PENINSULA 

I 

PAGAN RACES 

OF THE 

MALAY PENINSULA 

BY 

WALTER WILLIAM SKEAT, MA. 

LATE OF THE FEDERATED MALAY STATES CIVIL SERVICE 
AUTHOR OF ' MALAY MAGIC ' AND ' FABLES AND FOLK-TALES FROM AN EASTERN FOREST 

AND 

CHARLES OTTO BLAGDEN, MA. 

LATE OF THE STRAITS SETTLEMENTS CIVIL SERVICE 

WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS SPECIALLY TAKEN 
FOR THE WORK 

IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. I 

3Lonti0n 

MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited 

NEW YORK : THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 
\ 1906 

\, All ri^^his resenied 

A LAND 

of old upheaven from the abyss by fire . . . 
where fragments of forgotten peoples dwelt. 

Tennyson. 

TO HIS MAJESTY 

CHULALONGKORN 

KING OF SIAM OF THE NORTH AND SOUTH 

SOVEREIGN OF THE LAOS, MALAYS, ETC. 

IN GRATITUDE FOR HELP 

EXTENDED TO 

THE CAMBRIDGE EXPEDITION OF 1899-1900 

THIS RESULT OF INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION AND GOODWILL 

IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED 

PREFACE 

The line between comparative and descriptive ethno- 
graphy is now very definitely laid down, and in spite 
of the occasional citation of illustrative parallels here 
and there, especially in the footnotes, it is to the 
second class that the present work claims to belong. 

The work is essentially a compilation from many 
sources, but differs from most books of that kind, 
first, in being based to a very large extent on 
materials hitherto unpublished, and accessible only 
through private channels of information, and secondly, 
in having been constructed with special knowledge of 
the subject and in a critical spirit. The need of such 
a work has long been felt by all who have interested 
themselves in the subject, and will be obvious to 
any one who glances over the Bibliography contained 
in the present volume. 

The method pursued by the authors, and the 
peculiarly heterogeneous nature of the materials at 
their disposal, have made it impossible to present to 
the reader an invariably harmonious and ordered 
narrative in a uniform and attractive style. Instead 
of this, he will, however, have within the compass of 
a pair of volumes the whole substance of what has 

viii PREFACE 

been written about the Pagan Races of the Malay 
Peninsula by dozens of explorers and observers in 
scores of more or less inaccessible or obsolete books 
and periodical publications, supplemented by and 
critically collated with a great mass of the most 
recent original material collected on the subject. He 
will find in this book many facts, but few hypotheses : 
at the present stage of our study of these races the 
collection of definite data seems to be the most 
immediate duty, and such theories as are here put 
forward are intended to suggest lines of research for 
future explorers and students. 

The work has grown under the hands of its 
authors. Both had spent some years of their lives 
in districts partly occupied by Pagan tribes in the 
South of the Peninsula, and had been attracted to 
the study of their peculiarities primarily by the fact 
that some of these aborigines spoke strange non- 
Malayan dialects. In default of any record of their 
antecedents, it seemed that the problem of the past 
history of these races could be approached most 
readily from the linguistic side ; and though a more 
comprehensive survey of their physical and cultural 
characteristics has somewhat modified this view, there 
is no doubt of the importance of the evidence of 
language in this connexion. Both in speech and in 
blood the races dealt with in the present work are, 
however (except in small and comparatively circum- 
scribed areas), mixed and diverse, and it is only by 
unravelling the different strands which enter into 
their structure that we can hope to understand them. 

PREFACE ix 

With this end in view, the several parts of the book 
dealing with their racial and cultural characteristics, 
which had originally been arranged under the head- 
ings of the various subjects dealt with, were entirely 
rewritten upon a phylogenetic system, so as to throw 
into relief the differences which separate one race 
from another ; and in the part dealing with language, 
the several distinct elements of which their dialects 
are made up have been analysed in considerable 
detail. One great difficulty which besets a student 
of this subject is how to reconcile the sometimes 
apparently conflicting testimonies of anthropology 
and philology : while not assuming to have found the 
explanation, the authors of the present work claim 
that in laying bare some seeming contradictions in the 
evidence, they are clearing the ground for the recon- 
struction on a sound basis of the early history and 
ethnology of an important part of South-Eastern Asia. 
It is not, therefore, solely as a monograph on the 
particular tribes specially dealt with that the present 
work claims to be regarded, but also as a necessary 
preliminary to a general scientific survey of the races 
of Southern Indo- China and the Malay Peninsula. 
Resident as they have been for untold centuries in 
the Peninsula, these pagan tribes nevertheless have 
much affinity with some of the wild races of Indo- 
China, and thus form a link between these two 
regions. Moreover, the Malay population of the 
Peninsula presents characteristics which vary very 
distinctly in different districts, and in some parts it 

contains a strong strain of aboriginal blood, so that 
VOL. I a 2 

X PREFACE 

an investigation into the wild races is an essential 
preparation towards a scientific study of the Malays 
themselves. The authors hope that the material 
they have collected will serve as a basis upon which 
may be reared a more systematic and accurate study 
of all the races of the Malay Peninsula. There is 
great need of a thorough survey of the Peninsula as a 
whole, from the point of view both of geographical 
and ethnological science and of industrial and eco- 
nomic development. 

Such a work should be undertaken by the 
Governments of the Straits Settlements and the 
Federated Malay States, disposing as they do of 
ample revenues which they have always shown them- 
selves ready to spend freely on objects of material 
utility. Whereas the Governments of British India, 
the Netherlands Indies, French Indo- China, and 
even that enterprising novice among colonial adminis- 
trations, the American Government of the Philippines, 
have done, and are doing, a great deal in the way of 
promoting the scientific study of their respective 
countries and peoples, the Governments of the Malay 
Peninsula have as yet done very little in that direc- 
tion. The matter appears to have been overlooked, 
owing to the pressure of other business. Yet, apart 
from the high scientific value of such investigations, 
there are not wanting signs of the times that point 
to the supreme importance to European Governments 
in the tropics of intimately studying and carefully 
considering the peculiarities of the alien and less 
civilised races committed to their care. There has 

PREFACE xi 

been, of late, in more than one quarter, a dangerous 
tendency to elaborate and Europeanise administrative 
and judicial machinery, and pari passu to lose touch 
with native ideas and customs, to push the native 
gently but firmly aside, and to impose upon him all 
manner of well-meant but complicated regulations, 
which he cannot in the least understand, and which 
often run counter to his social and religious principles. 
A more intimate study of the people of the country and 
their habits of life and thought is urgently required in 
order to avoid the growing danger of estrangement and 
want of sympathy between the rulers and the ruled. 

In such a survey of the Peninsula it is to be 
hoped and expected that the Government of Siam, as 
the suzerain of the Northern Malay States, would 
co-operate. Indeed, some of the preliminary work in 
that quarter has already been done by the Cambridge 
Expedition of 1899- 1900, which visited the Siamese 
Malay States by the special permission and with the 
active and generous assistance of His Majesty the 
King of Siam. It was during the course of that 
expedition that the whole of the recent information 
relating to the Negritos of the Northern States, and 
now embodied in this work, was collected, as well as 
the material contained in the progress reports of the 
expedition to the British Association (Anthropological 
Section, 1900, 1901), and a very large mass of other 
anthropological matter, as yet unpublished. 

The title of the present work, which had been 
provisionally fixed as " Wild Tribes " or " Wild Races 
of the Malay Peninsula," was finally cast into its 

xii PREFACE 

present form because it was felt that the point of 
religion (as between Mohammedan and non-Moham- 
medan) was perhaps a better dividing line, on account 
of its definiteness, than the vague, indefinite, and 
perhaps undefinable, quality of wildness. 

The title-page bears the names of two authors, but 
by far the greater part of the book (including the Intro- 
duction) was written by the one whose name stands 
first, the special task of the other having been confined 
to writing the part dealing with Language, together 
with the Appendix relating thereto, in the second 
volume. Each author has, as far as possible, revised 
and checked the work of the other, but the ultimate 
responsibility of each is to be apportioned to his own 
share of the book. 

Moreover, though the authors themselves have 
contributed the greater part of the original material 
which the book contains, they are indebted to others 
for a considerable amount of hitherto unpublished 
information, which has greatly enhanced the value of 
the work. Their acknowledgments are particularly 
due to Messrs. D. F. A. Hervey, C.M.G., H. Clifford, 
C.M.G., F. Emeric, A. Grubauer, C. D. Bowen, 
N. Annandale, H. C. Robinson, G. B. Cerruti, and 
H. Ling Roth, the Rev. H. E. Luering, Father W. 
Schmidt, Professor Rudolf Martin, and the Councils 
of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and 
Ireland, and the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic 
Society respectively, for information relating directly 
to the aborigines of the Peninsula and their lan- 
guages ; and to Messrs. A. Cabaton, A. Lavallee, the 

PREFACE xiii 

late P. Odend'hal (whose early death was a serious 
loss to the cause of Indo-Chinese research), S. H, 
Ray, G. A. Grierson, CLE., E. H. Man, CLE., Sir 
Richard Temple, CLE., W. L. H. Duckworth, and 
others, for help in connexion with cognate or allied 
races and languages. Several officers of the Govern- 
ment Service in the Malay Peninsula, particularly 
Messrs. L. Wray, junr., A. Hale, H. N. Ridley, and 
F. W. Knocker, have also been kind enough to read 
portions of the book in proof, and have contributed, 
as the fruit of their experiences, no small amount of 
material in the shape of comments and criticisms. 
Mr. A. Cabaton was good enough to read the Com- 
parative Vocabulary in proof, and his intimate know- 
ledge of several Indo-Chinese languages enabled him 
to enrich it by many valuable etymological sugges- 
tions. To him the authors are also indebted for 
access to the unpublished material of Messrs. P. 
Odend'hal and A. Lavallee. 

For the illustrations, which form a notable addition 
to the value of the work (the greater part having 
been taken specially for the occasion), the authors 
are also indebted to the help of many hands. 
Mr. T. J. M'^Gregor has contributed (at his own 
charges) the largest part of the original photographs ; 
others have been lent by Messrs. L. Wray, A. D. 
Machado, A. Hale, G. B. Cerruti, W. P. Hume, 
F. W. Douglas, T. Gardner, F. F. Laidlaw and 
Professor R. H. Yapp (the two last being members 
of the Cambridge Expedition), F. M. Elliot, R. F. 
Arnott, and others, who cannot all be mentioned ; 

xiv PREFACE 

while to Sir W. Hood Treacher, K.C.M.G. (formerly 
Resident-General of the Federated Malay States), 
Sir John Rodger, K.C.M.G., Messrs. E. W. Birch, 
H. C. Belfield, Cecil Wray, D. G. Campbell, 
F. J. Weld (Residents of the several States), 
R. N. Bland, recently Acting Resident Councillor of 
Malacca, H. W. Thomson, His Siamese Majesty's 
Assistant Adviser in Kelantan, A. T. Dew, and G. C. 
Bellamy, the authors owe special acknowledgments 
for their kind assistance in helping to get photographs 
specially taken for use in the present work. 

For permission to reproduce certain published 
illustrations, which were needed to explain the work 
of other writers, the authors are indebted to Professor 
A. Grunwedel, to the General Council of the Royal 
Museums (Museums Administration Department), 
Berlin, the Council of the Berlin Anthropological 
Society, Dr. von Traeger, Mr. H. Singer, the Editor 
of Globus, the firms of Georg Reimer, Berlin (pub- 
lisher to the Royal Museums Department), Friedrich 
Vieweg und Sohn, Brunswick (publishers of Globus), 
Gustav Fischer, Jena (publisher of Martin's Inland- 
stdmme), as well as to M. A. de Mortillet (for per- 
mission to reproduce the illustrations from L' Homme), 
to Cambridge University (Museum of Archaeology 
and Ethnology), for photographs of the Skeat collec- 
tion, to the Council of the Anthropological Institute 
of Great Britain and Ireland, the Council of the 
Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, and to 
Messrs. Lambert and Co., photographers, of Singa- 
pore. To Messrs. Stanford they are indebted for 

PREFACE XV 

permission to reproduce their map of S.E. Asia, to 
Dr. P. Geiger for a map showing the Distribution of 
Ipoh, to Mr. F. F. Laidlaw for help in the arrange- 
ment of Part I., and to Mr. N. W. Thomas for much 
generous assistance in the revision of the proofs, and 
for the compilation of the Indexes. 

To these and many other willing helpers the 
authors hereby express their most hearty thanks ; 
and they venture also to anticipate on behalf of their 
readers a high appreciation of the unselfish and 
public-spirited manner in which these numerous colla- 
borators have contributed valuable material towards 
a work that has not been undertaken in a commercial 
spirit but for a scientific purpose. 

Lastly, acknowledgments are due to the publishers 
and printers for undertaking the work in the same 
spirit, and executing it in a manner which it must be 
left to the reader to appraise. The date of publication 
has been repeatedly postponed by the recurring ill- 
health of one or other of the authors, and this has, of 
course, thrown an additional burden on the publishers, 
to whose forbearance under these trying circumstances 
the authors feel that special recognition is due. 

W. W. SKEAT. 
August 1906. C. O. BLAGDEN. 

CONTENTS 

PAGE 

PREFACE ....... vii 

BIBLIOGRAPHY . . . . xxv 

INTRODUCTION ...... i 

PART I.— RACE 

R.\ciAL Characters . . . 19 

Racial Affinities — General . . . -24 

Note by W. L. H. Duckworth on "Fasciculi Malay- 

ENSES" . . . 96 

Note on Diseases of the Aborigines . . .100 

PART II.— MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 

CHAPTER I 
Food — Stimulants — Narcotics . . .109 

CHAPTER II 
Dress . . . ■ • 137 

CHAPTER III 
Habitations . . . • • .168 

CONTENTS 

CHAPTER IV 

PAGE 

Hunting, Trapping, and Fishing .... 200 

CHAPTER V 

Modes of Barter . . . . .225 

CHAPTER VI 
Weapons and Implements ..... 242 

CHAPTER VII 
Cultivation ....... 338 

CHAPTER VIII 
Arts and Crafts ...... 374 

CHAPTER IX 
Decorative Art ...... 395 

CHAPTER X 
The Social Order ...... 494 

CHAPTER XI 
Dealings with Other Races . . -521 

APPENDIX . . • . -571 

PLACE AND PERSONAL NAMES . -717 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

The Lair of Mowgli ..... Fro7ttispiece 
The Langat River near the Hot Springs, Dusun Tua 

(Selangor) ..... hitroduction 

The River Langat at Lubo' K'lubi (or Kelubi), Selangor . ,, 

Upper Reaches of the Klang River, near Sakai Houses 

(Selangor) .,...„ 

TO FACE PAGE 

Negrito Type — Andamanese . . .28 

Negrito Type — Semang of Perak . . .28 

Aboriginal Dravidian Type — Veddas of Ceylon . . .29 

Suggested Aboriginal Dravidian Type — Sakai of Perak . . 29 

Suggested Aboriginal Malayan or Jakun Type — " Savage Malays " 

of Pekan, in Pahang (Heathen) . . . .31 

Civilised Malay Type — Chiefs of Negri Sembilan (Mohammedan) 31 
Negrito Type — Head of Semang Man, Kedah . . .34 

Negrito Type — Head of Semang Man, Perak . . .34 

Suggested Aboriginal Dravidian Type — Head of Sakai Man, 

Perak ....... 35 

Suggested Aboriginal Malayan, or " Savage Malay " Type — Jakun 

of Sungei Ujong . . . . . -35 

Mixed Group of Ulu Jelai Sakai, Pahang . . .38 

Group of Ulu Jelai Sakai, Pahang . . . -39 

Bujo', a young Jakun, mixed with strong Negrito Strain . . 40 

Head of Bujo' in Profile, showing marked Prognathism . . 40 

Young Sakai Girl in Centre (mixed Type showing strong Negrito 

Strain) . . .41 

Jakun with marked Sakai Strain, Selangor . . .42 

Jakun of Mixed Type, Bukit Prual, Selangor . .43 

Yeop Sandah, Wife and Child, Ulu Jelai Sakai with Negrito 

Strain, Pahang . .44 

Sakai Girl (showing Negrito Strain) . . . .45 

Semang of Kuala Kenering, Ulu Perak . . .54 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

TO FACE PAGE 

Sakai of S. Perak 

Sakai Group, Ulu Kali, Ulu Selangor 

Old Sakai Man, " The Father of all the Sakais," Ulu Berang. 

Eight Miles from Tanjong Malim, South Perak 
Mixed Sakai-Semang Type, Ulu Batu, Selangor . 
Mixed Sakai-Semang Type, Ulu Batu, Selangor . 
Sakai Boy with Blowpipe, Ulu Sungkai, S. Perak 
Sakai Boy (probably of Ulu Slim) 
Group of Jakun, showing Negrito and Sakai Blood, at Ulu Batu 

Selangor ..... 
Mixed Jakun Type, Bukit Prual, Selangor 
Group of Jakun (Aboriginal Malayans) from Klang 
Orang Laut or Sea-Jakun (four specimens) 

A. Profile of Semang Girl with Skin Disease 

B. Semang Girl (Full Face) with Skin Disease . 
Smallpox Patient in Seclusion, Ulu Slim (South Perak) 
Semangs preparing Poisonous Yams for Food {A^ B) 
Semang of Kedah having a Meal 
Sakai cooking Rice in Bamboo Vessels, Chenderiang (Batang 

Padang, Perak) 

Sakai of Ulu Slim (Perak) 

Negrito Dress and Articles of Apparel 

Semang Dress . 

Semang and Pangan Girdles 

Fungus-String Girdle of Semang Woman (Kedah) 

Seed and Tooth Necklace of Semang Woman (Kedah) 

Semang with Girdles of Malay Cloth 

Semang Combs .... 

Sakai Girl of South Perak 

Sakai Women in Malay " Sarongs," showing Necklaces, Armlets, 
and Bracelets ...... 

Sakai Family, showing Head-dresses, Necklaces, and Nose-quills 

Sakai Family, showing Nose-quills, Necklaces, Armlets, and Leaf- 
Ornaments ...... 

Sakai Group, Ulu Lui, Ulu Langat, showing Women and Girls in 
Malay Dress ...... 

Aboriginal Group at Ulu Kali, Ulu Selangor, showing Adoption 
of Malay Dress ...... 

Pangan Weather Screen of Palm Leaves (Ulu Kelantan) 

Interior of Round Leaf-Shelter of Pangan (Ulu Kelantan) 

Plan and Sections of Long (or Oval) Shelter used by Semang at 
Siong, Kedah ...... 

55 
58 

59 
60 
61 
62 

63 

66 
67 
90 

91 
102 
102 
103 
116 
116 

117 
120 

138 
139 

142 

143 
143 
148 
149 
152 

153 
156 

157 
158 

159 
176 

176 

177 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

TO FACE PAGE 

Semang at Ulu Jelentoh, Gopeng, Kinta, with Nipah-Palms (Nipa 

fruticans) in Background, newly cut for Thatchwork . 178 

Semang standing at side of Hut (at Sungei Tapah), near Batu 

Gajah, Kinta, Perak . . . . .179 

An Invisible Sakai Village (up the Big Tree in the Centre of the 

Picture) . . . . . .180 

Sakai Tree Hut, Sungei Berang, Perak, Seven Miles from Tanjong 

Malim . . . . . . .181 

Sakai Huts at Chenderiang, Batang Padang, Perak . .182 

Tree Hut, Ulu Batu, about Twelve Miles from Kuala Lumpur, 

Selangor . . . . 183 

Sakai House at Changkat Kerbu or Korbu . . 184 

House of Aborigines at Kuala Seleh, Ulu Klang . .185 

Huts at Durian Chandong, Ulu Langat, about Three Miles above 

Klubi, but on a Tributary of the Langat. Men absent 

Hunting . . . . . . .185 

Sakai House, Lui River, Ulu Langat, Selangor . . .186 

Ground Hut with thatched Roof, Ulu Kuang, about Three Miles 

from Kuang Station, Selangor . . . .186 

Besisi Huts about One and a Half Miles from Sepang . .187 

Besisi Hut about One and a Half Miles from Sepang (Kuala 

Langat District of Selangor), showing overlapping Gable- 
Ridge . . . . . . .187 

Sakai with Spring-Trap, Perak . . . . .206 

Sakai with Trap, Perak — Boy explaining its Action . . 206 

Sakai Boy watching Rat-Trap, Gunong Ubi, Ulu Slim . .207 

Sakai Boy watching Pig-Trap (with Spring-Spear), Ulu Slim . 207 
Sakai with Trap set in an Opening of a Game Fence . 208 

Types of Fish-Hooks (Natural and Artificial) . . .209 

Sakai Fish-Dam, for catching Fish in the Kinta River at Lubo' 

Kelah ("Lobou Kela") . . . . .209 

Sakai in Jungle Accoutrements, Sungei Berang, Seven Miles from 

Tanjong Malim . . . . . .212 

Aboriginal Group ready for Hunting, Bukit Prual, Kepong, 

Selangor . . . . . . .213 

Sakai Fishing at Ulu Kali, Ulu Selangor . . .214 

Aborigines Fishing at Ulu Klang . . .214 

Two Sakai Women with Pet Jungle-Pigs. Ulu Slim, Perak . 215 
Sakai Women and Children with Pet Jungle-Pig . .215 

Group of Jakun with Blowpipes, showing Man (in Centre) with 

Back-Basket, Blowpipe, and Chopper . . . 21S 

Hunting Party with Blowpipes, Bukit Prual, Kepong, Selangor . 219 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

TO FACE PAGE 

Aboriginal Group at Lubo' K'lubi, Ulu Langat, Selangor . 220 

Jakun Women (Ulu Klau, Pahang), with Hunting Dog in Fore- 
ground . . . . . . .221 

Stone Implements from Pahang .... 244 

Jakun Man in Hunting Accoutrements . . . .245 

Semang Implements . . . . . .270 

Two Semang Bows, Two Quivers, and their Arrows . .271 

Semang Apparatus for poisoning Blowpipe Darts . .281 

Padang the Semang collecting Poisonous Sap from the Upas 

Tree. Ulu Siong, Kedah . . . . .281 

Semang Blowpipe Apparatus . . . . .282 

Semang of Sumpitan, near Lenggong, Upper Perak, showing 

Blowpipes and Quivers . . . . .283 

Sakai of South Perak, with Blowpipes .... 296 

Sakai Quivers ....... 297 

Sakai of South Perak, carrying Blowpipe . . . 298 

Sakai Men, One (standing) with Blowpipe and Quiver, the Other 

(seated) with Back-Basket . . . . -299 

Man using Blowpipe, Bukit Prual, Selangor ; at his left Side is 

the open Quiver with Darts .... 304 

Jakun using Blowpipe, Lubo' K'lubi, Ulu Langat, Selangor . 305 

One of the Upas {A7itiaris) Trees that furnish the Dart Poison, 

Berang River, Perak . . . . .312 

Young Upas Tree (" Pohun Ipoh "), near Berang River, 

Perak . . . . . -312 

Boiling the Poison for the Blowpipe Darts . . -313 

Besisi Quivers containing Darts poisoned with Upas Sap . 314 

Dart-Quivers and Poison-Case . . . . .314 

Drying- Rack for Blowpipe Darts employed by the Besisi . 315 

Besisi Apparatus for brewing Dart-Poison . . -315 

Kuantan Darts with Poison Spatula . . . -315 

Jakun walking up a Tree, Ulu Batu, Selangor . . . 338 

Sakai Tree-Felling : One Man (on Staging) starting Work, the 

Other (on the Left) climbing up to assist him . -339 

A Sakai Plantation at Changkat Bertam on the River Raya (Perak) 344 
Sakai Plantations near the Head- waters of the River Kampar 

(Perak), seen from the Summit of Mt. Chabang . . 344 

Aboriginal Hill Clearing, with Huts, Ulu Batu, Selangor 345 

Aboriginal Hill Clearing, with mixed Cultivation (Tapioca and 

Bananas), Ulu Batu, Selangor . . . -345 

Aboriginal Women husking Padi with Pestle in large wooden 

Mortar, Ulu Klau, Pahang . . . -352 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

TO FACE PAGE 

Aboriginal Women husking Padi (showing End- View of Mortar) 

Ulu Klau, Pahang . . . -353 

Tapioca Plantation, with Group of Aborigines, Ulu Batu, Selangor 358 
Cultivation of the Tapioca-Plant (on Left) and Sugar-Cane (in 
Centre) — Aboriginal Woman in Foreground, Ulu Kali, 
Selangor . . . . . . -359 

White Cloth of Upas Bark . . . . -376 

Semang Baskets . . . . . -376 

Sakai Men with Back-Basket and Blowpipes, Ulu Slim, S. Perak 377 
Negrito Industries ...... 384 

Group at Sungei Ledong, Ulu Klang. These Sakai are Lampan 

(Stream-Tin) Workers . . . . -385 

Semang Mats and Baskets . . . . .386 

Jakun Bet el- Wallets . . . . .387 

Aboriginal Women washing for Stream Tin with Wooden Pan, 

Kuala Seleh, Ulu Klang, Selangor . . . .388 

Encampment of Aboriginal Stream -Tin Workers, Ulu Klang, 

Selangor ....... 389 

Development of the Patterns from the Chevron . . .414 

Quivers for Blowpipe Darts employed by the Semang of Kedah . 414 
Semang Quivers . . . . .414 

Semang Combs, Ulu Siong, Kedah . . . .415 

Semang Receptacles . . . . . .415 

Charm-Patterns on Combs . . . . 426, 427 

Hypothetical Ixora Blossom and Comb explaining the Flower- 
Theory of Vaughan-Stevens . . .428 
Specimens of Correct " Tin-weg " {i.e. "Central-Panel") Patterns 429 
Specimens of Correct " Was "-Patterns .... 430 

Specimens of Correct " Pawer "-Patterns . .431 

Charm-Patterns on Combs .... 432, 433 

Correction of Inaccurate Drawings . . . .434 

Alleged Representation of Parts of the Body 434 

Bamboo No. i. Bamboo No. 2. Bamboo No. 3. Bamboo No. 4 450 
Burial Bamboo of a Chief (" Sna-hut ") — unexplained . 451 

Burial Bamboo of a Married Woman 

Burial Bamboo of a Man 

Birth Bamboo or Tahong 

Burial Bamboo of a Boy 

Burial Bamboo of a Girl 

Tube ("Gor" and "Gar") Patterns, Plate I. 

Tube ("Gor" and "Gar") Patterns, Plate II. 

Tube ("Gor" and "Gar") Patterns, Plate III. 

451 
451 
460 
460 
460 
461 
462 
463 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

TO FACE PAGE 

Tube ("Gor" and "Gar") Patterns, Plate IV. . 

Tube ("Gor" and "Gar") Patterns, Plate V. . 

Tube (" Gor" and " Gar") Patterns, Plate VI. . 

Specimens of "Sumpit" Patterns, Plate VII. . 

Specimens of "Sumpit" Patterns, Plate VIII. . 

Specimens of " Sumpit " Patterns, Plate IX. 

Specimens of " Sumpit " Patterns, Plate X. . . 

Specimens of "Sumpit" Patterns, Plate XI. 

Sakai Hairpins, Perak ..... 

Sakai Combs, Perak (two specimens) . . ' 

Bamboo Vessels used by Perak Sakai 

Quiver used by Perak Sakai .... 

Bamboo Vessels used by Perak Sakai 

Bamboo No. i. — ^Charm Pattern of unknown use 

Fig. 7. — Magician's Staff .... 

8. — Charm to invoke Aid of Argus-Pheasants against Centi 

pedes and Scorpions .... 

9. — Charm to cause Rain and protect Young Rice Plants 
-Charm to keep away Ants 
-Charm against two Kinds of Skin-Disease 
Fig. 1 2. — Hut-Building Charm (to facilitate Collection of Materials) 
Fig. 13. — Charm for driving away Demons 
Fig. 14. — Charm to send Centipedes to sleep and protect 

Gatherers of " Nipah "-Fruit 
Fig. I 5. — Charm against Venomous Spiders 
Fig. 16. — Charm to facilitate Capture of Fish and protect the 

Anglers ...... 

Fig. 17. — Charm to protect the Crops from their Enemies 

Fig. 18. — Charm to bring Rain for the Crops 

Kuantan Dart-Quiver ..... 

Mantra Patterns ..... 

Besisi Zoomorphs ..... 

Model of Insignia of Besisi Batin or Chief 
Central Panels of Comb Patterns, Fig. 7 
Central Panels of Comb Patterns, Fig. 8 

Fig. 

Fig. 
Fig. 10. 
Fig. II. 

Map showing Distribution of Ipoh (Upas-Poison) 

261 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

The authorities enumerated in the following list are of course of a varying value, 
into which the personal equation to a large extent enters, nevertheless it is possible 
to make a rough classification which may be of service to intending students. To 
begin with, it should be perfectly evident that, although the work done by those 
writers who have actually had local experience is of immeasurably greater impor- 
tance in questions of fact than any, even the very best, work of home-staying writers 
can be, yet in respect of deductions from, or in the scientific treatment of those 
facts, the home -staying student, with his easy access to libraries, museums, 
laboratories, and other scientific machinery, holds the field at a very great 
advantage. It is necessary to draw attention to this point, because the full 
measure of credence to be given to any particular part of the material here got 
together cannot otherwise be properly arrived at. Broadly speaking, then, the 
entire series of writers here recorded may be briefly classified as follows : — 

(a) Writers with local experience, including not only government officials but 
European missionaries (chiefly French Roman Catholics), planters, and 
miners, to whom may be added a few scientific men who have acquired 
some local field-knowledge. 

(iJ) Scientific men who have no local field-knowledge, but who possess other 
advantages, as above. 

((') Travellers without any scientific training, and at the same time without any 
adequate local knowledge. These might well be expected to be mere 
discoverers of "mare's-nests," but taking their work as a whole, I am 
glad to be able to state that, though they have made some bad blunders, 
there are fewer of these than might be expected. 

The foregoing remarks being duly borne in mind, I have next to point out 
that the modern study ^ of the Wild Races of the Malay Peninsula may be divided 
advantageously, from an historical point of view, into three main stages or 
periods of development : — 

The first of these stages covers, roughly speaking, the first half of the nineteenth 
century, from 1800-1850. This period contains the name of no systematically 
trained anthropologist, and the evidence collected pending its duration rests upon 
the observations of various able but, from a modern point of view, comparatively 
untrained European observers, among whom may be mentioned. Sir Stamford 
Raffles, the founder of Singapore, William Marsden (author of the History of 
Sumatra, a Malay- English and English-Malay Dictionary, and other works), John 
Leyden (translator of the Malay Annals), John Crawfurd (a most prolific writer 
but much inclined at times to spread himself in mere speculation), John Anderson 
(author of the "Considerations"), P. J. Begbie, and Lieutenant Newbold, all of 
whom did much good pioneer work in the early days. 

The second period runs from the year 1850 to about 1890. At the very out- 
set of this period the (for his time, remarkably) critical, accurate, and voluminous 
writings of J. R. Logan, based in the main on his own personal investigations, 
placed the study of these races on an altogether higher plane. At the same time 
the reports of travellers like Miklucho-Maclay, Miss Isabella Bird (the latter in a 

1 In this " modern study " are not, of It will of course be remembered that 
course, included the few scattered the Portuguese domination which corn- 
notices from Dutch sources (before the menced with the capture of Malacca by 
timeof Raffles), or from early Portuguese d'Albuquerque in 15 11, was terminated 
v/riters such as Goudinho de Eredia, by their loss of Malacca to the Dutch 
who is the only one of these early in 1641, who ceded it in turn to 
authorities that is really worth quoting. England by treaty. 

VOL. I XXV /; 

xxvi BIBLIOGRAPHY 

more popular way only), Montane, and de Morgan, together with the great store 
of valuable information collected on the one hand by French Roman Catholic 
missionaries, such as P. Favre and P. Borie,' and on the other hand by officials 
of the local governments, amongst whom may be mentioned Leech, Maxwell, 
Swettenham, (Major) M'Nair, Hervey, G. Bellamy, Hale, J, A. G. Campbell, and 
Lister, arrested the attention of European anthropologists and filtered through 
various channels into the works of Waitz, Reclus, De Quatrefages, and A. H. 
Keane. 

The third period, which may be described as having lasted from about the year 
1890 to the present day (1906), is distinguished by the fact that during its course 
some of the most eminent anthropologists of Europe, more especially of Germany, 
have themselves either personally or through their agents taken an active part in 
the work of inquiry. At the same time the excellent work done by the official 
element during the two preceding periods was continued and greatly extended by 
Clifford, Leonard Wray, Ridley, Kelsall, A. D. Machado, and Cerruti ; whilst as a 
representative of the non-official element during this period should be specially 
mentioned the name of Mr. Nelson Annandale, late of Balliol College, Oxford, 
and now Curator of the Indian Museum at Calcutta. Mr. Annandale first broke 
ground in the Peninsula as a member of the Cambridge Expedition of 1899, and 
has since collected much valuable material on his own account, the results of his 
work being given in Fasciculi Malayenses. From the point of view of mere bulk, 
however, the greater proportion of the ethnographical material and notes collected 
during this period was got together by Vaughan-Stevens, and as it is in a just and 
reasonable estimate of this very material that one of the chief difficulties of dealing 
with this period consists, I propose here to discuss the matter in detail. In 1891 
Vaughan-Stevens, whose Christian name is given (by his German editors) as Hrolf, 
was commissioned by a group of the leading anthropologists of Berlin (the Rudolf 
Virchow Stiftung, headed by Virchow himself), in combination with the Berlin 
(Government) Ethnographical Museum, to undertake a systematic study of the 
Wild Races of the Malay Peninsula. From the very outset Vaughan-Stevens' work 
was to some extent shrouded in niyster}' and doubt, and his mode of action and 
even his character were criticised and assailed. He arrived under the aegis of one 
of Europe's greatest anthropologists, and he styled himself, or at least passed as a 
"professor," yet he himself possessed, as his own work shows, no scientific 
or linguistic attainments, and could have had no right to any sort of academic 
title. Mr. H. N. Ridley, who knew him well, and with whom he stayed, gravely 
doubted, in conversation with myself, whether his name were really Vaughan- 
Stevens at all, and told me that he had at least an alias, presumably of Norse 
origin, i.e. Svensen. His dialect was a variety of the "cockney," apparently of 
the Islington variety ; he was uneducated and ignorant in many ways to a quite 
remarkable degree. On the other hand, he had travelled extensively in many parts 
of the world, and he was a fair observer. Martin, who was at great pains to follow 
up Vaughan-Stevens' tracks in the Malay Peninsula, with the express object of 
testing his veracity, charges him with the love of exaggeration for its own sake, and 
makes no less serious reflections in connection with some of his statements as 
to the extent and difficulty of his wanderings and methods of collecting specimens 
(see Martin, page 170 seqq. ). These exaggerations were no doubt due to the natural 
vanity of the man, and his love of self-glorification, and in the case of the latter he 

^ There has frequently been in other in the text) been accurate, unbiassed, 
parts of the world a tendency to dis- and helpful. This has also been the 
credit all reports of this kind when case in British North Borneo and Sara- 
made by missionaries, but I am able to wak, where the same sound pioneering 
say that in the Malay Peninsula the work accomplished by the missionary 
work done by them has in the main (in element has been testified to by Brooke 
spite of one or two exceptions dealt with Low {v. Ling Roth, op. cit.). 

I 

BIBLIOGRAPHY xxvii 

may himself have been deceived. But what has most detracted from the credit he 
has earned as a serious student is his reputation as a teller of after-dinner "yarns," 
which certainly had something of the true Gilbertian ring about them, and it is no 
doubt this fact that has most adversely affected the opinion of his work held by 
more than one authority of standing. Some of his stories, I have been informed, 
were capital, and Vaughan- Stevens was a born raconteur^ Yet even Rudolf 
Martin (page 174) himself hesitates to deny that there may be still some value in 
Vaughan- Stevens' •' voluminous " communications (of course with the proNdso that 
they must be most carefully and critically handled and sifted from an expert 
point of view, before they can be safely regarded as material for the comparative 
ethnologist) ; and his conclusion is, that if we eliminate from the material left 
behind by Vaughan-Stevens what may be styled the "accretions" of his own 
fancy, there must yet always be left over a foundation of valuable facts the 
collection of which will remain Vaughan-Stevens' permanent contribution to the 
subject of our inquiry. 

It is with this view (which is also that of Blagden) that I desire to associate 
myself, but I may here explain that in order to assist the reader and the student I 
have taken the precaution of having the uncorroborated or more doubtful portions of 
Vaughan-Stevens' material (such as his remarks on " totemism," which, though to 
my mind hopelessly wide of the mark, are too important to omit) set in smaller 
type, except in cases of isolated facts or portions of a particular context, in which 
instances attention is drawn to the doubtful or inaccurate portion in the footnotes. 
An exception to this treatment had to be made in the chapter on " Decorative 
Art," where to avoid the perpetual alternation of small and large type, the doubtful 
and uncorroborated passages have been enclosed in square brackets, as has been 
explained in the text. It should also be here noted that I have, as a general rule, 
throughout my own {i.e. the non-linguistic) portion of this work (Parts I. -III. 
inclusive) taken the opportunity of correcting mistakes and misspellings, and of 
unifying the spelling of native words, though otherwise adhering as closely as 
possible to the exact wording of the texts quoted. With regard to the references, 
it should be borne in mind that in dealing with the Semang of Kedah, the Pangan 
(where so stated), the Blandas and Besisi of the Kuala Langat district in Selangor, 
I am writing from my own experiences ; no foot references therefore are given, 

^ A few instances of the tales so corpse, into the sacred and inviolable 
embroidered by Vaughan-Stevens are enclosure of the Towers of Silence in 
given as evidence well known to resi- order to have the opportunity of select- 
dents in the Malay Peninsula : In New ing at leisure the skull of a Parsee ; 
Guinea a whole tribe he was staying being refused permission to return, 
with were massacred by a rival tribe, he made the doorkeeper drunk with a 
Vaughan-Stevenshimself escaping to the bottle of whisky that he had by him. 
Fly River and floating down it for three And so forth, and so forth. Small 
weeks clinging to a drifting log, and wonder that his professional reputation 
feeding on raw fish that he caught with went by the board, more especially as 
his hands as he drifted by. — He was he brought from Ceylon the name of an 
sleeping in the king's hut in a cannibal artist in fiction scarcely, if at all, inferior 
island in the South Pacific, and expect- to that he earned in the Straits. Yet 
ing treachery, slept with his feet wide e.xamples of professional men who have 
apart on the pillow, and his head where done good work, although they may have 
his feet should have been ; his foresight suffered from a similar weakness have 
was justified, as at midnight an axe-head not been uncommon, and if we compare 
crashed into the unoccupied part of the one part, of Vaughan-Stevens' work with 
pillow, and jumping up, he found him- another, and the whole with the work 
self presenting his pistol at the head of of other observers, we shall find suffi- 
his royal host. — He was in Bombay, ciently conclusive proofs of his general 
and got himself carried, disguised as a good faith in the facts that he recorded. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

In all other cases, the reference to the authority quoted is given at the foot of the 
page, though in the case of an obviously continued passage or narrative the refer- 
ence has not of course been put at the foot of every page but at suitable intervals 
only, which will easily explain themselves. The work, however, has grown 
considerably under my hands, and here and there it has been necessary to make 
corrections, or even to add material in a footnote, which should, strictly speaking, 
have been incorporated in the text. For this and for any other shortcomings in 
dealing with the material I can only plead that I have done my best, subject to 
the very great and severe limitations that have conditioned the work from start to 
finish. It must not be forgotten that part of the material in this book has come 
from rare old pamphlets and journals written by travellers in nearly all the 
important languages of Europe, some of which contain numerous typographical 
errors and other mistakes due to their ignorance of Malay, which have here 
been corrected. 

It only remains to mention the most eminent and distinguished of all the 
anthropologists that science has yet sent out to study the many vexed questions 
connected with these races. I refer to my friend Rudolf Martin, whose monumental 
and epoch-making work (Die Inlandstiimme der Malayischen Halbinsel), the first 
of its kind, was published at Jena by Gustav Fischer during the past year. 

W. S. 
The following main references to Martin's work corresponding to certain main 
references in this book are given for the benefit of students, it being premised 
that Martin deals with the aborigines chiefly from an anthropological, the 
present authors chiefly from a cultural and linguistic point of view ; moreover, 
Martin's book is arranged according to subject, ours is founded on a 
phylogenetic or tribal basis : the two works thus stand in a complementary 
relation to each other. 

PAGAN RACES OF THE MALAY 
PENINSULA. 

Vol. L 

Part \. Race . 

Part IL — 

Ch. i. Food 
Ch. ii. Dress 
Ch. iii. Habitations 

Ch. iv. Hunting, Trapping, Fish 

PAGE 
19-106 

109-136 

137-167 

168-199 

Ch. vi. Weapons and Implements 

Ch. V. Modes of Barter 

Ch. xi. DeaUngs with other Race; 

Ch. vii. Cultivation 

Ch. viii. Arts and Crafts 
Ch. ix. Decorative Art . 
Ch X. The Social Order 

Vol. II. 
Part III.— 
Ch. i. Birth - Customs and 

Beliefs .... 1-27 

Ch. ii. Maturity Customs and 

Beliefs . . . 28-54 

Ch. iii. Marriage Customs and 

Beliefs .... 55-88 

Ch. iv. Burial Customs and 

Beliefs .... 89-116 

Ch. V. Music, Songs, and Feasts 117-172 

Ch. vi. Religion and Folklore . 173-376 
Part IV. Language .... 379-end 

200-224 

242-337 

225-241 \ 

521-570/ 

338-373 

374-394 
395-493 
494-520 

INLANDSTSMME DER MALAY- 
ISCHEN HALBINSEL. 

ni. 

III. 

(4. 

720, 

Physiche Anthropologie 
Schluss 
Ergologie — 
Nahrung . 

Korperbedeckung . 
Besiedelungs- u. Wohnungs 

verhaltnisse . 
Nahrungssuche, Jagd u. 

Fischfang, Jagd- u. Fange 

gerathe . 
Soziologie. GeheimerTausch- 

handel. Verkehr mit Malayen 
Anpflanzungen der Halbkul- 

turstamme .... 
Hausgerathe, Haushalt, u.s.w. 
Ornamentik . . . . 
Soziologie. Soziale Ordnung. 

Rechtsgewohnheiten 

PAGE 

219-644 
1000-1036 

732-744 
680-695 

639-677 

729-731 
796-800 
801-853 

874-S77 

8. Sitten u. Gebrauche. Schwan- 

gerschaft,! Geburt, u.s.w. . 890-903 

2. Ohr- und Nasenschmuck, 
u.s.w., Tatauierung, Bema- 
lung 696-706 

7. Ehe. Hochzeitsgebrauche, 

U.S.W 862-873 

8. Tod. Grabbeigaben. Seelen- 

haus, u.s.w 926-931 

8. Spiele. Musikinstrumente. 

Gesang, u.s.w. . . . 904-921 

9. Religiose Vortstellungen ' 932-986 
10. Sprache 987-999 

1 Cp. also Martin, pp. 678-679. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Abbreviations used in Parts I. -III. inclusive of this Work. 

Ausland. — Das Auslatid, Munich, etc. 

J. E. A. — -/otcrnal of Eastern Asia (one number only issued). 
Ethn. Notizbl. — Ethnologisches Notizblatt. 
J. A. I. — -Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and 

Ireland. 
J. I. A. — -Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia (otherwise 

known as " Logan's Journal"). 
J. R. A. S.— Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

J. R. A. S., S. B. — -Jou7-nal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch. 
Man's ^w^.i — jNIan, E. H. O71 the Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Anda- 

vianese Islands. 
Sel. Journ. or S.J. — Selatigor Journal (formerly published at the Government 

Press, Kuala Lumpur, Selangor). 
V. B. G. A, — Verhandlungen der Bei'liner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie. 
Z.f. E. — Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie. 

Vaughan-Stevens, ii. ; Vaiighan-Stevens, iii. — Veroffentlichungen aus dem K. 
Museum fiir Volkerkunde : Bd. ii. (3-4 Heft) ; Bd. iii. (3-4 Heft). 

Note.- — The abbreviations of names of authors or works occurring in the text 

are given in the Bibliography itself. Where there are several works by the same 

author, the abbreviation indicates which work is referred to. Thus "Hale, p. 

300," refers solely to that author's paper "On the .Sakais" in vol. xv. of the 

Journal of the Anthropological Institute, after which entry in the bibliography 

the abbreviation [" Hale "] is shown. 

All articles on or by editors of Vaughan-Stevens' material are given under 

the heading "Stevens, Vaughan-," not under the name of each individual editor. 
This list includes a number of works of a general nature which contain 

incidental references to or descriptions of the races here dealt with. 

1904. Abbot, Dr. Human Images among the Mantong [Orang Laut]. 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch [No. 41], pp. 
128, 129. 

1846. Abdullah. Hikayat Abdullah bin Abdulkadir Munshi. .Singapore. 

1824. Anderson, John ["Anderson"]. Political and Commercial Con- 
siderations relative to the Malayan Peninsula and British Settlements 
in the Straits of Malacca. With Appendix : of the Aboriginal Inhabi 
tants of the Malayan Peninsula, and particularly of the Negroes, called 
Semang. Prince of Wales' Island. Pp. xxvii-xlvii. 

1902. Annandale, Nelson, and Robinson, H. C. Some Preliminary 

Results of an Expedition to the Malay Peninsula. Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland. London. 
Vol. xxxii. p. 407. 

1903. Annandale, Nelson, and Robinson, H. C. Fasciculi Malayenses 

[" Fasc. Mai."]. Anthropology. Pt. i. London : Longmans, Green, 

and Co. 
1903. Annandale, Nelson. Fasciculi Malayenses. Supplement, Map, and 

Itinerary. London: Longmans, Green, and Co. ["Fasc. Mai."]. 
1878. Anonymous. The Semangs. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 

Straits Branch, No. 2, p. 231. [Miscellaneous notices.] 
1 88 1. Anonymous. The Ipoh Tree — Perak. Journal of the Royal Asiatic 

Society, Straits Branch, No. 8, p. 161. [Miscellaneous notes.] 
1850. Barbe, Rev. ["Barbe"]. Agriculture of the Mintra \i.e. Mantra]. 

1 To distinguish it from the publica- Anthrop. Inst, of Great Britain and 
tion called " Man " issued by the Ireland, which latter is printed Maji. 

XXX BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Bengal Catholic Herald, June 12, 1850. Reprinted in Journal of the 

Indian Archipelago, vol. v. p. 487. 
1896. Bartels, M. 6',?«; Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. 
1886. Bastian, Adolf. Indonesien, oder Die Inseln des Malayischen 

Archipelago's. Berlin. III. Lieferung, Sumatra und Nachbarschaft. 

S. 104 seqq. 
1886. Bastian, Adolf. Reisen in Birma. Leipzig. P. 432. 
1834. Begbie, p. J. ["Begbie"]. The Malayan Peninsula, embracing its 

History, Manners, and Customs of the Inhabitants, pp. 2-18. Madras. 

1886. Bellamy, G. C. ["Bellamy, G."] The Sakais of Selangor, Kuala 

Langat. Selangor Journal, 1895, vol. iii. No. 14, p. 224 seqq. Re- 
printed from Government Report (1886). 

1849. Bigandet, p. [" Bigandet "]. N. Ann. de la Propagation de la Foi, 
1849, tome i. pp. 80-88. 

1883. Bird, Isabella (Mrs. Bishop). The Golden Chersonese, pp. 13-17. 

1893. Blagden, Charles Otto ["Blagden," or " C. O. B."]. MS. Notes on 

Aborigines in the Jasin District of Malacca. 

1894. Blagden, Charles Otto. Early Indo-Chinese Influence in the Malay 

Peninsula. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, 
No. 27, p. 21 seqq. 

1902. Blagden, Charles Otto. A Malayan Element in some of the 

Languages of Southern Indo- China. Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, Straits Branch [No. 38], p. i seqq. 

1903. Blagden, Charles Otto. The Comparative Philology of the Sakai 

and Semang Dialects of the Malay Peninsula. Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 39, p. 47 seqq. 
1861. Borie, H. [" Borie (tr. Bourien) "]. Notice sur les Mantras, tribu 
sauvage de la Peninsule Malaise. Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- 
Land- en Volkenkunde. Deel x. p. 413. Translated by Bourien, P. 
On the Wild Tribes of the Interior of the Malay Peninsula. Transac- 
tions of the Ethnological Society of London, N.S. vol. iii. p. 72 seqq. 

1887. Borie, H. An Account of the Mantras, a Savage Tribe in the Malay 

Peninsula. Miscellaneous Essays relating to Indo-China. London. 
Second series, vol. i. pp. 286-307. 

1886. Borie, H. La Presqu'ile de Malacca, les Malais et les Sauvages. Tulle. 
1878. Bort, Balthasar. Corte beschrijvinch der wilde Menschen, hun 

omtrent Malacca, Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volken- 
kunde, 1878. Also Batav. Genootsch. K. en W. Batavia, 1883, xxviii. 
88-92. 

1865. Bourien. See Borie. 

1876. Bradley, Capt. J. Travel and Sport in Burmah, Siam, and Malay 
{sic, i.e. Malaya). 

1882. Brau de St.-Pol Lias. Sur la Riviere Pluss, interieur de la presqulle 

Malaise. Nouvelle Revue. Juni, 1882. 

1883. Brau de St.-Pol Lias [" Brau de St.-P. Lias"]. Perak et les Orangs- 

Sakeys. Paris. 
1865. Cameron, J. ["Cameron"]. Our Tropical Possessions in Malayan 
India. London : Smith, Elder, and Co. 

1887. Campbell, J. A. G. ["Campbell, J. A. G."]. The Sakais of Selangor, 

Ulu Langat. Selangor Journal, vol. iii. 1895, No. 15, p. 240 seqq. 

Reprinted from Government Report (1887). 
1876. Castelnau, Fr. de. Memoire sur les Mantras. Revue de Philologie 

et d'Ethnographie, vol. ii. pp. 132-143. 
1904. Cerruti, G. B. The Sakais of Batang Padang, Perak. Journal of the 

Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch [No. 41], pp. 113-I17. 
1892. Claine. Tourdu Monde, Jun. 18, 1892, p. 398. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY xxxi 

1 89 1. Clifford, Hugh. Some Notes on the Sakai Dialects of the Malay 
Peninsula. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, 
No. 24, p. 13 seqq. 

1896. Clifford, Hugh. East Coast Etchings. Straits Times Press. 

Singapore. 

1897. Clifford, Hugh. A Journey through the Malay States of Tringganu 

and Kelantan. Journal of the Royal Geographical Society. London. 
Vol. ix. p. I seqq. 

1897. Clifford, Hugh. In Court and Kampong. Grant Richards. 

1898. Clifford, Hugh. Studies in Brown Humanity. Grant Richards. 
1903. Clifford, Hugh, C.M.G. [" CHfiford "]. MS. notes and vocabularies 

embodied in this book. 
1820. Crawfurd, John. History of the Indian Archipelago. 3 vols. 

Edinburgh. Vol. ii. pp. 125-192. 
1828. Crawfurd, John. Journal of an Ambassady from the Governor-General 

of India to the Courts of Siam and Cochin China. London. 
1834. Crawfurd, John. Miscellaneous Works on the Polynesian and East 

Indian Languages (with vocabulary). 
1848. Crawfurd, John. On the Alphabets of the Indian Archipelago. 

Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. ii. 

p. 765 seqq. 

1848. Crawfurd, John. On the Malayan and Polynesian Languages and 

Races. Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. ii. 
p. 183 seqq. 

1852. Crawfurd, John. Grammar and Dictionary of the Malay Language. 

2 vols. London. Vol. i. ch. xvi. clxxi. -ii. 
1856. Crawfurd, John. Descriptive Dictionaiy of the Indian Islands and 

Adjacent Countries. London. 
1882. Croix, J. Errington de LA["De la Croix"]. Etude sur les Sakaies 

de Perak. Revue d' Ethnographic, tome i. p. 317 seqq. 
1885. Croix, J. Errington de la. Sept mois au pays de I'etain, Perak. 

Bulletin de la Societe de Geographic de Paris, 1885, p. 394 seqq. 
1882. Daly, D. D. Surveys and Explorations in the Native States of the 

Malayan Peninsula, 1875-82. Proceedings of the Geographical 

Society. London. N.S. vol. iv. p. 393 seqq. (1882). 
De Morgan. See Morgan, J. de. 
1894. Dennys, N. B. Descriptive Dictionary of British Malaya. London. 
1897. Douglas, W. W. Report to Government relating to Sakei Tribes in 

Selangor, Klang District. Reprinted in Selangor Journal, vol. v. 

1902. Duckworth, W. L. H., M.A. Some Anthropological Results of the 

Skeat Expedition to the Malay Peninsula. Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, vol. xxxii. p. 142 seqq. 
See also Skeat. 

1903. Duckworth, W. L. H., M.A. Note on a skull labelled " Soemang- 

schadel, ^, Bukit Sapi, Upper Perak, 1902" ; now in the Museum of 
the Royal College of Surgeons. Man, No. 18, p. 34 (March). 

1904. Duckworth, W.L.H., M.A. Studies in Anthropology, pp. 242, 256. 

Cambridge University Press. 
1904. Duckworth, W. L. H., M.D., Sc.D. Morphology and Anthropology, 
PP- 359' 488-490. Cambridge University Press. 

1849. Earl, S. W. On the Leading Characteristics of the Papuan, Australian, 

and Malayu-Polynesian Nations. Journal of the Indian Archipelago 
and Eastern Asia, vol. iii. pp. 682 ; vol. vi. pp. i, 66 seqq. 

1853. Earl, S. W. Native Races of the Indian Archipelago — Papuans. 

London. 
1863. Earl, S. W. On the Shell-Mounds of Province Wellesley, in the Malay 

xxxii BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Peninsula. Transactions of the Ethnological Society. London. 
N.S. vol. ii. p. 119 seqq. 
1882. Eredia, Goudinho de. Malaca, L'Inde Meridionale et le Cathay. 
(Trans.) Bruxelles. 

1848. Favre, p., A.M. Account of the Wild Tribes inhabiting the Malayan 

Peninsula, Sumatra, and a few neighbouring Islands. Journal of the 
Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. ii. p. 237 seqq. Translation. 
For the original, see Ann. de la P. de la F., vol. xxii. 

1849. Favre, P., A.M. Journey in Johore. Journal of the Indian Archipelago 

and Eastern Asia, vol. iii. p. 50. 
1849. Favre, P., A.M. Pawangs. Journal of the Indian Archipelago and 

Eastern Asia, vol. iii, p. 115. 
1S49. Favre, P., A.M. Journey in the Menangkabau States of the Malay 

Peninsula. Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, 

vol. iii. p. 153. 
1S65. Favre, P., A.M. Account of the Wild Tribes inhabiting the Malayan 

Peninsula, Sumatra, and a few neighbouring Islands. With a Journey 

in Johore and a Journey in the Menangkabau States of the Malayan 

Peninsula. Paris. 

1904. Folkmar, Daniel. Album of Philippine Types. Manilla. 

1 90 1. Geiger, p. ["Geiger"]. Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Ipoh-pfeil-gifte. 

(Inaugural Dissertation. ) Basel. With map. 
1893. Gerland. Jb. Verein fiir geographic, Frankfurt, 1893, p. 60. 
Grunwedel, a. See Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. 

1905. Grubauer, a. Negritos. Ein Besuch bei den Ureinwohnern Inner 

Malakkas. Dr. A. Petermann's Geogr. Mitteilungen, 1905, Heft xii. 
(Mainly an account of a visit to the Sakai of Ulu Kerbu. ) 

1895. Haddon, Dr. A. C., F.R.S. Evolution in Art, as illustrated by the Life- 

Histories of Designs. London : Walter Scott. 
1885. Hale, Abraham. Stone Axes, Perak. Nature, vol. xxxii. p. 626. 
1888. Hale, Abraham. On the Sakais. Journal of the Anthropological 

Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, vol. xv. p. 285-301. ["Hale."] 
1888. Hale, Abraham. Notes on Stone Implements from Perak. Journal of 

the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, vol. xvii. 

p. 66. 
1903. Hale, Abraham. MS. notes and comments embodied in this book. 
1874. Hamy, E. T. Sur les races sauvages de la peninsule Malaise. Bulletins 

de la Societe d' Anthropologic, Paris. Ser. 2, tome ix. p. 716-723. 

1896. Hamy, E. T. Les races malaiques et americaines. L' Anthropologic, 

vol. vii. p. 129. 
1883. Haughton, T. H. Landing of Raffles in Singapore. Journal of the 

Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 10, p. 285; No. 11, 

p. 282. 
1879. Hervey, D. F. a. Trip to Gunong Blumut. Journal of the Royal 

Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 3, p. 85. 

1882. Hervey, D. F. A. The Endau and its Tributaries. Journal of the 

Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 8, p. 93. 

1883. Hervey, D. F. A. The Mentra Traditions. Journal of the Royal 

Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 10, p. 189. 
1888. Hervey, D. F. A. Journal of the Folklore Society, vol. vi. (1888), 
p. 64. 

1903. Hervey, D.F.A., C.M.G. MS. material and vocabularies embodied in 

this book. 

1904. Hervey, D. F. A., C.M.G. The Legends of Bukit Dato' Batu Gedong, 

and of Tanjung Tuan (Cape Rachado) in Malacca. Man, 1904, 14. 
1879. Hornaday, Wm. T, Account of a Naturalist's Visit to the Territory 

BIBLIOGRAPHY xxxiii 

of Selangor. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, 

No. 3, p. 124. 
1848. HORSFIELD, Thomas, M.D. Report on the Island of Banka. Journal 

of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. ii. pp. 315-336. 

[Contains an account of the " Rayad " or " Orang Laut."] 
1887. HovELACQUE and Herve. Precis d' Anthropologic, p. 381. 
1906. HuBBACK, T. R. Elephant and Seladang Hunting in Malaya. Row- 
land Ward. 
1885. Innes, Emily. The Chersonese (with the Gilding off). 2 vols, 
1866. Jagor, F. Singapore- Malacca- Java Reiseskizzen. Berlin. 

Jansen, H. See Stevens, Vaughan-. 
1902. Johnston, Sir H. The Uganda Protectorate, vol. ii. p. 478 seqq. 
1863. JoRDANUS, Friar. The Wonders of the East (Trans. Ed. Col. Sir 

Henry Yule). London (Hakluyt Society). 
1880. Keane, a. H. On the Relations of the Indo-Chinese and Inter-Oceanic 

Races and Languages. Journal of the Anthropological Institute of 

Great Britain and Ireland, vol. ix. No. 3, p. 254 seqq. 
1896. Keane, A. H. Ethnology. Cambridge University Press. P. 257 seqq. 
1894. Kelsall, H. S. a Trip up the Pahang, Tembeling, and Tahan Rivers, 

and an Attempt to reach Gunong Tahan. Journal of the Royal Asiatic 

Society, Straits Branch, No. 25, p. 33 seqq. 
1894. Kelsall, H. S. A List of Jakun Names of Persons collected at S. 

Madek. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 26, 

p. 57. See also Lake. 
1896. Klemm. See Stevens, Vaughan-. 

1893. Klinkert, H. C. Malay-Dutch Dictionary. Leyden. 

1905. Knocker, F. W. A Sakai Counting-Stick or Tally. With plate. 
Journ. F. M. S. Museum, vol. I. ii. 60-61. 

1894. Kcenig, J. G. Journal of a Voyage from India to Siam and Malacca in 

1779. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. [No. 26], p. 59 seqq. 

1895. Kruyt, J. A. On the Straits Settlements and the Malay Peninsula. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 28, p. 19. 
1889. KuHN. Beitrage zur Sprachenkunde Hinter-Indiens. Ref. Bayer. Akad. 

1889, p. 198. 
1902. Laidlaw, F. F. See under Duckworth, W. L. H., and also Skeat, W. W. 
1894. Lake and Kelsall. Journey on the Sembrong River. Journal of the 

Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 26, p. i. 
1894. Lake and Kelsall. Johore. Journal of the Royal Geographical 

Society. London. Vol. iii. p. 281. 
1894. Lake and Kelsall. The Camphor Tree and Camphor Language of Johore. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 26, p. 35. 

1878. Lane-Fox. Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain 

and Ireland, vol. vii. p. 434 seqq. 
1895-6. Lapicque. a la recherche des Negritos. Tour du Monde, N. S. 
(1895), tome i. pp. 409, 421, 433, 445, 453, 589, 601, 613; N. S. 
(1896), tome ii. pp. 37, 49, 61, 73. 

1896. Lapicque. La race Negrito. Annal. de Geographic, tome v. p, 407. 

1879. Leech, H. W. C. About Kinta. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 

Straits Branch, No. 4, p. 21. 
1S92. Letessier, Rev. Charles, A.M. [" Letessier "]. The Sakais of 

Selangor. Selangor Journal, vol. i. p. loi. 
1642. Leupe, p. a. (Jansz). Die Orang Benoea's of Wilden op Malacca in 

1642. Tijdschrift voor Indische, Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, Bd. iv. 

(Ser. ii.), S. 128. 
1811. Leyden, John. On the Languages and Literature of the Indo-Chinese 

Nations. Asiatic Researches, vol. x. p. 158. 

xxxiv BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1 821. Leyden, John. Malay Annals. Translated from the Malay Language. 
London. 
Lias. See Brau de St. -Pol. 

1896. Ling Roth, H. The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo. 
London, 1896. See especially vol. ii. pp. 200-201. Tools used in 
preparing Ipoh-Poison in the Malay Peninsula. With diagrams. 

1887. Lister, Hon. Martin. The Negri Sembilan, their Origin and Con- 
stitution. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 

19, p. 35- 

1895. Lister, Hon. Martin. Atoran Sungei Ujong. Journal of the R. A. S., 

S.B. [No. 28], p. 53. 
1847. Logan, J. R. The Orang Binua of Johore. Journal of the Indian 

Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. i. p. 242. 
1847. Logan J. R. Physical Characteristics of the Mintira. Journal of 

the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. i. p. 294. 
1847. Logan, J. R. The Orang Sabimba of the Extremity of the Malay 

Peninsula. Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. i. 

p. 295. 
1847. Logan, J. R. Biduanda Kallang of the River Pulai in Johore. Journal 

of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. i. p. 299. 
1847. Logan, J. R. The Orang Sletar of the Rivers and Creeks of the Old 

Strait and Estuary of the Johore. Journal of the Indian Archipelago 

and Eastern Asia, vol. i. p. 302. 
1847. Logan, J. R. Table of Measurements illustrative of the Physical 

Peculiarities of the Mintira, Biduanda Kallang, and Sabimba. Journal 

of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. i. p. 305. 
1847. Logan, J. R. The Superstitions of the Mintira. Journal of the Indian 

Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. i. p. 307*. 
1847. Logan, J. R. Visit of a Party of Orang Mintira to Singapore. Journal 

of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. i. p. 332*. 

1847. Logan, J. R. The Ethnology of the Johore Archipelago. Journal of 

the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. i. p. 336*. 

1848. Logan, J. R. Customs common to Assam Hill Tribes and those of the 

Indian Archipelago, vol. ii. p. 229. See also pp. 515 «., 516, 517 n., 

529- 

1848. Logan, J. R. Journal of a Voyage to the Eastern Coast and Islands 

of Johore. Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. 
ii. p. 616. 

1849. Logan, J. R. Five Days in Naning, with a Walk to the Foot of 

Gunong Datu in Rambau. Journal of the Indian Archipelago and 
Eastern Asia, vol. iii. pp. 24, 203, 278, 402, 489. 

1849. Logan, J. R. The Languages of the Indian Archipelago. Journal ot 

the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. iii. p. 637. 

1850. Logan, J. R. The Ethnology of the Indian Archipelago. Journal of 

the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. iv. p. 252, etc. Cp. 

ib. p. 411 (Silong and Orang Laut). 
1850. Logan, J. R. The Ethnology of Eastern Asia. Journal of the Indian 

Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. iv. p. 441. 
1850. Logan, J. R. Ethnology of Eastern Asia and Indo-Pacific Islands. 

Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. iv. p. 552- 

1850. Logan, J. R. The Ethnology of South-Eastern Asia. Journal of the 

Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. iv. pp. 456-482. 

1851. Logan, J. R. Notices of Pinang. Journal of the Indian Archipelago 

and Eastern Asia, vol. v. pp. i, 93, 155, 189, 292, 354, 400. 
1 85 1. Logan, J. R. Notes at Pinang, Kidah, etc. Journal of the Indian 
Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. v. p. 53. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1 85 1. Logan, J. R. The Ethnology of the Indo-Pacific Islands. Journal of 
the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. v. p. 2 1 1 seqq. 

1853. Logan, J. R. Ethnology of the Indo-Pacific Islands. Journal of the 
Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. vii. p. 20. 

1880. Logan, J. R. Memorandum of the Various Tribes inhabiting Penang 
and Pro\ance Wellesley. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
Straits Branch, No. 7, p. 83. 

1850. Low, Col. James. The Karean Tribes or Aborigines of Martaban and 
Tavai, with Notices of the Aborigines in Keddah and Perak. Journal 
of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. iv. p. 413. 

1850. Low, Col. James. The Semang and Sakai Tribes of the Malay 

Peninsula, Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. 
iv. p. 424 seqq. 

1 85 1. Low, Col. James. Ancient Connection between Kedah and Siam, vol. 

V. p. 498. 
1 90 1. Luering, Dr. Ulu Kampar Sakai. Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, Straits Branch, No. 35. 

1900. M'Carthy, James. Surveying and Exploring in Siam. London. Pp. 

13-14- 

1901. M'Crindle, Dr. J. W. Ancient India as described in Classical Litera- 

ture. London. P. 77. 

1902. Machado, a. D. a Vocabulary of the Jakuns of Batu Pahat, Johore, 

together with some Remarks on their Customs and Peculiarities. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, S. B., No. 38, p. 29. 
1876. M'Mahon, Lieut. -Col. A. R. The Karens of the Golden Chersonese. 

London. 
1878. M'Nair, Major F. Perak and the Malays, or Sarong and Kris. London. 
1839. Malcolm, H. Travels in South-Eastern Asia. 2 vols, London. 
1883. Man, E, H. On the Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Andaman Islands. 

London. [" Man's Andam."]. 

1882. Marche, M, Alfr. Bull. Soc. Normand. de Geogr. Rouen, iv. 

273-87- 

1883. Marche, M. Alfr. Report in Arch. Miss. Sci. et Litt. Paris, 1883. 

1811. Marsden, William. The History of Sumatra. Ed. 17S3, 1784,1811. 

1812. Marsden, William. Grammar of the Malayan Language, with an 

Introduction and Praxis. London. 

1899, Martin, Professor Rudolf. Die Ureinwohner der Malayischen 

Halbinsel. Correspondenz-Blatt der Deutschen Anthropologischen 
Gesellschaft. S. 125. 

1900. Martin, Professor Rudolf. Ueber eine Reise durch die Malayische 

Halbinsel. Mitteilungen der Naturwissenschaftlichen Gesellschaft in 

Winterthur. Heft ii. S. 21. 
1905. Martin, Professor Rudolf ["Martin"]. Die Inlandstiimme der 

Malayischen Halbinsel. Gustav Fischer. Jena. 
1 89 1. Mason, Otis T. Origins of Invention : a Study of Industry among 

Primitive People. 
1897. Maxwell, Charlton N. Report to Government relating to the Sakai 

Tribes in Selangor, Ulu Selangor District. Reprinted in Sel. Journ. 

vol. v. p. 398. 
1878. Ma.xwell, W. E. (Sir William). Antiquities of Province Wellesley. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. I, p. 114. 

1878. Maxwell, W, E. (Sir William). The Semang and Sakei Tribes of 

the Districts of Kedah and Perak bordering on Province Wellesley. 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. i, p. iii. 

1879. Maxwell, W. E. (Sir William). The Aboriginal Tribes of Perak. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 4, p. 46. 

xxxvi BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1881. Maxwell, W. E. (Sir William). Aryan Mythology in Malay Tradi- 
tion. J.R.A.S., N.S. 1 88 1, vol. xiii. 

1899. Meyer, A.B., M.D. Distribution of the Negritos in the Philippine 
Islands and elsewhere. Dresden. 

1895. Meyners, d'Estrey, Dr. Revue de Geographie. Dix-neuvieme Ann^e, 
Deuxieme livraison, pp. 110-115. 

1875. Miklucho-Maclay (Baron) N. von. Journal of Eastern Asia, vol. i. 
(the only number issued), p. 94, with plate. 

1875. Miklucho-Maclay (Baron) N. von. Ethnologische Excursion in Johore. 

Natuurkundig Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indie, Deel xxxv. p. 250. 

1876. Miklucho-Maclay (Baron) N. von. Ethnologische Excursionen in der 

Malayischen Halbinsel (Nov. 1874 to Oct. 1875). Natuurkundig 

Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indie, Deel xxxvi. p. I seqq. Plates 

I.-III.i 
1876. Miklucho-Maclay (Baron) N. von. Ueber die Orang-Semang und 

Orang-Sakai. Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropo- 

logie. S. 226. 
1876. Miklucho-Maclay (Baron) N. von. Sprachrudimente der Orang-Utan 

von Johor. Tijdschrift voor Ind. Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, Deal 

xxiii. pp. 309-312. 
1876. Miklucho-Maclay (Baron) N. von. Einiges iiber die Dialecte der 

Melanesischen Volkerschaften in der Malaiischen Halbinsel. Tijdschrift 

voor Ind. Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, Deel xxiii. p. 309. 
1878. Miklucho-Maclay (Baron) N. von. Ethnological Excursions in the 

Malay Peninsula. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, 

No. 2, p. 205. 
1878. Miklucho-Maclay (Baron) N. von. Dialects of the Melanesian Tribes 

in the Malay Peninsula. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits 

Branch, No. i, p. 38. 

1883. Miklucho-Maclay (Baron) N. von. Abstract of Four Lectures before 

the Imp. Russ. Geog. Obtch. in Oct. 1882. See also Ausland, 1883, 

No. 33, p. 64. 
1882. MoNTANO ["Montano"]. Quelques jours chez les indigenes de la 

province de Malacca. Revnae d'Ethnographie, tome i. p. 41. 
1837. Moor, H. J. ["Moor"]. Notices of the Indian Archipelago and 

Adjacent Countries. Singapore. 

1884. Morgan, J. de. Article in Bulletin de la Societe Normande de 

Geographie, tome vi. pp. 423 seqq. 

1885. /"Morgan, J. de [L'Homme, or L'H.]. L'age de la pierre polie dans la 

presqu'ile Malaise. L'Homme, tome ii. p. 494. 

1885. Morgan, J. de [L'Homme, or L'H.]. Negritos de la presqu'ile Malaise. 

L'Homme, tome ii. pp. 545, 577, 609, 641, 713. 

1886. Morgan, J. de [L'Homme, or L'H.]. Quelques observations au sujet des 

publications sur les Negritos de la presqu'ile Malaise. L'Homme, 
- tome iii. p. 40. 
1885. ^Morgan, J. de. Mceurs, coutumes, et languages des Negritos de 
I'interieur de la presqu'ile Malaise. Bulletin de la Societe Normande 
de Geographie, tome vii. p. 4 1 1 . 
Morgan, J. de [" De Morgan "]. Voyage d'exploration dans la presqu'ile 
Malaise. Bulletin de la Societe Normande de Geographie, tome viii. 
pp. 141, 211, 281 ("Journal de Voyage"). 
1854. Netscher, E. Beschrijving van een Gedeelte der Residentie Riouw. 

1 Three plates of Sakai and Semang, best in his collection. The distinction 
stated to have been drawn with the between Sakai and Semang comes out 
help of a camera hicida, and to be the strongly, though Maclay did not see it. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY xxxvii 

Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde. Bd. ii. p. 

1 08 seqq. 
1839. Newbold, T. J. [" Newbold "]. Political and Statistical Account of the 

British Settlements in the Straits of Malacca. 2 vols. London. 

Vol. ii. chap, xv., " Remarks on Aborigines,'' pp. 369-434. With 

Vocabularies, pp. 422-431, 434. 
1891. Pleyte, C. M. [" Pleyte"]. Sumpitan and Bow in Indonesia. Internat. 

Archiv f. Ethnologic. Bd. iv. s. 265. Trans. With Illustrations. 
Preuss, K. T. H. See Stevens, Vaughan-. 
1883. QuATREFAGES, DE. The Pigmies. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 

Straits Branch, No. 11, p. 83; No. 13, p. i. Cf. Les Pygmees. 

Paris, 1887. ["De Quatrefages."] 

1 817. Raffles, Sir Thomas Stamford. The History of Java. London. 

Second edition. 1830. 

1818. Raffles, Sir Thomas Stamford. On the Malayu Nation. Asiatic 

Researches, vol. xii. p. 102. 

1830. Raffles, Sir Thomas Stamford. Memoir of the Life and Public Services 
of Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles. London. Second Edition. 1835. 

1879. Raffles, Sir Thomas Stamford. The Maritime Code of the Malays. 
Malay Weekly Register, reprinted in Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, Straits Branch, No. 3, p. 62 ; No. 4, p. I. 

1898. Rathborne, a. B. Camping and Tramping in Malaya. London. P. 
186 seqq. 

1883. Reclus, E. Nouvelle Geographie Universelle, vol. viii. L'Inde et 
ITndo-Chine. Paris. 

1 89 1. Ridley, Henry N. Discovery of a Stone Implement in Singapore. 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 23, p. 141. 

1895. Ridley, Henry N. Mammals of the Malay Peninsula. Nat. Science, 
vol. vi. No. 37 (March), p. 163. 

1898. Ridley, Henry N. The Poisonous Plants of the Malay Peninsula. Agri- 
cultural Bulletin of the Botanic Gardens Department, Straits Settle- 
ments, No. 8 (December), p. 199 seqq. [Contains much valuable 
information about " Ipoh " and other dart-poisons of the Peninsula, 
with list of authorities.] 

1903. Ridley, Henry N. MS. Notes and comments embodied in this 

book. See also Skeat, 1900. 

1904. Ridley, Henry N. The Orang Laut of Singapore. Journal of the 

Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch [No. 41], pp. 129, 130. 

1897. Roe, E. J. Report to Government relating to Sakai Tribes in Selangor, 

Kuala Lumpur District. Reprinted in Selangor Journal, vol. v. 
1893. Ronkel, p. S. von. Ein Malayischer Bericht iiber die Djakun der 
Halbinsel Malakka. Globus, Bd. Ixiv. No. 4, S. 53. 

1898. Rowland, W. R. ["Rowland"]. Bemerkungen liber einen kleinen 

Stamm von Orang Bukit, zur Zeit angesiedelt und beobachtet auf 
Perhentian Tinggi Estate, Negri Sembilan, Mai - Sep. 1896. Mit- 
teilungen d. k. k. Geographischen Gesellschaft, in Wien. Bd. xli. 
Heft lo-ii, S. 706-713. 

1901. Schmidt, P. W. ["Schmidt"]. Die Sprachen der Sakai und Semang 

auf Malaka und ihr Verhiiltnis zu den Mon-Khmer-Sprachen. Bijdragen 
tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Ned. -Indie, 6 volgr., Deel 
viii. pp. 399-5S3 of vol. lii. (1901). 
1897. Scott, W. D. Report relating to Sakai Tribes in Selangor, Kuala 
Selangor District. Reprinted in Sel. Journ. vol. v. p. 396. 

1902. Seligmann, C. G. Note on the Preparation and Use of the Kenyah 

Dart Poison "Ipoh." Journal of the Anthropological Institute of 
Great Britain and Ireland, vol. xxxii. p. 239. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1S69. Semper, Carl. Die Philippinen u. ihre Bewohner. 

1896. Skeat, W. W. Vocabulary of the Besisi Dialect. Journal of the Royal 

Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 29, p. 13. 

1897. Skeat, W. W. Report to Government relating to Sakai Tribes in 

Selangor, Kuala Langat District. Reprinted in Sel. Journ. vol. v. 

pp. 325 seqq. 
1900. Skeat, W. W. Malay Magic, an Introduction to the Folklore and 

Popular Religion of the Malay Peninsula. London : Macmillan. 
1900. Skeat, W. W. First Report on Results of the Cambridge Exploring 

Expedition to the Malay Provinces of Lower Siam. Report to the 

British Association, Bradford, 1900. British Association, Section D 

(Anthropology'). See also Duckworth and Smyth. 

1900. Skeat, W. W. and Ridley, H. N. The Orang Laut of Singapore. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 33, p. 247. 

1 90 1. Skeat, W. W. Fables and Folktales from a Far Eastern Forest. 

Cambridge University Press. 

1 90 1. Skeat, W. W. Second Report on the Results of the Cambridge Ex- 

ploring Expedition to the Malay Provinces of Lower Siam. Anthro- 
pological Section, British Association, Glasgow. 

1902. Skeat, W. W. The Wild Tribes of the Malay Peninsula. Journal of 

the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, vol. xxxii, 

p. 124. 
1902. Skeat, W. W. Blowpipe from Kuantan, Malay Peninsula. Man, No. 

108 (Oct.), p. 145. 
1902. Skeat, W. W. Malay Spiritualism. Journal of the Folklore Society, 

vol. xiii. No. 2, p. 134 seqq. 

1898. Smyth, H. Warington. Five Years in Siam. London. Vol. ii. 

pp. 76, 77. 

1902. Smyth, H. Warington. Boats and Boat-building in the Malay Penin- 
sula, with Notes by W. W. Skeat. Journal of the Society of Arts. 
[Deals with O. Laut boats.] 

1849. Spenser, St. John. The Population of the Indian Archipelago. Journal 
of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. iii. p. 379. 

1 89 1. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Die Reisen des Hrn. Vaughan-Stevens 
in Malacca. Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropo- 
logic, S. 829. Ed. Griinwedel. \V. B. G. A.^ 

1 89 1. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Die Wiklen Eingeborenen von Malacca. 

Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, S. 837. 
Ed. Virchow. \V. B. G. A.-] 

1892. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Schadel und Haar von Orang Panggang 

in Malacca. Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropo- 
logie, S. 439. Ed. Virchow. [F. B. G. ^.] 

1892. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Orang Panggang und Orang Benua. 
Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, S. 465. 
Ed. Griinwedel. [V. B. G. A.] 

1892-4. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Materialen zur Kenntniss der Wilden 
Stamme auf der Halbinsel Malaka. Veroffentlichungen aus dem K. 
Museum fiir Volkerkunde, Berlin. Bd. ii. Heft 3-4, S. 81 ["Vaughan- 
Stevens, ii."]; Bd. iii. Heft 3-4, S. 95 ["Vaughan-Stevens, iii."]. 
Ed. Griinwedel. 

1892. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Orang Panggang und Orang Benua. 

Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologic. Bd. xxiv. S. 465-468. Mitteilungen von 
A. Griinwedel. [Z.f. E. xxiv.] 

1893. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Die Zaubermuster der Orang-Semang. 

Bearbeitet von A. Griinwedel. Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologic, Bd. xxv. 
S. 71. \_Z.f. E. xxv.] 

BIBLIOGRAPHY xxxix 

1894. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Die Zaubermuster der Orang-hutan. 

Bearbeitet von A. Grtinwedel. Zeitschrift flir Ethnologic. Bd. xxvi. 

S. 141. \Z. f. E. xxvi.] 
1894. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Haar und Schadel von Blandass Sinnoi 

(Malacca). Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft ftir Anthropologie, 

S. 354. VV.B. G.A.I 
1896. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Schadel und Extremitaten-Knochen von 

Jacoons, Malacca. Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft fur 

Anthropologie, S. 141. \V. B. G. A.'] 
1896. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Mitteilungen aus dem Frauen-leben der 

Orang Belendas, der Orang Djakun und der Orang Laut. Zeitschrift 

fiir Ethnologie, Bd. xxviii. S. 163-202. Ed. Bartels. \.Z.f. E. 

xxviii. ] 
1896. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Ausdruck der Gemiithsbewegungen der 

Orang-hutan von Malacca. Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft 

fur Anthropologie, S. 270-272. Ed. Bartels. \V. B. G. A."] 
1896. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Geschichte der Djakun (Benar-Benar). 

Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft flir Anthropologie, S. 301- 

309. Ed. Klemm. [ F. B. G. A.\ 
1896. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Abreise von Malacca. Brief an R. 

Virchow. Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft fur Anthropologie, 

S. 463. iV. B. G. A.] 
1896. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Notizen aus den Reisen des Hrolf 

Vaughan-Stevens in Malaka. Von A. Grtinwedel. Ethnologisches 

Notizblatt, Jahrgang I. Heft 3, S. i segg. [Et/in. Notizbl.^ 

1896. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Der Cholera-zauber bei den Temia auf 

der Halbinsel Malaka (Jansen, H.). Globus, Bd. Ixix. S. I17-119; 
and 137-142. 

1897. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Anthropologische Bemerkungen liber die 

Eingeborenen von Malacca. Zeitschrift flir Ethnologie. Bd. xxix. S. 

173-206. Ed. Bartels. \_Z.f. E. xxix.] 
1899. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Die Zauber-Muster der Orang Semang in 

Malaka. Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie. Bd. xxxi. S. 137. Ed. Preuss. 

\_Z.f. E. xxxi.] 
1899. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Die Zauberbilderschriften der Negrito in 

Malaka. Globus, Bd. Ixxv. S. 345 (Nr. 22) ; and S. 364 (Nr. 23). 

Von Dr. K. Th. Preuss. [Globus, Ixxv.] 
1902. Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-. Namengebung und Heirat bei den Orang 

Temia auf der Halbinsel Malaka. Globus, Bd. Ixxxii. (No. 16), S. 

253. Ed. Stonner. [Globus, Ixxxii.] 
Stonner, H. See Stevens, H. Vaughan-. 
1897. Stonor, O. F. Report to Government relating to Sakai Tribes in 

Selangor, Ulu Langat District. Reprinted in Sel. Journ. vol. v. p. 

395- 

1904. Swan, R. M. W. Note on Stone Implements from Pahang. Man, 
No. 34 (April). 

1880. Swettenham, (Sir) Frank A. From Perak to Slim, and down the 
Slim and Bernam Rivers. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits 
Branch, No. 5, p. 51. 

1880. Swettenham, (Sir) Frank A. Comparative Vocabulary of the Dialects 
of some of the Wild Tribes inhabiting the Malayan Peninsula. Journal 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, Straits Branch, No. 5, p. 125. Cp. 
No. 6, p. 293. 

1887. Swettenham, (Sir) Frank A. ["Swettenham"]. On the Native Races 
of the Straits Settlements and Malay States. Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, vol. xvi. pp. 221-229. 

xl BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1894. SwETTENHAM, (Sir) FRANK A. Note on the Jacoons. Journal of the 

Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, vol. xxiii. 

p. 89. 
1899. Temple, Sir Richard, Bart. Journal of the Anthropological Institute 

of Great Britain and Ireland, vol. xxix. p. loi. 
1 90 1. Temple, Sir Richard, Bart. Census Report on Andaman Islands. 
Thomsen, Rev. C., referred to by Begbie in his Introduction (p. ix). 
1847. Thomson, J. T. T. Remarks on the Sletar and Sabimba Tribes. 

Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, vol. i. p. 341*. 
1 85 1. Thomson, J. T. T. Description of the Eastern Coast of Johore and 

Pahang and Adjacent Islands. Journal of the Indian Archipelago and 

Eastern Asia, vol. v. pp. 85, 133. 
1873. Thorel. Voyage d'Exploration en Indo-Chine. Paris. Tome ii. 

p. 289 seqq. 
1844. TOMLiN, Jacob. Miss. Journals and Letters written during Eleven Years 

Residence and Travels among the Chinese, Siamese, Javanese, Khassias, 

and other Eastern Nations, p. 85. 
1 90 1. Turner, Sir W. Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 

vol. xl. part i. No. 6. 
ViRCHOw, Professor Rudolf. See Stevens, Hrolf Vaughan-, and 

Miklucho-Maclay. 
1865. Waitz, Th. ["Waitz"]. Anthropologic der Naturvolker. Theil v. 

Heft 1-2, pp. 84 seqq and 175 seqq. 
1869. Wallace, Dr. Alfred Russel [" Wallace"]. The Malay Archipelago, 

The Land of the Orang-utan and the Bird of Paradise. London. 2 

vols. See vol. ii. pp. 441-451. 
Warington Smyth. See Smyth. 
1903. Wilkinson, R. J. Malay-English Dictionary. In three parts. Kelly 

and Walsh, Singapore, Hong-Kong, Shanghai, and Yokohama. 
1890. Wray, Leonard, Junior. Journal of a Collecting Expedition to the 

Mountains of Batang Padang, Perak. Journal of the Royal Asiatic 

Society, Straits Branch, No. 21, p. 123. 

1892. Wray, Leonard, Junior. Ipoh Poison of the Malay Peninsula. Journal 

of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, vol. xxi. 
p. 476. Reprinted from the Kew Bulletin of 1891. 
1894. Wray, Leonard, Junior. Some Observations on the Height and Eye- 
sight of the Wild Tribes of Perak. Perak Museum Notes, No. iii. 

P- 33- 
1894. Wray, Leonard, Junior. The Long-jointed Bamboo, called " Buloh 

Ber-sumpitan," used by the Semang for making Blowpipes. Perak 

Museum Notes, No. iii. p. 54. 
1897. Wray, Leonard, Junior. The Cave-dwellers of Perak. Journal of 

the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, vol. xxvi. 

No. I, p. 36. Repr. Perak Mus. Notes, No. ii. pt. i. See also Perak 

Mus. Notes, vol. i. No. i. pp. 13-15. Further Notes on the Cave- 
dwellers of Perak ; and vol. iii. passim. 
1903. Wray, Leonard, Junior. MS. notes and comments embodied in this 

book. 
1880. Yule, Col. Sir Henry. Notes on and Analogies of Manners between the 

Indo - Chinese Races and the Races of the Indian Archipelago. 

Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 

vol. ix. No. 3, p. 290 seqq. 
1903. Yule, Col. Sir Henry, and Burnell, A. C. Hobson-Jobson. A 

Glossary of Anglo-Indian Colloquial Words and Phrases. New 

Edition, edited by William Crooke, B.A. 

1893. ZuxiGA, Martinez de. Estadimo de las Islas Filipinas. Madrid. 

INTRODUCTION (Environment) 

One of the most important of the geographical aspects of the Malay 
Peninsula (which we may take as running from Tavoy to Singapore) 
is its shape, which is that of a long-necked bottle or an Indian club, 
narrow towards the upper extremity, bulging at the centre, and taper- 
ing again at the lower extremity. The neck of the bottle or club at 
its narrowest point in the north (the Isthmus of Kraw) measures but 
thirty-five miles from sea to sea ; at its broadest (the belly of the 
bottle), it is still under two hundred miles across ; hence, in spite 
of its great length of roughly about a thousand miles from north to 
south, there is no spot, even in the far interior of the Peninsula, 
which is as much as a hundred miles from the sea. The result is 
that the Malay Peninsula, though distinctly forming a part of the 
Asiatic mainland, takes on the characteristics of an island rather than 
those of the continent to which it incidentally coheres, and in most 
respects should be properly regarded as forming an integral part of 
the Malay Archipelago. Regarded from another aspect, the Malay 
Peninsula is at once a causeway of colossal proportions, and a break- 
water. In the former capacity it connects the land forms of the fauna 
and the flora (and even the geological strata) of the Asiatic main- 
land with forms occurring in the islands of the Malayan Archipelago, 
with several of which, including Rio and Lingga, Banka, Billiton, 
and Sumatra, it is known to have been once geologically connected. 
In the latter, it deflects what might be the normal course of the 
trade of the Far East, some hundreds of miles to the south-eastward, 
towards the equator and the cluster of great tropical islands of 
which the Malay Archipelago consists. The actual course of trade 
therefore follows the coast-line of the Malay Peninsula through the 
Straits by way of Penang, Malacca, and Singapore, the first and last 
of which certainly appear to be as convenient spots for vessels pro- 
ceeding by this route as any that could have been chosen. At the 
same time the descriptions of the ancient glories of Malacca, even 
if we allow for considerable exaggeration on the part of the chroniclers, 
leave no doubt as to the reality of its former importance, and but 
for the silting up of its harbour there appears but little reason why 
the former Queen of those seas should now sit brooding over her 
ancient fame. But apart from these three ports, which, after all, 
VOL. I B 

INTRODUCTION 

are to a great extent more of the nature of ports of call than termini, 
and apart, too, from the fast-growing commercial importance of the 
Federated Malay States, by far the greater portion of the Peninsula 
is still much cut off from the world, and knows as little of it as, to 
quote the homely Malay simile, the " frog under a coconut-shell." 
Hence, in spite of the recent great developments both of planting 
and mining, perhaps two-thirds of the entire country is still " un- 
opened," and remains covered with the tropical growth of centuries, 
forced to its utmost development by the hot and humid climate result- 
ing from its insular character and equatorial position. 

With regard to the character of the country itself, a glance at 
the map will show that the backbone of the Peninsula consists of a 
range, or rather system of ranges, the source of the innumerable 
small rivers and streams which drain and irrigate the country from 
end to end, and the chief of which give their names to the several 
States of Kedah, Perak, and Selangor on the west coast, to Patani, 
Kelantan, and Trengganu on the east, and to Johor at the southern- 
most extremity. The hills, which are steep and savage, being clad 
with jungle to the very sky-line, terminate in not a few places in rugged 
and precipitous peaks, several of the highest of which are upwards 
of 7000 to 8000 feet high. Their formation is chiefly of a granitic 
character, with quartz and quartzose veins, which on decomposition 
yield the extensive stanniferous, and to a minor extent auriferous 
deposits that have been worked with such conspicuous success in 
the alluvial plains. It is chiefly on the foothills, where these are 
unoccupied, that the wild aborigines make their home. They are, 
however, also found in small scattered communities on the hills 
of the main ranges, up to a height of even 3000 feet and more. 
Though caves are fairly common, especially in isolated limestone 
masses in the northern part of the Peninsula, the aborigines do not 
as a rule frequent these, preferring the rock-shelters, which are not 
infrequently the haunt of the Semang. The alluvial land, which 
lies at the foot of the hills and in stretches along the coast, has 
every appearance of having been formerly covered by the sea, and 
indeed in this respect the observations of science are at one with 
aboriginal tradition, which asserts that the sea in former times 
washed right up to the base of the mountains. The alteration of 
the coast-line itself is continuous and extraordinarily rapid. On the 
eastern coast, which is subject to an annual bombardment from the 
rollers of the China Sea, hurled against it by the full sledge-hammer 
force of the north-easterly monsoon, the fierce tides that race up 
and down the coast are continually forming long, narrow bars of 
sand parallel to the coast, each end of which keeps growing till 
it reaches a point at which the coast-line curves to meet it, when a 
narrow mouth perhaps is all that is left. The result is an extra- 
ordinary phenomenon like the Inland Sea of Singora, which has 

ENVIRONMENT 

been formed exactly in the manner described, and measures about 
sixty miles in length by about twenty in the broadest part ; the upper 
part of it is fresh water and the lower part salt, and in most parts 
it is so shallow as to be difficult of navigation, except for the native 
canoes or boats specially constructed. The Cape of Patani is 
another example of one of these long sandy peninsulas. It measures 
about four miles in length. 

The western coast is protected from the full force of the south- 
western monsoon by the Island of Sumatra, which forms a natural 
breakwater, and gives to the Straits of Malacca the character of a 
vast river or lake. With every tide the Straits fill from the open 
sea, the tides rising to a height of between twenty and thirty feet. 
Here and there, at intervals along the western coast, e.g. for many 
miles along the coast of the Malacca District, as well as at the northern 
and southern extremities of the coast -line of Selangor, extend 
magnificent expanses of sandy beach, fringed here and there by 
coconut palms, but more generally by what looks at first sight 
something like a row of larches, in reality the Casuarina, or " she- 
oak " tree of Australia. Here, more especially on the shore of 
Kuala Langat, their favourite haunt, wander from time to time rare 
scattered parties of the Sea-Jakun, the women fishing for the small 
fry in the hot and shallow waters, the men spearing razorshells, 
or digging out mussels with a quick twist of their jungle-knife from 
among the roots of the " api-api " trees, or collecting cockles and 
other bivalves whose tracks and haunts revealed themselves to the 
initiated eye alone in the bright and smoking sands. 

In spite of these and other most welcome breaks in the 
monotony of the mangrove, however, there is less open coast on 
this side of the Peninsula than there is on the eastern, and almost 
anywhere the serried ranks of mangrove trees can be seen, working 
their way out from the river-mouths into the sea, their network of 
prong- like roots checking the dispersion of the soil continually 
eroded and carried down by the wash of the tidal rivers, and build- 
ing it up with continual accretions and by sensible gradations into 
higher and firmer banks. One of the chief causes of this alteration 
of the coast-line, which although it is gaining on the sea in places, 
is in others losing ground with equal rapidity, is undoubtedly the 
velocity of the tides and the continual alteration in the set of the 
marine currents. For the alteration of the geographical character 
of the interior, however, the chief factor is undoubtedly the climate, 
which has a temperature varying from about 68" to a little above 
90° in the shade in the plains, and the torrential rainfall (varying from 
about 90 inches to 130 inches per annum) — a combination which 
naturally tends to turn the greater part of the country into a 
forcing-house calculated to promote the most rapid development 
conceivable of every form of vegetation. 

INTRODUCTION 

What is this vegetation like, and what is its effect upon the 
various forms of Hfe that depend upon it ? This is a question which 
has been answered in many different ways, in accordance with the 
temperament of the questioner. To one the very name of the 
tropical jungle implies something horrible, haunting, monstrous, the 
oppressive darkness of a perpetual smothering gloom, teeming with 
pestiferous disease and death. To another it implies everything 
luxuriant, gorgeous, glowingly beautiful, a feast of form and colour ; 
to a third it brings the absorbing interest which attends every fresh 
self-revelation of nature, every new half-glimpse into the region of her 
awful mysteries. At all events the jungle is not, when taken as a 
whole, a sort of improved botanical or zoological garden. Its trees 
(even the largest) are not invariably curtained about and festooned 
with a fantastically twisted network of serpentine creepers and 
parasites, nor is it even invariably difficult to penetrate. Brilliant 
plumaged birds and butterflies of all the hues of the rainbow do 
not flit in myriads from tree to tree. No carpet of the choicest 
and gayest hot-house flowers is spread under foot. On the other 
hand, the country is not a mere collection of malarial swamps, 
exhaling mephitic and poisonous vapours ; there is not at least one 
tiger behind every tree, at least one snake in every clump of grass. 
Splendours such as we read of are certainly not wanting, and their 
beauty is not exaggerated, but their occurrence is occasional, sporadic, 
isolated, and irregular, and hence (but for the rare exception of a 
chance encounter with a wild beast) they come upon the traveller 
with the sense of a delightful surprise and relief which may occur 
at any moment, and which is never long absent. But the colour 
scheme of it is on the whole sombre, and even monotonous, with 
rare splashes of bright colour, usually from some gaily-marked tree- 
stem, or from light shining through an opening in the forest. It is 
on the topmost branches that the flowers, buds, fruits are generally 
displayed, and therefore the butterflies and the birds congregate ; it 
is but rarely that these can be seen from below, though in the under- 
wood and brushwood the case is often different. The most densely 
matted, and as a rule the gayest, part of the jungle is always at the 
edge of a clearing or along the banks of the rivers. In such places 
and in the underwood it is often all but impenetrable, and if a mile 
a day be taken for the cutting of a jungle-trace, it may be put down 
as very good progress. But throughout by far the greater part of the 
Peninsula no great trouble will be experienced in penetrating the 
undergrowth, if the approved method be adopted of following the 
Malay forest-paths, which are often those of wild beasts, and of the 
races of which we write, who are scarcely less wild than they. 

The tropical vegetation of the Peninsula is of many kinds, and 
each region (whatever its area) has its own often highly specialised 
character. Inland the deep primeval or virgin forest (" rimba "), the 

ENVIRONMENT 5 

underwood or "secondary growth" ("belukar") generally the result of 
abandoned plantations of rice or other products, the bamboo jungle, 
the " niahang "-tree swamp, the tamarisks and the subtropical vegeta- 
tion of the highest mountain peaks, the " dusun " or half-wild fruit- 
orchard of the aborigines (with its towering durian trees, covered 
with their great green globes of prickly fruit, that look for all the 
world like Brobdingnagian chestnuts, and the less stately, but not less 
welcome fruit-trees that cluster together about the durian's foot, the 
mangostin, the " rambutan " with the blood-red hairy fruit-clusters 
that give it its name, the smooth white creamy "langsat," the "rambai," 
" duku," mango, jack, and many others), the low scrub or brushwood 
("semak"), the mangrove swamp and the sandy stretches along the 
sea-coast that are fringed by the Casuarina, one and all have their 
own distinctive herbs and plants and to some extent their distinctive 
fauna. The same remark may in fact be made of the relatively 
small area where the jungle has been completely outrooted and 
killed, such as that in the neighbourhood of deserted tin-mines, to 
which the heaped-up overburden gives the air of a burial-place of 
giants, the Malacca hills, where tapioca once flourished, now clad 
with tall jungle-grass, the wide rice-plains of Kedah and Perak and 
Province Wellesley, and the pasture- lands kept for the plough- 
buffaloes in and near the villages of the rice-cultivators themselves. 

One and all of these regions reveal emphatically the working 
of the law of development in correspondence with environment. In 
the deep forest, for instance, where the vast tree-trunks, impelled by 
the universal struggle for light and life, rise to about four times the 
height of our ordinary English oaks, the eye is at once attracted by 
the fact that so many stems rise bare and branchless for a hundred 
feet (and upwards) from the soil. These are most frequently, 
perhaps, the hardwood timber-trees that depend upon the depth of 
their roots for safe anchorage against the tropical tempests. Others, 
whose roots strike less deeply, or which for some special reason 
require additional support, are buttressed about with huge "struts" 
(the bane of the woodcutter), that taper and converge upwards 
continuously till they merge in the mighty bole at a height of some 
twelve yards or more from the tree-foot. In either case the branches, 
flowers, and fruit are mostly developed as near the crown of the tree 
as may be, since it is there, and there only, that they can obtain the 
necessary amount of air and light and warmth, and even of rain, that 
they require for their self-nourishment. The rush of the trees 
towards the light, in fact, is a struggle for life, a contest a otiirance, 
in which the defeated have scant chance of surviving, for beneath 
the thick branch-canopy of the big jungle there is dim twilight even at 
broad noontide. This life-and-death struggle, moreover, produces 
yet greater modifications in the structure of plants other than trees ; 
it is to this that we may ascribe the interminable array of parasites. 

INTRODUCTION 

orchids, ferns, fungi, mosses, lichens, and of plants that climb (guttas, 
rattans, peppers, ficuses, to mention a few that are obvious), some 
by utilising their stems (serpent-fashion) for twining round their 
sturdier neighbours, others by use of their leaf-stalks, by modification 
of the leaves themselves, by adventitious roots, tendrils, " suction- 
pads," suckers, curved hooks, and all other imaginable grappling 
devices and developments of which the botanical world is capable. 

Next to this struggle for light, heat, and moisture, which is terrible 
in its almost passionate intensity, comes the need for self-protection, 
and to some extent, perhaps, as a corollary of this, the need for the 
efficient propagation of the species. To the first of these two causes 
we owe the huge number of prickly, thorny plants, shrubs, and trees 
that seem in places to turn the forest into a vast natural vegetable 
armoury (the rattans, a great number of palms, many creepers, and 
trees with prickly fruits, such as the durian, belong to these) ; the 
plants with bitter or poisonous sap, the glass-like spicules of the 
leaf- cases of the bamboo, and the stings of the giant tree-nettle, 
the terror of man and beast, under the branches of one of which I 
have myself ridden on elephant-back. To the second cause we owe 
such curiosities in the history of dispersion as the " fillcup "-fruit, 
whose " sail " gives it a rotatory motion that enables it to bore into 
the ground at the tree's foot, and the great pincushion-like (albeit 
barbed) heads of the spinifex grass on the east coast of the Peninsula, 
which goes bowling over the sand at the rate of an express train, 
till it catches against a fallen branch or log or similar obstruction, 
where it is most likely to find the depressions that collect the 
moisture. 

In the animal kingdom of the Peninsula this specialising ten- 
dency is not less distinctly marked. For instance, the colour of the 
black leopard (or panther, as it is variously called), which is an 
exclusively nocturnal animal, furnishes it with a most effective 
means of concealment, and when we observe how cunningly its 
sable hue (which might otherwise become conspicuous, as a mass, 
from its very uniformity) is in one species at least mottled and 
diversified by greyish rosettes, which produce, with an almost 
startling fidelity to nature, the effect of moonhght shining through 
leaves, it becomes impossible to withhold our admiration of the 
design. The striped colouring of the tiger and civet, the mottled 
skin of the yellow, spotted panther and tiger-cat, are undoubtedly due 
to the same instinctive selection for stalking, or what may be called 
"strategic" purposes. So too in the colour of the crocodile, which has 
no enemies to fear in its own domain, we have an admirable example 
of " strategic " colouring, for it is the exact counterpart of the tidal 
mudbanks, and especially of the slime-covered logs that lie scattered 
about them, the "deception" being so complete that even the mouse- 
deer, monkeys, and other small game which go down to the water 

ENVIRONMENT 

either to drink, or to feed on shell-fish, at ebb-tide in the heat of 
the day, are completely deceived, and not infrequently pay the 
penalty for their want of care in adventuring too near their lurking 
enemy, by being swept into the water after the manner described 
in the Besisi jungle songs, by one swoop of the crocodile's lashing 
tail. 

On the other hand, the grey-blue "slaty" colour of the 
elephant, buffalo, rhinoceros, adult tapir, and wild boar, which (with 
the possible exception of the elephant, though it too may at least be 
described as being to a large extent a water-animal) very closely 
matches the colour of the forest-mud in which they disport them- 
selves during the heat of the tropical noonday, is clearly intended to 
afford them whatever protection may be possible when they are 
immersed in their wallow, and for the time being, therefore, entirely 
defenceless, and is therefore protective. Similarly the piebald colour- 
ing of what is called the striped squirrel, and (as Ridley has pointed 
out) the striped and spotted skin of the young tapir, roe-deer, and wild 
boar, with the prevalence of russets and chestnut browns, browns 
and greys, among many species of deer, squirrels, smaller monkeys, 
and wild dogs, are in various ways admirably adapted for the protec- 
tion of the species, the browner shades in particular being very 
difficult to see in the dusk of the evening, which is the time when 
the majority of these animals seek their food. A still more interest- 
ing case is that of the white fauna of the immense limestone caves 
of the Peninsula, of which the Batu caves in Selangor, and the 
Biserat caves of Ulu Patani, are well-known examples. These caves 
are frequented by myriads of bats, which produce deep deposits of 
guano, and among the fauna which live either upon the bats or the 
guano, are a white snake, a white rat, and even a white cockroach ! 
Among the apes and monkeys (especially the larger ones) which, 
owing to their extreme agility and strength are in little need of any 
specially protective colouring, the correspondence of colour to 
environment is less marked ; it may, however, be worth pointing 
out that the spectacled monkey {^Senmopithecus obsciirus) is called 
" lotong " by the Malays, who have evidently observed the close 
correspondence of its colour to the bark of the immense forest-tree 
called "jelotong" {Dyera Matngayi, D. costulatd), which abounds 
in the forest where it lives. 

In the cases we have mentioned the protective or " strategic " 
colouring of the animal, when once modified, has been permanent ; 
but the Peninsula yields more than one example of an animal which 
can change its colouring from time to time for the purpose of 
still more effective concealment. Such are the " sumpah-sumpah " 
{Calotes), which, though not a true cham^eleon, has yet received 
that name from its sharing the chamasleon's most remarkable 
characteristic, and in a lesser degree, certain tree-lizards and tree- 

INTRODUCTION 

frogs, which latter I have seen turn an ahnost milky white when 
exposed to full sunlight. 

In all the foregoing cases, as indeed in all of which we have 
hitherto any record, the specialisation of the animal, whether 
of an aggressive or prophylactic character, takes the form of a 
modification of colouring in conformity with its most usual sur- 
roundings for the purpose of concealment, and the principle of the 
importance of colouring thus developed is, of course, very marked 
among the lower orders of creation, among the birds, snakes, and 
various forms of the insect world (more especially the well-known 
leaf and stick insects), with the all - important modification that 
among all these latter classes the influence of an additional pur- 
pose is observable, viz. that of colouring for sexual attraction — a 
feature of which no example whatever is known among the higher 
animals of the Peninsula. But colour-modification is, of course, by 
no means the only form of specialisation that occurs, for form- 
modification, combined with that of colour, is found in a host of 
Malay insects, of which the leaf-insect and stick-insect are the best 
known examples ; while the shield of the many varieties of tortoise, 
the scaly mail of the manis, and the lance-like quills or chevaux 
de /rise of the porcupine, all afford notable examples of animals 
provided with special forms of armour because they are ground 
animals and have no other way of escape. 

But we approach what is still far the most significant and charac- 
teristic section of the fauna of the Peninsula when we consider the 
immense proportion of the denizens of the jungle that have learnt to 
live in trees. Among these are the bear, the leopard, and panther, 
and all other representatives of the cat kind (with the sole exception 
of the tiger), the bear-cat and the civet, and an uncounted army of 
squirrels, apes, monkeys, snakes, and lizards. By far the most 
numerous part of the sylvan population of the Peninsula is, in fact, 
distinctively arboreal, and the most interesting section of these are 
those bizarre creatures — half-animal, half-bird — which in the Malayan 
jungles continually afford some fresh and delightful surprise. These 
are the flying-foxes and fruit-bats, flying squirrels, flying lemurs, flying 
lizards, flying frogs. 

Some of these, of course, such as the flying-foxes, which owe 
their name to the vulpine character of their head, are true bats, and 
really fly, but many of them progress on the principle of the aero- 
plane, by taking off from the trunk of a tree at a considerable height 
from the ground, gliding downwards to the next, and then climbing 
up from the point at which they alight, and repeating the glide as 
before. The flying squirrels and flying lemurs, which travel by this 
method, make use of a fold of skin between the fore and hind leg on 
each side of the body, the membrane when tightly stretched perform- 
ing the work of a parachute. Of the large flying lemur, or " kubong," 

ENVIRONMENT 

which is locally plentiful, there are at least two varieties, one of 
which has a soft, most beautifully delicate silvery grey fur, the other 
being of a reddish-brown colour. There is also a species of flying 
squirrel, which is very much smaller, its body being little bigger than 
a rather large mouse. The flying lizard, or Draco, which is most 
brilliantly coloured, has the membranes with which it flies stiffened 
by slight processes, which enable it to use them to a limited 
extent as wings, its flight producing an impression similar to the 
" buzzing " of the wings of some large insect. In flying it inflates the 
gorgeous golden pouch beneath its throat (by means, as it appeared 
to me, of a spine which it erected and depressed at pleasure), and in 
full sunlight produces the strangest and at the same time most 
fascinating effect imaginable. 

The flying frog, which is said to glide through the air by means 
of an abnormal development of the webs of its feet, is well known 
from the description given by Wallace, but I think it is worth while 
adding that there are other tree-frogs in the Peninsula, which do not 
appear to be flying frogs, their feet being merely provided with 
suction pads, resembling those of the Malayan house-lizard. 

In another department of animal life, that of the fishes, there 
are in the Malay Peninsula many good examples of specialisation 
that should not be passed over : these are (to take some of the 
most conspicuous) the frog-fish called " tembakul," which may be 
seen in great numbers skipping over the sloping banks of tidal rivers 
at the passing of a boat or steamer; the "aruan" or "snakehead" 
{Ophiocephalus)^ a kind of walking mud -fish resembling a perch, 
which may be seen progressing over dry land towards a pool by the 
opening and shutting of its gill-cases; and a small fish called Toxotes 
Jaculator, which is able to shoot a fly off a leaf above the stream by 
means of a drop of water forcibly expelled from its mouth, a remark- 
able fact, which, as I have ventured to suggest in a later part of this 
book, is necessarily a matter of common knowledge to the aboriginal 
inhabitants of the Peninsula, to whom it may not inconceivably have 
suggested the blowpipe. 

We have seen how powerful has been the effect of the joint 
insular and climatic conditions upon the fauna and flora of the 
Peninsula, and how the peculiar character of the vegetation has 
affected the fauna. This latter idea leads us naturally to the 
question, in what way and to what extent have the indigenous races 
of the Peninsula been themselves affected by the climate and the 
character of the country ? Throughout the world this physical 
specialisation is far less marked in man than in the lower animals. 
This, however, is probably not due to the fact that he is incapable 
of such development, nor is it due to his being, comparatively 
speaking, a late arrival on the earth, but simply to the fact of his 
possessing mechanical ability to a degree that lifts him far above the 

INTRODUCTION 

other members of the brute creation, above the orang-outang, for 
example, a comparison worth making because, according to native 
tradition, a variety of it, called the " mawas," once inhabited the Pen- 
insula, as it still inhabits the neighbouring islands of Borneo and 
Sumatra, to the latter of which at least the Malay Peninsula was once 
(as already pointed out) geologically united. That it is not due to any 
incapacity for such development, is clear from the immense number 
and variety of ways, as in the blind, deaf and dumb (or in special 
trades for instance), in which one or other of his senses becomes quite 
abnormally developed through constant use, to say nothing of isolated 
phenomena, such as the cases of web-foot connected with East Anglia 
since the days of the Gyrvii. That it is not due to his late arrival 
will appear when we reflect that the most wonderful development 
does continually occur in the life-history even of a single individual. 
Probably we should be quite safe in saying that of all animals man 
is best able to accommodate himself to new or strange surroundings, 
even to those which appear most certain to threaten his very 
existence. But since he is able to obtain this end by the use of 
special implements and devices, we shall find that (as might almost 
be expected) it is these mechanical appliances that he improves 
rather than his own members. Hence even in the Malay Peninsula, 
which must certainly be one of the most densely wooded countries 
in the world, although the Sakai has been driven by the dangers 
that threaten him to build his huts in trees, he shows no tendency 
to develop into a really arboreal type ; and although he is quite 
capable of walking up the stem which forms the approach to his 
aerial abode, he still prefers to make use of some rude kind of ladder 
to go up and down by (just as, in Les Landes, the French fenlander 
has kept to his stilts). So too the Orang Laut, although he has 
lived in his boats from the cradle to the grave, as far back as history 
will carry us, has never developed, however expert in diving he 
may be, anything remotely approaching amphibious characteristics. It 
is therefore not so much in the sphere of physical development, great 
as in certain ways this undoubtedly is, that we must expect to find 
the full effect of the wild man's geographical surroundings, but in 
the use that he makes of those surroundings, and the development of 
his character. 

In what relationship, then, does the wild man of the Peninsula 
stand to, and what use does he make of the flora and fauna that 
have been described ? It is certainly owing to the dangerous 
proximity of wild beasts, such as elephants and tigers, that he has 
taken to living in the high tree-huts just referred to. For the wild 
elephant of the Peninsula in particular is very rascally, and will 
pull even a tree-hut to pieces if he can reach it (as, in one case 
that I remember, an elephant in the Langat river demolished, 
for sheer mischiefs sake, a Malay dug-out canoe). But nevertheless 

ENVIRONMENT ii 

both tiger and elephant are hunted, killed, and eaten at times, and 
there is hardly any animal, bird, or reptile in the jungle (except 
perhaps the toad, scorpion, and a few snakes and insects) that does 
not at some time or other, and in some district or other, form part 
of the aboriginal menu. Monkeys, wild pig, deer of all kinds, 
squirrels, porcupines, flying-foxes and flying lemurs, argus pheasants 
and peacocks, blue herons and hornbills, tortoises, lizards, rats, and 
snakes, these provide some of their favourite dishes, and if one or 
two concessions are made to the prejudices of civilisation, there 
would perhaps not be much to which we should be inclined to take 
exception. But the catholicity of their tastes necessitates at once a 
most thorough and accurate knowledge of the habits of the varied 
denizens of the jungle, and a considerable amount of ingenuity and 
mechanical skill in the contrivance of traps, pitfalls, springes, and 
nooses for securing their quarry, and this knowledge, skill, and 
ingenuity the wild races certainly possess in a very marked degree. 

The Besisi method of securing the argus pheasant, described in 
the text, is the outcome of close observation, as is their method of 
" splashing " with the tip of their rod in the water to catch the 
" sembilang " fish ; their springes and traps for monkeys, wild pigs, 
and other small mammals and birds, are frequently most complicated 
devices. But, cleverly designed as these are, they will catch 
nothing unless the trappers have a sufficiently intimate knowledge of 
the haunts and habits of their intended victim to foresee the exact 
spot at which the latter will inevitably pass, and in passing release 
the catch that starts the mechanism : their knowledge of the presence 
and movements of game, even at a considerable distance away in 
the jungle, amounts to an instinct : their lungs (though this is a 
matter that has not yet been investigated) must be enormously 
developed and improved to enable them, at (comparatively) great 
distances, to exhibit such skill with the blowpipe, as they are known 
to possess : their sight, whether longer or not than that of the 
average European, is unquestionably so much better trained, that 
they can instantaneously distinguish quite small birds or squirrels 
even when partially screened by thick foliage, where a European 
would, for some time at all events, be totally unable to perceive 
anything at all : their sense of smell, by which they are able even to 
track snakes, is unquestionably keener, and certainly far better 
trained, than that of an European, or even than that of an ordinary 
town-bred (and therefore as a rule in every way degenerate) Malay, 
though it may not be materially better than that of the Malay who 
has been bred to the jungle. 

With regard to the vegetation of the Peninsula, it may be safely 
said that the wild races make use of everything that can in any way 
be regarded as even remotely edible and capable of sustaining life, for 
they not only employ every edible fruit, seed, root, tuber, stem, bark, 

12 INTRODUCTION 

leaf, young shoot, bud (not to mention ferns and fungi) that comes 
their way, but even make use of plants that are highly poisonous, 
until they have been treated, such as the fruit of the " perah "-tree, 
which is poisonous unless cooked, and some of the wild yams, which 
they eat after washing out the poison. Of the number of edible fruits 
in the jungle, the lists of their names given in the text will give 
some faint idea, though even these lists must not be taken as in any 
sense complete, and if they should (to take a very rare contingency) 
be in any manner of doubt as to the edibility of any particular fruit, 
the birds and the monkeys will be their guide. Even the despised 
mangrove swamp, regarded by Europeans as the ne plus ultra of 
all impenetrable and unproductive forms of vegetation, contributes 
its quota of edible fruits, such, for instance, as the " pisang-pisang " 
and " berembang," of both of which I myself have eaten. Water 
is obtained by tapping the " kait-kait " and other wild creepers, and 
from the stems of certain large bamboos, which not infrequently hold 
water in their hollow internodes. But the most important plants 
and trees, from an ethnological point of view, are undoubtedly (after 
mere food-producers), the upas tree, the upas creeper, the tuba or 
fish-poison creeper, and a species of bamboo called Bambusa Wrayi. 
Of these it will be sufficient to remark (since they have been treated 
very fully in the text) that the first three are the main ingredients of 
the famous dart-poison of the aborigines, which, like the wourali 
poison of the South American Indians, is in some of its compounds, 
at all events, almost immediately fatal, whether to man, bird, or 
beast. The fish-poison (so called because it was formerly much 
used for poisoning the small streams in the Peninsula and thereby 
stupefying the fish) is used in combination with both of the other 
two main ingredients of the dart-poison, whether tree or creeper. 
And the last of the category, Bambusa Wrayi or longinodis, is an 
extremely rare bamboo, which has exceedingly slender internodes 
that grow to quite six feet in length, and which, though only known 
to grow on two or three mountains in the Peninsula, has been never- 
theless singled out by the aborigines to serve in the production of 
their jointless blowpipe. 

In the foregoing pages we have glanced at that inexhaustible 
(and after all indescribable) profusion of nature by which the 
ancestors of these races found themselves surrounded in that dim 
and unrecorded past, when first their toilsome wanderings, prolonged 
through generations, brought them face to face within the narrow 
confines of the Malay Peninsula. At whatever period this was, and 
in whatever order they may have arrived, we can now recognise with 
sufficient clearness the Semang, Sakai, and Jakun as three distinct 
and separate races ; the Negritos or Semang, with their woolly hair 
and round bright eyes, the darkest, the best-developed, and at the 
same time the most markedly nomadic of all the races in the 

ENVIRONMENT 13 

Peninsula ; the Sakai, who are the lightest, with their often interest- 
ing features, reminiscent may be of their old Dravidian ancestry, 
though modified by the effect of their somewhat narrow-lidded half- 
closed eyes, hair of a distinctly wavy character, and their generally 
somewhat emaciated appearance ; and the Jakun or aboriginal 
Malayans, with their smooth blue-black hair, a race hard to dis- 
tinguish, because of its admixture with the other two main stocks, but 
who must nevertheless be accepted as a type, if the physical evidence 
of skull and skull-features, skin-colour and hair-character are not to 
be utterly denied. In each case the fate of their scanty bands must 
have been very similar — a never-ending struggle for existence first 
against the forces of nature, against hunger, disease, and a hundred 
forms of death, and later against the persecutions of man, thus faith- 
fully mirroring the battle of the gigantic vegetation and dangerous 
beasts among which they lived. The shadow, the hall-mark of the 
primeval forest — at once their protector, their sustainer, and their 
grave — is burned into them, and shows itself in the restless motion 
and hunted expression of their eyes, and even in their very gait, for 
the great height to which they raise the foot in walking (a habit 
acquired in circumventing the continual obstacles that meet them 
in the undergrowth), and the careful deliberation with which they 
plant it on the ground, remain even when they come out into open 
country, and expose them to much ridicule and cheap witticisms on 
the part of the Malays. It was the forest that supplied them with 
food, shelter, clothing, ornaments, implements of every description, 
with drugs and simples when they were sick, with materials and 
subjects for their dances, feasts, songs, instruments of music. Their 
strongest asseveration was to say, " May a tree fall on me," — an 
expression that fully brings out the extent to which this particular 
terror dominated their lives. It was the forest that received their 
dead into its kindly bosom ; indeed, to be laid to rest in the cool 
outstretched arms of the great forest-trees was the highest honour 
that could be paid to their departed chiefs, whose spirits they so 
pathetically prayed to ' pay heed only to their dead ancestors, for 
their living friends would find food.' Their simple idea of the 
delights of a future state was after all but a glorified " Avilion," an 
" Island of Fruits," from which all that was noxious and distressing 
to man (and therefore to man's soul) had been eliminated, and the 
very entrance to which lay over the natural bridge formed by the 
trunk of a fallen tree. 

Yet, surrounded as they were by possibilities of harm, they 
quitted themselves like men, and as iron is welded into steel, the 
very hardships of their life only served to throw into relief their 
higher qualities — their ingenuity, dexterity, open-heartedness, sin- 
cerity, and well-developed common sense — qualities which, I must 
confess, I never yet met so generally diffused in any other tropical 

1 4 INTRO D UCTION 

race of which I have had experience, and had never expected to 
meet outside the fabled frontiers of Arcadia. Yet this is the 
universal testimony of all who have known them well, and I need 
only add to my own a single testimony, that of a Malay (who was 
of all men best qualified to speak), who himself once remarked to 
me in tones of deep disdain, " What stupid animals these Sakai 
are, they don't know how to tell a lie ! " 

It is a fact that, as a natural consequence of their inherent 
honesty, unselfishness, and single-mindedness — the undoubted result 
of their natural and unluxurious mode of life — these despised, per- 
secuted, and (in a worldly sense) ignorant savages, without the 
guiding star of even the most rudimentary form of letters, 
philosophy, or history, have yet given us a practical example of the 
ideal social state in which liberty, equality, and fraternity are not 
mere names but real and living forces, and in which, since a 
moderately communistic system of property prevails, there is no 
room — so simple is their form of life — for the disintegrating 
influences of theft, murder, fraud, greed, or any other of the grosser 
sins that plague the conscience of civilised humanity, influences 
which, whenever the experiment has been tried among Europeans 
of establishing a community on the same lines, have been (and are 
long likely to remain) the inevitable causes of its failure. The 
facts, viewed in this light, are striking, and perhaps mortifying, but 
probably all that they mean is that the stage of development reached 
by those races is a rudimentary one, the exact counterpart of that 
golden age of innocence to which all civilised and semicivilised 
races regretfully look back, and which ceases when once the golden 
apple of commerce is thrown into their midst. "Why rushed the 
discords in but that harmony should be prized ? " Yet surely, if for 
no other reason than for their possession of these high qualities, the 
needs of these rude, uncultured, but not all-unenlightened tribes 
now subject to our sway, should stir the real and ready sympathy of 
all who believe in our manhood, and in our imperial worth as 
champions of the weak. 

The most important factor that remains to be mentioned in the 
development of these races, is the subject of the relations between 
them and the Peninsular Malays. Which of the three races 
was the first to arrive in the Peninsula, is a point that in the 
nature of things cannot be decided. As an equatorial race we may 
perhaps suppose that it was the Negritos. All that we can say for 
certain is, that in the mediseval period, when all three races were 
already established there, the Peninsula appears to have been 
occupied in some force, first by some old Indo-Chinese race ^ of 

1 It is of interest to note the fact Prince Damrong, a keen and pro- 
that when I was in Bangkok H.R.H. gressive ruler, drew my attention in 

ENVIRONMENT 

15 

comparatively high civilisation, whose language has left its trace on 
the aboriginal dialects (but of whose domination there is no clear 
record in history), and later by colonies of Malay immigrants from 
Sumatra — a people also of some civilisation (of a Hinduised type) 
whose immigration has continued to the present day, and whose 
influence on the aborigines is naturally much more marked. The 
conversion of these latter settlers from their more tolerant Hindu 
beliefs to the militant and missionary faith of Islam (which took 
place less than 600 years ago), was a most critical event for the 
aborigines, its ultimate effect being to drive these unfortunate tribes- 
men into the hills of the interior and reduce them to the condition 
of hunted outlaws, to be enslaved, plundered, and murdered by the 
Malay chiefs at their tyrannous will and pleasure. 

This condition of things lasted some five centuries, and naturally 
enough branded itself, in unforgetable fashion, deep into the memory 
of the victims. The Portuguese domination of Malacca (which 
commenced with the taking of that city in 15 11 and lasted for 130 
years), and that of the Dutch, who became their successors on 
the capture of Malacca in 1641 and held it till 1795 (^'^d who were 
able besides to establish trading factories in several parts of the 
Peninsula), did nothing to rescue the aborigines from their state of 
serfdom. It was not indeed until the establishment of the British 
Protectorate, which raised them to an equality with their oppressors, 
and thereby righted an historic wrong, that they regained the right 
and the power to live as men. Indeed, even in the earlier days of 
that protectorate itself, and so long as the power of the Malay pirate 
in these seas remained unbroken, their condition improved but 
slowly, and indeed for many years after they had acquired some 
measure of security for life and property, they were still most out- 
rageously imposed on by the Malay, who traded upon their naive 
simplicity, and at the same time upon their unrivalled knowledge of 
the jungle, to acquire for his own purposes immense quantities oi 
gutta, camphor, eagle-wood, rattan, damar, and other valuable jungle 
products, for which he paid the collectors the merest fraction of 
their real value. These methods and many other forms of 
oppression have since been almost completely suppressed by the 
strong arm, but we are now confronted by the yet graver question, 
whether our system of protection is to become more fatal to our 
proteges than even the Malay slave-raids that we so strenuously put 
down, the effect of which was, after all, though individual members 
might be lost to the community, to keep them a race apart, whereas 

particular to the words of command were neither Siamese nor Malay. The 

addressed by the mahouts, in the north answer to tliis suggestive inquiry of 

of the Malay Peninsula, to the elephants Prince Damrong has been given at the 

under their charge, and pointed out end of vol ii., in the chapter devoted 

that some of these words at all events to "Language." 

1 6 INTRODUCTION 

to-day (though there is as yet no marked dedine in their numbers) 
they are fast tending to become assimilated and absorbed, losing 
their language, their customs, their purity of blood and (worst loss of 
all) their natural truthfulness and honesty. Probably at the present 
stage it is too late to avert wholly the natural trend of events, and 
the only palliative appears to be (in the best interest of the aborigines 
themselves as well as of their former oppressors) to encourage and 
develop the systematic study by our own officials of native thought, 
law, and custom, and to encourage and develop the ideas of the natives 
themselves through the means (some of which I am glad to say have 
already been tried) of their own industries and culture (barbarisms 
and babuisms, of course, excluded). By thus giving them an assured 
status and the stimulus of a new and higher form of self-respect, 
we may at least develop and improve that most important class of 
the race (as distinct from his degenerate fellow-countryman of the 
towns), the genuine Malay peasant, inured to the hard vicissitudes 
of the jungle or the sea. Whatever can be achieved in this 
direction, be it httle or much — and the writer is one of those whom 
experience has convinced that much can be done — will be in its 
ultimate result of immeasurably greater benefit to the unsophisticated 
alien races over whom the Malay genius for assimilation is so soon 
destined to prevail, than any system of forest reservation or even the 
most paternal vigilance over their affairs. 

RACE. 

PART I 

VOL. I 

j 

RACIAL CHARACTERS. 

The Names of the Tribes. 

In discussing the affinities of the various races and 
tribes of wild men in the Malay Peninsula, it is im- 
portant to get a clear idea of the exact meaning of the 
names which the Malays apply to them, and which 
are taken, for the most part, either from the natural 
(geographical) features of the country in which the 
particular race of "wild men" in question live, or 
from the stage of civilisation at which they happen 
to have arrived. 

The commonest of these names, with their English 
equivalents, are as follows : — 

Malay Name. 

Translation. 

Remarks. 

o 

rang Utan . 

Men of the Forest 

Used of all the tribes. 

,, Bukit . . 

Men of the Hills . . . 

Of Inland Tribes only. 

,, Paya . 

Men of the Swamps. 

,, Darat. . 

Men of the Dry Land . 

Land Jakun. 

,, Laut . . 

Men of the Sea . 

Jakun of the coast, especially 
the Besisi of the Selangor 
coast, and the Johor and 
Singapore tribes, sometimes 
called " Sea-gypsies." 

,, Dalam 

Men of the Interior. 

„ Ulu . . 

Men of the Head-waters. 

,, Tanjong . 

Men of the Capes 

/.^. Men of the "river-bends." 

,, Liar 

" Wild " Men . . . 

Of wholly nomadic tribes who 
are rarely met with. 

19 

RACIAL CHARACTERS 

Malay Name. 

Translation. 

Remarks. 

Oiang Jinak . 

Lit. "Tame" Men . 

Of all tribes either settled or 
less absolutely nomadic. 

,, B'la . . 

"Kept" or "Domesti- 

Used especially of slaves and 

cated " Men 

dependants ( = " Bila " of 
some old writers, e.g. 
Logan). 

„ Sahbat . 

Friendlies 

From Arabic "Sahabat" = 
" Friend." 

, , Rayat . 

Subjects or Serfs . 

From Arabic ' ' Ra iyat. " Used 
especially of the sea tribes 
(Rayat Laut). 

Of the foregoing names, the term " Orang Utan " (or 
" Hutan ") is perhaps the one which is most generally 
used in the Peninsula. The correct meaning of 
"orang" in Malay is "man" {Jionio\ and "utan" 
means "jungle." Hence " Orang Utan " simply means 
"Man of the Jungle," i.e. "Wild Man," and the 
phrase has (in modern Peninsular Malay) no other 
meaning. The application of the name " orang-outang " 
in Europe to a kind of ape was probably due to the 
mistake, or the jest, of some early traveller. It goes 
back to 1 63 1, when it occurs in a passage in Bontius, 
quoted by Yule, s.v. " orang utan." The mistake was 
repeated, as has since been pointed out, in 1652, when 
Tulpius, in giving a representation of the ape (not 
the mail) wrote underneath it " Ho?no Sylvestris, 
Orang utang."^ The term "orang utan," as has just 
been said, has practically come to mean nothing more 
than " Wild Man " (or " Men ") in Malay, and hence 
it is even used of the sea tribes, as in the case of the 
Orang Utan S'letar (the "Jungle-men of the S'letar" 
river), who form a branch of the Orang Laut.^ 

1 V. B. C. A. xxiii. 831 ; and Nic. 
Tulpii Obsefv. Med. Amsterdam, 1652, 
p. 284. The original specimen of the 
Homo Sylvestris of Tulpius is now in 

the British Museum. We must note 
that Malay "Orang utang" (not "utan") 
= " debtor " ; v. L' Homme, iii. 43. 
2 It seems, however, that in Sumatra 

THE NAMES OF THE TRIBES 

On the other hand, the following names are applied 
to definite local groups or hordes of wild men, with, 
in some cases, a vague amount of racial connotation, 
this being especially the case with " Semang " and 
" Sakai " : — 

Name of Group. 

Racial Connotation (if any). 

Remarks. 

I. SfiMANG 

Negrito tribes of the Malay 

Also called Menik, Meni', or 

Peninsula generally (also 

Mendi' by themselves ( = 

especially of West Coast 

Martin's " Mendi "). 

Negritos) 

Pangan 

East Coast Negritos {i.e. 

V. -Stevens has " Panggang " 

'* East Semang") 

passim, erroneously. ^ 

II. Sakai . . 

Dravido-Australian (?) 

Occasionally used by mistake 

tribes of the Malay Pen- 

forSemang. The "Blandas" 

insula generally 

ofV.-St. ; "Senoi "of Martin. 

Senoi . 

" Central Sakai " tribes 

The term used by some pur 
sang Sakai of themselves. 
It is said to mean " Man " 
in Sakai. 2 

III. Jakun 

Aboriginal Malayan tribes 

Formerly spelt Jacoon ( Raffles, 

generally 

Jokong), etc. 

Hill Jakun or 

Aboriginal Malayan Land 

Including the Benua (Logan) 

Orang Bukit 

tribes 

= Benar (V. -Stevens). 

Sea Jakun or 

Aboriginal Malayan Sea 

S'letar, Sabimba, Bed. Kallang, 

Orang Laut 

tribes 

Muka Kuning, Akik, etc. 

Blandas . 

Certain mixed tribes of the 

Wrongly used as synonymous 

Interior of Selangor and 

with Sakai by V. -Stevens. 

S. Ujong 

Called Landas by themselves. 

Bfisisi . . .-• 

Certain (Malayan ?) Sea 

Also called Bersisi (V. -Stevens), 

tribes of the Selangor 

and 'Sisi (by themselves). 

and Malacca Coast 

Mantra . 

Certain (Malayan?) tribes 

Also Mentera' and Mintira 

of Interior of Malacca 

(Logan). 

Udai . 

A certain mixed tribe 
(?Semi-Negrito) of Johor 

Unidentified. 

the expression is actually used to de- 
note the anthropoid apes. In Borneo 
the word "Maias" is used to denote 
the "orang-outang," of which the 
" Mawas " of the Peninsula is probably 
a tradition. In a letter of November 
3rd, 1 90 1, Mr. Hale informs me 
that the term "Orang alas" (an old 
Malay phrase for ' ' jungle-men ") is used 
in the Kinta valley as the equivalent of 
" Mawas." 

^ The word is properly spelt Pangan, 
and has nothing to do with Malay 

"panggang," "to roast, "as V. -St. oddly 
imagined, the two words being pro- 
nounced quite differently. Mr. Charles 
Hose has suggested that it may be akin 
to a North Bornean word " pangan," 
which means "friendly" — a much more 
likely suggestion. 

2 De Morgan (viii. 225) mentions a 
hill called "Gunong Senoi" ("Sonoi"), 
a place-name, but this probably means 
" Hill of the Senoi"' or " Wild-men's 
Hill." Cp. Luering's Vocabulary of the 
'■'■ Ulu Kainpar" Dialect, s.v. " Man." 

RACIAL CHARACTERS 

The term " Semang" has never been satisfactorily 
explained. The term " Sakai," on the other hand, has 
been (unjustifiably, as I think) explained as meaning 
" dog " ; a more possible derivation, as Grtinwedel 
points out,^ being from the Sanskrit " Sakhi " = 
" Friend," in which case its use would be paralleled by 
the alternative Malay name " Sahbat" or "Sabat" (from 
Arab. " Sahabat " = " Friend " or " Friendly "), though 
even this is hardly a likely explanation. 

The word " Sakai " is also used in Malay (as is 
*' Semang ") in the sense of retainer or follower of a 
native chief. It is thus more or less analogous to Rayat 
or subject. This last term is commonly applied 
by the Malays to the Mantra and Besisi ; but these 
last two tribes prefer to speak of themselves as " Hill 
Men" (Orang Bukit), or "Men of the Interior" 
(Orang Dalam), and " Men of the Sea" (Orang Laut) 
respectively, or else simply as " Jakun." 

Finally, the term " Sakai " has not unfrequently 
been used, like the expression " Orang Utan," as a 
generic term for all the wild men of the peninsula. 
It is also frequently used by the Malays in combina- 
tion with many of the terms given above {e.g. Sakai 
Liar, Sakai Jinak, Sakai Bukit, Sakai Rawang, Sakai 
Laut, Sakai Ulu, Sakai Dalam, Sakai Bla), but not as 
a rule with the other words mentioned in the list. 
The word " Semang " is also occasionally used in a 
similar way. But the majority of the names applied 
to these tribes by the Malays are purely place-names, 
e.g. Orang Kinta (from the Kinta valley in Perak) ; 
Orang Klang and Orang Rawang (from places in the 
" Klang " and " Langat " districts of Selangor), and 
the numerous tribal names of the Orang Laut, such 

^ V. B. G. A. xxiii. 830. " Sakei " is an alternative spelling. 

I THE NAMES OF THE TRIBES 23 

as the " Sabimba," " S'letar," " Muka Kuning," and 
many similar titles. 

In the following work the name " Semang " will be 
used principally for all Negrito tribes, whether those 
dwelling on the West Coast or those on the East, the 
latter of whom are generally called (as has already 
been explained) " Pangan." 

It will also be used (culturally) of the mixed 
Semang-Sakai tribes amongst whom, either on account 
of their use of the bow or for other reasons, the 
Semang element has been assumed on the whole to 
preponderate. 

The name " Sakai " will be similarly ear-marked 
for the second ethnical group (Dravido- Australian ^\ 
whether pure or only preponderatingly Sakai, 

The name " Jakun " will, in the same way, be applied 
to the southern tribes, composing the third ethnical 
group, for which the name " Benua" (Orang Benua = 
Men of the Country or " Aborigines," as opposed to 
the immigrant Malays) was used by European writers 
at least as far back as 161 3, although it does not now 
appear to be used by the natives themselves.^ 

Finally, I may say that the names of the fabulous 
tribes, e.g. Orang Ekor or "Tailed" People, Orang 
Gergasi or Giants, Orang Mawas or "Orangoutang" 
People, referred to by Vaughan - Stevens,^ Orang 
Peri or Fairies, etc., etc., will be treated of in the 
chapter on Religion, to which they more properly 
belong. 

Vaughan -Stevens asserts that the term " Udei " 

* At the same time it should be Goudinho de Eredia {A/alaca, 

observed that certain modern writers Brussels, 1882) mentions the Benua 

(among whom is Logan) apply the in a work written in 161 3. 
name "Benua" to a particular Jakun ^ yj^fg Griinwedel in V. B. G. A. 

tribe in Johor, who will be here called xxxiii. 830, and elsewhere. 
" Benua-Jakun." 

24 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

( "Udai") is used by the Orang Pangan as an ex- 
pression of contempt for the tribes dweUing near 
Belum in Perak, and that its meaning is equivalent to 
" bastard." He also alleges it to be applied by the 
Malays in the north to the Orang Jinak, i.e. the 
more settled ("Tame") Semang. His explanation of 
the word, however, is certainly incorrect.^ 

RACIAL AFFINITIES— GENERAL. 

The Older Views. 

The descriptions of these tribes by the older 
writers were based on very inadequate knowledge, 
and were often extremely speculative and misleading. 
De Quatrefages, De Morgan, M.-Maclay, Vaughan- 
Stevens, and others held what may be called the Pan- 
Negrito theory, i.e. the belief that all the wild tribes 
were of Negrito origin, and attempted to account for the 
anthropological difficulties involved by premising the 
intermixture of these tribes with Malays and certain 
other races, selected apparently at random, such as 
Siamese, Papuans, and African negroes, to account 
for the presence of whom the " wrecked slave-dhow " 
theory was introduced, without the slightest regard to 
the obvious geographical objections, or to the remark- 
able racial discrepancies between the races compared. 
We have it, for instance, on the authority of Mr. 
H. N. Ridley, that Vaughan -Stevens at one time 
regarded the Semang as descendants of "escaped 
negro slaves brought over by Alexander the Great " ! 

' Vaughan- Stevens, iii. Heft. 3-4, p. 100. 

I THE SEMANG PROBLEM 25 

Even some of those sounder authorities who re- 
cognised the fact that the identity of origin of all these 
tribes could not be maintained, spoilt their case by 
attempting to identify the Semang with the African 
negro, an attempt which the marked diversity of type 
between the two races concerned would alone render 
little short of absurd. 

An allied theory (that of the Papuan origin of 
the Semang) has been completely confuted by a 
succession of modern anthropologists, among whom 
it will be sufficient to mention Wallace, Waitz, 
Hamy, and others, whose researches may be con- 
sidered to have fairly established the following pro- 
positions : ^ — 

(i) That there were not less than two clearly dis- 
tinguishable, if not contrasted, racial types among the 
wild aborigines of the Peninsula, 

(2) That the characteristics of the Negrito type 
found among the Semang showed no more trace of 
derivation from the true negro than they did from that 
of the Papuan. 

A. — The Semang Problem. 

As regards the former (Pan-Negrito) theory, it 
should be noticed that even Vaughan-Stevens and his 
followers unconsciously divide the Semang from the 
Sakai. 

Thus Vaughan-Stevens, while strongly postulating 

* Wallace, for instance, clearly dis- Malays ' of Wallace) . . . relient For- 

tinguishes between the Semang as mesa a Malacca." 

Negritos, and the Jakun as " savage Waitz distinguishes two clearly sepa- 

Malays." rale types — the Semang whom he de- 

Hamy, after admitting the existence clines even to call Negritos — apparently 

of Negritos in the Peninsula, goes on for fear of implying Negro affinities — 

to say, " Les Indonesiens (the 'savage and the Benua or savage Malays. 

26 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

their common Negrito origin (according to the " Pan- 
Negrito " theory), divides the tribes into two well- 
marked main groups — (i) The Sakai or " Blandas " 
(including the "Tembeh," the " Keni," the "Senoi," 
" Besisi," and " Kenaboi ") ; (2) the Orang Menik, 
whom he subdivides correctly into Pangan and 
Semang, the latter comprising the tribes of Kinta, 
Kensiu, Belum, and Bong Districts. 

In the first of these two groups the names 
Tembeh, Keni, and Kenaboi are probably nothing 
but place-names ; ^ Tembeh, which Vaughan-Stevens 
spells Tumior or Tummeor, and which he would 
derive from Timor — the name of an island at the 
opposite end of the Malay archipelago ! — is certainly 
identical with the Tembe of Clifford, in spite of 
Vaughan-Stevens' description of them as being " dark 
of colour " and "tattooed,"^ two facts which would, if 
established, appear to indicate a proportion of Semang 
blood, though no doubt much mixed with Sakai. 

In the second group the names of the subdivisions 
are mostly names of places, Kensiu being in the north 
of Kedah ; the Kinta, a tributary of the Perak river ; 
Belum in Ulu Perak ; and Bukit Bong, a hill in 
Ligeh, All the tribes in this second group belong 
to the Negrito stock, and Vaughan-Stevens, in spite 
of his preconceived theories, could not help noticing 
the difference between them and the Sakai tribes. 

The third (Malayan) element Vaughan-Stevens 

^ "Kenaboi" is the name of a stream beh " at Sepang, south of Klang, 

in Jelebu. " Tembeh ": other spellings upon the same coast. I may add that 

are "Tembir" and "Tembe," the form there is, in N. Selangor and Perak, a 

employed by Clifford. For a parallel strong tendency to pronounce this 

compare the word "gambler," which same word as "gambiok," or even 

is (correctly) pronounced "gambir"at "gamiok," a form which accounts 

Klang in the central part of the Se- for the form "Temiok," which is also 

langor coast-line, " gambior " at Kwala found (Martin). 
Selangor (north of Klang), and "gam- - V. B. G. A. xxiii. 831. 

I THE SEMANG PROBLEM 27 

apparently attributes exclusively to modern (civilised) 
Malay admixture. 

So, too, De la Croix, ^ though professing his ad- 
herence to the "Pan-Negrito" theory, nevertheless 
distinguishes to a great extent the Semang from the 
Sakai. 

De Morgan distinguishes between the " Sakai " 
peoples to the south of the river Plus, a large tributary 
of the Perak river, and the Semang who live to the 
north, and remarks that these two tribes are hostile 
to each other ; but yet concludes that all the wild 
men of the Peninsula belong to a single race which 
he identifies with the " Negritos of New Guinea" ! 

It is not, I think, necessary to deal at length with 
the statements of all the writers who hold this view, 
though mention should certainly be made of the work 
of Miklucho-Maclay," who states that both the " Orang 
Sakai" and "Orang Semang" (two radically different 
types) are ''pur sang Melanesians " ! ^ 

* Rev. d'Ethn. vol. i. No. 4, 1882. that the Negrito might represent 

2 J. R. A. S,, S. B., No. 2, p. 208. the undeveloped type of an alioriginal 

^ On the other hand, it is only fair race, of which both Negro and Papuan 

to point out that both Miklucho-Maclay might be the highly specialised deriva- 

and Meyer (following M.-Maclay) re- tives. 

garded both Negritos and Papuans as For an opposite opinion, see A. 13. 
one stock, and were apparently unable Meyer's Negritos, p. Z'i)- I' may, 
to see the difference of type between however, be still taken as true that no 
them, in which connection Keane satisfactory proof of the connection of 
writes, " It will be enough to insist, the two races has yet been formulated, 
with Wallace and Flower, on the funda- and that Sir William Flower's brilliant 
mental differences (between the Papuan hypothesis still remains an hypothesis. 
and the Negrito type) . . . the two have It should be noted that the existence 
in fact little in common except their of the Negritos was definitely known 
dark colour and frizzly or woolly hair, early in the nineteenth century (Craw- 
features which they share also with tiie furd, Rafiles, Anderson, circa 1810- 
African Negro " (Keane iny. ^. /. ix. 1825), and at the same time it was 
p. 285). distinctly understood that they weie 
The only kind of ultimate connec- distinct from the Orang Benua of the 
tion between these races that appears, South. These early writers had no 
anthropologically speaking, at all pos- opportunity of seeing the central (Sakai) 
sible, would be that outlined in a tribes, because, until the year 1875, 
suggestion put forward by the late the Northern States were practically a 
Sir William Flower, who thought terra incognita. 

28 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

Relationship of the Set^tang to other Races. 

In the Appendix will be found a table which is, 
perhaps, the most compendious way of enabling some 
comparison to be made between the various branches 
of the undoubtedly pure and allied Negrito races now 
known to us, though the number of measurements in 
most cases is far too small to be at all conclusive, and 
the intention is not to prove the connection, but merely 
to show the nature of the unsolved problem. 

The net result is to show that the African pygmies 
(Bambute, etc.) observed by Sir H. Johnston may 
be rather shorter than either the Andamanese or the 
Negritos of the Philippines and of the Malay Penin- 
sula, whereas these last three races are practically of 
the same height. All four are brachycephalic,^ and 
have actually woolly hair, and their skin-colour varies 
from a dark copper or chocolate to a glossy black. 

A curious point about this group is that it still 
remains a moot question — as our most recent authori- 
ties declare — whether any Negritos occur in Borneo, 
which would naturally be the connecting link between 
the Malay Peninsula and the Philippines. 

B. — The Sakai Problem. 

According to the older writers, all traces of non- 
Negrito blood among the wild tribes of the Peninsula 
were due to admixture between these tribes and 
civilised Malays. The types of those two races 
(Semang and Sakai) are, however, fortunately so 

^ The Semang are said to vary brachy- or mesaticephalic, their head- 

from brachy- to dolichocephalism, length increasing in Perak and 

but the writer believes it will elsewhere through admixture with 

ultimately be found that the purer their dolichocephalic Sakai neigh- 

Semang {e.g. in Kedah) are mainly hours. 

THE NEGRITO I'ROHLEM. 

Nkgrito Type — Anda.manf.se. 

/ 'ol. I. p. 28. 

(See also Appendix.) 

THE SAKAI PROBLEM. 

Abor 

IGINAL DRAVIDIAN TyPE— VEDDAS OF CEYLON. 

SuciGESTED Aboriginal Ukaviuian Tvi^e— Sakai ui I'ekak. 
(See also p. 55, Appendix, etc.) 

Vol. /. />. 29. 

I THE SAKAI PROBLEM 29 

Strongly contrasted that their separation is not a 
very difficult matter. The existence of a separate 
Sakai type had long been suspected, and theories 
to this effect had been more than once promulgated 
(first, I believe, by Clifford), but the honour of 
proving the fact by scientific demonstration and 
measurements has fallen to Germany in the person 
of Professor Rudolf Martin, of Zurich, who has made 
a careful study of the Senoi tribe, and in his recent 
pamphlet on the relationship of these tribes has pointed 
out the need for isolating the second element in this 
complex racial problem.^ With this fact well estab- 
lished, the Sakai problem has entered upon a new 
phase, the most burning question connected with it at 
present being that of the probable relationship of the 
Sakai to certain races in the same region who are to 
some extent of a similar habitus. 

Briefly, it may be said that two alternative theories 
now hold the field. One of these theories, which has 
recently been advanced by P. W. Schmidt in his 
brilliant paper in the Bijdragen, seeks to identify the 
Sakai with certain tribes of Mon - Annam origin. - 
His argument is based partly upon the admitted 
linguistic affinity between the Sakai dialects and 
those of the Mon-Annam family, and partly upon 
an old description by Thorel ^ — (i) of the Annamese ; "* 
(2) of the Cambojans or Khmers;^ and {3) of 
the wild tribes of the interior of Camboja (Stieng, 
Bahnar, Sedang, etc.). Linguistic evidence, how- 

^ The scientific proof of the state- - Bijdragen, etc., 1 901. No. ^2 

merits made in the pamphlet has ap- (6 Volgr. deel 8), pp. 399-583. 
jjeared in Professor Martin's larger work, '^ Voyage iP Exploration en Indo- 

which was published by Gustav Fischer Chine: Gamier, Paris, 1873, vol. ii. 

at Jena in the course of the current year p. 2S9 seqi]. 
(I905),and which isentitled/>';> /«/a;;a'- ' L.c. p. 2<)o seqc/. 

sidmme der nialayischcn Ilalbinsel. ^ L.c. p. 294 sei](]. 

30 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

ever, when taken by itself, is notoriously an unsafe 
guide, and though of the three races described by 
Thorel the third group mentioned certainly approach 
the nearest to the Sakai type, the points of divergence 
between the two are nevertheless much too great to 
allow of an unhesitating assent to this identification. 
The tribes-folk (of Thorel's third group), for instance, are 
described as being " above the middle height," whereas 
the Sakai, as proved by the measurements to hand, 
do not in the least correspond to Thorel's description. 
The second difference is in their skin-colour, which is 
described by Thorel as darker than that of the Malays, 
whereas the colour of the Sakai, though very variable, 
is in fact, as a rule, except when mixed with Semang 
blood, a good deal lighter.^ 

Again, the eyes of the Stieng, Bahnar, Sedang, 
etc., are described as being very rarely a trifle oblique, 
whereas the eyes of the Sakai are certainly horizontal. 

None of these difficulties taken separately would, 
perhaps, appear insuperable, but when taken together 
they must be sufficient to cause us at least to suspend 
our judgment, and to regard the Sakai problem as still 
awaiting solution. 

The alternative theory comes to us on the high 
authority of Virchow, who puts it forward, however, 
in a somewhat tentative manner.^ It consists in re- 
garding the Sakai as an outlying branch of a racial 
group formed by the Vedda, Tamil, Korumba, and 
Australian ^ races, to show the nature of the connexion 
between which a table (for which see Appendix) of 

1 It is unfortunate that Schmidt omits ^ Assuming the Australian Blacks 
mentioning these first two important to be a non-homogeneous group, it is 
points in quoting Thorel. the type which approaches the Dra- 

2 Virchow in I'.B.G.A. xxviii. 152 vidian that is, of course, alluded to 

seqq. 

and elsewhere. here. 

THE MALAYAN PROBLEM. 

ll^ray. 

AbOKIGINAI, ^[ALAYAN OR JAKUN TYPE — "SAVAGE MALAYS" OF PEKAN, 

IN Pahang (Heathen). 

Nos. I and 4 are the best types. 

nt by Hale. 

I THE JAKUN PROBLEM 31 

comparative measurements has been drawn up by the 
writer. 

Relationship of the Sakai to other Races. 

The possibiHty of there being some ultimate re- 
lationship (such as has just been referred to) between 
the Veddas, Tamils, Australians, and Sakai was 
foreshadowed by Virchow in 1896,^ the main points of 
comparison being the height, skull -character, skin- 
colour, and hair- character. Of these, to go by the 
comparative table, the height is variable, but in all 
four of the races compared it is certainly greater than 
that of the Negrito races. The skin-colour, again, it 
is true, varies to a remarkable degree, but the general 
hair -character appears to be uniformly long, black, 
and wavy, and the skull-index, on the other hand, 
appears to indicate consistently a dolichocephalic or 
long-shaped head. 

C. — The Jakun Problem. 

The third of the three great problems which con- 
front us in dealing with the wild tribes of the Peninsula 
is that of the relationship between the Malays and the 
Benua or mixed tribes in the southern portion of the 
Malay Peninsula. 

By the Pan- Negrito theorists the Jakun were 
regarded as tribes of Negrito origin, more or less 
modified by admixture with the civilised (Moham- 
medan) Malays. Both Crawfurd, however, and, more 
particularly, Favre long ago pointed out the reasons 
which oblige us to regard the Jakun as aboriginal 
tribes, and as having been settled in the Peninsula since 

' V. B. G. A. xxviii. 152 seqij., and elsewhere. 

32 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

a period long anterior to the conversion of the Pen- 
insular Malays to Mohammedanism. " In course of 
time the early Arab trading vessels brought over priests 
from Arabia, who made a number of converts to Islam ; 
those of the Benua [i.e. Jakun) who declined to abjure 
the customs of their forefathers, in consequence of the 
persecutions to which they were exposed, fled to the 
fastnesses of the interior, where they have since con- 
tinued in a savage state." ^ In other words, part of 
them remained wild, and part adopted the civilisation of 
the immigrant Malays. So, moreover, Logan, follow- 
ing Newbold, goes a step further, and comes to the 
conclusion that the physiognomy of the Jakun of Johor 
(with some exceptions) points to a "Tartar" ex- 
traction— an expression for which I think we are 
justified in reading Mongol or Mongoloid.^ In this 
sense it has certainly been accepted by later writers, 
such as, for example, Waitz and A. R. Wallace, the 
former of whom describes the Benua {i.e. Jakun) 
as "primitive Malays," while the latter explicitly 
describes the Jakun as "savage Malays"; more- 
over, many writers {e.g. Miklucho-Maclay, in writing of 
the Mantra, etc.) describe their remarkably close re- 
semblance to the Malays, whilst attributing it solely 
to (civilised) Malay admixture. The view taken by 
the present writer is to a great extent in accordance 
with these writers, with the proviso that the isolation 
of the " savage Malay " element is not the key to the 
whole of the mystery with which we are here con- 
fronted. The Jakun, in fact, as will appear in this 
work, form a composite group, consisting of tribes 
which, though largely Jakun or aboriginal Malayan, 

^ favre in J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 240. 
- Besides this, Logan talks of their " strong family likeness to the Malays. " 

I THE JAKUN PROBLEM ^ 

are also in some cases partly Semang and partly 
Sakai, the crossing between these various elements 
making it impossible at present to adopt any proper 
classification beyond specifying both Land and Sea 
Jakun as for the most part aboriginal heathen Malays/ 

Relationship of the Jakun to other Races. 
Our statistics unfortunately at present are far too 
incomplete even to admit of such a comparison being 
made between the two types specially concerned, as was 
possible in dealing with the Semang and Sakai. The 
difficulty is, moreover, largely increased by the fact 
that the influence of the civilised Malays has in this 
part of the world been very widely spread, and hence 
it has hitherto been the custom to label as Malay 
many non-Malayan crania. It must not be forgotten 
that the true Malay should always bear some relation- 
ship to the Mongoliaii or " Tartar'' type, and that it is 
only on measurements obtained from countries where 
the Malay stock is relatively pure {e.g. in the centre 
of Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula) that a table 
of statistics of any practical value can be founded. 
Meanwhile the most important evidence of aboriginal 
Malayan influence in the Peninsula consists in the 
aboriginal Malayan dialects still spoken by the 
Jakun, though even in the case of the Jakun the 
matter has been complicated by the uncritical 
practice of attributing their Malayan vocabulary, as 
well as their physical characteristics, to admixture 
with civilised Peninsular Malays. Whereas, as a 
matter of fact, both the dialects and the general 
characteristics of the Jakun may perhaps rather be 

' Cy. Hamy, p. 25«. ,fl«/t'. Though no Jakun tribe exists which does not contain 

single Jakun tribe may now consist solely some such individuals, and I believe that 

of aboriginal Malayans, I doubt if any in many cases they amount to over 50 %. 
VOL. I I) 

34 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

compared to those of the Malay Archipelago than to 
those of the civilised Peninsular Malay. The table 
in the Appendix, incomplete as it is, will, however, 
perhaps be of some use here as showing the kind of in- 
formation which is required to clear up this part of the 
still unsolved Malayan problem. 

At present all that can be said is that we might 
expect the civilised Malays to be at least as tall as, if 
not taller than, the Jakun, their uncivilised cousins. 
This condition of things does not appear to be borne 
out by the table, but we must wait for fuller information 
before this point can be decided. The skull-index of both 
races is as nearly as possible identical (brachycephalic). 
The hair-character, moreover, is absolutely identical, 
but the skin of the Jakun, doubtless through exposure 
to the weather, is a shade darker, as a rule, than that 
of the Malays. 

General Results. 

The synoptical table to be found in the Appendix 
will, it is hoped, provide certain standards by which to 
test and classify the three main ethnical groups of the 
Peninsula. It need perhaps scarcely be added that 
although many individuals are to be found in the Pen- 
insula who conform pretty closely to one or other of the 
three types indicated, the least degree of intermixture 
(either as between themselves or as between them 
and their civilised neighbours) will tend immediately 
to produce some divergence from these standards. 

Generally speaking, however, and bearing in mind 
these necessary qualifications, the three types may be 
roughly described as follows : — 

A. Semang Type. — Height of men about 1491 
mm. ; of women, 1408 mm. ; skull- index brachy- 

< ^2 

^ H 

:: X 

C-H 

z 

u 

< 

< 

b: 

^ 

;-' 

a; 

< 

^ 

^ 

z 

Q 

< 

<; 

-^ 

^ 

z 

< 

u 

5 

<■ 

Ctf 

C/} 

I THE THREE MAIN TYPES 35 

cephalic (or bullet-headed) to mesaticephalic ; skin of a 
dark copper or rather chocolate-brown colour passing 
into a " shiny black " ; ^ hair (which is generally shaved 
off) woolly, like that of the Negro and the Papuan ; 
forehead low and rounded ; nose remarkably broad 
and flat or "spreading"; cheeks full, but with the 
cheek-bones not very prominent ; eyes round, wide- 
open, and straight {i.e. not "oblique" like those of 
Mongolian races) ; chin feebly developed {i.e. rounded 
off, and frequently almost unmarked) ; mouth variable, 
but rather large as a rule, the lips, which are also 
variable, being generally well formed, but sometimes 
turned outwards or "everted" ; beard, none to speak 
of, as a rule, but when found, thin and straggling, or, 
occasionally, woolly, like the hair itself. 

B. Sakai Type. — In height the Sakai are, I 
think, without doubt, a slightly taller race than the 
Semang or Negritos. The shape of their head, on 
the other hand, is in marked contrast to that of the 
Negritos, as they belong in type to the dolichocephalic, 
or long-headed, races. Their skin-colour varies more 
remarkably than that of any of these tribes, being in 
some extremely dark brown, in others a remarkably 
light yellowish -brown, much lighter than that of 
the Malays. Their hair, too, is long, black, and wavy 
in character, sometimes with a slight reddish tinge in 
reflected light. Their forehead is flat, and projects 
remarkably over the root of the nose, which latter is, 
as a rule, somewhat fine and small, and often slightly 
tilted at the tip. The cheek-bones are very broad, 
especially when considered in relation to the rest of 
the features. Their eyes are a very dark brown, 
small, horizontal, and often half-closed, as different as 

1 Seey. /. A. vol. iv. p. 428. 

36 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

can be from those of the Semang. Their chin is long 
and somewhat sharp and pointed. Their mouth is of 
small size, with lower lip full, loose, and often con- 
spicuously projecting. Their beard is, as a rule, 
almost non-existent, but a few individuals occur who 
are fairly well covered with hair. 

C. Jakun Type. — In height the Jakun appear to 
be, if anything, a little taller than the Sakai (in which 
case they would be the tallest of the three aboriginal 
races). Their head is brachycephalic, or " bullet "- 
shaped. Their skin is generally of a dark coppery 
colour, not unlike that of the Malays, but with a 
tendency to darker shades, which are, doubtless, due 
partly to exposure and partly to their manner of living. 
Their hair is long and straight, or "smooth," and of a 
dark bluish-black tint, such as is invariably found in 
the hair of Mongolian races. Their forehead is 
usually well developed. Their nose is, as a rule, thick, 
fiattish, and short, with wide-open nostrils, though it 
must be noted here that a more developed type occurs. 
Their cheek-bones are very high and well marked, 
like those of the Mongolian type. The face, as a rule, 
is inclined to be fiattish. Their eyes are dark brown, 
of moderate size, and rarely with some slight tendency 
to obliquity. They have, as a rule, a strong chin and 
somewhat square jaws. Their mouth, as a rule, is 
large and broad, though frequently moderate and with 
well-formed lips. Their beard is of the scantiest. 

The establishment of these types may, I think, be 
considered to justify the classification based on hair- 
character which Martin proposes. The Semang he 
describes as Ulotrichi, or woolly-haired tribes, who are 
to be clearly distinguished from the Sakai, who are 
wavy-haired (Cymotrichi). In the third (composite) 

NUMBERS 

37 

group, for which I propose to retain the generally used 
native name of Jakun, I have merely to suggest the 
recognition (for our present purposes) of the Jakun (or 
aboriginal Malayan) type as Lissotrichi, or smooth- 
haired individuals, in the place of Martin's mixed tribes 
that cannot be classed. With this slight modifica- 
tion, I may say that the present work is based entirely 
on Martin's plan of classification, which in this modi- 
fied form may now be given as follows : — 

Group. 
I. 

Hair-character. 

Name of Tribe. 

Known in the 
present work as 

Semang. 

Ulotrichi, or Woolly- 

.Semang^, Menik, or 

haired tribes. 

Pangan. 

II. 

Cymotrichi, or Wavy- 
haired tribes. 

Senoi or Sakai. 

Sakai. 

III. 

Lissotrichi, or Smooth- 

(a) Land Jakun 

Jakun. 

haired tribes. 

or O. Bukit. 

{/>) Sea Jakun or 

Orang Laut. 

O. Laut. 

This list is, as I have just said, merely a classifica- 
tion of racial ^ypes or standards, and does not include 
mixed tribes such as the Kenaboi, Blandas, Besisi, 
and Mantra, which will be included culturally under 
the general title of Jakun, the Malayan aborigines, 
who form a sub-group of the Jakun, being divided 
into the Hill or Land Jakun (Orang Bukit) and Sea 
Jakun (Orang Laut) respectively. 

Numbers. 

It is extremely difficult to form any idea of what 
the real numbers of the aboriginal population of the 
Peninsula may be. What Favre remarks of the 
Jakun applies equally to all the wild races of the 
Peninsula, whose number, as he says, is very difficult 
to ascertain, because part of them are a nomadic 

38 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 

people, so that the same family, and in fact the same 
individuals, appear to-day in one place and next week 
some two or three miles further on ; next month they 
will remove again, to roam the forest or to come back 
to their first habitation, so that those who perceive 
them here and there imagine that they are fresh 
persons, and in their calculation they count the 
same individuals two or three times over. Their 
number, as reported to him, was always much more 
considerable than the number he found upon visiting 
the places themselves.^ 

The most recent (1901) census report of the 
Federated Malay States, though containing- at least 
one clerical error,^ and often doubtless falling far short 
of the truth, is yet our sole guide to the real numbers 
of the aboripfines : — 

o 

Aborigines of Perak. 

Larut 

Matang 

K. Kangsar . 

1021 

Upper Perak 

• 515 

Kinta . 

. 1681 

Lower Perak 

189 

Batang Padang 

. 2808 

Krian 

Selama . 

37 

New Territory 

• 1731 

Total 

7982 

Aborigines of Negri Sembilan. 

Seremban 

157 

Coast . 

174 

Jelebu . 

125 

Kuala Pilah . 

700 

Tampin 

221 

Total . 

1377 

Grand 

Total 

Aborigines of Selangor. 

Kuala Lumpur . . . 219 

Ulu Selangor . . . 470 

Klang . . . . .172 

K. Langat 
K. Selangor . 
Ulu Langat . 

Total . 

Aborigines of Pahang. 

114 
1875 

,,, ^ , f K. Lipis . . 2467 

Ulu Pahang-! „ u j t> . /c^--. 

< *♦ ;. . , , I Raub and Bentong 669 

Temerloh 

Pekan .... 

Kuantan 

Total 

1598 

2391 

215 

7340 

18,574 

1 See Favre vsx J. I. A. vol. ii. pp. forest upon the approach of a European. 
253-255. Against this statement must, - In one of the Perak districts immi- 

however, be set the inveterate tendency grants from India are included as 

of these tribes to hide themselves in the aborigines. 

I MIXTURE OF RACES 39 

Allowing 25,000 as a probable minimum for the 
"F.M.S.," the Straits Settlements, Kedah, East 
Coast States, and Johor should swell the total to at 
least 35,000 or 40,000.' 

Mixture of Races. 

According to Vaughan-Stevens, the Sakai (" Senoi " 
or "Blandas," as he calls them, giving a quite un- 
warranted extension to the term Blandas) ^ are a 
Negrito tribe with a very large admixture of civilised 
Malay blood, which he supposes to have obscured the 
original characteristics of the tribe. This view (the 
Pan-Negrito theory) is, however, as has already been 
said, quite untenable, since it is obvious that what- 
ever else may happen anthropologically, the fusion of 
two brachycephalic tribes, or even two mesaticephalic 
tribes, could not possibly produce a mixed tribe which 
was mainly dolichocephalic. 

Vaughan-Stevens leaves out of sight, moreover, 
the extremely potent cultural and religious barrier 
which divides the civilised Mohammedan Malays from 
the rude heathen tribes of the jungle. In the case of 
a Malay mating with one of these heathen women, 
the children as a rule follow the religion of the father,^ 
and become merged in his race, the only important 
exception being the case of Malay traders living with 
Sakai women in the Sakai country, and then deserting 
them and their children, in which case the children 
remain with the tribe. Hence it is the civilised Malay, 
and not the uncivilised aboriginal race, that is most 

* For fuller details, showing (lis- neighbourhood, 
tribution of the sexes, see Appendix. •■ Among the jungle tribes themselves 

^ Blandas or B^landas. It is probably it seems that the tribal name follows the 

a mere coincidence that Ptolemy speaks male line ; sons-in-law join their father- 

of a river Palandas (apparently the river in-law'ssettlement. — Vaughan-Stevens, 

Muar) and a town Palanda in the same ii. 90, 94. 

40 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

affected when the two live in close proximity (as 
indeed has been observed in Kedah by Logan, and 
elsewhere). On the other hand, unions between 
Malay women and heathen tribesmen, although they 
are certainly known to occur,^ are nevertheless of the 
rarest description ; and whereas in former days a 
woman who so disgraced her family as to mate with 
one who was regarded as little better than the brutes 
that perish, would have paid the penalty with her life, 
she still has to undergo an extreme form of social 
ostracism, which must inevitably act as a strong 
deterrent. Hence the most appreciable admixture of 
blood is only as between one wild tribe and another. 

This, which I believe to be the normal state of 
things, has one very important exception, for in various 
parts of what is known as the Negri Sembilan, but 
especially in Johol, a number of small groups of 
Sumatran Malays (principally of Menangkabau origin) 
have amalgamated with the local groups of aboriginal 
tribes on what were (nominally at least) honourable 
and equal terms, under which the Batins or chiefs of the 
Jakun even retained, for a time at least, their full share 
of authority in the mixed government thus established.^ 

The late Martin Lister, in writing of the Rembau 

' Mr. C. O. Blagden informed me had previously been the mistress of 

of a case at Malacca which was re- more than one white man, she died 

ported to him by the woman's family. suddenly soon after. And such cases 

Mr. Hale supports the view expressed have not been uncommon. The fact 

in the text by writing, that in his that there is the same objection to an 

many years' experience he has never alliance between a Malay woman and 

met with a case of the kind {i.e. of a a Chinese or a Tamil, clearly shows 

Malay woman marrying a Sakai man). that this prejudice is based on religious 

He explains this by saying that the scruples. 

Mohammedan naturally does not like '^ Thus Mr. Hale writes me that the 

his women, who are virtually his slaves, " Waris " tribe in Rembau was divided 

to get out of his control, and that into two sections, called " Beduanda 

when the daughter of a well-known Jawa" and "Beduanda Jakun" respec- 

S. Ujong chief went to live with a tively ; and that the paramount chief of 

Chinaman at Malacca, although she Rembau (called " Penghulu " or " Un- 

« i~ 

cu y 

S E- M 'C' 

O ^ 

bj) 

rt 

c 

^ 

ci 

o 

A- 

>. 

_ 

J= 

(11 

hj) M 

rt 

Machado. 

Young Sakai Gikl in Centre (mixed Type showing strong Negrito Strain). 

Caught when young in Uhi Lipis, and now in the To' Raja of Jelai's household. The 
other two are Malay children. 

Vol. I. p. 41. 

I MIXTURE OF RACES 41 

Malays/ gives reasons for this remarkable divergence, 
pointing out that whereas the rest of the Peninsular 
Malays at the time of the Menangkabau immigration 
were, speaking generally, mere piratical freebooters 
bent on conquest and rapine, the Menangkabau people, 
on the other hand, were peaceful agriculturalists who 
had been forced to emigrate through the pressure of 
population in their own country. Hence all that the 
latter desired was land for cultivation, and this they 
were quite satisfied to obtain by peaceful means. And 
hence in the case of these Menangkabau colonies there 
has been a true amalgamation between them and the 
Jakun of Rembau, which has not been the case elsewhere. 

It must not be forgotten, as I have already said, 
that large masses of the soi-disant Malay population 
in many parts of the Malay States from Kedah to 
Singapore are undoubtedly the descendants of savage 
tribesmen who, by intermarriage with the civilised 
Malays and by the adoption of the higher level of 
culture which in these parts accompanies conversion 
to the Mohammedan religion, have in the course of 
a few generations become barely distinguishable from 
the ordinary Malay inhabitants, of the western and 
southern portions of the Peninsula. 

Traces of such absorption, in which the meta- 
morphosis is not quite complete, are certainly to be 
found, for instance, in the State of Kedah, in which, 
some years back, it was noticed by Logan that the 
Malayan population approximated in their general 
appearance to the wild Negrito tribes of the interior. 

dang ") was chosen from each of these Negri Sembilan, aboriginal descent is 

sections alternately. " Originally the claimed, in order to prove the owner- 

Batins {i.e. the Jakun chiefs) had a say ship of land." 

in the matter, but now they are squeezed > In J. R. A. S., S. B., No. 32, 

out of it." And yet "all over the p. 300. 

42 RACIAL AFFINITIES paut 

The descendants of aboriginal slaves would, of course, 
form a large factor in the problem. 

This process of absorption is, moreover, still pro- 
ceeding with quite as much rapidity as in the past, 
and where it appears that the numbers of the abo- 
rigines are dwindling, we may rest convinced that, in 
the majority of cases at all events, their gradual dis- 
appearance is rather due to conversion and absorption 
than to the proximity of civilisation, which in the 
case of these tribes does not appear to have produced 
such deleterious effects as it is said to have done in 
other parts of the world/ 

In spite of this important exception, however, the 
amount of admixture of Malay blood, even in the Jakun 
group (to say nothing of the Sakai or Semang groups, 
where the mixture is admittedly less), has been un- 
doubtedly very much exaggerated, especially by 
writers who failed to recognise the "savage Malay" 
element, and regarded every approach to the Malay 
type of features as evidence of civilised Malay ad- 
mixture. 

In conclusion we may say that, except in the 
northern and some of the central states, where the 
circumstances were different, the "civilised Malay" 
element has not appreciably affected the racial purity 
of the wild tribes of the Peninsula, the main admixture 
(which in many places is obvious enough) having 
been among themselves. Hence the chief forms of 
admixture that are worth considering are as follows : — 

^ See p. 30, par. 35, of the recent 18,574 persons. 

(1901) Federated Malay States Census Mr. Hale writes me that the point 

Report, where we are told that the of religion often means nothing but the 

returns show that there is little tend- ceremony of circumcision, and that 

ency on the part of the aborigines to converted slaves of this kind often 

decrease, and that they now number reverted to the jungle (on emancipa- 

(in the Federated Malay States alone) tion). 

Jakun urn I markiiu S. 

iN, SKl.ANHiuK. 

I'ol. /./. 42. 

AKux OF .\[ixi:u TvPK, Rlkit Pkual, Selangok 

Vci. I. A 43. 

I RACE-CHARACTERS OF NEGRITOS 43 

(i) Semang + Sakai, or " Semang-Sakai," 

(2) Semang + Jakun, or " Semang-Jakun," 

(3) Sakai + Jakun, or " Sakai-Jakun," 

and further crosses arising from the various mixed 
races thus produced.^ 

I. — Race-Characters of Semang. 

The Semang country runs (roughly speaking) from 
Chaiya" and Ulu Patani (Singora and Patalung) to 
Kedah in the north of the Peninsula, and thence to 
mid-Perak and Northern Pahang. 

Wallace^ states that the height of the Semang 
varies between 1266 mm. and 14 16 mm. This latter 
figure is, however, certainly too low. 

Martin lays stress on the fact that the sexual 
difference in height is actually greater in tribes of 
small stature {i.e. Semang and Senoi) than it is 
amongst taller tribes of the wild races, especially, 
e.g., among the Blandas, His rough estimate of the 
average height of a male Semang is about the same 
as that of a Sakai (1500 mm.). De Morgan says the 
Semang are the taller, but the fact is doubtful.'^ 

The following account of the physical characters 
of the Peninsular Negritos includes measurements" 
taken by Mr. Laidlaw and myself in the Ulu Lebih 
district of Kelantan, and by myself at Jarum : — 

^ That the foregoing statement of that any stranger who, while staying 

the case is the true one, appears even in a Jakun house, was able to talk the 

from the remarks of Vaughan-Stevens husband off to sleep, acquired thereby 

himself, when he says that " Half- an acknowledged right to usurp his 

bloods, with Malay or Chinese fathers, marital privileges for the lime being. 
are quite unknown among the wild - W. Smyth's Five Years in Siani, 

tribes, but that such admixture is per- ii. 76. 

mitted, although 7iot liked, by those •"' Quoted by Lane-Fox, J. A. I. vii. 

clans who live in close contact with 437 ; cp. y. R. A. S., S. B., No. 7. 
the Malays" (V. B. G. A. xxiii. 833). * For measurements, see LHonnne, 

Mr. Hale, on the other hand, in- ii. 552 ; and Wray, Per. Mus. N. iii. 

forms me that among the Malays in pp. 33-35. 
N. Sembilan it was an accepted belief ■' Given in extenso in Appendix. 

44 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

The average height of five adult males that v^e 
measured was 1491 mm. (about 4 feet 9 inches), that 
of three w^omen 1408 mm., or some 3^^ inches less. 

The face was round, the forehead low, rounded, 
narrow, and projecting, or, as it were, " swollen." The 
nose was short and flattened, the nostrils much dis- 
tended, and the breadth of the nose was remarkably 
great, five adult males having an average of 10 1.2, and 
three adult females an average of 97.4. The cheek- 
bones were broad, and the lips were sometimes full and 
turned outwards, or "everted," but not as a rule thick. 

The jaws often protruded slightly, but I did not 
see any case of marked prognathism. The ears were 
small. The six front teeth in the upper jaw were 
often filed so as to present a concave surface anteriorly, 
in imitation of the common Malay practice. The 
teeth as a rule were white and good, except in ad- 
vanced age. In one or two cases only they were dis- 
coloured with betel-juice, and in one case caries was 
present. The milk-teeth of a child when examined were 
perfectly normal and regular. The shoulders were com- 
paratively broad. The forearms, with two exceptions, 
appeared not to be so long relatively as they are in 
the Andamanese. The exceptions were two Pangan 
at Jarum, whose arms were so long as to present a 
pithekoid character. But the number of persons ob- 
served is too small to separate them from the Pangan 
of Kelantan. The person was usually well developed. 

The head measurements taken by ourselves give 
a mesaticephalic index as an average ; for five men the 
average was 78.9, for three women 81. i. This feature, 
however, is clearly variable, as one of the men (Pan- 
dak) had an index of y^.^, and a Pangan at Jarum 
one of 74.4, as against an index of 85 in the skull 

.Sakai Girl (showi.ng Negrito Strain"), 

Living at Batu Pahat Johor but originally from UIu Lipis Pahang. Carrying a bamboo 
cylinder for water. 

Vol. /. /. 4 = 

I RACE-CHARACTERS OF NEGRITOS 45 

collected by Grubauer, which means an index of about 
87 in the living person.^ 

Martin again states that all the Mendi' ( = Semang) 
measured by him were mesaticephalic, with a strong 
tendency to dolichocephaly. 

The following notes on a male skeleton found by 
myself in Kedah, and averages of measurements taken 
from living Semang (Pangan) in Kelantan and Patani, 
may be of interest. I am indebted for them to Dr. 
W. L. H. Duckworth, of Jesus College, Cambridge, 
Vv'ho has also described a Semang skull recently 
collected by Dr. Grubauer.^ 

The skull viewed in norma verticalis is ellipsoid and mesaticephalic. The 
glabellar prominences are very moderate in amount. Muscular ridges are feebly 
developed, and the zygomatic arch is slender. The nasal profile is comparatively 
flat, but the nasal spine is large. Prognathism of the subnasal and dental type 
is well marked. The nasal bones are large and rather flat, the aperture pyri- 
formis is cordate in outline. The palate is hypsiloid, the teeth large and 
blackened. The anterior surfaces of the upper incisors and canines have been 
filed. Chin-prominence slight, ascending ramus of mandible short. The skull 
should be described as mesaticephalic, metriocephalic, mesognathous, chamie- 
prosopic, microsemic, platyrhine, mesoprosopic, and niesocephalic, and on the 
whole probably represents an intermediate form between the dolichocephalic and 
brachycephalic types. 

The vertebral column shows no particular marks of inferiority. The scapula; 
are small and relatively very broad, the coracoid is large, and the upper border 
very straight. The clavicles show signs of disease, but have a very remarkable form 
which can hardly be altogether pathological. The peculiarity consists in the 
exaggeration of the normal curve (with concavity directed forward) of the outer 
part of the bone ; the two portions of the bone meet at about a quarter of its 
length from the outer end, at an angle which in the right clavicle is nearly 90°. 

The pelvis aflbrds the best indication of the sex of the skeleton. The crests 
of the ilia are not so much incurved anteriorly as in the European pelvis. The 
femurs are rather straight in the shaft, with distinct accessory adductor tubercles. 

Generally speaking, the characters of the skull are not such as to enable us 
to refer it to any well - recognised type without hesitation. Certain marks of 
inferiority, which may be regarded not as racial peculiarities, but as constituting 
retentions of conditions normal in infancy, .should be noticed. These, which 
often occur in lower or primitive races, and are spoken of, with others, as 
"infantile" features, are the rotund contour of norma occipitalis, and the short- 
ness of the ascending ramus of the mandible. The conditions of the cranial 
suture leave no doubt as to the skull having reached maturity. 

The conformation of the skeleton of the nose, and the type of prognathism, 
constitute resemblances to skulls met with not unfrequently amongst the negro 
races, especially the races of Central Africa, rather than amongst Oceanic negroes. 

1 In mesaticephalic subjects the possibility of Sakai admixture should, I think, 
be discounted. - See Appendix. 

46 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

The lack of characters usually determining sex in the skull is also in favour of this 
view. On the other hand, no definite resemblance in respect of the cranium can 
be traced to the Bush natives of South Africa, whereas the facial features resemble 
certain crania from Sumatra, Java, Borneo, and one from the Andamans. Again, 
the size and proportions of the scapula are not unlike those of the Bushman 
of Africa ; an accessory adductor tubercle appears on the femurs in both, and in 
both the lower ends of the femurs are slender. Differences, however, obtain in 
the sacra, and on the wliole the Semang's bones are tlie larger. The great length 
of the forearm said to characterise the Andamanese is absent in the Semang.^ 

Sir William Turner describes a skeleton from 
Pahang," which differs notably from the above. It is 
microcephalic and brachycephalic. There is, however, 
no precise evidence as to whether this skeleton belonged 
to an undoubted Semang, and as brachycephaly is a 
mark of certain tribes belonging to the third group of 
Martin's classification, it might perhaps equally be re- 
ferred to one of these. Another skeleton described by 
Virchow (quoted by Turner, loc. cit.) shows also 
differences in other directions.^ 

Hair. 

The hair of the Semang that we observed was in 
most cases characteristically Negrito — crisp, short, 
and very curly, in fact, actually woolly in the purer 
types of the tribe. In colour it was of a brownish- 
black, not a bluish -black like that of Malays (and 
other Mongoloid races). In section it varied from an 
oval or ellipse at the thicker or basal end, to almost a 
circle near the tip. In other words, it possessed a 
Negrito character in respect of section ; ^ and the 
measurement of the spirals was about 15 mm. The 
chin-hairs were few and straggling, and in only two 

1 For a fuller description of this end of Part I. and also the Appendix 

skeleton see W. L. H. Duckworth in of this book. 

_/. A. I. vol. xxxii. (1902), p. 142 5^^^. ; ^ Trans. J?. S. Ediit. vol. xl. part 

and for his description of a brachy- i. No. 6. 

cephalic Semang skull purchased by ^ See Appendix, 

the Royal College of Surgeons, see Ap- ■• For a detailed description of this 

pendix ; and for other Semang measure- hair kindly supplied by Dr. W. L. H. 

ments, see note by Dr. Duckworth at Duckworth, see Appendix. 

I RACE-CHARACTERS OF NEGRITOS 47 

cases did we see a Semang with even the sHghtest 
beard/ which in one of the two cases was closely- 
curled and woolly, in the other thin and straggling. 

In another passage Vaughan - Stevens is quoted as saying that the half- 
breed Semangs are the only members of these tribes who could be considered 
as comparatively well provided with hair, and that even in their case the hairiness 
stands in almost direct relation to the mixture of blood. ^ The E. Semang 
(Pangan) when of pure blood has so little beard or whiskers that he is ashamed 
for his little scrubby beard to be seen, and therefore plucks it out. Yet he tries 
to retain the moustache, so that it may "distinguish him from a woman" {sic). 

Elsewhere we are told that " The hair of the Semang (Menik) is less inclined 
to turn grey in old age than that of the Malays, grey hair being in fact regarded 
as quite exceptional." ^ 

Skin-colour. 

The skin was of a dark chocolate-brown in the 
Semang that we measured in Kelantan, approximating 
in the case of some of the Kedah Negritos to the 
glossy black mentioned by Anderson/ In the old 
people it was much scarred and sometimes diseased, 
the disease most prevalent being that called " kurap " 
by the Pvlalays, but of a mild type. The colour of No. 3 
of Topinard's scale corresponded very closely with the 
colour of most of the Eastern Semang measured by 
myself. In the younger individuals the skin was 
smooth and clean and the body physically well de- 

^ For a fuller account see J. A. I. tendency towards it that the source can- 

xxxii. 151. For hair-sections see not be mistaken, although the hair of 

Montano, PI. xxxi. In another place the rest of the family may more nearly 

Vaughan-Stevens remarks as follows : — approach the Sakai (Blandas) type. 

" The peculiar spirally tufted (' pep- The pure types of either kind are very 

per-corn ') hair of the E. Semang (Pan- seldom seen there ; but rather they over- 

gan) has kept its influence up to the lap and produce intermediate groups, 

present day in that district in Pahang which show in some cases more and in 

where the half-breed descendants of the others less of a tendency to possess the 

E. Semang (Pangan), Tembeh (Temia), curly hair referred to." 
and Sakai (Blandas) were settled as ^ j^ other words, the hairiness is 

prisoners of the Rawa Malays ever due to the presence of the Sakai ele- 

since their pure-blooded forefathers ment. 
were first sold to the Malays of Pahang. ^ Z.f. E. xx\x. 178. 

In a family of this mixed type it often '' J. Anderson, quoted by Col. James 

happens that one or several of the Low, states that the Semang of Treng- 

children show in this respect either a ganu were not of such a ' 'jet-blcuk and 

complete reversion to the E. Semang ij^lossy appearance " as those of Kedah 

(Pangan) type, or at least so decided a [J. I. .4. vol. iv. p. 428). 

48 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

veloped, but in older individuals it was often much 
scarred, and in two or three cases slightly diseased. 

With regard to the skin-colour of the Negritos, Vaughan-Stevens remarks that 
among the wilder Semang, or " Menik " (the men of which tribe wear nothing 
but a cord or girdle and the women a waist-fringe that lets the light through), 
the colour of the skin is very uniform. The W. Semang (? Semang-Sakai 
tribes), however, offer nearly as great a variety as the Malays. The Semang 
(Menik) did not regard the lighter - coloured Sakai (Blandas) as superiors (!). 
Their god Pie was dark like themselves. Although the Semang is of darker 
colour than the Sakai (Blandas), and appears to be less influenced by heat, he 
(V. -St.) was still of opinion that this capacity for bearing heat arises rather 
from his constitution, than from the darker colour of his skin {vide remarks on 
this subject as affecting the Sakai, infra). 

The pronounced nomadic character of all these tribes makes it impossible to 
arrive at any conclusions as to the effect produced by altitude, soil, shade, dust, 
or clothes upon the texture and colour of the skin. The family or tribe lives 
perhaps for a month upon a hill at an elevation of some thousands of feet above 
the sea, next month at the foot of the same hill ; at one time in the thick, dark 
jungle, and at another in the hot, open plains. 

According to the Malays, the Negritos never wash themselves, and therefore 
possess as a rule a powerful odour, and the statement is certainly a true one. 
When, for instance, for the sake of the experiment, he (V.-St. ) had induced the 
E. Semang (Pangan) to wash themselves with soap, they did not appear to 
retain any particular smell afterwards. But when, immediately afterwards, he ac- 
companied them on a rapid march, and after going some distance from them 
had again returned to their company, the odour was distinctly noticeable.* 

Si^ht. 
The eyes of the Semang that we examined, which 
were round, wide-open, and horizontal, were uniformly 
of a very rich deep brown in colour ; in one case only, 
that of an old man, they were of a greyish-brown tint. 
The Semang as a race were far from being unpleasant- 
looking people, the most striking peculiarity in their 
appearance being a certain wild look about the region 
of the eyes, probably due, in part, to the great width 
between them, and to the curious depression of the 
upper part of the nose, as well as to a natural rest- 
lessness of the eyes themselves, which these tribes 
possess in common with wild animals. Their eyesight 
appeared to be good of its kind, and in the few cases 
that we tested the colour-vision was normal.^ 

* Z.f. E. xxix. 174-176. are given by Wray, Per. Mus. N. 

^ A few sight-statistics of Semang iii. p. 38. 

I RACE-CHARACTERS OF NEGIUrOS 49 

The eyes of the E. vSemang (Pangan), when they are of pure blood, have 
the conjunctiva of a deep yellow colour ; whereas the Sakai (Blandas) do not 
{v. sitpra).^ 

The E. Semang (Pangan) show no traces of short-sight and are " at the 
top of the scale " in quickness of observation ; this quality, however, standing in 
inverse ratio to the progress made by their tribe in civilisation. ^ 

Hearing. 

The ears of the Semang that we observed were 
distinctly small, and their hearing appeared ordinarily- 
acute. In one case, however, that of a youngish man, 
slight deafness was noticeable. 

The sense of hearing among the E. Semang (Pangan), though not so acute 
as among the Jakun, is nevertheless sharper than among the more civilised 
W. Semang, Sakai (Blandas), or Tembeh (Temia). 

On the other hand, exceptional sharpness of hearing occurred more frequently 
among the W. Semang than among any of the other tribes mentioned.-^ 

Hands and Feet. 

There is no doubt that these wild nomadic tribes 
frequently meet with accidents. Out of the few men 
that we measured, one suffered from a deformed finger, 
and another had lost the little toe of his left foot. 

It is very difficult to answer the question concerning the usual position of the 
palm of the hand, i.e. whether it is directed forwards, or backwards, or sideways. 
The hands are so constantly occupied in the case of both sexes that they are very 
seldom at rest. So far, however, as he (V.-St. ) had been able to observe it, the 
palm was held sideways by the Negritos, i.e. directed towards the leg or a little 
towards the front, whereas by the Sakai (Blandas) and Jakun it was directed 
backwards. 

The aborigines were at first much perplexed by being asked whether when 
their fist was closed they could still stretch out one finger of the hand without 
unclosing the others. Both the Semang and Sakai (Blandas) could, however, 
do this very easily when it was explained to them. 

In measuring the width of the span between the thumb and the little or 
middle finger, he (V.-St.) was struck by their inability to open their fingers 
freely.'' 

The most noticeable point about the feet of the 
Semang is the remarkable inward curve of the hallux, 

1 Z.f.E. xxix. 176. ^ //'. p. 182. 

^ lb. p. 181. ^ lb. pp. 190, 191, 194. 

VOL I E 

50 RACIAL AFFINITIES 

as shown in the tracings of Pangan feet which we took 
in Ulu Kelantan. 

The following passage from Vaughan-Stevens about 
the walk of the aborigines in general (" Orang Utan ") 
applies perfectly to the Semang : — 

" I have tried to obtain some data on the walk of the Orang Utan, but I 
find that this is scarcely possible, from reasons related to the great variability of 
their environment. In the first place, it is very rare to find a man who is free 
from cuts, cracks, or thorn-pricks ; for according to their custom they go bare- 
foot in spite of the roughness of the land and of the obstacles and dangers with 
which the thick vegetation threatens them. This influences their walk in one 
respect. In the second place, they are appreciably influenced by the character 
of the jungle through which they have been wandering for some weeks previously. 
From habit they adapt their walk to the peculiarities of the way by which they 
have to travel. A path (for instance) where thorns that have fallen from the trees 
and creeping plants surround him causes the man to walk carefully and slowly, 
and at each step to delay a moment before he trusts the whole weight of the 
body to the foot ; and this method of walking is retained some days from mere 
habit, even when the thorny jungle is left and the path is once more smooth and 
level. 

" After observing a man for a whole day, I found that he employed no fewer 
than eight different ways of walking, which varied with the nature of the ground 
to be traversed. And the ground to be traversed suff'ers such constant changes 
throughout the life of the Orang Utan that I really do not know which of these 
ways of walking I should describe as his most usual method. Contrary to the 
European in general, he has few or no level paths to go by, and hence the gait 
which he adopts on such a path would not be his usual way of walking, but 
would be precisely the method which he employs most rarely. 

" The footsteps of the Negritos, I am prepared to maintain, are almost straight 
in the majority of cases, whereas all those of the Orang Utan (?) turn outwards. 
In all races, however, there is so great a difference in the [usual] angles that it 
is impossible to say which angle is the real standard."^ 

Locomotion. ^ 

With regard to strength and endurance in walking, the wild E. Semang 
(Pangan) stand in the front rank. Then come the Jakun and the civilised (W. ) 
Semang ; and, last of all, the various tribes of Sakai (Blandas and Tembeh). 

The Semang are bad runners, but they are as quick as an eel or a snake in 
getting through marshy swamps or forest, their small bodies being very pliant and 
supple. In getting fast through bushes or mangrove jungle they are better than 
the Sakai (Blandas), although the latter have the better sense of direction in 
unknown forest. 

Climbing, 

The following remarks, from the dialectal forms, 
evidently refer to the Semang : — 

^ Z./. £. xxix. 191, 192. 2 /(j_ pp_ ig^^ ip^. 

11 

I RACE-CHARACTERS OF NEGRITOS 51 

Climbing, which in general is called " Lu-ig " ("Looig"), is designated by 
three different names, according to the method employed : 

1. " Chidwad " (" Chidward "), in which the foot is straight, exactly as in 
the position of the Sakai (Blandas) in the photograph I sent you. 

2. " Tinbon " (" Tinhorn"), in which the feet grasp the tree with the inner 
side of the sole. 

3. '*Ti-Nangan" (" Tee-Nungarn "), in which a rope is used (precisely as 
in Ceylon), or in which the stem is embraced by the arms and legs at the same 
time (European fashion). The grasp of the hands is called " Ma-Cheb." 

A specimen of rope sent to Berlin by Vaughan- 
Stevens was labelled as follows : — 

" Nangan ('Nungarn'), the rope used in climbing, for fastening the ankles 
together, whilst the inside of each foot is pressed against the tree. " 

In the same passage Vaughan-Stevens speaks very 
contemptuously of the Semang as climbers — 

"The Semang are bad climbers; an ordinary school -girl would excel 
the best of them. For climbing a straight, high stem, the Sakai (Blandas) is 
the better. The Semang is nervous when high up in the air, especially if the 
wind blows a little. The winds are for him the messengers of diseases ; he does 
not like to be unprotected in their domain at the top of a high tree." ^ 

This description, however, is most unfair to the 
Semang, many of whom, at least, can climb almost 
like monkeys. I myself once saw two of the Kedah 
Semang run several yards up trees by putting the flat 
of their feet against the trunk and their arms round it. 

S^vimniing.'^ 

The Semang are very bad swimmers, but the majority of them know how 
to swim, which is called " Kijuaij " (" Keejooije "), and in water which only 
reaches up to the breast they splash merrily about. They swim exactly in the 
same way as the Northern Slalays, swimming on the breast and paddling with 
the hands like dogs, and drawing the legs vertically upwards from the knees, 
and then straightening them vigorously, thus making a great splashing. Of deep 
or rushing turbid water they have superstitious fears ; they are afraid, as a child 
is afraid of the dark, as they "do not know what their god Kari (' Kee,' jfV) 
may send to draw them down into the depths." 

Throiving."^ 

In throwing the [" tame "] Semang is as clumsy as a European woman. The 
action is the same, i.e. with the shoulder instead of with the wrist and elbow. 

' Z.f. E. xxix. 199. - lb. p. 198. 3 /^ p 200. 

52 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

Sensitiveness to Pain. 
The Semang appear to be less sensitive to pain than the Sakai (Blandas).^ 

Physioi^noiny. 

The open mouth is sometimes covered by the hand, or the latter is carried up 
to some part of the head. 

When a man is indignant or defiant he frowns. He does not, however, at 
the same time clench his fists. 

In " simple " people the corners of the mouth are very slightly depressed, and 
the adjacent extremities of the eyebrows raised, by the muscle that the French 
call the " grief muscle." 

In the more intelligent the eyes sparkle, the skin round and under them being 
wrinkled, and the mouth slightly drawn back at the corners. 

When one man sneers or jeers at another it rarely happens that the corners 
of the upper lip over the canine or eye teeth are raised on the side facing the 
man whom he addresses. 

A dogged or obstinate expression can be very easily recognised among the 
Semang. 

It is uncertain whether any gesture of contempt exists. 

Disgust is expressed by a sudden expiration of the breath, something like 
incipient vomiting. 

In the case of extreme fear the Semang children remain quite quiet. The 
met sit down quietly and frequently utter a sharp hissing noise. Both men and 
women open their mouths and eyes. 

To show that he cannot prevent something being done, or cannot himself do 
something, he slightly raises his eyebrows, and keeps his mouth somewhat open. 

The children pout markedly when they are sulky, and run away quietly. 

To express affirmation the head is thrust forwards, whereas to express negation 
the eyes are cast dovvn.- 

Physical Endurance. 

Vaughan-Stevens remarks that he did not observe any difference between these 
races in the power of enduring heat, e.g. when they had been exposed through 
the whole day to the sun on a journey, except as regards their general \^sic, 
? individual] power of enduring fatigue. Elsewhere he remarks that in the sensi- 
tiveness of the head to the sun's heat very little difference (between the three 
races) at first probably existed. [This point, however, is a difficult one to establish, 
since] the Semang (Menik) wear nothing as a rule but a head-band, and hence 
scarcely feel any special increase of the sun's heat. 

There is never any appreciable degree of cold in the plains of the Peninsula, 
and even such falls of temperature as occur are never of long duration. The 
cold wet winds of the mountains are, however, felt more by the E. Semang 
(Pangan) and Tembeh (Temia)^ than the Sakai. The wild E. Semang (Pangan), 
however, can bear such low temperatures as occasionally occur without the least 
sign of discomfort, when the more civilised tribes are reduced to cowering over a 
fire with chattering teeth. 

1 Z.f. E. xxix. 203. omitted. Even the answers given by 

2 Answers to questions drawn up by Vaughan-Stevens with regard to the 
Darwin, collected by V.-St., and pub- Semang are sometimes inconsistent, 
lished in V. B. G. A. xxviii. 270-272. ^ Vaughan - Stevens ascribes this 
The answers referring to the Sakai greater sensitiveness of the Tembeh to 
and Jakun are valueless, the two races the fact of their constitution having 
being confused by V.-St., and are hence been enfeebled by disease ! 

I SUMMARY OF NEGRITO CULTURE 53 

The Negritos themselves acknowledge that the Semang (Menik) child 
generally suffers more when in want of food than the Sakai (Blandas) and Jakun 
children. ^ 

Summary of Semang Culture.^ 

The Semang are the most nomadic of all these 
tribes, the wilder ones never staying, it is alleged, 
more than three days in one place. But few of them 
have taken to agriculture, and they obtain their liveli- 
hood by hunting, fishing, and trapping, by digging up 
wild roots and tubers, and by gathering the various 
jungle fruits as they come into season. 

They are fond of tobacco, but very seldom indulge 
in betel-chewing, of which, in fact, I never saw an 
instance among the Semang of Kedah and Ulu Patani. 
They wear to some extent the loin-cloth of tree-bark 
(the bark selected being in some cases that of the 
upas or poison-tree), but their distinctive costume 
appears to be a raere girdle of leaves, or, as especially 
on festal occasions, a peculiar girdle manufactured from 
the long black shiny strings (really the rhizomorph) 
of a toad-stool ! 

The wildest of the Semang do not appear as a 
race to tattoo, or scarify, either the face or the body, 
though in some cases they may have learnt the custom 
(of scarification) from the Sakai. They (the men 
especially) often shave the head, and not unfrequently 
about half a dozen of their front teeth will be seen 
to have been filed, though this is not necessarily a 
Semang custom. The women wear in their hair a 
magic comb which is believed to avert disease and 
danger. The Semang do not circumcise. Their dis- 
tinctive weapon is the bow with poisoned arrows, 

' Z. f. E. xxix. 202, 203. 
- For Col. Temple's comparison of Semang with Andamancse v. Appendix. 

54 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

though many of them have now adopted the blowpipe 
of the Sakai and Jakun. 

Their habitations are of the most primitive descrip- 
tion, generally consisting of natural shelters under 
overhanging rocks, or of the simplest form of leaf- 
shelters, erected either on the ground or between the 
branches of trees. The most advanced type of these 
leaf-shelters was a shelter made long enough to accom- 
modate the entire tribe and furnished with their re- 
markable bamboo bed-places. They have no boats, 
but occasionally use rough bamboo rafts for drifting 
down stream. Their musical instruments are all of 
bamboo, and consist of simple kinds of " stamping " 
instruments (intended for beating time rather than for 
making music), the nose-flute and the Jew's-harp. 
They have no drums. 

They barter jungle produce with the Malays, but 
do not work for the latter to so great an extent as the 
Jakun. Their religious ideas are of great interest. 
They have a kind of deities called Kari and Pie, but 
these appear, like some of the " high gods " of the 
Australian " Blackfellows," to be rather of the nature 
of mythological personages or otiose gods than real 
divinities, as, although they have many divine attri- 
butes, there is practically no trace of an actual cult. 
The Semang marriage rite is of the slightest, but 
they are strict monogamists, and both sexes are faith- 
ful to the marriage tie. It is said by Malays that they 
formerly devoured their dead, burying the head only ; 
this assertion may rest on some old Semang practice 
of disinterring the corpse, but they now invariably 
bury the deceased entire. They have no great fear 
of the ghosts of the deceased, such as is shown so 
strongly by the Sakai and the Jakun, 

Sakai of S. Pekak 

P'oi. I. A 55. 

RACE-CHARACTERS OF SAKAI 55 

II. — Race-Characters of Sakai. 

The Sakai appear to have their racial focus in 
the mountain ranges of S.E. Perak and N.W. Pa- 
hang. Their district marches on the north (in Perak) 
with that of the Semang, the dividing line being 
stated by some observers to be the Perak river, and 
by others (De Morgan, Hale, and others) to be the 
Plus river already referred to. There can be no 
doubt, however, that there has been a considerable 
admixture ; witness the photographs of some so-called 
" Semang " tribes of Perak and elsewhere, which 
frequently include types that are distinctly Sakai ; 
certainly no really distinct geographical boundary can 
be drawn between the two races, and on the whole it 
would seem that the much-talked-of line of demarca- 
tion between the Semang and Sakai is (as far as race 
and culture go) no line at all, but a belt of mixed tribes 
which run, e.g., through mid- Perak and N. Pahang.^ 

On the east coast the Sakai do not appear to 
extend far into either Kelantan or Trengganu, though 
they are found in Pahang, their admixture with Pangans 
commencing somewhere near Clifford's line, e.g., in 
the district of Ulu Jelai. Westward of the central 
chain, on the other hand, they appear to extend 
through the interior of Selangor, and thence, in 
the form of a narrowing wedge (and with a rapidly 
increasing admixture of Jakun blood), through the 
inland districts of Negri Sembilan, at least as far south 
as Malacca, and almost certainly as far south as Johor. 

' For further notes on their distribu- fortunately no clear proof that the 

tion, see, for instance, De la Croix's writer is always able to distinguish 

article in Rev. d'' Ethnogr. vol. i. No. between Semang and Sakai. 
4 {1882), p. 320 ; though there is un- 

56 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

As, however, the exact racial limits of the Sakai have 
not yet been defined (if, indeed, they will ever be 
definable), it has been thought best to draw the line 
between the Sakai and the Jakun at the point where 
the influence of the latter commences to be fairly 
certain and appreciable, i.e. at Southern Selangor and 
mid-Pahang. 

Passing to the general physical characters of this 
second group, the Senoi ^ (or Cymotrichi of Martin), 
I am indebted to Professor Martin for much of my 
information concerning them. Owing to the fact that 
their headquarters are in S.E. Perak and N.W. 
Pahang, no member of our exploring party came across 
any individuals. Consequently the following account 
is drawn chiefly from published notes and other 
material kindly supplied by Martin.^ 

In height the Sakai does not appreciably differ 
from the Semang. 

The average height of the men is 1504 mm., 85 
per cent of the individuals measured ranging from 
1460 to 1580 mm. Some few individuals were as low 
as 1380 mm. 

The average height of the women is 1437 mm., 5 3 per 
cent ranging from 1390 to 1450 mm., and 17 per cent 
below 1390 mm. The smallest individuals, two adult 
married women, possessed a height of 1320 mm. only. 

The head is chiefly dolichocephalic, whereas the 
Semang measured by Martin are described as mesati- 
cephalic, with, however, a strong tendency to the 
dolichocephalic condition. 

^ Senoi = Orang Halas of Newbold. pines' quills therein. 
Cp.yi /. A. vol. iv. p. 429, where the ^ To this should be added the 

O. Alas of Ulu Kantu (? Kinta) are measurements of Wray {Per. AIus. 

described by Col. Low as a tribe of Notes, iii. pp. 33, 34). Those in Fasc. 

Perak Sakai, who pierce the cartilage Mai. are taken account of at p. 96 

of the nose and ears and insert porcu- seq., infra. 

RACE-CHARACTERS OF SAKAI 57 

The face is fairly long and broad, but pointed 
towards the chin. The forehead is, in the male, flat, 
often far overshadowing the eyes, and causes the root 
of the nose to retreat far back. Of the men 93 per 
cent, and ']t^ per cent of the women, are mesoprosopic. 
The lips are thick ; the under-lip often hangs down 
and may be described as "swollen." The Sakai are 
distinctly lighter in complexion than the Semang. The 
hair is black, but never deep black ; in most cases it 
shows a brownish shimmer, especially in the young, and 
differs widely from that of the Semang and the Malay. 

From the remarks of other travellers who have 
met with Sakai, as well as from photographs, we may 
picture the Sakai as a slenderly built race, and as often 
presenting an emaciated appearance, which is increased 
by their long, unkempt wavy hair hanging down to the 
shoulders, and by their large restless eyes. 

In evidence of their striking resemblance to the 
Veddas, it is perhaps worth remarking that one of the 
brothers Sarasin, who had lived among the Veddas 
and knew them well, when shown a photograph of a 
typical Sakai, at first supposed it to be a photograph 
of a Vedda.' 

Without wishing to definitely commit myself as to 
the affinities of this race, I think that it is fairly clear 
even from the existing evidence that they are at any 
rate quite distinct from the Semang or Ulotrichi of 
Martin, as they are also from the Jakun (Lissotrichi) 
type found among the southern tribes. 

A number of other measurements concerning this 
type are taken from the writings of Rudolf Virchow. 

1 This information was given me liy quite as emphatically remarked to me 
Professor Martin, who himself showed upon the resemblance of my Sakai 
the photograph. Mr. Shrubsall once photographs to Tamils. 

58 RACIAL AFFINITIES 

who, in discussing the height of individuals measured 
by Vaughan- Stevens, gives the figures which are 
quoted in the Appendix. 

In another volume of the Verhandlungen^ Virchow 
refers to the skull of a Sakai (Senoi) woman, which 
he describes as orthodolichocephalic, and the full de- 
scription of which will be found in the Appendix. 

The most interesting point about this skull, apart 
from its dolichocephalic character and certain structural 
anomalies, is the formation of the nose, which is de- 
pressed to such an extent that Virchow was tempted 
to regard it as pithekoid. Another no less important 
point in Virchow's paper is the description he gives of 
the Sakai hair-character, concerning which he says : — 

•' On the other hand, I must also point to a very pronounced Sakai (Blandas) 
characteristic. In a recent consignment sent by H. Vaughan-Stevens was found 
the lock of hair of a Sakai {Senoi) man from the north of the Peninstila. The 
memorandum sent with it was to the effect that ' the clan to which the man 
belongs does not cut the hair.' At the meeting of 2ist November 1891 {Verh. 
p. 844), I treated the Sakai (Blandas) hair in detail from a large number of 
specimens of hair sent by Vaughan-Stevens. As compared with those specimens, 
I may briefly state that the lock of hair now before us exactly corresponds to 
them. Its wavy striuture distinguishes it co7npletely from the spirally curled 
structure of the E. Semang (Pangan) hair (Verh. 1892, p. 443). Its length 
amounts to rather more than 20 cm., but we cannot decide exactly how long the 
hair was when entire, as it is not stated at what distance from the scalp the lock 
was cut off. It is of a blackish appearance, and in reflected light of a slightly 
brownish and glossy colour ; seen under the microscope in thin sections it is light 
brown, with a dark and often interrupted medulla. The ends, as is the case 
with the uncut hair, are pointed, broken at the sides, and frequently split into two 
or more fragments. 

' ' The contrast between the two races cannot be more sharply expressed. Unfor- 
tunately Vaughan-Stevens has neglected to take advantage of his opportunities, 
and to send us a larger number of specimens of hair from his Semang friends, of 
which measurements would also be highly desirable. We hope the opportunity 
will be given him to fill up these gaps." - 

Elsewhere Vaughan-Stevens, writing apparently of 
the body-hair of the Sakai (Blandas) tribes, says: — 

" The natural growth of the hair is thin and scattered, and in both sexes the 
direction of growth of the hair (of the body), as well as that at the back of the 
head and under the arms, is slightly upwards." 

1 V. B. G. A. xxviii. 154 (cp. I. c, ^ lb. xxvi. 359. See also Montano, 

1894, for further particulars). PI. xxxi. 

m^ 

Old Sakai Man, 

'I'HK Father of all thk Sakais, " Ull Blrang, Eight Miles 
EROM Tanjoxg Malim, Solth Perak. 

I 'pi. I. /. 59. 

RACE-CHARACTERS OF SAKAI 59 

The hair of the Sakai (Blandas) in old age is less inclined to become grey 
than that of the Malays, and complete baldness is actually so rare that it is 
looked upon as a remarkable exception which only occurs occasionally. ^ 

The more detailed account of the Sakai (Blandas) 
hair referred to above as collected by Vaughan- 
Stevens is as follows, the description of the specimens 
being in Vaughan-Stevens' own words : — 

"yV(7. 39. Specimen of hair chosen for me by an old Batin, as a typical example 
of Sakai (Blandas) hair ; tradition declared it to be the original form. The Sakai 
themselves unanimously declare that the straight, coarse hair sometimes found 
among them comes from cross-breeding with the Malays, and themselves call it 
coarse ('Kasar'). The supposed original type, of which they are very proud, 
is called Water-hair (' Rambut Ayer'); it is still to be seen occasionally and 
has a distinct reddish tinge. Moreover, it does not as a rule turn white, as the 
coarser hair does. The present specimen is from a Sakai woman 35 years old, 
and has been cut off as close to the scalp as possible. "' 

No. 40. From a 75-year-old Sakai man, wizened and bent with age. 

No. 41. From a 37-year-oId Sakai man. 

No, 43. From children. The shortest specimen is from a 4-months-old 
boy ; the next longest from a 2-year-old girl ; the longest from a 6-year-old boy.^ 

To the foregoing may be added Virchow's descrip- 
tion of a remarkable specimen of hair (No. 105) sent 
by Vaughan-Stevens : — 

It is an immense shock {Sc/iopf) reaching 30 cm. in length, and consists 
of thick glossy black hairs, which display a somewhat reddish tinge towards the 
tips. 

A fourth specimen of hair (No. 104) sent by Vaughan-Stevens consisted of a 
beautifully wavy lock of 36 cm. in length, which, taken as a whole, was of a 
splendid black, with a reddish shimmer in reflected light, especially towards the 
tips, though otherwise it is coarse but glossy. I find no noticeable difference 
from the Sakai hair which I have already fully described at the meeting of 21st 
November 1891 {Verk. pp. 844-846). 

Not only from these statements of Vaughan-Stevens, but still more from inspec- 
tion of the hair-specimens sent by him, it is clear that the Sakai (Blandas) cannot 
be at all nearly related either to Negritos or Papuans. Moreover, the difference 
of this hair from that of the " Orang Sakai " described by Miklucho-Maclay is 
abundantly clear.' 

With regard to the above-mentioned specimens of 
hair Virchow adds a few remarks of his own, conclud- 
ing as follows : — 

The net results of this investigation lead me to a conclusion similar to the 
one to which I came at the meeting of the i6th February 1889 (I'erh. p. 158), 

1 Z.f. E. xxix. 178, 179. 

2 Vaughan-Stevens, quoted by Virchow in F. B. G. A. xxiii. 844, S45. 

^ V. B. G. A, xxviii. (Virchow) 149,150. 

6o RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

with respect to the more ancient races of the Southern and South - Eastern 
Islands of the Malay Sea. Just as in these islands I could point out a broad 
zone of wavy-haired people between the spiral-haired Melanesians and the straight- 
haired Malays, so, too, in Malacca the wavy -haired Sakai race (Blandas) 
appears to have established itself between the spiral-haired Negritos (Semang) 
of the North and the lank- [straff) haired [Jakuns and] Malays of the South 
and of most of the coast districts. For the islanders I have again adopted 
for this race the old and certainly much-misused name of Alfuros. It follows 
that the near relationship of the Sakai (Blandas) to the Alfuros might be inferred 
from this evidence. 

Of the insular Alfuros I remarked that, in respect of their hair-character, they 
connect up with the Australians on the one hand and the Veddas of Ceylon on 
the other. Perhaps, therefore, the Sakai ("wild men ") of Malacca might be 
regarded as Dra\'idians. However, we are precluded from regarding them as 
entirely identical, owing to the fact that the Sakai (Blandas) are inclined to be 
brachycephalic, whereas these other races are dolichocephalic. ^ This raises new 
questions, which can only be decided by further information. ^ 

The Colour of the Skiti.^ 

According to Vaughan- Stevens, the Sakai (Blandas) of the present time (like 
the western or domesticated ("tame" Semang) offernearly as great a diversity of 
colour as the Malays. 

The Sakai is lighter than the Semang, and seems to be more affected by 
heat than the latter (v., however, supra). 

Among the Sakai (Blandas), whose colour varies, he (V.-St.) saw nothing 
that could support the theory that, among a number of individuals, those with 
darker skins stood exposure better on the march. On the other hand, in this 
thickly wooded country one cannot walk far without coming into the protection 
of the shade of the forest. 

The Sakai (Blandas) prefer the lighter colour, and are proud of fair- 
coloured children, in which they possibly follow the Malay view. But in olden 
times the light colour was not an attribute of their chiefs.^ 

He could not find that there was any relation between a coarse or fine skin 
texture and its colour, when the coarseness of the skin is not the result of special 
exposure, or of a disease. 

He found among the vSakai (Blandas), when no skin disease was present, no 
other smell than that which is ever to be observed in cases where the activity of 
the skin is suppressed, and no cleansing material, such as soap, etc., is employed ; 
for the splashing of water over the body rather answers the purpose of refreshing, 
than that of cleansing, the skin. 

The eyes of the Sakai (Blandas) are all alike, and Vaughan-Stevens observed 
no deviation from shades Nos. i or 2.^ 

1 There can, however, now be little in small numbers between brachy- 

doubt arising from this particular cephalic Negritos as well as brachy- 

difificulty, in view of the fact that cephalic Malayan tribes, 
in the purest strain of Sakai blood * V. B. G. A. xxiii. (Virchow) 847. 

dolichocephaly has been shown to ^ Z.f.E. xxix. (V.-St.) 174-176. 

obtain. The original dolichocephalic * This statement of Vaughan-Stevens 

character of the Sakai appears to have is, I believe, without foundation, 
been modified owing to their isolation ^ Virchow in V. B. G. A. xxiii. 840. 

MixicD Sakai-Sf.mang Type, Ulu Batu, Sei.angor. 

yo!. I. /. to. 

' jj^-?. ^"^^^^ A 

Mixed Sakai-Skmanh; Type, \:}\.\3 Batu, Selancok. 

.'l/'f >,;;,•-<;;-. 

Vol. I. p. 6i. 

I 

RACE-CHARACTERS OF SAKAI 

In colour the eyes of all the Sakai are exactly alike (,Z. f. E. xxix. 176), and 
do not have the conjunctiva coloured deep yellow as the Negritos do. 

The eyes of their children are extremely well formed, and with their long 
black eyelashes add much to the beauty of their appearance. There is no trace 
of the " Mongolian fold," in which the skin of the inner corner of the eye droops 
over the eye itself; the edge of the upper eyelid is always well formed.^ 

Squinting is certainly known to them, since they are much afraid of the 
endangering of their padi-harvest by a demon (Hantu), whom they represent as 
"squinting." The Sakai (Blandas) believe that the visual field of a person 
who squints is wider than of a person whose sight is normal. ^ 

Among the Sakai (Blandas) he (V. -St. ) only met with three cases of short-sight, 
two of which were men and one a woman. On the other hand, however, the 
far-sightedness of the eye cannot be well estimated in the jungle, thickly shut in 
as it is by trees and leaves. Much depends on practice and general acquaintance 
with the objects in the jungle, to which Vaughan-Stevens was, comparatively 
speaking, much less accustomed. But the jungle men or women would even 
show him the points of an animal's horns among the surrounding foliage, a thing 
which it is naturally very difficult to discover, whereas he, with normally good 
sight (for an European), had to search vainly for a long time before he observed 
them. Again, everything which was in motion they saw at once, however insigni- 
ficant it might be in point of size. 

The Sakai (Blandas) had, in general, decidedly weak eyes. In their 
earliest youth, if no accident attacked them, they had good sight for any object 
moving in the jungle. But, as might be expected in the case of a forest-people, 
their eyes soon tired in a strong light. On the few opportunities which Vaughan- 
Stevens had of finding himself with Sakai (Blandas) in a wide, open space, he 
observed that he could distinguish far-distant objects much better than they could. 

lie adds tliat among the Sakai (Blandas), who wore Malay clothing, and 
were acquainted with the use of needle and thread, he never met with an old 
Sakai (Blandas) woman who could not thread an ordinary needle without 
difficulty.' 

On the subject of sight, Mr. L. Wray,'* during his 
travels in Perak, came to the following conclusions : — 

" Seven Sakais from Cheroh came up to carry down baggage, so ... in the 
afternoon I measured them and tested their eyesight. I have now tested the 
sight of between thirty and forty of both sexes, and there seems to be no doubt 
that they have very good sight as a race. Of those tested in Batang Padang, the 
shortest distance that the Army test-spots could be seen was 32 feet, and the 
longest 91 feet. In testing recruits for the British Army 20 feet is considered an 
average distance for these spots to be read, and a man reading at over that 
distance is classed as long-sighted, and under as short-sighted. In measuring the 
women there was great difliculty, as they did not know Malay and could not count. 
... I got over it by giving the subject a handful of matches, and explaining by 
signs that I wanted a match for each spot on the card held up." 

Hearing J' 

The sense of heaving of tlie Sakai (Blandas) and Tembeh, though not so acute 
as that of the Jakun, was about equal to that of the W. Semang. 

1 Z. /..£•. xxix. (V.-St.) 176, 177. ^J.R.A.S., S. B., No. 21, pp. 

^ Griinwedel in Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 14S, 149. For fuller statistics and 

152. details, v. Feral- Miis. Notcs,*n\. p. 36. 

^ Z.f.E. xxix. (V.-St.) 180, 181. 5 Z.f. E. xxix. iSi. 

62 RACIAL AFFINITIES 

Hands and Feet. ^ 

The Sakai (Blandas), like the Semang, experienced no difficulty whatever in 
stretching out one finger when the rest of the fingers were closed. 

The little toe of the Sakai (Blandas) is much less straight than that of the 
Jakun, although they never wear boots as we do to deform their feet, but the 
tip of the little toe is nevertheless bent like ours, and is either comparatively 
small in proportion or differs in direction from the other toes. 

After remarking that the footsteps of the Orang 
Utan are usually turned outwards, Vaughan-Stevens 
adds : — 

One thing, however, is worthy of remark among all Sakai (Blandas), the 
setting down of the foot is done with the middle of the foot. The heel does not 
touch the ground first. But in nine cases out of ten which came under observa- 
tion the foot was injured by thorns, stones, etc., so that from time to time a more 
or less unnatural gait was caused. 

It is, therefore, very difficult to give an exact description of the walk of the 
Sakai (Blandas). The body is held upright and very straight, while the whole 
movement proceeds from the ankles, knees, and hips. At the same time there is 
only a very slight, rhythmical swing of the arms.- 

One hand usually carries the blow-gun (Sumpitan), the other being armed 
with the parang, i.e. jungle-knife or chopper, and is always in readiness to give 
a quick blow to a prickly rattan or other obstacle half hidden among the foliage 
through which the path of the Sakai leads. This custom has to such an extent 
become second nature that, even when he walks without a weapon in the open 
plains, the Sakai holds his arms in the accustomed position. It is difficult to say 
what is the usual carriage of the head. 

In the matter of strength and physical endurance the Sakai (Blandas) and 
Tembeh (Temia) are at the bottom of the scale. 

The Sakai (Blandas) are not so clever as the Semang in getting through 
bush or jungle, though the Sakai have the better sense of direction.^ 

Climbing. 

In climbing a straight high stem the Sakai (Blandas) 
are better than the more civilised Semang. This, 
however, is not saying much, since the Western 
Semang are (according to Vaughan-Stevens) very bad 
climbers'* — an opinion already combated (p. 51). 

When the Sakai (Blandas) want to climb a small tree only, they climb it like 
the Central Sakai (Senoi). The larger trees usually have climbing-plants and 
runners hanging down from their branches, or smaller trees in their immediate 

^ Z.f. E. xxix. (V.-St.) 190. arms are not swung in walking. 

2 On the very next page (193), how- ^ Z. f. E. xxix. (V.-St.) 192, 193. 

ever, Vaughan-Stevens remarks that the * lb. p. 199. 

Sakai Bfjv WITH Bi.owiMPi:, L'l.u Sun<;k.m, S. Pkrak 

Vcl. I. p 62 

Sakai Bov (i'robablv ok Ulu Slim) 

/ 'ol. I. p 63. 

1 RACE-CHARACTERS OF SAKAI 63 

neighbourhood, from the branches of which the Sakai can swing himself up into 
the branches of the larger ones. The Sakai, however, always knows how to 
cut notches in the bark for the purpose of climbing. 

At the present day they practise every method of climbing which they can 
learn from their neighbours. 

Access to the high-raised huts of the Tembeh (Temia) is afforded by a tree- 
trunk placed diagonally, similar to the shorter tree-trunk utilised by the Sakai 
(Blandas) of Kuantan, who are much mixed with Tembeh (Temia) blood. They 
allege that as their huts have no doors, the dogs and fowls which are wandering 
about everywhere might otherwise get into the huts and do mischief there when 
the men were away. 

Among the Tembeh (Temia) the object is solely to keep intruders out, 
especially the black panther and the python. For this reason a smooth and 
slippery bamboo is carefully freed from all projections at the nodes, with the 
exception of a few thin twigs, by which the feet may be supported in climbing, 
and set up in a sloping position. No special grip of the toes is used in climbing 
them, and the toes of the Tembeh (Temia), especially the great toe, are not more 
strongly developed for gripping than the toes of other Sakai. Very small 
children are often left for hours in those airy huts, on account of their safety, as 
they are here safe from the great cats and snakes, and prevented from falling 
down by the low parapet.^ 

Swimming. 

The Sakai (Blandas) swim but little, in fact they only do so when they are 
obliged to cross a river, or when they are bathing. They then swim like dogs. 
They throw out their arms forwards in a swinging, circular stroke, while the 
body turns towards the side away from the stroke. Both the breast-stroke and 
side-stroke, as well as swimming on the back, are unknown to them. 

Among the Sakai (Blandas) the Central tribes (Senoi) are always con- 
sidered the best swimmers ; this is probably due to the fact that the big Pahang 
river has afforded them more practice. 

The Tembeh (Temia) cannot swim at all.- 

Sleeping."^ 

The Sakai (Blandas) women do not, as a rule, sleep on the side, but on the 
back, and try to raise the head a little by some sort of pillow. They give as 
their reason for this that, if they lie on the side, the hip has to bear the weight 
of the body, in which case they would get " latah,'"* and suffer from cramp in 
their sleep ! 

The Sakai (Blandas) men often sleep on the back, at the same time drawing 
the legs up towards the body, so that the sole of the foot rests flat upon the 
ground. But the side-long position is also not unfrequently adopted by the men 
when they first lie down, in fact sometimes one side and sometimes the other 
is chosen indifferently. Sakai (Blandas) men told Vaughan-.Stevens that when 
they lay upon their side such vermin as ants, scorpions, and centipedes would 
crawl over the sleeping-mats and enter their eyes, nostrils, and mouth, whereas 
by lying on the back they could feel their approach. Others, however, declare 
that by sleeping on the back they can hear a noise or alarm-signal better. 

Among the Sakai (Blandas), as among the .Semang (I'angan), the bachelors 
inhabited the verandah (when there was one) or else the external portion of the 

^ Z.f. E. xxix. 200. 2 jf) p igg 4 j\ strange hysterical affection 

2 Z.f. E. xxix. 186-198. common among Malays. 

64 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

huts. Among the Tembeh the only difference was that the bedroom of the 
married people was separated off by a low partition.^ 

Physical Eiidiiraiice.'^ 

Sakai tribes which have adopted Malay clothing generally experience dis- 
comfort in the absence of headgear to protect them from the sun. On the other 
hand, the Sakai (Blandas) appear to suffer more from the cold, wet winds 
of the mountains than the Jakun. 

If this power of withstanding change of temperature depended upon the 
relatively greater abundance and regularity of their food, the Sakai should be 
less sensitive to such changes than any other tribe. But whether their sensitive- 
ness to such changes was originally greater than that of other tribes or not, the 
fact that they are now accustomed to clothes and to the protection of better- 
built houses has rendered them more susceptible to every change of temperature. 

The Sakai children endure want of food better than the Semang children 
[v. supra). 

The younger men of the Sakai have a game called " K'lupent," which is 
usually played when they are sitting round the fire in the evening while their 
womenfolk are plaiting mats and baskets. Each player who is a candidate for the 
favour of a girl, endeavours to heap disgrace on his opponent and raise himself 
in the esteem of the women. The game is played with short slivers of rattan, 
which can by a particular knack be made to draw blood at every stroke, a rapid 
backward motion of the arm and wrist causing the sharp edge of the rattan 
to strike the skin Uke a knife, and cutting it easily. When I asked for its applica- 
tion in earnest, the force of the blow from the knot made me writhe with pain. 
The instrument is also made from string. The ring (of rattan slivers) is twisted 
round the hand, the knot at the end of the strips being held between the thumb 
and forefinger. The arm is then lifted, and as it is brought down the knot is 
released and descends with a swingeing blow on the forearm of the opponent, 
whilst at the same moment the arm is drawn rapidly in to the body. 

The men sit opposite one another with bare arms. A small stake is deposited 
by each. He who first acts as striker asks the other how many blows of the 
rattan he will bear on his forearm without crying out. If he receives the 
stipulated number without wavering, he puts his opponent's wager into his 
pocket, and then in turn takes the rattan slivers and challenges the other to 
name the number of blows he will endure ; should any one who receives 
the blows call out for them to cease, he loses his bet and is loaded by his 
opponent and the spectators with scorn and jeers (which is the true purpose of 
the game when, as usual, it is inspired by malice). 

The Sakai (Blandas) children are acquainted with a form of the tug-of-war 
in which one or more children on each side pull a rope in opposite directions. 
They have probably borrowed the idea from Malay children, who may be frequently 
seen playing at it. 

Summary of Sakai Culture. 

The Sakai, though still largely nomadic, and at first 
extremely shy, are perhaps the most sociable and talka- 
tive of the three races, when once their confidence is 

1 Z. f. E. xxix. 190. - lb. pp. 201-203. 

I SUMMARY OF SAKAI CULTURE 65 

gained. Like the Semang they not unfrequently live 
in tree - huts or other temporary forms of shelter. 
Their men wear the tree-bark loin-cloth, and their 
women a tree-bark wrapper, except, of course, where 
they have borrowed Malay clothing. They tattoo 
the face, the design commonly taking the form of four 
gradually converging lines drawn from the region of 
the ear to the root of the nose, with perhaps a sort of 
pitchfork design incised upon the chin. These designs 
are sometimes marked out in rows of black and white 
dots (in lieu of scarification) ; with these may be con- 
nected their black and white bead -necklaces. Both 
scarification and body-painting take, however, various 
forms, the latter having been developed into a regular 
system. They do not circumcise, and seldom file the 
teeth, but they not unfrequently wear a metal ring or a 
porcupine quill inserted through the septum of the nose. 

Their distinctive weapon, like that of the Jakun, 
is the bamboo blowpipe, which they have brought to 
great perfection. 

They have no form of boat, nor do they even as a 
rule use rafts. ^ 

Their musical instruments are very fairly similar 
to those of the Semang, and, like the latter, they not 
unfrequently engage in the barter of jungle products. 
Their agriculture is of the most primitive description, 
their chief implement (for breaking-up the soil) being 
a pointed stick. 

Of their religion very little is at present known- 
less even than of that of the Semang. There is, 
however, a kind of deity whom they call Tuhan, and 
who appears somewhat analogous to the Kari of the 
Semang. Their alleged totemism is quite unproved. 

1 Hale, p. 286. 
VOL. I F 

66 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

Like the Semang they are strict in their observ- 
ance of the marriage tie, but unUke them they 
have the greatest possible fear of death, or rather, 
perhaps, of the ghost of the deceased, and will 
frequently burn down or desert an encampment in 
which a death has occurred. 

III. — Race-Characters of Jakun. 

There remains for consideration the third group 
of tribes which inhabit the southern portion of the 
Peninsula, These are the mixed tribes of Martin, and 1 
include the Jakun or "savage Malays" of Wallace. 
They fall into three main and two subordinate groups, 
the latter of which are without doubt closely allied. 

1. Tribes mainly of Semang origin, e.g. the 
Kenaboi (?) and perhaps the Udai. 

2. Tribes mainly of Sakai origin, e.g. the Blandas 
and Berembuns (?). 

3. The Jakun or Malayan aborigines, comprising — 
{a) The Orang Bukit, or Land (lit. " Hill") Jakun. 
{b) The Orang Laut, or Sea Jakun. 

Although it is not possible at present to make a I 
proper classification of all the tribes of the Jakun 
group, it may yet be useful to attempt a rough and 
general identification of them so far as the very scanty 
information we possess will take us. 

The Blandas properly so called, whose home is in 
Southern Selangor, have been described by Martin as 
dolichocephalic, and hence are most likely to prove 
largely of Sakai extraction.^ Their exact affinities, 

1 For the " Blandas," see also Lenggeng, Singa Kuasa, and Pakat, 

Newbold, ii. 393, where we are told and four Jinangs or chiefs of the 

that they had (in 1839) four Batins second rank, viz. Pawang Padiching 

or chiefs of the first rank, viz. Baning, (" Pawampa de Cheyng"!), Ampu 

/^■".- 

iSIlXED lAKUN TyPK, BUKIT PRUAL, SeLANGOR 

; '('/. /. /. 67 

I RACE-CHARACTERS OF SAVAGE MALAYS 67 

however, have not hitherto been traced, and in spite of 
their doHchocephalic skull-character, it would not be 
safe, in the absence of more exact information as to 
their hair - character, etc., to attempt to so identify 
them as such. They have, therefore, been retained 
in the group of mixed tribes to which the name of 
Jakun has been given in this book. It may be noted 
that although their district is conterminous with that 
of the Besisi, they present a marked contrast to the 
latter tribe, both in respect of their head-index, which 
is dolichocephalic as contrasted with the brachycephaly 
of the Besisi, and also in their language and their 
customs.^ No exact measurements of the Blandas 
have yet been published, pending the appearance of 
Martin's forthcoming work, and hence they will not 
be referred to again in the present chapter. 

The Kenaboi (or " Sakai " of S. Ujong) may 
perhaps prove to be a mixed tribe mainly of Semang 
type (though with some Sakai admixture), as the few 
facts we possess would lead us to expect.^ The 
Berembun, or Birmun, and Pago tribes cannot yet be 
safely classified. The Udai appear to have a stronger 
Semang admixture than the tribes surrounding them. 

The Besisi and Mantra of Selangor and Malacca 
are brachycephalic (Martin), and are most probably a 
mixed branch of the Sea-Jakun — in spite of the fact 
that the Besisi dialect presents a close connection with 

Manis, Palsai (? Pa' Lesai), and Ram- ' For further remarks re admixture, 

bong ("Rumbong"). V'aughan-Stevens v. conclusions, /;//)vz. 
gives a quite unwarranted extension to - The Kenaboi is a stream in Jelebu. 

the term which he generally uses as In a letter of 3rd November 1902, 

the equivalent of Sakai. lie also Mr. Hale writes that the "O. Kena- 

states (obviously as a pure guess) that boi " had so harmful a reputation that 

the amount of Malay blood in them is it was believed that any one who ac- 

" not less than 2 percent, and prob- cidentally trod upon their expectora- 

ably more " (V. - St. ii. 94), but the tion would suffer severely from boils 

entire passage wants correction. and blains, if he did not die of it. 

68 RACIAL AFFINITIES 

the dialect of the Sakai. They have certainly some 
Semang, and probably a little Sakai admixture, but 
appear nevertheless to be largely Malayan. 

The Beduanda of Naning and Rembau are, as is 
locally known, mixed with a strong Menangkabau Malay 
element. The term " Beduanda" is to be applied — 

(i) To Mohammedan Malays descended, it is 
alleged, from Menangkabau men and aboriginal 
women. 

(2) To aborigines (heathen). These latter prob- 
ably have no right to be considered as descended 
from Menangkabau, although they do sometimes 
claim it. 

" Beduanda" appears to be a title introduced from 
without (through Hinduised Malay influence) among 
these tribes. The Malay Beduanda^ are the premier 
" Suku " or clan in their own estimation, and are 
"sons of the soil," because of their (partial) aboriginal 
descent. They recognise the aboriginal Beduanda^ as 
distant kinsmen who have been left behind in the 
march of civilisation. The Mantra are Beduanda, 
but the Jakun are not so recognised. 

The Benua of Logan and other early writers, here 
called Benua -Jakun, cannot yet be classed, but the 
Jakun and the Orang Laut have a comparatively large 
Malayan element, though both have in some parts a 
strong infusion of Semang and Sakai blood. 

Labu Tribes. 

Reliable accounts of the tribes in the Labu district 
of Sungei Ujong are so rare that I make no excuse 
for the following quotation : — 

1 " Beduanda Jawa." ^ " Beduanda Jakun. " 

I RACE-CHARACTERS OF SAVAGE MALAYS 69 

" The tribe settled here {i.e. on I'erhentian Tinggi estate) consists of twelve 
men, seven women, six older and five small children. It belongs to a larger 
tribe of about two hundred souls, which is settled in Batang Labu, Sungei 
Ujong, under a Batin. 

"The Batin, who might have been able to give information on the point, was 
not here, and from the somewhat indefinite statements of the older men 1 
conclude that this tribe belongs to one of the four great Sakai families, which 
(according to Martin Lister), coming from the mountains of Skudei, have settled 
in the States of Johol, Jelebu, Klang, and Sungei Ujong, and, indeed, in that 
of S. Ujong, as from all that I could hear they have nothing in common with 
the Sakais {sic, [?] Besisi tribes) of Klang. 

"According to the oljservations made up to the present, the height of the 
men is on the average 1580 mm., of the women 1470 mm. The trunk is long, 
the legs short and sturdy, the arms long. The shoulders are broad, and the head 
normal ; the face at the temples and lower jaw narrow, but broad in the middle. 
The colour of the skin is usually 43/44 of Broca's scale ; the colour of the 
hair 41, Broca. The quantity of hair on the head is considerable, in the beard 
moderate, on the body scanty. The hair is certainly not generally crimped or 
curly, as many report ; for although among the women it is usually so, among the 
men I found it very variable, i.e. both wavy and curly, and yet again straight, 
as amongst the Malays. 

" The colour of the iris is 2/5, according to Broca. The slits of the eyes are 
somewhat crooked. The nose is small and pointed ; the root broad, as are also 
the nostrils and the bridge. Seen from the side, the bridge of the nose is slightly 
convex, the root deep, the point slightly bent to the side. 

"The lips are thick; the ear small and somewhat prominent; the helix is 
incurved ; the lobule adhesive to the head ; Darwin's tip very insignificant. 

" The men are generally well formed ; the women are remarkably small and 
slender as a rule. In physical strength they appear to resemble the Malays, though 
they may perhaps be somewhat tougher ; in the handling of the chopper (parang) 
and adze (bliong) they are acknowledged to be the Malays' superior, though this 
may perhaps depend upon agility and practice rather than on actual strength. In 
the felling of trees they always strike the same point with the greatest precision 
with their heavy narrow axes. It is one of their special characteristics that they 
do not use the hoe in the same way as other people ; instead of making the stroke 
and bringing back the hoe in the same direction for the next blow, they bring it 
back to its original position by raising it in both hands over the left temple and 
over the head, so that every blow gains considerably in force. 

" The carriage of the body is, in general, negligent ; the shoulders are drawn 
inwards, the knees and feet turned inwards ; in fact, even the strongest men 
afford an unedifying spectacle. In the jungle, however, they appear to greater 
advantage, as they are evidently more at home there. They do not strike about 
them with the chopping-knife (parang) so much as the Malays in clearing a way 
for themselves, but turn and wind about with much agility in all directions, and 
in this way move from one spot to another very ncjiselessly and quickly. 

" In physiognomy they generally resemble the I\Ialays so closely ( !) that one only 
recognises them by their look, which is invariably one of surprise and timidity ; 
they have besides a somewhat wilder expression than the Malays. 

" Their power of sight was throughout %'ery well developed ; but without having 
taken exact tests, nothing abnormal in this respect has struck me. The same 
remark applies to their sense of hearing. 

" I have not been able to notice any artificial deformities among them ; but as 
natural abnormalities I might mention the unusually broad and inward-turned 
feet of most of the men, and the quite remarkable pigmentation of the breasts 
of the women. Of the seven multipara; which I had the opportunity of obser- 
ving, two were already quite old and shapeless ; the other five, however, were 
all under twenty-three, and in each of them the extraordinarily light-coloured 

70 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

areola (Broca, about 40) ' covered the nipple and the greater part of the mamma 
like a broad flat cover.' The diameter of the areola was never below 5 cm., 
and in some almost 10 cm." ^ 

Kenaboi Tribes. 

One of the tribes mentioned by Logan consists 
of the "Sakai," said to frequent the neighbourhood 
of Mount (Gunong) Kenaboi. These are doubtless 
identical with the Orang Kenaboi of Vaughan-Stevens.^ 
If it is possible to locate this "tribe," and at present 
there is hardly any information concerning them, the 
latter name, i.e. "Kenaboi," is obviously preferable 
to that loosely used by Logan. 

Vaughan- Stevens considered them, as already 
stated, to be a subdivision of the parent-stock of the 
Sakai (Blandas). This classification, however, re- 
quires confirmation, the measurements taken showing 
a brachycephalic as well as a dolichocephalic element. 

Further measurements taken by Vaughan-Stevens 
will be found in the Appendix.^ 

Berembun and Udai Tribes. 

Logan* further mentions certain tribes living to 
the north of the Benua-Jakun, whom he calls the 
Berembun {" Birmun ") tribes, because they have their 
headquarters about Gunong Berembun and the neigh- 
bouring mountains.^ 

The upper reaches of the rivers rising in the 
Berembun mountains are occupied by the tribe called 
Udai. 

The Udai (who appear to be the same people 
who are known to the Benua-Jakun of Johor under 

1 W. Rowland in Alitt. Geog. Ges. * Loc. dt. 

Wien. xli. 706, 707. ^ Gunong Bermun appears to be 

2 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 97. identical with Gunong Berembun, 
^ Virchow in F. B. G. A. xxiii. 842- which is situated in Sungei Ujong, 

844. 102° 2' E. by 2° 55' N. 

I RACE-CHARACTERS OF SAVAGE MALAYS 71 

the name of Orang Pago) are found on some of the 
tributaries of the Muar. This tribe has less approxi- 
mated to Malayan habits than the others/ 

Newbold,^ on the other hand, makes the following 
remarks about this tribe : — 

The Udai tribe is little known. The Tuanku 
Putih of Rembau once informed me that the Udai 
were a race of savages thinly scattered over the states 
of Jelebu, Pahang, Trengganu, and Kedah, and that 
they resembled in features the darker variety of 
Jakun.^ Their size is represented as smaller, and 
their habits more savage. 

Newbold regards them as distinct from the Benua, 
under which title he groups the following tribes : — 
Jakun, Orang Bukit, Rayat, Utan, Sakai, Alas,** Blan- 
das, Besisi, and Akik. 

Vaughan-Stevens ^ has the following note on the 
Udai :— 

" The term Udai is applied by the Pangan to — 

" (i) The pygmy tribes of Belum in Perak. 

"(2) By the Malays to the Orang Jinak or 
* Tame ' Semang. 

" (3) And also to a species of demon (Hantu), who 
was sometimes identified with the whole jungle race, 
whom many Patani Malays call ' Hantu Pari,' or 
'Udai Pari.'" 

Belum, as already noted, is in the extreme north 
of Perak, but the people referred to are Semang, as 
may also be the Udai of Newbold and Logan. The 
latter live on the Muar, which rises in the Negri 

1 Logan, vol. i. I.e. Perak" (Newbold, ii. 383). It should 

2 Newbold, ii. 381, 382 be noted that such names as "Orang 
^ I.e. the Negrito element among Bukit," " Rayat," and " Orang Utan " 

the Jakuns. or " Alas," can hardly be considered as 

* The "Alas are said to be a tribal names, 
tattooed race, living in the interior of ^ P. loi. 

72 RACIAL AFFINITIES 

Sembilan and in Sungei Ujong. Their alternative 
name Pago is taken from a tributary of the Muar in 
Johor which bears that name. 

So Httle is definitely known of these Orang Pago 
or Udai, however, that it is very difficult to ascertain 
what is their exact relationship to the other wild people. 
On the whole, they are probably a race somewhat mixed 
with the Semang, dwelling in N.W. Johor, the Negri 
Sembilan, Sungei Ujong, and Jelebu ; or they may 
even perhaps be chiefly of Negrito origin, an outlier, 
as it were, of the main groups of that race whose 
principal home is farther to the north. For the 
present, and until more definite information is forth- 
coming, the question must remain open. 

Besisi. 

One of the most important of the tribes living on 
the southern extremity of the Peninsula are the Besisi. 
The name always used by themselves is "Sisi"; the 
Malay explanation (Besisi = Bersisik) ^ is certainly due 
entirely to Malay popular etymology. 

According to Logan (/. ^.), the Mantra on the north- 
west " march with the Besisi, one of the most numerous 
tribes, who occupy all the streams flowing in that 
direction from Gunong Berembun. It is this tribe 
which occupies the Sungei Ujong and Linggi, and the 
lower part of the Langat, with their feeders." 

Martin says of the Besisi that they are essentially 
brachycephalic, whilst the Blandas, like the Sakai 
(Senoi), are chiefly dolichocephalic. He adds that 
whilst the Sakai (Senoi) are amongst the shortest of 
the wild tribes, the Blandas and Besisi show a larger 
percentage of relatively taller individuals. With them, 

1 I.e. the "scaly" people. 

I RA CE- CHA RA CTERS OF SA VA GE MA LAYS 72, 

curiously enough, the women also are tall (1510 mm.), 
and the sexual difference sinks with them to 2.4 cm.^ 

Mantra or Mintera. 

The Mantra (Mentra or Mintera)," the largest 
tribe, dwell about Gunong Berembun and the adjacent 
mountains. They possess the higher part of both the 
western and eastern streams. On the south they fre- 
quent the upper part of the Langat, etc. The follow- 
ing notes on the physical characters of the " Mantra" 
are given by Logan, ^ who gives figures : — 

The remarks respecting the Benua physiognomy 
{y. infra) are, on the whole, applicable to the "Mantra." 
The face of the woman (figured), in particular, although 
grave, is not dull and sullen. In the case of the 
most intelligent of the party, the head preserves the 
general Benua characteristics. The forehead is fine, 
but as usual the cheek-bones swell out laterally beyond 
it. The faces of all the Mantra seem to be formed 
of two parts, separated by a line across the eyes. 
The upper (part) is the forehead, rising from a base 
considerably narrower than the line connecting the 
zygomatic projections. The great bulk of the lower 
part is horizontally oblong, the external lines having 
a slight inclination inwards from the zygomatic arches 
to the angles of the lower jaw opposite the mouth, 
after which they converge towards the chin, which 
forms an angle much more obtuse than in the Beduanda 

1 For further measurements see App. - Often derived from Mai. "Mantra" 

According to Newbold (ii. 393) the (a "charm"), I believe wrongly, the 

chiefs of the Besisi included one I'.atin word being pronounced Menlera' by 

or chief of the first rank only, viz. Pa' the Mantra themselves. " Men- 

Limpei, who succeeded his uncle Breh dera' " ( = a " man " in Semang) seems 

(" Breyk ! "), a Jinang called Mumin, a a better derivation, though the " d " is 

Jukrah named Sakdnal, and a Poyang certainly a difhculty. 
named Manan. ' /. /. -•/. vol. i. p. 294. 

74 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

Kallang.^ This form is given by the lower jaw not 
proceeding directly to the ear, but forming an angle 
below it. The vertical elongation of the upper part 
of the face is a striking feature. The nose in all is 
small and slightly turned up, and the mouth large. 
The hair falls over the shoulders ; and, in one of 
the men, showed a profusion of curls. The toes of the 
Mantra tribes, like those of all the tribes of the interior 
with which I have any acquaintance, are spreading, 
so that the foot is very broad anteriorly in propor- 
tion to its length. Other characteristics may be 
gathered from an inspection of the annexed table.^ 

Elsewhere ^ the lips of the Mantra are said to be 
"gross and loose," and the profile prognathous. 

M. Borie ^ stated that the tribes from Selangor up 
to Mount Ophir are known as Mantra, and that "the 
number of Mantra " did not appear to him to exceed 
2000, although it was one of the most numerous tribes. 
To many authors even this estimate appears too great. 
It is indeed doubtful if M. Borie was right in stating 
that the Mantra were the most numerous tribe. They 
distinguish themselves both from the Besisi and the 
Jakun. M. Borie speaks of the Mantra as extending 
from Selangor to Mount Ophir, in which case he has 
evidently included with them the Besisi. 

The Catholic mission to the Mantra near Malacca 
was visited by Miklucho-Maclay, who gives the head- 
index of the Mantra (15) as between 74 and 89. '^ 

Further measurements will be found in the 
Appendix. 

^ See under O. Laut. "^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 301. The 

^ See Appendix. The "profusion " loose " lips are a Sakai feature. 

of curls" may be due to Semang ad- * (Trans. Bourien), p. 72. 

mixture ; in other respects the features = Virchow in V. B. G. A. xxiii. 

described are Sakai. 843. 

I RACE-CHARACTERS OF SAVAGE MALAYS 75 

M.-Maclay strongly supports the Malayan character 
stipulated for the Mantra, although as he believed 
that element to be due to admixture with civilised 
Malays, he fails to see the full force of his facts. 

He says that the Orang Mantra, near Malacca, are a small tribe better known 
than the other Orang Utan, from the fact that, so long ago as the year 1848, 
Catholic missionaries settled down among them.^ He visited a number of them 
at the Ayer Salak Mission near Malacca, and found them, in consequence of the 
influence of the school and their constant intercourse with the missionaries, " the 
most uninteresting of all the Orang Utan tribes for the purposes of his particular 
studies." Their language had been forgotten and had been replaced by Malay, 
in which all their school-books and religious works were written. The mission- 
aries had done nothing to collect the remains of the old language. 

The Mantras whom he saw (most of them children and women) were almost 
•without exception of a Malay type ; if he had come to see them without knowing 
that they were Mantras, he would probably have taken them for a number of 
Malays, badly fed, and brought up in a miserable condition, and he should have 
doubted the possibility of any mixture of Melanesian blood. ^ 

According to Logan, the Mantra were chary of 
bathing, and their only plaything was a kind of top 
called "gasing kunde."^ 

Beduanda. 

The Jakun of the Rembau and Negri Sembilan 
states are said to bear the closest resemblance, how- 
ever, to the Malays of those states. " But we cannot 
infer from this that they descend from these Malays, 
as we know by history and tradition that they were in 
the Peninsula before them ; and that the Rembau 
Malays descend from the Jakun by their mother's side, 
as we have seen when speaking of the arrival of To' 
Peter (Tu Puttair), which explains sufficiently the re- 
semblance we perceive in the [Rembauj Malays to 
the Jakun."* 

Favre states that the Jakun — of these states {i.e. 

1 The founder of the mission, M. mission in 1878. 

Borie, has written a short paper upon '^ J. R. A, S., S. B., No. 2, pp. 

them, since printed in Misc. Essays 218, 219. 

on Indo-China, series ii. vol. i. pp. ^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 330*. 

286-307. Herr Y. Jagor visited the ^ Favre in^. /. A. vol. ii. p. 245. 

76 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

of Rembau, Negri Sembilan, etc.) — were very short, 
their physiognomy was low, and seemed to announce 
great simpHcity ; many of them were ugly and badly 
made — they had the inferior part of the nose much 
depressed — but though their lips projected a little they 
were generally well formed. To the foregoing Favre 
adds that he had already observed that this class of 
Jakun bore 2. great resemblance to the Malay; or at 
least to many of the Malays.^ 

JoHOR Land-Tribes — Distribution. 

The Jakun of Johor were spoken of by Logan 
as being a taller race than those of Malacca. He 
found several of them with hawked or aquiline 
noses ^ — the men were healthy but generally thin; 
the women, on the contrary, were plump, and though 
healthy too, were not particularly " stout " (.'^). 

Logan has given the fullest account of the wild folk 
that inhabit Johor, He divided them into several 
distinct tribes, the first of which he called the Orang 
Benua of Johor. These occupied all the interior of 
Johor properly so called. They also possessed the 
interior of the most southerly portion of Pahang. The 
most definite description of their territory, however, 
was that they occupied the upper branches of the most 
southern system of rivers in the Malay Peninsula.^ 
These rivers, from west to east, were the Batu Pahat, 
the Pontian, the Johor river, and the Endau. This 
latter communicates in its upper reaches with the Batu 
Pahat by a branch called the Sembrong, so that the 

1 J. I. A. vol . ii. p. 246. may be due. It does not, moreover, 

2 This, coupled with the greater appear to be so common as to be 
height, points to some sort of admixture, typical of the tribe, much less of the 
but it is impossible in the absence of race. 

further details to say to what race it 3 y; /. ^. vol. i. p. 246 stq. 

I RACE-CHARACTERS OF SAVAGE MALAYS 77 

communities living to the west could communicate 
with those of the east, and vice versa. 

All these rivers except the Pontian rise in a group 
of mountains known as Gunong Blumut. 

Two rivers in this neighbourhood do not appear 
to be inhabited by the Jakun ; these are the Pulai in 
the south-west of Johor, and the Sedili, lying just to the 
north of the Johor river. Logan found no Benua on 
the Johor river below the junction of the Sayong and 
Lenggiu (branches of the Johor river). On the 
north-west they did not extend beyond the Simpang 
Kiri — a branch of the Batu Pahat. Whether the 
Pahang tribes — to the north of the Endau — are similar 
to the Benua, he had no opportunity of ascertaining, 
but the Benua inhabiting the country indicated un- 
doubtedly formed a separate tribe in themselves — 
they had no connection with any other tribe and 
scarcely any knowledge of such,^ 

Race-Characters of Johor Land-Tribes. 

Speaking of the personal appearance of the Benua- 
Jakun (or " Benua of Johor," as he calls them), Logan 
says " that in personal appearance they bore a strong 
family resemblance to the Malays, and he remarked of 
many of them, as he had previously done of the Besisi, 
that the difference was scarcely appreciable so long as 
they remained at rest and silent. But the great majority 
were at first glance distinguishable from Malays. 
The most constant and obvious characteristic was the 
eye, which, as in the Berembun tribes (noticed below), 
was soft, mild, and with a liquid brilliancy, very different 
from the dark, cloudy aspect of that of the Malay. He 

' Logan, /. I. A. vol. i. p. 246 seq. ^ lb. p. 249 seq. 

78 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

only noticed in two or three of the men that habitually 
wild expression which occurs more frequently amongst 
the Berembun tribes. The mouth varies greatly, but in 
all is open and entirely devoid of that degree of firm- 
ness which generally characterises that of the Malay, 
but which is sometimes wanting in them also. In a 
considerable number the lips are thick and projecting, 
and this is sometimes carried so far that they are as 
prominent as the nose. The lips do not form an acute 
angfle but are often in a line. The forehead has a 
moderate slope, and in itself is well formed, though 
small. But it is disproportionate to the face, the 
middle part of which, between the posterior part of 
the lower jaw and the upper part of the cheek-bones, 
expands laterally much beyond the base of the fore- 
head. The nose is always low, whereas in the Malay, 
although it is frequently of the same description, it is 
sometimes seen higher and more shapely. The general 
shape of the head and features of the Benua assimilates 
to the Malayan, although it is decidedly smaller ; but 
it is not clear whether more examples might not be 
obtained of approximation to Bugis faces than to 
Malayan. In many cases the Benua -Jakun face 
is fat and fleshy and all the features heavy, but in 
general it is not fat. The greatest breadth is commonly 
across the cheek-bones, but in several instances where 
the jaws were prominent the lower part of the face was 
broadest. Viewed in profile, the jaw-bones are seen 
to advance more than in the Malays in general, so 
that the chin, lips, and extremity of the nose are in 
one line, approaching to the vertical, which forms an 
obtuse angle with that on which the nose and fore- 
head are placed. Physically they may be considered a 
link between the Negrito ("negro") and brown races 

I RACE-CHARACTERS OF SAVAGE MALAYS 79 

of the Archipelago. The general expression of the 
face denotes good-nature, mildness, innocence, content, 
want of mental energy and reflectiveness, and a pre- 
dominance of the senses over the intellect. The com- 
plexion is generally similar to that of the Malays, but 
he noticed several who were much fairer than any 
Malays. The hair is black and in general smooth 
and lank, and in all somewhat more dry and tangled 
than in the Malays, arising from the little oil which 
they use. The children were often dull and fat, and 
very timid, yet many were lively, bold, and engag- 
ing, and his Malay followers everywhere remarked 
that in appearance they could not be distinguished 
from Malayan children. The body is smaller and in 
general shorter than that of a Malay, but it is hand- 
somer and less heavy ; the great length of the trunk 
in proportion to the limbs sometimes destroys the 
effect of the slighter and neater build. The chest is 
generally broad and full, and the shoulders narrower 
and less sloping than is the case with Malays. The 
pelvis is not so broad, and the limbs in particular are 
lighter, neater, and often well shaped. They are almost 
always in excellent condition, without being too fat, 
although the softer sex has often a tendency to obesity. 
The comparative shortness of stature, and the smooth, 
rounded surfaces which the person presents throughout, 
in a large majority of the Benua-Jakun, add to the 
Bugis aspect which is often observable among them.^ 

Most of the preceding remarks may be extended 
to the Berembun tribes. 

Miklucho-Maclay, in a brief account of an excursion 
made long after Logan, in 1875, through Johor, comes 
to the conclusion that there can be no doubt of the 

^ Logan \nj. I. A. vol. i. p. 250. 

8o RACIAL AFFINITIES 

existence in Johor of an aboriginal non- Malayan 
population, not only not of Malay origin, " but prob- 
ably related to the Papuans " (!). 

Here and there ^ he came across individuals whom 
he could not consider otherwise than as retrogrades 
to the main aboriginal type. In most of these cases 
the hair, though not absolutely identical with that of 
the pure Papuan type, resembled in texture and growth 
that of the Malayo-Papuan (mixed race) of the West 
Coast of New Guinea, who are by no means incon- 
siderable in number. In these individual cases the 
hair was quite different from the curled hair of the 
other Jakun ("Orang Utans ").^ 

The chief reasons for his decision on this point 
were deduced from the existence of these reversions 
from the present to the aboriginal type ; the fact that 
the Jakun (" Orang Utans ") were not easily dis- 
tinguishable from the Malays inhabiting the interior of 
Johor did not diminish this decision, because these 
Malays had "by intermarriage partly inherited the 
Jakun ('Orang Utan') type." 

This system of intermarriage had, in M.-Maclay's 
opinion, been " in practice for centuries," and was 
likely to have been occasioned "by the flight into the 
interior of those of the coast Malays who preferred 
retirement into the jungle to embracing the doctrines 
of Islam " at the time of the conversion of the country 
to Mohammedanism. 

^ The italics are mine. The net consciously selected Negritos to figure 
result of M.-Maclay's remarks is to and observe, without paying any re- 
establish the presence of a small gard to the perhaps somewhat less 
Negrito element among some, at all striking characteristics of the Malayan 
events, of the Jakun tribes of Johor. type so general in the tribes through 
Unfortunately M.-Maclay could not get whom he passed. But this weakness, 
rid of his preconceived ideas, and as unfortunately, is a very general one. 
he was hunting for what he believed 2 M.-Maclay, Journ. East Asia, i. 
to be the Papuan (!) element, he un- 97. 

I RA CE- CHA RA CTERS OF SA VA GE MA LAYS 8 1 

Miklucho-Maclay figures a woman of the river 
Leba, a tributary of the Endau, age about i8 years, 
and mother of two children ; height 1420 mm. ;^ head 
brachycephalic ; index 81. The hair was frizzled, and 
for this reason Miklucho-Maclay selected her to figure. 
She cannot then be regarded as a typical example of 
the Wild Tribes (" Orang Liar") of that neighbour- 
hood — who are in all probability identical with 
Logan's Benua-Jakun, — as Maclay speaks of meeting 
with individuals with frizzled hair only " here and 
there." 

A male Jakun ("Orang Utan ") from Garib, on a 
tributary of the Endau, is also figured by the f same 
author. His height is 1500 mm. ;^ cephalic index 79 ; 
age about 18. "The face is remarkable owing to the 
small forehead, a broad, slightly projecting nose, thick 
lips, narrow under-jaw, and receding chin. The hair 
is of Malayan type." 

The third person figured, a woman of the Jakun 
("Orang Utan") Sletar, belongs to a branch of the 
Orancr Laut.'^ 

It is difficult to form any estimate of the numbers 
of the Benua-Jakun of Johor. 

Maclay remarks that these tribes are gradually 
becoming extinct, and attributes it to the constant 
advance of the Malay and Chinese population, and to 
frequent intermarriage between the Malays and the 
Jakun (" Utan") women ; the latter race is becoming 
intermixed into the former, and this mixed race is fast 

increasinof. 

But it would have been more consistent had he said 

' In urig. 1.42 inches (sic). O. Sletar see Lapicque, Toiii\ dti 

- In orii,'. 1.50 inches (.f/c). .'/., N'.S. ii. (1896), V^'^ sem. pp. 

^ I'or other illustrations of the 5S, 59. 

\OL. I G 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 

that the "aboriginal non-Malayan population" was 
being swamped by intermixture with Malay blood, 
assuming his view to be correct, for the " aboriginal 
population," according to his own theory, already 
largely consists of individuals of mixed parentage. 

Hervey, writing six or seven years after Miklucho- 
Maclay, states that the settlements of the tribe under 
discussion, whom he calls Jakun, on the Sayong and 
Lenggiu, on the Benut, Pontian, and Batu Pahat, as well 
as those on the Madek, a tributary of the Sembrong, 
and the upper Endau (Indau), may be described as 
Orang Ulu Jinak, or "tame tribes of the interior." 
He believes that there are within the limits of Johor 
a few representatives of the Orang Liar, or wild men, 
amongst the Segamat hills, near the source of the 
Endau.^ 

The " Madek tribe " was visited by Hervey, who 
says that their numbers are very limited, comprising 
no more than thirty souls. They are not uniform in 
type, even their limited community presenting several 
varieties, which is accounted for by the intermarriage 
with Malays ; the Chinese have, he believes, had little, 
if any, intercourse with them. 

In the Appendix will be found Virchow's remarks 
on the Jakun material (measurements, etc.) collected 
by Vaughan-Stevens. 

Under the same reference will be found Virchow's 
description of three Jakun skulls sent home by the 
same collector, the main points of interest in which are 
as follows : — 

The first of these skulls was that of a young 
woman, and was very light, the second, that of an 
old man ; yet both, in fact, were characterised by 

^/.R.A.S.,S.B., No. 8, p. I oo seq. 

I RA CE- CHA RA CTERS OF SA VA GE MA LA YS 83 

Virchow as being, in point of size, a dwarf skull 
(nannocephalic). The skull shown in Fig. 3 belonged 
in shape to the bullet-head type, but was high in 
proportion (hypsi-brachycephalic). The nose was 
very broad, the bridge being deeply incurved and 
short, its position, together with that of the teeth 
(which were thickly encrusted with betel), agreeing 
very well with the extreme prognathism of this 
specimen. The second skull (that of the old man) 
was a little broader in proportion than that of the 
young woman (ortho-mesaticephalic). The features 
were large and heavy, the orbits very large, and the 
nose broad and flat (platyrhine). 

The third (which was stated to be that of a male, 
but appeared to Virchow to be that of a female) was 
of yet broader and flatter appearance (eurycephalic). 
The cheek-bones, as a whole, were depressed, the 
orbits of moderate size, and the nose resembled that 
of No. 2. In this skull, again, as in No. 2, progna- 
thism of a pronounced type was present. The pro- 
portions of the face in all three skulls were much more 
constant than those of the cerebral portion of the 
skull. Nevertheless, in spite of a certain amount of 
marked variation in the latter, "the racial unity of the 
tribe cannot be doubted, as the similarities are greater 
and more numerous than the differences." Virchow 
proceeds to describe the limb-bones of a female skeleton 
sent home by the same collector, and in this con- 
nection remarks that, although they undoubtedly come 
from an adult individual, " they are small and delicate 
like children's bones." 

From this Professor Virchow drew the conclusion 
that "in any case we can congratulate ourselves 
on seeing before us the most unmistakable divarf 

84 RACIAL AFFINITIES hakt 

bones offered by ethnology." If, however, by this 
expression he intends to convey — which appears to 
be the only interpretation possible — that the Jakun 
are a dwarf race, one can only reply that any such 
conclusion, especially when based upon measurements 
taken from a single individual, even if it were other- 
wise well founded, would be altogether premature, and 
furnishes an example of one of the curious lapses to 
which even great intellects appear occasionally liable. 
We shall have to await, there is very little doubt, a 
considerable body of fresh evidence before any such 
conclusion can be either definitely established or 
refuted. 

On the important subject of the hair-character of 
the Jakun, Virchow remarks that in his opinion the 
hair of all the Jakuns examined (by Vaughan-Stevens) 
belonged to the same type, and that the contrast with 
that of the Semang and Sakai was " as sharp as can 
be imagined." This was a matter of the more im- 
portance "as the relationship of the Jakun to the 
other tribes has always been a matter of dispute." 

The Jakun hair, then, appears to have been, 
generally speaking, black ("glossy black" in the case 
of a specimen sent) and straight, and the percentage 
of Jakuns with wavy or curly hair seems to have been 
extremely small. There can at all events be no 
doubt whatever, in spite of the exceptions that 
admittedly occur, that the former is the real hair-type 
of the Jakun race. 

The skin -colour in general was a yellowish or 
greyish tint of brown (No. 37 of the Parisian colour- 
plate being the commonest shade). 

The eyes of the Jakun were usually a dark 
shade of brown (Nos. 2-3), and the conjunctiva 

RACE-CHARACTERS OF SAVAGE MALAYS 85 

frequently more or less bloodshot. The teeth were 
good, often slightly projecting, but free from caries ; 
the lips well formed and thin ; the ear lobes invariably 
perforated and much distended. 

Hearing. 

The sense of hearing was certainly sharper among the Jakun ' [than among 
either the Semang or the Sakai]. 

Hauds and Feet. 

In the case of the Jakun, especially with the children, it is possible to 
ascertain pretty exactly, by observing the feet, whether any kind of mixture with 
Malay or other blood, at least of recent date, has taken place. The little toe 
of the Jakun, especially in childhood, is very straight in comparison with that 
of the Sakai (Blandas), and quite especially so in comparison with that of the 
Malays and Chinese. It has much less of the talon-like crook which is so usual 
in our own feet. I have, in fact, seen little toes in Jakun children which were 
as straight and well-formed as any of the other toes of the foot. 

When, moreover, the Jakun arrives at manhood, and especially by the time 
he is upwards of thirty years old, his feet become covered all over with knobs 
and knots, are stiff, ugly, scarred and diseased. The Jakun never wash, 
and although their hands and feet are often in water, it is usually dirty, marshy, 
and unhealthy water, which penetrates into the cracks of the skin, scratches and 
pricks caused by thorns, etc., and causes the limbs to swell and stiffens them, 
until they look like the work-worn hands of an old labourer in England who 
has had to be out in all sorts of weather. 

This is one result of the hardships of their life ; for the infants and children 
have small, well-formed hands and feet. The contrast between those of the 
father and of the youngest child is very great. The hands of the women, how- 
ever, are beautiful and soft. 

The half-blooded Orang Laut are skilful at thieving, especially with the toes. 
I have been robbed of small objects which lay on the ground, while I have been 
talking with a man, face to face, and never noticed that he took them off. I have 
also seen from the corner of the eye how the toes of the foot slowly slid over the 
desired object and dragged it along with them, till the foot could be raised to the 
hand, when the thing could be grasped in the fingers and hidden.^ 

Climbing. 

The oldest (!) method of climbing employed by the Jakun (or "Benua") 
consists in binding the ankles with a head-rope (Kopf-sei/) as the Sinhalese do.^ 

Swimming. 

The Jakun (Benua) swim well, and are good divers. They use the Malay 
method. The Orang Laut is an excellent swimmer. He swims, like the Malay, 
on the breast, so that his body is in a somewhat sidelong position. He stretches 
the left and right arm alternately out of the water, and brings them back to the 
side of the body, like the spokes of a wheel from the hub. The hands are 

* Z,f. E. xxix. 182. 2 /j^ p_ ,QQ 3 /^_ p 200. 

86 RACIAL AFFINITIES 

thus directed backwards with open palms, and the legs are struck outwards at 
each motion of the body, like those of a frog. The children swim as well as 
adults, even before they can walk. The Orang Laut are also excellent divers. ^ 

Among the Jakuns, two children at a time will take the end of a rattan-rope 
between the teeth and tug till one has conquered the other ; but they have not 
the Malay tug-of-war. 

It amused me very much to see how a small Jakun boy one day diverted 
his comrades by sitting down in the well-known Indian fashion, with the soles 
of his feet placed flat on the floor, his legs bent at the knees, and drawn up 
close to the body, and his body depressed till it almost touched the ground. 
While he was in this position a short stick of bamboo was placed through his 
elbows behind his back. Thus handicapped, the fat, tubby little fellow had to 
bend forward till he touched the ground with his forehead, without letting the 
bamboo slip out of position. All made the attempt, but this little fellow was the 
most expert and agile of all.^ 

Sleeping. 

The Jakun, whether lying on one side or the other, usually rolls himself 
together into a "ball" for sleeping. If the night is hot, he soon begins to 
unroll himself a bit, but in the early or colder hours of the morning one 
can be quite sure of finding both sexes with knees drawn up to the body. 
The children sleep from earliest childhood on a mat which is laid upon the 
ground. Their place is at their mother's breast, between her and the smoulder- 
ing fire, and enclosed more or less in her arms.^ 

As soon as signs of approaching puberty appear in their children, the Jakuns 
arrange for them to sleep apart. On land, the boy slept in a separate part of the 
hut, or in the front part of the boat if he was on water. In the covered 
platforms on the coast the girls slept with the married people. In the temporary 
huts with covered platforms used in former times, which the Jakuns %asited in 
their well-known places of assembly on the coast, the bachelors, when they 
passed the night there, always slept in huts which were separate from the married 
people.* 

Physical Endurance. 

In illustration of the fortitude of the Jakun, Vaughan - Stevens tells of 
one who had deep-seated ulcers. " I gave him sulphate of copper {Blaustein) 
and zincoid, showed him how to use it, and expressly warned him to be careful. 
But as I feared a misunderstanding, I followed him soon after he had left me, 
and came upon my patient just as he had made use of the Blaustein. That 
had been done very freely, as the earlier neglect of the ulcer prevented him 
from feeling it at once, although the whole surface of about four square inches 
was touched with it." The patient squatted on the ulcered leg, and Vaughan- 
Stevens saw the muscles of the leg quiver and contract into knots in con- 
sequence of the pain which the patient felt after a few minutes ; but not a 
movement, not a sound, nor any other sign except a deep breathing was to be 
observed. " He began to speak in firmly measured tones, and when I 
remarked that that was called medicine (' ubat '), he calmly replied that the 
doctor (' bomor ') had told him so. He had shown endurance with a vengeance, 
but as there was no reason to put him to a further test, I gave him a morphia 
injection, for which he was very grateful."-'' 

The question of the Jakun's sensitiveness to heat is difficult to answer, since 

1 Z.f. E. xxix. 198. - lb. p. 20 1. 

* lb. p. 190. ^ lb. pp. 205, 

•" lb. 186. 
206. 

I MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 87 

he wears, as a rule, nothing but a head-band to keep his long hair in order, and 
hence gets so accustomed to the sun's rays that he scarcely feels any special 
increase in the sun's heat. 

The Jakun appear to suffer less from the wet, cold winds of the mountains 
than any of the other tribes. The Jakun appears to owe his powers of endurance 
to the relative robustness both of his physical and mental powers, due to his 
greater tendency to savagery. 

He has, moreover, long carried on a rude but persistent form of agriculture, 
cultivating rice and tubers, though he also consumes much more fish than the 
others. 

The Jakun children endure want of food better than those of the Semang.i 

Sea-Jakun or Orang Laut — Distribution. 

Orang Laut is the name applied to wandering 
coast tribes whose permanent dwelling is usually in 
their boats. They are spoken of as Rayat Laut, or 
Sea-subjects — subjects, that is, of the kings of Johor 
or Malacca. According to Crawfurd,^ they are some- 
times called Sika, Orang Akik ("Akkye"), or more 
frequently Bajau or pirates. Their headquarters are 
the narrow straits between the islands of the Johor 
archipelago.^ The same writer says that from this 
neighbourhood they have spread to the shores of 
Banca, Billiton, some of the islands of the coast of 
Borneo, and even as far as the Celebes and Buru, 
from whence they make voyages to the north coast of 
Australia. Prior to the introduction of steam-vessels 
by the English and Dutch Governments these " Sea- 
folk " are said to have been formidable pirates.^ 

The Johor archipelago is thinly peopled by a 
number of " tribes " of Orang Laut, known collectively 
as the Orang Pe-suku-an,^ a name meaning the people 
divided into tribes. A list of some twelve of these 
tribes is also given, and we are told that besides these 

' Z.f. E. xxix. 202, 203. Singapore and Billiton (see J. I. A. 

2 Descr. Diet., s.v. "Orang Laut." vol. i. p. 336*). * V. p. 570 infra. 

^ The Johor archipelago consists of •'' Seey. /. A. vol. i. p. 336*, " Eth- 

the innumerable islands lying between nology of the Johor Archipelago." 

88 RACIAL AFFINITIES 

there are some wild tribes in the interior of the larger 
islands. 

The Sabimba river has not yet been traced, but the 
Orang Sletar take their name from Sungei Sletar, a 
creek of the island of Singapore, only 8 miles distant 
from the modern town. According to Thomson,' they 
numbered in all 200 people, or 40 boats, and were 
subject to a Batin or petty chief, under the sovereignty 
of the Sultan of Johor. 

At the time of the first landing of Sir Stamford 
Raffles at Singapore about thirty families of Orang 
Laut lived a little way up the .Singapore river, about 
half of them on shore and half in boats.- This settle- 
ment had been in existence since 181 1 or thereabouts."^ 

At the present time there are still a few of the 
Orang Laut to be found in the island of Singapore. 

Amongst other branches of the same race one or 
two may be mentioned as having been described by 
various writers. Such are the Beduanda Kallang ^ of the 
Pulai river in Johor. These folk formerly haunted the 
" Kallang " creek to the east of the town of Singapore, 
but when the island was ceded to the British they 
were removed by the Temenggong {or raja) of 
Johor to the Pulai river in that state, where they have 
since dwelt. From about 100 families they have 
been reduced by the ravages of small-pox to eight. 
They were, beyond a doubt, very closely allied to the 
Orang Sletar of Singapore, as well as to the Orang 
Laut who formerly inhabited the Singapore river, and 
the few survivors now living in the island. 

The Orang " Muka Kuning," also described by 

^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 342* (1847). liinibangs, Muka Kunings, and Bidii- 

"^ J. R. A. S., S.B. No. 10, p. 285. andas," then settled near Cape Riiniania, 

' Crawfurd, Desc. Did., s.v. "Singa- at the mouth of the Johor river, 
pore." Borie (1861) mentions the " Sa- * J. I. A. vol. i. p. 299 (Logan). 

I RACE-CHARACTERS OF MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 69 

the same writer, inhabit the forests on the banks of 
the Sa-raya and its tributary the Muka Kuning. 

Pulau Tinggi, off the east coast of Johor, was a 
favourite lurking-place for the Orang Laut in the days 
when they practised piracy. 

We may conclude then that the almost innumer- 
able creeks, inlets, and islands lying along the coast 
of Johor and to the south of it, as far as Billiton at any 
rate, are — or perhaps it is necessary to say were — 
peopled by wild men of Malayan origin, who spent 
most of their time on the water, and that almost every 
community of these people was called by a different 
name, the name of the locality that it occupied for the 
time being. 

And finally we are told by Anderson that in the 
upper coasts of the Malay Peninsula, from " Poongha" 
to Trang (in the neighbourhood of Junk Ceylon), in- 
cluding a coast of 16 or 18 leagues and a number of 
islands, there were no inhabitants except the Orang 
Laut who navigated from island to island.^ 

Race-Characters of the Orang Laut. 

The physical characters of members of this race 
have been described by Logan - and Thomson.'' 

The former gives an account of three men of the 
Beduanda Kallang. The chief features of the face 
appear to be the great width of the forehead, which is 
at the same time unusually low, the absence of prog- 
nathism, and the thinness of the lips. The face is flat 
and the eye-brows horizontal. The general character 
of the face is between that of the Malay and Siamese, 

• App. to Anderson's CotisideraliouSy '* Cellates "or " Men of the Straits." 
p. liv. (1824). The O. Laut are first -J. I. A. vol. i. p. 301 seg. 

mentioned by l)e Barros, who calls them ^ fh. p. 34/*- 

90 RACIAL AFFINITIES 

but perhaps nearer the latter. The features of Saweng 
and Sango (two of the men described) had a pinched 
or compressed look. He had never seen any men 
who resembled them. The Orang Sletar are closely 
allied to the Beduanda Kallang (both indeed appear to 
be branches of one tribe, the aborigines of Singapore). 

In the same paper the height of three individuals 
of the Beduanda Kallang is given as respectively 5 ft., 
5 ft. 4|- in., 5 ft. 5 in.^ Other measurements of interest 
are — circumference of the head, average 21 in. ; height 
of forehead, 2 in. ; breadth of forehead, 5^ in.^ 

Thomson,^ remarking on the physical characters 
of the Sletar tribe, says that they are closely allied 
to the Beduanda Kallang. This, coupled with the 
fact that the Sletar and Kallang are both creeks of the 
island of Singapore, the original locality of each, and 
that sampans (canoes) can approach the navigable 
part of either creek within two miles, there need 
not be any hesitation in proclaiming their identity 
of origin, although they now live as separate 
tribes. The most distinctive features of these tribes 
are the lowness of the brow, retreating back- 
wards from the superciliary ridge ; a protrusion of 
the lower part of the face, not in the manner of 
prognathous tribes, but by the acuteness of the facial 
angle. When viewed from the front they are found 
to possess an obliquity of eyes and eyebrows, the 
eyelids being much closed and only showing half the 
pupil. The general contour of the face obtains a 
decided character by great breadth of forehead, ex- 
pansion of zygoma, and rapid tapering to the chin, 
which is lengthy and narrow. The nose is depressed 
and mouth moderate. Such may be considered the 

^ 1.523 m., 1.638 m., 1.657 m. ^ 532 mm., 5 cm., 13 cm. ' Loc. cit. 

(iKoi-p OF Iakln (AnciRKiiN ai, Malayans) i-kom Ki.ang 

Vol. I. p. 90. 

OkAXO I.AUI' OR Sl-:.\-I.\KUX. 

A'. //. 3 •-<//. 
Okant; Lati i>I' Kalanh, Sincapoke. 

A'. 11. Vaf^/^. 

Orang Lal't of Kalanc, Singai'orI';. 

A'. II. \aj^f>. 

Okano Laut ok Kalang, Singapokk. 

A'. //. V,ipr-(SI;,at Expedition). 

Okang Laut oi' Kalanc;, Singapore. 

JW. /. /. 91. 

RACE-CHARACTERS OF MALA VAN SEA-G YPSIES 91 

distinctive features of the race, though many were 
seen possessing the Malayan type strongly marked/ 
In a previous passage Thomson states that in his 
own opinion this tribe of Orang Laut may be 
said, with little fear of contradiction, to be merely un- 
converted Malays in the general acceptation of the 
term, though a distinct class from the Malays properly 
so called who poured their hordes over the Archi- 
pelago {sic ?) - prior to 1 200 of the Christian era, from 
the great river Malayu ("Malayoo"), in Sumatra. 
While all the tribes of Malays on the coast of the 
Malayan Peninsula and adjoining islands have em- 
braced the tenets of Mahomet, they have remained 
unaffected by the movement. 

Taking into consideration Logan's view as to the 
"Tartar" characters of the Jakun quoted above in 
dealing with that race, and the close relationship 
existing between the Jakun and the Orang Laut,^ it 
seems safe to conclude that both are branches of a 
Mongoloid stock which probably inhabited the Penin- 
sula before the irruption of the more civilised Malays, 
who in this case are to be regarded as a specialised 
branch of the same stock. 

A distinguishing feature of the Orang Laut appears 
to be their height, which is about 5 ft. 3 in.^ on an 
average, to judge from the scanty measurements avail- 
able. That of the Besisi and Blandas appears to be 
about 5 ft. I in,^ according to Dr. Martin's statement. 
But an extensive series of measurements is necessary 
before it is justifiable to make a definite statement on 
the subject. I venture, however, to suggest that the 

1 Thomson, loc. cit. 5, p. 325 ; also Crawfurd, Descr. Diet. 

2 The interrogation is mine. imder " Benua." 
•* See Newbold, ii. 410, 411, 413, ■• 1.6 m. 

414 ; and Skeat,y. A'. //. .V. , S.B., No. ■• 1.54S ni. 

92 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

greater height of the Orang Laut may depend, at any 
rate, partly on the smaller amount of intermixture with 
Semang (and Sakai) tribes. The more inland Jakun 
of Johor and Selangor sometimes show considerable 
traces of a Negrito strain. Had this been noticeably 
present in the Orang Laut, I think Logan and 
Thomson and other good observers would have 
noticed it, especially if it had affected the hair.^ 

It is impossible to form an estimate of the number 
of Orang Laut existing at the present time. Certain 
it is that the number is much less than it was a century 
ago, largely owing, no doubt, to the ravages of small- 
pox as well as to their conversion to Islam and con- 
sequent absorption among the Malays. 

Walking. 

The children of the Orang Laut very soon become tired on land, and walk 
with legs bent outwards ; the half-breeds are straighter and stronger. 

The adult Orang Laut soon becomes tired in walking, and the walk of the 
entire race is, in fact, very clumsy on the land, because they squat down so much 
together in their little boats ; they can, in fact, be recognised at once from this 
characteristic.^ 

Cli7nbing. 

The Orang Laut climb well, when obliged to do so. As the trees on the 
coast are usually of small circumference, they can clasp the round trunk more 
than half-way round with their arms, and use the inside of the foot in climbing up. 
They do not appear to be acquainted with the idea of climbing by help of a rope 
or noose. If, therefore, they wish to climb a larger tree, which they cannot 
climb up by the help of the arms and legs alone, they are obliged to make a ladder. 
For this purpose bamboo pegs are driven into the tree one above the other, at 
distances of about two feet. To the ends of these pegs a baml)oo pole is lashed 
so that it stands out from the tree about six inches. By means of these pegs, 
which serve in place of the rungs of a ladder, the man climbs up, and as he 
climbs drives fresh pegs into the tree above those already driven ; when he has 
reached the end of the first pole, he fastens a second pole to the tree in con- 
tinuation of the first, and so on till he reaches the branches. Bark-fibre is used for 
lashings, and the ladder thus constructed is left in its place till it falls to pieces.^ 

Throwing. 

The Orang Laut are very sure and strong throwers, and far excel all the 
other tribes in this respect. They are, for instance, very clever at throwing the 

^ There are, however, to be seen though there are straight-haired ones 
curly-haired Orang Laut boys in Singa- as well. 
pore. In fact they are fairly common, '^ Z.f, E. xxix. 194. ■^ lb. p. 19S. 

SUMMARY OF SA VAGE MALA V CULTURE 93 

shells of fiat bivalves ("Muschel"), such as that of the pearl oyster. They 
hold it at the edge between one finger and the thumb, so that the shell lies 
back flat over the wrist, and jerk it at a crab or a bird upon the sands, striking 
their target with the sharp edge. A lump of hard coral with a natural hole, 
through which a line woven from willows is threaded, and bound into the form of 
a ring, is thrown by help of this line with great force and certainty of aim at 
crabs on the shore, and so forth. ^ 

Summary of Jakun Culture.- 

The Jakun, no less than the Semang and Sakai, 
are largely nomadic tribes, and though the Land Jakun 
for the most part practise some form of agriculture, 
they also live to a great extent by hunting, trapping, 
and fishing, and keep both dogs and fowls. 

Some of the Jakun of Johor cultivate rice, others 
plant yams, plantains, water-melons, sugar-cane, and 
sometimes also, on a very small scale, tobacco. In 
particular, however, they plant durian trees, on which 
they set a high value on account of the fruit.^ The 
Mantra and Besisi hold a marriage-carnival at harvest- 
time.^ They smoke tobacco and chew betel, or, as a 
substitute, cassia- leaves, together with gambir and 
lime, which they obtain by barter from the Malays 
of the coast. ^ Their clothing is like that of the 
Malays but scantier, that of the men only a linen 
apron {e.£: among the Mantra and Udai), that of the 
women a sarong.'' They are accustomed to file their 
teeth to a point ; they do not practise circumcision, 
but a form of incision has been recorded.' The 
universal weapon of the northern Jakun (Besisi. 
Mantra, and others) is the blowpipe with poisoned 
arrows. Bows and arrows are known to them, but 

1 Z./. E. xxix. (V.-St.) 200. 3 Logan in /. /. A. i. 254, 255 ; 

- This account is re-written from the Favre, ib. ii. 259. 

summar)- of Bcnua Culture by Waitz * Logan, loc. cit. p. 260. 

(who uses Henua as the equivalent of "' Logan, loc. cit.; Newbold, ii. 4.06. 

" Savage Malay," in which sense " Logan, loc. cit. p. 252. 

Jakun is used here). '' Ii'. p. 271. 

94 RACIAL AFFINITIES part 

are not employed ; they do not engage in tribal 
fights.' The blowpipe is often fitted with a spear- 
point at the muzzle, as is frequently the case among 
the Dayaks. That of the Sabimba is said to have 
been introduced to them from Sambas in Borneo by 
the Malays of the sea- board, from whom they also 
obtain other objects, especially rice." The ten-foot 
blowpipe of the Benua, and the preparation of their 
arrow-poison, has been described by Newbold.^ The 
Jakun, who do not invariably poison their arrows, carry 
spears and long knives * in addition to the blowpipe ; 
the Mantra use the sword and kris of the Malays, 
as well as the blowpipe and spear. ^ The huts of 
the Benua-Jakun vary in point of size and fittings ; 
they have usually only one room in the centre, are 
built on piles, and are reached by means of a ladder ; 
many of them are not altogether without such com- 
forts as Chinese curtains for dividing the rooms, and 
perhaps a few Chinese dishes ; *' for the most part, 
however, they are but poorly built and furnished, the 
sides being only constructed of leaves or tree -bark, 
and they are forsaken by the inhabitants when a 
death occurs.^ The Jakun of Malacca build their 
huts only two feet high, four feet broad, and six feet 
long, but raise them on piles and surround them with 
a bulwark of thorns for protection against tigers.** For 
river voyages (with the exception of the Sabimba) 
they employ boats constructed out of a hollow tree- 
trunk, but they do not venture on the open sea, which 
they are said to dread.^ Of musical instruments the 

J Logan, i. 272, 273, iii. 405, 406, « lb. p. 253, 254. 

iv. 429. "^ Newbold, ii. 404 ; Borie in 

2 Thomson in/. /. A. i. 337*, 338*. Tijdsckr. Deel x. 420 ; Netscher, ib. 

3 ii. 395, 396. Deel ii. 138 ; Moor, 242. 
^ P'avre iny. /. -•/. ii. 262. * Favre, loc. cii. 257. 

^ Logan, i. 330. ^ Logan in /. I. A. i. 271, 284, 

1 S UMMA RY OF SA VA GE MALAY C UL TURK 9 5 

Mantra employ a bamboo flute and a kind of guitar/ 
though others are recorded. From their position it 
follows that all the trade of the Jakun is in the hands of 
the Malays, who give them cloth, pots, dishes, ironware, 
etc., in exchange for jungle produce, but who at the 
same time greatly oppress them by means of the debts 
into which they lead them, as well as by their treachery 
and unjust dealing," this treatment being in direct 
contrast to that which they receive from the Chinese.^ 
At their tribal feasts they chant songs and perform 
mimetic dances in imitation of the various denizens of 
the jungle, the performer, who is dressed in leaves, 
carrying a peculiar dance-wand, and the performances 
themselves being apparently a form of productive 
magic. They have a more advanced social organisa- 
tion than the Sakai and Semang, and in some cases 
their Batin or chief has a peculiar and unknown object 
as part of his regalia. 

They also practise peculiar marriage and burial 
rites {e.g. the mound-ceremony, a species of marriage- 
carnival at harvest-time, and the erection of a miniature 
hut for the soul of the deceased), and have many 
magic ceremonies and traditions which point to the 
prevalence of ancestor- worship and Shamanism as 
ingredients in their religion. 

297, 332 ; Thomson, ibid. 347* ; cp. men " for pirates, or in some similar 

also Logan in J. I. A. vol. i. p. 388, motive. But these Henua may have 

where he remarks that " like the been Land Jakun after all. 

northern tribes, the Benua have a 1 Borie, loc. cit. p. 424. 

great dread of the sea," a characteristic "^ Logan, loc. cit. pp. 261, 285. 

which he attributes to "exaggerated ^ Waitz, pp. 176, 177. As Col. 

ideas respecting waves, sea -sickness, R. C. Temple points out, what such 

and pirates." On this it may be re- tribes get by barter may be of value to 

marked that it is hard to believe that themselves ; what they give is of none, 

any true Sea Jakun really dread the sea, But though the bargaining of the 

and that formerly when they professed Chinese may jierhaps thus be defended, 

themselves afraid of it, the reason might that of the Malays, who go far beyond 

perhaps be sought in a fear of their the Chinese, can not. — Temple in 

being themselves taken by the "white /. ./. /. vol. xxix. p. loi. 

Note by W. L. H. Duckworth on " Fasciculi 
Malayenses," Vol. I. 

Messrs. Annandale and Robinson,' whose expedition 
to the Malay Peninsula followed that of Mr. Skeat 
(of whose party Mr. Annandale was a member), have 
provided abundant data which will yield much in- 
formation when fully worked out. At present the 
chief results that have come to hand appear to me 
to be the following. F'irstly, as regards the living 
inhabitants of the Malay Peninsula, we are presented 
with observations whence the average colour of skin 
and eyes, the hair- characters, the stature, and the 
cephalic index of Semang, Sakai, people of the' 
Trang coast, and South Perak Malays are obtainable, 
founded on a much broader basis than has hitherto 
been accessible. As regards the South Perak Malays, 
the data are probably entirely new. The foregoing 
results have been tabulated in the Appendix" (i) for 
purposes of general comparison in the comparative table, 
and (2) separately for purposes of comparison inter se. 
In the second place, the craniological collection 
comprises some extraordinarily valuable specimens, 
though unfortunately the number is not very large. 
Special mention must be made of the collection of 
skulls of the Orang Laut formed by Mr. Annandale. 
The appended table " gives concisely the results of the 

' l<\\\k\ox%o{ Fasciculi Malayenses. - For this table see Appendix. ^ /^_ 

96 

NOTE ON ''FASCICULI MALA YENSES" 97 

craniometrical study of these. It will be noted that 
the Orang Laut and Orang Bukit, although separated 
by Mr. Annandale, are yet closely associated physically. 
When the general results of the expedition are reviewed, 
it becomes evident, in the first place, that the Semang 
and the Sakai types are connected by transitional 
forms so numerous that it is only from the examination 
of very large numbers of individuals that the two 
extreme forms can be differentiated. It is particu- 
larly to be noted that the cephalic index fails con- 
spicuously to differentiate the two, whereas the stature 
is a more reliable characteristic, and it is from this, 
with the skin-colour and hair-characters, that evidence 
upon which the distinction is based is to be obtained. 
In the second place, the Samsams of the Trang coast 
(as is also the case with the South Perak Malays) 
stand, as indeed might have been expected, quite apart 
from the Semang and Sakai. Thirdly, as regards the 
results of the Skeat expedition, the characters of the 
Pangans measured by Messrs. Skeat and Laidlaw fall 
within the range of variation established by the more 
numerous observations in the Fasciculi Malayenses. 
When we turn to the craniological side we find that 
the Pangan skull provided by Mr. Skeat possesses 
characters which bring it also into line with the 
Semang and Sakai group of Messrs. Annandale and 
Robinson in everything except cranial capacity, which 
in the former example is greater than in any case 
observed by the authors of Fasciculi Malayenses. 

Then comes the extraordinary case of Grubauer's 
Semang skull.^ This, although microcephalic, provides 
the unusually high cephalic index-figure of 85, which 
carries it far beyond the range of indices otherwise 

I Cf. Man, No. iS, 1903. 
VOL. I H 

98 NOTE BY W. L. H. DUCKWORTH part 

available for comparison. This unusual index need not 
be regarded as ruling out the skull from the ranks of 
the Semang-Sakai group, as the total number of skulls 
known is but fifteen or so, and in the living the index 
may, as is seen from the table, reach the figure of 85.5 
( = 83.5 on the skull). 

Three more remarks may be made on the results 
of the authors of the Fasciculi Malayenses. 

In the first place, they have obtained extraordinarily 
high figures for the radio-humeral index in the living 
Semang : results which do not accord with those 
obtained from the data of the Skeat expedition (whether 
from living Pangan or Semang or skeletons of the 
same), nor with Messrs. Annandale and Robinson's 
own results in the case of the skeletons collected by 
them. This is evidently due to their method of 
measurement, for their results for the living Semang 
are consistent throughout intej' se. But the final effect 
is to give an incorrect idea of the preponderance of 
forearm length, which, though present, is not nearly so 
marked as the figures suggest. 

Secondly, and regarding the craniological results 
detailed in the Fasciculi Malayenses, the skulls repre- 
sented in photographs afford but slight material for 
comparisons, partly owing to the fact that two of them 
are skulls of aged women. The Semang skull, Plate 
xvi. Figs. 4, 5, 6, has a much flatter nasal skeleton 
than that of the Pangan in the Cambridge Museum ; 
and also presents less subnasal prognathism than the 
latter skull. 

F"inally, Plate xviii. Figs. 4, 5, 6, gives photo- 
graphs of the skull of an " Orang Laut Kapir" {i.e. 
"Kafir" or "unconverted" Orang Laut) of the 
Trang coast : were the prove7iance of this specimen 

ON " FASCICULI MALA YENSES " 99 

not precisely known, its dimensions, as given in the 
table, and its proportions and appearance would lead 
to its being regarded as a good example of the Oceanic- 
negro type as met with in New Guinea, New Britain, 
and neighbouring islands. Caution must therefore be 
exercised in basing conclusions on skulls taken from 
ancient cemeteries of the kind whence this skull was 
obtained. 

Note on Diseases of the Aborigines. 

Very little has been observed about the diseases to 
which the wild aboriginal tribes are subject, and on the 
whole it appears that they are not much troubled by 
sickness, the reason being doubtless that as they live in 
a state of nature only the hardiest of their children 
survive. All of them are, however, in mortal terror 
of one disease in particular, viz. small-pox, from which 
many of their tribes have greatly suffered from time 
to time. 

I. — Semang. 

Fever does not appear to trouble the Semang 
so much as a malignant sort of ulcers and various 
minor forms of cutaneous disease (Mai. " kurap ") 
which are very prevalent locally. The wife of the 
Semang chief (Pelima) at Siong was afflicted with 
an ulcer which was one of the worst I have seen in 
the East, and which had eaten deeply into the left leg. 

Both Semang and Sakai are generally well formed, 
and are not unfrequently described as showing a 
magnificent physique. Deformed people and dwarfs 
are extremely rare, probably for the reason already 
given. One of the Semang (Pa' Gelugor) whom I 
observed at J arum may, however, have approximated 
to a dwarf type, all of his measurements proving to be 
under the average. On the other hand, his back was 

NEGRITOS OF KEDAH loi 

slightly bowed, but as he had arrived at an advanced 
age, this is perhaps more likely to have been due to 
physical infirmity than to congenital deformity. 

Some form of acute rheumatism, or more probably 
sciatica, appears occasionally to attack them, as 
in the case of a woman belonging to the Kedah 
Semang, of whose temporary "cure" I myself was 
witness.^ From the woman's own account, the pain, 
which was extremely acute and caused her great 
suffering, was situated in the bones of the leg. The 
pain caused her to break out openly into weeping 
and loud crying, but nevertheless she was able to 
make her way into the forest for some thirty yards 
till she reached the site of her former house, in which 
she was presently " doctored " by the chief of the tribe. 

The teeth of the Semang, like those of most other 
savages on a similar plane of culture, were extremely 
good, and were seldom attacked by caries. 

Delivery, as a rule, was attended by very little 
difficulty, the woman usually resuming her ordinary 
avocations after three or four days' seclusion. 

It could not be determined what sickness was 
meant by a "great death" or plague that was 
traditionary among the Semang, but the symptoms 
were described to Vaughan-Stevens as follows : those 
who were attacked by the disease about noon, died 
before sunset, by which time the body had turned 
black in colour. It was evidently also much swollen 
up, since it was described by the Semang as looking 
" like a leech, when it falls off." 

That the Semang (" Menik ") had no name for 
the disease seems to show that it was formerly 
unknown to them, and that they had no other tradi- 

^ Cp. vol. ii. p. 230. 

I02 NOTE ON DISEASES OF THE ABORIGINES iart 

tion about it than that "it had only come twice." 
The only thing that could be found out about it, 
besides, was that nobody attacked by it escaped with 
his life. It was further stated that it had arisen in 
consequence of the neglect of Pie's command never 
to stay more than five days in one place. This 
command, however, only applied to the men.^ 

Vaughan-Stevens gives Semang names for many 
other diseases, but in almost every case fails to 
translate or identify them. 

II. — Sakai. 

The foregoing remarks appear to be as applicable, 
generally speaking, to the Sakai as to the Semang. 
At all events, the Sakai have the same dread of small- 
pox and the same liability to ulcers and skin diseases, 
of which latter Hale (p. 288) distinguishes three kinds 
(" Kurap," " Kurap ayam," and " Kudis "), the pre- 
valence of which he ascribes to the fact that the Sakai 
"very seldom bathe." ^ He also mentions^ headache 
and stomach-ache as being diseases which are prayed 
against by the Sakai. De Morgan (ii. 717) mentions 
fevers (which are cured by the use of crushed 
" langsat " stones), colic, diarrhoea (for which calcined 
bones are used), dysentery, " kurab," and "wounds," 
which latter are dressed with sugar-cane pulp, bound 
with a strip of bark-cloth. 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — There are no very special remarks to be 
made with regard to the diseases of the Blandas 
tribe. Some individuals suffered greatly both from 

1 -SVV Vaughan-Stevens, iii. io2. ii. 717; Brau de Saint - Pol Lias, 

2 The two latter are ringworm and and other writers, 
itch. Cp. De Morgan in L' Homme, '^ Hale, p. 301. 

I SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 103 

cutaneous disorders and ulcers, but this was probably, 
as with the Semang and Sakai, the result of the food 
that they lived on, more especially of some of the 
yams and roots. Fevers were also very prevalent at 
certain seasons, but small-pox was the one disease that 
they most greatly dreaded, and on the appearance of 
which they would flee from the district. 

Besisi. — Owing to their way of life, it was not 
uncommon to meet amongst them individuals who had 
been accidentally maimed or wounded, and on one 
occasion, whilst driving along the Langat road at Klang, 
I encountered a Jakun who had been badly lamed by 
the injury and contraction of the muscles of the knee. 
After considerable persuasion, I induced him to return 
to Klang and enter the hospital, which was then 
in charge of the late Mr. W. M. Little. Mr. Little 
kindly interested himself in the case, and succeeded in 
affording the man a good deal of relief; but when the 
man had been a few days in hospital he returned to 
the jungle, saying before he left that he could not live 
in a place which was so shut in and devoid of trees. 
I never knew a case of mental disease among any 
of these tribes. 

Jakun of Negri Sembilan. — The chief diseases are 
more or less malignant kinds of skin-disease — in part 
inherited, in part brought on themselves, for the 
hillmen of Negri Sembilan never indulge in the 
luxury of a bath. 

They do not appear to possess much stamina for 
resisting fever and other internal ailments. When 
they had been living in the house assigned to them by 
Rowland for a short time, they became dissatisfied, and 
all developed a dry, painful cough, and moved about 
very despondingly ; scarcely an hour passed without 

I04 NOTE ON DISEASES OF THE ABORIGINES i>art 

one of them coming to Rowland and saying that he 
was about to die, until at last Rowland had huts built 
for them after their own manner, when they at once 
recovered. Rowland adds that he heard nothing of 
mental diseases among them, though there are many 
such among the Malays.^ 

Jakun of Johor. — The Jakun were not much 
subject to sickness ; though none the less, for want of 
proper care, few of them reach to an advanced age. 
The sickness of which they have the greatest dread, and 
from which they suffer most, is the small-pox. If any 
one is attacked by it, he is at once entirely abandoned ; 
parents, relations, friends, and neighbours all fly from 
him alike, and the poor sick man, left without any 
assistance, of course dies miserably. In the case of 
other diseases, the sick are not so entirely uncared for ; 
some sort of physic, which consists ordinarily of an 
infusion or decoction of wild plants, being given 
according to the rude prescription of a Pawang, 
though usually without any success. The Jakun die 
for the most part of fever caused by the dampness 
and insalubrity of the places they inhabit.'^ 

Like the people of India, they are also generally 
very subject to ulcers. Many of them have very 
troublesome skin diseases, though as a rule these are 
not dangerous. If the missionaries succeed in 
gathering the Jakun into villages, as they intend to 
do, and to make their habitations more salubrious, 
ulcers will certainly be much more scarce amongst 
them ; and it may be hoped that the cure of their 
skin diseases will not present any great difficulty. 
A small provision of quinine or other remedies 

1 Rowland, p. 707. 
2 Favie \nj, I. A. vol. ii. ]). 265. 

I SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 105 

for fever would also doubtless preserve the life of 
many.^ 

Benua-Jakun. — Of the Benua of Johor we are told 
that, like all these tribes, they have an excessive fear of 
the small'pox. The explanation they give of this is that 
in former times their tribe was severely visited, and 
greatly thinned, by it, and that a vow was then made 
that they and their descendants in all time to come 
should flee from its presence whenever and wherever 
it appeared. If it should again break out, they would 
necessarily abandon both the victim and the locality.' 

The Benua of the Lenggiu and Sayong are said to 
close their rivers by felling trees across them whenever 
they hear that this disease prevails at Johor Lama 
{i.e. "Old Johor") or elsewhere in the country. 
Vaccination would prove a great boon.^ 

Orang Laut or Sea-Jakun. 

0. Laut, Beduanda Kallangf. — The Beduanda Kallang 
of Singapore formerly consisted of about a hundred 
families occupying as many boats, but the ravages 
of the small-pox have reduced the number to eight.** 

0. Laut, Sletap. — Several of the men and women of 
the Sletar tribe were subject to deformity in hands 
and limbs, a rather unusual circumstance for these 
parts, and the disease most prevalent among them 
was a cutaneous scaly eruption (Mai, " Kurap ") that 
covered the whole body. To this disease whole 
families were subject, from the mother to the infant at 
the breast, nearly every second person appearing to be 
afflicted with it. The feet of the old people were also 

' Favre in /. /. A. vol. ii. p. 265. ' lb. 

2 y. /. A. vol. i. p. 2S4. < //'. p. 300. 

(o6 NOTE ON DISEASES OF THE ABORIGINES part i 

attacked by a sort of disease resembling leprosy, and 
the features of the face in one or two cases were found 
to be contracted from some such cause/ its victims 
being naturally rendered hideous to look upon." 

* From the description this might be suffered from a disease of the skin of 

attributed to some disease of syphilitic the feet and hands, named " Kedal," 

origin, which is not impossible, seeing which had, however, no affinity with 

the propinquity of the Sletar to Singa- leprosy properly so called, 
pore. On the other hand, it may be ^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 345*. 

remarked that the Malays themselves 

MANNERS AND CUSTOMS. 

PART II 

CHAPTER I. 

Food — Stimulants — Narcotics. 

Although food is always (naturally) a burning ques- 
tion among the wild tribes that are still nomadic, it 
apparently becomes, strange as it may seem, of even 
greater importance among those that are just entering 
the path of civilisation, who are frequently rendered, to 
a pitiable extent, dependent upon the Malays for their 
very existence, a circumstance which the latter are not 
slow to turn to their own advantage. The wildest 
tribes, who are thoroughgoing nomads, seldom stay 
more than three or four days in one place, but as 
soon as they have exhausted the sources of food in 
one neighbourhood, move on to the next, and hence 
are as a rule fairly, though not liberally, supplied. 

The staple food of these tribes does not consist so 
much of the flesh of animals as of such wild vegetable 
food as may happen to fall from time to time in season. 
When this fails, the men engage in hunting, trap- 
ping, and fishing excursions in order to eke out 
their dwindling stock of vegetable supplies, which 
consist mainly of wild yams,^ roots, and fruits of the 
jungle. 

The less wild tribes who have learnt the use of 

^ According to H. N. Ridley the of the wild tribes is Dioscorea penta- 
yam most sought after by all branches pliylla. 

109 

no FOOD PART 11 

rice are forced to obtain their supplies of it by the 
barter of jungle produce at ruinous rates, as they 
seldom succeed in obtaining a crop of their own which 
will last for more than a small portion of the year. 

As will readily be expected, not only the knife and 
fork of civilisation, but even such objects as chop- 
sticks, are completely unknown, the flesh of the animal 
which has been killed being broken up into pieces of 
convenient size, which are picked up from the dish 
(which often consists of nothing more elaborate than 
a large banana-leaf obtained from the neighbouring 
forest) and conveyed to the mouth by hand. In the 
case of a leg or wing of a small mammal or bird the 
bone is held in the hand in primitive fashion, and the 
flesh gnawed off it sans c^r^vionie and sans gene. For 
drinking purposes bamboo vessels, gourds, and coco- 
nut-shells are used, though a mere leaf, or the hand 
itself, are used at convenience. 

In eating, the women and girls of all three wild 
races wait until the men have finished. 

For drinking purposes the " tamer " tribes generally 
keep in their huts earthenware water-pots, for which a 
half coconut-shell is, as among the Malays, the most 
generally accepted " bailer." In drinking from running 
water, however, the water is thrown into the mouth 
by hand, unless a big leaf happens to be available. 

In this connexion it may be of interest to 
note a statement to the effect that the Orang Laut, 
when they wished to drink, threw the water up into 
the mouth with the hand with unerring aim, and 
instead of splashing the entire face (as a European 
would), they were able to throw water into the mouth 
at about the distance of a foot from the palm of the 
hand without wetting their faces to speak of. Even 

GENERAL REMARKS 

the children employed this method. On the other 
hand, when a mother wished to give her infant some 
water to drink, she let it drip from her hand into the 
child's open mouth.^ 

With regard to rice, the wildest tribes of the 
Peninsula (Pangan, etc.) do not eat it, although it is 
the staple food of the Malays and all the later im- 
migrants to the country. 

The first step towards the adoption of a grain diet 
would seem to be taken when the wild people take 
to cultivating and eating a species of millet ("sekoi ").^ 

For this, at a later period, a more or less scanty 
diet of rice (obtained from the Malays by barter) is 
gradually substituted by the less nomadic tribes 
(generally by tribes who have learned to grow a few 
light "catch" crops, in which rice is not included), 
and eventually we find the first beginnings of rice 
culture among tribes who cultivate for themselves not 
only bananas, maize, tapioca (and in a few cases even 
tobacco), but also a scanty stock of half-wild rice. 

The wilder tribes of Semang and Sakai, and even 
perhaps a few of the Jakuns, practise methods of 
obtaining fire by friction. The Malayising tribes 
appear, however, for a long time past to have known 
the use of flint and steel, which is perhaps the method 
still most generally in vogue. A few of the more 
advanced have, however, learnt the use of "trade" 
matches, which they call by their Malay names 
("tarek api " = pull-fire, or "gesek api " = scratch-fire). 
The tinder used consists of the downy substance or fluff 
which collects round the leaf-bases of certain palms. ^ 

^ Z.f. E. xxix. 184. 3 It is chiefly obtained from Caryota 

^ De la Croix, p. 340. li\% Fanicum tnitis. Lour. — Ridley. 
italicum. — Ridley. 

112 FOOD I'ART II 

This fluff is also used as a kind of wad to prevent 
windage in shooting with the blowpipe. 

A simple form of torch, consisting of lumps of 
" dammar " (Mai. " damar ") wrapped round with palm- 
leaves and tied with vegetable fibres, is also pretty 
generally employed. 

Among the Semang, cooking is the duty of the 
women, and among the more nomadic tribes usually 
consists in slightly roasting the flesh of the small 
mammals and birds killed by the men, though it is 
certain that, in some cases at all events, the definition 
of man as a " cooking animal " breaks down, for the 
meat is eaten absolutely raw. Flesh-meat is inserted 
in a cleft stick, which is made to lean at an angle over 
the fire. Rice, if obtainable, is fire-dried in green 
bamboos, which are carried about and broken open as 
circumstances may require. Yams and roots are grated 
and wrapped up in strips of banana-leaf for baking. 
Fish are usually baked in the same way as the flesh of 
birds and animals. 

The methods of the Sakai are very similar, and 
both they and the Semang have several ingenious 
methods of treating poisonous yams, etc., in order to 
make them fit for consumption. 

Among the Jakun of the coast, and to some extent 
among the inland Sakai and Semang, iron cooking 
utensils (Malay rice-pots, etc.) have been introduced, 
and with these the difficulties of cooking largely dis- 
appear. 

I. — Semang. 

Food and its Preparation. 

Kedah Semang. — The food of the Western Semang, 
when I visited them in Kedah, consisted of rice eked 

CHAP. I NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 113 

out with a little sugar-cane, both of which were cultivated 
by themselves, together with a little tapioca and the 
wild roots and fruits of the jungle. Their flesh-food 
consisted of small birds and animals, but more often of 
fish and turtle, etc., which they caught or harpooned 
in the river at the foot of the hill. A few of these 
Negrito tribes still hunt with the bow, but the blow- 
pipe has also made some converts, especially towards 
the south. They are unfettered by religious re- 
strictions in their search for food,^ and are averse to 
nothing which can be converted into a means of 
sustenance. We often encountered the holes made by 
them in digging for roots in the deepest recesses of 
the forest. 

Pang-an. — The food of the Eastern Semang (Pan- 
gan) does not differ from that of their western kindred. 
In a small rock-shelter which I visited in the hills 
of Patalung near Singora, and which was deserted 
by the Pangan just before we got there, we found 
the remains of a fire, the ribs of a small tortoise 
on which they had been feeding, and a half-smoked 
(native) cigarette. In the deserted semicircular 
huts of the Pangans at Ulu Aring, in Kelantan, 
we found the remains of fires, short bamboo vessels 
which had been used for carrying dried rice (" nasi 
lemang"), and a half coconut-shell, which had, no doubt, 
been used for drinking. These Pangan when in the 
neighbourhood used to come down to the Malay 
hamlet at Kampong Buntal for rice and tobacco. 

Kedah Semang and Pangan. — Fire - making by 
friction is the simplest method practised by both 
Eastern and Western Semang. It usually takes the 
form of rubbing together short blocks of wood, 

' For rules as to eating the " soul-bird " (an alleged exception), v. vol. ii. pp. 4-6. 
VOL. I I 

114 FOOD I'ART II 

bamboo, or cane. A common method consists in 
passing a rattan line round the portion of a dried 
branch (that of certain kinds of trees can alone be 
used), and holding the branch down by the foot, wliilst 
the line is rapidly worked to and fro with the hands, 
until the friction ignites the dust which falls from the 
wood. 

The Semang also not unfrequently supply them- 
selves with fragments of flint and tool-iron, which they 
carry about with them. 

They use as tinder the down-like substance or 
fluff which gathers about the leaf-bases of palms, and 
which they also, as has been said, use as a wad in 
shooting with the blowpipe. 

This complete fire apparatus is generally carried 
on the person, not unfrequently in a small bamboo 
cylinder. 

Perak Semang". — The same remarks apply to the 
Semang of Perak, De Morgan adds that the bamboo 
tube in which the fire apparatus is carried is often 
beautifully decorated (by incised lines). He also 
states that the Perak Semang obtain their tinder from 
the sugar-palm^ ("kabong").- 

Semang" and Pang-an. — The Semang hearth con- 
sists of a few short logs or sticks, whose ends converge 
to a common centre. They are laid upon a clear spot 
of ground, and the fires are allowed to smoulder away 
gradually, being only " made up " when a bigger fire 
is required for cooking, though they are kept burning 
night and day until the encampment changes its 
ground. 

Kedah Semang. — Of roots and fruits it is not only 
the innocuous kinds that are employed ; even poison- 

1 Arenga saccharifera. — Ridley. ^ Dg Morgan, vii. 414. 

CHAP. I NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 115 

ous yams and roots are specially treated by the 
Semang to render them fit for food. For this pur- 
pose they are rasped against a prickly stick (a sort of 
natural "nutmeg grater")/ the raspings being mixed 
with a little lime (slaked with water in a coconut-shell) 
and worked up with a small spatula of "bertam"^ 
palm. Finally they are kneaded by hand into a sort 
of dough, which is wrapped up in a strip of fresh 
banana -leaf, slipped into a cleft stick, and slowly 
roasted over the fire. The yams thus treated 
are called " kleb " by the Semang, and " ubi kapor " 
by the Malays. The Semang informed me they 
were highly poisonous, unless treated as here de- 
scribed.' 

I noticed a number of these yams (" ubi kapor ") in 
the Semang shelter at Siong in Kedah, where they 
were inserted between the slats of the roof. Other 
kinds of yams employed by the tribe in question 
were the "ubi takob," which is baked; the "ubi 
tanjong," which is boiled; and " kense " or tapioca- 
root, which was no doubt obtained by barter from 
the Malays, as none was grown in the clearing at 
Siong. 

Perak Semang-. — The Perak Semang render the 
roots of the wild yam edible by means of prolonged 
fermentation (in the earth ?) and by culinary treat- 
ment extending over six days. 

But the roots of the amorphophallus cannot, it 
appears, be made edible by any sort of treatment, this 
latter plant being regarded as furnishing, when mixed 
with Ipoh, the most deadly kind of poison known to 

* The prickly stem of a kind of (or "gadong"), ^that requires to be 
rattan {Ca/amiis). - Eugeissona tfistis. prepared in this way. The other 
^ \i'\son\y Dioscorca dainoiia,Ko\b. species are hannless. — Ridley. 

ii6 FOOD PART II 

the tribe, whilst even the contact of the sap with the 
skin produces considerable irritation.^ 

Meals. 

Kedah Semang". — Among the Semang of Kedah the 
women and girls, after cooking the food, were not 
allowed to eat any of it until the men and boys of 
the tribe had finished their repast. At Siong on 
one occasion I photographed a number of Semang 
in the middle of a meal. Their food, which they 
eagerly devoured and obviously enjoyed, consisted 
of a quantity of rice and some small fowls that 
I had brought with me, — a sufficient reply to the 
assertion which has often been made that these tribes 
are afraid to eat the flesh of any domestic creature. 
These materials, after cooking, were deposited in 
separate heaps upon large banana- leaves, and were 
partaken of first by all the males of the tribe sitting 
together. 

The women could be seen inside the hut waiting 
quite patiently when their work was done until their 
lords and masters should have finished their repast. 

\Sti7mdants and Narcotics. 

Kedah Semang. — Betel -chewing appeared to be 
very sparingly indulged in by all the Semang tribes 
that I came across. Occasional instances certainly 
occur, but the custom is certainly very much more 
rarely found among the Semang than among the more 
southern tribes, and their teeth were, as a rule, entirely 

* De la Croix (quoting Sir H. Low), same as that of the Semang of Kedah, 
p. 334. From Mr. L. Wray I learn that with the addition of gourds, pumpkins,, 
in other respects their diet is much the chillies, maize, and sweet potatoes. 

Skcat. 
A. Semang of Kedah rasping yams with prickly 
stem of young rattan. 

Skcai. 
B. Pouring lime upon the raspings preparatory to 
mixing and cooking. 

SEMANGS I'KKl'ARINC; I'oisuNors Vams for F'ooix 

iikeat. 

Skm\n<; of Kkdaii ii\\in<; a Mi.ai.. 

I'oL I. f. 1 16. 

CHAP. I NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 117 

free from the discoloration which necessarily accom- 
panies the custom referred to.^ 

Semang- and Pangan — Perak Semang-. — On the other 
hand, both Semang and Pangan (East Semang) are 
(like all the wild tribes of the Peninsula) inordinately 
fond of tobacco. They carry it in a small but beauti- 
fully decorated bamboo tube, a specimen of which I 
obtained in Ulu Kelantan. Some of the more civilised 
tribes are said to grow their own tobacco. Almost 
invariably, however, they obtain it by barter from the 
Malays, as do also the Semang of Perak. ^ 

1 1. — Sakai. 
Food and its Preparation. 

Perak Sakai. — The wilder Sakai tribes (Sakai 
Bukit), like the Semang, live upon wild tubers, roots, 
and fruits, together with the llesh of animals and birds 
that fall victims to the darts shot from their blowpipe. 
They do not as a rule search for game until every- 
thing else fails. ^ They will, however, eat almost 
any sort of animal food, and the land tortoise is as 
acceptable to them as to the Karens of Martaban.^ 

To both these classes of food must be added, 
among the more settled tribes, the produce of their 
gardens, which includes maize, sugar-cane, tapioca, 
sweet potatoes, yams, rice, and many plants which can 
be cultivated as catch crops. A curious fact recorded 
of them is that they do not make use of salt.'' This 

' Mr. L. Wray tells me that in ^ Hale, p. 295 ; see also De la Croix, 

Upper Perak he saw some Semang- p. 340. 
Sakai (from the Plus) burning fresh- ■* J. I. A. vol. iv. p. 430. 

water shells to make lime for their betel. ' lb. vol. iv. p. 429. To this list 

^ J. I. A. vol. iv. pp. 425, 426. of plants millet must be added. 

ii8 FOOD PART II 

has been contradicted by other writers,' though it is 
quite possible that salt, owing to the difficulty of 
obtaining it, may not be used by some of the wilder 
tribes, who fear the risks attendant upon barter. The 
young growing shoots of the giant bamboo (" buluh 
betong ") are eaten both cooked and raw,' 

According to M. Lias, the food of the Perak Sakai 
consists mainly of tapioca-root, yams, sweet potatoes, 
maize, bananas, poultry, eggs, fish, and game killed 
by the blowpipe. 

"They also," he continues, "eat rats, snakes, 
monkeys . . .," a Malay said to me, laughing. 

But To' Lela denies it. 

" It is not we, the Sakai of Kerbu, who eat that, 
it is the Ulu Burong people."* 

De Morgan says that they eat the shoots of ferns, 
palms, bamboos, p'rah-fruit, certain fungi that grow on 
rotten trees, and yams of every description, together 
with tapioca (which has been imported in recent times, 
but the use of which has spread everywhere), sugar- 
cane, maize, gourds, and water-melons, turmeric, 
millet, and (half- wild) bananas which have big seeds 
in them. Kulim leaves are used as seasoning,* 

Both these accounts, curiously enough, omit to 
mention the wild fruits which grow in great profusion 
at certain seasons of the year in the forests of the 
Peninsula. It would be interesting to know whether the 
Sakai are less markedly frugivorous than the Semang 

^ L. Wray, Cave-dwellers, p. 39. 2 j j^ 4^ ^'^ ^ ^\^ jjo. 21, p. 154. 

Mr. Wray tells me that the food of ^ Brau de S. P. Lias, pp. 279, 280. 

the Batang Padang Sakai (and those of * De Morgan, viii. 157 ; c/. 

the Hills between Kinta and Pahang) VHoiiune, ii. 713. The Sakai are 

agrees with that of the Perak Semang, also said to eat the tuberous roots 

except that millet is substituted for of Smilax megaiarpa, De C. Its 

rice. Frogs and snakes are also eaten, Malay names are " Akar banau," 

as well as some insects, e.g., the " Rabanu," " Rabana," " K'luna,"and 

♦' Buprestes" beetles, which are roasted. " Lampau Bukit." — Ridley, 

CHAP. I SAKAI OF PERAK 119 

or Jakun. But there is no reason to think so, and most 
probably, Hke the others, they will eat anything that is 
not actually poisonous. Thus Mr. L. Wray writes that 
once, in an evil moment, he was induced by assurances 
and example of some of the Sakai to eat some pretty 
apple-like fruit with which a tree growing by the side 
of the river was laden. The fruit, though pleasant at 
first, left a very disagreeable after - taste, and he 
suffered for the remainder of the day with sore mouth 
and lips. It was a species* of the genus Garcima, of 
which the " gelugor " fruit - is a well-known and closely 
allied example. 

Mr. Wray first saw, on Gunong Chunam Prah, 
at a height of 3350 feet (102 1 m.), a blackberry 
which grows amongst the underwood (" blukar ") on 
the old Sakai clearings (" ladang "). The berry was 
red and long, and had something of the flavour of its 
English ally. The leaf and method of growth were also 
very similar. Raspberries^ were common in the same 
situations, but the fruit was small and nearly tasteless.* 

The methods employed by the Sakai for obtaining 
fire are similar to those used by the Negritos. To 
procure fire the hill Sakai (Orang Bukit) rub two dry 
pieces of bamboo together.^ 

In Kinta, according to Hale, every Sakai carries a 
tinder-box, which, however, he does not use more 
than he is obliged to do, as the fire of each family is 
always kept smouldering to prevent its extinction." 

Hale's description of the Sakai hearth deserves 
full quotation. Each family (he writes) and wife . . . 
had a separate hearth. These hearths are very 

* Probably Garcinia Castata, Hensl. ^ De la Croix, p. 340. 

* Mai. "gelugor," i.e. Garcinia " Hale, p. 294. The Batang Padang 
atroviridis. ' Rubiis rosafoliiis. Sakai are said to use the fire-drill. — 

'' J.R.A.S., S.B., No. 21, p. 155. Fast: Mai. 41. 

I20 FOOD PARI II 

simple constructions ; a mat of leaves is spread 
on the floor, and over this is spread about three 
inches of earth, and a fire lighted, which once lighted 
is not allowed to got out. For although every Sakai 
carries a tinder-box, it is much easier to blow up 
a smouldering log into a blaze than to rekindle it. 
Three or four long logs of suitable wood, each about 
nine inches in diameter, are arranged so that their 
ends approach the middle of the hearth. A small fire 
of sticks is lighted in the centre, and the logs keep the 
fire up for weeks, and as they burn away are drawn 
gradually into the fire. The burning ends serve to 
support the saucepans, and the accumulated ashes 
below to roast tapioca and sweet potatoes in. As 
there are always several other logs lying about the 
floor drying so as to be ready for use, it is not very 
easy to get about without knocking one's shins. ^ 

The Sakai generally use earthen cooking vessels, 
but prefer iron ones when they can get them. Like 
the Negritos, they have many ingenious methods 
for the preparation of their food. The wild yam 
and the "kapayang" fruit ^ ("piyung") are cut into 
small pieces, cooked, and laid in running water for 
twenty-four hours to draw the poison out of them.^ 

A similar process is employed in the preparation of 
the bitter cassava ^ [Maiiihot uiilissima). 

A yet more curious process described by Hale is 
to bury such poisonous tubers for days together in one 
of the swamps in the jungle. After being steeped in 
this way till they are sodden, they are dug up again 
and rasped with a prickly shoot of rattan (alrccidy 

^ Hale, p. 294. * Sic Vaughan - Stevens (/'/>.), but 

- Pangitimedtile. Thehuskof thenut according to Mr. II. N. Ridley the 

is used as a receptacle. — L'H. ii. 619. bitter cassava is not cultivated in the 

3 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 112. Peninsula! 

2 S 

<_ a 

o ^ 

... : A*i 

SAKAI OF PERAK 

described). The raspings are put into a matwork 
bag, and the foul -smelling, unwholesome moisture 
squeezed out of them with a kind of primitive lever. 
They are then dried over the fire in a green bamboo, 
and put aside till required for food.^ 

This preparation is said by Hale to be called 
" koyi " (" koyee "), and will keep good for a month.^ 

The seeds of some trees (such as the " p'rah ") ^ are 
similarly treated ; they are put into a matwork bag 
and buried in swamps sometimes for months together 
before they are touched. Eventually, however, they 
are lifted out of the swamp by means of a cord attached 
to the bag, and are then pounded and squeezed into a 
bamboo, when they are ready for use. The result is 
a highly flavoured kind of preserve called by the 
Malays "serum p'rah," or "p'rah paste," which in 
spite of its strong odour is yet greatly prized.* 

The Sakai use rude wooden spice-blocks (" seng- 
kalan ") for grinding their spices. Not unfrequently 
part of a bamboo internode is used for the purpose 
when they are travelling in the jungle. In this way 
they grind up their salt, chillies, and the other season- 
ings ^ which they eat with their rice, the latter of which 
is boiled in an internode of bamboo.^ 

Meals. 

Perak Sakai. — Hale says of the Sakai that they 
have only two regular meals, an early morning break- 
fast and a midnight supper, but that they were con- 
tinually having slight snacks of some kind of vegetable 

' Hale, p. 298. ^ De M. figures a woollen plate 

- lb. p. 295. (probably used for this purpose) and a 

3 Mezzcttia leptopoda, Oliver (Ano- bamboo water-vessel. — HH. ii. 619. 

nacere). ■• Hale, p. 29S. '• L. Wray, Cave-ihvellers, y. 39. 

122 FOOD PART U 

food (sug^ar-cane, tapioca, or sweet potatoes) when 
they happened to be indoors during the daytime.' 

Stimulants and Narcotics. 

Perak Sakai. — Of tobacco and betel the Sakai are 
exceedingly fond, the leaf of a wild betel (" chambai ") ^ 
being freely taken when no other is obtainable. Both 
of these habits are probably acquired from the Malays, 
from whom a Sakai will also occasionally learn to 
smoke or eat opium. ^ 

III. — Jakun. 

Food. 

Blandas. — There is nothing requiring special 
comment about the diet of the Blandas, except that it 
contains less animal food and a larger proportion of 

1 Hale, p. 295. 

\'aiigh.in-Slevens slates that he had 
often read that the aborigines (Orang 
Hutan) relieve themselves from flatu- 
lence in any way that they please, 
without the least notice being taken of 
it by any of those present, but that this 
habit is condemned and regarded as 
"vulgar." Vaughan - Stevens often 
heard one Sakai reprove another wlien 
such a breach of decorum was made, 
although men only were present. On 
one occasion an excuse was offered by 
one of those present on behalf of 
his comrade, the offender "looking 
ashamed as he went out." Whenever 
Vaughan - Stevens asked the Sakai 
what was their opinion in such a case, 
they always condemned it very strongly, 
but suggested that it might have 
occurred accidentally and unintention- 
ally, by way of apology. The idea 
that this habit might be regarded (as 
among the Chinese) as a compliment 

to the host cannot be entertained, 
as among the aborigines it would be 
an insult rather than a compliment. 
Accidents of the kind may happen 
from their greedy manner of eating, and 
if the men appear to take no notice, 
it is only because they do not wish to 
attract attention to the mistake which 
has been made ^Z. f. E. x.\ix. 184). 

2 Mr. Ridley writes me that several 
wild pepper leaves are used as substitutes 
for the betel-leaf. lie has seen Selangor 
Sakai near Kuala Lumpor cut off long 
strips of bark from Piper argenteitm, 
with the object of chewing them. A 
portion only of the bark was taken in 
each case, so that the plant might not 
be killed. 

^ L. Wray, Cave-dwellers, p. 39. 
Mr. Wray tells me further that the 
Batang Padang Sakai grow tobacco, 
drying and cutting but not fermenting 
the leaves, and wrapping the product 
in young " palas " leaves. 

CHAi'. I SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 123 

rice than that of the Semang and Sakai, the Selan- 
gor tribe being rather more advanced in matters of 
cultivation. In Kuala Langat, I have myself fre- 
quently seen the latter at their meals (which I have 
also occasionally shared), when their only food consisted 
of boiled rice, seasoned with acid fruits (" asam k'lubi " 
= Zalacca conferta) obtained from the jungle. 

Food and its Preparation. 

Besisi. — A favourite kind of preserve not yet 
mentioned consists of a paste obtained from the pulp 
of the durian, which the Besisi bury in the ground for 
months together until long after it has fermented. 

A curious but firmly held belief of the Besisi is 
that acid fruits must not be eaten with the game 
killed by their poisoned darts, as to do so will, they 
imagine, bring out the full symptoms of the poison in 
those who partake of it. 

When cooking such game they generally cut 
out the part surrounding the puncture caused by the 
dart. 

In some of the songs improvised by the Besisi 
the various processes employed in the preparation of 
their game for food are described in detail. The 
game (if an animal) first has its fur removed by 
singeing, when the skin is "poked" off, and the 
carcase quartered and cooked. 

The seasonings used are " kulim " ^ leaves, tur- 
meric, and (wild) ginger, leaves of the " kayu k'lat,'"' 

^ Soiodocarpusborneensis((^\^(:\v\iix), * A name applied to many species of 

a large tree, every part of which smells Eugenia of the section "syzygium," 
strongly of onions. — Ridley. and other trees somewhat resembling 

them (Myrtaceas:). — Ridley. 

124 FOOD PART II 

"spices" (the precise kind is not mentioned), and 
" kesom," ^ 

Different kinds of seasoning are mentioned in 
other songs, especially various kinds of wild pepper, 
" pedas chanchang " -^ and " pedas jintan."^ " Asam 
k'lubi " ■* is excluded as a seasoning for animals 
killed with the blowpipe, for the reasons stated above. 

The most usual method of making fire among 
all the branches of the Jakun race (including the 
Besisi) is by means of flint and steel. Logan, how- 
ever, mentions a case in which some Jakun produced 
fire by circular friction, exactly as it is sometimes pro- 
duced by civilised Malays.^ The steel consists of a 
fragment of tool-iron, and is generally wrapped up 
together with the flint in a piece of cloth and left in 
the hut during short absences of the owner, or carried 
on the person (in his " bujam " or matwork pouch) 
together with the usual palm-fluff tinder. 

The commonest type of hearth is the Malay box- 
hearth, which consists of a shallow box filled with 
earth, upon which are usually laid, in a triangle, the 
Malayan firestones, between which a fire of sticks is 
kindled. Fire-logs, such as are used by the inland 
Sakai, are, however, often to be seen. 

Meals. 

Besisi. — As in the case of all the wild tribes, the 
Besisi men eat before the women. Morning and 
evening are their special meal-times, but they con- 

' Probably =" kasum," Polygonum ^ Cummin, also used by tlie Malays 

Jlaccidum, ^leissn. (Polygonacece), a in making curries. — Ridley, 

common weed, also called " kalima * The fruit of Zalacca conferta, 

paya"or "swamp" kalima. — Ridley. Griff. 

- Unidentified. ^ J. I. A. vol. i. jx 255. 

SAVAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 125 

stantly chew sugar-cane, etc., throughout the day, and 
they do not hesitate to accept an extra meal whenever 
the opportunity offers. They gorge, in fact, Hke 
pythons whenever they get the chance, and are only 
too willing to sleep it off afterwards. It is, however, 
only fair to them to say that they do not often get the 
opportunity of eating to excess, except in the fruit season 
or at harvest-time. They eat monkeys, rats, snakes, 
and even crocodiles. 

One of their more elaborate banquets, at which I 
was present, will be described in detail in a later 
chapter. 

Betel-leaf and Tobacco. 

Besisi. — The chewing of the betel-leaf is a favourite 
occupation of the Besisi, who especially affects the 
wild betel-leaf called " chambai " and the bark from the 
stem of a creeper called " kalong," ' which is, I was told, 
identical with the stem of the "chambai." I have 
tasted both, and found that both possessed equally the 
pungent aromatic Havour of the betel-leaf, and left 
behind them a sort of roughness of the palate for at 
least a few minutes after they had been chewed. 
The Besisi are also extremely fond of tobacco, which 
is generally smoked in the form of small cigarettes, 
rolled up in thin coverings of palm-leaf after the Malay 
fashion, but which is also occasionally chewed." 

Food and iis Preparation. 

Mantra. — Of the Mantra we are told that no kind 
of food comes amiss, so long as it does not " intoxicate " 
or poison them.^ 

• Piper i ait iti inn. -' Skeat m Sel. Journ. vol. v. p. 381. 

' y. I. .-i. vol. i. p. 254. 

126 

FOOD 

According to Logan, the Mantra never eat the 
flesh of the elephant.^ The same writer gives a Hst of 
no fewer than forty different jungle fruits, all of which 
the Mantra are in the habit of eating.^ 

Father Barbe has said that if the flesh of monkeys, 
to which the Mantra are very partial, were not 
prohibited by the Koran, there is no doubt that the 
generality of them would have been converted to 
I slam. ^ 

Meals and Tobacco.'^ 

The Mantra have three meals — morning, mid-day, 
and evening. 

The Mantra women were much addicted to to- 
bacco, but they did not smoke it. 

' Borie (tr. Bourien) says they •' eat 
all that falls into their hands — bears, 
monkeys, squirrels, rats, deer, birds, and 
the roots and bulbs which the earth 
produces in abundance, such as the 
kaledek, or sweet potato (' kledek ') ; 
fruits such as the banana, and the sugar- 
cane, which serves to satisfy their thirst 
as well as to nourish them. The maize 
and rice which they cultivate can only 
support them four months in the year. 
To cultivate rice on the mountains it 
is necessary to cut down the forest, to 
burn it, and then to sow, which de- 
mands more labour than is required for 
hunting in the forest, where perhaps, 
too, they may find roots or other vege- 
table food. The hunting of monkeys 
and squirrels pleases them more than 
anything else, and they give themselves 
up to it with ardour ; their labour and 
fatigue they count as nothing if they 
can but capture tlieir prey, which they 
distribute part to their parents, part to 
their relations, and part to their friends 
who attend the feast. If they are 
joined by no one, they first of all burn 
off {i.e. singe) the hair, and then cut 
up the carcase, and throw the portions 

into a frying-pan to cook them, when 
each person proceeds to devour his 
share silently in the shade" (Borie, 
pp. 76, 77). Later, M. Borie adds, 
the Mantra "do not give themselves 
the trouble of cutting out that part 
of the flesh which has been pierced by 
the arrow, and which has a slightly 
bluish appearance " (p. 78). This is 
contrary to the usual statements of 
the Besisi, who maintain that the flesh 
surrounding the wound ought always 
to be cut out. 

2 " The fruits used are the tampui, 
takaro, lari, kandim, kimok, klcdang, 
tampune, kleres, pulasan, rambutan, 
ramnian, Icrang, prah, jireh, kingong, 
kadumpal, kumpal, binnong, tangkoi, 
redan, sikrang, ampadil, bangkong, 
puteh, lonah, kamalun, didalin, mang- 
kapas, jangkang, bom bong, luen, kamui, 
sop, chitlong, sippam, lanjut, klissa, 
lalam, kimoh, sirlang, rumang." — -J. I. 
A. vol. i. p. 331*. For identifications, 
V. Ridley's I'lant-List {I.e.), and other 
parts of this book. 

3 Barbe, /. /. A. vol. v. pp. 487, 
488. 

* /. /. A. vol. i. p. 254, 255. 

SAVAGE MALAYS OF JO HO R 127 

Food and its Preparation. 

Benua-Jakun. — Much of their [the Benua's] food is, 
according to Logan, derived from fishing, snaring, and 
hunting, no sorts of flesh being rejected. The 
ungka, kra, and probably some other species of 
monkeys, are, according to Logan, used by them 
as food, but he believes not frequently so, and 
"although the Malays asserted that snakes were 
eaten," he could find no corroboration of the state- 
ment while amongst the Benua.^ 

According to the same authority, the Benua-Jakun 
tribes of Johor also make use of a considerable 
number of fruits and seeds, which they obtain from the 
forest, and eat either in their raw state or after boiling 
or roasting them. He mentions the names of no less 
than sixty-nine of these trees.^ 

In dealing with the subject of fire-making among 
the Benua-Jakun, Logan remarked that the means of 
obtaining a light were so simple that there was no 
occasion to carry fire on their journeys. On his way 

1 Logan,y. R. A. S. No. 7, p. 87. Cp. one with fleshless seeds ; ihe rambutan, 

Newbold : "In eating, no dish adorns ther.gading, r.uhan,r.kasumt)a, rambei, 

their table, save occasionally the leaf of duku, two kindsof manggis (mangostin), 

the ' sayak ' tree, and that of the I'iro hangke, bidara, tanipui, niarki, lunko- 

(? Birah) furnishes their usual drinking- koyo.klueng, bokobaka,bahkon, katian, 

cup. A vessel of clay called ' Tarn- chaminoi, rampinoi, saun, kani]xing, 

mumong ' is applied to the purposes of sundeh, taban, nierpadi, kes, garop, 

cooking, differing in shape from that chabet, ranieng, palas, gippu, kadun- 

used by Malays. The entrails of wild dong, kulem, saloi, hukani, tampanoi, 

animals are taken out and the hair jittai, kcrdas, bluru, blatong, nialai, 

scraped or singed f>fif before the flesh mindaleng, kapas, ridan, ranianipas, 

is boiled. Instead of betel-leaf, ihcy ramun, jila, ujol, k. rabu, pahct, kich- 

often chew the leaf of a tree called ipo, tikact, kilcai, pinjeng, jiring, kika, 

' kassi,' together with the arcca-nui and buntol, jilibom, mayong, machang, 

gambler, but seldom mix them with kachang, kirpol, kawe, pakop, tayo, 

lime. Tobacco, whenever it can be timanibun, gungang, dumpa, merlilin, 

had, is used to excess, even by women kansil, pilampi. — J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 

and children." — Newbold, ii. 405, 258, 259. For identifications, see 

406 ; cp. y. /. .'/. vol. i. p. 257. Ridley's Tiant-List, and other parts of 

- Including several kinds of durian, this book. 

i:8 FOOD TAUT II 

from Pines to the Lenggiu his two guides asked him to 
allow them to go for a little while to a small deserted 
gutta-collector's ("taban") hut not far from the path. 
As their absence was prolonged, and a heavy rain was 
falling, he went to the hut, and there found them 
comfortably extended and smoking native cigarettes 
(" roko' "), and it was only with great difficulty that he 
could induce them to resume the journey. They had 
procured a light by making the end of a piece of dry 
stick revolve rapidly in a small depression which they 
had made in another stick.^ 

There were usually two fireplaces among the Benua, 
and they were furnished with the ordinary pots and 
pans used by the Malays, and had also small supplies of 
the coarsest Chinese plates and saucers. Water was 
carried and kept in the shell of a peculiar species of 
large melon which they cultivate, and which forms a 
very neat and serviceable, though not durable, jar. 
The bamboo is converted to the same purpose, but 
not often. The stem of an " onak " - with the [tips of 
the] thorns broken off formed a strong and very 
effective grater. This was also used by the northern (.'*) 
tribes. Platters made of hard wood, cut into neat 
shapes and slightly curved, served, in conjunction with 
a half coconut - shell, to bruise chillies and other 
condiments. Malays have generally adopted for this 
purpose a pestle and shallow stone mortar. Most of 
the condiments were supplied by the Malays, such as 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 254, 255. up which it climbs in the jungle. 

- " Onak " is the whip-like structure There may be some doubt, however, 

(or " flagellum ") which forms the con- as to whether this "whip" is ever 

tinuation of the midrib of a rattan (or strong enough to be used for the 

calanuis) leaf. It is armed, as a rule, purpose described, and as " onak " is 

with most formidable (recurved) thorns, often mistakenly used for the creeper 

and serves as a species of grapnel by itself, it is possible that the stem 

which this gigantic creeper hooks itself of the rattan is all that is here in- 

on to the higher branches of the trees tended. 

SA VA GE MALA YS OF JOHOR 1 29 

onions and turmeric, etc. The roots of a cultivated 
plant were variously prepared. In the time between 
meals, or when a person came in hungry, they were 
roasted amongst the embers. For regular meals they 
were grated down or simply boiled with the addition 
of hog's grease or vegetable oil.^ 

Meals. 
Benua- Jakun. — The whole household ate together, 
the wife sitting near the fireplace, so as to have the 
smoking pots and pans within reach. From these she 
replenished the plates from time to time. From the 
activity, relish, and high good-humour with which the 
viands were discussed, it was very apparent that the 
Benua is blessed with a strong appetite, and looks 
upon the satisfying of it as the main end of life. The 
children were in general overfed, and even those who 
were naturally vivacious seemed with difficulty to 
resist the lethargic influence consequent on their 
cramming themselves with potatoes boiled in hog's 
grease, a kind of food with which their natural nutri- 
ment is eked out from the third or fourth day of their 
existence." 

Stimulants and Narcotics. 
Benua-Jakun. — The Benua use betel -leaf, but not 
to excess like the Malays. The gambler, betel-nut, and 
lime which are eaten with it they, like other aborigines, 
obtain from the Malays. Their favourite luxury was 
tobacco, in which both sexes freely indulged. The 
women were often to be seen seated together and 
weaving mats, each with a native cigarette (" roko' ") in 
her mouth. While they were speaking it was trans- 

'^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 254. * lb. pp. 266, 267. 

VOL. I K 

130 FOOD PART II 

ferred to the perforation in the ear. When they were 
met paddling their canoes, the " roko' " was seldom 
wanting.^ 

Articles of Diet. 

Berembun Tribes. — Snakes (as well as the iingka, 
kra, and some other species of monkeys)" were used as 
food by the Berembun tribes, who employed dogs to 
discover them. Those principally sought were pythons 
{e.g. the ular sawa and u. sawa rcndam, cobra (u. 
tedong), and others which are unidentified, e.g. u. ipong, 
u, naga, u. gasing, u. ripung, u. ulabat, u. ringkup, u. 
siu, u. manan, and u. kamong. The pythons (sawa) and 
ripung were the best flavoured. They all possessed 
"a fishy taste," Several kinds of snakes, even if the 
teeth are carefully removed, like those of the preceding 
species, cannot be used, the aborigines asserting that 
their flesh is poisonous,^ 

The Berembun tribes use wooden platters and 
coconut-shells (for grinding their condiments) like the 
Benua (and the Javanese), They also employ either 
large bamboos or the shell of a particular species of 
large melon for carrying water,^ 

Food and its Preparation. 

Jakun of Johor. — The food of the Jakun differs in 
no way froni that of the other semi -civilised tribes 
already referred to. I may mention, however, that 
they have grown so used to rice that they cannot do 
without it, and probably first began to cultivate it 
more than forty years ago.^ 

Tapioca-root appears, however, to be the staple 

' J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 254, 255. ■* Fb. p. 254. 

* Cp. p. 127 (of the Benua-Jakun). * See Hervey in/. K. A. S., S. B., 

3 /. /, A. vol. i. p. 257. No. 8, p. 122. 

CHAP. I SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 131 

diet of the Jakun living near Batu Gajah in Johor, 
for, according to H. W. Lake, although they also eat 
fruits and fish, with a little rice which they obtain, 
together with salt and tobacco, from Malay traders in 
exchange for rattan ("rotan"), resin or "dammar," gutta 
(" getah "), and camphor wood, they nevertheless 
mainly subsist on the root of the tapioca. He was 
further informed by the Batin that during the greater 
part of the year, when they disperse in search of jungle 
fruits, these people live entirely on tapioca-root (" ubi 
kayu ") and fruit. ^ 

On the other hand, Favre, writing of the food 
eaten by the Jakun in general, emphasised the fact 
that they had no regular diet. They liked good 
food, but when they were deprived of it they eat with 
satisfaction any other, even such food as would be an 
object of horror to civilised people. They lived upon 
the flesh of every kind of animal — snakes, monkeys, 
bears, tigers, birds, etc., whilst yams, plantains, wild 
fruits, the leaves of trees, and certain roots furnished 
the principal part of their ordinary food. Those of 
them who cultivated rice sold a part of it to the 
Malays, or exchanged it for cloth, and upon the 
remainder they lived for a few months in the year. 
They did not dislike the flesh of domestic animals, 
fowls, etc., but, on the contrary, they preferred it to 
that of wild animals. At several of their houses there 
was a good quantity of fowls. Sometimes they 
cooked the flesh before they ate it, but at other times 
they ate it raw ; some merely put the animal upon the 
fire till the hairs were singed, when they considered it 
" cooked." Favre saw some large monkeys which, 
after having been " cooked " in this very fashion, were 

J H. W. Lake in/. R. A. S., S. B., No. 25, p. 3. 

132 FOOD PART II 

dished up upon a kind of mat as a meal to some seven 
or eight persons, who speedily devoured the whole in 
a few minutes, leaving only the skeleton. In eating 
they used no dish; an iron frying-pan served for 
cooking, plantain leaves served as plates, and some 
coconut-shells formed their usual drinking-cups. Some 
Jakun tribes ^ refused to eat the flesh of elephants, 
under the pretext that it would occasion sickness, but 
many others were "not so scrupulous." When an 
elephant was killed either by themselves or by the 
Malays, they called together their friends and relatives 
to partake of the large entertainment which was 
prepared ; and then built huts in which to lodge their 
guests until the animal which furnished the feast was 
entirely finished, when every one decamped and 
returned to his usual way of living. When the durian 
season was come, a good number of Jakun families 
left their houses, both men and women as well as 
children repairing to the places where the durian trees 
grew. They then cleared the ground in order to find 
the fruit more easily when it ripened and fell, and, 
dwelling in a small shelter built of leaves, "prepared 
themselves to enjoy the treat that nature presented to 
them." For six weeks or two months they ate nothing 
but durians. When the season was over the place was 
deserted till the proper season next year.- 

Favre further observes that "one of their most 
prized dishes is a honeycomb," and "let it be said 
with due respect to the opinion of our European 
cooks, the time when the honey is in the comb is not 
(amongst these epicures of nature) considered the 

1 P'avre writes : " Plusieurs tribus de ' J. T. A. vol. ii. pp. 260, 261 ; cp. 

Benuas" (./. P. F. xxii. 303); but also vol. i. pp. 254-260. 
totemism need not be hence inferred. 

CHAP. I SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 133 

proper moment to take the hive ; but they wait until 
the small bees are well formed in the cells, and a few 
days before they are ready to fly away, the honey- 
comb is taken with great care, and, wrapped up in a 
plantain leaf, is put upon the fire for a few minutes, 
when wax and animals are devoured together, and 
considered as an uncommon treat ! " ^ 

Jakun (unspecified). — According to Vaughan- 
Stevens, the Jakun were in the habit of using for 
drinking purposes either " some sort of cup " or a leaf 
if nothing else were obtainable.'-' 

The same authority informs us that the Jakun on 
their wanderings always carried the smouldering end 
of a rope made of tree-bark fibre.^ 

The ceremonial method used by the Jakun for 
kindling fire will be described in detail in a latei 
chapter. 

Sthnulants and Narcotics. 

Finally Favre states of the Jakun that they were 
in the habit of chewing betel-leaf together with its 
usual accompaniment of areca-nut and gambler, and 
that when they were unable to procure the betel-leaf 
they used the leaf of a tree called "kasi."^ Tobacco, 
when it was procurable, was much used, even by 
women and children, both for smoking and chewing/ 

Udai. — Of the Udai our information is of the 
scantiest, all we are told being contained in a sentence 
by Newbold, to the effect that "they (the Udai) sub- 
sist on the flesh of the animals they catch, on wild 
roots, and on fruits of the forest."*^ 

* J. J. A. vol. ii. p. 261. ^ J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 261 ; see also 
2 Z.f. E. xxix. 184. vol. i. p. 255. 

' lb. xxviii. 1 68. •' Newbold, ii. 3S1, 382. 

* Gomphia Ilookcri, Plancli. 

134 FOOD PART II 

Orang Laut ok Sea-Jakun. 

Orang" Laut, Sletar. — The food of the Orang Laut 
or sea tribes appears to have differed very little from 
that of the land tribes (Orang Bukit), though doubtless 
it included much more fish than that of the latter. We 
are told of the O. Sletar that the satisfying of hunger 
was their only pursuit, of water they had abundance 
without having to search for it; with the "serkap" or fish- 
spear, and the " parang " or chopper as their only imple- 
ments, they eked out their existence from the stores of 
the river and forest. To them the staple of life in the 
East, rice, was a luxury ; tobacco they procured by the 
barter of fish and a few marketable products collected 
from the forests and coral reefs. Of esculent roots 
they had the " prioh " and " kalana," ^ both bulbous and 
not unlike coarse yams ; of fruits they ate the "tampoi,"^ 
"kledang,"^ and " buroh," when they came in season ; 
and of animals they hunted the wild hog, but refrained 
from snakes, dogs, "iguanas," and monkeys. This 
formed their principal food, for many minor products 
of the forests and creeks must be left unmentioned."^ 

0. Laut, Sabimba.^ — The Sabimba, when visited by 
Logan, planted no vegetables of any kind, but used such 
leaves, roots, and fruits as the forest afforded.'' They 
ate the flesh of every forest animal which they could 

• Dioscorea dejlexa. Hook. The palm [Oncosperma Tigillaria\ and the 
" akar kakap " (Dioscorea orbiculata) fruit of the " tampoi," " nianeling," 
is also eaten. — Ridley. " pancho," "kabes," " ridan " \Ne- 

^ Bcucaiirea Malayaiia. pheliuni glabruni, Noronh.], " ka- 

■^ Artocarpiis lancecefoliits. dumpa " [? " kadampang " = 6V<7r«//za 

* _/. /. A. vol. i. p. 343*. parvijiora, Roxb.], "ranjas," "mangos 
^ E.g. the " akar kalana" [Diosc. utan " [iMajigi/era spp.], " kledang," 

dejlexd], " simapo " [? Sirjtpoh Dillenia " pasal " [ArJista odontophylla\ " dur- 

spp., of which the acid fruit is eaten], ian " [Durio zibethiiius, L.], " lakup," 

"ajas," " anpiro," " katapa " [? " ka- "pakala," "tore." — J. I. A. vol. i. 

tapang" = Terminalia catappa, L. ], p. 296. 
the cabbage ("umut") of the nibong 

CHAP. I MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 135 

kill, and when brought in contact from time to time 
with more civilised people, showed no objection to any 
kind of food, save the fowl, which they scrupulously 
avoided. The wild animals and birds eaten were the 
wild pig,^ mouse-deer or chevrotain - (" plandok "), the 
monkeys called " k'ra " ^ and "lotong,"^ the civet-cat* 
("musang"), the squirrel (" tupai "), "kubong,"^ monitor 
lizard' ("bewak"), "malok," imperial pigeon("pergam"), 
" kalongkang," " koko," mynah bird® (" tiong "), green 
pigeon '■* (" punai "), the oil of snakes, and many kinds of 
fish. The roe-deer ^'^ (" kijang "), the sambhur deer 
(" rusa "'), elephant, and bear are not found in Battam. 
Flesh of all kinds was cooked by the men, vegetables 
by the women. ^^ 

Another observer of the Sabimba (Thomson), who 
visited them shortly after Logan, tells us that their 
food consisted of rice as the staple article, but that 
they added to this the flesh of the hog, monkey, 
snake, and ape, and birds of all kinds excepting that 
of the fowl, for the reasons stated in Logan's paper. 
Their vegetables consisted of the wild fruits of the 
jungle. This tribe was much more helpless than the 
Orang Sletar, being entirely dependent on the Malays 
for their arms and for the greater part of their food. 
They were unacquainted with the brewing of inebriat- 
ing liquors, though they informed Thomson that their 
tribe formerly possessed the art. In their habits they 
were, therefore, as temperate as the Malays.^" 

0. Laut, Muka Kuning-, — Of the diet of the Orang 

* Sus tnJicits. ^ Hydrosattrus salvator. 
^ Tragulus napu and Tragulus ' Mainatits java)if)isis. 

kanchil. " Osmatreron vernaus. 

3 Macacus cynomolgus. "^ Cervulus mtiutjac. 

* Scinnopithectts. '• _/. /. A. vol. i. p. 296. 

* Paradoxurus and I'tTerra. *- /b. p. 347. 

* GaUopithecus — the Hying squirrel. 

136 FOOD PART II 

Muka Kuning all that we know is contained in the 
following passage : "The articles of food which they 
derive from the forest are the same animals and 
vegetables that are used by the Orang Sabimba (see 
pp. 134, 135). As with the Sabimba, the fowl is for- 
bidden food."^ 

0. Laut (tribe unspecified). — Thomson found, at 
Pulau Tinggi (off the east coast of Johor), a number 
of O. Laut who had been attracted thither by a plenti- 
ful crop of durians. Six boats from Mora, an island 
of the Johor Archipelago (about 50 miles N. lat), he 
found on their way to P. Tinggi ; they had travelled 
by sea one hundred and eighty miles to partake of this 
fascinating fruit.^ 

* J. I. A. vol. i. p. 337*. ^ Ibid. vol. v. p. 140. 

CHAPTER II. 

Dress. 

Although it has been more than once asserted ' that 
the wild people of the Peninsula are accustomed to go 
entirely nude, I have hitherto failed to get any satis- 
factory first-hand proof of this. On the other hand, the 
fact that any such custom is invariably denied by the 
wild people themselves, is by no means conclusive, and 
the matter must, at least, await further investigation. 
The Semang of Kedah, for instance, strenuously 
denied it, and it was not alleged of them even by the 
neighbouring Malays. There is no more proof of the 
practice obtaining in the case of the Sakai than there 
is in that of the Semang, and with regard to the Jakun 
of the south, the opposite view has been strongly 
set forth by Logan. The fact that the children, up 
to the age of puberty, are allowed to run about un- 

' Cp., e.g., Bradley, pp. 294, 295 : does not appear from this statement 

"The pitiable objects before us were that there was anything amounting to 

completely naked, both men and a custom among the Benua of going 

women." [Bradley, however, was a bad totally nude, and it is possible that 

observer from a scientific point of view.] the impression may have got about 

But see Logan's remark in J. I. A. from a few similarly isolated instances, 

vol. i. pp. 252, 253 : " With the for which there was, doubtless, some 

exception of one house, where the special reason. See Kavre in /. /. A. 

mistress lay in a corner and ajipeared vol. ii. p. 258, whore this view is 

to be, like her husband, totally destitute advocated. Cp., on the other hand, 

of clothes, I found the women every- Sweltenham, p. 228 : " Their clothing, 

where wearing a short 'sarong.'" It when they wear any, consists,"' etc. 

'37 

133 DRESS PART II 

dressed does not of course imply that the grown-up 
people do so. 

Before entering upon a description of the dress 
worn by the various tribes, I should like to point out 
the remarkable fact that none of the wild tribes 
of the Peninsula, so far as has been observed, are in 
the habit of dressing themselves in the skins of 
animals, or of decorating themselves with the feathers 
of birds. In both respects they appear to obey what 
seems to have been an ancient and general prejudice 
(possibly of religious origin) on the part of the tribes 
of South-East Asia, and in this regard they present 
a strong contrast to the bulk of the inhabitants of the 
Malay Archipelago. This neglect is certainly not 
due to the lack of opportunity, since the Malay 
Peninsula is probably little, if at all, worse off from a 
zoological point of view than any of the islands of 
Netherlands India. 

The Girdle. 

In the matter of dress, the girdles worn by the three 
main races form one of the most interesting subjects 
of inquiry. It is not easy to determine for certain 
which of the various forms of girdle are of Sakai and 
which of Semang origin, but there certainly appears to 
be a strong affinity of type between the Semang 
fungus-string girdle ^ and some forms of girdle worn by 
the Andamanese. Moreover, this form of girdle 
appears only to be found among fairly pure Semang, 
and among such tribes as the N. Perak Sakai (who are 
neighbours to the Semang, and have a strong infusion 

1 Professor M. Ward, who has kindly structure this so-called " Rock -vein 
examined my specimens under the Creeper " can only be the rhizomorph 
microscope, informed me that from its of a kind of fungus. 

//?. 

AKGKITO DkKSS AM) AK TICLKS UK Al'I'AREL. 

• V ^' ^" .V JJ'^V'Hiets ■' worn in the hair by Sakai {sic) woman (No. i is wrapped in a painted leaf). 4. Head- 
ctrclet or diadem. 5, 6, 9, 10, 22, 24. Necklaces with pendants of shells, etc. (No. 6 of " buprestes "-lees 
llneaded like beads ; No. 10 with squirrels' tails, etc.; the shells so used are llybocysiis tkphas, Jousscaumei, 
< yclof'korus Afalayanus, C. scviisu/caius, etc.). 7, 8. liracelets of coiled wire. 14, 15, 30. Two rings of 
coiled brass wire, and one [No. 30] of woven rattan. 16. Girdle. 11. Loin-cloth. 12. 73. Nose-quilb (or 
nose-pins ). iS, 19, 28, 29. Combs (Nos. 18, 28 used for pinning flowers, etc., into the hair ; Nos. 10, 20 of 
wood). 17,25,26,27. Bamboo hair-pins. 20,23. Knives. 21,31. Vessels of bone and of wild-goat"s horn. 

I'ol. /./. 138 

Skent Collection. 

Skmano Dkkss. 

I, 2. Two Pangan leaf-ornaments (Ulu Aring, Kelantan). 

3. One Pangan ear-ornament of rolled strips of palm-leaf (Ulu Aring). 

4. Pangan woman's leaf-ornament worn as V)andolier (Ulu Aring)— leaves and strips of 

palm leaf strung upon black fungus-strings. 

Vol. I. p. 139. 

CHAP. II GENERAL REMARKS 139 

of Semang blood), whereas it is not recorded among 
pur-sang Sakai in other parts of the country remote 
from Negrito influence. Hence there can be no reason- 
able doubt that this form of girdle should be assigned 
to the Semang tribes rather than to the Sakai. ^ 

Another form of waist-belt which seems possibly 
derived from Negrito sources is that consisting of a 
fringe '"' of leaves suspended from a string, such as is 
said to be worn by the wilder Negritos {e.g. the 
Pangan).^ It occurs, sporadically, among the Perak 
Sakai (of G. Bujang Malaka), and also among the 
Mantra of Malacca, in both of which cases it might 
consequently be regarded as an interesting survival of 
Negrito culture among the more southern tribes. 

The original Sakai type of girdle has not yet been 
identified, and in the present state of our knowledge 
it is probably not identifiable with any certainty. 
There only remain, in fact, for us to choose between 
the girdle of coiled cane^ and the bark-cloth girdle. 
But both of these girdle -types reappear among the 

> Cp. Man's ^;/a'., /.r. p. 181: * Thelate Mr. J. E. Peall, F.R.G.S., 

" Garenpeta, the ornamental waist-belt in the course of some notes on the 

of Dentalittm octagotiion which is worn Malayo- Polynesian theory (_/. R. G. S. 

occasionally by both sexes"' (cp. //'. vol. iv. p. 241), says: "At page 293, 

Plate vii. Fig. 35). note 100, of \.\ic Journal (vol. iv. ?), I 

- Or fringes (v. infra) ; it would see the waist-girdle, ' rua-rua,' men- 
appear that a string with the leaves tioned. Coiled cane waist-girdles are 
attached is considered sufficient in the common among most of our ultra- 
case of men, but that several rows Indian races, for men and also for 
of these fringes are worn by the women. Baupa Nogas (sic}) call 
women. them ru-pak, usually a long split cane 

■' Man's And., I.e. 109 : " The males [is used], coiled eight or ten times round 
of this tribe (Jiirawa) wear round their the waist ; chiefs have very orna- 
heads, waists, knees, and arms, fringes mental ones, with patterns in coloured 
of string attached to a cord or cane. " seeds and trade beads; an exception- 
And cp. ib. p. no (note): "The ally rare kind has thin plates of brass 
Jarawa women have hitherto been on, and is called a ra >on^ ru-pak. A 
seen with only armlets and cinctures monograph of the cane-girdle as seen 
of string, to which a few short fibres from the Himalayas to Eastern Poly- 
were attached, obviously only for nesia would reveal some startling 
ornamental purposes." affinities." 

I40 DRESS I'ART 11 

Jakun, and indeed among other aboriginal tril^es with 
Malayan affinities, e.g. among those of Sumatra and 
Borneo. This question, therefore, must also await 
further inquiry. 

The ofirdle of bark-cloth is so well-known and so 
widely spread throughout S. E. Asia, the Malay Archi- 
pelago, and the Pacific Islands, that a very few words 
about it should here suffice. The finest and best- 
known variety of this cloth is the " tapa " cloth of 
Polynesia. The cloth made by the tribes of the 
Malay Peninsula is, as a rule, more roughly manu- 
factured, though some very good cloth, decorated with 
zigzag patterns, is made in Perak. An interesting 
point is that the grooving or toothing of the bark-cloth 
mallet used by some of the Jakun runs longitudinally 
instead of transversely as in specimens from Rotuma.^ 

Ligatures. 

The bands or ligatures worn by the aborigines 
round the upper part of the arm, the wrist, and just 
below the knee, were doubtless originally employed, 
as in other parts of the world, for a practical object, 
viz. to strengthen the muscles and prevent strains, 
the risk of which must be constantly present to the 
mmd of a jungle people. It would appear just 
possible that even the use of the girdle, more especially 
that of coiled cane, may perhaps, in some cases, have 
had an equally utilitarian origin. On the other hand, 
this explanation can hardly apply to the necklace, or 
to rings, so that one key will certainly not fit all the 
locks. The necklaces worn by these Peninsular tribes, 
and I think also the rings, are certainly worn for 

' Cp. p. 389, infra. I have to thank Mr. J. Stanley Gardiner for pointing 
this out. 

GENERAL REMARKS 141 

medical, or rather for magico-medical reasons, as are 
the combs of the Semang and of the Semang-Sakai 
women. I myself was definitely told this on several 
occasions both by the Semang and Jakun, and it agrees 
with the observations of other travellers in the same 
region. 

Thus, for instance, the Sakai of Kampong Langkor 
(S. Kerbu) believed in the ubiquitous presence of 
evil spirits (Hantu), against whose evil intentions 
they protected themselves by means of charms worn, 
in the forms referred to, upon their persons. Their 
bracelets, rings, and copper ornaments were, in fact, 
nothing but talismans, as De la Croix discovered in 
the following way : — A young girl who had disposed 
of her seed necklace to him came back in a hurry to 
ask for it to be returned. He thought she was not 
satisfied with her bargain, and was about to give 
her some knick-knack or other in addition, when she 
informed him that all she wanted back was the set 
of small spirals of copper-wire attached to the neck- 
lace. In spite of the most extravagant offers of 
tobacco, which certainly ought to have persuaded her, 
she would not allow him to retain the spirals, and 
evidently attributed a far greater value to them than 
could be accounted for by the mere worth of the 
copper. De la Croix subsequently asked the chief 
of the tribe (Bah Itam) about it, and the latter told 
him, with evident conviction, that the girl would 
certainly fall ill if she ceased to wear these metal 
rings. ^ 

' De la Croix, p. 338. See, too, use of necklaces and other ligatures 

the necklace described by Vaughan- may also apply to the girdle. 
Stevens, p. 153, infra. . This magical 

142 DRESS PART 11 

I. — Semang. 
T/ie Gi7'dlc. 

Kedah Semang". — By far the most remarkable and 
becoming form of girdle worn by any of these tribes, and 
one which appears, as has been said, to be of typically 
Semang origin (though occasionally found among the 
Sakai and even the Malays of Perak), was the girdle 
made from the long black glossy strings of a fungus 
(called in Malay the "Rock-vein Creeper").^ These 
fungus girdles were of elaborate workmanship, the 
strings of the rhizomorph being most beautifully woven 
into a long narrow plait which was coiled round and 
round until it formed a girdle of the requisite shape 
and size, the loose ends forming a handsome fringe. 
This girdle was rarely worn by men, but more 
frequently by women, and it was from these latter 
that I obtained the specimens now in the Cambridge 
Museum. 

A yet simpler form of personal attire worn by 
the men of these Semang tribes as well as by the Sakai 
consists of a simple waist-cord or string into which 
leaves are inserted to form a fringe. The leaves 
generally used are those of the " chalong " tree or the 
" kelawe." 

Even when the Semang were wearing the Malay 
"sarong" they still frequently retained this string 
underneath it, either from the mere force of habit or for 
reasons connected with their belief in Magic. In such 
a case, however, the leaves were more conveniently 
omitted, and the string alone retained. 

A similar leaf-belt was also sometimes worn by 

' Mai. "akar"or " urat batu," i.e. "Rock-creeper"' or "Rock-vein Creeper." 

Skrnt Collection. 

Skmang and Pangan Girdi.ks. 

I. Man's girdle of tree bark (. /rA'Crtr/wi) (I'lu Aring). 2. Hlack fungiis->triiig woman's girdle, 
liought from owner (Siong). 3. Ciirdle of Pangan woman (Kuala Sam, Keluntan river). 4. 
Woman's string-;;ir(llc of jungle fibrv (Sioiii;). 

Vol I. /. 142. 

S/cca! Collection. 

Fungus-String Gikdi.k of Skmang Woman (Kkdah). 

liousrlit from tlie wearer. 

V*\ ^~"^* "* |L 

«^ 

^ 

^f4j^ 

'V'*^ 

'^V^7rH^''^/•>5T7^^•^ 

Skeat Collfction. 
Seed and Tooth N'kcklace of Skman(j Woman (Kedaii). 
Bought from tl>e wearer. 

Vol. I. /. 143. 

CHAP, n NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 143 

the women, whilst the boys, as a rule, wore the string 
or cord in all its simplicity. It was made, as a rule, 
either of twisted strips of palm-fibre {Eiigeissona tristis 
or " bertam "), or of the long black strings of the Rock- 
vein fungus ("akar batu") already mentioned. 

The Semang of Kedah, however, most commonly 
wore the ordinary (Malayan?) loin-cloth, which con- 
sists, in its most primitive form, of a long narrow 
strip of beaten tree-bark or cloth, one end of which is 
wrapped round the waist, the other (loose) end being 
passed between the legs and tucked in through the 
part which serves as a girdle, with the free part hang- 
ing down in front. This bark loin-cloth, however, was 
not at all common among the Kedah tribes, the men 
preferring to use the cloth variety, which they obtained 
by barter from the Malays. In default they occasion- 
ally utilised the bark of the Artocarpus or, preferably, 
a finer cloth manufactured from the bark of young 
saplings of the Antia7'is or "upas" tree.^ The most 
usual attire of these Kedah women was a cloth waist- 
wrap reaching to the knee. 

Pangan. — The Pangan of the Belimbing district in 
Ulu Kelantan were said to make their loin-cloths from 
the bark of a species oi Ficus ("ara"), as well as from 
that of the " upas " tree and the Artocarpus. A girdle 
of coiled cane with a fringe of leaves was also worn by 
the Pangan women,- if not by the men, in the Ulu 
Kelantan (S. Sam) district. 

^ De M.'s unnecessarily vehement (Calamtds), which form a girdle round 

cUtnenti is due, no doubt, to his not the waist as thick as the arm. They 

having seen it. also wear a piece of bast or ciHtun stulT, 

■■^ I give the following in a foot- fastened in front, drawn through be- 
note as, though it is certainly I'angan, tween the legs, and then tied to thegiidle 
there is nothing to show its locality : — behind. Fig. 2 (Plate ii.) showsa Sakai 
"The remainder of the costume of the {sic, re,/e Pangan) lady in her daily cos- 
women consists of a number of thin tume, drawn from nature." — ^t.-Mac- 
and sometimes red - coloured rattans lay in /. A'. ^. 5"., 5. ^., No. 2, p. 214. 

144 DRESS I'AKi 11 

Perak Semang-. — The clothing of the Perak 
Semang is similar to that of the Negritos of Kedah.^ 

As they have no manufactures of their own, their 
clothing consists chiefly of the inner bark of trees. A 
few, however, who venture to approach the Malayan 
villages obtain a little cloth in exchange for various 
kinds of jungle produce.'' 

Necklaces. 

Kedah Semang. — The simplest form of necklace 
worn by the Semang in Kedah took the form of a 
simple neck-string or ligature either of the " Rock- 
vein " fungus or of fibre of the " bertam " palm 
[Eiigeissona), and was sometimes further embellished 
by stringing upon it the leaves of certain trees in 
alternation with knots of palm-leaf (ZzV?<^/(a;). It was 
therefore, in fact, made on the same principle as the 
simplest form of girdle. 

More elaborate necklaces were, however, frequently 
worn. These consisted of two or more strings which 
were fastened together at a single point, and on which 
were threaded various small trophies of the chase, 
small wild roots, fruits, seeds, and other objects, all 
of which appear to be commonly worn for magical 
reasons. 

One of these more elaborate necklaces, which I 
obtained from the Semang of Kedah, consisted of a 
double string on which were threaded the teeth of 
an ape (Siamang), a number of minute bundles of 
fragrant grass, a couple of bear's (.'*) teeth, a number 
of small flat beans, and a couple of small buttons of 

* De Morgan, vii. 412 ; cp. Swelt. p. 228. 
2 /. I. A. vol. iv. pp. 425, 426. 

NEGRITOS OF PERAK 145 

European manufacture, the latter being evidently 
regarded as objects of no small value ! 

Perak Semang-. — The necklaces (of the Perak 
Negritos) consist of a series of chains of black and 
white seeds, alternately arranged and fastened together 
in a bunch. Some of these are very small, others as 
big as the closed fist/ 

To these strings are attached hunting and fishing 
trophies consisting of the teeth or bones of animals, 
tufts of squirrels' tails, big fish-scales, and so forth, 
together with shells of the genus Bulimus and Hybo- 
cystis, or sea-shells of various sorts (but not Helix nor 
Cyclophorus, which are common in these forests). 
These shells are filled with a perfume extracted from 
trees. - 

The green legs of a beetle {Bupresies) are some- 
times but very rarely inserted between the seeds.^ 
Whenever they can get coins, the Negritos wear them 
on their necklaces. De Morgan saw them wearing 
dollars, copper coins, and even Dutch coins of the 
seventeenth century.* 

Ligatures i^Arvilets and Bracelets). 

Kedah Semang. — In addition to girdles and neck 
laces, the Semang of Kedah almost all wore armlets, 
bracelets, and knee-bands, which were usually made, 
like their girdles and necklaces, from jungle-fibre, and 
very much upon the same principle. 

These ligatures were usually made, in Kedah, of 

* De Morgan, vii. 413. It must he doubtless Sakai. - Ibid. 

remembered that he is writing of mixed ' Ibid. 

Semang - Sakai tribes, and tioes not * De Morgan, vii. 414. Cp. Swetl. 

apparently distinguisli between Sakai p. 228 : " The women (Semang) wear 

and Semang necklaces. The black and strings of brass rings, boars' or squirrels' 

white arrangement is not found among teeth, beads or beetles' legs, and coins 

the purer Semang or Jakun, and is when they can get them.'" 

VOL. I L 

146 DUESS PART II 

twisted fibre obtained from the " bertam " palm 
{Eugcissona). Sometimes, however, they were made 
of finely plaited strips of rattan {Calai?ms), or of the 
string^s of the " Rock-vein " fungus. Metal armlets and 
rings were, however, worn in a few cases, but these are 
more commonly found among tribes who mix more 
freely with the Malays. I never saw any armlets 
with European beads among the Semang of Kedah. 

The foregoing remarks apply equally to the Pan- 
ofan of Kelantan. 

Perak Semang". — The bead - armlets or ligatures 
worn by the Semang of Perak were frequently made 
on the same plan as their necklaces {i.e. of black and 
white seeds strung alternately). Ordinarily they were 
very narrow, but in some cases they were very broad 
and covered a large portion of the arm.^ 

Semang- (of Perak?). — The women wore, by way of 
a charm, bracelets made from the leaves of the 
" palas " {Licuala peltata), the men bracelets of the 
Rock-vein Creeper (the plant called "Tam-tum") 
fitting tightly to the left wrist. These bracelets are 
called " Chin-ing-neng." - 

Head- dress — Men 's. 

Kedah Semang. — Among the Semang at Siong 
some of the men were wearing short woolly hair forming 
small spiral clusters close to the scalp. Most, how- 
ever, had adopted the fashion of shaving the head, 
which is found among other branches of the Negrito 
race {e.g. the Andamanese), as well as, frequently, 
among the local Malays. 

None of the men that I saw were in the habit of 

* De Morgan, vii. 413. ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 126. 

CHAP. II NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 147 

wearing anything on their heads, though several made 
a rough kind of turban out of some strips of bright red 
cloth that I had given them, and in this guise strutted 
about for all the world like great turkey-cocks ! 

On special occasions they bound their heads with 
fillets of palm-leaf, and for protection against various 
diseases special head-dresses were used, which will be 
described later. Flowers are also worn " for dandy." 

The (Malayan ?) top-knot was worn by some of the 
boys, but not by any of the men that I saw, though 
Vaughan- Stevens says that he saw men wearing it. 

Perak Semang". — Vaughan-Stevens'^ account of the 
top-knot worn by the Perak Semang is as follows : — 

Some of the Perak men leave a tuft — at the frontal end of the scalp,— hut this is 
adopted from the Baltaks (sic), who cut their hair into all sorts of shapes. Nothing 
is known why this tuft is left. " Pie's orders " [Pic, a deity of the Semang tribes, 
brother of Karih] is the only reply they give. Each of the tufts was taken from a 
man of about thirty years of age, whose hair had never been cut before, and had 
ceased growing. They were not tied in any way while on the head and were cut 
off for me readily without demur. . . . When the hair of the rest of the scalp 
has been left for a long time without cutting, the tuft cannot be distinguished from 
the rest of the hair. The exact position of the tuft varies slightly in different men, 
by about 20 or 25 mm. either to the front or back, but always in the median line. 

When the hair (as a whole) is not cut for a long time, the tuft shows the 
" pepper-corn " character with increased distinctness, it being in that case less dis- 
turbed by the leaves and twigs through which the Semang passes. The tuft, 
when left to itself, gets more or less combed out from its isolated position. 

T/ic Beard. 
Kedah Semang. — In one or two cases only did I 
see Kedah Semang with anything approaching a 

^ In the same passage we are told that much-mixed Perak Semang (N'o. 55). 

the E. Semang (Pangan) men cut off ... The ' pepper-corn ' character is 

their hair as close to the scalji as the best shown some six months (5/V) after 

jungle-knife (parang) will allow, partly cutting, when the spirals lie only from 

for coolness' sake and partly for cleanli- 5 to 10 mm. above the scalp. I gave 

ness. But they left a small tuft, at each of the men furnishing specimens 

the top of the occiput, which they did 55 and 56 a high cap which I made 

not cut. Vaughan -Stevens continues : them wear for a week, so as to allow 

"Two of these little tufts — called the hair to assume its normal shape 

' Bag-i ' — I now send cut off close to before cutting it. And I kept both 

the skin, complete. One belonged to an men near me for that time." (Prom 

Eastern Semang (Pangan) of unmixed P'asc. A. fol. 29 ; Vaughan-Stevens in 

blood (Xo. 56), and the other to the V. B. G. A. vol. xxiv. pp. 440, 441.) 

148 DR£SS PARI II 

beard, their chin-hairs as a rule being few, straggling, 
and scanty. Yet in one case I saw a Semang with 
a real beard, which, though very short, grew in closely 
curled spirals, presenting a woolly appearance, exactly 
like the owner's hair. On the other hand, most of 
the grown men had slight black moustaches. 

Pangan. — The wild pure-blood Eastern Semang 
(Pangan) "plucks out his scrubby little beard, but 
tries to retain the moustache," in order, we are told, 
that he may be " distinguished from a woman " (!) ^ 

Head-dress — Women s. 

Kedah Semang. — The women's hair usually grew 
longer than the men's, and was in some cases allowed 
to grow (apparently uncared for) in a species of curly 
mop.^ This, however, was probably in the case of 
women who had some proportion of Sakai blood in 
their veins. In several cases the women, as well 
as the men, had partially shaved the head, the 
women always leaving, however, a circular patch at 
the back of the head, and a thin fringe on the fore- 
head untouched. 

Several of them were wearing the magic combs 
which they employ as a safeguard against diseases, and 
several of them too, probably with a view to receiving 
"company," had bound their heads with the Licuala- 
leaf fillets usually reserved for special occasions. 

The following were some of the forms of head- 
dress employed by the Semang women : — 

a. An oval shaven patch on top of head. 

/'. A rectangular shaven patch on top of head. 

c. Quill-like plant shoots worn like horns in the hair. 

^ Z. f. E. xxix. 179. The ab- the waist, is so obvious as to scarcely 

surdity of the explanation given by need pointing out. 

Vaughan-Ste%-ens, as purporting to come - Among these was the chief's 

from a race who habitually go bare to wife. 

SKMAM. Willi (.ilKlUls ol \lAI..\V Cl.oTII. 

I'ol. /. /. i^ 

\ ' r 

SKMANf; CO.MIiS. 

2. Two West Negrito (Semang of Keclah), said to be worn as charms— old well-worn 

specimens bought off the head of the wearers. 
One K. Negrito (Pangan) obtained from Ulu Aring, Kelantan. 
5. Two obtained by Grnbauer in Upper Perak. — Presented to Cambridge Mii-.euni by 

Ridgeway. 

I'o/. I. f>. T49. 

CHAP. II NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 149 

In the method of dressing the hair represented by 
a, three fillets of Licttala -\q.?l{ were used. One of 
these was carried from ear to ear over the top of 
the head, and the other two from ear to ear over the 
back of the head, the one just above and the other 
just below the clump of untouched hair covering the 
back of the head. 

\n b, 2i single fillet was used, which was carried 
all round the edges of the clump at the back of the 
head only. In c, the horns consisted of the quill-like 
growing shoots of the Lowia grandiflora ("sulur 
lobak "), and were worn for magical purposes. Another 
woman had bound her head with a fishing line, using 
the hook as a fastening. 

Magic Co77ibs. 

Kedah Semang. — In addition to the various forms 
of head-dress mentioned, some of which are common 
to both sexes, the Semang women wore in their hair 
a remarkable kind of comb, which appears to be worn 
entirely as a charm against diseases. 

These combs were almost invariably made of 
bamboo (an average specimen measuring perhaps 
three inches by five), and were decorated with an 
infinite variety of designs, no two of which ever entirely 
agreed. It was said that each disease had its appro- 
priate pattern, and hence in some cases several combs 
were worn simultaneously, apparently to protect the 
wearer against several diseases at once. 

Similar combs are worn by the Pangan, the Semang 
and Sakai of Perak, and most of the mixed (Semang- 
Sakai) tribes, eg. the O. Jelei of Pahang. 

Their patterns and magical significance will be 
fully described in a later chapter. 

150 DRESS PART II 

Nose-sticks and EarHngs. 

Kedah Semangr. — The custom of wearing a stick 
through the septum of the nose was not practised in 
Kedah. It is also unknown to the Andamanese, and 
as it is common among the Perak Sakai and the Sakai 
of Pahang, it is no doubt a practice of Sakai origin.^ 

Earrings of rolled-up leaf (banana and "licuala") 
are worn by both sexes.^ 

Perak Semang. — It is quite possible that some of 
the Perak Semang may have learnt nose-boring from 
the Sakai, but I have not met with any record of its 
employment among the purer Semang tribes, though 
they do wear earrings ; it is quite unknown to the Jakun. 

II. — Sakai, 
The Girdle. 

Perak Sakai. — The fringed waist-cord sometimes 
worn by the Semang is also found among the Sakai 
and Jakun. Thus De la Croix says that, in the 
neighbourhood of Mt. Bujang Malaka, the Sakai 
women that he saw wore, instead of the tree -bark 
girdle, a row of small grass- bundles attached to a 
cord which went around the waist. And in i869(.'*) 
M. Alfred Marche observed the same form of girdle 
among the Mantra women north of Malacca.^ 

On the other hand, we are told that the waist- 
wrap or " loin - cloth " of tree - bark, which is 
most probably of Malayan origin, appears to be very 

1 Cp. Man's A7id. p. I15 : "No differ greatly from their neighbours the 

attempt is made to alter the shape of Nicobarese." - See p. 526, infra. 

the nose by flattening or pinching it, ^ De la Croix, p. 330. Another 

nor is the cartilaginous septum ever form (of coiled jungle-fibre with leaves 

perforated for the purpose of inserting attached) is sometimes seen among 

ornamental bars or rings. In this, as mixed Seniang-Sakai {fi.g. the O. Jelei 

in many other respects, the Andamanese of Pahang). 

SA A' A / OF PERA A' 151 

generally worn by all Sakai tribes who have not yet 
adopted the Malay " sarong." ^ 

It varies from about 3 or 4 inches (7.5 cm. to 10 
cm.) to about i inch (2.5 cm.) in width. - 

The fullest description of this girdle is that given 
by De la Croix, who tells us that the dress of the 
Sakai consists of a mere strip of tree - bark rolled 
round them, which is passed between the legs and 
carried round the waist, tucked through at the belt, 
and then allowed to fall down in front in the shape 
of a fan. This garment, which is called " selampit," 
measures from 3 to 4 metres in length, and is manu- 
factured either from the bark of the Ipoh tree (Anti- 
aris toxicaria) or from that of the wild bread-fruit 
tree i^Artocarpus). It is prepared by spreading the 
bark upon a tree-trunk and striking it with a wooden 
mallet. The sap is thus driven out of it, but the cloth 
has then to be washed and dried several times before 
it attains the requisite suppleness."' 

The best and finest cloth is that made from the 
Ipoh tree.* 

Both men and women wore this gfarment, which 
De la Croix took to be " the national costume of the 
Sakai." 5 

The use of the black fungus girdle, which un- 
doubtedly originated among the Semang, has also 
been observed among the Perak Sakai," but not, so far 

^ Cp. J. I. A. vol. iv. p. 429 (of * lb. See figure 136. 

the Perak Sakai), anil also Hale, "^ Hale, I.e., describes this girdle as 

p. 292 (of the same). made from "a hlack, leafless, aquatic 

2 75-100 mm. by25 mm. Mr. Ridley creeper called ' akar batu' ('area battu") 

tells me that the "chawats"' worn by found growing on stones under water 

the Sakai of the " Balu Caves" (near in mountain streams." " Akar batu," 

Kuala Lumpur in Selangor) were cer- or more properly "urat batu" {i.e. 

tainly not more than an inch in width, " Rock creeper "' or " Rock-veins"), is 

and if anytliing a little less. the Malay name of this rhizomorph, for 

^ De la Croix, p. 330. * //'. which ?•. p. 138, «//;<:. Hale describes 

152 DRESS PART II 

as I am aware, among other sections of the race more 
remote from the Semano;-. 

Neck/aces, Armlets, Bracelets, Rin^s. 

Perak Sakai. — De Morgan speaks of the necklaces 
and bracelets of the Perak Sakai as in no way differing 
from those worn by the Perak Semang (p. 146). 

According to Hale, the men appeared to wear no 
ornaments except very small bracelets and waist-belts 
made of the " Rock-vein " fungus (already mentioned).' 
The women, on the other hand, wore bracelets and 
necklaces made of seeds, shells, certain sweet-smelling 
roots, and anything they could get from the Malays 
that could be strung on. A necklace, purchased from 
an old woman, contained nine strings of black and 
white seeds differently arranged, a string of old Malay 
copper coins, a few glass beads, the tip of a squirrel's 
tail, two tufts of monkeys' hair, a spiral of brass 
wire, five snail shells, and the brass support of the 
ribs of an umbrella. This was about the average of 
a Sakai necklace,- 

The Sakai of " Changkat Riam" (in Perak), 
according to De Morgan, strung upon their necklaces 
and bracelets not only seeds but small bones as well.^ 

These necklaces and bracelets were very similar to 
those of Sungei Raya, but at Changkat Riam brass 
ornaments were conspicuous by their absence, prob- 
ably owing to the great distance of the latter settle- 
ment from any of the Malay villages.* 

On the arm a thickish string, or series of strings, is 

it as being worn by the Sakai men (of ' Hale, p. 292. 

Kinta in Perak), as well as by the local ^ lb. See also De la Croix, p. 330. 

Malays, who in this case are clearly ' .S"iV, ? " Riang. " — De Morgan, viii. 

borrowers. 211. ^ lb. 

'is;"^^'"'''- 

SAKAI (ilKI. tH Sol 111 I'KKAK, 
showin^ bark cloth tlress, headband, iieckhRC. arnilcl. rinij, ami bracelets. 

r.u. /./. 152. 

If raj: 

Sak Ai WoMKN IN Malay " Sakonus," showing Nixki.aces, Armlets, and Bkacklkts. 

Ulii Herlang, I'erak. 

;W. /./. 153. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 153 

also occasionally worn by the Sakai. The women 
(very rarely) wear anklets as well as bracelets and 
armlets,^ Moreover, whenever they are able to do so, 
the Perak Sakai substitute metal rings, spirals, and 
beads obtained from the Malays for the strings of 
natural objects just described.^ Their favourite piece 
of jewellery is undoubtedly the brass bracelet or 
finger-ring, both of which are in the form of spirals, 
which they fit on to their arm or finger." 

Vaughan-Stevens^ states that necklaces ("dokoh") 
among the Sakai were worn by persons of both sexes 
and of all ages, whereas among the Jakun or Benua 
(" Benar- Benar ") they were only occasionally worn. 
Attached to them were amulets ("tangkal") made 
from the " bunglei," the fresh roots of which were cut 
"diagonally" into small slices. When the necklace is 
ready its maker lays it upon his palm, and facing 
eastwards, touches it with his lips, and repeats the 
following invocation addressed to the Evil Spirit 
(Hantu) : — 

Nkcklace Charm. 

CM ! Die, O Mati-anak, buried under the earth heaped up for the Roadway. 

What is the origin of thy existence ? 

Demon of the blood of a person dead in childbirth, 

That is the origin of thy existence. 

Mati-anak of the River-banks, return to the River-banks ; 

Mati-anak of the " outcrop," return to the outcrop ; 

Pluck out with spells and neutralise again and again the demon Mati-anak. 

Descend, O poison of the Mati-anak ; 

Rise, O Ncutraliser of mine. 

As soon as the words have been spoken, the 
speaker spits twice upon the necklace and the cere- 
mony is ended. The plants of which the necklace is 

' De Morgan, vii. 413. black antl white seeds with glass 

- De Morgan, viii. 150 and vii. 413. beads. ^ De Morgan, vii. 413. 

Cp. also Hale, p. 293. Their great * V.-St. ii. 144. The original has 

ambition seems to be to replace the been corrected. 

154 UHESS I'ART u 

made must, like officinal plants, be pulled up, and not 
cut or dug up.^ 

Selangop Sakai. — The foregoing remarks as to the 
dress of the Perak Sakai apply equally to the Sakai 
of Selangor, amongst whom, however, copper, brass, 
and even iron arm -rings (spiral or otherwise) and 
bracelets are perhaps rather more commonly worn, as 
most of these Selangor tribes live somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of Malay civilisation. 

The same is true of finger-rings, which are still 
occasionally manufactured from various products of 
the jungle (bone, horn, tortoiseshell, the crest of the 
Rkinoplax, etc.), though metal rings are much pre- 
ferred, and are usually obtainable. 

The Hmd-di'-ess. 

Perak Sakai. — The method of wearing the hair is 
for the men (whose hair is long and wavy) to wear it 
just down to the shoulders in a wild and unkempt 
condition ; and the women are also said, among the 
wilder tribes, to wear it in a mop, which " stands 
out all round from the head." When, however, they 
have intercourse with the Malays they tie it back in a 
knot like the latter." 

According to Bartels, Vaughan - Stevens heard 
(among the Sakai) that iron may not be used for 
cutting either the hair or finger-nails, this being the 
reason why the wilder tribes of them (Orang Liar) 

1 Vaughan - Stevens, ii. 144, 145. sion of "batuampat" ("four boulders") 

Vaughan - Stevens' account contains with " batu ampar" ("outcrop of 

several errors (due to his ignorance of rock "), and his building up of a pretty 

Malay), which have here been corrected. little theorj' on the mistaken version. 
The worst of these is perhaps his confu- ' Hale, p. 293. 

I 

SAKAI OF PERAK iS5 

would never have their hair cut/ Both men and 
women left untouched the hair of the body.^ 

We are further told that the Sakai (Blandas), for 
thoroughly washing the head and hair, employed the 
scrapings of the inner part of the bark of a particular 
creeper (" kletterrebe "), of which the young stems and 
shoots were armed with an abundant quantity of 
sharp thorns, like those of the rose. The leaf was 
like that of an acacia, dark green and smooth, and 
of great circumference. A handful of freshly scraped 
bark was applied to the head, together with water, 
somewhat like a sponge, when it produced a thick 
lather.^ 

This creeper may well be the "b'luru," a climber 
used by the Malays as a substitute for soap. 

By way of head-dress the men, however, some- 
times wore a mere cord, furnished with two small 
knots or rosettes, whereas the women preferred 
merely to wear In their hair the flowers of the 
field.^ 

Elsewhere, speaking of some (fifteen) Sakai women 
whom he saw at Kampong Langkor (on S. Kerbu), 
De la Croix remarks that one of them who had 
charming features, and was indeed actually pretty, 
wore in each ear a small white flower which she had 
picked at the side of the path ; another wore a simple 
tuft of grass in her hair, and (passed through her ears) 
some kind of plant which hung down as far as her 
back. An old woman, again, wore in her hair (or 
*' chignon") nothing but a tall plant, which oscillated 
with every movement of her body. ' 

The women also occasionally wear the combs of 

» Z.f. E. xxix. 178. •» De la Croix, p. 330. 

2 lb. p. 179. 3 /^_ ') /^_ p. 336. 

156 DUESS PART II 

the Negrito women. ^ According to De Morgan, 
these combs are made of decorated bamboo, or else 
of small wooden teeth bound together by means of an 
exceedingly tight string. These latter are used by 
the Sakai of G. Bujang Malaka and of S. Kampar^ 
(both of which places are in Perak). 

In addition to these combs the Sakai women, 
when they wear their hair long, adorn their heads 
with fillets and bouquets, which they keep in place 
by means of a comb or a long dagger-shaped bamboo 
pin, covered with (incised) patterns.^ 

The fillets and bouquets are generally gathered in 
the forest and worn fresh, though the Sakai not 
unfrequently also wear dried plants cleverly plaited.* 

According to Hale, the Sakai women also wear 
porcupines' quills, etc., through the lobe of the ear, rolls 
of cloth and other materials being also worn, not for 
the purpose of ornament, but in order to enlarge the 
orifice.^ Short bamboo tubes with flowers in them are 
then inserted." 

For the quills, earrings were not unfrequently 
substituted — probably owing to their greater con- 
venience. According to De Morgan, the women also 
wore earrings consisting of copper rings, a small 
string of beads, or a mere flower, whose stalk is 
inserted into the perforation of the lobe." 

Nose-sticks or Nose-quills. 

Perak Sakai. — But one of the most distinctive orna- 
ments is the nose-quill, which appears to be originally 

1 Hale, p.295 (and Plate xiii. ib.). * De Morgan, vii. 413, 414. 

2 De Morgan, vii. 413, 414. * Hale, p. 293 : cp. vol. ii. 39. 

3 This pin is also used (Hale, p. " ^..i.^ among the Semang-Sakai of 
295) for disentangling the hair. For U. Jelei, Pahang. 

patterns, v. Fasc. Mai. 35, 36. ' De Morgan, vii. 413, 414. 

i p 

Sakai I'amilv, snowiNt; Xose-quills, Ni;cKr.Act>, Akmi.i:ts, and 

LliAl'-OKNAMliNTS. 
Ulu Bikum, near Bidor, South Perak 

Vol. /./. 157- 

SAKAI OF PERAK 157 

a Sakai ornament, and is worn by both sexes. Some 
tribes {e.g. those of S. Kinta) wore porcupines' quills 
passed through a perforation made for the purpose in 
the septum of the nose.' The men wore them with 
the ends passed between the hair and the top of the 
ear. The women passed them through the lobe 
itself.^ A long bone of a fish, bird, or monkey' (and 
among the Sakai of Pahang a nose-ring*) is sometimes 
substituted for the quill. 

Occasionally for the porcupine's quill a piece of 
wood, about a quarter of an inch (6 mm.) in diameter 
and about six inches (15 cm.) long, was substituted. '^ 

A few who affected to be dandies used to orna- 
ment their nose-sticks.^ 

An occasional substitute for the quill is a rolled-up 
piece of banana-leaf." 

Selang-or Sakai. — The nose-quill is also occasionally 
worn by the Selangor Sakai {e.g. in the district of 
Ulu Langat).*^ 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas of Selangor. — The Blandas of the Kuala 
Langat district have now largely adopted the Malay 
dress, though when at work in the jungle they still 
frequently revert to the bark loin-cloth, which forms a 
more convenient working dress. The women more 
usually wear a sort of short skirt or kilt of bark- 

• According to Colonel Lx)w, the of porcupines [J. I. A. vol. iv. ]i. 429). 
Malays divided the Sakai of Perak - De Morgan, vii. 414. 

into three classes — the "Tame"' Sakai, •' ilale, p. 293. 

the " Hill " Sakai of Ulu Birtang («< , ■• As in a photograph hy K. .Martin. 

quare " Bertang "), and the Alas of ■■ 15 cm. hy 6.2 mm. Cp. /. A". .-/. 6., 

Ulu Kantu (j;V, cpiu-rf "Kinta"). S. B., No. 4, p. 30. 
This last tribe difl'ered from the other '' /^. This applies also to the 

two in having adopted the custom of Semang-Sakai of Ulu Jelei, I'ahang. 
piercing the cartilage of the nose and ^ Swettenham, p. 22S. 

ears, and inserting therein the quills ** J. A. G. Campbell, p. 243. 

158 DRESS PART II 

cloth, the ends of which, though usually unsewn, are 
sometimes roughly stitched together with jungle fibres. 
The " feel " of the bark-cloth made by these people 
is not unlike a sort of rough leather. 

The above remarks are equally true of the Besisi 
tribes of Selangor, who were pretty generally in the 
habit of wearing Malay dress. 

Besisi. — The everyday dress of the Besisi differed 
very little from that of the Malays, the men wearing 
for the most part a loose cotton jacket and trousers, 
and the women a jacket and a Malay sarong. In the 
jungle, however, the more convenient " chawat " ' still 
lingered on, and shy as the Besisi might be of 
wearing it before strangers, they had no such scruples 
when by themselves. Red " sarongs " were preferred. 

Bracelets and armlets, rings, necklaces, etc., were, 
on the other hand, worn most profusely, a good scrap 
necklace, with plenty of coins on it, being highly 
valued, as the wearing of coins was believed to be 
especially good for the eyes. 

The rings worn by the Besisi were made of 
various natural products of the jungle, bone, horn, 
tortoiseshell, etc. ; from chips of coconut-shell ; from 
black coral ("akar bahar") ; from "batu akik," a species 
of stone ; from various kinds of shell ; and from the 
red crest of the solid-crested Hornbill or Rhinoplax. 
This latter was valued by the Besisi, as by the Malays, 
on account of the belief that it would turn green 
whenever poison approached the wearer. Finely 
woven matwork pouches (" bujam ") were also com- 
monly carried for holding betel-leaf, etc. 

Nose-boring and tattooing of all kinds (or rather 
scarification), if ever practised, had, however, long 

' Cp. vol. ii. p. 144, 17. I. 

Sak.m Gkuli', Uia" Lli, Ulu L.\n(;.\t, miowing Wo.mkn and Giki.s in Malay Dress. 

Vol. I. />. 153. 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 1 59 

disappeared, and though face - painting was still 
occasionally to be seen, it was only on special occasions 
(such as the tribal [feasts) that the ancient methods of 
personal adornment were still in evidence. 

Mantra. — The Mantra, with the exception of 
their young children, never go absolutely nude, the 
men always wearing at least some "covering round the 
waist," andihe women always wearing the "sarong" of 
the Malays, " which covers the entire body from the 
knee to above the breast." The "holiday garb" of 
the men is the ordinary wear of the local Malays 
(a loose jacket, a "sarong," or perhaps short trousers, 
and a coloured handkerchief wrapped round the 
head).^ 

Many of the Mantra around Gunong Berembun 
still wear the bark of the Artocarpus (" t'rap "), the 
men using the " chawat," and the women a piece of 
rude cloth, formed by simply beating the bark, which 
they wrap round their persons, and which, like the 
" sarong " of the Johor females, reaches only from the 
waist to the knees. They have no description of 
shoe, sandal, or slipper, and no articles of the toilet. - 

The women " take considerable care of their 
hair, which they gather up on the top of their heads, 
and plait in the shape of a crown," fastening it with 
pins, and on special occasions inserting round it 
flowers and leaves.^ 

The Mantra females have wider ear-pertorations 
(than the Benua of Johor). They are enlarged to the 
diameter of about half an inch by inserting a wooden 
pin or roll of Licuala- (" palas ") leaf, which is gradually 
increased till the desired width is acquired. Pendants 
are not worn, but many have ear-studs (" subang "), 

^ Logan iny. /. A. vol. i. pp. 252, 253. * lb, ^ lb. 

i6o DjRESS part II 

about the size of a Company's rupee, made by Malays, 
and similar to those worn by Javanese females. 
Silver rings are also worn. They bind the hair in 
the same way as the Johor Benua.' 

The " little girls " have their ears pierced by 
their parents for the reception of earrings ; in the 
absence of earrings, these holes are filled with small 
rolled-up strips of banana-leaf or a large stud of 
wood.- 

They also wear large Malay waist-buckles (of the 
kind called " pinding") and Malay bracelets.^ 

The children wear necklaces consisting of strings 
of monkeys' bones, teeth of bears or tigers, coins, and 
shells ; these necklaces, however, are not worn for 
mere ornament, but as a talisman against disease.^ 

The only other point that calls for remark with 
regard to the dress of the Mantra, lies in the close 
resemblance between the form of girdle worn by the 
Sakai women in the neighbourhood of G. Bujang 
Malaka (which consisted of a row of small grass- 
bundles fastened to a cord which went round the 
waist), and that observed in 1869, by Marche, among 
the Mantra women north of Malacca.' 

Benua - Jakun of Johop. — According to Logan, 
the original dress of the males, to which a few 
individuals whom he met were still restricted, was the 
" chawat " — a narrow strip of cloth passing between 
the legs and fastened round the waist. With these 
exceptions all were provided with the Malay short 
trousers ("seluar"), jacket (" baju "), plaid skirt, or 
wrapper (" sarong "), and headkerchief (" saputangan "), 
or some of them, but often in so ragged a condition as 

' Logan in_/. /. A. vol. i. pp. 252, 253. - Borie (tr. Bourien), pp. 75, 76. 

' Id. < /d. '" De la Croix, p. 330. 

CHAP. II SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR i6i 

to show that they carried their wardrobes on their 
persons, and were seldom able to renew them. With 
the exception of one house, where the mistress lay in a 
corner and appeared to be, like her husband, totally 
destitute of clothes, Logan found the women every- 
where wearing a short "sarong," fastened at the 
waist or a little below it, and barely reaching to the 
knees — it was, in fact, only the half of an ordinary 
Malay "sarong." This was the only garment that 
they possessed, but in a few families, such as that of 
the Bentara of Boko, some of the females wore the 
Malay jacket ("baju"). The hair was bound in a knot 
behind. From the great desire universally expressed 
for pretty " sarongs," jackets (" bajus "), handkerchiefs, 
and ornaments, we must do the Benua ladies the justice 
to believe that they would willingly deck themselves in 
the full Malayan costume if they had the means.' 
The only ornaments that they possess are plain 
brass rings and bracelets. Their ears were pierced, 
but the orifice, which is of the diameter of a quill, was 
more often occupied by the native cigarette or "roko'," 
or a piece of cloth, than an earring. - 

The hair was black and in general smooth and 
lank, but in some it was frizzled, and in all somewhat 
more dry and tangled than in the Malay, arising from 
the little oil that they use. It is worn long or 

' " Hoth men and women go nearly to appear more decently clad. The 

naked svhilst near their own haunts ; women particularly take ijrcat pleasure 

they wear nothintj hut a strip of the in silver bracelets, rings, and other orna- 

tlbrous hark of the 'ttrap' tree, beaten ments. Idonot recollect that I have seen 

into a sort of cloth of a reddish-brown any instance of the Benua wearing the 

colour, called a 'sabaring,' round their skins uf wild beasts, as has been alleged, 

loins ; part of this comes down in They carry about with them little mat 

front, is drawn between the legs, and pouches, containing generally a small 

fastened behind. The men sometimes portion of tobacco, a tlint and steel, a 

encircle their heads with a string of knife, and a rude bamboocall or whistle" 

Z/(7/a/a- (' palas") leaves. On visits to (Newlmld, ii. 398); r'. p. 137, ante. 
Malay villages they generally contrive -J. /.A. vol. i. pp. 252, 253. 

VOL. I M 

1 62 DRESS PART I 

cropped short, as with the Malays, according to the 
taste of the individual. Some old women had long 
discontinued the use of oil, and their dry, rusty, 
unkempt locks, aiding the effect of their piercing, 
sinister eyes, which almost seemed to be touched by 
insanity, frightened some of Logan's Malays not a 
little ; and so persuaded were they that the old ladies 
had the " evil eye," that they felt greatly relieved when 
he left the house.' 

The clothes of the Jakun (when they used 
any) were ordinarily the same as those used by 
the Malays, but poor, miserable, and, above all, very 
dirty ; many of them used clothes without washing, 
from the day they received or bought them until they 
became rotten by use and dirt, when they were 
obliged to throw them away ; if vermin were found, 
which was often the case, principally upon the women 
who were more dressed up, they were immediately 
eaten with delight, as in Cochin-China. If many of 
them were badly dressed, and some nearly naked, it 
was more from a lack of clothing than in accordance 
with their own wishes, especially amongst the women ; 
for all desired to be clothed, and the most agreeable 
presents which could be offered to them were the 
short (Malayan) trousers, " sarongs," jackets, or hand- 
kerchiefs to put round their heads, according to 
the Malay fashion. Those of them who went 
habitually nearly naked never appeared in that 
condition before strangers, except when they actually 
had no clothes. The Jakun of Johor, who were 
superior to the others in many respects, as can be 
inferred from what has been said, were also the best 
dressed ; their women wore much the same as Malay 

1/. /.A. vol. i. pp. 251, 252. 

SA VA GE MA LA YS OF JO NOR 163 

women, both as to dress and the order of their appear- 
ance ; they had, moreover, a great number of rings on 
their fingers, some of which were crystal, some of 
copper, and some of tin, but also a good many of silver; 
they took a peculiar pleasure in these ornaments, as 
well as in silver bracelets.^ The men had at least the 
trousers, a small jacket or " baju," and a handkerchief 
for the head. The Jakun of the Negri Sembilan 
and Rembau had the same dress as was used by the 
Jakun of Johor, and the women the same ornaments, 
but they were not so well clothed, many of them 
going nearly naked, at least near their houses ; and 
those who used clothes often showed an embarrass- 
ment which proved that they were not accustomed 
to their use. The Jakun of Malacca were badly 
dressed, many of the women had only a *' sarong," and, 
if they were married, a ring, the necessary present of 
the husband at marriage. The greater part of the 
men had nothing but a strip of the fibrous bark of the 
" t'rap " tree, beaten into a sort of cloth of a reddish- 
brown colour, called a " sabaring," round their loins ; 
part of this came down in front, was drawn between 
the legs, and fastened behind, - 

As regards the hair, some of them left the 
whole to grow and turned it round the head, like 
the Cochin-Chinese ; others, as for instance many of 
those of Malacca, cut theirs off entirely;^ yet others, 

' J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 25S. liair. however, is .illo\\e(l to grow as 

^ lb. '"'ig •'!'> possible. The Jakun custom 

3 •'Formerly the Jakun did not cut of l)indint; the fringe of hair uith a 

the hair, but let it grow (from child- hand of tree-bark, to keep it out of 

hood to age) down to their neck and the eyes, is imitated by the Orang 

shoulders. The hair of the boys is at Laut " {Z. f. E. xxix. 177). "The 

the present day cut to a fringe over Jakun girls stick flowers in their hair, 

the forehead, or else it is all cut off instead of the brightly coloured shells 

with the exception of a scalp-lock, as used by the Orang Laut " (;'/'. p. 

jimong Malay children. The girls' 178). 

164 DRESS PART II 

chiefly those of the Negri Sembilan and Rembau and 
Johor, shaved the head, leaving unshaven only, on 
the crown, a space about three inches in diameter, 
where they never cut it, just in the same way as the 
Chinese ; and to prevent this head of hair from being 
hooked by the branches of trees in the jungle, they 
tied it up in the form of a top -knot. They had 
scarcely any beard, and many of them had none at 
all. The women left their hair to grow, and then tied 
it up in the same way as the Malay women ; but as 
they had but little occasion to care much for appearance, 
it will be easily imagined that they were not very 
particular in this respect. Some of them are said to 
treat their hair with lime.' 

It does not yet seem to have been recorded 
whether the Jakun are in the habit of eradicat- 
ing their beard, but there is, I believe, very little 
doubt upon the point. Vaughan - Stevens does 
not actually state that the Jakun men pull out the 
hair of the face, though he clearly implies it in 
saying that the beard and whiskers (of the Jakun) 
are scarcely ever present, even if they are not in- 
tentionally pulled out.- 

Oranct Laut or Ska-Jakun. 

Necklaces and Armlets. 

Name of Tribe unspecified. — The Orang Laut have 
now all taken to the Malay dress. The desire to 
adorn the person exists among their women despite 

' Logan in J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 248. people, to wliich I called their attention 

Cp., however, the statement of \'.- a long time before, ever treated their 

Stevens — -"I could not learn whether the hair with lime, as some of the New 

Jakun, although they perceived the Guinea men do " (Z./ i?. xsix. 178). 

reddish colour of the hair of the young - Z.f. E. xxix. 1 79. 

J/ALA VAN SEA-GYPSIES 165 

their usually degraded condition. The girls will take 
any object that glitters to wear upon their arms, 
neck, or breast. Nowadays these objects are nearly 
always the products of civilisation obtained from 
Malays and Chinese, but formerly coloured bi- 
valves, seed-grains, etc., were employed. Vaughan- 
Stevens saw a prettily composed necklace, with which 
the woman who possessed it positively refused to 
part. It was made up of variously coloured plant- 
seeds growing on the coast, small variegated 
marine bivalves gathered from the sands, and short 
segments of crabs' legs (like one of our own coral 
necklaces).^ 

The Hair. 

The " turned in " (cingckdngfc) part of the claw 
of a crawfish is often used by the Orang Laut as 
a head-scratcher, and for this purpose is stuck in the 
hair or kept in the girdle. If the claw is short, a 
little piece of stick is stuck in it, in order to lengthen 
it sufficiently. Half of the lower jaw of fishes which 
have " needle-teeth " is frequently, even to the present 
day, used in place of a comb.- 

As might be expected from people who are so much 
on the sea, the Orang Laut girls use brightly 
coloured shells for hair ornaments, instead of the 
flowers which are used by the Jakun.'' 

Up to manhood the boys do the same, but no 
later, unless there is some special reason (besides 
mere decoration of the person) for their doing so.^ 

At the present day the Orang Laut bind the hair 
back to keep it out of their eyes either with a band 

' Z.f.E. xxviii. 170. 2 /^. xxix. 178. ' Jb. * lb. 

1 66 D/^ESS PART 11 

of cotton Stuff, or else, in imitation of the Jakun, with 
a similar band of tree-bark. They do not, however, 
like to wear any sort of covering for the (top of the) 
head, even in the sun,^ 

Among the Orang Laut both sexes use fat or oil 
for their body and hair, because, as they say, the sea- 
water irritates the unprotected skin, if it is later 
exposed to the sun. At the present time coconut- 
oil and other oils are easy to get, but formerly fish-fat 
was used." 

In the following accounts the name of the tribe is 
specified : — 

0. Laut, Sletap. — The middle of both men and 
women was generally covered by a coarse wrapper made 
from the bark of the Artocarp2is, and extending 
from the navel to the knee. The women affected a 
slight degree of modesty at first approach, but this soon 
disappeared. Instead of the wrapper of " t'rap," they 
frequently put on instead an old patched-up Malay 
** sarong." The locks of the men were bound up 
with a tie of cloth, and sometimes by the Malay 
headkerchief or " saputangan " ; those of the women 
fell in wild luxuriance over their face and shoulders. 
Their children went entirely naked until the age of 
puberty.^ 

0. Laut, Sabimba. — Their close relations with the 
Malays have given them a taste for dress, as they 
were wearing cloth instead of the bark of trees. The 
women were dressed in " sarongs," after the manner 
of Malay women, but the men wore only a strip 
of cloth of scanty dimensions round the middle and 
passing between the thighs.' 

' Z.f. E. xxix. 177. '^ J. I. A. vol. i. i>. 345* 

^ lb. p. 185. * lb. p. 350*. 

MALA YAN SEA-GYPS/ES 167 

0. Laut, Muka Kuning-.— The males (of the Orang 

Muka Kuning) mostly wear the " chawat " of Arto- 
carpus ("t'rap") bark, and the females short "sarongs" 
of cloth.' 

0. Laut, Akik. — Their dress resembled that of the 
Malay, but was coarser and poorer, and when they were 
engaged in ordinary pursuits seldom extended beyond 
a waist-cloth or "chawat.""^ 

• y. /. ./. vol. i. p. 337*. - NewlxiUl, ii. 413, 414. 

CHAPTER III. 

Habitations. 

The two first and most obvious forms of shelter would, 
to a wild jungle-dwelling race, naturally be the large 
umbrella-like palm-leaves growing in the forest, and 
natural caves or holes in the ground. In the case of 
the latter, however, it appears that certain preferences 
exist, for " the caves which have been inhabited (in 
Perak) are those which are formed by the overhanging 
of the cliffs {i.e. ' rock-shelters '), and not those caverns 
that have been hollowed out in the rock. The same 
class of cave was inhabited by many of the cave- 
dwellers of Europe, as well as by the early New 
Zealanders." ^ Mr. Wray further informs me that 
he could find no trace of human remains in the caves 
themselves, but that in some rock-shelters near the 
" dark caves " there were some thick deposits. For 
an exception to this rule, however, it ought to be 
pointed out that the well-known " limestone caves " 
at Batu (six miles from Kuala Lumpor in Selangor) 
were certainly at times inhabited by some of these 
jungle -folk, as was stated by W. T. Hornaday 
in his account of his discovery of the caves, in the 
company of the late Captain Syers, and confirmed by 

^ L. Wray, Cave-dwellers, p. 37. 
16S 

GENERAL REMARKS 169 

later visitors. The reason for this use of these caves, 
moreover, is in this instance known, viz. : the fact 
that they afforded protection against wild elephants. 
At the same time it is only fair to add that this is the 
only exception I know of. 

Although, however, the practice of utilising such 
natural refuges as are afforded by the geographical 
features (such as trees and rock-shelters) of the country 
they live in appears to be common to all the wilder 
members of the three races alike, and although it may 
be possible to trace certain similarities in the methods 
by which their more settled fellow-tribesmen succeeded 
in evolving a hut-type which, at first of the pile-hut 
type common in S.E. Asia, became gradually assimi- 
lated to that of the Peninsular Malays, it is neverthe- 
less quite possible in certain respects to differentiate 
the various types of hut, and even to specify with 
almost complete certainty to which of the three races 
these types should be assigned. 

The Semang huts, for instance, frequently resemble 
(as might almost be expected) the huts built by the 
Andamanese, and the circular (and semicircular) huts 
formed by planting a number of palm-leaves upright 
in the ground, with their tops drooping over to a 
common centre, appear also to be only recorded in 
districts where Negrito inHuence is either certain or 
to be suspected. The long leaf-shelter, too, that I 
visited in Kedah was certainly of a type apparently 
confined exclusively to the Semang or Negrito. It 
may be added, moreover, that the Semang appear 
(speaking broadly and generally) to be on the whole 
more given to the use of tree-shelters and huts on 
ground-level than the average Sakai or the Jakun, 
and that both of the latter races seem especially fond 

I70 HABITATIONS 

of building their huts upon very lofty house-posts. 
Mr. Wray informs me that he has never seen in 
Perak a " bee-hive " hut, or even a tree-hut, made 
either by the Semang or by the Sakai, although at 
Kuala Dipang and elsewhere he has seen very tall 
tree-huts built by the Malays. 

The most interesting question, however, connected 
with this subject is undoubtedly that concerned with 
the successive steps by means of which the hut-type 
is evolved. 

Among the Semang its evolution is perhaps on the 
whole the clearest, the various stages being, as they 
appear to me, the following : — 

1. Natural shelters — rock -shelters, caves, tree 

buttresses, branches, etc. 

2. Artificial shelters or weather-screens — a single 

large palm-leaf, either planted in the ground 
or fixed across the fork of a tree. 

3. A number of such palm-leaves, planted in a 

straight row, or in a semicircle or circle, their 
tops drooping over towards a common centre, 
thus forming a "round" or "bee-hive" hut 
— if in the fork of a tree, the hut's shape is 
naturally adapted to suit its branches.^ 

^ For one of the earliest ac- neighbourhood of this river, through 

counts of these tree-dwellings '^ur glasses, our notice was attracted by 

lie 1 what seemed to be some enormous 

(treated from a somewhat sensa- ^^^^^^, ^^^^^ j^ ^^e trees. The size of 

tional standpoint), see 7>«7;(?/rt«a' these nests was prodigious, yet they 

Sport itl Biirmah, S/a//i, and were not placed at a very great height 

Ala/ay \sicl by Capt. J Bradley, f"™'" ^^^ ground, nor in the tallest trees. 

/ o <'\ TT r ,. ..1 ..u The number of them was seven, but we 
(1876). Uniortunately the ac- i 1 1 .1 .u ► • 1 1 

\ I / J concRKicd there were others not visible 

count IS only of general interest, from our position. We were puzzled 

as no means are afforded of to think what bird could construct nests 

even approximately identifying of t^'is size, for they appeared from our 

the locality ''°'"' °^ ^'^^ '° ^^ ^^ ^'^ ^^ lolerably- 

^" sized huts, and much the shape of 

'While searching the country in the roughly constructed wigwams. While 

CHAP, in 

GENERAL REMARKS 

171 

The " long " or " communal " shelter, which is 
nothing more than a round or "bee -hive" 
hut extended to form an ellipse or oval. 

Small granaries or store-huts on high posts, 
and perhaps also huts which commence to 
approach for the first time the Malayan hut- 
type, but are still built on the level of the 
ground.' 

A hut similar to the last, but with Boor raised 
on posts (which makes it still more conform- 
able with the common Malayan hut-type). 

we were still speculating, the difficulty 
was solved. A large ape was observed 
to leave one of the nests and descend 
to the ground ; and he was soon fol- 
lowed by eight or nine others, who all 
walked about erect like men. We 
watched ihem for a long time, and saw 
them picking berries, or something else 
of a similar kind, from the bushes. 
Their actions were most human-like. 
They walked ab<jut exactly like men, 
and even appeared to be talking to each 
other. Several of them climbed the 
cocoa-palms in search of the nuts ; but 
they did not display that activity in 
ascending which distinguishes most of 
the ape trilie. Their every motion was 
human in the extreme"' (p. 292). 
Later, he discovers that the supposed 
" apes " are men. 

[The mention of " cocoa-palms " (!) 
is a strange circumstance reepiiring ex- 
planation, as none of these wild tribes 
plant coconuts, at least until they are a 
good deal more advanced in civilisation 
than these tribes otherwise appear to 
have been. It may of course have 
been that they were living in or near 
an abandoned Malay clearing, or that 
they were less wild than was sujipnsed, 
or, most probably, I think, that the 
trees were not really coconut-palms. 
— W. S.] 

In a later passage we read : "They 
[the tree-huts] were from 30 to 50 feet 
[9-15 m.] from the ground, built in the 
lower branches of a si)ecies of large, 

wide-spreading tree, in general appear- 
ance very much like the oak. Access 
to them was gained by a number of 
notches cut in the tree-trunk, . . . 
and when we got amongst the branche.-. 
we had to crawl out snake - fashion, 
to get at the huts, which were the 
shape of a bee -hive, thoui^h rather 
more pointed at the apex. They were 
constructed entirely of small branches 
and twigs tied together at the top, and 
bent round to form the hollow space in 
the interior. The height of each hut wa> 
about 6 ft.[ 1 80 cm.], the internal diameter 
about the same. The entrance was a 
hole in the side, so small that we could 
scarcely force our way in. The cordage 
with which the huts were constructed 
was made of some tough creeper, and 
the strands were so loosely twisted 
together that the least touch parted 
them." — Bradley, pp. 297, 29S. 

Elsewhere (J. H. pj). 319, 320) Capt. 
Bradley mentions a settlement of fifteen 
huts, "one or two" (he says) "in a 
tree." On pp. 330, 331 he mentions 
another of these tree-villages. " It " 
(the village) " consisted of five huts buih 
in the trees, and seven hovels erected 
on the ground." "They were" (he 
continues) " built of branches like those 
described in a former chapter ; but 
were overlaid with deer -skins." 
Another settlement (described on p. 
315) had four tree - huts only in 
number. 

' De Morgan, viii. 296. 

172 HABITATIONS 

The last type of dwelling — and by no means the 
least interesting one — to find a place in these pages 
is that of the old " Orang Laut " of Singapore and 
Johor. These once most formidable pirates (who at 
that time dwelt exclusively in their boats) were the 
only inhabitants of the island of Singapore (which has 
now a population of over 200,000) on the memorable 
day of February (1819) when Sir Stamford Raffles 
landed to make a city out of what was then a mere 
desolate mangrove swamp. Contemporary and more 
recent writers give us a picture of the " Orang Laut," 
and the extraordinarily restricted quarters in which they 
lived. Huddled up in a small boat, measuring scarcely 
twenty feet in length, they found all the domestic 
comfort of which they were in need. At one end was 
the hearth, in the centre their few utensils, and at the 
other end, beneath a matwork awning, not exceeding 
six feet in length, was the sleeping apartment of a 
family that often counted five or six, together with a 
cat and a dog. Under this awning they found shelter 
from the tropical rains and heats alike, from the time 
of their birth to the grave.' 

I. — Semang. 

The Rock-shelter. 

Kedah Semang. — The Semang are almost in- 
eradicably nomadic, have no fixed habitations, and rove 
about like the beasts of the forest.^ The wilder ones 
seldom stay more (they informed me) than three days 

1 See Crawfurd, Descr. Diet., s.v. "Malay Peninsula." 
2 /. /. A. vol. iv. pp. 425. 426. 

NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 173 

in one place.' Rock-shelters are also commonly used 
by them.- 

Pangan. — At Ban Tun, in the province of Pata- 
lung on the north-western shore of the Inland 
Sea (Singora), I visited one of these small rock- 
shelters which had been inhabited, up to the night of 
our arrival, by nine Pangans, who had only deserted 
it on hearing our approach. It was formed by a large 
overhanging rock under the brow of a very steep and 
lofty hill. Its size was very small, measuring only 
from about 9 to 12 feet (2.7 m. to 3.6 m.) in length by 
6 to 8 feet (i.S m. to 2.4 m.) in width, and from about 
4 to 5 feet (1.2 m. to 1.5 m.) in height. Its position 
on a shoulder of the hill was very well chosen, as 
the ground fell away precipitously in front of it, and 
the only way to reach it was to go round by the back 
of the overhanging rock itself. The mouth of the 
cave was, moreover, further concealed and protected 
by a thicket of thorny bamboo, which grew at the 
more precipitous end. Altogether it was as difficult 
a spot to find without a guide as any which could have 
been selected. The sole article of furniture was one 
of the rough bamboo sleeping-stages, or "barbicans," 
which are to be seen in most Semang encampments,'' 
and which are made by lashing half a dozen thick 
bamboo poles together. This particular bed, however, 
could not have accommodated more than one or two 

' Among the K. Semang (I'angan) Semang arc less particular llian the 

it is an estahlisheil custom to break up I'angan (\'aughan-Stevens, iii. 103). 

the existing encampment on the fifth - See a valuable note on this subject 

day at the latest. This custom is called by Mr. L. Wray (Cciif-JwdUrs, j). 

"Jog," and is attributed to the com- 37). 

mands of Pie : indeed, the days arc •• These most i>eculiar platforms or 

counted on the fingers, and it is believed "bedsteads'" are found also in the 

that if this custom be seriously in- Andamans, and (according to my friend 

fringed, a severe form of plague will Mr. Lorimer Fison) in Fiji I I should 

attack the guilty parties. The W. be glad to know of other examples. 

174 HABITATIONS 

persons at most, and the other members of the family 
had evidently been sleeping on beds of heaped-up 
leaves, which were still quite green and fresh on our 
arrival. There were also the ashes of four separate 
tires, one at least of which had been extinguished by 
water ; and there were fragments of the ribs of a small 
tortoise on which they had been feeding, as well as a 
half-smoked (native) cigarette, an indication that they 
had probably had some traffic, either direct or through 
the medium of "tamer" fellow-tribesmen, with the 
Malays or Siamese of the locality. 

Tree-shelters. 

Perak Semang*. — Another obvious kind of " natural 
shelter " is that afforded by the branches of trees, the 
scanty protection thus obtained being speedily im- 
proved by the building of a weather-screen, out of 
which is easily and naturally developed the tree-built 
hut. The exact purpose served by those arboreal 
dwellings has been much disputed, but the most 
reasonable explanation — and I think undoubtedly the 
correct one — is that they are built for protection from 
wild beasts. In most cases the proximity of wild 
beasts is certainly their raison d'etre. We are told,^ for 
instance, in so many words, that some of the Semang 
" in the thicker parts of the forest, where the elephants, 
tigers, and other zvild animals are most abundant, make 
their temporary dwellings upon the cliffs and branches 
of large trees," - The simplest form of the tree-shelter 

* J. I. A. vol. iv. 425, 426. their houses on the level of the ground. 

* Another possible cause (inunda- When, however, safeguarding against 
tions) is certainly suggested by the tigers is necessary, they build lietween 
following note (for which see Bastian, the bianclies of the trees, just as the 
Reiscn in Birma. Leipzig, 1 886, p. Puleahs build their nests in their 
432): — '-The inhabitants of the hills forests." But in the Malay Penin- 
in Pegu, who are insured [by their sula this first reason would rarely if ever 
position] against inundations, build ^pply- 

CHAP. HI NEGRITOS OF PERAK 175 

consists of a screen of leaves fixed across the branches 
of the tree a little above the fork to serve as a roof. Usu- 
ally, however, side-screens are added, for comfort's sake. 

I am told by Mr. Wray that he once visited a 
Semang house in the Piah valley, in Upper Perak. 
It measured about 50 feet (15.2 m. x 6 m.) in length 
by 20 feet in width, and was built on posts of such 
a height that the floor was 15 feet (4.5 m.) above 
the ground. There were three ladders on one side of 
the house to give access to it, and it appeared to have 
been inhabited by at least three families. Underneath 
it Mr. Wray found the bones of the wild pig, deer, 
and " seladang " {Bos gaurus. the wild bull or " bison "), 
as well as the horn of one of these latter animals. 

Pangan. — The Pangan tree-huts observed by 
Messrs. Ridley and Kelsall on the banks of the Ulu 
Tahan river in Pahang (in 1891) were "small roofed 
platforms, raised about 15 or 20 feet (4.5 m. to 
6 m.) from the ground," ' and were reached (as Mr. 
Ridley tells me) by a ladder formed of sticks lashed 
across two neighbouring trees. 

Ground-screens of Leaves. 
Semang and Pangan. — Yet another kind of shelter 
used by the Semang is the palm-leaf ground-screen,- 
which is intended simply as a protection against rain 
and wind. It is constructed by planting three or four 
stout sticks or poles in a row in the ground at an 
angle of about 60 to 75", and lashing palm-leaves 
across them so closely that the rain cannot penetrate.^ 

^J.R.A.S., S. B., No. 25, p. will frequently content himself with the 

45; shelter of a single palm-le-if planted in 

- It goes without saying that these the ground, 
screens vary in size and construction ■'' Cp. Logan(/.i^\v^..V., .S'. A'.,No. 7. 

according to the needs of the party. p. 85): The "temporary lairs "(of the 

When a Semang is travelling alone, he Semang) are " only protected from the 

h 

17 HABITATIONS 

Shelters of this type are also largely used by the 
Malays for temporary purposes, especially in the 
eastern states of the Peninsula. 

Pangan. — The next stage would appear to be that of 
the round or bee-hive hut. In the interior of Kelantan 
(near Kampong Buntal in Ulu Aring), Mr. Laidlaw 
and I visited several of these curious habitations. One 
that we photographed was a hemispherical leaf- 
shelter, very slenderly constructed, the materials em- 
ployed being leaves of the "bertam" palm (^Etigeissona) 
and a Rattan or Calamus called " Rotan Dudok." The 
bases of the leaf-stalks were firmlyplanted in the ground, 
the upper ends of the leaves bending naturally over so as 
to protect about one-half of the hut-Hoor from the rain. 
The leaves planted round the circumference of the 
semicircle at the back of the shelter were of full length, 
but a slight fence of shorter leaves, about 2 feet (60 cm.) 
high, completed the circumference. At the back of 
the hut was the usual big abattis or chevaiix-de-frise 
of felled trees, which is very generally formed by these 
people for protection against wild beasts. 

A slightly different type of hut was seen on the 
banks of the Tahan river by Mr. Ridley in 1891. The 
huts themselves consisted of a bee-hive-shaped structure 
of palm-leaves about 4 feet (1.2 m.) high, the bases of 
the leaves planted in the ground and their upper parts 
interwoven together. So far the structure was similar 
to those already described, but these particular huts 
" were completely filled with palm-leaves, in the midst 
of which could be seen the depression caused by the 
occupant when he curled himself up in them " either for 

weather by a few branches or leaves stuck in the gr(;un<I, with a small cross- 
hung over two or three sticks." And piece, and a few leaves or branches of 
cp. alsoy. /. .'^. vol. iv. pp. 425, 426 : trees laid over to secure them from the 
"Their huts . . . consist of two posts weather." 

A'. //. i .,/, 

I'AN<;.\N Wi:.\Tlll-.K SCREKX i>V P.M.M LiCAVKS (L'l.L- K 1- I.ANTAN ). 

M 

i^ 

Ij 

y 

'< ■ 

^■i^« 

w 

•-' ,-. '. 

/ 

.rf-; '-He 

_- — .^^ 

/A- ■ 

A'. //. ) iti'f>(Ski-itt lixf-ciiition). 
IMKKIDK OK k<irM> Ll.Al -Slll.l 11 K OF TANCAN (L'LU KKI-ANTAN). 

I'ot. I. /. 176. 

D 

D 

D 

hfl 

x: 

C 

c 

-I 

C) 

v« 

o 

H 

o 

>. 

D 

o 

hfl 

(U 

x; 

^ 

Z 

O 

<— 

o 

^ 

o 

>, 

D (§) 

n 

D 

a 

bf 

01 

O 

t*-. 

o 

h 

o 

>> 

hiO 

CHAP. Ill NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 177 

rest or warmth. " There were altogether seven of 
these 'nests' on the river-bank,"^ and the occupants, 
who were, I think, undoubtedly Pangan, had only just 
left them before his and his companion's arrival. 

Coniiminal Shelter's. 

Semang' of Kedah. — From an ordinary round hut 
which will shelter one or two small families the transi- 
tion to an elongated shelter which will hold a greater 
number is not very difficult. The Semang shelter at 
Siong in Kedah accommodated all the members of the 
tribe who were living in the neighbourhood, and con- 
tained no fewer than eleven (?) sleeping-places arranged 
in two long rows ; it may therefore be described as 
being of the "barrack" or "long-house" type. The 
upright timbers of this shelter consisted of young sap- 
lings planted in two opposite rows, across them being 
lashed the leaves of the "chencham," a low-growing 
palm not unlike the well-known " bertam " palm 
{Eugeissona tristis) in appearance, but which was 
declared by the Semang to be a different tree. The 
uprights of the shelter were called " pengkong," and 
the leaves lashed across them "hapoi." There were, 
besides, two central posts or pillars (" jehu "), each about 
a third of the distance from either end of the shelter, 
and a dozen poles placed, as props or " wind-braces," 
in various positions and at various angles, in order to 
strengthen the structure and keep it from being blown 
over in a high wind." In front of the shelter at the 
upper end was a big opening which served as the 
main entrance, but there were in addition several 

» /. R. A. s., s. B., No. 25, p. 45. 

* " TCnungked,'' Plus dialect ; or "chCnidel," Kedah. 

VOL. I N 

178 HABITATIONS 

smoke-holes^ which were also used for ingress or egress 
as occasion might serve. The two slopes of the roof 
were not united over a ridge-pole, as in the ordinary 
(Malay) house, but a longitudinal aperture was left be- 
tween them for about two-thirds of the entire length of 
the roof, and through the gap thus caused the greater 
part of the smoke from the many fireplaces issued. 

All round the walls were ranged a number of 
bamboo sleeping-platforms, consisting of a framework 
of split bamboos, each end of which was supported by 
a horizontal slat or rod.- These latter were in turn 
supported on low forked wooden trestles called 
" jongka." These bed-platforms were between 5-6 
ft. (1.5 m. to 1.8 m.) in length by about 3 ft. (.91 m.) 
in breadth ; and their exact position was as shown in 
the accompanying diagram. Young men of the tribe 
slept near the main opening or door, and the chief 
at the upper end as shown. 

I may add that the owner of each sleeping-platform 
or family unit possessed a separate fire or hearth, over 
which he used to sit and warm himself when the nights 
were cold. On the other hand, I never saw any kind 
of pillow, either in the houses of the Semang of Kedah 
or in those of the Pangan. 

Huts. 

Kedah Semang". — We now come to the last class 
of Semang dwellings in which they begin to build 
huts of a rather more substantial character than those 
hitherto described, apparently, in the first instance, 
to serve as store-houses. An excellent example of this 
was to be seen in the Semang encampment at Siong 

1 "Karop?" Plus; or "pemong?" Kedah. 
- " Keding," Plus dialect ; or "pelayen," Kedali. 

>i 

•SSiT^^OK*,.- 

SlCMANi, 

/'.>/. /. /. T78. 

,, , , , ., , , lA, WITH NlI'AII-I'ALMS [X/PM FKUr/C.I.VS) 

IN HACKGROUNO, NEWLV CLT IOR THATC IIWORK. 

ll'rav. 

SkMANG SIANUIN', \l MDK t )l Hll lAI .Sl.N(,Kl lAPAH), NliAK liATf GAJAII, KiNIA, PEKAK. 
The luit .shows one of the methods of interweaving palm leaves. 

yc:l. I. p. 1-9. 

CHAP. Ill NEGRITOS OF KEDAH \ic) 

in Kedah, where, side by side with the long "communal " 
shelter in which the tribe lived, stood a tiny granary 
in which their scanty stores of rice were preserved. 
This little granary stood on six thin posts, the floor 
being raised about 4-5 ft. (1.2 m. to 1.5 m.) from the 
ground, for the purpose of protecting its contents 
from small marauders. It measured about 4 ft. in 
length by about 3 ft. (1.2 m. x.91 m.) in width, and 
was little more in fact than a large box on posts. Its 
walls were made of tree-bark, and the roof was 
thatched with the leaf of the " bertam " palm, and 
it was entered by a tiny doorway to which access was 
afforded by a long inclined pole. From the stage in 
which these tiny huts were used solely for the pur- 
poses of storage, to one in which they could be used 
as dwellings, the transition would be as easy and as 
natural as possible. 

On the other hand, it must here be remarked that 
although in this way they may sometimes come to 
dwelling — in Malayan fashion — in a hut with raised 
flooring, the Semang nevertheless appear to retain a 
strong predilection for building their huts either 
altogether aloft in trees, or else upon the level of the 
ground itself.^ 

Perak Semang. — Direct evidence of huts with raised 
flooring being inhabited by pure Semang is very scanty. 
The Semang village mentioned by De Morgan prob- 
ably belonged to this latter (more developed) class, 
especially as he describes it as standing in the midst 

' The huts built by the Pan^an seem carry alxjui with them when they move to 

rather intended for the purpose of their next campint;-place. These huts 

storing supplies {e.g. rice) than for are always set up in the thickest part of 

regular occupation. Five or six of the jungle, and by way of further precau- 

these huts are usually built in one place, tion thearlicles left behindare frequently 

and the Pangan leave such articles of marked with special signs. — V.-St. iii. 

property there as they do not wish to 102, 103. 

I So HA lU TA TIONS 

of an immense plantation {'' un vaste Jardin''), which 
seems to imply some degree of permanence. All he 
says of the houses, however, is that they " were con- 
structed on a level with the ground," and " were open 
to all the winds that blow," and that the Semang 
protected themselves at night against the attacks of wild 
beasts by means of great " braziers " [sic) which they 
light up under their roof.' On the whole, it seems 
that the Semang take much less readily than the Sakai 
to the Malayan custom of building their huts on piles. 
Among the Semang of Perak (Menik) no one uses 
any special kind of pillow, whether of wood or of any 
other material. Often they use no pillow at all, and 
if they do, the first thing that comes to hand (such as 
a bundle of grass or twigs), or the arm will be used.- 

II. — Sakai. 
Skelters and Jree-hiits. 

Perak Sakai. — The wild tribes of the Perak Hills 
(Sakai Bukit), according to what De la Croix was 
told by the tame Sakai of S. Kerbu, are seldom met 
with, as they do not live in villages, and build no 
houses, but when night arrives they either sleep in 
the shade of a tree, or (at the most) hurriedly erect a 
shelter of leaves.'' 

Selangor Sakai. — The Sakai, like the Semang, 
make use of caves as well as trees to dwell in. Mr. 
Ridley informs me that he once saw an excellent 
example consisting of a rock-shelter which he visited 

1 De Morgan, viii. 296. ever, seems to have been hearsay, and 

2 Z.f.E. xxix. 186. Elsewhere (p. Mr. Wray informs me that the Sakai 
1S7), V.-St. says that the wild Semang of the Perak Hills build very good 
(rangan)alonedonot use the pillow con- houses (cp. Z'//. ii. 646), which prob- 
sisting of a cloth bag stuffed with cotton. ably accounts for De M."s much too 

^ De la Croix, p. 340. This, how- sweeping d^tnenti (Z'//. iii. 43). 

'»-^ '- -^,. 

1^' 

<>. «' 

Sakai Tkek Hit, Sungki I'.kk.\X(;, I'i.kak, Skven Miles from Tan'jong Malim. 

Vo/. I. p. i8i. 

SAKAT OF PERAK i8i 

at the Batu caves seven miles from Kuala Lumpur in 
Selangor, Here, as in the Semang rock-shelters, were 
the remains of a bamboo bed-place, and in addition 
there were screens of palm-leaves which had been put 
up as a protection against the weather. In this rock- 
shelter, as in others in the same district, the walls 
were decorated with rough charcoal sketches of well- 
known objects, e.g. boats, etc. Excavations were made 
in the floor of this rock-shelter on the chance of finding 
traces of earlier occupation, but nothing was found 
except a round stone evidently brought from the river 
to support a cooking-pot. 

In spite of the foregoing, however, both rock- 
shelters and palm-leaf wind-screens appear to be less 
popular with the Sakai than with the Semang, and 
there are few records, if any, of their employment of 
the bee-hive type of hut, at all events beyond the 
limits of Negrito influence. So far as I have been 
able to discover, the huts of the pure-bred Sakai are, 
as a rule, rectangular in plan. 

Tree-huts, on the other hand, analogous to those 
already described as used by the Semang, are certainly 
to be seen among the Inland (Sakai) Tribes of 
Selangor at least. On an expedition to Ulu Kali in the 
interior of Selangor in 1893, ^ myself saw two of these 
Sakai tree-huts, one of which must have been from 
30-40 ft. {9 m. to 12 m.) from the ground. Both must 
have been very nearly the same size, about 6 ft. by 
4 ft. (1.8 m. X 1.2 m.), and not more than 4 ft. in height.' 

' Of the same district Mr. William huts high up against the trees, usually 

T. Hornaday says : " We were at Batu fifteen to twenty feet from the ground, 

in the durian season, and often visited to get out of the way of wild he.asts. 

the trees in the forest when the Malays Hut the rascally elephants often take 

were collecting the fruit as fast as it the trouble to pull down even those 

fell. Like the Jakun, they build little high platforms and frighten the in- 

IlABlTAriONS 

Htits and Houses. 

Perak Sakai. — The Sakai in commencing to build 
their huts with rather more reference to Malay 
models still retain the communal idea. One of these 
Sakai communal houses, described by Hale,^ was built 
on a slope, close to the summit of a lofty hill. The 
thatching of the roof (with leaves of the bertam palm) 
was a clumsy imitation of Malayan methods. The 
floor of the house, which was raised above the ground, 
rested upon nine posts, eight of inconsiderable and 
one of very great diameter, which was, in fact, the 
trunk of a large tree. Every other part of the house 
was entirely built of bamboo.- The walls consisted of 
long screens of sheet-thatch, which were suspended 
loosely at their upper ends under the eaves, so that 
the lower ends could be pushed open outwards. The 

habitants half out of their wits. The 
herds to which we paid our respects 
had just the night before visited several 
durian camps, and had torn down the 
highest platform of all, as if to show 
the Malays that it was of no use trying 
to build a hut out of their reach. Of 
course the Malays fled to the jungle. 
There are several large caves in the 
vicinity, and the Jakun are in the 
habit of taking refuge in them when 
the elephants become too neighbourly " 
(J.R.A.S., S.B., No. 3, p. 128). 
Batu is a small village six miles from 
Kuala Lumpur in Selangor. Mr. 
Hornaday is probably here writing of 
the Inland or Hill Sakai. The 
Jakun are really the savage Malayan 
tribes, but the word is often used 
loosely, especially by Malays (as here). 

' P. 249. So too, according to De 
Morgan, the entire tribe of Sakai at 
Changak (PChangkat) Kerbu (in Ulu 
Perak) lived in a big house which they 
shared in common. 

The house was divided into com- 
partments, where the various families 

were separately installed, the hearths, 
however, being shared in common, and 
placed in the centre of the building. 
The room of the chief (Penghulu) was 
much better kept than the others, the 
sleeping - places of flattened bamboo 
being covered with mats decorated with 
yellow patterns ; all the blowpipes of 
the tribe were suspended from the 
rafters, and big bamboos covered with 
decoration were deposited in the corners 
to supply him with water (De Morgan, 

i- 43)- 

'^ Mr. Hale, however, very rightly 
points out that the Sakai are very 
ready to adapt themselves to circum- 
stances in the matter of material. Thus 
elsewhere Mr. Wray remarks that the 
leaves of fan -palms are used by the 
Sakai to thatch their houses, and that, 
owing to the extreme hardness of the 
stems, they are not in the habit of 
cutting the palms down when felling 
the jungle for their clearings, which 
probably accounts for their great abund- 
ance (/. R. A. S., S. B., No. 21, p. 
155)- 

.'/' Gregor. 

Tree Hut, Ulu Batu, AKOfr Tuki.ve Miles from Kiala I.imi'UR, Seeangor. 

Vol. I. p. 383. 

CHAP. HI SAKAl OF PERAK 183 

house in question was more than an hour's climb from 
water. It was surrounded by a clearing of about two 
acres in extent, where tapioca, maize, sugar-cane, and 
tobacco were grown. The house contained sixteen 
inhabitants, divided into six distinct family units, each 
of which had its own hearth. In the case of a man 
having two wives, each wife had her own hearth, 
marked out by means of a low partition of split 
bamboos. There was a door in the end-wall, and also 
an outlet in the slope of the roof 

On the other hand, the Sakai huts observed in Ulu 
Kinta by De Morgan are described as being built 
very far apart from each other, and situated in the 
midst of immense plantations of tapioca, " sorgho " (?) 
and maize, trom which it may possibly be deduced 
that they were on rather less strictly communal 
principles. De Morgan was invited to enter the 
Penghulu's hut. which was, like those at S. Raya. built 
at a height of about 1.50 m. from the ground. It was 
very small, but very clean. Blowpipes, arrows, and a 
spear hung from the roof, and it contained many betel- 
leaf-wallets, necklaces, nets, lines, and a small but 
highly decorated piece of bamboo, the use of which 
was for carrying the worms used in rod-fishing. - 

In another place, De la Croix, in describing the 
Sakai village of Kampong Chabang, in the upper 
reaches of S. Kerbu (a tributary of the Plus river in 
Perak, which is a few miles furth(*r north than Ulu 
Kinta), remarks that the village consisted of a dozen 
huts, erected in the midst of a clearing, on the banks 
of the river. The chi(Ts but (the largest) was built 
upon piles, and measured ten metres in length by five 

' Hale. p. 294. ii. 645, for illustrations showing ground- 

'•* De Morgan, viii. 167. Cp. /."//. plan .-ind elevations of a S.akai hut. 

1 84 HABITATIONS 

metres in breadth. The flooring, consisting of flattened 
tree-bark, was raised about a metre above the ground. 
Both the walls and the roof with its double slope were 
constructed alike of broad strips of bark, which afforded 
an excellent shelter from the floods of rain that fell in 
the wet season. A notched tree-trunk served as house- 
ladder for giving access to the interior of the building.^ 

In the middle of the only room was placed a hearth 
consisting of a thick layer of clay deposited in a (square) 
wooden frame. This was the hearth ("dapor") of Malay 
houses. A few pots and receptacles of various kinds 
containing provisions were hung upon the walls. The 
remaining huts were all of the same type, except two 
or three whose side-walls were made of matwork, in 
imitation of the Malays. - 

Pahang- Sakai. — A graphic description of the 
mountain hut of a Sakai by Mr. L. Wray is interest- 
ing from the fact that the locality referred to is in 
the far interior of Pahang. 

Mr. Wray wrote ^ that the house (in the Tahan 
valley) in which he passed the night was a large and 
well-built one, and seemed to be occupied by two 
families. It was at an elevation of about 4000 feet 
(1225 m.), and being perched on the top of a cleared 
hill fully exposed to the winds, he found it very cold. 

Hanging up in the house were strings of the lower 
jaws of monkeys, musangs, and other animals, and in 
another house he saw bunches of hornbill skulls. 
These were kept hanging up in the smoke as trophies, 
in the same way as the Dayaks keep human heads in 
their houses. Another custom which seemed to point 

' De la Croix, pp. 322, 323. Brau fifteen families in the same place (pp. 

fie S. P. Lias, in writing of the Sakai 279, 280). 
of Sungei Kerbu, adds that they ■' Jbid. 

always lived in groups of from ten to '^ J. A'. A. S., S. />'., No. 21, p. 162. 

i\ .i^m'-' 4 lib iisf' 

Ippiffl 

1 laii^vcr^c >vLn' 

Lon^itiuiinai .^■•. 11 

'-> ■liS^'^'^ -"^^-S^-V v».<vv!»4s ^ 

'•<■' -'... 

r- K- ^^^ ■:.:&, .r.;i 

Elevation 
Sakai Holse at Ciianc^kat Kkkii . k !<■ 

/V Morgan, j 

r.>/. /. /. 184. 

HousK OK x\h()Ku;inks at Kl'ai.a Si.i.i;ii, L'l.i; Klanc; 

McGregor. 

Huts at Dukian Chandong, Ui.r Langat, about Thrkk Miles above Kllki, hut ox 

A Tkihutaky of the Lan<;at. Men absent Hunting. 
Vo/. I. p. 185. 

CHAP. Ill SAKAl OF PAHANG 185 

to a connection between the two races was that they 
kept large fires burning in the centre of their houses 
during the night, and that it was only during the first 
part of the night that they slept, after that they sat up 
round the fire and talked till morning.' 

I hit Furniture — PiUoivs. 

Perak Sakai. — It appears that pillows were much 
more generally used by the Sakai than by the Semang. 
The pillow of the Central Sakai (Senoi) men was 
always an internode of bamboo, through each extremity 
of which four small round pegs were driven. The 
pillows of the women were the same, but they were 
usually fitted with a pair of pegs or " feet " pointed at 
both ends, so that by a blow they could be driven into 
the hole at the end or taken out. For this purpose part 
of the node was cut away, in order to allow the inside of 
the tube to be reached. Small objects that the women 
used for their toilet or for other purposes were kept in 
the interior of these bamboo pillows ; and by means of 
the " feet " they were prevented from falling out again. - 

These pillows were of various patterns, which 
differed with the tribe. The Central Sakai (Senoi), 
who always appear to have had a somewhat more 
artistic feeling than the other Sakai (Blandas), say 
that their bamboo pillows were formerly ornamented 
with incised lines or " painted " emblems.' but that 
these are all now forgotten, and the form of pillow 
now universally employed is a kind of stuff-bag or 
pillow filled with cotton. This new form of pillow, 
however, could only be used when the tribe became 
more settled. So long as they remained entirely 

' Wray in /. R. A. S., S. B., No. "^ Z. f. E. xxix. (V.-St.) 186. 

21, p. 162. 3 In origin.il, " jtainted totems"! 

1 86 HABITATIONS 

nomadic, bulky things, such as these pillows, could 
not be carried with them ; and if the present cotton- 
filled pillows were left a week in a house uncared for, 
termites and other vermin would injure them, even if 
damp and mould did not do so.' 

The bamboo pillows referred to formed part of the 
furniture of the house, and when not being used lay- 
together in a corner." 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — -As far as I was able to discover, the 
Blandas (Hill Tribes of the Kuala Langat district in 
Selangor) seldom if ever dwelt in leaf-shelters, and 
the only important difference between their houses 
and those of the Besisi — which will presently be de- 
scribed— lay in the far greater relative height of the 
wooden posts on which the Blandas house was built. 
These high-built huts of the Blandas were frequently 
entered by means of a movable ladder, which was re- 
moved when they went abroad into the forest. Their 
traditional pillow was a block of " pulai " {alstonia, a 
soft, cork-like wood). 

Besisi. — On the other hand, although I never 
came across an instance of a Blandas family living in 
a tree-hut, I think there is practically no doubt that 
the Besisi, who had a relatively larger proportion of 
Semang blood in them, did occasionally do so. At 
S. Nipah (in the very same district of Selangor) I 
once knew a soi-disant Malay family (in reality they 
were Besisi converts) who lived in a tree-hut some 20 
ft. to 30 ft. (6 m. to 9 m.) from the ground, and on one 
occasion I climbed up to have a look at it. The "hut" 
itself was a tiny shelter about 6 ft. (1.8 m.) in length, 

• Z.f. K. xxix. (V.-St.) 187, 188. 2 ii,_ 

Sakai House, Lui Rivkk, Ui.u Langat, SiiLANtjoK. 

Xcjtii-e the liciulu of the liouse-poits. 

M^U>c^o>: 

.'>i'itri-(;or. 

Ground Hut with thatched Roof, Ui.u Kuang, about Thkie Miles from 
KuANG Station, Ski.angor. 
J''/. A /. 1 86. 

1/ • • ^ ^ X a1^ ^ ''■ f^J* ^/Vrl^'J f|«%ft 05* 

/ . -1/. /•-V/'/oC. 
Hi-.siM ill i>, A)u)i 1 OM'. AM) A Mali- Mii.i:s ikum Ski'an<;, 

shou'iii:; abatti< nf irc-cs felled as a protection against wild beasts. 

/. J/. Elliot. 

Besisi Hut about Onk and a Halk Mii.ks FR(J^r Sei'ang (Kuala Langat 

DiSTKicT or Sici.ANGOk), SHOWiNt; ovKRLAi'PiNt; Gablk-Ridgi:. 

1 was myself inside this liut ulieii it was taken. 

Vol. I. p. 187. 

CHAP. Ill SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR i8- 

by 4 ft. (1.2 m.) in width, and was not more than three 
or four feet high. The walls and roof were made of the 
Malay palm-leaf awning ("kajang"), and it contained a 
small sleeping-mat and mosquito-curtain (an unlooked- 
for luxury in so poor an abode), and a few cooking 
and other utensils. A man and his wife lived there, 
but I cannot say whether they had any children. Both 
happened to be very short, I should say not more than 
4^ ft. (1.37 m.), but I should much doubt whether 
either of them could stand upright in it. The method 
of entering it was enough to try the nerves of any 
one that was at all inclined to be dizzy. The ascent was 
achieved by means of the rudest and most primitive 
stick-ladder imaginable, a large creeper that grew 
upon the tree affording some slight additional assist- 
ance. On reaching the top of this ladder, one had to 
rest one's elbows upon the Hoor of the shelter, and 
swing one's self up into safety by main force. The 
descent was, if anything, the more trying process of 
the two, yet the Malays did not appear to mind it. 

The actual houses of the Besisi in this same district 
were built of timber and palm-thatch like the houses 
of the local Malays, but had several peculiar points 
about them. The slopes of the roof-gable, for one 
thing, were carried much lower than in an ordinary 
Malay house, and in some cases at least the eaves 
were actually level with the floor. 

Another characteristic feature was that one of the 
slopes of the gable was frequently carried much higher 
than the other, so as to overlap and leave a gaj) 
through which smoke could issue, without the rain 
penetrating too easily. In the Malay type of house, 
the upper edges of the two roof-slopes meet at the 
top, and the rain is kept out by an arrangement called 

1 88 HABITATIONS part ii 

" perabong,"' w hich covers over the gap between the 
edges. 

rhe houses are exceedingly diminutive, much 
more so, in proportion to their inhabitants, than 
Malay houses ; in fact, I saw many among the Besisi 
that were little more than boxes. They are usually 
thatched with palm-leaves loosely strung together, the 
kind of leaves usually employed being either those of 
the fan-palm or the " bertam " palm, A few of these 
houses were supported on fairly high posts, higher 
than those of Malay houses. The Besisi, who carry 
the eaves of their huts down to the level of the floor, 
generally use, however, very short house-posts. 

The joists are tied together with split rattan or 
other strong lashings, and each settlement, however 
small, is as a rule defended by an abattis of fallen trees. 
The Besisi often, perhaps in imitation of the Malays, 
erect a sort of landing of split " nibong " stems in 
front of the door whereon to winnow their grain. 

The house of one of the Batins or big chiefs of 
the Besisi (Batin Suntai by name) was described to 
me in one of their tribal songs as follows : — 

SoNc OF TH1-: Hatin's Hut. 

" Kepong " bark was all its roofing, 
" Bertam " leaves were all the side- walls, 
" Bertam " stems were all the flooring, 
" Loyak "' stems were all its jiillars. 
Such the house of Batin Suntai, 
At " Nine-Rivers," up the Kalis, — 
Diirian-wood did form his pillow, 
Leaves of " lemba " were his dishes, 
His the beaten tree-bark girdle. 

The pillow generally used by the Besisi is said to 
have been a block of hard wood, without feet, concave 
on the upper side, and convex on the lower, ^ and cut 

' In the original it is described as take and an impossibility, which is 
being convex on the upper side, and clearly due to some confusion, 
concave underneath, an obvious mis- 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 189 

off squarely at the ends. It ditlers from the Jakun 
and Blandas pillow, the wood of which was very soft.' 

The Balai. 

Besisi. — Before leaving the subject of Besisi huts 1 
must not omit to mention the important fact that there 
were among these Jakun tribes traces of the use of a 
Tribal Hall, such as is always attached to the house 
of a Malay chief, and is called " Balai " both by Jakun 
and Malays. On the occasion of a Besisi wedding, 
the Besisi of Ayer Itam (on the Selangor coast) had 
built a hall of this kind at right angles to the house of 
their tribal chief or Batin (thus forming a sort of " T "- 
shaped building in which the " Balai " formed the 
downstroke of the " T "). Such Balais are frequently 
mentioned in Besisi songs, and I think there is very 
little doubt that we do not hnd here a simple instance of 
borrowing from the Malays, but rather an example of a 
custom sprung from their common origin. The building 
in question was erected by the voluntary labour of all 
the men ot the tribe (just as would have been the case 
if it had been built by a Malay chief), and it was large 
enough to contain about sixty to seventy people or 
more (the members of the tribe itself numbering about 
sixty). It was opposite the door of this building that 
the bell-shaped mound which was explained to me as 
the religious emblem of the tribe -' was thrown up. 
And it was inside this same building that the various 
tribal feasts took place. 

lints. 
Labu Tribes. — Their dwellings are the simplest and 

' Z.f. L. xxix. 186. Sec p. 186, supra, and p. 105, infiii. 
2 Cp. vol. ii. pp. 72-74. 

.90 HABITATIOXS 

rudest that can be imagined. Rowland, in writing of 
the Labu tribe that he observed, mentions that when 
they had deserted the house built by his coolies, with 
its raised sleeping-platforms, he found them again in 
the interior of the jungle (instead of at the edge), 
and that every married man (or bachelor) had built 
for himself a small round hut on the level of the 
ground. Each of these huts was entirely constructed 
of the leaves of the " bertam " palm [Eugeissona tristis, 
Griff), measuring about two or three metres in length, 
the stalks of which were planted close together in the 
ground, so as to form a circle of about two metres in 
diameter ; the extremities of the leaves met at the 
top, but gave only a scanty shelter from the rain. 
The people in these huts lived upon the ground itself, 
which is always moist in the jungle, and generally 
considered to be unhealthy, and in heavy rain were 
not protected from flooding even by a ditch round the 
hut. Yet in these huts they soon recovered from 
their fevers and coughs, and regained their usual 
serenity. These huts stood close together, a few steps 
from a brook.' 

Hut Furniture. 

Kenaboi. — The Kenaboi, who appear determined 
in this as in many other things to take a different line 
from the Sakai, to which race Vaughan-Stevens says 
he assigns them," made their pillows of split lengths 
of bamboo cut square at each end, the lengths being 
interwoven with one another "in and out."^ The 
interior served the women for holding small objects, 

' Rowland, p. 708. have Semang affinities. 

2 This begs tiie entire question. It ^ An obscure and obviously in- 

is more probable that the Kenaboi may accurate description. 

CHAP, in SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 19 

such as combs and medicines. The exact patterns 
were said to be lost.' 

Huts and their Furniture. 

Mantra. — Of the Mantra huts, M. Borie says that 
their dwelHngs scarcely kept out the rain, and were 
open to every wind, most frequently being without 
either doors or windows. The best of them consisted 
of nine posts, of which three were about a third longer 
than the six others. These nine posts were strongly 
planted in the ground in three rows, with the long 
posts in the centre ; these posts were then united at 
the top by means of longitudinal and transverse 
timbers lashed together by means of rattans ; upon 
these timbers were placed rafters - to sustain the roof, 
which was made of leaves ; and the floor, which was 
generally raised several feet above the ground, was 
formed by laying laths across the longitudinal and 
transverse timbers and covering these laths with the 
bark of trees ; the sides were similarly more or less 
covered in either with leaves or tree-bark.'^ 

The following articles were found in a compara- 
tively well-furnished Mantra hut, which was occupied 
by two men, two women, and two children. 
There were two blowpipes (" sumpitan "), several 
choppers and axes, two torch-stands, two iron pans, 
two earthenware pots, two wallets or back-baskets 
(" sentong "), a kind of basket termed by the Malays 
"garing," two plates, two cups, five small tea-cups, 
four earthenware spoons, seven "sarongs," three jackets 
("baju"), three pairs of trousers ("seluar"), four 
waist-bands, four headkerchiefs, one pair of ear- 

' Z. f. E. xxix. 187. - In oriijinal, "shingles'" (.t/V). 

' Borie (ir. Hourien), p. 76. 

192 HABITATIONS i-art ii 

Studs (" SLibang "), three hair-pins, and three copper 
rings. ^ 

Shelters and Trcc-huts. 

Jakun. — Of the tree-huts of the Jakun M. Borie 
says, that however poor might be the huts of the 
Mantra, those of the Jakun were still more primitive ; 
it was their custom to perch their domicile on trees, 
sometimes at a height of from 25 ft. to 35 ft. (7.6 m. to 
10.6 m.) from the ground ; ' most commonly, however, 
they were only about twenty feet from the ground, and 
were ascended by means of a ladder, which even their 
dogs became accustomed to climbing.^ 

On the other hand, some members of the tribe 
would construct their huts at a height of no more than 
3 ft. or 4 ft. (.91 m. to 1.2 m.) from the ground. Like 
the Mantra, they lived, ate, and slept on the main 
floor of the building. At one side of it was the hearth, 
on which a fire was always kept burning to drive away 
mosquitoes, and they used the loft for putting away their 
weapons, their provisions, and their cooking utensils.^ 

Jakun of N. Sembilan. — The best houses of the 
Negri Sembilan Jakun were about the same as the 
poorer and ruder houses belonging to the Jakun of 
Johor, but others were, as described by Newbold, 
rude edifices perched on the top of four high wooden 
poles ; thus elevated for fear of tigers, and entered by 
means of a long ladder, and presenting, when viewed 
through certain holes which served as doors, no very 
satisfactory appearance to the uninitiated. The roofs 
were often thatched with "chucho" leaves. There was 
but one room, in which the whole family was huddled 
together, with their dogs and the bodies of such animals 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. p. 254. and even more. 

- Bigandet (p. 427) says 60 feel •' Borie (tr. l>ouricn), p. 76. ' lb. 

- 

CHAP. Ill SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 193 

as they might have caught. They were interdicted, by 
one of their singular rules, from using any other wood 
than that of the " petaling " and " jambu k'lat " in the 
construction of these huts. The huts were made so as 
to be movable at a moment's warning ; on the appear- 
ance of small -pox, or any other contagious disorder, 
a whole encampment would vanish in the course of a 
single night. The huts were ordinarily situated on 
the steep side of some forest -clad hill, or in some 
sequestered dale, remote from any frequented road or 
footpath, and with little plantations of yams, plantains, 
and maize about them (some also had fields of rice). 
The bones and hair of the animals whose flesh the 
inmates might have been feeding upon strewed 
the ground near them, whilst numbers of dogs — 
generally of a light brown colour — gave timely notice 
of the approach of strangers.' 

Jakun of Malacca. — The Malacca Jakun(or"Benua"), 
characterised by Favre as the most ignorant, were the 
poorest and most miserable, their best houses being 
about the same as the worst of those of the Menang- 
kabaus;- indeed Favre found several families who lived 
without houses at all. These latter, gathering them- 
selves together to the number of five or six families, 
would choose a place in the thickest of the forest, and 
there clear a circle about 25-30 ft. (7.6 m. to 9 m.) in 
diameter ; having cleared this space, they would sur- 
round it with the branches of trees they had just cut ; 
to this they would add other thorny branches collected 
from other parts, and so make a sort of bulwark 
against tigers, bears, and panthers, which were present 
in good numbers. Having done this, they would pro- 
ceed to establish their dwelling in the enclosure thus 

' Newbold, vol. ii. p. 404. - I.e. Inland Malays near Malacca. 

VOL. I O 

194 HABITATIONS 

formed in the following way : each family worked to con- 
struct what would afford them a bed during the night, 
a seat in the day-time, a table for their repasts, and a 
shelter in bad weather ; it consisted of about fifteen 
or twenty thin poles about 6 ft. (1.8 m.) long, which 
were laid the one beside the other, and supported at the 
two extremities by two transverse sticks set upon four 
wooden posts ; the completed structure being about 
two feet in height, four feet in breadth, and six feet in 
length. A dozen leaves of the " chucho " gathered 
together by their ends, and tied up at the head of the 
bed, extended over it and covered it from end to end. 
These beds were placed all round the enclosure, in such 
a position that when all the occupants were sleeping 
every one lay with his feet directed towards the centre 
of the hut, which was purposely left vacant, to serve 
either as a place for cooking, or for any other purpose.' 
Jakun of Johor. — Before Favre himself visited the 
Jakun, report had induced him to consider them (he 
says) as savage as wild beasts, and as sleeping like 
birds on the branches of trees. Even afterwards 
when he questioned the Malays on the subject, some 
of them answered as before ; but this was far from 
being the truth, as there was no Jakun without some 
sort of more or less well-ordered dwelling. Some of 
them indeed had habitations which could scarcely be 
called houses ; but these were very few ; and for the 
most part they had houses. The Jakun of Johor 
built houses in the Malay manner, some of them being 
" fine buildings." Favre found several which were 
much more comfortable than any Malay house he had 
seen in the interior of Johor; such were the houses 

' Translated iny. /. A. vol. ii. pp. 250, 257. For the original, see Favre in 
Ann. P. F. xxii. 301. 

CHAP. Ill SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 195 

of the Penghulu Batin on the Johor river, and that of 
a Jakun chief on the Benut river. These two houses 
were divided into several rooms, some of which were 
for the private accommodation of the Jakun women, 
and the furniture consisted of a few pots, plates, 
several other similar vessels, and a good quantity of 
mats. Other houses were much more ordinary, but 
were yet pretty comfortable and clean, and were 
always divided into two or three rooms at least, and 
furnished with an iron frying-pan for cooking rice in, 
a few coconut-shells for holding water, and baskets 
for carrying food. All these houses were raised about 
6 ft. (1.8 m.) from the ground, and were entered by a 
ladder like the Malay houses.^ 

House Fn r)i itu re — Pillows. 

Jakun (district unspecified). — The Jakun pillow was, 
unlike the others, made of soft wood, probably because 
it could in that case be made without iron tools. It 
was always convex at the sides and underneath, but 
concave at the top, and was often stained red, yellow, 
or black. These colours were obtained, the red from a 
tree-bark, the yellow from a root, and the black from 
a mixture of oil and charcoal. The yellow appears 
from the description to be the Malay " kunyit " or 
turmeric — a well-known root. The particular tree 
which gave the red is not known, although there are 
several trees whose bark gives a red colour. 

It was the log-pillows of the women which were 
most carefully stained. Those of the men were used 
during the day for all sorts of purposes, e.g. as a Hoat 
for a crocodile line, in which case their dark colour 

1 J. T. A. vol. ii. pp. 255, 256. 

196 HABITATIONS i-art ii 

makes them easily visible, and hence soon shows where 
the crocodile has gone after swallowing the bait. The 
above type of pillow, however, is never seen now ; 
stuff-pillows filled with cotton having replaced it.^ 

Houses and House Fttrniture. 

Benua-Jakun of Johop. — According to Logan, 
the houses of the Benua of Johor varied greatly in 
size, neatness, and finish. They were much slighter 
and more primitive than the huts of the Malays, the 
greater part consisting only of one small room raised on 
thin posts made of saplings, with a rough flooring 
of small sticks placed at irregular distances, and some- 
times with such large gaps between them that children 
were liable to fall through. The sides were made of 
bark,- and were generally enclosed all round, but 
sometimes they had only a piece of bark here and 
there, and Logan himself slept in houses three sides 
of which were quite open. A rude and very narnnv 
and steep ladder led to an open doorway. The roof 
was covered with leaves, commonly those of the 
" scrdang," which answer as well as the leaves of the 
nipah palm, but last only half as long. The leaves of 
the" Palas" and other palms were also occasionallyused, 
and Logan was told that even padi-straw was some- 
times collected for thatch. The floor was constructed 
at various heights from 5-9 ft. (1.5 m. to 2.7 m.) above 
the ground. In localities where elephants abounded it 
was generally high. Houses of greater pretensions 
were sometimes to be seen. On the Pau, Logan visited 
a house which, under one roof, had a large hall with an 

{ 

' Z./. £■. xxix. (V.-St.) p. 189. chiefly used for this purpose, both in 

2 The bark of the "kepong" was Johor and by the Berembun tribes. 

CHAP. Ill MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 197 

elevated recess facing the door, where guests sat 
during the day and slept at night. At the sides were 
two large rooms and a long narrow apartment with 
two fireplaces and an array of cooking utensils. An 
open platform, a foot or two below the level of the 
floor, connected the hall with two other bedrooms 
under a separate roof At Paya Sandar, near the 
Sembrong, he visited another large cottage which, in 
addition to bedrooms which were partitioned off, had 
several recesses with curtains of coarse cloth hung before 
them. Sleeping mats and pillows were in every house.' 

Berembun Tribes. — The Berembun tribes had mats, 
but as a rule no pillows or curtains. Coarse Chinese 
curtains were general, but were often lacking, and 
where this was the case the whole family, with the 
guests, slept in one and the same open apartment, and 
were sometimes packed rather closely together. There 
were usually two fireplaces, and these, in the larger 
huts, were sometimes in a separate room, but they 
were in general at one side of the single apartment, 
where the floor was depressed by about a foot.- 

Udai. — According to Newbold, the Udai were said 
rarely to construct huts. They employed the day in 
roaming the forest, and sank down to rest wherever 
fatigue or the shades of night overtook them.'^ 

OR.\N(i Laut or Ska-Jakux. 

Orang- Laut, Sletar. — The Sletar tribe of the Orang 
Laut, though confining their wanderings to a limit of 
some 30 m. sq. (7500 hectares), might still be considered 
highly nomadic. In boats (or "sampans") barely 
sufficient to float their load, they would skirt the man- 

' /. /. A. vol. i. pp. 253, 254. - n>. 3 Newbold, ii. 381. 382. 

198 HABITATIONS part n 

groves, collecting their food from the shores and 
forests as they proceeded, exhausting one spot and 
then searching for another. To one accustomed to 
the comforts and wants of civilisation, their life ap- 
peared to be one of extreme hardship. Huddled up 
in a small boat hardly measuring 20 ft. (6 m.) in 
length, they yet found in it all the domestic comfort 
they were in want of; at one end was the fire- 
place, in the middle the few utensils of which they 
might be in possession, and at the other end beneath 
a network awning (or " kajang "), not exceeding six 
feet in length, was the sleeping apartment of a 
family numbering as many as five or six, together 
with a cat and dog ; under this awning they took 
shelter from the dews and rains of the night, and from 
the heat of the day. Even the Malays in pointing 
out these confined quarters exclaimed "how miserable," 
though of any misery the objects of their commisera- 
tion were not aware. In these same quarters they 
found all their wants supplied ; their children would 
sport on the shore at low water in search of shell-fish ; 
and during high water they might be seen climbing 
the mangrove branches, and dashing from thence into 
the water, with all the life and energy of children of a 
colder clime, at once affording a proof that even they 
were not without their joys.' 

Orang" Laiit, Sabimba. — The Sabimba tribe (of the 
Orang Laut) erected in the forest rude temporary huts, 
the floors of which were on the level of the ground, 
and never remained long in the same spot." 

Orang" Laut, Muka Kuning*. — The tribe consisted of 
about fifty families, who lived scattered in small huts 
beneath the trees of the forest. Their huts were 

^ /. I. A. vol. i. pp. 344*, 345*. ^ Logan in/ /. A. vol. i. p. 297. 

CHAP. Ill MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 199 

formed of a rude platform supported by four posts 
about three feet in height, from which the roof of 
'* serdang " leaves rose at once without any inter- 
vening wall. They were open at both ends, and had 
no ladder or door.^ 

Orang" Laut, Beduanda Kallang-. — Before the British 
obtained possession of Singapore, the Kallang river, 
which may be said to bound the present suburbs of 
Singapore to the eastward, was the immemorial haunt 
of a small tribe who lived in boats, but avoided the 
sea. Upon the cession of Singapore they were re- 
moved by the Temenggong" to the Pulai, where they 
have remained ever since. They formerly consisted 
of about one hundred families, occupying as many 
boats, but these members were reduced to eight by 
the ravages of small-pox. They had so much dread 
of the sea^ that they did not venture to quit the river, 
and constantly proceeded towards the interior before 
night. When a strong breeze arose they would drag 
their boats ashore, but yet they never made huts.' 

Orang" Laut, Akik. — The Akik tribe of the Orang 
Laut, on the other hand, did build houses, erecting 
temporary sheds called " bagan " along the coast, 
whenever they had occasion to go ashore to build boats, 
mend nets, or collect dammar or w^ood-oil, etc. Other- 
wise they resided along with their families in their 
boats for months together, during which they employed 
themselves both in fishing and in collecting Zostera 
(agar-agar) and beche-de-mer (or tripang). They 
frequently made long voyages in their fragile vessels.^ 

• J. I. A. vol. i. p. 337*. ' But see p. 94, n. 9. 

2 I.e. the Raj.i of Johor. * /. I. A. vol. i. p. 300. 

^ Newbold, ii. 413, 414. 

CHAPTER IV. 

Hunting, Trapping, and Fishing. 

Although the aboriginal tribes of the Peninsula do 
not usually resort to the hunting of game until their 
supply of vegetable food begins to give out, and they 
thence begin to feel the pressure of want, yet from the 
moment they set out on the chase they shake off their 
apparent apathy and appear as if transformed, show- 
ing themselves most keen, clever, and determined 
hunters. Their rate of progress through even the 
thickest parts of the jungle has already been noticed. 
In shooting, they are most careful and accurate, seldom 
wasting an arrow or a dart, and simple as their 
weapons may appear to us, they are able with these 
imperfect means to attack and destroy both the elephant 
and the tiger. Their powers of scent, sight, and 
hearing are very fully developed ; they are credited 
with the power of tracking snakes (which, however, 
have a fairly strong odour) by their smell alone. 
Their knowledge of the movements of game amounts 
to intuition ; they know better than any one the rare 
hot springs and " salt licks " where the wild beasts 
congregate, the small cleared patches on lonely 
mountain-heights where the argus pheasant " dances," 
or the monkey-king hunts for grubs, and the far-off 

GENERAL REMARKS 201 

forest -pools, which are the drinking -places of the 
birds. ^ 

The weapons of these tribes consist chiefly of the 
blowpipe and the bow, the former being the weapon 
of the Sakai, the latter that of the Semang. To these 
may be added a rude kind of adze and a jungle-knife 
or chopper, spears of palm-wood or bamboo, which 
are replaced by iron-bladed weapons among the 
Malayising tribes. Of the use of the " squailer " or 
throwing-stick, there is not much recorded, although 
these are undoubtedly used, especially by the Jakun 
tribes of the south, Throwing-sticks of hard wood, 
some of which are sharpened at one end only whilst 
others are sharpened at both, are also used by the 
Peninsular Malays, by whom they are called (as by 
the Jakun) "seligi."" They are, moreover, I believe, 
much used by other races of Indo-China. 

In trapping and fishing they are particularly 
expert — some of their traps having the simplicity of 

' of their extraordinary skill in No. 2, pp. 212, 213). 
jungle travelling, M.-Maclay wrote as ' Capt. J. Bradley mentions seeing 

follows : — Knowing the direction in on several occasions in the I'enin- 

which he was to go and keeping it in sula what he evidently look for 

mind, the Sakai would try to find out " squailers,"' and though he gives no 

the thinner patches in the jungle. details of locality, his evidence is very 

The sajilings which he could not avoid circumstantial. Thus in one place he 

he would bend aside with his hand says that outside the tree-huts which 

without breaking them ; the larger ones they discovered, " a number of spears 

he would stoop or creep underneath. were laid among the branches of the 

He would never tear or cut away trees." These consisted merely of 

a liana or creeper which hung in his "long sticks of hard wood, sharpened 

way, preferring to hold it in his hand at both ends"; in other words, the 

and crawl underneath it ; and in spite Malay " scligi " (J. Bradley, Travel 

of this constant stooping and crawling, and Sporty p. 298). In yet another 

circumventing and circuitous running, place he mentions that he found, "in 

he would advance with great rapidity. the interior of one of the huts, a 

In following, not without trouble, number of short thick sticks intended 

these real men of the jungle, M.-Maclay apparently as missile weapons. Several 

had to confess that, in s]Mte of his of them had traces of blood and 

long experience and practice in these feathers ailhering to them, as if they 

things, he had found his master in a had been used for knocking down 

fifteen -year-old boy (y. A'. A. S., S.B., birds" (id. p. 330). 

HUNTING, TRAPPING, AND FISHING i-art ii 

genius. Snares are perhaps the most commonly- 
employed by them, often differing little from those in 
use among the Malays — in which case it is hard to 
say which way the borrowing went. An example of 
this is to be seen in the Semang rat-trap, which 
appears to be exactly identical with a bamboo rat-trap 
commonly used by the Malays {e.g. in Selangor and 
Perak). So, too, many of the bird -snares and 
monkey-traps employed by the Jakun are hardly to 
be distinguished from those used by the Malays, 
although in a few instances, such as in their method 
of catching fish by splashing or dabbling for them, and 
a peculiar method of entrapping the argus pheasant, 
the Langat Malays themselves informed me, probably 
not without good reason, that they had picked up 
these ideas from the Jakun in the same district. 

I. — Semang. 
Hunting and Trapping. 
Semang" (locality unspecified). — The Semang 
handle both the bow and the spear with wonderful 
dexterity, and destroy even the largest and most 
powerful animals (such as the elephant and rhinoceros) 
by ingenious contrivances. They are also very 
expert with the blowpipe, and poison their darts 
with a deadly poison called Ipoh, procured from 
the juice of various trees. They seldom suffer from 
beasts of prey, as they are extremely sharp-sighted, 
and as agile in climbing trees as the monkeys. Their 
method of destroying elephants, in order to procure 
their tlesh or their tusks, is both extraordinary and 
ingenious. When they have perceived any elephants 
ascending a hill, they lie in wait in small parties of two 
or three, and as the animals descend again (which 

NEGRITOS 203 

they usually do at a slow pace, plucking the branches 
as they move along), while the hind legs are lifted up, 
the Semang cautiously approach them from behind, 
and drive, by main force, a sharp-pointed and fire- 
hardened splinter of bamboo or palm-wood (" nibong "), 
which has been touched with poison, into the sole of 
their victim's foot.^ In this way they effectually lame 
him, and not unfrequently bring him down, when the 
whole party rush upon him with spears and sharp- 
pointed sticks and soon despatch him. The 
rhinoceros they obtain with yet greater ease. This 
animal, which is of solitary habits, is frequently found 
wallowing in marshy places, with its whole body 
immersed in the mud and only part of its head 
visible. The Malays call such an animal " badak tapa," 
or the "recluse" rhinoceros. Especially towards the 
close of the rainy season they are said to seek places 
in which to bury themselves in this manner, and upon 
the dry weather setting in, through the powerful effect 
of the vertical sun, the mud which surrounds them 
forms a hard thick crust, in which the rhinoceros is 
imbedded, and from which it cannot effect its escape 
without some difficulty and exertion. The Semang 
thereupon collect large quantities of combustible 
materials which they convey to the spot, and quietly 
approaching, quickly build up over the animal an im- 
mense fire, which, being well fed with fresh hiel. 
soon completes his destruction, and renders him in 
a fit state to make a meal of The projecting horn 
on the snout is carefully preserved, as it is supposed 

* J. /. A. vol. iv. p. 426 ; (■/'. i}if)a, p. man who . . . would drive a larqe-bladed 

207,//. I. And c|). also Ridley, J/a///wa/i .spear between the hind les^s [of the 

of the Malay Peninsula, \>. id},: "The elephant] into the abdomen, which 

Aboritjines known as Sakai sometimes wound w.assoon after fatal, and trackint; 

hunt it. There was recently living a the animal he would secure the ivory." 

204 HUNTING, TRAPPING, AND FISHING i'art n 

to be possessed of medicinal properties, and is highly 
prized by the Malays, to whom the Semang generally 
barter it for tobacco and similar commodities.^ 

Kedah Semang". — I had, unfortunately, while in the 
Semang country no opportunity of testing in the 
capacity of an eye-witness the remarkable account of 
their methods of big-game hunting as related above by 
Marsden. The weighty authority of the latter, how- 
ever, should strongly support his account, even if we 
did not know that in other parts of the world, and 
even of the Malay Peninsula itself, methods quite as 
ingenious have been recorded.- The Semang of 
Kedah, in addition to the bow, spear, and blowpipe, 
make use of all sorts of ingenious traps, pitfalls, and 
snares to secure their quarry. Birds are caught by 
means of a species of bird-lime manufactured from the 
viscid sap of some of the numerous " ficus " or 
" gutta " trees that abound in the forest, and even 
rats are caught by means of a peculiar snare which 
resembles, however, in principle, a rat-trap commonly 
used by the Malays. For hunting purposes a kind of 
semi-wild reddish-coloured dog is used, but it does 
not appear to have much pace. 

I may add that the Semang do not appear as a rule 
to keep the domestic cat, but they not unfrequently 
make pets of young monkeys {e.g. the " lotong "), 
which, it is alleged, are sometimes brought up by hand. 

Perak Semang*. — Mr. L. Wray wTites me (in a 
letter dated November 12, 1903) that the Semang of 
Upper Perak kill big game by means of their bows 
and arrows, the latter being poisoned, and having 
barbed heads and detachable fore-shafts. 

* J. I. A. vol. iv. pp. 426, 427. not credit this account, which 

* Mr. Wray informs me that he does sujiported by Logan and others. 

NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 205 

Fishing. 

Kedah Semang-. — The wilder Negrito tribes who 
live on high mountains naturally depend little upon 
fish as an article of diet. Those who dwell near 
rivers, however {e.g. the Semang of Siong), no less 
naturally make use of fish for purposes of food, and 
though I believe they usually eat them in a fresh 
condition, they certainly do not always do so, as is 
stated of the Sakai by Hale.' The simplest instru- 
ment that they employ for this purpose is a kind of 
small basket-work scoop, which is made of bamboo, 
and is used for catching small fry in pools or sluggish 
waters, or in any place from which their retreat is cut 
off. For angling the Semang employ the rod and 
line, the rod being usually a straight unpeeled stick 
about six feet in length, and the line — which is usually 
not much longer than the rod — being made from 
twisted strands of tree-bark i^Artocarpiis). The line 
is always made fast to the tip of the rod, and no reel 
is used, though the use of it is well known to the 
neighbouring Malays. The hooks are, as a rule. 
roughly manufactured from bits of brass or other wire. 

In addition to the foregoing the Semang are 
adepts in the use of fish - spears and harpoons, by 
means of which they kill or capture quite large fish 
and tortoises. The harpoon used by the Semang at 
Siong was of very great length (about ten feet), and 
was made of the leaf-stem of a kind of large palm. 
The river being shallow at this spot, and full of 
obstacles, the Semang who was to act as harpooner 

* Cp. De M. viii. 285: "Beside the the coast, whence they obtain salt, 
river Krian the Semang frequently de- nipah leaves, shell-fish, andyiVi which 
scend to the plain, on their way to they dry. ^^ Cp. I.^ Homme, ii. 716. 

2o6 HUNTING, TRAPPING, AND FISHING part ii 

would take his stand in concealment behind a fallen 
tree-trunk or snag, and there wait whilst another 
Semang drove the fish upstream towards him. The 
fish in endeavouring to conceal themselves from the 
latter would naturally make for the snag or tree-trunk, 
thus affording his opportunity to the harpooner. 

The harpoon-head was of iron, obtained from the 
local Malays, and the shaft was the leaf- stem of a 
palm called " ranggam." 

The temporary poisoning of the stream by means 
of the root of Derris clliptica (Mai. "tuba"), which 
is a general method of fishing among the Peninsular 
tribes, may also have been practised by the Semang 
at Siong, but I neither saw nor heard anything of it 
during my stay, any more than I did of the use of the 
casting-net. 

II. — Sakai. 

Hunting and Trapping. 

Perak Sakai. — Their most important weapon is 
the bamboo blowpipe, a full account of which will 
appear in a later chapter. By means of the poisoned 
darts blown through this tube, both birds and monkeys 
and other small animals are brought down from quite 
high trees at distances varying up to 60 yds. {55 m.).^ 

Mr. L. Wray informs me that he knew of a 
well-authenticated case of a leopard being killed near 
Gopeng in Perak by a Sakai with a blowpipe. 

To kill an elephant the Sakai stalk it from behind 

1 "Almost their only weapon consists couple of minutes. They say that if 

of a blowpipe about seven or eight feet they can hit an elephant or a pig 

long, from which they shoot poisoned in the eye, a couple of darts will do 

darts with great accuracy as much as the job" (J. R.A.S., S.B., No. 4, 

thirty or even forty paces (23 m. to p. 29). Cp. De M. ii. 649 seg. for 

30 m. ); a single dart is sufficient further notes on hunting and 

to bring a bird or monkey down in a trapping. 

CerKiid. 

Sakai with Tkap, I'kkak — 1)()V kxii.aimm; ii^ Ai imn. 

Vcl. I. /. ;o6. 

Sakai P.ov watching Rat-Trai', Gltnong Ubi, Ui.u Slim. 

w^mm 

SAK.A1 U<JV \\ATLlil.\(. I'iG-lKAl' ^UITll Sl'Kl.NG-SPF.AR ), ULU SLIM. 
ft)/. I. p. 207. 

SAKAJ OF PERAK 207 

until they are able to drive a sharp-pointed stake into 
the sole of its foot as the latter is lifted in walking. 
The elephant being thus effectually lamed, and un- 
able to pursue them, they shoot their poisoned darts 
into him from behind a tree (preferably into his eye), 
and thus despatch him. They are no less ready to 
attack the tiger and the rhinoceros.' 

The Sakai of Perak, like the Semang, not un- 
frequently employ dogs in the chase, a custom which 
Mohammedanism has, no doubt (to some extent, though 
not entirely), brought into disuse among the Malays. - 

The traps and snares used by the Sakai are of 
various sorts and sizes, one of the commonest being 
the " b'lantek " or spring-spear trap, of which there is 
a very good account in Hale.^ This trap is used for 
killing game of almost any size, from the rhinoceros 
to the porcupine. When used for large game the 
spear is either manufactured from a single piece of 
bamboo, or has its shaft made of a hard piece of wood, 
with a bamboo spike or blade firmly bound to its 
lower extremity. In either case the point of the 
weapon is generally fire-hardened. For small mammals 
a hardwood shaft, the end of which is similarly 
sharpened and fire-hardened, is employed. 

The "b'lantek" described by Mr. Hale is one of the 
forms of a Malay spear-trap called " b'lantek parap," 
or the " slapping spring-spear." The different parts of 
it are as follows : — 

^ De la Croix, p. 335. De M. held in a bent position by a bit of 

{L'Honimc, ii. 651) questions the truth jungle cortl, which at a touch releases 

of this account. the spring, when the spike, which is 

" /. I. A. vol. iv. p. 429. eight to ten inches long, is buried in 

^ Hale, pp. 289, 290. Cp. "They the animal. The existence of these 

generally get pigs and deer by an in- spring traps makes it advisable always 

genious wooden spring made of the to be accompanied by a Sakai guide 

branch of a tree with a bamboo spike when moving about their countrj-." — 

fixed to the end of it ; the spring is /. K. A. S., S. B., No. 4, p. 29. 

2o8 HUNTING, TRAPPING, AND FISHING part ii 

(i) A powerfully elastic and tapering rod or 
" spring " is set horizontally, with its thicker end 
passed between two trees, the butt-end of the spear- 
shaft (2) being securely lashed to its thinner extremity. 

Two strong uprights (3) and (4), firmly planted 
in the ground at right angles to the big spring, are 
then connected by a stout cross-bar (5) and two pairs 
of crossed sticks (6) and (7), the latter being planted 
in the ground in a line with the two uprights. 

A cord is then made fast to the outside pair of 
cross-sticks (7) and attached to a rattan ring (8), 
which slides along the cross-bar (5) till the cord 
connecting it with (7) is drawn taut ; the smaller end of 
the big spring is drawn back till it touches the anterior 
upright (3), and set by means of a strong bamboo 
noose (9), which is held by a small spring (9), the 
other end of which is connected with the rattan ring 
(8) already referred to. 

Any animal which passes along the path between 
the two sets of cross-sticks (6) and (7) and touches 
the taut cord, in so doing pulls away the rattan ring 
(8) and releases the small spring (9), which flies up, 
releasing the big spring in its turn, the result being 
that the spear is driven, with all the force that the 
spring is capable of giving it, straight towards the 
animal that touched the cord. 

The next kind of spring-trap, referred to by Hale, 
is one in which the big wooden spring is made to 
strike the butt-end of a spear, causing it to fly like 
an arrow across the track of any passing animal. 

This spring-trap is undoubtedly the " b'lantek 
paut," or "draw-back spring-spear," of the Peninsular 
Malays. 

The third kind of spring-trap, which is described 

V. ,. 

I J 3 4 /'(■ Morgatt. 

Types ov Im-sii-Hooks (Natural and Aktifictal). 

1. Natural liooUs of the rattan or climbing cane 
{(Salajinis). 

2. Single Malay lish-hook (iron). 

3. Double hook of rattan used by aborigines. 

4. Single hook of rattan used by aborigines. 

f y^ ^ S^ yt^ '.■*■;■ 

:;c^^ 

De Morgan. 

Sakai Fish-Dam, for catching Fish in the Kinta 
River at Lubo' Kei.ah ("Lobou Kela"). 

See p. 211. 
{iV.B. The lettering is not explained in De Morgan's te.\t.) 

V'oi. I. />. 209. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 209 

as being worked on the bow principle, is the Malay 
" b'lantek terbang," or " Hying spring-spear." 

I do not, however, give Hale's description, as he 
states that the Sakai professed " utter ignorance " of it.' 

All three forms of the spring-spear-trap described 
are, however, certainly known to and used by the 
Peninsular Malays, though it may be an open question 
whether the Malays or the aboriginal tribes were the 
first to employ it. 

Of ordinary snares or springes (for animals and 
birds) Hale says that they are made of rattan by the 
Sakai and variously set ; the most usual form being 
a simple rattan noose set taut by a stout wooden 
spring : with these they catch rats, squirrels, and 
animals as large as the porcupine. - 

Bird-lime is also employed. The sap of a " gutta- 
tree " is boiled down until it attains the required 
consistency, when it is applied to a number of thin 
slips of rattan, these slips being thickly planted over 
the ground to catch small birds : of some gregarious 
sorts, like the little padi-bird, great numbers are 
taken.' 

Fishing. 

Perak Sakai. — Of the Kinta Sakai Hale says that 
they do not trouble themselves about fishing until 
their vegetable food is on the point of exhaustion. 
They live on the mountain -tops, and do not go 
down to the big rivers for fish unless forced to do so 
by scarcity of food.^ Once in about three months 
they will make a journey to one of the big rivers, and 
there, by means of fish-dams,^ etc., obtain a large 

' Hale, p. 290. - //'. ' lb. p. 291. ^ lb, 

'" Cp. Ue M. in L'H. ii. 653. 

VOL. I I' 

2IO HUNTING, TRAPPING, AND FISHING part ii 

supply of fish. They do not, however, understand 
the drying of it, and hence even the biggest haul 
only means a few days' feasting, while the fish 
remains good.^ 

De Morgan states that fishing with rod and line 
{lignes volantes) is practised by the Sakai, a very 
primitive form of hook being employed, which consists 
of the " curved-back " thorns of certain kinds of rattan 
[Calaums), the line being made from strands of tree- 
bark (the fibres of Artocarpus)? 

De la Croix says they are very clever at making 
'' bow-nets," etc., and that he and Mr. Brooke Low, 
in ascending S. Kerbu, saw many small Sakai fishing- 
huts on the banks.^ 

The Sakai also make much use of " very beautiful 
casting-nets," manufacturing the twine of which the 
net is made from the inner bark of a creeper, by 
twisting two strands together on the thigh in the 
usual way. These nets are weighted, according to 
Hale, with chains manufactured from tin, which are 
obtained from the Malays, and attached to the outside 
edge of the net.^ 

De Morgan, however, saw some which were of still 
simpler construction, and weighted with stones,'^ the 
twine of which the net was made being manufactured 
from strands of bark of the " t'rap," or wild bread- 
fruit tree {Artocarpus). 

^ Hale, p. 291. carrying the worms that they use as 

- L'Homme, ii. 653, 655 ; but, on bait. Cp. VHomme, ii. 619 (illustra- 

the other hand, Hale (p. 291) states tion). 

that the Sakai "do not appear to ^ De la Croix, pp. 322-325; 

know anything of angling." De M. U Homme, ii. 655. 

{EH. ii. 655) also speaks of their em- * Hale, p. 291. 

ploying small bamboo receptacles for '' De M. vii. 418. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 

Fisk-dams, Weirs, and Traps. 

The Sakai also commonly take fish by means of 
fish-dams, weirs, and traps (all of which are con- 
structed very closely in accordance with the methods 
of the Malays, from whom they are most probably 
to a great extent copied. In the case of a wide 
shallow river, a V-shaped fish-fence is set across the 
stream, and a fish-trap or " weel " set at the point of the 
V (which fronts upstream). Deep narrow streams 
are fenced or dammed across, and the weels set in 
the opening.^ 

Hale describes in detail (p. 291) an extensive 
fish-trap which he saw in the Kinta river, where it 
was about sixty yards (54 m.) wide and rather swift. 

His description is as follows : — 

A is a grating of bamboo, B a platform to catch 
the fish, C and D are two rows of strong posts. This 
grating is built half-way across the river (30 yards ?), 
and being strongly made will last a year. During 
flood-time many fish are taken, but most during the 
driest season of the year, when the second half of 
the river is dammed and all the water made to pass 
through the grating. 

In order to assist this latter process the scrapings 
of a certain poisonous jungle-root ^ is thrown into the 
river some distance above the grating, the effect of 
which is to drive the fish down half-stupefied. Several 
hundred fish (many of a large size) are often taken by 
this means. 

^ De Morgan relates how he passed for catching fish (De Morgan, viii. i6o). 
a night in a deserted (Sakai) fishing- ^ Doubtless Derris elUptica, called 

hut which fronted a huge dam (then "tuba" by the Malays; v. Wray, 

half demolished) which had been used Per. Mus. N., No. I. pp. 19-23. 

212 HUNTING, TRAPPING, AND FISHING i-aktu 

Htmting and Trapping. 

Selangor Sakai. — The second form of spring-spear 
trap ("b'lantek paut ") appears to be identical with 
that described as the " p'lantek " by Letessier, among 
the Sakai of the Kuala Lumpor district. 

Among the snares used by these Sakai, the " p'lan- 
tek " (he says) is the commonest and most dangerous,^ 
being composed of a strong springy rod furnished 
with a bamboo dart, which is intended to pierce any 
animal of sufficient size that disengages (in passing) 
the short cord keeping the rod in position. Before 
crossing the felled trees (which are always in the 
proximity of a Sakai habitation) for the first time, it is 
just as well to ascertain that there are no traps of this 
description along the route. ^ 

In a graphic account of some Sakai tribes of the 
Ulu Langat district, the late Mr. J. A. G. Camp- 
bell remarked that it was very amusing to go out 
hunting with the Sakai in the jungle, and to see 
the stealthy way in which they went through it with- 
out breaking a twig. Although their pace seemed 
slow, it was very difficult to keep up with them, and 
they seldom failed to bring home some bird or beast 
for their evening meal. No other race in the Malay 
Peninsula could be compared with them in respect of 
their wonderful knowledge of the jungle. They were 
absolutely at home in it, and did not mind sleeping 
out in the rain either under a tree or up among its 
branches. They had a wonderful instinctive knowledge 
of the presence of animals, and could tell, when nobody 
else could, of a bird or animal moving at a great 
distance. They were even believed to be able to track 

' Letessier, p. lOO. 

/■(>/. /. /. 212. 

''• . V.V, ^ ^ 

— o 

^^eswj.i 

'\ ; 

'^^ -ifT^^^ -^ 

■] 

CHAP. IV SAKAI OF S ELAN GO R 213 

snakes by their smell, and could at all events catch 
any number of them without the slightest difficulty. 
The Sakai of Ulu Langat made a good deal of money 
by selling animals and birds to the jNIalays. They 
hunt with blowpipes, spears, and knives ; but some 
have bought guns, which many of them use in common. 
They seldom hope to get more than two deer a year 
each, but count on about fifteen pigs. They have 
many modes of trapping game, a favourite one being 
to make game-fences (made of sticks planted in rows 
with palm-leaves tied across them), some of which are 
500 yards (450 m.) long, and then to drive the game 
against this fence, and there shoot or spear it. They 
have many other snares which are well known to the 
Malays. They are not particularly brave. Many of 
them who have guns are not brave enough to hunt the 
elephant or bison, and are not ashamed to tell you so.^ 

Fishing. 

Selangor Sakai. — The method of fishing which 
the Sakai consider the most important from their 
point of view, since it is also the most effective, 
consists in temporarily poisoning small streams and 
rivers in the manner already described, by means of 
the powerful sap obtained from the pounded root of a 
plant which the Malays call " tuba" [Dcn'is clliptica). 
By means of this poison which is thrown into the river 
fish are stupefied in large numbers,- and may then be 
caught by hand or transfixed with a sort of harpoon or 
gaff made for the purpose. 

' J. A. G. Cimpbell, p. 243. whether this method of fish-ix)ison- 

- The fish slnpefied by means of ing is borrowed from the M.ilays, 

" tuba" are in no case, I believe, l<illed or vice versa. It is in any case a 

outright by the poison. I should add, custom of exceedingly wide distribu- 

perhaps, that it is impossible to tell tion. 

214 HUNTING, TRAPPING, AND FISHING part ii 

Thefollowingdescriptionofoneof the Fishing Feasts 
of the Selangor Sakai, which was witnessed by the 
writer in the interior of Selangor (Uki Langat district), 
is taken from the account ' of Father Letessier. He 
writes that the fishing at Ulu Beranang, at which he 
was present, was a great festivity. Installed upon the 
bank under a few large leaves of the " bertam " palm, 
which were made to lean obliquely against a horizontal 
pole nine feet from the ground, each family at evening 
counted the fish caught, and dried them upon a large 
wooden grill built over the fire, where a bountiful 
supper was cooking. 

The children, one above the other, holding on to 
the giant creepers which hung from the great trees, 
swung themselves from bank to bank or played in the 
water, in spite of their mothers, who feared that the 
poison might affect their little ones. Indeed, one of 
them suffered a long time from colic from having 
drunk the water too soon. 

After supper, which was served on plates of leaves, 
without spoon or fork, the children recommenced their 
games, whilst their elders smoked cigarettes, stretched 
at ease upon branches or mats. The women, who had 
done nothing during the day, continued drying the 
fish far into the night. 

Ill, — Jakun. 

Hunting and Trapping. 

Blandas. — The Blandas of K. Langat, like most 
of the tribes referred to, will eat everything that they 
can catch, and are very expert in the use of the blow- 
pipe, and employ dogs to discover their quarry. They 

1 Lelessier, j). loo. 

M'Gregor. 

SakaI IISHIXU AT L'lu Kam, Ulu Selangor. 

MHhrg, 

Aii(>Ki(;iNK> FiMiiNr, w V\x Ki am,. 
Women in slreani ilrivinu the lish, olil man on the bank with hanil-nel (" bintoh "). 

I'o!. /. /. 21 

•^-M ^ 

**P 

t V_/' '. S^ 

1 

.*H 

■^ 

Two SAKAI W'dMI.N with Pi-.T IfMJLE-l'KJS. Ulu Sl.lM, I'i;u.\K. 

SaKAI WoMKN AM) ('mi.DKKN Wnil I'Kr JlN(;i.i:-l'|(:. 
The children's turn (notice face-paint of woman feeding child). Ulu Slim, Perak. 

;V. /. A 215- 

CHAP. IV SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 215 

do not, however, in hunting trust merely to their own 
skill, or to that of their dogs, as the following charm, 
which was given me by them as a charm of great 
efficacy in bringing down monkeys, will show : — 

The Monkey -Charm. 

Charm the souls of apes and monkeys, 
Souls o( lototig, k'ra, and wa'wd'. 
Come ye down — or feed the wild beasts ! 
Come ye down — or feed the bear-cat I 
'Tis the "lemp'rai" stem up-tippling, 
'Tis the " lemp'rai " stem down-settling, 
'Tis the " kumiiang " stem down-settling I 
Forward then, at random stopping — 
Though one handmaid be short measure — 
Come ye down, with souls enchanted. 
Monkeys, by my spells enchanted. 
Lo, it is no dew descending. 
But the tears of apes and monkeys, 
Tears of lotong, kWa, and wo'iva^. 
Maidens, 'tis your souls descending. 
Deem ye me some tree-stump walking, 
Deem ye me the lightning's shadow. 
Though your eyes may see me walking, 
Walk I hid, as one smoke-shrouded. 
Though I pass, may ye not see me. 

The Blandas also occasionally keep wild animals 
for future consumption, though they cannot exactly be 
said to fatten them. I have seen a young wild pig 
kept in this way, a strong cage being built for it 
underneath the raised hut -floor of a Blandas man 
who lived on the river Langat. 

Besisi. — The Besisi of K. Langat, in hunting, still 
as a rule use the blowpipe, though in many places it 
is fast becoming obsolete. Most of them also are 
well provided with spears and jungle-knives, but in a 
good many cases one meets with men who hav<i 
managed to barter or buy an old Tower musket from 
the Malays, and this gun is then used in common by 
all members of the tribe. 

The Besisi, like most of the aborigines, are won- 

2i6 HUNTING, TRAPPING, AND FISHING 

derful woodsmen. When I was at Sepang they 
frequently brought me in wild animals and birds that 
they had caught alive, among them being specimens 
of the Malayan partridge (" sorong lanting "), the 
" bertam " bird, the argus pheasant or " kuau," various 
kinds of chevrotain, and even, on one occasion, the 
rare and curious mammal called Gyuiiiura ("pijat- 
pijat "). So, too, in his account of the wild tribes 
of the same district, Mr J. A. G. Campbell re- 
marked that the Besisi (" Orang Laut ") used to 
bring him as many as ten "mangrove" snakes 
(" ular bakau ") at a time, telling him they had caught 
them all that morning. Monkeys, birds, tiger-cats, 
etc., were sold by them for very small sums, and a 
monkey that would bring ten dollars in Singapore 
could be bought from them for twenty cents. ^ 

In addition to spring-traps, such as those already 
described, many kinds of fall-traps and springes ot 
various kinds, as well as game-fences, were used by 
the Besisi for trapping game of different sorts and sizes. 

For bird-lime many sorts of trees possessing a 
viscous sap were resorted to and the sap mixed in 
various proportions, the liquid being boiled down if 
necessary till a proper consistency is reached. The 
sticky gum thus obtained was applied to the ends of a 
number of short rattan sticks or slivers (from i ft. to 
2 ft. in length), and these as a rule were set in notches 
cut for the purpose with a jungle-knife in the branches 
oi" the trees to which the birds resorted. 

The bird-lime was usually kept (by the Besisi) in 
small bamboo tubes, which were corked with a section 
of the leaf-stalk of a " bertam " palm. 

In order to capture the argus pheasant the folio w- 

' J. A. G. Campbell, p. 243. 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 217 

ing very peculiar though cruel method was pursued. 
The argus pheasant, which is a most beautiful bird, 
is exceedingly shy of man, and lives, as a rule, a long 
way off in the hilly part of the forest, where it may 
be heard calling, and sometimes (but very rarely) can 
be seen flying overhead. 

Here and there these birds have regular dancing- 
grounds which they clear of weeds and small shrubs by 
seizing the roots with their beaks and twisting their 
necks round the stems so as to drag the latter up out 
of the ground. 

The Besisi of Kuala Langat, being aware of this 
habit, search for one of their dancing-grounds and 
plant in the centre of it one or two long and flexible 
slivers of bamboo, bent double so as to form a stifl 
kind of noose standing upright in the ground. The 
edges of these slivers are as sharp as knives, and 
when the birds twist their necks in the nooses (mis- 
taking them, it is alleged, for newly-grown weeds) 
and try to drag them out of the ground, they generally 
kill or choke themselves in doing so.' 

Fishiti!^. 

Besisi. — The Besisi of Langat (as their claim to be 
Orang Laut might lead us to expect) are very expert 
fishers. Their bait.' for the most part, consists of 
worms, especially the sand-worm ("pumpun sarang "), 
which they stalk and very adroitly dig up out of the 
sand before it has time to bury itself too deeply. 
They commonly also use, however, the " pumpun 

' Often, however, they are taken markable process here described, is 
alive in one of the many kinds of bird- contained in the Museum at Cambridge, 
traps used by the Jakun. A model, - It is described by Klinkert as re- 
made at my request by a member of sembling a millipede, as living in the 
the tribe in order to exhibit the re- sand, and as affording luit for fish. 

2i8 HUNTING, TRAPPING, AND FISHING 

ruat," which is a mud-worm of immense length (some 
I have seen measured upwards of three feet) Hving 
deep down in the mud of the mangrove swamps. A 
good deal, perhaps most, of the angling is done by the 
women, whom I have often seen fishing in this way, 
and who become very clever in the use of the rod.' 

A somewhat unusual method of rod-fishing in vogue 
among some of the Besisi, as well as among some 
of the local Malays (who are said to have learnt it from 
them), is extremely curious. The fisherman goes out 
in a dug-out canoe, at about half- tide, and paddles 
gently in and out among the mangrove -roots in the 
little salt-water creeks of the tidal rivers. On 
reaching a suitable spot he starts angling, using an 
extremely short rod (not above two feet long), and a 
line not more than three feet long at the most. A 
novice might suppose that the only chance of getting 
a bite at all under such circumstances from anything 
better than a gudgeon would be to remain as silent and 
still as the grave. The Besisi, however, knowing his 
fish better, splashes the tip of his rod vigorously in 
the water. This has the effect of making his quarry 
(big mud -fish such as the " sembilang " - and the 
" b'lukang ") go for the bait with a greedy rush which 
results in their immediate capture. The fisherman, 
however, cannot be too careful, as the " sembilang " 
is furnished with very poisonous spines (one at each 
side and one on its back), and I have known these to 
cause painful wounds, the effects of which continued 
to be felt for several days afterwards. 

1 Mr. G. C. Bellamy says : " Some throw the bait similarly to fly-fishing, 

of the women are expert fishers, and whipping the fish out with great skill " 

make use of a light rod and a line of (Bellamy, p. 229). 
about the same length as the rod. - Plotosus canias, etc. The " b'lu- 

They stand in the shallow water and kang " is unidentified. 

^ 'i^if '*^^ 

Hunting Paktv with Blowpipes, Bukit Pklai., Kepong, Selangor. 

P'ol. I. />. 219. 

SAVAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 219 

I may add that I myself have caught " sembilang " 
by the method described. The Malays call it 
" kachau " or " mengachau sembilang " (" splashing " or 
"dabbling for sembilang"), and it is thought that the 
fish take the splashing for that made by the crabs on 
which they feed, and which may often be seen flitting, 
like small violet will-o'-the-wisps, along the edge of 
the tidal waters, among the forked mangrove-roots. 

The Besisi also make use of the Malay casting-net 
("jala"), as well asof many kinds offish-traps, which they 
frequently set in dams or fish-fences. They also use 
the fish-spear, but the method of poisoning fish by 
means of "tuba" {De7'ris elliptica) is now little practised 
by them, as it is discountenanced by the Government, 

In addition to fish, the Besisi (as Orang Laut) live 
largely on shell-fish, which they collect (for the most 
part by hand) on the sandy flats of the foreshore in 
the Kuala Langat district. I have frequently seen them 
collecting cockles (" krang "), " kcp^ih," " lokan," and 
mussels("kijing"), whose breathing-holes are plentifully 
visible in places where the sand and the mud-flats 
meet and the Berembang and Api-api trees cover the 
surface with their network of surface-roots and pointed 
suckers. The discarded shells are thrown away near 
the houses, and diminutive kitchen-middens are thus 
occasionally to be seen in the actual process of formation. 

Hunting- and Trapping. 

Mantra. — The Mantra use poisoned bow -traps 
as well as darts for killing their game. A springy 
rod is planted in the ground with a short spike fixed 
to it near the point, at right angles. The spike is 
poisoned with " ipoh," and the point lightly pinned to 
the ground with a wooden fork, so that the slightest 

220 HUNTING, TRAPPING, AND FISHING 

touch may release it, and the spike strike its intended 
victim.' 

Benua-Jakim (of Johor). — According to Logan, 
it was in the forest that the Benua sought their 
principal supplies of animal food. Their favourite 
dish — the llesh of the wild hog— was also that which 
was procurable in the greatest abundance. Logan 
passed several tracts which seemed literally to swarm 
with the hog. For miles together the banks of some 
streams were covered with the prints of their feet, 
and in some moist hollows their tracks were so abun- 
dant that it was impossible to recognise the path, and 
his guide repeatedly lost it. In other districts, again, 
they seemed to be less numerous. They were par- 
ticularly plentiful in some places to the southward of 
the Lulumut chain, and the men of the settlement 
called Durian-tree Village (Kampong Pohun Durian), 
on the river Pines, a few days before his arrival there, 
had killed fifteen. They were killed by the help of 
dogs and spears. Of the two varieties of dog which 
the Benua possessed, the larger one was the proper 
hunter of the hog, although the smaller used also to be 
joined in the chase. Their spear- head, which was of 
native fabrication, was broad and very thin towards 
the edges. It was set on a shaft about eight feet 
long, and formed a light and serviceable weapon, 
without which the Benua never ventured into the 
forest or went upon a journey, and in the efficiency of 
which, for defensive and offensive purposes, he had 
much confidence. Whenever he entered a house his 
spear was stuck, with the head upwards, into the 
ground in front of the doorway.' 

^ Geiger, p. 29. 
- /. I. A. vol. i. pp. 256, 257 ; cp. ih. vol. ii. p. 25S. 

' V 

^^Wt^^ 

M'Grcgor. 
AkI N Wu.MI.N (L'LU KLAU, PAHANG), WITH HUNTING DOG IN FOREGKOUND. 

Voi. I. p. 221. 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF JOB OR 

Elsewhere we are told by the same writer that next 
to the hog, deer were most sought. The roe-deer 
(" kijang ") and the sambhur (" rusa ") were chased by 
the larger variety of dog, and the diminutive mouse-deer 
(" p'landok ") by the small variety, which was generally 
reserved for that purpose. It had some resemblance 
to the Bengal fox, and appeared to be allied to the 
Chinese breed. The most common mode of hunting 
the mouse-deer was to send the dog into the jungle 
on the banks of a stream, the Benua either slowly 
floating down the current, or pulling against it in his 
canoe, and cheering on and guiding the dog with his 
deep, long-drawn, monotonous cries of " oh ! oh! oh!" 
The dog, on running down a mouse-deer, was said to 
be in the habit of breaking its leg, and then, by means 
of barking, to direct the hunter to the spot. The 
only domestic animals besides the dogs, of which 
several were to be found in every cottage, were fowls 
of a larger breed, and the common Malay cat.' 

Trapping. 

Benua-Jakun.— A formidable and effective snare 
was used by the Johor Benua, as well as by the 
Berembun tribes, for capturing or killing the deer 
and the hog, and even in some cases the tiger. It 
consisted of a slight and rude game-fence carried to 
a considerable length across the ground which the 
animals were expected to traverse. At every twenty 
or thirty feet openings were left, between which spears 
were fixed (close to and parallel with the fence), with 
the heads reaching across the openings. The end of 
the shaft was fastened to the extremity of a freshly cut. 

^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 257. 

HUNTING, TRAPPING, AND FISHING i'art ii 

and therefore highly elastic, sapling, placed hori- 
zontally, and measuring about fifteen feet in length 
and two to two and a half inches in breadth. The 
other extremity was fastened to a strong stake driven 
into the ground, and within a few feet of this another 
stake was placed (in such a direction that when the 
sapling was forcibly bent back against it for two or 
three feet it was perpendicular to the fence). The 
method by which it was retained so retracted was 
equally simple and effective. A rough pole secured 
by two stakes was placed parallel to one of the poles 
of the fence (on the side where the spear and its other 
apparatus were), but at a level a little below that of 
the spear. A stick measuring a few feet long was 
then bound firmly to one extremity of the sapling so 
as to be parallel to, and on the same level as, the 
spear, while the other extremity, w^ell smoothed, was 
made to pass under another stick which was fixed at 
right angles to it, the ends of which passed under 
the two poles. The sticks retained their position by 
their mutual pressure. To this cross-stick a black and 
thin, but very strong, string was fastened. The other 
end of the string was attached to the further side of 
the opening, and the portion passing across it was 
made to hang loosely. When an animal entered the 
opening the pressure of its body on this part of the 
string pulled the cross-stick forwards. An advance of 
less than an inch released it, and the instant the stick 
which kept the sapling bent was thus freed in its turn, 
the latter sprang forward with immense force to its 
natural position, and the spear was driven into the 
body of the animal, indeed in many cases probably 
right through it. The slightness of the pressure 
required to release the spring, and the rapidity and 

SA VA GE MALA YS OF JOHOR 223 

irresistible force with which the spear was impelled 
across the opening were admirable. The materials 
for every part of this contrivance were collected from 
the forest around. Even the spear-head was made of 
a species of bamboo (the " buloh kasap ") and was 
exceedingly hard and sharp. ^ 

The Berembun tribes also, to capture wild animals, 
dug pits about twelve feet in depth, which they 
covered over with brushwood. ■ 

Wild pigeons, wild fowl, and many other birds 
used for food were caught by means of bird-lime, of 
which they possessed several very effective kinds, 
prepared by mixing the viscid sap yielded by different 
trees.^ 

Fishing. 

Benua-Jakun. — Many families had small huts on 
the bank of the nearest stream on which they kept 
canoes, and men, women, and children, one, as a rule, 
to each canoe, were everywhere met with engaged 
in the quiet occupation of angling. They had, how- 
ever, other methods of catching fish. The most 
common was by means of small portable traps woven 
from rattan creepers {Calami). Rows of stakes or fish- 
fences were also used. But the most elaborate form 
of fish-trap consisted of a large framework, like the 
skeleton of a bridge, which was thrown right across 
the stream, and at a level some feet higher than the 
banks, so as to be above inundations. A line of stakes 
was fixed across the river-bed, an opening being left 
in the middle. Above this the Benua took his seat 
on a small platform (sometimes sheltered by a roof), 

' /. /. A. vol. i. pp. 257, 258. proved fatal, v. Lake in /. R. A. S., 

Accidents from these traps often occur S. B., No. 25, p. 4. 

to human beings. For one which ^ y^ /. ^. vol. i. pp. 257, 25S. ^ lb. 

224 HUNTING, TRAPPING, AND FISHING 

and suspended a small net in the opening. On this 
net he kept his eyes intently fixed, and as soon as a 
fish entered he raised the net and extracted it. The 
rivers and streams abounded in fresh-water fish, and 
there were about fifty species.' 

Udai. — The Udai were described by Newbold as 
preferring the delights of the chase to the drudgery of 
agriculture ; they employed the day in roaming the 
forest, and subsisted on the fiesh of the animals that 
they captured." 

Orang Laut or Sea-Jakun. 

Orang Laut, Sabimba. — To the blowpipe as their 
principal weapon the Sabimba owed all that they could 
obtain of the animals that lived in the trees of the 
forest, whilst with their dogs (a " species of pariah ") 
they hunted the wild hog."^ 

Orang Laut, Beduanda Kallang. — The Beduanda 
Kallang were fishermen and foresters, and divided 
their time between these two pursuits. They had 
small fishing-stakes near the mouth of the river which 
some of them visited in the mornings.'' 

Orang Laut, Akik. — The Akik were expert divers 
and fishermen, and employed nets which they made 
themselves.^ 

1 /. /. ./. vol. i. p. 256. •■' /. /. A. vol. i. p. 347-* 

2 Newbold, ii. 381, 382. * lb. p. 300. 

'•> Newbold, ii. 413, 414. 

CHAPTER V. 

Modes of Barter. 

Money is not yet understood by any but the most 
civilised members of the three races, all of whom trade 
to a greater or less extent in jungle produce, the chief 
articles bartered being gutta, tree-gum or "dammar," 
wood-oils (camphor, benzoin, etc.), perfumed wood, 
e.g. eagle-wood or "gharu," and to a limited extent, 
minerals, more especially tin. 

In return the jungle-folk get rice, tobacco, salt, 
areca-nuts, cloth, cooking utensils, implements, tools, 
and weapons, and occasionally such luxuries as beads 
and (very rarely) looking-glasses. 

They appear to possess a decided preference 
(doubtless due to the fact that neither are Mussulmans) 
for dealings with the Chinese, who obtain for them 
various articles which have now become necessities 
of their existence, and who do not cheat them so 
mercilessly as the Malays. 

In many Malay legends reference is made to the 
alleged Sakai and Semang practice of depositing 
the objects that they were willing to barter in a 
recognised spot, and then returning a few days later 
to take up the articles that the Malays had mean- 
while deposited in the same spot by way of payment 

VOL. I Q 

226 MODES OF BARTER 

— a method allowing plenty of scope for the chicanery 
of which the Malays are so generally accused. 

Logan's remarks upon the Benua-Jakun of Johor 
are, however, quite to the point here, and apply 
almost equally to all branches of the tribes in the 
Peninsula. 

At all events (he says) it is to the Malays that the 
more civilised aborigines owe every departure from 
their original forest habits. If we deprive them of 
those articles for which the Malays have purposely 
infected them with a taste, and those they have them- 
selves voluntarily sought from the desire to imitate 
and approximate to the habits of the more civilised 
appropriators of their country, there will remain hardly 
anything to distinguish them from their wilder com- 
patriots. Indeed, examples may still be seen of men 
whom indolence alone prevents from working up to 
the high prices that the Malays would exact from 
them, and who live in a wild nomadic condition, their 
only clothing a loin - cloth, and their food limited 
during the greater part of the year to the produce of 
their clearings and of the forest.^ 

Compared with the labour that the acquisition 
of the necessaries of life costs them, that which is 
required to obtain the few luxuries and conveniences 
to which they are now habituated is excessive. 
Instead of a scanty and irregular supply of clothing 
and other articles, it should, in view of the fact that 
their industry is greater, suffice to raise them eventually 
to a condition of greater plenty and comfort than has 
been attained by the Malays themselves.- 

1 /. /. A. vol. i. pp. 285, 286. '^ lb. 

CHAP. V NEGRITOS 227 

I. — Semang. 

Semang: (no district specified). — In 1835, the usual 
method of barter employed between the Semang 
and the Malays was for the latter to deposit their com- 
modities, consisting chiefly of coarse cloths, tobacco, 
and knives, in any open space in the vicinity of the 
known Semang camping-grounds, and then retire to a 
convenient distance. The Semang would next ap- 
proach, and, having selected such articles as they 
fancied, bear them off, leaving in their place what- 
ever they might deem a fair equivalent ; this latter 
consisted chiefly of elephants' teeth, eagle-wood, resin, 
canes, rattans, and so forth, of which, through ignorance 
of their market value, the Semang always left an 
ample supply. A few, however, who had partially 
overcome their timidity, and occasionally ventured to 
approach the Malayan villages, speedily learned to 
profit by the superstitions and fears of their new 
acquaintances, and to demand a high and exorbitant 
rate for the vegetable preparations which they were 
wont to use as medicine.' 

In a more detailed account we are told that a few 
of them who ventured to approach the Malayan 
villages obtained a little cloth in exchange for elephants' 
teeth, eagle-wood, wax, woods, gums, "dammar," and 
canes which they procured in the forest, but of the in- 
trinsic value of which they possessed but little know- 
ledge, so that they were generally imposed upon by 
the crafty Malay. From the Malays also they pro- 
cured their arms, knives, and tobacco, of which last 
they made great use. In their own turn, however, 

> Begbie, pp. 8, 9. 

MODES OF BARTER 

they frequently leariu to work upon the superstitions 
of the Malays (when they had no products to barter, 
and wished to procure a supply of tobacco), by pre- 
senting them with medicines which they pretended to 
derive from particular shrubs and trees in the woods, 
and represented as efficacious for the cure of headache 
and other complaints.' 

Pangfan. — The Pangan or Eastern Semang that 
we saw at Ulu Aring in Kelantan used to depend 
upon the Malay hamlet of Kampong Buntal for their 
rice, as well as for their salt and their tobacco, and 
had come down, in fact, at the time when we were 
there for the purpose of obtaining this latter com- 
modity, of which I myself was able to present them 
with a considerable supply. The only other articles 
for which they were usually indebted to the Malays 
were the cloths they wrapped round their waists, and 
the blades of their jungle-knives and spear-heads. On 
the other hand, one of the men that we observed was 
in possession of a razor which had been " given " him 
(doubtless in return for more than its fair equivalent 
in other commodities) by the Malay chief or " Peng- 
hulu " of the village. 

Kedah Semang. — The Semang of Kedah had 
themselves grown a small field of rice, and to the 
extent of their harvest were independent of the local 
Malays, so far as their food-supply was concerned. 
Nevertheless the scantiness of this stock made it 
quite clear that in a few months they would have 
come to an end of it, and would either be obliged to 

' J. I. A. vol. iv. pp. 425, 426. Similar charges are, of course, often 

This account is not quite just to made by the Malays (from whom this 

the Semang, who undoubtedly offered idea may have been derived), but on 

to the Malays what they themselves proper investigation they prove to be 

resrarded as efficacious medicines. baseless. 

SA A' A I OF PER A A 229 

live again for a while on roots and fruits, or (more 
probably) to eke out the shortness of their own supply 
with a fresh store obtained from the Malays. The 
knives, spear-heads, and even the harpoon-heads used 
by this tribe were all of Malay manufacture, as were 
also all the cloths that they were wearing. 

Perak Semangf. — As to the extent to which these 
simple ways of trade were employed, De Morgan says 
that the Semang obtained a " considerable portion "' of 
their livelihood by the barter of jungle produce with 
the Malays.^ Like the earlier authorities quoted, he 
adds that they were " absolutely ignorant " of the 
value of money.' 

II. — Sakai. 

Perak Sakai. — The wild Sakai of the Perak Hills 
(Sakai Bukit) in trading with the Malays always 
either employ a " tame " Sakai as their intermediary, 
or else confine themselves to depositing their jungle 
products on the banks of the rivers at times and in 
places which are tacitly understood. They then 
withdraw, returning some time later to fetch the 
articles which the Malays offer them in exchange.^ 

The articles in which the Sakai usually trade are 
enumerated by De la Croix as including tree-gum, resin 
(or "dammar"), gutta, caoutchouc, wax, honey, ivory, 
and rhinoceros horns. These articles they dispose 
of to the Malays, not for ready money, but for cloth, 
salt, kitchen utensils, etc., the Malays being too 
clever to lose by the exchange.'' 

Selangor Sakai. — The Sakai of Selangor (Kuala 
Lumpor district) appear to have a decided preference 

1 De Morg.in, viii. 296. ' De la Croix, p. 340. 

•- /^. * /f>. p. 337- 

230 MODES OF BARTER pari- ii 

for dealing with the Chinese, who supply them with 
tobacco, cloth-stuffs, rice, tools, and cooking utensils, 
in return for various articles of jungle produce, such 
as gutta-percha and charcoal. They do not have 
recourse to the Malays except when there are no 
Chinese, as they are frequently cheated by the former, 
whereas the latter treat them not only with scrupulous 
honesty, but even with a sort of" fraternal cordiality." ' 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — The foregoing descriptions of barter as 
it obtains among the Semang and the Sakai of Perak 
apply so closely to the Blandas of Kuala Langat 
that it is hardly necessary to particularise further. 
An interesting point, however, which is worth men- 
tioning is that both the Blandas and the Besisi, their 
neighbours, make considerable use of incantations and 
magic in collecting their jungle produce. The follow- 
ing charm employed by the collectors of wild honey 
is a fair example : — 

Honey-gatherers' Charm. 

" Mung, mung, mung I '" the moon-white apes cry 

(Apes of " rock " and " well " and " basil "), 

Come ye out into the moonlight. 

Hearken to me with affection, 

List to me with kind affection, 

Grannies, hark to me, your grandchild, 

Who but begs for you to teach him 

How to weave a mat — of rushes ! 

Grannies, o'er the seas come hasting, 

O'er the hills come hasting, Grannies ! 

.•swinging, swaying, come ye hither 1 

All I beg is, you should teach me 

How to weave a mat — of bees-wax I 

Grannies, hark to me your grandchild ! 

When I have explained that the moon -white 
" apes " in this invocation are probably intended to 

' Letessier, p. lOO. 

I 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SE LANG OR 231 

represent the Blandas honey-collectors themselves, 
and that the word " Grannies " refers to the wild bees, 
who are supposed to be deceived by this quaint piece 
of fiction, I think the purport of this charm will be 
sufficiently clear without further explanation. 

Besisi. — The same remarks apply to the Besisi ; 
one of the charms used by whom (in collecting wild 
honey) was quoted by the present writer in Ala/ay 
Magic} I may add that the Besisi in the Kuala Langat 
district often raised a considerable crop of rice, and 
it was the object of the neighbouring Malays to cajole 
as much of this out of them as possible. On several 
occasions I was obliged to step in to protect them as 
far as I could from their rapacious neighbours. The 
latter frequently charged the Besisi with using false 
measures and similar methods of deception, but I 
never found that the charge could be fairly sub- 
stantiated, and have little doubt that the real object 
of these charges was to discredit and rob the Jakun. 

Mantra. — Of the Mantra we are told, on the high 
authority of Logan, that there were *' no traders, shop- 
keepers, or artificers " among them,- but this does not, 
of course, signify that the Mantra do not engage in 
the ordinary trade in jungle products. In addition 
to this we are informed that the Mantra have no 
weights, but employ the (usual) coconut-shell as a 
measure.^ 

Benua-Jakun of Johor. — But by far the clearest and 
most circumstantial statement of the trading methods 
of any of those Peninsular tribes is Logan's report 
upon the trade of the Benua-Jakun of Johor. 

The Malays (according to Logan) have taught the 

' For this, and another Blandas App. p. 611. 
charm of the same kind, v. Mai. Magic, -J. I. A. vol. i. p. 330*. •'' lb. 

MODES OF BARTER 

Jakun to covet things which he knows not how to 
procure save from them. These are cloth, and certain 
articles of earthenware and iron, such as coarse plates, 
pots, pans, chopping-knives or " parangs," and axes. 
Sugar and coconuts again are both much prized. 
The Jakun's supply of rice often fails. His tobacco 
is deficient in strength. Although he has both wild 
and cultivated betel-vines, he has neither gambier, 
areca-nut, nor lime. Hence the Malays often ascend 
the river, their canoes laden with a tempting variety 
of these particular articles, and the Jakun, unable to 
resist the desire of calling some of them his own, 
needs little persuasion to become indebted to the 
Malay trader for any amount the latter may choose to 
impose upon him. The Jakun now finds himself in 
possession of a few of those things which bring him 
nearer the Malay, and at the same time under an 
obligation to collect rattans for his creditor, various 
kinds of eagle - wood, (" gharu " and " chandan "), 
camphor, resin or "dammar," wax, and "gutta taban." ^ 
These articles, with the exception of the "dammar," 
of which he makes torches, are articles of no value in 
his own eyes, but in which his forests so abound 
that, if a more equitable system of exchange were 
established between him and the Malays, he would 
not only find himself in possession of a large supply 
of all those articles which are now sparingly doled out 
to him, but actually also of a growing capital. The 
collection of the above commodities, however, does 
not form a constant or regular employment for any of 

' Hervey, in/. R. A. S., S. B., No. I was told they were too busy getting 

8, pp. 103, 104, says, in writing of the rattans for the Malays, which they do 

Jakunof Johor : " At this place, Kam- at a fixed price in rice and other 

pong Kenalau, I found a clearing, but articles, such as clothing, crockery, 

no cultivation ; on asking the reason, parangs (choppers), salt, and tobacco."" 

CHAP. V SAVAGE MALAYS OF JO HO R 233 

the Jakun. It is only when there is an unusual 
demand for any of them in Singapore that the Malays 
hurry to the interior and induce the Jakun to engage 
for a time in procuring a supply of whatever happens 
to be in request. At the period of Logan's visit 
nearly every man in the country was searching for 
" gutta taban," to which the name of " gutta-percha," 
a gum yielded by a different tree, is erroneously 
applied by Europeans. This tree was one of the 
commonest in the forests of Johor. It is not found 
in the alluvial districts, but in undulating or hilly 
ground (such as that which occupies the centre of 
the Peninsula between the Endau and the Batu 
Pahat) it occurs frequently, and in some places 
abundantly. Wherever Logan penetrated he found 
that collectors of " taban " had preceded him.^ 

The Jakun, after felling the tree. " ringbarks " 
the trunk by making an incision completely round it, 
from which the viscous milk flows. Similar incisions 
are made at distances of from 6 to iS inches through- 
out the entire length of the trunk. The rings are 
no broader than the blade of the chopper with which 
they are made, no bark being removed save the 
rough superficial coating for an inch or two on each 
side. Many trees felled by Malays had rings of bark 
to the breadth of about an inch cut right out instead 
of a single incision. A Malay woodman who had been 
employed in different places in procuring the gutta 
stated that this was the usual Malayan system. 'I he 
bark is not stripped off the tree, as has been stated. 
Logan asked both the Malays and the Jakun in different 
parts of the country whether they could not procure the 
gutta in the same way as they collect the dammar. 

• J. I. A. vol. i. ]ip. 260, 261. 

234 MODES OF BARTER part ii 

without destroying the tree. But the answer always 
was that the " taban " would not run like dammar, 
or like many other guttas, such as caoutchouc, and 
this is probably the fact. Varying statements were 
made as to the produce per tree, the extremes 
mentioned being two kati's and fifty kati's,^ but it is 
doubtful whether anything near the latter quantity is 
ever obtained from a single tree. Many of the Jakun 
who had been engaged for some months in collecting 
assured me that they had occasionally obtained as 
much as eighteen kati's, but never more, and that the 
quantity obtained is usually nearer from three to five 
kati's than it is to the maximum mentioned. Logan 
described the collection of " taban" at length, because 
nearly the whole of the Jakun tribes had for some 
time past been withdrawn by it from their usual 
pursuits. They were not, however, under any ap- 
prehension that it could be extirpated, as it was 
only full-grown, or nearly full-grown, trees that repaid 
the labour of felling them and extracting the gutta, and 
the younger trees which they were compelled to leave 
would be amply sufficient (they believed) to keep up 
the stock. They were, no doubt, to some extent correct, 
but the effect of thinning out the " tabans " too rapidly 
had already been to reduce the annual supply of seed 
and seedlings. The seeds were eaten by the Jakun, 
but they did not, like the Malays in some countries 
[e.g. at Siak), extract an edible vegetable tallow from 
them." 

Of the methods in which the other articles of traffic 
yielded by the jungle were procured, Logan con- 
sidered it unnecessary to speak at any length, because 
he did not learn that they differed in any respect from 

1 A "kati"=i.i lbs. 2 y. /. a. vol. i. pp. 262, 263. 

SA VA GE A/A LA YS OF JOHOR 235 

those adopted by the Malays. He mentions, how- 
ever, that both races had very superstitious ideas 
regarding the collection of camphor. When engaged 
in searching for it they abstained from certain kinds 
of food, ate a little earth, and used a kind of artificial 
language, which was called the " Camphor Language " 
(" bhasa kapor "). This language Logan found to be 
the same on the Sedili, the Endau, and the Batu Pahat. 
From specimens which he subjoined it appears that 
most of the words are formed from the Malayan, in 
many cases by a mere periphrasis, such as "grass- 
fruit" for "rice," "far-sounder" for "gun," "short- 
legs " for " hog," " leaves " for " hair," etc' 

It was believed that if care were not taken to use 
this " Camphor Language," great difficulty would be 
experienced in finding camphor trees, and that when 
found the camphor would not yield itself to the 
collector. Whatever may have been the origin of 
this superstition, it was evidently based on the fact 
that although camphor trees were abundant, it very 
frequently happened that no camphor could be ob- 
tained from them. "Were it otherwise," said an old 
Jakun, who was singularly free from superstition. 
" camphor is so valuable that not a single full-grown 
tree would be left in the forest." Camphor was not 
collected by the Berembun tribes, at least on the 
western side of the Peninsula, and they were, there- 
fore, unacquainted with this Camphor Language. - 

But the present sketch of the Jakun trade in 
jungle produce would be incomplete were no reference 
made to the regular organisation established by the 
Malays for the purpose of exploiting their unsuspect- 
ing neighbours. 

^ J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 263, 264. * fb. pp. 265, 266. 

236 MODES OF BARTER 

The Malayan Penghulu, Jinang,' or other head- 
man in each river-district was also the head of the 
monopoly of trade with the Jakun. Hence traders 
entering the river most commonly visited him, and he 
either supplied them from his own store, or purchased 
what they required from the riverain Malays, or 
allowed them to do so themselves. This system was 
enforced with more or less rigour, according to the 
character of the Penghulu, but traffic was always to a 
certain extent carried on without his intervention, 
though strangers were absolutely prohibited from 
trading with the Jakun direct." 

To get a more complete understanding, however, 
of the system by which this monopoly was maintained 
and worked, it is necessary to explain the scheme a 
little more fully. 

The Malays settled on the rivers leading into 
the country of the Jakun might be divided into three 
classes: (i) the Penghulu and his relatives and 
dependants ; (2) the Johor Malays (who frequently 
belonged to Telok Blanga, and enjoyed a certain 
consideration and prestige owing to their means and 
their Singapore connexion) ; and (3) miscellaneous 
settlers who did not possess these advantages. The 
trade with the Jakun was chiefly in the hands of the 
first and second classes, who acted in concert. The 
prices at which purchasable articles were to l)e valued 
was from time to time regulated by the Penghulu, who 
in this, as in all other matters, consulted the principal 
men of the river. The Penghulu next conferred with 
the Jakun chiefs or Batins, and so managed the dis- 
cussion as to carry the point already agreed upon. 
The principle on which the sliding scale of prices was 

' Cp. /. /.A. vol. i. pp. 273, 274. ^ ^f"- P- 286. 

CHAP. V SAVAGE MALAYS OF /OHO/? 237 

managed was simply that of maintaining a high value 
for anything that was sold to the Jakun, and a low one 
for what was bought from them. When the Jakun 
rice -harvest had been reaped, they were persuaded 
that rice was everywhere so plentiful that its price 
was very small, and that, on the other hand, the price 
of cloth had advanced as much above as the price of 
rice was depressed below that of the Singapore market. 
The conclusion of all the inquiries made by Logan, and 
of numerous instances of barter of which he was a wit- 
ness, was that the Malays sold the goods which they 
purchased in Singapore at advances of from 100 to 400 
per cent, whilst they bought " taban," camphor, 
dammar, and other produce of the forest at from 100 
to 400 per cent below the prices which they received 
in Singapore. Thus a voyage of two or three days 
enabled the Malay to double or quintuple the value 
ot goods transferred from Singapore to Johor and 
from Johor to Singapore. As the trade was almost 
entirely carried on by barter, the Malays had a double 
profit on every transaction. Yet they were not 
satisfied with having established this vulture -like 
system of trade. They resorted, besides, to every 
indirect means of enhancing their gains that was at all 
consistent with the preservation of the trade. They 
made, for instance, advances of goods, and as their 
debtors were entirely unacquainted with writing and 
accounts, they had little difficulty in exacting far more 
than the stipulated return from those Jakun whose 
memories were not very tenacious ; for the return 
was made in small quantities from time to time, as 
the jungle produce happened to be collected. But 
the most certain and constant mode of defrauding the 
Jakun was in weighing the goods which were the 

238 

MODES OF BARTER 

subject of the bargain. This was generally done very 
hurriedly, and when a pretence was made of doing it 
more carefully the beam was brought into a horizontal 
position, not by the counterpoise of the weights, 
but by the finger of the Malay. This method of 
weighing had, at the time of Logan's visit, become so 
general, that although the Jakun generally were 
aware that the Malays did not weigh fairly, and some 
had even acquired so much knowledge of the balance 
as to point out in what the fraud consisted, the Malay 
would laugh it off, insist that it was all right, and 
either deliver the article to one of his attendants, or 
toss it into his canoe. To show more definitely the 
extent to which the Malays took advantage of the 
ignorance of the Jakun, Logan added the following 
lists of prices of various articles, as ascertained in 
several localities : — ^ 

Trade on the Sembrong. 
Articles sold to the Jakun. 

Local Price. 
8 c. 

Singapore Price. 

$c. 

Tobacco .... 

per kati ' 

I.OO 

■13 

Salt 

per gantang 

.i8i 

.04 

Coconuts . . . . . 

. each 

.04 

.01 to .02 1 

Common "sarongs" or skirts 

. each 

2.00 

• 50 i 

Bugis " sarongs " (inferior) . 

_ 

5.00 to 6.00 

1.00 to 1.25 1 

White cotton jackets (" bajus ") 

. each 

.38 to .75 

.10 ' 

Ileadkerchiefs 

. each 

•58 

• 14 

Common red cotton cloth 

per yard 

•38^ 

.10 

Large plate (common) . 

. each 

•38 

.10 

Small plate (common) . 

. each 

.09 

.04 ! 

Saucers .... 

. each 

•03I 

.01 

Cups ..... 

. each 

.09 

.01 

1 /. /. A. vol. i. pp. 2S6, 2S7. But 
see >i. to p. 95, ante. 

2 These are the actual prices ex- 
amined, and the Singapore prices in 

general are those of articles of the 
same quality. A "kati"=i^ lbs. = 
,1,5 pikul. A " gantang " varies, but 
roughly = i gallon. 

MALA VAN SEA-GYPSIES 

239 

Articles bought from 

the Jakiin 

1 

Eagle-wood (liginini aloes) . per kali 
Camphor ..... per kali 
Dammar ..... per pikul 

Benjamin (mixed) . . . per pikul 

Local Price. 

Singapore Price. 

Cents. 

..^8 
.16 
•35 

.09 

Cents. 
.50 to .66 

•30 
.57 and up- 
wards 
.60 to .80 

On the Lenggiu. 
Articles sold to the Jakun.- 

Local Price. 

Singapore Price. 

? c. 

Cents. 

Rice (coarse and uncleaned) per 5 gantangs 

1. 00 

•33:; 

Tobacco . per kati (of about 12 tahils) 

.18 

.09 to .10 

Salt ..... per 13 gantangs 

1. 00 

•50 

I small earthenware pan or " blanga" . 

.09 

.04 

I small rice-pot or saucepan ("kuali ") . 

•38^ 

• 15 

I large rice-pot ...... 

.77 

•39 

I chopper or parang ..... 

.38^ 

.iiA 

I common knife ...... 

.20 

.08 

OkANt; Laut or Ska-Jakun. 

Sabimba. — The colony of Orang Laut who were 
living [circ. 1850) near the source of the Tembrau 
(which falls into the " Selat Tembrau " or " Old 
Strait " of Singapore, opposite the most northerly 
point of the island) consisted of twenty -five men. 
thirty women, and fifteen children. They were slaves 
of the reigning Chief of Johor (Teinenggong), being 
under a Malay " Jinang," who employed them in 
collecting " taban," "dammar," rattans, eagle-wood 
("gharu"), ebony, " chandan," and wax. In return 
he supplied them with rice, sago, and (very rarely) 

^J.J.A. vol. i. p. 288. 

Jh. 

240 MODES OF BARTER part ii 

with a little cloth. Other Malays were also allowed 
to carry on a little trade (by barter) with them/ and 
by this means they obtained a supply of axes, hatchets, 
earthenware, cooking-pots, iron pans, salt, chillies, 
and tobacco." 

Elsewhere we read ot the Sabimba tribe as con- 
sisting of eighty individuals, young and old, and as 
being employed in cutting rattans for the Malays, 
who furnished them with rice, weapons, and utensils 
in return.'^ 

Orang" Muka Kuning". — The Orang Muka Kuning 
(we are told) were entrusted to the care of a Malay 
headman or Batin, named Pajar, who lived on Pulau 
Loban,and was appointed by the chief (Yam-tuanMuda) 
of Rhio. He visited them from time to time, bring- 
ing rice and other articles, and receiving in return the 
jungle produce that they had collected for him. We 
are further expressly told that the Orang Muka 
Kuning were prohibited from trading with other 
persons " under penalty of a ducking." Rattans, 
dammar, and eagle-wood they barter for rice, cloth, 
implements, tobacco, and salt.* 

For looo rattans they received four " gantangs " 
of coarse rice;'' for loo dammar torches, six " aan- 
tangs"; and for one basketful (measuring ih foot 
deep and broad) of eagle-wood, four " gantangs " of the 
same commodity.'' 

Beduanda Kallang.^ — ^Similarly we are told that the 
Beduanda Kallang were fishermen and foresters, 
dividing their time equally between the two pursuits, 
and that they were in the habit of collecting jungle 

1 Except in "taban," which they '^ J. I. A.\o\. i. p. 298. 

cannot dispose of to others under pain ' lb. p. 347*. * Ii->- p. 337*- 

of a ducking. 5 /^. 6 /^. p. 333^^. 

MA LA VAN SEA - G YPSIES 24 1 

produce for a Malay headman under the reigning 
chief (Temenggong) of Johor, who had charge of 
them.' 

Orang Akik. — The Orang Akik erected temporary 
sheds along the coast whenev^er they had occasion to 
go ashore, to collect dammar and wood-oil, etc., etc. 
For months together, however, they resided in their 
boats, employed not only in fishing, but in collecting 
agar-agar {Zostcra), and tripang or beche-de-mer 
i^Nolotkuria), etc. When the season or the weather 
did not permit of this, they employed themselves in 
gathering wood and pork-oil." 

' /. I. A. vol. i. p. 300. = "hog's grease," the Malay for 

2 Su in original, but I cannot be which ("niinyak babi "') may be so 

sure what is meant by "pork-oil," translated; -'. ante, p. 129. New- 

unless, as I think most probable, it bold, ii. 413, 414. 

VOL. I 

CHAPTER VI. 

Weapons and Implements. 

Stone Implements. 

Stone implements are very numerous in the Penin- 
sula, especially in Perak and Pahang, but it is an 
open question whether any forms of stone implement, 
except possibly chips or flakes, were ever manufactured 
by any of the wild tribes, the weight of evidence 
being decidedly against it. It is necessary, however, 
to deal with this question here, as it is to the wild 
tribes that their use has perhaps been most generally 
attributed.' 

Captain J. Bradley (a sportsman travelling in the 
Malay Peninsula in 1876) speaks of finding in the 
tree-huts of the aborigines (though without giving 
any details which might identify either the tribe or 
the district) "a curious instrument made of bone, and 
apparently intended to serve as a knife, together with 
a sort of tomahawk formed by fixing a pointed stone 

* See, for instance, the tradition cp. Swett. p. 228 : " It is believed 

quoted by De Morgan, vii. 157, of a that comparatively recently some at 

tribe that was " ignorant of metals, and least of these tribes used implements 

employed notliing but implements of of flint or slate." 

stone " ; and the same story as referred The prevalence of this tradition may, 

to by Hale, p. 285 : " A Sakai chief however, easily be explained if any of 

in Kinta told me of a race who did not these aborigines had previously used 

know anything about iron, but used chips of flint (or other kinds of stone) 

stone axes to cut down trees.'' And for knives. 

242 

I 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 243 

Upon a stick." Elsewhere (p. 331) the same writer 
speaks of finding (in the same locality) " a number of 
sharpened stones, serving the purpose of knives." Hut 
both statements are far too vague to base any con- 
clusions upon. 

Again, we have the statement of Vaughan-Stevens 
to the effect that a tribe of Negritos (whom he terms 
*' Orang Pangan," and assigns to the district that 
he calls No. 2) informed him that they had formerly 
been in the habit of using stone weapons ; and that 
they made, at his request, wooden models of these very 
implements. He adds, moreover, that the Pangan 
" recognised " some stone implements which he showed 
them as their " old work-tools." Unfortunately, how- 
ever, it does not appear whether he showed these stone 
implements to the Pangan before or after the models 
were made ; but the former would probably have been 
the case, and at all events Vaughan-Stevens' own editor 
very properly points out that a scrutiny of these models 
shows them to be identical in shape with iron tools of 
the Malay type still in use in the Peninsula.^ 

Lastly, one of the facts that has been much relied 
upon, viz. that aboriginal (non-Malay) names exist for 

' In the passage referreti lo,\'aughan- stone tools, it transpired that they no 

Stevens remarks that it had been especi- longer possessed any, but "from their 

ally interesting to find that the Pangan traditional knowledge'' they at once 

knew that their ancestors had emjiloyed manufactured some wooden models, 

stone weapons before they obtained \'aughan- Stevens, however, possesseil 

iron from the Siamese {sic). Vaughan- three or four genuine stone imple- 

Stevens was not, however, able to ments, and, without saying a worti. 

properly establish this fact until he laid them before the Snahut, who at 

had been formally received into the once exclaimeil, "Those are Menik '" 

tribe. When he asked the Pangan {i.e. "Those belong to the P.ingan "). 

what tools they had used in ancient Other Pangan, moreover (later, and in 

times, before they could obtain the other places), recognised these implc- 

Malayan chopper ("parang") — since ments as their "old work - tools' 

they themselves did not know how to (Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 99). But see 

work iron — they at once replied that also p. 437, w. 2, /;//;vr, where the teeth 

they had used stone. On Vaughan- of Ramboo-rats arc mentioned as being 

Stevens further inquiring after such used before the introduction of iron. 

244 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS paktii 

such articles as " axes," " spears," and " knives," ' does 
not, unfortunately, prove that the material of which 
these implements were made was necessarily any sort 
of stone ; w-hereas the fact adduced by Wray that no 
single stone spear-head or chopper (or, I may add, 
arrow-head) has ever yet been found in the Peninsula 
(although in several dialects aboriginal names for them 
occur) appears conclusive in the opposite sense." 

On the general question, Griinwedel, in reporting 
the receipt of forty-nine stone implements (" batu lintar ") 
sent home by Vaughan-Stevens from the Malay Pen- 
insula, remarks that these implements are distributed 
throughout the entire Indian Archipelago, and reappear 
even in Further India, Burma, Cambodia, etc. Vaughan- 
Stevens could not say what race they were once used 
by, for neither the (civilised) Malays nor any of the 
wild tribes knew anything certain either about their 
origin or their use. The latter paid no attention to 
them when they met with them on their wanderings, 
and the superstitious Malays only believed them to be 
the missiles of evil spirits, and, when they found them, 
would store them away in their huts without having 

1 Clifford in/. A". ./. 5., S. B., No. (5) Si<inmnt;-knifc (?). It is a "flat, 

24, p. 27. thin lamina of diorite ox greenstone, 

- W'ray, Per. M. N. iii. p. 3. Mr. slightly concave and conve.x, and 

II. N. Ridley informs me that he has measvucs about I foot in length by 

found about seven main types of stone 2 inches wide l)y about \ of an inch 

implements in Kelantan. The seven thick in the thickest part." 

chief types obtained were as follows: — (6) Small knife. 

(1) Stone club (or mallet ?). (7) Large knife or chopper. 

(2) Stone chisel or gouge (New According to Mr. Ridley, the sup- 
Guinea type). [It may, however, be jxjsed agate of which these implements 
doubted whether these so-called chisels are often said to be made was probably 
are in reality chisels or axes. Of the a burnt diorite. 

latter there are two types: (i) the axe Not a single specimen either of a 

whose head fits into a socket ; (2) the spear-head or of an arrow-head \va.s 

one whose long and chisel - shaped found, 

head goes through the helve. — En.] For a recent find in Pahang, z'. Swan 

(3) Stone adze (ordinary I'eninsular, in Ma)i, 1904, 34 (with diagrams). 
i.e. Malayan type). The most curious of these specimens is 

(4) Stone adze (New Guinea type). the stone ring here figured. 

M'Gjcgor. 

Jakux Man in Hunting Accoutrements, 

showing bark cloth girdle, blowpipe, and iiuiver, with bone fastener. Ulu Batu, Selan<'or. 

Vol. /. /. 245. 

GENERAL REMARKS 245 

any idea of their real use. They are found at various 
depths below the surface, and although nothing cer- 
tain is known about them in the Peninsula, yet as the 
various wild tribes nevertheless assert that in former 
days a race of men, differing both from themselves and 
the Malays, lived in the Peninsula, it may be assumed 
that it is to them that the use of stone implements is 
tacitly attributed, though this evidence is altogether 
too vague to rely upon.^ 

By the aid of the microscope traces of copper and 
iron may be identified on these stones. The stones 
showing such traces are used by the Malays to fur- 
nish tips for the metal spurs of their fighting-cocks, 
since they believe that tips thus furnished cannot be 
blunted. The Malay children play with them, and 
try to make them smoother than they were when first 
found.- In no case did Vaughan- Stevens discover 
them ill situ, the specimens being all obtained from 
Malays during his twelve months' journey between 
Johor and Kelantan.^ 

Stone implements are numerous in Pahang, Negri 
Sembilan, Selangor, and South Perak, very rare in 
Johor and Kelantan. Sometimes they occur in Kedah 
and Trengganu, but are very rarely found in Patani.^ 

The arguments bearing upon this most difficult 
suljject were excellently stated many years ago by 
Wray, who, in an article on the cave-dwellers of Perak, 
remarked that it had been somewhat too rashly taken 
for granted that the cave-dwellers (of Perak, etc.) were 
the makers of the stone implements which had been dis- 

' V. B. G. A. xxiii. 832. obtained from the eastern sea-coast 

•^ But their most iniporlant use among of the Peninsula, and llie abundance 

the Malays is medicinal. of those found on the western coast, 

■' /'. B. G. A. xxiii. ^l},. \\o\n\ to the jw^sibility of their having 

^ Vaughan- Stevens, iii. loi. The l)ecn introduced from some part of 

comparative rarity of the specimens Sumatra. 

246 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

covered In such abundance in Perak and the neighbour- 
ing states. The least reflection would have served to 
show that these implements indicated a much higher 
intelligence than would be compatible with the evidences 
afforded by the remains discovered in the caves, ^ 

All the stone implements were of axe or chisel 
blades, and not one single spear-head had ever been 
found. The second division of the stone age was 
divided from the first by the introduction of axe- 
pointed implements and all the important advances 
that were indicated by the use of this type of tool. 
If the cave people had been acquainted with the use 
of stone, they would almost certainly have employed 
spear-pointed implements of the rudest kind ; as when 
they had advanced as far as the making of chisels and 
axe-pointed tools, they would have been able to build 
houses and be independent of the shelter of caves, 
and have been in a position to cultivate the soil and 
raise food instead of having to subsist on shell-fish and 
the animals of the jungle. The multiplicity of the 
types of stone implements found in Perak showed that 
the users of them must have been in a comparatively 
high state of civilisation,^ 

The remarkable absence of all palaeolithic patterns 
might be explained by supposing that there had never 
been a period in this part of the world when the ruder 
implements were in use, but that the people (who- 
ever they were) that employed them were settlers 
from some other locality who on arrival had reached 
the second stage of the stone age. There was of 
necessity no means of fixing, even in the most ap- 
proximate manner, the date of the introduction of the 
use of stone in Perak, but the similarity of the types 

* L. Wray, Cave-dzoellers, pp. 43, 44. Cp. I'Homme, ii. 494 seq. '- Il>. 

GENERAL REMARKS 247 

of the implements was quite sufficient to indicate that 
it was a continuation of the same wave of progress 
which led to the evolution of these tools in other 
countries. This was, of course, far from saying that 
the stone age in Malaya had been contemporaneous 
with that of Europe. The number of the stone im- 
plements was, however, as striking here as in other 
parts of the world, pointing indubitably to the long 
continuance of the use of these lithic tools. ^ 

The finding of a few implements in the cave- 
deposits would by no means prove that the in- 
habitants of these caves were the makers of them, but 
only that they were of the same age. For it was 
quite likely that there had been two races of different 
degrees of advancement living in the country at the 
same time, and that the lower might occasionally 
acquire either by barter or other means the weapons 
of the higher race. In the same way the wild tribes 
were now accustomed to the use of iron axes, pottery, 
clothes, and other things bought from the Malays, 
whilst the Malays themselves in turn used articles of 
European manufacture." 

The aborigines, again, might well have been able 
to fashion weapons out of bamboo with knives made of 
the same material (especially when hardened by the 
application of fire), and these would be probabK" 
supplemented by the use of sharp fragments of stone 
[as well as of bone]. In this way it would be quite 
possible to make bamboo-pointed spears, blowpipes, 
darts, and bows and arrows. Bamboo weapons would, 
of course, have left no trace, in view ol the long 

1 I>. Wray, Cave-dwellers^ p. 43, 44. Bozzolo, about 1 50 specimens obtained 
Mr. Wray informs me that lie purchased in UUi I'erak, and Pataiii. 
for the Perak Museum, from Mr. •' Ibid. \ cp. Wxa^y, Join n. F. Af. S. 

Afits. I. i. pp. 13-15. 

!4S WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

period that must have elapsed since they had been in 
use. That the aborigines used fire was abundantly 
evident, and this, in the hands of other savages, had 
been made into a most effective means of shaping 
wooden objects.' 

In other words, the rudimentary stage of culture 
through which these tribes have passed, and in some 
cases are still passing, may perhaps be more accurately 
described as a " wood and bone " age than as an age 
of stone. 

To sum up, we may conclude that the wild tribes 
(Sakai and Semang) were not the manufacturers of the 
stone axes and chisels found in the Peninsula, and the 
case in fact appears to be a close parallel to that of 
the Andaman islanders, of whom Man has recorded 
(p. i6i) that " they never, even when iron was scarce, 
made arrow-heads, axes, adzes, or chisels of stone." 

The following list includes, on the other hand, 
the stone implements which certainly are, or are at 
all likely to have been formerly used by the wild 
tribes of Malaya. They are the anvil and hammer 
recorded by De Morgan (consisting of an upper and 
a lower stone)," the whetstone,-' chips or flakes used as 
knives, and cooking-stones,^ To this list, which so 
far agrees with the list of implements used by the 
Andamanese, may be added the stone rasp or file, 
consisting usually of a piece of sandstone,^ which is 
used especially for filing the teeth among the Pangan 
of Kelantan. 

On the other hand, the wild aborigines of the 
Hills (Orang Bukit) of to-day, who possess no imple- 

^ L. Wray, Cave-dwellers, p. 46. is used; cp. Hale, p. 286. 

2 De Morgan, vii. 415. * V. supra, p. 124, etc. 

^ Sometimes ;i stone axe-head itself '• l'. infra, vol. ii. t,;^. 

GENERAL REMARKS 249 

ments of iron, rely almost entirely upon wood or 
bone for the blades of their weapons, as well as for 
all their implements.' 

Knives ami Spears. 

The most primitive form of knife, and at the same 
time the most natural form for the country, still to be 
found among the wild tribes (as also on some cere- 
monial occasions among the Malays) consists of a 
sharp sliver of bamboo, which makes a very fair knife. 

It is possible, and perhaps even probable, that 
flakes and chips of stone may have been used in 
former times when the knife of Malay civilisation was 
not procurable." and when the work required could 
not be performed by a knife of bamboo,^ or bone. 

The Malay " dagger " or " kris " and other kinds 
of Malay weapons are also occasionally used by the 
wild tribes, especially the Jakun, but wooden and bone 
awls (for boring purposes) are used to this day.' 

In its earliest form the spear of the country 
seems to have been some form of throwing-stick or 
" squailer," the use of which has been recorded 
among the Jakun by Logan,' whilst at least two 
forms of it" are certainly still known to the Pen- 

' Dc la Croix, p. 340, N\here this being ni<ire effective than mitjht at first 

statement is, liowevcr, confined to the be supposed. In IJomeo, for instance, 

Sakai. a bamboo knife is used by tlie exc- 

•^ Capt. I. 15radley, p. 298, also cutioner for cutting off heads; l)eing 

mentions finding in i>ne of the tree- merely sharjx:ned whenever it is used, 
huts which he discovered "a curious ^ F"or examples, sec pji. 316 and 

instrument made of bone, and appar- 329, infra. 

cntly intended to serve as a knife." '' Vo\ the spear, :•. /. /. A. vol. i. 

And on p. 331 he says : "The only p. 257, and Lake iny. A'. A. S., S. />., 

other .articles found were a number of No. 25, p. 3. It is pre-eminently a 

sharpened stones, serving the purpose "savage Malay " weapon, and is used 

of knives." Cp. p. 269, /r. i, infra, universally by the Jakun. 

^ Such ca.ses would, however, be *"' One sharpened at one end, the 

exceedingly rare, these bamboo knives oUkt .tI both. 

250 U'KA/'OXS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

insular Malays.' The bamboo spear is still largely 
used, especially by the wilder aborigines. The metal 
spears, which are of several types (all of them 
Malayan), are used for fishing as well as hunting. 

The fact that no stone spear-head has yet been 
found in the Peninsula is certainly a notable one, and 
may point to the fact that the spear-heads used by the 
men of the Malay stone age were made of bamboo 
or of some other equally perishable material. There 
is little differentiation of metal spear-types as between 
the aborigines, doubtless owing to the fact that all 
have borrowed alike froni the Malay. In war, spear- 
heads are sometimes lashed to the muzzle-end of a 
blowpipe. 

Hatchets. 

The hatchets now used by the wild tribes 
throughout the Peninsula are obtained by barter or 
purchase from the Malays, except, perhaps, in a few 
cases in which some sort of rude substitute is roughly 
forged. Even in the latter case, however, the blades 
are, I believe, invariably copied from Malay models, 
and there appears to be no record of the use of 
an independent axe - type among either Sakai or 
Semang, even though they may (and certainly do) 
have non- Malay names for them. ' 

On the other hand, there is, I believe, a good 
deal still to be learnt from the nature of the rattan 

1 Cp. J. Bradley, p. 298 : "Outside sticks, intended, apparently, as missile 

the (tree-) huts a number of spears weapons. Several of them had traces 

were laid amongst the branches of the of blood and feathers adhering to 

trees. They consisted merely of long them, as if they had been used for 

sticks of hard wood sharpened at both knocking down birds." 

ends." And cp. also zA p. 320: "Some - Capt. J. Bradley (p. 298) alone 

of them (the wild men) seized their mentions finding in a tree-hut " a sort 

spears, or pointed sticks." Also p. of tomahawk, formed by fixing a 

331 : "In the interior of one of the pointed stone upon a stick." 
huts were a number of short thick 

GENERAL REMARKS 251 

lashings by means of which the adze-head is made 
fast to the helve, for I was repeatedly assured by 
Malays living in the Besisi and Blandas country 
(on the Langat) that the difference between the 
lashings of a Malay and a Jakun adze-head could be 
detected without the least difficulty by the expert. 

Firearvis. 

All branches of the wild tribes now generally 
possess some form of firearm, which most usually 
takes the shape of an old Tower musket, and is not 
unfrequently owned, or at least used, in common by 
all the men of the tribe who claim it. 

These guns are obtained by barter at extortionate 
rates from friendly Malays or Chinamen. 

The use of firearms by the Sakai and Semang 
appears, however, to have been of extremely recent 
date, as it is only since the establishment of a strong 
government in the Malay States that there has been 
any sort of peace between them and the Malays, and 
before the establishment of this peace the Malays 
were not likely to be willing to put such dangerous 
weapons in the hands of their victims.' 

The Bow. 

The use of the bow in the Peninsula is confined 
to those tribes which are (wholly or partly) of Negrito 
origin. It is indubitably their chief tribal weapon, as 
the blowpipe appears to be that of the Sakai,- and as 
the spear is that of certain of the Jakun tribes. 

There are, it is true, several references in old 
writers to the use of the bow by Sakai and Jakun. 
but upon examination it will easily be seen that they 

* Scey. I. A. vol. i. p. 272. ' Cp. De Morgan, vii. 415. 

252 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

are not of such a character as to shake the statement 
made in the foregoing sentence. Some of these 
statements, especially those of M.-Maclay,^ De la 
Croix,- and perhaps even De Morgan and Maxwell, 
are due to the fact that none of these writers were 
able to distinguish between the Sakai and the 
Semang, and habitually applied the term " Sakai " to 
groups of Negritos. Pleyte, therefore, in his^ great 
monograph on " the Blowpipe and the Bow," was 
perfectly right in correcting M.-Maclay, who is perhaps 
the most typical example of this class of writer. And 
although it must be admitted that when all these 
statements (based on misnomers) have been dis- 
counted, there still remain one or two testimonies 
to a knowledge of the bow, on unimpeachable authority 
(not on the part of the Sakai, but on that of the 
Jakun), even these latter yield to investigation. 

Logan, for instance, informs us that the bow and 
arrow were known to the Jakun (whom he calls 
" Benua ") ; but he immediately proceeds to qualify 
this statement by adding that though they were 
known they were not used, and I think there can be 
no very great doubt that the tradition was based on a 
rumour of the bows of the far-off Semang.'^ Again, 

' Cp. M.-Maclay in J. A'. A. S., latter point, see Pleyte, loc. cit. It 

S. B., No. 2, p. 214. is also entirely incorrect (as Pleyte 

Miklucho-Maclay says, "Another not points out) to describe the bow as a 

so dangerous, but ethnographically a Sakai weapon, it being the distinctive 

much more important weapon, is the weapon of the Negrito tribes. The 

bow (' loids '), the use of which I have alleged Sakai bow described by 

only seen among the unmixed Orang Miklucho-Maclay is, as his map shows, 

Sakai. It is about two metres long, is a Pangan bow, and it is veiy unlikely 

made of bamboo, and the arrows have that the arrows, still less the bow, would 

iron points." This quotation, however, Ije of bamboo. Lastly, for " loids " we 

is a tissue of misstatements. The bow should read " loidd"or " loydd," which 

of the aborigines of the Malay Peninsula is the ordinary Semang name for 

can neither be described as more im- the bow. 
portant ethnographically nor as less - De la Croix, p. 331. 

dangerous than the blowpipe, on which ^ Logan in /. /. A. vol. i. 'p. 272. 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 253 

another observer (quoted by Pleyte *), when staying 
in Singapore, observed and described in detail some 
methods of arrow-release employed by the Temiang 
tribe (of the Orang Laut), and states that the bow of 
which he writes was used for shooting small game and 
fish ; adding that the same weapon was employed in 
the magic ceremonies of the tribe.- 

This account, at first sight, seems clear enough, 
but it has to be noted that the giver of the informa- 
tion had come from Sumatra, and that what he was 
describing was probably a Sumatran custom, and had 
nothing to do with the customs of the " Orang Laut." 
If correct, it is one of the interesting instances of 
Semang influence in the south, of which we sometimes 
get examples. 

It cannot, therefore, be considered as yet estab- 
lished that the bow is employed as a tribal weapon 
by any tribes that are either of Sakai or Jakun ex- 
traction ; and I may add that there is very little prob- 
ability of its ever being so established. If, however, 
this should ever prove to be the case, it must certainly 
be in a mixed Semang-Sakai or Semang-Jakun tribe, in 
which the Negrito influence has remained so strong as 
to resist effectually the incursions of the alien culture. 
A survival of this kind is not impossible, even in the 
extreme south of the Peninsula, where the Semang 
influence, in small patches, is sometimes particularly 
strong. But apart from this remote possibility, I think 
that any idea of discovering the bow in use either as a 
Sakai or a Jakun weapon may once for all be definitely 
abandoned, antl that, if it should ever happen to be so 
found among either of these two races, il will only be 
in the guise of a " borrowed plume." 

• Internat. Arch. f. E. Bd. iv. S. 34 ct scqq. - Doubtless as a "fleam." 

!54 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

There is not much more to add with regard to 
the bow, unless it be to note the fact that the bows 
of the Semang very closely resemble one figured by 
Man, who describes it as coming from the southern 
group of the Andamans.' The bows from the North 
Andamans appear to be of a different character, and 
it is therefore in these South Andamans that it might 
be advisable to lock first for evidences of connexion 
between Semang and Andamanese culture. Unfor- 
tunately, however, these are just the islands of which 
least is known, and I am therefore only able to draw 
attention to the subject as one that especially requires 
to be worked up. 

The Blowpipe. 

The distribution of the bamboo blowpipe or 
blow-gun, as Geiger, following Pleyte, has recently 
shown, is (with the possible exception of the Mentawai 
Islands) inseparably bound up with the use of Ipoh 
poison, the region covered being in either case 
limited, l^roadly speaking, to the confines of the 
Malayan region, using that word in its widest sense. 

In the Malay Peninsula itself the blowpipe is 
found among all tribes, from Johor, in the extreme 
south, to Singora, in the north. -' 

The blowpipe is to be seen in its highest develop- 
ment (as far as the Peninsula is concerned) among the 
Sakai, Besisi, and Mantra, whilst among the Semang 
(and some Jakun) it is found in its lowest and 
roughest form. 

The Sakai and Jakun, on the other hand (as has 
already been shown), do not employ the bow, the use of 

' Cp. p. 280, M. I, infra. J. H. A. S., S. B., No. 25, p. 3, and 

2 U.-M3.c\a.y'in/.I^.A.S.,S.B.,T^o. No. 26, p. 14. 
2, pp. 213, 214. P"or exceptions, v. 

GENERAL REMARKS 255 

which is confined to the Semang.^ It is in fact now 
quite certain that the natural weapon of the Semang 
is the bow, and that they only learnt the use of the 
blowpipe from the Sakai. Hence even when they did 
take to it, they adopted it quite perfunctorily, and at 
no time took such trouble over its manufacture or pride 
in its possession as the two other races mentioned." 

In the islands of the Malay Archipelago (in 
Borneo, for instance), the blowpipe consists of a long 
wooden barrel or tube the interior of which has to be 
bored out."' This method of manufacture is much 
clumsier and more, laborious than that by which its 
bamboo fellow of the Peninsula is made, and it 
stands, I think, more or less to reason that if the 
wooden blowpipe of Borneo (or that made by some of 
the savage Malay tribes in the Peninsula) had had to 
be invented before the idea of utilising Banibusa 
Wrayi for the purpose had arisen, the bamboo 
blowpipe as we know it would never have existed. On 
the other hand, the sporadic existence of the wooden 
blowpipe may reasonably be due to the rarity or the 
absence of the particular species of long -jointed 
bamboo [Bambusa Wrayi)* from which the wild tribes 
of the Peninsula manufacture their blowpipes, for it is 
inconceivable that any intelligent race that had once 

' Cp. Swett. p. 228 : "The Sakai use that he has seen some beautifully made 

no other weapons than the blowpipe, blowpipes among the Semani; of 

but the Semang have a very powerful Upper Perak and Selama. 
bow and iron -barbed arrows, with ^ II. Ling Roth, vol. ii. pp. 1 84- 1 87. 

which they can kill the largest game." * Mr. Wr.iy writes me that />. 

Cp. also Dc Qualrefages, pp. 230, 231. IVrayi is only used by the Semang of 

■^ This remark applies especially to Upper I'erak and Selama, and the 

the Semang tribes furthest removed mixed Sakai - Semang tribes of the 

from Sakai influence, e.g. to the Plus district in Perak. In other 

Semang of Kedah, and perhaps in districts of Perak another species is 

some degree to the Pangan of Ulu used, of a kind not yet determined, 

Patani and Ulu Kelantan. On the with internodes of 3 to 4 ft. in length, 

other hand, Mr. L. Wray writes me Cp. Wray, Per. M. N. iii. pp. 54-5S. 

!56 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

discovered the ready-made blowpipe of bamboo would 
ever again have resorted to the method of boring its 
tube out of wood, or to the perhaps still clumsier 
process of uniting a couple of wooden half-cylinders, 
which when fitted together do duty as a tube. 

Speaking generally, it appears on the whole 
most reasonable to suppose that the blowpipe was 
introduced into the Malay Peninsula by the Sakai, 
upon their first advent into that region, that it has 
since been perfected by the same race, and that the 
modern blowpipe of the Malayan tribes in the Penin- 
sula (as well as that of the Archipelago) was either 
an inferior imitation of the Sakai weapon, or else that 
the wooden blowpipe was an altogether independent 
invention, which appears at the best most improbable. 

The only point in which the Bornean blowpipe is 
in any way an improvement on that of the Sakai is in 
its possession of a " sight," which the Sakai blow- 
pipes are, I believe, universally without. Yet even a 
rifled blowpipe has been recorded from Perak,^ and 
although the statement is unsupported, in all other im- 
portant respects — in the labour required for its construc- 
tion, in the important matter of weight, and in finish 
— the Bornean weapon is certainly inferior, not only 
to the Sakai blowpipe, but even to that of the Semang. 

The exact distribution of the various types of 
blowpipe in the Malay Peninsula yet remains to be 
worked out. Some information on this point is, how- 
ever, already forthcoming. The most highly devel- 
oped (and decorated) type of blowpipe is, as has 
already been said, found among the central Sakai 

1 See De Quatrefages, p. 231 («(7/f). "choke-bore" blowpipe, such as is 
This must be a mistake of M. Lias. found among the Besisi (v. p. 308, 
I believe what he saw was a infra). 

I 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 257 

(Senoi), the Besisi, and the Mantra. To these the 
Blandas of southern Selangor should, I think, be 
added. In its rarest form, that of the jointless tube, 
this blowpipe is only found within a yet more 
restricted area, i.e. in parts of Perak,^ and (according 
to one writer) in the Nenggiri- district of Kelantan. 
Outside the geographical area covered by these tribes 
we find, as a rule, rougher and less-finished specimens 
of this weapon. The Semang of the north, for in- 
stance, and, as far as I am aware, the Semang alone, 
make use of a roughly made blowpipe which bears 
very little decoration, but which not unfrequently has 
a mouthpiece of native gutta or resin. 

The most interesting type, the wooden split-tubed 
blowpipe, which is identical with one used in Peru, is 
said to be " only used south of the Pahang river in the 
state of that name."^ Yet the specimen now in the 
British Museum came from Kuantan, which is a good 
way north of the Pahang river. Vaughan-Stevens is, 
however, probably right in stating that the tree from 
which this wooden blowpipe is made {Calophylluni, sp., 
called in Malay " Penaga") is used because it is proof 
against warping, but that it is only of local distribution. 

Quiver and Darts. 
What is true of the blowpipe in general, is true 
of the quiver and the darts. Thus the quiver of the 

' Mfssrs. R. H. Yapp and Laidlaw between the old and new worlds consist 

(who were with me in 1S99-1900) in stone and bronze implements, round 

found the bamboo from which these towers, pyramids, coins, methods of 

blowpipes are made on Mt. Inas, on the embalming and skull • deformation, 

north I'erak frontier, and obtained circumcision, early carvings of ele- 

single-jointcd blowj^ipes in the same phants found in Central America, 

district. Mr. \ app tells me that this and prehistoric tobacco - pipes found 

l)amboo closely resembles the blowpipe- in Ireland. — Wray in Per. Mus. Notes, 

reed of S. America {Annitiinaria vol. iii. 
Sc/ioHtduri^kii, Benth., I^amhuscie). '^ I'. B. G. .4. xxiii. 8j4. 

Other proofs of prehistoric intercourse ' Vaughan-Stevens, /.f. 

VOL. I S 

WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

Borneo natives presents several marked points of con- 
trast with the quiver used by the Sakai, The device 
of having a separate reed for each dart has not been 
adopted by the Borneans, who have, however, invented 
the long wooden " hook " or " prong " which is attached 
to the quiver, and is inserted through the hunter's 
belt to keep the quiver in position. This appears all 
the more natural, since it is more likely to have been 
invented by a race wearing better and stronger loin- 
cloths than those of the Sakai, who may perhaps once 
have gone naked, and who still fasten their quivers 
about their waists with a cord.' 

As regards the dart, Professor Tylor was, I think, 
the first to point out as a general distinction that the 
blowpipe darts of south-east Asia do not have the 
butt made of cotton, whereas this is commonly the 
case with the dart of the South American Indians.^ 

Iron dart-points are never employed by Sakai or 
Semang, though they are used by Borneo natives, the 
point being always (among the former) of one piece 
with the shaft. The Semang dart is of much coarser 
and clumsier construction than that of the Sakai, and 
that of the Bornean is clumsier still, the shaft of the 
dart being driven right through the butt, so that it 
often slides up and down, a piece of bad workmanship 
not found among the Semang or the Sakai. 

1 For an account of the Borneo by the last-mentioned. He ndds that the 

weapon, v. Ling Roth (ch. xxii.). Here wooden cap is now used bylhe Sakai, the 

perhaps may be mentioned the somewhat rattan one by the Mantra, Besisi, and 

gratuitous assumptions of Vaughan- Kenahoi (V. -St. ii. I20). Mr. Blagden 

Stevens, who considers the evolution tells me that the Malacca Mantra 

of the cap or cover used for the use wooden caps bound with rattan, 

quiver to have been carried out as ^ For a good deal of miscellaneous 

follows: — (l) cover made from cuticle information about the darts (which, 

of trees, as used by the O. Kuantan however, is of small value in view of 

and (formerly) by O. Kenaboi ; (2) cap the way in which the tribes have been 

made of wood hollowed out by fire, as mixed up together), see Vaughan- 

used by the O. Sakai ; (3) cap made Stevens, ed. (jriinwedel, in V. B. G. A. 

of wood hollowed out by a knife, as used xxiii. 835, 836. 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 259 

Use of Clay Pellets. 

Captain P. J. Begbie, an old and painstaking and 
(for his time) fairly accurate authority on the Malay 
Peninsula, records the shooting of clay pellets (as well 
as darts) from the blowpipe by the Jakun ' at Malacca 
in 1833. This statement is confirmed by Mr. L. 
Wray, who informs me that these pellets are often 
employed by bird-collectors at Malacca, where they 
have been used from time immemorial. Mr. Wray 
himself had a Malacca bird-collector (an Eurasian 
Malay) who used these pellets for collecting purposes 
in Perak. Mr. Douglas, of Sarawak, also tells me 
that boys in Borneo commonly use small clay pellets 
for shooting small birds, and that these pellets are 
shot out of a small blowpipe. 

Use of the Blowpipe.- 

In loading, the blowpipe is held vertically in one 
hand and the pointed end of the dart inserted with 
the other into the orifice in the centre of the mouth- 
piece.^ The latter is always fitted to the root-end 
of the bamboo. Into the tul)e of the blowpipe, and 
behind the butt-end of the dart, is almost invariably 
inserted a small wad for the prevention of " windage." 
This wad is made from the flocculent down that 

1 Begbie, pp. 5, 6. for their reception), and he was only 

2 As an examiile of the extreme able to obtain four specimens altogether 
difficulty of obtaining information from (\'.-St. ii. 113). 

the aborigines about the blowpipe, •• So Boiie (tr. Bourien), \t. 78 : 

Vaughan-Stevens remarks that many " Into the bore of the inner Kimboo, at 

Malays living near the O. Kuantan the mouthpiece, is placed an arrow 

have never seen their blowpipes, several inches long." p"or an unique 

though they know that they possess and questionable exception see Maxwell 

them. In some cases these weapons mJ.R.A.S.^ .V. j9., No. 4, p. 48: "I 

were hid in the sterns of liviti^q bamboos had always regarde<l the blowpipe as a 

in the jungle (the nodes being removed breechloader," etc. 

26o 

WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

collects about the leaf-bases of certain palms, especially 
the " tukas " [Caryota Griffitkii or C. mitis), or certain 
kinds of rattan (Calmnus geminiflcris), and results 
from the destruction of the softer tissues/ 

In shooting, the entire mouthpiece is, as a rule, 
taken into the mouth, the fingers being commonly 
crossed beneath the tube (near the mouthpiece). 
Sometimes, however, the edges of the mouthpiece 
alone are inserted between the teeth and the lips. 
As the dart leaves the tube, there is a sharp hollow 
" ping " like that of a pop-gun. - 

Range of Dart. 

The effective range of the blowpipe darts used 
by the best " shots " of these tribes may be put at from 
50 to 60 yards as an outside limit, but in practice a 
range of 100 feet is seldom exceeded.^ 

' Vaughan-Stevens, ii. Ii6. Really 
the fibro-vascular bundles of the leaf- 
sheaths. 

2 Cp. Newbold, ii. pp. 400, 401 : 
"It is propelled by collecting a con- 
siderable quantity of air in the lungs, 
and suddenly emitting it with a sharp 
noise resembling that occasioned by 
the discharge of an air-gun." 

3 Cp. , for example (of the Sakai), 
(i) Hale, p. 289, where it is stated that 
the range is effective up to 60 yards (55 
m.), and that at 50 yards (45 m.) a 
skilled performer will put five out of 
six darts into a playing card. 

(2) De Morgan (vii. 417) says they 
can shoot straight up to 80 metres, 
but in practice do not shoot more than 
30 to 35 paces {23 m. to 27 m.). 

(3) Letessier puts the range at 28-30 
yards (25m. to 27m.), but he is no doubt 
speaking of the ordinary range of their 
shooting. They usually shoot at fairly 
short range, in order to make sure of 
their aim, as they do not wish to risk 
wastin" their arrows. 

(4) J. A. G. Campbell says : "I have 
myself seen birds and monkeys killed 
on high trees at a distance of 60 
yards" (55 m.) ; and adds: "The 
Sakai seldom misses his shot " (S. J. 
iii. 241). 

Of the Jakun — (i) Log;in (iny. /. A. 
vol. ii. p. 262) states that the range 
(of the blowpipe-dart) to take proper 
effect is about 70 or 80 feet (21 m. 
to 24 m.). " Some can reach 140 or 
150 feet (46 m. to 49 m.), but then 
there will be little chance of their 
inflicting a dangerous wound." 

(2) Bcrie (tr. Bourien), p. 78, says 
50-60 yards (45 m. to 54 m. ). 

(3) Newbold, ii. 400, 401, puts the 
effective range at 60-70 feet (20 m.). 

(4) \'aut;han-Stevens, in V. B. G. A. 
xxiii. 835, 836, puts it at 20-30 metres 
in a horizontal direction, and more 
in a vertical. 

(5) The Kuantan blowpipe is very 
roughly made ; it has a range of 40 
paces (30 m.) only (Vaughan-Stevens, 
ii. 113)- 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 261 

The Use of Ipoh. 

The question whether the use of Ipoh is of 
Malay origin must (says Geiger, p. 38) in all prob- 
ability be answered in the negative. It is clear, 
however, that he is here using the word Malay in its 
narrowest sense, as he subsequently points out (pp. 
40, 41) that the eastern boundary-line between those 
who use the blowpipe (and Ipoh) and those who do 
not does correspond to the boundary-line between the 
Malay and the Polynesian languages (p. 41). In this 
latter case he is clearly using the word Malay in its 
wider sense, as applied to what may be called 
" Greater Malaya " (including the countries inhabited 
by the " savage Malays " of Wallace). Moreover, he 
then proceeds to quote Brandes' remark, that " the 
natives who use the blowpipe form one family of 
languages." 

The true conclusion, after all, appears to be that 
the use of Ipoh may be of Malay origin, but only in the 
wider sense of the word; and in the same way, it is just 
conceivable that the blowpipe may be (in its wooden 
form at least) of " Greater Malayan " origin. On the 
other hand, the wooden blowpipe is so different a 
weapon from the blowpipe of bamboo that it will 
perhaps be maintained that the two forms may have 
arisen independently. Even, however, if this was the 
case, the bamboo weapon must certainly have been 
invented in some country like the Malay Peninsula or 
Sumatra, where Bambiisa ]Vrayi or longinodis is known 
to be indigenous ; and further, as has been remarked 
already, it is inconceivable that any intelligent race 
should descend to using the wooden form ot blowpipe 
when it had once known and used the infinitely 

262 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

superior blowpipe of bamboo. The only other possible 
alternative seems to be to accept the wooden blowpipe 
as the original form, and to suppose that the race 
which invented it failed to improve upon it, the 
invention of the (improved) bamboo form being 
conceded to a race infinitely behind the Malayan 
race in the matter of culture. To speak frankly, this 
last alternative does not appear credible, and unless 
on the whole we prefer to concede the possibility of 
the invention of at least two independent blowpipe 
types in the Malayan region, we are forced back upon 
the first of these two alternatives, viz. : the supposition 
that the bamboo blowpipe was introduced by the 
Sakai, who subsequently perfected it, and that it was 
then more or less roughly copied by the aboriginal 
tribes of Malayan origin in districts where B. Wrayi 
was wanting. 

I have spoken mainly of the blowpipe itself, 
rather than of the poison that was used with its darts, 
partly because I think that Geiger has shown that for 
all practical purposes the introduction of the one 
meant the introduction of the other, and partly because 
it is easier to get at the facts about the blowpipe than 
it is to get at those about " Ipoh." But I will now 
proceed to a discussion of the poison itself. 

In remarking that the various kinds of Ipoh poison 
are, as a rule (though not exclusively), rather used for 
hunting than for warlike purposes, Geiger explains 
that both Ipoh antiar and derrid, taken internally, are 
practically harmless, whereas Ipoh tieute, on account 
of the strychnine contained in it, " might be dan- 
gerous." Hence the latter poison is usually em- 
ployed for the destruction of beasts of prey such as 
the tiger (Newbold and Malbec and Bourgeois), 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 263 

though it certainly is used for apes. And this is 
probably, as Geiger suggests, the reason why the 
part struck by a poisoned arrow is usually excised 
before the game so killed is cooked and eaten — a 
practice which is doubtless of far more importance in 
the case of some of these poisons {e.g. tieute) than it 
is in the case of the others. 

The arrow and dart poison called " Ipoh " by the 
Malays has obtained its native name from the fact that 
the two chief substances which (either separately or 
in combination) form its basis are derived from plants 
distinguished, the one as the Ipoh tree (Antiaris), and 
the other as the Ipoh creeper [Strycknos). Derris 
elliptica or " tuba," on the other hand, is but rarely 
used, so that the poison-mixture almost invariably 
contains one or other of the Ipoh's as its main 
ingredient. The action of these two chief poisons is 
very different, and the choice of one or the other is, 
as has already been pointed out, dictated by the 
circumstances of supply. Incomparably the most 
famous of these two ingredients is, however, the sap 
of the Ipoh or Upas tree, which owes its notoriety 
to the inventions or exaggerations with w'hich Foersch 
once " amused the credulity of Europe." 

The deadly exhalations attributed to the Ipoh tree 
{Antiaris) certainly have, as has long been proved, r.o 
foundation whatever in fact, at all events so far as the 
tree itself is concerned. 

But it seems, on the other hand, well worlh 
pointing out that the sap of the " Rengas " tree 
certainly produces at the least contact (as is well 
known locally) an extraordinary inflammation of the 
skin. When I was residing at Klang in Selangor, 
there was a fine Rengas tree growing at the back of 

264 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

my house, and one day, not dreaming of the con- 
sequences, I ordered my Boyanese sais to cHmb the 
tree and lop off a few small branches which obscured 
the view. This he did, not knowing the tree, the 
result being that both his face and his hands quickly 
became inflamed and swollen beyond all recognition, 
and I was obliged to send him to hospital for treat- 
ment. This fact about the Rengas tree sap is well 
known in Malaya, and taking it in conjunction with the 
fact that Rengas sap often forms one of the ingredients 
of Ipoh poison, I cannot help thinking that here we 
have a quite possible source of the Upas-tree fable.' 

Ingredients of the Poison. 

The proper proportions of the ingredients used in 
making the dart-poison of the wild tribes have doubt- 
less been ascertained by centuries of trial, and are 
now in many cases handed down from father to son. 
Although, however, the basis of the poison may be 
the same among all the members of a given tribe, the 
exact proportions, and even the exact ingredients, 
forming the " blend " vary to a very great extent with 
the individual and (of course) with the locality and the 
season, and hence any conclusions reached must be 
necessarily general ones." 

* Foranactual legendof the Upas-tree got in exchange from the Malays, were 

type, see the Besisi tradition in vol. ii. mixed up together. It thus came to 

2 According to M. - Maclay the pass that the dart-poison not only of 

chief ingredient of this poison was every tribe, but of every individual of 

the juice of the well-known Upas tree each tribe, was made up of different 

of the Javanese, the Aniiaris toxicaria. materials, and that in consequence of 

With this juice a great many other sub- this the effects were very various. The 

stances were mixed, the number and effect on man was certainly very deadly 

nature of which depended partly on and very rapid : thoroughly trustwortliy 

chance, and partly on the science of Malays in different parts of the Penin- 

the preparer. The poison fangs of sula told him that they knew from 

diCerent kinds of snakes, the juices of actual observation that a man who had 

a number of trees and fruits, even been wounded by it was not able even 

arsenic, which the " tame " aborigines to finish his " sirih " (betel-chewing), 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 265 

Even Vaughan-Stevens, who talks of the "real arrow 
poison " as if it were a certain definite composition 
(instead of a set of compositions), states that indi- 
viduals of the same tribe disagree as to the proper 
composition of the poison, and that if a man dreams of 
killing a beast even with some perfectly harmless 
substance, he will in future add this to the ingredients 
which make up his own particular " blend " of the 
poison in question.^ 

Miscellaneous Ingredients. 

The employment of pepper, tobacco, capsicum, 
onion, and other comparatively harmless ingredients 
may be due {vide Geiger, p. 18) to the fact of their 
pungent qualities being regarded as likely to produce 
inflammation. According to Van Hasselt, on the 
other hand, they are added to give the poison the 
desired consistency, but this does not seem very 
probable. Scorpions' stings and snakes' fangs, etc., 
are also added to the mixture, as well as Pangium 
edule, Reinw., which contains prussic acid. In this last 
case, however, as well as in that of some of the other 
ingredients just mentioned, Geiger points out that the 
poisonous principle is almost certainly evaporated by 
boiling, and it may well be that some of the substances 
aforesaid are employed rather for magical than for 
pharmacological reasons. 

Use of Mineral Poisons. 

Geiger further informs us (p. 18) that no single poison 
(of all those that he investigated) showed the slightest 

but was seized with violent cramps very rapid eft'ect, even when ndminis- 

and severe vomitings, and so died. In tered in very small doses (J. A'. A. S., 

some experiments that M. • Maclay 5. A\, No. 2, pp. 213, 214). 

made vipon animals the poison had a ' ii. 128. Cp. also ii. loS. 

266 IVEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

chemical trace of either arsenic or antimony in its 
composition. Hence he elects to consider them as 
pure plant poisons. On the other hand, the weight of 
native testimony (of all kinds) as to the addition of 
arsenic to these poisons is so universal and over- 
whelming, that I am inclined to think we have not yet 
quite got to the bottom of the matter, though in the 
view of Mr. L. Wray it is the use of arsenic by the 
Malays, in the cleaning of their kris (and other) 
blades, that has given rise to these reports. " As a 
dart-poison" (Mr. Wray writes me), "arsenic would 
be useless, and it is not found in the Peninsula in a 
state in which even the Malays could extract it from 
its ores." It is sold in the bazaars, however, and may 
be used for special purposes ; e.g. in shooting tigers. 

Durability. 

As regards the durability of Ipoh poison, Geiger 
is doubtless right in ascribing the conflicting reports 
which characterise it in that respect to the variability 
of the ingredients composing the poison.^ There is 
almost certainly a great difference in durability 
between the poison obtained from the Upas creeper 
and that of the Upas tree. 

Effect of the Poison. 

Small birds or mamnials when struck by a dart 
coated at the point with poison of an average 
strength are killed almost instantaneously, but bigger 
ones take, as a rule, some minutes to die. In the 
case of the largest and strongest monkeys the effect 
of the same (average) poison may take a quarter of 

' Geiger, p. 24. The chemical the scope of this book, is fully treated 
aspect of the question, which is beyond by Geiger, loc. (it. 

CHAP. VI GENERAL REMARKS 267 

an hour or perhaps rather longer. In all cases the 
time which elapses before the animal dies depends 
naturally upon the strength of the poison which has 
been usedJ 

In the words of De Morgan, "a man or (big) 
animal," struck by one of these poisoned arrows, feels 
for several minutes nothing but the pain of the wound. 
This is followed by muscular spasms and vomiting, 
and death follows in a few (more) minutes, if a strong 
preparation of the poison has been used. If, how- 
ever, the poison is no longer fresh (or in any way too 
weak), the agony lasts for several hours, in the course 
of which the wound inflames and acquires a bluish 
tinge." 

Vaughan-Stevens says that apes and gibbons when 
struck run a little further through the branches and 
then fall down in about twenty minutes — less if Upas 
(Ipoh) is added to the poison. Old men (of the wild 
tribes) say that Ipoh makes the poison spread more 
rapidly through the blood. Ipoh acts instantaneously 
even when hard and dry ; without it the poison works 
much more slowly.^ 

Antidotes. 

The antidotes mentioned by Geiger (p. 26 scqq.) 

consist of certain plant-roots,' the leaf-stalks of a tree 

called "pule,""' the chewed root q>{ Hcrnandia sono7-a, 

L. ; as well as that of Opkioxylon scrpcutiniun, L., and 

' Cp. J. A. G. Campbell (p. 241): arrows of the Semang bow, but 
" For a large bird (as a horn- the Upas poison is used for these 
bill) or a monkey it takes about a as well as for the darts of the blow- 
quarter of an hour for the poison to pip<-'. 

work, after which time the animal -^ ii. 128 : and cji. Wray.y. A. I. I.e. 

falls to the ground ; with small birds * E.i:^. those of Criiium asiaticuttt, 

or beasts the poison is almost in- L., or Kadix toxicaria, Dutch, 
stantaneous."' ' Sic ( ? sipulih) = Ahtonia scholaris, 

- De Morgan (vii. 417; /'I/oninir, Hr. In Malay " pulih "=" return to 

ii. 621) is here writing of the poisoned life." 

268 WEAPONS AND JMPJ.EMENTS i-art ii 

Andira Horsficldi, Lesch. {PapilionacecB), as well as 
certain indescribable emetics such as that referred to 
by Friar OdoricusJ 

To these may be added the plant called " crab's- 
fat " (" lemak kepiting ") ^ mentioned by Newbold, and 
common salt, which is also (according to De Morgan) 
occasionally referred to as an antidote. According to 
the Malays, a particular kind of black maize if applied 
to the wound will act as a remedy. Some such 
substance may possibly be of use as an absorbent 
where a very mild preparation of poison is used, but as 
a rule the aborigines declare that the only remedy is to 
cut out the part affected immediately, whenever the 
strongest preparation of the poison (for which there 
is no known antidote) is used. This, however, is 
seldom possible, because even at a distance of from 
20 to 30 yards the aboriginal can drive his dart into 
the flesh up to the butt.^ 

1. — Semang. 
Stone I77ipleme7tts — Knives and Hatchets. 
The attempt of Vaughan- Stevens to identify 
certain stone implements, of which he obtained models, 
with tools of East Semang or Pangan workmanship, 
can hardly be sustained, for the reasons already set 
forth, and it may, I think, be taken as a certainty that 
no branch of the Negrito race in the Malay Peninsula 
has ever arrived at a sufficiently advanced stage of 
civilisation to enable them to produce the highly 
finished neolithic implements that are so common in 
the Peninsula. On the other hand, it is exceedingly 
probable that the Semang, like their Andamanese 

1 Odorici Lib. p. 21. ^ Newbold, ii. 403. 

•^ Vaughan- Stevens, ii. 128. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 269 

cousins, formerly employed both chips and flakes of 
stone for various cutting purposes, as well as the 
simple two- stone apparatus which with the Anda- 
manese takes the place of hammer and anvil. 

Slivers of bamboo, again, were and still are un- 
doubtedly used by the Semang as knife-blades^ and 
spear-heads, whilst long needles and other boring 
instruments are made of bone or wood. 

For filing the teeth (Malay fashion) the Pangan 
employ a piece of sandstone. 

The iron knives (" pisau "), choppers ("parang" 
or "golok"), and hatchets (" b'liong "), ordinarily 
employed by the Semang, are undoubtedly all of 
Malay origin, and are usually made by Malays, or by 
Chinamen following the ordinary Malay patterns, 
and have nothing particularly distinctive about them, 
which probably accounts for their being omitted from 
the accounts given by the usual authorities. I have 
ventured to draw attention to them, however, because 
even in cases where the blade may be actually of 
Malay manufacture, yet both the helve (or shaft) and 
its rattan lashings may be, and no doubt often are, 
distinctive of the race, and as such would repay any 
attention that might be given them. Indeed, I have 
often been informed by Malays that the axe-fastenings 
of the aborigines could be easily distinguished from 
those employed by the Malays in the same neighbour- 
hood. 

The Malay dagger, or " kris," and the " Tower 
musket " have both found their way to some extent 

into the hands of the Semang, by whom they 

especially the latter — are greatly prized. 

' Mr. G. C. Bellaniy has sent me a of Ulu Klci, Pahang; cp. p. 249. 
bone-hafted knife, from the " I'angan " ante, ti. 2. 

27 o WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS vaxt u 

The Spear. 

Kedah Semang*. — Hardly any writer, except De 
Morgan, mentions the use of the spear by the Negritos 
(Semang), though many talk of their bows and blow- 
pipes. It is, however, interesting to find that the 
Semang of Kedah have a word of their own for the 
spear, and that their name for it ^ is totally different 
both from the word used by the Sakai ^ and that used 
by the Jakun and Malays.^ 

A spear which was collected among the Semang 
tribes of Upper Perak (Gunong Sapi) by Grubauer, 
and which is now in the Ethnographical Museum at 
Cambridge, measured 53 J in, ( 1 307 mm., over-all length) 
by about i in. (25 mm.) in diameter at the thickest part. 

Its shaft was made of some tough and heavy 
wood, and had received a certain amount of polishing. 
The upper end of the shaft tapered to a point, which 
its owner had evidently been in the habit of planting 
in the ground. Its blade, which was of iron, measured 
64 inches (153 mm.) from point to shoulder, and a 
little less than an inch [ca. 20 mm.) in width. 

The Bow. 
Kedah Semang*. — The Semang living at Siong were 
evidently quite familiar with the bow, as they described 
it to me minutely in every detail, but they told me 
that they had now given up using it. It is quite 
possible, on the other hand, that they were concealing 
their bows, as they are known not unfrequently .0 do. 
The bow (" loydd ") that they once used (and of which 

' "Ad." For De Morgan's account support the view that the Sakai learnt 

cp. L' H. ii. 618. the use of the spear from the aboriginal 

2 " Tarok " (Senoi dialect); "be- ]\lalayan tribes, 
lush " (Tembeh dialect) : both of which ' "Lembing" or " bolos " — con- 
words are of Malayan origin, and thus nected with Mai. "buloh " = bamboo. 

1. SemaiiR bow. 

Skmang Implements. 
3 «• 

De Morgan. 
Arrowhead with two barbs. 

Arrows. 3 a. Transverse section of shaft. 
5. Kutt-cnd of arrow showing vanes and notch. 6. .Vrrows in their quiver. 7,8. Bamboo tubes used 
.-xs poison recepl.-icles. 9,10. Spc.irs with bamboo heads. 11,12. Spears with iron heads. 13. Cane. 
»4«, ^\k. Bamboo fishing receptacles. 15. I„irgc bamboo wnter-tulre with arm. 16, i6<j. Wooden 
plate. 17. Small box or recept.icle m.ide from the hard outer part of the "kapayang" fruit. 18. 
Bamboo whistle. 19, 20. Flutes. 21. Bamlwo "guitar" with strings made by r.\ising the skin of the 
bamboo itself, and inserting wedges lieneath them. 22. Drum with wooden barrel, and heatled w ith 
skm tightened by wooden wedges. 23. Bamboo Jews-harp. 24, 24 a, h. Flint and steel, with bamboo 
receptacle.— De Morgan in /,'//. 25th October 1S85, p. 619. 
Vol. I. p. ■i-jo. 

t 

I 

- 2 " 

y -3 

_: a. 

I 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 271 

they made me a model) was, they said, roughly speaking, 
"a fathom and a half" in height (probably 2.1 m. to 
2.4 m.), and was made of a kind of wood called, in 
the Semang dialect, " temakah." The string was of 
twisted jungle-fibre and the arrows ("wong loydd ") 
were of bamboo with barbed iron heads. 

I was further informed that the string was made from 
carefully twisted strands oftree-bark, greased and waxed,' 
and the arrow-shafts from an internode of bamboo. 

The same informants told me that the shafts of the 
arrows are often decorated with incised patterns, and 
have barbed-iron points which fit into a socket at the 
end of the shaft. This part of the shaft is bound 
round with a thin sliver of rattan, and the point is so 
fitted into it that any wounded animal that tries to 
rid itself of the arrow (by rubbing itself against the 
brushwood) may succeed in breaking off the shaft, but 
will leave the point sticking in the wound. A wound 
from this point, moreover (which is crusted with 
several coatings of Upas poison), soon kills its victim. 
The arrow is usually winged with feathers of the 
hornbill, and the point is rudely forged by pounding 
a red-hot piece of iron between two large stones. 

Perak Semang". — The Semang (of Perak) have a 
very powerful bow and iron-barbed arrows, with which 
they kill the largest game.'- It is usually about 7 ft. 
(2.1 m.) in length, and the iron heads of the arrows, 
which are given a high finish, are of good workman- 
ship, and poisoned.^ Mr. L. Wray writes me that 
the arrow-heads (of the Perak Semang) are made of 

' DeM., who confirms this (/.'//. ii. = feathers or "vane"; and "go" = 

6 1 8), adds that sinews of wild animals quiver. The bow isof "ibul" wood, and 

(deer or bull) are also used for the cord. 2 metres in length, with a curvature of 

- Swett. p. 228. According to 0.30 m. The arrow is 90 cm. in 

De M. "ak" = bow; *'ya6" = bow- length. For further details, cp. 

string; " loi" = arrow-point ; "preg" L'H. ii. 618. ^ fjale, p. 290. 

372 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

hard wood, of thin sheet-iron cut from meat-tins, etc. 
(mounted in wood), and also of forged iron, and that 
he has sent specimens of all these kinds to the 
British Museum from Selama and Upper Perak. 

Mr. Wray further states that, besides the blowpipe- 
darts, the Semang used bows with poisoned arrows. 
These arrows had detachable fore-shafts, with either 
barbed-iron or hard wooden heads. The heads are 
about 2 in. in length by f in. in breadth (50 mm. by 
19 mm.), and are thickly coated, except near the point, 
with poison. Mr. Wray had not seen the effect of 
one of these arrows on an animal, but the Semang 
amongst whom he lived for about three months on one 
occasion said that they were able to kill pig, sambhur 
deer, wild oxen, and even rhinoceros with them, and 
as he saw bones of these animals at their camps, there 
appeared to be no reason to doubt the truth of the 
statement. It was asserted that a deer would drop 
in from 30 to 40 yards (27 m. to 36 m.) after being 
struck by an arrow, the rapidity of the action of the 
poison depending on the vascularity of the portion 
of the body pierced by the arrow.^ 

But the best idea of the Semang bow can be 
formed from the description of two specimens which 
were collected in Perak by Grubauer on his recent 
expedition to the Malay Peninsula, and which were 
purchased from him by me on behalf of the Cam- 
bridge University Museum. 

The first of these two bows, the stock of which 
was made of a light-coloured but tough kind of wood, 
measured jj in. (over-all length) by i in. (1957 rnm. 
by 25 mm.) in thickness at the handle, and the 
shoulders, which took the knots at each extremity of 

' /. A. /. vol. xxi. (1892), pp. 477, 478. Cp. n Homme, ii. 6l8. 

NEGRITOS OF PERAK 273 

the bow-cord, were 3 in. (76 mm.) from the tip of the 
stock at the lower end, and \\ in, {-^^ mm.) from the tip 
at the other. The length of the cord, which was made 
of stout twisted jungle-fibre (probably manufactured 
from the bark of the artocarpus or " t'rap " tree), was 
about 68 in. (1907 mm.) from knot to knot. 

The second bow was made of a different kind of 
wood, which was of a dark brown colour, and polished. 
Its over-all length was 71 in. (1983 mm.), and it was 
rather thicker at the handle (i^ in. = 38 mm.); the 
distance from the extreme upper tip to the shoulder 
taking the upper knot of the bow-cord was i^ in. 
(38 mm.) ; the corresponding measurement at the 
lower extremity being 2 in. (5 cm.), and the length of 
the cord itself, from knot to knot, 63 in. (160 cm.). 

Together with the bows just described were a 
couple of quivers containing poisoned arrows. Each 
of these quivers was made from a bamboo internode, 
the lower knot of which formed the bottom of the 
quiver, but neither had any sort of cover or lid, the 
projecting butt-ends of the arrows preventing it. 

The body of the first quiver was made from a 
particular kind of bamboo which appeared to me to 
resemble the kind called " buluh kasap." It bore no 
decoration of any description, and its diameter was 
\\ in. (38 mm.), its length being 19^ in. (484 mm.). 
In this latter measurement, however, is not included 
a projecting spike which served as a foot when 
planted in the ground, and which, in the present case, 
measured 5 in. (126 mm.) in addition; so that its 
over-all length was 24^ in. (611 mm.). 

Its contents were a couple of arrows and one long 
hornbill feather measuring 14.^ in. (344 mm.) in length. 

The length of the first arrow (over-all) was 40 in. 

VOL. I T 

274 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

(loi cm.), and its diameter two-fifths of an inch (i cm.). 
The shaft was of bamboo, and the arrow was made on 
the harpoon principle; that is to say, its head was fitted 
into a short wooden socket-piece with a sharp upper 
end which fitted into the hollow at the lower extremity 
of the shaft or " stele," so that the head could be 
drawn out without difficulty when required. The 
head itself was of iron, and was thickly coated with a 
dark brown (almost black) incrustation of Upas poison. 
It had only a single barb, which before it was caked 
over with the crust of poison must have been about 
an inch in length, and had been fitted into the socket- 
piece by a whipping of some strong but fine jungle- 
fibre (probably the strong thread-like fibres of the 
" langkap " palm, or some allied material). The 
entire length of the head (including the socket-piece) 
was 1 1 in, (28 cm.), and the latter was nicked all 
round at the point where it joined the shaft. ^ 

At the butt-end of the shaft was the rounded nock, 
about a fifth of an inch (5 mm.) deep, and just below 
this nock was the outermost of the two fastenings of 
the feathers, the precise object of which latter is not 
very clear. The feathers used are those of the horn- 
bill, and only two are used at a time. The quill 
having been split, the feather is divided, half being 
attached to one side of the shaft and half to the other, 
by means of two lashings, one close to the nock (as 
described) and the other about a quarter of the way 
down the shaft, the exact length of the feathering being 
8^ in. (204 mm,). But the extraordinary part about 
the feathering of these arrows is that the web of each 

* For a Semang quiver, v. UII. ii. could not be ascertained in the case 

618. of these first two arrows, since the 

- The exact method l)y which the juncture was entirely concealed by 

head was fitted into the socket -piece the lashing. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF PERAK 275 

feather is clipped right up to the quill, so that it can 
have only the very slightest effect upon the flight of the 
arrow. Moreover, the two webs are affixed (all that 
is left of them) at a convergent angle, and the question 
which at once suggests itself, in view of this peculiar 
method of fastening them, is whether the Semang 
really understand the principle of feathering, and 
whether they do not rather employ it either as the 
mutilated survival of more intelligent methods, or 
perhaps make use of it for solely magical reasons.. 
At all events, the probability that they do not 
understand the principle is borne out by the in- 
dependent observations of Vaughan-Stevens, in con- 
tinuation of the passage quoted below ; and the 
(apparently inevitable) conclusion that in the Semang 
we have a race of archers who employ feathering, but 
do not understand its elementary principles, is a 
sufficiently remarkable fact, and one which may 
perhaps be taken as showing the extreme simplicity 
of the civilisation that we find among them. I 
should add that the only part of this arrow which is 
decorated is the part covered by the feathering, which 
has a large number of incised rings cut round it. 

The second arrow (of the first quiver) was like to 
the lirst, from which it only differed slightly in 
respect of its measurements. Its shaft, for instance, 
was 37^ in. (897 mm.), over-all length, and two- 
fifths of an inch ( i cm.) in diameter. The length of the 
feathering, including the lashings, was S^^,-, in. (210 
mm.), and the web was clipped off as above de- 
scribed. The iron head, which was single-barbed, like 
that of the first arrow, was, however, a trifle shorter. 

The second quiver, — which is decorated with a 
number of concentric rings and a bold geometrical 

276 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

design consisting of two rows of triangles, with con- 
verging points (called " puchok rebong " or the " bam- 
boo-shoot " pattern), and below this with a pattern 
consisting of a number of the concentric and conterminal 
curves, known to the Semang as the " hawk's-eye 
pattern" (" mata lang "), — measured 24^ in. (611 
mm.) over-all, the projecting spike or foot being 8^ 
in. (204 mm.), and i| in. (35 mm.) in diameter. 

There were no loose feathers inside it, but four 
arrows, whose over-all lengths were 32]^ in. (814 
mm,), 34:| in. (864 mm.), T^2)t '^^- (^34 mrn.), and, again, 
32I in. respectively, with a length of feathering varying 
from 7 to 7^ in. (i77 mm. to 200 mm.). In diameter 
they were a fraction less than the arrows contained in 
the first quiver, but the only important respect in which 
they differed consisted in the treatment of the head. 

Two of these arrows were of the same type 
(roughly speaking) as those in the first quiver ; i.e. 
their iron points were spliced into a short wooden 
socket-piece, which latter in its turn was inserted into 
the hollow end of the bamboo shaft. Between these 
two the only noticeable difference lay in the manner 
in which the juncture had been effected between the 
wooden socket-piece and the iron point ; in the first 
case the spike of the iron point had been driven into 
the socket-piece (which latter had been bored out on 
purpose to take it), the two parts of the head being 
bound very firmly together at the point of junction with 
a lashing of split rattan coated with resin ; in the second 
case the juncture was effected by setting the spike of 
the iron arrow-head between two short prong-like 
projections (of the socket- piece), somewhat on the 
" rat's-tail " principle, and binding the two parts 
round as before. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF PERAK 277 

Both these two arrows are single-barbed, and are 
decorated, like those contained in the first quiver, 
with a number of incised rings between the two 
extremities of the feathered portion of the shaft. 

The remaining two arrows of the second quiver, 
which have not yet been described, are much more 
roughly made, and make no pretension to any skill 
of workmanship. In both of them the iron spike of 
the arrow-head is inserted into the hollow at the 
bottom of the shaft direct, and they are entirely un- 
provided with the wooden socket -piece or holder 
present in all the other specimens. Also, they are 
quite undecorated. 

I think there can be no doubt that these last two 
arrows have been hurriedly made, for use, perhaps, 
in an emergency, and that they are less typical of the 
arrows ordinarily used by the Semang than those 
which have received the greater care and finish. 

According to Vaughan - Stevens, the feathers of 
the rhinoceros bird (" tekub ") are used as a chariii to 
make the arrow fatal when it is employed against the 
tiger, and only tiger-arrows are so equipped.' 

Vaughan-Stevens further remarks that this feather- 
ing is not adopted to make " the arrow tly straight as 
in Europe," or at least that the Semang docs not 
understand the principle involved in it. " The 
feather is stuck in the middle of the shaft, and its 
vane may point either forwards or backwards, and 
it does not matter how it happens to be fastened 
on." When Vaughan-Stevens pointed out that the 
arrow, when released (if the vane pointed forwards), 
would offer resistance to the wind and flutter sharply 
towards the left, the Semang replied that if the 

* Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 135. 

278 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

" wing " of the feather pointed backwards, it would 
be " compressed " (?) when in actual use. Vaughan- 
Stevens further remarks, somewhat naively, that, " at 
all events, as a tiger is always attacked at a distance 
of a few yards only, an exact aim is of little con- 
seque?ice " ! ^ 

The feathers are of five types, which are con- 
sidered to be of varying values. In one the full 
breadth of the wing is cut down whenever it is 
required for use. The least valuable kind is only 
used if the better sorts are rare or unobtainable. In 
one sort the feather is split with a chopper (" parang "), 
an operation which requires the greatest care and 
precision. - 

In order to make the feathers more effective, the 
Putto is said in ancient times to have pronounced a 
charm over them, but nobody now knows this charm, 
for the Puttos are long ago dead and gone.^ 

The illustrations which accompany the foregoing 
account represent the following objects : — [a) quiver as 
used by the Semang, not for hunting but on his 
travels through the jungle. It does not contain more 
than ten arrows, which are, however, of different 
sorts, two being tiger-arrows ; [d) quiver with magic 
rings ; {c) obsolete tiger-arrow, headed with bamboo ; 
[d) and [e) other types of arrows.^ 

The decorated bamboo quiver, which holds only 
three or four arrows, terminates in a point which 
enables it to be planted in the ground, and is either 
simply carried in the hand, or passed through the 
back of the wearer's belt.'' 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 135. 

•■2 3 45 //,iJ_ 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF PERAK 279 

Preparation of the Poison. 

Perak Semang-. — The methods employed in pre- 
paring the arrow-poison of the Perak Semang are 
identical with those used for the manufacture of poison 
for their blowpipe-darts. 

De Morgan states that a coating of poison is 
applied directly to the arrow-head, which is dried over 
the fire like the wooden spatula, when it is covered 
with the dart-poison. A considerable number of 
coatings (of poison) are applied, so that the arrow- 
head gets thickly encrusted with it.^ 

The same writer's account of the effects of the 
poison, which of course vary considerably with its 
strength and that of the victim, has already been 
given, and so need not here be repeated." 

The ordinary range at which the Semang bow is 
used is from 30 to 40 paces (23 m. to 30 m.) — no 
greater than that of the blowpipe. The actual 
distance, however, to which the arrows will carry is 
something much greater ; De Morgan, in fact, places 
it at about 150 metres.^ 

This same authority states, and here he is in 
complete accordance with what I have heard from 
the Negritos myself, that these arrows are employed 
by the Semang for attacking all kinds of animals, not 
only monkeys and birds, but big and dangerous game 
such as the elephant, rhinoceros, and the tiger. And 
although Vaughan - Stevens alleges that they are 
employed for tigers only, the statement of De Morgan 
is undoubtedly, I think, the right one.' 

Patani Semang. — Of the bow used by the Eastern 

' De .Morgan, vii. 417. ^ De Morgan, vii. 415. 

-' Supra, p. 267. * Ibid. 

28o ]VEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS i'art ii 

Semang, or Pangan, we know little more than what 
is contained in the account given by De la Croix. 
The Semang of Patani employ instead of the blow- 
pipe an immense bow of about 6 to 7 ft. (1.8 m. to 
2.1 m.) in length, which is made either of bamboo or 
of ironwood, the bow-string being a cord of twisted 
rattan.^ The arrow, which is 0.70 m. in length, is 
made of bamboo, and carries at the butt-end a couple 
of feathers, clipped and fitted to it longitudinally, and 
at the point an iron blade sharpened and furnished 
either with one or with two barbs." 

These arrows, like the darts of the blowpipe, are 
always poisoned with " Ipoh." ^ 

77ie Bloivpipe mid Darts. 

Kedah Semang*. — In addition to their national 
weapon, the bow, the Negritos also very frequently 
make use of the bamboo blowpipe, which they have 
undoubtedly borrowed from some of their wild neigh- 
bours, either Sakai or Jakun. 

The blowpipe has received but little elaboration 
among the Semang. It consists of a long and delicate 
inner tube (which is the actual blowpipe), protected 
by an outer tube or casing, which serves the double 
purpose of preserving the fragile inner tube from 
damage and of keeping it from warping as the sap 
dries out of it.^ 

' De M. (iii. 42) declares, and I Andaman Negritos (which difiFers widely 
agree with him, that i)amboo is not from that used by the natives of Great 
used f()r bows. It is too weak. If the Andaman); and that even the arrows 
illustration given by De la Croix on p. (though the similarity is less marked 
341 of the article here quoted be com- than in the case of the bow) never- 
pared with those of Negrito bows in theless show a general resemblance. 
Man's Audatiianese {yXdXQ VI. pp. 174, ^ jje ]a Croix, p. 331. ^ Ibid. 
175). it ^^"ill be seen that this Semang * Cp. De Morgan, vii. 415, and 
bowisexactlysimilarto that of the Little Begbie, pp. 5, 6. 

=■•5 )!■ 
3 Z'^ 

a. o <£. 

o a 9- 

-§5 I 

— ,0 .0 

< 1 g ■£ 

— ^ — 

NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 

The inner pipe or blow-tube naturally requires to 
be absolutely free from any roughness or inequality, 
such as might in the least interfere with the propulsion 
of the dart. Hence it is manufactured when possible 
from a single internode of a particular species of 
l)amboo, whose stem combines the two essentials of 
great length of internode with an extremely small 
diameter.^ This plant, however, is very rare, and 
has only been recorded hitherto from one or two 
mountains in the Peninsula {e.g. G. Inas and others), 
and bamboos whose internodes are of sufficient length 
to form a single jointless tube are rarer still ; '" though 
even these are occasionally met with. 

Most usually, therefore, the inner tube is composed 
of two internodes. The node or joint is excised, and 
the two extremities brought carefully together and 
clamped by means of a closely-fitting sheath (usually 
of palm-wood), which is slipped over the two abutting 
ends on what may perhaps be called a sort of fish- 
plate system. 

Up to this point the method of manufacturing the 
Semang blowpipe does not differ in any essential from 
that employed by the Sakai. The Semang, however, 
apparently finds it too much trouble to poke out the 
central node of the blowpipe case, and to polish it 
within (Sakai fashion) by drawing through it the 
prickly whip-ends of the rattan. Hence he simply 
cuts the outer tube through at the central knot, and 
having excised the latter, slips the two portions 
of the now bisected casing over the inner tube, and 
unites them by a mere splice of the roughest 
description. Again, he seldom takes any great 

' Bambusa Wrayi or longinodis. are also made by ihe Senoi and Tcmlx;h 

- Cp. Hale, p. 288: such weapons (see Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 112). 

282 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

trouble in decorating or giving a " finish " to the 
completed weapon. 

Perak Semang". — Another peculiarity about the 
Negrito blowpipe is that its mouthpiece is frequently 
made of gutta-percha or resin.' 

One of the blowpipes that was brought back by 
Grubauer from the same district possessed a jointless 
inner tube of Bambusa Wrayi, and measured 85^ in, 
(217 cm.), over-all length." It had a round wooden 
mouthpiece of the type found among the Semang in 
the northern frontier of Perak and in Kedah. This 
specimen is now in the Cambridge Ethnographical 
Museum, together with another blowpipe, collected at 
the same place and time, the peculiarity of which is 
that its mouthpiece is made of a solid lump of resin, 
apparently as a substitute for gutta-percha, which is 
more frequently used for the mouthpiece by Semang 
tribes. 

The over-all length of this latter specimen is 80A 
in. (204 cm.). It has a spliced inner tube, joined in the 
usual way, and it also has what one hardly expects to 
find in a Semang blowpipe, viz. the short cylindrical 
bamboo block inside the muzzle-end, which is so 
commonly used by Sakai tribes, though its exact 
raison d'etre is not very clear. 

Pang-an or East Semang. — Among the Eastern 
Semang (Pangan) the shaft of the blowpipe-dart is 
generally of rougher workmanship than it is among 
the Sakai. The former manufacture it from the leaf- 
stalk of the " bertam " palm [Bugeissona tristis), the 
shaft being simply pared down with a knife until it 
reaches the dimensions of a rather thick knitting- 
needle or "crow quill," when it is generally polished with 

' De Morgan, vii. 416; IJH. ii. 613, 614. - See p. 255, «. 4, supra. 

I 

f..f,le/Ji- 

Skmam; BLovvi'iri-: Ai'r.\KAiL.'«. ' ''"'''•'" 

1,2. Negrito blowpipes. 3. Dart. 4. Poison-spatul.i. 5. Section of mouth-eiid 
of a blowpipe, showing dart in position in centre of inner tube, with wad (A') behind 
the butt-end (.V) of the dart, P, K, S, being the arrangement for splicing the 
inner tube, and L, Z,', that for joining when necessary the miuithpiece-end on to the 
outer tube (6, 7). S. Semang dart-quiver. 
/■<'/. /. /. 282. 

CHAP. VI EAST COAST NEGRITOS 283 

" tiger's-tongue" leaves (" memplas rimau"), lightly 
touched with resin, and fitted into a small cone-shaped 
butt-end. It is then sharpened to a fine point, and 
has a slight incision or nick cut all round the shaft at 
the commencement of the point. This nick enables 
the point (whenever the shaft collides with anything) 
to break off short, and thus, bee-like, the dart leaves its 
sting in the wound when the quarry tries to escape 
through the jungle. It is not, perhaps, going too 
far to describe the dart as a sort of human bee-sting, 
and it is not impossible that this feature of the wild 
man's armoury may have been copied from nature. It 
is of course only the point, below the nick, that is 
coated with poison. 

The point itself is as long and fine as a needle, 
but is nevertheless as a rule wonderfully strong, 
though this strength naturally depends upon the 
qualities of the stem from which it is made. The 
conical butt, which steadies the dart in its flight and 
assists its momentum, is fitted on to the thicker end 
of the dart-shaft, and is made of a species of rattan 
(" rotan 'lang "), which is pared down with a knife just 
sufficiently to allow it to pass with freedom through 
the tube. 

As regards the length of the darts, a Semang 
named Chintok told me that the Pangan of Ligeh 
make use of the foot (from heel to toe) as the re- 
cognised standard of length for a blowpipe-dart, but 
that longer darts carried both further and truer than 
the shorter ones. Another standard which was said 
to be in use was the bone of the forearm measured 
from the elbow to the little finger-joint. 

The quiver in which the Semang kept their 
new-made darts was of the simplest possible type, 

284 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part n 

consisting of nothing but an internode ("joint") of 
bamboo, which was, however, often highly ornamented 
exteriorly,' but was nevertheless entirely devoid of the 
elaborate fittings which are to be found in the quivers 
used by the Sakai. 

Preparation of the Poison. 

Kedah Semang-. — The following is a detailed 
account of the method employed by the Semang for 
tapping the Upas tree. During my stay at Siong 
(in the interior of Kedah), a Semang named Padang 
went out one morning to collect Upas poison for his 
darts, and I was allowed to accompany him. He took 
with him a poison receptacle made out of a bamboo 
internode (it was about one foot long, and just big 
enough in diameter to admit a man's thumb), a jungle- 
knife or chopper (" golok "), and a small lump of wax 
obtained from the comb of a small wild bee.^ A 
few yards away from the hut, in heavy jungle, he 
stopped in front of a fine tree from 40 to 60 ft. (12 m. 
to 18 m.) high, and with smooth bark not unlike an 
English beech. This was a specimen of the Upas 
tree. Picking a leaflet of the low-growing " bertam " 
palm,'^ he cut off a part of it, taking a strip of leaf 
about 9 inches long. This strip he affixed by means 
of the wax to the stem of the tree. He then vigorously 
slashed the bark of the tree with the chopper, 
cutting a succession of large V-shaped marks, one 
above the other, in the bark. This process, he de- 
clared, was dangerous, from the liability of the sap to 
spurt into and blind the operator's eyes. The poison, 
however, is a blood poison, and there does not appear 

1 Cp. VH. ii. 617 (illustration). ^ Mai. "kelulut." 

•"' Eugeissona (ristis, Grift". {Pabiue). 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 285 

to be any real danger, as even the practice of cutting 
out the flesh surrounding the wound, before eating 
an animal which has been killed with a blowpipe- 
dart, does not appear to be practised universally,^ and 
there is probably no great harm in the poison unless 
(as stated) when it gets into the blood. - 

To return to the subject, another Semang (named 
Chintok) showed me how to apply the poison to the 
darts. This process was usually performed over one of 
the numerous hearth-fires within the palm-leaf shelter, 
but on the present occasion it was performed outside. 
Chintok took the bamboo containing the poison, and 
borrowing a fire-log from his own hearth, settled down 
quietly to the work. Having first poured the poison 
into the bamboo tray (formed from a diagonal section 
of a big stem of bamboo), he next took up a little of 
the liquid in a primitive kind of bamboo ladle, and 
pouring it out upon a broad wooden spatula, com- 
menced to toast the latter at the fire, working up 
the poison with a small bamboo spatula. When first 
deposited on the spatula, the poison was very fairly 
liquid, and of a light brown, liver, or coffee colour, bui 
Chintok continued to heat it until it became of a 
very rich, dark "Vandyke" brown, little (if at all) 
lighter than the dried poison which is still to be seen 
on the darts. As soon as it had sufficiently thickened 
and browned. Chintok rolled the tip of each of the 

' P"or an exception sec Borie (ir. sap, and for experiment have lain along 

Bourien), p. 78 (of the Mantra). the trunk, sleeping there for a whole 

* The wild tribes certainly appear, or night, without its having the slightest 

pretend to be, ver)- much afraid of the effect on me. I have held my head 

tree, but on this point \aughan-Stevens close over the boiling sap and breathed 

says: " I have myself felled four, have the strongly - smelling steam for an 

spent three to four hours sitting on the hour together without getting even a 

trunk, and waited till the sap flowed headache, and I never felt a burning if 

out of the cut rings, have had my I put the juice on my skin or any irri- 

hands and arms quite sticky with the lation in the eyes" (V.-St. ii. 112 . 

286 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

darts in turn in it until they acquired a thick, coagu- 
lated clot about the point, which extended as high 
as the nick already referred to. The darts, thus 
poisoned, were dried in the sun, being made to lean 
against a stick or log, with the points directed upwards. 

It was alleged by the Semang that the "blackening" 
of the dart would render it less visible when in use. 
but even if the assertion were true, it seems hardly 
necessary. Yet some of the Semang maintained that 
the dart-point (when coated with the poison) is regu- 
larly " blackened " by being smoked either over a fire 
or in torch-smoke. Possibly, however, the reason of 
the popularity of the black tint may be merely that it 
shows that the dart has been well dried. 

The poison used is of several strengths, which 
vary according to the kind of quarry which it is de- 
signed to kill. Chintok informed me that when it was 
used in its full strength a thin line was burnt across 
the butt-end thus, 0 ; but that when the poison used 
is of inferior strength (as it would be if designed for 
small game or birds), no mark was made on it. 

None of the Kedah Semang were in the habit of 
mixing anything with the Upas poison. This, how- 
ever, was due (they said) to the fact that they used 
poison derived direct from the Upas tree [Antiaris), 
which can be utilised without any further admixture, 
whereas other Semang tribes, e.g. those north of the 
Plus, employed the Upas creeper (" ipoh akar," or 
" ipoh gunong "), which has been identified with 
Stryckttos tieute {Bl. Loganiace(E)} 

The cuticle or bark of this latter plant is (by the 
Semang north of the Plus) shredded and boiled till it 

* See Ridley's Planl-List, s.v. " Ipoh." Cp. also J. A. G. Campbell, 
p. 241, 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 287 

becomes sufficiently thickened for use, but they beHeve 
the fumes of the boiHng liquor to be so poisonous that 
they sit yards away from the pot during the operation/ 

According to Vaughan- Stevens, the Ipoh by 
itself does not kill in twenty-five cases out of thirty, 
and, in the other five, does so only through the pier- 
cing of an artery or other vital part. This statement, 
however, must be received with caution, as the poison 
is not required to kill, but merely to bring down the 
quarry, which is usually followed up and despatched 
by hand," the strength of the poison used naturally 
varying greatly according to the resisting power of 
the object struck. If the quarry, e.g. a small bird, were 
allowed to fall dead in thick jungle, it would certainly 
be hard to retrieve, whereas when it is wounded and 
trying to escape through the jungle, it can be tracked 
more easily (from a native point of view) by the rustling 
it makes. Moreover, the aborigines naturally husband 
their scanty stock of poison as far as possible, and 
seldom if ever waste their ammunition.^ 

The question of antidotes has been much debated, 
but the only one that the Semang of Kedah could 
suggest was the eating of earth mixed with " asam 

* For a similar instance of the based not on the Ipoh creeper (Strychtus) 
use of the tree-Ipoh poison alone, see but on the tree Ipoh ; and as no men- 
Hale, p. 289. See also De Morgan tion is made of Strychnos ("Hiay") 
(L'H. ii. 620), who is perfectly clear on being added to it, and Vaughan- 
the point, and hears out what I my- Stevens himself adds that even for large 
self independently observed. De birds the " Ipoh " itself was sufficient, 
Morgan remarks that "if they require the conclusion is obvious. Moreover, 
a less - powerful poison, they employ on p. 107 he distinctly implies that in 
the sap of the Ipoh tree, with the some cases only Atttiaris poison is em- 
addition of the sap of certain small ployed. 

roots (' tuberculcs '), or even the sap - C^. Z. f. E. xxvi. 169, where 

of the Ipoh by itself." monkeys wounded by one of these darts 

But the most conclusive evidence on are described as being despatched by 

this point is that of Vaughan-Stevens the chopper ("parang "). 

himself, according to whose account the ^ Cp. Z'//. ii. 6 1 7, where we arc told 

poison of the Benua-Jakun tril)es is they never shoot at a moving object. 

WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

k'lubi " (an acid jungle fruit), but this does not seem to 
agree with the Sakai and Jakun prejudice, which is 
directed against the eating of acid fruit with the flesh 
of animals killed by the dart. On the other hand, the 
eating of the earth would no doubt in itself be good. 

Perak Semang. — De la Croix quotes ^ from Sir 
Hugh Low's journal the results of some experiments 
with Ipoh poison which Sir H. Low had carried out. 
He quotes, inter alia, Sir Hugh Low's remark to the 
effect that the Semang informed him that in preparing 
their poison they mixed the sap of the tree- Ipoh with 
that of a particular kind of climbing plant, and that 
they then dried it immediately on a spatula over the 
fire, no further preparation being required. " 

Sir Hugh Low is further quoted as writing that 
on a particular day one Lela Perkasa had just brought 
him some fresh sap from an Ipoh tree growing near- 
by, the trunk of which had been cut down, and that 
in view of previous experiences, he (Sir H. Low) had 
the poison prepared in his own presence.^ 

The man began by making a small wooden spatula, 
on which he spread successive layers of the poison. 
This he dried gradually over a slow fire, or rather over 
hot embers, the substance immediately turning a nut- 
brown colour. He assured Sir Hugh that the poison 
was thus carried on the spatula, and that when it was 
required for use it was only necessary to moisten the 
point of the arrow and rub it over the poison."* 

The tree which furnished the sap had been cut 
down, but young branches had sprouted since, and those 
that he brought in proved that it was essentially the 
same as an artocarpus, from which Sir H. had obtained 

i 

1 Sir H. Low, quoted by De la Croix, p. 331. 
2 3* Ibid. Cp. L' Homme, ii. 620-622. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF PERAK 289 

some poison some time back on the banks of the 
Plus.^ 

After describing further experiments with the 
poison, Sir H. Low remarks that Lela Perkasa had 
assured him that the sap of the Ipoh creeper, when 
not quite fresh (as in the previous day's experiments), 
could not produce so rapid an effect as that which had 
been prepared the same morning. ' 

Lela Perkasa further stated that the sap of the 
Ipoh^ was absolutely innocuous until it had been 
heated as above described. When a stronger poison 
is required, the sap of the Ipoh is mixed with sap 
obtained from the roots of a plant called " lekir " 
(" lekyer " — a common Amorphophalhts). A tenth 
part of this latter added to the mixture will make the 
poison strong enough to kill a rhinoceros or a tiger ; 
if it merely touches the skin it will raise a blister, and 
hence they are afraid to keep it ready-made for fear of 
accidents. There is another plant called "gadong," 
which is described as a species of wild yam, and 
whose sap increases the activity of the poisonous 
principle of Ipoh ; yet Lela Perkasa declared that 
none of these saps is poisonous in the state in which 
it is gathered from the tree, but requires admixture 
and heating over a slow fire. This operation, he 
said, should only be performed in the jungle, and in 
the presence of not more than two persons.' 

The "lekir" has a stem about 9 feet high. The 
leaves, which branch into three separate parts, are 
from 4-5 feet long. The stem of the biggest, though 
not yet quite full grown, was 4 inches (" pouces ") in 

' Sir H. Low, quoted by Dc la meant. For \aughan -Stevens' experi- 

Croix, p. 331. 2 //, ments with the sap, see p. 287, /;. i. 

■' Probably the Ipoh tree is here * Sii II. Low, Av. cit. p. m. 

VOL. I U 

290 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

diameter, and was variously coloured with shades of 
brown, green, and grey. The blossom is white, and 
only appears when the leaf and stem are already dead. 
At the moment of expansion it emits an intolerable 
odour, resembling that of putrefying matter. The 
lower part of the blossom continues to shoot up as 
the ends ripen. Sir Hugh had seen it reach a height 
of 4 feet and with pericarps (?) more than a foot 
long. He had also had brought him a specimen of 
"gadong," which was a thorny creeper with trefoil 
leaves, growing out of a bunch of slightly flattened 
roots.^ 

Yet another excellent account of the methods of 
poisoning the dart-points, as practised by the Perak 
Semang, is that given by Mr. Wray, who states that 
he once visited Ulu Selama, where some of the 
Semang lived, and was taken by them to a place 
called Kuala Jah, at about five hundred feet of 
elevation, where he was shown, growing in the virgin 
forest, within a hundred yards of one another, two 
large Ipoh trees. The larger was about five feet in 
diameter at a height of five feet from the ground, and 
had a trunk full a hundred feet in height at the first 
branch. It had been tapped many times, the bark 
being deeply scored up to a height of twenty-five feet 
from the ground ; the smaller tree was also scored all 
over. The bark externally was white, and internally 
orange-brown, and was very thick and fibrous. On 
fresh scores being cut into the bark, the dirty whity- 
brown sap ran very sparingly out, and was conducted 
down palm leaves, stuck on to the trunk of the tree 
with clay, into bamboos. The scores weie cut slanting 
alternately right and left, like what is known as 

> Sir H. Low, quoted by De la Croix, p. 333. 

CHAP. VI NEGRITOS OF PERAK 291 

herring-bone stitching, with the lower ends of the 
scores pointing inwards. At the bottom of each 
series of scores was put a leaf, fastened to the bark 
with clay, to lead the sap which trickled down into 
a baml)oo. Only about three ounces of sap was got 
the first day ; but two days afterwards, by erecting a 
scaffolding around the tree and extending the scores 
up the trunk, about one pint was obtained. Three 
ounces of sap, the Semang declared, was enough to 
poison a hundred blowpipe-darts.' 

The sap having been collected from the trees, a 
spatula-shaped piece of wood was taken and heated 
over a clear wood fire, and a small quantity of the sap 
poured on to it and spread out with another but 
smaller wooden spatula, and held over the fire till 
nearly dry, and the process repeated till all the sap 
was evaporated. There remained on the spatula a 
dark brown gummy substance, on which the points of 
the darts were rubbed three times, being dried over 
the fire between each application of the poison. This 
simple process completed the preparation ol the 
poison, with the exception of the other things that 
are sometimes mixed with the Ipoh. 

The sap, which proved to be bitter and biting in 
taste, and decidedly acid to test-paper, on exposure to 
the air quickly darkened to a brown colour, and 
yielded, when dried on a water-bath, twenty-nine per 
cent of solid Ipoh. This substance, if put thinly on a 
slip of glass and examined by a microscope, is seen to 
contain numerous crystals of antiarin. 

In the course of the same account Mr. Wray 
further observes that what Griffith says about the 
poisonous properties of the Ipoh being derived from 

' L. Wray in/. A. /. vol. xxi. (1S92), pp. 476, 477- 

292 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS iaki ii 

admixture of arsenic was information probably derived 
from the Malays, for the aborigines are quite ignorant 
of that poison ; and. as Professor Ringer pointed out, 
the action of arsenic is very different from that of 
Ipoh, besides which animals killed with arsenic would 
be quite unfit for food.' 

Mr. Wray here observes that it is the aborigines 
alone who use poisoned weapons in the Peninsula. 
The Malays put arsenic on their krises and spears, 
but it is employed solely with the view of bringing 
out the damascening of the blades, and not as a 
poison.- 

Mr. Wray once had the opportunity of noticing 
the effects of Ipoh poison on a human being. It 
occurred while he was descending a river in Upper 
Perak in 1889, and he made at the time a note to the 
effect that, while unloading and carrying the baggage 
over the rocks, a poisoned blowpipe-dart fell out of a 
quiver and stuck into the upper part of one of the 
men's feet. It was at once pulled out, and a Semang 
squeezed the wound to get as much blood as possible, 
then tied a tight ligature round the leg and put lime- 
juice on to the wound. The man complained of 
great pain in the foot, of cramp in the stomach, and 
vomited, but these symptoms soon passed off. The 
point only went into the foot about one-third of an 
inch, and the dart was instantly pulled out. The 
Semang said that had it gone deep into a Heshy part 
of the body it would have caused death. ^ 

As stated above, the Semang sometimes mix 
other poisons with the Ipoh. The plants from which 
these are derived are known to the Malays as " lekir " 
and " gadong." In both cases it is the expressed juice 

' L. Wray in/. A. /. vol. xxi. {1892), p. 477. - /b. ^ lb. 

{ 

NEGRITOS OF PERAK 293 

of the tubers that is employed. The "lekir" is an Aroid 
belonging to the genus Amorphophallus, and the 
" gadong " is a thorny climbing yam belonging to the 
order Dioscoreacccc. Botanical specimens of both 
these plants had been sent to the Calcutta Botanical 
Gardens, but identifications had not (when writing) 
been received. It was probable that the specimens of 
" lekir " had been transmitted to Kew by Dr. King, in 
which case they would be found numbered 3327.^ 

The tubers are rasped up fine with a knife, and 
the soft mass put into a piece of cloth, which is then 
forcibly pulled through two pieces of stick tied firmly 
together a short distance apart, so that the juice, 
which is very acrid, is expressed without coming in 
contact with the hands. The juice of the '' lekir " and 
"gadong" tubers so obtained is mixed with the Ipoh 
sap, and the mixture dried on a wooden spatula over a 
fire, and the darts poisoned in the way that has already 
been described.'^ 

The tubers of both these plants, which contain 
starch in large quantities, are cut up into thin slices 
and suspended in a basket in running water and 
allowed to steep until the poison contained in them 
has been dissolved out. They are then cooked and 
eaten by the aborigines, and also occasionally by the 
Malays.^ 

The acrid juices of these plants are said not to be 
fatal by themselves, and the part they play when 
mixed with the arrow-poison is to cause local irritation, 
which hinders wounded animals from escaping before 
the antiarin has time to act ; but all the Semang and 
Sakai encountered declared that the pure Ipoh was 
more deadly than the mixture.^ 

^'gL. Wray in /. ./. /. vol. xxi. (1892), ]ip. 47S, 479. - ^ < lb. 

294 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

The juice of the tubers of the "gadong" is decidedly 
acid when fresh. It smells somewhat like raw 
potatoes, and is bitter and astringent, producing a 
stinging sensation on the tongue, and a very un- 
pleasant dry feeling in the mouth, which persists for 
a considerable time. The acidulated juice yields a 
yellowish-brown precipitate to a solution of iodine in 
iodide of potassium. The precipitate redissolved in 
sulphurous acid and evaporated yields long, branching, 
needle-like crystals. The juice mixed with spirits, 
filtered and evaporated to dryness and redissolved in 
dilute sulphuric acid, filtered and evaporated again, 
also yields long branching crystals, which have an 
astringent taste like the juice, and are possibly the 
poisonous principle.' 

The freshly expressed juice of the " lekir " tubers is 
faintly acid to test-paper. It smells somewhat like 
beetroot, and is acrid and causes irritation when 
applied to the skin. It appears not to contain alkaloid, 
as it affords no precipitate when a solution of iodine 
in iodide of potassium is added to the filtered and 
acidulated juice, nor when the juice is just rendered 
alkaline by potash. When distilled, the distillate 
smells like the juice, and is slightly opalescent, but it 
does not cause irritation when applied to the skin, or 
even to a wound. It tastes the same as it smells, and 
does not injuriously affect the tongue.^ 

Antidotes. 

The only antidote for Ipoh poison (said Lela Per- 
kasa) was to eat earth. Any sort of earth will do, and 
the patient, however ill, will always end by getting 

■ L. Wray in /. ./. /. vol. xxi. (1S92), p. 479. ^ //'. pp. 479- 480. 

CHAP. VI EAST COAST NEGRITOS 295 

better. He learned of this antidote by seeing a crow 
that he had wounded fly down to the ground, swallow 
some earth, and resume its flight.' 

Pang-an or E. Semang*.- — The following is a summary 
of Vaughan-Stevens' description of the preparation of 
Ipoh poison by the Pangan. The sap of the tree 
(obtained by shaving the stem and bruising it with 
the back of a " parang ") is poured into a vessel made of 
twisted palm-leaf It is stirred till it turns bright 
yellow, when it is poured into a pot for boiling. The 
bark of " perghoo," " choichoi," " kree," " lendow," 
and " garsung " is put into a bamboo with the leaves 
of " rumpi " (j-zV. ? " rami ") and " jelatang " " ; water is 
added, and the mixture heated for about ten minutes. 
The liquor is then added to the pot, the lees of wet 
bark being wrapped in a leaf and wrung out to extract 
the remainder of the liquid. Meanwhile the bark of 
" Blay kechil," " Blay besar," " Blay hitam," and " Bhoi " 
is similarly boiled and added to the liquor. The tubers 
of "gadong" and "kepayang" fruits are cut up small and 
boiled for four hours, when they too are added to the 
mixture. The fruit of "s'lowung" and " chow " and the 
roots of " bal," " sedudo'," and " begung " are boiled in 
yet another baml)ooand put into the pot with the rest. 
The sap of two rattans (Riong and Butong) follows, 
and the heads of centipedes and snakes and scorpions' 
tails are smoked between two knife-blades and added 
also. Fresh Rengut (" ringhut ") fruits may now be 
added if procurable, and the pot containing the mixture 
is boiled till its contents are reduced by one-half' 

The contents are then poured through a palm-leaf 
funnel into a clean bamboo, the pot washed, the 

' Sir H. Low, quoted by Dc la The :iccount is probably (as usual with 
Croix, p. 333. - V.-St. "jelatung." V.-St.) ecleclic. For identification-, 
■ Vaughan - Stevens, ii. 1 1 1 seqq. v. App. 

296 WEAPOAS AND IMPLEMENTS iakt 11 

" filtered " liquor poured back and the Ipoh (Upas) sap 
added, the pot being then boiled till the mixture 
becomes a golden-yellow syrup. When sufficiently 
thickened it is poured off into bamboo tubes, and is 
ready for use. Its preparation takes about 2^ hours.' 

II. — Sakai. 
Stone hnpk^nents. 

Perak Sakai. — The remarks already made with 
regard to the use of stone implements by the Semang 
apply with no less force to the Sakai tribes, none of 
which, any more than the Semang, has ever yet 
reached a stage of civilisation at which such implements 
might have been produced, though they may never- 
theless have quite well been in the habit of using 
chips and flakes of stone to do their cutting. 

On the other hand, they are, like the Semang, 
undoubtedly acquainted with the use of cutting and 
boring instruments made of bamboo or bone, and like 
them too they now obtain their axes and spear-heads 
and choppers from the neighbouring Malays. 

The Spear. 

Perak Sakai. — Of the Sakai of Perak Hale" says, in 
fact, that they purchase spears and other implements 
from the Malays, but that though he also saw spears 
which they made for themselves, and which were fur- 
nished with fire-hardened bamboo blades, the Sakai 
told him the latter were only used for .setting in spring- 
traps. This .statement on the part of the Sakai was 
doubtless true as far as the .specimens that Mr. Hale 
.saw were concerned, but in those parts of the country 

' Vaughan-Stevens, ii. in seqq. ^ Hale, p. 288. 

SAKAI ok Sdl III I'l.KAK, UIIII Hi (nVlMI'KS. 

I'o/. I. /. 296. 

SAKAI OL'IVKRS. 

1. Sakai dart-ciuiver (S. Kinla, Perak). 

2. Sakai dart-quiver (S. I'ernam) : section showing darts (A") carried in 
small bamboo tubes or reeds (A) ; also the node {D) forming the bottom of 
the (bamboo) quiver; a rattan ring (C) for holding back the wadding ; and 
the recess (^E) in which the wadding is carried. — De Morgan in L'JI. 25th 
October 1885, p. 616. 

Vol. I. />. 297. 

CHAP. VI SAKAI OF PERAK 297 

where iron blades are scarce, spear- blades made of 
bamboo with palm-wood shafts are nevertheless em- 
ployed as the most natural and usual substitute.' 

The Boiv. 

Perak Sakai. — There are only two cases known to 
me in which the use of the bow has l)een attributed to 
the Sakai. 

According to De la Croix, the Sakai of Kenering 
possessed a bow - which was similar to that used by 
the Semang of Patani ; and a similar statement was 
made by Miklucho-Maclay, who was, however, quite 
rightly corrected by Pleyte. In both cases, however, 
there can be no doubt that the error arose entirely 
from applying the name " Sakai " to Negritos, and 
that these so-called Kenering Sakai of De la Croix, 
no less than Miklucho-Maclays Sakai, were in reality 
of Semang (or, at least, Semang-Sakai) origin.^ 

The Blowpipe. 
Perak Sakai. — The Sakai blowpipe has the same 
arrangement of an outer and an inner tube, and is con- 
structed of the same material as that of the Semang. 
The inner tube is closely fitted into the outer tube or 
casing, which (unlike the casing of the Semang weapon) 
is made in one piece, the central node (should a 
jointless tube be unobtainable) being knocked out 
with a wooden spike, and the jagged edges rasped 
away by means of the prickly " leaf-whips " of a kind 
of rattan, and finally polished so as to allow the 
inner tube or blowpipe to be fitted into it without 

* De Morgan, vii. 417; viii. 225, ^ The "Hill Kreans" («.<•. "Karens"), 

and elsewhere. whose "long hows and arrows" are 

- DelaCroix, p. 331 ; cp. /,VA)«W(-. referred to in /./. .4. (vol. iv. pp. 429, 

"'• 4-- 430). must certainly liave hcen so too. 

298 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

injury. This doubling of the tube, as has been said, 
is intended to keep it straight and to prevent warping, 
and generally to protect the blowpipe, which would 
be otherwise too frail to sustain its own weight.^ 

The Sakai blowpipe is, as a rule, far more highly 
decorated (with incised rectilinear designs) than that 
of the Semang, and has a wooden mouthpiece which, 
for shooting purposes, is either placed between the lips 
and the teeth or taken directly into the mouth itself.' 

The darts, which are not of bamboo but of the 
hard leaf-rib of the " bertam," are of the usual "knit- 
ting-needle " type, and have butt-ends not of rattan 
but of " bertam " wood, but are more delicately finished 
and symmetrical than those of the Semang, which in 
comparison are very roughly made. They are from 
8-1 1 in. (20 cm. to 28 cm.) long. The usual wad of 
flocculent palm-down is inserted in the tube behind 
them to prevent windage.^ 

This down is obtained from the cuticle of a tree, 
fined down with a knife, sun-dried, and rolled in the 
hand in order to eliminate the harder tissues.* 

The quivers of the Sakai are much more elaborate 
than those of the Semang. They are made from a 
bamboo (internode), which is highly decorated, and 
which contains small bamboo tubes or reeds in which 
the darts are kept ; they further contain all the re- 
quisites for making new darts and for poisoning them.^ 

1 For descriptions and illustrations, ° De Morgan, Z'//. ii. 6 1 6, and 
see De Morgan, vii. 416 ; U Homme, vii. /. c. Hale (p. 289) adds, "At 
ii. 614 ; and Hale (who gives measure- the bottom of the quiver a supply of 
ments), pp. 288, 289 ; cp. also_/. /. A. bees-wax is always kept, with which to 
vol. iv. pp. 429, 430, where, however, polish the quiver as well .as the blow- 
bamboo (!) darts are spoken of. pipe, exteriorly ; this polishing, com- 
■^ ^ De M. and Hale, loc. cil. bined with the fact that they are always 
* De M. loc. cit. Hale (p. 289) suspended over the fire, where the 
says it is composed of the natural fluff smoke can get at them, helps to give 
or down obtained from the leaf-bases them the rich red colour that the 
of certain rattans {Calami). Sakai admire." 

Sakai of South I'kkak, t \kkvin<; Hi.owpipi 

Vol. r. f. 298. 

^i 

Sakai Men, One (stande\(;) with Blowi'ife and Quivek, the Other (seated) 

WITH Back- Basket. 
P'^o!. I. p. 299. 

\V>ay. 

SAKAI OF FERAK 299 

A ring of woven cane (encircling the quiver) affords 
the means of attaching the quiver to the waist-cord, a 
similar ring being used for fastening the hinge of the 
lid, which latter is of basket-work,^ and is fitted interiorly 
with a ring of bent cane for holding the wadding, and 
preventing it from falling out when the lid is opened.' 

The girdle is made from the cuticle of the Arto- 
carpus finely plaited, and is fastened about the waist 
with a buckle made of bone.'^ 

The range of a blowpipe-dart is about 80 metres, 
according to the strength of the operator. But the 
usual range actually employed is never more than 
30 to 35 paces (23 m. to 27 m.). At this distance, 
however, they are marvellously clever, and a Sakai 
has been seen to hit with his first shot a dollar deposited 
on the trunk of a fallen tree at about 30 paces (23 m.) 
distance/ 

M. Brau de Saint-Pol Lias declared ' that he had 
seen a blowpipe which was rifled, but he gives no 
details, and until some confirmation comes to hand, 
his statement, which is entirely imsupported, cannot 
be received with too much caution. 

When the Sakai require a very powerful poison 
they mix together in a bamboo tube the sap of a tree 
called Ipoh and the sap of a sniall root. They then 
gently dry the mixture over a slow fire, adding 
moisture from time to time in order to dry it afresh. 

1 Or of wood hollowed out by fire * De M. L'H. ii. 617. Cp. Hale, 

and knife, that of the Kenahoi beinj; p. 289. The l)lowpi])e is a very deadly 

of basket-work. — V.-Sl. ii. I20, 121. weapon for any animal up to the size of 

- De M. loc. lit.x I' Ilomvic, ii. 620. a siaiiiang, and up to a distance of 60 

^ Cp. Hale, p. 289, where we .arc yards (55 m.), whereas at 50 yards (45 

told that the quiver is "supported m.) distance "a .Sakai, clever in the 

round the waist by a cord of native u.sc of it, will put five d.arts out of six 

manufacture, and fastened with a buckle into a common l>laying card." Cp. 

made from tlie bone of a monkey, the De la Croix, p. 334. 
upper mandible of a hornbill," etc. ^ Lias, pp. 25S, 259; cp. p. 256, (////f. 

300 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS i-art ii 

The boiling is completed in four processes ; and just 
before the last boiling a little poison obtained from 
the poison glands of snakes, scorpions, and centipedes 
is added. A little of the poison is then applied to a 
small spatula, which is dried slowly over a smoulder- 
ing fire ; a fresh layer is then applied and the spatula 
moved slowly to and fro over the fire. The poison thus 
prepared is dark brown, and is very soluble in water. 
If a less powerful poison is required, the sap of the 
Ipoh and the root is alone employed, or else the Ipoh 
by itself; in either case the methods of preparation 
are identical. The poison is now ready for immediate 
use, the point of the dart being slightly wetted and 
rubbed upon the small spatula which is covered with 
the poison.^ 

To complete his inquiry into the sources of the 
arrow-poisons of the aborigines, Mr. Wray visited the 
district of Batang Padang, to ascertain how the Sakai 
prepared their poison. As previously mentioned, they 
only used it on their blowpipe - darts, as bows and 
arrows are not employed by them.'- 

Mr. Wray visited two Ipoh trees, both of which 
were deeply scored like those in Selama. The scoring 
of the bark was not, however, so regular as with the 
Semang, and no sign of the herring-bone method was 
to be seen. The usual plan was to cut detached 
V-shaped incisions, and the method of collecting the 
sap differed also from that already described.^ 

Several pieces of bamboo were taken, and to each 
was fixed a piece of wood, which was ingeniously cut, 

J De M. /. c, Cp. Hale, 289. The for use, it is put on a spatula moistened 

sap of the Ipoh tree is " l)oiled down to and warmed over the fire, and then 

the consistency of thick treacle, a large applied to the dart." Cp. also De la 

quantity at a lime. It will then, in a Croix, p. 334, as to the varying strengths 

properly stoppered bamboo, keep for of the Sakai poison (even on the darts 

any length of time. When required of the same quiver). -^ Wray, I.e. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 301 

SO that when its chisel-shaped upper end was applied 
to the bark of the tree below a score the sap flowed, 
first down its upper surface till it met with a cut 
channel which conducted it round to the under surface, 
and then into the bamboo receptacle.' 

The sap being collected, two wooden spatulas were 
prepared, and a piece of large bamboo split in half so 
as to form a small trough, and the sap poured into it. 
The larger spatula was heated over a fire and the sap 
ladled out of the bamboo and spread on its heated 
surface by means of the smaller spatula, and dried bv 
being held with the uncoated side over the fire ; it 
was then reversed and sap spread on its upper or 
uncoated side, and when that was in its turn nearly 
dry, again reversed and a fresh supply of sap applied 
to the surface first coated. This was repeated until 
all the sap had been inspissated. ' 

The darts are coated in the manner before 
mentioned, and when the poison is very hard and dry 
and will not soften by being heated, a few drops ol 
water are put on to the spatula and mixed, by means 
of a smaller spatula, with the poison until it acquires 
the right consistency to apply to the points of the darts. •' 

The Sakai and Semang methods of collecting and 
preparing the poison are really the same, only differing 
in details. The Sakai, however, do not mix " Ickir " 
juice with the Ipoh,and the way they mix the "gadong"' 
juice with it is not the same as that employed by the 
Semang. For this purpose the Ipoh sap is prepared 
as just described, and a piece of the " gadong "' tuber is 
peeled and sliced up fine and placed in a joint of a 
bamboo, and ground up with water by means of a 
wooden pestle. The fluid is then poured off and 

» /. A. I. vol. xxi. (1892), pp. 479, 480. « lb. 3 rb. 

302 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

fresh water added and the process repeated. The 
fluid is then boiled and filtered through leaves in 
which some fine scrapings of bamboo are put. It is 
then evaporated in an open vessel over a fire to the 
consistency of a thick syrup, and mixed with the Ipoh 
in the proportion of three parts of Ipoh to one of 
" gadong." ^ 

The Sakai living in the plains employ the 
Antiaris poison, as a rule, since the plants from which 
it is prepared are low-country forms ; but the Sakai of 
the hills use a poison prepared from three hill plants 
known as " Ipoh akar," or root Ipoh — in contradistinc- 
tion to the Antiaris or "Ipoh kayu" (tree Ipoh) — 
"prual," and "lampong." -' 

" Ipoh akar " is a large climbing Strychnos, with a 
stem often as much as three inches in diameter. It 
has dark green glabrous, opposite leaves, with three 
prominent longitudinal veins. The fruit is said to be 
large and round, and to contain seeds about half an 
inch in diameter, and the flower is stated to be reddish. 
It grows on the hills, and is to be seen at over 
4000 feet elevation. The specimens procured were 
collected on Gunong Batu Putih in Batang Padang. 
The portion of this plant from which the poison is 
extracted is the bark of the roots and lower part of 
the stem. It is often employed without admixture, 
and is then prepared ^ as follows : — 

The bark, which is burnt sienna coloured, is 
scraped with knives irom the roots ; the scrapings are 
put into a pan with water and boiled, the water is 
poured off and filtered. Fresh water is added to the 
bark, which is again boiled for some minutes, and the 
water poured off a second time. The exhausted 

» /. A. I. vol. xxi. (1892), p. 480. 2 jb^ 3 7(5 

SAKAI OF PERAK 303 

shavings of bark are then thrown away, and the 
filtered infusion, which is bright burnt sienna coloured, 
is reduced by boiling in an open pan to a syrup. It 
is then poured while hot into a bamboo, where it 
solidifies. It is applied to the darts in the manner 
already explained, and is said to be more powerful 
than the Antiaris, but is rendered quicker in its 
action when mixed with the poison derived from the 
other two plants above mentioned.^ 

Of these " prual"-' is also a climber, growing on the 
hills. The largest stem Mr. Wray had seen was one 
and a half inches in diameter. It has opposite bright 
green entire leaves, but of its flowers and fruit he 
had neither seen nor been able to get any description. 
The young shoots contain a very fine strong white 
silky fibre. His specimens were also collected on 
Gunong Batu Putih, The bark of the roots, which is 
rather pale yellow in colour, is the part of the plant 
which is employed in making the poison. This 
arrow-poison is said not to be so strong as Antiaris, 
but to be quite capable of killing when used by itself^ 
The third plant is called "lampong," and is also a 
climbing species o'i Strychnos!' It has opposite three- 
veined leaves like " Ipoh akar" (only they are consider- 
ably smaller), and it is stated to have similar fruit, i)ut 
grows lower down on the hills, Mr, Wray's specimens 
being collected on the Cheroh hills. Like the two 
preceding plants, the bark of the roots, which is white, 
is the part from which the poison is extracted. It is 
said to be not so powerful as " prual," but is often 
employed by itself^ 

In making the mixed poison six parts of scraped 

' J. A. I. vol. xxi. (1892), p. 48 1. - CoplcsapcUa flaTtsccus. 

3 Wray, /. c. * Str. Maivgayi, Clarke. ' ^^'ray, /. c. 

304 WEAPONS AiYD IMPLEMENTS part ii 

" I poll akar " bark are taken, to which is added one part 
ofeachof "prual" and "lampong" bark, and the mixture 
is exhausted with boiling water, filtered and evaporated 
in the same way as has already been described when 
simple " Ipoh akar" is treated.' 

It was stated by the Sakai that Antiaris and " Ipoh 
akar " are rarely if ever mixed with one another. The 
latter poison is said to retain its virulence, in the 
form of an extract, for years. - 

III. — Jakun. 
Weapons and Implements. 
The same remarks that have been made with 
regard to stone implements in the case of the Semang 
and the Sakai apply with at least equal force to the 
third branch of these aboriginal tribes, and need 
not therefore be recapitulated here. The weapons and 
implements of the Jakun at present are the "parang" 
or chopping-knife, the "seligi " or "squailer," the spear 
(originally of bamboo), the blowpipe, and (finally) 
the adze, although knowledge of this latter appears to 
have been merely borrowed by the Jakun from their 
more progressive neighbours. As has already been 
recorded, an old writer declares that he met a Jakun at 
Malacca in 1833, who claimed to have killed a man at 
the distance of 40 yards (36.5 m.) with a clay pellet 
that he had discharged from his blowpipe. ■" 

The Spear. 

Of the Jakun spear, we are told that it consists 

of an iron blade of about i ft. long (30 cm.) and i in. 

(2.5 cm.) broad in the middle, attached to a thick, rudely 

worked shaft about five or six feet long, and sharp at 

» Wray in/. A. I. vol. xxi. (1892), p. 481. ' lb. ^ Begbie, pp. 5, 6. 

N:AN U.-INC. Hl.OW I'll K. lilKir I'KIAI., SKI.ANT.OK ; AT HIS LEFT SlDK IS THE OI'KX 

(JllVI.K Wnil l>AKT>. 

I'o/. I. />. 304. 

Takun using Bi.o.vpii'k, Llho' KiAiii, Ulu Lan(;at, Sei.angok. 

Vol. I. p. 305. 

CHAP. VI SA VAGE MALA YS OF NEGRI SEMBILAN 305 

the inferior extremity, in order to enter easily into the 
ground ; for before the Jakun enter a house they strike 
the end of the spear into the ground, where it remains 
until they go away. It is scarcely possible to meet a 
single Jakun without his spear,' which is both a stick 
to walk with and an offensive or defensive weapon as 
occasion may require. The " parang " is an iron blade 
of about I ft. (30 cm.) long, and 2-3 in. (5 cm. to 7.5 
cm.) broad, with a shaft like that of a large knife ; they 
use it to cut trees employed in the building of their 
houses ; and to cut branches to open a passage when 
journeying through thick jungle ; as well as for a de- 
fensive weapon against wild beasts. On one occasion 
Logan heard of a Jakun who, being attacked by a 
tiger, defended himself with a " parang " (the only 
weapon he had with him at that time). Nearly half 
an hour was spent in this singular combat ; the Jakun 
lost an eye and was seriously wounded in the head ; 
but the tiger paid the forfeit with his life." 

Jakun, N. Sembilan. — Of the weapons of the Negri 
Sembilan tribes scarcely any records have been 
published. Rowland, however i^loc. cit.), cannot help 
expressing his astonishment at the certainty with which 
they could hit a target measuring only i ft. (30 cm.) 
square at distances ranging up to So m. At the same 
time he describes in detail their method of discharging 
the blowpipe, which was to take the mouthpiece 
partially into the mouth (so that the mouthpiece for 
at least 2 cm. was covered by the upper lip, and to a 
lesser extent by the under one). And the same writer 
has also remarked that instead of the arms being 

^ /. I. A.vo\. ii. p. 262. Cp. ,how- parang, the sumpitan with poisoned 

ever, Wray, who states that "the Jakun arrows, and a fnv of them the spear." 
of the Menangkabau States use the ^ Cp. vol. i. p. 272. 

VOL. I X 

3o6 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

Stretched far forward to support the shaft of the blow- 
pipe (as it might be expected would be the case), it is 
the mouthpiece itself that is held (firmly and in both 
hands) immediately in front of the operator's mouth. 

Blandas. — The Blandas (Langat) blowpipe is hardly 
distinguishable from the Besisi weapon, and will be 
described more fully under that head. The dart was 
of the midrib of a fan-palm leaf (" serdang " or " kepau "), 
its butt-end ("basong") of " akar menitan," and the 
leaf carried inside the lid of the " tabong tela," or 
" dart-quiver," as a squirrel-charm, was " salerik tupei." 

The Spear. 

Besisi. — The Besisi, like the Blandas, get their 
spears from the Malays. A favourite form of spear 
among the Besisi is the fish-spear, of which there are 
several varieties ; most of these types, however, have 
been borrowed from the Malays, as was their Besisi 
name " tiruk." 

The Blowpipe. 

The inner tube of the Besisi blowpipe is made 
(as among all the tribes already referred to) from 
a couple of internodes of the long -jointed bamboo 
[Ba77ibusa Wrayi). The middle node having been 
excised, the abutting ends of the two pieces are 
brought together again, coated with a little resin to 
make them adhere better, and spliced, as among the 
Sakai of Perak, by means of a connecting cylinder or 
jacket, which is fitted over their abutting ends. 

One of these pieces of the blowpipe is invariably 
longer than the other, and is called by the Besisi the 
" man-piece," the shorter one being called the 
" woman-piece," the Besisi women being, as a rule, 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 307 

markedly shorter than the men of the tribe. Occasion- 
ally, however, these pieces are called the " mother- 
piece " and " child-piece " respectively. The con- 
necting-piece is called " chemat " (as among the 
Mantra). 

For making the mouthpiece, which is always of 
wood, a hole is bored right through the piece of wood 
selected for the purpose ; it is then fitted by hand 
into the butt-end of the inner tube, the end of 
which is cut off flush with it. In order to make the 
fit a tight one, the lips of the mouthpiece (which are 
made long and thin to facilitate their introduction 
between the inner and the outer tube) are in many 
cases cut or broken at one side, thus enabling a fine 
slip of cane to be pushed into the interstice, so as to 
act as a delicate wedge. In some cases leaves are 
used as a wedge (instead of this slip of cane), and 
some of these bear traces of fire at their edges, as if 
it had been intended to dry or harden them. Thin 
strips of cloth are also sometimes similarly used by 
the more civilised tribes. 

The mouthpiece when complete is fitted on to one 
end of the inner tube, which then only requires to be 
fitted carefully to the bigger tube that forms the case or 
sheathing. The latter, on account of the connecting- 
piece or jacket that unites the two inner parts, has 
naturally to be rather larger than would otherwise be 
necessary. 

The outer Tube or Caswc'. 

The casing is manufactured either from Bambiisa 
JVrayi or some similar kind of long-jointed bamboo, by 
poking out the central node with a sharpened spike or 
boring-rod ( " jcngroh " or "jengrok " ) made of a hard 

3oS WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS vari ii 

kind of palm - wood. The ragged portions of the 
internode which still remain are rasped down with the 
formidably armed leaf-whip ("onak") of a rattan (or 
" Wait-a-bit Thorn "), which is thrust down into the 
tube and worked to and fro until the jagged remains 
of the node have been entirely removed. 

Both the inner tube and its case having thus been 
prepared and cut to the same length, it only remains 
to push the former with great care into its casing. 

Treatment of the Mttzzle-end. 

But in order to obviate the inconvenience and 
risk of a " loose fit," several narrow and long wedge- 
shaped strips about a foot and a half long (like the 
"gores" in the waist of a lady's skirt) are excised at 
the muzzle-end of the case, and the inner tube, which 
is now cut shorter than the case (by about 3 inches), 
is pushed down into it as far as it will go [i.e. to 
within 3 in. (7.5 cm.) of the muzzle-end of the case). 

The split ends of the case are now drawn together 
till they fit the blowpipe tightly, and a short thick 
cylinder, of a woody kind of bamboo, and measuring 
about 3 in. (7.5 cm.) long, having been fitted into the 
vacant space inside the muzzle -end (to which the 
blowpipe does not reach), the whole affair is bound 
round either by a single long strip of cane, or by 
numerous rings of plaited cane, and coated over with a 
thick crust of tree-gum or resin in order to keep these 
lashings from working loose, this elaborate arrange- 
ment being finished off by a small ring-shaped piece 
of coconut- or tortoise-shell which is imbedded in the 
resin at the muzzle-end of the blowpipe in order to 
protect the muzzle from fraying or from similar 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 309 

injury/ The blowpipe is now ready for use, and it only 
remains to decorate it with the customary patterns or 
magic emblems employed by the tribe. 

Ornmitentation. 

The question of ornamentation will be treated 
more conveniently elsewhere, but I may remark in 
passing that although the patterns of the Besisi 
blowpipes were, with few exceptions, of the highly 
conventionalised rectilinear incision type, I neverthe- 
less more than once noticed the delineation of some 
animal or reptile {e.g. a lizard) upon their polished 
shafts. The ordinary motive in the blowpipe and 
quiver patterns of this tribe — at least as the matter 
was explained to me by the Besisi themselves — 
consisted of the representation (in an extremely rudi- 
mentary form) of the limbs and body of the spectacled 
monkey or " lotong " {Sc?n7iopttkecus). 

The outer case of the Besisi blowpipe was divided, 
as a rule, into two approximate halves by the central 
node or knot. Subdividing it further, roughly speak- 
ing, into quarters, the second quarter (counting from 
the muzzle-end) was almost invariably left undecorated, 
except perhaps by one or two rings or zigzags, this 
being the part by which it was, I understood, most 

' There can be little doubt that the of blowpipes in the Peninsula are with- 

object of this device is simply to out this device, yet the quarrj' is so 

strengthen the blowpi]ie. Vaughan- little disturbed by their " tone '' that a 

Stevens, in describing a similar device bird sitting on a tree may be shot at 

among the Mantra, supposes it to be and missed several times before it will 

due to a wish on the part of the move. Moreover, the sharper tone 

Mantra to obtain a sharper tone or would necessarily be heard further. 

note from the dart as it leaves the At the same time this device un- 

tube, probably (he thinks) because the doubtedly improves the weapon by 

sharper tone would be less audible to rendering it less liable to warp 

the quarry. There does not, however, interiorly, and by weighting it better, 

appear to be the slightest foundation It also has the advantage of keeping 

for any such supposition. The majority out insects. 

3IO WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

generally held when it was being carried on a hunt- 
ing expedition. I cannot say for certain whether 
this explanation is of wider application, but if so it 
would explain why this part of the bamboo is so 
frequently stripped of its outer cuticle and polished 
with wax. 

The Cleaning-rod. 

A primitive kind of cleaning -rod which was 
frequently used by the Besisi was called "jenghek." 
It was made on the ramrod principle, a long rod of 
palm-wood being perforated at one end, and strips of 
palm-leaf threaded through the perforation. This 
rod, when worked up and down the tube, made the 
cleaning of the interior of the blowpipe an easy 
matter. The muzzle of the blowpipe was in addition, 
not unfrequently, stoppered with leaves in order to 
keep out white ants, the small wild bees called 
" kelulut," and many other kinds of insect — a pre- 
caution which is of no small importance in the Malay 
Peninsula. 

The Dart. 

The following are the names given by the Besisi 

to the different parts of their blowpipe-dart ("damak"). 
The shaft is called " huyang," the butt-end " bentol," 
the point "chen," and the nick above the point "gret." 

The conical butt-end (also called " tom bentol ") 
is only made of what is called in Besisi "long angkau," 
— which is the stem of a kind of creeper called in 
Malay " akar lada luan," — or of some light wood such 
as " pulai." 

The stem or shaft of the dart is made from the 
leaf- ribs of various kinds of palm, especially the 
" serdang," " ranggam," " kepau," " kumung " (.'^), and 

I 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 

"bertam," though a shaft made of the last-named 
material is generally considered to be of inferior quality.' 

The shaft of the dart with the point broken off is 
called " pandong damak." 

The polishing process, which is carried out very 
carefully by the Besisi (with " memplas " leaves), is 
called " chengat." 

The Poison. 

We now come to the Besisi dart-poison, the 
ordinary ingredients of which were given me as 
follows : — 

(i) " Ipoh batang " (in Besisi, '' cht^s'')= Anha?'2s 
toxicaria, the Upas tree (the Poison-tree of Java). 

(2) •' Malai."- 

(3) " Tenet." ^ 

(4) " Jenu'," or " tuba," the well-known Malay fish- 
poison similarly used by the Besisi. 

According to another account that I received, the 
ingredients of the Besisi poison ^ were : — 

(i) " Chong ches " (root of the "ipoh" creeper^ 
Stryc linos tieutc). 

(2) " Ches {i.e. " ipoh ") malai." 

(3) " Ches {i.e. " ipoh ") tenet." 

(4) " Ches {i.e. " ipoh ") kroi." 

(5) "Jenu " (Mai. "tuba"). 

(6) " Pedas," or pepper.'^ 

(7) " Warang," or arsenic. 

' Occasionally we meet with the being used at all requires corrobora- 

statement that these darts are made of tion. 

bamboo. Darts made of this material, - = " Way " (V. -Si.). For iiiemifi- 

however, would be of inferior quality, cations, v. App. 

and where the report of its use is not s _ " K.annet " (V.-Si.). 

due to careless observation, its employ- ^ Kor identifications, and a similar 

ment is doubtless due to some tern- receipt pven by Hellamy (p. 220), v. 

porary difficulty of obtaining a belter App. 

material. This employment of bamboo * For a suggested reason (for the em- 
is not at all usual, and the fact of its ployment of pepper), see p. 319, ;/. 7. 

312 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

(8) " Gengang " — a kind of large millipede. 

(9) The "teeth" ("lemoyn") of tigers, centipedes, 
and snakes. 

When the sap of the Upas creeper was used 
instead of, or in conjunction with, that of the tree 
Upas, the roots of the creeper were simply grubbed 
up and shredded. When the sap of the tree Upas was 
used, the collector, using his jungle-knife ("parang"), 
would slash the outer bark of the Upas (a tall forest 
tree growing sometimes to 100 feet in height), 
making V-shaped incisions, at the lowest point of 
each of which the sap would naturally accumulate, 
which was accordingly drawn off at will. When the 
scar was healed (but not before) a fresh supply of 
sap may be obtained by slashing the bark in a fresh 
place. Each new incision was generally made a little 
higher up than the last, and I have seen a tree covered 
with the scars, the highest of which perhaps reached 
a distance of at least 30 or 40 feet from the ground. 

The sap thus collected was gradually reduced by 
long and patient boiling, as among the Sakai, to 
the consistency of treacle, and when sufficiently 
inspissated, was poured off into a small bamboo 
poison-tube called "jelok," which is carefully stoppered 
with a wooden stopper until required for use. Bellamy 
{I.e.) says that prepared opium ("chandu") is also 
sometimes added. 

Poisoning the Dart. 

When the time arrived, the poison was applied to 
the dart -point as usual, forming a thick clot about 
the point, and an entire quiverful of darts having 
been poisoned, they were at once deposited upon a 
highly ingenious drying rack or stand, and placed in 

A 3 

^ ? 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 313 

the sun to dry, the stand being designed not only 
to hold them in position, but also to prevent them 
from being accidentally knocked against, or perhaps 
blown away in a high wind. 

When the drying was completed the darts 
were fitted into the reed-bundle of the quiver, and 
their butt-ends branded or marked with lime and 
water, in order to distinguish the various strengths of 
the poison, the designs consisting of bars, crosses, and 
dots. 

The usual nick (as has been said) was made round 
the dart, but there was a belief among the Besisi that 
no acid fruit should be eaten with the flesh of animals 
killed by these darts, as they believed this would 
bring out the full effects of the poison in the eater. 

In addition to the above must be noticed the 
belief, which was related to me by the Besisi, to the 
effect that even the branch struck by a poisonous dart 
dies, not immediately, but slowly and surely.^ 

The Quiver. 

The Besisi quiver (like that of the Sakai) was 
carried on the left hip, and fastened about the 
waist with a cord of twisted tree-bark, secured by 
a buckle of bone or tortoiseshell. 

The interior of the quiver is fitted with a rolled- 
up bundle of small tubes or reeds made of young 
bamboo twigs, about as big as an ordinary lead- 
pencil. These reeds are united by lashings inside 
the body of the quiver, each reed holding a single 
dart, the butt-end of which fits closely into its 
own individual reed at the upper extremity. 

1 I may also mention that the Besisi, maize was the only antidote for this 
like many other aborigines, asserted that Upas poison. 

314 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

The cover or cap of the quiver, which was made 
of finely woven basket-work (of rattan), was fitted 
on to its upper end or top.^ It consisted of three 
triangular sections of basket-work, the edges of 
which overlapped, and were so brought together as to 
make a kind of peaked lid. Inside this cap was kept 
a supply of the usual palm-down (or tinder),^ the in- 
teriorly projecting edges of the cap-sections being 
left free to hold this down or fluff in its place. ^ An 
additional supply, together with the complete apparatus 
required for poisoning fresh darts when the supply 
runs short, is sometimes pushed down into the centre 
of the spiral formed by the rolled-up reed-bundle. 
It was also the rule among the Besisi to carry in the 
quiver a little beeswax for polishing the points of 
their darts, so as to prevent them from adhering to 
the sides of the reeds. To effect this polishing they 
wax a rectangular panel on the front of the quiver, 
after scraping off the surface of the cuticle, and work 
up the points of their darts by rolling them upon it. 

The quiver is called " lok " in Besisi ( = " telak " 
elsewhere), and its cover (Mai. " tudong ") was 
called " tebong lok." Inside this cover, which was 
hollowed out of a soft wood resembling " pulai," was 
carried the tinder or palm-fluff (the " rabok tukas " 
of the Malays =Bes. " barok "), which was used, as 
has been said, as a sort of wadding for preventing 
windage in shooting with the blowpipe. 

In addition to this tinder, two or three leaves of a 
creeper called the " Bringer-down of squirrels " ^ 
(" akar penurun tupei "), or of another creeper called 

1 Cp. V.-St. ii. 121.; •* ?=" Penurun lotong " (" Bringer- 

- Seep. 260, ante, n. i. down of monkeys "), Ca/^arza jM^rt/a^a, 

3 In the wooden cap a slight bamboo Muell. It is called by the Blandas 

bar takes their place. " salerik tupei." 

* 

j= 

o 

V 

r: 

-n 

;• 

-* 

_ 

u: 

^ 

a 

, , 

o 

J3 

^ 

? 

■J) 

0 

■ = 

■z 

^ 

rt 

- 

: 

., 

'^ 

H 

.C 

Ui 

'-) 

■J) 

-;* 

r! 

_rt 

u 

X 

n 
-J 

3 

*x 

*.'. 

rt 

>> 

— 

CQ 

n 

-> 

,^ 

^ 

yu 

s 

'J 

o 

f^ 

5 

■3 

u 5* i S. " 5 
^ 3 I. >. S a. 

ji o .r! " "^ u 

= . 3 S S •- 

ii"-" nil 

3 O " ^ "" £2, 

7- ^ = n n 

^ =•= i i< 

rt 

rt 

— ^ ? ^ J2 

1 

1 

SA-ta/ Colkctioit. 
I)u\ini,-Rack I'liK lii.uw I'li'i-. l)\ki> i.\ii'i.()\ i-.i) nv WW. l?i-;sisi. 

itkciit Collection. 

Brcsisi Apparatus kok jiUiAviNG Dart-I'oison. 

I. Pestle for pounding " ipoh." 2. Clolli strainer. 3,4,5- Receptacles for the poison. 
6. Poison-hol'Jer or tube for carrying " ipoh." 

Kuantan Darts with Poison Spatlla. 

Presented by Mr. Douglas to the British Museum. (.See p. 326.) 

Vol. [. p. 315. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALA YS OF MALACCA 315 

" akar samuga'," are carried by way of a charm for 
success in hunting, Hke the " siyap " of the Dayaks. 

The reeds (of the reed-bundle in the quiver) are 
called " plet." 

The Blowpipe. 

Mantra. — The weapons of the Mantra are the 
blowpipe, spear, the Malay dagger or " kris," and 
a kind of (Malay) sword called " chenangkas." ' 

There is no important difference between the 
Mantra methods of manufacturing the blowpipe, 
and those practised by the Besisi. A few words 
with regard to the polishing and other processes 
may, however, here be added. The polishing of the 
interior of the blowpipe-tube is begun by means of 
bamboo shavings fixed to the end of a cleaning-rod." 

The process is then repeated a second time with 
" polishing- leaves " (of " akar simplas "), and again 
a third time with a small strip of bark-cloth, which 
is used merely to give it a " finish," ^ 

The two portions of the blowpipe-tube are then 
spliced in the usual way (as among the Besisi). The 
only difference lies in the nomenclature used by 

' J. I. .4. vol. i. p. 330*. die, but they are generally lost to ihe 

- ^ Vaugiian-Stevens, ii. 1 14. For sportsman, as they arc able to run 

the Mantra blo\v|)ipc, see Ikirbc : "To (after having been wounded) to a gnat 

pr(jcure (their food) they use the sumpi- distance. These savages seldom miss 

tan, which is a bamboo from 6 to S feet their aim. 1 have seen them thus 

long ; the arrows are slips of bamboo shoot with their arrows monkeys seated 

10 inches long, with a piece of light on trees of 70 or So feet liigh, when 

wood at the bottom, shapctl to the the wounded animal, after jumping on 

bore of the tube, which they propel some other branches, and throwing 

by blowing hard. The point of the away what he was eating, immediately 

arrow being anointed with a jirepared after fell down, if the ' ipoh ' h.id 

poison called 'ipoh,' communicates it been well prepared"' (Kev. M. Barbe, 

to the blood, and after two or three in the Hcnj^a/ Catholic Herald, 1 2lh 

minutes the animal vomits and falls June 1S50 ; quoted \\\ J.I.A. vol. v. 

dead. Should tlie arrow penetrate the pp. 4S7, 488), Cp. also Borie, ante. 
skin of large animals, many of them 

3i6 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

the Mantra, who call the longer portion of the inner 
tube "sulu" ("sooloo"), and the shorter one "tongkat," 
the outer shaft or case being called "tagu" ("targoo"). 
As among the Besisi, the connecting-piece or "jacket" 
(of " rappen " bamboo) is called " chemat." ^ 

The hollow in the mouthpiece of this blowpipe, 
which is made of "jelotong" wood, is bored with 
" a wooden awl " — "jelotong " being a very soft wood, 
which lends itself readily to this treatment.^ 

The knots of the outer shaft are pierced in the 
ordinary way, and the hole enlarged as usual with 
the prickly leaf- whips or " onak " of the " Rotan 
tunggal." Next the leaves of the " Rotan riong " (?) 
are substituted and the process continued, until the 
enlarging process is complete, when the interior is 
polished in the usual way (as among the Besisi). 
The bamboos are often dried and kept for a con- 
siderable time before they are made into a blowpipe.^ 

The external cuticle is next scraped or shaved off 
at the muzzle -end for a distance of a short span 
(measured from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the 
forefinger) to enable the resin to adhere more securely. 
This portion of the tube is then split into the desired 
number of subdivisions, one of which is again split to 
take the end of a "rattan" lashing, which is pushed 
home. A small hole is made at the upper end of 
one of the splits, and the end (of the lashing) pushed 
through it and fastened off there.' 

A quantity of resin is then melted and coloured 
with black from the cooking-pots, and poured round the 
whole of the split part. Before the binding process 

' Vaughan - Stevens, ii. 114 seqq. of it ; the sheath from tip of index-finger 
The "sulu" measures the maker's to the opposite thumb. Both tube and 
"full arm-stretch," the " tongkat " half caseareof"temiang" bamboo. "^'^^ lb. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 317 

has been completed, however, a small (tubular) piece 
of another kind of woody bamboo (" pagai ") of small 
calibre is inserted into the aperture of the muzzle. This 
serves as an internal block (" sunglork " = " senglak ") 
for supporting and protecting this portion of the tube, 
and for keeping the splits in their proper (relative) posi- 
tion. It forms part of the case, not of the inner tube.^ 

The longer portion of the blowpipe-tube is fitted 
to this block, and a ring of coconut-shell called 
" lengait " (" linghite ") is imbedded in the resin at 
the muzzle-end, which is heated to receive it." 

This " muzzle-block " produces an especially sharp 
note as the dart passes out at the muzzle. It is 
difficult to describe this note, which, however, is much 
less audible than the note produced when no muzzle- 
block is used, and Vaughan-Stevens supposes it to be 
the result of an effort to weaken the note and mak(" it 
less audible to the quarry.^ 

The outer cuticle of the case is also scraped or 
shaved off in several places, part being polished and 
rubbed with bees-wax, which latter substance is also 
used for rubbing that part of the case which is neither 
shaved nor polished.^ 

llic Dart. 

The darts are of the thick outer rind of the 
"kredok" palm, the butts of the soft inner wood of 

* V.-St. ii. 1 19. See the Besisi blow- the curve of the mouthpiece beijins " 
pipe, p. 308, suf<ra. The description in should be corrected to "at the extremity 
the original (p. 119) is very involved of the muzzle-end," where the " sung- 
and muddled, owing to a confusion of the lork " is inv.nriably placed, and indeed 
muzzle-end and the mouthpiece. The if it were not so how could the darts 
diagrams, too, in the original passage, pass out of the blowjupc ? The muzzle- 
have evidently got mixed. Thedescrip- end, too, has no curve as the mouth- 
tion of the "sunglork "(probably "seng- piece has. These errors have been cor- 
lik") as being placed in position "where reeled in the present text. -^ • Id. 

3i8 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

" habong," or of " tarentong." ' The butt-end is fixed 
on with resin, and the shaft of the dart is rubbed with 
beeswax ; warped darts are straightened over the 
fire by hand, and marks are only added to the butt- 
end when it is necessary to distinguish two strengths 
of poison in one quiver ; in which case it is (as might 
be expected) the darts tipped with the stronger poison 
that receive the marks." Various standards of measure- 
ment ^ for the darts are given, a dart of the longest 
standard being always used first at the trial of a blow- 
pipe, and then the next and the next longest, until 
the one which appears most suitable is selected.* 

The Poison. 

Vaughan-Stevens' account '' of the Mantra poison 
appears to be a jumble of several receipts, but is 
given here as the details may be worth verifying. 

To make a spoonful of poison five strips of "kroie"*^ 
bark are pounded with a pestle (" pomonong," sic) in 
an iron pot which has first been prepared by waxing. 
Water is added, and the liquor boiled about ten minutes. 
The pot is then taken off the fire and deposited on a 
stand consisting of a wooden fork which has a cross- 
piece, intended to hold the pot, fastened across the 
bifurcated portion. The fork-ends rest on the ground, 
and the upper end or shaft is supported at a sharp 
angle of about 45 degrees. The pot is then tipped up 

1 Or of bamboo, see p. 315, n. i, "[arm]-bone," from elbow to wrist. 
supra. " Habong " is unidentified ; Length of the butt-end : shortest little 
" kredok" is Cyrtostachis heca; " taren- fmger-joint ; thumb or thumb-nail (?) ; 
long " is Canipnosperma auriculala. thumb-joint ; breadth of forefinger, or 
Seep. 331, 1. 2. " tampong k'ladi " (yam-calix), about 

2 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 123. half of the first-mentioned. 

3 E.g. " ukor susu," i.e. breast to ■* Vaughan-Slcvens, ii. 124. 
breast, or elbow to nearest breast (of " Ibid. p. 125 seqc/. 

the maker); and " satu tulang," an ^ Lophopetalum pallidum. — Ridley. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 319 

till the liquor is close to the brim, and one end of a 
roll of bamboo shavings (about 4 inches long) is in- 
serted in the liquor, the other end being placed in a 
special receptacle made of bark, so as to draw off the 
poison by suction. The liquor thus drawn off is put 
back into the pot and root-shavings of the " umpas 
padi," "koopur,"' " prachek,""' " mundess," " chantong 
badak," and "gadong"'^ are added. The pot is then 
boiled for about ten minutes more, when it is again 
set on the stand and skimmed with a kind of woolly 
leaf — that of a plant called " chapa-neng." ■* The 
bark receptacle (covered with a species of sieve- 
shaped filter) is now set on the ground (underneath 
the forked stand on which the pot is resting). A 
funnel is made of the woolly leaves referred to, and 
the liquor drawn off into the funnel by the suction of 
the bamboo shavings (already described), a few fine 
punctures being made in the bottom of the funnel to 
facilitate the process.^ 

The pot is then rinsed, the liquor put back, and 
the "ipoh"" and "tuba"" added (the latter being 
first, however, pounded and mixed in the bark re- 
ceptacle with a little liquor from the pot).^ 

The bark receptacle is then rinsed and the rinsings 
added to the pot, together with a pod of chillies 
(" Spanish pepper").'* 

After ten minutes' boiling the pot is again removed 
and set down on the stand, and the process of filtra- 
tion repeated in exactly the same manner as before. 

' I.e. "kupor" ("akar"). Prob. ^ \".-St. ii. 125. 

Jiiilnts »ioiiiccamis,h.,\.\\e:com\wan\\\\i\ " Antiaris toxuaria (Upas tree) or 

raspberry. Vox identifications, r-. App. Stiyrhnos tieiite (Upas creeper). 

"•* Or "perachet"= 7a(^<r;7/«-WM//a;/(7 " Den-is cl I iptica,^QX\\\\. " V.-St. /.<-. 

malacccnsis, Hook. fil. " This is to keep evil spirits from 

^ Dioscorea d,eviouum, Koxb. entering the poison and destroying its 

* CUrodendronvelutintim. — Ridky. power ( Vaughan-Slcvens, ii. 128). 

320 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

The pot is once more rinsed and dried on the fire, 
the Hquor (in the bark receptacle) put back into the 
pot, the fire reduced, and the pot slowly boiled till 
a mere spoonful of gold -brown syrup is all that 
remains.^ 

When properly made, as described, the liquor can 
(by dipping a spatula into it) be drawn out into long 
thin elastic strings about an inch in length, though 
this only happens when a sufficient quantity of 
" tuba " is used.^ 

When the poison has been transferred (by means of 
the spatula) into the bamboo poison-tube or poison- 
carrier,^ fresh poison obtained from snakes, centipedes, 
and scorpions may be added to it. A lemon- (or lime ?) 
pip is spitted upon the point of a dart and burnt, the 
charred pip being mixed with a lump of arsenic " as 
big as the head of a match," and stirred round in the 
poison-tube/ 

Three drops of the sap of " Rotan kemanting " 
may be added, but this appears to be an innova- 
tion. The Mantra poison is very sticky, and seldom 
dries properly unless " ipoh " is mixed with it.^ 

Antidotes. 

In speaking of antidotes, it is interesting to note 
Logan's remark to the effect that the Mantra were 
in the habit of saying that they found resistance to 
the Menangkabau Malays in vain, because the latter 
were armed with muskets, and had learned the use 
of antidotes to their " ipoh " poison, so that the 

» V.-St. ii. 127. 2 V.-St. {ibid.) called "tahim'ret" ['« tahi meret" = 

adds that when a ring of lighter colour "ants' dung " in the Jakun dialect], 
is seen at the edges of the "ipoh "during ^ In original, "into the tube of the 

the boiling, it is believed to be a sign quiver " {sic). 
of strength (of the poison), and is * * V.-St. /. c. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 321 

slender darts of the blowpipe inflicted but little injury 
upon them.^ 

The Qiiiver. 

Their quiver, which is of" telang " bamboo, is dried 
at leisure when not required for immediate use. Often, 
however, it is merely filled with hot ashes and dried 
in the sun for two to three days to expedite matters." 

The cap is manufactured from a small block of 
soft wood (that of the "jelotong" tree). After it has 
been roughly shaped, a small depression is made at 
one end, in which red-hot embers are laid. When it 
has been charred sufficiently deep the hole is cleared 
out and shaped with a knife, and fresh embers put in 
to complete the burning-out process. The outside is 
shaped with a knife as required.'^ 

The Mantra quiver alone has a broad band woven 
according to what is called the " bat's-wing " pattern, 
near the top, in addition to the ordinary rings or 
lashings.^ The girdle is of " trap " bark, with a knot 
as buckle, 

' y. /. A. vol. i. p. 273. wood, the soft central portion of which 

- Vaughan-Stevens (ii. 120) gives has necessarily to be burnt out to pre- 

several words for this process, as used vent it from decaying, the hole being 

by various tribes, but with one prob- then pluc;ged with wax to make the 

able exception they are all bad Malay cap water-proof. 

meaning "quick"' or "rapid." * This same (bat's-wing) pattern as 

They are — seen (in the same position) on the 

"chupat" (used by Sakai) = Malay quiver of the O. Kuantan may per- 

"ch^pat": haps be a reminiscence of the time 

"banghaf ■' 1 (used by T " bangat'" when a woven band, similar to that 

and J- Kenaboi) -J and of the Mantra, occupied its jiKace. 

"dras" j = Malay ( " dras " : This woven band (of the Mantra 

"ertjoos ■ (used by Besisi), which is quiver) encircles externally that part of 

merely a corrupt form of the common the quiver in which is kejn the "so- 

Besisi word "jo-jriss" (which un- called pinlal tuk.xs." 
doubtedly stands for "jos-joss"= [.y/V \aughan-Stevens, ii. 122. But 

" quick-quick ''). here there seems to be a considerable 

' The description here (\'aughan- muddle, as on the same page " pintal " 

Stevens, ii. 123) is very obscure and is explained as the name of the girdle, 

confused. The key to the employment and " pintal tukas "' as the name of the 

of this process is the use of " jclotong "' flocculent wad which goes behind the 
VOL. I Y 

322 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

The Mantra, like the Besisi, make a rectangular 
patch or panel in front of the quiver by scraping off 
the surface of the cuticle and waxing it. It is on this 
patch that they work up (by rolling) the points of 
their darts. Vaughan-Stevens states that the effect 
of wax is also occasionally obtained by their rubbing 
the nose upon it, the required effect being produced 
by the natural moisture of the skin. Grotesque as this 
statement sounds, it may yet have some truth in it. 
I myself have more than once seen the Besisi rub 
the nose upon the panels of their quivers, though I have 
never seen or heard of the remainder of the operation 
here described, and at the most, all that can be safely 
said against it is that Vaughan-Stevens' account re- 
quires further corroboration/ 

The Mantra, like most of the other tribes, carry 
a small stock of resin at (or near) the bottom of the 
quiver, this being chiefly intended for fixing on the 
butt-ends of the darts should they work loose at any 
time. The interior is fitted with the usual reeds.- 

butt-end (pfropfen) of the dart, and Stevens' wretched orthography its cor- 

which is the material really referred to ruption into such a form as "linghur" 

in the last sentence. For "pintal tukas," would be more than probable. 1 myself 

therefore, in this passage read " tukas " have frequently seen these same patches 

or " rabok tukas," i.e. fluff of the on the quivers of the Besisi. 
tukas-palm (and />««;>« when this fluff is - See Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 105,106; 

referred to), but keep "pintal," i.e. 122. Vaughan-Stevens says this resin is 

plaitor plaiting, for the girdle. "Tukas" obtained from a tree which he has 

has nothing whatever to do with been unable to identify, but which is 

" tikus," as suggested by Vaughan- called " kceji " (sic). According to 

Stevens (note to v. -St. ii. 121).] Blagden, " kijai " is {properly speak- 

* Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 121-122. ing) the resin obtained from the 

This rectangular patch was only seen "kedondang" tree, and there can 

by Vaughan-Stevens among the Mantra, be little doubt that this is its right 

who use, he says, a very sticky meaning here. He adds that it was 

poison which seldom properly dries. fonnerly used for fixing on the rattan 

The Mantra, he says, call it "linghur," rings which encircle the body of the 

which Vaughan-Stevens' editor suggests quiver, but that now "the Malay 

may = Mai. "lingga." The nearest cement," prepared " from buffalo-milk 

word that I can find, however, is and chalk," is substituted. I am unable 

Malayo-Javanese "lenga" = oil. The to corroborate this, and it should be 

sense is right, and with Vaughan- quite unnecessary, as the wedging, to 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF PAHANG 323 

Blowpipe and Quiver — first type. 

Pahang- Jakun (Kuantan). — Of the blowpipes used 
by the O. Kuantan there appear to be at least two 
types, one of which is the roughest form of blowpipe 
made, and the other resembles that of the aboriginal 
Malayans. The former is described as being made 
from long internodes of the " semeliang " (" semi- 
liang") bamboo, whose internodes are much shorter 
than those of the Bambusa JFr^j>'z (" buluh temiang "). 
The internal tube, therefore, is made in two lengths, 
which are joined by means of an outer tube or sheath 
which is manufactured from the midrib of the leaf of 
the " langkap " palm, and drawn over them.^ 

When the two abutting ends have been fitted 
together, a piece of rag (formerly, it is said, it was a 
ligature of plant-fibre) is smeared with heated resin 
and wrapped first round the end, the wrapping being 
coated over with a thin layer of gutta-percha, which is 
melted by turning it round a firebrand. The mouth- 
piece is also made of {sic, ? covered with) gutta-percha 
instead of the more usual material, wood.-' 

These blowpipes are the least effective of all 
those known in the Peninsula, and cannot propel a 
dart above forty paces. They are little used, and are, 
according to Vaughan-Stevens, hidden inside the 
stems of living bamboos, the nodes of which have 
been knocked out. Vaughan-Stevens was only able 
to obtain four.^ 

The bamboo internode from which the quiver of 

which V. -St. himself makes reference, is ployed by the O. Kuantan is " damar 

a much simpler method of tightening tooyoom " (Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 113). 

these rings. ' Cp. Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 112. 

One of the kinds of resin thus em- - Ibid. ' IbiJ. 

324 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

the O. Kuantan is nianufactured is not slowly dried 
like that of the Benua-Jakun, and hence the rings 
round it work loose and require to be tightened by 
wedges. The cap is made by the women of woven 
(and untrimmed) pandanus-leaf (P. furcatus). The 
waist-cord, which is made of " akar dow " (? " dauk ") 
has no buckle, but a knot at the cord-end, and its 
decoration is peculiar to itself The interior of the 
quiver is only fitted with a small reed-bundle, room 
being left, whenever it is used, for the insertion of 
the bamboo poison-holder. At the bottom of the 
quiver a little resin (" tuyum ") is kept (as among 
the Mantra) and used for making fast the butt-ends 
of the darts. The arrows, which are made of the 
leaf-stem of the " langkap " palm, are very roughly 
made, and are frequently used, without poison, for 
killing small birds, and only rarely for killing apes, 
when poison is obtainable. Their length is " from 
elbow to wrist," but they are often shorter,' 

Not more than one out of every five or six of the 
O. Kuantan possesses poison at all, and that which he 
has is frequently compounded out of ingredients which 
are quite harmless. - 

Bloivpipe and Quiver — secoiid type. 

The second type of blowpipe used by the Orang 
Kuantan appears to be peculiar to the Jakun or 
savage Malayan race. A specimen of this rare and 
interesting blowpipe, which has been presented to 
the Ethnological Department of the British Museum 
by a member of the Malay States Service, was de- 

' Cp. Vaughan - Stevens, ii. 113. end is said to be the combined breadth 
The breadth (^sic, ? length) of the butt- of the first two fingers. '•■' Ibid. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF PAHANG 325 

scribed in 7^/(3:^/,' whence the following description by the 
present author has, with slight alteration, been drawn: — 
Mr. F. \V. Douglas, of the Malay States Service, 
obtained this blowpipe on the east coast of the Malay 
Peninsula in the Kuantan district of Pahang, during 
October 1897, fi'oni a man belonging to one of the 
jungle-tribes dwelling on the borders of Pahang and 
Kemaman. Its measurements are as follows : — 

Total length (over-all) . . . 5 ft. 2 in. (157 cm.) 
Interior diameter at mouthpiece ^^ in. (10.9 mm.) 
Interior diameter at muzzle-end ^ in. (9.37 mm.) 

Hence the bore of the tube at the muzzle-end is 
a fraction less than it is at the mouthpiece, so that we 
have here an instance of a wooden blowpipe imitating 
the natural proportions that obtain in the original 
bamboo blowpipe, from which it was copied ; for in 
the bamboo blowpipe it is always the root-end which 
is placed nearest the mouth, so that the bore at the 
muzzle-end is generally a fraction less than at the 
mouthpiece ; in other words, this blowpipe, like its 
bamboo original, has a slight " choke " in the bore.- 

The illustrations here given are full-size. They 
show the muzzle -end and the mouthpiece in two 
positions, the mouthpiece having been chipped in 
transit. I had it photographed to show the binding 
before it was mended.'' 

This particular blowpipe is made of some very 
hard wood, probably of " pcnaga " {Calopliyllum). 
The cylinder is carefully split down the middle and 
the two halves grooved on the inner side throughout 
their entire length, so that when fitted together again 
they form a perfect tube. This tube, which forms 

' Skeat in Man, No. loS of 1902. - //;. 3 /^ 

326 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS iart ii 

the blowpipe, is bound round from end to end with a 
long thin strip of some kind of cane {Calamus), over 
which is deposited a thick incrustation of a gutta-like 
substance, the object of which is evidently to protect the 
bands and prevent them from being loosened, as well 
as to hermetically close any cracks that might otherwise 
permit the passage of air. The thickness of this deposit 
is increased to about \m. (1.2 cm.) at the mouthpiece.' 

In Vaughan - Stevens (ed. Griinwedel) '" a very 
similar blowpipe (collected among the " Benua " or 
Jakun of East Johor) is described. It is not abso- 
lutely identical with Mr. Douglas's specimen, since 
it is longer (by about nine inches), and its two half- 
cylinders of " penaga " wood are protected by a bam- 
boo casing. Mr. Douglas's specimen, on the other 
hand, corresponds with remarkable fidelity to a Per- 
uvian blowpipe, described in the second volume of 
Reiss und Stuebel's Kultur imd Industrie siidaineri- 
kanischer Volker. This Peruvian specimen came 
from the Huallaya river, and was described as con- 
sisting of " the two halves of a palm-stem carefully 
grooved and fitted together and bound round with 
cipo, which was covered besides with a layer of black 
wax. It was fitted with a short bone mouthpiece."" 

The quiver belonging to the blowpipe (also pre- 
sented by Mr. Douglas to the museum) similarly 
presented some new and interesting features : — ^ 

The body of the quiver is made from a bamboo 
internode measuring \\\ in. (29 cm.) in length, and of 
great diameter (4 in. = 10 cm.). It is covered with a 

1 Skcat, loc. cil. Kuanlan, but he cannot say for certain 

2 Vaughiin - StcvL-ns, ii. I02. Mr. whether it is indigenous, or introduced 
G. Pfenningwerth of Kuantan writes me by Dayaks. 

that the "bored" blowpipe, resembling ^ Skeal, loc. cit. Cp. OtisT. Mason, 

that of the Dayaks, is certainly used in Origin of Invention, p. 208. '' lb. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 327 

flattish four-peaked cap made of woven pandanus-leaf, 
which is made fast to a double ring of plaited rattan 
or Calamus (which encircles the body of the quiver) 
by means of a short cord of plaited tree-bark (A7'io- 
carpus ? or Eugeissona tristis ?). The usual waist- 
cord of twisted tree - bark is attached to the same 
rattan-rings. The exterior of the quiver is decorated 
throughout by the usual incised patterns (which are, how- 
ever, unusually rough and irregularly executed), and 
there are traces of resin at the bottom of the quiver/ 

The interior is fitted with the usual rolled-up 
reed- bundle, the number of reeds being sixty- five. 
Of these, however, only five contain darts, and there 
is one loose dart of which the butt-end has been lost, 
making six darts in all. All of these darts have 
broken or (as I think more probable) blunt points, and 
have very probably been used for knocking over small 
birds. Only one (the loose one) has traces of a coat- 
ing of poison upon it, and even of this one the extreme 
tip of the point is blunt like the rest." 

Of the darts the longer ones measure 7 J in. ( 1 9 cm. ) 
in length, and the shorter about 7J- in. (18 cm.), and their 
butt-ends are made of some very light pith-like wood 
and are of irregular length, two being about i in. (2.5 cm.) 
long, and the other three being only half that length. 
But they are all very incompletely rounded, are all 
cut off square at the lower end, and are all pretty 
much of the same diameter throughout, instead of 
tapering towards the shaft, as is the case with the 
better -made darts used by the Sakai, Besisi, etc. 
Another distinction is that in two of them the upper 
end of the dart-shaft is driven right through the butt- 
end, emerging at its extremity beyond the upper end 

' Skeat, he. cit. - Ibid. 

328 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS part ii 

of the butt, a peculiarity which may be seen in the 
blowpipe-darts of Borneo.^ 

The only other contents of the quiver were two 
rolled-up pieces of old chintz cloth, and a spear-shaped 
wooden spatula, still coated with poison, - 

In view of all the evidence, and in spite of slight 
differences, I think there need be no hesitation what- 
ever in identifying both the blowpipe and quiver as a 
variety of the " Benua-Jakun " blowpipe and quiver 
which Vaughan-Stevens obtained in the eastern part 
of Johor, in spite of the fact that this specimen was ob- 
tained in Kuantan, north of the Pahang, a fact which 
disagrees with Vaughan-Stevens' own statement to 
the effect that this type of blowpipe is not found (in the 
Malay Peninsula) north of the river in question. This 
particular specimen, at all events, has the additional 
interest of more nearly approaching the blowpipe of Peru 
than any other specimen yet recorded from this part 
of the world — a fact which should be of special interest 
to the students of the problems of distribution.^ 

The Bloivpipe. 

Benua-Jakun. — One of the Kuantan types of blow- 
pipe is found also among the Benua-Jakun. These 
tribes use a peculiar form of blowpipe, the internal tube 
of which is made in a very primitive fashion, of wood, 
though its outer casing is as usual of bamboo. Its 
length and calibre vary with the individual maker.' 

It is exceedingly rare and hard to obtain, especi- 
ally as it takes sixteen days to make. It is made 
from the wood of the " penaga " tree ("penaghur," 
sic), a sapling of which is felled and split through- 
out its entire length. The two halves are then 

1 Skeat, hi. cit. - lb. ■"' //'. ■* Q.\>. Favre in Atni. P. /•'. xxii. 304. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 3^9 

roughly carved into shape, the flat parts planed 
and fitted together with a chopping - knife, bound 
round with rattan "ties" at intervals, and carefully 
rounded. The " ties " themselves are moved occa- 
sionally, according to necessity, to enable the work 
to be completed. The two halves are "trued" by 
wetting one half and then pressing the two together.' 

Next a broad black line is drawn with charcoal 
down the centre, and the groove cut out with the 
chopper, a quarter of the circumference at a time 
only, to prevent warping. The cutting-out process 
is continued until the cleaning-rod (" bingrot ") can 
just pass along within the double groove, when the 
two lengths are again bound together, at short 
intervals, and made fast at one end within a 
movable clamp or vice (" kahon "), the object ol 
which is to hold the two divided halves of the tube 
firmly together and at the same time to keep the blow- 
pipe in position till the binding process is completed. -' 

As soon as this process, which is effected with a 
strip of cane (" rotan tunggal ") is over, the mouthpiece 
is made. It is said that this was formerly made oi a 
soft wood called " kelebok" (" libut "), but it is now 
made of harder wood. The orifice was first bored 
out with a " bone awl " and then gradually enlarged, 
after which the end of the tube was warmed and 
rubbed with resin and the mouthpiece fitted on to it 
and shaped with the chopper. The outer case was 
made of bamboo, the nodes being pushed out (as 
usual) with a long stick. The baniboo was then 
heated over a slow fire and bent downwards with a 
constant pressure, which was applied by means ot a pair 
of wooden pincers. This process was repeated about 

' Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 102 uij</. '^ Ih. 

330 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

a dozen times, the object being to make the bamboo 
case soft and yielding. The broken edges of the nodes, 
which still remained inside the bamboo, were removed 
in the ordinary way. The bottom node, however, 
was left until the completion of the following process.' 
The end of the blowpipe being pushed into the 
bamboo case as far as it will go without forcing, the 
remainder is then driven home by bringing down the 
extremities smartly upon a block of wood. This pro- 
cess is assisted by the warming, and the bottom node 
already mentioned is then cut away. Use is made 
of the long cleaning-rod (" bingrot ") to give a 
further polish to the interior of the tube, the thin 
end being first inserted, and then the thicker end, 
with a piece of skate-skin attached. The final polish is 
effected by substituting the leaves of the " mamp'las " 
for the skate-skin, this part of the process alone taking 
two or three days to complete. The mouthpiece is then 
made out of soft wood smoothened and coated over 
with a layer of gutta-percha to give it more durability. 
A small hole is made in the centre of the node (at the 
lower end) to let the air in, and the shaft is softened by 
steaming and straightened by eye. When the node is 
finally excised, a rod with twisted bamboo shavings 
attached to it is pushed down inside the tube, and 
worked to and fro to clear away the remains of the 
node." 

The Darts and the Quiver. 

The darts, which measure from " breast to breast " 

(of the maker), are described as being manufactured 

from the hard outer cuticle of a palm called " kredok " 

{Cyrtostachis Iceca)^ Each of the spaces between 

' v. -St. ii. 103 seqq. 2 /(, dulds) is also said to be used by the 

3 The wood of tapioca [Manihot Benua. — Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 106. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 33' 

the knots furnished on an average forty arrows, a 
single day's work for their maker. These arrows 
are dried for a long time and kept in reserve, as they 
are seldom used twice. ^ When bent or warped, the 
dart-shaft was straightened by hand over a fire.- 
They are often used unpoisoned, without nicks. ^ 

The quiver of these Benua tribes is made from 
part of an internode of the large bamboo, which is cut 
when green, filled with wet clay, and exposed to 
gentle heat. As the clay dries, the bamboo is gradu- 
ally moved further from the fire, the process often 
taking several weeks to complete, though when once 
completed it effectually prevents the bamboo from 
warping. After the first heating it is wrapped in 
bark to protect it from the smoke of the hearth-fire, 
and thus gradually obtains its golden-yellow colour. 
The cap, which is made by the women, is of woven 
" nipah " or pandanus-leaves. The quiver itself is 
fitted with reeds as usual, and the waist-cord is of 
" t'rap " bark, with buckle of wood, bone, tortoise- 
shell, or even cash. It is quite plain and undecorated."* 

An elaborate system of marking the darts, in 
order to distinguish the several strengths of the 
poison, was employed by these tribes, as follows : — '' 

Marks. 

Nature of Quarry. 

Strength of Poison. 

• • 

Large birds 
Squirrels {i.e. small 

mammals) 
Civet-cats (mcdium- 

si/ed mammals) 
Apes (large mammals) 

Ipoh (Aittiaris) only. 
Ipoh + fish-" stings."' 

Ipoh + fish-" stings "+ centipedes. 

Ipoh -(- fish-" stings " -f- centipedes -i- 
-snake-poison (/.c. " full strength " 
of poison). 

' Vaughan-Stcvens, ii. io6. ' ff>id. p. 107. 

^ Ibiit p. 123. Cp. Favre, Aun. * fbiJ. pp. 104, 105. 

/'. /''. xxii. 304. » Ibid. p. 107. 

332 

WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

Unpoisoned arrows (for small birds) were not 
kirnished with any distinguishing mark.^ 

The amount of poison - made at a time is sufficient 
for a quiver containing ("nominally") lOO arrows; 
this, however, no doubt merely means that the 
poison - makers of these tribes make rather more 
poison at a time than they require to use, since no 
quiver holds anything near the number mentioned.* 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 107. 

- 7b. There is nothing special to note 
as regards this poison, for which see App. 

■' The following account of the 
preparation of the jioison of the 
Iknua is from Newbold : — "The 
Benua employ throe preparations of the 
Ipohor Upas poison to tip their arrows 
with, these three kinds being distin- 
guished by the names ' Ipoh krohi,' 
' Ipoh lennik ' or ' kennik,' and 
' Ipoh mallaye.' 

"The ' krohi ' is extracted from the 
root and bark of the Ipoh tree, the 
roots of the 'tuba' and ' kopah,' red 
arsenic, and the juice of limes. 
The ' tennik ' is made in the same 
manner as the 'krohi,' leaving out the 
' kopah ' root. The ' mallaye ' poison, 
which is accounted the most potent of 
the three, is prepared from the roots of 
the 'tuba,' the 'perachi,' the 'kopah,' 
and the ' chey ' ; and from that of the 
shrub ' mallaye ' ; hence its name. 

"The process of concocting these 
preparations is as follows : — The roots 
are carefully selected and cut at a 
particular age of the moon ; probably 
about the full. The woody fibre is 
thrown away, and nothing but the 
succulent bark used. This is put into 
a ' kuali ' (a sort of earthen pipkin), 
with as much soft water as will cover 
the mass, and kneaded well together. 
This done, more water is added, and 
the whole is submitted to a slow heat 
over a charcoal fire until half the water 
has evaporated. The decoction is 
next strained through a cotton cloth, 
and again submitted to slow ebullition 
until it attains the consistency of syrup. 
Ked arsenic ('warangan'), which is 

rubbed down in the juice of the sour 

lime, the 'limau asam' of the Malays, 
is then added, and the mixture jioured 
into small bamboos, which are care- 
fully closed up ready for use. Some 
of the tribes add a little opium, spices, 
and saflVon ; some, the juice of the 
lancha, and the bones of the sunggat- 
lish burnt to ashes. 

" A number of juggling incantations 
are performed, and spells gibbered 
over the seething caldron by the Poy- 
angs, by whom the fancied moment of 
the projection of the poisonous prin- 
ciple is as anxiously watched for as 
that of the philosopher's stone or the 
elixir vitae by the alchemists and philo- 
sophers of more enlightened races. 
When recently prepared the Ijx)h 
poisons are all of a dark liver-brown 
colour, of the consistency of syrup, and 
emit a strongly narcotic odour. The 
deleterious principle appears to be 
volatile, as the efticacy of the poison is 
diminished by keeping" (Newbold, ii. 
pp. 400, 401). 

Newbold further mentions — as the 
only antidote of which the Benuas 
could tell him — the fresh sap of a 
shrub called " lemak kfpiting" 
(" Lemmah kopiting " ; lit. = " crab's- 
fat "), nibbed round and into the 
wound, and afterwards over the limb 
in which the puncture has been made. 
— Newbold, ii. 402. 

[For identifications, v. pp. 318, 319, 
a?ite, and App. "Krohi" stands for 
"kroi" in the Besisi dialect, "tennik" 
for "tenet," "mallaye" for " malai " 
( = " Blay " of Vaughan-Stevens,?), 
"I'erachi" for " perachek " (or 
" I'erachet "), and "chey" for Bes. 

CHAP. VI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MT. BEREMBUN 333 

The Bloii'pipv. 

Jakun of Berembun. — All the Berembun tribes 
(visited by Logan) used the blowpipe and poisoned 
darts. The former was a light and neat instrument. 
and differed from the " bored " wooden blowpipe of 
the Dayaks. That of the Berembun tribes consisted 
of two bamlioos about 7 ft. (2.13 m.) in length, the one 
enclosed within the other, the external one being about 
three-fourths of an inch (19 mm.) in diameter, and 
neatly decorated for about i ft. (91 cm.) in the centre 
and at each extremity. To prev^ent it from splitting, 
the fibrous bark of the Artocarpus was bound around 
6 in. (45 cm.) of the extremity and coated with resin 
("dammar"). The internal tube was of the same 
length as the case, but its "bore" measured only 
three-fifths of an inch (15 mm.). It was composed of 
two pieces of bamboo, united by a splicing-piece 8 in. 
(20 cm.) long, which embraced both ends tightly at 
the point of junction. The bamboo used in the manu- 
facture of this blowpipe (" buluh temiang ") was very 
light and finely grained.' 

The darts (" damak ") were made from the stem 
of the bertam-palm leaf. They measured 10 in. (2^ 
cm.) in length, and ,',; in. (1.5 mm.) in diameter at 

"ches"or "cheh"(Mal. "ipoh"). "Ko- the milky saji drawn from the stem of 

pah" = ?Carrt/<7 wrt/(J«-t«/m,but "limou Autians that is generally empl<iycd. 

asam" = the lime(.M.al. "Limau asam"). Of the ihin poison mentioned liy Ncw- 

Newbold (/.c) distinguishes three kinds l)oid, "Ipoh malai " (or " mall.aye '"), 

of poison in the Mal.ay Teninsula : which is the root of a West Indian 

(l) "Ipoh kroi" ("krohi"), (2) " Ipoh plant {YVievetiu >ie>n/olia,]\iss., A/>ocy- 

tenet" ("tenni"),and (3) "Ipoh malai" ticuea), is said to be the foundation. — 

("mallaye"), of which the first two are See Geiger, p, 20.] 
founded ujOTn the root and bark of the ' /. J. A. vol. i. p. 272. From the 

Ipoh tree. Newhold seems, however, to foregoing account it is probable that 

have confused "Ipoh akar" (6V;jt^;wj) the Berembun blowpipe belonged to 

with "Ipoh batang" (Antian's), for it is the Sakai type. 

334 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

the base, from which they gradually tapered to a very 
fine and sharp point. The base was inserted into a 
conical butt-end of " kayu tutu " ^ (which is very porous 
and light), the dart there measuring about i in. (25 mm.) 
in length and one-third of an inch (8 mm.) in diameter. 
The points of the dart had been dipped for about five- 
sixths (21 mm.) of an inch in Ipoh poison. This latter 
is made by taking the sap of the Upas creeper, the 
Upas tree (or " kyas "),- " tuba," and limes, which are 
then bruised, boiled, and strained. Arsenic is added, 
and other substances, such as " pachet," ^ " jimardes," ■* 
" malai," and " gadong," are also sometimes added as 
well. The liquid, which is called " ipoh," having been 
thus prepared, has the colour and consistency of 
prepared opium ("chandu"). An incision is made 
round the point of the dart just above the poison to 
ensure its breaking off and remaining in the wound. ^ 

Each dart is kept (ready for immediate service) in a 
reed or case of bamboo, the diameter of which is about 
one-fourth of an inch (6 mm.). Fifty of these reeds 
are laid side by side and united by strings. They are 
then rolled up and inserted into a large quiver, which 
is also made of bamboo, and which has a neat lid made 
from the wood of the "jelotong." This quiver con- 
tains, in addition, a quantity of the wadding (" barok "), 
which is of a very light, spongy character, and is 
also used as tinder, which these tribes extract from a 
tree called "runut."" When the dart has been inserted 
into the blowpipe a little " barok " is introduced behind 
it. When the operator blows into the blowpipe, this 
substance is pressed against the butt-end of the dart, 

1 Sic, ? "l\ito'k" = //idlsi:us macro- * Sic? Unidentified. 
phyllus. ^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 272 seqq. 

2 " Kyas" = "kayas"(" ipoh kayu"). "^ 6"jV, ? " rengut. " 
•"' Sic, ?"pcrachet," q.v. 

MALA VAN SEA-G YPSIES 335 

and effectually prevents windage. In shooting, the 
blowpipe is firmly held by both hands, which are lightly 
clasped over the near extremity of the tube, which in 
turn is firmly inserted into the mouthpiece, which thus 
serves as a species of handle.' 

Weapons. 

Udai. - The Udai use sharpened palm - wood 
(" nibong ") stakes, hardened with fire at the end, as 
spears, as well as the blowpipe with poisoned darts," 

Orang Laut or Sea-Jakun. 
Weapons and Iniple'jucnts. 

0. Laut, Sletar. — The Sletar tribe of the Orang 
Laut are described as possessing no weapons, whether 
for offence or defence. 

In the same passage, however, we are told that 
they do employ a form of fish-spear called " serkap," 
as well as the Malay "parang" or chopper (which, of 
course, may on occasion be used either as a defensive 
or offensive weapon).^ 

0. Laut, Sabimba. — The Sabimba use a Dayak 
blowpipe, which is also armed with a spear - head, 
bayonet fashion. It is curious, says Logan, that this 
weapon has been imported for the Sabimba from time 
immemorial, and that they have not acquired the art 
of manufacturing their blowpipes from bamboo like 
the Berembuns. The Bornean sumpitan, adds Logan 
(evidently by way of distinction), is artificially bored." 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 272, 273. The of the Kcratong and Jekati.— y. A'.^..V., 

blowpipe is not used by the Jakun of A. B., No. 25, p. 3 ; No. 26, p. 14. 
Uhi End.iu, Ulu SCmbrong, and Ka- ' Newbold, ii. 381, 3S2. 

hang, though it is by their iioiglibours -^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 342*. • lb. 297. 

336 WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS 

It is most unfortunate that this account is so 
meagre, but a contemporary account by Mr, Thompson 
adds a few more scattered facts. He describes the 
Sabimba as hunting the wild hog by the aid of their 
dogs, and as feeding on monkeys, snakes, apes, etc. 
" Their blowpipe is the same as that used by the Dayaks 
of Sambas in Borneo, from whence it is imported to 
Singapore, and from thence finds its way to the 
Tembrau, the river on which they are now located. 
The dart of this blowpipe is delicately fashioned, but the 
Sabimba make a ruder description themselves. The 
darts are poisoned with the juice of the Upas tree, which 
is called 'ipoh.'" The admission that the Sabimba 
make a ruder sort of dart themselves, tallies entirely 
with what we find to be the case among many of those 
tribes who are in the habit of employing not only 
their own weapons, but those of their neighbours in 
the chase, no doubt in hopes that the latter would 
bring them better luck. It would be interesting to 
know what proof there was that the blowpipes resem- 
bling those of the Dayaks at Sambas were borrowed,^ 

0. Laut, Muka Kuning. — With the help of dogs, the 
blowpipe, a kind of palm-wood spear (the " seligi " or 
" spear of nibong "), the axe, the hatchet, and the 
knife, the O. Muka Kuning procure their ordinary 
food in the forest, together with rattans, resin or 
" dammar," and eagle-wood, which they barter for rice, 
cloth, implements, tobacco, and salt." 

The Bow. 

0. Laut, Temiang". — The following reference to a 
form of arrow-release attributed to a less-known sea- 

' To me the statement is most unlikely. J. /. A. vol. i. pp. 347*, 348*. 
2 Ibid. p. 337*. 

CHAP. VI MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES ^^7 

tribe is, so far as I have been able to discover, 
unique : the bow (of the Temiang) was held in a 
horizontal position (a hole being made in the centre 
of the bow, through which the arrow passed), the 
three fingers bent over the string, and the arrow 
held between the first and second fingers, the thumb 
straightened, and the little finger partially straight- 
ened.^ 

' Essex Jnst. Bull. vol. xvii. Oct. -Dec. p. 21 of short copy. See, however, 
remarks on p. 253, ante. The entire passage wants corroboration. 

VOL. I 

CHAPTER VII. 

Cultivation. 

The most primitive form of horticulture (if so it can 
be called) employed by these tribes arises from the 
throwing away of the seeds of fruit that they have 
eaten in the jungle. A Malay chief of Selangor 
informed me that the Besisi were originally in the 
habit of eating the fruits of the jungle in a small 
shelter built upon the spot where they had been 
gathered, but on its being pointed out that this 
practice resulted in a superfluous number of fruit-trees 
all growing in the same spot, the whole tribe took to 
carrying their fruit to a little distance before eating 
it, and afterwards removed during the fruit season 
to a fresh spot every year, in order to spread the 
seeds over a wider region of the country. 

On the other hand, fruit-seeds or seedlings were 
certainly planted by the aborigines from time to time 
among the catch-crops in their clearings, and the 
ground round the trees that were in bearing was 
regularly cleared (about once a year) of undergrowth. 
This, however, was probably intended rather to 
facilitate the collection of the fruit than with any idea 
of improving the fruit-bearing capacity of the tree. 

For the latter purpose magic was more frequently 

338 

lAKLN WAI.KISC 11" A TKKK, I'l.f HATU, SKLAXGOR 

I'oi. /. A 3-,S. 

C irruti. 

S/.KAi Tki-.e-Felling : One Man (on Stacinc;) starting Wokk, the Gtiik 
(on the Lekt) ci.imbixg up to assist him. 

Vol. r. p. 339. 

CHAP. VII GENERAL REMARKS 339 

employed, though it is true that various ingenious 
devices were adopted for the purpose of scaring away 
wild animals (such as monkeys, squirrels, bear-cats, 
and civet-cats) which were certain to assemble to feast 
upon the fruit. 

Amongst the animals that were fond of the 
durian, bears and tigers were always especially men- 
tioned, it being asserted that these animals were in 
the habit of tearing open the huge, green, spiky fallen 
fruit by inserting their sharp claws into the divisions 
of its thick rind, and feasting upon the creamy 
pulp that envelops the seeds within. Whether this 
be so or not, it is certain that both bears and tigers 
are frequently met with in the neighbourhood of these 
durian groves, and that not a few of the aborigines 
have lost their lives through being attacked either in 
or near the tiny huts or shelters that are built under 
the durian trees, during the fruit season, for the 
watchers. I may add that the number and variety of 
wild fruits eaten by the aborigines were far in advance 
of those eaten by the Malays. 

All the aborigines are adepts at tree-felling, at 
which even the Malays cannot beat them. Standing 
on a lofty platform made of a few crossed sticks, 
they cut the stem through at the point where the 
buttresses spring from the trunk. They never 
seem to miss their stroke even by a hair's-brcadth, 
the cutting being so cleanly done that the top of the 
stump often looks as smooth as a billiard-table, a great 
contrast to the roughly cut stumps left by some 
Malays and most Chinese. In the southern districts 
of Selangor the Jakun, who did a good deal of felling 
for the Protectorate Government, proved cheap and 
excellent workers, though they required management, 

340 C UL TI VA TION vart i i 

as they would never work unless they were in a 
humour to do so. Their favourite method of felling, 
when a large area had to be cleared, was to select 
a tree of the largest size, and then to fell it in 
a particular direction so as to bring down with it a 
number of smaller trees in its fall. 

In the earliest stages of cultivation, the first kind 
of grain to be planted by the aborigines is a kind of 
Chinese millet, which is grown together with a few- 
light catch-crops, more especially by tribes living 
among the hills of the Peninsula at a considerable alti- 
tude. The last mode of cultivation introduced is 
usually rice, and even when this latter is cultivated, it 
is generally on so small a scale and with such hopelessly 
inadequate implements, that it could hardly be ex- 
pected (when the various "enemies" of the rice had 
taken their toll) that there would be any substantial 
harvest left to gather. 

Magic rites play a large part in the rice-planting 
customs of the Sakai and the Jakun, but less so, I 
believe, in those of the Semang, who seem to be less 
superstitious than their neighbours, 

Mr. Blagden has shown that there are several non- 
Malay aboriginal names for rice in the Peninsula, and 
this fact, coupled with the existence of varieties of the 
grain special to the aborigines, and with the generally 
aboriginal character of the harvest -rites, argues 
against such words being borrowed by the civilised 
(Mohammedan) Malays. The line between pagan 
and Mohammedan Malay is drawn at irrigation. 

The fact that there have been cases in which the 
Jakun have taken even to the cultivation of coffee 
shows, however, that they are by no means incapable 
of improvement. 

CHAP. VII NEGRITOS OF KEDAh 341 

I. — Semang. 
Agriculture. 

Kedah Semang* and Pangan. — The wildest Semang 
tribes do not eat rice, except when they may have suc- 
ceeded in obtaining a scanty supply through the medium 
of other Semang more conversant with Malays. 

They live, in fact, for the most part upon roots, 
eked out by the trophies of their skill in hunting and 
fishing, together with the wild fruits of the jungle as 
they come in season. 

The Semang, who have reached the first and most 
rudimentary stage of agriculture, plant by way of a 
substitute for rice a species of Chinese millet (" sekoi ") 
which is called in Malay " cat's - tail " (" ekor 
kuching "), and which is perhaps selected from its 
flourishing better than rice on the higher ranges. 

The fact of these tribes being millet-eaters, of 
which I was first informed by the Semang of Kedah, 
1 subsequently found had been already recorded by De 
Morgan and several other writers. It is, of course, 
conceivable that the fact of their being eaters of millet 
may have given the nickname of " Orang Sekoi," or 
" Millet-men," to the tribes who bear it. But on the 
other hand the name might quite as easily have been 
derived from some small stream or river (Sungei 
Sekoi), since on the whole this is the more usual 
method by which these tribes get their names. 

In the next stage of development (in which the 
Negritos are still semi -nomadic, and migrate h'om 
one district to another as soon as their scanty crop is 
harvested) they actually begin to grow rice in a primi- 
tive fashion, as well as a few catch-crops, such as 
bananas, sugar-cane, tapioca, maize, and sweet potatoes, 

342 CULTIVATION 

all, however, with a minimum expenditure of time and 
trouble. The rice that they grow, at this stage, is 
always "hill-rice" (Mai. " huma "), a fresh plot of 
forest-ground (usually the sloping side of a hill) 
being selected and cleared annually. The branches 
are then lopped off from the fallen trees, the debris is 
burnt, and the rice sown in the interstices between 
the remaining tree-stumps, this latter process always 
necessarily taking place during the more rainy season. 

A good instance of this culture of " hill-rice " was 
to be seen at Siong (in Kedah), where the Semang 
had cleared a great part of the slope of Bukit Temesu, 
and planted it with rice and the light catch - crops 
mentioned in the foregoing list, with the exception, 
however, of tapioca, which, for some reason unknown 
to me, they did not plant. 

At the time of my arrival their scanty stock of rice, 
which was of very poor quality, had all been harvested, 
and they had stored it in a tiny hut or barn, built 
upon very high posts and no bigger than a box 
(4 feet by 4 feet), in order to remove its precious 
contents beyond the reach of small mammals. 

Perak Semang*. — These remarks apply equally to 
the Semang of Perak. 

II. — Sakai. 

Fruit-gathering. 

Perak Sakai. — The Sakai method of gathering 
wild tree-fruit is to climb the trees in which ripe fruit has 
been seen, and then to lop off the fruit-laden boughs, 
so that the fruit itself may be picked off the boughs 
(as they lie on the ground) and eaten at leisure.^ 

' De Morgan, viii. 284. This method is also practised by the Malays. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 343 

Agriculture. 

The Hill Sakai (Sakai Bukit) are said to practise 
no form of agriculture ; but those who have reached 
the earliest stage of it are described as cultivating 
the species of Chinese millet called " sekoi " (or " ekor 
kuching ") already mentioned/ Mr. L. Wray saw a 
field of this millet grown at an altitude of 2400 ft. (730 
m.) in Perak, and remarks that this form of grain is 
grown largely by the Sakai, both in the hills of N. Perak 
and of the Plus district, but that no rice was grown 
there, and that their staple food appeared to be tapioca." 

Mr. Wray adds that they also grew sweet potatoes, 
sugar-cane, pumpkins, and tobacco, but no fruit, except 
in the settlements near Malay villages.^ 

Elsewhere the Perak Sakai are described as 
planting not only the crops already named, but maize 
and yams, etc., etc' 

According to Col. Low and De Morgan, the Sakai 
make no sort of use of ploughing or harrowing 
implements, but content themselves with making holes 
in the ground with a pointed stick, in the open spaces 
between the roots and tree-stumps,'' to contain the rice- 
seed which is dropped into them. 

De la Croix, in describing the Sakai village of 
Kampong Chabang, on the upper waters of S. Kerbu 
(a tributary of the Plus river in Upper Perak), gives 
a graphic description of one of these aboriginal 
clearings, stating that the jungle had been cleared 
tor an area of about five acres {deux /leciares), and 

• De la Croix, p. 340. Sed v. p. ^ /^jV/. 

340, ante. * J. 1. A. vol. iv. p. 429 ; .ind cp 

- Wray in /. K. A. S., S. B., No. Hale, p. 294. 

21, p. 163. For illustrations of clear- ^ Low,/. /. ^. vol. iv. pp. 429, 430; 

ings, cp. l.'Hommf, ii. 642. 643. cp. De Morgan, vii. 423; /,"//. ii. 611. 

344 CULTIVATION 

great trees lay on all sides, the open spaces between 
them being planted with rice. Here and there were 
upright posts from which were suspended pieces of 
bamboo which sounded as the wind shook them. 
These were scarecrows designed for driving away the 
crowds of birds which came to rob the rice-fields. 
When the wind was not strong enough to move these 
scarecrows, the aborigines did so themselves by means 
of an arrangement of cords or creepers, all of which con- 
verged towards a small shelter in the centre, wherein 
a watchman was always posted. It looked not unlike a 
network of telegraph lines. The same apparatus was 
used for scaring away wild elephants, which were a 
veritable scourge to plantations in the jungle.' 

Vaughan-Stevens, in giving a very long and full 
account of rice-planting as practised by the Sakai,- 
made out five main divisions of their agricultural 
work — felling, burning, sowing, reaping, and the offer- 
ing of first-fruits. To commence, he stated that as a 
rule only one harvest was obtained, unless the soil was 
exceptionally rich, when two harvests might possibly 
be obtained. Hence it was the most usual thing for 
the clearing to be deserted as soon as the harvest had 
been reaped. The patch of forest which happened to 
be selected was cleared during the prevalence of the 
drier season, by means of the hatchet and the chopper.^ 
A favourite method of felling was to cut a number 
of small trees half-way through, and then to fell a 

' De la Croix, p. 323 (1882). This - Called by Vaughan-Stevens 
method is common among the Malays, Blandas, though, as has already been 
but as Mr. Blagden shows, the abori- explained, Vaughan-Stevens almost in- 
gines themselves may have grown rude varial)ly employed this term for what 
crops. Wray {^Per. Mtis. N. iii. pp. 29- are throughout this book called Sakai. 
30) gives two kinds of rice, " Padi Mr. Blagden, however, from internal 
Sakai" and "Padi Si Antah," both linguistic evidence, attributes this parti- 
described as varieties grown only by cular account to the Mantra of Malacca, 
the Sakai. 3 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 146. 

• •■ N.-' . .. 

^^^"%. 

.*-:^..'!\X; 

A S.\K.\[ I'l.ANTATION AT ClIANCKAT BeRTAM ON THE RlVKR RAYA (PERAK). 

SAK \I I'l.ANIATIONS NEAR IIIK 1 1 KAH-WA I'ERS OE THE UlVER KaMI'AK (PERAK), 
SEEN EROM THE SlMMEl' ( (E Mt. ('llAHANfJ. 

rol. /./. 344 

Amokiginai, Hill (Jllakl\(;, wnii llurs, Ulu Batu, Sklangok. 

M'Gregor. 

Aboriginal Hill (lkaking, wiiii mixld (lltivatio.n (Tai'IOCa and 

I'.ANANAS), Ulu Hatu, Sklancjok. 
Vol. I. p. 345. 

SAKAJ OF I'ERAK 345 

bigger one in such a way that it brought them all 
down in its fall. 

The felled timber, after being left to dry for a few 
weeks, was then set on fire, and with the exception of 
some of the thicker stumps soon burnt to ashes. In 
the spaces between these stumps the padi was planted, 
just before the commencement of the wet season. 
Before felling, however, all tools, whether choppers or 
hatchets, had to be charmed to avoid accidents which 
might be brought about by evil spirits. Women and 
children, on such occasions, were not allowed to be 
present on account of the dangers that they might 
incur. In every village there was generally at least one 
man — perhaps several — who knew these charms. At 
the present day the Penglima or village chief was as 
a rule the only one who knew them, for since the 
wizards had died out, any one who knew the charm 
could work it. 

The actual process was as follows : — 

Two forked uprights (of no stipulated size or 
material) were planted vertically in the ground (a few 
feet apart) and supported a horizontal pole running east 
and west. The handle or helve of a hatchet was then 
suspended from the pole, and just underneath it were 
planted a branch (of some kind of forest tree) and a 
young shoot of " bunglei." To these were added a 
half coconut-shell filled with earth, which served as a 
censer (" sangkun "), a chopper, to be deposited on 
the ground beneath the pole, and the blade of the 
hatchet whose helve was suspended as described. The 
ceremony commenced at sunrise, when the saplings 
were cut and erected as related above. ^ 

The magician then strewed incense (benzoin) over 

' Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 146. 

346 CULTIVATION 

the embers, and facing the rising sun, knocked the 
blade out of the hatchet-helve, and suspended the 
latter as described. Next he deposited the chopper 
and hatchet-blade, and picking them up again and 
crossing his hands in the smoke, described seven 
successive circles in the smoke, calling aloud seven 
times in succession as he did so. 

He then repeated the following charm : — 

"O Spirits of every Hill-locked Basin, return ye 
and seek the Spectral Huntsman. It is my desire to 
open up this clearing. O ye Four (great) Magicians, 
unto all Four of you I prefer my request. It is my 
desire to open up this clearing. Grant me coolness 
of body, and do me no harm nor scaith, but grant me 
coolness and coldness within this body of mine." 

The harm and scaith referred to included the risk 
of being crushed by falling trees, of falls, and of 
accidental wounds inflicted by the implements used by 
the operator ; as well as the attacks of wild beasts, 
and fever. 

When the charm was completed the hatchet-head 
was re-inserted in its helve and (along with the 
chopper) returned to its owner. A first clearing was 
then made, in the usual way, round the middle point 
of a circle which was about twelve yards in diameter. 
The chopper and hatchet were then turned seven 
times round in the smoke in strict silence, after which 
every one returned home. The owner of th^ tools 
commenced his work on the following day. To the 
foregoing should be added that the charm had to be 
said for each of the tools separately.^ 

The burning ceremony took place as soon as the 
felled timber was dry enough. Men, women, and 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 147, 148. 

CHAP, vu SAKAI OF PERAK 347 

children gathered together at mid-day in an open 
space on the sheltered side of the clearing. Here the 
censer was set up, and its smoke used to fumigate a 
half coconut-shell filled with coconut-oil. Before the 
latter was poured into the shell two or three polishing 
leaves (of the " akar simplas ") were put into it. The 
oil was called " minyak b'rangsang." ^ 

The magician next turned his face towards the 
east, lifted the shell full of oil to his lips and repeated 
this charm : — 

" O Lightning, in Heaven and on Earth, I desire 
to give scope to the rage of Fire. I desire to burn oft' 
this clearing. I desire to summon the Four (great) 
Magicians. I desire to summon the winds from their 
seven coigns, the seven winds of equal rank, and to 
summon the whirlwind." - 

After this charm was spoken each took up his tree- 
bark torch from the heap in which they had been 
deposited and dipped the end of it into the oil in the 
shell (which the magician had replaced on the ground). 
The women and children did likewise. Each 
individual then handed his torch to the magician, who 
alone might kindle it (by means of the embers in the 
censer). The company then hastened off in various 
directions, and each of them kindled the fallen timber 
in as many places as possible. This charm was con- 
cluded at noon, as that was the nour by which the 
leaves and twigs would all be well dried by the hot 
sun.'^ 

After this " burning " ceremony came that for 
planting the rice. When the grountl had been 
cleared by the burning of all but the larger trunks it 
was ready, after the first showers of the wet season, 

* Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 148. * lb. pp. 148, 149. ' 73 

348 

CULTIVATION 

to receive the seed. The men then prepared pointed 
sticks (or dil^bles) made from the saplings of a special 
kind of hard-wood tree called " tamun," ^ the bark of 
which was peeled off, and a hollow made at the thicker 
end to receive the seed, which was stored in the huts 
in sacks. 

The magician set out at sunrise for the fields, 
accompanied by all the men, women, and children 
who were going to take part in the sowing. On 
arriving at the first available open space near 
the middle of the field the magician drew a circle 
round himself with a specially made staff, which like 
the other dibbles was made out of " tamun " wood, 
and all the planting-sticks were heaped up inside the 
circle. The whole of the company sat outside the 
circle in a wide irregular ring, forming what is called 
the Rice-bin (" kepuk" ).- In the centre the " bunglei " 
plant already mentioned was planted in the ground, 
and near it a branch of the " tamun " tree from which 
the planting-sticks had been made.^ 

The " tamun " wood was chosen because the 
" tamun " tree bears its fruits in a ring round the 
base of the trunk at a height of only about 2 dcm. 
from the ground, the object of the planters being 
that the rice should by sympathy flower near the 
ground, as the " tamun " tree fruits, instead of 
growing long and rank and weedy. So, too, the 
" bunglei " plant was chosen because no animals ate it, 
the hope being that the rice might be similarly spared. 
The censer having been placed near this plant and 
incense burned on it, seven small holes, each about 
an inch deep, were made in the centre of the circle. 

' Mai. "Satambun.'' - Mai. "kepok,"' a very large circular " lice-bin." 

3 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 149. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 349 

Each individual then brought his planting-stick 
and drove it firmly into the earth, inside the ring 
(" kepuk "). One of the women's seed-pouches was 
then deposited within the ring and a quantity of rice- 
grains (saved from the first seven ears cut at the last 
year's harvest)^ were mixed with the seed contained in 
the pouch. A charm was then repeated as follows : — 

" O Dong, Black Princess, who dwellest as a recluse 
i^lit. fastest) in the sea for six months (in the year), I 
summon thee to assist me in planting rice, so that 
from a fist-full, from a mere pinch (of seed) may grow 
a hundred-fold, a thousand-fold, a koyan or two."- 

Turning his face to the east, the magician then 
took up the pouch and waved it in a circle seven 
times through the smoke which was still rising from 
the censer, counting aloud as he did so, " One, two, 
three, four, five, six, seven." 

When the charm had been said, a little rice-seed 

' This is the Rice-soul (or rather its time she is usually connected with the 

embodiment), called in Malay " anak cultivation of rice. See Skeat's /a^/tfj 

padi " or the "Rice -baby." See and Folktales from ati Eastern Forest, 

Malay Magic, \>. 235 segq. note to p. 49.] 

' Vaughan- Stevens explains that On the subject of the Rice -soul, 
this little Black sea- Princess (who Vaughan-Stevens further remarks that 
descends with the wet monsoon) had the rice had a soul which was con- 
the reputation of being able to protect demned to wander for three days. 
the rice- fields if she wished, against all During these three days and nights the 
other evil spirits except the " Squinting body of the rice was exposed, in a way 
Demon," who was usually more or less \^aughan-Stevens could not make quite 
harmful. All evil spirits but the latter sure of, to the attacks of evil demons 
feared this Princess, who was wont to which, under cover of darkness, 
taunt them with the misdeeds they had approached it in the form of mice, 
committed during their lifetime, and But the demons could not break 
on account of which they hatl been through the enchanted ring of plant- 
condemned by " Ciranny Long-breasts " ing-sticks, nor could they penetrate 
(" Gendui I>anyut '") to dwell in the sea to the inner circle of seven holes in 
and pass their lime in squirting water which the body of the rice was 
up at the clouds. [The full name of buried. 

this Princess is Putri Sadong. She is After the third night the"semangat" 

frequently referred to in the traditions or soul of the rice returned to its body, 

of the Malays, who describe her as the after which it could take care of itself. 

Princess of the Limestone Caves, and so that the protection of the planting- 

as ruling over the wild mountain goats sticks was no longer needed (Vaughan 

("kambing gurun "). At the same Stevens, ii. 151, 152). 

350 

CULTIVATION 

out of the pouch was dropped into each of the seven 
holes and covered up with earth by the magician, who 
made use of his stick for the purpose. The planting- 
sticks of the company were then waved round seven 
times through the smoke in a circle, the number of the 
completed circles being each time counted aloud by 
the magician. As soon as the planting-sticks had all 
been fumigated, each person took up his own pair, one 
in each hand, and went off with them to the field. 
The women followed, and the pouch was taken as 
well. The whole company now proceeded to plant the 
seed, working in a long line or file, casting the seed 
with one hand and pricking holes with the other. 
The women then divided the rice-seed between them, 
starting with that in the pouch, which must be planted 
first in any case. They next resorted to the main 
stock of seed, all of which they planted, dropping a 
few grains into each hole, and covering them up with 
hand or foot. When the day's work was ended the 
planting-sticks had to be brought back to the place 
where the ceremony was performed and restored to 
their original position. This ceremony had to be 
repeated for three consecutive days, but after that 
they might be deposited anywhere.^ 

To the foregoing I should add that if the planting- 
sticks in the course of the work got clogged together 
with wet earth this might on no account be removed 
by rubbing the stick against a tree, but had to be 
wiped away with the front of the foot. If the stick 
was accidentally knocked against a tree, the mouse- 
demons would hear it, and, joyfully exclaiming, " Rice- 
planting, rice-planting," set to work to dig up the 
seed." 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 150, 151. - Ihiil. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 351 

As soon as the rice began to ripen, all the men. 
women, and children set to work to drive off the 
birds, apes, elephants, squirrels, and other enemies of 
the rice. A small hut or shelter was built in the 
field ; and part or the whole of each family went to 
live there while the rice was ripening. The reaping 
was done with the same implements as are used by 
the Malays. None of the aborigines could remember 
any other kind being used. In default of the Malay 
reaping-knife ("tuai"), the reaper would pinch off each 
head of rice between finger and thumb. From five 
to twenty ears, on the other hand, according to the 
skill of the reaper, were seized between the finger 
and the thumb and cut off close to the ear when the 
reaping-knife was used, the stalks being left on the 
spot, either to be burnt or to wither. The rice-heads 
were then collected together, and thrown upon a 
threshing - floor to be separated from the husks. 
Here they were trodden to and fro under foot, 
and the stalk-ends sifted out. The rice required 
for immediate use was then thrown into a massive 
wooden mortar, where it was pounded with a heavy 
pestle, which split the husks, and the husked rice, as 
soon as the husks had been separated from it, was 
then ready for cooking,' 

Before the commencement of the harvest, how- 
ever, a magic ceremony had to be performed, which 
took place at sunrise. All who were interested in 
the harvest assembled at one of the watchers' huts in 
the rice-fields, and seated themselves in a ring round 
its walls. In the middle of the hut stood a sack filled 
with rice to the brim — an obvious piece of symbolism. 
One of the rcaping-knives was then inserted, with the 

■} \'aughan-Stevens, ii. 151, 152. 

352 CULTIVATION 

pointed end downwards, in the c^^ntre of the open 
mouth of the sack of rice, and to the butt-end of its 
(projecting) bamboo handle ; above the iron blade a 
small knob or clot of beeswax ' was affixed. 

With his face turned to the rising sun, the magician 
now crouched down in front of the sack, and, placing 
his lips close to the knob of beeswax, repeated aloud 
the following charm : — - 

" O thou that squintest, turn thy back to me ; thou 
that art blind, confront me. Lo, I reap the seven 
heads of rice, yea, and take the soul of the rice, and 
bear it back with me to the house." 

The magician then withdrew the reaping- knife 
from the sack's mouth, and proceeding to the circle of 
the seven holes and fastening seven rice-plants (one 
taken from each of the holes) to the upper part of the 
handle of the reaping-knife, turned his face towards 
the rising sun, and (retaining meanwhile the reaping- 
knife with the rice-plants attached) repeated the rest 
of the charm, which consisted merely of the words : 
" I will drive thee out, O Demon, from before me." 
At this he applied the edge of the reaping-knife to 
the rice-stalks and cut them through.'' 

The rice-heads being still fastened to the reaping- 
knife, the magician took them back with him to the 

' Vaughan-Stevens explains that wax squirrels, etc. The demons soon notice 

was used in order to symbolise the wax- all the unwatched places, whenever 

like nature of fresh rice when boiled. the attention happens to flag, and 

'^ Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 152. hence great care is taken of the grains 

The squinting demon is represented which contain the soul of the rice, and 

as squinting because the Sakai believe the spirit is so blinded by magic that 

that a man who squints can see further they can be collected together in 

round him than another whose eyes safety. The squinting spirit is always 

are naturally formed. A large rice- spying round the house, and looking out 

field demands ceaseless watchfulness, for a chance of playing off his tricks ; he 

and the eyes of the owner cannot look incites the fowls and dogs to steal food 

round far enough to take note of all outof the huts when the master isabsent. 

the depredations committed by birds, ^ Vaughan-Stevensj ibid. 

I 

Anouir.iNAi. WoMKN HLsKiNc Padi (siunviNi; Eni)-Vii;w of Mortar) 
Ui.u Ki.Ar, Paiianc. 

I 

Vol. I. p. 353- 

SAKAI OF PERAK 353 

hut, and there untying them, wrapped them up in a 
cloth or mat, and deposited them on the top of the 
rice in the second sack. There they had to stay for 
three days, during which time the women alone were 
allowed to cut the rice in the field, after which a 
pause followed until the end of the rice-feast. The 
rice-heads thus collected were husked, but the stalks 
and husks might not be thrown away before the feast 
was over, and were preserved in a basket or sack, which 
was kept in the hut. The rice thus obtained formed 
the portion used for the rice-feast, it being the rule that 
whatever remained over must be divided among the 
guests before they returned home after the banquet.' 
The following up of these three days' reaping by 
the offering to the guests is considered as an act of 
hospitality on the part of the chief, any omission of it 
being considered " mean." The reasons given to 
Vaughan-Stevens for not throwing away the remains 
of the feast were (i) that the guests might see how 
much had been obtained from the harvest, and assure 
themselves that the host had not kept back any of 
theithusked rice ; further, it was asserted that the 
Rice-soul, when it returns from its three days' wander- 
ings, is made welcome by means of the feast, and 
also, moreover, fortified by the charms against the 
trouble that might be caused by the demons later 
on. It was asserted, too, that it would be an insult 
to the Rice-soul if its husk were immediately thrown 
away as worthless ; and hence the husks were pre- 
served in order that the Rice-soul might see them 
upon its return. As soon as it returned, the grain of 
the seven rice-heads was collected together in a cloth 
or sack and hung up in an out-of-the-way place, until it 

* Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 152. 
VOL. I 2 A 

354 CULTIVATION 

was time for it to i^e mixed with the main stock of 
seed. Till then it took up its abode in these seven 
ears. To this it was added, that fresh rice when 
boiled possessed a peculiarly pleasant aroma, which 
was not to be obtained from old rice. Hence when 
the guests arrived they would raise the husks to their 
noses and inhale their aroma, as a means of ascertain- 
ing the quality of the harvest ; for, although the rice- 
grains had the same aroma as the husks, it would not 
be seemly to test the grains themselves in this way.^ 

Whilst the women were engaged in reaping the 
rice during the first three days, the men were em- 
ployed in procuring from the forests and streams the 
meat and fish required for the feast. Afterwards, 
however, both sexes took a share in the reaping, since 
the grains fall very easily and quickly out of the ears 
as soon as they are once fully ripe.-' 

After the rice which had been collected during the 
first three days had been husked and prepared, a 
sufficient quantity was cooked for the entertainment 
of the expected guests, the cooking taking place on 
the morning of the fourth day, by which time the 
supplementary dishes that had been procured by the 
men were available.^ 

The men now put on their best clothes, and the 
bachelors of the tribe, putting fiowers in their head- 
bands, took their blowpipes with them, and prepared 
to lead their guests to the feast-house.^ The most 
distinguished guest, i.e. the Batin or one of the 
subordinate chieftains or the magician, was fetched 
last, all the people accompanying him, and the un- 
married men acting as a kind of Bodyguard.^ 

' Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 153, 154. - Ibid. ^ Ibid, 

* I.e. the "Balai." ^ Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 153, 154. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 355 

As soon as the last guest had arrived, which was 
usually about mid-day, the dishes were placed upon the 
mats. Nowadays the host provides the rice and the 
betel-leaf, and every one who receives the invitation 
gives about ten cents towards the purchase of luxuries. 
Formerly, however, those ten cents were paid in kind, 
and consisted of various supplementary dishes, such as 
fish, game, and vegetables. Waiting on the guests, 
on the other hand, was the duty of the householder 
and his wife and his grown-up daughters.^ 

Before the meal commenced, as soon as the guests 
had chosen their places (the women and children 
sitting together in one place and the men in another), 
the magician took the censer and dispatched it seven 
times round the circle of guests, who continued to 
pass it round from hand to hand until it returned 
again to the magician, the latter calling out "one, 
two, three, four," and so forth each time that he 
received it, until the seven circuits were completed. 
These were, however, the only words uttered by the 
magician during the ceremony, and he did not turn in 
any special direction. - 

When this proceeding was over, the magician 
waved the censer seven times round the reaping- 
knives and the cloth in which the seven rice-heads 
were wrapped, and both of the latter being sus- 
pended from one of the central pillars of the house, 
the censer was simply passed around that i)illar. 
Next, the censer was carried round all the rice- 
sacks (which were intended to receive the harvested 
rice), and, lastly, seven times round the cooking-pots, 
which stood apart by themselves. It was then 
deposited at the foot of the pillar at the top of which 

' Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 154. - Ibid. 

336 

CULTIVATION 

were suspended the Rice-soul and the reaping-knives. 
The magician next took a few boiled rice -grains 
and laid some of them on the heads of each of the 
children present, in order that they might always 
remember when they were older how to prepare rice 
for their children. This completed the ceremony, and 
the actual feast then began.' 

After the meal the guests washed their hands in 
the water which had been placed in coconut -shells 
for every one to quench his thirst. And when they 
had all washed, each person present greeted the others 
of his (or her) sex in turn, stretching out the hand 
without rising. Betel-leaf was then brought forward 
and handed round, the host and his wife meanwhile 
taking their own share of the repast in a corner of 
the hut. When they had finished their meal, they 
too greeted each of the guests in the same way, and 
each guest, after responding, had to come forward again 
and return the greeting of the host. Meanwhile the 
wife of the host, on her own account, exchanged 
greetings with the other women. The incense was 
now removed from the censer and the smoking shell 
offered by the magician once to every adult. When 
he had received it back, he passed it once more seven 
times round the pillar on which the Rice -soul was 
hung, and then deposited it on the ground at the foot 
of the pillar. The unboiled rice which remained over 
from the three days' harvest was equally divided 
among all the guests ; but ^he boiled rice which had 
not been eaten at the feast was the magician's own 
perquisite." 

The guests who lived at a distance now took their 
leave, and as before were accompanied on their way 

' Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 154, 155. 

2 Ibid. 

CHAP. VII SAKAI OF SELANGOR 357 

by the owners of the rice-field. Before they departed 
the women alone greeted the host seven times. The 
host, however, was not permitted to accompany any 
of them to their homes until his most distinguished 
guest had departed.' 

The wife of the host, although she sat near him, 
received no greeting, except a quite informal one 
from some of her special friends. All the guests left 
the house in time to reach their dwellings before 
nightfall."' 

Ilorticulhire. 

Selang-op Sakai. — Of the devices employed by the 
Sakai of Selangor for scaring the monkeys away from 
their fruit-trees, an official in Selangor, some years 
back, observed one day as he was walking along 
the central range a noise that resembled the stroke 
of an axe on a hollow tree. Next day the same 
noise continued, and he therefore started off to 
investigate ; and in a small creek or water-gully came 
upon an ingenious contrivance put up by the Sakai to 
frighten monkeys away from some durian- trees, of 
which there were a number in full bearing in the 
neighbourhood. The contrivance was made out of 
an internode of bamboo, some five feet long, and had 
a fairly big stone lashed to the ])Ottom end ; rather 
less than half-way up a hole had been l:)ored and a 
long thin stick passed through it, the ends of which 
were made fast to a couple of trees on either side. 
The bamboo was fixed at about half a right angle, and 
a second bamboo led a stream of water into it ; as 
soon as the first baml)oo became full, its top-heaviness 
caused it to tilt up, when the weighted end fell with 

' Vauglian-Slevens. ii. 155. - Ihid. 

358 CULTIVATION - part ii 

a thud upon a third piece of bamboo which was fixed 
ready to receive it. The same writer added that the 
Sakai employed the " whistHng " (or " AiloHan ") 
bamboo a good deal for the same purpose, but said 
that this " fog-bell " of theirs was better.' 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — No record has hitherto been obtained of 
the actual rice-planting ceremonies practised by the 
Blandas in K. Langat. But the agricultural rites of 
all these tribes, as might be expected, are borrowed 
almost in their entirety from their Malay neighbours, 
and hence there is reason to believe that they cannot 
differ greatly from the ceremonies just described. 
That this is the case is borne out to some extent by 
the text of two padi - planting charms, which were 
given me by the Blandas in this same district. The 
first, which corresponds to the Malay tree-felling in- 
vocations, may be rendered as follows : — 

Charm to expel Earth-demons on opening up- a Clearing. 

Leaves of "kreduk" and "selimbar,"'' 
Tree-shoots that entwine and dangle, 
Dangle till they reach down earthwards, 
Therewith chase I you, Earth-demons ; 
Ely to- leftward, fly to rightward, 
I have chos'n this spot as lodging 
For Bananas, Yams, and Rice-plants. 
Lords of hill, and hill-locked basin. 
Drive we back these foul Earth -demons ! 

The second of these charms is to be used for 
calling the Rice-soul home at harvest-time (" panggil 
semangat padi ").^ It runs as follows : — 

' "Queensland" in Sel. J. vol. i. ^ a big climbing parasite (Klin- 
No, 15, p. 230. kert). 

2 "Menetau"; so-called in Malay '' Cp. Malay Magic, p. 235 seqq. 
also. 

\ •■"^^r.j:^%:s;^":iJ^-:a»gll^^w 

■\.\L 

•A' 

.■>»»■ 

'^^•r^iML^ 

f • 

?.*-■. 

■/*r'r>''o/"- 

•r-^ 

Cui-TivATioN or Tiiii T.mmoca-Plant (ox Lkit) and Slgar-Cank (in Centre) — 
Aboriginal Woman in Foreground, L'i.u K am, Selangor. 

Vol. I. p. 359. 

SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 359 

Charm kor invoking the Rice-soul. 

* 

Rice-l)oat ' male and Rice-boat female ! 
Cluck, cluck cluck ! your souls I summon, 
Both the girl-child and the hoy-child 
Come, we yearn to bear you homewards, 
Souls of Rice-plants,- S'lotan, IJorak, 
Jambi, I'ulul,'' Mai/e, Bananas. 
Thus into the house we bear you, 
In the soil no longer slumber, 
Slumber now within the curtains.^ 

The directions given me in connection with this 
charm were that the magician, on reaching the house 
(when returning from the rice - field), should say 
"Coming" (Mai. " datang "). As soon as the people 
in the house, who ought to be on the look-out, hear 
this announcement, they should bid the Rice-child 
welcome with " Come hither, then ! " 

One of the most interesting facts to be deduced . 
from the above charm (which was given me by an old 
Blandas chief) is the fact that by these aborigines 
a soul is attributed to maize and banana trees, as well 
as to the various kinds of rice. 

Horticulture. 

Besisi. — The Besisi have little that can be termed 
horticulture, though by dispersing either in their own 
plantations, or in the jungle, the seeds and stones of 
the fruit which they eat, and sometimes clearing the 
undergrowth around them afterwards, they naturally 
come to look to some extent upon the trees that 
spring from these seeds as the property of their tribe. 

* The rice-boat or " puan,*' as it is " Borak " and "Jambi," are the names 

called in Malay, is a boat-shaped of the best kinds of rice ("padi") grown 

wooden box (with built-out jiart be- in the district. 

hind), in which rice is deposited by ^ " I'ulut " is Oryza f;lutinosay or 

Malays when used ceremonially on glutinous rice, used chiefly with turmeric 

great occasions, or in jirocessions, such on ceremonial occasions. 
as that of a wedding, etc. ' /.//. " mosquito - curtains" — a 

'■' "Sclotan" or " S'lotan," as well as wonderfully graphic and human touch ! 

36o CULTIVATION 

At the same time, it should be observed that their 
claim when made, as so often happens, by way of pro- 
test against some usurping Malay, is not to the owner- 
ship of the tree or trees, but merely to a reasonable 
share of their fruit. The Malay is frequently left in 
possession by the simple jungle-folk with this express 
proviso, but as frequently breaks his contract, and this 
question of the ownership of such trees has repeatedly 
received the attention of the Government, the dis- 
appointment of the aborigines having repeatedly led 
to great wrangling between them and the Malays, 
whilst the latter never hesitate to use their power as 
the stronger race for the purpose of seizing the trees 
entirely whenever they find an opportunity of doing so 
unchecked. The trees thus planted are the durian, 
the mangostin, rambutan, rambai, lansat, tampoi, 
and others, the value of even a small orchard of this 
kind to a Malay being very considerable. The late 
Sultan Abdul Samad of Selangor, whose mother was 
said to have been of aboriginal extraction, had several 
such orchards in his possession, and most of the in- 
fluential Malay chiefs who surrounded him were the 
owners of similar property. 

The collecting of the fruit is done for the most 
part by women. A special fruit-gathering implement 
(which may, however, be copied from one employed by 
the Malays) has been described by Mr. Bellamy, who 
saw it in use among the Besisi, as I have myself done. 
It was used mostly for fruits about the size of an 
apple, especially the mangostin, and its main object 
was apparently to do away with the necessity of climb- 
ing the trees. To make it, the Besisi would procure 
a long thin bamboo, and splitting it lengthwise (at 
one extremity) between two joints or nodes, press 

CHAP. VII SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 361 

the split end forcibly down until the section opened 
out and took shape not unlike that of a small round 
cage. This cage -like formation was then bound 
round with rattan to preserve its shape, and a portion 
of two or three of the bars of the cage excised, 
sufficient length being, however, left in the bars of 
the upper section to form a sort of claws. The fruit- 
gatherer, after strapping a basket on to her back, 
then set to work, and passing the claws round the 
stalk of the first mangostin, gave a slight pull so as to 
detach the fruit, which, instead of falling to the ground 
and becoming bruised, simply dropped into the cage 
below the claws. 

I may add that the Besisi also occasionally, like 
the Malays, make use of magic to cause their fruit- 
trees to bear better. 

Agriculture. 

The Besisi cultivated the usual catch-crops (maize, 
tapioca, yams, and sweet potatoes, etc.) as well as 
rice, though the harvests that they obtained were 
seldom very much to boast of Their settlement at 
Ayer Itam stood in very low-lying ground which re- 
mained more or less swampy throughout the year, so 
that there was no trouble about water- courses and 
embankments, a fact which they evidently appreciated, 
this being the great stumbling-block in the way ol 
regular rice-cultivation, even among the local Malays. 
The following lines of a song sung at a Besisi rice- 
feast describe the various processes of rice-culture as 
practised by their tribe : — 

SONC; OK THK KiCE-rLANTKRS. 

Go ye out to fell your clearings. 
Burn yc llien your sun-dried tinilier, 

36: 

CULTIVATION 

Early plant, to make rice fruitful,^ 
Plant ye rice, yams, cane, bananas. 
Build a hut to shade the planters. 
When your crop's ripe, reap it quickly, 
Or you'll want, your rice grown rotten. 
Leave it not then, reap it thoroughly. 

The operations of sowing and reaping were always 
accompanied by the reciting of charms, which appear at 
first sight to be borrowed, almost bodily, from the rice- 
customs of the local Malays, though it is more probable 
that a large portion of them were of independent Jakun 
{i.e. aboriginal Malayan) origin. Periodical feasts 
were also held in the house of the tribal chief or Batin, 
both when the rice first began to bloom, and also at 
the beginning, middle, and end of the harvest. 

The Besisi have a ceremony (resembling that of 
the Malays) for bringing the Rice-soul back to the 
house. But on arrival at the house the Rice-soul is 
suspended from the ridge-pole of the roof ("tulang bum- 
bongan ") instead of being deposited (as by the local 
Malays) in the rice-bin (" kepok padi.")- As soon as 
the Rice-soul has been brought home the Besisi hold 
one of their great feasts or orgies (" main jo'oh "), at 
one of which I was fortunate enough to be present, and 
of which I accordingly took careful notes at the time. 

This festival that I attended took place at the 
Besisi settlement at Ayer Itam in the Kuala Langat 
district of Selangor. On reaching the Batin's house 
— which was the largest house in the village, and had 
a specially built " balei " attached to it, which could 
have probably held at one time a hundred people — we 
found it decorated in expectation of our arrival, which 
took place at about half-past one. By half-past two 

* Lines two and three are trans- 
posed in the original, no doubt by 
accident. 

■' One of the points that suggest for 
this rite an origin independent of the 
civilised Malay customs. 

CHAP. VII SAVAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 363 

the cooking of the rice by the women of the village 
was completed, and there being about sixty persons 
present, the men sat down. Before the feasting com- 
menced, however, a charm was recited by one of the 
minor chiefs. Seating himself at the head of two long 
rows of banana-leaf "dishes" (all of which were well 
heaped with rice as they lay on the floor), he addressed 
a friendly invitation to those beasts of the jungle and 
noxious insects which at all other times are considered 
the deadliest foes of rice-planters, but which (on this 
occasion only) were invited to glut themselves, and so 
join in the general banquet. This charm, which I 
afterwards took down from the chief who recited it, 
was mostly in Malay, and ran as follows : — 

Invocation ok the E.nkmies 01 thk Rice-crop. 

I'artake, O Round-foot. 

Partake, ( > Rats. 

Partake, O Blight. 

Partake, O Finches, 

Partake, O Stink-lnigs. 

Partake, O Caterpillars. 

Partake, O (Ireen-fly. 

Partake, (^ Deer. 

Partake, O Pig. 

Partake all of you of the year's Eldest-born. 

We have not eaten yet. 

But are just about to do so. 

" Round-foot " is euphemistic for the elephant, 
which, together with the wild pig, deer, and rats, used 
to work terrible havoc in the Besisi rice-fields at times. 
At the close of the invocation a small portion of rice 
was carried out of the house by one of the company 
and deposited on the top of an old tree-stump not far 
from the house- -in \)Xooi o{ bona fides. 

The remaining banana-leaves were now unfolded and 
the feasting began, and lasted a considerable time, the 
Batin or chief of the tribe feeding last. When it was 

364 CULTIVATION 

over we sat in groups and conversed till nightfall, when 
our unsophisticated orchestra struck up its liveliest air, 
and the business of the evening (dancing and singing) 
commenced in real earnest. The performance was 
strictly choral (in the old Greek sense of the word), and 
the names of the airs (and their accompanying dances) 
which were performed were as follows : — (i) " Radin," 
or "The Prince"; (2) " Gubang Laut," or "The 
Pirateer"; (3) " Pukol Baling"; (4) " Ingkau Badan," 
the two last being tunes of the Bajau or Malayan 
pirates, with whom the Besisi claim kinship. A little 
later, after an interval for song-dances of the mimetic 
type (viz. the "Siamang," " Bangkong," and " Gagau "), 
the women, after considerable pressing, were induced 
to join the entertainment and perform certain dances 
called (i) the " P'rang," or the war-dance; (2) the 
" Bengkalis";^and(3)the " Kopak " (the latter^of which 
was said to be a purely Jakun air), the men doing the 
actual dancing. Generally speaking, the motions of 
the dancers were much freer than is the case with 
the Malays ; indeed, some of the dances, such as the 
" Pirateer" (or " Gubang"), grew almost furious, and 
roused great enthusiasm on the part of the audience. 
The " Siamang " and its companion pieces, on the 
other hand, were really acted in character by men of 
the tribe, the actor repeating the words of the poem 
after the Batin or tribal chief, and suiting his gestures 
to the words as he did so. Some of this acting was 
particularly clever. 

I may add that the full dancing dress of the Jakun 
on these occasions consisted of woven strips of " ser- 
dang" (palm) leaves, which were made up into (i) a 

' The name of an island oft" the believe, of a fish after which the island 
opposite coast of Sumatra, and also, I was named. 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF MALACCA 365 

head-band with a long fringe, which went completely 
round the head and partially hid the face ; (2) two 
tassels similarly constructed, which were attached to 
the head-band; (3) a sort of bandolier made of the 
same leaves ; and (4) a " serdang "-leaf belt. The full 
dress was not ready on our arrival, but it was worn the 
next morning at an additional impromptu performance 
which was got up for our benefit before we left on our 
journey home. 

AgticulUire . 

Mantra. — The Mantra were not so advanced in 
cultivation as the Karens of the Tenasserim coast. 
These last cultivated cotton and made their own cloth, 
which was not the case with the Mantra. The 
Karens also had vegetables, which were unknown to 
the Mantra. The latter contented themselves with 
clearing a small piece of ground in March, and in |ul\- 
set fire to the (felled) trees, which by that time were 
sufficiently dry, and at the beginning of September 
planted their padi and yams (" k'ladi "), etc. Hut 
these clearings were usually so small that their 
harvest of rice was only enough to last them for a 
couple of months, the yam being then their only food 
for the remainder of the year.^ 

Logan relates that just as the Benua-Jakun on com- 
mencing a new clearing made offerings to the earth- 
genie (" Jin Bumi "), so too the Mantra, when he had 
resolved to abandon his old plantation, began first of 
all by searching for a good locality. When he had 
found one, it remained for him to discover whether the 
supernatural powers were favourable to his occupation 
of it. This he did by attending to his first dream 
after making the selection. Should he dream of being 

> Barbe in/. /. A. vol. v. pp. 487, 488. 

366 

CULTIVATION 

chased by a clog, or by an enemy, or of entering water, 
or of water flooding the locality, or of any other such 
incident which was considered a bad omen, he pro- 
ceeded to seek for another spot. Favourable omens 
were to dream of felling or of climbing trees, of ascend- 
ing a hill, or of growing plants, and so forth. When 
by means of his dreams he felt assured that he had 
selected a fortunate place, he repaired to the spot, took 
a little betel-leaf, repeated a charm over it, chewed 
it, and then spat or rather blew it out of his mouth 
(" sembor ") in the direction of the four cardinal points. 
The charm used was the following : — " Huma,^ Opener 
of the mouth. Opener of me, open, and let youth at the 
river-mouth be fostered by youth. I cast down devils, let 
them fall headlong even before I have charmed them. 
I have driven away the venom of devils. I ask you to 
expel and drive away devils of every description."^ 

The ceremony ended, he proceeded to fell a space 
"big enough to cook in" (" tebas api dapor "), and 
retired. Three days later he returned to the spot, 
and began his labour in earnest. Having cleared a 
sufficient space, he waited until the trees he had felled 
were sufficiently dry, and then, on some clear windy 
day, set fire to them. When the ground was ready to 
receive his plants, he prepared some rice-flour mixed 
with water (Malay, " tepong tawar "), in which he 
dipped a brush made up of leaves of the " satawar," 
"gandarusa," " ati-ati," and " ribu-ribu," and sprinkled 
the liquid at intervals about his clearing.^ He then 
buried in the ground some talisman that had the pro- 
perty of driving away the evil influence or bad demon 
that lurked in the ground (" buang badi tanah "). The 

^ A clearing for dry hill-padi. - _/. /. A. vol. i. pp. 320, 321*. 

3 Cp. Malay Magic, pp. 230-233. 

cHAi'. vn SA VAGE MALA YS OF MALACCA 367 

clearing being now completely protected, he proceeded 
with confidence to plant his potatoes and yams/ 

Rice, however, required a special charm of its own, 
and when it was sown, about two " chupak " measures 
of padi were taken and mixed with the rice-llour 
water (" tepong tawar") and lime-juice. This liquor 
was carried to the place where the rice was to be 
sown, together with a Malay peeling-knife (" pisau 
raut "), a " sarong," a censer (" perasapan "), and leaves 
of the " ribu-ribu," " sadingin," and " pandan." The 
padi was then fumigated in the smoke of gum ben- 
jamin or eagle-wood ("lignum aloes"), and the leaves 
placed over it, the " sarong " being stretched between 
two erect poles, and the knife deposited on the ground. 
The following charm or invocation was then repeated : 
— " In the name of Allah. For good-luck's sake give 
cold, give coolness. Lo. I deposit here this infant 
[i.e. the padi-seed)." The leaves were now planted 
in the ground, and the padi was sown. Three days 
afterwards the sowing of the entire field was completed, 
the holes for the seed having been prepared before- 
hand. In planting "wet" or "swamp" rice ("padi 
sawah ") similar ceremonies were used.- 

When the grain was ripe, and a day had been fixed 
for the commencement of the harvest, a large quan- 
tity of food was collected, and guests invited to attend 
the feast of the New Year's Day of the Rice (" makan 
sulong tahun "). In the morning the head of the 
family, having carefully wrapped his clothes round 
him so as to conceal his entire person (" berselubong "), 
proceeded to the padi-field with a Malay reaping-knife 
(" tue "), and repeated this invocation : — " In the name 
of Allah. I take up the soul of the Rice. Let it not 

I /. J. A. vol. i. p. 321*. * Ibid. 

368 CUL TIVA TION , part i i 

suffer from coolness nor from cold. I take up these 
infants (the Rice-souls) and hear them homewards." 
The operator next cut (the first) seven ears, and carried 
them away to his house. He next ordered some of 
his household to go to a different part of his field, and 
cut a considerable quantity of padi, the grain of 
which, when brought in, was trodden and rubbed out 
of the straw by foot,' after which it was husked and 
cooked along with the food that had been collected on 
the preceding day. When the guests had feasted 
and were about to depart, each of them received a 
little of the new rice and food uncooked as a kind of 
blessing or largess (" berkat ")."' 

The names given by the Mantra to the different 
varieties of padi cultivated by them were the 
following : — 

Kledang Miet (elephant). Rihu. Ilati kerbau (buffalo's 

(a wild fruit). heart). 

Tampoi Machin. Atap (palin- Sri gunong (luck of 

(a wild fruit). thatch). the mountains). 

Saring. Undan (pelican). Tingol. Tulut itam (black 

glutinous rice). 
Koai. Lampei. Burak. I'ulut putih (white 

glutinous rice). 

The dry-rice cultivation is by tar the most pre- 
valent, but the wet cultivation is also resorted to at 
Labu, Malim, Serdang, Payong, Pasang, Jugra, 
Rawang Kechil, Rawang Besar, Kidang, and Sepang 
Kechil.^ 

Of other forms of cultivation the only one which I 
have found ascribed to the Mantra is gambier-planting 

1 Q,^. Malay iMagii, p. 245. There are in fact three methods of rice - 

2 y, /. A. vol. i. p. 322*. planting practised in the country — (i) 

3 Ibid. p. 331*. the dry hill-rice; (2) swamp-grown rice 
It should be explained that the cul- (without embankments orwater-course); 

tivation of wet rice grown within low (3) wet rice (with both these latter), 
embankments is not practised, so far as Most of the places mentioned are in the 
I know, by any of these Jakun tribes. Kuala Langat district of Selangor. 

CHAP. VII SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 369 

(which is mentioned by Logan), though I have little 
doubt that many other light crops, such as tobacco, 
are also grown by them when occasion happens to 
serve. ^ 

Horticulture. 

Benua-Jakun of Johop. — Although their clearings did 
not yield fruit, the Benua often planted young durian 
trees and " chempedak " trees among their potatoes 
and bananas. In after years they would revisit the 
place, and if the trees had grown up and bore fruit 
they would cut down the young jungle (" b'lukar ") 
growing up around them, and thus reclaim their 
orchard.-' In the forest Logan passed many of 
these orchards, some of which contained durian trees 
of great size and beauty. The durian groves were 
frequently at a distance of one or two days' walk (or 
even more) from the clearing, and families found it in 
such cases more convenient and agreeable to resort to 
the groves themselves than to have the fruit brought 
to them. Slight temporary huts were therefore con- 
structed beside the fruit-trees, and here they passed 
the fruit season, which lasted from one to two months, 
and only returned home when the last durian had 
been gathered. In one of these groves, that of 
Danlek, where Logan took advantage of the hut to 
rest and pass the night, there were some smaller huts 
on the ground, which appeared to have been specially 
devoted to durian-eating, for while bushels of seeds 
and husks were heaped around them, very few were 

' J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 254, 255. spent upon clearing the trees around 

' These orchards generally con- them. See account of Jakun orchards 

tained from ten to twelve large durian iny. /. A. vol. ii. p. 261. 

trees, and great care and trouble was 

VOL. 1 2 B 

370 CULTIVATION part ii 

to be seen below the raised hut. The durian feast 
was the most joyous season of the year, and if the 
wilder habits of their forefathers still had a poetical 
charm for the Benua, as appeared to be the case, it 
would not be easy to picture them in a happier mood 
than when secluded in such a spot as Danlek, freed 
for the while from the intrusions and exactions of the 
Malays, and drawing from the pure waters of the 
Kahang river, which ran past the grove, and from the 
surrounding forest, the cheer which recalled the 
banquets of the olden time when a traditionary prince 
of their race ruled the land. A full-grown durian 
orchard was the only kind of property in any form of 
cultivation which was of permanent value to them, for 
whilst neither houses, nor gardens, nor rice -fields, 
nor in fact any land whatever, had sufficient value to 
command a price, durian trees were not unfrequently 
sola. One dollar was the standard price paid for 
each of the buttress- like projections or "struts" 
(" banir ") which the trunk of the durian, like that 
of several other Malayan trees, throws out at the 
base of the stem. Those with plain stems and no 
buttresses were valued at two dollars. Durian 
groves were sometimes rented for a piece of cloth or 
similar object of the value of a few dollars, and by 
their custom (" hadat ") the renter was invariably 
entitled to the produce for two successive seasons. 
This was probably founded in reason, for durians 
generally have alternate light and heavy crops. ^ 

Agriculture. 

Their method of rice-planting was to clear fresh 
patches of jungle annually, and to build their huts in 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 259, 260. 

CHAP. VII SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR yj\ 

the clearings so made, the principal hut being built in 
the piece of ground that had last been cleared. This 
was usually at some distance from the bank of a river, 
in order to avoid the inundations which occur after 
heavy rains. Offerings were made, as by the Malays, 
to the Earth genie ("Jin Bumi ") on commencing to 
fell the forest. As soon as a sufficient space had 
been opened, the trees were left for some months to 
dry. They were then burnt, and holes made with a 
stick in the ground (which was enriched by the wood- 
ash produced by the burning) for the reception of 
plants and seeds brought from their last clearing. 
The cultivated plants found in almost every Jakun 
clearing were the sweet potato (" k'ledek "), the 
potato (" ubi benggala "), the tapioca (" ubi kayu "), 
the water - melon, and the sugar - cane. Bananas 
occurred frequently, but not abundantly. Maize was 
not so common as with the Berembun tribes. The 
wild leaves and shoots used as vegetables by these 
tribes^ did not appear to be resorted to in Johor. In 
many clearings tobacco was cultivated, and in a few- 
some kinds of bean (" kachang bunga'," etc.). In a 
considerable number of the clearings a portion was 
set apart for the growth of rice. The dry or wet 
forms of cultivation were resorted to according to the 
nature of the locality, but the former was most 
general. Flowers were neglected. Only a single 
instance of their cultivation was noticed, and they 
were never worn in the hair. It must be remembered, 

' Such as the "lipii," " ahin^," and the leaves of ferns (" paku "), "jc- 

"chinarong," "bayan,"' and "maman"; latang," " tuba," " kapaya,'' " kaOm," 

the "cabbage" of the palms called "samoma," " papijih " ; and the roots 

" nibong," " langkap," " enau," of the "gadong," "gupul," "bajon," 

"runut," "chacheng," " dempong," "k'luna," " lintag," " tragcl," "da- 

"noin," "k'lasak," "limpet," " che- gun," " tukil," "kung," "wuan," 

che," "semambu," and " serdang " ; " woel," " ounu, " " kapayang," etc. 

372 

CULTIVATION 

however, that the dwelHngs of these people were 
environed by one vast botanical garden, and that the 
river-banks were hung and the forest paths strewed 
with a great variety of beautiful flowers. All the 
remarks in this section, with the slight exceptions 
mentioned, apply also to the Berembun tribes. The 
clearing having once been formed, received no culture, 
and was left entirely to the control of the women. ^ 

The only kinds of cultivation in which the 
Benua-Jakun engaged have now been noticed. They 
had no agricultural implements, A stick sharpened 
at one end served as a dibble, and the chopper 
("parang") was used for digging up roots, cutting 
sugar - cane, etc. Rice (or padi) was reaped by 
hand, and canoes were employed for transporting any 
considerable quantity of it. A canoe from 12 to 15 
feet in length was able to carry from 400 to 500 
gallons ("gantangs") of rice, besides the two men 
whose task it was to manage it.- 

Orang Laut or Sea-Jakun. 

Orang- Laut, Sletar.^The Orang Sletar neither dug 
nor planted, but lived nearly independent of their 
fellow-men, for to them the staple of life in the East, 
rice, was a luxury. Of esculent roots they had the 
" p'rioh " (? " peria ") and " k'lana," ^ both bulbous, 
and not unlike coarse yams ; of fruit they ate the 
" tampui," "k'ledang," and " buroh," whenever they 
came in season.^ 

1 /. /. A. vol. i. pp. 255, 256 ; cp. 
a similar method of rice - planting 
ascribed to the Jakun, J. I. A. vol. 
ii. p. 258, where we are told that 
after the harvest the place is aban- 

doned and another selected for the next 
year. 

2 y. /. A. vol. i. pp. 271, 272. 

3 Sic. ? "k'luna,"as in note, p. 371. 
•« /. /. A. vol. i. p. 343* 

CHAP. VII MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 373 

Orang" Laut, Sabimba. — The Sabimba also abstained 
Irom planting, and consequently their vegetables con- 
sisted of the wild fruits of the jungle.^ 

Orang" Laut, Muka Kuning. — The Orang Muka 
Kuning did not cultivate any plants, or breed any 
animals save dogs.^ 

Orang Laut, Beduanda Kallang. — The Beduanda 
Kallang not only did not cultivate any plants, but 
asserted that their ancestors had made a vow on the 
part of their tribe never to make clearings for the 
purpose of cultivation, and stated that they believed 
that if any of them were to break it death would be 
the consequence.^ 

' y. /. ./. vol. i. p. 347^-. 2 ii^icl. p. 337^. 3 /i,i,i p_ 300. 

CHAPTER VIII, 

Arts and Crafts. 

Division of Labour. 

As a rule it may be said among all the tribes that the 
men perform the essential minimum of such work as 
requires brute force, and the women do the rest. 
Among the wildest Semang tribes, the men do the 
hunting, and the women the shelter-building and the 
cooking, and so, too, among tribes which have 
reached the agricultural stage ^ the men do the 
felling and heavy clearing, whilst the women do 
the lighter clearing and lopping of branches, as 
well as the sowing and reaping, and not unfrequently 
the tilling of the soil, if the scratching of its surface 
with a pointed stick can be so called. Similarly, when 
a regular house or hut has to be built, the men only 

* The following description, by 
Logan, of the work of the Benua-Jakun 
women applies, generally speaking, 
to all tribes that have reached this 
stage : — 

" The plantation, having once been 
formed, receives no culture, and is left 
entirely to the control of the women, 
who are never for a moment idle. In 
the morning, having first refilled their 
melon -skins (or gourds) with water, 
they fasten a deep basket on to their 
backs by means of straps passing over 
the shoulders and head, and proceed 

to collect sweet potatoes, sugar-cane, 
and so forth, for the morning repast. 
Breakfast once cooked and despatched, 
they employ themselves in nursing 
their children and weaving mats and 
bags until it is time to go out and fill 
their baskets again for the evening 
meal. If the men are at home, a slight 
meal is also prepared in the middle of 
the day. The only employment at a 
distance from the plantation which 
they share with the men, and some- 
times pursue by themselves, is angling " 
(/. /. A. vol. i. p. 256.) 

374 

CHAP, vm GENERAL REMARKS yji 

perform such work as actually requires their strength 
{e.g. the felling, transporting, and erection of the 
heavier timbers), and the women complete it. On 
the other hand, the men are very generally, I believe, 
if not invariably, both the makers and decorators of 
their own weapons {e.g. the blowpipe and the bow, 
quivers and arrows) as well as their own implements 
{e.g. axe-handles, knife -handles, and spear- shafts), 
whilst the work of making bags and baskets, mats, 
wallets, and pouches, and in fact all kinds of mat and 
bark-cloth making, and basket-work, commonly fall to 
the lot of the women. 

The men, again, do most of the hunting and trap- 
ping, but the women take a large share in the fishing, 
and in the collecting of roots and fruits. All the 
cooking, on the other hand, is performed by the 
women and girls of the tribe, as is also, naturally 
enough, the nursing and care of the children. 

The catechism addressed to the bridegroom at a 
Besisi wedding contains a fairly exhaustive category 
of the duties of the would-be husband, and does not, 
to my mind, bear out the general assumption that the 
women are burdened with an unfair share of the work. 
On the contrary, it appears to me that the division of 
labour among these children of nature is very fairly 
equitable, and that the man cannot reasonably be 
expected to do more. Can it be that it is in a more 
advanced stage of civilisation that the real oppression 
of the woman begins .-* 

Manufacture of Bark-cloth. 

The bark-cloth which forms the ordinarv worka- 
day wear of all the wilder branches of these tribes is 

376 

ARTS AND CRAFTS 

usually made from the same material as the " tapa " 
cloth of Polynesia, though it is rarely, if ever, quite 
so finely worked up, and is generally, in fact, somewhat 
roughly made. When stripped from the tree it is 
beaten out by means of a wooden mallet, either round 
or toothed. 

A specimen of the latter, which was collected by the 
writer among the Blandas of Selangor, is now in the 
Cambridge Museum ; this specimen is grooved or 
toothed transversely, as in Sakai specimens from 
Batang Padang (Perak), whereas in other districts, 
more under Semang influence, the flat under-surface 
of the mallet is subdivided into a large number of 
small squares. The direction of the grooves or teeth 
must of course depend upon the position in which the 
operator sits or stands with respect to his work.^ 

The cloth when made is often decorated with 
designs, which again bear a curious family resemblance 
to the main designs sometimes seen on " tapa " cloth. 

The tree from which the bark is generally taken is 
a kind of wild bread-fruit tree {Artocarpus)'^ which is 
called by the Malays " terap " or " t'rap." But the bark 
of other trees (even that of the Upas tree,^ which 
furnishes the deadly dart;poison of these tribes) is also 
very generally used, the poisonous sap being merely 
well washed out of it with water. This particular 
kind of cloth seems generally to be recorded from 
districts under some degree of Semang (Negrito) 
influence. 

' See p. 140, aute. 

- I.e. Artocarpus Kunst/eri, Hook, 
fil. {Urtkacece). It is interesting to 
note that both this bread-fruit tree 
and the Upas belong to the same 
botanical order. 

3 Antiaris toxicaria, Bl. ( Urticacea). 
The bark of a kind of ficus (called 
"ara") was also said to be used for 
cloth by the Negritos of Belimbing (in 
Ulu Kelantan). 

Skeat Collcciioii. 

WlIITK Cl.OTH OF Ul'AS BAUK. 

Made from the upas-tree {Ani/aiis ioxicaria) by the Semang of Kedah. Below the 
cloth is the wooden cudgel with which it was made in my presence. 

Skman<; Maskkts. 

I. One small hack-basket found in Pangan hut (Kuala Sam.Kclantan). 2. One matwork bag made by 
Semang woman (Siong, Kedah). 3. One large pouch made by Semang woman (Siong, Kedah). 4, 5. Two 
hack-baskets or wallets obtaintd from Ilesis'. 

Vol. I. p. 376. 

Vol. I. /. 377. 

CHAP. VIII GENERAL REMARKS 377 

Basket-work. 

The following remarks about basket-work fairly 
apply to all three races : — Basket-work is perhaps one of 
the most important industries of the aboriginal women. 
It is frequently employed not only for the manufacture 
of the all-important dossier or back-basket in which the 
varied products of the jungle are carried homewards, 
but also for many of the traps in which birds, fishes, 
and some of the smaller mammalia are captured. The 
work is as a rule beautifully executed, and in plaiting 
the aboriginal women can rival the Malays. Split 
rattan and split bamboo are perhaps the most usual 
materials employed for these purposes, as they are not 
only strong but pliant and durable. But like all jungle 
folk, these races naturally adapt themselves to the 
necessities of their surroundings, and of course use 
whatever plant grows most handily for their purpose. 
Thus not unfrequently the stem of the " bemban " is 
selected, even though it lacks the durability of the 
other materials referred to. And the fibrous inner 
cuticle of several kinds of trees (such as Artoca^-pus, 
which furnishes the bark cloth) is yet another source 
of supply.^ 

Network and Weaving. 

Network, on the other hand, seems to be but 
scantily practised by any of these tribes, except, per- 
haps, where Malay influence is appreciable, and of 
the actual weaving of any, even the roughest kind, of 
cloth, there is no record whatever. 

1 See p. 376, opp. 

378 ARTS AND CRAFTS 

Absence of Pottery. 

There is also as yet no clear record of any form ol 
pottery having ever been manufactured by any of the 
aborigines, and indeed, so far as is known, no pottery 
of any sort is at present made by them. At the same 
time, we have the generally reliable authority of 
Newbold for the statement that a vessel of clay, called 
" tammumong," was applied (by the Jakun or Benua) 
to the purposes of cooking, and that it differed in shape 
from that used by the Malays} 

Traditions of Written Characters. 

In spite of their being one and all universally and 
absolutely illiterate, there are nevertheless among all 
these Peninsular tribes traditions of various kinds 
relating to a lost book or books that are believed 
to have once contained their sacred writings, and 
are alleged to have been destroyed by some fatality. 
This belief is common in Indo- China, and we are 
informed, for instance, that if the Tavoy Karen 
traditions are to be credited, the ancestors of their 
principal tribe once possessed a written book or books, 
which were given them by one Kachaklong, a very 
sacred personage, and which were writteii on cowskin 
parchment? 

' Newbold, ii. 405-407. If there is remarks that "this assumed use of 

anyreading of this riddle to be achieved, parchment made from cow and buffalo 

it may perhaps be that the Jakun or skin militates against the idea of a 

"savage Malayans" alone of all these Hindu or even of a Buddhist origin 

tribes once possessed, before the influx being assigned to it." On this point, 

of the more civilised Malays from however, Dr. Stein, in his " Prelimin- 

Sumatra, the art of pottery, hence the ary Report on Archaolog. Explor. in 

pots made by them naturally look a Chinese Turkestan" (London, 1901), 

shape of their own. p. 47, notes with surprise that the 

2 y. A ^. vol. iv. p. 417. The writer rubbish heap near the Nuja River 

CHAP. VIII NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 379 

Other Arts arid Crafts. 

Other kinds of arts and crafts practised by these 
tribes will be found in other parts of this book, e.g. 
the building of houses and leaf-shelters in the chapter 
on Habitations, the making of blowpipes and bows in 
the chapter on Weapons and Implements, the art of 
cooking as known to the Semang in the chapter on 
Food, personal ornaments under Dress, the construc- 
tion of traps and implements required for the chase 
or for fishing in the chapter on Hunting, Fishing, and 
Trapping, the art of agriculture in the chapter on 
Cultivation, and Decorative Art under the chapter 
so named. 

I. — Semang. 

Geiieral hidustry. 

Kedah Semang-. — The Negritos that I visited at 
Siong in Kedah were very lazy workers, but as it was 
harvest-time (the one season of the year when they 
are most free from the pressure of want), they were 
having just then an easy time of it. None the less 
they are certainly the best and most skilful hunters in 
the Peninsula, and, as a rule, made traps and weapons, 
collected the poison from the Upas tree and applied it 
to their darts, and when game failed, went out after 

" yielded another writing material, above in y. K. A. S., Jan. 1902, p. 232, 

little suspected among a Buddhist remarks that these leather documents 

l)opul;ition with an Indian civilisation. will probably prove to date from the 

About two dozen Kharosthi documents second century A.D. , and quotes a 

on leather, mostly dated and appar- notice of an Indian official letter on 

ently of official nature, prove that the parchment sent to Augustus in Strabo, 

Budtlhists of this region had as little xv. 72, 73, given by M 'Crindlc, in 

objection to the use of leather for writ- .Attcient India as described in Classical 

ing purposes as the pious Brahmans /.ifera/ure (igoi), p. 77. 
of old Kashmir had to the leather bind- For similar traditions (to that in the 

ings of their Sanskrit codices." Mr. text) :■. p. 347 of vol. ii. 
Vincent A. Smith, in reporting the 

38o 

ARTS AND CRAFTS 

fish and turtles, or assisted the women in their 
search for roots. 

Manufacture of Bark-cloth. 

Kedah Semang-. — I have seen the Semang of Kedah 
make cloth of Upas-bark by cutting down young 
saplings of the Upas tree, (whose diameter was 
perhaps no more than 3 or 4 inches). These they 
" ring-barked " a few feet from the root-end, and then 
loosened the bark iji situ by hammering it with a 
mere rounded (hardwood) cudgel, and then turning it 
back by hand in the way that a sleeve is rolled back, 
or a stocking taken off, the process being continued 
until all the bark on each sapling has been similarly 
treated. As soon as the last of the bark has been 
thus stripped off it is thoroughly washed to remove 
the poisonous sap contained in it, dried for a short 
while in the sun, and is then ready for use without 
any further preparation. 

But by far the most interesting of all the Semang 
articles of attire is the black girdle woven from " urat 
batu " (or " rock-veins "). This girdle, which is called 
" tentom " in the Kedah dialect of Semang, is not 
manufactured, as usually stated, from a kind of creeper,^ 
but from the vegetative parts or rhizomorphs of a 
fungus which resemble long, slender, black, leathery- 
looking shiny strings, rather thinner than ordinary 
leather boot-laces. A number of these strings are 
woven together into a single plait, which measures 
several yards in length, the loose end, 4 or 5 inches 
of each string, being allowed to hang down (when 

' See p. 138, note i. 

CHAP. VIII NEGRITOS OF PERAK 381 

the rest has been worked in) instead of being fastened, 
so that when the girdle is coiled round the waist a 
continuous and thick bushy fringe is the result, 

Perak Semang*. — The loin-cloth of the Negritos, 
which constitutes their sole garment, is made (accord- 
ing to De Morgan) from the bark of a tree [Artocarptis). 
The material is thick, but supple and soft to the feel, 
and is occasionally painted yellow with the sap of 
a plant, the patterns consisting simply of broken lines 
[de lignes brisdes)} 

Of the method of manufacture we are elsewhere 
told that the bark (of the Artocarpus) is either rendered 
supple by being pounded between two stones, or by 
being beaten upon a tree-trunk with a strong wooden 
mallet or cudgel. The strip of bark cut off from the 
tree measures from 3-4 metres in length, and from 
50-60 centimetres in breadth." 

In confirmation of the account given above of the 
Kedah Semang, I hear from Mr. Wray that the bark of 
the Antiaris was used by both the Semang of Perak and 
the Sakai as bark-cloth. It was prepared as follows : — 
A young tree was felled and cut into pieces of suitable 
length. The outer portion of the bark was then 
shaved off with a knife and the inner bark was beaten 
with bat-shaped pieces of wood until it would slip oft" 
from the stem. The bark was then put into running 
water, in which it was allowed to remain for the space of 
one month to free it of the poison ; then it was beaten 
with wooden bats, on one face of which furrows had 
been cut at right ancrles to each other, to produce a 
grain on the finished cloth." 

In a recent communication Mr. Wray writes me 

* Ue Morgan, vii. 412. •'' L. Wray in /. A. J. vol. xxi. (1892), 

2 Ibid. ii. 5. pp. 477, 47S. 

382 ARTS AND CRAFTS part ii 

that these mallets employed by the Semang of Perak 
to beat out the bark and give it the grain (which it 
retains even after considerable wear) are made of hard 
palm-wood. They are bat-shaped, with cylindrical 
handles, and have one surface of the blade of the bat 
scored with lines at right angles to each other, which 
leave projecting squares about a quarter of an inch 
across, divided by V-shaped grooves of the same 
width. There are several of these mallets from 
Upper Perak and Selama in the Perak Museum. 

The fungus fringe is sometimes supplemented by 
a fringe made from small strips of Artocarpus bark. 
In a specimen from Selama the garment is made up 
as a sort of belt, and ties behind, the fringe being 
much fuller and deeper in front. Other specimens 
from Upper Perak are made of long plaited cords 
many yards in length, and are wound round the loins. 
This woman's garment Mr. Wray considers to be 
characteristic of the Semang. 

Mat-making. 

Kedah Semang*. — The art of mat-making appears 
to be natural to the Semang, although they make 
but limited use of it. It is one of the industries 
which are assigned to the women, the chief articles 
thus made being the mat-work bags or sacks and the 
wallets which are used by the Semang for holding 
their husked rice, roots, and fruits, and similar articles. 
It is quite possible that some kind of small sleeping- 
mat may also be sometimes manufactured by the 
Semang, though I have never seen it or met with any 
record of its use among the pure Negritos. 

CHAP. VIII NEGRITOS OF PERAK 383 

Substittdes for Pottery. 

Perak Semang-.— Of the art of pottery, according 
to De Morgan/ the Semang are absolutely ignorant, 
the only vessels they use being manufactured 
from big stems of bamboo, which they employ for 
cooking purposes when green, and use as water- 
vessels when the sap has dried out of them." Dc 
Morgan adds that he only once (at S. Kerbu) saw a 
wooden bowl used, this being one which had been 
carved out of the root of a tree with a knife. ^ 

Raft- via king. 

Perak Semang". — None of the Semang make boats, 
but the Semang (of Perak) make rafts by lashing 
together twenty or thirty bamboos of big diameter, 
and on these they float down the Perak River nearly 
as far as Kuala Kangsar, " though even they walk back 
agam. 

Ironwork. 

Perak Semang". — One of the most primitive methods 
of forging iron known is recorded of the Perak 
Semang by De Morgan.^ It consists simply in 
heating the iron till it gets red hot, and then batter- 
ing it into the required shape between two stones. 
This, according to De Morgan, is the method by 
which they manufacture the iron heads of the arrows 
that are used with their bow. 

It is interesting to read that the Negritos of the 
Andaman Islands employed a yet simpler method, as 

' De Morgan, vii. 414. -^ De Morgan, vii. 414 \i.e. among 

- Cp. Swett. p. 22S : "Of ]wttery Sakai-Scmang ?] 
they [the Negritos] h.ivo no know- ^ Male, p. 286. 

ledge." * De Morgan, vii. 415, 

384 ARTS AND CRAFTS part 11 

although they similarly shaped the iron by battering it 
between stones, they did not even previously heat it.^ 

De Morgan adds'^ that the material used by the 
Semang for this rude form of metal-work consists of 
old tool-iron, which they obtain from the Malays, and 
that they have no idea of extracting the iron from the 
ore, although the oxide of iron is fairly plentiful in 
their part of the country. 

Mr. L. Wray writes me that he once saw some 
Semang forging iron in Upper Perak. They employed 
the " double-piston bamboo bellows " to blow up their 
charcoal fire, and used a piece of iron fastened to a 
block of wood as an anvil and an iron hammer. The 
knives, spear-heads, etc., made by them were all of 
the shapes employed by the Malays of the same 
district. 

II. — Sakai. 
General Industry. 

Perak Sakai. — The Sakai rise early, strap on 
their wallets after breakfast, take their jungle-knives 
or blowpipes, and set off into the jungle in search of 
food and firewood, or tree-resin ("dammar") for torches, 
etc. Others stay at home, and work in and about the 
house, making blowpipe - darts, ornamenting their 
bamboo quivers and other receptacles, and so on.^ 

Manufacture of Bark-cloth. 

Perak Sakai. — According to De Morgan, the 
Perak Sakai, when they wished to manufacture bark- 
cloth, commenced by making incisions in the bark 

1 yi.z.Vi% Andamanese, p. 159 ^ De Morgan, vii. 415; viii. 296. 

•' Hale, p. 295. 

Ni:r,Kir(j Industkies. 

Seiiiang mun :it Siong, Kctlah, making blowpipe dart (on left), rat-trap, and flute 
rcspeclivoly. Man on riglit holdinR yams in cleft stick ready for cookiii.s;. 

I'ol. I. />. 384- 

Jl 

CHAP. VIII SAKAI OF PERAK 385 

of a full-grown Artocarpus, so as to mark out a 
broad band or strip of bark, the size of which varied 
according to the object for which it was required, an 
average size being from three to four metres by 
from sixty to eighty centimetres.' 

When the required strip had been thus marked 
out, the bark itself was hammered in situ until it was 
loosened and detached from the trunk. This strip 
was then taken and laid upon a tree-stump or any- 
thing else that might serve, and was then pounded 
with a wooden mallet, and (occasionally) decorated 
with designs in yellow paint (as among the Semang). 

The Sakai of Batang Padang (Mr. L. Wray informs 
me) employ mallets made of a piece of hard heavy 
wood about 13 in. (33 cm.) long, by \\ in. (^^yl mm-) 
in diameter. The side of the mallet with which 
the bark is beaten is grooved transversely, the grooves 
extending about half-way round the stick. 

Mr. Wray writes me that the Sakai women also 
wear belts composed of a coil of twine made from the 
black fibre of the sugar palm (" gomuto' "). These 
belts are about i^ in. (31.5 mm.) thick, and of 
such a diameter that they can just be passed round 
the hips of the wearer. They are often decorated 
with flowers and sweet-smelling leaves, and with them 
are often worn two bunches either of bark-fibre or of 
finely-cut " pandanus "-leaves. These bunches, which 
are about 6 in. (15 cm.) long, are placed one on either 
hip, the upper (tied) end of each being inserted into 
(and between) the strands of the belt. Both these 
belts and hip-bunches are quite characteristic of the 
Sakai. 

* De Morgan, vii. 413, of the Sakai of Changkat Chabang in Pcrak. 
VOL. I 2 C 

386 ARTS AND CRAFTS part ii 

Basket-ivork. 

Perak Sakai. — Baskets were made by the Sakai 
women, of which De Morgan relates that they were 
" beautifully executed," and that their plait-work was 
" fairly close." ^ They are usually made of split rattan. 

According to De la Croix, the wallet, or rather 
back-basket, in which the Perak Sakai, during their 
journeys through the forest, carried their provisions, 
trophies of the chase, etc., was made of " artistically 
woven rattan," and fixed upon their backs by straps of 
tree - bark which were passed round their shoulders. - 

Network. 

Perak Sakai. — The wilder Sakai employed natural 
fibres obtained from the " t'rap " tree (Artocarpus) 
for the making of their casting - nets, which were 
weighted with stones.^ 

The nets used by the more civilised Sakai do 
not, however, materially differ from those used by 
the Malays. 

Mat-work. 

Perak Sakai. — Mat-work was one of the Sakai 
industries enumerated by De Morgan, who says that 
it was mainly used in the production of small sleeping- 
or sitting-mats {petits tapis) and rice-bags or sacks."* 

Substitutes for Pottery. 
Perak Sakai. — The same ignorance of the art of 
pottery that exists among the Semang is also found 

1 De Morgan, vii. 415 ; cp. L'H. ^ De Morgan, vii. 418. 

ii. 611, where he gives specimens of * Ibid. vii. 415. For patterns, cp. 

both close and open work. I' H. ii. 61 1. 

2 De la Croix, p. 335. 

■■m ■'^■■- : ■■'■ -J-rj—k 

^:-^^i 

r^;. . ... 

|vS^;-'>;iSS;-'$!^---.^^^^^ '^ ''^^'^'' ■^- 

(:^-. .... ■ . ■ . 

// fi. 

£^..s.:::.^u,ii^ 

Si MANC. M.MS AND R.V.SKKTS. 

/V Morgan. 

1-4. Mats. 5. Bag made of inalling. 6. llack-tiaskel of open rattan-work. 7. nack-l>a.skct of 
close rattan-work. 8, 9. Malay jungle-knife and sheath. 10. Jungle-knife of a different pattern. 
>i, 12. nigging sticks. 13-14. Hatchets. — Pc Morgan in I.'H. 25th October 1885, p. 611. 

' 'ol. I p 336. 

Skeat Collection. 

Iartn l')i:ii:i.-\\'Ai,i.i:T.s. 

One betel-wallet (Besisi) with small pouches (for holding hetel-leaves, areca-nut, and lime) carried 
inside it. Three other wallets (Besisi and I51andas) showing various patterns. (See p. 390.) 

ro!. /. /. 337- 

CHAP, viii SAKAI OF PERAK 387 

among the Sakai.^ For carrying water the Sakai employ, 
says De Morgan,- the largest bamboo stems they can 
find, the smaller ones, when green, being reserved for 
cooking purposes. The water-vessels of the Sakai 
were frequently well decorated, and sometimes pro- 
vided with a loop for ease in carrying them over the 
shoulder.'^ Glutinous substances, such as grease, wax, 
the viscid sap of certain trees (used as bird-lime), and 
even poison, they kept in the shells and husks of big 
nuts or fruits. For poison, however, they generally 
employed a small bamboo internode, which they corked 
with a small section of the leaf-stalk of the " bertam " 
{Eugeissona tristis), which is very abundant in these 
forests. 

Boat- and Raft-building. 

Perak Sakai. — The inland Sakai of Perak, accord- 
ing to Mr. Hale, were essentially landsmen, and 
living as they did near the upper reaches of rivers, 
where it was quite impossible to navigate them, 
they knew nothing of boat-building, not even to the 
extent of making a bamboo raft.^ 

This statement, however, does not necessarily 
apply to all the Sakai of Perak (probably not to 
those living some way down-stream), for we are told 
by De la Croix that when they were driven to travel 
by water, they would make a rough kind of raft con- 
structed of bamboos, which were lashed together with 
rattans or creepers. M. De la Croix continues that as 
they were naturally idle, they would not expose them- 

' De Morgan, /,'//. ii. 612. "Many of our Sakai made boxes of 
- De Morgan, vii. 414. these bamboos ('bululi belong') and 
^ For an instance of the application crammed into them all their clothes, and 
of the big internodes of the bamboo henceforth appeared clad only in a two- 
called " buluh bdtong," see Wray in inch wide strip of bark-cloth." See also 
J.R.A.S., S.B., No. 21, p. 154: p. 121, ;/. 5, d/t/f, * Hale, p. 286. 

388 ARTS AND CRAFTS tart ii 

selves to the hard labour of re-ascending the rapids ; 
and that, hence, when they reached their destination 
they preferred to return on foot through the forest.^ 
M. De la Croix adds that he himself had often met 
with these deserted rafts drifting with the stream.'^ 

Mining. 

Perak Sakai. — It should be added that a few 
individuals of the more civilised Sakai tribes [e.g. in 
Ulu Kinta)^ used to do a little mining for tin in a 
primitive way, the process employed being usually 
that of washing out the stream tin (known as "lampan" 
in Malay). The Sakai were also regarded both by 
Malays and Chinese as the best prospectors, and 
often received liberal payment for any work they 
could be induced to perform in that capacity. 

SelangOF Sakai. — The habits of the Ulu Langat 
Sakai are simple ; they live nearly the same life all the 
year round. Up at 5 a.m., and out in the jungle 
after eating some cold rice or plantains, hunting or 
searching for jungle produce until about 1 1 a.m., and 
then returning home for a meal. A couple of hours 
later they go out again to inspect their jungle-traps 
and fishing-stakes, and to collect the birds or beasts 
they had shot with their blowpipes in the morning. 
They seldom use their blowpipes in the afternoon. 

* This remark as to their idleness is, when there are many rapids in the 
however, unjust to the Sakai, and is river ; to get it up-stream would, in the 
obviously based on a misconception. upper reaches of many rivers in the 
It is not through mere idleness that Peninsula, be a sheer impossibility, to 
the Sakai omitted to w-ork their rafts say nothing of the needless loss of time 
up-stream again. Not merely the labour and trouble involved. Moreover, I am 
but the time spent in such a proceeding informed by Machado that the Sakai of 
would make any such attempt little Ulu Jelei in Pahang can pole a raft up- 
short of absurd. It is hard enough stream as fast as Malays can pole a boat, 
work, as the writer knows from ex- - De la Croix, p. 335. 
perience, to get a raft down-stream ^ See Hale, p. 285. 

I 

CHAP. VIII SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 389 

They are most energetic, and never sleep in the 
middle of the day ; they go to bed early, and rise 
early. ^ 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — The methods used by the Blandas of 
Kuala Langat for manufacturing their bark-cloth are 
similar to those of the Sakai, the bark of the Arto- 
carpus being detached and pounded in the same way. 
An interesting development of the wooden mallet 
used for pounding the cloth is, however, to be found 
among the Blandas, this mallet being furnished with 
transverse ridges or teeth cut into its under surface. 
These teeth facilitate the process of separating the 
fibres, and render the material softer and more 
flexible." As a rule the bark-cloth of the Blandas is 
quite undecorated, though when made from the bark 
of the Artocarpns it is stained by the sap of the tree 
to a sort of deep reddish tinge. Their baskets are the 
" sentong " or back-basket and the " kampah " ; their 
wallet patterns are copied by the Malays. 

Besisi. — Among the chief articles of mat-work made 
by the Besisi women of Kuala Langat are sleeping- 
mats (made of undyed material, but otherwise not 
unlike the ordinary Malay type), small square mats 
for sitting on,^ mat-work bags for holding rice and 
other objects, and the small delicately woven pouches 
of pandanus (or rush-work) which they continually 
carry at their waists to hold their tobacco, their ilint 
and steel, their apparatus for chewing the betel-leaf, 

' J. A. G. Campbell, p. 243. and other non- Mohammedan tribes of 

* This specimen is in the Museum the Malay Archipelago. Among the 

at Cambridge ; t'. ante, p. 140. Peninsular tribes, however, they are 

■* These small square mats correspond never worn, but rolled up for carrying 

to the sitting-mats worn by the Dayaks whenever necessary. 

390 

ARTS AND CRAFTS 

and similar articles. The material of which their 
mats are made consists mainly of pandanus or screw- 
pine leaves, which they tear into longitudinal strips, 
Malay fashion, by means of a short wooden holder in 
which iron teeth are set. 

The pouches are often decorated either by means 
of raised ' or coloured rush-work, or by means of 
coloured threads, which latter are stitched on to the 
pouch, following the lines of the pattern required. 

The Besisi, not only in Kuala Langat but through- 
out the region inhabited by them, are very expert at 
the building of small dug-out canoes {i.e. " chem- 
plong "), some of which cannot be surpassed.^ 

Their paddle -blades are as a rule much longer 
and narrower than those of the Malays, and are 
consequently less trouble to make. 

I cannot say that I remember ever seeing a 
Jakun sail his boat, and am inclined to believe that 
on the Selangor coast, at all events, they never 
reached this point. 

Iron-work. 

Besisi. — The Besisi of Kuala Langat have, moreover, 
made some advance in metal-work, of which they have 
picked up some idea from the Malays. Thus in writing 
of the fish-spears used by this tribe, Mr. Bellamy 
remarks that they make them by their own unaided 
ingenuity, and that in the jungle near Sungei Am- 
pang he once saw a small native forge, to which was 
attached a rough species of bellows made of two 
upright bamboos, each of which measured about three 
inches in diameter, and that into each of these bam- 

1 Like the well-known and beauti- are occasionally seen in this country, 
fully made "Malacca baskets" which ^ Cp_ (j, c, Bellamy, p. 230. 

CHAP. VIII SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 391 

boos was fitted a sort of piston-rod, which was bound 
round with cloth. These rods were held one in each 
hand, and when moved up and down alternately pro- 
duced a continuous current of air.' 

Mantra. — Of the industries of the Mantra, with 
regard to the subjects treated of in this chapter, nothing 
special has been recorded, though we learn from 
Logan's Journal that their girls were taught to make 
bags and mats.- 

Writing is unknown ; they reckon dates by tying 
knots in a string.^ 

Jakun of Johor. — Like all Indian nations, the Jakun 
have a propensity to idleness ; but to be exact in this 
account, and just towards them, I must say that thev 
are not so lazy as either the Malays or Hindus. Their 
first and principal occupation is the chase ; they have 
a great predilection for this exercise, it being the first 
means by which they feed themselves and their 
families ; and from having been brought up in that 
habit, in which the greater part of their life is spent, 
they should be skilful hunters, which in fact they are, 
both in their way and in the manner of using their 
weapons, as will be seen elsewhere. In the daytime 
they remain at home, where they prepare their arrows 
and other weapons, the substances with which they 
poison their arrows, and cook and eat the animals 
caught the day before, or build or repair their houses, 
etc.^ The Jakun who have no taste for cultivating rice, 
or who are not acquainted with the manner of doing 
so, are generally very miserable ; they are then 
obliged to look to the Malays to provide for their 

' G. C. Bellamy, p. 229. tradition of a lost book, sec p. 536, 

- J. I. A. vol. i. p. 330. infra, and ii. 346, 347. 

3 Ibid. For the Besisi and Mantra * J. /. A. vol. ii. p. 25S. 

392 ARTS AND CRAFTS part ii 

livelihood ; they traverse the jungle all the day 
seeking after rattan, dammar, eagle- wood, and several 
other articles of commerce ; the next morning they 
go to some Malay house, where they dispose of the 
produce of their search, receiving in return a small 
quantity of rice, sometimes scarcely sufficient to 
support their family for that very day ; after that they 
return to the same thing for the purpose of in like 
manner procuring food for the next day, and so on/ 

Baskets. 

Jakun of Johor. — Among the Jakun the panniers 
or back-baskets (so generally worn by all the abori- 
ginal tribes) are usually made either of basket-work 
or of tree-bark. 

D. F. A. Hervey, in writing of the Johor Jakun, 
describes a pannier of the second kind mentioned as 
being manufactured from the bark of the " meranti."- 

Mining. 
Where the Chinese work tin-mines, they some- 
times employ the Jakun as workmen. It is, however, 
also alleged that there is a place in Jelebu where the 
Jakun work the mines by themselves, and bring the 
tin to Pahang, where they sell it.^ 

Boat-building. 
Benua- Jakun. — Of Jakun boats we learn (also 
from Logan) that their canoes were used for 
transporting produce and for fishing, as well as for 
visiting every part of the network of rivers on which 
they lived. These canoes varied in length from 8 to 

' J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 260. A fine hardwood kind of jungle tree, 

- J. R. A. S., S. B., No. 8, p. 97. generally a Shorea {Dipterocarpea). 
3 J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 260. 

CHAP. VIII SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 393 

15 feet, and were always hollowed out of one piece 
of wood. The most durable timber was selected, the 
" kayu penak " being preferred as being capable of 
lasting for upwards of twenty years. A canoe measur- 
ing from 12 to 15 feet in length, which would carry from 
400 to 500 gallons (" gantang ") of padi, together 
with the two men who would be required to manage 
it. was valued at from 10 to 12 dollars. A canoe of 
rather smaller size (8 or 9 feet in length) was valued 
at 7 or 8 dollars.^ 

Divisions of Time. 

Benua-Jakun. — The Benua have no divisions of 
time save the natural one of the north and south 
monsoons, each of which they call a " wind year " 
(" satahun angin "). They mark time (as the Mantra 
also do) by the seasons when their rice-crops are 
harvested (" musim padi "), or when fruits ripen 
(" musim buah "). They indicate the progress of the 
day by the inclination of a stick. Early morning is 
represented by pointing a stick to the eastern horizon." 
Placed erect it indicates noon, inclined at an angle of 
about 45 degrees to the west it corresponds nearly with 
3 o'clock, and so on.' In this way a guide familiar 
with the path can intimate within an hour the time 
at which a particular place will be reached, and 
describe with considerable accuracy the distance of 
one place along the route from another. Distances 
exceeding a fraction of a day are reckoned by nights, 
as in some of the Polynesian islands.^ 

' J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 271, 272. * Ibid. p. 388 ; cp. Newbold in 

2 The Malays use the word " poko" " vol. ii. pp. 417-421 : "The Benua 

to indicate directions on the horizon. have no written language nor symbols 

•^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 283. for articulate sounds, as far as my 

594 

ARTS AND CRAFTS 

Orang- Laut, Akik. — Of the Orang Laut or " Akik " 
Newbold remarks that they were remarkably in- 
genious in handicrafts, particularly in that of boat- 
building, and that they frequently made long voyages 
in their fragile vessels. The same writer informs us 
that they made use of mat- (or leaf-) work sails and 
awnings, and of cordage, all of which were of their 
own manufacture. And he also tells us that they 
built temporary sheds (" bagan's ") along the coast, 
whenever they had occasion to go ashore for boat- 
building, but that otherwise they resided, for months 
together, in their boats alone, ^ 

Net-making. 

The same writer records the fact that the O. Akik 
made use of nets which they similarly manufactured 
themselves, for purposes of fishing." 

personal knowledge extends ; though, 
as previously mentioned, I am assured 
by natives that some of the tribes 
in Perak write on the leaves of the 
Stebbal. The Benua are ignorant of 
the simplest rules of arithmetic. In 

counting, the natural plan of indigita- 
tion is adopted, throwing the articles 
counted into heaps of fives and 
tens." 

' Newbold, ii. 413, 414. 

- Jbid. 

CHAPTER IX. 

Decorative Art. 

We now come to what is by far the most difficult 
of all the many difficult subjects that have had to be 
faced in compiling the description of these tribes — 
the much-vexed question of the interpretation of 
their art. The subject in itself offers a most fruitful 
field of inquiry, such as might take years of the most 
patient and conscientious investigation to complete. 
The writer feels it here necessary to remind his 
readers that he does not pretend to offer solutions 
of the many important questions involved. The 
building of theories has been kept outside the scope 
of this work, the object of which is to describe cus- 
toms as they are, and to lay a foundation upon which 
in years to come a really reliable and lasting edifice 
may be constructed. For we have to face the fact 
that with reference to part of this subject an edifice 
has already been reared upon a foundation of sand, 
and that though the bricks of which it was com- 
posed may to some extent be useful in laying the 
foundation of the new building, the original edifice 
is none the less inevitably doomed to irremediable 
destruction. 

395 

396 DECORA TIVE ART part i i 

The Flower-theory of Vaughan- Stevens. 

The sandy foundation to which I refer, and on 
which so airy a superstructure has been built, is 
Vaughan -Stevens' so-called "flower-theory," which 
has been regarded by many as a species of master-key 
for unlocking the innermost secret recesses of Negrito 
art in the Peninsula. This astounding theory, or 
tissue of begged questions, for it is nothing less, 
sets out by ascribing to one of the most backward and 
undeveloped races of mankind — a race of lifelong 
nomads, who go almost stark naked and live upon the 
victims of their bow and spear — a system of decorative 
art based upon scientific principles which would not 
discredit a text-book of botany. 

Certainly it was not without reason that one of 
Vaughan-Stevens' own editors speaks of the " extra- 
ordinary intellectual force of the primitive human 
race " which alone could have evolved the '* firmly 
welded flower-system " (" discovered " by Vaughan- 
Stevens himself in the Semang comb patterns), as 
meriting that a monument should be erected to it by 
way of recognition ! 

In order to explain what we are asked to believe 
in the case of this flower-theory of Vaughan-Stevens, 
one of the bamboo back- combs which the Semang 
women wear in their hair must be taken, and the 
entire pattern with which the solid part of the comb 
is decorated carefully copied on to paper. The solid 
part, as will then be seen, is divided by means of 
straight lines running horizontally into a number of 
separate panels. The number of these panels differs 
as between comb and comb, but we may take the one 
chosen by Vaughan-Stevens, which has eight panels 

CHAP. IX GENERAL REMARKS 397 

in all — there being four narrow panels at the top of 
the solid part, and three more narrow panels just 
above the teeth, with a central panel of great breadth 
between them. By the side of this panel-scheme a 
flower should be drawn (preferably an Ixora, that being 
the flower selected by Vaughan- Stevens), showing 
pistil, stamens, petals, and sepals — the smell of the 
flower need not be drawn, but may be understood ! 
Now we are asked to believe that the first panel (count- 
ing from the top of the comb) represents the smell^ of 
the flower in question ; the upper edge '" of this first 
panel the pistil and stamens ; the second panel the 
" lengthened (or projecting) spike above the green 
sepals " ; ^ and the lowest horizontal line, bounding 
the eighth or lowest panel, the sepals themselves.'* 

The petals (" tapak "), which one would think 
would be one of the most obvious parts of a flower in 
the eyes of a savage, have no panel assigned to them, 
and what other parts of the flower are represented by 
the unassigned panels we are not informed, but we 
have a shrewd suspicion that the botany text-book 
had been unfortunately mislaid before this part of the 
investigation was completed. Otherwise we might 
have been treated to further ethnological (and perhaj^s 
even to botanical) discoveries ! 

To be just to Vaughan -Stevens, however, the 
obvious fact is that as he conducted his investigations 
in Malay, he must have been early brought face to 
face with the Malay word " bunga," a flower 
( = " bakau " in Semang), and as he evidently did not 

* The Semang "was" is said to seem that the pistil is what is really 

= " smell," but perhaps really means intended, but this has been mentioned 

the solid part of the comb {v. p. 426, already under another name. 

infra). ^ Sem. "tepi." ■* Sem. "mos." For the whole 

^ Sem. "pawcr." It is by no passage, see pp. 426, 427, iufra, 

means clear what this means ; it would especially 427, «. i. 

598 DECORATIVE ART 

know that a common secondary meaning of "bunga" 
was a pattc7'n, he was, most unfortunately, started 
upon the wrong tack from the very outset. The fact 
of the word " bunga," which he thought meant 
" flower," being appHed to the whole pattern, naturally 
suggested to him the idea that the series of horizontal 
lines might perhaps be intended to divide the 
various panels which (he expected) would represent 
the various parts of the flower in question. He asked 
his questions, we feel sure, in perfect bona fides, but 
nevertheless he must have had some such idea as 
this in his mind, and his accommodating informants 
naturally supplied him with the very information that 
he thought he wanted. Thus Vaughan-Stevens, in 
falling into the trap, has furnished us with yet one more 
of those awful object-lessons which are provided from 
time to time by ethnologists who rely too much upon 
the answers given by " question-worried savages." As 
he is not the first, so he will not be the last, and there 
are perhaps none of us who can tread this thorny path 
so securely as never to come into danger of a fall. 

Up to this point we know, I think, quite enough 
to be able to state definitely what the " mos " and the 
" pawer " are not; but our duty does not stop here, 
and a little further consideration of Vaughan-Stevens' 
material will show us, I am inclined to think, what 
Vaughan-Stevens himself must have narrowly missed 
discovering, viz. that the "mos" and "pawer" were 
probably the names of two flowers — as indeed, with 
that courageous inconsistency which in such a case may 
he regarded as a proof of honesty, he himself has 
informed us in the very same passage in which he 
states his general flower-theory of the combs. The 
"mos" is, if as I hope we may trust Vaughan- 

CHAP. IX GENERAL REMARKS 399 

Stevens for the fact, a strong-scented kind of Ixora, 
and the " pawer " a similar flower with a somewhat 
weaker scent.' It is therefore quite conceivable that 
the two upper panels of the pattern of the particular 
comb that he took for his type, or even of a set of 
such combs, may represent, or at least in some way 
possess an association with, two kinds of Ixora. 
That this solution is more than merely possible is 
shown by the names of the third and fourth panels, 
whose names, as given by Vaughan- Stevens, are 
partly Semang and partly Malay, and mean " rice- 
fruit " (i.e. rice-grains) and " salak "-fruit - respectively. 
This practice, in fact, of giving names to patterns or 
parts of patterns, either from something that they 
actually represent, or from something they are supposed 
to resemble (or are associated with in use), is a very 
usual and general practice in the Malay Peninsula, and 
is so obvious a method of describing a pattern that we 
must confess we see nothing very striking or original 
in the idea. For an exact parallel, see the " cucumber- 
seed " pattern described below. Hence the parts of the 
pattern would represent different flowers or fruit ; — a 
very different thing from the elaborate theory stated 
above, which is based 7ipo?t a botanical ana/ysis of the 
coinponent parts of a si^igle flower — this latter being a 

' The chief kinds of Ixora found species is the Ixora referred to as 
indigenous to the Peninsula, according " Tetawar bindang," for the Malay 
ioKidXny's Plant- List, ^TQ Ixora fulgens, word " padi '' means simply rice, or 
Roxb., and other species (A'K/'/V7<rrr), a rice - plant, and " bendang " (not 
large orange Ixora common in the " bintang "= " star ") means "rice- 
jungle ; Ixora opaca, Br. ; Ixora swamp " too. Elsewhere we are told 
grandiflora, Zoll. ; Ixora paii'iflora, by Vaughan -Stevens that it is the 
Wall. ; Ixora pendula. Jack ; and l)lossoms of certain parasitic plants 
Ixora amana. Wall, (an orange-red that arc especially efficacious against 
Ixora). No such name as " Tctawar diseases ; and hence they are used in 
bindang" is recorded for any of these, the charms (see Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 
but as Ixora pendula is sometimes 135)- 

called " Baratong padi," there can be - " Salak "' is a kind of palm 

little doubt that this or a closely allied (Zalacca). 

400 DECORATIVE ART 

development which is entirely foreign to the cast of mind 
even of the Malays, who are a race some centuries 
ahead of the Semang in general intelligence.' 

Vaughan - Stevens, however, not content with 
applying this theory to the combs, attempted to carry 
it even further and extend it to all other patterns 
executed by the Semang, such as the patterns on 
their blowpipes, their quivers, and their magic tubes. 
This extension, however, is regarded, even by 
Vaughan-Stevens' own editors, as utterly untenable, 
so that we need not trouble to waste any more time 
in following him further away from the track. 

It is, unfortunately, necessary to speak thus plainly, 
in order to prevent the published work of Vaughan- 
Stevens from entrapping scholars who use it, and who 
may not have had the right kind of field experience to 
enable them to use it critically. But it is a far more 
congenial and grateful task for the writer — knowing, as 
he does, the all but insuperable difficulties of the subject 
— to record the fact that, setting apart all question of 
this absurd pseudo-botanical theory, that indefatigable 
pioneer (Vaughan-Stevens) has left behind him, not 
only a fine collection of specimens of Negrito art (now 
in the Museum of Ethnology at Berlin), but also a vast 
mass of most valuable observations which only require 
critical revision and recension to render them a verit- 
able storehouse of fresh and remarkable information 
for the ethnologist. From this point of view, the 

1 For other scarcely less grotesque the three concentric ring- lines which 

and far - fetched ideas of Vaughan- separate the panels in a pattern repre- 

Slevens, see Vaughan - Stevens, iii. sent three kinds of lightning employed 

136, and similar references, where by Kari — the straight flash, the 

we are told that the hollow of forked flash, and the '■^ heavy blue 

a bamboo internode (used as a tropic lightning flash," only the 

quiver) represents a mountain -with middle one of which is supposed to 

caves in the interior, and that be effective ! 

CHAP. IX GENERAL REMARKS 401 

work that has been hitherto accompHshed, not only by 
Vaughan-Stevens himself in the collecting of speci- 
mens and information, but also by his German editors 
under the most difficult circumstances imaginable, is 
worthy of nothing but the highest and most generous 
praise. In the light of the fuller knowledge that we 
now possess, I find nothing — even where I am 
obliged to differ or to correct — but what proves that 
their work has been done in the best scientific spirit — 
in other words, with a single regard to truth. 

Hence the plan of the present chapter has been 
formulated with the object of giving in as complete a 
form as possible the result of the inquiries of Vaughan- 
Stevens, rescued as far as possible from his faulty 
classification and his blunders, and also from the vitiat- 
ing influence of his " flower-theory," Any readers 
who wish to see more of this theory for themselves 
can do so by consulting the original articles in the 
German journals from which the extracts in this 
chapter are taken. The remainder of this chapter 
will include — (i) the detailed explanations of a few 
typical Semang patterns which the writer himself 
has personally investigated, and (2) the substance of 
the German articles based upon V^aughan- Stevens' 
material, from which, as I have said, the fallacious 
" flower-theory," together with other obvious mistakes 
due to bona-Jidc ignorance, have been as far as pos- 
sible eliminated. 

Symbolism. 

One of the most important features of the art- 
work of these tribes consists in their practice of 
representing an object by means either of one of its 
chief parts or of some closely associated idea. A 

VOL, I 2 D 

402 DECORA TIVE ART 

bat, for instance, is represented by a wavy pattern, 
indicating its wings ; a stag by a small triangle, re- 
presenting his pointed slot. These facts were pointed 
out to me both among the Blandas and Besisi of 
Selangor, before I ever read a line of Vaughan-Stevens, 
and subsequently by the Semang of Kedah. The 
principle has also been noticed by other observers (apart 
from Vaughan-Stevens),^ and may be accepted as 
definitely established. It is, I think, not unconnected 
in origin with the general ideas underlying the practice 
of sympathetic magic or " make-believe," and there is 
therefore no reason why it should not be employed 
by the members of a race who, to a not inconsiderable 
extent, employ what may be called " sympathetic 
methods" in their "medicinal" ceremonies. 

Representation of Entire Objects. 
At the same time it must be insisted upon that 
the powers of draughtsmanship of the aborigines do 
not by any means stop at this point, I have myself 
seen perfectly intelligible drawings representing com- 
plete objects, both animals and plants, upon the shafts 
of blowpipes and similar objects," and in this respect 
the fine collection got together by Vaughan-Stevens 
is obviously rich. One of the best of these latter is 
perhaps, as Vaughan-Stevens himself points out, the 
drawing of a spider by a Sakai upon a bamboo 
" stamper " or " tuang-tuang." ^ 

Geometrical Patterns. 

But in spite of their possessing the power both 
to conceive and to represent a complete artistic 

^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 142. forbidden to the Mohammedan Malays, 

'^ This was among the Blandas and they are probably of " savage Malayan " 

Besisi, and as such zoomorphs are origin. ^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 143. 

CHAP. IX GENERAL REMARKS 403 

conception, these tribes employ, in the vast majority 
of cases, patterns which are purely geometrical, and 
it is in respect of these that the explanations collected 
by Vaughan-Stevens should be subjected, whenever 
it may be possible, to the closest scrutiny. My own 
experience has been, with regard to these geometrical 
designs, that, as a rule, every other native has a 
different explanation to offer about them, and that, 
on the other hand, the same interpretation will 
nevertheless be frequently given with reference to 
two, or even perhaps to three or four designs which are 
obviously different. In both of these ways Vaughan- 
Stevens no doubt suffered considerably, as will, I 
think, be clear to anyone who has the opportunity 
of checking his work. Especial care should therefore 
be exercised in dealing with this particular class of 
patterns, and every possible means of checking the 
explanations given of them by natives should be 
adopted. 

Dividing Lines or Borders. 

A great deal of emphasis was laid by the informants 
of Vaughan-Stevens upon the ring-lines (" keng-oin " 
or " kening-uin ") which separate the various patterns. 
Exactly similar ring-lines (or " party "-lines) are, how- 
ever, employed by the Malays (as by many other races) 
for separating their patterns, and there can, I think, 
be no manner of doubt that the sole original function 
of these lines was to divide the patterns and to keep the 
various rows of figures in their proper place. It is, of 
course, conceivable that later on (as Vaughan-Stevens 
in many passages is made to say) some superstition may 
have arisen which postulated a particular number or 
arrangement of these lines as a charm against light- 

404 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

ning, but I cannot personally believe this, and in any 
case it will be evident to anybody who examines 
this point that these lines do, as a matter of fact, 
divide and regulate the patterns, and this is what, I 
claim, must (beyond doubt) have been their original 
function. 

Essential Irregularity of the Patterns. 

A yet further point in which, I regret to say, I must 
differ entirely from Vaughan-Stevens is his continual 
insistence upon the completeness and regularity of 
each (geometrical) figure and row of figures. He 
has gone so far in this respect as to correct (not 
always accurately) his originals, a work of entire 
gratuitousness, to make the best of it. It cannot. I 
think, be too strongly emphasised that we want to 
collect and to interpret the patterns as they are, and 
not as they might or perhaps even ought to be. 
This does not, of course, preclude the pointing out 
of substantial irregularities whenever they are of any 
interest and importance, but it cannot, I think, be too 
widely recognised that the designs of these tribes, 
like those of the Malays and of most other tribes on 
a similar or even on a higher plane of culture, are 
radically and essentially irregular, and that any ex- 
cessive regularity in a pattern might be ground for 
distrusting the authenticity of the specimen in which 
it occurred. 

Terminology. 

Before going further, a clear understanding must 
be arrived at about the names used in this section. 
In spite of the distinction drawn by Vaughan-Stevens 
between quivers and charm-receptacles, I confess that 

CHAP. IX GENERAL REMARKS 405 

I have not succeeded in discovering the smallest differ- 
ence between them from the decorative point of view. 

Vaughan-Stevens himself, in spite of his lonc( 
article upon this subject, headed " goh " and " gah," ' 
is continually confusing them, and as his own editor 
points out, his remark that "others {sc. designs) could 
not be reduced (to a size that would suit the blow- 
pipe), and hence were retained as 'goh' or 'gah,'"' 
shows that in his mind there was no essential 
difference between them. Elsewhere, after comparing 
the blowpipe and "goh" patterns, he derives the 
blowpipe patterns from a " goh," whereas, according 
to his own general theory, it was from a "gah" that 
these patterns were evolved. Elsewhere, again, he 
refers to both "goh" and " gah " together as dart- 
quivers. The only conclusion that can be drawn, as 
his own editor quite rightly points out, is that 
Vaughan-Stevens really found no specific difference 
between his " goh " and "gah " patterns, and that his 
theory of the evolution of the blowpipe patterns from a 
"gah" rests upon some misapprehension of his own. 

The fact of the matter is (in my own mind at least 
I am sure), that both these forms of the widespread 
bamboo receptacle should be included in one class 
merely as receptacles, without any reference to what 
their contents might be. In fact the word " go' " in 
Semang ( = " gob " in Andamanese)" is the exact equi- 
valent of the Malay " tabong," and merely signifies a 
vessel or holder formed from a single internode of a 
large kind of bamboo, which had, as a rule, certain specific 

' In orig. "gor" and "gar" (j/<). probably be "g;i'" and" ga'." The form 

These names of Vaughan-Stevens are " gu' " ("guh") is probably identical, 

both cockney spellings, there being no Cp. p. 44S, infra. 

"r" whatever at the end of either of - Man's Andamauese, p. 8. 
these words. The correct fcjrms would 

4o6 DECORATIVE ART tart a 

uses, but might as easily be put to half a hundred 
others. Hence the Semang " go' " at times served as 
a quiver, at other times served to carry magic herbs 
and roots, and the general paraphernalia of the Negrito 
sorcerer. If the fact is once recognised that, from a 
decorative point of view, there is absolutely no differ- 
ence between the quiver (" goh ") and the charm-tube 
(" gah "), and that both alike are really " go' " (the form 
" gah" or " ga " being probably, if it has any authority 
at all, a mere dialectal variant of *' go' "), the source of 
endless confusion will be avoided. 

Similarly, the word " gu' " also appears to be 
applied indifferently both to bamboo quivers and 
burial bamboos, etc. It probably signifies, like "goh," 
a bamboo tube or receptacle. There does not to 
me appear sufficient evidence of the existence of what 
Vaughan-Stevens calls " gi " to include it in this list. 
Vaughan - Stevens himself could obtain no specimen 
of it, and himself says that they had been completely 
forgotten and disused. What they purported to be 
was a species of charm-tube carried by the women, 
" on which all the seventy Disease-patterns were cut." 
As, however, there are (not seventy but) a hundred 
and forty of these patterns, and as it would be a 
physical impossibility to crowd even the central panel 
of seventy of these patterns upon the surface of a 
bamboo that was meant to be portable, there can be 
little doubt that this was one of the many cases in 
which Vaughan-Stevens was led altogether astray. 

Classification of the Patterns. 

The charm-patterns employed by the wild tribes 
of the Peninsula may be roughly classified according 
to the objects that they are employed to adorn. 

CHAP. IX 

GENERAL REMARKS 

407 

Description of Object, 
(i) Bamboo combs.* 

(2) Large bamboo tubes, cut from a 
single intemode, and including — 
(a) Bamboo quivers* (for ar- 
rows or darts). 

{b) Charm bamboos.* 
{c) Myth bamboos.* 
{d) Burial bamboos.* 
{e) Birth bamboos.* 
(f) Bamboo "stampers."* 
{g) Seed bamboos (used for 
dibbling rice). 
(3) Small bamboo tubes, including — 
(a) Poison-receptacles. 

(h) Tobacco-receptacles. 
(4) Blowpipes.* 

(5) Miscellaneous objects, e.g. arrows, 
nose-sticks, fish-hooks, and vari- 
ous implements (ring-lines only). 
Mats and wallets (mat-work and 
embroidery). 

(6) 

(7) Bark-cloth (painting only). 

(8) The human body (painting and 

tattooing and scarification of the 
person) — v. vol. ii. ch. ii. 

(I) 

(2) 

Use. 

Used chiefly by Semang (V.-St. 
loc. cit.) ; chiefly by Sakai (Mar- 
tin, 703). Not used by Jakun. 

(a) Arrow - quivers used by 

Semang only ; dart - 
quivers by all three 
races. 

(b) Used by Semang only. 

(c) Do. do. 
{d) Do. do. 

(e) Do. do. 

(/) Used by Sakai only (?). 
(g) Collected among Semang. 

(3) 

(a) Commonly undecorated 
when used by Semang, 
but decorated by Sakai 
and to some extent by 
Jakun. 

(b) Used especially by Semang. 

(4) Borrowed in the case of the Semang, 
but decorated by all three races. 

(5) Some of these {e.g. arrows) are 
used by Semang only, but they 
cannot all be specified. 

(6) Not used by Semang except when 
borrowed, but found among Sa- 
kai, and still more among Jakun. 

(7) Decorated by .Sakai especially, 
rarely by Semang and Jakun. 

(8) Scarification and tattooing (accord- 
ing to Mr. L. Wray) appear to be 
practised by the Sakai of Perak ; 
body-painting by all three races, 
but especially by the Sakai. 

The asterisked objects are the only ones whose 
patterns have been seriously studied, and that in 
most cases for the Semang only. 

Of these divisions the first (that containing the 
Semang combs) includes prophylactic patterns in- 
tended to protect the wearer against various accidents 
and diseases, and must await a fuller discussion 
below. 

The Semang patterns of the .second class were 
supposed by Vaughan-Stevens to have been originally 

4o8 DECORATIVE ART 

copied from patterns on certain bamboo tubes, which 
were merely used as charms (and not as quivers and 
blowpipe-tubes). Vaughan-Stevens asserts that the 
former, when first used as quivers, remained of the 
same size as the tubes from which their patterns were 
copied, but that in the latter case the patterns on 
being transferred to the blowpipe-tubes were reduced 
in size. What the truth may be is hard to say. No 
foundation for this statement of Vaughan - Stevens 
appears, and the writer does not himself regard it 
as credible. 

There are said to be in all seventy-three specimens 
of these patterns (for quivers and charm-tubes) col- 
lected by Vaughan - Stevens, who has attempted 
to explain them by means of the " flower-theory " he 
had employed in explaining the combs, but this 
extension, as has already been pointed out, is quite 
untenable (even supposing his " flower-theory " were 
admitted for the combs). 

The main objections alleged are as follows : — 

1. There are some quivers which have no patterns 
at all but only a few ring-lines (ex. Fig. 8). 

2. Some quivers have the same pattern in all 
their panels (ex. Fig. 9). 

3. In many quivers the central panel is left vacant, 
and hence the " Disease-pattern " must necessarily be 
looked for in some one of the other panels (ex. Fig. 10). 

4. Again, in some cases, in which all the panels 
are occupied, the central panel is in no way more pro- 
minent than the rest, so that its special importance, 
and in fact its very place in the scheme, still remains 
to be proved. 

5. The patterns of the two upper panels (which 
according to the theory should correspond to the 

GENERAL REMARKS 409 

"was" and "pawer" of the combs) are not in all 
cases divisible as they would be on the combs.' 

The chief difference, however, appears to be that 
in the case of the combs the main Disease-pattern is 
always to be found in the centre, whereas both in the 
blowpipe patterns and in those of the quivers and 
charm-tubes the central panel is often a blank one. 
The fact alleged by Vaughan-Stevens, that in blow- 
pipe patterns of the kind the upper pattern serves to 
protect the men from epidemics, and the lower the 
women {sic), suggests to his editor the possible applica- 
tion of some such explanation to the upper and lower 
patterns of the quivers and charm-tubes. On the 
other hand, the central patterns that some of these 
very quivers and charm-tubes possess are explained 
by the same authority as charms directed against the 
Diseases that attack the men only. Finally, even 
the division of the ring-lines into groups can be of 
no very special significance, as they are sometimes 
distributed at equal distances over the whole bamboo.-' 

Biiriai Bamboos. 

The Semang " gu' " and burial bamboos are of 
no account as charms. ' On the former the mytho- 
logical designs and emblems connected with the 
Putto (of whom only the tradition remains that they 
were once an order of greater chiefs and servants of 
the god Pie) were incised, and the latter have now 
passed to the Sna-hut. Four myth bamboos were 
obtained from the Sna-hut hy Vaughan - Stevens, 
together with the interpretation of their patterns. 

' Z.f. E. XXV. 71-100. - //'. described as being available as a chaiin 

' See, however, Gu' IV., which is against water-snakes. 

4IO DECORATIVE ART part ii 

There, for instance, is represented the thunder-god 
Kari, and the symbols of his power, together with 
the god Pie and his daughter Simei. In addition to 
these there are certain fabulous animals, described as 
the guardians of Paradise, and a great variety of 
flowers and fruits. A Putto is shown lying with his 
head upon a magic stone-cushion, and receiving from 
Pie in a dream instructions as to the manufacture of 
mats and other objects. But most unfortunately there 
is no coherence, and the exact connotation even of the 
word " gu " itself is wanting. The designs themselves 
are so vague, that one can scarcely distinguish human 
beings from animals, and the same design, or part of 
a design, often signifies many entirely different objects.^ 
The burial patterns or "penitah"^ of the dead are 
said to be cut by the Sna-hut upon a bamboo tube which 
is deposited in the grave (inserted in the deceased's 
girdle). By these patterns the life-story of the person 
or persons concerned is depicted, so that on their 
appearing before the judgment throne of Kari the 
bamboo serves as a kind of credentials. The patterns 
inscribed on these bamboos vary according to the age 
and sex of the deceased. Their import has up to the 
present received no manner of explanation.^ 

Birth Bamboos. 

The Semang " tahong " is a ** birth bamboo " 
carried by the woman, which nobody but her husband 
may see, but which she must never go without. It 
contains, we are told, "no flower-patterns."'* 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 124. mand," is of course a possible one, 

2 The form given by Vaughan- though I do not feel quite sure of it. 
Stevens is "penitor" (" pcneetor "). ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 119, 120. 
The suggested derivation from " titah," ' V. B. G. A. xxiv. 466, 467; cp. 
the royal word meaning to "com- Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 1 1 5. 

CHAP. IX GENERAL REMARKS 411 

Bamboo Stampers. 

We now come to the Sakai " tuntong " (more 
correctly " tuang-tuang ") or " kovvet-niss," to which 
recourse was had in every emergency of Hfe. These 
bamboos always consisted of a pair of tubes, one of 
which was somewhat smaller than the other, so that 
quite different tones were produced by them when 
struck. These tubes were closed at the lower end 
by the natural node ; but they were left open at the 
top, so that the closed end, when struck upon the 
ground, emitted a distinct musical note.^ 

The illustrations will be treated in fuller detail 
below. The first is 48 cm. high, the second 56 cm. 
high.'- 

There are also " tuang-tuangs " in secular use. 
These, however, are neither provided with incised 
patterns nor painted, but serve merely to give a signal 
for calling home the inhabitants of a house or 
village, since they can be heard at a great distance 
through the jungle. These undecorated tubes are 
common among tribes who live in the neighbourhood 
ot the Malays. They serve in this case, however, 
only as instruments of music.'' 

The patterns of the other objects classified call for 
no special remark, being mostly confined to ring-lines 
and plain geometrical patterns, with the exception of 
those employed for decorating the person, which will 
be fully treated in another chapter. 

• Z. f. E. xxvi. 140. Vaughan- ^^ z^f^E. xxvi. 14S. V. Stevens 

Stevens remarks that these "tuntonp;s" has here evidently confused the "tuang- 

(as he calls ihom) are never struck upon luang" of these ]\itterns, which is a 

wood. This refers, perhaps, to the mere "stamper," producing a note when 

Sakai customs, as I myself have more struck against the ground, with an in- 

than once seen and heard them struck strument hearing the same name which 

upon the wooden tloor- limbers of has a mouth-hole al one side, and is 

Jakun huts. really used as a species of "conch." 

4i: 

DECORATIVE ART 

Blowpipe Patterns. 

According to Preuss, the (129) specimens of 
Semang blowpipe patterns, their dart-quivers ("go' "), 
and charm-tubes (" ga ") are intended to serve as 
charms against the various diseases and accidents 
which are likely to attack or affect the men.' 

The tradition of the Semang about the origin of 
their blowpipe patterns ascribes them to the invention 
of their god Pie, who with the aid of his daughter 
Simei planted the flowers of their chief god Kari or 
"Thunder" near a mountain peak(Jelmol), and evolved 
from them the patterns which would avail against 
Diseases. The Putto " incised these correct patterns, 
exactly as Pie had invented them, on bamboos which 
were deposited in a large cave, where they were changed 
into stone ^ by the god, in order that they might always 
be ready to serve as patterns. A set of these patterns 
was prepared for each of the Sna-hut ; whose task it 
was to see that the correct drawings were used by 
the people. The Putto alone, however, knew where 
the caves were. The parts of the flowers represented 
on the combs in accordance with these traditions, viz. 
" tepi," " was," " pawer," and " mos," are dealt with ac- 
cording to their existing arrangement on the blowpipes, 
without, however, any further working out of the details, 
e.g. the identification of the remaining parts of the cor- 
responding patterns which are incised on the combs.'' 

In the publications of the Berlin Ethnographical 
Museum,' mention is made of the Semang explanation 

J J' Z. f. E. xxxi. 1 59. See also 
/C.f. E. XXV. 73/; There seem to be, 
however, more imporlanl uses. 

- Spelt by V.-St. "Puttow," which 
may = " Pattau," th<jugh <iriinsvedel 
suggests a connexion with " Buddha," 

which is, at the best, a doubtful guess. 

^ This is doubtless due to some 
legend connected with one of the 
limestone caves, so common in the 
north portion of the Peninsula. 

* V.-Sl. iii. no. '■ //'. p. 130. 

GENERAL REMARKS 41; 

of the patterns as derived exclusively from one of their 
fundamental patterns (i a), which latter has a close 
resemblance to a typical " motive " employed by the 
Sakai. The Semang are even asserted to know the 
exact order in which the simpler figures were succes- 
sively developed ! The first eighteen stages of this 
development were described by Vaughan - Stevens, 
but in this respect Nos. 1-4 (inclusive) and No. 13 
are all that need be indicated. The fact that the 
Semang are not acquainted with the development of 
the complicated figures of which they make use, 
Vaughan- Stevens seeks to explain — I confess un- 
convincingly — by the fact that these latter patterns 
were formerly incised by the Sna-hut, or even by the 
Putto.' 

The E. Semang (Pangan) have only one 
" pichod " pattern, which they are said by Vaughan- 
Stevens to have learnt from the Sakai (?), but this 
pattern and its variants are alleged to be used by the 
Semang as the groundwork of all their patterns. - 

Among the Semang the pyramidal figure is said to 
be taken as the basis of all their decorative art. It is 
an obvious and simple figure (possibly connected with 
the zigzag) which is commonly found in the art of 
almost all other savage peoples, and there is no 
necessity whatever for supposing that it can only 
have been borrowed from a loreign source.^ 

Turning to mixed Semang- Sakai tribes, the 
Tembeh of the east coast states used no decora- 
tion for their blowpipe or quiver ; hitc^r they 

' /.. f. E. xxxi. 160. were indebted for this form of orna- 

- Vaughan -Stevens, ill. 129 ;/. ment to an older stage ("stadium") 

Vaughan-Stcvcns' comment is ihat this of tlie common race, from which they 

figure must either obyiously have lieen were both evolved (jiV .'). 
borrowed from the Sakai or that Ixith •' Ibid. p. 130. 

414 

DECORATIVE ART 

copied the patterns of the E. Semang or Pangan, 
but very sparingly.' Vaughan - Stevens describes 
in connexion with this tribe a strange " code " 
or set of signs which he calls the " Tembeh 
message-characters," and he adds that these message- 
characters are known not only to a section of the 
Tembeh, but throughout the whole of the Malay 
Peninsula ! '" The signs were notched on a section oi 
bamboo or drawn upon it in charcoal. At the top 
stood the sign which represented the name of the 
sender (which all parties concerned would be likely 
to know), and underneath stood that of the recipient. 
The characters employed represented such ideas as 
"go," "return," "wait," "escape," "wood-felling," 
" man," " woman," " family," " danger," " salt," 
" tobacco," " day," " night," etc., and so on down to the 
representation of the numbers i to lo.^ A special sign, 
for instance, stands for " night " or " darkness," and 
another special sign for " day " or " daylight." * 

We next come to the magical designs of the 
Sakai, who since they believed (unlike the Semang) 
in demons, naturally used these designs in a way 
that the Semang never did. Vaughan-Stevens here 
tells us that each tribe of the Sakai has a design 
which does for all the members of the tribe. 

Vaughan-Stevens adds that the designs were used 
merely as charms against certain evil spirits, and hence 
were less numerous than the magical designs of the 
Semang which were intended for use against all the 
(personified) Diseases that they knew of or could 
imagine.^ 

' Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 98. 
- This, however, is certainly a stretch 
of the imagination. 

2 No Semang or Sakai tribe has 

numerals of its own beyond three or 
four. 

< Globus, Ixix. 117, 1896. 

* Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 130. 

I - i -I- 'F X II -ll' H 0 ! 

//\\3./A\ ^./h AVX 

1-^=^ 

/j. 

^^^^--v^--v^_ ^>.-v^^-s <:^c:;y::^c:^ .-gy?'^^^^^- .;;;:««=5«f^ 

Dkveloi'Mknt ok the I'attekns irom the C'iievkon iZ.f. E. xxxi. i6o). 

- 

■ 

1 

i 

■l,'l 1\EKS lOR Hl.ow I'll'E l»\Krs KMl'I.OVEn 

Hv Till. Si \i\N(, iir Kkdaii. 

Di- Morgan 

Semam; Quivers. 

De Morgan in L H. 23tli October 18S3, p. 617. 

Vol. /.A 414. 

CHAP. IX GENERAL REMARKS 415 

The following is Vaughan - Stevens' statement 
as to the alleged origin of the Sakai charm- 
patterns : — 

As he (Vaughan-Stevens) was anxious for further 
explanation (about the patterns) he took a bamboo 
(" tabong ") belonging to one of the men, and asked 
to be shown which were Tuhan's finger-prints. In- 
stead of replying, the man seized a piece of firewood, 
rubbed his finger on the charred end, and pressed 
his blackened finger-tip upon the bamboo, thus 
producing a triangular pattern.^ 

Further inquiry elicited the information that for 
the interior portion of this figure no fixed rule 
existed, and that (e.g?) dots might be introduced 
instead of lines. It was further asserted that the 
more complicated patterns were only so many varieties 
of the simple triangle or V-pattern, duplicated and 
arranged X-wise instead of side by side." 

Of pure Jakun {i.e. Malayan) designs very little 
seems yet to have been written, and specimen illus- 
trations of Jakun patterns seem hardly less rare than 
descriptions thereof The decorative art of the Besisi, 
so far as I have observed (like their language), so 
closely resembles that of the Sakai as to be almost 
indistinguishable. It is therefore among some of 
the Johor and Kuantan tribes (probably among those 
who still manufacture the wooden blowpipe) that we 
must look for purer specimens of " savage Malay " art- 
work. On the other hand it must not be forgotten that 
much decoration of Malayan origin that was probably 
indigenous in the first place among the Jakun or 

* Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 130. This collected his information. Can we say 

passage exhibits, unfortunately, the un- that the mark made by a blackened 

critical spirit (which in some respects finger-tip suggests a triangle ? 

wasamerit!) in which Vaughan-Stevens ''■ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 130. 

4 1 6 DECORA TIVE ART 

heathen Malays, has undoubtedly been incorporated 
in the art-work of Semang and Sakai tribes. Un- 
fortunately, as I have said, practically nothing has 
yet been done at this subject, and all that is possible 
in the present work is to indicate the nature of 
the inquiry which, it is most earnestly to be hoped, 
some future investigator may find the means to carry 
out. 

I. — Semang. 

Analysis of the Patterns of a Semang Quiver (Siong). 

We now come to the interpretation of certain 
typical specimens of the Semang patterns, which 
were explained to me by the owners of the objects 
described as follows : — 

(i) Second Panel {a) — 

Blossom of the " p'rah tree, with its skin (or 
bark.?)." 

(2) Second Panel (d) — 

Hill tortoise (" kura bukit "). 

The " baning " (a bigger variety). 

The " kahh " (the biggest variety). 

Ribbed breast of a tortoise, showing the bones. 
It should be noted that in the case of the 
smallest variety there are six tortoise 
breasts in the field, whereas in that of 
the middle-sized kind there are four, and 
in that of the largest three only. 

(3) Third Panel— 

The fruit of the " kelubi." 

(4) F'ourth Panel — 

Blossom of the " rotan senik " (a kind of rattan). 
Blossom of the " rotan tunggal " (another kind). 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 417 

(5) Bottom panel of the quiver — 

Deer-slots, These are distinguished from the 
rest of the designs by the scraping off of 
the outer cuticle of the bamboo over certain 
parts of the design that are darker than the 
rest. The parts thus scraped are polished 
with wax, which gives them a reddish tinge. 

(6) Borders are added to all the panels — 

Hawks' eyes (" mata lang "). 

Although I was able without much difficulty to get the 
explanation of the foregoing details, I had less 
success with the remaining portions of the patterns, 
though most likely the objects in the second panel 
{a) were meant to attract the various kinds of land- 
tortoise portrayed in the second panel (<^). In the 
case of the fifth panel this intention is abundantly 
obvious, since it consists of deer-slots pointing towards 
the fruit of the " kelubi " as well as to that of the rattan 
or Calamus, the object of the design being, no doubt, 
to attract the deer by a suggestion of their favourite 
feeding-grounds, where they would, of course, be more 
easily slain or captured. 

Analysis of the Patterns upon a Second Dart-quiver. 

The Semang further informed me that the object of 
their entire set of quiver patterns was to bring down 
various species of monkeys and apes and other small 
mammals. This particular set of patterns was 
described as possessing much magical virtue (" kom 
jasa' '*), the phrase being still more clearly ex- 
plained by the comment of my informants, that it 
would be a " slayer of many victims " (" banyak bunoh- 
nya"). 

VOL. I 2 E 

41 8 DECORATIVE ART part i.i 

Each panel of the pattern contained some special 
design which was believed to be of the highest 
efficacy in bringing down a particular species of 
animal. Thus the first, second, third, fourth, and 
fifth panels inclusive contained charms for bringing 
down various species of apes and monkeys, e.g.—- 

(i) The " kaldos " (Mai. " sinekah " or " Chikah"?). 

(2) The "talug" (Mai. " lotong "). 

(3) The " kebon " (Mai. " mawah " or " wa-wa "). 

(4) The "bawad" (Mai. " b'ro'"). 

(5) The "bateyu" (Mai. " siamang "). 

The two bottom panels, on the other hand, were 
devoted to the bear-cat (" chepag " or " chepog " = 
Malay " binturong ") and the civet-cat or " kenseng " 
(Malay " musang ") respectively.^ 

Analysis of the Decorations on a Third Dart-quiver. 

(i) First Panel — 
Fish-scales. 
Thorns of the rattan (leaf-whip and stem). 

(2) Second Panel — 

Python and pythons' bones (" ular sawa "). 

(3) Third Panel- 

Do. do. 

(4) Fourth Panel — 

Do. do. 

(5) Fifth Panel- 

Hawks' eyes and scales. 

This appears to be a food-charm like the last. In 
fact,il cannot help thinking it more than likely that the 

1 The " lolong " is a Semnopithecus the "siamang," Hylobates lav (gibbon) ; 
(spectacled monkey); the "b'ro'," the "wa-wa," Z^/o^ai'(j^a^/725; the" bin- 
Macacus7umestrinus\Q.ocox\.\x'i-zaoTiV&y); turong," Ardidis binturong. 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 419 

proximity of the fish-scales and rattan thorns may be of 
special significance, since these prickly leaf-whips of the 
rattan are frequently used to make a funnel-shaped 
trap for fish, which immediately on entering the mouth 
of the trap are caught and held fast by their scales. 

Analysis of the Decorative Symbols on a Comb. 

(i) First Panel — 

Rattan thorns ("duri rotan "). 
(2) Second (central) Panel — 

Diamond-shaped diagram filled with little pitted 
marks called "cucumber seeds" (" bunga 
timun "). The cross-lines are called *' ten- 
weg " ( = " tin-weg " of V.-St.). 

The complete design is meant to serve as a charm 
to protect the woman against venomous reptiles and 
insects. The chief's wife informed me that a similar 
design, for a siinilar reason, was sometimes painted 
upon the breast of women belonging to the wild 
Semang-Sakai tribes in the northern part of the 
valley of the Plus. 

The specimens above described were all collected 
by the writer in the same region, viz. among the 
Negritos of Siong, in the interior of Kedah. 

The charm-patterns which have been studied by 
Vaughan-Stevens are, with one exception (that of the 
Sakai " tuang - tuang "), all Semang patterns, and 
relate to the following classes (as given above) : — 

Class (i). Bamboo combs. 

Class (2). Large bamboo tubes, including [a) 
bamboo quivers, {f) medicine bamboos, (r) memorial 
bamboos, {d) burial bamboos, [c) birth bamboos. 

Class (4). Bamboo blowpipes. 

420 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

The Theories of Vaughan-Stevens. 
comb patterns. 

In the following pages the description of the 
patterns employed by the Semang, although given in 
the form of a summary of Vaughan-Stevens' own words 
as reported by his German editor/ has been revised, 
rearranged, and corrected where necessary.' 

The magical bamboo back-combs of the Semang 
women are worn throughout the entire Semang region,"^ 
though on the western side of the main mountain range 
of the Peninsula, from Kedah to Perak, rather for orna- 
mental than for any other reasons, the rules for com- 
posing the patterns being now forgotten there. The 
use of these combs (the name for which is "tin-leig" or 
" tela' ") is to serve as a means of protecting women 
against the diseases {e.g. fever, called "pong" in Semang) 
against which the flowers referred to are of service. 
For external injuries, such as those caused by a falling 
tree in the jungle, or by the bite of a centipede, other 
talismans are used, not combs. The Semang employ 
no comb for the purpose of dressing their stubborn, 
closely curled hair, yet the women often wear eight 
back combs at a time, and sometimes even as many 
as sixteen, which in this case form a double row, 
the one behind the other. When eight combs are 
worn, two are fixed side by side facing frontwards, two 
backwards, and two towards each side, the teeth being 
inserted right up to the solid part of the comb. The 
choice of a comb or set of combs depends in each 

^ Z./.£. XXV. 71-100(^0?. Griinwedel). enclosed in square brackets. 

For list of comb patterns, v. App. •' Hair-combs were also seen by 

'^ For the convenience of future Lapicque among the Semang of Ulu 

investigators passages that contain Selama. — Tour du Monde, N.S., i. 

statements requiring corroboration are (1895), 620. 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 421 

case upon three considerations — (i) the Disease or 
Diseases prevalent anywhere in the neighbourhood 
at the time of choice ; (2) those Diseases which are 
most dreaded at the time ; and (3) the presence or 
otherwise of other women. 

[To understand this last consideration it must 
be remembered that according to Semang ideas 
the winds bring Diseases with them as punishment 
for any sins that Kari, the thunder-god, desires to 
avenge by their means. The Wind-demon, who is 
sent from Kari with this message, passes over the 
head of the person and deposits the Disease upon his 
(or her) forehead, from whence it spreads over the 
rest of the body. But the god Pie (" Play") pacifies 
Kari and turns aside the punishments decreed by him, 
by giving the Semang a talisman that the winds dare 
not approach. If, therefore, a woman is protected by 
the correct form of magic comb, the Wind, on touching 
her head, encounters the scent of the " was " (the first 
or uppermost panel of the comb), and thereupon falls to 
the ground until the wearer of the comb has passed. 
If several women, each wearing a particular set of 
combs, are sitting or walking together, and a Disease 
comes in the name of Kari to punish one of them 
who is not wearing the protective comb pattern, yet 
so long as there is another woman close by who is 
wearing it, the first panel pattern of the latter will 
protect the former woman. Hence when several 
women are walking together they wear different combs 
for their mutual protection from different Diseases.] 

[The winds do not bring every kind or any special 
kind of Disease, though every Disease has a special 
wind as its messenger, and hence comes the necessity 
of varying first-panel (" was ") patterns. It is not as 

422 

DECORATIVE ART 

a rule the case that a " was " should especially avail 
against more than one particular kind of Disease, 
though many of these patterns to a lesser extent 
may avail against other Diseases as well. It does not 
therefore often happen (though it may sometimes do 
so) that a Semang cuts a first-panel pattern on a comb 
for any other than its specific purpose. It is said that 
the profusion of first-panel patterns which exists has 
arisen occasionally through their being changed by 
the magicians, who excused themselves on the above 
grounds whenever it happened.] On the whole, a 
Semang woman possesses as a rule from twenty to 
thirty magic combs, so that in an encampment in which 
there are several women a great number of patterns 
are present. The women lend each other their combs 
or omit to wear them as the case may be, especially 
when, e.g., several of them are together, and one may 
be protected by the combs worn by the others. In 
the huts or shelters the combs are taken out of the 
hair and inserted between the slats of the roof. 

At night the combs are not worn. When a woman 
is buried all her combs are buried with her, so that 
the Diseases which have been warded off from her 
body during her lifetime may not hurt her soul when 
dead. The idea appears to be that the soul of the 
deceased should have the same protection secured to 
it that the living has possessed. 

In the ways above described, the encampment is 
sufficiently protected, as long as the Semang do not 
leave the place they are in. 

[Concerning the origin of the custom, the invariable 
explanation of the Semang is that the patterns of the 
magic comb were the invention of their god Pie, 
and that the patterns employed were not borrowed 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 423 

from any other people ; and they add that in olden 
times the magic comb only possessed three teeth. ^] 
The E. Semang or Pangan still make their combs with 
only four to five teeth to them, their sole instrument 
for carving the bamboo being a rough chopping-knife 
(" parang "), whereas the Semang of Perak (at Belum), 
who possess a better class of Malay knives, give their 
combs a dozen or even more than a dozen teeth.' 

At the different places at which it was asked, the 
question, " What is the use of the teeth ? " always 
received the same answer, viz. that the combs would 
soon fall out and be lost but for the long teeth, which 
were the only means of fastening them into the hair. 
The men, too, do not wear combs, because (as they 
allege) their hair is too short. Their talismans are, 
therefore, as stated above, incised on the quivers and 
charm-holders. [It was further alleged that in very 
ancient times the women also very often carried a 
special charm-tube, on which all the seventy Disease- 
charms were incised — in other words, a " gi " of a form 
resembling that of the modern dart-quiver.^ This 
special charm-holder was inserted in the loin-cloth or 
girdle, in the same way as the quivers now carried by 
the men. The modern girdle of the Semang men is 
said to be based on this old custom, whereasj the 
Sakai fasten on their quivers with special straps. It is. 
moreover, still the custom for the Semang quivers 
to lack any lid or covering; for if a quiver ("go'") 
or charm - tube (" gi ") had a cover, the charms 
being covered would therefore be powerless. The 

' The suggestion is here made that and among the central Sakai, these 

the multiplication of the number of combs have far more than three or four 

teeth in these combs may have been teeth, 

due to Sakai influence, .\niong I'erak ^ Z. f. E. xxv. 75. 

Sakai who have Semang admixture. -^ See, however, p. 406, autr. 

424 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

" tahong " ^ of the women is a modified survival of 
this custom. [The comparative completeness of the 
traditions of the Semang with regard to their patterns 
was ascribed to the fact of these charm-tubes having 
contained specimens of all their forms.'"] 

The Diseases against which the magic combs are of 
avail only attack women, and many of these are very 
largely the result of the imagination. [Diseases which 
attack both sexes are usually (since the women as a 
rule do not go far away from the men) arrested by the 
quiver and blowpipe patterns of the latter. On this 
account, the women do not as a rule use any quiver 
patterns, although they are not prohibited from 
doing so.^] 

The combs, as a rule, do not last long. The teeth 
easily break off, and the combs themselves are more 
liable to be lost than the quivers and charm-holders of 
the men. As, moreover, they are buried with the 
women when they die, there is always something for 
the young people to do and to learn. When they 
know the patterns of the quivers and charm-tubes, 
they are allowed to cut these for the men. But the 
men also cut other patterns as well as those of the 
quivers and charm-holders ; and the beautiful and 
accurately incised patterns of the combs are the work 
of men. The kind of bamboo most used for the 
manufacture of these combs is a very tall species which 
the Semang call " semeng." The useless upper 
portion is cut off, that required for use well dried, 
and the process of making the comb then proceeds 
as follows : — 

A single internode is taken, and both knots (or 
" nodes ") are excised, so carefully as not to crack the 

1 Cp. V. B. G. A. xxiv. 465 scqq. ^ ■■ Z. f. E. xxv. 75. 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 425 

internode. The cut edge is then most carefully 
smoothed, and, precaution being taken to see that the 
entire portion Is sufficient for " two comb-lengths," 
the three double ring-lines are first incised twice 
each upon both sides of the tube. These lines serve 
not only to divide up the pattern, but themselves 
possess a certain amount of charm-power. They are 
produced by laying the edge of the chopper across the 
bamboo at right angles and rolling the latter along 
with the left hand. Sometimes these lines, it is true, 
are first incised separately on the surface of the comb 
after the splitting of the internode, but this was rarely 
the case, because it was then more difficult to make 
them parallel. The internode is now split into two 
separate parts of equal size, which are then split again 
into as many pieces as the bamboo allows. Large 
bamboo shafts will produce four or even six laminae, 
but smaller ones as a rule only yield three. The 
pattern is now incised with the point of the chopper and 
rubbed over with dry charcoal, a drop of water being 
added to rub it quite into the lines. The lamina is 
then heated over the fire and wax rubbed in with the 
help of bark-cloth or something of the kind, after which 
the lamina is wiped clean. The hot wax not only fills 
up the incisions of the pattern and fixes the powdered 
charcoal in them, but at the same time takes away all 
traces of the charcoal from the smooth, hard, unincised 
portions of the comb. 

The comb is now turned round and a deep furrow 
is cut on the back corresponding exactly to the lowest 
line of the pattern on the front, half the thickness of 
the bamboo being cut through and the gap widened 
from below. The woody part of the interior is 
then stripped off as far as this cross-cut, until 

426 

DECORATIVE ART 

the under part of the lamina is reduced by half 
throughout. Next, the comb is again turned round, 
and from the front, at the bottom end, thin strips 
of the outer cuticle are torn in order to mark the 
interstices between which the teeth are to come. At 
the bottom of the pattern an incision is made to 
prevent these strips from tearing away and so spoiling 
the pattern ; these small incisions are then deepened, 
and the same process having been repeated at the 
back of the comb, the teeth are thus entirely released. 
It remains to polish the borders, to scrape away loose 
fibres, to point the teeth, and the comb is finished.^ 

The process of incision is called " makeii " 
("makiee "), the comb "tin-leig," and the entire 
pattern " kenaij " (" kenije "), i.e. "drawing." The 
whole of the solid part of the comb is sometimes 
also called "was."'- The old standards of measure- 
ment for these combs, though they are certainly now 
very little regarded, were : (i) for the teeth, a palm's 
breadth ("tappar"); (2) for the length of the solid part, 
from the upper extremity to the teeth, the length of 
the forefinger (" jayi ") ; (3) for the width of this same 
part the breadth of four fingers pressed together at the 
tips (" en-chas "). The teeth of the comb are called 
"mad," which in Semang either means "eye" or 
" blade." [The eight parts of the pattern on the solid 
part are named: — (i) first panel = " was "; (2) second 
panel = " pawer " ("pawaire"); (3) third panel = 
" kabo' saleg " (" kabur salag ") ; (4) fourth panel = 
" kabo' padi " ("kabur padi ") ; (5) fifth or central 
panel = " tin-weg " or "tin-wag"; (6) sixth panel = 
"ning"; (7) seventh panel =" bie " (" beay ") ; (8) 
eighth panel = " nos." The top border or edge of the 

^ Z.f. E. XXV. TJ-T^. 

- See p. 397, n. i, atiie. 

/.. ''. A". XXV. Plate I. 

CH.\KM-r.\rTl.KNS ON CoMBS 

rW. /. /. 426. 

Vol. /.A427 

NEGRITOS OF PERAK 

427 

comb above the "was" (i) is called " tepi," the 
bottom border below the eighth panel (" nos ") is 
called "mos."^] 

Looking at the prevalent patterns of the first and 
second panels, it is easy to see that many of them are 
identical with or form parts of the patterns which 
represent the Disease in the fifth panel. [The ex- 
planation given was that when the charm patterns were 
being made, Pie wished, whilst assigning a pattern to a 
particular Disease, to make known at the same time 
what flower was blooming most freely when the 
Disease prevailed, and hence gave both a similar form. 
But when both the first and second panel patterns 

' These names are in part certainly 
of Malay origin, and not pure Scmang, 
e.g. (i) = Mai. " tapak," a palm's- 
breadth; (2) = Mai. "jari," a finger; 
* ' mad " may 1 )e connected , through I ndo- 
Chinese, with Malay "mata" = eye or 
blade of an instrument. So too "kahii' 
saleg" (Mai. " salak ") = fruit of the 
" salak "-palm ; " kabii' padi " (Mai. 
" padi ") = rice-fruit; " tcpi "' = Mai. 
" tSpT," edge. On the other hand, 
" ning,'" " bie," "nos" (?) = one, two, 
four (in Semang). 

The passage {Z.f.E. xxv.79 ) in which 
v. -St. defines his flower-lheor)' (7'. p. 
397) runs as follows : — " ' Was' and 
' pawer ' are the protecting designs, the 
power of which keeps off the sickness. 
' I'awcr,' ' kos,' and ' tepi " are 
parts of a flower, of which ' was ' is 
the smell, and ' tepi ' the pistil and 
stamens, hence a supplementary line 
above a ' wiis ' has the same name. 
The projecting spike above the green 
sepals is called ' pawcr,' the sepals ' mos. " 
To give the rest of the names : the 
flower it self is called ' bakau,' the 
petals ' tapak ' ; of a flower that has a 
sweet .smell, ' ber-pen-hat ' (becr-pcn- 
hat ') is the word used by the Se- 
mang ; if a disagreeable smell, ' hl- 
hid ' ('hee-heed') is the word. Two 
distinct jungle flowers are now 

considered as 'pawer' — 'Mos,' 
really a kind of Ixora, which 
corresponds to the ' pawer,' and a 
flower called by the Malays ' tetawar 
bintang,' or ' star tetawar,' whose 
botanical name is not yet known, 
but which resembles the 'mos.' 
All slight - scented flowers of the 
Ixora kind are called ' pawer,' with 
the addition of a specific seconil name." 

On the foregoing tissue of errors I 
wouldremark that "tepi"isa pure Malay 
word ( =: edge or border), and does not 
mean pistil or stamens, for which there 
is no name in Semang, nor could be. 

The "projecting spike" can only 
be the pistil, which X^aughan-Stevens 
has already told us is called (with the 
stamens) "tepi." "Pawer "and "mos,"' 
on the other hand, are probably the 
names of flowers, not parts of a flower, 
as explained below. " Bakau " = 
"flower" in Semang = Mai. "bunga," 
a "flower" or '■^ patterit."' 

The drawing of the Ixora (given 
in Ciriinwedel's text) is, as he there 
states, a hypothetical one of the writer's, 
serving only to help to determine the 
technical expressions. 

As regards the plant "tetawar bin- 
tang " (5/<), which is certainly a blunder 
for " tetawar (or ' setawar ') bendang," 
see note to i^age 399, ante. 

428 

DECORATIVE ART 

were to be given an identical form, and confusion was 
probable, he introduced certain special signs called 
" gehab " (" g'hab "), " kos," and " ob." '] No. 39, for 
example, shows in its central panel reversed duplicates 
of its first and second panel patterns, which in this 
case appear to be absolutely alike ; with this, however, 
should be compared the corrected sketch of this comb 
pattern in Fig. 8. [This is due to the fact that the 
"was" and "pawer" flowers bloom simultaneously, and 
the patterns for them are therefore almost identical.-] 

One reason for the numerous variations in these 
comb patterns consists in the fact that the patterns 
of the combs are mostly cut by young people instead 
of by the men, as in the case of the more correctly 
cut quiver and blowpipe patterns. But an error in 
the pattern does not, as a Pangan man said, take 
away the power of the comb. " It is like a break or a 
hole in a bird-trap : the bird may slip through, instead 
of falling into the trap, but it is always a question 
whether it will see the hole'' ^ 

All the figures on the combs, with the exception of 
the first, second, and fifth panels, must in every case be 
of the simplest kind. They are derived as a rule from 
a first or second panel pattern, with the omission of the 
special marks. The young people who copy the combs 
often overlook this, and insert at the sides the first 
or second panel patterns in full. But the error is no 
worse than, e.g., the writing of capital letters instead 
of small ones would be to a European.' 

As concerns the composition of the patterns, 

^ These names want corroboration. 
See, for example, the combs num- 
bered 29 (PI. III.), 13B (PI. II.), 
4C (PI. I.), 4B (PI. I.), 18B (PI. 
II.), 50 (PI. IV.), 42 (PI. IV.), 63 
(PI. IV.), 21B (PI. III.), 14A (PI. 

II.), 62 (PI. II.), 60 (PI. IV.), 21A 
(PI. III.), iF (PI. III.), lA (PI. I.), 
lE (PI. I.), 13A (PI. II.), 12B 
(PI. II.), 39 (PI. III.), 16B (PI. II.). 

2 Z.f.E. XXV. 77-79. 

2 1 Ihid. 

.... r 

[Fig. 2.] 

/ 'aiighaii-Stci'i'iis. 
IIvi'oTiiiiTiCAL I.xoK.\ Bi.osso.M .\NU Co.MH ^ Figs. 2 and 3, Z.f. E. .\\V. 78* 
i.xHi,.\iM.Nc; THK P'lowkk-Theokv oi- Vaughan-Stkvkns. 

Till: .strial luunbers in Fig. 2 indicate the position of the various panels carryiiii; patieriis 
referred to in the text. 

i'ol. I. p. 4sS. 

1 

N 

M 

^ 

«U 

P\ 

NEGRITOS OF PERAK 429 

there are strict rules for composing them all, whether 
combs, quivers, or charm-tubes ; these rules, however, 
are not easy to set forth ; in the first place, let us 
consider : — 

1. In what cases is a panel left free ? 

2. In what cases may the designer insert what 
patterns he pleases ? 

In the quivers the blank portion (or panel) is 
always in the central part of the bamboo tube, but in 
the case of the combs it must never come in the 
centre, where the most important part of the design 
is to go, but must be confined to the smaller panels. 
In many combs it is the first panel pattern that is 
omitted, in others it is any of the other panels (with 
the exception of the second). The full description of 
the combs (below) will not only show this, but will at 
the same time show where partial or entire quiver 
patterns may be inserted. In this latter respect it is 
left to the designer to decide what pattern he will use, 
and from whence he will take the design. He may 
take either entire or modified quiver or blowpipe 
designs, or even invent new ones, so long as he does 
not choose first or second panel patterns. 

The drawings and combs collected by Vaughan- 
Stevens are nearly all from the E. Semang or Pangan, 
and are all very typical specimens of the work of the 
east coast Negritos, though they are not all made by 
the men ; a single specimen was obtained from the 
Semang of Perak (PI. IV.), and two others were also 
collected on the west side of the Peninsula (see the 
last three combs on PI. IV.). 

[The reason why the patterns of the first, second, 
and central panels alone are specifically laid down, 
and not those of the remaining panels, lies in the 

430 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

fact (say the Pangan) that the women are not able 
to go far enough alone into the jungle, to seek any 
particular flower, when the Disease finds them without 
the appropriate comb. In such cases the woman looks 
for " was " or " pawer " flowers like those depicted on 
the comb, and takes the nearest match she can get. 
These, however, must not be the same as those for the 
quiver and charm-tube patterns, but may correspond 
to the third, fourth, and fifth panel of the comb. 
These plants, which are akin to those of the precise 
species desired, the woman deposits in a bamboo tube 
filled with water, and stirs them round to some extent 
in the water, and if she can likewise obtain the 
special " was " and " pawer " flowers, she adds these 
also and drinks the infusion. She then rubs the wet 
flowers on the affected part of her body before 
throwing them away.] 

In course of time certain flowers came to be 
looked on as having more healing power than others, 
and in consequence the patterns derived from them 
were preferred for wearing on the combs. This, 
however, is a matter of individual taste. 

[The fact is, that although the actually specified 
flowers would (it is believed) have effected an 
immediate cure, yet even the flowers most nearly 
related to them will eventually, though much more 
slowly, produce the desired result. If then, in panels 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, for which no strict rules exist, a special 
sign is found, it is taken to indicate that the Sna-hut 
should be summoned in case the Disease should get 
too strong a footing. In former times, according to 
tradition, it was the special duty of the Sna-hut to 
see that the incised figures were correct, and from 
this Vaughan-Stevens concludes that the choice of 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 431 

the ground patterns was also left to them, so far as 
they had learnt them from the Putto,' the servant 
of Pie.] But now the people who cut the combs 
choose these patterns themselves, and learn to incise 
the quiver patterns.'- 

In the case of the individual panels, the following 
observations may be made : — 

[Every separate sign repeated in the first panel 
pattern is called " was " also. A distinguishing 
stripe, either at the top or bottom of the panel (in the 
repetition of the first panel pattern) is called, as already 
stated, " gehab " (" g'hab ") — see, for example, i8E = 
" kos " in the second panel pattern. When the first 
panel pattern is blank it is called "was picheg." Where 
and why these blank panels were introduced is not 
known now — "the Puttos have so arranged it" 
(see 60, 62).] If a supplementary line is introduced 
at the top of the first panel it is called " tepi " or 
edge-line (see 8B). But this line appears on all the 
combs and also on all the quivers and charm-tubes; 
though in very many cases it is not completed and 
coincides with the line of section. In certain cases 
this edge - line is represented by a broad, dark 
stripe. In other cases {e.g. on the quivers and charm- 
tubes) it comes between the first panel pattern and 
the edge of the comb, and is, naturally, clear and 
distinct.^ 

' Cp. Vaughan-Stevens, iii. iii. (2) Combs which possess a blank 

2 3 Z.f.E. XXV. 81. The combs firsl panel, <.,f. Nos. iB, 20A, 20IJ, 53. 

with these clearer edge-lines are — (3) Combs which have blank panels 

(I) Some combs which possess in one or several parts (other than the 

common signs, but which were thus "wiis"), e.^. in their third panels 

selected and grouped by the Puttos (" kabii' s.ileg "), etc.; for the second 

without any known reason for their panel and the fifth are never simul- 

being thus treated. These combs are taneously omitted from the comb. 

Nos. iC, 8C, 9H, 12C, 14A, 20G, These combs arc Nos. 3.\, 3B, 3C, 7C, 

22A, 26, 33, 39, 54. SB, 18B, 19O, 23, 29, 32A, 50, 60, 62. 

432 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

Second Panel {or ''Pdwer'')} 

[When the second panel pattern is covered over 
with a number of Hke figures, each figure is called 
" yil-toij." If a specially distinctive element is intro- 
duced into one or several " yil-toij," such a mark is 
called " 'ziat " (see, for example, F19). 

If a distinguishing stripe is introduced either 
above or below the panel in question {e.g. at 7C), 
such a stripe is called " kos," and serves as a token. 
This token, however, appears on but few combs 
(17A, 19M, 22D, 28B). It may be at the top, bottom, 
or either side. The three lines shown in the remain- 
ing panels of 19M are due to an error of the cutter's.] 

As already stated, there are combs which lack both 
first and second panel patterns, but which are never- 
theless of avail against the approach of fatal Diseases. 

Tke " Palm-fruit " and other Panels. 

[When the third, fourth, sixth, seventh, and eighth 
panels are covered with repetitions of a single separate 
figure, each of these figures is called " yil-toij " ; if 
they are covered with a single figure which cannot be 
subdivided, but which is of avail for the whole, it is called 
" ken " (see No. 61). Panel eight (" nos ") is bounded 

Nos. 8C, 9B, 12C, 14A, 22A, 26, "kapal," 56 "ingkeng," 64 " sanol," 

33 of the first series possess a broad 65 "inankuing," "munlong," 66 "tel," 

and black "edge"-line, which extends 67 "baliu," "bahur,"68 "chal!ag,"69 

from the first panel to the uppermost "hillog," 70 " ballur," 25C "lanes." 

border of the comb. The outer cuticle These combs have no "was" or "yil- 

of the bamboo is pared off in order to toij," except Nos. 25C and 25D, which 

blacken it with charcoal ("chen-el-us") have a "yil-toij "sign above and below it 

["us "is evidently the word for fire]. respectively in order to distinguish them 

There appears to be some unwritten from A and B of these numbers. The 

law as to the width of this blackened Disease expelled by 25A, 25B may 

portion, which also appears on the perhaps be fatal, but that prevented 

l)lowpipe patterns. Cp. p. 437, infra. l:>y 25D and 25C is certainly fatal if 

1 Z. f. E. XXV. 81. Nos. 25D the combs are not worn. 

CllAKM I'AriKRNs ( >N CoMlts 

/..f. /■:. XXV. Plate III. 

/ ■('/. /. /. 432. 

('H.\K.M-I\\J TKKNS ON C(J.\IJ 

/../. E. xxv. Plate IV 

I 

Vol. I. p. 433. 

I 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 433 

by an imaginary line of juncture between the teeth and 
the solid part of the comb. The lowest of the ring- 
lines comes above the eighth panel. ^] 

The Central Panel {" Tin-weg''). 

[The patterns for the various Diseases primarily 
represent the affected part of the body ; when different 
parts of the body are affected the patterns are com- 
bined, but the exact rules which determine the 
method of composition are forgotten. Only this is 
certain, that in cases where the "was" or " pawer " 
flowers (in the case of any particular Disease) are of 
especial value for healing purposes, only repetitions 
of the same pattern appear on the comb, and no 
others. If the central panel shows a pattern which 
covers the entire panel from left to right, it is 
called "makeii" (" makiee ") — see, for example, 9B. 
If, however, panel five is covered with a row of 
repeated figures (as in 19B), each separate figure 
or emblem is called "sumpid."- If the fifth panel is 
covered with an unrepeated pattern which entirely 
covers the solid part of the comb, it is called " ne- 
ning"^ — see, for example, 68. Any special sign in 
one of the central panels, or the " sumpid," etc., is 
called " ob." The figures delineated in the plate are 
the accepted emblems representing various parts of 
the human anatomy, which appear in the patterns ot 
the central panel. ■*] 

» Z.f.E. XXV. 82. It is, hence, of Vaughan- Stevens, = Mai. "sumpil," 

clear that the diagram given to illus- or " sumpitan," a blowpipe, 
trate these remarks on p. 78 of the ^ In the original spelt "neningk." 

Zeitschrijt is incorrectly drawn, and an impossible spelling in Semang. All 

that the double line below the eighth these terms lack corroboration, 
panel should be deleted. * Z. J. L. xxv. S3. 

- Sic, guare " sumpit," a confusion 

VOL. I 2 F 

434 DECORATIVE ART 

Other Emblems} 

[The emblem representing the square n| is called 
" chenewel," that of the diamond <^ " ehiit." The 
triangle A is called " kasing " (which is translated 
by the Malay " dahulu," " long ago " or " overpast "). 
The circle O is called " nai " (" ni "), i.e. " one " or 

"first." The straight line ( ) is called " pejuag," 

unless it is carried across the entire solid part of the 
comb, when it is called " win-yuing " (" winyooeng "). 
An emblem formed by two curved incisions or 
ring-lines which run parallel to each other across the 
solid part of the comb is called " enghongye " - 
(" ng-her-'ngyay ") ; a dot ( ' ) is called " pawor " ; a 
short stroke ( — ) " bing " ; " pawor " was formerly 
the E. Semang (Pangan) expression for both of 
these signs, and "bing" an expression introduced 
from the west coast of the Peninsula in order 
to distinguish the one from the other. Both signs 
have an identical significance. Diagonal hatching 
is called " chenass," rectangular " sud." Between 
straight parallel strokes and curved strokes ZI ^ ^ 
no difference is made. They are all called "sud." 
So, too, any kind of sloping diagonal lines, whether 
straight or otherwise, // ((( ))), are called " chenass."] 

[The signs for different parts of the human body, 
referred to above, include representations of the 
following parts of the anatomy : — 

(i) The head, (2) the eyes, (3) the nape of the 
neck, (4) the breast, (5) the stomach, (6) the back, 
(7) the side, (8) the nose, (9) the breasts, (10) the 
upper and lower jaws (with teeth), (11) [wanting], (12) 
the forehead, (13) the hand, (14) the fingers or toes, 

' Z. f. E. XXV. 84. personal pronoun. These terms are 

- "Ye" may stand for the first all uncorroborated. 

B 

MUJJ^ 

D 

Fig. ;. 

^VWW^V 

A B C 

www vv 

A B 

KiG. 6. 

y aiiglian-S tt-.'i ns 

OiKKiXTioN oi I\.\( ruRATK Dr \\viN(;s (Figs. 3 and 6, /. /". H \\v. 85). 

0 

Q iO 

^\ y I I I I I I 

I I I I I I 

3 It 5 ^ 

O X A 11 

^^ ^ 'S 

/^~\ 

(5 f 7/ "S 

Al.I.KGKI) Rlll'KKSKN lATluN DK I'AKTS OK TIIK MuDV. 
(For explaiKitions see text.) 

/A S 

/ 'itMg/ian-Stcz-ens. 

l-ol./.t.AX^ 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 435 

(15) the joints (elbows or knees), (16) the hips, (17) 
the shoulders, (18) vagina and penis, (19) the anus, 
(20) the arms, (21) the ribs (seen from the back), 
(22) the ribs (seen from the front). ^ 

Dotted lines ( ) or lines of dashes ( ) 

are only used to distinguish one ordinary figure from 
another which otherwise would be exactly like it.] 

Cross-hatcliing {^' din'')r 

[Cross-hatching (on combs) has a threefold meaning. 
In the representations of flowers it indicates a pro- 
tuberance or "knobby" formation. In the case of 
combs which have their central panel cross-hatched 
{e.g. that of No. 25 B) the cross-hatching indicates a 
protuberance of great size, in this case a hill (!), the 
individual lines of the pattern being said to represent 
pathways upon it. In the "sumpits" (" sumpid ") or 
repeated Disease-patterns this cross-hatching typifies 
the swelling or inflammation which the Disease in 
question has caused. The cross-lines may be either 
horizontal or at right angles to the line bordering 
the figure (Fig. 5, A, B). In the case of a curve, 
however, the cross-lines slope downwards from right 
to left (C). When the figure is formed by three 
parallel lines the cross-lines intersect the central 
line of the three (D). In certain cases, whether the 
pattern is drawn large or small, the number of these 
cross-lines must be counted. These cases, however, 
will again be referred to in the course of the descrip- 
tions of particular combs.] 

[As examples to show how necessary it is that 
the patterns should be cut as exactly as possible, 

' But these signs rarely occur where and ihc whole of this part of the system 
we might expect them in patterns con- recalls the European investigator. See 
nccted with parts of tlie human body, .Appendix. - Ibid. 

436 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

and how the similarity of the combs to one another 
might l)e exaggerated through inexactness, see Nos. 
32 B, 22C. The patterns of the third, fourth, and sixth 
to eighth panels are unimportant, since their selection 
was optional on the part of the designer, but the first 
panel pattern in 22C (Fig. 6) is absolutely wrong. ^] 

Private Marks? 

[The combs are always said to have once possessed 
a particular name-mark in the seventh panel (" bie "). 
This mark, however, is not to be confused with the 
special signs, which may appear only in the patterns 
of the first, second, and central panels, but must 
be omitted in the next panel. The name -mark 
naturally has no influence on the power of the 
pattern. At the present day they very seldom appear, 
and when they do, are inserted in the third, fourth, 
and sixth to the eighth panels, and are called " chor " 
or " name "-marks. 

Among all the combs represented below ^ there 
is not a single specimen so marked. The marks 
naturally differ with each individual, and whenever 
a similarity of name-marks appears it is only through 
some misunderstanding of the pattern copied, or 
through some sign that has been wrongly transferred.] 

QUIVERS AND CHARM-TUBES. ■* 

Besides the charm-patterns on the combs of the 
Pangan women, a corresponding system of charm - 
patterns is employed by the men. These are incised 
upon bamboos (" go' " and " ga' "), one of which is the 

1 Z. f. E. XXV. 84. At (a) the ^ Z. /. E. xxv. 85. 

left-hand side-line, and at ((5) the third ^ Cp., however, Vaughan - Stevens, 

cross-line is missing, and at [c) the side- iii. s.v. And for detailed list of combs, 

lines do not meet. The first-panel pattern v. App. 
of 32R is a different flower from 22C. * Preuss in Z.f. E. xxxi. 131-147. 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 437 

Semang quiver, and the other is described as a 
charm-holder (with patterns corresponding to those 
now seen on the blowpipe), which is said to have 
been formerly carried by the men. 

[The Puttos ^ gave the Semang (in return for their 
presents) certain sticks (charred at one end and 
bearing mysterious signs upon them), which protected 
the wearers from particular Diseases, when held with 
the charred end downwards. For this purpose they 
were inserted in the waist -cord. Originally the 
patterns were marked out with charcoal ; but later 
they were incised, when the same material (charcoal) 
was rubbed into the incisions, - 

By degrees light bamboo tubes, which received 
the name " ga'," were found more convenient. Instead 
of charring the end, the Pangan peeled off the smooth 
outer cuticle, and then blackened it with charcoal, 
which adhered better in consequence.] This lower 
extremity, with its node or knot, was called " chen- 
el-us." ^ Both ends, in fact, were thus peeled, although 
the upper node was cut off after a few days.^ The in- 
cised patterns were cut into the bamboo while it was 
still green, usually after it had been held for a few 
moments over a fire, to facilitate the cutting. If, on 
the other hand, the cuticle is not removed from the 
tube-ends, the latter would often split in the course 
of a few days ; though this is not the case with the 
blowpipe shafts, which are relatively stronger and have 

' Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 131, is taken "dOkan"), was used for incising bamboo 

as read in what follows. before iron was known. For lists i'. App. 

• According to another passage, the ^ Cp. p. 431, «. 3, ante, and see 

designs were in the first instance in- Z.f. E. xxv. 82, and note. 

cised on the bamboos and rubbed over * The (Rcrliii) Museum possesses a 

with charcoal. The Semang assert charm - tube ("gar") of Vaughan- 

that often, instead of a knife, the tooth Stevens, which exhibits the upper 

of a bamboo-rat, or " om " (Malay (peeled) node as well. 

438 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

a smaller bore. To make it more portable, the tube 
(" ga' ") was of small diameter, and several tubes were 
often carried at the same time, one fitting into the 
other. They served at the same time to contain the 
flowers and herbs that were required for warding off 
Diseases.^ 

The quivers ("go'"), which are closely related to 
the charm-holders ("ga' "), were cut and carried in the 
same way, only the charm -tube was usually carried 
in the quiver, which latter was the larger of the two. 

When they adopted the blowpipe of the Sakai, 
the Semang kept their darts in the " go'," ^ instead of 
adopting the highly specialised Sakai quiver — the 
Semang still retain a strong dislike to carrying any- 
thing slung around the hips,^ This is the reason why 
the darts are so much shorter than the quiver* con- 
taining them, i.e. because it was once used for another 
purpose. The Sakai quiver had a soft wooden bed 
at the bottom to receive the dart-points, and for this (in 
the "go' ") the magic leaves and flowers were substi- 
tuted. The Sakai quivers had a cap to protect the 
contents from rain ; but the Semang were prevented 
from covering the orifice, [because the effect of the 
magic flowers would in that case have been nei'',ralised. 
But on the introduction of the blowpipe, the patterns, 
which (up to that time) had been incised upon the 
charm-holders, were transferred to the shorter portion 
(" yoh ") of the inner tube of the blowpipe. But 
although the lower part of the pattern (corresponding 
to the " chenel-us " or charred end of the charm-tube) 

^ Cf. Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 131. " Quivers for blowpipe arrows." 

2 The proper name for the quiver is ^ Cf. Z.f. E. xxv. 75. 

"go'," or "goh," which latter is l)e * I.e. 28 to 30 cm. against the 35 

Morgan's word for quiver ("carquois"); 1045 cm. of the quivers (without the 

cp. Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 171, under knot). 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 439 

was occasionally more or less covered over by the 
resin that coated the muzzle-end, the virtue of the 
charm was not impaired thereby. 

It was evident at once that many of the patterns 
on the charm-holders (" ga "), which were originally 
designed for a bamboo of larger diameter, did not 
suit the reduced area available for them in the blow- 
pipe. The muzzle part of the latter, therefore, was 
shortened to correspond with the design. 

The patterns now constructed are of varying 
length (as in Figs. 113, 114, 121, etc.), and further 
ring-lines are either added at the muzzle-end, or are 
omitted entirely ; even their pattern is varied. The 
blackened muzzle-end of the blowpipe was soon 
either altogether omitted or replaced by a band of 
varying width, formed by stripping the bamboo of its 
outer cuticle and smearing it with charcoal.^ It is 
still to be seen in many specimens between the main 
design and the muzzle-end.] 

The general irregularities of design extend even 
to the East Semang or Pangan. The Kensiu, 
Kinta, Bong, and Bclum tribes of the west coast 
have added designs of their own to the old patterns, 
and employ them merely as a form of decoration, both 
for the blowpipes and the dart-quivers that accom- 
pany them. [Many patterns of the charm-holders could 
not be adapted to the blowpipe tube, and hence were 
retained for the charm-tubes only. The same patterns 
were never employed in both sets, and hence the two 
sets (of charm-tube and blowpipe patterns) must be 
combined to form a complete series.] 

* See illustrations. The order in to Yl. Then come (3) the blowpipe 

which they are arranged is as follows : patterns from i to 128, where 66A i.> 

— (I) Quivers and charm-tubes inter- inserted. The arrangement is that of 

mixed from A to Z, and (2) from Ai Vaughan-Stevens himself. 

440 

DECORATIVE ART 

Classification of the Patterns (" Go " and " Gd ")/ 

The patterns of the quivers and charm-holders 
usually present such considerable divergencies (as 
compared with the combs) that there can be no 
question of dividing their patterns into chief panels 
(first and second) and subsidiary panels, as could be 
done with the combs. In the first place, their central 
or Disease - patterns, when identifiable as such by 
reason of their special size, are sometimes exactly the 
same (as appears in the case of Nos. 30, 54, 61, Ni, 
N2, and N3 ; Oi and O4 ; O2 and O3). The central 
Disease -patterns of these quivers and charm-tubes 
bear, it is true, identical names, but it is against 
different forms of the same Disease that they are 
employed. In the combs, again, any such varieties 
were always strictly separated when indicated in the 
design. In the second place, the central panels, apart 
from their size, are not invariably identical either for 
all ("go'," O3) or several panels (quiver Di, blow- 
pipe No. 51) of the same pattern, not to mention 
the smaller panels of other patterns. Moreover, 
very characteristic patterns sometim*^ s occur even 
in the smaller panels (Oi, Ri). In the third place, 
we may note — and this is for the present the most 
important item — that the two panels in the same tube 
(corresponding to the first and second panels of the 
combs) are in many quivers and charm-tubes identical 
(O3, T2). They are also sometimes identical in 
different tubes (e.g. Nos. 30 and 36 ; 54 and 71). 

[Lastly, there are (apart from the central patterns 
and the first and second panels) special designs that are 

^ In original " gor " and "gar." Taken from Preuss in Z.f. E. xxxi. 191-195 
seqq. For lists of the patterns, v. App. 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 44i 

never repeated throughout the entire range of the charm 
patterns (^.^. Nos. 36,66, 124,01). The first and second 
panels so insisted on do not, therefore, possess the 
least advantage over the others. The aforesaid varia- 
tions from the comb patterns receive considerable 
emphasis (in spite of the general similarity of the 
arrangement in both cases) as soon as one takes the 
patterns in which the central panel, being of the same 
size as the rest, cannot therefore be distinguished with 
certainty. The above -described patterns almost all 
belong to Class lA (see above) ; and the following 
come partially under I A, but mainly under ID, which 
might be expected to exhibit more or less similar 
patterns in all the panels. Hence we can maintain 
with certainty that, even if it were admitted that the 
patterns on the tubes contained fiower-designs (in 
addition to the Diseases there represented), they 
are not at all events based upon the system employed 
for the combs. ^ Moreover, it is certain that this 
logical system is not primitive," but is the result 
of a development at which, from the endlessly varied 
patterns of the tubes, we can perhaps guess, but 
of which scarcely any stages can be clearly deter- 
mined. 

[It is well known that the Semang hold that the 
tubes with mere ring-lines (quivers A, B, and C ; 
blowpipe No. 50) take precedence of all tube 
patterns as a foundation for the arrangement of 
the charm patterns by the Puttos. The original 

' It is quite incomprehensible why that Vaughan-.Stevcns occupied himself 

Vaughan-Stevens, even in the tube with the comb patterns first, and found 

patterns, should hold so strictly to the a solution of them tolerably satisfactory 

system of "was" and " pawcr," as it to himself. — Note by Preuss {loc. cit.). 
is impossible that he should have heard - There is, I think, no doubt that 

anything positive about them from the the lo^^ic of the system was introduced 

Semang. The only explanation is by Vaughan-Stevens. 

442 

DECORA TI VE ART 

torm of these designs is said to be the charm on 
the arrow - quivers against lightning (see p. 400).] 
The quivers in the Berlin Museum usually show 
from five to seven triple ring-line groups, just about 
equi-distant from one another ; where there are six 
groups there is often a wider space left in the 
centre (see Illustrations). Apart from the number of 
groups, these two kinds correspond in fact to the 
commonest arrangement of the panels on the tubes 
and combs, and even quivers D and E might be 
here reckoned. Even a simple ring-line group, pos- 
sessing no specific import, acts as a general charm 
against Diseases (quivers B, C). There then follow 
single and double hatchings within the groups of 
ring-lines, the panels themselves being left vacant 
(quivers G, Mi to M3, blowpipe No. 50, etc.). 
Lastly, the same simple figure may occur in all panels 
or in the second panel of any particular pattern 
(quivers I, O3, Ti, blowpipes t^Z^ 47, 49, etc.). This 
fact may remind us either of the charcoal stripes 
with which sick persons bedaub the diseased parts 
of their body in order to recover, or the special 
signs which the Puttos employed in like fashion 
(see above), and which may be regarded as forming 
the series of ring-lines, which appear to be greatly 
multiplied here, without any clear object. As 
soon, however, as the work of differentiating the 
patterns of particular panels is approached, our 
difficulties begin, as positive data are completely 
wanting, and no panel (with the exception of the 
middle one) is in any way more prominent than the 
others. 

The undivided patterns intended as charms against 
serious Diseases, which cover the whole tube, seem 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 443 

to make it certain that the simple signs have always 
been accompanied by the complicated representations 
of Disease. These two extremes — simple ring-lines 
and complicated designs — form the foundation of the 
subsequent development. 

[Only with regard to the occasional Semang practice 
of inserting a pattern in the centre panel and leaving 
the rest free, a conjecture may perhaps be offered. 
The centre panel, like the original scheme of the 
ring-lines on the arrow-quiver, is generally indis- 
tinguishable from the other panels in respect of its 
size (not to mention the blowpipes, where the design 
is generally much crushed together). It is also often 
quite indistinguishable from the rest in respect of 
the special import attached to the general pattern. 
It is therefore quite possible that its size, even when 
unusually large, is not of any special import, and 
that it was only at a later stage that it was reserved for 
the chief Disease-pattern, as indeed we find to be 
the case to some extent in the tubes and uniformly in 
the combs. One stage of its development appears 
to be marked by a simple yet specialised central 
pattern, to which other panels (with pairs of incised 
lines) are added at the top and bottom (see, e.g.. Ni 
to N3, Oi, Ri, R2, T2, Nos. 29, 30, 36, 51, etc.). 

Again, in the description of the patterns emphasis 
is often laid on the fact that the size of the vacant 
centre panel is a matter of entire indifference. In the 
blowpipes (as has been said) it is usually so crushed 
together that a group is formed of the ring-lines which 
serve as boundaries, and the alleged importance of the 
size of the centre panel appears to be a mere fancy. 
On the other hand, its separating effect is always 
recognised and never forgotten, even though a 

444 

DECORATIVE ART 

particular pattern may be no longer distinguishable 
from one with the incised centre panel. Now Vaughan- 
Stevens in one place says that patterns with vacant 
centre panel prevail against epidemics, and further, 
that epidemics in the drawings are expressed by two 
complete and undivided patterns, separated from each 
other by ring-lines, the upper design being intended 
to protect the men, and the lower the women. The 
examples cited — 96, 97, loi, 105, 109 — all belong to 
group IB,^ and therefore possess a blank centre 
panel. It is only with respect to one specimen 
(quiver H2) that any further explanation is required, 
as in the quivers the large centre panels are not com- 
pressed to the vanishing point. It may be conjectured 
that these blank centre panels in every case are only 
intended to separate the men's and women's patterns 
from one another, but that in certain cases (as in that 
of an epidemic which attacks men and women alike), 
when it was not thought necessary to cut special comb 
patterns for the women, the purpose was remembered. 
In fact there is actually a quiver (Wi) with an empty 
centre panel, purporting to protect men and women 
alike from a Disease common to both of them.- 

The following are the considerations which lead 
us to this conclusion. Vaughan-Stevens says ^ that the 
Diseases which may attack both sexes are, since the 
women as a rule are not far from the men, warded off 
by the patterns of the men's quivers and blowpipes. 
Hence the women, as a rule, do not employ any quivers 
as charms, although there is no rule against it. We 
see, however, that the charms against epidemics, and 
indeed even the charm on quiver Wi, contained sepa- 
rate and varying charm patterns both for men and 

1 Z.f.E. xxxi. p. 152. 2 jh^ p. 171. Quiver Wi. 3 z.f.E. xxv. 75 f. 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 445 

women on the same quiver. We also see that varieties 
of quivers F and G are allotted to the women by way 
of compensation for the fact that they have their 
seventy main Disease -patterns (not reckoning the 
varieties) on their combs, and that these latter only 
include the Diseases which may attack them alone. 
Should we not then infer that men and women as a 
rule have always had different patterns for Diseases 
common to both ? for it is scarcely to be supposed 
that the seventy, or perhaps one hundred and forty. 
Diseases of the women should be all absolutely different 
from those of the men [cf. quiver H). So the patterns 
of the quivers and blowpipes, if they were to be 
efficacious for both sexes at the same time, must 
possess two patterns, and these would be the tubes 
with the centre panel left blank. In this connexion 
quivers H and O are especially striking. In quivers 
F, G, and H the pattern is called "hu-ju-weg." 
Quivers F and G possess no dividing centre panel, 
and have special quiver patterns for the women. 
Quiver H has not got it, and therefore shows the 
division alleged above. Quiver O has an emi)ty 
centre panel, with exactly the same pattern at top and 
bottom, though in reverse order.^] 

Even, however, if this idea is right, it does not 
help to make the signification of the patterns any 
more comprehensible. The comb designs would, 
however, appear to be an imitation of the men's 
quiver patterns, with a broad incised centre panel. 
[The signification of the latter was said to be ex- 
plained by the patterns of the ancient "gi." The 

^ The patterns of the tubes are never only exception. It is a simple pattern, 

directed against Diseases which by their Thus no proof of the point at issue 

nature can only attack the man. Sr (apart fiom quiver Si) is possible in 

against disease of the testicles forms ilic this direction. 

446 DECORATIVE ART 

first and second panel patterns were new additions, 
and the other (narrow) panels were taken over as 
mere meaningless additions to the patterns of the men. 

There do not appear to be any fundamental 
differences in the outer arrangements of the quivers, 
charm-tubes, and blowpipes. The alleged reduction 
of the charm -tube patterns on the blowpipes may- 
show that the omission of particular panels did not 
have much effect. Classes IE and IF of the blow- 
pipe patterns are of special importance, since, in 
contrast to the quivers and charm-tube patterns, 
they exhibit entire panels, and even entire designs, 
merely filled up with dotted figures. It might be 
inferred from this that after the charm-tube patterns 
were transferred to the blowpipes a fresh evolution of 
patterns took place.] In the blowpipe drawings we do 
not find spirals instead of the ring-lines, as in the case 
of the quivers and charm-tubes. 

The names of the tube patterns do no more to help 
their interpretation than those of the first, second, and 
fifth comb panels (" tin-weg," "was," and " pawer "). 
In four of the names of the quivers and charm-tubes 
(N, S, Vi, Xi) are to be found expressions for certain 
parts of the body (the Diseases afi"ecting which, 
according to Vaughan- Stevens, are supposed to be 
warded off by means of the patterns). Sometimes, 
however (besides the name of the pattern), the actual 
name of the Disease itself is given, and one of these 
Disease titles (Pi) actually refers to the affected part 
of the body. Moreover, the name for quivers D and 
E (" lasai ") must (according to Vaughan- Stevens) be 
derived from the black ring-lines of the design ; and, 
besides, the patterns, which possess the same name 
and ward off similar sicknesses, in some cases are of 

NEGRITOS OF PERAK 

447 

identical form, but not unfrequently are entirely 
different (see quivers 1 1 and I2, Li and L2, etc.). On 
the other hand, the almost identical patterns of quivers 
Ci and C2, which are both evidently directed against 
a similar Disease, have quite different names. ^ These 
contradictory observations may be taken to prove that 
the names of the quiver and charm-tube patterns must 
have been strung together from conflicting sources. 
Among the names of the blowpipe patterns occurs 
"pong," which Vaughan- Stevens (as in the case of 
comb I ■) translates " fever." Whether the other 
names which are not translated also denote Diseases 
must remain undecided. Every pattern here has a 
special name. There are, indeed, many points of con- 
nection with Professor Grlinwedel's glossary ; but in 
the entire absence of more definite knowledge as to 
their meaning it is not worth while to follow them up.^ 

' Cf. also the names and patterns of 
" goh," Ki and K2. 

2 Z.f. E. XXV. 87. 

2 Out of the five categories men- 
tioned, the frequent complete agreement 
of names, without their patterns betray- 
ing any special similarity, isvery striking. 
They run as follows :— "alteg" (blow- 
pipe 32), cf. "alteg" (second panel of 
comb 49) ; "bil-uing" (blowpipe 78), 
cf. "biling" (" billing," second panel 
of 19N, etc.); "buing" ("boing," 
blowpipe 74), cf. " boin " (first panel 
of 30), "boing" (second panel of 17H, 
etc.); "hili" ("hillee," charm-lulje 
Z), cf. "heli" ("h'lee," comb 63); 
"is" (blowpipe 81), cf. "is" (second 
panel of comb lE); " let-tud " ("let- 
tod," quiver P2), cf. "let-tod" (first 
panel of 7C, etc.); " lig-boid " (" lig- 
boid," blowpipe 89), " lig-bui " ("lig- 
boi," blowpijie 75), cf. "lig-boig" 
(second panel of 16A, etc.) ; "pa-ham " 
("pa-hum") (blowpipe 56), cf. "pn- 
hom" ("pa-herm," second panel of 1 1'", 
etc.) ; "pasir" (blowpipe \7.),cf. "pasir" 
(first panel of 12A, etc.); " pelig ' 

(blowpipe 39), cf. "pelig" (comb 11) ; 
" pen -al -dung" (" pen-ul-doorng," 
blowpipe 30), cf. "pena-long" ("pena- 
long," second panel of 15A, etc.); 
"sob" (quiver C2), cf "sob" (second 
l^anel of 50H, etc.); "tak-kor" 
("tukkor," blowpipe 92), cf. " te- 
kor " ("tukkor," comb 60); "lis" 
(blowpipe 35), cf. " tis " (quiver Ci) ; 
"cheg-la(r)pun " (blowpipe 5), cf. 
" chig-Ia " ("chiglar," comb 52); 
" chel - chinin " ("chel chineng," 
quiver Q2), cf. "chin-cng" ("chin- 
eng," second panel, 22C, etc.); "toig 
keling," quiver Ni), cf. "lu-eg" 
(blowpipe 24). 

Other names agree with the ex- 
])ressions for the " gu" " (?'. p. 104 f.). 
"jelabor" (blowpipe 30), cf. "jelabo" 
("jelabor," "gu'," I21, a mythical 
animal) ; " kang-kung " (blowpipe 98), 
cf. " kangkung " ("gu"," 1 20, a 
mythical monster) ; " keli-char " (comb 
62), cf "klichai" ("gu"," III3, IV, 
a flower): "sinai tepis" ("scni tepees," 
blowpipe 117), cf. " sinei " ("seni," 
"gu"," I4, a rattan whip). 

448 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

This list might no doubt be considerably increased 
if parts of the various expressions were compared. 
In the complete absence, however, of Semang texts 
(and hence of any knowledge of their grammar) this 
partial agreement would not at present count for much. 
It may, however, be concluded from the above list 
that the names of the quivers, charm-tubes, blowpipes, 
and combs must be taken in close relationship with 
those of the first and second panels, so that the flower- 
symbolism of these patterns appears all the more 
mysterious and obscure. 

MYTH-BAMBOOS AND OTHERS.^ 

[The "gu' " is a bamboo tube w^hich is described as 
having served originally for preserving records of every 
description, and as having been in the first instance 
known only to the Puttos. The entire mythology 
(and history ?) of the Semang is said to have been 
engraved upon them, and some of these remarkable 
records yet remain in the possession of the descendants 
of the ancient Sna-huts. These same bamboo tubes 
served, apart from their mythological significance, to 
contain the magical and medicinal implements of the 
Puttos, and were accordingly plugged at the orifice 
with wood or bark-fibre. The four myth-bamboos 
here described come from the E. Semang or Pangan 
on the east coast of the Peninsula."] 

' The word "gu"' is undoubtedly hoot," " k'ngoin," "lee -eg," " aiee," 

identical with the word "go'" (in " ken-achole," " pinjor tadook," 

some dialects "gu'") which we have " Kiee," "Play," "Chinnoi," " ke- 

had already, and merely signifies, as nigh," "kelos," "seni," " kabote," 

explained above, a bamboo receptacle. "jug," "Chilleg," "Jelabor," "Cham- 

The names which here occur were spelt par," " Challog,"' " Semi," " sin-goie- 

by Vaughan-Stevens as follows : "(iuh" bewar," etc. 

(pronounced "goo"), "Puttow," "Sna- ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 104. 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 449 

Bamboo No. i with incised Mythological Designs} 
Length of the original 45 cm. 

1. The "lotong " monkey ("aii" = Semnopithecus). 

2. " Penjok taduk." 

3. " Kenaij " (" kenigh " sic, ? " kenaii "). 

4. beni. 

5- "Jag." 

6. "Kelos." 

7. Kari, the Thunder-god. 

8. Simei. 

9. Pie. 

10. Sna-hut. 

11. " Kla-to-ong." 

12, 13. " Sin-goi bewa " or " kampll." 

14, 15. " Chileg langwe." 

16, 17. "Sin-goi bewa" or "kampll. 

18. Kari's throne and " kalcheng. 

19. " Kanteh." 

20. " Kangkung." 

21. " Jelabo'." 

22. " Kangkeng." 

23. " Champa'." 

24. Champa's spear. 

25. " Chalog." 

26. Chalog's spear. 

This bamboo is subdivided by the usual ring-lines." 

The topmost panel contains an unfinished drawing 

of a monkey called " aii " (Malay " lotong "), for 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 107-124. the holes are sealed with resin, but 

2 When a spiral is sutistituted fur these holes, of course, are entirely 

these ring-lines, it is called "li-eg.'" devoid of significance (see Z. f. E. 

In some cases the " gu's " have been xxv. (1893) 71 seqq, 

gnawed into by mice, in which case 

VOL. I 2 G 

450 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

which see Bamboo 3, but why this figure was left un- 
finished is unknown. 

The second panel is called " kenachol " (" ken- 
nachole "), this name denoting, however, the panel 
itself and not the figures inscribed upon it. The 
figures in each panel will be taken from right to 
left, beginning with Fig. 2. This figure and those 
following represent objects which hang above the 
judgment throne of the Thunder-god Kari ("Kiee" = 
" Kayi ").^ The Semang call this figure (No. 2) 
" penjok taduk." The first word means loin-cloth, 
and the second " pendant flower decorations." 

It is difficult to explain exactly what is meant by 
the expression, unless it may either be taken to 
signify loin-cloth and flower-pendants (the con- 
junction being omitted, as is so frequently the case in 
these dialects), or unless the " taduk " may be some 
unknown or fabulous material, in accordance with the 
explanation given to Vaughan-Stevens.'- Kari alone 
(according to the Semang) makes use of this material, 
which, like everything else he possesses, is prepared 
by the Chin-oi (" Chinnoi "), a race of people who 
never die. 

The object represented by Fig. 3 is called by the 
Pangan " kenaij " (" kenigh " ?), a term which is of 
uncertain meaning. In the case of the women's 
combs, it denotes the representation of the Disease 
against which the charm pattern is devised, but it 
was also applied to anything bright and glittering, 
e.g. a sunrise or sunset, lamps, rings, and even 
provision tins! It does not seem to mean " light- 

^ This god, who is himself portrayed play a large part in the traditionary 

by Fig. 7, is the chief deity or Thunder- accounts of Malay regalia, and this 

god of the E. Semang or Pangan. may be the case with the Semang too ; 

2 Fabulous objects and materials V. -St. iii. \o(>;v. pp.455, 511, infra. 

v» 

mi 

fgfj. 

Wim§ 

mmmm 

mmm 

WW 

lilt, 

Mi 

W0\ 

*•#, 

www* 

iWfW 

i^mM 

i# 

V/f 

m 

WfW 

IPtt 

##jWlV 

iii%rt## 

mm 

%n 

■m 

m% 

mm 

iD0t\ 

WWWIWI 

PWi 

p* 

llllllUll 

m 

/te'v 

m 

m0 

iWii 

mm. 

WW* 

mm 

mm 

mm 1 

:^m^t0^%mimMi^^"^^wiHHwmmNm 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 451 

ning," however, for the usual Semang word for 
lightning is " kelos." 

Fig. 4 is called "Sinai" (" Seni "). These are 
rattan whips, the emblems of Kari's servant, Sinai, ^ 
used to whip the winds with, whenever they refused 
to obey his master's commands. Sinai is himself a 
wind, and invisible to all but Kari. Sinai has a 
whip in either hand. The winds do not sit beside 
Kari, but have a place assigned to them in the 
clouds below him, at a place called " Kabut " 
(" Kabote ").- The winds which refuse to obey 
Kari are represented by the figure left of Fig. 4 ; 
the slanting, waved lines represent the winds, whilst 
the side lines represent their prison, where they 
await Kari's sentence. 

The beaker-shaped figure (No. 5) which follows is 
called "jag," and represents a wild fruit on which 
Kari feeds ; it was not known, however, whether the 
fruit is represented by the entire figure or by some 
portion of it ; it was only known that the Puttos 
intended it to represent a fruit. 

All winds are here personified ; they are living 
beings, servants of Kari, but invisible to all but 
him.* 

The next rows (3, 4, 5, and 6) were called "n'nam." 

The zigzag line (Fig. 6) represents Kari's 
lightning. Whenever he is wroth and wishes to 
strike any one, he sends for his servants, who bring 
him a flower which only grows at Kari's dwelling- 
place, and which consists of a spike of bell-like 
flowers. Kari then leans forward on his throne and 

' Vaughan-Stevens' spelling of this - Mai. " kabut," or darkness ; cf. 

name varies greatly : Sin-ai, Chin-ai, Newhold, ii. 423 ; V.-St. iii. 106. 
Sinnoi, Chinnoi, etc. "^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 107. 

452 

DECORATIVE ART 

shakes the flower - spike over the sinner, whereat, 
just as when flint strikes steel, the Hghtning darts 
whithersoever Kari desires it. Then from the bell- 
like flower -cups themselves, as they strike against 
each other, comes the far-rolling sound of thunder, 
whilst the mightier detonations of the storm are the 
voice of Kari's wrath. The echoes which reverberate 
in the mountains are the answers of Pie, his fellow- 
deity, who remonstrates with him. In the illustration 
the flower is not visible, but only the universal zigzag 
symbol. 

The Semang have an intense dread of lightning, 
their charm against which, employed (it is said) at 
first by " Pie's command," consists of three ring- 
lines, incised on the quiver at short intervals.^ These 
ring-lines were made in the first instance by the 
Puttos, but that is all the Semang know about them, 
though they trust in them blindly.^ 

Fig. 7 represents the god Kari. He is not always 
depicted in this form, but invariably has with him as 
his attribute the zigzag line which represents lightning. 

Fig. 8 is Simei, the daughter of Pie. 

Fig. 9 is Pie. 

It is difficult (says Vaughan-Stevens) to say in 
what relationship the E. Semang (Pangan) consider 
their two gods, Tuhan and Pie, to stand to Kari, or 
whether the two former are modern accretions. It is 
certain, however, that Kari represents the highest 
power, and that Tuhan, as well as Pie, is compelled 
to obey him.^ 

Fig. lO represents a Sna-hut. 

' See, however, p. 400, «. i, 
ante. 

2 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 107. An- 

other method of stopping lightning was 
by means of blood-throwing. 
■* Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 109. 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 453 

The black indentations below these figures re- 
present the rattan mats on Kari's floor, which were 
made for him by the Chin-oi or Sinoi. 

Fig. 1 1 in the fourth row represents the tree 
against which Kari's chair leans. In the branches of 
this tree tarry the still unborn souls, and on its trunk 
Kari cuts a tally for each new-born Semang. This 
tree is called " kla-to-ong," and is full of blossoms.^ 
The figures hanging on the right of the drawing are 
the fruits of the tree which are eaten by Kari. 

Next follow Figs. 12, 13, 16, 17, which comprise 
the flowers "sin-goi bewa" or "kampll" ; and Figs. 14, 
15, which represent the flowers called "chileg langwe."^ 

Fig. 18 represents Kari's judgment-seat, con- 
sisting of a short plank which rests at an angle 
against a tree. I'he wavy lines between the branches 
represent " kalcheng," i.e. fruits which are eaten by 
Kari, and which his servants have set before him. 
The waved line above the seat represents the flowers 
called " sin-goi bewa," which are suspended behind the 
throne on which Kari sits to judge the dead.^ 

In the fifth row. Fig. 19 represents a gigantic 
spirit called " Kanteh," which resembles a Semang. 
His office is that of door-keeper of Paradise, and it 
is he who restrains the souls of alien races from 
entering into that part of Paradise which is assigned 
to the Semang. 

Beside him stands (at his left hand. Fig. 20) a 
powerful animal, called " Kangkung," ' whose task it 
is to keep tiger-souls out of heaven. 

Next on the left comes Fig. 21, an animal called 

* Seep. 455, «'«/ra, where "klaton" ^ lb. p. 117. 

is a fruit. Perhaps " klatung " is right. * Possibly the loris or Malay.in sloth ; 

^ v. - St. iii. 112. Cp. Bamboo which is in the front rank as "magic." 

No. 3 (p. 457, infra). lb. p. 122. 

454 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

" Jelabo'," whose function it is to keep the souls of 
wicked Semang from entering heaven.^ 

Next again on the left (Fig. 22) is a beast called 
" Kangkeng," which keeps out the souls of snakes and 
scorpions. - 

In the sixth row follow Figs. 23 and 25, the last 
of which has been unavoidably cut in two in obtaining 
the illustration. Fig. 23 is a dark-complexioned 
gigantic spirit "Champa'" called "Abang" (Mai. for 
"elder brother"). No. 25 represents his brother 
" Chalog," who is called " Adik " (Mai. for " younger 
brother "). The latter is placed under the former's 
authority, and both are the joint guardians of Tuhan's 
heaven, Tasig. 

Figs. 24, 26, 27 represent the bamboo spears of 
these two brothers. The zigzag figures between 26 
and 27 are the lightning - carrying flowers, which 
belong to Kari, and whose custodians are the two 
gigantic spirits just mentioned. 

The last row, or " name "-row, which is called 
" chor " ( = name ?), is always placed at the end of the 
bamboo, and is covered with a uniform pattern. Its 
decoration varies according to the other patterns on 
the bamboo, but its real significance could not be 
explained. Vaughan-Stevens regards it merely as a 
sort of finishing touch to the rest of the figures.^ 

Bamboo {'' Gtc ") No. 2. Height 41 an} 

Here, too, the order of the figures is fixed, but 
no definite explanation is forthcoming of the slant- 
ing line in the topmost panel. 

' The nearest Semang animal-name ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 122. 

known to me is that of " lelabas " (?= ^ Ibid. p. 124. 

dial. " telabah "), the Malayan sun-bear. * Jbid. pp. 124, 125. 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 455 

The first row of figures is called " kenachol," 
as in Bamboo No. i. 

Fig. I represents a sleeping chief (Putto) in the act 
of receiving (in a dream) a communication from Pie, 
who acts as Kari's go-between whenever the latter 
wishes to communicate with the great chiefs (Puttos). 

Fig. 2 represents a fruit called " klaton," which 
the great chiefs or Puttos were in the habit of eating.' 

^^gs. 3, 5, 6 are flowers called " klai-yau " 
(" kli-yow "), " bi-chu-ring " (" bee-choo-ring "), and 
" yawel " ("yowell"); and Fig. 4 represents a spear 
called "at" ("art"), all these representing the 
insignia of the great chiefs' power. 

Fig. 7. The smaller part of this figure at the 
top represents the mallet employed in the manufacture 
of bark-cloth, the larger part of the figure at the 
bottom represents the bark-cloth itself. 

The following panels are called " n'nam," as in 
Bamboo No. i. 

Fig. 8. These represent " taduk " flowers {cf. 
Bamboo No. i, Fig. 2), p. 450, ante. 

Fig. 9. This object is called " bu-hu " (" boo- 
hoo ") ; it represents a special kind of bark-cloth which 
only the great chiefs wore." 

Fig. 10 is a magic stone pillow, called " sni-ding," 
on which the great chief lays his head when he wishes 
to get information by means of dreams. 

Fig. II. A Putto asleep with his head resting 
upon the pillow (Pig. 10).^ 

Fig. 12. A mat called " chi-on," only used by 
the great chiefs. It was manufactured from rattan 

' See p. 453, ante. of Mai. " buluh " = bamboo. Cp. p. 

'" Quicrc ix^ixw Scni. " biiyu " = Mai. 510, infra. 
" mcngkuang," or ralhcr a corruption •* Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 124. 

456 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

(" rotan sega "). This figure, together with Figs. 
lO, II, signifies that the Putto is receiving instruc- 
tions in a dream how a mat is to be made. 

Fig. 13. " Angkel," a magic pillow made of wood 
which serves the same purpose as the stone pillow 
represented by Fig. 10. 

Fig. 14. A great chief asleep with his head 
upon the wooden pillow (Fig. 13). 

Fig. 15. A spear-point. This figure, together with 
Figs. 13, 14, signifies that the great chief is dream- 
ing how a spear-point should be made. 

Fig. 16. A sleeping chief (Putto). By his side 
(Fig. 17) is his servant (Hala).^ 

Fig. 18 represents two large black stones, which 
the great chiefs or Puttos lay together at an angle, so 
as to form a V-shaped trough, into which their magic 
flowers and other materia medica may be put." 

Fig. 19. A tree-bark filter and a water-vessel, 
signifying the pouring of water over the ingredients, 
so that it passes through the filter into the vessel 
in question, which is placed on a sort of stand 
(Fig. 20).^ 

Fig. 16 represents a Putto dreaming of sending 
his servant (Fig. 17) to gather flowers and herbs for 
medicines and to prepare them for use. The servant 
is shown pressing down the flowers into the trough 
formed by the two stones described above. 

Figs. 21 and 22 represent flowers called " tu-ag " 
and "jampong," the ashes of which are used 
medicinally. 

^ In Semang " Hala"=" medicine- chiefs (Sna-huts) of the Pangan use 

man."' bones and teeth, which they grate on 

2 Among the medicines of the Puttos a stone with a little water, as also the 

love-potions were also mentioned to Sakai do. Cf. V. B. G. A. xxiv. (i8g2) 

Vaughan-Stevens ; but the ingredients 468. 

could not be ascertained. The lesser ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 124. 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 457 

The last row with the ornamental border is called 
" chor," as in Bamboo No. i. 

Bamboo (" Gii ") No. 3. Length 40 cm} 

1. " Tinjo " or " Tin-jui " (" Tinjoe "), a kind of 
saurian. 

2. " Sin-goi bewa," the name of a flower." 

3. "Kll-cha."^ 

4. "Chig-eg." 

5. "Ail.'"' 

6. " Sin-goi bewa." 

Fig. I represents a terrible kind of saurian, with 
jaws shaped like those of centipedes, but which in 
length are equal to the human arm. It is called 
" Tin-jui." No one knows where the creature lives, 
yet the great chiefs (Puttos) were able to conjure it up. 
Directly they were angry with any one they called this 
beast, which killed the evil-doer.^ Since the Puttos 
have disappeared, no one has seen this saurian again. 

Figs. 2 (6) and 3 are flowers called "sin-goi 
bewa" and " kll-cha," which were of avail in exorcis- 
ing the reptiles represented by Figs, i and 4. 

Fig. 4 represents a creature called " Chig-eg," 
which performs the same functions as the " Tin-jui," 
but only kills women. 

Fig. 5 depicts the monkey called " Aii " : a long- 
tailed monkey resembling the Semnopi the cits or 
" lotong." When the winds sent by Kari as 
messengers to the earth do not make sufficient haste, 
Aii comes and chastises them with rattan whips." 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 125, 126. ° Evidently a "sending" of some 
- See p. 453, ante. kind. Lizards are often closely con- 

2 In original " kli-char " {sic). nected with magicians. 

* See p. 449, ante. ^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 126. 

458 

DECORATIVE ART 

Bamboo (" Gn ") No. 4. Height, 41 cm) 

Bamboo No. 4 is of quite a dilfiferent kind from 
the foregoing. The designs upon it only represent 
" kh-cha " flowers. When the great chiefs or Puttos 
laid these flowers in water, they could drive the 
poisonous sea-snake " Ikub " back to the bottom of 
the sea.^ 

BIRTH-BAMBOOS (" TAHONG "). 

[The " tahong " is a bamboo tube which is worn 
secretly under the girdle by expectant mothers. The 
interior of the tube, when each extremity has been 
stoppered, is used to contain flint and steel for making 
fire and so forth. The main part of the pattern consists 
of two portions, the upper part of which consists of 
zigzag ring - lines, which serve as a charm against 
nausea and vomiting ; the lower part contains a 
number of rows or columns, each representing one of 
the stages through which the woman has to pass from 
the moment of conception till the birth. ^ 

As mentioned, the " tahong " is carefully concealed 
by the Semang women under the girdle, and may not 
be seen by any strange man. The husband cuts the 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 127. 

2 I.e. "Ikub Lingang" ( = Mal. 
" ular berang"), a sea-snake of a kind 
believed to be most venomous. In 
case a Semang wished to employ these 
flowers, they did not receive their 
magic power until he received the 
" gu' " as well. Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 
126. 

3 It is difficult to fix these stages 
accurately, as the Semang people often 
made mistakes in locating the exact 
position of the ailment. The following, 
however, is certain : the ring -like 
marks at the point of one of the 

column-lines (at the end of the black 
chevroned line) represent the child in 
the womb. The black chevrons form 
the connection between child and 
mother, the latter being represented as 
much the larger. At the right extremity 
of the vertical chevroned line is a row 
of discs, on the side of the mother, 
which represents the loss of blood by 
the tearing of the vessels at birth (ibid.). 
[It is perhaps worth while adding 
that the word "tahong" is curiously 
like IMal. "tabong, " a bamboo tube — 
a fact which raises some doubt as to 
the genuineness of the word. — W. S.] 

NEGRITOS OF PERAK 

459 

pattern, and an enceinte woman who lacks a " tahong " 
is regarded by other Semang women in much the 
same way as a mother without a wedding-ring would 
be regarded in Europe.^ 

The patterns of the " tahongs " differ but slightly 
inter se, according to the skill of the men who engrave 
them. One of the lesser chiefs (Sna-hut) is in pos- 
session of the orthodox pattern, and is always in a 
position, in case he is asked, to produce the accurate 
design.^ 

The patterns given in the accompanying illustration 
are not, according to Vaughan- Stevens, altogether 
correct. He therefore supplies a commentary.''] 

^ Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 115. * lb. 

^ The corrections run as follows :— 
" In I " there should he "a straight, 
horizontal band of double-lined, gable- 
shaped figures, which do not run spirally 
round the bamboo as in the aisc of 
No. 2. The ends should not be 
closed. In 2 " there should be "four 
spiral bands of double -lined, gable - 
shaped figures. In 3 " tliere should be 
" the same jiattern as in the case of No. 
2 ; only that there should be single-line 
figures instead of two. In 4 " there 
should be " a horizontal row of single- 
line figures (as in 3) as termination of 
the upper part of the pattern. 

" In .-/" there should be "a cross-line 
of disc-shaped figures. B. These [Patterns 
should have right - angled hatching. 
C. The upper and under part of this 
pattern consists of diflerenl figures. 
The upper discs under the ring-like 
pattern resemble those of /> ; those run- 
ning down below A should wind in 
sinuous curves from one side to the 
other. D. The > three-cornered 
figures ought to be exactly opposite ; 
the disc-like figure at A ought to end 
at the centre of the angle. E. The 
exact number of the thick black 
chevrons on the vertical lines, as well 
as the adjacent short vertical strokes, is 
of no special consequence. F. The 
same pattern as in .-/, but in a vertical 

direction ; the two middle ones are 
correct, and show what the rest ought to 
be. G, H. Should have right-angleil 
hatching ; at /(''the right angles become 
larger as they approach the corners. 
/. These figures are exactly like those 
at B, but al)ove the disc- figure at 
A there should only be two figures, of 
which tiie lower is considerably longer 
than the upper. K. The crescent- 
shaped figures should be one behind 
the other, so that the point of the 
upper is covered by the end of the 
lower one. L. A part of these figures 
should show right-angled cross-lines. 
M. These figures difler at the top 
and bottom, but all should be regular 
crosses. The lower figures should have 
the points of the inner square on the 
vertical margin-lines. N. The cross- 
lines of these figures should be right- 
angled. 0. The pattern above the 
disc-paltern at A is incorrect. The 
gable-shaped, one-lined figure over the 
disc should be obliterated. The square 
lying uppermost should have above a 
one-lined, gable-shaped figure with a 
short one-lined under-piece, the other 
being triple-lined, forming a double 
strip, so as to pass into the second figure 
without any dividing line at the top of 
the second square. All other lines of 
the lower square are double. The 
third square must be extended towards 

46o DECORATIVE ART 

BURIAL BAMBOOS/ 

[The " penitah " or burial bamboo is a bamboo 
tube covered with incised patterns which is buried 
with the deceased, whose soul is supposed to take it 
to the judgment throne of Kari. If the dead person 
has been very wicked in life, his tribal chief or Sna- 
hut, who alone is in a position to cut the patterns on 
the burial bamboo, refuses to do so, and the soul 
which, when interrogated by Kari, cannot produce 
its own burial bamboo is condemned. The power 
that the chief (Sna-hut) exercises in consequence of 
this belief is boundless. 

The engraved patterns differ for these chiefs (Sna- 
hut) ^ according to the sex and age of the deceased ; 
that of the Sna-hut himself differing from those of the 
other members of the tribe. The Puttos or greater 
chiefs, too, had their own " penitah " pattern, but this 
is no longer known to any one. Vaughan- Stevens 
failed to obtain a detailed explanation of these patterns, 
and all he could make out was that the pattern 
assigned to the chiefs or Sna-hut had reference to 
their functions as medicine-men, and that it had been 
assigned to them by Pie and the greater chiefs or 
Puttos. 

The burial bamboo of the men is always a larger 
and longer tube than that of the women. Formerly 
it always bore a name-mark ("chor"), but now it is 
usually made without any such distinction.^ 

The very different patterns which are in use for 

A, in order that the space may be filled — Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 1 16. 

out." All this may be true, but see, ' Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 1 19-123. 

however, remarks on p. 404 as to the ^ See illustrations {ib. p. 119). 

essential irregularity of these patterns. ^ Ib. p. 1 20. Cf.Am the illustrations. 

i; t5 

I - 

r: 5 

A B 

I'oL /. /.. 461 

tj /y 0 

I ' aug lian-S t CTcns. 

Tube ("Gor" and "Gak") I'attkkns, Platk I. {/..j. E. xxxi. 142). 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 461 

the grown women are believed to be the invention of 
the goddess Simei.^ 

The burial bamboo is inserted in the dead man's 
girdle. The expression to " receive a penitah " is 
equivalent to " dying." - 

The following is the list of these burial bamboos 
collected by Vaughan-Stevens : — 

(i) That of a Semang Sna-hut, Height 2,1 cm.^ 

(2) That of a man. Height 40 cm. The hatch- 
ing of the figure A is a name-sign (" chor ").^ 

(3) That of a married woman. Height 35 cm.^ 

(4) That of a boy. Height 35^ cm. That the 
two hatchings in the middle are to be regarded as 
name-signs is very probable, but this is not quite clear 
from the notes. ^ 

(5) That of a girl. Height 38^ cm." (identical 
with " Gu'," No. 2).] 

The list of the old blowpipe patterns was de- 
scribed by the Pangan as being practically complete, 
but plenty of modern ones certainly exist, to say 
nothing of other patterns of the quiver and charm- 
tube types. The topmost line of the pattern of the 
latter always coincides with the upper edge of the 
bamboo, the lowest with the commencement of the 
peeled portion of the tube (muzzle-end or " chenel- 
us "). The blowpipe patterns, on the other hand, 
with the exception of the first eight, were originally 

' V.-St. iii. 120. See accompanying ^ Ibid. p. iiS. ■• Ibid. p. 119. 

illustration, which differs completely " Ibid. p. 120. ^ Ibid. p. 12 1. 

from the others— those of a man, a boy, " Ibid. p. 123. 

and a girl ((].v.). " Z. f. E. xxxi. 162-164. ^or list 

2 Ibid. pp. 118, 121. of patterns, -■. App. 

462 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

taken from bamboo tubes, on which the patterns of 
the original blowpipes had been copied. The upper 
end of the design is always remote from the mouth- 
piece, i.e. from the bearer ; ^ whereas the first panel or 
" was " end may, as already mentioned, be either 
above or below, and its exact position in each design 
will be given in accordance with Vaughan-Stevens' 
statements. No portion of this tube is peeled 
(" chenel-us "). Hence the uppermost and the lowest 
line in the design coincides exactly with the upper and 
lower extremities of the tube.^ 

[It is impossible to give so much space to the 
description of individual patterns as is done by 
Vaughan-Stevens. The reader must ascertain from 
the design on his own account the differences between 
the various pattern-bands, as well as the " peculiarities " 
of each individual band. For in these Semang pat- 
terns it is a cardinal feature that where a figure is 
repeated at intervals, there always occur some slight 
modifications {e.g. in the matter of the hatching, etc.) 
of the exact design. Hence the position only of any 
such peculiarities will be given. The number of the 
figures in any particular " row " or panel appears to 
be a matter of indifference, and to depend upon the 

1 In making his corrections of the exaggerated demand for geometrical 
Semang drawings Vaughan - Stevens regularity, whicli the original patterns 
himself (as his editor quite rightly themselves never show, must awaken 
points out) is not free from errors. many doubts. It is true that so much 
Moreover, as to Vaughan-Stevens' ob- accuracy must be claimed for the cor- 
servation that the Semang knew no rect patterns as may be necessary to 
semicircles, he himself allows that it keep all the manifold figures distinct, 
is extremely difficult for them to cut but in consequence of Vaughan-Stevens' 
curves on the bamboo, though semicir- insistence on "accuracy" one often 
cular curves are, in fact, very numer- asks one's self in vain, Does such and 
ous. One might perhaps expect that such a figure belong to the essence of 
a wild race should hesitate to attempt the pattern or not ? 
to draw semicircles, but the idea that ^ Z. f. E. xxxi. 163. F'or an ex- 
it " anxiously avoids " them is absurd, ception see, e.t;., Nos. 5 and 7, com- 
and untrue as well. Moreover, this pared with the original blowpipes. 

fl A a fl a fl a a Q a a a on a a* 

ixiiiiiiiiiiiiii-- 

i:":::::::::":? 

j* 

= AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAi 

-il« 

/. /. 46^ 

/ 'augl:an-Stc;-cns 
TlBi; ("GOK" AND "(JaK") I'ATri-.KNS, Pl.ATK II. {/../. K. xxxi. 143. I 

I 'aiighan-Stevcns. 

Tube cGok" and "Gak") Pattkkns, Plate 111. {/.././■. xx.xi. 144). 

Vol. I. p. 463- 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 463 

actual circumference of the bamboo and similar cir- 
cumstances. It is not always possible to tell which 
figure is the real subject of a panel. Where, how- 
ever, nothing is said to the contrary, it may generally 
be taken to be the figure furthest to the left in each 
of the designs. Many panels, however, have only one 
pattern throughout, and hence an irregular figure 
inside the same is no " peculiarity " in the above 
intended sense, and - will only occasionally be men- 
tioned in the description.^ Between a " pecu- 
liarity " and such an irregularity there is a great 
difference from the Semang point of view (see No. 
40). Besides these two there is a third kind of 
"deviation" or differentiation (see No. 96 and No. 
112, etc.).'- Where there are only spirals instead 
of the ring-lines, the exact position of both extremi- 
ties relatively to the figures represented is always 
exactly determined. In the case of the repetition of 
figures in a band, the beginning or the end may occur 
either to the right or left or in immediate coincidence 
with one of the figures, the aforesaid " peculiarities " 
occurring relatively to a definite figure (see, e.g., spiral 
2 in charm-tube M). T2 may perhaps be taken as an 
exception, as may be inferred from its design.] 

The widths of the various pattern-bands or panels 
are not arbitrary, but stand in a certain fixed relation- 
ship to one another, very much as is shown by the 
designs. The exact width, however, of the central 
panel (when it is left free) is of no consequence, and 
hence the Semang generally commences to cut the 
pattern at the top and bottom first, and so gradually 

1 Z./.E.,loc.cii. It. must therefore - In the designs, however, no 
be presupposed that the differentiations difference can be seen between a 
not mentioned by Vaughan - Stevens "peculiarity" and a mere " irre^u- 
belong to the class of mere irregularities, larity." See No. 45. 

464 DECORATIVE ART part 11 

works towards the middle. On the other hand, 
the design for the central panel is usually the first part 
to be incised by way of a commencement. The vari- 
ous kinds of cross-lines have already been partially 
described in connection with the comb patterns.^ [The 
following rules, however, have also to be observed. 
The not uncommon figure a must never be hatched 
at the point of intersection.- The right-angled cross- 
lines are scarcely ever inserted, except where they can 
be given their full length (see figure b). Exceptions 
may, however, be seen in quiver A2, part 3, in 8 and 
9, 1 1 and 1 2 (lines counted from the left). Special 
attention should be given to the cross-lines of two 
pairs of parallel lines in and about the space formed 
by their intersection (see, for instance, figure b, as 
well as quiver O, quiver O, parts 3, 4, and 6). To 
these should be added many other kinds of cross-lines 
which help to produce a difference in the patterns {e.g. 
parallel and slanting cross-lines). The effect of these 
will become evident through a closer consideration of 
the designs. Their number is usually quite arbitrary.] 
Very short strokes have the same significance as 
dots : they are produced by means of a blunt-pointed 
knife (see, e.g., No. 24). The broad black stripes and 
figures of the designs here given are produced in the 
originals by peeling the part and colouring it black.^ 

Classification of the Patterjis.^ 

If the general arrangement of the blowpipe 
patterns is compared with that of the quivers and 

1 See Z.f. E. xxv. 85. nately only too typical of the hair- 

- These so-called " rules " — to taboo splitting character of much of V^aughan- 

the cross-hatching of a point, and to Stevens' work. 

say that a line may only be inserted ^ Z.f.E. xxxi. 164. 

when there is room for it — are unfortu- "* Ibid. pp. 147-159. 

/'■<'/. /. />. 464. 

Vol. I. p. 465. 

rz 

V'auglian-Stcvenst\ 
Tube ("Gor" and "Gak'i Patterns, Plate \'. {/../. E. xxxi. 148). 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 465 

charm-tubes, their similarity-is evident, in spite of the 
differences between the individual patterns.' The 
Semang themselves appear to classify both kinds of 
patterns in the same general groups, and although 
this grouping was frequently undertaken by widely 
different members of the race, it has always remained 
essentially the same, even though the assigning of 
individual figures to particular classes may have varied. 
In the case of the blowpipe illustrations Vaughan- 
Stevens has adopted this classification, though in 
the case of the "go'" and "ga'" he has only occa- 
sionally referred to it.^ 

The blowpipe patterns, called " tenwad," may be 
separated into two types — [a) that of the majority, 
which, as possessing ring-lines, have each band or 
panel of figures separated from the next, and (b) 
those which have these lines at the extremities alone 
(see, for instance, Nos. 18, 21, 23, 44). In the first 
class, subdivision I A (see, for instance, Nos. 29, 30, 
36) contained the chief " motive " in the central por- 
tion (called " betud "), just as the combs contained 
the pattern representing the Disease in the central 
panel, and above and below this came alternate rows 
or bands of figures and ring-lines. Whereas, how- 
ever, on the combs the central (or Disease-pattern) is 

' Vaughan - Stevens here expresses "go"' as dart - quivers. Cf. also 
himself thus: "Others (sc. designs) V.-St. iii. 136. This is due to the fact 
could not be reduced {$c. to 'sumpitan ' that \'. -Stevens evidently found no real 
size), and consequently are retained difference of pattern betwreen the " go' " 
as ' gor ' or ' gar.' " Thus " go' " and and the '• ga','' whilst his account of the 
"ga',"so far as the derivation of the development of the arrow-quiver ('* cha- 
"cha-nam-pah-i" is concerned, are used nam-pah-i ") rests upon tradition alone. 
without distinction. See below, where "- Of the following classes IE to 
V. -Stevens, after comparison of the IG there appears at all events in 
"sumpit" and "go' " patterns, declares the "go"' and "ga"'a much more 
that the " cha-nam-pah-i " is developed limited number than on the blow- 
out of a "go'." In another place pipes. For Class II. \ and IIRofthe 
V.-Stevens includes the " ga' " with the " go'," see below. 

VOL. I 2 II 

466 DECORA TIVE ART 

of relatively great width, the corresponding central 
panel of the blowpipes frequently seems to be narrow.^ 
[Subdivision IB of the same class has an empty 
space in the centre corresponding to that to be seen 
in quivers Li, F2, etc., whereas a space of this kind 
does not occur on the combs. This characteristic is 
one of a kind that does not usually strike the eye. 
When, indeed, the design of the long charm-tube 
(" ga' ") was adapted to the shorter portion of the 
blowpipe-tube (" cha-nam-pah-i "), the meaningless 
blank centre space, the existence of which was only 
due to the rule that the pattern must cover the entire 
bamboo, was either altogether omitted or reduced 
to the space between two ring -lines. If any one 
wished to make the intervals between the ring-lines 
as wide as the vacant middle space (see, for instance, 
No. 56), there would be no rule to hinder him, 
but only custom. Hence it is difficult to know 
whether any particular figure belongs to this class," 
and Vaughan-Stevens himself was doubtful how to 
classify No. 75 until a Semang cut the design for 
him on a charm-tube ("ga'"), leaving the open space 
in the centre. It belongs, therefore, to the same type 
as No. 56, except that the latter blowpipe pattern 
may be classified with yet another group on account 
of the dotted lines of the design, as we shall see. 
Since the vacant centre space in No. 75 was only 

^ Z.f. E., I.e. 152. Only comb 2oG does not appear to be any precise rule, 

has also a small, scarcely prominent as other variations are also admissible, 
central panel {Z.f. E. xxv. 94). Hence ^ Confusion with class I A is especi- 

it is frequently impossible to establish ally easy because of the want of pro- 

the"betud." minence given to the " betud." Again, 

Of the remaining panels there may the non-multiplication of the ring-lines 

be either four above and three below, (" kening-uin "), which one would 

or three above and two below, or in expect to find there upon the omission 

the case of a long "cha-nam-pah-i," of the vacant centre space, does not 

five above and five below. But there point to the omission. 

'■<"'. /. /. 466. 

f VV\\ 

T7 

A IJ 

^ /• n 

iiii ii ii 

,■••■ < 

•■•. / 

T T^T 

V XK 

••,••■ ''■ 

•: ■■ :: 

- V ';■■ ••;_ 

z '-■ ■'\ \ 

■■. ■■. : ; 

- iM ; 

' 

TtY 

; 

AAA 

- n M 

11 

Sl-mph" Pattkkns, Plate \'II. {/,./.£. xxxi, 150). 

/ 'aughan- 
Stevens. 

CHAP. IX NEGRITOS OF PERAK 467 

bounded on each side by a ring-line, there was no 
indication when the space was omitted.' Blank 
panels in general are called " picheg," with the name 
for the panel in question prefixed.-] 

This class IB is used for protection against any 
form of epidemic, whether severe or light. ^ In another 
place, however, Vaughan-Stevens restricts the patterns 
employed against epidemics to a special subdivision of 
Class IB. On this point he says that a Disease which 
we should call an epidemic, and which, though it only 
appears occasionally, attacks all or many at the same 
time {e.g. influenza, small-pox, and cholera), is signified 
by Nos. 96, loi, 105, 109 of the blowpipe patterns 
and by quiver H2, in which cases a design (usually, 
but not always, of identical form for both halves) 
fills the entire space, and is only divided into two 
parts in the centre by means of ring-lines. The 
upper half is for the men, the lower half for the 
women. This class, moreover, is not represented 
upon the combs, since the Disease attacks both sexes 
equally. No. 97 at first sight appears an exception, 
but the single black cross-line of the lower half is 
not a ring-line, since these are invariably at least 
drawn in pairs.^ 

[Apart from these two subdivisions, there is a yet 
further subdivision of the first type."^ IC is of avail 
against Diseases which appear at different times and 
in different forms and in different parts of the body.] 

' See the previous note. ID appear to be arranged under lA ; 

* Z.f. E.yl.c. 152. Cf. "w.is picheg" IE and IF, on the other hand, as far 
on the combs (Z./. E. xxv. 81). as externals go, arc not precluded 

^ But the Diseases against which the from being grouped with Classes lA 

" ga' " and "go' " patterns (which pos- and IH {cf. No. 56.). ICj shows, 

sess a vacant centre space) are said to moreover, an approach to Class II., 

prevail are not epidemics. in resjiect of the general arrange- 

* Loc. cif. 153. Cf. also i. 11. ment of the patterns (see Nos. 73, 

* In what follows Classes IC and 77, 88). 

468 DECORATIVE ART 

A number of short pillar-like figures with other figures 
near one another in the central space are specially- 
characteristic of this class of pattern. These more 
general charms are called " bihe " (" beehay ")/ 
Above and below the central space are to be found 
spaces containing yet other figures. The blowpipe 
design No. 127^ is an example; it corresponds to 
quivers Ai to A4, and also to combs 28 A and 31. 

In subdivision ID the spaces separated by the 
ring-lines, including the central space, are filled with 
an essentially identical figure. 

The dotted designs or " pichod " were divided by 
the Semang into two groups, which Vaughan-Stevens 
distinguishes as simple and compound. In answer to 
his question why these designs, especially those in 
which there were only a few rows of dotted figures, 
were not classified with the designs which resembled 
them in arrangement, he was told that they were quite 
another kind of charm (" tankor " = Mai. " tangkal ".'*).' 
Class IE, a simple series of dotted figures, protects 
the owner against slight external injuries, and the 
complicated pattern IF against more serious ones. 
This latter was formerly cut by the Sna-hut them- 
selves. 

Finally, there is subdivision IG, of which the 
narrow bands or spaces, enclosed between one or 
several groups of ring-lines, contain double cross-lines. 
Those with single cross-lines are special marks of 
Class I.' 

1 Cf, the Semang name " bie " bands above or below the central space 

("beay") — which means "two" — (see No. 127) ahhough included by 

for the seventh space of the comb Vaughan-Stevens under IC. 

pattern. ' A talisman or amulet — dotted 

- In the following table, however, figures appear to a small extent in all 

No. 127 is introduced by ^'. -St. under classes, e.g. 95, 118, 125, etc. 

I A, and Nos. 121 and 123 have no ^ Loc. cii. 157. 

; ■.'/. /. t- 40S. 

Vaughaii-Stevcns. 
Sl'KClMENS OK "SfMI'IT ' I'ATTKKNS, PLATE IX. [/..f.E. XXxi. 154). 

KoA /. /. 465 

CHAP. )x NEGRITOS OF PERAK 469 

[The essential features of this class, as declared by 
the great chiefs, are as follows : — 

(i) The number and position of the ring-lines. 

(2) The figure-rows or bands of the "was" and 
** pawer," as well as the Disease-pattern in all cases, 
and in some tube-figures. The ring-lines denote, in 
inverse proportion to their number, the seriousness or 
otherwise of the Disease in question.' The tradition 
that the Putto only gave these rings as charms to 
protect the owner against lightning " appears, how- 
ever, to be an exception to this rule. 

A few remarks may here be made with reference 
to the representation of these ring-lines. Three such 
parallel ring-lines when in combination [are called 
a ^^^ "keng-uin" or " kening-uin," but the 

ring-line proper is the middle line a, which should, 
however, be accompanied by both the others.'' The 
two outside lines are also ring-lines, and form the 
usual dividing band or border between each row of 
figures on the bamboos." If these two latter are com- 
pared to a full stop, the single line would represent 
a comma. The three lines appear in many drawings, 
but like the double, triple, and quadruple spiral 
ring-lines, the double,'' barred,'" and doubly barred " 
ring-lines are employed in place of the original 

' In this case the shorter blowpipe dangerous, but which at the same time 

patterns as compared witli the longer may be averted by charms, whilst the 

"go"' patterns must invariably re- upper line represents the harmless, the 

present more serious illnesses, since the lower the most terrible, which cannot 

ring-lines of the former are relatively be averted. Sic Vaughan-Stevens (iii. 

smaller in number than those of the 136). Cp. p. 400, «. i. 

latter. This, however, is most im- * .fi".^. in " go'," () and T2. Spiral 

probable. lines and rings are also used in com- 

- On the arrow - quivers and on binution as dividing lines of patterns, 

"go',"' A, see Vaughan-Stcvons, iii. e.i^. in "go",'' A2. 

136, and illustrations. ^ E.g. No. 117. 

^ It corresponds to the sort of " E.g. No. 99. 

lightning which is, to some extent, " E.g. No. 73. 

470 DECORATIVE ART i-art ii 

patterns, perhaps as a new kind of distinguishing 
mark, when the same figure has been specialised to 
such an extent that it is difficult to invent new 
variations. No one, however, knows now why the 
great chiefs originally chose these forms. 

Again, a fundamental difference may be dis- 
tinguished by observing whether the " was " (the 
upper figure) reaches to the edge of the bamboo (as in 
No. 79 and in quiver O), or whether a vacant space 
is left separated by one or more horizontal lines (as 
in No. 51 and in quiver P). The edge-line above 
the " was " plays the same part in the patterns of 
these tubes ("go'" and "ga'") as it did in the case 
of the combs, the only difference being that above 
the " was " there may be one or two bands of ring- 
lines. This refers to the lower border and to the 
" mos "-line. The fact that the quiver and blowpipe 
patterns show these same distinguishing character- 
istics, is supported by the assertion that the shorter 
portion of the blowpipe-tube (" cha-nam-pah-i ") was 
originally derived from a quiver pattern.^ 

The second class of these patterns contains two 
further subdivisions. The one (HA) goes with 
comb pattern 25 D, the Disease connected with which 
always terminates fatally except when averted by the 
patterns. Here, too, belong, e.g., Nos. 107, 112, 115, 
all of which are without the vertical lines which divide 
the entire pattern. In the second subdivision which 
possesses these vertical lines (I IB) the Disease is one 
which may cause death. The corresponding comb 
patterns are 25 A and 25 B. So, too, in the quivers 
both classes are present and both exhibit patterns 
either with or without the vertical lines referred to. 

1 Z.f. E. xxxi. 157, 158. 

I 'a uffhan •Siemens. 

I 'ol. /. /. 470. 

Si'KciMKNs OF "Slmpit" I'attkrns, J'latk X. {/././•-. xxxi. 155). 

SpI'XIMKNS ok "SUMPIT" I'ATTKKNS, I'l-ATE XI. [Z.f.E. XXxi. 156) 

]'augJiaii-StL-i'cns. 

I'ol. I. />■ 471- 

Hah Collection. 
S\K.\I IFAIKI'I\>;, I'krak. 

Hale ColUciioii. 

SAKAI COMHS, I'KKAK. 

/laic CollectioH. 

SAKAI CdMBS. Pkrak. 

I'ol I. /. 470. 

Hale Col lectio}! ■ 

Hamboo Vk.ssei.s usF.n bv 
Pf.rak Sakai. 

Hale Collection. 

Quiver used bv Perak Sakai. 

Hale Collection. 

Bamboo Vessels used bv 1'ekak Sakai. 

; 'oi. I. /. 471. 

CHAP, jx SAKAI OF PERAK 471 

For instance, I IB is represented in quiver Pi, Si, 
and Xi ; but Vaughan- Stevens was not able to 
obtain a pattern of 1 1 A. The significance of the 
patterns with regard to the course of the disease is 
the same as that of the blowpipes. In both sub- 
divisions the same figures may occur, although they 
are usually made smaller in I IB than in 1 1 A. The 
chief difference does not lie in the form of the figures, 
but in their general arrangement.^] 

If these charm patterns, no matter of what class, 
are not worn till after the Disease has got a foothold, 
they do not help. In that case a decoction of the 
materials denoted by the figures ' must be drunk by 
the patient. This rule applies alike to the patterns 
of combs, quivers, charm-tubes, and blowpipes. 

II. — Sakai. 

We shall now consider the designs on some 
musical instruments of the kind called " tuntong " (or, I 
think, more correctly, " tuang-tuang "), this being the 
only form of the decorative work of the Sakai that 
appears to have been studied by Vaughan-Stevens. 

' Z./iS". xxxi. 158. In fact, however, ID. 8-10, 16, 20, 25, 33,37,41, 

there are in IIB quite different figures 42, 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 52, 58, 60, 

to those which are grouped under IIA, 63, 70, 72, 74, 75, 80, 99, 106, 108, 

at least in the case of the blowpipe, 125. 

and in Class IIB there is no sign IE. Ii, 15, 17, 19, 26, 29, 31, 

of any special smallness of the 32, 39, 48, 55-57, 62, 66 A, 79, 81, 

figures. 85, 120. 

The 129 patterns of the blow- IF. 12, 24, 38, 40, 43, 59, 64, 

pipes are divided in the following way 65, 69, 89, 93. 

into the classes described : — IG. 73, 77, 88, 91, 95, 119. 

lA. 5, 13, 28, 30, 35, 36, 51, 53, IIA. I, 3, 4, 6, 22, 107, 112, 

54, 61, 66, 67, 71, 76, 78, 82, 83, 114, 115. 

86, 87, 90, 92, 94, 100, 103, 104, IIB. 18, 21, 23, 44, 98, no, 

III, 124, 126, 127. 122, 128. 

IB. 2, 7, 27, 34, 68, 84, 96, 97, - Naturally it is quite different in 

loi, 102, 105, 109, 113, 1 1 6- 1 1 8. the case of the fatal disease of Class 

IC. 14, 121, 123. IIA. Cf. Z.f.E. XXV. 81, 83. 

472 DECORATIVE ART 

STAMPER ('* TUANG-TUANG ") PATTERNS.^ 

These "tuang-tuangs" were bamboo tubes closed at 
one end by the natural node or joint, but open at the 
other. They were decorated with magical designs, 
and were employed in the magic ceremonies of the 
Sakai. Two of these instruments were generally 
used together, and being held one in each hand were 
struck upon the ground from time to time in such a 
way as to produce musical notes. The account given 
by Vaughan-Stevens of the specimens he succeeded 
in obtaining is as follows : — 

Bamboo No. i ?- 

[The explanation of the first of the patterns was 
that if the bamboo were held with the knot down- 
wards, the two figures represented at the bottom 
would be seen to be those of a man and a boy, both 
of them in a sitting or rather in a squatting posture. 

This explanation must be taken for what it may be 
worth, though Vaughan-Stevens adds that his Sakai 
informant showed him the exact posture that the 
bottom design was intended to represent, viz. that of a 
man (as has been said) in a squatting position, with 
the right leg drawn up and the right knee resting 
upon the knee of the left leg. 

The line of chevrons just above this lowest design 
is explained as being formed by the angles of the 
boy's knee and ankle, which motives are repeated all 
round the bamboo in a continuous band (B). 

So far, the explanation of this pattern appears to 

1 For list, z/. App. The same criticism ^ z.f.E. xxvi. 146. Length of the 

applies here as at p. 411, 11. 2. original bamboo, 42 cin. 

/ 'au^hanStevcns. 

Bamboo Xo. i. — Charm Pattkkn of cnknown usk 
(For explanation see text.) 

Original length, 42 cm. 

Vol. I. /. 472. 

s u:>/i?}<^-)t vtf ^fn\^ 

"^ 

CHAP. IX SAKAI OF PERAK 473 

be the least convincing of the series, there being no 
discernible reason for distinguishing this chevron from 
any other.] 

At C (Vaughan-Stevens continues) is represented 
a long fish-fence with a trap or " weel " in a river 
(Mai. " serok "), the wavy line in the centre repre- 
senting the movements of a fish in the water. The 
dotted straight line at C2 represents the posts of 
the fish-fence as seen from above. The other three 
parts are angles of the fish-fence. At D (Vaughan- 
Stevens was told) a man warming his hands at the fire 
was represented, the fingers of his two hands being 
intertwined, the figure thus produced forming the 
sign for " fire." But this explanation is not very 
convincing, and of the rest of the pattern no explana- 
tion whatever could be obtained.^ 

Bamboo No. 2.- 

Fig. 7. — The wizards' staff proper was a crooked 
bamboo. The one figured contains a charm against 
the vampire, apes {i.e. epileptic attacks), and the 
Argus pheasant {i.e. madness). On the upper- 
most internode is represented the figure of a house 
or rather perhaps fence (such as that already men- 
tioned). 

A " vampire," according to the view of the Sakai, 
is not a demon — even though it is incidentally so 
called — but a being of llesh and blood. The ape- 
demon and the Argus-pheasant demon (" kuang ") are 
distinguished from it by the fact that the demons can 
come through walls and hedges, which the vampire 
cannot do. The dots near the figure of the fence 

' Z.f.E. xxvi. 146. - Ibid. pp. 167-172. 

474 DECORA TIVE ART 

represent the upper extremities of the posts forming 
the fence, as seen from above. The projections at 
A in the fence pattern represent the feet of the 
vampire, and hence, indirectly, the vampire itself. The 
double row of dots running between the fence figures 
represents the vampire's loin-cloth or " chawat." ^ 

The next row shows (at B — B) the " seven bam- 
boos " of the " Tabong " legend,- which form a favourite 
subject for representation. Between these seven 
bamboos (all separate) there now remain the follow- 
ing alternate figures: (i) a bamboo -leaf or leaves, 
pointing upwards ; (2) the vampire's wings ; (3) a 
bamboo-leaf or several leaves, pointing downwards ; 
(4) clouds ; (5) the vampire's wings and body ; (6) a 
bamboo-leaf, pointing downwards ; (7) clouds. 

The next division shows the figures on the 
feathers of the Argus ; the scale-shaped figure which 
is shown beside it in the illustration representing the 
scales on the feet of the bird. The fourth division 
contains the eyes on the feathers of the Argus 
pheasant's tail. The fifth division represents clouds, 
which, like the vampire, are emblematic of nocturnal 
life. The sixth division again shows the eyes on the 
tail-feathers of the Argus. 

The seventh division represents the elbows of 
the ape, as emblematic of an entire ape. The dots 
shown above at C are the dots on the blowpipe-dart, 
and help to distinguish the figure from others, such 
as the elbow of an ape. 

The broad stripes produced by stripping off the skin 
in the eighth division again represent bamboo stems.^ 

1 Z.f.E. xxvi. 170. is possible that Vaughan - Stevens 

* This will be found in vol. ii. pp. may have fallen into some trap 

213, 214. through misunderstanding his in- 

Ibid. p. 171. Here again it formants. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 475 

The figures in this field are: (i) a bamboo ; (2) 
the vampire's claws, the double row of dots between 
the claws again representing the "chawat" (or 
" vampire's " loin-cloth) ; (3) a bamboo ; (4) clouds ; 
(5) a bamboo ; (6) the wings of the Argus pheasant ; 
(7) a bamboo; (8) clouds; (9) a bamboo; (10) the 
vampire, hanging downwards; (11) a bamboo; (12) 
clouds. 

The lowest part of the stem of the instrument 
represents clouds and stars, as emblems of night, 
during which the demons are especially active. 

It is with a musical instrument of this kind that 
the magician conducts the ceremony, his pupil mean- 
while sitting behind him with painted bamboos, of 
which those portrayed at A and B are specimens. 
The one marked A is 48 cm. long, and has a 
diameter of 5 cm. ; B is 56 cm. long, and has a 
diameter of 3^- cm. The patterns with which they 
are painted are given again unrolled at the side of 
this text, from a pattern made for Vaughan-Stevens 
himself.^ 

[These particular bamboos were said to represent 
in general the oldest form of this instrument. The 
figure marked A was said to show the hot finger- 
marks of Tuhan impressed upon the bamboo by way 
of ornament, while the seven bamboos are again said 
to be denoted by the peeled stripes.] From its shape 
the object at A must represent the chief bamboo at 
a " tuang-tuang " ceremony, and B the second one. 
The figures portrayed on the second bamboo represent 
two sorts of rattan, called respectively " riong " (or 
" rayong " .?) and " butong " (? " bctong "), which play 
an important part in the preparation of the Pangan 

^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 171. 

476 DECORATIVE ART 

arrow-poison. The figure is an ordinary representa- 
tion of rattan ; the interval representing the tree 
round which the rattans dimb. The repetition of the 
figures indicates mukipHcity. 

These two bamboos do not form a pair, but came 
from quite different localities. Vaughan - Stevens, 
however, adds that up to the time of writing he had 
not seen a painted pair really used. The shorter 
of the two is always held in the right hand.^ 

Of the many existing patterns of these instruments 
Vaughan-Stevens only succeeded in getting specimens 
of the following : — 

Fig. 8. A charm to be used by men as a protection 
against scorpions and millipedes. 

Fig. 9. Against mice and squirrels. 

Fig. 10. Against ants. 

Fig. II. Against a skin-disease. 

Fig. 12. Against the collapsing of houses. 

Fig. 13. Unexplained. 

Fig. 14. Against millipedes, a charm intended for 
the use of women engaged in searching for the fruit 
of the " salak "-palm. 

Fig. 15. Against spiders supposed to be venomous. 

Fig. 16. Against fish armed with poisonous 
spines. - 

Fig. 1 7. Against animals which destroy the rice- 
harvest. 

Fig. 18. Against drought. 

The first two of the following illustrations are 
taken from copies of designs incised upon bamboo 
staves by a Sakai who refused to part with the origi- 
nals. The rest are originals. 

Fig. 8. — In the centre of the pattern is seen a 

1 Z.f. E. xxvi. 172. 2 E_g^ «» sembilang " fish. 

CHAP. IX SAKAl OF PERAK 477 

male Argus pheasant (" kuang ") with its two long 
tail-feathers covered with "eyes." The wheel-shaped 
marks at A represent these "eyes," the disc-shaped 
marks at B its wings. To the left of this bird is 
portrayed a long, reddish -yellow millipede, its head 
looking in the direction of the Argus's tail. The 
dotted lines running parallel to the millipede on its 
right and left represent the traces that it leaves 
behind on the flesh of any person whom it attacks. 
To the right of the Argus are shown two blue 
scorpions in the act of approaching each other. The 
object confronting each of their stings represents the 
swelling that forms in the flesh of any person stung 
by them. The female of this kind of scorpion is 
considered more poisonous than the male, and is said 
to produce double perforations when it stings.' Hence 
the double row of dots at C denotes the effect of the 
female's sting, the single row at D the sting of the male. 

The original pattern was incised upon one of these 
bamboo " tuang-tuang," and the interpretation given 
to Vaughan- Stevens was that, "since the Argus 
pheasant lives on scorpions and millipedes, its help 
is summoned against them by striking this bamboo 
upon the ground." - 

Fig". 9 (a copy like Fig. 8).' — The illustration 
shows three rows of designs, separated by lines, 
which ran completely round the original bamboo. The 
man who copied this drawing for Vaughan -Stevens 
took only a half-stem instead of the whole, because 
it was easier to hold on the knee while the figures 
were being incised with the chopper ("parang"). 

* This distinction, pcihaps, maybe ' Z.f.E. xxvi. 173. For more con- 

due to a tradition of the double-stinged ventionalised Argus patterns, v. Fasc. 
scorpion. Mai. 17-26. •' Ibid. pp. 174, 175. 

478 DECORA TIVE ART 

The central row is of special interest, as it shows 
how the Sakai draw elevations as ground-plans. The 
central figure represents a Sakai house, the structure 
being raised on posts and lashed together with rattan. 
The floor of these houses is raised, as a rule, two or 
three feet above the earth, is of split bamboo, and a 
roughly made wooden ladder leads up to it ; the 
interior is divided by a partition made of split bamboo 
slivers, tree-bark, or leaves. One of the rooms thus 
formed (at the back) serves as a bedroom for the 
married inmates, the other (the front one) being set 
aside for cooking purposes, as well as for sitting in, 
and for the reception of guests. At one end of this 
front room is a small square wooden box, which 
is filled up with earth to form the hearth. The 
two gable-ends of the roof are filled in with palm- 
leaves (" atap ") fastened to light slats to prevent the 
rain from entering. The sides of the house consist 
of upright sticks, with horizontal cross-pieces, to which 
latter palm -leaves are fastened as before. Thus the 
drawing is to be explained as follows : — 

A is the track leading to the house. 

B is the house-ladder. 

C^ the cooking-room. 

C'- the sleeping-room. 

D a doorway (without door). 

E the partition. 

F the hearth or fireplace. 

G the side walls (except the front one). 

H H the palm-thatched gables of the roof. 

J the back gable-end. 

The lowest panel with the dotted lines represents 
a rice-field (" padi ") near the house.^ 

1 Z.f.E. xxvi. 175. 

if/S-uvi/fnvj ^ = 

1.2 

i 

'ii^ 

X/^-w^x^fe..^'V^Vl 

Ws 

Vic. 12. — HUT-BUILUING ChAKM (TO 
FACILITATE COLLECTION OF MATERIALS). 

Original width, 72 cm. 

/ 'a ii^^/ian-S t cvc ns. 

"k;. 13. — Charm for Ukiving 
AWAY Demons. 

Original width, 71 cm. 

P'ol. I. p. 479. 

CHAP. IX SAKAI OF PERAK A79 

In the upper panel are represented at Fig. i the 
rice-stamper which the Sakai, like the Malays, use for 
pounding rice out of the husk — [a) is the rice-mortar, 
[b) the trestles supporting the rice-stamper, (c) and (d) 
the stamper as it falls into the mortar, and [c) the 
extremity of the stamper. 

Fig. 2 portrays a tortoise ; Fig. 3 a frog. 

Fig. 4 is the sieve used for winnowing the rice 
when pounded. 

Fig. 5 represents a mouse ; Fig. 6 a squirrel — 
recognisable by its bushy tail. 

The entire design is a rain-charm, the effect of 
the rain being symbolised by a tortoise and frog, 
which enter the rice-field, the mice and squirrels which 
come after the rice (when it is already gathered in) 
being expelled thereby. 

Fig. 10. — Original drawing of a " tuang-tuang." ^ 

The seven long stripes, where the outer cuticle 
of the bamboo has been peeled off, represent the 
seven bamboos already mentioned.' The figures at 
A stand for a house-floor (an abbreviated symbol or 
emblem standing for the whole house.) The dots at 
the bottom represent the hearth. 

At B are shown the bristles of a wild pig, which 
are introduced as symbolising game that has been slain 
and brought home. At D is the pig's carcase. At C 
are the ants which devour its flesh ; and at E the nest 
in which they live. 

The general design is intended to keep the ants 
at a distance, and the bamboo that bears it is very 
often given into the charge of one of the children, 
who proceeds to strike it upon the house - floor 
whenever there is boar- flesh about, if ants are seen 

* Z. f. E. xxvi. 177. - Cf. Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 129. 

48o DECORATIVE ART part ii 

approaching. The Sakai believe that the hollow sound 
of the bamboo, together with the vibration of the 
tloor-timbers struck by the instrument, will drive 
away the insects.^ 

Fig". 11. — Original drawings of a " tuang-tuang " " 
intended for protecting the person against two forms 
of skin-disease, one of which produces white leprous- 
like ulcers, and the other hard knobs on and under 
the skin. To take the bottom of the picture first 
(the open end of the bamboo being uppermost) 
— at A are shown a number of frog -holes in the 
banks of a river. The dots and lines represent 
these holes as they appear in the soft mud, some 
(at A) being under water, others (at B) above it. 
Above this figure, from which it is separated by a 
ring-line, are portrayed (at B) a number of frogs' 
legs, which are introduced as an abbreviated 
symbol of the frogs themselves, completely con- 
ventionalised. Above these frogs (at C) are a 
number of elliptical figures, said to represent rows 
of ant-heaps. 

Other objects represented by these figures are (i) 
a Disease ^ whose effect is compared to the biting of 
ants, and (2) the torso of a victim of the Disease 
referred to. 

Out of the ground (at D) grow creepers, which are 
represented (by means of interlaced lines) as climbing 
round the stems of trees, the short horizontal strokes 
between the interlacing figures symbolising the stems 
of the lianas. The still shorter strokes on the outer 
side of the interlaced creepers show if they are 
prickles and thorns, or (when they are mere dots) 

1 Z.f.E. xxvi. 176. 2 lb, pp. 177-179. 

3 Probably Mai. " scmut-semutan," or "cramp," lit. the "creeping of ants." 

CHAP. IX SAKAI OF PERAK 481 

the claw- marks of animals on the bark/ Directly 
under the ring-line, which divides this panel from the 
one above it, are to be seen, between the lianas, four 
minute figures (numbered i to 4) which are said to 
represent a bird, a butterfly, a caterpillar, and a tree- 
frog respectively. The panel (E) above the ring-line 
represents various stages in the growth of a tree. 
Reading this from right to left, we commence with 
the broad black stripe signifying the leafless tree- 
trunk. To the left of this there follow five similar 
figures, which represent fully developed leaves. To 
the left of this again is a black stem, with leaf-drawing 
on the right side only ; these represent the young 
and undeveloped leaves at the top of the tree. Re- 
turning to the right of the panel, we come to a black 
stem with zigzag figures (jv>') on each side of it ; 
these zigzag lines represent twigs. 

The cross-hatched figure to the left of this latter 
stem {^ z) represents the extremity of the creepers 
(which are shown in the panel next below), and signifies 
that these creepers, starting from the ground, have 
reached the topmost branches of the tree.' 

Still further to the left (next to the stem with the 
branches) is represented the topmost shoot of the 
tree with its leaves still undeveloped. The lower 
part of the tree is of some interest. 

The broad part of the stem is portrayed by peeling 
off a thin strip of the outer cuticle of the bamboo. 

• In the (jerman oriy;inal, a sentence a case would necessarily run in Averii- 

here follows to the elTect that the short ca/ direction instead of a horizontal 

cross - strokes between each pair of one. 

creepers represent two lines of ants, ^ Z./. /i.xwi. 17S. Some of V. -St. 's 

which are portrayed as running up and explanations in this and the following 

down the creepers. This st^itement, ten pages seem far-fetched, and should 

however, conflicts with what goes im- be received with caution. He gives no 

mediately before, as the strokes in such localities. 

VOL. I 2 I 

482 DECORATIVE ART 

This treatment, however, is only continued up to a 
certain point, and then the stem shrinks suddenly- 
together to a single line ; this is to signify the diminu- 
tion in size of the tree towards the top. Above this 
panel there is a repetition of the pattern already de- 
scribed at C, but in this case the three rows of the 
pattern are explained as representing the spots on 
the skin caused by the Disease, these spots being 
described as resembling " melon-seeds," and as break- 
ing out upon the head, the body, and the feet, thus 
necessitating the three rows of the pattern. 

The topmost panel (above the one just described) 
represents fish-scales, which signify the leprous scales 
caused by the Disease, and which are again repeated 
in three rows, corresponding as before to the head, 
body, and feet of the patient. They are multiplied 
in order to denote that if not cured they will gradu- 
ally spread over the whole body. Near the right 
extremity of this panel are to be seen a number of 
dots on the scales ; these are meant to signify the 
last stage of the disease, which is marked by incur- 
able ulcers out of which blood comes. They are 
said to resemble the sores which come from wounds 
inflicted by the poisonous spines of a kind offish.^ 

The entire design is a survival of a charm- 
pattern which was employed by the ancient Sakai 
magicians.' 

Fig. 12. — Pattern of a " tuang-tuang " resembling 
Fig. II, the open end of the bamboo being in this 
case at the bottom.^ 

^ There can, I think, be no doubt sented, too, may quite possibly re- 
whatever, from what I myself saw of semble the " bidara pahit," which 
small-pox on the east coast, and from the east coast Malays employ in their 
what I remember of native descriptions ceremonies for wardin^j off the attacks 
of the sj'mptoms, that this pattern was of the Small-pox Demon, 
a small-i'Ox charm. The liee rcpre- ^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 179. ^ Jhid. 

CHAP. IX SAKAI OF PERAK 483 

The hatching in the lowest panel represents the 
wall of a house, as symbolising the house itself. The 
figures A A are partially burnt trees, which have 
remained standing after the felling and burning of a 
clearing. To the left of these trees (at B) is a 
young " bertam "-palm leaf placed upright (in its 
natural position). At C is shown a branch or tree- 
stem forked at both ends, stems of this kind being 
used as props or trestles. 

The next three figures to the left of these are 
also " bertam "-leaves (one upright and two upside 
down), the upright ones representing the central or 
inner leaves of the palm, and the remaining pair the 
outer ones (which are forced outwards and downwards 
as the inner ones expand). At D there follows a tree 
(either blown down by the wind, or perhaps uprooted 
by human agency), which is shown lying ready for its 
stem to be split. 

At E we have a leaf of the " langkap "- {Licuala) 
palm, such as is sometimes used for thatching in 
substitution for " bertam " [Enj^cissona). Above this 
are drawings which symbolise house-building material. 

a. This represents a creeper in full leaf Whenever 
this creeper (which is used for the house-lashings) is 
pulled down from the top of the tree up which it has 
climbed, it falls in coils on the ground. These are 
symbolised by the duplication of the lower part of the 
figure.' 

b. Left of this is the figure at b ; the lower part of 
which represents a kind of rough ladder by means 
of which the roof (of the half-built house) can be 
reached; half-way up comes a break showing the 
place where the roof is joined on, and above that we 

> Z.f. E. xxvi. 179. 

484 DECORA riVE ART p a rt 1 1 

see the roof-timbers, which serve here as a substitute 
for the ladder by which the ridge of the gable is 
reached. 

c. The figure at c (representing the roof-frame ?) 
is in contact with the roof (J?) ; the lower half repre- 
sents the thatch-work (" atap ") of " bertam "-leaves. 

d. Two rattans (cane -creepers) intertwined (to- 
gether with their leaves) are seen at d (cf. Fig. 13). 

e. At e we have rude steps which are ascended by 
the worker when he wishes to detach the rattans from 
the summits of the trees. 

f. Joined to the thatch at f are small figures 
symbolising the freshly cut leaf and the slat of thatch 
made out of it. 

g. The figure at g represents a long zigzag path, 
the windings of which denote the obstacles round 
which the cut " ataps " have to be carried in the 
jungle before they can be brought to their destination. 

The complete design is a charm to assist the 
builder of a house in finding and using the materials 
he requires. 

Fig. 13. — The tradition explaining the origin 
of this pattern is now, alas ! no longer current, and 
for each of the figures two different versions were 
given. This bamboo had descended from father to 
son for three generations, and was universally recog- 
nised as a charm - pattern intended to drive away 
demons seeking shelter on cold nights in the warm 
upper story or loft in the roof. The various figures 
of the pattern were still universally recognised — 
with the exception of some about which nothing 
certain was known, and which were only retained in 
accordance with ancient custom. All that could be 
remembered with regard to the tradition of this 

CHAP. IX SAKAI OF PERAK 485 

pattern was that it was connected in some way with 
the " tabong " legend. Beginning at the open end 
of the bamboo, the second important figure was the 
rattan creeper, but the significance of the numerous 
triangular figures could not be made out. Only in 
one respect was opinion unanimous. The rattan re- 
ferred to shows fruit and leaves, and a whip will be 
seen in the same figure. Hence the conventional 
forms of the rattan depend in each case upon the use 
which is to be made of it.^ 

Fig-. 14. — This is the original pattern - of a " tuang- 
tuang " which is sounded by those who are about to 
collect the acid fruit of the " nipah- " or thatch-palm"^ 
(as well as that of a similar sort of palm called " k'lubi 
asam " in Malay) before entering the swamp in which 
they grow. These particular fruits are employed as 
spices by the Sakai. The palms in question resemble 
the " bertam "-palm in being stemless. The leaves 
grow out of the ground in a great tuft, and the root- 
clump itself, swelling gradually as the plant gets 
older, forms a small hillock in the swampy ground. 
These hillocks are full of scolopendra attracted by the 
fruit, which always grows upon a thick stem, suspended 
only a few centimetres above the surface of the ground. 
Because of these scolopendra the women are not 
allowed, as a rule, to pick the fruit, which is the 
business of the men. 

The figures depicted at a in the top panel of the 
design are the typical " frogs'-leg " pattern, which are 
said to be always used as the symbol of a " swamp." 

The fact that the figures are represented both at 
the top and the bottom signifies that the entire region 
where the fruit grows is swampy. The panel marked 

' Z.f.E. xxvi. 181. - Ibid. pp. 1S2, 1S3. •' Nipa fruticans. 

486 DECORATIVE ART i-art ii 

d represents the interlacing of palm -leaves amid 
vegetation of such luxuriance that a passage has to 
be cut through it with a chopper (" parang "). At 
each side of the pattern a simple zigzag line {b b) 
runs upwards. This represents a series of scattered 
root-hillocks belonging to the palms on the landward 
side of the swamp. The figures at c (the right-hand 
bottom corner of the design) represent a slight rising 
of the ground at the point from which the swamp has 
been entered. The panel next above d represents 
clumps of dead palm-stumps, the decay of which leaves 
an open pathway composed of earth that is soft on 
the top. Such a pathway, however, often conceals 
the pointed growing shoots of the palms, which, as 
they near the surface, often inflict severe wounds 
upon the naked foot, whereas in the case of living 
'• nipah "-palms, which have a firm stem to support 
the foot, this cannot happen. It is on this account 
that the outlines of the hillocks are furnished with 
points on the inner side. When, therefore, the fruit- 
gatherer walks across these hillocks to reach the 
interior of the swamp (as indeed he always does from 
the land side, rather than, like the Malay, in a boat 
from the water) the ground gives way beneath him 
and he sinks in. The surface of the hillocks is 
heaped with dead sticks and leaves, and if the fruit- 
gatherer happens to sink deeper still till he reaches 
another hillock lying underneath, his foot is not un- 
likely to come in contact with sharp shoot -points 
below the surface {e). Farther on he comes to the 
great leaf-tufts and the " nipah " fruits, which latter 
look not unlike a gigantic bunch of grapes protruding 
from between the leaf-stems on the hillocks round 
the palm -clumps. The figure at / represents one 

ll<;. 14. — CllAKM ID. SKM) (.!l..N n- 
I'KUKS T(J SI-KKT AM) rKi)l|.( I 

Gatiikrers ok V.' Xipaii '-I'Knu 
Original « idth, 26 1 111. 

J 'aughan-.Sli-i-iis. 
Fk;. 15. — CiiAKM \i;ain-.i Nknomous Spidi.ks. 
Original width. 28 cm 

I'ol. I. /. 486, 

t-^ 

p. %— 

dt 

y^i 3'l^iV^^ ^ 

3 ^ ^ 

( 1 1 TiTii 1 1 1 1 > 1 1 1 1'^'T 

^ "^ -^.-Jv^in.ni.."^>,nn 

, Z 

i< 

2=1 

SAKAI OF PERAK 487 

of these bunches of fruit and that at z the hillock 
itself. Over this (at li) is portrayed a millipede, and 
at i the track of the same insect. The track of the 
millipede as it creeps to and fro on the leaf-stems is 
indicated by two drawings of millipedes looking in 
opposite directions. 

The object of the charm is to cause the " milli- 
pedes to fold their legs together and sleep," so as not 
to be able to injure any one engaged in plucking the 
fruit. At the right side of the figure (at k) a sleeping 
millipede is shown. ^ 

Fig". 15. — Among the great variety of spiders in the 
Peninsula there is a poisonous one that spins its web 
at about a man's height in the jungle.' According to 
the aborigines, it is the male that spins the thread and 
directs the prey towards the female, who sits in the 
web guarding it. 

The angles (called " elbows ") at the right of the 
pattern {a) represent tree -branches, and the female 
spider (the lower figure) is seated upon them. The 
female spider in this case has a superfluous leg, which 
extends to figure b at the left of the figure. 

Such superfluous limbs are not unusual in the 
drawings of the wilder Sakai. They are not due to 
want of observation, but to want of calculation. The 
more Malayized Sakai would never commit such an 
error.^ 

' Z.f. E. xxvi. p. 183. reckon the two additional legs, and it 

' Ibid. pp. 184, 185. did not occur to him to help himself 

' When Vaughan- Stevens saw the out by means of the other hand, 

mistake in the figure he pointed it out After two or three failures, he took a 

to the Sakai who brought it. The number of twigs in his hand, and laid 

latter, taken aback, counted the legs them on each of the legs of the figure 

by laying each of the fingers of one in succession. Then he caught a spider 

hand in turn upon each of the legs of and killed it, and compared it for some 

the spider. After thus counting up to time with the drawing without being 

\\vt, he appeared not to be able to able to see clearly where the mistake 

488 DECORATIVE ART part u 

Other Sakai drawings of spiders have five legs, 
but in this specimen we sometimes see seven and 
sometimes eight. Perhaps the mistake may have 
arisen from copying an older pattern. The fact that 
the male spider (in the centre of the figure) has two 
rows of legs, instead of one, was explained as indicat- 
ing that these spiders do not remain in one place, but 
run to and fro. 

The Sakai believe too that the spiders have fangs 
or jaws like the millipedes, but that they are too small 
to be seen. As already mentioned, the " spider's 
feet " at the edge belong to the female ; the explana- 
tion being that the spider is supposed to have run 
along the thread. 

Near one of the right feet of the female is to be 
seen a small round figure surrounded by short strokes. 
This is the young one, which the female is supposed 
to be tending. 

The figure on the body of the male is incorrectly 
drawn, but has no significance. 

The upper part of this pattern is of special 
interest. It represents the stony side of a hill — a 
locality where these spiders are supposed to be 
specially numerous. 

The figure c towards the upper half of the drawing 
indicates a hill emerging into a sand-covered plain 
(like the plains which lie near rivers). Over this 
again rise hill-ridges, represented by a figure that 
appears to possess three separate types, denoting 
respectively (i) projecting rocky masses, (2) simple 
rocky or stony ground, and (3) water-courses.' 

was. At last he tore off the legs of were not enough to go round. The 

his victim, and laid them in succession only thing he then said was " silap " 

on those of the figure, when he was (mistake), 

highly astonished to find that there ' Z.f. E. xxvi. 184. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 489 

The dots denote " leaves " or vegetation, e.g. 
grass, etc. Slopes covered with forest are also shown, 
with their summits bare of vegetation. The curves 
[^--] which reach to the centre of the pattern represent 
a ravine which is only wooded at the upper part, 
where the trees of the surrounding jungle are shown. 
The vertical lines are the trunks of the trees, the 
curves [^] their branches, and the dots their leaves. 
The boughs at the right are leafless. Then follow 
two columns of leafy trees, and a third (leafless) one 
with lianas, orchids, etc., growing upon its dead 
branches. Above these, at the rim of the pattern, 
the signs [^^] represent long rattans and similar 
creepers climbing from tree to tree. 

The figure is the copy of a " tuang-tuang " pattern 
— a picture of the forest as the draughtsman had 
probably often observed it.^ 

Fig. 16. — Like Fig. 15 this is only a copy of one 
of these patterns, with which the owner absolutely 
refused to part. The original was intended to serve 
as a charm to assist the women in catching small 
fish, and at the same time to afford them some; 
slight protection against poisonous fishes. Towards 
the left, at the bottom, is depicted a big tortoise ; a 
little to its right, a small one and a rather larger 
one ; these three, which typify a male, a female, and 
a young one, are meant to symbolise the amount 
of the booty. In the extreme left-hand (bottom) 
corner is a fishing-rod, which is drawn upside down. 
The rather thicker black line represents the rod, 
the black spot near its foot the reel, and the thinner 
line the line itself. In the centre of the right-hand 
border are to be seen three rice-spoons of an ancient 

' Z.f. E. xxvi. 185. 

490 DECORATIVE ART part ii 

type, consisting of a wooden handle with a bowl 
made from a kind of shell. A little to the left of 
these spoons stands a water-bird, the species of which 
could not be ascertained. It has, however, webbed 
feet and a pouch under its beak. Further to the left 
are two frogs. Above the spoons, in the right-hand 
top corner, stands a mangrove-bush, such as grows in 
the salt-water swamps. The central figure of the 
pattern is a rattan creeper of the kind called " manau," 
which frequently grows at the mouths of rivers. The 
vertical lines [^==] are stems of this creeper with its 
formidable thorns, the cross - strokes its leaves. 
Between these two rattan-stems, and just above them, 
one of the prickly leaf-whips of the same plant is 
shown, the prickles being so formidable as to have 
earned from the Malays the name of " tiger-claws." 
In the left-hand top corner is depicted a scorpion, 
which serves as a sort of hieroglyph indicating the 
word " scorpion-tail," as the Sakai name these " tiger- 
claw " thorns.^ 

Fig. 17, like Figs. 15 and 16, is the copy of one 
of these instruments (" tuang-tuang ") with which the 
owner would not part. This pattern is intended as a 
charm to protect the growing crops and the plantations 
round the house from injury by animals. In the 
lowest (third) division of the pattern are to be seen — 
(i) the house itself, and (2) near the house (at A) a 
figure which looks like a ladder. This figure repre- 
sents the steps, which consist of small logs thrown 
into the mud and dirt in order to make the soft 
ground passable. Around the house there is a field 
planted with sweet potatoes. The round white 
figures on stalks [ o] at B are the leaves of the 

^ Z.f. E. xxvi. 186. 

CHAP. IX SAKAl OF PERAK 49' 

plant ; the dark ones the edible tubers. The plant to 
the right at C is supposed to be growing, as it appears, 
at the foot of a slope, and the smaller one, shown upside 
down at the bottom (near D), appears to be growing 
on the hill. The Sakai frequently clear the side of a 
hill for their small plantations and huts. The entire 
landscape, indeed, is hilly, and the valleys are mostly so 
overgrown with vegetation that a successful clearing 
cannot possibly be made without good implements.' 

The central division of the pattern is occupied by 
several kinds of plants, divided from each other by 
six dead trees, which are denoted by vertical strokes. 
Starting from the right, we see, in the intervals 
between these trees, (i) maize, (2) yams or 
" keladi " [Caladiimi), with their edible tubers, then 
three sugar-canes, which are throwing out (edible) 
shoots at the root. Next we again see maize and 
tapioca (" ubi kayu "), the latter with its edible root- 
tubers ; then come two plants, one above the other, 
the upper one being a species of yam with tubers, 
and the lower one a banana tree with young banana 
shoots. The dots around the plants denote a con- 
siderable growth of grass. The uppermost part of 
the figure contains the animals against which this 
charm is directed. Above, at the right-hand corner, 
is to be seen a caterpillar, with a rat underneath it ; 
then follow (on the left) two monitors or " lace-lizards " 
(such as steal hens' eggs). Beside each of the 
monitors stands a leafy tree, representing the favourite 
hiding-place of these reptiles. The large trees, which 
are often left standing in the clearing, then form the 
hiding-places referred to ; the little strokes that cover 
each side of their stems represent the running up and 

> Z.f.E. xxvi. 187. 

492 DECORATIVE ART i-art ii 

down of these reptiles at night-time. In the left- 
hand top corner a tortoise with her young one is to 
be seen. The crescent-shaped figure is meant for a 
puddle, denoting the home of the reptile in question.^ 

Fig". 18. — Copy of a " tuang-tuang," which the 
owner refused to sell. It serves as a charm to 
produce rain when a light monsoon (and consequent 
drought) is damaging the rice -fields. The figures 
[//////] represent rain driven by the wind, the strokes 
a violent downpour, the dots the drops ; [////] is the 
north-east, [///] is the south-west monsoon. The 
lines of rain indicated by these curves typify a 
tempest. The repetition of the rain-motive denotes 
" much rain." Near these rain-figures is a double 
row of tortoise eggs as symbols of the tortoise, which 
in its own turn represents moisture, wet, dirt, etc. 
Down the centre there runs a row of figures 
representing young " kepayang " (" piyung ") fruits. 
The " kepayang " begins to develop its fruit when 
the rainy season commences, and its ripened fruit drops 
as the season ends— which explains the symbolism. 
There are certainly some kinds of " kepayang " trees 
that bring forth their fruits in other months, and the 
Sakai, when shown these trees, remarked that the rainy 
season was the season in which the "kepayang " trees 
of his ancestors ripened. What the real explanation 
may be is not known, but most probably the tradition 
of the Sakai is quite correct, even if one cannot 
explain it in every detail." 

Magic combs are also found among the Sakai, but 
little is known of them. They usually have more 
teeth than the Semang ones.^ 

' Z.f.E. xxvi. 1 88. 2 jhid^ 

'" See, however, Martin, 703, and cp. p. 423, /t. I, a»/e. 

Lhit. Miis. 
KtrANTAN DART-QUIVKR. 
(See also p. 31 5. y 
I I'or rubbings of Bcsisi and I'.landas blowpipe patterns, rvV/t' Appendix.] 

/ ■<>/. /. /. 492. 

Blag,i,-ii. 
" Kraknp chamai" : this "okeh " (ornamental design 
on the blowpipe, ^[al. " ukir") is so called because it 
imitates the growth of the wild "sirih" or betel-vine 
(■' chamai "). 

' Okeh le-it hubi," Mai. "ukir lilit ubi," coniparec 
to the intersecting branches of an " ubi " (tuber). 

M.\NTK \ I' \ I 1 i:UNS. 

Skcat ColUxtion. 

BksisI /iii)M(.)KI'IIS. 

Centipede on Kesisi flute, bought from the performer. Lizard on shaft of Hesisi l)lowpi]:e. 
(See also p. 309, ante.) 

Vol. I. p. 493. 

CHAP. IX SAVAGE MALAYS AND SEA-GYPSIES 493 

III. — Jakun and OuANf; Laut. 

As has already been pointed out above, no 
material is at present available which would enable us 
to come to any conclusion with regard to the artistic 
work of the Jakun, The patterns employed both by 
the Blandas and the Besisi showed no appreciable de- 
parture from those employed by the Sakai. Yet it is 
perhaps worth while recording that the same practice 
that has been recorded among the Sakai of drawing 
the part of a figure instead of the whole was certainly 
well understood by the Besisi, who were themselves 
the first to inform me of this fact, and who showed me 
many specimens of their work in which this principle 
was acted upon. The commonest Besisi zoomorphs 
were lizards, centipedes, and the " lotong," the long- 
tailed '* spectacle monkey " of the Peninsula, of which 
I have seen drawings both on their blowpipes and 
their quivers, and although as a rule it was only the 
bones, or in some cases the extremities ("jari" = 
fingers and toes), that were represented, everv 
member of the tribe appeared to recognise them, 
without the slightest difficulty, as the symbol of the 
Semnopithecns. The pattern representing it bore 
some resemblance to a pattern recorded by Mr. 
Blagden among the Mantra of Malacca ; these latter, 
however, gave it the name of " krakap chamai," or 
" wild betel-vine shoots." Another pattern, which 
Mr. Blagden sketched at the same time, was called 
" le'it hubi' " or " entwined tuber-shoots" ( = Mai. " lilit 
ubi "). But these, with a few Kuantan and Mantra 
patterns preserved by Vaughan-Stevens, form about 
all the material at present available. 

CHAPTER X. 

The Social Order. 

chiefs, laws, and succession. 

A STKiKiNc; difterence between the three races is 
discernible the moment the question of social or- 
ganisation is approached. The Semang have at 
present no organised body of chiefs, and though it 
is true that, according to Vaughan- Stevens, they 
possessed a set of superior chiefs called " Putto " 
(" Puttow " or " Puttau "), and a set of inferior chiefs 
called " Sna-hut," neither title has yet been recorded by 
any other observer, and all that we know at present from 
other sources is that the tribal heads of the Semang 
tribes were called " Pelima" ( = Mai. " Penglima"). The 
Sakai, again, appear to possess nothing more elaborate 
in the way of social organisation than the Semang, 
but among the Jakun of the south we have, under 
the tribal Chief or Batin, a series of subordinate chiefs 
called respectively " Jinang," " Jukrah," " Penghulu," 
" Penglima " — a state of things which points to a com- 
paratively great advance on the part of the race in the 
art of self-government. And it is also significant that 
the titles of the first three of these offices (Batin, Jinang, 
and Jukrah) are very rarely found north of Selangor, 
except perhaps in some of the scattered communities 
of the Orang Laut on the western sea-board of the 
Peninsula. It is, in fact, among these very Orang Laut 

494 

cHAK X GENERAL REMARKS 495 

or Sea-Jakun that this system of tribal chiefs and sub- 
chiefs is most fully developed.^ In other words, we 
here have evidence that the aboriginal Malayan race 
stands upon a higher social plane than either the Sakai 
or the Semang — a fact which agrees very closely with 
the conclusions derivable from other grounds of com- 
parison. This fact, however, will appear still more 
clearly from the detailed descriptions of social customs 
to follow, e.g. from the evidence of their possessing 
some knowledge of political boundaries — a knowledge 
which both the Sakai and the Negritos fail to possess. 

To sum up, every portion of the primitive social 
fabric reared by these tribes bears the clear impress 
of the child-like simplicity and trustfulness that lies 
at the root of their character ; and in no department is 
this more evident than in that which pertains to law and 
public order. The evidence discovers an unappreciable 
amount of crime, few laws, and still fewer hard-and-fast 
penalties fixed for the non-observance of the latter. 

De Morgan considers that the laws of the Sakai 
should attract attention, not only from the fact of their 
forming a rudimentary system based solely on customs 
which, originating in the peculiar circumstances and 
habits of the people, have grown to possess the 
authority of a legal code, but also from the remark- 
able spirit of equality and fairness which this primitive 
body of custom exhibits, and which is calculated to 
produce a high impression of the intellectual worth of 
the race that made it, in spite of their having always 
lived apart from the civilisation of their neighbours. - 

' Most of the Jakun tribes have was inferior to the Orang Kaya, though 

traditions of a great chief of their own, superior to the I'enghulu, of whom he 

superior even to the Hatin {e.g. the had several under him. Misc. Ess., I.e. 

Mantra, Misc. Ess. re/, hid., Sec. Ser. p. 288. It is here, therefore, that we 

vol. i. p. 301); and in the old consti- must look for the Batin"s original status, 
tution of the kingdom of Johor the Batin - De Morgan, vii. 419. 

496 THE SOCIAL ORDER 

They live as nomads in a densely forested region, in 
which, as a rule, they make small clearings or planta- 
tions, remaining in one place for this purpose during 
varying periods from about three months to a year, 
but never more. When they migrate and form fresh 
clearings they seldom move to any distance, but remain 
in the neighbourhood in order to gather the crops 
which come to maturity after their departure.^ Hence 
their hunting is also confined within definite areas. 

They thus possess the characteristics at once of 
nomadic and agricultural races, shunning their more 
civilised neighbours, and only engaging in trade to an 
altogether negligible extent. - 

The most rudimentary of the social systems that 
obtain among these tribes is that of the Semang, who 
live under the simplest form of patriarchal government. 

The Semang and Jakun chiefs have a kind of regalia, ' 

I. — Semang. 

Kedah Semang. — The chief of each Semang tribe 
is now called " Pelima " ( = Mai. " Penglima," the " Sna- 
hut" of Vaughan-Stevens), Proof is still required of the 
statement that there were till recently yet greater chiefs, 
who possessed a more extended influence and were 
called " Puttos." These, if they ever existed, seem to 
have now died out, at least in name, if not in function. 

I was told that the last Big Chief (" Pelima Besar ") 
of the Kedah tribes was called " To' Pelima Chiak " 
(or " Old Chieftain Finch "). He was reputed to be 
invulnerable (" beketok," i.e. " pachydermatous through 
magic"), and hence had great influence. Plis tribe told 
me he once kept a Malay who had murdered a Semang 

' De Morgan, vii. 419. Semang); 510, 511 (of the Eesisi); and 

- Ibid. p. 420. vol. ii. pp. 291 and 313, note (of the 

^ See vol. i. pp. 450, 455 (of the Jakun of Jelebu). 

CHAP. X NEGRITOS OF KEDAH 497 

tied up to a tree for two to three months, until a 
blood -fine of twenty- three dollars was paid. To' 
Chiak (though even he died not long afterwards) 
was, moreover, the only Semang in the whole country 
who ever entered the presence of the Raja of Kedah. 

In modern days the Pelima's authority is confined 
to his official relations with his people. He is, how- 
ever, still the chief medicine -man of the tribe, and 
actively follows his profession.^ His duties appear in 
fact to be practically identical with those of the obsolete 
Putto, his position and authority being practically those 
of the head of a family, which in this case is represented 
by a larger family, the tribe. 

In Kedah the tribal chief of the Semang was called 
(as already mentioned) " Pelima," but in Perak the 
word " Penghulu " appears to be more general. 

Laws. 
Crime among the Semang appears to be extremely 
rare, but I was given by the Pelima the following scale 
of fines. These, however, are less by way of illus- 
trating the precise amounts which would be actually 
levied in each case than the general principles and 
proportions according to which the amount would be 
determined. 

Theft of a blowpipe .... $5.00 
Theft of a bow ..... 6.00 "^ 
Theft of a shot-gun (European blun- 
derbuss) ..... 10.00 
Abduction of a married woman (nom- 
inally) ..... 40.00 ' 

' As in a case of which I had was considered a sjreater ofl'ence than 

personal cognizance, cp. vol. ii. that of a blowpipe, 

p. 230. •' Hut this is a sum which no Semang 

2 It is interesting to note that among would usually he at>le to pay ; hence ths 

this Negrito tribe the theft of a bow idea was probably taken from the law of 

VOL. I 2 K 

49S 

THE SOCIAL ORDER 

This last was also mentioned, if I remember rightly, 
as the fine for murder. In default of paying the fine 
the culprit should be " flogged with a rattan," or 
" bound to a tree until he paid." 

For cheating a fellow-tribesman a man would be 
fined, so long as he had money to pay the fine ; 
otherwise he would come in for a " thoroughly good 
scolding " from all the members of the tribe (in other 
words, he would have to run, on a limited scale, the 
gauntlet of tribal opinion). 

Perak Semang. — There were originally among the 
Semang (according to one account) thirty Big Chiefs 
or Puttos, but these have now all died out.^ 
Their duties were to choose the inferior chiefs from 

the local Malays, with whom it would 
be the usual "blood-money" (to be paid 
by a murderer) ; in other words, it is 
the fine which has to be paid, if pos- 
sible, in commutation of the death 
penalty. These fines are always, I 
believe, paid in kind. 

1 Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 103. 

There is no confirmatory record of 
this title yet to hand, and it appeared 
quite unintelligible to the Semang of 
Kedali. If not Siamese, the word 
may be due to some mistake or con- 
fusion with some such word as the 
Malay " Dato'," which simply means 
big chief (lit. grandfather), and which 
in its abbreviated form "To'" is still 
commonly applied to Sakai chiefs as 
well as to Malays. On the other hand, 
this does not explain Sna-hut. [Blagden 
compares " patao," the " wizard " of 
the Jarai (Annam), who speak a 
Malayan language.] The full ac- 
count given by Vaughan - Stevens 
is as follows : — " According to the 
Pangan, the Semang never had, at 
any time, a Raja or liatin, or anybody 
corresponding to those functionaries. 
In ancient times the Puttos were 
highly esteemed as the religious 
teachers of the people, as well as 
rulers. Pie, the Semang deity, was 

their chief; but whether he was a 
deity whose servants the Puttos gave 
themselves out to be, or a chief chosen 
by the Puttos, and who on his death 
was replaced by another Putto, could 
not be clearly ascertained. There were 
' many ' — some say ' thirty ' — Puttos, 
who met once in every eight months 
to consult. Each of these thirty Puttos 
had a district assigned to him. The 
Semang of each district chose a Sna- 
hut (roughly corresponding to the Malay 
Penghulu), who decided all local ques- 
tions. The Sna-hut received his direc- 
tions from the Putto of the district, who 
gave his instructions in the name of 
Pie. The Puttos were dreaded in the 
highest degree as the messengers of 
the deity ; they formed a separate class, 
and were unmarried. When one died. 
Pie elected a successor from among the 
Semang. The command to move their 
residence on the fifth day did not apply 
to the Puttos ; they lived at Pie's abode, 
on the 'Jelmol' mountain, in the 
northern part of Perak, but are now 
no longer in existence. Only the Sna- 
huts are still in possession of the charms 
against misfortune and disease, and of 
nmch other knowledge, which the 
Puttos have communicated to them " 
(Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 103). 

CHAP. X NEGRITOS OF PERAK 499 

among themselves, and to be teachers of religion to 
their people.' 

They formerly had great power as priests, sor- 
cerers, and medicine-men.- " The tribesman went 
to the Sna-hut, the Sna-hut to the Putto, the Putto 
to Pie, and Pie to Kari," ^ these last two being the 
two chief deities of the Semang. 

De Morgan gives us the following general 
account ^ of the social constitution of the Semang of 
Perak. The political and administrative organisation 
of the Negritos is, like that of the Sakai, exceedingly 
simple. In every " changkat " or village there is a 
functionary invested with full powers, who is called 
by the Malays " Penghulu." These Penghulus are all 
of equal standing, and own no superior, whether in 
the shape of a Raja or any higher assembly. Hence 
each Penghulu has absolute authority in his own 
village. 

On the occurrence, it is true, of any dispute 
between the villages, an assembly of the Penghulus 
of the villages concerned will take place, and to these 
may be added a few men who are specially well versed 
in affairs ; but these assemblies are altogether ex- 
ceptional, and are only occasioned by the necessity 
of composing private interests. 

Complete equality exists as between individuals, 
and caste is unknown. Even the chief is on an equal 
footing with his men, except when in discharge of his 
official duties. 

To the foregoing it should be added that all their 
property is in common. ' 

' Vaughan-Stevens, iii. 103. ■* De Morgan, vii. 420 ; cp. /,'//. 

' Ibid. p. 109. ii. 558. 

■^ Ibid. p. 107. ^ J. I. A. vol. iv. p. 427, sea qiurre. 

500 THE SOCIAL ORDER 

II. — Sakai. 
Chiefs. 

Perak Sakai. — The only functionaries of the Sakai 
are the Penghulus, of whom there is one to each 
village, who " is succeeded at his death by his eldest 
son, or by any one else whom he may have appointed, 
in default of a son, as his successor during his life- 
time." ^ Over his tribe he has every right (but the 
capital one), but the enforcing of his authority is mainly 
due to his position.'- 

When a village migrates, the Penghulu conducts 
the migration ; if more than one village is established, 
the original Penghulu appoints a chief (from among 
his sons or relations) to take charge of each of them.^ 

The chief is the equal of his fellow - tribesmen, 
except when he is acting expressly on behalf of the 
common interests of his village.'* 

Of the Ulu Bertang (Bujang Malaka) Sakai, Dr. 
Luering writes me, that they do not employ the title 
of Batin, their chieftains being called " Seruyan." ^ 
The first " Seruyan " Dr. Luering's informant could 
remember was one Ba-Naun, who is now dead, as is 
his son Ba-Jelang. Ba-Naun had authority over all 
Chenderiang and Dipang. 

Then there are special titles given to the Sakai by 
the late Sultans of Perak. " My ancestors," said the 
same informant, " were made ' mentri,' '^ and my proper 
title should be Singa' mentri " (" mentri " is a Malay 
title of dignitaries). Another title given by the Sultan 
was that of To' Sang, who died without children, and a 

1 Women excepted. Z. f. E.-^xVm. ^ This title was also given to the 

167. 2 34 i3e Morgan, vii. 420. chief of the Sakai at Slim. — Swett. in 

5 I have no other record of this title. J.R.A.S., S.B., No. 5, p. 59. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 501 

third title is Lela Pa-jangga. The last occupant of 
this latter title had a daughter, who is now alive 
and is married to Si Itam, the elder brother of Dr. 
Luering's informant Singa'. 

Laws} 

The penalty of death is reserved for murder,- and 
the execution of the murderer is permitted to the 
relatives of his victim, the weapon which is to be used 
being that with which the crime was committed. 
As a rule the criminal escapes into the forest, where 
he is pursued and killed, frequently during his sleep. 
Crimes of this kind (murder) are, however, so exceed- 
ingly rare as to be a quayttitd ndgligeable. The penalty 
for theft, which is equally rare, is exclusion from the 
tribe — "a sort of banishment." The man thus exiled 
has to fell and plant a new clearing at a distance from 
the settlement of his tribe, and if he refuses, is tied 
up to a tree and Hogged with a rattan. 

In cases of dispute (about women), or assault, the 
Penghulu (who acts both as civil and criminal judge) 
condemns the guilty party to pay fair compensation to 
his victim. 

For enticing away a married woman, the penalty 
is a fine of seven dollars " at the most." Among 
tribes which use money, the fines vary from one and 
two to seven dollars ; among the wilder tribes they 
are paid in kind (tapioca, rice, etc.).^ 

' De Morgan, vii. 25 ; U H. ii. 558. sidered a great crime, To' Lila told me, 

- The punishment of those who used and often gives rise to a fight. The 

the blowpipe to commit murder was guilty parties are made to pay a fine to 

especially severe ; the murderer being the husband, generally thirty dollars 

compelled to eat a portion of his each. (This well proves the enormity 

victim's tlesh [no doubt in order that it of the fault ! ) The woman's fine is 

might poison him]. — Eth. A'olizbl.\. 10. paid by her father or brothers. I pro- 

^ Cp. Br. de St. -P. Lias, p. 281, secuted my researches on the penal 

where we find: — "Adultery is con- legislation of the Sakai : 

502 THE SOCIAL ORDER part ii 

Elsewhere De Morgan adds that in case of banish- 
ment the condemned party has to leave at two nights' 
notice, abandoning for ever, not only his property, but 
his wife and children. In serious cases the Penghulu 
always takes counsel with the elders of the tribe. ^ 

Contracts^ 

The following is a summary of what De Morgan 
says about Sakai contracts : — 

There is no form of actual sale among the Sakai, 
who do not use money or any substitute for it. Fre- 
quently, however, a form of contract is met with which 
consists in handing over some portable object, such as 
a blowpipe, in return for a promise to supply a family 
with food for a specified period. Thus a blowpipe and 
quiver with darts are valued at a fortnight's food-supply 
for a family, and a loin-cloth of beaten tree-bark 
(" t'rap ") is priced at a month's supply of food, and so 
on, according to the character of the object transferred. 

Leases are rare, on account of the patriarchial 
system in vogue. The family takes the place of an 
artificially created society, and is usually numerous 
enough to cultivate its own lands without farming 
them out to strangers. Such land is, however, occa- 
sionally leased in return for a supply of food. Loans 
for one or more stated occasions are more usual ; e.g. 

" 'And when a Sakai kills a man " 'He asks or buys.' 

. . . ?' "' If he has no money ? ' 

" ' Never !' interrupted To' Lila •' ' That does not matter, he is given 

quickly. them. When a man from a distance 

" ' When he steals . . . ?' enters the country, he has only to ask 

"'Never!' he replied, with the and is given food.' " 

same energy. See NotizhL, i. 7-1 1, for further 

" 'What ! Are there no robbers?" information by Vaughan-Stevens, who 

" ' No.' does not, however, specify from what 

" ' When a man is hungry, and he localities he collected it. 

has no yams ?' ' De M. viii. 224. '- lb. vii. 424. 

SAKAI OF PERAK 503 

loans of knives, hatchets, and other objects which the 
Sakai cannot make themselves and obtain from the 
Malays ; as well as loans of houses, clearings, or crops. 
The Sakai are honest and always return a loan. 

For all these contracts consent alone is necessary, 
and no regular form is used. 

The " contract of donation " is chietiy applied to 
some portable article, e.g. a knife. Similar presents 
were those made by a son-in-law to his (prospective) 
father-in-law. 

Debts may arise, e.g., from failing to return a 
borrowed article that has been lost, or from fines, 
etc. 

The debtor and his family work for the creditor 
for one or two months (according to the Penghulu's 
decision), the creditor finding them food. They then 
retire into the forest until their plantation is once 
more able to support them. A debtor is despised by 
everybody, and is derisively given, when a monkey 
is killed, the creature's muzzle as his portion of food. 
Sometimes the creditor is put by the Penghulu in 
possession of a debtor's crops.^ 

Property} 

As has already been pointed out, the petty chief 
of each Sakai village (Pelima or Penghulu) has, as 
De Morgan states, every right but the capital one 
over the members of his settlement. His authority 
is enforced (like that of the father of a European 
family) by means of the intluence derived from his 
age and position in the tribe, rather than by that 
of any legal sanction. The tribe, in fact, merely forms 
(as it were) a rather larger family circle. 

^ De Morgan, vii. 424. 2 n,i({_ p. 420. 

504 

THE SOCIAL ORDER 

Individual property does not exist ; its place is 
taken by family property.^ So, too, cultivation is 
carried out in common, and the plantation is culti- 
vated by all the members of the family under the 
directions of the father, extra work being imposed in 
default. The produce is shared between all the 
members of the family (and, perhaps, even with a few 
of their neighbours). What proves this community 
of cultivation, is the fact that as soon as one of the 
sons of the family takes up land elsewhere, he is ex- 
cluded from his share of the produce of the plantation, 
although he is nevertheless very well received when 
he comes to pay a visit to his parents.^ 

Successio7i? 

The order of inheritance is as follows: — (i) De- 
scendants, (2) ascendants, and (3) collateral branches 
of the same family. The rights of the first class 
include representation, or the rights of the children of 

' On the other hand we have the 
following statements from Vaughan- 
Stevens : — *' Women, though they 
might not hold office, were allowed to 
possess land. At marriage such land 
passed to the husband, the wife losing 
all title to it. But all durian and 
other trees, if planted either by herself 
or by her orders, were her exclusive- 
property, and might be made over to 
any one whom she chose in the life- 
time of her husband. In such cases 
the tree was marked in the presence of 
the chief with the sign of its new 
possessor (such signs consisting of an 
incision), which varied with each in- 
dividual, and which was cut into the 
bark of the tree thus disposed of. A 
married woman ran no great danger 
of contracting debts. If she had any 
such before her marriage, the bride- 
groom was informed of them ; and if 
the marriage took place, he himself 
became responsible for them. If, 

however, he was not informed, the 
woman's parents were held responsible. 
If the woman had lost her parents, or 
if she were a widow, and gave her 
[new] husband no information about 
such debts, she was liable to be pun- 
ished for her deceitfulness by a minor 
chief, but the creditor dared not press 
his claim upon her [new] spouse, 
since it was the creditor's business 
to see that the prospective husband 
knew of it, as every marriage was 
spoken of far and wide before it 
actually took place. The failure of 
a crop which she had sold before- 
hand might bring a woman who 
owned land into debt, and she was 
unable to work off the debt as the 
men could, except by the protracted 
process of mat- and basket-making ; so 
that in the eyes of the Sakai, this was 
a [valid] excuse for her debt " {Z.f. E. 
xxviii. 168). 

- De Morgan, vii. 421. ^//i'. p. 423. 

CHAP. X SAKAI OF SELANGOR 50$ 

the deceased to take his place in the succession. In 
default of heirs belonging to any of the three branches 
referred to, the house and clearing are abandoned as 
if accursed. 

If the deceased has died of an epidemic sickness, 
everything is abandoned by his heirs, who fear that 
the very soil or goods of the deceased may contain 
the germs of the disease. 

Property rights are collective, not individual. 

This flows from the custom by which the Penghulu 
designates, in every case, the limits of the ground 
that each member of the tribe may occupy. Even 
abandoned land may not be taken up again without 
the consent of the tribal chief. 

The result is that all the members of the tribe are 
guaranteed against dispossession. 

Chiefs, Laws, Succession. 

Selangor Sakai. — There is no trustworthy authority 
for the title of " Batin " as obtaining among the 
Sakai of Perak. Whether we may conclude that this 
title is not used at all in Perak is doubtful, but in any 
case the completest form of the Sakai constitution 
(and that one of Malayan origin)' is to be found in the 
interior of Selangor, where the Batin is the chief of a 
group of Sakai villages, which as a rule are fairly near 
each other. Under the Batin are the Mentri or Jinang, 
Jukrah (or Jekra), Penghulu Balai, and Penglima. 

The foregoing is probably the full list of these 
functionaries, but it very seldom happens that any 

' Letessier, p. 99. Both forms Jekra does not seem altogether certain, and the 

and Jiikra(or Jukrah)areused. The form form Jukrah may merely be an instance 

Jukrah is explained as an abbreviation of po])ular etymology. All these titles 

of Juru-krah,()r"(W7'cVotticer"("super- are Malayan, and show the strong Jakun 

visor of the co)-7k'e") ; hut this derivation influence among the Sakai of Selangor. 

5o6 THE SOCIAL ORDER part ii 

group of villages has a complete set of them all at 
once. Some tribes have a Batin, Jinang, and Penghulu, 
others a Jinang, Jukrah, and Penghulu, others a Ju- 
krah only, and so on. 

Three of these six titles (Mentri, Penghulu, and 
Penglima) are used by the civilised Malays of the 
Peninsula, but the other three are otherwise only 
used by the Jakun, from whom the Selangor Sakai 
have clearly borrowed. 

The title of Batin is hereditary and passes as a 
rule to the eldest son ; but if the Batin die without 
issue, and none of his close relatives happens to 
be a suitable person, the Jinang or Jukrah appoints 
as Batin some close relation of another Batin of the 
same tribe.^ 

The Batin is the executive, and at the same time 
the administrative, head of the tribe, although his 
methods of performing his duties are distinctly 
patriarchal in character. In addition to the duties 
already mentioned, he is required especially to insist 
on the enforcement of the tribal customs generally, 
and the selection of seasons and methods for the fishing 
of the river.'^ 

A fine is the penalty most generally inflicted on 
the guilty parties, but for insubordination or serious 
crime it commonly takes the form of banishment from 
the tribe, or death by the kris, in conformity with 
ancient custom.^ Of these two forms of punishment 

' Letessier, p. 99. The rule among closely with what I myself was told 

the Sakai tribes of Selangor is on more than one occasion by the 

certainly as described, but vide Logan Jakun chiefs. But from the extreme 

in J. I. A. i, 275 : " At the death of rarity with which anything of this 

a Batin his successor is chosen from his sort happens, I am somewhat in- 

sisters' sons." This is probably among clined to doubt whether the power of 

tribes under Rembau influence. inflicting the death ])enalty, which is 

- Letessier, p. 99. claimed by the Batins, was not borrowed 

•* Ibid. This last statement agrees by the Sakai from the Jakun or Malays. 

CHAP. X SAKAI OF SELANGOR 507 

the former alone appears to be an original Sakai prac- 
tice. A small tribute of rice (says Letessier) was 
paid annually to the Batin by the members of the tribe. 
The Jinang is the representative of the Batin on 
all occasions when the latter is unable to be present in 
person, and not unfrequently is tacitly allowed to 
assume the government of the tribe, without the elec- 
tion of a Batin at all. " Mentri " is probably only the 
Malay equivalent of " Jinang." 

The Jukrah is the petty chief who marshals the 
tribesmen (for any necessary work that has to be per- 
formed in common). 

The Penghulu (or P. Balai) fills the post of a 
sort of master of the Batin's household, and is also, 
generally speaking, his administrative officer. The 
Penglima (Letessier adds) is his executive officer. 

Selang-or Sakai. — Of the Sakai of Ulu Langat, Mr. 
Campbell relates that they very rarely commit such 
crimes as murder. He enquired (he says) what 
punishment a murderer would probably receive, and 
was told that he would be fined ten jungle-knives 
("parangs"), ten hatchets (" b'liongs "), ten blowpipes 
("sumpitans"), ten saucepans, and such-like. In a case 
of adultery the man was fined as for a murder, but he 
kept the woman. Very frequently no fine was infiicted 
for adultery, but the woman was simply taken over. 
But in any case, the woman was not punished. Mr. 
Campbell adds that he was told that there were no 
specific punishments for theft, which rarely occurs. 
Things taken out of another person's house were re- 
garded as " borrowed, not stolen." In the case of a 

On the whole, it is more probable, I seems pretty clearly to show. The 

think, that the idea was borrowed from kris is certainly a Malay rather than a 

the Malays, as indeed the method of Jakun weajKin, and execution by means 

enforcing it, by execution with the kris, of it is a typical Malay practice. 

5o8 THE SOCIAL ORDER part ii 

hardened offender, the Batin would send him some 
miles away into the jungle to live by himself,' 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — The Blandas of K. Langat have the same 
system of government as that of the Selangor Besisi, 
They have further, however, condensed the description 
of the limits of their jurisdiction in a series of pro- 
verbial or legal " maxims," which have all the force of a 
duly formulated, though unwritten, code, and which are 
invoked by their chiefs for the purpose of settling 
any disputes that may arise among them. The 
following are a few examples which I took down 
from the lips of one of their chiefs : — 

1. The laws of Batin 'langgong Gagah : - 
15y hill and hill-foot, cave, hill-basin 
Lies the path, prevail the customs, 

Of the kin o' the wasting millet. ^ 

2. The Batin and the Jinang tarry 
At the limits of fulf flood-tide ; 

The Land-folk's chief frequents the hill-tops. 
His sway is o'er the upper Langat, 
His are the dues of yams and 'gharu,' 
' Ch^rok,' ' los,' tin-sand, mine-paddocks ; 
'Tis his to feed upon wild aroids, 
His are rattan and gutta taban. 

3. To the Batin of the Sea-folk * 
'Longs the bellying sail of palm-leaf, 
'Longs the swirling of the oar-blade, 
Anchor dropjied and S])rcaded awning. 
Clearing, felling for fish-fences, 

I lunting fish, and sting-ray spearing. 

4. The laws are at the top of the trunk, 
The genealogy at the bottom, 

The laws of our chiefs follow the Raja's ruling. 

5. Where the wild-bees' nest swings, where the wait-a-bit creepers fall away from 
their supports, 

' J. A. G. Campbell, p. 242. probably means " of the kinsfolk who 

2 Said to be a son of To' Klambu, live upon millet" (instead of ricej, this 

who lived and died at Tunggul Si being a custom of the wilder tribes. 

Jaga. * I.e. of the Besisi (as a Coast tribe). 

^ The expression is obscure, but " Cherok " and "los " are unexplained. 

SA VAGE MALA YS OF SELANGOR 509 

Where the streams commence their tricklings, where the " kasai " trees crowd 

ever closer together, 
Where the croak-croak-croaking of frogs is lieard, 
Where the wind follows through the divide 
And the streams follow down into the valleys, 
There through the swamps — splash-splash — go the chiefs of our tribe. 

Another version of the Law, of a slightly different 
type, ran as follows : — 

Gobang (Jubin, Buluh Bohal ; 

Round the Island of Sumatra, 

Round the Menangkabaus' Island, 

Came we unto Pagar Kuyong, 

Came we to the land of Jali, 

Came we unto Tanjong Pagar,' 

Came we unto Johor Lama. 

Toh Bombong''^ opened the Nine Rivers, 

With Batin Chap, and Batin Maruis,-' 

Batin Lengges, Batin Bereh, 

Batin Kantun, Batin Calang, 

With old To' Klambu, Granny Beoi, 

Batin Wat, and Batin Minah.* 

Says the Law again : — 

Where betel-palms grew thick together, 
Where coco-palms grew thick together. 
Where belel-palms their crests were waving, 
Where coco-palms their crests were waving. 
Founded we the Land Semujong," 
Ruling o'er the Nine Streams' Sources, 
By the Fourfold States maintained. 
By the Fourfold Clans sustained. 
Thence we spread to the Pass of Bidai, 
Thence we spread to the Pass of Naning, 
Thence we spread to the Stream of Labu, 
Thence we spread to Granny BCoi's. 
All the land's To' Bombong's countrj', 
He it was became To' Klana, 
Founder of the Land Semujong. 
Batin Galang wended seawards, 
Seawards wended and turned pirate. 
Granny Bioi and Batak G'rodok, 
Reaching Rawang, went ashore there ; 
At Rawang, Big and I.illle Rawang, 
Dwelt our Sires both big and little. 

A collection of these Jakun records, which are 

' At Singapore. Iwelveof these Batins. See p. 513, «. 2. 

* This was the name of To' Klana ■'' The older (and accurate) name of 
before his inauguration ("bt?Ium di- the State that is now (I believe through 
lantik "). ^ Or Baruis. a white man's blunder) called Sungei 

* Altogether there were said to be Ujong. 

5IO THE SOCIAL ORDER i'art h 

comparable to those of the Rembau Malays, would 
prove of great interest. 

Chiefs. 

Besisi.— Among the Besisi of Langat the Batin 
is the arbiter of all disputes, at least of all such as are 
referred to him by the subordinate chiefs of the tribe. 
He also acts as priest at marriages, as magician, and as 
judge in cases of wrong-doing, the fines that he inflicts, 
in place of money, usually taking the shape of pieces of 
cloth (" sarongs," etc.) or cooking-pots (" kuali," etc.).^ 

The Jinang is their vice-Batin; the Penghulu 
Balei has charge of the tribal feasts and the holding 
of councils ; the Jukrah is the summoner of the tribe ; 
the Penglima the Batin's executive officer. 

There are, I think, some grounds for believing the 
drum (which is not usually found among the Semang 
or Sakai) to be part of the insignia of Jakun chiefs. 

The Besisi of Sepang more than once described to 
me a strange sort of head-gear which had formed the 
insignia of their lineal chiefs ; and I heard later from 
a local Malay chief that this head-gear had been, 
within his remembrance, in the actual possession of 
Batin Pah Kasat (a former chief of Sepang Kechil), 
who showed it to my informant, and who used to 
wear it on his head whenever the tribe met in council. 
My informant stated that this head-gear was made of 
some unusual material, which might have been some 
kind of manufactured tree - bark ; strands of this 
material (whatever it might be) were cunningly inter- 
woven to form knots resembling the " buku bemban " 
(a kind of multiple knot) of the Malays. This head- 
gear was called the Buluh Bohal (lit. " Bamboo of 

' Bellamy, p. 227, etc. 

c!^ 

Skeat Collection. 
MoDlvL Ol- iNSUiMA (JI- lil'.SISI BATIN OK CJIIEF. 

A myslic knot (in foreground) of some unknown iiuiterial. It is carried 
in the bamboo receptacle here shown upright behind it. 

I'ol. I. p. 511. 

CHAP. X SA VAGE MALA YS OF MALACCA 5 1 1 

Bohal "), and descended direct as an heirloom 
(" pesaka ") from father to son in the male line. It 
was not used, however, by any other than this one 
tribe, and although I offered great rewards, I was never 
able to obtain a sight of it. Indeed, I was told that 
when the Batin who had owned it died, it was taken 
back to Selat Dumei in Sumatra.' 

Chiefs? 

Mantra. — The constitution of society was as simple 
amongst the Mantra as amongst the Benua of Johor. 
Perfect equality prevailed. The Batin was not dis- 
tinguished in his manner of life from the others. 

Of Batins the Mantra had Batin Palimei, who 
ruled in Jempul, Batin Chinchang of Johol, Batin 
Puchu of Batang Muar, Batin Kechi of Ulu Muar, 
and Batin Jedam {} Jadam) on the borders of Pahang 
and Muar. Each of these Batins had under him a 
Jinang, a Jukrah or Juru-krah, and an indefinite 
number of Penglimas and Ulubalangs. On the death 
of a Batin a successor was chosen from amongst the 
sons of his sisters.^ 

The Batin must be called to take part at the 
installation of every new Raja. This is because all 
rulers, from the Raja downwards, were first " in- 
stituted " by the Batin. "^ 

' Finding that there was no means described by Vauglian -Stevens (s.r. 

of seeing the thing itself, I had a copy " penjok *'), which appears, from the 

of it made in cloth by one of the name " buhu " (sic, ? " buluh "), and 

Bosisi, on the understanding that the from the fact that "penjok" is a 

copy was to be as exact as it was Semang-Sakai word for " loin-cloth,'' 

possible to make it. On the whole, I to have perha|is lieen a loin-cloth of this 

am inclined to believe that Ruluh Bohal very material. l't\u p. 455. atiti- ; and 

was a place-name (? in Sumatra), whence cp. p. 450, ante. 

came a piece of bamboo "cloth, " - /. /.A. vol. i. p. 330*. 

which was believed to have been taken ^ Jbid. p. 275 ; compare Misc. 

from the bamboo out of which the first Ess. rcl. Ind., Sec. Ser. vol. i. pp. 

ancestor of the race wxs said to have 301, 302. 

issued. But cp. the insignia of Karl * Ibid. 

512 THE SOCIAL ORDER vart ii 

In the work of government (added the relater), 
the Batin, in the forest, was guided by the ancient 
customs (" Selasila' "), or what used to be done from 
times of old; the Penghulu, in his Hall of Audience 
(" Balei "), by the written laws (" Berundang ") ; and 
the Raja, in his Palace ("Astana"), by equity 
("'Adilan")/ 

Laws. 

Crimes were very rare. Theft was unknown, 
and children were carefully instructed to avoid it. 

2 

Property and Succession. 

Mantra. — Amongst the Mantra the distribution of 
property on the death of the husband was as follows : 
the goods which belonged to the husband before the 
marriage went to his parents and brothers and sisters. 
Those acquired during the marriage were divided 
equally between these relations and his widow, who, 
however, was considered as a trustee for the children. 
The clearing ("ladang") was inherited by her. On 
the death of the wife, in the event of her husband 
surviving, her antenuptial goods go to her children, 
and the goods in common are equally shared between 
the husband and the children, who leave their father 
and live with the nearest female relatives of their 
deceased mother.^ 

The Family. 

Benua-Jakun. — The Benua family was an innocent 
and happy one, and mutual kindness prevailed on 

^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 327*. Penghulu "Adilan = Moi)ammedan law. 
here = the chief of the State, Raja= ^ Ibid. p. 330*. 

head of the confederation of States, and ^ Ibid. pp. 274, 275. 

SA VA GE MALA YS OF JOHOR 5 1 3 

every side. The authority of the father was absolute, 
nor were the sons freed from it even when they 
had themselves become the heads of families. It is 
probable that in the more purely nomadic ages the 
family was less subject to be early broken up, and 
that the patriarchal system prevailed to a yet fuller 
extent. In the house, however, the husband 
appeared more as an honoured guest than as its lord. 
The wife had the entire management. A Benua 
expressed their ideas on this score figuratively, by 
saying that the husband was the captain of the vessel 
(" Nakhoda prahu ") and the wife captain of the house 
(" Nakhoda rumah ").' 

Chiefs? 
Benua- Jakun. — The boundary between the east 
coast State of Pahang and Johor intersects the Benua 
country ; the whole of the Anak Endau and the lower 
part of the Sembrong being in Pahang (and conse- 
quently under the Bendahara), and all the other rivers, 
including the Madek, on which the Benua are found, 
appertaining to Johor (so that they are, consequently, 
under the Temenggong). The authority of the Benda- 
hara and the Temenggong, however, was little more 
than nominal, the affairs of the Benua being entirely 
administered by their own chiefs, each of whom had a 
definite territorial jurisdiction. The highest in rank 
and in nominal authority was the Batin Anak 
Setia, the descendant of the ancient (traditionary) 
Raja of the Benua. On the Endau, below the 
junction of the Sembrong and Anak Endau, resided 

' J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 266, 267. into tribes, each under an elder, termed 

2 Ibid. pp. 273-275 (quoted by De the Batin, who directs its movements 

Quatrefages, pp. 221, 222). See and settles disputes. In the states of 

also Newbold's account (vol. ii. pp. Sungei Ujong and Johol are twelve 

392-394): "The Benua are divided tribes, consisting of upwards of 1000 

VOL. I 2 L 

514 THE SOCIAL ORDER part ii 

the Batin Hamba Raja. The Lenggiu, a branch of 
the Endau, was under the Batin Setia Raja, who was 
also their great executive officer ; his relationship 
to the Batin Anak Setia having some resemblance to 
that between the Malay Temenggong and the Sultan 
of Johor. The Sungei Selai, again, was under the 
Batin Singa Dewa. The Sembrong in the vicinity 
of Tanjong Bongko' was under the Batin Setia Bati, 
higher up near Gagau under the Batin Jukrah, and still 
nearer its source under Batin Dewa Kasuma (?) and 
under the Batin Bentara. All these, except the two last, 
were within the Pahang boundary. The local Malay 
authority, who, in matters of government, possessed 
a nominal power, and whose relationship with regard 
to the Benua was properly that of the maintainer and 
regulator of the Malayan trade monopoly, was called 
To' Jinang. The Benua on the Batu Pahat and its 
branches were under the Bentara or Mangki {^sic, ? 
Mangku) Pemanggun of Bekok. The jurisdiction of 
the Malay Penghulu of Batu Pahat had once ex- 
tended to Ginting Batu on the eastern Sembrong, but 
since the waterways became obstructed the To' Jinang 

individuals, under twelve Batins, who, limpei '), who succeeded his uncle, 

as mentioned in the account of these Breyk, a short time ago pro tempore, 

states, have the power of electing the until his son, now a child, be old enough 

Malay chiefs. [These twelve chiefs to take upon himself the direction of the 

were probably those referred to in the affairs of the tribe. The Blaiidas have 

Blandas traditions {v. siipra).^ Under four Jinangs, viz. Pawampa de Cheyng 

each Batin are two suljordinates, termed {sic, ?), Ampu Manis, ' I'alsye ' (? Pa' 

Jinang {'Jennang') and Juru - krah Lcsai), and Rumbong ; and two Juru- 

CJuroka'), who assist the former in kras. The Besisi, one Jinang named 

his duties. A Juru-krah of the Besisi Mnmin; one Juru-krah, Sekanal ; and 

tribe, named Tenggin (?), from the one Poyang, Manan (' Mannan '). The 

interior of Selangor, and a Poyang functions of their Batin resemble those 

named Ambui, of the Blandas tribe, pertaining to the Malay Raja ; the 

informed me that the latter had four title of Jinang is equivalent to that of 

Batins named Baning ('Banning') the Malay Penghulu; and that of the 

or the ' Tortoise,' Lunggeyng, Singa- Juru - krah to that of Mata - Mata. 

kuasa (' Singa-quassa') or the ' Mighty There is also a war chief called 

Lion,' and Pakat. The Besisi tribe Pelima, identical with the Malay Pdng- 

has one Batin only. Pa' Limpei ('Pa- lima." 

SA VA GE MA LA YS OF JOHOR 5 1 5 

of the Endau had engrossed the trade of the Johor 
portion of the Sembrong river.' The Benua of Benut 
were under a Jukrah (" Juru-krah ") and a Batin. 
Each Batin had absolute authority within his own 
jurisdiction, l)ut he referred difficult or unusual 
cases to a Council composed of all the Batins, 
excepting the Batin Anak Setia ; and matters in 
which all the Benua were concerned appertained 
to the same Council. Their deliberations were said 
to be sometimes very prolonged, particularly in 
affairs of a novel character, when their knowledge 
of the old " 'adat " did not supply them with any 
precedents. 

Laws. 
Benua-Jakun. — Offences against property or person 
were, from the mildness of the race, of very rare occur- 
rence. Crimes of all kinds might be expiated by the 
payment of fines, the sentences being invariably im- 
posed, not in the form of coins, of which very few 
reached their hands, but in coarse Chinese plates or 
saucers (" pinggan "). Adultery was punishable by a 
fine of from 10 to 20 plates according to circumstances ; 
theft the same ; murder, which, however, seems to be 
almost unknown, by one of 60 plates. One-half of the 
fine went to the Batin and the other half to the injured 
person. If the offender failed to deliver the plates, he 
became the slave of his victim. Complaints were 
inquired into by the Batin, who assembled a number of 
the elders and consulted with them. The Batin was 
considered to be responsible for any property that was 
stolen. But he could not convict the thief without 
confession or direct evidence of the theft. No regular 

* So Logan, but no part of the and only jKirt of the left bank of the 
Sembrong river is now in Pahang, Endau. 

5i6 THE SOCIAL ORDER iart ii 

tax was paid to the Batins, but presents were fre- 
quently made to them.' 

Loans were freely given, but no pledge was ever 
taken, - 

Property and Sticcession^^ 

Benua-Jakun. — On the separation of husband and 
wife by mutual consent, their hitherto common property 
was divided into three parts, of which the husband 
took two and the wife one. On the husband's death, 
one-third of the estate went to daughters and two- 
thirds to sons. On the wife's death, the goods in 
common fell to the husband's share. 

Again, if the wife happened to own a clearing 
("blukar") it descended to her children, the father, 
however, being an usufructuary trustee during his life. 

Chiefs!^ 

Johor Jakun. — Each tribe was under an elder, 
termed the Batin, who directed its movements and 
settled disputes. 

Under each Batin were two subordinates, termed 
Jinang and Juru-krah, who assisted him in his duties. 

A fourth title was that of Pawang, but it was rather 
a title of honour than of jurisdiction, and indicated 
the persons who were generally charged with fulfilling 
the offices of physician and teacher. 

^ /. I. A. vol. i. p. 274. (ibid.) that adultery is punished with 
Of the Benua Newbold says (ii. death if the parties are taken in the act. 
394) 395) • " Capital crimes such as Cp. also Vaughan - Stevens ir. 
murder are punished by drowning, by V. B. G. A. xxiii. 834. [The only im- 
impaling, or by exposure to the sun, portant point is that for theft double 
leaving the criminal bound to a Nipah restitution had to be made, etc. But no 
(i.e. thatch-leaf palm) to perish from localities being given, it is quite un- 
heal and hunger." [The penalties certain of what tribe Vaughan-Stevens 
mentioned are all practised by the is speaking.] 
Malays, from whom their institution is - /. /. A. vol. i. p. 285. 
probably borrowed.] Newbold adds 3 /(, p_ 274. ^ //'. vol. ii. 267, 268. 

SAVAGE MALAYS OF JO HO R 

517 

The functions of the Batin resembled those 
appertaining to the Malay Raja. The title of Jinang 
was equivalent to that of the Malay Penghulu, and 
that of Juru-krah was applied to the inferior executive 
(police) officers. There was also a war chief called 
Penglima.' 

After the death of a Batin (or chief of the tribe) 
the eldest of his sons would be presented by his 
nearest relation to the whole collected tribe, and 
would then be declared and publicly recognised as 
the successor of his father in the Batinship. If the 
people refused to declare him Batin, the second son 
of the late Batin would be presented ; and if this 
second son and his other brothers were refused by 
the people, a stranger to the family would be elected.-'' 

' J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 267. 

-' Ibid. It is related by some persons 
that the Jakun have great influence in 
the respective Malay states where 
they are living, and chiefly in the 
election of Malay Penghulus in the 
Mcnangkabau states. Newbold too 
says the same, and confirms it by the 
following fact : — " .\ few years ago the 
late Penghulu of Sungei Ujong, Klana 
Leber, died, leaving two nephews, 
Kawal and Bhair. It is an ancient 
custom, prevalent still in the interior 
and, I believe, generally throughout 
Malayan nations, that when a chief 
dies his successor must be elected on 
the spot, and before the interment of 
the corpse (which is not unfrequently 
deferred through the observance of this 
usage to a considerable length of time), 
otherwise the election does not hold 
good. 

"Now it happened that Kawal was 
absent at the time of Penghulu Leber's 
death. The three .Sukus and one of 
the twelve Batins took advant.age of 
Rhair's being on the spot, elected him, 
and buried tlie body of the deceased 
chief. Against this proceeding the 
Kaja di Kaja and the remainder of 

the elective body, the eleven Batins, 
protested ; a war ensued, which ter- 
minated in 1S28, pretty much as it 
began. Kawal, however, by virtue of 
the suff-rages of the eleven out of the 
twelve Batins, and by the support of the 
Raja di Raja, is generally considered 
the legitimate chief. In Johol the 
Batins have a similar influence in the 
election of the Penghulu." 

It appears certain that in lormer 
times the Batins exercised such an 
influence in the elections of the Malay 
chief ; but we must say that they 
have at the present time lost a great 
part of it ; for in Johol, Rcmbau, and 
several other places they are so few in 
number that such a fact would be im- 
possible, and the contempt which the 
Malays have for them, ;is well as their 
own natural disposition to tranquillity 
and peace, scarcely permit us to 
believe that such is the case now even 
for .Sungei Ujong, where they are the 
most numerous. — J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 
270. 

\'ide, however, M. Lister {loc. cit.) 
on the constitution of N. Sembilan, 
where this alleged influence of the 
Batins is confirmed. 

5i8 THE SOCIAL ORDER iart ii 

After the death of a Jinang or a Juru-krah, the 
Batin would appoint the eldest son of the deceased to 
succeed to his office. If, on the other hand, the 
Batin should find the eldest son of the late dignitary 
unfit for the appointment, he would nominate another 
of the same family, and only when there was no proper 
person in the family itself to fill the office would he 
then appoint some one outside it.^ 

Lawsr' 

Jakun. — Though the Jakun were generally good, 
and little inclined to evil ways, they showed, notwith- 
standing, from time to time (though seldom) that 
they were in natiira /apsa, like the rest of mankind, 
from whence the necessity of establishing laws 
amongst them ; though we can say, to their praise, 
that their laws rather prevented disorder than 
punished it. Their laws were not everywhere 
uniform ; each tribe had its customs and regulations, 
those here stated being those more generally received. 
They were not written down ; but might be ex- 
pressed in some such way as follows : — ■ 

Murder and Assault? 

If a person kill another without just cause, he 
shall be put to death. 

If a person beat another, he shall be beaten in 
the same way ; if he wound him, he shall be wounded 
in the same way. 

If a person insult another, he shall pay a fine. *! 

1 /. /. A. vol. ii. p. 268. - Ibid. p. 267. ^ Ibid. p. 269. 

CHAP. X SA VA GE MA LA YS OF JOHOR 5 1 9 

Theft} 

If any person steals the property of his neigh- 
bour, he shall return it, and pay a fine to the Batin. 

If a person has already stolen several times, the 
Batin shall confiscate all his property. 

If it is recognised that a person is in the habit 
of stealing, he shall be killed ; because it is not con- 
sidered possible that a man who has given way to 
such a habit can ever again become an honest 
man. 

The laws about marriage and divorce, and the 
disposal of children, will be dealt with more fully in the 
chapter on Marriage, Suffice it to say, with regard to 
marriage, that they are strict monogamists, the penalty 
for conjugal infidelity being the capital one ; and that 
the laws concerning divorce provide for the return of 
the dowry by the defaulting party ; and with regard to 
children, that they cannot be sold against their will, 
whatever age they may be, but must be taken care of, 
on the death of both parents, by the next of kin. 

Inheritance?' 

After the death of the parents the whole of their 
property shall be divided amongst all the children in 
equal parts. 

To the foregoing account it may be added that 
if a Jakun man died in debt, his debts were paid to 
the extent of one half, the creditor losing the other 
half, even though there were property enough left 
to pay the whole. The balance went to the next of 
kin ; to the widow, if there were one, in preference to 

1 J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 269. - Ibid. p. 270. 

THE SOCIAL ORDER 

a grown-up son, but a man might leave his property 
to any relation he pleased.' 

Chiefs. 

Udai. — The Udai are described by Newbold as 
being " without either laws or any form of govern- 
ment,"" but this statement must not be taken au pied 
de la lettre. 

Orang Laut or Sea-Jakun. 

The Orang Laut system of chiefship seems to have 
been the same as that of the Jakun, the titles of the 
tribal chiefs including those of Batin, Jinang, Jukrah, 
Penglima, Hulubalang, etc. Even among the tribes 
to be found at the present day on the island of 
Singapore (e.g. the men of Kallang), these titles are 
still preserved, in spite of the close proximity and 
influence of Singapore itself. 

With this exception, however, there is scarcely a 
single remark extant to inform us what were the 
actual methods of law and government as practised 
by the Orang Laut, though there can be little doubt 
that they were practically identical with those of the 
Jakun. With regard to the rule of succession to 
property, we may infer from Logan's remark about 
the Sabimba^ [that the father's property descended 
to the sons], that it was actually identical with the 
Jakun rule. 

' /. R. A. S., S. B., No. 8, p. I20. 2 Newbold, ii. 381, 382. 

2 See vol. ii. p. 1 16. -y. 

CHAPTER XI. 

Dealings with Other Races. 

The most nomadic of all the wild tribes of the 
Peninsula are certainly the wilder Semang, who 
seldom stay more than three days in any one locality, 
and spend their entire lives in the hunt for wild roots 
and game. These " cheery little hunters," as they 
have been well described, travel continually in the 
north of the Peninsula, but do not usually appear to 
go far southward, their journeys being generally 
confined to the interior of the States of Perak, Kedah, 
and Kelantan, the old Malay State of Patani, and a 
portion of Trengganu and Pahang (north of the 
mouth of the river Tahan). 

Of the Sakai tribes of Perak Sir F. Swettenham 
remarks that the common idea that they wander at large 
all over the hills is certainly a mistake. Each particular 
tribe keeps exclusively to its own valley, and is 
frequently at feud with its neighbours on either side.' 
Their habits are migratory within their own districts, 
but except when compelled by the oppression of the 
Malays or other causes they seldom leave their own 
valleys. - 

The Jakun or " savage Malayan " tril)es, among 

* This does not mean that they actually go to war. 
* Swettenham, op. (it. 

521 

522 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

whom may be reckoned the Besisi (the most numerous 
of the Coast-Jakun tribes) are, on the other hand, in 
the habit of migrating to greater distances, such as, 
for instance, to Batu Pahat in Johor and to the Strait 
of Dumei (Selat Dumei), off the west coast of Sumatra. 

One of the most important causes which contribute 
to these periodical migrations is their great love of 
fruit, especially that of the durian. The seasons at 
which this fruit ripens vary in different parts of the 
Peninsula, and the wild jungle-dwellers (when not 
forestalled by Malays), pass from one fruit-grove to 
another as the trees ripen. But the number of fruit- 
groves thus visited by any given tribe is always 
limited, and usually consists, I believe, of the very 
same series, no attempt being made to poach upon the 
preserves of other tribes ; that is to say, the Sakai 
would not visit a Semang fruit-grove or vice versa, 
so that their wanderings are thus confined within 
certain well-defined limits. 

It has often been stated by way of demonstrating 
the low state of their intellect that the wild tribes of 
the Peninsula are unable to count beyond three. 
This statement, however, is somewhat misleading, as 
although they can only count up to three in many of 
their dialects, higher numerals are still preserved in 
some localities (f.^. in Johor), and there is besides 
sufficient evidence to make it very fairly certain that 
the Mon-Anam numerals up to ten (and perhaps 
higher) must have formerly been known at least to 
some of the tribes in question.' 

Many of them can to this day count up to ten in 
Malay, their knowledge of Malay numerals being 
doubtless due to their practice of bartering jungle 

1 Cp. C. U. Blat,'den, /. A\ A. S., S. />., No. 27, p. 40. 

CHAP. XI GENERAL REMARKS 523 

produce with the Malays. From these latter they 
have learned the higher numerals, retaining only, in 
their own dialect, the names of the first three or four' 
of them, which are all they would commonly require 
for everyday use among themselves. 

In the following pages will be given a few examples 
of the inhuman treatment that these wild tribes have 
suffered in the past at the hands of their Malay 
persecutors — a treatment of which several writers, 
among them Mr. Hugh Clifford — have described the 
results in vivid and picturesque narrative. 

As an offset to these cases, complaints of being 
cheated by the Sakai and Jakun are not infrequently 
made by Malays, and some countenance is even lent 
to these statements by the high authority of writers 
like Logan. There are, however, the gravest reasons 
for disbelieving, or at the least for heavily discounting, 
all tales of this kind, which it is never safe to accept 
without the strictest investigation. Having investi- 
gated a good many Malay complaints of this sort, the 
present writer is convinced that in the majority of 
cases, at all events, there is as little likelihood of 
Malays being cheated by any of these wild races as 
there would be of the wolf of the fable being 
deceived by the lamb." The Semang are perhaps an 
exception. 

The most carefully collected government statistics 
do not (as has already been stated in the first part of 
this book) bear out the idea that the aborigines of the 
Malay Peninsula are destined to be killed oH" by 
the kindness of civilisation. Their actual numbers 

* Cp. Clifford, /. R. A. S., S. B., bearing on the same subject will be 
No. 24, p. 18. found in an earlier chapter^that on 

2 A good deal more information " Modes of Harter. '" 

524 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

(especially when the small but necessary allowance is 
made for wastage through the conversion of an in- 
creasing number to Islam) have certainly not decreased 
to any appreciable extent, and the position of all the 
tribes, as a whole, is gradually improving. The 
ix)licy of reserves is obviously unsuited for a race 
in which the nomadic instinct is so strong ; to 
confine a head of deer in a buffalo-pen must needs 
be fatal to the deer. A just and strong govern- 
ment has already given them what they most 
required, viz. protection against their most powerful 
and aggressive compatriots the Malays. The raids of 
the latter, which were once so common, have now been 
rigorously repressed, the result being that the relations 
between the aborigines and their quondam persecutors 
are much improved, though the necessity for constant 
vigilance has not by any means as yet been super- 
seded. In spite of the devoted labours of the 
missionaries — more especially those of the Roman 
Catholic persuasion, who find in the simple hearts 
of this wild and untutored jungle-folk the very best 
possible soil for the sowing of their seed — it is 
perhaps most probable that the ultimate destiny of 
the great majority of these wild folk is absorption 
into the Mohammedan population. On the other hand, 
the fact is, and it is but scant justice to acknowledge 
it, that rude and uncultivated as these people are, 
yet in some respects they are vastly superior to 
the races by whom they are likely to be absorbed — 
more honest, more truthful, less covetous, more free 
in every way from crime ; and on this account, as 
well as on others, they have a foremost claim on the 
consideration of the responsible Government. 

CHAP. XI NEGRITOS OF PEh'AK 525 

I. — Semang. 
Dealings with Strangers. 

Semang-.— The Negrito lives by his bow and blow- 
pipe alone, and sleeps in a temporary lean-to shed in 
spots where game is plentiful. The Sakai affects to 
look down upon the Negrito, while the latter is a 
happy-go-lucky, cheery little hunter who looks down 
on nobody.' 

The Semang are very merry and lively, and even 
their women and young girls are much less wild than 
those of the Sakai, and assail the traveller with all 
kinds of extraordinary questions.'- 

Kedah Semang". — A good many years ago the 
Bendahara of Kedah sent two of the Kedah Semang 
for the inspection of some of his English friends 
at Penang ; but shortly after leaving Kedah, one of 
them whose fears could not be appeased became very 
obstreperous, and endeavoured to upset the small 
boat in which they were embarked. The Malays, 
therefore, with their usual apathy and indifference to 
life, put the poor creature to death, and threw him 
overboard ; the other arrived in safety, was kindly 
treated, and received many presents of cloth and 
money. He was taken to view the shops in the 
town, and purchased a variety of spades, hatchets, and 
other iron implements, which he appeared to prize 
above everything else. On his return to Ian he 
built himself a small hut, and began to cultivate mace, 
sugar-cane, and yams.' 

Perak Semang. — In exchanging jungle produce 
(of the intrinsic value of which they are ignorant) 

' Cliftord,/. R. A. S., S. /V., No. 24, p. 14. 
- De Mor;^.in, viii. 297. ' Anderson, p. 427. 

526 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES i-art ii 

for cloth, the Semang are generally imposed upon 
by the crafty Malay, but they in turn, however, 
frequently impose upon the superstitious Malays, 
when they have no products to barter and wish to 
procure a supply of tobacco, by presenting them with 
medicines which they pretend to derive from parti- 
cular shrubs and trees in the woods, and which they 
represent as efficacious for the cure of headache and 
other complaints.^ 

I am told by Mr. L. Wray that the Semang of 
Upper Perak have large clearings in which they 
cultivate rice and other grains, and have quite good 
well-built houses. There are others who appear to 
live in a more nomadic way, but even these have 
houses to which they resort sometimes. They go 
at times over the mountains to Selama and to Kedah. 

The tribes of Upper Perak are in the position of 
dependents to the Malays, and appear to have been 
so for a long time past. The Malays call them in 
and make them fell the jungle and plant up their 
ladangs, collect jungle produce, and do house-build- 
ing, etc., for them. In exchange they give them salt, 
.salt-fish, tobacco, knives, axes, etc. , 

They appear to have been hunted and enslaved | 
less than the Sakai,- but on the other hand their 
position has apparently affected them more than some 
other subject races, and they are untruthful, cunning, 
and unreliable to a very marked degree. Mr. Wray 
was once for three months living amongst them, and 
this was the conclusion that he arrived at, much 
against his will. It may not apply to the wilder 
Negritos. 

* Anderson, pp. 425, 426 ; cp. De Morgan, L'ffomme, ii. 556, 

- For an instance, see p. 530 infra. 

CHAP. XI SAKAI OF PERAK 527 

II. — Sakai. 
Dealings with Strangers. 

Perak Sakai. — Clifford says,' that in contrast to 
the Negritos, who Hve as hunters in slight lean - to 
sheds, the Sakai live in houses, and plant as well 
as hunt ; and adds further that the Sakai tribes are, for 
the most part, now split up into innumerable clans, 
each consisting of a few families living in places 
surrounded by the Malays, and thus cut off from 
communication with each other, these small clans 
being more advanced in civilisation, and at the same 
time more degenerate than their brothers the Sakai 
of the far interior. 

De Morgan says that, thanks to their honesty, 
they can do without police, and that as often as he 
compared our feverish life in Europe with the peace- 
ful existence (of the Sakai), the comparison always 
proved to the advantage of the latter.- 

Hale, who saw a great deal of the Sakai people 
in Perak, invariably found them (where not demo- 
ralised by Malay intercourse) most kind and simple- 
hearted, and always anxious to do their best to 
assist any white man that happened to be in want of 
assistance. He found this, moreover, the general 
opinion amongst those who had had dealings with 
these tribes. As has already been stated in the case 
of the Semang, the Sakai in their natural state were 
given neither to lying or cheating, though, on the other 
hand, they themselves are often the victims of the 
most shameless imposture on the part of the Malays.^ 

' /. K. A. S., 5. B., No. 24, p. 14. 
^ De Morgan, vii. 425 ; cp. /.'//omwe, ii. 556-559. ^ Hale, p. 286. 

528 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part n 

Hale adds that, the Malays themselves cheated 
the Sakai most remorselessly. He was informed 
by one of his men that he could always get tin ore 
sufficient to smelt ten kati's [rather over 13 pounds] 
of tin for a jungle-knife (" parang ") worth only thirty 
cents/ 

They are a most peaceful race, and now at all 
events never make war on each other or go in for 
any sort of inter-tribal fighting. They are affectionate 
and faithful both to their family and friends, and will 
treasure objects which belonged to the deceased. -' 
For the rest we may accept the statement that they 
are by no means stupid, but very much the reverse 
in all matters that even indirectly concern their own 
interests. They are incapable, however, of standing 
any prolonged mental strain, and their inventive 
faculties seem dormant rather than non - existent. 
When the occasion arises they are by no means want- 
ing in resource."^ 

The Sakai of Perak (as Mr. L. Wray writes me) 
are quite independent except in a few places. They 
were, in Malay times, hunted like wild beasts, and 
when captured enslaved by the Malays. At the 
same time there seems to have been a certain amount 
of intercourse kept up between the two races in the 
shape of a traffic in jungle produce and tin ore, on 
the one part, and knives, axes, cooking-pots, salt, 
cloth, etc., on the other. A few isolated tribes are 

1 I am not quite sure, however, Cp. also Montano (quoted by De 

that some injustice is not done to the Quatrefages, pp. 226, 227): " M. 

Malays in this particular respect, as Montano informs us that they never 

Mr. Hale (p. 287), himself records make war on each other, and that the 

instances in which articles were offered parents watch tenderly over their 

to him by the Sakai at a ridiculously children, and will even when necessary 

low valuation. deprive themselves of food on their 

-2 Hale in y. .7. /. pp. 291, 292. account." 

SAKAI OF FERAK 529 

Still to be found, such as the Sakai of Blanja and 
those at Pulau Tiga ("Three Islands") in Batang 
Padang, both of which have maintained their in- 
dependence though completely surrounded by Malays. 
The Sakai are very shy, but are truthful and honest. 
Those of Batang Padang have lately taken to going 
by the railway down to Telok Anson to sell rattans, 
dammar, and other jungle products at better prices 
than they could get from the up-country Malays. 
They are now beginning to show a fondness for dress, 
and it is no uncommon sight to see a party of Sakai 
women coming into the towns very much smarter 
and better dressed than the average of Malay 
women. 

Mr. Wray tells me that he has known several in- 
stances of Sakai living in Malay Kampongs in Larut 
and Kuala Kangsar, not as slaves but as independent 
land- and house-holders. 

Before the emancipation of the slaves in 1882-83, 
there were many Sakai women in the houses of 
the Malays, and quite a considerable number remained 
after that date. The children appear to be treated 
just the same as the wholly Malayan members of the 
family. 

Mr. Wray adds, that the Sakai of Perak, who are 
in touch with the Malays, employ the Malay numerals 
up to quite high figures, and are sharp in money 
transactions. In the eighties he saw an excellent 
instance of this at Batu Pipis in Kinta. In paying 
for some things he gave some coppers to a Sakai, who 
picked out a Sarawak cent and gave it back, asking 
for a Straits cent in exchange. 

The following passage by I\I. Maclay gives an 
accurate picture of the hostile relations still subsisting 

VOL. r 2 M 

530 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

in some parts between the Malays and aborigines.' 
Maclay remarks that if the " tamer " Sakai are some- 
what dependent upon the Malays, the "wilder" ones 
remain decidedly hostile to them, and never lose an 
opportunity of taking revenge on these foes of theirs, 
who by continually laying out new plantations diminish 
the territory of the original inhabitants, get the pro- 
duce of the jungle from them for a mere trifle, and 
also, whenever they can possibly do so, capture their 
children in order to keep them or sell them as slaves. 
This man-hunting, which is now very rarely practised 
by the Malays, was formerly practised on a larger 
scale, and in many districts where numerous tribes 
of the original inhabitants used formerly to dwell, 
no traces of them are now to be found. The 
Malays, however, in spite of their superiority in 
all respects to these denizens of the jungle, are 
nevertheless very much afraid of them, and do not 
venture either alone or in too small parties into those 
parts of the forest which the wilder aborigines are 
known to frequent. - 

L, Wray has remarked that Sakai tracks, where- 
ever possible, invariably follow the bed of some 
stream, and there is thus nothing to guide anybody 
in attempting to follow them. This, he was informed, 
was intentional, and in times past was a necessary 
measure to prevent their being followed and hunted 
out of their mountain homes by the Malays.^ 

' Maclay in writing of the Pangan, jurisdiction of the F. M. S. For an 

whom he calls Saltai. J.R.A.S., S.B., instance in which six Malays were 

No. 2, pp. 212, 213. It is, how- severely punished, see Maxwell in 

ever, bare justice to the Government of y. R. A. S., S. B., No. 4, p. 46. 

the British Protectorate to say that ^ Miklucho Maclay in _/. R. A, S., 

the raiding of the aborigines by Malays .S", B., No. 2, p. 213. 

has been sternly repressed, whenever ^ _/. R. A. S., S. B., No. 21, pp. 

the opportunity has offered, within the 163, 164. 

f 

SAKAI OF SELANGOR 

The "tamer" Sakai, on the other hand, even 
when exploited by the Malays, frequently stand on 
somewhat better terms with them. It is in this lighter 
vein that a French traveller in Perak (M. Brau de 
Saint-Pol Lias) ^ writes as follows : — 

" I approach an old man with a round, good- 
natured face, white hair, and grey moustache and 
beard, and ask him his age. 

" He smiles, hesitates a moment, and replies : 

" ' Sa-ribu ! ' (' a thousand '). 

" The Malays annoyingly break out into a great 
shout of laughter, whereupon I ask them : 

" ' Why do you laugh like fools ? Perhaps he 
means a thousand months. Which of yotc can tell me 
how many years that makes ? ' 

" They hold their peace. 

" I return to my Sakai. I am determined to clear 
up the point at once, and to find out if the Sakai, 
as I have been told, can really only count up to 
three. 

" ' Sa-ribu ! That is perhaps too much,' I say to 
the good-natured old man ; ' it is too much. Let us 
see about how much.it is approximately.' 

" * Sa-ratus ' (' a hundred '), he replies quickly. 

" ' That is still too much. Perhaps you mean 
sixty } ' 

" ' Yes, sixty.' 

" I have not settled the point yet." ' 

Selang-or Sakai. — The nomadic instinct of the 
Sakai dies hard, even among the more settled tribes, 
and Letessier records the fact that many Sakai 
who had been enslaved and converted by the Malays 
have taken the advantage of the establishment of the 

' Brau de Saint-Pol Lias, pp. 251-253. 

532 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES i'art it 

British power in the Peninsula " and for the most part 
gone back to their hunting of monkeys and wild 
pigs."^ Their wonderful knowledge of the jungle 
and instinct in finding and capturing game has been 
referred to elsewhere. 

It cannot be denied that they are, generally speak- 
ing, dirty to an extreme as compared with the Malays, 
scarcely any of them bathe except when caught in the 
rain, and a great number of them, more especially 
the members of the inland tribes, suffer from some 
more or less advanced stage of skin disease, which 
is due, no doubt, entirely to their way of living. 
There is, however, a good deal of difference in this 
respect between the inland tribes and those near the 
coast who have come to a greater extent under Malay 
influences. 

They are also often very lazy, and, as might be 
expected, improvident, both characteristics being due 
to the life which they lead. 

In many respects the Sakai of Kuala Lumpur are 
far better off than their forefathers were in the days 
when Malay influence was predominant in the Pen- 
insula. In those days, as Letessier says," they had no 
fixed abode. Hunted by the Malays, who stole 
their children, they were forced to leave their dwell- 
ings and fly hither and thither, passing the night in 
caves or in huts (" pondok "), which they burnt on their 
departure. "In those days," they say, "we never 
walked in the beaten tracks lest the print of our 
footsteps in the mud should betray us." For wherever 
the Malay perceived any indication of their presence, 
he would build himself a small shelter, and never | 

I Letessier, p. lOO. Cp. Maxwell, y. R. A. S., S. B., No. i, pp. 112, 113. 
^ Letessier, p. 1 00. 

SAKAI OF SELANGOR 53: 

leave it until he had discovered the place of retreat 
where they generally spent the night. Accompanied 
by a few accomplices, he would then repair to the spot 
at nightfall, and the party, concealing themselves until 
dark, would wait to commence their raid until the 
" Hill-men " were asleep. The Malays would then fire 
several rifle shots, spreading terror and confusion 
in every family, whose breaking up made them an 
easy prey to their assailants, who would promptly 
make a rush for the spot where they heard the shrieks 
of the women and children. The girls were, as a rule, 
at once knocked on the head, and the boys were carried 
off and sold as slaves. There is hardly a family that 
has not its own especial calamity to relate, the result 
being the profound aversion that they avowedly 
cherish for the Malay ; no hatred, however, exists nor 
desire for vengeance, as such a feeling would be 
incompatible with the extraordinarily peaceful nature 
of the race.^ 

Any act of vengeance, moreover, would be fatal to 
them, in view of their insignificant numbers and lack 
of means of defence. They prefer therefore to 
sacrifice the part for the whole, and this is certainly 
the only possible course open to them, so far as 
regards the loss of their property. Since the arrival of 
the English, however, they have grown much bolder, 
for as the government has always befriended them 
whenever they have chosen to make a complaint, they 
are now able to hold their own in spite of the un- 
ceasing menaces of their enemy. -' 

By the Chinese, on the other hand, they are very 
much more kindly treated, and are consequently much 

' Letessier, p. loi. - Ibid, 

534 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

more at home with them, and deal with them in 
preference to the Malays.^ 

Finally, we are told by Letessier that what chiefly 
distinguishes the Sakai from the Malays is the 
natural simplicity of their manner. They have a 
childlike openness of speech and are scrupulously just 
in their dealings. This uprightness and simplicity is 
so visibly expressed on their frank and smiling 
countenances, that even when they are attired like 
Malays it is almost invariably possible to recognise 
them when encountered on a journey. Both their 
food and clothing are as simple as possible ; they find 
all their wants supplied by the forest. 

Sakai of Ulu Lang-at. — Campbell, in writing of the 
Ulu Langat Sakai, states that their manners were 
simple, and that they were naturally liberal, and 
would share anything in their house with any one, 
and were hurt if their offer were refused. At the 
same time, they were neither spiteful nor vindictive, 
and though many of them had guns, they were not 
brave enough to hunt the elephant or bison, and were 
not ashamed to say so. 

A curious feature of their hospitality, pointed out 
by Campbell, is that whenever asked to do anything 
they would at once comply, but would not as a rule 
offer to do it of their own accord. 

On the other hand, they would not refuse any 
gifts that might be offered them, and indeed in most 
cases, would look for presents whenever a European 
visited their settlements. 

Their mode of trading was very simple, and they 
never got the best of a bargain. "^ 

' Letessier, p. 99. - Campbell, p. 240. 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 535 

III. — Jakun. 

Besisi. — Like many wild races in other parts, they 
are reticent and shy of strangers, and will frequently 
hide in the jungle or up trees when a white man is 
visiting their settlement for the first time. This shy- 
ness, however, wears off much sooner than it does with 
the Malay, so long as they are well and justly treated ; 
in fact, in many cases it soon entirely disappears. 

Their ignorance not unfrequently takes a form 
which though natural enough in itself, appears ex- 
ceedingly comical to a European. 

Batin Tirus of Telok Pulai once asked Mr. G. C. 
Bellamy if he could take off his boots. He apparently 
had an idea that the white man was born with 
boots on. Mr. Bellamy asked him how old he 
was, and although he was a great-great-grandfather, 
his reply was "More than ten years old" (" Sapuloh 
tahun lebih "). He put the same question to the 
Jinang at Sa-jangkang, and received a similar reply.^ 
I myself have had exactly similar experiences. 

The Besisi are to a man most hospitable and 
liberal, and their sense of gratitude is far more 
developed than is the case with the Malays. Mr. 
Bellamy adds that they never forget a kindness, and 
always remember the ' Tuan ' (White Man) who 
visited them on such and such an occasion. - 

If treated properly, they will do almost anything 
to oblige. On several occasions Mr. Bellamy had to 
use them as guides through the jungle, and all that 
he had to do was to state his requirements, when, 
without any hesitation or bargaining for wages, they 
at once afforded him the assistance required."^ 

• Bellamy, p. 228. - Ibid. ^ Ibid. 

536 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

Mr. Bellamy adds that although they hold such a 
low position in the scale of society, yet they are 
perfectly happy and contented. Their earthly bliss is 
contained, as they themselves will tell you, in " eating, 
working, and sleeping," and they ask for nothing more. 
Meet them where you will, either in their wretched 
huts, in the jungle gathering fruit or honey, by the 
seaside fishing, or anywhere else, they are always 
ready with a cheery response to your salutation.^ 

It is certain that they have never possessed 
an alphabet of their own, though they do possess 
the tradition of a sacred volume (" Kitab""-^) which is 
said to have been destroyed by fire many years ago. 

But to describe them as children, or to assume 
that their brain is in a state of arrested development, 
is by no means an adequate statement of the case. 
They will work very hard and very rapidly for short 
intervals, even on their own account, and when 
" sweated " by the Malays who compel them to collect 
jungle produce, etc., they will often work, literally 
like " slaves," for a long while together. The fact 
that they have picked up agriculture when they might 
have got sufficient to supply all their wants from the 
forest, and had been in the habit of so doing for 
hundreds of years, shows that they are not incapable 
of progress. I have even known a small group of 
Besisi families take to the planting of Liberian coffee, 
whilst others have leased land from the government, 
have done road -work for government officers, and 
have even acquired such industries as that of the 
blacksmith. I think, in fact, that it can safely be said 
that the Malays can do very little that the Besisi, if 
taken young enough, and with equal advantages, 

' Bellamy, p. 228. - Ibid. p. 227 ; and cp. 378, 391, ante. 

"^ 

■V 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF SELANGOR 537 

could not acquire ; though certainly those of them 
who have been spoilt either by opium-smoking or other 
Malay or Chinese vices, can hold their own with their 
teachers in a contest of misapplied wits. All these 
facts help to bring out what I believe to be the most 
salient characteristic of these tribes, viz., their un- 
rivalled power of adaptability. 

Jakun of Sungei Ujong". — The Jakun of Sungei 
Ujong were till recently on no better terms with the 
Malays than the aborigines of Selangor and Perak.^ 

At a Malay wedding-feast in Sungei Ujong, some 
of the Jakun guests (of whom nearly one hundred 
were present) informed the Rev. M. Borie (a French 
Roman Catholic missionary) and Mr. J. R. Logan 
how unhappy they were in that place, and what bad 
treatment they experienced from the Malays, so much 
so that only a few days before several of them had 
been killed and wounded by order of the Malay chief. 
They declared that they intended to escape over into 
the Company's territory, where they hoped to find more 
tranquillity and assistance ; and asked the Europeans 
to take them with them. Two of them offered them- 
selves as servants for ever, or rather as slaves, as 
they intended not to receive any pay. This was a 
great mark of confidence, since by so speaking they 
took their lives in their hands, for the mention of their 
design would have undoubtedly been the cause of 
some fresh order for killing the first authors of this 
resolution, which would have been called a conspiracy. 
These requests were not acceded to, but some advice 
was given to the aborigines, the Europeans of the 

^ J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 280. The S. the tally-stick as a innemonic when they 
Ujong tribes, who are no better at want to calculate, v. Knocker, Joiirtt. 
counting than others of their race, use F. M.S. Mus. vol. i. No. ii. pp. 60-61. 

538 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

party intending to return again to the place after a 
short interval/ 

Mantpa. — The Mantra of Malacca have suffered like 
other aboriginal tribes from the raids and incursions of 
the neighbouring Malays, their most implacable foes 
being the members of a Malay tribe called Rawa, This 
people are natives of a country in Sumatra called 
Rawa, Rau, and Ara, lying immediately to the north 
of Menangkabau, and penetrated by the large but 
scarcely navigable river Rakan. They are dis- 
tinguished for their trading character, and, as traders 
and settlers, they have for a long period, but particu- 
larly during the last twenty or thirty years, annually 
repaired to the Peninsula opposite, sometimes by way 
of the Rakan, but more generally by the river Siak. 
They are bold, persevering, and thrifty, qualities 
which have long enabled them to engross the principal 
internal traffic between Malacca and Pahang. They 
always go well armed, but the chief source of their 
strength is their social spirit, which leads them to 
make common cause against those who have injured 
any of their nation. They are now settled in con- 
siderable numbers in Rembau, Sungei Ujong, and 
the western part of Pahang, and their numbers and 
power yearly increase and become more formidable. 
Seven months before the time of Logan's (present) 
memoir, large bands of them, under one Bata Bidohom, 
who was reputed invulnerable, attacked the Mantra 
in several places, killing many of the men and carrying 
away more than a hundred of their women and girls 
into Pahang, where they sold them as slaves. The 
Rawa declared that they would hunt down the Mantra 
everywhere and deal with them all in the same way, 

' /. /. A. vol. ii. pji. 280, 281. 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALA YS OF MALACCA 539 

in consequence of which the greater number of Mantra 
left their houses and became scattered far and wide 
about the country.^ 

At the same time it must not be forgotten that the 
enmity of the Malays is often limited considerably by 
a superstitious fear of their victims." 

Amongst the Malays themselves the " tuju," or 
Pointing charm, and other supernatural arts are also 
to some extent practised, but their practitioners are 
considered inferior in power to those of the aborigines. 
The very circumstance of these tribes remaining 
unconverted is probably a principal cause of the belief 
crediting them with the possession of unhallowed 
powers. In no country where new creeds are received 
is there a total immediate abandonment of the ancient 
ones. So long as the existence of the old gods and 
demons of the land is believed in there will always be 
multitudes ready either to ask their aid or deprecate 
their wrath, in spite of the fact that they believe it 
sinful to do so. To this day neither Hinduism, Islam- 
ism, nor Christianity itself have totally extinguished 
the ancient superstitions of the countries where they 
prevail. And this same unreasoning fear of the 
aborigines has doubtless in numberless cases operated 
more powerfully in their defence than the best of laws 
could have done.^ 

Of the visit of a party of Mantra to Singapore, 
Logan has left a most interesting and valuable ac- 
count.'' On the occasion referred to his IVIalay writer 
(one Inche Mohammed bin Haji Abdul Fatha, whom 
he had sent to Malacca to collect additional materials 
for a comparison of the languages of the aboriginal 

1 J. /. A. vol. i. pp. 32S*, 329*. ■•' 3 Jbiii. p. jzS*. 

■* loici. p. 332*^ -f'V'/- 

540 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

tribes) informed him that he had brought a party of 
Mantra to his house in Malacca, and thought he could 
induce them to visit him in Singapore, so that he 
might be enabled to gain more thorough knowledge of 
their character and condition. The party in question 
had moved into British territory some time previously, 
and had settled at Rumbiah on Mr. Westerhout's land. 
Logan requested Mohammed to bring them to Singa- 
pore, and they arrived there on the i6th of October 
and remained till the 7th of November. The party 
consisted of a Mantra named Pawang and his wife, a 
second man named Parut and his wife, and a third 
man named Tala. 

They hesitated much about undertaking the voyage, 
as the members of this race, like all the tribes of the 
interior, have a hereditary dread of the sea, and no 
Mantra had ever ventured upon it from time imme- 
morial. When they came on board the " scotchy " 
they were at once placed below, to prevent their being 
frightened by the waves and the motion of the vessel. 
They soon became very sea-sick, and it was not till 
the boat was opposite Pulau Pisang that one of the 
men had so far recovered as to venture to rise and 
look round. But no sooner did the rolling waves 
meet his sight than he was seized with fear, and 
plunged below the deck again. 

When they took up their residence in Logan's com- 
pound they were at first a little reserved, although they 
had evidently seen Europeans frequently. On the 
second and third days their principal employment, while 
their poisoned arrows lasted, was to shoot birds, and 
they soon discovered more species in the " kampong " 
than we had ever observed ourselves. On the second 
day they had depopulated all the trees. Amongst the 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 541 

spoils which they seemed to prize most were two owls 
and a colony of bats. The latter they seized upon 
with great glee, carried at once to their house, broiled 
slightly, and devoured. Nothing being now left in 
the compound, Logan took them next evening along 
the Garden Road, but they did not succeed in getting 
any birds, and this made them think Singapore a poor 
country. Some clumps of jungle on the hills beyond 
Mr. Caldwell's villa redeemed it a little in their eyes, 
and they were anxious to reach them, but disliked 
having to cross the swamps. Logan offered to give 
them a small plantation if they would remain in Singa- 
pore, pointing to the sugar-canes and fine fruit-trees 
in the Chinese plantations on the side of the road. 
They said they could not live where there was so 
little forest, and as for plantations they could make 
clearings of their own in Malacca, They pointed to 
Said Omar's and Mr. Dyce's hill, and asked what was 
the value of such a house with the hill and trees 
around it. When told that it might sell for 3000 
dollars, they expressed the liveliest astonishment. 
Shortly afterwards, when Pawang was describing the 
mountains of his country, he was asked for what price 
the Mantra would sell Gunong Berembun. He hesi- 
tated, looked at Mr. Dyce's hill, and at last said, " Ten 
godowns," i.e. store-houses (" sa-puloh gedong "). 

Of all the sights that they saw in Singapore, the 
Chinese Temple pleased them most. Hut after hav- 
ing visited the town, Telok Blanga, Scglap. and some 
other parts of the island, they declared that Malacca 
was a much finer place. ^ 

The three men dift'ered considerably in disposition. 
The most remarkable was Pawang. who displayed 

' /. /. ,-/. vol. i. pp. 332*, 333*. 

542 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES i'art ii 

much sense and firmness in his character, and a slight 
degree of pride and reserve in his manner. He was 
looked up to by his companions as a man of superior 
ability and knowledge, and his reputed skill in natural 
and supernatural medicines made him an object of 
much attention to the Malays in the neighbourhood, 
who invited him to their houses and visited him, to 
solicit herbs and charms. The women in particular 
regarded him as a magician of undoubted art, and 
many, on first approaching him, threw themselves at 
his feet. His head was decidedly intellectual in its 
formation. 

Parut was a picture of indolence, good-nature, and 
contentedness. He seemed to enjoy what the passing 
moment brought, without any intrusion of thought or 
care. 

Tala was also good-natured and indolent, but more 
lively, and not without a little humour. He was 
exceedingly fond of raw brandy, and, when slightly 
elevated, danced, sang, and played on his flute — a 
mere piece of bamboo with some holes in it. On the 
third evening he was seized with melancholy, his 
thoughts reverted to his absent wife, and he sat for 
some hours by himself drawing plaintive notes from 
his flute, and singing of her, by turns, while the tears 
coursed down his cheeks. His temperament was 
much more excitable than that of the others, J| 

The women were good-natured, and one of them, 
Pawang's wife, was even lively. Whilst their con- 
versation was characterised by an Old Testament 
simplicity and unreserve, their manners were in every 
respect modest. 

The impression which they made upon every one 
who saw much of them was very favourable. In 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF MALACCA 543 

manners they were soft, simple, candid, and, at the 
same time independent. Their whole conduct was 
marked by a tone of propriety and good sense. They 
showed an entire absence of obtrusiveness, greediness, 
deceitfulness, intolerance, or any other of the vices 
which so often mar the effect of the good qualities 
possessed by many of the races who inhabit Singapore. 
In a word, they were perfectly well behaved, and in- 
spired a trustfulness and liking which are not often 
awakened by Asiatics in the breast of the European.* 
Within a fortnight after Logan had wished them a 
safe voyage back to Malacca, and promised to visit 
Gunong Berembun under Pawang's guidance, a 
rumour reached him that the trading boat which 
carried them away had been wrecked and three of 
them drowned. This most painful intelligence was 
confirmed, and the satisfaction that he had anticipated 
when bringing these notes to a close, from the hope 
that some attention and sympathy might be drawn to 
the race, was embittered by the reflection that the 
resolution of his simple friends to overcome their 
natural dread of the sea had proved a fatal one to 
them. It appears that stormy weather was ex- 
perienced from Pulau Pisang to Padang. When off 
the latter place, on the 14th, the boat being much 
damaged and the wind rising to a gale, the Malays 
made for the shore. They had nearly reached it, 
about nine o'clock at night, when, dreading that the 
boat would be dashed to pieces, the crew prepared to 
leap overboard, and wade to the land. Tala and 
Pawang's wife were afraid to do so, but his sister and 
Parut, her husband, consenting, Pawang fastened them 
to himself by their waist-bands, saying that they would 

' /. /. A. vol. i. pp. T,:iz*, 334*. 

544 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES 

live or die together, and then they all plunged into 
the waves. They sank at once, for it was deeper 
than they had believed, and the bottom being a stiff 
mud, they never rose again. Next morning the 
Malays, who had succeeded in reaching the shore, 
saw the boat still holding together, and, on going to 
it, they found Tala and Pawang's wife alive in it. 
The survivors procured a boat and arrived at Malacca 
on the evening of the following day.^ 

Jakun of N. Sembilan. — In contrast to the bad treat- 
ment of these tribes is the position of the aboriginal 
element in Rembau, of which the late Mr. M, Lister 
has informed us that the " Batins " or chiefs were, 
according to ancient usage, closely connected with 
the Malay tribe from which the Penghulus of States 
were in nearly all cases elected. The four principal 
Batins were those of Ulu Klang, Sungei Ujong, 
Jelebu, and Johol. They had a strong voice in 
the election of the Mohammedan Penghulu. The 
cause is apparent. The Menangkabau colonists 
married the daughters of Batins. Their children 
were Mohammedans and their female children (in 
accordance with Menangkabau law) inherited and 
became the origin of the " Waris " or tribe of 
" Beduanda," which was declared to be the inheriting 
civilised tribe, whilst at they same time they still had 
to recognise the Batin or Jakun's powers in the 
mountains and forests, and preserve their position 
and identity in connection with the "Beduanda" 
tribe." Hence came the custom of female inheri- 

1 /. /. A. vol. i. pp. 334*, 335* and other Malay pirates occupying a 

- The reason for this striking dif- coast -line, as in the case of Selangor 

ference in the treatment of tlie Rembau and Perak, driving back and taking as 

aborigines are stated by Mr. Lister as slaves the non-Mohammedan aborigines 

follows : — '• First and foremost it must of the Peninsula termed ' Semang, ' 

be understood that instead of Bugis 'Sakai,' 'Jakun,' and 'Waris Laut,' 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF jV. SEMBILAN 545 

tance, and according to Menangkabau custom a man 
cannot marry in his own tribe, that is, in the tribe of 
his mother. Hence a Beduanda man must marry into 
another tribe, and his children belong to the tribe of 
the mother/ 

It is often most interesting to converse with Batins 
and Jakun chiefs on their traditions and laws, especially 
in tracing the connection with the Malay Moham- 
medan customs. A Batin will invariably tell you 
that all the forest and waste lands — called by them 
" Gaung," " Guntong," " Bukit," " Bukau," as inclusive 
of everything uncultivated — belong to them. This is 
by origin correct ; but there is at the same time no 
doubt that they have parted with their rights to the 
Mohammedan tribe of Beduanda in all cases of 
government, concession, and taxation. Still the 
Dato' of Johol pays to the Batin of Johol a pro- 
portion of the revenues derived from waste lands 
through his minister the Jinang of Johol, who is, so 
to speak, minister for the aborigines. The Batins 
often collect themselves where the Beduanda are 
remiss in doing so. For instance, in Muar {i.e. on 
the reaches of the Muar river above the Segamat 
boundary), Batin Gemala, who is the principal Batin 
of Johol, declared that he collected a fee that he called 

the people of Menangkabau who countries in wliich tliey might quietly 

penetrated into the Negri Sembilan settle and make their home. Now it 

vid Malacca or the Muar river came is more than probable that all these 

as settlers. They came in search of settlers came from the interior of 

pastures new, possibly on account of Sumatra. Th'jy were accustomed to 

troubles and disturbances in the State mountains, hilly districts where existed 

of Menangkabau in Sumatra, just as rich alluvial valleys, in which they 

we did in leaving English shores for knew they would find soils fertile 

the continent of America. They were and easy of irrigation'' {J. R. A. S., 

no Rajas or warriors on the look-out S. B., No. 22, Dec. 1890, pp. 299, 

for conquest and plunder, but merely 300). 

peaceful immigrants from Sumatra, ^ J. R. A. S., S. B., No. 22, p. 

who hoped to find fertile and rich 302. 

VOL. I 2 N 

546 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES i-akt ii 

" penchong alas " from the Malays who collected 
jungle produce. The amount of the fee was insignifi- 
cant, being one dollar per man once in three years. 
He declared with pride that this was the " penny-box 
of the man of the woods." ^ The simplicity of this 
form of taxation was most curious, and shows the 
freedom from guile of the aboriginal mind. He was 
attempting at the time of this meeting to collect this 
fee for the past three years, not in advance. Lister 
tried to assist him, but the attempt was vain. He was 
somewhat indignant at the falseness of the Malay ; but 
for his own part. Lister was not astonished. In talking 
of his position with reference to the Dato' of Johol, 
he said that as between him and the Dato', " custom 
cannot be altered, agreements cannot be changed, 
alliances cannot be revoked." - This is a very 
beautiful expression of Malay fealty and loyalty. 
Sometimes a Batin or Jurukrah, who is minister 
to the Batin, is very indignant. He will say, " the 
Penghulus^ get thousands of dollars now in selling our 
forests." Then it is explained to them how necessary 
it is this earth should be developed. They are in- 
formed that they are not able to govern or regulate 
such things, and that they cannot truly claim the forests 
as being theirs ; but that what they can claim is to have 
all that they require for their maintenance from the 
forests. They will then reply that this is quite right, 
and that they are really perfectly happy as long as 
they have forests reserved to them, and that they do 
not know what to do with money. They are delighted 
with presents of tobacco, stuffs, and other trifles. If 

' " Peti duit orang utan." "Alas" is an obsolete Malayan word for "jungle." 

- " Adat tiada berubah, perjanjian tiada bcralih, setia tiada bertukar." 

•' I.e. Lesser chiefs. 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF N. SEMBILAN 547 

you give them money they generally go home to the 
forest and bury it, never telling any one where, so 
that on their death it is lost. There was one man who 
liked getting money, and he always came alone to 
Lister to ask for it. He came alone so as to be 
able to bury the money without difficulty. He had 
evidently a craving for silver, and experienced the 
satisfaction of a miser in knowing that he had money, 
though he did not make use of it.^ 

The conversation of the Jakun is full of proverbs, 
and they constantly quote sayings which have certainly 
become Malay, but which often and often are unknown 
to Malays of the present day. It is a usual thing for 
a Malay to exclaim when a Jakun is talking, " How 
clever he is at talking!"^ and to look at him in 
admiration. The Malay, however, knows the Jakun's 
intense simplicity ; and if he wants any advantages 
from him, he will get all he requires. He will also 
laugh at him, though in a friendly chaffing way, and it 
is often amusing to hear the Jakun get by far the best 
of the laugh. ^ 

The Jakun never object to the collection of 
revenues by British officials. They say that the 
English know how to do it, and that they do it 
rightly, and that it should be so ; but they say the 
Malays know nothing about it, and that when money 
comes into a Malay country it makes nothing but 
difficulties and trouble. They are lookers-on, and it is 
hardly necessary to say how correct their views are."* 

A Jakun has the greatest dread of a grant for 
land. Nothing will persuade him to take out a 
grant, and if pressed (which in the Native States is 

1 ^ ' y. A'. A. S., S. /}., No. 22, pp. 302, 303. 
- " I'andei s"kali chakap." 

I 

548 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part n 

unnecessary), he will leave the country and travel 
away into the mountains of the interior. Anything 
binding, any direct taxation or registration, drives 
him away.^ 

The real objection of the Jakun to taking out 
pfrants for land is because of their custom that if there 
is a death in the house, they must leave the place and 
settle elsewhere, generally many miles away.' 

The origin of the land tenure in Rembau is very 
curious, and probably unknown in any other State of 
the Malay Peninsula. When the original settlers 
arrived they ingratiated themselves into the good graces 
of the aborigines, and first of all, no doubt, got free gifts 
of forest land from the Batin. Later on there probably 
was competition for waste lands in fertile valleys, and 
presents were given to the Batin of the land. This 
resulted later in the sale of land to the Mohammedan 
settlers. The price was a knife or a weapon, a piece 
of cloth or some article valued by the Jakun; but it 
became an actual sale. According to Mohammedan 
law, land cannot be sold ; it is God's land, and man 
cannot sell it. Thus here we have distinctly the 
aboriginal origin in the sales of waste lands. Later, 
as the Mohammedans became powerful in the country, 
the Mohammedan tribe of Beduanda took up the sale 
of waste lands and made considerable profit by it ; 
and during the last twenty years the Beduanda chiefs 
have sold waste lands of, say, three or four acres 
in extent, for eight and ten dollars and sometimes 
more.^ 

As this custom was against the Mohammedan law, 
it was easy for the government to put a stop to an 

^"-"^ J. R. A.S., S. B., No. 22, pp. 303, 304. 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF N. SEMBILAN 549 

usage which caused many disputes, much trouble, and 
even bloodshed in the country.' 

In an article printed in this same Journal (1889) 
Lister gave the dry facts in connection with the 
origin of their constitution. The tribes are governed 
by the " 'Adat Perpatih," and by the customs derived 
from the aborigines. With the Raja family this is 
not the case, and the " 'Adat Temenggong " governs 
property and inheritance." 

Here again is a case that has only been referred 
to as having created ill-feeling, but which illustrates 
the Batin's influence in State matters. Batin Gemala, 
the principal Batin of Johol, who lived some miles in 
the interior on the left bank of the Muar river, was 
induced, in consequence of a number of his people 
becoming Mohammedans and of other Mohammedan 
settlers arriving in the reaches (" rantau ") of the 
Muar river above Segamat, to consider the advis- 
ability of bringing forward a Penghulu.''' 

The Penghulus of States having by origin been 
brought into office by the Batin, this was no doubt 
constitutionally correct. Batin Gemala brought the 
individual whom he had selected to the Dato' of Johol 
in order that the Dato' should recognise this new 
Penghulu-ship. The Dato' of Johol did so. He 
thought it would conduce to a settled population in 
Muar, where formerly, as on many other rivers, the 
people of the " reaches " had been nomadic, moving 
from reach to reach and never permanently settling. 
The Penghulu of Ladang, however, whose ancestors 
before him had always ruled this district under the 
Penghulu of Johol, was much annoyed at this new 
departure, and the result was quarrels and jealousies. 

' -' 3 y. R. A. .v., .V. />*., No. 22, pp. 304, 305. 

550 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES i'art n 

When the Penghulu of Muar subsequently died, the 
Dato' of Johol would not make further experiments 
in accepting a Batin as Penghulu.^ 

Berembun Tribes. — The great superstition of the 
Berembun tribes is their best safeguard against their 
equally superstitious though more civilised neighbours. 
The Malays and Chinese of Malacca, with few ex- 
ceptions, but especially the Malays of Naning, 
Rembau, and the other States of the interior of the 
Peninsula, have implicit faith in the supernatural 
power of the Berembun Poyangs, and believe that 
many lay members of the aboriginal tribes are 
imbued with it. Hence they are careful to avoid 
offending the Berembun tribes, because although 
the latter do not attempt, at the time, to retaliate, 
or even use threats, they are believed nevertheless 
to have taken the offence deeply to heart, with the 
intention of revenging themselves, sooner or later, 
by occult means. Moreover, the Malays, when they 
have the opportunity, resort to the Poyang for the cure 
of various diseases, with which either they themselves 
or their relatives are troubled. A third motive, viz., 
revenge, also not infrequently sends the Malays to 
the Poyang, whose power is invoked with the object 
of causing disease and misfortune, or even death, to 
any one by whom they have been injured.'^ 

War in all its forms is quite unknown to them.^ 

Benua-Jakun. — But in order to understand 
thoroughly the relationship between the Benua and the 
Malayafurtheracquaintancewiththe Benua is necessary. 

To commence with, the Benua who is not well 
supplied with the necessaries of life in considerable 

' /. R. A. S., S. B., No. 22, pp. - y. /. A. vol. i. p. 328*. 

310, 311. 3 //n'd. p. 273. 

SAVAGE MALAYS OF JO HO R 

variety has nothing butj hislown indolence to blame. 
As in other communities, the condition of individuals 
varies much. The active and persevering do not 
grudge their labour to render themselves and their 
families comfortable. Their clearings are well stocked 
with vegetables. Their families are clothed. They 
have their fishing-hut and canoes on the river, and 
their durian-grove and hut in the forest, and they and 
all about them are cheerful and even happy. And yet 
they never have any other capital than their industry. 
Others again have not a tithe of their comforts, but 
are so reconciled to their own indolence and its 
results, that they are contented with their lot. I 
soon found that a large house and a sufficient supply 
of clothing were certain evidences that the head 
of the family was endowed with a superior measure 
of intelligence and cheerfulness. Where all are on 
an equality, accumulated capital wanting, and hardly 
anything inherited but the common right of taking 
the produce of the forest, personal advantages are 
the only ones known. He who has most intellect 
and activity fares the best.' 

The good-humour and cheerfulness of the Benua 
are amongst their most striking characteristics. 
Their minds are free from thought and free from 
care. They are timid, but at the same time 
perfectly independent, and, whilst entirely exempt 
from all servility of manner or address, and want- 
ing in that peculiar courtesy which distinguishes 
the Malay, they are thoroughly respectful. Though 
in address they are abrupt and open, they have the 
same natural softness of manner and unwillingness to 
offend which characterise the uncontaminated Malay. 

' y. /. A. vol, i. p. 266. 

552 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

Their plainness and modesty of manner is accompanied 
by a mental candour and truthfulness which the Malay 
regards as barbarous simplicity, but which must attract 
the sympathy and good-will of the European in a 
strong degree, and place them in his estimation far 
above all the more civilised Asiatic races with whom 
he is familiar. Amongst the Benua he feels as if the 
oppressive moral atmosphere which surrounds him 
elsewhere, were exchanged for a pure and elastic one, 
in which he can once more breathe freely. The 
simplicity and openness of their minds, combined 
with their freedom from vanity, levity, and any over- 
weening pride, communicate a tone of sense to their 
conversation. In their personal habits the Benua 
are as cleanly as the Malays. Their paucity of dress 
even gives them an advantage in this respect over 
the Malay. They scrupulously wash and clean every 
article of food before cooking it, and reject meat that 
is at all tainted. The ground below the hut, as with 
the Malays, is made the receptacle of all the vegetable 
d(fbris of their cookery and repasts, but it is free from 
the noisome smell which surrounds the dwellings of 
the Jakuns. The dogs live in the hut, but are cleanly 
and receive their share of wholesome food. In re- 
spect of the personal appearance of the Benua, it is 
said that the sensual predominates over the intellectual 
in the expression of their countenances. In their 
manners they are perfectly modest, while familiar and 
open, and although both sexes at all ages freely 
associate, I did not observe anything that could have 
led to the supposition that there was not the strictest 
reserve amongst the unmarried, and fidelity amongst 
the married.^ 

' /. /. A. vol. i. pp. 267, 268. 

SAVAGE MALAYS OF JO HO R 

To this imperfect sketch of the character of the 
Benua it should be added that although less sensitive 
in their feelings than the Berembun tribes, whose 
pride takes offence at the least appearance of a slight 
or assumption of control, they would probably show 
themselves reserved, unsocial, and even sullen if they 
were not treated with kindness and respect. They 
are less distrustful, less changeful, and more robust in 
their character than the Berembun tribes, who require 
to be humoured like children, and. if they are not so 
treated, easily convince themselves that they are 
wronged, neglected, or treated with a want of con- 
sideration. Like children, too, they are very suscep- 
tible to flattery.^ 

It is this excessive sensitiveness both to flattery 
and slight which seems to supply that psychological 
link between the aborigines and the Malays, which at 
the first contemplation of the great difference between 
them, seems to be wanting. Civilisation has deprived 
the Malay of the openness and simplicity of the 
Benua, and hardened him. But although he has 
substituted for a total want of manner one of the most 
strongly marked manners possessed by any race, his 
pristine sensitiveness is covered, not conquered. It 
is indeed the secret of much that is peculiar in his 
social deportment. That art of putting everything 
in a pleasing point of view, of softening and concealing 
the natural asperities of a subject under discussion, 
of rendering even that which in other hands might 
wound the self-love of the person addressed, the 
medium of a compliment — an art in which thi; well-bred 
Malay is unsurpassed and which the combined soft- 
ness, frankness, and simple dignity of his manner so 

' /. I. A. vol. i. pp. 267, 268. 

554 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

well second, — is the growth of this very sensitiveness. 
He soothes and flatters others that he himself may be 
soothed and flattered. The command over his own 
passions and feelings which he has obtained renders 
courtesy and politeness habitual, but has veiled, not 
subdued, his Benua nature, and the sense of wrong, 
when not relieved by speedy revenge, sometimes 
preys upon his mind till he is goaded into fury, and 
moodiness becomes madness. It is another result of 
the inherency of the Benua disposition that many 
Malays, who have not the sustained animal spirits or 
firmness required by the civilisation and position 
which the race have obtained, are disposed to a 
degree of melancholy which sometimes becomes sullen- 
ness. Let the Benua be drawn from his seclusion 
into intercourse with other nations, and his character 
will be emboldened and hardened by the change in 
his habits, and unless a more powerful and spiritual 
religion than that of the Malays should elevate 
him in character as well as in civilisation, we may 
see him bring the kris to the aid of his spells, and 
substitute the "amok" for the " tuju." As yet the 
race sits happy in the ethnic nursery, unconscious 
of the progress of events which must force it 
from its child -like ignorance and peace, and teach 
it to know the corruption and the strife which 
nations of larger growth have found in civilisa- 
tion.' 

The Benua occasionally embrace Islamism, but 
although attachment to their old habits and pride in 
the antiquity of their race combine with their want 
of regard for the Malays in rendering them averse 
to this conversion, the Malays are persuaded that 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 269, 270. 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 555 

they will ultimately be entirely amalgamated with 
them. This is a fate which every consideration of 
humanity and religion urges us to endeavour to avert. 
As yet the Benua preserve much of their natural 
openness and honesty of character, and their whole 
disposition is such as to give assurance that they 
would prove willing recipients of Christianity, were 
it presented to them in its purity and simplicity. 
Were an intelligent and kindly missionary to settle 
amongst them, the superiority of his character to that 
of the Malays would speedily gain for him the in- 
fluence and authority of a father. A great improve- 
ment in their condition might be brought about by 
merely placing their intercourse with the Malays upon 
a juster footing, to accomplish which the influence of 
the Singapore government and the authority of the 
Temenggong (the Sultan of Johor) would, it may be 
anticipated, be readily accorded.^ 

To compare or contrast the aborigines of the south 
of the Peninsula with the Bataks and the Davaks and 
the Malays, it need here only be remarked that the 
character of the first three races mentioned is essen- 
tially the same, and that it may still be recognised 
even in the Malay.- 

The Benua has less development of intellect, and 
less corruption of the passions. Natural influences 
are with him greater than artificial ones. Every 
individual and every family lives rather in the pure 
and fresh presence of nature than of men. Detached 
in family groups in the forest, Malay corruption, 
which would long ago have reduced them to its own 
dye if it could have operated on them en masse in 
villages, has found no assailable point. The absolute- 

1 J. J. A. vol. i. p. 291. - Ibid. 

556 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

ness of the influence of the family, and of simple and 
solitary pursuits, has also prevented the internal 
growth of vices. There is no outward influence to 
counteract it. Society in its turn contains no institu- 
tion or principle that can interrupt its harmony. Their 
character and habits afford no room for any disturb- 
ance of the equality that reigns throughout the whole 
country. Hence there is no appreciable social strife 
or ambition.^ 

As has been said, both the Bataks and most of 
the Dayaks preserve the Benua character at bottom ; 
but, unlike the Benua, they have elaborated their 
superstitions and their social habits, and have acquired 
some vicious propensities, such as gambling, and the 
unnatural customs of head-hunting and cannibalism, 
though it is undeniable that the Bataks as a race 
have a greater prevalence of social virtues than 
most European nations, and that truth, honesty, hos- 
pitality, benevolence, chastity, absence of private 
crimes, are here found actually to co-exist even with 
cannibalism." 

The Benua nature, as we have already had occasion 
to notice, is also very recognisable in the Malays, 
although the pride and pretension engrafted upon it 
by Mohammedanism, the bold and active part which 
they have played in the modern history of the Archi- 
pelago, and the influence of courts formed on the 
Mohammedan model have obliterated much of its 
simplicity and all its artlessness.^ 

War is unknown to the Benua, as it is to the 
Berembun tribes. The Menangkabau Malays are 
rapidly increasing in the portion of the Peninsula 
occupied by them, and are even spreading over the 

1 /. /. A. vol. i. pp. 292, 293. ''■' ^ Ibid. p. 293. 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 557 

interior of Pahang, and, from their Chinese-like habit 
of combining for mutual ends, are growing formidable 
to the Pahang Malays. It would appear that they 
deal more harshly with the aborigines than the Malays 
of the Peninsula, for they are recorded to have 
formerly attacked the Mantra and killed some of their 
Batins. This proceeding drove many Mantra families 
from the neighbourhood, and small colonies found their 
way into the British territory at the back of Malacca, 
and other places. The Mantra say that they found 
resistance in vain, because the Menangkabau Malays 
were armed with muskets, and had learnt the use 
of antidotes to the ipoh poison, so that the slender 
darts of the blowpipe inflicted but little injury upon 
them.^ 

Every outlet from the country of the Benua is 
occupied and guarded by Malays, who, by preventing 
the free access of strangers and working upon the 
ignorance and fears of the Benua, keep them imprisoned 
in the interior of the country. Having thus effectually 
locked them up in the jungles, they prey upon them 
in a most unscrupulous manner. It is probable that 
if the character of the Benua had been weaker they 
would have been long since reduced to direct slavery. 
But although timid and unwarlike, they have stubborn 
notions of right and wrong, and any attempt at com- 
pulsion is met with an obstinate resistance. The 
Malay, therefore, respects the independence and the 
customs (" hadat ") of the Benua, adapts himself to his 
notions, and has recourse to craft and cajolery to 
attain his ends.- He treats his victims with a great 

^ J. I. A. vol. i. p. 273. MS. which was forwarded by one of 

2 The following passage, explanatory the Selangor chiefs, and purports to 

of the customs of the Benua, is trans- be the answer given by the four chiefs, 

lated from a copy of an old Malay or Neneks {i.e. "elders," lit. grand- 

558 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

show of respect and kindness, and cheats them to 
their faces in the most courteous and friendly manner. 
Though he himself dreads the power of their Poyangs, 
he is well aware at the same time of the influence of 
his bolder and more energetic and reckless character 
on the Benua, and, when occasion requires it, talks of 
his good- will being abused, of the inadequacy and 
dilatoriness of the return that is being made to him 
for his advance, and hints that if his debtor does not 
prove more diligent, he will not be able to restrain his 
anger.^ 

Jakun of Johor. — The Jakun tribes are entirely 
inoffensive, having an excellent temper ; they are 
generally kind, affable, inclined to gratitude and to 
beneficence. Hospitality is much practised amongst 
them, not only towards other Jakun but towards any 
stranger who reaches their habitations. All Indian 
nations are much inclined to begging ; and anything 
they happen to see that pleases them they ask of the 
owner, when they know that there is no means to 
steal it, and sometimes their demands are so frequent 
and repeated as to appear very importunate. The 
Jakun, however, are not so ; they differ much in this 
respect from other Indians ; they are liberal and 
generous. When visited they very seldom ask for 

fathers), who were summoned to the lofty branches, where the ' Kempas ' 

presence of Mahomed Shah, king of links its knots, there we love to 

Johor : — sojourn. Our weapons are the blow- 

" We wish to return to our old pipe (' temiang'), and the quiver of 

customs, to ascend the lofty mountain, arrows imbued in the gum of the 

to dive into the earth's deep caverns, deadly ' Telak ' {sic). The fluid most 

to traverse the boundless forest, to delicious to us is the limpid water that 

repose, with our head pillowed on the lodges in the hollow of trees, where 

knotted trunk on the ' Durian ' tree, the branches unite with the trunk ; 

and curtained by ' Resam ' leaves. To and our food consists of the tender 

wear garments made from the leaves shoots of the fragrant 'Jemantong' 

of the ' Lumbah,' or ' T'rap ' tree, and the delicate flesh of the bounding 

and a headdress of ' Bajah ' leaves. deer." — Newbold, pp. 394, 395. 

Where the ' Meranti ' trees join their ^ J.I.A. vol. i. p. 285. 

* 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 559 

anything, and will never refuse what is asked from 
them ; and when after asking their visitor refuses to 
take anything, they will press him to do so. They 
very seldom have quarrels among themselves, and 
their disputes are usually settled by their Batins or 
chiefs without any display of malice or fighting. Their 
laws allow of punishments for several sorts of crime, 
but the Batin seldom has occasion to apply them. 
Candour and honesty, qualities very rare in India, 
and perhaps so in all Asia, are notwithstanding found 
amongst the Jakun. It is remarkable that they abhor 
lying and thieving, not in words as the Malay, but 
really and in practice. They are never known to 
steal anything, not even the most insignificant trifle. 
These remarkable qualities have on more than one 
occasion induced persons to attempt to domesticate 
them, but the result has generally been the disappear- 
ance of the Jakun upon the slightest coercion. A Mr, 
Lewis, formerly Assistant Resident at Penang, had 
for some time a Jakun family in his house. They 
appeared at first to be very glad of their position, but 
having been one day employed in some servile work, 
they fled away and appeared no more. The reason 
is that the Jakun are extremely proud, and will not 
submit for any length of time to servile oflices or to 
much control. This, if it was a defect, was the only 
one that Logan remarked in them. ^ 

Europeans are known to the Jakun, as a rule, by 
report only, the greater number of them having never 
seen a European. But on account of the great 
number of Chinese in the Peninsula, few of them are 
unaware of the existence of China ; they are told, too, 

' J. I. A. vol. ii. pp. 266, 267. 

S6o DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES i>art ii 

of Bengal, of Sumatra, and of Siam ; these are the 
boundaries of their knowledge in geography. Their 
science in astronomy is yet more limited ; they see 
the sun rise and set every day ; that the moon some- 
times appears, sometimes not ; they use the light of 
the heavenly bodies when present, and sleep when it 
is dark, but they have never noticed or inquired about 
the course of the stars ; they scarcely know how many 
days go to the duration of a moon, nor how many moons 
go to a year. They are not at all aware even of their 
own age, or of that of their children ; such observations 
appear to them mere superfluities as being not re- 
quired in their way of living.^ Their ignorance of 
such matters, however, may be less surprising when 
we remember that those of the Malays themselves 
who live in the interior of the Peninsula are not 
aware of all these things, and that on these subjects 
many of them are no better informed than the Jakun. 
A thing in which the Jakun (especially those of the 
Menangkabau States) are truly skilled, is the art of 
using the blowpipe and poisoned arrows ; as has been 
pointed out in speaking of their weapons. They have 
no knowledge of writing, nor do they make use of 
any symbolical signs. ^ 

Both the intellectual faculties of the Jakun and the 
knowledge they evince are very limited ; the reason 
of which is probably, however, not so much the defect 
of their intelligence itself, as the want of the necessary 
means to develop it. The Jakun are indeed very 
ignorant, but are also certainly capable of acquire- 

1 "The Jakun are entirely ignorant the decimal calculation, the natural 

of the first principles of mathematics, indigitation, is adopted by them in 

nor do they know tlie simplest rules of ordinary use." — Newbold, ii. 394. 
arithmetic. The mathematical instru- - J. I, A. vol. ii. p. 251. 

ment which probably gave origin to 

1 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 561 

ment ; they are endowed with a sound mind, a right 
judgment, and a good memory. They are seldom if 
ever either insane or idiotical ; all are more or less 
intelligent, and have all their intellectual faculties in 
a sound state, corresponding to the common and 
ordinary rules of nature. There can be little doubt 
that if they were to receive the same care that is 
given to European children, they would become 
equally intelligent, and possibly more susceptible of a 
good education than a great part of the natives of 
India/ 

Relations between Jak2Ln and Malays. 

When these two races, whose common origin is in 
many respects clear, are compared, it is hard to avoid a 
feeling of astonishment on perceiving so remarkable a 
difference between them. The dissimilitude in their 
physical appearance is very slight when compared 
with that which exists in their manners, customs, and 
moral qualities." 

The Jakun and Malays, so different in many points, 
are notwithstanding similar in some respects ; both are 
ignorant and consequently superstitious. In these 
two points they resemble each other, with this differ- 
ence, that the Malays are ignorant and pretentious, 
whereas the Jakun are ignorant, but aware of their 
ignorance ; and though they are proud and in- 
dependent, yet they think that others know better 
than themselves and thus easily endure to be taught. 
Moreover, though both races are superstitious, the 
Malays are certainly more so than the Jakun ; and 
those of the Jakun who have the least to do with the 

1 /. /. A. vol. ii. p. 248. 2 Ibid. p. 274. 

VOL. I 2 O 

562 

DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES 

Malays are at the same time the least supersti- 
tious.^ 

The Jakun hates the Malay, and the Malay 
despises the Jakun. There is a natural and un- 
controllable antipathy between the two races ; but 
they stand in need of each other, and their mutual 
intercourse is indispensable. The Jakun launch out 
into incessant complaints against the Malays, as being 
bad people, cruel murderers ; " and, what is no less 

1 J. I. A. vol. ii. pp. 275, 276. 

^ Some few years back the Jakun on 
the Endau, tliat is to say, the Endau, 
Sembrong, and their tributaries, were 
in comparatively comfortable circum- 
stances, procuring the produce of the 
jungle for traders, and receiving the 
ordinary returns in kind, or planting 
tapioca, sweet potatoes, sugar-cane, and 
plantains ; they finding Johor rule 
comparatively quiet, rather took to 
the Johor side of the Endau, to the 
annoyance of the Pahang authorities. 
These latter in their jealousy issued 
an attractive but deceitful proclama- 
tion intended to draw back the runaway 
Jakun into Pahang territory, on pretence 
of celebrating some ancestral feast, 
but in reality with the intention of 
enslaving them ; the Jakun were in- 
duced to go into Pahang, but got 
wind of what was likely to happen in 
time for some of them to get away. 
On another occasion some Pahang 
Jakuns crossed over into Johor 
territory ; Che Ngku Da of Pianggu, 
who is the local chief on the Pahang 
side, ordered them to return, and shot 
one of them who did so ; nor are the 
foregoing solitary instances of the in- 
human treatment suffered by these 
tribes, as by similar tribes in the north 
of the Peninsula, at the hands of the 
Malays ; but it is needless to multiply 
instances, the fact that it is systematic 
is already sufficiently well known and 
authenticated, though it has been 
hitherto allowed (except in Perak) to 
remain an unnoticed fact. What is 
required is that steps should be taken 

to make the ruling powers in Malay 
States aware that we can no longer 
view with indifference any toleration 
by them of misconduct by any of their 
subjects towards the aborigines resid- 
ing in their territories, and that we 
shall expect severe measures to be 
adopted against any one offending in 
this way. 

The Malays of Johor, though they 
have not imitated the brutal conduct of 
the Pahang Malays, have nevertheless 
taken advantage, though not perhaps 
more than is natural, of their superior 
position in their dealings with the 
Jakuns. They do not give them the 
fair market value in kind for the 
jungle produce they receive from them, 
and are not content with an exchange 
which brings them less than 100 to 
200 per cent profit ; by this means 
they keep the Jakun constantly in 
their debt ; he has learned wants now 
which he has to work so hard to 
satisfy that he has little or no time 
left for the cultivation which would 
formerly have kept liim in comfort ; 
still mcjre is this the case, where they 
are forced to work for a local Malay 
official, not at the ordinary rates of 
exchange in kind, but merely for 
sufficient rice to keep body and soul 
together, while they toil to satisfy his 
grasping greed. Treatment such as 
this elicits comment even from the 
apathetic Malay, especially when he is 
a fellow-sufferer, perhaps a constable 
on a station drawing a monthly salary, 
which he seldom if ever enjoys the 
sight of, though it is, no doubt, 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JO HO R 563 

criminal in their eyes, thieves, pilferers, and liars. 
Some of them made the sensible remark that the 
numerous " sembahyangs," or prayers of the Malays, 
could not be of any use to them so long as they re- 
mained addicted to so many vices ; but they took 
great care before thus expressing themselves to look 
about, for they knew that if any Malay should chance 
to overhear them, they would not remain long un- 
injured. But the Jakun not only hates and abhors 
the Malays, he fears them as well ; and what makes 
his position yet more irksome, is the necessity he is 
under of being obliged to trade with them. The 
" dammar " and other products he finds in the forest 
cannot be disposed of except through the medium 
of Malays, and this establishes a daily intercourse 
between them. But what is really surprising is that 
in these communications they always remain on good 
terms, and that although the Jakun is rude and wild, 
he yet knows how to give the Malay dc fcaic benite 
de cour, and habitually keep great harmony and peace 
in his relations with them. But if the Jakun hates 
and fears the Malays, the Malays in return both 
despise and fear extremely the Jakun. The Malays 
consider the Jakun as infidels (" kafir"), and therefore 
despicable, and as being in a rank only a little higher 
than animals ; but on the other hand the Malays 
themselves are superstitious in the extreme. ¥or 
Malays, everything they do not understand is a 
mystery ; everything not common must be endowed 

transmitted regularly from Singapore. taught them the value, but which was 

But this is merely by the way, an not originally in their list of articles 

illustration of personal characteristics of food ; tlicy have gone so far as to cul- 

which do not end with the Jakun. tivate it for the last thirty years when 

The Jakun cannot now get on with- allowed the needful leisure. — Ilervey 

out rice, of which the Malays have in /. A'. .•/. 6'., No. S, pp. 120-122. 

564 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

with extraordinary virtue ; and consequently, to a 
Malay, a Jakun is a supernatural being, endowed with 
supernatural power, and with an unlimited knowledge 
of the secrets of nature. He must therefore be 
skilled in the arts of divination, sorcery, and fascina- 
tion, and able to do either good or evil according to 
his pleasure ; his blessing will be followed by the 
most extraordinary success, and his curse by the most 
dreadful of disasters. Whenever he hates a person 
he turns himself towards the house, and strikes two 
sticks the one upon the other, and thereupon, what- 
ever may be the distance between himself and his 
enemy, the latter will fall sick, and even die if the 
Jakun perseveres with this ceremony for a few days' 
duration. Moreover, to a Malay the Jakun is a man 
who, by his nature, must necessarily know all the 
properties of every plant, and consequently must be a 
clever physician, a belief which explains the eagerness 
of Malays who are sick to obtain their assistance, or 
at least to obtain some medicinal plants from them ; 
and these they must obtain on any terms, because 
they are necessary for them to preserve their life. It 
is unnecessary that a physician of this sort should 
actually visit the patient's house, since he knows 
everything, he can give in his own house the proper 
remedies to cure the sickness. He is also gifted with 
the power of charming wild beasts, even the most 
ferocious. Such are the effects of Malay superstition ; 
and this is the reason why though they despise the 
Jakun they at the same time fear them, and will in 
many circumstances refrain from ill-treating them.^ 

But if the Jakun hates the Malays and fears them, 
it is certainly not the result of any natural timidity, 

1 /. I. A. vol. ii. pp. 272-274. 

CHAP. XI SAVAGE MALAYS OF JOHOR 565 

for they do not do so towards other nations ; they do 
not disHke the Chinese, and they have a remarkable 
sympathy for Europeans, and place unlimited trust in 
them after a single interview. The reason is that 
Europeans generally show a security and frankness in 
their conversation which by its great contrast with the 
deceitfulness of the Malays at once catches the hearts 
of this childlike race. They love the European, and 
attach themselves to him as soon as they know him, 
and the slightest good office received from him is the 
source of the most unbounded gratitude.^ 

When Favre was journeying in Johor, every time 
a Jakun settlement was reached, and one of the houses 
entered, one of the women of the family would at once 
take a basket, disappear, and a few minutes after re- 
enter with some yams or other vegetables, which were 
cooked and offered to their guests about half an hour 
after their arrival. When next day a few small 
articles were offered them in return, they were re- 
ceived with some appearance of shame ; so much so, 
that it was necessary to explain to them that they 
were not intended as a present, but in settlement of 
a debt ; and that they were merely offered according 
to European custom, by which a traveller must 
always give something to the owner of the house 
where he happens to have slept. On the contrary, 
whenever a Malay house was entered, the chief of 
the family, persuaded that this was a lucky windfall 
and not to be lost, would at once commence by every 
imaginable means to speculate upon his guests ; hence 
the exaggerated difficulties thatwould bealleged against 
continuing the journey, which was made to appear im- 
possible for want of coolies, guides, etc., the significa- 

' J. I. A. vol. ii. pp. 277, 278. 

566 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

tion of which was that, " If you do 7iot give me a 
substantial present, you shall not pass farther r The 
traveller may give as much as is in his power, but yet 
this will never be sufficient. The actions of these 
Malays generally show low and sordid sentiments, 
whereas the Jakun are naturally proud and generous.' 

Udai. — The Udai are said to be of more savage 
habits than the (purer-bred) Jakun, prefer following 
the chase to the drudgery of agriculture, and are de- 
scribed as being without religion,- laws, or any form 
of government.^ 

They have no knowledge of letters, and are 
accused by the Jakun of devouring their dead and of 
cohabiting with the beasts of the forest, particularly 
the siamang. They go nearly naked, never wash 
their bodies, wear no covering for the head, and use 
the blowpipe, poisoned arrows, and sharpened palm- 
wood stakes as spears.'* 

Orang Laut or Sea- Jakun. 

Orang Laut Sletar. — Thomson describes the Orang 
Sletar and their kindred tribes as wild, ignorant, and 
indolent.^ Such sweeping criticism of unknown tribes, 
however, is seldom of any real value, and is not in- 
frequently very far from the truth. The following 
detailed description of his visit to the locality in which 
the Orang Sletar lived is infinitely more valuable in 
enabling us to form an idea of the race with which 
we are now dealing. 

One day, when anchored close to the shore, several 
small boats and canoes were seen skirting the man- 

1 J. I. A. vol. ii. p. 275. ^ I.e. in the popular sense of the term. 

3 Newbold, ii. 381, 382. * Ibid. ^ j_ /_ J^^ vol. i. p. 346*. 

CHAP. XI MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 567 

groves and slowly approaching. These proved to be 
two families of the Sletar tribe. After careful ex- 
amination it appeared that they were known to the 
Malays as " Orang Utan Sletar." On their first 
approach it was difficult to avoid being struck with 
the extreme squalidness of their appearance, united 
as it was to a dull insensibility to what was going 
forward, a marked contrast to the pertness of their 
Malay conductors, who assumed over them an air of 
superiority and command which is never witnessed in 
Malays when in the presence of Europeans alone, and 
which at once afforded a convenient standard for 
judging of the place which the Orang Sletar should 
hold in the ranks of civilisation. The families con- 
sisted of two men, three women, and several children 
of both sexes. They were at first exceedingly shy, 
and could with great difficulty be prevailed on to 
speak, but by kindness of treatment, and some trifling 
presents, the men were induced to throw off a con- 
siderable deal of their reserve, so much so that they 
daily visited the gunboat, bringing fish and a few 
birds for barter, and since a system of fair dealing 
with them was strictly maintained by the commander 
and his crew, they promised always in future to visit 
the gunboat to supply such necessaries, should she 
ever enter their neighbourhood again, and to tell the 
people of their tribe to do the same. As the result 
of the visit of the gunboat they were well supplied 
with many necessaries (luxuries to them), such as rice, 
tobacco, and cloth, in consequence of which they took 
great trouble in procuring what the gunboat's company 
were most in want of, viz. fresh fish, and her departure, 
it evidently appeared, was attended with considerable 
regret on their side. On better acquaintance, when 

568 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES part ii 

asked why they always used to run away before the 
gunboat, their simple reply was, that they were afraid 
they would be carried off to Gallang, a place noted 
for the fierceness of its pirates, of whom they bore a 
great dread. ^ 

On likenesses of two of them being taken (those 
of a man and a woman), the man sat with great steadi- 
ness and composure, and seemed perfectly aware of 
the meaning of the process. When the sketch was 
completed and shown to him it elicited a slight smile. 
With the other subject, however, considerable difficulty 
was encountered. She at first hid her face beneath 
her shaggy matted locks that strayed in wild abund- 
ance over her shoulders, and would only now and 
then venture a glance at the operations of the pencil. 
No persuasions would induce her to show her face, 
till at last her young child was given her, when she 
took up a position natural to a mother, and the sketch 
was accordingly soon completed." 

Orang Laut Sabimba. — Thomson describes theOrang 
Sabimba as forest nomads, possessing no boats or 
canoes, even of the simplest construction, and as re- 
garding the water " with a degree of terror." ^ To 
this he adds that they show a great detestation of 
the Chinese, removing always from their vicinity. 

Elsewhere we are informed that their personal 
appearance is, to say the least, pleasing ; the well- 
formed features of the young and the contented 
placidity of countenance of the old seem at once to 
show them to be an improvable race. Unshackled with 
the dogmas of Islam, and child-like in their perception 

' J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 341*, 342*. - Ibid. p. 342*. 

3 Ibid. p. 347*. This statement, however, is evidently due to some mis- 
apprehension. 

CHAP. XI MALAYAN SEA-GYPSIES 569 

of the things of this world, they stood as it were on 
the threshold of such a faith as Christianity presents 
in its most humble, primitive, and purest form. Their 
address was open and simple, their demeanour re- 
spectful. Yet the Malays spoke of them as being 
little better than baboons, and treated them as a class 
much inferior to themselves. The Malay women of 
the house in which Logan was sheltered ordered about 
their less fortunate sisters in a manner not to be mis- 
taken, and this was allowed as a matter of course. It 
afforded considerable amusement to see how the 
Malay women disposed the limbs, straightened the 
face, and directed the eyes of a female that was per- 
suaded to allow herself to be sketched, and when she 
had been placed in a position pleasing to themselves, 
they seated themselves where they could best gratify 
their curiosity.^ 

Orang Laut Akik. — Of the Orang Akik it is stated 
that they were expert divers and fishermen, and fre- 
quently made long voyages in their fragile vessels. 
They built houses, erecting temporary sheds (or 
" bagans ") along the coast whenever they had occasion 
to go ashore to build boats, mend nets, or collect dam- 
mar, wood-oil, etc. Otherwise they resided along with 
their families in their boats for months together, em- 
ployed in fishing, collecting Agar-agar (the Zostcra 
of Linnaeus), beche-de-mer (trepang), etc. When the 
season or state of the weather did not permit this, 
they employed themselves in collecting wood and pork- 
oil ; '' in making, boat-awnings ("kajangs"), nets, sails, 
cordage, and so forth. '• 

The Orang Akik were excessively proud, looking 

' J. I. A. vol. i. pp. 349*, 350*. 2 I'robably hog"s-grease. Seep. 241, ;/. 2, ante. 
3 Newbold, ii. 413, 414. 

570 DEALINGS WITH OTHER RACES i'Art ii 

down upon the Malays as an inferior race, and disliked 
theterm "Rayat" (or "subject") usually applied to them. 
Like the (Land) Jakun, they were of a restless turn of 
mind, and impatient of all control, but passionately 
fond of music, especially that of the violin. In handi- 
crafts they were remarkably ingenious, particularly in 
boat-building. They considered the (Land) Jakun as 
their superiors, and showed them great respect. It 
was said that though a Jakun could take an Akik 
woman to wife, the Akik were not permitted to marry 
with the Jakun females.' 

The Charge of Piracy against the Orang Laut. 

It has often been questioned whether the Orang 
Laut of the Johor coast have been rightly charged 
with the crime of piracy, and it certainly is very 
highly probable that some part of the burden of the 
charge is due to their being confused (as Orang Laut 
or " sea-gypsies,") with the Illanum and other more 
powerful and formidable tribes of the Archipelago. 
Yet it must be noted that Begbie in his table of the 
Maritime Tribes of the Empire of Johor (pp. 271-273 
of his Malay Pejiinsula, published in 1833), specially 
distinguishes for their piratical propensities the tribes 
of Sekana, Gonwn (?), Booroo, Kondoor, Tumboosoo, 
Laboo, Temiang, and Gallang, of which all but three 
were ruled by a Batin of their own. The fact is that 
the Johor "sea-gypsies" formed but a limited and 
somewhat insignificant section of the Orang Laut, and 
were probably only piratical in a very small way. 

^ Newbold, ii. 413, 414. 

APPENDIX 

APPENDIX. 

PART I.— RACE. 
Suggested Negrito Group. 

Page 28. 

Physical 
Characters. 

Andamanese. 1 

Philippine 
Negrito. - 

Semang 
(or Pangan).^ 

African Pigmy.* 

Height of 

1492 mm. 

1480 mm, (Mon- 

1491 mm. (5) 

A 

men 

(1365-1631) 

tano, H. and H.), 

(Skeat and Laid- 

i473(GuiIlemard, 

law). 1525(23) 

1452 mm. 
among the 
Bambute 
(Shrubsall). 

quoted by Keane) 

N.A. 

Height of 

1393 mm. 

1430 mm. (Mon- 

1549 (Martin) 

women 

(1320-1511) 

tano, H. and II.) 

1408 mm. (3) 

(Skeat and Laid- 

law). 1445 (3) 

N.A. 

1387 (Martin) 

Skull- 

Decidedly 

Decidedly brachy- 

Mesaticephalic 

Brachycephalic 

index 

brachycephalic-^ 

cephalic *' 

(Skeat, Laid- 
law, Martin), 
brachycephalic 
in skull men- 
tioned by Vir- 
chow,'^ and in 
Grubauer's.^ 
Mesaticephalic, 
N.A. 

among the Bam- 
bute, Baamba, 
and Bagaqde 
(Shrubsall) 

Hair- 

Woolly and 

Classed with that 

Woolly (in the 

Woolly - de- 

character 

black, amount- 

of the Anda- 

purest type) clas- 

scribed as " ord- 

ing to "sooty" 

manese. '-^ 

sed with that of 

inary negro 

(E. H. Man) 

Andamanese 
and I'hilippine 
Negritos. '0 
Ditto, N.A. 

hair " (Shrub- 
sall). 

Skin- 

Extremely black, 

Dark copper (Mon- 

Dark-brown 

colour 

"resembling the 

tano, quoted by 

passing into a 

hue of a black- 

H. and H.) 

glossy black 

leaded stove " 

(Martin, Skeat, 

(E. H. Man) 

and Laidlaw). 
Never black, 
N.A. 

^ All the Andamanese statistics are 
taken from Man, 77ie Andatnan Islands, 
p. 5 et seqq., except the skull-char- 
acter, which is given by Virchow in 
/'. B. G. E. xxviii. 153. 

- Montano, quoted by Hovelacque 
and Herve, Pn'iis if Anthropologic, p. 
38 1 ; Keane's Ethnologv, pp. 259 et scq. 

^ N. Annandale antl II. C. Robinson, 
Fasciculi Alalayciises, Longmans, 
Green, and Co., for University I'ress, 
Liverpool (1903). 

* From Sir H. Johnston's The 
Uganda Protectorate, vol. ii. pp. 478 
et scq. 

^' V. B. G. A. xxviii. 153. 

^ Ibid. - Ibid. 

" /////.p. 580. Abrachycephalicskull 
collected by Dr. Grubauer, and pur- 
chased i)y the Royal College of Surgeons. 
It was ilescribed by Mr. W. L. H. Duck- 
worth in .Man (March 1 903, No. iS). 

" /'. B. G. A. xxviii. 152. 

'" Ibid. 

573 

574 

APPENDIX 

Page 31. 

Suggested Draviuo-Austrai.ian Group. 

Physical 
Characters. 

Vedda.l 

Tamil.'.i 

Auslraliaii.-' 

.Sakai. 

Height of 

1533 mm. 

1649 mm. {64) 

Varies between 

1495-1548 mm. 

men 

[1 460- 1 600] 

?sex (Deniker) 

1710mm. (West (^L'lrtin) 
Coast, Dawson, : [1422-1596, 
H. and H.), i V.-St.] 

and 1550 mm. 

1535(62 $) 

S. and G. give 

N.A. 

^1663 91568 

Height of 

1433 

1568 (1630- 

1437 (Martin) 

women 

[1355-1500] 

1515) S. and G. 

[1314-1469, 

V.-St] 

1397 (4 9) N.A. 

Skull- 

Dolichocephalic 

Dolichocephalic 

Dolichocephalic 

Dolichocephalic. 

index 

Mesaticephalic, 

N.A. 

Hair- 

Long, black, and 

Long, black, and 

Long, black, and 

Long, black, and 

character 

wavy 

waN'y 

wavy 

wavy 
Variable, N.A. 

Skin- 

Very variable 

\'ery dark Ijrown, 

Dark chocolate 

Very variable 

colour 

passins; into 
black ■(?) * 

l)rown 

(very light to 
dark yellowish- 
brown) 
Ditto, N.A. 

' The Brothers Sarasin, Reise aiif Central Australia, App. C. 

Ceylon. ■* Cp. Virchow in V.B. G. A. xxviii. 

- Deniker, Races of Man, p. 579. 152 et seqq. "Many Sinhalese, al- 

2 Hovelacque and Herve, op. dt. ; though of Aryan origin, are so dark that 

Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes of they have been called quite black." 

i 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 

575 

Malayan Group, 

Page 33. 

Physical Characters. 

Jakun Type.l 

Malay Type.2 

Height of men . . 

1 
1 

i 

About 1527 mm. 
(V.-St.); 1473-1657 
(Logan) ; 1439- 
1608 (Martin). 

1583 mm. (Martin). 
1594 (36 c? S. Perak, 
Mai.), N.A. 

; Height of women 

1 

About 1378 mm. 
(V.-St.); 1504.5 
(Logan). 

1499 (Martin). 

1 Skull-index . . . 

Brachycephalic. 

Brachycephalic. 
Ditto, N.A. 

1 

, Hair-character 

Straight or lank, 
somewhat coarse, 
often with bluish- 
black tint of Mon- 
goloid hair. 

Lank, somewhat 
coarse, and often 
of a bluish -black 
type. 
Ditto, X.A. 

Skin-colour . 

Dark reddish or cop- 
pery brown, of a 
darker shade than 
the Malays. 

A coppery brown. 
Light olive, N.A 

Co.Mi'ARisoN OF THE THREE Main Types. Page 34 et seqq. 

Feature. 

Semang (Neprito). 

.Sakai (unidentified). 

Jakun (Savage Malay). 

I. Height of 
Man 

1 49 1 mill. 
(Skeat and Laid- 
law.) 1525, N.A. 

1495-1548 mm. 

(Martin). 

I535(62(?), N.A. 

About 1527 mm. 
(V.-St.); 1657 
(Logan) ; 1439- 
1608 (Martin). ! 

2. Height of 
Woman 

3. Cephalic 
index 

1408 mm. 
(Skeat and Laid- 

law. ) 

Brachycephalic. 
Mesaticephalic, N.A. 

1437 mm. (.Martin). 

Dolichocephalic. 
Mesaticephalic, N.A. 

1378 mm. [1258 
(V.-St.); 1504 
(Logan)]. 

Brachycephalic. 

4. Skin-colour 

Chocolate-brown to 

Varying from dark 

Dark olive-brown to 

very dark sepia, 
passing into a 
" shiny black." 

brown up to very 
light broiL'tt (much 
lighter than the 
Malays). 

dark copper (a 
shade darker than 
the Malays). 

* Logan, y. /. A. vol. i. p. 305, see Table, infra. 
^ Annandale and Robinson, op. cii. 

576 

APPENDIX 

Comparison of the Three Main Types — continued. 

Feature. 

Semang (Negrito). 

Sakai (unidentified). 

Jakun (Savage Malay). 

5. Hair . . 

Woolly (short, crisp 

Wavy, very dark 

Straight or lank and 

curls close to 

brown to black. 

bluish-black (like 

scalp), and black 

mostly the latter 

that of the Chinese 

in colour. 

sometimes with 

or Malays). 

Ditto, N.A. 

a slight reddish 
tinge in reflected 
light. Variable, 
N.A. 

6. Forehead . 

Low and rounded. 

Flat, and projecting 
greatly over the 
root of the nose. 

Inclined to be square. 

7. Nose . . 

Short, very wide, and 

Small and often 

" Stumpy " (thick 

flat or spreading. 

slightly tilted, with 

and short, but 

alse set deeper than 

with wide - open 

the septum, and 

nostrils). 

very deep nasal 

notch (Martin). 

8. Cheeks . 

Cheek - bones not 

Cheek-bones much 

Cheek - bones high 

very broad or pro- 

the broadest part 

and well marked, 

jecting, and full 

of the face, both 

like those of 

cheeks. 

forehead and chin 

Chinese. Face as 

being very nar- 

a whole inclined 

row in proportion. 

to beflattish. 

9. Eyes . . 

Round, wide-open. 

Very dark brown, 

Dark brown, of 

and straight (not 

small, semi-closed, 

moderate size, and 

oblique). Iris a 

horizontal. Black 

rarely with some 

very rich dark 

to reddish-brown 

slight tendency to 

brown. Black to 

(as in Semang), 

the oblique. 

reddish - brown, 

N.A. 

N.A. 

10. Chin . 

' ' Feebly developed " 

Long and pointed. 

Strong and inclined 

(rounded off and 

to be square. 

often almost un- 

marked). 

1 1 . Mouth 

Mouth rather large, 

Mouth of small size. 

Mouth often large 

and lips some- 

with lower lip 

and broad, but 

times " everted." 

full, loose, and 
often conspicu- 
ously projecting. 

lips well-formed. 

12. Beard . 

None to speak of. 

As a rule, a few 

As a rule extremely 

When found, thin 

straggling frizzly 

scanty. 

and straggling. 

chin hairs, like 

or occasionally 

that of the 

woolly. 

Vedda's, but oc- 
casionally, in a 
few individuals 
who otherwise 
appear of pure 
race, well devel- 
oped and almost 

bushy. 

Measurements of E. Semanc (Pancan) of Kelaktan by Messrs. Skeat and Laidlaw, 

■ Mr. W. L. il. Duckworth, 

XJ.A. /. vol. xsxii. p. 149- 

.; 

1 
1 

..„. 

A«e. 

S„. 

.„ 

i 
I 

1 

X 

1 

t 

il 
1 

1 

» 
1 

1 
X 

1 

: 

5 
I 
1 

i 

■a 

J. 

1 
1 

2 

3 
1 

■ao 

1 
J 

1 

1 

Sk,„Ca,oa,. 

Eve (^jbur. 

„a.Ca,oar. 

Ear Shape. 

Te.,b. 

1 

1 

1 

1 

■ 

' 

p.„a.k. . . 

« 

,s,l 

"■i 

"° 

,« 

,.. 

•95 

"° 

8s 

■ .8a 

«35 

■'" 

36s 

.93 

.44 

96 

.40 

"° 

.34 

.OS 

.,a 

** 

« 

" 

Lighter ihan 
(Topinard) 

Cray brown (d) 

Black, woolly 

Moderalety 

large 

niiMing. teeth 
suined Nvilh betel 

> 

3 

t4' 

iSlS 

..»s 

,.a 

<9S 

si- 

• I. 

408 

...0 

(48 

.59< 
.S6a 

34a 

,88 

.48 

■.7 

■as 

.. 

.. 

30 

Darker than 

"bji"'' 

niack, curly 
Very brown, 

Moderately 

. .nc 

, 

' 

' 

Ragong . 

""' 

i 

■"" 

■"■ 

9.6 

w 

Sa, 

... 

3>1 

" 

"•" 

,3a 

.s» 

3.. 

.84 

.s. 

.a, 

■38 

... 

.06 

.73 

4..S 

...5 

3..S 

A little lighter 
Ihan (3) 

DarkW™ 

Lbsely curled 

' 

""acb^'wora"''',!' 

; 

• 

r-:-': : 

.. 

i 

I. ,9 

: 

,oS 

S5. 
S6« 

957(4) 

4=8 

3I1 

73<4) 

::: 

'74 
'3. 

.389 

::: 

.8s 

146 

■00(41 

■38 

■■7(4) 

'" 

■04(4) 

■7.(.) 
.67 

- 

38 
3« 

: 

3 (Tapinanlt 

pupil large 

Similar to 
Ragong 

; 

78.9 

Bearded ■ b.aw 1 

i 

. 

; 

ir ; ; 

" 

(!)i4ao 
■379 

996 

!7S 

676 

l!S 

■3S 
P>79S 

3<9 

381 

6S 

»4 

80c 

>45« 

.8. 

.7a 

.33 

90 

■ ■6 

■ ■« 

■33 

99 

l«4 

39 

3« 

^ 

3 (Topinard) 

Darkbr.™ 

' 

' 

Hardly any left 

,o 

KebnnB . . . 

"■■= 

Orana 
Teku 

..» 

..« 

«7S 

«9i 

„. 

S.a 

38, 

7. 

..73 

7.3 

■■« 

,.a 

.8, 

.3. 

■ „ 

.34 

"« 

■ as 

,. 

.63 

36 

39 

=■ 

Reilde. ihade 
of No. 3 (Top.) 

Verv^darkrich 

Black lanky. 
like MsUy 

" 

Average Female . 

No-b) 

Pan. 

Mai 

.,<] 

"' 

«»j 

SSa 

Bje 

384 

S9 ■ 

"7SW 

«37<.) 

■47> 

.93 

.75 

... 

9S 

■79 

'" 

..3 

97 

.39 

39 

38 

>■ 

»■•■ 

97.. 

!3> 

«, 

737 

"97 

*^ 

107, 

7.S 

.360 

a8a 

•74 

.4a 

'" 

'" 

■o4 

IW 

"' 

.33 

3. 

" 

30 

Uppe,„mNo. 

J&k'iS 
(Top.) 

Dark brown 

Thick, short. 

Small 

6.pp.r,.a.hfil.d 

("""■fKef, (ia. 
( .1 J '"" 

0(anj{ 
Teku 

,60 

3.S 

Sa8 

,80 

No. 3 (Top.) 
wilh more red 

'.zVrS!;'' 

Teeih (milk den.i. 
jionMalK^reja. 

^arge."^"lo.^"i" 

.J 1 

1 

1 

regula.. 

^ 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 

577 

Pages 38, 39. 

Return showing the Distribution of the Aborigines according to 
Age and Sex in each District of the Federated Malay 
States in 1901. 

State. 

Aborigines. 

Grand 
Total. 

District. 

Males 

Females 

under over 

15- 1 15- 

under 
15- 

over 
15- 

M. F. 

Perak 

Selangor . 

Negri 
Sembilan 

Pahang . 

,Larut. 

Matang. 

Kuala Kangsar . 

Upper Perak 

Kinta .... 

Lower Perak 

Batang Padang . 

Krian .... 

Selama .... 
^New Territory 

139 
73 

257 
41 

502 

4 
230 

402 
198 
628 

47 
1024 

17 
776 

107 
78 

229 
47 

393 

3 
128 

373 

166 

567 

54 

889 

13 
597 

541 480 
271 244 
885 i 796 
88 i loi 
1326 1282 

21 ] 16 
1006 1 725 

1,021 
515 

1, 681 
189 

2,8o3 

37 
1. 731 

Total . 

r Kuala Lumpur 

Ulu Selangor 
J Klang .... 
1 Kuala Langat 

Kuala Selangor 
\ Ulu Langat . 

Total . 

rSeremban 

Coast .... 
■\ J^Iebu .... 
Kuala Pilah . 
.Tampin 

Total . 

rUlu / Kuala Lipis 
1 Pahang ( Raub . 
-V Temerloh 

Pekan .... 
I Kuantan 

Total . 

1246 1 3092 

985 

2659 

4338 1 3644 

7,982 

40 
66 
34 
157 

14 

82 
170 

59 
290 

I 
46 

35 

9^ 
38 
181 

14 

62 
136 

41 
271 

■40 

122 
236 

93 

447 

I 

60 

97 
234 

79 
452 

54 

219 
470 
172 

899 

I 

"4 

3" 1 648 

366 

550 

959 ' 916 

1,875 

32 51 

47 64 
9 57 

122 242 

44 84 

26 
22 

20 
III 
29 

48 
51 
39 
225 
64 

83 1 74 
loi 73 

66 1 59 
364 1 336 
128 1 93 

157 
174 
125 
700 

221 

244 498 

208 

427 

742 I 635 

1.377 

372 

95 
257 
no 

27 

902 
256 
578 
242 
99 

343 
86 
231 
123 

20 

850 
232 
532 
237 
69 

1274 j 1193 
351 1 318 
835 763 
493 SOI 

126 1 89 

2,467 

669 

1,598 

2,391* 

215 

86i 

2077 

803 

1920 

3079 2864 

7.340 

Grand Total 

2662 1 6315 

2362 

5556 

9118 8059 \ iS,S74* 

* Includes 1397 se.\ not given. 
From the Census of the Population, Federated iMalay States, 1901. 

Measurements of E. Semang of Kelantan. 

Page 43. 

I. Residence, Sungei Bumit in Aring. Formerly top teeth were filed down with 
sandstone in Malay fashion. Skin much scarred. Lips thick ; slight straggly 
Feet curved inwards and much splayed, little toe of left foot missing. 
VOL. I 2 P 

beard. 

578 APPENDIX 

Non - Mohammedan, stated his age to be 2 years. Formerly married, no 
children. 

2. Residence, Sungei Bumit. Slightly deaf. Lips thick. Feet contours 
normal. Head shaved with a razor given him by Penghulu of Kampong Buntal. 
Unmarried. Pandak's brother-in-law. Very restless. 

3. Slave living near Kampong Buntal. Parents lived in jungle of Ulu 
Lebih. Middle linger of right hand deformed. Age stated by himself to be 70 
years. Married, with two children. Colour, 3 Topinard's scale. Eyes dark 
rich brown. Hair short, woolly, very dark dull brown. 

4. Brother of No. 3. Slave captured when very young. Religion, 
Mohammedan. Colour, 3 Topinard's scale. Colour vision, normal or nearly 
so, tendency not to distinguish between dark shades, dark purples being com- 
pared with dark reds, but rejected. The boy is very nervous and taciturn. 
Residence, Kuala Aring. 

5. Residence, Sungei Sam. Son of No. 7. Skin a little lighter than 
Topinard's No. 3. Hair wiry, very closely curled. Teeth not filed, much worn, 
but white and undecayed. Non-Mohammedan. A slave. Parents, Pangans of 
Sungei Lebih. Has a moustache. 

6. Petal or Pelima. Residence, Sungei Sam. Skin a shade lighter than 
No. 5, covered with skin disease of a mild type. Eyes dark brown ; strongly 
marked superorbital ridges. Eyes very restless. Has a moustache and beard 
of woolly hair. Six front teeth of upper jaw filed, slightly decayed. Has a 
humorous expression about the mouth. Parents from Sungei Galas. 

7. Slave at Sungei Sam. Skin darker than 3 (Topinard's). Feet much 
splayed, as in No. i. Eyes dark brown. .Skin diseased. 

8. Slave at Sungei Sam. 

9. Slave girl at Kampong Buntal. Unmarried, but sexually mature. Feet 
and hands small and delicately shaped. Hair short, thick, and woolly. Parents 
lived in Ulu Aring. Inclined to steatopygia. 

10. Wife of No. 3. Skin rather redder than No. 3 Topinard. Hair 
black and lanky like a Malay's. Eyes very dark brown. Parents and grand- 
parents Pahang Sakai living on Sungei Tahan ; tribe now moved down- 
stream. No Malay admixture admitted. Mother of No. 11. Breasts very 
pendulous. 

11. Daughter of No. 3 and No. lo. Skin colour. No. 3 Topinard, but 
rather redder. Eyes dark brown, darker than in parents. Teeth, milk teeth, 
perfectly regular, the upper front pair of incisors very large, two next smaller, 
much as in English children. 

Note on Messrs. Skeat and Laidlaw's Measurements of Pangans 
OF Jarum by Dr. W. L. H. Duckworth. 

In addition to the recorded measurements of Pangan Semangs (cp. Duck- 
worth, y. ^. /., Jan. -June 1902), Messrs. Skeat and Laidlaw have provided 
measurements of three Pangans of Jarum, and have appended the following 
notes : — 

A. Pa'-Gclugor : a grandfather ; name = father of Gelugor ; age about 45-50; 

slightly bent owing to an injury. The skin tint is rather darker than 
No. 2 (Anth. Notes and Queries). Eyes dark brown ; hair black and 
closely curled. Five teeth are filed, one tiroken. 

B. Kechong : wife of Pedending ; with three children ; enceinte. Skin tint is 

similar to that of A ; eyes dark brown ; hair black, and closely cut all 
round head, except at the back, on which a tuft or "jambul" is worn. 
Teeth white and good ; six are filed. 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 

579 

s "^ 

?? 

•pE3H JO 30U9J3jmnOJI3 j 

0 

T*- M 

" 1 

•mo j 

oj uoissajdaQ [E5Uojj-osbj^ 

00 

2 S 

1 

M 1 

(jilSiaq-pEaH) uii^Q jo xajaa^ 

OS 

H M 

8 

•jBg JO snSBJX oj xsjja;^ 

s- 

•3S0 jj JO mpEajg 

<2 

•aso^ JO mSuaq 

rr> 

-tt CO 

r% 

•qjpBajg iBTUoStg 

0 

8^ 2 

M M 

^0 

•qjpBwg jBjuojij iBuiiujj\[ 

0 

« o 

•^ 

•mpcajg ^'^I'^^'IQ. 

^s 

0 ro 

M It 

•* 

•qipBSjg JBjnaojajux 

VO 

m 

■qipEaja P^SH 

E> 

0 N 

N 

•qiSusq pB3H 

CO rN. 

- 

•suiJV J° uedg 

lO O 
00 f*. 

M M 

0 

•Supjig JqSpH 

s 

0\ 

•punojg 
uiojj uinujajg jo aouBisid 

0 

S 2^ 

CO 

•punoag 

lUOJJ 3I>IUV JO 30UBJSIQ 

m -o 

1^ 

•punojQ 

UIOJJ 33U^ JO aaUBJSIQ 

^ 

? 2 

^0 

•punoiQ 

tllOJJ dlfj JO 3DUEJSIQ 

1^ 

NO ■«■ 
in IT) 
00 00 

m 

•pUnOJQ lUOJJ i3gui_J 
^IPP'IV }° "^P J° 33UEJSICI 

o 

•0- 

5" 8 

■«■ 

•punoiQ 

UIOJJ JSU^ JO aOUBJSIQ 

o 

1^ 1. 

^ 

•punojQ 

UIOJJ -WOqiJJ JO 3DUBJSIQ 

<s 

« in 

« 

■japinoqs JmSih '^ 'R^i'H 

o 

0 

f f 

~ 

•(sjnjBjs jEjoi) iq3i3H 

f 

s s. 

c 

g 

u 

3 
n 

"(5 

3 

s :e 

< _C 

u. "o 
° o 

Z rt 

5 

a 
2 

o 

1 1 

^ c 

io- 
era 
ex. 

VO 

„ 

« 

CO 

^e^ 

00 

^ 

0 

t^ 

00 

^^^ 

ci 

f? 

^ 

0 

0 

!5^ 

" 

■9- 

>o 

VO 

o\ 

M 

-£•0 

^ 

0 

1^ 

06 

IH 

00 

0 

rt 

.c 

U 

•0 

01 

rt 

0 

0 

rt 

B 

UJ 

3 

J 

.ti 

tn 

Sj 

0 

2 

a. 

t«5 

ca 

< 

< 

58o APPENDIX 

C. Bgrapit : a female ; skin tint closely corresponding to No. 2 (Anth. Notes 
and Queries). Eyes dark brown ; hair black and closely curled, with 
frizzled "jambul." Teeth blackened: six are slightly filed. Subject 
does not know any Malay words. 

The foregoing notes afford no means of distinguishing these Pangans of 
Jarum from the Pangans of Kelantan already described {J. A. I. loc. cit.) to whom 
they are closely allied in respect of skin colour, eye colour, colour and characters 
of the hair, and in the custom of filing the front teeth. The skin colour only is 
very slightly different, approaching No. 2 in place of No. 3 of the types. Nor 
do the measurements (which are appended) justify any distinction, as they in no 
case remove any individual of the three to any considerable distance from the 
range known to obtain among the other Pangans, and in many instances they 
fall within the range of variation in the several characters. 

To complete this account a few notes on the measurements are now given. 
Averages have not been computed for the Jarum Pangans, as in view of the very 
small number {3) it is quite possible to treat of each individual separately. The 
most striking feature is the very simian nature of the proportions of the upper 
limb in the man Pa'-Gelugor. 

A. With regard to the measurements of Pa'-Gelugor, the stature (No. i ) is small 

and results from an accident (cp. descriptive notes) ; the following five 
measurements are all small and indicate great length of the arms, which is 
fully brought out by the relatively high figure which represents the span. 
Nos. 6, 7, and 8 (the dimensions of the lower limb) are not far removed 
from the average for Pangans (seey. A. I. loc. cit. : average for men), but No. 
9 is very small and is modified in association with the stature. Similarly 
the sitting height is small (No. 10). The breadth index (74.4) shows a 
value which is low for Pangans, but is exceeded in this respect by one of 
the Kelantan men (Pandak 73'8). The nasal index (i 12. i) is very large, 
but is approached by the Kelantan Pandak with 107. i. Finally the 
radio-humeral index has a large value, indicating that the upper limb has 
very simian characters, but here again the figure, 88.6, is approached by 
the same Kelantan Pandak with an index of 84.4. 

B. Kechong : the stature is distinctly above the average, but the proportions of 

the upper limb as deduced from measurements 2-5 inclusive are well 
within the range of variation for Kelantan women (Pangans). Further, 
while the heights at hip and knee are greater, that at the ankle is within the 
range again. The next four dimensions are all greater than the Kelantan 
average, but not very strikingly so, and the breadth index is not without 
the limits of variation referred to. The proportions expressed by the 
radio-humeral index are within the same range. Lastly, the nasal 
index must be referred to. This yields a very small figure, which points to 
a very narrow or proportionately long nose. On the whole, this feature, 
taken with the number of instances in which the measurements prove 
greater than the average, suggest that some admixture with another 
stock, most probably Malay, has produced the observed differences. 
At the same time it must be remembered that in other external 
features and in the cephalic index there is nothing remarkable about this 
woman. 
C. Berapit : in this instance we again find the occurrence of several dimensions 
greater than those of the four Kelantan women previously described ; but 
the increase is in most cases very small. On the other hand, the head 
proportions (Bi : 81. 6) are well within the range of variation, though 
the bi-malar breadth is below the average. The nose is shown by the 
nasal index (112. l) to be distinctly broader than the average of the four 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 

581 

women mentioned (97.4), but in this respect Berapit, whose age is not 
given, is surpassed by a young Kelantan girl of 15 or 17 (Kutum). 
Lastly, the radio-humeral index being much greater (80.1) than the 
average (70.8) is nevertheless surpassed by that of the same Kelantan 
girl Kutum (8.51). 

It is believed that with regard to the foregoing notes the remarks made as 
to the close similarity of the Pangan from Kelantan and Jarum will be seen to 
be justified, especially in view of the scanty material for comparison. With 
regard to the paper published in the journal of the Anthropological Institute 
(July-Dec. 1902), giving averages for twenty Semangs (six not indicated) of 
Upper Perak, it is to be noticed that the figures for the Jarum Pangans come 
within the range of variation provided by the larger number of observations. 

Page 44. 

Measurements of a Semang Skull collected by Grubauer, and now 
IN THE Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons — described 
BY W. L. H. Duckworth in Man, No, 18 (March 1903). 

Measitrefiienfs of Skull. 

Craniai- Portion ; 
Maximum length . 
Maximum breadth 
Basi-bregmatic height . 
Horizontal circumfer- 

mm. . Facial Portion 
167 
132 
128 

mm. 

Indices : 

mm. 

q6 

Cephalic 

• 8s 

96+ 

Altitudinal . 

. 82.6 

62 -f- 

Alveolar 

. 100 

131 

Facial (Kollmann's) 

• 47-2 

34 

Orbital 

. 82.9 

41 

Nasal 1 

• 44.8 

48 

21-5 

Basi-nasal length 
Basi-alveolar length . 
Nasi-alveolar length . 
I Bi-zjgomatic breadth 
482 Orbital height . 
Orbital width . 
Nasal height 
I Nasal width 

Capacity : — two determina' 
tions gave 1245 cc. and 
1250 cc. respectively ; 
124s cc. is the more correct 
figure. 

The person to whom it had belonged was a member of the tribe of Penghulu 
Dahabo (?), of Goyal {i.e. " Mount ") Sapi, eight hours' walk ( U'egeslidtden) from 
Kuala K^nSring in Upper Perak. The skull was that of an old man who had 
been buried between three and four years. 

~-It presents some remarkable resemblances 10 a cranium in the Cambridge 
Ethnological Museum, which I described in Alan (1902, No. 28) : the shortness 
of the cranium and the general rotundity are alike in each, as is also the small 
figure of the cranial capacity. Where the Semang skull differs from the 
Andamanese .skull just mentioned, it resembles a skull described by Turner as 
that of a Sakai, and figured in a communication to the Royal Society of 
Edinburgh.- The Sakai skull agrees with the subject of the present account 
in the possession of prominent brow-ridges, and consequently flattened 
orbits, the nasal bones and aperture have similar characters in each. But 
Turner's " Sakai " is dolichocephalic, so that the correspondence of type is 
not far-reaching. No very close resemblance can be traced between the Semang 
here described and the skull from Pahang described by Turner, or the E. Semang 
(" Pangghan ") described by Virchow.^ 

^ Falsified by great development of 
the^nasal spine. 

2 Vol. xl. Part i. No. 6. 

^ See comparisons in "Some 

Anthropological Results of the Skeat 
Expedition to the Malay Peninsula," 

Jotini. Anthr. Inst. vol. xxxii. 1902, 

"p. 142. 

582 

APPENDIX 

Page 45. 

List of Measurements of Skull and other Parts of Skeleton 
OF Semang. 

Description : Pangan 
Peninsula, collected 
Skeat, M.A. 

Aleasurcments of Skull. 

from Malay 
by W. W. 

Cranial portion — mm. 

Maximum length . . -179 

Maximum breadth . . . 141 

Basi-bregmatic height . .129 

Horizontal circumference . 511 

Cranial capacity. Each observation 
(2) gave 1,425 cc. = mesocephalic. 

Facial portion — 
Basi-nasal length . 
Basi-alveolar length 
Nasi-alveolar length 

99 

lOI 

62 

Bi-zygomatic breadth . 

• 134 

Orbital height 

33 

Orbital width . 

40 

Nasal height 

• 47 

Nasal width 

. 26 

Jugo-nasal arc . 

. 107 

Jugo-nasal width 

• 97 

Indices — 

Cephalic . 

. 78.7 

Altitudinal 

• 72 

Alveolar . 

102 

Facial (Kollmann's) . 

46.2 

Orbital 

82.2 

Nasal 

• 55-3 

Naso-malar 

1 1 0. 3 

Measurements of Bones of the Skeleton. 

R. 

L. 

Second 

23 

25 

Bones, etc. — 

Third . 

24 

25 

Humerus 

308 

305 

Fourth . 

25 

23 

Radius . 

? 

239 

Fifth . 

27 

21 

Femur . 

426 

425 

Index given by com 

Tibia . 

374 

372 

bined figures . 

97- S 

Ulna . 

? 

253 

Fibula . 

365 

361 

Femur, special measu 

rements for 

Radio-humeral index 

? 

78.3 

Tibio- femoral index 

87.7 

87.5 

K. 

L. 

Inter-membral index 

? 

68.2 

Platymeria — 

Femero-humeral inde? 

^ 72.3 

71.8 

Transv. diameter . 
Anterior -posterior 

27 

27 

Length. 

Breadth. 

diameter . 

20 

20 

Sacrum 

93 

lOI 

Platymeric index . 

74-7 

74.7 

Scapula-heiglit 

117 

125 

,, breadth 

102 

103 

Platycnemia — 

Sacral index . 

108.6 

Transv. diameter . 

21 

19 

Scapular index 

87.1 

82.4 

Antero - posterior 

Clavicle 

• "9 

129 

diameter . 

33 

29 

Claviculo-humeral in 

Platycnemic index 

63.6 

65-5 

dex 

. 38.6 

42-3 

Popliteal region — 

Anterior 

Posterior 

Transv. diameter . 

33 

34 

height of 
centrum. 

height of 
centrum. 

"M.N." . 

26 

25 

Lumbar vertebra — 

"M. P." . 

23 

23 

First . 

• 23 

25 

Popliteal index 

69-6 

67.6 

4 

1 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 

5«3 

ViRCHOw's Description of E. Semang (Pangan) Skull. Page 46. 

The skull is that of an elderly person, apparently that of a man, and shows 
traces of burning. The capacity is 1370 ccm. , the horizontal circumference 
489, the sagittal 364 mm. ; in other words, the measurements on the whole are 
small. The skull is remarkably short, liroad, and high, its type hypsibrachy- 
cephalic (L. Br. Ind. 81.5 ; L. H. I. 76.9) ; in this connection it may be 
remarked that the figure of the ear-height index (68.2) is unusually high. The 
occipital index (31.2) is likewise large. On the other hand, the basilar index 
(55-4) proves to be relatively small. In analysing the sagittal circumference 
it is seen that 35.1 per cent belong to the frontal hone, 35.7 per cent to the 
parietal bone, anil only 29. i per cent to the occipital bone. 

The sutures on the vertex are simple, but behind, and at the side, much 
serrated. The temporal surfaces are not very high, each being bounded by 
a double linea semicircularis, of which the upper component passes above the 
parietal eminence as far as the lambdoid suture, whilst the lower runs straight over 
the parietal eminence. 

The brow is tolerably broad (minimal frontal breadth 91 mm.), low, and 
somewhat sloping. The brow ridges are prominent, the glabella is less prominent. 
The frontal eminences are ill-defined. The transition from the brow to the 
vertex of the skull is gradual, the latter being flattened. The parietal eminences 
are large and prominent. Descent to the occiput is sudden. The upper part of 
the occipital bone is rounded without a distinct protuberance or superior semi- 
circular line. The lower part of the bone is obliquely placed but nearly 
horizontal, and is comparatively smooth. The mastoid processes are small. 
The external auditory meatus is compressed in the sagittal direction. The 
temporal sutures are normal. The squameous portions of the temporal bones are 
broad and prolonged backwards. As regards the measurements of breadth, the 
maximum breadth is 133, the bi-auricular 107, the occipital 104, the temporal 
99 mm., the intermastoid diameter is 119 mm. At the base of the skull the 
foramen magnum is asymmetrical, the right half being fuller than the left ; its 
form is almost round, 31 by 29 mm., index, 93.5, and very large. The 
jugular foss.x are extremely large. The basilar process is broad and flat. 

The face is low and broad; index (73.8?) chama.'prosopic ; the zygomatic 
arches hut little displayed; the "tuberositas ossis inferior" reinforced by the 
tuberosity of the upper maxilla. The orbits are moderately large, the upper 
margin inclined downwards and outwards, the lower margin deeply excavated, 
the index 80 (chamxkonchic). The nose is short, with the bridge flat and 
rounded, broad, the aperture asymmetrical and narrow. The index is 50, 
mesorrhine. The canine fossa> are shallow. The upper jaw is strongly pro- 
gnathic, and at the same time asymmetrical, and somewhat deflected to the right ; 
the intermaxillar}- suture synostotic. The teeth are nbsent except the first 
premolar on the right, which is worn down and brownish ; at the same time the 
edges of the jaw are somewhat weather-worn. In the region of the front molars 
there are traces of old alveolar caries. The gums are short and broad, but the 
index is leptostaphyline (68.6). The palate bone is wide. 

The mandible is toothless, the dental alveoli being obliterated behind on 
the right and in the middle. The alveolar curve is broad in front. The chin 
not prominent, in consequence of which all the lower part of the mandible forms 
a continuous broad curve. The angles arc somewhat splayed, the bigonia! 
diameter is nevertheless small, only 89 mm. The rami are broad, 35 mm., set 
on almost at a right angle. The condylar processes are very low, 50 mm. long ; 
the joint surfaces flattened, the right presenting clear evidence of arthritis 
deformans. The coronoid processes are 58 mm. high. 

So much for the formation of the skull. For many decades the Semang 
tribes have been regarded as the chief representatives of the lowest form of 

584 APPENDIX 

bodily structure. When all other " lower" races had been successively stripped 
of their conjectured resemblance to apes, all our hopes of discovering at least 
some kind of a Proanthropos were directed to the obscurity of the forests of 
Malacca. Even these hopes, however, now appear to be futile. At least this 
first specimen of a Semang skull possesses (beyond its prognathy and the simple 
formation of its lower jaw) nothing specially pithekoid. There is present 
neither platy- nor katarhiny, nor a processus frontalis squamae temporalis, nor a 
processus lemurianus. With its capacity of 1370 ccm., its minimal frontal 
width of 91 mm., its well-developed temporal region, it may be ranked with the 
skulls of civilised peoples, than many of which it is certainly less pithekoid. 

Now it is indeed not improbable that, if Vaughan-Stevens should fulfil 
his promise and my hopes and send us more skulls of E. Semang (Pangan) 
people, a few less well-formed and perhaps much smaller specimens may be 
found among them. But to this kind of variation we have been long accustomed. 
In discussing the skulls of the Philippine Negritos {cf. F. Jagor, A'eisen hi 
d. Philip, p. 374, plate II. figs. 4-6 : Berlin, 1873) I have already demon- 
strated this by figures. The capacity of four specially selected Negrito skulls 
varied between 11 50 and 13 10 ccm., on the other hand they were all hysibrachy- 
cephalic, like the E. Semang (Pangan) skulls. 

The similarity of the two races, which has so often been conjectured, 
can now be looked upon as established. The most important factor which 
Vaughan-Stevens has brought forward as bearing on this point is the hair. Un- 
fortunately in this respect the fates have not been auspicious to us. In the box 
of which he speaks there are only a few quite small remnants of single hairs 
left. But they are black, fine, and spiral. Moreover, all doubt must disappear 
on examining the top-knot (" Bag-i ") which he took from the head of a man and 
sent here. It shows the same tendency to the formation of entangled spirals 
that is known to us in the Negrito hair, and it is diametrically opposite in character 
to the Sakai ("Blandas") hair which I also received from Vaughan-Stevens, 
and which I described in detail at an earlier meeting {Fer/i. 1891, p. 844). 

This top-knot consists of an extremely elegant combination of a great number 
of black spirals, which when slightly relaxed and held against the light form a loose 
web of " screw-like" (i.e. spiral) hairs isolated throughout their entire length. The 
diameter of the spirals reaches to as much as 2 mm. [sic, ? 2 cm.]. Under the 
microscope each separate hair appears thin and of a blackish-brown colour ; the 
pigment, however, lies so thick that the interior cannot be very clearly seen from 
the outside. From cross-sections it is apparent that this pigment is chiefly accumu- 
lated in the outer layers of the hair (" Haarschaft "), and is almost entirely 
wanting from the inner part, which sometimes occupies almost half the cross-section. 
The cuticle is very delicate and pale. In almost every case there is no medulla ; 
when it appears it is discontinuous, weak, and but slightly coloured. The pigment, 
in thin layers, appears of a pure brown colour, one might almost say light 
brown. It consists of very fine brown grains, which, when not quite sharply 
focussed, almost give the impression of a diffused " infiltration." In reality, 
however, they form narrow spindle-shaped figures. The form of the cross-section 
is mostly an elongated oval, which is frequently flattened or laterally compressed. ^ 

Page 46. 

Note on Specimen ok E. Semang (Pangan) Haik, by 
W. L. n. Duckworth. 
Provenance, Kelantan Province, I\falay Peninsula. 
Native described by the collector (Mr. F. Laidlaw) as a Pangan, " father of 
Kepar." See Laidlaw 's notes, Skeat Expedition, 1899. 

The hair is in the form of a ringlet which forms curls of a diameter from 9 
mm. to about 20 mm. 

1 V. B. G. A. xxiv. (V.-St.) 442-444. 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 

585 

Colour black — under microscope densely pigmented — surface rough. 

Sections. — Pigment seen to be uniformly distributed along length of longitudinal 
sections. In transverse sections it is seen in the form of fine granules aggregated 
chiefly about the periphery of the section and just within the well-marked 
cuticular border. There is also a core formed of an aggregation of the granules 
in the centre of the section. This core is about -^\^ mm. in diameter. 

Inform, the sections vary from an oval or ellipse at the thicker or basal end, 
to almost a circle near the tip of the hair. The indices of four sections work out 
at 55.2, 58.9 (these are oval), 86.7, 86.9 (the latter are sections near the tip of 
the hair). The hair has thus negroid characters in respect of section. 

Page 53. 

Points of Comparison between Semang, Andamanese (from Temple's 
Census Report) ^ and Philippine Negritos. 

Semang. 

Andamanese. 

Philippine Negritos.2 

Height 

i. Men, 1491 mm. 

i. 1447-1472 mm. 

1485 mm. (18) (Mon- 

(W.S.); 1549 (R.M.); 

p. 67. 

tano, p. 84) ; 1489 

1525 (>-^A.). 

(Semper, Phil. 1869, 
p. 49); ca. 1400 (7) 
(Sawyer, p. 201). 

ii. Women, 140S mm. 

ii. 1 360- 1 385 mm. 

1432 mm. (12) (Mon- 

(W.S.); 1387 (R.M.); 

p. 67. 

tano, do.); 1408 (Sem- 

1445 (N.A.) 

per, do.) ; ca. 1350 
(Sawyer, do.).^ 

Shape of head 

i. .Mesaticephalic. 

i. Ditto, p. 67. 

ii. Brachycephalic. 

ii. Ditto, p. 67. 

Marked brachycephaly 
(Meyer, Nep: p. 25). 

Hair . 

i. Black and woolly. 

i. Ditto, p. 56. 

Black-brown, Broca 41 
(Meyer, p. 27). "Spir- 
alig, verfilzt. z. T. zu 
kleinen Quasten auf- 
gerollt." 

ii. Complete shaving of 

ii. Ditto, p. 56. 

Head shaved in Luzon 

the head. 

Bojigngiji com- 

(Globus, xliii. 378). 

pletely sliaved 

Hair cut short (Meyer, 

heads, p. 50. 

p. 28). 

iii. Closely cropped hair. 

iii. Ditto, p. 50. 
Onge Jarawa 
closely cropped. 

Eyes . 

i. Rich liquid Iirown. 

i. Ditto, p. 56. 

ii. Round and bright. 

ii. Ditto, p. 56. 

Skin . 

i. Colour (black to rich 

i. Ditto, p. 56. 

Brown like Malays 

dark chocolate brown). 

(Meyer, p. 34). 

Food . 

i. Roots, fruit, and game. 

i. Ditto, p. 50. 

Fruits, roots, honey, 
and game (Meyer, p. 
32}. 

\Coittinuation of table and notes on pp. 586, 587- 

! 

586 

APPENDIX 

Points of Comparison — continued. 

Huts 

Hutfurnititre 

Implements — 
Stone 

B<nvs 

Harpoons . 

Tattooinz 

Ornamenta- 
t io n of 

Utensils 

Dancinp 

Semang. 

ii. Elaborate preparation. 

iii. Heads of animals 
killed in hunting, hung 
up partly as trophies 
and partly as ornaments. 

i. Leaf-shelters (especially 
beehive-shaped huts). 

ii. Communal huts. 

i. Bamboo sleeping plat- 
forms. 

ii. Hammer and anvil of 

natural stones. 

i. (a) Chips and flakes 

only. 
{b) No axe, arrow, or 

spear heads, 
ii. Ordinary long bow of 

palm-wood or bamboo. 

iii. {a) Fish harpoons. 

Andamanese. 

Philippine Negritos. 

{b) Some Semang tribes 
have no harpoons. 

Never applied to face ; 
practically unknown to 
Semang. 

i. Delicate and elaborate. 

ii. Rough. 

i. Standing in a ring and 
alternately bending and 
straightening the knees. 

ii. The practice called 
" rentak Balei " or 
" drumming on the floor 
of the tribal hall," 
practised by Jakun 
tribes mixed with Se- 
mang, and may be a 
survival of former Se- 
mang custom. 

ii. Ditto, p. 50. 
iii. Ditto, p. 66. 

i. Ditto, p. 50. 

(cp. also Martin, 

p. 668). 
ii. Ditto, p. 50. 

i. Ditto, p. 51 
(Onge Jiirawa 
only). 

ii. Ditto, p. 66. 

i. [a) Ditto, p. 66. 

(/;) Ditto, p. 66. 

ii. Onge Tarawa 
only, pp. 66, 67. 

iii. (a) Used by 
Bojigngiji and 
Yerewas, p. 50. 

{b) Not used by 
Onge-Jarawas. 

Not among Onge- 
Jarawas, p. 50. 

i. Onge Jarawa, p. 

50. 
ii. Ditto, p. 50. 

i. Onge Jarawa, p. 
64. 

ii. Ditto, p. 64. 
Bojigngiji and 
Jiirawas use a 
special kind of 
sounding board 
for drumming on 
with the feet 
rhythmically, with 
song and clap- 
ping of hands in 
unison. 

Leaf-shelters {Z.f. allg 
Erdk. X. 253). 

Bow of bamboo, 93 to 
219 cm. long (Meyer, 
pp. 13-24). 

Fish spear (Meyer, p. 
17). 

Keloids (?) at any rate 
cuts. Tatooing (?) 
(Meyer, p. 26). 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 

587 

Points of Comparison — continued. 

Semang. 

Andamanese. 

Philippine Negritos. 

Burial 

i. Corpse buried with 
knees drawn up in silting 
posture. 

ii. Platform burial (in 
trees) of chiefs. 

iii. Former disinterment 
of bones probable in 
view of traditions of 
past customs. 

i. Ditto, p. 65. 

ii. Ditto, p. 65. 
iii. Ditto, p. 65. 

In hollowed trunks a 
foot below the surface 
(Meyer, p. i). 

^ The following instructive list of 
points of difference between Semang 
and Andamanese has been drawn up 
by Sir Richard Temple, and is given 
in the above - mentioned (Census) 
Report : — 

Face : In the variation of the 
Andamanese face. Implements : In 
the blow-gun and poisoned arrows and 
spears. Hunting: In trapping game. 
Feeding: Men before women. Quivers: 
In having reed quivers : Andamanese 
stick their arrows in their waist-belt. 
Ornamentation : In quality and artistic 
merit. Omameiits : In personal orna- 
ments and piercing the nose. Huts : 
In rock-shelters, cave-dwellings, tree- 
huts, barricaded huts. Clothi)tg: Of 
hammered barks ; loin-cloth for men, 
petticoat for women. Magic: In its 
practice and in use of magical designs. 
Music : In nose - pipe and castanets. 
Songs: In their nature. Marnage : 
Based on purchase and ceremonies. 
Beliefs: In Shamanism, metamorph- 
ism into tigers of living men, in ideas 
as to "God." language: In its 
mixture with Malay and Mon ; basis 
can be proved perhaps to be (? Onge 
Jarawa) Andamanese, though the 
specimens I have seen afford very little 
hope of this. Also a portion of the 
Semangs have fixed habitations and a 
rude agriculture, this latter capacity 
being entirely absent in the Andaman- 
ese. 

On the foregoing list I would 
remark that allowance must be made 
in many cases for the fact that the 
Semang in the Malay Peninsula have 

long been subjected to the predominant 
influence of Indo-Chinese and Malayan 
culture, which is quite sufficient to 
account for the Semang use of the 
blowpipe and poisoned arrows ; for 
some, at least, of their methods of 
trapping game ; for the feeding of men 
before women ; for the Semang use of 
bamboo quivers ; for their cloth of 
hammered tree - bark, and to some 
extent for their magical practices ; for 
their use of the nose - flute or nose- 
pipe, which is a well - known Indo- 
Chinese instrument ; for their basing 
of marriage on purchase and its 
attendant ceremonies ; for the Semang 
Shamanistic and Were-tiger practices ; 
and for the Mon-Khmer affinities of 
their language, as well as for their 
fixed habitations and rude agriculture. 
On the other hand, the Semang shelters 
and tree-huts are undoubtedly due to 
the presence of the larger fauna, which 
do not occur in the Andaman Islands, 
where such shelters are therefore super- 
fluous. As to the variation of the 
Andamanese face, I cannot agree that 
it is a point of difterence, as the 
variation in Semang features is strongly 
marked. — W. S. 

■^ I have to thank Mr. X. W. 
Thomas for the facts in this column. 
In Folkmar"s Album of Philippine 
Types, the following measurements (of 
three Northern and Southern Philippine 
Negritos) are given : height standing, 
1475 mm. ; cc]ihalic index, S0.45. 

■" Many profiles show a marked 
resemblance to portraits in J. A. I. 
{v. Meyer, PI. ix.). 

588 APPENDIX 

Page 58. 

Vaughan-Stevens' Sakai Measurements (ed. Virchow). 

Height of the men from 1422 to 1596 mm. (1594 in V. B. G. A. xxviii. 

152). 

Height of the women from 1341 to 1469 mm. 

The variation between the men is 172 mm., among the women 128 mm. 

Between the tallest man and shortest woman, 253 mm. 

Three Sakai men attained a height of between 1500 and 1600 mm. 

The shortest man was a 32-year-old Sakai of 1422 mm., all the men of the 
other tribes measuring more than 1470 mm. 

The smallest arm-stretch (1370 mm.) was that of a 22-year-old Sakai woman 
whose height was 1424 mm., the difference against the arm-stretch being - 54, 
and another whose height was 1469 mm. had an arm-stretch of 1463, a difference 
of —6. On the other hand, a 42-year-old woman (1341 mm. in height) had an 
arm-stretch of 1375, giving a difference in favour of the arm-stretch of -1-34.^ 

Page 58. Sakai Skull described by Virchow. 

Let us now consider the Skull of the Central Sakai {'■'■ Senoi") IVomati, the first 
of its tribe which has reached Europe. Without doubt it is the skull of an old 
woman, as the description will soon show. In capacity (1350 ccm.) it falls only 
20 ccm. short of the E. Semang (Pangan) skull ; for a woman it may be 
considered well -developed. Its horizontal circumference (495 mm.) is even 
greater than that of the E. Semang (Pangan) skull, and its vertical circum- 
ference (362 mm.) is almost equal to the latter. 

Its form is orthodolichocephalic (L. B. I. 72.6; L. H. I. 73.2; O. H. I. 
61.5). In the norma verticalis, as well as in the norma temporalis, it appears 
correspondingly compressed and comparatively narrow. The lack of prominence 
of the tubera, and the marked curvature of the upper occipital bone largely 
contribute. The occipital index is calculated at 31.2, the basilar index at 50.2 ; 
to the occiput belong accordingly more than one-third of the total length. The 
percentage components of the sagittal arc are : — 

Frontal component, 34.8. 
Parietal component, 35.9. 
Occipital component, 29.2. 

The parietal development is therefore the most marked, and in consequence 
the occiput has the appearance of having been driven backwards. 

In spite of the age of the individual, the condition of the sutures is very good. 
Syntosis is entirely absent. Most of the sutures are simple, the lambdoid alone 
being strongly indented in its upper part. Here, however, an exception must 
be mentioned, inasmuch as the limbs of the suture on each side are interrupted 
in their upper third ; here the suture runs inward almost horizontally, sub- 
sequently rising fairly steeply and forming a triangular projection at the 
lambda. - 

^ N.B. These measurements (of the across the breast in the usual way 
arm-stretch) were taken by Vaughan- (Virchow, V.B.G.A. xxiii. 842, 843). 
Stevens behind the back, instead of "- V. B. G. A. xxvi. (Virchow) 356. 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 589 

The surface of the bones is uniformly smooth and yellowish in colour, on the 
right lighter, on the left with a strong inclination to brown ; their entire asjject 
shows that the person had not been long buried. All muscle and sinew attach- 
ments are weak, some not developed at all. Moreover, the " plana tempor- 
alia " are but little developed ; their upper edge does not reach the parietal 
eminences. 

The brow-ridges are practically non-existent, the glabella not sunken, the 
tubera but feebly indicated. The middle portion of the brow, which is otherwise 
moderately straight and somewhat narrow, is symmetrically arched. At the 
glabella there is a small horizontal scar. The sagittal arc has a sharp return 
curve, is on the whole long, in front somewhat flattened, descending from the 
line of the parietal protuberance in a strongly -marked curve; the occiput, as 
already remarked, projects. There is no occipital protuberance, but in its place 
a slightly irregular rectangular depression marked by large emissary veins. The 
foramen magnum is roundly oval, 32 to 27 mm. in diameter, with an index 

of 84.3- 

The temporal region is somewhat irregular ; stenokrotaphy is marked on both 
sides, especially on the left ; a shallow, slightly funnel-shaped groove traverses 
the angulus parietalis. The temporal ala; are large, with strong foramina. 
The sphenoparietal suture is short, 7 mm. The temporal squamx are somewhat 
outwardly arched. The external auditory meatus is large and round. 

The face is small and noticeably narrow. The index is chamaprosopic (77.7). 
The zygomatic arches are delicate, almost depressed. The bi-jugal diameter is 
only 117 mm. The orbits are very deep and high, arched inwards and above 
(diagonal). The index is hypsikonchic (86.1). The nose is broad and much 
flattened. The transverse diameter measures at the root 12, in the middle 11, 
below 18 mm. The nasal bones are quite uninjured and large. The naso-frontal 
suture projects upwards. The bridge is broad, flattened in the middle, and 
towards the middle on each side a large emissarj' foramen is seen. The aperture 
is large, but at the same time somewhat broad and low. The nasal spine is 
moderately developed. The index is platyrrhine (54.3). The upper jaw is 
delicate, short, slightly prognathic, but at the same time verj' atrophied ; the 
incisors and the canine are absent on the left, and their alveoli are filled up. 
Only a few molars and premolars remain, and these are thickly incrusted with 
lime, and are blackened with betel-nut juice. The palate is Icptostaphylinc. 

The under jaw is very small and atrophied, all the teeth are lost and the 
alveoli are filled up, but in the region of the second molars there are large, open 
cavities, and in the region of the incisors there is a projection of the alveolar 
margin. The chin is small, but prominent ; the rami are delicate, and the pro- 
cessus lemuriani feeble.' 

With exception of the facial and palatal index, strong differences every- 
where present themselves, but the face and the maxilla cannot be determined 
exactly on account of the great alteration which they have undergone. Mean- 
while, however, I wish to submit that the calculated indices for these two 
parts probably give the correct relation. Some differences may be referable to 
the sex. Thus the difference of the orbits which, in the case of the male Semang 
(Pangan), are chamcekonchic, in the female Sakai (lilandas) are hypsikonchic. 
But the contrast between the cephalic and the nasal indices is so strongly marked 
that a strongly marked distinction of the two races must be assumed if the two 
skulls now lying before us represent real tribal types. On this point little can be 
said. At the meeting of 21st November 1891, at which I communicated the 
indices of living subjects calculated from the measurements of H. Vaughan-Stevens 
among the ten .Sakai (Senoi) measured, I could only produce one dolichocephalic 
and two mesaticephalic ; on the other hand, seven were brachycephalic. But 

1 r. B. G. A. xxvi. (Virchow) 356. 

590 

APPENDIX 

at that time {ibid. p. 838) Vaughan-Stevens was still of the opinion that the 
Sakai (Blandas) were half-breeds, and that all, although in variable proportions, 
had Malay blood. But as he maintains the purity of the blood of the Sakai 
(Senoi) woman whose skull he obtained in Perak, it may well be that this skull, 
though female, exhibits the really pure Sakai (Senoi) type. We shall have to 
await further material.^ 

The characteristic which removes the skull of the Sakai (Senoi) woman 
farthest from that of the Semang (Pangan) is \.\\efon>iation of the nose. This latter 
is platyrrhine to such an extent that one might be inclined to call it pithekoid. 
In my academic treatise on some characteristics of the skull of the lower human 
races (Berlin, 1875, p. 1 1 5), I have given a detailed comparison between the 
Malay nose and that of the Orang Utan, and have thus clearly demonstrated that 
the form called katarrhine is essentially dependent on the small size of the nasal 
bones. There can be no question of such katarrhiny in the case of this Sakai 
(Senoi) woman, because in her case the nasal bones are comparatively large. 
If, in spite of this, the structure of the nose, and especially the contour in profile, 
reminds us of the nose of the Malay, and perhaps still more of that of the Negro, 
this is attributable to the strongly-marked impression, or rather depression, of 
the bridge of the nose, which of course must be connected with a weaker de- 
velopment of the nasal septum. With this is connected the higher position of the 
fronto-nasal suture. That such a formation of the nose is usual among the Sakai 
(Blandas) appears to follow from the description, unfortunately not a very detailed 
one, which H. Vaughan-Stevens formerly transmitted to us {Verh. 1891, p. 840, 
Figs. I and 3). The nose of the Semang (Pangan) skull, on the other hand, is 
mesorrhine, and although short and broad, slightly rounded at the bridge ( Verh. 
1892, p. 442, illustr.).^ 

The chief points in which this Sakai skull differs from the former E. Semang 
(Pangan) skull {Verh. 1892, p. 438) may be conveniently seen by placing the 
index numbers side by side : ^ — 

Indices. 

E. Semang (Pangan). 

Sakai.(Blandas). 

Length-breadth . 
Length-height . 
Ear-height . 
Occipital .... 
Facial .... 
Orbital .... 

Nasal 

Palatal .... 

Brachycephalic 81.5 

Hypsicephalic 76.9 

68.2 

30- 1 
Chamaeprosopic 73.8? 
Chamx'konchic 80.0 
Mesorrhine 50.0 
Leptostaphyline 68.6 

Dolichocephalic 72.6 

Orthocephalic 73-2 

61.5 

31-2 

Chamasprosopic 77.7 
Hypsikonchic 86. i 
Plat)'rrhine 54.3 
Leptostaphyline 68.0? 

Finally, the fact should be mentioned that this Sakai skull exhibits in addition 
several structural anomalies, as, for instance, bi-lateral stenokrotaphy, an unusual 
form of the occipital squama and the processus lemuriani. I waive the point 
whether these are rather individual variations or racial characteristics. 

1 V. B. G. A. xxvi. (Virchow) 358. 2 73. p. 358. 

3 lb. p. 357. 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 591 

ViRCHOw's Description of Sakai Hair-character. Page 58. 

All the specimens are of considerable length. The hair of the 35-year-old 
woman measures 59, that of the 37-year-old man 32, that of the 75-year-old 
man 26 cm. in length, and from all the evidence we may, I think, say that the 
hair of the head of the Sakai (Blandas) is at once distinguished by its extra- 
ordinary length. This is partly explained by the Sakai custom of refraining from 
cutting the hair of the head. Again, the pointed ends of the hairs appear very 
fine even to the naked eye, and the lips when seen under the microscope appear 
pointed, but are worn and broken or indented at the sides, presenting a jagged 
appearance. Again, throughout each strand of hair the cuticle is extremely thin, 
a fact which explains the somewhat dull {tnatt) appearance of the hair. 

The colour of the hair is very dark in the coarser specimens. To the naked 
eye it resembles ebony, and only in reflected light is there a slightly brownish 
shimmer to be perceived. But in most of the specimens there is a very unequal 
thickness of the separate strands, and even with the naked eye the thinner 
specimens can be seen to possess that lighter tinge from which the "Water- 
hair " mentioned by Vaughan- Stevens arises. When, however, Vaughan-Stevens 
speaks precisely of a reddish tinge, this is a somewhat exaggerated statement to 
make in the case of adults, though the hair of the 2-year-old girl does, in fact, 
show a light reddish-brown tinge. 

Seen under the microscope, the pure black hair of the Sakai looks altogether 
opaque and uniformly black ; its tint, however, is not the black of the Negro's 
hair, which so often shows a bluish tinge, but a tint which distinctly shades off 
into brownish black in the thinner places. In the finer specimens a thin and 
black but frequently interrupted medulla may be distinguished. The thinnest 
specimens mostly show, when viewed from the side, a faint yellowish-brown 
colour, in which no grains are distinguishable ; the colour appearing rather to be 
uniformly diffused through the whole of the matter. Here and there, moreover, 
there appear single hairs, the matter of which is uniformly dark brown with a 
tendency to yellow. This implies, therefore, a certain approach to blonde hair. 
Many of these thin specimens have no trace of a medulla, in others a weak 
central medulla is visible, which is frequently continuous, but more often inter- 
rupted in character. In the most marked case of interruption the appearance is 
that of long spindle-shaped depressions, with more or less grain-like contents 
which appear at certain intervals. In these the medulla matter is quite colourless. 
These characteristics appear to a special degree in the hair of the 2-year-old 
girl (No. 43), some few of the thinnest specimens being absolutely colourless. ^ 

In cross section the formation of the finer hairs appears to be circular (drek- 
riinde), the coarser sometimes approaching an oval formation. I have not seen 
deeper flattenings or impressions. In the coarser black hairs the pigment always 
has a dark brown appearance when strongly magnified, and appears to consist 
of grains of varying size, which frequently exhibit a somewhat " spindle-shaped," 
or at all events "stripy" formation. Where the smaller grains predominate 
there arises a somewhat yellowish tinge. The granular pigment is distributed 
throughout the medulla matter most densely in the outer portions, and the least 
so towards the centre. 

The hair of the 75-year-old man (No. 40) is specially interesting. Even to 
the naked eye it appears of a mixed character ; thin reddish -ycllo-M hairs, and in 
some places numerous ^rey or even white ones are to be seen blended with coarse 
and absolutely black ones. The microscope shows, moreover, that the latter 
possess no medulla or air-cells at all, so that the cause of their turning grey can 
only be ascribed to the failure of the colouring matter, in other words to a kind 

1 V. B. G. A. xxiii. (Virchow) S45, 846. 

592 APPENDIX 

oi Leukopathy (Albinism). The yellowish hairs again are quite uniform in colour, 
and contain a narrow medulla, which is sometimes interrupted, but as a rule 
colourless. In a few cases only in the course of such medulla; were shorter, 
black-looking interruptions {Absdtzc) to be noticed. 

In no case whatever, even in the case of the comparatively short hair of the 
children, did there appear any tendency to curl or even to the formation of 
spirals. On the contrary, all the specimens sent in show lanky (" gestrecktes ") 
hair. But in all the specimens the tendency to vvaviness is noticeable, and in 
some it amounts to " twisting." The ends especially, as Vaughan-Stevens remarks, 
curl upwards in the form of a semicircle. For the most part this formation is 
carried some way up the lock, which thus acquires a curly appearance. In this 
respect it shows a marked divergence from the Alongolian and also from the 
pure Malay hair. This is apparently to a great extent owing to the much finer 
and thinner structure of the hair, which, moreover, as a rule is very irregularly 
formed. 

The designation of "tufts"' so repeatedly used, refers, it appears, to the 
peculiar tendency often shown by a large number of hairs to grow together into 
a species of tuft or lock, which is separated by small intervals from the adjoining 
hairs. This occurs mostly in the great "hair-tuft" {Schopf)^ of the Benua man 
(No. 46), which perhaps does not represent the entire hair of the man, but only 
the largest part of it. Vaughan-Stevens has in this case specially emphasised the 
presence of "tufts." But these tufts have not the least resemblance to the 
" Biischeln " ol the Melanesians and true Negroes which have been so long 
denoted by this name. Probably, too, they do not owe their existence to the 
growth of the hair as it were in separate groups, but to the natural tendency of 
long hairs to entwine themselves together or twist into strands. 

Page 63-64. 

For information concerning the sexual relations of the Sakai, see Z. f. E. 
xxviii. 181, 182. The most interesting part of the information there given is 
contained In Vaughan-Stevens' remarks as to the employment of an apparatus 
resembling the "ampallang" of the Sunda Islands. Vaughan-Stevens describes 
it as a small cylinder of wood, horn, or tortoise-shell which had a knob at each 
end, and whicli was thrust through "a square aperture in the glans penis." As, 
however, Vaughan-Stevens as usual gives no localities or any other sort of 
information by which his statements could be checked, and as he himself adds 
that the custom was only prevalent among the Tembeh, and is now extinct, 
I am afraid it is only too probable that the whole story will prove to be one of 
the mare's-nests which Vaughan-Stevens has so frequently discovered. It is 
significant that Vaughan-Stevens obtained, on his own admission, his specimens of 
this apparatus from the " Senoi " {i.e. Central Sakai) who, as he is careful to 
inform us, nroer employ this apparatus themselves. And it also appears that 
he was only enabled to "establish the fact" by the aid of a Dayak, who knew 
that Vaughan-Stevens was anxious to discover this apparatus among the Sakai, 
and had been talking on the subject to the very Sakai man from whom Vaughan- 
Stevens derived his information ! 

Page 70. Vaughan-Stevens' Kenahoi Measurements. 

The height of a Kenaboi man was between 1500 and 1600 mm. 
Height of a 28-year-old woman 1352 mm. 

1 It is a top-knot, not a tuft (as the term is applied to the woolly tufts of 
Negro hair). 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 

593 

Head-Index. 

Dolichocephalic 

Mesaticephalic 

Brachycephalic 

Men. 

I 

I 

Women. 

Total. 

I 
I 

2 

; 

I 

3 

The children are omitted. 

Vaughan-Stevens' Besisi Measurements. 

Page 73. 

Five Besisi men attained a height of between 1500 and 1600 mm. 
The arm-span 1 of a 45-year old Besisi woman, whose height was 1440 mm., 
amounted to 1423, giving a difference of — 17 against the arm-stretch. 

Head- Index. 

Men. 

Women. 
2 

7 

Total, j 

Dolichocephalic 

Mesaticephalic 

Brachycephalic 

2 
2 

t 

■.■ ! 

4 
6 

The children are omitted.^ 

Vaughan-Stevens' Mantra Measurements. Page 74. 

Hei-hL 

Height (of men) from 1471 to 1638 mm.^ Logan gives them a height 
of between 1484 and 1781 mm.* The average is put by Virchow at 1553 mm.* 

Height (of women) from 1405 {sic, 1409 in V. B. G. E. xxviii. 152) to 1488 
mm.* 

The variation among the men amounts to 83 nmi. ; among the women to 
167 mm. 

Between the tallest man and shortest woman the variation is about 233 mm. 

Two men measured 1608 and 1638 respectively, and a third man measured 
between 1500 and 1600 mm. The greatest arm-stretch (1755 mm.) was that of 
a 35-year-old Mantra man, whose height was 1538, the difference in favour of 
the arm -stretch being +217 mm.*" \Cont. on p. 595. 

' Measured (by V.-St.) behind the 
back instead of across the breast in the 
usual way, vide I'. B. G. A. xxiii. 842. 

- Virchow in V. B. G. .4. xxiii. S42- 
844. 

3 lb. p. S42. 

VOL. I 

* Jb. xxviii. p. 152. 

^ lb. xxiii. p. S42. 

'"' Measured by Vaughan - Stevens 
behind the back instead of across the 
breast in the usual way (?'. B. G. .1. 
xxiii. S42). 

2 Q 

594 

APPENDIX 

•saoj ssojDB qjpBajg 

'^'t^'^' : : "^"^^ : ^ j 

•jooj }o -p] ov o> o : : o> 0 : "t^ 

•■Einqg JO siXpuoo |^3UJ^Jx^ sqj oj jmuaj 
JO jajuBqsojj jb3j3 aqj luojj .miusj jo -pj 

•sqiujijo mSua-]; 

« t^ OS : : 0 0 : o 

•uini|i sqj 
JO S3ss330jci snouids jousdns 'jousjub aqj 
u33M]3q psjnsi^siii ^uojj ui siAjsd jo qiptjajg 

■^00-- O 0 ■ 0 

•puBq JO ■;;/ 

^ 

•jsuA\ OJ uiJB JO qjSusq 

« 0 0 • • 0 -^ 

Www-. « N 

g 

•jsiBAv ;b •;»/ 

00 00 00 . , NO OO 

r^ 

•SJapjnoqs sqj Avoisq aousiajiunojiQ 

Hn . . p*i 

o 

•sjspinoqs; aqj u33A\j3q juojj uj qipESjg 

-** 

SO ■* -^ : : vo *A 

J? 

•uinipqeiS oj uiqo lucij UAVBjp 
auji puB A\Ef J3M01 Xq'pauuoj uiqa jo ajSuy 

en -^ 0 * ■ « 0\ r^ 00 
[^ fs. t>* vO vo -<h vo 

•8[2UB IBIOBJ 

00 00 t^ • * i^vo • 

•JBajo aoyuo oj uiqQ ir^'S'S : : 'ti'ij • "m 

•MOjq JO 
jjBd jsaqSiq oj utqo luojj sacj jo qjSua^ 

t>. r^ tN. . • so t^ • 00 

•/JzjojqgisH 

.-♦nHw . ■ t-m -4n 

•asBq JB MOiq jo qipBSjg 

^ ^!^ -^ t ! m ^ '• -f 

•pi guposuuOD 3Ut[ jqgiBajg 

-^j- in »o • • -J- in • »n 

•aoBj asAO painsEaui saqoxe oijbuioSXz aqj jo 
sjuiod Sunosfojd jsoui aqj uiaMiaq qjpBajg 

oo 00 00 . • rvoo • 00 

•aDUBjaqnjojd iBjidiooo jo juiod 
jsaqSiq puB (uiqo) A\Br \iiAO\ aqj p'unoa -p] 

tCcc HM -«* Mn 
« « W « N « « • 

■* 

•SDUBJaqmojd jBiidpoo puB peaqajoj aqi 
punoa pajnsBaui pEaq aqj jo aouaiajiunoJiQ 

C4« C«X 

« Ov 0 O 0 MM. 
<N M w M W M N ■ 

s 

•sauoq (BjauBd jo sippiui ssoiDB 
X1IB3IU9A paansE3ui sjbs jo s'aoyuo ussMjsg 

r4:t -4n Hn 

•SAVOjqaXa 
i3A0 painsBsm jb3 jo saoijuo usaMjsg 

-4N F^fi 

■JBS JO 301JUO OJ 

33ucJ3qmojd jBjidpoo jo'juiod jsaqSiq luoj^ 

vO vO ^ • • NO VO • vO 

•IB9 JO aoyuo oj nn^^s 
JO 9||3UBjuoj J0U3JUB JO jjEd jssqSiq uioaj 

SO vO SO • • O *0 • t^ 

Height, 
ft. in. 

rt cj rt >o rt '^ 4j J-' r* rr; 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 

595 

Head-Index, 

1 
Men. 1 Women. 

Total. 

1 

Dolichocephalic 

Mesnticephalic 

Ikachyceijhaiic 

I 

3 
7 

3 1 4 

3 ! 6 ! 

... [ 3 ' 

6 j 13 , 
1 1 

The children are omitted.^ 

I may add that Montane describes the eye-colour of the Mantra as almost 
always No. i ; that of their skin as No. 37, though occasionally Nos. 21, 22, 
and 30 occur ; and that of their hair as Nos. 34, 41.2 

Vaughan-Stevens' Jakun Measurements, 

Page 82. 

Out of 35 adult Jakuns, 20 (6 men and 14, i.e. all the women) were under 
1560 mm. in height.^ 

The average for 21 men was a height of 1527 mm.^ 

Three Jakun men attained a height of between 1500 and 1600 mm.* 

The average for the 14 women was 1378 mm." 

The shortest man (No. i) was 1439; the next (No. 10) was 1476, two 
others (Nos. 12 and 17) were 1488 mm. 

The shortest woman (No. 9) was 1253 ; the next (No. 8) was 131 1 ; a third 
(No. 14) 1322 ; a fourth (No. 4) 1342 ; a fifth (No. 3) 1365 mm. 

The arm-stretch" of a 21-year-old Jakun woman, whose height was 1523, 
amounted to 1545 mm., giving a difference in favour of the arm-stretch of + 22 
mm. This was the greatest arm-stretch found among the women.* 

Head- Index. 

Men. 

I 

I 

2 

4 

Women. 

Total. 

Dolichocephalic 

Mesaticephalic 

Brachycephalic 

I 
2 

3 

2 

2 

7 

The children are omitted.'' 

* Virchow in V. B. G. .1. xxiii. 843, 

844. 

- Arch, des Miss. 3rd s. xi. 322. 
On Plate 21 is given a Mantra 
skull, front view and profile. On 
Plate 31 hair - sections of Mantra, 
Kenaboi, Udai, Jakun. On pp. 354, 
360, skeletal and skull indices of ditto. 

^ Virchow in Z. f. E. xxiii. 144. 

* r. /?. G. .1. xxviii. 151. 

" l/t. xxiii. 842. 

** If>. xxviii. 151. 

^ Measured by Vaugiian-Stevens be- 
hind the back, instead of across the 
breast. I'id. I'. B. G. ./. xxiii. S42, 
843. 

*" Virchow in /'. B. G. .4. xxiii. S42. 

'•' lb- pp. S43, S44. 

596 APPENDIX 

Let us now consider the three skulls,^ which arrived from Vaughan-Stevens 
at the same time (as the extremity-bones of the woman). 

No. I. — The skull of the young woman is very light (452 grm.), and unquestion- 
ably nayinocephalic ; its capacity is 1032 ccm. The horizontal circumference 
measures 465, the sagittal circumference 342 mm. Of the latter 33,3 fall to the 
front of head, 35.9 to the middle, and 30.6 per cent to the back of the head.'- 

(Figs. I and 2.) The form is hypsi-tnesaticephalic, or rather hypsi-brachycephalic 
(L. Br. I. 79.8; L. II. I. 76.7). 

Though the skull is metopic, on the other hand the basilar suture is closed. 
The third molars in the upper jaw have not quite erupted; in the lower jaw 
they are still quite enclosed. On each side is an epipteric ossicle. The minimal 
frontal breadth is 92 mm., the bistephanic diameter is lOl mm., figures, that is, 
of considerable magnitude. On the other hand, the bi-asterionic diameter 
measures only 93 mm., and the entire back part of the head appears laterally 
compressed. 

(Fig. 3.) Face index mesoprosopic (76.7) ; middle facial index chanucprosopic 
(47.4). Further, the orbital index is hypsikonchic (94. l), and the nasal index 
platyrrhine (57.5), a new proof that orbital and nasal indices need not necessarily 
be concordant. Nose very broad, bridge deeply incurved and short, nasal bones 
cut off below almost straight. With this position of the nose the extreme prognath- 
ism agrees very well, no less than with that of the teeth, which, together with 
the alveolar processes, project strongly, the palatal index being leptostaphylitie 
(71. l). The teeth are encrusted with some black material (Sirih, or betel-leaf). 

Lower jaw weak. Middle part low, chin flat and rounded, front teeth strongly 
projecting, covered at the roots with tartar, molar teeth but little worn ; the 
second left molar and the right canine are carious. Ascending rami of mandible 
low, set on very obliquely, and the angle very large. 

No. 2. — A heavy (750 grm.) skull of an oldish man, likewise nannocephali': 
(capacity 1 190 ccm.). The horizontal circumference is greater {485 mm.), the 
sagittal circumference (345 mm.) but little different from that of No. I. The 
several sections of the latter dimension are distributed just as in No. i : Front 
of head 31.8 ; middle 37.3 ; back of head 30.7 per cent ; only that the middle 
of the head dominates still more. The form is ortho-mesaticephalic (L. Br. I. 77.2; 
L. H. \. 74.3).=' 

The skull is that of an elderly individual ; the molars are deeply worn away. 
Teeth strongly coloured with betel. On the right an incomplete separate 
epipteric ossicle ; alisphenoids broad. At the asteria, especially on the left, 
numerous small Wormian bones. Minimal frontal breadth small (88 mm.), 
temporal (106), and occipital transverse diameters larger. All sutures open. 

Face large and heavy. Index mesoprosopic (83.3) ; the middle facial index 
(47.6) chammprosopic ; the orbital index is likewise hypsikonchic (89.4), and the 
nasal index platyrrhine (52.0). Orbits very large. Moderate prognathism ; 
alveolar processes short. Palatal index hyperleptostaphyline (55.7). In the 
upper jaw a low, but strongly projecting, somewhat injured alveolar process. 
Front teeth are wanting, on the right three molars only, on the left only the 
second molar retained, and rather worn down. Very heavy but powerful 
mandible with low body (22 mm.), and very broad ascending rami (35 mm.); 
small and slightly projecting chin. The median teeth are wanting, the lateral 
ones large and pretty complete, strongly coloured with betel, moderately 
worn. 

No. 3. — According to statement, male ; according to appearance, female skull 
without lower jaw, eurycephalic (1230 cm.). The horizontal circumference 

^ Either of Hill Jakuns or Orang V. B. G. A. xxviii. 142. 
Laut (in either case of the same ^ Virchow in V. B. G. A. xxviii 

Malayan stock). Vide Virchow in 146. ^ lb. pp. 146, 147. 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 597 

measures 480, the sagittal circumference, however, only 363 mm. Of the latter 
33.0 per cent fall to the front, 35.8 to the middle, and 31. i to the back of the 
head ; the relations therefore resemble in a high degree those of No. i. On 
the other hand the breadth of brow (87 mm.) as well as the temporal diameter 
(99 mm. ) is smaller. Strong i)arietal stenokrotaphy. Very broad basilar process. 
The form is hypsi-braxhyiepkalic (L. Br. I. 80.3; L. H. I. 76.3) Smooth, 
small brow, without supra-orbital ridges, and without subglabellar depression. 
Flattened curve of the vault. Projecting occiput. 

Middle facial index ihainivprosopic (47.4). Cheek-bones as a whole depressed, 
marked tuberositas temporalis, zygomatic arches moderately prominent. Orbital 
index mesokonchic {84.2) ; nasal index platyrrhine {52.2) ; palatal index lepto- 
staphyline (77.7). Strong prognathism ; short alveolar processes, which are formed 
quite like a shovel. Teeth are wanting, except the much worn and tartar- 
covered first molar of the left side. Nose broad at root, bridge rather flattened 
and deeply indented, nasal bones tolerably broad, aperture wide. P'ronto-nasal 
suture placed very deeply. External auditory meatus much constricted. Palate 
large. Curve of teeth almost horse-shoe-shaped ; slight torus palatinus. 

A comparison of these results shows us that the cerebral portion of the skull 
undergoes greater variations than the facial. As regards the former, of the three 
skulls, two indeed are nannocephalic, and the third reaches only the modest 
capacity of 1 230 ccm., but this latter is in fact hypsi-brachycephalic, resembling, 
to speak more accurately. No. i, whereas No. 2, on the other hand, is hypsi- 
mesaticephalic, on account of its smaller breadth. The proportions of the face 
are much more constant. The predominant character is platyrrhiny, combined 
with leptostaphyly, which is present in all the skulls. In co-relationship with 
this should be mentioned the lowness of the face, as expressed by the middle 
facial index, and the lowness of the face in general, as expressed by the total 
facial index, the latter being shown at least in two out of three skulls. On the 
other hand, the orbits show, as they frequently do, greater individual variations, 
since No. i and No. 2 have a hypsikonchic index, whereas No. 3, on the other 
hand, is mesokonchic. In spite of this, the racial unity of the tribe cannot be 
doubted ; the similarities are greater and more numerous than the differences.' 

Jakun Skulls described by Virchow. Page 82. 

I. Measiircmcnts.- 

Capacity .... 
Greatest horizontal length 

,, breadth 
Vertical height 
Auricular height 
Horizontal circumference 
Sagittal circumference, frontal arc 

,, ,, parietal arc 

,, ,, occipital arc . 

Entire sagittal circumference . 
Minimal frontal breadth 
Temporal breadth 
Occipital breadth 
Auricular breadth 

Height of Eace («) (Nasion to " Brow ")3 
,, (/') ( ,, Prosthion) 

' l\ B. G. A. xxviii. (\irchow) 147, 14S. 
- lb. p. 1 56. ^ ? Bregma. 

9 

i 

i 

ccm. 

1032 

1 190 

1230 

mm. 

163 

171 

173 

)> 

130 

(Pt) 

132 (pt) 

139 (T) 

,, 

125 

127 

132 

,, 

104 

115 

>»3 

,, 

465 

485 

480 

,, 

114 

100 

120 

,, 

123 

129 

130 

,, 

105 

106 

113 

,, 

342 

345 

363 

,, 

92 

88 

87 

,, 

lOI 

106 

99 

., 

93 

107 

102 

,, 

102 

III 

T04 

,, 

89 

105 

,, 

55 

(2 59) 

60 

56 

598 

APPENDIX 

Breadth of Face (a) 

Kb) 

(0 

Orbital height 

,, breadth 
Nasal height 

,, breadth 
Palatal length 
,, breadth 

II. Calculated hidices. 

9 

6 

i 

ii6 

126 

118 

84 

87 

88 

82 

94 

32 

34 
40 

34 
38 
48 

32 
38 

44 

23 

25 

23 

45 

52 

45 

32 

29 

35 

I 
9 

2 

6 

I 

79.8 
76.7 
63-3 
76.7 

77.2 
74-3 
67-3 
83.3 

80.3 
76.3 
65.3 

47-4 
94.1 

47.6 
89.4 

47-4 
84.2 

57-5 

52.0 

52.2 

71. 1 

55-7 

77-7 

Length-breadth index 
Length-height index 
Ear-height index 
P^acial index {a) 
Lower facial index (l>) 
Orbital index 
Nasal index 
Palatal index 

Virchow proceeds to describe the limb-bones of the female skeleton (collected 
by Vaughan -Stevens). 

Of the arm-bones of this woman the following measurements may here be 
added : — 

1. Os humeri, left, 228 mm. long ; circumference of the diaphysis, 45 ; 
diameter of the head, 29.35 ! transverse diameter at the condyles, 46 mm. 

2. Radius, left, 185 mm. long; transverse diameter of the head, 15 ; of the 
lower end 23 mm. 

3. UInK, each 204 mm. long ; transverse diameter of the little head, 
1 1 mm.^ 

The extremity-bones of the woman No. I sent by Vaughan-Stevens include 
both the ossa femoris, an os humeri, both ulnce, and a radius. 

Apparently all these bones belong to the same skeleton. They agree as to 
appearance, stage of development, and size. None of them shows traces of a 
recent injury or of a disease got over during life. They are throughout of firm com- 
position, have smooth surfaces, sharp outlines, and are of a brownish-yellow colour, 
here and there somewhat spotted. They are small and delicate like children's 
bones. Nevertheless they come without doubt from an adult individual ; the 
blending of the epiphyses with the diaphyses is complete in all. Only in a few 
plnces, e.g. at the head of the femur and at the upper end of the ulna, is there 
still to be seen a shallow furrow in place of the earlier intermediary cartilage.- 

If with Mr. Humphrey we take the average proportion of the femur-length 
to the stature as being -^-^J'-^, we should obtain for our Jakun woman a stature of 
1229 mm. ; that is to say, 24 mm. less than that of the girl (1253 mm.) measured 
by Vaughan-Stevens, and estimated as being from 18 to 20 years old. In any 
case we can congratulate ourselves on seeing before us the most unmistakable 
dwarf-bones offered by ethnolog}'.^ 

Before I go into further comparisons with neighbouring tribes, I should like 
to make a few remarks on the colour of the skin and hair and eyes among the 
Jakuns. I take these from the registers of Vaughan-Stevens of the year 1895.'' 

1 V. B. G. A. xxviii. 
3 lb. p. 145. 

(Virchow) 144. 

4 lb. p. 148, 

lb. p. 144. 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 599 

Hair. 

In my opinion the hair of all Jakuns examined belongs to the same type, and 
the contrast with the Sakais and Semangs is as sharp as can be imagined. This 
is the more important as the question of the relation of the Jakuns to the other 
tribes has always been a matter of dispute.^ 

The colour of the hair is usually not stated ; only in a few cases (two men, 
one woman) is it expressly described as " black," yet it is doubtless to be 
assumed that if the hair of any of these people had not been black, the fact 
would have been expressly mentioned. Only once, in the case of a man forty 
years old, is it described as grey. It is called "straight" in the case of four men 
and thirteen women ; in the case of one man it is stated to be "slightly wavy.'" 
One man, of twenty to twenty-five years (No. 12), is expressly singled out as an 
exception ; his hair was curly and much matted, most of it being cut short to a 
length of 70 to 80 mm., but longer on the crown. Vaughan-Stevens reports that 
the genealogy of this man was known for five generations, and was free from 
crossing ; it was said that he came from a stock which had never intermarried 
with other than Jakun families ; moreover, he was the only member of his family 
who possessed curly hair. In the case of a larger number of other men no exact 
statement could be made, probably because the hair was either shaved or cut 
short ; nevertheless it is true that in spite of cutting it still had a length of 
10, perhaps 20, 80, 120, 200 mm. Often it is described as thick, sometimes at 
the same time matted. In the case of the women, the same expression is used 
throughout, viz. "long and straight."^ 

The Colour of the Eyes. 
(The following table, compiled by Vaughan-Stevens, is given by Virchow. ) ' 

Nos. 

Men. 

Women. 

1-2 

I 

2 

I 

2-3 

21 

II 

2 (29) 

I 

As regards the colour of the iris, this was comparatively dark, usually dark 
brown. The deepest shade (No. 1-2) is only recorded in the case of one 
woman ; shades Nos. 2 and 3 were the most frequent, of which No. 3 denotes a 
lighter shade of brown. 

In the eyes of the Jakun the conjunctiva is generally more or less bloodshot, 
a fact which they attribute to the trying nature of their many changes between a 
jungle and a sea-life !* 

The teeth of the Jakuns, not the alveolar continuation, often project l2-l6 

' V. B. G. A. xxviii. (Virchow) 150, as well as the colour of it to a more 

151. advanced age than the neighbouring 

2 Z. f. E. xxix. 17S. As regards tribes (V. -St. xnZ.f.E. xxix. 178). 

the Jakuns, and especially the older The Jakuns have only a little hair 

women among them, grizzled hair is on the face ; the beard is scanty, and 

frequent ; the total loss of colour is not whiskers are scarcely ever seen among 

usual, and the hair merely becomes thin them, even if they are not intentionally 

more often than it totally disappears. pulled out {Z. f. E. xxix. 179) 

This, however, is only comparative as ^ y ^ (j ^ xxviii. (Virchow) 148, 

between the aborigines (Orang Hutan) 149. 

themselves, since they retain their hair * Z. f. E. xxix. iSo. 

6oo 

APPENDIX 

mm. in front of the incisors of the under-jaw, which are almost vertical. Caries 
rarely occurs among the forest-dwellers ; but, on the other hand, frequently among 
those who live among the Malays. The lips are well-formed, thin, and the 
upper one well curved. 

The nose is never perforated, but the ear-lobes of the women are always per- 
forated and distended till the hole attains a diameter of 5 mm. to 5 cm. 

The fore part of the head is always full and prominent (Fig. 3). 

Here is given (in the original) Fig. 3. 
Besisi woman. 

-Profile of Chamai, a 45-year-old' 

The outline in Fig. 4 shows the typical form of the breast of a young 12-year- 
old Mantra girl named Awi immediately before her marriage. The two breasts 
are often unsymmetrical.' 

tHere is given (in the original) Fig. 4. 
("Owee"), a 12-year-old Mantra girl. 

-Outline of the breast of Aw 

'] 

Skin-Colour. 

The colour of the skin was determined (by V.-St. ) in accordance with the 
Parisian colour-plate. The following numbers were determined : — 

Women. 

Nos. 

Men 

21 

21-30 

I 

21-37 

22-29 

... 

29-30 

I 

29-34 

I 

29-37 

8 

30 

I 

30-^7 

30-37 

4 

37 

3 

37-44 

I 

^-43 

I 

43 

I 

In two cases it is noted that the individual concerned (No. 9^, No. 15 9) 
was afflicted with a skin disease called Kurap {Korab). In one case (No. 6) light 
patches are mentioned. ^ 

In reviewing these statements, it appears in the first place that the skin-colour 
in general corresponds to a yellowish or greyish tint of brown. The darkest 
shades are the Nos. 27, 34, and 42, which, however, were only found in one 
individual in each case ; No. 27 in a woman, Nos. 34 and 42 in men ; these 
presented a dusky brown, approximating in Nos. 27 and 34 to the negro colour. 
All other individuals showed lighter shades, especially Nos. 21, 30, 44, whereas 
Nos. 22, 29, 37 displayed a medium brown tint.-' In this connection we must 
notice that No. 37 is noted most frequently, namely, in the case of fifteen men 
and ten women = 68.1 per cent of the men, and 66.6 per cent of the women, or, 

[^Continued on p. 602. 

^ V. B. G. A. xxiii. (Virchow) S40. 

2 lb. xxviii. (Virchow) 148. 

3 For a specimen (sent by V.-St.) 
of a Jakun woman's hair, vide V. B. 

G. A. xxviii. 150. It is described as 
a fine "glossy black" lock, and was 
24 cm. in length. 

RACIAL AFFINITIES 

60 1 

^.^ ^-v 

A 

c^ t*.oo 

e- \£j 1/^ c*- 

c*- c^ 

I =*- 

00 M 

d> rn 

t^ t>. 

>» 

^^~. ,-^ 

'T^ 

*oo 0 

'^ 

'G 

g. 

°" 0 

■^ «ooR^ 

VO ^" 

*^' 

," 

0 

m« rr>2 

VO 

3 

0 

c 

VO 

M •* 

ro Ov 

^ 

^. fo 

c^ «■ (5\ >>• 

cjv -i- 

\ ^^ 

C/2 

13 

I^ 

r- »o 

r» 1^ 

CO 

M 

» oa 

=^ C3\ 

c« CO d* c^- 

vd 00 

'. ^^ 

S 

t>. t^ 

CO rv 

0 

^^ 

^^ ^^ 

^^ 

"^ X 

n S 

•II 

o- »-. CO c^ 

t^ sS 

'. «*■• ' 

>o 

vO fO 

c3 r^ 

1 

u" 

r.* 

r^ t^ 

CO t^ 

^ 

m 

t^ 00 •«- t^ 

r^ w 

CI 

•— 

<N< .^ 

f**, rn ro fn 

ti vd 

vd ^* 

s 

(^ 

r^ t^ r^ t^ 

r^ t^ 

t^ 

X 

„ 

N -a- >o m 

00 Ov 

0- 

rt 

«<^ M 

in N N VO 

d> >d 

d <^- 

«i 

CO 

CO CO 00 CO 

0 

^_^ 

^^ 

^^ 

^.^ 1 

0 

•0 

_, •<> _, 

•0 

'o 1 

fl 2 

0 

0 ^^ ■>^ 0 

?o 1 

« 0\ fo « 

« ■* 

•S-o 

^. ^ 

^^ «- 1 

t-. 

M \0 "^ 'O 

r^ c*; 

u 

r^ 

oi r* 06 0* 

r^ 

t^ r^ r^ t^ 

00 00 

1 

N N 

r^ 0> w « 

r^ m 

00 

CO C^ 

t^ m >-i «o 

0 N 

CO 5_ 

s 

T •* ^ •* 

►. M 

" " 

" 

j; 

0 t>- 

r~ 0 CO 0 

0 f 

r" 1 

N 0 

r^ 0 ro o^ 

(^ N 

^ cv. 

JO VO 

U-) >n VO 0 

VO VO 

■^ 1 

*5 

M - 

1 

^-. '^ 

^^ 

^_, 

^^ 

4> V 

^■~>o ■<• 

•0 --^^ 

•0 -^ 

*o 

♦00 0 r 

-0- ^ ^ -oo 

.0 'o 

VO 

3 (C 

f^ - « tN. 

~ Ov to <?..«• 

rvO 00 2" 

10 N '^ 0 t~ 

0 0 

.^ 

0 r- N - 

•1- •* N vO Ov 

M IT^o 

10 lO VO VO ro 

VO VO 

10 

^ 

1 

0 0 

>^ 

B 

^■9 - 

0 

. . . rt u 

- • - n 

0 

5^-5 " 

" - - iS 

i^-^ - 

" -^ 5 E 

_^ 

V 

^ 

: >, 

■2 >. r^ 

B 

u 

i 1 
a 1 

11 11 

.3 2 

traight 
ariable 

' < 

Variab 

Mor 

tha 

Strain 

tn 

W > 

u 

4i 

C r1 > 

v 

01 0 

_o 

^ 

i ^ ^^--g = 

u "0 

•^Sr"^ 

0 
0 

0 

S F * - 0.2 2 

•i; 0 
0 ^ 

"rt 0 0 u 

■z r *a^ 

U 

■^■y^ -a"^?-" 
J ^ 

Va 
shade 

Velio 
S. 

• 

a 

^ 

. 

-• 'j< 

. 5 

1 

1 

IS 3 

;; ffl 

'rang CoasI 

Natives — 

Samsam: 

Orang L 

,^ - ; 

S5 

emang- 
Grit 

•« 6 ;S J5 2 

lalays- 
S. Per 

Upper 

en 

w 

l-i 

•« 1 

g '^ « = t«j:-3 9 

a^-:2 ■« 8 iri-S 

.1 = 0 

- - i2"o^ 

CO 

^3 «'n":3;::3 
.= -^ 3 - p 

0 " c y •-> : rt — 

^ " -. ^ > - rt 

- « :;^ c-= c = 

C.Sf ^ ~ >>-■'■§ 3 

-: rt 'yi ,„ - - ,5 = 

- '^ > 2^ = -" -^ 
■-^'•' J; »,-S'-^ 
,5 o = a, -5 o 1^ M 

is 

7; *- rt »- 

2-^ c c Ji rt c u 

?^ a- S ° = 
; o^j2'«9^^ 

^ o - .c/27: n n 

ai c u^ =^ E 
= ^ S.~. « bi t* „ 

h: vi: bt. -pH 

*^ t.-"._.2 VU 3 TT 

i^ . « rt 'J •— ^ c L. 

•7 <3 If u >^'3 - 

'S a. u u S " • 
10 j;-5~-£:^.£ 

6o2 

APPENDIX 

in all, in 67.5 per cent of the individuals examined. There can therefore be no 
question of their being a black race.^ 

The skin-colour of the darkest of the Jakuns corresponded to No. 28 of 
Broca's table. The degree of admixture of Malay blood determines the colour, 
making it lighter where the sun does not affect it. 

[This remark, however, is doubtless based upon Vaughan- Stevens's Pan- 
Negrito theory, the real interpretation of the facts being, no doubt, that the 
lighter (and more nearly Malay) colour is due to the purer (aboriginal) Malayan 
element.] - 

When the skin, as is especially the case among the Jakuns, is much affected 
by cutaneous disorders (" Kurap "), the persons of both sexes emit an unpleasant 
rank odour, which is still noticeable after washing.-' 

PART II.— MANNERS AND CUSTOMS. 

Pangan Dart Poison.* Page 295. 

Ingredients of 
Poison. 

Scientific Name. 

Description 
of Plant. 

Part used. 

Remarks. 

I. " Taloon" 

Sliychnos, sp. 

Strong- 

Bark and 

Str. pubescens. 

(Mai. "Blay 

smelling 

sap 

Clarke (Logani- 

Besar ") 

plant 

ace(T), Ridley (?) 

2. " Kannet" 

Gnetum scan- 

9 ) 

Bark 

Gnetum edule, 

(Mai. "B. 

dens, Roxb. 

Bl. ( Gnetacece), 

Kechil ") 

Ridley 

3. " Greear'" 

Sttychnos, sp. 

,, 

Bark and 

Str. tieute, Bl. 

(?)(Mal. "B. 

(Java) 

sap 

{Loganiacece), 

Itam ") 

Ridley [Mai. 
" Ipoh akar"] 

4. "T61" 

Coscinhwifenes- 

,1 

>j 

= Koopur (V.-St. 

("Tele") 

tratuvt, 
Colebr. 

p. 124) 

5. " Pergu " 

Unknown 

,, 

Bark 

(" Perghoo") 

6. "Bhoi" 

? Roiicheria, 

J, 

Bark and 

Ridley says Ro2c- 

("Boi") 

Griffithii 

sap 

cheria Griffithi- 
ana. Planch 
{Line(€), [also 
" ipoh akar 
putih "] 

7. "Choi-clioi" 

Unknown 

Tree ? 

Bark 

8. "Kri" 

,, 

, , 

, , 

("Kree") 

9. " Lendau '" 

, J 

(" Lendow ") 

ID. "Garsung" 

)> 

,, 

,, 

II. "Chow" 

,, 

Fruit 

12. " Piyung" 

Pangiiim edule. 

jj 

>> 

P. edule, Mig. 

(Mai. "Kapa- 

?sp. 

{Bixinea), Ridl. 

yang ") 

^ V. B. G. A. xxviii. (Virchow) 149. 
2 lb. p. 840. 

3 Z.f. E. xxix. 174, 175. 

* Vaughan-Stevens, ii. 109 seq. 

NEGRITO DART POISONS 

603 

Pangan Dart Poison — continued. 

Ingredients of 
Poison. 

Scientific Name. 

Description 
of Plant. 

Part used. 

Remarks. 

13. " Slowung" 

Miqttelia catt- 

Small 

Seed- 

data, King 

climber 

capsules 

( Olacinea), 

Ridley 

14. " Rengut " 

Epipremmim 

" Large 

Fruit 

("ringhut ") 

giganteum, 
Schott, V. 
Ridley 

creeping 
aroid with 
leathery 
leaves " 

15. " Ipoh"" 

Antiaris toxi- 
caria, Bl. 
( Urtkacea)i 
Ridley 

Tree 

Sap from 
bark 

16. " Rotan 

Unknown 

Rattan or 

Sap 

riong" 

climbing 
cane 

17. " Rotan 

? - Betong, a 

J, 

,, 

V.-St. describes it 

butong " 

kind of bam- 
boo (sic) 

as a rattan, but 
no such rattan 
is known 

18. " Rumpi '' 

Bcehmeria 
Nivea, 
Gandich ; 
Laportea, 
gen. identi- 
fied with 
Bahmena 
tenacissima, 
Urtica (BSti- 
vans 

Nettle 

Leaves 

According to 
Ridley, Laportea 
cremilata, Forst. 
( Urticacea) 
= " rami" (?) 

19. "Jclatang" 

Cnesmone 
Javanica 

" 

i> 

(J el. Badak) Cnes- 
mone Javanica, 
Bl. [Euphor- 
biaceie), Ridley 

20. " Bal ■' 

21. "Sidudok " 

> Piper, sp. 

Pepper- 
vine 

Roots 

22. " Kegung" 

A morphophallits, 
sp. {Aroideu), 
Ridley 

Aroid 

>> 

23. " Gadong" 

Dioscorea, sp. 

Yarn 

»» 

Diosc. Damonum , 
Roxb. ( Dioscore- 
ace<r, Ridley 

24. Other sub- 

Scorpion, .snake. 

Any poison-snake 

stances 

and centipede 
poison 

does 

6o4 

APPENDIX 

Page 311. 

Besisi Dart Poison. 

Ingredients of Poison. 

Identification. 

Description of 
Plant 

Part used. 

1 

A.' 

I. " Ipoh akar " 

Strychnos lieute, Bl. 

Creeper 

Scrapings ! 

(Logaiiiaceic), Ridl. 

from root ; 

2. "Tuba" 

Derris elliptica, Benth. 
{Leguminos(c), Ridl. 

" 

? Root j 

3. Pepper 

1 

4. "Rengas" 

Melanorrhoca IVallachii, 
Hook, fil., or 

Fruit { 

Exccecaria agallocha, or 

Sap 1 

Ghita rengas, Migs. 

i 

5. Non-vegetable sub- 

Arsenic 

1 

stances 

B.*^ 

I. " Ipoh akar " 

(As above) 

or " batang" 

Antiaris ioxicaria, Bl. 
{Urticacece), Ridley 

Tree 

Bark 

2. " Malai '"' 

Thevetia neriifolia, 
Juss. {Cerbcra The- 
vetia, L.) ; 'i Strych- 
nos pubescens, Clarke 
{Loganiacecc), Ridl. 

Creeper (?) 

3. -'Tenet" 

? Gneium edzde, Bl. 
{Gnetaccic), Ridley 

" 

4. "Jinu" (Mai. 

Derris elliptica, Benth. 

,. 

"tuba") 

{Leguminosce), Ridl. 

5. " Kroi" 

Lophopetalmn pallidum, 
Laws, Ridley 

6. Non-vegetable sub- 

Arsenic; also snake, 

stances 

scorpion, and centi- 
pede poison when 

available 

^ Collected by myself, but largely 
agreeing with a list by Bellamy (p. 229), 
who, however, omits " rengas " and 

adds "chandu" (prepared opium), which 
maybe a mistake for " jenu"= "tuba." 
2 B. Collected by self.— W. S. 

I 

MALA YAN DART POISONS 

605 

Mantra Dart P 

OISON.' 

Page 319 

Ingredients of Poison. 

Identification. 

Part used. 

Remarks. 

I. " Rotan kemant- 

(Also "R. kcrai") 

Sap 

ing" 

Dctinonorops geni- 
culatus, Mart. 
(Pahna), Ridl. 

2. " Chantong 

Unknown 

Bark or 

badak " 

roots 

3. "Bernr keejang" 

Alocasia Sitigapori- 

Sap 

(" Birah kijang ") 

ana, or Singapor- 
etisis, Lindl. 

4. " Umpas padi"' 

Strychios, sp. 

Bark (?) 

In his list of the full- 

(or any other 

strength poison, V. - 

Strychnos) 

St. says " umpas " 
= " Biay hitam " 
of Pangans, i. e. Str. 
tieute (Java) 

5. " Umpas pile " 

Strychnos, sp. 

Bark (?) 

,, 

{?Mal. "Upas 

pahit ") 

6. " Mundess" 

Unknown 

Roots and 
bark 

7. "Prachek" 

TabemiVtnontana 
malaccensis. Hook, 
fil. (Apocyfiacete), 
Ridl. 

»> 

1 8. " Koopur" 

Carapa /nalaccensis. 

Bark 

= Newbold"s 

1 

Lam. 

"kopah" 

9. " Kroie" 

Lophopetalum pal- 

,, 

= Newbold's 

lidum, Laws. 

"krohi" 

( Celas/rinciv) 

10. " Lada api " 

? Chillies 

Fruit 

TBlandas, " ternek '" 

II." Ipoh " (tree) 

Antiaris ioxicaria 

Sap 

-! Kenaboi, " kayas " 
U"kyass") 

12. " Gadoiig " 

Dioscorca, sp. 

Knobs 

13. Lemon (or lime ?) 

Citrus, sp. 

Seeds 

14. "Tuba" 

Rand id diimetoriiin. 

Root 

Derris elliptica. 

Lam. (J.R.A.S. xvi. 

Benth. (Legunti- 

1886, 414), V.-St. 

tiasa), Ridl. 

ii. 124, note; or 

Derris elliptica 

15. Non-vegetable 

Centipedes, snakes, 

poisons 

j scorpions, arsenic 

1 

1 

Note. — Ridley also identifies "grow," the name of a fruit which when eaten 
by an animal makes its flesh poisonous for men to eat. " It ('grow ') looks like 
a Xanthophyllum " (Ridley). " Berar keejang " (although lure included by V.-St. 
in the poison ingredients) " is the aroid plant used if the man eats acid fruit after 
killing anything with the blowpipe" (V.-St.). " Chapaneng," the leaf used for 
straining the Ipoh, is Clerodendron velutinuni. " Chooping " or " chupen<T '" 
mentioned as an antidote to " tuba," is, as Mr. Ridley personally remarked to me 
"a Menispermacious plant, which I know well" (it is not, however, given in 
Ridley's List). "Chapaneng" (in Ridley's List) is given as Clerodendron 
villosum, Bl. (Verbenaceic). ' V.-St. ii. 124. 

6o6 

APPENDIX 

Page 326. 

The following description of the Peruvian blowpipe referred to is taken from 
the second volume of Reiss and Stiibel's monumental work, Kuliiir jiiid 
Industrie Siid-Amerikanischer Volkcr. 

It was brought from the Huallaga River (Peru), and consists of two grooved 
and hollowed-out halves of a palm-stem, carefully titted together, and wound 
round with " ^ipo," which is covered besides with a layer of black wax. A short 
bone mouthpiece is fitted into it. 

The quiver consists of a bamboo arrow-receptacle with a gourd-shell bottom, 
and a lining of dried palm-leaves in which the small blowpipe arrows are firmly 
stuck. 

It has a cap-shaped covering, a gourd-like receptacle containing cotton-wool, 
and the half-jaw of a fish called " pana," set with sharp teeth. 

The arrows measure 24. 5 cm. in length, and are made out of palm-leaf ribs. 

Pago 332. 

Benua Dart Poison.^ 

Ingredients of Poison. 

Identification. 

Part used. 

I. *' Ipoh " 

Antiaris toxicaria 

Bark 

2. " Babuta " 

Excacaria agallocha, L., 
or Cerbera odollam, \.. 
and C. Laxtaiia, Ham. 
[Apocynaceic), Ridl. 

Sap 

3. "Gurah" 

Sapium indicunt, L. , or 
Eranihemiiiii malva- 
cense, Clarke 

Sap 

4. Non - vegetable 

(i) Centipede heads ; (2) 

substances 

millipedes ; (3) the 
stings of scorpions; (4) 
spines offish, e.g., the 
"sembilang," "kitang," 
" lepu," " siong," 
" pari," " tC - tuka," 
"k'li" ; (5) liver of the 
" buntal" fish"-^ 

Page 420 et seqq. 

Skmang C0M15 Patterns. 

\_Notc by Editof. — The following list was compiled from V^aughan-Stevens' 
manuscripts and printed in Z.f. E xxv. 86 et seq. 

In the present version the original list has been condensed as far as possible ; 
Vaughan-Stevens' faulty system of nomenclature has been eliminated, and the 
actual numbers of the panels themselves substituted ; the result being that the 
description of the patterns is now much easier to follow. 

The numbering is that of the original, but obvious corrections have been 
made in a few places ; and all less important details omitted to save space. — 
W. S.] 

1 V.-St. ii. 107 et seq. 
- Vari<jus kinds of snake-poison are 
added by the W. Benua, e.g. that of the 

black cobra, and a small brown snake 
called "Ali." The E. Benua add that 
of the " ular berang " and " gala." 

NEGRITO COMB PA TTERNS 607 

For sketches of the central panel patterns (No. 5) of Nos. lA to 11 A, see 
Plate I.; Nos. liB to 19N, Plate II.; 19O to 38, Plate III.; 39 to end, 
Plate IV. 
I A. Disease, " Pong" or " Kingkong" = " Fever" — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-ying," cp. 21B, 4A, 12C, 3A, 20G ; (2) " Knel-lap," 
cp. 21B, iG ; (4) " PawCr "-pattern " Lig-teg," cp. iiA, 18E ; (6) the 
same ; (8) the same. 

iB. Disease, same as lA — 

Panel : (i) "T6-hong" = "empty," in conjunction with {2) " Tink- 
tonk," which is carried over the top border; (2) " Tink-tonk " ; (4) 
" Was "-pattern "Pasir" (" Passeer ") = " sand," cp. 12A, 19N, 20J, 
19A, 19H, 19B, A7, 19J, 18C (variations of the " Pasir" pattern) ; (6) 
the same ; (8) the same. 
iC. Disease, same as lA — 

Panel: (l) "Jdnasik" (" Jennassik"), cp. 14B, 9A, iSE, 2A, iD, 
1 1 A, 57, 41, 19F, loB ; (2) " ' Kitteng,' 42 variations" ! (4) " PawCr "- 
pattern " Lip-hoig," cp. 19F, 16A (a different pattern but with the same 
name); (6) " Pawer "- pattern " umung " (" Oomoong "), cp. loA, 9B, 
55, 20H, and (i) of iD, 57 ; (8) identical with (4). 
iD. Disease, same as lA — 

Panel : (i) the same as iC, but differing in design ; (2) "Bong," cp. 
2A and (?) loB ; (4) " umung," cp. (6) of iC ; with (6) cp. (4) of iC ; 
with (8) cp. (4). 
lE. Disease, same as lA — 

Panel: (i) " um " ("Oom"), cp. 21A, 21F, and (2) of 21A ; (2) 
"is" ("Ees"); (4) " Pawer "-pattern, the same; (6) the same; (8) 
" Pawtr "-pattern " ; " Knel-lap," cp. iG, 21B, and (?) lA. 
I F. Disease, same as i A — 

Panel: (i) " fim," cp. lE; (2) " Pahom " ("Paherm"), cp. 21 A 
and (i) of 21 A ; (4) the same, with some variation ; (6) same as (i) ; (8) 
same as (4). 
iG. Disease, same as lA — 

Panel: (l) " Manteng," with upper border; (2) "Knel-lap," cp. (8) 
of lE ; (4) cp. lE ; (6) cp. lE ; (8) same as (2). 
2 A, Disease, " Kadong," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " Jcnasik " (" Jenassik "), cp. iC, iD ; (2) "Bong," c\>. 
iD; (4) as in iD ; (6) " Chis-kes," " Pawer "-pattern, cp. 4B, 4C ; 
(8) as in (4). 
2B. Disease, same as 2A — 

Panel: (i) " Led-wod," cp. 54, 4B, 49, 17B, 16A, 8A, 4C, iSF ; 
(2) " Sad-an-yet " (" Sad-un-yet "), identical with 19K, 45, 19!; (4) 
like (2) of lA ; (6) cp. (4) ; (8) identical with (2). 
3A. Disease, " Kimbu " ? (" Kimbur "), unexplained — 

Panel: (i) "Pen-ying," cp. lA, 4A, 2iI5, 12C, 20G ; (2) " Angis," 
cp. 20G ; (6) like (2) ; (8) like (i). 
3B. Disease, same as 3A — 

Panel: (i) " Chig-lag," cp. 3C, 20F ; (2) " Kil-kel," cp. 19II and 
C8 (?). Panels (6) and (S) like ( i ). 
3C. Disease, same as 3A — 

Panel : (l) " Chig-lag," cp. 3U ; (2) " Bakol," cp. 20F, 20J ; (6) like 
(2); (8) like (I). 
4A. Disease, " Klasau " ("Klassow"), unidentitied — 

Panel : (i) " Pen-ying," cp. i.-\., 21B, 3A, 12C, 20G ; (2) " Ki-bfit " 
(" Kee-boot"), cp. 37; (4) " Was "-pattern " Trbal-i " ? ("TcLal-i"), 
cp. (I) of 6A, 18A, 20H, 55 ; (6) and (8) like (2). 

6o8 APPENDIX 

4B. Disease, same as 4A — 

Panel: (l) " Led-vvod," cp. 54, 49, 2B, 16A, 8A, 4C, 17B, 18F ; 
(2) " Chis-kes," cp. 4C ; (4) and (6) like (i) ; (8) like (2). 
4C. Disease, same as 4A — 

Panel: (l) " Led-wod," cp. 4B (half-size); (2) "Chis-kes," ver}' 
different from that of 4B ; (4) and (6) " Penalong," cp. 15A and (?) 18H ; 
(8) like (I). 
5A. Disease, " Pasar chinbcg " (" Passar-chin-beg "), imexplained, cp. " I.i- 
cliin-beg " (" Lee-chin-beg ") = " disease of the upper jaw " — 

Panel: (i) " Let-seig " (" Let-saig "), cp. 35, 6C, 24, 6G, 27, 20B, 
61, 59, 18H; (2) "Sil"; (4) " Was "-pattern " Tebal-i," cp. 4A ; (6) 
" Was "-pattern " Penalong," cp. 18H and (?) iSA; (8) like (4). 
5B. Disease, same as 5 A — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-hii," cp. 25A, 50, 20A, 19L, 44, 25B, 22A, 19C ; 
(2) " Batchai," cp. 18G ; (i) " Was "-pattern " Tebal-i," cp. 6A, i8A, 
etc.; (6) " Was "-pattern "en-let" ("N'let"), cp. 28B ; (6) " Was "■- 
pattern " en-let," varied in 28A. 
6 A. Disease, " Kayan challag," undefined- 
Panel : (i) "Tebal-i," variation of 18A, 55, 20H ; (2) " Makuin " 
("Mukoin"), varied in 15B; (4) " Pawer "-pattern " Sll," cp. 5A ; (6) 
and (8) like (i). 
6B. Disease, same as 6A — 

Panel: (i) " Let-seig," cp. 6D, 15A, 18H, 59, 61, 20B, 5A, 27, 6G, 
24, 6C, 35, which show every possible variation of "Let-seig" (2) 
" tnnyangil " (" N'nyangil "), varied in 6D, 38; (4) like (2); (6) and 
(8) " Was "-pattern " Pen-hil," cp. 5B, etc. 
6C Disease, same as 6A — 

Panel: (i) " Let-seig," cp. 6B ; (2) " Tebal" (" Tebal"), cp. I9A(?) 
and 61 (?); (4), (6), (8) like (2). 
6D. Disease, same as 6A — 

Panel: (l) "Let-seig"; (2) "tnnyangil" ("N'nyangil"), varied in 
6B, 38 ; (4) like (i) ; (6) like (i) ; (8) like (2). 
6E. Disease, same as 6A — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-hil," cp. 5B ; (2) " entei," variation of 6G ; (4), 
(6), " Pawer "-pattern " A-et " ? (" Aet ") ; (8) like (2). 
6F. Disease, same as 6 A — 

Panel: (i) "Pen-hil," cp. 5B, 6E ; (2) " Al-tong," cp. 40, 19B ; 
(4) " Was "-pattern " Chig-lag," cp. 3B, 3C, 20F ; (6) " Pawer "- 
pattern " Kil-kel," cp. 19II, 3B, SC ; (6) as (2). 
6G. Disease, same as 6A — 

Panel: (i) "Let-seig," cp. 6B, etc.; (2) "Entei," cp. 6E ; (4) and 
(6) " Pawer "-pattern " Si-ei-yong " (" .See-i-yong ") ; (8) Keiyong, cp. 
33, 58, 17C. 
6IL Disease, same as 6A — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-hil" (half-size), cp. 5B ; (2) " Langut" (" Langhut"); 
(4) and (6) " Pawer "-pattern " Angis," cp. 3 A, 20G ; (8) like (2). 
7A. Disease " Tan-eg," unexplained — 

Panel: (i) " Pasir "(" Passer ")=" sand," cp. 19J, 18C, 19B, 19H, 
19A, 20J, 19N, 12A ; (2) "Kayap" ("Kiap"); (3) " Pawer "-pattern 
"Sad-an-yet" (" Sad-un-yet "), cp 19J ; (4) like (2); (6) and (7) 
" Was "-pattern " Kasom," cp. 20C, 58, 19E, 31, 17C, 19G, 32B, 
22C, 23, 22E, 36, 22D, 17A, 51, 19M, 52, 7B; (8) " Penalong," cp. 
18H. 
7B. Disease, same as 7A — 

Panel: (i) "Kasom," cp, 7A ; (2) " Kahib " ; (3), (4), (6), (7) like 
(2) ; (8) like (i) ; (5) see p. 90, Fig. 7. 

< iK/4~> nm 

wwn m 

i A I B iC iD ■£ 'F ,Q 

J3 3C 

SB 

/O A 

/OB 

/, A 

// B '^^ 

/2 3 liC / \/ 

I3A / \ 

/J 5 

/J-^ /ra ,6 A '68 //A yB 

^/// %M \^ '^^^ ^^ ^^^ 

/SQ- 'S» 

V/ ^ 

'SB 

'SO /s e 

'8^ 

ioB 

ioC 

JtOD /7 

.V J T/A 

I 'itughan-Siet'eif 

CENTKAI, FANKLS of CoMH I'ATTKKNS, I'KJ. 7 (/./. F. XXV. 90!. 

W. /. /. 608. 

tf 

« 

ro 

\ n 

I 'aiig/ian-Slt-fCiu. 

Central Panicls ov Comb J'attekns, 1'ig. 8 [Z.f. E. x.w. 91). 

Vol. I. p. 609. 

NEGRITO COMB PATTERNS 609 

7C. Disease, same as 7A — 

Panel: (i) "Let-tod," cp. 8C, 32A, 18B, but "Was picheg"; (2) 
" Kemit " (" Kem-meet "), cp. 26; (4) " PSwer "-pattern " P-rnalong,'" 
cp. 18H ; (6) like (2) ; (8) " Pfiwer "-pattern " Boing," cp. 18F, 17B. 
8A. Disease " Ber," unidentified — 

Panel : (i) " Led-wod," cp. 2B ; (2) defective, should resemble (2) of 
8 A, but is not quite the same; (4), (6), and (8) "Pawer "-pattern" Kl-but." 
8B. Disease, same as 8 A — 

Panel : (i) "Lcgiyap," with upper border; (2) " Ni-en-ka" (" Ne-an- 
kar"); (6), (7), (8) like (2). 
8C. Disease, same as 8A — 

Panel : (i) " Let-tod," cp. 18B, 32A, 7C ; (2) " Kil-kel," cp. igHand 
(?) 3B; (4) "PfiwGr"- pattern " KT-but," cp. 37: (6) like (2); (8) 
" PawCr "-pattern " Boing," cp. i8F(?)and 17B. 
Q.V. Disease, " Kang-keng" ?(" Kung-keng "), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Jcnasik," cp. 2A, etc.; (2) "Chab-lab," reverse of 
"Gau."cp. 57; (4), (6) like (I); (8) like (2). 
9B. Disease, same as 9A — 

Panel: (i) " Hcr-saydd " (" Hersaige "), cp. 26, 43, loA, 37, 14A ; 
(2) " limring," cp. 10; (4) " Was "-pattern "Tebal-i," cp. 6A ; (6) like 
(2); (8) like (4). 
io.\. Disease, " Tak-ui " (" Tak-oye "), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " Hcr-sei," cp. 9B ; (2) "umung," cp. 9B ; (4) and (S) 
" Was "-pattern " Tcbal-i " ; (6) " Pawcr "-pattern " Chab-lab," cp. 9A. 
loB. Disease, same as loA — 

Panel : (i) " JOnasik," diminishing from left to right, cp. 2A ; (2) and 
(6) " Bong," cp." 2A and iD(?) ; (4) and (8) " Was "-pattern "Tebal-i." 
1 1 A. Disease, " PclTg" (" Peleeg') = " Head-ache " — 

Panel: (i) "Jcnasik" (i size), in conjunction with (2); (2) and (8) 
"Lik-tck," iSE; (4) and {d) " Was "-pattern " Chig-lag," cp. 3B, 3C, 
20F. 

[End of patterns given on Plate L] 

iiB. Disease, same as iiA — 

Panel : (l) " Pcn-h!l," cp. 5P.. 6E ; (2) Po-nel-tu ; (4) and (6) " Was "- 
pattern "Tobal-i," cp. 6A, iSA, 55, 2oIi ; (6) " Was "-pattern " Let- 
seig," cp. 5 A. 
12A. Disease, " Chas-ai " (" Chas-eye "), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " Pasir," cp. 7A, 19T, iSC, 19H, 19A, 20T, 19N, 12A : 
(2), (4), (6), and (8) "Tabag." 
12B. Disease, same as 12A — 

Panel: (l) "Manau"; (2), (6), and (8) "Lid-da," cp. 14A ; (2) 
"Lid-da." 
12C. Disease, same as 12A — 

Panel: (i) " Tepi " ("Border"), with "Pen-ying"; (2) " Na-pek " 
("Na-pek") ; (6) and (8) like (i) ; (4) like (2). ['"N.apek" means "pig" 
in Semang.] 
1 3 A. Disease, " Ung-ag-buig," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " Kan-hcng," cp. 13B ; (2) " Seg-kit " ; (4). (6), and (8) 
" Pawcr "-pattern "Seg-kit." 
13B. Disease, same as 13A — 

Panel: (i) "Kan-beng"; (2), (4), (6). (S) "Kan-beng," different 
from (i). 
14A. Disease, " It-al-ig," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Hir-sayd," cp. 9B ; (2) "Lid-da": (4), (6), (8) "Pawer"- 
pattern " Lid-da," cp. 12B. 

VOL. I 2 R 

6io APPENDIX 

14B. Disease, same as 14A — 

Panel: (i) " Jcnasik," cp. 2A ; (2) and (6) " Pawer "-pattern "Bui" 
(" Bool ") ; (4) and (8) " Pawcr "-pattern " Chab-lab," cp. 6A. 
15A. Disease, " Makau kalon " (" Mackow-Kallon") — 

Panel: (i) and (6) "Let-seig"; (2) and (4) " P^nalong " ; (8) 
" Penalong " (varying from preceding). 
15B. Disease, same as 15A — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-hll," cp. 6A, 6H ; (2) and (8) " Makuin " (" Ma- 
koin ") ; (4) and (6) " Chig-lag." 
1 6 A. Disease, " Kdlak-sog "? (" Klik-sog ") — 

Panel : (i) " Led-wod," cp. 2B ; (2) and (8) " Lig-boig " ; (4) and (6) 
<; Chig-lag." 
16B. Disease, same as 16A — 

Panel: (i) and (8) "eng-ah"'; (2) "A-i't"; (4) and (6) " Ki-but." 
17A. Disease, " Tin-weg Lan-ka" (" Tinwag-lankar "), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " Kasom," cp. 22D, 51 ; (2), (4), (6), and (8) "Da-da," 
cp. 23, 22D; (4) "Chig-lag," cp. 3C ; (7) " Si-ei-yong." 
17B. Disease, same as 17A — 

Panel: (i) "Led-wod," cp. 4B ; (2) and (8) "Boing"; (4) and (6) 
"Chig-lag," cp. 3B. 
17C. Disease, same as 17A — 

Panel: (i) " Kasom," cp. 31, 19E ; (2) and (6) "Kei-yong"; (4) and 
(8) " Chig-lag," cp. 3B. 
18A. Disease, " Bakau Timun " (" Bakow-Timoon"), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Tebal-ei"; (2) and (6) "Jenul," cp. 43 and (?)48 ; (4) 
and (6) " Was "-pattern Tebal-ei. ^ 
18B. Disease, same as 18A — 

Panel: (i) and (6) "Let -tod"; (2) and (8) " Bele " or " Bclo " 
("B'ler"), cp. 18C, 22.\. 
18C. Disease, same as 18A — 

Panel: (i) " Pasir " (" Passeer " = " Sand "), cp. 19H ; (2) and (8) 
"Bele "or "Belo"(" B'ler"), cp. 22A and (?) 18B; (4) and (6) " Bong," 
cp. ioB(?), 2A, iD, 
18D. Disease, same as 18A — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-hil," cp. 19D, 47, 46, 19C etc. ; (2), (4), (6), (8) 
''Ijueg" ("Ejooaig"), cp. 47 ; (3), (7) "Chig-lag." 
18E. Disease, same as 18A — 

Panel: (i) "JCnasik," cp. 9A ; (2) and (8) " Lik-teg," cp. iiA (?) ; 
(4) and (6) "covered with ' Goh ' patterns." 
18F. Disease, same as 18A — 

Panel: (i) " Led-wod," cp. 8A ; (2) and (8) "Boing"; (4) and (6) 
like (I). 
18G. Disease, same as 18A — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-hll" ; (2) and (6) " Bat-teschai " ? cp. 5B(?);(4)and 
(6) "Ijueg," cp. 47. 
18H. Disease, same as 18A — 

Panel: (i) " Let-sCig," cp. 15A, 6B, etc.; (2) and (4) "Penalong," 
cp. 15A (?) ; (6) and (8) " Kasom," cp. 32B, 7B. 
19A. Disease, "Bakau timun," unidentified (but see 18A) — 

Panel : (i) " Pasir," cp. 7A ; (2) and (8) " Tobal," cp. 61 and 6C (?) ; 
(4) and (6) "Chig-lag," cp. 3C. 

' N.B. — The name of this disease, disease, which covers the person with 

"Bakau Timun," means literally (in small spots. " Cucumber seed " is the 

Semang) "cucumber blossom," and name given to a common Semang 

probably refers to some form of skin- comb pattern ; cp. 1 9 A. 

I 

NEGRITO COMB PATTERNS 6ii 

19B. Disease, same as 19A — 

Panel: (i) " Pasir " (small size) ; (2), (4), (6) "Altong," cp. 6F, 40; 

(3) and (7) "Chig-lag" ; (8) " Biling," cp. 19N. 
19C. Disease, same as 19A — 

; Panel : (i) " Pen-hil," cp. 5B ; (2) and (8) " Yang-knil " ; (4) " Chig- 

? lag"; (6) "Sad-an-yit," cp. 19K, 19T. 

I 19D. Disease, same as 19A — 

r Panel: (i) " Pen-hil," cp. 5B ; (2) " Yat-ut " ; (4) " Pawer "-pattern 

" Kil-kel," cp. 8C ; (6) " Pawer "-pattern " Chau-ei " ("Chow-ai"). 
19E. Disease, same as 19A — 

Panel : (i) " Kasom," cp. 20C, 58, 31, 17C, 19G, 32B ; {2), (4), (6), 
1 (8) " Si-ei-yong." 

■ 19F. Disease, same as 19A — 

^, Panel: (i) and (6) "Jonasik"; (2) " Lig-boig " ; (4) and (6) 

I "Hersaydd" (" Hor-sei "), cp. 9B, loA. 

'1 19G. Disease, same as 19A — 

Panel: (i) "Kasom," cp. 19E ; (2) and (8) " Kelapei," cp. 19M, 
19L, 19C; {4) and (6) " Goh " patterns. 
19H. Disease, same as 19A — 

Panel: (i) " Pasir," cp. 12A ; (2), (4), (6), (8) "Kil-kel"; (3) and 
(7) " Was "-pattern "Chig-lag," cp. 3B. 
19J. Disease, same as 19A — 

Panel: (i) " Pasir," cp. 12A; (2), (4), (6) " Sad-an-yit " ; (3) and (7) 
" Pawer "-pattern "Kelapei," cp. 19L. 
19K. Disease, same as 19A — 

Panel : (i) " Pen-hTl," cp. 6E, 6H, iiH, etc. The remainder consists 
of two variants of " Sad-an-yit." 
19L. Disease, same as 19A — 

Panel : (i) " Pen-hil," cp. 19K ; (2) and (4) " Kdlapei," cp. 19C ; (6) 
and (8) " Pawer "-pattern " Kl-but " ; (3) and (7) " Goh " pattern. 
19M. Disease, same as 19A — 

Panel: (i) "Kasom"; (2), (4), (6), (8) "Kelapei"; (3) and (7) 
" Chig-lag," cp. 3C. 
19N. Disease, same as 19A — 

Panel : (l) " Pasir " ; (2) and (S) " Biling " ; (4) and (6) " Chig-lag." 
[End of patterns given on Plate II.] 
19O. Disease, same as 19A — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-hil" ; (2) " Pc-ncl-tu," cp. iiB (?) ; (8) "Biling"; 

(4) " Goh " pattern. 
20A. Disease, "Metan-tau" ("Met-un^tow"), probably a skin disease, like iSA — 

Panel : (i) " Pen-hil" ; (4) and (l) like (2) ; (6) a " fancy" pattern. 
20B. Disease, same as 20A — 

Panel: (i) " Let-seig," cp. 27 ; (2) " Ta'at " ; (4) and (8) " Halei," cp. 
39, 50; (6) " Tink-tonk," cp. iB. 
20C. Disease, same as 20A — 

Panel: (i) "Kasom"; (2) and (4) " Keig " ; (6) and (8) " Chog." 
20D. Disease, same as 20A — 

Panel: (i) " Boin " ; (2), (4), (6), (8) "cr-gap." 
20F.' Disease, same as 20A — 

Panel: (i) "Chig-lag" (the "under stripes" = "picheg"); (2), (4), 
(6), (8) "Bakol,"cp. ic (?). 
20G. Disease, same as 20A — 

Panel : (i), (6), (8) " I'cn-ying," with border ; (2) " Angis," cp. 3A ; 
(4) " Pawcr "-pattern " Pen-hil." 

1 20E omitted in the original. 

6i2 APPENDIX 

2oH. Disease, same as 20A — 

Panel: (i) " Tebal-ei " ; (2), (6), (8) "Sob"; (4), (7) " Gau," 

fP- 57- 
20J. Disease, same as 20A — 

Panel: (i) "Pasir"; (2) " Bakel " ; (3), (4), (6) " Pawer "-pattern 
'« Gau " ; (8) " Pawer "-pattern " Tink-tonk." 
21A. Disease, " Au-in " ("Ow-in"), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " um " ; (2), (4), (6), (8) " Pahom " (" Paherm "), 
cp. iF, 
21B. Disease, same as 21 A — 

Panel : (i) "Pen-ying"; (2), (4), (6), (8) "Knel-lap." 
22A.1 Disease, " Man-wok kekil," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-hTl" ; (2) and (4) "Btle" or " Bclo " ; (3) " Sad- 
an-yit"; (6) and (8) " Boing " ; cp. 17B ; (7) " Chig-lag." 
22C. Disease, same as 22A — 

Panel: (l) " Kasom " ; (2), (4), (6), (7), (8) " Chin-eng." 
22D. Disease, same as 22A — 

Panel: (i) " Kasom," cp. 17A; (2) and (4) " Da-da," cp. 23, 17A 
(6), (8) " Chin-eng"; (3), (7) "Chig-lag." 
22E. Disease, same as 22A — 

Panel: (l) "Kasom"; (2), (4) " Chin-eng " ; (4), (6) "Chig-lag"; 
(7)) (8) "Let-seig" (two variants). 

23. Disease, " Cheb," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Kasom"; (2) "Da-da"; (6), (7), (8) two variants of 
"Kasom." 

24. Disease, " Tu-eg," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Let-seig"; (2), (8) " Langut " ("Langut"); (4) and (6) 
" covered with ' Goh '-pattern." 
25A. Disease, " Ka-tam " (" Kattam ") — 

Panel: (l) "Pen-hil"; (2) " Ing." The remaining designs are very 
peculiar : they represent forest-paths. The disease, a kind of fever, which 
is found in all parts of the Peninsula, attacks all parts of the body in such 
a way that the patient is unable to walk for some time. This design may 
be borrowed from the .Sakai, since it is found among all four of the 
Scmang groups. 

Tribe : Semang of Kinta (" Kintar," Ulu Kinta being a Sakai locality), 
who stated that this fever (" Katam ") is less fatal to them than 25C ; and 
hence (i) and (2) are used. 
25B. Disease, same as 25A — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-hil " (i size) ; (2) "Yat-fit." 

Tribe : Semang of Bclum ("Bloom"), who made a similar statement 
to that attributed to the Kinta Semang in 25A [Plate IV.]. 
25C. Disease, same as 25 A — 

Panel: (i) "Pen-hil." 

Tribe : Semang of Bong, who stated that they only used ( i ) for reasons 
similar to those just given (25A, B). 
25D. Disease, same as 25A — 

Tribe: S:mang of Ken-siu ("Ken-siew") and E. Semang ("Orang 
Panggang "), who made similar statements to the preceding. 

26. Disease, " Yan-tui hi-li " (" Yan-toe hiliie "), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " Hersaydd " ("Her-sei"), same as (4), (6), (8); (2) 
"Kem-mit." 

27. Disease, " Wing-jang," unidentified— 

' 22B is wanting in the original, 22C, 22D, 22E are described as having 
errors in their respective patterns. 

NEGRITO COMB PATTERNS 613 

Panel: (i) " Let-seig " ; (2), (4), (8) " Langut " ("Langut"); (3) 

" Goh " pattern " ; (6) " Pcnalong," cp. 18H ; (7) "Bele" or " Belo." 

The illness is said to commence in the region of the nipples and 

spread downwards. [A, B, C, reckoning from the left side, are said to 

be inaccurately drawn.] 

28A. Disease, " Ke-sum " ("Kay-some"), unidentified — 

Panel (i) "En-let"; (2), (4), (6), (8) "Biling"; (3) " Si-ai-yong " ; 
(7) "Chig-lag." 
28B. Disease, same as 28A — 

Panel: (i) "En-let"; (2) " Min-len " ; (4) " Tebal-ei " ; (6) and (8) 
" Jenasik." 

29. Disease, " Yan-tul man-ka " (" Yan-tool-mankar "), unidentified, cp. 26 — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-hil " ; (2) " Yang-knil " ; (6) " Kasom " ; (8) 
"Langut" ("Langut"). 

30. Disease, " Pcn-al-dung " (" Pen-ul-doong "), unidentified — 

Panel : (i), (6), and (8) " Boin," cp. 60 ; (2) " Chog " ; (4) a pattern 
invented by the maker of the comb. 

31. Disease, " Chab-ok," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " Kasom " ; (2) " Keiap," cp. 51 ; (4) " Was "-pattern 
"Tcbal-ei," cp. 6A ; (6) " Pawer "-pattern " Ijueg," cp. 47; (8) 
" Pawer "-pattern " Chis-kis," cp. 4B. 
32.\. Disease, "Ttbil" ("Tebeel"), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " Picheg," "Let-tod"; (2) " Ka-wa " ("Kawar"); (8) 
" Pfiwer "-pattern " Boing." 
32B. Disease, same as 32A — 

Panel: (l) "Kasom"; (2), (4), (7) " Chin-eng " ; (3) "Chig-lag"; 
(6) " Kasom" (variant) ; (8) " Ijucg." 

33. Disease, " Kau-i," unidentified — 

Panel: (l) " Pen-hil," with wide border; (2), (S) " Kei-yong " ; (4), 
(6) " Pawer "-pattern " Si-ei-yong." 

34. Disease, " Lui," unidentified — 

Panel: (l) "Pen-hil"; (2) and (8) "Min-len"; (4), (6) "Was" 
pattern "Chig-lag." 

35. Disease, " Chig-lak " ( = " Chig-lag " ?), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Let-seig"; (2), (6) "Mud-beg" (Mood-bag"); (4), (8) 
" Was "-pattern " Cheg-lag " ( = " Chig-lag " ?). 

36. Disease, " Kong," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Kasom"; (2), (8) " Sclang dui " ; (4), (6) " Pawer "- 
pattern " Ki-but." 

37. Disease, " Kamalij " (" Kamalege"), unidentified — 

Panel: (l) " Hersaydd " (" Her-sei ") ; (2), (S) "Ki-but"; (4), (6) 
" Was "-pattern " Chig-lag." 

38. Disease, " Pcnapit " (" Penappit "), unidentified — 

Panel : (i) " Ken-beng" ; (2), (8) " Enrnyangil " ; (4), (6) " Pen-hil." 
[End of patterns given on Plate IIL] 

39. Disease, " Han-be" or " Han-bo"? (" Ilun-ber "), unidentified — 

Panel : (i), (4), (6) " Kin-sei " ; (2) " Ha-lei." 

40. Disease, " Heit," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Pen-hil"; (2), (4), (6), (8) " Al-tong " ; (3), (7) 
*' Chig-lag." 

41. Disease, " Selang-dui " (" Salangdoy "), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "JOnasik"; (2) "Chog"; (4), (''^ " Wr.s "-pattern 
"Tebal-ei"; (6) " PawOr "-pattern "Ki-b.i." 

42. Disease, " Kang-wom," unidentified — 

Panel : (i), (4), (6), (8) " Yc-lap-e " (" Yeh-lap-eh )" ; (2) " Kit-tcng." 

43. Disease, " Tang-tong " (" tung-tong"), unidentified — 

6i4 APPENDIX 

Panel: (l) " Hersaydd " ("Her-sei"); (2) '♦ Jenul" ; (4), (8) 

" Was "-pattern " Tebal-ei " ; (6) " Ki-but." 

44. Disease, " Sad-or," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-hil " ; (2), (4), (6), (8) " U-kap." 

45. Disease, " Ser-sayi " or " Sa-sayi " ? (" Scr-sayee "), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " Pen-hll " ; (2) " Sad-an-yit " ; (3), (7) "Chig-lag"; (4), 
(6), (8) "Boing," cp. 17B. 

46. Disease, " Eg-to," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) and (6) "Pen-hil"; (2) " A-bat " ; (3), (7) "Sad-an- 
yit"; (4), (8) " Was "-pattern " Ka-som." 

47. Disease, " Kam," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Pen-hil"; (2) " Ijueg " ; (3) and (4) " Let-seig." 

48. Disease, " Ga-sun " ("Gassoon"), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Ta-song"; (2) "Jenul"; (4), (6), (8) " Ken-beng," 

cp. 38- 

49. Disease, "\an-tui hi-log " (" Yan-toe hillog"), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " Led-wod " ; (2), (4), (6), (8) "Al-teg." 

50. Disease, " Ka-hib," unidentified- 

Panel : (I) "Pen-hil"; (2) " Ha-lei " ; (6) " Kasom," Mark 
"Gehab"; (8) like (i). 

51. Disease, " Lang-e " or " Lang-6 " (" Lang-er"), unidentified — 

Panel ; (i) and (7) " Kasom " (two forms) ; (2) " Keiap " ; (3) " Let- 
tod " ; (4), (6) "Ijueg"; (8) "Da-da." 

52. Disease, " Chig-la " (" Chig-lar "), unidentified — 

Panel : (i)" Kasom"; (2), (8) " Biling " ; (3), (7) "Let-tod" ; (4), (6) 
^ " Chig-lag." 

53. Disease, " Ye-eng," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) " He-ka " or " H6-kar " ("Her-kar"), with " W. picheg" ; 
(2), (6), (8) "Chau-ei." 

54. Disease, " Tag-an," unidentified — 

Panel : (i) " Led-wod" ; (2), (6), (8) " Bel-ung " (" Bel-oong"). 

55. Disease, "Tan-kwoi" (" Tun-kwoy "), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Tebal-ei"; (2), (4), (6), (8) "Sob." 

56. Disease, " Ye-lar-i " (" Yel-lar-e "), unidentified — 

Panel : (i) and (2) lacking, the illness being a fatal one. 

57. Disease, " Geltalung " or "Jeltalung" (" Gel-taloong" ) unidentified — 

Panel : (i), (4), (6) " Jcnasik" (2), (8) " Gau." 

58. Disease, " Pin-ad-yod," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Kasom"; (2) (4), (6), (8) "Kei-yong." 

59. Disease, " Eng," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Let-seig"; (2) " Ta-at " ; (4), (8) "Chig-lag"; (6) 
" Yat-ut." 

60. Disease, " Ta-kor " or " Tak-or " (" Tukkor,") a kind of large tumour, 

carbuncle, etc. (cp. " Goh " patterns). 
Panel : (i) " Boin," cp. 30; (2), (6), (8) " Tabag," cp. 12A. 

61. Disease, " Mer-oh," unidentified — 

Panel: (i) "Let-seig"; (2) " Tebal" ; (3), (7) "Chig-lag"; (4) 
" Ki-but " ; (6) " Goh " pattern ; (8) not designated. 

62. Disease, "Kli-cha" (" Klee-char "), unidentified — 

Panel: (i) and (6) " Wah " ; (2) "Jung-ei" ("Joong-ei"; (8), 
" Goh " pattern. [Plate XIL 

63. Disease, " Hcli " ("H'lee"), unidentified — 

Panel : (i), (4), (6) " Heka" ; (2), (8) "Tabag." 

64. Disease, " Chig-benk" (" Chig-bnk "). "| For protection against fatal 

65. Disease, " Kelau-wong" (" Klow-wong"). ^ diseases, and therefore without 

66. Disease, " Hajaing." J (i) and (2). 

I 

NEGRITO COMB PATTERNS 

615 

67. Disease, " Teneng ". 

68. Disease, " Halng." 

69. Disease, " Awls" (" Awees "). 

70. Disease, " Kelang-In " (" Klung-een ' 

j For protection against fatal 
r diseases, and therefore without 
J (I) and (I). 

The numbers in the following list 

repetitions of the same pattern are not 

A-bat (" Abbat") (2),! 46. 

A-it ("Aet") (2), 16B. 

Al-teg (2), 49. 

Al-tong (2), 40, 6F, 19B. 

Angis (2), 3A, 20G. 

Ba-chai (" Batchai ") (2), Gio, B5. 

Bakol (2), 20F, 3C, 20T. 

Bele or "Belo" ("B'ler") (2), iSB, 

22A, 18C. 
Bel-ung ("Bel-oong") (2), 2B, 54. 
Biling ("Bil-ling")(2), 52, 28A, 19N. 
Boin (i), 60, 30. 
Boing (2), 18F, 17B. 
Bong (2), 2A, loB, iD. 
Bui ("Bool") (2), 14B. 
Chab-lab or Chab-leb ("Chub-lab") 

(2), 9A. 
Chau-ai ("Chow-ai") (2), 53. 
Chig-lag or Chig-leg (" Chig-lag") (i), 

3B, 3C, 20F. 
Ching-eng (2), 32B, 22C, 22E. 
Chis-kis (" Chis-kes") (2), 4B, 4C. 
Chog(2), 41, 30. 
Da-da (" Da-dar ") (2), 17A, 23, 22D 

[? breast]. 
Eng-a ("Eng-ah") (i), 16B. 
En-let (" N'let" (i), 28B, 28A. 
En-nyangil (" N'nyangil ") (2), 6B, 

6D, 38. 
En-tei ("En-tai") (2), 6E, 6C.. 
Er-gap ("ergap" (2), 20D. 
Gau ("Gow ") (2), 57. 
Ha-lei ("Hallai") (2), 50, 89. 
He-ka or " H6-kar " ? (" Herkar ") ( i ), 

14- 
Hersaydd, Hersayj, or " Hcr-sei " 

("Hersige") (i), 26, 43, 9B, loA, 

37, 14A ; cp. " Ser-sayee," iufr. 
Ijueg (" Ejooaig") (2), 47, 18D.' 
Ing (2), 25A. 
Injeng (2), 20A. 
Is ("ees") (2), lE. 
Jenasik (" Jennassik ") (i), 14B, iC, 

9A, 18E, 2A, iD, 1 1 A, 57, 41, 

19F, 19B. 
Jgnul (2), 48, 43. ISA. 

refer to the numbers given above. The 
given, but only the variations. 

Jung-ei (" Toong-ai") {2), 62. 

Ka-h!b (2)^ 7B. 

Kan-beng (i), 13A, 13B. Cf. Ken- 

beng. 
Ka-som or Kesom (" Kassom," " Kay- 
some ") (I), 20C, 58, 19E, 31, 17C, 

19G, 32B, 22C, 23, 22E, 36, 22D, 
_ 17A, 51, 19M, 52, 7B. 
Ka-wa (" Ka-war") (2), 32A. 
Kei-ap or Kayap? ("Kiap") (2), 31, 

51. 7A. 
Keig, Keg ("Kaig") (2), 20C. 
Kei-yong or Kayong ? (" Kiyong ") (2), 
^58, 33, 17C. 
Kclapei or Kolepe ("Klappay") (2), 

19M, 19L, 19C. 
Kcm-it {"Kemmeet") (2), 26, 7C. 
Ken-beng (i), 38. Cp. Kanbeng. 
KT-but (" Kee-boot ") (2), 37, 4A. 
Kilkel (2), 19H, 3B, 8C. 
Kinsei or Kinse ("Kinsey"), 39. 
Kiteng (" Kit-teng ") (2), iC, 42. 
Knel-lap (2), lA, 21B, iG. 
Langut ("Langhut") (2), 24, 27, 

6H. 
Led-wod (i), 54, 4B, 49, 2B, 16 A, 

8 A, 4C, 17B, 18F. 
Legiyap ("Legeeyap") (i), 8B. 
Leik-teg or Likteg ("Likteg") (2), 

iiA, 18E. 
Let-seig or Let-sCg (" Let-saig ") (i), 

35, 6C, 24, 6G, 27, 5A, 20B, 61, 

59, 18H, 15A, 6B, 6D. 
Let-tod (I), 18B, 32 A, 7C, 8C. 
Lid-dah? (" Lid-dar") (2), 14A, 12B. 
Lig-boig (2), 19F, 16A. 
Makuin (" Mukoin '") (2), 6A, 15B. 
Manau (" Manow") (i), 12B. 
Man-teng (i), iG. 
Min-len (2), 2SB, 34. 
Mud-beg {" Mood-bag") (2), 35. 
Napek (2), 12C [ = pig]. 
Ni-en-ka ("Ne-an-kar" (2), 815, cp. 

8A. 
Pa-hem or Pa-hnm (" Pa-herm ") (2), 

21F, 2 1 A. 

I In original W. = Was, i.e. hrsi panel, 
here represented by (l) ; P. = Pawer, 

i.e. second panel, here represented by 

(2). 

6i6 

APPENDIX 

Pa-sir ("Passeer") (i), 12A, 19N, 
20T, 19A, 19H, 19B, 7A, 19J, 
18C. 

Penalong or Penaldung (" Penalong") 
(2) 15A, 18H. 

Pe-nel-tu ("Peneltoo") (2), 190, iiB. 

Pen-hil ("Pen-heel") (i), 25A, 50, 
20A, 19L, 44, 25B, 22A, 5B, 19C, 
19O, 6H, 29, iiB, 6F, 19K, 19D, 
18D, 40, 34, 18G, 6E, 25C, 33, 
46, 47, 45, 15B. 

Pen-ying (i), lA, 21B, 4A, 12C, 3A, 
20G. 

Sad-an-yit (" Sad-un-yet ") (2), 19K, 

45. I9J- 
Seg (I), 20D. 

Seg-kit ("Seg-keet") (2), 13B, 13A. 
Selang-dui ("Slangdoy") (2), 36. 
Si-ai-yong or Si-ayong ? ( " See-i-yong ") 
. (2), 17E. 

Sil ("Seel") (2), 5A. 

Sob (2), 55, 50U. 

Ta-at (2), 20B, 59. 

Ta-bag (2), 63, 12A, 60. 

Ta-song ("Tassong") (i), 48. 

Tebal or Tcbal ("Tebal") (2), 19A, 

6C, 61. 
TcbaJ-ai or " Tcbali' " ? (" Tebal-i ") 

(I), 6A, 18A, 55, 20II. 
Tink-tonk {sic) (2), iB. 
Tohong ("Tohong"), (i), iB. 
U-kap or u-kep ("00-kap") (2), 44. 
Dm (" Oom ") (I), lE, 21A, il. 
Umung ("Oomoong") (2), loA, 9B. 
Wah (I), 62. 
Yang-knil (2), 29, 19C. 
Yat-ut or Yet-ut (" Yat-oot ") (2), 
^ 19D, 25B. 
Ye-lap-e or Yl-lap-i (" Yeh-lap-eh ") 

(I), 42. 

To complete this list should be added the following, which includes all 
names not yet mentioned from the preceding list of comb patterns : — 

Ang-ag-boig? (" Ung-ag-buig "), 13A. 

Awin ("Ow-m"), 21A. 

Awis ("Awees"), 69. 

Bakau Timun (i), 18A (= cucumber 

blossom). 
Bakel (2), 20J. 
Ba-teschai (?) (2) and (6), 18G. Cp. 

5B (?). 
Ber, 8A. 
Chab-ok, 31. 

Chas-ai (" Chas-eye "), 12A. 
Cheb, 23. 

Chig-bgnk (" Chig-bnk "), 64. 
Eg-to, 46. 

Eng, 59. Cp. 25A? 
Ga-sun ("gassoon"), 48. 
Gel-talung or Jel-talung? ("Gel- 

taloong "), 57. 
Haing, 68. 
Hajaing, 66. 

Hanb'j or Hanbo? (" Hun-ber '"), 39. 
H6li ("H'lee"), 63. 
It-al-ig, 14A. 
Kadong, 2A. 
Kam, 47. 

Kamalij (" Kamalege "), 37. 
Kang-keng? (" Kung-keng"), 9A. 
Kang-wom, 42. 
Katani, 2 5 A. 
Kau-i or Kawi, 33. 

Kayan chalag (" Kayan challag"), 6A. 
Kelik sog (" Klik-sog"), 16A. 

Kelangin (" Klung-een "), 70 [? mis- 
print for " Kelangez " = heart, or 
cp. " Kling-in," Quiver Yi. 

Kelau-wong or "K^luwang" ? ("Klow- 
wong"), 65 [? = bat]. 

Kimbu or Kimbo ? ("Kimbur"), 3A. 

Kinsei or Kinse? 39 ( = tapioca?). 

Klasau (" Klasow "), 4A. 

Kli-cha (" Klee-char "), 62 (name of a 
flower). 

Kong, 36 

Lang-e or Lang-o (" Lang-er"), 51. 

Li chinbeg (" Lee chinbeg"), 5 A. 

Lig-teg, I A. 

Lik-teg ( = " Lig-teg " ?), liA. 

Ma-kau ka-lon (" Mackow kallon "), 
1 5 A. 

Manwok kekil, 22A. 

Mer-oh, 61. 

Met antau, 20A. 

Pasar chinbeg (" Passar chin-beg"), 
5A. 

Pel-ig("Pel-eeg"), 11 A. 

Penapit (" Penappit "), 38 

Picheg, 32A. 

Pin-ad-yod, 58. 

Pong or Kingkong = fever, I A. 

Sad-or, 44 

Sersayi (" Ser-sayee "), 45 

Tag-an, 54. 

Ta-kor or Tak-or ("Tukkor"), 60. 

Takui ("Tak-oye"), loA, 

NEGRITO QUIVER PATTERNS 617 

Tan-eg, 7A. Wing-jang, 27. 

Tang-tong ("Tung-tong"), 43. Cp. Van-tui hili (" Yantoe hillie "), 26 

iB? Yan-tui hilog ("Yan-toe hillog"), 

Tan-kwoi (" Tun-kwoy "), 55. 49- 

Teneng, 67. Yan-tul man-ka ("yan-tool-mankar "), 

Tebil ("Tebeel"), 32A. 29. Cp. 26. 
Tinweg langkah ("Tinwag lankar,") Ye - eng, 53 ("ye"? = the personal 

1 7 A. prefix). 

Tu-eg, 24. Ye-lar-i (" Yel-lar-e "), 56. 

Semang Quiver and Charm-tube Patterns. Page 436. 

Quiver K: " keng-uin " (" k'ng-oin ") ; charm against lightning. Incom- 
plete.' For illustration, see p. 142. 

Quiver B : " beb " {" bab ") ; a charm against pains in the region of the base 
of the spine. It appeared to Vaughan-Stevens to be a sort of liver -disease. 
Incomplete, p. 142. 

Quiver C : same name as Quiver B ; charm against pains in the vertebrae. 
Incomplete, p. 142. 

Quiver D : " lasai " (" lassai ") ; charm against " nyus-en " (" neuss-en '") or 
toothache. The name "lasai" refers to the black bands (stripes). Every 
Quiver and Charm-tube that shows them is called "lasai." Incomplete, 

P- '42. 

Quiver E : same name as Quiver D; charm against " pelig ' ("p'leeg") or 
headache. Incomplete, p. 142. 

Quiver F: " hu-ju-weg " (" hoojoowag ") ; charm against cyclones, which 
"often tear a passage 10-58 m. broad through the forest. This charm is specially 
designed for protection against falling trees. Another Quiver with slightly 
difi'erent pattern is assigned to the women." Incomplete, p. 142. 

Quiver Ci : same name as Quiver F ; charm against falling trees, such as 
are thrown down in an ordinary storm. A companion Quiver is assigned to the 
women, as in the case of Quiver F. Incomplete, p. 142. 

Quiver H : same name as Quiver F ; charm against weak, decayed and dead 
branches of trees, which might during a storm be blown down upon those 
walking below ; also against heavy fruits, like the durian fruit. For the women 
there is in this case no companion (Quiver, since they have a comb-pattern for it. 
Incomplete, p. 142. 

Quiver I : " ket-chau " (" kt'chow ") ; charm against the violent rains of the 
North-east Monsoon, which cause sickness in those who are exposed to them. 
Incomplete, p. 142. 

Quiver K : same name as Quiver I ; charm against the rains of the South- 
west Monsoon. Incomplete, p. 142. 

Quiver "L.: " met-ches"? (" metchas") ; charm against "bi-cha" ("bee- 
char"), the itch. Complete, p. 142. 

Charm-tube M: " tin-lai " ; charm against "tin-lig" (" tingleeg") = injury 
in consequence of lifting or carrying a heavy burden. Complete, p. 142. 

Charm-tube N : " pi-as chan " (" pee-ass-chan ") — " disease ^'foot " ; charm 
against soreness of the foot (through walking, etc.). Complete, p. 142. 

1 In order to save room, only so is constantly repeated in the band, 

much of the unrolled patterns is drawn only the beginning of the dr.iwing is 

as is actually necessary for the reader given, in order to facilitate its exam- 

to follow. Hence the words " com- ination, although the whole (unrolled) 

plete " or "incomplete" are always circumference of the bamboo is repre- 

added. Again, where the same motive sented. 

6i8 

APPENDIX 

Quiver O : " bung-kong" (" boon-kong") ; charm against poisonous fruit or 
food. The upper half is the same as the lower reversed. Complete, p. 142. 

Quiver P : same name as Quiver O ; charm against poisonous or injurious 
drinking-water. Complete, p. 143. 

Quiver (^ : "ling-wen" ; charm against eruptions of the skin and pustules, 
e.g. the pustules of small-pox. Complete, p. 143. 

Quiver R : " pi-as kyun " (" pee-as-kyung ") ; charm against " tek-kor," i.e. 
large swellings, e.g. carbuncles. Complete, p. 143. 

Charm-tube S : " pi-as kuin " (" pee-ass-kooin ") ; charm against influenza or 
catarrh. Incomplete, p. 143. 

Charm-tube T : " klar-chus-an " (" klar-choos-un "); charm againt " ka-beb " 
or "cramp" (?) ; stiffness of the limbs through exposure to the atmosphere. In- 
complete, p. 143. 

Quiver U : " pi-as kyap " (" pee-ass-keop ") ; charm against constipation and 
suppression of urine. Complete, p. 143. 

Charm-tube'^: "ham-mar"; charm against "chit-tor" or coughing. In- 
complete, p. 143. 

Charm-tube W : " kla-duid " (" kla-dooid ") ; charm against " klin-chang 
kyok " ("klin-chang keok ") or paralysis. Complete, p. 143. 

Charm-tube X. Complete, p. 144. 

Charm-tube Y. Complete, p. 144. 

Charm-tube Z : " hil-lai " (" hilliee ") ; charm against injury to the foot from 
a thorn, sharp stone, or the like. Wounds of this kind are called " te-pi-yas " 
(" tepee-yass "). Incomplete, p. 144. 

Quiver Ai : " ba-lu " or " ba-ler " ("balloo" or "bailer"); charm against 
many diseases or injuries of like character. Complete, p. 144. 

Quiver A2 : same name and charm as Quiver Ai. Complete, p. 144. 

Quiver A3 : same name and charm as Quiver Al. Complete, p. 144. 

Quiver A4 : same name and charm as Ai. Complete, p. 144. 

Quiver Bi : " chi-chll " (" chee-cheel ") ; charm against inability to walk. 
Incomplete, p. 145. 

Quiver B2 : same name as Quiver Bi. Charm against another form of the 
preceeding. Incomplete, p. 145. 

Quiver Ci : " tis " ("tees"); charm against " til-buig " ("telboig"), an 
internal disease. Incomplete, p. 145. 

Quiver Qz: "sob"; charm against an internal disease. Incomplete, p. 145. 

Quiver Di : " li-chin-beg " ("lee chin beg") ; charm against disease of the 
upper jaw. Incomplete, p. 145. 

Quiver D2 : same name as Quiver Di ; charm against disease of the lower 
jaw. Incomplete, p. 145. 

Ei : "pCnrdes" (" penooless ") ; charm against disease of the knee. In- 
complete, p. 145.^ 

E2 : same name and charm as Ei. Complete, p. 145. 

Fi : "chin-kob" (" chin-kob ") ; charm against stone, "it appears." In- 
complete, p. 145. 

F2 : same name as Fi ; charm against redness of the urine. Incomplete, 

p. 145- 

Quiver Q\ : " chls bos" ("chees bos"); charm against stiff neck. Com- 
plete, p. 145. 

Quiver G2 : same name as Quiver Gl ; charm against scrofula, " it appears." 
Incomplete, p. 145. 

' From this point V.-Stevens fre- 
quently ceases to designate the tubes 
as "go'" or "ga'"; probably, how- 

ever (according to his editor), " go' " 
is always meant. 

NEGRITO QUIVER PATTERNS 619 

Quiver Hi : "tig-gib kyong'' (" tig-geeb kyong ") ; charm against "bent 
arm " (?) Incomplete, p. 145. 

Quiver H2 : same name as Quiver Hi ; charm against a disease of the arm, 
which is often dangerous when it spreads to the rest of the body. Complete, 

p. 145- 

Qtiiver Ii : " hli-suin " (" h'lee-soin ") ; charm against a disease of the 

acromion. Incomplete, p. 145. 

I2 : same name as Quiver Ii ; charm against disease of the shoulder. In- 
complete, p. 148. 

Kl : " lil-lel " ; charm against disease of the loins. Incomplete, p. 148. 

K2 : "lil-lel taul-yu "(" lil-lel towl-yoo"); charm against elephantiasis. 
Incomplete, p. 148. 

Ll : " sa-kinwad " ; charm against disease of the back. Incomplete, p. 148. 

L2 : same name and disease as Li. Incomplete, p. 148. 

Mi : "pob-bi-ob" (" pob-bee-ob ") ; charm against disease of the ear. In- 
complete, p. 148. 

M2 : same name and disease as Mi. Incomplete, p. 148. 

M3 : same name and disease as Mi. Incomplete, p. 148. 

Ni : " tuig keling " (" toig k'eling ") ; charm against " pan-gis" or " pan-jis '' ? 
(" pan-giss "), an internal disease under the breast-bone. Incomplete, p. 148. 

N2 : same name as Ni ; charm against " Kwi-klip " (" quee-klip"), on the 
upper part of the breast-bone. Incomplete, p. 148. 

N3 : same name as Ni ; charm against an internal disease. Incomplete, 
p. 148. 

Quiver Oi : " llb-ob " ("leeb-ob"); charm against sickness of the head. 
Incomplete, p. 148. 

O2 to O4 : same name as Quiver O i ; charm probably against disease of the 
head. Incomplete, p. 148. 

Pi : " lit-tud " (" let-tod ") ; charm against " empo ka-tu " (" um-po kater ") 
or "scaly skin." "Appears to be a kind of leprosy." Complete, p. 148. 

P2 ; same name as Pi ; charm against skin disease. Complete, p. 148. 

Qi : " chil chinin" ("chel chineng ") ; charm against " say-i kluid " ("si-ee 
kluid ") or swollen ankle. Incomplete, p. 149. 

Q2 : same name as Ql ; apparently a charm against dislocation or spraining 
of the ankle. Incomplete, p. 149. 

Quiver Ri : " senai yong " or " sOnayong " ? ("seni yong") ; charm against 
a disease in the region of the os sacrum. Complete, p. 149. 

R2 : same name as Ri ; charm against a disease in the posterior region. In- 
complete, p. 149. 

Si: "ke-dc heb-deb " {" kayday heb-deb"); charm against disease of the 
testicles. Complete, p. 149. 

Ti : "chis-wes" (" chiss-wess ") ; charm against disease in the region of the 
navel. Incomplete, p. 149. 

T2 : same name and disease as Ti. Incomplete, p. 149. 

Ui : " hej-kel li-keng beng" ("hedgkel lee-keng-beng '") ; charm against 
inflammation of the eyes. Incomplete, p. 149. 

Vi : " pias kui " (" peeass kooey ") ; charm against " huig " (" hoig "), a kind 
of ear-ache. This specimen is said to show one of the special marks which are 
made by the Sakai on their quivers "when the ' lampoi '-fruit is ripe" ; and by 
the Semang during the durian-harvest. Incomplete, p. 149. 

Quiver \Vi : " chiling p.it " (" chilling part ") ; charm against a disease in the 
region of the nipples ; for men and women. Incomplete (part i. complete), 
p. 149. 

Xi : " li-kain " (" lee-kine ") ; charm against " chim-pid mu " (" chim-peed 
mor"), which appears to be a polypus in the nose ("mu"). It was, however, 
said that in bad cases it caused death, if it spread upwards. Complete, p. 149. 

620 

APPENDIX 

Vi : " kling-Tn " (" kling-een ") ; charm against disease of the eyebrows. 
Incomplete, p. 149. 

Page 461 seqq. Semang Blowpipf, rAiTERNs. 

1. " Malai " (" mallay "). Incomplete, p. 150. 

2. " Chingll" (" ching-eel "). Incomplete, p. 150. 

3. " Nu" ? (" n'or "). Complete, p. 150. 

4. " Yuig " ("yoig"). Incomplete, p. 150. 

5. " Cheg la pon" ("chag lar pon "). Incomplete, p. 150. 

6. "Til us kus" (" tel 00s koos "). Incomplete, p. 150. 

7. "Ka-chel." Incomplete, p. 150. 

8. " Bi-S'lt kan-ling" (" besoot kan-ling"). Incomplete, p. 150. 

9. " Kejel " or "Kajal." Incomplete, p. 150. 

10. "Klata." Incomplete, p. 150. 

11. " Suwen" (" soowen "). Incomplete, p. 150. 

12. " Pasir" (" paser "). Incomplete, p. 150. 

13. " Chib-ber " or " chib-bo " (" chib-bur "). Complete, p. 150, 

14. " Cha-chi " (" cha-chee"). Complete, p. 150. 

15. " Yes " ("yess "). Incomplete, p. 150. 

16. " Baim boweig" ("bime bowaig"). Incomplete, p. 150. 

17. " Abeg "? ("abag"). Incomplete, p. 150. 

18. " Ko-kog" or "ko-koj "? ("ker-kerg"). Complete, p. 150. 

19. " Ag-eg" ("ug-egg"). Incomplete, p. 150. 

20. "Yal-v/ig." Incomplete, p. 150. 

21. " Kak-ku " (" kak-koo "). Complete, p. 150. 

22. " Lig-jeg"? (" lig-jag"). Incomplete, p. 150. 

23. "Sebog." Complete, p. 150. 

24. " Ti-ui " (" tee oowee "). Incomplete, p. 150. 

25. "Ong." Incomplete, p. 150. 

26. " Pu wai" (" poo-whai"). Incomplete, p. 150. 

27. " Cheg-neg "?(" chag nag"). Incomplete, p. 150. 

28. "Chig-eg." Incomplete, p. 150. 

29. "Wong." Incomplete, p. 150. 

30. " Jelabo' " or " j jlaba " (" jelabor "). Incomplete, p. 150. 

31. " A-chan " ? (" atchan "). Incomplete, p. 150. 

32. "Al-teg." Incomplete, p. 151. 

33. " Ta-la " ("tallar"). Incomplete, p. 151. 

34. " Baling "(" balling"). Incomplete, p. 151. 

35. " Tis " ("tees"). Incomplete, p. 151. 

36. " Kawe(r) " or " kawo " ("kower "). Incomplete, p. 150. 

37. " Hu-hau " ("h'oo how"). Incomplete, p. 151. 

38. "Engjang." Complete, p. 151. 

39. " Pelig " (" peleeg"). Incomplete, jx 151. 

40. " Bem-chem." Incomplete, p. 151. 

41. " Kam-aij " (" kamaije"). Incomplete, p. 151. 

42. " J\Iel-lo" ("mellow"). Incomplete, p. 151. 

43. " Lip-kap." Incomplete, p. 151. 

44. "Ting-tang." Incomplete, p. 151. 

45. " Kawil " ("kowil"). Complete, p. 151. 

46. " Kam-tul " ("kum-tool"). Incomplete, p. 151. 

47. " Kad-di-ap" ("kad-dee-ap"). Incomplete, p. 151. 

48. "Yang-im." Incomplete, p. 151. 

49. " Beng-kem"? ("benkam "). Incomplete, p. 151. 

50. " Te-seng "? (" tay-sang "). Incomplete, p. 151. 

51. " Em-pai"? (" empi "). Incomplete, p. 151. 

NEGRITO BLOWPIPE PATTERNS 

621 

52. " Pung-bun " (" poong-boon "). Incomplete, p. 151. 

53. " Li-hui" (" le-hoy "). Incomplete, p. 151. 

54. "Jil-hel." Incomplete, p. 151. 

55. " Ye-wun "? (" yeh-von "). Almost complete, p. 151. 

56. " Pa-ham " or " pahom "(" pahum "). Incomplete, p. 151. 

57. " Chos pi-o" (" choss peo"). Incomplete, p. 151. 

58. " Chili tui "?(" chillee tooey "). Incomplete, p. 151. 

59. *' Lis-nus " (" lis-noos "). Almost complete, p. 151. 

60. " Chin-lai " (" chinii "). Incomplete, p. 151. 

61. " Kabug " (" kaboog "). Incomplete, p. 154. 

62. " Tal-ong " ? (" tallong "). Incomplete, p. 154. 

63. " Chailed (or "chil-ed"?) bit"? ("chilled beet"). Complete, p. 154. 

64. "Tong." Incomplete, p. 154. 

65. •' Hug-weg"? (" hoog-wag"). Incomplete, p. 154. 

66. " Yang-un " ("yang oon "). Incomplete, p. 154. 
66a. " Gem-ap " (" gemaap"). Incomplete, p. 154. 

67. " Singat " (" singart "). Incomplete, p. 154. 

68. " Pajet." Complete, p. 154. 

69. " Buap" (" booarp"). Complete, p. 154. 

70. " Klang-yu " (" klang-yoo "). Incomplete, p. 154. 

71. " Pang-ot "? (" pang-ert "). Incomplete, p. 154. 

72. "Tilkil." Complete, p. 154. 

73- " Ing-yes " (" ing yess"). Incomplete, p. 154. 

74. " Bu-ing" (" bo-ing"). Complete, p. 154. 

75. " Lig-ljui" (" lig-boi "). Complete, p. 151. 

76. " Tej " (" ta'je"). Complete, p. 151. 

77. " Chimaking" (" chimarking"). Complete, p. 154. 

78. " Bil-uing" (" bil-ooing"). Incomplete, p. 154. 

79. " Pu-lo "?(" poo-low "). Incomplete, p. 154. 

80. " Sabai yau " (" sabi vow"). Incomplete, p. 154. 

81. "Is"("ees"). Incomplete, p. 154. 

82. " Maing-cha "? (" maing char '"). Complete, p. 154. 

83. "Hong." Incomplete, p. 154. 

84. "As" ("ass"). Complete, p. 154. 

85. "Sing-hep." Inct)mplete, p. 155. 

86. " Em bos" (" em boss"). Incomplete, p. 155. 

87. " Hi-u " (" hee-oo "). Incomplete, p. 155. 

88. " Sa-kop" ? (" sar-kop"). Incoinplete, p. 155. 

89. "Lig-boid." Incomplete, p. 155. 

90. "Kejil." Complete, p. 155. 

91. " SiulTp" (" sudeep"). Complete, p. 155. 

92. " Tak-kor" ? (" tuk-kor "). Incomplete, p. 155. 

93. " Tut-nap" ?(" toot knap"). Complete, p. 155. 

94. " H'na-pah." Incomplete, p. 155. 

95. " Gla-wa "? ("gl'r war "). Incomplete, p. 155. 

96. " Pong." Fever. A severe form of fever which appears at a definite 
time of the year. Incomplete, p. 155. 

97. "Pung-pang." Incomplete, p. 155. 

98. " Kang-kung " (" kung-koong"). Incomplete, p. 155. 

99. " Sir-i " (" ser-ee "). Complete, p. 155. 

100. " Chil-drd " (" chil dool "). Incomplete, p. 155. 
loi. " Tai-yor " (" ti yor "). Complete, p. 155. 

102. "Tig-toig." Complete, p. 155. 

103. " Ni-poi " (" nee-poy "). Incomplete, p. 155. 

104. " Yamo piipi yu " ? (" yamo purpee-yoo"). Complete, p. 155. 

105. " Chi-chau " (" chee-chow "). Complete, p. 155. 

622 APPENDIX 

io6. " Hak-kar " (" hukkar "). Incomplete, p. 155. 

107. "Kenabil." Complete, p. 155. 

loS. " Kaltu " (" kaltoo "). Complete, p. 155. 

109. " Pig-pau "' (" pig pow "). Complete, p. 156. 

1 10. "Tig-ja." Complete, p. 156. 

111. "Puk-pug" ("pook poog"). Incomplete, p. 156. 

112. "Ong." Sideways complete, p. 156. 

113. "Yap," or " yop " ? ("carp"). Complete, except for the middle part, 
P- 156. 

114. " Gihar" ? (" ge har "). Complete up to space 2. P. 156. 

115. "Wor," or " wa " ("wor"). Complete, p. 156. 

116. " Ham-ming" ("hum meeng"). Complete, p. 156. 

117. "Senaitepis" (" seni tepees"). Complete, p. 156. 

118. " Pap-lif." Complete, p. 156. 

119. " Las," or " les" ? (" las"). Incomplete, p. 156. 

120. " Nes-os" ("ness os"). Complete, p. 156. 

121. " Ta-sai" (" tassai "). Complete, p. 156. 

122 " Ni-chip-pip" (" nee-chip peep"). Complete, p. 156. 

123. " Chu-hut " (" choo hoot "). Sideways complete, p. 156. 

124. " Piches " (" pichess "). Incomplete, p. 156. 

125. " Betungking" (" betoonking "). Complete, p. 156. 

126. "lyor"? ("eeor"). Charm against disease of the ear. Complete, 

P- 156. 

127. "Tet-per" ("tet-pur"). Charm against disease of the nose (cf. No. 
126). Complete, p. 156. 

128. " Ing-heng"? (" ing hang"). Sideways complete, p. 156. 

\N.B. — In Globus Ixxv., Nos. 22, 23, and also in Z. f. E. xxxi. etc., will be 
found papers commenting on the foregoing lists of patterns, but as to a great 
extent they are written under the influence of the untenable flower-theory, their 
most valuable part consists in their frank criticism of the weak spots in that 
theory itself. Another point is that the classification of the patterns is greatly 
over-elaborated, and that the essential irregularity of the patterns themselves is 
frequently disregarded. The first and most important task is to find out the 
meaning of the Semang names, and it is to this alone that we may look to get 
results of permanent value. — W.S.] 

Critical Summary of Paper by Dr. Preuss in Z.f.E. xxxi. 180. 

This paper of Dr. Preuss commences with a discussion of the emblems said 
by Vaughan-Stevens to be employed for representing various parts of the body, 
as to which we have to remark that very few indeed of them appear to be 
actually used in patterns from the names of which the seat of the disease can be 
localised, and further that, as is indeed quite rightly pointed out by Dr. Preuss 
himself, many of these special emblems do not occur in any form in any of the 
patterns at all ; and that, in addition to these difficulties, many of the variations 
in the patterns are absolutely and entirely without significance. 

A glaring instance of an entirely unacceptable explanation given by \'.iughan- 
Stevens is that the cross-lines of the " tin-weg " (comb pattern) represent forest- 
paths, " probably because it is from these paths that a particular disease is spread 
over the Peninsula" — a statement which, apart from its own grotesquely far- 
fetched character, directly conflicts with Vaughan-Stevens' own explanation of 
similar cross-lines in another place, viz. that they represent a "larger swelling" 
or "hill." We are further asked by Vaughan-Stevens to believe (l) that many 
flowers and other objects though bearing quite different names, are nevertheless, 
as a rule, identical ; (2) that the very same (or quite similar) flowers are — also as 
a rule — not identical. Whence it follows, as the result of (i), and (2) that special 
signs or marks had to be introduced to distinguish the latter. 

THEORIES OF VAUGHAN-STEVENS 623 

These patterns, then (according to Vaughan-Stevens), represent ideographs 
drawn direct from nature (in the first instance at all events), but complicated by 
the addition of distinguishing marks, which cannot be separated from the patterns 
themselves. The Semang theory of the evolution of these patterns, which they 
are declared to illustrate Vjy a number of series proceeding from the simplest 
to the most complicated forms, may or may not have been [in Dr. Preuss's 
opinion; in ours most certainly must have been] due to injudicious "leading" 
questions put by Vaughan-Slevens — at all events it is described very properly by 
Dr. Preuss as a perfectly valueless exercise, such as might occupy an ethnologist 
at his study-table. The same general remarks apply to the "somewhat in- 
comprehensible " grouping of the patterns on the quivers and charm-bamboos, 
for which we are similarly given a number of sets, in this case too proceeding 
from the simplest (representing the mildest diseases) to the most complicated 
(representing the worst), although [as Vaughan-Stevens here quite rightly objects] 
it is certain that the patterns for the most serious diseases would naturally have 
been developed before those for the milder ones. 

The classification of the comb patterns is next discussed by Dr. Preuss, and 
certain conclusions drawn therefrom, but as both classification and conclusions 
are based on the untenable " flower "-theory, which we have elsewhere exposed, 
no more need be said on the subject here. 

Finally, the markings on the pandanus leaves ("buyu")are considered as 
possibly taken from nature, though the alleged connection between the triple 
ring-lines and the three kinds of lightning is somewhat mildly described as 
obscure. [We may add that in our own view there is no proof whatever of the 
former, and that the latter statement is utterly absurd.] 

The comparative rarity, if not the complete absence, of any identity of 
pattern as between the various panels of the 140 different comb-designs is then 
touched on, and the possible cause of those divergences considered, the use of 
the alleged special signs or marks ("gehab," "edziat," "ob," and " kos ") being 
considered in this connection, and the superfluous character of the " tCpi "-line 
[for the real explanation of which see our text] is pointed out. 

The classification of the so-called "was"- and " pawcr "-patterns is then 
discussed, as to which the same comments may be made as have been above 
applied to the theory of the comb patterns. Dr. Preuss himself very justly 
points out many inconsistencies and difliculties. We ourselves have explained 
in the text the real signification of many of the terms, notably " kabu salag," 
" kabu padi," "neing," "behai,"and (as mentioned above) " tcpi," and it is 
therefore unnecessary to recur to the question here. Turning to the patterns on 
the charm-tubes, quivers, and blowpijies, Dr. Preuss observes that "on account 
of their greater lack of system they appear to be older than the combs," although, 
of course, according to the Vaughan-Stevens' theory, it was the comb patterns 
that were developed first. Nevertheless the combs are treated first in order, and 
the legend of their introduction is related in detail. The comb patterns are then 
analysed and shown to consist, generally speaking, of a broad band in the centre 
called " tin-weg," with two narrow bands at the top, which (according to 
Vaughan-Stevens) are called " was" and " pawer," and two lower bands alleged 
to be of no special importance. [We have in the text already exposed the 
baseless character of this imaginary system.] 

We are next asked to believe that the different ]5arts of the same comb 
pattern are supposed to act independently of and successively to each other ; if the 
"was" does not act, the " pawCr " will, and if that fails, the "tin-weg." No 
reasons are given for this remarkable hypothesis, the accuracy of which must be 
challenged when we find that certain of the combs, whose patterns are designed 
to protect the wearer against dtinily illnesses, have nothing but a " tin-weg," and 
that the "was" and " pawCr " are in themselves of no utility whatever. Dr. 
Preuss himself " receives the impression " that the flower-patterns ("was "and 

624 APPENDIX 

"pawer") are '* in part borrowed" from the disease-patterns, even though they 
are seldom combined in one comb. Yet it is absolutely essential to suppose that 
the flower-patterns {if they 7-eaIly represent flowers) were taken direct from nature 
and not in any case borrowed from the "tin-weg." The simplest and, so far as 
the writer can see, the only way out of the whole coil, is to suppose that 
Vaughan-Stevens was ignorant of the fact that the word "bunga," as used not 
only by the Malays but among these tribes, signifies a decorative emblem, border, 
or pattern, as well as a flower, without any necessary correlation between its usual 
signification and the object (or objects) represented. It can hardly be doubted 
that in the (rare) cases in which the flower- and disease-patterns in the same 
comb resemble each other, it is the disease part of the pattern that takes after 
the flower part of the pattern, and not vice versa, whilst in other cases the disease 
part of the pattern may be taken from other objects besides flowers. At all 
events it is tenable to suppose, as is here done by Vaughan-Stevens' editor, that 
" the object of healing has always been the chief thing," and the working of a 
charm an accretion of secondary importance, as among these tribes at all events 
the two ideas are indistinguishable. A yet further difficulty (in the way of the 
acceptance of the comb-theoiy) lies in the existence of an alternative theory, 
also promulgated by Vaughan-Stevens, to the eff"ect that all patterns originated 
from the charcoal marks on wood which were employed by the Puttos for the 
prevention, expulsion, and conjuration of diseases. 

Other narrow bands or panels on the combs are supposed by \"aughan- 
Stevens to represent such flowers as are next best in point of efficacy (!), and these 
are said to imitate the "was" and "pawer" pattern of other combs, or their 
special signs ! Of these all one can say is that an explanation of this kind (as to 
the employment of "second-best " (!) patterns) is totally at variance with the 
practical character of the race to which the practice is attributed ; and that it is 
quite inacceptable ! Dr. Preuss himself sees that these bands are too narrow to 
represent anything eftectively, and that their "purport" [if any!] "would be 
exceedingly insignificant " ! 

Here follows a statement in detail of the flower-theory, which we have shown 
in the text to be utterly untenable — a mere house of cards that falls with a crash 
when the lowest card has been removed. The conclusive arguments against it 
are too numerous to be repeated here, but we may perhaps be permitted to ask 
a few pertinent questions. Why should a "tepi"-line represent both pistil 
and stamens of a flower, especially when the word is nothing more than the ^Ialay 
word "tepi" = edge or border, and neither pistil nor stamens can by any flight 
of imagination be nominally regarded as the edge of a flower ? To what race, 
either of savages or civilised men, would it occur to represent the smell as part of 
a flower, and as requiring visible illustration ? What race of savages on an 
equally low plane of culture is able to distinguish between the pistil, stamens, and 
sepals at all, terms which have simply been invented for the purposes of botanical 
analysis ? Why again are the petals, which we might fairly expect to rank as 
the most important part of a flower in the eyes of a native, and the only part of 
a flower, in fact, that is recognised by the Malays (a race immeasurably in advance 
of the Semang as regards culture), entirely omitted and disregarded? 

The Charm-hieroglyphics {sic) of the Negritos in Malacca. 

In vol. Ixxv. (No. 23) of Globus there is given an account of Vaughan-Stevens' 
combs, with especial reference to the signs said to be used for various parts of the 
body (see vol. i. pp. 434, 435 of text). The "one hundred and forty combs are 
divided into seventy pairs, each of which is directed against a disease whose 
name is usually given, but not explained," nor is there, as a rule, the smallest 
clue to any of the sicknesses given. As regards the signs for parts of the body, 
only one or two of these could (as Dr. Preuss points out) be identified without 

il 

SAKAI HEADBAND PATTERNS 625 

assistance. Many of these alleged " hieroglyphs " (!) are composed of the 
very simplest geometrical signs, crosses, circles, and ovals, chevrons (with the 
points arranged either vertically or horizontally), parallel straight lines, and tlie 
the like ; for instance, Nos. 16, 17, and 19 are merely subdivisions of the same 
" hieroglyph " as No. 2, with which, in a sense, they have absolutely nothing 
to do ; No. 19 being vertical instead of horizontal. So too Nos. 4, 5, 11, 12, 
13, 14, 18, and 21 are all reducible to the chevron, which in one or two cases 
has been drawn at the side of a straight line. Considering this and considering 
also the extraordinarily over-elaborate and unnatural character of these so-called 
body-signs — those for the foot, for instance, the arms, and the side are quite 
incredibly complicated — I can only say that to me they fail to carry any sort of 
conviction, and that they suggest, as in the case of the flower-theory, the presence 
of the European investigator, with his (in this case anthropological) text-book 
and his stupefying succession of injudicious leading questions, fired otf with the 
rapidity and persistence of a machine-gun ! Even Dr. Preuss himself, who has 
certainly shown a considerable amount of penetration and acumen in detecting 
flaws in the material he was given to work upon, has doubts as to whether the 
emblem alleged to signify " breast" — a mere cross — is to be interpreted as such 
wherever it occurs. Moreover, many of the alleged body-symbols do not occur 
at all in Vaughan-Stevens' collection, either on combs or blowpipes. The state- 
ment that follows, to the effect that the cross-hatching of certain combs represents 
forest-paths, " probably because one catches on them the disease, a kind of 
fever," is so ludicrous as to require no comment whatever. The "was" and 
" pfiwcr " patterns are next described. They are collected into groups, under 
unexplained (disease)-names, and their grouping which here follows: (i) as 
panels with single design, (2) as panels with repeated (regular) designs, (3) as 
repeated designs showing certain irregularities or special signs, does not appear 
to be of any particular value, as no conclusions of any weight are drawn 
therefrom. 

It is a sufficient and significant comment on the general wrong-headedness of 
Vaughan-Stevens' modus operandi, that his editor should have to point out that 
Vaughan-Stevens has introduced "parallel lines'" into some of the "corrected"' 
(sic) drawings which do not exist in the originals, and that he has done this 
without drawing any sort of attention to the fact. Finally, Vaughan-Stevens' 
own statement as to the use of the special signs (to distinguish similar patterns 
in certain circumstances) cannot, in the opinion of his editor, be in any way 
substantiated. Similar signs are used for different thing's and z'ice versa. 

Sakai Hi;Aij-iiANi> Patterns. Page 472. 

The head-bands of the men are on the average 57 cm. long and 6 cm. broad. 
Patterns i, 3, 7 runs through the length of the band, 2 is repeated eight limes, 
4, seven times ; 5, six limes ; 6, eight times ; 8, five times. 

The patterns of the head-bands of the women, which are called "Rib" 
(" Reeb") are given on Plate .\. Eigs. 9-20. 

The 15atin and his substitutes, the petty chiefs, are said to have had each a 
special head-band with patterns, which are now forgotten. 

On ordinary occasions the Sakai (" Blandas") are said to have formerly worn 
the usual unpainted head-band instead of that painted with the " Dream-name,'" 
but it only served to bind their hair. 

At Fig. 5 is given a name-design which represents the Argus pheasant 
("Kuang. ") The name is said to be derived from the fact that the child"s 
motions appeared in the dream to recall those of the bird at pairing-time. The 
illustration represents the breast plumage of the bird. The length of the original 
is 18 cm. 

This specimen is rare, since it was not formerly the custom to incise names, 

VOL. I 2 S 

626 APPENDIX 

\ 

but only to paint them on the head-bands. Now, however, names of members 
of the Kenaboi tribe are incised on the mouth-piece of tiie blowpipe. 

The patterns (of head-bands) represented are collected on Plate X. Nos. i-S 

1. Clearing with felled trees lying cross-wise, shortly before a "burn." 

2. Roots of trees and creepers with fibres and side-roots. 

3. Creepers, vines, and the like, which creep undulating over the earth. 
The triangular figures are said to represent the creepers as seen from above, 

according to the old Sakai ("Blandas") method, the teeth represent roots and 
root-fibres penetrating the earth. 

4. Star-shaped forest flower. 

5. Interlaced "rattan-tendrils." 

6. Under -side of a large tree -leaf; the side -strokes represent the veins 
branching out from the mid-rib. 

7. Liana, with rattan wound round it. Only used by magicians. A black 
line replaces the usual dots. 

8. Young, budding palm-leaves (deeply furrowed on the open side). 

Fig. 9. The pattern of the midwife's head-band. It arose not from a dream, 
but from the patterns of the children's face-paint ; it is in fact a combination of the 
pattern of the boy | (lower half) and that of the girl /\ (upper half), see Plate IX. 
Figs. lo-ii. As already mentioned, not only the magicians but the niidwives of 
the Senoi, Besisi, and Kenaboi tribes only wore a pattern on their head-bands 
on festival occasions. Yet the midwife had the right to wear the pattern of her 
dream-name, though the magician might never do this. 

Length of the band 99 cm. Breadth 5 cm. 

Fig. 10. This pattern shews the conventional form of the padi-knife, with 
which the women reap the padi. 

Length of the band 66 cm. Breadth 4 cm. 

Fig. II. Tracks of wild pig in soft ground. The vertical figure at A and 
B is only intended to complete the design. 

Length of band 64 cm. Breadth 3 cm. 

In the reproduction the pattern is abridged. 

Fig. 12. This pattern, called "Semut" ("Smut"), or the " Ant "-pattern, 
represents the section of a nest of white ants or " termites." 

Length of band 114 cm. Breadth 5 cm. 

Fig. 13. Side-walls of a house. 

Length of band 91 cm. Breadth 7 cm. 

Fig. 14. Upright posts or pillars of the house. 

Length of the band 120 cm. Breadth 5^ cm. 

Fig. 15. Extremities of a frog. 

Length of the band 120 cm. Breadth 5 cm. Like Figs. 13, 14. 

Fig. 16. Tracks of a tiger on soft soil. 

Length of the band 137 cm. Breadth 6 cm. 

F''ig. 17. Drawing on a tiger's skin. 

Length of the band 96 cm. Breadth 7 cm. 

Fig. 18. Six kinds of butterflies. 

Length of the band 93 cm. Breadth 5^ cm. 

Fig. 19. One half of a house-roof or gable : the slope of the timbers from the 
roof- ridge to the eaves. 

Length of the band 94 cm. Breadth 6 cm. 

Fig. 20. The forked posts which at each corner of the house are driven into 
the earth in order to support the horizontal roof-beams. 

Length of the band 94 cm. Breadth 4 cm. 

TEXT OF NEGRITO SONGS 

627 

PART IV. 

TEXT OF SEMANG SONGS COLLECTED IN KEDAH AND 

PATANI BY W. W. SKEAT.» 

Fruit Sons:;. 

The fruit-cluster turns - in the wind. 
The fruit -chister at the end^ of the 

spray. 
The fruit-chister turns in the wind. 
The fruit-cluster we climb for (?). 
The I'ruit - cluster at the end of the 

spray. 
The fruit-cluster turns in the wind. 
The fruit cluster waves to and fro. 
The fruit-cluster whose fruit is acid. 
The fruit-cluster sways to and fro (?). 
The fruit-cluster turns in the wind. 
The fruit - cluster spins round and 
round. 
Fruit Spi:r. 

Our fruit grows i)lunip at the end of 

the spray. 
We climb along and cut it from the 

end of the spray. 
Plump, too, is the bird (?) at the end 

of the spray. 
And plump the young squirrel at the 
end of the spray. 
Fruit So7i<:^. 

They swell and swell, the fruit-buds. 
To and fro wave the fruit -buds. 
P)lown-about arc the fruit -buds. 
In the wind, the fruit-buds. 
In the light wind, the fruit-buds. 
They turn round and round, the fruit- 
buds. 
And rock to and fro, the fruit -buds. 
Soii,^ofthe Ti^pus {Wild Giti!:cr]. 
Telentor batang temenyusun. The stem bends as the leaves shoot up. 

Tdpag telentor-gayor. The leaf-stems sway to and fro. 

Telentor miising-gayor. To and fro they sway in divers ways. 

0-gers6ydd telemoyn. We rub them and they lose their 

stiffness. 
Goyal Hfnas o tcpcis. On Mount Inas they are blown about. 

Tempat ye goyal I Unas. On Mount Inas which is our home. 

O tepos angin mergel. Blo\vn about by the light breeze. 

Tangke bah si-ajof. 
Tangke bah englang rengal. 

Tangke bah si-ajoi. 
Tangke bah 6 chinbonn. 
Tangke bah englang rengal 

Tangke bah si'-ajoi. 
Tangke bah 6-iyoi. 
Tangke bah seg masam. 
Tangke bah o kenvam. 
Tangke bah si-ajof. 
Tanske bah telelwd. 

BekSmbcing kebok ye 'lang rengal. 
O tingleng 6 tangkos 'lang rengal. 
BekSmbbng chinatol 'lang rengal. 
Bek^mbdng kejbh chereh "lang rengal. 

Telelpul wong Iwkau. 
()-iyo( wong bakau. 
O-tcpbs wong bakau. 
Ka-angfn wong bakau. 
Angin mergel ■• wong bakau. 
Perelsel wong bakau. 

Sf-ajo( wong bakau. 

• These are the texts of the songs 
given in vol. ii. of this work (chap, v.), 
under the heading of Music, Songs, and 
Feasts, and referred to in Part iv. 
(Language). Theyare inserted here for 
the greater convenience of those who 
may wish to compare the two. These 

songs were recorded on a phonograph, 
and the accents here given represent 
the verse-rhythm as recorded by the 
instrument. 

2 Or dangles ? 

' Lit. along the branch. 

^ Or "melgel'" (?-./.). 

628 

APPENDIX 

Tqx)S ngass, tepos yemyem. 

() tepos chfangiil. 

O t£p6s yemyem jelmol. 

O tepos dngin mergel. 

O ngeg-ngog ka-jelmol. 

O ngeg-ngog ka-jelmol Hinas. 

Jelmol Bcching, Jelmol Si'ong. 
Jelmol Malau, Jelmol Kuwi. 
Jelmol Mantan, Jelmol Lumu" 
Tempat ye sa-genap gunong. 

Laifi* A'ni. 

() ting- tiing Kra. 

O iyoi Kra. 

() chip-chop Kra. 

Balo'ng nguku Kr;;. 

Balo'ng tangoi Kra. 

Pederr seme Kra. 

Pederr hamaling Kra. 

Hau-urr Kra. 

O jinjon Kra. 

O tingtimg Kra. 

Tingtung techawog Kra. 

(') yob-y6b Kra. 
Wong-wong tangoi Kra. 
Tekelachoyn Kr.l. 
Sa-genap pengwong Kra. 
( ) yob-yol) Kra. 
Teiadhiid Kra, 
(TL)kcladeng Kra. 

Blown about is the fog {?). Blown 

about is the haze. 
Blown about are the young shoots. 
Blown aljout is the haze of the hills. 
Blown about by the light breeze. 
It multiplies (or nods?) upon the hills. 
It multiplies (or nods ?) upon the Hills 

of Inas. 
Hills of Beching, Hills of Siong, 
Hills of Malau, Hills of Kuwi. 
Hills of Mantan, Hills of Lumu'. 
Upon every mountain is our home. 

Alonkey Sori'^. 

He runs along the branches, Kra. 

Carries (fruit) with him, Kra. 

He goes to and fro, Kra. 

Over the knotted "sOraya," Krii. 

Over the knotted " rambutan," Kia. 

Over the live bamboos, Kra. 

Over the dead bamboos, Kra. 

Over the big bamboos, Kra. 

He hangs downwards, Kra. 

He runs along the branches, Kra. 

Running along the branches he hoots, 

Kra. 
He peers forward, Kr.a. 
Among the young Rambutan.'N, Kr.i. 
And shows his grinning teeth, Kra. 
From every sapling, Kra. 
He peers forward, Kra. 
Dressed for the dance, Kra. 
With the porcupine's quill through his 

nose, Kra. 

The phonetic transcription made by Mr. K. J. Lloyd from the phonograph 
records, and expressed in the symbols of the Association Phoneti(jue Internationale, 
is subjoined, as it contains a few variants from the above spelling and i:)erhaps 
helps to define the nature of the sounds used more accurately in some respects. 
For the value of the vowel and consonant symbols used here see the remarks on 
the phonology of these dialects in the chapter on Language in vol. ii. of this work. 
The double dot (:) after a sound has the effect of making the sound long. The 
single dot () has the same effect as in music : it makes the sound half as long 
again. Accent is marked with the usual sign, but it is placed in its logical 
position, before the syllable to be accented. 

'tAT/ke : 
'tArjke : 
'tAJjke : 
'tATjke : 
tAT/ke : 
'tATjke : 
'tATjke : 
'tA7;ke : 
'tATjke : 
'tATjke : 
'tATjke : 

'bD-h 
'bD-h 
'bD-h 
'bDh 
'bD-h 
'bD-h 
'bD-h 
'bDh 
'bDh 
'bD-h 
'boh 

'si- a'dxDi 
Etj'Iat; re'j/Al ; 
'si- a'd3Di 
'o-tfin 'bDn : 
etj'Iat; re'TjAl 
'si- a'd5Di 
'o' ij'ui 
'seg mA'sAni 
'o" ke7?'ja:ni 
'si a'diDi 
'telel'wi:] 

PHONOGRAPH RECORDS OF NEGRITO SONGS 629 

'bAlcAm'b^T; kA'b0k 'je 'Iat; rA'7;Al : 
'o* ti'Vle*'? 'o' tAVkds 'Iat; ta'tjaI : 
'bAkAm'b0r7 'tJi"na:'tDl 'lAr; rA'77Al : 
'bAkAm'bpT? 'kAd50h 'tjAreh 'Iat; ta'tjaI 

telel'pu:! : 'wogj; bA'kau 

o: i'ju'i" 'wogT; bA'kau 

o : te'p0s 'wOgTj bA'kau 

kA • A'7;i:n 'wogi? bA'kau 

A ■ Tji • n 'mergel 'wogTj bA'kau 

perel'sel 'wog?; bA'kau 

si : A'diO'i 'wog?; bA'kau 

'telen't3r 'bAtA?; 't£mE7jju'su-n 

'tA'pAg 'telen'tor 'gaJDr 

'telen'tor 'mA'siTj 'ga'jor 

'o' ger'sojd : 'tele'mojn 

'gDJAl 'hinAs 'o' te'p0s 

'tAmpAt 'je 'goJAl 'hinAs 

'o' te'p0s 'ATjin 'mer:gel : 

'tep0s '7;D:s 'tEp0s 'jemjem 

'o' te'p0s 'IJIa'tjuI : 

'o* te'p0s 'jemjem 'd5elmDl : 

'o- te'pds 'ATjin 'mer:gel : 

'o- »?eg'7;og 'kA- d3ermol 

'o- ■>?eg'7?og kA 'd;elmDl 'hinAs 

'd3elm3l 'betji?; 'd5elm3l 'sjo?; 

'd3elmol 'mAlau 'djelmol 'ku'wi 

'd5elmDl 'mAntAn 'dselmol 'lu'mu 

'tAmpAt 'je 'sAgAnAp 'guino?? 

'o' \\y{\.wr\ kra: 
'o* i'jui kra: 
'o- tjip'tj0p kra: 
'bAbg?; 'ryuku kra : 
'bA-lOT? '\.Ktf>\ kra: 
pA'de:r: sA'me: kra: 
pA'de:r: hA'mAli?? kra: 
'hau'ur: kra: 
'o' d3in'd50n kra : 
'o' tiVtUT; kra : 
'ti7?tU77 tA't/a:wDg kra : 
'o* job'JDb kra : 
'wDgT/wDgT? '^.^■fp\ kra : 
'tekela'tfojn kra : 
'sAgenAp 'pet/wdt; kra : 
'o • job'JDb kra : 
'telAd'hud kra : 
'tAkAlA'de?; kra : 

James Low's '« Sakai Song," 1 

Pirdu salen kinnang ingat sampei 
Yari mola asal nyite gyijen 

' It is stated that no satisfactoiy trans- 
lation could be obtained ; and no attempt 

is made by Low to supply this want. 
I can make no sense of this speci- 

630 

APPENDIX 

Ayer anibun umbun moli 
Kiri baju layang mayep singi. 

. . . remember until 

Day first-beginning . . . 

Water o/-devf /rom-stone (?) begin, 

Send (?) jacket yc?r-flying /^-soar on-high. 

kirim " (.Mai.), ^nd '• oingi " is probably a misprint for '■ lingi. 

Kiri 

Fragment ok a Sakai Song (in the Korbu Dialect) recorded by 
JBkau de St. Pol Lias.^ 

Mano 

Bei-mado 

Ago-tchip 

Tcha-djaroi 

Ka itou 

Chouo 

Tchip matuui 

Fowl ! 

Come here I • 
Don't go away ! 
Eat rice, 
Do not Tear. 
Dog! 
Go away ! 

Or in our spelling : — 

Mano, bei mado, ago chip, cha jaroi, ka itu, chuo, chip matui. 

Each line is first sung as a solo by the leader and then repeated by the other 
singers in chorus, without a break between the solo and the response. 

Hale's Specimen ok a Sakai So;>.g (krom the Ulu Kinta Region).- 

jcrlemoi [=jelmol] 

mountain 

jerreboo 

hill 

tra-ap 

to descend 

cherook 

road 

alour 

stream 

moug-alas [? mengalas] 

hillock 

Yung-bclah [Yong bclah] 

Mount Riam 

Gass-ahr [? Gasa] 

Mount Ungus [? Angus or Hangus] 

Ver-rail [VerCl] 

Mount Chabbong [Chabang] 

Mah-wah [? Mavvah] 

mountain in Ulu Burong 

Youg-yup [Yong Yup] 

do. 

Guss-aal [? Gcsal] 

mountain in Ulu Kerlon [sic, qu. Ulu 

Korbu] 

Cheu-goat [? Chegot] 

mounlain^in Ulu Burong 

Laut-urrh [? Latbh] 

mountain " two months' journey from 

Kinta " 

Jel-li [Jelai] 
Yeu-yeel [? Yeyil] 
Bor-rok [? Berok] 
Lan-noh 

Berrap-pit [B^rapit] 

mountain at Sungei Perrang[/.f. Perang] 
mountain at Ulu Sungei Riah \i.e. 
Raya] 

do. 

men, the words of which are apparently 
for the most part Malay, but quite un- 
connected with one another. If there 
is any Sakai in it, it escapes my notice. 

— /. I. A. (1850), vol. iv. p. 431. 

^ Pirak et les Orangs - Sakeys, pp. 
270, 271. 

- /. A. I. (1S86), vol. XV. p. 296. 

TEXT OF SAKAI SONGS 

631 

Ed-joah [? Ejo] 

J ah -goo [? Jagu] 

Be-nah 

Bakah 

Tad-dah 

Cheb-bcarih 

Tam-boon [? Tambun] 

Bct-eham 

Chab-barh 

mountain at Kinta 

do. 
mountain near Tambou [? Tambun] 
mountain near Kinta 

do. 

do. 
Tambou [? Tambun] 
name of a Malay village 
River Choh ' 

DE MORGAN'S SPECIMENS. 

Sakai Song (De Morgan's Spelling). 

Djelmoul, batou, topasse, allour, trab, loghop, hoii, sla djehoup, tchanteign, 
djehouk, tt7?rtban, Uhem-^QY, rafikeinz, sla, Zvbouk, kercp, tchep - tchip, 
tchimmare, tchimote, tchimaioui, tchimatro, mcirdjak - pao, bok, kokouah - 15, 
mafiintchol, dik, toughnoun, rended-pagho, nisch, bara, bok, tcherak, knarOUl, 
.S'JnOi. 

His translation is : — 

Montagne, pierre, village, , coUine, race, cau, feuille, branche, 

liane, baton, fourche, branche de broussaille, branche d'arbre, feuille, graine, 

atape, chemin, , en haut du pays, par-ci, par-la, montagne 

, grande poutre de faite, 

elevee, attacher, — 

palissade, plancher, murs des maisons, attacher. 

The above is apparently in the Ktrbu (or Korbu) dialect of Sakai, and is a 
mere string of names of natural objects, with a few verbs interspersed. 
In our spelling it would be as follows : — 

Jelmul batu tepase 

alur 

trab legop hong 

mountain stone village 

river-bed 

to descend (?) valley (?) water 

sla jehup chanteSng 

jehuk 

chabang chempok rangkeng (?) 

leaf (of) tree root (?) (of) 

tree 

branch 

sla kebuk kerop 

chapchTp 

chim-ma-re chi(p)-mo-te 

leaf seed (fruit) thatch 

to-go 

to-go-downslream to-go-upstream 

chi(p)-ma-tui chi(p)- 

-ma-tro 

mojak (?)-pao bok kekuah-lo (?) 

to-go-over there (?) to-go- 

(?) 

peak-of-hill to bind 

manginchol (?) dik 

tugnun(g) 

rended-paga (?) nish bara 

house (?) 

beam 

fence mat wall 

bok cherak knarul 

Senoi 

to bind 

men (?). 

Specimens of Dialects as translated from a Page of De 
Morgan's Diary. - 

The French original is as follows : — 

Le soir nous arrivons au sommet du Gounong Riam que je croyais le plus 
eleve de tout le pays, mais je reconnais mon erreur ; nous avons devant nous une 

^ Hale states that the proper names 
of which the greater part of this 
"song" consists are all (except the 
mountain Laut-urrh) of places between 
lats. 4° 30' and 5°, and in the Kinta 
watershed. 

The spelling is the old - fashioned 

"English" spelling evidently, and as 
the names are proper names and can 
only be conjecturally transliterated, I 
have not meddled with it except by 
giving the suggested interpretations in 
square brackets. 

- Of these specimens the Sakai of 

632 APPENDIX 

montagne immense dont la pointe couverte de nuages nous est invisible. Voyant 
qu'il failait encore monter longtemps, je donne I'ordre de tout preparer pour la 
nuit. Nos hommes ont apporte de I'eau, les feux sont allumes et bientut le riz 
cult dans les marmites. Sakayes et Malais se presseni autour des feux car ils ont 
froid, ils sont peu couverts. L'obscurite se leve un peu, j'interroge le panghoulou 
d'Oulou Sougni Kinta sur le nom des montagnes qui nous environnent. " Lc 
grand pic que vous voyez la-bas," me dit-il, "est le Gounong Kerlxju, c'est de 
ses flancs que part le Sougni Kerbou ; nous ne serons pas au somniet demain 
avant le milieu du jour ; plus loin a droite est le Gounong Djelignam, un peu 
plus eleve que le Gounong Kerbou ; sur ces montagnes il n'y a pas (i"eau." 

The Malay version, in De Morgan's spelling, is : — 

Pfitarl kita tiba poutchou Gounoii Riam, sa//ffya pikir lobi tinghi dalam negri 
ini, tetapi saA<7ya silap lain satou gounofl liJbi bessar poutchou dalam aou.in bantin 
depan kita, laghi djao na sampc. Sa//a)'a baghi oukoum brenti siap fa(;el hari 
malam. Ada oraii baoua ayor, api souda passafi laghi sikit nassi souda niassa 
dalam blaiiRa, oran darat sama orafi malayou brimpoun dekat api, dia oran add 
soudjou ; sikit kain katop dia pouna badan ; tchura sikit sa//aya tana d<ikat pang- 
houlou Soui^i Kinta apa nama gounoii koululifl kita. " Itou gounon bessar, 
nampa sama,^ gounon Kerlx>u, deri dia poui^a rousso touroun Sourii Kerlx)u. 
kita ta sampe dia jx)ufia poutcho eso doulou sttna hari ; Mbi djao sobla kanan, 
Gounon Djeliiiam lobi sikit tinghi deri Gounon Kerbou ; atas sonioua ini gounoii 
tada ayor."' 

"Soman" Version in Okiuinal Spellim;. 

Aye top tiba depd, ghic djelmol Riam, isch nano ghie pa, a, tompad no 
konlep, a p4 tich-kei fvah hoi domod yis, jxinanak doda da ye mad yis ; laghi 
dje migh hoi ischk hogh biadoa ni kail simpak mad yis. hoigh ciiol djelmol ; 
somafi oui ouei hon tthiim och, lag! esen nassi hoigh in tchen kloukum blaiiiia 
soma bji yob gop tchatOU begh 6ch tokat dia /Vs!k essen ouegh ta /<7;//koup cs%\ 
mad yisamig pegn bein panghoulou you ^vwta la kcinmi pa klilik ik. " Hoch pa 
tchikei edak yorno djelmol koui kcrlwu, eh yikn yok pA kerbou, to eh-hoi labok 
tchiamo steiiia ayi tib.i lio yo houel djelmol Djclifiam, lobi die yok pi koui kerliou, 
no pA to Ix) hon." 

S5MAN Version (Revised Spelling with Tentative Interlinear 
Equivalents). 

Aye top tiba dcpd gie jclmol Riam ish nano gie 

We in-the evening arrived Mt. Riam 

p4 a tcmpad no kcnlep a pd chikei (?) ngong (?) hoi 

hill Tiwi-mistaken hill big 

dcmod yis pcnanak dida da ye mad yis lagi je uiig 

before (?) us more far I 

hoi ish (?) hog biadu ni kali simpak mad yis, hoig 

to halt (?) 
dugol (?) jelmol ; semang wi-wei hong chom osh, lagi 

mountain : the men brought water kindled fire, more 

esen na-si hoig inchen klukom blanga sema (?) byi ( ? ? ) 

a little- rice was-cooking in ///<f-pot men? (t/'/^t forest (?) 

S. Raya is the best, and the " Soman " spoken by a race of partly Negrito 

(/.^. di-ilect of mixed tribes of the origin, it is in the main a Sakai dia- 

Sungei Piah neighbourhood called lect. 

Semang by their neighbours of the ' Misprint for sana, as the literal 

Plus and Ktrbu valleys) is the most version shows. 

corrupt. Though called Semang, and ■* I.e. presently. 

TEXT OF SAKAI SONGS 

633 

yob gop 

chatii beg osh tCkat dia isik 

esen 

strangers together near ihe-^xe. cold they bodies 

little 

weg ta 

chiikiip esi mad yis amig pen (?) 

beng^ 

clothes not 

cover bodies At %wxv-rise (?) I inquire 

of 

panghulu 

yu kcnta la kOnma pa klilik ik 

hosh 

M<f-chief 

Kinta what name hills around us 

this (?) 

pa chikei 

edak (?) ycrno jelmol kui Kcrbu eh 

yikng 

hill big 

mountain K^rbu 

yok pa 

Kcrbu to eh-hoi labok chiano (?) satenga 

ayi 

Kcrbu before (?) half 

a day 

tiba Ho 

yo huel jelmol Jelingam (?) Icbl je (?) 

yok 

arrive far 

left is the Mt. Jelingam (?) more high 

pa kui 

Ktrbu no pa to bo hong 
K.rbu hills not is (?) water. 

Sakai of Sungei " Kerbou " (KftRBu OR KoRBU) IN Original Spelling. 

^/ap ye /VAuol tchauok djelmol Riam Aye ///mat (5/ga <//elo te ado ?V^ouol 
ye oitoX, .v-cnOl moi djelmOl bigat w/t'nou tchaouak eki'lol tsioUt'// dada ye ti 
djjro tiba aye oundjo oukoum c'ye siap w£;/sat layek mou serihoi en hok' goi 
hcich ti meiihen tshana souda tchhchki^ eii^oldi blanna seiihoi djelmOl ramei 
ghop hemyeyo beg huch ri senhoi ma dekat menhen abat wcnouh ri senho'i 
ye ikol mahia mefihen. Aye somafi bek fa>ighoii\0Vi g(';//ch61 Gcinta lomo 16 
djelmol rendek ye. " Na djelmol fnorioxih. touh n(7h-touh' djelmol Kerbou dM 
ye pouna tc/ioiOUS rik teoith' KerboU ye doik lo/ ye pouiia djal6k iakal men- 
men djoun his, Idbi djero mapa tiii moun djelmol iJjelin&m djero te bahli d'erik 
djelmol Kerbou empak kemhoXXeh ana djelmol hon /u' hoii." 

Sakai of S. Kf:RBU in Revised Spelling with Inierlinear Translation. 

Atap ye ishuol chawok jelmol Riam. Aye himat 

In the evening we arrived oti the top of Mt. Riam. I thought (?) 
biga jelo ta ado ishuol ye wol senoi moi jelmol bigat 

more high ^country this arriving I turned (?) other (?) mountain more 

m^nu chawak ekc-loi tsiiieh dada ye ti J6r6 tiba aye unjo ukum eya 
big point in the clouds before us more (?) far to-reach I give order 
siap mensat layak mu senghoi en hokh goi hosh ti 

ready because (?) night there were men brought water kindled fire more (?) 
mengheng chana suda chechap engkeloi blanga senghoi jelmol 

a-little rice was cooking in the-^o\. the men of the mountains 

ramei gop hemyayo beg hosh ri senghoi 

all-together-w/M ///f-strangers assembled near the-'nxe. //ze-bodies (?) of the men 
ma dekat mengheng abat menuh ri senghoi ye 

were cold little was the clothing big were the bodies (?) of men ^ our (?) 
ik51 mahia mengheng aye seman bak- panghulu genchol 

next-morning when it was daylight a-little I inquired of the-c\i\^{ 

Genta lemo 16 jelmol rendiik ye na jelmol moniih tuh nah-tiih 
of Kinta name what mountains around us that mountain big there that is 
jelmol Kerbu deri ye-punya cheriis rik teuh Kerbi'i ye beta 

Mt. Kerbu from its flank descends the water of Kerbu we cannot (?) 

1 Lit. near? Cf. "beg," supra, 
and the " dokat " of the Malay version, 
from which these translations were 
evidently made. 

2 See the corresponding passage in 
the "Soman" version, and the note 
thereon. 

634 APPENDIX 

loi ye-punya jalok iakal mengmeng jung(?) his, lebi jero ma' pa' 

ascend its summit to-morrow before (?) mid (?) day, more far towards 
ting mun jelmol Jelingam (?) jero ta bahlf dherik jelm61 Kerbu empak 

hand right zV Mt. Jelingam high more (?) again (?) than Mt. Kcrbu on 
k-.-mbuch ana jelmol hong he hong. 

all (?) these mountains there-is (?) no (?) water. 

Sakai ok Sungei Raya in Original Spelling.^ 

Dou tiba loun Riam, an peker - lobi ^ tchoron kato nogri * ado, kotapi an 
silap ghe lain nano loun lob^ ntoui poutcho kato aouan, bandin* nto kita laghi 
iia lai" an ock oukoum pon siap idji S'inoui ; maii louniom an tOUeh osch 
tolash passan, laghi ghaghe" tchiana^ tchiehem katou likomon senhoi sama gop 
bosatOU rOU osch," ada loumam maii sorlet,'" ghe aban katop '* isi. Tchora 
ghe eiitaiia nanou '- pouloU '^ to" Gonta ayo '•' imo loun klilin"' kita. " Adja 
loun nlOi '" bakou '-^ sana loun KerboU ; deri befi tcholo to Kerbou ; *" kita ta'"-' 
\k\ dia pouiia'-' poutcho houpoul " tchano kolighi,--* lobi iia liJn kontam loun 
Djelinain,^* lobi "^ ghe tsoran deri loun Kerbou ; -'' alas sonioua ini loun te ta '" 
toud-h. ■' -^ 

Sakai of Sungei Raya in Revised Si-ei.ijng wnii Interlinear 
Translation. 

Du29 tiba lun Riam an peker lebi chtrong '"* kato 

In the evening we arrive on Mt. Kiam I thought it was more high in 
nfgri ado kdtapi an silap " gii ^^ lain nano lun l^be 'ntui 

country this but I was-mistaken a-little another one mountain more big 
pucho kato awan banding 'nto kita lag! nya lai an ok ukuni 
//v-peak in the clouds rears-up(?) before us still far to-reach I gave order 
pon ^^ siap ijl ^ scngui mang Ivimom 

to-halt and make-ready because day was-turning-into night there-were men (?) 
an^ tiieh osh tolash ^^ pasang lag! gage chana chahem katii likemong 
brought water fire was kindled more a-little rice was-cooking in the pot 
si^nghoi sama gop bcsatii ru osh ada '^'' lumam mang sengat 

men ^ with strangers assembled near the-iwt. they-were men (?) were cold 
ga aban katop isi. Ch^ra''® ga eng tanya 

little clothing covered their bodies. When it was daylight (?) a-little I asked 
nanu-'^pulu to Gcnta ayo imo lun kliling'**' kita. 

one chief ^y country <y'Kinta what /5 ///«; name tJ/"Mf mountains around us. 
" Aja lun ntoi baku^^ sana lun Kcrbu deri beng'*^ chclo*'' 

That mountain big that you see there is Mt. Kerbu; from near it descends(?) 

* In the original this version is given '^ (koligh-his) kolighi. ^ DjeliSam. 

twice, the second time with French -•' lobi. -^ Kerbou. ^ te ta (teh-to, 

equivalents, word for word. When teh-ta). -'^ tOU^//. 
the second version differs from the first, -•' De Morgan gives "we" as the 

the variant is given in these notes. equivalent, which is clearly wrong. 
The French equivalents, except where •'" I.e. "the highest." 

ihey seem to require correction, are ^^ De Morgan, " to see, to dis- 

not noticed here. tinguish." •'" Ibid. " lofty, high. " 

- peker. 2 lobi. ^ niigri. •' bandiii. ~' IbiJ. "for, in order to." 

« lai. T ghaghe. » tchiana. " osch. 3* /^^, "for." ^5 /^,-^. .. i - 

''• siiiet, sofiet. '^ katop. '"^ manou. ^ Ibid. " to carry." ^^ Qu. "these"? 

i-* pohoulou. " to. i» ayo. *^ kliliii. ''^ De Morgan, "again." ■'^Ibid."oV 

" ntOUtf/4. 18 bakou. i» KerboU. <» Ibid, "to see." " "lofty." 

2" (to) ta. ■-> pouna. 2- houpoul. ^- Ibid, "its" " Ibid, "flank." 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 635 

to Kerbu kita ta lai dia-punya pucho hupul chano 

the water (?) of Kerbu we can not reach its summit to-morrow before 

k lig-i, Icbi nya Ion kentam lun Jelingam(?), lebi ga^ cherang"^ 

midday, more far towards the right is Mt. Jelingam (?), more a-little high 
deri ^ lun Kcrbii ; atas somua ini km ta ta tueh. 

than Mt. Kcrbu ; on all these mountains there is no water. 

BESISI SONGS COLLECTED IN THE KUALA LANGAT 
DISTRICT OF SELAXGOR BY W. W. SKEAT.^ 

Gajah {Merat). The Elephant.'' 

Chong Peralong bunyi' gajah, 

At the Hill of Peralong trumpets (lit. is noise of) the Elephant, 

Gajah kawan gajah tungal. 

Elephant of the herd to the Elephant solitary. 

Gajah tuhah jet-Ieh kawan. 

T'.e Elephant old that foUowi-indeed the herd. 

Gajah kramat gajah tengkis. 

The Elephant sacred, the Elephant shrunk-foot.^ 

Gajah puaka' dari Johor. 

The Elephant t?/" magic that comes from Johor. 

Gajah nakeh chelui ha-bawau. 

Elephant that descend.f to-///<'-sea. 

Gajah mayin di-pante pasir. 

The Elephant that playi on-///<;-shore (?/-sand. 

Gajah mayin di-tanah pasir. 

7"i^:f- Elephant ///aZ-playi- in-ground ^-sand. 

Gajah yut-leh ka-hulu Langat, 

The Elephant returns to-Z/^e-Upper (lit. to-head-c?A) Langat, 

Yal-leh ha-chong di-tanah kramat. 

And climbj--then \.o-the-\vA\ in-M^-land sacred. 

Atam chong, chong dah bedok. 

Trample^-on the hill, and the hill has falkw. 

Atam d'long d'long dah tegot. 

Tramplej-on a tree, and the tree has snapp^(/. 

Kara' ti'il kara' tapang. 

There-i&VL\z\.x\ .^/^-trackj-, there-x&vs\akn //zV-footstepi-. 

1 De Morgan, "lofty." ^ The common Malay elephan" is a 

- Ibid, "than." \z.xiQly oi Elef has indictts. 

3 Ibid, "of." ^ K shrunken foot is regarded as the 

* For translations of these songs see sign of a sacred animal, whether 

vol. ii. p. 147 et seq. I may add that elephant or tiger. The former is also 

in setting them a full stop has inad- indicated by stunted tusks. An 

vertently been placed at the end of elephant with these marks was killed 

each line, and it has not been thought at Klang in Selangor a few years ago. 

worth while to correct this throughout. Its death (at the hands of a European) 

Note : that all Besisi final vowels are was regarded as the cause of the failure 

pronounced long, and are followed by of the coffee-land boom then at its 

the Malay click (') ; final "a"' (which height. It used to range through the 

in Malay is short) is marked long to Langat District, and was probably the 

help the reader. one mentioned in this song. 

656 APPENDIX 

Doyt-dah teh luchar-luchar.* 
Done-for-is the land, // is muddy-muddy. 

Kom-dah chok ka-nabian. 

Got-has by walk/«,f io-the Prophet's-shrine. 

Odo kapong gajah kramat. 
Do-not kill ///<r- Elephant sacred. 

Kalau kapong he mati tulah. 

\i y&it kill him J you will die presumptuous. 

Gul miyan tuht-kh kaul-he. 

Take incense (benzoin) ami burn vowj-your. 

Kramat hayang ha-kinchu-hi,^ 

The sacred-onc is fond of-grandchildren-hi.s. 

Kagar ngot nachar leba'. 

.■4nd dcsirej not /o-eat their plantations. 

Kagar ngot nachar niyu. 

Desires not /o-fecd-on their coconuij. 

Chok-leh gajah ka-bukil bukau. 

Roam£'</-then has //4^- Elephant to-hill and foot-hill. 

Chok-leh gajah ka-gaung guntong. 

Roam('(/-then has M<'-Elephani to-///<r-cavern and tarn. 

Chok-leh dah ka-hulu I^ngat. 
Roam^-^/then has he to-///<'- Upper I^ngat. 

Gajah trek-leh mah henom. 

The Elephant /V-drawM-then /^^-people many. 

Gajah trek ha-teh lop-lop. 

7"A<"-Elephant is draw// to-<7-country far-far. 

Chok-leh gajah ka-laut tawar. 

Roamcf/thcn has ///^-Elephant to-M<r-sca <7/-fre.shwater.- 

Gajah kCbus ka-laut tawar. 

Tli;- Elephant dier at-M^'-sea iT/'-fresh-water. 

Badak {Ai^ap). The Rhinoceros.^ 

Impit-impit bunyi' badak. 

' Impit-impit,' is the cry <?/-///c-rhinoceros. 

Badak kawan, badak tunggal. 

Rhinoceros <'/-M^-herd, rhinoceros that is solitary. 

Temong kawan tclong nachar. 

// call J its comrade to seek -for food. 

' Cp. " luchar " (of fruit) in the song * It is not yet certainly known 

about the " Klcdiing " fruit. whether the two - horned rhinoceros 

■■* «« Hi" seems to be the form which exists in the Peninsula, though more 

corresponds to Mai. "dia" ( = he, than one kind is suspected to exist, 

slie, it), whilst "he'' seems to mean Malays describe a special kind of 

"you." In case of inadvertence in rhinoceros which they call "Badak 

italicising it may be noted that the Api,"" the " Fiery Rhinoceros," which 

difference between singular and plural is is supposed to be redder and more 

not expressed in the original text of these fiery than the ordinary kind. Nothing 

songs. ^ Probably a placename. certain is known about it. 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS dyj 

Badak chok yal ha-chong. 

Zy/^-Rhinoceros that walkj and ascend.r to the-hillj. 

Badak chok di-ampa' jemu.' 

The Rhinoceros that walkjr at " out-crop dry." 

Nama akal lawan badak ? 

What device have I to resist /'/'^-Rhinoceros? 

Tcmong kawan, kawan hap. 

/call viy comrade.f, }iiy comrades are lacking. 

Mah gli, yal ha-long, 

A man - frightened, / climb-up a tree, 

Badak dudui di-tekah d'long. 

But M^-Rhinoceros wait.f at-tfie base of -the tree. 

Tegot rhak kawin ha-teh. 

/ break a branch and throw // to-ground. 

Kageng badak, badak bra't. 

Bitej- // ///(f-rhinoceros, and M^-rhinoccros passt'^-. 

Oyn chelui klo, duh-leh ha-dong, 

I descend too, and run then homewards, 

Yal ha-dong jet-leh badak. 

And climb into the house, hut followj-then ///^-rhinoceros. 

Gul snapang tembak badak. 

/ take w/jj^-gun and shoot ///.r-rhinoccros. 

Kom puru dah, badak dah bedcik. 

Hit him ///^-bullet done, Mif-rhinoceros done fall. 

Dah layu Lante-leh badak. 

Done scorch him quarter then the Rhinoceros. 

Jon nachar nuintet mulih. 
Give /^-eat a-litlle to each one. 

Chumbu jual " jebah China". 
TV/if-horn sell /(^-foreigners ^-China. 

A'a. The Tiger. 

A'a' ru' di-chen tanjong. 

The Tiger roarj at the end of the point. 

Nama kagar ? kagar nachar. 

What does he want ? he wants to eat. 

Nachar dena' nachar ketur. 
To eat wild-fowl, eat wild-pig. 

Nachar rusa' nachar kanchel. 

To eat sambhur-deer, eat kanchil. 

A'a' blang sebrang bawau. 

The Tiger striped that crosses the sea. 

Odd yong dalam bilang. 
Do-not forget this in the telling. 

Koi-leh teh nakeh teh a'a'. 

The headj-indeed of the land they are the land of the Tiger. 

' =Mal. [batu] ampar jemor? v. p. 642, 11. 2, infra. 
2 I.e. I am. » Better "juwal. 

638 

APPENDIX 

A'a' dah humpah hangke. 

The tiger has sworn-an-oath against — Somebody.* 

A'a' hamur lima' depa'. 
The Tiger leapi five fathom. 

Elak a'a' lompat kanan. 

Dodge the Tiger ; leap to the right. 

A'a' chok batang jclong. 

The Tiger walks- along a trunk lengthy. 

A'.i' kayi' chong dah tingi. 
The Tiger sees the hill is lofty. 

A'a' jctek pedf are'. 

The Tiger sleeps at noonday. 

Lek-leh a'a' chok mCri. 

Rise up, O Tiger, to walk the forest. 

A'a' tClong benatang rls. 

The Tiger looks for beasts that are living. 

A'a' chok ha-gunong Ledang. 
The Tiger walkj to Mount Ophir. 

Nakeh limpat asal a'.^'. 

That ii the place </-origin of-the Tiger. 

Takch Jinang, takeh Datoh. 

There is his jinang, there is his Date'. 

Takeh Jukrah, takeh Hatin. 

There is his Jukrah, there is his Hatin. 

Takeh kar.i' Hatin a'a'. 

There dwelb M<r-grcat-chief <?/-Tigers. 

(Di)dong Batin kebus-lch a'.V. 

At the house of his Great-chief dies-then ///(--Tiger. 

Brnang. The Bear. 

Wah wah wah bunyi' bruang. 

' Wah-wah-wah,' is the-cry of-the bear. 

Bruang pangong, bruang hijak.'-' 
77;^-bear *' panggong," the bear "hijak." 

Bruang nachar maroyt shuht.' 

The Bear that feeds by tearing-out wild-bees. 

Yal sialang' * gul ha-tebol. 

That climbs the bee-tree, and seizes l>ees. 

Chok de'-gimong chClui ha-bawau. 

77m/ walks from the crags and descendr to-M«-sea. 

Kagar nachar doyt ha-tebol. 

That wants /<»-feed utterly on-l)ees. 

* fJt. against "him," or "that 
man." 

2 Ridley says the presence of a 
second kind of bear (probably the 
Indian) is reported. " Butler heard of 

it at Pekan. It lives in sandy open 
country." 

3 " Shuht" = "kelulut." "Maroyt" 
= " di-tebok "or " tfr-kopak." 

* " Sialang " = Bes. " long salang." 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 639 

Val bakau, bakau maroyt. 

That climbs the mangrove-/'r^«, and the mangrove-trees tear-open. 

Yal kempas, kdmpas maroyt. 

That climbs thc-Vtvn^zs-trees, and the kempas trees tear open. 

Chohh neneh lemoyn bruang. 

Sharp indeed is-the tooth of the bear. 

Chohh bagai biong baja'. 
Sharp as a-hatchet of-steel. 

Mamat Solong , gul hau-parang. 

Mamat the Firstborn take j<7«r chopping-knife. 

Chclui-leh bruang, chelui ni^nginte. 

Descends-then the Bear, descends looking-around-/5?w. 

Dah ming lia-teh, bedok-leh ^ bruang. 

He near to-ground is, he drops then, the Bear. 

Chinchang-leh, Mamat Solong. 

Chop-at-.4iw-then. Mamat the Firstborn. 

Bruang lek, t.kam pula'. 

The Bear rises, awof attacks jw/ in-turn. 

Elak bruang Mamat Solong. 

Dodge Mt'-bear, Mainat-M^ Firstborn. 

Dah chinchang- Mamat Solong. 

You have chopped-at-him, Mamat the Firstborn. 

Kcbus-leh, ai, bruang 'dah kebus. 

Dead then is he. Oho I the Bear is dead. 

Gul 'pcdu' ubat mah bedok. 

Take you his spleen to cure men who fall. 

Rusd\ The Sambhiir. 

Keng bcrdengkeng bunyi" rusa". 

' Keng bcrdengkeng,' is the cry of the Sambhur-deer. 

Nama puoi di-tengah pematang. 

What are you doing in the middle of the rise ? 

Kita' kaye' ka-leba'-mah. 

We are looking at the plantation ^somebody. 

Doyt-dah leba' nachar rusa'. 

Done-with-is the plantation, eat^w-up-^r the deer. 

Kara' ti'il bi*kas rusa'. 

There remains the slot that is mark of the stag. 

Jong rusa' tujah-tujah. 

The hooves of the stag are pointed-pointed. 

Kampong-kampong iku rusa'. 
Tufted-tufted is the tail of the stag. 

Tong rusa' triang-triang. 

The ears of the slag are pricked-up-pricked-ii]->. 

' = " Groyn," to fall. 2 <t Ketong'' or " chetong." 

640 APPENDIX 

Tandok rusa' jeroka'-jfirokih. 

The horns of the slag branch-branch. 

Lenga'-lenga' leher rusa'. 

And slender-slender the neck of the stag. 

Rusa' nakeh, rusa' puaka'. 

A stag like that, is a stag of magic. 

Mah p^kong doyt dah tuhah. 

A man with an ulcer, who done is aged. 

Nakeh jadi rusa' kramat. 

That is what became a stag sacred. 

Rusa' rangas, rusa' mCnuang.' 
A stag of many lines, a stag bull. 

Rusa' hijok, rusa' sabut. 

A stag (j/gomuto-twigs, a stag of coconut husk. 

Rusa' umbut, rusa' ubi'. 

A slag (?/' palm-shoots, a stag of tubers. 

Rusa' nachar lembong klora'. 

A stag that eat/ the shoots of the kSlorak. 

Rusa' nachar lcml)ong kachang.- 

A stag tliat eati the shoots of the cow-itch. 

Nachar kachang koi dah gatal.' 

That eats the cow-itch, /;// his head is irritable. 

Koi gatal asah tandok! 

His head is irritable and he rub.f ■• his horns. 

Asah tandok, tandok btdok. 

He rub/ his horns, and his horns fall. 

Rusa' amas, rusi' puaka'. 

The stag of gold, the stag of magic. 

Chok-dah diiyt paming jaring. 
Wandered-done lie, quite near the toils. 

Bongkar halau bOr-dengkeng rusa'-hJ. 
Rouse and drive him bellowing stag this. 

Rusa' chok dalam sersap. 

A stag wanders among the fallen-leaves. 

Rusa' jOtek dalam st-rsap. 

A stag that sleep/ among the fallen-leaves. 

Rusa" t.rkcjut chOrut ha' jaring. 

The stag starts uj), and is strangled in the toils. 

Oi mah pawang chohh-leh rusa'. 

Ho ! Mr. /)«;-- wizard, spear the stag. 

' =Mal. " benuang," used of big had been eating it) might also arise 

old bull animals — e.g. of the buffalo, from his being seen in ihe act of 

stag, and I think others. rubbing his head when he loses his 

- His eating of "kachang babi " horns annually. — Ridley. 
{? cow-itch) might cause actual irrita- ^ "Gatal" = Bes. " kakaht " or 

tion ; it grows commonly near planta- " kakaJt." 
lions, but even then the idea (that he •* Or sharpens. 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 641 

Dah chohh buang badi'. 

When you have stabbed him, cast-out the mischief. 

Oi, mah pawang bante rusa'. 

Ho ! Mr. Z'e^tv-. wizard, quarter this stag. 

Etc., etc. 

Kijang. The Roe-deer. 

Emptp, empep bunyi' kijang. 

' Empep, cmpC'p,' is the cry of the roe-deer. 

Kijang chok di-ujong pcmatang.' 

The Roe-deer that wanderi at the end of the rising. 

Kijang yut ka-pangkal pcmatang. 

The Roe-deer that returns to the landward-end of the rising. 

Diam di-gunong Ulu Langat. 

That dwells on the crags of the upper Langat. 

Kijang nachar lembong perenchun.^ 

The Roe-deer that feeds-on the shoots of wild cinnamon. 

Vek, ai,^ Mamat Solong. 

O brother, Mamat the Firstborn. 

Vek, ai,"* gul-leh tohok. 

O brother, take then your spear. 

Gul tohok tikam kijang. 

Take your spear and stab the roe-deer. 

Cheliau lem-lem, duh-dah kijang-ha. 

Look very-careful ly, running is Roe-deer this. 

Klek-leh, ai ! kijang dah bcdok. 

Ho I then, carry him, the Roe-deer has fallen. 

Ka'an ha-dong machin-leh kijang. 

Carry him homewards and cook then the Roe-deer. 

Dah machin bente kijang. 

^\^len you''ve done cooking, quarter then the Roe-deer. 

Jon nachar muntet mulih. 

Give to eat a-little to each-one. 

Mai ohok adik kakak. 

Come ye hither, sisters-young and sisters-old. 

Nachar daging kijang naha. 

To eat the flesh of Roe-deer this. 

Bihih dah u'ut h=. 

UHien gorged is belly your. 

Lek-leh ai ! Mamat vSolong. 

Rise then, ho I Mamat the Firstborn. 

Main jo'oh ^ dalam bale. 

For the feast (/drinking within th; tribal-hall. 

\ "Pematang" (Mal.) = Bes. " um- ("lada") ?wild cinnamon.— Ridley. 

"^\- ^ V.l. " Lek, oi," "rise up, ho.' 

- "Perenchun"' = " kayu pedas " ^ Or"ja'ah"? 

VOL. I 2 T 

642 APPENDIX 

Bale panjang, bale bdsar. 

The Hall that is long, the Hall thai is broad. 

'Nari kijang hadat mah nyom. 

To-dance the Roe-deer is the custom 0/ people young. 

Hukah Itjmol hukah kcdol. 

To please the men atui to please the women.' 

Mah nyom henom di-bale. 

People that are young are many in the Hall. 

Eso' j^mah tahun jadi. 

To-morrow and for ever (?) be years of-plenty. 

Jadi pleh, jadi padi. 

Plenteous l>e fruit, plenteous be rice. 

Pleh . . . Pleh, Pleh, Pleh, oi. 
Fruit . . . Fruit; Fruit, Fruit, oho. 

Kanchel. The Chevrotain. 

Nyau-ganyau bunyi' kanchel. 

' Nyau-ganyau,' is the-cxy ^-///f-kanchil. 

Kanchel telong pleh d'long-mcri. 

Ty/^-kanchil that seeks M«'-fruit 0/ trees of-the-{oxe=,\.. 

Pleh kOpau tC-long kanchel. 

Fruit 0/ the kepau seeks /A^-kanchil. 

Kanchel nachar di-ampa' jOmu.- 
7'-4<'-kanchil that feeds at l>ed-rock dry. 

Kanchel nachar daun ludai. 

7'/6<L--kancliil that eats ///£--leaves o/-M<r-ludai. 

Kanchel nachar daun hila". 

7"/4t-kanchil that eats M^-leaves ^-Mi-sweet-potato. 

Kanchel nachar daun yet. 

TV/c'-kanchil that eats the-lcdS o/'-the-yam. 

Kanchel gli gOntah ^ bcdok. 

The kanchil that fears Mt'-thunderbolti fall. 

Kanchel gli binatang ttkam. 

TV/tf-kanchil that fears wild-beasts wi/l attack htm. 

Kanchel gli katop ■• tijau. 

7'//tf-kanchil that fears the-hiie o/'-M^-snake. 

Kanchel chok-leh chohoi doi. 

77/.'-kanchil that walks-then by-day a;«/ night. 

1 Lit. " be-pleased male, be-pleased ("when the buffaloes go down to the 
female." water," i.e. about 5 p.m.), etc. Still, 

2 ="Ampar j:'mur"(?) I do not the best translation seems, "when the 
feel sure about the interpretation of bed-rock (or outcrop) dries (in the sun)," 
" ampa'," but " jcmu " is surely cp. Mai. " kring ambun" = "at dew- 
"jCmor," and the whole phrase cer- dr)'." 

tainly means, as I was told, "in the ^ " Gentah." N.B. "Are' aler'' 

early morning."' Possibly " ampa' "= (" ra"') = to lighten ["ra' " = "sehaja"] 

"civet-cat," i.e. "when the civet-cat " are' garong," thunder, 

basks (in the sun)," a phrase analogous ^ " Katop" or " kathop" = Mai. 

to the Malay " kerl)au birendam " " pagut " (" ular "). 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 

643 

Kanchel jetek pedf are'. 

Ty^ij-kanchil that sleeps at-noon of-day. 

Kanchel jetek dalam lemat.^ 

TViif-kanchil that sleeps among //^c'-brushwood. 

Kanchel jetek ha-bangko' mok. 

Ty^f-kancliil that sleeps among-leaf-casej of mhox^g-palms. 

Kanchel jetek di-lumbun rumput.- 

77?(r-kanchil that sleeps 2«-Me-tangle of grass. 

Mai-leh he telong kanchel. 

Hither then you, seek the kanchil. 

Ningket ^-leh jerat kanchel. 

Set then the noose for the kanchil. 

Ples^-dah, ai ! kom dah jerat. 

Release^/ is it, hurrah ! got him has Mg-noose. 

Dah higap ka'an ha-dong. 

The tioose has caught him ; carry him homewards, 

Dah hadong he layu.* 

" Done " homewards do you scorch him. 

Dah layu he bente. 

Done scorch him; do you quarter him. 

Dah bente he gule. 

Done quarter him ; do you rnake cooked-meat. 

Jon nachar muntet mulih. 

Give to eat a-little to each-one. 

Pclandok (Pandok). The Mouse-deer. 

Krusau-krusau ^ ru' pandok. 

• Krusau-krausau,' is the cry of the mouse-deer. 

Pandok nachar lembong ludai." 

The mouse-deer that eati the shoots 0/ the ludai. 

Pandok nachar pleh kledang. 

The mouse-deer that eat.f the-{nx\i o/'//^<?-kledang. 

Pandok nachar pleh kepau." 

The mouse-deer that tzXs thc-irmt of the kepau. 

Pandok nachar pleh mangis. 

The mouse-deer that eatx Mf -fruit of the-m2iX\gostxn. 

Pandok nachar pleh diyan. 

The mouse-deer that eati- the-fruit of the durian. 

Kom bau pandok jol-leh chau. 

IVhen he get^ ///f-scent of-the mouse-deer, barks-then the dog. 

Kom bau pandok putih. 

He-has got the-%zQX\X. (?/"-a-mouse-deer white. *> 

^ Bes. " lemat " = secondary growth. " Tyi^l. " ludai " = Bes. "long 

^ V.l. " Rambun rumput." maya'." 

3 Pies = Mai. " terbingkas," to be- '' ''Ke'p^.vi" = Pholidocarpis macro- 
corn^ released (of the catch); carpus. V.l. " Serdang " = Z/z;nV^«« 
' ' nmgket " = " pasang. " cochinchinensis. 

* Or "singe"? "Layu" = Bes. » WTiite is the mark of a "sacred'^ 

"holoi." 5 K/. "kuh, kuh!" animal. 

644 APPENDIX 

Jet-leh bau pandok putih. 

Follow-then M^-scent of the mouse-deer white. 

Pandok putih chclui ha-dooh. 
T'A^-mouse-deer white descendj to-M^-water. 

Dalam dooh kom-Ieh dah. 
In Mt'-water got-then has.^ 

Dah kcbus pandok putih. 
Is dead M^-mouse-deer white. 

Klek-leh ha-donj; pandok putih-ha. 

Carr>'-then homewards the mouse-deer white this. 

Bente-leh pandok putih. 
Quarter-then the mouse-deer white. 

Jon nachar muntet mulih. 
Give to eat a-Iittle to each-one. 

K:tur. The Wild Boar. 

Dret, dret, dret, bunyi' kctur. 

' Dret, dret, dret,' is the cry of the wild-pig. 

Kenon ketur nachar ha-bois. 

The young of the wild-pig that feed-on sugarcane. 

Nachar yet, nachar hila'. 

Feed-on yams, feed -on sweet-potatoes. 

Doyt dah nachar icba'-he. 

Utterly is eaten-up thii clearing ^t/" yours. 

Jong kctur tujah-tujah. 

The feet of the Boar are pointed-pointed. 

Tih kctur soroi-soroi.* 

The fore-legs r/M^ Boar are sloping-sloping. 

Bulu' kctur gcrchas-gcrchas. 

The bristles of the Boar are stubborn -stubborn (? bristling). 

Met kctur pclat-pclat.-' 

The eyes of the Boar are squinting-squinting. 

Tbng kctur chanchang-chanchang. 

The ears of the Boar are pricked-up pricked-up. 

Scmuk-leh pipi kctur. 

Fat indeed are the chaps of the Boar. 

Iku kctur gewet-gewet. 

And the t.til of the Boar is crisp and curly (?).^ 

Chclui kctur nachar ha-be. 

There descends the Boar to feed upon r^«'' rice. 

Gul ding blau klau bunga'. 

Take your bamboo blowpipe scored with patterns. 

' I.e. the dog has got it. explanation given me it = " curl-curl,"' 

^ V.l. "choroi-choroi." /.«•." inclined to be curly," but is not the 

^ " P^rlat-p6rlat," or " pclat-pilat " wild pig's tail supposed to bestraight (?). 

= cross-eyed or squinting (?) (Mai. Ridley suggests "goes flip-flap, froni 

•' t^rbliak "). the way it flaps when he is running." 

* Exact sense doubtful : from the I ] 'refer, however, the former sense. 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 645 

Huat-pcchit begum-begani.^ 

Whiz and it sticks ! the Boar goes grunt-grunt. 

Cheliau ber-lem-lem ketur kedim duh. 
Look carefully, the Boar is now running. 

Etc., etc. 

Kok (/ KCik).- The Cocotuit-monkey. 

Kok, kok, kok gantang, 

' Kok, kok,' is the cry of the monkey "gantang," 

Kok gantang, kok rangka',-^ 

Of the monkey "gantang,"' and the monkey " rangka', 

Kok buku sfirling-sCrling.^ 

And the monkey " buku " that peers-peers. 

Muh kok-keh rimai-rimai. 

The muzzle t^/" monkey yon is dimpled-dimpled. 

Tih kok-keh rimpang-rimpang.'' 

The fingers 0/ monkey yon are crooked-crooked. 

Paho kok pako'-pako'.*^ 

The haunches of the monkey are bowed -bowed. 

Iku kok-keh d'long prau-prau." 

The tail t?/ monkey -yon is a tree waving. 

Nachar pleh pleh diyan. 
EatiMi,'- fruit, fruit of the durian. 

HindikSkok lek-leh klo.» 

Shakes (?) the monkey, rise-then again. 

Yek, ai ! '*' Mamat Soiong. 

Ho, brother ! Mamat the Firstborn. 

Yek, ai ! gul-leh ding blau. 

Ho, brother ! take-then bamboo-tube. 

Benchop sC-loloyn, cheliau ber-lem-lem. 
Stalk ;■/ craftily, look very carefully. 

Huet lechTp,^* kom domok 'dah. 

Whiz and it sticks, hit hitn the dart has. 

Duh-dah kok tengong-prengong. 
Run-off-has the monkey, helter-skelter. 

Kuak-kuak kok kedim bedok. 
Vomiting the monkey now falb. 

Denting-denting bedok kok-keh. 
With thud-thud falls monkey yon. 

1 " Begum - begam"= " bunyi am- kujap '' or " kangkang koyak. " 

boi," explained as meaning " he cries ^ "Pak6'-pako'" = Mai. " changko'- 

' Oh ! ' when he is struck " ! changko'." 

2 =Mal. "Bro'." " = Mai. "gunchang." 

3 The " kok gantang," "rangkak," ^ = Mai. " gegar " (?). 
and " buku " appear to be three kinds ^ =Mal. "pula. " 

of " Bro'," or coconut monkey. ^*^ V.l. " lek, ai " = " rise up, 

* =Mal. "kerling." ho !" 

''' Explained as = Ma]. "kangkang- '^ = Mai. "lekat." 

646 APPENDIX 

Klek-leh, ai I Mamat Solong. 
Pick-it-up, ho I Mamat the Firstborn, 

Ka'an ha-dong rongko'-royon. 

And bear it homewards though bent and bowed. 

Ka'an ha-dong champak pekil. 

Bear it homewards and throw // downwards. 

Inak Solong, layu-leh kok-keh. 

Aunt Eldest-born, scorch monkey-yon. 

Mamat Solong, bente-leh kok-keh. 

And you, Mamat the Elder-born, quarter-then monkey-yon. 

Jon nachar muntet mulih. 
Give /o-eat a-little to each-one. 

U'ut he dah bihi-leh, 

When that belly c/ yours is gorgeiZ-then, 

Lek-leh, ai, Mamat Solong. 

Rise then, ho ! Mamat the Firstborn, 

Lek jo'oh dalam l)ale. 

Rise up and drink within the Hall. 

Bale panjang bale besar. 

The Hall that is long, the Hall that is broad. 

Esok jemah tahun jadi. 

To-morrow and afterwards shall be a year plenteous. 

Bilang kok, pleh jadi. 

Tell of the monkey, and fruits shall be plenteous. 

Pleh . . . pleh, pleh, pleh, pleh. 
Fruit . . . fruit, fruit, fruit, fruit. 

The Hiamang. The Gibbon. 

Mong, mong, mong,' bunyi' Siamang. 

' Mong, mong, mong,' is the cry ^-M<-Siamang. 

Siamang bertembong * di-ampa' jemu.^ 
The Siamang that hoots at-outcrop dry. 

Siamang mcnenteng di-sendoh ^ Kalih,* 

The Siamang that chatters on-the upper Kalih. 

Nimul-leh Siamang di-sendoh Luar. 
Appears-then the Siamang on-the upper Luar. 

Lompat prau " di-lembong b'ranti. 

Leaps atid rustles in the branches of the meranti. 

Champak prau di-lembong ludan. 

Hurtles atul rustles in-M^ branches oi the ludan. 

Berdak-berdong " nachar Siamang. 
Fallen-fruit-husks eatJ the Siamang. 

I Onomat. v. next line. = " upper end of water." = Mai. 

- Onomat. word, connected with "ulu." 

"mong." * V. " Bangkong " song and others. 

•'' When (the dew on) the outcrop ^ = Mai. "berdrau." 

(granite) dries. F. p. 642 «;//£ (n.). " = Mai. " lepok-lepak " = " fallen 

* From "sen (or "chen") dooh '' fruit-husks." 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 647 

Benchop ^ seloloyn - cheliau-^ ber-lem-lem. 
Stalk him warily, look very carefully. 

Mamat Solong, Mamat Alang. 
Mamat Solong and Mamat Alang. 

Yak,'* ai ! Siamang kedim duh. 
Elder-brother, oho ! the Siamang now runj. 

Yek, ai ! gul-leh ding biau. 

Elder-brother, oho ! take-then the bamboo blowpipe. 

Gul blau ding klau bunga'.^ 

Take the blowpipe of the bamboo scored vjith patterns. 

He subai cheh " kakom. 

Do you try upas-poison /£7-implant. 

He subai" cheh benani. 

Do you try upas-poison to insert. 

Lo lekuis, kom domok dah. 

Shoot and it sticks, got him the dart has. 

Yek, ai, cheliau Siamang-nong. 
Elder-brother, oho ! watch Siamang-just. 

Ka-kua',** kuh-dah Siamang. 
Cough-cough %'omited-has the Siamang. 

Cheliau Siamang prom'-' perteng.'*' 
\Vatch the Siamang fall -vith a clatter. 

Yek, ai ! Siamang dah bedok. 
Elder-brother, oho ! the Siamang has fallen. 

Klek-leh, ai ! rongko-royon." 
Carry /4?>«-then, oho? bent-a«(/-bo\ved. 
Klek^^ .Jeh^ ai I Siamang ha-o. 
Carry-then, oho ! Siamang this-indeed. 

Telong-telong rangas ludan. 
Seek, seek branches of the ludan. 

Telong-telong rangas changan. 
Seek, seek branches of the changgan. 

Telong angeng he layu ^^ Siamang. 
Seek firelogs you to scorch the Siamang. 

Telong-telong pcdas chanchang. 
Seek-seekyi?r seasoning (t/" chanchang. 

1 " Benchop" = "endap," to stalk. " »«Cheh," or "ches" (Bes. for 

2 = " P'lahan- plahan," probably Mai. "ipoh"). 
reduplicated from " sa-loyn-loyn." ^ = Mai. " choba. " 

3 " Cheliau," not " chelui," appears * = Mai. " bato' luak," 
to be the correct reading. ^ =Mal. " rebah." 

^ "Yek" is a variant reading for ^^ =Mal. " berdebum " ; or to fling 

" lek," here and elsewhere. oneself with a crashing noise through 

•'' This passage depends on the branches, 
meaning of the phrases "ding klau 11 =Mal. " terbongko'-bongko'." 

bunga'," and " ding klampcnai," which i- = Mai. " dokong." 

maybe kinds of bamboo, or "decorated" i3<iSoloi" (or " holoi ") = Mai. 

and the reverse. V. p. 648, n. 10. "layu," to singe (?) or scorch. 

648 APPENDIX 

Telong-telong pedas jintan. 
Seek-seek, for seasoning ^^/'jintan. 

Krio'-kria',^ haro-galo.- 
Crackle-crackle, mix and mingle //. 

Dah layu,3 bentc-leh * Siamang. 

IVhen it is scorched, cut-up the Siamang. 

He jcin muntet mulih. 

Do you give a-little to everybody. 

Biar chukop dageng Siamang, 

Let it suffice, yon flesh of the Siamang, 

Chukop-leh nachar kadui ■'' hedet. 
Sufficient for-eating both great and small. 

UngkS ** ( Temho' or Tehmok). A Kind of Ape. 

Wong wong wong bunyi' ungka'. 

* Wong, wong, wong,' is the cry of the wawa. 

Ungka' bermain di lembong kepong. 

The wa'wa' that play^ among the sprays of the kepong. 

Ungka' bermain di lembong scraya'. 

The wa'wa' that playj among the sprays of the seraya'. 

Ungka' bermain di lemlx)ng jelotong. 

The wa'wa' that play^ among the sprays ^ Mtf jelotong. 

Berdak-bcrdong nachar ungka'. 
Crunching and crunching feeds the wa'wa'. 

Pleh angong nachar ungk.i'. 

The fruit of the anggong is the food of the wa'wa'. 

Pleh rambai nachar ungka'. 

The fruit of the rambai is the food of the wa'wa'. 

Bulu' ungka' putih kapas. 

The fur of t lie wa'wa' is white as cotton. 

Bulu' ungka' sutra' hitam. 

The fur of the wa'wa' is silk that is black.^ 

Kening ungka' bagei andam. 

The brow of the wa'wa' is as-it-were trimmed. 

Iku * ungka' tombat-tombat. 

The stern of the wa'wa' is flat-and-hard {lit, solid-solid).' 

Gul ding blau klampenai."^ 

Take_y(7«r bamboo blowpipe " klampenai." 

1 Onomat. prob. from the crack- " These lines may refer either to 

ling of the firelogs, or rather the noise two different varieties of *' wa'wa'," or 

of the tubers frying in the pot — " bunyi else to the fact that the face and hands 

goreng ubi di-kua!i." are white, whilst the body is black 

- =Mal. " kachau-kachau-kan." (and silky). 

3 " Soloi " (or " holoi "). See note ^ Here = sternorrump, the "wa'wa"' 

13 to preceding page. having no tail. 

* =Mal. "topah" (or "bantei"?) ^ =Mal. " tumpat " (?). 

^ Or"kadoi." ^'^ "Bl. kiampfinai"; explained tome 

" "Ungka" is the Jav. (Malayan?) as = " ding Brunei " or "Borneo bam- 

for "wa'wa'," ace. to Ridley. boo," possibly referring to the wooden 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 649 

Benchop seloloyn cheliau ber-lem-lem. 
Stalk it warily, look very carefully. 

Tih ungka' kantau-kantau. 

The arms of the wa'vva' are long and slender (?). 

Jong ungka' buai-ber-buai. 
The legs of the wa'wa' are swaying together. 

Yak, ai ! cheliau ber-lem-lem. 
Ho, brother ! look very carefully. 

{/?est same as Siamang. ) 

BayS. The Crocodile. 

Wa'-wa'-wa' nakeh baya'. 
Wa'-wa'-wa', that is the crocodile. 

Baya' telok baya' rantau. 

The crocodile of the bay, the crocodile of the reaches. 

Koi baya' tungku-tungku. 

The head of the crocodile is covered with lumps. 

Iku baya' bage pedang. 

The tail of the crocodile is like a sword. 

Lemoyn baya' kanching-kanching. 

The teeth of the crocodile are clenched together. 

Manl' lubok kara' baya'. 

Wherever is a river-pool dwelb the crocodile. 

Baya' garang baya' ganas. 

The crocodile that is fierce, the crocodile that is savage. 

Yal jemor atas tebing, 

That climbs up to bask upon the river bank, 

Chelui ha-dooh telong nachar. 

And descends to- the river to look for food. 

Bayang mah kayi'-leh baya'. 

The reflection of a man sees-then the crocodile. 

Koi hap, kom-leh nachar. 

If the head is lackw/§, he gets-then food. 

Koi dah, kom nachar ngot. 

If the head is there, he gets food not. 

Nakeh kra' atas d'long. 

That is a monkey upon the timber. 

Kapet baya', bedok ha-do6h. 

It is struck by the crocodile, and falU into the water. 

Baya' benam dalam lubok. 

And the crocodile smotheri- it in the mud. 

(Kuantan) type of blowpipe, which is Mai. " kelar " cp. " selar,' etc.] If this 

(necessarily) undecorated, as distinct is right, "ding" (bamboo) is applied 

from "ding klau bunga'," or the to the rare wooden type in spite of its 

"blowpipe scored with patterns" (the material, otherwise it must be a special 

indigenous variety). [" Klau " prob. = kind of bamboo. 

650 APPENDIX 

Dah kebus ka'an ha-teh. 
Done dead he bears // ashore. 

Lempeh ha-d'long biar kebus nene'. 

And batters it on-timber to let it die thoroughly. 

Kebus nene' nachar l)ulat. 

When it is dead thoroughly he devours it whole. 

Ja7>.<ak.^ The i\/onitor Liza id. 

Koi jawak tungku-tungku. 

The head of the great-Lizard is knobby and knotty. 

Met jawak met porting. 

The eyes of the great- Lizard arc eyes narrow (?). 

Munchong jawak munchong runching. 

The snout of the great-Lizard is a snout sharp-pointed. 

U'ut jawak biang-biut. 

The belly of the great-Lizard sways a;/rt' swaggers. 

Ti'il jawak jarang-jarang. 

The foot-prints of the great-Lizard tve spread a;;^ splayed. 

Sisek cheloii bage pari'. 

The scales of its back are like those of the sting-ray. 

Iku jawak bage pcdang. 

The tail of the great-Lizard is like a sword. 

Lcmoyn jawak duri' pandan. 

The teeth of the great-Lizard are thorns of the screw-pine. 

Lidah Jawak lidah chal)ang. 

The tongue of the great-Lizard is a tongue that's forked. 

Nakeh mah chakap bohong. 

That is the man who telb falsehoods. 

Jawak nakeh Tuhah - bay.i'. 

(?/"-/>4f-great- Lizard that is Chief the crocodile. 

Adik bay?.' tOmai-tcmai. 

// is the younger brother of the crocodile since days-of-old. 

Baya' teh Baya' bawau. 

The crocodile of the land ; and the crocodile of the sea. 

Mui di-teh, mui di-bawau. 

One upon land, and one in the sea. 

Cheliau bcrlem-Iem tetak jawak. 
Look very-warily and cho'p-a.x. the great-Lizard, 
etc., etc. 

Ular Sawa' (Tijau Telon). The Python (i). 

Seng, seng, seng, tijau telon. 
Hiss, hiss, hiss, goes the Python. 

Teldn klewen ^ di-atas kayu. 

The Python coiled in the top of a tree. 

^ Or '*giang"= "geriyang" (?). 3 = Mai. " belengkar " (coiled, of a 

2 "Tuhah" -'./. "horoh." snake). " Telon = Mai. " telan " (?). 

I 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 651 

Telon klewen di-atas^ rambun.- 

The Python coiled in the top of the brushwood. 

Telon klewcn di-dalam lumbun.-' 
The Python coiled among the grass. 

T6lon lep lobang batang. 

The Python that enters the hole in the tree-trunk. 

Telon lochoyn * bilang sawa'. 

The Python spotted thai is called 'sawa'." 

Iku t^lon bage g.ising.^ 

The tail of the Python is like a peg-top. 

Lidah telon bawang putih. 

The tongue of the Python is like garlic.^ 

Lemoyn telon duri pandan. 

The teeth of the Python are thorns of tlie screw-pine.'^ 

Telon lemak dalam gobuk.^ 

The Python that is fat in its cheeks. 

Koi telon bage sendok. 

The head of the Python is like a spoon. 

Sisek ^ koi bage amas, 

The scales of its head are like-unto gold, 

Jare' mui ratus ampat puloh.^** 

And its feet ^^ are one hundred and forty. 

Kret kadui bage niyu. 

Its body is big as a coconut-/^/;//. 

Tijau telon telan kdtur, 

The Python that swallow j- the wild -pig, 

Telan kctur higap pandok.^^ 

Swallowj^ wild-pig and captures the mouse-deer. 

Telan pandok, higap rusa'. 

Swallows the mouse-deer a)id captures the sambhur-deer. 

Ttilan rusa', higap a'a'. 

Swallows the deer, and captures the tiger. 

■ =Bes. "kulong." ^ White onions, i.e. garlic, a very 

^ = " Ujong kayu." apt description. Mai. " bawang " = 

3 =Mal. "rumput." Bes. "bantut." 

•» " Lochoyn " = Mai. "rintek." ^ Bes. " Hakek habll" ; Mai. 

^ This seems to be the right mean- "duri" = Bes. "jongreng." 

ing. It refers, of course, to the tip of ^ " Lemak" = Bes. "lentoyt"; "go- 

the Python's tail. A z;./. is " gaweng," buk" = jMal. "pipi." 

which was said to mean the tip (of ^ =Bes. "ketong." 

a tail), but this is obviously wrong, '^^ The ribs on which it walks, corre- 

as there is no sense in saying that its spending to the feet of a centipede, 

"tail" was "like its tip." I am " Ze. ribs. Z//. fingers or toes, 

convinced " gasing " = " peg - top " is ^^ " Telan" = " geloyt" (?) or "ge- 

right, loyn" v.s. 

652 APPENDIX 

Ular SawcV. The Python (2). 

Sawa' sindc, sawa' bcrante.' 

The Python of the snake-cloth, the Python with-the-c\\2Lin. 

Sawa' sinde - jadi' kraniat. 

The I'ython of the snake-cloth become sacred. 

Sawa' datang do' mata' ayi. 

The Python come from the springs ly water. 

Kadui kret (bagC) Ijatang niyu. 

Big-fy-ljody (like) the stem of the coconwi-palm. 

Nakeh gClar sawa' (hcr)-chul.i'. 

That is the name of the Python with-//<<r-horn. 

Saw.V sindC' chclui hawau, 

The Python of the snake-cloth that descend^rf /^ //i^-sea, 

Kl.ahc sam.a' kramat hawau, 

Attd fought with the sacred Python cf the Sea, 

Laut bosar laut kOchil sudah. 

Till the sea that was big sea small I)ecanic. ' 

Kramat asal mulJl' jadi'. 

The sacred Python that of beginning first l)ecamc. 

Kramat nakeh Mah mah karah.* 

Sacre<l Python yonder have people defeated. 

Lawan ngot Sawa' darat. 

Resist cannot the Python of the land. 

Salah s£-mt>ah Sawa' darat. 

Wrong admits the l^thon of the land. 

Al.ih mah chclui de' leh. 

Defeated was ///<--one thcU descend^rf from the land. 

MOnang mah chdlui de' bawau. 

Victorious ///^-one that descendft/ from the sea. 

Nakeh dah puak.'i' alci. 
That-<7M^ h.as spirit more.* 

Sawa' kcbus yal ha-plangi'. 

The Python dead ascend^rf \.o-the rainbow.^ 

Jadi iKigc uis plangi'. 

Became like the fire of the rainbow. 

1 I'roJKibly, according to Ridley, the little sea. 
from the diamond jxittem on its back, * "Karah" must be a mistake of 

or perhaps from some analogous belief mine for "kalah." I can make no 

to that of the wild-boar's chain (" rantei sense of "karah." The sense given 

babi "') the animal's charm or talisman. seems to suit. 

- " Sindc " = Mai. " (kain) chindai," ' ? exact meaning = " magic - force 

supix)sed to be an extremely valuable still." 

magic cloth of silk, with python- " " Plangi' " explained as = "sumbu 

patterns woven into it, which latter buta' )-al langit " (?). The one whose 

came to life when fumigated. horn was blunted (lit. blinded) ascended 

^ Or in the big sea, after fighting in to the heavens. 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 653 

Chula' gul sawa' bawau. 

The horn was taken by the I'ylhon of the sea. 

Chclui bcrlem-lem, odo langkah. 

Look very-carefully, do-not step-over ;'/.' 

Kalau langkah timpa' derhaka'. 

\i you step-over it you will be-crushed y^r a rebel. 

Lilit kret p^nyakit Sawa'. 

T^i-wind-round _j'^//r body is the sickness of the Python. 

Odo yong dalam gres. 
Do-not forget in your heart. 

Esok jemah.'^ 
To-morrow and always. 

Baning. The Tortoise. 

Baning, Baning, Baning. 
Tortoise, Tortoise, Tortoise ! 

Tih baning juntul-juntul, 

T'/ic-fore-paws (///. hands) c/-/A<r-Tortoise are bent-out-sideways, 

Jong baning patul-patul.^ 

,-/«</-Mc-hind-paws (lit. feet) of-the Tortoise are shaped like adzes. 

Koi baning kclang-kClup. 

The head of the Tortoise shoots-in-and-out (?). 

Blakang baning bagc batu. 

7"A£-back <7/"-M6r-Tortoise is like a rock, 

Hitam-leh gres baning, 

And black is M^r-heart ■* ofthe-'Yo\\.d\%&, 

Hijau-leh 'p^du' •' baning. 
.^//(/-green-too is /Ac'-bile ^-M^-Tortoise. 

Vek, ai, Mamat Solong, 

O brother, Mamat /A^- Firstborn, 

Gul hau, gul ding blau. 

Take_j'^«/- knife, take j^z^r bamboo blowpipe. 

Gul tohok chok-leh (ha)-meri. 

Take your spear and walk through M^-forest. 

Tclong baning, nakeh ti"il. 

Search-for ^'^^-Tortoise, those are its footprints. 

Nakeh teh nachar baning, 

Here is //zf-ground where feeds ///^-Tortoise, 

Lembong bengkong (?) nachar baning. 
0«-shoots of-the-^' chemeh " feeds /^<f-Tortoise. 

1 The rainbow's foot. turned sideways, unlike the " labi- 

2 "Esok jemah" explained as= labi." According to Ridley, the paws 
"nisam jaman " or " nisam alo," lit. of the " labi - labi " {7'rionyx) are 
to-morrow (" besok ") and further. straight, whilst those of the " baning " 

' The "baning" or land - tortoise ( 7>5/Wi5> twjj) are turned sideways, 
was described to me as running on the ^ Liver, 

joints of its paws, with its flappers ^ Mai. " hempedu " = bile. 

654 APPENDIX 

Dah kayi' Mamat Solong. 

You have seen it, Maniat the Firstborn. 

Dah kayi' dalam treng [d'long].^ 

Yoii have see« it, among the buttress<?x. 

Dah bongkar Mamat Solong. 

Now you have drivew-ZZ-out, Maniat the Firstborn. 

Klekleh ha-dong Mamat Solong. 

Carry it then homewards, Mamat the Firstborn. 

Mamat Solong bentC-leh baning. 

Mamat the Eldest-born, cut-up the Tortoise. 

Chinchang - halus biar machin. 
Chop-//-up small and let // be-cooked. 

Dah machin hidang jambar. 

When it is cookie/ serve it on /(fa/-plates. 

Jon nachar muntet mulih. 
Give /<7-eat a little to each-one. 

Oi Mamat Solong, oi Mamat Alang. 

Ho, Mamat Firstborn ; ho Mamat Third-born, 

Bihi u'ut, rentak bale. 

When ^oxg'td is your belly, drum-upon the Hallyf^wr. 

fCatak. 

Kok, kok, kok, bunyi' rengkong. 

* Croak, croak, croak ' is the cry of the Toad. 

Chemrap-leh bunyl' rengkong tai. 

Loud was ///f-croaking ^-Mtr-toad just-now. 

Rengkong kara' di-pangkal d'long. 
7%<r-Toad that dwells a.i-the-{ooi of-X.K^s. 

Rengkong kara' di-hulu Langat, 
The-Toad that dwelli on-/-4^-upper Langat, 

Jangkar huhi jangkar hilir. 

Jumping upstream awt/ jumping downstream. 

U'ut ramping^ nakch rengkong. 

With the waist so slender, that is ///t-Toad. 

Bidang-leh dada' rengkong. 
Broad-indeed is the chest of-the-Tosni. 

Chelap^-leh met rengkong. 
GoggUng-indeed are the-eyes of-the-Toad. 

Katok-leh-" koi rengkong. 

And j//(7;-//j'-tapering is the-head of-the-Toad. 

Cherpe-leh jare" rengkong. 
Crumpled-indeed are M^-fingers o/-t/ie-Toad. 

II 

1 "Treng" = Mal. "jangkar kayu," ^ F./. "u'ut hat" = Mal. " ping- 

or "treng d'long" (also = "Triang"(?), gang ramping," i.e. small or wasp- 

whence " Triang " in S. Ujong). waisted, like the fish-trap, f.v. 

■^ Mai. " chinchang " = Bes. " kS- ^ = Mai. " tembil," protruding, 

tong" or "chetong." •' = Mai. " renchong pdurut." 

TEXT OF BESTS I SONGS 655 

Lidun-leh jong rengkong. 

And splay tv/- indeed a7-e the feet of- 1 he -Toa.i\. 

Klochot i-leh chclon rengkong. 
Kough-indeed is M^-back of-the-To2^A. 

Kret rengkong getah bul-dah. 

And the body of the Toad exudes poison.-' 

Katak rengkong nachar lipan. 

Foi- the Toad rengkong feeds-upon centipedes. 

Katak rengkong nachar kala'. 

7y;i;-Toad rengkong feeds-upon scorpions. 

Katak rengkong gcloyn batu'. 
The-To3.A rengkong swallows gravel. 

Odo nachar Katak rengkong. 
Do-not then eat the-Toa.d. rengkong. 

Bul-leh nachar Katak rengkong. 
Poisonous /(7-eat is the-Tozd rengkong. 

Gul hau-he, kabong^ rengkong. 

Take then your knife, a«(f chop-at tlie-Toad. 

Hi ■* chok he odo gli. 

.^he walks-off you do-not /'^-frightened. 

Tetkala' jaman esok jemah, 

From the time of-old, to-morrow and after, 

Tinggal gaya' tingal jaman, 

May there remain this function, may there remain this memorial, 

Tingal pleh jadi. 

Alay it remain that fruits-i$6' plentiful. 

Lajig. The Kite.^ 

Sek sek leau ^ bunyi' lang. 

' Sek sek leau,' is the cry of the kite. 

Lang berblga' atas gunong. 

The kite that soars above the crags. 

Lang berklambau atas awan. 

The kite that swoops above tlie clouds. 

Sarang lang di-lembong jelotong. 

The nest of the kite is in the branches of the jelotong. 

Sarang lang di-lembong kempas. 

The nest of the kite is in the branch^j of the kempas. 

'Nak beranak '' di-lembong kempas. 

For-generations it has beeti in /"/itr-branches of-tke kempas. 

Sudah sampei sakit anak, 

And when has arriveoT the sickness of its children, 

1 " Klochot " = Mai. "bcrkrutu." = Mai. "dia " (the toad). 

2 Has slime that is poisonous. ^ =Kite, probably a_/fi-/^/«c^-kite,z'.^. 

3 V.l. "kapong,"but v. next line, ^> F./. " kesek-kleau " = /?V. " mew- 
the toad is not killed. mew." 

* Here distinctly explained to me as " == Mai. " Anak-beranak. " 

656 APPENDIX 

Tinggi rendah layak lang, 
High ajid low soar^ the kite, 

Higap siakap jon kenon-keh, 

And catchf^ the siakap-fish to give ils-young-ones, 

Higap tijau jon kenon-keh. 

And catch^j snakes to give to its young-ones. 

Lalu lang ka-Batu Lalau. 
Pass^j- the kite to Batu Lalau. 

Lalu lang ka-Bukit Tingi. 
Pass^x the kite to Bukit Tingi. 

Lalu lang ka-Batu Putih. 
Pass^5 the kite to Batu Putih. 

Lalu lang ka-Batu Ptrhambang. 
Pass^^ the kite to Batu Pcrhambang. 

Sampei Perhambang chelui ha-teh 

On reach/'«^ Perhambang it descends to earth 

Telong chinduai atas gunong. 

To seek-for the love-plant upon the mountains. 

Kagar berubat kenon-keh. 

// wants to cure //5-young-ones-yonder. 

Kom chinduai di-atas gunong, 

When one getJ the love-plant upon the mountains, 

Rindu bayang ' dalam badan. 

Yearning and longing are within the body. 

Chinduai lang ka'an ha-dong. 

The love-plant of the kite bear it homewards, 

Biar lem dalam gres. 

Let it vtake one well at heart. 

Lek lem-lem [cheliau] ^ kfinon lang-keh. 
Rise-up warily, watch the young of the kite. 

Gres oyn hukah nene'. 

This heart ^mine is pleasured greatly. 

Oyn sro telong ubat. 

I know how to search-for simples. 

Odo bayang odo lengah. 

Do-not then yearn and do-not dally. 

Odo lengah di-kampong bunga'. 
Do-not dally in ///t'-Garden <?/-Flowers, 

Chokleh ka-kampong^ buah. 

But proceed to-M^-Garden ^-Fruits, 

Tingalkan tetkala' * jaman. 

And let there remain, from-the-time of-old, 

' For "bayang" in this sense, cp. seems most probable ; some word seems 

" sayang "" (?). Or does it = " of to have dropped out. 

spirit"? ^ Usually " pulau "=" island." 

2 Sense not quite clear, but above ■• Better "ta'kala." 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 657 

Utang kasih kenon lang-keh, 

A debt (?/" affection 1 to the young of the kite, 

Nakeh tanda' niah bCranak. 

That is ///£-sign (j/'-women child-bearing. 

Hay am (or ^* De/uV ") mci-i. The Jungle-fowl. 

Nang chenangkas bunyi' dena'. 

' Nang chenangkas ' - is the cry of the jungie-fovvl. 

Dena' meri di-sematang.-' 

Fowl of the jungle upon the rising-ground. 

Nakeh gelar dena' putih, 

That is the name <7/^M(f jungle-fowl white,' 

Nakeh gelar dena' pikat, 

That is the name of the fowl " decoy," 

Jebah Malayu kabeh rachek. 

Wherewith foreigners Malay set their snares. 

Jebah Malayu bawa' pikat. 

Foreigner j' Malay carry it for decoy iitg. 

Thayt-leh mai dena' putih. 

Fly-then hither, 0 jungle-fowl white. 

Lawan ngot dena' henom. 

Resist hi/H cannot jungle-fowl so many. 

Dah tuhah dena' putih. 

He is their chief, the jungle-cock white. 

Dena' putih thayt ^ ha-dong-keh. 

T'/itf jungle-fowl white flies homeward-yonder. 

Nang chenangkis-leh dena' tai. 

' Nang chenangkis ' was the cry of the jungle-fowl just-now. 

Dengar chakap temai-temai. 
Listen-to the talk ^days-gone-by. 

Esok jemah. 

To-morrow and after, etc. 

Kliiang {Hampet).^ The Flyingfox. 

Pe . . . lompe," lompe, thayt hampet. 
Flip-flap, flip-flap, flies the flying-fox. 

Nakeh bunyi' tliayt hampet. 

That is the sound of the iiyitig of the flying-fo.\. 

^ I.e. a debt of gratitude. ated "t." The usual sounds of " th," 

2 = Cackle, cackle. as in "this" and "thick," do not occur 

^ Variant for "pematang." at all in Besisi. 

* I.e. sacred. ** Also "hapet" and "sapet." The 

^ Or"tohyt." I think that "thayt " fullest form would perhaps be" sampet." 

is nearer the actual pronunciation, as ^ =Mal. " berkepah-kepah," to use 

given in the Flying-fox song. The the wings (or rather the noise made in 

"th" in this case is simply the aspir- doing so). 

VOL. I 2 U 

658 APPENDIX 

Hanipet thayt dari sebrang. 

The flying-fox that fliej from ovcx-seas. 

Hampet tha>"t meri banglang.^ 

The flying-fox that ^\qs from the jungle side. 

Hampet tha>'t dari pulau.^ 

The flying-fox that fliej from the islets. 

Hampet thayt dari selat. 

The flying-fox that fliej from the straits. 

Hampet mai nachar bunga'.^ 

The flying-fox that comes to eat the fruit-buds. 

Telong pleh chok hi. 

To seek -for fruit goes he. 

Hampet thaJ't dah ka-hulu'. 

The flying-fox that flown has to the upper-wa/^rj. 

Hampet ihaJt dah ka-hilir.^ 

The flying-fox that flown has downstream.'^ 

Sieng-mayeng ^ bangsa' hampet. 

Sundry and divers are the tribes ^flying-foxes. 

Ham])et nachar pleh buan. 

The flying-fox that eats the fruit of the rambutan. 

Hampet nachar pleh duku'. 

The flying-fox that eats the fruit of the duku. 

Hampet nachar pleh diyan. 

The flying-fox that eats the fruit of the durian. 

Sibang-sibut ^ sayap hampet. 
Flap-flap ^i) the wings of the flying-fox. 

Kilat-kilau sayap hampet. 

Flash-flash go the wings of the flying-fox. 

Nakeh gelar bilang hampet. 

That is-calied * the tale ^" ///^-flying-fox. 

Gul ding blau klau bunga'.^ 

Take_)'tf«r bamboo blowpipe, scored with patterns. 

Gul blau nalbh hampet. 

Take your blowpipe and shoot the flying-fox. 

'L6 lekuis,^** kom domok dah. 
Shoot, and it sticks, hit the dart has. 

Yek ai ! chelui " hampet. 

Brother, oho ! descends M^-flying-fox. 

1 =Mal. " deri seblah utan." ^ Lit. name. 

'^ "Pulau" = Bes. "po'hong" (?= » I take "klau" to be = Mai. 

Mai. "tokong"). " kclar," /.<;. "scored" or "incised," 

3 Bats (and flying -foxes) are very as distinguishing the indigenous (usual) 

fond of eating the flower-buds of fruit- type of decorated blow-gun from " ding 

trees. — Ridley. klampenai," the undecorated Kuanlan 

* /.<;. tothe "kuala" (Mai. "kuala" or Borneo type. But v. the Wa'wa' 

= Bes. " temba' "). ?,ox\<g [supra). 

" Lit. to the estuary. 1** Or "lekuys." 

•5 =Mal. " masing-masing." " ? " Cheliau " =see. 

" =Mal. " angkap-angkap." 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 659 

Jibang-jibuk^ bedok dah hampet. 

Plimp-plump fallen has //^^-flying-fox. 

Kuak-kuak kuh dah hampet. 
Retch-retch, vomited has the flying-fox. 

Klek-leh ha-dong, layu hampet. 

Carry-then him homewards, and scorch the flying-fox. 

Dah layu bente hampet 'nong, 

When you have scorched him, quarter the flying-fox yonder, 

Temong mah dalam bale. 

And call the people within the Hall. 

Jon nachar adik kakak. 

Give food to our sisters-young sisters-old. 

Jon nachar kadui hedet. 

Give food to both great and small. 

Jon nachar muntSt mulih. 
Give food a little to each-one. 

Bihi u'ut lek-leh jung, 

WJien gorged is your belly, rise-up-then ou your feet, 

Mamat Solong, Solong vSidai, 
Mamat the Firstborn, Firstborn Sidai, 

Chok beh jo'oh he o'oi ! ^ 

Go-forth and brew drink, you there, hullo ! 

Rentak bale, bale panjang. 

Drum-upon the ¥ia.U-J?oor, the Hall that is long. 

Rentak bale, bale bSsar. 

Drum-upon the Hall-Jioor, the Hall that is broad. 

Biar hukah dalam bale. 

And make merrj- within the Hall. 

Pleh jadi bage pleh. 

Fruit is-pleritiful as fruit (can be ?). 

Pleh jadi tihap are'. 

P'ruit is-plentiful every day. 

Pleh jadi tihap bulan. 

Fruit is-plentiful every month. 

Pleh jadi tihap tahun. 
Fruit is-plentiful every year. 

Tahun nakeh tahun reja',^ 

A year like that is a year ^plenty (?). 

Pleh . . . Pleh, Pleh, Pleh. 
Fruit . . . Fruit, Fruit, Fruit. 

1 =Mal. " chebak-chsbak." 3 -];]-,£ meaning of " reja' " was ex- 

" The proper reading here may be plained to me as — " kabeh lebeh," to 

" he se-oi (se'oi) " — '■' do you chant" " make more." It may stand for Mai. 

or "sing," especially as chanting always " kreja '' = " work." 

accompanied the drinking. 

66o APPENDIX 

Kledanscy The Kkdattz Fruit. 

Gul hau iMamat Solong. 

Take your knife, Mamat the Firstborn. 

Ta'oyn ^ ena' ^ Solong. 
Orders j'o«, Aunt Solong. 

Ta'oyn ena' Tengah. 
Orders yoti. Aunt Tengah. 

Kagar nachar pleh kledang. 

Who want to-eat the4x\x\\. o/"-//<£- Kledang. 

Yal-leh Mamat Solong. 
Climb-up-then, Mamat Mt'-Firstborn. 

Glu-glai* pleh kledang. 

Swaying and waving a;r the fruits of the Kledang. 

But^'-leh kenon, muntet mulih. 
Pick-M^w-up-then, children, a-little each of yott. 

Dah emboyn '' pleh kledang. 

They are full-ripe, the fruits of the Kledang. 

'An ha-dong pleh klcdang-ha. 

Bear homewards the fruits of the Kledang-yon. 

Kawin ha-dong pleh kledang. 

Throw-down at-home the fruits of the Kledang. 

Mai-leh yek, ibah, wo, ninik. 

Hither-then, grandfathers," brothers-in-law, fathers, great-grandfathers. 

Mai gahu' kenon kakak adik. 

Hither aunts,* children, elder-sisters and younger. 

He nachar pleh kledang. 

Do you feed-upon the fruits of the Kledang. 

Kledang luchar® odo punan. 

When the Kledang /r«;V is soft, go not a-craving. 

Kledang dCndang i" odo punan. 

Even for the Kledang crow-black go not a-craving. 

Yek ai ! " Mamat Solong, 

Brother, oho ! Mamat the Firstborn, 

Tcmong mah nyom mai ha-dong-ki. 

Summon the people young to come to-hut-that. 

Mah nyom jo'oh dalam bale. 

Let the people young drink in the Hall. 

Nakeh tandii' pleh h^nom. 

That is the sign that fruit -is plentiful. 

1 Artocarpus lancicef alius , Ridley. ^ Brothers (?). 

2 =Mal. "suroh." " Paternal (.?). 

3 = Mai. " Mak sudara." " = Mai. " Ranum," over-ripe ; cp. 
•* Explained as = waving about when " luchar-Iuchar " in Elephant song. 

poked with the fruit-pole (" melimpei- '•* The crow-black Kledang is an 

limpei dengan kayu di-jolok "). inferior variety. Also — " Kl. babi." 

5 F./. "mut" = Mal. "pungut." " V.l. " Lek ai ! " Rise up, 

« =Mal. " Penoh." ho ! 

1 

TEXT OF B ESI SI SONGS 66 1 

Plenom diyan, henom buan. 

Plenteous are the Durians, plenteous the Rambutans. 

Henom rambai, henom pelasan. 

Plenteous the Rambai, plenteous the Pulasan. 

Henom tampoi, henom kundang. 

Plenteous the Tampoi, plenteous the Kundang. 

Henom-leh pleh nadoyt. 
Plenteous-indeed fruits all. 

Odo mungkir sambilan tahun. 
Let-not them fail /or nine years. 

r/eh Rcdany The Redan Fruit. 

Gul hau Mamat Solong. 

Take your knife, Mamat the Firstborn. 

Yal long pleh, pleh redan. 

Climb the tree <?/" fruit, the fruit of the Redan. 

Dahan tutor broyt ha-teh. 

The branches lop and pass to-Z/z^-ground. 

Gul-leh nadoyt pleh redan-ki. 

Take-then every-one of the fruits ^Redan-yon. 

But-leh pleh redan-ki. 

Pick-up-then the fruit ^'Redan-yon. 

Dah mut ^ 'an ha-dong-he. 

When you have picked them up, bear them to-hut-your. 
Jambar kachar mah henom. 
Serve them up as iooA for people many. 
Kadui hedet nachar pleh redan. 
For big and little to-eat the fruits of the Redan. 
Hadat mah nyom nachar redan. 
// is the custom ^people young to-eat the Redan. 
Odd punan dalam bale. 
Do-not go a-craving in the Hall. 
U'ut he dah bihi. 
When belly your is gorged, 

Lek menari Mamat Solong. 

Rise a7id dance, Mamat the Firstborn. 

Lek jo'oh dalam bale. 

Rise and drink in the Hall. 

Biar hukah mah henom. 
Make meriy people many. 

Kenon-kenon odo gli. 
Children-children, do-not be-startled. 

^ A very sour, wild, hairless rambutan. — Ridley. 
2 "Mut," v.l. "ka-but." 

662 APPENDIX 

Kabau. l^he Kahaii Fruit. 

Yam kabau lang-yamJ 

Bends the Kabau, and h&r^d.s- about. 

Keau-plakeau ^ batang kabau. 
Waves-to-and-fro ^ the stem of the Kabau. 

Putih panau antok * kabau. 

White awaf mottled is the bark of the Kabau. 

Antok kabau (jadi) hau-chandong.^ 

Bark of the Kabau (becomes) chopping-knifo (?). 

Tegot rhak jadi kumbang.^ 

Break its branch^ become borer-bee (?). 

BiJdok daun jadi layang.^ 

Fall its leaves become swallow (?). 

Bedcik bunga' tabor mclukut.* 

FalU its blossom like ■s.CA.X.X.^xed rice-meal. 

Btdok bunga' g^mar panas." 

Fall J its blossom like rain of/zr/w^-sunshine. '" 

Odo nachar pleh kabau. 

Do-not eat the fruit of the Kabau. 

Nachar pleh kabau bul-leh. 

If you eat the fruit of the Kabau you will iJ^^'poisoned-indeed.'^ 

Odo yong kapada' bilang. 
Do-not forget this in-the telling. '- 

Bilang kabau esok j6mah. 

Telling of the Kabau to-morrow aud for-ever. 

Lalu ka-bale jo'oh bale. 

Pass to M^-Hall and drink '^ in the Hall. 

Gerdah-gerdah jo'oh bale. 
Creak-creak ! ive drink in the Hall. 

Bale panjang, bale bcsar 

The Hall that is long, the Hall that is broad. 

1 " Yam " was explained as =Mal. broken (or brittle?) the borer -bee 
" mclentur" (" to sway ") and " lang- develops or multiplies ("jadi"). Orcan 
yam" as = Mai. "mdlempei." Prob- it mean when the branches are broken, 
ably they are the same word. it swells up ("kembang") round the 

2 " KJau - plakeau " was also ex- break, as many trees do ? 

plained as = " melentur,' but it is ob- " Possibly in allusion to some belief 

viously onomatopoeic and hence should connecting swallows with the leaves, 

perhaps rather be rendered "creak- But "layang" may also = " mela- 

creak" (the noise made by the swaying). vang," to flutter (Bes. " tohyt "'). 

3 = Creaks (?). * = " Wen punai " in Besisi." 

4 ="Lantok" (Mai. "kulit"). ^ f/;/. "hayu" = Mal. " hangat," 
6 I can make no sense of this, unless which is " bhasa halus," or "polite," 

it is the handle of the chopper that is for " hayong " in the "bhasa kasar " 

referred to, as made from the bark. {i.e. the "vulgar speech"). 

" I can make nothing of this. "Kum- i" ^27_ heat, or hot. " Z?V. Vomit, 

bang'' is the borer-bee. If right, it ^^ Or "what is told you." 

may mean that where its branches are '^ Make merry. 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 663 

Mah nyom kreja' bale. 

People young work in the Hall. 

Lemol kedol kreja' bale. 

Men and women work in the Hall. 

Nakeh hukah mah henom. 
That like people many. 

Tahun jadi, jadi pleh. 

May it be a year plenteous, ivlien plenteous are fruits. 

Nachar pleh, pleh buan. 

Eat we fruits, the frait of the Rambutan. 

Pleh manggis, pleh diyan. 

Fruit of the Mangostin, fruit of the Durian. 

Nachar pleh kadui hedet. 
Eat zve fruit great ««;/ small. 

Nachar pleh adik kakak. 

Eat we fruit, younger-sisters and elder. 

Hukah-leh Mamat Solong. 
Make-merry-then, Mamat the Firstborn. 

Pleh jadi tihap tahun. 

May fruit be plenteous everj' year. 

Gabang. The Gabang Fruit 

He 1 gul hau Mamat Solong. 

Do you take knife Mamat the Firstborn. 

Gul hau, katoyt pleh gabang. 

Take knife, and lop-off the-itmi of -the gabang. 

Pleh gabang proh ha-teh. 

Fruit of-the-g2.h2,x\g that falls to-ground. 

Katoyt raweh,^ raweh berjihai. 

Lop-off the twigs, the twigs that wave-round-and-round. 

Katoyt he dahan tengah. 

Lop-off you the branches midmost. 

Katoyt he broyt ha-teh. 

Lop-off you and slip-down ^ to-ground. 

Kita' pungut pleh gabang. 

We collect the-knit of-the-gzhs.r\g. 

'On-leh jaras ambong. 

Bear-then * the basket, and the back-basket. 

Ka'an ha-dong pleh gabang-ha. 

Bear them homewards, the fruits ^-gabang-this. 

Temong-leh mah henom, 
Call-then people many, 

Jon nachar muntet mulih. 

And give to-eat a-little /^^-eveiyone. 

1 V.l. "hi." "ranting"). " Berjihai "= "berkirei." 

2 " Raweh " (Bes.) = twigs (Mai. ^ ZzV. pass. ■»? Put them (into). 

664 APPENDIX 

Dah nachar pleh gabang-nong, 

When yotc have eaten the fruits of the gabang-there, 

Lek-leh he Mamat Solong, 

Rise-up then, you, Mamat ^-4£- Firstborn, 

Jo'oh-leh dalam bale. 

^Hof make-merrj'-with-drinking within the-YiiW. 

Nakeh hadat datoh-he, 

That -was the custom ^grandfathers-your, 

Mah nyom kabeh bale. 

For people little to-work-in M^-IIall. 

Hukah-leh mah lemol, 
/"ij-please the men-folk,* 

Mah kedol dalam bale. 

And the women-folk within ///t'-Iiall. 

Mai-leh 'an tsuk joliing. 
Come-hither-then bring _yo«;- hair long. 

'An hikat lesoi tsuk-he. 

Take comb smoothen hair-your. 

Biar lem-lem tsuk-he. 

Let it be good-good - hair your. 

Biar cheliau mah lemol. 
Let see // the men-folk. 

Gul piok gul pren. 
Take ;vVt^-pot take rice. 

Machin pren nachar mah honom. 
Cook rice as food /or people many. 

Gul banga' beh jumak. 

Take pan aw^make cooked-meats. 

Nakeh kabeh mah kedol. 

That is done 6y the women-folk. 

Nachar-leh he ha-pren. 
Eat-then you of the rice. 

Nachar hi odo lewar.^ 

Eat j£?z<-there, do-not *5i?-slow. 

U'ut bihi jetek-k5'. 

When your belly is full, sleep also. 

Bertani tcnnng. The Solitary Bertavi-palnt. 

Bertam tenung di-Langkap Berjunte.'* 
7',4if-Bertam solitary at Langkap Berjuntei. 

Bertam tenung di-hulu Langat. 
T'j^^-Bertam solitary in Ulu Langat. 

^ Lit. like-«V-indeed folk-men. palm, the name of a place on the upper 

^ I.e. beautiful. Langat, which was described to me by 

^ " Lewar " = Mai. " lengah," = the Besisiasanold burying-placeof their 

"loiter " or "dally." "Ha"="this." ancestors. "Tenung" was explained 

* L.B. =the overhanging Langkap- as = Mai. " tunggal," "solitary." 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 665 

Hang menungkap ^ pleh bertam. 

? Bend-over-outwards the-h\\\X% ^/-/'/ie-Bertani. 

Kita' gul ka'an ha-dong. 

We take and bear homewards. 

Blah jon nachar muntet mulih. 

When split, give to-t^X. a little to everyone. 

Pleh bertam esok jemah. 

Fruit ^-//^^- Bertam to-morrow a7id always. 

Bertam tenung atas gunong. 
77/^-Bertam solitary upon //^.f-crags. 

Nakeh tanda' pleh jadi. 

That is the sign that Fruit -will be plentiful. 

Nakeh tanda' tahun reja'. 

That is the-%\^x^ of-a-yt2ir of plenty. 

Hukah nadoyt kenon henom-keh. 
Make-merry all children many-that. 

Hukah doyt mah di-bale. 
Make-merry all people in-ZA^-Hall. 

Nachar doyt bihi u'ut-leh. 

Eat them up utterly till gorged is your belly-indeed. 

Lek ai ! ^ Mamat Alang, 

Rise up, ho ! Mamat //id'-Second-born, 

Mayin jo'oh dalam bale. 
Make-jo«-merry-with drinking within M^-Hall. 

Bale panjang, bale besar. 

The-Usdl that is long, M^-Hall that is broad. 

Temong mah mayin tari. 

Call the people to-make-merry with dancing. 

Biar sro mayin jo'oh. 

Let them know we are making-merry-with drinking. 

Nakeh tahun henom-leh pleh. 

That is a year ^abundant-indeed fruit. 

Merbau? The Merbau Tree. 

Plak-plau tebang merbau. 
Crash-crash we fell the merbau. 

Merbau gadeng, merbau humbut. 

The merbau ivoiy-white, the merbau of the palm-cabbage. 

Merbau kunyet kita' 'nak bahan. 

The merbau of turmeric we are-going-to split-up. 

Oi tukang chentong * tebang merbau. 

Ho, Maker of Back-baskets, fell the merbau. 

1 The exact meaning of "hang Afzelia coriacea — a sea - shore 
menungkap " is not clear. variety. The second is unidentified 

2 F./. "Yek ai" ? O brother. at present. —Ridley. The^ " mer- 

3 Three kinds of " merbau " are bau," in Besisi, is called " apel," or 
here mentioned. The first is probably " a-pell." 

Afzelia Palembanica, and the third ^ " Chentong " may either be 

666 APPENDIX 

Tingi jelepak tumbang merbau. 
Loftily rocks (?) and falls the merbau. 

Bavva' pahat, bawa' rimbas. 
Bring chisel, bring planing-adze. 

Dah bahan siap lante. 

Now you have split it, make-ready the grating. 

Siap dandan siap kurong. 

Make-ready a gallery, make-ready a deckhouse. 

Siap dayong siap kajang. 
Make-ready oars, make-ready awning. 

Muat gharu muat lilin. 
Load eaglewood, load wax. 

Ka'on kemiyan, muat damar. 
Load benzoin, load resin. 

Muat getah getah taban. 
Load gutta, gutta taban. 

Tegak ^ tihang blayar ha-bawau. 
Set up yoiir mast and sail \.o-the sea. 

Blayar menuju bawau Mambang.^ 

Sail pointing-towards the sea of the_ Mambang. 

Labo' sauh, yal ha-teh. 

Drop j'(7«r anchor, a;/(/ climb to-land. 

Tukar barang di-dong-naliL 
Barter goods at the houses here. 

Pahu' menuju negri Malaka'. 

Oiir boat points to the land of Malacca. 

Laboh sauh di-negri Malaka', 

We let-fall our anchor off the land'*?/ Malacca, 

Tukar lilin tukar damar. 
And barter our wax, barter our resin. 
Tukar getah ^ tukar kemiyan. 
Barter our gutta, barter our benzoin. 

Ka'on'' bras ka'oii garam. 

And load up with husked-rice, Xoz-A-up-with salt. 

Pahu menuju ka-negri kita'.^ 

Otir boat points to-land of o\\x%. 

Laboh sauh di-negri kita', 

Let-fall our anchor at-land ^ours, 

Temong kawan kadui hedet, 

A)id call our comrades great and small, 

the man's name, or taken with ^ There are many kinds of " getah "- 

" tukang " it may = Basket - maker — producing trees in the country, 

probably the latter. "Chentong" or "Getah taban," for instance = gutta- 

"scntong" is the back-basket used for percha, and "getah susu " or "getah 

carrying jungle -produce among these grip " = caoutchouc, 

tribes. * " Ka'on " = Mai. "muat." 

1 =Bes. " lek tihang." »"Ka-ntgri kita"' = Bes. " ha - 

2 Doubtless a place-name of this dung he-pape '." 
region. Mai. " Mambang" = "Deity." 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 667 

Ka'an barang ka-rumah kita', 

And carry our goods to house ^ours, 

Jon barang muntet mulih. 

Atid give of tlie goods a-little to everyone. 

Piilai.^ The Cork-tree. 

Pulai 2 alai kik-kik-kik. 

The Pulai waves (?) ' creak-creak-creak ' (?). 

Pangkal sengit tiup ^ angin. 

Its base rocks with-the-Wo^iiwg wind. 

Rendang rampak berjurei* 

Spreading and thick-leaved and dangling 

Daun pulai akar pulai. 

Are the leaves of the Pulai, the roots of the Pulai (?). 

Jangkar rentang jangkar purus,*"' 

Roots that penetrate, roots on-the-surface, 

Jangkar purus naga mengunjam. 

Its roots o«-/.^f-surface that are like Dragons contending. 

Baku' pulai susu dara'." 

The buds of the pulai are like the nipples of a virgin. 

Daun pulai getah susu. 

The leaves of the pulai have sap like milk. 

Batang pulai putih panau.'^ 

The stem of the Pulai is gray a«<f mottled. 

Lembong * simpulan lembong pulai. 

Like the peak of a head-cloth are the shoots of the Pulai. 

Sanggul (di) hujong'-^ lembong pulai. 

Like scroll- work finial ai-e the shoots of the Pulai. 

Tingi chakih ^'^ poko' pulai. 

High are the buttresses of the tree Pulai. 

Bedok bunga' tabor 'lukut. 

Falls its blossom like scattered rice-ends. 

Bedok bunga' hujan rinyei.^^ 

Falls its blossom like rain drizzling. 

1 Alstonia scholaris, Ridley. dragons," and which form the Mai. sub- 

2 =;Bes. "tingkur." stitute for cork, being used largely for 

3 =Bes. "ka'ahbua'." fishing-floats. 

•* " Berjurei," perhaps from its long •» "Susu dara'" = Bes. " tuh mah 

pendulous fruit, or from its aerial roots nyoni." 

or streamers. " Sengit " = Bes. "send- " "Panau" = Bes. "bechang"; its 

ing." " Rampak " = Bes. "jelakah " bark is gray (Ridley.) In Besisi prose 

— ex. "jelakah rhak tengko'-keh." this sentence would run " bechang-leh 

^ Prob. = penetrate (the ground) as lantok long tengko'-ke." 
distinct from its streamers. Cp. Mai. * = Mai. " puchok sapu - tan- 
" ta' rentang peluru di'lalang." "Purus" gan," i.e. "shoot" or "peak." 
was explained as = Mai. " mempulor," ^ I.e. like a piece of terminal scroll- 
referring to the light-wood root-clumps work such as is used in Malay carvings, 
that project above the surface of the ^'^ = Mai. "banir." 
soil under the tree "like struggling ^^ = Bes. " gemar banchi." 

668 APPENDIX 

Nakeh gelar hadat pulai. 

That is called the custom of the Pulai-tree. 

Gul biong kagah pulai. 

Takcj'our hatchet am/ fell /he Pulai-tree. 

Beh pahu' kayuh Malaka'. 

Make a canoe and paddle to-Malacca. 

Jual niyu dagang barang. 

Sell coconuts, barter goods. 

Bawa' pulang sampan pulai. 

Take home }'our canoe o/-Fa\ai-2iiood. 

Tarek ka-darat odo lek. 

Pull-?V-up on-to-M(j-shore, do-not /et it ,^<?/-old. 

Jual ka-China' mui ratus ringit.' 

Sell it to-Z/^f-Chineseyb/- one hundred dollars. 

Ltikah. The fish-trap 

Ting ting hit 2 lukah ginting, 

" Ting ting hUt " is ///^r-fish-trap small-waisted, 

Lukah ginting kabeh Mamat Alang. 

Fish-trap small-waisted, made-by Mamat ///^-Second-born. 

Tahan-leh dooh-gendeh-ki. 
Set-zV-then /w-ZZ/^-river-there. 

Ka-lep kah, kah btrisi ketong.^ 
Enter it fish, fish covered-with scales. 

Kah henom kah bage. 
Fish many, fish various. 

Kah scbarau,* kah tapah. 
7y«^-fish Sebarau, the-dsh Tapah. 

Kah 'ruan, kah bujor. 
77;i?-fish Aruan, the-fish Bujor. 

Kah lembat, kah puyu'. 

7'//c-fish Lembat, the-fish Pepuyuh. 

Nakeh lep lukah ginting. 

Those enter /Ae-fish-trap small-waisted. 

Ka'an ha-dong kawin ha-dong. 

Bear the/n homeward and throw them down-in-///i;-hut. 

Siang-leh kah henom. 
Slice-up-then fish many. 

' " Ringgit." In Besisi the word 3 " Ketong " = scales (of fish). 

" ting" is sometimes used for " dollar." * Mai. "ikan aruan " = "kah bakap" 

Probably it is onomatopoeic for silver (Besisi), 

coins in general. Cp. our own "chink." "ikan bujor "=" kah bun- 

N.B. The small dug-out used by the tok " (i.e. round fish), 

Besisi is called by them "pahu jong- "ikan lembat " = " kah da- 

kong." ^ gon," 

2 " H&t " = small-waisted like a " ikan pJpuyuh " = " kah 

wasp, hour-glass-shaped. cheret." 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 669 

Beh jumah machin lem-lem.i 

Make gravy and cook very-carefully. 

Dah machin temong kawan. 

When yon have cooked thcni call your comrades. 

Jon nachar muntet mulih. 
Give to-eat a-little /<?-everyone. 

Bihi u'ut nachar kah-nong.^ 

When gorged is your belly luith eating fish-those. 

Lek-leh ai, Mamat Solong. 
Rise-up-then, ho ! Mamat MiS-Firstborn. 

Rentak bale, bale panjang. 

Drum-upon the-W^a\\-Jioor, M^-Hall that is long. 

Rentak bale bale besar. 

Drum-on the-Yi2iS\-floor, the-WzW that is broad.' 

Hukah cheliau adik kakak. 

They like to look-on, little-sisters and elder-sisters. 

Nakeh bangsa' lukah ginting, 

That is Md'-way-of ///£-lish-trap small-waisted. 

Hwn. Children's Bathing Song. 

Hum mah hddet, hum 'gi. 
Bathe people little, bathe-go. 

Biar sejuk,^ odo panas. 
Let be cool do-not fe-hot. 

Biar chuchi' kret-he. 
Let be clean body-your. 

Gosok * lem-lem kret-he. 
Rub very-carefully body-your. 

Odo daki' kret-he. 

Do-not leave impurities on body-your. 

Yut ha-dong gul hikat. 

Return homewards and take yotir comb. 

Gul hikat, hikat tsuk-he. 

Take your comb and comb hair-your. 

Biar lichau, biar linyang. 

Let it-be smooth, let it be glossy. 

Hadat hum mah hedet. 

Such is the-z\xi\.oxa. /o-bathe people little. 

Mah nyom chok ha-bale. 

People young proceed to-Me-Hall. 

Gerdak-gerdak bunyi' bale, 

' Creak-creak ' is the-noise of the Hall, 

* Lit. well-well. Mai. "panas" = Bes. " rayong " 

'^ Bes. " nong " = " hinong " — (of the body, as well as of the sun, 

Mai. "tadi." etc.). 

3 Mai. "sejuk"=Bes. " teket " ; ■* .Mai. " Gosok " = Bes. " gosoyt." 

670 APPENDIX 

Bale panjang bale besar. 

T/ie-lia.\\ that is long, tAe-HaW that is broad. 

Mah ktdol hukah kayi'. 

Women-folk like to-see. 

Mah nyom dalam bale. 

People little within the-Wz\\. 

Jadi pleh, tahun jadi. 

Plentiful be fruits, year be plentiful. 

Jadi pleh pleh bage. 

Plentiful be fruits, fruits various. 

Jadi pleh tihap are'.^ 

Plentiful be fruit every day. 

Jadi pleh tihap bulan. 

Plentiful be fruit every month. 

Jadi pleh tihap tahun. 

Plentiful be fruit every year. 

Odo mungkir pada janji. 

Do-not go-back upon what is promised. 

Hadat sural dalam buku', 

yA^r-customs that are written within ///e-book. 

Pleh . . . Pleh, pleh, pleh, pleh. 

Fruit . . . Fruit, fruit, fruit, fruit. 

Hadat orang ber-utan, 

This is ///<?-custom of people a-jungling, 

Hadat orang main jo'oh. 

The-cvLStom ^-people that make-merry with drinking. 

Bangkong. The Baugkong Fruit. ^ 

Hong kau barah hong ! 

Hong kau barah hong ! 

Hong mirimpa' bangkong. 

Hong — we pluck the-hangkong. 

Kong kau Bapai Tunang. 

Kong — reach (?)-out, Father Tunang. 

Nang kau Bapai Sayang. 

Nang — reach-out, Father Sayang. 

Yang kau Bapai Odong. 

Yang — reach-out. Father Odong. 

Dong merimpa' bangkong. 

Dong — we pluck M^-bangkong. 

Kong bangkong kudes.-^ 

Kong — ///if-bangkong kudes. 

Kong, bangkong katel.** 

Kong — the bangkong katel. 

1 Mai. " tiap " (or " tihap ") = Bes. is usually repeated at beginning of the 
" ha'in " — ex. " ha'-in are', ha-in next. 

bulan," etc. ^ A small variety of "bangkong" 

2 A wild "chcmpedak." It will be or wild "chempedak." 

seen that the last syllable of each line * Smaller than the " b. kudes." 

I 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 671 

Kong bangkong mengoh.^ 
Kong — the bangkong mengoh. 

Kong bangkong palas.^ 
Kong — the bangkong palas. 

Chok Bapai Odong, 
Go, 0 Father Odong, 

Chok Bapai Tunang, 
Go, 0 Father Tunang, 

Chok-leh Wak Solong.s 
Go, 0 Father Solong, 

Chok mirimpa' bangkong. 
Go, and pluck the bangkong. 

Kom bangkong dah. 

Got the bangkong ^o« have. 

He ka'an ha-dong. 

Z?^-you bear them homewards. 

Temong Mak Tunang, 
And call to Mother Tunang, 

Kom midas * bangkong. 

To get quarter^a? the bangkong, 

Gul piok gompong,^ 

And to-\.^S!iQ the--^o\. thafs chipped, 

Nakeh mo'oh bangkong. 

That is for-boiling the bangkong. 

Ring subang biring. 

Follow-zy/M /;^£-leaf-rings,^ 0 follow. 

Iring ha-dong iring. 
Follow home, 0 follow. 

Iring kawan Gentoi. 
Follow, friend Gentoi. 

Rai subang birai. 

Wave your leaf-rings, wave them. 

Rai 'ku mengirai. 
/ wave, I wave them. 

'Ku kirai mayang muntet. 
I wave palm-blossom a-little. 

Sih kakom tulasih. 
Basil, plant holy-Basil. 

^ "Mengoh" or " mengah," the (cp. " sumbing ") = chipped, of a pot. 
large variety. ^ This refers to the leaf- rings or 

^ About same size as (3), but long- artificial nooses of palm-leaf which are 

shaped. made up into bunches or tassels and 

3 Sic: no doubt "Sayang" should fastened to the girdle (" kabok ha- 

be read here, as above. u'ut ") and headbands, or merely in- 

* V.l. " tongka," which — Mai. serted in them, in which case they are 

" tetak, kluarkan biji-nya." called (in Bes. ) "mayang sikih " or 

^ " Gompong " = Mai. "sompong" "sikis" — Mai. "sisip." 

672 APPENDIX 

Kakom di-ruang batang. 
Plant it in-//^c?-cranny of-a-lree. 

Badan tidak kasa', 

If the Body /j-not capable, 

Sa' kara' mulih.^ 
Able, it remains alone. 

Lih nama' alo, 
Lone, what else, 

Lo hadat Datoh, 

Else? '7iV the custom of our grandfathers, 

Toh mah nyom. 

Grandfathers, yi?r people young, 

Nyom kreja' bale. 

Young, /^-work in the Hall. 

Lai leniol ktdol, 

Hall, both men and women, 

Dol hadat Datoh. 

Women, 'tis the custom of our grandfathers. 

Toh mak Kalih. 

Grandfathers, and Mother Kalis. 

Mak kalih pande. 
Mother Kalis is clever. 

De mak kalih, 

Clever is Mother Kalis, 

Lih pande ngot. 
Kalis, and clever not, 

Ngot mak Geboi, 

Not (clever) is Mother Gcboi, 

Boi kreja' bale. 

Geboi, a/- working in-M^-Hall. 

Le nama' alo, 
Hall, what else, 

L6 mah hukah, 
Else ? People like, 

Hukah pleh jadi. 
Like fruits plentiful. 

Di tahun reja'.'-^ 

Plentiful, a year c?/ abundance. 

Reja' mah henom. 

Abundance, (since ?) people are many. 

Hdnom jadi be. 

Many, plenteous-iJ^r rice. 

Be jadi pleh. 

Rice, /it'-plenteous fruit. 

1 Or^g^nar' (Bes.) = alone. jadi"; so that this interpretation is 

2 Here again " rcjak " was explained doubtless right; and perhaps " rejak " 
as a good or fruitful year = Mai. "tahun in Besisi = Mai. " jadi " in all senses. 

TEXT OF B ESI SI SONGS 673 

Pleh tijak-gerdak, 

Fruit, we tread-rtwo^-tramp, 

Dak rentak bale. 

Tramp, <2«a'-drum-on the \\z\\-floor. 

Le lante bSrtam, 
Hall, floor of bertam, 

Tam bertam beh, 
Bertam, of bertam. Do, 

Beh nama' alo, 

Do what shall we else ? 

Esok jemah jadi. 

To-morrow aizd always be-plenteous, 

Di jadi pleh. 

Plenteous, be plenteous fruit. 

He-e-e ! 
He-e-e ! 

Song of the Sick Boy 

A Besisi Song (" Seoi" or " heoi ") 

Cherabong bunga' empai, 

Swells the blossom of the Baru '^-tree, 

BStasap bunga' meso'. 

And thick the blossom of the Tembusu. 

Odo k^nang alb, gadeh, ai ! 
Do-not care further granny, oh ! 

Kawen-leh, kawen dah. 

Throw it down — thrown-down it is. 

Odo nodor^ alo, gadeh, ai ! 

Do-not mention it further, granny, oh ! 

Kara' tempok oyn, gadeh, ai ! 
Remains calyx mine, granny, oh ! 

Kara' til jare' oyn, gadeh, ai ! 

Remain prints ^fingers mine, granny, oh ! 

Kara' til jong oyn, gadeh, ai ! 

Remain prints offset mine, granny, oh ! 

Kara' bllang seoi oyn, gadeh, ai ! 
Remains to-tell song mine, granny, oh ! 

Chong kenang gres oyn, gadeh, ai ! 

Tor the hills yearns heart mine, granny, oh 

Miong seoi oyn di-dong,^ gadeh, ai ! 
Hear song mine in-^/i^-house, granny, oh ! 

Lek chok, gadeh, bungkus ha-pren, 

/ arise and go, granny, wrap up-Z/ie-rice, 

Oyn chok meri, 'gar nechit chlm. 
I go to the forest, will snare birds. 

1 Or " Bharu" = "new." - " Nodor " := Mai. "menutor." 

3 Or " hru-dong." 

VOL. I 2 X 

674 APPENDIX 

Nechit chim bSkoni ngot, gadeh, ai ! 
Snaring birds / get not, granny, oh ! 

Odo harap-leh, gadeh, ai ! 
Do-not hope-indeed, granny, oh ! 

Kenon hun ngot yal kulong. 

Your child is strong not to climb up-aloft. 

Klet sentong chong ketok-ha, gadeh, ai ! 

/ bear a back-basket, but its lashings are broken-these, granny, oh ! 

'An chim tates, ayut ha-dong. 

/ pick-up a bird hornbill, and return towards-hut. 

Kajoh neneh chim tates, gadeh, ai ! 

Heavy indeed is the bird hornbill, granny, oh ! 

'Dah yut, machin-leh chim tates, gadeh, ai ! 

/have return^^, cook-then the bird hornbill, granny, oh ! 

Kachar-leh chim tates, gadeh, ai ! 
Eat-then the bird hornbill, granny, oh ! 

Jon kachar niuntet mulih. 

Give to-eat a-little to everybody. 

Odd punan chim tates-ha, gadeh, ai ! 

Do-not go-craving-for the bird hornbill-this, granny, oh ! 

Kachar-leh chim tates, gadeh, ai ! 

But eat-then the bird hornbill, granny, oh I 

AdTk, kakak, ipar, duai. 

Little-sisters, elder-sisters, brothers-in-law, and sisters-in-law (?) 

Improvised Besisi Song of the Hunting of the Coconut Monkey. 

Chok-leh mcri hinong. 
Go-then to the forest now. 

An blau mui tekih,^ 
Take blowpipe one stem, 

'Lok2 mui, damak tujuh tekah, 
Quiver one, darts seven stem, 

Ha-nalo kenon ka'. 

To-shoot the young of the coconut-monkey. 

Kaldh dah, kom ha-gres, 
Shot is-/V, got to-/A£-heart, 

Bedok ha-tCh dah ; 
FalU-« to-///<'-earth is //, 

Toyt chong, bok kt-non ka'. 

Cut a creeper, bind the young of the monkey, 

Bdk klet ha-chclon, an yut ha-dong. 

Bind and carry on-//:^-back, bear it return to-//if-house. 

Nimul ha-dong, kokos^-leh . 
Reach home, remove-/V^-fur-then. 

' Numeral coefficient = Mai. " ba- " buangbulu " to remove the fur, prob- 

tang." ably in part at least by singeing, and 

2 =Bes. "jelok." then rubbing the skin with ashes (Mai. 

"5 Explained as = Mai. " abu-i " or " abu "). Ka'== " kok " (Mai. b'ro'). 

TEXT OF BESISI SONGS 675 

Dah kokos, chok lantok^-kiah chiang, 
Done remove-zVj-fur, poke-off skin-zVi first, 

Kontok 2-leh, kajon ha-mah muntet mulih.. 
Quarter-then and give to-people a-little to each. 

Bo punan gulei-ha. 

Do-not go-craving-for cooked-meat-this. 

Bo tenglep ' kapays kubi, bal he, 

Do-not insert ixvixX-of 'asam kelubi or poisoned you -vill be, 

Tenglep plong kulim, tenglep kunyit, tenglep lia', 
Insert lea%-es ^ kulim, insert turmeric, insert ginger, 

Tenglep plong karong, tenglep lempar, tenglep kesom,* 

Insert leaves of the "kelat" tree, insert spices, insert "kesom." 

Gul chongkhe' nasi', chongkoh jumah ha- bangku.^ 

Take a spoon y^r boiled-rice, scoop the gravy into a palm-sheath vessel. 

Nachar ramai muntet mulih. 

Eat all-together, a-little each-one. 

Odd punan kret ka'-nong. 

Do-not go-craving-for the body ^monkey-yonder. 

Bru dah nachar, lek gul mudut. 
Finished have eating, rise get cigarettes, 

Bru mudut, kam-leh nong. 

Finished cigarettes, repose-then now, 

Bru kam, jetek-leh. 
Finished repose, sleep-then. 

Besisi Description of a Storm. 

Luhh-ha," duh lep-lep " doo-gendeh 

The storm is here, run and enter-upon the river ; 

Mudik sen-do5, tahan ngot buah-ha. 

Ascend to the headwaters, endure not gale-this ; 

Kedek ^ luhh, are' garong ^-ha. 

Rages the storm, the day thunders-here, 

Lindong telok-ha. 
Shelter we in cove this. 

Besisi Description of Padi (Rice) Planting i" 

Chok meri oi ! menebas leba' hinong. 

Go to the jungle, ho ! to-clear your plantation now, 

1 Mai. " tikamkan kulit." palm). 

2 Mai. "bantai." ^ Also " seluhh " = Mai. "ribut." 

3 Mai. "masokkam" or "buboh." '' Reduplication of " lep " = "to 
The injunction refers to the Besisi enter," Mai. " masok." By fleeing 
superstitious prejudice against eating upstream they escape the worst of the 
acid fruits with animals killed by storm, which is imagined as taking 
poisoned darts. place near the river-mouth. 

■* Prob. =Mal. "kasom," for which ^ Qu. meaning of " kedek." 

see Ridley's ZwA ^ " Garong " = " thunder.' 

5 Mai. "upih" (of nibong or other '^^ See pp. 361, 362, supra. 

676 APPENDIX 

Be' * di' jds, be' ^ di' gomo' ; 

Rice work early, rice make fruitful ; 

Jojos j£mu,2 dah 'chin tuht kah. 

Quick-quick dry the-felled-trees, done cooked burn also. 

Tabu 3 be', petom yet, petom bays, 
Sow rice, plant yams, plant sugarcane, 

Petom hcntok, kachek dung, teduh mtngubah. 

Plant bananas, fix the piles of a \m\, for shelter when planting-out. 

Hcndum be', be' ^ tok hinong. 

When ripe the rice, the rice reap immediately, 

Nisim payah nachar, be' lepat 

Else to-morrow hard to-feed ; the rice vjUI rot. 

Odo biar be'-hi, tdk be' doyt-doyt. 

Do-not neglect rice-this, reap the rice finished-finished. 

Besisi Courtship : an Imaginary Dialogue.* 

M. He kagar ha-uyn, ai ? 
Do you long for-rae, eh ? 
F. Nama' 'to' ? dyn jet kid, mani emboh-hd ? 

What is that ? I follow also, how should I be unwilling. 
J/. < )yn kagar kid. 

I \ox\<g-for you too. 
F. Mani emboh-hd? lemol kabeh, dyn jet kid; nama' 

Mow should I be unwilling ? the man acts I follow also ; because 
dyn kcdol, dyn jet kah. 

I am a woman, I follow too. 

J/. 'Dah neneh, neneh-leh ; dyn ikun gendek-ah, laheh 

Is that true? True-be-it ; I will be your iA\.\\cx and rao\k\.t\, clear it 
'dah. 
is. 

F. Nama' 'to' ? dyn jet kid, mui hare'-d, lek ngot dah. 

What is that ? I will follow you too, one day indeed long(er) not it is. 
M. Nakeh lek dyn-hS. 
That long I too. 
/". He garang chongkak langah bage' hong 'dah nisam 

/^ you are rude fierce aW coarse like hornet, 7£//i^«-z'/-is to-morrow / 
tahan ngot lek-d ; beh dah dyn, nis^im tahan ngot. 

endure not long indeed ; done with it have I, to-morrow / endure not. 

[Here the betel-box (an evidence of contract with Malays?) is pushed across, 
and the man makes his speech.]^ 

M. Hak he, dyn kagar tfilong tdmpat chambai, dyn t£long kfnon-kuda', 

Thing ^/you(?), I desire to-find a betel-box, I seek a filly, 
'gar kom ; dyn telong pahu, hap tihang, dyn ganti 

/ wish to have it ; I seek a boat, if it has-no mast, I will provide 

1 Note that the object be' ("rice," riage formula which follows it, see 

Mai. "padi,") precedes the verb, an vol. ii. p. 6^ et seq. 

unusual construction. ^ It would seem from the next ver- 

'- Or "jcmur." ^ Or " tabur." sion that what follows is addressed to 

■* As to this dialogue and the mar- the girl's parents. 

BESISI BETROTHAL RITES 677 

tihang, hap layar I'iyn ganti layar, oyn 

a mast, if it has-no sail ^ I will provide a sail, I 

telong salama' bawau-ha, kom ngot, naha nimul ka-dol 

have sought it the-length of sea this, a7td got it not, here /^arrive at country 
he, dah piong bunga', piong salama' bawau-ha. Jan 'dah, 

your, having smelt the flower, smelt it the-length of sea this. Tired /am 

chok-o salama' ha-ah, naha dah bunga'-ah, an pleh 

(?/" going indeed so-far as this, this is Z^^; flower, / take the fruit of the 

timun ; dah tiba' bau' bunga' ha-ciyn, oyn jet klo, klet- 

cucumber ; has reached the scent of the flower to me, I follow too, /pick it 
ah ; agar hap oyn pC-piong pepiong ; hap pipiong agar 

up ; if desire not I to-smell it I should have smelt it ; not ' smelling / desire 

sabulih-kih, kagar pakom ha-6yn atas he-o ; agar 

as-much-as-possible-that, desiring to-get it for myself from you-indeed ; desiring 
kom mui bulan kom ngot, yut wa ; hak kagar 

to get if in one month / get it not, / return not-yet ; this thing / desire 
atas he. 
from you. 

The following is a variant of the latter part of the foregoing dialogue which is 
supposed to be made by a man to parents of his beloved. 
[After pushing the betel-stand towards them, say] : — 

Ilak - he', oyn handak telong, tempat sirih. 
Property ^you, I desire to-seek, a-stand-for betel. 

Oyn telong kenon kuda', 'gar sabulih kom-nya. 

I am-seeking the young of a horse, /desire very-much to-get it. 

Oyn telong pahu'. 
I am-seeking a boat, 

Hap tihang, oyn ganti tihang, 

If it have-no mast, I will provide a mast, 

Hap layar, oyn ganti layar. 

If it have no sail, I will provide a sail. 

Oyn telong sa-lama' laut-ha, kom ngot. 
I seek it as-far-as sea-this, but got-it not. 

Nahi tiba' dol-he', dah piong bunga' mui jong.^ 

Now (?) / reach couutry-your, have smelt blossom one foot. 

Piong sa-lama' bawau-ha. 
/ smelt it as-far-as sea-this. 

Jail dah, chok salama' hi-ah. 

Weary am / with-roaming as-far-as this-indeed. 

Naha dah bunga'-ah. 
This is blossom-indeed. 

Dah tiba' bau bunga' ha-6yn, 6)01 turut. 

Has reached scent <?/" blossom to-me, I follow //. 

Klek-ah, klek dah-leh. 

Pick-?V-up, /-picked -//-up have-then. 

1 le. " Though I had desired not to explained to me as referring to the girl 
smell it, I should have smelt it, and ("kenon"). 

not smelling it, I desire to smell it as ^ 41 ]yiui jong (one foot) " is a 

much as possible." numeral coefficient. 

2 "Hak" = Mal. " hak " (property), 

678 

APPENDIX 

Agar 1 hap oyn pfipiong, dah pepiong. 

If wanted not-at-all I to-smell //, / should have smelt it. 

Hap pepiong agar sabuUh-ki ; minta' pa-koni - ha-6yn, atas he-o. 
Not smelling / want as-much-as-possible ; / ask to-possess // for-myself, from 
you-indeed. 

Agar sabulih, sabulan belum bulih, yut wa. 

/ want it very-much, in one-month not-yet got, / return not-yet. 

'Nak bcr-hajab atas he. 

/ want to-get-my-desire from you. 

Besisi Marriage Ceremony. 

The following catechising of the 
was carried on by the Ponghulu Balei 

/'. TOrbli pingan mangko ? 

B. 

TerblT. 

P. 

Ttrbll piok banga' ? 

B. 

Ttrbll. 

P. 

Tcrbli hendi ? 

B. 

TcrblT. 

P. 

TCrbll hau ? 

B. 

Tcrbli. 

P. 

Tcrbli biong ? 

B. 

Tcrbli. 

P. 

Kabeh dung ? 

B. 

Kabeh. 

P. 

Kabeh tanga' ? 

B. 

Kabeh. 

P. 

Kabeh Icba' ? 

B. 

Kabeh. 

P. 

Kabeh scndoh ? 

B. 

Kabeh. 

P. 

Kabeh timba* ? 

B. 

Kabeh. 

P. 

Petom yet ? 

B. 

Petom. 

P. 

Petom bays ? 

B. 

Petom. 

P. 

P(3tom be' ? 

B. 

petom. 

P. 

Petom hentok ? 

B. 

Petom. 

P. 

Kahun gah ? 

B. 

Kahun. 

P. 

Kahun yal pleh ? 

B. 

Kahun. 

Batin (acting on behalf of the bridegroom) 
(acting on behalf of the bride). 

Have-you-bought (/it. Bought ?) plates 
and cups ? 

I have (///. Bought). 

Have you bought pots and pans? 

I have. 

Have you bought clothing ? 

I have. 

Have you bought chopper ? 

I have. 

Have you bought hatchet ? 

I have. 

Have you built (///. Built?) house? 

I have. 

Have you made (///. Made ?) steps ? 

I have. 

Have you made clearing (/.<■. for a planta- 
tion) ? 

I have. 

Have you made spoon (of wood) ? 

I have. 

Have you made laater-hucket ? 

I have. 

Have you planted (///. Planted ?) yams ? 

I have. 

Have you planted sugar-cane ? 

I have. 

Have you planted rice ? 

I have. 

Have you planted bananas ? 

I have. 

Can fell (trees) ? 

I can. 

Can climb-for fruit ? 

I can. 

1 " Agar " appears to be here a 
shorter form of " kagar," which is 
frequently abbreviated to "gar," the 
"ka" being merely the verbal prefix. 

^ " Pakom " or " pa-kom " = Mai. 

"men-dapat." I should have ex- 
pected "ka-kom," but " pakom " is 
what was given me. The exact mean- 
ing of these last sentences is difficult, 
but I believe it to be as given above. 

BE SIS/ MARRIAGE RITES 

679 

P. Kahun nalo ? 

Can shoot (with the blowpipe) ? 

B. Kahun. 

I can. 

P. Kabeh mudut ? 

Do you smoke? (///. "Make cigarette?") 

B. Kabeh. 

I do. 

P. Telong kepoh yohh ? 1 

Find eggs (?/- turtle ? 

B. Telong. 

I find. 

P. Hoi? 

True? 

B. Nahol. 

True. 

Chong Singapura' Malaka', 

A hill in Singapore or Malacca, 

Pulau Pinang oyn bli. 

Or in the Isle of Penang would I buy. 

Chong Stilangor Perak oyn bli. 

A hill in Sclangor or Perak would I buy. 

Naha-kah kOnon mah. 
This-the-more t/ie child of a man. 

P. Nahol tempa' krep ? 

True, fall-upon your body ? ^ 

B. Odo kenon mah. 

Speak not of the child of a man. 

Sikah lotong alo oyn telong, 

Chikah and lolong-monkeys even I seek, 

Alo oyn kakom. 
Even I capture. 

Naha-kah kenon mah. 
This-the-more the child of a man. 

P. Pun kledek piin. 

? sweet-potatoes ? 

Tela' tanaman Jakun. 

Sweet-potatoes (zrt'-planted ^j/-//iif-Jakun. 

Hoi kata' Batin, Jinang, Jukrah. 

"True," says the Batin, Jinang aW Jukrah. 

Mah horoh mah nyom. 

By men old and men young. 

Killing busut killing. 

Around the mound ajtd round again. 

Besisi Proverbs. 

(1) Dah jon ; hap telong. 

If you have, give ; if you have not, seek. 

(2) Bujam 'mpai an meri, 

A wallet new take to the jungle, 

Bujam li' kara' ha-dung. 
A wallet old leave at-home. 

1 Or "yahh." 

2 Or "kret" ; the expression really 
means, " So may a tree fall upon you." 

This is the most binding oath known 
to the Besisi. 

68o 

APPENDIX 

(3) Seh tclong, bSdok bat, 

Jf a thing is lost, seek it ; ?/" fallen, pick it up, 

Chidut kacham, kStok bok,^ 

//" spilt, dig ?V up (?) ; //snapped, bind it. 

Besisi Propitiatory Address to the Enemies of the Padi (Rice), 

BEFORE the PaDI -FEAST. ^ 

Santap jong lintar,^ 
Santap-leh kane', 
Santap-leh jTsek,* 
Santap-leh royt,* 
Santap-leh kapinding, 
Santap-leh liulat, 
Santap-leh jangau,*' 
Santap-leh rusa', 
Santap-leh kctur, 
Sant.ip he solong" taluin, 
Oyn kachar wa, 
Naha' ^ nachar are'. 

Partake, O Round-Foot, 

Partake, 0 rats, 

Partake, 0 Blight, 

Partake, O Finches, 

Partake, O Stink-bugs, 

Partake, 0 Caterpillars, 

Partake, 0 Green-fly, 

Partake, 0 Deer, 

Partake, O Wild-Roars, 

Partake ye ^/eldest-born of-tke-ytHT. 

I eat not-yet. 

This eat immediately. 

" 

Fragment of Bf.sisi Invocation.^ 

Hoi '** mui 'mbar Cmpe 'nipat. 
True, one, two, three, four, 

Hdl lima' anam tujoh. 
True, live, six, seven. 

M^lflap sama' subang gading." 
Surround with nooses of ivory (colour). 

Mflt-lap sama' subang tinjong. 
Surround with nooses ring-shaped. 

Lcgeng beh jelong chong dendan. 
Stretch make long thu creeper ^decoration. 
Legang beh jclcing chong ki'ip.*^ 
Stretch make long feet </ centipedes. 

Bilang limau lilang. 
Tell-of ///< limes wax-like. 

1 V. infra, p. 685, where some of 
these phrases reappear in a different 
order. 

2 As to this charm, see p. 363, 
supra. 

^ I.e. the elephant. 

* A kind of insect, explained as = 
Mai. "benah." 

* =Mal. "pipit." 

" =Mal. "pianggang." 
^ I.e. the food-offerings. 

* Lit. this. This line should mean, 
" I am just about to eat." 

'•* This invocation is used at the 

" bersawei " ceremony for the relief of 
sick persons, at which the medicine- 
man invokes and is possessed by spirits. 
See vol. ii. p. 306 et seq. 

>" " Hoi" = "true," "approved," 
" sanctioned." 

" "Subang" is explained as de- 
scriptive of the decoration of the walls 
with objects made from strips of 
"serdang"or "kcpau" palm-leaf; "tin- 
jong" is said to refer to the ring form 
of decoration especially. 

'^ These lines refer to the palm-leaf 
fringes stretched round the walls. 

J 

BESISI MAGIC 68 1 

Bilang limau purut. 
Tell-of the limes rough-coat. 

Rentak ' bale bumbun. 
Drum in the hall ^-leaves. 

Rentak-leh bale salong. 

Drum in the hall <7/'-palm-leaves. 

Besisi Charm against Devils. ^ 

Mui, 'mbar, mpe', 'pat, lima', nam, tojoh. 
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven. 

'Tu ^ kla' jok * siyau,** jok bingin." 

]\Iay that indeed be cool which was feverish, be cool and cold. 

Dalam dageng, dalam ja'ang, dalam urat, dalam seni." 
In flesh, in bones, in sinews, in joints. 

Chabut buang Jin Shetan ! 

Pluck-forth and cast-out both Jins a7id Devils ! 

Terbuka', urei Jin Shetan ! 

Be-opened, be-unfastened, both Jins and Devils ! 

Minta' sunteng,* minta' chabut Jin Shetan ! 

/ \)&'gyou to expel, / heg fozt to pluck-forth both Jins and Devils ! 

Bawa' Busu ^ tepong pCngalin ; 

Bring, O Busu, flour /or the sucking-charm ; 

Bawa' Busu tepong penawar,!" 

Bring, O Busu, the flour that is a neutraliser, 

Tawar sakalian bisa' dalam dageng, dalam urat ! 
7o neutralise all venom in flesh and in sinews ! 

Siyau biar bingin ! 

7^hat which is feverish let-be cool ! 

Chabut Jin Shetan dalam nyawa' dalam gres ! 

Pluck-forth Jins and DqwWs from within the spirit and from within the 
heart ! 

Bawa' Busu bunga' tenglang ! '^ 

Bring, O Busu, the blossom of the tenglang ! 

Biar berbilang dalam salong, dalam bumbun. 

'Let-it be- chanted within the palm-le.a.{-ct\\, within the leaf-chamber.'- 

Bawa' Busu sakalian Shetan ! 
Bring, O Busu, all the Devils ! 

1 "Rentak" is to drum on the ^ = Mai. "sendi." 

floor with the foot. ^ =Mal. "buang" {? cf. " sun- 

2 For this and the next two charms toh "). 

see vol. ii. pp. 309, 310. ^ Explained as = " Baba' Bungsu " 

3 = Mai. "itupula." or "Busu." 

* =Mal. "sejuk." i" =Mal. " tepong tawar. " 

5 = Fever-heat. ^' Explained as the name of a rare 

6 =:Mal. "dingin," explained as flower growing upon the moun- 
" pini (or 'pirei') di tulang," "pain tains. 

in the bones." '^ I.e. that of the medicine-man. 

682 APPENDIX 

Sinta' pisau rewang,^ ngilir^ Batu Perimun.^ 

Drawj'owr knife ^"pearl-shell (?) and remove to Batu Pcrimbun. 

Riniun kla' Shttan, Rimun kla' ncjis ! 

At Pcrimbun then be the Devils, Pcrimbun then be foul ! 

Another Besisi Charm against Devils. 

Hong hang jadi bueh. 
Hong hang become Foam. 

Bueh, jadi batu. 
Foam, become Rock. 

Batu jadi bueh. 
Rock, become Foam. 

Pcrempan ■* kiri, perempan kanan. 

Dash thcm-to the \ek-hatiii, dash them to the right hatiii. 

Pcrempan 'kan ku, shetan bage. 

Dash them down for me, these devils divers. 

Hong plcsC' " mula' plese'. 

Hong Pcltsit, that from-the-first wert Ptltsit. 

Piyok lendcik, banga' lendiik. 

The pot is boiling, the copper is boiling. 

Kiri pcrisi, kanan pcrisi. 

On the left hand I till it, on the right hand I fill it. 

Pisi-kan " aku shetan bage'. 

Do ye fill it for me, O devils divers. 

Besisi Charm ised kor exorcising the Spectre Huntsman 

(" HaNTU Pi^MBURU"). 

Chongkang-changkeng " gul ha-paut * dul ^ buluh. 

I go helter-skelter to-seize wr-peeling-knife with the handle ^bamboo. 

Hang kupes '** pinang bulu" ; 
For peeling the betelnut hairy ; 

Hentak " pedang atam ^'- batang jclang, 

/ draw my sword, and walk-along a tree-trunk lengthy, 

^ ? = Mal. "gewang," pearl shell. ** "Paul" appears to be a contrac- 

2 ? =Mal. "gilir." tion of Mai. " p^raut " = " peeler "' (the 

3 Locality unidentified. (Possibly usual name in Malay being "pisau 
Gunong BLrembun, N5gri Sem- raut " or " knife for peeling '"). 
bilan?) » " Dul" = handle or hilt (? = MaI. 

* =Mal. " hempan," "to dash "ulu." 
down." ^" " Hang-kupes " = Mai. " akan 

^ =Mal. " Pelcsit " ; also called kupas." "Ha" is the commonest 

" Pemprat " by the Besisi, who describe form used for "to" (Mai. "akan") 

it as a kind of vampire which "sucks in Btsisi, but before a "k" the form 

dry our blood" ("mOngisap habis used is " hang-" (not " ha-"), 
mahamkita"). " " Hentak " = Mal. "sentak," the 

•* = Mai. " pcrisikan." proper Besisi word being "jok" 

^ "Chongkang-changkeng," v. I. ( = Mai. "sentak" or " chabut," "to 

" chongkah - changkeli," explained as pull or draw "). 
= Mal. " lentang-pukang." ^^ 3^.5. "atam"' = Mal. "mcniti." 

BESISI MAGIC 683 

Manchap ^ ding tujoh tekah,- 

And sharpen ^"bamboo seven stakes, 

Merojoh^ gengop * Hantu Buru. 

To transfix the chin ^M^-Spectre Huntsman. 

Shiah kiri, shiah kanan, 

Avaunt to-the-\&{\., avaunt /«7-///^-right, 

Shiah Hantu Buru ! 

Avaunt, 0 Spectre Huntsman ! 

Besisi Charm for expelling the Demon of Pain ("Ta war Bisa").'^ 

Cherai tsuk " hantu nahS. 

Dishevelled is the hair of the demon yonder. 

Lemah-lemiht tohuk ajes ! ^ 

Soft and weak is your spear, my father ! 

Tekam ^ lembong, chabut tawar.' 

If you attack the shoot, / pull-out the neutraliser. 

Tekam daun, chabut tawar. 

If you attack the leaf, / pull-out the neutraliser. 

Chok belencliong '" hantu, chabut tawar. 

When go-brush-past the demons, / pull-out the neutraliser. 

Tunjok hantu, chabut tawar. 

When point-a^ me [or the-patient] the demons, / pull-out the neutraliser. 

Kalep hantu, chabut tawar. 

When enter ine the demons, / pull-out the neutraliser 

Kenen *' hantu, chabut tawar. 

When oppress me the demons, / pull-out the neutraliser. 

Kapet hantu, chabut tawar. 

When strike nie the demons, / pull-out the neutraliser. 

Tekam hantu, chabut tawar. 

When attack me tlie demons, / pull-out the neutraliser. 

Hentap i- penawar, tekam hantu. 

/ draw forth the neutraliser, when attack me the demons. 

Chelui bisa', yal tawar ! 

Descend, 0 Venom ! ascend, 0 Neutraliser ! 

Bukan oyn pande menawar : 

It is not I that is clever at neutralising : 

1 "Manchap" = Mai. " meran- ^ V.l. "shuk." 

chap." "^ "Ajes" or " ajeh," explained as 

2 " Tekah " = Mai. " poko' " or = " bapa' " (cf. Mai. "aji "). 
"batang." ^ =Mal. "ttrkam," Bes. " ke- 

3 " Merojoh " = Mai. " merojok " (?) tong." 

or " menikam," "to transfix." '■' Mai. "tawar, ptnawar," Bes. 

■* "Gengop" (or "dengop," v.l.) " hendek " (?). 

explained as =Mal. "dagu," "chin,"' 'o yj_ " belensong," = Mal. " me- 

and as being a word of the " Bhasa lintas," cf. Mai. "langsong." 

Hantu," " spirit language." 11 Explained as " tekenyit " or 

^ For this and the next charm see " ttpeny it "=" to oppress." 

vol. ii. pp. 308, 309. ^2 =Mal. "sentak." 

684 APPENDIX 

Guru tuhah pande menawar. 

The Teachers aged were clever at neutralising. 

Datang chinchili' bawa' pcnawar. 

Come, 0 chinchili' bird, bring a neutraliser. 

Pcnawar tckam hantu. 

A neutraliser 7i)hen attack me the demons. 

Datang guru pande bawa' tepong tawar. 

Come, O Teacher clever, bring the flour neutralising. 

Menawar dalam urat. 

To- neutralise /a?« in the sinews. 

Besisi Inwalling Charm (" P£ndinding"). 

Ta' Krusau, Batu Putih, Batu Ladun tinggi, 

Ta' Krusau, on Batu Putih, on Batu Ladun lofty, 

Tijak ha-rumpun serai, ^ tijak Alu Bcsi.'^ 

/tread upon the grass citronella, /tread-upon the Pestle <?/'-Iron. 

Pcndinding Shetan bage kla' ' tekSm,'' 

As an inwalling at^ainst devils divers and foul, 

Chabut gunong tujuh, mc-ndinding kla' Shutan. 

/ uproot the hill-crags seven, to inwall tne against the devils. 

Blah rotan sa-labu,° sa-blah jalan hantu', 

/split rattan one-length, on-one-side proceed j<f, O demons, 

Sa-blah jalan-ku.*^ 

On-the-other proceed-I. 

Lengkong kawan lengkong trang. 

Be your rampart, friends, a rampart ij/" light." 

Lengkong "ku lengkong g'lap. 

Be this rampart ^'mine a rampart (t/" darkness.* 

Description of the House ok a Besisi Chief." 

Flung '" lantok kcpong. 

Its roof 7uas bark of the kSpong tree, 

Dinding daun birtam. 

Its walls (?/' leaves of the bcrtam palm, 

Lantei batang bc-rtam. 

Its floor the stems of bertam falms, 

^ Doubtless in allusion to the legend goats, pestle and mortar, and how a 

of theseven clumpsof magic lemon-grass similar fate befell one Dato' Antan 

(citronella), which are believed by the Besi (Chief of the Iron Pestle), and how 

Malays to grow on the peaks of some "the Iron Pestle and Stone Mortar 

of the highest mountains in the Penin- are still to be seen, it is said, at Gunong 

sula. The exact sense of " Ta' Kru- Angsi," between Rembau and S. 

sau " is not clear, but it may be con- Ujong. 
nected with " krusau," the cry of the ^ ="Pula'." 

mouse-deer, v. p. 643 ante. ^ ="Nejis. 

2 "Alu bCsi" ("Iron Pestle") clearly ° =Bes. "chong mui pontong" 

refers to some special geological feature ("pontong," however, is also Malay), 
on this hill, similar to, if not identical •» =Bes. " englang chok hantu', 

with, the Antan Besi (also="Iron englang chok dyn." 
Pestle ") of Malacca tradition, cp. " Lit. visible. 

Hervey in Man, 1904. 14, where we * Lit. dark, 

are told how Dato Saiyid Itam's ship *• See p. 188 supra. 

was turned into stone, with his fowls, '<* ///. leaves, thatch. 

BESTS I MAXIMS 685 

Tihang long loya'. 

Its posts of the trunk of the loya'. 

Nakeh dung Batin Suntai. 

Such was the house of Batin Suntai. 

Dooh-gendeh semilan, di sen-do5h Kalih. 
At the rivers nine, on the upper Kalis. 

Bantal-nya banir diyan. 

Pillow-his was a buttress of the duvian tree. 

Soi daun lemba'. 

And his mat the leaves of the lemba'. 

Hcndi lantok terap. 

His clothes were of bark of the terap tree. 

Nakeh unang silah-silah. 

Such are the laws of the genealogy. 

Tali tembaga' di-atas batang. 

Like a wire ^copper stretched over a tree-trunk. 

Silah di-bawah batang. 

Whilst the genealogy is below the tree-trunk. 

Diyan temba' ^ ; kenen ketok ^ ; 

If it is a durian it will rot ; if it is too slender it will snap ; 

Ketok bok ^ ; chidut kacham * ; 

If it snaps you can bind it ; if it spills }'ou can dig it up. 

Sih telong" ; bedok bat.<5 

If you lose it, look-for //; if it drops, pick it up again. 

Besisi Specimen, believed to be an Improvisation. 

Telong pleh s'ari tanam.^ 
Look-for fruit in one-day planted. 

Telong pleh s"ari buah. 
Look-for fruit in one-day fruiting. 

Nakeh te' To' Klana'. 

That is the land of To' Klana. 

Dooh-gendeh met semilan ; 
The rivers of the springs nine ; 

Nakeh pechah-pichit 

Thence we broke and scattered 

Ka-laut ka-darat. 
To-Md-sea and to-^/^f-land. 

Ulu Kalis * tcmpat pcmuka'. 

Ulu Kalis is the place which was first cleared. ^ 

1 Mai. " kalau durian, timbus." ^ One of the nine streams: it is 

2 Mai. " ginting putus. " mentioned in the Siamang song. 

3 Mai. " putus berubong." " Ulu " means the headwaters or upper 
* Mai. " tumpah gali." part of the course of a river. 

° Mai. "hilang chhari." ^ /.^. for habitation. Mai. "buka," 

8 Mai. " chichir pungut." is so used of establishing new settle- 

7 Bes. "pttom." ments, jit. by clearing the jungle. 

686 APPENDIX 

Nakeh-leh pechah-pTchit 
Thence we broke and scattered 

Menjadi rayat bawau. 

To become the subjects of the sea. 

Menchari hal-hidup tibu-tibar. 

To seek a livelihood in scattered parties. 

Jet hal chim, nakeh bddok ha-bawau. 

Those who followed matters of birds,^ they fell to the sea. 

Menchari hal ka'-untong. 
And sought matters y^r profit. 

MC-njadikan kinchu kinchet. 

And begat grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 

'Lor ha-bawau susor ngot. 

They moved -out to the sea and skirted it not. 

Menjadi kaidah^ suku waris.^ 

But became by division tribes and he.\xs-o/-the-soil. 

Menjadi kttok.* 

And became broken-up. 

Bfisisi *' Trumba.'"^ 

Tribal Song of Origin. 

Gobang Gubin Buluh Bohal. 
Gobang Gubin Buluh Bohal. 

Tanah Jati, tanah Ilendau. 

The countr}' (y'Jati, the country of the Endau. 

Tcrjatoh " ka-tanah Johor Lama'. 
IVe come to-M^-land ^ Johor old. 

Tengki-tengkel Jtram Lama'. 
^Tengki-tengkel Jilram old. 

/'Naning Naneng'^ Batin Baruis. 
At Naning Naneng was Batin Baruis. 

Batin Banggai-punya' asal. 
Batin Banggai-his or\gm-was. 

Bukit Nuang, Bukit Galah. 
JJukit Nuang, Bukit Galah. 

1 Because birds were more plentiful lines except where indicated by the 
on the coast than inland. brackets. Each line is, however, 

2 Or assigned to. nevertheless complete in itself ; that 

3 In the Negri Sembilan the Malay is to say, where there are two or 
Waris, or "heirs of the soil," claim more place-names occur in a line, they 
descent in the female line from always come together and in the order 
aborigines. given, it being only the order of the 

* I.e. divided. lines that varies (except as indi- 

6 As to these genealogical and tradi- cated). " Lit. fell upon, 

tional songs and sayings, see vol. ii. p. "^ Qu. the Malay form of the name 

164 Jis^i^. and notes thereupon. There is -f the Besisi form : cp. " turun chelui " 

no settled order in singing these on p. 687. 

I 

BESISI SONGS OF ORIGIN 687 

^Bukit Gentel Batin Mara. 
At Bukit Gentel was Batin Mara. 

Punya' asal [kcna] Batin Mara. 

Its origin was [because of] Batin Mara. 

Batin Barai [kenaj Batin Barai. 

And Batin Barai [because of] Batin Barai. 

Batin Suntai [kena] Batin Suntai. 
^And Batin Suntai [because of] Batin Suntai. 

/"Turun chelui Batin Galang. 
Went-down and descended Batin Galang. 

Tolak ka-laut, jadi rayat laut. 

y^/?^ pushed seawards, a«a^ became Subjects of the Sea. 

Rayat laut jadi Bajau. 
^And the Subjects of the Sea became Pirates. 

^Selayan Batang Niyu, 
At Selayan was [Batin] Stem of the Coconut-palm. 

I Selayan Batang Pinang. 

^At Selayan was [Batin] Stem of the Areca-palm.^ 

Cherteng Perteng Tagun Brego.- 

With Cherteng, Perteng, Tarun, Bergul. 

Tunggul-si-Jaga' di-hulu Langat. 

And the " Stump-of-the-Watcher " on-the-upper Langat. 

Ching Bcranang Pejam Gebok.^ 

With Ching, Beranang, Pejam, Gebok. 

Langkap Berjuntei, Bangkong Menggoh. 

The Langkap-palm overhanging and Bangkong Menggoh. 

Bangkong Gadeng, Kechau, Langlang. 
Bangkong Gadeng, Kechau, and Langlang. 

1 Unexplained. But in the Kenaboi first three were explained as being 
dialect "senayan" or "senoyon"= near Ulu Klang (Selangor), Gebok, 
coconut palm, and also banana. See, and the next two as near Ulu Sungei 
however, vol. ii. p. 166, n. i, and ib. Ujong. (It appears from the map 
p. 167, 71. 9. that Bc-ranang and Gebok (or Geboh 

2 Tarun and Birgul, on the border as the map spells it) are places quite 
of the Ulu Langat district of Selangor close to the present frontier of Sungei 
and Sungei Ujong. Ujong and Selangor). " Bt. Tunggoh 

2 Compare this with the following S. Jaga" also marked on the map in 

string of place-names, which according that region. Bukit Putus is close 

to my Malay informant, one Mamat to Tt-bong, a Malacca border village ; 

of Jus in Malacca territory, constituted Paya Luas near Mantai ; Bangkong 

the old boundaries of the countries of Chondong just under Mt. Ophir. 

Naning and Muar (round Malacca Merebau Saratus lies between Mt. 

territory) : — Chang, Beranang, Pajam, Ophir and Kuala Kesang (which is at 

Gebok, Lebah Bergoyang, Tunggu present the boundary on the sea 

Bersejaga, Bukit Putus, Paya Luas, between the territories of Malacca and 

Bangkong Chondong, Merebau Saratus, Muar). Tanjong Gading is in Muar 

Kuala Kesang, Tanjong Gading. The territory. — C. O. B. 

I APPENDIX 

Batujamun, Batu Lalau. 

The Rock ^Jamun, and the Rock ^' Lalau. 

Pra' Charek, Batu Btrgentel. 

Pra' Charek, and Batu Bergentel. 

Merbau Karawang, terjatoh Ayer Tawar. 

Merbau Karawang, till y on come to Ayer Tawar. 

Lebah Bcrgoyang, Bcrtam Tcnung. 

The Bees'-nest that-sways, and the Bertam-palm solitary. 

''Ginting Pauh, Lantei Nibong. 

The Divide of the Wild-Mango, the Flooring of the Nibong Palm-wood. 

Lalu ka-bukit Perentian Rinipun. 

A ?id pass to the hills of the Halting-place umbrageous. 

Lalu ka-bukit Perentian Tingi. 

And pass to the hills of the Halting-place lofty. 

Lalu ka-tanjong Batu Bcrdaun. 
\. And pass to the cape of the Rock leafy. 

Sumah muka' Tanah Semujong ? ' 

Who opened-up ///^-land <?/'Senuijong? 

Adik Nyai Techap Ponghulu Klambu. 

Little-Sister Nyai Techap and the chieftain Mosquito-curtain. 

Samah mukfi' Tanah Semujong. 

Together opened-up the land (7/"SLmujong. 

Lep baju jala' juandii'.- 

They who donned ^ the coat casting-net-J^a/t'a? became Men-of-the-Bodyguard. 

MOnjadi Jebah'* Rombau. 

Became the Foreigners of Rembau. 

Lep baju blah chakap sisi'. 

Those ivho donned the coat divided speak Besisi. 

BfiLANDAS OR B'LANDAS SPECLMENS.^ 

The B'LANDAS Trumba. 

Among the B'landas of Selangor I only succeeded in unearthing a few scraps 
of their "trumba" or genealogical songs, in spite of the fact that the old Besisi 
man who gave me the Btsisi version declared that the latter was borrowed from 
the B'landas. Hence the only version which has any sort of completeness about it 
remains that obtained from the Besisi. What scraps I could collect, however, 
among the B"landas had the merit of agreeing pretty well with the Bcsisi version. 
As a general rule, however, the B'landas appear to have embodied the facts they 
wanted to remember in maxims and proverbial sayings rather than songs, and 
these latter will be found to corroborate the " trumba." 

^ I.e. Sungei Ujong, a state of the of a non-Malayan element. I may add 

Negri Sembilan. that there is little appreciable differ- 

- I.e. Beduanda or Biduanda, now ence in pronunciation between " Belan- 

a tribal name common to Malays and das," " B'landas," and even "Blandas," 

aborigines, but here applied to Malays. beyond a slight dwelling on the "Bl," 

3 Lit. entered. * I.e. Malays. which disappears when the word is 

^ It will be noticed that all the spoken quickly. The word, therefore, 

specimens that follow are almost purely may be pronounced "Blandas," the 

Malayan: even B.sisi is largely so, technicallycorrect spelling " Belandas " 

but Belandas shows hardly any traces being misleading to an Englishman. 

B LA NBAS MAXIMS 689 

One of the scraps obtained from the B'landas consisted of the usual string of 
place-names, which ran as follows : — 

Jeram Merensing di-ulu Langat, 
Kichau, Langlang, Gubang, Gobeng, 
Merbau Berkrawang, Bangkong Gadeng, 
Ptjam, Rebok, Ranching, Beranang, 
Leba' BOrgoyang, Bertam Tenung. 

The first of these lines is not in the Besisi version. The rest are identical. 

B'landas Traditional Sayings and Legal Maxims. 

1. 'Adat tingal de' Batin Tangong Gagah. 

The custom bequeath^flf by Batin Tanggong Gagah. 

Di-bukit bukau, gaung, guntong, 

Over hill and foot-hill, cavern, and tarn 

Latih-kan jalan, lorong-kan 'adat, 

YoxcQ. your path, make-rt-channelyi7r_j'(?«r customs, 

Sekoi yang bereleh, waris yang kcdim. 

For the millet that wastes-away, for the Waris [Heirs] that are now. 

2. Singah Batin Jinang 

Tarries the Batin and the Jinang 

Sengan pasang jena'. 
As-far-as the flood-tide full (?). 

Batin bukit makan atas gunong. 

The c\i\ fti of the H\\\->nen feeds upon the crags. 

Ulu Langat perentah dia. 

The Upper Langat is domain his, 

Gharu dia pegang, 
Eaglewood he holds, 

Gadong los cherok bijeh lumbong. 

As well as wild-yams, los (?), cherok (?), ana tin-sand ^ mines. 

Birah makan dia, 
Wild-aroids eats he, 

Getah taban, rotan dia pegang. 
Gutta-percha taban, and rattan he holds. 

3. Batin Laut yang ampunya 

It is the Batin of the sea /'c-whom-belonging 

Layer nang m.engelembong. 
The sail that bellies, 

Dayong nang kirap, 
The oar that swirls, 

Laboh sauh, bentang kajang, 

To drop the anchor, to spread the awning, 

Tebas ttbang, menchhari ikan. 
To clear and fell, to hunt-for fish, 

Buat belat, menikam pari. 

To make fishing-stakes, to stab the sting-ray. 

VOL. I 2 Y 

690 APPENDIX 

4. Unang di-atas batang, 

7'he laws are on-the-io^p-of the tree-trunk. 

Sllah di-bawah batang, 

The genealogy underneath the tree-trunk, 

Unang Pelima Raja yang pcgang. 

The laws 0/ the Pelima it is the Raja who holds. 

5. Leba' bcrgoyang onak yang meruntai. 

Where the hees'-fiest sways, anJ the Wait-a-bit-creepers that have fallen-down. 

Ayer yang meleleh, kasai yang bertaup, 

Among the streams which trickle, and the kasai-Zr^^rj that grow-together, 

Kang sad^ngkang bunyi katak, 

.,4««f croak-croak-croak is the cry of the frog, 

Ginting di-turut angin, 

Where the Divide is loWovi^^-through by the wind, 

Lorah di-turut ayer, 

Ami the valleys are [o\\o\s&d.-through by the streams, 

Tcmpat rinchah-rinchahan Balin Jinang. 

Is the place of the splash-splashing of the Batin ^wa' Jinang. 

Gobang Gubin Buloh Bohal, 
Gobang Gubin Buloh Bohal, 
Melengkong Pulau I\rcha,' 
Encircling the Island of Pcrcha, 
Lilit Pulau Mdngkabau,- 
Surrounding the Island (3/" Menangkabau, 
Jatoh •* ka-tanah Pagar-Ruyong,- 
We happened on-Mt'-land (^/"Pagar-Ruyong, 
Jatoh ka-tanah Jati, 
We happened on-M^-land ^Jati, 
Jatoh ka-Tanjong Pagar, 
We happened on-Tanjong Pagar,* 

Jatoh ka-tanah Johor Lama. 
We happened on-//<<;-land <?/" Johor Lama. 

To' Bombong'' muka' aye Scmilan. 

To' Bombong opened-up the Nine Streams. 

Batin Chap, Batin Maruis, 

With Batin Cliap, and Batin Maruis. 

Batin Lengges, Batin Biireh, 
Batin Lengges, a;:^/ Batin Bereh, 

Batin Kantun, Batin Galang, 
Batin Kantun and Batin Galang, 

To' Klambu, Gendeh Beoi, 

The Chief of the Mosquito-net, and Granny Beoi, 

Batin Minah, Batin Wat. 
Batin Minah aftd Batin Wat." 

1 Sumatra. before his installation ("belum di- 

2 Districts in the upland country of lantik "). "Galang" = " Merak 
Central .Sumatra. Galang." 

3 lit. fell. * At Singapore. ^' Altogether there were said to be 
^ This was the name of To' Klana twelve of these Batins. 

BLAND AS SONGS OF ORIGIN 691 

Kata undang : — 
Says the Law : — 

Betasap batang pinang, 

Where thick grow the stems 0/ the betel-palms, 

Betasap batang niyu, 

Where thick grcno the stems of the coco-palms, 

Melempei daun pinang, 

Where wave the leaves of the betel-palms, 

Melempei daun niyu. 

Where wave the leaves of the coco-palms, 

Memuka' tanah Semujong, 

There was opened the land of Sungei Ujong, 

Kan wakil mata Semilan Suku, 

For authority over the springs of the Nine Clans, 

Memangku negri ampat 

It is maintained by the countries four, 

Nating yang ampat suku. 

And sustained by the Four Clans. 

Mcnempoh ka-Ginting Bidai, 
They struck Ginting Bidai, 

Menempoh ka-Ginting Naning, 
They struck Ginting Naning, 

Menempoh ka-Batang Labu, 
They struck Batang Labu, 

Menempoh ka-Gendeh Beoi, 
They struck Gendeh Beoi, 

Pulang ka-negri To' Bombong, 

^«(/ returned to the country of To' Bombong, 

Lantik To' Bombong To' Klana, 
Was-installed To' Bombong as To" Klana, 

Memuka' tanah Semujong, 

And opened-up the land ^Sungei Ujong, 

Batin Galang turun ka-laut, 

Batin Galang descended to the sea, 

Turun ka-laut jadi Bajau, 

Descended to the sea a7zd became a Pirate, 

Gendeh Beoi dcngan Batak Gerodok, 
And Granny Beoi with Batak Gerodok, 

Turun ka-Rawang naik darat. 

Descended at-Rawang ar.d there went ashore, 

Rawang k^chil Rawang besar, 

At Rawang the little, and Rawang the big, 

Jengku kechil jengku besar. 
Ancestors little and ancestors big. 

692 APPENDIX 

Proverbial Sayings, etc. 

Rimau mgngaum di-ujong tanjong, 
The tiger roars at-the-enii of the cape, 

Gajah mtraung di-atas gunong. 

The elephant trumpets upon the crags, 

Gajah berentak sCmatang panjang, 

The elephant drums-upon the knoll that is long, 

Gajah tcr-dorong tigii' dcpa'. 

The elephant whose stride is three fathoms, 

Bcrapa' kuat gajah [dan rimau], kuat lagi ungka'. 

A^o matter how fast the elephant [and the tiger], faster yet is the ape. 

2. Chinchang-kan, bo-landas, 

If you chop-at anything^ you •vant -something to-strike-ujX)n, 

Lompat-kan, tumpu. 

If you leap, you-must-have a taking-off- place, 

Buat sTkat 'kan pendapat. 

If you make a comb )w/ shall get (plenty ?). 

Usui asal jangan di-tinggal, 

) our beginnings attJ origin do-not-let be-desert^</, 

Jangan lupfi' kapada' bilang. 
Do-not forget this in the telling. 

Charm {"KR.mat") for catching Monkeys.' 

Gogul k'ra gogul. 

Enchant (?) the Monkey, enchant /;//;;. 

Gogul-ku, ai ! semangat lotong, k'ra', wa"wa'. 
Enchant-I, oho ! the souls (T/'lotongs [kra, etc.]. 

Kalau ta' turun, makan bOnlurun, 

li you do-not descend, you shall be c^Hen by the bear-cat, 

Ta' datang, makan binatang. 

If you not come, yoii shall be devoured by beasts. 

Jangkit kayu lemperai. 

As tips-up the tree "lemperai," 

Duduk sama' lemperai. 
Settles-down even-so the "lemperai." 

Jangkit kayu kumbang. 

As tips-up the tree "kumbang," 

Jalan kau menumpang, 

Proceed you by means of lodging, 

Berjalan juga' mui dayang tada' guna'. 

For proceeding moreover one handmaid is-not sufficient. 

Kalau gogul turun juga', munyit, semangat kau. 
If enchanted descend then, O monkeys, soul your, 

: Kemat {Alal. " hik'mat ") lotong. As to this charm see p. 215 supra. 

BLAND AS MAGIC 693 

Semangat-kau munyit. 
Soul your, O monkeys. 

Bukan ayer fmbun turun, 

It-is-not water of dew that descends, 

Ay^r mata siamang, k'ra, lotong, yang turun. 

// is water of the eyes ^siamang, kra, lotong, that descends, 

SSmangat-mu dayang yang turun. 
Soul-your, 0 handmaiden, that descends. 

Jalan-ku sepjrti tunggul, 
Walk-my like a slump, 

Jalan-ku sSpfirti batang, 
Walk-my like a tree-trunk, 

Jalan-ku s§perti mayang-mayang kilat. 
Walk-my like shadows <?/ lightning. 

Mata'-kau mSmandang aku gtlap sl-pCrli ralmn, 
Eyes-your looking-at me be darkened as-if 'oith fumigation, 

Aku lalu jangan kau memandang aku. 
As I pass, do-not you look-at me. 

Honey-collector's Charm to quiet the Bees (called "Jermal 
TEbul," or the Trap (?) of the Wild Bees).' 

Mung, mung, mung, siamang bulan, 

' Mung, mung, mung,' c?y the apes moon-zuhite, 

Tglasih, t^laga', batu. 

The apes ^ Basil, Well, atid Rock. 

Mari-lah mencntang bulan, 
Come-j'^-hither to confront the moon, 

Tundok sayang ka-pada' aku. 
Obey afid show iondness unto me. 

Tundok kasih, tundok sayang, 

Obey and show affection, obey and sho'u fondwejj, 

Sayang, gendui, kapada' chuchu. 

Show (ondness, grannies, unto you7- grandchild. 

Anak chuchu 'nak belajar 

Yotir grandchild desires to learn [how to make ?] 

Tikar purun dengan ^ gendui. 

A mat of rushes with yoti, grannies. 

Datang gendui dOri sebrang laut. 
Come-hither, grannies, from beyond the sea, 

Datang gendui deri seblah gunong. 

Come-hither, grannies, from beyond the hill-crags, 

Datang gendui buai-berbuai, 
Come-hither, grannies, swaying-to-and-fro, 

Anak chuchu 'nak belajar 

Yoicr grandchild desires to learn [how to make ?] 

^ As to this charm see p. 230 et seq., supra. ^ I.e. from. 

694 APPENDIX 

Tikar sambang dcngan ^ gendui. 

A mat oi-At'i^xX.&A-bees' -wax with you, grannies. 

Tundok gendui kapada' chuchu'. 
Obey, grannies, unto your grandchild. 

Rice Ceremonies (" Menetau ■').2 

Daun duk, daun sSlimbar,'' 

Leaves of the kr^duk (?) pahti, leaves of the selimbar, 

Puchok kayu jurei-btrjurei, 

Shoots ^ trees dangling-and-dangling, 

Jurei sampei ka-tanah, 

Dangling so as to reach to-the-ground, 

Aku mcngundorkan jembalang tanah. 
I drive-back the spirits 0/ the soil. 

Shiah kiri, shiah kanan, 

Avaunt to the left, avaunt to the right, 

Aku nak mC-nunipang sini. 
I desire-to lodge here. 

Nak tanam padi kladi pisang. 

/ desire to plant rice, yams, bananas. 

Datang de' gaung, datang de' guntong, 

Ye who came from the hills, ye who came from the tarns, 

Minta' undorkan jembalang tanah. 

/ request you to-retire, ye spirits of the soil. 

Char.m for invoking the Rice-soul at Harvest (" Panggil 

SEMANGAT I'ADI "). 

Puan-puan^ 'tina', puan-puan jantan, 
Rice-boats female, rice-boats male, 

Kur s<;mangat 'kau, 
Cluck, souls of yon, 

Anak muda', anak jantan. 

Child (i.e. girl) young, child male, 

'Nak bawa' terkendongkan ka-rumah. 

We wish to bring you slung-at-our-waist homewards. 

Scmangat Padi S'lotan, Borak, Jambi, 

Souls tJ/' Padi {of the kind called) SMotan, Borak, Jambi, 

Semangat Pulut, Jagong, Pisang, 

Souls ^glutinous- Rice, Maize, Bananas, 

Kita bawa' naik ka-rumah. 

We bear you and climb-up to-///^-house. 

Jangan tidor dalam tanah. 
Do-not sleep within the soil, 

' I.e. from. embah" ("akar") Uncaria sclero- 

2 For this and the next charm see phylla, Roxb. {Kubiacea-), a large wild 

Pr- 358, 359 supra. gambler. 

•* According to Klinkert, a big ^ A rice receptacle used at weddings, 

climbing parasite. Ridley has " sel- etc. 

BLAND AS MAGIC 695 

Mari tidor dalam klambu'. 

Come-hither awo? sleep within the mosquito-curtain. 

On reaching the house say " Datang " ("We are coming"), to which the 
people in the house should answer " Datang-lah " ("Come hither then !"). 

Charm for Exorcism (" Bersawai " = ^£j. "Bersalong" or "Tisi"').^ 

Satu', dua', tiga','pat, lima', nam, tujuh ! 
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven ! 

L^pas kepala' tujuh ! 
Let-go heads seven ! 

Semangat di-bayang-bayang jangan lepas. 
But the soul coming-aw(/-going do-not let-go. 

Hantu shetan biar lepas. 

The Demons and Devils let go. 

De' dalam urat, dalam dageng 

From within the sinews and within the flesh 

Tijuk 2 siyau, tijuk dingin. 

Be cold ivhat was hot, be cold and cool. 

Turun segala' bisa', naik tawar. 
Descend all Venoms, ascend Neutralisers. 

Aku menawar segala' bisa'. 
I neutralise all Venoms, 

Naik tawar. 
Ascend Neutralisers. 

Charm used by the B'landas of Kuala Langat in the B£rjin 

Ceremony. 

O Guru sekelian Guru, 

0 spiritual-guides, all spiritual-guides, 

B^sar kechi' tuhah muda'. 
Big a7id little, old a}td yo\mg. 

Sahya' minta' tolong ubat, 

1 ask-for assistance ?'//-medicine, 

Sakit dalam urat. 

For sickness in the veins, 

[Dalam tulang, sendi, nyawa']. 

In the bones, joints, or spirit [as the case 77iay be\ 

Charm for the Cramp (called "Semut Buta' ''). ^ 

Gerembak gerembai, 
Gerembak gerembai, 

1 For this and the next charm see "semut -an Buta "= giant's or ogre's 

vol. ii. p. 296. 2 =Mal. "sejuk." cramp, i.e. cramp caused by an ogre 

3 For this charm see vol. ii. p. 297. or giant which is believed to feed upon 

There seems to be some play on, the victim. The charm opens as if 

or confusion between the expression referring to ants, but " lahang Buta'" 

"semut buta' " = " blind ants,'' and can only refer to the giant (" Bota"). 

696 APPENDIX 

Juntei kayu ara', 

Hangs-down the tree "ficus," 

I'anjang janggut, merah mata'. 

Long too is your beard, ^ scarlet j'^wr eyes. 

Labuh 2 unta'-unta'. 

Hanging-downwards in tatters. 

Buat-ap^' budak bawa', patah manau,'' 

Wherefore do yoti children bring? as /snap this rattan, 

Merosoh mclasah lahang* Hantu, 

{Even so) broken and damaged be your jaw-bone, O Demon. 

Lahang buta' ketuta' kfituti', 

Your jaw-bone, O Giant , 

BSsi kttok, bC'si kling, 

Like iron that is hammered (?), like iron of the Klings, 

Merosoh mclasah lahang Hantu, lahang Bula'. 

Broken <?//</ damaged /v;w/r jaws, O Demon, your jaws, 0 Giant. 

Tawar aku mfnawar lahang Buta'. 

Neulraliser my neutralises jv«;- jaw, 0 Giant. 

Bukan aku-punya' pjnawar, 

// is not my-own Neutral iser, 

Malim I'utih-punya' penawar, 

// is Malim I'utih's-own Neutraliser, 

Lahang Buta'. 

For the jaws tf/" Giants. 

Charm against the "Hantu Uri " (Caul Demon).^ 

Puchok salak, puchok ranggam. 

Shoots of the salak, shoots of the ranggam, 

Uri jala', uri lagam, 

Caul like a casting-net, caul like a horse's bit (?), 

Uri bJrikat, tlrbuku' uri. 

Caul that art bound, be unloosened, 0 caul. 

Uri tlrtambat, t^rbuka' uri. 

Caul that art tied-up, be unloosened, O caul. 

Uri b:r-simpei, tOrbuka' uri. 

Caul that art noosed, be unloosened, 0 caul. 

Uri ber-sauh, t^rbuka" uri. 

Caul that art anchored, be unloosened, O caul. 

Oi Jin mt^numpang, t^rbuka' uri. 

Ho Jin that lodgest here, be unloosed this caul. 

Oi Jin Shetan, t^rbuka' uri. 

Ho Jin and Devils, be unloosed this caul. 

Oi Jin Rimba', t.rbuka' uri. 

Ho ymfrom the Deep-forest, be unloosened this caul. 

^ I.e. feelers (if applied to ants). beard, hanging downwards in tatters 

2 The expression (1. u.) was ex- (i.e. 'elf-knots')." 
plained as = like cobwebs ("sarang ^ =Mal. " rotan manau.'' 

laba-laba"). Probably the right read- ■• =Mal. "rahang." 

ing is " Scarlet your eyes, long too your " For this charm see vol. ii. p. 15. 

BLAND AS MAGIC 697 

Oi Jin Batu Pcr'pat, terbuka' iiri. 

Ho Yin from the Rock (?/" Per'pat-trees, be unloosened this caul. 

Oi Jin Bukit Ara', terbuka' uri. 

Ho Jin/;-^/M the Hill ^ licus-lrees, be unloosened this caul. 

Oi Jin Kempas, terbuka' uri. 

Ho ]'\nfrom the Kempas-tree, be unloosened this caul. 

Uri ^ Hantu Laut, 

Q^ixA-spirit, Demon of the Sea, 

Uri petir kilat, ujan banchi, ujan rinye. 

Ca.\i\-spirit that earnest from thunder, lightning, rain that drizzles, rain that 
mizzles. 

Uri pulang ka-Malim Putih, Malim Sidi. 

O Caul-spirit, return to-Malim Putih, Malim Sidi. 

Bukan aku membuka uri, 

/t is not I who unloosen this caul, 

Malim Putih Malim Sidi yang buka' uri. 

/t is Malim Putih and Malim Sidi who unloosen this caul. 

Blandas Charm against the Bajang.^ 

Hum Bajang^ langhwi,* 
CM, O Bajang Langsuir, 

Mati-anak asal jadi. 

A Stillborn-Child is the ongin ^'ou sprang-from. 

Bajang langhwi, 
O Bajang Langsuir, 

Sepah pinang Bagina' Ali.^ 
Quid of betel-nut of Baginda Ali. 

Blandas Charm against the Langsuir (" SfiRAPAH Langsuir").*' 

Langhwi,'^ Langhwa. 
Langhwi, Langhwa. 

Paroh sapengetop.^ 
y'our beak is stumpy. 

Bulu kain chindai. 

Your feathers are cloth of silk. 

' Explained as =" Hantu Uri, yang these tribes. Cp. Bes. "sapet" = 

makan darah ibu di-jilat." The caul " hapet," the flying-fox ; Bes. " soroh " 

has different names according to its = " horoh," old or aged; and many 

shape. other examples. 

- For this charm see vol. ii. p. 14. ^ This last line is obviously due to 

3 " Bajang "= Mai. "bajang" (a Mohammedan influence, doubtless 

demon, as to which see Skeat's I^Talay derived at second hand through the 

Magic, p. 321 seq.\ Malay. 

* "Langhwi" is the Blandas and ^ For this charm see vol. ii. p. 13. 

Besisi form of Mai. "Langsuir"' {ibid. " Mai. "Langsuir." 

p. 325 seq.\ The initial " s " of a * Explained as = "pandak' 

syllable is often turned into " h " among (stumpy). 

698 APPENDIX 

Mata' mata' saga'. 

Your eyes are eyes of the crab's-eye-bean. 

Tungkul pinang muda'. 

Your heart is an areca-nut young. 

Darah benang chayar. 

Your blood is thread watery. 

Urat benang bulang. 

Your veins are thread lox^'i'j\xi'g-o^\-cocks'' -spurs. 

Tulang ranting aur. 

Your bones are twigs of the giant-bamboo. 

Ekor kipas China'. 

Your tail is a fan ^ China. 

Turun bisa',^ naik tawar. 

Descend venom, ascend Neutraliser. 

Tawar dalam tulang, tawar dalam urat. 

Neutralise vetwm in the bones, neutralise it in the veins. 

Tawar dalam sfindi. 
Neutralise it in the joints. 

Tawar dalam rumah, tawar dalam utan. 

Neutralise it within tlie house, neutralise // in the jungle. 

Turun bisa', naik tawar. 

Descend venom, ascend Neutraliser. 

Kunchi Langhwi. 
Lock-up-//^i? Lang-suir. 

Turun blsa', naik tawar. 

Descend venom, ascend Neutraliser. 

Charm kor expelling the Pontianak (a Demon). ^ 

Pontianak mati btranak. 
Pontianak that didst die in-birth. 

Mati di-timpa' tambun tambak. 

Die awfl' be-crushed beneath the embankment of the roadway. 

Kalau damak panjang pandak. 
Whether the dart be long or short. 

Akan mclemang-kan Pontianak, Jin Langsuir. 

Let it serve for cooking the Pontianak, and the Demon Langsuir. 

Diam Pontianak di-puchok kayu. 

Dwell, O Pontianak, in-/^iJ shoots ^ trees. 

Diam Jin di-sakat. 

Dwell, 0 Jin, in the epiphytes. 

Jangan menumpang Langsuir 
Do-not lodge here, O Langsuir. 

Jangan mt^numpang Jin. 
Do-not lodge here, 0 Jin. 

* I.e. pain. 15. As to the Pontianak in Malay super- 

^ For this charm see vol. ii. pp. 14, stition.see Skeat's iT/a/a;/i1/<3_§7V, p. 327. 

BLAND AS MAGIC 699 

Jangan menumpang Pontianak. 
Do-not lodge here, O Pontianak. 

Jangan menumpang Hantu Rimba'. 

Do-not lodge here, 0 Demon of the Deep-Forest. 

Jangan menumpang Hantu Utan. 

Do-not lodge here, 0 Demon of the Jungle. 

Hantu utan pulang ka-utan. 

Demons of the Jungle, return to the Jungle. 

Hantu Rimba' pulang ka-rimba'. 

Demons of the Deep- Forest, return \.othe Deep-Forest. 

Blood-throwing Charm. ^ 

01 Hantu Pemburu, 
Ho, Demon Hunter, 

Ambil darah sa-chupa', 
Accept ^ blood one chupa', 

Gulei dCngan chendawan. 

And cook it with your mushrooms. 

Jangan-kau buru sini. 
Do-not you hunt here. 
Buru-kau panchu wali.^ 
Hunt you in the marsh of i^\ (?). 

Buru-kau panchu mahang.3 

Hunt you in the marsh of the mahang trees. 

Anjing-kau Tampoi. 
Dog-your is Tampoi. 

Anjing-kau Koing. 
Dog-your is Koing. 

Anjing-kau Sukum. 
Dog-your is Sukum. 

Anjing-kau Langsat. 
Dog-your is Langsat. 

Sentak pisau katok, 

/ draw-forth ?ny knife for-chopping, 

Nak raeng'rat akar tawar. 

In-order-to sever the Creeper Neutralising. 

Nak m^ng'rat akar kadam. 
In-order-to sever the Creeper Big. 

Nak memadam Hantu Buru. 

In-order-tb extinguish the Demon Hunter. 

Jangan b.rburu sini, 
Do-not hunt here, 

1 For this charm see vol. ii. p. 297. is told to go and hunt m the forest of 

2 Sic, ? " panchur Ali." Ranchak Mahang ; see /. R.A S. , 

3 In a charm against the Spectre S. B., No. 7, P- ^7 (reprinted m 
Huntsman used by Malays in Perak he Skeat's Malay Magic, p. 117)- 

700 APPENDIX 

Porgi balik ka-t:mpit asal-kau, 

But go back io-the place ^origin-your, 

Di panchu Ali. 

In the swamps of Ali. 

B'landas Charm for exorcising the Polong.i 

Fatah pahat, patah perdah. 

Broken is the chisel, broken the adze-helve. 

Patah mimahat batang tilentang. 
Broken in chiselling a tree-trunk supine. 

Patah ra'ang,2 patah lidah. 

Broken be your jaw-bones, broken your tongues. 

Aku mulang orang ^ datang. 

As I go-back, so do you come-forward, 

Datang de' laut, pulang ka-laut. 

Ye who come from the-SGz, return \.o-the-stSi. 

Datang de' gunong, pulang ka-gunong. 

Yc who come from the crags, return to-Mf-crags. 

Datang de' tanah, pulang ka-tanah. 

Yc who come from ///<r-earth, return to-///^'-earth. 

Asal m.nj.'idi hantu polong. 

Such your-or'\^\n, 6* demon "polong." 

Charm for exorcising the Pawul (a Kind of Grave-Demon).^ 

Puchok ulan daun ulan. 

Shoots ^convoh-ulus, leaves o/" convolvulus. 

Gintas'* sa-panjang lantei 
Brush-past at-length-*?/" //i^-floor. 

Sa-bulan dua bulan 

One month and two months 

Shiah ** kiri, shiah kanan. 

Avaunt to thcAeh-hand, avaunt to-the-righl-haftd. 

Sial aku, Pawul bangkei. 
P'atal be I, Pawul be carrion. 

B'landas Charm for Protection against Tigers. 

Trong wet, trong wau.^ 
Trong wet, trong wau. 

Sangkut tunggul mulang-mulang. 

Be stuck a/«<?w^-M^-stumps going-to-and-fro. 

' For this charm see vol. ii. p. *' " Shiah " = Mai. "Siah." 

14. ^ " Trong wet, trong wau." I could 

2 " Ra'ang '■ = Mali "rahang." get no proper explanation of this, but 

^ Lit. people. the words appear to be onomatopoetic, 

* As to this charm see vol. ii. p. probably intended to represent a tiger's 

105. growling. The rest of the charm is 

° " Gintas "= Mai. "m.lintas." clear enough. See vol. ii. p. 294. 

BLAND AS MAGIC 701 

'Mtrat ^ aku sudah d'hulu. 
Weight-giver of-me has-been-j-^/of first. 

Rimau punan ktpala' orang. 

O tiger, go-craving-for the head of Somebody. 

Btrat-lah kaki gantong bumi. 

Heavy-/5£ your hind-feet hung-about-with /■//t^-earth. 

Btrat tangan, gantong batu. 

Heavy-(^£ your-{oxt^z.\s=> hung-about-with rock. 

Tujoh lapis di-hadap aku. 
Seven folds be in-front of-me. 

'Merat aku sudah d'hulu. 
Weight-giver of-me has-been-ja/^ first. 

A Second B'landas Tiger-charm (apparently consisting of a 
Couple of Stanzas of the Malay "Pantun" Type).^ 

Tambakau goyang-goyang. 

The tobacco-plant waves ayid waves. 

Aku tanam di-ruang batu. 

I planted it m-a hole of the rocks. 

Tepok, tarek tali. 

Clap, and pull the string. 

Bage bulan dinding de' mata-hari.^ 
As-when the moon is fenced-ofF from the sun. 

[Aku] minta ayer sa-gayong. 
[I] ask-for water a-ladleful. 

Sa-gayong tepi p'rigi. 

A-ladleful yr<7OT the side of the well. 

Aku bediri saperti payong.* 

May I stand-here zs-ii protected by a«-umbrella. 

Bagei anak bidadari. 

Or like a-child of-the-Fairies. 

1 "Merat," contracted from Malay ^ The allusion is, of course, to the 
" Pcmberat," as was explained to me belief that the sun is desirous of de- 
at the time. It means literally " weight- vouring the moon, which, on the 
giver " ; and hence, technically, a occasion of an eclipse, he is believed to 
" weight - giving charm," which it is be actually attempting to do. 

the object of the threatened person to * " Saperti payong," I take to be 

repeat before the tiger can get at elliptical for " saperti orang di-payong- 

him. kan." The object of this part of the 

2 As to this charm see vol. ii. p. charms appears to be to secure the 
295. invisibility of the speaker. 

702 APPENDIX 

Si Nibong. 

A BUandas Story. ^ 

Tihang nibong, atap nibong, 

Its posts were <?/" nibong, its thatch ^nibong, 

Lantei nibong, tinggal kampong. 

Its floor ^nibong, deserted is the village. 

Tinggal kawas Busu Baba', 
Deserted the holding of Busu Baba' 

Bujang Semangan tinggal kachip 

And Bujong Simangan, deserted the betelnut-scissors 

Tujoh biji, tinggal pinang 

Seven in-number, deserted the betelnut-trees 

Tujoh batang, tinggal sirih 

Seven in-number, deserted the betel-vines 

Tujoh junjong, dalam kachip 

Seven in-number, in the wrt//'(?r ^betelnut-scissors 

Tujoh kachip, dalam pinang 

Seven betelnut-scissors, in the matter of betelnuts 

Tujoh biji, pinang siluang, 

Seven seeds, ^betelnut {of the kind called) sJltiang, 

Dalam sirih tujoh lei ; 

In the matter of the betel-leaves, seven leaves ; 

Buat kachip taring pllandok. 

Made were the betelnut-scissors of the eye-teeth of a mouse-deer. 

Kata' adik Bujang Stmangan. 

Spake the younger-brother Bujang SCmangan. 

Buka' k'Mika' lima' ^ abang. 

Open the Times Five elder-brother. 

Kita jalan ka-kampong orang. 

We 74'/// go to-///f -village of certain people. 

Baju di-masok kain b.lum. 

Coal he had put-on, skirt not-yet. 

Sapu-tangan bclum saluar bjlum. 
Headcloth not-yet, trousers not-yet. 

Kata' Bujang Semangan simpolan 
Said Bujang Sfimangan a headcloth 

Sutra' muri sa-ratus sambilan puloh 

(7/" silk the finest one-hundred and mn^iy 

Lima' ringgit herga-nya.^ 
And five dollars the price of it. 

^ This fragmentary tale was collected '-' /.<?. the Malayan diagram of divina- 

from an old BSsisi man called B:d6h tion (or magic squares), to ascertain 

at Sepang K'.chil. He said that it was the auspicious hour for starting on the 

in reality a Blandas story, and that no journey. See Skeat, J\lal. Magic, pp. 

doubt accounts for its being almost 555 seq. 

purely Malayan in language. For a •* F. /.adds "rega-nya" (the Blandas 

summary of it see vol. ii. p. 312 ct seq. form) following the Malay "herga-nya." 

I 

BLAND AS STORY OF SI N I BONG 703 

Abang belangak ka-negri orang. 

Do you brother go to-M^-country of certain people. 

Bawa' pidang sapu-laman. 

"Yzk^ your sword the "sweeper of the courtyard." 

Bawa' k'ris sapu-rantau. 

Take^'<w/r kris the "sweeper <?/" river-reaches." 

Biar baik, jangan beri lovoyt.^ 

Let all be well, do-not give trouble. 

Antarkan kami, tukang Jinang, 
Guide us, 0 craftsman Jinang, 

Jalan ka-rumah Jukrah tuhah. 

To go to-M^-house of the Jukrah aged. 

Tengah jalan Petri Adah. 

Half way (^they met) Princess Adah. 

Petri Tepong kakak-nya adik-nya, 

And Princess Tepong elder sister and younger sister, 

Mentri ada' antar Petri 

A Minister there-was escorting the Princesses 

Jalan ka-rumah Jukrah tuhah. 

To go to-//z^-house of the Jukrah aged. 

Simpang lima' ka-kampong bungil', 

By the cross-roads five to-//i£-village (p/" flowers, 

Simpang lima ka-pulau buah. 

By the cross-roads five to-^^£-isle <?/" fruit. 

MenSpat rumah Jukrah tuhah 
Opposite the house of the Jukrah aged 

Limau abong limau pagar. 

Grew the limes called abong, the limes called pagar. 

Sampei ka-rumah Jukrah tuhah, 

When they reached to-//zf-house of the Jukrah aged, 

Di-habu hangat anjing bangkang.^ 
By-//i(?-ashes hot was a dog savage. 

Minta' ubat padi mentri. 

They asked-for medicine from the minister. 

Ada' ubat ambun batu,^ 

He had medicine the dew of the rock, 

Nak mJnyampak habu hangat. 
In-order-to cast-on the ashes hot. 

Nak menempoh anjing bangkang. 
In-order-to strike the dog savage. 

Sampei ka-rumah Jukrah tuhah, 

So they reached to-//i^-house of the Jukrah aged, 

1 Explained as = Mai. " lorat " (from according to the Bisisi it also means 
Arab, "tharurat"?) used in the sense "lying down" or "crouching" (Mai. 
given above, sed quare. "baring"). 

2 Perhaps = Mal. "bengkeng." But ^ Or " dew-like stone " {i.e. hail?). 

704 APPENDIX 

Tidor di-rumah Jukrah tuhah. 

^«a? slept at-M^-house of the Jukrah aged. 

Tengah malani Petri Ttpong 

YidXi through the night the Princess Ttpong 

Tidor sama' abang Nibong. 
Slept with brother Nibong. 

Besok pagi abang Nibong 
Next-morning early brother Nibong 

Ada' tingal PStri Tcpong. 

Has deserted the Princess Tcpong. 

Tahi mata' sa-kgdang tungku, 

The droppings of her eyes were as-big-as fire-stones, 

Tahi gigi sa-kedang dapor. 

The scourings of her teeth as-big-as the hearth. 

Btlayar laut pulau BSrapi, 

They ^ sailed to the sea of the Island Fiery, 

Kanchang jong di-sakat pulau KSdong, 

And swift was their vessel till it grounded on the Island ^/Kedong, 

Itu-lah sa-belah laut Pahang. 
That-is beside the sea of Pahang. 

B'landas Charms according to Vaughan-Stevens." 

First Birth-Charm. 

Oong ooree moolah ooree-atas bukit rumput labas dee-chabut bloong-tuk 
bloong-penowar menowar beeser ooree nike towar toorun beeser ooree. 

Ung uri mula uri atas bukit rumput Itpas (?) di-chabut 

Om ! placenta original placenta upon the hill grass loose is-pulled out 

bilang terbilang ^ penawar menawar bisa uri naik 

saying and saying the neutraliser neutralises the venom of the placenta rise 

tawar turun bisa uri. 

neutraliser descend venom ^"placenta. 

Second Birth-Charm. 

Galoogal pasal lintang patar loong-soo laloo kattak treejun larbie munkar 
teejak manow leechin booloot poolang kar lumpoo penang poolang kar-ragung 
seeree poolang kar-ragung chaboot beeloontok beeloon towar menowar beeser 
ploosoo. 

Gelugor pasal * lintang patah bungsu lalu 

Gelugor and pasal be crossed aiid broken when youngest-born (?) passes 

* I.e. Si Nibong and his brother. first Vaughan-Stevens' spelling, and then 

'^ These are given on pp. 143-152 mine, with suggested emendations. 

of the first part of the " Malerialen •* This very doubtful phrase recurs 

zur Kenntniss der Wilden Stiimme auf elsewhere, v. infra, pp. 714, 715. 

der Halbinsel Malaka" {Veroffentl. ■* "Gelugor" is a kind of sour wild 

Konigl. Mas. f Volkerk.,'Q2cnA\\. Heft mango. "Pasal," Ardisia odonto- 

3-4 = " Vaughan-Stevens, ii."). I give phylla, Wall. (Afj'rsinecr). 

INVOCATIONS 705 

katak terjun labi mungkir tijak manau lichin bSlut pulang ka- 

frog jump-down tortoise refuse to step-on rattan slippery eel back to 

lumpor pinang pulang ka-ragong chabut bilang terbilang tavvar 

mud areca-nut back to calyx(?) extract it saying and saying neutraliser 

menawar bisa p^lusoh. 
neutralises venom <?/" loosener. 

Farewell to thf: Dying. 

O matee matee-lar jangghan ingart lagee bapi moiee soodara nenek moyang 
nn'ang matee assing pergee nn'ung heedup mencharee makun. 

O mati mati-lah jangan ingat lagi bapai 

O dying -one, die indeed ! Do not remember more your father 

moi sudara nenek moyang nang mati asing 

mother brothers grandfathers great-grandfathers let them who are dead apart 

pergi nang hidup menchari makan. 
go who are living seek food. 

Charm of the Necklace. 1 

Oong matee matee-anak, matee timpah tannah tamoon tamok apa asal kow 
minyaydy hantoo darrar orang matee brannok eetoo asal kow minyaydy matee- 
anak dee tebing, poolang kar tebing matee-anak batoo ampah, poolang kar batoo 
ampah. Chaboot boolong took-towar nenowar hantoo matee-anak toorun beeser 
matee-anak nike penowar akoo. 

Ung mati mati-anak. 
Om ! Die 0 Matianak ! 

Mati timpah tanah tamun tamak. 

Die, crushed by the earth heaped on the roadway. 

Apa asal kau menjadi ? 

What is the origin of thy being ? 

Hantu darah orang mati beranak, 

Demon of the blood of a person dead in-childbirth, 

Itu asal kau menjadi ! 

That is the origin (^/"thy being. 

Mati-anak di-tebing, pulang ka-tebing. 

Matianak oi the river-bank, return to the river-bank. 

Mati-anak batu-ampa', pulang ka-batu-ampa'. 
Matianak of the rock-bed, return to the rock-bed. 

Chabut bilang ter [bilang ?] tawar menawar hantu mati-anak. 

Pluck-out saying and saying neutralise and neutralise the demon Matianak. 

Turun bisa mati-anak ! 

Descend venom of the Matianak ! 

Naik p; nawar aku ! 
Rise neutraliser mine ! 

1 This is evidently an invocation vocation is supposed to give the neck- 

against the Pontianak demon, against lace the power of an amulet : see 

whom the necklace is presumably in- p. 153 supra, and \'aughan- Stevens, 

tended to protect the wearer. The in- ii. 145. 

VOL. I 2 Z 

7o6 APPENDIX 

Charm used when clearing Jungle for Planting 

O hantoo teeap goontong teeap poolang chaharoo hantoo sebooroo akoo 
nn"ok-natow nin tannah. O eetoe powang naing brimpat akoo mintar padar 
powang naing brimpat akoo nn'ok-natow nin tannar ; bree seejok dallam badan 
iangghan rosak, jangghan benassar dallam badan bree seejok dingin dee dallam 
badan akoo inee. 

O hantu tiap guntong tiap, 

0 demon every (7/"tarn every. 

Pulang chahari (?) bantu seburu. 
Return seek the demon huntsman. 

Aku 'nak natau nin tanah. 

1 want to clear this land. 

O itu pawang neng bdrempat. 

0 those magicians the four. 

Aku minta' pada pawang neng bfrSmpat, 

1 ask ^magicians the four. 

Aku 'nak natau nin tanah. 
I want to clear this land. 

Bfri sijok dalam badan. 
Give coolness within body. 

Jangan rosak jangan binasa dalam badan. 
Do-not ruin do-not destroy within body. 

Bfri sijok dingin didalam badan aku ini. 
Give coolness cold within body mine this. 

Charm used before burning the Felled Clearing. 

Ah keelat dee langit dee boohoomey akoo nn'ok lepas brangsong apee nn'ok 
bakkar oomar akoo mow mangil powang naing brimpat akoo mow mangil angin 
toojoe penyuroe toojoe sepangkat mangil angin pooling bleeong. 

Ah kilat di-langit di-buhumi, 

0 lightning in the sky on the earth, 

Aku 'nak Icpas birangsang api, 

1 want completely to-kindle fire, 

'Ndk bakar huma. 

Wishing to burn the clearing. 

Aku mau mangil pawang neng bdrempat. 
I wish to call magicians the four. 

Aku mau mangil angin tujoh p^nyuru tujoh sapangkat. 
I wish to call wind seven corners seven in-a-row. 

Mangil angin puting bSliong. 
Call the whirlwind. 

Charm used at the Rice-sowing. 

O partree dong heetam bertapar dee lowt annam boolan inee sayar mow 
mangil tannam padee sar-gringam sar-jumpoot nike-lar be-ratus be-rebus be- 
koyan. 

MANTRA MAGIC 707 

O Patri Dang Hitam bertapa di-laut ! 

O Princess Dang Hitam that dwellest-as-a-recluse in the sea 1 

Anam bulan ini saya mau mangil. 

Six months these I wish to call thee. 

Tanam padi sa-gerenggam sa-jemput. 

/ atn planting rice a-handml a-pinch. 

Naik-lah beratus beribu bekoyan. 

Let-it-arise a hundredfold a thousandfold by-//i!£-ton. 

Charm used before reaping the Rice. 

Yang minyooiing meelakkong yang bootar mee-addap akoo lak-nowi, padee 
toojoe tanki meeambee smunghut padee bawar poolang kar roomah. . . . Akoo 
nn'ok mesar hantoo tar keesar. 

Yang menyuling milakang yang buta mi-adap. 

Thou that squintest turn -thy -back to me, thou that art blind turn -thy -face 

towards me. 
Aku nak (?) nuai padi tujoh tangkai. 
I wish to reap rice seven stems. 

Mi-ambil semangat padi bawa pulang ka-rumah. . . . 
To take the soul (Thrice a«^ bring // home \.o-the-\\o\x%t. . . . 
Aku 'nak misar 1 hantu takisar. 
I want to turn-off demons haunting, 

LOGAN'S MANTRA OR MENTERA^ CHARMS. 
Pendinding.^ 
[The Pendinding or In- walling charm is to protect us from various dangers.] 
Hong * kachula katumbo bisi * kanduri iang limu kahutan katungalan ^ aku 

1 Probably = Mai. "mengisar.'" own scheme quite consistently, mixing 

- In the original, "Mintira." These up the long and short vowels pretty 

magic formulae, the translation of which frequently. He also constantly puts i 

will be found in vol. ii. of this work, on for j (as in Iang), and n for «o- (as in 

pp. 329-333, are here given in Logan's ankau). 

original spelling, with the slight modi- In view, however, of the fact that 

fication noticed below. The key to it, these charms are not in standard Malay, 

as given on p. 39 of vol. i. of the but in the patois or dialect spoken by 

Journal of the Indian Archipelago, is the Mentera (with the phonology of 

as follows : a (as in far) ; a (as it in which we have but an imperfect 

tub) ; e (as ey in they, or a in dare) : acquaintance), it has been thought best 

I (as ee in see) ; i (as in pin) ; ei (as i to adhere to the original spelling, 

in pine) ; J (as in no) ; H (as 00 in merely pointing out dialectic peculi- 

room) ; « (as in bull) ; eu (as 21 in arities and giving an approximate 

user or eu in eulogy). Malay version, and equivalents where it 

Logan's (') accents have for con- seemed desirable. Some passages are 

venience been turned into (~) in the unfortunately corrupt or unintelligible, 

present reprint. So that his scheme, ^ j_ /_ ^_ ;_ ^09. 

theoretically, is much the same as the * Logan's note on this word will be 

one used elsewhere in this work. As found on p. 329 of vol. ii. 

a matter of fact, however, Logan, be- •' The meaning of the next five words 

sides confusing a and e, printing both is very doubtful, and the text may be 

e, habitually puts i for /, while his ei corrupt, 

is really ai, and he does not use his '' From" tungal"( = Mai. "tunggal"). 

7o8 APPENDIX 

ta'dinding ^ batu aku baring dedinding bum! tierap bertarap tutop angin salagori 
lean lawanku santa sabut didalam gantong klam kabut mata orang miningo aku 
datang klam kabut pllmun aku mallmun sikllan muso sitruku lawanku guru sidik 
turun berdoa aku minginakan doa plimun sikllan mata muso sitrukan lawanku. 

Suggested Malay Version. 

Hong, kachula katumbo' btsi kanduri (?) yang'elmu ka-hutan ka-tunggalan, aku 
ter-dinding batu, aku baring di-dinding bhumi, tiarap-ber-tiarap, tutop angin sela- 
guri 'kan lawan-ku, sentak sabut didalam gantong klam kabut mata orang men- 
engo' aku datang klam kabut pelimun aku melimun sekelian musoh setru lawan-ku 
guru sidik turun berdua aku mengcnakan doa pelimun sdkelian mata musoh setru 
'kan lawan-ku. 

Pendinding. 

Heh pisamin namanla bisi aku dilm dalam kandang maleikat sablas diklriku 
aku diam dalam kandong kandang maleikat sablas dikanan ko aku diam dalam 
kandang maleikat sablas diblakang aku, aku diam didalam kandang maleikat 
sablas diadapan ko terniaia Mahamad mangkal '^ aku terniala bulan bintang 
mataharl jikalau tida tirniaia aku pun tida terniala dan terniala bomi dan langit 
mengkal ^ aku pun terniaia jikalu tida terniala bomi dan langit aku pun tida 
terniala terniaia mayat didalam kubor mengkal - aku pun terniaia birkat dekabul 
kan doa guruku kapada aku kabulkan Mahamad kabulkan baginda rasul Allah 
maka kabul aku memakei doa saribu niawa tidala aku terniaia saada^ iang 
berniawa diatas dunia ini.^ 

Malay Version. 

Hei, Pisamin nania-nya besi, aku diam dalam kandang malaikat sablas di- 
kiri-ku, aku diam dalam kandong kandang malaikat sablas di-kanan-ku, aku diam 
dalam kandang malaikat sablas di-blakang-ku, aku diam didalam kandang malai- 
kat sablas di-hadapan-ku ; t6r-anyaya Muhamad maka aku t^r-anyaya, bulan 
bintang matahari jikalau tidak tcr-anyaya, aku-pun tidak ter-anyaya, dan ter- 
anyaya bhumi dan langit, maka aku-pun ter-anyaya, jikalau tidak ter-anyaya 
bhumi dan langit, aku-pun tidak tcr-anyaya, berkat di-qabul-kan doa guru-ku 
kapada aku ; qabul-kan Muhamad, qabul-kan Baginda rasul Allah, maka qabul 
aku mdmakai doa sa-ribu nyawa, tidak-lah aku t6r-anyaya sa'-ada yang ber-nyawa 
di-atas dunia ini. 

Pengaseh. 

[The Pengasih is a charm to make others love us.] 

Minia aku sidayong - dayong, aku tuang depanchur, aku tiga aku sepirti 
payong, aku berjalan lebch deri ana segala manusia, berkat aku memakei 
pengaseh, habis kaseh segala manusia iang kaki dua berjari lima, usakan antara 
manusia selangkan rumput ranting kayu kayan bomi dan langit tundo kaseh sa'- 
ada tundo sayang tundo gimar pfida aku juga.^ 

"solitary." These dialects often have must be recollected, is spoken in the 
a nasal for the nasal + sonant of the villages of the inland district of Mai- 
Malay equivalent. See charm called acca, of which the Mentcra frequent 
" Chucha," ?>{/>-a, i-.^'. "engang." the jungles). ^ ]\ial. "maka." 
^ Logan translates wrongly, " I am ^ Apparently = " s5 -f- ada" = "all 
not walled": it should be, "I am there are " ; cf. the next charm, 
walled in " : " ta'-" = Mal. " ter-" here * /. /. A. i. 309, 310. 
(as in M^nangkabau Malay, which, it ^ Ibid. 310, 311. 

MANTRA MAGIC 709 

Malay Version. 

Minyak aku si-dayong-dayong, aku tuang, di-panchur, aku tegak, aku seperti 
payong, aku ber-jalan lebeh deri anak segala manusia, berkat aku memakai 
pengasih, habis kasih segala manusia yang kaki dua ber-jari lima, usah-kan 
antara manusia selang-kan rumput ranting kayu-kayu-an bhumi dan langit tun- 
dok kasih sa-ada tundok sayang tundok gemar pada aku juga. 

PiMANIS (PkMANIS). 

The Pemanis (from manis, sweet) renders the person using it universally 
agreeable. 

Pucho pimanis daun pimanls, aku titas sambll berlari, dudu pun aku terlalu 
manis, berdiri pun aku terlalu manis, manis dipandang segala manusia berkaki 
dua berjari lima sepirti bulan dangan matahari, terlalu manis memandang chayia 
muka aku, birkat aku makei doa pimanis nai chayia manis di muka aku.^ 

Malay Version. 

Puchok pemanis, daun pemanis, aku tetas sambil ber-lari, dudok-pun aku 
ter-lalu manis, ber-diri-pun aku ter-lalu manis, manis di-pandang segala manusia, 
ber-kaki dua, ber-jari lima, seperti bulan dengan matahari, ter-Ialu manis meman- 
dang chahia muka aku, berkat aku memakai do'a pemanis, naik chahia manis di- 
muka aku. 

Panundo (Penundok). 

The Penundo' secures submission from others. 

Paku 2 rondo, paku rinda, aku litta didalam sibi,^ aku dudu dalam orang iang 
bania, aku juga mintara'* iang libbeh rasul Allah, melakukan aku simbileh 
minama ° mamu, aku dudu segala manusia iang berniawa abes ^ tundo, tundokan 
Allah, tundokan Mohamad, ditundokan baginda rusul Allah, birkat aku memakei 
doa pinundo aku nundo " segala manusia, berkaki dua berjari lima, kabulkan 
Allah, kabulkan Mahamad, kabulkan baginda rasul Allah, kabulkan aku memakei 
doa pinundo aku memadap tuntong * berjiwa segala manusia berkaki dua berjari 
lima.^ 

Malay Version, 

Paku rondo', paku rendah, aku letak di-dalam sibai, aku dudok dalam orang 
yang banyak, aku juga mentara yang lebih rasul Allah melaku-kan aku semb'leh 
minama (?) mamu (?) aku dudok, segala manusia yang ber-nyawa habis tundok, 
[di-]tundok-kan Allah, [di-]tundok-kan Muhamad, di-tundok-kan Baginda rasul 
Allah, berkat aku memakai do'a penundo', aku nundok[-kan] segala manusia 
ber-kaki dua, ber-jari lima, [di-]qabul-kan Allah, [di-]qabul-kan Muhamad, [di-] 
qabul-kan Baginda rasul Allah, qabul-kan aku memakai do'a penundo' aku meng- 
adap tentang [yang] ber-jiwa segala manusia, [yang] ber-kaki dua, ber-jari lima. 

1 y. /. ^. i. 311. c ]\Ial. '-habis." 

- " Paku " = " nail " (as Logan in- " From tundo (?.Ial. "tundok"), ap- 

terprets it), or perhaps more probably parently by nasalisation of the initial ; 

" fern." the form, being seemingly passive, 

^ Mai. "sibai." can hardly be for " menundo " (Mai. 

* Mai. "sementara" ; cf. next charm. "menundok"). 

* Interpreted by Logan as = Mai. ^ Mai. "tentang." 
*')'ang bernama," sed qucere. ^ J. I. A. i. 311, 312. 

7IO APPENDIX 

Chucha. 
The Chucha causes enemies to lose their strength and be humiliated. 

Siluso padang silasa 

Siligi batang sulaseh ^ 

Minta tutop hati lang gusar 

Minta buka hati lang kasih 

Aje eje eche echa - 

Ana lalang tumbo delimba,-* 

Aku jChet ^ aku depuji 

Aku salah aku disumbah ^ 

Usakan samantara manusia 

Berkaki dua berjari lima 

Sidangkan gaja putih 

Gaja blang sabrang laut 

Songsang bulu songsang gading 

Songsang bulel '' songsang kaki 

Songsang tangan songsang urat 

Songsang daging songsang dara 

Tundo minlumba kilingking kaki kiriku, 

Minia aku terkllang turun dipanjuru lawang" 

Ana ngang^ diujong bulo 

Aku jolo dangan timiang 

Matahari terkilek diklning aku 

Simut periring dibibir aku 

Chucha Allah chucha Mahamad 

Chucha baginda rasul Allah.'' 

Malay J^ersiott. 

Selusoh padang silasa, Seligi batang selasih, Minta' tutop hati yang gusar, 
Minta' buka hati yang kasih. Aje eje eche echa ! Anak lalang tumboh di- 
lembah, Aku jahat, aku di-puji, Aku salah, aku di-sembah. Usah-kan saman- 
tara manusia, Berkaki dua berjari lima, Sedang-kan gajah putih, Gajah blang 
sebrang laut, Songsang bulu, songsang gading, Songsang bfilalei, songsang kaki, 
Songsang tangan, songsang urat, Songsang daging, songsang darah, Tundok 
menyembah[-kan] kelingking kaki kiri-ku, Minya' aku ter-kilang (?), turun di- 
panjuru lawang, Anak enggang di-ujong buluh, Aku [men-]jolo' dengan temiang, 
Matahari tcr-kilek di-kening aku, Semut ber-iring di-bibir aku. Chucha Allah ! 
chucha Muhamad ! Chucha Baginda rasul Allah. 

1 Mai. "selusoh," meansa specific for ^ Probably misprint for " disimbah " 
alleviating the pains of labour. Mai. = Mai. "di-sembah"; so too infra, 
"selasih" is the plant called "Holy "minlumba." 

Basil." '^ Mai. " bulalai," or "belalei." 

2 This line is unintelligible and ' The word " lawang "(" door ") is 
probably not intended to convey any given in Malay dictionaries as being 
meaning : perhaps the words are mere from the Javanese ; it is not corn- 
variations on the word "chucha." monly used in the Peninsula, I believe. 

3 Mai. " di lembah." '' For "engang," Mai. "enggang." 
* Mai. "jahat": the vowels are These dialects pretty frequently have a 

characteristic of Mcntera and the other nasal only, where Malay, etc., have 

Jakun dialects. I believe the e has nasal -f sonant : e.g. "henak" = Mal. 

the "open" sound, i.e. a (in such " hendak " ; and in the first charm, 

cases where Malay has a), at any rate supra, " Katungalan." 
in the first syllable of the word. " J. I. A. i. 312, 313. 

MANTRA MAGIC 711 

Pemata Lida (Pematah Lidah). 

The Pemata Lida is a prayer for rendering enemies speechless. 

Pinang kring pinang kotei 

Dibila ^ dikaki gaja 

Dara jantong aku konchi tulangnia aku pata-pata 

Heh Allah Heh Mahamad Heh Baginda rasul Allah 

Minta kabulkan doa pemata lida 

Aku matakan ^ lida muso sitru lawanku 

Limah ^ ankau krasla aku 

La illaha ilallah berkat aku memakel doa pemata lida.* 

Malay Version. 

Pinang kring, pinang kotei, Di-blah di-kaki gajah, Darah jantong aku 
kunchi[-kan], tulang-nya aku patah-patah[-kan]. Hei Allah ! Hei Muhamad ! 
Hei Baginda rasul Allah ! Minta' qabulkan doa pematah lidah, Aku mematah- 
kan lidah musoh setru lawan-ku. Lemah angkau, kras-Iah aku. La illaha 
ilallah, berkat aku memakai do'a pematah lidah. 

Pebinchi 

The Pebinchi (from binchi, hatred) is used to excite hatred in the object of 
affection towards a rival. 

Pucho pebinchi daun pebanchi ^ aku rintas tujo tankeh tujo le ^ aku gunting 
tujo kali aku megunting ^ hati ana sidang siano itu, ankau ^ memandang siano itu 
bagimana angkau memandang habu,^ bagimana ankau memandang paya, dudu 
ankau binchi, tidor ankau binchi, berjalan ankau binchi, makan ankau binchi, 
mandi angkau binchi, minum ankau binchi, kormeimei ^"^ bayang sidang siano Itu, 
sampei tiga harl putus binchi ankau melihat pada siano Itu, memandang aku 
sa'orang terlampau manis bagi angkau memandang iang berchaia muka aku dua 
bias hari turun matahari sama turun smangat ankau nai matahan sama nai 
smangat siano Itu." 

Alalay Version. 

Puchok pembenchi, daun pembenchi, aku rintas tujoh tangkai, tujoh 'lai, aku 
gunting[-kan] tujoh kali, aku menggunting hati anak sidang sianu itu, angkau 
memandang sianu itu bageimana angkau memandang abu, bageimana angkau 
memandang paya ; dudok, angkau benchi ; tidor, angkau benchi ; ber-jalan, 
angkau benchi ; makan, angkau benchi : mandi, angkau benchi ; minum, angkau 
benchi. Kur, mari-mari, bayang sidang siami itu, sampai tiga hari putus benchi, 

1 Mai. "di-belah." * Wrong spelling for "angkau," 

2 Mai. " patahkan " : Mentera, like Mai. " engkau." 

some other Malayan languages, appar- '-^ It is characteristic of these dialects 

ently sometimes forms verbs by nasal- to pronounce an initial h- in words 

ising an initial tenuis ; but this form where Malay no longer pronounces it 

may be an abbreviation of " mematah- even though preserving it in writing, 

kan. " i*' = Mal. "kur," the word used in 

2 Mai. "lemah," weak or feeble. calling poultry and in addressing the 

* J. I. A. i. 314. soul (as a bird) in charms, and Mai. 

^ Misprint for " pebinchi," /.«." pe- " mari," the Mentera equivalent for 

benchi," Mai. "pembenchi." which is " mai " (in our spelling; = 

^ Mai. " helai, lai"; or "lei." " mei " in Logan's). 

^ Mai. " menggunting." " J. I. A. i. 315. 

712 APPENDIX 

angkau melihat pada sianu itu ; memandang aku sa'-orang ter-lampau manis 
bagei angkau memandang yang ber-chahia muka aku duablas hari ; turun 
matahari, sama turun semangat angkau ; naik matahari, sama naik semangat 
sianu itu. 

Pebinchi. 

Pucho beruwang ruwang disilang daun pebinchi iman pujo bawa pulr.ng hati 
didalam terlalu binchi ankau berdiri binchlkan siano itu, ankau berjalan 
binchikan siano itu, ankau tidor binchikan siano itu, usakan samantara man- 
usia sidangkan rumput ranting kayu kayan lagi habis binchikan mandang siano 
itu, turun chahia pada muka aku jikalau berchahia malam berchahia muka 
siano itu jekalau tiada berchahia malam tiada berchahia muka siano itu aku 
turunkan minia pemanis aku naikan doa pebinchi binchikan segala umat segala 
manusia turunla pemanis siano itu nai doa pebinchi dimuka siano itu habes binchi 
sikilian iang berniawa memandang muka siano itu meningar swara siano itu.^ 

Malay Version. 

Puchock bSruang-ruang di-selang daun pembenchi iman pujo' bawa' pulang 
hati didalam terlalu benchi angkau berdiri benchi-kan si-anu itu, angkau ber-jalan 
benchi-kan, si-anu itu, angkau tidor benchi-kan si-anu itu, usah-kan semtnlara 
manusia, sfdang-kan rumput ranting kayu-kayu-an lagi habis benchi-kan meman 
dang si-anu itu, turun chahia pada muka aku, jikalau berchahia malam berchahia 
muka si-anu itu, jikalau tiada berchahia malam, tiada berchahia muka si-anu itu, aku 
turun-kan minya' pemanis, aku naik-kan do'a pembenchi, benchi-kan segala ummat 
segala manusia, turun-lah pemanis sianu itu, naik do'a pembenchi di-muka sianu 
itu, habis benchi sekelian yang ber-nyawa, memandang muka sianu itu, mOnengar 
suara sianu itu. 

Tankal- Tikam Gaja. 

(A spell used when about to attack an elephant.) 

Hong ! gampah bad!, gampah dah chimarong,-^ dah chinnikar,^ siba kiri, 
siba kanan, aku membuang badi gampah gaja mengugnot •* gaja mengubang, 
mengubang disabrang danau, prio mendide blanga mendide saljrang tanjong, siba 
kiri, siba kanan, siba kumbang ^ badi nene, aku melepaskan jari tangan.*^ 

Malay Version. 

Hong, gempar badi, gempar 'dah chimarong, 'dah chimukar ; sibar [ka-] 
kiri, sibar [ka-]kanan, aku membuang badi, gempar gajah, mengangut gajah 
mengubang, mengubang di-sebrang danau ; prio' mendideh, blanga mendideh 
sebrang tanjong ; sibar [ka-]kiri, sibar [ka-]kanan, sibar [ka-]kubang (?) badi 
nene' ; aku melepaskan jari tangan. 

Tankal Tikam Gaja.'^ 

Iang nene kapada aku, iang aku kapada nene, bau aku bau ayer, bau aku bau 
daun, bau aku bau tana, bau aku bau nene, bau aku bau kubang, santap simpolan 

' J. I. A. i. 315, 316. •' Logan translates " goto the water- 

- Wrong spelling for " Tangkal \^i%€if^ sed quare. Perhaps it is for 

Tikam Gajah." Mai. "kubang," the "wallowing hole" 

^ These words are obscure. of big beasts such as elephants and 

* Misprint for " mengungot " = Mai. buffaloes, 

"mengangut" (?). ^ J. I. A. i. 316. 

MANTRA MAGIC 71 3 

pinang ku, mantong hidong nene, kaki ta'anket ^ kaki brat, tangan ditating tangan 
brat, bagi digantong batu bala, bagi digantong tampayun,^ bergra batu, sama 
bergra tangan nene, bergra sama bergra tali prut niambut jari tangan chuchu 
nene.^ 

Malay Ve7-sion. 

Yang nenek kapada aku, yang aku kapada nenek ! Ban aku, ban aver ; 
bau aku, bau daun ; bau aku, bau tanah ; bau aku, bau nenek, bau aku, bau 
kubang. Sentak simpolan pinang ku, mantong hidong nenek ; kaki ter-angkit, 
kaki brat ; tangan di-tating, tangan brat, bagei di-gantong batu b'lah, bagei di- 
gantong tempayan : bergrak batu, sama bergrak tangan nenek ; bergrak, sama ber- 
grak tali prut, [me]-nyainbut jari tangan chuchu nenek. 

Tankal Ribut. 

The following is a tdnkdl or charm to allay storms : — 

Rambong per-rango'on batong gaja menaut gaja mangobang mengobang 
sabrang laut sia kiri sia kanan, aku kambang ribut.* 

Malay Version. 

Rambong piranggo'an batang, gajah menaut {sic, ? melaut o>- mengangut), 
gajah niengubang, mengubang sebrang laut, siah [ka-]kiri, siah [ka-]kanan, aku 
kembang (?) ribut. 

On entering the forest the following tdnkdl is repeated : — 

Siba kiri, siba kanan, segala muso sitru lawanku minta buang pandangan pada 
aku, aku berjalan sa'orang jua.^ 

Malay Version, 

Sibar [ka-]kiri, sibar [ka-]kanan segala musoh setru lawan-ku, minta' buang 
pandangan pada aku, aku ber-jalan sa'orang jua. 

Charm against the Hantu Saburu. 

Apa nama ankau anjing Sokom nama ankau anjing itam nama tuhanko *^ ayer 
nama tuanko riddang nama tuanko utan pos pigi ankau pulang bawei ' anjingku ^ 
pulang, apa diburu sini tada babi tada rusa ditutup lobang idong kabau idong 
suda ku doa bau ku bawa angin lalu.'-' 

Malay Version. 

Apa nama angkau? Anjing Sokom nama angkau, anjing Itam nama [ang-]- 
kau, Ayer nama tuan-kau ! Redang nama tuan-kau, utan pos (?) pergi angkau 

1 Logan here again wrongly translates '^ Mai. ' ' tuan-kau. " 

" ta' " (which =Mal. " ter-")asanega- "^ ]\Ial. "bawa." The form is char- 

tive, and (what is worse) as a prohibi- acteristic : cf " bapai " for Mai. 

tive : cf. the first charm. "bapa." But (conceivably) "bawei" 

The vowel in the final syllable is [i.e. " bawai "') is for "bawa-i," with 

characteristic : cf. "jehet," supra. the transitive afiix, scd qticere. 

- Probably a misprint for "tempa- * Mai. " anjing-kau." The dog's 

yan." name, Sokom, is that of one of the 

^ /. I. A. 316, 317. Wild Huntsman's dogs, as known to 

'^ Ibid. 317. the Malays — v. Malay Magic, p. 593. 

5 Ibid. 9/- ^- ^- i- 31S. 

714 

APPENDIX 

pulang bawa anjing-kau pulang. Apa di-buru sini ? Tada babi, tada rusa, 
di-tutop lobang hidong-kau, bau hidong sudah-ku do'a, bau-ku bawa angin 
lalu. 

Tankal Kapielu. 

Hong piclu ^ mula piulu terbang jabut biluntok bilum - tawar, aku menibuang 
tawar pielu dikapala aku membuang diatas kapala ilang pielu ^ minta buang diatas 
kapala.* 

Malay V'ersion. 

Hong [ka-]pialu, mula pialu, ttrbang chabut beluntok bilang {or ? bilang 
terbilang) tawar ; aku membuang tawar [ka-]pialu di-kapala aku, membuang 
di-atas kapala, hilang [ka-]pialu, minta buang di-atas kapala. 

Tankal Kambonc^ 

Hong^ jiwa mula jiwa jiwa sheitan suda aku tawar jiwa tompang suda 
aku tawar jiwa takina ' suda aku tawar aku membuang jiwa kras smangat 
ankaula smangat jiwii bangket bunkar segala jiwa dalam prut dalam badan 
terbit lanchang aku memalang segala jiwa.* 

Malay Version. 

Hong dewa, mula dewa-dewa, setan sudah aku tawar, dewa tumpang sudah 
aku tawar, dewa ter-kcna sudah aku tawar, aku membuang dewa k'ras semangat 
angkau-lah semangat dewa bangkit-bongkar segala dewa dalam p'rut, dalam 
badan tSrbit lanchang (?), aku mfimbalang segala dewa. 

Charms used by Mentera in Rice-cultivation. 

(1.)^' 

Uma pemuka mulut pemuka aku buka-la blia di-ilir dibila ole blia aku 
membuang seitan jato bliinto bulum ko tawar aku membuang bisa seitan minta 
buangkan minta jaukan segala seitan. •" 

- These two mysterious words occur 
in Vaughan-Stevens' charms, p. 704 «., 
supra ; and also in a slightly different 
form in the first of the Mentera charms 
used in connection with rice-cultivation, 
infra. Logan here translates " b. b. 
tawar" " uncharmed biluntok," what- 
ever that may be, and the version in vol. 
"• P- 333> assumes "biluntok" to be 
the name of a shrub, and " bilum " to 
represent Mai. " bilang " ; scd qiuere. 
/./.-■/. i. 318. 

3 lSic.\ 

5 Mai. " kembong. 
^ See note on 

of 

vol. ii. 

' Mai. "terkena." 

^ J. I. A. i. 318. Logan's trans- 
lation, on which the version given in 
vol. ii. p. 333, is founded, assumes 
that " jiwa " = Mai. "jiwa," "life." 
But this is at least questionable, as is 

also the translation of "memalang"' 
( = replace), which is probably Mai. 
" membalang," "to throw away," and 
"jiwa" may be for "dewa," in the sense 
of " spirits," in this case maleficent 
ones. If so, the meaning would be : 
" Om ! ye spirits primeval, spirits and 
devils ! I have counteracted the spirits 
that lodge, the spirits that are incurred ; 
I cast out the spirits that are hard of 
heart. Ve souls of the spirits, arise 
and come forth ! all ye spirits within 
the belly, within the body, come out 
forthwith ! I cast out all spirits ! " 

^ Used to charm the uncleared spot 
selected for clearing with a view to 
planting rice there. A translation is 
given on p. 366 of this volume, differ- 
ing somewhat from Logan's. Both are 
doubtful. 

1" J. I. A. \. 320. For " bliinto " v. 
n. 2 ante. 

MANTRA MAGIC 715 

Malay Version. 

Huma(?) pgmbuka mulut, pembuka aku, buka-lah blia (i^zV), di-hilir, di-bla 
ulih blia {sic). Aku membuang setan jatoh {sic, ? chabut) beluntok bilang 
(? bilang terbilang) ku tawar, aku membuang bisa setan, minta' buang-kan, minta' 
jauh-kan segala setan. 

(II.) 1 

Smillahi mujor bri siju bii dingin ko melittakan bude.'^ 

Malay Version. 
Bismillahi mujor b'ri sejok, b'ri dingin, ku meletak-kan budak. 

(III.)3 

Smillahi'* aku mengambil smangat paddi jangan dibri sijo bri dingin aku 
mengambil bude bude^ pulang ka ruma aku." 

Malay Version. 

Bismillahi ! aku mengambil semangat padi, jangan di-b'ri sejok, b'ri dingin, 
aku mengambil budak-budak ka-rumah aku. 

Mentera Prayer said when the Juice of the Daun Pamanto 
AND Daun Pamadam is given to the Child [at Birth].^ 

Kurmeimei ^ tapandang^ seitanbintoi'^ranggam^^ ankau samapadam^^ padam 
kau suda trang nan suda ditingo pandangan ku ada mengikut tuhan pamanto ^^ 
minta padamkan aku sekali suda tabali ^'* minta padamkan sekali nan suda.'-' 

Malay Version. 

■ Kur ! mari-mari, terpandang setan bintoh ranggam (?) angkau ; sama padam, 
padam-kau ; sudah terang yang sudah di-tengo' pandangan-ku ada mengikut tuan 
pemanto (?) ; minta' padam-kan aku sekali sudah ter-balik, minta' padam-kan 
sekali yang sudah. 

1 Used before sowing the rice seed. though most of the words are intelli- 

Translated on p. 367 of this volume. gible by themselves. 

"^J.I.A. i. 321. The vowel (of » Mai. "kur." and Mai. " mari " ; 

"bude") is characteristic: Mai. v. supra. 
"budak." 9 Mai. "terpandang," "looked 

^ Used before beginning the reaping upon." 
of the rice. The translation will be i*' Apparently = " sick." 

found on pp. 367, 368 of this volume. ^i Perhaps cf. Mai. "renggang" "far 

* Ar. "bismi'llahi," "in the name apart"; or (as Mr. Skeat suggests) in 

of God." spirit-language = "body." Trans, "i/jj'^ 

° "The infants" are the first reap- look, O demons, sick 5/;a///5e your body." 
ings of the rice, conceived as embodying ^"^ Mai. "padam," " dim (of light)," 

the soul or souls of the rice, in accord- " to extinguish." 

ance with the animistic theory which ^^ There is a word Mai. " mantolj;," 

pervades Malayan folklore. See ^1/a/ay "to return home," but it is doubtful 

Magic, p. 243. whether this is connected with " pa- 

6 /. /. A. i. 322. manto." 

'' Logan offers no translation of this ^^ Mai. '• terbalik." 

charm, and its meaning is doubtful, i-^ y_ /_ ^^_ i. ^23. 

7i6 APPENDIX 

Jakun Charm for Protection against the Tiger.' 

Kalau chutek, kalau chatei 
Sangkut dahan pauh 
Matahari jentei harlmau tuha 
Jauh jangan dekat 
Aku tahu asal engkau " 
Mula mSnjadi,*' Fatimah nama 
Mak, nabi Musa nama bapa. 
Segrlching segrlchang patah 
Ranting digonggong angsa 
Taroh kanchi lerkanching " 
Maka kanchi nabi tidak terawa " 
Tidak ternafsu tCrkanching " 
Brat buangkan hawa nafsu 
Aku tahui tCiron tCmuron " engkau 
Mula menjadi. 

[This charm being already in Malay form, no Malay version is given.] 

Ho-'cfs Translation of the above Charm. 

Even though they be withered, though they snap, may you be entangled in 
the boughs of the faiih - tree till the sun falls, old tiger, keep far away and 
approach not ; I know the origin of your first being, Fatimah was your mother's 
name, and the prophet Moses ^ your father's. Snap, snap go the twigs in the 
bill of the goose. Put on the lock and you are fastened up, once the lock of the 
prophet has been placed on you, no longer can you indulge your desires, you are 
fastened up ; heavy is the restraint placed on your desires. I know your original 
descent. 

' Communicated to D. F. A. Hervey tion of Mohammedan influence, so far 

by the Dato' of the Jakuns of the neigh- as the name is concerned, though the 

bourhood of Mt. Belumut (Johor), and core of the legend is probably native, 

printed in Straits Asiatic Journal, No. and perhaps really a Jakun idea. 
3, p. III. The spelling of the original - '• Pauh " is a wild mango tree, 

has been preserved, but the long accent ^ Hervey observes that as Fatimah 

(— ) substituted for the circumflex (A). lived long after Moses, probably Ali's 

In the words marked '^ the accent on name should be substituted for that of 

the e should, however, be (^), not (— ). Moses. But historical correctness is not 

The language of this charm does not to be expected in a composition of this 

differ apparently from that of Malay sort, and the names themselves are really 

charms, and the references to Fatimah non-essential. The root idea in charms 

and Moses are of course indications of of this type is to "bluff" the objects 

Malay influence. It may well be that aimed at by a declaration on the part 

the whole charm is borrowed from a of the exorcist that he knows the origin 

Malay source. or descent of the individuals or species 

A legend communicated at the same in question : this idea runs through num- 

time, and printed (in Malay) on p. no bersof Malay charms, and as the versions 

of the same number, differs from the often differ inter se, it apparently 

charm in ascribing the origin of the does not much matter whether the 

tiger (and also the crocodile) to the frog exorcist's knowledge of his adversary's 

and " Baginda Ali " ; another indica- origin is real or merely assumed. 

PLACE AND PERSONAL NAMES.^ 

PLACE NAMES. 

Se.%[ang of Kedah. 

Beching or Berching, a hill. Malau, a hill. 

Chassa, a place (? near Baling, in Mantan, a hill. 

Kedah). Palok, a stream (? near Belum). 

Danjok, a place near Belum. Pendrok, a stream (? near Baling!. 

Gadung, a stream (? near Baling). [Kendrong, snpra\ 

Gapeh, a place near Ulu Siong, Kedah. Selamar (/;-. Selamarr = /!/«/. Selama), 

Gend'ra, a place near Tomo'. the Selama river in Perak. 

Hinas (/;-. Hinass), J/a/. Gunong Inas, Siong, a river and hills in the Ulu 

a mountain in Perak. Kedah. 

Kempor (/;-. Kemporr), an islet near Sitong, a place near Belum. 

Belum. Sungke, a place in the Ulu Kedah 

Kendrong(? = Pendrok, z'«/'ra),astream. (? near Baling). 

Kuwi, a hill. Teliang, the name of a tribe of Pangans. 

Lekob, a stream (?near Belum). Temengor, the name of a tribe of Pan- 

Lumu', a hill. gans. 

Semang of Kuala Kenering. 

Bukit Sapi (WUd-Ox Hill) ^ ^.^^^^^, ^^ ^^^^^ ^^ ^l^^j^ settlements visited bv 
Jepo (Dschepo) V ^j^^ ^^^^^^^^ 

Ongbal I 

PERSONAL NAMES. 

Semang and Pangax (Skeat). 

N.B. — The sign =, when preceded or followed by the serial numbers, stands 
for "married,"' ccel. means "unmarried," and ob. cceL means "died unmarried." 
The meaning of some of the names has been given where certain ; in other cases 
it may be compared with words in the Vocabulary. 

Male. 

1. Bayok, i.e. "Crocodile" {Mai. 3. Chabang [(u7.], /.^. "Fork" (yl/a/. 

Buaya)[^a'/.] Chabang). 

2. Bunga' [Blossom]. 4- Chakup. 

1 This list is intended to be representative but not exhaustive. 
717 

7i8 

APPENDIX 

5. Chentok [son of 34] = 99. 

6. Cherwok {cal.^ 

7. Debok = 77 [d. 109]. 

8. Dcrum {or Jarum) [caV.] ; see 44. 

9. Echak. 

10. Gelugor, i.e. '■'G.-fruiC [see 37]. 

11. Graluyd [another name for 15] 

= lOI. 

1 2. Gureng or Curing : ( i ) see 26 ; 

(2) see 47. 

13. He'; see 38. 

14. Hibor [? brother of 63] = 86 ; ch. 

106, 49, 67, 29, and 83. 

15. Ipong [another name for 11] = loi. 

16. Jadam [Bitter Aloe]: (i) son of 39; 

(2) son of 36, = 110 [divorced, 
no children]. 

17. Jarum [(tr/.], [another name for 

8] ; see 44. 
iS. Jt'lok = 85 [son, 47]. 

19. Kang = 78 [child, 113]. 

20. Kapas [Cotton] or Siren, son 

of 41. 

21. Kasok=io7 [children, 32, 11 3]. 

22. Kenanting = 72 [no children]. 

23. Kok \cc£l.\; see 43. 

24. Kroh [fo?/.] 

25. Kui [t'rt/.] 

26. Lembek [Soft, Pliant] : (i)[ = 64, 

ch. 12 (2), and 26 (2)]; (2) 
see 47. 

27. Li\vadd=i03. 

28. Lundor [t"<r/.] ; see 44. 

29. Marem [<"a7.] 

3°- 
31- 
32. 

Merlel [^«-/.] 
Mirah [Red]. 
Munleng [see 21]. 

33. Nangom. 

34. Pa' Belong [brother of 40] = 90. 

35. Pa' Deau, brother of 36; see 114. 

36. Pa' Gamer = 93 [father of 39, 46, 

16 (I), and 117]. 

37. Pa' Gelugor [called Dutu (?) before 

birth of eldest son Gelugor] : 
came from S. Buluh, on borders 
of Ligeh and Kelantan ; =91; 
children 10 and 45. 

38. Pa' Halus [called He' before birth 

of Halus] : =92. 

39. Pa' Mani = eldest son of 36 : was 

" poisoned by Mekong Jamal " ; 
= (i) 77 ; ch. Mani (i 16) ; 
= (2) 61 ; ch. Jadam (16). 

40. Pa' Rating [brother of 34] = 94 ; 

ch. 14 ; see 118. 

41. Padang [Flat-land or Plain] = 106 ; 

ch. 20. 

42. Pandan or Penden [killed Halus, 

at the instigation of a Malay 
named Kadir, who himself slew 
the slayer in turn]. 

43. Pawah=76; ch. 95 and 23. 

44. Pedendeng or Pindeng = 79 ; 

ch. 28, III, and 17. 

45. Pendra' or Pendra' ; see 37. 

46. Penleg. 

47. Pisang, i.e. "Banana" [of S. 

Jarum] =70 ; ch. 12 ( I), 26 ( I). 

48. Rembe [Pangan from Tomo', 

Ligeh] = 89 ; ch. 66. 

49. Remeng=i05; ch. 87. 

50. Repcneh or Rempcning (Pangan 

of Kelantan) = 84 or 96.' 

51. Rengi' [dead, son of 5]. 

' At Siong (Kedah) Skeat was given the table as follows 
Repeneh (w.) = Penanga' ( /'.) 

I I I 

Tumbi (/«.) Penlos (/.) Bunga' (w.) 

and at Jarum (Raman), two or three days' distant (by elephant), the same family 

was given as follows ; 

Rempening = Kenanga' 

I I I 

Penlos (y. ) Bunga' (w.) Tumbi (w.) 

PLACE AND PERSONAL NAMES 

719 

52. 
53- 
54- 
55- 
56. 

61. 
62. 

63. 
64. 

6v 

66. 
67. 
68. 

69. 

70. 
71- 

72. 

73- 

74- 

75- 

76. 

77- 

7S. 

79- 

80. 
81. 
82. 

Sangi" = 7i ; ch. 56, 73, loS. 

Senura' \cal.'\ 

Seren [another name for 20] ; q. 

Sireng. 

Suni' : son of 52, q.v. 

57- 
5S. 

59- 
60. 

Tadoyn [rn.'/.] 

Teku = 69. 

Tukang (of Ulu Plus) : betrothed 

to 67. 
Tumbi : son of 50, q.v. 

Female. 

Bengang = 39 [second wife]. 
Berapet [another name for Ma' 

Gelugor, q.v. ]. 
Bermang [? younger sister of 14]. 
Bewa' [Wind] = 26 (i). 

Chabol [had two or three husbands, 
but was barren ; eaten by tiger 
while still young]. 

Chekol [small child ; d. of 48]. 

Chelag!' ; betrothed to 59. 

Chenbah [eaten by tiger when quite 
small]. 

Chuyeng = 58. 

Dulang [Tray] = 47. 
Dumke= 52. 

Halus [Fine, Thin] : killed by a 
Semang named Penden (? Pandan) 
at instigation of a Malay named 
Kadir, who then killed Penden 
also. 

Hanggor [fF27a^-Vine] = 43, q.v. 

Jinjong or Jong =39 [first wife]. 
This same Jinjong, or another 
woman of the same name, also 

= 7- 
Junu= 19 [child, 113]. 

Kanchong or Kcchong [Water- 
Vessel] = 44. 

Kelarah=9 [no children]. 

Kelawer \cal.^^ 

Keleweng [dead]. 

Kembis [died of " sakit perut "" 
(? dysentery)]. 

84 

Kenanga', also called Penanga', 
= 50, q.v. 

85. Kenbok=i8. 

86. Keneh=i4. 

87. Kensau [small child, d. of 49]. 

88. Kesing [dead, eaten by tiger]. 

89. Lansat [L. //•■«//'] = 48. 

90. Ma' Betong= 34. 

91. Ma' Gelugor [called Berapet, be- 
fore birth of eldest son Gelugor] 

= 37, q-''- 

92. Ma' Halus [also called " Pon " 
or " P6nn"J = 38. 

93. Ma' Keme' = 36. 

94. Ma' Rating = 40. 

Gadung \VVild-Xzxn\ = 22 [no chil- 95 

dren]. 

Gagak [Crow] : d. of 52. 96 

Gundang [^/^-Snail] [died young 97 

of dysentery (" sakit prut "')]. 98 

99- 
100. 

Panjang, i.e. "Long" [f«/.]; 

see 43. 

Penanga' = 50, q. v. 

Penlos : d. of 50. 

Pertad [ra-/.] 

Pisang [Banana] = 5. 

Pon or Ponn ; see 92. 

Rcbong [Bamboo-Sprout] = 1 1 or 
15 [Rebong was eaten by tiger]. 

102. Sarok [ra/.] 

103. Sensonn [d.] = 27. 

104. Sermoi [d.] 

105. Silom = 49. 

106. Sungsang [Feet-foremost] = 41. 

107. Ta'ong = 2i [children 32, 115]. 

108. Tape. 

109. Tekah: daughter of 7, ^.z'. 

no. Telasih [Basil -//<7«/] = 16 (2) 
[parents, Semang of Kedah ; was 
" seized by a Malay named Drah- 
man, and divorced by Jadam "]. 

III. Telemba' or Telembok \ccel. ] ; 
see 44. 

Sex unrecorded. 

112. 

11^. 

Betong [probably eldest son of 
34; ob. ccel.'] 
Chengkim [see 19, 78]. 

114. Deau [probably eldest son of 35, 
q.v. 

115. Lanas [dead] ; see 21, 107. 

720 

APPENDIX 

ii6. Mani [sex not recorded, but un- 117. Nged \ccel., youngest child of 36, 
doubtedly eldest son of 39 (Pa' ^-^'-l 

Mani), q.v. 1 18. Rating, i.e. "Branch" or "Twig" 

[probably eldest son of 40]. 

SfiMANG OF Kuala K£n£ring (Grubauer). 
Sex not stated. 

1. Betong. 

2. Buclio (Butjo). 

3. Bunga [Blossom]. 

4. Dahabo. 

5. Daun [Leaf]. 

6. Dumhei {sic, ? Dumkei). 

7. I'agi [Morning]. 

I. Jamu. 
5. Guri. 

S£mang (Martin).' 

Male. 

2. Katim. 3. Labang. 

Female. 
6. Mandong. 

4. Pah. 

7. Tot. 

Sakai of Perak (J. Low).- 

1. Ba-himpun (Ba-himpoon). 

2. Bassuwait (Ba-suwait). 

3. Panggil [Call]. 

4. Si Bunga [Blossom]. 

5. Si Busut [Anthill]. 

6. Si Jaman (Sijamman). 

7. Si Kumbal. 

8. Si Lanchap (?). 

9. Si Limun (Silimoon). 

19. Bage. 

20. 

21. 

Male. 

10. 
1 1. 
12. 

«3- 
14. 

15- 
16. 

17- 
18. 

24. 

Itam Kandul (Etam Kundool). 

Moirse (?). 

Nus (Noose). 

Si Bate ? (Si Barte). 

Si Kechi (Si-Kiche) [Little-owt-]. 

Si Miyan. 

Si Rangis. 

Si Timor [East]. 

Si Tong (Sittong;. 

Si Tupai [Squirrel]. 

Si Yadap. 

Si Yassen (?). 

Si Yute (?). 

\"uman. 

Female. 

25. Si Pulih (Si-Pootih) [White]. 

26. 
27. 

28. 

29. 

Singap. 
Sirtus. 
Sungoh. 
Tan gam. 

1. Baka. 

2. Barsep. 

3. Bejam. 

Sakai (S£noi) Martln. 

Male. 

4. Belaham. 

5. Beprop. 

6. Besingloi. 

7. Betrugat. 

8. Bulan [Moon]. 

9. Changkoal. 

1 In these and the subsequent names, 
extracted by permission from Martin's 
Inlandstdinmc, the spelling of the 
original has been modified. 

- /. A. I. vol. iv. pp. 431, 432. The 
spelling of the original has been slightly 
modified where shown. 

PLACE AND PERSONAL NAMES 

721 

10. Cheloh. 

20. 

Koin. 

30- 

Ranga. 

1 1 . Chimpang. 

21. 

Kulob. 

31- 

Rihui. 

12. Chawa. 

22. 

Lamai. 

32. 

Ringit [Dollar]. 

13. Dilbul. 

23- 

Lutkuya. 

33. 

Salim. 

14. D51a. 

24. 

Miingot. 

34- 

Seleben. 

15. Gundot. 

25- 

Megat. 

35- 

Sudin. 

16. Ikan [Fish]. 

26. 

Menion [? Incense]. 

36. 

Tona. 

17. Kaput. 

27. 

Mentori. 

37- 

Turong. 

18. Kelab. 

28. 

Pie. 

19. Kelubhat. 

29. 

Randam. 
Female. 

38. Belhoi. 

43- 

Ika. 

48. 

Mapun. 

39. Bendon. 

44. 

Kamin. 

49- 

Mona. 

40. Bia. 

45- 

Kalo. 

50- 

Selo. 

41. Dima. 

46. 

Ladud. 

51- 

Singun. 

42. Elong. 

47- 

Loog. 

52. 

Tenoko. 

Besisi (Martin; 

Male. 

I. Agip. 

6. 

Kepok [Rile 

-Bin]. 

II. 

Selemba. 

2. Aman. 

7- 

Mahat. 

12. 

Seto. 

3. Bentang [Spread]. 

8. 

Saipong. 

13. 

Sinam. 

4. Genong. 

9- 

Samasa. 

14. 

Yep. 

5. Kaledang [K.-/;7«V]. 

10. 

Sauko [? Sar 
Female. 

igko]. 

1 5. Damei. 

16. 

Seridiot. 

17- 

Tiram [Oyster]. 

1. Bobol. 

2. Bungsu [Youngest]. 

3. Gadong [Wild-Ydi.m']. 

4. Glawa. 

5. Jarui. 

6. Joui. 

7. Katung. 

8. Kiche [Little]. 

9. Kol. 

10. Kulit Jawa[?name 

of a tree]. 

1 1 . Kulou. 

31. Allun [?Alun, i.e. 
" ^vi&W-qf-the-Sea "]. 
Bodo [Stupid]. 
Bonglong. 
Chak. 
Chianti. 
Gohom. 
Iloi. 

32. 

33- 
34- 
35. 
36. 
37- 

Bfisisi.i 
Male. 

12. Kunong. 22. 

13. Linak. 23. 

14. Mot. 24. 

15. Mundo. 

16. Nodo [?"Nodoh" 25. 

or "Nodor," i.e. 

Talker]. 26. 

17. Pangoh. 27. 

18. Raje. 

19. Rien. 28. 

20. Rumpel. 29. 

21. Saleh. 30. 

Female. 

38. Tampan. 46. 

39. Jukut. 47. 

40. Kewe. 48. 

41. Kintot. 49. 

42. Klosoi. 

43. Kolot. 50. 

44. Limong. 51. 

45. Nabongkok. 

Sambilai. 

Sijah. 

Slat [Straits -^-//^ij- 

Seal 
Soui [ ? Sawi, i.e. 

" Lettuce "]. 
Sulong [Eldest]. 
Tannah [ ? Tanah, 

i.e. "Earth"]. 
To Kussai. 
Ulan [Convolvulus]. 
Wah. 

Nonia [? Nonya]. 
Nokalou. 
Nuka. 
Panchong [Peg 

Stake]. 
Pram. 
Takoh. 

1 /. /. A. vol. 

P- 325' 

VOL. I 

3 A 

722 

APPENDIX 

Skeat adds : — 

Pa' Nanti (w.) [Father of " Wait "], Ma' Nanti (/), Lempar (w.). Bedoh {;«.), 
and Sauma {/.). 

Belandas (Martin) 
Male. 

1. Amat. 5. Jewang. 

2. Bertam [E.-/Vz/;«]. 6. Kobal. 

3. Damang. 7. Lepang. 

4. Deia. 8. Mengong. 

9. Pikat [Horsefly]. 

10. Prisak. 

1 1. Sampul [Wrap]. 

12. Dapat [Get 

Find]. 

13. Kampik. 

1 4. Kaseb. 

Skeat adds : — 

Female. 

15. Laigu. 

16. Lemeh [? Soft]. 

17. Pipeh [Flat]. 

1 8. Posoi. 

19. Rabot [Torn] 

20. Treng. 

2 1 . Wang. 

Pa' Pikat (w.), Ma" Pikat (/.), Pa' Bijan (w.), Ma' Bijan (/.), and Kaseb (/.). 

M6NTRA (Martin) 

Male. 

I. Baja. 

3. Itam [Black]. 

5. Mannon. 

2. Budang. 

7- 

4. Kolob. 
Sulong [Eldest]. 

Female. 

6. Manu [? Bird]. 

8. Mani. 

9. Mori. 

10. Muna. 

II. Panan. 

12. Semilan [Nine]. 

M£ntra.i 

Male. 

I. 

Bosojulot. 

14. 

Hang [Disappear 

or 

25. 

Piniunga. 

2. 

Bunga [Blossom]. 

Lose]. 

26. 

Powoh. 

3- 

Chagak. 

15- 

Inat. 

27. 

Pring. 

4- 

Chichar. 

16. 

Jangkang. 

28. 

Ru [Casuarina- Tree\ 

5- 

Chimah. 

17- 

Minai. 

29. 

Rumpong. 

6. 

Chiriau. 

1 8. 

Padan. 

30. 

Sagat [Scrape-Sago]. 

7- 

Dayong [Oar]. 

19. 

Pa Daun [Father 

of 

31- 

Sawaneng. 

8. 

Galla [? iSW^Pole]. 

Leaf]. 

32. 

Sia. 

9- 

Gigai. 

20. 

Pa Lokot. 

33- 

Sika. 

10. 

Gimgam [? Fistful]. 

21. 

Palsai [? Pa" Lesai] 

34- 

Singaja [Intentional, 

II. 

Ginya. 

22. 

Pa Singan. 

On- Purpose]. 

12. 

Hanas. 

23- 

Peero. 

35- 

Sinya. 

'3- 

Ikan [Fish]. 

24. 

Pines. 
37. Sungei [River]. 

36. 

Smaroi. 

1 J. I. A. vol. i. p. 324*. 

PLACE AND PERSONAL NAMES 

723 

Female. 

38. Assan. 

39. Bakat. 

40. Bungkas. 

4 1 . Cha'ap. 

42. Che'en. 

43. Chimas. 

44. Dapoi. 

45. Dau. 

46. Goam. 

47. Hulat [Grub]. 

48. Ingas. 

49. Jungeh. 

50. Kacho. 

51. Kochen. 

52- 

Lijoh. 63. 

Ranyak. 

53- 

Lontang. 64. 

Ringit [Dollar]. 

54- 

Mabangkeng [Ma' Bang- 65. 

Ruguan. 

keng], 66. 

Sa [One]. 

55- 

Mabayo [Ma' Bayo]. 67. 

Siba. 

56. 

Magoyang [Ma' Goyang, 68. 

Simonye. 

i.e. "Mother-of- Rocker"]. 69. 

Simun. 

57- 

Maklang [Ma' Klang]. 70. 

Sinaron. 

58. 

Marumput [Ma' Rumput, 71. 

Singom. 

/.e. " Mother-of-Grass "]. 72. 

Tanah [Earth]. 

59. 

jNIelem. 73. 

Tannang. 

60. 

Mine. 74. 

Tingal [Remainin 

61. 

Napon. 

\.dit-behind\. 

62. 

Platap. 75. 

Umal. 

Orang Hutax of Johor (Miklucho-Maclay). 1 
Male. Female. 

I. Losso. 2. Lingin-la. 

Orang Muka Kuxing.^ 

Male. 

I. Antas. 

5. Jalan [Path]. 

9. Majah. 

2. Awa. 

6. Jawak [Monitor-Lizard]. 

10. Nibor. 

3. Ibol \l.-Palm\ 

7. kelut. 

II. Oko. 

4. Iras. 

8. Leka. 

12. Sare. 

13- 

Te [?Teh, i.e. "White"]. 

Female. 

14. Bina. 

19. Lima [Five]. 23. 

Rabo [Tinder]. 

15. Dras [Quick]. 

20. Limpat. 24. 

Rina. 

16. Jodo [Pair, Affinity]. 

21. Mina. 25. 

Sijo. 

17. Kassah. 

22. Pangel [? Call 26. 

Tama. 

18. Kate. 

or Summon]. 27. 

Ulu [Head-Waters] 

1. A win. 

2. Desan. 

3. Dosan. 

4. Kadang. 

Orang Sletar (Thomson). ^ 

Alale. 

13. Singal. 

Kassap [Rough]. 
Kissah. 
Kosan. 

Masei. 12. Sadang. 

14. Soning. 

9. Nassap. 
10. Nosan. 
Penis. 

II 

15- 
16. 

Bunteh (Boon teh). 
Impang. 

17- 

18. 

Fef7zale. 

Neckang. 
Nongei. 

19. Sangkang. 

20. Sookang. 

1 Journal of Eastern Asia, vol. i. 
No. I, pp. 99-100. 

- J. I. A. vol. i. p. 
3 Ibid. p. 346*. 

539^ 

724 

APPENDIX 

Sabimba (Thomson 

).' 

Male. 

I. Angin [Wind]. 

8. 

Kassar [Coarse]. 

14. 

Pang. 

2. Ayin. 

9- 

Kassaw. 

15- 

Rama [Butterfly]. 

3. Bangas. 

10. 

Lodang. 

16. 

Rinnah [Low, -Short]. 

4. Bintang [Star]. 

II. 

Luyut (Looioot). 

17- 

Serong [Athwart, Askew]. 

5. Butun (Bootoon). 

12. 

Mulut ( Mooloot) 

18. 

Solai. 

6. Deman. 

[Mouth]. 

19. 

Talei. 

7. Jali (Jalee). 

13- 

Nipis [Thin, Flat]. 
Female. 

CO. 

Umbu (Oomboo). 

21. Asia [Age]. 

24. Minah (Meenah). 

28. Tawei. 

22. Bukit (Bookit) [H 

11]. 

25. Mangi ? (Mungee). 

29. Tengah [Half]. 

23. Dayang (Dyang) [I 

land 

26. Narimah(Nareemah). 30. Timah (Teemah) 

maid]. 

27. Rini (Reenee). 

[Tin]. 

/. /. A. vol. i. p. 349^ 

END OF VOL. I. 

Printed by R. & R. Clark, Limited, Edinlurgh. 

BY THE SAME AUTHORS 

8vo. 2 IS. net. 

MALAY MAGIC 

BEING AN INTRODUCTION TO THE 

FOLKLORE AND POPULAR RELIGION OF THE 
MALAY PENINSULA 

BY 

WALTER WILLLIAI SKEAT, M.A. 

WITH A PREFACE BY 

CHARLES OTTO BLAGDEN, M.A. 

SPECTATOR. — ''^losl interesting. . . . Mr. Skeat's book must be read 
and ranked with those interesting volumes of Sir Frank Svvettenham and Mr. 
Hugh Clifford, Lieut. Newbold and Sir William Maxwell." 

ATHENALUM. — "A valuable work and a necessary addition to the library 
of the student of anthropology. " 

OUTLOOK. — "One of the most fascinating volumes we have come across for 
a long time." 

OBSERVER. — " He has gathered together a great deal of curious and interest- 
ing matter, and has given a really notable addition to our later folklore literature." 

GLASGOW HERALD.— "Thtxe is much more in Mr. Skeat's volume that 
is of the greatest interest, not only to the student of folklore, but to the student of 
man and the vagaries of the human mind, and we would fain quote further from 
his most engrossing pages. The book is one of the most important additions 
made in recent years to our knowledge of a remarkable race." 

MORNING TOST— " A rich collection of Malayan practice, folklore, and 
religion. . . . Students of Mr. Tylor's and Mr. Frazer's works will find the 
volume full of interest. . . . There has been no better book of the kind since that 
of Messrs. Spencer and Gillen on the natives of Central Australia." 

DAILY NEIVS.—" The book has an interesting preface by Mr. Charles 
Otto Blagden, and is pleasantly illustrated with photographs of native-made 
puppets engaged in various rites and dances. There is an excellent index, and the 
whole work is a model of its kind, very unlike the many crude collections of scraps 
at third hand, which do so much to discredit the science of anthropology. Mr. 
Skeat's volume is an example of sound and industrious research, and of lucid 
statement." 

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON. 

NEW WORKS ON ANTHROPOLOGY 

Svo. With a Map. 

THE LOWER NIGER 
AND ITS TRIBES 

BY 

Major ARTHUR GLYN LEONARD 

late 2nd batt. east lancashire regiment 

author of 

'the cajMel: its uses and management,' and 'how we made Rhodesia' 

In his Preface to this work Dr. A. C. Haddon points out that the author has all 
his life been deeply interested in comparative religion, and that by the attention he 
has paid to Aryan and Hindu mythology, as well as to the natives of Asia and 
Africa, he had prepared himself for the detailed study of a particular people. 
Endowed with sympathy and an earnest desire to sec everything from the native 
point of view — to "think black," as Miss Kingsley tersely put it — Major Leonard 
has studied the natives of the Lower Niger at first hand. He draws a vivid picture 
of the wonderful Niger delta, and traces its effects on the mind and nature of its 
inhabitants. His studies have led him to the conclusion that the European has 
never understood the Negro, and the present volume is his interpretation of Negro 
thought and expression. 

d>vo. With Illustrations. 

AT THE BACK OF 
THE BLACK MANS MIND 

OR, NOTES ON THE KINGLY OFFICE 
IN WEST AFRICA 

BY 

R. E. DENNETT 

AUTHOR OF 
' NOTES ON THE FOLK-LORE OF THE FJORT,' ETC. 

In this work the author's twofold object is to show (i) that, concurrent with 
fetichism or Jujuism, there is in Africa a religion which gives a much higher, con- 
ception of God than is generally acknowledged, and (2) to make clear the vital 
importance of the kingly office to the African communities. He believes that the 
lasting effect of missionary effort, and the simplification of the work of governing 
the natives, depend to a great extent on a fuller recognition of these truths concern- 
ing the religious and political systems of the African tribes. 

MACMILLAN AND CO, Ltd., LONDON. 

NEW WORKS ON ANTHROPOLOGY 

Svo. I OS. net. 

ADONIS, ATTIS, OSIRIS 

STUDIES IN THE HISTORY OF ORIENTAL RELIGION 

BY 

J. G. FRAZER, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D. 

FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 
AUTHOR OF 'the GOLDEN BOUGH ' 

The studies contained in this book are an expansion of the corresponding 
sections in The Golden Bough. By far the greater portion of them is new, and they 
make by themselves a fairly complete and, the author hopes, intelligible whole. 
In studying afresh these three Oriental worships, Dr. Frazer has paid more attention 
than formerly to the natural features of the countries in which they arose, because 
he is more than ever persuaded that religion, like all other institutions, has been 
profoundly influenced by physical environment, and cannot be understood without 
some appreciation of those aspects of external nature which stamp themselves 
indelibly on the thoughts, the habits, the whole life of a people. 

%vo. With numerous Illustrations and a Map. 

THE TODAS 

BY 

W. H. R. RIVERS, M.A., M.D. 

FELLOW OF ST. JOHn'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 

Dr. Rivers recently spent some time visiting the Todas, a most interesting 
pastoral people of Southern India. They are an isolated and quite peculiar people, 
and have been described several times ; but Dr. Rivers has obtained far fuller 
information than any previous observer, especially with regard to their most 
elaborate religious ritual, which centres round the dairy. The dairy, in fact, 
forms their temple. Dr. Rivers obtained many interesting photographs which 
serve to illustrate his work. 

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON. 

IMPORTANT WORKS ON ANTHROPOLOGY 

THE GOLDEN BOUGH. A Study in Magic and Religion. 
By J. G. Frazer, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D. Third Edition, 
revised and enlarged. Three vols. 8vo. [/;/ the Press. 

LECTURES ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE 
KINGSHIP By J. G. Frazer. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 

THE HISTORY OF HUMAN MARRIAGE. By 
Edward Westermarck, Ph.D. With Preface by 
Dr. A. R. Wallace. Third Edition. 8vo. 14s.net. 

THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
MORAL IDEAS. By Edward Westermarck, Ph.D. 
In two vols. Svo. Vol. I. 14s. net. 

THE NORTHERN TRIBES OF CENTRAL AUS- 
TRALIA. By Baldwin Spencer, M.A., F.R.S., 
and F. J. GiLLEN. With numerous Illustrations. Svo. 
2 IS, net. 

THE NATIVE TRIBES OF CENTRAL AUSTRALIA. 
By Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen. With 
numerous Illustrations. Svo. 21s. net. 

NATIVE TRIBES OF SOUTH-EAST AUSTRALIA. 
By A. W. HowiTT, D.Sc. With Illustrations and 
Maps. Svo. 2 I s. net. 

t 

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON. 

,1
